Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) heterogeneity in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC)


Early phase I trials with monoclonal antibodies targeting PD-1/PD-L1 have
demonstrated durable clinical responses in patients with NSCLC. However,
the prognostic/predictive role of tumor PD-L1 expression has not been
determined. Current assays for evaluation of PD-L1 protein expression are
not standardized. Here, we demonstrate PD-L1 protein distribution in
NSCLC tumors using both conventional immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
quantitative immunofluorescence (QIF), and compare results obtained using
three PD-L1 antibodies targeting the intracellular (IC) and extracellular
(EC) domains.We measured PD-L1 protein expression using two antibodies
against the IC domain (E1L3N [Cell Signaling Technology] and SP142
[Spring Biosciences Inc.]) and one antibody binding the EC domain (E1J2J
[Cell Signaling Technology]) in 49 NSCLC whole tissue sections and a TMA
with the same 49 cases. Mel624 cells stably transfected with PD-L1, as
well as Mel624 parental cells and human term placenta were used as
controls and for antibody validation. PD-L1 protein expression in tumor
and stroma was assessed using chromogenic IHC and the AQUA method of QIF.
For IHC, PD-L1 positivity was determined using previously reported
cut-points for tumor (1%, 5%, and 50%) and stroma (5%). IHC inter-assay
concordance was evaluated using kappa coefficient. AQUA scores were
measured in an average of 28.6 fields of view per case or by TMA at
two-fold redundancy. Linear regression coefficients (R2) were used to
compare antibody QIF scores. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes were scored
in hematoxylin/eosin stained slides using current consensus
guidelines.Chromogenic IHC assays showed fair to poor concordance (kappa
0.124 - 0.552) for all cut-points. QIF showed PD-L1 immunopositivity was
heterogeneous for all three PD-L1 antibodies. R2 values were lower when
E1J2J (EC) was compared to E1L3N and SP142 (IC) (R2 = 0.090 and 0.079),
while coefficients were higher when the IC antibodies were compared (R2 =
0.658). E1L3N and SP142 significantly correlated with high TILs (p =
0.007 and p = 0.021) but E1J2J did not (p = 0.281). E1J2J significantly
correlated with older age (p = 0.038), but no other clinicopathological
feature. SP142 significantly correlated with lymph node positive status
(p = 0.030) Objective determination of PD-L1 protein levels in NSCLC
reveals significant heterogeneity within tumors. There is significant
inter-assay variability, even between assays detecting the same protein
domain. This could be due to different antibody affinities, cross
reactivity, or distinct target epitopes. Efforts to determine the
clinical value of these observations are underway.

