Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of combination chemotherapy using a novel oral
chemotherapeutic agent, TAS-102, with oxaliplatin on human colorectal or
gastric cancers and 5-FU-resistant gastric cancer xenografts


Background: TAS-102 is a novel oral nucleoside antitumor agent composed
of trifluridine (FTD) and tipiracil hydrochloride (TPI) at a molar ratio
1:0.5. FTD is the active antitumor component of TAS-102 and its
triphosphate form is incorporated into DNA in tumor cells. TPI is a
potent inhibitor of thymidine phosphorylase, an enzyme that degrades FTD,
allowing adequate plasma concentrations of orally administered FTD to be
maintained and potentiating the antitumor activity of FTD. In a recent
international multicenter randomized double blind Phase III study
(RECOURSE), use of TAS-102 was shown to significantly improve overall
survival, progression-free survival and had a favorable safety profile in
comparison to the placebo in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
refractory to standard chemotherapies. In this study, we evaluated the
antitumor effects of TAS-102 in combination with oxaliplatin on
gastrointestinal tumor xenografts, including a 5-FU-resistant subline, in
a nude mouse model.Method: The human colorectal cell lines HCT-116 and
SW48 and gastric cancer cell lines SC-2, MKN74 and MKN74/5-FU, a
5-FU-resistant cell line derived from MKN74, were implanted into nude
mice subcutaneously. TAS-102 (150 mg/kg/day) was orally administered
twice daily from days 1 to 14 and oxaliplatin (7 or 13 mg/kg/day) was
administered intravenously on days 1 and 8. Growth inhibitory activity
was evaluated by assessing tumor volume and the growth delay period,
estimated based on the period required to reach a tumor volume five times
greater than the initial volume (RTV5).Results: TAS-102 and oxaliplatin
monotherapy were effective on all the evaluated colorectal and gastric
cancers, even for a 5-FU-resistant gastric cancer cell line. The tumor
growth inhibitory activity and RTV5 of the group receiving TAS-102 with
oxaliplatin were significantly superior to those receiving either
monotherapy for all evaluated cancers (PBackground: TAS-102 is a novel
oral nucleoside antitumor agent composed of trifluridine (FTD) and
tipiracil hydrochloride (TPI) at a molar ratio 1:0.5. FTD is the active
antitumor component of TAS-102 and its triphosphate form is incorporated
into DNA in tumor cells. TPI is a potent inhibitor of thymidine
phosphorylase, an enzyme that degrades FTD, allowing adequate plasma
concentrations of orally administered FTD to be maintained and
potentiating the antitumor activity of FTD. In a recent international
multicenter randomized double blind Phase III study (RECOURSE), use of
TAS-102 was shown to significantly improve overall survival,
progression-free survival and had a favorable safety profile in
comparison to the placebo in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
refractory to standard chemotherapies. In this study, we evaluated the
antitumor effects of TAS-102 in combination with oxaliplatin on
gastrointestinal tumor xenografts, including a 5-FU-resistant subline, in
a nude mouse model.Method: The human colorectal cell lines HCT-116 and
SW48 and gastric cancer cell lines SC-2, MKN74 and MKN74/5-FU, a
5-FU-resistant cell line derived from MKN74, were implanted into nude
mice subcutaneously. TAS-102 (150 mg/kg/day) was orally administered
twice daily from days 1 to 14 and oxaliplatin (7 or 13 mg/kg/day) was
administered intravenously on days 1 and 8. Growth inhibitory activity
was evaluated by assessing tumor volume and the growth delay period,
estimated based on the period required to reach a tumor volume five times
greater than the initial volume (RTV5).Results: TAS-102 and oxaliplatin
monotherapy were effective on all the evaluated colorectal and gastric
cancers, even for a 5-FU-resistant gastric cancer cell line. The tumor
growth inhibitory activity and RTV5 of the group receiving TAS-102 with
oxaliplatin were significantly superior to those receiving either
monotherapy for all evaluated cancers (P<0.05). Tumor growth inhibition
in the combination treatment group was more than 70%. Furthermore, the
RTV values on day 29 were less than 5 for SC-2, MKN74 and MKN74/5FU
xenografts. These results demonstrate that combination therapy with
TAS-102 and oxaliplatin is significantly more effective than either
monotherapy in colorectal and gastric cancer xenografts, including a
5-FU-resistant xenograft, when evaluated by tumor growth inhibition and
growth delay period. This combination appeared to be well-tolerated, as
drug-related death or a reduction in body weight of more than 20% was not
observed. Conclusion: The present preclinical findings indicate that
combination therapy of TAS-102 and oxaliplatin is a promising treatment
option for colorectal or gastric cancer, not only for chemo-nave tumors,
but also for recurrent tumors after 5-FU-based chemotherapy.

