Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-24 inhibits lung cancer cell migration and invasion by
disrupting the SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling axis


IntroductionThe stromal cell derived factor (SDF)-1/chemokine receptor
(CXCR)-4 signaling pathway plays a key role in lung cancer metastasis.
Therefore, disrupting the SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling axis will reduce the
incidence of lung metastasis. In the present study we investigated
whether interleukin (IL)-24 can inhibit the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis and suppress
lung cancer cell migration and invasion in vitro. Further, the efficacy
of IL-24 in combination with CXCR4 antagonists was
investigated.MethodsHuman H1299 lung tumor cell line was stably
transfected with a tetracycline-inducible plasmid vector carrying the
IL-24. Upon addition of doxycycline (Dox; 1g/ml), cells were induced to
express IL-24 protein. The expression levels of CXCR4 and its downstream
molecular mechanisms in H1299 cells were analyzed. The inhibitory effect
of IL-24 on SDF-1/CXCR4 axis is determined by RT-qPCR, western blot,
luciferase reporter assay, flow-cytometry and immuno-cytochemistry and
the consequence of its inhibition on cell migration, and
invasion.ResultsEndogenous CXCR4 protein expression levels varied among
four human lung cancer cell lines with H1299 cells showing the highest
expression. Doxycycline-induced IL-24 expression in the H1299-IL-24 cell
line resulted in reduced CXCR4 mRNA and protein expression. IL-24
post-transcriptionally regulated CXCR4 mRNA expression by decreasing the
half-life of CXCR4 mRNA (>40%). Associated with CXCR4 inhibition was the
reduced protein expression of pAKTS473, pmTORS2448, pPRAS40T246 and
HIF-1. IL-24 inhibited tumor cell migration and invasion both in the
presence and absence of the CXCR4 agonist, SDF-1. However, the
combinatorial effect of either IL-24 combined with CXCR4 inhibitors
(AMD3100, SJA5) or with CXCR4 siRNA demonstrated enhanced inhibitory
activity on tumor cell migration.ConclusionsOur study results demonstrate
that IL-24 inhibits lung tumor cell migration and invasion by disrupting
the SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling pathway and exhibits enhanced anti-metastatic
activity when combined with CXCR4 inhibitors.

