Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adipose-derived stem cells after Paclitaxel treatment demonstrate
decreased function and suppression of breast cancer cell viability


Background: Following neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy for breast
cancer resections, poor soft tissue wound healing can pose a major
clinical challenge. Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) in clinically
applied stromal vascular fractions are considered to play a positive role
in wound healing (SVF) as evidenced by their increasing use in breast
reconstructive procedures. Our study evaluated the potential confounding
effects of Paclitaxel (PTX) on ASC proliferation and differentiation
capacities and if PTX treated ASCs may subsequently influence tumor cell
viability.Methods: IRB-approved human ASCs were isolated and treated with
PTX at different concentrations. Proliferation, cell viability, and cell
migration rates were measured by growth curves, MTT assays and scratch
assays. ASCs were cultured in derivative-specific differentiation media
with or without PTX (1uM) for 3 weeks. Adipogenic, osteogenic and
endothelial differentiation levels were measured by quantitative RT-PCR,
Oil-Red-O, Alizarin Red staining and cord formation on Matrigel,
respectively. MDA-MB-231 (breast cancer cell line) and ASCs were
co-cultured at equal cell numbers. ASC conditional media were collected
every 3 days from ASC no-PTX treatment and PTX treated - washout
groups.Results: PTX decreased proliferation of ASCs in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. PTX treatment down-regulated the capacity of ASCs
for adipogenic, osteogenic and endothelial differentiation (pBackground:
Following neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer
resections, poor soft tissue wound healing can pose a major clinical
challenge. Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) in clinically applied
stromal vascular fractions are considered to play a positive role in
wound healing (SVF) as evidenced by their increasing use in breast
reconstructive procedures. Our study evaluated the potential confounding
effects of Paclitaxel (PTX) on ASC proliferation and differentiation
capacities and if PTX treated ASCs may subsequently influence tumor cell
viability.Methods: IRB-approved human ASCs were isolated and treated with
PTX at different concentrations. Proliferation, cell viability, and cell
migration rates were measured by growth curves, MTT assays and scratch
assays. ASCs were cultured in derivative-specific differentiation media
with or without PTX (1uM) for 3 weeks. Adipogenic, osteogenic and
endothelial differentiation levels were measured by quantitative RT-PCR,
Oil-Red-O, Alizarin Red staining and cord formation on Matrigel,
respectively. MDA-MB-231 (breast cancer cell line) and ASCs were
co-cultured at equal cell numbers. ASC conditional media were collected
every 3 days from ASC no-PTX treatment and PTX treated - washout
groups.Results: PTX decreased proliferation of ASCs in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. PTX treatment down-regulated the capacity of ASCs
for adipogenic, osteogenic and endothelial differentiation (p<0.05 vs.
control). In comparison with controls, PTX treated ASCs had decreased
cell migration (relative scratch width, pBackground: Following
neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer resections, poor
soft tissue wound healing can pose a major clinical challenge.
Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) in clinically applied stromal vascular
fractions are considered to play a positive role in wound healing (SVF)
as evidenced by their increasing use in breast reconstructive procedures.
Our study evaluated the potential confounding effects of Paclitaxel (PTX)
on ASC proliferation and differentiation capacities and if PTX treated
ASCs may subsequently influence tumor cell viability.Methods:
IRB-approved human ASCs were isolated and treated with PTX at different
concentrations. Proliferation, cell viability, and cell migration rates
were measured by growth curves, MTT assays and scratch assays. ASCs were
cultured in derivative-specific differentiation media with or without PTX
(1uM) for 3 weeks. Adipogenic, osteogenic and endothelial differentiation
levels were measured by quantitative RT-PCR, Oil-Red-O, Alizarin Red
staining and cord formation on Matrigel, respectively. MDA-MB-231 (breast
cancer cell line) and ASCs were co-cultured at equal cell numbers. ASC
conditional media were collected every 3 days from ASC no-PTX treatment
and PTX treated - washout groups.Results: PTX decreased proliferation of
ASCs in a dose- and time-dependent manner. PTX treatment down-regulated
the capacity of ASCs for adipogenic, osteogenic and endothelial
differentiation (p<0.05 vs. control). In comparison with controls, PTX
treated ASCs had decreased cell migration (relative scratch width, p<0.05
vs. control). Following cessation and washout of PTX after 8 days,
treated ASCs exhibited cell growth and differentiating ability, but their
capacity was suppressed compared to controls. The cumulative population
doubling time was longer for cells co-cultured with PTX treated-washout
ASC conditional media. (pBackground: Following neoadjuvant or adjuvant
chemotherapy for breast cancer resections, poor soft tissue wound healing
can pose a major clinical challenge. Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) in
clinically applied stromal vascular fractions are considered to play a
positive role in wound healing (SVF) as evidenced by their increasing use
in breast reconstructive procedures. Our study evaluated the potential
confounding effects of Paclitaxel (PTX) on ASC proliferation and
differentiation capacities and if PTX treated ASCs may subsequently
influence tumor cell viability.Methods: IRB-approved human ASCs were
isolated and treated with PTX at different concentrations. Proliferation,
cell viability, and cell migration rates were measured by growth curves,
MTT assays and scratch assays. ASCs were cultured in derivative-specific
differentiation media with or without PTX (1uM) for 3 weeks. Adipogenic,
osteogenic and endothelial differentiation levels were measured by
quantitative RT-PCR, Oil-Red-O, Alizarin Red staining and cord formation
on Matrigel, respectively. MDA-MB-231 (breast cancer cell line) and ASCs
were co-cultured at equal cell numbers. ASC conditional media were
collected every 3 days from ASC no-PTX treatment and PTX treated -
washout groups.Results: PTX decreased proliferation of ASCs in a dose-
and time-dependent manner. PTX treatment down-regulated the capacity of
ASCs for adipogenic, osteogenic and endothelial differentiation (p<0.05
vs. control). In comparison with controls, PTX treated ASCs had decreased
cell migration (relative scratch width, p<0.05 vs. control). Following
cessation and washout of PTX after 8 days, treated ASCs exhibited cell
growth and differentiating ability, but their capacity was suppressed
compared to controls. The cumulative population doubling time was longer
for cells co-cultured with PTX treated-washout ASC conditional media.
(p<0.01 vs. no-PTX treatment group). Total cellular mRNA expressions of
epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EPCAM), synuclein gamma (breast cancer
specific protein 1; SNCG) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-) were
down-regulated in MDA-MB-231 cells when co-cultured directly with PTX
treated ASC or indirectly with PTX treated-washout ASC conditional media
(pBackground: Following neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy for breast
cancer resections, poor soft tissue wound healing can pose a major
clinical challenge. Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) in clinically
applied stromal vascular fractions are considered to play a positive role
in wound healing (SVF) as evidenced by their increasing use in breast
reconstructive procedures. Our study evaluated the potential confounding
effects of Paclitaxel (PTX) on ASC proliferation and differentiation
capacities and if PTX treated ASCs may subsequently influence tumor cell
viability.Methods: IRB-approved human ASCs were isolated and treated with
PTX at different concentrations. Proliferation, cell viability, and cell
migration rates were measured by growth curves, MTT assays and scratch
assays. ASCs were cultured in derivative-specific differentiation media
with or without PTX (1uM) for 3 weeks. Adipogenic, osteogenic and
endothelial differentiation levels were measured by quantitative RT-PCR,
Oil-Red-O, Alizarin Red staining and cord formation on Matrigel,
respectively. MDA-MB-231 (breast cancer cell line) and ASCs were
co-cultured at equal cell numbers. ASC conditional media were collected
every 3 days from ASC no-PTX treatment and PTX treated - washout
groups.Results: PTX decreased proliferation of ASCs in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. PTX treatment down-regulated the capacity of ASCs
for adipogenic, osteogenic and endothelial differentiation (p<0.05 vs.
control). In comparison with controls, PTX treated ASCs had decreased
cell migration (relative scratch width, p<0.05 vs. control). Following
cessation and washout of PTX after 8 days, treated ASCs exhibited cell
growth and differentiating ability, but their capacity was suppressed
compared to controls. The cumulative population doubling time was longer
for cells co-cultured with PTX treated-washout ASC conditional media.
(p<0.01 vs. no-PTX treatment group). Total cellular mRNA expressions of
epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EPCAM), synuclein gamma (breast cancer
specific protein 1; SNCG) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-) were
down-regulated in MDA-MB-231 cells when co-cultured directly with PTX
treated ASC or indirectly with PTX treated-washout ASC conditional media
(p<0.05 vs. control). In cells co-cultured for 3 days, VEGF proteins
released in conditioned medium were decreased compared with single
cultures (pBackground: Following neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy for
breast cancer resections, poor soft tissue wound healing can pose a major
clinical challenge. Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) in clinically
applied stromal vascular fractions are considered to play a positive role
in wound healing (SVF) as evidenced by their increasing use in breast
reconstructive procedures. Our study evaluated the potential confounding
effects of Paclitaxel (PTX) on ASC proliferation and differentiation
capacities and if PTX treated ASCs may subsequently influence tumor cell
viability.Methods: IRB-approved human ASCs were isolated and treated with
PTX at different concentrations. Proliferation, cell viability, and cell
migration rates were measured by growth curves, MTT assays and scratch
assays. ASCs were cultured in derivative-specific differentiation media
with or without PTX (1uM) for 3 weeks. Adipogenic, osteogenic and
endothelial differentiation levels were measured by quantitative RT-PCR,
Oil-Red-O, Alizarin Red staining and cord formation on Matrigel,
respectively. MDA-MB-231 (breast cancer cell line) and ASCs were
co-cultured at equal cell numbers. ASC conditional media were collected
every 3 days from ASC no-PTX treatment and PTX treated - washout
groups.Results: PTX decreased proliferation of ASCs in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. PTX treatment down-regulated the capacity of ASCs
for adipogenic, osteogenic and endothelial differentiation (p<0.05 vs.
control). In comparison with controls, PTX treated ASCs had decreased
cell migration (relative scratch width, p<0.05 vs. control). Following
cessation and washout of PTX after 8 days, treated ASCs exhibited cell
growth and differentiating ability, but their capacity was suppressed
compared to controls. The cumulative population doubling time was longer
for cells co-cultured with PTX treated-washout ASC conditional media.
(p<0.01 vs. no-PTX treatment group). Total cellular mRNA expressions of
epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EPCAM), synuclein gamma (breast cancer
specific protein 1; SNCG) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-) were
down-regulated in MDA-MB-231 cells when co-cultured directly with PTX
treated ASC or indirectly with PTX treated-washout ASC conditional media
(p<0.05 vs. control). In cells co-cultured for 3 days, VEGF proteins
released in conditioned medium were decreased compared with single
cultures (p<0.01 vs. control).Conclusion: Our results indicate that: 1)
PTX inhibited ASC proliferation and decreased the multipotency
differentiating capacity; and 2) Direct contact or treatment with
conditional media from PTX treated ASCs suppressed tumor cell growth. In
evaluating autologous ASCs for reconstructive procedures, this study may
provide insight into poor soft tissue wound healing immediately following
the removal of chemotherapy as well as decreased recurrence in breast
cancer patients.

