Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiRNA profiling in esophageal precancerous for malignancy
progression risk assessment


Background: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a metaplastic disease with risk
to develop esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Current screening method for
BE patients (endoscopy and biopsy) is discomfort, expensive and
relatively risky for patients. Moreover, the procedure is complicated by
subjective histopathology examination and only 2% of BE patients annually
progress to adenocarcinoma. The aim of our study was to identify miRNA
profiles in order to predict cancer progression in high-risk BE
patients.Methods and patients: FFPE samples were obtained from 113
patients (35 EAC, 21 low-grade dysplasia of esophagus, 33 BE and 24
healthy control). There were 74 males and 39 females; mean age was 55.9
years, range 15 - 94 years. Total RNA was purified from FFPE biopsy
samples using proteinase K treatment followed by RNeasy kit (Qiagen).
Microarray analysis was performed using the GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Array
(Affymetrix). The data were analyzed using R software and the
Bioconductor package.Results: In total, 113 GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Arrays
were performed in 113 patients. Expression profiles of 1733 human miRNAs
were analyzed. In supervised clustering analysis we found 8
differentially expressed miRNAs (pBackground: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is
a metaplastic disease with risk to develop esophageal adenocarcinoma
(EAC). Current screening method for BE patients (endoscopy and biopsy) is
discomfort, expensive and relatively risky for patients. Moreover, the
procedure is complicated by subjective histopathology examination and
only 2% of BE patients annually progress to adenocarcinoma. The aim of
our study was to identify miRNA profiles in order to predict cancer
progression in high-risk BE patients.Methods and patients: FFPE samples
were obtained from 113 patients (35 EAC, 21 low-grade dysplasia of
esophagus, 33 BE and 24 healthy control). There were 74 males and 39
females; mean age was 55.9 years, range 15 - 94 years. Total RNA was
purified from FFPE biopsy samples using proteinase K treatment followed
by RNeasy kit (Qiagen). Microarray analysis was performed using the
GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Array (Affymetrix). The data were analyzed using R
software and the Bioconductor package.Results: In total, 113 GeneChip
miRNA 3.0 Arrays were performed in 113 patients. Expression profiles of
1733 human miRNAs were analyzed. In supervised clustering analysis we
found 8 differentially expressed miRNAs (p<0.001 or logFC 2) in BE
patients compared to EAC patients and 10 differentially expressed miRNAs
(pBackground: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a metaplastic disease with risk
to develop esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Current screening method for
BE patients (endoscopy and biopsy) is discomfort, expensive and
relatively risky for patients. Moreover, the procedure is complicated by
subjective histopathology examination and only 2% of BE patients annually
progress to adenocarcinoma. The aim of our study was to identify miRNA
profiles in order to predict cancer progression in high-risk BE
patients.Methods and patients: FFPE samples were obtained from 113
patients (35 EAC, 21 low-grade dysplasia of esophagus, 33 BE and 24
healthy control). There were 74 males and 39 females; mean age was 55.9
years, range 15 - 94 years. Total RNA was purified from FFPE biopsy
samples using proteinase K treatment followed by RNeasy kit (Qiagen).
Microarray analysis was performed using the GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Array
(Affymetrix). The data were analyzed using R software and the
Bioconductor package.Results: In total, 113 GeneChip miRNA 3.0 Arrays
were performed in 113 patients. Expression profiles of 1733 human miRNAs
were analyzed. In supervised clustering analysis we found 8
differentially expressed miRNAs (p<0.001 or logFC 2) in BE patients
compared to EAC patients and 10 differentially expressed miRNAs (p<0.001
or logFC 2) in LGD patients compared to EAC patients. One of the dominant
findings was decreased expression of miR-223 in EAC and LGD samples,
which is known to function as a tumor suppressor blocking E2F1. Using
LOOCV classifier with 13 miRNAs signature we were able to correctly
classify 86 from 113 samples (AUC = 0.840). Prediction model fails mostly
in LGD prediction (18/21), probably due to incorrect pathological
classification.Conclusion: We have identified miRNA profiles and
signature allowing for better diagnostics of cancer progression in BE and
LGD patients, which, however, will require further
validation.Acknowledgment: This work was financially supported by IGA UP
LF 2014_019, NPU LO1304, CZ.1.05/2.1.00/01.0030 and
CZ.1.07/2.3.00/30.0004.

