Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of NF-kB signaling pathway by glucocorticoid in breast
cancer cells


Steroid hormone signaling through nuclear receptors plays critical roles
in every stage of breast cancer development. Although estrogen receptor
(ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) are well studied, due to the high
heterogeneity of breast cancer, therapies targeting these nuclear
receptors are still not effective enough or generate inconsistent and
even controversial results. In this study, we focused on the
glucocorticoid (GC)/ glucocorticoid receptor (GR) signaling to
investigate how it regulates NFkB activity that leads to differential
outcomes in different subtypes of breast cancer. A qRT-PCR array
containing a curated NF-kB responsive gene set (84 genes) was utilized in
this study to analyze the effect of GC/GR on basal and luminal subtypes
of breast cancer cells. It was identified that MDA-MB-231 cells (basal
subtype) were more responsive than MCF7 cells (luminal subtype) to GC
treatment as the former showed more down- or up-regulated NF-kB target
genes. Negative regulation of the NF-kB target genes was more prevalent
in both cells, which is consistent with the general rule of
trans-repression of NF-kB by GR. However, there were also a number of
NF-kB target genes up-regulated by GC in both subtypes of breast cancer
cells, suggesting that the trans-activation of NF-kB by GR may also play
an important role in breast cancer cell growth and pathological
behaviors. Among the differentially expressed genes in both cell types,
genes with functions in cell migration and adhesion are highly regulated,
such as CXCL1, CCL2, ICAM1, VCAM1, BIRC3 and SNAP25, implying that GC may
mainly regulate the invasion and metastasis of breast cancer cells via
NF-kB signaling. Biochemical studies identified that GR was activated by
GC differently in MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cells; the interaction between GR
and various NF-kB subunits were also different in these cells, thus
elucidating part of mechanisms underlying the differential regulation of
NF-kB by GC in different subtypes of breast cancer cells.

