Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of apoptosis in prostate cancer cells by altering cell
metabolism


The levels of ceramides, sphingosine and their related metabolites have
been reported to play an important role in cell fate by determining the
balance between apoptosis and cell survival signaling through what has
been called the sphingolipid rheostat. One of sphingosine metabolic
product, sphingosine-1-phosphate, has been widely proven to be related
with tumor growth, resistance to apoptosis, angiogenesis, metastasis and
invasiveness in several tumors. In prostate cancer,
sphingosine-1-phosphate levels correlate with risk of progression to
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), PSA levels, Gleason score,
positive surgical margins, lymph node extension, metastatic extension and
mortality.Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) act as pleiotropic
transcription factors which serve as major components for cancer
progression, upregulation of HIFs are essential for metastasis and tumor
growth once hypoxia has ensued. Several relations between HIFs and
ceramides/sphingosine metabolism have been reported recently, suggesting
that both mechanisms might be somehow interconnected.Despite decades of
research inhibitors to HIF have been few and far between. The
DNA-intercalating agent doxorubicin was identified one such inhibitor by
a mechanism not yet understood. The major mechanism of
doxorubicin-mediated apoptosis has been established to be induced by the
transcription factor, p53. The p53 cell cycle arrest is usually through
p21 which has been shown to have enhanced expression in response to
sphingosine kinase 2, one of the enzymes that mediate the conversion of
sphingosine to sphingosine-1-phosphate.Several studies associating
chemotherapy with different drugs that attempt to modify sphingosine and
ceramides metabolism have been published with some remarkable results,
although never complete responses. We hypothesize that the incomplete
responses may be due to an incomplete blockade of the conversion of
ceramides and sphingosine towards their phosphorylated metabolites,
sphingosine-1-phosphate and ceramide-1-phospate respectively.Previous
work has focused on single agents to enhance chemotherapy. In this work
we are interested in studying the combination of different modifiers in
the metabolism of ceramides/sphingosine with doxorubicin in order to
achieve a total metabolic blockade in an effort to elicit a complete
clinical response for prostate cancer.

