Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL10 within the tumor microenvironment induces gemcitabine
resistance in pancreatic cancer cells


Background: The systemic treatment of pancreatic cancer (PC) is hindered
by the rapid development of chemoresistance to current cytotoxic
therapies. Mechanisms governing the development of chemoresistance remain
poorly characterized, particularly with respect to contributions from the
tumor microenvironment. Thus, the goal of this study was to identify
novel mechanisms acting within the tumor microenvironment which lead to
PC chemoresistance.Methods: Intratumoral soluble mediator concentrations
from resected PC specimens (n = 26) as well as supernatants from
co-cultures of primary tumor-associated pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs)
and PC cells (n = 12) were evaluated using a panel of 41 growth factors,
chemokines and cytokines. The effect of CXCL10, a highly expressed
soluble mediator during co-culture, on viability, proliferation, and
apoptosis of PC cells was evaluated with and without gemcitabine
treatment. In addition, the contribution of CXCL10 on migration patterns
of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) was assessed.Results:
Co-culture of tumor-associated PSCs with PC cells revealed increased
CXCL10 levels compared to either cell type cultured alone. In addition,
high intratumoral CXCL10 concentrations correlated with reduced overall
survival (HR 6.9; P = .006). While CXCL10 treatment had a small effect on
the viability of PC cells, it led to significantly increased PC cell
viability in the presence of gemcitabine. Further, gemcitabine treatment
induced the expression of the CXCL10 receptor, CXCR3, and this induction
of CXCR3 was associated with the absence of apoptotic markers in PC
cells. Finally, constitutive expression of CXCL10 by PC cells
preferentially led to the migration of regulatory immune cell
subsets.Conclusion: Paracrine CXCL10 signaling between stromal, PC and
immune cells may be responsible not only for chemoresistance to
gemcitabine, but also the recruitment and potential polarization of
regulatory immune cell subsets in the pancreatic cancer microenvironment.

