Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of ascites on tumor response in advanced stage ovarian
cancer


Background: Ascites can create a progressive microenvironment for tumor
cells, whereas there is few evidence on the role of ascites on tumor
response in ovarian cancer. Thus, we investigated cellular response by
ascites in ovarian cancer cell line, and evaluated the effect of ascites
on clinical outcomes in patients with advanced-stage ovarian
cancer.Methods: Moreover, we collected clinico-pathologic database of 277
patients with stage IIIC-IV ovarian cancer, and investigated factors
affecting overall response (OR) and survival. Furthermore, we collected
ascites from four patients with stage IIIC-IV serous adenocarcinoma of
the ovary, and cell migration, invasiveness and proliferation by adding
ascites were evaluated in SKOV-3.Results: OR rates were not different
between patients with ascites and those without ascites (77.8% vs. 89.1%;
P = 0.094), and no ascites was associated with better progression-free
survival with marginal significance (37.4 vs. 27.1 mons; P = 0.056) in
spite of no effect of ascites on overall survival. In multivariate
analyses, no ascites was a favorable factor for reducing the risk of
non-OR with marginal significance (adjusted OR, 0.286; 95% CI,
0.080-1.018; P = 0.053), whereas ascites was not an independent factor
affecting survival. Moreover, ascites increased migration and
invasiveness of SKOV-3 (Figs. 1A and 1B). Although proliferation of
SKOV-3 was decreased for the first 24 h, it increased in time-dependent
manner till 72h (Fig. 1C).Conclusions: Ascites may contribute to
invasion, migration and proliferation of ovarian cancer cells. Our
clinical findings also support that ascites may affect overall response
after primary treatment, suggesting the possibility that ascites can act
as a tumor microenvironment related with tumor cell survival.

