Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P21-activated protein kinase 1 high expression is a positive
prognostic factor in human primary and metastatic pancreatic cancer


Background: P21-activated protein kinase 1 (PAK1), a main downstream
effector of small Rho GTPases, is overexpressed in many malignancies. Its
overexpression was associated with poor prognosis in some tumor types
including breast cancer, gastric cancer, colorectal cancer and so on.
However, the expression and clinical relevance of PAK1 expression in
human pancreatic cancer remain unknown.Methods: The present study was
designed to investigate the clinical and prognostic significance of PAK1
expression in pancreatic carcinoma. We examined the expression of PAK1 by
immunohistochemistry in 72 primary pancreatic carcinoma samples and 20
liver metastatic samples. The relationships between PAK1 and
clinicopathological parameters and prognosis in primary and metastatic
pancreatic cancer were analyzed.Results: Among the total 92 cases,
primary pancreatic cancer samples had significantly higher rate (38/72,
52.8%) of high PAK1 expression than liver metastatic samples (5/20,
25.0%) (p = 0.028). In 72 primary pancreatic cancer patients, high PAK1
expression was associated with younger age (p = 0.038) and moderately or
well differentiated tumor (p = 0.007). Moreover, a positive relationship
was found between high PAK1 expression and overall survival (OS)
(pBackground: P21-activated protein kinase 1 (PAK1), a main downstream
effector of small Rho GTPases, is overexpressed in many malignancies. Its
overexpression was associated with poor prognosis in some tumor types
including breast cancer, gastric cancer, colorectal cancer and so on.
However, the expression and clinical relevance of PAK1 expression in
human pancreatic cancer remain unknown.Methods: The present study was
designed to investigate the clinical and prognostic significance of PAK1
expression in pancreatic carcinoma. We examined the expression of PAK1 by
immunohistochemistry in 72 primary pancreatic carcinoma samples and 20
liver metastatic samples. The relationships between PAK1 and
clinicopathological parameters and prognosis in primary and metastatic
pancreatic cancer were analyzed.Results: Among the total 92 cases,
primary pancreatic cancer samples had significantly higher rate (38/72,
52.8%) of high PAK1 expression than liver metastatic samples (5/20,
25.0%) (p = 0.028). In 72 primary pancreatic cancer patients, high PAK1
expression was associated with younger age (p = 0.038) and moderately or
well differentiated tumor (p = 0.007). Moreover, a positive relationship
was found between high PAK1 expression and overall survival (OS)
(p<0.005). Patients with high PAK1 expression had a better OS than those
with low PAK1 expression. Univariate and multivariate analysis by Cox
regression including PAK1 and other prognostic pathological markers
demonstrated high PAK1 immunostaining as an independent prognostic factor
for survival in pancreatic cancer patients (PBackground: P21-activated
protein kinase 1 (PAK1), a main downstream effector of small Rho GTPases,
is overexpressed in many malignancies. Its overexpression was associated
with poor prognosis in some tumor types including breast cancer, gastric
cancer, colorectal cancer and so on. However, the expression and clinical
relevance of PAK1 expression in human pancreatic cancer remain
unknown.Methods: The present study was designed to investigate the
clinical and prognostic significance of PAK1 expression in pancreatic
carcinoma. We examined the expression of PAK1 by immunohistochemistry in
72 primary pancreatic carcinoma samples and 20 liver metastatic samples.
The relationships between PAK1 and clinicopathological parameters and
prognosis in primary and metastatic pancreatic cancer were
analyzed.Results: Among the total 92 cases, primary pancreatic cancer
samples had significantly higher rate (38/72, 52.8%) of high PAK1
expression than liver metastatic samples (5/20, 25.0%) (p = 0.028). In 72
primary pancreatic cancer patients, high PAK1 expression was associated
with younger age (p = 0.038) and moderately or well differentiated tumor
(p = 0.007). Moreover, a positive relationship was found between high
PAK1 expression and overall survival (OS) (p<0.005). Patients with high
PAK1 expression had a better OS than those with low PAK1 expression.
Univariate and multivariate analysis by Cox regression including PAK1 and
other prognostic pathological markers demonstrated high PAK1
immunostaining as an independent prognostic factor for survival in
pancreatic cancer patients (P<0.005).Conclusions: For the first time, we
report that PAK1 is a novel prognostic marker for pathologically
confirmed human pancreatic cancer. Reduced expression of p21-activated
protein kinase 1 correlates with poor histological differentiation in
pancreatic cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

