Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of novel RNA aptamer-based RNase I activity assay for
pancreatic cancer biomarker development


Background: Ribonuclease I (RNase I) is highly expressed in pancreas and
also seen in serum. Previous reports have noted its differential activity
and association to a number of cancers including pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). In search of clinically relevant biomarkers for
PDAC detection, in this study, we have pursued classification
characterization by a novel plasma RNase I activity assay for
discriminating PDAC cases from benign conditions and other
malignancies.Methods: We have developed a new assay for accurate and
precise quantification of RNase activities based on a specific and strong
fluorescence intensity of malachite green (MG) bound to an RNA aptamer
(MGA). The MGA chimeras were produced in E. coli using a novel optional
noncoding RNA scaffold (OnRS) based recombinant RNA technology
established in our lab. MGA chimeras were thus purified to a high degree
of homogeneity (>98% pure) with an anion-exchange fast protein liquid
chromatograph (FPLC) method and utilized in our assays. The cleavage of
MGA by RNases (dominantly by RNase I) results in a dose- and
time-dependent decrease in the fluorescence intensity at 630/650 nm
(excitation/emission) for MGA-bound MG, which could be abolished by RNase
inhibitor and utilized to determine RNase activities in any given sample.
We applied this assay to quantitate the serum RNase activity levels in a
set of prospectively collected serum from our IRB-approved Pancreas
Registry including PDAC, benign cases (including chronic pancreatitis)
and other (non-PDAC) malignancies, and normalized to that of a pooled
serum sample from healthy subjects. Data analysis was performed for group
comparison of the RNase activity levels and significance evaluated by
Mann-Whitney U test (PBackground: Ribonuclease I (RNase I) is highly
expressed in pancreas and also seen in serum. Previous reports have noted
its differential activity and association to a number of cancers
including pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC). In search of clinically
relevant biomarkers for PDAC detection, in this study, we have pursued
classification characterization by a novel plasma RNase I activity assay
for discriminating PDAC cases from benign conditions and other
malignancies.Methods: We have developed a new assay for accurate and
precise quantification of RNase activities based on a specific and strong
fluorescence intensity of malachite green (MG) bound to an RNA aptamer
(MGA). The MGA chimeras were produced in E. coli using a novel optional
noncoding RNA scaffold (OnRS) based recombinant RNA technology
established in our lab. MGA chimeras were thus purified to a high degree
of homogeneity (>98% pure) with an anion-exchange fast protein liquid
chromatograph (FPLC) method and utilized in our assays. The cleavage of
MGA by RNases (dominantly by RNase I) results in a dose- and
time-dependent decrease in the fluorescence intensity at 630/650 nm
(excitation/emission) for MGA-bound MG, which could be abolished by RNase
inhibitor and utilized to determine RNase activities in any given sample.
We applied this assay to quantitate the serum RNase activity levels in a
set of prospectively collected serum from our IRB-approved Pancreas
Registry including PDAC, benign cases (including chronic pancreatitis)
and other (non-PDAC) malignancies, and normalized to that of a pooled
serum sample from healthy subjects. Data analysis was performed for group
comparison of the RNase activity levels and significance evaluated by
Mann-Whitney U test (P<0.05 significant).Results: A total of 140 patients
serum specimen was analyzed. 60 PDAC cases (stage I (n = 8), stage II (n
= 25), stage III/IV (n = 27)), 60 benign conditions (chronic pancreatitis
(n = 15), acute pancreatitis (n = 3), benign cysts (n = 17), normal
pancreas (n = 25)), and 20 non-PDAC malignancies (Pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumor (n = 11), CholangioCA(n = 2), Ampullary CA(n = 3),
Hepatoma (n = 2), GIST (n = 1), lymphoma (n = 1))Group comparison of
RNase activity:PDAC vs benign: Median PDAC = 1.454; median benign group =
1.181 (P-value, Background: Ribonuclease I (RNase I) is highly expressed
in pancreas and also seen in serum. Previous reports have noted its
differential activity and association to a number of cancers including
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC). In search of clinically relevant
biomarkers for PDAC detection, in this study, we have pursued
classification characterization by a novel plasma RNase I activity assay
for discriminating PDAC cases from benign conditions and other
malignancies.Methods: We have developed a new assay for accurate and
precise quantification of RNase activities based on a specific and strong
fluorescence intensity of malachite green (MG) bound to an RNA aptamer
(MGA). The MGA chimeras were produced in E. coli using a novel optional
noncoding RNA scaffold (OnRS) based recombinant RNA technology
established in our lab. MGA chimeras were thus purified to a high degree
of homogeneity (>98% pure) with an anion-exchange fast protein liquid
chromatograph (FPLC) method and utilized in our assays. The cleavage of
MGA by RNases (dominantly by RNase I) results in a dose- and
time-dependent decrease in the fluorescence intensity at 630/650 nm
(excitation/emission) for MGA-bound MG, which could be abolished by RNase
inhibitor and utilized to determine RNase activities in any given sample.
We applied this assay to quantitate the serum RNase activity levels in a
set of prospectively collected serum from our IRB-approved Pancreas
Registry including PDAC, benign cases (including chronic pancreatitis)
and other (non-PDAC) malignancies, and normalized to that of a pooled
serum sample from healthy subjects. Data analysis was performed for group
comparison of the RNase activity levels and significance evaluated by
Mann-Whitney U test (P<0.05 significant).Results: A total of 140 patients
serum specimen was analyzed. 60 PDAC cases (stage I (n = 8), stage II (n
= 25), stage III/IV (n = 27)), 60 benign conditions (chronic pancreatitis
(n = 15), acute pancreatitis (n = 3), benign cysts (n = 17), normal
pancreas (n = 25)), and 20 non-PDAC malignancies (Pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumor (n = 11), CholangioCA(n = 2), Ampullary CA(n = 3),
Hepatoma (n = 2), GIST (n = 1), lymphoma (n = 1))Group comparison of
RNase activity:PDAC vs benign: Median PDAC = 1.454; median benign group =
1.181 (P-value, <0.0001) Resectable-stage PDAC (stages I & II) vs benign:
Median PDAC = 1.616; median benign group = 1.181 (P-value, Background:
Ribonuclease I (RNase I) is highly expressed in pancreas and also seen in
serum. Previous reports have noted its differential activity and
association to a number of cancers including pancreatic adenocarcinoma
(PDAC). In search of clinically relevant biomarkers for PDAC detection,
in this study, we have pursued classification characterization by a novel
plasma RNase I activity assay for discriminating PDAC cases from benign
conditions and other malignancies.Methods: We have developed a new assay
for accurate and precise quantification of RNase activities based on a
specific and strong fluorescence intensity of malachite green (MG) bound
to an RNA aptamer (MGA). The MGA chimeras were produced in E. coli using
a novel optional noncoding RNA scaffold (OnRS) based recombinant RNA
technology established in our lab. MGA chimeras were thus purified to a
high degree of homogeneity (>98% pure) with an anion-exchange fast
protein liquid chromatograph (FPLC) method and utilized in our assays.
The cleavage of MGA by RNases (dominantly by RNase I) results in a dose-
and time-dependent decrease in the fluorescence intensity at 630/650 nm
(excitation/emission) for MGA-bound MG, which could be abolished by RNase
inhibitor and utilized to determine RNase activities in any given sample.
We applied this assay to quantitate the serum RNase activity levels in a
set of prospectively collected serum from our IRB-approved Pancreas
Registry including PDAC, benign cases (including chronic pancreatitis)
and other (non-PDAC) malignancies, and normalized to that of a pooled
serum sample from healthy subjects. Data analysis was performed for group
comparison of the RNase activity levels and significance evaluated by
Mann-Whitney U test (P<0.05 significant).Results: A total of 140 patients
serum specimen was analyzed. 60 PDAC cases (stage I (n = 8), stage II (n
= 25), stage III/IV (n = 27)), 60 benign conditions (chronic pancreatitis
(n = 15), acute pancreatitis (n = 3), benign cysts (n = 17), normal
pancreas (n = 25)), and 20 non-PDAC malignancies (Pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumor (n = 11), CholangioCA(n = 2), Ampullary CA(n = 3),
Hepatoma (n = 2), GIST (n = 1), lymphoma (n = 1))Group comparison of
RNase activity:PDAC vs benign: Median PDAC = 1.454; median benign group =
1.181 (P-value, <0.0001) Resectable-stage PDAC (stages I & II) vs benign:
Median PDAC = 1.616; median benign group = 1.181 (P-value, <0.0001)PDAC
vs other Malignancies: Median PDAC = 1.454; median other Malignancies =
1.242 (P-value = 0.0748)Conclusion: RNase activity level successfully
discriminates PDAC cases from the benign conditions including chronic
pancreatitis. Specifically, early-stage PDAC group is significantly
separated from the benign group. Further testing is being performed for
evaluating the test as a potential early detection diagnostic modality.

