Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum microRNA signatures predict recurrence and survival in
Caucasian patients with early stage non-small cell lung cancer


Early stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients can be curatively
treated by surgery alone or with adjuvant chemotherapy. However, about
half of patients develop recurrence and eventually die of this disease.
The purpose of this study is to identify circulating microRNAs (miRNA) as
minimally invasive biomarkers for the prognosis of early stage NSCLC that
may allow personalized clinical management of early stage NSCLC patients.
Using a large series of 171 stage I and II NSCLC Caucasian patients, we
screened and validated serum miRNA signatures predictive of recurrence
and survival in these patients. We identified six miRNA expression ratios
that were associated with recurrence and three miRNA expression ratios
that were associated with overall survival. In Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, the area under the curve (AUC) for
clinical variable-only model was 0.714 for recurrence and 0.678 for
survival; however, the AUC increased to 0.878 for recurrence and 0.796
for survival when the miRNA ratio signatures were added to the recurrence
and survival models respectively. The patients in the high risk group as
defined by the 6 miRNA ratio signature exhibited an approximately 5-fold
increased risk of develop recurrence compared with low risk patients. In
survival analysis, the death rate increased over 4-fold in the high risk
group compared with the low risk group. Our results suggest that the
miRNA ratio signatures could serve as prognostic biomarkers for early
stage NSCLC.

