Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: USP7 deubiquitinase promotes ubiquitin-dependent DNA damage
signaling by stabilizing RNF168


In DNA damage response (DDR), histone ubiquitination by RNF168 is a
critical event, which orchestrates the recruitment of downstream DDR
factors, e.g. BRCA1 and 53BP1. Here, we report USP7 deubiquitinase
regulates the stability of RNF168. We showed that USP7 disruption impairs
the monoubiquitination of H2A (uH2A) and ultraviolet radiation
(UVR)-induced monoubiquitination of H2AX, and decreases the levels of
pBmi1, Bmi1, RNF168, pChk1 and BRCA1. USP7 silencing by siRNA reduces
uH2A and UVR-induced monoubiquititination of H2AX, as well as the levels
of Ring1B, Bmi1, RNF168 and BRCA1, recapitulating the chronic USP7
deficiency. USP7 disruption also compromises the formation of UVR-induced
foci (UVRIF) and ionizing radiation-induced foci (IRIF) of uH2A,
poly-K63-ubiquititination and BRCA1, but does not affect UVRIF and IRIF
of 53BP1. USP7 was shown to physically bind RNF168 in vitro and in vivo.
Overexpression of wild-type USP7, but not its catalytic-inactive or
interaction-defective mutants, prevents UVR-induced RNF168 degradation.
Both USP7 mutants are unable to cleave Ub-conjugates of RNF168 in vivo.
Furthermore, ectopic expression of RNF168, or both RNF8 and RNF168
together, rescue the formation of UVRIF and IRIF of
poly-K63-ubiquititination and BRCA1. Taken together, these findings
reveal an important role of USP7 in regulating ubiquitin-dependent
signaling via stabilization of RNF168.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

