Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phytochemical pterostilbene suppresses lung cancer stem cell
generation via modulating tumor-associated macrophages


Tumor associated macrophages have been shown to play key roles in tumor
progression in different cancer types including lung. Here we
investigated the role of M2-tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) in the
generation of lung cancer stem cells (LCSCs) and the potential of
modulating TAMs to inhibit the generation of LCSCs. Elevated Muc1
expression has been reported in inflammatory lung macrophages and
associated with lung cancer development. We first found that Muc1 is
overexpressed in lung cancer patients and associated with poor survival
rates from public database; importantly, we showed that when co-cultured
with TAMs, the level of Muc1 along with stemness genes significantly
increased in lung cancer cells. Pterostilbene dose-dependently suppressed
self-renewal ability in TAMs-cocultured lung cancer cells via
downregulating Muc1, NF-kB, CD133, -catenin and Sox2 expression.
Subsequently, we demonstrated Muc1-silenced TAMs exhibited a
significantly lower ability to promote the generation of LCSCs and a
decreased level of NF-kB, CD133 and Sox2. Collectively, we demonstrated
that Muc1 played an important role in TAMs-induced LCSC generation and
pterostilbene treatment inhibited this phenomenon. Modulation of TAMs
using pterostilbene may be of future clinical use for treating lung
cancer patients.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

