Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of p62/IMP2 novel targets in breast cancer
metastasis


As one of the most common types of cancer in women, breast cancer is far
from being well controlled, especially when the cancer spreads to other
organs in the body. Therefore, it is important to understand the
molecular and cellular mechanism of metastatic breast cancer, and to
identify new proteins that regulate the metastatic process, as such
proteins may be used as targets for possible therapeutic intervention.
Our previous study showed that p62/IMP2 (IGF2 mRNA binding protein 2) is
overexpressed in breast cancer tissues. In our present study, some
variants were generated with stable overexpression of p62/IMP2 in
MDA-MB-231 cells and LM2-4 cells, and we found that overexpression of
p62/IMP2 can increase breast cancer cell migration and reduce cell
adhesion. We also found that the p62/IMP2 can bind to c-myc mRNA and
increase the expression of c-myc in the two cell lines. To identify new
p62/IMP2 targets related with cell adhesion, we performed a Human
Extracelluar Matrix & Adhesion Molecules PCR Array to see which gene
expression changes in the p62/IMP2 overexpressed cells, compared to the
control cells. Our results showed that 18 adhesion molecules are
up-regulated with the overexpression of p62/IMP2 (Fold regulation>2, pAs
one of the most common types of cancer in women, breast cancer is far
from being well controlled, especially when the cancer spreads to other
organs in the body. Therefore, it is important to understand the
molecular and cellular mechanism of metastatic breast cancer, and to
identify new proteins that regulate the metastatic process, as such
proteins may be used as targets for possible therapeutic intervention.
Our previous study showed that p62/IMP2 (IGF2 mRNA binding protein 2) is
overexpressed in breast cancer tissues. In our present study, some
variants were generated with stable overexpression of p62/IMP2 in
MDA-MB-231 cells and LM2-4 cells, and we found that overexpression of
p62/IMP2 can increase breast cancer cell migration and reduce cell
adhesion. We also found that the p62/IMP2 can bind to c-myc mRNA and
increase the expression of c-myc in the two cell lines. To identify new
p62/IMP2 targets related with cell adhesion, we performed a Human
Extracelluar Matrix & Adhesion Molecules PCR Array to see which gene
expression changes in the p62/IMP2 overexpressed cells, compared to the
control cells. Our results showed that 18 adhesion molecules are
up-regulated with the overexpression of p62/IMP2 (Fold regulation>2,
p<0.05) while 2 are down-regulated. We selected 7 up-regulated genes
(such as CTGF, HTBS1 and COL15A1) and a down-regulated gene (ITGB4) as
candidates for the further evaluation by real time PCR. All candidates
genes were further verified byRNA immunoprecipitation (RIP). The data
from RIP suggested that connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) may be a
potential target of p62/IMP2. These results provided evidences for a
better understanding of breast cancer metastasis and targets for future
anti-metastatic drug design.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

