Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SUMOylation inhibition attenuates the cancer stem cell population
in glioblastoma and basal breast cancer


INTRO: TFAP2A and mouse homolog Tcfap2a are transcription factors that
play a critical role in development and cancer. We have recently shown
that SUMOylation of TFAP2A is a key posttranslational modification that
maintains the basal breast cancer phenotype. Treatment with anacardic
acid (AA), a SUMOylation inhibitor, led to depletion of the
CD44+/hi/CD24-/lo cancer stem cell population. Interestingly,
glioblastoma has also been shown to express TFAP2A and demonstrates an
expanded cancer stem cell population.METHODS: Mouse 4T1 basal mammary
cancer, IOWA-1T human basal breast cancer and UG118 glioblastoma cell
lines were analyzed. MTT was used to measure cell viability. Coulter
Counter and hemocytometer were used for cell quantification. Matrigel
invasion and western blot were used to further characterize the cell
lines.RESULTS: Treatment of 4T1 and UG118 cells with AA in vitro resulted
in a 67% and 65% decrease in cell viability by MTT assay, respectively (p
INTRO: TFAP2A and mouse homolog Tcfap2a are transcription factors that
play a critical role in development and cancer. We have recently shown
that SUMOylation of TFAP2A is a key posttranslational modification that
maintains the basal breast cancer phenotype. Treatment with anacardic
acid (AA), a SUMOylation inhibitor, led to depletion of the
CD44+/hi/CD24-/lo cancer stem cell population. Interestingly,
glioblastoma has also been shown to express TFAP2A and demonstrates an
expanded cancer stem cell population.METHODS: Mouse 4T1 basal mammary
cancer, IOWA-1T human basal breast cancer and UG118 glioblastoma cell
lines were analyzed. MTT was used to measure cell viability. Coulter
Counter and hemocytometer were used for cell quantification. Matrigel
invasion and western blot were used to further characterize the cell
lines.RESULTS: Treatment of 4T1 and UG118 cells with AA in vitro resulted
in a 67% and 65% decrease in cell viability by MTT assay, respectively (p
< 0.05 for both). Quantification of cell number confirmed that AA
treatment inhibited cell proliferation. At 48 hours, 4T1 cells
demonstrated a decrease of 73-77% (p INTRO: TFAP2A and mouse homolog
Tcfap2a are transcription factors that play a critical role in
development and cancer. We have recently shown that SUMOylation of TFAP2A
is a key posttranslational modification that maintains the basal breast
cancer phenotype. Treatment with anacardic acid (AA), a SUMOylation
inhibitor, led to depletion of the CD44+/hi/CD24-/lo cancer stem cell
population. Interestingly, glioblastoma has also been shown to express
TFAP2A and demonstrates an expanded cancer stem cell population.METHODS:
Mouse 4T1 basal mammary cancer, IOWA-1T human basal breast cancer and
UG118 glioblastoma cell lines were analyzed. MTT was used to measure cell
viability. Coulter Counter and hemocytometer were used for cell
quantification. Matrigel invasion and western blot were used to further
characterize the cell lines.RESULTS: Treatment of 4T1 and UG118 cells
with AA in vitro resulted in a 67% and 65% decrease in cell viability by
MTT assay, respectively (p < 0.05 for both). Quantification of cell
number confirmed that AA treatment inhibited cell proliferation. At 48
hours, 4T1 cells demonstrated a decrease of 73-77% (p < 0.01), and UG 118
cells decreased by 97 to 98% (p INTRO: TFAP2A and mouse homolog Tcfap2a
are transcription factors that play a critical role in development and
cancer. We have recently shown that SUMOylation of TFAP2A is a key
posttranslational modification that maintains the basal breast cancer
phenotype. Treatment with anacardic acid (AA), a SUMOylation inhibitor,
led to depletion of the CD44+/hi/CD24-/lo cancer stem cell population.
Interestingly, glioblastoma has also been shown to express TFAP2A and
demonstrates an expanded cancer stem cell population.METHODS: Mouse 4T1
basal mammary cancer, IOWA-1T human basal breast cancer and UG118
glioblastoma cell lines were analyzed. MTT was used to measure cell
viability. Coulter Counter and hemocytometer were used for cell
quantification. Matrigel invasion and western blot were used to further
characterize the cell lines.RESULTS: Treatment of 4T1 and UG118 cells
with AA in vitro resulted in a 67% and 65% decrease in cell viability by
MTT assay, respectively (p < 0.05 for both). Quantification of cell
number confirmed that AA treatment inhibited cell proliferation. At 48
hours, 4T1 cells demonstrated a decrease of 73-77% (p < 0.01), and UG 118
cells decreased by 97 to 98% (p < 0.001). Cell invasiveness assessed by
Matrigel invasion assay was attenuated in 4T1 and UG118 cells after
treatment (84%, p INTRO: TFAP2A and mouse homolog Tcfap2a are
transcription factors that play a critical role in development and
cancer. We have recently shown that SUMOylation of TFAP2A is a key
posttranslational modification that maintains the basal breast cancer
phenotype. Treatment with anacardic acid (AA), a SUMOylation inhibitor,
led to depletion of the CD44+/hi/CD24-/lo cancer stem cell population.
Interestingly, glioblastoma has also been shown to express TFAP2A and
demonstrates an expanded cancer stem cell population.METHODS: Mouse 4T1
basal mammary cancer, IOWA-1T human basal breast cancer and UG118
glioblastoma cell lines were analyzed. MTT was used to measure cell
viability. Coulter Counter and hemocytometer were used for cell
quantification. Matrigel invasion and western blot were used to further
characterize the cell lines.RESULTS: Treatment of 4T1 and UG118 cells
with AA in vitro resulted in a 67% and 65% decrease in cell viability by
MTT assay, respectively (p < 0.05 for both). Quantification of cell
number confirmed that AA treatment inhibited cell proliferation. At 48
hours, 4T1 cells demonstrated a decrease of 73-77% (p < 0.01), and UG 118
cells decreased by 97 to 98% (p < 0.001). Cell invasiveness assessed by
Matrigel invasion assay was attenuated in 4T1 and UG118 cells after
treatment (84%, p < 0.01 and 28%, p INTRO: TFAP2A and mouse homolog
Tcfap2a are transcription factors that play a critical role in
development and cancer. We have recently shown that SUMOylation of TFAP2A
is a key posttranslational modification that maintains the basal breast
cancer phenotype. Treatment with anacardic acid (AA), a SUMOylation
inhibitor, led to depletion of the CD44+/hi/CD24-/lo cancer stem cell
population. Interestingly, glioblastoma has also been shown to express
TFAP2A and demonstrates an expanded cancer stem cell population.METHODS:
Mouse 4T1 basal mammary cancer, IOWA-1T human basal breast cancer and
UG118 glioblastoma cell lines were analyzed. MTT was used to measure cell
viability. Coulter Counter and hemocytometer were used for cell
quantification. Matrigel invasion and western blot were used to further
characterize the cell lines.RESULTS: Treatment of 4T1 and UG118 cells
with AA in vitro resulted in a 67% and 65% decrease in cell viability by
MTT assay, respectively (p < 0.05 for both). Quantification of cell
number confirmed that AA treatment inhibited cell proliferation. At 48
hours, 4T1 cells demonstrated a decrease of 73-77% (p < 0.01), and UG 118
cells decreased by 97 to 98% (p < 0.001). Cell invasiveness assessed by
Matrigel invasion assay was attenuated in 4T1 and UG118 cells after
treatment (84%, p < 0.01 and 28%, p < 0.05, respectively). Western blot
demonstrated a dose-dependent decrease in expression of the cancer stem
cell marker CD44 or the mouse homolog CD49f following AA treatment of
UG118 and 4T1 cells, respectively. Western blot confirmed that while
total TFAP2A levels were unchanged, SUMO conjugated TFAP2A was decreased
after AA treatment of 4T1 cells. To further establish relevance to human
cancer, an aggressive chemotherapeutic resistant patient-derived
xenograft, IOWA-1T, similarly demonstrated a 41% drop (p INTRO: TFAP2A
and mouse homolog Tcfap2a are transcription factors that play a critical
role in development and cancer. We have recently shown that SUMOylation
of TFAP2A is a key posttranslational modification that maintains the
basal breast cancer phenotype. Treatment with anacardic acid (AA), a
SUMOylation inhibitor, led to depletion of the CD44+/hi/CD24-/lo cancer
stem cell population. Interestingly, glioblastoma has also been shown to
express TFAP2A and demonstrates an expanded cancer stem cell
population.METHODS: Mouse 4T1 basal mammary cancer, IOWA-1T human basal
breast cancer and UG118 glioblastoma cell lines were analyzed. MTT was
used to measure cell viability. Coulter Counter and hemocytometer were
used for cell quantification. Matrigel invasion and western blot were
used to further characterize the cell lines.RESULTS: Treatment of 4T1 and
UG118 cells with AA in vitro resulted in a 67% and 65% decrease in cell
viability by MTT assay, respectively (p < 0.05 for both). Quantification
of cell number confirmed that AA treatment inhibited cell proliferation.
At 48 hours, 4T1 cells demonstrated a decrease of 73-77% (p < 0.01), and
UG 118 cells decreased by 97 to 98% (p < 0.001). Cell invasiveness
assessed by Matrigel invasion assay was attenuated in 4T1 and UG118 cells
after treatment (84%, p < 0.01 and 28%, p < 0.05, respectively). Western
blot demonstrated a dose-dependent decrease in expression of the cancer
stem cell marker CD44 or the mouse homolog CD49f following AA treatment
of UG118 and 4T1 cells, respectively. Western blot confirmed that while
total TFAP2A levels were unchanged, SUMO conjugated TFAP2A was decreased
after AA treatment of 4T1 cells. To further establish relevance to human
cancer, an aggressive chemotherapeutic resistant patient-derived
xenograft, IOWA-1T, similarly demonstrated a 41% drop (p < 0.007) in cell
invasiveness and a concomitant decrease in SUMOylated TFAP2A with AA
treatment.CONCLUSION: Inhibition of the SUMO pathway attenuates the
cancer stem cell population in basal breast cancer and glioblastoma.
While further investigation is needed, SUMOylation may be a common
biological posttranslational modification that defines cancer stem cells.
Furthermore, basal breast cancer, brain cancer, and other cancers that
express TFAP2A may be amenable to SUMOylation inhibitors such as AA.

