Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Matrigel rescues breast cancer cells from the growth inhibitory
effects of HIF-1 and HIF-2 silencing


Tumor microenvironments are frequently hypoxic and result in the
stabilization of hypoxia inducible factors (HIF-1/2) that
transcriptionally activate genes involved in invasion, metastasis,
metabolism and angiogenesis [1]. The role of hypoxia and the contribution
of HIF in the angiogenic switch leading to tumor progression and
resistance to treatment are well documented. This angiogenic response to
HIF activity is largely mediated through activation of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Noninvasive characterization of the
loss of both isoform of HIFs (HIF-1 & HIF-2) on tumor vascularization is
relatively unexplored. Here we investigated the effect of HIF silencing
on tumor growth in the presence or absence of Matrigel that resembles the
complex extracellular matrix (ECM) found in most tumors and determined
its effect on tumor vasculature using noninvasive MRI.MDA-MB-231 human
breast cancer cells expressing shRNA against both HIF-1 and HIF-2
(231-DK) were established as previously described [2]. In vivo studies
were performed using MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells expressing an empty
vector control (231-EV) and 231-DK cells implanted in the mammary fat pad
of female SCID mice. Tumor growth curves were obtained from cells
inoculated either in 0.05 ml of Hanks balanced salt solution (HBSS) or
together with Matrigel solution (8.8 mg/ml). All MRI studies were
performed on a 9.4T Bruker Biospec horizontal bore scanner. 3D maps of
vascular volume (V/V) and permeability (VP) were obtained using a rapid
gradient-echo sequence and albumin-GdDTPA (0.5 g/kg) as the contrast
agent (CA). A proton density (PD) image was acquired prior to CA
injection, using a 3D gradient echo sequence, with TE/TR = 1.5/10 ms and
3 flip angle and analysis of the images were performed as previously
described [3].Exposure to hypoxia showed no increase in HIF-1 or 2
protein expression in 231-DK compared to 231-EV cells. A significant
growth advantage of the 231-DK cells in vivo was observed when inoculated
in the presence of Matrigel compared to 231-DK in HBSS. Growth advantage
of tumors in the presence of Matrigel was less dramatic for 231-EV cells.
When inoculated with Matrigel, 3D reconstructed maps of 231-DK tumors
showed significantly increased VP compared to 231-EV tumors with no
difference in the VV. Increased vascular permeability in tumors derived
from 231-DK cells compared to tumors derived from 231-EV cells can be
attributed to VEGF in the Matrigel that is known to exhibit paracrine
effects. These data suggest that ECM components may modulate molecular
targeting and highlight the importance of the tumor microenvironment in
modifying HIF silencing effects. Work is under way to analyze the effects
on the metastatic burden in these systems.References: 1. Semenza, Trends
in Mol. Med, 2002; 2. Krishnamachary et al., PLoS One, 2012; 3. Zhu et
al., Magn Reson Mater Physics, 2014.Supported by NIH R01CA136576 and P50
CA103175.

