Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations among tissue vitamin D metabolites and breast cancer
risk factors in women undergoing reduction mammoplasty


Background: Vitamin D, the precursor to the potent steroid hormone
calcitriol (1,25(OH)2D), is mainly obtained through sunlight exposure,
diet and supplements. Some basic science and preclinical studies indicate
that vitamin D promotes differentiation and apoptosis; inhibits the
proliferation and inflammation and therefore decreases the risk of
developing cancer. However, most of these studies were done in cell
culture and epidemiology studies utilized blood vitamin D assays. This
study validates methods for measuring 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D in breast
tissues and investigates the relationship between tissue vitamin D,
plasma vitamin D and breast cancer risk factors. Methods: To validate the
assay, 44 tissue samples from 11 women with no history of breast cancer
undergoing reduction mammoplasty were used to investigate the levels of
vitamin D across the breast by enzyme immunoassay. Tissue and plasma
25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D levels were then determined in 176 subjects who
have available epidemiological profiles and among whom we previously
determined breast hormone and receptor levels. Correlations between
tissue vitamin D metabolites with blood vitamin D metabolites,
participants characteristics (e.g., age, race and BMI), and other hormone
and receptor levels were analyzed using Pearson's correlation
coefficient. Non-normally distributed continuous variables were
logarithmic transformed. Partial correlation coefficients were also used
to examine associations while adjusting for participant characteristics.
Results: The average coefficient of variation of 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D
among 4 breast sections were 14.81% and 19.13%, respectively. For the
entire study set, tissue 25(OH)D levels ranged between 53.24-209.36
nmol/Kg and tissue 1,25(OH)2D range was 2.48-41.91 pmol/Kg. We observed
positive correlations between tissue and plasma levels of 25(OH)D (r =
0.55, pBackground: Vitamin D, the precursor to the potent steroid hormone
calcitriol (1,25(OH)2D), is mainly obtained through sunlight exposure,
diet and supplements. Some basic science and preclinical studies indicate
that vitamin D promotes differentiation and apoptosis; inhibits the
proliferation and inflammation and therefore decreases the risk of
developing cancer. However, most of these studies were done in cell
culture and epidemiology studies utilized blood vitamin D assays. This
study validates methods for measuring 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D in breast
tissues and investigates the relationship between tissue vitamin D,
plasma vitamin D and breast cancer risk factors. Methods: To validate the
assay, 44 tissue samples from 11 women with no history of breast cancer
undergoing reduction mammoplasty were used to investigate the levels of
vitamin D across the breast by enzyme immunoassay. Tissue and plasma
25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D levels were then determined in 176 subjects who
have available epidemiological profiles and among whom we previously
determined breast hormone and receptor levels. Correlations between
tissue vitamin D metabolites with blood vitamin D metabolites,
participants characteristics (e.g., age, race and BMI), and other hormone
and receptor levels were analyzed using Pearson's correlation
coefficient. Non-normally distributed continuous variables were
logarithmic transformed. Partial correlation coefficients were also used
to examine associations while adjusting for participant characteristics.
Results: The average coefficient of variation of 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D
among 4 breast sections were 14.81% and 19.13%, respectively. For the
entire study set, tissue 25(OH)D levels ranged between 53.24-209.36
nmol/Kg and tissue 1,25(OH)2D range was 2.48-41.91 pmol/Kg. We observed
positive correlations between tissue and plasma levels of 25(OH)D (r =
0.55, p<0.0001) and 1,25(OH)2D (r = 0.58, pBackground: Vitamin D, the
precursor to the potent steroid hormone calcitriol (1,25(OH)2D), is
mainly obtained through sunlight exposure, diet and supplements. Some
basic science and preclinical studies indicate that vitamin D promotes
differentiation and apoptosis; inhibits the proliferation and
inflammation and therefore decreases the risk of developing cancer.
However, most of these studies were done in cell culture and epidemiology
studies utilized blood vitamin D assays. This study validates methods for
measuring 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D in breast tissues and investigates the
relationship between tissue vitamin D, plasma vitamin D and breast cancer
risk factors. Methods: To validate the assay, 44 tissue samples from 11
women with no history of breast cancer undergoing reduction mammoplasty
were used to investigate the levels of vitamin D across the breast by
enzyme immunoassay. Tissue and plasma 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D levels were
then determined in 176 subjects who have available epidemiological
profiles and among whom we previously determined breast hormone and
receptor levels. Correlations between tissue vitamin D metabolites with
blood vitamin D metabolites, participants characteristics (e.g., age,
race and BMI), and other hormone and receptor levels were analyzed using
Pearson's correlation coefficient. Non-normally distributed continuous
variables were logarithmic transformed. Partial correlation coefficients
were also used to examine associations while adjusting for participant
characteristics. Results: The average coefficient of variation of 25(OH)D
and 1,25(OH)2D among 4 breast sections were 14.81% and 19.13%,
respectively. For the entire study set, tissue 25(OH)D levels ranged
between 53.24-209.36 nmol/Kg and tissue 1,25(OH)2D range was 2.48-41.91
pmol/Kg. We observed positive correlations between tissue and plasma
levels of 25(OH)D (r = 0.55, p<0.0001) and 1,25(OH)2D (r = 0.58,
p<0.0001). Tissue 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D levels were also well correlated
(r = 0.59, pBackground: Vitamin D, the precursor to the potent steroid
hormone calcitriol (1,25(OH)2D), is mainly obtained through sunlight
exposure, diet and supplements. Some basic science and preclinical
studies indicate that vitamin D promotes differentiation and apoptosis;
inhibits the proliferation and inflammation and therefore decreases the
risk of developing cancer. However, most of these studies were done in
cell culture and epidemiology studies utilized blood vitamin D assays.
This study validates methods for measuring 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D in
breast tissues and investigates the relationship between tissue vitamin
D, plasma vitamin D and breast cancer risk factors. Methods: To validate
the assay, 44 tissue samples from 11 women with no history of breast
cancer undergoing reduction mammoplasty were used to investigate the
levels of vitamin D across the breast by enzyme immunoassay. Tissue and
plasma 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D levels were then determined in 176 subjects
who have available epidemiological profiles and among whom we previously
determined breast hormone and receptor levels. Correlations between
tissue vitamin D metabolites with blood vitamin D metabolites,
participants characteristics (e.g., age, race and BMI), and other hormone
and receptor levels were analyzed using Pearson's correlation
coefficient. Non-normally distributed continuous variables were
logarithmic transformed. Partial correlation coefficients were also used
to examine associations while adjusting for participant characteristics.
Results: The average coefficient of variation of 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D
among 4 breast sections were 14.81% and 19.13%, respectively. For the
entire study set, tissue 25(OH)D levels ranged between 53.24-209.36
nmol/Kg and tissue 1,25(OH)2D range was 2.48-41.91 pmol/Kg. We observed
positive correlations between tissue and plasma levels of 25(OH)D (r =
0.55, p<0.0001) and 1,25(OH)2D (r = 0.58, p<0.0001). Tissue 25(OH)D and
1,25(OH)2D levels were also well correlated (r = 0.59, p<0.0001). After
adjustment for BMI and age, tissue 1,25(OH)2D was positively correlated
with plasma adiponectin to leptin ratio (r = 0.18, p = 0.047), and
inversely correlated with tissue IGF to IGFBP3 ratio (r = -0.30, p =
0.025). None of these associations were found when comparing these
factors with plasma level vitamin D metabolites. Conclusions: Our data
indicate that although plasma and tissue vitamin D metabolites strongly
correlate with each other, studying the target organ, namely the breast,
provides greater insight into mechanistic carcinogenic relationships and
how hormone levels in tissues modulate the microenvironment of the normal
breast that may be related to breast cancer risk.

