Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tim-3/galectin-9 interaction might be associated with the
immunosuppression of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)


Purpose: Although GIST shows high expression of Wilms Tumor 1 (WT1) and
might be potentially immunogenic, there are no evidences that antitumor
immunity suppresses GIST development. Elucidation of the mechanism of the
immunosuppression of GIST might contribute to the establishment of the
immunotherapy against GIST.Methods: Nineteen GIST tissue samples were
evaluated for the expression of various tumor-associated antigens, MHC
class I, immune check point molecules and the infiltration of immune
cells by immunohistochemistry. Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) from
freshly resected GIST tissues were analyzed for WT1 tetramer
assay.Results: All GIST tissues showed diffuse WT1 expression but not
GP-100, NY-Eso1, Melan A and MAGEA4. They all expressed MHC class I and
WT1 tetramer positive CD8+T cells were found in TILs from some GIST
tissues. Seven GIST tissues showed marked CD8+ T cell infiltration and
the infiltration of CD8+T cells and NK cells was strongly correlated.
However, all the immune cells infiltrated into GIST tissues were CD69
negative inactivated cells. Although PD-1/PD-L1 expression was not seen
in GIST tissues, galectin-9 was expressed in tumor cells and Tim-3 was
expressed on NK cells but not CD8+T cells in all the GIST
tissues.Conclusions: Galectin-9 on tumor cells and Tim-3 on infiltrated
NK cells might be associated with the immunosuppression of GIST.

