Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MafB and ETS2 potentiate Notch signaling in T-ALL


Despite the high frequency of activating Notch mutations in human T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), these naturally occurring Notch1
mutant alleles fail to efficiently drive leukemia onset, indicating a
requirement for collaborating events that potentiate the Notch oncogenic
program. We performed an in vitro gain-of-function screen to identify
gene products that enhanced the signaling strength of naturally occurring
Notch mutants. Both MafB and ETS2 emerged as candidates that individually
potentiated Notch signaling, and when co-expressed, they dramatically
enhanced signaling strength comparable to the levels induced by MAML1, a
core component of the Notch transcriptional complex. Knockdown of MafB in
mouse T-ALL cell lines suppressed the expression of common Notch target
genes, including cMyc and Hes1, and sustained knockdown of MafB
expression impaired T-ALL cell growth in cell competition assays.
Notably, MafB is sufficient to enhance the oncogenic potential of
naturally occurring Notch mutants in vivo, by significantly accelerating
T-ALL onset. Moreover, this enhanced Notch pathway activation required
MafB-ETS2 interaction, and facilitated the recruitment of PCAF and p300.
Although all primary human T-ALL samples that express MafB display an
elevated Notch pathway signature, the T-ALL samples positive for high
levels of MafB expression, exhibit low levels of Notch1 expression,
further suggesting a role for MafB as an enhancer. These data present a
novel mechanism for the enhancement of the oncogenic potential of weak
Notch mutants in leukemia and introduce MafB as a potential therapeutic
target in T-ALL.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

