Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduction of microRNA-21 by vitamin D compounds during ductal
carcinoma in situ transition to invasive ductal carcinoma


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small RNA molecules of approximately 22
nucleotides in lengths that can negatively control target gene expression
post-transcriptionally. There are currently more than one hundred known
human miRNAs. miRNAs have been shown to play an important role in the
development and progression of various types of cancer. In breast cancer,
ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is an early non-invasive precursor, which
is known to progress to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) if left
untreated. The involvement of miRNAs in the breast cancer progression
from DCIS to IDC is still not well understood, and potential regulation
of miRNAs by vitamin D compounds during the progression has not been
tested. We have previously reported that a novel Gemini vitamin D analog,
1,25-dihydroxy-20R-21(3-hydroxy-3-deuteromethyl-4,4,4-trideuterobutyl)-23-y
ne-26,27-hexafluoro-cholecalciferol (BXL0124), inhibits the progression
of DCIS to IDC in vivo. To identify miRNAs that could potentially be
involved in DCIS progression to IDC, we utilized the MCF10DCIS.com
xenograft tumors. MCF10DCIS.com cells (10^6 cells/mouse) were injected
subcutaneously into the rear flanks of nu/nu mice. The mice were then
treated with BXL0124 (0.1 g/kg) for 5 weeks. The critical DCIS to IDC
transition occurred between weeks 3 and 4 in the in vivo lesions, and
several microRNAs were assessed with respect to the DCIS to IDC
transition at weeks 3 and 4. Among many miRNAs analyzed, miR-21, miR-24,
and miR-140 were up-regulated in IDC lesions compared to DCIS lesions,
whereas no marked changes were observed with respect to miR-200c,
miR-let-7a, miR-26a, miR-34a, and miR-182. One of the miRNAs identified
miR-21, is a well-known oncomir and overexpressed in breast carcinoma,
mediating cell survival, proliferation, and metastasis. The increased
expression of miR-21 was significant when DCIS lesions progressed to IDC,
and this effect was diminished by the treatment with Gemini vitamin D,
BXL0124, at week 4. In conclusion, vitamin D compounds reduce the levels
of miR-21 during DCIS transition to IDC, potentially contributing to its
preventive effects in breast cancer progression. Further investigation of
the mechanisms of action by which vitamin D compounds regulate miR-21
should be considered. (This work was supported in part by the National
Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute R01-CA127645 and the
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Grant ES005022).

