Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The RNA-binding protein HuR facilitates proliferation and
metastasis in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the fourth most
common cause of cancer-related death in the Unites States, with an
overall 5-year survival rate of Background: Pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the fourth most common cause of cancer-related
death in the Unites States, with an overall 5-year survival rate of <6%.
The ubiquitously expressed RNA-binding protein HuR (ELAVL1) has been
implicated in numerous cancer types as a post-transcriptional facilitator
of tumorigenesis, through its stabilization of various proliferation-,
survival-, and metastasis-associated mRNA transcripts. Our lab has
previously demonstrated that elevated HuR expression in human resected
PDA samples is associated with poor prognostic factors (e.g. increased T
stage). Here, we explored the role of HuR expression in human PDA growth
and metastasis by generating isogenic PDA cell lines with induced
silencing or overexpression of HuR.Methods: Stable MiaPaCa2 cell lines
were generated that produce two different shRNAs against the HuR coding
sequence (labeled Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700) in response to doxycycline
(DOX) induction. HuR silencing was validated by RT-qPCR and Western
blotting. Similarly, a DOX-inducible MiaPaCa2 cell line that
overexpresses HuR cDNA (Mia.HuR) was generated and validated. Sustained
50% knockdown and 1.5-2-fold overexpression were achieved, respectively.
Following characterization of HuR expression in these cell lines under
DOX conditions, we performed a 7-day cell proliferation (PicoGreen) assay
and assessed anchorage-independence over a 4-week period by soft agar
colony formation assay. Metastatic potential was measured by Matrigel
invasion and in vitro scratch test assays.Results: Upon DOX induction,
Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700 cell lines showed significantly reduced cell
proliferation over 7 days (22% and 15% reduction compared to non-induced
in sh290 and sh700 respectively, pBackground: Pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the fourth most common cause of cancer-related
death in the Unites States, with an overall 5-year survival rate of <6%.
The ubiquitously expressed RNA-binding protein HuR (ELAVL1) has been
implicated in numerous cancer types as a post-transcriptional facilitator
of tumorigenesis, through its stabilization of various proliferation-,
survival-, and metastasis-associated mRNA transcripts. Our lab has
previously demonstrated that elevated HuR expression in human resected
PDA samples is associated with poor prognostic factors (e.g. increased T
stage). Here, we explored the role of HuR expression in human PDA growth
and metastasis by generating isogenic PDA cell lines with induced
silencing or overexpression of HuR.Methods: Stable MiaPaCa2 cell lines
were generated that produce two different shRNAs against the HuR coding
sequence (labeled Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700) in response to doxycycline
(DOX) induction. HuR silencing was validated by RT-qPCR and Western
blotting. Similarly, a DOX-inducible MiaPaCa2 cell line that
overexpresses HuR cDNA (Mia.HuR) was generated and validated. Sustained
50% knockdown and 1.5-2-fold overexpression were achieved, respectively.
Following characterization of HuR expression in these cell lines under
DOX conditions, we performed a 7-day cell proliferation (PicoGreen) assay
and assessed anchorage-independence over a 4-week period by soft agar
colony formation assay. Metastatic potential was measured by Matrigel
invasion and in vitro scratch test assays.Results: Upon DOX induction,
Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700 cell lines showed significantly reduced cell
proliferation over 7 days (22% and 15% reduction compared to non-induced
in sh290 and sh700 respectively, p<0.001). Accordingly, HuR
overexpression in Mia.HuR showed slightly increased cell proliferation
over 7 days (15% increase compared to non-induced, pBackground:
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the fourth most common cause of
cancer-related death in the Unites States, with an overall 5-year
survival rate of <6%. The ubiquitously expressed RNA-binding protein HuR
(ELAVL1) has been implicated in numerous cancer types as a
post-transcriptional facilitator of tumorigenesis, through its
stabilization of various proliferation-, survival-, and
metastasis-associated mRNA transcripts. Our lab has previously
demonstrated that elevated HuR expression in human resected PDA samples
is associated with poor prognostic factors (e.g. increased T stage).
Here, we explored the role of HuR expression in human PDA growth and
metastasis by generating isogenic PDA cell lines with induced silencing
or overexpression of HuR.Methods: Stable MiaPaCa2 cell lines were
generated that produce two different shRNAs against the HuR coding
sequence (labeled Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700) in response to doxycycline
(DOX) induction. HuR silencing was validated by RT-qPCR and Western
blotting. Similarly, a DOX-inducible MiaPaCa2 cell line that
overexpresses HuR cDNA (Mia.HuR) was generated and validated. Sustained
50% knockdown and 1.5-2-fold overexpression were achieved, respectively.
Following characterization of HuR expression in these cell lines under
DOX conditions, we performed a 7-day cell proliferation (PicoGreen) assay
and assessed anchorage-independence over a 4-week period by soft agar
colony formation assay. Metastatic potential was measured by Matrigel
invasion and in vitro scratch test assays.Results: Upon DOX induction,
Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700 cell lines showed significantly reduced cell
proliferation over 7 days (22% and 15% reduction compared to non-induced
in sh290 and sh700 respectively, p<0.001). Accordingly, HuR
overexpression in Mia.HuR showed slightly increased cell proliferation
over 7 days (15% increase compared to non-induced, p<0.001). HuR
silencing resulted in a dramatic reduction of colony formation in soft
agar over 4 weeks (57% and 71% reduction compared to non-induced control
cells, pBackground: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the fourth
most common cause of cancer-related death in the Unites States, with an
overall 5-year survival rate of <6%. The ubiquitously expressed
RNA-binding protein HuR (ELAVL1) has been implicated in numerous cancer
types as a post-transcriptional facilitator of tumorigenesis, through its
stabilization of various proliferation-, survival-, and
metastasis-associated mRNA transcripts. Our lab has previously
demonstrated that elevated HuR expression in human resected PDA samples
is associated with poor prognostic factors (e.g. increased T stage).
Here, we explored the role of HuR expression in human PDA growth and
metastasis by generating isogenic PDA cell lines with induced silencing
or overexpression of HuR.Methods: Stable MiaPaCa2 cell lines were
generated that produce two different shRNAs against the HuR coding
sequence (labeled Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700) in response to doxycycline
(DOX) induction. HuR silencing was validated by RT-qPCR and Western
blotting. Similarly, a DOX-inducible MiaPaCa2 cell line that
overexpresses HuR cDNA (Mia.HuR) was generated and validated. Sustained
50% knockdown and 1.5-2-fold overexpression were achieved, respectively.
Following characterization of HuR expression in these cell lines under
DOX conditions, we performed a 7-day cell proliferation (PicoGreen) assay
and assessed anchorage-independence over a 4-week period by soft agar
colony formation assay. Metastatic potential was measured by Matrigel
invasion and in vitro scratch test assays.Results: Upon DOX induction,
Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700 cell lines showed significantly reduced cell
proliferation over 7 days (22% and 15% reduction compared to non-induced
in sh290 and sh700 respectively, p<0.001). Accordingly, HuR
overexpression in Mia.HuR showed slightly increased cell proliferation
over 7 days (15% increase compared to non-induced, p<0.001). HuR
silencing resulted in a dramatic reduction of colony formation in soft
agar over 4 weeks (57% and 71% reduction compared to non-induced control
cells, p<0.05). HuR silencing also reduced cells ability to invade
through Matrigel (41% and 56% reduction compared to non-induced control
cells, pBackground: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the fourth
most common cause of cancer-related death in the Unites States, with an
overall 5-year survival rate of <6%. The ubiquitously expressed
RNA-binding protein HuR (ELAVL1) has been implicated in numerous cancer
types as a post-transcriptional facilitator of tumorigenesis, through its
stabilization of various proliferation-, survival-, and
metastasis-associated mRNA transcripts. Our lab has previously
demonstrated that elevated HuR expression in human resected PDA samples
is associated with poor prognostic factors (e.g. increased T stage).
Here, we explored the role of HuR expression in human PDA growth and
metastasis by generating isogenic PDA cell lines with induced silencing
or overexpression of HuR.Methods: Stable MiaPaCa2 cell lines were
generated that produce two different shRNAs against the HuR coding
sequence (labeled Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700) in response to doxycycline
(DOX) induction. HuR silencing was validated by RT-qPCR and Western
blotting. Similarly, a DOX-inducible MiaPaCa2 cell line that
overexpresses HuR cDNA (Mia.HuR) was generated and validated. Sustained
50% knockdown and 1.5-2-fold overexpression were achieved, respectively.
Following characterization of HuR expression in these cell lines under
DOX conditions, we performed a 7-day cell proliferation (PicoGreen) assay
and assessed anchorage-independence over a 4-week period by soft agar
colony formation assay. Metastatic potential was measured by Matrigel
invasion and in vitro scratch test assays.Results: Upon DOX induction,
Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700 cell lines showed significantly reduced cell
proliferation over 7 days (22% and 15% reduction compared to non-induced
in sh290 and sh700 respectively, p<0.001). Accordingly, HuR
overexpression in Mia.HuR showed slightly increased cell proliferation
over 7 days (15% increase compared to non-induced, p<0.001). HuR
silencing resulted in a dramatic reduction of colony formation in soft
agar over 4 weeks (57% and 71% reduction compared to non-induced control
cells, p<0.05). HuR silencing also reduced cells ability to invade
through Matrigel (41% and 56% reduction compared to non-induced control
cells, p<0.05), whereas HuR overexpression (Mia.HuR) resulted in a
dramatic increase in invasion (1,250% increase compared to control,
pBackground: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the fourth most
common cause of cancer-related death in the Unites States, with an
overall 5-year survival rate of <6%. The ubiquitously expressed
RNA-binding protein HuR (ELAVL1) has been implicated in numerous cancer
types as a post-transcriptional facilitator of tumorigenesis, through its
stabilization of various proliferation-, survival-, and
metastasis-associated mRNA transcripts. Our lab has previously
demonstrated that elevated HuR expression in human resected PDA samples
is associated with poor prognostic factors (e.g. increased T stage).
Here, we explored the role of HuR expression in human PDA growth and
metastasis by generating isogenic PDA cell lines with induced silencing
or overexpression of HuR.Methods: Stable MiaPaCa2 cell lines were
generated that produce two different shRNAs against the HuR coding
sequence (labeled Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700) in response to doxycycline
(DOX) induction. HuR silencing was validated by RT-qPCR and Western
blotting. Similarly, a DOX-inducible MiaPaCa2 cell line that
overexpresses HuR cDNA (Mia.HuR) was generated and validated. Sustained
50% knockdown and 1.5-2-fold overexpression were achieved, respectively.
Following characterization of HuR expression in these cell lines under
DOX conditions, we performed a 7-day cell proliferation (PicoGreen) assay
and assessed anchorage-independence over a 4-week period by soft agar
colony formation assay. Metastatic potential was measured by Matrigel
invasion and in vitro scratch test assays.Results: Upon DOX induction,
Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700 cell lines showed significantly reduced cell
proliferation over 7 days (22% and 15% reduction compared to non-induced
in sh290 and sh700 respectively, p<0.001). Accordingly, HuR
overexpression in Mia.HuR showed slightly increased cell proliferation
over 7 days (15% increase compared to non-induced, p<0.001). HuR
silencing resulted in a dramatic reduction of colony formation in soft
agar over 4 weeks (57% and 71% reduction compared to non-induced control
cells, p<0.05). HuR silencing also reduced cells ability to invade
through Matrigel (41% and 56% reduction compared to non-induced control
cells, p<0.05), whereas HuR overexpression (Mia.HuR) resulted in a
dramatic increase in invasion (1,250% increase compared to control,
p<0.05). In a complementary in vitro scratch test, cell migration was
reduced by HuR silencing and increased by HuR overexpression
(pBackground: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the fourth most
common cause of cancer-related death in the Unites States, with an
overall 5-year survival rate of <6%. The ubiquitously expressed
RNA-binding protein HuR (ELAVL1) has been implicated in numerous cancer
types as a post-transcriptional facilitator of tumorigenesis, through its
stabilization of various proliferation-, survival-, and
metastasis-associated mRNA transcripts. Our lab has previously
demonstrated that elevated HuR expression in human resected PDA samples
is associated with poor prognostic factors (e.g. increased T stage).
Here, we explored the role of HuR expression in human PDA growth and
metastasis by generating isogenic PDA cell lines with induced silencing
or overexpression of HuR.Methods: Stable MiaPaCa2 cell lines were
generated that produce two different shRNAs against the HuR coding
sequence (labeled Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700) in response to doxycycline
(DOX) induction. HuR silencing was validated by RT-qPCR and Western
blotting. Similarly, a DOX-inducible MiaPaCa2 cell line that
overexpresses HuR cDNA (Mia.HuR) was generated and validated. Sustained
50% knockdown and 1.5-2-fold overexpression were achieved, respectively.
Following characterization of HuR expression in these cell lines under
DOX conditions, we performed a 7-day cell proliferation (PicoGreen) assay
and assessed anchorage-independence over a 4-week period by soft agar
colony formation assay. Metastatic potential was measured by Matrigel
invasion and in vitro scratch test assays.Results: Upon DOX induction,
Mia.sh290 and Mia.sh700 cell lines showed significantly reduced cell
proliferation over 7 days (22% and 15% reduction compared to non-induced
in sh290 and sh700 respectively, p<0.001). Accordingly, HuR
overexpression in Mia.HuR showed slightly increased cell proliferation
over 7 days (15% increase compared to non-induced, p<0.001). HuR
silencing resulted in a dramatic reduction of colony formation in soft
agar over 4 weeks (57% and 71% reduction compared to non-induced control
cells, p<0.05). HuR silencing also reduced cells ability to invade
through Matrigel (41% and 56% reduction compared to non-induced control
cells, p<0.05), whereas HuR overexpression (Mia.HuR) resulted in a
dramatic increase in invasion (1,250% increase compared to control,
p<0.05). In a complementary in vitro scratch test, cell migration was
reduced by HuR silencing and increased by HuR overexpression (p<0.01 for
both).Conclusion: Taken together with our previous findings, our work
demonstrates that manipulation of HuR expression affects key
characteristics of tumorigenesis (i.e. proliferation, invasion, and
migration). These findings, along with ongoing in vivo work, continue to
support the notion that targeting HuR in PDA cells may be a promising
therapeutic strategy.

