Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of an RGD peptide in osteoclast maturation and behavior as
a therapeutic option for metastatic bone disease


Metastatic bone disease is a common feature of many types of cancer and
has a severe impact on the quality of life of patients. Hence, specific
therapeutic strategies inhibiting tumor induced osteolysis are urgently
needed. In this study, we aimed to interfere with integrin adhesion
receptors, which are central players of the bone resorption process,
including osteoclastogenesis as well as osteoclast/bone matrix
interaction. For this purpose, we used a cyclic RGD peptide which blocks
integrin V3 and V5-ligand binding. Our results revealed that the RGD
peptide blocked osteoclast maturation in a dose-dependent manner. In
detail, pre-osteoclasts treated with the RGD peptide exhibited reduced
cell spreading, migration and adhesion on RGD-containing matrix proteins,
such as osteopontin and fibrinogen, which are ligands of integrin V3. The
activation of the most upstream signal transduction molecules of the
integrin receptor-initiated pathway, such as FAK and c-Src, were
consistently blocked by the RGD peptide. First evidence has suggested
that the RGD peptide might interfere with metastatic bone disease in vivo
and the evidence presented herein describes the underlying mechanisms of
the inhibitory effect of the RGD peptide on V-integrin expressing
pre-osteoclasts by blocking integrin ligand binding and interfering with
osteoclast maturation and cell behavior. In conclusion, our findings
suggest that using an RGD peptide to interfere with V-integrins on
osteoclasts may represent a novel therapeutic strategy in the treatment
of malignant bone disease.

