Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing nab-paclitaxel antitumor activity through addition of
BMS-754807, a small-molecule inhibitor of IGF-1R/IR, in experimental
pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related death in the United States, and is expected to become the
second-leading cause of cancer death by 2030. Gemcitabine, the standard
of care agent over the past 16 years, has limited clinical benefits.
Recently, nab-paclitaxel has shown greater efficacy against advanced PDAC
in combination with gemcitabine. Our lab has demonstrated superior
antitumor activity of nab-paclitaxel compared with gemcitabine or
docetaxel in preclinical PDAC studies. Insulin like growth factor (IGF)
signaling proteins are frequently overexpressed in PDAC and correlate
with aggressive tumor phenotype and poor prognosis indicating that the
IGF system is an important therapeutic target in PDAC patients.
BMS-754807, a small molecule inhibitor of IGF-type 1 receptor (IGF-1R)
and insulin receptor (IR), has shown efficacy in PDAC. We evaluated
combination treatment benefits of nab-paclitaxel with BMS-754807 in
experimental PDAC.In vitro cell proliferation and protein expression were
measured by WST-1 assay and immunoblotting. Heterotopic tumor growth and
animal survival experiments were performed in murine xenografts.In vitro
analysis of four PDAC cell lines (AsPC-1, BxPC-3, MIA PaCa-2, Panc-1)
revealed that single agent nab-paclitaxel and BMS-754807 both inhibited
cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. To evaluate the
combination treatment benefits of nab-paclitaxel and BMS-754807, the IC25
dose of BMS-754807 was combined with increasing doses of nab-paclitaxel.
Addition of BMS-754807 decreased the nab-paclitaxel IC50 from 7.2 M to
490 nM for AsPC-1, 430 nM to 50 nM for BxPC-3, 740 nM to 540 nM for MIA
PaCa-2, and 690 nM to 280 nM for Panc-1 cell lines. These data suggest
that BMS-754807 combines well with nab-paclitaxel and efficiently
decreases the nab-paclitaxel IC50 in PDAC cell lines. In a heterotopic
AsPC-1 PDAC model, relative to controls (10021.3), percent net local
tumor growth was 17.121.1 with nab-paclitaxel (p = 0.002), 37.616.2 with
BMS-754807 (p = 0.01) and 0.769.1 with nab-paclitaxel plus BMS-754807 (p
= 0.0002). In Panc-1 subcutaneous xenografts, compared with controls
(10031.5), percent net tumor growth was 7.827.2 with nab-paclitaxel (p =
0.002), 40.224.1 with BMS-754807 (p = 0.02) and -29.716.8 with
nab-paclitaxel plus BMS-754807 (p = 0.0001). In an animal survival study,
median animal survival was increased compared to controls (21 days) after
nab-paclitaxel therapy (40 days, a 90% increase, p = 0.002), BMS-754807
therapy (27 days, a 29% increase, p = 0.01), and nab-paclitaxel plus
BMS-754807 therapy (47 days, a 124% increase, p = 0.005).These results
highlight measurable antitumor activity of BMS-754807 in experimental
PDAC and support the potential of BMS-754807 in combination with
nab-paclitaxel as promising targeted therapy for clinical pancreatic
cancer therapy.

