Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of the selective RAF inhibitor HM95573 in
melanoma


The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is particularly
important for the survival and proliferation of tumor cells. Activation
of the MAPK pathway due to mutations in BRAF and NRAS is considered one
of the causes of melanoma.HM95573 is a novel, highly potent RAF kinase
inhibitor. Biochemically assayed for over 120 kinases, HM95573 showed the
high selectivity toward BRAF mutant and CRAF kinases. The half maximal
inhibition concentrations (IC50) of HM95573 against BRAFWT, BRAFV600E and
CRAF kinases were 41nM, 7nM and 2nM, respectively. The strongly inhibited
kinases subsequent to RAF kinases appeared to be CSF1R (44nM), DDR1
(77nM) and DDR2 (182 nM).HM95573 potently inhibited the growth of mutant
BRAF melanoma cell lines such asA375 (IC50: 57nM) and SK-MEL-28 (69nM)
and of mutant NRAS melanoma cell lines such asSK-MEL-2 (53nM) and
SK-MEL-30 (24nM). In addition, the phosphorylations of MEK and ERK
downstream kinases associated with cell proliferation were effectively
inhibited with treatment of HM95573in mutant BRAF and mutant NRAS
melanoma cells.HM95573inhibited the downstream signaling in melanoma
cells even in the presence of HGF which is known to mediate innate
resistance to RAF inhibitors.HM95573 showed the excellent antitumor
activity in mouse models xenografted with both of BRAF mutation cell
lines (e.g. A375 and SK-MEL-28) and NRAS mutation cell lines (such as
SK-MEL-2 and SK-MEL-30) compared to two RAF inhibitors approved in
melanoma which were effective to only BRAF mutation cell lines under
conditions tested. Furthermore, HM95573 did not show a potential to
paradoxical activation inducing tumor growth in mouse xenograft study
using A431 cuSCC (cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma)cancer cell.Now,
HM95573 is currently in phase I development in patients with advanced
solid tumors including melanoma in Korea.

