Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BKM120-mediated G2 arrest: Structural and functional segregation
of off-target action and PI3K inhibition


Due to its central role in growth, proliferation, survival and migration,
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) is considered as an important drug
target in oncology (1). BKM120 is one of the clinically most advanced
PI3K inhibitors (PI3Ki), and is currently listed in more than 80 clinical
studies aimed at attenuating tumour progression. As an off-target effect,
BKM120 was reported to disrupt microtubules (MT) at concentrations around
1 M (2).Here, we elucidate in detail the structural factors defining
PI3K- and tubulin-binding of BKM120, and present a pure PI3K inhibitor
(PQR309) and a potent MT disruptor (MTD147) differing from BKM120 by only
1 Dalton. Separation of PI3Ki and MT disruption activities of BKM120
allowed profiling of BKM120 against PQR309 and MTD147: cellular growth
profiles of PQR309 clustered with other PI3Ki such as GDC0941/GDC0980,
while BKM120 matched MTD147. Both yielded a G2/M cell cycle arrest with
typical histone3 phosphorylation. Accumulation of G2/M arrested cells was
already evident at concentrations yielding 50% growth inhibition.
Interestingly, BKM120 concentrations for 50% cell growth inhibition (with
evident G2/M arrest) ranged below or within its reported AUC0-24 levels
at day 8 in patient plasma (3,4). This result implies that the two
activities of BKM120 cannot be separated, thus complicating the
understanding of drug action and impacting on the rational of combination
therapies at relevant drug doses.Using X-ray crystallography we found
that BKM120 binds to the colchicine pocket on -tubulin. This study
further highlights the importance of the pyrimidine core orientation for
tight tubulin binding. Interestingly, activities of regio-isomers of the
pyrimidine core are inversed for PI3Ki and tubulin association, and
modulate binding by a factor of >30x. Finally, a combination of
biochemical, cellular and structural data suggests an inverted
orientation of BKM120 in the catalytic cleft of PI3K as previously
proposed (6). In summary, the dissection of BKM120 functions allows
reassessment of its dominant activity, to increase drug safety, and to
flexibly control PI3K and/or MT targeting in combination therapy.1. M. P.
Wymann, R. Schneiter, Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9, 162 (2008).; 2. S. M.
Brachmann et al., Mol Cancer Ther 11, 1747 (2012). 3. J. C. Bendell et
al., J Clin Oncol 30, 282 (2012). 4. C. Saura et al., Clin Cancer Res 20,
1935 (2014). 5. A. E. Prota et al., Science 339, 587 (2013). 6. S. M.
Maira et al., Mol Cancer Ther 11, 317 (2012).

