Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activin signal promotes cancer progression and is involved in
cachexia in a subset of pancreatic cancer


Purpose: We previously reported that activin produces a signal with a
tumor suppressive role in pancreatic cancer (PC). Here, the association
between plasma activin A and survival in patients with advanced PC was
investigated.Experimental Design: The plasma activin A concentrations of
patients with advanced PC were determined using an ELISA. The influence
of ligands on PC cell lines was evaluated using an MTT assay and western
blot analyses. The INHBA gene (beta subunit of inhibin) was overexpressed
in PC cell lines, and this phenotype was investigated.Results: Contrary
to our expectations, patients with high plasma activin A levels had a
significantly shorter survival period than those with low levels (median
survival, 314 days vs. 482 days, P = 0.034). The cellular growth of the
MIA PaCa-2 cell line was greatly enhanced by activin A via non-SMAD
pathways. The cellular growth and colony formation of an
INHBA-overexpressed cell line were also enhanced. In a xenograft study,
INHBA-overexpressed cells tended to result in a larger tumor volume,
compared with a control. The bodyweights of mice inoculated with
INHBA-overexpressed cells decreased dramatically, and these mice all died
at an early stage, suggesting the occurrence of activin-induced
cachexia.Conclusions: Our findings indicated that the activin signal can
promote cancer progression in a subset of PC and might be involved in
cachexia and that plasma activin A can be a novel prognostic factor in
patients with advanced PC. The activin signal might be a novel target for
the treatment of PC.

