Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IR700-conjugated anti-CD44 monoclonal antibody for phototherapy
theranostics of triple-negative breast cancer


CD44 transmembrane glycoproteins are cell adhesion molecules that play a
role in cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.1 CD44
expression is associated with stem-like breast cancer cells1 and is
upregulated under hypoxia2 making it a significant target. Monoclonal
antibody (mAb)-linked to photosensitizers have achieved targeted
phototherapy.3 We developed a CD44 mAb-targeted photosensitizer complex
for combined fluorescent detection and phototherapy (PT) of CD44
expressing triple negative breast cancer cells. The mAb conjugate is
activated by near-infrared (NIR) light, and demonstrates phototoxic
effects selectively in CD44 expressing breast cancer cells following cell
membrane binding.CD44 mAb was conjugated with a NIR phthalocyanine dye,
IR700, to form CD44-IR700. MB-MDA-231 (CD44 positive), MCF-7 and BT-474
(CD44 negative) were selected for the cell studies. SDS-PAGE, UV
spectroscopy and confocal fluorescence imaging were performed to
determine purity, composition and cellular localization of the conjugate.
Microscopic observation and cell viability tests were performed to study
CD44-specific cell death. Tumor models were established by inoculating
2106 MB-MDA-231 or BT-474 cells in the upper-right mammary fat pad of
athymic female mice. In vivo fluorescence imaging was performed on a
Li-Cor Pearl Impulse scanner. Tumor bearing mice (n = 5 per group)
injected with PBS, IR700, anti-CD44 mAb, IgG-IR700 and CD44-IR700 were
monitored over a 3 week-period and sacrificed to harvest tumors. NIR
light at a dose of 30 J/cm2 was applied on day 1 after
injection.CD44-IR700 demonstrated preferential binding to the cell
membrane of MB-MDA-231 but not MCF-7 or BT-474 cells. CD44-specific cell
death was initiated by CD44-IR700-mediated PT (>90% of MB-MDA-231 cells
were killed immediately, while 88% of MCF-7 cells and 90% of BT-474 cells
were alive). Irradiation itself was harmless to cells and there was no
cytotoxicity associated with IR700 and CD44 antibody or with CD44-IR700
in the absence of irradiation. In vivo fluorescence imaging verified the
3-fold increased retention of CD44-IR700 in MB-MDA-231 tumors compared to
BT-474 tumors. CD44-IR700 injection together with a therapeutic dose of
NIR light exposure resulted in significant growth delay in MB-MDA-231
tumors, but not BT-474 tumors. We did not observe tumor growth delay in
separate groups of mice injected with PBS, IR700, anti-CD44 mAb, or
IgG-IR700, irrespective of NIR light application. Histological studies
confirmed a significant increase of necrosis in the treated MDA-MB-231
tumors.This novel PT theranostic strategy provides a promising
opportunity for treating CD44 expressing primary and metastatic triple
negative breast cancer.References: 1. Louderbough et al, Mol Can Res,
2011; 2. Krishnamachary et al, PloS one, 2012; 3. Mitsunaga et al, Nat
Med, 2011.Supported by NIH R01 CA136576 and P50 CA103175.

