Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A surrogate gene expression signature of tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) predicts degree of benefit from trastuzumab added to
standard adjuvant chemotherapy in NSABP (NRG) trial B-31 for HER2+ breast
cancer


Background: Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) have demonstrated to be
predictive of trastuzumab as well as chemotherapy benefit in adjuvant
FinHER and neoadjuvant GeparQuattro phase III trials of trastuzumab in
HER2-positive breast cancer patients (pts). Since TILs assessment is
subject to inter-observer variations, we attempted to develop a surrogate
gene expression signature of TILs and evaluate it as a potential
predictive marker for the degree of benefit from trastuzumab plus
standard adjuvant chemotherapy in NSABP B-31.Methods: Two hundred cases
selected from the discovery cohort of B-31 with Affymetrix gene
expression data were assessed for the percentage of TILs using
International TILs Working Group guidelines. Gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA) was done to identify functionally enriched biologic pathways.
Genes strongly associated with high TILs were identified (N = 119).
Hierarchical clustering analysis of TILs signature was performed in
Affymetrix gene expression data set from 731 cases randomly selected from
B-31. Proportional hazard models were used to test the heterogeneity of
degree of benefit from trastuzumab subgroups identified by TILs signature
with disease-free survival as the end point.Results: Among 200 cases, 34
were classified as morphologic high (>50%) TILs. GSEA revealed that
tumors with high TILs expressed up-regulation of genes in several immune
activation pathways involving T and B cells. Tumors with low TILs had
up-regulation of muscular, fibrous tissue, extracellular matrix, and
estrogen receptor (ER) gene sets. ER status by immunohistochemistry (IHC)
was also inversely associated with TILs (p = 0.002). Hierarchical
clustering of genes most strongly associated with TILs identified a small
subset (N = 86, 12%) out of 731 pts with high expression of
TILs-associated genes and more benefit from trastuzumab (HR = 0.06, CI
0.01-0.47, p = 0.007) versus samples with low or intermediate TILs (HR =
0.57, CI 0.43-0.76, pBackground: Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
have demonstrated to be predictive of trastuzumab as well as chemotherapy
benefit in adjuvant FinHER and neoadjuvant GeparQuattro phase III trials
of trastuzumab in HER2-positive breast cancer patients (pts). Since TILs
assessment is subject to inter-observer variations, we attempted to
develop a surrogate gene expression signature of TILs and evaluate it as
a potential predictive marker for the degree of benefit from trastuzumab
plus standard adjuvant chemotherapy in NSABP B-31.Methods: Two hundred
cases selected from the discovery cohort of B-31 with Affymetrix gene
expression data were assessed for the percentage of TILs using
International TILs Working Group guidelines. Gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA) was done to identify functionally enriched biologic pathways.
Genes strongly associated with high TILs were identified (N = 119).
Hierarchical clustering analysis of TILs signature was performed in
Affymetrix gene expression data set from 731 cases randomly selected from
B-31. Proportional hazard models were used to test the heterogeneity of
degree of benefit from trastuzumab subgroups identified by TILs signature
with disease-free survival as the end point.Results: Among 200 cases, 34
were classified as morphologic high (>50%) TILs. GSEA revealed that
tumors with high TILs expressed up-regulation of genes in several immune
activation pathways involving T and B cells. Tumors with low TILs had
up-regulation of muscular, fibrous tissue, extracellular matrix, and
estrogen receptor (ER) gene sets. ER status by immunohistochemistry (IHC)
was also inversely associated with TILs (p = 0.002). Hierarchical
clustering of genes most strongly associated with TILs identified a small
subset (N = 86, 12%) out of 731 pts with high expression of
TILs-associated genes and more benefit from trastuzumab (HR = 0.06, CI
0.01-0.47, p = 0.007) versus samples with low or intermediate TILs (HR =
0.57, CI 0.43-0.76, p<0.001) (interaction p = 0.03).Conclusions: High
TILs are associated with high immune, low stromal, and low ER gene
expression levels. Identification of a subgroup with increased benefit
from trastuzumab in breast cancer confirms previous studies on TILs as
another complementary predictive marker for trastuzumab benefit in
HER2-positive breast cancer. Furthermore, our study provides a
comprehensive gene expression analysis and its relationship to TILs in
breast cancer. While the clinical utility of TILs or its gene expression
signature is limited because even low TILs are associated with
significant benefit from trastuzumab, they may prove to be useful as
biomarkers for immunotherapy.Support NCI U10-CA-12027, -69651, -37377,
-69974; PA U24-CA-114732; PA DOH disclaims responsibility for analysis,
interpretations, or conclusions.

