Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP53 autoantibody can detect CA125 screen negative ovarian cancer
cases and can be elevated prior to CA125 in preclinical ovarian cancer


Detection of ovarian cancer in early stage could improve mortality from
the disease by 10-30%. Most attempts to utilize serum biomarkers for
early detection of ovarian cancer have focused on CA125. As CA125 is
expressed by only 80% of ovarian cancers, multiple biomarkers will be
required to detect ovarian cancers that fail to express the antigen. In
studies with preclinical samples to date, no biomarker has been
consistently elevated prior to CA125. Detecting an autologous immune
response to tumor associated antigens might provide improved lead time.
TP53 is mutated and overexpressed in virtually all high grade serous
ovarian cancers. Autoantibodies reactive with wtTP53 have been reported
in approximately 15% of ovarian cancers at the time of conventional
diagnosis, but most reports have studied a limited number of cases and
preclinical sera have not previously been tested.We have developed a
novel immunoassay for quantitating TP53-specific autoantibody (AAb) in
small volumes (2 uL) of serum. Samples from the MD Anderson Cancer Center
Tissue Bank (MDACC), the MDACC Ovarian SPORE NROS screening study, the
Australian Ovarian Cancer Study (AOCS) and the UK Collaborative Trial of
Ovarian Cancer Screening (UKCTOCS) were used for discovery and
validation. Assay cut-offs were determined by including less than 2%
false positive samples in each control group (98% specificity of the
assay).Elevated titers of TP53 AAb were detected in 13 of 50 sera (26%)
from MDACC patients with stage III-IV ovarian cancer and in 4 of 216 sera
(1.9%) from healthy controls from the NROS study. Using the same cut-off
we detected TP53 AAb in 28 of 108 cases (25.9%), 7 of 109 benign controls
(6.4%) and 10 of 464 normal controls (2.1%) from the AOCS study. TP53 AAb
was found in 3 of 12 cases (25.0%) in early stage (I/II) and 22 of 90
cases (24.4%) in late stage (III/IV). To further validate the result in
the AOCS, we analyzed 2,471 serial serum samples from the UKCTOCS trial.
Elevated TP53 AAb was found in 18 of 87 cases (20.7%) and 8 of 435 normal
controls (1.8%). Increased titers were detected in 6 of 32 cases (18.8%)
in early stage and 12 of 55 cases (21.8%) in late stage. Positivity was
found in 11 of 49 cases (22.5%) detected with rising CA125 and 7 of 38
(18.4%) cases not detected with rising CA125. TP53 AAb titers rose prior
to CA125 in 7 of 11 cases (63.6%). In 11 TP53 AAb (+) and CA125 (-)
cases, TP53 AAb titers rose a mean of 13.5 months and a median of 5
months prior to CA125. In 7 TP53 AAb (+) and CA125 (-) cases, titers rose
a mean of 33 months and a median of 29 months prior to cancer diagnosis.
Consequently, quantitative assessment of TP53 AAb titers holds promise
for earlier detection of ovarian cancer in combination with CA125.

