Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-induced miR-210 potentiates MDSC function through
regulation of Arg1, Il-16 and Cxcl12, and promotes tumor growth


Myeloid Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSCs) are an integral component of the
hypoxic tumor microenvironment. We demonstrated that hypoxia selectively
induced miR-210 via HIF-1 in splenic MDSCs from tumor-bearing mice.
Overexpression of miR-210 enhanced MDSC-mediated T cell suppression under
normoxia, while targeting of hypoxic miR-210 decreased MDSC function. Our
data show that miR-210 modulated MDSCs function by increasing arginase
activity and NO production, although it had no effect on ROS or cytokine
(IL-6 and IL-10) production and PD-L1 expression. A comprehensive
approach using microRNA target predictions tool, transcriptome analysis,
and luciferase reporter assay strongly pointed to the regulation of Arg1,
Cxcl12 and Il16 at both mRNA and protein levels by miR-210 in splenic
MDSCs. In mediating the immunosuppressive effects of miR-210, targeting
of Arg1, and blockade of IL-16 and CXCL12, in splenic MDSCs from
tumor-bearing mice under normoxia dramatically decreased MDSC-mediated T
cell proliferative response and IFN-gamma production. Interestingly,
miR-210 overexpressing MDSCs enhanced in vivo their immune suppressive
activity resulting in an increase in 4T1 tumor growth. Therefore, the
potential therapeutic use of miR-210 inhibitor oligonucleotide alone, or
along with HIF-1 inhibitors as adjuvant tool combined to
immunotherapeutic approaches, may be beneficial for boosting the immune
system in cancer patients.

