Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD151-integrin complexes suppress ovarian tumor growth by
repressing slug-mediated emt and canonical wnt signaling


The majority of human ovarian cancer is diagnosed in the late, metastatic
stages and is highly resistant to current chemotherapies. The molecular
and cellular mechanisms underlying the malignancy of ovarian cancer
remain poorly understood. We report a surprising functional link between
CD151-31 integrin complexes and the malignancy of serous ovarian cancer.
Analyses of clinical specimens indicate that CD151 expression is
significantly reduced or diminished in approximately 90% of metastatic
lesions, while it remains detectable in >40% of primary ovarian tumors.
These observations suggest a putative tumor-suppressing role of CD151 in
ovarian cancer. Indeed, our analyses with multiple ovarian cancer cell
lines show that knocking down CD151 or 31 integrin markedly enhances
tumor cell proliferation, growth and ascites production in nude mice.
These changes are accompanied by impaired cell-cell contacts and aberrant
expression of E-cadherin, Mucin 5AC and fibronectin, largely reminiscent
of an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like change.
Importantly, Slug, a master regulator of EMT, is markedly elevated upon
CD151 removal. Knocking down Slug partially restores CD151-31 integrin
complex-dependent suppression of cell proliferation. Moreover, disruption
of these adhesion protein complexes is accompanied by a concomitant
activation of canonical Wnt signaling, including elevated levels of
-catenin and Axin-2 as well as resistance to the inhibition in
-catenin-dependent transcription complexes. Taken together, our study
demonstrates that CD151-31 integrin complexes suppress ovarian cancer
malignancy by repressing Slug-mediated EMT and canonical Wnt signaling.

