Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoproteomics scaled-down to tumor biopsies for future TKI
treatment selection


IntroductionMass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics of cancer cell- and
tissue lysates provides a unique approach to evaluate the cell signaling
network, revealing information on aberrantly activated signaling pathways
and potential drug targets. To enable phosphoproteomics-based treatment
selection for improved efficacy of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in
patients with advanced solid tumors, needle biopsies should provide
reproducible profiles, representative of the individual tumor
phospho-proteome. We have assessed reproducibility and intra- and
inter-tumor heterogeneity by downscaling an antibody-based pTyr
phosphopeptide enrichment protocol to 1 mg protein input using colorectal
cancer (CRC) cell line and tissue as model, including needle biopsies
from patients.MethodsPhosphopeptide immunoprecipitation (IP) using
P-Tyr-1000 anti-phosphotyrosine-agarose beads (PTMScan, CST) was
performed using triplicates of 1, 5 and 10 mg protein from HCT116 CRC
cell line lysate and 1, 5 and 10 mg protein from 3 patient-derived
tumors. In addition, multiple 14-gauge core needle biopsies were obtained
from 7 CRC resection specimen for analysis at 1 mg protein input in
biopsies with 50% tumor cells. After measurement by LC-MS/MS, database
searching was performed for phosphopeptide identification (ID),
ion-intensity-based quantification and phosphosite
localization.ResultsPhosphoproteomics of the cell line triplicates of 1,
5 and 10 mg protein input yielded a total of 474, 574 and 689 unique
phosphopeptides, and a median number of 362 (range: 272-393), 443
(237-470) and 526 (496-653) per input level, respectively. The
ID-reproducibility was 43% for 1 mg and 60% for 10 mg protein replicates.
In tissue, a median total of 909 (481-928) unique phosphopeptides were
identified per tumor, with 361 (175-536), 629 (284-796) and 896 (398-909)
phosphopeptides for the 1, 5 and 10 mg levels, respectively. For the 2-4
needle biopsies that were analyzed per tumor, a median of 208
phosphopeptides (range 140-279) were identified at a median ID
reproducibility of 58% for duplo and 39% for triplo biopsies.
Unsupervised clustering based on phosphopeptide intensities showed that
multiple tumor biopsies from individual patients cluster
together.ConclusionThis scale-down study demonstrates the feasibility of
label-free pTyr-phosphoproteomics at the biopsy level. Unsupervised
analysis shows that tumor needle biopsies from individual patients
cluster together indicating that this analysis can identify patient
specific phosphoproteomic profiles. Therefore, down-scaled pTyr-based
phosphoproteomics of patient tumor biopsies may enable future
phosphoproteomics-based TKI treatment selection.

