Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOCS3 deficiency in myeloid cells promotes tumor development:
Involvement of STAT3 activation and myeloid-derived suppressor cells


Suppressor Of Cytokine Signaling (SOCS) proteins are negative regulators
of the JAK/STAT pathway, and generally function as tumor suppressors. The
absence of SOCS3 in particular leads to heightened activation of the
STAT3 transcription factor, which has a striking ability to promote tumor
survival while suppressing anti-tumor immunity. We report for the first
time that genetic deletion of SOCS3 specifically in myeloid cells
significantly enhances tumor growth, which correlates with elevated
levels of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) in the tumor
microenvironment, and diminished CD8+ T-cell infiltration in tumors.
Furthermore, SOCS3-deficient bone-marrow-derived cells exhibit heightened
STAT3 activation and preferentially differentiate into the
Gr-1+CD11b+Ly6G+ MDSC phenotype. Importantly, we identify
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) as a critical factor
secreted by the tumor microenvironment that promotes development of MDSC
via a STAT3-dependent pathway. Abrogation of tumor-derived G-CSF reduces
the proliferation and accumulation of Gr-1+CD11b+ MDSC and inhibits tumor
growth. These findings highlight the critical function of SOCS3 as a
negative regulator of MDSC development and function, via inhibition of
STAT3 activation.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

