Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking of S100A9 with tasquinimod demonstrates a potent
anti-myeloma activity


Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable hematological malignancy
characterized by clonal proliferation of plasma cells localized
preferentially in the bone marrow (BM). Using an in vivo model of MM, we
have recently demonstrated that a population of myeloid-derived
suppressor cells in the BM microenvironment is involved in the regulation
of MM progression. These cells abundantly produce the pro-inflammatory
protein S100A9. Function of S100A9 could be blocked with tasquinimod
(ABR-215050, Active Biotech/IPSEN), a quinoline-3-carboxamide derivative
that binds to S100A9 and inhibits interaction with its receptors. Here,
using pre-clinical models of MM, we investigated the anti-tumor effect of
tasquinimod.The anti-tumor effect of tasquinimod was initially evaluated
in vivo in a syngeneic MM model. In this model, mouse MM cells, injected
intravenously, home to the BM and grow as MM that closely resembles the
human disease. Tumor-bearing mice were randomly assigned to treatment or
control groups. The treatment group received tasquinimod at a dose of 30
mg/kg/day in drinking water for 28 days. Administration of tasquinimod
significantly improved survival of MM-bearing mice (pMultiple myeloma
(MM) is an incurable hematological malignancy characterized by clonal
proliferation of plasma cells localized preferentially in the bone marrow
(BM). Using an in vivo model of MM, we have recently demonstrated that a
population of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in the BM microenvironment
is involved in the regulation of MM progression. These cells abundantly
produce the pro-inflammatory protein S100A9. Function of S100A9 could be
blocked with tasquinimod (ABR-215050, Active Biotech/IPSEN), a
quinoline-3-carboxamide derivative that binds to S100A9 and inhibits
interaction with its receptors. Here, using pre-clinical models of MM, we
investigated the anti-tumor effect of tasquinimod.The anti-tumor effect
of tasquinimod was initially evaluated in vivo in a syngeneic MM model.
In this model, mouse MM cells, injected intravenously, home to the BM and
grow as MM that closely resembles the human disease. Tumor-bearing mice
were randomly assigned to treatment or control groups. The treatment
group received tasquinimod at a dose of 30 mg/kg/day in drinking water
for 28 days. Administration of tasquinimod significantly improved
survival of MM-bearing mice (p<0.005).Xenograft models of human MM
established in immunodeficient SCID-beige mice were utilized to exclude
the involvement of B-, T- and NK cells in the pro-survival effect of
tasquinimod. Treatment with tasquinimod significantly (pMultiple myeloma
(MM) is an incurable hematological malignancy characterized by clonal
proliferation of plasma cells localized preferentially in the bone marrow
(BM). Using an in vivo model of MM, we have recently demonstrated that a
population of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in the BM microenvironment
is involved in the regulation of MM progression. These cells abundantly
produce the pro-inflammatory protein S100A9. Function of S100A9 could be
blocked with tasquinimod (ABR-215050, Active Biotech/IPSEN), a
quinoline-3-carboxamide derivative that binds to S100A9 and inhibits
interaction with its receptors. Here, using pre-clinical models of MM, we
investigated the anti-tumor effect of tasquinimod.The anti-tumor effect
of tasquinimod was initially evaluated in vivo in a syngeneic MM model.
In this model, mouse MM cells, injected intravenously, home to the BM and
grow as MM that closely resembles the human disease. Tumor-bearing mice
were randomly assigned to treatment or control groups. The treatment
group received tasquinimod at a dose of 30 mg/kg/day in drinking water
for 28 days. Administration of tasquinimod significantly improved
survival of MM-bearing mice (p<0.005).Xenograft models of human MM
established in immunodeficient SCID-beige mice were utilized to exclude
the involvement of B-, T- and NK cells in the pro-survival effect of
tasquinimod. Treatment with tasquinimod significantly (p<0.0001) reduced
growth of H929 and RPMI-8226 tumors in these mice. We next utilized
S100A9 knockout (KO) mice to address the question of whether the
anti-tumor effect of tasquinimod is mediated through inhibition of
S100A9. Administration of tasquinimod did not improve survival of
MM-bearing S100A9 KO mice. These data suggest that the anti-MM effect of
tasqunimod is indeed mediated through inhibition of S100A9.BM
angiogenesis plays a critical role in MM progression. We evaluated
whether inhibition of S100A9 with tasquinimod would block angiogenesis in
MM. Immunohistochemical staining with anti-CD31 antibody demonstrated
increased angiogenesis in the BM of MM-bearing mice compared with control
tumor-free mice, and treatment with tasquinimod significantly reduced
angiogenesis (pMultiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable hematological
malignancy characterized by clonal proliferation of plasma cells
localized preferentially in the bone marrow (BM). Using an in vivo model
of MM, we have recently demonstrated that a population of myeloid-derived
suppressor cells in the BM microenvironment is involved in the regulation
of MM progression. These cells abundantly produce the pro-inflammatory
protein S100A9. Function of S100A9 could be blocked with tasquinimod
(ABR-215050, Active Biotech/IPSEN), a quinoline-3-carboxamide derivative
that binds to S100A9 and inhibits interaction with its receptors. Here,
using pre-clinical models of MM, we investigated the anti-tumor effect of
tasquinimod.The anti-tumor effect of tasquinimod was initially evaluated
in vivo in a syngeneic MM model. In this model, mouse MM cells, injected
intravenously, home to the BM and grow as MM that closely resembles the
human disease. Tumor-bearing mice were randomly assigned to treatment or
control groups. The treatment group received tasquinimod at a dose of 30
mg/kg/day in drinking water for 28 days. Administration of tasquinimod
significantly improved survival of MM-bearing mice (p<0.005).Xenograft
models of human MM established in immunodeficient SCID-beige mice were
utilized to exclude the involvement of B-, T- and NK cells in the
pro-survival effect of tasquinimod. Treatment with tasquinimod
significantly (p<0.0001) reduced growth of H929 and RPMI-8226 tumors in
these mice. We next utilized S100A9 knockout (KO) mice to address the
question of whether the anti-tumor effect of tasquinimod is mediated
through inhibition of S100A9. Administration of tasquinimod did not
improve survival of MM-bearing S100A9 KO mice. These data suggest that
the anti-MM effect of tasqunimod is indeed mediated through inhibition of
S100A9.BM angiogenesis plays a critical role in MM progression. We
evaluated whether inhibition of S100A9 with tasquinimod would block
angiogenesis in MM. Immunohistochemical staining with anti-CD31 antibody
demonstrated increased angiogenesis in the BM of MM-bearing mice compared
with control tumor-free mice, and treatment with tasquinimod
significantly reduced angiogenesis (p<0.005). Serum collected from
tasquinimod or vehicle control treated MM- bearing mice two weeks after
tumor cell inoculation, was subjected to a Mouse Angiogenesis Proteome
Profiler Antibody Array (R&D). A significant decrease in serum levels of
pro-angiogenic factors including VEGF, FGF2, tissue factor, and endoglin
was detected in tasquinimod-treated mice.Taken together, our data suggest
that targeting S100A9 with tasquinimod results in a strong anti-tumor
effect in pre-clinical models of MM. This effect is associated with
reduced angiogenesis in the BM. Therefore, tasquinimod could potentially
be therapeutically beneficial for patients with MM.

