Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic profiling of APC14/+ mice maintained on a methyl donor
deficient diet reveals alterations to methionine and fatty acid
metabolism associated with cancer protection


Our laboratory has previously demonstrated that administration of a diet
deficient in methyl donor nutrients (folic acid, methionine, choline and
vitamin B12) reduces tumor multiplicity by greater than 95% in ApcMin/+
mice. However, the mechanism by which this dramatic cancer protection is
afforded is unknown. To begin to identify the metabolic consequences of
methyl donor deficiency, we have conducted an LC/MS-based metabolic
profiling analysis of colonic mucosa collected from Apc14/+ mice fed a
methyl donor deficient (MDD) diet for 17 weeks. Methyl donor deficiency
causes significant alterations to a number of key metabolic pathways,
including those involved in the methionine cycle, fatty acid oxidation,
and tryptophan catabolism. We observed significant reductions in
methionine (65% reduction, pOur laboratory has previously demonstrated
that administration of a diet deficient in methyl donor nutrients (folic
acid, methionine, choline and vitamin B12) reduces tumor multiplicity by
greater than 95% in ApcMin/+ mice. However, the mechanism by which this
dramatic cancer protection is afforded is unknown. To begin to identify
the metabolic consequences of methyl donor deficiency, we have conducted
an LC/MS-based metabolic profiling analysis of colonic mucosa collected
from Apc14/+ mice fed a methyl donor deficient (MDD) diet for 17 weeks.
Methyl donor deficiency causes significant alterations to a number of key
metabolic pathways, including those involved in the methionine cycle,
fatty acid oxidation, and tryptophan catabolism. We observed significant
reductions in methionine (65% reduction, p<0.001) and betaine (70%
reduction, pOur laboratory has previously demonstrated that
administration of a diet deficient in methyl donor nutrients (folic acid,
methionine, choline and vitamin B12) reduces tumor multiplicity by
greater than 95% in ApcMin/+ mice. However, the mechanism by which this
dramatic cancer protection is afforded is unknown. To begin to identify
the metabolic consequences of methyl donor deficiency, we have conducted
an LC/MS-based metabolic profiling analysis of colonic mucosa collected
from Apc14/+ mice fed a methyl donor deficient (MDD) diet for 17 weeks.
Methyl donor deficiency causes significant alterations to a number of key
metabolic pathways, including those involved in the methionine cycle,
fatty acid oxidation, and tryptophan catabolism. We observed significant
reductions in methionine (65% reduction, p<0.001) and betaine (70%
reduction, p<0.001), accompanied by large increases in homocysteine
(88.6-fold increase, pOur laboratory has previously demonstrated that
administration of a diet deficient in methyl donor nutrients (folic acid,
methionine, choline and vitamin B12) reduces tumor multiplicity by
greater than 95% in ApcMin/+ mice. However, the mechanism by which this
dramatic cancer protection is afforded is unknown. To begin to identify
the metabolic consequences of methyl donor deficiency, we have conducted
an LC/MS-based metabolic profiling analysis of colonic mucosa collected
from Apc14/+ mice fed a methyl donor deficient (MDD) diet for 17 weeks.
Methyl donor deficiency causes significant alterations to a number of key
metabolic pathways, including those involved in the methionine cycle,
fatty acid oxidation, and tryptophan catabolism. We observed significant
reductions in methionine (65% reduction, p<0.001) and betaine (70%
reduction, p<0.001), accompanied by large increases in homocysteine
(88.6-fold increase, p<0.001) and S-adenosylmethionine (17.2-fold
increase, pOur laboratory has previously demonstrated that administration
of a diet deficient in methyl donor nutrients (folic acid, methionine,
choline and vitamin B12) reduces tumor multiplicity by greater than 95%
in ApcMin/+ mice. However, the mechanism by which this dramatic cancer
protection is afforded is unknown. To begin to identify the metabolic
consequences of methyl donor deficiency, we have conducted an LC/MS-based
metabolic profiling analysis of colonic mucosa collected from Apc14/+
mice fed a methyl donor deficient (MDD) diet for 17 weeks. Methyl donor
deficiency causes significant alterations to a number of key metabolic
pathways, including those involved in the methionine cycle, fatty acid
oxidation, and tryptophan catabolism. We observed significant reductions
in methionine (65% reduction, p<0.001) and betaine (70% reduction,
p<0.001), accompanied by large increases in homocysteine (88.6-fold
increase, p<0.001) and S-adenosylmethionine (17.2-fold increase,
p<0.001), confirming that dietary methyl donor deficiency alters
one-carbon metabolites in the colon. MDD mice were found to have reduced
levels of acyl-carnitines and free carnitine (58% reduction, pOur
laboratory has previously demonstrated that administration of a diet
deficient in methyl donor nutrients (folic acid, methionine, choline and
vitamin B12) reduces tumor multiplicity by greater than 95% in ApcMin/+
mice. However, the mechanism by which this dramatic cancer protection is
afforded is unknown. To begin to identify the metabolic consequences of
methyl donor deficiency, we have conducted an LC/MS-based metabolic
profiling analysis of colonic mucosa collected from Apc14/+ mice fed a
methyl donor deficient (MDD) diet for 17 weeks. Methyl donor deficiency
causes significant alterations to a number of key metabolic pathways,
including those involved in the methionine cycle, fatty acid oxidation,
and tryptophan catabolism. We observed significant reductions in
methionine (65% reduction, p<0.001) and betaine (70% reduction, p<0.001),
accompanied by large increases in homocysteine (88.6-fold increase,
p<0.001) and S-adenosylmethionine (17.2-fold increase, p<0.001),
confirming that dietary methyl donor deficiency alters one-carbon
metabolites in the colon. MDD mice were found to have reduced levels of
acyl-carnitines and free carnitine (58% reduction, p<0.001).
Additionally, we detected a reduction in the critical metabolic
component, acetyl CoA, suggesting decreased transport of fatty acids into
the mitochondria for use in fatty acid oxidation (FAO). Finally, we
observed changes in the mucosal levels of tryptophan (32% reduction, p =
0.02), kynurenine (2.8-fold increase, p = 0.008) and indolepropionate
(5.1-fold increase, p = 0.005), that were retained for seven weeks beyond
active methyl donor deficiency. Taken together, these findings suggest
that dietary methyl donor deficiency significantly disrupts the
methionine cycle, inhibits fatty acid transport and oxidation, and may
induce long-term changes to tryptophan metabolism. This study has
improved our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the
cancer protection conveyed by dietary methyl donor deficiency and has
identified metabolic pathways that are candidate targets for
chemopreventive intervention.

