Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of taxanes with mesothelin-targeted immunotoxin RG7787
induces synergistic killing of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer has a poor prognosis with a 5 year median overall
survival of just 6%. Most pancreatic adenocarcinomas express the cells
surface antigen mesothelin (MSLN). RG7787 is a cytolytic fusion protein
that uses an anti-mesothelin (MSLN) antibody Fab to target a modified,
deimmunized Pseudomonas exotoxin A cytotoxic payload to cells that
express MSLN. The immunotoxin is internalized by cells, releasing the
toxin to the cytosol, where it enzymatically modifies elongation factor-2
causing a global halt in protein synthesis. We have previously observed
that combination of paclitaxel with RG7787 significantly enhances
anti-tumor effect in a KLM1 xenograft model of pancreatic cancer. Here,
we report that co-treatment with nab-paclitaxel induces durable complete
regressions in this model as well as explore the mechanisms underlying
the favorable interaction of RG7787 with taxanes. We demonstrate that the
enhanced killing with the combination can also be observed in vitro.
Co-treatment lowers the dose of RG7787 required to achieve complete cell
killing to the physiologic range. This favorable interaction requires the
toxin portion of the molecule and cannot be replicated by treating with
the anti-MSLN Fab alone. The timing of treatment with the two drugs is
not critical, as similar cytotoxic effects are observed when taxane is
given 24 hrs before, 24 hrs after or simultaneously with RG7787. Addition
of taxane does not increase immunotoxin-mediated protein synthesis
inhibition, nor can combination of taxane with the protein synthesis
inhibitor cycloheximide reproduce the enhanced killing seen with the
taxane/ RG7787 combination. Further studies exploring the critical
factors in this interaction are ongoing.

