Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TCR engineered adoptive T-cell therapy for lung cancer is
augmented by combined PD1 and TIM3 antibody blockade


INTRODUCTION:ACT has shown great promise in melanoma and hematologic
malignancies; however one major limitation of engineered T cells
targeting solid tumors is likely to be tumor microenvironment-induced
hypofunction of the T cells. To study and limit this problem, we have
developed a model in which human T cells engineered to target the antigen
NYESO1 using a high-affinity engineered TCR (Ly95) are injected into mice
bearing human A549 lung cancer cells. Using this model we demonstrate
upregulation of PD1 and TIM3 on Ly95 TILs. We were able to augment T cell
anti-tumor activity by combining Ly95 T cell therapy with anti-hPD1 and
anti-hTIM3 antibodies.Materials and Methods:In vitro: Human T cells
activated by anti-CD3/CD28 Dynabeads and transduced with lentivirus had
50% expression of Ly95 TCR as measured by flow cytometry. They were
cocultured with marked tumor cells to measure IFN release and
antigen-specific killing. In vivo: Immunodeficient mice with 200mm3 flank
A549-A2-ESO (AAE) tumors received 107 T cells via tail vein. Three weeks
later, tumors were harvested/digested, and human TILs were
isolated/assessed for tumor killing/IFN secretion. This was repeated
after the TILs were rested for 24hrs at 37C/5%CO2. The number of TILs and
PD1/TIM3 expression on the isolated TILs were assessed by flow cytometry
at fresh harvest and post rest. The in vivo experiment was repeated
comparing Ly95 T cells alone vs. Ly95 T cells plus either/both
intraperitoneal (IP) anti-hPD1 or/and IP anti-hTIM3 at 10mg/kg every 5
days.Results:Ly95 TCR T cells were able to kill AAE tumor cells and
secrete high amounts of IFN in an antigen-specific/dose dependent fashion
after 18hr coculture. 107 IV Ly95 T cells were able to slow AAE flank
tumor growth as compared to control tumors (498mm3 vs. 1009mm3,
pINTRODUCTION:ACT has shown great promise in melanoma and hematologic
malignancies; however one major limitation of engineered T cells
targeting solid tumors is likely to be tumor microenvironment-induced
hypofunction of the T cells. To study and limit this problem, we have
developed a model in which human T cells engineered to target the antigen
NYESO1 using a high-affinity engineered TCR (Ly95) are injected into mice
bearing human A549 lung cancer cells. Using this model we demonstrate
upregulation of PD1 and TIM3 on Ly95 TILs. We were able to augment T cell
anti-tumor activity by combining Ly95 T cell therapy with anti-hPD1 and
anti-hTIM3 antibodies.Materials and Methods:In vitro: Human T cells
activated by anti-CD3/CD28 Dynabeads and transduced with lentivirus had
50% expression of Ly95 TCR as measured by flow cytometry. They were
cocultured with marked tumor cells to measure IFN release and
antigen-specific killing. In vivo: Immunodeficient mice with 200mm3 flank
A549-A2-ESO (AAE) tumors received 107 T cells via tail vein. Three weeks
later, tumors were harvested/digested, and human TILs were
isolated/assessed for tumor killing/IFN secretion. This was repeated
after the TILs were rested for 24hrs at 37C/5%CO2. The number of TILs and
PD1/TIM3 expression on the isolated TILs were assessed by flow cytometry
at fresh harvest and post rest. The in vivo experiment was repeated
comparing Ly95 T cells alone vs. Ly95 T cells plus either/both
intraperitoneal (IP) anti-hPD1 or/and IP anti-hTIM3 at 10mg/kg every 5
days.Results:Ly95 TCR T cells were able to kill AAE tumor cells and
secrete high amounts of IFN in an antigen-specific/dose dependent fashion
after 18hr coculture. 107 IV Ly95 T cells were able to slow AAE flank
tumor growth as compared to control tumors (498mm3 vs. 1009mm3, p<0.05.)
Flow cytometric analysis of harvested/digested tumors revealed that 5.2%
of the tumor digest was human TILs. Freshly isolated TILs were
hypofunctional in their ability to kill tumor cells and release IFN when
compared to cryopreserved Ly95 T cells (pINTRODUCTION:ACT has shown great
promise in melanoma and hematologic malignancies; however one major
limitation of engineered T cells targeting solid tumors is likely to be
tumor microenvironment-induced hypofunction of the T cells. To study and
limit this problem, we have developed a model in which human T cells
engineered to target the antigen NYESO1 using a high-affinity engineered
TCR (Ly95) are injected into mice bearing human A549 lung cancer cells.
Using this model we demonstrate upregulation of PD1 and TIM3 on Ly95
TILs. We were able to augment T cell anti-tumor activity by combining
Ly95 T cell therapy with anti-hPD1 and anti-hTIM3 antibodies.Materials
and Methods:In vitro: Human T cells activated by anti-CD3/CD28 Dynabeads
and transduced with lentivirus had 50% expression of Ly95 TCR as measured
by flow cytometry. They were cocultured with marked tumor cells to
measure IFN release and antigen-specific killing. In vivo:
Immunodeficient mice with 200mm3 flank A549-A2-ESO (AAE) tumors received
107 T cells via tail vein. Three weeks later, tumors were
harvested/digested, and human TILs were isolated/assessed for tumor
killing/IFN secretion. This was repeated after the TILs were rested for
24hrs at 37C/5%CO2. The number of TILs and PD1/TIM3 expression on the
isolated TILs were assessed by flow cytometry at fresh harvest and post
rest. The in vivo experiment was repeated comparing Ly95 T cells alone
vs. Ly95 T cells plus either/both intraperitoneal (IP) anti-hPD1 or/and
IP anti-hTIM3 at 10mg/kg every 5 days.Results:Ly95 TCR T cells were able
to kill AAE tumor cells and secrete high amounts of IFN in an
antigen-specific/dose dependent fashion after 18hr coculture. 107 IV Ly95
T cells were able to slow AAE flank tumor growth as compared to control
tumors (498mm3 vs. 1009mm3, p<0.05.) Flow cytometric analysis of
harvested/digested tumors revealed that 5.2% of the tumor digest was
human TILs. Freshly isolated TILs were hypofunctional in their ability to
kill tumor cells and release IFN when compared to cryopreserved Ly95 T
cells (p<0.05.) After overnight rest away from tumor, TILs improved in
function. Further analysis revealed that Ly95 TILs had upregulated their
expression of PD1 and TIM3 (increase from 5 to 40% in PD1 and from 17 to
50% in TIM3.) Combining a single Ly95 T cell IV injection with multiple
IP anti-hPD1 and anti-hTIM3 injections resulted in 43% reduction in flank
tumor size compared to Ly95 T cell injection alone (189mm3 vs. 332mm3,
pINTRODUCTION:ACT has shown great promise in melanoma and hematologic
malignancies; however one major limitation of engineered T cells
targeting solid tumors is likely to be tumor microenvironment-induced
hypofunction of the T cells. To study and limit this problem, we have
developed a model in which human T cells engineered to target the antigen
NYESO1 using a high-affinity engineered TCR (Ly95) are injected into mice
bearing human A549 lung cancer cells. Using this model we demonstrate
upregulation of PD1 and TIM3 on Ly95 TILs. We were able to augment T cell
anti-tumor activity by combining Ly95 T cell therapy with anti-hPD1 and
anti-hTIM3 antibodies.Materials and Methods:In vitro: Human T cells
activated by anti-CD3/CD28 Dynabeads and transduced with lentivirus had
50% expression of Ly95 TCR as measured by flow cytometry. They were
cocultured with marked tumor cells to measure IFN release and
antigen-specific killing. In vivo: Immunodeficient mice with 200mm3 flank
A549-A2-ESO (AAE) tumors received 107 T cells via tail vein. Three weeks
later, tumors were harvested/digested, and human TILs were
isolated/assessed for tumor killing/IFN secretion. This was repeated
after the TILs were rested for 24hrs at 37C/5%CO2. The number of TILs and
PD1/TIM3 expression on the isolated TILs were assessed by flow cytometry
at fresh harvest and post rest. The in vivo experiment was repeated
comparing Ly95 T cells alone vs. Ly95 T cells plus either/both
intraperitoneal (IP) anti-hPD1 or/and IP anti-hTIM3 at 10mg/kg every 5
days.Results:Ly95 TCR T cells were able to kill AAE tumor cells and
secrete high amounts of IFN in an antigen-specific/dose dependent fashion
after 18hr coculture. 107 IV Ly95 T cells were able to slow AAE flank
tumor growth as compared to control tumors (498mm3 vs. 1009mm3, p<0.05.)
Flow cytometric analysis of harvested/digested tumors revealed that 5.2%
of the tumor digest was human TILs. Freshly isolated TILs were
hypofunctional in their ability to kill tumor cells and release IFN when
compared to cryopreserved Ly95 T cells (p<0.05.) After overnight rest
away from tumor, TILs improved in function. Further analysis revealed
that Ly95 TILs had upregulated their expression of PD1 and TIM3 (increase
from 5 to 40% in PD1 and from 17 to 50% in TIM3.) Combining a single Ly95
T cell IV injection with multiple IP anti-hPD1 and anti-hTIM3 injections
resulted in 43% reduction in flank tumor size compared to Ly95 T cell
injection alone (189mm3 vs. 332mm3, p<0.05.)Conclusions:The PD1 and TIM3
pathways are involved in tumor-induced hypofunction of TCR engineered
TILs. Combining anti-hPD1 and anti-hTIM3 antibodies with TCR T cells, and
likely CAR T cells, will likely enhance the efficacy of these approaches
in lung cancer and other solid tumors.

