Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatitis B virus genotype, mutations, human leukocyte antigen
polymorphisms and their interactions in hepatocellular carcinoma: a
multi-centre case-control study


Objective:Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths worldwide. Our aim was to evaluate the effects of
the hepatitis B virus (HBV) genotype, mutations, HLA single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and their interactions on HCC risk.Methods: A
multi-centre case-control study of 1,507 HBV-related HCC cases and 1,560
HBV persistent carriers as controls was performed. HBV genotype,
mutations and genome-wide association studies (GWAS)-identified HLA-DQ/DR
SNPs (rs9272105 and rs9275319) were detected.Results: We found that the
frequencies of the HBV genotypes B and BC (coinfection) were varied among
the studied areas, but genotype C was consistently more frequent in
HBV-related HCC (80.6% among HCC vs. 34.4% among the controls). Moreover,
11 HBV hotspot mutations in the EnhII/BCP/PC region were independently
and significantly associated with HCC risk. We also detected significant
interactions of HLA-DQ/DR rs9272105 with both the HBV genotype and
mutations (P Objective:Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second
leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Our aim was to evaluate
the effects of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) genotype, mutations, HLA
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and their interactions on HCC
risk.Methods: A multi-centre case-control study of 1,507 HBV-related HCC
cases and 1,560 HBV persistent carriers as controls was performed. HBV
genotype, mutations and genome-wide association studies (GWAS)-identified
HLA-DQ/DR SNPs (rs9272105 and rs9275319) were detected.Results: We found
that the frequencies of the HBV genotypes B and BC (coinfection) were
varied among the studied areas, but genotype C was consistently more
frequent in HBV-related HCC (80.6% among HCC vs. 34.4% among the
controls). Moreover, 11 HBV hotspot mutations in the EnhII/BCP/PC region
were independently and significantly associated with HCC risk. We also
detected significant interactions of HLA-DQ/DR rs9272105 with both the
HBV genotype and mutations (P < 0.05 for each), but there were not
significant interactions for rs9275319. Through a stepwise regression
analysis, the HBV genotype, the 11 mutations, HLA-DQ/DR rs9272105 and
rs9275319, and the interaction of the mutation A1752G with rs9272105 were
all entered into the prediction model of HCC, and the area under the
curve (AUC) for the panel including the HLA-DQ/DR SNPs, HBV genotype and
mutations was 0.840 (sensitivity = 81.3%, specificity =
74.8%).Conclusions: The HBV genotype, the mutations and the HLA-DQ/DR
SNPs may serve as biomarkers for the surveillance of HBV persistent
carriers. Large studies with prospective designs are warranted to further
evaluate our results.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

