Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Meiotic cohesin REC8 associates with chromosome instability in
melanoma


Chromosome instability (CIN) is an important component of multiple
malignancies. CIN is linked to drug resistance, tumor grade and
aggressiveness. Melanoma is a highly chromosome instable tumor and CIN is
a differentiating feature between melanoma and benign nevi. Meiotic
proteins are present in melanoma and previous work in our lab suggests a
role for these proteins in CIN and that melanoma cell replication has
attributes as chromosome pairing and DNA bridging that can be explained
by the presence of meiosis proteins. REC8 is a meiotic cohesin which
holds sister chromatids together during the first meiotic division,
therefore we sought to study the potential role for REC8 in CIN in
Melanoma. A model of chromosome instability developed in melanocytic cell
lines showed association of REC8 as CIN progressed strengthening the
hypothesis that REC8 may be involved in CIN. We overexpressed REC8 in
melanoma lines and in E6E7 melanocytes with a TET-inducible system and
examined the change in the polyploid population by flow cytometry, cell
count and FISH. Results suggest that overexpression of REC8 alone is not
sufficient to drive polyploidy in these cell lines. Nevertheless, the
association of REC8 with CIN is intriguing and further research in the
role of meiosis proteins in melanoma is warranted. Future work will aim
at dissecting coexisting meiotic proteins; specially the proteins of the
cohesin ring and its regulatory proteins that are also present at high
levels in melanoma and could be responsible of chromosome number
abnormalities.

