Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sex hormone receptor expression affects ovarian cancer survival


Background and aims: Influence of sex hormones in ovarian cancer is of
great interest, but study results are inconclusive. A majority of all
ovarian cancers display high expression of sex hormone receptors, but the
effect of endocrine treatment is limited. We assessed estrogen (ER) and ,
progesterone (PR), and androgen (AR) receptor expression in an ovarian
cancer cohort in order to study the potential correlation between
receptor expression and disease free survival. Expression of the genes
encoding the respective receptors (ESR1, ESR2, PGR and AR), was further
explored in molecular ovarian cancer subtypes.Methods: 140 ovarian
cancers were collected in Sweden 1998-2000. A majority of the tumors were
serous, high-grade and advanced stage. Immunohistochemical stainings for
the receptors were evaluated on a tissue microarray, and dichotomized as
either negative (10% stained cells). The 5-year disease free survival
(DFS) was estimated and Cox regression was used for multivariable
modelling. ESR1, ESR2, PGR and AR were analyzed using an independent
dataset (n = 285 tumors). Progression free (PFS) and overall survival
(OS) for high versus low gene expression was analyzed in the six
molecular ovarian cancer subtypes, using the median as cut-off.Results:
Immunohistochemical expression of PR and AR were both associated with
increased 5-year DFS (p10% stained cells). The 5-year disease free
survival (DFS) was estimated and Cox regression was used for
multivariable modelling. ESR1, ESR2, PGR and AR were analyzed using an
independent dataset (n = 285 tumors). Progression free (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) for high versus low gene expression was analyzed in the six
molecular ovarian cancer subtypes, using the median as cut-off.Results:
Immunohistochemical expression of PR and AR were both associated with
increased 5-year DFS (p<0.001, Log Rank test), whereas no such
association was observed for ER or ER. The independent effect of PR and
AR was retained in multivariable analyses adjusted for stage and age. An
additional effect on survival in cases expressing both PR and AR was
seen, though the evidence of such an interaction was very weak (p = 0.10,
Cox regression).Gene expression analyses revealed higher mRNA levels of
PGR in the molecular subtypes constituted of borderline and endometrioid
tumors respectively (p10% stained cells). The 5-year disease free
survival (DFS) was estimated and Cox regression was used for
multivariable modelling. ESR1, ESR2, PGR and AR were analyzed using an
independent dataset (n = 285 tumors). Progression free (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) for high versus low gene expression was analyzed in the six
molecular ovarian cancer subtypes, using the median as cut-off.Results:
Immunohistochemical expression of PR and AR were both associated with
increased 5-year DFS (p<0.001, Log Rank test), whereas no such
association was observed for ER or ER. The independent effect of PR and
AR was retained in multivariable analyses adjusted for stage and age. An
additional effect on survival in cases expressing both PR and AR was
seen, though the evidence of such an interaction was very weak (p = 0.10,
Cox regression).Gene expression analyses revealed higher mRNA levels of
PGR in the molecular subtypes constituted of borderline and endometrioid
tumors respectively (p<0.001, Kruskal Wallis test). In the molecular
subtypes, improved PFS was seen in cases with dual high expression of PGR
and AR in the immunoreactive subtype, although this effect could not be
proven (p = 0.23). However, tumors which expressed high levels of PGR and
were of this subtype showed an improved OS (p = 0.041). In contrast,
improved OS for PGR low and ESR1 high tumors was seen in the mesenchymal
subtype, although the evidence was weak (p = 0.091 and p = 0.064
respectively, Log Rank test).Conclusions: This study indicates that PR
and AR may serve as independent prognostic markers in subsets of ovarian
cancer, with the best 5-year disease free survival seen with combined
PR/AR positivity. Gene expression analysis of the corresponding genes
revealed differences among the subtypes of ovarian cancer. This
underlines the importance of stratifying tumors also based on molecular
features when investigating prognostic markers. Larger, well defined
study cohorts are needed to identify the best markers and to elucidate in
which specific subtypes of ovarian cancer endocrine treatment may have a
role.

