Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive genomic analyses of oral squamous cell carcinoma
tissues by semiconductor-based next-generation sequencing


Somatic mutation analysis is standard of practice for human cancers in
order to identify therapeutic sensitizing and resistance mutations. We
performed comprehensive genomic analyses that use PCR target enrichment
and next-generation sequencing on the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine
(PGM). We first validated a multigene sequencing screen interrogating
2855 mutational hotspots in 50 cancer-related genes using the Ion Torrent
AmpliSeq cancer panel v2. Ten nanogram of DNA was used as template to
amplify 207 regions in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Approximately
1000 average coverage was obtained with more than 90% of target bases
having at least 100 sequence reads. We detected mutations of the TP53
gene in 96% (22 of 23) of OSCC cell lines. Of the 62 OSCC specimens, 42
presented at least one somatic mutation among the 50 investigated genes,
and 21 of these showed multiple gene somatic mutations. The most frequent
mutations were detected on TP53 (26 of 62; 41.9%). CDKN2A mutations were
identified in 9 cases; STK11 mutations were observed in 8 cases; and
PIK3CA were mutated 5 cases. In addition, we sequenced 409 cancer-related
genes in matched tumor and normal DNA from OSCC patients using the Ion
Ampliseq Comprehensive Cancer Panel. This panel targets all exons of 409
tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes frequently cited and frequently
mutated (covered regions: 95.4% of total), and 15,992 amplicons amplify
more than 1.2 megabases of target sequence. We piloted the use of this
platform to identify somatic mutations in 37 OSCC specimens including
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples. We also detected copy
number variations (CNVs) in which segments of the genome can be
duplicated or deleted from sequencing data. This targeted next generation
sequencing using low amounts of FFPE DNA is a valuable tool for
high-throughput genetic testing in research and clinical settings.

