Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome-wide expression profiling of long noncoding and
small nucleolar RNAs in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas identifies
novel transcripts associated with survival


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) persists as one of the most
common and deadly malignancies, with early detection and effective
treatment still posing formidable challenges. To expand our currently
sparse knowledge of the epigenetic alterations involved in this disease
and identify potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets, we globally
profiled the dysregulation of small nucleolar (snoRNA) and long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) in head and neck tumors. Using next-generation
RNA-sequencing data from 40 pairs of tumor and matched normal tissues, we
profiled lncRNA expression by mapping each RNA-seq library to a reference
annotation containing 32,108 lncRNAs. Using edgeR, we found 19,681 lncRNA
transcripts significantly differentially expressed by a fold change
magnitude 4 with a false discovery rate Head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) persists as one of the most common and deadly
malignancies, with early detection and effective treatment still posing
formidable challenges. To expand our currently sparse knowledge of the
epigenetic alterations involved in this disease and identify potential
biomarkers and therapeutic targets, we globally profiled the
dysregulation of small nucleolar (snoRNA) and long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNA) in head and neck tumors. Using next-generation RNA-sequencing
data from 40 pairs of tumor and matched normal tissues, we profiled
lncRNA expression by mapping each RNA-seq library to a reference
annotation containing 32,108 lncRNAs. Using edgeR, we found 19,681 lncRNA
transcripts significantly differentially expressed by a fold change
magnitude 4 with a false discovery rate <10-4. We selected the 10 most
dysregulated lncRNAs and further confirmed the dysregulation of these
lncRNAs in-vitro by performing quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR
(RT-qPCR) on two normal oral epithelial cell lines and five HNSCC cell
lines. Using Kaplan-Meier analysis, we demonstrated a correlation between
high expression of several lncRNAs, including JPH1-7, upregulated by
40-fold in HNSCC, with overall poor survival in a cohort of over 400
HNSCC patients (HR = 1.62, p Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) persists as one of the most common and deadly malignancies, with
early detection and effective treatment still posing formidable
challenges. To expand our currently sparse knowledge of the epigenetic
alterations involved in this disease and identify potential biomarkers
and therapeutic targets, we globally profiled the dysregulation of small
nucleolar (snoRNA) and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) in head and neck
tumors. Using next-generation RNA-sequencing data from 40 pairs of tumor
and matched normal tissues, we profiled lncRNA expression by mapping each
RNA-seq library to a reference annotation containing 32,108 lncRNAs.
Using edgeR, we found 19,681 lncRNA transcripts significantly
differentially expressed by a fold change magnitude 4 with a false
discovery rate <10-4. We selected the 10 most dysregulated lncRNAs and
further confirmed the dysregulation of these lncRNAs in-vitro by
performing quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-qPCR) on two normal
oral epithelial cell lines and five HNSCC cell lines. Using Kaplan-Meier
analysis, we demonstrated a correlation between high expression of
several lncRNAs, including JPH1-7, upregulated by 40-fold in HNSCC, with
overall poor survival in a cohort of over 400 HNSCC patients (HR = 1.62,
p < 0.01). Meanwhile, RNA-sequencing analysis of 31 tumor-normal pairs
yielded 33 significantly dysregulated snoRNA. We identified one snoRNA,
SNORD116-20, downregulated by 4-fold in HNSCC, whose expression levels
correlated significantly with overall patient survival (HR = 1.64, p Head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) persists as one of the most
common and deadly malignancies, with early detection and effective
treatment still posing formidable challenges. To expand our currently
sparse knowledge of the epigenetic alterations involved in this disease
and identify potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets, we globally
profiled the dysregulation of small nucleolar (snoRNA) and long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) in head and neck tumors. Using next-generation
RNA-sequencing data from 40 pairs of tumor and matched normal tissues, we
profiled lncRNA expression by mapping each RNA-seq library to a reference
annotation containing 32,108 lncRNAs. Using edgeR, we found 19,681 lncRNA
transcripts significantly differentially expressed by a fold change
magnitude 4 with a false discovery rate <10-4. We selected the 10 most
dysregulated lncRNAs and further confirmed the dysregulation of these
lncRNAs in-vitro by performing quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR
(RT-qPCR) on two normal oral epithelial cell lines and five HNSCC cell
lines. Using Kaplan-Meier analysis, we demonstrated a correlation between
high expression of several lncRNAs, including JPH1-7, upregulated by
40-fold in HNSCC, with overall poor survival in a cohort of over 400
HNSCC patients (HR = 1.62, p < 0.01). Meanwhile, RNA-sequencing analysis
of 31 tumor-normal pairs yielded 33 significantly dysregulated snoRNA. We
identified one snoRNA, SNORD116-20, downregulated by 4-fold in HNSCC,
whose expression levels correlated significantly with overall patient
survival (HR = 1.64, p < 0.05), suggesting its functional significance
and clinical relevance in head and neck cancer pathogenesis. Similarly,
in in-vitro experiments, we found reduced expression of this snoRNA in
HNSCC cell lines compared to normal oral epithelial cell lines. The
precise molecular roles of these transcripts identified warrants further
characterization, but our data suggest that they are likely to play
substantial roles in head and neck cancer pathogenesis and are
significantly associated with patient survival.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

