Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of SHANK2 as a tumor suppressor disrupted by
recurrent somatic structural variation (SV) in neuroblastoma


Background. Neuroblastoma is a malignancy of the developing sympathetic
nervous system which exacts significant morbidity and mortality in
children. Large sequencing efforts have revealed a relative paucity of
somatic point mutations in this and other childhood cancers. Structural
variations (SVs) including translocations, inversions, deletions,
duplications, and other complex events can occur in germline DNA or be
acquired somatically in tumors. Recurrent somatic SVs affecting known
genes are likely to be functional and may elucidate novel tumor
suppressors or oncogenes.Methods. We are performing whole-genome
sequencing (WGS) of 187 matched tumor-normal pairs from high-risk
patients as part of the NCI-TARGET project
(http://www.ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target) using Complete Genomics
technology. High confidence somatic SVs were identified and a subset
subsequently validated with Sanger sequencing; in vitro functional
studies were performed using human derived neuroblastoma cell line
models.Results. To date, we have analyzed WGS data from 106 matched stage
4 tumor-normal pairs. Among 2,770 high-confidence somatic SVs (average
26.1 per tumor, range 1-158), we observed recurrent focal deletions in
ZFHX3 (n = 5) and EZH2 (n = 2), in addition to ATRX (n = 2), ARID1B (n =
2), and PTPRD (n = 5), each of the latter genes previously reported in
neuroblastoma. A total of 210 inter-chromosomal translocations disrupting
known genes were detected (average 2.0 per tumor, range 0-12). Notably,
14.4% of MYCN non-amplified stage 4 tumors (11/76) harbored SV
breakpoints within SHANK2 at 11q13; all SHANK2 breakpoints were validated
by Sanger sequencing. With the exception of a single deletion at the
c-terminus, all breakpoints mapped within the long isoform of SHANK2
(transcript variant 1: NM_012309), and clustered within the ankyrin
repeat domain which is involved in protein-protein interactions. Low
SHANK2 expression in primary tumors obtained at diagnosis was associated
with worse overall survival (p = 6.3 105), suggesting SHANK2, known to
regulate neuronal differentiation, may function as a tumor suppressor.
Consistent with this hypothesis, mRNA expression of SHANK2 was low in a
panel of 27 neuroblastoma cell lines and further silencing with siRNA did
not produce an observable phenotype. In contrast, forced expression of
the long isoform of SHANK2 in three independent neuroblastoma cell lines
with low endogenous SHANK2 levels resulted in profound reduction in cell
growth (p Background. Neuroblastoma is a malignancy of the developing
sympathetic nervous system which exacts significant morbidity and
mortality in children. Large sequencing efforts have revealed a relative
paucity of somatic point mutations in this and other childhood cancers.
Structural variations (SVs) including translocations, inversions,
deletions, duplications, and other complex events can occur in germline
DNA or be acquired somatically in tumors. Recurrent somatic SVs affecting
known genes are likely to be functional and may elucidate novel tumor
suppressors or oncogenes.Methods. We are performing whole-genome
sequencing (WGS) of 187 matched tumor-normal pairs from high-risk
patients as part of the NCI-TARGET project
(http://www.ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target) using Complete Genomics
technology. High confidence somatic SVs were identified and a subset
subsequently validated with Sanger sequencing; in vitro functional
studies were performed using human derived neuroblastoma cell line
models.Results. To date, we have analyzed WGS data from 106 matched stage
4 tumor-normal pairs. Among 2,770 high-confidence somatic SVs (average
26.1 per tumor, range 1-158), we observed recurrent focal deletions in
ZFHX3 (n = 5) and EZH2 (n = 2), in addition to ATRX (n = 2), ARID1B (n =
2), and PTPRD (n = 5), each of the latter genes previously reported in
neuroblastoma. A total of 210 inter-chromosomal translocations disrupting
known genes were detected (average 2.0 per tumor, range 0-12). Notably,
14.4% of MYCN non-amplified stage 4 tumors (11/76) harbored SV
breakpoints within SHANK2 at 11q13; all SHANK2 breakpoints were validated
by Sanger sequencing. With the exception of a single deletion at the
c-terminus, all breakpoints mapped within the long isoform of SHANK2
(transcript variant 1: NM_012309), and clustered within the ankyrin
repeat domain which is involved in protein-protein interactions. Low
SHANK2 expression in primary tumors obtained at diagnosis was associated
with worse overall survival (p = 6.3 105), suggesting SHANK2, known to
regulate neuronal differentiation, may function as a tumor suppressor.
Consistent with this hypothesis, mRNA expression of SHANK2 was low in a
panel of 27 neuroblastoma cell lines and further silencing with siRNA did
not produce an observable phenotype. In contrast, forced expression of
the long isoform of SHANK2 in three independent neuroblastoma cell lines
with low endogenous SHANK2 levels resulted in profound reduction in cell
growth (p < 0.0001) and viability (p Background. Neuroblastoma is a
malignancy of the developing sympathetic nervous system which exacts
significant morbidity and mortality in children. Large sequencing efforts
have revealed a relative paucity of somatic point mutations in this and
other childhood cancers. Structural variations (SVs) including
translocations, inversions, deletions, duplications, and other complex
events can occur in germline DNA or be acquired somatically in tumors.
Recurrent somatic SVs affecting known genes are likely to be functional
and may elucidate novel tumor suppressors or oncogenes.Methods. We are
performing whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of 187 matched tumor-normal
pairs from high-risk patients as part of the NCI-TARGET project
(http://www.ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target) using Complete Genomics
technology. High confidence somatic SVs were identified and a subset
subsequently validated with Sanger sequencing; in vitro functional
studies were performed using human derived neuroblastoma cell line
models.Results. To date, we have analyzed WGS data from 106 matched stage
4 tumor-normal pairs. Among 2,770 high-confidence somatic SVs (average
26.1 per tumor, range 1-158), we observed recurrent focal deletions in
ZFHX3 (n = 5) and EZH2 (n = 2), in addition to ATRX (n = 2), ARID1B (n =
2), and PTPRD (n = 5), each of the latter genes previously reported in
neuroblastoma. A total of 210 inter-chromosomal translocations disrupting
known genes were detected (average 2.0 per tumor, range 0-12). Notably,
14.4% of MYCN non-amplified stage 4 tumors (11/76) harbored SV
breakpoints within SHANK2 at 11q13; all SHANK2 breakpoints were validated
by Sanger sequencing. With the exception of a single deletion at the
c-terminus, all breakpoints mapped within the long isoform of SHANK2
(transcript variant 1: NM_012309), and clustered within the ankyrin
repeat domain which is involved in protein-protein interactions. Low
SHANK2 expression in primary tumors obtained at diagnosis was associated
with worse overall survival (p = 6.3 105), suggesting SHANK2, known to
regulate neuronal differentiation, may function as a tumor suppressor.
Consistent with this hypothesis, mRNA expression of SHANK2 was low in a
panel of 27 neuroblastoma cell lines and further silencing with siRNA did
not produce an observable phenotype. In contrast, forced expression of
the long isoform of SHANK2 in three independent neuroblastoma cell lines
with low endogenous SHANK2 levels resulted in profound reduction in cell
growth (p < 0.0001) and viability (p < 0.0001) as measured by RTCES and
CellTiter-glo assays respectively.Conclusion. A plethora of SVs exist in
neuroblastoma, and unlike somatic point mutations, many are recurrent.
Studies are ongoing to determine the mechanism by which SHANK2 suppresses
neuroblastoma tumorigenesis and to understand the biological relevance of
other recurrent coding and non-coding SVs in this childhood malignancy.

