Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A humanized mouse model for translational assessment of targeted
immune checkpoint blockade


The blockade of immune checkpoints is a promising therapeutic avenue for
cancer therapy, with durable objective responses observed in patients
with a variety of solid tumors. Despite these successes, current animal
models do not reliably identify targets with the greatest clinical
potential, due in part to differences between human and murine immune
systems. Hence, robust preclinical tools to test these drugs directly
against human cancers in the context of a human immune system are
required. Champions Oncology has now developed the ImmunoGraft, whereby
two innovative technologies, the patient-derived xenograft and humanized
mice (immunodeficient mice reconstituted with a human immune system), are
combined in a single platform.Immune-compromised NOG
(PrkdcscidIl2rgtm1Sug) mice were reconstituted (humanized) with human
CD34+ cells and twelve weeks after humanization, mature human CD45+ cells
comprised close to 50% of the leukocytes detected in the circulation and
secondary lymphoid tissues of the now humanized animals. Growth of NSCLC
tumors implanted into humanized NOG animals was comparable to those in
non-humanized counterparts, and when humanized animals harboring NSCLC
tumor implants were treated with ipilimumab, tumor growth was slowed,
exhibiting marked regression. Systemic immune activation was observed in
humanized mice following treatment with ipilimumab, characterized by
robust proliferation of huCD3+ T cells and activated huCD4+ Th1 cells, as
well as an increase in tumor-infiltrating huCD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(all relative to vehicle controls).We have developed an innovative new
preclinical cancer model, the ImmunoGraft, which will enable novel
immunotherapeutic agents to be accurately evaluated for efficacy against
virtually any cancer indication that can be engrafted. As a
proof-of-concept of the utility of the ImmunoGraft, we demonstrated how
effectively ipilimumab restricted the growth of NSCLC implants engrafted
in humanized animals. This translational platform is, therefore, more
reflective of the human tumor microenvironment (both immune and
non-immune cell-based) and is the most clinically-relevant model for
screening immune system-targeting therapies, as single agents or in
combination with standard-of-care drugs and other immuno-modulators. The
ImmunoGraft has strong potential to revolutionize the application of
immunotherapy to both personalized oncology and translational drug
discovery.

