Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneous mechanisms of acquired resistance in high grade
serous ovarian cancer


In contrast to other solid cancers, overall survival for patients with
high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) is little changed over the last
30 years and it has been difficult to advance beyond platinum-based
combination chemotherapy. As HGSC are driven by genomic copy number
change rather than recurrent point mutation, we undertook whole genome
sequence (WGS) analysis of a large HGSC cohort in order to survey
structural variation at high resolution. Utilizing 114 tumours from 92
patients, we performed transcriptome, methylation, and miRNA expression
analyses to support the WGS data, and compared resistant, refractory, and
sensitive primary disease. We evaluated tumour and normal DNA samples
from patients with primary refractory, primary resistant or primary
sensitive disease to better understand the drivers of these clinical
phenotypes. We also characterized paired pre-treatment chemosensitive and
post-resistance samples, and end-stage HGSC obtained from patients who
underwent a research autopsy. We found that gene breakage involving
tumour suppressors such as NF1 and RB1 is a common form of inactivation
in HGSC and in other circumstances contributes to acquired chemotherapy
resistance in some patients. We found evidence of a chemotherapy
footprint in the genome of recurrent tumour samples. We observed a
striking degree of diversity of other mechanisms of acquired resistance,
including multiple independent germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 reversion events
in individual patients, loss of BRCA1 promoter methylation, a shift in
molecular subtype to a desmoplastic phenotype, and a recurrent promoter
fusion associated with overexpression of a driver of drug resistance,
validated in an independent dataset. Collectively our findings underscore
the plasticity of the HGSC genome and indicate that pre-empting
resistance by modifying current first line therapy or countering it when
it emerges will require a diversity of approaches.

