Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapy of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by novel
6-pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine thienoyl antifolates with selective transport
by the proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT)


Pemetrexed (PMX) is a 5-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine antifolate
used for first-line and maintenance therapy of NSCLC. Whereas
correlations were reported between clinical responses in NSCLC and levels
of folate receptor (FR) , FR is not a pharmacologically relevant PMX
transporter. Rather, PMX is primarily transported by the reduced folate
carrier (RFC) and PCFT. RFC is ubiquitously expressed, whereas PCFT shows
more limited expression in normal tissues, although both are broadly
expressed in tumor cells. Unlike RFC, PCFT is active at acidic pH, with
significant levels at pH 6.8. Using patient cDNAs from normal lung (n =
8) and NSCLC samples (n = 37), we measured transcripts for RFC and PCFT,
and for intracellular targets for PMX, including thymidylate synthase
(TS) and glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase (GARFTase), by
real-time RT-PCR (qPCR). PCFT was detected at similar levels in normal
lung and NSCLC specimens, while RFC was decreased in tumors compared to
normal lung. Expression of TS and GARFTase were increased in NSCLC
samples, compared to normal tissue. In NSCLC cell lines A549, CRL5872,
H460, H1650 and H2030, PCFT and RFC, but not FR, were detected by qPCR.
We synthesized novel 6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine thienoyl
regioisomers related to PMX [AGF94 (2,5) and AGF154 (2,4)] as potential
antitumor agents. Based on patterns of inhibition of proliferation of
engineered Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing human RFC or PCFT,
AGF94 and AGF154, unlike PMX, are not transported by RFC but are
excellent substrates for PCFT. AGF94 and AGF154 showed potencies
comparable to PMX toward all the NSCLC cell lines. We found that [3H]PMX
and [3H]AGF154 were transported by PCFT into the NSCLC cell lines at pH
5.5 and pH 6.8 and uptake could be blocked by non-radioactive AGF94.
AGF154 accumulation over sustained exposure at pH 5.5 was greater than
that of PMX, whereas accumulations of AGF154 and PMX were nearly
identical at pH 6.8. In H460 cells treated with PMX, thymidine (10 M)
partially protected cells from growth inhibition, whereas neither
adenosine (10 M) nor 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (AICA) (320 M) were
protective. In cells treated with AGF94 or AGF154, adenosine and AICA,
but not thymidine, were completely protective, consistent with inhibition
of de novo purine biosynthesis at GARFTase. Potent GARFTase inhibition by
AGF94 and AGF154 was confirmed by an in situ assay which measures
incorporation of [14C]glycine into formyl GAR (FGAR), the GARFTase
product. Our results suggest that novel 6-substituted
pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine thienoyl antifolates may offer significant
promise for treating NSCLC, reflecting their selective membrane transport
by PCFT over RFC and potent inhibition of de novo purine biosynthesis.

