Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the NDP kinase critical for DNA repair


Introduction and Purpose:Cellular supply of deoxynucleoside triphosphates
(dNTPs) is crucial for DNA replication and repair. It is known that
ribonucleotide reductase (RNR), a rate-limiting enzyme for dNTP
synthesis, is required for DNA repair. The catalytic function of RNR
produces dNDPs. There are eight isoforms of NDP kinase that catalyzes the
subsequent step for dNTP formation in human cells. In this study, we aim
to identify the isoform of NDP kinase required for DNA repair.Preliminary
results:By RNA interference experiments, we identified NME3, one isoform
of the nucleoside diphosphate kinases, critical for DNA repair. It has
been shown that RNR forms a complex with Tip60, a histone
acetyltransferase, by which RNR is recruited to DNA damage sites for
repair. In this study, we found that NME3 directly interacts with Tip60.
The effect of knockdown of NME3 on DNA repair was rescued by
re-expression of wild-type but not the mutant type defective in Tip60
interaction. Overexpression of NME3 was able to facilitate DNA repair,
which was intervened by disrupting the interaction of NME3 with Tip60.
Moreover, exogenous addition of deoxynucleosides facilitates
NME3-mediated DNA repair.Conclusion:Among 8 isoforms of NDP kinase, NME3
is identified to be critical for DNA repair, indicating its potential as
a target for developing chemosensitization agent.

