Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progesterone generates cancer stem cells through membrane
progesterone receptor-triggered signaling in basal-like human mammary
cells


Among the four main subtypes of breast cancer, basal-like breast cancer
(the predominant subtype of triple-negative breast cancer) is of
particular concern, due to its high frequency, relative lack of effective
therapies and poor prognosis. Ionizing radiation (for example as
treatment for other cancers) and cumulative exposure to steroid hormones
(as seen in postmenopausal women under hormone replacement therapy) are
known risk factors for breast cancer. Because of their tumor-initiating
properties, cancer stem cells (CSCs) were proposed to be responsible for
relapse and metastasis. In MCF10A non-cancerous basal-like PR-negative
cells, progesterone treatment and 1 Gy X-rays generated ALDH+ and
CD44+/CD24- CSCs. Here, we report that progesterone activated the
Pi3k/Akt pathway via membrane progesterone receptor (mPR). Inhibition of
the Pi3k/Akt pathway counteracted the generation of CSCs by progesterone
and irradiation. The stimulation of Pi3K/Akt by progesterone resulted in
the inactivation of FOXO3 and a downregulation of miR-29 expression.
Stabilization of miR-29 expression impeded the generation of CSCs, while
its inhibition alone was sufficient to generate CSCs. This study provides
a new mechanistic basis for progesterone and radiation-induced breast
cancer risk. In addition, the elucidation of new pathways and miRNA
regulations involved in CSC generation and maintenance may open the door
to potential new strategies for basal cancer primary or adjuvant therapy,
by blocking non-CSCs from replenishing the pool of CSCs and by targeting
mechanisms responsible for CSC maintenance. Such CSC-focused therapies
may be effective at preventing metastasis and relapse.

