Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) analysis of PIK3CA and AKT1
mutations in patients enrolled onto the Phase 1b study of the PI3K
inhibitor taselisib (GDC-0032) in solid malignancies


The PI3K signaling pathway is one of the most frequently activated
pathways in cancer, and controls critical proliferative and survival
processes. Taselisib (GDC-0032) is a novel, oral, selective inhibitor of
PI3K, sparing inhibition of PI3K. (Ndubaku CO et al. J Med Chem 2013).
Preclinically, taselisib demonstrates enhanced potency in PIK3CA mutant
cells, with greater signaling and growth/survival effects in mutant cells
vs. wild-type cells. In the phase Ia study with single agent taselisib,
partial responses (PRs) were observed in 6/34 enrolled patients. All 6
responses were observed in patients with PIK3CA mutant tumors (Juric D.
et al. AACR 2013), indicating the need to determine PIK3CA mutation
status from patients treated with taselisib. Circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA) provides an up-to-date liquid biopsy that can be used to detect
somatic mutation in oncogenes especially when tumor tissue is not
available.Analysis was undertaken on five cohorts of patients enrolled
onto the taselisib Phase 1b study comprised of 106 patients. In total, 87
patients had tumor tissue available for PIK3CA mutation testing. Plasma
was collected from 91 patients prior to treatment and 10 patients had
matched plasma collected at the study discontinuation visit. Tissue
samples were assessed using the Roche cobas PIK3CA mutation test that
detects 17 PIK3CA hotspot mutations, of which 47 (54%) tissue samples
were positive for PIK3CA mutations. Analysis of PIK3CA and AKT1 mutations
from plasma was performed using an Inostics BEAMing digital PCR Oncobeam
panel, which detects 8 PIK3CA hotspot mutations and 1 AKT1 mutation.
ctDNA was detected in all 91 patients sampled, and ranged from 1.3ng to
1ug per milliliter of plasma. PIK3CA mutations were identified in the
plasma of 51 patients (56%), and an AKT1 mutation was identified in one
patient. For 80 patients that had both tissue and plasma available for
PIK3CA mutation testing, a sensitivity of 81%, a specificity of 74% and
an overall accuracy of 78% was observed. Allele frequency ranged from
0.02% to 75.58% with a median of 2.72%. In two cohorts that enrolled
hormone receptor positive, HER2 negative breast cancer patients, a
sensitivity of 84%, a specificity of 87% and an overall accuracy of 88%
was observed between 42 matched tissue and plasma samples. In a patient
who experienced a sustained clinical partial response to taselisib in
combination with fulvestrant, a decrease in plasma PIK3CA allele
frequency was observed from 3.05% in the pretreatment sample to 0.14% in
the study discontinuation sample. In summary, analysis of PIK3CA
mutations from plasma in patients enrolled onto trials testing the
efficacy of taselisib may be a useful surrogate for patients when tissue
is unavailable, an observation that is being assessed in ongoing trials.

