Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44v3-positive (CD44v3+) and CD24-negative (CD24) cells possess
cancer stem cell (CSC)-like properties in a human oral squamous cell
carcinoma cell line


Background:CSCs are defined as minor cell population which have higher
tumor-initiating ability, self-renewal ability and multilineage
potential. Although CSCs in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) were
identified by several surface antigen (e.g., CD44, CD133) or ALDEFLOUR
assay, it is still elusive which are universal markers for CSC in OSCC.
The aim of this study is to clarify potential CSC markers for a OSCC cell
line using a combination of cell surface markers, CD44v3 and
CD24.Materials and Methods: A OSCC cell line, SAS, was used in the
experiment. CD44v3+/CD24 cell fraction was sorted from SAS cells with a
FACSAria II and compared with the other three fractions (CD44v3+/CD24+,
CD44v3 /CD24, CD44v3/CD24+ cell fraction) in cell proliferation, drug
resistance and sphere forming ability. mRNA expression levels of various
genes, such as stemness genes, anti-apoptosis genes and hypoxia-related
genes, were compared among the fractions using quantitative real-time
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.Results:The proportion of
CD44v3+/CD24, CD44v3+/CD24+, CD44v3/CD24, CD44v3/CD24+ cells was 34.9%,
39.8%, 14.2% and 11.0%, respectively. CD44v3+/CD24 cells showed a higher
sphere forming ability, and drug resistance for CDDP, 5-FU and Cetuximab
and expressed higher mRNA levels of CSC property-related genes (ABCG2,
Oct-4, Nanog) and a hypoxia-related gene (HIF-1) than the other cell
fractions. There were no significant differences in cell proliferation
among the fractions.Conclusion:The results suggest that CD44v3+/CD24 cell
fractions in SAS possess CSC-like properties. The investigation of
tumorigenic capacity in NOD/SCID mice is now under way.

