Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional landscape of lung squamous cell carcinoma in
Northeast Asian patients


Lung Squamous Cell Carcinoma (LSCC), the second most prevalent type of
lung cancer, is known to have different genetic and epigenetic
characteristics from lung adenocarcinoma. Molecular pathogenesis remains
to be elucidated to identify therapeutic targets, especially for patients
with no driver mutations identified in previous studies. In this study,
we obtained RNAs from fresh tissue of 101 patients of LSCC, and its
paired normal site. RNA-seq was performed with paired-end sequencing of
HiSeq2000. The average throughput uniquely mapped to the human genome
reference was 10Gbp per sample. Differentially expressed genes showed
higher expression in HOX families, FOXL2, SOX2, FGFR3, JAK3, and ALK. In
contrast, WIF1, RSPO2, ROS1, TAL1, PRDM16 was down regulated in tumor
cells. To subgroup patients with their driver mutation, somatic mutation
have been detected with comparison to normal paired samples, filtering
with MAFLung Squamous Cell Carcinoma (LSCC), the second most prevalent
type of lung cancer, is known to have different genetic and epigenetic
characteristics from lung adenocarcinoma. Molecular pathogenesis remains
to be elucidated to identify therapeutic targets, especially for patients
with no driver mutations identified in previous studies. In this study,
we obtained RNAs from fresh tissue of 101 patients of LSCC, and its
paired normal site. RNA-seq was performed with paired-end sequencing of
HiSeq2000. The average throughput uniquely mapped to the human genome
reference was 10Gbp per sample. Differentially expressed genes showed
higher expression in HOX families, FOXL2, SOX2, FGFR3, JAK3, and ALK. In
contrast, WIF1, RSPO2, ROS1, TAL1, PRDM16 was down regulated in tumor
cells. To subgroup patients with their driver mutation, somatic mutation
have been detected with comparison to normal paired samples, filtering
with MAF<0.01 of Northeast Asian Population, 1KG, and ExAC 65000 exomes.
The average number of nonsynonymous somatic mutation was 49.63 per
sample. Sixty-seven patients had somatic mutation in TP53, CDKN2A,
NFE2L2, and PIK3CA. This was relatively small compared to patients from
TCGA, mainly consisting of Western population. After excluding 4 patients
identified to be close to normal cells by PCA analysis of expression
pattern, and 2 other patients suspected to be false classified from
adenocarcinoma presenting mutation in EGFR (L858R) and KRAS (G12D), 28
patients remained to be elucidated. No EGFR, ALK, RET, FGFR3, TACC fusion
have been found, suggesting novel isoform of transcripts or other
mechanisms driving carcinogenesis.

