Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of methylation patterns in cancer tissue shown by
targeted Next-Gen bisulfite sequencing


Continuing research demonstrates an ever increasing number of genes with
measurable dysregulation in their DNA methylation state.We have developed
a panel of targeted NextGen bisulfite sequencing amplicon assays (TGBS)
centered on cancer genes with altered DNA methylation. This cancer panel
includes tumor suppressor genes (BRCA1, RASSF1, RUNX3), DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs and MGMT), DNA repeats (LINE1 and Sat2),
oncogenes (MYC,ERBB2), receptor genes (EGFR, ESRRA, NR2E1), Homeobox
genes (HOXA10, HOXA11, EN1) and detoxification genes (GSTM1, GSTM2) among
others. A total of 80 genes covering over 1500 CpG sites were selected
and assays for these regions were developed and validated using
PCR/Pyrosequencing. 10 pairs of DNA samples (tumor vs adjacent normal)
for four cancer types (ovarian cancer, breast cancer, cervical cancer,
and colorectal cancer) were sequenced using this panel on an Ion Torrent
PGM system. We have used this data to characterize the general behavior
of these cancer samples as compared to normal in three specific ways.
First, we have assayed the change in overall methylation level between
normal and cancer samples using these multiplexed amplicons, using these
values for both an unsupervised hierarchical clustering and principal
component analyses. We have then attempted to establish a per tissue
normal methylation profile, and measured the distance to this normal
profile for each of the cancer samples. As has been discussed in previous
work, cancer has more of an anti-normal profile than a characteristic
pattern per se. Finally, we have examined the methylation patterns within
individual reads, and assessed the measured methylation entropy or
randomness of these patterns in normal versus cancer samples

