Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accumulation of tolerogenic human 6-sulfo LacNAc+ dendritic cells
in renal cell carcinoma is associated with poor prognosis


6-sulfo LacNAc+ (slan) DCs, representing a myeloid human blood DC subset,
produce various proinflammatory cytokines, display cytotoxic activity and
efficiently stimulate natural killer (NK) cells and T lymphocytes. Recent
studies demonstrated that slanDCs accumulate in metastatic tumor-draining
lymph nodes from cancer patients, indicating that slanDCs may contribute
to antitumor immunity.We constructed tissue microarrays from primary
clear-cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC) and paired non-neoplastic renal
tissues from 265 patients who underwent radical/partial nephrectomy in
the Department of Urology, University Clinic, TU Dresden. The slanDCs
were identified by immunohistochemistry using a DD2 antibody, developed
in the Institute of Immunology, TU Dresden. Freshly prepared
tumor-infiltrating cells from 10 specimens were used for phenotypic
characterization by flow cytometry. The effects of slanDCs and
T-lymphocytes isolated from freshly prepared peripheral blood mononuclear
cells on ACHN, CAKI-1 and on two native ccRCC cell lines were assessed by
flow-cytomtery, proliferation assays. The frequency of slanDCs in ccRCC
and paired non-neoplastic renal tissues were correlated with the
clinico-pathological characteristics of patients. SlanDCs were detectable
in the majority of primary tumors (93.2%), metastatic lymph nodes (87.5%)
and distant metastases (85.1%). A significantly (p6-sulfo LacNAc+ (slan)
DCs, representing a myeloid human blood DC subset, produce various
proinflammatory cytokines, display cytotoxic activity and efficiently
stimulate natural killer (NK) cells and T lymphocytes. Recent studies
demonstrated that slanDCs accumulate in metastatic tumor-draining lymph
nodes from cancer patients, indicating that slanDCs may contribute to
antitumor immunity.We constructed tissue microarrays from primary
clear-cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC) and paired non-neoplastic renal
tissues from 265 patients who underwent radical/partial nephrectomy in
the Department of Urology, University Clinic, TU Dresden. The slanDCs
were identified by immunohistochemistry using a DD2 antibody, developed
in the Institute of Immunology, TU Dresden. Freshly prepared
tumor-infiltrating cells from 10 specimens were used for phenotypic
characterization by flow cytometry. The effects of slanDCs and
T-lymphocytes isolated from freshly prepared peripheral blood mononuclear
cells on ACHN, CAKI-1 and on two native ccRCC cell lines were assessed by
flow-cytomtery, proliferation assays. The frequency of slanDCs in ccRCC
and paired non-neoplastic renal tissues were correlated with the
clinico-pathological characteristics of patients. SlanDCs were detectable
in the majority of primary tumors (93.2%), metastatic lymph nodes (87.5%)
and distant metastases (85.1%). A significantly (p<0.001) higher number
of slanDCs were detected in primary ccRCC tissues (mean: 3.74 slanDC/mm2,
range: 0-19.82 slanDC/mm2) compared to tumor-free tissues (mean: 1.19
slanDC/mm2, range: 0-9.9 slanDC/mm2). A higher density of slanDCs in
ccRCC tissues was significantly correlated with a higher grading and
stage of the primary tumor (p = 0.001 and p = 0.006 respectively), as
well as with lymph node- or distant metastases (p = 0.039 and p6-sulfo
LacNAc+ (slan) DCs, representing a myeloid human blood DC subset, produce
various proinflammatory cytokines, display cytotoxic activity and
efficiently stimulate natural killer (NK) cells and T lymphocytes. Recent
studies demonstrated that slanDCs accumulate in metastatic tumor-draining
lymph nodes from cancer patients, indicating that slanDCs may contribute
to antitumor immunity.We constructed tissue microarrays from primary
clear-cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC) and paired non-neoplastic renal
tissues from 265 patients who underwent radical/partial nephrectomy in
the Department of Urology, University Clinic, TU Dresden. The slanDCs
were identified by immunohistochemistry using a DD2 antibody, developed
in the Institute of Immunology, TU Dresden. Freshly prepared
tumor-infiltrating cells from 10 specimens were used for phenotypic
characterization by flow cytometry. The effects of slanDCs and
T-lymphocytes isolated from freshly prepared peripheral blood mononuclear
cells on ACHN, CAKI-1 and on two native ccRCC cell lines were assessed by
flow-cytomtery, proliferation assays. The frequency of slanDCs in ccRCC
and paired non-neoplastic renal tissues were correlated with the
clinico-pathological characteristics of patients. SlanDCs were detectable
in the majority of primary tumors (93.2%), metastatic lymph nodes (87.5%)
and distant metastases (85.1%). A significantly (p<0.001) higher number
of slanDCs were detected in primary ccRCC tissues (mean: 3.74 slanDC/mm2,
range: 0-19.82 slanDC/mm2) compared to tumor-free tissues (mean: 1.19
slanDC/mm2, range: 0-9.9 slanDC/mm2). A higher density of slanDCs in
ccRCC tissues was significantly correlated with a higher grading and
stage of the primary tumor (p = 0.001 and p = 0.006 respectively), as
well as with lymph node- or distant metastases (p = 0.039 and p<0.001,
respectively). Remarkably, a higher density of slanDCs was significantly
correlated with a reduced progression-free, tumor-specific or overall
survival of ccRCC patients. Freshly prepared ccRCC-infiltrating slanDCs
expressed HLA-DR and low densities of CD86, but CD40, CD80, CD83 and CCR7
could not be detected. Whereas the proinflammatory cytokines TNF- and
IL-12 were not found, a proportion of slanDCs showed expression of the
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. Further studies revealed that primary
ccRCC cells efficiently impair the capacity of slanDCs to stimulate CD4+
and CD8+ T-cell proliferation and Th1 programming. In addition, ccRCC
cells significantly inhibited slanDC-mediated NK cell activation.These
findings indicate that higher slanDC numbers in ccRCC tissues are
associated with poor prognosis. The induction of a tolerogenic phenotype
in slanDCs leading to an insufficient activation of innate and adaptive
antitumor immunity may represent a novel immune escape mechanism of ccRCC.

