Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparing radiation therapy and ipilimumab to ipilimumab alone in
metastatic melanoma patients


Purpose/Objective:With evidence suggesting ipilimumab and intracranial
stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) improves survival compared to SRS alone,
we compared toxicity, response rates (RRs), and outcomes of metastatic
melanoma patients receiving radiation (RT) and ipilimumab to ipilimumab
alone.Methods and Materials:We reviewed records of metastatic melanoma
patients receiving ipilimumab 3mg/kg between 2010-2014. RRs, measured by
immune RECIST criteria, and toxicity were compared by Fischer's exact
text. Overall survival (OS) was estimated by the Kaplan Meier
method.Results:61 patients received ipilimumab, with 35 (57.4%) also
receiving radiation within 4 months of ipilimumab. The radiation cohort
was similar at baseline except for greater systemic burden of disease
(82.9% vs. 42.3%, p = 0.005), higher dexamethasone use (14.3% vs. 0%, p =
0.048), and more brain involvement (74.3% vs. 0% pPurpose/Objective:With
evidence suggesting ipilimumab and intracranial stereotactic radiosurgery
(SRS) improves survival compared to SRS alone, we compared toxicity,
response rates (RRs), and outcomes of metastatic melanoma patients
receiving radiation (RT) and ipilimumab to ipilimumab alone.Methods and
Materials:We reviewed records of metastatic melanoma patients receiving
ipilimumab 3mg/kg between 2010-2014. RRs, measured by immune RECIST
criteria, and toxicity were compared by Fischer's exact text. Overall
survival (OS) was estimated by the Kaplan Meier method.Results:61
patients received ipilimumab, with 35 (57.4%) also receiving radiation
within 4 months of ipilimumab. The radiation cohort was similar at
baseline except for greater systemic burden of disease (82.9% vs. 42.3%,
p = 0.005), higher dexamethasone use (14.3% vs. 0%, p = 0.048), and more
brain involvement (74.3% vs. 0% p<0.001). 92.3% of brain metastases
received SRS. Grade 3 toxicity was not statistically different between
cohorts (5.9% vs. 20.0%, p = 0.113); one grade 4 was experienced (1.6%),
while no grade 5 occurred. While the ipilimumab alone group demonstrated
a trend toward higher 1-year OS (49.4% vs. 73.2%, p = 0.090), the cohort
did not have any patients with brain metastases; therefore, comparing
only patients with extra-cranial metastases, 1-year OS was similar (76.2%
vs. 73.2%, p = 0.587). RR between both cohorts was similar (20.0% vs.
11.5%, p = 0.494). Pre-ipilimumab absolute lymphocyte count greater than
1000 was the only significant predictor for increased RR in multivariable
analysis (Odds Ratio: 8.56, 95% CI: 1.82-40.42; p = 0.007). Comparing 2-5
fractions of radiation to ipilimumab alone demonstrated a trend towards
higher response rate (42.9% vs. 11.5%, p = 0.074).Conclusion:Despite
poorer prognostic characteristics in the RT with ipilimumab cohort,
toxicity, RR and OS were similar between the arms. Prospective studies
investigating the ideal radiation fractionation to improve ipilimumab
response rates are warranted. ALC Purpose/Objective:With evidence
suggesting ipilimumab and intracranial stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS)
improves survival compared to SRS alone, we compared toxicity, response
rates (RRs), and outcomes of metastatic melanoma patients receiving
radiation (RT) and ipilimumab to ipilimumab alone.Methods and
Materials:We reviewed records of metastatic melanoma patients receiving
ipilimumab 3mg/kg between 2010-2014. RRs, measured by immune RECIST
criteria, and toxicity were compared by Fischer's exact text. Overall
survival (OS) was estimated by the Kaplan Meier method.Results:61
patients received ipilimumab, with 35 (57.4%) also receiving radiation
within 4 months of ipilimumab. The radiation cohort was similar at
baseline except for greater systemic burden of disease (82.9% vs. 42.3%,
p = 0.005), higher dexamethasone use (14.3% vs. 0%, p = 0.048), and more
brain involvement (74.3% vs. 0% p<0.001). 92.3% of brain metastases
received SRS. Grade 3 toxicity was not statistically different between
cohorts (5.9% vs. 20.0%, p = 0.113); one grade 4 was experienced (1.6%),
while no grade 5 occurred. While the ipilimumab alone group demonstrated
a trend toward higher 1-year OS (49.4% vs. 73.2%, p = 0.090), the cohort
did not have any patients with brain metastases; therefore, comparing
only patients with extra-cranial metastases, 1-year OS was similar (76.2%
vs. 73.2%, p = 0.587). RR between both cohorts was similar (20.0% vs.
11.5%, p = 0.494). Pre-ipilimumab absolute lymphocyte count greater than
1000 was the only significant predictor for increased RR in multivariable
analysis (Odds Ratio: 8.56, 95% CI: 1.82-40.42; p = 0.007). Comparing 2-5
fractions of radiation to ipilimumab alone demonstrated a trend towards
higher response rate (42.9% vs. 11.5%, p = 0.074).Conclusion:Despite
poorer prognostic characteristics in the RT with ipilimumab cohort,
toxicity, RR and OS were similar between the arms. Prospective studies
investigating the ideal radiation fractionation to improve ipilimumab
response rates are warranted. ALC < 1000 should be considered an
exclusion criteria for these trials.

