Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma pharmacokinetics and tumor accumulation in mice of IMGN779,
an antibody-drug conjugate for acute myeloid leukemia


IMGN779, an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) consisting of the anti-CD33
antibody, Z4681A, linked to the potent DNA-alkylating agent, DGN462, via
a charged disulfide linker, sulfo-SPDB, is in development for the
treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). IMGN779 is highly active in
vitro against AML cell lines and primary patient AML cells and causes
complete regression of AML xenograft tumors at non-toxic doses in vivo.To
understand the fate of IMGN779 upon uptake, we performed metabolism
studies on cultures of ADC-treated AML cells in vitro, and distribution
studies in vivo, following the plasma clearance and tumor accumulation of
the ADC in mice. The antigen-mediated binding, uptake, and degradation of
IMGN779 by AML cells in culture were measured using a radiolabeled
conjugate. CD33-targeted degradation of IMGN779 was observed in treated
cultures, with metabolites detected within the cells, some as
DNA-adducts, and in the media following efflux from cells. Approximately
40% of initially-bound IMGN779 was measured as protein-free degraded
species after 22 h incubation at 37 C, with an additional 40% measured as
DNA-associated species.To evaluate plasma pharmacokinetics (PK), mice
were injected with [3H]propionate radiolabeled Z4681A antibody (Ab), or
with IMGN779 that was radiolabeled either on the Ab portion of the ADC
([3H]propionate) or on the DGN462 moiety. Total Ab and intact ADC
concentrations were determined in plasma samples collected from 2 min to
28 days post-injection. Overlapping clearance profiles for Z4681A and
Ab-labeled IMGN779 were observed with half-lives (t) of 18 d, which
demonstrated that conjugation with DGN462 did not alter Ab PK. A faster
clearance of [3H]DGN462-labeled IMGN779 was observed, with a plasma t of
4.5 d, indicating that DGN462 is released from IMGN779 in circulation.
Plasma samples were CD33-affinity captured and analyzed by LC/MS to
determine the mass-distribution profile of IMGN779. A decrease in
relative abundances of antibody species associated with a high number of
DGN462 molecules from 2 min- 3 d supported the plasma clearance
results.To determine the tumor localization of IMGN779 and its
metabolites, the radioactivity in excised HL60/QC xenografts dosed with 5
mg/kg [3H]IMGN779 or non-targeting [3H]ADC was measured at 6, 24 and 48 h
after treatment. The total amount of ADC (intact and metabolized) present
was similar, but slightly higher for IMGN779 versus non-targeting ADC
samples. However, the amount of both extractable metabolites and
DNA-bound species was higher in tumor samples from mice treated with
IMGN779 versus non-targeting ADC, indicating CD33-targeted metabolism in
the tumor.From these studies, we conclude IMGN779 demonstrates CD33
target-mediated generation of DGN462 metabolites, and also exhibits
DNA-modification consistent with the mechanism of action of its effector
molecule, DGN462.

