Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequential use of first and second generation TKIs are effective
on prolonged overall survival in elderly population affected by Ph+ acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: the GIMEMA experience


Background: We have explored if the administration of two TKIs, Nilotinib
(NIL) and Imatinib (IM) can improve the results without increasing the
toxicity in the elderly Ph+ Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) patients.
We investigate the type and number of BCR-ABL kinase domain mutations
developing during and after the study.Methods: We have designed a study
(ClinicalTrials.gov. NCT01025505) in which patients more than 60 years
old or unfit for intensive chemotherapy and SCT where treated with two
TKIs, NIL 400 mg twice daily, and IM 300 mg twice daily, alternating for
6 weeks for a minimum of 24 weeks (study core) and indefinitely in case
of response. The 6-weeks rotation schedule was respected, irrespectively
of temporary discontinuations. The primary end-point was the rate of
Disease Free Survival (DFS) at 24 weeks (4 courses of treatment); the
secondary end points included the evaluation of CHR, CCgR and CMR
rates.Results: 39 patients have been enrolled in 15 Italian hematologic
Centers (median age 66 years, range 28-84). Among these, 8 patients were
unfit for standard chemotherapy or SCT (median age 50 years, range
28-59). 27 patients were p190, 5 were p210 and 7 were p190/p210. After 6
weeks of treatment, 36 patients were evaluable for response: 34 were in
CHR (94%) and 2 in PHR (6%). 23 patients have already completed the study
core (24 weeks), 87% were in CHR and 17 are currently continuing therapy
in the protocol extension phase.Thus, the OS at 1 year is 79%, and 64% at
2 years. Overall, 1 patient was primarily resistant and 13 patients have
relapsed, with a median time to relapse of 7.6 months (range 0.8-16.1
months), for a DFS of 51.3% at 12 months.Conclusions: In this small
cohort of Ph+ ALL elderly/unfit patients, the rates of relapse and
progression were not likely to be different from the rates observed with
Imatinib alone.Acknowledgements: ELN, AIL, AIRC, PRIN, FP7 NGS-PTL
project.

