Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells and immunosuppressive T regulatory cells
are associated with aggressive breast cancer subtypes


Background: An increase in tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
indicates an immune response to tumor antigens. CD8+ TILs play a vital
role in cancer progression, and may have tumor suppressive effects.
FoxP3+ T regulatory cells (Tregs), however, suppress a variety of immune
cells - including CD4+ TILs, CD8+ TILs, dendritic cells, B cells, and
macrophages - and thus may inhibit the beneficial effect these cells have
on tumor suppression. Specifically, CD8+ TILs - which are a critical
component of tumor-specific adaptive immunity - are a major target of
Tregs. This study was aimed at understanding how these TILs correlate
with breast cancer molecular subtypes in diverse population of breast
cancer patients.Methods: Tissue Microarrays (TMAs) of breast cancer cases
from 1992-2010 were obtained from the University of Chicago breast cancer
biospecimen bank under IRB approved protocols. Molecular subtype was
assigned based on immunohistochemical (IHC) staining into the following
groups: luminal A (ER+ and/or PR+, HER2-), luminal B (ER+ and/or PR+,
HER2+), HER2-like (ER/PR-, HER2+) and basal-like (ER/PR/HER2-, EGFR+
and/or CK5/6+). IHC for CD8 and FoxP3 was performed on TMAs using DAKO,
cat # M7103 antibody, and Abcam antibody cat #ab20034. The amount of CD8+
and FoxP3+ cells presents within the neoplastic tissue were counted
manually in two high-powered fields (x400) by two independent
pathologists, and recalculated for 1 mm2. The ratio of FoxP3+/CD8+ was
calculated and correlated with molecular subtype.Results: Of the 292
cores evaluated, 268 were evaluable representing 134 individual cases.
There were 28 basal-like (20.9%), 14 HER2 (10.4%), 78 luminal A (58.3%),
and 14 luminal B (10.4%). Basal-like tumors showed the highest
infiltration of both Tregs and CD8+ TILs when compared to other breast
cancer subtypes, and the ratio of FoxP3+: CD8+ TILs in basal-like tumors
were 1.7, 2.5, and 4.5-fold higher than in HER2, Luminal A, and Luminal B
tumors respectively (pBackground: An increase in tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) indicates an immune response to tumor antigens. CD8+
TILs play a vital role in cancer progression, and may have tumor
suppressive effects. FoxP3+ T regulatory cells (Tregs), however, suppress
a variety of immune cells - including CD4+ TILs, CD8+ TILs, dendritic
cells, B cells, and macrophages - and thus may inhibit the beneficial
effect these cells have on tumor suppression. Specifically, CD8+ TILs -
which are a critical component of tumor-specific adaptive immunity - are
a major target of Tregs. This study was aimed at understanding how these
TILs correlate with breast cancer molecular subtypes in diverse
population of breast cancer patients.Methods: Tissue Microarrays (TMAs)
of breast cancer cases from 1992-2010 were obtained from the University
of Chicago breast cancer biospecimen bank under IRB approved protocols.
Molecular subtype was assigned based on immunohistochemical (IHC)
staining into the following groups: luminal A (ER+ and/or PR+, HER2-),
luminal B (ER+ and/or PR+, HER2+), HER2-like (ER/PR-, HER2+) and
basal-like (ER/PR/HER2-, EGFR+ and/or CK5/6+). IHC for CD8 and FoxP3 was
performed on TMAs using DAKO, cat # M7103 antibody, and Abcam antibody
cat #ab20034. The amount of CD8+ and FoxP3+ cells presents within the
neoplastic tissue were counted manually in two high-powered fields (x400)
by two independent pathologists, and recalculated for 1 mm2. The ratio of
FoxP3+/CD8+ was calculated and correlated with molecular subtype.Results:
Of the 292 cores evaluated, 268 were evaluable representing 134
individual cases. There were 28 basal-like (20.9%), 14 HER2 (10.4%), 78
luminal A (58.3%), and 14 luminal B (10.4%). Basal-like tumors showed the
highest infiltration of both Tregs and CD8+ TILs when compared to other
breast cancer subtypes, and the ratio of FoxP3+: CD8+ TILs in basal-like
tumors were 1.7, 2.5, and 4.5-fold higher than in HER2, Luminal A, and
Luminal B tumors respectively (p<0.05 for all correlations).Summary:
FoxP3+ and CD8+ TIL infiltration density were significantly different
among molecular subtypes of breast cancer. Future studies will examine
the genomic determinants and prognostic significance of TILs in
aggressive breast cancer subtypes, especially basal-like breast cancers.

