Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histology-specific patterns of DNA methylation in Lynch-associated
and sporadic ovarian cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer is a heterogeneous group of cancers, and
molecular tools are urgently needed for a better understanding and
targeted management of this often lethal disease. Since epigenetic
methods can offer new tools for the management of ovarian cancer, our aim
was to investigate epigenetic mechanisms in ovarian tumorigenesis
representing different histological types. Expression profiling of
ovarian and endometrial cancer cell lines treated with demethylating
agents as well as literature were used to select gene candidates for
epigenetic regulation. A methylation-specific multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) assay was constructed
for thirteen genes to study methylation in 104 (85 sporadic and 19 Lynch
syndrome-associated) ovarian carcinomas.Increased methylation
(hypermethylation) was characteristic of ovarian cancer tissues relative
to the corresponding normal tissues and hypermethylation was consistently
more prominent in non-serous than serous tumors. The highest frequencies
of hypermethylation were detected in Lynch-associated clear cell ovarian
carcinomas. An interesting finding among endometrioid ovarian carcinomas
was a significant association of lower levels of methylation in HOXA9,
RSK4 and SPARC with higher tumor grade; thus, the methylation patterns of
high-grade endometrioid ovarian carcinomas resembled epigenetic
characteristics of high-grade serous tumors. Overall, non-serous ovarian
tumors of Lynch and sporadic origin (as opposed to serous tumors) showed
frequent epigenetic inactivation in RSK4, SPARC, PROM1, HOXA10, HOXA9,
WT1-AS, SFRP2, SFRP5, OPCML, and MIR34B.Our findings provide important
new information regarding some critical genes affected by epigenetic
dysregulation in ovarian tumorigenesis. The results will be utilized in
future experiments aiming to define the genetic and epigenetic origins of
ovarian carcinomas of different types.

