Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and evaluation of itraconazole analogues for hedgehog
pathway inhibition


The hedgehog (Hh) pathway is a developmental signaling pathway that plays
a key role in embryonic development. While the pathway is generally
quiescent during adult life, dysregulation of the Hh pathway can lead to
cell proliferation and tumor growth. This abnormal Hh signaling is
typically responsible for tumors associated with basal cell carcinoma
(BCC) and medulloblastoma (MB) and inhibiting the Hh pathway is a valid
target to develop novel chemotherapeutic agents. Most Hh inhibitors
identified to date target the protein smoothened (SMO), a crucial
component of the Hh pathway. Vismodegib is a SMO inhibitor that was
recently approved by the FDA for the treatment of advanced BCC. However,
there has been an emergence of resistance to Vismodegib; this resistance
is a result of a point mutation in SMO. This occurrence of
Vismodegib-resistant SMO mutations highlights the therapeutic need for
new Hh pathway inhibitors. Itraconazole (ITZ), a well-known antifungal
agent, was recently determined to be a potent inhibitor of the Hh pathway
in vitro and in vivo; ITZ was also found to be a potent inhibitor of wild
type SMO and Vismodegib-resistant SMO. ITZ is well-characterized and
there is a good understanding of its potential side effects. This
well-known safety profile makes ITZ a desirable drug candidate. Our
ongoing studies on the ITZ scaffold are focused on exploring the regions
of ITZ that are required for potent Hh pathway inhibition. The design,
synthesis, and preliminary in vitro evaluation of these ITZ analogues
will be reported herein.

