Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential gene expression profile of tissue factor pathway
inhibitor-2 (TFPI-2) in malignant pleural mesothelioma


Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is an asbestos-related malignancy
characterized by rapid progressive local growth, late metastases, and
poor prognosis despite aggressive strategies involving surgery,
chemotherapy, and radiation. The tissue factor pathway inhibitor-2
(TFPI-2) has been shown to play an important role in the regulation of
extracellular matrix digestion and remodeling, and its reduced synthesis
is implicated in various pathophysiological processes such as
inflammation and tumor growth/metastasis. In this study we have
elucidated the gene expression profile of TFPI-2 among 22 MPM tumor
samples using Affymetrix U133AB chip platform. We noticed 13/22 tumors
had more than 3-fold reduction in their TFPI-2 gene expression patterns
compared to three normal peritoneums. Decreased TFPI-2 expression was
observed in majority of epithelial histotypes that exhibited short-term
recurrence (STR 4-fold) among 5 out of 7 autologous normal pleura-MPM
tumor samples. We also found > 3-fold decreased TFPI-2 gene expression
pattern in three out of six MPM patient derived cell lines. A robust
2-fold induction in TFPI-2 gene expression was found as a consequence of
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-AzaC) and trichostatin-A combination treatment
of two MPM patient derived cell lines. Studies are underway to assess
whether TFPI-2 promoter hypermethylation is involved in the
down-regulation of its expression pattern seen among fifty percent of MPM
tumor samples. Further studies are needed to understand the regulation
and interaction of TFPI-2 in mesothelioma carcinogenesis that could be
utilized for future early detection and therapeutic strategies to combat
this insidious disease.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

