Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modification of obesity effects on prostate cancer outcomes by age
and education


Background: Poor prostate cancer (PCa) outcomes have been associated with
obesity. Patient age and educational attainment may influence factors
related to cancer knowledge, fear of cancer, and screening practices. The
goal of this project was to determine how obesity effects on prostate
cancer outcomes may be modified by age and education. The specific study
aim was to examine the impact of education and age on the relationship
between pre-treatment obesity and prostate cancer severity and risk of
biochemical failure. The hypothesis was that the relationship between
obesity and prostate cancer severity varies by demographic
factors.Methods: Our sample included 1318 Caucasian (CA) and 327 African
American (AF) PCa patients in the Study for Clinical Outcomes Risk and
Ethnicity at the University of Pennsylvania Health System. Obese was
defined as a BMI of 30 kg/m2. Patient age was dichotomized at the median
(60 years) and education was quantified as less than college degree vs.
college degree. The outcomes of interest were advanced stage (T3, T4),
advanced grade (Gleason score 7+) and risk of biochemical failure.
Modification by age and education groups was analyzed in age-adjusted and
race-stratified logistic models for stage and grade outcomes and Cox
regression models for time to biochemical failure.Results: Obese CA men
were more likely to have high PCa stage (OR = 1.61, 95% CI = 1.22-2.11)
and grade (OR = 1.63, 95% CI = 1.27-2.09). Effects on stage were similar
regardless of age group or educational attainment. However, younger CA
and AF men (OR = 1.94, 95% CI = 1.35-2.78 and OR = 2.29, 95% CI =
1.19-4.42, respectively), as well as CA men with higher education (OR =
2.01, 95% CI = 1.46-2.70) were more likely to have advanced grade at
diagnosis. Time to biochemical failure was significant only among African
Americans in the younger age group (HR = 3.72, 95%CI = 1.23-11.23) and
with less education (HR = 3.39, 95% CI = 1.36-8.43).Conclusions: The
results suggested that obesity effects on PCa outcomes can be modified by
patient age and education and should be studied in the context of these
factors. Inconsistent obesity-PCa associations among studies may be
related to varying sample population characteristics. Identifying key
factors that influence obesity associations will provide critical
information about patients whose PCa risks may decrease from targeted
interventions. This research may suggest new approaches for prostate
cancer intervention via weight management, physical activity, and
targeted education, screening and treatment for those patients at highest
risk for unfavorable outcomes and related mortality.

