Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 regulates survival of human
melanoma cells upon endoplasmic reticulum stress through autophagy


Although receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIP1) is emerging as a
critical determinant of cell fate in response to cellular stress
resulting from activation of death receptors and DNA damage, its
potential role in response of cells to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
remains undefined. Here we report that RIP1 functions as an important
pro-survival mechanism in melanoma cells undergoing ER stress through
activation of autophagy. While pharmacological induction of ER stress
upregulated RIP1 and triggered autophagy in melanoma cells resistant to
ER stress-induced apoptosis, knockdown of RIP1 inhibited autophagy and
rendered the cells sensitive to killing by ER stress, recapitulating the
effect of inhibition of autophagy. Consistently, overexpression of RIP1
enhanced induction of autophagy and conferred resistance of melanoma
cells to killing by ER stress. Activation of JNK, which phosphorylated
the BH3-only protein Bim leading to its dissociation from Beclin-1, was
involved in ER stress-induced, RIP1-mediated activation of autophagy in
melanoma cells. On the other hand, activation of the transcription factor
heat shock factor protein 1 (HSF1) downstream of the IRE1/XBP1 axis of
the unfolded protein response was responsible for the increase in RIP1 in
melanoma cells undergoing ER stress. Collectively, these results identify
upregulation of RIP1 as an important adaptive mechanism of melanoma cells
to ER stress by protecting against cell death through activation of
autophagy, and suggest that targeting the autophagy-activating mechanism
of RIP1 may be a useful strategy to enhance sensitivity of melanoma cells
to therapeutic agents that induce ER stress.

