Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-186 inhibition alters cell proliferation and colony
formation in prostate cancer


MicroRNAs (miRs), key regulators of cancer-related genes, are
dysregulated in many solid tumors, including prostate cancer. However,
the role of miR-186 in prostate cancer (PCA) requires further
elucidation. Previously, we observed mature miR-186-5p was significantly
up-regulated in the serum collected from PCA patients (n = 15) diagnosed
with aggressive PCA (stage III/IV) disease compared to disease-free men
(n = 5). In addition, miR-186 expression was significantly up-regulated
in metastatic PCA cells (PC3) compared to a normal prostate epithelial
cell line (RWPE1). Putative and predicted miR-186 gene targets in various
cancers include pro-apoptotic and tumor suppression-related genes (e.g.,
P27, FOXO1, AKAP12). We hypothesized that miR-186 inhibition will reduce
the aggressive PCA phenotype.To test this hypothesis, PC3 cells were
transiently transfected with miR-186 inhibitor and scramble control for
24hrs. Cell viability and colony formation of transfected cells were
evaluated via the ATPlite Luminescence assay and soft agar assay. We also
evaluated expression profiles of predicted miR-186 gene targets in PCA
cell lines and transiently transfected PC3 cells using qRT-PCR.Transient
inhibition of miR-186 repressed cellular proliferation and colony
formation by 48-58% in 72-96hrs and 30% after 21 days, respectively. We
observed a 1.6-2.24 fold up-regulation in ROCK1 gene expression in PC3
cells treated with miR-186 inhibitor. However, additional studies are
needed to assess whether stable inhibition of miR-186 will increase PCA
invasiveness by up-regulating ROCK1 using in vitro assays and murine
models. Moreover, predicted miR-186 gene targets require validation using
qRT-PCR, western blots and luciferase reporter assays. Such efforts may
lead to the identification of novel biomarkers to improve diagnostic,
prognostic and clinical management strategies.

