Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TH-302 potentiates the antitumor activity of topotecan in
neuroblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma preclinical models


Background: There is strong evidence that tumor cells in the hypoxic
regions cause drug resistance and tumor relapse. Hypoxia targeting agents
may make cytotoxic therapy more effective. In this study, we investigated
the efficacy of TH-302, a hypoxia-activated prodrug of
bromo-isophosphoramide mustard, both alone and in combination with the
cytotoxic agent topotecan, in preclinical models of neuroblastoma (NBL)
and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS).Materials and methods: A panel of four NBL and
three RMS cell lines was tested in vitro under normoxic or hypoxic
conditions to assess the effect of TH-302 on cell proliferation, both as
a single agent and in combination with topotecan. In vivo activity was
also evaluated in different xenograft models. TH-302 (50 mg/kg) and
topotecan (1 mg/kg) were administered daily for 2 consecutive weeks, as
single agents or in combination. Animal survival was studied with an NBL
(SK-N-BE(2)) metastatic tumor model. Cleaved caspase-3 and the hypoxia
staining agentpimonidazolewere used as apoptotic and hypoxicmarkers in
vivo.Results: Under normoxic conditions, all tested lines showed an
anti-proliferative response to TH-302 with the IC50s ranging from 4.6 to
52M. When exposed to hypoxia (1% O2) overnight, a dramatic decrease of
IC50 was observed, ranging from 0.07 to 2.4M. Adding topotecan to the
TH-302 treatment significantly increased cytotoxicity in all tested tumor
cell lines. In both NBL models (SK-N-BE(2) and CHLA-20), single-agent
TH-302 treatment delayed tumor growth. Complete tumor regression was
observed in the combined treatment group after a two-week treatment
period, but all the regressed tumors relapsed after treatment ended. In
the CHLA-20 xenograft model, single-agent topotecan also induced complete
tumor regression. However, median timetorelapse in the combination group
was significantly longer than in the topotecan group (43 days vs. 16
days; pBackground: There is strong evidence that tumor cells in the
hypoxic regions cause drug resistance and tumor relapse. Hypoxia
targeting agents may make cytotoxic therapy more effective. In this
study, we investigated the efficacy of TH-302, a hypoxia-activated
prodrug of bromo-isophosphoramide mustard, both alone and in combination
with the cytotoxic agent topotecan, in preclinical models of
neuroblastoma (NBL) and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS).Materials and methods: A
panel of four NBL and three RMS cell lines was tested in vitro under
normoxic or hypoxic conditions to assess the effect of TH-302 on cell
proliferation, both as a single agent and in combination with topotecan.
In vivo activity was also evaluated in different xenograft models. TH-302
(50 mg/kg) and topotecan (1 mg/kg) were administered daily for 2
consecutive weeks, as single agents or in combination. Animal survival
was studied with an NBL (SK-N-BE(2)) metastatic tumor model. Cleaved
caspase-3 and the hypoxia staining agentpimonidazolewere used as
apoptotic and hypoxicmarkers in vivo.Results: Under normoxic conditions,
all tested lines showed an anti-proliferative response to TH-302 with the
IC50s ranging from 4.6 to 52M. When exposed to hypoxia (1% O2) overnight,
a dramatic decrease of IC50 was observed, ranging from 0.07 to 2.4M.
Adding topotecan to the TH-302 treatment significantly increased
cytotoxicity in all tested tumor cell lines. In both NBL models
(SK-N-BE(2) and CHLA-20), single-agent TH-302 treatment delayed tumor
growth. Complete tumor regression was observed in the combined treatment
group after a two-week treatment period, but all the regressed tumors
relapsed after treatment ended. In the CHLA-20 xenograft model,
single-agent topotecan also induced complete tumor regression. However,
median timetorelapse in the combination group was significantly longer
than in the topotecan group (43 days vs. 16 days; p<0.01). In the
combination group, all relapsed tumors remained responsive to the drug
treatment when re-challenged with the original treatment regimen. In the
neuroblastoma metastatic model, all three regimens prolonged animal
survival, but the combined treatment group showed better survival than
single-agent treatments (pBackground: There is strong evidence that tumor
cells in the hypoxic regions cause drug resistance and tumor relapse.
Hypoxia targeting agents may make cytotoxic therapy more effective. In
this study, we investigated the efficacy of TH-302, a hypoxia-activated
prodrug of bromo-isophosphoramide mustard, both alone and in combination
with the cytotoxic agent topotecan, in preclinical models of
neuroblastoma (NBL) and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS).Materials and methods: A
panel of four NBL and three RMS cell lines was tested in vitro under
normoxic or hypoxic conditions to assess the effect of TH-302 on cell
proliferation, both as a single agent and in combination with topotecan.
In vivo activity was also evaluated in different xenograft models. TH-302
(50 mg/kg) and topotecan (1 mg/kg) were administered daily for 2
consecutive weeks, as single agents or in combination. Animal survival
was studied with an NBL (SK-N-BE(2)) metastatic tumor model. Cleaved
caspase-3 and the hypoxia staining agentpimonidazolewere used as
apoptotic and hypoxicmarkers in vivo.Results: Under normoxic conditions,
all tested lines showed an anti-proliferative response to TH-302 with the
IC50s ranging from 4.6 to 52M. When exposed to hypoxia (1% O2) overnight,
a dramatic decrease of IC50 was observed, ranging from 0.07 to 2.4M.
Adding topotecan to the TH-302 treatment significantly increased
cytotoxicity in all tested tumor cell lines. In both NBL models
(SK-N-BE(2) and CHLA-20), single-agent TH-302 treatment delayed tumor
growth. Complete tumor regression was observed in the combined treatment
group after a two-week treatment period, but all the regressed tumors
relapsed after treatment ended. In the CHLA-20 xenograft model,
single-agent topotecan also induced complete tumor regression. However,
median timetorelapse in the combination group was significantly longer
than in the topotecan group (43 days vs. 16 days; p<0.01). In the
combination group, all relapsed tumors remained responsive to the drug
treatment when re-challenged with the original treatment regimen. In the
neuroblastoma metastatic model, all three regimens prolonged animal
survival, but the combined treatment group showed better survival than
single-agent treatments (p<0.01). In a RMS xenograft model, combined
treatment was also more effective than single-agent TH-302 or topotecan.
Double immunostaining of apoptotic and hypoxic markers showed that TH-302
mostly targeted tumor cells residing at hypoxic regions while topotecan
was more effective on tumor cells outside the hypoxic zones. The combined
treatment induced tumor cell apoptosis in both normoxic and hypoxic
regions.Conclusions: TH-302 showed antitumor effects in neuroblastoma and
rhabdomyosarcoma xenograft models. Compared to single-agent TH-302 or
topotecan, the combination treatment significantly improved tumor
response, delayed tumor relapse, and enhanced animal survival.

