Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wogonin overcomes cisplatin resistance of head and neck cancer by
targeting antioxidant defense mechanisms


Background: Cisplatin is a first-line chemotherapeutic agent for head and
neck cancer (HNC). However, the main limitation to clinical usefulness of
cisplatin is the high incidence of chemoresistance causing one of major
failures in cancer management. This may suggests the necessity of
combination therapies of cisplatin with other drugs to circumvent
chemoresistance. Wogonin, one of major natural flavonoids, is known to
reverse multidrug resistance in several types of cancers, however, which
has been rarely tested in HNC cells. Therefore, the present study
investigated the ability and molecular mechanisms of wogonin overcoming
cisplatin resistance in HNC cells.Methods: Two cisplatin-resistance HNC
cell lines (AMC-HN4R and -HN9R) and their parental and other human HNC
cell lines were used. The effect of wogonin, alone and in combination
with cisplatin, was assessed in HNC cells and normal cells by measuring
cell viability, cell cycle and death assays, reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production, and protein expression, and in preclinical tumor
xenograft mouse models.Results: Wogonin selectively killed HNC cells but
spared normal cells. It inhibited NF-E2-related factor 2 (NRF2),
P-glycoprotein, and glutathione S-transferase P (GSTP), overexpressed in
cisplatin-resistant HNC cells, resulting in the increased ROS
accumulation in HNC cells, an effect that can be blocked by the
antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine. Wogonin also induced selective cell
death by targeting the antioxidant defense mechanisms enhanced in the
resistant HNC cells and subsequently, effectively activating cell death
pathways involving PUMA and PARP. Therefore, wogonin significantly
sensitized the resistant HNC cells to cisplatin in vitro and in
vivo.Conclusions: Wogonin might be the promising anticancer candidate by
inducing ROS accumulation and selective killing HNC cells, thus
contributing to overcome the cisplatin-resistance of HNC cells.

