Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crystal structures of CARM1 bound to sinefungin and diverse
peptide substrates


Co-activator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1) is a protein
arginine N-methyltransferase (PRMT) enzyme that has been implicated in a
variety of cancers including AML (1) and breast (2), prostate (3), lung
(4) and colorectal (5) carcinomas. CARM1 is known to methylate H3
histones and non-histone substrates including p300/CBP, AIB1/SRC-3 and
PABP1 (6). To date, several crystal structures of CARM1 have been solved,
including structures with small molecule inhibitors (7), but no ternary
structures with nucleotide and peptide substrate have been reported.
Here, the crystal structures of human CARM1 with the SAM mimic sinefungin
(SFG) and three different peptide sequences from histone H3 and PAPB1 are
presented, and both non-methylated and singly-methylated arginine
residues are exemplified. Extensive interactions are seen with residues
Glu266, Glu257, and His414 and the substrate arginine side chain. Two key
hydrogen bonds are made by the side chain of Asn161 with the backbone
carbonyl of the P1 peptide residue and the backbone NH of the P3 peptide
residue. The carbonyl of the P1 peptide residue engages the protein
through water mediated hydrogen bonds. These structures show how the
CARM1 binding site is capable of accommodating a variety of peptide
sequences. Comparisons to known CARM1 complexes with small molecules
provide additional insights into inhibitor design.1. Vu, L. P. et al,
PRMT4 blocks myeloid differentiation by assembling a
methyl-RUNX1-dependent repressor complex. Cell Rep 2013, 5 (6),
1625-38.2. Al-Dhaheri, M. et al, CARM1 is an important determinant of
ERalpha-dependent breast cancer cell differentiation and proliferation in
breast cancer cells. Cancer Res 2011, 71 (6), 2118-28.3. Kim, Y. R. et
al, Differential CARM1 expression in prostate and colorectal cancers. BMC
Cancer 2010, 10, 197.4. Elakoum, R. et al, CARM1 and PRMT1 are
dysregulated in lung cancer without hierarchical features. Biochimie
2014, 97, 210-8.5. Ou, C. Y. et al, A coactivator role of CARM1 in the
dysregulation of beta-catenin activity in colorectal cancer cell growth
and gene expression. Mol Cancer Res 2011, 9 (5), 660-70.6. Bedford M.T.;
Clarke S.G. Protein arginine methylation in mammals: who, what, and why.
Mol Cell 2009, 33, 1-13.7. Sack, J.S et al, Structural basis for CARM1
inhibition by indole and pyrazole inhibitors. Biochem J 2011, 436, 331-9.

