Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs with
colorectal cancer by subgroups in the Vitamins and Lifestyle (VITAL) Study


Background: There is substantial evidence that use of non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduces the risk of colorectal cancer
(CRC), but no subgroup has been identified for which the chemoprevention
effect outweighs the risk of side effects. Methods: We tested the
interaction between NSAID use and multiple risk factors on CRC risk in
the VITAL cohort. A total of 73,458 individuals aged 50-76 completed a
questionnaire between 2000 and 2002, and 674 incidental colorectal cancer
cases were identified through 2010. Results: In stratified analysis, high
use of any type of NSAIDs (4+days/week for 4+ years) was statistically
significantly associated with a lower risk of CRC across all subgroups
stratified by sex, BMI, physical activity, smoking, alcohol intake,
screening and dietary factors, with a suggestion of stronger association
among men, obese individuals, and heavier drinkers; however, none of
these tests for interaction reached statistical significance. The
associations were almost identical for subjects with higher overall CRC
risk scores (HR: 0.62; 95% CI: 0.49-0.79) and those with lower risk
scores (HR: 0.61; 95% CI: 0.42-0.88). Differential effects by cancer
subsites and stages were tested. NSAID use was associated with a greater
risk reduction of proximal colon cancer vs distal (p for difference =
0.06) and distant stage vs local (p for difference = 0.04). Conclusion:
The association between high use of NSAIDs and CRC risk does not differ
significantly among subgroups. Impact: Our results suggest that NSAIDs
have a generally beneficial role in colorectal cancer prevention, largely
unmodified by other exposures.

