Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation and calibration of next-generation sequencing to
identify Epstein-Barr Virus-positive gastric cancer


Background: Gastric adenocarcinoma was recently classified by a large
genomic study into four molecular subtypes, including one defined by
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positivity. EBV infection in tumors is
conventionally assessed by in situ hybridization (ISH), but detection of
viral nucleic acids by next-generation sequencing represents a potential
alternative.Methods: Normalized EBV read counts were determined by whole
genome, whole exome, mRNA and miRNA sequencing for 295 fresh-frozen
gastric tumor samples. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections
were retrieved for ISH confirmation of 13 high-EBV and 11 low-EBV cases
selected at random.Results: By each sequencing method, numbers of EBV
reads were bimodally distributed across tumors, with a minority having
much higher counts. In pairwise comparisons, individual samples were
either consistently high or consistently low by all genomic methods for
which data were available. Empiric cut-offs based on molecular data of
1000 normalized reads for whole genome, 100 for exome, 4 for mRNA and
5000 for miRNA had perfect concordance identifying 26 (9%) tumors as
EBV-positive. One sample tested by ISH lacked tumor cells. For the 23
tumors with EBV status determined by both approaches, EBV-positivity or
-negativity by molecular testing was confirmed by EBER-ISH in all but one
case (kappa = 0.91). The exception was a microsatellite instability-type
cancer EBV-negative by both mRNA and miRNA sequencing, with equivocally
positive ISH interpretation.Conclusions: EBV-positive gastric tumors may
be accurately identified by quantifying viral sequences in genomic data.
Simultaneous analyses of human and viral DNA, mRNA and miRNA could
streamline tumor profiling for clinical care and research.

