Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proanthocyanidins from grape seeds inhibit growth of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma by decreasing dna methylation and reactivation of
silenced tumor suppressors


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
cancer worldwide. Despite advances in diagnostic and therapeutic methods,
survival of HNSCC patients remains unchanged over the last 30 years.
Epigenetic alterations are commonly associated with several types of
cancers including HNSCC. Studies have shown that DNA hypermethylation
plays important roles in the risk of cancers by inactivating the tumor
suppressor genes/proteins. Thus, epigenetic changes are considered as
promising therapeutic targets for cancer treatment. Dietary
phytochemicals offer promising options for the development of effective
strategies for the prevention of cancer, and thus can be utilized as
complementary and alternative medicine. In the present study, we
investigated the effect of grape seed proanthocyanidins (GSPs) on DNA
methylation and growth of HNSCC cells in vitro and in vivo models. Our
analytical data revealed that the levels of global DNA methylation and
DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity were higher in HNSCC cells compared
with normal human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBEC). Treatment of HNSCC
cells (FaDu and SCC-1) with GSPs for 6 days results in significant
decrease in global DNA methylation (70-80%, PHead and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common cancer worldwide. Despite
advances in diagnostic and therapeutic methods, survival of HNSCC
patients remains unchanged over the last 30 years. Epigenetic alterations
are commonly associated with several types of cancers including HNSCC.
Studies have shown that DNA hypermethylation plays important roles in the
risk of cancers by inactivating the tumor suppressor genes/proteins.
Thus, epigenetic changes are considered as promising therapeutic targets
for cancer treatment. Dietary phytochemicals offer promising options for
the development of effective strategies for the prevention of cancer, and
thus can be utilized as complementary and alternative medicine. In the
present study, we investigated the effect of grape seed proanthocyanidins
(GSPs) on DNA methylation and growth of HNSCC cells in vitro and in vivo
models. Our analytical data revealed that the levels of global DNA
methylation and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity were higher in
HNSCC cells compared with normal human bronchial epithelial cells
(NHBEC). Treatment of HNSCC cells (FaDu and SCC-1) with GSPs for 6 days
results in significant decrease in global DNA methylation (70-80%,
P<0.001) level, DNMT activity (60-80%) as well as in levels of DNMT
proteins (DNMT 3A and DNMT 3B) compared to non-GSPs-treated control
cells. The observation on DNA methylation levels was verified by
analyzing the levels of 5-methylcytosine (5-mC) using dot-blot analysis.
Additionally, GSPs treatment also reactivated tumor suppressor proteins,
such as Cip1/WAF1/p21 and p27 in HNSCC cells. Treatment of HNSCC cells
with 5-Aza-dc, an inhibitor of DNA methylation, also resulted in
suppression of DNA methylation as well as DNMT protein expression and
DNMT activity in these cells. Tumor xenograft studies were performed to
further determine the effect of GSPs on the growth of HNSCC cells using
athymic nude mouse model. Our in vivo study demonstrated that
administration of GSPs (0.5%, w/w) in supplementation with AIN76A control
diet resulted in inhibition of xenograft growth of FaDu cells in nude
mice (80%; PHead and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth
most common cancer worldwide. Despite advances in diagnostic and
therapeutic methods, survival of HNSCC patients remains unchanged over
the last 30 years. Epigenetic alterations are commonly associated with
several types of cancers including HNSCC. Studies have shown that DNA
hypermethylation plays important roles in the risk of cancers by
inactivating the tumor suppressor genes/proteins. Thus, epigenetic
changes are considered as promising therapeutic targets for cancer
treatment. Dietary phytochemicals offer promising options for the
development of effective strategies for the prevention of cancer, and
thus can be utilized as complementary and alternative medicine. In the
present study, we investigated the effect of grape seed proanthocyanidins
(GSPs) on DNA methylation and growth of HNSCC cells in vitro and in vivo
models. Our analytical data revealed that the levels of global DNA
methylation and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity were higher in
HNSCC cells compared with normal human bronchial epithelial cells
(NHBEC). Treatment of HNSCC cells (FaDu and SCC-1) with GSPs for 6 days
results in significant decrease in global DNA methylation (70-80%,
P<0.001) level, DNMT activity (60-80%) as well as in levels of DNMT
proteins (DNMT 3A and DNMT 3B) compared to non-GSPs-treated control
cells. The observation on DNA methylation levels was verified by
analyzing the levels of 5-methylcytosine (5-mC) using dot-blot analysis.
Additionally, GSPs treatment also reactivated tumor suppressor proteins,
such as Cip1/WAF1/p21 and p27 in HNSCC cells. Treatment of HNSCC cells
with 5-Aza-dc, an inhibitor of DNA methylation, also resulted in
suppression of DNA methylation as well as DNMT protein expression and
DNMT activity in these cells. Tumor xenograft studies were performed to
further determine the effect of GSPs on the growth of HNSCC cells using
athymic nude mouse model. Our in vivo study demonstrated that
administration of GSPs (0.5%, w/w) in supplementation with AIN76A control
diet resulted in inhibition of xenograft growth of FaDu cells in nude
mice (80%; P<0.01) compared to the tumor xenograft growth in mice fed
with non-GSPs-supplemented control diet. The growth inhibitory effect of
dietary GSPs on the HNSCC tumor xenografts was associated with the
inhibition of DNA methylation, DNMT activity and reactivation of silenced
tumor suppressor proteins in tumor tissues. Together, this preclinical
study provides evidence that GSPs act as a DNA demethylating agent and
able to reactivate an epigenetically silenced tumor suppressors to
inhibit growth of HNSCC cells.

