Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting RFX-1 as a novel therapeutic strategy in hepatocellular
carcinoma


Regulatory factor X (RFX) 1 is a transcription factor that has been
linked to negative regulation of tumor progression; however, its
biological function and signaling cascades are unknown. In this study, we
identify RFX-1 is a negative regulator of cell proliferation in human
HCC. We demonstrated that ectopic expression of RFX-1 suppressed the
colony forming ability of HCC cell lines through activating SHP-1
expression. In addition, nude mice bearing RFX-1-overexpressing tumors
showed a repression of growth rate compared to the control group.
Notably, we demonstrated that mRNA and protein level of RFX-1 is highly
correlated with SHP-1 in 101 clinical HCC patients, indicating that RFX-1
might be a tumor suppressor of human HCC. To identify the RFX-1 activator
for HCC therapy, we screened in-house small molecule library and found
that one of small molecules, SC-2001, targeted RFX-1 and exhibited potent
anti-tumor effect on HCC cells. In addition, we proved that SHP-1
activation and STAT3 dephosphorylation induced by SC-2001-activated
RFX-1. Furthermore, genetic knockdown of RFX-1 reversed SC-2001-induced
cell growth inhibition. Importantly, by a mouse xenograft model,
silencing of RFX-1 could rescue the anti-HCC tumor effect caused by
SC-2001 in vivo, implying that RFX-1 is a promising target for HCC
therapy. Taken together, our results indicated that RFX-1/SHP-1/STAT3
signaling might a potential strategy for HCC therapy, and SC-2001 is a
promising lead compound for drug development of HCC target therapy.

