Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) expression and proliferation
index (Ki-67) in neuroendocrine tumors of the gastrointestinal tract and
pancreas


EZH2 is a polycomb group protein that is involved in the progression of
multiple human cancers including prostatic, endometrial, and colonic
adenocarcinomas. Its expression has been shown to increase from typical
carcinoid to atypical carcinoid and further to small cell/large cell
neuroendocrine carcinomas of the lung. Here we examine the EZH2
expression and the proliferation index (PI) by Ki-67 expression in
neuroendocrine tumors of the gastrointestinal tract (GI) and pancreas.We
retrieved 72 cases of GI and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors of grades
G1 (n = 56), G2 (n = 6) and G3 (n = 10) which were graded according to
the WHO classification. Expression of EZH2 and Ki-67 was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry using monoclonal antibodies (EZH2 at 1:200; Ki-67 at
1:70). Expression of EZH2 was determined to be low (10%), and was
compared with the respective PI.All G1 tumors had low EZH2 expression and
a low PI (20%). In G2 tumors, EZH2 expression was intermediate (1-10%)
and PI was between 0-8%. One of the G2 tumors had a low PI of 0, however,
the EZH2 expression was intermediate (3%). There was increased EZH2
expression relative to increasing tumor grade from G1 to G3 (p EZH2 is a
polycomb group protein that is involved in the progression of multiple
human cancers including prostatic, endometrial, and colonic
adenocarcinomas. Its expression has been shown to increase from typical
carcinoid to atypical carcinoid and further to small cell/large cell
neuroendocrine carcinomas of the lung. Here we examine the EZH2
expression and the proliferation index (PI) by Ki-67 expression in
neuroendocrine tumors of the gastrointestinal tract (GI) and pancreas.We
retrieved 72 cases of GI and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors of grades
G1 (n = 56), G2 (n = 6) and G3 (n = 10) which were graded according to
the WHO classification. Expression of EZH2 and Ki-67 was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry using monoclonal antibodies (EZH2 at 1:200; Ki-67 at
1:70). Expression of EZH2 was determined to be low (10%), and was
compared with the respective PI.All G1 tumors had low EZH2 expression and
a low PI (20%). In G2 tumors, EZH2 expression was intermediate (1-10%)
and PI was between 0-8%. One of the G2 tumors had a low PI of 0, however,
the EZH2 expression was intermediate (3%). There was increased EZH2
expression relative to increasing tumor grade from G1 to G3 (p
<0.05).EZH2 expression increases incrementally from G1 neuroendocrine
tumors to G2 and further to G3 tumors, suggesting an association or a
role in progression of neuroendocrine tumors. There is strong correlation
between the expression of EZH2 and PI in G1, G2 and G3 tumors. EZH2
appears to be a better predictor of tumor grade in G2 tumors as compared
to PI. Thus, EZH2 could be used as an additional diagnostic marker in
examining atypical GI neuroendocrine tumors.

