Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of p53 codon72 polymorphism with susceptibility to
hepatocellular carcinoma in Chinese population of Northeast Sichuan


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is commonly known asthe king of cancer,
with high mortality and low survival due to advanced stage and poor
clinical outcomes worldwide. Development of HCC is a multistep process
which involves in genetic factors such as alterations of oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes, and environmental exposure like viral infections
and aflatoxin contamination as well. The p53 tumor suppressor protein
plays key roles in tumor development and progression, and single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the p53 gene codon 72 (P53Arg/Pro)
changes the structure of the protein and affects its activity which might
affect cancer risk. Data showed that the prevalence of P53Arg/Pro
different genotypes varied with race and geographic location, and
previous studies provided controversial findings about the association of
P53Arg/Pro and HCC incidences. A case-control study here was employed to
investigate the associations between p53 codon72 polymorphism and HCC
susceptibility in Chinese population of northeast Sichuan.A total of 150
subjects with HCC and 341 cancer-free control subjects were involved in
this study. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood and the p53
codon72 polymorphism was measured by Taqman MGB, a fluorescent
quantitative real time PCR assay. The distribution frequency of p53 sites
was compared between the HCC group and the control, including the
stratified and interaction analysis of the related environmental factors
about HCC in order to understand the roles of p53 codon72 polymorphism
and environmental factors in the development of HCC.The results showed
that the distribution frequency of p53 sites of Arg/Arg, Arg/Pro, Pro/Pro
were 18.0%, 48.7%, 33.3% in HCC group,and 16.4%, 47.8%, 35.8% in the
control respectively, which indicated that there was no obvious
differences between the two groups. Further stratified with smoking,
alcohol drinking, gender, HBV infection,no risk increasing genotype was
found either. However, interactions between p53 codon72 polymorphism and
above environmental conditions exposure might increase the risk of
HCC(smoking OR = 2.18,95%CI:1.12-4.25), (gender OR =
3.01,95%CI:1.00-9.14), (HBV infection OR = 6.05,95%CI:2.29-16.00),
respectively. Our findings indicated that no significant association was
found between p53 codon72 polymorphism and the susceptibility to HCC in
Chinese population of Northeast Sichuan currently.; However, interaction
between genetic factors and environment exposure significantly increased
the risk of HCC. This study suggests some environmental exposure control
measures, such as smoking cessation, hepatitis B vaccination and early
screening for men at high-risk age, which could be taken to effectively
prevent the development of HCC.

