Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concurrent aberrations in the Wnt, MAPK and PI3K pathways
identified through next generation sequencing of relapsed refractory
colorectal adenocarcinoma (CRC): Implications for future therapeutic
trials


Background: Relapsed refractory colorectal adenocarcinoma (CRC) is
evolving as a disease with distinct molecular subsets rather than a
singular histology. Given the varied outcomes of CRC patients treated on
clinical trials particularly with targeted therapies, we aimed to
identify a molecular phenotype for future therapeutic targeting.Methods:
We identified CRC patients referred to our Phase I clinic with adequate
tissue for next generation sequencing (NGS) on a commercially available
platform (FoundationOne, Boston, MA). Over 2000 exons of 186
cancer-related genes plus over 30 introns from 14 genes often rearranged
in cancer were fully sequenced for point mutations, insertions/deletions,
copy number alterations (CNAs) and select gene fusions.Results: Overall,
60 relapsed CRC patients (31 male, 29 female; median age 55 years; 56
colon primary, 4 rectum primary). 48 (80%) patients had a mutation linked
to aberrant Wnt pathway signaling (most commonly, APC 43 pts, 90%). Of
these 48 patients, over half (n = 26, 54%) demonstrated a concurrent
mutation affecting the PI3K cascade (PIK3CA in 12 patients [4 E545K, 3
Q546K, 2 E542K, 1 H1047Y, 1 E453K, 1 R38C]). Of these 26 pts with
concurrent aberrant Wnt and PI3K pathways, 22 also demonstrated a
concomitant MAPK pathway mutation (17 KRAS and 3 BRAF). Of the 60 CRC pts
overall, 22 (37%) patients had coexisting aberrations linked to in all
three (Wnt, PI3K, and MAPK) cascades.Conclusions: Concomitant mutations
in three pathways (Wnt, MAPK, PI3K) implicated in cancer occur frequently
in patients with advanced CRC, emphasizing the need for a combinatorial
therapeutic strategy ideally targeting all three cascades.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

