Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of selective GRP94 inhibitors for the treatment of
cancer


Glucose Regulated Protein 94 (Grp94) is an Hsp90 paralog localized in the
lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of higher eukaryotes. While the
mechanisms associated with Grp94-pathogenic expression are still actively
studied, the focus thus far of most cancer related studies has been
primarily on the immunogenic activity of Grp94/peptide complexes and the
involvement of this protein in the secretion of IGF-I and IGF-II and the
regulation of Toll-like receptors and integrins. This status quo has
recently changed when work from our lab has shown that in certain breast
cancers the maintenance of a high density HER2 species at the plasma
membrane and its associated aberrant signaling also requires Grp94,
rendering these tumors highly sensitive to Grp94 inhibition. The
discovery of selective and potent Grp94 inhibitors has been hindered due
to the high similarity of the ATP-binding regulatory pocket of the Hsp90
paralogs. However, recent work from our lab has shown that this apparent
roadblock can be overcome by using library screening and structural and
computational analysis to discover purine-based molecules that show
100-fold selectivity for the Grp94 isoform. Herein, we detail for the
first time the structure activity relationship of the selective purine
derived Grp94 molecules. This work provides insights on how to overcome
the high structural similarity of Hsp90s in the ligand binding pocket,
and also reports selective and therapeutically relevant Grp94 inhibitors
based on a purine scaffold. These initial inhibitors have potent activity
against cancer cells providing an important platform for the development
of Grp94 inhibitors with drug-like features and potential for clinical
translation.

