Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting wildtype and L858R/T790M mutant EGFR by
isoliquiritigenin induces apoptosis and Inhibits tumor growth of NSCLC


Genetic alteration of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a high
risk factor of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Isoliquiritigenin
(ILQ), a chalcone derivative, reported anti-cancer activities. In this
study, we investigated the effects of ILQ on the growth of tyrosine
kinase inhibitor -sensitive and -resistant NSCLC cells and elucidated its
molecular mechanisms. Treatment with ILQ inhibited growth and induced
apoptosis in both tyrosine kinase inhibitor-sensitive (HCC827, H1650;
delE746-A750 EGFR) and -resistant (H1975; L858R/T790M EGFR) NSCLC cells.
However, ILQ didn't showed the inhibitory effects of cell growth and
induction of apoptosis in Met amplified-HCC827GR or K-ras mutated-A549
cells. ILQ induced apoptotic markers, the cleavage of caspase-3 and
poly-(ADP ribose)-polymerase, increased expression of Bim and reduced
expression of Bcl-2. ILQ inhibited the catalytic activity of both
wildtype and double mutant (L858R/T790M) EGFR by kinase assay. Treatment
with ILQ inhibited the anchorage-independent growth of NIH3T3 cells
stably transfected with either wildtype or double-mutant EGFR with or
without EGF stimulation. ILQ also reduced the phosphorylation of Akt and
ERK1/2 in both TKI-sensitive and -resistant NSCLC cells in the western
blotting analysis. ILQ directly bound both wildtype and double-mutant
EGFR by ATP-competitive manner. Computational docking model expected that
ILQ interacted with Glu762 and Met793 sites of wildtype EGFR and Lys745,
Met793 and Asp855 of mutant EGFR. ILQ attenuated the tumor growth of
H1975 cell xenografted athymic mice in vivo, which was caused by
decreased expression of Ki-67 and diminished phosphorylation of Akt and
ERK1/2. Taken together, ILQ suppresses NSCLC cell growth by directly
targeting wildtype or mutant EGFR.

