Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Repair of challenging FFPE DNA improves library success rate and
sequencing quality


Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) clinical samples are an
invaluable source of information about genetic alterations in human
disease, especially cancer. Next generation sequencing is a powerful tool
to mine that information. Unfortunately, sequencing DNA from FFPE samples
is challenging due to limited quantities and poor quality, a result of
DNA damage incurred during fixation and storage. In this study, we
investigated the effects of DNA repair on library preparation and
sequencing from FFPE samples. We evaluated a repair enzyme mix that is
designed to work on a broad range of DNA damage including modified bases,
nicks, gaps, and blocked 3 ends. Results from FFPE DNA samples of varying
quality show that DNA repair generally increases library yields by
10-170%, with the largest improvement on samples of poor quality. Careful
analysis of sequencing data shows that base calling qualities for all 4
bases are improved upon DNA repair. Aberrant G:C to A:T mutation were
significantly reduced, consistent with cytosine deamination being induced
during fixation and storage at room temperature. Interestingly,
sequencing miscalls for base pair changes not typically associated with
fixation were also reduced. We are currently investigating the source of
these mutations. With DNA repair a noticeably positive impact on read
mapping and read pairing was observed, resulting in the generation of
more useable data. Pretreatment of FFPE DNA by the repair enzyme mix is
easily implemented upstream of library construction, allowing fast
turnaround time and easy automation. We expect that these improvements
will enable the analysis of many FFPE samples that would otherwise not be
accessible.

