Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metronomic scheduling: a promising strategy to manage intratumor
heterogeneity and control treatment resistance


To date, the emergence of drug resistance is never dealt with until it
occurs. Yet, studies have shown that treatment-sensitive and -resistant
malignant cell subpopulations coexist within the same tumor. Being able
to decipher their complex relationship and characterize the impact of
intratumor heterogeneity on treatment efficacy is essential to understand
tumor biology and define adaptive therapeutic strategies to overcome
resistance. We developed 2D and 3D spheroid co-culture models to analyze
the expansion of A549 (DsRed expressing) and A549-EpoB40 (GFP expressing)
cells over time (for up to one month), which are drug-sensitive and
-resistant lung carcinoma cells, respectively. The fluorescent signals
were recorded daily to quantify and localize each tumor subpopulation. We
showed that the sensitive cells constitute the predominant subpopulation
in the absence of any chemotherapeutic treatment, since they have an
unexpected suppressive effect on the growth of resistant cells (-79% at
day 14, pTo date, the emergence of drug resistance is never dealt with
until it occurs. Yet, studies have shown that treatment-sensitive and
-resistant malignant cell subpopulations coexist within the same tumor.
Being able to decipher their complex relationship and characterize the
impact of intratumor heterogeneity on treatment efficacy is essential to
understand tumor biology and define adaptive therapeutic strategies to
overcome resistance. We developed 2D and 3D spheroid co-culture models to
analyze the expansion of A549 (DsRed expressing) and A549-EpoB40 (GFP
expressing) cells over time (for up to one month), which are
drug-sensitive and -resistant lung carcinoma cells, respectively. The
fluorescent signals were recorded daily to quantify and localize each
tumor subpopulation. We showed that the sensitive cells constitute the
predominant subpopulation in the absence of any chemotherapeutic
treatment, since they have an unexpected suppressive effect on the growth
of resistant cells (-79% at day 14, p<0.001). Using cell-free conditioned
medium and Transwell systems, we demonstrated that this inhibition was
independent from cell-to-cell interactions. We then showed that a
conventional treatment schedule that eradicates the sensitive cells
(cytotoxic dose, once a week) irremediably resulted in the selection of
the resistant subpopulation in the different co-culture models.
Conversely, a metronomic treatment schedule (ten times lower doses of
drugs, five times a week) was an effective strategy to suppress the
growth of sensitive cells (100-fold decrease vs untreated control at day
14, pTo date, the emergence of drug resistance is never dealt with until
it occurs. Yet, studies have shown that treatment-sensitive and
-resistant malignant cell subpopulations coexist within the same tumor.
Being able to decipher their complex relationship and characterize the
impact of intratumor heterogeneity on treatment efficacy is essential to
understand tumor biology and define adaptive therapeutic strategies to
overcome resistance. We developed 2D and 3D spheroid co-culture models to
analyze the expansion of A549 (DsRed expressing) and A549-EpoB40 (GFP
expressing) cells over time (for up to one month), which are
drug-sensitive and -resistant lung carcinoma cells, respectively. The
fluorescent signals were recorded daily to quantify and localize each
tumor subpopulation. We showed that the sensitive cells constitute the
predominant subpopulation in the absence of any chemotherapeutic
treatment, since they have an unexpected suppressive effect on the growth
of resistant cells (-79% at day 14, p<0.001). Using cell-free conditioned
medium and Transwell systems, we demonstrated that this inhibition was
independent from cell-to-cell interactions. We then showed that a
conventional treatment schedule that eradicates the sensitive cells
(cytotoxic dose, once a week) irremediably resulted in the selection of
the resistant subpopulation in the different co-culture models.
Conversely, a metronomic treatment schedule (ten times lower doses of
drugs, five times a week) was an effective strategy to suppress the
growth of sensitive cells (100-fold decrease vs untreated control at day
14, p<0.001) while maintaining intra-tumor heterogeneity and thus
preventing the selection of resistant cells (-85% vs conventional
schedule, pTo date, the emergence of drug resistance is never dealt with
until it occurs. Yet, studies have shown that treatment-sensitive and
-resistant malignant cell subpopulations coexist within the same tumor.
Being able to decipher their complex relationship and characterize the
impact of intratumor heterogeneity on treatment efficacy is essential to
understand tumor biology and define adaptive therapeutic strategies to
overcome resistance. We developed 2D and 3D spheroid co-culture models to
analyze the expansion of A549 (DsRed expressing) and A549-EpoB40 (GFP
expressing) cells over time (for up to one month), which are
drug-sensitive and -resistant lung carcinoma cells, respectively. The
fluorescent signals were recorded daily to quantify and localize each
tumor subpopulation. We showed that the sensitive cells constitute the
predominant subpopulation in the absence of any chemotherapeutic
treatment, since they have an unexpected suppressive effect on the growth
of resistant cells (-79% at day 14, p<0.001). Using cell-free conditioned
medium and Transwell systems, we demonstrated that this inhibition was
independent from cell-to-cell interactions. We then showed that a
conventional treatment schedule that eradicates the sensitive cells
(cytotoxic dose, once a week) irremediably resulted in the selection of
the resistant subpopulation in the different co-culture models.
Conversely, a metronomic treatment schedule (ten times lower doses of
drugs, five times a week) was an effective strategy to suppress the
growth of sensitive cells (100-fold decrease vs untreated control at day
14, p<0.001) while maintaining intra-tumor heterogeneity and thus
preventing the selection of resistant cells (-85% vs conventional
schedule, p<0.001). Similar trends were observed with HT29 colon cancer
cells sensitive or resistant to oxaliplatin. Our results thus support the
fact that daily low doses of drugs would lead to better results than high
cytotoxic doses in the long term, to overcome problems of drug resistant
cell selection that underlies many cases of cancer recurrence.
Mathematical modeling of cell expansion and response to treatment is in
progress to further define situations of tumor heterogeneity where
resistant cells could be controlled by metronomic-based treatment
schedules, to achieve a stable or reduced global tumor population.
Mathematical models that support adaptive therapeutic approaches, by
changing the drug doses and schedule over time, will also likely help us
to optimize the global efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents and targeted
therapies in heterogeneous cancer populations. Leading-edge technologies
such as 3D imaging and high sensitivity genomics will be required, in the
near future, to further unravel the complex interactions among cancer
cell subpopulations and increase knowledge of the influence of
intra-tumor heterogeneity on treatment response.

