Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosome secretion in ovarian carcinoma


The purpose of this study is to elucidate the mechanism of exosome
secretion in Ovarian Cancer (OC).OC is the leading cause of death from
gynecological cancers in western countries.Exosomes, 30-100 nm vesicles,
contain various lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, exhibit paracrine
bioactivities as well as distant transfer of regulatory messages to other
cells. In our lab, the presence of OC derived exosomes accelerated
cancerous pathologies in mice, thus determining OC derived exosomes as
having a pro cancerous effect and therefore a worthy target for OC
therapy.The precise mechanism of the biogenesis and release of exosomes
has yet to be elucidated; however, several studies have revealed the
involvement of nSmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a/b genes in these processes.OC is
characterized by primary solid tumors, solid metastases, and effusions to
the peritoneal and pleural cavities as the tumor progresses. In order to
develop a relevant model for solid tumors and effusions in vitro we
utilized 3D Macro-porous alginate scaffolds and 3D OVCAR 8 cell line
spheroids respectively.In the present study, we examined the expression
of the above mentioned genes at the mRNA and protein levels in human
ovarian cancer samples derived from primary, metastatic lesions and from
effusion derived OC cells and compared the expression profile to that of
cell lines utilizing in our 3D in vitro model.Our results show that in OC
samples, nSMmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a mRNA expression are significantly
higher in effusions vs solid tumors (pThe purpose of this study is to
elucidate the mechanism of exosome secretion in Ovarian Cancer (OC).OC is
the leading cause of death from gynecological cancers in western
countries.Exosomes, 30-100 nm vesicles, contain various lipids, proteins,
and nucleic acids, exhibit paracrine bioactivities as well as distant
transfer of regulatory messages to other cells. In our lab, the presence
of OC derived exosomes accelerated cancerous pathologies in mice, thus
determining OC derived exosomes as having a pro cancerous effect and
therefore a worthy target for OC therapy.The precise mechanism of the
biogenesis and release of exosomes has yet to be elucidated; however,
several studies have revealed the involvement of nSmase2, Tsap6 and
Rab27a/b genes in these processes.OC is characterized by primary solid
tumors, solid metastases, and effusions to the peritoneal and pleural
cavities as the tumor progresses. In order to develop a relevant model
for solid tumors and effusions in vitro we utilized 3D Macro-porous
alginate scaffolds and 3D OVCAR 8 cell line spheroids respectively.In the
present study, we examined the expression of the above mentioned genes at
the mRNA and protein levels in human ovarian cancer samples derived from
primary, metastatic lesions and from effusion derived OC cells and
compared the expression profile to that of cell lines utilizing in our 3D
in vitro model.Our results show that in OC samples, nSMmase2, Tsap6 and
Rab27a mRNA expression are significantly higher in effusions vs solid
tumors (p<0.026, pThe purpose of this study is to elucidate the mechanism
of exosome secretion in Ovarian Cancer (OC).OC is the leading cause of
death from gynecological cancers in western countries.Exosomes, 30-100 nm
vesicles, contain various lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, exhibit
paracrine bioactivities as well as distant transfer of regulatory
messages to other cells. In our lab, the presence of OC derived exosomes
accelerated cancerous pathologies in mice, thus determining OC derived
exosomes as having a pro cancerous effect and therefore a worthy target
for OC therapy.The precise mechanism of the biogenesis and release of
exosomes has yet to be elucidated; however, several studies have revealed
the involvement of nSmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a/b genes in these
processes.OC is characterized by primary solid tumors, solid metastases,
and effusions to the peritoneal and pleural cavities as the tumor
progresses. In order to develop a relevant model for solid tumors and
effusions in vitro we utilized 3D Macro-porous alginate scaffolds and 3D
OVCAR 8 cell line spheroids respectively.In the present study, we
examined the expression of the above mentioned genes at the mRNA and
protein levels in human ovarian cancer samples derived from primary,
metastatic lesions and from effusion derived OC cells and compared the
expression profile to that of cell lines utilizing in our 3D in vitro
model.Our results show that in OC samples, nSMmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a
mRNA expression are significantly higher in effusions vs solid tumors
(p<0.026, p<0.0001 and pThe purpose of this study is to elucidate the
mechanism of exosome secretion in Ovarian Cancer (OC).OC is the leading
cause of death from gynecological cancers in western countries.Exosomes,
30-100 nm vesicles, contain various lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids,
exhibit paracrine bioactivities as well as distant transfer of regulatory
messages to other cells. In our lab, the presence of OC derived exosomes
accelerated cancerous pathologies in mice, thus determining OC derived
exosomes as having a pro cancerous effect and therefore a worthy target
for OC therapy.The precise mechanism of the biogenesis and release of
exosomes has yet to be elucidated; however, several studies have revealed
the involvement of nSmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a/b genes in these
processes.OC is characterized by primary solid tumors, solid metastases,
and effusions to the peritoneal and pleural cavities as the tumor
progresses. In order to develop a relevant model for solid tumors and
effusions in vitro we utilized 3D Macro-porous alginate scaffolds and 3D
OVCAR 8 cell line spheroids respectively.In the present study, we
examined the expression of the above mentioned genes at the mRNA and
protein levels in human ovarian cancer samples derived from primary,
metastatic lesions and from effusion derived OC cells and compared the
expression profile to that of cell lines utilizing in our 3D in vitro
model.Our results show that in OC samples, nSMmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a
mRNA expression are significantly higher in effusions vs solid tumors
(p<0.026, p<0.0001 and p<0.02, respectively). Surprisingly, the protein
content of these genes are significantly lower in effusions vs. the solid
samples in these very same samples (pThe purpose of this study is to
elucidate the mechanism of exosome secretion in Ovarian Cancer (OC).OC is
the leading cause of death from gynecological cancers in western
countries.Exosomes, 30-100 nm vesicles, contain various lipids, proteins,
and nucleic acids, exhibit paracrine bioactivities as well as distant
transfer of regulatory messages to other cells. In our lab, the presence
of OC derived exosomes accelerated cancerous pathologies in mice, thus
determining OC derived exosomes as having a pro cancerous effect and
therefore a worthy target for OC therapy.The precise mechanism of the
biogenesis and release of exosomes has yet to be elucidated; however,
several studies have revealed the involvement of nSmase2, Tsap6 and
Rab27a/b genes in these processes.OC is characterized by primary solid
tumors, solid metastases, and effusions to the peritoneal and pleural
cavities as the tumor progresses. In order to develop a relevant model
for solid tumors and effusions in vitro we utilized 3D Macro-porous
alginate scaffolds and 3D OVCAR 8 cell line spheroids respectively.In the
present study, we examined the expression of the above mentioned genes at
the mRNA and protein levels in human ovarian cancer samples derived from
primary, metastatic lesions and from effusion derived OC cells and
compared the expression profile to that of cell lines utilizing in our 3D
in vitro model.Our results show that in OC samples, nSMmase2, Tsap6 and
Rab27a mRNA expression are significantly higher in effusions vs solid
tumors (p<0.026, p<0.0001 and p<0.02, respectively). Surprisingly, the
protein content of these genes are significantly lower in effusions vs.
the solid samples in these very same samples (p<0.001-0.0001). This
discrepancy is explained by the presence of nSMmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a
proteins in effusion fluid-derived exosomes.Clinical analysis shows that
elevated nSmase2 and Tsap6 mRNA expression correlates with poor survival
(pThe purpose of this study is to elucidate the mechanism of exosome
secretion in Ovarian Cancer (OC).OC is the leading cause of death from
gynecological cancers in western countries.Exosomes, 30-100 nm vesicles,
contain various lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, exhibit paracrine
bioactivities as well as distant transfer of regulatory messages to other
cells. In our lab, the presence of OC derived exosomes accelerated
cancerous pathologies in mice, thus determining OC derived exosomes as
having a pro cancerous effect and therefore a worthy target for OC
therapy.The precise mechanism of the biogenesis and release of exosomes
has yet to be elucidated; however, several studies have revealed the
involvement of nSmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a/b genes in these processes.OC is
characterized by primary solid tumors, solid metastases, and effusions to
the peritoneal and pleural cavities as the tumor progresses. In order to
develop a relevant model for solid tumors and effusions in vitro we
utilized 3D Macro-porous alginate scaffolds and 3D OVCAR 8 cell line
spheroids respectively.In the present study, we examined the expression
of the above mentioned genes at the mRNA and protein levels in human
ovarian cancer samples derived from primary, metastatic lesions and from
effusion derived OC cells and compared the expression profile to that of
cell lines utilizing in our 3D in vitro model.Our results show that in OC
samples, nSMmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a mRNA expression are significantly
higher in effusions vs solid tumors (p<0.026, p<0.0001 and p<0.02,
respectively). Surprisingly, the protein content of these genes are
significantly lower in effusions vs. the solid samples in these very same
samples (p<0.001-0.0001). This discrepancy is explained by the presence
of nSMmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a proteins in effusion fluid-derived
exosomes.Clinical analysis shows that elevated nSmase2 and Tsap6 mRNA
expression correlates with poor survival (p<0.036) and less favorable
response to chemotherapy, respectively (pThe purpose of this study is to
elucidate the mechanism of exosome secretion in Ovarian Cancer (OC).OC is
the leading cause of death from gynecological cancers in western
countries.Exosomes, 30-100 nm vesicles, contain various lipids, proteins,
and nucleic acids, exhibit paracrine bioactivities as well as distant
transfer of regulatory messages to other cells. In our lab, the presence
of OC derived exosomes accelerated cancerous pathologies in mice, thus
determining OC derived exosomes as having a pro cancerous effect and
therefore a worthy target for OC therapy.The precise mechanism of the
biogenesis and release of exosomes has yet to be elucidated; however,
several studies have revealed the involvement of nSmase2, Tsap6 and
Rab27a/b genes in these processes.OC is characterized by primary solid
tumors, solid metastases, and effusions to the peritoneal and pleural
cavities as the tumor progresses. In order to develop a relevant model
for solid tumors and effusions in vitro we utilized 3D Macro-porous
alginate scaffolds and 3D OVCAR 8 cell line spheroids respectively.In the
present study, we examined the expression of the above mentioned genes at
the mRNA and protein levels in human ovarian cancer samples derived from
primary, metastatic lesions and from effusion derived OC cells and
compared the expression profile to that of cell lines utilizing in our 3D
in vitro model.Our results show that in OC samples, nSMmase2, Tsap6 and
Rab27a mRNA expression are significantly higher in effusions vs solid
tumors (p<0.026, p<0.0001 and p<0.02, respectively). Surprisingly, the
protein content of these genes are significantly lower in effusions vs.
the solid samples in these very same samples (p<0.001-0.0001). This
discrepancy is explained by the presence of nSMmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a
proteins in effusion fluid-derived exosomes.Clinical analysis shows that
elevated nSmase2 and Tsap6 mRNA expression correlates with poor survival
(p<0.036) and less favorable response to chemotherapy, respectively
(p<0.027). Furthermore, Rab27a protein is lower in pleural effusions
compared to peritoneal effusions (pThe purpose of this study is to
elucidate the mechanism of exosome secretion in Ovarian Cancer (OC).OC is
the leading cause of death from gynecological cancers in western
countries.Exosomes, 30-100 nm vesicles, contain various lipids, proteins,
and nucleic acids, exhibit paracrine bioactivities as well as distant
transfer of regulatory messages to other cells. In our lab, the presence
of OC derived exosomes accelerated cancerous pathologies in mice, thus
determining OC derived exosomes as having a pro cancerous effect and
therefore a worthy target for OC therapy.The precise mechanism of the
biogenesis and release of exosomes has yet to be elucidated; however,
several studies have revealed the involvement of nSmase2, Tsap6 and
Rab27a/b genes in these processes.OC is characterized by primary solid
tumors, solid metastases, and effusions to the peritoneal and pleural
cavities as the tumor progresses. In order to develop a relevant model
for solid tumors and effusions in vitro we utilized 3D Macro-porous
alginate scaffolds and 3D OVCAR 8 cell line spheroids respectively.In the
present study, we examined the expression of the above mentioned genes at
the mRNA and protein levels in human ovarian cancer samples derived from
primary, metastatic lesions and from effusion derived OC cells and
compared the expression profile to that of cell lines utilizing in our 3D
in vitro model.Our results show that in OC samples, nSMmase2, Tsap6 and
Rab27a mRNA expression are significantly higher in effusions vs solid
tumors (p<0.026, p<0.0001 and p<0.02, respectively). Surprisingly, the
protein content of these genes are significantly lower in effusions vs.
the solid samples in these very same samples (p<0.001-0.0001). This
discrepancy is explained by the presence of nSMmase2, Tsap6 and Rab27a
proteins in effusion fluid-derived exosomes.Clinical analysis shows that
elevated nSmase2 and Tsap6 mRNA expression correlates with poor survival
(p<0.036) and less favorable response to chemotherapy, respectively
(p<0.027). Furthermore, Rab27a protein is lower in pleural effusions
compared to peritoneal effusions (p<0.013).In our in vitro model, mRNA
analysis of OVCAR8 cells grown on alginate scaffold and spheroids show a
higher expression of Tsap6 and Rab27a in spheroid cultures vs. scaffold
cultures, corresponding with higher expression of these same genes in
effusions vs. solid tumors in OC.To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first study to attempt to develop a 3D in vitro model for the various
forms of OC that will enable research on the exosome secretion mechanism
in this disease, hopefully leading to a fuller understanding of the
exosomes secretion process and to the development novel therapies to
address this disease.

