Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival of patients with mucinous ovarian carcinoma and ovarian
metastases: A population-based cancer registry study


Objectives: Patients with mucinous ovarian carcinoma (MOC) generally have
a favorable prognosis, although in advanced stage, prognosis is
significantly worse compared to patients with serous ovarian carcinomas
(SOC). This might be due to the difficulties in the distinction of MOC
from metastatic tumors. In the current study we investigate prognosis of
MOC compared to other types of ovarian cancer and to synchronous
metastases to the ovary (sMO).Materials and methods: Age, laterality,
FIGO stage, tumor grade, treatment and survival were extracted from the
Eindhoven Cancer registry for all patients diagnosed with ovarian
carcinomas or sMO between 1990 and 2012. 5-year survival analysis and Cox
proportional hazard analysis were conducted.Results: 3,556 patients with
primary ovarian carcinoma (of which 474 mucinous) and 289 with sMO were
identified. In advanced stage, 5-year survival of patients with MOC was
comparable to survival of patients with sMO (11% vs. 11%, p = 0.32) and
decreased compared to patients with SOC (26%, pObjectives: Patients with
mucinous ovarian carcinoma (MOC) generally have a favorable prognosis,
although in advanced stage, prognosis is significantly worse compared to
patients with serous ovarian carcinomas (SOC). This might be due to the
difficulties in the distinction of MOC from metastatic tumors. In the
current study we investigate prognosis of MOC compared to other types of
ovarian cancer and to synchronous metastases to the ovary (sMO).Materials
and methods: Age, laterality, FIGO stage, tumor grade, treatment and
survival were extracted from the Eindhoven Cancer registry for all
patients diagnosed with ovarian carcinomas or sMO between 1990 and 2012.
5-year survival analysis and Cox proportional hazard analysis were
conducted.Results: 3,556 patients with primary ovarian carcinoma (of
which 474 mucinous) and 289 with sMO were identified. In advanced stage,
5-year survival of patients with MOC was comparable to survival of
patients with sMO (11% vs. 11%, p = 0.32) and decreased compared to
patients with SOC (26%, p<0.01). For MOC there was no clinically
significant effect on 5-year survival of either debulking (12% vs. 8%,
pObjectives: Patients with mucinous ovarian carcinoma (MOC) generally
have a favorable prognosis, although in advanced stage, prognosis is
significantly worse compared to patients with serous ovarian carcinomas
(SOC). This might be due to the difficulties in the distinction of MOC
from metastatic tumors. In the current study we investigate prognosis of
MOC compared to other types of ovarian cancer and to synchronous
metastases to the ovary (sMO).Materials and methods: Age, laterality,
FIGO stage, tumor grade, treatment and survival were extracted from the
Eindhoven Cancer registry for all patients diagnosed with ovarian
carcinomas or sMO between 1990 and 2012. 5-year survival analysis and Cox
proportional hazard analysis were conducted.Results: 3,556 patients with
primary ovarian carcinoma (of which 474 mucinous) and 289 with sMO were
identified. In advanced stage, 5-year survival of patients with MOC was
comparable to survival of patients with sMO (11% vs. 11%, p = 0.32) and
decreased compared to patients with SOC (26%, p<0.01). For MOC there was
no clinically significant effect on 5-year survival of either debulking
(12% vs. 8%, p<0.01) or chemotherapy (12% vs. 10%, p = 0.02) as compared
to patients with SOC (28 vs. 13% after chemotherapy, pObjectives:
Patients with mucinous ovarian carcinoma (MOC) generally have a favorable
prognosis, although in advanced stage, prognosis is significantly worse
compared to patients with serous ovarian carcinomas (SOC). This might be
due to the difficulties in the distinction of MOC from metastatic tumors.
In the current study we investigate prognosis of MOC compared to other
types of ovarian cancer and to synchronous metastases to the ovary
(sMO).Materials and methods: Age, laterality, FIGO stage, tumor grade,
treatment and survival were extracted from the Eindhoven Cancer registry
for all patients diagnosed with ovarian carcinomas or sMO between 1990
and 2012. 5-year survival analysis and Cox proportional hazard analysis
were conducted.Results: 3,556 patients with primary ovarian carcinoma (of
which 474 mucinous) and 289 with sMO were identified. In advanced stage,
5-year survival of patients with MOC was comparable to survival of
patients with sMO (11% vs. 11%, p = 0.32) and decreased compared to
patients with SOC (26%, p<0.01). For MOC there was no clinically
significant effect on 5-year survival of either debulking (12% vs. 8%,
p<0.01) or chemotherapy (12% vs. 10%, p = 0.02) as compared to patients
with SOC (28 vs. 13% after chemotherapy, p<0.01 and 29% vs. 5% after
debulking, pObjectives: Patients with mucinous ovarian carcinoma (MOC)
generally have a favorable prognosis, although in advanced stage,
prognosis is significantly worse compared to patients with serous ovarian
carcinomas (SOC). This might be due to the difficulties in the
distinction of MOC from metastatic tumors. In the current study we
investigate prognosis of MOC compared to other types of ovarian cancer
and to synchronous metastases to the ovary (sMO).Materials and methods:
Age, laterality, FIGO stage, tumor grade, treatment and survival were
extracted from the Eindhoven Cancer registry for all patients diagnosed
with ovarian carcinomas or sMO between 1990 and 2012. 5-year survival
analysis and Cox proportional hazard analysis were conducted.Results:
3,556 patients with primary ovarian carcinoma (of which 474 mucinous) and
289 with sMO were identified. In advanced stage, 5-year survival of
patients with MOC was comparable to survival of patients with sMO (11%
vs. 11%, p = 0.32) and decreased compared to patients with SOC (26%,
p<0.01). For MOC there was no clinically significant effect on 5-year
survival of either debulking (12% vs. 8%, p<0.01) or chemotherapy (12%
vs. 10%, p = 0.02) as compared to patients with SOC (28 vs. 13% after
chemotherapy, p<0.01 and 29% vs. 5% after debulking, p<0.01).
Multivariate regression analysis for age, tumor grade and subtype
including sMO was carried out, showing a significantly better overall
survival for SOC compared to MOC (HR 0.51, pObjectives: Patients with
mucinous ovarian carcinoma (MOC) generally have a favorable prognosis,
although in advanced stage, prognosis is significantly worse compared to
patients with serous ovarian carcinomas (SOC). This might be due to the
difficulties in the distinction of MOC from metastatic tumors. In the
current study we investigate prognosis of MOC compared to other types of
ovarian cancer and to synchronous metastases to the ovary (sMO).Materials
and methods: Age, laterality, FIGO stage, tumor grade, treatment and
survival were extracted from the Eindhoven Cancer registry for all
patients diagnosed with ovarian carcinomas or sMO between 1990 and 2012.
5-year survival analysis and Cox proportional hazard analysis were
conducted.Results: 3,556 patients with primary ovarian carcinoma (of
which 474 mucinous) and 289 with sMO were identified. In advanced stage,
5-year survival of patients with MOC was comparable to survival of
patients with sMO (11% vs. 11%, p = 0.32) and decreased compared to
patients with SOC (26%, p<0.01). For MOC there was no clinically
significant effect on 5-year survival of either debulking (12% vs. 8%,
p<0.01) or chemotherapy (12% vs. 10%, p = 0.02) as compared to patients
with SOC (28 vs. 13% after chemotherapy, p<0.01 and 29% vs. 5% after
debulking, p<0.01). Multivariate regression analysis for age, tumor grade
and subtype including sMO was carried out, showing a significantly better
overall survival for SOC compared to MOC (HR 0.51, p<0.01), whereas there
was no difference for sMO compared with MOC (HR 1.16, p =
0.19).Conclusion: Patients with advanced stage MOC have a worse prognosis
than advanced stage SOC. Survival is almost identical to that of patients
with sMO, which might indicate that (a large part of) advanced stage MOC
are in fact metastases. This may partly explain the limited effects of
chemotherapy and debulking in patients with MOC. Methods to differentiate
between primary MOC and metastatic disease are needed to provide optimal
treatment and insight in prognosis.

