Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic responses in a novel patient-derived xenograft mouse
model for rare acinar cell pancreatic carcinoma


Acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas (ACC) is an uncommon malignancy,
accounting for less than 1% of all pancreatic neoplasms. Because of its
rarity, only a few retrospective studies are available to help guide
management. We previously reported the case of a patient with metastatic
ACC who achieved prolonged survival with doxorubicin as a result of
personalized treatment designed in part on the basis of molecular and
in-vitro data collected on analysis of the tumor and primary cells in
culture developed from the liver metastasis. We now report the
characterization of a patient derived xenograft (PDX) mouse model
originating from this patient's ACC liver metastasis tissue. Antitumor
activity of multiple drugs (5-FU, irinotecan, oxaliplatin, gemcitabine,
bevacizumab, erlotinib, doxorubicin and imatinib) used as single agent
therapy is demonstrated. Of the targeted and cytotoxic therapies used,
oxaliplatin produced a dramatic and prolonged response to therapy even
after withdrawal of treatment. Bevacizumab produced a significant
response, as well. Serum lipase and tissue amylase levels correlated with
the antitumor response to therapy. Thus, we have developed and
characterized an ACC PDX model that may be used in drug discovery for the
treatment of this rare cancer for which no standard of care exists.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

