Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor heterogeneity represented in human cancer cell lines


EGFR has been found frequently mutated in human cancers, and more than
10% lung cancer patients associated with EGFR mutation. In addition,
several critical mutations within the EGFR have been shown as gain of
function mutations or can cause drug resistance to the EGFR inhibitors. A
panel of ATCC tumor cell lines has been characterized for EGFR mutation
and EGFR signaling pathway. Particularly, lung cell line NCI-H1975, which
contains both drug sensitive mutation EGFR p.L858R and drug resistant
mutation p.T790M, has displayed a resistance to EGFR inhibitor.Overall,
NCI-H1975 cell line can be used as a nice model to study drug resistance,
as well as to screen novel EGFR inhibitors that overcome the
p.T790M-mediated resistance. Moreover, we have used next generation
sequencing to analyze the mutation allelic frequency of both mutations,
and observed tumor heterogeneity within this cell line. Impact of cell
passage numbers on the mutation allele frequency of the cell line was
also examined. Furthermore, a novel single cell western blot assay has
been used to analyze the EGFR mutation, EGFR protein expression and
downstream signaling within individual cells of three lung cancer cell
lines at the single cell level. Collectively, NCI-H1975 cell line
represents the acquired drug resistance found in clinical cancer
patients, and this study demonstrates the tumor heterogeneity represented
in human cell lines.

