Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sigma-2 ligands sensitize triple negative breast cancer cells to
PARP inhibitor treatment


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-25% of breast cancer
cases. Effective targeted treatment for TNBC is lacking. Poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) is a key enzyme involved in single-strand
DNA break repair. PARP inhibitors have been used in combination with
various chemotherapeutic agents in TNBC with limited success. The sigma-2
receptor is associated with cellular proliferation and quiescence and has
been used as the target for imaging solid tumors by positron emission
tomography. The sigma-2 receptor has been identified as progesterone
receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1) protein complex. Recent work has
suggested that the sigma-2 receptor may also be an effective therapeutic
target. In this study we looked for potential synergy between PARP
inhibitors and sigma-2 ligands using a triple negative breast cancer cell
line, MDA-MB231.We showed that the sigma-2 ligand, SW43, and a PGRMC1
ligand, AG205, induced cell toxicity and caspase 3 activation in a
dose-dependent manner. The combination of SW43 and PARP inhibitor,
Olaparib, resulted in additive cytotoxicity by cell viability assay and
colony forming assay. Olaparib inhibited PARP activity in MDA-MB231 cell
line, suggesting that the single-strand DNA break repair may be
inhibited. SW43 and AG205 treatment decreased PGRMC1 and EGFR protein
levels, suggesting that sigma-2/PGRMC1 ligands reduce growth factor
signaling. In conclusion, SW43 and Olaparib induce cell death by separate
signaling pathways. Sigma-2 ligands may selectively sensitize tumors to
PARP inhibitor treatment in triple negative breast cancer patients.

