Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: On the evolution of erlotinib-resistant NSCLC subpopulations


One of the foremost challenges to cancer treatment is the emergence of
drug resistance. Adding complexity to this problem is the recent
realization that drug resistance can stem from selection for both
intrinsically resistant subpopulations as well as subpopulations that
adapt to the drug challenge through epigenetic and/or signaling state
changes. Because of this complexity, cells have many ways to survive in
response to targeted inhibitors, resulting in a diversity of resistance
states between and even within patient tumors. Ongoing strategies are
aimed at finding the best second-line therapies for resistant tumors.
However, the extent to which drug-resistant subpopulations exhibit
similar or divergent sensitivities to second-line treatments is unknown.
How different are drug-resistant subpopulations from one another? Do
these differences affect the types of inhibitors that will be effective
in killing these drug-resistant colonies, resulting in a variety of
strategies for managing drug-resistant populations? What are the
molecular changes that correspond to differences in secondary drug
response? Here, we aim to determine the degree of heterogeneity between
drug-resistant clonal populations by profiling their response to a panel
of second-line therapies and examining mutational states to secondary
drug response. This study will provide insight into whether or not
drug-resistant subpopulations adopt similar or disparate drug-resistant
states.

