Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering the tumor microenvironment: Hemin conditioning in vivo
impairs tumor growth and reprograms the immune-modulatory response in
prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer death in men
in the United States, and inflammation is recognized as a risk factor. In
this regard we have previously shown that Heme Oxygenase-1 (HO-1)
over-expression plays a critical role in prostate tumor cells per se by
impairing cell proliferation, invasion and migration in vitro and tumor
growth in vivo. In the present study, we aimed to assess the role of
stromal HO-1 in PCa. The stroma was conditioned by subcutaneously (s.c.)
injecting C57BL/6 mice with 200l of hemin (30M; HO-1 pharmacological
inducer) or its vehicle PBS on days 8, 5 and 1 prior to tumor challenge.
TRAMP-C1 cells (T-C1; 2106 isogenic murine PCa cells) were s.c. injected
on the same flank in Matrigel. Hemin pre-treated animals showed a
significant increase in tumor latency (12-day delay when compared to
control mice; Mantel-Cox test, PProstate cancer (PCa) is the second
leading cause of cancer death in men in the United States, and
inflammation is recognized as a risk factor. In this regard we have
previously shown that Heme Oxygenase-1 (HO-1) over-expression plays a
critical role in prostate tumor cells per se by impairing cell
proliferation, invasion and migration in vitro and tumor growth in vivo.
In the present study, we aimed to assess the role of stromal HO-1 in PCa.
The stroma was conditioned by subcutaneously (s.c.) injecting C57BL/6
mice with 200l of hemin (30M; HO-1 pharmacological inducer) or its
vehicle PBS on days 8, 5 and 1 prior to tumor challenge. TRAMP-C1 cells
(T-C1; 2106 isogenic murine PCa cells) were s.c. injected on the same
flank in Matrigel. Hemin pre-treated animals showed a significant
increase in tumor latency (12-day delay when compared to control mice;
Mantel-Cox test, P<0.01) and a significant decrease in tumor growth rate
(Student t test, P Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of
cancer death in men in the United States, and inflammation is recognized
as a risk factor. In this regard we have previously shown that Heme
Oxygenase-1 (HO-1) over-expression plays a critical role in prostate
tumor cells per se by impairing cell proliferation, invasion and
migration in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. In the present study, we
aimed to assess the role of stromal HO-1 in PCa. The stroma was
conditioned by subcutaneously (s.c.) injecting C57BL/6 mice with 200l of
hemin (30M; HO-1 pharmacological inducer) or its vehicle PBS on days 8, 5
and 1 prior to tumor challenge. TRAMP-C1 cells (T-C1; 2106 isogenic
murine PCa cells) were s.c. injected on the same flank in Matrigel. Hemin
pre-treated animals showed a significant increase in tumor latency
(12-day delay when compared to control mice; Mantel-Cox test, P<0.01) and
a significant decrease in tumor growth rate (Student t test, P <0.05). In
vitro lymphocyte proliferation assays showed that hemin was able to
enhance CD3-mediated T cell proliferation and its administration was
sufficient to revert T-C1-mediated immunosuppresion. Immunophenotyping of
the tumor infiltrate, draining and contralateral lymph nodes and spleen
samples obtained from mice after euthanasia was carried out using flow
cytometry. Significant differences were detected in the frequency and
activation state of both CD8+ T lymphocytes (PProstate cancer (PCa) is
the second leading cause of cancer death in men in the United States, and
inflammation is recognized as a risk factor. In this regard we have
previously shown that Heme Oxygenase-1 (HO-1) over-expression plays a
critical role in prostate tumor cells per se by impairing cell
proliferation, invasion and migration in vitro and tumor growth in vivo.
In the present study, we aimed to assess the role of stromal HO-1 in PCa.
The stroma was conditioned by subcutaneously (s.c.) injecting C57BL/6
mice with 200l of hemin (30M; HO-1 pharmacological inducer) or its
vehicle PBS on days 8, 5 and 1 prior to tumor challenge. TRAMP-C1 cells
(T-C1; 2106 isogenic murine PCa cells) were s.c. injected on the same
flank in Matrigel. Hemin pre-treated animals showed a significant
increase in tumor latency (12-day delay when compared to control mice;
Mantel-Cox test, P<0.01) and a significant decrease in tumor growth rate
(Student t test, P <0.05). In vitro lymphocyte proliferation assays
showed that hemin was able to enhance CD3-mediated T cell proliferation
and its administration was sufficient to revert T-C1-mediated
immunosuppresion. Immunophenotyping of the tumor infiltrate, draining and
contralateral lymph nodes and spleen samples obtained from mice after
euthanasia was carried out using flow cytometry. Significant differences
were detected in the frequency and activation state of both CD8+ T
lymphocytes (P<0.05) and myeloid Gr-1+ cells (P Prostate cancer (PCa) is
the second leading cause of cancer death in men in the United States, and
inflammation is recognized as a risk factor. In this regard we have
previously shown that Heme Oxygenase-1 (HO-1) over-expression plays a
critical role in prostate tumor cells per se by impairing cell
proliferation, invasion and migration in vitro and tumor growth in vivo.
In the present study, we aimed to assess the role of stromal HO-1 in PCa.
The stroma was conditioned by subcutaneously (s.c.) injecting C57BL/6
mice with 200l of hemin (30M; HO-1 pharmacological inducer) or its
vehicle PBS on days 8, 5 and 1 prior to tumor challenge. TRAMP-C1 cells
(T-C1; 2106 isogenic murine PCa cells) were s.c. injected on the same
flank in Matrigel. Hemin pre-treated animals showed a significant
increase in tumor latency (12-day delay when compared to control mice;
Mantel-Cox test, P<0.01) and a significant decrease in tumor growth rate
(Student t test, P <0.05). In vitro lymphocyte proliferation assays
showed that hemin was able to enhance CD3-mediated T cell proliferation
and its administration was sufficient to revert T-C1-mediated
immunosuppresion. Immunophenotyping of the tumor infiltrate, draining and
contralateral lymph nodes and spleen samples obtained from mice after
euthanasia was carried out using flow cytometry. Significant differences
were detected in the frequency and activation state of both CD8+ T
lymphocytes (P<0.05) and myeloid Gr-1+ cells (P <0.01). These phenomena
were observed not only in the tumor infiltrate but also in other organs,
suggesting hemin treatment had systemic effects on the immune
compartment. The expression levels of several neovascularization-related
genes was assessed by RT-q-PCR, and no significant differences were
observed for VEGF, FGF, TIMP-1, CD142, uPA and TSP-1. Collectively, these
data suggest that hemin does not affect vascularization and acts through
an immune-based mechanism. Interestingly, tumors from hemin-conditioned
mice showed reduced Galectin-1 (Gal-1) expression (2.6 fold; Student t
test, P Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer death
in men in the United States, and inflammation is recognized as a risk
factor. In this regard we have previously shown that Heme Oxygenase-1
(HO-1) over-expression plays a critical role in prostate tumor cells per
se by impairing cell proliferation, invasion and migration in vitro and
tumor growth in vivo. In the present study, we aimed to assess the role
of stromal HO-1 in PCa. The stroma was conditioned by subcutaneously
(s.c.) injecting C57BL/6 mice with 200l of hemin (30M; HO-1
pharmacological inducer) or its vehicle PBS on days 8, 5 and 1 prior to
tumor challenge. TRAMP-C1 cells (T-C1; 2106 isogenic murine PCa cells)
were s.c. injected on the same flank in Matrigel. Hemin pre-treated
animals showed a significant increase in tumor latency (12-day delay when
compared to control mice; Mantel-Cox test, P<0.01) and a significant
decrease in tumor growth rate (Student t test, P <0.05). In vitro
lymphocyte proliferation assays showed that hemin was able to enhance
CD3-mediated T cell proliferation and its administration was sufficient
to revert T-C1-mediated immunosuppresion. Immunophenotyping of the tumor
infiltrate, draining and contralateral lymph nodes and spleen samples
obtained from mice after euthanasia was carried out using flow cytometry.
Significant differences were detected in the frequency and activation
state of both CD8+ T lymphocytes (P<0.05) and myeloid Gr-1+ cells (P
<0.01). These phenomena were observed not only in the tumor infiltrate
but also in other organs, suggesting hemin treatment had systemic effects
on the immune compartment. The expression levels of several
neovascularization-related genes was assessed by RT-q-PCR, and no
significant differences were observed for VEGF, FGF, TIMP-1, CD142, uPA
and TSP-1. Collectively, these data suggest that hemin does not affect
vascularization and acts through an immune-based mechanism.
Interestingly, tumors from hemin-conditioned mice showed reduced
Galectin-1 (Gal-1) expression (2.6 fold; Student t test, P <0.01),
evidencing a clear and long-term effect on lectin/glycan interactions on
tumor cells. This in turn, may impact upon host immunosurveillance, as
Gal-1 has been widely recognized as a central tumor escape mechanism.
Altogether, these results showcase how HO-1 pharmacological modulation in
the stroma dramatically affects PCa tumor progression in vivo and
postulate lectin/glycan interactions as potential mediators of these
observations.

