Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating cell-free tumor DNA (cfDNA) analysis of 50-genes by
next-generation sequencing (NGS) in the prospective MOSCATO trial


BackgroundPrecision-medicine initiatives are driven by the molecular
analysis of tumor samples (fresh or FFPE material). Such an approach is
limited by the availability of the tumor material and the challenges
related to on-purpose tumor biopsies. A very appealing alternative to
advance precision-medicine initiatives is the development of liquid
biopsies using cfDNA.MethodsWe investigated the use of NGS on tumor
biopsy and plasma, and evaluated the consistency between the tissue
biopsy (tDNA) and cfDNA analysis on a prospective cohort of patients with
metastatic or locally advanced solid tumors enrolled in the MOSCATO 01
trial (NCT01566019).Blood samples were collected at inclusion before
tumor biopsy and cfDNA was extracted from 500l plasma. Hot-spot mutations
from 50 genes were screened with Ampliseq CHP2 panel (IonTorrent, Life
Technologies, Dramstadt). Only variants reported by the Torrent Suite
Variant Caller v4.2 were retained for the analysis. Paired results in
tumor and plasma were described using Cohen's Kappa agreement coefficient
().ResultsFrom November 2011 to May 2014, among the 516 patients enrolled
in the MOSCATO 01 trial, 190 patients (37%) were analyzed for tDNA and
cfDNA. In addition, cfDNA was evaluated in 43 patients for whom no tumor
analysis was performed because of low cellularity (5 cases each) included
KRAS (33 cases), PIK3CA (22 cases) and TP53 genes (22 cases). When
considering only these ten most frequent mutations, 77 mutations were
identified in 71 patients: 39 in tumor and plasma, 36 in tumor, but not
in plasma and 2 mutations only in plasma, with a of 66% (95%CI, 56-76%).
The p.H1047R PIK3CA mutation, was found only in tumor (5 cases); for the
other nine mutations, the coefficient varied from 56% to 89%, with a
median of 75%.The cfDNA analysis of the 43 patients without tDNA analysis
revealed at least one mutation in 24 patients (56%), including 11
pathogenic variants of therapeutic interest.ConclusionThe analysis of
cfDNA using NGS represents an attractive and noninvasive alternative to
tumor biopsies, and can be used as a surrogate method to screen for
mutations. Further prospective validation is warranted.

