Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-dose-rate brachytherapy as monotherapy for favorable-risk
adenocarcinoma of the prostate delivered in a single 19 Gy fraction:
Preliminary results of a prospective pilot study


INTRODUCTION: We evaluated the acute genitourinary (GU) and
gastrointestinal (GI) toxicities, health-related quality of life (HRQOL)
factors, biochemical control rates, and technical feasibility of
high-dose-rate (HDR) brachytherapy as monotherapy for favorable-risk
prostate cancer delivered in a single 19 Gy fraction.METHODS: A
single-institution, prospective pilot study was performed by evaluating 6
patients with low- and intermediate-risk prostate cancer treated with
high-dose-rate (HDR) brachytherapy as monotherapy. Patients received a
single 19 Gy fraction as HDR monotherapy without the use of a
transperineal hyaluronic acid injection. Patients were assessed according
to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.0 and
Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQOL) questionnaires. Additionally,
prostate specific antigen levels have been followed for evidence of
biochemical failure.RESULTS: All 6 patients tolerated the implant well
and were all discharged home the same day. Median follow-up was 15 months
with all subjects followed for at least 12 months. No grade 3, 4, or 5
toxicities were observed. Two of the 6 patients experienced grade 2 GU
toxicity. One patient experienced grade 2 GI toxicity. HRQOL bowel and
urinary assessments revealed peak complaints at 3 months which returned
to baseline at 6 months. There have been no biochemical
relapses.CONCLUSION: This is the first study using HDR brachytherapy as
monotherapy for favorable-risk prostate cancer using one implant
delivered in a single 19 Gy dose in the United States. All patients
demonstrated acceptable acute toxicities and were pleased with their
cost-effective treatment choice.

