Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Taiwanin A targets against nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drug-activated gene-1 in human lung carcinoma


Taiwanin A (,-bis(piperonylidene)--butyrolactone) is isolated from
Taiwania cryptomerioides. Similar to paclitaxel, Taiwanin A also
extracted from tree barks and have anti-tumor activity in breast, liver,
and lung cancer cell lines. The objective of this study is to demonstrate
the cytotoxicity of Taiwanin A against tumor cells by increasing the
expression of Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug-activated gene
(NAG-1). NAG-1 has been reported to have antitumor and pro-apoptotic
activity, suggesting potential target for cancer therapy. Silencing NAG-1
mRNA expression in A549 reduces the cytotoxicity caused by Taiwanin A.
Furthermore, the c-Jun-N-terminal kinase/Ste20-related protein
proline/alanine-rich kinase (JNK/SPAK) pathway played a key role in the
action of NAG-1 on cell viability, whereas the addition of the JNK
pathway inhibitor, SP600125, resulted in the inhibitory effect of NAG-1
and recovery of Taiwanin A treated cells. Xenograft tumor model showed
that Taiwanin A dose-dependently significantly decreases tumor mediated
growth in nude mice by increasing NAG-1 expression accompanied tumor
apoptosis. These data support the conclusion that Taiwanin A inhibits
lung carcinoma growth by increasing NAG-1 expression via the JNK pathway
both in vivo and in vitro. This result might be contributed to compound
design for increasing cytotoxicity activity in the future.

