Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNF43 is a frequent mutational target in serrated colorectal
neoplasia


BACKGROUND. The Wnt signalling pathway is altered in the majority of
colorectal cancers by APC mutation. Cancers arising via the serrated
neoplasia pathway are hallmarked by BRAF mutation and microsatellite
instability (MSI), but do not commonly mutate APC. RNF43 and ZNRF3 are
transmembrane E3 ubiquitin ligases that are localised to intestinal stem
cells where they cooperate to suppress Wnt signaling. Mutation of these
genes may be an alternate mechanism to bypass the Wnt signal. RNF43 /
ZNRF3 double knockout mice develop intestinal neoplasia and germline
mutation of RNF43 has been reported in serrated polyposis. We therefore
hypothesised that somatic mutation of RNF43 and/or ZNRF3 would be
important in the development of serrated colorectal neoplasia.METHODS.
RNF43 and ZNRF3 mutations were assessed in a pilot series of 24 BRAF
mutant cancers representing the serrated neoplasia pathway and 10 control
BRAF wild type cancers using Agilent V4+UTR whole exome capture followed
by sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq 2000. An extended cohort of 80 BRAF
mutant cancers (48 MSI, 32 MSS) and 67 BRAF wild type cancers was
examined by Sanger sequencing. The frequency of a common hotspot mutation
in RNF43 was validated in a second series of 42 BRAF mutant and 22 BRAF
wild type colorectal cancers. Transcript expression for RNF43 and ZNRF3
was assayed using Illumina HT-12v4 BeadChip expression arrays in 29 BRAF
mutant cancers, 187 BRAF wild type cancers and a subset of 32 matched
normal mucosa samples.RESULTS. RNF43 mutations were detected in whole
exome sequencing data in 11/24 BRAF mutant but no BRAF wild type cancers
(PBACKGROUND. The Wnt signalling pathway is altered in the majority of
colorectal cancers by APC mutation. Cancers arising via the serrated
neoplasia pathway are hallmarked by BRAF mutation and microsatellite
instability (MSI), but do not commonly mutate APC. RNF43 and ZNRF3 are
transmembrane E3 ubiquitin ligases that are localised to intestinal stem
cells where they cooperate to suppress Wnt signaling. Mutation of these
genes may be an alternate mechanism to bypass the Wnt signal. RNF43 /
ZNRF3 double knockout mice develop intestinal neoplasia and germline
mutation of RNF43 has been reported in serrated polyposis. We therefore
hypothesised that somatic mutation of RNF43 and/or ZNRF3 would be
important in the development of serrated colorectal neoplasia.METHODS.
RNF43 and ZNRF3 mutations were assessed in a pilot series of 24 BRAF
mutant cancers representing the serrated neoplasia pathway and 10 control
BRAF wild type cancers using Agilent V4+UTR whole exome capture followed
by sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq 2000. An extended cohort of 80 BRAF
mutant cancers (48 MSI, 32 MSS) and 67 BRAF wild type cancers was
examined by Sanger sequencing. The frequency of a common hotspot mutation
in RNF43 was validated in a second series of 42 BRAF mutant and 22 BRAF
wild type colorectal cancers. Transcript expression for RNF43 and ZNRF3
was assayed using Illumina HT-12v4 BeadChip expression arrays in 29 BRAF
mutant cancers, 187 BRAF wild type cancers and a subset of 32 matched
normal mucosa samples.RESULTS. RNF43 mutations were detected in whole
exome sequencing data in 11/24 BRAF mutant but no BRAF wild type cancers
(P<0.01). Three of these 11 cancers also had a ZNRF3 mutation. RNF43 and
ZNRF3 mutations were also frequently concordant in a larger series of
cancers. RNF43 mutations were associated with MSI (PBACKGROUND. The Wnt
signalling pathway is altered in the majority of colorectal cancers by
APC mutation. Cancers arising via the serrated neoplasia pathway are
hallmarked by BRAF mutation and microsatellite instability (MSI), but do
not commonly mutate APC. RNF43 and ZNRF3 are transmembrane E3 ubiquitin
ligases that are localised to intestinal stem cells where they cooperate
to suppress Wnt signaling. Mutation of these genes may be an alternate
mechanism to bypass the Wnt signal. RNF43 / ZNRF3 double knockout mice
develop intestinal neoplasia and germline mutation of RNF43 has been
reported in serrated polyposis. We therefore hypothesised that somatic
mutation of RNF43 and/or ZNRF3 would be important in the development of
serrated colorectal neoplasia.METHODS. RNF43 and ZNRF3 mutations were
assessed in a pilot series of 24 BRAF mutant cancers representing the
serrated neoplasia pathway and 10 control BRAF wild type cancers using
Agilent V4+UTR whole exome capture followed by sequencing on an Illumina
HiSeq 2000. An extended cohort of 80 BRAF mutant cancers (48 MSI, 32 MSS)
and 67 BRAF wild type cancers was examined by Sanger sequencing. The
frequency of a common hotspot mutation in RNF43 was validated in a second
series of 42 BRAF mutant and 22 BRAF wild type colorectal cancers.
Transcript expression for RNF43 and ZNRF3 was assayed using Illumina
HT-12v4 BeadChip expression arrays in 29 BRAF mutant cancers, 187 BRAF
wild type cancers and a subset of 32 matched normal mucosa
samples.RESULTS. RNF43 mutations were detected in whole exome sequencing
data in 11/24 BRAF mutant but no BRAF wild type cancers (P<0.01). Three
of these 11 cancers also had a ZNRF3 mutation. RNF43 and ZNRF3 mutations
were also frequently concordant in a larger series of cancers. RNF43
mutations were associated with MSI (P<0.0001), being identified in 43/48
BRAF mutant / MSI cancers (90%), 6/32 (19%) BRAF mutant / MSS cancers and
6/44 BRAF wild type / MSS cancers (14%). The high frequency of a G7
frameshift mutation at position 659 of RNF43 was similarly present in
25/33 (76%) BRAF mutant MSI cancers but only 1/34 MSS cancers from a
second, validation cohort. Transcript levels of RNF43 and ZNRF3 were
positively correlated (r2 0.47, PBACKGROUND. The Wnt signalling pathway
is altered in the majority of colorectal cancers by APC mutation. Cancers
arising via the serrated neoplasia pathway are hallmarked by BRAF
mutation and microsatellite instability (MSI), but do not commonly mutate
APC. RNF43 and ZNRF3 are transmembrane E3 ubiquitin ligases that are
localised to intestinal stem cells where they cooperate to suppress Wnt
signaling. Mutation of these genes may be an alternate mechanism to
bypass the Wnt signal. RNF43 / ZNRF3 double knockout mice develop
intestinal neoplasia and germline mutation of RNF43 has been reported in
serrated polyposis. We therefore hypothesised that somatic mutation of
RNF43 and/or ZNRF3 would be important in the development of serrated
colorectal neoplasia.METHODS. RNF43 and ZNRF3 mutations were assessed in
a pilot series of 24 BRAF mutant cancers representing the serrated
neoplasia pathway and 10 control BRAF wild type cancers using Agilent
V4+UTR whole exome capture followed by sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq
2000. An extended cohort of 80 BRAF mutant cancers (48 MSI, 32 MSS) and
67 BRAF wild type cancers was examined by Sanger sequencing. The
frequency of a common hotspot mutation in RNF43 was validated in a second
series of 42 BRAF mutant and 22 BRAF wild type colorectal cancers.
Transcript expression for RNF43 and ZNRF3 was assayed using Illumina
HT-12v4 BeadChip expression arrays in 29 BRAF mutant cancers, 187 BRAF
wild type cancers and a subset of 32 matched normal mucosa
samples.RESULTS. RNF43 mutations were detected in whole exome sequencing
data in 11/24 BRAF mutant but no BRAF wild type cancers (P<0.01). Three
of these 11 cancers also had a ZNRF3 mutation. RNF43 and ZNRF3 mutations
were also frequently concordant in a larger series of cancers. RNF43
mutations were associated with MSI (P<0.0001), being identified in 43/48
BRAF mutant / MSI cancers (90%), 6/32 (19%) BRAF mutant / MSS cancers and
6/44 BRAF wild type / MSS cancers (14%). The high frequency of a G7
frameshift mutation at position 659 of RNF43 was similarly present in
25/33 (76%) BRAF mutant MSI cancers but only 1/34 MSS cancers from a
second, validation cohort. Transcript levels of RNF43 and ZNRF3 were
positively correlated (r2 0.47, P<0.0001) and were significantly lower in
BRAF mutant compared to BRAF wild type cancers (PBACKGROUND. The Wnt
signalling pathway is altered in the majority of colorectal cancers by
APC mutation. Cancers arising via the serrated neoplasia pathway are
hallmarked by BRAF mutation and microsatellite instability (MSI), but do
not commonly mutate APC. RNF43 and ZNRF3 are transmembrane E3 ubiquitin
ligases that are localised to intestinal stem cells where they cooperate
to suppress Wnt signaling. Mutation of these genes may be an alternate
mechanism to bypass the Wnt signal. RNF43 / ZNRF3 double knockout mice
develop intestinal neoplasia and germline mutation of RNF43 has been
reported in serrated polyposis. We therefore hypothesised that somatic
mutation of RNF43 and/or ZNRF3 would be important in the development of
serrated colorectal neoplasia.METHODS. RNF43 and ZNRF3 mutations were
assessed in a pilot series of 24 BRAF mutant cancers representing the
serrated neoplasia pathway and 10 control BRAF wild type cancers using
Agilent V4+UTR whole exome capture followed by sequencing on an Illumina
HiSeq 2000. An extended cohort of 80 BRAF mutant cancers (48 MSI, 32 MSS)
and 67 BRAF wild type cancers was examined by Sanger sequencing. The
frequency of a common hotspot mutation in RNF43 was validated in a second
series of 42 BRAF mutant and 22 BRAF wild type colorectal cancers.
Transcript expression for RNF43 and ZNRF3 was assayed using Illumina
HT-12v4 BeadChip expression arrays in 29 BRAF mutant cancers, 187 BRAF
wild type cancers and a subset of 32 matched normal mucosa
samples.RESULTS. RNF43 mutations were detected in whole exome sequencing
data in 11/24 BRAF mutant but no BRAF wild type cancers (P<0.01). Three
of these 11 cancers also had a ZNRF3 mutation. RNF43 and ZNRF3 mutations
were also frequently concordant in a larger series of cancers. RNF43
mutations were associated with MSI (P<0.0001), being identified in 43/48
BRAF mutant / MSI cancers (90%), 6/32 (19%) BRAF mutant / MSS cancers and
6/44 BRAF wild type / MSS cancers (14%). The high frequency of a G7
frameshift mutation at position 659 of RNF43 was similarly present in
25/33 (76%) BRAF mutant MSI cancers but only 1/34 MSS cancers from a
second, validation cohort. Transcript levels of RNF43 and ZNRF3 were
positively correlated (r2 0.47, P<0.0001) and were significantly lower in
BRAF mutant compared to BRAF wild type cancers (P<0.0001).CONCLUSIONS.
RNF43 is a frequent mutational target in serrated neoplasia. The high
frequency of both substitution and frameshift mutations support the
functional relevance of these alterations. We hypothesise that RNF43 is
mutated as an alternative to APC in serrated lesions as a mechanism of
bypassing control of the Wnt signal. These data support our current model
of serrated neoplasia whereby BRAF is mutated early in serrated polyp
development and RNF43 is subsequently mutated to remove constraints on
the Wnt signal and allow progression to cancer.

