Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common genetic variants in epigenetic machinery genes and risk of
upper gastrointestinal cancers


Background: Populations in north central China are at high risk for
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and gastric cancer (GC), and
genetic variation in epigenetic machinery genes and pathways may
contribute to this risk. Methods: We used the adaptive multilocus joint
test (AdaJoint) to analyze 191 epigenetic genes involved in DNA
methylation, chromatin remodeling, and microRNA biosynthesis in 1942 ESCC
and 1758 GC cases [1126 cardia (GCA) and 632 non-cardia adenocarcinoma
(GNCA)] and 2111 controls with Chinese ancestry. We examined the
regulatory function of risk SNPs using in silico analyses and expression
quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analysis in normal esophageal and gastric
tissues. Results: Significant pathway-based associations were observed
for the overall epigenetics (P = 3.4E-02) and chromatin remodeling (P =
3.9E-02) pathways with GCA risk, but not GC, GNCA or ESCC. SETD1B, CBX4,
KAT5, ZGPAT, BTD, EED, SMARCD1, POLE3, AGO2, RING1 and MBD3L1 were
associated with ESCC risk, and SUV42OH1, ASH1L, KAT5, JARID2, PRMT1,
MBD3L1, SRRT, KDM5A, DROSHA and KAT6A were associated with GC risk
overall (nominal P Background: Populations in north central China are at
high risk for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and gastric
cancer (GC), and genetic variation in epigenetic machinery genes and
pathways may contribute to this risk. Methods: We used the adaptive
multilocus joint test (AdaJoint) to analyze 191 epigenetic genes involved
in DNA methylation, chromatin remodeling, and microRNA biosynthesis in
1942 ESCC and 1758 GC cases [1126 cardia (GCA) and 632 non-cardia
adenocarcinoma (GNCA)] and 2111 controls with Chinese ancestry. We
examined the regulatory function of risk SNPs using in silico analyses
and expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analysis in normal
esophageal and gastric tissues. Results: Significant pathway-based
associations were observed for the overall epigenetics (P = 3.4E-02) and
chromatin remodeling (P = 3.9E-02) pathways with GCA risk, but not GC,
GNCA or ESCC. SETD1B, CBX4, KAT5, ZGPAT, BTD, EED, SMARCD1, POLE3, AGO2,
RING1 and MBD3L1 were associated with ESCC risk, and SUV42OH1, ASH1L,
KAT5, JARID2, PRMT1, MBD3L1, SRRT, KDM5A, DROSHA and KAT6A were
associated with GC risk overall (nominal P < 0.05). We identified EED
rs10898459 (rho = -0.22, P = 2.9E-02) as a potential esophageal eQTL;
DICER1 rs7157322 (rho = -0.42, P = 1.4E-02) and PPP1CA rs1790733 (rho =
-0.41, P = 2.1E-03) as potential gastric eQTLs; and ASH1L rs12724079 and
rs8179271 as potential gastric subtype eQTLs. Significance: As one of the
first attempts to investigate epigenetic gene and pathway-level
associations, our results suggest that chromatin remodeling and
epigenetic pathways warrant further evaluation in relation to GC risk in
other populations.

