Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: F-box protein fbxl5 nuclear retention by specific inhibitors of
nuclear export induces snail ubiquitination leading to reversal of EMT


Background: FBXL5 belonging to SKP1-cullin 1-F-box protein E3 ligase
complexes (F-BOX) been shown to promote snail nuclear ubiquitination
thereby regulating snail induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) processes. However, cancer associated enhancement in the nuclear
exporter Exportin1 (Xpo1) expression results in nuclear expulsion of
FBXL5 causing snail stability and EMT. Here we demonstrate that Xpo1
inhibition by specific inhibitors of nuclear export (SINEs) results in
nuclear retention FBXL5, causing nuclear degradation of SNAIL leading to
reversal of mesenchymal phenotype to epithelial in HMLE-SNAIL
models.Methods: Molecular assays (MTT, Annexin V FITC, Histone DNA ELISA,
Spheroid formation, Western Blotting, Confocal microscopy,
Co-immunoprecipitation, Xpo1 site directed mutagenesis) and computational
techniques (gene expression microarray, pathway analysis) were used. In
vivo activity of Selinexor was evaluated in xenografts developed from
HMLE-SNAIL cells in ICR-SCID mice.Results: SINEs [Selinexor (KPT-330) and
+ve controls KPT-185 and Leptomycin B (LMB)) not KPT-301 (-ve control)]
reverse mesenchymal morphology, induce growth inhibition and apoptosis in
HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL cells and prevent spheroid formation
(IC50s 150 nM). Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated that SINE
treatment resulted in nuclear retention of FBXL5 that was concurrent with
nuclear degradation of snail. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed
nuclear ubiquitination of snail by SINEs. Western blotting analysis
verified nuclear enhancement of FBXL5 that was consistent with
down-regulation of EMT markers (Vimentin, snail, EpCAM) and enhancement
of E-Cadherin. SiRNA against FBXL5 or transfecting cells with cys528
mut-Xpo1 that lacks SINE binding site markedly abrogated SINE activity
thereby verifying the Xpo1 and FBXL5 mediated mechanisms of action.
Pathways analysis of quadruplet microarray expression arrays from SINE
treated HMLE-SNAIL cells demonstrated differential expression of F-Box
family proteins [FBXO2, FBXL17, FBXO33, FBXO37, FBXW7 (pBackground: FBXL5
belonging to SKP1-cullin 1-F-box protein E3 ligase complexes (F-BOX) been
shown to promote snail nuclear ubiquitination thereby regulating snail
induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) processes. However,
cancer associated enhancement in the nuclear exporter Exportin1 (Xpo1)
expression results in nuclear expulsion of FBXL5 causing snail stability
and EMT. Here we demonstrate that Xpo1 inhibition by specific inhibitors
of nuclear export (SINEs) results in nuclear retention FBXL5, causing
nuclear degradation of SNAIL leading to reversal of mesenchymal phenotype
to epithelial in HMLE-SNAIL models.Methods: Molecular assays (MTT,
Annexin V FITC, Histone DNA ELISA, Spheroid formation, Western Blotting,
Confocal microscopy, Co-immunoprecipitation, Xpo1 site directed
mutagenesis) and computational techniques (gene expression microarray,
pathway analysis) were used. In vivo activity of Selinexor was evaluated
in xenografts developed from HMLE-SNAIL cells in ICR-SCID mice.Results:
SINEs [Selinexor (KPT-330) and +ve controls KPT-185 and Leptomycin B
(LMB)) not KPT-301 (-ve control)] reverse mesenchymal morphology, induce
growth inhibition and apoptosis in HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL cells
and prevent spheroid formation (IC50s 150 nM). Immunofluorescence
analysis demonstrated that SINE treatment resulted in nuclear retention
of FBXL5 that was concurrent with nuclear degradation of snail.
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed nuclear ubiquitination of snail
by SINEs. Western blotting analysis verified nuclear enhancement of FBXL5
that was consistent with down-regulation of EMT markers (Vimentin, snail,
EpCAM) and enhancement of E-Cadherin. SiRNA against FBXL5 or transfecting
cells with cys528 mut-Xpo1 that lacks SINE binding site markedly
abrogated SINE activity thereby verifying the Xpo1 and FBXL5 mediated
mechanisms of action. Pathways analysis of quadruplet microarray
expression arrays from SINE treated HMLE-SNAIL cells demonstrated
differential expression of F-Box family proteins [FBXO2, FBXL17, FBXO33,
FBXO37, FBXW7 (p<0.001)] and suppression of snail network. Most
significantly, oral administration of SINE (Selinexor at 15 mg/kg three
times a week for three weeks) resulted in complete cure of HMLE-SNAIL
tumors (tumor free at 120 days). SINE exposed animals showed normal
spleen size and morphology in comparison to control animals that showed
spleen enlargement (pBackground: FBXL5 belonging to SKP1-cullin 1-F-box
protein E3 ligase complexes (F-BOX) been shown to promote snail nuclear
ubiquitination thereby regulating snail induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) processes. However, cancer associated enhancement in the
nuclear exporter Exportin1 (Xpo1) expression results in nuclear expulsion
of FBXL5 causing snail stability and EMT. Here we demonstrate that Xpo1
inhibition by specific inhibitors of nuclear export (SINEs) results in
nuclear retention FBXL5, causing nuclear degradation of SNAIL leading to
reversal of mesenchymal phenotype to epithelial in HMLE-SNAIL
models.Methods: Molecular assays (MTT, Annexin V FITC, Histone DNA ELISA,
Spheroid formation, Western Blotting, Confocal microscopy,
Co-immunoprecipitation, Xpo1 site directed mutagenesis) and computational
techniques (gene expression microarray, pathway analysis) were used. In
vivo activity of Selinexor was evaluated in xenografts developed from
HMLE-SNAIL cells in ICR-SCID mice.Results: SINEs [Selinexor (KPT-330) and
+ve controls KPT-185 and Leptomycin B (LMB)) not KPT-301 (-ve control)]
reverse mesenchymal morphology, induce growth inhibition and apoptosis in
HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL cells and prevent spheroid formation
(IC50s 150 nM). Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated that SINE
treatment resulted in nuclear retention of FBXL5 that was concurrent with
nuclear degradation of snail. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed
nuclear ubiquitination of snail by SINEs. Western blotting analysis
verified nuclear enhancement of FBXL5 that was consistent with
down-regulation of EMT markers (Vimentin, snail, EpCAM) and enhancement
of E-Cadherin. SiRNA against FBXL5 or transfecting cells with cys528
mut-Xpo1 that lacks SINE binding site markedly abrogated SINE activity
thereby verifying the Xpo1 and FBXL5 mediated mechanisms of action.
Pathways analysis of quadruplet microarray expression arrays from SINE
treated HMLE-SNAIL cells demonstrated differential expression of F-Box
family proteins [FBXO2, FBXL17, FBXO33, FBXO37, FBXW7 (p<0.001)] and
suppression of snail network. Most significantly, oral administration of
SINE (Selinexor at 15 mg/kg three times a week for three weeks) resulted
in complete cure of HMLE-SNAIL tumors (tumor free at 120 days). SINE
exposed animals showed normal spleen size and morphology in comparison to
control animals that showed spleen enlargement (p<0.001). Quantitative
sandwich ELISA of spleen tissue extracts showed suppression of snail
expression in SINE treatment animals.Conclusion: This is the first proof
of concept study demonstrating that targeted inhibition of Xpo1 can
inhibit EMT through nuclear retention of FBOX protein, particularly FBXL5
and consequent snail ubiquitination and degradation. Our findings open a
unique possibility to block EMT at the nuclear pore.

