Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role and mechanism of JAB1 as a therapeutic target in biliary
tract cancer


Background: JAB1 (c-Jun activation domain binding protein-1) is a c-Jun
coactivator, also known as COP9 signalosome subunit 5 (CSN5). Jab1 has an
important role in cell proliferation and apoptosis. Overexpression of
Jab1 is correlated with poor prognosis in various cancers. Biliary tract
cancer (BTC) has a poor prognosis with a huge unmet medical need. The
role of Jab1 has not been studied in BTC. We investigated the role and
mechanism of Jab1 as a potential therapeutic target in BTC.Methods: We
used 8 kinds of BTC cells and designed Jab1 siRNA. MTT assay and colony
formation assay were done to determine growth inhibitory effect of Jab1
knockdown. Cell cycle analysis was done by FACS Calibur flow cytometer
and cell migration was evaluated by wound healing assay. We used
cycloheximide chase assay for measuring of protein half-life.Results: BTC
cell lines showed high level of Jab1 expression. Among them, SNU478,
SNU869 and SNU 1196 were indicated with especially higher level of Jab1
expression. Cell growth and proliferation of BTC cells were decreased by
Jab1 knockdown. Depletion of Jab1 induced G1 arrest, as well as decreased
CyclinD/CyclinA and increased p27. Cell migration was also inhibited by
Jab1 knockdown. Inhibition of Jab1 showed the decrease of pSrc, pAkt.
Interestingly, depletion of Jab1 led to the elevation of PTEN protein
levels without change of PTEN mRNA levels. PTEN half-life was longer in
Jab1 siRNA-transfected cells. Suppression of Jab1 increased the
sensitivity of BTC cells to the cytotoxic chemotherapeutic
agent.Conclusion: Suppression of Jab1 shows antitumor effects in BTC
cells by inhibiting cell proliferation, migration, cell cycle and
increase of chemosensitivity. Taken together, Jab1 might be a potential
therapeutic target in BTC.

