Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of anti-cancer ADCs with Concortis C-and K-lock
technology


Antibody-Drug Conjugation (ADC) is a rapidly growing area and has been
widely explored for cancer therapy. In the past decade, numerous
progresses have been reported on the identification of proper antibodies,
targets validation, discovery of novel payloads, improvement of linkers,
as well as the development of new coupling techniques.We have developed
novel conjugation methods, C-lock, K-lock and the combination of the two.
C-LockTM conjugation method utilizes a novel linker chemistry to
re-connect the reduced disulfide bonds between antibody heavy and light
chains, and in the meantime, to introduce a drug to each disulfide bond.
While K-LockTM conjugation method is a linker-controlled conjugation
technology highly selective on 1 or 2 particular sites among 80-90 Lys
side chains of an antibody. The generated ADCs have fewer regioisomers
and lower DAR (Drug-Antibody Ratio) while maintaining comparable potency
to ADCs from regular conjugation methods. Further purification will give
rise to site-specific homogeneous products without needs for cell
engineering or enzymatic modification steps. The lead ADCs generated by
these technologies showed improved activity both in vitro and in vivo in
relevant tumor models, and also exhibited less toxicity compared to
commercial standard.To pursue to the next level, we are currently
developing dual drug ADCs which have two different payloads conjugated to
single antibody; as well as bi-specific ADCs with either single or dual
drug conjugations (2nd generation or ADC-2X). Initial results indicated
that these ADCs showed improved activity and specificity in relevant
tumor cell lines compared to 1st generation ADCs. Detailed results will
be reported. All these data proved that our ADC technologies are unique
and superior in antibody drug conjugation and are promising for
anti-cancer drug development.

