Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TCR profiling of T lymphocytes in ovarian tumors and malignant
ascites using next-generation sequencing


Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are often observed in many types of
solid tumors and considered to reflect the host immune system that
eliminates or protects tumor cells. Many studies indicated that higher
TIL infiltration is correlated with better prognosis of patients. In
addition, some studies suggested that T cells in malignant ascites are
associated with clinical outcome. Thus, it is important to define the
immune microenvironment in malignant effusions through characterization
of T cell repertoire. We here applied a high-throughput next generation
sequencing method to characterize T cell receptor (TCR) sequences of a
set of primary cancer, ascites, and blood from 12 ovarian cancer
patients. We also analyzed the TCR cDNAs of the T cell subtype
populations in malignant fluids from 3 ovarian cancer patients. We
observed the clonal expansion of certain T cells in tumor and ascites,
and found the enriched TCR sequences representing the distinct profiles.
Moreover, we investigated TCR sequence signature of CD4+, CD8+, and
CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells in malignant effusion and identified
clonally expanded T cell populations. Interestingly TCR sequences among
three T cell subsets were almost mutually exclusive. Although the
functional studies of clonally expanded T cell populations are definitely
required, our approach offers the detailed characterization of T cell
immune microenvironment for investigating a beneficial immune response in
the host immune system and further contributes to the improvement of
cancer immunotherapy.

