Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BET inhibitor INCB054329 is efficacious as a single agent or
in combination with targeted agents in colorectal cancer models


The Bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) family of proteins consists of
BRD2, BRD3, BRD4 and BRDT. Each BET protein contains two bromodomains
(BD1 and BD2) that recognize acetylated histones at enhancer and promoter
regions of a select number of genes. BET proteins function as
transcriptional regulators that are critical for the expression of
oncogenes such as c-Myc; thus, BET proteins are important for cancer cell
proliferation and survival. We have identified INCB054329, a potent and
selective BET protein inhibitor that targets BD1 and BD2 of BRD2, BRD3
and BRD4. In this study, we characterized the pharmacology of INCB054329
in solid tumor cell lines. In a panel of colon cancer cell lines, more
than 50% are sensitive to INCB054329 treatment with IC50 values below 500
nM in cell proliferation assays. INCB054329 down-regulated c-Myc
expression, and induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in sensitive
colon cancer cell lines. Moreover, INCB54329 was efficacious in the RKO
colon cancer xenograft model. To understand whether BRD inhibition would
synergize with other signaling pathway inhibitors and standard of care
agents for colon cancer, we employed a high throughput combination
screening strategy. Several combinations were active in a panel of colon
cancer cell lines and demonstrated synergistic interactions based on
combination index values. As an example, strong synergy was observed
between INCB054329 and MEK inhibitors. The combination of INCB054329 and
MEK inhibitors synergistically blocked expression of c-Myc protein and
inhibited the MEK/ERK signaling pathway. Our data suggest the potential
utilization of INCB054329 as a single agent or in combination with other
targeted therapies for the treatment of colon cancer.

