Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum vitamin D levels and prostate volume


Introduction: We investigate the association between serum
25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OH D) levels and prostate volume, PSA, and PSA
density (PSAD) given literature linking vitamin D with prostate
proliferation.Procedures: From 2010-13, we enrolled 40-79 year old
ambulatory men undergoing trans-rectal ultrasound (TRUS) guided prostate
biopsy for elevated PSA or abnormal DRE from academic, outpatient urology
clinics in Chicago, IL. Men with PSA > 50ng/ml were excluded. Clinical
and demographic data were collected by self-administered questionnaires
and chart review. Venipuncture for serum 25-OH D and prostate volume
estimation by the ellipsoid formula were done during TRUS. PSAD was
calculated as the pre-biopsy serum PSA (ng/ml) divided by the prostate
volume (cm3). The association of prostate volume, PSA, and PSAD with
25-OH D was assessed using univariate analysis of variance with 25-OH D
as a categorical variable. Best fit linear regressions were constructed
for multivariate analysis of this association adjusted for age, BMI,
serum 25-OH D, PSA, 5-alpha reductase inhibitor (5-ARI), alcohol and
tobacco use.Results: We had 364 cases (median age 62.4) and 186 negative
biopsies (NBx, median age 62.1, p = 0.046). European Americans comprised
41.4% of cases vs 39.3% of NBx (p = 0.55). Cases had more PCa family
history (25.5 vs 14.4% in NBx, p = 0.0001) but had smaller prostate
volume relative to NBx (35.4 vs 50.5cm3, p Introduction: We investigate
the association between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OH D) levels and
prostate volume, PSA, and PSA density (PSAD) given literature linking
vitamin D with prostate proliferation.Procedures: From 2010-13, we
enrolled 40-79 year old ambulatory men undergoing trans-rectal ultrasound
(TRUS) guided prostate biopsy for elevated PSA or abnormal DRE from
academic, outpatient urology clinics in Chicago, IL. Men with PSA >
50ng/ml were excluded. Clinical and demographic data were collected by
self-administered questionnaires and chart review. Venipuncture for serum
25-OH D and prostate volume estimation by the ellipsoid formula were done
during TRUS. PSAD was calculated as the pre-biopsy serum PSA (ng/ml)
divided by the prostate volume (cm3). The association of prostate volume,
PSA, and PSAD with 25-OH D was assessed using univariate analysis of
variance with 25-OH D as a categorical variable. Best fit linear
regressions were constructed for multivariate analysis of this
association adjusted for age, BMI, serum 25-OH D, PSA, 5-alpha reductase
inhibitor (5-ARI), alcohol and tobacco use.Results: We had 364 cases
(median age 62.4) and 186 negative biopsies (NBx, median age 62.1, p =
0.046). European Americans comprised 41.4% of cases vs 39.3% of NBx (p =
0.55). Cases had more PCa family history (25.5 vs 14.4% in NBx, p =
0.0001) but had smaller prostate volume relative to NBx (35.4 vs 50.5cm3,
p <0.0001). On univariate analysis, serum 25-OH D was negatively
associated with prostate volume and serum PSA and was statistically
significant for the cases and negative biopsy groups. On linear
regression, 25-OH D was negatively associated with prostate volume, PSA,
and PSAD (Table 1).Conclusion: Vitamin D is more strongly correlated with
prostate volume than serum PSA. This suggests an anti-proliferative role
for vitamin D in BPH/LUTS and PCa and warrants more study.Funding:
NoneTable 1: Linear Regression Models for Prostate Volume, PSA and
PSADCovariates with * reached significance, pIntroduction: We investigate
the association between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OH D) levels and
prostate volume, PSA, and PSA density (PSAD) given literature linking
vitamin D with prostate proliferation.Procedures: From 2010-13, we
enrolled 40-79 year old ambulatory men undergoing trans-rectal ultrasound
(TRUS) guided prostate biopsy for elevated PSA or abnormal DRE from
academic, outpatient urology clinics in Chicago, IL. Men with PSA >
50ng/ml were excluded. Clinical and demographic data were collected by
self-administered questionnaires and chart review. Venipuncture for serum
25-OH D and prostate volume estimation by the ellipsoid formula were done
during TRUS. PSAD was calculated as the pre-biopsy serum PSA (ng/ml)
divided by the prostate volume (cm3). The association of prostate volume,
PSA, and PSAD with 25-OH D was assessed using univariate analysis of
variance with 25-OH D as a categorical variable. Best fit linear
regressions were constructed for multivariate analysis of this
association adjusted for age, BMI, serum 25-OH D, PSA, 5-alpha reductase
inhibitor (5-ARI), alcohol and tobacco use.Results: We had 364 cases
(median age 62.4) and 186 negative biopsies (NBx, median age 62.1, p =
0.046). European Americans comprised 41.4% of cases vs 39.3% of NBx (p =
0.55). Cases had more PCa family history (25.5 vs 14.4% in NBx, p =
0.0001) but had smaller prostate volume relative to NBx (35.4 vs 50.5cm3,
p <0.0001). On univariate analysis, serum 25-OH D was negatively
associated with prostate volume and serum PSA and was statistically
significant for the cases and negative biopsy groups. On linear
regression, 25-OH D was negatively associated with prostate volume, PSA,
and PSAD (Table 1).Conclusion: Vitamin D is more strongly correlated with
prostate volume than serum PSA. This suggests an anti-proliferative role
for vitamin D in BPH/LUTS and PCa and warrants more study.Funding:
NoneTable 1: Linear Regression Models for Prostate Volume, PSA and
PSADCovariates with * reached significance, p<0.05.

