Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reconstructing evolutionary models of tumor progression from
single-cell heterogeneity data


Studies of genetic variation in solid tumors have revealed massive
cell-to-cell heterogeneity within single tumors, leading to a surge of
interest in reconstructing processes of tumor progression at the cellular
level. These efforts are hindered by a lack of accurate quantitative
models of tumor evolution processes and computer algorithms to analyze
tumor heterogeneity data with respect to these models. We have previously
developed algorithms to infer likely tumor phylogenetic trees from
single-cell fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) gene copy number
data, which has the advantage of making it practical to profile thousands
of single cells and thus to survey hundreds of cells per tumor across
tens of tumors. We have further shown that these phylogenetic
reconstructions of a tumor's past evolution have significant predictive
power for future progression of those tumors in a variety of cancer
types. In the present work, we address the need for accurate models of
tumor evolution through new methods to infer FISH-based tumor phylogenies
while simultaneously learning tumor-specific models of evolution by copy
number variation at the single gene, single chromosome and whole genome
scales.We have applied these algorithms to four FISH data sets: i)
cervical cancers collected from paired primary and metastasis from 16
patients and probed at for four genes (LAMP3, PROX1, PRKAA1 and CCND1)
measured for up to 250 cells per tumor, ii) tongue cancers collected from
65 patients at four tumor stages and probed at for four genes (TERC,
CCND1, EGFR and TP53) measured for up to 250 cells per patient, iii)
prostate cancers collected from 6 non-progressive and 7 progressive
carcinomas and probed at six genes (TBL1XR1, CTTNBP2, MYC, PTEN, MEN1 and
PDGFB) measured in up to 407 cells per patient, and iv) ductal carcinoma
in situ and invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast collected as paired
samples from 13 patients and probed at eight genes (COX2, MYC, CCND1,
HER2, ZNF217, DBC2, CDH1 and TP53) and measured on up to 220 cells per
tumor. Statistical analysis of inferred cervical cancer trees allowed us
to distinguish progressing from non-progressing primary tumors with 86%
accuracy, while similar statistics derived from tongue cancers allowed us
to significantly classify tumors with good versus bad prognosis with
respect to overall (P-value = 0.0000394) and disease-free (P-value =
0.000117) survival, independent of tumor stage and smoking behavior.
These results improve on our best prior accuracies for each of these
tasks, providing validation for the model inference approach while also
providing new methods relevant to the problem of predicting future
progression of tumors.

