Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physical inactivity increases the risk of endometrial cancer and
premenopausal breast cancer


Background. Epidemiological studies indicate that physical activity
reduces the risk of cancer. Physical inactivity or sedentary behavior,
has recently been suggested as a risk factor independent of physical
activity level. Breast and endometrial cancer incidence have both been
associated with physical activity, and endometrial cancer incidence with
physical inactivity/sedentary behavior. The purpose of the present study
was to investigate physical inactivity as a risk factor for breast
cancer, divided into pre- and postmenopausal subtypes, and for
endometrial cancer, and to explore possible dose-response relations
regarding the level of physical inactivity.Methods. In a population-based
prospective cohort study, 29 520 women in the southern part of Sweden, in
ages between 25 and 64 years, participated. A questionnaire-based survey
was performed 1990-92. Their reported professions were classified as
sedentary or not which together with reported participation in
competitive sports constituted the basis for classification into three
activity-levels; (1) physical inactivity, defined as having sedentary
occupation and no participation in competitive sports, (2) partly
inactive, defined as either having a sedentary occupation or non-
participation in competitive sports, (3) Physical active, defined as not
having a sedentary occupation and participation in competitive sports.
The association between physical inactivity and pre and postmenopausal
breast and endometrial cancer incidence were analyzed by Cox regression,
adjusted for hormonal factors, family history of cancer, body mass index
(BMI) and age.Results. Physical inactive women had a significantly
increased risk of endometrial cancer (HR = 2.41, 95% CI 1.14-5.11) and
premenopausal breast cancer (HR = 2.40, 95% CI 1.14-5.02), compared with
women who were less physical inactive. No such association was found for
postmenopausal breast cancer. Analysis of linear trend showed a
significant dose-response relationship with increased risk of both
premenopausal breast cancer (ptrend 0.02) and endometrial cancer (ptrend
Background. Epidemiological studies indicate that physical activity
reduces the risk of cancer. Physical inactivity or sedentary behavior,
has recently been suggested as a risk factor independent of physical
activity level. Breast and endometrial cancer incidence have both been
associated with physical activity, and endometrial cancer incidence with
physical inactivity/sedentary behavior. The purpose of the present study
was to investigate physical inactivity as a risk factor for breast
cancer, divided into pre- and postmenopausal subtypes, and for
endometrial cancer, and to explore possible dose-response relations
regarding the level of physical inactivity.Methods. In a population-based
prospective cohort study, 29 520 women in the southern part of Sweden, in
ages between 25 and 64 years, participated. A questionnaire-based survey
was performed 1990-92. Their reported professions were classified as
sedentary or not which together with reported participation in
competitive sports constituted the basis for classification into three
activity-levels; (1) physical inactivity, defined as having sedentary
occupation and no participation in competitive sports, (2) partly
inactive, defined as either having a sedentary occupation or non-
participation in competitive sports, (3) Physical active, defined as not
having a sedentary occupation and participation in competitive sports.
The association between physical inactivity and pre and postmenopausal
breast and endometrial cancer incidence were analyzed by Cox regression,
adjusted for hormonal factors, family history of cancer, body mass index
(BMI) and age.Results. Physical inactive women had a significantly
increased risk of endometrial cancer (HR = 2.41, 95% CI 1.14-5.11) and
premenopausal breast cancer (HR = 2.40, 95% CI 1.14-5.02), compared with
women who were less physical inactive. No such association was found for
postmenopausal breast cancer. Analysis of linear trend showed a
significant dose-response relationship with increased risk of both
premenopausal breast cancer (ptrend 0.02) and endometrial cancer (ptrend
<0.01).Conclusions. In the current study we found an increased incidence
of premenopausal breast cancer and endometrial cancer in physical
inactive women and a linear trend indicating dose-response relationship.
Not only physical activity but also the avoidance of physical inactivity
may reduce the risk of premenopausal breast cancer and endometrial cancer.

