Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-wide analysis of more than 160,000 individuals identifies
four novel pleiotropic risk loci shared between breast and ovarian cancer


Background: Common variants in six genomic regions are known to confer
susceptibility to both breast and ovarian cancer. We combined summary
results from association studies of these two cancers to identify
additional shared risk loci.Methods:We compiled an up-to-date list of the
most significant variant at every independent locus known to be
associated with ovarian (n = 18) and/or breast (n = 92) cancer risk at
genome-wide significance (P Background: Common variants in six genomic
regions are known to confer susceptibility to both breast and ovarian
cancer. We combined summary results from association studies of these two
cancers to identify additional shared risk loci.Methods:We compiled an
up-to-date list of the most significant variant at every independent
locus known to be associated with ovarian (n = 18) and/or breast (n = 92)
cancer risk at genome-wide significance (P < 510-8) in women of European
ancestry. Subtype specific and unpublished variants were included. We
evaluated association at each variant for the other cancer using summary
results from the OCAC and BCAC data sets (cases/controls: ovarian 15K/31K
and breast 63K/61K). Each data set was restricted to European ancestry
samples, had been imputed into the 1000 Genomes panel, and comprised
summary statistics from meta-analysis of GWAS and case-control studies
genotyped for 200K variants on the iCOGS custom array. We considered the
evaluated associations significant at a threshold P-value Background:
Common variants in six genomic regions are known to confer susceptibility
to both breast and ovarian cancer. We combined summary results from
association studies of these two cancers to identify additional shared
risk loci.Methods:We compiled an up-to-date list of the most significant
variant at every independent locus known to be associated with ovarian (n
= 18) and/or breast (n = 92) cancer risk at genome-wide significance (P <
510-8) in women of European ancestry. Subtype specific and unpublished
variants were included. We evaluated association at each variant for the
other cancer using summary results from the OCAC and BCAC data sets
(cases/controls: ovarian 15K/31K and breast 63K/61K). Each data set was
restricted to European ancestry samples, had been imputed into the 1000
Genomes panel, and comprised summary statistics from meta-analysis of
GWAS and case-control studies genotyped for 200K variants on the iCOGS
custom array. We considered the evaluated associations significant at a
threshold P-value < 4.610-4 after Bonferroni correction for multiple
comparisons.In a separate approach, we combined results for all variants
with P Background: Common variants in six genomic regions are known to
confer susceptibility to both breast and ovarian cancer. We combined
summary results from association studies of these two cancers to identify
additional shared risk loci.Methods:We compiled an up-to-date list of the
most significant variant at every independent locus known to be
associated with ovarian (n = 18) and/or breast (n = 92) cancer risk at
genome-wide significance (P < 510-8) in women of European ancestry.
Subtype specific and unpublished variants were included. We evaluated
association at each variant for the other cancer using summary results
from the OCAC and BCAC data sets (cases/controls: ovarian 15K/31K and
breast 63K/61K). Each data set was restricted to European ancestry
samples, had been imputed into the 1000 Genomes panel, and comprised
summary statistics from meta-analysis of GWAS and case-control studies
genotyped for 200K variants on the iCOGS custom array. We considered the
evaluated associations significant at a threshold P-value < 4.610-4 after
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.In a separate approach, we
combined results for all variants with P < 10-3 in both data sets using
fixed effects inverse variance meta-analysis. We also conducted a subtype
specific meta-analysis by combining results for serous ovarian and
estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer risk.Variants identified
within 1 Mb of known risk regions in each data set were excluded and only
novel findings are reported here.Results:One ovarian cancer risk variant
was also associated with breast cancer risk in the same direction as its
known ovarian association at P Background: Common variants in six genomic
regions are known to confer susceptibility to both breast and ovarian
cancer. We combined summary results from association studies of these two
cancers to identify additional shared risk loci.Methods:We compiled an
up-to-date list of the most significant variant at every independent
locus known to be associated with ovarian (n = 18) and/or breast (n = 92)
cancer risk at genome-wide significance (P < 510-8) in women of European
ancestry. Subtype specific and unpublished variants were included. We
evaluated association at each variant for the other cancer using summary
results from the OCAC and BCAC data sets (cases/controls: ovarian 15K/31K
and breast 63K/61K). Each data set was restricted to European ancestry
samples, had been imputed into the 1000 Genomes panel, and comprised
summary statistics from meta-analysis of GWAS and case-control studies
genotyped for 200K variants on the iCOGS custom array. We considered the
evaluated associations significant at a threshold P-value < 4.610-4 after
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.In a separate approach, we
combined results for all variants with P < 10-3 in both data sets using
fixed effects inverse variance meta-analysis. We also conducted a subtype
specific meta-analysis by combining results for serous ovarian and
estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer risk.Variants identified
within 1 Mb of known risk regions in each data set were excluded and only
novel findings are reported here.Results:One ovarian cancer risk variant
was also associated with breast cancer risk in the same direction as its
known ovarian association at P < 4.610-4: rs635634 at 9q34 (P(breast) =
8.110-7).The meta-analyses identified three additional risk loci at
genome-wide significance. Rs10820599 at 9q31 (P = 4.110-9) and rs8037137
at 15q26 (P = 1.910-10) were associated with overall ovarian and breast
cancer risk and rs201308915 at 2p23 (P = 3.210-8) was associated
specifically with serous ovarian and ER-negative breast cancer risk. None
of the variants demonstrated statistical evidence of heterogeneity in
effect between cancers.Tissue-specific annotation, quantitative trait
locus and pathway analyses of these loci to identify potential
pleiotropic functional mechanisms are ongoing.Conclusion: These results
confirm the pleiotropic effects of alleles at four new loci on breast and
ovarian cancer susceptibility. Three of them have not previously been
associated at genome-wide significance with risk of either cancer. Future
cross-cancer analysis based on even larger data sets and incorporating
other hormone-related cancers are likely to yield further insights into
the shared genetic basis of these common cancers.

