Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a highly specific Met antibody for screening Met
overexpression in NSCLC


Approximately 5%-22% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with
secondary resistance to EGFR TKIs had evidence of amplification of the
Met oncogene. This dysregulation of Met signaling was implicated in the
proliferation and eventual metastasis of NSCLC, and therefore represents
an attractive target for anticancer drug development.Currently, there are
a number of clinical trials for Met targeted small molecule and
monoclonal antibody therapies. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis of the
Met protein will be very important for these Met targeted therapies and
requires a highly specific antibody to prevent false positives. To
develop a highly specific monoclonal antibody against Met for IHC
analysis in NSCLC, we generated 97 monoclonal antibodies. IHC evaluation
showed that 8 of the antibodies had suitable performance in Met positive
NSCLC patient tissues. The 8 Met monoclonal antibodies were further
tested on a high density protein microarray chip containing 17,000 human
proteins. The microarray analysis showed that clone 3G5 was highly
specific as evidenced with it only reacting with Met on the microarray.
This new 3G5 Met monoclonal antibody will be a promising candidate as a
diagnostic reagent for detecting Met protein in NSCLC with minimal false
positives.

