Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining PD1- and CTLA4-inhibiting antibodies with cisplatin or
PARP inhibition in an attempt to eradicate BRCA1-deficient mouse mammary
tumors


Solid tumors are usually not eradicated by conventional chemotherapy
resulting in disease relapse and mortality. An intriguing example is
BRCA-associated breast cancer. A genetically engineered mouse model for
BRCA1-associated breast cancer (K14Cre;Brca1F/F;p53F/F), which highly
resembles disease in human patients, can be used to study therapy escape
and residual disease in BRCA-deficient tumors. Due to the BRCA
inactivation, the tumors that arise in this model lack homologous
recombination-directed DNA repair, an Achilles heel that has provided a
therapeutic opportunity to eradicate tumors with DNA damage-inducing
agents. Despite repeated sensitivity some residual cancer cells escape
the deadly effect of anticancer therapy and lead to disease relapse. A
special histopathological feature of BRCA1-mutated tumors in both humans
and mice is the presence of infiltrating lymphocytes. This may be
explained by the high frequency of genomic alterations of BRCA1-mutated
tumors resulting in the generation of many neo-antigens. Our hypothesis
is that blocking inhibitory T-cell signaling, using antibodies directed
against CTLA4 and PD1, may increase the activity of the T-cell
compartment towards a diverse pool of antigens, and successfully
eliminate residual tumor cells in combination with DNA damage-inducing
drugs. In particular, we will present data of combining CTLA4- and PD1-
targeting antibodies with PARP inhibition or cisplatin to eliminate
residual tumor cells in this mouse model for BRCA1-mutated breast cancer.

