Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance and possible role of GPNMB in patients with
breast cancer


Glycoprotein non-metastatic B (GPNMB) is a type I transmembrane protein,
which is isolated from differential expression assay using metastatic
melanoma cells. The physiological function is very little known but may
be supposed to be associated with cell invasion and motility particularly
in breast cancer cells. Here we investigated the role of GPNMB in breast
cancer. First we checked expression of GPNMB by RT-PCR and western blot
in several cancer cell lines including breast, gastric, and colon cancer
followed by establishment of GPNMB measurement by ELISA because it's
reported that GPNMB is shed at extracellular domain by sheddase such as
ADAM10. GPMNB expressed in breast (5/6:83%), gastric (3/6:50%), colon
(1/7:14.3%) cancer cell lines. Of breast cancer cell lines, GPNMB was
highly expressed in SK-BR3 (HER2 positive), BT474 (HER2/ER positive),
MDA-MB-157 (Triple negative) cells. Shed GPNMB in culture medium was
measurable and correlated with expression of each cell line. Next we
evaluated serum GPNMB in patients with breast (n = 164; primary 119,
metastatic 43), gastric (n = 38), and colorectal (n = 50) cancer in our
institute from 2011.9-2014.2.) This study was approved by the central
ethics committee of Gifu University. Serum GPNMBs were 9.403, 5.751,
6.550 ng/ml, respectively. GPNMB for breast cancer patients was
statistically higher than those by colorectal cancer patients (p =
0.018). Of breast cancer patients, GPNMB for HER2-type patients was
higher than those for Luminal type and DCIS patients (p = 0.0386, p =
0.0195, respectively). Those for triple negative patients was also higher
than those for DCIS patients (p = 0.0459). Interestingly, serum GPNMB was
dramatically reduced in accordance with chemotherapy in some patients.
Based on these clinical observations, we further investigated
relationship between GPNMP and HER2 in vitro. Blockage of GPNMB induced
not only HER2 but also EGFR expression. On the other hand, inhibition of
HER2 by trastuzumab increased expression of GPNMB. Depletion of GPNMB
increased sensitivity of trastuzumab, suggesting that GPNMB may play an
important role in crosstalk of signal transduction for breast cancer.
These notions may suggest a novel therapeutic strategy to overcome HER2
positive breast cancer.

