Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age-stratified risk of unexpected uterine sarcoma following
surgery for presumed benign leiomyoma


Background: Estimates of unexpected uterine sarcoma following surgery for
presumed benign leiomyoma that utilize age-stratification are
lacking.Patients and Methods: A retrospective cohort of 2075 patients
that had undergone myomectomy was evaluated to determine the case
incidence of unexpected uterine sarcoma. An aggregate risk estimate was
generated using a meta-analysis of similar studies plus our cohort.
Database-derived age distributions of the incidence rates of uterine
sarcoma and uterine leiomyoma surgery were used to stratify risk by
age.Results: Of 2075 patients in our cohort, six were diagnosed with
uterine sarcoma. Our meta-analysis revealed 8 studies from 1980-2014.
Combined with our cohort, there are 18 cases of leiomyosarcoma reported
in 10120 patients, for an aggregate risk of 1.78 per 1000 [95% CI:
1.1-2.8], or 1 in 562. There are 8 cases of other uterine sarcomas
reported in 6889 patients, for an aggregate risk of 1.16 per 1000 [95%
CI: 0.5-4.9], or 1 in 861. The summation of these risks gives an overall
risk of uterine sarcoma of 2.94 per 1000 [95% CI: 1.8-4.1], or 1 in 340.
After stratification by age, we predict the risk of uterine sarcoma to
range from a peak of 10.1 cases per 1000, or 1 in 98, for age 75-79 to
less than 1 case per 500 for age Background: Estimates of unexpected
uterine sarcoma following surgery for presumed benign leiomyoma that
utilize age-stratification are lacking.Patients and Methods: A
retrospective cohort of 2075 patients that had undergone myomectomy was
evaluated to determine the case incidence of unexpected uterine sarcoma.
An aggregate risk estimate was generated using a meta-analysis of similar
studies plus our cohort. Database-derived age distributions of the
incidence rates of uterine sarcoma and uterine leiomyoma surgery were
used to stratify risk by age.Results: Of 2075 patients in our cohort, six
were diagnosed with uterine sarcoma. Our meta-analysis revealed 8 studies
from 1980-2014. Combined with our cohort, there are 18 cases of
leiomyosarcoma reported in 10120 patients, for an aggregate risk of 1.78
per 1000 [95% CI: 1.1-2.8], or 1 in 562. There are 8 cases of other
uterine sarcomas reported in 6889 patients, for an aggregate risk of 1.16
per 1000 [95% CI: 0.5-4.9], or 1 in 861. The summation of these risks
gives an overall risk of uterine sarcoma of 2.94 per 1000 [95% CI:
1.8-4.1], or 1 in 340. After stratification by age, we predict the risk
of uterine sarcoma to range from a peak of 10.1 cases per 1000, or 1 in
98, for age 75-79 to less than 1 case per 500 for age <30.Conclusion: The
risk of unexpected uterine sarcoma varies significantly across age
groups. Our age-stratified predictive model should be incorporated to
more accurately counsel patients and to assist in providing guidelines
for surgical technique for leiomyoma.

