Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro compound screening identifies enhancers of adenoviral
oncolysis with Delta24-RGD in patient-derived glioblastoma stem cells


The tumor targeted oncolytic adenovirus Delta24-RGD is currently under
phase I/II investigation for the malignant brain tumor glioblastoma.
Despite encouraging results, the efficacy of oncolytic virotherapy still
requires improvements due to heterogeneous or poor responses. In this
study, we performed a screen of 446 clinically applied drugs to identify
those that enhance Delta24-RGD oncolysis in glioblastoma. Cell viability
was determined five days post-infection in Delta24-RGD resistant
patient-derived glioblastoma stem cell (GSCs) cultures. Potential hits
were tested for synergistic viral sensitization using the Chou-Talalay
method. Effects on viral infection and replication were investigated
using Ad-Luc-RGD and Delta24-RGD-GFP viruses, and apoptosis and necrosis
were evaluated using caspase-3/7 and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assays.
Selection based on the efficacy of combination treatment led to the
identification of ten drugs as potential Delta24-RGD sensitizers from the
initial screen. Further analysis of effects on viral replication,
synergistic interactions and ability to penetrate the blood-brain barrier
narrowed this down to four remaining compounds, fluphenazine, indirubin,
lofepramine and ranolazine. These four agents increased caspase-3/7
activity and fluphenazine also increased LDH levels in combination with
Delta24-RGD. Fluphenazine, indirubin, lofepramine and ranolazine
sensitized 12/12, 11/12, 9/12 and 11/12 distinct GSC cultures to
Delta24-RGD, respectively. In conclusion, a clinical compound screen on
glioblastoma stem cells in combination with in vitro mechanistic studies,
revealed four highly effective compounds that sensitize GSCs to
Delta24-RGD oncolytic therapy.

