Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear targeted gold nanoparticles for radiation enhancement


Gold nanoparticles (AuNP) have been shown to enhance radiation dose
(Hainfeld et al, 2004) resulting in significant improvement in tumor
control (Hainfeld et al 2008, 2010, 2012). AuNPs that target nuclear DNA
have the potential to greatly improve such radiation dose enhancement due
to the utilization of the cascade of low energy Auger electrons that
follow x-ray absorption. If the AuNP binds to the DNA, these high LET
electrons should greatly augment double strand breaks and tumor cell
killing. While positively charged peptides are known to take NP into the
cell nucleus, they are expensive and subject to proteolytic degradation.
We reasoned that just putting a positive charge on the AuNP might mimic
enhanced cellular uptake, endothelial escape and nuclear translocation.
Such three nm AuNPs had high cell uptake but were retained in the
endosome with none getting into the nucleus whereas one nm positively
charged AuNPs were found in the cell nucleus and nuclear membrane as well
as the cytoplasm as evidenced by light and electron microscopy.
Nuclear-localized positively charged AuNPs were found predominantly over
regions of heterochromatin. Cells incubated with positively charged AuNPs
in vitro and then irradiated showed an increased number of H2AX binding
sites as evidenced by fluorescence. Cell metabolism assays using MTT, a
surrogate for cell viability, performed one, two and three days following
radiation therapy, showed that cells irradiated after loading with
positively charged, nuclear targeted AuNPs manifested some decrease in
cell viability.

