Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERG-based stratification of prostate cancer highlights ethnicity
associated biological differences


Introduction: The molecular basis of racial/ethnic differences in the
detection and outcomes of the carcinoma of the prostate (CaP) needs to be
better defined to improve biomarkers and identify appropriate therapeutic
targets. ETS-related gene fusions in proto-oncogenes (ERG, ETV1) are
among the most common early oncogenic alterations described in CaP.
Studies have highlighted the racial/ethnic variation in ERG fusion and
ERG oncoprotein expression frequencies showing: the highest frequencies
in Caucasian (CA) men, the lowest frequencies in Asian men, and
intermediate frequencies in African American (AA) men. These differences
persisted when patients were carefully matched for age and
clinico-pathologic features. Building on our and other's previous
findings, the current study was conducted to evaluate ERG expression
frequencies in a large cohort of AA and CA CaP patients.Methods: Patients
enrolled at the Walter Reed National Military Medical Center who
consented to provide radical prostatectomy (RP) specimens to the CPDR
Tissue Bank and Clinical Database were evaluated. The current study
included 443 AA and 696 CA patients. ERG oncoprotein expression was
detected by immunohistochemistry using the 9FY mouse monoclonal anti-ERG
antibody and was correlated with clinico-pathologic features and CaP
outcomes, including time to biochemical recurrence.Introduction: The
molecular basis of racial/ethnic differences in the detection and
outcomes of the carcinoma of the prostate (CaP) needs to be better
defined to improve biomarkers and identify appropriate therapeutic
targets. ETS-related gene fusions in proto-oncogenes (ERG, ETV1) are
among the most common early oncogenic alterations described in CaP.
Studies have highlighted the racial/ethnic variation in ERG fusion and
ERG oncoprotein expression frequencies showing: the highest frequencies
in Caucasian (CA) men, the lowest frequencies in Asian men, and
intermediate frequencies in African American (AA) men. These differences
persisted when patients were carefully matched for age and
clinico-pathologic features. Building on our and other's previous
findings, the current study was conducted to evaluate ERG expression
frequencies in a large cohort of AA and CA CaP patients.Methods: Patients
enrolled at the Walter Reed National Military Medical Center who
consented to provide radical prostatectomy (RP) specimens to the CPDR
Tissue Bank and Clinical Database were evaluated. The current study
included 443 AA and 696 CA patients. ERG oncoprotein expression was
detected by immunohistochemistry using the 9FY mouse monoclonal anti-ERG
antibody and was correlated with clinico-pathologic features and CaP
outcomes, including time to biochemical recurrence.<brResults: The result
revealed lower frequencies of ERG in the index tumors of AA men as
compared to CA men (28.4% vs. 51.5%, p Introduction: The molecular basis
of racial/ethnic differences in the detection and outcomes of the
carcinoma of the prostate (CaP) needs to be better defined to improve
biomarkers and identify appropriate therapeutic targets. ETS-related gene
fusions in proto-oncogenes (ERG, ETV1) are among the most common early
oncogenic alterations described in CaP. Studies have highlighted the
racial/ethnic variation in ERG fusion and ERG oncoprotein expression
frequencies showing: the highest frequencies in Caucasian (CA) men, the
lowest frequencies in Asian men, and intermediate frequencies in African
American (AA) men. These differences persisted when patients were
carefully matched for age and clinico-pathologic features. Building on
our and other's previous findings, the current study was conducted to
evaluate ERG expression frequencies in a large cohort of AA and CA CaP
patients.Methods: Patients enrolled at the Walter Reed National Military
Medical Center who consented to provide radical prostatectomy (RP)
specimens to the CPDR Tissue Bank and Clinical Database were evaluated.
The current study included 443 AA and 696 CA patients. ERG oncoprotein
expression was detected by immunohistochemistry using the 9FY mouse
monoclonal anti-ERG antibody and was correlated with clinico-pathologic
features and CaP outcomes, including time to biochemical
recurrence.<brResults: The result revealed lower frequencies of ERG in
the index tumors of AA men as compared to CA men (28.4% vs. 51.5%, p <
0.0001). Furthermore, AA men with higher grade CaP (Gleason 8-10) had
even lower ERG frequency (16%), suggesting distinct molecular biologic
features in aggressive CaP for AA men. A trend with age was observed for
both racial groups, with younger CA showing higher ERG frequencies. At
least one focus of ERG positive PIN was present in prostates with ERG
positive tumors. In both CA and AA patients, a very low frequency (8%) of
ERG expression was noted in anterior index tumors compared to posterior
tumors.Conclusions: This study lends increasing support to differences of
the most common early genomic alteration (ERG) between AA and CA CaP
patients. The study also underscores the importance of identifying new or
improving existing biomarkers with consideration of patient
race/ethnicity.

