Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurate measurement of free and complexed PSA concentrations in
serum of women using a novel technology with fg/mL sensitivity


Measurement of free and complexed PSA (prostate specific antigen;
complexed with ACT) in certain patient groups such as prostatectomy
patients and women at risk of breast and ovarian cancer has been limited
by the sensitivity of current immunoassay technology (5-30 pg/mL for
common clinical analyzers). Fifth generation assays for total PSA with
detection limits of 0.05 to 0.1 pg/mL have been described (McDermet 2009;
Thaxton 2009; Wilson 2011). We developed a next-generation assay format
based on MSD's MULTI-ARRAY electrochemiluminescence technology with
detection limits of 2 fg/mL (0.002 pg/mL) for complexed PSA (cPSA) and 20
fg/mL for free PSA (fPSA), requiring only 25 L of serum or plasma per
measurement.Assays were calibrated against the WHO standards 96/668 (free
PSA) and 98/670 (90% complexed, 10% free PSA). The dynamic range of both
assays was three to four orders of magnitude. Typical intra-plate
coefficients of variation ranged from 5% to 15%. LLOQ's of cPSA and fPSA
assays were 5 fg/mL and 55 fg/mL, respectively. Spike recovery and
dilution linearity were between 80% and 120%. Approximately 100 serum
samples from women were evaluated. Free PSA was detectable in 95% of
samples and cPSA was detectable in all samples.Multiple literature
reports indicate that free PSA might be a marker for early detection of
breast cancer; however, the concentrations of many samples were close to
or below the detection limits of the assays used for the studies. We
tested 48 serum samples from patients with breast cancer and 37 serum
samples from apparently healthy women. As the table below shows, there
was no clear difference between PSA concentrations in cases and
controls.In conclusion, we developed a next-generation assay format that
is 100 to 1000 times more sensitive than the currently available clinical
PSA assays. This enables accurate determination of free PSA and cPSA
concentrations in the serum of females.

