Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protocadherin 10-mediated suppression of tumorigenesis and
metastasis in colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading types of cancer death
worldwide, and over one third of these patients will die of their disease
mainly due to distant metastasis. Genomic deletion that occurs at tumor
suppressor loci is a common genetic aberration in CRC. By using loss of
heterozygosity analysis, we identified Protocadherin 10 (PCDH10) as a
novel tumor suppressor gene in CRC. Ectopic expression of PCDH10 reduced
cancer cell proliferation, anchorage-independent growth, migration and
invasion, as well as increased serum starvation-induced apoptosis in
vitro. Subcutaneous injection of PCDH10-expressing CRC cells in SCID mice
showed the reduction of tumor growth compared with that observed in
mock-inoculated mice. Furthermore, via intrasplenic implantation, the
re-expression of PCDH10 in silenced cells restrained liver metastasis and
improved survival in SCID mice. The molecular mechanisms of
PCDH10-mediated tumor suppression are involved in the up-regulation of
p53-p21 pathway and down-regulation of active -catenin. Taken together,
PCDH10 could restrain cell growth and epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition, and thus inhibit the development and progression of
CRC.Keywords:PCDH10, tumor suppressor gene, colorectal cancer, molecular
mechanismCategory : MCB04 Oncogenes and Tumor Suppressor Genes

