Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of p27 upregulates MnSOD in a STAT3-dependent manner,
disrupts intracellular redox activity and enhances cell migration


Cell migration is a dynamic process that is central to a variety of
physiological functions as well as disease pathogenesis. The modulation
of cell migration by p27 (officially known as CDKN1B) has been reported,
but the exact mechanism(s) whereby p27 interacts with downstream
effectors that control cell migration have not been elucidated. By
systematically comparing p27+/+ mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) with
genetically ablated p272/2 MEFs using wound-healing, transwell and
time-lapse microscopic analyses, we provide direct evidence that p27
inhibits both directional and random cell migration. Identical results
were obtained with normal and cancer epithelial cells using complementary
knockdown and overexpression approaches. Additional studies revealed that
overexpression of manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD, officially known
as SOD2) and reduced intracellular oxidation played a key role in
increased cell migration in p27-deficient cells. Furthermore, we
identified signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) as
the transcription factor responsible for p27-regulated MnSOD expression,
which was further mediated by ERK- and ATF1-dependent transactivation of
the cAMP response element (CRE) within the Stat3 promoter. Collectively,
our data strongly indicate that p27 plays a crucial negative role in cell
migration by inhibiting MnSOD expression in a STAT3-dependent manner.

