Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking constitutive aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) signaling
attenuates androgen receptor activity


PURPOSE: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a member of the
basic-helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors. AhR is widely
known for regulating the transcription of drug metabolizing enzymes
involved in the xenobiotic metabolism of carcinogens and therapeutic
agents, such as cytochrome P450-1B1 (CYP1B1). Additionally, AhR has also
been reported to interact with multiple signaling pathways during
prostate development. Here we investigate the effect of sustained AhR
signaling on androgen receptor function in prostate cancer cells.
METHODS/RESULTS: Immunoblot analysis shows that AhR expression is
increased in androgen independent (C4-2) prostate cancer cells when
compared to androgen sensitive (LNCaP) cells. qRT-PCR studies revealed
constitutive AhR signaling in C4-2 cells without the ligand induced
activation required in LNCaP cells. A reduction of AhR activity by short
RNA mediated silencing in C4-2 cells reduced expression of both AhR and
androgen responsive genes. The decrease in androgen responsive genes
correlates to a decrease in phosphorylated androgen receptor and androgen
receptor expression in the nucleus. CONCLUSION: These data indicates that
AhR is required to maintain hormone independent signaling by the androgen
receptor in C4-2 cells. Collectively, these data provide evidence of a
direct role for AhR in androgen independent signaling and provides
insight into the molecular mechanisms responsible for sustained androgen
receptor signaling in hormone refractory prostate cancer.These studies
were supported by the RCMI grant 2G12RR003062-22.

