Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Periostin secreted by breast cancer cells inhibits macrophage
phagocytosis and adhesion to fibronectin


Interactions between cancer cells and immune cells are critical to the
development of breast cancer metastases. We have previously shown that
breast cancer cells secrete periostin, an extracellular matrix protein
implicated in tumor progression. Here we evaluated 1) the effect of
macrophage secretions on 4T1 breast cancer cell production of periostin
and 2) the effect of periostin on key macrophage functions. In vitro,
periostin secretion by highly metastastic 4T1 mammary cancer cells was
investigated by ELISA. Following a 48-hour incubation with conditioned
media obtained from J774A-1 monocyte cells, 4T1 cells secreted
significantly higher periostin concentrations (pInteractions between
cancer cells and immune cells are critical to the development of breast
cancer metastases. We have previously shown that breast cancer cells
secrete periostin, an extracellular matrix protein implicated in tumor
progression. Here we evaluated 1) the effect of macrophage secretions on
4T1 breast cancer cell production of periostin and 2) the effect of
periostin on key macrophage functions. In vitro, periostin secretion by
highly metastastic 4T1 mammary cancer cells was investigated by ELISA.
Following a 48-hour incubation with conditioned media obtained from
J774A-1 monocyte cells, 4T1 cells secreted significantly higher periostin
concentrations (p<0.05). Next, the effect of prolonged incubation with
periostin on proliferation, adhesion and phagocytosis of macrophages was
investigated using mouse J774A-1 and RAW264.7 monocyte cells and mouse
primary bone marrow macrophages. In the conditions tested, periostin did
not affect macrophage proliferation. Incubation with periostin
significantly decreased macrophage adhesion to fibronectin-coated vessels
(pInteractions between cancer cells and immune cells are critical to the
development of breast cancer metastases. We have previously shown that
breast cancer cells secrete periostin, an extracellular matrix protein
implicated in tumor progression. Here we evaluated 1) the effect of
macrophage secretions on 4T1 breast cancer cell production of periostin
and 2) the effect of periostin on key macrophage functions. In vitro,
periostin secretion by highly metastastic 4T1 mammary cancer cells was
investigated by ELISA. Following a 48-hour incubation with conditioned
media obtained from J774A-1 monocyte cells, 4T1 cells secreted
significantly higher periostin concentrations (p<0.05). Next, the effect
of prolonged incubation with periostin on proliferation, adhesion and
phagocytosis of macrophages was investigated using mouse J774A-1 and
RAW264.7 monocyte cells and mouse primary bone marrow macrophages. In the
conditions tested, periostin did not affect macrophage proliferation.
Incubation with periostin significantly decreased macrophage adhesion to
fibronectin-coated vessels (p<0.05). Incubation with periostin also
significantly inhibited macrophage phagocytosis of polymer beads
(pInteractions between cancer cells and immune cells are critical to the
development of breast cancer metastases. We have previously shown that
breast cancer cells secrete periostin, an extracellular matrix protein
implicated in tumor progression. Here we evaluated 1) the effect of
macrophage secretions on 4T1 breast cancer cell production of periostin
and 2) the effect of periostin on key macrophage functions. In vitro,
periostin secretion by highly metastastic 4T1 mammary cancer cells was
investigated by ELISA. Following a 48-hour incubation with conditioned
media obtained from J774A-1 monocyte cells, 4T1 cells secreted
significantly higher periostin concentrations (p<0.05). Next, the effect
of prolonged incubation with periostin on proliferation, adhesion and
phagocytosis of macrophages was investigated using mouse J774A-1 and
RAW264.7 monocyte cells and mouse primary bone marrow macrophages. In the
conditions tested, periostin did not affect macrophage proliferation.
Incubation with periostin significantly decreased macrophage adhesion to
fibronectin-coated vessels (p<0.05). Incubation with periostin also
significantly inhibited macrophage phagocytosis of polymer beads
(p<0.05). Together, these observations indicate that the secretion of
periostin by 4T1 cells is, in part, stimulated through paracrine
communication with macrophages, and that periostin inhibits both
macrophage adhesion and phagocytosis.

