Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High complexity barcoding to study clonal dynamics in response to
cancer therapy


Targeted therapies, such as erlotinib and imatinib, lead to dramatic
clinical responses, but the emergence of resistance presents a
significant challenge. Recent studies have revealed intratumoral
heterogeneity as a potential source for the emergence of therapeutic
resistance. However, it is still unclear if relapse/resistance is driven
predominantly by pre-existing or de novo acquired alterations. To address
this question, we developed a high-complexity barcode library,
ClonTracer, which contains over 27 million unique DNA barcodes and thus
enables the high resolution tracking of cancer cells under drug
treatment. Using this library in two clinically relevant resistance
models, we demonstrate that the majority of resistant clones pre-exist as
rare subpopulations that become selected in response to therapeutic
challenge. Furthermore, our data provide direct evidence that both
genetic and non-genetic resistance mechanisms pre-exist in cancer cell
populations. The ClonTracer barcoding strategy, together with
mathematical modeling, enabled us to quantitatively dissect the frequency
of drug-resistant subpopulations and evaluate the impact of combination
treatments on the clonal complexity of these cancer models. Hence,
monitoring of clonal diversity in drug-resistant cell populations by the
ClonTracer barcoding strategy described here may provide a valuable tool
to optimize therapeutic regimens towards the goal of curative cancer
therapies.

