Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of the acetylcholine signaling pathway suppresses the
growth and angiogenesis of human lung cancers


Cigarette smoking bears a strong association with the development of lung
cancer. Nicotine is the addictive component of cigarettes. Several
convergent studies show that nicotine facilitates the growth and
angiogenesis of human lung cancers. The biological activity of nicotine
is mediated by nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). The endogenous
ligand of nAChRs is acetylcholine (ACh). Data from our laboratory and
other research groups show that lung cancers express all of the genes for
synthesis, transport and degradation of ACh. These include nAChRs,
choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), vesicular acetylcholine transporter
(VAChT), choline transporter (ChT1) and acetylcholinesterase (AChE).
Nicotine upregulates the ACh-signaling loop in human lung cancer cells.
Therefore, we conjectured that disruption of ACh-signaling pathway should
suppress the growth of human cancers. We show that alpha7-nAChR
antagonists robustly suppress angiogenesis in human lung and retinal
microvascular endothelial cells. The anti-angiogenic activity of
alpha7-nAChR antagonists was also observed in chicken chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) and nude mouse models. Similarly, vesamicol, a small
molecule antagonist of VAChT, decreases nicotine-induced tumor growth in
human NSCLCs. Our studies suggest that the acetylcholine signaling
pathway may be have potential applications in the therapy of human lung
cancers. Our results are also relevant to lung cancer patients who are
exposed to nicotine via secondhand smoke, nicotine patches, gums or
electronic cigarettes.

