Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Midlife racial differences In leukocyte telomere length and in
associations between modifiable factors and telomere length


Background: We previously investigated whether cord blood leukocyte
telomere length differs by race as a way to assess the role of early life
factors in the prostate cancer racial disparity. We hypothesized that
telomere length is shorter in black neonates given their 60% higher adult
prostate cancer risk, but did not observe a racial difference. Whether
peripheral blood leukocyte telomere length differs by race in midlife -
after decades of exposures that shorten telomeres - has not been
addressed in detail. Obesity, inactivity, and smoking have been
associated with shorter leukocyte telomere length. These factors are
among the few purported risk factors for lethal prostate cancer that are
modifiable and for which prevalence differs by race. Thus, we examined
whether telomere length is shorter in black men, evaluated associations
between modifiable factors and telomere length overall and by race, and
assessed whether associations between modifiable factors and telomere
length influenced any racial difference in telomere length. Methods: The
Health Professionals Follow-up Study is a cohort of US men aged 40-75
years followed since 1986. At baseline and biennially men completed
questionnaires on lifestyle and medical factors. Blood was collected in
1993-95. We measured telomere length (telomere/single copy gene) by
quantitative PCR for a subset: 43 black and 56 white men without cancer.
We estimated associations between modifiable factors and the natural
logarithm of telomere length overall and by race using linear regression
to adjust for age, and evaluated interactions using the likelihood ratio
test. We estimated geometric mean telomere length and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) for black and white men using linear regression to adjust
for age and further for modifiable factors. Results: Black and white men
did not differ in age or waist circumference, but black men were less
physically active (total) and more likely to smoke. Waist (per 1
increase: = -0.03; p = 0.002), inactivity (per 1 MET-hr/wk decrease: =
-0.003; p = 0.09), and smoking (current vs not: = -0.25; p = 0.06) were
inversely associated with ln telomere length. The association for waist
was stronger in black ( = -0.04; p = 0.005) than white ( = -0.01; p =
0.3) men (p-interaction = 0.1). Associations for inactivity
(p-interaction = 0.1) and smoking did not differ by race (p-interaction =
0.4). Geometric mean telomere length did not differ by race adjusting for
age (black: 1.42, 95% CI 1.28-1.58; white: 1.38, 95% CI 1.26-1.50), or
further adjusting for waist, inactivity, and smoking (black: 1.43, 95% CI
1.28-1.59; white: 1.35, 95% CI 1.23-1.48). Conclusion: Telomere length
did not differ between black and white men. Lethal prostate cancer risk
factors - waist, inactivity, and smoking, were associated with shorter
telomere length in all men, and waist more strongly so in black men.

