Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone demethylase NDY1/KDM2B as a driver of survival and
proliferation of normal and neoplastic mast cells


Proliferative disorders of mast cells exhibit a range of clinical
behavior from benign cutaneous forms to aggressive systemic mastocytosis
and mast cell leukemia. While these disorders are rare in people, they
are among the most common malignancies in the dog, a circumstance that
provides a useful model for an orphan disease. Growth of both normal and
neoplastic mast cells is driven by c-kit (CD117), a tyrosine kinase
receptor for stem cell factor. Ligand-independent, constitutive
activation of c-kit via mutation is a common feature of mastocytic
neoplasia. Therefore, tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) that target c-kit
have activity in aggressive mastocytosis in people and in dogs. However,
resistance to c-kit targeted TKIs is common in both species, highlighting
a need for other therapeutic targets.Our data indicates that chromatin
modification may be important in mast cell biology. Specifically, we have
shown that the JmjC domain lysine 36 specific histone H3 demethylase,
NDY1/KDM2B, supports the proliferation and immortalization of bone-marrow
derived mast cells. It is well known that NDY1/KDM2B is a driver of
hematopoietic transformation and is associated with malignant progression
in certain solid tumors (breast, pancreatic and urothelial carcinoma).
Therefore, we investigated the effects of knockdown of NDY1/KDM2B in
neoplastic human and canine mast cells in vitro and in xenografts. Our
data demonstrate that this knockdown inhibits proliferation and induces
apoptosis in vitro and inhibits tumor growth in vivo. Therefore,
targeting therapy of NDY1/KDM2B or downstream effectors in mast cell
tumors could be a beneficial addition to the existing therapeutic
modalities.Supported by grants from the Morris Animal Foundation (D14CA)
and NIH (R01CA109747).

