Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The antitumor activity of hyaluronic acid nimuselide-NH2
bioconjugate (CA102N) in human colorectal cancer (CRC)


Carrier mediated drug delivery systems are promising next generation
therapeutics for targeted delivery and improved efficacy and safety of
cytotoxic drugs. Hyaluronic Acid conjugated drugs (HACD) are novel
carrier-mediated drug delivery systems (Targeting Carrier) characterized
by CD44-mediated endocytosis of Hyaluronic Acid (HA) and intracellular
drug release. The present study investigates the in vitro and in vivo
antitumor activity of CA102N, an HA- Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor
conjugate, HA-Nimesulide, currently in preclinical development.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors are a class of compounds that are
associated with anticancer properties. CA102N was able to selectively
inhibit HCT116 and HT29, CRC cancer cell growth in vitro with an IC50 of
57.7 and 77.14 M respectively. In in vivo studies, strong anti-tumor
effects and rapid tumor shrinkage was observed within 3 days posttherapy
in mice bearing HT-29 xenografts treated with either 1.5 or 4.5 mg/kg of
relative amount of the conjugate. Further, full and sustained regression
of tumors was also attained during the entire observational period (14
days) after the last dose. No treatment related toxicity was noticed in
mice. HACD drug delivery systems may offer great advantages in the
development of a new class of bioconjugated drugs for intracellular
delivery and enhanced safety of potent cytotoxic drugs.

