Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lapatinib promotes promoted the incidence of hepatotoxicity by
increasing chemotherapeutic agent accumulation in hepatocytes


Purpose: Lapatinib has been used in combination with capecitabine or
paclitaxel in treating patients with progressive HER2-overexpressing
metastatic breast cancer. Unfortunately, an increased hepatotoxicity had
been found in the combinational therapy. The aim of this study was to
investigate the potential mechanism of the increased hepatotoxicity
during the combination treatment of lapatinib and chemotherapeutic
agent.Experimental design: The incidence of hepatotoxicity was analyzed
in the patients and Swiss mice with combinational treatment of lapatinib
and paclitaxel or doxorubicin. Pharmacokinetic studies of paclitaxel and
doxorubicin were carried out in mice. The chemotherapeutic agent
accumulation was performed in ABCB1 overexpressing hepatocellular cancer
cells and normal liver tissues.Results:The patients received lapatinib
and paclitaxel treatment showed a higher incidence of hepatobiliary
system disorders than those received paclitaxel alone. The in vivo
experiments showed that the subjects in group of lapatinib plus
chemotherapeutic agent had significantly higher levels of alanine
aminotransferase and serious hepatocyte injury compared with that in
group of single drug. Pharmacokinetic studies revealed that lapatinib
could increase the exposed level of paclitaxel and doxorubicin without
inhibiting the activity of CYP 3A4. Further study demonstrated that
lapatinib could increase the accumulation of doxorubicin in
ABCB1-overexpressing hepatocellular cancer cells and normal liver tissues
without altering the protein level of ABCB1.Conclusion: The higher
incidence of hepatotoxicity during the treatment of lapatinib plus
chemotherapeutic agent was due to the increased agent accumulation in
liver cells via inhibiting the function of ABC transporters inhibited by
lapatinib. This is important information direction for the design of
combinational therapy in clinic.

