Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-proliferative effects of ZR2002, a novel combi-molecule with
EGFR/DNA binary targeting properties compared to Gefitinib in
glioblastoma cell lines and brain tumor stem cells


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive form of primary
brain tumor in adults with a survival of only 12-15 months. Brain tumor
stem cells (BTSCs) contribute to tumor initiation, progression, chemo-
and radioresistance, which accounts for tumor recurrence and treatment
failure. Amplification of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is one
of the most common genetic alterations associated with GBM
aggressiveness. EGFR variant III (EGFRvIII) is an activating mutation
that accounts for 60% of EGFR mutations in patients whose tumors show
amplification of wild type EGFR. Despite the evidence that EGFR-induced
pathway represents an attractive therapeutic target in GBM, gefitinib
(Iressa, ZD1839), an orally active, selective EGFR-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor showed only a limited potency in clinical trials. ZR2002, a
prototype of combi-molecule capable of generating the binary EGFR/DNA
targeting activity without requirement for hydrolytic cleavage has not
been tested against BTSC. Given the ability of ZR2002 to concomitantly
induce DNA damage and block EGFR-mediated signaling, we hypothesized that
it would exert greater anti-proliferative activity than gefitinib in GBM
tumor cell lines and BTSCs. To investigate our hypothesis, we used
isogenic cell lines: U87EGFR wild-type (wt) and U87EGFRvIII
(over-expressing EGFRvIII), U87MG (parental cell line) in addition to
T98G, a GBM cell line known to express high levels of EGFR and BTSCs
derived from patients newly diagnosed with GBM. BTSCs were cultured as
neurospheres in stem cell media supplemented with growth factors (EGF,
FGF), heparin and proliferation supplement. We examined the half maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of ZR2002 compared to gefitinib using MTT
proliferation assay. Our results show that all cell lines tested were
resistant to gefitinib when compared to ZR2002, which showed
sub-micromolar potency in all tested cell lines following a short 2 h
drug exposure. IC50s for T98G, U87-MG and U87-EGFRIII treated with ZR2002
were 0.019 M, 0.048 M and 0.073 M, respectively. We further investigated
the effect of ZR2002 in four different BTSC cell lines 48EF, OPK111,
OPK164 and OPK161 and showed that the IC50s were in a similar range 0.027
M, 0.014 M, 0.089 M and 0.019 M, respectively. While GBM cell lines and
BTSCs are highly resistant to gefitinib, they showed a greater
sensitivity to ZR2002 (IC50 is less than 0.1 M). These findings pave the
way for developing single molecules with dual therapeutic modalities as a
new strategy for GBM treatment. Additional pre-clinical studies are
ongoing to evaluate the ability of ZR2002 to cross the blood brain
barrier and its efficacy in an orthotopic tumor brain model. This
research is funded by the Canadian Cancer Society grant #70217.

