Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A tissue engineered model of Ewing's sarcoma


More than 90% of the deaths that occur in adolescents and young adults
(AYA) suffering from Ewing sarcoma (ES), the second most common bone
sarcoma, are a direct result of tumor metastasis from bone and growth
within the lung. Yet, little is known about the bone or lung
microenvironment and the critical role they play in promoting tumor
survival, growth, and differentiation. Current preclinical models poorly
reflect how ES behaves in patients and most rely upon 2D cell cultures
that place tumor cells on flat plastic containers or within animals.
Neither model adequately mimics human tumors and the resulting phenotypic
drift from their human counterparts can lead to misleading preclinical
results and drug candidates that seem promising in the lab but often
disappoint when advanced to the clinic.In an attempt to overcome this
notable challenge, our team of cancer biologists, bioengineers, and
clinicians pioneered a tissue-engineered ex vivo bone tumor niche that
better mimics the native behavior of malignant bone tumors. Briefly, this
synthetic osseus niche - fabricated from biologically inert 10 m
electrospun PCL fibers - forms a minature wafer capable of fostering
strong cell-matrix adhesion, in vivo-like expression of oncogenic protein
targets, and a physiological cell proliferation rate that is better
suited for evaluation of experimental cytotoxic drugs. Importantly, this
tissue engineered preclinical ES model provides a unique opportunity to
assess several of the most promising biologically targeted therapies,
including those directed toward the pathognomonic EWS-FLI chromosomal
translocation, mTOR, and IGF-1R (a critical drug target responsible for
malignant transformation of ES from MSCs and oncogene addiction).Given
the nascent convergence between the tissue engineering/regeneration and
cancer biology fields, the advantages and potential pitfalls of
tissue-engineered bone tumor models will be introduced and recent
findings discussed, including identification of cell/ECM interactions
that promote ES cell survival, maintain oncogenic proteomic signatures,
and preserve an in-vivo like response to conventional and biologically
targeted therapies. Unpublished work will be presented that highlights
the ability of flow perfusion bioreactors to more uniformly distribute
cells and nutrients throughout the ECM-saturated 3D scaffolds while
increasing clearance of waste byproducts.In conclusion, a tissue
engineered preclinical ES model allows scientists a unique opportunity to
modulate and control key interactions between tumor cells, their adjacent
microenvironment, and even heterotopic cells while simultaneously
monitoring the impact of these interactions on cancer cell behavior. At
the expense of reduced biological complexity, the more simplified ex vivo
system is expected to shed new light on druggable targets tangent to the
cells themselves, and in so doing, ultimately yield innovative therapies
able to cure ES patients.

