Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive molecular pathology analysis of small bowel
adenocarcinoma reveals novel targets with clinical utility


Small bowel accounts for only 0.5% of cancer cases in the US; a third of
which are adenocarcinomas. But incidence rates have been rising at a rate
of 2.4% per year over the last decade. Because of the rarity of this
cancer, little is known about its molecular pathology and there are no
molecular markers for diagnosis, predicting prognosis or therapeutic
intervention. The aim of this study was therefore to look into this
disease at a molecular level to better understand its biology and
identify biomarkers and potential points of therapeutic
intervention.Using a retrospective 28 patient matched normal-tumor cohort
next generation sequencing (NGS) was performed using a 50 gene cancer
hotspot panel, gene expression arrays were used to profile 29,000 RNA
transcripts and 450k CpG methylation arrays were used to carry out DNA
methylation analysis. We also looked at microsatellite instability (MSI),
HER2 and p53 expression.NGS identified novel mutations in IDH1, CDH1,
KIT, NRAS, FGFR2, FLT3, NPM1, PTEN, MET, AKT1, RET, NOTCH1 and ERBB4.
Previously known mutations such as high-frequency KRAS and TP53 and
low-frequency HER2 were also confirmed in our cohort. The average patient
had 2.6 mutations with eight patients having only a single mutation to
one having seven. Array data revealed 17% of CpGs and 5% of RNA
transcripts assayed to be differentially methylated and expressed
respectively (pSmall bowel accounts for only 0.5% of cancer cases in the
US; a third of which are adenocarcinomas. But incidence rates have been
rising at a rate of 2.4% per year over the last decade. Because of the
rarity of this cancer, little is known about its molecular pathology and
there are no molecular markers for diagnosis, predicting prognosis or
therapeutic intervention. The aim of this study was therefore to look
into this disease at a molecular level to better understand its biology
and identify biomarkers and potential points of therapeutic
intervention.Using a retrospective 28 patient matched normal-tumor cohort
next generation sequencing (NGS) was performed using a 50 gene cancer
hotspot panel, gene expression arrays were used to profile 29,000 RNA
transcripts and 450k CpG methylation arrays were used to carry out DNA
methylation analysis. We also looked at microsatellite instability (MSI),
HER2 and p53 expression.NGS identified novel mutations in IDH1, CDH1,
KIT, NRAS, FGFR2, FLT3, NPM1, PTEN, MET, AKT1, RET, NOTCH1 and ERBB4.
Previously known mutations such as high-frequency KRAS and TP53 and
low-frequency HER2 were also confirmed in our cohort. The average patient
had 2.6 mutations with eight patients having only a single mutation to
one having seven. Array data revealed 17% of CpGs and 5% of RNA
transcripts assayed to be differentially methylated and expressed
respectively (p<0.01). Gene expression and DNA methylation data was
merged to reveal 266 transcripts where DNA methylation was inversely
correlated with gene expression (Spearman Small bowel accounts for only
0.5% of cancer cases in the US; a third of which are adenocarcinomas. But
incidence rates have been rising at a rate of 2.4% per year over the last
decade. Because of the rarity of this cancer, little is known about its
molecular pathology and there are no molecular markers for diagnosis,
predicting prognosis or therapeutic intervention. The aim of this study
was therefore to look into this disease at a molecular level to better
understand its biology and identify biomarkers and potential points of
therapeutic intervention.Using a retrospective 28 patient matched
normal-tumor cohort next generation sequencing (NGS) was performed using
a 50 gene cancer hotspot panel, gene expression arrays were used to
profile 29,000 RNA transcripts and 450k CpG methylation arrays were used
to carry out DNA methylation analysis. We also looked at microsatellite
instability (MSI), HER2 and p53 expression.NGS identified novel mutations
in IDH1, CDH1, KIT, NRAS, FGFR2, FLT3, NPM1, PTEN, MET, AKT1, RET, NOTCH1
and ERBB4. Previously known mutations such as high-frequency KRAS and
TP53 and low-frequency HER2 were also confirmed in our cohort. The
average patient had 2.6 mutations with eight patients having only a
single mutation to one having seven. Array data revealed 17% of CpGs and
5% of RNA transcripts assayed to be differentially methylated and
expressed respectively (p<0.01). Gene expression and DNA methylation data
was merged to reveal 266 transcripts where DNA methylation was inversely
correlated with gene expression (Spearman < -0.5). Almost 90% of these
CpGs were found to be located inside gene bodies, the first exons and 5
and 3 UTRs. Almost 60% of the overall genome-wide changes in methylation
(hyper and hypo) also occurred inside the gene bodies, the first exons
and 5 and 3 UTRs. CHN2 was identified as one of the genes consistently
hypermethylated and downregulated in tumor compared to normal (Spearman
-0.71, pSmall bowel accounts for only 0.5% of cancer cases in the US; a
third of which are adenocarcinomas. But incidence rates have been rising
at a rate of 2.4% per year over the last decade. Because of the rarity of
this cancer, little is known about its molecular pathology and there are
no molecular markers for diagnosis, predicting prognosis or therapeutic
intervention. The aim of this study was therefore to look into this
disease at a molecular level to better understand its biology and
identify biomarkers and potential points of therapeutic
intervention.Using a retrospective 28 patient matched normal-tumor cohort
next generation sequencing (NGS) was performed using a 50 gene cancer
hotspot panel, gene expression arrays were used to profile 29,000 RNA
transcripts and 450k CpG methylation arrays were used to carry out DNA
methylation analysis. We also looked at microsatellite instability (MSI),
HER2 and p53 expression.NGS identified novel mutations in IDH1, CDH1,
KIT, NRAS, FGFR2, FLT3, NPM1, PTEN, MET, AKT1, RET, NOTCH1 and ERBB4.
Previously known mutations such as high-frequency KRAS and TP53 and
low-frequency HER2 were also confirmed in our cohort. The average patient
had 2.6 mutations with eight patients having only a single mutation to
one having seven. Array data revealed 17% of CpGs and 5% of RNA
transcripts assayed to be differentially methylated and expressed
respectively (p<0.01). Gene expression and DNA methylation data was
merged to reveal 266 transcripts where DNA methylation was inversely
correlated with gene expression (Spearman < -0.5). Almost 90% of these
CpGs were found to be located inside gene bodies, the first exons and 5
and 3 UTRs. Almost 60% of the overall genome-wide changes in methylation
(hyper and hypo) also occurred inside the gene bodies, the first exons
and 5 and 3 UTRs. CHN2 was identified as one of the genes consistently
hypermethylated and downregulated in tumor compared to normal (Spearman
-0.71, p<0.001). This trend was validated using immunohistochemistry and
pyrosequencing. Finally mutations in TP53 which were found in more than
half of the cohort (15/28) and Kazald1 hypomethylation were both were
indicative of poor survival (p = 0.0345, HR = 3.2 and p = 0.0079, HR =
4.9 respectively). Sanger sequencing was used to confirm TP53 mutations
and immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed protein overexpression in all
mutant cases. Six cases were positive for MSI and three for HER2
overexpression.This study has for the first time highlighted the extent
of molecular changes taking place in SBA. The clinical potential of TP53
mutations and Kazald1 hypomethylation as prognostic biomarkers and CHN2
as a diagnostic biomarker are focus areas for further research by our
group.

