Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational pharmacology approaches to explore the novel
mechanism of a pan-PIM kinase inhibitor, JP-11646, in acute myeloid
leukemia


Leukemia, an aggressive immature hematological malignancy, is the sixth
leading cause of cancer death in the U.S., with an overall cure rate of
only 25%. PIM kinases are serine/threonine kinases that regulate cell
cycle and survival. In hematological malignancies, PIM kinases are
overexpressed, constitutively active, and associated with drug
resistance. Thus, PIM kinases are novel therapeutic targets. JP-11646 is
a pan-PIM inhibitor that has shown antitumor activity in various tumor
types, with an increased potency against PIM2. In these studies, a
comparison of three pan-PIM inhibitors on cell proliferation and PIM
expression, along with the effect of JP-11646 on cellular signaling were
investigated in human acute leukemia (AML).An in vitro MTT assay was used
to determine the overall anti-proliferative effects of various pan-PIM
inhibitors in human AML (HEL, and MV(4;11)) cell lines. Cells were
exposed to various concentrations (0.001 to 100 M) of JP-11646, AZD1208
and LGB321. An Emax model was used to estimate the overall potency (IC50)
and maximal inhibition (Imax) of the three inhibitors (0.06 M, 0.20 M and
0.43 M and 89, 35 and 46 percent, respectively). It was determined that
JP_11646 is 3-100 times more potent than AZD1208 and LGB321. Following
inhibitor treatment (1, 2, 4, 6 and 24 hrs), PIM2 protein expression
decreases by 50% at 6 hrs following 0.1 M JP-11646; while both AZD1208
(0.45 M) and LGB321 (0.20 M) increase PIM2 protein expression by 1.5-fold
following 2-6 hours of treatment. In conjunction with PIM 2 protein
inhibition, real-time PCR results show that JP_11646 treatment results in
a time- and concentration-dependent decrease of PIM1, 2 and 3 mRNA. In
HEL cells, JP_11646 is more potent against PIM2, with PIM2 mRNA loss
occurring as early as 1-2 hours post treatment. To determine the
consequence of PIM inhibition via JP-11646, p-4EBP-1 and cleaved caspase
protein expression were examined. Following 24 hours of JP-11646
treatment, p-4EBP-1 protein decreases in a concentration-dependent
manner, suggesting the effect of JP-11646 on AML cell proliferation may
be due to a disruption in p-4EBP-1 function in translation. Similarly,
cleaved caspase increases and caspase 3 decreases following JP-11646
treatment, suggesting JP-11646 induces apoptosis. PE annexin V staining
with FACS analysis confirmed that cells treated with JP-11646 undergo
apoptotic or necrotic cell death in a time and concentration dependent
manner, which is a unique characteristic of JP-11646 versus other known
pan-PIM inhibitors.In summary, the novel PIM kinase inhibitor, JP-11646,
demonstrated more potent anti-leukemic activity than other pan-PIM kinase
inhibitors in human AML cell lines. The modulation of PIM2 kinase,
additional downstream targets, and the induction of apoptosis at nM
concentrations by JP-11646 suggests JP-11646 is a novel and unique
pan-PIM inhibitor.

