Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel actions of next-generation taxanes benefit advanced stages
of prostate cancer


Purpose: To improve the outcomes of patients with castrate resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC), there is an urgent need for more effective
therapies and approaches that individual specific treatments for patients
with CRPC. The current studies compared the novel taxane, cabazitaxel
with the previous generation docetaxel, and aimed to determine which
tumors are most likely to respond.Experimental design: Cabazitaxel (CBTX)
and docetaxel (DCTX) were compared via in vitro modeling to determine
molecular mechanism, biochemical and cell biological impact, and cell
proliferation, which was further assessed ex vivo in human tumor
explants. Isogenic pairs of RB knockdown and control cells were
interrogated in vitro, and in xenograft tumors for cabazitaxel
response.Results: The data herein show that i. CBTX exerts stronger
cytostatic and cytotoxic response compared to DCTX, especially in CRPC;
ii. CBTX induces aberrant mitosis, leading to pyknotic and multinucleated
cells; iii. taxanes do not act through the androgen receptor (AR); iv.
Gene expression profiling reveals distinct molecular actions for CBTX v.
tumors that have progressed to castration resistance via loss of RB show
enhanced sensitivity to CBTX.Conclusions: CBTX not only induces improved
cytostatic and cytotoxic effects, but also impacts distinct molecular
pathways, compared to DCTX, which could underlie its efficacy after DCTX
treatment has failed in CRPC patients. Finally, RB is identified as the
first potential biomarker that could define the therapeutic response to
taxanes in metastatic CRPC. This would suggest that loss of RB function
induces sensitization taxanes, which could benefit up to 50% of CRPC
cases.

