Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fine mapping of two GWAS at 9q22 and 14q13 associated with
differentiated thyroid cancer risk


Context: Incidence of differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC) varies
considerably between countries and ethnic groups. High incidence rates
have been reported in Pacific islands, especially in Melanesian women of
New Caledonia (NC). DTC was reported as the only cancer for which the
contribution of inherited genetic factors exceeds that of environmental
factors. Recent genome-wide associations studies (GWAS) have identified
several susceptibility loci, the most robust associations were reported
for SNPs in chromosomes 9q22 (rs965513 and rs186727) and 14q13 (rs942289
and rs116909734). It remains unclear whether these 4 SNPs represent
independent signals of association or if there are other independent
signals within each locus. We aimed to replicate the 4 previously
identified SNPs at 9q22 and 14q13 in a population of European descent and
in the high risk population of Melanesians in NC. We also sought to
determine if there are other SNPs with stronger association and if
multiple SNPs are independently associated to DTC within each
locus.Methods: We included subjects from 2 case-control studies,
conducted in Metropolitan France and in New Caledonia. We genotyped and
imputed 81 SNPs at 9q22 and 561 SNPs at 14q13 in 625 cases and 776
controls of European ancestry and 244 cases and 189 controls of
Melanesian ethnicity. We performed logistic regression using the
log-additive model and we conducted conditional analysis to identify
independent markers of DTC.Results: At locus 9q22, among Europeans, we
replicated the association of DTC with rs965513 (OR = 1.52, p = 5.9 10-6)
and rs1867277 (OR = 1.38, p = 2.5 10-4). No other SNP was significantly
associated with DTC after conditioning on rs965513. In Melanesians, ORs
for rs965513 and rs1867277 were similar to those observed in Europeans,
but no variant was significantly associated with DTC. At locus 14q13, we
replicated the SNPs rs944289 (OR = 0.41, p = 4.7 10-4) and rs116909374
(OR = 1.97, p = 3.3 10-3) in Europeans, and conditional analysis revealed
a third independent signal at rs999460. In Melanesians, we replicated the
association with rs944289 (OR = 0.74, p = 1.1 10-3) but not with
rs11699374. The most significant signal was observed for an independent
SNP rs1755774 (OR = 0.57, p = 1.6 10-5). This variant was also associated
with DTC in Europeans (OR = 0.70, p = 7.3 10-3). Interestingly, this
variant is located in a region containing an uncharacterized lincRNA,
which is abundantly expressed in thyroid tissue. Examination of the
observed associations of DTC with SNPs cannot account for the striking
difference in incidence rates between Europeans and
Melanesians.Conclusion: We confirmed the previously reported associations
of DTC with SNPs at locus 9q22 and 14q13. No additional other signal was
observed at locus 9q22. At locus 14q13, we identified new interesting
susceptibility SNPs in both ethnic groups. SNPs at 9q22 and 14q13 cannot
explain the very high incidence of DTC in Melanesians compared to
Europeans.

