Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A truncated Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1 protein protects
from pulmonary fibrosis mediated by irradiation in a murine model


Background: Fibrosis can develop as a late side effect of radiation
exposure in a variety of tissues, including lung and skin. Late radiation
injury and fibrosis are characterized by parenchymal cell depletion,
inflammation, senescence, fibroblast proliferation, and excessive
deposition of collagen. Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) is a
critical mediator of cellular senescence and fibrin stabilization, and
its expression is increased in experimental fibrosis models. We sought to
determine if inhibition of PAI-1 signaling with a recombinant truncated
protein (rPAI-123) would protect from the development of
radiation-induced lung injury.Methods: C57Bl/6 mice received
intraperitoneal injections of rPAI-123 (5.4 g/kg/day) or vehicle (PBS)
for 18 weeks beginning two days prior to radiation exposure. Cohorts of
mice treated with rPAI-123 or vehicle were exposed to thoracic
irradiation in 5 daily fractions of 6 Gy (RT), and followed for survival
(n = 8 per group) and tissue collection (n = 3 per each time point).
Histologic changes in irradiated lungs were evaluated by Masson-Trichrome
staining at 19 weeks after RT. Senescence was assessed with staining for
beta-galactosidase activity in lung tissue and primary pneumocytes. To
define the roles of rPAI-123 in the fibroproliferative response, cell
proliferation (MTT assay) and collagen deposition (Hydroxyproline assay)
were examined in a mouse fibroblast cell line in vitro.Results:
Administration of rPAI-123 increased C57Bl/6 mice survival from 37.5% to
62.5% at 19 weeks after radiation exposure. At 19 weeks after
irradiation, hydroxyproline content was markedly decreased in mice
received rPAI-123 compared to mice received vehicle (RT+rPAI-123:
56.210.79, RT+vehicle: 84.972.98, g/lung respectively, p = 0.001 between
RT+vehicle and RT+rPAI-123). C57Bl/6 mice exposed to RT+vehicle had dense
foci of subplueral fibrosis at 19 weeks, whereas the lungs of mice
exposed to RT+rPAI-123 were largely devoid of fibrotic foci. Cellular
senescence in response to radiation was significantly decreased by
rPAI-123 treatment in primary type2 pneumocyte culture (2-fold reduction
at 5 days after RT, p = 0.036), and in lung tissues (>2-fold reduction at
4, 8, and 16 weeks after RT, pBackground: Fibrosis can develop as a late
side effect of radiation exposure in a variety of tissues, including lung
and skin. Late radiation injury and fibrosis are characterized by
parenchymal cell depletion, inflammation, senescence, fibroblast
proliferation, and excessive deposition of collagen. Plasminogen
activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) is a critical mediator of cellular
senescence and fibrin stabilization, and its expression is increased in
experimental fibrosis models. We sought to determine if inhibition of
PAI-1 signaling with a recombinant truncated protein (rPAI-123) would
protect from the development of radiation-induced lung injury.Methods:
C57Bl/6 mice received intraperitoneal injections of rPAI-123 (5.4
g/kg/day) or vehicle (PBS) for 18 weeks beginning two days prior to
radiation exposure. Cohorts of mice treated with rPAI-123 or vehicle were
exposed to thoracic irradiation in 5 daily fractions of 6 Gy (RT), and
followed for survival (n = 8 per group) and tissue collection (n = 3 per
each time point). Histologic changes in irradiated lungs were evaluated
by Masson-Trichrome staining at 19 weeks after RT. Senescence was
assessed with staining for beta-galactosidase activity in lung tissue and
primary pneumocytes. To define the roles of rPAI-123 in the
fibroproliferative response, cell proliferation (MTT assay) and collagen
deposition (Hydroxyproline assay) were examined in a mouse fibroblast
cell line in vitro.Results: Administration of rPAI-123 increased C57Bl/6
mice survival from 37.5% to 62.5% at 19 weeks after radiation exposure.
At 19 weeks after irradiation, hydroxyproline content was markedly
decreased in mice received rPAI-123 compared to mice received vehicle
(RT+rPAI-123: 56.210.79, RT+vehicle: 84.972.98, g/lung respectively, p =
0.001 between RT+vehicle and RT+rPAI-123). C57Bl/6 mice exposed to
RT+vehicle had dense foci of subplueral fibrosis at 19 weeks, whereas the
lungs of mice exposed to RT+rPAI-123 were largely devoid of fibrotic
foci. Cellular senescence in response to radiation was significantly
decreased by rPAI-123 treatment in primary type2 pneumocyte culture
(2-fold reduction at 5 days after RT, p = 0.036), and in lung tissues
(>2-fold reduction at 4, 8, and 16 weeks after RT, p<0.001 at each time
point). Treatment of NIH-3T3 fibroblasts with rPAI-123 resulted in
decreased collagen production, but had no effect on
proliferation.Conclusions: These studies identify that rPAI-123 has a
novel protection mechanism against radiation-induced fibrosis in murine
lungs due to its ability to reduce senescence in type2 pneumocytes, and
the potential to be an effective therapy option for radiation induced
fibrosis.

