Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of a histone DNA demethylase on castration resistant
prostate cancer cell lines, a potential therapeutic application


INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES:Androgen receptor signaling is the key
driving force in prostate cancer progression, even in
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). SD70, a competitive
inhibitor of KDM4 class of histone demethylases, was demonstrated to have
significant inhibitory effect on AR transactivation function in LNCaP
cells and androgen-insensitive basal activity in CWR22Rv1. In-vitro
assessment of efficacy in CWR22Rv1 cells demonstrated cytotoxity at 5 M.
We aimed to demonstrate the efficacy of SD70 in CRPC cell lines,
determine its effect in conjunction with currently approved therapies,
and identify a useful biomarker for this novel drug.MATERIALS AND
METHODS:Using MTT viability assays, we first assessed SD70 dosing against
two CRPC lines (C42B and GRP), then against C42B drug-resistant strains
(abiratarone, enzalutamide, abi+enza, docetaxel). For the resistant
lines, cells were then treated with 1 M SD70 in combination with 10 M
abiratarone, 10 M enzalutamide or 1 nM docetaxel. In vivo drug study was
conducted with mouse xenograft models (3 million CWR22Rv1 cells via s.c.
injection) in athymic nude mice. When the tumor volume reached 100 mm3,
animals were randomly assigned to receive 10 mg/kg SD70 or vehicle via
i.p. injection daily. Tumor monitoring was continued until tumor burden
exceeded humane endpoint limits indicated by IACUC.RESULTS:SD70
demonstrated complete cytotoxic response at 5 M against C42B and GRP cell
lines; IC50 was 2.1 M and 2.9 M, respectively. All drug-resistant C42B
cell lines were responsive to SD70 treatment; IC50 ranged from 0.90-1.57
M. SD70 was found to be synergistic with abiratarone, enzalutamide, and
docetaxel against drug-resistant C42B and GRP cell lines. In the CWR22Rv1
mouse xenograft model, SD70-treated mice demonstrated significantly lower
tumor volume at the end of treatment period (SD70: 507.31203.72 mm3,
control: 2388.01543.58 mm3); no significant drug toxicity was observed.
Expression of AR surrogate markers (PSA, KLK2, TMPRSS2) were diminished
in C42B and enzalutamide-resistant C42B lines treated with SD70. No
changes in autophagy reporter LC-3 or activation of Akt was
observed.CONCLUSIONS:SD70 demonstrates promising cytotoxic efficacy
against CRPC cells lines in vitro, and appears to have a synergistic
effect with currently approved CRPC medications (docetaxel, enzalutamide,
and abiratarone) in drug-resistant CRPC lines. Initial in vivo trial
demonstrated excellent efficacy against CWR22Rv1 without significant
toxicity. Ongoing evaluation into identifying biomarkers will allow for
further evaluation of this promising new agent.

