Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FTY720-P is a potent inhibitor of class I histone deacetylases
that enhances histone acetylation, reactivates ER expression, and
increases hormonal therapeutic sensitivity of breast cancer


Hormonal therapies, including ovarian ablation, ER antagonists, and
aromatase inhibitors, are the standards of care for treatment of ER
positive breast cancer. However, development of resistance to hormone
therapies in advanced breast cancer is a major obstacle. Moreover,
estrogen receptor- (ER)-negative breast cancer is clinically aggressive
and does not respond to conventional estrogen targeted therapies.
Strategies that lead to re-expression of ER could sensitize breast
cancers to selective ER modulators. FTY720/Fingolimod, a sphingosine
analog, is an FDA-approved pro-drug for treatment of multiple sclerosis
that also has anticancer actions that are not yet well understood. We
have now found that FTY720 is phosphorylated in breast cancer cells by
nuclear sphingosine kinase 2 and accumulates there. Nuclear FTY720-P in
turn is a potent inhibitor of class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) that
enhances histone acetylations and gene expression independently of its
known effects on canonical signaling through sphingosine-1-phosphate
receptors. In ER negative human and murine breast cancer cells, FTY720
reactivated expression of silenced ER and sensitized them to tamoxifen.
Moreover, oral administration of clinically relevant doses of FTY720 to
mice bearing ER negative syngeneic breast tumors also re-expressed ER and
increased therapeutic sensitivity to tamoxifen in vivo more potently than
a known HDAC inhibitor. Our work suggests that FTY720 is a promising
strategy for effective treatment of conventional hormonal
therapy-resistant breast cancer and triple-negative breast cancer.
Supported by NIH grant RO1CA061774 and the Department of Defense BCRP
program award W81XWH-14-1-0086 (S. Spiegel).

