Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progression of paraproteinemia in HIV-positive versus HIV-negative
patients


BACKGROUND: Paraproteinemias occur in 1 to 3% of people over the age of
50 and progress to hematological malignancies (HM) at the rate of about
1% per year. In HIV+ patients a higher incidence of paraproteinemia has
been reported however the rate of progression to HM remains unclear. We
studied a large database comparing HIV+ and HIV- patients with
paraproteinemia for incidence of HM.METHODS: Patients tested for HIV who
also had a serum protein electrophoresis test (SPEP) performed between
January 1st 2001 and December 31st 2011 were identified using a medical
database at a large tertiary care center. SPEP+ patients were stratified
into distinct (D-SPEP) or faint/multiple/oligoclonal (F-SPEP) bands by an
independent laboratory technician. Demographics, coinfections and biopsy
data were reviewed.RESULTS: 181,851 patients underwent a HIV test and
10,293 were HIV+. Significantly greater number of HIV+ patients (1381 of
10,293) compared to HIV- (6512 of 171,588) were tested for paraprotein
(13.4% vs 3.8%, pBACKGROUND: Paraproteinemias occur in 1 to 3% of people
over the age of 50 and progress to hematological malignancies (HM) at the
rate of about 1% per year. In HIV+ patients a higher incidence of
paraproteinemia has been reported however the rate of progression to HM
remains unclear. We studied a large database comparing HIV+ and HIV-
patients with paraproteinemia for incidence of HM.METHODS: Patients
tested for HIV who also had a serum protein electrophoresis test (SPEP)
performed between January 1st 2001 and December 31st 2011 were identified
using a medical database at a large tertiary care center. SPEP+ patients
were stratified into distinct (D-SPEP) or faint/multiple/oligoclonal
(F-SPEP) bands by an independent laboratory technician. Demographics,
coinfections and biopsy data were reviewed.RESULTS: 181,851 patients
underwent a HIV test and 10,293 were HIV+. Significantly greater number
of HIV+ patients (1381 of 10,293) compared to HIV- (6512 of 171,588) were
tested for paraprotein (13.4% vs 3.8%, p<0.0001). Of those tested, the
prevalence of SPEP positivity was higher in HIV+ (266 of 1381) versus
HIV- (537 of 6512) (19.3% vs 8.2%, pBACKGROUND: Paraproteinemias occur in
1 to 3% of people over the age of 50 and progress to hematological
malignancies (HM) at the rate of about 1% per year. In HIV+ patients a
higher incidence of paraproteinemia has been reported however the rate of
progression to HM remains unclear. We studied a large database comparing
HIV+ and HIV- patients with paraproteinemia for incidence of HM.METHODS:
Patients tested for HIV who also had a serum protein electrophoresis test
(SPEP) performed between January 1st 2001 and December 31st 2011 were
identified using a medical database at a large tertiary care center.
SPEP+ patients were stratified into distinct (D-SPEP) or
faint/multiple/oligoclonal (F-SPEP) bands by an independent laboratory
technician. Demographics, coinfections and biopsy data were
reviewed.RESULTS: 181,851 patients underwent a HIV test and 10,293 were
HIV+. Significantly greater number of HIV+ patients (1381 of 10,293)
compared to HIV- (6512 of 171,588) were tested for paraprotein (13.4% vs
3.8%, p<0.0001). Of those tested, the prevalence of SPEP positivity was
higher in HIV+ (266 of 1381) versus HIV- (537 of 6512) (19.3% vs 8.2%,
p<0.0001). HIV+ SPEP+ patients were more likely to have F-SPEP and light
chain paraproteins compared to their HIV- counterparts. HIV+SPEP+
patients were significantly more likely to be tested and more likely to
be positive for hepatitis B and C co infections.HIV- SPEP+ patients were
more likely to have a D-SPEP and IgA and IgM subtype paraproteins than
HIV+ patients. HIV- patients also had a higher incidence of HM which
persisted when adjusted for year of SPEP and duration of follow up
(pBACKGROUND: Paraproteinemias occur in 1 to 3% of people over the age of
50 and progress to hematological malignancies (HM) at the rate of about
1% per year. In HIV+ patients a higher incidence of paraproteinemia has
been reported however the rate of progression to HM remains unclear. We
studied a large database comparing HIV+ and HIV- patients with
paraproteinemia for incidence of HM.METHODS: Patients tested for HIV who
also had a serum protein electrophoresis test (SPEP) performed between
January 1st 2001 and December 31st 2011 were identified using a medical
database at a large tertiary care center. SPEP+ patients were stratified
into distinct (D-SPEP) or faint/multiple/oligoclonal (F-SPEP) bands by an
independent laboratory technician. Demographics, coinfections and biopsy
data were reviewed.RESULTS: 181,851 patients underwent a HIV test and
10,293 were HIV+. Significantly greater number of HIV+ patients (1381 of
10,293) compared to HIV- (6512 of 171,588) were tested for paraprotein
(13.4% vs 3.8%, p<0.0001). Of those tested, the prevalence of SPEP
positivity was higher in HIV+ (266 of 1381) versus HIV- (537 of 6512)
(19.3% vs 8.2%, p<0.0001). HIV+ SPEP+ patients were more likely to have
F-SPEP and light chain paraproteins compared to their HIV- counterparts.
HIV+SPEP+ patients were significantly more likely to be tested and more
likely to be positive for hepatitis B and C co infections.HIV- SPEP+
patients were more likely to have a D-SPEP and IgA and IgM subtype
paraproteins than HIV+ patients. HIV- patients also had a higher
incidence of HM which persisted when adjusted for year of SPEP and
duration of follow up (p<0.0001).CONCLUSIONS: While a higher prevalence
of paraproteinemia was noted in the HIV+, HM incidence was lower in the
HIV+ compared to HIV-, suggesting that nonmalignant virus-dependent
proliferation may lead to paraproteinemia in some HIV+ cases.
Identification of HIV+SPEP+ cases with higher risk of HM will be
clinically relevant.Comparison of HIV+SPEP+ and HIV- SPEP+ patients

