Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of CRBN binding protein AGO2 plays important roles for
myeloma cell growth


Immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) are therapeutically active compounds that
bind to the E3 ubiquitin ligase substrate recruiter cereblon (CRBN) and
induce many cellular responses, including cytotoxicity. We had found that
the expression of CRBN in multiple myeloma (MM) cells provided the basis
for their responses to IMiDs. In this report, we have identified
argonaute 2 (AGO2) as a new member of CRBN-downstream binding protein and
found that: 1) the steady-state levels of CRBN in IMiD-sensitive cells
are significantly higher than in IMiD-resistant cells; 2) the
steady-state levels of AGO2 in IMiD-sensitive cells are significantly
less compared to IMiD-resistant cells, suggesting that CRBN plays a role
in regulating AGO2. AGO2 is a component of microRNA (miRNA)-induced
silencing complexes and plays an important role in miRNA maturation and
function. The matured miRNAs are considered as key regulators of almost
all cellular pathways. Treatment of IMiD-sensitive MM cells with
lenalidomide, an IMiD, significantly increased CRBN, decreased both AGO2
and miRNAs and inhibited cell growth. In contrast, although treatment of
IMiD-resistant MM cells with lenalidomide moderately increased CRBN and
decreased both AGO2 and miRNAs, this treatment did not significantly
inhibit cell growth. However, silencing of AGO2 with small hairpin RNA
significantly decreased both AGO2 and miRNAs and inhibited cell growth
regardless of whether the cells are sensitive or resistant to IMiDs.
Therefore, AGO2 could be considered as a new drug target for overcoming
IMiDs resistance in MM cells.

