Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Hdj2 protein in metastatic progression of experimental
intracranial glioma


Glioblastoma is one of the most malignant cancer types with median
survival of 15 months regardless of the application of combined radio-
and chemotherapy. Expression of Hdj2 negatively correlates with the
increase of tumor aggressiveness. For assessment of Hdj2 role in tumor
progression, invasiveness and metastasis formation in gliomas we
developed three C6-based cell lines with Hdj2 and related proteins
knock-down: C6 shHsp70, C6 shHdj1 and C6 shHdj2 itself. Following
intracranial injection of the modified tumor cells the animals survival
was estimated. As compared to control C6 (25.43.9 days) and C6 shHdj1
(25.53.8) we observed a nearly 1.5-fold decrease in survival in C6 shHdj2
(16.83.5 days) (PGlioblastoma is one of the most malignant cancer types
with median survival of 15 months regardless of the application of
combined radio- and chemotherapy. Expression of Hdj2 negatively
correlates with the increase of tumor aggressiveness. For assessment of
Hdj2 role in tumor progression, invasiveness and metastasis formation in
gliomas we developed three C6-based cell lines with Hdj2 and related
proteins knock-down: C6 shHsp70, C6 shHdj1 and C6 shHdj2 itself.
Following intracranial injection of the modified tumor cells the animals
survival was estimated. As compared to control C6 (25.43.9 days) and C6
shHdj1 (25.53.8) we observed a nearly 1.5-fold decrease in survival in C6
shHdj2 (16.83.5 days) (P<0.05). On the contrary, in C6 shHsp70 group the
survival increased up to 42.512.0 days (the increase is completely
explainable by the slower growth rate of the culture). Subsequent MR
imaging and histological analysis of the tumors demonstrated elevated
invasiveness and metastatic activity in C6 shHdj2 group in comparison to
C6 shHsp70, C6 shHdj1 and control C6. High migration activity and the
ability of detached C6 shHdj2 cells to settle on the substrate was proved
in wound-healing assay, colony forming assay and calcium-dependent cell
aggregation assay. Immunofluorescence analyses showed loss of
membrane-expressed N-cadherin and loss of intercellular contacts mediated
by N-cadherin in C6 shHdj2 cells in comparison to other considered cell
lines. Actin staining with rhodamine-falloidin revealed highly abundant
leading edges in C6 shHdj2 culture.Decrease of Hdj2 expression in gliomas
has proved to be of high importance in tumor progression and formation of
metastasis.

