Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Furin activity: A driver of rhabdomyosarcoma progression


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in
children. The prognosis and survival rate is often very poor and
therefore new therapy approaches are required. Thus, we focus on 1)
employing RMS-specific peptides for targeted delivery of
chemotherapeutics to the tumor site and 2) identifying novel therapeutic
targets. In a previous study we discovered that RMS-homing peptides bind
preferably to the proprotein convertase furin. Initial investigations
confirmed a high expression of furin throughout different pediatric soft
tissue sarcoma types and hinted that furin promotes the tumorigenic
phenotype of RMS cells in vitro as well as in corresponding xenografts in
vivo. Here we present a novel approach of tetracycline-induced
shRNA-based silencing of furin in vitro and in vivo in order to
investigate in depth the role of furin in RMS progression. Furin
depletion was confirmed at mRNA, protein and activity level and led to
impaired maturation furin substrates insulin like growth factor 1
receptor (IGF1R) and transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-1). We found
that loss of furin activity suppresses the malignant phenotype of Rh30
cells by decreasing proliferation and affecting formation of colonies.
Furthermore, we observed increased caspase 3/7 activity and enrichment of
nucleosomes in the cytoplasm upon furin depletion, thus hinting
initiation of apoptotic processes. Induction of furin silencing in RMS
xenografts in NOD/SCID mice delayed tumour growth, indicating a crucial
role of furin in early phases of tumour growth. Taken together, our data
underscore the importance of furin for RMS progression and therefore
targeting the activity of furin represents a promising tool for treatment
of RMS.

