Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of glioma presence during radiotherapy on tissue damage


Animal models have been used to quantify the genomic and functional
changes post-radiotherapy in brain tissue. However, in these models the
effects of tumor presence during radiotherapy is not taken into account.
We have recently measured significant genomic changes in the rat brain
tissue that was occupied by the tumor post-radiotherapy compared to
normal irradiated tissue. In our current work we are characterizing the
long term functional changes caused by the presence of the tumor during
radiotherapy.Sprague Dawley male rats (7wks) were divided between three
experimental groups: Sham implant, RT+sham implant, and RT+Tumor (C6-GFP
tumor implant glioma). Hypofractionated irradiation (8-6Gy/day for 5
days) was localized to a 1cm strip of the cranium starting 5 days post
implant, which resulted in a complete regression of the tumor and
prolonged survival. The former tumor area was imaged 65 days post implant
using a 9.4T Biospec MRI scanner (Bruker) with a 20cm bore using a
quadrature rat brain array. 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS)
was performed in the former tumor/implant region using a STEAM sequence
with the following parameters: TR = 2s/TE = 2.22ms/ # of averages = 512/
voxel size 56mm3. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was performed using a
spin echo EPI sequence with a TR = 500ms, TE = 33.2ms, 2 repetitions,
slice thickness = 12.8mm, b value = 800 s/mm2, 30 of directions, matrix
size 12825616 giving a spatial resolution of 150150800mm. 1H MRS data was
analyzed using LC Model and DTI was analyzed using Medinria. Intravital
microscopy was also used to quantify blood brain-barrier (BBB)
permeability and leukocyte activity.1H-MRS revealed that both RT+sham
implant and RT+C6-GFP tumor groups had a significant reduction in taurine
levels (p Animal models have been used to quantify the genomic and
functional changes post-radiotherapy in brain tissue. However, in these
models the effects of tumor presence during radiotherapy is not taken
into account. We have recently measured significant genomic changes in
the rat brain tissue that was occupied by the tumor post-radiotherapy
compared to normal irradiated tissue. In our current work we are
characterizing the long term functional changes caused by the presence of
the tumor during radiotherapy.Sprague Dawley male rats (7wks) were
divided between three experimental groups: Sham implant, RT+sham implant,
and RT+Tumor (C6-GFP tumor implant glioma). Hypofractionated irradiation
(8-6Gy/day for 5 days) was localized to a 1cm strip of the cranium
starting 5 days post implant, which resulted in a complete regression of
the tumor and prolonged survival. The former tumor area was imaged 65
days post implant using a 9.4T Biospec MRI scanner (Bruker) with a 20cm
bore using a quadrature rat brain array. 1H magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (1H-MRS) was performed in the former tumor/implant region
using a STEAM sequence with the following parameters: TR = 2s/TE =
2.22ms/ # of averages = 512/ voxel size 56mm3. Diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) was performed using a spin echo EPI sequence with a TR = 500ms, TE
= 33.2ms, 2 repetitions, slice thickness = 12.8mm, b value = 800 s/mm2,
30 of directions, matrix size 12825616 giving a spatial resolution of
150150800mm. 1H MRS data was analyzed using LC Model and DTI was analyzed
using Medinria. Intravital microscopy was also used to quantify blood
brain-barrier (BBB) permeability and leukocyte activity.1H-MRS revealed
that both RT+sham implant and RT+C6-GFP tumor groups had a significant
reduction in taurine levels (p <0.04) in the former tumor/implant area.
However, the RT+C6-GFP tumor group had a significant increase in GABA
levels (p = 0.02), which may indicate an effect on synaptic
neurotransmission. Interestingly, myo-inositol levels ,which is
associated with RT-induced brain damage, did not decrease significantly
in either RT+sham implant or RT+tumor groups (p = 0.056 and p = 0.061,
respectively). Fractional anisotropy (FA), which measures neuronal fiber
density showed no significant changes when comparing RT+sham implant and
RT+Tumor to sham. Using intravital imaging we also measured a significant
increase in BBB permeability (pAnimal models have been used to quantify
the genomic and functional changes post-radiotherapy in brain tissue.
However, in these models the effects of tumor presence during
radiotherapy is not taken into account. We have recently measured
significant genomic changes in the rat brain tissue that was occupied by
the tumor post-radiotherapy compared to normal irradiated tissue. In our
current work we are characterizing the long term functional changes
caused by the presence of the tumor during radiotherapy.Sprague Dawley
male rats (7wks) were divided between three experimental groups: Sham
implant, RT+sham implant, and RT+Tumor (C6-GFP tumor implant glioma).
Hypofractionated irradiation (8-6Gy/day for 5 days) was localized to a
1cm strip of the cranium starting 5 days post implant, which resulted in
a complete regression of the tumor and prolonged survival. The former
tumor area was imaged 65 days post implant using a 9.4T Biospec MRI
scanner (Bruker) with a 20cm bore using a quadrature rat brain array. 1H
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS) was performed in the former
tumor/implant region using a STEAM sequence with the following
parameters: TR = 2s/TE = 2.22ms/ # of averages = 512/ voxel size 56mm3.
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was performed using a spin echo EPI
sequence with a TR = 500ms, TE = 33.2ms, 2 repetitions, slice thickness =
12.8mm, b value = 800 s/mm2, 30 of directions, matrix size 12825616
giving a spatial resolution of 150150800mm. 1H MRS data was analyzed
using LC Model and DTI was analyzed using Medinria. Intravital microscopy
was also used to quantify blood brain-barrier (BBB) permeability and
leukocyte activity.1H-MRS revealed that both RT+sham implant and
RT+C6-GFP tumor groups had a significant reduction in taurine levels (p
<0.04) in the former tumor/implant area. However, the RT+C6-GFP tumor
group had a significant increase in GABA levels (p = 0.02), which may
indicate an effect on synaptic neurotransmission. Interestingly,
myo-inositol levels ,which is associated with RT-induced brain damage,
did not decrease significantly in either RT+sham implant or RT+tumor
groups (p = 0.056 and p = 0.061, respectively). Fractional anisotropy
(FA), which measures neuronal fiber density showed no significant changes
when comparing RT+sham implant and RT+Tumor to sham. Using intravital
imaging we also measured a significant increase in BBB permeability
(p<0.05) in the RT+tumor implant compared to sham and an elevated level
of leukocyte-endothelial adhesion.In conclusion, using our tumor implant
model to study the effect of radiation alone versus radiation combined
with the presence of tumor, we have measured several functional changes
post-radiotherapy. Our results indicate that radiation might be the most
significant influence on neuronal fiber disruption and damage while tumor
presence might play an important role in disrupting synaptic transmission
as well as exasperating the inflammatory side effects of radiation.

