Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Levels of Fibroblast Growth Factor 21 (FGF21) in serum as
diagnostic biomarker in patients with breast cancer


Epidemiological studies have suggested a close link between obesity and
breast cancer. There is an immediate need to investigate the potential
pathways linking obesity and breast cancer to have an early diagnosis in
patients and optimize the chance of cure. FGF21 is a regulator of local
and systemic metabolic homeostasis and its expression is induced in
response to diverse physiological or pathological stressors. High serum
levels of FGF21 were found in obese individuals, subjects with metabolic
syndrome, type 2 diabetes mellitus and coronary heart disease. Up to
date, the clinical implication of FGF21 in cancer was not elucidated. Our
aim was to study the role of serum FGF21 as a diagnostic biomarker of
breast cancer. The serum levels of FGF21 in 45 breast cancer women
patients (median age 59, range 32-88 years) and 51 age-matched healthy
controls were evaluated using a quantitative ELISA test (R&D Systems,
Inc.). Patients samples [Stage (S) SI: 17; SII: 17; SIII: 6; ND: 5] were
obtained before surgery, without any previous treatment. We included
patients with carcinoma in situ (n = 2), invasive ductal (n = 31) and
lobular (n = 8), special carcinoma (n = 2), ND: 2. We observed that
breast cancer patients showed significantly elevated values of serum
FGF21 (median 224.55 pg/ml, range 24.15-776.19) respect to the levels
observed in healthy controls (76.86, 0.00-425.60) (KW and MW,
pEpidemiological studies have suggested a close link between obesity and
breast cancer. There is an immediate need to investigate the potential
pathways linking obesity and breast cancer to have an early diagnosis in
patients and optimize the chance of cure. FGF21 is a regulator of local
and systemic metabolic homeostasis and its expression is induced in
response to diverse physiological or pathological stressors. High serum
levels of FGF21 were found in obese individuals, subjects with metabolic
syndrome, type 2 diabetes mellitus and coronary heart disease. Up to
date, the clinical implication of FGF21 in cancer was not elucidated. Our
aim was to study the role of serum FGF21 as a diagnostic biomarker of
breast cancer. The serum levels of FGF21 in 45 breast cancer women
patients (median age 59, range 32-88 years) and 51 age-matched healthy
controls were evaluated using a quantitative ELISA test (R&D Systems,
Inc.). Patients samples [Stage (S) SI: 17; SII: 17; SIII: 6; ND: 5] were
obtained before surgery, without any previous treatment. We included
patients with carcinoma in situ (n = 2), invasive ductal (n = 31) and
lobular (n = 8), special carcinoma (n = 2), ND: 2. We observed that
breast cancer patients showed significantly elevated values of serum
FGF21 (median 224.55 pg/ml, range 24.15-776.19) respect to the levels
observed in healthy controls (76.86, 0.00-425.60) (KW and MW, p<0.0001).
On the basis of the optimal cut-off point of 76.86 pg/ml serum FGF21,
37/45 breast cancer patients showed higher levels of FGF21 versus 26/51
healthy controls. The assay in our population exhibited a sensitivity of
95% and a specificity of 50%. Interestingly, we observed that serum FGF21
significantly increased since the early-stages of the disease. On the
other hand, we didn't find any significant associations between the serum
FGF21 levels and the clinic pathological variables relevant in breast
cancer nor overall survival. We did not observe a significant association
between the circulating lipid profile and the serum FGF21 levels
(Spearman, NS). Our data showed a tendency that suggests that FGF21 is
associated with the Disease Free Survival. Moreover, a second population
of clear cell renal cell cancer (ccRCC) was included, taking into account
that ccRCC is considered a cell metabolic disease associated with
obesity. We observed that ccRCC patients (n = 98) showed significantly
elevated values of serum FGF21 (median: 211.18 pg/ml, range 28.55-222.88)
respect to the levels observed in healthy controls (MW, pEpidemiological
studies have suggested a close link between obesity and breast cancer.
There is an immediate need to investigate the potential pathways linking
obesity and breast cancer to have an early diagnosis in patients and
optimize the chance of cure. FGF21 is a regulator of local and systemic
metabolic homeostasis and its expression is induced in response to
diverse physiological or pathological stressors. High serum levels of
FGF21 were found in obese individuals, subjects with metabolic syndrome,
type 2 diabetes mellitus and coronary heart disease. Up to date, the
clinical implication of FGF21 in cancer was not elucidated. Our aim was
to study the role of serum FGF21 as a diagnostic biomarker of breast
cancer. The serum levels of FGF21 in 45 breast cancer women patients
(median age 59, range 32-88 years) and 51 age-matched healthy controls
were evaluated using a quantitative ELISA test (R&D Systems, Inc.).
Patients samples [Stage (S) SI: 17; SII: 17; SIII: 6; ND: 5] were
obtained before surgery, without any previous treatment. We included
patients with carcinoma in situ (n = 2), invasive ductal (n = 31) and
lobular (n = 8), special carcinoma (n = 2), ND: 2. We observed that
breast cancer patients showed significantly elevated values of serum
FGF21 (median 224.55 pg/ml, range 24.15-776.19) respect to the levels
observed in healthy controls (76.86, 0.00-425.60) (KW and MW, p<0.0001).
On the basis of the optimal cut-off point of 76.86 pg/ml serum FGF21,
37/45 breast cancer patients showed higher levels of FGF21 versus 26/51
healthy controls. The assay in our population exhibited a sensitivity of
95% and a specificity of 50%. Interestingly, we observed that serum FGF21
significantly increased since the early-stages of the disease. On the
other hand, we didn't find any significant associations between the serum
FGF21 levels and the clinic pathological variables relevant in breast
cancer nor overall survival. We did not observe a significant association
between the circulating lipid profile and the serum FGF21 levels
(Spearman, NS). Our data showed a tendency that suggests that FGF21 is
associated with the Disease Free Survival. Moreover, a second population
of clear cell renal cell cancer (ccRCC) was included, taking into account
that ccRCC is considered a cell metabolic disease associated with
obesity. We observed that ccRCC patients (n = 98) showed significantly
elevated values of serum FGF21 (median: 211.18 pg/ml, range 28.55-222.88)
respect to the levels observed in healthy controls (MW, p<0.01). No
difference was observed between serum FGF21 levels in ccCRR and breast
cancer populations. We conclude that serum FGF21 has a potential use as a
high sensitive diagnostic biomarker for early detection of breast cancer
and ccRCC. This fact is highly relevant due to the lack of diagnostic
biomarkers for these diseases and could significantly improve the overall
survival rate of these cancer patients.

