Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-grade serous ovarian cancer subtypes are similar across
diverse populations


The most common and lethal type of invasive epithelial ovarian cancer is
high grade serous (HGSC). Three to four gene expression-based HGSC
subtypes have been identified in prior studies. In contrast to most
previous studies, which have assessed the performance of survival
classifiers in validation sets, we sought to determine the degree of
similarity of gene expression patterns in subtypes between populations
using systematic unsupervised clustering within populations.We analyzed
publically-available mRNA expression data from studies with >200 HGSC
tumors: The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, US, n = 519, Affymetrix HT U133a),
Tothill et al. (GSE9891, Australia, n = 242, Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0)
and Yoshihara et al. (GSE32062, Japan, n = 258, Agilent G4112a). We
restricted analyses to the 12,249 genes shared across all datasets and
selected from these the union of the 1,500 most variant genes per
population (2,824). Using these datasets, we performed k-means clustering
within each population for k = 3 and k = 4. We compared each cluster to
all other clusters using Significance Analysis of Microarrays, which
outputs an F score for all 12,249 genes, measuring cluster-specific
differential expression. We then calculated the correlation of the
resulting F score vectors across populations and within populations
across both numbers of centroids (k = 3 or k = 4). We identified
analogous clusters by high F score correlations and determined each
cluster's similarity to the TCGA subtypes based on cluster-specific
differentially expressed genes.We observed high concordance of gene
expression patterns for clusters across populations and across k-means
runs, suggesting that analogous clusters exist in most analyses. For k =
3, F score correlations across populations for clusters 1, 2 and 3,
respectively, ranged between 0.77-0.85, 0.80-0.90, and 0.66-0.72. For k =
4, F score correlations for clusters 1-4 were, respectively: 0.76-0.85,
0.82-0.85, 0.65-0.78, and 0.52-0.78. Across k = 3 and k = 4, correlations
for cluster 1 within TCGA, Tothill, and Yoshihara were 0.99, 1.00 and
1.00, and correlations for cluster 2 were 0.96, 0.98, and 0.95,
respectively. Correlations for cluster 3 were less strong: 0.56, 0.88,
and 0.60, respectively. For k = 4, cluster 4 was composed mainly of
samples that belonged to cluster 3 for k = 3; 88% for TCGA, 54% for
Tothill, and 95% for Yoshihara. When compared to TCGA subtypes, cluster 1
corresponded most strongly to mesenchymal, cluster 2 to proliferative,
cluster 3 to differentiated, and cluster 4 to immunoreactive.Our
observation of highly correlated gene expression patterns between
clusters across populations, across platforms, and across the number of
centroids provides strong evidence that at least three biological HGSC
subtypes exist. The mesenchymal-like and proliferative-like subtypes are
particularly consistent across populations, and could be uniquely
targeted for treatment.

