Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of iodine uptake by SENP2 in thyroid cancer


Background: About 1020% of thyroid cancer patients does not respond to
radioactive iodine(RAI) therapy, since the expression or membrane
trafficking of sodium iodine symporter(NIS) was ameliorated. We
investigated whether iodine uptake and expression of NIS were regulated
by the balance of SUMOylation in thyroid cancer.Methods: We analyzed the
expression of NIS mRNA using fresh frozen tissues of papillary thyroid
cancer. After overexpression of desumoylating enzyme SENP2 in human
anaplastic thyroid cancer cell line (FRO) and silencing SENP2 in human
NIS-overexpressed HeLa cell line (HeLa-hNIS), we evaluated the expression
of NIS mRNA and iodine uptake. We selected 30 patients of different
expression level of SENP2 (low and normal SENP2) and constructed tissue
microarray for immunohistochemistry stain. And the patients
clinico-pathologic features were reviewed using medical records.Results:
Twenty six percent of papillary thyroid cancer tissue showed reduced
expression of SENP2 and NIS mRNA. Silencing SENP2 in HeLa-hNIS, NIS mRNA
and iodine uptake was reduced. By co-immunoprecipitation, the interaction
between SUMO2/3 and C/EBP was detected. After overexpression of SENP2,
NIS mRNA and iodine uptake was restored. By comparison of response of RAI
among two groups, reduction of serum thyroglobulin level after RAI was
blunted in the group of low SENP2, compared to that in the group of
normal SENP2.Conclusion: Overexpression of SENP2 can induce NIS
expression and iodine uptake. This may be a novel therapeutic target for
RAI-refractory thyroid cancer patients.

