Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 3D tissue culture-based utra-high content screening platform
that uses phenotypic profiling of cancer tissues to identify selective
inhibitors of receptor tyrosine kinases


3D tissue cultures provide a more physiologically relevant context for
the screening of compounds, compared to 2D cell cultures. Cells cultured
in 3D hydrogels also show complex phenotypes, increasing the scope for
phenotypic profiling.Here we describe a high-content screening platform
that uses human micro-tissues cultured in 3D in standard 384 well assay
plates to study the activity of biologically active molecules. Image
analysis tools were developed to process 3D image data to measure 854
phenotype-derived parameters. Multiparametric analysis was used to
evaluate the effect of compounds on tissue morphology.We applied this
screening platform to measure the activity and selectivity of inhibitors
of the c-Met and EGF receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinases in 3D cultured
prostate carcinoma cells. c-Met and EGFR activity was quantified based on
the invasive phenotypic profiles induced by their respective ligands, HGF
and EGF, which were added in parallel assays. c-Met and EGFR inhibitors
generally showed the expected inhibitory profile equivalent to that
obtained in the absence of cognate ligand. However, one phase-III c-Met
inhibitor, displayed an unexpected phenotypic profile characterised by
potent inhibition of tumour cell invasion and off-target effects
consistent with a previously reported polypharmacology of this compound.
The screening method was applied to a novel collection of 70 bi-specific
compounds designed to target both c-Met and EGFR. Compounds were
identified that induced phenotypic profiles indicative of selective
inhibition of either c-Met, EGFR or both targets.In conclusion, this
poster describes a fully scalable high-content screening platform that
uses phenotypic profiling to evaluate receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor
selectivity and activity in a physiologically relevant setting.

