Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new multiple feature approach for rapid and highly accurate
somatic structural variation discovery from whole cancer genome sequencing


We present SWAN, a statistical framework with implemented software
package for accurate detection of genomic structural variants in
next-generation sequencing (NGS) data from cancer. SWAN is designed to
sensitively detect submicroscopic and lesser size genome structural
variants that could possibly present at low allele frequency in the
sample as may be the case in clonal subpopulations of a primary tumor.
The likelihood ratio scan statistics module of SWAN collectively
quantifies evidence from read-pair, hang-reads based on Marked Poisson
Process models while the softclipping module additionally integrates the
evidence from remapped soft-clipped reads. Using a spike-in dataset, we
compared SWAN against established structural variant callers in
recovering simulated homozygous and heterogeneous variants of various
sizes and types. SWAN maintained high accuracy, high precision and low
false positives across this broad spectrum and outperformed all the other
callers. In additional benchmark with golden standard real data from
sample NA12878, SWAN again showed the best-balanced accuracy among all
callers and was 30% more sensitivity in detecting validated deletions
than the next runner-up caller LUMPY in 50x coverage. Even at 5x
coverage, SWAN was able to find 40% of the validated deletions while
LUMPY did less than 20%. As an application to whole cancer genome
sequencing, we analyzed a matched sequenced colorectal adenocarcinoma
sample and found 39 somatic deletions, insertions and duplications, some
of which could potentially drive the cancer progression. SWAN is quite
efficient in memory utilization and speed, and can be used for
large-scale genome-wide structural variant genotyping and discovery based
on NGS data.

