Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic profiling identifies PTK2/FAK as a targetable marker of
radioresistance in head and neck cancer


One of the primary treatments for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) is radiotherapy. Despite decades of study, few if any targetable
biomarkers for resistance to this modality. To systematically evaluate
resistance to radiotherapy in HNSCC, we evaluated 50 HNSCC cell lines
using reverse phase protein array (RPPA). Utilizing this method we
identified 11 protein markers with altered expression in radioresistant
HNSCC cell lines (FDR 1%), including PTK2/FAK. Both PTK2/Fak gene
expression and copy number were highly correlated to PTK2/Fak protein
expression and both were associated with radioresistance in these cell
lines. Additionally, in clinical samples from the TCGA, PTK2/Fak copy
number was highly associated with gene expression, with high expression
levels in HNSCC tumors. To validate the association between PTK2/Fak and
clinical radioresistance in HNSCC, we examined PTK2/FAK copy number in
two separate cohorts of HNSCC patients treated uniformly with
radiotherapy (n = 39 and n = 44). In both cohorts, PTK2/Fak amplification
was associated with treatment failure following radiotherapy (p = 0.04
and p = 0.03 respectively and p = 0.004 for the combined population).
Additionally, in a separate cohort of HNSCC patients treated with
radiotherapy, high levels of PTK2/Fak gene expression were associated
with failure following radiotherapy (p = 0.02). Additionally, in vitro
pharmacologic inhibition of PTK2/FAK function led to radiosensitization
in multiple HNSCC cell lines, primarily via induction of G2/M arrest,
with minimal apoptosis observed. Taken together, these data identify a
validated, targetable biomarker of radioresistance in HNSCC.

