Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Latent membrane protein 1 N-C interaction of EBV facilitates
(nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells
transcriptional activity


Background: Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is known
to be involved in the carcinogenesis of numerous cancers, including
nasopharyngeal carcinoma and lymphoma. The C-terminus of LMP1 can recruit
a spectrum of host cell cytosolic signaling molecules to exert its
effects on downstream pathways. However, the function of the cytosolic
N-terminus of LMP1 is not clear.Methods: Partial deletion or point
mutation of the N-terminus of LMP1 were made.Results: Sequence analysis
showed that not only were the lengths of LMP1 N- and C-termini different,
so too were their distributions of charged amino acid side chains, with
negatively charged amino acids being abundant in the C-terminus and
positively charged amino acids dominating in the N-terminus. We found
that deletion or mutation of N-terminal positively charged amino acids
weakened the effects of LMP1 on nuclear factor NF-B transcriptional
activity. Furthermore, co-expressing a short N-terminal peptide of LMP1
enhanced the effect of full-length LMP1 on NF-B transcriptional activity.
We further demonstrated that the LMP1 N- and C-termini interact, which
facilitated downstream signal transduction. Mutation of N-termial
positively charged side chain amino acid could weaken LMP1 effect on cell
motility.Conclusion: LMP1 N- and C-termini could interact and facilitate
NF-B transcriptional activity and cell motility.

