Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the p53 target Wig-1 in senescence and cancer


The wild type p53-induced gene 1, Wig-1 (also known as Zmat3 or PAG608)
binds to AU-rich elements in mRNAs and thereby regulates important tumor
associated factors including p53, FAS, and N-Myc.Focusing on normal human
diploid fibroblasts (HDF), we are now exploring the role of Wig-1 in
senescence. SiRNA-mediated Wig-1 depletion increases senescence markers
such as Beta-galactosidase staining, H3K9me3, H4K20me3, and p21. Also,
Wig-1 is spontaneously downregulated in cells undergoing replicative
senescence.The trimethylation of lysine 9 on histone 3 (H3K9me3) is an
established marker of cellular senescence and increases upon
siRNA-mediated Wig-1 knockdown in HDF cells. It is also increased in late
passage (senescent) fibroblasts that express low Wig-1 levels.Our
RNA-immunoprecipitation sequencing (RIP-seq) data of tumor cells shows
that Wig-1 binds histone-modifying enzymes SUV39H2 (which trimethylates
H3K9), and subunits of PP1 (protein phosphatase 1, which dephosphorylates
H3T10). These mRNAs have AU-rich elements in the 3UTR. Importantly, we
have observed that both SUV39H2 and its corresponding methylation
(H3K9me3) is increased upon Wig-1 silencing.In a cohort of 350 lung
cancer patients, we found Wig-1 gene amplification in a large portion of
squamous cell carcinomas, whereas in lung adenocarcinomas the Wig-1 gene
was unchanged. Interestingly, strong Wig-1 staining in this cohort
correlates to worse prognosis.We think Wig-1 attenuates senescence via
downregulating important senescence markers in both tumor and normal
cells. Evidence point to Wig-1 playing an inhibitory role on the mRNAs of
histone modifying enzymes, thereby acting on well established senescence
markers of gene expression and chromatin regulation.

