Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Podophyllotoxin acetate (PA) enhancing -ionizing radiation-induced
apoptosis via the ROS/p38/caspase pathway


To develop a new radiosensitizer candidate capable of increasing the
efficiency of radiotherapy and to investigate the underlying molecular
mechanisms in vitro and in vivo. To develop a new radiosensitizer against
non-small cell lung cancer cells, we screened a natural product library
for growth-inhibitory compounds. Podophyllotoxin acetate (PA) was found
to be cytotoxic toward NCI-H460 cells, and its IC50 value was determined.
The radiosensitizer effects of PA were tested at its IC50 value in
clonogenic and cell-counting assays. The intracellular mechanism
underlying this effect was determined by immunoblotting and by measuring
propidium iodide uptake and ROS generation. The radiosensitizer activity
of PA in vivo was tested in nude mice by treating with PA and IR, and
measuring tumor volume and assessing apoptosis. PA, tested at its
experimentally determined IC50 value (12 nM), enhanced -ionizing
radiation (IR)-induced death of NCI-H460 cells by increasing apoptosis,
yielding a mean calculated dose-enhancement ratio of 3.8. Combination
with PA and IR also increased the production of reactive oxygen species
(ROS), which subsequently induced phosphorylation of p38, suppressed
phosphorylation of ERK, and activated caspase-3, -8, and -9. Notably,
inhibition of ROS production prevented p38 phosphorylation, and
inhibition of ROS production or p38 activation blocked caspase activation
and apoptosis. In a xenograft assay, combination with PA and IR delayed
tumor growth by 11.4 days compared with controls, yielding an enhancement
factor of 1.48. Collectively, these results indicate that PA functions as
a radiosensitizer by enhancing apoptosis through activation of a
ROS/p38/caspase pathway and suppression of ERK.

