Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyperoxia may be a treatment option for NSCLC


Introduction: Many anti-tumor drugs have been developed, however,
prognosis of NSCLC remains poor and new approaches for NSCLC treatment
are expected. Lung is a unique organ whose epithelial cells are directly
exposed to oxygen. Hyperoxia produces reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
induces cell damage. Therefore we attempted to investigate the potential
of hyperoxia as an anti-tumor treatment in NSCLC cells in this
study.Methods: We used oxygen-concentration-adjustable incubators and
validated effect of hyperoxia on various lung cancer cell lines in vitro.
The effect of hyperoxia on cell proliferation, apoptosis and gene
expression was evaluated using MTS assay, flowcytometry and cDNA
microarray, respectively.Results: We found that the growth of lung cancer
cell lines (A549, NCI-H1975) was inhibited by 50% of hyperoxia in a
dose-dependent manner, while that of normal airway epithelial cells
(NHBE, BEAS-2B) was not. Two independent pathway analysis using cDNA
microarray revealed the activation of NF-kB and AMPK pathways, and the
production of nitric oxide and ROS in hyperoxia (50%) treated lung cancer
cell lines compared to untreated ones. The combined treatment with
ABT-263, Bcl-2 inhibitor, and hyperoxia (50%) induced synergistic growth
inhibition and apoptosis in NCI-H1975 and SK-MES-1 cells. Moreover, the
combination of ABT-263 and activator of either ROS, NF-kB or AMPK also
showed synergistic growth inhibition in those cells.Conclusions:
Hyperoxia (50%) showed anti-tumor effect in NSCLC cell lines through the
activation of NF-kB and AMPK pathways, and the production of ROS. The
effect was augumented in combination with Bcl-2 inhibitor. Hyperoxia may
be a treatment option for NSCLC patients.

