Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide shRNA screen identifies ITIH5 gene as a metastasis
suppressor of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)


Background: PDAC is a leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide,
and most patients have incurable disease at diagnosis. Life expectancy is
only 3-6 months post-diagnosis, ostensibly due to early dissemination to
liver and other vital organs. Results: By transfecting a shRNA library
into non-metastatic PDAC line S2-028 followed by experimental metastasis
assay, ITIH5 was identified. Metastatic PDAC cell lines (e.g., S2-007,
MIAPaCa-2, Panc-1) had significantly lower ITIH5 protein expression
compared to immortalized pancreatic ductal epithelial cells and
non-/poorly-metastatic PDAC cell lines (e.g., S2-028 and BxPC3). By
manipulating expression in different PDAC cell lines (over-expression in
S2-007 and MIAPaCa-2, knockdown in non-metastatic S2-028 with two
different shRNA) functional and selective regulation of metastasis was
observed. Orthotopic tumor growth of PDAC cells was not blocked. Thus
ITIH5 qualifies as a metastasis suppressor. Overexpression of ITIH5
significantly inhibited invasion and migration, while down-regulation
increased these cellular properties. Immunohistochemistry of a human PDAC
tissue microarray (n = 81) revealed that negative expression of ITIH5
showed significantly higher incidence of liver metastasis (P = 0.0482)
corresponding with worse prognosis after surgery (P = 0.0299).
Conclusions: ITIH5 is a potent metastasis suppressor with suggestive
prognostic value in PDAC. Future studies will continue to characterize
biochemical properties of ITIH5, identify interaction partners, and
investigate the molecular mechanism(s) of action. Support: National
Foundation for Cancer Research, Steiner Family Fund and CA168524.

