Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting KIF3a and primary cilia differentially affects sonic
hedgehog sensitivity and the rate of glioblastoma progression


Adults diagnosed with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) typically have a
median survival less than 15 months. GBM patient biopsies and derived
cell lines contain subsets of cells extending primary cilia, microtubular
antennae that mediate signaling events reported to influence cell
proliferation and tumor cell growth. However, it remains unclear how
cilia contribute to the phenotypic characteristics of GBM. To determine
whether cilia influence GBM tumor progression, we generated several
stable patient-derived cell lines devoid of cilia by expressing a
dominant-negative form of Kif3a (dnKif3a), a protein normally essential
for ciliogenesis. Depending on the line, mice receiving intracranial
implants of dnKif3a-expressing cells survived shorter, as long as, or
significantly longer than mice implanted with control cells. To determine
if ciliated cells derived from different GBM tumors share similar
sensitivities to sonic hedgehog (SHH), a mitogen present in adult brain
that activates receptor signaling cascades within cilia, we exposed
control and dnKif3a-expressing cells in vitro to vehicle or recombinant
SHH. Interestingly, only the cell line that prolonged survival in vivo
displayed significant increases in proliferation following exposure to
SHH, an effect that was blocked by either dnKif3a or pretreatment of the
cells with cyclopamine, an inhibitor of the SHH cascade. All cell lines
tested appeared to respond to SHH as evidenced by activation of
downstream SHH signaling components in their cilia. Collectively, our
data suggest that strategies to disrupt primary cilia in GBM patients
could lead to inhibition or enhancement of tumor growth potentially by
altering cell sensitivity to the extracellular environment.

