Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DEPTOR is a direct NOTCH1 target that regulates proliferation,
metabolism and glucocorticoid resistance in T cell leukemia


DEP-Domain Containing mTOR-Interacting Protein (DEPTOR) is frequently
overexpressed in multiple myelomas and required for cell survival.
However, its implications in other hematological malignancies and the
precise mechanisms of regulation remain largely undefined. Here, we
systematically analyzed DEPTOR expression in human acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL), a hematological malignancy accounting for 80% of
pediatric leukemia. Whereas substantially inhibited in B-ALLs,
unexpectedly, expression of DEPTOR is significantly elevated in a subset
of T-ALLs where NOTCH1 is aberrantly activated. Mechanistically, we show
DEPTOR expression is dependent on NOTCH signaling in T-ALL cell lines and
primary specimens, and demonstrate NOTCH1 directly binds to and activates
human DEPTOR promoter. DEPTOR depletion in T-ALL cells abolishes
proliferation, attenuates glucose metabolism, enhances apoptosis and
sensitizes resistant cells to -secretase inhibitor or dexamethasone
treatments. Conversely, ectopically expressed DEPTOR promotes
proliferation and aerobic glycolysis, and confers dexamethasone
resistance. DEPTOR functions through AKT-dependent mechanisms to sustain
cell proliferation and drug resistance, while the AKT-independent roles
of DEPTOR appear to promote glucose metabolism. We therefore define a
novel mechanism that, in addition to the previously reported
HES1/PTEN-mediated regulation of AKT, NOTCH1 alternatively activates AKT
through inducing the downstream target gene DEPTOR. Our findings thereby
highlight DEPTOR as a critical mediator in leukemogenesis and suggest
DEPTOR expression may serve as a potential biomarker predicting
glucocorticoid resistance and targeting DEPTOR may achieve better
therapeutic benefits.

