Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BCL10 is a novel DNA damage response factor whose expression
inversely correlates with the clinical outcome of breast invasive ductal
carcinoma


Timely and properly cellular response to DNA damage is essential for
maintenance of genome stability and integrity. B-cell lymphoma/leukemia
10 (BCL10) facilitates ubiquitination of NEMO in the cytosol, activating
NFB signaling. Translocation and/or point mutations of BCL10 associate
with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas and other malignancies.
We recently found that BCL10 in nucleus is enriched onto the DNA damage
sites in an ATM- and RNF8-dependent manner, and ATM-dependent
phosphorylation and RNF8-dependent ubiquitination of BCL10 confers UBC13
to RNF8/RNF168 to regulate ubiquitination-mediated DSB signaling and
repair. In this report, we further found that inhibition of BCL10
expression compromised RNF168 dimerization and RNF168-dependent histone
H2A ubiquitination. Immunohistochemistry staining analysis revealed that
BCL10 expression status inversely correlates with prognosis in 339 cases
of breast invasive ductal carcinoma with a median follow up of 60 months
(range, 3-127 months). Taken together, our results demonstrated that
BCL10 is a novel DDR factor with a potential role as a biomarker in
breast cancer therapy.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

