Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian cancer risk factors by histologic subtypes: evidence for
etiologic heterogeneity


Background: A subset of high grade serous carcinomas may arise from the
fallopian tube, while some endometrioid and clear cell carcinomas may
derive from endometrial tissue. Previous studies have suggested
differences in ovarian cancer risk factors by histologic subtypes, but
had limited sample sizes. In the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium (OC3),
we evaluated associations of reproductive, hormonal, demographic and
lifestyle factors, and family history of cancer with ovarian cancer
subtypes. Identification of potential differences in associations among
subtypes is important for clarifying ovarian cancer etiology and for
developing novel prevention and risk prediction approaches.Methods: Among
over 1.2 million women from 21 cohort studies, 4,347 ovarian cancers with
histology information were identified during follow-up (3223 serous, 555
endometrioid, 316 mucinous, 253 clear cell). We used competing risks Cox
proportional hazards regression to compute risk factor associations by
histologic subtype. Models were stratified on study and year of birth and
adjusted for age, parity and oral contraceptive use; subtype
heterogeneity was evaluated by a likelihood ratio test. Unsupervised
hierarchical clustering was used to evaluate patterns of risk factors by
histology.Results: Most risk factors showed significant heterogeneity
across histologic subtypes. Higher parity was most strongly associated
with lower risks of endometrioid (RR per child: 0.79; 95%CI: 0.74-0.85)
and clear cell (RR: 0.69; 95%CI: 0.61-0.78) carcinomas (p-het5 years) was
associated with endometrioid carcinomas (RR: 2.23; 95% CI: 1.46-3.42) and
serous carcinomas (RR: 1.66; 95% CI: 1.44-1.92), and inversely associated
with clear cell carcinomas (RR: 0.43; 95% CI: 0.20-0.91; p-het = 0.001).
Family history of breast cancer was associated with increased risk of
serous carcinomas (RR:1.13; 95% CI:1.02-1.27) and endometrioid carcinomas
(RR: 1.44; 95% CI: 1.12-1.87; p-het = 0.02). Smoking (per 20 pack years)
showed a positive association with mucinous carcinomas (RR: 1.38; 95% CI:
1.09-1.75) and an inverse association with clear cell carcinomas
(RR:0.62; 95% CI: 0.46-0.85; p-het = 0.001). In unsupervised hierarchical
clustering, serous and mucinous carcinomas clustered in one group and
endometrioid and clear cell carcinomas in the other.Conclusion: Our
results demonstrate heterogeneous associations of risk factors with
ovarian cancer subtypes, supporting the hypothesis that the subtypes
develop through different pathways. Most established risk factors were
more strongly associated with non-serous carcinomas, suggesting that risk
prediction may be more challenging for serous cancers, the most fatal
subtype.

