Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adapting the Syngraft mouse model to study metastatic recurrence
of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer is one of the most aggressive human malignancies with a
5-year survival rate for all stages of only 6%. While surgery remains the
most effective treatment for pancreatic cancer, the majority of patients
that undergo resection go on to die of pancreatic cancer recurrence. The
biology of pancreatic recurrence is poorly understood due to the lack of
sufficient mouse models to study this aspect of the disease. Our
laboratory has adapted the Syngraft mouse model in order to study
metastatic recurrence of pancreatic cancer. The Syngraft model is an
orthotopic syngeneic mouse model using a pancreatic tumor cell line
derived from the genetically engineered model (KrasG12D/+; Ink4a
flox/flox) that has been modified with lentiviral vectors expressing
mCherry and luciferase. After orthotopic injection, tumor formation was
detected with the IVIS Spectrum using injected luciferin. Mice underwent
distal pancreatectomy with spleenectomy when the primary pancreatic tumor
measured 107 photons/sec/cm2, with a mean time to surgical resection at
19 days. Mice were then followed for metastatic recurrence to the liver
using the IVIS Spectrum, with a mean time to recurrence of 23 days. We
were able to establish a rate of metastatic recurrence in the Syngraft
mouse model of 41% to the liver. Research is ongoing to enhance the
metastatic efficiency of the injected cell lines and to further
characterize the model for evidence of single cell and micrometastases in
the liver. This model holds potential to be a useful tool to study the
cell and molecular biology of pancreatic cancer recurrence.

