Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of fetal oncogene 5T4 in CTCs obtained from NSCLC
patients is discordant with the expression measured in the primary tumor


The fetal oncogene 5T4 is a cell surface protein, with over-expression
observed in a variety of cancers as compared to normal adult tissue.
Recent studies have shown that expression of 5T4 appears to be associated
with the undifferentiated state and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), and thus has been associated with a more invasive phenotype. We
have developed assays to measure the expression of the fetal oncogene,
5T4, in both the primary tumor compartment and in the circulating tumor
cell compartment. These assays were then used to investigate 5T4
expression in a small cohort of patients with NSCLC. We obtained matched
primary tumor and blood samples, with the blood being obtained prior to
resection of the primary tumor. The expression of 5T4 was found to be
robust and measurable in both the primary and circulating tumor
compartments. We observed expression of 5T4 in both adenocarcinoma and
squamous cell carcinoma, in all stages and grades of tumor, with no
specific correlation between expression and stage, grade or pathology. We
further observed robust enumeration of CTCs in NSCLC samples. The
expression of 5T4 was heterogeneous in the CTC compartment with no
correlation to grade, stage or pathology. Finally, we observed no
concordance between 5T4 expression in the primary tumor and the
circulating tumor cell compartment. We discuss the current utility of
target expression in predicting response to targeted therapy in the
context of antibody based therapy, and the role that CTCs may have in the
clinic.

