Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-associated antigen gene-loading polyplex micelle is a
promising platform for anti-cancer DNA vaccine


Backgrounds: Polyplex micelle attracts an increasing attention as a gene
carrier, because of efficient gene transduction and biocompatibility in
vivo. In this study, we examined the potential of polyplex micelle
carrying genes encoding tumor-associated antigen (TAA): squamous cell
carcinoma antigen recognized by T cells-3, CD40L and GM-CSF as a DNA
vaccine platform in mouse tumor models with different types of major
histocompatibility antigen complex (MHC).Methods and Results:
Intraperitoneal administration of polyplex micelles were predominantly
distributed and expressed in the lymph nodes, spleen and liver. The
triple DNA vaccine significantly prolonged the survival of mice harboring
peritoneal dissemination of CT26 colorectal cancer compared with mock
controls, of which long-survivor mice induced complete rejection of
re-challenged CT26 tumors. The DNA vaccine also inhibited the growth and
metastasis of subcutaneous CT26 and Lewis lung cancers in BALB/c and
C57BL/6 mice, respectively, which represent different MHC haplotypes. The
DNA vaccine highly stimulated both cytotoxic T lymphocyte and natural
killer cell activities, and increased the infiltration of CD11c+-DC, CD4+
and CD8a+ T cells into tumors. Depletion of CD4+ or CD8a+ cells using
their neutralizing antibodies deteriorated the anti-tumor efficacy of the
DNA vaccine.Conclusions: TAA/CD40L+GM-CSF gene-loaded polyplex micelle is
a novel vaccine platform to elicit tumor rejection immunity regardless of
recipient's MHC-haplotype.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

