Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultrasensitive DNA methylation detection using sputum and plasma
for early detection of NSCLC


Purpose:The National Lung Cancer Screening Trial provides hope that early
detection can result in a reduction of mortality from lung cancer. This
study was to determine if molecular alterations of sputum and plasma in
patients with CT detected pulmonary nodules could predict patients with
malignancy from those without.Materials and Methods: We conducted a
prospective case-control study obtaining cases and controls from the Lung
Cancer Spore Trial at Johns Hopkins Hospital. Plasma, sputum and
pre-operative CT scans were obtained from all patients. We processed the
plasma, sputum and tumor by using promoter Methylation on beads followed
by quantitative methylation specific real-time PCR to investigate
promoter methylation status of six cancer-related genes, CDO1, TAC1,
HOXA7, HOXA9, SOX17 and ZFP42.Results:223 patients were analyzed,
including 162 patients with NSCLC and 61 patients with benign lesions.
The sensitivity and specificity values for lung cancer detection in
plasma, sputum or in both are shown. Plasma methylation seems to be more
specific than sputum methylation. Both concomitant methylation in both
plasma and sputum yielded the highest specificity for all gene
combinations. Promoter methylation of CDO1, TAC1, HOXA9 and SOX17 has a
high specificity but low sensitivity to detect lung cancer.Conclusion:
Our gene panel of promoter methylation has a high enough specificity to
be clinical useful but its sensitivity is low. The integration of this
panel with other biomarkers would be needed to create a platform of high
enough specificity and sensitivity to be clinically applicable.

