Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Robust estimation of mutation burden


Developing a more robust approach to measure mutational burden is of
central importance to improving the characterization of the molecular
profile of tumor and may improve our ability to predict tumor progression
or response to therapy in patients. Mutational burden is typically
calculated as a direct enumeration of called somatic mutations per
megabase covered. However, there is a growing appreciation that tumor
purity, variable sequencing coverage, and copy number alterations can
substantially impact the accurate identification any specific somatic
mutation. Furthermore, population genetic theory and empirical data
indicate that in many cases the vast majority of somatic mutations appear
in only a small subpopulation of tumor cells, a context in which there is
a high likelihood that an individual subclonal mutation may not be
identified by conventional analysis. This tendency to miss low frequency
mutations is highly variable and dependent, in part, upon sample purity
and results in a strong source of bias not addressed in existing methods
to measure variant allele frequencies.We present a novel computational
method that incorporates these sources of bias in a coherent
probabilistic framework that enables maximum-likelihood inference of
relevant population parameters such as mutation burden. We apply our
method to simulated data as well as patient tumor samples diluted with
varying known proportions of normal DNA. We show that our approach allows
us to generate estimates of mutation burden that are robust to the
substantial variations in purity and sequencing coverage that are
frequently encountered in patient tumor analysis. Hence, our novel method
may improve the accurate detection and quantification of variant alleles
in patient tumors to better understand their genetic landscape and guide
clinical management.

