Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-exome sequencing reveals a novel germline variant in
CEBPA-associated familial acute myeloid leukemia: 45-year follow-up of a
large family


Familial acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is rare and linked to germline
mutations in RUNX1 or CCAAT/enhancer binding protein- (CEBPA). We
conducted whole-exome sequencing on a large family with AML originally
evaluated at NIH in 1969 and uncovered a CEBPA Q311P mutation in all
tested, affected members. The Q311P variant, located in the C-terminal
bZip domain of CEBPA, was predicted to be highly deleterious by in silico
algorithms; the Q311 position was highly conserved among CEBPA orthologs
and paralogs. This variant has not been observed in the NHLBI's Exome
Sequencing Project or the Broad Institute's Exome Aggregation Consortium.
Protein structural modeling suggested that the Q311P mutation alters the
ability of the CEBPA dimer to bind DNA. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that the Q311P mutant had attenuated binding to DNA, as
predicted by the protein modeling. Consistent with these findings, we
found that the Q311P mutation has reduced transactivation of a promoter
with a tetramer of CEBP sites, consistent with a loss-of-function
mutation. In addition, there was decreased colony survival in fibroblasts
with CEBPA Q311P, associated with the clinical radiosensitivity
postulated in one carrier. From 45 years of follow-up, we observed
incomplete penetrance (46%) of CEBPA Q311P; we did not observe other
cancers or leukemias segregating with the mutation. Thus, we present a
comprehensive clinical and molecular characterization of a novel
AML-associated variant in CEBPA in a NCI family with nearly half a
century of follow-up. This study reveals that a germline mutation in the
C-terminal bZip domain can alter the ability of CEBPA to bind DNA and
reduces transactivation, leading to AML, though with lower penetrance
than the canonical N-terminal frameshift germline mutations.

