Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carnosic acid induces apoptosis through inhibition of STAT3
signaling and production of ROS in human colon cancer HCT116 cells


Carnosic acid (CA), the main antioxidant compound of Rosmarinus
officinalis L., has been shown to display anticancer activity. However,
the molecular mechanisms underlying the anticancer effects of CA remain
poorly understood. This study revealed that treatment with CA
significantly reduced the cell viability and induced apoptosis in HCT116
cells as evidenced by the induction of p53 and Bax, release of cytochrome
c, cleavage of caspase-9, -7 and -3 and PARP and the inhibition of Bcl-2
and Bcl-xl expression. CA inhibited the constitutive phosphorylation, the
DNA binding and the reporter gene activity of signal transducer and
activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) in HCT116 cells by blocking the
phosphorylation of upstream Janus-activated kinase-2 (JAK2) and Src
kinases. Moreover, CA attenuated the expression of STAT3 target gene
products, such as survivin, cylcin D1, D2, and D3. Since ROS is a
universal entity mediating apoptosis, we examined whether CA induced
apoptosis via ROS formation. Treatment with CA generated ROS and
pretreatment with ROS scavenger N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) rescued cells
from apoptosis by abrogating the inhibitory effect of CA on the
activation of JAK2-STAT3 and Src-STAT3 signaling pathways and rescued
cells from CA-induced apoptosis by blocking the induction of p53, and the
cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP. In conclusion, CA induced apoptosis in
HCT116 cells via generation of ROS, induction of p53, activation of
caspases and inhibition of STAT3 signaling pathway.

