Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An innovative 3D porous scaffold-based perfusion bioreactor system
for the in vitro maintenance and expansion of primary breast cancer tissue


Introduction: Development of cancer treatment protocols has traditionally
been based on studies in experimental animal models or taking advantage
of human established tumor cell lines for in vitro and in vivo assays.
Here we present an innovative method to culture breast cancer tissues in
porous 3D scaffolds by using a perfusion-based bioreactor
system.Experimental procedures: Freshly excised estrogen-receptor
positive breast cancer specimens were fragmented and cultured in a 3D
sandwich-like format between porous scaffolds under perfusion flow, with
on-line monitoring of environmental condition. DMEM/F12, supplemented
with 10% autologous human serum, was used as a culture medium in the
presence or absence of estrogens. The ability of tumor cells to survive
and expand into the scaffold in perfusion culture as well as their
ability to recapitulate features of the original breast cancer specimens
was histologically assessed.Results: With this innovative method we were
able to preserve viability and to promote the expansion of breast cancer
cells from surgical specimens together with accompanying stromal and
immune cells into the porous scaffold. Expanding cancer cells were viable
after 21 days and recapitulating the initial histology with formation of
glands. Administration of estrogen to the culture medium was associated
with increased expansion of cancer cells into the scaffold starting at 14
days of culture.Conclusions: Culture of breast cancer tissue in a 3D
scaffold-based bioreactor preserves malignant, interstitial and
immunocompetent cells present in surgically excised breast cancer
samples, thus allowing direct testing of basic cancer research hypotheses
in intact, complex human tumor microenvironments. Furthermore, it might
allow a direct evaluation of the effects of various treatments on
malignant and non-transformed cells. This engineered in vitro model could
be extended beyond the context of our primary scientific interest, namely
breast cancer, as a broader platform allowing animal-free testing of
innovative approaches for the treatment of human malignancies, possibly
in the direction of personalized medicine.

