Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Catalytic topoisomerase II inhibitors suppress the androgen
receptor signaling and prostate cancer progression


Background: Although the new generation of anti-androgens (e.g. MDV)
improves survival of metastatic prostate cancer patients, tumors
eventually recur indicating that additional therapeutic means is required
to fully block the functions of the androgen receptor (AR). Since DNA
topoisomerase II (Topo II) was demonstrated to be essential for AR to
initiate gene transcription, this study tested whether catalytic
inhibitors of Topo II can suppress the AR signaling and block prostate
tumor growth.Methods and Results: Androgen-dependent and MDV-resistant
prostate cancer cells were treated with increasing doses of catalytic
Topo II inhibitors, ICRF187 and ICRF193. Luciferase reporter assays
showed that both inhibitors suppressed the transcriptional activities of
wild-type AR, mutant AR (F876L and W741C), and AR-V7 splice variant.
ICRF187 and ICRF193 decreased AR recruitment to its target promoters and
reduced AR nuclear localization. Both ICRF187 and ICRF193 inhibited
androgen-dependent and MDV-resistant cancer cell proliferation and
delayed cell cycling at the G2/M stages. In castration-resistant LNCaP
tumors, ICRF187 inhibited tumor growth, PSA secretion and expressions of
several other AR regulated genes. These repressive effects became
stronger when tumors were co-treated with MDV. Additionally, ICRF187
effectively inhibited tumor growth of MDV-resistant MR49F as well as
castration-resistant 22RV1 xenografts.Conclusions: Catalytic Topo II
inhibitors can block the AR signaling and inhibit tumor growth of
castration-resistant xenografts, suggesting their potential applications
in treating castration-resistant cancers in patients.

