Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing the effects of the small molecule cathepsin L inhibitor,
KGP94: combination with radiotherapy and evaluation of antimetastatic
potential in vivo


Introduction: KGP94, a small molecule cathepsin L inhibitor, has
previously been shown to effect growth delay in a C3H mammary carcinoma
model, while in vitro experiments suggest it may have anti-metastatic
potential. The aim of this study was to investigate the anti-tumoral
effects of KGP94 in the C3H mammary carcinoma when combined with
radiotherapy, and to investigate the effects on metastasis in the murine
SCCVII carcinoma model.Materials and Methods: Male CDF1 or C3H/HeNHsd
mice were inoculated on the right rear foot with a C3H mammary carcinoma
or a SCCVII carcinoma, respectively. A solution of KGP94 was prepared by
dissolving in a mixture of 10% Tween 80 and 90% HEPES-buffer. KGP94 was
intraperitoneally injected at 0.01ml/g mouse bodyweight. When C3H mammary
carcinomas reached a volume of 200 cubic mm, the non-anaesthetised mice
were restrained and tumors locally irradiated (230 kV x-rays) with a
single dose of 10 Gy. KGP94 (20 mg/kg) was intraperitoneally injected
either before (immediately, 2 days, or 4 days) or after (immediately, 2
days, or 4 days) irradiation. Anti-tumor activity was assessed by
determining the tumor growth time, which was either the time in days to
reach 3 times the volume (TGT3) at irradiation or the time in days to
reach a volume of 500 cubic mm (TGT-500) from tumor initiation. For the
metastases study, SCCVII tumor material was inoculated on day 0. On day 5
KGP94 treatment was started (10mg/kg) and continued for a further 10
days. Mice were then euthanized and their lungs were removed and put in
Bouin's solution overnight. Lung metastases could easily be visualized
and were counted manually. Results are listed as Mean ( Standard Error).
One-way ANOVA comparison of group means was performed, and a
PIntroduction: KGP94, a small molecule cathepsin L inhibitor, has
previously been shown to effect growth delay in a C3H mammary carcinoma
model, while in vitro experiments suggest it may have anti-metastatic
potential. The aim of this study was to investigate the anti-tumoral
effects of KGP94 in the C3H mammary carcinoma when combined with
radiotherapy, and to investigate the effects on metastasis in the murine
SCCVII carcinoma model.Materials and Methods: Male CDF1 or C3H/HeNHsd
mice were inoculated on the right rear foot with a C3H mammary carcinoma
or a SCCVII carcinoma, respectively. A solution of KGP94 was prepared by
dissolving in a mixture of 10% Tween 80 and 90% HEPES-buffer. KGP94 was
intraperitoneally injected at 0.01ml/g mouse bodyweight. When C3H mammary
carcinomas reached a volume of 200 cubic mm, the non-anaesthetised mice
were restrained and tumors locally irradiated (230 kV x-rays) with a
single dose of 10 Gy. KGP94 (20 mg/kg) was intraperitoneally injected
either before (immediately, 2 days, or 4 days) or after (immediately, 2
days, or 4 days) irradiation. Anti-tumor activity was assessed by
determining the tumor growth time, which was either the time in days to
reach 3 times the volume (TGT3) at irradiation or the time in days to
reach a volume of 500 cubic mm (TGT-500) from tumor initiation. For the
metastases study, SCCVII tumor material was inoculated on day 0. On day 5
KGP94 treatment was started (10mg/kg) and continued for a further 10
days. Mice were then euthanized and their lungs were removed and put in
Bouin's solution overnight. Lung metastases could easily be visualized
and were counted manually. Results are listed as Mean ( Standard Error).
One-way ANOVA comparison of group means was performed, and a P<0.05 was
considered significant.Results: For established C3H mammary carcinomas,
the TGT3 for control animals was 4.2 days and for the KGP94 treated
animals 5.8 days. The TGT3 for radiation alone was 12 days and the
various combinations with KGP94 resulted in TGT3s ranging from 10.5 to
12.5 days. For initiation studies the TGT-500 for control animals was
18.0 days ( 0.3) for the C3H mammary carcinoma and 13.6 days ( 0.7) for
the SCCVII carcinoma. Treating tumours with 10 mg/kg KGP94 for 5 days
from the day of initiation significantly increased the TGT-500 for both
tumour models to around 21 and 17 days respectively. The metastasis study
revealed that 5 out of 10 mice in the control group developed lung
metastasis, whereas only 3 out of 10 mice did so in the KGP94 treated
group.Conclusion: KGP94 has a small effect on established tumors when
given alone, but did not enhance the response to radiation therapy.
However, KGP94 significantly delayed the initial growth of primary
tumors, suggesting an effect on metastasis that was confirmed in the lung
metastasis studies.

