Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Original microenvironment of different cancer types is maintained
upon culture of primary tissues in perfused bioreactors


The development of novel three-dimensional (3D) culture systems allowing
the survival/expansion of primary tumors in vitro may help to bridge the
gap between conventional bi-dimensional (2D) cultures and animal models,
poorly predictive of therapeutic responses.We have investigated the
suitability of a previously developed perfused bioreactor system for the
in vitro culture of human primary tumor tissues.Surgical specimens of
colorectal cancer (CRC, n = 15), glioblastoma (n = 3), breast cancer (n =
3), sarcoma (n = 2), and melanoma (n = 1) were used. Tumor fragments,
obtained upon mechanical mincing and enzymatic digestion, were cultured
on collagen scaffolds, in medium supplemented with human serum, under
alternate perfusion up to 20 days. Characterization of expanded tissues
was performed by histo-morphological analysis, immunofluorescence and
gene expression profiling.CRC tissues were effectively expanded in
perfused 3D cultures in 10 out of 15 cases, whereas no expansion was
observed under static culture conditions. Gene profiles of expanded tumor
tissues suggested a heterogeneous tissue composition, as indicated by the
expression of EpCAM, CD90, CD8, CD16 and Foxp3 genes. Phenotypic analysis
confirmed that expanded tissues included epithelial and stromal cells, as
assessed by EpCAM and vimentin staining, respectively. Evidence of tumor
cell proliferation was provided by Ki67 staining. Furthermore,
infiltrating CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes were consistently identified
within cultured tumor fragments.The established protocol could easily be
adapted to other tumor types, including breast-cancer, glioblastoma,
sarcoma and melanoma, with highly effective tissue formation.Taken
together, our results indicate that culture of primary tumor fragments
within perfused bioreactors can be successfully achieved over a
short-time period in a reproducible manner, and results in the expansion
of epithelial and interstitial cells. These ex-vivo generated tissues
might mirror features of the original tumor more effectively than 2D or
3D static cultures, and of patient-derived xenografts, thus possibly
representing useful tools for the evaluation of sensitivity to
chemotherapies or new targeted treatments.

