Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting cancer phenotypes with mechanism-driven multi-omics
data integration


Over the past decade technological advances have enabled molecular
profiling of human cancers across distinct genomic domains and other
omes. The availability of such multi-omics datasets has in turn enabled
the discovery of cancer subtypes characterized by distinct molecular
patterns within and across different data modalities. Despite promising
beginnings and the wealth of data, most efforts so far have focused on
the discovery of new molecular taxonomies, enumerating novel cancer
subtypes, and only subsequently projecting them into a biological context
by leveraging knowledge on genetic and epigenetic variations, genomic
alterations, gene expression patterns, and, in general, cell
pathophysiology.A paradigmatic approach to omics-based cancer
classification usually entails the i) discovery of novel molecular
subtypes; (ii) the biological contextualization of such subtypes and
their correlation with clinical phenotypes; and (iii) the development of
predictors to detect these subtypes. Nevertheless, the direct clinical
utility of such taxonomies is less evident. Some of the molecular
subtypes, for instance, might not portend any different clinical
behavior, or the underlying molecular pathways might not be actionable.
Ultimately, existing biological knowledge enters the analysis only a
posteriori to characterize and label the novel subtypes, rather than
being leveraged a priori to guide the discovery process itself.To
overcome such nearly universal absence of mechanistic underpinnings for
the omics-derived signatures and develop clinically useful biomarkers, we
have proposed to develop mechanistic predictive models by incorporating
gene network and signaling pathway information directly into the
statistical learning process used to detect the cancer phenotypes. Unlike
the paradigm described above, we used omics data and prior biological
information to directly detect and predict the phenotypes. We now further
extend this concept and leverage biological knowledge also to constrain
multi-omics data integration, by implementing predictive rules that
mechanistically aggregate measurements across distinct genomic
modalities, reproducing the natural flow of biological information in the
cell: from genome to phenotype, through epigenome, transcriptome and
proteome.To illustrate our approach and its impact on computational
learning and cancer classification, we analyze clinically relevant cancer
phenotypes using independent training and testing data. To this end we
build our novel predictors using the Top Scoring Pair (TSP) algorithm, a
two-gene parameter-free classifier, and its multi-pair extension kTSP. We
then compare the classification performance of predictors derived from a
single omics modality to those constructed by integrating multi-omics
data according to mechanistic and biologically meaningful rules,
revealing increased accuracy with the integrated classifiers.

