Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC16/CA125 and Epithelial Growth Factor Receptor functionality in
ovarian cancer


MUC16 encodes the CA125 antigen that is an established characteristic
factor in epithelial human ovarian cancer. Yet its function remains
largely unknown. The cloning of MUC16 has opened the door to additional
functional exploration. MUC16 has a molecular size of over 14,000 amino
acids and consists of a 31 amino acid cytoplasmic domain, a 25 amino acid
transmembrane region, a 58 amino acid ectodomain and an external domain
of up to 60 tandem repeats. As little as 114 AA of MUC16 will traffic to
the membrane and induce an altered, more aggressive phenotype, and longer
elements from the carboxyterminus with multiple CA125 antigenic tandem
repeats were not substantially different. When either A2780 or SKOV3 or
3T3 cell lines had these short elements of the MUC16 gene carboxyterminus
expressed, they had substantial increases in matrigel invasion and
increased phosphorylation of AKT and ERK signaling. While MUC16 does not
change in vitro growth. However, when placed in nu/nu mice, the MUC16
transformed tumors were more aggressive, with statistically significant
more rapid tumor growth. Associated with these alterations in signal
transduction are changes in gene expression including upregulation of
fibronectin, IL-1, MMP7, and MMP9.EGF is a growth factor associated with
ovarian cancer that is known to have interactions with epithelial growth
factor receptor. In order to delineate the relationship of MUC16 and
EGFrecepor, the current research work was undertaken to see the function
of MUC16 and its effects on downstream signaling of AKT, ERK and SRC
phosphorylation. Five different lentiviral plasmids that produce shEGFR
targeting different DNA sequences were transfected into 293 cells.
Subsequently, these cells secreted a lentivirus that contained shEGFR.
Virus supernatant was used to infect SKOV3-MU16c114 cell line to create
clonals SKOV3-MUC16c114-shEGFR cell lines. These cell lines were stably
transfected and is selected with puromycin at 0.5 ug/ml.Equal amounts of
24 hrs starved SKOV3 phrGFP (vector), MUC16c114, and MUC16c114-shEGFR
cell line protein extracts were western blot analysed and equal amounts
of EGFR were detected in phrGFP and MUC16c114 while EGFR was knocked out
in the MUC16c114-shEGFR cell line. Increased amount of 4H11 (MUC16) mAbs
was seen in the MUC16c114-shEGFR cell line compared to MUC16c114 and
phrGFP vector control cell lines. The loss of EGFR expression was
associated with decreased Matrigel invasion. Stability of EGFR was also
examined. The introduction of MUC16c114 increased EGFR expression in each
cell line tested. The relative stability of EGFR was increased by MUC16
expression as measured by EGFR persistence in the presence of
cycloheximide.We conclude the MUC16 may induce its aggressive phenotype
through stabilization of EGFR on the cell surface..

