Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ibrutinib plus proteasome or MALT1 inhibitors overcome resistance
to BCR antagonists in CARD11 mutant-expressing B-lymphoma cells


Background: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B-cell malignancy
with poor prognosis. Ibrutinib, a covalent first in-human Bruton's
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, approved for second line treatment for MCL
patients, has an overall response rate of nearly 70% in patients with
relapsed and refractory MCL (Wang, 2013). However, combination strategies
with novel therapies remain an important option for the 30% of
non-responding or progressing patients. Caspase recruitment
domain-containing protein (CARD)11 is a critical component of NF-B
signaling in B and T cells (Stepensky, 2013). Mutations in the
coiled-coil domain of CARD11 can result in constitutive NF-B activation
and resistance to B-cell receptor (BCR) antagonists in ABC-DLBCL (Lenz,
2008) and MCL cell lines (Rahal, 2014). This study investigated the
effect of CARD11 mutations on MCL tumor growth, and evaluated combination
strategies to overcome resistance to BCR antagonists.Methods: Jeko cells
(an ibrutinib-sensitive MCL cell line [IC50 = 0.5 M]) were co-infected
with lentiviral vector pCDH-EF1 expressing either wildtype (WT) or CARD11
mutants (mut2 [L244P] or mut10 [L225LI], Lenz, 2008), generated by
site-directed mutagenesis, and with lentiviral vector pGreenPuro
expressing an endogenous knockdown small hairpin (sh)RNA targeting the
3-untranslated region of CARD11. Stable transfectants were compared for
their sensitivity to ibrutinib. Pharmacological inhibitors of NF-B,
PI3K/SYK, proteasomes, or apoptosis pathways were also evaluated in
combination with ibrutinib.Results: The mutant stable cell lines have
similar levels of CARD11 expression, which are comparable to levels of
endogenous CARD11. CARD11 shRNA inhibited 70% of endogenous CARD11
expression resulting in cell death. Jeko cells expressing WT or mutant
CARD11 were protected from shRNA toxicity, and cells expressing mut10
CARD11 proliferated 40% faster than WT-expressing cells. Mutant cells
were less sensitive to ibrutinib (IC50 = 0.8 M [WT]; IC50 = 1.9 [mut2] or
2.6 M [mut10]). In mutant CARD11-expressing Jeko cells, ibrutinib
inhibited the activity of downstream BCR signaling molecules ERK and AKT,
but not NF-B. Addition of the proteasome inhibitors (carfilzomib or
bortezomib) or the MALT1 inhibitor MI2 sensitized CARD11 mutant cells to
ibrutinib treatment (IC50 = 2.6 M [ibrutinib]; IC50 = 0.2 M
[ibrutinib+bortezomib]; IC50 = 0.1 M [ibrutinib+MI2]). MI2 also
facilitated the degradation of CARD11 protein, and synergized with
ibrutinib for complete inhibition of the NF-B pathway. Analysis of the
ibrutinib and MI2 combination in murine models is ongoing.Conclusion:
This study showed that the combination of ibrutinib with proteasome or
MALT1 inhibitors can sensitize CARD11 mutant cells to treatment and may
provide a strategy to overcoming resistance to BCR-antagonists
in-vivo.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

