Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IDH mutation status and role of WHO grade and mitotic index in
overall survival in grade II-III diffuse gliomas


Diffuse gliomas are up till now graded based upon morphology. Recent
findings indicate that isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutation status
defines biologically distinct groups of tumors. The role of tumor grade
and mitotic index in patient outcome has not been evaluated following
stratification by IDH mutation status. To address this, we interrogated
558 WHO grade II-III diffuse gliomas for IDH1/2 mutations and
investigated the prognostic impact of WHO grade within IDH-mutant and
wild-type tumor subsets independently. The prognostic impact of grade was
modest in IDH-mutant [hazard ratio (HR) = 1.21, 95% confidence interval
(CI) = 0.91-1.61] compared to IDH-wild type tumors (HR = 1.74, 95% CI =
0.95-3.16). Using a dichotomized mitotic index cut-off of 4/1000 tumor
cells, we found that while mitotic index was significantly associated
with outcome in IDH-wild type tumors (log-rank pDiffuse gliomas are up
till now graded based upon morphology. Recent findings indicate that
isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutation status defines biologically
distinct groups of tumors. The role of tumor grade and mitotic index in
patient outcome has not been evaluated following stratification by IDH
mutation status. To address this, we interrogated 558 WHO grade II-III
diffuse gliomas for IDH1/2 mutations and investigated the prognostic
impact of WHO grade within IDH-mutant and wild-type tumor subsets
independently. The prognostic impact of grade was modest in IDH-mutant
[hazard ratio (HR) = 1.21, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.91-1.61]
compared to IDH-wild type tumors (HR = 1.74, 95% CI = 0.95-3.16). Using a
dichotomized mitotic index cut-off of 4/1000 tumor cells, we found that
while mitotic index was significantly associated with outcome in IDH-wild
type tumors (log-rank p<0.01, HR = 4.41, 95% CI = 2.55-7.63), it was not
associated with outcome in IDH-mutant tumors (log-rank p = 0.471, HR =
1.10, 95% CI = 0.80-1.51), and could demonstrate a statistical
interaction (pDiffuse gliomas are up till now graded based upon
morphology. Recent findings indicate that isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)
mutation status defines biologically distinct groups of tumors. The role
of tumor grade and mitotic index in patient outcome has not been
evaluated following stratification by IDH mutation status. To address
this, we interrogated 558 WHO grade II-III diffuse gliomas for IDH1/2
mutations and investigated the prognostic impact of WHO grade within
IDH-mutant and wild-type tumor subsets independently. The prognostic
impact of grade was modest in IDH-mutant [hazard ratio (HR) = 1.21, 95%
confidence interval (CI) = 0.91-1.61] compared to IDH-wild type tumors
(HR = 1.74, 95% CI = 0.95-3.16). Using a dichotomized mitotic index
cut-off of 4/1000 tumor cells, we found that while mitotic index was
significantly associated with outcome in IDH-wild type tumors (log-rank
p<0.01, HR = 4.41, 95% CI = 2.55-7.63), it was not associated with
outcome in IDH-mutant tumors (log-rank p = 0.471, HR = 1.10, 95% CI =
0.80-1.51), and could demonstrate a statistical interaction (p<0.01)
between IDH mutation and mitotic index. Patient age, an established
prognostic factor in diffuse glioma, was associated with outcome only in
the IDH-wild type subset, and consistent with prior data, 1p/19q
co-deletion conferred improved outcome in the IDH-mutant cohort. These
findings suggest that stratification of grade II-III gliomas into subsets
defined by the presence or absence of IDH mutation leads to subgroups
with distinct prognostic characteristics. Further evaluation of grading
criteria and prognostic markers is warranted within IDH-mutant versus
IDH-wild type diffuse grade II-II gliomas as independent entities.

