Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abstract Submission


Protein tyrosine kinase 7 (PTK7), a catalytically inactive receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) that is highly expressed by T-lineage cells during
intrathymic development, is a novel marker for human CD4+ recent thymic
emigrants (RTEs), and is also highly expressed on some T-lineage
thymomas, e.g., Jurkat cells as well as inprimary T-Acute Lymphoblastic
leukemia. The function of PTK7 in normal human T-cell development and in
oncogenesis remains unclear. Here, using RNAi-mediated gene silencing in
T-lineage tumor cells, primary human peripheral T-cells, and thymocytes,
we found that targeting PTK7 consistently decreased cell survival by
augmenting caspase-3 activation of apoptosis. The PTK7 knockdown also
decreased AKT phosphorylation and PI3 kinase activity, suggesting an
essential role for PTK7 in survival of RTEs and developing thymocytes
involving the PI3K/AKT pathway. Using mass spectrometry we identified
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) receptor as an active kinase partner
of PTK7. This interaction was biologically relevant in that PTK7
downregulation also reduced IGF-1R-dependent survival signals in
T-lineage cells. As enhanced IGF-1-dependent signaling is a frequent
event in oncogenesis, the intersection of PTK7 with the IGF-1 signaling
pathway suggests the potential of PTK7-directed therapy of T-lineage
tumors.

