Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the mixed solution of sodium hyaluronate and
hydroxyethylstarch on gynecologic cancer cell line


Effect of hyaluronic acid and hydroethyl starch mixture in ovarian cancer
cellObjective: Post-operative tissue adhesion is a very serious problem
in patients with ovarian cancer. This study is to investigate the role of
hyaluronic acid and hydroethyl starch mixture against the tissue adhesion
through in vitro experimentations with ovarian cancer cell lines.Methods:
We used different concentrations of hyaluronic acid and hydroethyl starch
(HA/HES) mixture in SKOV3 cell lines. We performed the adhesion and
proliferation inhibition assay in different method, mixing and spreading
cells. For the migration inhibition assay, we evaluated the effect
according to the concentration of HA/HES mixture. The wound-healing assay
was performed after artificial injury and physical barrier of 100% HA/HES
mixture was evaluated.Results: In adhesion and proliferation inhibition
assay, the viable adherent cells were decreased according to the
concentration of HA/HES mixture. The confluence increased over time,
except for 100% HA/HES mixture. This result was more obvious in spreading
method. The wound recovery was slow in high concentration of HA/HES
mixture in the migration inhibition assay and wound-healing assay. The
physical barrier of 100% HA/HES mixture inhibited the cell growth until
48 hours.Conclusion: The proliferation and recovery inhibition of SKOV3
cell lines using HA/HES mixture was confirmed and the inhibitory effect
appeared to be in proportion of the concentration of HA/HES mixture. This
growth inhibition effect of HA/HES mixture will be useful clinically in
patients with ovarian cancer

