Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer Core 125 Panel for quantitative expression and mutation
profiling


Molecular profiling of heterogeneous circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and
tumor biopsy samples at the single-cell level is critical for identifying
different cancer cell subpopulations and understanding their value in
predicting metastatic cancer progression and responses to treatment.
Unfortunately, the isolation and comprehensive characterization of
hundreds to thousands of individual cancer cells present formidable
analytical and technical challenges.To this end, we developed a
high-throughput (HT) HiCellex technology to obtain the genome-wide
expression and mutation profiles of hundreds to thousands of epithelial
cancer cells at the single cell level. Importantly, HiCellex allows
selective molecular profiling of a complete set of viable cells at the
single-cell level in the presence of contaminating leukocytes without
physical separation of individual cells. The genetic profiling technology
uses unique cell-specific molecular barcodes to label mRNAs in individual
viable cancer cells by a spliceosome-mediated trans-splicing mechanism.
Barcoded trans-splicing constructs, necessary for the labeling of the
entire population of pre-mRNAs, are delivered and expressed in a pool of
target cancer cells with lentiviral vectors. Digital expression data are
generated by HT sequencing of barcoded amplified cDNAs and easily cluster
to each cell in silico using cell-specific barcodes.This presentation
will provide results of development and validation of genome-wide and
multiplex RT-PCR profiling assay of the 500 most informative subtyping
and metastatic signature genes (MGS) in model cancer cell lines, CTC and
tumor samples. The developed HiCellex 500 MGS profiling assay is a
cost-effective approach to effectively characterize, subtype and identify
prognostic and diagnostic biomarkers in heterogeneous cancer cells at the
single-cell level.

