Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of CYP2A6 genetic polymorphisms on nicotine metabolism
and lung cancer risk in two prospective cohorts of smokers


Background. Cytochrome P450 2A6 (CYP2A6) is polymorphic and catalyzes the
metabolism of nicotine and certain tobacco-specific carcinogens,
including 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK), thus may
affect smoking behavior and contribute to substantial inter-individual
variation in risk of smoking-related lung cancer. CYP2A6 genetic
profiling coupled with biomarkers of tobacco constituents may enhance our
understanding of the gene-environmental interaction on lung cancer risk
and identify high-risk smokers for targeted preventive
interventions.Methods. A nested case-control study including 513 incident
lung cancers and an equal number of individually matched controls, all
current smokers, was conducted within two population-based prospective
cohorts with >80,000 Chinese men and women aged 45-74 years in Shanghai
and Singapore. Quantified were 4 common allelic variants of CYP2A6 (*4,
*7, *9 and rs1137115), urinary total nicotine, total cotinine (COT),
total 3-hydroxy cotinine (3HC), and total
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanol (NNAL, a NNK metabolite).
Calculated were total nicotine equivalent (TNE = the sum of total
nicotine, COT and 3HC), and the 3HC:COT ratio as a measure of CYP2A6
activity. Logistic regression method was used to calculate odd ratios and
95% confidence intervals for lung cancer associated CYP2A6 genotypes and
urinary biomarkers.Results. The smoking-adjusted ORs (95% CIs) of lung
cancer comparing the highest to lowest quartile of total nicotine, total
COT, total 3HC, TNE, and total NNAL were 2.49 (1.72-3.62), 3.03
(2.35-5.41), 3.56 (2.35-5.41), 3.35 (2.25-5.00), and 2.43 (1.65-3.57),
respectively (all Ps for trend Background. Cytochrome P450 2A6 (CYP2A6)
is polymorphic and catalyzes the metabolism of nicotine and certain
tobacco-specific carcinogens, including
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK), thus may affect
smoking behavior and contribute to substantial inter-individual variation
in risk of smoking-related lung cancer. CYP2A6 genetic profiling coupled
with biomarkers of tobacco constituents may enhance our understanding of
the gene-environmental interaction on lung cancer risk and identify
high-risk smokers for targeted preventive interventions.Methods. A nested
case-control study including 513 incident lung cancers and an equal
number of individually matched controls, all current smokers, was
conducted within two population-based prospective cohorts with >80,000
Chinese men and women aged 45-74 years in Shanghai and Singapore.
Quantified were 4 common allelic variants of CYP2A6 (*4, *7, *9 and
rs1137115), urinary total nicotine, total cotinine (COT), total 3-hydroxy
cotinine (3HC), and total 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanol
(NNAL, a NNK metabolite). Calculated were total nicotine equivalent (TNE
= the sum of total nicotine, COT and 3HC), and the 3HC:COT ratio as a
measure of CYP2A6 activity. Logistic regression method was used to
calculate odd ratios and 95% confidence intervals for lung cancer
associated CYP2A6 genotypes and urinary biomarkers.Results. The
smoking-adjusted ORs (95% CIs) of lung cancer comparing the highest to
lowest quartile of total nicotine, total COT, total 3HC, TNE, and total
NNAL were 2.49 (1.72-3.62), 3.03 (2.35-5.41), 3.56 (2.35-5.41), 3.35
(2.25-5.00), and 2.43 (1.65-3.57), respectively (all Ps for trend <
0.001). All 4 individual mutant variants of CYP2A6 were associated with
reduced 3HC:COT ratio (all Ps for trend Background. Cytochrome P450 2A6
(CYP2A6) is polymorphic and catalyzes the metabolism of nicotine and
certain tobacco-specific carcinogens, including
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK), thus may affect
smoking behavior and contribute to substantial inter-individual variation
in risk of smoking-related lung cancer. CYP2A6 genetic profiling coupled
with biomarkers of tobacco constituents may enhance our understanding of
the gene-environmental interaction on lung cancer risk and identify
high-risk smokers for targeted preventive interventions.Methods. A nested
case-control study including 513 incident lung cancers and an equal
number of individually matched controls, all current smokers, was
conducted within two population-based prospective cohorts with >80,000
Chinese men and women aged 45-74 years in Shanghai and Singapore.
Quantified were 4 common allelic variants of CYP2A6 (*4, *7, *9 and
rs1137115), urinary total nicotine, total cotinine (COT), total 3-hydroxy
cotinine (3HC), and total 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanol
(NNAL, a NNK metabolite). Calculated were total nicotine equivalent (TNE
= the sum of total nicotine, COT and 3HC), and the 3HC:COT ratio as a
measure of CYP2A6 activity. Logistic regression method was used to
calculate odd ratios and 95% confidence intervals for lung cancer
associated CYP2A6 genotypes and urinary biomarkers.Results. The
smoking-adjusted ORs (95% CIs) of lung cancer comparing the highest to
lowest quartile of total nicotine, total COT, total 3HC, TNE, and total
NNAL were 2.49 (1.72-3.62), 3.03 (2.35-5.41), 3.56 (2.35-5.41), 3.35
(2.25-5.00), and 2.43 (1.65-3.57), respectively (all Ps for trend <
0.001). All 4 individual mutant variants of CYP2A6 were associated with
reduced 3HC:COT ratio (all Ps for trend < 0.05). When all 4 genotypes
were combined to create a CYP2A6 index with 5 groups: G1 (most efficient)
to G5 (least efficient), the 3HC:COT ratio for G1 was 4 times that of G5
with a strong dose-dependent genotype-phenotype relation (P trend
Background. Cytochrome P450 2A6 (CYP2A6) is polymorphic and catalyzes the
metabolism of nicotine and certain tobacco-specific carcinogens,
including 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK), thus may
affect smoking behavior and contribute to substantial inter-individual
variation in risk of smoking-related lung cancer. CYP2A6 genetic
profiling coupled with biomarkers of tobacco constituents may enhance our
understanding of the gene-environmental interaction on lung cancer risk
and identify high-risk smokers for targeted preventive
interventions.Methods. A nested case-control study including 513 incident
lung cancers and an equal number of individually matched controls, all
current smokers, was conducted within two population-based prospective
cohorts with >80,000 Chinese men and women aged 45-74 years in Shanghai
and Singapore. Quantified were 4 common allelic variants of CYP2A6 (*4,
*7, *9 and rs1137115), urinary total nicotine, total cotinine (COT),
total 3-hydroxy cotinine (3HC), and total
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanol (NNAL, a NNK metabolite).
Calculated were total nicotine equivalent (TNE = the sum of total
nicotine, COT and 3HC), and the 3HC:COT ratio as a measure of CYP2A6
activity. Logistic regression method was used to calculate odd ratios and
95% confidence intervals for lung cancer associated CYP2A6 genotypes and
urinary biomarkers.Results. The smoking-adjusted ORs (95% CIs) of lung
cancer comparing the highest to lowest quartile of total nicotine, total
COT, total 3HC, TNE, and total NNAL were 2.49 (1.72-3.62), 3.03
(2.35-5.41), 3.56 (2.35-5.41), 3.35 (2.25-5.00), and 2.43 (1.65-3.57),
respectively (all Ps for trend < 0.001). All 4 individual mutant variants
of CYP2A6 were associated with reduced 3HC:COT ratio (all Ps for trend <
0.05). When all 4 genotypes were combined to create a CYP2A6 index with 5
groups: G1 (most efficient) to G5 (least efficient), the 3HC:COT ratio
for G1 was 4 times that of G5 with a strong dose-dependent
genotype-phenotype relation (P trend < 0.001). Smokers with CYP2A6 G5
consumed significantly fewer cigarettes and excreted lower urinary TNE (P
trend Background. Cytochrome P450 2A6 (CYP2A6) is polymorphic and
catalyzes the metabolism of nicotine and certain tobacco-specific
carcinogens, including 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone
(NNK), thus may affect smoking behavior and contribute to substantial
inter-individual variation in risk of smoking-related lung cancer. CYP2A6
genetic profiling coupled with biomarkers of tobacco constituents may
enhance our understanding of the gene-environmental interaction on lung
cancer risk and identify high-risk smokers for targeted preventive
interventions.Methods. A nested case-control study including 513 incident
lung cancers and an equal number of individually matched controls, all
current smokers, was conducted within two population-based prospective
cohorts with >80,000 Chinese men and women aged 45-74 years in Shanghai
and Singapore. Quantified were 4 common allelic variants of CYP2A6 (*4,
*7, *9 and rs1137115), urinary total nicotine, total cotinine (COT),
total 3-hydroxy cotinine (3HC), and total
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanol (NNAL, a NNK metabolite).
Calculated were total nicotine equivalent (TNE = the sum of total
nicotine, COT and 3HC), and the 3HC:COT ratio as a measure of CYP2A6
activity. Logistic regression method was used to calculate odd ratios and
95% confidence intervals for lung cancer associated CYP2A6 genotypes and
urinary biomarkers.Results. The smoking-adjusted ORs (95% CIs) of lung
cancer comparing the highest to lowest quartile of total nicotine, total
COT, total 3HC, TNE, and total NNAL were 2.49 (1.72-3.62), 3.03
(2.35-5.41), 3.56 (2.35-5.41), 3.35 (2.25-5.00), and 2.43 (1.65-3.57),
respectively (all Ps for trend < 0.001). All 4 individual mutant variants
of CYP2A6 were associated with reduced 3HC:COT ratio (all Ps for trend <
0.05). When all 4 genotypes were combined to create a CYP2A6 index with 5
groups: G1 (most efficient) to G5 (least efficient), the 3HC:COT ratio
for G1 was 4 times that of G5 with a strong dose-dependent
genotype-phenotype relation (P trend < 0.001). Smokers with CYP2A6 G5
consumed significantly fewer cigarettes and excreted lower urinary TNE (P
trend < 0.001). Compared with CYP2A6 G1, the multivariate-adjusted ORs
(95% CIs) of lung cancer for G2, G3, G4 and G5 were 0.95 (0.64-1.42),
1.04 (0.67-1.63), 0.54 (0.34-0.86) and 0.69 (0.43-1.13), respectively, (P
trend = 0.005). Furthermore, there was a suggestive interaction between
CYP2A6 index and total NNAL on lung cancer risk (P interaction =
0.087).Conclusion. CYP2A6 genetic polymorphisms have a strong influence
on cigarette consumption, nicotine uptake and metabolism. In addition to
reduced carcinogen exposure, altered metabolism of the tobacco-specific
carcinogen NNK may contribute to the reduced risk of lung cancer in
smokers with low functional CYP2A6 genotypes.Grants: R01 CA129534, R01
CA144034, UM1 CA182876.

