Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PIM1 and CDK4/6 kinases in renal cell carcinoma


In this study we examine the hypothesis that combination therapy
targeting the VEGFR, PIM1, and CDK4/6 kinases improves the efficacy of
VEGFR-directed monotherapy in renal cell carcinoma (RCC).Two RCC cell
lines, 786-O and Caki-1 (chosen for differences in VHL), were evaluated
and the ED50s of SGI-1776 (PIM1 inhibitor), PD0332991 (CDK4/6 inhibitor),
and LY2835219 (dual PIM1 and CDK4/6 inhibitor) assessed with an MTT
assay. Cell Titer-Glo was used to determine the effects of each of the
inhibitors on cellular viability alone and in combination with sunitinib
(VEFGR tyrosine kinase inhibitor). The effect of LY2835219 on
phosphorylation of BAD, a PIM1 substrate, was assessed by Western
blot.PIM1 and dual PIM1-CDK4/6 inhibition showed more potent effects on
cellular viability than CDK4/6 inhibition. ED50 values of each inhibitor
for RCC cells are reported in Table 1. Further assays showed greater
decreased cellular viability in cells treated with the combination of a
PIM1 inhibitor and sunitinib than in cells treated with either a PIM1
inhibitor or sunitinib alone. When combined with sunitinib, dual
PIM1-CDK4/6 inhibition was more effective than PIM1 inhibition in 786-O
cells. Sunitinib in combination with a CDK4/6 inhibitor was not as
effective as in combination with either a PIM1 inhibitor or a dual
PIM1-CDK4/6 inhibitor. Western blot analysis showed a decrease in
phospho-BAD in cells treated with a dual PIM1-CDK4/6 inhibitor.Potency of
Kinase Inhibitors Against RCC Cell LinesOur data reveal that targeting
PIM1 in combination with sunitinib is superior to sunitinib alone in RCC
cell lines. Additionally, in 786-O cells, added CDK4/6 inhibition further
improves the efficacy of the combination therapy. Dual PIM1-CDK4/6 kinase
targeted therapy in combination with sunitinib is an attractive
therapeutic regimen with good potential for translation to the clinic.
Ongoing studies include further characterization of the molecular events
involved including apoptosis, cell cycle regulation, PIM1 kinase and
CDK4/6 kinase activity, and evaluation of the combination therapy in a
mouse xenograft model of RCC.

