Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted epigenetic reprogramming reverts tumor progression in
triple-negative breast cancer models by the activation of retinoic acid
receptor alpha


INTRODUCTION: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is associated with
aggressiveness, early recurrence and poor prognosis and no other
therapeutic alternative besides chemotherapy. The silencing of genes
associated with cell differentiation in cancer is required for tumor
progression. In this process the epigenetic modifications induced by
aberrant control of the chromatin remodeling machinery in transformed
cells plays a key role. Therefore, finding a mechanism to restore the
expression of these genes by reverting the abnormal epigenetic
modifications is an important task in the fight against cancer. We showed
previously that the selective interference of the Sin3's PAH2 domain with
Sin3 interaction domain (SID) mimicking peptides restored expression of
E-cadherin, estrogen receptor and RARa target genes such as RARb and
CRBP1 leading to cell differentiation and anti-tumor effect in TNBC
cells. Here we studied whether the re-expression of retinoic acid
receptors (RARs) induced by the small molecule C16 (SID decoy) can make
TNBC cells sensitive to selective retinoid therapies.EXPERIMENTAL
APPROACH: Human and mouse cell models of TNBC as well as MMTV-Myc
oncomice were used to test the effects of the SID decoys on the induction
of RAR signaling, cell proliferation, induction of differentiation in 3D
cultures, expansion of the cancer stem cell compartment, atypical ductal
hyperplasia (ADH), ductal carcinola in situ (DCIS), tumor development and
metastatic dissemination.RESULTS: Our data show that C16 induced a
differential expression of RARs, 10 fold upregulation of RARa2,
RARbeta1/2, 10 fold downregulation of RARg1 and 30% increased production
of retinoic acid (RA). The combination of C16 plus RARa agonists, AM80
(tamibarotene) or AM580 induced 75% inhibition of cell proliferation in
2D cultures, induced immature acini in 3D and impaired cancer stem cell
proliferation inhibiting tumorsphere formation (65%) in vitro. In vivo,
the combination of C16 and AM580 reduced 90% tumor growth and metastasis.
Interestingly, the treatment of MMTV-Myc oncomice with C16 alone or in
combination with AM80 prevented mammary gland hyperplasia, DCIS and
delayed tumor development (80% tumor free survival, Kaplan-Meier
analysis).CONCLUSION: As a whole, the epigenetic reprogramming of the
TNBC cells is promising for design of therapies based on the use of RARa
agonists to induce differentiation of the tumor cells; giving these
patients a chance of an alternative or complementary therapy to
chemotherapy regimens.

