Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated level of BCL-2 is the primary target for inhibition
during duvelisib (IPI-145) therapy: ABT-199 neutralizes the resistance
mechanism in chronic lymphocytic leukemia


Inhibition of BTK by ibrutinib, PI3K-delta with idelalisib, or PI3K-delta
and gamma with duvelisib (IPI-145), all components of B-cell receptor
(BCR) pathway, has significantly improved the treatment outcome in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) via disrupting the interactions with
microenvironment. Though BCR network inhibitors induce durable remission
in the majority of CLL patients, a proportion of patients that initially
respond to treatment develop resistance or some show maintained
lymphocytosis in the blood. Identifying and overcoming resistance
mechanisms will be crucial for the most effective combinatorial use of
these agents. Duvelisib is an orally bioavailable, highly potent small
molecule inhibitor of p110 and p110 with KD values of 0.023 nM and 0.24
nM, respectively. Preclinical investigations with duvelisib overcame
signals from PI3K/AKT/S6 pathway and promoted apoptosis in primary CLL
cells (Balakrishnan et al, ASH 2013). Duvelisib is currently in a phase
III trial in CLL. During first phase I study, we performed molecular
investigations. PBMCs collected from CLL patients from Phase I study of
duvelisib treatment (Pre/Day 0 and Post/Day 28) were subjected to RPPA
analysis (n = 7). Interestingly, of the 141 proteins analyzed, Bcl-2 was
maximally and significantly elevated in Day 28 samples (mean fold + SEM:
1.7 + 0.2; p = 0.015), suggesting that this could be in part the
mechanism involved in resistance during therapy. Further analysis of
protein expression by immunoblotting confirmed that Bcl-2 protein was
elevated in post-treatment samples (1.3 + 0.1; p = 0.086; n = 7). This
was in conjunction with elevated levels of Bcl-2 transcripts analyzed by
mRNA array (TaqMan Human Apoptosis - 93 genes) assay (3.0 + 0.4; p =
0.002) and RT-PCR (1.9 + 0.2; p = 0.003), while other anti-apoptotic
genes (Bfl-1, Mcl-1, Bcl-w Bcl-g, Bcl-b, Bcl-xL) were unchanged.
Importantly, ex-vivo incubations of pre- and post- duvelisib samples with
3 nM ABT-199, a highly selective clinically promising Bcl-2 protein
antagonist, induced significantly greater apoptosis in post-therapy
samples (79%) in comparison to pre-treatment (58%) samples suggesting
that Bcl-2 is the primary target for inhibition during duvelisib intake
(n = 5; p = 0.041). In addition, duvelisib induced sensitivity on ex-vivo
post- duvelisib clinical samples (n = 15) was specifically towards
ABT-199 and produced significantly more apoptosis in the presence of
ABT-199 (45%, pInhibition of BTK by ibrutinib, PI3K-delta with
idelalisib, or PI3K-delta and gamma with duvelisib (IPI-145), all
components of B-cell receptor (BCR) pathway, has significantly improved
the treatment outcome in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) via
disrupting the interactions with microenvironment. Though BCR network
inhibitors induce durable remission in the majority of CLL patients, a
proportion of patients that initially respond to treatment develop
resistance or some show maintained lymphocytosis in the blood.
Identifying and overcoming resistance mechanisms will be crucial for the
most effective combinatorial use of these agents. Duvelisib is an orally
bioavailable, highly potent small molecule inhibitor of p110 and p110
with KD values of 0.023 nM and 0.24 nM, respectively. Preclinical
investigations with duvelisib overcame signals from PI3K/AKT/S6 pathway
and promoted apoptosis in primary CLL cells (Balakrishnan et al, ASH
2013). Duvelisib is currently in a phase III trial in CLL. During first
phase I study, we performed molecular investigations. PBMCs collected
from CLL patients from Phase I study of duvelisib treatment (Pre/Day 0
and Post/Day 28) were subjected to RPPA analysis (n = 7). Interestingly,
of the 141 proteins analyzed, Bcl-2 was maximally and significantly
elevated in Day 28 samples (mean fold + SEM: 1.7 + 0.2; p = 0.015),
suggesting that this could be in part the mechanism involved in
resistance during therapy. Further analysis of protein expression by
immunoblotting confirmed that Bcl-2 protein was elevated in
post-treatment samples (1.3 + 0.1; p = 0.086; n = 7). This was in
conjunction with elevated levels of Bcl-2 transcripts analyzed by mRNA
array (TaqMan Human Apoptosis - 93 genes) assay (3.0 + 0.4; p = 0.002)
and RT-PCR (1.9 + 0.2; p = 0.003), while other anti-apoptotic genes
(Bfl-1, Mcl-1, Bcl-w Bcl-g, Bcl-b, Bcl-xL) were unchanged. Importantly,
ex-vivo incubations of pre- and post- duvelisib samples with 3 nM
ABT-199, a highly selective clinically promising Bcl-2 protein
antagonist, induced significantly greater apoptosis in post-therapy
samples (79%) in comparison to pre-treatment (58%) samples suggesting
that Bcl-2 is the primary target for inhibition during duvelisib intake
(n = 5; p = 0.041). In addition, duvelisib induced sensitivity on ex-vivo
post- duvelisib clinical samples (n = 15) was specifically towards
ABT-199 and produced significantly more apoptosis in the presence of
ABT-199 (45%, p<0.0001; 3 nM) compared to other clinically-relevant
agents such as ibrutinib (1%, p = 0.10; 10 M), idelalisib (4% p = 0.05;
10 M) or ABT-737 (16%, p = 0.0002; 10 nM). We report that elevated Bcl-2
level is the primary target for inhibition during duvelisib therapy and
thereby combination with ABT-199 could be a rational approach to overcome
the resistance mechanism.

