Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt and Myc cooperate to promote cell proliferation in Lck-Dlx5
T-cell lymphomas


Constitutive activation of AKT is a frequent occurrence in the
development of human T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL),
due largely to inactivation of PTEN. Up regulation of MYC is also
commonly observed in T-ALL. We previously demonstrated that transgenic
expression of a constitutively active form of Akt2 alone is sufficient to
initiate T-cell lymphoma in mice, and that tumor formation typically
requires up regulation of c-Myc or Dlx5 caused by specific chromosomal
rearrangements. Here we report that transgenic overexpression of Dlx5
specifically in the mouse thymus can also drive T-cell lymphomagenesis.
Tumors from these mice were characterized by loss of Pten expression and
trisomy 15. Proliferation of these lymphoma cells was highly sensitive to
the Akt pathway inhibitors BEZ235 and RAD001 as well as to the Myc
inhibitor JQ1. Additionally, BEZ235 was found to cooperate with JQ1 to
induce a more profound effect on cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Moreover, BEZ235 potentiated vincristine-induced apoptosis when cells
were treated with both drugs simultaneously, whereas pretreatment with
BEZ235 antagonized the cell-killing effect of vincristine. These findings
suggest that combination therapies with AKT and MYC inhibitors hold
promise for the treatment of T-ALL in the clinic.

