Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity of CD34 and CD38 expression in adult acute B
lymphoblastic leukemia cells is reversible and not hierarchically
organized


The existence and identification of leukemia stem cells in adult acute B
lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) remain controversial. We examined whether
adult B-ALL is hierarchically organized into phenotypically distinct
subpopulations of leukemogenic and non-leukemogenic cells or whether most
B-ALL cells retain leukemogenic capacity, irrespective of their
immunophenotypes. Cells from CD34+CD38-, CD34+CD38+, and CD34-CD38+
subpopulations of primary adult B-ALL xenografts were shown to be capable
of reconstituting the original leukemia in NOD-scid-IL2Rg-/- mice. We
found that primary leukemia cells from 11 of 25 adult B-ALL patients with
different expression profiles of CD34 and CD38 proliferated robustly and
became CD34-CD38+ after being co-cultured with OP9 stromal cells.
Surprisingly, cultured CD34-CD38+ B-ALL cells were able to reestablish
the complete leukemic phenotype in xenografts. Transcriptomic analysis of
CD34+CD38-, CD34+CD38+, and CD34-CD38+ fractions purified directly from
xenografts and CD34-CD38+ cells from culture revealed no significantly
distinct expression profiles of transcription factors among these
populations. Furthermore, 5.7% of single adult primary B-ALL cells
engrafted in vivo. These observations suggest that adult B-ALL follows
the stochastic stem cell model and that the heterogeneity of CD34 and
CD38 expression in B-ALL is reversibly dependent on the microenvironment
and is not hierarchically organized.

