Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SeriMabs: N-terminal serine modification enables modular,
site-specific payload incorporation into antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs)


Site-specific incorporation of cell-killing agents into cancer-targeting
antibodies is an active area of innovation in the field of ADCs. We have
developed a highly modular site-specific conjugation platform employing
N-terminal serine engineered antibodies (SeriMabs), using ligation
chemistry orthogonal to lysine and cysteine modification which typically
employs maleimide containing linkers. Humanized IgG1 antibodies were
engineered with N-terminal serine residues on either the light or heavy
chain, with the precise position optimized for quantitative conversion to
the corresponding glyoxyl aldehyde in the presence of sodium periodate.
The aminooxy functional group of the heterobifunctional linker
N-[(aminooxy)acetyl]-3-[(3-nitro-2-pyridinyl)dithio]-L-alanine was
condensed with the aldehyde group on the antibody using 4-amino phenethyl
alcohol catalyst, yielding a stable oxime bond under conditions that
fully maintain antibody integrity. The dithiopyridine groups were then
reacted with thiol-containing maytansinoid or IGN cell-killing agents,
yielding disulfide-linked SeriMab ADCs with exactly 2 payload molecules
per antibody, as determined by MS analysis, in > 90% yield and with a
monomer content of > 98%. Conjugation of payload was found to be
selective for the N-terminal serine based on MS/MS analysis. The
site-specific ADCs were found to bind to their target antigens with
affinity similar to the corresponding lysine-conjugated ADCs, and FcRn
binding (pH 5.8) of the SeriMab ADCs were comparable to lysine-conjugated
controls.DGN462, our proprietary DNA-acting IGN payload used in our
preclinical candidate IMGN779, was conjugated to SeriMabs against two
targets, and in both cases, high, antigen-specific in vitro potency was
noted. The oxime linkage used in the serine site-specific conjugates was
found to be stable at pH 5.5 and pH 7.4 in buffer, as little detectable
payload was released over 4 days at 37C.SeriMab antiFR-DGN462 (2 DGN462
molecules per Ab) demonstrated potent, dose-dependent antitumor activity
against NCI-H2110 non-small cell lung cancer xenografts in SCID mice.
SeriMab antiFR-DGN462 was highly active at a single injection dose of 50
and 25 g/kg (DGN462 dose) with a minimal efficacious dose (MED) of 10
g/kg.We have developed a modular method for preparing site-specific,
disulfide-linked ADCs with good biochemical characteristics, through an
optimized N-terminal serine engineered IgG, using the same thiol
containing effector payloads employed in our lysine-conjugation platform.

