Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Heparan Sulfated Proteoglycans by branched peptides for
selective cancer imaging and therapy


Purpose of this study is evaluating the effect produced by targeting
Heparan Sulfated Proteoglycan (HSPG) by specific branched peptides, on
cancer cell adhesion, migration and drug-resistance.In previous papers we
reported on synthesis and biological activity of tetra-branched peptides
(NT4) containing the sequence of human neurotensin (NT), coupled to
different tracers or drugs. Differently to monomeric NT, NT4 peptides
bind with high selectivity to cells and tissues from different human
cancers like colorectal cancer, pancreas adenocarcinoma and urinary
bladder cancer and can efficiently and selectively deliver drugs (1-3) or
liposomes (4,5) for cancer cell imaging or therapy, in vitro and vivo. By
using NT4 conjugated to methotrexate (MTX) or 5FdU we obtained
significant reduction of tumor growth in mice (1,2). We demonstrated that
the branched structure provides NT4 with the ability to bind membrane
sulfated glycosaminoglycans as well as different membrane endocytic
receptors like LRP1 and LRP6 (6). This switch in target binding is
responsible for the high and broad cancer selectivity of NT4 branched
peptides, when compared to native NT.Considering the role of HSPG in
cancer cell interaction with the extracellular matrix, we have here
analyzed the effect of NT4 on cancer cell adhesion and migration on
different supports. Moreover, since binding and internalization of NT4
peptides is mediated by specific NT4 receptors on cancer cell membrane,
which may allow by-passing drug resistance produced by drug membrane
transporters, we have also tested the ability of drug-armed NT4 to
by-pass drug resistance in cancer cell lines.We found that 1- NT4
branched peptide inhibits adhesion and migration of different cancer cell
lines on different supports and 2- MTX-conjugated NT4 allows by-passing
drug resistance in MTX-resistant human breast cancer cells.The ability of
NT4 peptides to allow by-passing drug resistance and to interfere with
cancer cell adhesion and migration, when associated to their already
demonstrated high and broad cancer selectivity, reinforce their potential
role as selective and efficient cancer theranostics. Moreover, due to
their specific binding to sulfated glycans, NT4 peptides can be used as
probes for clarifying the role of these glycans in different aspects of
tumor progression.References.1. Falciani C. et al. Mol Cancer Ther 2007,
6, 2441-8.2. Falciani C. et al. Curr Cancer Drug Targets 2010, 10,
695-04.3. Falciani et al. ChemMedChem 2010, 5, 567-74.4. Falciani C. et
al. ChemMedChem 2011, 4, 678-85.5. Falciani C. et al. J Pept Sci 2013,
19, 198-204.6. Falciani C. et al. J Med Chem 2013, 56, 5009-18.

