Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of anti-human PD1 and PD-L1 antibodies in MiXeno mouse
models


As evidenced by strong clinical data from antibodies targeting cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4), programmed death protein-1 (PD-1), and
its ligand PD-L1, cancer immunotherapy is now a major breakthrough in
cancer treatment. Meanwhile, new immunotherapeutic agents with various
targets and mechanisms, as well as new drug combinations are under active
preclinical development. However, reliable humanized animal models are of
increasing importance as more programs are reaching the in vivo stage,
where direct evaluation of therapeutics with anti-human targets are
necessary. We have previously reported our efforts in generating mouse
MiXeno models that harbor human immune cells by engrafting
immuno-deficient mice with human PBMC (the MiXenoTM model) to evaluate
anti-PD-L1 antibody. In the current study, we carried out extensive
validation of these models in vivo by generating multiple cell
line-derived MiXeno models and testing them with anti-human PD-1 or PD-L1
antibodies in different animal strains (NOD/SCID vs. NPG). Our studies
demonstrated that MiXeno models can successfully reconstitute human T
cells in mice to support the anti-tumor activity of the
immuno-therapeutic agents. MiXeno model is simple and fast, and may
become valuable tools for in vivo evaluation of immunotherapeutic agents.

