Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotactic factors underlying tumor infiltration by
immunocompetent cells in colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of cancer related death.
Several studies have convincingly showed that CRC infiltration by
immunocompetent cells and, in particular, cytotoxic CD8+ T cells,
IFN--producing cells, Foxp3+ regulatory T cells and CD16+ MPO+
neutrophils, is significantly associated with prolonged patient survival.
However, the factors driving these cell populations into the tumor site
remain to be elucidated. We are investigating the chemokine/chemokine
receptor network promoting CRC infiltration by immune cells associated to
favorable prognosis.We have analysed the expression of a panel of genes
encoding for 39 chemokines and for 7 markers identifying specific immune
cell types in 58 freshly excised specimens of CRC and corresponding
control colonic tissues. In parallel, chemokine receptor profiles on
clinically relevant immunocompetent cell populations have been
characterized by flow cytometry.Our results suggest that tumor
infiltration by immunocompetent cells associated to favorable prognosis
is linked to the expression of three main chemokine patterns: 1) CCL3,
CCL5, CXCL9, and CXCL10 capable of recruiting cytotoxic CD8+ and IFN-
producing T cells; 2) CCL22 and CXCL12 attracting Foxp3+ regulatory T
cells; 3) CXCL2, CXCL5 and CXCL8 inducing migration of CD16+ MPO+
neutrophils. We have started to investigate the chemokine sources. CRC
cells purified from tumor specimens were found to express chemokines
potentially recruiting T and myeloid cells, including CCL3, CCL5, CXCL9,
CXCL10, CXCL12, and CXCL2, CXCL5, CXCL8. The stimuli driving chemokine
expression by tumor cells remain however to be clarified and are
currently under investigation.

