Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular and functional characterization of ovarian cancer stem
cells


Epithelial Ovarian Cancer (OC) is one of the leading causes of death for
women, and no significant therapeutic progress has been made in the last
decades.Recent data suggest that one of the mechanisms accounting for
resistant and/or relapsing disease is a subpopulation of cells in human
tumors with stem-like characteristics (cancer stem cells, CSCs). CSCs are
defined as a small subpopulation of cells within the tumor bulk that
possess the capacity, on one hand, to self-renew and, on the other hand,
to give rise to all heterogeneous cancer cell lineages that compose the
tumor of origin. The CSC hypothesis provides an attractive cellular
mechanism to explain the therapeutic refractoriness, dormant behavior,
and relapse of the disease.Our study aims at assessing ovarian cancer
stem cells (OCSC) as causal players in OC etiology and progression and at
defining their molecular and functional profile. Specifically, we are
pursuing the following objectives through the accomplishment of these
milestones: 1) collection of normal and pathological samples; 2)
identification of OCSC based on functional properties; 3) comparison of
gene expression profiles between cancer stem cells and their normal
counterpart; 4) characterization of novel genes/pathways involved in OCSC
function (clonogenicity, tumorigenicity, quiescence, chemoresistance,
etc.).This workflow is being applied to a series of fresh surgical
samples of OC as well as to normal ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) and
fallopian tube epithelium (FTE), namely the tissues of origin of OC.
Thus, we obtained a collection of primary cells that recapitulate many
traits of the original tissue both in vitro and in vivo. The gene
expression profiles of sphere-forming SC has been compared to that of
adherent, parental cells, aimed at identifying stemness-associated genes.
This screening has been extended to OC, OSE, and FTE, resulting in a set
of genes that are differentially expressed in OCSC as compared to their
normal counterparts.A subset of such genes has been selected for the
subsequent validation, both as OCSC biomarkers that could have clinical
applications and as drivers in the biological and pathogenic function of
OCSC.Our study might set the stage for innovative therapeutic approaches
aimed at the selective elimination of OCSC, thus preventing tumor
recurrence and chemoresistance, namely the two main causes of ovarian
cancer lethality.

