Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of saliva samples from healthy adults in north central
Florida for human papillomavirus infection


Background: Prevalence rates of healthy adults shedding HPV in their
saliva have varied depending on the socio-economical status of the
subjects. We hypothesize that samples collected from high-poverty and
low-education areas of North Central Florida will have a high prevalence
of HPV positive subjects. From published studies, we would expect an
infection rate of 2-10% with male and female rates being similar.Methods:
Through health fairs in North Central Florida, we consented and collected
saliva from 148 healthy adults. Of the 148 study samples, 64% were
between age 18-60 and 22% were above age 60. 32% of the saliva samples
were from males and 68% were from females. Dividing the saliva samples by
race, we had 41% white, 51% African American. DNA was isolated from the
saliva samples and PCR was used to amplify HPV-specific DNA. Degenerate
PCR primers were used for the PCR and sequencing the amplicons. All DNA
samples were coded so the investigators do not know the identity of the
samples until completion of all experiments.Results: We optimized the
degenerate primer sets, MY09/MY11 and GP5+/GP6+, for magnesium
concentration and annealing temperature. In addition we optimized a
nested PCR using the degenerate primers to increase the sensitivity of
HPV detection. From our direct DNA sequence analysis, we identified
10/148 (7%) HPV-positive samples. HPV-types found include: 16, 12, 32,
38, 61, 83, 72, 90, and 110. The inclusion of the primer set GP5+/GP6+
with MY09/11 resulted in an increase of total HPV-positivity from 5% to
7% and the detection of high-risk HPV types 32 and 90. Of the
HPV-positive saliva samples, 9% were from 18-60 year old healthy adults
and 3% were from over 60-year old adults. Adult females had a similar
infection rate as adult males, 7% vs. 6%. Upon comparing race, African
Americans were slightly more likely to be infected than whites, 7% vs.
5%. Of the 10 adults with detectable virus in their saliva, 70% were of
the high risk HPV type.Conclusion: Our sample size was small but showed
an overall infection rate of healthy adults to be similar to rates found
in other studies. In our study, male and females had similar infection
rates. The age 60 and younger group were found to be three times more
likely to be infected than the older than age 60 group. We found no
significant difference between race in our study.

