Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-155 directly targets PDCD4 and activates BIC promoter
through AP-1 dependent transcription to replenish miR-155 expression in
SAS cells


Pdcd4 (programmed cell death 4) has been demonstrated to be a tumor
suppressor gene and is expressed at higher levels during apoptosis. PDCD4
is down regulated in a subset of oral cancers (tongue and buccal cavity)
and an association between its down-regulation by miR-21 and
tumorigenesis and invasion in oral carcinoma has been demonstrated. In
this study we show that miR-155 directly targets PDCD4 in SAS (tongue
squamous carcinoma) cells. We demonstrate a positive feedback loop
between miR-155 expression and AP-1 dependent transcription through the
down regulation of PDCD4. Analysis of miR-155 promoter (BIC) showed the
presence of NF-B and AP-1 (c-Jun and c-Fos) transcription factor binding
sites and PDCD4 is known to inhibit AP-1 dependent transcription. Ectopic
expression of PDCD4 in SAS cells drastically reduced the BIC promoter
activity via inhibition of AP-1 dependent transcription and down
regulated the levels of miR-155. We also generated the Lentiviral based
miR-155 sponge stable cells to down regulate miR-155 in SAS cells, and
found an increase in PDCD4 protein levels. The activity of BIC promoter
was relatively low in miR-155 sponge stable cells compared to control
sponge stable cells as analyzed by a dual luciferase reporter assay. We
have also seen the reduced rate of proliferation in miR-155 sponge stable
cells compared to control sponge stable cells. Thus our data show that
miR-155 directly targets PDCD4 and consequently activates AP-1 dependent
transcription in BIC promoter and increasing the levels of miR-155.

