Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence for diverse mechanisms of tumorigenesis in breast and
ovarian tumors of BRCA1/2 carriers


Germline mutations in the tumor suppressors BRCA1 and BRCA2 lead to
increased risks of breast and ovarian cancers at least in part due to
their roles in homologous recombination based double stranded DNA repair.
Genetic alterations including loss of the wild-type BRCA1/2 allele, PTEN
loss and TP53 mutations are thought to contribute to genomic instability
in susceptible tissues and therefore tumor formation. In order to further
investigate the mechanisms of tumorigenesis in BRCA1/2 carriers, we
performed whole exome sequencing of 39 breast and ovarian tumors and
matched blood germline DNA. Sequencing data were analyzed using GATK and
MuTECT for variant calls and ngCGH and Sequenza for copy number analysis.
Using cellularity corrected tumor versus germline allele frequency
calculations, we found no evidence of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in 17%
of BRCA1 tumors (n = 4 of 24) and 40% of BRCA2 tumors (n = 6 of 15).
Genomic instability as measured by percentage of genome in the diploid
state showed that BRCA1/2 tumors with no evidence of LOH had decreased
genomic instability (average% genome diploid 76+27% vs 57+16%, p = 0.01)
with no difference in the overall somatic mutation rate (average 50+71 vs
83+156 single nucleotide variants per megabase, p = NS). While there were
also no significant differences in the average number of predicted
deleterious somatic mutations in BRCA1/2 tumors with no LOH versus tumors
with LOH (n = 13+15 vs 13+6, p = NS), tumors without LOH were
significantly less likely to have mutations or loss in TP53 or loss of
PTEN (50% versus 93%, p = 0.007). Of the ten tumors with no LOH, five
were from patients who had received prior cytotoxic chemotherapy. Other
tumors with no LOH were from patients with atypical presentations
including a mixed histology epithelial ovarian tumor in a BRCA1 carrier,
and a triple negative breast cancer in a 70 year old BRCA2 carrier. Of
the 29 tumors with evidence of LOH, no patient had received cytotoxic
chemotherapy for a prior malignancy or in the neoadjuvant setting. No
recurrent driver mutations other than TP53 mutations were identified in
the BRCA1/2 tumors with or without LOH. Twenty-six pathogenic likely
driver mutations were identified in 25 cancer genes outside of TP53,
including NRAS, PIK3CA, and ABL2. Our results indicate that approximately
75% of tumors in BRCA1/2 germline mutation carriers arise via a classic
pathway involving LOH of the wildtype allele, loss of function of TP53
and/or PTEN and significant genomic instability. However, approximately
25% of tumors may arise via an alternative pathway, possibly related to
prior chemotherapy in some cases. Further studies are needed to determine
the molecular and clinical factors associated with this proposed classic
versus atypical pathway of tumorigenesis in BRCA1/2 carriers and whether
these characteristics are associated with outcomes such as survival and
platinum and/or PARP inhibitor sensitivity.

