Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel Mps1 kinase inhibitors with potent anti-tumor activity


Cell cycle deregulation represents one of the hallmarks of cancer and
consequently cell cycle arrest is the predominant mode of action for a
number of antimitotic cancer drugs (e.g. taxanes and vinca alkaloids).
Targeted disruption of the cell cycle checkpoint offers a novel approach
to cancer treatment since tumor cells will not arrest in mitosis despite
DNA damage or unattached/misattached chromosomes resulting in aneuploidy
and cell death. Mps1, a mitotic kinase that is overexpressed in several
human cancers, has been shown to function as the key kinase which
activates the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) to secure proper
distribution of chromosomes to daughter cells.Here, we disclose for the
first time the structure and functional characterization of two novel
Mps1 inhibitors, BAY 1161909 and BAY 1217389, derived from structurally
distinct chemical classes. BAY 1161909 and BAY 1217389 inhibited Mps1
kinase activity with IC50 values below 10 nM while showing an excellent
selectivity profile against a broad panel of kinases. In cellular
mechanistic assays, BAY 1161909 and BAY 1217389 abrogated
nocodazole-induced SAC activity, inducing premature exit from mitosis
(mitotic breakthrough), which results in multinuclearity and tumor cell
death. Both compounds efficiently inhibited tumor cell proliferation in
vitro (IC50 values in low nanomolar range), showing a similar inhibitory
pattern in a broad panel of tumor cell lines. In vivo, the Mps1
inhibitors BAY 1161909 and BAY 1217389 achieved moderate efficacy in
monotherapy in tumor xenograft studies (tumor growth inhibition 50%).
However, according to its unique mode of action, when combined with
paclitaxel, at the maximum tolerated dose, low doses of Mps1 inhibitor
reduced paclitaxel-induced mitotic arrest in line with weakening of SAC
activity. Consequently, combination therapy strongly improved efficacy
over paclitaxel or Mps1 inhibitor mono-treatment in a broad range of
xenograft models including those being intrinsically
paclitaxel-insensitive as well as those with acquired paclitaxel
resistance. Both Mps1 inhibitors showed good tolerability without adding
toxicity to paclitaxel monotherapy.Our findings validate the innovative
concept of SAC abrogation and justify clinical proof of concept studies
evaluating Mps1 inhibitors BAY 1161909 and BAY 1217389 in combination
with antimitotic cancer drugs in order to enhance their efficacy and
potentially overcome resistance. BAY 1161909 is currently in a phase I
clinical trial (NCT02138812), start of clinical investigation of BAY
1217389 is planned. To our knowledge BAY 1161909 and BAY 1217389 are the
first Mps1 inhibitors in clinical trials.

