Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression models for predicting doxorubicin response in
canine osteosarcoma


Purpose: The use of gene expression models for predicting individual
response to cancer therapy is a promising area of research for improving
outcome. Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone cancer in dogs,
with an average 1 year survival after treatment. The co-expression
extrapolation (COXEN) method has been established as a gene expression
method for accurately predicting drug sensitivity in human cancer. Our
purpose is to explore the ability of COXEN for the intra- or interspecies
extrapolation of cancer cell line data for prediction of chemosensitivity
in canine osteosarcoma patients.Methods: Gene expression and drug
sensitivity data to doxorubicin (DOX) for the human NCI60 cell line panel
were publicly available. Corresponding data was obtained and generated
for the canine ACC29 cell line panel and canine osteosarcoma tumors via
cell viability assays, hospital record search, and microarray gene
expression analysis. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
identified in reference sets by Significance Analysis of Microarrays or
t-test analysis between sensitive and resistant samples to DOX. Probe
matching between species was done based on highest target sequence
homology or by collapsing probes to gene level by selecting probes with
maximum variance between samples. Hierarchical clustering was done using
the CIMminer program. DEGs are filtered for genes sharing strong
co-expression between reference and co-expression datasets, followed by
prediction model building using the Misclassification Penalized Posterior
(MiPP) algorithm.Results: The NCI60 and ACC29 panels are similarly
sensitive to DOX with log GI50 molar ranges of -8.3 to -5.7 and -8.2 to
-5.9, respectively. Samples from ACC29 and COS16 clustered according to
DOX sensitivity 67 and 100% correctly when DEGs from NCI60 were used.
NCI60-trained models using DEGs co-expressed with the ACC29 were 83%
accurate in predicting sensitivity to DOX in ACC29 (p = 0.019, binomial).
NCI60-trained models using DEGs co-expressed with COS49 were 67% accurate
in predicting response to DOX in COS49 (p = 0.049, binomial, p = 0.045,
Log Rank test). Models with NCI60 DEGs but co-expressed and built on
COS16 were 73% accurate in COS33 (p = 0.026, binomial, p = 0.001, Log
Rank test). ACC29-trained models using DEGs co-expressed with COS49 were
73% accurate in COS49 (p = 0.008, binomial). Models with ACC29 or
ACCosteo DEGs but co-expressed and built on COS16 were each 70% accurate
in COS33 (p = 0.047, binomial, p = 0.071 and 0.071, Log Rank
test).Conclusions: Both human and canine COXEN models were able to
accurately predict response of canine osteosarcoma patients to DOX. The
best performing model involved identifying DEGs from human cell lines,
co-expressing and building the model with dog tumors, suggesting that
genomic strategies in canine oncology could benefit from the wealth of
available human genomic data, and could provide validation for
personalized medicine in human cancer.

