Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant upregulation of 14-3-3 gamma promotes mononucleated
polyploidization in human lung cancers


Advanced non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC), frequently display
increased expression of 14-3-3 gamma (14-3-3); a scaffolding protein
shown to have oncogenic capacity. This aberrant increase in expression
has also been correlated with poorer survival, indicating that
upregulation of 14-3-3 results in a more aggressive tumor phenotype. Our
lab is in pursuit of characterizing the mechanisms driving this more
advanced cancer phenotype. One such mechanism currently being
investigated is 14-3-3's ability to promote polyploidization in lung
cancer cells. Polyploidization is a known mechanism observed to increase
tumorigenicity, resistance to conventional therapies, and theorized to
promote chromosomal instability. Our data shows that overexpression of
14-3-3 results in a subpopulation of cells that harbor mono-nucleated
tetraploid DNA content. This suggests that elevated expression of 14-3-3
promotes aberrant cell cycle progression, either by mechanisms of an
abortive mitosis known as endomitosis, or by means of endoreplication, a
re-replication event occurring in the absence of mitosis. Further
analyses have confirmed that these cells, in the absence of tumor
suppressor p53, remain viable and undergo cellular division; supporting
our hypothesis that upregulation of 14-3-3 is resulting in an unstable,
tumorigenic tetraploid cell state. Taken together, our data elucidates
one role by which 14-3-3 may be contributing to a more aggressive tumor
phenotype in patients with advanced NSCLC.

