Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic impact of KRAS copy number amplification in
esophagogastric junction adenocarcinoma


Background: The incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) or
esophagogastric junction adenocarcinoma (EGJA) has been dramatically
increasing. KRAS oncogenic alterations activate multiple pathways in
various types of cancer. A recent comprehensive genetic study has
reported that around 20% of EAC harbor KRAS copy number gain (Dulak AM et
al, 2012, Nat Genet). However, the prognostic role KRAS amplification has
not been well examined in EAC/EGJA.Methods: DNA was extracted from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue of 145 EGJA (Siewert types
I-III). KRAS copy number was detected by real-time quantitative PCR, and
KRAS copy number gain was defined as KRAS/RNase P (as a reference) ratio
2.5. The impact of KRAS amplification was analyzed in relation to
clinicopathological factors, and patient outcomes [disease free survival
(DFS), and overall survival (OS)]. Multivariate cox proportional hazards
model was performed adjusting clinicopathological factors.Results: KRAS
amplification was observed in 40 (33.1%) cases. KRAS amplification was
significantly associated with the lymph node metastasis (P = 0.0145), and
was significantly associated with poorer patient outcome (P = 0.0355 in
DFS, and P = 0.0067 in OS). In multivariate analysis, KRAS amplification
was an independent prognostic factor for OS [multivatiate hazard ratio
(HR) = 2.53; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.22-5.25, P = 0.014] and DFS
[multivatiate hazard ratio (HR) = 1.94; 95% confidence interval (CI),
1.04-3.56, P = 0.0382].Conclusions: KRAS copy number gain may be a useful
prognostic marker in EGJA.

