Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-B signaling between stromal macrophages and breast cancer cells


It has become increasingly clear that the tumor microenvironment directly
interacts with tumor cells to promote tumor growth and progression. Tumor
associated macrophages (TAMs) have emerged as key components of the tumor
microenvironment, and their presence in breast cancer is associated with
poor prognosis. There is evidence that nuclear factor -kappaB (NF-B) is
an important signaling pathway between cancer cells and the stromal
compartment. Disruption of NF-B communication between TAMs and breast
tumors may weaken the pro-tumorigenic influences of TAMs, and therefore
make the tumor more susceptible to standard treatments.Our work reveals
that when breast cancer cells and bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs)
are co-cultured in transwell plates, activated canonical NF-B and STAT3
levels dramatically increase in both cell types. This signaling
interaction was confirmed by co-culturing human blood derived macrophages
with breast cancer cells. BMDMs co-cultured with breast cancer cells
acquire a mixed M1/M2 activation phenotype, and also have skewed
inflammatory cytokine production. In basal-like mouse tumors, active NF-B
levels are much higher in the CD11b+ (TAM) fraction compared to the
CD11b- fraction. Even more so than BMDMs, TAMs isolated from mouse
basal-like tumors have high NF-B activity, and can promote elevated NF-B
and STAT3 activation and cytokine production in breast cancer cells when
co-cultured in transwell plates. BMDMs genetically lacking p65 have
altered inflammatory cytokine production when compared to wild type
BMDMs, which remains skewed when the cells are co-cultured with breast
cancer cells. Because the NF-B pathway can be targeted therapeutically,
understanding how NF-B activation influences breast tumor-TAM
communication is important for developing new treatment options for
aggressive cancers.

