Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiotensin-(1-7) targets c-Met signaling by up-regulating the
phosphatase PTP1b to reduce triple negative breast cancer


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer with no known targeted therapies, since the tumors cells lack
expression of the estrogen receptor and do not overexpress the HER2/Neu
oncoprotein. Our laboratory showed that angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)], an
endogenous seven amino acid peptide hormone, specifically activates the G
protein-coupled receptor mas to inhibit the growth of lung, breast and
prostate cancer cells and tumors. Using the 4T1 syngeneic mouse TNBC
model, we examined the molecular signaling involved in the anti-tumor
effects of Ang-(1-7). Ang-(1-7) significantly reduced tumor volume when
compared to the control group (a 46% reduction by day 18, n = 6-7,
pTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer with no known targeted therapies, since the tumors cells lack
expression of the estrogen receptor and do not overexpress the HER2/Neu
oncoprotein. Our laboratory showed that angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)], an
endogenous seven amino acid peptide hormone, specifically activates the G
protein-coupled receptor mas to inhibit the growth of lung, breast and
prostate cancer cells and tumors. Using the 4T1 syngeneic mouse TNBC
model, we examined the molecular signaling involved in the anti-tumor
effects of Ang-(1-7). Ang-(1-7) significantly reduced tumor volume when
compared to the control group (a 46% reduction by day 18, n = 6-7,
p<0.05), with a concomitant decrease in tumor weight (2.00.3 g in
untreated mice vs. 1.30.1 g in treated mice, pTriple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast cancer with no known
targeted therapies, since the tumors cells lack expression of the
estrogen receptor and do not overexpress the HER2/Neu oncoprotein. Our
laboratory showed that angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)], an endogenous seven
amino acid peptide hormone, specifically activates the G protein-coupled
receptor mas to inhibit the growth of lung, breast and prostate cancer
cells and tumors. Using the 4T1 syngeneic mouse TNBC model, we examined
the molecular signaling involved in the anti-tumor effects of Ang-(1-7).
Ang-(1-7) significantly reduced tumor volume when compared to the control
group (a 46% reduction by day 18, n = 6-7, p<0.05), with a concomitant
decrease in tumor weight (2.00.3 g in untreated mice vs. 1.30.1 g in
treated mice, p<0.05). A significant reduction in the proliferation
marker Ki67 was observed in tumors from Ang-(1-7)-treated mice compared
to tumors from untreated mice (18.13.7 Ki67(+) cells vs 103.917.2,
pTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer with no known targeted therapies, since the tumors cells lack
expression of the estrogen receptor and do not overexpress the HER2/Neu
oncoprotein. Our laboratory showed that angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)], an
endogenous seven amino acid peptide hormone, specifically activates the G
protein-coupled receptor mas to inhibit the growth of lung, breast and
prostate cancer cells and tumors. Using the 4T1 syngeneic mouse TNBC
model, we examined the molecular signaling involved in the anti-tumor
effects of Ang-(1-7). Ang-(1-7) significantly reduced tumor volume when
compared to the control group (a 46% reduction by day 18, n = 6-7,
p<0.05), with a concomitant decrease in tumor weight (2.00.3 g in
untreated mice vs. 1.30.1 g in treated mice, p<0.05). A significant
reduction in the proliferation marker Ki67 was observed in tumors from
Ang-(1-7)-treated mice compared to tumors from untreated mice (18.13.7
Ki67(+) cells vs 103.917.2, p<0.005). Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter
factor (HGF/SF) is a potent inducer of cell proliferation and cancer cell
invasion by activating the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) c-Met and
HGF/SF/c-Met signaling is elevated in TNBC. Ang-(1-7) attenuates c-Met
RTK activation by HGF [phospho-c-Met(Y1234/1235)] in human MDA-MB-231 and
mouse 4T1 TNBC cells by 30.3% (pTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is
an aggressive form of breast cancer with no known targeted therapies,
since the tumors cells lack expression of the estrogen receptor and do
not overexpress the HER2/Neu oncoprotein. Our laboratory showed that
angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)], an endogenous seven amino acid peptide
hormone, specifically activates the G protein-coupled receptor mas to
inhibit the growth of lung, breast and prostate cancer cells and tumors.
Using the 4T1 syngeneic mouse TNBC model, we examined the molecular
signaling involved in the anti-tumor effects of Ang-(1-7). Ang-(1-7)
significantly reduced tumor volume when compared to the control group (a
46% reduction by day 18, n = 6-7, p<0.05), with a concomitant decrease in
tumor weight (2.00.3 g in untreated mice vs. 1.30.1 g in treated mice,
p<0.05). A significant reduction in the proliferation marker Ki67 was
observed in tumors from Ang-(1-7)-treated mice compared to tumors from
untreated mice (18.13.7 Ki67(+) cells vs 103.917.2, p<0.005). Hepatocyte
growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) is a potent inducer of cell
proliferation and cancer cell invasion by activating the receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) c-Met and HGF/SF/c-Met signaling is elevated in
TNBC. Ang-(1-7) attenuates c-Met RTK activation by HGF
[phospho-c-Met(Y1234/1235)] in human MDA-MB-231 and mouse 4T1 TNBC cells
by 30.3% (p<0.001) and 32.1% (pTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an
aggressive form of breast cancer with no known targeted therapies, since
the tumors cells lack expression of the estrogen receptor and do not
overexpress the HER2/Neu oncoprotein. Our laboratory showed that
angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)], an endogenous seven amino acid peptide
hormone, specifically activates the G protein-coupled receptor mas to
inhibit the growth of lung, breast and prostate cancer cells and tumors.
Using the 4T1 syngeneic mouse TNBC model, we examined the molecular
signaling involved in the anti-tumor effects of Ang-(1-7). Ang-(1-7)
significantly reduced tumor volume when compared to the control group (a
46% reduction by day 18, n = 6-7, p<0.05), with a concomitant decrease in
tumor weight (2.00.3 g in untreated mice vs. 1.30.1 g in treated mice,
p<0.05). A significant reduction in the proliferation marker Ki67 was
observed in tumors from Ang-(1-7)-treated mice compared to tumors from
untreated mice (18.13.7 Ki67(+) cells vs 103.917.2, p<0.005). Hepatocyte
growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) is a potent inducer of cell
proliferation and cancer cell invasion by activating the receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) c-Met and HGF/SF/c-Met signaling is elevated in
TNBC. Ang-(1-7) attenuates c-Met RTK activation by HGF
[phospho-c-Met(Y1234/1235)] in human MDA-MB-231 and mouse 4T1 TNBC cells
by 30.3% (p<0.001) and 32.1% (p<0.005), respectively. The phosphatase
PTP1b, a negative regulator of c-Met RTK activation, was significantly
up-regulated by 75% in response to Ang-(1-7) treatment in the 4T1 cells
(from 0.80.1 to 1.40.1, pTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an
aggressive form of breast cancer with no known targeted therapies, since
the tumors cells lack expression of the estrogen receptor and do not
overexpress the HER2/Neu oncoprotein. Our laboratory showed that
angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)], an endogenous seven amino acid peptide
hormone, specifically activates the G protein-coupled receptor mas to
inhibit the growth of lung, breast and prostate cancer cells and tumors.
Using the 4T1 syngeneic mouse TNBC model, we examined the molecular
signaling involved in the anti-tumor effects of Ang-(1-7). Ang-(1-7)
significantly reduced tumor volume when compared to the control group (a
46% reduction by day 18, n = 6-7, p<0.05), with a concomitant decrease in
tumor weight (2.00.3 g in untreated mice vs. 1.30.1 g in treated mice,
p<0.05). A significant reduction in the proliferation marker Ki67 was
observed in tumors from Ang-(1-7)-treated mice compared to tumors from
untreated mice (18.13.7 Ki67(+) cells vs 103.917.2, p<0.005). Hepatocyte
growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) is a potent inducer of cell
proliferation and cancer cell invasion by activating the receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) c-Met and HGF/SF/c-Met signaling is elevated in
TNBC. Ang-(1-7) attenuates c-Met RTK activation by HGF
[phospho-c-Met(Y1234/1235)] in human MDA-MB-231 and mouse 4T1 TNBC cells
by 30.3% (p<0.001) and 32.1% (p<0.005), respectively. The phosphatase
PTP1b, a negative regulator of c-Met RTK activation, was significantly
up-regulated by 75% in response to Ang-(1-7) treatment in the 4T1 cells
(from 0.80.1 to 1.40.1, p<0.05), suggesting that the heptapeptide hormone
increases PTP1b to negatively regulate c-Met signaling. A significant
decrease in immunoreactive phospho-c-Met(Y1234/1235) was also observed in
4T1 tumors treated with Ang-(1-7) as compared to untreated tumors (from
47.0 to 19.7% of field, n = 5, pTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is
an aggressive form of breast cancer with no known targeted therapies,
since the tumors cells lack expression of the estrogen receptor and do
not overexpress the HER2/Neu oncoprotein. Our laboratory showed that
angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)], an endogenous seven amino acid peptide
hormone, specifically activates the G protein-coupled receptor mas to
inhibit the growth of lung, breast and prostate cancer cells and tumors.
Using the 4T1 syngeneic mouse TNBC model, we examined the molecular
signaling involved in the anti-tumor effects of Ang-(1-7). Ang-(1-7)
significantly reduced tumor volume when compared to the control group (a
46% reduction by day 18, n = 6-7, p<0.05), with a concomitant decrease in
tumor weight (2.00.3 g in untreated mice vs. 1.30.1 g in treated mice,
p<0.05). A significant reduction in the proliferation marker Ki67 was
observed in tumors from Ang-(1-7)-treated mice compared to tumors from
untreated mice (18.13.7 Ki67(+) cells vs 103.917.2, p<0.005). Hepatocyte
growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) is a potent inducer of cell
proliferation and cancer cell invasion by activating the receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) c-Met and HGF/SF/c-Met signaling is elevated in
TNBC. Ang-(1-7) attenuates c-Met RTK activation by HGF
[phospho-c-Met(Y1234/1235)] in human MDA-MB-231 and mouse 4T1 TNBC cells
by 30.3% (p<0.001) and 32.1% (p<0.005), respectively. The phosphatase
PTP1b, a negative regulator of c-Met RTK activation, was significantly
up-regulated by 75% in response to Ang-(1-7) treatment in the 4T1 cells
(from 0.80.1 to 1.40.1, p<0.05), suggesting that the heptapeptide hormone
increases PTP1b to negatively regulate c-Met signaling. A significant
decrease in immunoreactive phospho-c-Met(Y1234/1235) was also observed in
4T1 tumors treated with Ang-(1-7) as compared to untreated tumors (from
47.0 to 19.7% of field, n = 5, p<0.05). The Ang-(1-7)-mediated
suppression of HGF/SF-mediated c-Met activation was abrogated by
D-alanine7-Ang-(1-7) [D-Ala], a mas receptor antagonist. In agreement
with the Ang-(1-7)-mediated reduction of the tumor volume of 4T1 tumors,
HGF-induced activation of the MAPKs ERK1 and ERK2 was reduced by the
heptapeptide hormone in vitro (by 59.7 and 74.8%, respectively, n = 5).
Further, Ang-(1-7) treatment significantly attenuated HGF/SF-stimulated
cell invasion through Matrigel (by 532, n = 8, pTriple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast cancer with no known
targeted therapies, since the tumors cells lack expression of the
estrogen receptor and do not overexpress the HER2/Neu oncoprotein. Our
laboratory showed that angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)], an endogenous seven
amino acid peptide hormone, specifically activates the G protein-coupled
receptor mas to inhibit the growth of lung, breast and prostate cancer
cells and tumors. Using the 4T1 syngeneic mouse TNBC model, we examined
the molecular signaling involved in the anti-tumor effects of Ang-(1-7).
Ang-(1-7) significantly reduced tumor volume when compared to the control
group (a 46% reduction by day 18, n = 6-7, p<0.05), with a concomitant
decrease in tumor weight (2.00.3 g in untreated mice vs. 1.30.1 g in
treated mice, p<0.05). A significant reduction in the proliferation
marker Ki67 was observed in tumors from Ang-(1-7)-treated mice compared
to tumors from untreated mice (18.13.7 Ki67(+) cells vs 103.917.2,
p<0.005). Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) is a potent
inducer of cell proliferation and cancer cell invasion by activating the
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) c-Met and HGF/SF/c-Met signaling is
elevated in TNBC. Ang-(1-7) attenuates c-Met RTK activation by HGF
[phospho-c-Met(Y1234/1235)] in human MDA-MB-231 and mouse 4T1 TNBC cells
by 30.3% (p<0.001) and 32.1% (p<0.005), respectively. The phosphatase
PTP1b, a negative regulator of c-Met RTK activation, was significantly
up-regulated by 75% in response to Ang-(1-7) treatment in the 4T1 cells
(from 0.80.1 to 1.40.1, p<0.05), suggesting that the heptapeptide hormone
increases PTP1b to negatively regulate c-Met signaling. A significant
decrease in immunoreactive phospho-c-Met(Y1234/1235) was also observed in
4T1 tumors treated with Ang-(1-7) as compared to untreated tumors (from
47.0 to 19.7% of field, n = 5, p<0.05). The Ang-(1-7)-mediated
suppression of HGF/SF-mediated c-Met activation was abrogated by
D-alanine7-Ang-(1-7) [D-Ala], a mas receptor antagonist. In agreement
with the Ang-(1-7)-mediated reduction of the tumor volume of 4T1 tumors,
HGF-induced activation of the MAPKs ERK1 and ERK2 was reduced by the
heptapeptide hormone in vitro (by 59.7 and 74.8%, respectively, n = 5).
Further, Ang-(1-7) treatment significantly attenuated HGF/SF-stimulated
cell invasion through Matrigel (by 532, n = 8, p<0.05 compared to HGF/SF
stimulation); this effect was abrogated by the mas receptor antagonist
D-Ala. Collectively, our data suggest that Ang-(1-7) in part suppresses
the progression of triple negative breast tumors by activating the mas
receptor to upregulate the phosphatase PTP1b and attenuate HGF/SF-induced
c-Met activation, resulting in decreased ERK1/2 signaling, reduced tumor
growth and diminished cell invasion, providing support for the use of
Ang-(1-7) as a novel therapeutic agent for patients with TNBC.

