Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docetaxel induced-JNK2/PHD1 signaling pathway increases cell death
in cancer cells under hypoxia through the degradation of HIF-1


HIF-1 has been shown to regulate the expression of more than 70 genes
involved in angiogenesis, tumor growth, metastasis, chemoresistance and
radioresistance. There has been a growing interest in using HIF-1
inhibitors as anticancer drugs. Recently, docetaxel, which has been
approved by the FDA for treatment of various cancers, has been reported
to enhance the degradation of HIF-1, but its molecular mechanism is
unclear. In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanism
underlying the docetaxel-induced degradation of HIF-1 and cell death in
cancer cell under hypoxia. Pretreatment of docetaxel increased the
polyubiquitination and proteasome mediated-degradation of HIF-1 and cell
death in cancer cells under hypoxia. Under hypoxia, pharmacological
inhibitors or siRNAs for PHD1 (prolyl hydroxylase 1) effectively
prevented HIF-1 degradation and cancer cell death through inhibiting
docetaxel-mediated activation of PHD1. In addition, siRNA-mediated
knockdown of JNK2 blocked docetaxel-induced degradation of HIF-1 and
cancer cell death through inhibiting the activation of PHD1. Through a
luciferase reporter assay, we observed that the inhibition of the
JNK2/PHD1 signaling pathway significantly suppressed the transcriptional
activity of HIF-1. Our results collectively show that, under hypoxia,
docetaxel contributes to cause apoptotic cell death under hypoxia by
triggering the JNK2/PHD1 signaling pathway, thereby increasing the
degradation of HIF-1.

