Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New biomarkers to optimize preclinical development of the PDI
inhibitor XCE853


Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is a chaperone protein that regulates
oxidative protein folding as well as cell viability. Increased PDI levels
have been documented in a variety of human cancers, including ovarian,
prostate, and lung cancers. Inhibition of PDI activity leads to apoptosis
in cancer, suggesting that PDI is a promising druggable target. XCE853
was originally identified within a family of synthetic compounds
displaying a preferential antiproliferative activity on drug-resistant
human cancer cells (Gutmann et al, AACR annual meeting, 2013). XCE853
inhibits in vitro recombinant PDI activity and blocks in vitro
proliferation of human tumor cells with IC50s in the nanomolar range
through an irreversible cytolysis (Prevost et al, AACR annual meeting,
2014). By contrast, XCE853 has no or limited antiproliferative activity
on several human non-tumoral immortalized cells (MCF10, RPE1 or RWPE1)
even at high concentrations. The ex-vivo approach using fresh human
hepatocellular carcinoma explants incubated 48h with XCE853 (100nM) has
shown the decrease of the proliferation (KI-67 labeling) with an
apoptosis induction (Caspase-3 labeling). In addition, XCE853 which
displayed an excellent oral bioavailability in mouse blocks growth of
human ovarian cancer using the in vivo OVCAR-3 xenograft model leading to
complete tumor growth arrest even after the cessation of treatment.To
optimize the preclinical and clinical development, we are now
characterizing new biomarkers to 1) stratify the tumors which are
sensitive and non-sensitive to XCE853 and to 2) identify the optimal dose
regimen.Altogether, these data support further efforts on XCE853
preclinical studies to prepare the Phase-I clinical study entry.

