Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteosarcoma cell lines response to approved and investigational
anticancer agents and statins along with gene and microRNA expression


Background: Sarcomas are rare heterogeneous cancers with significant
unmet medical need. Approved and Investigational compounds were tested
against 64 human sarcoma cell lines. Gene expression was determined using
Affymetrix Exon ST1 arrays. Eleven of 64 human sarcoma lines were
osteosarcoma. Methods: 64 adult and pediatric sarcoma lines were screened
against the approved and investigational agents. Compounds were screened
in 9-pt concentration response (0.001-10 M). The cells were cultured in
384-well plates overnight, and then compounds were added (DMSO, 0.25%).
Viability was determined after 96h using Alamar Blue. In separate
experiments, the response of the osteosarcoma lines to 9 statins was
assessed at 9 concentrations with a 96h exposure time and CellTiter-Glo
as endpoint. Concentration response curves and IC50s were determined from
an average of 3 experiments. Gene expression was determined by the Exon
ST1 array. MicroRNA expression was determined using the NanoString human
miRNA probe set on the nCounter Prep Station followed by immobilization
in the cartridge for data collection. Results: The genes highly
differentially expressed by the osteosarcoma lines, RUNX2, CDC42EP3,
CGNT1, EHD4 and EST1, were compared with simvastatin (NSC633782)
sensitivity. The response of the osteosarcoma lines to 9 statins showed
that pitavastatin (NSC779706) was most effective with IC50 ranging from
0.2 - 5 M. The SAOS-2 line was most responsive to the statins. Overall,
the synthetic statins (fluvastatin, pitavastatin and atorvastatin) were
more effective against the osteosarcoma cell lines than the
fermentation-derived statins. Among the fermentation-derived statins,
simvastatin had the most similarity in potency and pattern to the
synthetic statins. All ten osteosarcoma cell lines tested were resistant
to pravastatin, rosvustatin, and bestatin (IC50>10M). ERBB4 was highly
expressed in 3 of 11 osteosarcoma lines. These 3 lines were the most
sensitive to 13 EGFR inhibitors tested. SAOS-2 cells express high FGFR2
and KIT, CHA59 cells express high FGFR3 and SK-ES-1 cells highly express
KIT. Eighteen approved and investigational broad spectrum kinase
inhibitors and selective FGFR, KIT and MET inhibitors were tested. The
most sensitive osteosarcoma lines were SK-ES-1, CHA59, HOS, and Hu09
while SA-OS-2 was less sensitive. MYC, MYCL1, and MYCN gene expression
indicated that SAOS-2, OHS, CHA59 and SK-ES-1 express high MYC. OHS,
SK-ES-1, CHA59, HOS and Hu09 cells were sensitive to the two bromodomain
inhibitors tested, JQ1 and GSK-1210151A, while SAOS-2 was less sensitive.
The SJSA-1 line expresses high GLI1, PTCH1 and PTCH2. Five SMO inhibitors
were tested and only the Hu09 cells responded. Conclusions: Testing
investigational agents in a panel of sarcoma cell lines along with
molecular characterization may help identify new drugs worthy of clinical
trial in sarcoma.

