Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma fatty acids and colorectal cancer risk: The Singapore
Chinese Health Study


BACKGROUND: Fatty acids are a heterogeneous group of compounds that may
promote or inhibit colorectal carcinogenesis. Fatty acid composition of
plasma lipids capture dietary fat intake, as well as endogenous
synthesis. Prospective analyses of fatty acid composition are needed to
establish the role of long-chain monounsaturated and polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PUFAs) on risk of developing colon cancer.METHODS:A nested
case-control study of colon cancer (211 cases and 211 matched controls)
was conducted within the Singapore Chinese Health Study, a cohort of
63,257 men and women ages 45 to 74 years who were recruited between 1993
and 1998. Fatty acids were quantified by gas chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry (GC-MS/MS) in plasma specimens that were collected an
average of three years prior to colon cancer diagnosis. Desaturase
activity was estimated as the product-to-precursor ratio of individual
plasma fatty acids as follows: 5 desaturase = arachidonic (20:4n-6) to
dihomo--linolenic (20:3n-6) ratio, 6 desaturase = arachidonic (20:4n-6)
to linoleic (18:2n-6) ratio, and stearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase (SCD-1) =
oleic (18:1) to stearic (18:0) ratio. Conditional logistic regression was
used to calculate multivariable odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).RESULTS:Statistically significant inverse associations
with colon cancer risk were observed for the essential PUFAs, -linolenic
(18:3n-3) (OR = 0.42; 95% CI: 0.24, 0.75) and linoleic (18:2n-6) (OR =
0.44; 95% CI: 0.23, 0.82), comparing highest to lowest quartile. There
were no associations with the longer-chain n-3 PUFAs, eicosapentanoic
(20:5n-3) and docosahexaenoic (22:6n-3). A positive association was
observed with arachidonic acid (20:4n-6) and with elevated synthesis of
arachidonic acid, as quantified by the 5 and 6 desaturase indices.
Compared with the 1st quartile, the OR (95% CI) for the 4th quartile was
2.31 (1.30, 4.12) and 3.38 (1.76, 6.49) for 5 and 6 desaturase indices,
respectively (both Ps for trend BACKGROUND: Fatty acids are a
heterogeneous group of compounds that may promote or inhibit colorectal
carcinogenesis. Fatty acid composition of plasma lipids capture dietary
fat intake, as well as endogenous synthesis. Prospective analyses of
fatty acid composition are needed to establish the role of long-chain
monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) on risk of
developing colon cancer.METHODS:A nested case-control study of colon
cancer (211 cases and 211 matched controls) was conducted within the
Singapore Chinese Health Study, a cohort of 63,257 men and women ages 45
to 74 years who were recruited between 1993 and 1998. Fatty acids were
quantified by gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GC-MS/MS) in
plasma specimens that were collected an average of three years prior to
colon cancer diagnosis. Desaturase activity was estimated as the
product-to-precursor ratio of individual plasma fatty acids as follows: 5
desaturase = arachidonic (20:4n-6) to dihomo--linolenic (20:3n-6) ratio,
6 desaturase = arachidonic (20:4n-6) to linoleic (18:2n-6) ratio, and
stearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase (SCD-1) = oleic (18:1) to stearic (18:0)
ratio. Conditional logistic regression was used to calculate
multivariable odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals
(CIs).RESULTS:Statistically significant inverse associations with colon
cancer risk were observed for the essential PUFAs, -linolenic (18:3n-3)
(OR = 0.42; 95% CI: 0.24, 0.75) and linoleic (18:2n-6) (OR = 0.44; 95%
CI: 0.23, 0.82), comparing highest to lowest quartile. There were no
associations with the longer-chain n-3 PUFAs, eicosapentanoic (20:5n-3)
and docosahexaenoic (22:6n-3). A positive association was observed with
arachidonic acid (20:4n-6) and with elevated synthesis of arachidonic
acid, as quantified by the 5 and 6 desaturase indices. Compared with the
1st quartile, the OR (95% CI) for the 4th quartile was 2.31 (1.30, 4.12)
and 3.38 (1.76, 6.49) for 5 and 6 desaturase indices, respectively (both
Ps for trend <0.03). Higher levels and elevated synthesis of oleic acid
(18:1), as estimated by SCD-1 index were associated with statistically
significant lower colon cancer risk. Compared with the lowest SCD-1
quartile, the OR was 0.43 (95% CI: 0.20, 0.92) for the highest quartile
(P for trend = 0.024).CONCLUSION: These novel data suggest that
endogenous synthesis of arachidonic and oleic acid may play a critical
role in the risk of developing colon cancer in humans. Once confirmed,
chemopreventive strategies may be developed as modulators of desaturase
activity that result in lower arachidonic acid and higher oleic acid
synthesis.GRANTS: UM1 CA182876 and R01 CA144034.

