Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ONC201/TIC10 targets colorectal cancer stem cells and bulk tumor
cells via an Akt-Foxo3a-TRAIL-dependent mechanism


ONC201/TIC10 is a first-in-class anti-tumor agent that induces cell death
selectively in cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. ONC201/TIC10 is
entering phase I/II clinical trials for patients with advanced cancer.
Colorectal tumors contain a small population of stem cell-like cells
(cancer stem cells, CSCs) capable of self-renewal that contributes to
tumor maintenance, resistance to therapy and disease relapse. We
hypothesized that the potent anti-tumor effect of ONC201/TIC10 in colon
cancer involves targeting both CSCs and bulk tumor cells. We show that
ONC201/TIC10 depletes CSC markers, prevents CSC-mediated colonosphere
formation and induces cell surface TRAIL in CSCs in vitro. We further
validated these results in xenograft tumor studies in mice, compared the
effects of ONC201/TIC10 in CSCs and non-CSCs and validated the mechanism
of TRAIL induction in CSCs. ONC201/TIC10 significantly reduces the growth
of tumors initiated with sorted Aldefluor(+) CSCs and prevents the
passage of these tumors. ONC201/TIC10 upregulates apoptosis markers
cleaved caspase-8 and cleaved PARP and downregulates CSC markers ALDH,
CD44 and CD133 in the xenograft tumors. In a limiting dilution xenograft
tumor initiation assay ONC201/TIC10-treatment decreased tumor initiation
and was superior to 5-Fluorouracil treatment. Thus, ONC201/TIC10 inhibits
CSC self-renewal in vivo. We have previously described that ONC201/TIC10
exposure leads to transcriptional induction of the TRAIL gene via the
transcription factor Foxo3a, which is activated by dual inactivation of
Akt and ERK. ONC201/TIC10 reduces levels of phosho-Akt, phospho-ERK,
phospho-S294 Foxo3a, phospho-S253 Foxo3a and induces TRAIL in
CSC-initiated xenograft tumors. ONC201/TIC10-mediated effects on Akt,
ERK, Foxo3a and TRAIL occur in both bulk tumor cells and CSCs. Next, we
performed control experiments to confirm the Akt-Foxo3a-TRAIL-dependent
mechanism. ONC201/TIC10-mediated depletion of CD44(+) cells was
significantly blocked by the TRAIL-sequestering antibody RIK-2. We have
previously reported that ONC201/TIC10 upregulates DR5 in tumor cells and
disruption of the DR5 death domain decreases ONC201/TIC10-mediated cell
death. ONC201/TIC10 increases cell surface DR5 in CSCs and non-CSCs. DR5
knockdown rescues ONC201/TIC10-mediated colonosphere inhibition and
depletion of CD44(+) cells further supporting a DR5-TRAIL-dependent
mechanism. Overexpression of myristoylated Akt significantly reduces
induction of surface TRAIL and rescues depletion of CSC markers and
colonosphere inhibition by ONC201/TIC10. Foxo3a knockdown also
significantly rescues ONC201/TIC10-mediated colonosphere inhibition and
depletion of CD44(+) cells. The identification and demonstration of CSCs
as a target further supports the use of ONC201/TIC10 for colorectal
cancer therapy and provides an innovative biomarker that could be
monitored in the clinic.

