Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative protein-marker prognostic model for early-stage
endometrioid endometrial carcinoma


Endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEC) is the major histological type
of endometrial cancer, the most prevalent gynecologic malignancy in USA.
EEC recurrence or metastasis is associated with an abysmal prognosis.
Early-stage EEC is generally curable, but a subset has high risk of
recurrence or metastasis. Prognosis estimation for early-stage EEC mainly
relies on clinicopathological characteristics, but is unreliable. We
aimed to identify patients with high-risk early-stage EEC who are most
likely to benefit from more extensive surgery and adjuvant therapy by
building a prognostic model that integrates clinical variables and
protein markers. We employed two large, independent EEC datasets as
training and validation cohorts, and generated the levels of 186 proteins
and phosphoproteins using reverse-phase protein arrays. Using the
training samples, we developed a predictive model containing two clinical
factors and 18 protein markers and optimized the risk group
classification. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses in the validation cohort
confirmed an improved prognostic power. Compared with clinical variables
(stage, grade, and patient age), only the risk groups defined by the
integrative model were consistently significant in both univariate and
multivariate analyses across both cohorts. Our prognostic model is
potentially of high clinical value for stratifying patients with
early-stage EEC and optimizing their treatment strategies.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

