Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial ATAD3A combines with GRP78 to regulate the stability
of the WASF3 metastasis-promoting gene


ATAD3A is an integral mitochondrial membrane protein with unknown
function, although we now show that high-level expression is associated
with poor survival in breast cancer patients. Using a mass spectrometry
approach we have demonstrated that ATAD3A interacts with the WASF3
metastasis promoting protein. Knockdown of ATAD3A leads to decreased
WASF3 protein levels in breast and colon cancer cells. Silencing ATAD3A
also results in loss of both cell anchorage-independent growth and
invasion and suppression of tumor growth and metastasis in vivo using NSG
immuno-compromised mice. HSP70 is responsible for stabilizing WASF3 in
the cytoplasm, but inactivation of HSP70 does not lead to loss of WASF3
stability at the mitochondrial membrane, where presumably it is protected
through its interaction with ATAD3A. In response to endoplasmic reticulum
stress, increases in the GRP78 protein level leads to increased WASF3
protein levels. We also show that ATAD3A was present in a WASF3-GRP78
complex and suppression of GRP78 led to destabilization of WASF3 at the
mitochondrial membrane, which was ATAD3A dependent. Furthermore,
ATAD3A-mediated suppression of CDH1/E-cadherin occurs through its
regulation of GRP78-mediated WASF3 stability. It appears, therefore, that
stabilization of WASF3 function occurs through its interaction with
ATAD3A and GRP78, which may provide a bridge between the endoplasmic
reticulum and mitochondria, allowing communication between the two
organelles. These findings also suggest that pharmacologic inhibition of
ATAD3A could be an effective therapeutic strategy to treat human cancer.

