Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Male pattern baldness in relation to prostate cancer-specific
mortality: A prospective analysis in the NHANES I Epidemiologic Followup
Study (NHEFS)


Background: Androgenic action underlies prostate gland development and
prostate cancer progression. However, the role of such in prostate
carcinogenesis remains unclear. Results from studies that have
quantitated pre-diagnostic, circulating androgens at a single time-point
in relation to prostate cancer are inconsistent, possibly due to the
failure to capture cumulative or relevant age-specific hormone exposure.
Therefore, we used male pattern baldness as a proxy of long-term androgen
exposure, and investigated the association between dermatologist-assessed
male pattern baldness and prostate cancer-specific mortality in the
NHANES-I Epidemiologic Followup Study (NHEFS).Methods: We included 4,316
men from NHEFS, who were 25-74 years, received dermatologic exams, and
had no prior cancer diagnosis at baseline. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (95%CIs) were estimated using Cox proportional
hazards regression with age as the time-metric and baseline hazard
stratified by age at baseline. A hybrid model was used to account for
stratification and clustering of the survey design, while adjusting for
variables used to calculate sample weights.Results: During follow-up
(median = 21 years), 3,284 deaths occurred, 107 of which had the
underlying cause of prostate cancer. Any degree of baldness was
associated with a 56% increased risk of prostate cancer-specific
mortality (HR = 1.56; 95%CI = 1.02, 2.37) and, specifically, moderate
balding was associated with an 83% increased risk of the outcome (HR =
1.83; 95%CI = 1.15, 2.92), each compared with no balding. Conversely,
male pattern baldness was not statistically significantly associated with
all-cause mortality.Conclusion: Our analysis suggests that male pattern
baldness is associated with an increased risk of fatal prostate cancer,
and supports the hypothesis of overlapping pathophysiological
mechanisms.Impact: If the association between male pattern baldness and
fatal prostate cancer is substantiated in future studies, male pattern
baldness may contribute to predictive algorithms of prostate cancer risk,
helping guide individuals as to whether they should opt to undergo cancer
screening.

