Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel regulation of cyclin D1 stability and the DNA damage response


Deregulation of the cell division cycle is critical for cancer
development. Transition from G1 to S phase of the cell cycle is promoted
by D-type cyclins (D1, D2 and D3). Cyclin D1 is a critical regulator of
cell cycle progression due to its ability to activate cyclin dependent
kinases (CDK) 4 and 6, which phosphorylate and inactivate the
retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and activates the transcription factor E2F1
to promote the expression of genes essential for G1/S progression.
Importantly, mutations in the tumor suppressor gene RB1 or inactivation
of the RB tumor suppressor pathway occurs in almost all human
malignancies and one such mechanism involves cyclin D1 overexpression.
Even in cancer cells with amplified or elevated cyclin D1 mRNA, the
Cyclin D1 protein rapidly declines as cells progress through the G1 phase
of the cell cycle to reach undetectable levels in S-phase, and this is
thought to be dependent on the Skp1-Cul1-F-box protein (SCF) E3 ubiquitin
ligase complex. The identity of the E3 ubiquitin ligase that is
specifically involved in downregulating cyclin D1 during S-phase of the
cell cycle or the functional significance of cyclin D1 downregulation
however, remains unknown, as recent genetic studies in mice demonstrated
that the steady state levels or stability of cyclin D1 protein, are not
altered following the inactivation of the known regulators of cyclin D1
stability. Using a genetic si-RNA-based screen, we have identified a
novel E3 ubiquitin ligase; SCF-FBXW5, which specifically interacts with
and downregulates cyclin D1 protein, both in unperturbed proliferating
cancer cells and following DNA damage. Importantly, inactivation of this
E3 ubiquitin ligase inhibits the proliferation of cancer cells primarily
through cyclin D1-dependent inhibition of S-phase progression and
sensitizes cancer cells to DNA damage induced by UV or ionizing
radiation. These findings identify a novel axis of regulating cyclin D1
stability in cancer cells with implications for targeting this axis to
inhibit cyclin D1-driven cancers.

