Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma MICA and pancreatic cancer


Background: We hypothesized that major histocompatibility complex class I
chain-related protein (MICA) may be useful for detecting early pancreatic
cancer and guiding immunotherapy. MICA, which is up-regulated on the
tumor cell surface, is a major ligand for natural killer (NK) cell
receptors - NKG2D. The binding of transmembrane MICA to NKG2D facilitates
the recognition of tumors by NK cells, resulting in tumor elimination.
However, many tumors release MICA into circulation in the soluble form
and thus escape immune surveillance. Several small studies showed that
soluble MICA levels (s-MICA) are higher in pancreatic cancer patients
than healthy people. The goal of this project was to define whether
s-MICA concentration is associated with pancreatic cancer in a
population-based case-control study in Minnesota (1994-98, mean age 66
years).Methods: Cases 20 years (n = 163) were ascertained from hospitals.
Controls (n = 542) were randomly selected from the general population and
frequency matched to cases by age (within 5 y), sex and race. All
subjects were interviewed in-person regarding demographic information,
lifestyle, and medical history. For this analysis, only Caucasians (96%
of all participants) were included. S-MICA plasma concentrations were
measured using a commercially available Luminex kit (R&D Systems, MN);
level of detection was 2 pg/ml.Unconditional logistic regression was used
to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for
pancreatic cancer in relation to s-MICA concentration. S-MICA was modeled
as 4 categories after adjustment for age, sex, smoking status, pack-years
and diabetes. S-MICA concentration 2 pg/ml was assigned to the null
category, whereas all other participants were divided into tertiles. The
first tertile was the reference category since the number of cases in the
null category was small (N = 20).Results: Among controls, s-MICA
concentrations were positively associated with older age (70 y) and
diabetes. The ORs for pancreatic cancer were 1.17 (0.71-1.94) and 1.82
(1.12-2.97) in the second and third tertiles, respectively, compared to
the first tertile (p-trend = 0.02), while ORs for the null category were
1.05 (0.57-1.92). For the 3rd versus 1st tertile, s-MICA was
significantly associated with pancreatic cancer in the following groups:
men, OR = 2.46 (1.31-4.64; p-trend = 0.007); people younger than 70 y,
2.42 (1.26-4.64; p-trend = 0.007), and in those without diabetes, 1.91
(1.15-3.19; p-trend = 0.02). Notably, among cases with known death dates
(N = 107), s-MICA concentrations were significantly higher for those who
died in the first three months of follow-up, suggesting a more virulent
or later stage cancer for those with higher concentrations.Conclusions:
Our study supports the hypothesis that plasma s-MICA concentration is
positively associated with increased odds of pancreatic cancer and
suggests that s-MICA concentration may be a promising biomarker for early
detection of pancreatic cancer.

