Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt signaling in prostate cancer stem like cells


Introduction: Cancer stem like cells (CSLCs) are characterized by
features of tumorigenicity, serial passages and the expression of
specific stem cell markers. CSLCs possess characteristics of adult stem
cells, including self-renewal. CSLCs can be isolated from cancer cell
lines, including prostate, and form morphologically distinct colonies
(e.g. holo, mero and para clones). Colony formation has been used as a
surrogate biological assay to identify and characterize CSLCs and holo
and meroclones from prostate cell lines have been proposed to contain
CSLCs. Wnt signaling through the action of two major intracellular
transducers, calcium ([Ca2+]i) and the transcription factor -catenin, is
a key regulator of stem cell self-renewal. In whole populations of cancer
cell lines (e.g. PC3, MCF7), Wnt signaling operates via a convergent
rather than distinct canonical (Wnt/-catenin) and non-canonical
(Wnt/Ca2+) pathways. Little is known about the characteristics of Wnt
signaling (e.g. Wnt induced [Ca2+]i release or -catenin expression) in
prostate CSLCs.The aim of this study was to characterize the clonal
expansion of PC3 cell line and to investigate Wnt signaling in these
colonies.Methods: PC3 cells, in a single cell suspension, were plated at
low density (6 cells/cm2) in 6 well plates (Nunc) and imaged over 10 days
with Incucyte (Essen Bioscience) and analysed using Image J software.
Some colonies were loaded with Fluo4 and FuraRed dyes (Invitrogen) and
used in a live [Ca2+]i imaging assay Wnt 5A or 9B (200ng/ml) with an
Olympus FV1000 confocal system; the same colonies were then used in
immunostaining for the -catenin protein (Abcam 22656) followed by
confocal microscopy. Data is presented as means SE; Mann Whitney U test
was used for statistical analysis.Results: IncuCyte imaging captured
colony formation from single cells plated and two morphologically
distinct types of PC3 colonies were observed at day 10, termed
holoclone/meroclone (h/m clone) and paraclone (p clone). Mean colony
diameter of those categorized as h/m clone was 838 22m (n = 102) and 1191
28m for p clone (n = 96); mean cell density (%) showed a significant
difference (pIntroduction: Cancer stem like cells (CSLCs) are
characterized by features of tumorigenicity, serial passages and the
expression of specific stem cell markers. CSLCs possess characteristics
of adult stem cells, including self-renewal. CSLCs can be isolated from
cancer cell lines, including prostate, and form morphologically distinct
colonies (e.g. holo, mero and para clones). Colony formation has been
used as a surrogate biological assay to identify and characterize CSLCs
and holo and meroclones from prostate cell lines have been proposed to
contain CSLCs. Wnt signaling through the action of two major
intracellular transducers, calcium ([Ca2+]i) and the transcription factor
-catenin, is a key regulator of stem cell self-renewal. In whole
populations of cancer cell lines (e.g. PC3, MCF7), Wnt signaling operates
via a convergent rather than distinct canonical (Wnt/-catenin) and
non-canonical (Wnt/Ca2+) pathways. Little is known about the
characteristics of Wnt signaling (e.g. Wnt induced [Ca2+]i release or
-catenin expression) in prostate CSLCs.The aim of this study was to
characterize the clonal expansion of PC3 cell line and to investigate Wnt
signaling in these colonies.Methods: PC3 cells, in a single cell
suspension, were plated at low density (6 cells/cm2) in 6 well plates
(Nunc) and imaged over 10 days with Incucyte (Essen Bioscience) and
analysed using Image J software. Some colonies were loaded with Fluo4 and
FuraRed dyes (Invitrogen) and used in a live [Ca2+]i imaging assay Wnt 5A
or 9B (200ng/ml) with an Olympus FV1000 confocal system; the same
colonies were then used in immunostaining for the -catenin protein (Abcam
22656) followed by confocal microscopy. Data is presented as means SE;
Mann Whitney U test was used for statistical analysis.Results: IncuCyte
imaging captured colony formation from single cells plated and two
morphologically distinct types of PC3 colonies were observed at day 10,
termed holoclone/meroclone (h/m clone) and paraclone (p clone). Mean
colony diameter of those categorized as h/m clone was 838 22m (n = 102)
and 1191 28m for p clone (n = 96); mean cell density (%) showed a
significant difference (p<0.01) in h/m compared to p clones: 27.2 3.2(n =
8) vs 4.7 0.4 (n = 5), respectively. Cells in h/m and p clones showed
[Ca2+]i release in response to both Wnt 5A and 9B; Cells in h/m clones
demonstrated a significantly (pIntroduction: Cancer stem like cells
(CSLCs) are characterized by features of tumorigenicity, serial passages
and the expression of specific stem cell markers. CSLCs possess
characteristics of adult stem cells, including self-renewal. CSLCs can be
isolated from cancer cell lines, including prostate, and form
morphologically distinct colonies (e.g. holo, mero and para clones).
Colony formation has been used as a surrogate biological assay to
identify and characterize CSLCs and holo and meroclones from prostate
cell lines have been proposed to contain CSLCs. Wnt signaling through the
action of two major intracellular transducers, calcium ([Ca2+]i) and the
transcription factor -catenin, is a key regulator of stem cell
self-renewal. In whole populations of cancer cell lines (e.g. PC3, MCF7),
Wnt signaling operates via a convergent rather than distinct canonical
(Wnt/-catenin) and non-canonical (Wnt/Ca2+) pathways. Little is known
about the characteristics of Wnt signaling (e.g. Wnt induced [Ca2+]i
release or -catenin expression) in prostate CSLCs.The aim of this study
was to characterize the clonal expansion of PC3 cell line and to
investigate Wnt signaling in these colonies.Methods: PC3 cells, in a
single cell suspension, were plated at low density (6 cells/cm2) in 6
well plates (Nunc) and imaged over 10 days with Incucyte (Essen
Bioscience) and analysed using Image J software. Some colonies were
loaded with Fluo4 and FuraRed dyes (Invitrogen) and used in a live
[Ca2+]i imaging assay Wnt 5A or 9B (200ng/ml) with an Olympus FV1000
confocal system; the same colonies were then used in immunostaining for
the -catenin protein (Abcam 22656) followed by confocal microscopy. Data
is presented as means SE; Mann Whitney U test was used for statistical
analysis.Results: IncuCyte imaging captured colony formation from single
cells plated and two morphologically distinct types of PC3 colonies were
observed at day 10, termed holoclone/meroclone (h/m clone) and paraclone
(p clone). Mean colony diameter of those categorized as h/m clone was 838
22m (n = 102) and 1191 28m for p clone (n = 96); mean cell density (%)
showed a significant difference (p<0.01) in h/m compared to p clones:
27.2 3.2(n = 8) vs 4.7 0.4 (n = 5), respectively. Cells in h/m and p
clones showed [Ca2+]i release in response to both Wnt 5A and 9B; Cells in
h/m clones demonstrated a significantly (p<0.05) longer dwell time for
[Ca2+]i release in response to Wnt 9B than 5A, with mean dwell times
(seconds) of 45.3 2.6 (n = 52) and 38.0 4.3 (n = 52),
respectively.-catenin was expressed in both h/m and p clones from PC3
cell line.Conclusions: Distinct colony types can be observed in cultures
of PC3 prostate cancer cell line. These colonies have quantifiable
characteristics in addition of observable morphologies. A majority of
cells within different colonies show Wnt induced [Ca2+]i release and
-catenin expression. A convergent model of Wnt signaling is likely to
operate in prostate CSLCs.

