Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-kB - p53 gene associations and prostate cancer risk


Introduction: Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed male
malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer death, representing 29%
of all male cancer deaths. Various tumor suppressor genes have been
identified, playing a role in prostate cancer development and
progression. The tumor suppressor gene p53, is the most commonly mutated
gene in human cancers. Studies show that p53 can induce activation of
NF-kB, and loss of NF-kB activity specifically abrogated the p53-mediated
apoptotic response, without impinging on the ability to activate
expression of target genes or induce cell-cycle arrest. NF-kB plays a
well-known function in the regulation of immune responses and
inflammation, but growing evidences support a major role in oncogenesis.
Although it has been suggested that activation of NF-kB is not directly
associated with tumor development and progression, NF-kB has been
considered to be a major biomarker and therapeutic target. Enhanced NF-B
activity can be directly induced by mutations of NF-B genes and/or
oncogenes that activate the NF-B signaling pathway. In view of the
earlier reports, this study is aimed at investigating the role of p53 and
NF-kB gene polymorphisms in prostate cancer risk and the possible
correlation between p53-NF-kB gene in development and progression of
disease.Materials & methods: Blood samples were collected from 113
prostate cancer patients and a 135 normal healthy and age matched male
subjects from local wellness clinics. DNA extracted from the blood at the
Genetic Research Institute of the Desert is used to screen two gene
polymorphisms in p53 and NF-kB using PCR-RFLP,gel electrophoresis and PCR
and ABI 3130 CE-based genetic analysis. Genotype data was recorded from
two methods and analyzed for frequency, Chi-Square & correlations
coefficients using SPSS statistical package (PASW Grad pack 18).Results:
Our data showed a strong association of p53 codon248 (pIntroduction:
Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed male malignancy and the
second leading cause of cancer death, representing 29% of all male cancer
deaths. Various tumor suppressor genes have been identified, playing a
role in prostate cancer development and progression. The tumor suppressor
gene p53, is the most commonly mutated gene in human cancers. Studies
show that p53 can induce activation of NF-kB, and loss of NF-kB activity
specifically abrogated the p53-mediated apoptotic response, without
impinging on the ability to activate expression of target genes or induce
cell-cycle arrest. NF-kB plays a well-known function in the regulation of
immune responses and inflammation, but growing evidences support a major
role in oncogenesis. Although it has been suggested that activation of
NF-kB is not directly associated with tumor development and progression,
NF-kB has been considered to be a major biomarker and therapeutic target.
Enhanced NF-B activity can be directly induced by mutations of NF-B genes
and/or oncogenes that activate the NF-B signaling pathway. In view of the
earlier reports, this study is aimed at investigating the role of p53 and
NF-kB gene polymorphisms in prostate cancer risk and the possible
correlation between p53-NF-kB gene in development and progression of
disease.Materials & methods: Blood samples were collected from 113
prostate cancer patients and a 135 normal healthy and age matched male
subjects from local wellness clinics. DNA extracted from the blood at the
Genetic Research Institute of the Desert is used to screen two gene
polymorphisms in p53 and NF-kB using PCR-RFLP,gel electrophoresis and PCR
and ABI 3130 CE-based genetic analysis. Genotype data was recorded from
two methods and analyzed for frequency, Chi-Square & correlations
coefficients using SPSS statistical package (PASW Grad pack 18).Results:
Our data showed a strong association of p53 codon248 (p<0.001) and NF-kB
gene polymorphism (pIntroduction: Prostate cancer is the most commonly
diagnosed male malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer death,
representing 29% of all male cancer deaths. Various tumor suppressor
genes have been identified, playing a role in prostate cancer development
and progression. The tumor suppressor gene p53, is the most commonly
mutated gene in human cancers. Studies show that p53 can induce
activation of NF-kB, and loss of NF-kB activity specifically abrogated
the p53-mediated apoptotic response, without impinging on the ability to
activate expression of target genes or induce cell-cycle arrest. NF-kB
plays a well-known function in the regulation of immune responses and
inflammation, but growing evidences support a major role in oncogenesis.
Although it has been suggested that activation of NF-kB is not directly
associated with tumor development and progression, NF-kB has been
considered to be a major biomarker and therapeutic target. Enhanced NF-B
activity can be directly induced by mutations of NF-B genes and/or
oncogenes that activate the NF-B signaling pathway. In view of the
earlier reports, this study is aimed at investigating the role of p53 and
NF-kB gene polymorphisms in prostate cancer risk and the possible
correlation between p53-NF-kB gene in development and progression of
disease.Materials & methods: Blood samples were collected from 113
prostate cancer patients and a 135 normal healthy and age matched male
subjects from local wellness clinics. DNA extracted from the blood at the
Genetic Research Institute of the Desert is used to screen two gene
polymorphisms in p53 and NF-kB using PCR-RFLP,gel electrophoresis and PCR
and ABI 3130 CE-based genetic analysis. Genotype data was recorded from
two methods and analyzed for frequency, Chi-Square & correlations
coefficients using SPSS statistical package (PASW Grad pack 18).Results:
Our data showed a strong association of p53 codon248 (p<0.001) and NF-kB
gene polymorphism (p<0.031) with prostate cancer. Further analysis of
these two gene combinations in prostate cancer and controls showed a
significant correlation (pIntroduction: Prostate cancer is the most
commonly diagnosed male malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer
death, representing 29% of all male cancer deaths. Various tumor
suppressor genes have been identified, playing a role in prostate cancer
development and progression. The tumor suppressor gene p53, is the most
commonly mutated gene in human cancers. Studies show that p53 can induce
activation of NF-kB, and loss of NF-kB activity specifically abrogated
the p53-mediated apoptotic response, without impinging on the ability to
activate expression of target genes or induce cell-cycle arrest. NF-kB
plays a well-known function in the regulation of immune responses and
inflammation, but growing evidences support a major role in oncogenesis.
Although it has been suggested that activation of NF-kB is not directly
associated with tumor development and progression, NF-kB has been
considered to be a major biomarker and therapeutic target. Enhanced NF-B
activity can be directly induced by mutations of NF-B genes and/or
oncogenes that activate the NF-B signaling pathway. In view of the
earlier reports, this study is aimed at investigating the role of p53 and
NF-kB gene polymorphisms in prostate cancer risk and the possible
correlation between p53-NF-kB gene in development and progression of
disease.Materials & methods: Blood samples were collected from 113
prostate cancer patients and a 135 normal healthy and age matched male
subjects from local wellness clinics. DNA extracted from the blood at the
Genetic Research Institute of the Desert is used to screen two gene
polymorphisms in p53 and NF-kB using PCR-RFLP,gel electrophoresis and PCR
and ABI 3130 CE-based genetic analysis. Genotype data was recorded from
two methods and analyzed for frequency, Chi-Square & correlations
coefficients using SPSS statistical package (PASW Grad pack 18).Results:
Our data showed a strong association of p53 codon248 (p<0.001) and NF-kB
gene polymorphism (p<0.031) with prostate cancer. Further analysis of
these two gene combinations in prostate cancer and controls showed a
significant correlation (p<0.001) between the two gene polymorphisms in
prostate cancer patients. Individually, both p53codon 248 and NF-kB del
were robustly associated with prostate cancer occurrence. Moreover, the
gene-gene combination predicted the occurrence of prostate
cancer.Conclusions: A strong association of p53 and NF-kB gene
polymorphisms with prostate cancer suggests these two genes to be
possible markers for prostate cancer risk. NF-kB is known to crosstalk
with many other tumor-related signaling pathways including p53. Given the
unprecedented role of p53-NF-kB in tumorigenesis, p53-NF-kB risk alleles
can be used as a screening device for cancer susceptibility to inform the
need for more intensive ongoing cancer surveillance.

