Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The valuable experimental model system Cancer Xenopatient
established in NOG mice


Viable and stable human cancer materials combined with adequate clinical
information are required for advance in cancer research and patient care.
Conventional in vitro cancer cell lines are commonly available without
enough information on the patient including disease phenotypes and
drug-sensitivity. Mice bearing Patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) with
clinical information (so-called cancer xenopatients) could be essential
and useful systems to accelerate cancer medicine. In this study, we
investigated the establishment efficiency of PDX using NOG mice with
clinical factors of xeno-transplantaion. The NOG mouse, the
NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rnull (NOG) mice derived from the NOD/SCID mouse with a
common gamma chain, has multifunctional defects in natural killer cell
activity, macrophage function, complement activity, and dendritic cell
function in addition to lacking functional T and B lymphocytes. NOG mice
were reported to be the best appropriate immunodeficient host animal for
direct xenografting of fresh tumor tissue. We also discuss herein its
contribution for not only reliable preclinical studies of new anticancer
drugs but also personalized anti-cancer therapies. Sixty-one PDX lines
were established from 116 surgically removed tumor tissues inoculated
into NOG mice's subcutaneous (53%). PDX lines were established from
various types of epithelial tumors and also from sarcomas including
gastrointestinal stromal tumor and Ewing/PNET sarcoma. The metastatic
tumors yielded PDX lines effectively (65%) than the primary tumors (27%,
pViable and stable human cancer materials combined with adequate clinical
information are required for advance in cancer research and patient care.
Conventional in vitro cancer cell lines are commonly available without
enough information on the patient including disease phenotypes and
drug-sensitivity. Mice bearing Patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) with
clinical information (so-called cancer xenopatients) could be essential
and useful systems to accelerate cancer medicine. In this study, we
investigated the establishment efficiency of PDX using NOG mice with
clinical factors of xeno-transplantaion. The NOG mouse, the
NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rnull (NOG) mice derived from the NOD/SCID mouse with a
common gamma chain, has multifunctional defects in natural killer cell
activity, macrophage function, complement activity, and dendritic cell
function in addition to lacking functional T and B lymphocytes. NOG mice
were reported to be the best appropriate immunodeficient host animal for
direct xenografting of fresh tumor tissue. We also discuss herein its
contribution for not only reliable preclinical studies of new anticancer
drugs but also personalized anti-cancer therapies. Sixty-one PDX lines
were established from 116 surgically removed tumor tissues inoculated
into NOG mice's subcutaneous (53%). PDX lines were established from
various types of epithelial tumors and also from sarcomas including
gastrointestinal stromal tumor and Ewing/PNET sarcoma. The metastatic
tumors yielded PDX lines effectively (65%) than the primary tumors (27%,
p<0.001). The group engrafted into NOG mice after 2 days or later from
the surgical removal showed a higher establishment rate (61%) than that
of the group engrafted at the day of surgery or the next day (51%),
however non-significant (p = 0.49). Our PDX models were preserved well
not only in morphological characteristics but also in gene expression and
alteration patterns. In 8 cases (7%), the transplantable xenografts for
several generations were composed of monotonous large non-epithelial cell
growth of human origin, revealed to be the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
infection associated lymphoprolipherative lesions prospected by
chromogenic in situ hybridization for EBV-encoded RNA. We revealed
efficient establishment rates both for primary tumors and metastatic
tumors. PDXs linked with clinical information will contribute to reliable
preclinical studies for new anticancer drugs. The fast and efficient
establishment of individual PDXs may also contribute to future
personalized anti-cancer therapies.

