Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NFB: Activation by EGF requires TLR4 and activation by LPS
requires EGFR


In normal cells, quiescent NFB is activated by inflammatory stimuli,
whereas the abnormal constitutive activation of NFB is important for the
survival of most cancer cells. NFB activation is regulated by several
different pathways. Recently we showed that EGFR is an important mediator
of NFB activation, in both non-malignant and malignant cells. We now
provide additional mechanistic insight into this pathway by further
investigating whether signaling to NFB in response to EGF depends solely
on EGFR, or involves another receptor known to activate NFB. Knockdown
experiments revealed that TLR4 and two downstream components in the
canonical TLR4 pathway, MYD88 and TAK1, are all required for
EGF-dependent NFB activation. Conversely, the ability of TLR4 to activate
NFB in response to LPS was impaired by down regulating EGFR expression or
by use of the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib. PP2, a general inhibitor of
SRC-family kinases, blocked EGF-induced NFB activation, and the SRC
family member LYN became bound to EGFR upon LPS stimulation. Erlotinib
blocked this LPS-dependent association, indicating a key role for LYN in
EGFR-TLR4 cross signaling. In mice, erlotinib blocked the LPS-induced,
NFB-dependent expression of TNF and IL-6, indicating that EGFR is
essential for LPS-induced NFB activation in vivo.

