Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progranulin A9D mutation functionally leads to the cytoplasm
retardation of angiogenin


Neurodegenerative diseases are progressive neurological disorders with
selective neuron loss in particular regions of brain, including
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), Alzheimer's disease (AD),
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's disease (PD), and many
others. Gene defects have been recognized as a prominent factor in the
etiology and pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. To date,
hundreds of genetic variants that located in dozens of genes have been
associated with susceptibility to various neurodegenerative diseases.
Among them, more than 60 mutations in progranulin (PGRN) have been
reported in FTLD, AD, ALS and PD. One of the mutations in PGRN gene exon
1 introduces a charged amino acid in the hydrophobic core of the signal
peptide at residue 9 (PGRN A9D), and results in cytoplasmic mis-sorting
of this protein. However, the mechanism of actions of this mis-sorting
remains elusive. To address this issue, we first examined the subcellular
distribution of PGRN with A9D mutation in human neuronal-like cells
(SH-SY5Y). The results have shown that PGRN A9D mutation failed to
undergo maturation and accumulated in the stress granules. Interestingly,
this mutation also induces redistribution of cellular angiogenin (ANG), a
stress response factor and neurodegenerative diseases related protein,
from nuclear to cytoplasm. PGRN was also directly interacted with ANG in
stress granules. Furthermore, the cytoplasmic retardation of ANG by PGRN
A9D mutation abolished ANG-enhanced rRNA transcription and cell survival.
Taken together, these results indicate that PGRN with A9D mutation
changed localization of ANG as well as cell growth and survival,
suggesting that PGRN and ANG act in concert to regulate the progress of
neurodegenerative diseases.

