Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of a transplantable, NY-BR-1 expressing breast
cancer model in HLA-transgenic mice


Introduction: Breast cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer
related deaths in women worldwide and current standard therapies show
limited efficacy. However, immunotherapeutic approaches like adoptive T
cell transfer might represent an attractive option for the treatment of
breast carcinoma. The differentiation antigen NY-BR-1 appears as a
suitable target for T cell immunotherapy against breast cancer as it is
overexpressed in 60% of breast carcinomas compared to healthy
breast.Objectives: The aim of this project is to establish a
NY-BR-1-expressing, transplantable tumor model in HLA transgenic mice
that would allow to investigate the functional role of NY-BR-1-specific
HLA-restricted CD4+ T cells in vivo with respect to their capacity to
sustain cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL)-mediated tumor attack. Furthermore,
the capability of NY-BR-1-specific CD4+ T cells to interact with
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) thereby potentially promoting
differentiation of TAMs into immunostimulatory type-1 macrophages (M1)
will be investigated.Materials and methods: Stable transfectant clones of
the C57BL/6 derived lymphoma cell line EL4 and of the mammary
adenocarcinoma cell line EO771 expressing NY-BR-1 were established.
Furthermore, an H2Db-restricted, NY-BR-1-specific CTL epitope could be
identified which upon peptide immunization of C57BL/6 mice resulted in
the generation of NY-BR-1 specific, H2Db-restricted CTL lines, similarly
to immunization with a rec. NY-BR-1 encoding adenovirus as observed in
parallel experiments.Results and conclusions: Transplanted EL4 and EO771
derived transfectant clones stably expressing NY-BR-1 gave rise to
subcutaneous tumors in H2-compatible, HLA-DR4 transgenic mice. In
addition, a NY-BR-1-specific CTL line recognizing EL-4/NY-BR-1 expressing
transfectants in vitro was successfully generated upon peptide
immunization as described above. Studies to investigate the cooperative
effect between the aforementioned CTL line and HLA-DR3- and
HLA-DR4-restricted NY-BR-1-specifc CD4+ T cell lines, upon joint adoptive
transfer into tumor bearing HLA-transgenic mice are currently ongoing.
The results presented here demonstrate the first NY-BR-1 expressing mouse
tumor model, allowing the investigation of NY-BR-1-specific immune
responses in vivo.

