Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of BRIP1 as a novel marker of breast tumor
malignancy in the Omani population


The rationale of the present study is based on the following observations
made in Oman: 1) a significantly increasing number of younger females
(25-40 years) present to the clinic with advanced stage of breast cancer
(BC); 2) the rate of consanguinity is significantly high (50%); and 3)
the transition from normal/benign to malignant phenotype of breast tumor
requires the involvement of a subset of specific genes. The long-term
objective of this study was to identify and validate the gene(s) that
underpin BC malignant transformation using functional genomic approaches.
RNA samples were isolated from 40 malignant breast tumor tissues and 40
normal/benign breast tissues and analyzed by microarray gene expression
profiling. Among a number of differentially expressed genes, BRIP1
showing a 5-fold up-regulation was identified as a potential gene that
might underpin the transition from the benign to the malignant phenotype.
The differential expression of BRIP1 was structurally validated by RT-PCR
using the remaining RNA of the same samples previously examined by
microarray. Pathway analysis was carried out to predict the major
functional pathways involving BRIP1 to other identified genes. Ongoing
sequencing of these genes using DNA extracted from the same samples will
ultimately identify any genetic alteration that can affect the normal
function of these genes. Functional validation assays will validate
further the physiological relevance of BRIP1 in tumor malignancy, and
perhaps other novel gene(s) specific to BC in the Omani population. This
study has identified BRIP1 as a novel potential marker for BC malignancy,
and can be a potential biomarker for early diagnosis of BC and/or a
target to pave the way towards the design of anti-BC therapeutic
strategies.

