Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative phosphorylation-dependent regulation of cancer cell
apoptosis in response to anticancer agents


Although cancer cells develop resistance to multiple types of anticancer
agents, whether they adopt similar or differential mechanisms to evade
cell death in response to a broad spectrum of cancer therapeutics is not
fully defined. We show differential sensitivity, caspase activation, and
cytokines/chemokines release in response to multiple anticancer agents.
We demonstrated that DNA-damaging agents (etoposide and doxorubicin), ER
stressor (thapsigargin), and histone deacetylase inhibitor (apicidin)
target oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) for apoptosis induction,
whereas other anticancer agents including staurosporine, taxol, and
sorafenib induced apoptosis in OXPHOS-independent manner. DNA-damaging
agents induced mitochondrial biogenesis accompanied by increased
production of cellular and mitochondrial ROS. Mitochondrial biogenesis
upregulated both mitochondrial protein-folding machinery and unfolded
protein response. Induction of mitochondrial biogenesis occurred in a
caspase activation-independent mechanism but was reduced by autophagy
inhibition and p53-deficiency. Abrogation of complex-I blocked DNA
damage-induced caspase activation, whereas inhibition of complex II or
gross complexes did not modulate the caspase activity. Interestingly, DNA
damaging agent doxorubicin showed strong binding to mitochondria, which
was disrupted upon OXPHOS complex I-deficiency but not by OXPHOS complex
II-deficiency. Thapsigargin-induced caspase activation was reduced upon
abrogation of complex-I or gross-complexes whereas a reverse trend was
observed with apicidin. Together, our findings define the specific
targets of apoptosis induction in response to a broad range of anticancer
therapeutics, which provide a new strategy for differential mitochondrial
targeting for cancer therapy.

