Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of HPV prevalence between HPV-vaccinated and
non-vaccinated young adult women (20-26 years)


Background Although the HPV vaccine provides protection against genital
warts and HPV-associated anogenital cancers among young girls, there is
some concern about its effectiveness when administered to young adult
women due to the risk of prior HPV infections before vaccination and
potentially reduced immunogenicity when administered at older ages. This
study used 2 cycles of the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES) data to evaluate the effectiveness of the HPV vaccine
among women 20-26 years of age.Methods This cross-sectional study
included 592 young adult women (20-26 years) with complete information on
HPV prevalence and HPV vaccination status from NHANES 2007-2010.
Multivariate logistic regression models were used to examine differences
in HPV prevalence between vaccinated and unvaccinated young women.Results
After controlling for past sexual behaviors, vaccinated women had a lower
risk of testing positive for the 4 types included in the HPV vaccine (6,
11, 16, or 18; Table 1). This association became stronger when the number
of recent sexual partners was controlled for. However, vaccinated women
had a higher prevalence of nonvaccine high-risk types than unvaccinated
women (61.5% vs 39.7%, prevalence ratio 1.55, 95% CI 1.22-1.98). After
adjusting for the number of recent sexual partners, the difference in
prevalence of high-risk nonvaccine types was reduced, but remained
significant.Conclusion HPV vaccination was effective for the protection
against all four vaccine types in young adult women. Vaccinated women had
a higher prevalence of nonvaccine high-risk types, which suggests that
they may benefit from vaccines that cover additional types of HPV.Table
1. Type-specific HPV prevalence among US adult women by HPV vaccination
status.aPrevalence was weighted using sample weights.bModel 1 was
adjusted for age, race/ethnicity, education, income, smoking status, and
marital status.cModel 2 was adjusted for variables in Model 1 plus
sexually transmitted diseases and number of lifetime sexual
partners.dModel 3 was adjusted for variables in Model 2 plus number of
sexual partners in the past 12 months.

