Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential utility of DNA methytlation as a biomarker for
prediction of ulcerative colitis associated colitic cancer (UCAC)


Background: Patients with Ulcerative colitis (UC) have more increased
risk for the development of colorectal cancers compared with the
average-risk population.Methods or strategies other than intensive
colonoscopic surveillance to diagnose ulcerative colitis-associated
colorectal carcinoma (UCAC) at early stage are limited. DNA methylation
is deeply involved in carcinogenesis in many tumor types and its
potential utility as a biomarker has been suggested.Aim: To evaluate
potential utility of DNA methylation as the risk marker for UCAC, we
quantified DNA methylation of inflamed rectal mucosa, neoplastic tissue
and adjacent colonic mucosa of UC patients.Method: Inflamed rectal mucosa
(n = 84) and normal appealing proximal mucosa (n = 10) of 84 cancer-free
UC patients were examined. Neoplastic tissue (n = 33) and adjacent
colonic mucosa (n = 26) from 16 UC patients with neoplasia (UCAC or DALM)
were also studied. Bisulfite pyro sequencing was performed for the
quantification of 45 cancer or age-related candidate panels and LINE1
repetitive element. Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 450 platform was
also used to determine 470,000 CpG sites distributed across the
genome.Results: Inflamed mucosa in UC was characterized as hyper
methylation in candidate panels using the helical unsupervised
clustering. In several panels, hyper methylation was associated with
severe clinical phenotypes including steroid dependent, refractory,
longstanding severe inflammation etc. (DPYS and miR-1247: pBackground:
Patients with Ulcerative colitis (UC) have more increased risk for the
development of colorectal cancers compared with the average-risk
population.Methods or strategies other than intensive colonoscopic
surveillance to diagnose ulcerative colitis-associated colorectal
carcinoma (UCAC) at early stage are limited. DNA methylation is deeply
involved in carcinogenesis in many tumor types and its potential utility
as a biomarker has been suggested.Aim: To evaluate potential utility of
DNA methylation as the risk marker for UCAC, we quantified DNA
methylation of inflamed rectal mucosa, neoplastic tissue and adjacent
colonic mucosa of UC patients.Method: Inflamed rectal mucosa (n = 84) and
normal appealing proximal mucosa (n = 10) of 84 cancer-free UC patients
were examined. Neoplastic tissue (n = 33) and adjacent colonic mucosa (n
= 26) from 16 UC patients with neoplasia (UCAC or DALM) were also
studied. Bisulfite pyro sequencing was performed for the quantification
of 45 cancer or age-related candidate panels and LINE1 repetitive
element. Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 450 platform was also used
to determine 470,000 CpG sites distributed across the genome.Results:
Inflamed mucosa in UC was characterized as hyper methylation in candidate
panels using the helical unsupervised clustering. In several panels,
hyper methylation was associated with severe clinical phenotypes
including steroid dependent, refractory, longstanding severe inflammation
etc. (DPYS and miR-1247: p<0.05. GSTP1: pBackground: Patients with
Ulcerative colitis (UC) have more increased risk for the development of
colorectal cancers compared with the average-risk population.Methods or
strategies other than intensive colonoscopic surveillance to diagnose
ulcerative colitis-associated colorectal carcinoma (UCAC) at early stage
are limited. DNA methylation is deeply involved in carcinogenesis in many
tumor types and its potential utility as a biomarker has been
suggested.Aim: To evaluate potential utility of DNA methylation as the
risk marker for UCAC, we quantified DNA methylation of inflamed rectal
mucosa, neoplastic tissue and adjacent colonic mucosa of UC
patients.Method: Inflamed rectal mucosa (n = 84) and normal appealing
proximal mucosa (n = 10) of 84 cancer-free UC patients were examined.
Neoplastic tissue (n = 33) and adjacent colonic mucosa (n = 26) from 16
UC patients with neoplasia (UCAC or DALM) were also studied. Bisulfite
pyro sequencing was performed for the quantification of 45 cancer or
age-related candidate panels and LINE1 repetitive element. Illumina
Infinium Human Methylation 450 platform was also used to determine
470,000 CpG sites distributed across the genome.Results: Inflamed mucosa
in UC was characterized as hyper methylation in candidate panels using
the helical unsupervised clustering. In several panels, hyper methylation
was associated with severe clinical phenotypes including steroid
dependent, refractory, longstanding severe inflammation etc. (DPYS and
miR-1247: p<0.05. GSTP1: p<0.01. mean of three: pBackground: Patients
with Ulcerative colitis (UC) have more increased risk for the development
of colorectal cancers compared with the average-risk population.Methods
or strategies other than intensive colonoscopic surveillance to diagnose
ulcerative colitis-associated colorectal carcinoma (UCAC) at early stage
are limited. DNA methylation is deeply involved in carcinogenesis in many
tumor types and its potential utility as a biomarker has been
suggested.Aim: To evaluate potential utility of DNA methylation as the
risk marker for UCAC, we quantified DNA methylation of inflamed rectal
mucosa, neoplastic tissue and adjacent colonic mucosa of UC
patients.Method: Inflamed rectal mucosa (n = 84) and normal appealing
proximal mucosa (n = 10) of 84 cancer-free UC patients were examined.
Neoplastic tissue (n = 33) and adjacent colonic mucosa (n = 26) from 16
UC patients with neoplasia (UCAC or DALM) were also studied. Bisulfite
pyro sequencing was performed for the quantification of 45 cancer or
age-related candidate panels and LINE1 repetitive element. Illumina
Infinium Human Methylation 450 platform was also used to determine
470,000 CpG sites distributed across the genome.Results: Inflamed mucosa
in UC was characterized as hyper methylation in candidate panels using
the helical unsupervised clustering. In several panels, hyper methylation
was associated with severe clinical phenotypes including steroid
dependent, refractory, longstanding severe inflammation etc. (DPYS and
miR-1247: p<0.05. GSTP1: p<0.01. mean of three: p<0.0001). Notably, in
many panels, hyper methylation was significantly associated with longer
duration of disease in cancer-free patients. Among them, some panels
showed hyper methyhlation in both neoplastic and adjacent tissue compared
to rectal mucosa of cancer-free cases (DPYS and N33, both p values
Background: Patients with Ulcerative colitis (UC) have more increased
risk for the development of colorectal cancers compared with the
average-risk population.Methods or strategies other than intensive
colonoscopic surveillance to diagnose ulcerative colitis-associated
colorectal carcinoma (UCAC) at early stage are limited. DNA methylation
is deeply involved in carcinogenesis in many tumor types and its
potential utility as a biomarker has been suggested.Aim: To evaluate
potential utility of DNA methylation as the risk marker for UCAC, we
quantified DNA methylation of inflamed rectal mucosa, neoplastic tissue
and adjacent colonic mucosa of UC patients.Method: Inflamed rectal mucosa
(n = 84) and normal appealing proximal mucosa (n = 10) of 84 cancer-free
UC patients were examined. Neoplastic tissue (n = 33) and adjacent
colonic mucosa (n = 26) from 16 UC patients with neoplasia (UCAC or DALM)
were also studied. Bisulfite pyro sequencing was performed for the
quantification of 45 cancer or age-related candidate panels and LINE1
repetitive element. Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 450 platform was
also used to determine 470,000 CpG sites distributed across the
genome.Results: Inflamed mucosa in UC was characterized as hyper
methylation in candidate panels using the helical unsupervised
clustering. In several panels, hyper methylation was associated with
severe clinical phenotypes including steroid dependent, refractory,
longstanding severe inflammation etc. (DPYS and miR-1247: p<0.05. GSTP1:
p<0.01. mean of three: p<0.0001). Notably, in many panels, hyper
methylation was significantly associated with longer duration of disease
in cancer-free patients. Among them, some panels showed hyper
methyhlation in both neoplastic and adjacent tissue compared to rectal
mucosa of cancer-free cases (DPYS and N33, both p values <0.0001). Genome
scale analysis revealed that UC with severe inflammation or neoplasia was
characterized as hyper methylation at CpG sites rather than outside CpG
sites. Gene ontology analysis demonstrated frequently methylated promoter
CpG sites in these cases frequently encoded protein related to
biosynthetic process (Fold enrichment: 2.07. p value using Benjamini
correction: 5.69E-05).Conclusion: Hyper methylation at CpG sites of
non-neoplastic colonic mucosa in UC with severe inflammation and
neoplasia suggested the potential utility of DNA methytlation as a
biomarker for prediction of UCAC. Moreover, enrichment of specific
pathway in methylated genes suggests the possibility of targeting therapy
for treating UCAC.

