Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of H2AX as a biomarker of genotoxic carcinogen in the
urinary bladder of rats


Background: Bladder cancer is the seventh most common cancer in males
worldwide. Recent studies have demonstrated that DNA double-strand breaks
are recognized to be a serious injury leading to genome instability and
cancer development. The rapid phosphorylation of histone H2AX at Serine
139, to become H2AX, occurs in response to DNA double-strand breaks.
Roles of H2AX in carcinogenesis are still unclear, and there are few
reports on the association with bladder cancer. We have previously
demonstrated that H2AX expression is induced in urinary bladders of
N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)-nitrosamine (BBN)-treated rat (Toyoda et al.,
J Toxicol Pathol, 26: 215-221, 2013). To evaluate the value of H2AX as a
biomarker for carcinogenicity and genotoxicity to the urinary bladder, we
performed an immunohistochemical analysis of H2AX expression in
chemical-treated rats.Methods: Six-week-old male F344 rats were treated
with 0.05% BBN, 1.8% 2-nitroanisole (2-NA), 2% 2,2-bis
(bromomethyl)-1,3-propanediol (BMP), 0.1% phenethyl isothiocyanate
(PEITC), 3% melamine, or 3% uracil in either drinking water (BBN) or diet
(other chemicals) for 4 weeks. Animals were sacrificed at 4 or 6 weeks of
the experiment, and immunohistochemistry for H2AX in urinary bladders was
performed.Results: At week 4, H2AX expression in the urothelium were
significantly increased in BBN and 2-NA groups compared with the
controls. H2AX expression ratio (positive cells/1000 cells) in BBN, 2-NA
and control groups were 7621, 11137 and 0.80.6, respectively. H2AX was
recognized as dot-like foci in nuclei of epithelial cells, and the
positive cells were mainly located near the basal layer of the mucosa. In
BMP and PEITC groups, H2AX expression was mainly observed in umbrella
cells and intermediate cells, respectively. In melamine and uracil
groups, there were diffuse urothelial hyperplasia and focal expression of
H2AX especially in the basal layer. The expression ratios of H2AX in BMP,
PEITC, melamine and uracil groups were 8.36.6, 269.0, 1611 and 1111,
respectively. Two weeks after withdrawal of administration, although the
expression ratio of H2AX was markedly reduced in all groups, it remained
high in BBN (171.9) and 2-NA (193.4) groups compared with the controls
(0.60.9).Discussion and conclusion: BBN and 2-NA, genotoxic bladder
carcinogens, induced more extensive H2AX expression in the urothelium
than other non-genotoxic (melamine and uracil) or non-carcinogenic
chemicals (BMP and PEITC), and H2AX-positive cells remained in relatively
large numbers even 2 weeks after withdrawal of its administration. In
addition, ratio of basal cells, intermediate cells and umbrella cells in
H2AX-positive cells showed similar patterns in BBN/2-NA and
melamine/uracil groups. These data indicate that H2AX has potential as a
biomarker for early detection of genotoxic carcinogen in the urinary
bladder.

