Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of Fn14 in EGFRvIII-driven glioblastoma


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is the most common malignant brain tumor in
adults. Most GBM patients succumb to the disease less than one-year post
diagnosis due to the highly invasive nature of the tumor, which prevents
complete surgical resection and gives rise to tumor recurrence. The
invasive phenotype also confers radio-and chemoresistant properties to
the tumor cells; therefore, there is a need to develop new therapeutics
that target drivers of GBM invasion. Amplification of EGFR is observed in
over 50% of GBM tumors, of which half concurrently overexpress the
variant EGFRvIII, and expression of both receptors confers a worse
prognosis. EGFR and EGFRvIII cooperate to promote tumor progression and
invasion, in part, through activation of the JAK/STAT-signaling pathway.
Here we report that GBM cells expressing EGFRvIII show increased
expression of a previously established mediator of glioma cell invasion
and survival, fibroblast growth factor-inducible 14 (Fn14), at the mRNA
and protein level. Treatment with a STAT3, STAT5, or JAK inhibitor
decreased Fn14 mRNA and protein expression. Finally, knockdown of Fn14
levels in the EGFRvIII-expressing glioma cells decreased both cell
survival after temozolomide (TMZ) treatment and cell invasion, which
suggests that Fn14, in part, mediates the oncogenic phenotypes conferred
by EGFRvIII signaling. Since EGFR inhibitors display limited therapeutic
efficacy in GBM patients, we hypothesize that Fn14-targeted therapies
could potentially limit invasiveness and chemoresistance in these tumor
subtypes.

