Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engraftment of patient derived xenografts on mice with a humanized
immune system


The stimulation of the endogenous antitumor immunity has the potential to
achieve clinically significant tumor regression. The recent clinical
success with antibodies interfering with immune checkpoints on T-cells
(PD1 and CTLA-4) has motivated oncology research world wide to focuses on
new immunotherapy approaches. Further immune regulatory molecules are
currently in target validation and together with cancer vaccines,
therapeutic antibodies, immunoconjugates, and tumor reactive T-cells
(CARTs) they all might contribute to an improved cancer therapy in the
next years.The identification and validation of new targets for antitumor
immune therapy is still a challenge for the preclinical research as the
classical syngeneic tumor models are of limited translational value and
the patient-derived human tumor xenograft models (PDX) are growing on
immunodeficient animals.In first studies using human mononuclear cells
(MNC) we demonstrated the engraftment of human T cells on immunodeficient
mice. The transplanted human mononuclear cells (MNC) differentiated in T
cell as measured by CD3, CD4 and CD8 expression. The inoculation and
tumor growth of SW480 colon cancer cells on humanized mice was possible
concurrent with accumulation of human T cells in the tumor.Our aim was
the further improvement of this test system and the demonstration of a
functional reconstitution of a human immune system by engrafting human
hematopoietic stem cells in immunodeficient mice.Humanized mice were
transplanted with patient derived melanoma fragments without evidence for
rejection correlated with an increase of human T cells in the peripheral
blood. Drug sensitivity testing with various immunoconjugates will
follow.Our humanized mouse models will enable a more appropriate
preclinical assessment of immune-based therapeutic antitumor strategies
especially when combining the humanized mouse with patient-derived tumor
xenografts.

