Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteome-based combined treatment strategies synergizing
antagonism of androgen receptor function in prostate cancer


Acquired resistance to second-generation androgen receptor (AR)-targeted
therapies compels the development of novel therapeutic agents for
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). We have recently reported a
novel function of endostatin (ES) through direct binding and inhibition
of AR in human prostate cancer (PCa) cells. Molecular characterization of
the putative mechanisms of ES function on AR-positive PCa cells by global
proteomic analysis revealed dramatic upregulation of CYP51A1 expression
in LNCaP cells, suggesting that the increases in cholesterol biosynthesis
and the resultant steroidogenesis may provide survival mechanism for PCa
cells through the augmentation of androgen-AR axis. To validate this
hypothesis, anti-proliferative effects of combined treatment of ES with
Lovastatin or Fluconazole, inhibitor of HMG-CoA reductase or CYP5A1, were
analyzed in vitro using AR-positive LNCaP cells. Results indicated a
significantly enhanced ES-mediated growth inhibition on LNCaP cells by
targeting both the ligand biosynthesis and receptor function. Proteomic
profiling further indicated that ES significantly decreased the levels of
AR, coactivator Ran (ARA24) and downregulated AR-driven expression of MCM
complex 2, 3, 4 and 6, MDC1 and STMN1, suggesting that AR-targeted
effects of ES include disruption of DNA replication, cell cycle
propagation and cell division. We found that dual inhibition of AR
nuclear transport and AR-mediated cell division by co-treatment of ES and
Taxol greatly decreased PCa cell proliferation. Together, this
interdisciplinary approach integrating proteomics with PCa cell function
possibly suggests that antagonism of AR, which is the principal drug
target for the PCa treatment, can be potentiated by the combination of ES
with currently used chemotherapy agents and adjuvants. These findings
further provide new insights into proteome-based approach as a useful
tool to design and optimize effective therapeutic regimens for individual
patients with CRPC.

