Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rictor alterations elicit non-canonical signaling mechanisms
contributing to tumorigenicity and therapeutic resistance in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Background: Rictor (RPTOR independent companion of MTOR, complex 2) is a
highly conserved protein and is a critical component for proper assembly
and functionality of the mTORC2 complex. The goal of our current study is
to characterize the functional consequences of genomic alterations of
RICTOR in advanced refractory NSCLC. Our preliminary data suggest that
Rictor alterations have the potential to not only signal canonically
through AKT, but also provide cancer cells with alternate, more
advantageous oncogenic signaling via non-canonical mechanisms.Methods: We
correlated genomic data (DNA hybrid capture based next generation
sequencing (NGS), Foundation Medicine, Inc.), gene expression profiling,
and clinical outcome in the context of the ongoing BATTLE-2 clinical
trial of targeted therapies in chemo-refractory NSCLC (198 cases). We
further (1) surveyed early stage NSCLC (230 cases) in The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) database and performed two-way hierarchical clustering
comparing gene expression profiling in amplified vs. diploid cases; (2)
utilized a single-nucleotide polymorphism array to select RICTOR
amplified and diploid NSCLC cell lines; (3) assessed Rictor protein and
RNA expression by Western blot and qRT-PCR, respectively; and (4)
performed RICTOR knockdown using siRNA followed by migration, invasion,
and clonogenic assays.Results: In the BATTLE-2 cases, we identified 15%
of RICTOR alterations (9% amplifications, 6% mutations, mutually
exclusive) preferentially associated with resistance to all therapies
(AKTi+MEKi, erlotinib+AKTi, sorafenib, or erlotinib). In the TCGA we
found: (1) 10% of RICTOR amplifications and 3% mutations; (2) significant
correlation between amplification and elevated RICTOR gene expression;
and (3) a putative functional gene expression signature associated with
RICTOR amplification. In diploid cell lines we found concordance between
AKT phosphorylation and activation of other downstream mTORC2 targets
(i.e. SGK1 and PKC), but in RICTOR amplified cell lines we witnessed a
discordant activation of these pathways, and thus were able to define
unique signaling class systems in our cell lines harboring RICTOR
alterations. Furthermore, following RICTOR knockdown in our amplified
cell lines, a reduction in clonogenic, migratory, and invasive capacity
was seen, suggesting that RICTOR amplification may provide a survival
advantage in select cancer cells by tipping the signaling balance toward
a non-canonical oncogenic pathway (AKT-independent).Conclusion: Rictor
alterations may define a new molecular NSCLC subtype with distinct
biology that expose unique avenues for therapeutic intervention. Ongoing
studies are underway to explore specific therapeutic strategies,
non-canonical signaling and Rictor mutations.Supported by: NHI-NCI
CA155196 & 2P50CA070907-16A1

