Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stress-induced reprogramming of epithelial cancers toward a
stem-like fate


Cancer cell plasticity has become a focus of intense study as it impacts
both therapy and drug resistance. Epigenetic changes contributing to
cellular plasticity and stemness allow tumor cells to adapt to
microenvironmental stress and or drug treatment. We recently reported
that the heterodimer integrin receptor v3 serves as a marker of stem-like
breast, lung, and pancreatic carcinomas that are highly resistant to
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as erlotinib. In fact, v3 was
found to be both necessary and sufficient to drive stemness, drug
resistance, and tumor progression. Here, we report that 3 expression is
expressed in response to a range of cellular stresses, including nutrient
deprivation, hypoxia, oxidative stress, and cancer therapy.
Stress-induced 3 gene expression is enhanced by epigenetic histone
modifications that promote an open chromatin state enabling binding of
the HNF4A transcription factor to the 3 promoter. Once expressed, 3
induces reprogramming toward a stem-like fate by driving a subset of NFB
target genes, including FOXP1, a transcription factor that controls
expression of pluripotency genes OCT4 and NANOG. Therefore,
stress-induced chromatin remodeling and the HNF4A-mediated induction of 3
expression triggers a switch from an epithelial to a cancer stem-like
phenotype. Evidence is provided that pharmacological blockade of this
epigenetic change not only inhibits 3 expression but reverses tumor
stem-like properties and enhances their response to therapeutic standard
of care. These findings define a stress-induced but reversible epigenetic
pathway leading to 3 expression on a range of epithelial cancers that
drives cancer stemness, tumor progression and drug resistance.

