Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional genomics to investigate the genetic determinants of
cell death induced by oxidative stresses


Increased oxidative stress in the tumor microenvironments is a prominent
stress that many tumor cells need to cope with during oncogenesis. The
stress depletes intracellular glutathione, increases reactive oxygen
species, and finally triggers cell death in tumors. Despite its
importance during oncogenesis, the genetic determinants and the cell
death mechanisms under oxidative stress remain poorly defined. Here, we
applied a genome-wide siRNA screen to oxidative-stress-induced cell
death. Candidate genes were identified if the silencing could rescue cell
death under oxidative stresses. The identified candidate genes are
prioritized by the magnitude of rescue and the consistency among
different siRNAs that target the same gene. Selected top hits were
further functionally validated using independent siRNAs and chemicals in
multiple cancer cell types. To further understand the functional aspects
of these genes, we also analyzed the transcriptional and metabolomic
response to oxidative stresses. By these functional genomics approach, we
found that: 1) The Integrated Stress Response (ISR) is provoked by
oxidative stresses to mediate cell death. Therefore, inhibition of
IRE1-splicing activity, which is one of the major branches of ISR
pathway, could abolish oxidative-stress-induced cell death. 2)
Surprisingly, inhibition of multiple component of mTORC1 signaling,
including mTOR itself, could rescue oxidative-stress-induced cell death.
While further investigation is still in progress, these preliminary
findings unravel a unique molecular process in which oxidative stress
mediate cell death and the adaptive mechanism by which tumor cells
survive these stresses.

