Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The DNA methylation inhibitor induces telomere dysfunction and
apoptosis of leukemia cells that is attenuated by telomerase
over-expression


DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTIs) such as 5-azacytidine (5-AZA)
have been used for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and
other malignancies, and inhibition of global/gene-specific DNA
methylation is widely accepted as a key mechanism behind their anti-tumor
activity. It is currently unclear whether other mechanisms are involved
in DNMTI's action. Because telomerase or telomerase reverse transcriptase
(TERT) plays a key role in malignant transformation and progression
through telomere elongation and other telomere lengthening-independent
activities, and TERT or telomerase has been shown to confer chemo- or
radio-resistance to cancer cells, we determine whether DNMTIs affect
telomere function and whether TERT/telomerase interferes with their
anti-cancer efficacy. We showed that 5-AZA induced DNA damage and
telomere dysfunction in AML cell lines by demonstrating the presence of
53-BP1 foci and the co-localization of 53-BP1 foci with telomere signals,
respectively. Telomere dysfunction was coupled with diminished TERT
expression, shorter telomere and apoptosis in 5-AZA-treated cells.
However, 5-AZA treatment did not lead to changes in the methylation
status of subtelomere regions. Downregulation of TERT expression
similarly occurred in primary leukemic cells derived from AML patients
exposed to 5-AZA. TERT over-expression significantly attenuated
5-AZAmediated DNA damage, telomere dysfunction and apoptosis of AML
cells. Taken together, 5-AZA mediates the down-regulation of TERT
expression, and induces telomere dysfunction,which consequently exerts an
anti-tumor activity. These findings may have implications in DNMTI and
telomerase-based strategies for cancer therapeutics.

