Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapy of osteosarcoma with radiolabeled monoclonal
antibody to an insulin-like growth factor-2 receptor


Introduction: Overall survival for patients with osteosarcoma has not
meaningfully improved in over 30 years and there is a tremendous need for
novel treatment strategies. Consistent overexpression of the insulin-like
growth factor-2 receptor (IGF2R) has been previously demonstrated in
osteosarcoma. Radioimmunotherapy (RIT) is a means of delivering cytotoxic
radiation in a targeted manner, independent of specific pathway, using an
antigen-specific antibody bound to a radioisotope. RIT has been
successfully used in numerous oncologic scenarios. The purpose of this
project was to perform a biodistribution experiment to determine if
188Re-labeled IGF2R-specific mAB preferentially localizes to tumor and to
evaluate if it will effectively target and treat osteosarcoma cells
without toxicity to normal tissue.Materials and Methods: Twenty SCID mice
underwent heterotopic implantation of OS17. Tumor was allowed to grow to
5mm in diameter. Ten mice were randomized to receive 50Ci via
intraperitoneal injection of 188Re-MEM-238 (IGF2R specific murine Ab) and
10 were randomized to receive 188Re-MOPC-21 (isotype control).
Radioactivity was measured from harvested organs at 24 and 48 hours and
percentage of injected radiolabeled Ab was calculated for each animal. A
Scatchard plot analysis was used to calculate binding site number per
OS17 cell. Twenty female SCID mice underwent heterotopic tumor
implantation and thereafter were randomized into 4 groups; 300Ci
188Re-MEM-238, 300Ci188 Re-MOPC-21, unlabeled MEM-238, and untreated.
Tumor size was measured over a 14-day period and repeated thereafter over
a 24-day period. Immunohistochemistry was performed to assess IGF2R
staining.Results: 188Re-MEM-238 preferentially localizes within the tumor
at both 24 and 48 hours, reaching statistical significance at 48 hours (p
= 0.001). Preferential uptake of 188Re-MEM-238 in the bone was not
demonstrated. A moderate number of binding sites are available per OS17
cell however the binding constant is very high (Ka = 5.8 1010 M-1), which
is directly proportional to the efficacy of RIT. There was nearly
complete abrogation of the tumor growth by 188Re-MEM-238. There was
minimal IGF2R staining in tumor treated with 188Re-MEM-238, moderate
staining for tumor treated with 188Re-MOPC-21 and robust staining in the
control groups.Conclusions: These findings indicate that the IGF2R
expression differential between tumor and healthy tissue is substantial
enough to permit for RIT targeting. Further characterization and
development of this novel approach appears to be warranted. Future goals
will include dosimetry calculation to establish the maximally tolerated
dose, to characterize single and repeated dosing schemas across a panel
of osteosarcoma tumors in both immunodeficient and immunocompetent murine
models and to assess the safety of such treatments.

