Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cabozantinib, a multi-target receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
decreases tumor growth and angiogenesis in a patient-derived
dedifferentiated liposarcoma xenograft


Background: Upregulation of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways,
including vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) and MET
(also known as hepatocyte growth factor receptor), is found in different
subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma. Cabozantinib (CABO) is a multi-target
inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinases including VEGFR, MET, RET, and
KIT. We aimed to evaluate the anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor effect of
CABO alone and in combination with the standard-of-care cytotoxic agent
doxorubicin (DOX) in a patient-derived xenograft model of
dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDLPS).Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice were
bilaterally transplanted with human UZLX-STS3 DDLPS tumors, a model
originating from a patient with DDLPS. Twenty eight tumor-bearing mice
were assigned to 4 groups and treated for three weeks with either vehicle
(control), DOX (i.p., 1.2mg/kg/twice per week), CABO (p.o., 30mg/kg/QD)
or CABO+DOX (same dose/schedule as for the single agents). Tumor volume
was measured three times a week. Mitotic and apoptotic activity were
assessed on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and with phospho-histone
H3 (pHH3) and cleaved-caspase 3 (CC3) immunostainings. Microvascular
density (MVD) was evaluated by counting CD34 positive vessels. Statistics
were calculated using the Mann-Whitney U pairs tests. p Background:
Upregulation of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways, including
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) and MET (also known
as hepatocyte growth factor receptor), is found in different subtypes of
soft tissue sarcoma. Cabozantinib (CABO) is a multi-target inhibitor of
receptor tyrosine kinases including VEGFR, MET, RET, and KIT. We aimed to
evaluate the anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor effect of CABO alone and in
combination with the standard-of-care cytotoxic agent doxorubicin (DOX)
in a patient-derived xenograft model of dedifferentiated liposarcoma
(DDLPS).Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice were bilaterally transplanted with human
UZLX-STS3 DDLPS tumors, a model originating from a patient with DDLPS.
Twenty eight tumor-bearing mice were assigned to 4 groups and treated for
three weeks with either vehicle (control), DOX (i.p., 1.2mg/kg/twice per
week), CABO (p.o., 30mg/kg/QD) or CABO+DOX (same dose/schedule as for the
single agents). Tumor volume was measured three times a week. Mitotic and
apoptotic activity were assessed on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining
and with phospho-histone H3 (pHH3) and cleaved-caspase 3 (CC3)
immunostainings. Microvascular density (MVD) was evaluated by counting
CD34 positive vessels. Statistics were calculated using the Mann-Whitney
U pairs tests. p < 0.05 was considered as statistically
significant.Results: A significant delay in tumor growth was observed in
CABO and CABO+DOX treated groups as compared to controls (pBackground:
Upregulation of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways, including
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) and MET (also known
as hepatocyte growth factor receptor), is found in different subtypes of
soft tissue sarcoma. Cabozantinib (CABO) is a multi-target inhibitor of
receptor tyrosine kinases including VEGFR, MET, RET, and KIT. We aimed to
evaluate the anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor effect of CABO alone and in
combination with the standard-of-care cytotoxic agent doxorubicin (DOX)
in a patient-derived xenograft model of dedifferentiated liposarcoma
(DDLPS).Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice were bilaterally transplanted with human
UZLX-STS3 DDLPS tumors, a model originating from a patient with DDLPS.
Twenty eight tumor-bearing mice were assigned to 4 groups and treated for
three weeks with either vehicle (control), DOX (i.p., 1.2mg/kg/twice per
week), CABO (p.o., 30mg/kg/QD) or CABO+DOX (same dose/schedule as for the
single agents). Tumor volume was measured three times a week. Mitotic and
apoptotic activity were assessed on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining
and with phospho-histone H3 (pHH3) and cleaved-caspase 3 (CC3)
immunostainings. Microvascular density (MVD) was evaluated by counting
CD34 positive vessels. Statistics were calculated using the Mann-Whitney
U pairs tests. p < 0.05 was considered as statistically
significant.Results: A significant delay in tumor growth was observed in
CABO and CABO+DOX treated groups as compared to controls (p<0.05) or DOX
single agent (pBackground: Upregulation of receptor tyrosine kinase
signaling pathways, including vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
(VEGFR) and MET (also known as hepatocyte growth factor receptor), is
found in different subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma. Cabozantinib (CABO)
is a multi-target inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinases including VEGFR,
MET, RET, and KIT. We aimed to evaluate the anti-angiogenic and
anti-tumor effect of CABO alone and in combination with the
standard-of-care cytotoxic agent doxorubicin (DOX) in a patient-derived
xenograft model of dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDLPS).Methods: NMRI
nu/nu mice were bilaterally transplanted with human UZLX-STS3 DDLPS
tumors, a model originating from a patient with DDLPS. Twenty eight
tumor-bearing mice were assigned to 4 groups and treated for three weeks
with either vehicle (control), DOX (i.p., 1.2mg/kg/twice per week), CABO
(p.o., 30mg/kg/QD) or CABO+DOX (same dose/schedule as for the single
agents). Tumor volume was measured three times a week. Mitotic and
apoptotic activity were assessed on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining
and with phospho-histone H3 (pHH3) and cleaved-caspase 3 (CC3)
immunostainings. Microvascular density (MVD) was evaluated by counting
CD34 positive vessels. Statistics were calculated using the Mann-Whitney
U pairs tests. p < 0.05 was considered as statistically
significant.Results: A significant delay in tumor growth was observed in
CABO and CABO+DOX treated groups as compared to controls (p<0.05) or DOX
single agent (p<0.05). Both CABO and CABO+DOX reduced the mitotic
activity in comparison with control (38% and 66% decrease, respectively,
pBackground: Upregulation of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways,
including vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) and MET
(also known as hepatocyte growth factor receptor), is found in different
subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma. Cabozantinib (CABO) is a multi-target
inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinases including VEGFR, MET, RET, and
KIT. We aimed to evaluate the anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor effect of
CABO alone and in combination with the standard-of-care cytotoxic agent
doxorubicin (DOX) in a patient-derived xenograft model of
dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDLPS).Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice were
bilaterally transplanted with human UZLX-STS3 DDLPS tumors, a model
originating from a patient with DDLPS. Twenty eight tumor-bearing mice
were assigned to 4 groups and treated for three weeks with either vehicle
(control), DOX (i.p., 1.2mg/kg/twice per week), CABO (p.o., 30mg/kg/QD)
or CABO+DOX (same dose/schedule as for the single agents). Tumor volume
was measured three times a week. Mitotic and apoptotic activity were
assessed on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and with phospho-histone
H3 (pHH3) and cleaved-caspase 3 (CC3) immunostainings. Microvascular
density (MVD) was evaluated by counting CD34 positive vessels. Statistics
were calculated using the Mann-Whitney U pairs tests. p < 0.05 was
considered as statistically significant.Results: A significant delay in
tumor growth was observed in CABO and CABO+DOX treated groups as compared
to controls (p<0.05) or DOX single agent (p<0.05). Both CABO and CABO+DOX
reduced the mitotic activity in comparison with control (38% and 66%
decrease, respectively, p<0.005). CABO+DOX showed better antimitotic
activity than either single agent DOX or CABO (pBackground: Upregulation
of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways, including vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) and MET (also known as
hepatocyte growth factor receptor), is found in different subtypes of
soft tissue sarcoma. Cabozantinib (CABO) is a multi-target inhibitor of
receptor tyrosine kinases including VEGFR, MET, RET, and KIT. We aimed to
evaluate the anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor effect of CABO alone and in
combination with the standard-of-care cytotoxic agent doxorubicin (DOX)
in a patient-derived xenograft model of dedifferentiated liposarcoma
(DDLPS).Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice were bilaterally transplanted with human
UZLX-STS3 DDLPS tumors, a model originating from a patient with DDLPS.
Twenty eight tumor-bearing mice were assigned to 4 groups and treated for
three weeks with either vehicle (control), DOX (i.p., 1.2mg/kg/twice per
week), CABO (p.o., 30mg/kg/QD) or CABO+DOX (same dose/schedule as for the
single agents). Tumor volume was measured three times a week. Mitotic and
apoptotic activity were assessed on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining
and with phospho-histone H3 (pHH3) and cleaved-caspase 3 (CC3)
immunostainings. Microvascular density (MVD) was evaluated by counting
CD34 positive vessels. Statistics were calculated using the Mann-Whitney
U pairs tests. p < 0.05 was considered as statistically
significant.Results: A significant delay in tumor growth was observed in
CABO and CABO+DOX treated groups as compared to controls (p<0.05) or DOX
single agent (p<0.05). Both CABO and CABO+DOX reduced the mitotic
activity in comparison with control (38% and 66% decrease, respectively,
p<0.005). CABO+DOX showed better antimitotic activity than either single
agent DOX or CABO (p<0.005 for both). The CABO-based treatments induced
higher apoptotic activity as compared to control (2.1 fold in CABO and
2.4 fold in CABO+DOX, pBackground: Upregulation of receptor tyrosine
kinase signaling pathways, including vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor (VEGFR) and MET (also known as hepatocyte growth factor
receptor), is found in different subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma.
Cabozantinib (CABO) is a multi-target inhibitor of receptor tyrosine
kinases including VEGFR, MET, RET, and KIT. We aimed to evaluate the
anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor effect of CABO alone and in combination
with the standard-of-care cytotoxic agent doxorubicin (DOX) in a
patient-derived xenograft model of dedifferentiated liposarcoma
(DDLPS).Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice were bilaterally transplanted with human
UZLX-STS3 DDLPS tumors, a model originating from a patient with DDLPS.
Twenty eight tumor-bearing mice were assigned to 4 groups and treated for
three weeks with either vehicle (control), DOX (i.p., 1.2mg/kg/twice per
week), CABO (p.o., 30mg/kg/QD) or CABO+DOX (same dose/schedule as for the
single agents). Tumor volume was measured three times a week. Mitotic and
apoptotic activity were assessed on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining
and with phospho-histone H3 (pHH3) and cleaved-caspase 3 (CC3)
immunostainings. Microvascular density (MVD) was evaluated by counting
CD34 positive vessels. Statistics were calculated using the Mann-Whitney
U pairs tests. p < 0.05 was considered as statistically
significant.Results: A significant delay in tumor growth was observed in
CABO and CABO+DOX treated groups as compared to controls (p<0.05) or DOX
single agent (p<0.05). Both CABO and CABO+DOX reduced the mitotic
activity in comparison with control (38% and 66% decrease, respectively,
p<0.005). CABO+DOX showed better antimitotic activity than either single
agent DOX or CABO (p<0.005 for both). The CABO-based treatments induced
higher apoptotic activity as compared to control (2.1 fold in CABO and
2.4 fold in CABO+DOX, p<0.005). Results were confirmed by pHH3 and CC3
stainings. Furthermore, significantly decreased MVD was observed in the
CABO and the combination treated tumors as compared to control (64% and
67% decrease, respectively, pBackground: Upregulation of receptor
tyrosine kinase signaling pathways, including vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor (VEGFR) and MET (also known as hepatocyte growth factor
receptor), is found in different subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma.
Cabozantinib (CABO) is a multi-target inhibitor of receptor tyrosine
kinases including VEGFR, MET, RET, and KIT. We aimed to evaluate the
anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor effect of CABO alone and in combination
with the standard-of-care cytotoxic agent doxorubicin (DOX) in a
patient-derived xenograft model of dedifferentiated liposarcoma
(DDLPS).Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice were bilaterally transplanted with human
UZLX-STS3 DDLPS tumors, a model originating from a patient with DDLPS.
Twenty eight tumor-bearing mice were assigned to 4 groups and treated for
three weeks with either vehicle (control), DOX (i.p., 1.2mg/kg/twice per
week), CABO (p.o., 30mg/kg/QD) or CABO+DOX (same dose/schedule as for the
single agents). Tumor volume was measured three times a week. Mitotic and
apoptotic activity were assessed on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining
and with phospho-histone H3 (pHH3) and cleaved-caspase 3 (CC3)
immunostainings. Microvascular density (MVD) was evaluated by counting
CD34 positive vessels. Statistics were calculated using the Mann-Whitney
U pairs tests. p < 0.05 was considered as statistically
significant.Results: A significant delay in tumor growth was observed in
CABO and CABO+DOX treated groups as compared to controls (p<0.05) or DOX
single agent (p<0.05). Both CABO and CABO+DOX reduced the mitotic
activity in comparison with control (38% and 66% decrease, respectively,
p<0.005). CABO+DOX showed better antimitotic activity than either single
agent DOX or CABO (p<0.005 for both). The CABO-based treatments induced
higher apoptotic activity as compared to control (2.1 fold in CABO and
2.4 fold in CABO+DOX, p<0.005). Results were confirmed by pHH3 and CC3
stainings. Furthermore, significantly decreased MVD was observed in the
CABO and the combination treated tumors as compared to control (64% and
67% decrease, respectively, p<0.005) and as compared to DOX alone (57%
and 61% decrease, respectively, pBackground: Upregulation of receptor
tyrosine kinase signaling pathways, including vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor (VEGFR) and MET (also known as hepatocyte growth factor
receptor), is found in different subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma.
Cabozantinib (CABO) is a multi-target inhibitor of receptor tyrosine
kinases including VEGFR, MET, RET, and KIT. We aimed to evaluate the
anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor effect of CABO alone and in combination
with the standard-of-care cytotoxic agent doxorubicin (DOX) in a
patient-derived xenograft model of dedifferentiated liposarcoma
(DDLPS).Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice were bilaterally transplanted with human
UZLX-STS3 DDLPS tumors, a model originating from a patient with DDLPS.
Twenty eight tumor-bearing mice were assigned to 4 groups and treated for
three weeks with either vehicle (control), DOX (i.p., 1.2mg/kg/twice per
week), CABO (p.o., 30mg/kg/QD) or CABO+DOX (same dose/schedule as for the
single agents). Tumor volume was measured three times a week. Mitotic and
apoptotic activity were assessed on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining
and with phospho-histone H3 (pHH3) and cleaved-caspase 3 (CC3)
immunostainings. Microvascular density (MVD) was evaluated by counting
CD34 positive vessels. Statistics were calculated using the Mann-Whitney
U pairs tests. p < 0.05 was considered as statistically
significant.Results: A significant delay in tumor growth was observed in
CABO and CABO+DOX treated groups as compared to controls (p<0.05) or DOX
single agent (p<0.05). Both CABO and CABO+DOX reduced the mitotic
activity in comparison with control (38% and 66% decrease, respectively,
p<0.005). CABO+DOX showed better antimitotic activity than either single
agent DOX or CABO (p<0.005 for both). The CABO-based treatments induced
higher apoptotic activity as compared to control (2.1 fold in CABO and
2.4 fold in CABO+DOX, p<0.005). Results were confirmed by pHH3 and CC3
stainings. Furthermore, significantly decreased MVD was observed in the
CABO and the combination treated tumors as compared to control (64% and
67% decrease, respectively, p<0.005) and as compared to DOX alone (57%
and 61% decrease, respectively, p<0.005).Conclusions: CABO has anti-tumor
activity in the UZLX-STS3 DDLPS xenograft model by inhibiting
proliferation, inducing apoptosis and suppressing angiogenesis. These in
vivo results support ongoing and planned clinical trials with
cabozantinib in mesenchymal malignancies.

