Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of lipidomics to a sulindac intervention of aromatase
inhibitor-induced pain


(a) Introduction. The regular use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) has been associated with a lower risk for epithelial
cancers including breast. NSAIDs block cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 and -2
enzyme metabolism of -6 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) to
prostaglandins (PGs). Additionally, -6 and -3 PUFA are metabolized by
lipoxygenases (LOX) and cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzyme families to
produce over 100 metabolites known as oxylipins. Oxylipins exhibit a wide
spectrum of biological activity including mediators of pain and
inflammation.The overarching objective of the work is to determine if
sulindac (an NSAID) intervention changes oxylipin profiles in breast
cancer patients, and if individual oxylipins are related to pain caused
by aromatase inhibitors (AI).(b) Methods. This work takes place within
the context of an R01-funded single arm, open-label clinical trial of
sulindac (N = 100). Breast cancer patients that are stable on AIs
complete pain and quality of life questionnaires, and provide blood and
urine samples after a 4-week NSAID washout, after a 3 month observation
period, at baseline and 3, 6 and 12 months on sulindac intervention (150
mg bid). Oxylipins were quantified in blood and urine (n = 10) at the end
of washout, baseline, and after 3 months on sulindac using liquid
chromatography (LC) mass spectrometry (MS)-based methods.(c) Results. We
quantified 62 total oxylipins in plasma and 87 in urine. Thus far, our
analysis has focused on plasma oxylipins. Wilcoxon signed-rank tests were
used to compare oxylipin levels at baseline and after 3 months of
sulindac. COX metabolites of both -6 and -3 PUFA were non-significantly
decreased. In terms of -6 metabolites, 7 LOX products were significantly
decreased 11-HETE (P = 0.028), 15-HETE (P = 0.037), 9,12,13-TriHOME (P =
0.017), 9,10,13-TriHOME (P = 0.012), 8-HETE (P = 0.028), 9-HETE (P =
0.028), and 12-HETE (P = 0.047). Significantly decreased -6 CYP450
metabolites were 15(S)-HETrE (P = 0.028), and 5,6-DiHETrE (P = 0.028).
The -3 metabolites that significantly decreased were the LOX-derived
5-HEPE (P = 0.022), and 15-HEPE (P = 0.028), and CYP450-derived
5,15-DiHETE (P = 0.047), 5,6-DiHETE (P = 0.009), and 15,16-DiHODE (P =
0.012).Thus far 53% of participants reported pain other than every day
types of pain post-washout. The -6 CYP450 metabolite 11(12)-EpETrE was
significantly correlated with both worst pain ( = -0.669; P = 0.034) and
severity ( = -0.778; P = 0.008). The -6 CYP450 metabolite 20-HETE was
significantly correlated with severity ( = -0.714; P = 0.047).(d)
Conclusions. Our preliminary data indicate that oxylipin profiles change
in response to sulindac and may be related to pain. Success in shifting
plasma oxylipin profiles toward an
anti-inflammatory/anti-thromobotic/cardioprotective profile would
maximize efficacy and to reduce potential toxicities of NSAIDs within the
context of for prevention of breast and other cancers.

