Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using a cell based model system to characterize CYP17A1 genetic
variants


Androgen and estrogen steroid hormones are potent growth stimuli for both
prostate and breast cancer. Cytochrome P450 17A1 (CYP17A1), a P450
monooxygenase, is required for the synthesis of these hormones and is the
target of abiraterone, a drug approved for the treatment of
castration-resistant prostate cancer. CYP17A1 catalyzes the 17
hydroxylation of the C21 steroids pregnenolone and progesterone and has a
lyase activity that cleaves the C17-20 bond to produce the sex steroid
precursors, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and androstenedione. We
identified twelve nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
CYP17A1 and hypothesized that the resultant amino acid changes might
alter hydroxylase and lyase activity and thereby impact steroid hormone
synthesis. This hypothesis was examined by transiently transfecting
HEK293T cells, with either wild-type or polymorphic CYP17A1 constructs.
Cells were treated for 3 hours with tritiated ([3H]) progesterone and the
production of hydroxylated (OH) metabolites analyzed by HPLC. In cells
transfected with wild-type CYP17A1, 8.11% and 55.5% of the
[3H]-progesterone was recovered as 16-OH progesterone, and 17-OH
progesterone, respectively. Using the ratio of 17-OH progesterone to
16-OH progesterone as a quantitative measure of CYP17A1 enzyme activity,
wild-type CYP17A1 yields a ratio of 6.9+/- 0.05. In contrast, the SNP
(rs200063521) which causes an aspartic acid to histidine amino acid
change at residue 216, results in a 2.2 fold decrease in
16OH-progesterone synthesis compared to wild-type suggesting altered
hydroxylase function. CYP17A1 protein expression, as determined by
western blot analysis, suggests that a glycine to arginine conversion at
residue 162 (rs141821705) results in decreased protein levels. Studies to
further characterize the CYP17A1 variants are underway. This work could
lead to a better understanding of the role of CYP17A1 SNPs in cancer
progression and response to CYP17A1 targeted therapies.

