Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockout of UCP2 suppresses skin carcinogenesis


Mitochondria are important and necessary components of cell organelles.
In recent times, mitochondrial metabolism has regained attention due to
the growing evidence suggesting that dysfunction of mitochondria could
play a major role in cancer.Cancer cells that are actively proliferating
have great demand for ATP. This huge demand for ATP is met by glycolysis,
which is called the Warburg Effect.Although the Warburg effect has lately
been challenged, dysfunction of the mitochondrial dependent processes is
a characteristic feature of almost all tumor cells, which lead to higher
oxidative stress, inhibition of apoptosis and enhanced cell
proliferation; which are the hallmarks of tumor cells.Mitochondrial
uncoupling proteins have gained enormous interest in the field of cancer
metabolism due to their impact on mitochondrial dependent
processes.Uncoupling proteins are a family of mitochondrial proteins
present in the inner mitochondrial membrane whose physiological role is
to decrease membrane potential and hence ATP production. One of the most
interesting functions of UCPs is to decrease the generation of
ROS.However, because of altered mitochondrial dependent processes, cancer
cells have elevated levels of ROS production leading to a phenomenon
called oxidative stress. To fight against this oxidative stress, UCP2 (a
homologue of UCP family) has shown to be up-regulated in a number of
human cancers. However, there is no direct evidence supporting UCP2
contributes to carcinogenesis.Considering this ability of UCP2 to
modulate ROS, membrane potential and mitochondrial bioenergetics, an
interesting question to us, was whether UCP2 is involved in the
progression of cancer.Using UCP2 homozygous knockout mice and UCP2
overexpressed cells; our data have demonstrated that knockout of UCP2
suppressed skin carcinogenesis. Overexpression of UCP2 enhanced skin cell
transformation and oncogenic activation. In addition, genipin, a known
UCP2 inhibitor, was able to inhibit oncogenic activation during skin cell
transformation, even in UCP2 overexpressed cells. Finally, although
knockout of UCP2 increased the basal levels of protein oxidation, it did
not enhance protein oxidation in mouse skin epidermal tissues during skin
carcinogenesis.In summary, our data have provided direct evidence that
UCP2 promotes carcinogenesis, and targeting UCP2 may serve as a
translational approach for chemoprevention.

