Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating heterogeneity within cancer cell populations using
single cell RNA detection


As researchers continue to analyze the relationships between gene
expression and biological processes involved in the development and
progression of cancer, increasing importance is being placed on the study
of genetic variation across single cells. However, traditional methods
tend to measure RNA expression globally, with cell lysis and fixation
steps resulting in a loss of key information about individual cells,
making it challenging to properly assay the genetic heterogeneity within
cell populations. We demonstrate the use of a single cell RNA detection
technology that specifically measures gene expression in live cells
without altering their viability or inherent biology. This enables
researchers to not only detect heterogeneity within their samples, but
also separate, enrich, and further characterize cell subpopulations based
on RNA expression variation, when using techniques such as Fluorescent
Activated Cell Sorting (FACS).Here, we describe live cell detection of
cancer biomarkers within heterogeneous cell models. First, we co-cultured
MCF-7 and SK-BR3 breast cancer cell lines in specific ratios to mimic
heterogeneous breast cancer populations. Subsequent characterization of
the populations was performed by both flow cytometry using fluorescent
live-cell RNA detection probes, and quantitative real-time PCR. Next, we
analyzed miR-221 expression in a mixture of T47D and MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cell lines, which allowed us to sort the two cell types based on
differential expression of this microRNA and perform downstream
immunohistochemical analysis of vimentin and E-cadherin, two protein
markers known to be associated with the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition during tumor progression.Use of a live cell RNA detection
methodology in gene expression experiments allows scientists to formulate
novel questions and design experiments that better address the importance
of gene expression heterogeneity in normal and disease states,
particularly in cancer, where individual cells within the tumor
microenvironment may exhibit aberrant RNA expression profiles that render
them invasive or metastatic.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

