Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The inactivation of PP2A caused by the replacement of its
regulatory subunit plays a crucial role in the hemangiomagenesis


Hemangioma is the most frequent vascular tumor of early childhood.
However, the mechanism leading to their development, progression and
maintenance has remained unclear. In this study, we generated an
endothelial-specific PyMT-expressing transgenic (Tg) mouse (Tie2-PyMT)
that spontaneously develop hemangioma. Using Tie2-PyMT transgenic mice
and bEnd.3 cells, an PyMT induced mouse brain endothelial cell line
idicates that the direct expression of PyMT gene in vascular endothelial
cells leads to rapid cell proliferation and hemangioma development. An
interaction between the core AC dimer of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A)
and PyMT, but not B regulatory subunit was verified both in hemangioma
endothelial cells of Tie2-PyMT Tg mice and bEnd.3 cells by
immunoprecipitation. Whereas in endothelial cells of Tg negative mice and
PyMT silenced bEnd.3 cells, the B regulatory subunit binds to the core AC
dimer of PP2A. PyMT binding to PP2A led to the inactivation of PP2A
phosphatases and subsequently activates its downstream ERK1/2 and AKT
pathway, which may be responsible for the proliferative effect of PyMT on
vascular endothelial cells. Moreover, the effect of PyMT on PP2A
phosphatases activity could be rescued by Okadaic acid (OA), a specific
inhibitor of PP2A. Treamtment of Tie2-PyMT transgenic mice with the PP2A
activator, FTY720, significantly delayed hemangiomagenesis in this model.
Furthermore, PP2A complex composition and its phosphatases activity were
also examined in patient hemangioma specimens. Consisten with the animal
model, a decreased PP2A phosphatases activity and the dissociation of B
subunit from the PP2A core dimer were observed. These findings suggest
that the inactivation of PP2A caused by the replacement of its regulatory
subunit plays a crucial role in the hemangiomagenesis.

