Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering and mapping difficult proteins using comprehensive
mutagenesis


Alanine (Ala) scanning is a widely used mutagenesis approach for
systematic evaluation of protein function, which for large targets can be
laborious and time-consuming. We have developed a platform technology,
Shotgun Mutagenesis, for rapid and comprehensive alanine scanning
mutagenesis for protein mapping and engineering applications. Using this
technology, every residue in a target protein is individually mutated,
expressed in human cells, and assayed for desired functions. Critical
mutations are rapidly identified using high-throughput 384-well assays
including flow cytometry. Here we used Shotgun Mutagenesis to create
comprehensive mutation libraries for different classes of targets
including the GPCR CXCR4, bitter taste receptor TAS2R16 and the
therapeutic antibody Palivizumab (Synagis). For the cancer target CXCR4,
we identified critical residues for antibody binding (epitope mapping)
and ligand-dependent activation (functional domain mapping). We also
discovered TAS2R16 residues that can be altered for increased expression
(protein optimization) and Palivizumab residues which tolerate germline
substitutions permitting engineering of a maximally humanized antibody
variant (antibody humanization). This platform allows comprehensive
protein mapping and engineering of challenging targets previously
considered prohibitively time-consuming or expensive, enabling discovery
pathways for many untapped therapeutic targets.

