Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-137 confers chemoresistance by suppressing CASP3 in lung
cancer cells


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death. Although
molecular targeting therapy (MTT) could benefit patients with EGFR
activating mutations, chemotherapy still is the first choice of EGFR wild
type patients, MTT failed ones and patients of developing countries
without regarding their EGFR status. However most of these
chemotherapy-treated patients will develop drug resistance eventually.
Here, we identified miR-137 might contribute to chemo-resistance in lung
cancer in part. Our previous study identified 5 miRNAs (let-7a, miR-182*,
miR-372, miR-137 and miR-221) whose expression can be an independent
marker to predict the outcome of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients. Among them, miR-137 acts as a risky miRNA. Caspase-3 (CASP3)
was predicted as one of miR-137 potential targets. CASP3 is a critical
effector caspase that promotes programmed cell-death when activated in
the apoptotic cells both by extrinsic and intrinsic pathways that are
highly conserved and related to drug resistance. We found miR-137 could
regulate CASP3 through binding to its 3UTR. Endogenous CASP3 can be
up-regulated by over-expressing miR 137 in CL1-5, H1437 and A549 cells
and down-regulated by silencing miR-137 in H1299, CL1-0 and A549 cells.
Suppression of CASP3 by miR-137 providing lung cancer cells with ability
of anti-apoptosis under UV-induced cell death. MiR-137 also increase IC50
of CL1-5, H1437, A549 and H1975 cells under cisplatin treatment to at
least 2 folds. Restoration of CASP3 could reverse the effect. Our IHC
data also shows the CASP3 protein expression is negative correlated with
miR-137 level. In summary, manipulation of miR-137 might provide a
potential treatment for EGFR wild-type and MTT failed NSCLC.patients in
the future.

