Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical testing demonstrates strong activity of STA-12-8666,
an HSP90 inhibitor-SN-38 conjugate, in small cell lung cancer (SCLC)


Purpose/Objectives: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly aggressive
disease representing 12-13% of all lung cancers, with 5 year survival
rate of only 6%. While most patients respond initially to cytotoxic
chemotherapies such as irinotecan, etoposide or carboplatin, resistance
rapidly emerges and response to second line agents such as topotecan is
limited, and in contrast to non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), few
targetable oncogenes occur in SCLC.In this study, we tested new compound,
STA-12-8666, which binds tumor-concentrated active form of shock protein
90 (HSP90) and has cleavable linker attached to SN-38, the active
metabolite of irinotecan. Cleavage of the linker within the tumor
provides time-release of SN-38 at high local concentration, while
significantly limiting drug exposure and toxicity in non-transformed
issue. The goal for this work was to evaluate STA-12-8666 for potential
use as a new second line monotherapy, or as adjuvant in the frontline
setting.Materials/Methods: Three dose levels of STA-12-8666 were
evaluated in comparison to irinotecan, ganetespib, carboplatin,
etoposide, and chemotherapy combinations in 4 independent SCLC xenograft
models, including parental and cisplatin-resistant derivative cell lines
(SCLC1, SR2), and a patient-derived xenograft (PDX). STA-12-8666 was also
evaluated in drug combinations. Intratumoral responses were profiled
using a mass spectrometry based approach to evaluate kinase pathway
activation, and results confirmed by immunohistochemistry and western
blot analysis. Pharmacokinetic analysis was performed to benchmark
retention of STA-12-8666 to isomolar irinotecan in lung tumors.Results:
In all three models, high dose (150 mg/kg) STA-12-8666 was well
tolerated. In most cases, three doses administered at weekly intervals
caused complete regression of established tumors, with response durable
for > 2 months. Those tumors that regrew were responsive to re-dosing
with STA-12-8666, and were subsequently eliminated. STA-12-8666 was also
effective in limiting or eliminating tumors growth that had progressed
following initial treatment on standard first and second line agents for
SCLC. Low dose (50 mg/kg) STA-12-8666 controlled but did not eliminate
tumors: however, it strongly enhanced the action of 30 mg/kg carboplatin,
resulting in tumor elimination. Pharmacokinetic and proteomic analysis
confirmed STA-12-8666 concentration in tumors, and identified a signature
of DNA damage response biomarkers in STA-12-8666-treated tumors that
strongly contrasted with the pattern induced by irinotecan.Conclusions:
Together, these results indicate that STA-12-8666 may be a promising
therapy in both frontline and second line settings for SCLC and strongly
support the evaluation of this compound in Phase I/II clinical
trials.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

