Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of a novel phosphodiesterase 10 inhibitor in an
orthotopic mouse model of lung cancer


BACKGROUND: We recently reported that phosphodiesterase 10A (PDE10) is
elevated in certain tumor types and essential for tumor cell growth (Li
et al., Oncogene 2014). Here we evaluate anti-tumor efficacy,
pharmacokinetics, tissue distribution, and tolerance of a novel PDE10
inhibitor, ADT-048, in mice. METHODS: ADT-048 was orally administrated to
C57BL/6 mice and free levels quantified in plasma and tissues by LC-MS.
Anti-tumor activity was evaluated in athymic nude-Foxn1nu mice after
inoculating the left lung with 1106 A549 lung tumor cells transfected
with luciferase. Tumor growth was monitored by in situ bioluminescence
using the In Vivo Imaging System and efficacy was evaluated by necropsy
grading. RESULTS: ADT-048 inhibited A549 lung tumor cell growth with an
IC50 value of 0.7 M, while appreciably higher concentrations were
required to inhibit the growth of normal airway epithelial cells (IC50 =
35 M). Pharmacokinetic studies demonstrated a half-life suitable for once
a day dosing, while tissue distribution studies demonstrated a unique
capacity to achieve high concentrations in lungs relative to plasma and
other tissues. ADT-048, at a dose of 100 mg/Kg, displayed significant
anti-tumor activity as evident by reduced luminescence and tumor grading
following 28 days of treatment. CONCLUSIONS: A novel PDE10 inhibitor,
ADT-048, was found to display highly potent and selective tumor cell
growth inhibitory activity in vitro. ADT-048 was well tolerated in mice
and had attractive pharmaceutical properties with a unique capacity to
achieve high lung concentrations following oral administration. Efficacy
studies demonstrate strong anti-tumor activity of ADT-048, which
represents a candidate for clinical development. Supported by NIH grants
1R01CA155638 and 1R01CA131378 (Piazza).

