Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of epithelial plasticity of cancer cells by
tumor-associated macrophages


Epithelial plasticity of cancer cells is considered to be critical for
the metastatic process of cancer cells. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) has been proved to associate with cancer metastatic dissemination
from primary tumor site to distal metastatic organ. In contrast,
accumulated evidence showed that the reversal process of EMT, i.e.,
mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), is critical for metastatic
colonization. However, the mechanism for controlling the epithelial
plasticity during metastatic process is unclear. Tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) are the most abundant host immune cells in tumor
microenvironments. TAMs have been shown to modulate cancer progression
through regulating cancer cell growth and metastasis, and remodeling
extracellular matrix. However, it is still unclear about the roles of
TAMs in regulating epithelial plasticity during cancer metastasis. Here,
we demonstrate the distinct characteristics of that the TAMs in primary
and metastatic tumors. The TAMs in metastatic tumors carry a M2-like
phenotype; in contrast, the TAMs in primary tumors are composed of
heterogeneous population containing both M1-like and M2-like cells.
Furthermore, we polarize human monocytes into M1-like and M2-like
macrophages and treat cancer cells with M1 and M2 macrophages conditioned
medium. We find that different macrophage subtypes have a distinct effect
in modulating epithelial plasticity of cancer cells. Interestingly,
polarized macrophages regulate cancer cell morphological changes through
epigenetic regulation. Therefore, we propose that TAMs in tumor
microenvironment may polarize into different subtypes and facilitate
cancer metastatic dissemination. These findings have implications for
designing alternative strategies aimed at preventing and inhibiting
cancer metastasis.

