Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigations of covalent binding efficiency for third-generation
EGFR irreversible inhibitors AZD9291 and CO-1686


Patients with non-small cell lung cancer with activating EGFR mutations
initially respond to first-generation and second-generation EGFR
inhibitors. However, clinical efficacy is limited by acquired resistance,
frequently driven by the EGFR T790M mutation. In addition, patients
oftentimes experience severe side effects including rash and diarrhea due
to the inhibition profile against wild-type EGFR. AZD9291 and CO-1686 are
the leading third-generation irreversible EGFR inhibitors in clinical
development. They selectively inhibit T790M EGFR, while sparing wild-type
EGFR. In this study, we investigated the covalent binding efficiency of
these two irreversible EGFR inhibitors using biochemical and cellular
assays. We discovered that these two inhibitors had dramatic difference
in covalent binding efficiencies in WT and mutant EGFR binding at
biochemical and cellular levels. In pEGFR cellular assay, AZD9291
displayed much prolonged inhibition of pEGFR than CO-1686. In CO-1686
treated cells, recovery of pEGFR had reached 50% of control levels only
after 4 hours. In the meantime, pEGFR in AZD9291 treated cells had no
recovery even after 24 hours. These data may suggest different covalent
bond formation efficiency and reversibility between different types of
irreversible EGFR inhibitors. This may be one of the important factors
for consideration when develop third-generation EGFR inhibitors.

