Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Scaffold protein KSR1 is negatively regulated by merlin and
promotes tumor development in merlin deficient tumors


Accumulated evidence suggests that the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway plays a
crucial role in the development of Merlin-deficient tumours. However, the
mechanism in which Merlin precisely suppresses this mitogenic signalling
pathway has remained poorly understood. In addition, drug specificity,
side effects and drug resistance are serious problems when treating
patients with MEK inhibitors and therefore a more specific therapeutic
target needs to be identified. Using our primary human in vitro model and
three complementary approaches including lentiviral shRNA, active mutants
and use of a clinically approved inhibitor, we report that
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK scaffold protein Kinase Suppressor of Ras 1 (KSR1) plays
a vital role in promoting schwannoma proliferation, multipolar morphology
and other pathological phenotypes. Proteomic analysis suggests that
merlin shares multiple binding partners with KSR1 incl DCAF1 from the E3
Ubiquitin Ligase CRL4DCAF1, which is directly associated with and
functionally inhibited by the tumour suppressor Merlin in the nucleus.
Functional study suggests that KSR1 and DCAF1 might co-operate and/or
complement to regulate schwannoma's proliferation. These findings
demonstrate that Merlin disrupts Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK activity at the scaffold
protein level and also suggest that KSR1 is a specific therapeutic target
for Merlin-deficient tumours.

