Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Codon 72 and Intron-3 polymorphisms in TP53 are risk factors for
breast cancer


Purpose: A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in exon-4 of the TP53
gene (Arg72Pro) has been associated with an increased risk of developing
various human malignancies. Since a 16-base pair polymorphism
(insertion/duplication) intron-3 (PIN3) is in linkage disequilibrium with
Arg72Pro of TP53, we assessed whether these two polymorphisms serve as
breast cancer risk alleles for African Americans (AAs) and non-Hispanic
Caucasians (CAs).Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded invasive ductal carcinoma tissues [cases, n = 120 (AAs
= 55 and CAs = 65)] and from blood of healthy women [controls, n = 152
(AA = 74 and CAs = 78)]. Exon-4 of TP53 was amplified by PCR using
exon-specific primers, followed by Sanger sequencing. Identification of
SNP was done by using DNASTAR software. TP53 PIN3 polymorphism was
detected by amplifying genomic DNA using specific primers followed by gel
electrophoresis. The A1 allele (no duplication) resulted in 162 bp
fragment and the A2 allele (with 16 bp duplication) resulted in 178 bp
fragment. The phenotypes of Arg72Pro (Arg/Arg, Arg/Pro, and Pro/Pro) were
correlated with PIN3 status, clinicopathologic features, race/ethnicity,
and patient survival using the 2 test and Kaplan-Meier analyses. A p
value of Purpose: A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in exon-4 of the
TP53 gene (Arg72Pro) has been associated with an increased risk of
developing various human malignancies. Since a 16-base pair polymorphism
(insertion/duplication) intron-3 (PIN3) is in linkage disequilibrium with
Arg72Pro of TP53, we assessed whether these two polymorphisms serve as
breast cancer risk alleles for African Americans (AAs) and non-Hispanic
Caucasians (CAs).Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded invasive ductal carcinoma tissues [cases, n = 120 (AAs
= 55 and CAs = 65)] and from blood of healthy women [controls, n = 152
(AA = 74 and CAs = 78)]. Exon-4 of TP53 was amplified by PCR using
exon-specific primers, followed by Sanger sequencing. Identification of
SNP was done by using DNASTAR software. TP53 PIN3 polymorphism was
detected by amplifying genomic DNA using specific primers followed by gel
electrophoresis. The A1 allele (no duplication) resulted in 162 bp
fragment and the A2 allele (with 16 bp duplication) resulted in 178 bp
fragment. The phenotypes of Arg72Pro (Arg/Arg, Arg/Pro, and Pro/Pro) were
correlated with PIN3 status, clinicopathologic features, race/ethnicity,
and patient survival using the 2 test and Kaplan-Meier analyses. A p
value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.Results: In
cases, the Arg/Arg/, Pro/Arg, and Pro/Pro phenotypes were 15%, 31%, and
55% in AAs and 57%, 29%, and 14% in CAs (pPurpose: A single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in exon-4 of the TP53 gene (Arg72Pro) has been
associated with an increased risk of developing various human
malignancies. Since a 16-base pair polymorphism (insertion/duplication)
intron-3 (PIN3) is in linkage disequilibrium with Arg72Pro of TP53, we
assessed whether these two polymorphisms serve as breast cancer risk
alleles for African Americans (AAs) and non-Hispanic Caucasians
(CAs).Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded invasive ductal carcinoma tissues [cases, n = 120 (AAs
= 55 and CAs = 65)] and from blood of healthy women [controls, n = 152
(AA = 74 and CAs = 78)]. Exon-4 of TP53 was amplified by PCR using
exon-specific primers, followed by Sanger sequencing. Identification of
SNP was done by using DNASTAR software. TP53 PIN3 polymorphism was
detected by amplifying genomic DNA using specific primers followed by gel
electrophoresis. The A1 allele (no duplication) resulted in 162 bp
fragment and the A2 allele (with 16 bp duplication) resulted in 178 bp
fragment. The phenotypes of Arg72Pro (Arg/Arg, Arg/Pro, and Pro/Pro) were
correlated with PIN3 status, clinicopathologic features, race/ethnicity,
and patient survival using the 2 test and Kaplan-Meier analyses. A p
value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.Results: In
cases, the Arg/Arg/, Pro/Arg, and Pro/Pro phenotypes were 15%, 31%, and
55% in AAs and 57%, 29%, and 14% in CAs (p<0.001), respectively. A
similar distribution was observed in controls (16%, 42%, and 42% in AAs
and 56%, 37%, and 6% in CAs) (pPurpose: A single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) in exon-4 of the TP53 gene (Arg72Pro) has been associated with an
increased risk of developing various human malignancies. Since a 16-base
pair polymorphism (insertion/duplication) intron-3 (PIN3) is in linkage
disequilibrium with Arg72Pro of TP53, we assessed whether these two
polymorphisms serve as breast cancer risk alleles for African Americans
(AAs) and non-Hispanic Caucasians (CAs).Methods: Genomic DNA was
extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded invasive ductal
carcinoma tissues [cases, n = 120 (AAs = 55 and CAs = 65)] and from blood
of healthy women [controls, n = 152 (AA = 74 and CAs = 78)]. Exon-4 of
TP53 was amplified by PCR using exon-specific primers, followed by Sanger
sequencing. Identification of SNP was done by using DNASTAR software.
TP53 PIN3 polymorphism was detected by amplifying genomic DNA using
specific primers followed by gel electrophoresis. The A1 allele (no
duplication) resulted in 162 bp fragment and the A2 allele (with 16 bp
duplication) resulted in 178 bp fragment. The phenotypes of Arg72Pro
(Arg/Arg, Arg/Pro, and Pro/Pro) were correlated with PIN3 status,
clinicopathologic features, race/ethnicity, and patient survival using
the 2 test and Kaplan-Meier analyses. A p value of <0.05 was considered
statistically significant.Results: In cases, the Arg/Arg/, Pro/Arg, and
Pro/Pro phenotypes were 15%, 31%, and 55% in AAs and 57%, 29%, and 14% in
CAs (p<0.001), respectively. A similar distribution was observed in
controls (16%, 42%, and 42% in AAs and 56%, 37%, and 6% in CAs)
(p<0.001). When compared to ER positive, a higher frequency of Arg/Pro or
Pro/Pro was noted in estrogen-negative breast cancers (p = 0.03) in both
racial groups. However, no significant survival difference in these
racial groups was observed when Pro carriers were compared with Arg/Arg
cases (log rank, p = 0.565). Frequencies of PIN3 polymorphisms (A1A1,
A1A2, and A2A2) were similar in both cases and controls; however, overall
A1A1 frequency was higher than the other two genotypes of PIN3. The
phenotype Pro/Pro, was strongly associated with A1A1 polymorphism in both
racial groups of breast cancer patients (pPurpose: A single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in exon-4 of the TP53 gene (Arg72Pro) has been
associated with an increased risk of developing various human
malignancies. Since a 16-base pair polymorphism (insertion/duplication)
intron-3 (PIN3) is in linkage disequilibrium with Arg72Pro of TP53, we
assessed whether these two polymorphisms serve as breast cancer risk
alleles for African Americans (AAs) and non-Hispanic Caucasians
(CAs).Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded invasive ductal carcinoma tissues [cases, n = 120 (AAs
= 55 and CAs = 65)] and from blood of healthy women [controls, n = 152
(AA = 74 and CAs = 78)]. Exon-4 of TP53 was amplified by PCR using
exon-specific primers, followed by Sanger sequencing. Identification of
SNP was done by using DNASTAR software. TP53 PIN3 polymorphism was
detected by amplifying genomic DNA using specific primers followed by gel
electrophoresis. The A1 allele (no duplication) resulted in 162 bp
fragment and the A2 allele (with 16 bp duplication) resulted in 178 bp
fragment. The phenotypes of Arg72Pro (Arg/Arg, Arg/Pro, and Pro/Pro) were
correlated with PIN3 status, clinicopathologic features, race/ethnicity,
and patient survival using the 2 test and Kaplan-Meier analyses. A p
value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.Results: In
cases, the Arg/Arg/, Pro/Arg, and Pro/Pro phenotypes were 15%, 31%, and
55% in AAs and 57%, 29%, and 14% in CAs (p<0.001), respectively. A
similar distribution was observed in controls (16%, 42%, and 42% in AAs
and 56%, 37%, and 6% in CAs) (p<0.001). When compared to ER positive, a
higher frequency of Arg/Pro or Pro/Pro was noted in estrogen-negative
breast cancers (p = 0.03) in both racial groups. However, no significant
survival difference in these racial groups was observed when Pro carriers
were compared with Arg/Arg cases (log rank, p = 0.565). Frequencies of
PIN3 polymorphisms (A1A1, A1A2, and A2A2) were similar in both cases and
controls; however, overall A1A1 frequency was higher than the other two
genotypes of PIN3. The phenotype Pro/Pro, was strongly associated with
A1A1 polymorphism in both racial groups of breast cancer patients
(p<0.000078).Conclusion: These preliminary findings suggest that Arg72Pro
polymorphism and PIN3 in TP53 are related with higher breast cancer
susceptibility for both African American and non-Hispanic Caucasian
patients. This work was supported by a pilot grant from UAB Breast SPORE
grant of the National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute
(5P50CA089019).

