Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical study of HSP-90 inhibitor drug, AUY922 showed good
efficacy in treatment of nasopharyngeal cancer


Introduction: Prognosis of patients with metastatic or recurrent
nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) is usually poor. Despite some good response
to chemotherapy by cisplatin-containing regimen, long term remission in
NPC patients is not common. Response rate to second line drug after
failing cisplatin is poor. Heat shock protein-90 (HSP-90) is a molecular
chaperone essential to the folding of a wide variety of oncogenic client
proteins. Inhibition of HSP-90 can lead to a combinatorial blockage of
signal transduction leading to cancer cell death. Here, we reported a
successful preclinical study showing good efficacy of an anti-HSP-90
drug, AUY922 in treating NPC in cell culture in vitro and xenograft model
in vivo in nude mice.Experimental Design: WST assay was used to determine
the growth inhibitory dose of AUY922 in 3 NPC cell lines (C666, HONE1 &
CNE2) and 2 cisplatin resistant NPC cell lines (HONE1-EBV-Cisp-Res &
HK1-LMP1-Cisp-Res). Subcutaneous NPC xenografts was treated by AUY922
i.p. to examine tumor growth inhibition. DNA flow cytometric analysis
(DNA-FCM) and Yo-Pro staining were carried out to analyze the effect of
AUY922 in cell cycle progression and apoptosis. RT-PCR and Western
blotting were performed to examine the effects of AUY922 in regulating
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) gene transcripts and kinase pathway
phosphorylation respectively.Results: AUY922 (at GI-50 of 22 nM for C666)
could effectively induce tumor growth inhibition in all the 3 NPC cell
lines with 300-900 and 180-2700 folds of higher sensitivity than
cisplatin or 5-FU. NPC xenograft regression was accomplished by AUY922
treatment at 35-65 mg/kg alone with additive effect when combined with
cisplatin. Importantly, AUY922 was also growth inhibitory in the 2
cisplatin resistant NPC cell lines in vitro or in vivo hinting its
potential use in the clinical setting in patients refractory to
cisplatin. By DNA-FCM, AUY922 could induce prominent G2 cell cycle phase
arrest and sub-G1 apoptotic peak at 60 nM (with low level of early
apoptosis by YoPro staining). >95% NPC patients in Hong Kong are EBV
positive. AUY922 can dramatically induce the expression of 2 EBV
transcripts - BZLF1 (for viral lytic cycle) and LMP2A (associated with
cytotoxic T cell lysis) indicating its potential in facilitating tumor
lysis through these processes. Western blot delineated substantial
regulation of phosphorylation in AKT, mTOR, GSK-3-beta, NF-KappaB,
IKK-alpha/beta and IKB-alpha pathways but not in CREB, p38 and PARP
pathways.Conclusion: The findings of this preclinical study clearly
showed the good potential of this HSP90 inhibitor drug, AUY922 in NPC
treatment. Ethics approval is pending to initial clinical trials of
AUY922 in patients with metastatic/locally recurrent NPC in Hong Kong.

