Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC1 serves as metabolic regulator in triple negative breast cancer


Breast cancer, the second leading cause of cancer deaths in women, is the
most common cancer among North American women, accounting for nearly 1 in
3 cancer cases diagnosed in the U.S. women. Triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) subtype accounts for approximately 15-25% of all breast cancer
cases and has an increased incidence of metastasis, high recurrence
within 1-3 years and a high mortality rate. Therefore, identifying
factors that facilitate tumor growth and metastases have the potential to
serve as novel molecular targets for breast cancer therapy. Mucin1
(MUC1), a glycoprotein associated with chemoresistance, is aberrantly
overexpressed in TNBC and facilitates growth and metastasis of TNBC
cells. This occurrence can be partially attributed to MUC1 interaction
with hypoxia-inducible factor alpha (HIF1), a key regulator of
glycolysis. In the present study we examined the effect of MUC1
expression on cancer cell metabolism of TNBC cell lines under normoxic
(20% Oxygen) and hypoxic (1% Oxygen) conditions. MUC1 was ectopically
overexpressed in the MDA-MB-231 cell line and stably knocked down in the
MDA-MB-468 cell line. Results indicate that MUC1 interacts with HIF1 and
the interaction is further enhanced under hypoxic conditions. In
addition, MUC1 expression enhanced glucose and glutamine uptake, enhanced
lactate secretion and altered the expression of several metabolic genes.
Furthermore, untargeted global metabolomic profiling identified
metabolite alterations in which MUC1 expression modulates cancer cell
metabolism to facilitate growth properties of TNBC cells. Thus our
results support the notion that MUC1 serves as a metabolic regulator in
TNBC, facilitating metabolic reprogramming that influences growth of TNBC.

