Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hydroxychloroquine inhibits proliferation and S6 phosphorylation
in human renal carcinoma cells


mTOR inhibitors are used to treat metastatic renal cell cancer (RCC), but
most patients eventually become resistant. One possible mechanism for
resistance is upregulation of autophagy, a pathway which helps recycle
intracellular proteins and promotes cell survival. Hydroxychloroquine
(HCQ), a potent autophagy inhibitor used to treat malaria and autoimmune
disorders, is currently being studied in the context of cancer treatment.
Here, we have investigated the effects of HCQ on three different renal
carcinoma derived cell lines. We found that HCQ treatment inhibits RCC
cell growth, promotes apoptosis, inhibits mitochondrial oxygen
consumption, and increases glycolysis rates. To understand the molecular
mechanism behind these effects, we examined various nodes in the mTOR
pathway and compared the effects of HCQ with the effects of the mTOR
inhibitor RAD001. A key downstream readout of the pathway, phospho-S6
protein, was inhibited by both HCQ and RAD001. However, the upstream
kinase, P70S6K, was only inhibited by RAD001 and not HCQ, suggesting that
the block by HCQ was downstream of the p70S6K. Treatment with the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, restored phospho-S6 levels, suggesting
that the reduction of phospho S6 is caused by increased degradation of
phospho, but not total S6. Surprisingly, depletion of the key autophagy
regulator Atg7 did not mimic the effects of HCQ, indicating that HCQ
regulates S6 phosphorylation by ATG7-independent mechanism. Our finding
suggests that HCQ may be useful in the treatment of renal cell carcinoma.

