Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role for the NLRP3 inflammasome in lung cancer


Although significant advances have been made in the diagnosis and
treatment of lung cancer, it remains the most fatal cancer worldwide.
This poor outcome is mainly due to the limited curative options available
especially for advanced cancer stages. About 80% of lung cancers are Non
Small Cell Lung Cancers (NSCLC). Although several mutations in oncogenes
and tumor genes have been identified in NSCLC, the oncogene K-ras and the
Receptor Tyrosine Kinases (RTK) being the most frequently mutated, about
40% of cancers are driven by unidentified mutations. Many cancer cells
activate a proinflammatory program to manipulate the host immune system
to support their growth. Inflammasomes are crucial effectors of the
innate immunity. Upon activation, inflammasomes assemble into
multiprotein complexes controlling the activation of the inflammatory
caspase-1 and the maturation of the pro-Interleukin-1beta (pro-IL-1b) and
the pro-IL-18 into active cytokines. The NLRP3 inflammasome detects
pathogens, airborne pollutants but also self-danger signals released by
dying cells. In the lung, hyperactivation of this complex upon bleomycin
or asbestos exposure drives an inflammatory response resulting in lung
fibrosis.Published large-scale genomic analyses of NSCLC identified
somatic mutations in the NLRP3 gene and scored NLRP3 as a putative
oncogene. Little is known about the role of the NLRP3 inflammasome in
lung cancer. We speculated that the NLRP3 inflammasome could play a
prominent role in NSCLC and studied the function of NLRP3 inflammasome in
human non-transformed and transformed lung epithelial cells. Our data
unravel new functions for the NLRP3 inflammasome in DNA damage sensing
and unexpectedly suggest that NLRP3 could act as a tumor suppressor gene
in lung cancer.

