Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution of the HER2 L755S mutation as a mechanism of
acquired HER-targeted therapy resistance


Background: Targeting HER2 with lapatinib (L), trastuzumab (T), or the LT
combination, is effective in HER2+ breast cancer (BC), but acquired
resistance commonly occurs. In our 12-week neoadjuvant trial (TBCRC006)
of LT without chemotherapy in HER2+ BC, the overall pathologic complete
response (pCR) rate was 27%. To investigate resistance mechanisms, we
developed 10 HER2+ BC cell line models resistant (R) to one or both drugs
(LR/TR/LTR). To discover potential predictive markers/therapeutic targets
to circumvent resistance, we completed genomic profiling of the cell
lines and a subset of pre-treatment specimens from TBCRC006.Methods:
Parental (P) and LR/TR/LTR lines of 10 cell line models were profiled
with whole exome/RNA sequencing. Mutations detected in R lines but not in
P lines of the same model were identified. Mutation-specific Q-PCR was
designed for sensitive quantification. Resistant cell and xenograft tumor
growth were measured in response to drugs. Whole exome sequencing (>100X)
and Ampliseq of 17 baseline tumor/normal pairs from TBCRC006 were
performed.Results: We found and validated the HER2 L755S mutation in the
BT474/ATCC-LTR line and BT474/AZ-LR line (in 30% of DNA/RNA), in which
the HER pathway was reactivated for resistance. Overexpression of this
mutation was previously shown to induce LR in HER2-negative BC cell
lines, and resistant growth of BT474/AZ-LR line is significantly
inhibited by HER2-L755S-specific siRNA knock-down, suggesting its role as
an acquired L/LT resistance driver in HER2+ BC. Sequencing of BT474/AZ-LR
single cell clones found the mutation in 30% of HER2 copies in every
cell. Using mutation-specific Q-PCR, we found statistically higher HER2
L755S levels in two BT474 parentals compared to P lines of SKBR3, AU565,
and UACC812. These data suggest that HER2 L755S resistant subclones
preexist in the BT474 parentals and were selected by L treatment to
become the major clone in the two R lines. The HER1/2 irreversible
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) afatinib (Afa) robustly inhibited growth
of BT474/AZ-LR and BT474/ATCC-LTR cells (IC50: Afa 0.02M vs. L 3 M) and
BT474/AZ-LR xenografts. Whole exome sequencing/Ampliseq of TBCRC006 found
the HER2 L755S mutation in 1/17 primaries. This patient did not achieve
pCR. The variant was present in 2% of DNA on both platforms, indicating a
subclonal event of the resistance mutation.Conclusion: Acquired L/LT
resistance in the two BT474 R lines is due to selection of HER2 L755S
subclones present in parental cells. The higher HER2 L755S levels in
BT474 parentals compared with other parentals, and detection of its
subclonal presence in a pre-treatment HER2+ BC patient, suggest that
sensitive mutation detection methods will be needed to identify patients
with potentially actionable HER family mutations in primary tumor.
Treating this patient group with an irreversible TKI like Afa may prevent
resistance and improve clinical outcome of this subset of HER2+ BC.

