Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NPY1 receptor specific peptide-drug-conjugates as novel treatment
for metastatic breast cancer


The NPY1 receptor is a known marker for breast cancer that was
characterized first at the university hospital Bern by the group of
Reubi. In healthy breast tissue the NPY2 receptor (NPY2R) can be found,
expression of which is switched to the NPY1R in tumor tissues (Reubi et
al., Cancer Res. 2001, 61, 4636-4641). Particularly high NPY1R densities
were also found in tumor biopsies of patients suffering from Ewing's
sarcoma, which is a rare, difficult to treat juvenile bone cancer (Krner
et al., Clin. Cancer Res. 2008, 14, 5043-5049.). Our own results verify
these literature reports, shown on a panel of patient biopsies where
nearly 50% of the tumors strongly overexpress the NPY1R, whereas NPY2R
could not be detected.OntoChem has developed peptide-drug-conjugates
(CytoPep) that are selective agonists of the NPY1 receptor. As drugs we
have used tubulin binding cytolysins and maytansines. CytoPep shall be
developed as novel approach to treat Ewing's sarcoma and NPY1R expressing
breast cancer.We will present data on in vitro and in vivo pharmacology
of these PDCs. IN particular efficacy is directly correlated with NPY1R
expression levels in cells. We will also demonstrate internalization
studies, showing a fast and selective internalization into NPY1R
expressing cells. These in vitro data will be compared with corresponding
data from ADCs such as for example trastuzumab emtansine, that show a
considerably slower internalization and efficacy.

