Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear receptor PPAR activation triggers hepatic cell death in
Ikk-deficient mice


Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) plays a critical role
in lipid metabolism, inflammation, carcinogenesis, and cell survival.
Recent study showed that PPAR agonist dramatically induced the cell cycle
arrest genes, such as p21 and Gadd45b, in the liver of mice. However, the
inductions of these genes were not lead to hepatic cell death. Thus,
here, we investigated the Ikkb gene whether this can affect the hepatic
cell death or survival after induction of p21 and Gadd45b. To exam the
function of Ikkb after PPAR activation, the Wild-type (IkkbF/F) and
liver-specific Ikkb-null (IkkbF/F-AlbCre) mice were treated with the PPAR
agonist Wy-14,643 for two weeks. As results, Hepatic cell death was
undergone to apoptosis by increases of cleaved-caspase-3 and cleaved poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase only in the liver of IkkbF/F-AlbCre mice by
Wy-14,643 and this was also supported by TUNEL staining. Moreover,
Wy-14,643 treatment elevated phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase
only in the liver of IkkbF/F-AlbCre mice. Liver histology showed notable
feature of hepatitis only in the IkkbF/F-AlbCre mice treated with
Wy-14,643. And marked increase Tnfa mRNA was followed in
Wy-14,643-treated IkkbF/F-AlbCre mice. However, expression of the gene
related to lipid metabolism such as Ppara and Acox1 were not
significantly changed by Wy-14,163 in both IkkbF/F and IkkbF/F-AlbCre
mice. These studies suggest that Ikkb gene may play a critical role in
hepatic cell survival against PPAR activation.

