Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD133-expressing circulating tumor cells might predict poor
prognosis in patients with head and neck cancer


PURPOSE: The prognostic value of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) number in
patients with head and neck carcinoma (HNSCC) has been reported to be
positive. The hypothesis of the additional markers on CTCs might predict
clinical outcomes have been proposed. This study aimed to elucidate the
prognostic/predictive value of CD133-expressing CTCs in HNSCC
patients.PATIENTS AND METHODS: In a prospective single-center study, CTCs
were enumerated in the peripheral blood of 24 subjects, including 14
patients with HNSCC and 10 healthy donors, at baseline and 2 weeks after
starting first dose of chemotherapy. CTCs were measured using an
immunomagnetic separation technique by combined negative and positive
selection strategies. Immunofluorescence staining methods were applied
for surface marker identification. Tumor response at 12 weeks after
chemotherapy of the whole cohort was performed by computed tomograpgy or
magnetic resonance imaging scans following RECIST criteria 1.1.RESULTS:
In the first step of efficacy evaluation phase, an average recovery rate
of 85.5% and a R2 value of 0.9932 were found when compared between spiked
and recovered blood samples. A CTCs detection rate of 100.0% (14/14) was
found by this protocol and the number could successfully differ HNSCC
patients from healthy donors (P = 0.001). The mean and median (range) of
baseline CTC number were 105.0 and 87.2 (34.5-358.1) cells/mL of blood.
The higher baseline CTCs number was associated with higher tumor stage
(AJCC 7th edition, P = 0.003). The higher absolute number (>5cells/mL of
blood) of baseline CD133-expressing CTCs could predict poor survivals
(Kaplan-Meier survival curves, P = 0.013). In all assessable patients, a
high correlation rate of 92.9% was found between changes of CTCs (decline
or elevation) and CT responses (progressive disease [PD] and partial
response [PR]/Stable disease [SD]) with a P value of 0.005 (Fisher exact
test).CONCLUSION: The number of CD133-expressing CTCs might be a useful
prognostic for survivals and predictors for imaging response evaluation
at 12 weeks in patients with HNSCC. Further investigation in large-scale
prospective trials is warranted on the basis of the findings in this
study.

