Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relation between tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) subsets and
CD47 expression on squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN)
in tumor microenvironment


Introduction: In general, TAM is classified into M1 producing Th1
cytokines and M2 secreting IL-10. Numerous reports have demonstrated that
M2 infiltration to tumor microenvironment associates with local
immunosuppression and proliferation of cancer cells. In this study, we
investigated phagocytic potentials of M1 and M2 in SCCHN in relation to
the expression of CD47 molecule, which is known as Don't eat me signal
against macrophage (M).Material and Methods: CD68 (pan-M marker) positive
CD163 (M2 marker) negative M1 (derived with GM-CSF and IFN-) and
CD68+CD163+M2 (derived with M-CSF and IL-10) were induced from positively
selected CD14+ cells in PBMC from a healthy donor. Phagocytosis of
CD47+/CD47-SCCHN cell lines labeled with CFSE by M1/M2 were assessed
using multi-color flow cytometry. Suppressions of the phagocytosis by
neutralizing anti-CD47 antibody were also evaluated. Furthermore, we
examined CD68, CD163 and CD47 expressions immunohistochemically in 74
cases of oral squamous cell carcinoma, and relation between M counts or
CD47 expression on cancer cells and clinicopathological parameters or
prognoses.Results: M1 derived from PBMC showed higher phagocytic
potential comparing to M2. Phagocytosis of M1 was dose-dependently
inhibited by anti-CD47 neutralizing antibody, however M2 phagocytosis was
not suppressed. In immunohistochemical analysis, while CD47 was expressed
in almost half cases of oral cancer, CD47 expression did not correlate to
the numbers of total M nor M2. Patients with high CD47 expression on
cancer cells, increasing number of total M or M2 showed significantly
shorter overall survival.Conclusion: Only M1 showed CD47-dependent
phagocytosis of CD47-expressed cancer cells in vitro. While CD47
expression on patient samples did not correlate with number of total M or
M2, each of them independently showed significant association with
prognosis. Various mechanisms were presumed between CD47 expression on
SCCHN cells and tumor-infiltrating M subsets.

