Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of resveratrol combined with dichloroacetate (DCA) on
breast cancer cell lines and MCF-10a noncancerous cells


Resveratrol, (3,5,49-trihydroxy-trans-stilbene), was first reported to
act as a chemo-preventative anticancer compound in mice by Jang et al. in
1997 and has been shown to induce apoptosis and reduce both cell
viability and mitotic index in many cancer cell lines. Earlier work in
our lab found that it affects glucose utilization by decreasing glucose
uptake by MCF-7 cells. The present study examined combinations of
resveratrol with DCA, a compound that affects mitochondrial metabolism
(reversing the Warburg Effect). A goal of this study was to determine if
DCA might sensitize cancer cells to other chemotherapeutic compounds that
affect glucose metabolism, such as resveratrol. Glucose uptake and
lactate production by treated cells were measured, and Western blots were
used to estimate levels of several proteins, including cleaved PARP and
p21. Both resveratrol and DCA were found to reduce cell viability of
treated breast cancer cell lines. Resveratrol, but not DCA, was found to
induce caspase-3,7, a measure of apoptosis. This suggests that
resveratrol and DCA may affect viability via different mechanisms. More
importantly, a synergistic effect of these compounds on cell viability
was observed, where DCA was found to enhance the anti-proliferative
effect of resveratrol.

