Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel CDK2/9 inhibitor has antineoplastic activity in lung cancer
by inducing anaphase catastrophe


Our prior work revealed the first generation CDK2/9/7 inhibitor
seliciclib (R-roscovitine, CYC202) significantly inhibited lung cancer
growth and tumorigenicity by increasing apoptosis via induced anaphase
catastrophe. In anaphase catastrophe, cells with aneuploidy (a hallmark
of cancer), cannot cluster supernumerary centrosomes. This triggers
abnormal anaphase and apoptosis. This study explored lung cancer
antineoplastic effects of a next generation CDK2 inhibitor: CCT68127
(Cyclacel Ltd). This is a more potent and selective CDK2/9 inhibitor than
seliciclib (IC50 for CDK2 and CDK9 are 30nM and 110nM, respectively). We
compared antineoplastic activities of CCT68127 versus seliciclib in
murine (transgenic mouse model-derived) versus human lung cancer cells.
In murine lung cancer cell lines (ED1, LKR13, and 393P), IC50 of CCT68127
at 48 hours was 25M. Lung cancer cell lines with mutant KRAS (LKR13 and
393P) were more responsive to CCT68127 than ED1 cells with wild-type
expression. Minimal growth-inhibition occurred in C10 murine pulmonary
epithelial cells. In human lung cancer cell lines (Hop62, A549, H2122,
H522, and H1703), CCT68127 IC50s were comparable to the studied murine
lung cancer cells. Notably, lung cancer cells with mutant KRAS (Hop62,
A549, and H2122) were more sensitive than lines with wild-type KRAS
expression (H522 and H1703). Human BEAS-2B immortalized bronchial
epithelial cells were relatively resistant to CCT68127 treatment.
CCT68127 induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner in murine lung
cancer cell lines (ED1 and LKR13). CCT68127 induced apoptosis at the 1M
concentration to levels seen with seliciclib 20M concentrations in these
cancer cells. Apoptosis was induced in Hop62, A549, H522, and H1703 human
lung cancer cell lines. A mechanism responsible for these effects was
uncovered. CCT68127 treatment triggered anaphase catastrophe in both
murine and human lung cancer cell lines independently of KRAS mutation
status. To identify other mechanisms engaged by CDK2/9 antagonism, RPPA
(Reverse Phase Protein Assay) analyses were performed in CCT68127-treated
lung cancer cells. Expression levels were studied in nearly 200 critical
growth-regulatory proteins. Analyses were examined before and after 6,
24, and 48 hours of CCT68127 or vehicle treatments in murine (LKR13 or
ED1) and human (Hop62 or H522) lung cancer cells having or not KRAS
mutations. A distinct profile was identified and included DNA repair,
Hippo pathway and Rab GTPase pathways that were markedly down-regulated
by CDK2/9 antagonism. Taken together, both anaphase catastrophe and
specific growth regulatory proteins are engaged to elicit antineoplastic
effects of a highly selective and specific CDK2/9 inhibitor.

