Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The apoptotic mechanism of action of SKI-178, a novel Sphingosine
kinase 1 selective inhibitor


We previously developed SKI-178 as a novel Sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1)
selective inhibitor that is cytotoxic toward a broad panel of cancer
types. Herein, we sought to determine the mechanism-of-action of
SKI-178-induced cell death. We present evidence that SKI-178 induces
prolonged mitosis followed by apoptotic cell death through the intrinsic
apoptotic cascade. Further examination of the mechanism-of-action (MOA)
of SKI-178 implicated c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) and
cyclin-dependent protein kinase 1 (CDK1) as critical factors required for
SKI-178-induced apoptosis. In cell cycle synchronized human AML cell
lines, we demonstrate that entry into mitosis is required for apoptotic
induction by SKI-178 and that CDK1, not JNK, is required for
SKI-178-induced apoptosis. We further demonstrate that the sustained
activation of CDK1 during prolonged mitosis, mediated by SKI-178, leads
to the simultaneous phosphorylation of the pro-survival Bcl-2 family
members, Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl, as well as the phosphorylation and subsequent
degradation of Mcl-1. Moreover, multi-drug resistance mediated by MDR-1
and/or pro-survival Bcl-2 family member over-expression did not affect
the sensitivity of AML cells to SKI-178. In addition to AML, we extend
the MOA of SKI-178 to include various solid tumor cell lines, including
pancreatic cancer and glioblastoma. Taken together, we provide evidence
that SKI-178 induces apoptosis in a CDK1-dependent manner and is not a
substrate for MDR1, making it a promising chemotherapeutic candidate for
the treatment of various cancer types, including those known to be drug
resistant.

