Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of miR-135b in clinical outcome and metastasis in
colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of cancer death in
both the Western world and Taiwan. Age, gender, and genes are important
risk factors for colorectal cancer. Activation of Wnt signaling pathway
is an important step involved in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer.
Approximately 70-80% of sporadic colorectal carcinomas have somatic
mutations that inactivate APC. But, only 30% CRC patients in Taiwan have
APC gene mutation that was significantly lower than the other countries.
Thus, the other mechanism involved in APC gene inactivation may
contributed to CRC progression in Taiwan. Here, we focus on the Wnt
signaling associate microRNAs. Four wnt signaling-associated microRNAs
were selected in this study, including miR-21, miR-200a, miR-135a and
miR-135b. A total of 156 colorectal cancer patients were enrolled in this
study. The expression of miR-21, miR-200a, miR-135a, miR-135b and wnt
signaling association genes were analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry. The expression levels of miR-21, miR-200a and
miR-135a were not correlated with clinical parameters of CRC patients.
The expression of miR-135b were positive correlated with gender, tumor
stage, and lymph node metastasis. No any significantly correlation were
found between miR-135b, Wnt, -catenin and APC. But the expression levels
of miR-135b were positive correlated with the upstream gene STAT3,
-catenin and C-Myc. Thus, we suggested that upregulation of miR-135b may
through -catenin mediated STAT3 activation.

