Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-6 and RANTES mediate the cross-talk between tumor cells and
CAFs in the esophageal tumor microenvironment


Desmoplasia, or deposition of connective tissue proper in the stroma, is
a key characteristic of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). The
cellular component of connective tissue proper is comprised of
fibroblasts, and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are widely
recognized as a major constituent of the tumor microenvironment (TME).
The purpose of this study was to identify tumor-promoting factors that
are secreted as a result of the crosstalk between CAFs and tumor cells in
ESCC.We have performed a comprehensive cytokine array and found that IL-6
and RANTES (also known as CCL5) are significantly overexpressed in
conditioned media from co-culture of esophageal CAFs and ESCC cells,
compared to mono-culture. Both proteins are known to play important roles
in the development of multiple types of cancer, mostly via activation of
the STAT3 signaling pathway. We have demonstrated that co-culture with
fibroblasts prompts the ESCC cells to acquire a more mesenchymal
phenotype and express potent mediators of cell migration and invasion,
such as matricellular proteins (periostin, fibrillin, osteonectin) and
hepatocellular growth factor (HGF). Furthermore, knockdown of IL-6
suppresses invasiveness and proliferation of human ESCC cells in our 3D
organotypic culture model. We have also performed staining of tissue
samples from ESCC patients and found that, compared to normal esophagus,
expression of IL-6 and RANTES is enhanced in ESCC in both epithelial
cells and fibroblasts.In summary, our findings indicate that IL-6 and
RANTES are responsible for migration and invasion of ESCC cells promoted
by CAFs in the tumor microenvironment. This is the first report of such a
dual induction of these specific cytokines in ESCC, and it provides a
rationale for dual inhibition of IL-6 and RANTES as novel therapy for
ESCC, and possibly other types of cancer.Supported by NCI P01 CA098101.

