Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic (PD) and pharmacokinetic (PK) results of the
second-generation hypomethylating agent, SGI-110, in patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) after progression on sorafenib


Background:HCC is the sixth most common cancer and the third most common
cause of cancer death worldwide. Sorafenib treatment improves survival in
advanced disease, but no therapy has demonstrated significant activity
after progression on sorafenib. Increased methylation of genes implicated
in tumorigenesis has been described in HCC and has been associated with
outcome and etiology. We evaluated the therapeutic and biologic effects
of SGI-110, a hypomethylating agent in patients with HCC. SGI-110, a
dinucleotide of decitabine and deoxyguanosine, increases decitabine
exposure by protecting it from deamination due to slow release on
subcutaneous (SC) injection. PK and PD results of an open-label, phase 2
study in patients with HCC are presented here.Methods:Adults with
histologically confirmed, advanced-stage HCC who had received sorafenib,
had evidence of disease progression, and ECOG PS 0-1 were enrolled.
SGI-110 (SC) was given on D1-5 of a 28-day cycle. Blood samples were
taken for PK/PD analysis and, when possible, paired tumor biopsies were
taken for analysis of global DNA (LINE-1) and gene-specific methylation
and gene expression. Patients were imaged every 8 weeks and allowed to
continue treatment after radiologic but not clinical progression. End
points include disease control rate (DCR) at 16 weeks, overall response
rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival.Results:50 HCC
patients (43M/7F; median age 60 years [range 32-82]; ECOG PS 0/1: 21/29)
were enrolled. The initial dose of SGI-110 was 60 mg/m2 (4 patients
treated), but due to grade 4 neutropenia, the dose was decreased to 45
mg/m2 for subsequent patients. SGI 110 was well tolerated at 45 mg/m2;
myelosuppression was the major adverse event. Full PK was available from
16 patients (3F/13M). The PK profile for SGI-110 after 45 mg/m2 showed
protracted conversion to deliver active metabolite decitabine with
exposure window lasting beyond 8-hr and mean(SD) decitabine AUC exposures
of 94(22) ng*hr/mL that were comparable to those achieved in AML/MDS
after 60 mg/m2. Potent LINE-1 demethylation was observed in blood
(-35.6%, n = 27) and in tumor (-12.9%, n = 10) DNA; significant
demethylation (-27.4%, n = 6) was also observed on promoter of tumor
suppressor gene MZB1 which is frequently hypermethylated and silenced in
HCC.Conclusions:SGI-110 was well tolerated at a dose of 45 mg/m2
administered SC on D1-5 of a 28-day cycle. PK was consistent with that
seen in another solid tumor study and provided more persistent decitabine
exposures compared with PK in hematologic malignancies. The PD changes in
blood and tumor LINE-1 and MZB-1 methylation are promising and consistent
with the desired biologic effect of SGI-110. Analysis for clinical
efficacy is ongoing.

