Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid, automated BRAF mutation testing of cell-free DNA from
plasma of patients with advanced cancers using the novel Idylla platform


Background: BRAF V600 mutations are prevalent in diverse cancers and can
be targeted with BRAF inhibitors. Cell-free (cf) DNA from plasma offers
an easily obtainable material for BRAF mutation analysis.Methods: cfDNA
from plasma samples of patients with advanced cancers or malignant
histiocytosis with known BRAF V600 status from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor samples, who progressed on systemic
therapy was purified and 50-100ng were used for BRAF V600 mutations
testing using the Idylla fully integrated real-time PCR-based platform
(Biocartis, Mechelen, Belgium) with a quick turnaround time (Background:
BRAF V600 mutations are prevalent in diverse cancers and can be targeted
with BRAF inhibitors. Cell-free (cf) DNA from plasma offers an easily
obtainable material for BRAF mutation analysis.Methods: cfDNA from plasma
samples of patients with advanced cancers or malignant histiocytosis with
known BRAF V600 status from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor
samples, who progressed on systemic therapy was purified and 50-100ng
were used for BRAF V600 mutations testing using the Idylla fully
integrated real-time PCR-based platform (Biocartis, Mechelen, Belgium)
with a quick turnaround time (< 60 minutes). Results were compared to
mutation analysis of FFPE primary or metastatic tumor tissue obtained at
different points of clinical care from a CLIA-certified
laboratory.Results: cfDNA was extracted from plasma samples of 160
patients with advanced cancers (colorectal, n = 62; melanoma, n = 36;
non-small cell lung, n = 13; breast, n = 10; thyroid, n = 10;
appendiceal, n = 5; ovarian, n = 4; endometrial, n = 4; other cancers, n
= 16). BRAF mutations were detected in 29% (47/160) of plasma samples and
in 39% (62/160) of FFPE tumor samples, resulting in concordance in 141
cases (88%, kappa = 0.74, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.63- 0.85) with
sensitivity 73%, specificity 98%, positive and negative predictive value
96% and 85%, respectively. In addition, 35 (22%) patients had sequential
plasma samples collection while on therapy including 9 of 17 patients,
who had BRAF V600 mutation in FFPE but not in plasma at baseline. Of
interest, in 3 of these 9 patients BRAF V600 mutation emerged in plasma
later in the course of disease. If these 3 patients are included in the
concordance analysis the overall agreement between testing modalities is
144 cases (90%, kappa 0.78, SE 0.05, 95% CI 0.68-0.88) with sensitivity
77%, specificity 98%, positive and predictive value 96% and 87%,
respectively. In 15 of 19 discrepant cases identical plasma cfDNA samples
were tested using an alternative cfDNA BRAF mutation PCR-based method
(BEAMing, Sysmex Inostics, Baltimore, MD), which yielded 100% agreement
with the Idylla. Longitudinally collected plasma samples were available
in 16 patients with plasma and FFPE BRAF V600 mutations treated with
predominantly BRAF targeting combinations. Changes in the amount of
BRAF-mutant cfDNA corresponded with changes in serum tumor markers and
disease burden visualized via imaging.Conclusions: Detecting BRAF V600
mutations in plasma cfDNA using the Idylla platform is a fast and
noninvasive alternative to mutation testing of tumor tissue with an
acceptable level of concordance and should be investigated further for
testing and monitoring of BRAF mutation status in patients with cancer.

