Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of the 11q23.3 glioma susceptibility locus


Glioma is the most common malignant primary brain tumor and is associated
with poor prognosis. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated
with glioma risk have recently been investigated through genome-wide
association studies (GWAS). Results of these studies have implicated
seven independent glioma risk loci in six chromosomal regions. However,
the mechanisms by which these SNPs contribute to cancer risk are still
unknown. Here, we performed an in-depth functional analysis of one of
these risk loci located near the PHLDB1 gene on 11q23.3. We began by
retrieving all SNPs in linkage disequilibrium (LD; r2 0.2) with the
glioma-associated SNP (rs498872). 61 genes contained in the region
defined by a boundary of 1Mb from each end of the LD SNPs were considered
candidate targets. A subset of 10 candidate functional enhancer/promoter
SNPs was defined by overlap with ENCODE biofeatures and allele specific
activity in luciferase and EMSA assays in astrocytes and GBM cells.
Functional SNPs in the promoter of PHLDB1 implicated its transcriptional
regulation in glioma risk. Chromatin conformation capture (3C) identified
a physical interaction between one enhancer SNP and the promoter of the
DDX6 gene. We also conducted neurosphere formation assays to evaluate the
functional role of two top candidate genes, PHLDB1 and DDX6. We found
that knockdown of either gene caused a significant reduction in U87MG
neurosphere number and size. Taken together, these studies revealed the
functional landscape of the 11q23.3 glioma susceptibility locus and
implicated the transcriptional regulatory network of PHLDB1 and DDX6 in
the mechanism of increased glioma risk.

