Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying obesity-linked gene expression changes in prostate
cancer


Background: Obese men are at higher risk of advanced prostate cancer and
have higher rates of cancer-specific mortality after diagnosis. The
biological mechanisms explaining this association are unknown. Using mRNA
expression profiles of tissue from prostate cancer patients, we aim to
identify pathways that are differentially altered in tumor and adjacent
normal tissue of overweight/obese men compared to healthy weight
men.Methods: The study includes men with prostate cancer in the Health
Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS) and the Physicians Health Study
(PHS), for whom archival tissue and long-term follow-up is available.
Whole genome mRNA expression profiling was performed on tumor tissue (N =
402) and adjacent normal tissue (N = 200) using the Affymetrix 1.0 ST
array. Body mass index (BMI) was taken from questionnaires before
diagnosis. Among 402 men in the study, 111 lethal events (metastasis or
death) were recorded. We identified top Gene Ontology biological
processes differentially expressed by obesity status using Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). Single sample GSEA was used to generate
pathway scores. Odds ratios for lethal disease were estimated using
logistic regression.Results: 48% of men were healthy weight (BMI 18.5 to
Background: Obese men are at higher risk of advanced prostate cancer and
have higher rates of cancer-specific mortality after diagnosis. The
biological mechanisms explaining this association are unknown. Using mRNA
expression profiles of tissue from prostate cancer patients, we aim to
identify pathways that are differentially altered in tumor and adjacent
normal tissue of overweight/obese men compared to healthy weight
men.Methods: The study includes men with prostate cancer in the Health
Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS) and the Physicians Health Study
(PHS), for whom archival tissue and long-term follow-up is available.
Whole genome mRNA expression profiling was performed on tumor tissue (N =
402) and adjacent normal tissue (N = 200) using the Affymetrix 1.0 ST
array. Body mass index (BMI) was taken from questionnaires before
diagnosis. Among 402 men in the study, 111 lethal events (metastasis or
death) were recorded. We identified top Gene Ontology biological
processes differentially expressed by obesity status using Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). Single sample GSEA was used to generate
pathway scores. Odds ratios for lethal disease were estimated using
logistic regression.Results: 48% of men were healthy weight (BMI 18.5 to
<25 kg/m2), 31% were overweight (BMI 25 to Background: Obese men are at
higher risk of advanced prostate cancer and have higher rates of
cancer-specific mortality after diagnosis. The biological mechanisms
explaining this association are unknown. Using mRNA expression profiles
of tissue from prostate cancer patients, we aim to identify pathways that
are differentially altered in tumor and adjacent normal tissue of
overweight/obese men compared to healthy weight men.Methods: The study
includes men with prostate cancer in the Health Professionals Follow-up
Study (HPFS) and the Physicians Health Study (PHS), for whom archival
tissue and long-term follow-up is available. Whole genome mRNA expression
profiling was performed on tumor tissue (N = 402) and adjacent normal
tissue (N = 200) using the Affymetrix 1.0 ST array. Body mass index (BMI)
was taken from questionnaires before diagnosis. Among 402 men in the
study, 111 lethal events (metastasis or death) were recorded. We
identified top Gene Ontology biological processes differentially
expressed by obesity status using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA).
Single sample GSEA was used to generate pathway scores. Odds ratios for
lethal disease were estimated using logistic regression.Results: 48% of
men were healthy weight (BMI 18.5 to <25 kg/m2), 31% were overweight (BMI
25 to <27.5 kg/m2), and 21% were very overweight/obese (BMI 27.5 kg/m2)
at diagnosis. GSEA identified 15 gene sets enriched in the tumor tissue
of very overweight/obese vs healthy weight men (FDR Background: Obese men
are at higher risk of advanced prostate cancer and have higher rates of
cancer-specific mortality after diagnosis. The biological mechanisms
explaining this association are unknown. Using mRNA expression profiles
of tissue from prostate cancer patients, we aim to identify pathways that
are differentially altered in tumor and adjacent normal tissue of
overweight/obese men compared to healthy weight men.Methods: The study
includes men with prostate cancer in the Health Professionals Follow-up
Study (HPFS) and the Physicians Health Study (PHS), for whom archival
tissue and long-term follow-up is available. Whole genome mRNA expression
profiling was performed on tumor tissue (N = 402) and adjacent normal
tissue (N = 200) using the Affymetrix 1.0 ST array. Body mass index (BMI)
was taken from questionnaires before diagnosis. Among 402 men in the
study, 111 lethal events (metastasis or death) were recorded. We
identified top Gene Ontology biological processes differentially
expressed by obesity status using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA).
Single sample GSEA was used to generate pathway scores. Odds ratios for
lethal disease were estimated using logistic regression.Results: 48% of
men were healthy weight (BMI 18.5 to <25 kg/m2), 31% were overweight (BMI
25 to <27.5 kg/m2), and 21% were very overweight/obese (BMI 27.5 kg/m2)
at diagnosis. GSEA identified 15 gene sets enriched in the tumor tissue
of very overweight/obese vs healthy weight men (FDR < 0.25).
Interestingly, 9 of the 15 gene sets were epigenetic processes related to
chromatin remodeling and RNA processing. Other biological processes
identified were macromolecular complex disassembly, Golgi vesicle
transport, and ribonucleotide metabolic process. Results from an analysis
on the adjacent normal tissue indicate that these results are
tumor-specific.To look further into the role of chromatin remodeling, we
calculated a pathway score based on 35 chromatin-related leading edge
genes from the obesity GSEA. As expected, the score was significantly
associated with BMI. In addition, the score was positively associated
with PSA at diagnosis, pathologic stage, and Gleason grade. After
adjustment for age and year at diagnosis, the score was associated with
lethal progression, with an odds ratio of 5.11 (95% CI: 2.60, 10.52) for
lethal outcome comparing extreme quartiles. After further adjusting for
pathologic stage and Gleason grade the odds ratio decreased slightly but
remained significant. In a mediation analysis, we found that 57% of the
BMI effect on lethal outcome was mediated by the score.Conclusion: Genes
involved in chromatin regulation were enriched in tumor tissue of obese
men. Tumors with high expression of these genes were found to have worse
clinical characteristics and to be associated with worse outcomes. Our
findings support a role for epigenetic regulation in the obesity-lethal
prostate cancer relationship.

