Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P300 inhibition enhances cytotoxic effect of Gemcitabine through
E2F1 activation in pancreatic cancer


Background:Transcriptional cofactor, P300 has been reported to regulate
cell cycle on G1/S transition. Previously, we shown that prolonged
S-phase is associated with increased apoptosis induced by Gemcitabine
(GEM) in pancreatic cancer cells. Thus, we hypothesized that targeting
P300 enhances the cytotoxic effect of GEM on pancreatic cancer.Methods:We
studied 2 human pancreatic cancer cell lines, Panc1 and MIAPaCa2. P300
was gene-silenced using siRNA, and P300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT)
activity was inhibited by specific inhibitor C646. Cell viability was
measured by WST-8 assay and GEM-induced apoptosis was measured using
Caspase3 and PARP by Western blotting, Tunel assay by immunofluorescence
staining, and Annexin V-PI staining by flow cytometry. CDK4/6 inhibitor
Palbociclib was used to block S-phase entry.Results:Robust P300
expression was observed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and human
pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissues. When P300 expression was depleted by
specific P300 siRNA, cell viability after GEM treatment was decreased
significantly compared with the control pancreatic cancer cells (43%
decrease in MIAPaCa2 and 39% decrease in Panc1, respectively,
pBackground:Transcriptional cofactor, P300 has been reported to regulate
cell cycle on G1/S transition. Previously, we shown that prolonged
S-phase is associated with increased apoptosis induced by Gemcitabine
(GEM) in pancreatic cancer cells. Thus, we hypothesized that targeting
P300 enhances the cytotoxic effect of GEM on pancreatic cancer.Methods:We
studied 2 human pancreatic cancer cell lines, Panc1 and MIAPaCa2. P300
was gene-silenced using siRNA, and P300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT)
activity was inhibited by specific inhibitor C646. Cell viability was
measured by WST-8 assay and GEM-induced apoptosis was measured using
Caspase3 and PARP by Western blotting, Tunel assay by immunofluorescence
staining, and Annexin V-PI staining by flow cytometry. CDK4/6 inhibitor
Palbociclib was used to block S-phase entry.Results:Robust P300
expression was observed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and human
pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissues. When P300 expression was depleted by
specific P300 siRNA, cell viability after GEM treatment was decreased
significantly compared with the control pancreatic cancer cells (43%
decrease in MIAPaCa2 and 39% decrease in Panc1, respectively, p<0.05).
Increased GEM-induced apoptosis was confirmed by increased cleaved forms
of Caspase3 and PARP, increased tunel positive cells, and increased
Annexin positive cells in P300-depleted cells compared to the control
cells. When S phase entry was blocked by Palbociclib, the effect of gene
silencing of P300 on GEM-induced apoptosis was abolished. As Rb-E2F1
complex is known as the key regulator of the S phase specific gene
transcriptions, we evaluated the effect of P300 gene silencing on Rb and
E2F1. While P300 gene-silencing did not affect Rb phosphorylation after
GEM treatment, it increased E2F1 expression significantly (56% increase
in MIAPaCa2 and 119% increase in Panc1, respectively,
pBackground:Transcriptional cofactor, P300 has been reported to regulate
cell cycle on G1/S transition. Previously, we shown that prolonged
S-phase is associated with increased apoptosis induced by Gemcitabine
(GEM) in pancreatic cancer cells. Thus, we hypothesized that targeting
P300 enhances the cytotoxic effect of GEM on pancreatic cancer.Methods:We
studied 2 human pancreatic cancer cell lines, Panc1 and MIAPaCa2. P300
was gene-silenced using siRNA, and P300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT)
activity was inhibited by specific inhibitor C646. Cell viability was
measured by WST-8 assay and GEM-induced apoptosis was measured using
Caspase3 and PARP by Western blotting, Tunel assay by immunofluorescence
staining, and Annexin V-PI staining by flow cytometry. CDK4/6 inhibitor
Palbociclib was used to block S-phase entry.Results:Robust P300
expression was observed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and human
pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissues. When P300 expression was depleted by
specific P300 siRNA, cell viability after GEM treatment was decreased
significantly compared with the control pancreatic cancer cells (43%
decrease in MIAPaCa2 and 39% decrease in Panc1, respectively, p<0.05).
Increased GEM-induced apoptosis was confirmed by increased cleaved forms
of Caspase3 and PARP, increased tunel positive cells, and increased
Annexin positive cells in P300-depleted cells compared to the control
cells. When S phase entry was blocked by Palbociclib, the effect of gene
silencing of P300 on GEM-induced apoptosis was abolished. As Rb-E2F1
complex is known as the key regulator of the S phase specific gene
transcriptions, we evaluated the effect of P300 gene silencing on Rb and
E2F1. While P300 gene-silencing did not affect Rb phosphorylation after
GEM treatment, it increased E2F1 expression significantly (56% increase
in MIAPaCa2 and 119% increase in Panc1, respectively, p<0.05). When
pancreatic cancer cells were treated with combination of GEM and C646,
P300 specific HAT inhibitor, the cell viability was reduced significantly
compared with when treated with GEM alone (48% decrease for Panc1, and
58% for MIAPaCa2, respectively, pBackground:Transcriptional cofactor,
P300 has been reported to regulate cell cycle on G1/S transition.
Previously, we shown that prolonged S-phase is associated with increased
apoptosis induced by Gemcitabine (GEM) in pancreatic cancer cells. Thus,
we hypothesized that targeting P300 enhances the cytotoxic effect of GEM
on pancreatic cancer.Methods:We studied 2 human pancreatic cancer cell
lines, Panc1 and MIAPaCa2. P300 was gene-silenced using siRNA, and P300
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity was inhibited by specific
inhibitor C646. Cell viability was measured by WST-8 assay and
GEM-induced apoptosis was measured using Caspase3 and PARP by Western
blotting, Tunel assay by immunofluorescence staining, and Annexin V-PI
staining by flow cytometry. CDK4/6 inhibitor Palbociclib was used to
block S-phase entry.Results:Robust P300 expression was observed in
pancreatic cancer cell lines and human pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissues.
When P300 expression was depleted by specific P300 siRNA, cell viability
after GEM treatment was decreased significantly compared with the control
pancreatic cancer cells (43% decrease in MIAPaCa2 and 39% decrease in
Panc1, respectively, p<0.05). Increased GEM-induced apoptosis was
confirmed by increased cleaved forms of Caspase3 and PARP, increased
tunel positive cells, and increased Annexin positive cells in
P300-depleted cells compared to the control cells. When S phase entry was
blocked by Palbociclib, the effect of gene silencing of P300 on
GEM-induced apoptosis was abolished. As Rb-E2F1 complex is known as the
key regulator of the S phase specific gene transcriptions, we evaluated
the effect of P300 gene silencing on Rb and E2F1. While P300
gene-silencing did not affect Rb phosphorylation after GEM treatment, it
increased E2F1 expression significantly (56% increase in MIAPaCa2 and
119% increase in Panc1, respectively, p<0.05). When pancreatic cancer
cells were treated with combination of GEM and C646, P300 specific HAT
inhibitor, the cell viability was reduced significantly compared with
when treated with GEM alone (48% decrease for Panc1, and 58% for
MIAPaCa2, respectively, p<0.05).Conclusion:Targeting P300 by siRNA or HAT
inhibitor enhances the efficacy of GEM on pancreatic cancer cells. Our
observation suggests the presence of Rb-independent E2F1 regulatory
mechanism in pancreatic cancer cells. This pathway may be an important
therapeutic target to potentiate GEM chemotherapy in the treatment of
pancreatic cancer.

