Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of ABCB1 overcomes cancer stem cell-like properties and
acquired resistance to MET inhibitor in non-small cell lung cancer


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR mutations have
shown a dramatic response to EGFR inhibitors (EGFR-TKI). EGFR T790M
mutation and MET amplification have been recognized as mechanisms of
acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI. Recently, MET inhibitors have been used
in NSCLC patients for clinical trials. In this study, we tried to
identify the mechanisms of acquired resistant to MET inhibitor. We
analyzed the antitumor effects of two MET inhibitors; PHA-665752 and
crizotinib, in 10 NSCLC cell lines. EBC1 cells with MET amplification
were only sensitive cells to both of MET inhibitors. We have established
PHA-665752 resistant cells; namely EBC1-R cells. EBC1-R cells showed high
expression levels of ATP-binding Cassette Sub-family B Member 1 (ABCB1)
as wells as phosphorylation MET (p-MET). EBC1-R cells grew as cell sphere
that exhibited cancer stem cell-like (CSC) properties and epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT) feature. Two miRNAs, miR-374a and miR-138
which targeted ABCB1, were decreased in EBC1-R cells. ABCB1 inhibitor
elacridar could suppress sphere numbers and EMT phenomenon and restore to
the resistance to PHA-665752 in EBC1-R cells. Our study demonstrated that
ABCB1 overexpression associated with CSC properties and EMT may be
critical for acquire resistance for MET inhibitor. ABCB1 inhibition might
be a novel therapeutic strategy for resistance to MET inhibitor in NSCLC
cells.

