Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ID4 and p53 cross-talk promotes restoration of mutant-p53
transcriptional activity


The physiological mechanisms that can restore biological activity of
mutant p53 is an area of high interest given that mutant p53 expression
is observed in one third of prostate cancer and more than 50% of all
cancers. Here we demonstrate that ID4 (inhibitor of differentiation-4) a
dominant negative regulator of bHLH transcription factors can restore
mutant p53 transcriptional activity in prostate cancer cells. ID4 is
highly expressed in the normal prostate and decreased in prostate cancer
due to promoter hypermethylation. Prostate cancer cell lines: DU145
harbors mutant p53 and also lacks ID4 expression; LNCaP cells express
wild-type p53 and ID4; whereas PC3 cells are null for p53 and express low
levels of ID4. p53 mutants (P223L and V274F) in DU145 cells are within
the DNA binding domain and abrogate p53 transcriptional activity due to
structural de-stabilization and/or DNA interactions. Ectopic expression
of ID4 in DU145 cells resulted in increased apoptosis and expression of
BAX, PUMA and p21, transcriptional targets of p53. DNA binding, p53
luciferase reporter studies and ChIP analysis demonstrated that mutant
p53 gains ID4 dependent DNA binding and transcriptional activity in part
due to CBP/p300 dependent acetylation of p53 at lysine 373. Loss of ID4
in LNCaP cells also abrogated wild-type p53 DNA binding and
transcriptional activity with concomitant loss of CBP/p300 requirement
and decreased acetylation of p53. To further elucidate ID4 dependent
restoration of biological activity of p53 we stably transfected p53-null
cell line PC3, which has endogenous ID4 with mutant p53 mimicking DU145
cells. mRNA, protein levels and apoptosis assays were used to determine
the effects on cell death and to determine if mutant p53 had the ability
to transactivate upstream/downstream targets (MDM2, PUMA, and p21). To
further validate our gene expression profile of p53 responsive targets,
we performed DNA binding assays as well as p53 luciferase reporter assays
to demonstrate wild-type and mutant p53 transcriptional activity in PC3
cells. Also, to elucidate the mechanism by which ID4 promotes apoptosis,
we performed acetylation studies in LNCaP and DU145 xenografts (+/-) ID4
as well as p53 co-immunoprecipation studies to demonstrate interaction of
both lysine residues 320 and 373. Our results indicate that transfected
mutant p53 in PC3 cells were able to induce expression of downstream
targets as well as effect biological processes such as apoptosis and cell
cycle arrest. Also, post-translational modifications on residues lys320
and lys373 indicated activation of mutant p53. Collectively, based on our
studies we demonstrate that ID4 promotes post-translational modifications
of p53, which in turn regulates p53 transcriptional activity. NIH grant
#R01CA128914

