Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PARP activity by BGB-290 potentiates efficacy of
temozolomide in patient derived xenografts of glioblastoma multiforme


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive and fatal disease commonly
treated with radiation and temozolomide (TMZ), but emergence of therapy
resistance invariably limits treatment efficacy. Inhibition of Poly-ADP
ribose polymerases 1 and 2 (PARP1/2) sensitizes GBM cells, and inhibitors
of PARP are emerging as combination partners with TMZ. However, limited
brain penetration precludes use of several promising PARP inhibitors in
GBM. BGB-290 is a relatively new and potent PARP inhibitor that crosses
the blood brain barrier with a brain to plasma ratio of 0.2. The focus of
the present study was to evaluate antitumor effects of BGB-290, as single
agent or in combination with TMZ, in patient derived GBM xenografts and
glioma cell lines. In a biochemical assay, low doses (30-100 nM) of
BGB-290 suppressed PARP activity, while single agent anti-tumor activity
of BGB-290 was modest and restricted to concentrations above 3 M.
Combinations of 0.1 M BGB-290 with 10 M TMZ significantly diminished
primary neurosphere formation in a patient-derived xenograft line, GBM12,
decreasing relative neurosphere count to 3.1 1.3% as compared to 9.2 3.1%
with TMZ alone, p = 0.03. Consistent with a mechanism involving
disruption of DNA repair, treatment of GBM12 cells with TMZ and BGB-290
combination resulted in robust H2AX foci formation and a synergistic
increase in DNA damage signaling as compared to TMZ or BGB-290 alone.
TMZ-sensitizing effects of BGB-290 were heterogeneous in TMZ-resistant
(GBM12TMZ) sublines that were developed previously by in vivo selection
of parental GBM12 with cyclical TMZ therapy. The average neurosphere
formation across 4 resistant sublines lacking MGMT expression after 100 M
TMZ only was 75.3 9.0% versus 14.9 7.4% with TMZ and 0.1 M BGB-290,
pGlioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive and fatal disease
commonly treated with radiation and temozolomide (TMZ), but emergence of
therapy resistance invariably limits treatment efficacy. Inhibition of
Poly-ADP ribose polymerases 1 and 2 (PARP1/2) sensitizes GBM cells, and
inhibitors of PARP are emerging as combination partners with TMZ.
However, limited brain penetration precludes use of several promising
PARP inhibitors in GBM. BGB-290 is a relatively new and potent PARP
inhibitor that crosses the blood brain barrier with a brain to plasma
ratio of 0.2. The focus of the present study was to evaluate antitumor
effects of BGB-290, as single agent or in combination with TMZ, in
patient derived GBM xenografts and glioma cell lines. In a biochemical
assay, low doses (30-100 nM) of BGB-290 suppressed PARP activity, while
single agent anti-tumor activity of BGB-290 was modest and restricted to
concentrations above 3 M. Combinations of 0.1 M BGB-290 with 10 M TMZ
significantly diminished primary neurosphere formation in a
patient-derived xenograft line, GBM12, decreasing relative neurosphere
count to 3.1 1.3% as compared to 9.2 3.1% with TMZ alone, p = 0.03.
Consistent with a mechanism involving disruption of DNA repair, treatment
of GBM12 cells with TMZ and BGB-290 combination resulted in robust H2AX
foci formation and a synergistic increase in DNA damage signaling as
compared to TMZ or BGB-290 alone. TMZ-sensitizing effects of BGB-290 were
heterogeneous in TMZ-resistant (GBM12TMZ) sublines that were developed
previously by in vivo selection of parental GBM12 with cyclical TMZ
therapy. The average neurosphere formation across 4 resistant sublines
lacking MGMT expression after 100 M TMZ only was 75.3 9.0% versus 14.9
7.4% with TMZ and 0.1 M BGB-290, p<0.01. In contrast, 2 MGMT
overexpressing sublines were much less sensitive to the combination with
relative neurospheres 91.9 5.2% versus 73.2 9.2% respectively,
pGlioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive and fatal disease
commonly treated with radiation and temozolomide (TMZ), but emergence of
therapy resistance invariably limits treatment efficacy. Inhibition of
Poly-ADP ribose polymerases 1 and 2 (PARP1/2) sensitizes GBM cells, and
inhibitors of PARP are emerging as combination partners with TMZ.
However, limited brain penetration precludes use of several promising
PARP inhibitors in GBM. BGB-290 is a relatively new and potent PARP
inhibitor that crosses the blood brain barrier with a brain to plasma
ratio of 0.2. The focus of the present study was to evaluate antitumor
effects of BGB-290, as single agent or in combination with TMZ, in
patient derived GBM xenografts and glioma cell lines. In a biochemical
assay, low doses (30-100 nM) of BGB-290 suppressed PARP activity, while
single agent anti-tumor activity of BGB-290 was modest and restricted to
concentrations above 3 M. Combinations of 0.1 M BGB-290 with 10 M TMZ
significantly diminished primary neurosphere formation in a
patient-derived xenograft line, GBM12, decreasing relative neurosphere
count to 3.1 1.3% as compared to 9.2 3.1% with TMZ alone, p = 0.03.
Consistent with a mechanism involving disruption of DNA repair, treatment
of GBM12 cells with TMZ and BGB-290 combination resulted in robust H2AX
foci formation and a synergistic increase in DNA damage signaling as
compared to TMZ or BGB-290 alone. TMZ-sensitizing effects of BGB-290 were
heterogeneous in TMZ-resistant (GBM12TMZ) sublines that were developed
previously by in vivo selection of parental GBM12 with cyclical TMZ
therapy. The average neurosphere formation across 4 resistant sublines
lacking MGMT expression after 100 M TMZ only was 75.3 9.0% versus 14.9
7.4% with TMZ and 0.1 M BGB-290, p<0.01. In contrast, 2 MGMT
overexpressing sublines were much less sensitive to the combination with
relative neurospheres 91.9 5.2% versus 73.2 9.2% respectively, p< 0.01.
Next Gen Sequencing revealed discrete non-synonymous somatic mutations in
the mismatch repair pathway of GBM12TMZ sublines lacking MGMT, which led
us to examine the relationship between mismatch repair and sensitizing
effects of PARP inhibition. Silencing Msh2 resulted in marked TMZ
resistance in U251 cells (94.7 5.4% relative growth with 100 M TMZ),
while co-treatment with 0.1 M BGB-290 and 100 M TMZ decreased growth to
23.5 9.6% (pGlioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive and fatal
disease commonly treated with radiation and temozolomide (TMZ), but
emergence of therapy resistance invariably limits treatment efficacy.
Inhibition of Poly-ADP ribose polymerases 1 and 2 (PARP1/2) sensitizes
GBM cells, and inhibitors of PARP are emerging as combination partners
with TMZ. However, limited brain penetration precludes use of several
promising PARP inhibitors in GBM. BGB-290 is a relatively new and potent
PARP inhibitor that crosses the blood brain barrier with a brain to
plasma ratio of 0.2. The focus of the present study was to evaluate
antitumor effects of BGB-290, as single agent or in combination with TMZ,
in patient derived GBM xenografts and glioma cell lines. In a biochemical
assay, low doses (30-100 nM) of BGB-290 suppressed PARP activity, while
single agent anti-tumor activity of BGB-290 was modest and restricted to
concentrations above 3 M. Combinations of 0.1 M BGB-290 with 10 M TMZ
significantly diminished primary neurosphere formation in a
patient-derived xenograft line, GBM12, decreasing relative neurosphere
count to 3.1 1.3% as compared to 9.2 3.1% with TMZ alone, p = 0.03.
Consistent with a mechanism involving disruption of DNA repair, treatment
of GBM12 cells with TMZ and BGB-290 combination resulted in robust H2AX
foci formation and a synergistic increase in DNA damage signaling as
compared to TMZ or BGB-290 alone. TMZ-sensitizing effects of BGB-290 were
heterogeneous in TMZ-resistant (GBM12TMZ) sublines that were developed
previously by in vivo selection of parental GBM12 with cyclical TMZ
therapy. The average neurosphere formation across 4 resistant sublines
lacking MGMT expression after 100 M TMZ only was 75.3 9.0% versus 14.9
7.4% with TMZ and 0.1 M BGB-290, p<0.01. In contrast, 2 MGMT
overexpressing sublines were much less sensitive to the combination with
relative neurospheres 91.9 5.2% versus 73.2 9.2% respectively, p< 0.01.
Next Gen Sequencing revealed discrete non-synonymous somatic mutations in
the mismatch repair pathway of GBM12TMZ sublines lacking MGMT, which led
us to examine the relationship between mismatch repair and sensitizing
effects of PARP inhibition. Silencing Msh2 resulted in marked TMZ
resistance in U251 cells (94.7 5.4% relative growth with 100 M TMZ),
while co-treatment with 0.1 M BGB-290 and 100 M TMZ decreased growth to
23.5 9.6% (p<0.01), which is similar sensitivity to TMZ alone in U251
parental cells. In an initial in vivo study with orthotopic GBM12
xenografts, administration of BGB-290 at 3 mg/kg twice per day combined
with 25 mg/kg TMZ extended survival of animals beyond 300 days (80%
survival at day 320), while in the group treated with TMZ alone 80%
animals were moribund before day 150. In conclusion, BGB-290 is a
promising PARP inhibitor with high potency, cytotoxicity and favorable in
vivo efficacy in TMZ sensitive and possibly a subset of recurrent TMZ
resistant GBM.

