Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A panel of patient derived gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST)
xenograft models for in vivo preclinical drug testing


Objective: Most GIST are dependent on the KIT/PDGFRA signaling pathway
and therefore can be treated with specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKI). With time GIST develop resistance to TKI. We need reliable models
which can be used for preclinical drug testing.Methods: Patient-derived
xenografts were established in nu/nu NMRI mice by subcutaneous
implantation of fresh, surgically resected tumor specimens from
consenting patients with GIST treated at the University Hospitals Leuven.
Once tumor growth was observed, pieces of tumor were re-transplanted to
next generations of mice. At each passage tumor fragments were collected
for histological and molecular characterization. A model was considered
to be established after observing stable histological and molecular
features for at least two passages.Results: At present we have access to
five successfully established GIST models, with different KIT mutations
and different sensitivity to standard TKI (Table).Untreated tumors from
subsequent passages show morphological and immunohistochemical features
resembling the original patient biopsy, verifying the stability of GIST
xenografts growth. KIT mutational status has also been confirmed in
samples obtained from all models. These models are used for pre-clinical
testing of new therapeutic approaches, and current results served as a
rationale for at least four prospective clinical trials. If needed, we
parallel our patient-derived models with in vitro or in vivo studies
using one of the few established GIST cell lines.Conclusion: Our
established GIST xenografts maintain the histological and molecular
characteristics of the original patient sample and are a very useful and
reliable preclinical platform for testing the new targeted approaches in
GIST. The platform is available for collaboration with academic and
commercial partners (contact patrick.schoffski@uzleuven.be).*models which
showed tumor growth for at least two passages; n/a-not applicable

