Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photoimmunotherapy with an anti-EGFR antibody conjugated to an
IRDye700 results in extensive and rapid cell death in vitro and in vivo
in human pancreatic cancer cell lines


Photoimmunotherapy (PIT) of cancer utilizes tumor-specific monoclonal
antibodies conjugated to a photosensitizer phthalocyanine dye IR700 which
becomes cytotoxic upon irradiation with near infrared light. In this
study, we aimed to evaluate the efficacy of PIT on human pancreatic
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo in a nude mouse model. An in vitro
cytotoxicity assay was used to determine cell death following treatment
with PIT for Panc-1, MiaPaCa2, and BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer cells.
For in vivo determination of PIT efficacy, nude mice were implanted with
BxPC-3 pancreatic tumors expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP).
After tumor engraftment, the mice were divided into two groups: treatment
with anti-EGFR-IR700 + 690 nm laser and treatment with 690 nm laser only.
Anti-EGFR-IR700 (100 g) was administered to the treatment group via tail
vein injection 24 hours prior to therapy. Tumors were then exposed and
treated with phototherapy at an intensity of 150 mW/cm2 for 30 minutes.
Whole body imaging was done using an OV-100 small animal imaging system.
Anti-EGFR-IR700 antibody bound to the BxPC3 cells to a high degree based
on image co-localization. Anti-EGFR-IR700 caused extensive cancer cell
killing after light activation compared to control cells in cytotoxicity
assays. In the mouse experiments, the treatment group had significantly
smaller tumors as measured by GFP than the control after just 96 hours.
The present results indicate the high potential of PIT for pancreatic
cancer therapy.

