Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the cell death mechanism after silencing of
PAX3-FOXO1 in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma using a CRISPR-Cas mediated
knockout approach


Chromosomal translocations leading to the generation of PAX-FOXO1 fusion
oncogenes are found in about 80 percent of all alveolar Rhabdomyosarcoma
(aRMS). Recent whole genome sequencing studies revealed that apart from
these translocations mutation frequency is generally very low in aRMS,
with no other genetic changes detected in some cases. aRMS tumor cells
depend on the fusion protein and exhibit cell cycle arrest or undergo
cell death upon blocking of its activity. Taken together this strongly
suggests that the PAX-FOXO1 fusion represents the tumor initiating event
and that it remains the most important tumorigenic factor for aRMS
maintenance at later tumor stages.However, the molecular mechanisms
involved in tumorigenesis downstream of PAX3-FOXO1 are only partially
understood yet, including the ones involved in oncogene addiction. We
therefore aimed to further characterize the molecular events leading to
cell death after silencing of PAX3-FOXO1. Towards this aim, we used an
inducible shRNA system to silence PAX3-FOXO1 in different aRMS cell
lines. Reduction of PAX3-FOXO1 below a threshold of about 20 percent of
its basal level efficiently induced Caspase-dependent cell death.
CRISPR-Cas mediated knock-out of individual members of the apoptotic
cascade was then used to further characterize the involved apoptotic
mechanism. BH3-only proteins including Bim were found as relevant sensors
detecting cellular stress after silencing of PAX3-FOXO1.This data
suggests that combined interference with PAX-FOXO1 activity and
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members might accelerate tumor cell death.

