Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal neuregulin-1 promotes adaptive resistance in mutant BRAF
melanoma


RAF inhibitors are first-line treatments for melanomas that harbor BRAF
V600E/K mutations; however, patients invariably progress on these
targeted therapies. While durable resistance is mediated frequently by
stable alterations intrinsic to the tumor cells leading to ERK1/2 pathway
reactivation, the compensatory activation of growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) modulates the level of initial response. The
composition of the tumor microenvironment likely plays a key role in
these compensatory/adaptive responses to targeted inhibitors. In this
study, we demonstrate that NRG1 is expressed in fibroblasts, as well as
cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) isolated from a mutant BRAF
melanoma. Fibroblast derived-NRG1 was able to mediate the enhanced ErbB3
pathway activation in RAF-inhibited mutant BRAF melanoma cells.
Furthermore, conditioned medium from fibroblasts and CAFs limits RAF
inhibitor cytotoxicity in V600 BRAF-harboring melanomas. Importantly,
ErbB3 and ErbB2 targeting antibodies partially reverse the protective
effects of fibroblast-derived medium on ErbB3 pathway activation and cell
growth properties of mutant BRAF-inhibited melanoma cells. Together,
these data demonstrate a requirement for a paracrine-produced factor in
the tumor microenvironment to promote resistance to RAF inhibitor in
mutant BRAF melanoma and reinforce the idea that targeting ErbB3/ErbB2
signaling may improve the efficacy of RAF inhibitors.

