Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic miRNA miR-130a-induced inhibition of the growth
regulator protein ZAR2 in TNBC cells


ZAR2 is C4-type zinc-finger protein that we found to suppress the growth
of breast tumor cells. In the dividing breast cancer cells ZAR2 is
primarily located in the cytosol. It probably inhibits the growth of the
tumor cells through sequence-specific capture and degradation of certain
mRNAs which are critical for the growth of the cells. We found that the
level of ZAR2 protein is significantly lower in the highly aggressive
breast cancer cells of the triple negative subtype (TNBC). Forced
expression of ZAR2 in the TNBC cells prevented the proliferation and
invasiveness of these cells. Major objective of the research presented
here is to understand the mechanism of suppression of ZAR2 level in the
TNBC cells. As ZAR2 mRNA levels are very similar in the TNBC and non-TNBC
cells, we postulated that ZAR2 protein levels are down-regulated in the
TNBC cells due to the induction of a ZAR2-targeting miRNA in these cells.
We used computational prediction to identify potential microRNAs
down-regulating ZAR2 in the TNBC cells. One of the major miRNAs that is
predicted by DIANA-Tools
(http://diana.imis.athena-innovation.gr/DianaTools/index.php?r =
MicroT_CDS/index) to target ZAR2 mRNA is hsa-miR-130a-5p. We found that
the level of miR-130a-5p in the TNBC cells is inversely related to the
level of ZAR2 protein in the TNBC cells. We validated the binding of
miR130a-5p miRISC to several specific locations at the 3-UTR of ZAR2 mRNA
and the inhibition of translation of ZAR2 mRNA by this miRNA. We propose
that targeted knockdown of miR130a-5p in the TNBC cells will elevate the
level of ZAR2 protein resulting in the inhibition of the growth of these
cells. This research is supported in part by NIH/NCIgrant1R21CA181920-01
to GC and NIH grant 1U54RR026140 to SM.

