Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of microbial metabolites and resveratrol in prostate cancer
progression and clearance


Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are the chemical by-products of microbial
fermentation. Resistant carbohydrates, some starches, and foods generally
rich in fiber are used as substrates for this process. SCFAs are known to
activate key cellular receptors such as GPR43/FFA2, which mediate
programmed cell death in different cancer cells. Resveratrol (RES) is a
polyphenolic compound found in select vegetables and fruits and has been
known for its versatility in preventing and reversing a number of
diseases including some cancers. Much like SCFAs, RES has the ability to
induce programmed cell death in many clinical cancer models. To find out
if the SCFAs and RES modulates the different pathways that controls the
cancer progression, we utilized prostate cancer (PCa) cell lines to
establish a) if, there is any homology between SCFAs produced by normal
host epithelial cells and SCFAs produced by host intestinal microflora,
and b) assess the in vitro/vivo effectiveness of derived SCFAs utilizing
transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate (TRAMP C1, C2, and C3) cell
line(s), human prostate cancer cell line (PC-3) and live murine
specimens, respectively. Preliminary data indicates that SCFAs and RES
together regulate cell death pathways of PCa cells. Additionally, the
SCFAs have the capability to manipulate different molecular signatures
that directly govern the progression of PCa cells. Therefore, our data
suggests that these two compounds (SCFAs and RES) share related
biological pathways facilitated by intestinal microflora that can be used
to regulate prostate cancer progression and clearance.

