Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABTL0812, a new antitumor drug that inhibits the axis Akt/mTOR
through a novel mechanism of action


Background: ABTL0812 is a first-in-class orally administered compound
currently in Phase I/Ib First in Human Clinical Trial in patients with
advanced solid tumors (NCT02201823). ABTL0812 has cytotoxic effect on a
wide range of human tumor cell lines, including those which have become
resistant to standard therapy. We hereby dissect the anti-tumor activity
of ABTL0812, which relies on a novel mechanism of action that promotes
inhibition of the Akt/mTOR axis in cancer cells.Material & methods:
ABTL0812 molecular targets were identified by in silico analysis,
comparing ABTL0812 chemical structure against a database including more
than one million receptor-ligand interaction data. Functional relevance
of the targets was confirmed biochemically and pharmacologically.
ABTL0812 mechanism of action was established using human lung and
pancreatic tumor cells, MEF KO cells, as well as tumor
xenografts.Results: In silico screening showed that ABTL0812 binds four
targets which regulate tumor progression through Akt/mTOR axis. Two of
them are the transcription factors PPAR and PPAR (Peroxisome-Proliferator
Activating Receptors). In lung and pancreatic tumor cells ABTL0812
activated PPAR/-dependent gene transcription, while pharmacological
inhibition with PPAR/ antagonists impaired ABTL0812 cytotoxic effect.
Interestingly, ABTL0812 induced transcription of the endogenous Akt
inhibitor TRIB3 (tribbles homologue 3) through PPAR/ activation. TRIB3 is
a pseudokinase that inhibits Akt by direct binding and preventing its
phosphorylation by mTORC2 complex. According to this, ABTL0812-induced
TRIB3 overexpression resulted in inhibition of Akt phosphorylation,
impaired phosphorylation of the Akt substrates TSC2 and PRAS40 and mTORC1
inhibition (pS6), which in turn promoted autophagy-mediated tumor cell
death. MEF TRIB3-/- cells were resistant to ABTL0812-induced cell death,
indicating that TRIB3 mediates ABTL0812 citotoxicity. Finally, Akt
inhibition was observed in human lung and pancreatic tumor xenograft
models treated with ABTL0812 and in human platelets incubated with
ABTL0812. This supported the rational for using Akt phosphorylation as a
pharmacodynamic biomarker to monitor activity of ABTL0812 in patients
included in the Clinical Trial.Conclusion: ABTL0812 promotes
autophagy-mediated cell death in different cancer paradigms by inhibiting
the Akt/mTOR axis through a novel mechanism of action. ABTL0812 induces
PPAR/-mediated transcription of the TRIB3 gene. Upregulated TRIB3 protein
binds and inhibits Akt, leading to mTORC1 inhibition and reduction of
tumor growth. These findings provide evidences that ABTL0812 may be an
effective therapeutic strategy for targeting cancer.

