Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and development of a novel series of orally active,
selective PI3K-p110/ inhibitors for the treatment of solid and
hematological cancers


The phosphatidylinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) have emerged as important
therapeutic targets for the treatment of solid and hematological
malignancies. For solid tumor therapy, the majority of clinical activity
has largely centered on pan-class I (p110, , and ) inhibitors with
limited selectivity, or pan-class I/mTOR dual inhibitors, whereas
targeting p110 and p110 has been the main focus for hematological cancer
treatment in the clinic. Our research at Karus in the PI3K arena has been
based upon the emerging role of p110 and p110 in PTEN-deficient solid and
hematological tumorigenesis, and in the emerging role of individual PI3K
isoforms in tumor immunotherapy. We have designed and developed a
uniquely-selective series of orally-active molecules that inhibit the
p110/ isoforms, and which display high degrees of specificity over
protein kinases and other lipid kinases. Moreover, a spectrum of p110/
selectivity has been achieved in this series, which has facilitated
interrogation of preferred isoform inhibition profiles required to confer
tumor growth inhibition; additionally, by tuning selectivity over the
other class I isoforms, elimination of the mechanism-related toxicities
associated with the pan-class I inhibitors currently in the clinic can be
realized, making such agents potentially more conducive to combination
therapy. In vitro and in vivo therapy data for advanced lead compounds
will be disclosed.

