Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) signaling in the context of
gain-of-function mutant p53 in vivo


There is growing evidence that tumor cells depend on unique metabolism
for their continued growth and survival, and that cancer cells are
peculiarly addicted to the rapacious uptake of glucose and glutamine.
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is one of the central regulators of
cellular and organismal metabolism in eukaryotes, playing critical roles
in regulating cell growth and reprogramming metabolism. Several of the
downstream effects of AMPK on metabolic adaptation can be attributed to
the AMPK-dependent activation of the p53 tumor suppressor, resulting in
its transcriptional activation and initiating a metabolic cell cycle
checkpoint. However, in the absence of p53, treatment with the blood
glucose-lowering drug metformin delays tumor progression, suggesting that
the AMPK-p53 signaling axis responds in diverse manner depending on
genetic alteration. Due to the gain-of-function, mutant p53 protein
contributes to tumor metastasis and shortening the latency of tumor
progression. Thereby activated K-ras/mutant p53 mouse is preferentially
used as lung adenocarcinoma preclinical model. Here, we have established
mouse tumor cells derived from activated K-ras/mutant p53 mouse to
generate syngeneic lung cancer mouse model, allowing in vivo imaging. We
asked whether the gain-of-function metastatic phenotype observed in the
mouse is responsible for unique metabolic conditions resulting in the
formation of lung tumors. We have evaluated tumor metabolic environment
of this model and examined AMPK signaling pathways.

