Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiangiogenic platinum through glycan targeting


Heparanase is an endo--D-glucuronidase that cleaves heparan sulfate
glycosaminoglycans (HS-GAGs) in the extracellular matrix and basement
membrane. Cancer cells that aberrantly express heparanase potentiate
tumor progression, invasion and metastasis in two distinct ways; (1)
cleavage of HS-GAGs releases growth-factors to directly activate growth
receptors and (2) degradation of the heparan sulfate structural component
of the extracellular matrix (ECM) allows metastatic spread of cancer
cells. Recently, we determined that accumulation and cytotoxicity of
polynuclear platinum compounds (PPCs), including the Phase II clinical
trial compound, BBR3464 (+4), are dependent on the presence of
cell-surface GAGs. Here, we demonstrate that high affinity PPC-GAG
binding provides a new approach to glycan-based targeting by protection
against enzymatic cleavage by heparanase. It was determined by NMR
spectroscopy, that PPCs, especially the higher charged compound,
TriplatinNC (+8), inhibit heparanase cleavage of the oligosaccharide,
Fondaparineaux. Further, using the human umbilical primary cell line,
HUVEC, it was determined that PPCs reduce heparanase cleavage of the
GAG-bound growth factor, bFGF, from ECM. The end result of inhibition of
heparanase cleavage is a reduction in tumor invasion and angiogenesis.
Using the matrigel invasion assay, we show that sub-cytotoxic doses of
PPCs, but not cisplatin, reduces serum-induced invasion of HCT116 cells
through basement membrane. In an ex vivo rat aorta model, PPCs exhibit
antiangiogenesis activity, measured by the inhibition of new blood vessel
growth sprouting from the original aortic ring. Together, these
encouraging results support the potential to combine anti-metastatic and
cytotoxic activity in the development of dual-function platinum-based
drugs.

