Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Celastrol modulated Taz and induced cell apoptosis in vitro


Celastrol is derived from the Chinese medicinal plant Tripterygium
wilfordii, which has attracted great attention for its potent anticancer
effects. Celastrol has been found to inhibit the proliferation, induce
apoptosis, and suppress invasion/migration and angiogenesis both in vitro
and in vivo. In our current study, we treated the HEK293 cells with the
Celastrol(0.75M) for 24h and found that Celastrol could reduce the
expression of TAZ in HEK293 cells.To better evaluate the effect of TAZ on
HEK293 cells, cell growth curve and colony formation assay were
performed. HEK293/TAZ and HEK293/control cells were plated at a density
of 50 cells/mm2 in triplicate for 5 days and HEK293/TAZ and
HEK293/control cells were seeded into six-well plates of 500 cells/well
for two weeks. The result showed that HEK293/TAZ grew obviously faster
and could form more colonies than HEK293/control cells. To further
address the effect of TAZ in vivo, equal numbers(1.5106) of HEK293/TAZ
and HEK293/control cells were injected bilateral subcutaneously into nude
mice. The mice were sacrificed 40 days after injection. We found that the
latency of tumor formation in nude mice injected with HEK293/TAZ cells
was shorter than the tumor injected with HEK293/control cells.
Furthermore, HEK293/TAZ cells could lead to a larger tumor size compared
to the HEK293/control cells. Our data indicated that the overexpression
of TAZ could significantly promote cell proliferation in vitro and in
vivo.Furthermore, after HEK293/TAZ and HEK293/control cells were treated
with Celastrol(0.75M) for 24h, the data showed that the less PARP
cleavage was definitely observed in HEK293/TAZ cells than HEK293/control
cells by Western blotting. Moreover, 18.9% of HEK293/TAZ cells were
TUNEL-positive, compared with 83.2% of HEK293/control cells after
Celastrol treatment(0.75M, 24h). Our data indicated that overexpression
of TAZ could overcome partially the cell apoptosis induced by Celastrol
in vitro.In summary, our finding prompts that Celastrol could suppress
growth of tumor cells through the modulation of TAZ, and the mechanism
how TAZ plays its function needs to be further explored.

