Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nisin ZP, a food preservative, has antitumor potential for head
and neck cancer and extends survival


The use of small antimicrobial agents or bacteriocins, like nisin, to
treat cancer is a new approach that holds great promise. Nisin
exemplifies this new approach because it has been used safely in humans
for many years as a food preservative, and recent laboratory studies
support its anti-tumor potential in head and neck cancer. Previously, we
showed that nisin (2.5%, low content) has antitumor potential in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in vitro and in vivo. The current
studies explored a naturally occurring variant of nisin (nisin ZP; 95%,
high content) for its antitumor effects in vitro and in vivo. Nisin ZP
induced the greatest level of apoptosis in HNSCC cells compared to low
content nisin. HNSCC cells treated with increasing concentrations of
nisin ZP exhibited increasing levels of apoptosis and decreasing levels
of cell proliferation and clonogenic capacity. Nisin ZP-induced apoptosis
was defined by increased ethidium bromide and acridine orange (EB/AO)
staining and by increased levels of calpain-dependent PARP cleavage.
Importantly, nisin ZP also induced apoptosis dose-dependently in HUVEC
endothelial cells and concomitant decreases in vascular sprout formation.
Nisin ZP inhibited sphere formation of HNSCC cells in vitro and
tumorigenesis in vivo and long term treatment extended survival. In
summary, nisin ZP exhibits greater antitumor effects than low content
nisin, and thus has the potential to serve as a novel therapeutic for
HNSCC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

