Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cbl-b Inhibits p-gp transporter function by preventing its
translocation into caveolae in multiple drug-resistant gastric and breast
cancers


Background The transport function of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) requires its
efficient localization to caveolae, a subset of lipid rafts, and
disruption of caveolae suppresses P-gp transport function. However, the
regulatory molecules involved in the translocation of P-gp into caveolae
remain unknown.Methods Immunofluorescence microscopy and proximity
ligation assays were used to analyze the translocation of P-gp into
caveolae. Nude mice (n = 7 mice per group) were injected with SGC7901/Adr
vector, SGC7901/Adr + Cbl-b cells and/or Dox and tumor growth was
assessed. Immunoprecipitation and western blotting were used to examine
the effects of Cbl-b mediated ubiquitination and degradation of c-Src.
Immunochemistry was performed on primary tumor specimens from breast
cancer patients (n = 319) to determine the relationship of Cbl-b with
overall survival.Results c-Src dependent Caveolin-1 phosphorylation
promoted the translocation of P-gp into caveolae, resulting in multidrug
resistance (MDR) in adriamycin resistant gastric cancer SGC7901/Adr and
breast cancer MCF-7/Adr cells. In a negative feedback loop, the
translocation of Cbl-b from the nucleus to the cytoplasm prevented the
localization of P-gp to caveolae, resulting in the reversal of MDR
through the ubiquitination and degradation of c-Src. Clinical data showed
a significant positive relationship between Cbl-b expression and survival
in P-gp positive breast cancer patients who received anthracycline-based
chemotherapy.Conclusions Our findings reveal a new regulatory mechanism
of P-gp transport function.

