Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR4 Arg388 polymorphism is a poor prognostic factor for resected
stage III colon cancer


Purpose To evaluate the prognostic role of fibroblast growth factor
receptor 4 (FGFR4) polymorphism in patients with surgically resected
stage III colon cancer.Patients and Methods FGFR4 polymorphism was
checked in peripheral blood from 273 patients who received curative
resection and diagnosed as stage III colon cancer. Genomic DNA was
extracted from blood which was drawn before curative resection. FGFR4
Gly388Arg genotyping was carried out using high-resolution melting (HRM)
analysis.Results In total 273 patients, 92 patients (34%) were homozygous
for Gly388 allele, with 146 heterozygous (54%) and 35 homozygous (13%)
for Arg388. No significant association was found between clinical or
histopathologic tumor characteristics and FGFR4 genotype. In survival
analysis, Gly388 allele showed better 3Y-DFS than Arg388 carriers
(heterozygous or Arg388 homozygous) in patients with no adjuvant (p =
0.26) or 5-FU/LV treated (p = 0.038). However, patients receiving
adjuvant FOLFOX showed similar 3Y-DFS regardless of genotype. In
addition, 5Y-OS was found significant improvement in Gly388 allele
compared with Arg388 carriers (92.5% vs. 74.9%, p = 0.04) regardless of
adjuvant treatment. In univariate analysis, age, N stage, tumor
differentiation, lymphocyte response, adjuvant chemotherapy and FGFR4
genotype were associated with poor OS. In multivariate analysis, FGFR4
Arg388 carriers (HR 5.17; 95% CI, 2.06-12.92, pPurpose To evaluate the
prognostic role of fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4)
polymorphism in patients with surgically resected stage III colon
cancer.Patients and Methods FGFR4 polymorphism was checked in peripheral
blood from 273 patients who received curative resection and diagnosed as
stage III colon cancer. Genomic DNA was extracted from blood which was
drawn before curative resection. FGFR4 Gly388Arg genotyping was carried
out using high-resolution melting (HRM) analysis.Results In total 273
patients, 92 patients (34%) were homozygous for Gly388 allele, with 146
heterozygous (54%) and 35 homozygous (13%) for Arg388. No significant
association was found between clinical or histopathologic tumor
characteristics and FGFR4 genotype. In survival analysis, Gly388 allele
showed better 3Y-DFS than Arg388 carriers (heterozygous or Arg388
homozygous) in patients with no adjuvant (p = 0.26) or 5-FU/LV treated (p
= 0.038). However, patients receiving adjuvant FOLFOX showed similar
3Y-DFS regardless of genotype. In addition, 5Y-OS was found significant
improvement in Gly388 allele compared with Arg388 carriers (92.5% vs.
74.9%, p = 0.04) regardless of adjuvant treatment. In univariate
analysis, age, N stage, tumor differentiation, lymphocyte response,
adjuvant chemotherapy and FGFR4 genotype were associated with poor OS. In
multivariate analysis, FGFR4 Arg388 carriers (HR 5.17; 95% CI,
2.06-12.92, p<0.001) showed significantly poor prognostic factors for OS
together with age ( 70Y), N stage, poorly differentiation, absence of
lymphocyte response, no adjuvant chemotherapy.Conclusion FGFR4Arg388
polymorphism is an independent poor prognostic factor in surgically
resected stage III colon cancer. This result could guide the individual
selection for adjuvant chemotherapy and potential therapeutic target for
surgically resected stage III colon cancer.

