Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of hsa-miR-15a in EMT and chemoresistance in colorectal
cancer


Epigenetic alterations such as non-coding microRNAs are critical factors
in EMT and chemoresistance. Hsa-miR-15a, as one of the first miRNA
identified to be associated with cancer, has been investigated for its
role in several types of cancer. We are interested in understanding the
molecular and cellular mechanism of hsa-miR-15a in colorectal cancer as
hsa-miR-15a is down-regulated in colon cancer and associated with poor
patient prognosis. In this study, we have identified several direct key
targets of hsa-miR-15a that impact EMT transition, cell cycle and
apoptosis. Our results show that the expression of BMI-1, an important
regulator of EMT, was suppressed by hsa-miR-15a. The reduction of
hsa-miR-15a in colorectal cancer patient samples was significantly
inversely correlated with BMI-1 over-expression. Hsa-miR-15a also
suppresses the expression of anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2. The
suppression of BMI-1, BCL-2 as well as other key targets by hsa-miR-15a
has potential for increasing chemosensitivity as well as disrupting
cancer stem cell self renewal. In addition, hsa-miR-15a also has
potential as a prognostic biomarker in colorectal cancer. This work will
provide a further understanding of the mechanism of hsa-miR-15a loss in
colorectal cancer and its clinical significance in relationship with its
targets and pathways. The functional significance of hsa-miR-15a in
regulating key targets and pathways establishes the foundation for
hsa-miR-15a as a potential novel therapeutic strategy for treating
colorectal cancer.

