Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel p53 targets by RNA sequencing in mice
liver tissues


In response to various type of cellular stress such as X-ray irradiation,
ultraviolet exposure, and oxidative stress, the p53 protein is activated
and regulates its target genes that induce cell cycle arrest, senescence,
DNA repair, and apoptosis. Inactivation of the p53 gene is the most
common alterations observed in human cancers. Therefore, identification
of p53-target genes would help us to understand molecular carcinogenesis.
However, an entire picture of the p53 signaling pathway has not been
disclosed yet.To elucidate the mechanism whereby p53 suppress tumor
development, we purified RNA of 19 organs from p53+/+ or p53-/- mice with
or without 10 Gy of X-ray irradiation. RNA sequence analysis of 228
tissues provided expression profile of 23813 genes. Then we screened
genes which satisfy the following criteria at least one organ; median
FPKM value after radiation in p53WT mice is more than two-fold higher
than that of those in other groups with p-value of 0.05 by t-test; median
FPKM value after radiation in p53WT mice is more than one. Among 119
previously identified p53 targets with functional p53 binding motifs, 70
targets were induced by DNA damage in at least one mice tissues.Then we
selected 16 candidates those were induced in mice liver. Quantitative PCR
analysis using HepG2 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells revealed that
four genes were induced by adriamycin treatment in a p53-dependent
manner. Through these screening, here we identified p53-dependent
inositol phosphate converting enzyme (PICE) as a direct target of p53.
p53 induced PICE protein and mRNA in both human and mice. In addition we
identified p53 binding sequence within its promoter region and exon 7 of
the PICE gene. p53 also increased an inositol isomer synthesis in
response to DNA damage. Our findings revealed the novel role of p53 in
inositol phosphate metabolism.

