Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p73 dinucleotide polymorphism genotyping of human cancer cell lines


The p73 gene is a member of the p53 tumor suppressor family. The p73
dinucleotide polymorphism (DNP) (rs1801173) is a G4C14-to-A4T14 linked
pair of transitions located in exon 2 between the P1 and P2 gene
promoters. The P1 and P2 p73 gene promoters are the transcription
initiation sites for mRNAs encoding TAp73 and Np73 isoforms,
respectively. Recently, we reported the p73 DNP allele was associated
with (1) decreased risk [OR = 0.55, 95%CI = 0.31-0.99] for aggressive
prostate cancer (PCa) and (2) increased TAp73/Np73 protein isoform ratios
in ten human cancer cell lines. We hypothesize the presence of the p73
DNP allele causes altered p73 promoter usage resulting in increased
TAp73/Np73 protein isoform ratios, which could explain the observed
decreased risk for PCa aggressiveness. Our ultimate goal is to assess the
potential of p73 DNP as a biomarker for lower aggressive PCa risk.
Therefore, our initial aim in this study was to determine the p73 DNP
genotype in ten additional human cancer cell lines (DU 145, JEG-3, K-562,
LNCaP, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MRC-5, PC-3, SW48 and U-2OS) not yet
characterized for p73 DNP status. We previously reported the p73 DNP
genotype of three human cancer cell lines that we used as genotyping
controls: Caco-2 (homozygous polymorphic), NCI-H1299 (homozygous wild
type), and HepG2 (heterozygous). Cell lines were cultured and genomic DNA
was isolated and quantitated. Cell line genomic DNA samples were used in
TaqMan Real Time-PCR allelic discrimination assays to determine the p73
DNP genotypes. Our data conclusively determined that DU 145, JEG-3,
K-562, LNCaP, MDA-MB-468, MRC-5, SW48 and U-2OS were p73 DNP homozygous
wild type, while PC-3 and MDA-MB-231 werw p73 DNP heterozygous.

