Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGF induces cell growth and glycolysis in colon cancer


The platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) plays an important role in
several solid tumors. Involved in cell migration and proliferation
primarily of stromal cells in cancers PDGF represents a key target in
cancer therapy. The aim of this study was to analyze the specific role of
PDGF on tumor cell proliferation and metabolism in colorectal cancer
(CRC). The human colon cancer cell line HT-29 was cultured and stimulated
time-dependently with PDGF. Additionally, inhibition of the
PI3k/Akt/mTOR-pathway was performed simultaneously to PDGF stimulation.
Whole cell and RNA extracts were analyzed by Western Blot and RT-q-PCR
for the PI3k/Akt/mTOR-pathway and components of cellular metabolism. To
investigate the effects of PDGF on proliferation MTS assays were
performed. Additionally, mRNA levels of PDGF and metabolic factors in
tumors from patients with CRC were analyzed by RT-qPCR. PDGF stimulation
resulted in increased HT29 cell proliferation compared to untreated
controls. Blocking of Akt resulted in inhibition of pS6, activation of
Retinoblastoma (Rb) and reduced tumor cell growth. Additionally, under
stimulation a higher glycolytic rate was observed while oxygen
consumption remained unaltered. Investigated tumors from patients with
CRC showed a stage-dependent increase in PDGF expression and a boosted
glycolytic rate. The cytokine PDGF induced proliferation accompanied with
an altered glycolysis in HT-29 colon cancer. An increased glycolysis and
tumor cell proliferation support accelerated cell proliferation and tumor
growth. The growth reducing effect of Akt inhibition indicates the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR-pathway to play a crucial role in CRC progression and
therefore could be an important target in cancer therapy.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

