Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the liposomal formulation of eribulin mesylate
(E7389) in mice


E7389 (eribulin mesylate, Halaven, Eisai) is a fully synthetic analog of
the marine sponge natural product halichondrin B. It has been approved in
US and more than 50 countries worldwide for treatment of advanced breast
cancer. To improve the therapeutic index of E7389, a liposomal
formulation of E7389, E7389-LF is under development. In this study, we
characterized the pharmacokinetics of E7389-LF and E7389 (aqueous
formulation) in mice and evaluated the anti-tumor activity of E7389-LF
and E7389 in mouse xenograft model. In general the pharmacokinetics of
E7389-LF was characterized by a small volume of distribution, slow
clearance, and slow elimination in all liposomal formulations tested.
Plasma AUC of E7389-LF was more than 600 fold larger than that of E7389
in tumor bearing mice. Tumor AUC of E7389-LF was also observed. Moreover,
free E7389 (not liposome encapsulated and not protein bound) was measured
in mouse plasma by ultracentrifugation method. The concentration ratio of
E7389 in ultracentrifuged mouse plasma (UCM) vs E7389 in plasma after a 2
mg/kg i.v. of E7389 ranged from 54.19% to 65.41%, which was similar to
the free fraction in the mouse plasma. The respective concentration ratio
of E7389 in UCM vs E7389 in plasma after a 2 mg/kg i.v. of E7389-LF
ranged from 0.07% to 0.59%, and the exposure, expressed as AUC, of
UCM/plasma ratio was determined to be 0.2%. The free E7389 exposure,
measured by UCM, after E7389-LF administration was about 1.5 fold of that
after E7389 administration. Anti-tumor activity of E7389-LF and E7389 was
evaluated in a human pharynx carcinoma, FaDu, xenograft model. E7389-LF
showed dose-dependent anti-tumor effect with regression of tumors at 2.5
mg/kg dose, which was significantly better than that after E7389
administration in this model. These findings suggest that E7389-LF showed
better anti-tumor activity than that of E7389 in human FaDu xenograft
mouse model.

