Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of arachidonic acid pathways with prognosis in patients
with surgically resected non-small cell lung cancer


Background: Arachidonic acid (ARA) is a polyunsaturated fatty acid
present in the phospholipids of cell membranes. ARA is metabolized
through two major pathways, cyclooxygenase (COX) and lipoxygenase (LOX),
resulting in various biologically active eicosanoids, such as
prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids.
Cumulative evidence from both in vitro and animal studies suggests that
COX and LOX pathways may be involved in the development and progression
of lung cancer by regulating multiple biological processes. However, no
direct evidence exists to connect key enzymes of COX and LOX pathways
with prognosis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We conducted a
study to evaluate the association of protein expression of major enzymes
in the COX and LOX pathways with prognosis of NSCLC. Materials and
Methods: Included in the study are 98 patients with surgically resected
NSCLC. The archived paraffin-embedded tumor tissue blocks were retrieved,
and tissue microarray were constructed with at least two cores for most
cases. Clinical data were obtained from medical records. Expression
levels of COX-2, 12-LOX, 15-LOX-1, 15-LOX-2, 5-LOX activating protein
(FLAP), and 11-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I (11HSD1) and type II
(11HSD2) were evaluated immunohistochemically. Odds ratios (OR) of death
were estimated using logistic regression models with adjustment for age
at diagnosis, BMI, smoking status, and tumor stage. Results: All seven
assayed markers were significantly correlated with one another (r = 0.299
- 0.658, P Background: Arachidonic acid (ARA) is a polyunsaturated fatty
acid present in the phospholipids of cell membranes. ARA is metabolized
through two major pathways, cyclooxygenase (COX) and lipoxygenase (LOX),
resulting in various biologically active eicosanoids, such as
prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids.
Cumulative evidence from both in vitro and animal studies suggests that
COX and LOX pathways may be involved in the development and progression
of lung cancer by regulating multiple biological processes. However, no
direct evidence exists to connect key enzymes of COX and LOX pathways
with prognosis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We conducted a
study to evaluate the association of protein expression of major enzymes
in the COX and LOX pathways with prognosis of NSCLC. Materials and
Methods: Included in the study are 98 patients with surgically resected
NSCLC. The archived paraffin-embedded tumor tissue blocks were retrieved,
and tissue microarray were constructed with at least two cores for most
cases. Clinical data were obtained from medical records. Expression
levels of COX-2, 12-LOX, 15-LOX-1, 15-LOX-2, 5-LOX activating protein
(FLAP), and 11-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I (11HSD1) and type II
(11HSD2) were evaluated immunohistochemically. Odds ratios (OR) of death
were estimated using logistic regression models with adjustment for age
at diagnosis, BMI, smoking status, and tumor stage. Results: All seven
assayed markers were significantly correlated with one another (r = 0.299
- 0.658, P < 0.01). We observed that a higher level of COX-2 protein
expression was associated with advanced tumor stage (P = 0.026). A higher
level of 15-LOX-1 protein expression was associated with significantly
increased risk of death (OR = 3.27, 95% CI 1.01 - 10.5, P = 0.048) and a
higher level of 11HSD1 protein expression was associated with a
marginally significant increased risk of death (OR = 2.67, 95% CI 0.86 -
8.31, P = 0.089). No association of other markers with lung cancer death
was found. Conclusions: 15-LOX-1 and 11HSD1 may be prognostic markers for
NSCLC. Validation of the findings in an independent patient cohort is
warranted.

