Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of key survival-correlating microRNAs and
Piwi-interacting RNAs dysregulated in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma


Aberrant expression of microRNAs and piwi-interacting RNAs, two distinct
classes of non-coding RNA (ncRNA) and important regulators of gene
expression, is known to be implicated in human diseases including cancer.
The exact roles of microRNAs and piwi-interacting RNAs in the
pathogenesis of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), however,
remain poorly understood. Utilizing next generation RNA sequencing
analysis of raw data obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas, we discovered
significant dysregulation (fold change 2) in 231 microRNAs and 60
piwi-interacting RNAs between forty-three matched samples of tumor and
adjacent normal tissues, including down-regulation of mirs 30e and
let7-c, and up-regulation of piR34736 and mir-196a-1 in tumor tissue
compared to adjacent, non-tumor tissue. Further statistical survival
modeling using patient survival data and cox proportional hazard
regression analysis revealed that miRs 30e, 196a-1, and let7-c, and
piR34736 correlated significantly with survival in patients with HNSCC.
To further investigate these microRNAs and piwi-interacting RNAs,
quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) and MTT cell
proliferation assays were performed in-vitro to assess their isolated
effects on cancer gene expression in established HNSCC cell lines.
Endogenous expression of these ncRNA was compared between a set of three
normal oral keratinocytes and five HNSCC cell lines using qRT-PCR which
confirmed miR-30e and mir-let7-c down-regulation and piR34736 and
mir-196a-1 up-regulation in cancer. MTT cell proliferation assays upon
knock-down of miR-196a-1 and ectopically expressed mir-let7-c in HNSCC
revealed significant decreases in cell proliferation compared to cells
transfected with their respective negative control. Identification of key
ncRNAs differentially expressed between cancer tissue and adjacent normal
tissue may reveal important steps in the initiation and progression of
HNSCC as they are strongly correlated with patient survival. These key
microRNAs and piwi-interacting RNAs may serve as potential biomarkers and
therapeutic targets for future epigenetic-based cancer therapies.

