Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HP1-mediated spatiotemporal control of estrogen-responsive
transcription in breast cancer cells


Recruitment of transcriptional machinery to target promoters for aberrant
gene expression has been well studied, but underlying control directed by
distant-acting enhancers remains unclear in cancer development. Our
previous study demonstrated that distant estrogen response elements
(DEREs) located on chromosome 20q13 were frequently amplified (5060
copies) and translocated to other chromosomes in ER-positive breast
cancer cells. In this study, we used three-dimensional interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization to decipher spatiotemporal gathering
of multiple DEREs in the nucleus. Upon estrogen stimulation, the majority
of 20q13 DEREs were mobilized to form regulatory depots for synchronized
regulation of target loci. A chromosome conformation capture assay
coupled with chromatin immunoprecipitation further uncovered that
ER-bound regulatory depots are tethered to heterochromatin protein 1
(HP1) for coordinated chromatin movement and subsequent facilitation of
histone modifications of target loci, resulting in transcription
repression. Neutralizing HP1 function dissembled these regulatory depots
and reversed this transcription inactivation of candidate
tumor-suppressor genes. Deletion of amplified DEREs using the CRISPR/Cas9
genomic-editing system profoundly altered transcriptional profiles of
JAK/STAT signaling networks, leading to proliferation inhibition of
cancer cells with beneficial outcome of breast cancers. These findings
reveal a formerly uncharacterized feature of oncogenic amplicons that
multiple copies of the amplicon congregate as transcriptional unions in
the nucleus for synchronous regulation of function-related loci in
tumorigenesis. Disruption of their assembly can be a new strategy for
treating breast cancers and other malignancies.

