Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Noxa/MCL-1 axis in solid tumors treated with DNA
damaging agents


DNA damaging agents, such as cisplatin and etoposide, are employed for
the treatment of a wide array of solid tumors, but the prolonged use of
chemotherapeutic drugs is limited by their toxicity and by the
development of resistance. To overcome these major roadblocks to improved
prognosis requires mechanism-based therapeutic strategies that maximize
the antitumor effect of drugs while limiting their toxicities. These
agents exert anticancer effects via multiple mechanisms, yet its most
prominent mode of action involves the generation of DNA lesions followed
by the activation of the DNA damage response and the induction of BCL-2
family-dependent mitochondrial apoptosis. Direct therapeutic targeting of
the BCL-2 family in cancer is therefore conceptually appealing but has
proved remarkably challenging. This is due, in part, to the difficulty in
producing effective drugs and in achieving a satisfactory therapeutic
index. Also important, but less appreciated in this regard, are the
potentially complex, tissue-specific interactions among the BCL-2 family
members observed in different tumor types.We have found that the
expression of pro-apoptotic Noxa and anti-apoptotic MCL-1 proteins of the
BCL-2 family is a critical determinant of the sensitivity to DNA-damaging
agents in solid tumors; (1) MCL-1 is a labile protein and its stability
is regulated by phosphorylation followed by ubiquitination and
proteasome-mediated degradation; (2) Noxa specifically binds to and
recruits MCL-1 from the cytosol to the mitochondria. Translocation of
MCL-1 initiates its phosphorylation and subsequent ubiquitination, which
triggers proteasome-mediated degradation; (3) The Noxa-dependent
phosphorylation sites are regulated by CDK2 and are different from those
phosphorylated by CDK1 in response to paclitaxel treatment; (4) Noxa is
transcriptionally induced by cisplatin or etoposide. Downregulation of
Noxa by shRNA strongly inhibits cisplatin-induced apoptosis. These
results suggest that the Noxa/MCL-1 axis plays a critical role in
apoptosis induced by DNA damaging agents and targeting Noxa/MCL-1 could
be an alternative strategy to overcome the resistance to these agents.

