Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin upregulates hENT1 expression and enhances gemcitabine
efficacy in pancreatic cancer cells


Pancreatic cancer is the 4th leading cause of cancer death and is
normally diagnosed at a late stage due to the lack of symptoms and early
detection. Pancreatic cancer patients have one of the worst prognoses
among all cancer types with a 5 year survival rate of less than 5%.
Despite significant improvement in understanding molecular and epigenetic
changes of this disease, the prognosis and management remained unchanged.
The golden standard of advanced pancreatic cancer treatment is
gemcitabine or gemcitabine with more targeted therapy. Patients treated
with gemcitabine can, however, eventually develop resistance to this
drug. Previously published data from our laboratory demonstrated enhanced
efficacy of gemcitabine with the dietary agent, indole-3-carbinol (I3C)
though up-regulation of the human equilibrative nucleoside transporter
(hENT1). hENT1 is the major drug transporter for gemcitabine. One of the
drugs currently being investigated for treatment of pancreatic cancer is
metformin. Metformin is one of the most widely prescribed drugs for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Metformin has exhibited both
chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic activities in preclinical human
pancreatic cancer cells and animal models. Currently this drug is in
clinical trial for pancreatic cancer. Metformin has been found to be
transported by a member of the equilibrative nucleoside transporter (ENT)
family named ENT4.The current study examined the potential efficacy and
regulation of hENT1 in pancreatic cancer cells when treated with
gemcitabine and/or metformin. Several pancreatic cell lines (Mia PaCa-2,
AsPC-1, Su86.86 and PANC-1) were examined for modulation of hENT1
expression when treated with gemcitabine or metformin or in combination
for 24h and 72h. The results varied for each of the cell lines. After 24
h treatment, hENT1 expression analysis of Su86.86 and PANC-1 gemcitabine
resistant cell lines showed no change in hENT1 expression levels. After
72h of treatment with gemcitabine and/or metformin hENT1 expression was
up-regulated (pPancreatic cancer is the 4th leading cause of cancer death
and is normally diagnosed at a late stage due to the lack of symptoms and
early detection. Pancreatic cancer patients have one of the worst
prognoses among all cancer types with a 5 year survival rate of less than
5%. Despite significant improvement in understanding molecular and
epigenetic changes of this disease, the prognosis and management remained
unchanged. The golden standard of advanced pancreatic cancer treatment is
gemcitabine or gemcitabine with more targeted therapy. Patients treated
with gemcitabine can, however, eventually develop resistance to this
drug. Previously published data from our laboratory demonstrated enhanced
efficacy of gemcitabine with the dietary agent, indole-3-carbinol (I3C)
though up-regulation of the human equilibrative nucleoside transporter
(hENT1). hENT1 is the major drug transporter for gemcitabine. One of the
drugs currently being investigated for treatment of pancreatic cancer is
metformin. Metformin is one of the most widely prescribed drugs for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Metformin has exhibited both
chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic activities in preclinical human
pancreatic cancer cells and animal models. Currently this drug is in
clinical trial for pancreatic cancer. Metformin has been found to be
transported by a member of the equilibrative nucleoside transporter (ENT)
family named ENT4.The current study examined the potential efficacy and
regulation of hENT1 in pancreatic cancer cells when treated with
gemcitabine and/or metformin. Several pancreatic cell lines (Mia PaCa-2,
AsPC-1, Su86.86 and PANC-1) were examined for modulation of hENT1
expression when treated with gemcitabine or metformin or in combination
for 24h and 72h. The results varied for each of the cell lines. After 24
h treatment, hENT1 expression analysis of Su86.86 and PANC-1 gemcitabine
resistant cell lines showed no change in hENT1 expression levels. After
72h of treatment with gemcitabine and/or metformin hENT1 expression was
up-regulated (p<0.05); however, metformin did not enhance the efficacy of
gemcitabine. In AsPC-1, a cell line with moderate gemcitabine resistance,
hENT1 expression was down-regulated (pPancreatic cancer is the 4th
leading cause of cancer death and is normally diagnosed at a late stage
due to the lack of symptoms and early detection. Pancreatic cancer
patients have one of the worst prognoses among all cancer types with a 5
year survival rate of less than 5%. Despite significant improvement in
understanding molecular and epigenetic changes of this disease, the
prognosis and management remained unchanged. The golden standard of
advanced pancreatic cancer treatment is gemcitabine or gemcitabine with
more targeted therapy. Patients treated with gemcitabine can, however,
eventually develop resistance to this drug. Previously published data
from our laboratory demonstrated enhanced efficacy of gemcitabine with
the dietary agent, indole-3-carbinol (I3C) though up-regulation of the
human equilibrative nucleoside transporter (hENT1). hENT1 is the major
drug transporter for gemcitabine. One of the drugs currently being
investigated for treatment of pancreatic cancer is metformin. Metformin
is one of the most widely prescribed drugs for the treatment of type 2
diabetes mellitus. Metformin has exhibited both chemopreventive and
chemotherapeutic activities in preclinical human pancreatic cancer cells
and animal models. Currently this drug is in clinical trial for
pancreatic cancer. Metformin has been found to be transported by a member
of the equilibrative nucleoside transporter (ENT) family named ENT4.The
current study examined the potential efficacy and regulation of hENT1 in
pancreatic cancer cells when treated with gemcitabine and/or metformin.
Several pancreatic cell lines (Mia PaCa-2, AsPC-1, Su86.86 and PANC-1)
were examined for modulation of hENT1 expression when treated with
gemcitabine or metformin or in combination for 24h and 72h. The results
varied for each of the cell lines. After 24 h treatment, hENT1 expression
analysis of Su86.86 and PANC-1 gemcitabine resistant cell lines showed no
change in hENT1 expression levels. After 72h of treatment with
gemcitabine and/or metformin hENT1 expression was up-regulated (p<0.05);
however, metformin did not enhance the efficacy of gemcitabine. In
AsPC-1, a cell line with moderate gemcitabine resistance, hENT1
expression was down-regulated (p<0.05) after 24 h treatment with
gemcitabine and/or metformin; however, after 72h of treatment with
gemcitabine and metformin, metformin increase the efficacy of gemcitabine
(pPancreatic cancer is the 4th leading cause of cancer death and is
normally diagnosed at a late stage due to the lack of symptoms and early
detection. Pancreatic cancer patients have one of the worst prognoses
among all cancer types with a 5 year survival rate of less than 5%.
Despite significant improvement in understanding molecular and epigenetic
changes of this disease, the prognosis and management remained unchanged.
The golden standard of advanced pancreatic cancer treatment is
gemcitabine or gemcitabine with more targeted therapy. Patients treated
with gemcitabine can, however, eventually develop resistance to this
drug. Previously published data from our laboratory demonstrated enhanced
efficacy of gemcitabine with the dietary agent, indole-3-carbinol (I3C)
though up-regulation of the human equilibrative nucleoside transporter
(hENT1). hENT1 is the major drug transporter for gemcitabine. One of the
drugs currently being investigated for treatment of pancreatic cancer is
metformin. Metformin is one of the most widely prescribed drugs for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Metformin has exhibited both
chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic activities in preclinical human
pancreatic cancer cells and animal models. Currently this drug is in
clinical trial for pancreatic cancer. Metformin has been found to be
transported by a member of the equilibrative nucleoside transporter (ENT)
family named ENT4.The current study examined the potential efficacy and
regulation of hENT1 in pancreatic cancer cells when treated with
gemcitabine and/or metformin. Several pancreatic cell lines (Mia PaCa-2,
AsPC-1, Su86.86 and PANC-1) were examined for modulation of hENT1
expression when treated with gemcitabine or metformin or in combination
for 24h and 72h. The results varied for each of the cell lines. After 24
h treatment, hENT1 expression analysis of Su86.86 and PANC-1 gemcitabine
resistant cell lines showed no change in hENT1 expression levels. After
72h of treatment with gemcitabine and/or metformin hENT1 expression was
up-regulated (p<0.05); however, metformin did not enhance the efficacy of
gemcitabine. In AsPC-1, a cell line with moderate gemcitabine resistance,
hENT1 expression was down-regulated (p<0.05) after 24 h treatment with
gemcitabine and/or metformin; however, after 72h of treatment with
gemcitabine and metformin, metformin increase the efficacy of gemcitabine
(p<0.05). In MIA Paca-2, a gemcitabine sensitive cell line, the
expression of hENT1 was up-regulated (pPancreatic cancer is the 4th
leading cause of cancer death and is normally diagnosed at a late stage
due to the lack of symptoms and early detection. Pancreatic cancer
patients have one of the worst prognoses among all cancer types with a 5
year survival rate of less than 5%. Despite significant improvement in
understanding molecular and epigenetic changes of this disease, the
prognosis and management remained unchanged. The golden standard of
advanced pancreatic cancer treatment is gemcitabine or gemcitabine with
more targeted therapy. Patients treated with gemcitabine can, however,
eventually develop resistance to this drug. Previously published data
from our laboratory demonstrated enhanced efficacy of gemcitabine with
the dietary agent, indole-3-carbinol (I3C) though up-regulation of the
human equilibrative nucleoside transporter (hENT1). hENT1 is the major
drug transporter for gemcitabine. One of the drugs currently being
investigated for treatment of pancreatic cancer is metformin. Metformin
is one of the most widely prescribed drugs for the treatment of type 2
diabetes mellitus. Metformin has exhibited both chemopreventive and
chemotherapeutic activities in preclinical human pancreatic cancer cells
and animal models. Currently this drug is in clinical trial for
pancreatic cancer. Metformin has been found to be transported by a member
of the equilibrative nucleoside transporter (ENT) family named ENT4.The
current study examined the potential efficacy and regulation of hENT1 in
pancreatic cancer cells when treated with gemcitabine and/or metformin.
Several pancreatic cell lines (Mia PaCa-2, AsPC-1, Su86.86 and PANC-1)
were examined for modulation of hENT1 expression when treated with
gemcitabine or metformin or in combination for 24h and 72h. The results
varied for each of the cell lines. After 24 h treatment, hENT1 expression
analysis of Su86.86 and PANC-1 gemcitabine resistant cell lines showed no
change in hENT1 expression levels. After 72h of treatment with
gemcitabine and/or metformin hENT1 expression was up-regulated (p<0.05);
however, metformin did not enhance the efficacy of gemcitabine. In
AsPC-1, a cell line with moderate gemcitabine resistance, hENT1
expression was down-regulated (p<0.05) after 24 h treatment with
gemcitabine and/or metformin; however, after 72h of treatment with
gemcitabine and metformin, metformin increase the efficacy of gemcitabine
(p<0.05). In MIA Paca-2, a gemcitabine sensitive cell line, the
expression of hENT1 was up-regulated (p<0.05) after 24h treatment with
gemcitabine. Metformin and combination with gemcitabine treatments also
upregulated the expression of hENT1 (pPancreatic cancer is the 4th
leading cause of cancer death and is normally diagnosed at a late stage
due to the lack of symptoms and early detection. Pancreatic cancer
patients have one of the worst prognoses among all cancer types with a 5
year survival rate of less than 5%. Despite significant improvement in
understanding molecular and epigenetic changes of this disease, the
prognosis and management remained unchanged. The golden standard of
advanced pancreatic cancer treatment is gemcitabine or gemcitabine with
more targeted therapy. Patients treated with gemcitabine can, however,
eventually develop resistance to this drug. Previously published data
from our laboratory demonstrated enhanced efficacy of gemcitabine with
the dietary agent, indole-3-carbinol (I3C) though up-regulation of the
human equilibrative nucleoside transporter (hENT1). hENT1 is the major
drug transporter for gemcitabine. One of the drugs currently being
investigated for treatment of pancreatic cancer is metformin. Metformin
is one of the most widely prescribed drugs for the treatment of type 2
diabetes mellitus. Metformin has exhibited both chemopreventive and
chemotherapeutic activities in preclinical human pancreatic cancer cells
and animal models. Currently this drug is in clinical trial for
pancreatic cancer. Metformin has been found to be transported by a member
of the equilibrative nucleoside transporter (ENT) family named ENT4.The
current study examined the potential efficacy and regulation of hENT1 in
pancreatic cancer cells when treated with gemcitabine and/or metformin.
Several pancreatic cell lines (Mia PaCa-2, AsPC-1, Su86.86 and PANC-1)
were examined for modulation of hENT1 expression when treated with
gemcitabine or metformin or in combination for 24h and 72h. The results
varied for each of the cell lines. After 24 h treatment, hENT1 expression
analysis of Su86.86 and PANC-1 gemcitabine resistant cell lines showed no
change in hENT1 expression levels. After 72h of treatment with
gemcitabine and/or metformin hENT1 expression was up-regulated (p<0.05);
however, metformin did not enhance the efficacy of gemcitabine. In
AsPC-1, a cell line with moderate gemcitabine resistance, hENT1
expression was down-regulated (p<0.05) after 24 h treatment with
gemcitabine and/or metformin; however, after 72h of treatment with
gemcitabine and metformin, metformin increase the efficacy of gemcitabine
(p<0.05). In MIA Paca-2, a gemcitabine sensitive cell line, the
expression of hENT1 was up-regulated (p<0.05) after 24h treatment with
gemcitabine. Metformin and combination with gemcitabine treatments also
upregulated the expression of hENT1 (p<0.05) but metformin did not
increase the efficacy of gemcitabine. There was no change in expression
for MIA Paca-2 cells treated for 72h. Based on initial studies, the
sensitivity of pancreatic cancer cell lines to gemcitabine/metformin
combination is through up-regulation of hENT1.

