Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mutational landscape of localized gleason 6 and 7 prostate
cancer


Prostate cancer (CaP) remains the most common male malignancy worldwide,
leading to over 300,000 deaths per year. In Western countries, most
prostate tumours are diagnosed while they are confined to the prostate
and have relatively indolent histology, as assessed by the Gleason Score
(GS). CaP is a C-class tumour, characterized by large number of driver
copy-number aberrations and genomic rearrangements. Therefore, while
previous sequencing studies have focused largely on the coding regions of
late-stage disease, herein we comprehensively characterized the
copy-number profiles of 250 localized prostate cancers and analyzed the
whole genomes of 124 matched tumour/normal pairs derived from patients
with GS6 and GS7 prostate cancer. Using this the largest whole-genome
sequencing dataset of prostate cancer to date we confirm the C-class
character of the disease and identify strong genomic subtypes that
stretch across multiple types of somatic alteration, including SNVs, CNAs
and genomic rearrangements. We provide the first assessments of localized
hyper-mutation phenomena (chromothripsis and kataegis) in prostate
cancer, and identify specific genes driving higher levels of these
hyper-mutations. We identify unexpected biases in the location and role
of both non-coding SNVs and genomic rearrangements, including clear
association with epigenetic processes, and with genome-wide profiling of
methylation in 92 samples. Finally, we demonstrate a stark paucity of
clinically-actionable mutations in localized GS6 and GS7 disease, even
lacking those common in high-risk localized disease, indicating that
novel therapeutic development against the recurrent targets identified
here will be key to allowing less-aggressive, targeted treatment of
early-stage disease.

