Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic susceptibility to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in a
pooled study of three Eastern Asian populations


Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive subtype of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and is the most common NHL subtype diagnosed
worldwide. Some epidemiologic data have indicated differences in DLBCL
incidence rates and subtype distributions between Eastern Asian and
Western countries. The first large-scale genome-wide association study
(GWAS) of DLBCL with over 4000 cases conducted among individuals of
European ancestry recently identified five independent SNPs that achieved
genome-wide significance, and two SNPs that showed a suggestive
association with DLBCL risk. In order to evaluate whether Eastern Asians
and individuals of European ancestry share similar genetic risk factors
for this disease, we attempted to replicate these GWAS findings in a
pooled series of 1124 DLBCL cases and 3596 controls from Hong Kong, South
Korea, and Thailand. Three of the five genome-wide significant SNPs from
the DLBCL GWAS were significantly associated with DLBCL in our study
population, including the top finding from the GWAS, EXOC2 rs116446171,
which achieved genome-wide significance in our data (per allele OR =
2.04, 95% CI = 1.63-2.56; ptrend = 3.9 10-10). Additionally, we observed
a significant association with PVT1 rs13255292 (per allele OR = 1.34, 95%
CI = 1.19-1.52; ptrend = 2.1 10-6), which was the second strongest
finding in the GWAS, and with HLA-B rs2523607 (per allele OR = 3.05, 95%
CI = 1.32-7.05; ptrend = 0.009). Our study, which provides the first
evaluation in Eastern Asians of SNPs definitively associated with DLBCL
risk in individuals of European ancestry, indicates that at least some of
the genetic factors associated with risk of DLBCL are similar between
these populations.

