Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PD-L1 by MPDL3280A leads to clinical activity in
patients with metastatic triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)


Introduction: TNBC is a mutationally complex breast cancer subtype with
poor prognosis and no current targeted therapy options. Compared with
other intrinsic breast cancer subtypes, TNBC has higher programmed
death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression levels, which may hinder antitumor
T-cell responses. MPDL3280A is a monoclonal anti-PDL1 antibody,
engineered for optimized efficacy and safety, that blocks signaling
through the PD-L1/PD-1 and PD-L1/B7.1 pathways.Methods: MPDL3280A was
tested in a metastatic TNBC expansion cohort as part of a multicenter
Phase Ia study. Pts received MPDL3280A at 15 mg/kg, 20 mg/kg or 1200 mg
flat dose IV q3w. AEs were summarized for the safety follow-up duration
from the first dose to 30 days after the last dose before the clinical
cutoff on Sept 2, 2014. Responses were assessed by RECIST v1.1 criteria
in pts who received MPDL3280A by Jul 21, 2014, evaluable for efficacy (
6-wk follow-up). PD-L1 expression on tumor-infiltrating immune cells
(ICs) at baseline was centrally evaluated by IHC in archival or fresh
biopsies, and pts were scored as PD-L1 IHC (IC) 0, 1, 2 or 3. Peripheral
biomarkers were assayed using FACS and multiplex immunoassays.Results: In
the TNBC cohort, 27 pts were selectively enrolled. These pts had a median
age of 48 y (29-82 y) and were evaluable for safety; 52% had ECOG PS 0
and 44% had ECOG PS 1. Visceral and bone metastases were present at
baseline in 59% and 11% of pts, respectively. In addition, 85% received 4
prior systemic regimens (neoadjuvant, adjuvant or metastatic), including
anthracyclines (78%), taxanes (82%) and platinum agents (15% cisplatin,
41% carboplatin). All-grade treatment-related AEs occurred in 67% of pts,
most frequently fatigue (22%), pyrexia (15%), neutropenia (15%) and
nausea (15%). 11% of pts experienced a Grade 3-5 related AE (5 Grade 3
events: adrenal insufficiency, neutropenia, nausea, vomiting, decreased
WBC count; 1 Grade 5 pulmonary hypertension event in a pt with an atrial
septal defect). Among 21 efficacy-evaluable PD-L1 IHC 2 or 3 pts (13 IHC
2 and 8 IHC 3), the unconfirmed RECIST ORR was 24% (95% CI, 8% to 47%); 3
PRs and 2 CRs were observed. Response duration ranged from 0.1+ to 41.6+
wks, with the median not yet reached. Pts with evidence of durable
nonclassical responses suggestive of pseudoprogression were also
observed. Overall, the 24-wk PFS rate was 33% (95% CI, 12% to 53%).
Biomarker analysis revealed transient elevation of plasma cytokines and
proliferating CD8 cells following MPDL3280A treatment. Updated clinical
data, including PD-L1-negative pts, will be presented.Conclusions:
MPDL3280A was generally well tolerated and demonstrated promising
efficacy in pretreated metastatic PD-L1 IHC 2 or 3 TNBC pts. Furthermore,
circulating biomarker analyses revealed pharmacodynamic responses to
MPDL3280A. Clinical evaluation of MPDL3280A in metastatic PD-L1 IHC 0 or
1 TNBC is ongoing (NCT01375842).

