Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dovitinib exerts potent antitumor effects in gastrointestinal
stromal tumors


Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal
tumours of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Although Imatinib is the
current first-line therapy for patients not suitable for surgical
resection, 10 - 20% of GIST patients taking Imatinib do not respond to
this therapy and 40-50% of the patients develop acquired resistance to
Imatinib following partial response or stable disease. Thus, novel
treatments are needed for GIST. In the present study, four different
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) GIST models were used to demonstrate that
Imatinib effectively caused tumor regression in GIST26-0208A and
GIST09-0210 models with the common exon 11 KIT W557-K558 mutation
(Imatinib-sensitive models), inhibited tumor growth of GIST27-0510 model
with Y568-I571 and P573-L576 deletion and delayed tumor growth in
GIST27-0612 with wild-type KIT. Unlike Imatinib, Dovitinib effectively
caused tumor regression in all four PDX models tested regardless of their
KIT mutational status. On GIST27-0510 model, tumor regression was
observed as early as day 3 of Dovitinib treatment and continued to
approximately 22% of the initial tumor volume. Dovitinib provided longer
progression-free period than Imatinib after a 21-day treatment cycle. In
the GIST26-0208A model, signs of tumor regrowth were observed on day 2
for Imatinib and day 59 for Dovitinib following a 21-day treatment.
Dovitinib treatment took approximately 3.7 - 5 times longer to reach
initial tumor volume than Imatinib following a 21-day treatment.
Utilizing micro-Positron Emission Tomography (mPET), both Imatinib and
Dovitinib treatment showed decreased SUV and TLG readings after 8-day
treatment in GIST26-0208A. A trend of increasing activity was observed in
Imatinib but not in Dovitinib-treated tumors at day 11 and day 21
following an 8-day treatment, suggesting mPET could potentially be used
to access tumor response to Dovitinib. In Imatinib/Dovitinib-sensitive
models, Imatinib and Dovitinib induced significant reduction in
expression of p-ERK1/2, Bim, p-AKT (Ser473) and p-Cdc2 at 72 hours post
treatment. Although inhibition of p-c-Kit (Tyr568/570) was observed,
higher levels of p-Histone H2A-X (Ser139) and Cleaved PARP expression
were observed in Dovitinib than Imatinib treatment, suggesting that
Dovitinib was more effective than Imatinib in inducing cell death. Our
data showed that Dovitinib treatment is able to provide greater
advantages over Imatinib in all four PDX models regardless of their KIT
mutational status, suggesting that Dovitinib may offer an alternative
treatment for GIST that are insensitive to Imatinib.

