Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCL2/CCR2 axis signaling promotes metastasis of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma by activating ERK1/2 pathway via upregulating MMP2 and MMP9


Despite tremendous progress in diagnosis and treatments of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC) has been established nowadays, distant metastasis remains
the major cause of death.The underlying molecular mechanisms are largely
unknown. In the present study,we investigated the roles in NPCs for an
axis of candidate metastasis-related genes located at 17q11.2-q12,
chemokine C-C motif ligand 2 (CCL2), and located at 3p21.31, chemokine
C-C motif receptor 2 (CCR2). ELISA analyses of human serum from 50 cases
with NPC and 50 cases without NPC revealed the mean serum CCL2
concentration of cases with NPC was significantly higher than cases
without NPC (PDespite tremendous progress in diagnosis and treatments of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) has been established nowadays, distant
metastasis remains the major cause of death.The underlying molecular
mechanisms are largely unknown. In the present study,we investigated the
roles in NPCs for an axis of candidate metastasis-related genes located
at 17q11.2-q12, chemokine C-C motif ligand 2 (CCL2), and located at
3p21.31, chemokine C-C motif receptor 2 (CCR2). ELISA analyses of human
serum from 50 cases with NPC and 50 cases without NPC revealed the mean
serum CCL2 concentration of cases with NPC was significantly higher than
cases without NPC (P<0.001).Higher expression levels of CCL2 and CCR2
were frequently detected in NPCs compared with normal nasopharyngeal
epithelium samples by IHC analyses, and both ectopic expressions were
significantly associated with NPC metastasis (P = 0.039, p = 0.016,
respectively) and poor overall survival (P = 0.011, p = 0.004,
respectively). Overexpressions of CCL2 and CCR2 were observed in human
strong-metastatic NPC cell line S18 originated from CNE2 and 58F
originated from SUNE1. Correspondingly, relatively lower expressions of
CCL2 and CCR2 were detected in human weak-metastatic NPC cell line S26
originated from CNE2 and SUNE1 with weaker-metastatic ability compared to
58F. Functional studies demonstrated that upregulating the expressions of
CCL2 and CCR2 respectively in S26 and SUNE1 could effectively promote
cell migration and invasion in vitro, and enhance tumor distant
metastasis in vivo of nude mice, which could be further raised in cells
overexpressing CCR2 with exogenous CCL2 in the medium. When CCL2 and CCR2
were silenced by shRNAs respectively in S18 and 58F, decrease of cell
migration and invasion was showed and significantly fewer metastases were
observed. However, adding exogenous CCL2 to the medium culturing
CCR2-silencing cells could not rescue their weaken ability of migration
and invasion and metastasis. Mechanistic investigations suggested that,
dual overexpressions of CCL2/CCR2 could remarkably activate extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) signaling pathway, which sequentially
induced matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)2/9 transcriptional activation to
facilitate tumor metastasis. Taken as a whole, CCL2-CCR2 axis signaling
plays a pivotal role in NPC metastasis by activating ERK1/2 pathway via
upregulating MMP2 and MMP9, and this finding may help to identify novel
therapeutic targets for a better clinical management of NPC.

