Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dual PI3K / inhibitor RP6530 in combination with Brentuximab
Vedotin (SGN-35) synergistically induces cell death via inhibition of
tubulin polymerization in Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines


Introduction: The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is
consistently activated in relapsed/refractory Hodgkin lymphoma (HL).
Expression of the and isoforms of PI3K is restricted to cells of the
hematopoietic system, suggesting that RP6530, a novel dual PI3K /
Inhibitor, might represent a promising approach in the treatment of
lymphomas. The CD30-directed antibody-drug conjugate, Brentuximab Vedotin
(BV), has recently been reported to induce a high overall response rate
in relapsed/refractory HL, but is associated with limited response
duration. Combination therapies aimed at enhancing the anti-tumor
activity of BV and eventually reducing its side effects may have
significant clinical impact in the treatment of relapsed/refractory HL.
Our study aimed at investigating the activity and mechanism(s) of action
of RP6530 in combination with BV in preclinical HL models.Methods and
Results: RP6530 was active against a panel of HL cell lines (L-540,
KM-H2, L-428). Using a WST assay, increasing concentrations of RP6530
(1.25 - 20 M) resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of cell growth
(range, 20% to 40%). BV, at clinically achievable concentrations induced
a significant growth inhibition (range, 30% to 40%) in all HL cells.
Remarkably, when RP6530 was combined with BV at minimal, or mildly
inhibitory concentrations, a highly synergistic inhibition in all HL
cells was observed. Following a 48 hour exposure, RP6530 (5 M) and BV (10
ng/ml) synergistically inhibited the mean (SEM) growth of HL cells
(RP6530: 9 3%; BV: 12 3%; RP6530/BV: 26 3%). While single agents induced
only 20% HL cell death, combination of RP6530 and BV caused remarkable
induction of apoptosis (90%), with Combination Index (CI) as low as
0.003. To assess potential effects of RP6530/BV on microtubule dynamics,
we conducted a tubulin polymerization assay. Highly purified /-tubulin
and GTP were incubated with RP6530 and/or BV. While single agent activity
of RP6530 or BV was modest, RP6530/BV significantly inhibited tubulin
polymerization in a time-dependent manner (P Introduction: The
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is consistently activated in
relapsed/refractory Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). Expression of the and isoforms
of PI3K is restricted to cells of the hematopoietic system, suggesting
that RP6530, a novel dual PI3K / Inhibitor, might represent a promising
approach in the treatment of lymphomas. The CD30-directed antibody-drug
conjugate, Brentuximab Vedotin (BV), has recently been reported to induce
a high overall response rate in relapsed/refractory HL, but is associated
with limited response duration. Combination therapies aimed at enhancing
the anti-tumor activity of BV and eventually reducing its side effects
may have significant clinical impact in the treatment of
relapsed/refractory HL. Our study aimed at investigating the activity and
mechanism(s) of action of RP6530 in combination with BV in preclinical HL
models.Methods and Results: RP6530 was active against a panel of HL cell
lines (L-540, KM-H2, L-428). Using a WST assay, increasing concentrations
of RP6530 (1.25 - 20 M) resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of cell
growth (range, 20% to 40%). BV, at clinically achievable concentrations
induced a significant growth inhibition (range, 30% to 40%) in all HL
cells. Remarkably, when RP6530 was combined with BV at minimal, or mildly
inhibitory concentrations, a highly synergistic inhibition in all HL
cells was observed. Following a 48 hour exposure, RP6530 (5 M) and BV (10
ng/ml) synergistically inhibited the mean (SEM) growth of HL cells
(RP6530: 9 3%; BV: 12 3%; RP6530/BV: 26 3%). While single agents induced
only 20% HL cell death, combination of RP6530 and BV caused remarkable
induction of apoptosis (90%), with Combination Index (CI) as low as
0.003. To assess potential effects of RP6530/BV on microtubule dynamics,
we conducted a tubulin polymerization assay. Highly purified /-tubulin
and GTP were incubated with RP6530 and/or BV. While single agent activity
of RP6530 or BV was modest, RP6530/BV significantly inhibited tubulin
polymerization in a time-dependent manner (P < 0.0001), suggesting that
RP6530/BV disrupts microtubules in cells by abrogating microtubule
assembly. Finally, in vivo experiments were conducted to investigate the
antitumor activity of the two drugs. Compared to mock controls, treatment
of NOD/SCID mice bearing KM-H2 tumor nodules with RP6530 (150 mg/kg/BID/3
weeks) or BV (0.5 mg/kg/q44d) resulted in a mean tumor growth inhibition
of 90% and 40%, respectively. No mice experienced any apparent
treatment-related toxicity. Effect of RP6530/BV in the xenograft model is
currently being evaluated and results will be presented.Conclusions: The
combination of RP6530 and BV exerts a marked in vitro synergistic
antitumor activity against HL cells, thereby representing a promising
therapeutic strategy in the treatment of relapsed/refractory HL.

