Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting head and neck cancer-initiating cells with combinatorial
therapeutics through pharmacological inhibition of ROS scavenger and
conventional chemotherapy


Background: Cancer-initiating cells (CICs) contribute to tumor
initiation, progression and therapy resistance through critical
physiology mechanisms. Redox homeostasis plays an important role in the
regulation of cancer stemness. We recently have reported that cancer
cells containing differential level of ROS display distinct physiological
properties of stemness, proliferative activity, chemoresistance and
tumorigenicity. Therefore, to uncover the regulatory physiological
mechanisms by which to sustain the low lever of ROS in CICs warrants an
important study for future therapy development.Results: In this study, we
demonstrated that lower ROS levels in head and neck CICs (HN-CIC)
enriched population are associated with increased expression of ROS
scavenger such as catalase and SOD2. Pharmacological and genetic
inhibition of SOD2 or catalase caused the increased expression of
differentiation marker, cytokeratin 18, but the decreased expression of
CIC marker in HN-CICs. In addition, the sphere formation abilities of
HN-CICs under genetic inhibition of SOD2 or catalase were also
significantly abolished. Notably, combinatorial treatment with ROS
scavenger inhibitors and conventional anticancer drugs synergistically
reduced the stemness properties and tumorigenicity both in vitro and in
vivo. Using the Oncomine database, we found associations between SOD2 and
catalase expression and increasing head and neck cancer recurrence, tumor
invasion and resistance to Gemcitabine treatment.Conclusion: Together,
these data demonstrate the importance of antioxidant defense to maintain
the low ROS level, cell viability and chemosensitivity of HN-CICs.
Pharmacological inhibition of ROS scavenger (SOD2 and catalase) might be
a future alternative HNSCC treatment in combination with conventional
chemotherapy

