Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer risk in relatives of testicular cancer patients by
histology type and age at diagnosis: a joint study from five Nordic
countries


Background: None of population-based epidemiological studies to date had
a large enough sample size to show familial risk of testicular cancer
(TC) by patients and their relatives age at diagnosis and also by rare
histological subtypes.Objective: We aimed to estimate absolute and
relative risk of TC in relatives of TC patients by age at diagnosis in
patients and their relatives and histology subtypes.Design: A joint
population-based cohort study.Setting and Participants: A cohort of
97,402 first-degree relatives of 21,254 TC patients who were diagnosed
between1955 and 2010 in five European countries was followed for cancer
incidence.Outcome Measurements and Statistical Analysis: Standardized
incidence ratios (SIRs) were estimated using histology-, age-, period-,
and country-specific incidence rates as the reference. The lifetime
cumulative risks also were calculated.Results and Limitations: The
lifetime cumulative risk of TC in brothers of a patient with TC was 2.3%,
which represents 4-fold increased risk (SIR = 4.1, 95%CI = 3.6-4.6) over
the general population risk. TC in a father increased the risk up to
2-fold in his son (95%CI = 1.7-2.4; lifetime risk 1.2%) and vice versa.
When there were 2 TC patients diagnosed in a family, lifetime TC risk for
relatives was 10-11%. Depending on age at diagnosis, twins had 9-74%
lifetime risk of TC. Family history of most of the histological subtypes
of TC increased the risk for concordant and most of the discordant
subtypes. There was a tendency toward concordant age at diagnosis of TC
among relatives.Conclusions: This study provides clinically relevant
age-specific cancer risk estimates for family members of TC patients.
Familial TC cases tended to develop TC at an age close to age at
diagnosis of TC among their relatives, which is the novel finding of this
study.

