Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapy and agonistic CD40 cooperate to regress pancreatic
adenocarcinoma independently of TLR4 and MyD88


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is an aggressive and lethal
disease, with current standards of care extending overall survival by
only a few months, as observed with the combination of nab-paclitaxel
(nP) and gemcitabine (Gem). As such, efforts have begun to focus on the
prospect of immune therapy has a new paradigm for patients in PDA. Given
the potential synergy between chemotherapy and immune stimulation to
create an anti-tumor vaccine, we hypothesized that agonistic CD40
monoclonal antibody with combined Gem/nP chemotherapy can activate the
immune response and reverse immunosuppression in the PDA
microenvironment. Using the KrasG12D+/-;Trp53R172H+/-;Pdx-1 Cre (KPC)
genetically engineered mouse model of PDA, we found that 37.5% of mice
treated with Gem/nP/CD40 therapy had tumor regressions or stable disease,
compared to only 9% of mice receiving Gem/nP without CD40 (pPancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is an aggressive and lethal disease, with
current standards of care extending overall survival by only a few
months, as observed with the combination of nab-paclitaxel (nP) and
gemcitabine (Gem). As such, efforts have begun to focus on the prospect
of immune therapy has a new paradigm for patients in PDA. Given the
potential synergy between chemotherapy and immune stimulation to create
an anti-tumor vaccine, we hypothesized that agonistic CD40 monoclonal
antibody with combined Gem/nP chemotherapy can activate the immune
response and reverse immunosuppression in the PDA microenvironment. Using
the KrasG12D+/-;Trp53R172H+/-;Pdx-1 Cre (KPC) genetically engineered
mouse model of PDA, we found that 37.5% of mice treated with Gem/nP/CD40
therapy had tumor regressions or stable disease, compared to only 9% of
mice receiving Gem/nP without CD40 (p<0.03). Furthermore, when mice were
depleted of CD8 T cells, the tumor regressions were completely ablated.
To understand the mechanism by which chemotherapy potentiated CD40
agonist treatment, we injected PDA cell lines generated from KPC tumors
subcutaneously into C57Bl/6 mice, and found that more than 50% of mice
treated with Gem/nP/CD40 experienced T cell dependent tumor regressions
compared to only rare regressions in Gem/nP or CD40 treated mice
(pPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is an aggressive and lethal
disease, with current standards of care extending overall survival by
only a few months, as observed with the combination of nab-paclitaxel
(nP) and gemcitabine (Gem). As such, efforts have begun to focus on the
prospect of immune therapy has a new paradigm for patients in PDA. Given
the potential synergy between chemotherapy and immune stimulation to
create an anti-tumor vaccine, we hypothesized that agonistic CD40
monoclonal antibody with combined Gem/nP chemotherapy can activate the
immune response and reverse immunosuppression in the PDA
microenvironment. Using the KrasG12D+/-;Trp53R172H+/-;Pdx-1 Cre (KPC)
genetically engineered mouse model of PDA, we found that 37.5% of mice
treated with Gem/nP/CD40 therapy had tumor regressions or stable disease,
compared to only 9% of mice receiving Gem/nP without CD40 (p<0.03).
Furthermore, when mice were depleted of CD8 T cells, the tumor
regressions were completely ablated. To understand the mechanism by which
chemotherapy potentiated CD40 agonist treatment, we injected PDA cell
lines generated from KPC tumors subcutaneously into C57Bl/6 mice, and
found that more than 50% of mice treated with Gem/nP/CD40 experienced T
cell dependent tumor regressions compared to only rare regressions in
Gem/nP or CD40 treated mice (p<0.0001). Tumor regressions were dependent
on T cells and IFN-gamma, and accordingly, we found the proportions of
both CD4 and CD8 T cells producing IFN-gamma to be increased 2- to 4-fold
in mice treated with Gem/nP/CD40 as compared to other cohorts. Concurrent
with increased effector T cells, the proportion of T regulatory cells in
the tumor was reduced 6.9-fold after Gem/nP/CD40 (pPancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA) is an aggressive and lethal disease, with current
standards of care extending overall survival by only a few months, as
observed with the combination of nab-paclitaxel (nP) and gemcitabine
(Gem). As such, efforts have begun to focus on the prospect of immune
therapy has a new paradigm for patients in PDA. Given the potential
synergy between chemotherapy and immune stimulation to create an
anti-tumor vaccine, we hypothesized that agonistic CD40 monoclonal
antibody with combined Gem/nP chemotherapy can activate the immune
response and reverse immunosuppression in the PDA microenvironment. Using
the KrasG12D+/-;Trp53R172H+/-;Pdx-1 Cre (KPC) genetically engineered
mouse model of PDA, we found that 37.5% of mice treated with Gem/nP/CD40
therapy had tumor regressions or stable disease, compared to only 9% of
mice receiving Gem/nP without CD40 (p<0.03). Furthermore, when mice were
depleted of CD8 T cells, the tumor regressions were completely ablated.
To understand the mechanism by which chemotherapy potentiated CD40
agonist treatment, we injected PDA cell lines generated from KPC tumors
subcutaneously into C57Bl/6 mice, and found that more than 50% of mice
treated with Gem/nP/CD40 experienced T cell dependent tumor regressions
compared to only rare regressions in Gem/nP or CD40 treated mice
(p<0.0001). Tumor regressions were dependent on T cells and IFN-gamma,
and accordingly, we found the proportions of both CD4 and CD8 T cells
producing IFN-gamma to be increased 2- to 4-fold in mice treated with
Gem/nP/CD40 as compared to other cohorts. Concurrent with increased
effector T cells, the proportion of T regulatory cells in the tumor was
reduced 6.9-fold after Gem/nP/CD40 (p<0.05, versus Gem/nP or CD40 alone).
The loss of the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment was detectable
24 hours after Gem/nP/CD40 treatment, when CD11b+ and CD11c+ cells in the
tumor reduced production of IL-10 and TGF-beta by 1.3 to 5-fold (compared
to Gem/nP treatment), and increased production of IL-12 (35% versus 23%
in CD40 treated mice), concurrent with increased expression of both CD86
and MHCII (37% versus 10% in control group). Despite prior results
linking MyD88 signaling with immune potentiating effects of chemotherapy,
we observed that responses to Gem/nP/CD40 were independent of MyD88, and
TLR4 pathways. Tumor regressions with Gem/nP/CD40 were also independent
of TRIF, IFNAR, Caspase 1 and 4, TLR3, muMT, TNF-alpha, and Perforin.
These studies reveal a novel MyD88- and TLR4-independent mechanism of
chemotherapeutic activation of the immune system, and highlight the
significant clinical potential of combining Gem/nP with agonistic CD40
stimulation.

