Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The characterization of the effects of the strigolactones on the
heat shock response


Strigolactones (SLs) are a novel class of plant hormones that inhibit the
self-renewal of undifferentiated meristem cells in shoots regulating
above-ground plant architecture. Data from our lab have shown that SL
analogues are able to inhibit the growth and survival of a wide array of
cancer-derived cell lines including: prostate, colon, lung, breast and
osteosarcoma (U2OS) while minimally affecting cultured normal cells.
Treatment of cancer cells with SL analogues leads to the activation of
stress-related signaling including p38MAPKs and JNK1/2, as well as the
activation of the heat shock master regulator, heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1), and heat shock response (HSR) gene expression. We
further show that SLs generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) and that SL
treatments of cancer cells leads to the activation of GRP78, the master
regulator of the unfolded protein response (UPR). To further characterize
the relationship between SLs, HSR and UPR, several clones of HSF1 shRNA
knockdown, in U2OS cells were generated and are currently being studied.
Interestingly, while wild type mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells are
refractory to SLs treatments, we demonstrate that HSF1 knockout in MEFs
enhances the sensitivity of the cells to SLs treatments. Taken together,
our data suggest that the HSR and UPR are recruited as cell survival
mechanisms against the SLs treatments, giving rise to possible future
chemotherapeutic combinatorial treatment options.

