Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker discovery through bioinformatic analysis of genomic
profiles of PDX models with different responses to cancer therapies


Patient derived xenograft (PDX) tumor models have been proved to
recapitulate the complexity and heterogeneity of their corresponding
human tumors by phenotypic and genomic characterization, and thus become
to be widely used in recent years in preclinical setting to facilitate
drug discovery, translational studies and clinical trials support.
Results from increasing number of preclinical studies, especially mouse
trials, with PDX models in the past several years, have also demonstrated
close correlation between drug response profiles with PDX models and
clinical outcomes.GenenDesign has established over 800 PDX tumor models
and derived around 100 resistance models to drugs of interest. Genomic
profiling data of PDX models are acquired at hot-spot mutation, gene
expression, gene copy number and RNA/Exome sequence levels. Through our
in-house efforts, PDX models of different tumor types were tested with
related SOCs and clinical candidates in biomarker-driven multi-drug
multi-arm clinical trial settings. So far, more than 1200 data sets have
been generated, including responses to targeted inhibitors against HER2,
EGFR, FGFRs, c-Met/ALK, cell cycle regulators, Ras/Raf pathway, PI3K/Akt
pathway, epigenetic targets, as well as chemotherapy drugs.In this study,
we use bioinformatic tools to compare the genomic profiles of NSCLC PDX
models based on their response profiles to multiple chemotherapy drugs.
Biomarker signatures associated with SOC treatment sensitivity or
resistance are revealed from bioinformatic analysis and being tested with
both new NSCLC PDX models and clinical cohorts.The combination of genomic
profiles and drug response information to multiple chemo/targeted
therapies of over 800 PDX models at GenenDesign would help biomarker
discovery for companion diagnosis to meet the increasing needs for
precision medicine.

