Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical impact of telomere shortening in normal and leukemia
cells in chronic lymphocytic leukemia


Introduction: Prognosis in CLL is heterogeneous with the elderly, males
and those with multiple co-morbidities having the highest risk of poorer
outcomes. Whether this reflects differences in the biology of CLL or the
result of altered immunosuppression is unknown. In normal individuals,
the telomeres in somatic cells shorten with age, predisposing those with
shorter telomeres to death from infections, cancer and cardiovascular
disease. In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), short telomere length in
the leukemia cells predicts poor prognosis. The contribution of
un-modifiable factors of age, sex or comorbidities to telomere shortening
in CLL has not been elucidated. In the present study, we evaluated buccal
cell (BC) telomere length in patients with CLL, to determine if this is
predictive of survival, and can enhance the predictive value of leukemia
cell telomere length.Methods: The Manitoba CLL tumor bank contains 168
samples from newly diagnosed CLL patients between 2007-2011; with a
median follow-up of 4 years. Half of these patients required chemotherapy
and one-tenth have died. Genomic DNA was extracted from purified CLL
cells and buccal cells (BC) collected at diagnosis. Telomere length was
established by multiplex quantitative real-time PCR. Telomere/standard
(t/s) ratio was calculated using the beta-globulin gene as the standard.
Statistical analysis was performed using Statistical Analysis Software
(SAS) and Prism software.Results: The median adjusted telomere length was
shorter in CLL cells than in BCs being 0.53 and 2.01, respectively. In
BCs, telomere length significantly shortened with increasing age (p =
0.01) but was not reflective of the number of comorbidities or survival.
In contrast, telomere length in CLL cells was independent of age (p =
0.44) and sex (p = 0.75). Short CLL telomere length correlated with other
biological and clinical markers of poorer prognosis including un-mutated
IGHV status (pIntroduction: Prognosis in CLL is heterogeneous with the
elderly, males and those with multiple co-morbidities having the highest
risk of poorer outcomes. Whether this reflects differences in the biology
of CLL or the result of altered immunosuppression is unknown. In normal
individuals, the telomeres in somatic cells shorten with age,
predisposing those with shorter telomeres to death from infections,
cancer and cardiovascular disease. In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL),
short telomere length in the leukemia cells predicts poor prognosis. The
contribution of un-modifiable factors of age, sex or comorbidities to
telomere shortening in CLL has not been elucidated. In the present study,
we evaluated buccal cell (BC) telomere length in patients with CLL, to
determine if this is predictive of survival, and can enhance the
predictive value of leukemia cell telomere length.Methods: The Manitoba
CLL tumor bank contains 168 samples from newly diagnosed CLL patients
between 2007-2011; with a median follow-up of 4 years. Half of these
patients required chemotherapy and one-tenth have died. Genomic DNA was
extracted from purified CLL cells and buccal cells (BC) collected at
diagnosis. Telomere length was established by multiplex quantitative
real-time PCR. Telomere/standard (t/s) ratio was calculated using the
beta-globulin gene as the standard. Statistical analysis was performed
using Statistical Analysis Software (SAS) and Prism software.Results: The
median adjusted telomere length was shorter in CLL cells than in BCs
being 0.53 and 2.01, respectively. In BCs, telomere length significantly
shortened with increasing age (p = 0.01) but was not reflective of the
number of comorbidities or survival. In contrast, telomere length in CLL
cells was independent of age (p = 0.44) and sex (p = 0.75). Short CLL
telomere length correlated with other biological and clinical markers of
poorer prognosis including un-mutated IGHV status (p<0.0001), Zap70
positivity (p = 0.05), CD38 positivity (p = 0.003), short lymphocyte
doubling time (p = 0.004), higher Rai stage (p = 0.02) and an earlier
time to treatment (pIntroduction: Prognosis in CLL is heterogeneous with
the elderly, males and those with multiple co-morbidities having the
highest risk of poorer outcomes. Whether this reflects differences in the
biology of CLL or the result of altered immunosuppression is unknown. In
normal individuals, the telomeres in somatic cells shorten with age,
predisposing those with shorter telomeres to death from infections,
cancer and cardiovascular disease. In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL),
short telomere length in the leukemia cells predicts poor prognosis. The
contribution of un-modifiable factors of age, sex or comorbidities to
telomere shortening in CLL has not been elucidated. In the present study,
we evaluated buccal cell (BC) telomere length in patients with CLL, to
determine if this is predictive of survival, and can enhance the
predictive value of leukemia cell telomere length.Methods: The Manitoba
CLL tumor bank contains 168 samples from newly diagnosed CLL patients
between 2007-2011; with a median follow-up of 4 years. Half of these
patients required chemotherapy and one-tenth have died. Genomic DNA was
extracted from purified CLL cells and buccal cells (BC) collected at
diagnosis. Telomere length was established by multiplex quantitative
real-time PCR. Telomere/standard (t/s) ratio was calculated using the
beta-globulin gene as the standard. Statistical analysis was performed
using Statistical Analysis Software (SAS) and Prism software.Results: The
median adjusted telomere length was shorter in CLL cells than in BCs
being 0.53 and 2.01, respectively. In BCs, telomere length significantly
shortened with increasing age (p = 0.01) but was not reflective of the
number of comorbidities or survival. In contrast, telomere length in CLL
cells was independent of age (p = 0.44) and sex (p = 0.75). Short CLL
telomere length correlated with other biological and clinical markers of
poorer prognosis including un-mutated IGHV status (p<0.0001), Zap70
positivity (p = 0.05), CD38 positivity (p = 0.003), short lymphocyte
doubling time (p = 0.004), higher Rai stage (p = 0.02) and an earlier
time to treatment (p<0.0001). Patients with short CLL telomeres had also
decreased survival at four years (p = 0.05); living 22 months less than
those with normal telomeres. Adjusting for BC telomere length improved
the prognostic value of CLL telomere length as an independent predictor
of survival.Conclusions: These results demonstrate that BC telomere
length in CLL patients shorten with age independent of co-morbidities,
secondary malignancies and the respective CLL telomere length. CLL
telomere shortening is strongly associated with biochemical and clinical
markers of disease progression and survival. The predictive value for
overall survival is enhanced by correcting for changes in buccal cell
telomere length.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

