Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-1 receptor-associated kinase-1 and -4 expression in Hodgkin
lymphoma


BACKGROUND: The Toll-like receptor (TLR) mediates nuclear factor kappa B
(NFkB) activation in lymphocytes using a family of intermediary proteins
called IL-1 receptor associated kinase (IRAK). Mutations within and
upregulation of this pathway have been described in the carcinogenesis of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), but it is not known whether IRAK proteins are
present in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). Furthermore, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
has been shown to activate NFkB in HL but its association with proteins
upstream of NFkB is not described.METHODS: 1. We performed Western blots
on two Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cell lines to detect total IRAK-1 and
-4, and phospho-IRAK-1 and -4 (the activated forms). 2. Archived lymph
node biopsy samples from Hodgkin lymphoma patients diagnosed at the
University of Maryland were stained for IRAK-4.RESULTS: 1. IRAK-1,
IRAK-4, p-IRAK-1 and p-IRAK-4 were present in the malignant HRS cells in
two HRS cell lines (HDLM-2 and KM-H2). 2. Seventeen lymph node biopsy
samples showed marked positivity for IRAK-4 (mean of 2.3 on a 0-4 scale),
as well as lesser positivity in surrounding reactive lymphocytes and
histiocytes (mean of 1.6). The only sample to achieve a staining level of
4 was of mixed cellularity subtype, and was EBER-positive and
HIV-negative.CONCLUSIONS: The IRAK proteins are present in the malignant
HRS cells of Hodgkin lymphoma. Further work will examine IRAK-1, and
phospho-IRAK-1 and -4 in the lymph node samples. Future studies should
also examine whether IRAK causes downstream NFkB activation in HL as it
does in NHL, and whether HRS cells depend on IRAK's presence for
survival. A possible association with EBV infection will also be
investigated. IRAK is a targetable protein with inhibitors available, so
this and future studies may reveal new therapeutic strategies in relapsed
Hodgkin lymphoma.

