Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXP1 expression is associated with tumor progression and poor
prognosis in cervical cancer


Background: The forkhead box protein 1 (FOXP1) is considered as both a
tumor suppressor candidate and a potential oncogene. Here, we
investigated FOXP1 expression in cervical cancer, and the clinical
significance of FOXP1 and it's mechanism of action in cervical
cancer.Methods: To investigate the potential correlation between FOXP1
and various clinicopathologic parameters, we assessed the expression of
FOXP1 in archival tumor tissue specimens from 158 patients with cervical
cancer and 280 with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia as well as 378
matched nonadjacent normal tissues by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining.
Subsequently, we studied the FOXP1's functional role by small interfering
RNA (siRNA) approaches.Results: IHC staining demonstrated that FOXP1
expression increased during the normal to tumor transition of cervical
carcinoma (PBackground: The forkhead box protein 1 (FOXP1) is considered
as both a tumor suppressor candidate and a potential oncogene. Here, we
investigated FOXP1 expression in cervical cancer, and the clinical
significance of FOXP1 and it's mechanism of action in cervical
cancer.Methods: To investigate the potential correlation between FOXP1
and various clinicopathologic parameters, we assessed the expression of
FOXP1 in archival tumor tissue specimens from 158 patients with cervical
cancer and 280 with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia as well as 378
matched nonadjacent normal tissues by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining.
Subsequently, we studied the FOXP1's functional role by small interfering
RNA (siRNA) approaches.Results: IHC staining demonstrated that FOXP1
expression increased during the normal to tumor transition of cervical
carcinoma (P<0.001), and this increased expression was significantly
associated with tumor stage (P = 0.009) and tumor grade (PBackground: The
forkhead box protein 1 (FOXP1) is considered as both a tumor suppressor
candidate and a potential oncogene. Here, we investigated FOXP1
expression in cervical cancer, and the clinical significance of FOXP1 and
it's mechanism of action in cervical cancer.Methods: To investigate the
potential correlation between FOXP1 and various clinicopathologic
parameters, we assessed the expression of FOXP1 in archival tumor tissue
specimens from 158 patients with cervical cancer and 280 with cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia as well as 378 matched nonadjacent normal
tissues by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. Subsequently, we studied
the FOXP1's functional role by small interfering RNA (siRNA)
approaches.Results: IHC staining demonstrated that FOXP1 expression
increased during the normal to tumor transition of cervical carcinoma
(P<0.001), and this increased expression was significantly associated
with tumor stage (P = 0.009) and tumor grade (P<0.001). In multivariate
analysis, FOXP1+ (P = 0.031) and tumor stage (P = 0.032) were independent
prognostic factors for overall survival. FOXP1 knockdown by siRNA
decreased cell proliferation, migration, and tumorigenesis in HeLa and
CaSki cells.Conclusions: Taken together, our data indicate that FOXP1 has
a crucial role in cervical cancer progression, and its overexpression is
associated with poor prognosis, supporting that FOXP1 may be used as a
promising novel target for therapeutic interventions.

