Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical applicable human adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem
cells delivering therapeutic genes to brainstem glioma


Brainstem glioma is one of incurable malignancies in children due to its
unique inoperable location. Regarding the extensive migratory ability
toward cancer and the possible autologous transplantation, human
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hAT-MSC) are attractive vehicles
to deliver therapeutic genes to brainstem glioma. In this study, we
established clinically applicable hAT-MSCs expressing therapeutic genes
in a GMP facility and investigated the therapeutic efficacy against
brainstem glioma preclinically. For the feasible clinical application, 1)
hAT-MSCs were primarily cultured from the human subcutaneous adipose
tissue for making autologous transplantation possible, 2) hAT-MSCs were
genetically engineered to express two therapeutic genes, carboxyl
esterase (CE) and a secreted form of the TNF-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (sTRAIL) for synergistic effects, 3) human CE and sTRAIL sequences
were utilized to avoid immunological side effects, and 4) sTRAIL
expression vector was delivered by non-gDNA integrating gene transfer
technology. hAT-MSCs expressing sTRAIL CE showed significant therapeutic
effects against brainstem gliomas in vitro and in vivo. However,
simultaneous sTRAIL and CE expression failed to show synergistic effects
in vivo. The results indicate that non-viral transient sTRAIL gene
transfer to autologous hAT-MSCs is a clinically applicable stem
cell-based gene therapy for brainstem gliomas in terms of therapeutic
effects and safety.

