Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The vigorous immune microenvironment of microsatellite instable
colon cancer is balanced by multiple counter-inhibitory checkpoints


We examined the immune microenvironment of primary colorectal cancer
(CRC) using immunohistochemistry, laser capture microdissection/qRT-PCR,
flow cytometry and functional analysis of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes.
A subset of CRC displayed high infiltration with activated CD8+ CTL as
well as activated Th1 cells characterized by IFN- production and the Th1
transcription factor Tbet. Parallel analysis of tumor genotypes revealed
that virtually all of the tumors with this active Th1/CTL
microenvironment had defects in mismatch repair, as evidenced by
microsatellite instability (MSI). Counterbalancing this active Th1/CTL
microenvironment, MSI tumors selectively demonstrated highly up-regulated
expression of multiple immune checkpoints, including five - PD-1, PD-L1,
CTLA-4, LAG-3 and IDO - currently being targeted clinically with
inhibitors. These findings link tumor genotype with the immune
microenvironment, and explain why MSI tumors are not naturally eliminated
despite a hostile Th1/CTL microenvironment. They further suggest that
blockade of specific checkpoints may be selectively efficacious in the
MSI subset of CRC.Significance. The findings reported in this article are
the first to demonstrate a link between a genetically defined subtype of
cancer and its corresponding expression of immune checkpoints in the
tumor microenvironment. The mismatch repair defective subset of CRC
selectively up-regulates at least 5 checkpoint molecules that are targets
of inhibitors currently being clinically tested.

