Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of cell cycle progression in BRAFV600E
inhibitor-resistant human melanoma by histone deacetylase inhibitor


The BRAFV600E specific inhibitor vemurafenib blocks MAPK pathway and
induces cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase leading to apoptosis of
melanomas. To gain an understanding of the dynamics of cell cycle
regulation during vemurafenib therapy, we established several
vemurafenib-resistant (VemR) human melanoma sublines from BRAFV600E
vemurafenib-sensitive parental lines. Vemurafenib provoked G0/G1 phase
arrest in parental but not in VemR sublines. We hypothesized that the
refractoriness of VemR sublines to vemurafenib-mediated cell cycle
inhibition can be partially rescued by the chromatin modifier SAHA. SAHA
promoted G2/M arrest at expense of the S phase irrespective of
vemurafenib sensitivity. In parental lines, combination of SAHA and
vemurafenib induced both G0/G1 arrest and apoptosis, whereas in VemR
sublines combination induced G0/G1 as well as G2/M arrest resulting in
dramatic cytostasis. VemR sublines preferentially exhibited ERK1/2 and
AKT hyperphosphorylation. Gene expression profiling revealed MAPK
hyperactivation and deregulations of cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases
(CDK) in VemR sublines, all of which were reversed by SAHA; changes that
may explain the cytostatic effects of SAHA. These results suggest that
unresponsiveness of VemR sublines to the biological effects of
vemurafenib may be amenable by SAHA. These in vitro results, while
require further investigation may provide rational biological basis for
combination therapy in the management of VemR melanoma.

