Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAY 1238097, a novel BET inhibitor with strong efficacy in
hematological tumor models


Several BET inhibitors with strong anti-tumor efficacy have been
described in the last few years. Most of them are derived from diazepine
and azepine scaffolds, but more recently quinazolinones and isoxazoles
chemotypes have also been described. We have identified a novel scaffold
with strong BET inhibitory activity. Here we describe the biochemical
characteristics of BAY 1238097 and its anti-proliferative activity in
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and multiple myeloma (MM) models.In vitro,
BAY 1238097 showed strong inhibitory activity (IC50 Several BET
inhibitors with strong anti-tumor efficacy have been described in the
last few years. Most of them are derived from diazepine and azepine
scaffolds, but more recently quinazolinones and isoxazoles chemotypes
have also been described. We have identified a novel scaffold with strong
BET inhibitory activity. Here we describe the biochemical characteristics
of BAY 1238097 and its anti-proliferative activity in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) and multiple myeloma (MM) models.In vitro, BAY 1238097
showed strong inhibitory activity (IC50 < 100 nM) in a TR-FRET assay
using BET BRD4 bromodomain 1 and an acetylated peptide derived from
histone H4. In the NanoBRET assay, the interaction between BRD4, BRD3 or
BRD2 and H4 was inhibited with IC50 values of 63 nM, 609 nM and 2430 nM,
showing selectivity of the compound for BRD4. A strong reduction of c-Myc
transcript and protein levels was observed in treated MOLM-13 (AML) and
MOLP-8 (MM) cell lines. ChIP experiments performed in these models
additionally revealed that BAY 1238097 prevented binding of BRD4 to c-Myc
regulatory regions.In vivo, BAY 1238097 showed strong efficacy in the AML
models THP-1, MOLM-13 and KG-1, with T/C between 13 and 20%. Overall, the
compound was well tolerated at MTD, with body weight losses of 5-9% at
nadir. BAY 1238097 was also active in MM models. Efficacy was observed
against a human IGH-cyclin D1 translocated MOLP-8 model with a T/C of 3%,
whereas the standard-of-care agents bortezomib and lenalidomide were
inactive or poorly active. In this model, BAY 1238097 was well tolerated
at 10 mg/kg applied over 14 days, with no body weight loss measured. BAY
1238097 was also active against the FGFR/MMSET translocated model
NCIH929, with 19% T/C versus 49% T/C for the standard-of-care
lenalidomide. The compound was well tolerated applied at 12 mg/kg for 9
days (maximum body weight loss 6%).Gene expression profiling performed in
liver, blood and duodenum of rats treated daily with 2 mg/kg BAY 1238097
for 14 days demonstrated substantial effects on genes involved in cell
proliferation and in the immune response in vivo.Altogether, BAY 1238097
is a potent inhibitor of BET binding to histones and has strong
anti-proliferative activity in different AML and MM models through
down-regulation of c-Myc levels and its downstream transcriptome.
Initiation of clinical studies with BAY 1238097 is planned for early 2015.

