Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cosegregating variants in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
families that are located in loci discovered by genome wide association
studies (GWAS)


IntroductionChronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a B-cell malignancy
that is known to have a familial component to disease risk. Although 31
loci have been found to be associated with CLL risk, the functional
variant(s) driving these associations is mostly unknown. Here we set out
to identify rare, highly-penetrant, cosegregating, susceptibility
variants within the known GWAS discovered loci using whole exome
sequencing (WES) data in CLL families from the Mayo Clinic family study
of B-cell malignancies.MethodsWe performed WES on germ line DNA of 93 CLL
families with two or more members with CLL, using Agilent capture kits
and Illumina HiSeq2000. Bioinformatics analyses leveraged the following
software packages: Novoalign, Picard, The Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK),
and the Biological Reference Repository (bioR). Quality control filters
were implemented; subjects with mis-specified relationships were removed,
as were variants with IntroductionChronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a
B-cell malignancy that is known to have a familial component to disease
risk. Although 31 loci have been found to be associated with CLL risk,
the functional variant(s) driving these associations is mostly unknown.
Here we set out to identify rare, highly-penetrant, cosegregating,
susceptibility variants within the known GWAS discovered loci using whole
exome sequencing (WES) data in CLL families from the Mayo Clinic family
study of B-cell malignancies.MethodsWe performed WES on germ line DNA of
93 CLL families with two or more members with CLL, using Agilent capture
kits and Illumina HiSeq2000. Bioinformatics analyses leveraged the
following software packages: Novoalign, Picard, The Genome Analysis
Toolkit (GATK), and the Biological Reference Repository (bioR). Quality
control filters were implemented; subjects with mis-specified
relationships were removed, as were variants with <75% call rate,
IntroductionChronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a B-cell malignancy
that is known to have a familial component to disease risk. Although 31
loci have been found to be associated with CLL risk, the functional
variant(s) driving these associations is mostly unknown. Here we set out
to identify rare, highly-penetrant, cosegregating, susceptibility
variants within the known GWAS discovered loci using whole exome
sequencing (WES) data in CLL families from the Mayo Clinic family study
of B-cell malignancies.MethodsWe performed WES on germ line DNA of 93 CLL
families with two or more members with CLL, using Agilent capture kits
and Illumina HiSeq2000. Bioinformatics analyses leveraged the following
software packages: Novoalign, Picard, The Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK),
and the Biological Reference Repository (bioR). Quality control filters
were implemented; subjects with mis-specified relationships were removed,
as were variants with <75% call rate, <8X coverage, and those identified
as sequencing artifacts. Each GWAS locus was defined by +/- 1Mb of the
top GWAS hit within the locus. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) was calculated
among the single nucleotide variants (SNVs) located within each locus.
Potentially functional SNVs were identified based on: a) uncommon in
public databases (IntroductionChronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a
B-cell malignancy that is known to have a familial component to disease
risk. Although 31 loci have been found to be associated with CLL risk,
the functional variant(s) driving these associations is mostly unknown.
Here we set out to identify rare, highly-penetrant, cosegregating,
susceptibility variants within the known GWAS discovered loci using whole
exome sequencing (WES) data in CLL families from the Mayo Clinic family
study of B-cell malignancies.MethodsWe performed WES on germ line DNA of
93 CLL families with two or more members with CLL, using Agilent capture
kits and Illumina HiSeq2000. Bioinformatics analyses leveraged the
following software packages: Novoalign, Picard, The Genome Analysis
Toolkit (GATK), and the Biological Reference Repository (bioR). Quality
control filters were implemented; subjects with mis-specified
relationships were removed, as were variants with <75% call rate, <8X
coverage, and those identified as sequencing artifacts. Each GWAS locus
was defined by +/- 1Mb of the top GWAS hit within the locus. Linkage
disequilibrium (LD) was calculated among the single nucleotide variants
(SNVs) located within each locus. Potentially functional SNVs were
identified based on: a) uncommon in public databases (< 5%), b)
cosegregating in at least two CLL families, c) being highly conserved and
in coding regions, and d) functional prediction status of deleterious
(SIFT Score), damaging (PolyPhen Score), and a moderate, or high variant
impact (SNP Effect).ResultsIn our 93 CLL families, we sequenced 443
individuals: 160 with CLL, 73 with monoclonal B cell lymphocytosis (MBL),
and 210 relatives that were not diagnosed with CLL or MBL at the time of
sequencing. Median age of CLL diagnosis was 59 years (range 34-87), and
56% were male. Among the MBL individuals and relatives, the median age at
recruitment was 55 years (range 18-93), and 40% were male. A total of
317,666 SNVs passed our sequencing quality control filters of which
10,731 were within +/- 1 Mb of known GWAS hits from 31 loci. Of these
SNVs, 91% were in coding regions, 18% were reported to have high or
moderate impact, 6% were estimated to be damaging and 6% were predicted
to be deleterious.From these SNVs, we identified 76 putatively functional
variants distributed across 25 GWAS loci that were cosegregating in the
individuals with CLL or MBL in multiple CLL pedigrees. These SNVs were
all located in coding regions with high or moderate impact and were
predicted to be damaging and deleterious. Of these 76 variants, 56 had a
frequency of IntroductionChronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a B-cell
malignancy that is known to have a familial component to disease risk.
Although 31 loci have been found to be associated with CLL risk, the
functional variant(s) driving these associations is mostly unknown. Here
we set out to identify rare, highly-penetrant, cosegregating,
susceptibility variants within the known GWAS discovered loci using whole
exome sequencing (WES) data in CLL families from the Mayo Clinic family
study of B-cell malignancies.MethodsWe performed WES on germ line DNA of
93 CLL families with two or more members with CLL, using Agilent capture
kits and Illumina HiSeq2000. Bioinformatics analyses leveraged the
following software packages: Novoalign, Picard, The Genome Analysis
Toolkit (GATK), and the Biological Reference Repository (bioR). Quality
control filters were implemented; subjects with mis-specified
relationships were removed, as were variants with <75% call rate, <8X
coverage, and those identified as sequencing artifacts. Each GWAS locus
was defined by +/- 1Mb of the top GWAS hit within the locus. Linkage
disequilibrium (LD) was calculated among the single nucleotide variants
(SNVs) located within each locus. Potentially functional SNVs were
identified based on: a) uncommon in public databases (< 5%), b)
cosegregating in at least two CLL families, c) being highly conserved and
in coding regions, and d) functional prediction status of deleterious
(SIFT Score), damaging (PolyPhen Score), and a moderate, or high variant
impact (SNP Effect).ResultsIn our 93 CLL families, we sequenced 443
individuals: 160 with CLL, 73 with monoclonal B cell lymphocytosis (MBL),
and 210 relatives that were not diagnosed with CLL or MBL at the time of
sequencing. Median age of CLL diagnosis was 59 years (range 34-87), and
56% were male. Among the MBL individuals and relatives, the median age at
recruitment was 55 years (range 18-93), and 40% were male. A total of
317,666 SNVs passed our sequencing quality control filters of which
10,731 were within +/- 1 Mb of known GWAS hits from 31 loci. Of these
SNVs, 91% were in coding regions, 18% were reported to have high or
moderate impact, 6% were estimated to be damaging and 6% were predicted
to be deleterious.From these SNVs, we identified 76 putatively functional
variants distributed across 25 GWAS loci that were cosegregating in the
individuals with CLL or MBL in multiple CLL pedigrees. These SNVs were
all located in coding regions with high or moderate impact and were
predicted to be damaging and deleterious. Of these 76 variants, 56 had a
frequency of <0.005 in 1000 Genomes European population while the
remaining 20 had a frequency of 1%.ConclusionsThrough WES, we identified
a number of rare, penetrant and potentially predisposing SNVs located
within 25 of the 31 CLL GWAS-discovered loci. These segregating variants
provide a list for future validation and functional studies.

