Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Interleukin 1 signaling in tumor elicited inflammation and
colon cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the 2nd most common cause of cancer deaths in
the United States and other developed countries, despite important
advances in detection, surgery and chemotherapy. It becomes increasingly
clear that not only cell autonomous events in cancer cells are required
for tumor growth and progression. Growing CRC tumors possess the ability
to recruit inflammatory cells and upregulate inflammatory cytokines - a
phenomenon recently introduced as Tumor elicited inflammation(TEI). The
mechanisms of TEI induction and tumor promotion are not yet well defined.
IL23/IL17 pathway is one of the established regulators of TEI. While in
mice the ablation of IL-23 signaling results in a uniform loss of IL-17
response and in a decrease in tumor growth; in humans IL23/IL-23R gene
expression signature is not always consistent with elevated IL-17
signature, implicating that there should be other regulators of IL-17 and
TEI induction in tumors. IL-1 pathway is important for the induction of T
helper IL-17 producing cells (Th17) and for the production of IL-17 by
innate lymphoid cells (ILC), both in mice and in humans. IL-1 pathway is
also implicated in host defense, immunity and tumorigenesis, with some of
its functional characteristics similar to IL-23 pathway. In addition,
IL-1, much alike IL-23, can be also induced by various microbial derived
and host derived danger signals readily available within the tumor
microenvironment. Our own data suggests that components of IL-1 pathway
are upregulated in CRC tumors. Therefore, we hypothesized, that IL-1
pathway might be an important regulator of TEI and CRC tumorigenesis.
Using genetic tools and animal models, we examined if IL-1 has the
potential role in different stage of CRC and whether it serves as an
important regulator of TEI and CRC tumor cells proliferation and survival.

