Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlations of COX2 expressions in circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
and response to radiotherapy in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC)


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) frequently involves
metastasis at diagnosis. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs), captured as
liquid biopsy, can provide real-time clinical information on prognosis,
therapy choice and drug response and resistance. Cyclooxygenase 2
(COX-2), a key enzyme involved in prostaglandin production, participates
in inflammatory and neoplastic processes. It is expressed by various
tumours and contributes to carcinogenesis. Previous study showed that
expression of COX2 in HNSCC tumor tissue samples is associated with
clinical response to radiotherapy. The aim of study is to investigate
whether expression of COX2 in CTCs could be used as a predict factor to
clinical response to radiotherapy.An multiplex RNA in situ hybridization
(RNA-ISH) method, named CanPatrol CTC enrichment technique, was used to
isolate and categorize CTCs as epithelial, biophenotypic
epithelial/mesenchyma, and mesenchymal phenotypes. A total of 51 pateints
with HNSCC were enrolled into this study and assessed for CTC levels. Of
these 51 pateints, 13 patients were evaluated for COX2 expression in CTCs
before and after radiotherapy. The COX2 expression in one CTC or more was
defined as positive presence. Primary end point was the overall objective
response rate. At baseline, CTCs, ranging from 1 to 15, were identified
from 36(70.59%) patients, and the median and mean values were 2 and 3(3
SD) respectively. No significant correlations were observed between CTCs
amounts and clinicopathological parameters. Thirteen (25.49%) patients
had 2 CTCs both at the beginning and the end of treatment. COX2
expressions was identified in 6(46.15%) patients, which associated with
ascending mesenchymal rate afterwards, and indicate a trend of less
response to radiotherapy. Compared to 46.15% (6/13) of COX2-positive
patients, disease control characterized as decreased CTCs/ mesenchymal
CTCs after systemic radiotherapy was obtained in 53.85% (7/13) of
COX2-negative (pHead and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) frequently
involves metastasis at diagnosis. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs),
captured as liquid biopsy, can provide real-time clinical information on
prognosis, therapy choice and drug response and resistance.
Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), a key enzyme involved in prostaglandin
production, participates in inflammatory and neoplastic processes. It is
expressed by various tumours and contributes to carcinogenesis. Previous
study showed that expression of COX2 in HNSCC tumor tissue samples is
associated with clinical response to radiotherapy. The aim of study is to
investigate whether expression of COX2 in CTCs could be used as a predict
factor to clinical response to radiotherapy.An multiplex RNA in situ
hybridization (RNA-ISH) method, named CanPatrol CTC enrichment technique,
was used to isolate and categorize CTCs as epithelial, biophenotypic
epithelial/mesenchyma, and mesenchymal phenotypes. A total of 51 pateints
with HNSCC were enrolled into this study and assessed for CTC levels. Of
these 51 pateints, 13 patients were evaluated for COX2 expression in CTCs
before and after radiotherapy. The COX2 expression in one CTC or more was
defined as positive presence. Primary end point was the overall objective
response rate. At baseline, CTCs, ranging from 1 to 15, were identified
from 36(70.59%) patients, and the median and mean values were 2 and 3(3
SD) respectively. No significant correlations were observed between CTCs
amounts and clinicopathological parameters. Thirteen (25.49%) patients
had 2 CTCs both at the beginning and the end of treatment. COX2
expressions was identified in 6(46.15%) patients, which associated with
ascending mesenchymal rate afterwards, and indicate a trend of less
response to radiotherapy. Compared to 46.15% (6/13) of COX2-positive
patients, disease control characterized as decreased CTCs/ mesenchymal
CTCs after systemic radiotherapy was obtained in 53.85% (7/13) of
COX2-negative (p< 0.05). In summary, COX2-positive CTCs is a promising
predictive factor for response to radiotherapy.

