Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DTX1 is an epigenetically regulated tumor suppressor gene
discovered by integrative analysis of epigenetic and transcriptional
alterations in HNSCC


Half a million new cases of Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC)
are diagnosed annually worldwide. Given the advanced stage at diagnosis,
5 year survival after initial diagnosis is only 50% for HNSCC patients
despite the current therapeutic strategies.Recently, high throughput
technologies have accelerated the genome-wide characterization of HNSCC,
but given the high sensitivity of this methodology, these data require
careful evaluation. To improve the detection of cancer-related changes in
HNSCC we applied outlier statistics to high throughput DNA methylation
and gene expression data, and identified 76 top-scoring candidate
proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes with significantly changed
expression in tumors compared to normal tissues. We identified
epigenetically regulated candidates with potential role in HNSCC by
selecting genes with strong negative correlation between gene expression
and DNA methylation of their promoters. Differential expression and
methylation of selected candidates were confirmed with assays on an
independent HNSCC cohort and on public domain high throughput data on
TCGA-HNSCC cohort (The Cancer Genome Atlas). We further performed
functional evaluation of a lead candidate - DTX1 and demonstrated that
DTX1 is a negative regulator of cell migration. We confirmed that
epigenetic-dependent downregulation of DTX1 enhanced invasiveness of head
and neck cancer cells.Outlier analysis integrated with high throughput
expression and methylation can be used to identify an epigenetically-
regulated tumor suppressor genes, including DTX1.

