Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrating SNPs, epigenetics and transcriptomics to better
understand the inherited predisposition to breast cancer metastasis


Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer and the second leading cause of
cancer mortality in women. The vast majority of breast cancer mortality
is due to metastatic disease since the primary tumor can be relatively
easily surgically resected. More comprehensive understanding of biology
of metastasis is therefore clearly warranted to unveil novel
metastasis-associated molecules and cellular processes that might be
targeted for clinical intervention. Previously we demonstrated that like
cancer incidence, metastatic progression has a significant inherited
component. Using mouse complex trait mapping strategies we have been
isolating metastasis susceptibility genes from backcross analysis.
However, studies suggest that many of these QTL peaks are the result of
the contribution of multiple genes, suggesting that causal genes are not
being identified. To increase our ability to detect causal genes we have
implemented a new integrated strategy. Whole genome sequencing of
appropriate high or low metastatic mouse strains is performed to identify
variants, which are then filtered for those within DNAse hypersensitive
sites (DHS), based on the hypothesis that most inherited phenotypes are
due to expression differences rather than missense variants. The genes
associated with polymorphic DHS are then screened through mouse and human
tumor expression databases to identify those genes associated with
development of metastatic disease. This strategy was able to identify
genes previously associated with metastatic breast cancer in both mouse
and humans and new genes have also been validated. The results further
suggest that inherited variation in cellular mediated immune response may
be an important contributor to metastatic disease.

