Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrence prediction model using microRNA expression in hormone
receptor positive and tamoxifen treated breast cancer


Hormone receptor positive breast cancer patients have relatively good
prognosis after tamoxifen treatment but still about 40% of patients
experience treatment failure (1). Recently microRNAs (miRNAs) have been
spotlighted as a new biomarker for predicting prognosis and treatment
response. The purpose of this study is to identify microRNAs (miRNAs)
that related with distant recurrence after tamoxifen and standard
treatment and then build an early recurrence prediction model.Methods:
Our study measured the expression of 5 miRNAs (miR-134, miR-125b-5P,
miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and miR-222) that are selected as a tamoxifen
resistant related miRNA by previous micro-array experiment and paper
review. 176 FFPE tumor tissues of 176 patients who have hormone receptor
positive breast cancer with tamoxifen were measured miRNA expression by
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).Results: We identified all 5 miRNAs
are up-regulated in distant recurrence cases within 5 years after
surgery. Other clinico-pathological parameters that are tumor grade,
pathologic stage, HER2 statue and P53 status didn't have any specific
correlation with expression of miRNAs. The results suggest that distant
recurrence during tamoxifen treatment might be affected by tamoxifen
resistant related miRNAs. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses based on
expression cut-offs determined by receiver characteristics curves show
high expression of miR-134, miR-125b-5P, miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and
miR-222 were associated with short relapse-free time(log-rank P = 0.006,
PHormone receptor positive breast cancer patients have relatively good
prognosis after tamoxifen treatment but still about 40% of patients
experience treatment failure (1). Recently microRNAs (miRNAs) have been
spotlighted as a new biomarker for predicting prognosis and treatment
response. The purpose of this study is to identify microRNAs (miRNAs)
that related with distant recurrence after tamoxifen and standard
treatment and then build an early recurrence prediction model.Methods:
Our study measured the expression of 5 miRNAs (miR-134, miR-125b-5P,
miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and miR-222) that are selected as a tamoxifen
resistant related miRNA by previous micro-array experiment and paper
review. 176 FFPE tumor tissues of 176 patients who have hormone receptor
positive breast cancer with tamoxifen were measured miRNA expression by
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).Results: We identified all 5 miRNAs
are up-regulated in distant recurrence cases within 5 years after
surgery. Other clinico-pathological parameters that are tumor grade,
pathologic stage, HER2 statue and P53 status didn't have any specific
correlation with expression of miRNAs. The results suggest that distant
recurrence during tamoxifen treatment might be affected by tamoxifen
resistant related miRNAs. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses based on
expression cut-offs determined by receiver characteristics curves show
high expression of miR-134, miR-125b-5P, miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and
miR-222 were associated with short relapse-free time(log-rank P = 0.006,
P<0.0001, PHormone receptor positive breast cancer patients have
relatively good prognosis after tamoxifen treatment but still about 40%
of patients experience treatment failure (1). Recently microRNAs (miRNAs)
have been spotlighted as a new biomarker for predicting prognosis and
treatment response. The purpose of this study is to identify microRNAs
(miRNAs) that related with distant recurrence after tamoxifen and
standard treatment and then build an early recurrence prediction
model.Methods: Our study measured the expression of 5 miRNAs (miR-134,
miR-125b-5P, miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and miR-222) that are selected as a
tamoxifen resistant related miRNA by previous micro-array experiment and
paper review. 176 FFPE tumor tissues of 176 patients who have hormone
receptor positive breast cancer with tamoxifen were measured miRNA
expression by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).Results: We identified
all 5 miRNAs are up-regulated in distant recurrence cases within 5 years
after surgery. Other clinico-pathological parameters that are tumor
grade, pathologic stage, HER2 statue and P53 status didn't have any
specific correlation with expression of miRNAs. The results suggest that
distant recurrence during tamoxifen treatment might be affected by
tamoxifen resistant related miRNAs. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses based
on expression cut-offs determined by receiver characteristics curves show
high expression of miR-134, miR-125b-5P, miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and
miR-222 were associated with short relapse-free time(log-rank P = 0.006,
P<0.0001, P<0.0001, PHormone receptor positive breast cancer patients
have relatively good prognosis after tamoxifen treatment but still about
40% of patients experience treatment failure (1). Recently microRNAs
(miRNAs) have been spotlighted as a new biomarker for predicting
prognosis and treatment response. The purpose of this study is to
identify microRNAs (miRNAs) that related with distant recurrence after
tamoxifen and standard treatment and then build an early recurrence
prediction model.Methods: Our study measured the expression of 5 miRNAs
(miR-134, miR-125b-5P, miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and miR-222) that are
selected as a tamoxifen resistant related miRNA by previous micro-array
experiment and paper review. 176 FFPE tumor tissues of 176 patients who
have hormone receptor positive breast cancer with tamoxifen were measured
miRNA expression by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).Results: We
identified all 5 miRNAs are up-regulated in distant recurrence cases
within 5 years after surgery. Other clinico-pathological parameters that
are tumor grade, pathologic stage, HER2 statue and P53 status didn't have
any specific correlation with expression of miRNAs. The results suggest
that distant recurrence during tamoxifen treatment might be affected by
tamoxifen resistant related miRNAs. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses based
on expression cut-offs determined by receiver characteristics curves show
high expression of miR-134, miR-125b-5P, miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and
miR-222 were associated with short relapse-free time(log-rank P = 0.006,
P<0.0001, P<0.0001, P<0.0001,and PHormone receptor positive breast cancer
patients have relatively good prognosis after tamoxifen treatment but
still about 40% of patients experience treatment failure (1). Recently
microRNAs (miRNAs) have been spotlighted as a new biomarker for
predicting prognosis and treatment response. The purpose of this study is
to identify microRNAs (miRNAs) that related with distant recurrence after
tamoxifen and standard treatment and then build an early recurrence
prediction model.Methods: Our study measured the expression of 5 miRNAs
(miR-134, miR-125b-5P, miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and miR-222) that are
selected as a tamoxifen resistant related miRNA by previous micro-array
experiment and paper review. 176 FFPE tumor tissues of 176 patients who
have hormone receptor positive breast cancer with tamoxifen were measured
miRNA expression by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).Results: We
identified all 5 miRNAs are up-regulated in distant recurrence cases
within 5 years after surgery. Other clinico-pathological parameters that
are tumor grade, pathologic stage, HER2 statue and P53 status didn't have
any specific correlation with expression of miRNAs. The results suggest
that distant recurrence during tamoxifen treatment might be affected by
tamoxifen resistant related miRNAs. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses based
on expression cut-offs determined by receiver characteristics curves show
high expression of miR-134, miR-125b-5P, miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and
miR-222 were associated with short relapse-free time(log-rank P = 0.006,
P<0.0001, P<0.0001, P<0.0001,and P<0.0001, respectively) Conclusion: The
altered expression of miRNAs in hormone receptor positive breast cancer
is distinctly related to distant recurrence during tamoxifen treatment.
Our results suggest that combination of miRNAs expression model can
categorize high-risk subset of patients with short relapse-free and has
decent predictive value (AUC = 0.891, p-valueHormone receptor positive
breast cancer patients have relatively good prognosis after tamoxifen
treatment but still about 40% of patients experience treatment failure
(1). Recently microRNAs (miRNAs) have been spotlighted as a new biomarker
for predicting prognosis and treatment response. The purpose of this
study is to identify microRNAs (miRNAs) that related with distant
recurrence after tamoxifen and standard treatment and then build an early
recurrence prediction model.Methods: Our study measured the expression of
5 miRNAs (miR-134, miR-125b-5P, miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and miR-222) that
are selected as a tamoxifen resistant related miRNA by previous
micro-array experiment and paper review. 176 FFPE tumor tissues of 176
patients who have hormone receptor positive breast cancer with tamoxifen
were measured miRNA expression by quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR).Results: We identified all 5 miRNAs are up-regulated in distant
recurrence cases within 5 years after surgery. Other clinico-pathological
parameters that are tumor grade, pathologic stage, HER2 statue and P53
status didn't have any specific correlation with expression of miRNAs.
The results suggest that distant recurrence during tamoxifen treatment
might be affected by tamoxifen resistant related miRNAs. Kaplan-Meier
survival analyses based on expression cut-offs determined by receiver
characteristics curves show high expression of miR-134, miR-125b-5P,
miRNA-30a, miR-10a-5p, and miR-222 were associated with short
relapse-free time(log-rank P = 0.006, P<0.0001, P<0.0001, P<0.0001,and
P<0.0001, respectively) Conclusion: The altered expression of miRNAs in
hormone receptor positive breast cancer is distinctly related to distant
recurrence during tamoxifen treatment. Our results suggest that
combination of miRNAs expression model can categorize high-risk subset of
patients with short relapse-free and has decent predictive value (AUC =
0.891, p-value<0.0001).

