Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting CD99 in T-cell neoplasms


Introduction: CD99 is a 32 kDa transmembrane protein that regulates T
cell maturation and the transendothelial migration of leukocytes. CD99 is
also routinely used as a biomarker to aid in the diagnosis of T-cell
acute lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia (T-ALL), Ewing sarcoma, and
neuroendocrine tumors. We have previously shown that monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) directed against CD99 effectively induce cytotoxicity
in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS),
however, it remains unclear whether CD99 is a viable therapeutic target
in T-cell neoplasms.Design: CD99 protein expression was assessed on 115
lymphoma patient samples by immunohistochemistry (IHC) using tissue
microarrays. CD99 expression was also measured by flow cytometry on
mature T-cell lymphoma cell lines, T-ALL cell lines, and peripheral blood
(PB) T-cells. Cell lines exhibiting the highest levels of CD99 expression
were used for in vitro cytotoxicity assays and were incubated with 40
g/ml of anti-CD99 mAbs (DN16, O13, or 12E7) in the presence of increasing
concentrations of an anti-IgG cross-linking antibody (Ab) (50-100 g/ml).
Cell survival and morphology were assessed by flow cytometry and light
microscopy 72 hours following incubation with anti-CD99 mAbs.Results:
Various T-cell neoplasms showed CD99 expression by IHC based on a 5%
cut-off: 11/20 (55%) T lymphoblastic lymphomas, 7/16 (44%)
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphomas, 4/13 (31%) anaplastic large cell
lymphomas (ALCLs), 10/63 (16%) peripheral T-cell lymphomas, and 0/3 (0%)
NK/T cell lymphomas. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that CD99 is
up-regulated on Karpas-299 (ALCL) and Kopt-K1 (T-ALL) cell lines relative
to PB T-cells (normalized MFIs: 56.1, 39.5, 20.5), while low levels of
CD99 were expressed on Mac2A (ALCL), Hut78 (sezary syndrome), and Hut102
(mycosis fungoides) cell lines (normalized MFIs: 0.19, 10.9, 0.5,
respectively). Incubations of Kopt-K1 cells with DN16 or 12E7 induced
significant cell death in the presence of increasing concentrations of
anti-IgG Ab relative to IgG isotype control (DN16: 70-81% cell death,
p.0002; 12E7: 42-78% cell death, p.0003). Karpas-299 incubations with
DN16 or O13 also led to significant reductions in cell numbers in the
presence of anti-IgG Ab (O13: 25% cell death with 75 g/ml anti-IgG Ab,
pIntroduction: CD99 is a 32 kDa transmembrane protein that regulates T
cell maturation and the transendothelial migration of leukocytes. CD99 is
also routinely used as a biomarker to aid in the diagnosis of T-cell
acute lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia (T-ALL), Ewing sarcoma, and
neuroendocrine tumors. We have previously shown that monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) directed against CD99 effectively induce cytotoxicity
in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS),
however, it remains unclear whether CD99 is a viable therapeutic target
in T-cell neoplasms.Design: CD99 protein expression was assessed on 115
lymphoma patient samples by immunohistochemistry (IHC) using tissue
microarrays. CD99 expression was also measured by flow cytometry on
mature T-cell lymphoma cell lines, T-ALL cell lines, and peripheral blood
(PB) T-cells. Cell lines exhibiting the highest levels of CD99 expression
were used for in vitro cytotoxicity assays and were incubated with 40
g/ml of anti-CD99 mAbs (DN16, O13, or 12E7) in the presence of increasing
concentrations of an anti-IgG cross-linking antibody (Ab) (50-100 g/ml).
Cell survival and morphology were assessed by flow cytometry and light
microscopy 72 hours following incubation with anti-CD99 mAbs.Results:
Various T-cell neoplasms showed CD99 expression by IHC based on a 5%
cut-off: 11/20 (55%) T lymphoblastic lymphomas, 7/16 (44%)
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphomas, 4/13 (31%) anaplastic large cell
lymphomas (ALCLs), 10/63 (16%) peripheral T-cell lymphomas, and 0/3 (0%)
NK/T cell lymphomas. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that CD99 is
up-regulated on Karpas-299 (ALCL) and Kopt-K1 (T-ALL) cell lines relative
to PB T-cells (normalized MFIs: 56.1, 39.5, 20.5), while low levels of
CD99 were expressed on Mac2A (ALCL), Hut78 (sezary syndrome), and Hut102
(mycosis fungoides) cell lines (normalized MFIs: 0.19, 10.9, 0.5,
respectively). Incubations of Kopt-K1 cells with DN16 or 12E7 induced
significant cell death in the presence of increasing concentrations of
anti-IgG Ab relative to IgG isotype control (DN16: 70-81% cell death,
p.0002; 12E7: 42-78% cell death, p.0003). Karpas-299 incubations with
DN16 or O13 also led to significant reductions in cell numbers in the
presence of anti-IgG Ab (O13: 25% cell death with 75 g/ml anti-IgG Ab,
p<.0001; DN16: 38-43% cell death with 50-100g/ml anti-IgG Ab, p.0021).
Consistent with previous findings in B-ALL, cell death was associated
with marked cell aggregation.Conclusions: Our studies show that CD99 is
expressed on T-ALL blasts and T-cell lymphomas, particularly in ALCL.
Anti-CD99 mAbs are cytotoxic to T-ALL and ALCL cell lines in the presence
of anti-IgG Ab, suggesting that cross-linking or multimerization of CD99
is required to induce cell death. Collectively, these studies indicate
that targeting CD99 with therapeutic mAbs may represent a novel strategy
in the treatment of multiple T-cell neoplasms.

