Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid identification of potent and highly selective, oral PTEFb
Inhibitor BAY 1143572 with first in class potential


PTEFb (positive transcription elongation factor b) is a heterodimer of
the transcriptional control kinase CDK9 (Cyclin-dependent kinase 9) and
Cyclin T. PTEFb phosphorylates and activates RNA polymerase II. PTEFb
inhibition causes rapid depletion of short-lived mRNA transcripts and
their associated protein products involved in proliferation and survival
like Myc, or Mcl-1 which results in cell death of addicted tumor cells.We
previously disclosed the profile of the lead compound PTEFb BAY1, a
nanomolar PTEFb inhibitor with 50-fold selectivity within the CDK family
and cellular potency of about 1 M in proliferation assays on various
human tumor cell lines [1]. PTEFb BAY1 also revealed in vivo efficacy in
a human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) xenograft model in nude mice.
However, the lead compound also displayed certain limitations in ADME
properties like low aqueous solubility and a strong recognition by efflux
transporters in the Caco2 assay.Based on these findings, extensive lead
optimisation efforts led to the rapid identification of BAY 1143572 which
is a more potent and highly selective, orally available PTEFb inhibitor
with first-in-class potential. BAY 1143572 has a high aqueous solubility,
reduced drug efflux and a moderate oral bioavailability across species
that allows daily as well as intermittent dosing schedules in animal
models. BAY 1143572 revealed strong in vitro and in vivo anti-tumor
efficacy with various cell-lines.BAY 1143572 is currently being evaluated
in a Phase I study to determine the safety, tolerability,
pharmacokinetics and initial pharmacodynamic biomarker response in
patients with advanced cancer.This presentation will highlight the key
learnings from our PTEFb lead optimization program.[1]: AACR, April 5-9,
2014, San Diego, Poster Presentation, Abstract 4538, Cancer Res October
1, 2014, 74:4538; doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2014-4538

