Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer stem cell pathways with cell-permeable peptide
inhibitors


Direct targeting of several important cancer pathways has so far proved
challenging, owing to the lack of pathway-specific targets that can be
accessed by conventional small molecule drugs or therapeutic antibodies.
Nexigen develops and advances peptide-based cancer therapeutics, a new
class of drugs that functionally modulate currently undruggable pathways
by targeting intracellular protein-protein-interactions.One of these
undruggable pathways, the Wnt signaling cascade, has been identified as a
key pathway in cancer stem cells maintenance. Targeting oncongenic Wnt
signaling therefore holds great promise for tackling not only tumor
growth but also disease relapse, metastasis and drug resistance. Using
our proprietary next generation peptide screening system, we could
identify cell-permeable peptides that efficiently inhibit the Wnt pathway
through a specific interaction with a key component of intracellular
signaling. Our most advanced preclinical candidate has nanomolar target
affinity and significantly reduces the expression of Wnt target genes in
triple-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. The further functional
analysis of the peptide in various cancer cell lines revealed a
dose-dependent inhibition of cell migration, invasion, proliferation, and
the cancer stem cell phenotype. The siRNA-mediated knock-down of the
target protein or the inhibition of the Wnt pathway recapitulated the
inhibitory peptide effect in these assays. Most importantly, we observed
a significant suppression of primary tumor growth, tumor cell
self-renewal and a reduction of metastatic potential after treatment in
different xenograft models.In summary, our data suggest that our Wnt
pathway peptide inhibitor could be a promising new drug candidate for the
treatment of cancer stem cells in a broad diversity of cancers.

