Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of metformin on progression-free survival in patients
with advanced pancreatic well differentiated neuroendocrine tumor
receiving everolimus plus somatostatin analogue treatment


Introduction: Abnormal PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway signaling and autocrine
activation of the mTOR pathway, mediated through insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF1), has been implicated in the proliferation of pNET cells.
Everolimus (EVE), an inhibitor of mTOR (a central regulator of
growth/proliferation, cellular metabolism and angiogenesis) has shown
antitumor benefit in pNETs alone and in combination with Octreotide LAR
(OCT) in RADIANT-1 and RADIANT-3 trials. An increasing number of studies
have identified diabetic patients (pts) as having increased risk for the
development of cancer and have associated Metformin (MET) treatment with
a decrease of cancer risk. MET has also been associated with improved
outcomes in cancer pts. MET has recently shown some anti-cancer activity,
both in vitro and in vivo studies by antisecretory properties to decrease
insulin and IGF1 levels and by antitumor effect due to AMPK activation
and consequently inhibition to TSC1-2/mTOR complex, mediated to LKB1
oncogene expression.The aims of this retrospective study, even if in a
limited number of pts is to evaluate the effect of concomitant MET
administered during EVE plus OCT therapy in pts with pWDNETs and
diabetes.Methods: We retrospectively evaluated the difference in terms of
progression-free survival (PFS) between consecutive diabetic pts on MET
and those on insulin (INS) as concomitant drugs during EVE plus OCT
therapy. Normoglycemic pts served as controls.Results: Between 2009 and
2012, 31 pts (age 55.5 years; 22 males) were treated with EVE plus OCT.
Six pts received MET, 6 received INS and 19 pts were normolgycemic. In
the overall population, median PFS was 12 months (mo) (95%CI 6.3-17.7);
mPFS was 24 mo (95% CI 8.6-59.9) in diabetic pts and 12 mo (95% CI 8.7-
15.3) in normoglycemic pts (HR 3.17, 95% CI 1.18-8.49; p = 0.016).Median
PFS in pts on MET was not achieved versus 12.2 mo in pts treated with INS
(95% CI 0-28). At the time of this analysis, 4 pts (67%) on MET are still
receiving EVE plus OCT, with a median duration of treatment of 19.5 mo
(range 10-27+ mo).Conclusion: Although the limited number of pts hampers
the analysis, a prospective evaluation is required to either confirm or
discard these preliminary findings. With the aim to evaluate the
antiproliferative effect of MET in combination with EVE and OCT LAR in
pWDNET pts, a single arm, prospective, single center phase II study was
designed (MetNET-1 trial; NCT02294006). Forty-three patient will expect
to be evaluated. The study is currently ongoing, and the recruitment is
estimated to be completed in August 2016. The results will be anticipated
in 2017.

