Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of TGF--regulated CTCF suppression of telomerase links
a human stem cell disorder to tumorigenesis


Background: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a human stem cell
disorder with a prevalence of 1 in 14,000. Its clinical manifestations
include an 800-fold increased risk of tumorigenesis; yet the precise
mechanism of BWS-associated tumorigenesis remains elusive. In a previous
study, we showed that epigenetic silencing of 2-spectrin (2SP, gene
SPTBN1), a cytoskeletal protein and a Smad adaptor for Transforming
Growth Factor-beta (TGF-) signaling, was a causal factor in BWS. To
determine the mechanism for the oncogenic switch, and whether it is
related to the role of 2SP in TGF- signaling transduction or secondary to
its cytoskeletal functions, we analyzed disruption of two elements of the
TGF- pathway by generating double heterozygous Sptbn1+//Smad3+/
mice.Materials & Methods: Tumorigenesis analysis in Sptbn1+/ /Smad3+/
mice. Whole-transcriptome sequencing and IPA analyses were performed in
the BWS cells and Sptbn1+/; Sptbn1/; Smad3+/; and Sptbn1+//Smad3+/ MEFs.
Immunohistochemical analyses were performed for determining the
expression of TERT in BWS tumors and mice liver, pancreas and stomach
tissue specimens. ChIP assays were performed for examining the
recruitment of 2SP/Smad3/CTCF complex at the promoter of TERT.Results:
(1) 80% of Sptbn1+//Smad3+/ mice developed multiple tumors that were
phenotypically similar to those of patients with BWS. (2) Somatic
mutations in SPTBN1 and SMAD3 occur in multiple human sporadic cancers.
(3) Disruption of the TGF- pathway in Sptbn1+//Smad3+/ mice and BWS
cells. (4) 2SP Interacts with SMAD3 in a TGF--dependent manner. (5) 2SP
and SMAD3 interact with CTCF in the cell nucleus. (6) Dysfunction of the
2SP/SMAD3/CTCF complex increases hTERT levels in BWS and in
2SP+/-/Smad3+/- mice.Conclusions: We present a novel model of the
molecular pathogenesis of BWS by demonstrating a potential shift arising
from disruption of TGF- signaling leading to BWS-associated tumorigenesis
and human sporadic cancer development.

