Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemical inhibition or transient knockdown of wild-type p53
induced phosphatase 1 (WIP1/PPM1D) potentiates the response to MDM2
inhibitors in a p53-dependent manner


The mechanisms that determine p53 cell fate decision after its
non-genotoxic activation by MDM2 inhibitors are poorly understood.
Wild-type p53-inducible phosphatase-1 (WIP1/PPM1D) forms an
autoregulatory loop with p53 and is involved in the homeostasis of the
p53 stress response network. WIP1 is activated, gained/amplified and
overexpressed in a range of p53 wild-type malignancies.We investigated
cellular growth/proliferation of p53 wild-type (wt) and matched p53
mutant (mut)/null cell line pairs, differing in WIP1 genetic status, in
response to Nutlin-3 + GSK2830371 (WIP1i)/WIP1 siRNA-mediated knockdown.
We also assessed the effects of WIP1i or knockdown in combination with
Nutlin-3 on p53 post-translational modifications, p53 downstream
transcriptional targets and apoptosis.Phosphorylation of p53S15 (pp53S15)
was used as a marker of WIP1 catalytic activity. WIP1-amplified
MCF-7p53wt cells were very sensitive to the WIP1i, with a 50% growth
inhibitory concentration (GI50) of 2.65M + 0.54 (SEM). The three p53
wild-type and mutant/null cell line pairs showed relatively little
sensitivity to single agent WIP1i (GI50>10M). However the WIP1i, at a
non-growth inhibitory dose (2.5M) in vitro, potentiated their response to
Nutlin-3 in a p53-dependent manner. HCT116p53+/+; WIP1L450fs*1/+
(L450fs*1 is a WIP1 activating mutation), NGPp53wt and SJSA-1p53wt cell
lines showed a 2.4-fold (p = 0.007), 2.1-fold (p = 0.04) and 1.3-fold (p
= 0.02) decrease in their Nutlin-3 GI50 values respectively in the
presence of WIP1i at 2.5M. In contrast Nutlin-3 GI50 did not change in
HCT116p53-/, N20R1p53Mut and SN40R2p53Mut, NGP and SJSA-1 Nutlin-3
resistant daughter cell lines respectively. WIP1 transient siRNA
knockdown also resulted in potentiation of cells to Nutlin-3. In
WIP1-non-amplified (WNA) cells treated with either Nutlin-3 at the GI50
dose or 2.5M WIP1i, pp53S15 was not detected, however in combination,
these drugs resulted in dramatic levels of pp53S15. Interestingly protein
expression of p53 targets MDM2 and p21 were not affected in WNA cells by
the increased p53S15 phosphorylation; whereas BAX expression was
elevated. The Nutlin-3 + WIP1i/siRNA knockdown combination also resulted
in a significant increase in cell death markers between 24-48Hrs
post-treatment in a p53-dependent manner.Although the strongest WIP1i
potentiation of Nutlin-3 was observed in HCT116p53+/+; WIP1L450fs*1/+
cells which possess an activating WIP1 mutation, the NGPp53wt and
SJSA-1p53wt cell lines with wild-type WIP1 also showed potentiation.
These findings highlight the mechanistic importance of the p53-WIP1
autoregulatory loop in cell fate determination after non-genotoxic p53
activation by Nutlin-3. Potent inhibitors of WIP1 may potentiate the
response to other therapeutics aiming to activate p53 mediated tumour
suppression.

