Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical validation and clinical verification of phosphoprotein
biomarker modulation using a novel preservation system-based flow
cytometry assay in multiple myeloma clinical trials


Propelled by the advent of novel oncogenic pathway-targeting drugs and
increasing regulatory expectations to fulfil proof of mechanism endpoints
in clinical trials, there is a critical need to reliably evaluate target
inhibition by investigational drugs in biologically relevant
compartments. However, the ability to monitor modulation of labile
oncogenic pathway biomarkers in global hematomalignancy clinical trials
is complicated by varying technical expertise at clinical sites, when
specimen stability considerations do not permit analysis at a central
specialty laboratory. To address this critical gap, we developed a novel
preservation system, designated NovaPerm3 (NP3), that enables
stabilization of phosphoprotein based biomarker specimens in a single
step, requires less than 20 minutes, and can be implemented in routine
clinical trial settings. Stabilized specimens can be frozen and analyzed
even after 90 days in a specialized laboratory. Using the NP3
preservation system, we systematically developed and validated a flow
cytometry assay that not only enables reliable identification of
neoplastic plasma cells but also allows for quantitation of
phosphoprotein biomarkers in the tumor cells of interest present in both
the peripheral blood (PB) and bone marrow (BM). We will describe a)
modulation of phosphorylation levels of the S6 ribosomal protein (pS6RP)
by a novel anticancer agent in multiple myeloma patients b) qualitative
concordance between NP3-flow cytometry and western blot results from
multiple drug treated leukemia cell lines c) sensitive detection of
neoplastic plasma cells up to 1% of the total white cells and d) specimen
(pS6RP) stabilization over a 90 day period. In conclusion, our novel
preservation method and clinical trial laboratory validated flow assay
enables reliable quantification of signaling biomarkers in
hematomalignancy trials with ease in a specialized central laboratory
while reducing the procedural burden for collecting biomarker specimens
in global clinical trials.

