Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MALAT1 is crucial for epithelial-mesenchymal transition of breast
cancer cells in acidic microenvironment


Metastasis Associated Lung Adenocarcinoma Transcript 1 (MALAT1), a long
non-coding RNA (lncRNA), is found up-regulated in several tumors.
However, little is known about the role of MALAT1 in breast cancer, which
is one of the highly invasive tumors among women worldwide. In this
study, we found that MALAT1 was highly expressed in both breast cancer
cell lines and breast cancer specimens in comparison to normal specimens.
We found that low extracellular pH (pHe-acidosis), a major hallmark of
solid tumors, further up-regulates MALAT-1 in several breast cancer cell
lines in a time-dependent manner. Furthermore, acidosis induces
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)-associated vimentin and Twist
1 expression but suppresses E-cadherin levels in breast cancer cells.
Moreover, breast cancer cells under low pHe adopt stem-ness property as
revealed by an increase in CD44+ and ESA+ population, mammosphere
formation, and expression of OCT-4, SOX-2 and Nanog. Acidosis promotes
translocation of -catenin from cytoplasm to nucleus. The antisense
oligonucleotides mediated gene silencing of MALAT-1 prevents acidosis
induced nuclear translocation of -catenin. This is in consistent with our
previous finding that breast cancer cells cultured under low pHe exhibit
an increased invasion activity. These results suggest that
acidosis-induced MALAT-1 trigger an EMT program, leading to cell invasion
and metastasis. Therefore, MALAT-1 represents a potential target for
breast cancer therapy. Studies are underway to delineate the mechanistic
association between MALAT-1, -catenin, and EMT in acidic microenvironment.

