Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MK2206 disrupts cytoplasmic AKT-p21 complex in mantle cell
lymphoma: Evidence of p21 coupled cell cycle arrest


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas with poor response to conventional chemotherapy. MCL has
several deregulated signaling pathways including PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis. The
serine/threonine kinase AKT is a proto-oncogene that has emerged recently
as a major focus of target due of its critical regulatory role in diverse
cellular processes, including cancer development. We hypothesized that
inhibition of AKT activation through an inhibitor, MK2206 or stable
knockdown of AKT expression via Lentiviral shAKT would result in
cytotoxicity and sensitize MCL cells to chemotherapeutic drug such as
bendamustine. MCL cell lines (Jeko-1 and Mino) were treated either with
MK2206 (2.5 or 5M) or bendamustine (15 or 30M) for 24hr and molecular
changes or cell death were evaluated by immunoblot or Annexin-V-PI FACS
analysis, respectively. MK2206 treatment significantly reduced pAKTser473
or its target pBADser110 phosphorylation in both cell lines. Further,
MK2206 treatment resulted in growth arrest in both Jeko-1 and Mino cells
via p21Cip1/WAF1 upregulation. Preliminary studies on immunoprecipitaion
with anti-AKT antibody and cell fraction revealed that MK2206 treatment
disrupts cytoplasmic AKT-p21 complex and enhanced p21-nuclear PCNA
interaction in both Jeko-1 and Mino cells thereby allowing more
p21Cip1/WAF1 to accumulate into the nucleus leading to p21 coupled
S-phase changes in Jeko-1 (control = 41% vs MK2206 treated = 28%) and
Mino (control = 54% vs MK2206 = 39%). Genetic and stable lentiviral
knockdown of AKT resulted in similar impact on S-phase progression in
Jeko-1 (control = 58% vs shAKT = 34%) and sensitized cells to
bendamustine (15M for 24hr) -induced cell death in Mino (control shRNA =
12%, bendamustine alone = 44%, and shAKT plus bendamustine = 68%, pMantle
cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with
poor response to conventional chemotherapy. MCL has several deregulated
signaling pathways including PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis. The serine/threonine
kinase AKT is a proto-oncogene that has emerged recently as a major focus
of target due of its critical regulatory role in diverse cellular
processes, including cancer development. We hypothesized that inhibition
of AKT activation through an inhibitor, MK2206 or stable knockdown of AKT
expression via Lentiviral shAKT would result in cytotoxicity and
sensitize MCL cells to chemotherapeutic drug such as bendamustine. MCL
cell lines (Jeko-1 and Mino) were treated either with MK2206 (2.5 or 5M)
or bendamustine (15 or 30M) for 24hr and molecular changes or cell death
were evaluated by immunoblot or Annexin-V-PI FACS analysis, respectively.
MK2206 treatment significantly reduced pAKTser473 or its target
pBADser110 phosphorylation in both cell lines. Further, MK2206 treatment
resulted in growth arrest in both Jeko-1 and Mino cells via p21Cip1/WAF1
upregulation. Preliminary studies on immunoprecipitaion with anti-AKT
antibody and cell fraction revealed that MK2206 treatment disrupts
cytoplasmic AKT-p21 complex and enhanced p21-nuclear PCNA interaction in
both Jeko-1 and Mino cells thereby allowing more p21Cip1/WAF1 to
accumulate into the nucleus leading to p21 coupled S-phase changes in
Jeko-1 (control = 41% vs MK2206 treated = 28%) and Mino (control = 54% vs
MK2206 = 39%). Genetic and stable lentiviral knockdown of AKT resulted in
similar impact on S-phase progression in Jeko-1 (control = 58% vs shAKT =
34%) and sensitized cells to bendamustine (15M for 24hr) -induced cell
death in Mino (control shRNA = 12%, bendamustine alone = 44%, and shAKT
plus bendamustine = 68%, p<0.01). MK2206 did not induce any detectable
cell death by itself, however a significant apoptosis was induced when
these cells were treated with 30M bendamustine (pMantle cell lymphoma
(MCL) is an aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with poor response
to conventional chemotherapy. MCL has several deregulated signaling
pathways including PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis. The serine/threonine kinase AKT is
a proto-oncogene that has emerged recently as a major focus of target due
of its critical regulatory role in diverse cellular processes, including
cancer development. We hypothesized that inhibition of AKT activation
through an inhibitor, MK2206 or stable knockdown of AKT expression via
Lentiviral shAKT would result in cytotoxicity and sensitize MCL cells to
chemotherapeutic drug such as bendamustine. MCL cell lines (Jeko-1 and
Mino) were treated either with MK2206 (2.5 or 5M) or bendamustine (15 or
30M) for 24hr and molecular changes or cell death were evaluated by
immunoblot or Annexin-V-PI FACS analysis, respectively. MK2206 treatment
significantly reduced pAKTser473 or its target pBADser110 phosphorylation
in both cell lines. Further, MK2206 treatment resulted in growth arrest
in both Jeko-1 and Mino cells via p21Cip1/WAF1 upregulation. Preliminary
studies on immunoprecipitaion with anti-AKT antibody and cell fraction
revealed that MK2206 treatment disrupts cytoplasmic AKT-p21 complex and
enhanced p21-nuclear PCNA interaction in both Jeko-1 and Mino cells
thereby allowing more p21Cip1/WAF1 to accumulate into the nucleus leading
to p21 coupled S-phase changes in Jeko-1 (control = 41% vs MK2206 treated
= 28%) and Mino (control = 54% vs MK2206 = 39%). Genetic and stable
lentiviral knockdown of AKT resulted in similar impact on S-phase
progression in Jeko-1 (control = 58% vs shAKT = 34%) and sensitized cells
to bendamustine (15M for 24hr) -induced cell death in Mino (control shRNA
= 12%, bendamustine alone = 44%, and shAKT plus bendamustine = 68%,
p<0.01). MK2206 did not induce any detectable cell death by itself,
however a significant apoptosis was induced when these cells were treated
with 30M bendamustine (p<0.04). MK2206 (2.5M) treatment in combination
with bendamustine (15M) resulted in significant cell death in both p53
deficient Jeko-1 (40% vs control pMantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an
aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with poor response to
conventional chemotherapy. MCL has several deregulated signaling pathways
including PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis. The serine/threonine kinase AKT is a
proto-oncogene that has emerged recently as a major focus of target due
of its critical regulatory role in diverse cellular processes, including
cancer development. We hypothesized that inhibition of AKT activation
through an inhibitor, MK2206 or stable knockdown of AKT expression via
Lentiviral shAKT would result in cytotoxicity and sensitize MCL cells to
chemotherapeutic drug such as bendamustine. MCL cell lines (Jeko-1 and
Mino) were treated either with MK2206 (2.5 or 5M) or bendamustine (15 or
30M) for 24hr and molecular changes or cell death were evaluated by
immunoblot or Annexin-V-PI FACS analysis, respectively. MK2206 treatment
significantly reduced pAKTser473 or its target pBADser110 phosphorylation
in both cell lines. Further, MK2206 treatment resulted in growth arrest
in both Jeko-1 and Mino cells via p21Cip1/WAF1 upregulation. Preliminary
studies on immunoprecipitaion with anti-AKT antibody and cell fraction
revealed that MK2206 treatment disrupts cytoplasmic AKT-p21 complex and
enhanced p21-nuclear PCNA interaction in both Jeko-1 and Mino cells
thereby allowing more p21Cip1/WAF1 to accumulate into the nucleus leading
to p21 coupled S-phase changes in Jeko-1 (control = 41% vs MK2206 treated
= 28%) and Mino (control = 54% vs MK2206 = 39%). Genetic and stable
lentiviral knockdown of AKT resulted in similar impact on S-phase
progression in Jeko-1 (control = 58% vs shAKT = 34%) and sensitized cells
to bendamustine (15M for 24hr) -induced cell death in Mino (control shRNA
= 12%, bendamustine alone = 44%, and shAKT plus bendamustine = 68%,
p<0.01). MK2206 did not induce any detectable cell death by itself,
however a significant apoptosis was induced when these cells were treated
with 30M bendamustine (p<0.04). MK2206 (2.5M) treatment in combination
with bendamustine (15M) resulted in significant cell death in both p53
deficient Jeko-1 (40% vs control p<0.01) and p53 proficient Mino (65% vs
control pMantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas with poor response to conventional chemotherapy. MCL has
several deregulated signaling pathways including PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis. The
serine/threonine kinase AKT is a proto-oncogene that has emerged recently
as a major focus of target due of its critical regulatory role in diverse
cellular processes, including cancer development. We hypothesized that
inhibition of AKT activation through an inhibitor, MK2206 or stable
knockdown of AKT expression via Lentiviral shAKT would result in
cytotoxicity and sensitize MCL cells to chemotherapeutic drug such as
bendamustine. MCL cell lines (Jeko-1 and Mino) were treated either with
MK2206 (2.5 or 5M) or bendamustine (15 or 30M) for 24hr and molecular
changes or cell death were evaluated by immunoblot or Annexin-V-PI FACS
analysis, respectively. MK2206 treatment significantly reduced pAKTser473
or its target pBADser110 phosphorylation in both cell lines. Further,
MK2206 treatment resulted in growth arrest in both Jeko-1 and Mino cells
via p21Cip1/WAF1 upregulation. Preliminary studies on immunoprecipitaion
with anti-AKT antibody and cell fraction revealed that MK2206 treatment
disrupts cytoplasmic AKT-p21 complex and enhanced p21-nuclear PCNA
interaction in both Jeko-1 and Mino cells thereby allowing more
p21Cip1/WAF1 to accumulate into the nucleus leading to p21 coupled
S-phase changes in Jeko-1 (control = 41% vs MK2206 treated = 28%) and
Mino (control = 54% vs MK2206 = 39%). Genetic and stable lentiviral
knockdown of AKT resulted in similar impact on S-phase progression in
Jeko-1 (control = 58% vs shAKT = 34%) and sensitized cells to
bendamustine (15M for 24hr) -induced cell death in Mino (control shRNA =
12%, bendamustine alone = 44%, and shAKT plus bendamustine = 68%,
p<0.01). MK2206 did not induce any detectable cell death by itself,
however a significant apoptosis was induced when these cells were treated
with 30M bendamustine (p<0.04). MK2206 (2.5M) treatment in combination
with bendamustine (15M) resulted in significant cell death in both p53
deficient Jeko-1 (40% vs control p<0.01) and p53 proficient Mino (65% vs
control p<0.014). Similarly, 5M MK2206 plus 30M bendamustine combination
was more potent (65% in Jeko-1 and 76% in Mino) compared with either
MK2206 (2-5%) or bendamustine alone (20-45%). Western blot analysis
revealed induction of intrinsic apoptotic pathway including PARP
cleavage, loss of XIAP and activation of caspase-3 cleavage. In
conclusion, a novel mechanism of MK2206 is demonstrated where disruption
of cytoplasmic AKT-p21 interaction followed by more nuclear p21-PCNA
complex leading to p21 coupled growth arrest in MCL cell lines. These
studies underscore the importance of AKT inhibition to sensitize
apoptotic cell death in combination with standard chemotherapies in
difficult to treat MCL.

