Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of Palbociclib response signature across indications


Cellular proliferation is dependent on an orderly movement through the
various phases of cell cycle. Progression through the G1 phase in
particular requires phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein
which in turn releases E2F transcription factors resulting in
transcriptional activation of response gene necessary for progression
into S-phase. The cyclin D-CDK4/6 signaling pathway represent a critical
regulatory pathway controlling transition from G1 into S-phase and
greater than 90% of human tumors have mutations in this pathway.
Palbociclib is a potent, selective, and orally bioavailable inhibitor of
Cdk4/6. In human tumor xenograft models, Palbociclib has significant
antitumor activities. The clinical activities of Palbociclib have also be
demonstrated in the phase II PALOMA-1 trial for dramatic efficacy of
postmenopausal patients with locally advanced or newly diagnosed estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer in
combination with letrozole. To better understand the molecular mechanisms
of Palbociclib response, we have identified a common set of gene
signatures for ER+ BC as well as melanoma models. The physiological role
of these genes regulated by Palbociclib is associated with DNA
replication and repair, cell cycle, signal transduction, and Mitosis.
Many of these genes have been previously identified as E2F signatures. In
this study, we are aiming to expand this analysis to include two
additional indications including Head and Neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) as well as squamous cell lung carcinoma (Sq lung) using Illumina
RNASeq technology platform. Results from these studies will be presented
and core Palbo-response signature will be discussed. In addition, we will
also present the pharmacological effects of Letrozole on the gene
expression changes for these core signatures in ER+ BC models.

