Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial differences in the distribution of prostate tumor
biomarkers and treatment failure: The SCORE study


Prostate cancer exhibits the greatest disparity in mortality between
African American (AA) and European American (EA) men of any cancer in the
US. The reasons for this disparity include access to care, screening
patterns, and behavior. Biological differences may lead some AA men to
have biologically aggressive tumors. Using the Study of Clinical
Outcomes, Risk, and Ethnicity (SCORE) study, we identified prostate tumor
tissues from men undergoing prostatectomy at the Hospital of the
University of Pennsylvania between 1991-2008. Immunohistochemistry was
undertaken on the FFPE tumors of 45 EA and 55 AA men (mean age: 59.1
years, range: 41-71). No statistically significant difference in marker
phenotypes was observed for prevalence of TMPRSS2/ERG fusion proteins, or
in staining intensity for PSMA or Rb. We observed statistically
significant differences in marker phenotype for RACEMASE (EA Mean: 188.1
vs. AA Mean: 144.7, p = 0.004), c-myc (EA Mean: 54.7 vs. AA Mean: 21.6, p
= 0.005), and AR (EA Mean: 192.1 vs. AA Mean: 136.5, p = 0.002). These
data suggest that markers that have been reported to be associated with
tumor aggressiveness differ between EA and AA men.We further evaluated
whether these markers were associated with clinical outcome as measured
by biochemical (PSA) failure (BF) after radical prostatectomy (RP). We
observed 41 BF with a mean follow up of 32.6 months post-RP, compared
with 68 non-BF with a mean follow up of 53.7 months post-RP. After
adjusting for pathology tumor grade, only the presence of a TMPRSS2-ERG
fusion protein was significantly associated with BF. We observed a
significant interaction (p = 0.031) by race suggesting TMPRSS2-ERG
fusions were less likely to be associated with BF in AA than in EA. These
data suggest that TMPRSS2-ERG fusions may not be important predictors of
prostate cancer outcomes in AA men as has been suggested in EA men.*These
authors contributed equally to the work.

