Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transient receptor potential cation channel 3 (TRPC3) regulates
tumor proliferation and migration of BRAF wild type human malignant
melanoma


Background: It has been well known that melanoma has a poor prognosis due
to its rapid progression and high metastatic ability before. Although a
few new drugs came out into clinical field in very recent years, these
drugs are restricted to use for the patients who have BRAF or MEK gene
mutation. Therefore we still have to search new target points that are
not dependent on these gene mutations. TRP channels are activated by
changes of temperature or membrane voltage, resulting in activation of
intracellularresponses. Here, we investigate whether TRPC3 regulates cell
proliferation and migration of human melanoma in vitro and in
vivo.Material: C8161 cells, a BRAF wild type human melanoma cell line,
were mainly used in this study. Cell proliferation was assessed by 2,3,
-bis(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-5-[(phenylamino)-carbonyl]-2H-tetrazo
lium innersalt (XTT) assay. Cell cycle was analyzed by
fluorescence-activated cells sorting. In order to examine the roleof
TRPC3 in human melanoma, Short heparin RNA (shRNA) transductions with
lentivirus encoding either TRPC3 or scramble was performed according to
the protocols of the manufacture. Secretion level of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) 9 was assessed in the presence of Pyr3, TRPC
selective inhibitor or not by gelatin zymography. We transplanted C8161
cells into the side chest of female Balb-c nude mice at the level of
intradermal depth. Immediately after tumors were formed, Pyr3 or DMSO
(control) was injected intradermaly around the tumor every day. We
measured each diameters of tumor every two days, and calculated volume
and regression rate.Result: mRNA and protein of TRPC3 were expressed in
multiple human melanoma celllines and primary tissue. Proliferation rate
of TRPC3 knocked down C8161 decreases in 48 hours (pBackground: It has
been well known that melanoma has a poor prognosis due to its rapid
progression and high metastatic ability before. Although a few new drugs
came out into clinical field in very recent years, these drugs are
restricted to use for the patients who have BRAF or MEK gene mutation.
Therefore we still have to search new target points that are not
dependent on these gene mutations. TRP channels are activated by changes
of temperature or membrane voltage, resulting in activation of
intracellularresponses. Here, we investigate whether TRPC3 regulates cell
proliferation and migration of human melanoma in vitro and in
vivo.Material: C8161 cells, a BRAF wild type human melanoma cell line,
were mainly used in this study. Cell proliferation was assessed by 2,3,
-bis(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-5-[(phenylamino)-carbonyl]-2H-tetrazo
lium innersalt (XTT) assay. Cell cycle was analyzed by
fluorescence-activated cells sorting. In order to examine the roleof
TRPC3 in human melanoma, Short heparin RNA (shRNA) transductions with
lentivirus encoding either TRPC3 or scramble was performed according to
the protocols of the manufacture. Secretion level of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) 9 was assessed in the presence of Pyr3, TRPC
selective inhibitor or not by gelatin zymography. We transplanted C8161
cells into the side chest of female Balb-c nude mice at the level of
intradermal depth. Immediately after tumors were formed, Pyr3 or DMSO
(control) was injected intradermaly around the tumor every day. We
measured each diameters of tumor every two days, and calculated volume
and regression rate.Result: mRNA and protein of TRPC3 were expressed in
multiple human melanoma celllines and primary tissue. Proliferation rate
of TRPC3 knocked down C8161 decreases in 48 hours (p<0.0001). Pyr3, one
of pyrazole compounds that is known to inhibit selectively TRPC3,
suppressed cell proliferation (IC50 12.99 M). Both knockdown of TRPC3 and
Pyr3 decreased path length of migration (pBackground: It has been well
known that melanoma has a poor prognosis due to its rapid progression and
high metastatic ability before. Although a few new drugs came out into
clinical field in very recent years, these drugs are restricted to use
for the patients who have BRAF or MEK gene mutation. Therefore we still
have to search new target points that are not dependent on these gene
mutations. TRP channels are activated by changes of temperature or
membrane voltage, resulting in activation of intracellularresponses.
Here, we investigate whether TRPC3 regulates cell proliferation and
migration of human melanoma in vitro and in vivo.Material: C8161 cells, a
BRAF wild type human melanoma cell line, were mainly used in this study.
Cell proliferation was assessed by 2,3,
-bis(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-5-[(phenylamino)-carbonyl]-2H-tetrazo
lium innersalt (XTT) assay. Cell cycle was analyzed by
fluorescence-activated cells sorting. In order to examine the roleof
TRPC3 in human melanoma, Short heparin RNA (shRNA) transductions with
lentivirus encoding either TRPC3 or scramble was performed according to
the protocols of the manufacture. Secretion level of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) 9 was assessed in the presence of Pyr3, TRPC
selective inhibitor or not by gelatin zymography. We transplanted C8161
cells into the side chest of female Balb-c nude mice at the level of
intradermal depth. Immediately after tumors were formed, Pyr3 or DMSO
(control) was injected intradermaly around the tumor every day. We
measured each diameters of tumor every two days, and calculated volume
and regression rate.Result: mRNA and protein of TRPC3 were expressed in
multiple human melanoma celllines and primary tissue. Proliferation rate
of TRPC3 knocked down C8161 decreases in 48 hours (p<0.0001). Pyr3, one
of pyrazole compounds that is known to inhibit selectively TRPC3,
suppressed cell proliferation (IC50 12.99 M). Both knockdown of TRPC3 and
Pyr3 decreased path length of migration (p<0.01, pBackground: It has been
well known that melanoma has a poor prognosis due to its rapid
progression and high metastatic ability before. Although a few new drugs
came out into clinical field in very recent years, these drugs are
restricted to use for the patients who have BRAF or MEK gene mutation.
Therefore we still have to search new target points that are not
dependent on these gene mutations. TRP channels are activated by changes
of temperature or membrane voltage, resulting in activation of
intracellularresponses. Here, we investigate whether TRPC3 regulates cell
proliferation and migration of human melanoma in vitro and in
vivo.Material: C8161 cells, a BRAF wild type human melanoma cell line,
were mainly used in this study. Cell proliferation was assessed by 2,3,
-bis(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-5-[(phenylamino)-carbonyl]-2H-tetrazo
lium innersalt (XTT) assay. Cell cycle was analyzed by
fluorescence-activated cells sorting. In order to examine the roleof
TRPC3 in human melanoma, Short heparin RNA (shRNA) transductions with
lentivirus encoding either TRPC3 or scramble was performed according to
the protocols of the manufacture. Secretion level of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) 9 was assessed in the presence of Pyr3, TRPC
selective inhibitor or not by gelatin zymography. We transplanted C8161
cells into the side chest of female Balb-c nude mice at the level of
intradermal depth. Immediately after tumors were formed, Pyr3 or DMSO
(control) was injected intradermaly around the tumor every day. We
measured each diameters of tumor every two days, and calculated volume
and regression rate.Result: mRNA and protein of TRPC3 were expressed in
multiple human melanoma celllines and primary tissue. Proliferation rate
of TRPC3 knocked down C8161 decreases in 48 hours (p<0.0001). Pyr3, one
of pyrazole compounds that is known to inhibit selectively TRPC3,
suppressed cell proliferation (IC50 12.99 M). Both knockdown of TRPC3 and
Pyr3 decreased path length of migration (p<0.01, p<0.01 respectively).
These results suggested that TRPC3 was involved in cell proliferation and
migration of C8161. Pyr3 also shortened migration path length by tracking
the movement of C8161cells. Secretion level of MMP9 was decreased by
Pyr3. Pyr3 inhibited phosphorylation of signal transducer and activators
of transcription (STAT) 5, suggesting that TRPC3-induced proliferation
and migration were regulated by, at least in part, the JAK/STAT signaling
pathway. Tumor volume transplanted on mice side chest was dramatically
and immediately reduced by Pyr3 local injection, while that of control
group was increased. These results indicated that TRPC3 is involved in
cell proliferations not only in vivo but also in vitro.Conclusion: TRPC3
regulates proliferation and migration, and thus tumor growth and
metastasis of melanoma, suggesting that TRPC3 could be a novel target for
treating BRAF wild type humanmelanomas.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

