Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving therapeutic efficacy of Docetaxel in breast cancer


Chemotherapy is the preferred choice for treatment of advance breast
cancer (BrCa). In most cases, cytotoxic drugs are used at or near a
maximum tolerated dose (MTD) to achieve maximum response and eradicate
the neoplastic cells, at the same time MTD doses are often toxic and have
severe side effects. Lower dose i.e. optimal biological response modifier
dose (OBRMD) provides potentially beneficial responses, but is not
capable of achieving optimal clinical response. Hence, the focus of this
study was to achieve the optimal therapeutic outcome of Docetaxel (DTX)
at a lower dose by using it in combination with Apigenin (API), a dietary
flavonoid present in fruits and vegetables. Effect of DTX and API, either
alone or in combination on BrCa cells viability and apoptosis was
determined by MTT assay and flow cytometry, respectively. We further
investigated the mechanism of enhanced efficacy of DTX using western blot
analysis and real time qPCR. Significant decrease in cell viability was
observed when cells were treated with low dose DTX in combination with
API as compared to either of the agent used individually in MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-468 and MCF 10A cells. Real time analysis showed that API up
regulates pro-apoptotic molecules and down regulates anti-apoptotic
molecules when using in combination with DTX. These findings suggest that
Apigenin is capable of reducing the effective dose of docetaxel. Hence,
this new modality may have better therapeutic outcome with minimal or no
toxicity.

