Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of the PARP inhibitor talazoparib (BMN 673) with
the ATR inhibitor VE-821 overcomes the drug resistance of Schlafen
11-deficient cells


Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerases (PARP) inhibitors work as catalytic
inhibitors as well as PARP poisons by trapping PARP-DNA complexes (Murai
et al., Cancer Res. 2012: 72:5588-99), and talazoparib is the most potent
PARP inhibitor to date in terms of cytotoxicity and PARP trapping (Murai
et al., Mol. Cancer Ther. 2014:13:433-43). Nevertheless, mining the NCI60
data shows that half of the 60 cell lines are tolerant to talazoparib. To
elucidate the mechanisms of such tolerance, we searched for genes with
expression levels correlated to talazoparib sensitivity using CellMiner
(http://discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer/). Schlafen 11 (SLFN11) turned out
to be one of the most positively correlated genes whose expression is
correlated with cellular sensitivity to talazoparib. Using genetically
altered cells, we established that SLFN11 inactivation confers high
resistance to talazoparib, revealing that SLFN11 inactivation, which is
common in cancer cells (Zoppoli et al. PNAS 2014: 109:15030-5), is a
novel mechanism of resistance for PARP inhibitors. Based on genetically
engineered CRISPR/casp9 SLFN11-knockout cell lines and cell cycle
analyses, we found that the parent SLFN11-proficient cells arrest in S
phase without DNA replication, while SLFN11-knock out cells maintain
their replication until entering G2 phase in the presence of talazoparib.
Although ATR is the key regulator of intra-S phase check point, the
addition of the ATR inhibitor (VE-821) (Josse et al., Cancer Res. 2014)
does not rescue the replication arrest in SLFN11-proficient cells,
suggesting the existence of a SLFN11-dependent replication arrest
mechanism independently of ATR. On the other hand, the addition of the
ATR inhibitor in SLFN11-knock out cells alters the arresting point from
G2 to S phase, and eventually increases dead cells. This is probably
because the prolonged replication block leads to the collapse of
replication forks, resulting in DNA double-strand breaks. Consistent to
these findings, the combination of the ATR inhibitor with talazoparib
synergistically sensitizes SLFN11-knock out cells more efficiently than
the parent SLFN11-proficient cells. Together, these results demonstrate
that the combination of the ATR inhibitor with talazoparib can overcome
the resistance of SLFN11-deficient cells to talazoparib.

