Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of multiple oncogenic miRNAs on NUMB gene to mediate
head and neck carcinogenesis


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th leading
malignancy in the world. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNAs,
which are associated with the genesis and progression of cancers. NUMB is
a multi-functional adaptor protein, which can activate E3 ubiquitin
ligase and degrade target proteins to modulate pathogenesis. In silico
modules predict that miR-31, miR-96, miR-182 and other miRNAs might
target NUMB. This study investigates the concordant targeting of multiple
oncogenic miRNAs to NUMB, and to verify the roles of NUMB in HNSCC.
miR-31, miR-96 and miR-182 were found up-regulated in the vast majority
of HNSCC tissues. On the contrary, NUMB expression was largely
down-regulated in the tumors. A reverse correlation was noted between
miR-31 expression and NUMB expression. Reporter assays using wild type
and mutant constructs specified that these oncogenic miRNAs directly
target the sequences in the 3UTR of NUMB gene. However, miR-31 was unable
to target a predicted site in the coding sequence of NUMB gene to mediate
regulation. Exogenous expression of these miRNAs decreased NUMB
expression and increased the migration of HNSCC cells. Knockdown of NUMB
expression enhanced oncogenicity of HNSCC cells. However, the exogenous
NUMB expression decreased the migration and anchorage-independent growth
of HNSCC cells. The oncogenicity induced by these oncogenic miRNAs was
attenuated by NUMB expression. This study provides in vitro and in vivo
clues demonstrating that miR-31, miR-96 and miR-182 co-target NUMB gene
in HNSCC. The coordinative abrogation of these miRNAs together with NUMB
enhancement may be contributive to new therapeutic intervention against
head and neck cancers.

