Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuroblastoma (NB), Medulloblastoma (MB), and Ewing's sarcoma (ES)
express ROR1 and can be effectively targeted with NK cells modified to
express an anti ROR1 chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)


Background:Metastatic pediatric neuroectodermal solid tumors especially
NB, MB, and ES have a dismal prognosis (Perkins et al, PLoS One, 2014;
Smoll, Cancer, 2012). Targeted cellular therapy with T or NK cells
modified with CARs is a novel approach to chemo-resistant childhood solid
tumors (Grupp SA, Clin Cancer Res, 2012; Mackall C,Front Oncol, 2012). NK
cells can be significantly expanded by co-culture with genetically
engineered K562 cells overexpressing mb-IL21 (Lee D, PLOS, 2012). ROR1
has been identified as a novel target on B cell tumors in which CARs can
be developed and utilized for targeted cellular therapy (Hudecek et al.,
Blood, 2010).Objective:To evaluate the in-vitro cytotoxic activity and
function of PBNK expanded ex-vivo with K562 mb-IL21 and nucleofected with
mRNA encoding an anti ROR1-CAR against NB, MB, and ES.Material and
Methods:PBNK were expanded with irradiated K562 Clone 9.mb-IL21
(generously provided by Lee D, MD, PhD, MD Anderson, TX). Ex-vivo
expanded PBNK (ExPBNK) cells were electroporated with anti
ROR1-CD28-41BBl-CD3-tEGFR-mRNA. The cell surface expression of the
ROR1-CAR on NK cells was detected using anti-mouse IgG, F(ab)2.
Cytotoxicity of ROR1 CAR-NK cells was investigated against NB (SKNBE2,
SKNFI & SHSY5Y), MB (DAOY) and ES (TC71, EWS 502 & A673) cell lines by
DELFIA cytotoxicity assay at an E:T ratio of 10:1. Intracellular staining
of CD107a, interferon gamma, perforin and granzyme B was performed using
a 10:1 E:T ratio of ROR1-CAR-NK cells against tumor targets and analyzed
on the MACSQuant flow cytometer.Results:NB, MB, and ES cell lines
expressed ROR1 (50.215.6%), (55.55.1%), and (31.512%), respectively.
Expansion of NK cells was significantly increased 3988 435 fold (p =
0.00001) at day 14 vs day 0. CAR expression after nucleofection was
measured by F(ab)2 staining and showed a significant increase in
anti-ROR1-CAR- (88.31.7%) vs mock-electroporated NK cell populations (8.1
6.9%) p = 0.0001 at 36-48 hours. Anti-ROR1-CAR-NK cells exhibited
significantly increased lysis of ROR1 expressing tumor cell lines
compared to mock NK cells (934.6% vs 63.67.4%) p = 0.00001 at an E:T of
10:1. Similarly, expression of CD107a (46.19.1 vs 27.62.4%) p = 0.001,
interferon gamma (34.111.6 vs 16.76.7%) p = 0.003, granzyme B (68.58.9 vs
467.2%) p = 0.002, and perforin (51.37.7 vs 30.311.9%) p = 0.002 were
significantly increased in anti-ROR1-CAR-NK cells vs Mock-NK cells at
10:1 E:T ratio against the ROR1 expressing
targets.Conclusion:Anti-ROR1-CAR-ex-PBNK cells had significant enhanced
cytotoxicity and significantly increased CD107a, interferon gamma,
perforin, and granzyme B activity against ROR1 expressing tumors. Future
directions include investigating the ex-PBNK anti ROR1-CAR cells in-vivo
against ROR1 expressing pediatric solid tumors.

