Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of BTK inhibitors on differentiation of human
monocyte-derived dendritic cells


Dendritic cells (DCs) are primary antigen-presenting cells (APCs), which
process tumor antigen and present it on the cell surface to the T cells
of the adaptive immune system. However, immature DCs facilitate tolerance
toward cancer cells. Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) is highly expressed
in B cells, monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells and plays crucial
roles in differentiation and activation of myeloid cells. Dendritic cells
in Btk/ mice were reported to have more mature phenotype and stronger in
vitro and in vivo T cell stimulatory ability than wild-type DCs. However,
the functions of BTK in human DC differencation and maturation were not
well characterized. In this study, we revealed the effect of BTK
inhibition with ibrutinib, an FDA approved drug for chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) and mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), in human monocyte derived
dendritic cells (moDCs). We show that BTK was expressed in monocytes and
moDCs. BTK activity was regulated during moDCs differencation and BTK
inhibitors blocked GM-CSF/IL4 induced activation of BTK. LPS instead of
CD40L treatment increased BTK phosphorylation. It was noted that the
percentage of CD11c+ MHC IIlow subsets, which represented the immature
DCs, was significantly reduced upon ibrutinib treatment during moDC
differencation. Meanwhile, ibrutinib dose-dependently increased
proportion of CD11c+ MHC IIhigh cells, which represent more mature DCs.
We also tested BGB-3111, a more selective BTK inhibitor without ITK, TXK,
EGFR, HER2 and JAK3 activity in the same assay. We observed increased MHC
II level during differentiation of human moDCs with BGB-3111 treatment.
These results support combination strategies for BTK inhibitors with
other cancer immunotherapy agents.

