Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Latent class longitudinal modeling of CTCs in ER+ metastatic
breast cancer patients


The baseline and longitudinal monitoring of circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) demonstrated strong prognostic and predictive value in patients
with metastatic breast cancer (MBC) irrespective of tumor subtype but
particularly in ER+ disease. Utilizing a cohort of ER+ MBC patients, with
longitudinal assessments of CTCs, we applied a novel statistical model to
identify subgroups of CTC patterns that inform patient prognosis.This is
a retrospective analysis of 516 patients with MBC who had CTCs serially
enumerated as part of their disease evaluation and monitoring.
Two-hundred and six patients with ER+ disease and at least 3 CTC measures
were identified and constitute the cohort for this analysis. Peripheral
blood samples (7.5 ml) collected within 30 days before starting any
systemic treatment were drawn into CellSave tubes and processed within 72
hours of collection. The standardized US Food and Drug
Administration-cleared CellSearch System was used to isolate and count
CTCs. Two-stage models, consisting of patterns of trajectories of CTCs in
stage 1, defined via a latent class zero-inflated Poisson model, followed
by a probability weighted Cox model of survival outcomes were employed.
Both overall survival (OS) and progression free survival (PFS) were
considered separately. Model selection was based on Akaike Information
Criteria (AIC).Three classes of CTC trajectories are identified (always
low = L, 70.3%, controlled moderate = M, 20.9%, high uncontrolled = H,
8.7%) with significant differential OS (AHR M vs L 5.32, pThe baseline
and longitudinal monitoring of circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
demonstrated strong prognostic and predictive value in patients with
metastatic breast cancer (MBC) irrespective of tumor subtype but
particularly in ER+ disease. Utilizing a cohort of ER+ MBC patients, with
longitudinal assessments of CTCs, we applied a novel statistical model to
identify subgroups of CTC patterns that inform patient prognosis.This is
a retrospective analysis of 516 patients with MBC who had CTCs serially
enumerated as part of their disease evaluation and monitoring.
Two-hundred and six patients with ER+ disease and at least 3 CTC measures
were identified and constitute the cohort for this analysis. Peripheral
blood samples (7.5 ml) collected within 30 days before starting any
systemic treatment were drawn into CellSave tubes and processed within 72
hours of collection. The standardized US Food and Drug
Administration-cleared CellSearch System was used to isolate and count
CTCs. Two-stage models, consisting of patterns of trajectories of CTCs in
stage 1, defined via a latent class zero-inflated Poisson model, followed
by a probability weighted Cox model of survival outcomes were employed.
Both overall survival (OS) and progression free survival (PFS) were
considered separately. Model selection was based on Akaike Information
Criteria (AIC).Three classes of CTC trajectories are identified (always
low = L, 70.3%, controlled moderate = M, 20.9%, high uncontrolled = H,
8.7%) with significant differential OS (AHR M vs L 5.32, p<0.001, H vs L
10.41, pThe baseline and longitudinal monitoring of circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) demonstrated strong prognostic and predictive value in
patients with metastatic breast cancer (MBC) irrespective of tumor
subtype but particularly in ER+ disease. Utilizing a cohort of ER+ MBC
patients, with longitudinal assessments of CTCs, we applied a novel
statistical model to identify subgroups of CTC patterns that inform
patient prognosis.This is a retrospective analysis of 516 patients with
MBC who had CTCs serially enumerated as part of their disease evaluation
and monitoring. Two-hundred and six patients with ER+ disease and at
least 3 CTC measures were identified and constitute the cohort for this
analysis. Peripheral blood samples (7.5 ml) collected within 30 days
before starting any systemic treatment were drawn into CellSave tubes and
processed within 72 hours of collection. The standardized US Food and
Drug Administration-cleared CellSearch System was used to isolate and
count CTCs. Two-stage models, consisting of patterns of trajectories of
CTCs in stage 1, defined via a latent class zero-inflated Poisson model,
followed by a probability weighted Cox model of survival outcomes were
employed. Both overall survival (OS) and progression free survival (PFS)
were considered separately. Model selection was based on Akaike
Information Criteria (AIC).Three classes of CTC trajectories are
identified (always low = L, 70.3%, controlled moderate = M, 20.9%, high
uncontrolled = H, 8.7%) with significant differential OS (AHR M vs L
5.32, p<0.001, H vs L 10.41, p<0.001, H vs M 1.96, p = 0.039) and PFS
(AHR M vs L 2.05, pThe baseline and longitudinal monitoring of
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) demonstrated strong prognostic and
predictive value in patients with metastatic breast cancer (MBC)
irrespective of tumor subtype but particularly in ER+ disease. Utilizing
a cohort of ER+ MBC patients, with longitudinal assessments of CTCs, we
applied a novel statistical model to identify subgroups of CTC patterns
that inform patient prognosis.This is a retrospective analysis of 516
patients with MBC who had CTCs serially enumerated as part of their
disease evaluation and monitoring. Two-hundred and six patients with ER+
disease and at least 3 CTC measures were identified and constitute the
cohort for this analysis. Peripheral blood samples (7.5 ml) collected
within 30 days before starting any systemic treatment were drawn into
CellSave tubes and processed within 72 hours of collection. The
standardized US Food and Drug Administration-cleared CellSearch System
was used to isolate and count CTCs. Two-stage models, consisting of
patterns of trajectories of CTCs in stage 1, defined via a latent class
zero-inflated Poisson model, followed by a probability weighted Cox model
of survival outcomes were employed. Both overall survival (OS) and
progression free survival (PFS) were considered separately. Model
selection was based on Akaike Information Criteria (AIC).Three classes of
CTC trajectories are identified (always low = L, 70.3%, controlled
moderate = M, 20.9%, high uncontrolled = H, 8.7%) with significant
differential OS (AHR M vs L 5.32, p<0.001, H vs L 10.41, p<0.001, H vs M
1.96, p = 0.039) and PFS (AHR M vs L 2.05, p<0.001, H vs L 4.24, pThe
baseline and longitudinal monitoring of circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
demonstrated strong prognostic and predictive value in patients with
metastatic breast cancer (MBC) irrespective of tumor subtype but
particularly in ER+ disease. Utilizing a cohort of ER+ MBC patients, with
longitudinal assessments of CTCs, we applied a novel statistical model to
identify subgroups of CTC patterns that inform patient prognosis.This is
a retrospective analysis of 516 patients with MBC who had CTCs serially
enumerated as part of their disease evaluation and monitoring.
Two-hundred and six patients with ER+ disease and at least 3 CTC measures
were identified and constitute the cohort for this analysis. Peripheral
blood samples (7.5 ml) collected within 30 days before starting any
systemic treatment were drawn into CellSave tubes and processed within 72
hours of collection. The standardized US Food and Drug
Administration-cleared CellSearch System was used to isolate and count
CTCs. Two-stage models, consisting of patterns of trajectories of CTCs in
stage 1, defined via a latent class zero-inflated Poisson model, followed
by a probability weighted Cox model of survival outcomes were employed.
Both overall survival (OS) and progression free survival (PFS) were
considered separately. Model selection was based on Akaike Information
Criteria (AIC).Three classes of CTC trajectories are identified (always
low = L, 70.3%, controlled moderate = M, 20.9%, high uncontrolled = H,
8.7%) with significant differential OS (AHR M vs L 5.32, p<0.001, H vs L
10.41, p<0.001, H vs M 1.96, p = 0.039) and PFS (AHR M vs L 2.05,
p<0.001, H vs L 4.24, p<0.001, H vs M 2.06, p = 0.015) in multivariable
modeling adjusting for bone metastases (Y vs. N), number of metastatic
sites, and Her2 status.In summary, longitudinal monitoring of CTCs in
patients with ER+ MBC can provide additional prognostic stratification
and predictive value compared to standard baseline assessment and could
potentially assist in better therapy selection and specific efficacy
monitoring.

