Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mouse model for chemotherapy-induced alopecia with transplantation
of human hair follicles onto immune deficient mouse


Optimized research models of chemotherapy-induced alopecia (CIA) require
for further understanding the pathogenesis and protection of CIA. The
present study was aimed to develop a new mouse model for CIA by
follicular unit transplantation of human hair follicles onto the
immune-deficient mice. At 22 weeks after transplantation, single dose of
cyclophosphamide (Cph) was treated in mice of Cph100 (100mg/kg) and
Cph150 (150mg/kg) groups. On day 6 of treatment, hair follicles showed
dystrophic anagen representing with swollen dermal papilla and ectopic
melanin clumping in the hair bulb. In addition, up-regulated P53
expression and apoptotic matrix keratinocytes, and down-regulated
expression of Ki67 and melanogenic protein in the hair bulb were also
noted in both groupsin Cph100 and Cph150. Subsequently, hair follicles in
Cph100 appeared to recover as anagen hair follicles after 9 days. Ki67
and melanogenic protein expression returned as the levels analogous to
the control. On the other hands, hair follicles of Cph150 prematurely
entered dystrophic catagen-telogen phase after 9 days of treatment. Ki67
and melanogenic protein expression in immunofluorescence staining were
barely visible. Those findings indicate that this model represented two
pathways of dystrophic anagen pathway in Cph100 and dystrophic catagen
pathway in Cph150. Our model will be a useful tool for the further
understanding of the impact of chemotherapy on the human hair follicle.

