Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of prognosis and histologic patterns by the
IASLC/ATS/ERS classification in invasive pulmonary adenocarcinoma: A
meta-analysis


Background: Invasive pulmonary adenocarcinoma is composed of five
histologic patterns including lepidic, papillary, acinar, solid, and
micropapillary patterns by the International Association for the Study of
Lung Cancer, the American Thoracic Society, and the European Respiratory
Society classification. Many researches for histologic pattern and
survival rates were performed, but confirmative relationships of
histologic pattern and patient's prognosis are unclear. Methods: We
searched PubMed using the keywords IASLC/ATS/ERS classification and
International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic
Society/European Respiratory Society. Review articles and case reports
were excluded, and duplicated data, insufficient data, and overlapping
articles are also excluded. The pooled analysis was performed with the
Comprehensive Meta-analysis Software version 2.0. Results: Lepidic
predominant pattern had significantly lower recurrence and expire than
acinar, papillary, solid or micropapillary pattern. Acinar or papillary
pattern had significantly lower recurrence and expire than solid or
micropapillary pattern. Conclusions: Invasive adenocarcinoma with lepidic
predominant pattern has better prognosis than that with the other
predominant patterns. Acinar and papillary predominant patterns have
better prognosis than solid and micropapillary predominant patterns in
invasive pulmonary adenocarcinoma. There are no different prognoses
between acinar and papillary predominant patterns, and solid and
micropapillary predominant patterns of invasive pulmonary adenocarcinoma.

