Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alcohol consumption and risk of breast cancer by molecular subtype


Purpose: Alcohol consumption is a consistent risk factor for breast
cancer, although it is unclear whether the risk varies by molecular
subtype of breast cancer. Alcohol may influence breast cancer risk via a
steroid hormone pathway, or through non-hormonal pathways, including
increasing susceptibility to DNA damage.Methods: We assessed the
associations between alcohol intake and risk of breast cancer by
molecular subtypes among 106,045 women in the prospective Nurses Health
Study (NHS) cohort. Cumulative average alcohol intake was calculated from
semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaires collected every 2-4
years. Breast cancer molecular subtypes were defined according to
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), human epidermal
growth factor 2 (HER2), cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6) and epidermal growth
factor (EGFR) status from immunostained tumor microarrays in combination
with histologic grade. Luminal A cases were ER-positive and/or
PR-positive and HER2-negative and grade 1 or 2; Luminal B cases were
either ER-positive and/or PR-positive and HER2-positive or ER-positive,
PR-positive and HER2-negative with grade 3; HER2-type cases were
ER-negative, PR-negative and HER2-positive; Basal-like cases were
negative for ER and PR, and HER2 and positive for CK 5/6 and/or EGFR;
Unclassified tumors lacked expression of all five markers. Cox
proportional hazards models adjusted for age and breast cancer risk
factors were used to estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI). Competing risk analyses were used to assess heterogeneity
in associations across subtype.Results: A total of 2,624 cases of
invasive breast cancer were diagnosed between 1980 and 2006. Alcohol
consumers had an increased risk of Luminal A (n = 1,572 cases, per
10g/day increment HR (95%CI) = 1.10(1.04-1.15)) and an increased risk
that was suggestively stronger for HER2-type (n = 166 cases, HR =
1.19(1.06-1.35)) breast cancer. We did not observe statistically
significant associations between alcohol and risk of Luminal B (n = 534
cases, HR = 1.06(0.97-1.15)), basal-like (n = 259 cases, HR =
0.88(0.76-1.03)), or unclassified (n = 93 cases, HR = 0.88(0.69-1.12))
breast cancer. There was significant heterogeneity in associations
between alcohol and breast cancer by subtype (phet = 0.006).Conclusion:
Alcohol consumption was associated with increased risk of Luminal A and
HER2-type. Given that hormone receptors are positive in Luminal A and
negative in HER2-type, our findings suggest that both hormonal and
non-hormonal mechanisms may play a role in the association between
alcohol and breast cancer.

