Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of tumor suppressor microRNA using smoking-related lung
carcinogenesis cell model


Cigarette smoking is an important risk factor for lung cancer and induces
DNA hypermethylation. Hypermethylation can silence tumor suppressor
miRNAs. However, it is less known regarding the role of miRNA methylation
in lung carcinogenesis, especially smoking-related lung cancer. We are
now to discover the smoking-induced altered tumor suppressor miRNA in
human lung carcinogenesis cell model. First, we examined miRNA expression
profiles using Affymetrix GeneChip miRNA4.0 in human lung carcinogenesis
cell model; NHBE, BEAS2B, 1799, 1198, 1170I cells (PNAS. 89:6693-97.
1992, Cancer Biol Ther. 5:665-73. 2006). And we have validated candidate
tumor suppressor miRNAs by TaqMan real time PCR. We first discovered 6
candidate tumor suppressor miRNAs (miR-4448, miR-3180-3p, miR-584-5p,
miR-3658, miR-8064, miR-371b) and we confirmed known decreased expression
of several miRNAs in lung carcinogenesis cell model. Next, we tested
methylation of candidate tumor suppressor miRNAs promoter CpG site by
pyrosequencing. Increase of methylation was observed for 4 of the 6
candidate tumor suppressor miRNAs in human lung carcinogenesis cell
model. Furthermore, methylation of miR-584-5p, miR-3658, miR-8064,
miR-371b were greater in 1198 and 1170I cells exposed to cigarette
smoking condensate (CSC). In the further study, we will confirm the role
of tumor suppressor miRNA in smoking-related lung carcinogenesis by
functional study. These finding suggest that tumor suppressor miRNAs are
miRNA silenced by epigenetic mechanisms during smoking-induced lung
carcinogenesis. This research was supported by Basic Science Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by
the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (NRF-2013R1A1A2062146)
and the Korea Health Technology R&D Project through the Korea Health
Industry Development Institute (KHIDI), funded by the Ministry of Health
& Welfare, Republic of Korea (HI13C1611).

