Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation levels in mononuclear DNA in breast cancer from
the New York site of the BCFR


Alterations in DNA methylation both at specific loci and overall, have
been associated with breast cancer. These alterations have primarily been
observed at the tissue level, although emerging studies are evaluating
white blood cell (WBC) DNA methylation.To examine whether DNA methylation
change measured prospectively in a family-based cohort are associated
with breast cancer risk, we measured methylation levels of two repetitive
elements (LINE-1, and Sat2) and three genes in mononuclear cell DNA
(BLNK, CUEDC1, and IBSP) previously identified as differentially
methylated in breast cancer in a genome-wide association study. After an
average of 8 years of followup, we observed 81 invasive incident breast
cancers and compared their methylation levels measured with baseline
bloods with the remaining 1,508 women not affected with breast cancer in
the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family Registry (BCFR). We found
that the overall percent methylation in CUEDC1 was statistically
significantly higher in breast cancer cases than in controls (78.0%
versus 76.8%, respectively, p = 0.02). In a multivariable Cox
Proportional Hazards model adjusting for age at blood draw, with each 1
unit increase in CUEDC1 methylation level, the OR for breast cancer
increased by 1.07 (95% Confidence Interval (CI) = 1.00-1.14). We did not
find the other methylation markers to be related to risk. The area under
the curve was 67.6% (95% CI = 61.4% to 73.8%) for the 5 methylation
markers and Gail risk score, compared with 63.3% for the Gail score
only.Our finding for CUEDC1 replicates the finding from the Sisters Study
supporting that selected markers selected markers of epigenetic changes
measured in WBC may be potential biomarkers of breast cancer risk.

