Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating TIP60's role in regulating cancer metastasis


HIV-Tat-interacting protein 60 KDa (TIP60) is a lysine acetyltransferase
implicated in multiple cellular pathways such as transcription, DNA
damage-induced checkpoint activation, and apoptosis. TIP60 is a
haploinsufficient tumor suppressor and known to be down-regulated in
cancers, including virus induced cancers. Cell migration or
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a highly conserved cellular
program that allows polarized, immotile epithelial cells to convert to
motile mesenchymal cells. Recent studies show that down-regulation of
TIP60 correlate with cancer metastasis with higher tumor node metastasis
(TNM) and poor survival rates. Yet the mechanism of how TIP60 regulate
EMT remains unknown. In this study we found TIP60 acts as an inhibitor of
cell migration and negatively regulates metastasis capability of breast
cancer cells. By using in vitro and in vivo models we show that
overexpression of TIP60 inhibit breast cancer metastasis. Furthermore,
analyses of our expression data reveal that the levels of cell adhesion
genes are significantly changed in the absence of TIP60. Mechanistically,
we show TIP60 to interact with Snail2 and regulate its ability to bind to
its target promoters. Interestingly, we also found that TIP60 is
significantly down-regulated in the breast cancer patient, and levels of
TIP60 were significantly decreased as the disease progressed and its
expression negatively correlates with metastasis. In summary, our data
suggests that patients with lower TIP60 expression have a poor prognosis
of overall and disease free survival.

