Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hormone therapy use and the risk of breast cancer


Introduction: There is substantial evidence that hormone therapy (HT)
with estrogen-progestin (EPT) increases the risk of breast cancer, while
it is limited for estrogen-only therapy (ET). Questions remain regarding
the effect of different formulations, preparations, and routes of
administration.Aim: To assess the risk of breast cancer in women using
different HT therapies.Methods: Information on HT use was obtained from
the Norwegian Prescription Database, and breast cancer incidence from the
Cancer Registry of Norway. Poisson regression was used to estimate the
incidence rate ratios (RR) associated with different hormone
exposures.Results: We analyzed 686,614 women born in Norway, aged 45-79
years in January 2004, followed until December 2008, of whom 178,383
(26%) were prescribed HT. During the average 4.8 years of follow-up,
7,910 invasive breast cancers were registered. Compared with non-users,
tibolone users had a RR of 1.91 (95%CI:1.61-2.28), and users of EPT with
estradiol-norethisterone a RR of 2.74 (95%CI:2.55-2.95). Users of ET with
oral or transdermal estradiol had a RR of 1.40 (95%CI:1.16-1.68), and
1.40 (95%CI:1.00-1.95), respectively. Use of ET with oral or vaginal
estriol was not associated with an increased risk. Use of continuous or
sequential combined estradiol-norethisterone EPT regimens were both
associated with an increased risk (RR:2.80; 95%CI:2.59-3.02, and 2.31;
95%CI:1.88-2.83, respectively). Kliogest (estradiol-norethisterone)-users
had the highest risk of breast cancer (RR:3.26; 95%CI:2.84-3.73). The
increased incidence rates of invasive breast cancer approximates one
extra invasive breast cancer for every 475 women using tibolone and one
for every 259 women using estradiol-NETA each year.Conclusions: Use of
estradiol-norethisterone and tibolone HT was associated with an increased
breast cancer risk. Oral and transdermal ET preparations of estradiol
seemed to confer also an elevated risk. The risks varied by route of
administration and type of preparation.Adjusted for age (5-year), number
of births, age at 1st birth and time (offset)

