Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the near-infrared fluorescent protein iRFP for
plate-based assays and animal imaging


Fluorescence imaging has been extensively used in biological research
because of its high sensitivity, signal stability, and simplicity of
multiplexing. Compared to fluorophores in the visible spectral region,
fluorophores with excitation (Ex) and emission (Em) maxima in the
near-infrared (NIR) region (700-900 nm) are desirable in many
applications. Cells, buffers and plastic materials generate less
background fluorescence in the NIR region. As a result, NIR fluorescence
imaging offers higher sensitivity and better signal-to-background ratio
(SBR) compared to visible fluorescence. In addition, due to the reduced
light absorption and scattering in animal tissues, NIR fluorescence is
particularly suitable for in vivo imaging studies. In this study, we
characterized the NIR fluorescent protein iRFP for plate-based assays and
animal imaging. HEK293 cells stably expressing iRFP were established and
designated as HEK293-iRFP. Serial dilutions of HEK293-iRFP cells were
seeded in 96-well plate and scanned on the Odyssey CLx Imaging System. A
good linear relationship between fluorescence signal intensity and cell
number was obtained. The lower limit-of-detection was determined as 763
cells. To evaluate the performance of iRFP for animal imaging, the
iRFP-expressing plasmid was delivered into mouse liver cells using a
hydrodynamic injection method. A dose- and time-dependent pattern of
fluorescence signal was observed after plasmid injection. At 8 h
post-injection of 10 g of iRFP plasmid, a SBR of 41 was observed by live
animal imaging. Analysis of liver tissue lysates revealed a SBR of 148.
Other tissues, including kidney, spleen, heart and lung, showed very
little fluorescence signal. Our results demonstrate that iRFP is a good
reporter for both plate-based assays and animal imaging studies.

