Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor DNA as a non-invasive substitute to metastasis
biopsy for targeted sequencing in a prospective randomized trial for
personalized treatment in all tumor type: The SHIVA study


Rationale: The noninvasive biomarker circulating cell-free tumor DNA
(ctDNA) has the potential to enable noninvasive diagnostic tests for
personalized medicine in providing similar molecular information as that
derived from invasive tumor biopsies. The ongoing large multicentric
randomized histology-independent phase II trial (SHIVA, NCT01771458)
compares molecularly targeted therapy based on tumor molecular profiling
versus conventional therapy in patients with any type of refractory
cancer. The screening phase consists of the invasive biopsy of metastatic
tumor tissue and downstream analysis using Ion Torrent's Ampliseq hotspot
cancer panel. We evaluated whether ctDNA analysis would identify the same
mutations as those obtained through invasive biopsy.Patients and methods:
de novo detection of somatic mutations using ctDNA in 34 patients
covering 18 different tumor types, scanning 50 genes and more than 2500
mutations with a multiplexed next generation sequencing panel.Results: In
27 patients, 27 of 28 actionable mutations identified in metastasis
biopsies (96%) were detected in matched ctDNA. Among these 27 patients,
two additional mutations were found in ctDNA only. In the seven other
patients, mutation detection from metastasis biopsy failed due to
inadequate biopsy material, but was successful in all plasma DNA samples
providing three more potential actionable mutations. Conclusion; These
results suggest that ctDNA analysis is a cheaper, safer and quicker
alternative to invasive biopsy of metastasis, irrespective of cancer type
and metastatic site, for multiplexed mutation detection in selecting
personalized therapies based on the patient's tumor genetic content.

