Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Emerging role of CITED2 in hypoxia and TGF-beta mediated
proliferation and invasion in lung cancer


Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer mortality in the world.
Metastatic property is one of the major reasons for treatment failure in
lung cancer patients. Tumor microenvironment plays a key role in shaping
tumor progression. In solid tumors, a decreased oxygen and nutrient
supply creates a hypoxic microenvironment in the central region, which
elicits a set of genes to endow cancer cells with increased survival or
proliferation abilities. On the other hand, TGF-beta, which is often
released by tumor stroma cells, attenuates cell proliferation but induces
invasion of lung cancer. How cancer cells are shaped by tumor
microenvironment with elevated proliferation and invasion abilities are
elusive. Here, we report that CITED2, a MYC interacting transcriptional
modulator, responds to hypoxia induction and TGF-beta suppression to
orchestrate cellular proliferation and invasion, respectively. We
observed that hypoxia induced CITED2 expression in a group of lung cancer
cells, the proliferation and survival of which were dependent on CITED2
signaling. TGF-beta stimulation inhibited CITED2 expression, causing
decreased cell proliferation. Nonetheless, hypoxia potentiated TGF-beta
mediated invasion and rendered cell resistant to TGF-beta induced cell
growth arrest by elevating CITED2 dependent signaling. Our findings
provide that CITED2 functions as an oncogeneic switch for hypoxia and
TGF-beta mediated proliferation and invasion in lung cancer, deserving
additional evaluation as a biomarker for lung cancer progression.

