Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative assessment of in vitro activity and aactivated
progesterone receptor (APR) biomarker predictivity for multiple
antiprogestins


Background: In absence of ligand, PRA and PRB are evenly distributed in
nuclei in cell lines. Upon ligand binding, PRA and PRB dimerizes and form
discrete focal subnuclear distribution patterns, which are associated
with transcriptional activation of PR. This pattern corresponds to the
transcriptionally active form of PR and serves as an APR biomarker. The
expression of APR in cell lines was demonstrated to be predictive of
onapristone antiproliferative effects (Serin, Abs # 473, NCI-AACR-EORTC
2012). In this study the correlation of APR to the antiproliferative
effects of different antiprogestins (Type I & type II, and
steroidal/non-steroidal chemical structures) is examined. Method: T47D
and CAMA-1, two PR expressing breast cancer cell lines, were grown in
either FBS or Steroid Free FBS (SFFBS). In FBS, single agent
anti-progestins were studied; in SFFBS, cell lines were stimulated with
estradiol (E2) or progesterone (P4) and antiprogestins tested. All
experiments were performed in duplicate. APR was analyzed at 6h and 30h
using paraffin embedded cellular pellets, and processed with standard IHC
techniques. Cellular viability was measured by the MTS assay at 30h, 4d
and 7d. Antiprogestin drugs tested included: Aglepristone, Mifepristone,
Onapristone, PF02413873, ZK230211, and ZM150271. Results: In the T47D
cell line, in FBS between zero and 40% antiproliferative activity was
observed from D1 to D7 for all antiprogestins. In SFFBS, T47D
proliferation at D7 was increased >300% by E2 and >200% by P4. All
antiprogestins opposed P4 and E2 proliferative effects at D7, with a max
of 80% inhibition relative to control. In the CAMA-1 cell line, in FBS
weak antiprogestin antiproliferative effect was observed (Background: In
absence of ligand, PRA and PRB are evenly distributed in nuclei in cell
lines. Upon ligand binding, PRA and PRB dimerizes and form discrete focal
subnuclear distribution patterns, which are associated with
transcriptional activation of PR. This pattern corresponds to the
transcriptionally active form of PR and serves as an APR biomarker. The
expression of APR in cell lines was demonstrated to be predictive of
onapristone antiproliferative effects (Serin, Abs # 473, NCI-AACR-EORTC
2012). In this study the correlation of APR to the antiproliferative
effects of different antiprogestins (Type I & type II, and
steroidal/non-steroidal chemical structures) is examined. Method: T47D
and CAMA-1, two PR expressing breast cancer cell lines, were grown in
either FBS or Steroid Free FBS (SFFBS). In FBS, single agent
anti-progestins were studied; in SFFBS, cell lines were stimulated with
estradiol (E2) or progesterone (P4) and antiprogestins tested. All
experiments were performed in duplicate. APR was analyzed at 6h and 30h
using paraffin embedded cellular pellets, and processed with standard IHC
techniques. Cellular viability was measured by the MTS assay at 30h, 4d
and 7d. Antiprogestin drugs tested included: Aglepristone, Mifepristone,
Onapristone, PF02413873, ZK230211, and ZM150271. Results: In the T47D
cell line, in FBS between zero and 40% antiproliferative activity was
observed from D1 to D7 for all antiprogestins. In SFFBS, T47D
proliferation at D7 was increased >300% by E2 and >200% by P4. All
antiprogestins opposed P4 and E2 proliferative effects at D7, with a max
of 80% inhibition relative to control. In the CAMA-1 cell line, in FBS
weak antiprogestin antiproliferative effect was observed (<20%
inhibition); with SFFBS, P4 and E2 were weakly stimulatory and
antiprogestins had an inconsistent and weak treatment effect. The effect
of antiprogestins were not dose dependent. APR: in T47D and FBS, APR was
observed at 6h consistently for PR A and PR B. At 30h, controls were APR
positive, and with Aglepristone, Mifepristone and Onapristone treatment,
the surviving cells were APR neg; PF02413873, ZK230211and ZM150271 APR
effect was inconsistent. Specimens from SFFBS are under evaluation. For
CAMA-1, in FBS PRA and PRB were weakly expressed i.e. in 5% of the cells;
APR was always negative. Specimens from SFFBS are under evaluation.
Conclusion: The cell line expressing APR, T47D, is sensitive to direct
antiprogestins effect in FBS, to E2 and P4 growth stimulation in SFFBS.
In T47D, there was an antagonism by all antiprogestins at D7 and APR
status was reversed at 30 h completely in 3/6 cases and incompletely in
3/6. CAMA-1 does not express APR, is weakly stimulated by E2 and P4, and
antiprogestins have inconsistent effects in this cell line. APR status is
a predictor of antiprogestin action.

