Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DLEU1 significantly alters programmed cell death in
chemoimmunotherapy-treated TALENs-induced DLEU1 knockout and DLEU1
overexpressing Burkitt Lymphoma (BL): DLEU1 may act as a tumor suppressor
gene in pediatric BL


BACKGROUND:Burkitt Lymphoma (BL) is the most common histological subtype
of childhood and adolescent Non Hodgkin Lymphoma (Cairo et al, Blood
2007; Miles/Cairo, BJH 2012). Pediatric patients with BL with a
chromosome 13q deletion, particularly 13q14.3, had significantly poorer
outcome and inferior overall survival despite aggressive short, intensive
multi-agent chemotherapy (Poirel/Cairo et al, Leukemia 2009;
Nelson/Cairo/Sanger et al, BJH 2009). Deleted in Lymphocytic Leukemia 1
(DLEU1) is a BL classifier gene in the 13q14.3 (Dave et al, NEJM 2006)
and it has been implicated in regulating programmed cell death in
patients. Sequence-specific Transcription Activator-Like Effector
Nucleases (TALENs) have been developed for precision targeted genome
editing in in vitro and in vivo (Sander et al, Nat Bio
2011).OBJECTIVES:We hypothesize that DLEU1 may act as a tumor suppressor
gene and therefore investigated whether DLEU1 expression results in
changes in gene expression profiles, cell viability, apoptosis induced by
chemoimmunotherapy regimens in DLEU1 knockout and/or DLEU1 overexpressing
Raji BL cells.METHODS:TALEN-mediated DLEU1 knockout (DLEU1-KO) and DLEU1
overexpressing Raji BL cells (DLEU1-OE) were treated with Rituximab (RTX)
and/or Cyclophosphamide (CTX). MTS, Caspase assay, qRT-PCR, western blot,
and gene expression profiling using Affymetrix HG-133+ 2.0 arrays were
performed.RESULTS:A significant decrease of apoptosis in DLEU1-KO
(32.511.8%, pBACKGROUND:Burkitt Lymphoma (BL) is the most common
histological subtype of childhood and adolescent Non Hodgkin Lymphoma
(Cairo et al, Blood 2007; Miles/Cairo, BJH 2012). Pediatric patients with
BL with a chromosome 13q deletion, particularly 13q14.3, had
significantly poorer outcome and inferior overall survival despite
aggressive short, intensive multi-agent chemotherapy (Poirel/Cairo et al,
Leukemia 2009; Nelson/Cairo/Sanger et al, BJH 2009). Deleted in
Lymphocytic Leukemia 1 (DLEU1) is a BL classifier gene in the 13q14.3
(Dave et al, NEJM 2006) and it has been implicated in regulating
programmed cell death in patients. Sequence-specific Transcription
Activator-Like Effector Nucleases (TALENs) have been developed for
precision targeted genome editing in in vitro and in vivo (Sander et al,
Nat Bio 2011).OBJECTIVES:We hypothesize that DLEU1 may act as a tumor
suppressor gene and therefore investigated whether DLEU1 expression
results in changes in gene expression profiles, cell viability, apoptosis
induced by chemoimmunotherapy regimens in DLEU1 knockout and/or DLEU1
overexpressing Raji BL cells.METHODS:TALEN-mediated DLEU1 knockout
(DLEU1-KO) and DLEU1 overexpressing Raji BL cells (DLEU1-OE) were treated
with Rituximab (RTX) and/or Cyclophosphamide (CTX). MTS, Caspase assay,
qRT-PCR, western blot, and gene expression profiling using Affymetrix
HG-133+ 2.0 arrays were performed.RESULTS:A significant decrease of
apoptosis in DLEU1-KO (32.511.8%, p<.05) and a significant increase in
DLEU1-OE (9.75.5%, p2 fold, p2 fold, p<.05) and 79.8% of genes including
signaling pathways and anti-apoptosis related genes including ATK1, ikBa
and Bcl-2 were upregulated in DLEU1-KO.. There was a significant decrease
in apoptosis with RTX, CTX and in combination (0.850.05, 0.760.09, and
0.650.17, p2 fold, p<.05) and 79.8% of genes including signaling pathways
and anti-apoptosis related genes including ATK1, ikBa and Bcl-2 were
upregulated in DLEU1-KO.. There was a significant decrease in apoptosis
with RTX, CTX and in combination (0.850.05, 0.760.09, and 0.650.17,
p<.05, respectively) in DLEU1-KO whereas a significant increase with RTX
(11.5%, p2 fold, p<.05) and 79.8% of genes including signaling pathways
and anti-apoptosis related genes including ATK1, ikBa and Bcl-2 were
upregulated in DLEU1-KO.. There was a significant decrease in apoptosis
with RTX, CTX and in combination (0.850.05, 0.760.09, and 0.650.17,
p<.05, respectively) in DLEU1-KO whereas a significant increase with RTX
(11.5%, p<.05), CTX (13.9%, p2 fold, p<.05) and 79.8% of genes including
signaling pathways and anti-apoptosis related genes including ATK1, ikBa
and Bcl-2 were upregulated in DLEU1-KO.. There was a significant decrease
in apoptosis with RTX, CTX and in combination (0.850.05, 0.760.09, and
0.650.17, p<.05, respectively) in DLEU1-KO whereas a significant increase
with RTX (11.5%, p<.05), CTX (13.9%, p<.05) in DLEU1-OE. A significant
increase in cell proliferation was observed with RTX, CTX and combination
(1.140.06, 1.10.06, and 1.090.02, p2 fold, p<.05) and 79.8% of genes
including signaling pathways and anti-apoptosis related genes including
ATK1, ikBa and Bcl-2 were upregulated in DLEU1-KO.. There was a
significant decrease in apoptosis with RTX, CTX and in combination
(0.850.05, 0.760.09, and 0.650.17, p<.05, respectively) in DLEU1-KO
whereas a significant increase with RTX (11.5%, p<.05), CTX (13.9%,
p<.05) in DLEU1-OE. A significant increase in cell proliferation was
observed with RTX, CTX and combination (1.140.06, 1.10.06, and 1.090.02,
p<.05) in DLEU1-KO whereas a significant decrease with RTX, CTX and in
combination (0.920.01, 0.890.04, and 0.870.04, p2 fold, p<.05) and 79.8%
of genes including signaling pathways and anti-apoptosis related genes
including ATK1, ikBa and Bcl-2 were upregulated in DLEU1-KO.. There was a
significant decrease in apoptosis with RTX, CTX and in combination
(0.850.05, 0.760.09, and 0.650.17, p<.05, respectively) in DLEU1-KO
whereas a significant increase with RTX (11.5%, p<.05), CTX (13.9%,
p<.05) in DLEU1-OE. A significant increase in cell proliferation was
observed with RTX, CTX and combination (1.140.06, 1.10.06, and 1.090.02,
p<.05) in DLEU1-KO whereas a significant decrease with RTX, CTX and in
combination (0.920.01, 0.890.04, and 0.870.04, p<.05, respectively) in
DLEU1-OE vs control.CONCLUSIONS:We demonstrate that 1) DLEU1 knockout
resulted in significant changes of ikBa and Akt1 expression, inhibition
of apoptosis and increase of viability in RTX and CTX treatment; 2) DLEU1
overexpression significantly inhibited cell viability and increased
apoptosis in RTX and CTX treatment. We hypothesize that deletion of DLEU1
in pediatric BL may in part result in chemotherapy resistance secondarily
to a loss of a tumor suppressor gene.

