Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of individual foci of multifocal invasive lobular
breast cancer using gene expression profiling


Introduction: Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) comprises approximately
10-20% of breast cancers (BC) and appears to have a distinct biology from
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). ILC is known to have a higher incidence
of multifocal (MF) disease when compared to IDC (Biglia N, EJSO, 2013)
and in general, MF BC has been associated with an increased rate of
regional lymph node metastases (Cabioglu N, JACS, 2009). Treatment
decisions are most often defined by the largest of the MF tumors without
targeting potentially relevant biologic heterogeneity of the disease. We
conducted a genomic analysis of MF ILC to help address this knowledge
void.Methods: We characterized gene expression in multiple foci from 11
patients (pts) with MF ILC (all ER+ and HER2-, mean number of foci =
2.62) and 13 benign breast tissues. RNA was extracted from 31.5mm cores
from each foci and gene expression was measured in 730 known cancer genes
using the NanoString PanCancer pathways panel. Differential gene
expression analyses were performed between 1) MF tumors and benign tissue
(BT) accounting for pairing of pts and 2) different foci of MF tumors
from the same ILC pt by ANOVA. The association of clinical covariates
(age, number of tumors, grade and stage) in the top genes that were
differentially expressed between multiple foci was assessed by linear
mixed models accounting for pt and tumor.Results: A total of 20 genes
(including MET and EGFR, top 5 genes: SPRY2, SOX17, FIGF, PDGFA, IL6)
were differentially expressed (pIntroduction: Invasive lobular carcinoma
(ILC) comprises approximately 10-20% of breast cancers (BC) and appears
to have a distinct biology from invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). ILC is
known to have a higher incidence of multifocal (MF) disease when compared
to IDC (Biglia N, EJSO, 2013) and in general, MF BC has been associated
with an increased rate of regional lymph node metastases (Cabioglu N,
JACS, 2009). Treatment decisions are most often defined by the largest of
the MF tumors without targeting potentially relevant biologic
heterogeneity of the disease. We conducted a genomic analysis of MF ILC
to help address this knowledge void.Methods: We characterized gene
expression in multiple foci from 11 patients (pts) with MF ILC (all ER+
and HER2-, mean number of foci = 2.62) and 13 benign breast tissues. RNA
was extracted from 31.5mm cores from each foci and gene expression was
measured in 730 known cancer genes using the NanoString PanCancer
pathways panel. Differential gene expression analyses were performed
between 1) MF tumors and benign tissue (BT) accounting for pairing of pts
and 2) different foci of MF tumors from the same ILC pt by ANOVA. The
association of clinical covariates (age, number of tumors, grade and
stage) in the top genes that were differentially expressed between
multiple foci was assessed by linear mixed models accounting for pt and
tumor.Results: A total of 20 genes (including MET and EGFR, top 5 genes:
SPRY2, SOX17, FIGF, PDGFA, IL6) were differentially expressed (p<0.05)
between malignant foci from the same pt, after correction by false
discovery rate (FDR). EGFR expression was also negatively associated with
the number of positive lymph nodes (N1a vs N0 absolute fold change =
0.51, p = 0.043). We observed an excess of genes that were down-regulated
in MF ILC compared to BT. 277 genes were differentially expressed at
pIntroduction: Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) comprises approximately
10-20% of breast cancers (BC) and appears to have a distinct biology from
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). ILC is known to have a higher incidence
of multifocal (MF) disease when compared to IDC (Biglia N, EJSO, 2013)
and in general, MF BC has been associated with an increased rate of
regional lymph node metastases (Cabioglu N, JACS, 2009). Treatment
decisions are most often defined by the largest of the MF tumors without
targeting potentially relevant biologic heterogeneity of the disease. We
conducted a genomic analysis of MF ILC to help address this knowledge
void.Methods: We characterized gene expression in multiple foci from 11
patients (pts) with MF ILC (all ER+ and HER2-, mean number of foci =
2.62) and 13 benign breast tissues. RNA was extracted from 31.5mm cores
from each foci and gene expression was measured in 730 known cancer genes
using the NanoString PanCancer pathways panel. Differential gene
expression analyses were performed between 1) MF tumors and benign tissue
(BT) accounting for pairing of pts and 2) different foci of MF tumors
from the same ILC pt by ANOVA. The association of clinical covariates
(age, number of tumors, grade and stage) in the top genes that were
differentially expressed between multiple foci was assessed by linear
mixed models accounting for pt and tumor.Results: A total of 20 genes
(including MET and EGFR, top 5 genes: SPRY2, SOX17, FIGF, PDGFA, IL6)
were differentially expressed (p<0.05) between malignant foci from the
same pt, after correction by false discovery rate (FDR). EGFR expression
was also negatively associated with the number of positive lymph nodes
(N1a vs N0 absolute fold change = 0.51, p = 0.043). We observed an excess
of genes that were down-regulated in MF ILC compared to BT. 277 genes
were differentially expressed at p<0.05 after correction by FDR. The top
5 differentially expressed genes (by fold change) between ILC and BT were
COL11A1, COL1A1, WIF1, FIGF and PROM1. CDH1, a known marker of ILC, was
down-regulated in ILC compared to benign (absolute fold change = 2.54, p
= 6.02106), ranked only 39/277 genes by fold change. MET and EGFR ranked
29 and 42/277 genes (p = 5.99109 and 3.32108 respectively).Conclusion: We
observed significant heterogeneity for 20/730 genes between individual
foci of MF ILC within the same pt suggesting that MF synchronous ILC
lesions may have different biologic behavior. This in turn may have
important prognostic implications with potential therapeutic utility. Our
analyses also shows significant down-regulation of gene expression
between ILC tumors and BT for many genes other than CDH1 suggesting that
additional biomarkers can be used to further characterize ILC Study
funded in part by Mayo Clinic Cancer Focus Research Team, the 26.2 with
Donna Foundation and the Serene M. and Frances C. Durling endowment.

