Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of small animal image-guided irradiation to
preclinical in vivo models, such as patient-derived xenografts, to inform
on combination strategies


BACKGROUND: Patient derived xenograft (PDX) models sustain tumour
heterogeneity and genetic integrity of the original patient sample when
passaged in vivo and are highly predictive of clinical efficacy. As such
PDX models are widely used for preclinical efficacy testing of
anti-cancer agents Radiotherapy is a primary, adjuvant or neoadjuvant
treatment for a number of different cancers including lung, breast and
prostate with advances in image-guided micro-irradiation (IGMI) being
widely used to treat patients providing reduced side effect and more
accurate targeting of the tumour. However the use of IGMI in the
preclinical setting is less common with traditional irradiation studies
utilising a single beam or whole body irradiation with lead shielding to
focus the radiation to a specific area on the animal. Here we report the
application of the small animal radiation research platform (SARRP) to
preclinical models to demonstrate sensitivity and resistance
profiling.METHODS: PDX models were generated from NSCLC samples obtained
from untreated patients undergoing surgery implanted and maintained in
serial passage subcutaneously in MF-1 nude mice (Harlan UK). Tumour
growth was monitored by calliper measurements three times weekly and mice
recruited to a study when mean tumour volume was 200mm3.For irradiation,
mice were anaesthetised and CBCT images were acquired using the small
animal research platform (SARRP). The MuriSlice software was used to
identify the isocenter of the tumour and fractionated irradiation
administered (225 kV peak X-ray beams; dose rate of 2.5 Gy/min) using a
multi beam approach in order to spare the surrounding normal tissue.
Bodyweight and clinical condition of mice monitored daily.RESULTS:
Fractionated irradiation doses were successfully delivered to the tumours
over a 2 week period, whilst sparing the surrounding normal tissue using
the SARRP. Response to treatment was evaluated by tumour growth
inhibition. Models across a panel of Caucasian NSCLC PDX were reported to
be either responsive or resistant to treatment which was correlated to
the molecular characterisation (RNA sequencing) as well as response to
other treatments such as standard of care treatment.CONCLUSIONS: PDX
models can be dosed with irradiation using the SARRP platform effectively
with reduced side effects, improved safety and used to evaluate
combinations with anti-cancer agents to derive irradiation schedules and
regimens suitable for testing subsequently in clinical trials.

