Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel variant in DNA repair gene GTF2H4 is associated with lung
cancer risk: A reanalysis of GWAS datasets from the TRICL consortium


DNA repair pathways maintain genomic integrity and stability, and
dysfunction of DNA repair is involved in cancer. We hypothesize that
genetic variants in DNA repair genes are associated with risk of lung
cancer. To test this hypothesis, we performed a large-scale meta-analysis
of 123,371 SNPs in 169 DNA repair genes obtained from six datasets of
previously published genome-wide association studies (GWASs), consisting
of 12,160 lung cancer cases and 16,838 controls. We evaluated functional
relevance of the identified, previously unpublished important and
significant SNPs. Across the six GWASs, 14 SNPs were found to be
significantly associated with lung cancer risk with a false discovery
rate (FDR) of P DNA repair pathways maintain genomic integrity and
stability, and dysfunction of DNA repair is involved in cancer. We
hypothesize that genetic variants in DNA repair genes are associated with
risk of lung cancer. To test this hypothesis, we performed a large-scale
meta-analysis of 123,371 SNPs in 169 DNA repair genes obtained from six
datasets of previously published genome-wide association studies (GWASs),
consisting of 12,160 lung cancer cases and 16,838 controls. We evaluated
functional relevance of the identified, previously unpublished important
and significant SNPs. Across the six GWASs, 14 SNPs were found to be
significantly associated with lung cancer risk with a false discovery
rate (FDR) of P < 0.05, of which rs114596632 in GTF2H4 at 6q31.33 was the
most statistically significant SNP (OR = 1.19, 95% CI = 1.12-1.25,
Pcombined = 5.40 1010). The SNP rs114596632 was not strongly correlated
with the previously reported GWAS hit MSH5 rs3131379 in that region (r2 =
0.383). Further mapping of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region
identified that rs114596632 was partially tagged by HLA-B*0801 (r2 =
0.592) and HLA-C*0701 (r2 = 0.675). Importantly, the rs114596632 T allele
was significantly associated with decreased DNA repair capacity (DRC)
measured in peripheral T lymphocytes and decreased mRNA expression levels
of GTF2H4 in lymphoblastoid cell lines. We also validated two previously
known SNPs in DNA repair genes MSH5 and XRCC4 associated with lung cancer
risk. Subsequent pathway analysis with gene relationships across
implicated loci (GRAIL) revealed multiple significant connections for
GTF2H4, ERCC2, and MMS19. Our results provide evidence that genetic
variants of GTF2H4 confer susceptibility to lung cancer and suggest the
involvement of GTF2H4 in the etiology of lung cancer. (Supported by
U19CA148127, R01CA CA074386, R01CA092824 and the start-up funds from Duke
Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center)

