Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BMI-1 inhibition by PTC-209 induces mitochondrial apoptosis in
acute myeloid leukemia cells


Leukemia stem cells play important roles in leukemia initiation,
progression, and relapse, and represent a critical target for therapeutic
intervention. BMI-1 is essential for the self-renewal of normal
hematopoietic and leukemia stem cells. High expression of BMI-1 has been
associated with poor prognosis in AML. PTC-209 is a novel transcriptional
inhibitor of BMI-1, which has been reported to exhibit antitumor activity
against cancer-initiating cells in colorectal cancer. We investigated
anti-leukemia effects of the BMI-1 inhibitor PTC-209 on AML cells. A
total of 8 AML cell lines (MOLM-13, OCI-AML3, MV4-11, NB4, HL-60, U-937,
MOLM-14, OCI-AML2) were treated with different concentrations of PTC-209
for 48 hours and the IC50 values (concentration at which cell growth is
inhibited by 50% at 48 hours of exposure) and the ED50 values (effective
concentration inducing 50% killing as measured by Annexin V positivity)
were determined. The IC50 values were 0.38 0.07 M (mean SEM), indicating
high anti-proliferation effect. The ED50 values ranged from 1.2 to 2.6 M
in 7 cell lines (1.97 0.22 M) and the remaining cell line (NB4) showed
relative resistance to PTC-induced apoptosis (> 10 M). PTC-209 exhibited
dose- and time-dependent anti-proliferative and cytotoxic activities, by
inducing G1-S transition delay and apoptosis. PTC-209 induced
conformational change of BAX (i.e., BAX activation), loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), caspase-3 activation and DNA
fragmentation in addition to phosphatidylserine (PS) externalization,
indicating mitochondrial apoptosis. PTC-209 induced Annexin V in primary
AML cells (23.4 4.6% after 48-hour treatment with 1 M PTC-209, n = 23) in
a dose-dependent manner, which is more prominent in immature CD34+CD38-
population (33.7 6.0%; P = 0.0036). In accordance with its high
anti-leukemia activity, PTC-209 strongly reduced cellular BMI-1 levels in
CD34+CD38- AML cells. Higher reduction of BMI-1 expression was positively
correlated with higher susceptibility to PTC-209 in CD34+CD38- AML cells
(r = 0.88; P = 0.047). The apoptotic activity was observed independent of
p53 or FLT3 mutational status of the leukemia cells. Our data suggest
that BMI-1 inhibition by small molecule inhibitors may be developed into
a novel therapeutic strategy for AML. (Drs M. Andreeff and S. Kimura are
co-senior authors with equal contribution to the work)

