Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Addition of repositioned-drug dexamethasone improves anti-leukemia
synergy between HDAC inhibitors and nucleoside analogs


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous collection of bone marrow
clonal disorders that leads to clonal expansion and ineffective
hematopoiesis, remaining incurable in the majority of adult patients. The
physiopathology of this disease involves impaired epigenetic regulation
and resistance to conventional treatment. Such epigenetic marks can be
reversed by nucleoside analogs (NA) DNA methyltransferase inhibitors
(DNMTis) such as azacitidine (AZA) and decitabine (standard treatment for
pre-AML myelodysplastic syndromes; MDS), and histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACis). These agents synergistically induce re-expression of
silenced genes resulting in cell growth arrest, differentiation and
apoptosis. We have shown that interactions between NA and HDACis relied
on mechanisms modulating activation of pro-survival NA-mediated NF-kB
signaling, based on which we analyzed several original transcriptional
expression datasets related to the treatment of AZA or HDACis in AML cell
lines, xenografts and MDS/AML patients, and identified dexamethasone
(DEX) as a candidate repositioned-drug: 1) DEX could suppress the VEGFA,
STAT5, inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and their cognate receptors
gene sets in primary human bone marrow progenitor cells, which are
significantly activated in MDS/AML patients resistant to AZA+HDACi
treatment; 2) DEX could inhibit the alternative activated signaling
molecules responsible for resistance to AZA; 3) two clusters of
aberrantly methylated (hypo and hyper) genes examined were significantly
enriched in blasts from MDS patients comparing with healthy people, and
DEX was able to normalize expression of these genes; 4) DEX could
suppress the elevated target genes of P210 BCR-ABL gene fusion in MDS
patients; and, importantly 5) DEX has wide inhibitory effects on the
NF-kB pathway-targeted cytokines, chemokines, and their modulators on
human bone marrow CD34+ cells compared to untreated cells. Repositioned
DEX was validated in human leukemia cells exposed to HDACi/NA, a
situation where a marked reduction in the synergism exists because of
strong NF-kB activation. In the presence of DEX, either the drugs alone
or in combination displayed a significant increase in lethality, notably
in the case of HDACi/NA. As expected from our analysis, DEX inhibited
HDACi/NA-induced NF-kB activation in human leukemia cells; importantly,
co-administering HDACi/NA with DEX had a major impact on the outcome of
the drug combination. This new concept is critically relevant for
therapies involving NA and HDACis since AML cells that are still alive
after treatment constitute one of the main sources of chemo-resistance.
Thus, addition of DEX to the therapeutic intervention which results in
almost 100% cell death, may directly affect this small percentage of
cells with increased survival capacity, and thereby reduce/delay the
probability of relapse.

