Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation status of HPV16 E2-binding sites identifies subtypes
of HPV-associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas


Background: The viral E2 protein is a transcriptional repressor of the
HPV oncogenes E6/E7 and loss of E2 function is considered a key step in
carcinogenesis. Integration of HPV into the host genome may disrupt the
E2 gene. Furthermore, methylation of CpG dinucleotides in E2 binding
sites (E2BSs) in the HPV upstream regulatory region (URR) may interfere
with transcriptional repression of E6 and E7 by the E2 protein. We
hypothesized that CpG methylation of the E2BS is found in a proportion of
HPV16-associated oropharyngeal squamous cell cancers (OPSCC) in
association with E2 gene integrity and viral integration.Methods:
Methylation of 10 CpGs within the URR, encompassing E2BSs 1, 2, 3 and 4,
was quantitatively analyzed by bisulfite pyrosequencing in 57
HPV16-associated OPSCC. E2 status was analyzed by gene amplification and
quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Viral integration was determined by
integration-specific PCR methods.Results: Three subgroups with
differential E2BSs3 and 4 methylation were identified: a) complete
methylation (>80%) associated with presence of integrated HPV genomes
with intact E2 gene, b) intermediate methylation levels (20-80%) with
predominantly episomal HPV genomes with intact E2, and c) no methylation
(Background: The viral E2 protein is a transcriptional repressor of the
HPV oncogenes E6/E7 and loss of E2 function is considered a key step in
carcinogenesis. Integration of HPV into the host genome may disrupt the
E2 gene. Furthermore, methylation of CpG dinucleotides in E2 binding
sites (E2BSs) in the HPV upstream regulatory region (URR) may interfere
with transcriptional repression of E6 and E7 by the E2 protein. We
hypothesized that CpG methylation of the E2BS is found in a proportion of
HPV16-associated oropharyngeal squamous cell cancers (OPSCC) in
association with E2 gene integrity and viral integration.Methods:
Methylation of 10 CpGs within the URR, encompassing E2BSs 1, 2, 3 and 4,
was quantitatively analyzed by bisulfite pyrosequencing in 57
HPV16-associated OPSCC. E2 status was analyzed by gene amplification and
quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Viral integration was determined by
integration-specific PCR methods.Results: Three subgroups with
differential E2BSs3 and 4 methylation were identified: a) complete
methylation (>80%) associated with presence of integrated HPV genomes
with intact E2 gene, b) intermediate methylation levels (20-80%) with
predominantly episomal HPV genomes with intact E2, and c) no methylation
(<20%) with integrated HPV with disrupted E2. Patients with complete and
without methylation had poor 5-year overall survival compared to patients
with intermediate methylation (stage-adjusted hazard ratio 3.8 (95%CI
1.3-11.2) and 3.1 (95%CI 1.14-8.28); p = 0.03).Conclusions: E2BSs3 and 4
methylation in oropharyngeal cancers with episomal HPV and integrated HPV
with intact E2 gene might explain deregulated viral oncogene expression
in the presence of E2. The methylation level appears to be of prognostic
significance for patients with HPV-associated OPSCC.

