Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In situ delivery and production of anti-HER2 scFv


Introduction: Trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting human
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2), has become the main
therapeutics for HER2-positive breast cancers. Recently, active scFvs
(single-chain variable fragment) were produced and anti-tumor function
like BITE (Bi-specific T cell engagers) has been added to improve the
antitumor efficacy. On the one hand, the in situ delivery and continuous
production of anti-cancer drugs at the tumor site will be required to
evade adverse effects and elevate the dose of anti-cancer drugs in tumor
tissues. We have established such in situ Delivery and continuous
Production System (iDPS) with Bifidobacterium that can selectively target
hypoxic microenvironment of solid cancer tissues. The purpose of the
present study is to establish continuous production and secretion system
for biologically active anti-HER2 scFv by Bifidobacterium.Materials and
Methods: We constructed an expression vector of anti-HER2 scFv based on
the cDNA sequence of anti-HER2 antibody for E. coli. The biological
activity of the product was examined by ELISA, FACS,
fluorescence-immunostaining and MTT assay for cell growth using
differentially HER2-expressing human cell lines. Anti-tumor activity was
assessed by intratumoral injection with the anti-HER2 scFv for tumors of
a human breast cancer cell line transplanted into nude mice. We further
modified the above vector for E. coli. to make a shuttle vector for
Bifidobacterium. The binding activity of the product to HER2 was
confirmed by ELISA and the primary structure was examined by
LC-MS.Results: First, we succeeded in producing the recombinant scFv by
E. coli, which showed specific binding to HER2. The anti-HER2 scFv
inhibited the in vitro growth of several HER2-positive human cancer cell
lines with the same efficiency as Trastuzumab. The intratumoral injection
of the recombinant anti-HER2 scFv to transplanted human breast cancer
tissues in nude mice showed a significant inhibition of the tumor growth.
Next, to prepare iDPS of anti-HER2 scFv, we developed a recombinant
Bifidobacterium longum to express and secrete anti-HER2 scFv, which was
shown to bind to HER2 by ELISA, and its primary structure was confirmed
to be the same as the recombinant anti-HER2 scFv produced by E.
coli.Conclusion: We believe that iDPS for anti-cancer substances like
anti-HER2 scFv can contribute to the reduction of adverse effects and a
better-cost performance than current antibody medicines. Importantly, the
upcoming study to modify anti-HER2 scFv to carry BITEs-like activity will
be planned, which can provide much more therapeutic effects for not only
breast cancers but also other cancers expressing HER2.

