Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of 2D - cell strain and 3D - tumor spheroid models for
Precision Medicine


BackgroundPrecision oncology is a clinical approach aimed towards
tailoring treatment strategies for patients based on the genetic profile
of each patient's malignancy. Available cell line models are greatly
limited in recapitulating the genetic profile of the tumor and tumor
microenvironment of patients and therefore limit preclinical evaluation
of new targeted agents. Furthermore, a high failure rate of drug
candidates can be attributed in part to use of two dimensional (2D)
monolayer cultures as the initial screening method that frequently
produces inaccurate results and does not predict chemoresistance. The
ability of three dimensional (3D) cultured tumor cells derived directly
from patients to recapitulate tumor-like microenvironment suggests that
engineered tumor models may provide more accurate and reproducible
information for drug testing. At the Institute for Precision Medicine, we
grow patient-derived 2D cell strains and engineer 3D tumor spheroids for
patient`s tumor specific drug testing.DesignFresh tissue samples from 30
different solid tumors were digested in Type II or IV Collagenase (Gibco)
and then re-suspended in growth factor reduced Matrigel (BD), plated on
plastic, and overlaid with cell type specific cell growth media tsCM,
which consists of either serum free Advanced DMEM/F12 (Gibco) with
multiple growth factors optimized to propagate benign primary tumor
cells, or FBS enriched DMEM/F12 media. Cultures were maintained at 37C in
5% CO2. Once established, early cell strain culture passage and tumor
spheroids size BackgroundPrecision oncology is a clinical approach aimed
towards tailoring treatment strategies for patients based on the genetic
profile of each patient's malignancy. Available cell line models are
greatly limited in recapitulating the genetic profile of the tumor and
tumor microenvironment of patients and therefore limit preclinical
evaluation of new targeted agents. Furthermore, a high failure rate of
drug candidates can be attributed in part to use of two dimensional (2D)
monolayer cultures as the initial screening method that frequently
produces inaccurate results and does not predict chemoresistance. The
ability of three dimensional (3D) cultured tumor cells derived directly
from patients to recapitulate tumor-like microenvironment suggests that
engineered tumor models may provide more accurate and reproducible
information for drug testing. At the Institute for Precision Medicine, we
grow patient-derived 2D cell strains and engineer 3D tumor spheroids for
patient`s tumor specific drug testing.DesignFresh tissue samples from 30
different solid tumors were digested in Type II or IV Collagenase (Gibco)
and then re-suspended in growth factor reduced Matrigel (BD), plated on
plastic, and overlaid with cell type specific cell growth media tsCM,
which consists of either serum free Advanced DMEM/F12 (Gibco) with
multiple growth factors optimized to propagate benign primary tumor
cells, or FBS enriched DMEM/F12 media. Cultures were maintained at 37C in
5% CO2. Once established, early cell strain culture passage and tumor
spheroids size < 500 m were cryopreserved. Specific drug testing was
performed following 3 models: 2D monolayer culture, 2D monolayer culture
converted in a 3D system using the hanging drop system from Biomatrix 3D,
and engineered 3D tumor spheroids.ResultsOur success rate in generating
2D- cell strains and 3D tumor spheroids is about 30%-40%. In the initial
30 samples, we were able to establish 11 continuous 2D and 3D tumor
spheroid cultures derived from distinct primary and metastatic cancers
including prostate, kidney, bladder and endometrium, as well as sarcomas
and a neuroendocrine tumor. Tumor content in biopsy represents a major
factor for successful growth. Histology and cytology examination
demonstrates that 3D tumor spheroids recapitulate harvested tumors. Next
generation sequencing shows the presence of same genomic alterations
compared with original tumor without generating additional
mutations.ConclusionWe have developed individual patient-derived 2D tumor
cell strains and 3D engineered tumor spheroids as well as models for
patient`s tumor specific drug testing. This effort has been implemented
for Precision Care and Clinical Trials at our Institution.

