Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of the breast cancer-associated antigen
NY-BR-1


Breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies with increasing
incidence every year and a leading cause of death among women. Although
early stage breast cancer can be effectively treated, there are limited
numbers of treatment options available for patients with advanced and
metastatic disease.The breast cancer associated antigen NY-BR-1 was
identified by a serological screening strategy (SEREX). NY-BR-1 is
expressed in the majority (>70%) of breast tumors as well as metastases,
in normal breast tissue, in testis, and occasionally in prostate tissue.
NY-BR-1 was confirmed as an immunogenic antigen as we could detect
NY-BR-1 specific spontaneous humoral and cellular immune responses in
several breast cancer patients.However, biological function, regulatory
mechanisms, and interaction partners of NY-BR-1 are still unknown.
Therefore, we combined integrative functional analysis (genomics,
transcriptomics and epigenetics) and experiments to unravel the
transcriptional regulation of NY-BR-1 and to detect its function within
the mammary gland.As numerous binding sites for nuclear hormone receptors
(e.g. Estrogen Receptor alpha, Progesterone receptor and Glucocorticoid
receptor) and CpG islands were predicted within the promoter sequence of
NY-BR-1, primary-tissues from breast reductions or tumor cells obtained
from pleural effusions were treated with different hormones (Estradiol,
Dexamethasone, Progesterone, Retinoic acid, Vitamin D) or with the HDAC
inhibitors Valproic acid, Trichostatin A and the demethylating agent
5Aza-Deoxycytidine in order to analyze the transcriptional regulation of
NY-BR-1.Additionally, we analyzed the methylation status at various sites
within the promoter region of NY-BR-1 using EpiTyper MassARRAY technology
and publicly available resources such as the TCGA database. Here, we
present preliminary results of our analysis and evaluate their
implication for further investigation of NY-BR-1.

