Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Possible role of nimbolide in prevention and therapy of prostate
cancer


Prostate cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers worldwide.
Current therapies for metastatic prostate cancer are only marginally
effective, and hence novel treatment modalities are urgently needed.
Considerable evidence suggests that chronic inflammation plays a pivotal
role in the development and progression of prostate cancer. Thus agents
that can suppress these inflammatory mediators could form the basis of
novel therapy for prostate cancer patients. In our study, we focused on
analyzing the potential anticancer effects of nimbolide, a terpenoid
lactone derived from Azadirachta indica (Neem tree) against prostate
cancer. Data from the in vitro studies indicated that nimbolide could
inhibit cell proliferation, induce apoptosis and suppress cellular
invasion and migration. Interestingly, nimbolide also abrogated the
activation of pro-inflammatory STAT3 transcription factor, and this
effect was found to be mediated via an increased production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS), whereas depletion of ROS attenuated p-STAT3
inhibitory effects of the drug. The in vivo efficacy of nimbolide was
also analyzed in transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP)
model, in which this triterpenoid significantly suppressed the tumor
progression and growth without exhibiting any significant adverse
effects. Overall our findings indicate that nimbolide exhibits
significant anticancer effects in prostate cancer, and these effects may
be mediated at least in part through the modulation of STAT3 signaling
pathway.

