Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of p21 in the toxicity of mitomycin C and
decarbamoylmitomycin C


The mitomycins are a family of antitumor antibiotics made by
Streptomyces. One member of this family, mitomycin C (MC), is currently
used to treat certain cancers. Its mode of action has been extensively
examined. In comparison, 10-decarbamoyl mitomycin C (DMC) has not been
the object of such intense investigation. It has recently been found to
form similar or identical adducts with DNA as mitomycin C (MC). In
particular, DMC generates a unique stereoisomeric interstrand crosslink
(beta isomer, -ICL). Although the DNA-adducts of both drugs share common
structural features, the biochemical responses to the two drugs are
different. In particular, contrary to MC, the DNA-adducts generated by
DMC treatment (-ICL) rapidly activate a p53-independent signal
transduction pathway. Thus, the study MC-DMC provides an ideal model for
identifying structural features determining the cell signaling outcome in
the presence or the absence of a functioning p53 pathway. In particular,
we are interested in correlating MC and DMC-adducts structures with the
role of p21 in the toxicity of the -ICL and -ICL. In this report, we
present the following preliminary results 1) Synthesis of the beta DNA
monoadduct of DMC via post-oligomerization methods 2) Role of p21 in the
upstream p53-independent signaling pathway in response to MC/DMC and the
-ICL.

