Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer effects obtained against A20 lymphomas following
treatment with LTX-315 (Oncopore) in combination with low-dose
cyclophosphamide


Background: Host defense peptides (HDPs) are naturally occurring
molecules found in most eukaryotic species, where they play a significant
role in the first line of defense against pathogens. Several HDPs have
been shown to possess anticancer activity. Structure-activity
relationship studies on the HDP bovine lactoferricin has resulted in the
design of LTX-315, a short chemically modified peptide that induces
immunogenic dell death. Previous animal studies have demonstrated that
intratumoral (i.t.) treatment of syngeneic murine A20 B-cell lymphomas,
CT26WT colon carcinomas and B16F1 melanomas with LTX-315 resulted in
complete tumor regression and tumor specific immune responses. In the
present study, we investigated the antitumor effects of LTX-315 in
combination with low-dose cyclophosphamide (CY) against A20 lymphomas.
Methods: A20 lymphoma cells (5 106) were intradermally inoculated into
the abdomen of syngeneic Balb/c mice. Established tumors were treated
i.t. with LTX-315 in combination with low-dose CY. Results: Intratumoral
(i.t.) administration of LTX-315 in a suboptimal setting resulted in a
synergistic antitumor effect when combined with low-dose CY, compared to
CY and LTX-315 alone. In the combination therapy group the treatment
induced a complete regression of the tumor in the majority of the animals
(6 out of 9 animals), compared to LTX-315 alone (1 out of 8 animals) and
no regression in the two control groups (CY alone and vehicle).
Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that treatment with LTX-315 in
combination with low-dose CY results in a synergistic antitumor effect in
vivo. Thus, local treatment with the immunogenic cell death inducer
LTX-315 combined with systemic chemotherapy may represent a promising
combination strategy in future cancer therapy.

