Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast Metastasis Suppressor 1 (BRMS1) phosphorylation appears
necessary for metastasis suppressor activity


Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women worldwide. BRMS1 is a
metastasis suppressor that suppresses metastasis without significantly
affecting the growth of a primary tumor. BRMS1 contains two coiled-coil
motifs important for protein-protein interactions and two putative
nuclear localization sequences (NLS - aa198-205 (NLS1) and aa239-245
(NLS2)) and one nuclear export signal which appear to mediate
nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling. Although NLS2 is not necessary for active
transport into the nucleus, it is required for metastasis suppression
(PMC3563580). A serine immediately upstream of NLS2 (S237) can be
phosphorylated by cdk2 (PMC3037622). Therefore, we hypothesized that NLS2
and adjacent amino acids are critical mediators of metastasis
suppression. To test this hypothesis, NLS2 (aa231-248) epitope-tagged
with HA and GST was transduced into metastatic MDA-MB-231 and -435 breast
carcinoma cells expressing green fluorescent protein and stable colonies
were selected. BRMS1S237A-expressing MDA-MB-231 cells were no longer
metastasis suppressed, suggesting a critical role for phosphorylation of
BRMS1 in its metastasis suppressor activity. Studies are underway with
full-length BRMS1S237D (phosphomimetic) as well as expression with
truncated wild-type NLS2 and mutant (NLS2wt/S237A/S237D) to test whether
the BRMS1 phosphorylation or the NLS2 domain itself is critical for
metastasis suppressor activity. Support: CA87728, CA134981, P30-CA168524,
Natl Fndn Cancer Res, Komen SAC11037, KS Bioscience Auth, NHMRC

