Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the DEAD box RNA helicase DDX3 as a therapeutic
target in colorectal cancer


Over 85% of colorectal cancers is driven by aberrations in the
Wnt-signaling pathway. Thus, identifying druggable targets in this
pathway can be beneficial for optimizing colorectal cancer treatment.
Within this context, a member of the RNA helicase gene family, DDX3, has
been identified to exhibit oncogenic properties in breast and lung
carcinomas as well as medulloblastomas. Notably, recent studies have
identified DDX3 as a multilevel activator of Wnt-signaling in both normal
and transformed cells without activating mutations in the Wnt signaling
pathway. In this study, we evaluated whether DDX3 also plays a role in
the constitutionally activated Wnt-signaling that drives colorectal
cancer and therefore could be a potential therapeutic target in this
cancer type.To determine if DDX3 is expressed in colorectal cancers, we
immunohistochemically stained a cohort of 303 Dutch and German colorectal
cancer patients. We found 40.4% of these tumors to overexpress DDX3 in
comparison to the surrounding normal tissue. DDX3 expression was found
predominantly in the cytoplasm and occasionally in the nucleus. High
cytoplasmic DDX3 expression correlated with nuclear Beta-catenin
expression, a marker of activated Wnt-signaling. The presence of nuclear
DDX3 expression correlated with shorter overall survival (HR = 2.38, 95%
CI 1.45-3.93, p Over 85% of colorectal cancers is driven by aberrations
in the Wnt-signaling pathway. Thus, identifying druggable targets in this
pathway can be beneficial for optimizing colorectal cancer treatment.
Within this context, a member of the RNA helicase gene family, DDX3, has
been identified to exhibit oncogenic properties in breast and lung
carcinomas as well as medulloblastomas. Notably, recent studies have
identified DDX3 as a multilevel activator of Wnt-signaling in both normal
and transformed cells without activating mutations in the Wnt signaling
pathway. In this study, we evaluated whether DDX3 also plays a role in
the constitutionally activated Wnt-signaling that drives colorectal
cancer and therefore could be a potential therapeutic target in this
cancer type.To determine if DDX3 is expressed in colorectal cancers, we
immunohistochemically stained a cohort of 303 Dutch and German colorectal
cancer patients. We found 40.4% of these tumors to overexpress DDX3 in
comparison to the surrounding normal tissue. DDX3 expression was found
predominantly in the cytoplasm and occasionally in the nucleus. High
cytoplasmic DDX3 expression correlated with nuclear Beta-catenin
expression, a marker of activated Wnt-signaling. The presence of nuclear
DDX3 expression correlated with shorter overall survival (HR = 2.38, 95%
CI 1.45-3.93, p < 0.001). Functionally, we validated these findings in
vitro and found that inhibition of DDX3 with siRNA resulted in reduced
proliferation and a G1-arrest in the HCT116 and HT29 colorectal cancer
cell lines. This finding further supports the potential oncogenic role of
DDX3 in colorectal cancer.With respect to targeting DDX3, we developed a
small molecule inhibitor of DDX3, referred to as RK-33. RK-33 is designed
to bind to the ATP-binding site of DDX3 and abrogate its functional
activity. As proof of principle, we demonstrated that RK-33 binds
preferentially to DDX3 and not to DDX5 and DDX17, other members of the
RNA helicase family. Moreover, RK-33 inhibited the helicase activity in
an in vitro assay. Furthermore, treatment of colorectal cancer cell lines
and patient derived 3D- tumor cell cultures indicated that RK-33 inhibits
growth and promotes cell death with IC-50 values ranging from 2.5 to 8
uM.To further elucidate the mechanism of RK-33, we studied if inhibition
of DDX3 with RK-33 could cause inhibition of Wnt-signaling in colorectal
cancer cell lines. Treatment with RK-33 indeed resulted in reduced
TCF-reporter activity and lowered the mRNA expression levels of the
Wnt-signaling downstream target genes AXIN-2, C-MYC, CCND1 and
BIRC5A.Overall, we conclude that DDX3 has an oncogenic role in colorectal
cancer. Inhibition of DDX3 with the small molecule inhibitor RK-33 causes
potent inhibition of Wnt-signaling and is a promising future treatment
strategy in colorectal cancer.

