Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selection of BRCA1/2 negative cases using data mining analytical
approach for hereditary breast cancer prediction in high risk breast
cancer patients


Background:The causes of hereditary breast cancer are classified in two
groups as modifiable and non-modifiable (genetic) in our study.Some of
the non-modifiable factors selected are breast density, menarche age,
menopause, BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, family history, height and weight of
patients.On the other hand, oral contraceptive usage, alcohol
consumption, hormone therapy, breastfeeding, exposure to radiation and
smoking are among the modifiable factors.The risk of having hereditary
breast cancer could be identified by BRCA1/BRCA2 gene tests which
requires long lasting experiments and incurs high costs. Before
performing the required genetic test, the modifiable and non-modifiable
factors of the high risk patients are collected by geneticist or genetic
counselor and then calculated risk score of the patients.After observing
the test results, the effect of existing factors are analyzed.The aim of
this study is to develop a hereditary breast cancer prediction algorithm
by using data mining techniques for high risk breast cancer
patients.Methods:Different applications may require different data mining
methods.The current study involves the data classification technique for
predicting hereditary breast cancer through a function that incorporates
modifiable and non-modifiable factors. The data consists of 562 BRCA
negative, and 68 BRCA positive instances with 117 categorical and
numerical characteristics.The first step of this approach is
preprocessing the data on hand.Individuals with incomplete data are
excluded from the list, and some logical adjustments are
performed.Results:As a result, 440 patients (392 BRCA negative, 48 BRCA
positive), and 75 characteristics (3 numerical, 72 categorical
attributes) are obtained.In the second step, important factors are
determined by attribute selection algorithms. After applying 23 selection
and 7 ranking methods, the important attributes are determined as: age,
diagnosis, height, weight, menopause age, menarche age,
FIB/FIBBackground:The causes of hereditary breast cancer are classified
in two groups as modifiable and non-modifiable (genetic) in our
study.Some of the non-modifiable factors selected are breast density,
menarche age, menopause, BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, family history, height
and weight of patients.On the other hand, oral contraceptive usage,
alcohol consumption, hormone therapy, breastfeeding, exposure to
radiation and smoking are among the modifiable factors.The risk of having
hereditary breast cancer could be identified by BRCA1/BRCA2 gene tests
which requires long lasting experiments and incurs high costs. Before
performing the required genetic test, the modifiable and non-modifiable
factors of the high risk patients are collected by geneticist or genetic
counselor and then calculated risk score of the patients.After observing
the test results, the effect of existing factors are analyzed.The aim of
this study is to develop a hereditary breast cancer prediction algorithm
by using data mining techniques for high risk breast cancer
patients.Methods:Different applications may require different data mining
methods.The current study involves the data classification technique for
predicting hereditary breast cancer through a function that incorporates
modifiable and non-modifiable factors. The data consists of 562 BRCA
negative, and 68 BRCA positive instances with 117 categorical and
numerical characteristics.The first step of this approach is
preprocessing the data on hand.Individuals with incomplete data are
excluded from the list, and some logical adjustments are
performed.Results:As a result, 440 patients (392 BRCA negative, 48 BRCA
positive), and 75 characteristics (3 numerical, 72 categorical
attributes) are obtained.In the second step, important factors are
determined by attribute selection algorithms. After applying 23 selection
and 7 ranking methods, the important attributes are determined as: age,
diagnosis, height, weight, menopause age, menarche age, FIB/FIB<40,
SEB/SEBBackground:The causes of hereditary breast cancer are classified
in two groups as modifiable and non-modifiable (genetic) in our
study.Some of the non-modifiable factors selected are breast density,
menarche age, menopause, BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, family history, height
and weight of patients.On the other hand, oral contraceptive usage,
alcohol consumption, hormone therapy, breastfeeding, exposure to
radiation and smoking are among the modifiable factors.The risk of having
hereditary breast cancer could be identified by BRCA1/BRCA2 gene tests
which requires long lasting experiments and incurs high costs. Before
performing the required genetic test, the modifiable and non-modifiable
factors of the high risk patients are collected by geneticist or genetic
counselor and then calculated risk score of the patients.After observing
the test results, the effect of existing factors are analyzed.The aim of
this study is to develop a hereditary breast cancer prediction algorithm
by using data mining techniques for high risk breast cancer
patients.Methods:Different applications may require different data mining
methods.The current study involves the data classification technique for
predicting hereditary breast cancer through a function that incorporates
modifiable and non-modifiable factors. The data consists of 562 BRCA
negative, and 68 BRCA positive instances with 117 categorical and
numerical characteristics.The first step of this approach is
preprocessing the data on hand.Individuals with incomplete data are
excluded from the list, and some logical adjustments are
performed.Results:As a result, 440 patients (392 BRCA negative, 48 BRCA
positive), and 75 characteristics (3 numerical, 72 categorical
attributes) are obtained.In the second step, important factors are
determined by attribute selection algorithms. After applying 23 selection
and 7 ranking methods, the important attributes are determined as: age,
diagnosis, height, weight, menopause age, menarche age, FIB/FIB<40,
SEB/SEB<40, THB/THB40, SEO, cancer status of the family, clinical stage,
and pathological stage.As a result, three data sets are suggested for
classification. Finally, a total of 182 data classification results are
derived for the aforementioned data sets.All analyses are performed by
employing WEKA software.Conclusion:Comparison of the results shows that,
the best data classification method's predictions on the BRCA negative
class has 100% accuracy.Hence, a new individual's situation can be
assessed without undergoing detailed gene tests, resulting in cost and
required workforce reduction.The results are found to be promising and
applicable.As an extension of the study, a user friendly interface and a
decision support tool can be developed.

