Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FLX925 (AMG 925) is a rationally designed FLT3, CDK4/6 inhibitor
that retains potency against clinically relevant secondary resistance
mutations in FLT3


Acquired secondary resistance mutations to clinically active kinase
inhibitors remains a key obstacle between valid therapeutic hypotheses
and meaningful patient benefit. In AML, evidence suggests that inhibition
of FLT3 (particularly in FLT3-ITD mutated cancers) can be efficacious;
however, relapse from complete remission is common and often rapid. As
with other cancers driven by key oncogenic kinase mutations (e.g. BCR-ABL
in CML), a primary mechanism of resistance is the acquisition of
secondary resistance mutations in the oncogenic kinase themselves.
Multiple strategies have been pursued to address such resistance,
including the development of kinase inhibitors that either bind their
respective targets differently or by targeting multiple important
pathways simultaneously. Herein we describe a rationally conceived next
generation FLT3 inhibitor, FLX925 (previously AMG 925), that was
prospectively designed to address or avoid common resistance mechanism to
earlier FLT3 inhibitors with its unique binding mode and potent activity
against CDK4/CDK6.FLX925 is a potent and selective type 1 inhibitor of
FLT3 that retains its cellular potency against clinically relevant
secondary resistance mutations in FLT3 occurring with quizartinib or
sorafenib treatment (FLX925 IC50: MOLM13ITD, 15 nM; MOLM13ITD/D835, 28
nM; MV4-11ITD, 16 nM; MV4-11ITD/D835, 19 nM; MV4-11ITD/N841, 16 nM;
MV4-11ITD/F691, 73 nM). Indeed, while compounds currently in the clinic
became more than 200-fold less potent against a number of mutants, FLX925
remained relatively equipotent (+/- 5-fold the parental cell line IC50)
in these same resistant clones. This is in stark contrast to the striking
cross-resistance observed with quizartinib in sorafenib resistant cells.
Moreover, the few clones that grew out of a screen for resistance to
FLX925 displayed a persistence phenotype with modestly reduced
sensitivity to FLX925 (5-fold IC50 shift) that was rapidly reversible.
This persistence was associated with higher FLT3 protein levels and no
detectable secondary mutations in FLT3.In addition to its suppression of
FLT3 signaling, FLX925 potently inhibits CDK4/CDK6, central components of
the cell cycle machinery. This unique profile may reduce the likelihood
of emergent resistant clones and extends the therapeutic potential of
FLX925 to other malignancies dependent on these pathways (e.g. MCL).
Indeed, the addition of PD0332991 (a selective CDK4/6 inhibitor) to a
relatively selective FLT3 inhibitor reduced the frequency of acquired
resistance in a cell based screen, relative to a FLT3 inhibitor alone.
These data suggest the unique profile of FLX925 makes it an ideal
inhibitor for the treatment of cancers driven by FLT3 signaling, such as
AML. A phase I clinical trial evaluating the safety, tolerability
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics effects of FLX925 in patients with
AML is ongoing.

