Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the Bcl-2 inhibitor ABT-199 in xenograft models of
acute lymphoblastic leukemia by the pediatric preclinical testing program


Targeting the apoptosis pathway with BH3 mimetics such as ABT-263
(navitoclax) and ABT-199 is an appealing strategy for cancer therapy.
While the Bcl-2/Bcl-w/Bcl-xL inhibitor navitoclax has shown promising
activity in adults with lymphoid malignancies and in preclinical models
of pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), its application in
pediatric patients has been limited by Bcl-xL-mediated thrombocytopenia.
The specific Bcl-2 inhibitor ABT-199 has shown remarkable efficacy
against adult chronic lymphocytic leukemia in recent clinical trials,
although its activity against pediatric ALL is yet to be tested. The aim
of this study was to evaluate the in vivo efficacy of ABT-199 against a
large panel of pediatric ALL patient-derived xenografts (PDXs), and to
identify biomarkers predictive of ABT-199 response. Immune-deficient
(NOD/SCID or NSG) mice inoculated with PDXs derived from patients with
infant ALL harboring rearrangement of the Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL)
oncogene (infant MLL-ALL, n = 4), B-cell precursor ALL (BCP-ALL, n = 6),
BCP-ALL categorized as Ph-like (n = 4), T-cell ALL (T-ALL, n = 4) or
early T-cell precursor ALL (ETP-ALL, n = 2) were treated with ABT-199
(100 mg/kg x 21 days, p.o.) or vehicle control. Responses were assessed
by time to event measurements or stringent objective response criteria
modeled after the clinical setting. ABT-199 significantly delayed the
progression of 12/20 PDXs by between 0.4 and 28 days, and elicited
objective responses in 6/20 (30%) of PDXs (4 complete responses and 2
partial responses). No objective responses were observed in the T-ALL or
ETP-ALL PDXs. By comparison, navitoclax administered on the same dose and
schedule as ABT-199 elicited objective responses in 19/31 (61%) of PDXs
derived from the same pediatric ALL subtypes. Analysis of basal gene and
protein expression revealed that high Bcl-xL and low Bcl-2 expression
were significantly associated with in vivo ABT-199 resistance. Moreover,
the Bcl-2/Bcl-xL gene (P = 0.03) and protein (P = 0.002) expression
ratios were significantly elevated in PDXs that responded to ABT-199 in
vivo compared with non-responders. Notably, Mcl-1 expression at the gene
or protein level showed no significant correlation with in vivo ABT-199
sensitivity. In conclusion, the inferior objective response rate observed
for ABT-199 (30%) compared with navitoclax (61%) indicates that pediatric
ALL PDXs are less dependent on Bcl-2 for cell survival compared with
adult chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Moreover, Bcl-xL appears to be a more
significant ABT-199 resistance factor than Mcl-1 in pediatric ALL. While
ABT-199 has the potential to exert significant efficacy in the treatment
of aggressive and chemoresistant pediatric ALL, the prospective
identification of patients who might benefit from such treatment is of
paramount importance. Supported by NCI NO1CM42216.

