Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential regulation of LC3 A and B, GABARAPL 1 and 2 autophagy
genes by micro-environmental stress and role in breast cancer survival


The microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 MAP1LC3 (LC3) and
GABARAPL1 and 2 are the major proteins to monitor autophagy. Here, we
analyzed the role of both MAP1LC3, GABARAPL1 and 2 in breast cancer cells
and primary human breast cancer. HER2 amplified (BT474, SKBR3,
MDA-MB-453), ER positive (MCF7, T47D) and triple negative (MDAMB231)
breast cancer cell lines were studied in response to hypoxia, in high
[25mM] and low glucose [5mM] treatment. Low glucose increased the basal
levels for LC3A-II, LC3B-II and GABARAPL2-II in BT474, MCF7 and MDAMB231
cell lines. SKBR3 cell line had the lowest autophagic protein levels for
LC3B-II, and Gabarapl2-II and was the most resistance to the autophagy
inhibition mediated using siRNAs to all theseIn hypoxia both LC3B (up to
8 fold) and GABARAPL1 (up to 12 fold) mRNA expression were induced in all
cell lines (pThe microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 MAP1LC3
(LC3) and GABARAPL1 and 2 are the major proteins to monitor autophagy.
Here, we analyzed the role of both MAP1LC3, GABARAPL1 and 2 in breast
cancer cells and primary human breast cancer. HER2 amplified (BT474,
SKBR3, MDA-MB-453), ER positive (MCF7, T47D) and triple negative
(MDAMB231) breast cancer cell lines were studied in response to hypoxia,
in high [25mM] and low glucose [5mM] treatment. Low glucose increased the
basal levels for LC3A-II, LC3B-II and GABARAPL2-II in BT474, MCF7 and
MDAMB231 cell lines. SKBR3 cell line had the lowest autophagic protein
levels for LC3B-II, and Gabarapl2-II and was the most resistance to the
autophagy inhibition mediated using siRNAs to all theseIn hypoxia both
LC3B (up to 8 fold) and GABARAPL1 (up to 12 fold) mRNA expression were
induced in all cell lines (p<0.001). MAP1LC3A knockdown significantly
decrease cell proliferation in BT474, MCF7 and MDAMB231 while GABARAPL2
knockdown additionally decreased baseline cell proliferation in T47D and
SKBR3 breast cancer cells (pThe microtubule-associated protein light
chain 3 MAP1LC3 (LC3) and GABARAPL1 and 2 are the major proteins to
monitor autophagy. Here, we analyzed the role of both MAP1LC3, GABARAPL1
and 2 in breast cancer cells and primary human breast cancer. HER2
amplified (BT474, SKBR3, MDA-MB-453), ER positive (MCF7, T47D) and triple
negative (MDAMB231) breast cancer cell lines were studied in response to
hypoxia, in high [25mM] and low glucose [5mM] treatment. Low glucose
increased the basal levels for LC3A-II, LC3B-II and GABARAPL2-II in
BT474, MCF7 and MDAMB231 cell lines. SKBR3 cell line had the lowest
autophagic protein levels for LC3B-II, and Gabarapl2-II and was the most
resistance to the autophagy inhibition mediated using siRNAs to all
theseIn hypoxia both LC3B (up to 8 fold) and GABARAPL1 (up to 12 fold)
mRNA expression were induced in all cell lines (p<0.001). MAP1LC3A
knockdown significantly decrease cell proliferation in BT474, MCF7 and
MDAMB231 while GABARAPL2 knockdown additionally decreased baseline cell
proliferation in T47D and SKBR3 breast cancer cells (p<0.05, n = 3).
Moreover, using the Seahorse, decreased MAP1LC3A and GABARAPL2 expression
by siRNA led to cellular bioenergetic changes including increased basal
oxygen consumption of the MCF7.Co-expression analysis of autophagic genes
define distinctive clusters of MAP1LC3, GABARAPL 1 and 2 with the hypoxic
signature in breast cancer subtypes using the METABRIC series.The
expression levels of the MAP1LC3 and GABARAPL1 and 2 among the breast
cancer subtypes and normal tissue showed significant suppession of all of
them in cancer compared to normal breast tissue. In conclusion, all the
pathways were suppressed at RNA level in cancer compared to normal,
baseline levels were not associated with core classification of breast
cancer types. These latter data were confirmed in a breast cancer cell
line panel, which showed a marked variation in inducibility by
environemntal stress and role in survival under low glucose and hypoxia.
Thus analysis of induced gene expression in response to stress may be
important, or heterogeneity in selection of tumors for anti-autophagy
therapy.

