Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: XIAP maintains the characteristics of cancer stem cells and is a
therapeutic target in nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a common malignancy in South China.
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are thought as the key players in the resistance
to chemo- or radio-therapy and are response for tumor recurrence and
metastasis, while their ability to escape from the apoptosis pathway may
render them the resistant property to the therapies. We show that XIAP is
overexpressed in the NPC cell line S18, which have the higher SP
populations and CD44+ populations and the stronger abilities of
sphere-formation and metastasis. Importantly, XIAP knockdown decreases SP
and CD44+ populations, prevents sphere-formation and reduces the ability
of invasion and migration. What more, loss of XIAP enhances the
sensitivity of cells to conventional chemotherapy drugs CDDP and 5-FU.
The primary xenograft tumor formation in vivo found there is a dramatic
reduction in tumor formation in the XIAP KD group. They all indicate that
XIAP plays an important role in nasopharyngeal cancer stem cell. Further
studies show that XIAP limits MAPK signaling and thereby restricts
differentiation and maintains the characteristics of cancer stem cells.
We designed and synthesized a novel Smac mimetic compound APG-1387 that
promotes the rapid degradation of cIAP1/2 and XIAP, and it exerts an
antitumor effect on nasopharyngeal carcinoma cancer stem cells. Further
studies show that APG-1387 enhances the chemosensitivity and promotes
apoptosis in combination with CDDP and 5-FU of NPC in vitro and vivo.

