Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition is not required for breast to
lung metastasis but contributes to chemoresistance


The role of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in metastasis is a
longstanding source of controversy, largely due to an inability to
monitor transient and reversible EMT phenotypes in vivo. We have
established a novel and unique EMT lineage tracing system in spontaneous
breast to lung metastasis models. In these models, mesenchymal-specific
Cre-mediated recombination initiates permanent switch of fluorescent
markers in tumor cells undergoing EMT. This allows us to track EMT tumor
cells in the primary tumor, circulation and distant organs following the
trail of breast to lung metastasis in vivo. We confirmed that within a
predominantly epithelial primary tumor, a small portion of tumor cells
undergo EMT. Strikingly, lung metastases were mainly comprised of non-EMT
tumor cells maintaining their epithelial phenotype. Inhibiting EMT by
overexpressing miR-200 did not impact lung metastasis development.
However, EMT cells significantly contribute to recurrent lung metastasis
formation after chemotherapy. These cells survived cyclophosphamide
treatment due to reduced proliferation, apoptotic tolerance, and elevated
expression of chemoresistance-related genes. This study suggests the
potential of an EMT-targeting strategy, in conjunction with conventional
chemotherapies, in the treatment of breast cancer patients.

