Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Uses and update for CellMiner, a tool for access to and comparison
of molecular data and pharmacological response for the NCI-60


Integration and understanding of genomic and proteomic data and their
relationships with and influences on pharmacology have become key
components of cancer research and its translation to therapeutics.
Nonetheless, multiple significant obstacles need to be overcome for both
their integration and understanding. The NCI-60 cancerous cell lines
provide a premier opportunity in this area due to the scope and quality
of the available data. CellMiner (http://discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer)
is a web-application that allows the user to rapidly access data for
relative levels of transcript expression for 25,772 genes, genetic
variants for 16,568 genes, transcript expression for 360 microRNAs,
protein levels for 94 genes, and DNA copy number (from aCGH) for 23,413
genes. In addition, it provides concentration-response activities for
20,002 compounds including 114 Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-approved, 55 clinical trial, and 349 known mechanism-of-action
drugs. Here we present our latest CellMiner update along with examples of
data integration that provide enhanced understanding in the systems
biological sense. Included in the tool updates are i) the upcoming
Protein mean value cell line signature tool, ii) the recently introduced
Gene DNA copy number tool, iii) introduction of the Cross-correlations of
transcripts, microRNAs, and drugs tool, iv) the provision of additional
forms of data in the standard output for the Pattern comparisons tool,
and v) upgrades of the Genetic variant versus drug visualization tool
allowing the user to query for all drugs significantly correlated to
genomic variants for the whole human genome (or visa versa). Examples of
data integration will include SLFN11 expression versus the activities of
DNA-damaging drugs, RAS activation considering three forms of molecular
data, and PTEN knockdown and pharmacological connection (also using three
forms of molecular data). The data and tools are or shortly will be
publicly available at CellMiner.

