Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunosuppressive activity of cancer-associated fibroblasts in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Introduction:Evidence has accumulated indicating that cancer-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) play an important role in angiogenesis, invasion, and
metastasis. Simultaneously, CAFs might actively participate in inducing
immunosuppressive ability and promoting evasion from immunosurveillance.
In the present study, we investigated whether CAFs within the tumor
microenvironment contribute as one of key components of tumor immune
evasion in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).Materials and
methods:CAFs and normal fibroblasts (NFs) were prepared from surgical
tissue of HNSCC patients. Flow cytometric analysis was performed for the
expression of A-smooth muscle actin (A-SMA) and co-stimulatory molecules.
Inhibition of T-cell proliferation, T-cell apoptosis and induction of
regulatory T cells (Treg) were also examined using flow cytometry. The
mRNA expression of various cytokines was investigated by real-time
qRT-PCR.Results:Generated CAFs and NFs were negative for CD11b, CD34, and
CD45, and were positive for CD90 and FAP. The A-SMA expression of CAFs
was higher than that of NFs. CAFs efficiently suppressed T cell
proliferation as compared with NFs. Of note, this suppressive activity
was found under co-cultivation with not only CAFs, but also supernatant
from CAFs. CAFs, but not NFs expressed co-regulatory molecules, B7H1 and
B7DC and CAFs showed increased expression levels of cytokine genes
including IL-6, IL-8, TNF-A, TGF-, and VEGF. Moreover, PBMCs co-cultured
with supernatant from CAFs preferentially induced T-cell apoptosis and
Treg as compared with those from NFs.Conclusion:Our findings suggest
that, in the tumor microenvironment, CAFs might play a pivotal role in
establishing an immunosuppressive network along with tumor cells, and
subsequent facilitation to activate the immunosuppressive pathway.

