Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: eEF1A2 is a new target for anticancer therapy


Eukaryotic Elongation Factor 1A2 (eEF1A2) is an isoform of the alpha
subunit of eEF1 complex. Differently from the A1 isoform, the expression
of eEF1A2 is restricted to brain, heart and skeletal muscle. eEF1A2 is
overexpressed in tumors, including multiple myeloma (MM) (Li et al, 2012,
PLOS One 5, e10755), prostate (Sun et al, 2014, Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 450:1-6), pancreas (Xu et al, 2013, Clin Exp Metastasis 30:933-44)
and ovarian (Anand et al, 2002, Nat Genet 31:301-5), and has also an
oncogenic behavior favoring tumor cell proliferation while inhibiting
apoptosis (Lee and Surh, 2009, Ann N Y Acad Sci 1171:87-93). Thus, eEF1A2
is an interesting target for cancer treatment. Aplidin (plitidepsin) is
an antitumor agent, originally isolated from the marine tunicate Aplidium
albicans, which is being tested in MM patients in a phase III pivotal
trial in combination with dexamethasone and a phase I trial in
combination with bortezomib and dexamethasone. Herein we reveal the
interaction of Aplidin with eEF1A2 using different methods; i) a DARTS
assay showed that Aplidin protected eEF1A2 from digestion by the protease
subtilisin (EC 3.4.21.62); ii) a saturation binding experiment using
[14C]-Aplidin and eEF1A2 purified from rabbit muscle determined a Kd for
the interaction of approximately 80 nM; iii) a fluorescence anisotropy
test through two photon microscopy showed that Aplidin preferentially
binds the GTP-bound form of eEF1A2. Furthermore, we performed a
[14C]-Aplidin binding-guided fractionation of K562 cell extracts through
differential centrifugation and several chromatographic steps, including
ion-exchange and size-exclusion chromatography, demonstrating that eEF1A2
is the unique cellular protein that can be retrieved through specific
binding to Aplidin. In addition, HeLa-APL-R cells, a HeLa subclone made
extremely resistant to Aplidin, more than 1000 fold, (Losada et al.,
2004, Br J Cancer 91:1405-13), are shown to express 8 fold less eEF1A2
than the parental cells both at the mRNA (determined with an Affimetryx
HG-U133A Array) and protein (determined by iTRAQ) levels. When normal
eEF1A2 levels were restored in HeLa-APL-R cells through ectopic
expression of an eEF1A2-GFP construct, these cells were rendered
partially sensitive to Aplidin. Interestingly, the transfected cells
recovered most of the signaling events which are typically induced by the
drug in HeLa wt cells. Altogether, our results demonstrate that eEF1A2,
the oncogenic isoform of the alpha subunit of eEF1, is the primary target
of Aplidin and a new suitable and druggable target for anticancer therapy.

