Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Annexin A2 antibody inhibits the progression of triple-negative
and herceptin-resistant breast cancer by blocking epidermal growth factor
receptor functions


Short Description:Annexin A2 (AnxA2), a calcium-dependent phospholipid
binding protein, is abundantly present at the surface of triple-negative
and Herceptin-resistant breast cancer cells. Interactions between
cell-surface AnxA2 and tyrosine kinase receptors have an important role
in the tumour microenvironment and act together to enhance tumour growth.
The mechanism supporting this role is still
unknown.Methods:Triple-negative (MDA-MB-231) and Herceptin-resistant
(JIMT-1) breast cancer cell lines were grown in complete DMEM and
DMEM/F12 medium respectively, in a humidified incubator at 37C with 5%
CO2. The membrane function of AnxA2 was blocked by incubating cells with
anti-AnxA2 antibodies. Western blotting, immunoprecipitation,
immunofluorescence, 1-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-3,5-diphenylformazan
(MTT), flow cytometry, Clonogenic, and wound-healing assays were
performed in this studyResults:We demonstrate that in triple-negative and
Herceptin-resistant breast cancer cells a large amount of AnxA2 is
specifically translocated to the outer membrane domain. In addition,
AnxA2 interacts with extracellular domain of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) at the cell surface and has an important role in cancer
cell proliferation and migration by modulating EGFR functions. Blocking
AnxA2 function at the cell surface by anti-AnxA2 antibody suppressed the
EGF-induced EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation and internalization by blocking
its homodimerization. Furthermore, addition of AnxA2 antibody
significantly inhibited the EGFR-dependent PI3K-AKT and Raf-MEK-ERK
downstream pathways under both EGF-induced and basal growth conditions,
resulting in lower cell proliferation and migration.Conclusions: These
studies indicate that association of AnxA2 with EGFR in the membrane
domain might play a positive regulatory role in keeping EGFR signaling
events in an activated state in triple negative and Herceptin-resistant
breast cancer thus making AnxA2 an important therapeutic target.

