Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The geranylgeranyltransferase I inhibitor GGTI-2418 suppresses
multiple myeloma malignancy in the 5TMG1 mouse model


Little is known about the contributions of geranylgeranylated proteins to
multiple myeloma (MM) malignancy, and whether targeting
geranylgeranyltransferase I (GGT-1) is a viable therapeutic approach in
myeloma is yet to be explored. In this study, we investigated the effects
of GGTI-2418, a GGT-1 inhibitor that has reached phase I clinical trials,
on MM malignancy in the 5TMG1 mouse model, where GGTI-2418 effects were
assessed in the confines of the bone microenvironment that recapitulates
the clinical disease in humans. GGTI-2418 treatment significantly
decreased the serum levels of the MM biomarker IgG2B (M-protein) as well
as the percentage of MM tumors within the tibia as demonstrated by H&E
staining. X-ray and micro-CT analyses also identified that GGTI-2418
prevented MM induced bone disease with significantly lower tumor induced
osteolysis and trabecular bone volume loss noted. Furthermore, treatment
of mice with GGTI-2418 resulted in a significant activation of caspase 3
(apoptosis induction), accumulation of nuclear p27Kip in MM tumors (a
positive prognostic biomarker for MM patients), and reduction of -SMA
levels in myofibroblasts surrounding the sinusoidal vasculature,
suggesting decreased vascularization of marrow blood vessels.
Importantly, GGTI-2418 treatment resulted in a significant increase in
mouse median survival and delay in the onset of limb paralysis. In cell
culture studies, GGTI-2417, the methylester pro-drug of GGTI-2418 that is
better taken up by cultured cells, inhibited MM proliferation, increased
p27kip levels, induced apoptosis and sensitized MM cells to bortezomib.
Taken together, our preclinical studies suggest targeting GGT-1 as a
viable therapeutic approach in MM, and warrant the investigation of
GGTI-2418 in the clinic.

