Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G0S2 functions as a tumor suppressor gene through inhibition of
c-Myc


G0/G1 switch gene 2 (G0S2) is a direct retinoic acid target gene that is
widely expressed in diverse organs and has been reported to have a role
in adipose lipolysis by negatively regulating adipose triglyceride lipase
(ATGL). G0S2 is also commonly silenced by DNA methylation in a variety of
solid tumors including glioma, head and neck and lung cancers, and G0S2
induction is associated with retinoic acid-mediated clinical remissions
in acute promyelocytic leukemia. This evidence suggests that G0S2 may
possess tumor suppressor activity although definitive proof and
mechanistic details are lacking. We now clearly demonstrate using G0S2
null immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) that G0S2 can
function to oppose oncogene-induced transformation. G0S2 null MEFs were
readily transformed with H-RAS or EGFR while wild-type MEFs were not.
Importantly, re-introduction of G0S2 reversed H-RAS transformation of
G0S2 null MEFs. Although G0S2 is a known regulator of fat metabolism
through attenuating ATGL activity, we found that G0S2 repression of
oncogene-induced transformation was independent of ATGL inhibition.
Detailed microarray analysis demonstrated that G0S2 knockout alone
upregulated gene signatures associated with transformation, proliferation
and Myc transcriptional responses. G0S2 knockout also induced c-Myc
expression at the transcript and protein level. Finally, transient and
stable shRNA-mediated repression of c-Myc completely abrogated
oncogene-induced transformation of G0S2 null MEFs. Taken together, these
findings indicate that G0S2 can function as a tumor suppressor by
opposing Myc. Studies to elucidate the mechanism underlying G0S2
regulation of Myc are ongoing. Understanding the functions and mechanisms
of this novel tumor suppressor pathway may lead to new pharmacologic
strategies for many cancers where G0S2 is silenced.

