Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-671-5p promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition by
downregulating FOXM1 expression in breast cancer


microRNA (miRNA) dysfunction is associated with a variety of human
diseases including cancer. Our previous study showed that miR-671-5p was
deregulated during breast cancer progression. We aim to decipher the
functional mechanism of miR-671-5p in breast cancer. We found that
expression of miR-671-5p was decreased significantly in ductal carcinoma
in situ (DCIS) and invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) compared to normal and
atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) in the microdissected formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1), as an
oncogenic transcription factor, was predicted as one of the direct
targets of miR-671-5p, which was subsequently confirmed by luciferase
assays. Forced expression of miR-671-5p in breast cancer cell lines
downregulated FOXM1 expression, and attenuated the proliferation and
invasion in breast cancer cell lines. Notably, overexpression of
miR-671-5p resulted in a shift from epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) to mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) phenotypes in
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and induced S-phase arrest. Moreover,
miR-671-5p sensitized breast cancer cells to cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) and epirubicin exposure. Host cell reactivation (HCR) assays
showed that miR-671-5p reduces DNA repair capability in post-drug exposed
breast cancer cells. These data indicates that miR-671-5p functions as a
tumor suppressor miRNA by directly targeting FOXM1 in breast cancer.
Hence, miR-671-5p may serve as a novel therapeutic target for breast
cancer management.

