Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Presence of FTO rs9939609 and rs9930506 and severity of prostate
cancer in Puerto Ricans


Prostate cancer (PCa) mortality in Puerto Rico (PR) is significantly
higher (28.3/100,000 men) compared to US mainland Hispanics. Obesity is
prevalent in PR and has been associated with PCa mortality and
aggressiveness. Polymorphisms rs9939609 and rs9930506 in the FTO gene
have been associated with both obesity and PCa in other populations.
Previous work in our laboratory has shown that Puerto Rican patients who
underwent radical prostatectomy (RP) and also had at least one G allele
in the FTO rs9930506 polymorphism exhibited a greater likelihood for low
severity PCa. The aim of this work was to ascertain whether the presence
of both polymorphisms (rs9930506 and rs9939609) in tandem correlated with
PCa severity in this Puerto Rican population. The study population
consisted of the pathology specimens of 294 Puerto Rican PCa patients,
aged 40-79 years old who underwent RP as definitive treatment for PCa.
Genomic DNA was extracted from normal seminal vesicle paraffin-embedded
tissue. Polymorphisms were determined by RT-PCR. PCa severity was defined
based on RP stage and Gleason Score. Chi-square test and logistic
regression models were used to assess the correlation between FTO gene
polymorphisms and PCa severity. Other factors such as BMI and age were
considered in the model. We found that the A/G SNP in rs9930506 was
present in 135 patients (45.9%). Likewise for rs9939609 we found the A/T
SNP in 138 patients (46.9%). We found no statistically significant
relationship between either polymorphism by itself and PCa severity. In
104 (35.4%) patients both SNPs were heterozygous. Of these, 77 (74%) were
overweight or obese. Within this latter group, 55 (71.4%) exhibited low
severity PCa. Data showed that those patients with simultaneous
heterozygous forms had about 12% lower odds of low severity of PCa (95%
CI: 0.52, 1.50), although no statistical significance was found for this
relationship (p = 0.640). These results suggest that the presence of both
polymorphisms in their heterozygous form may be related to low severity
PCa in the obese/overweight group. Further studies are needed to
understand the mechanisms that may be involved in this modulation of the
development of severity in PCa in this population. This project was
supported by RCMI grant G12MD007600 (Center for Collaborative Research in
Health Disparities) and grant 8U54MD007587-03 (Puerto Rico Clinical and
Translational Research Consortium) from the National Institute on
Minority Health and Health Disparities, and by Award Grant Number#
CA096297/CA096300 from the National Cancer Institute of the National
Institutes of Health. The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institutes of Health.

