Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming acquired EGFRi resistance in NSCLC with targeted beam
irradiation in combination with targeted agents


BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients undergo primary,
adjuvant or neoadjuvant radiotherapy treatment with image-guided
radiotherapy (IGRT) being widely used to provide more accurate treatment
plans and reduced side effects.Patients who have activating mutations in
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are treated with EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFRi). However, resistance to EGFRi occurs
in the majority of patients with the main clinical drivers being
secondary gatekeeper mutations (T790M) or amplification of genes such as
c-MET and Her2.The small animal radiation research platform (SARRP),
which allows the treatment of rodent models of cancer more accurately
with planned protocols similar to those utilised in the clinic, was used
in combination with EGFRi, to assess the efficacy of combination
treatment strategies of irradiation (IR) in EGFRi resistant NSCLC
xenografts.METHODS: Resistance to EGFRi in the NSCLC cell line HCC827,
which harbours an activating EGFR mutation, was generated through
repeated exposure to Gefitinib or Erlotinib. Resistant models were
characterised for further mutations in the EGFR gene by direct sequencing
and for c-MET, Axl and Her2 over-expression/genomic amplification by
quantitative PCR.EGFRi resistant or parental HCC827 cells were implanted
subcutaneously into nude mice, xenograft growth was monitored by calliper
measurements and treatment initiated when the mean tumour volume reached
200mm3. An image guided IR dose of 3Gy/mouse/day (30Gy total) was
targeted directly to the xenografts whilst sparing the surrounding normal
tissue. Mice were treated with IR either alone or in combination with
Erlotinib or Crizotinib; response to treatment was evaluated by tumour
volume measurement.RESULTS: EGFR-TKI resistant HCC827 cell lines were
generated following successive cycles of treatment. Amplification of
c-MET was identified in a number of clones, but no Her2 amplification or
gatekeeper mutations; therefore Crizotinib, a c-MET inhibitor, was
selected for evaluation in these models.When assessed in vivo, treatment
of parental HCC827 xenografts with targeted IR or Erlotinib treatment
resulted in tumour regression. However, in the c-MET driven resistant
model, both the IR and Erlotinib response was significantly attenuated,
resulting in tumour re-growth. Combination testing with Crizotinib
restored the efficacy of both IR and Erlotinib to nave treatment levels
confirming the role of c-MET in resistance.CONCLUSIONS: Resistance to
EGFRi and IR in a HCC827 model is driven by c-MET amplification.
Treatment with Crizotinib restored sensitivity to both EGFRi and IR
demonstrating that pre-clinical models of resistance are invaluable in
assessing novel agents targeting the EGFR pathway and the development of
new combination strategies which seek to prevent/overcome resistance to
EGFRi.

