Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VDR genotype modifies vitamin D efficacy for colorectal adenoma
prevention in a randomized controlled trial


Objective: Although epidemiological and pre-clinical research suggests
that vitamin D and calcium supplementation reduce colorectal
carcinogenesis, we found that they had no effect on risk of colorectal
adenoma recurrence in a recently completed randomized controlled trial
(Vitamin D/Calcium Polyp Prevention Study, NCT00153816). We now examine
whether the effect of supplementation may be modified by common genetic
variants in vitamin D and calcium pathway genes previously associated
with 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels or other health outcomes.Methods: 41
candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 7 genes (GC, DHCR7,
CYP2R1, CYP27B1, CYP24A1, VDR and CASR) were genotyped in non-Hispanic
white trial participants (N = 1,676). All had at least one adenoma at a
baseline colonoscopy and were randomized to treatment with vitamin D3
(1000 IU/day), calcium (1200 mg/day), both or placebo in a modified 22
factorial design. Participants were followed until a subsequent
colonoscopy 3 or 5 years later and assessed for the presence of at least
one adenoma or advanced adenoma (adenoma 1 cm, or with >25% villous
histology and/or high-grade dysplasia, or cancer). Adjusted risk ratios
(RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to estimate genotype
effects, treatment effects and interactions. To account for multiple
testing, based on the effective number of independent SNPs, statistical
significance was defined as pObjective: Although epidemiological and
pre-clinical research suggests that vitamin D and calcium supplementation
reduce colorectal carcinogenesis, we found that they had no effect on
risk of colorectal adenoma recurrence in a recently completed randomized
controlled trial (Vitamin D/Calcium Polyp Prevention Study, NCT00153816).
We now examine whether the effect of supplementation may be modified by
common genetic variants in vitamin D and calcium pathway genes previously
associated with 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels or other health
outcomes.Methods: 41 candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
7 genes (GC, DHCR7, CYP2R1, CYP27B1, CYP24A1, VDR and CASR) were
genotyped in non-Hispanic white trial participants (N = 1,676). All had
at least one adenoma at a baseline colonoscopy and were randomized to
treatment with vitamin D3 (1000 IU/day), calcium (1200 mg/day), both or
placebo in a modified 22 factorial design. Participants were followed
until a subsequent colonoscopy 3 or 5 years later and assessed for the
presence of at least one adenoma or advanced adenoma (adenoma 1 cm, or
with >25% villous histology and/or high-grade dysplasia, or cancer).
Adjusted risk ratios (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used
to estimate genotype effects, treatment effects and interactions. To
account for multiple testing, based on the effective number of
independent SNPs, statistical significance was defined as
p<0.002.Results: VDR SNP rs731236 (Taq1, minor allele frequency 0.39)
statistically significantly modified the effect of vitamin D3 treatment
on advanced adenomas (interaction RR = 0.49, 95% CI = 0.31-0.76, P =
0.001) but not on any adenoma (interaction RR = 0.94, 95% CI = 0.80-1.11,
P = 0.48). Among participants (N = 249, 15%) with the homozygous variant
genotype, the risk of an advanced adenoma was 15.2% among those
randomized to placebo, and 3.2% among those randomized to vitamin D; a
risk reduction of 78% for vitamin D supplementation (RR = 0.22, 95% CI =
0.08-0.63, P = 0.005). In contrast, among participants with one or more
wild type allele (N = 1400, 85%), the risk of an advanced adenoma was
8.8% among those randomized to placebo, and 10.5% among those randomized
to vitamin D; an apparent risk increase of 19% for vitamin D
supplementation (RR = 1.19, 95% CI = 0.86-1.64, P = 0.3). Several other
VDR SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with rs731236 had borderline
statistically significant interactions. However, there were only
nominally statistically significant (PObjective: Although epidemiological
and pre-clinical research suggests that vitamin D and calcium
supplementation reduce colorectal carcinogenesis, we found that they had
no effect on risk of colorectal adenoma recurrence in a recently
completed randomized controlled trial (Vitamin D/Calcium Polyp Prevention
Study, NCT00153816). We now examine whether the effect of supplementation
may be modified by common genetic variants in vitamin D and calcium
pathway genes previously associated with 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels or
other health outcomes.Methods: 41 candidate single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 7 genes (GC, DHCR7, CYP2R1, CYP27B1, CYP24A1, VDR
and CASR) were genotyped in non-Hispanic white trial participants (N =
1,676). All had at least one adenoma at a baseline colonoscopy and were
randomized to treatment with vitamin D3 (1000 IU/day), calcium (1200
mg/day), both or placebo in a modified 22 factorial design. Participants
were followed until a subsequent colonoscopy 3 or 5 years later and
assessed for the presence of at least one adenoma or advanced adenoma
(adenoma 1 cm, or with >25% villous histology and/or high-grade
dysplasia, or cancer). Adjusted risk ratios (RRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were used to estimate genotype effects, treatment effects
and interactions. To account for multiple testing, based on the effective
number of independent SNPs, statistical significance was defined as
p<0.002.Results: VDR SNP rs731236 (Taq1, minor allele frequency 0.39)
statistically significantly modified the effect of vitamin D3 treatment
on advanced adenomas (interaction RR = 0.49, 95% CI = 0.31-0.76, P =
0.001) but not on any adenoma (interaction RR = 0.94, 95% CI = 0.80-1.11,
P = 0.48). Among participants (N = 249, 15%) with the homozygous variant
genotype, the risk of an advanced adenoma was 15.2% among those
randomized to placebo, and 3.2% among those randomized to vitamin D; a
risk reduction of 78% for vitamin D supplementation (RR = 0.22, 95% CI =
0.08-0.63, P = 0.005). In contrast, among participants with one or more
wild type allele (N = 1400, 85%), the risk of an advanced adenoma was
8.8% among those randomized to placebo, and 10.5% among those randomized
to vitamin D; an apparent risk increase of 19% for vitamin D
supplementation (RR = 1.19, 95% CI = 0.86-1.64, P = 0.3). Several other
VDR SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with rs731236 had borderline
statistically significant interactions. However, there were only
nominally statistically significant (P<0.05) interactions of SNP
genotypes with calcium treatment on adenoma outcomes.Conclusions: Our
results suggest that the effect of vitamin D3 supplementation on
colorectal carcinogenesis depends on common genetic variants in VDR, with
a 78% reduction in risk of advanced adenomas in individuals with the
rs731236 homozygous variant genotype, and no benefit in individuals with
one or more wild type alleles.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

