Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunotherapy targeting MASH2 antigen protects mice against
MASH2-expressing transplanted tumors and inhibits the development of
colorectal adenomas in APC +/Min-FCCC mice


The importance of the host immune system in controlling the growth and
development of colorectal cancer (CRC) is highlighted by the prognostic
value of immune infiltration, which suggests that cancer immunotherapy
could mobilize the immune system for clinical benefit. Human achaete
scute homolog 2 (Hash2) and its murine ortholog Mash2 are overexpressed
in human and mouse CRC, respectively, and are thus potential targets for
immunotherapy.The present studies assessed the ability of a recombinant
MASH2 protein combined with the AS15 immunostimulant to induce an immune
response and inhibit tumor growth in mouse models. CB6F1 mice received 4
injections of AS15 or MASH2+AS15 and were subsequently injected with
TC1/MASH2 tumor cells. In parallel, APC+/Min-FCCC mice that spontaneously
develop MASH2-expressing colorectal adenomas were immunized (x9) with
phosphate buffered saline (PBS), AS15 alone or MASH2+AS15, either before
(prophylaxis) or after (immunotherapy) colon adenomas were detectable by
colonoscopy. MASH2-specific antibody and cellular immune responses (CD4+
and CD8+ cells producing cytokines) were measured by ELISA and flow
cytometry, respectively. Colorectal adenomas were diagnosed and
characterized by histopathology.In both CB6F1 and APC+/Min-FCCC mice,
MASH2+AS15 induced strong MASH2-specific antibody and CD4+ responses that
were not observed after injection with PBS or AS15. CB6F1 mice immunized
with MASH2+AS15 showed slower growth of injected TC1/MASH2 tumors and
better survival in comparison to mice injected with AS15 alone. In
APC+/Min-FCCC mice, the mean number of colon adenomas was 2.6, 2.4 and
3.8 in the MASH2+AS15, AS15 and PBS groups, respectively (p = 0.059 for
MASH2+AS15 vs PBS). In these mice, the mean number of colon microadenomas
was 3-fold lower in the MASH2+AS15 group as compared to PBS control
(MASH2+AS15 [0.4], AS15 [0.6], PBS [1.1]; p = 0.001 for MASH2+AS15 vs
PBS). MASH2+AS15 was most effective in inhibiting distal colon
microadenomas, with the mean number 3-fold lower than that of the PBS
group (0.2 for MASH2+AS15, 0.4 for AS15, 0.6 for PBS, pThe importance of
the host immune system in controlling the growth and development of
colorectal cancer (CRC) is highlighted by the prognostic value of immune
infiltration, which suggests that cancer immunotherapy could mobilize the
immune system for clinical benefit. Human achaete scute homolog 2 (Hash2)
and its murine ortholog Mash2 are overexpressed in human and mouse CRC,
respectively, and are thus potential targets for immunotherapy.The
present studies assessed the ability of a recombinant MASH2 protein
combined with the AS15 immunostimulant to induce an immune response and
inhibit tumor growth in mouse models. CB6F1 mice received 4 injections of
AS15 or MASH2+AS15 and were subsequently injected with TC1/MASH2 tumor
cells. In parallel, APC+/Min-FCCC mice that spontaneously develop
MASH2-expressing colorectal adenomas were immunized (x9) with phosphate
buffered saline (PBS), AS15 alone or MASH2+AS15, either before
(prophylaxis) or after (immunotherapy) colon adenomas were detectable by
colonoscopy. MASH2-specific antibody and cellular immune responses (CD4+
and CD8+ cells producing cytokines) were measured by ELISA and flow
cytometry, respectively. Colorectal adenomas were diagnosed and
characterized by histopathology.In both CB6F1 and APC+/Min-FCCC mice,
MASH2+AS15 induced strong MASH2-specific antibody and CD4+ responses that
were not observed after injection with PBS or AS15. CB6F1 mice immunized
with MASH2+AS15 showed slower growth of injected TC1/MASH2 tumors and
better survival in comparison to mice injected with AS15 alone. In
APC+/Min-FCCC mice, the mean number of colon adenomas was 2.6, 2.4 and
3.8 in the MASH2+AS15, AS15 and PBS groups, respectively (p = 0.059 for
MASH2+AS15 vs PBS). In these mice, the mean number of colon microadenomas
was 3-fold lower in the MASH2+AS15 group as compared to PBS control
(MASH2+AS15 [0.4], AS15 [0.6], PBS [1.1]; p = 0.001 for MASH2+AS15 vs
PBS). MASH2+AS15 was most effective in inhibiting distal colon
microadenomas, with the mean number 3-fold lower than that of the PBS
group (0.2 for MASH2+AS15, 0.4 for AS15, 0.6 for PBS, p<0.001 for
MASH2+AS15 vs PBS, p = 0.032 for MASH2+AS15 vs AS15). Similarly, in the
therapeutic study, colon microadenomas were inhibited to the greatest
extent after immunization with MASH2+AS15. In conclusion, MASH2+AS15
immunotherapy leads to partial protection of mice against
MASH2-expressing transplantable tumors and strongly reduces the mean
number of spontaneous colorectal adenomas in APC+/Min-FCCC mice, by
inducing MASH2-specific CD4+ T cells and antibodies. These data are very
promising and demonstrate the utility of MASH2 immunotherapy, with
responses that may be further improved by combining with immunotherapies
that induce antigen-specific CD8+ T cells or with immune checkpoint
inhibitors.Funding: GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals SA

