Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soluble receptor for advanced glycation end-products is a player
in obesity-related colorectal cancer


Insulin resistance, adiposity, and chronic inflammation contribute to
colorectal cancer (CRC) development. N-(carboxymethyl)-lysine (CML) is a
well-characterized type of advanced glycation end product (AGE). It can
bind to the receptor for AGEs (RAGE) and trigger insulin resistance and
sustained chronic inflammation. Soluble RAGE (sRAGE) mitigates the
detrimental effect of RAGE by acting as a decoy receptor for its ligands.
In a case-cohort study within the Women's Health Initiative Observational
study, we examined the association between CML-AGE, sRAGE and risk of CRC
among 447 cases and 802 subcohort controls. Information on lifestyle,
anthropometry, medical history, and diet were collected at baseline.
Levels of CML-AGE and sRAGE were measured by ELISA using fasting blood
collected at baseline. Circulating levels of adipokines, insulin,
glucose, estradiol, and C-reactive protein were previously measured for
the study subjects. Multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression model
accounting for the case-cohort design was used to estimate hazard ratio
(HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for CRC according to quartile (Q)
of biomarkers with adjustment for age, race, waist circumstance, smoking,
family history of colorectal cancer, NASID, energy intake, physical
activity, alcohol consumption, saturated fat intake, available
carbohydrate intake, hypertension, hormone replacement therapy, calcium,
folate equivalent, red meat, insulin, and adiponectin. Average
participant follow-up was 7.8 years. Among 802 subcohort controls,
CML-AGE and sRAGE were both significantly inversely correlated with BMI,
waist circumference, serum insulin, glucose, and leptin, but positively
correlated with adiponectin (P values Insulin resistance, adiposity, and
chronic inflammation contribute to colorectal cancer (CRC) development.
N-(carboxymethyl)-lysine (CML) is a well-characterized type of advanced
glycation end product (AGE). It can bind to the receptor for AGEs (RAGE)
and trigger insulin resistance and sustained chronic inflammation.
Soluble RAGE (sRAGE) mitigates the detrimental effect of RAGE by acting
as a decoy receptor for its ligands. In a case-cohort study within the
Women's Health Initiative Observational study, we examined the
association between CML-AGE, sRAGE and risk of CRC among 447 cases and
802 subcohort controls. Information on lifestyle, anthropometry, medical
history, and diet were collected at baseline. Levels of CML-AGE and sRAGE
were measured by ELISA using fasting blood collected at baseline.
Circulating levels of adipokines, insulin, glucose, estradiol, and
C-reactive protein were previously measured for the study subjects.
Multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression model accounting for the
case-cohort design was used to estimate hazard ratio (HR) and 95%
confidence interval (CI) for CRC according to quartile (Q) of biomarkers
with adjustment for age, race, waist circumstance, smoking, family
history of colorectal cancer, NASID, energy intake, physical activity,
alcohol consumption, saturated fat intake, available carbohydrate intake,
hypertension, hormone replacement therapy, calcium, folate equivalent,
red meat, insulin, and adiponectin. Average participant follow-up was 7.8
years. Among 802 subcohort controls, CML-AGE and sRAGE were both
significantly inversely correlated with BMI, waist circumference, serum
insulin, glucose, and leptin, but positively correlated with adiponectin
(P values < 0.05). sRAGE levels were inversely associated with CRC (HRQ2
vs Q1:0.53; 95% CI: 0.31-0.90; HRQ4 vs Q1: 0.81; 95% CI: 0.46-1.42)
(Ptrend = 0.95). This inverse association was evident among women who had
BMI 25 kg/m2 (HRQ2 vs Q1: 0.49; 95% CI: 0.25-0.99; HRQ4 vs Q1: 0.43, 95%
CI: 0.19-0.97) (Ptrend = 0.22), but not among women with normal BMI (BMI
Insulin resistance, adiposity, and chronic inflammation contribute to
colorectal cancer (CRC) development. N-(carboxymethyl)-lysine (CML) is a
well-characterized type of advanced glycation end product (AGE). It can
bind to the receptor for AGEs (RAGE) and trigger insulin resistance and
sustained chronic inflammation. Soluble RAGE (sRAGE) mitigates the
detrimental effect of RAGE by acting as a decoy receptor for its ligands.
In a case-cohort study within the Women's Health Initiative Observational
study, we examined the association between CML-AGE, sRAGE and risk of CRC
among 447 cases and 802 subcohort controls. Information on lifestyle,
anthropometry, medical history, and diet were collected at baseline.
Levels of CML-AGE and sRAGE were measured by ELISA using fasting blood
collected at baseline. Circulating levels of adipokines, insulin,
glucose, estradiol, and C-reactive protein were previously measured for
the study subjects. Multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression model
accounting for the case-cohort design was used to estimate hazard ratio
(HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for CRC according to quartile (Q)
of biomarkers with adjustment for age, race, waist circumstance, smoking,
family history of colorectal cancer, NASID, energy intake, physical
activity, alcohol consumption, saturated fat intake, available
carbohydrate intake, hypertension, hormone replacement therapy, calcium,
folate equivalent, red meat, insulin, and adiponectin. Average
participant follow-up was 7.8 years. Among 802 subcohort controls,
CML-AGE and sRAGE were both significantly inversely correlated with BMI,
waist circumference, serum insulin, glucose, and leptin, but positively
correlated with adiponectin (P values < 0.05). sRAGE levels were
inversely associated with CRC (HRQ2 vs Q1:0.53; 95% CI: 0.31-0.90; HRQ4
vs Q1: 0.81; 95% CI: 0.46-1.42) (Ptrend = 0.95). This inverse association
was evident among women who had BMI 25 kg/m2 (HRQ2 vs Q1: 0.49; 95% CI:
0.25-0.99; HRQ4 vs Q1: 0.43, 95% CI: 0.19-0.97) (Ptrend = 0.22), but not
among women with normal BMI (BMI < 25) (HRQ4 vs Q1: 1.72, 95%
CI:0.53-5.55) (P value for interaction was 0.01). CML-AGE was not
associated with CRC risk (HRQ4 vs Q1: 0.78, 95% CI: 0.48-1.37) (Ptrend =
0.18). We found pre-diagnostic sRAGE levels were inversely associated
with risk of CRC among overweight and obese postmenopausal women. This
study identifed the RAGE pathway as a potential etiological factor in
obesity-associated CRC.

