Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lurbinectedin (PM01183) synergizes in vivo the antitumor activity
of doxorubicin in SCLC tumor xenografts


Background: Lurbinectedin (PM01183) is a synthetic tetrahydroisoquinoline
alkaloid currently evaluated as single agent and in combination in phase
I and II clinical trials for solid tumors and hematological malignancies.
In living cells, PM01183-DNA adducts stall replication and transcription
giving rise to double strand breaks, inducing accumulation of cells in
the S-phase of the cell cycle and triggering apoptosis. Studies aimed at
defining the in vivo synergism of PM01183 and doxorubicin in the
treatment of Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC) xenografted tumors are
presented here.Material and Methods: Athymic nude mice were implanted
with SCLC cells (NCI-H82 or NCI-H526). Mice bearing tumors (ca. 150 mm3)
were allocated (N = 6-8/group) to experimental groups, namely: placebo;
PM01183 at MTD (0.18 mg/kg), 0.75MTD, 0.5MTD and 0.25MTD; doxorubicin at
their MTD (8.0 mg/kg), 0.75MTD, 0.5MTD and 0.25MTD; and, PM01183 combined
with doxorubicin at (1+1), (0.75+0.75), (0.50+0.50) and (0.25+0.25) MTDs.
All treatments were given intravenously once per week during the
placebo-treated survival time. The antitumor effect induced by the
treatments was analyzed using two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. Also, the
synergism was defined by the combination index (CI) determined by the
CI-isobol method.Results: In both experiments, the combination of PM01183
and doxorubicin resulted in stronger antitumor effect (PBackground:
Lurbinectedin (PM01183) is a synthetic tetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloid
currently evaluated as single agent and in combination in phase I and II
clinical trials for solid tumors and hematological malignancies. In
living cells, PM01183-DNA adducts stall replication and transcription
giving rise to double strand breaks, inducing accumulation of cells in
the S-phase of the cell cycle and triggering apoptosis. Studies aimed at
defining the in vivo synergism of PM01183 and doxorubicin in the
treatment of Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC) xenografted tumors are
presented here.Material and Methods: Athymic nude mice were implanted
with SCLC cells (NCI-H82 or NCI-H526). Mice bearing tumors (ca. 150 mm3)
were allocated (N = 6-8/group) to experimental groups, namely: placebo;
PM01183 at MTD (0.18 mg/kg), 0.75MTD, 0.5MTD and 0.25MTD; doxorubicin at
their MTD (8.0 mg/kg), 0.75MTD, 0.5MTD and 0.25MTD; and, PM01183 combined
with doxorubicin at (1+1), (0.75+0.75), (0.50+0.50) and (0.25+0.25) MTDs.
All treatments were given intravenously once per week during the
placebo-treated survival time. The antitumor effect induced by the
treatments was analyzed using two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. Also, the
synergism was defined by the combination index (CI) determined by the
CI-isobol method.Results: In both experiments, the combination of PM01183
and doxorubicin resulted in stronger antitumor effect (P<0.05) than that
obtained with the more active single agent at the highest dose (MTD
level). Analyses of the results by the CI-isobol method indicated that,
after the treatment with PM01183 plus doxorubicin in the SCLC models
resulted in an additive (at Fa = 0.97, CI = 1.05) or synergistic (at Fa =
0.97, CI = 0.66) effect.Conclusion: An improved (additive or synergism)
in vivo antitumor activity was recorded after the treatment with PM01183
plus doxorubicin of mice bearing SCLC xenografted tumors.

