Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression level of inflammasomes compornents NLRP3, NLRC4, and
CASP1 in background non tumorous tissue were associated with worse
prognosis for curatively resected hepatocellular carcinoma


Background and Objectives:When assessing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
it is quite important to examine prognostic factors in the background non
tumorous liver tissue as well as HCC tissue itself. Inflammation has been
thought to have some influence to malignancy of neoplasms and
carcinogenesis. We focused on inflammasomes; multiprotein complex evoking
key cascades of inflammation. Components of inflammasomes are
investigated in mRNA level to identify molecular prognostic predictors
for curatively resected HCC.Methods:Candidate genes that code pattern
recognition receptors ; NLRP3, NLRC4, and AIM2 and caspase1 (CASP1) that
mature IL-1, IL-18 were investigated via real-time quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction in 158 consecutive curatively
resected HCC cases at our department. We investigated each gene
expression in both HCC tumor tissue (T) and background corresponding non
tumorous tissue (CN) and super normal tissue (SN) taken from resected
specimens of metastatic hepatic tumor was also assessed in this study.
Statistical analyses were performed with Kaplan-Meier method and compared
using the log-rank test. Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional
hazards models were used to determine the independent risk factors
associated with the RFS and OS.Results:The expression level of NLRP3,
NLRC4, and AIM2 (expression score/GAPDH1000) were significantly higher in
CN (NLRP3 median: 0.29 [range: 0.037-10.59], NLRC4 0.38[0.010-9.85] ,
AIM2 1.00 [0.016-43.62], n = 158 ) than in T (NLRP3 0.064 [0.0027-41.67]
PBackground and Objectives:When assessing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
it is quite important to examine prognostic factors in the background non
tumorous liver tissue as well as HCC tissue itself. Inflammation has been
thought to have some influence to malignancy of neoplasms and
carcinogenesis. We focused on inflammasomes; multiprotein complex evoking
key cascades of inflammation. Components of inflammasomes are
investigated in mRNA level to identify molecular prognostic predictors
for curatively resected HCC.Methods:Candidate genes that code pattern
recognition receptors ; NLRP3, NLRC4, and AIM2 and caspase1 (CASP1) that
mature IL-1, IL-18 were investigated via real-time quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction in 158 consecutive curatively
resected HCC cases at our department. We investigated each gene
expression in both HCC tumor tissue (T) and background corresponding non
tumorous tissue (CN) and super normal tissue (SN) taken from resected
specimens of metastatic hepatic tumor was also assessed in this study.
Statistical analyses were performed with Kaplan-Meier method and compared
using the log-rank test. Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional
hazards models were used to determine the independent risk factors
associated with the RFS and OS.Results:The expression level of NLRP3,
NLRC4, and AIM2 (expression score/GAPDH1000) were significantly higher in
CN (NLRP3 median: 0.29 [range: 0.037-10.59], NLRC4 0.38[0.010-9.85] ,
AIM2 1.00 [0.016-43.62], n = 158 ) than in T (NLRP3 0.064 [0.0027-41.67]
P<0.0001, NLRC4 0.14 [0.0044-6.14] PBackground and Objectives:When
assessing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), it is quite important to
examine prognostic factors in the background non tumorous liver tissue as
well as HCC tissue itself. Inflammation has been thought to have some
influence to malignancy of neoplasms and carcinogenesis. We focused on
inflammasomes; multiprotein complex evoking key cascades of inflammation.
Components of inflammasomes are investigated in mRNA level to identify
molecular prognostic predictors for curatively resected
HCC.Methods:Candidate genes that code pattern recognition receptors ;
NLRP3, NLRC4, and AIM2 and caspase1 (CASP1) that mature IL-1, IL-18 were
investigated via real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction in 158 consecutive curatively resected HCC cases at our
department. We investigated each gene expression in both HCC tumor tissue
(T) and background corresponding non tumorous tissue (CN) and super
normal tissue (SN) taken from resected specimens of metastatic hepatic
tumor was also assessed in this study. Statistical analyses were
performed with Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the log-rank test.
Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards models were used to
determine the independent risk factors associated with the RFS and
OS.Results:The expression level of NLRP3, NLRC4, and AIM2 (expression
score/GAPDH1000) were significantly higher in CN (NLRP3 median: 0.29
[range: 0.037-10.59], NLRC4 0.38[0.010-9.85] , AIM2 1.00 [0.016-43.62], n
= 158 ) than in T (NLRP3 0.064 [0.0027-41.67] P<0.0001, NLRC4 0.14
[0.0044-6.14] P<0.0001, AIM2 0.24 [0.0017-18.23] PBackground and
Objectives:When assessing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), it is quite
important to examine prognostic factors in the background non tumorous
liver tissue as well as HCC tissue itself. Inflammation has been thought
to have some influence to malignancy of neoplasms and carcinogenesis. We
focused on inflammasomes; multiprotein complex evoking key cascades of
inflammation. Components of inflammasomes are investigated in mRNA level
to identify molecular prognostic predictors for curatively resected
HCC.Methods:Candidate genes that code pattern recognition receptors ;
NLRP3, NLRC4, and AIM2 and caspase1 (CASP1) that mature IL-1, IL-18 were
investigated via real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction in 158 consecutive curatively resected HCC cases at our
department. We investigated each gene expression in both HCC tumor tissue
(T) and background corresponding non tumorous tissue (CN) and super
normal tissue (SN) taken from resected specimens of metastatic hepatic
tumor was also assessed in this study. Statistical analyses were
performed with Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the log-rank test.
Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards models were used to
determine the independent risk factors associated with the RFS and
OS.Results:The expression level of NLRP3, NLRC4, and AIM2 (expression
score/GAPDH1000) were significantly higher in CN (NLRP3 median: 0.29
[range: 0.037-10.59], NLRC4 0.38[0.010-9.85] , AIM2 1.00 [0.016-43.62], n
= 158 ) than in T (NLRP3 0.064 [0.0027-41.67] P<0.0001, NLRC4 0.14
[0.0044-6.14] P<0.0001, AIM2 0.24 [0.0017-18.23] P<0.0001, n = 158) and
SN (NLRP3 0.10 [0.029-0.74] P = 0.0026, NLRC4 0.090[0.032-0.16]
PBackground and Objectives:When assessing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
it is quite important to examine prognostic factors in the background non
tumorous liver tissue as well as HCC tissue itself. Inflammation has been
thought to have some influence to malignancy of neoplasms and
carcinogenesis. We focused on inflammasomes; multiprotein complex evoking
key cascades of inflammation. Components of inflammasomes are
investigated in mRNA level to identify molecular prognostic predictors
for curatively resected HCC.Methods:Candidate genes that code pattern
recognition receptors ; NLRP3, NLRC4, and AIM2 and caspase1 (CASP1) that
mature IL-1, IL-18 were investigated via real-time quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction in 158 consecutive curatively
resected HCC cases at our department. We investigated each gene
expression in both HCC tumor tissue (T) and background corresponding non
tumorous tissue (CN) and super normal tissue (SN) taken from resected
specimens of metastatic hepatic tumor was also assessed in this study.
Statistical analyses were performed with Kaplan-Meier method and compared
using the log-rank test. Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional
hazards models were used to determine the independent risk factors
associated with the RFS and OS.Results:The expression level of NLRP3,
NLRC4, and AIM2 (expression score/GAPDH1000) were significantly higher in
CN (NLRP3 median: 0.29 [range: 0.037-10.59], NLRC4 0.38[0.010-9.85] ,
AIM2 1.00 [0.016-43.62], n = 158 ) than in T (NLRP3 0.064 [0.0027-41.67]
P<0.0001, NLRC4 0.14 [0.0044-6.14] P<0.0001, AIM2 0.24 [0.0017-18.23]
P<0.0001, n = 158) and SN (NLRP3 0.10 [0.029-0.74] P = 0.0026, NLRC4
0.090[0.032-0.16] P<0.0001, AIM2 0.15 [0.053-1.30] P = 0.0003, n = 11).
CASP1 in CN (3.26 [0.34-32.95] n = 158) was significantly higher than
that in T (1.43 [0.13-40.98] PBackground and Objectives:When assessing
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), it is quite important to examine
prognostic factors in the background non tumorous liver tissue as well as
HCC tissue itself. Inflammation has been thought to have some influence
to malignancy of neoplasms and carcinogenesis. We focused on
inflammasomes; multiprotein complex evoking key cascades of inflammation.
Components of inflammasomes are investigated in mRNA level to identify
molecular prognostic predictors for curatively resected
HCC.Methods:Candidate genes that code pattern recognition receptors ;
NLRP3, NLRC4, and AIM2 and caspase1 (CASP1) that mature IL-1, IL-18 were
investigated via real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction in 158 consecutive curatively resected HCC cases at our
department. We investigated each gene expression in both HCC tumor tissue
(T) and background corresponding non tumorous tissue (CN) and super
normal tissue (SN) taken from resected specimens of metastatic hepatic
tumor was also assessed in this study. Statistical analyses were
performed with Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the log-rank test.
Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards models were used to
determine the independent risk factors associated with the RFS and
OS.Results:The expression level of NLRP3, NLRC4, and AIM2 (expression
score/GAPDH1000) were significantly higher in CN (NLRP3 median: 0.29
[range: 0.037-10.59], NLRC4 0.38[0.010-9.85] , AIM2 1.00 [0.016-43.62], n
= 158 ) than in T (NLRP3 0.064 [0.0027-41.67] P<0.0001, NLRC4 0.14
[0.0044-6.14] P<0.0001, AIM2 0.24 [0.0017-18.23] P<0.0001, n = 158) and
SN (NLRP3 0.10 [0.029-0.74] P = 0.0026, NLRC4 0.090[0.032-0.16] P<0.0001,
AIM2 0.15 [0.053-1.30] P = 0.0003, n = 11). CASP1 in CN (3.26
[0.34-32.95] n = 158) was significantly higher than that in T (1.43
[0.13-40.98] P<0.0001, n = 158). 158 HCC cases were subsequently divided
into two groups based on NLRP3, NLRC4, and CASP1 expression in T and CN
in each case. NLRP3 in CN median, NLRC4 in CN median, and CASP1 in CN
median cases demonstrated significant correlation with worse overall
survival respectively (NLRP3 P = 0.0074, NLRC4 P = 0.0121, CASP1 P =
0.0160). Furthermore, multivariate analysis identified NLRP3 expression
in CN median as an independent prognostic factor in overall survival (P =
0.0011).Conclusions:Our findings suggested that NLRP3, NLRC4, and CASP1
expression in CN were significantly correlated with curatively resected
HCC prognosis. Inflammation in background non tumorous tissue might be
related with HCC malignancy and those were putative biomarker for
curatively resected HCC.

