Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JNK/c-Jun- and NF-B-mediated microRNA-221 governs tumor suppressor
HDAC6 to potentiate malignant progression of liver cancer


Many clinical studies of cancer patients have established that the most
common reason behind changes in HDAC function is its overexpression.
However, among HDACs in liver cancer, HDAC6, a cytoplasmic tubulin
deacetylase, is uniquely endowed with a tumor suppressor, but the
mechanism underlying HDAC6 inactivation has yet to be uncovered. In this
study we show that genetic and epigenetic dysregulation was not part of
the HDAC6 inactivation mechanism. Instead, microRNA-221-3p (miR-221)
directly suppressed HDAC6 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. A
comprehensive miRNA profiling analysis identified seven putative
endogenous miRNAs that are significantly upregulated in HCC. Ectopic
expression of miRNA mimics in Dicer knockdown cells evidenced miR-221 to
suppress HDAC6 in HCC cells. Notably, targeted-disruption of miR-221
repressed cancer cell growth and proliferation, and it recapitulated
HDAC6 overexpression effects in HCC cells. Our results also demonstrate
that c-Met-mediated c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK)/c-Jun signaling
induced miR-221 to suppress HDAC6 and was sustained in liver cancer cells
but not in normal hepatic cells. In addition, cytokine-induced NF-Bp65
independently regulated miR-221, thereby suppressing HDAC6 expression in
liver cancer cells. HCC tissues derived from chemical-induced rat liver
cancer models validated that JNK/c-Jun activation and NF-kBp65 nuclear
translocation are essential for the transcriptional activation of
oncogenic miR-221 to repress tumor suppressor HDAC6 in HCC. In
conclusion, our finding suggest that the functional loss or suppression
of the tumor suppressor HDAC6 is caused by miR-221 through coordinated
JNK/c-Jun- and NF-B-signaling pathways during liver tumorigenesis,
providing a novel target for the molecular treatment of liver
malignancies.

