Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptide probe-based in vivo imaging of apoptosis and early
decision on stomach tumor response to treatment


Early decision on tumor response after anti-cancer treatment is still an
unmet medical need. Here we exploited ApoPep-1 peptide that binds to
histone H1 exposed on apoptotic cell surface as a probe and investigated
whether in vivo imaging of apoptosis using near-infrared fluorescence
dye-labeled linear and cyclic (disulfide-bonded) form of ApoPep-1 at an
early stage after treatment could enable us predict tumor response to the
treatment later. Treatment of SNU16 stomach tumor cells with cistplatin
and cetuximab alone significantly induced apoptosis of the cells, while
combination of cisplatin and cetuximab more efficiently induced
apoptosis, as detected by staining with linear and cyclic form of
ApoPep1. However, the differences among groups were more remarkable when
detected with cyclic form of ApoPep-1 compared to the linear counterpart.
In tumor-bearing mice, apoptosis imaging was performed at the first and
second week after the initiation of treatment, and tumor sizes and
weights were measured 3 weeks after treatment. In vivo fluorescence
imaging signals by the homing of ApoPep-1 to tumor was most remarkable in
the group injected with cyclic form of ApoPep-1 at the first week after
combined treatment with cisplatin plus cetuximab. There were no
significant differences in tumor sizes and weights between groups
injected with linear and cyclic form of ApoPep-1. Correlation analysis
revealed that imaging signals 1 week after treatment with cisplatin and
cetuximab in combination were most closely related with tumor volume
changes (r2 = 0.934). These results demonstrate that in vivo apoptosis
imaging using the cyclic form of Apopep-1 is a sensitive and predictive
tool for early decision on stomach tumor response after anti-cancer
treatment.

