Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity of liposomal docetaxel prodrug MNK-010 on PC3
human prostate xenografts in mice


The anti-mitotic taxanes are one of the most important families of
anticancer drugs that have broad anti-tumor activity and are widely used
for a variety of human cancer types. However, the taxanes are limited by
a number of serious pharmacological and toxicological effects, including
dose limiting myelosuppression, neurotoxicity and serious
hypersensitivity reactions. We are developing a unique delivery system
for docetaxel, comprised of a PEGylated liposomal nanoparticle containing
a prodrug of docetaxel to improve solubility, tolerability and increase
efficacy through improved pharmacokinetics and biodistribution. In this
study we evaluated the antitumor activity of MNK-010 on the growth of
established human PC3 xenografts in male immunodeficient mice. This study
tested the hypothesis that MNK-010 can provide greater efficacy than
Taxotere (docetaxel) at equivalent maximum tolerated doses (MTD) in mice
implanted with human PC3 tumor cells. Male nude mice bearing PC3 human
prostate xenografts were given two or four intravenous (IV) doses of
MNK-010, Taxotere or saline. Dosing intervals were twenty-one days for
two cycles or every four days for four cycles. The doses of Taxotere and
MNK-010 were based on maximum tolerated dose (MTD) or highest dose tested
for a given dose interval. Tumor volume was measured twice per week using
the Biopticon tumor imaging system and tumor volume data was analyzed to
determine tumor growth delay and partial tumor regression. Survival
analysis was conducted and median survival time determined. MNK-010
significantly (p The anti-mitotic taxanes are one of the most important
families of anticancer drugs that have broad anti-tumor activity and are
widely used for a variety of human cancer types. However, the taxanes are
limited by a number of serious pharmacological and toxicological effects,
including dose limiting myelosuppression, neurotoxicity and serious
hypersensitivity reactions. We are developing a unique delivery system
for docetaxel, comprised of a PEGylated liposomal nanoparticle containing
a prodrug of docetaxel to improve solubility, tolerability and increase
efficacy through improved pharmacokinetics and biodistribution. In this
study we evaluated the antitumor activity of MNK-010 on the growth of
established human PC3 xenografts in male immunodeficient mice. This study
tested the hypothesis that MNK-010 can provide greater efficacy than
Taxotere (docetaxel) at equivalent maximum tolerated doses (MTD) in mice
implanted with human PC3 tumor cells. Male nude mice bearing PC3 human
prostate xenografts were given two or four intravenous (IV) doses of
MNK-010, Taxotere or saline. Dosing intervals were twenty-one days for
two cycles or every four days for four cycles. The doses of Taxotere and
MNK-010 were based on maximum tolerated dose (MTD) or highest dose tested
for a given dose interval. Tumor volume was measured twice per week using
the Biopticon tumor imaging system and tumor volume data was analyzed to
determine tumor growth delay and partial tumor regression. Survival
analysis was conducted and median survival time determined. MNK-010
significantly (p <0.05) inhibited PC3 human tumor growth in nude mice at
all dose regimens evaluated compared to saline and Taxotere treatment.
MNK-010 delayed tumor growth up to 145 days, which was 59 days longer
than Taxotere at its MTD. MNK-010 also partially regressed 90% - 100% of
tumors in all dose groups. This antitumor activity contributed to
achieving median survival of 177 days, which was 150 days longer than
saline control and 80 days longer than Taxotere at its MTD. This study
demonstrated that Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals PEGylated liposomal
docetaxel prodrug nanoparticle MNK-010 is an active antitumor agent in
the PC3 prostate xenograft and possess significantly greater antitumor
activity compared to the standard of care Taxotere.

