Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arenobufagin targets K-Ras downstream to enhance the efficiency of
gemcitabine in human pancreatic carcinoma cells


Pancreatic carcinoma (PC) is a deadly form of cancer with poor overall
survival. Currently, chemotherapeutic such as gemcitabine and
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) are the most popular medication that can slightly
improve survival, but rapid drug-resistance makes it urgent to search for
more effective drugs. In hunting for natural components that cure PC, we
found that arenobufagin, a cardiac glycosides-like compound, showed
significant effects on the gemcitabine-resistant cell line Panc-1, the
gemcitabine-sensitive cell line ASPC-1 and K-Ras activating HPNE cells at
nanomolar concentrations. We used MTT and clonogenic survival assays to
examine survival and proliferation and western blotting to assess changes
of K-Ras downstream and apoptosis related proteins. We also detected the
cell cycle and migration by flow cytometry and wound healing assay.
Arenobufagin inhibited cellular survival and proliferation, decreased the
phosphorylation of key proteins of K-Ras downstream such as Akt, Erk and
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-B), induced cell cycle G2/M arrest and
apoptosis, and downregulated the level of phosphorylated epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR). Most importantly, our data showed that
arenobufagin can enhance the sensitivity of PC cells to gemcitabine and
5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Arenobufagin could enhance the effect of
gemcitabine and 5-FU on PC cells through targeting multiple key proteins.
All above makes arenobufagin a novel agent for combination therapy of
pancreatic carcinoma.

