Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Streamlining NGS workflows using cancer samples by the application
of the DNA Integrity Number (DIN) from the Genomic DNA ScreenTape assay


The results of numerous molecular screening and assay methods often rely
on the overall quality of the genomic DNA (gDNA) input material. However
extraction of genetic material can be challenging and often results in
low amounts or variable quality of gDNA samples, which are further
subjected to time and cost intensive downstream applications. For
example, array comparative genome hybridization (aCGH) and Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) can require intact, high quality gDNA to
ensure high quality, unambiguous results. It is therefore widely
recommended to perform an initial quality control (QC) of the input
material. Especially as only the final step of these workflows reveals if
meaningful results have been achieved. In order to provide an objective
and automated measure to standardize the gDNA integrity assessment, a
software algorithm has been developed. This functionality of the 2200
TapeStation system provides a numerical determination of the gDNA
integrity and is referred to as the DNA Integrity Number (DIN). This
study demonstrates how DIN obtained by the upfront QC of gDNA on the
Agilent Genomic DNA ScreenTape assay has allowed for significant saving
of sequencing and sample preparation overhead using cancer samples in NGS
workflows.

