Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated levels of plasma VEGF associated with the attenuation of
whole blood IFN- production and QOL impairment in patients with advanced
gastric cancer


Introduction:Gastric cancer is one of the leading types of cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer death in the world. Recently, the foci of
treatment shift towards not only survival benefit but also better quality
of life (QOL) in patients with advanced gastric cancer. Therefore, the
development of an auxiliary tool to assess QOL is likely to be
required.On the other hand, immune checkpoint blockade by anti-CTLA-4
antibody and anti-PD-1 antibody led to clinical breakthrough for the
treatment of patients with advanced cancer. Early phase clinical trial of
pembrolizumab in patients with advanced gastric cancer has already been
conducted. Pretreatment circulating VEGF have been recently shown to
associate with clinical outcome in patients treated with
ipilimumab.Certain circulating cytokine levels have been shown to reflect
tumor progression and have a prognostic value. Although, it remains
obscure whether circulating cytokine levels affect QOL and immune
function. In this study, we examined the correlation of circulating
cytokine with QOL as well as parameters of immune function such as whole
blood cytokine production and the number of peripheral Tregs in patients
with advanced gastric cancer.Methods:Subjects comprised 31 patients with
unresectable or recurrent gastric cancer. We evaluated plasma cytokine
levels and whole blood cytokine production after phytohemagglutinin (PHA)
stimulation using the bioplex array system. We also assessed the number
of peripheral Tregs by flow cytometry. Health-related QOL was assessed
using the Quality of Life Questionnaire (EORTC
QLQ-C30).Results:Significant negative correlation was found between
plasma VEGF levels and global health status scores (p = 0.0103) as well
as physical functioning scale scores (p = 0.0006) and cognitive
functioning scale scores (p = 0.0191). Some symptom scale scores (e.g.
fatigue, appetite loss) were correlated with plasma VEGF levels. There
was a negative correlation between plasma VEGF levels and whole blood
IFN- production (p = 0.0002). Significant negative relationship existed
between the number of peripheral Tregs and plasma IL-6 levels
(pIntroduction:Gastric cancer is one of the leading types of cancer and
the second leading cause of cancer death in the world. Recently, the foci
of treatment shift towards not only survival benefit but also better
quality of life (QOL) in patients with advanced gastric cancer.
Therefore, the development of an auxiliary tool to assess QOL is likely
to be required.On the other hand, immune checkpoint blockade by
anti-CTLA-4 antibody and anti-PD-1 antibody led to clinical breakthrough
for the treatment of patients with advanced cancer. Early phase clinical
trial of pembrolizumab in patients with advanced gastric cancer has
already been conducted. Pretreatment circulating VEGF have been recently
shown to associate with clinical outcome in patients treated with
ipilimumab.Certain circulating cytokine levels have been shown to reflect
tumor progression and have a prognostic value. Although, it remains
obscure whether circulating cytokine levels affect QOL and immune
function. In this study, we examined the correlation of circulating
cytokine with QOL as well as parameters of immune function such as whole
blood cytokine production and the number of peripheral Tregs in patients
with advanced gastric cancer.Methods:Subjects comprised 31 patients with
unresectable or recurrent gastric cancer. We evaluated plasma cytokine
levels and whole blood cytokine production after phytohemagglutinin (PHA)
stimulation using the bioplex array system. We also assessed the number
of peripheral Tregs by flow cytometry. Health-related QOL was assessed
using the Quality of Life Questionnaire (EORTC
QLQ-C30).Results:Significant negative correlation was found between
plasma VEGF levels and global health status scores (p = 0.0103) as well
as physical functioning scale scores (p = 0.0006) and cognitive
functioning scale scores (p = 0.0191). Some symptom scale scores (e.g.
fatigue, appetite loss) were correlated with plasma VEGF levels. There
was a negative correlation between plasma VEGF levels and whole blood
IFN- production (p = 0.0002). Significant negative relationship existed
between the number of peripheral Tregs and plasma IL-6 levels (p<0.0001).
We confirmed that PBMCs-secreted IFN- after PHA stimulation reduced by
the exposure to recombinant VEGF in vivo.Conclusion:These data indicate
that the evaluation of plasma VEGF level is likely to be useful to assess
QOL such as global health status, physical functioning and cognitive
functioning and elevated levels of plasma VEGF might associated with the
attenuation of immune function in patients with advanced gastric cancer.
Consequently, clinical utility of anti-VEGF therapy combined with
immunotherapy is required to investigate in larger clinical studies in
the future.

