Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of docetaxel with sulforaphane synergistically
inhibits triple negative breast cancer and cancer stem cells


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) (ER-, PR-, Her2-), constituting
10-20% of all breast cancers, is a heterogeneous disease with limited
treatment options and poor prognosis. TNBCs exhibit rapid progression
with the duration of response to first line palliative chemotherapy
typically less than 12 weeks, and overall five year survival of patients
with metastatic TNBC of 22%. The cancer stem cell (CSC) model provides an
attractive explanation for relapse of TNBC after primary therapy since
these cells demonstrate resistance to conventional chemotherapy. CSCs
which survive primary treatments, such as docetaxel, may self-renew and
differentiate into the heterogeneous tumor bulk resulting in local
recurrence and distant metastasis. Docetaxel has been demonstrated to not
only fail to eliminate CSCs but expands this population in preclinical
models. Further, docetaxel increases circulating IL-6 in patients
following therapy, a cytokine reported to expand breast CSCs. Therefore,
we sought to combine docetaxel with a small molecule CSC inhibitor
capable of reducing IL-6 production (sulforaphane, SF) for the effective
treatment of TNBCs.Our results in vitro demonstrate that docetaxel
treatment (5 nM) increases the proportion of CSCs in TNBC cell lines
(SUM149 and SUM159) as evident by flow cytometry analysis using the
ALDEFLUOR assay (70.622.0%) and cells which are CD44+/CD24-/EpCAM+ (2.9
fold). Mammosphere formation assay reveals 1 nM docetaxel increases
secondary sphere formation rate by 75.829%. As determined by ELISA, 5 nM
docetaxel treatment for 72 hours induces 3.5 fold increase in IL-6
production. Conversely, SF (2.5 M) selectively reduces the proportion of
ALDEFLUOR positive cells (51.515.0%) and mammosphere formation (39.23.8%)
while reducing IL-6 (55.65.0%) through regulation of NF-kB activity. In
combination docetaxel and SF synergize to effectively reduce bulk cell
line proliferation (combination index range 1-0.093). Further, SF
prevents docetaxel mediated CSC expansion and IL-6 production. Using a
mouse xenograft model docetaxel (10 mg/kg weekly) reduces tumor growth of
established tumors by 83.26.0% whereas SF (50 mg/kg daily) inhibits
primary tumor growth by 37.414.6%. In addition, secondary reimplantation
assays with limiting dilution analysis reveals docetaxel increases the
frequency of the tumor initiating CSCs (1/1514 control cells vs 1/330
docetaxel treated cells) while SF reduces the frequency to 1/3181 cells.
In vivo, the combination of docetaxel and SF exhibits a greater reduction
in primary tumor volume (92.52.1% reduction relative to control), and
synergistically inhibit the CSC population (1 in 4245 cells). These
results suggest that SF mediated inhibition of breast CSCs and IL-6
provide a scientific rationale for using this agent in combination with
docetaxel for TNBC.

