Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T cell therapy targeting a neoantigen reduces in vivo tumour growth


T-cell receptor (TCR) transfer is an attractive strategy to increase the
number of cancer-specific T cells in adoptive cell therapy. However,
recent clinical and pre-clinical findings indicate that careful
consideration of the target antigen is required to avoid on-target,
off-site toxicity. A safer alternative to targeting tumour-associated
self-antigens may be to direct engineered T cells against mutated
proteins such as frequently occurring frameshift mutations. Furthermore,
such frameshift mutations result in novel polypeptides allowing selection
of TCRs from the non-tolerant T-cell repertoire circumventing the problem
of low affinity TCRs due to central tolerance. The transforming growth
factor Receptor II frameshift mutation (TGFRIImut) is found in Lynch
syndrome cancer patients and in around 15% of sporadic colorectal and
gastric cancers displaying microsatellite instability.The -1A mutation
within a stretch of 10 adenine bases (nucleotides 709-718) of the TGFRII
gene gives rise to immunogenic peptides previously used for vaccination
of MSI+ colorectal cancer patients in a Phase I clinical trial. From a
clinically responding patient we isolated a CD8neg/CD4neg CTL clone from
which we cloned an HLA-A2-restricted TGFRIImut-specific TCR. We showed
that both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells transiently redirected with this
TGFRIImut-TCR recognised colon carcinoma cell lines harbouring the
frameshift mutation, indicating CD8+ co-receptor independency.Cysteine
modification of the TCR enhanced its expression and function and we have
demonstrated that these TCR-redirected T cells significantly enhanced
survival and reduced tumour growth in a NOD/SCID xenograft mouse model of
colorectal cancer.

