Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A web portal of next-generation clustered heat maps for
user-friendly, interactive exploration of patterns in TCGA data


The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) program is generating comprehensive
molecular profiles of more than 30 clinical tumor types, the first 12 of
which have been incorporated into a Pan-Cancer12 project. One
bioinformatic challenge is statistical analysis of the resulting
profiles; a second is the visual detective work necessary to explore
individual genes, pathways and patterns in the data. For that type of
detective work, we introduced CHMs in the early 1990s for pharmacogenomic
analysis (1) and later for integrated visualization of genomic,
transcriptomic, proteomic, pharmacological, and functional data (2). As
the ubiquitous first-order way of visualizing omic data, CHMs have
appeared in many thousands of publications (3-9), including all of the
major publications by the TCGA Research Network. However, a major
limitation is that they have been static or only modestly interactive
graphics. We have now developed next-generation clustered heat maps
(NG-CHMs), which use a Google-maps-like tiling technology for extreme
zooming and navigation without loss of resolution. NG-CHMs provide
pathway and gene ontology information, re-coloring on the fly, tools for
reproducibility, high-resolution graphics output, a statistical toolbox,
and link-outs to public sources of information on genes, proteins,
pathways and drugs. The result is a visually rich, dynamic environment
for exploration of the masses of data produced by TCGA. The compendium of
TCGA Pan-Cancer NG-CHMs currently includes 667 maps as an initial set,
but the numbers will soon rise into the thousands as more data types,
tumour types and algorithms are incorporated (at web portal
http://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/TCGA/NGCHMPortal/). As an
illustrative example, NG-CHMs proved pivotal as a tool for discovering
and analyzing molecular target themes common to multiple types of
gynecological cancers and themes that distinguish them from each other.1.
Weinstein JN Paull KD. Stem Cells 12; 13, 1994.2. Weinstein JN Paull KD.
Science 275;343, 1997.3. Myers TG Weinstein JN. Electrophoresis 18; 467,
1997.4. Eisen MB Botstein D. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 14863, 1998.5.
Golub TR Lander ES. Science 286; 531, 1999.6. Ross DT Brown PA. Nature
Genetics 24; 227, 20007. Scherf U Weinstein JN. Nature Genetics 24; 236,
2000.8. Zeeberg BR Weinstein JN. BMC Bioinformatics 6; 168, 2005.9.
Weinstein JN. Science 319; 1772, 2008.Supported in part by NCI Grant No.
U24CA143883, by a gift from the Mary K. Chapman Foundation, and by a
grant from the Michael and Susan Dell Foundation honoring Lorraine
Dell.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

