Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age dependent disposition of cyclophosphamide (CTX) and
metabolites in infants 1 year old with brain tumors


An ongoing trial of risk-adapted therapy for infants and young children
An ongoing trial of risk-adapted therapy for infants and young children <
3 yrs old diagnosed with brain tumors includes IV CTX (NCT00602667). One
aim is to describe the pharmacokinetics (PK) of CTX, and 2 of its
metabolites, the inactive carboxyethylphosphoramide mustard (CEPM) and
the active 4-hydroxycyclophosphamide (4-OH CTX) in children An ongoing
trial of risk-adapted therapy for infants and young children < 3 yrs old
diagnosed with brain tumors includes IV CTX (NCT00602667). One aim is to
describe the pharmacokinetics (PK) of CTX, and 2 of its metabolites, the
inactive carboxyethylphosphoramide mustard (CEPM) and the active
4-hydroxycyclophosphamide (4-OH CTX) in children < 3 yrs old. This report
describes the disposition of CTX and metabolites in infants 1 yr old.
Induction therapy includes 1.5 gm/m2 CTX IV over 1 hr on day 9 of a 28
day course. PK studies for CTX were performed in consenting patients and
samples were collected prior to drug infusion, at the end of the infusion
(EOI), and 3, 6, and 24 h after EOI. Blood was processed to plasma for
determination of CTX and CEPM using a LC-MS/MS method. For 4-OH CTX,
samples were immediately derivatized using phenylhydrazine to ensure 4-OH
CTX stability until analysis using a LC-MS/MS method. A model with one
compartment for CTX and each metabolite was fit to the data using
nonlinear mixed effects modeling. In 27 infants 1 yr, 133 samples were
obtained and analyzed for CTX, CEPM, and 4-OH CTX. The median (range)
age, BSA, and weight were 6.9 months (0.2 - 12 months), 0.4 m2 (0.2 - 0.6
m2), and 8.1 kg (3.6 - 14.1 kg), respectively. As depicted in the Table
below, CTX and 4-OH CTX AUC were 50% and 30% higher in the youngest age
group, respectively. Our preliminary analysis showed inclusion of age as
a covariate on CTX clearance to 4-OH CTX improved model fits, decreasing
the variability observed in 4-OH CTX AUC. Since high 4-OH CTX exposure is
associated with increased toxicities, our results indicate the need for
better models to accurately simulate 4-OH CTX exposures in infants with
the goal of developing rational dosing approaches for CTX in this
population. This is the first analysis of CTX and metabolite PK in
infants 1 yr old with brain tumors. Future studies will include a full
covariate analysis and an evaluation of exposure-toxicity relationships
associated with CTX and metabolites.Kruskal-Wallis, pAn ongoing trial of
risk-adapted therapy for infants and young children < 3 yrs old diagnosed
with brain tumors includes IV CTX (NCT00602667). One aim is to describe
the pharmacokinetics (PK) of CTX, and 2 of its metabolites, the inactive
carboxyethylphosphoramide mustard (CEPM) and the active
4-hydroxycyclophosphamide (4-OH CTX) in children < 3 yrs old. This report
describes the disposition of CTX and metabolites in infants 1 yr old.
Induction therapy includes 1.5 gm/m2 CTX IV over 1 hr on day 9 of a 28
day course. PK studies for CTX were performed in consenting patients and
samples were collected prior to drug infusion, at the end of the infusion
(EOI), and 3, 6, and 24 h after EOI. Blood was processed to plasma for
determination of CTX and CEPM using a LC-MS/MS method. For 4-OH CTX,
samples were immediately derivatized using phenylhydrazine to ensure 4-OH
CTX stability until analysis using a LC-MS/MS method. A model with one
compartment for CTX and each metabolite was fit to the data using
nonlinear mixed effects modeling. In 27 infants 1 yr, 133 samples were
obtained and analyzed for CTX, CEPM, and 4-OH CTX. The median (range)
age, BSA, and weight were 6.9 months (0.2 - 12 months), 0.4 m2 (0.2 - 0.6
m2), and 8.1 kg (3.6 - 14.1 kg), respectively. As depicted in the Table
below, CTX and 4-OH CTX AUC were 50% and 30% higher in the youngest age
group, respectively. Our preliminary analysis showed inclusion of age as
a covariate on CTX clearance to 4-OH CTX improved model fits, decreasing
the variability observed in 4-OH CTX AUC. Since high 4-OH CTX exposure is
associated with increased toxicities, our results indicate the need for
better models to accurately simulate 4-OH CTX exposures in infants with
the goal of developing rational dosing approaches for CTX in this
population. This is the first analysis of CTX and metabolite PK in
infants 1 yr old with brain tumors. Future studies will include a full
covariate analysis and an evaluation of exposure-toxicity relationships
associated with CTX and metabolites.Kruskal-Wallis, p<0.05; Dunn's
Multiple Comparison, pAn ongoing trial of risk-adapted therapy for
infants and young children < 3 yrs old diagnosed with brain tumors
includes IV CTX (NCT00602667). One aim is to describe the
pharmacokinetics (PK) of CTX, and 2 of its metabolites, the inactive
carboxyethylphosphoramide mustard (CEPM) and the active
4-hydroxycyclophosphamide (4-OH CTX) in children < 3 yrs old. This report
describes the disposition of CTX and metabolites in infants 1 yr old.
Induction therapy includes 1.5 gm/m2 CTX IV over 1 hr on day 9 of a 28
day course. PK studies for CTX were performed in consenting patients and
samples were collected prior to drug infusion, at the end of the infusion
(EOI), and 3, 6, and 24 h after EOI. Blood was processed to plasma for
determination of CTX and CEPM using a LC-MS/MS method. For 4-OH CTX,
samples were immediately derivatized using phenylhydrazine to ensure 4-OH
CTX stability until analysis using a LC-MS/MS method. A model with one
compartment for CTX and each metabolite was fit to the data using
nonlinear mixed effects modeling. In 27 infants 1 yr, 133 samples were
obtained and analyzed for CTX, CEPM, and 4-OH CTX. The median (range)
age, BSA, and weight were 6.9 months (0.2 - 12 months), 0.4 m2 (0.2 - 0.6
m2), and 8.1 kg (3.6 - 14.1 kg), respectively. As depicted in the Table
below, CTX and 4-OH CTX AUC were 50% and 30% higher in the youngest age
group, respectively. Our preliminary analysis showed inclusion of age as
a covariate on CTX clearance to 4-OH CTX improved model fits, decreasing
the variability observed in 4-OH CTX AUC. Since high 4-OH CTX exposure is
associated with increased toxicities, our results indicate the need for
better models to accurately simulate 4-OH CTX exposures in infants with
the goal of developing rational dosing approaches for CTX in this
population. This is the first analysis of CTX and metabolite PK in
infants 1 yr old with brain tumors. Future studies will include a full
covariate analysis and an evaluation of exposure-toxicity relationships
associated with CTX and metabolites.Kruskal-Wallis, p<0.05; Dunn's
Multiple Comparison, p<0.05Kruskal-Wallis, p = 0.06

