Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition is associated with a profound
inflammatory tumor microenvironment in lung adenocarcinoma


Promising results in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
have been seen with immunomodulatory agents targeting immune checkpoints,
such as programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) or programmed cell death 1 ligand
(PD-L1). However, only a select group of patients respond to these
interventions. The identification of biomarkers that predict clinical
benefit to immune-based approaches, such as immune checkpoint blockade,
is critical to successful translation of these agents. By using
integrated gene array analysis in three large independent NSCLC patient
datasets along with immunohistochemistry study (IHC), reverse phase
protein array (RPPA) and in vivo animal study, we demonstrated that
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is highly associated with a
profound inflammatory tumor microenvironment in lung adenocarcinoma. Our
data revealed immune activation and simultaneous development of multiple
immune suppressive mechanisms, including elevation of immune checkpoints
such as PD-L1, PD-L2, PD-1, TIM-3, BTLA and CTLA-4, as well as an
increase in tumor infiltrating CD4+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells, IL-6 and
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) in lung adenocarcinomas with a
mesenchymal phenotype. Our data suggested that EMT might represent a
potential biomarker to select the patients who will benefit from immune
checkpoint blockade agents and other immunotherapies in NSCLC and
possibly other cancers.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

