Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-drug conjugates to target cell surface TACE-cleaved
amphiregulin in breast cancer


Approximately 70% of breast cancer cases are Estrogen Receptor (ER)
positive. In many cases, these patients are well-served by endocrine
therapies such as tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors, however the
emergence of endocrine-resistant disease in up to 40% of these patients
is a major clinical concern. This necessitates treatment with more toxic
chemotherapies which are often successful at delaying tumor progression,
but are not curative.Recent work from our group and others has
demonstrated that Amphiregulin, an Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
(EGFR) ligand, is a critical effector of ER signaling in both normal
development and breast cancer pathogenesis, and is expressed in both
endocrine-sensitive and endocrine-resistant breast cancer. Like other
EGFR ligands, Amphiregulin is proteolytically processed at the cell
surface to release a soluble EGFR-binding signaling domain and a residual
cell-associated stalk. In this project, we are developing antibodies that
selectively recognize the residual transmembrane Amphiregulin cleavage
product with the goal of developing antibody-drug conjugates with which
to selectively target tumor cells with high levels of Amphiregulin
shedding.We have generated six humanized antibodies that recognize the
cell-associated neo-epitope revealed following the TACE-mediated
proteolytic release of Amphiregulin. Using both flow Cytometry and
immunofluorescence, we demonstrate that these antibodies selectively
recognize cleaved over full-length Amphiregulin in estrogen receptor
positive breast cancer cells. Conjugation of these antibodies with a
pH-sensitive dye, pHrodo, demonstrates robust and rapid antibody
internalization in live cells. Conjugation of these antibodies with
monomethyl auristatin E results in the disruption of the microtubule
network of breast cancer cells followed by cell death. We propose that
these agents may have utility in the treatment of breast and other
cancers in which Amphiregulin expression and processing play a prominent
role.This study is supported by the Department of Defense Breast Cancer
Research Program (W81XWH-14-1-0294).

