Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endothelial angiopoietin-2 expression correlates with tumor
angiogenesis and response to sunitinib in metastatic renal cell carcinoma


Background: Angiopoietin-2 (Ang2) is an endothelial cell derived growth
factor, which promotes tumor angiogenesis, tumor growth and metastasis.
Ang2 is a promising target for anti-angiogenic therapies, but its
potential as a biomarker for anti-angiogenic therapies remains unknown.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate expression of the Ang2-Tie2
signalling pathway components in metastatic RCC (mRCC) patients treated
with sunitinib, a modern multitarget TKI.Materials and methods: We
evaluated Ang2, CD31 and Ki67 expression in tumors of 136 patients with
metastatic RCC (mRCC) treated with first-line sunitinib from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor samples using
immunohistochemistry.Results: Ang2 was exclusively expressed in the
endothelial cells of tumor blood vessels. Using a cutoff of 50 Ang2+
vessels/microscopic field, 38% of the samples had high Ang2 expression.
High Ang2 expression correlated with high CD31+ vessel density (p =
0.002). 91% of patients with high Ang2 expression had partial response
(PR) or stable disease (SD) as best response to sunitinib as compared
with 76% of those with low Ang2 expression (P = 0.033). High CD31+ vessel
density correlated with a high clinical benefit rate (P = 0.015), and
with low levels of Ki-67+ tumor cells (P = 0.018). Combined high
expression of both Ang2 and CD31 predicted even better clinical benefit
rate with 100% of the patients with high Ang2 and CD31 expression (n =
25) achieving PR/SD as compared with 77% among the rest of the patients
(n = 101; P = 0.007). Only one patient (8%, n = 12) with papillary RCC,
but 49 (41%) patients with clear cell RCC had high Ang2 expression (P =
0.03).Conclusions: In this first study to investigate Ang2 expression and
outcome in mRCC patients treated with sunitinib, high Ang2 expression in
the tumor vasculature was predictive for sunitinib efficacy.

