Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variation at a cis-acting C/EBPG binding site is
associated with allele-specific ERCC5 transcript expression


Background: CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein gamma (C/EBPG) transcription
factor expression is correlated with that of ERCC5 and other key DNA
repair genes in normal bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC) suggesting a
regulatory role. In prior studies, ERCC5 transcript expression was
increased in a human lung carcinoma cell line H23 following CEBPG
overexpression and in NBEC from 81 subjects, A allele at putative ERCC5
cis-regulatory SNP (rSNP) rs751402 and T allele at rSNP rs2296147 were
associated with higher expression of ERCC5 marker SNP rs1047768 T allele
transcript. rs751402 is located in open chromatin region identified by
FAIRE-seq in NBEC and variation at rs751402 is predicted to alter binding
of C/EBP. These studies support the hypothesis that allelic differential
affinity to C/EBPG at rs751402 contributes to hereditary inter-individual
variation in regulation of ERCC5 either directly or through interaction
with complexes bound at rs2296147. The purpose of this study was to
further investigate the role of C/EBPG in ERCC5 cis-regulation in an
independent cohort of subjects and lung cancer cell lines. Methods: We
knocked-down C/EBPG transcript level by C/EBPG siRNA transfection in
human non-small cell lung carcinoma cell line H1703. Total and
allele-specific expression (ASE) at rs1047768 was measured through
multiplex competitive PCR-based amplicon sequencing library preparation
followed by Illumina HiSeq next generation sequencing (NGS). This NGS
controls for inter-target variation in PCR amplification during library
preparation by measuring each transcript native template relative to a
known number of synthetic competitive template internal standard copies.
The genotype at rs751402 and rs2296147 in NBEC from 78 subjects and 14
human lung carcinoma cell lines was determined by TaqMan SNP genotyping
assays. Direct assessment of the syntenic relationship of alleles in gDNA
from poly-heterozygous individuals was assessed by allele-specific PCR
followed by sequencing. Results: CEBPG transcript expression was
knocked-down by 93% in H1703 cells and this was associated with 4-fold
reduction in the ERCC5 transcript level at rs1047768. ERCC5 displayed
significant inter-individual variation in allele specific expression
(ASE) in NBEC from 85 subjects. Thirty nine out of 92 subjects including
3 cell lines were heterozygous at rs751402 and rs2296147 rSNPs and
rs1047768 marker SNP and will be assessed for haplotypes comprising those
sites. Conclusions: Results are consistent with CEBPG regulation of ERCC5
in the cell line H1703. The results obtained will enable us to test the
hypothesis that haplotypes comprising particular alleles syntenic between
rs1047768 and rs751402 are associated with higher allele-specific ERCC5
transcript abundance. Cell lines heterozygous at three sites will be
subjected to CEBPG up and/or down regulation to assess effect on
allele-specific ERCC5 expression at rs1047768.

