Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of ectopic lymph node-like structures in
neuroendocrine tumors of the small bowel


The formation of extranodal tertiary lymphoid follicles and lymphoid cell
aggregates has been described in nonmalignant conditions including
autoimmune diseases and chronic inflammation as well as in cancer.
Tumor-induced lymph node-like structures (LLS) participate in the host's
antitumor immune response by driving intratumoral immune cell priming. We
evaluated the host immune response by immunohistochemistry in 60 well
differentiated small bowel NETs. A miRNA microarray analysis was also
performed to identify a molecular signature of LLS presence. In 13/60
samples the immune response was organized as ectopic LLS. When present,
LLS were localized at the invasive edge of the tumors and contained
germinal centers in different stages of maturation. CD21+ dendritic cells
were present within the follicular germinal centers, while CD3+ T cells
were dispersed in the parafollicular cortex zone surrounding the CD20+ B
cell area of the follicles. Time to progression of metastatic tumors was
compared in an exploratory cohort of 5 patients with strong evidence of
LLS vs 5 patients with no evidence of LLS and was substantially longer in
the former group (94 vs 28 months; p = 0.15). Updated survival and miRNA
microarray analysis will be presented at the meeting.The understanding of
the functional nature of LLS may provide new insights into the
pathogenesis of the disease, possibly furnishing a new tool for
prognostic stratification and prediction of response to immune-based
treatments.

