Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-diagnostic smoking, alcohol and obesity and risk of second
primary cancer in female keratinocyte carcinoma survivors


BACKGROUND:Several studies have suggested a positive association between
personal history of keratinocyte carcinoma and risk of subsequent cancer
at other sites. Although smoking, alcohol, and obesity are well-known
risk factors for first cancers, few studies evaluate the role of these
risk factors in the development of second primary cancers (SPCs) in
keratinocyte carcinoma survivors.METHODS:In the Nurses Health Study
(NHS), 20,020 female keratinocyte carcinoma survivors were identified
from a cohort of 115,711 women from June 1884 to June 2010. Incident SPC
(all cancer combined and major individual cancers, including lung,
colorectal, breast, non-Hodgkin, melanoma, endometrial, ovary, and
bladder) were assessed throughout follow-up until June 2012. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to calculate the relative risks
(RRs) of SPC associated with pre-diagnosis smoking history, alcohol
consumption, and body mass index (BMI). We also compared these estimates
to those for first cancers in the cohort.RESULTS:During 239,029 person
years follow-up, we recorded 3,365 SPC cases. Compared with nonsmokers,
smokers with at least 25 cigarettes/d before keratinocyte carcinoma
diagnosis had a significantly elevated SPC risk for lung cancer (RR,
24.48; 95% CI, 15.93 to 37.62) and colorectal cancer (RR, 2.36; 95% CI,
1.33 to 4.19) in dose-dependent manner (test for trend
PBACKGROUND:Several studies have suggested a positive association between
personal history of keratinocyte carcinoma and risk of subsequent cancer
at other sites. Although smoking, alcohol, and obesity are well-known
risk factors for first cancers, few studies evaluate the role of these
risk factors in the development of second primary cancers (SPCs) in
keratinocyte carcinoma survivors.METHODS:In the Nurses Health Study
(NHS), 20,020 female keratinocyte carcinoma survivors were identified
from a cohort of 115,711 women from June 1884 to June 2010. Incident SPC
(all cancer combined and major individual cancers, including lung,
colorectal, breast, non-Hodgkin, melanoma, endometrial, ovary, and
bladder) were assessed throughout follow-up until June 2012. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to calculate the relative risks
(RRs) of SPC associated with pre-diagnosis smoking history, alcohol
consumption, and body mass index (BMI). We also compared these estimates
to those for first cancers in the cohort.RESULTS:During 239,029 person
years follow-up, we recorded 3,365 SPC cases. Compared with nonsmokers,
smokers with at least 25 cigarettes/d before keratinocyte carcinoma
diagnosis had a significantly elevated SPC risk for lung cancer (RR,
24.48; 95% CI, 15.93 to 37.62) and colorectal cancer (RR, 2.36; 95% CI,
1.33 to 4.19) in dose-dependent manner (test for trend P<0.01). We found
positive linear trends for the relationship between higher BMI and risk
for breast cancer, endometrial cancer and all-combined SPC (test for
trend PBACKGROUND:Several studies have suggested a positive association
between personal history of keratinocyte carcinoma and risk of subsequent
cancer at other sites. Although smoking, alcohol, and obesity are
well-known risk factors for first cancers, few studies evaluate the role
of these risk factors in the development of second primary cancers (SPCs)
in keratinocyte carcinoma survivors.METHODS:In the Nurses Health Study
(NHS), 20,020 female keratinocyte carcinoma survivors were identified
from a cohort of 115,711 women from June 1884 to June 2010. Incident SPC
(all cancer combined and major individual cancers, including lung,
colorectal, breast, non-Hodgkin, melanoma, endometrial, ovary, and
bladder) were assessed throughout follow-up until June 2012. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to calculate the relative risks
(RRs) of SPC associated with pre-diagnosis smoking history, alcohol
consumption, and body mass index (BMI). We also compared these estimates
to those for first cancers in the cohort.RESULTS:During 239,029 person
years follow-up, we recorded 3,365 SPC cases. Compared with nonsmokers,
smokers with at least 25 cigarettes/d before keratinocyte carcinoma
diagnosis had a significantly elevated SPC risk for lung cancer (RR,
24.48; 95% CI, 15.93 to 37.62) and colorectal cancer (RR, 2.36; 95% CI,
1.33 to 4.19) in dose-dependent manner (test for trend P<0.01). We found
positive linear trends for the relationship between higher BMI and risk
for breast cancer, endometrial cancer and all-combined SPC (test for
trend P<0.01). Keratinocyte carcinoma survivors who reported drinking at
least 30 g of alcohol/d had a marginally higher risk of SPC than
non-alcohol drinkers (RR, 1.17; 95% CI, 0.99 to 1.39), while there was a
J-shape association between alcohol consumption and risk of second
primary colorectal cancer. When we compared the magnitude of the
association between heavy smoking (25 cigarettes/day) and any cancer risk
among those with keratinocyte carcinoma vs. none, the RR for keratinocyte
carcinoma survivors (2.29; 95% CI, 1.97 to 2.66) slightly exceed that for
participants without keratinocyte carcinoma (RR, 1.94; 95% CI, 1.79 to
2.10).CONCLUSIONS:Our study found that prediagnostic smoking and obesity
were associated with overall SPCs and for several individual sites among
keratinocyte carcinoma survivors. These findings suggest that more
thorough surveillance and screening for SPCs is needed for the
keratinocyte carcinoma survivors with these risk factors. Further
research is needed to understand the long-term impact of smoking
cessation and healthy weight management among cancer survivors.

