Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a hepatocellular carcinoma cell line capable of
monitoring the differentiation of CD13(+)CD166(-) cancer stem cells and
effects of sorafenib


Background: Recent cancer stem cell (CSC) research has highlighted the
necessity to develop drugs targeting CSCs. However, only few in vitro
models are available which show CSC hierarchy and allow monitoring of CSC
differentiation and screening of drugs targeting CSC.Aim: In the present
study, we aimed to identify such hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell
line(s).Methods: Based on a hypothesis that the proportion of CSCs would
decrease during culture because of their differentiation into progenitors
(population switch), we tested the positivity of several markers (CD13,
EpCAM, CD133, CD44, CD90, CD24, CD166) in HCC cell lines (HuH-7, Li-7,
PLC/PRF/5, HLF, HLE) before and after 2 months culture.Results: Only Li-7
cells showed relevant population switch: the proportion of CD13
decreased, while that of CD166 increased during the culture. High
tumorigenicity of Li-7 was lost after the population switch.
CD13(+)/CD166(-) cells showed slow growth and reconstructed the bulk Li-7
populations composed of CD13(+)/CD166(-), CD13(-)/CD166(-) and
CD13(-)/CD166(+) fractions, while CD13(-)/CD166(+) cells showed rapid
growth but could not reproduce any other cell populations.
CD13(+)/CD166(-) cells showed high ALDH activity, spheroid forming
ability and resistance to 5FU. Microarray analysis demonstrated higher
expression of stemness-related genes in CD166(-) than CD166(+) fraction.
These results indicated the hierarchy of Li-7 cells, in which
CD13(+)/CD166(-) and CD13(-)/CD166(+) cells serve as slow growing CSCs
and rapid growing progenitors, respectively. Interestingly, sorafenib
selectively targeted CD166(-) fraction including CD13(+) CSCs, which
exhibited higher mRNA expression of FGF3 and FGF4, candidate biomarkers
for sorafenib. 5-FU followed by sorafenib inhibited the growth of bulk
Li-7 cells more effectively than reverse sequence or either
alone.Conclusions: We identified an useful cell line Li-7 capable of
monitoring the CD13 (+) CSC differentiation and screening the drugs
targeting the CSCs of HCC and found that sorafenib preferentially
targeted CD13(+) CSCs in vitro. Screening cell lines for population
switch may be useful to identify novel candidate model systems for
screening drugs targeting CSCs.

