Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of ubiquitin-specific proteases 47 in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition


Metastatic spread from primary tumor is the last phase of cancer
development. Approximately 90% of deaths from cancer are caused by
metastasis. During the transition from a benign tumor to a metastatic
one, tumor cells lose cell-cell contacts and gain cell motility for
invasion. This is called epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT is
considered to be a critical contributor of cancer metastasis. Hypoxia,
which plays a critical role in development and tumor progression,
orchestrates EMT through the coordinated regulation of different EMT
regulators.In this study, we found that a series of ubiquitin specific
proteases (USP), particularly USP47, were induced in human colon cancer
cells (DLD-1, HT-29 and SW-480) under the hypoxic condition based on cDNA
microarray data. USPs are a subfamily of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUB)
that primarily belong to the cysteine protease family and are known to
remove the monoubiquitin and polyubiquitin chains from specific target
proteins. Knockdown of USP47 substantially decreased expression of
mesenchymal markers. Furthermore, hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF),
especially HIF-2, was found to regulate transcription of USP47. These
results suggest USP47 as a novel regulator of EMT under hypoxic
conditions.

