Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maternal folate intake at periconception and genome-wide DNA
methylation modifications at birth in children


IntroductionFolate supplementation during pregnancy was previously
associated with a lower risk of acute lymphoblastic childhood leukemia
(ALL). Folate is involved in the one-carbon metabolic cycle necessary for
shuttling methyl groups for DNA methylation. Given the observation that
aberrant DNA methylation patterns are a characteristic of leukemic cells
during ALL oncogenesis, we hypothesized that (1) low folate exposure
during fetal development might modify the neonate's DNA genome-wide
methylation pattern, and that (2) such a modified pattern can lead to ALL
development. Here we investigate the first part of this
hypothesis.MethodsWe analyzed healthy control participants of the
California Childhood Leukemia case-control study. Participants
peri-conception folate exposure was estimated from self-reported maternal
folate intake and supplements, which was derived from a food frequency
questionnaire on the diet in the year prior to pregnancy, as a surrogate
for nutrient environment during the peri-conception period. DNA obtained
from archived neonatal blood spots was purified, treated with bisulfite
and assayed on the Illumina Infinium 450K genome-wide DNA methylation
array. After removing cross-reacting probes, SNP-related and polymorphic
CpGs, we analyzed the association of folate with methylation intensity of
319,265 CpGs in two independent datasets (n set 1 = 167 and n set 2 =
176). Models were adjusted for cell mixture, sex, gestational age, and
race. We used a false discovery rate with random resampling to reduce the
number of false-positive findings and we cross-validated the results
between sets.ResultsMaternal folate intake was broadly associated with
less child's DNA methylation: with a q-value IntroductionFolate
supplementation during pregnancy was previously associated with a lower
risk of acute lymphoblastic childhood leukemia (ALL). Folate is involved
in the one-carbon metabolic cycle necessary for shuttling methyl groups
for DNA methylation. Given the observation that aberrant DNA methylation
patterns are a characteristic of leukemic cells during ALL oncogenesis,
we hypothesized that (1) low folate exposure during fetal development
might modify the neonate's DNA genome-wide methylation pattern, and that
(2) such a modified pattern can lead to ALL development. Here we
investigate the first part of this hypothesis.MethodsWe analyzed healthy
control participants of the California Childhood Leukemia case-control
study. Participants peri-conception folate exposure was estimated from
self-reported maternal folate intake and supplements, which was derived
from a food frequency questionnaire on the diet in the year prior to
pregnancy, as a surrogate for nutrient environment during the
peri-conception period. DNA obtained from archived neonatal blood spots
was purified, treated with bisulfite and assayed on the Illumina Infinium
450K genome-wide DNA methylation array. After removing cross-reacting
probes, SNP-related and polymorphic CpGs, we analyzed the association of
folate with methylation intensity of 319,265 CpGs in two independent
datasets (n set 1 = 167 and n set 2 = 176). Models were adjusted for cell
mixture, sex, gestational age, and race. We used a false discovery rate
with random resampling to reduce the number of false-positive findings
and we cross-validated the results between sets.ResultsMaternal folate
intake was broadly associated with less child's DNA methylation: with a
q-value <0.05, we found more than 122,000 CpG sites associated with
folate intake in common in both sets. Because a fraction of these CpGs
were sign discordant between sets, we constrained our analysis to the
most significant CpGs, in order to avoid false positive associations. The
three most significant CpGs found in common in both sets were negatively
associated with folate. First, cg21039708 (chr.14) in the gene OTX2OS1 (q
IntroductionFolate supplementation during pregnancy was previously
associated with a lower risk of acute lymphoblastic childhood leukemia
(ALL). Folate is involved in the one-carbon metabolic cycle necessary for
shuttling methyl groups for DNA methylation. Given the observation that
aberrant DNA methylation patterns are a characteristic of leukemic cells
during ALL oncogenesis, we hypothesized that (1) low folate exposure
during fetal development might modify the neonate's DNA genome-wide
methylation pattern, and that (2) such a modified pattern can lead to ALL
development. Here we investigate the first part of this
hypothesis.MethodsWe analyzed healthy control participants of the
California Childhood Leukemia case-control study. Participants
peri-conception folate exposure was estimated from self-reported maternal
folate intake and supplements, which was derived from a food frequency
questionnaire on the diet in the year prior to pregnancy, as a surrogate
for nutrient environment during the peri-conception period. DNA obtained
from archived neonatal blood spots was purified, treated with bisulfite
and assayed on the Illumina Infinium 450K genome-wide DNA methylation
array. After removing cross-reacting probes, SNP-related and polymorphic
CpGs, we analyzed the association of folate with methylation intensity of
319,265 CpGs in two independent datasets (n set 1 = 167 and n set 2 =
176). Models were adjusted for cell mixture, sex, gestational age, and
race. We used a false discovery rate with random resampling to reduce the
number of false-positive findings and we cross-validated the results
between sets.ResultsMaternal folate intake was broadly associated with
less child's DNA methylation: with a q-value <0.05, we found more than
122,000 CpG sites associated with folate intake in common in both sets.
Because a fraction of these CpGs were sign discordant between sets, we
constrained our analysis to the most significant CpGs, in order to avoid
false positive associations. The three most significant CpGs found in
common in both sets were negatively associated with folate. First,
cg21039708 (chr.14) in the gene OTX2OS1 (q <10-14 in both sets) is
implicated in facial and eye defects. Second, cg13499966 (chr.2) in the
gene CYS1 (q IntroductionFolate supplementation during pregnancy was
previously associated with a lower risk of acute lymphoblastic childhood
leukemia (ALL). Folate is involved in the one-carbon metabolic cycle
necessary for shuttling methyl groups for DNA methylation. Given the
observation that aberrant DNA methylation patterns are a characteristic
of leukemic cells during ALL oncogenesis, we hypothesized that (1) low
folate exposure during fetal development might modify the neonate's DNA
genome-wide methylation pattern, and that (2) such a modified pattern can
lead to ALL development. Here we investigate the first part of this
hypothesis.MethodsWe analyzed healthy control participants of the
California Childhood Leukemia case-control study. Participants
peri-conception folate exposure was estimated from self-reported maternal
folate intake and supplements, which was derived from a food frequency
questionnaire on the diet in the year prior to pregnancy, as a surrogate
for nutrient environment during the peri-conception period. DNA obtained
from archived neonatal blood spots was purified, treated with bisulfite
and assayed on the Illumina Infinium 450K genome-wide DNA methylation
array. After removing cross-reacting probes, SNP-related and polymorphic
CpGs, we analyzed the association of folate with methylation intensity of
319,265 CpGs in two independent datasets (n set 1 = 167 and n set 2 =
176). Models were adjusted for cell mixture, sex, gestational age, and
race. We used a false discovery rate with random resampling to reduce the
number of false-positive findings and we cross-validated the results
between sets.ResultsMaternal folate intake was broadly associated with
less child's DNA methylation: with a q-value <0.05, we found more than
122,000 CpG sites associated with folate intake in common in both sets.
Because a fraction of these CpGs were sign discordant between sets, we
constrained our analysis to the most significant CpGs, in order to avoid
false positive associations. The three most significant CpGs found in
common in both sets were negatively associated with folate. First,
cg21039708 (chr.14) in the gene OTX2OS1 (q <10-14 in both sets) is
implicated in facial and eye defects. Second, cg13499966 (chr.2) in the
gene CYS1 (q <10-14 in both sets) is implicated in cystic kidney disease
and biliary liver fibrosis. Third, cg22664307 (chr.6) in the gene STX11
(q IntroductionFolate supplementation during pregnancy was previously
associated with a lower risk of acute lymphoblastic childhood leukemia
(ALL). Folate is involved in the one-carbon metabolic cycle necessary for
shuttling methyl groups for DNA methylation. Given the observation that
aberrant DNA methylation patterns are a characteristic of leukemic cells
during ALL oncogenesis, we hypothesized that (1) low folate exposure
during fetal development might modify the neonate's DNA genome-wide
methylation pattern, and that (2) such a modified pattern can lead to ALL
development. Here we investigate the first part of this
hypothesis.MethodsWe analyzed healthy control participants of the
California Childhood Leukemia case-control study. Participants
peri-conception folate exposure was estimated from self-reported maternal
folate intake and supplements, which was derived from a food frequency
questionnaire on the diet in the year prior to pregnancy, as a surrogate
for nutrient environment during the peri-conception period. DNA obtained
from archived neonatal blood spots was purified, treated with bisulfite
and assayed on the Illumina Infinium 450K genome-wide DNA methylation
array. After removing cross-reacting probes, SNP-related and polymorphic
CpGs, we analyzed the association of folate with methylation intensity of
319,265 CpGs in two independent datasets (n set 1 = 167 and n set 2 =
176). Models were adjusted for cell mixture, sex, gestational age, and
race. We used a false discovery rate with random resampling to reduce the
number of false-positive findings and we cross-validated the results
between sets.ResultsMaternal folate intake was broadly associated with
less child's DNA methylation: with a q-value <0.05, we found more than
122,000 CpG sites associated with folate intake in common in both sets.
Because a fraction of these CpGs were sign discordant between sets, we
constrained our analysis to the most significant CpGs, in order to avoid
false positive associations. The three most significant CpGs found in
common in both sets were negatively associated with folate. First,
cg21039708 (chr.14) in the gene OTX2OS1 (q <10-14 in both sets) is
implicated in facial and eye defects. Second, cg13499966 (chr.2) in the
gene CYS1 (q <10-14 in both sets) is implicated in cystic kidney disease
and biliary liver fibrosis. Third, cg22664307 (chr.6) in the gene STX11
(q <10-14 in both sets) is associated with
lymphohistiocytosis.ConclusionsThis study was the first to investigate
the association between maternal folate intake during the peri-conception
period and DNA methylation at birth with a genome-wide approach and it
found numerous associations throughout the genome. The relationships
between folate-sensitive CpG sites and DNA methylation events critical to
childhood leukemogenesis will be considered in our subsequent research.

