Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive and integrative genomic characterization of diffuse
lower grade gliomas


Background: Diffuse low and intermediate grade gliomas (LGG; WHO grades
II and III) have highly variable clinical behaviors that are not
optimally predicted by histology; some are indolent, while others quickly
progress to glioblastoma. Uncertainty is compounded by inter-observer
variability in diagnosis, in part due to modest correlation between
histology and biologic classes. Mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase
(IDH), TP53, ATRX, and co-deletion of chromosomes 1p and 19q are
implicated as clinically relevant LGG markers.Methods: We performed a
comprehensive genome-wide analysis of 293 LGG, incorporating exome
sequence, DNA copy number, DNA methylation, messenger RNA and microRNA
expression and targeted protein expression. Molecular data was integrated
with clinical outcomes to identify biologically robust LGG
subtypes.Results: We uncovered 19 mutated genes, including recognized
drivers and novel mutations. Unsupervised clustering of genome-wide data
from RNA-, DNA- and DNA methylation platforms uncovered concordant
classification of three robust, non-overlapping LGG subtypes that were
captured with highest correlation by IDH and 1p/19q status. The large
majority of IDH wild-type LGG showed strikingly similar genomic
aberrations and clinical behavior to primary glioblastoma. Nearly all
IDH-mutant LGG lacking 1p/19q co-deletion had mutations in TP53 (94%) and
ATRX inactivation (86%). IDH-mutant, 1p/19q-co-deleted LGG had most
favorable clinical outcomes and harbored mutations in CIC, FUBP1, NOTCH1
and the TERT promoter.Conclusions: Integration of genome-wide data from
multiple platforms cleanly delineates three LGG molecular subtypes
concordant with IDH and 1p/19q status: IDH-mutant LGG are either 1p/19
co-deleted or TP53 mutant, whereas most IDH wild-type LGG are molecularly
and clinically similar to glioblastoma. Overall, results support a
molecular-based, clinically relevant classification for implementation
into routine clinical practice.

