Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of NSCLC biomarkers underlying quantifiable
drug-induced clonal fitness


Lung cancer accounts for nearly 20% of all cancer-related deaths
worldwide. Subsets of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC; >80% of all lung
cancers) harboring activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations are highly sensitive to erlotinib, a small-molecule EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor. However, clinical responses to erlotinib are
variable and limited in duration as all tumors eventually relapse. Clonal
heterogeneity is thought to be a major cause of relapse, but it has been
difficult to quantify in drug-sensitive cancer cell populations. To
overcome this obstacle, we quantify clonal fitness via live-cell imaging
as a drug-induced proliferation (DIP) rate that incorporates cell
division, death, and quiescence into a single metric. This fitness rate
varies across cell types from positive (division prevails) to negative
(death prevails) and, unlike traditional IC50 measurements, can
effectively discriminate intricate degrees of drug sensitivity. Moreover,
in monoclonal sublines isolated nave-to-drug from NSCLC parental cell
lines, erlotinib-treated DIP rates calculated in vitro predict the
long-term growth rates (250+ days) of in vivo tumor xenografts. Using
global proteomics across a panel of monoclonal sublines, we have
characterized networks of biomarkers that act as molecular determinants
of phenotypic drug fitness. We have identified unsuspected molecular
correlates in the EGFR and AKT pathways and are currently investigating
whether they can act as lead targets for small molecule inhibition in
combination therapies. Our data indicate that a multi-scale systems
approach integrating molecular subtyping with quantifiable clonal fitness
can yield insights into clonal heterogeneity and lead to novel strategies
to overcome tumor relapse.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

