Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomere length and cancer mortality and all-cause mortality


Introduction:Short telomeres are associated with increased age and
age-related diseases. We tested the hypothesis that short telomeres are
associated with increased cancer mortality and all-cause
mortality.Methods:We studied 64637 individuals recruited from 1991 and
onwards from two prospective cohort studies; the Copenhagen City Heart
Study and the Copenhagen General Population Study. All had telomere
length measured by Q-PCR in DNA from peripheral blood and had the
telomere length-associated genotypes of rs1317082 (TERC), rs7726159
(TERT), and rs2487999 (OBFC1) determined. We calculated the sum of
telomere length shortening alleles from the three SNPs combined. We
conducted Cox regression, and instrumental variable analyses in a
mendelian randomization design, using the allele sum as a genetic
instrument for telomere length.Results:Telomere length shortened by 17
(PIntroduction:Short telomeres are associated with increased age and
age-related diseases. We tested the hypothesis that short telomeres are
associated with increased cancer mortality and all-cause
mortality.Methods:We studied 64637 individuals recruited from 1991 and
onwards from two prospective cohort studies; the Copenhagen City Heart
Study and the Copenhagen General Population Study. All had telomere
length measured by Q-PCR in DNA from peripheral blood and had the
telomere length-associated genotypes of rs1317082 (TERC), rs7726159
(TERT), and rs2487999 (OBFC1) determined. We calculated the sum of
telomere length shortening alleles from the three SNPs combined. We
conducted Cox regression, and instrumental variable analyses in a
mendelian randomization design, using the allele sum as a genetic
instrument for telomere length.Results:Telomere length shortened by 17
(P<10E-300) and 69 (P = 110E-104) base pairs per increase of one year of
age, and one allele increase of allele sum, respectively. Of the 7607
deaths during up to 22 years of follow-up, 2420 were due to cancer.
Shortening of telomeres (200 base pairs) was associated with increasing
cancer mortality and all-cause mortality with hazard ratios of 1.02(95%
CI;1.01-1.03) and 1.02(95% CI;1.02-1.03) in multifactorially adjusted
models. In contrast, in the genetic analyses, the corresponding odds
ratios were 0.86(95% CI;0.76-0.96) and 0.98(95%
CI;0.91-1.05).Conclusion:In an observational design, short telomeres were
associated with increased cancer mortality and all-cause mortality. In
contrast and importantly; in a mendelian randomization design, short
telomeres were associated with decreased cancer mortality, suggesting
that short telomeres are likely causative in protecting against cancer
mortality.

