Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulation of the Hippo pathway in soft tissue sarcoma promotes
FOXM1 expression and tumorigenesis


The genetic aberrations responsible for soft tissue sarcoma formation in
adults are largely unknown, and targeted therapies are sorely needed for
this complex and heterogeneous family of diseases. Here we report that
that the Hippo pathway is deregulated in many soft tissue sarcomas,
resulting in elevated expression of the effector molecule YAP. Based on
data gathered from human sarcoma patients, we concluded that more than
40% of human sarcomas have lost one or more copies of upstream HIPPO
pathway regulators including SAV1, LATS2, and NF2. Loss of these
molecules deactivates the HIPPO pathway, permitting uncontrolled
proliferation and growth. Expression of active YAP is the direct result
of this copy number loss and we have found YAP to be elevated in primary
human fibrosarscomas, liposarcomas, and pleomorphic tumors. Pharmacologic
inhibition of YAP significantly impaired primary sarcomagenesis in a
murine allograft model. Using a novel autochthonous mouse model and
mechanistic analyses in human and murine sarcoma cells, we determined
that YAP-dependent expression of the transcription factor, FOXM1, is
necessary for sarcoma cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. FOXM1
expression is elevated in multiple human soft tissue sarcoma subtypes.
Notably, FOXM1 directly interacts with the YAP transcriptional complex
via TEAD1, resulting in co-regulation of numerous critical
pro-proliferation targets that enhance sarcoma progression. Finally,
pharmacologic inhibition of FOXM1 decreases tumor size in vivo, making
FOXM1 an attractive therapeutic target for the treatment of sarcomas.

