Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD68+ immune cells show different infiltration patterns in tissue
samples from women with no clinical breast disease and those who have
benign breast disease


Introduction: The role of macrophages in the tumor microenvironment is of
increasing interest for tumor progression and invasion. Here we
investigated the difference in CD68+ cell density in tissue samples from
women with Benign Breast Disease (BBD) and women with no clinical breast
disease from the Komen Tissue Bank (KTB) at Indiana University.Method:
Archived breast tissue samples from women with BBD and no clinical breast
disease were obtained for this age-matched case-control study. BBD
samples included cases [later got Breast Cancer (BC)] and controls (did
not get BC). Samples were characterized via H&E stain for epithelial
proliferation [normal (N), fibrocystic non-proliferative (NP),
proliferative (P), or atypia (A)]. CD68+ cell density was obtained by
digital image quantitation on a per lobule basis (Total CD68+ cells/mm2).
Statistical analysis was performed with mixed effects regression.Results:
Among 276 women (median age 53, range 35-79) comprising 92 age-matched
triplets, 2508 lobules were evaluated [789 KTB, 839 BBD case, 880 BBD
control]. 1407 (56%) lobules were normal and 1101 (44%) were fibrocystic
{NP [613 (56%)], P [448 (41%)] and A [40 (4%)]}. Out of 2508 lobules
analyzed, 2362 (94%) had CD68+ cells, while 146 (6%) showed zero CD68+
cells [19 (2%) BBD cases, 20 (2%) BBD controls, 107 (14%) KTB,
pIntroduction: The role of macrophages in the tumor microenvironment is
of increasing interest for tumor progression and invasion. Here we
investigated the difference in CD68+ cell density in tissue samples from
women with Benign Breast Disease (BBD) and women with no clinical breast
disease from the Komen Tissue Bank (KTB) at Indiana University.Method:
Archived breast tissue samples from women with BBD and no clinical breast
disease were obtained for this age-matched case-control study. BBD
samples included cases [later got Breast Cancer (BC)] and controls (did
not get BC). Samples were characterized via H&E stain for epithelial
proliferation [normal (N), fibrocystic non-proliferative (NP),
proliferative (P), or atypia (A)]. CD68+ cell density was obtained by
digital image quantitation on a per lobule basis (Total CD68+ cells/mm2).
Statistical analysis was performed with mixed effects regression.Results:
Among 276 women (median age 53, range 35-79) comprising 92 age-matched
triplets, 2508 lobules were evaluated [789 KTB, 839 BBD case, 880 BBD
control]. 1407 (56%) lobules were normal and 1101 (44%) were fibrocystic
{NP [613 (56%)], P [448 (41%)] and A [40 (4%)]}. Out of 2508 lobules
analyzed, 2362 (94%) had CD68+ cells, while 146 (6%) showed zero CD68+
cells [19 (2%) BBD cases, 20 (2%) BBD controls, 107 (14%) KTB, p<0.0001].
KTB samples showed significantly lower (pIntroduction: The role of
macrophages in the tumor microenvironment is of increasing interest for
tumor progression and invasion. Here we investigated the difference in
CD68+ cell density in tissue samples from women with Benign Breast
Disease (BBD) and women with no clinical breast disease from the Komen
Tissue Bank (KTB) at Indiana University.Method: Archived breast tissue
samples from women with BBD and no clinical breast disease were obtained
for this age-matched case-control study. BBD samples included cases
[later got Breast Cancer (BC)] and controls (did not get BC). Samples
were characterized via H&E stain for epithelial proliferation [normal
(N), fibrocystic non-proliferative (NP), proliferative (P), or atypia
(A)]. CD68+ cell density was obtained by digital image quantitation on a
per lobule basis (Total CD68+ cells/mm2). Statistical analysis was
performed with mixed effects regression.Results: Among 276 women (median
age 53, range 35-79) comprising 92 age-matched triplets, 2508 lobules
were evaluated [789 KTB, 839 BBD case, 880 BBD control]. 1407 (56%)
lobules were normal and 1101 (44%) were fibrocystic {NP [613 (56%)], P
[448 (41%)] and A [40 (4%)]}. Out of 2508 lobules analyzed, 2362 (94%)
had CD68+ cells, while 146 (6%) showed zero CD68+ cells [19 (2%) BBD
cases, 20 (2%) BBD controls, 107 (14%) KTB, p<0.0001]. KTB samples showed
significantly lower (p<0.0001) CD68+ density (median 136 cells/mm2) as
compared to BBD cases (median 313 cells/mm2) and BBD controls (median 299
cells/mm2). (See Table) For each lobule type, KTB samples had lower CD68+
density compared with the same lobule type in BBD samples (pIntroduction:
The role of macrophages in the tumor microenvironment is of increasing
interest for tumor progression and invasion. Here we investigated the
difference in CD68+ cell density in tissue samples from women with Benign
Breast Disease (BBD) and women with no clinical breast disease from the
Komen Tissue Bank (KTB) at Indiana University.Method: Archived breast
tissue samples from women with BBD and no clinical breast disease were
obtained for this age-matched case-control study. BBD samples included
cases [later got Breast Cancer (BC)] and controls (did not get BC).
Samples were characterized via H&E stain for epithelial proliferation
[normal (N), fibrocystic non-proliferative (NP), proliferative (P), or
atypia (A)]. CD68+ cell density was obtained by digital image
quantitation on a per lobule basis (Total CD68+ cells/mm2). Statistical
analysis was performed with mixed effects regression.Results: Among 276
women (median age 53, range 35-79) comprising 92 age-matched triplets,
2508 lobules were evaluated [789 KTB, 839 BBD case, 880 BBD control].
1407 (56%) lobules were normal and 1101 (44%) were fibrocystic {NP [613
(56%)], P [448 (41%)] and A [40 (4%)]}. Out of 2508 lobules analyzed,
2362 (94%) had CD68+ cells, while 146 (6%) showed zero CD68+ cells [19
(2%) BBD cases, 20 (2%) BBD controls, 107 (14%) KTB, p<0.0001]. KTB
samples showed significantly lower (p<0.0001) CD68+ density (median 136
cells/mm2) as compared to BBD cases (median 313 cells/mm2) and BBD
controls (median 299 cells/mm2). (See Table) For each lobule type, KTB
samples had lower CD68+ density compared with the same lobule type in BBD
samples (p<0.0001).Conclusion: CD68+ cells are more frequent in breast
lobules from women with BBD compared to normal donors. This finding in
premalignant breast tissues is consistent with inflammation as a driver
of tumorigenesis.IQR - Interquartile range (25th percentile - 75th
percentile)

