Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal status promotes metastatic colonization via a cancer
cell-stroma crosstalk which uncouples EMT and stemness


During metastatic colonisation tumour cells must establish a favourable
microenvironment, or niche, that will sustain their growth. However, both
the temporal and molecular details of this process are poorly
understood.Here, using breast cancer models, we find that metastatic
initiating cells (MICs) in a mesenchymal phenotype exhibit high niche
activation ability as a result of Thrombospondin 2 (THBS2) secretion,
which prompts lung fibroblasts activation. Importantly, inhibiting the
mesenchymal phenotype of MICs, by blocking the epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT)-associated kinase AXL during the early stages of cancer
cell infiltration, reduces THBS2 secretion, niche activation ability, and
consequently metastatic establishment. Subsequently, cancer cells start
expanding at the target site and revert to a more epithelial phenotype.
Interestingly, the activated fibroblasts of the newly formed metastatic
niche trigger the reversion of cancer cell mesenchymal phenotype without
compromising self-renewal. Preventing this phenotypic reversion by
enhancing AXL expression during colonization block metastasis.In summary,
we demonstrate that during metastatic colonization the two events of
niche activation and EMT are functionally linked at the target site.
However, in this context, EMT becomes uncoupled from the stemness
required for metastatic growth. Further, once fibroblasts within the
niche are activated they promote the mesenchymal to epithelial transition
(MET) of tumour cells, leading to the outgrowth of metastases with
similar epithelial characteristics and stromal cell networks to their
original primary tumours.

