Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potentiation of LPS-induced toxicity in human hepatoma HepG2 cells
by aspirin and its protection by N-acetyl cysteine


Bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS) induce cytotoxicity in vitro and
inflammation-induced toxic responses in vivo. Use of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as aspirin, has been reported to
be beneficial in inflammation-associated diseases like cancer and
diabetes. Their precise molecular mechanisms, however, are not clearly
understood. Our previous studies on aspirin treated HepG2 cells strongly
suggest cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis associated with
mitochondrial dysfunction. In the present study, we have further
demonstrated that HepG2 cells treated with LPS alone or in combination
with aspirin induces subcellular toxic responses which are accompanied by
increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, oxidative stress,
apoptosis and mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction. The LPS/Aspirin
induced toxicity was attenuated by pretreatment of cells with N-acetyl
cysteine (NAC). Oxidative stress and glutathione-dependent
redox-homeostasis in the mitochondria were altered more severely compared
to the extramitochondrial compartment of cells. Pre-treatment of HepG2
cells with NAC has demonstrated selective protection in redox homeostasis
and mitochondrial dysfunction. Our results suggest that altered
glutathione (GSH)-redox metabolism, oxidative stress and mitochondrial
function in HepG2 cells play a critical role in LPS/aspirin-induced
cytotoxicity. These results may help in better understanding the
pharmacological and toxicological properties of NSAIDs in cancer cells
exposed to bacterial endotoxins. (Supported by Sheikh Hamdan Medical
Research Grant and Terry Fox Cancer Research Funds and a fund from CMHS
Research Committee).

