Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of the selective FGFR inhibitor
INCB054828


Aberrant signaling through Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptors (FGFR) has
been reported in multiple types of human cancers. Genomic analyses of
squamous cell lung, gastric and urothelial tumors have revealed recurrent
genetic alterations in FGFR1, FGFR2 and FGFR3 genes, respectively. FGFR
proteins contribute to the development of malignancies by promoting tumor
cell proliferation, survival, and migration and supporting angiogenesis.
Therefore targeting FGFR kinases may provide therapeutic benefit to
patients with cancers that have genetic alterations in genes encoding
components of the FGF-FGFR axis. INCB054828 is a potent inhibitor of
FGFR1, FGFR2, and FGFR3 that has selective pharmacological activity
against cancer cells with FGFR alterations.In vitro, INCB054828 potently
inhibited the kinase activity of recombinant FGFR1, FGFR2 and FGFR3
enzymes and was highly selective against a panel of kinases including
VEGFR2. In cellular assays, INCB054828 inhibited the autophosphorylation
of FGFR proteins with low nanomolar IC50 values and blocked signal
transduction by FGFR to downstream markers of pathway activation. Cancer
cell lines that have genetic alterations in FGFR1, FGFR2 and FGFR3 were
uniquely sensitive to growth inhibition by INCB054828, with IC50 values
generally in the range of 3-50 nM, compared with cancer cell lines or
normal cells without FGFR dependence (IC50 > 1500 nM). In vivo,
once-daily oral administration of INCB054828 inhibited the growth of
tumors that are dependent upon FGFR1, FGFR2 and FGFR3 activity at
tolerated doses. Suppression of tumor growth was dose-dependent and
correlated with pharmacodynamic inhibition of FGFR. Collectively, these
preclinical studies demonstrate that INCB054828 potently and selectively
inhibits models of FGFR-dependent cancers in vitro and in vivo,
supporting the compound's clinical evaluation in patients harboring
oncogenic FGFR activation.

