Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploiting the cytoskeletal filaments of neoplastic cells to
potentiate a novel therapeutic approach


Although cytoskeletal-directed agents have been a mainstay in
chemotherapeutic protocols due to their ability to readily interfere with
the rapid mitotic progression of neoplastic cells, they are all
microtubule-based drugs, and there has yet to be any microfilament- or
intermediate filament-directed agents approved for clinical use. There
are many inherent differences between the cytoskeletal networks of
malignant and normal cells, providing an ideal target to attain
preferential damage. Further, numerous microfilament-directed agents, and
an intermediate filament-directed agent of particular interest
(withaferin A) have demonstrated in vitro and in vivo efficacy,
suggesting that cytoskeletal filaments may be exploited to supplement
chemotherapeutic approaches currently used in the clinical setting.
Therefore, this talk is intended to expose academics and clinicians to
the tremendous variety of cytoskeletal filament-directed agents that are
currently available for further chemotherapeutic evaluation. The
mechanisms by which microfilament directed- and intermediate
filament-directed agents damage malignant cells will be discussed in
detail in order to establish how the drugs can be used in combination
with each other, or with currently approved chemotherapeutic agents to
generate a substantial synergistic attack, potentially establishing a new
paradigm of chemotherapeutic agents.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

