Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing protease inhibition enhanced delivery of prostate tumor
targeted peptide receptor based radiotherapy


Purpose: Peptide receptor targeted therapy for treatment of castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) has been explored by several groups
including our own. However limitations in tumor drug delivery and
transient retention at the tumor site has resulted in non-optimal
therapeutic effectiveness of Lu-177 based peptide therapies.Marsouvanidis
and co-workers (Cancer Biotherapy and Radiopharmaceuticals, 2014; DOI:
10.1089/cbr.2014.1706) recently demonstrated that co-administration of a
neutral endopeptidase (NEP) inhibitor could enhance prostate tumor
directed Lu-177-BB2r agonist drug delivery in excess of 300%. Based on
this report, we hypothesized that similar enhancement of drug delivery
might be possible for BB2r antagonist vectors currently under evaluation
in our laboratory.Methods: As a model system, we commercially synthesized
DOTA-4-amino-1-carboxymethyl-piperidine-D-Phe-Gln-Trp-Ala-Val-Gly-His-Sta-L
eu-NH2 (RM2), a potent BB2r antagonist, and radiolabeled with Lu-177 to
create the theranostic radiopharmaceutical. Male SCID mice (4 week old)
were bi-laterally flank inoculated with PC-3 prostate cancer cells
(5106/flank). Pharmacokinetic studies were conducted 4 weeks post cell
implantation using Lu-177-RM2 alone or co-injected with 300ug of
phosphoramidon (PA). Drug biodistribution studies were conducted between
15 min and 336 hrs post drug administration and Lu-177 content was
determined. Concurrent SPECT/CT images were obtained.Results: Enhancement
of Lu-177-RM2 tumor uptake was noted within 1 hour post injection
(9.7+/-2.6%ID/g vs 6.8+/-2.5%ID/g for Lu-177-RM2 + PA vs Lu-177-RM2
alone) and persisted for 24 hours post injection (9.6+/-2.5%ID/g vs
5.3+/-1.1%ID/g for Lu-177-RM2 + PA vs Lu-177-RM2 alone). The delayed time
points demonstrated that the initial drug delivery enhancement achieved
by co-injection of PA was transient, and by 48 hours post injection there
was no statistical significance between the Lu-177-RM2 + PA vs Lu-177-RM2
alone treatment groups.Summary: In vivo enzyme inhibition of NEP results
in short term transient improvement of theranostic drug delivery when
employing high affinity BB2r peptide antagonist targeting vectors.
Although a nearly 80% improvement in BB2r positive tumor xenograft
targeting was achieved, prolonged retention (beyond 24 hours post
administration) of the drug at the tumor site was not observed. These
results suggest that the benefits of combination NEP inhibitors with
theranostic radiopharmaceuticals needs to be assessed on a case by case
basis.

