Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methionine S-adenosyltransferase 2A (MAT2A) inhibitors for cancer
treatment


Methionine S-adenosyltransferase 2A (MAT2A) is the catalytic subunit for
synthesis of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), the principal methyl donor in
many biological processes. MAT2A is up-regulated in many cancers,
including liver cancer and colorectal cancer (CRC) and is a potentially
important drug target. In normal liver, methionine S-adenosyltransferase
1 (MAT1), but not MAT2A is expressed. MAT2A is induced in liver cancer.
We developed a family of fluorinated N,N-dialkylaminostilbene agents,
called FIDAS agents, that inhibit the proliferation of CRC cells and
liver cells in vitro and in vivo. Using a biotinylated FIDAS analog, we
identified the catalytic subunit of MAT2A as the direct and exclusive
binding target of these FIDAS agents. FIDAS agents do not bind MAT1A.
MAT2B, an associated regulatory subunit of MAT2A, binds indirectly to
FIDAS agents through its association with MAT2A. FIDAS agents inhibited
MAT2A activity in SAM synthesis, and depletion of MAT2A by shRNAs
inhibited CRC and liver cancer cell growth. FIDAS agents also inhibited
specific histone methylation and repressed transcription of c-myc and
other oncogenes. FIDAS agents delivered orally repressed CRC xenografts
in athymic nude mice. Based on SAR and docking studies, new generations
of FIDAS agents were synthesized and tested. An active in vivo metabolite
of FIDAS was identified. PK/PD studies were performed. Our findings
suggest that FIDAS analogs targeting MAT2A represent a family of novel
and potentially useful agents for cancer treatment.

