Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic implications of PI3K mutation and amplification in
curatively resected liposarcoma


Background: We investigated the epidemiologic characteristics and
prognostic significance of PIK3CA mutation/amplification in curative
resected liposarcoma. Methods: A total of 125 liposarcoma tissue samples
were collected over a 12-year period (2000-2012). PIK3CA mutation and
amplification of gene copy number were analyzed by pyrosequencing method
and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).Results: Nine of the 105
liposarcoma patients (8.6%) showed activating PIK3CA mutation.PIK3CA
mutations were more frequent in myxoid/round cell and pleomorphic type vs
well differentiated/dedifferentiated type (11.1% vs 88.9%, P = 0.044). In
FISH analysis of PIK3CA, amplification of PIK3CA was detected in 31 of
the 102 patients (30.4%) and histologic differences was not statistically
significant in patients with PIK3CA amplification (48.4% vs 51.6%, p =
0.328). In survival analysis, PIK3CA amplified patients showed worse
prognosis compared with PIK3CA-non amplified patients (median disease
free survival (DFS) 119.2 vs 38.3 months p = 0.01). In multivariate
analysis, positive PI3KCA amplification was an independent worse
prognostic factor for DFS (p = 0.04; HR, 2.6; 95% CI 1.36 to 5.1). PIK3CA
mutation was not associated with significant difference for DFS (p =
0.739)Conclusion: We demonstrated that histologic differences according
to PIK3CA mutation or amplification status. PIK3CA amplification was an
independent worse prognostic factor for DFS. Further studies are needed
to evaluate the potential diagnostic and therapeutic role of PIK3CA
mutation and amplification in liposarcoma.

