Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplex KRAS G12/G13 mutation testing of 16ng of unamplified
cell-free DNA from plasma of patients with advanced cancers using Droplet
Digital PCR


Background: Cell-free (cf) DNA from the plasma of cancer patients offers
an easily obtainable, low-risk, inexpensive and repeatedly applicable
source of biologic material for mutation analysis of druggable targets
and monitoring molecular changes in tumor(s) during and after therapeutic
interventions. Novel, multiplex, and accurate diagnostic systems using
low amounts of DNA are needed for further development of plasma cfDNA
testing in personalized therapy.Methods: cfDNA from plasma samples of
patients with advanced cancers who progressed on systemic therapy was
purified and 16 ng of DNA was tested with a KRAS multiplex assay to
distinguish wild-type allele from 7 of the most common mutations in in
the G12/G13 hotspot of exon 2 using the QX200 Droplet Digital PCR
platform (Bio-Rad, Pleasanton, CA). Results were compared to mutation
analysis of archival primary or metastatic tumor tissue obtained at
different points of clinical care from a CLIA-certified
laboratory.Results: cfDNA was extracted from plasma samples of 94
patients with advanced cancers (colorectal, n = 60; melanoma, n = 9;
non-small cell lung, n = 9; appendiceal, n = 3; ovarian, n = 3;
endometrial, n = 3; other cancers, n = 7). KRAS G12/G13 mutations were
detected in 62% (58/94) of plasma samples and in 68% (64/94) of archival
tumor samples, resulting in concordance in 84 (89%) of patients (kappa =
0.77, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.63- 0.90) with sensitivity 88% (95%
CI 0.77-0.94), specificity 93% (95% CI 0.78-0.99), positive and negative
predictive values 97% (95% CI 0.88-0.99) and 78% (95% CI 0.61-0.90),
respectively. Overall, 8 patients had KRAS G12/G13 mutation in the tumor,
but not in cfDNA and 2 patients had KRAS G12/G13 mutation in cfDNA, but
not in the tumor. Of interest, 1 of 2 patients with KRAS G12/G13 mutation
(colorectal cancer) in cfDNA, but not in the tumor, experienced rapid
disease progression after 1 cycle of cetuximab with chemotherapy.
Discrepancies will be addressed with testing of tissue samples using the
Bio-Rad QX200 system and repeating cfDNA testing with an increased amount
of DNA. Results will be presented at the meeting.Conclusions: Multiplex
detecting of KRAS G12/G13 mutations in a low amount of unamplified cfDNA
from plasma using the Bio-Rad QX200 platform is a noninvasive alternative
to mutation testing of tumor tissue with an acceptable level of
concordance and sensitivity, and should be investigated further for
testing of KRAS mutation status in patients with cancer.

