Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of glycine N-methyltransferase in the regulation of T cell
responses in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis


Glycine N-methyltransferase (GNMT) is known for its function as a tumor
suppressor gene. Since 100% of female Gnmt/ mice developed hepatocellular
carcinoma, we hypothesized that Gnmt/ mice may have defective immune
surveillance. In this study, we examined the immune modulation of GNMT in
T cell responses using experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
The results showed that EAE severity was significantly reduced in Gnmt/
mice. Pathological examination of the spinal cords revealed that Gnmt/-
mice had significantly lower level of mononuclear cell infiltration and
demyelination than the wild-type mice. In addition, quantitative
real-time PCR showed that expression levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, including IFN-gamma and IL-17A, were much lower in the spinal
cord of Gnmt/- than in that of wild-type mice. Accordingly, myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)-specific T cell proliferation and
induction of T helper (Th) 1 and Th17 cells were markedly suppressed in
MOG35-55 induced Gnmt/- mice. Moreover, the amount of regulatory T cells
was significantly increased in these mice. When the T cell receptor was
stimulated, the proliferative capacity and the activation status of
mTOR-associated downstream signaling were significantly decreased in
GNMT/- CD4+ T cells via an IL-2 and CD25-independent manner. Moreover,
GNMT deficiency enhanced the differentiation of regulatory T cells
without affecting the differentiation of Th1 and Th17 cells. Furthermore,
the severity of EAE in mice adoptive transferred with GNMT-deficient CD4+
T cells was much milder than in those with wild-type CD4+ T cells. In
summary, our findings suggest that GNMT is involved in the pathogenesis
of EAE and plays a crucial role in the regulation of CD4+ T cell
functions.

