Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple myeloma microenvironment and obesity


Multiple myeloma accounts for roughly 1% of all cancers diagnosed in the
United States each year. Risk factors include environmental exposure,
age, ancestry, gender, and obesity. Rates of obesity are on the rise in
the United States and around the world; in the United States alone, 69%
of adults are either overweight (BMI 25-30) or obese (BMI 30-35) and 6.3%
of adults are extremely obese (BMI > 35). Although there is a strong
epidemiological correlation between obesity and multiple myeloma, the
mechanism by which adipocytes contribute to the development and
progression of the cancer has yet to be identified. In this study, we
isolated stem cells from patients undergoing elective liposuction
surgery, differentiated the stem cells into adipocytes, and co-cultured
the adipocytes with RPMI 8226 or NCI-H929 multiple myeloma (MM) cell
lines. MM cells proliferated faster when co-cultured with adipocytes
versus growing alone. MM growth rate was significantly higher in response
to adipocytes from obese patients in comparison to adipocytes from normal
weight individuals. Further, conditioned media from adipocytes from obese
patients significantly increased pro-angiogenic signaling within a tube
formation assay, induced an increase in MM cell adhesion, and increased
expression of matrix metalloproteinases. In summary, our data suggests
that adipocytes in the MM microenvironment contribute to MM progression
and should be further evaluated as a possible therapeutic target.

