Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Construction and validation of an activating and inhibitory
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) system


Introduction: Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) consists a promising type
of adoptive immunotherapy. CARs consist of an antigen recognition unit
(scFv), a transmembrane (TM) region and an intracellular activation
domain. However, on target/off tumor responses due to target recognition
in normal cells limits the widespread application of this therapy. In
B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia, lymphocytes expressing
anti-CD19 CARs (19BBz) are being used in the clinical setting. However,
the expression of CD19 as a pan-B marker can lead to undesired side
effects such as depletion of mature B cells. As mature B cells express
both CD19 and CD20 antigens, we propose the creation of an inhibitory
anti-CD20 CAR, that when used in combination with 19BBz would be able to
discriminate between leukemic blasts and normal B cells. Methods and
results: Three inhibitory CARs were constructed containing signaling
domains of CTLA-4, PD-1 or BTLA. Jurkat T cells expressing the plasmid
pGL4.30 - expressing luciferase controlled by a NFAT responsive promoter
- were generated. K562 cell line was used as target cells and modified to
express CD19 (K5-19), CD20 (K5-20) or CD19 and CD20 (K5-19/20). In
coculture experiments, Jurkat cells expressing 19BBz showed induction of
luciferase activity when cultured with K5-19 or K5-19/20. However, Jurkat
expressing both activation and inhibitory CAR showed inhibition of
luciferase activity when incubated with K5-19/20 while maintained high
activity when cultured with K5-19 cells. Furthermore, all three
inhibitory CARs were able to inhibit the expression of the activation
marker CD69 induced by 19BBz. In primary human T lymphocytes, the 20PD1
CAR did not inhibit proliferation or cytotoxicity induced by 19BBz.
Surprisingly, T cells expressing 19BBz and 20PD1 showed preferential
lysis of NALM6 CD19+ CD20+ cells, suggesting that the addition of PD1
domain may increase T-cell function in specific contexts. This effect was
partially reversed by using a mutant PD1 domain where the tyrosines were
replaced by phenylalanine and was completely reversed by using an
anti-CD20 CAR truncated at the TM region, suggesting that this phenomenon
is dependent of signaling. Conclusions: Additional experiments are needed
to evaluate the activity of 20PD1 in primary human T cells. Experiments
with inhibitory CARs 20LAG3 and 20PD1LAG3 are ongoing and can serve as an
alternative to CAR 20PD1 in the construction of a conditional response
system.

