Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prolonged nightly fasting and breast cancer risk: findings from
NHANES (2009-2010)


A novel line of research has emerged suggesting that daily
feeding-fasting schedules have metabolic implications that are highly
relevant to breast cancer. In rodents, a habitual daily fasting schedule
that is aligned with sleep-wake cycles appears to have favorable effects
on a variety of cancer risk factors and may reduce cell proliferation.
While data from rodent models are compelling, no human studies have
explored the potential impact of this type of fasting schedule on cancer
risk factors such as hyperglycemia (a possible facilitator of neoplastic
proliferation). We examined cross-sectional associations of nighttime
fasting duration with glycemic control biomarkers associated with
increased breast cancer risk in a population-based sample of women in the
2009-2010 U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.Dietary,
anthropometric and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) data were available
for 2,212 women, and 2-hour postprandial glucose concentrations were
available for 1,066 women. Nighttime fasting duration was calculated
using time-stamped 24-hour food records. Separate linear regression
models examined associations of nighttime fasting with HbA1c and 2-hour
glucose concentrations. Logistic regression modeled associations of
nighttime fasting duration with elevated HbA1c (HbA1c 39 mmol/mol or
5.7%) and elevated 2-hour glucose (glucose 140 mg/dL). All models
adjusted for age, education, race/ethnicity, BMI, total kcal intake,
evening kcal intake, and the number of eating episodes per day. All
analyses used sample weights to account for differential probabilities of
selection into the sample, nonresponse, and noncoverage. Standard errors
were estimated using Taylor Series Linearization.Women in this sample
were an average of 46.8 years of age (SE = 0.66) and fasted approximately
12.4 (SE = 0.08) hours per night. Each 3-hour increase in nighttime
fasting (roughly one standard deviation) was associated with a 4% lower
2-hour postprandial glucose measurement ( 0.96, 95% CI 0.93 - 1.00; pA
novel line of research has emerged suggesting that daily feeding-fasting
schedules have metabolic implications that are highly relevant to breast
cancer. In rodents, a habitual daily fasting schedule that is aligned
with sleep-wake cycles appears to have favorable effects on a variety of
cancer risk factors and may reduce cell proliferation. While data from
rodent models are compelling, no human studies have explored the
potential impact of this type of fasting schedule on cancer risk factors
such as hyperglycemia (a possible facilitator of neoplastic
proliferation). We examined cross-sectional associations of nighttime
fasting duration with glycemic control biomarkers associated with
increased breast cancer risk in a population-based sample of women in the
2009-2010 U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.Dietary,
anthropometric and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) data were available
for 2,212 women, and 2-hour postprandial glucose concentrations were
available for 1,066 women. Nighttime fasting duration was calculated
using time-stamped 24-hour food records. Separate linear regression
models examined associations of nighttime fasting with HbA1c and 2-hour
glucose concentrations. Logistic regression modeled associations of
nighttime fasting duration with elevated HbA1c (HbA1c 39 mmol/mol or
5.7%) and elevated 2-hour glucose (glucose 140 mg/dL). All models
adjusted for age, education, race/ethnicity, BMI, total kcal intake,
evening kcal intake, and the number of eating episodes per day. All
analyses used sample weights to account for differential probabilities of
selection into the sample, nonresponse, and noncoverage. Standard errors
were estimated using Taylor Series Linearization.Women in this sample
were an average of 46.8 years of age (SE = 0.66) and fasted approximately
12.4 (SE = 0.08) hours per night. Each 3-hour increase in nighttime
fasting (roughly one standard deviation) was associated with a 4% lower
2-hour postprandial glucose measurement ( 0.96, 95% CI 0.93 - 1.00;
p<0.05), and a non-statistically significant 0.4 unit decrease in HbA1c (
-0.39, 95% CI -0.84 - -0.05; p = 0.08). Logistic regression models
indicate that each 3-hour increase in nighttime fasting duration was
associated with roughly a 20% reduced odds of elevated HbA1c (OR 0.81,
95% CI 0.68, 0.97; pA novel line of research has emerged suggesting that
daily feeding-fasting schedules have metabolic implications that are
highly relevant to breast cancer. In rodents, a habitual daily fasting
schedule that is aligned with sleep-wake cycles appears to have favorable
effects on a variety of cancer risk factors and may reduce cell
proliferation. While data from rodent models are compelling, no human
studies have explored the potential impact of this type of fasting
schedule on cancer risk factors such as hyperglycemia (a possible
facilitator of neoplastic proliferation). We examined cross-sectional
associations of nighttime fasting duration with glycemic control
biomarkers associated with increased breast cancer risk in a
population-based sample of women in the 2009-2010 U.S. National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey.Dietary, anthropometric and glycosylated
hemoglobin (HbA1c) data were available for 2,212 women, and 2-hour
postprandial glucose concentrations were available for 1,066 women.
Nighttime fasting duration was calculated using time-stamped 24-hour food
records. Separate linear regression models examined associations of
nighttime fasting with HbA1c and 2-hour glucose concentrations. Logistic
regression modeled associations of nighttime fasting duration with
elevated HbA1c (HbA1c 39 mmol/mol or 5.7%) and elevated 2-hour glucose
(glucose 140 mg/dL). All models adjusted for age, education,
race/ethnicity, BMI, total kcal intake, evening kcal intake, and the
number of eating episodes per day. All analyses used sample weights to
account for differential probabilities of selection into the sample,
nonresponse, and noncoverage. Standard errors were estimated using Taylor
Series Linearization.Women in this sample were an average of 46.8 years
of age (SE = 0.66) and fasted approximately 12.4 (SE = 0.08) hours per
night. Each 3-hour increase in nighttime fasting (roughly one standard
deviation) was associated with a 4% lower 2-hour postprandial glucose
measurement ( 0.96, 95% CI 0.93 - 1.00; p<0.05), and a non-statistically
significant 0.4 unit decrease in HbA1c ( -0.39, 95% CI -0.84 - -0.05; p =
0.08). Logistic regression models indicate that each 3-hour increase in
nighttime fasting duration was associated with roughly a 20% reduced odds
of elevated HbA1c (OR 0.81, 95% CI 0.68, 0.97; p<0.05) and
non-significantly reduced odds of elevated 2-hour glucose (OR 0.78, 95%CI
0.53-1.54).Randomized trials are needed to confirm whether a prolonged
nighttime fasting schedule could improve biomarkers of glycemic control,
thereby reducing breast cancer risk among women.

