Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting breast cancer stem cells and non-stem breast cancer
cells through combination therapies


Cancer stem cells (CSCs), as a subset of tumor cells with enhanced
capacity to generate tumors, have recently been attributed to driving
cancer recurrence and metastasis. Although the current CSC model
highlights the importance of developing strategies to target CSCs, it is
conceivable that the depletion of CSCs within a tumor would not lead to
complete regression since non-CSCs might still be capable of sustaining
tumor growth or regaining CSC potential. As either of these possibilities
would confound the effectiveness of therapeutic agents that exclusively
target CSCs, we aimed to rapidly identify combination therapies that
could synergistically target both breast cancer cells and breast CSCs.
Using a comprehensive small chemical library screen consisting of more
than 1600 compounds, we identified a total of 193 small molecules,
including 45 FDA approved drugs, which could target both breast CSCs and
non-CSCs. When combined with conventional chemotherapeutic agents (e.g.
cisplatin, doxorubicin or paclitaxel), histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors exhibited significant synergistic effects in targeting both
breast CSCs and non-CSCs. In summary, our data suggests that HDAC
inhibitors represent a class of agents that could synergize with
chemotherapeutic agents in refractory breast cancer cells and warrant
further investigations.

