Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term use of aspirin and risk of cancer


Background: Post-hoc analyses of RCTs of aspirin for the prevention of
cardiovascular disease support a potential role of daily aspirin use,
primary low-dose aspirin, in reducing overall cancer incidence. However,
long-term follow-up of the largest RCT of aspirin, the Women's Health
Study, found a reduction only in risk of colorectal cancer but not
overall cancer with alternate-day low-dose aspirin. Uncertainties remain
in relation to the optimum dose, duration of use, the impact of
discontinuing use, as well as potential differential benefits within
subgroups.Methods: We prospectively followed 82,600 female nurses and
47,651 male health professionals enrolled in the Nurses Health Study
(1980) and Health Professionals Follow-up Study (1986) until June 2012
and January 2010, respectively. Biennially, we collected data on aspirin
use, other risk factors, and diagnoses of cancer. Cox proportional
hazards models with time varying covariates were used to estimate RRs and
95% confidence intervals (95% CIs).Results: During up to 32 years of
follow-up, we documented 27,985 (20,414 among women, 7,571 among men
[excluding non-advanced prostate cancer]) incident cancers over 3,137,359
person-years. Compared with non-regular users, regular aspirin use (2
standard [325-mg] tablets per week in women; 2 times per week in men) was
associated with lower risk of overall cancer (multivariable RR 0.95; 95%
CI 0.93-0.98), which was primarily due to a lower incidence of
gastrointestinal (GI) cancers (HR 0.80; 95% CI 0.75-0.85), including
colorectal cancer (HR 0.75; 95% CI 0.69-0.81) and gastroesophageal
cancers (HR 0.86; 95% CI 0.71-1.04). Regular use of aspirin was not
associated with risk of non-GI cancer (HR 0.98; 95% CI 0.96-1.01). In
particular, no link between aspirin and breast cancer, advanced prostate
cancer or lung cancer was identified. The benefit of aspirin on overall
cancer appeared to be dose-dependent: compared with participants reported
no aspirin use, the RRs for cancer were 0.99 (95% CI 0.95-1.03) for those
who used 0.5 to 1.5 standard aspirin tablets per week, 0.97 (95% CI
0.93-1.01) for 2 to 5 aspirin per week, 0.93 (95% CI, 0.89-0.97) for 6 to
14 aspirin per week, and 0.94 (95% CI, 0.87-1.00) for 15 aspirin per week
(P for trend Background: Post-hoc analyses of RCTs of aspirin for the
prevention of cardiovascular disease support a potential role of daily
aspirin use, primary low-dose aspirin, in reducing overall cancer
incidence. However, long-term follow-up of the largest RCT of aspirin,
the Women's Health Study, found a reduction only in risk of colorectal
cancer but not overall cancer with alternate-day low-dose aspirin.
Uncertainties remain in relation to the optimum dose, duration of use,
the impact of discontinuing use, as well as potential differential
benefits within subgroups.Methods: We prospectively followed 82,600
female nurses and 47,651 male health professionals enrolled in the Nurses
Health Study (1980) and Health Professionals Follow-up Study (1986) until
June 2012 and January 2010, respectively. Biennially, we collected data
on aspirin use, other risk factors, and diagnoses of cancer. Cox
proportional hazards models with time varying covariates were used to
estimate RRs and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs).Results: During up to
32 years of follow-up, we documented 27,985 (20,414 among women, 7,571
among men [excluding non-advanced prostate cancer]) incident cancers over
3,137,359 person-years. Compared with non-regular users, regular aspirin
use (2 standard [325-mg] tablets per week in women; 2 times per week in
men) was associated with lower risk of overall cancer (multivariable RR
0.95; 95% CI 0.93-0.98), which was primarily due to a lower incidence of
gastrointestinal (GI) cancers (HR 0.80; 95% CI 0.75-0.85), including
colorectal cancer (HR 0.75; 95% CI 0.69-0.81) and gastroesophageal
cancers (HR 0.86; 95% CI 0.71-1.04). Regular use of aspirin was not
associated with risk of non-GI cancer (HR 0.98; 95% CI 0.96-1.01). In
particular, no link between aspirin and breast cancer, advanced prostate
cancer or lung cancer was identified. The benefit of aspirin on overall
cancer appeared to be dose-dependent: compared with participants reported
no aspirin use, the RRs for cancer were 0.99 (95% CI 0.95-1.03) for those
who used 0.5 to 1.5 standard aspirin tablets per week, 0.97 (95% CI
0.93-1.01) for 2 to 5 aspirin per week, 0.93 (95% CI, 0.89-0.97) for 6 to
14 aspirin per week, and 0.94 (95% CI, 0.87-1.00) for 15 aspirin per week
(P for trend <0.001). Significant risk reduction required at least 16
years of use (P for trend = 0.001) and was no longer evident within 4
years of discontinuing use. The association of aspirin use with cancer
risk was similar for women and men and did not vary by race, history of
diabetes, family history of cancer, body mass index, smoking history,
regular NSAID and multivitamin use.Conclusion: Our results support an
association of regular aspirin use with modestly reduced incidence of
overall cancer. However, in contrast to the findings in the post-hoc
analyses of several cardiovascular RCTs, higher doses of aspirin may be
required to achieve benefits in cancer prevention. Longer duration of use
was strongly associated with lower risk.

