Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical studies of a mutant p53 reactivating drug in
pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer therapy suffers from a lack of effective chemotherapy.
TP53 is second only to Kras as the most commonly mutated gene in
pancreatic cancer with point mutations occurring in 75% of patients.
Recently, our laboratory identified ZMC1 as an allele specific p53 mutant
reactivating compound. This compound selectively kills cancer cells that
express the p53-R175H mutation by restoring wildtype structure and
function to this mutant. It does not reactivate the DNA contact mutant,
p53-R273H or p53-R248H. This established ZMC1 as a lead compound for
mutant p53 targeted drug development. We are currently investigating the
potential of ZMC1 as novel anti-cancer drug through pre-clinical studies
in pancreatic cancer. Previously we reported the ZMC1 allele specificity
in murine pancreatic cancer cell lines derived from the KPC mouse model
expressing mutant KrasG12D and different alleles of TP53 (WT, null,
p53R172H, p53R270H). We have investigated the pharmacokinetics (PK) and
pharmacodynamics (PD) of ZMC1 in the KPC mouse model. Using LC/MS/MS we
developed a sensitive assay for detection of ZMC1 in mouse plasma. We
measured drug concentrations in mouse plasma and tumor tissues in
different delivery routes and different dosages in the PK studies. We
have developed a PD assay for ZMC1 with cleaved caspase-3 immunostaining
with which we have tested several doses of ZMC1 and found that we detect
activity of ZMC1 in KPCp53-R172H xenograft tumors while at the same time
relatively no activity in KPCp53-R270H tumors. These same assays were
also performed on KPC autochthanous tumors and again revealed activity of
ZMC1 in the KPCp53-R172H mice. Efficacy studies in the KPCp53-R172H
xenografts showed potent tumor growth inhibition at both intravenous
(1mg/kg) and intraperitoneal (5mg/kg) dosing while no evidence of growth
inhibition in KPCp53-R270H. Furthermore, ZMC1 extended the survival days
from average 15 days to 26 days in the KPCp53-R172H mice but it was not
significantly observed in the KPCp53-R270H mice. The tumor growth rate
was also decreased in the KPCp53-R172H but not in the KPCp53-R270H mice.
These studies indicated that ZMC1 is an allele-specific p53 mutant
reactivating compound and holds promise for future applications in
pancreatic cancer.

