Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation detection in urine from bladder cancer patients as
non-invasive prognostic tool


In Europe, bladder cancer (BC) is the second most common cause of death
among patients with genitourinary tract malignancies. Patients with
non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) have excellent survival;
however two-thirds develop recurrences. For the diagnosis of BC, we
mainly rely on urine cytology and cystoscopy. Although cystoscopy is the
mainstay of the diagnosis, it is an invasive and costly procedure.
Cytology has high specificity but has low sensitivity especially in
low-grade, low-stage tumors. Urine sediment cells are a source of tumor
DNA, they are easily accessible, and their sampling is not invasive. The
identification of a urine-based biomarker could partly replace
cystoscopies, thereby reducing the frequency and associated costs,
improving patient's quality of life and even leading to earlier detection
of recurrences. Tumor-specific mutations can be used to detect
recurrences in urine, presenting a non-invasive diagnostic procedure
respect to cystoscopy.The present study involves 252 male subjects
diagnosed with BC recruited between 1994 and 2012 from the Turin Bladder
Cancer Study. Urine samples have been collected for the first time at the
time of diagnosis, and exfoliated cells have been extracted. A subgroup
of 83 patients has been followed-up for three years, collecting a urine
sample every six months. We have investigated the diagnostic and
prognostic potentiality of a panel of 40 mutations in hTERT, FGFR3,
PIK3CA, and Ras genes detected in DNA from exfoliated cells by SNApShot
assay. For each gene we calculated crude and adjusted (by age, smoking
status, chemotherapy, low/intermediate/high risk, grade) Hazard Ratios
(HR) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (95% CI) using the
Cox proportional-hazard regression model. The results were correlated
with stage and tumor grade, with response to therapy and the occurrence
of recurrences, in order to assess the validity of exfoliated cells as a
source of DNA for the development of a non-invasive test for the
follow-up of patients.Mutations in hTERT gene promoter and FGFR3 gene are
the most frequent somatic mutations in BC. In particular, hTERT mutations
were significantly correlated with high risk, high grade and muscle
invasive tumors (pIn Europe, bladder cancer (BC) is the second most
common cause of death among patients with genitourinary tract
malignancies. Patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC)
have excellent survival; however two-thirds develop recurrences. For the
diagnosis of BC, we mainly rely on urine cytology and cystoscopy.
Although cystoscopy is the mainstay of the diagnosis, it is an invasive
and costly procedure. Cytology has high specificity but has low
sensitivity especially in low-grade, low-stage tumors. Urine sediment
cells are a source of tumor DNA, they are easily accessible, and their
sampling is not invasive. The identification of a urine-based biomarker
could partly replace cystoscopies, thereby reducing the frequency and
associated costs, improving patient's quality of life and even leading to
earlier detection of recurrences. Tumor-specific mutations can be used to
detect recurrences in urine, presenting a non-invasive diagnostic
procedure respect to cystoscopy.The present study involves 252 male
subjects diagnosed with BC recruited between 1994 and 2012 from the Turin
Bladder Cancer Study. Urine samples have been collected for the first
time at the time of diagnosis, and exfoliated cells have been extracted.
A subgroup of 83 patients has been followed-up for three years,
collecting a urine sample every six months. We have investigated the
diagnostic and prognostic potentiality of a panel of 40 mutations in
hTERT, FGFR3, PIK3CA, and Ras genes detected in DNA from exfoliated cells
by SNApShot assay. For each gene we calculated crude and adjusted (by
age, smoking status, chemotherapy, low/intermediate/high risk, grade)
Hazard Ratios (HR) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (95%
CI) using the Cox proportional-hazard regression model. The results were
correlated with stage and tumor grade, with response to therapy and the
occurrence of recurrences, in order to assess the validity of exfoliated
cells as a source of DNA for the development of a non-invasive test for
the follow-up of patients.Mutations in hTERT gene promoter and FGFR3 gene
are the most frequent somatic mutations in BC. In particular, hTERT
mutations were significantly correlated with high risk, high grade and
muscle invasive tumors (p<0.0001). In contrast, for FGFR3 the prevalence
of mutations was significantly higher in non-high grade (pIn Europe,
bladder cancer (BC) is the second most common cause of death among
patients with genitourinary tract malignancies. Patients with non-muscle
invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) have excellent survival; however
two-thirds develop recurrences. For the diagnosis of BC, we mainly rely
on urine cytology and cystoscopy. Although cystoscopy is the mainstay of
the diagnosis, it is an invasive and costly procedure. Cytology has high
specificity but has low sensitivity especially in low-grade, low-stage
tumors. Urine sediment cells are a source of tumor DNA, they are easily
accessible, and their sampling is not invasive. The identification of a
urine-based biomarker could partly replace cystoscopies, thereby reducing
the frequency and associated costs, improving patient's quality of life
and even leading to earlier detection of recurrences. Tumor-specific
mutations can be used to detect recurrences in urine, presenting a
non-invasive diagnostic procedure respect to cystoscopy.The present study
involves 252 male subjects diagnosed with BC recruited between 1994 and
2012 from the Turin Bladder Cancer Study. Urine samples have been
collected for the first time at the time of diagnosis, and exfoliated
cells have been extracted. A subgroup of 83 patients has been followed-up
for three years, collecting a urine sample every six months. We have
investigated the diagnostic and prognostic potentiality of a panel of 40
mutations in hTERT, FGFR3, PIK3CA, and Ras genes detected in DNA from
exfoliated cells by SNApShot assay. For each gene we calculated crude and
adjusted (by age, smoking status, chemotherapy, low/intermediate/high
risk, grade) Hazard Ratios (HR) and the corresponding 95% Confidence
Intervals (95% CI) using the Cox proportional-hazard regression model.
The results were correlated with stage and tumor grade, with response to
therapy and the occurrence of recurrences, in order to assess the
validity of exfoliated cells as a source of DNA for the development of a
non-invasive test for the follow-up of patients.Mutations in hTERT gene
promoter and FGFR3 gene are the most frequent somatic mutations in BC. In
particular, hTERT mutations were significantly correlated with high risk,
high grade and muscle invasive tumors (p<0.0001). In contrast, for FGFR3
the prevalence of mutations was significantly higher in non-high grade
(p<0.0001) and in NMIBC (p = 0.01). Cox regression analysis shows an
increased risk of recurrence and recurrence/progression in association
with hTERT mutations (adjpIn Europe, bladder cancer (BC) is the second
most common cause of death among patients with genitourinary tract
malignancies. Patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC)
have excellent survival; however two-thirds develop recurrences. For the
diagnosis of BC, we mainly rely on urine cytology and cystoscopy.
Although cystoscopy is the mainstay of the diagnosis, it is an invasive
and costly procedure. Cytology has high specificity but has low
sensitivity especially in low-grade, low-stage tumors. Urine sediment
cells are a source of tumor DNA, they are easily accessible, and their
sampling is not invasive. The identification of a urine-based biomarker
could partly replace cystoscopies, thereby reducing the frequency and
associated costs, improving patient's quality of life and even leading to
earlier detection of recurrences. Tumor-specific mutations can be used to
detect recurrences in urine, presenting a non-invasive diagnostic
procedure respect to cystoscopy.The present study involves 252 male
subjects diagnosed with BC recruited between 1994 and 2012 from the Turin
Bladder Cancer Study. Urine samples have been collected for the first
time at the time of diagnosis, and exfoliated cells have been extracted.
A subgroup of 83 patients has been followed-up for three years,
collecting a urine sample every six months. We have investigated the
diagnostic and prognostic potentiality of a panel of 40 mutations in
hTERT, FGFR3, PIK3CA, and Ras genes detected in DNA from exfoliated cells
by SNApShot assay. For each gene we calculated crude and adjusted (by
age, smoking status, chemotherapy, low/intermediate/high risk, grade)
Hazard Ratios (HR) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (95%
CI) using the Cox proportional-hazard regression model. The results were
correlated with stage and tumor grade, with response to therapy and the
occurrence of recurrences, in order to assess the validity of exfoliated
cells as a source of DNA for the development of a non-invasive test for
the follow-up of patients.Mutations in hTERT gene promoter and FGFR3 gene
are the most frequent somatic mutations in BC. In particular, hTERT
mutations were significantly correlated with high risk, high grade and
muscle invasive tumors (p<0.0001). In contrast, for FGFR3 the prevalence
of mutations was significantly higher in non-high grade (p<0.0001) and in
NMIBC (p = 0.01). Cox regression analysis shows an increased risk of
recurrence and recurrence/progression in association with hTERT mutations
(adjp<0.007 and pIn Europe, bladder cancer (BC) is the second most common
cause of death among patients with genitourinary tract malignancies.
Patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) have excellent
survival; however two-thirds develop recurrences. For the diagnosis of
BC, we mainly rely on urine cytology and cystoscopy. Although cystoscopy
is the mainstay of the diagnosis, it is an invasive and costly procedure.
Cytology has high specificity but has low sensitivity especially in
low-grade, low-stage tumors. Urine sediment cells are a source of tumor
DNA, they are easily accessible, and their sampling is not invasive. The
identification of a urine-based biomarker could partly replace
cystoscopies, thereby reducing the frequency and associated costs,
improving patient's quality of life and even leading to earlier detection
of recurrences. Tumor-specific mutations can be used to detect
recurrences in urine, presenting a non-invasive diagnostic procedure
respect to cystoscopy.The present study involves 252 male subjects
diagnosed with BC recruited between 1994 and 2012 from the Turin Bladder
Cancer Study. Urine samples have been collected for the first time at the
time of diagnosis, and exfoliated cells have been extracted. A subgroup
of 83 patients has been followed-up for three years, collecting a urine
sample every six months. We have investigated the diagnostic and
prognostic potentiality of a panel of 40 mutations in hTERT, FGFR3,
PIK3CA, and Ras genes detected in DNA from exfoliated cells by SNApShot
assay. For each gene we calculated crude and adjusted (by age, smoking
status, chemotherapy, low/intermediate/high risk, grade) Hazard Ratios
(HR) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (95% CI) using the
Cox proportional-hazard regression model. The results were correlated
with stage and tumor grade, with response to therapy and the occurrence
of recurrences, in order to assess the validity of exfoliated cells as a
source of DNA for the development of a non-invasive test for the
follow-up of patients.Mutations in hTERT gene promoter and FGFR3 gene are
the most frequent somatic mutations in BC. In particular, hTERT mutations
were significantly correlated with high risk, high grade and muscle
invasive tumors (p<0.0001). In contrast, for FGFR3 the prevalence of
mutations was significantly higher in non-high grade (p<0.0001) and in
NMIBC (p = 0.01). Cox regression analysis shows an increased risk of
recurrence and recurrence/progression in association with hTERT mutations
(adjp<0.007 and p<0.008, respectively). At first follow-up, the
significant association between high grade and hTERT mutations was
confirmed (p = 0.004). Cox regression analysis confirms an increased risk
of recurrence and recurrence/progression in association with hTERT
mutations (adjpIn Europe, bladder cancer (BC) is the second most common
cause of death among patients with genitourinary tract malignancies.
Patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) have excellent
survival; however two-thirds develop recurrences. For the diagnosis of
BC, we mainly rely on urine cytology and cystoscopy. Although cystoscopy
is the mainstay of the diagnosis, it is an invasive and costly procedure.
Cytology has high specificity but has low sensitivity especially in
low-grade, low-stage tumors. Urine sediment cells are a source of tumor
DNA, they are easily accessible, and their sampling is not invasive. The
identification of a urine-based biomarker could partly replace
cystoscopies, thereby reducing the frequency and associated costs,
improving patient's quality of life and even leading to earlier detection
of recurrences. Tumor-specific mutations can be used to detect
recurrences in urine, presenting a non-invasive diagnostic procedure
respect to cystoscopy.The present study involves 252 male subjects
diagnosed with BC recruited between 1994 and 2012 from the Turin Bladder
Cancer Study. Urine samples have been collected for the first time at the
time of diagnosis, and exfoliated cells have been extracted. A subgroup
of 83 patients has been followed-up for three years, collecting a urine
sample every six months. We have investigated the diagnostic and
prognostic potentiality of a panel of 40 mutations in hTERT, FGFR3,
PIK3CA, and Ras genes detected in DNA from exfoliated cells by SNApShot
assay. For each gene we calculated crude and adjusted (by age, smoking
status, chemotherapy, low/intermediate/high risk, grade) Hazard Ratios
(HR) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (95% CI) using the
Cox proportional-hazard regression model. The results were correlated
with stage and tumor grade, with response to therapy and the occurrence
of recurrences, in order to assess the validity of exfoliated cells as a
source of DNA for the development of a non-invasive test for the
follow-up of patients.Mutations in hTERT gene promoter and FGFR3 gene are
the most frequent somatic mutations in BC. In particular, hTERT mutations
were significantly correlated with high risk, high grade and muscle
invasive tumors (p<0.0001). In contrast, for FGFR3 the prevalence of
mutations was significantly higher in non-high grade (p<0.0001) and in
NMIBC (p = 0.01). Cox regression analysis shows an increased risk of
recurrence and recurrence/progression in association with hTERT mutations
(adjp<0.007 and p<0.008, respectively). At first follow-up, the
significant association between high grade and hTERT mutations was
confirmed (p = 0.004). Cox regression analysis confirms an increased risk
of recurrence and recurrence/progression in association with hTERT
mutations (adjp<0.007 and adjpIn Europe, bladder cancer (BC) is the
second most common cause of death among patients with genitourinary tract
malignancies. Patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC)
have excellent survival; however two-thirds develop recurrences. For the
diagnosis of BC, we mainly rely on urine cytology and cystoscopy.
Although cystoscopy is the mainstay of the diagnosis, it is an invasive
and costly procedure. Cytology has high specificity but has low
sensitivity especially in low-grade, low-stage tumors. Urine sediment
cells are a source of tumor DNA, they are easily accessible, and their
sampling is not invasive. The identification of a urine-based biomarker
could partly replace cystoscopies, thereby reducing the frequency and
associated costs, improving patient's quality of life and even leading to
earlier detection of recurrences. Tumor-specific mutations can be used to
detect recurrences in urine, presenting a non-invasive diagnostic
procedure respect to cystoscopy.The present study involves 252 male
subjects diagnosed with BC recruited between 1994 and 2012 from the Turin
Bladder Cancer Study. Urine samples have been collected for the first
time at the time of diagnosis, and exfoliated cells have been extracted.
A subgroup of 83 patients has been followed-up for three years,
collecting a urine sample every six months. We have investigated the
diagnostic and prognostic potentiality of a panel of 40 mutations in
hTERT, FGFR3, PIK3CA, and Ras genes detected in DNA from exfoliated cells
by SNApShot assay. For each gene we calculated crude and adjusted (by
age, smoking status, chemotherapy, low/intermediate/high risk, grade)
Hazard Ratios (HR) and the corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (95%
CI) using the Cox proportional-hazard regression model. The results were
correlated with stage and tumor grade, with response to therapy and the
occurrence of recurrences, in order to assess the validity of exfoliated
cells as a source of DNA for the development of a non-invasive test for
the follow-up of patients.Mutations in hTERT gene promoter and FGFR3 gene
are the most frequent somatic mutations in BC. In particular, hTERT
mutations were significantly correlated with high risk, high grade and
muscle invasive tumors (p<0.0001). In contrast, for FGFR3 the prevalence
of mutations was significantly higher in non-high grade (p<0.0001) and in
NMIBC (p = 0.01). Cox regression analysis shows an increased risk of
recurrence and recurrence/progression in association with hTERT mutations
(adjp<0.007 and p<0.008, respectively). At first follow-up, the
significant association between high grade and hTERT mutations was
confirmed (p = 0.004). Cox regression analysis confirms an increased risk
of recurrence and recurrence/progression in association with hTERT
mutations (adjp<0.007 and adjp<0.008, respectively). These findings could
suggest novel approach to identify biomarkers of BC at diagnosis and for
prognostic reasons.

