Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design, synthesis, and biological activity of N-phenyl
ureidobenzenesulfonates (PUB-SOs) as new and innovative small-molecule
drugs inhibiting proteins involved in DNA repair/replication mechanisms


Our research group has developed a new family of promising anticancer
agents designated as N-phenyl ureidobenzenesulfonates (PUB-SOs). PUB-SOs
are based on a genuinely new molecular scaffold and pharmacophore
constituted by two key aromatic moieties linked by a sulfonate bridge.
PUB-SOs block the cell cycle progression in the S-phase and cause DNA
double-strand breaks as confirmed by the phosphorylation of H2AX. In
addition, PUB-SOs exemplified by prototypical PUB-SO referred to as
SFOM-0046 activate selectively ATR-Chk1 pathway in all cell lines studied
while it does not activate the ATM-Chk2 pathway. Using
immunofluorescence, cell cycle analysis and cell survival assays, we
showed that the combination of the Chk1 inhibitor 7-hydroxystaurosporine
(UCN-01) and SFOM-0046 provide a proof-of concept that the cytotoxicity
of PUB-SOs can be synergized by relevant anticancer drugs. Accordingly,
we hypothesized that PUB-SOs inhibit proteins or enzymes involved in
critical DNA repair/replication mechanisms.In such a context, we designed
a new structure-activity relationship study to assess the effects of the
nature and position of different substituents on the aromatic ring B.
More than 50 new PUB-SO derivatives were prepared so far and they exhibit
antiproliferative activity on the low micromolar range on HT-1080
fibrosarcoma, HT-29 colon carcinoma, M21 skin melanoma and MCF7 breast
carcinoma. They block also the cell cycle progression in the S-phase.
These results show that substituents on ring B can be modulated to
optimize both the antiproliferative and as well as biopharmaceutical
properties.In conclusion, PUB-SOs are easily synthesized, purified and
pharmacomodulated, and they are therefore promising new and innovative
small-molecule drugs inhibiting proteins involved in DNA
repair/replication mechanisms through a genuinely innovative molecular
scaffold and pharmacophore.

