Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor dependence on HER2 signaling as a player in immune
infiltration required for trastuzumab activity


The identification of a robust clinical or molecular predictor of
trastuzumab benefit has proven challenging. Recent clinical studies have
shown that either tumor dependence on HER2 signaling or the presence of
high levels of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes is predictive of
trastuzumab sensitivity. Preclinical data suggest that only a fraction of
the HER2+ breast carcinoma (BC) cells are truly addicted to the oncogene
and that innate and adaptive immune cells contribute substantially to the
therapeutic effect of trastuzumab. Based on these data, we aimed to
determine whether tumor cells addicted to HER2 guide the development of
tumor immune cell infiltration required for trastuzumab cytotoxic
activity.Gene expression profile analysis of 53 HER2+ BC patients treated
with adjuvant trastuzumab and chemotherapy identified a 41-gene
classifier able to predict tumor relapse risk in both adjuvant and
neoadjuvant settings. Tumors classified as low-risk presented high HER2
mRNA levels and were mainly HER2-enriched based on PAM50 signature (pThe
identification of a robust clinical or molecular predictor of trastuzumab
benefit has proven challenging. Recent clinical studies have shown that
either tumor dependence on HER2 signaling or the presence of high levels
of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes is predictive of trastuzumab
sensitivity. Preclinical data suggest that only a fraction of the HER2+
breast carcinoma (BC) cells are truly addicted to the oncogene and that
innate and adaptive immune cells contribute substantially to the
therapeutic effect of trastuzumab. Based on these data, we aimed to
determine whether tumor cells addicted to HER2 guide the development of
tumor immune cell infiltration required for trastuzumab cytotoxic
activity.Gene expression profile analysis of 53 HER2+ BC patients treated
with adjuvant trastuzumab and chemotherapy identified a 41-gene
classifier able to predict tumor relapse risk in both adjuvant and
neoadjuvant settings. Tumors classified as low-risk presented high HER2
mRNA levels and were mainly HER2-enriched based on PAM50 signature
(p<0.0001); these tumors showed significantly enhanced immune cell
pathways and T cell infiltration as compared with high-risk samples.
Gene-set enrichment analysis identified chemokine and cytokine ligands
and receptor pathways enriched in low-risk patients (ES = 0.63, pThe
identification of a robust clinical or molecular predictor of trastuzumab
benefit has proven challenging. Recent clinical studies have shown that
either tumor dependence on HER2 signaling or the presence of high levels
of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes is predictive of trastuzumab
sensitivity. Preclinical data suggest that only a fraction of the HER2+
breast carcinoma (BC) cells are truly addicted to the oncogene and that
innate and adaptive immune cells contribute substantially to the
therapeutic effect of trastuzumab. Based on these data, we aimed to
determine whether tumor cells addicted to HER2 guide the development of
tumor immune cell infiltration required for trastuzumab cytotoxic
activity.Gene expression profile analysis of 53 HER2+ BC patients treated
with adjuvant trastuzumab and chemotherapy identified a 41-gene
classifier able to predict tumor relapse risk in both adjuvant and
neoadjuvant settings. Tumors classified as low-risk presented high HER2
mRNA levels and were mainly HER2-enriched based on PAM50 signature
(p<0.0001); these tumors showed significantly enhanced immune cell
pathways and T cell infiltration as compared with high-risk samples.
Gene-set enrichment analysis identified chemokine and cytokine ligands
and receptor pathways enriched in low-risk patients (ES = 0.63, p<0.0001,
FDRThe identification of a robust clinical or molecular predictor of
trastuzumab benefit has proven challenging. Recent clinical studies have
shown that either tumor dependence on HER2 signaling or the presence of
high levels of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes is predictive of
trastuzumab sensitivity. Preclinical data suggest that only a fraction of
the HER2+ breast carcinoma (BC) cells are truly addicted to the oncogene
and that innate and adaptive immune cells contribute substantially to the
therapeutic effect of trastuzumab. Based on these data, we aimed to
determine whether tumor cells addicted to HER2 guide the development of
tumor immune cell infiltration required for trastuzumab cytotoxic
activity.Gene expression profile analysis of 53 HER2+ BC patients treated
with adjuvant trastuzumab and chemotherapy identified a 41-gene
classifier able to predict tumor relapse risk in both adjuvant and
neoadjuvant settings. Tumors classified as low-risk presented high HER2
mRNA levels and were mainly HER2-enriched based on PAM50 signature
(p<0.0001); these tumors showed significantly enhanced immune cell
pathways and T cell infiltration as compared with high-risk samples.
Gene-set enrichment analysis identified chemokine and cytokine ligands
and receptor pathways enriched in low-risk patients (ES = 0.63, p<0.0001,
FDR<0.0001), with CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11 and CX3CL1 also significantly
(pThe identification of a robust clinical or molecular predictor of
trastuzumab benefit has proven challenging. Recent clinical studies have
shown that either tumor dependence on HER2 signaling or the presence of
high levels of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes is predictive of
trastuzumab sensitivity. Preclinical data suggest that only a fraction of
the HER2+ breast carcinoma (BC) cells are truly addicted to the oncogene
and that innate and adaptive immune cells contribute substantially to the
therapeutic effect of trastuzumab. Based on these data, we aimed to
determine whether tumor cells addicted to HER2 guide the development of
tumor immune cell infiltration required for trastuzumab cytotoxic
activity.Gene expression profile analysis of 53 HER2+ BC patients treated
with adjuvant trastuzumab and chemotherapy identified a 41-gene
classifier able to predict tumor relapse risk in both adjuvant and
neoadjuvant settings. Tumors classified as low-risk presented high HER2
mRNA levels and were mainly HER2-enriched based on PAM50 signature
(p<0.0001); these tumors showed significantly enhanced immune cell
pathways and T cell infiltration as compared with high-risk samples.
Gene-set enrichment analysis identified chemokine and cytokine ligands
and receptor pathways enriched in low-risk patients (ES = 0.63, p<0.0001,
FDR<0.0001), with CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11 and CX3CL1 also significantly
(p<0.05) associated with low relapse risk. The high CXCL9 expression in
low-risk tumors was validated by immunohistochemistry on FFPE tumor
slides. PD-L1 expression levels were also significantly higher in low-
than in high-risk tumors (p = 0.0014). Mean expression levels of relevant
chemokines in human HER2+ BC cell lines as analyzed by qRT-PCR were 3- to
30-fold higher in HER2-addicted lines HER2 (ZR75.30, SKBr3 and BT474)
than in non-addicted lines (MDAMB361 and MDAMB453). Similarly, murine
CXCL10 and CX3CL1 levels were 2- and 10-times higher, respectively, in
murine MI6 mammary carcinoma cells than in wild-type (WT) HER2 cells
derived from mice transgenically expressing human delta16-HER2, which
develop HER2-addicted tumors, or human WT-HER2, which develop
non-addicted mammary tumors. Analysis of PBMC migration induced by tumor
cells showed a higher recruitment of immune cells by HER2-addicted than
non-addicted cells in vitro.Overall, our results support the notion that
the activated HER2 oncogene induces production of chemokines/cytokines
that recruit the immune infiltrate favorable to trastuzumab activity.
Moreover, it seems likely that tumor cells themselves exert a
PD-L1-dependent immunosuppressive activity that trastuzumab reverts to
anti-tumor immunity.Supported by AIRC and Fondazione Pezcoller.

