Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTORC2 enhances flux through the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway
by regulation of GFAT1 expression


Metabolic and biosynthetic pathways drive cell growth and proliferation
in response to nutrients and growth factors. Highly proliferating cells
utilize glucose and glutamine to fuel biosynthetic processes. These two
nutrients serve as substrates for the glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate
amidotransferase (GFAT1), the rate-limiting enzyme in the hexosamine
biosynthetic pathway (HBP), which ultimately produces UDP-GlcNAc that is
necessary for protein glycosylation. Despite a role for the HBP in
insulin resistance and lifespan extension, the mechanisms underlying
GFAT1 regulation in vivo has remained elusive. We found mTOR complex 2
(mTORC2) controls flux through the HBP via regulation of GFAT1 expression
levels in response to glucose. In the absence of mTORC2, GFAT1 expression
is reduced and highly sensitive to glucose starvation. Furthermore,
UDP-GlcNAc is highly diminished and glycosylation of specific
transmembrane proteins such as CD147 is defective upon mTORC2 disruption.
However, mTORC2 is also required for glycolysis and other biosynthetic
pathways whose metabolites feed into the HBP. Thus, although exogenous
UDP-GlcNAc can partially rescue glycosylation defects, it does not rescue
the metabolic deficiencies in the absence of mTORC2. Like GFAT1, key
enzymes of biosynthetic pathways have decreased expression in
mTORC2-disrupted cells. Thus, by regulating levels of metabolic enzymes,
mTORC2 coordinates flux through biosynthetic pathways in response to
glucose availability. Our findings have implications for therapeutic
targeting of mTORC2 in insulin resistance and cancer metabolism.

