Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two new loci and gene sets related to sex determination and cancer
progression are associated with susceptibility to testicular germ cell
tumor


Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have reported 19 distinct
susceptibility loci for testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT). The aim of the
present study was to identify additional loci and gene sets associated
with susceptibility to TGCT. A GWA study for TGCT was performed by
genotyping 610,240 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1,326 cases
and 6,687 controls from Sweden and Norway. We put forward 34 SNPs from 17
novel regions and 11 SNPs previously reported, for replication in 710
case-parent triads and 289 cases and 290 controls. Predefined biological
pathways and processes, in addition to a custom-built sex determination
gene set, were subject to enrichment analyses using Meta-Analysis Gene
Set Enrichment of Variant Associations (M) and Improved Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis for Genome-wide Association Study (I). In the
combined meta-analysis, we observed genome-wide significant association
for rs7501939 on chromosome 17q12 (OR = 1.29, 95% CI = 1.19-1.40, P = 1.1
10-9) and rs2195987 on chromosome 19p12 (OR = 1.31, 95% CI: 1.19-1.45, P
= 3.2 10-8). The marker rs7501939 on chromosome 17q12 is located in an
intron of the HNF1B gene, encoding a member of the homeodomain-containing
superfamily of transcription factors. The sex determination gene set
(FDRM Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have reported 19 distinct
susceptibility loci for testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT). The aim of the
present study was to identify additional loci and gene sets associated
with susceptibility to TGCT. A GWA study for TGCT was performed by
genotyping 610,240 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1,326 cases
and 6,687 controls from Sweden and Norway. We put forward 34 SNPs from 17
novel regions and 11 SNPs previously reported, for replication in 710
case-parent triads and 289 cases and 290 controls. Predefined biological
pathways and processes, in addition to a custom-built sex determination
gene set, were subject to enrichment analyses using Meta-Analysis Gene
Set Enrichment of Variant Associations (M) and Improved Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis for Genome-wide Association Study (I). In the
combined meta-analysis, we observed genome-wide significant association
for rs7501939 on chromosome 17q12 (OR = 1.29, 95% CI = 1.19-1.40, P = 1.1
10-9) and rs2195987 on chromosome 19p12 (OR = 1.31, 95% CI: 1.19-1.45, P
= 3.2 10-8). The marker rs7501939 on chromosome 17q12 is located in an
intron of the HNF1B gene, encoding a member of the homeodomain-containing
superfamily of transcription factors. The sex determination gene set
(FDRM < 0.001, FDRI Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have reported
19 distinct susceptibility loci for testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT).
The aim of the present study was to identify additional loci and gene
sets associated with susceptibility to TGCT. A GWA study for TGCT was
performed by genotyping 610,240 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
1,326 cases and 6,687 controls from Sweden and Norway. We put forward 34
SNPs from 17 novel regions and 11 SNPs previously reported, for
replication in 710 case-parent triads and 289 cases and 290 controls.
Predefined biological pathways and processes, in addition to a
custom-built sex determination gene set, were subject to enrichment
analyses using Meta-Analysis Gene Set Enrichment of Variant Associations
(M) and Improved Gene Set Enrichment Analysis for Genome-wide Association
Study (I). In the combined meta-analysis, we observed genome-wide
significant association for rs7501939 on chromosome 17q12 (OR = 1.29, 95%
CI = 1.19-1.40, P = 1.1 10-9) and rs2195987 on chromosome 19p12 (OR =
1.31, 95% CI: 1.19-1.45, P = 3.2 10-8). The marker rs7501939 on
chromosome 17q12 is located in an intron of the HNF1B gene, encoding a
member of the homeodomain-containing superfamily of transcription
factors. The sex determination gene set (FDRM < 0.001, FDRI < 0.001) and
pathways related to NF-B, glycerophospholipid and ether lipid metabolism,
as well as cancer and apoptosis, was associated with TGCT (FDR
Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have reported 19 distinct
susceptibility loci for testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT). The aim of the
present study was to identify additional loci and gene sets associated
with susceptibility to TGCT. A GWA study for TGCT was performed by
genotyping 610,240 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1,326 cases
and 6,687 controls from Sweden and Norway. We put forward 34 SNPs from 17
novel regions and 11 SNPs previously reported, for replication in 710
case-parent triads and 289 cases and 290 controls. Predefined biological
pathways and processes, in addition to a custom-built sex determination
gene set, were subject to enrichment analyses using Meta-Analysis Gene
Set Enrichment of Variant Associations (M) and Improved Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis for Genome-wide Association Study (I). In the
combined meta-analysis, we observed genome-wide significant association
for rs7501939 on chromosome 17q12 (OR = 1.29, 95% CI = 1.19-1.40, P = 1.1
10-9) and rs2195987 on chromosome 19p12 (OR = 1.31, 95% CI: 1.19-1.45, P
= 3.2 10-8). The marker rs7501939 on chromosome 17q12 is located in an
intron of the HNF1B gene, encoding a member of the homeodomain-containing
superfamily of transcription factors. The sex determination gene set
(FDRM < 0.001, FDRI < 0.001) and pathways related to NF-B,
glycerophospholipid and ether lipid metabolism, as well as cancer and
apoptosis, was associated with TGCT (FDR < 0.1). In addition to revealing
two new TGCT susceptibility loci, our results support the notion that
genes governing normal germ cell development in utero are implicated in
the development of TGCT.

