Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of MSC2156119J in non-small cell lung cancer models with
activating EGFR mutation


The therapeutic success of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in
EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is hampered in a subset of
patients by the development of drug resistance through the EGFR T790M
gate keeper mutation. Recent investigations suggest that aberrant
activation of the c-Met receptor through c-Met amplification and/or HGF
upregulation may be an additional mechanism for acquired resistance.
Combination of an EGFR TKI with a c-Met inhibitor could, therefore, delay
and/or prevent the emergence of c-Met-driven resistance.The aim of our
study was to evaluate the efficacy of MSC2156119J, a highly selective
small molecule c-Met inhibitor, as monotherapy or in combination with
EGFR TKIs (erlotinib, gefitinib and afatinib) in human xenograft models
transplanted with two different primary NSCLC explants, LU342 and LU0858.
While both tumors express the activated EGFR mutant form, LU342 expresses
low levels of c-Met, while LU0858 expresses high levels of c-Met and
carries an amplified c-Met locus.Single-agent MSC2156119J was inactive
against the low c-Met-expressing LU342 explant and tumors progressed on
treatment (median tumor volume [TV] change >73%). Erlotinib treatment
resulted in tumor regression, with median TV change of -93% and tumor
growth delay (TGD) of 56 days. The combination of MSC2156119J and
erlotinib was more active, delaying tumor regrowth by 73 days compared to
erlotinib monotherapy. Administration of afatinib at 5mg/kg was highly
active in this model, inducing complete tumor regression (median TV
change -100%), similar to the combination of afatinib and MSC2156119J.In
contrast, the LU0858 explant, which carries an amplified c-Met locus, was
sensitive to MSC2156119J at a dose of 100mg/kg 5 days on and 2 days off
(5 on/2 off), inducing tumor stasis with a median TV change of 19% and
TGD of 34 days. While gefitinib and afatinib alone at doses of 150mg/kg 5
on/2 off and 5mg/kg 5 on/2 off, respectively, were inactive (median TV
changes >73%), in combination with MSC2156119J tumor growth inhibition
was enhanced, resulting in tumor regression (median TV changes of -64%
and -85%, respectively). In comparison, tumors treated with
platinum-based doublet chemotherapy (cisplatin 5mg/kg QW/pemetrexed
200mg/kg QW) progressed, with TGD of 16 days. When MSC2156119J was
combined with cisplatin/pemetrexed, antitumor activity was not
significantly enhanced compared to single-agent MSC2156119J (median TV
change -32%, TGD 30 days).Together, these findings are compatible with
the hypothesis that inhibition of the c-Met pathway prevents and/or
delays the emergence of c-Met-driven resistance in EGFR-mutant NSCLC.
Furthermore, the enhancement of antitumor activity in the low
c-Met-expressing LU342 model when MSC2156119J was combined with erlotinib
suggests that the combination of an EGFR TKI + MSC2156119J may also be
active in tumors with low levels of c-Met expression.

