Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decrease of ARNT promotes cancer metastasis by activating the
fibronectin/integrin 1/FAK axis


The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is widely
involved in regulating the tumorigenesis process by inducing genes that
are involved in tumor growth and angiogenesis. Tumorigenesis usually
involves normoxic conditions. However, the role of ARNT in tumor
metastasis during normoxia remains unclear. Here, we demonstrated that
ARNT protein levels were decreased in late stage human colorectal cancer
using an immunohistochemical analysis. Stably silence of the ARNT protein
promoted cancer cell migration and invasion, which was mediated by the
activation of the fibronectin/integrin 1/FAK signaling axis. In addition,
ARNT knockdown-induced migration and invasion was inhibited when ARNT was
restored in cells. In a xenograft analysis of severe combined
immunodeficiency mice, ARNT-knockdown inhibited tumor growth. However,
when ARNT expression recovered, the tumor growth of
ARNT-knockdown-induced metastatic lung colonies was significantly
enhanced. Interestingly, chemotherapeutic drugs inhibited ARNT expression
and promoted invasion of residual tumor cells. These results suggested
that ARNT may play a positive role during tumor growth (either in early
stage tumor growth or in metastatic organs), but plays a negative role in
tumor migration and invasion. Therefore, the efficiency of ARNT-targeted
therapy in different cancer stages should be carefully evaluated.

