Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of new NTRK1 gene fusion as oncogene target in
colon cancer


In an effort to better characterize the activity of a multi-kinase
inhibitors, antiproliferative activity was evaluated against a panel of
human tumor cell lines. Among the different cell lines tested we have
been able to highlight that the KM12 human colorectal carcinoma present
hypersensitivity to inhibition. By intersecting the results of activity
of the compound and the bibliographic data, we could confirm that the
activity of the compound was mediated by the inhibition of
phosphorylation of the receptor NTRK1.The NTRK1 gene encodes
Tropomyosin-related kinase A (TRKA), the hight-affinity Nerve Growth
Factor Receptor. NTRK1 was originally isolated from a human colon
carcinoma as a transforming oncogene activated by a somatic rearrangement
that fused TPM3 (non-muscle tropomyosin) gene to kinase domain of a novel
tyrosine-kinase receptor. The KM12 human CRC cell line expresses the
chimeric TPM3-TRKA protein and is hypersensitive to TRKA kinase
inhibition.Using differential quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR and
optimised immunohistochemistry we could confirm the existence of low
frequency (0.5%) NTRK1 re-arranged / activated forms in colorectal
carcinoma. A same colorectal tumor sample could contain different fusion
transcripts, highlighting the molecular heterogeneity of this type of
tumor Furthermore we detect a novel NTRK1 fusion in colorectal carcinoma
clinical samples corresponding to oncogenic rearrangement TRK-T2
identified in papillary thyroid carcinoma.These results confirm the
potential interest of the target NTRK1 in the panel of targeted therapies
against colorectal cancer.

