Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a natural compound as mammalian target of
rapamycin kinase inhibitor


The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a serine/threonine protein
kinase, plays a critical role in the regulation of Akt signaling-mediated
cell proliferation and transformation. Although several synthetic
chemical compounds have developed to inhibit mTOR kinase activity, only
few publications have been reported on the identification of natural
compounds to target the mTOR kinase active pocket. In this study, we
found that AME, a natural compound, inhibited cell proliferation by
impairment of G1/S cell cycle transition when cells were co-treated with
tumor promoters, such as epidermal growth factor. AME directly targeted
the active pocket of mTOR kinase domain by competing with adenosine
triphosphate (ATP), but not with PI3K and PDK1. We further confirmed that
AME inhibited phosphorylation of Akt at Ser473, which is a target amino
acid of mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2), and Akt-mediated GSK3 phosphorylation at
Ser9, which resulted in activation of GSK3. The activated GSK3 inhibited
cell proliferation by c-Jun phosphorylation at Ser243, which facilitated
destabilization and degradation of c-Jun through an
ubiquitination-mediated proteasomal degradation pathway. Notably,
decreased c-Jun stability by AME treatment suppressed EGF-induced
neoplastic cell transformation in JB6 Cl41 mouse skin epidermal cells and
HaCaT human skin keratinocytes in soft agar assay. Taken together, these
results demonstrated that AME might be a natural chemopreventive agent
targeting mTOR kinase active pocket.Key words: Natural compound,
ATP-competitive mTOR kinase inhibitor, mTORC2/Akt/GSK3 signaling,
chemoprevention

