Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor suppressive role of PRMT6 in regulating the pathogenesis
of hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary malignancy of
the liver. The overall 5-year survival rate of HCC patients remains at a
dismal 15% due to late diagnosis, metastasis and frequent tumor relapse.
The presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) has been proposed to account
partly for the challenge of treating HCC. Our group has previously
identified CD133 as a functional CSC marker of HCC. By adopting a PCR
array encompassing diverse human chromatin modifiers, protein arginine
methyltransferase 6 (PRMT6) was found to be differentially down-regulated
in CD133+ human HCC cells. 55.8% (43/77) of clinical HCC tumor tissues
showed down-regulated PRMT6 expression and patients with reduced PRMT6
expression were at significant risk of disrupted tumor encapsulation and
manifested vascular invasion. An antagonistic relationship between PRMT6
and CD133 was observed in HCC cells, while modulation of PRMT6 led to an
inversely altered CD133 expression. PRMT6 knockdown in liver cancer cells
induced morphological alterations, where extensive cytoplasmic stretching
and filopodia-like projections were observed. Moreover, PRMT6 regulated
cancer and stem cell-like properties in vitro and in vivo including
proliferation, colony formation, invasion, migration, angiogenesis,
self-renewal, chemo-sensitivity and tumor initiation. In addition, stable
knockdown of CD133 in HCC cells did not alter PRMT6 expression levels,
which suggested that PRMT6 is potentially functioning upstream of CD133.
Ongoing studies are in progress to delineate the underlying mechanisms by
which PRMT6 suppress HCC.

