Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: L1CAM and integrin v3 mediate direct cell contact between cancer
stem cells and endothelial cells: Promotion of endothelial cell migration
and survival


Sprouting angiogenesis requires endothelial cell (EC) migration. In
glioblastoma (GBM), cancer stem cells (CSC) in the perivascular niche
secrete factors that promote EC migration. Here, we identify a direct
interaction between the CSCs and ECs that is mediated by
RGD-peptide-dependent binding of L1CAM on CSCs with integrin v3 on ECs.
Using in vitro assays, we found that this interaction increased
migration-associated signaling events in ECs, including activation of
integrinv3, ERK, JNK and Akt, and VCAM-1 and E-selectin mRNA expression.
Comparison of the effects of co-culturing CSCs with ECs versus the
effects of conditioned media from CSCs co-cultured with ECs indicated
that the effects of the direct interaction and soluble factors differed
quantitatively and qualitatively. The direct interactions stimulated the
migration of ECs and primed them to the migratory effects of soluble
factors produced by the CSCs. The direct interaction also enhanced
expression of pro-survival genes in CSCs and ECs. In GBM biopsies,
Sox2-positive tumor cells were localized in close proximity to ECs and
injection of 3-negative ECs or L1CAM-negative CSCs into brain slices in
organotypic culture resulted in reduced interactions between ECs and
CSCs.RGD-peptide treatment of mice with established intracerebral GBM
xenografts increased the mean distance of Sox2-positive tumor cells from
ECs, decreased integrin v3 activation and decreased vessel surface area.
These data show that direct interactions between CSCs and ECs have potent
effects on EC migration and angiogenesis in GBM and have implications for
the design of angiogenesis-targeted therapies.

