Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of formyl peptide receptor 1 (FPR1) in neuroblastoma
tumorigenesis


The formyl peptide receptor 1 (FPR1) is a G protein-coupled receptor with
pattern recognition properties and is mainly expressed by myeloid cells.
It is involved in a broad range of host defense mechanisms and a variety
of host-derived agonists of FPR1 have been identified, including formyl
peptides released from disrupted mitochondria of necrotic cells.In the
present study, we demonstrate the expression of FPR1 in 7 different
neuroblastoma cell lines and in primary tumors. Furthermore, FPR1 is
expressed at increased levels in high stage tumors. Addition of the FPR1
agonist N-formyl-L-methionyl-L-leucyl-L-phenylalanine (fMLP) to
neuroblastoma cells in vitro caused enhanced proliferative activity,
increase of intracellular calcium response and activation of STAT3 and
MAPK/ERK signal transduction pathways. All these signal transduction
events were abrogated by the use of Cyclosporin H, a specific FPR1
antagonist.To assess the significance of this receptor in vivo, we
developed a set of neuroblastoma cell clones with different expression
levels of FPR1. Xenograft models showed that cells with overexpression of
the receptor developed tumors significantly faster compared to control
group.Our findings so far suggest that FPR1 may play a significant role
in neuroblastoma tumorigenesis and that therapeutic intervention of the
FPR1 pathway may be an important clinical strategy in neuroblastoma
therapy.

