Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Gpr43 in intestinal inflammation and carcinogenesis


Consumption of dietary fiber is positively correlated with lower
incidence of inflammation and carcinogenesis in intestine. In colon
dietary fibers are fermented by gut microbiota into short chain fatty
acids (SCFA, acetate, propionate and butyrate). Several studies
demonstrate that SCFA play a key role in protection of intestine from
inflammation and carcinogenesis. However, detail molecular mechanisms
underlying the biological effects of SCFA on intestine health are not
fully understood. Gpr43 is cell surface receptor for SCFA and recent
evidences suggest that it regulates colonic inflammation in a context
dependent manner. Intestinal inflammation is one of the risk factor for
development of cancer in gut. Based on these findings, role of Gpr43 in
regulation of colon carcinogenesis was evaluated. Colitis associated
colon cancer in wild type (WT) and Gpr43-/- mice was induced by single
intraperitoneal injection of azoxymethane (AOM) and repeated cycles of
dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) in drinking water. Gpr43-/- mice showed
drastically reduced survival, severe weight loss and increased diarrhea
and rectal bleeding than WT mice. At the end of treatment, colons of
Gpr43-/- mice exhibited increased number of polyps than that of WT mice.
Reciprocal bone marrow chimera experiments revealed that Gpr43 expression
in non-hematopoietic cells play a major role in suppression of colonic
inflammation and carcinogenesis. The data presented here suggest a model
in which Gpr43 plays a critical role in facilitating positive effects of
dietary fiber and gut microbiota on intestinal health.

