Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral drug formulations containing microspheres


Oral anticancer drug formulations are considerably favorable not only for
patient adherence, but also for ease of administration. The main
objective of the present research was to develop extended-release capsule
formulations containing doxorubicin hydrochloride-encapsulated albumin
microspheres. Albumin-based polymeric microspheres were evaluated as a
potential platform technology for providing extended-release of oral
dosage formulations. Bovine serum albumin microspheres were prepared by
spray drying and characterized for their physicochemical properties.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to analyze the size, surface
morphology, and size distribution of the drug-loaded microspheres. Zeta
potential measurements were carried out to assess the surface properties
and stability of the microsphere formulations. Dissolution studies were
conducted to analyze the release profiles of the microspheres and
capsule-containing microsphere drug formulations. SEM analysis indicated
that microspheres were less than 2-m in size, which is considered to be
optimal for uptake by the enterocytes. The average Zeta potential
measurements were approximately -30 mV. Additionally, the data showed
that microspheres, which contained 1% BSA and 0.1% glutaraldehyde,
provided a drug release profile that is desirable for cancer therapy.
Both microsphere and capsule-encapsulating microsphere formulations were
shown to provide extended-release of the drug over 36 hours. Thus,
capsules containing biodegradable microspheres show potential for
effective delivery of oral drug formulations.

