Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic targeting of fibroblast growth factor receptor and AKT
pathways significantly inhibits prostate cancer progression


The fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and AKT pathways are important stimuli
to prostate cancer (PCa) development and progression. FGF and AKT
pathways are becoming increasingly attractive as targets for PCa
therapeutic intervention. Dual-targeting of FGF receptor (FGFR) and AKT
signaling might be highly efficacious in the treatment of PCa. In this
study, we evaluated the combined treatment effect of FGFR inhibitor
AZD4547 and AKT inhibitor AZD5363 on PCa progression in vitro.
Proliferation assay shows that AZD4547 weakly inhibits PCa cell
proliferation, while AZD5363 demonstrates strong proliferation inhibition
effect. The combined treatment of AZD4547 and AZD5363 further inhibits
cell proliferation compared to AZD4547 monotreatment. Both AZD4547 and
AZD5363 inhibit cell anchorage-independent growth and invasion, and
combined treatment synergistically decrease cell soft agar colony
formation ability and invasiveness. Molecular mechanisms of the dual
targeting of FGFR and AKT were explored by immunoprecipitation (IP) and
western blot (WB). IP on 22RV1 cells shows that FGFR4 phosporylation was
inhibited by AZD4547 but not AZD5363, while was strongly decreased in the
combined treatment. WB demonstrats that in VCaP and LNCaP cells PLC
phosphorylation was significantly inhibited by AZD4547, slightly
decreases by AZD5363, and strongly inhibited by combined treatment. FGFR2
phosphorylation was remarkably inhibited by AZD4547 in VCaP and 22RV1
cells, slightly decreased by AZD5363 in VCaP cells, but was strongly
increased by AZD5363 in 22RV1 cells. Combined treatment of both cell
lines shows remarkable inhibition of FRS2 phosphorylation. Erk1/2 and MEK
phosphorylation was dramatically decreases by AZD4547, while was not
inhibited, or to some extent, increased by AZD5363. Notably, the combined
treatment synergistically inhibited MAPK signaling in PCa cells. AKT
phosphorylation was dramatically enhanced by AZD5363 as an inactive
hyperphosphorylated form. It was inhibited by AZD4547, but was still
highly enhanced in combined treatment because that the stimulation effect
of AZD5363 was too strong to be attenuated. Both AZD4547 and AZD5363
suppress STAT3 phosphorylation in LNCaP and 22RV1 cells, and the combined
treatment shows synergistic inhibition of STAT3 activation. STAT1
phosphorylation was inhibited by AZD5363 and combined treatment but not
by AZD4547 alone. WB also demonstrate that AZD5363 strongly inhibit
phosphorylation of AKT substrate and downstream proteins PRAS40, GSK3 and
S6, which are not, or slightly decreased by AZD4547, but are remarkably
inhibited by the combined treatment. This study provides a preclinical
proof of concept that combination of a FGFR inhibitor with an AKT
inhibitor has profound potential to treat prostate cancer.

