Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impaired cell cycle arrest with concurrent epigenetic deregulation
identified through next generation sequencing in patients with advanced
carcinoma of unknown primary: Implications for personalized medicine


Background: Patients with advanced carcinoma of unknown primary (CUP)
have limited effective therapeutic options given the challenges of
phenotypic and genotypic diversity. To identify future novel therapeutic
strategies we conduct an ongoing exploratory analysis of next-generation
sequencing (NGS) of relapsed, refractory CUP.Methods: We identified CUP
patients referred to our phase I clinic with adequate FFPE sections from
archival tissue for a targeted CLIA-certified NGS assay (Foundation One,
MA). Over 2000 exons of 186 cancer-related genes plus over 30 introns
from 14 genes often rearranged in cancer were fully sequenced for point
mutations, insertions/deletions, copy number alterations (CNAs) and
select gene fusions.Results: Of 19 patients seen (10 male, 9 female;
median age at diagnosis 49 years), 17 demonstrated genomic alterations
(median 3 aberrations/tumor, range 0 - 10); two patients had no
reportable genomic alterations. Of the 71 detected aberrations, 17 (24%)
have been implicated in impaired cell cycle regulation and arrest;
specifically in genes which encode the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK12
Q570*, CDKN2A/B loss, CDKN2A p16INK4a loss and p14ARF exon 2-3 loss) or
their associated proteins including amplification of CCND1 and CCNE1 (n =
3). Of these 8 patients with impaired cell cycle regulation, 5 (63%)
demonstrated concurrent mutations associated with epigenetic deregulation
and impaired DNA methylation, most commonly ARID1A Y1211fs*5 and
S1929fs*25, which encodes the AT-rich interactive domain-containing
protein 1A, Arid1a, a member of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling
complex); other mutations observed are CREBBP S893L (encoding a
ubiquitously expressed transcriptional coregulatory protein controlling
chromatin remodeling via its histone acetyltransferase activity); MLL2
R4904* (encoding an H3K4-specific histone methyltransferase) and KDM6A
S466* (encoding the histone H3 lysine 27 demethylase UTX). Overall 5 of
19 (26%) patients with advanced relapsed CUP demonstrated a profile of
aberrations that concurrently impact cell cycle arrest and epigenetic
regulation.Conclusion: Through NGS-based molecular profiling, we can a
subset of patients with advanced carcinoma of unknown primary with
coexisting mutations leading to impaired cell cycle arrest and epigenetic
deregulation, highlighting a therapeutic combination with a cell cycle
inhibitor (such as Cdk4/6 inhibitors currently in clinical trial) and
histone deacetylase inhibitors.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

