Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor receptors 2 is a novel therapeutic target
in esophagogastric junction adenocarcinoma


Background: The prognosis of esophagogastric junction (EGJ)
adenocarcinoma remains poor, though it is increasing worldwide. The
fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) play critical roles in various
human cancers, especially FGFR2 amplification has been implicated as a
key genetic alteration in EGJ adenocarcinoma. In this study, we confirmed
that FGFR2 can be a therapeutic target for EGJ adenocarcinoma.Methods:
Utilizing 200 cases with EGJ adenocarcinoma (Siewert types I-III), FGFR2
copy number was assayed by Real-time PCR (using RNaseP as a referent),
and FGFR2 expression was detected by immunohistochemistry. We examined
whether FGFR2 amplification correlates with FGFR2 expression. The
associations between FGFR2 expression and clinicopathological factors,
and prognostic impact of FGFR2 expression were examined. We investigated
the role of FGFR2 in cell proliferation, invasion, apoptosis and cell
cycle, using OACM 5.1C (FGFR2 overexpressing cell line), by siRNA
technique targeting FGFR2.Results: FGFR2 amplification was detected in 33
(22%) cases, and FGFR2 expression was observed in 112 (58%) cases. FGFR2
amplification significantly correlated with FGFR2 expression (p = 0.045).
FGFR2 expression was significantly associated with tumor depth of
invasion, nodal involvement, distant metastasis, lymphatic invasion, and
vascular invasion (all, p Background: The prognosis of esophagogastric
junction (EGJ) adenocarcinoma remains poor, though it is increasing
worldwide. The fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) play critical
roles in various human cancers, especially FGFR2 amplification has been
implicated as a key genetic alteration in EGJ adenocarcinoma. In this
study, we confirmed that FGFR2 can be a therapeutic target for EGJ
adenocarcinoma.Methods: Utilizing 200 cases with EGJ adenocarcinoma
(Siewert types I-III), FGFR2 copy number was assayed by Real-time PCR
(using RNaseP as a referent), and FGFR2 expression was detected by
immunohistochemistry. We examined whether FGFR2 amplification correlates
with FGFR2 expression. The associations between FGFR2 expression and
clinicopathological factors, and prognostic impact of FGFR2 expression
were examined. We investigated the role of FGFR2 in cell proliferation,
invasion, apoptosis and cell cycle, using OACM 5.1C (FGFR2 overexpressing
cell line), by siRNA technique targeting FGFR2.Results: FGFR2
amplification was detected in 33 (22%) cases, and FGFR2 expression was
observed in 112 (58%) cases. FGFR2 amplification significantly correlated
with FGFR2 expression (p = 0.045). FGFR2 expression was significantly
associated with tumor depth of invasion, nodal involvement, distant
metastasis, lymphatic invasion, and vascular invasion (all, p < 0.001).
In survival analysis, tumors harboring FGFR2 expression experienced
significantly unfavorable outcome (p = 0.039). We observed that si-FGFR2
significantly suppressed phosphorylation of Akt and Erk, resulting in
suppressing cell proliferation and invasion; and inducing apoptosis and
cell-cycle arrest (pBackground: The prognosis of esophagogastric junction
(EGJ) adenocarcinoma remains poor, though it is increasing worldwide. The
fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) play critical roles in various
human cancers, especially FGFR2 amplification has been implicated as a
key genetic alteration in EGJ adenocarcinoma. In this study, we confirmed
that FGFR2 can be a therapeutic target for EGJ adenocarcinoma.Methods:
Utilizing 200 cases with EGJ adenocarcinoma (Siewert types I-III), FGFR2
copy number was assayed by Real-time PCR (using RNaseP as a referent),
and FGFR2 expression was detected by immunohistochemistry. We examined
whether FGFR2 amplification correlates with FGFR2 expression. The
associations between FGFR2 expression and clinicopathological factors,
and prognostic impact of FGFR2 expression were examined. We investigated
the role of FGFR2 in cell proliferation, invasion, apoptosis and cell
cycle, using OACM 5.1C (FGFR2 overexpressing cell line), by siRNA
technique targeting FGFR2.Results: FGFR2 amplification was detected in 33
(22%) cases, and FGFR2 expression was observed in 112 (58%) cases. FGFR2
amplification significantly correlated with FGFR2 expression (p = 0.045).
FGFR2 expression was significantly associated with tumor depth of
invasion, nodal involvement, distant metastasis, lymphatic invasion, and
vascular invasion (all, p < 0.001). In survival analysis, tumors
harboring FGFR2 expression experienced significantly unfavorable outcome
(p = 0.039). We observed that si-FGFR2 significantly suppressed
phosphorylation of Akt and Erk, resulting in suppressing cell
proliferation and invasion; and inducing apoptosis and cell-cycle arrest
(p<0.001). We also confirmed that FGF 7 promoted the proliferation and
AZD4547 inhibited the proliferation through RAS-ERK and PI3K-AKT
pathways.Conclusion: FGFR2 can be a therapeutic target for EGJ
adenocarcinoma.

