Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive effects of a non-camellia tea against azoxymethane
-induced precancerous colorectal lesions in male rats


Tea (the leaves from Camellia plants) is one of the most popular
beverages in the world; substantial evidence supports its success in the
prevention of carcinogenesis and other chronic diseases in animal models.
Plants other than Camellia have been widely used as tea as well in
various cultures. We have systematically collected and identified over 30
species of frequently used Non-Camellia teas, which have been consumed at
least 300 years in China or other nations. Recently, non-Camellia teas
have attracted much attentions due to high potentials of preventing and
treating metabolic and inflammatory diseases, as well as cancers.
Epidemiologic studies report that tea consumption significantly reduces
risk of colorectal cancer (CRC). We here reported in vivo preventive
effects of the Ku-jin-cha (KJC) tea for CRC. KJC tea is a kind of
Non-Camellia tea prepared from leaves of the plant Acer ginnala and
popularly used in some Chinese regions for thousands of years. KJC
contains high levels of anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative compounds
such as ginnalins. However, the potential chemopreventive effect of KJC
remains unknown. Here, we investigated modulatory effects of KJC on colon
carcinogenesis using the rat azoxymethane (AOM) induced precancerous
colorectal lesion model.Wistar rats (male, 45 weeks old) were randomly
divided into 4 groups (Control, KJC, AOM and AOM+KJC, 10 rats/group) and
were fed either normal water or experimental water containing KJC for 12
weeks. After one week of water or KJC drinking, all rats except the
Control Group were injected with 15 mg/kg AOM (s.c., once weekly for 3
weeks). At 1617 weeks of age, urine and sera were collected for
metabolomic analysis using UPLC-QTOF/MS (ultra-HPLC coupled with
time-of-flight mass spectrometry). Rats were sacrificed at the end of KJC
administration, and colorectums collected for evaluation of aberrant
crypt (AC), aberrant crypt foci (ACF) and Crypts/focus. Spleens, thymuses
and bloods were also taken for immunological analysis. Our results show
that the numbers of AC, ACF and Crypts/focus in rats of the KJC+AOM Group
were significantly decreased, versus rats of the AOM Group (p Tea (the
leaves from Camellia plants) is one of the most popular beverages in the
world; substantial evidence supports its success in the prevention of
carcinogenesis and other chronic diseases in animal models. Plants other
than Camellia have been widely used as tea as well in various cultures.
We have systematically collected and identified over 30 species of
frequently used Non-Camellia teas, which have been consumed at least 300
years in China or other nations. Recently, non-Camellia teas have
attracted much attentions due to high potentials of preventing and
treating metabolic and inflammatory diseases, as well as cancers.
Epidemiologic studies report that tea consumption significantly reduces
risk of colorectal cancer (CRC). We here reported in vivo preventive
effects of the Ku-jin-cha (KJC) tea for CRC. KJC tea is a kind of
Non-Camellia tea prepared from leaves of the plant Acer ginnala and
popularly used in some Chinese regions for thousands of years. KJC
contains high levels of anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative compounds
such as ginnalins. However, the potential chemopreventive effect of KJC
remains unknown. Here, we investigated modulatory effects of KJC on colon
carcinogenesis using the rat azoxymethane (AOM) induced precancerous
colorectal lesion model.Wistar rats (male, 45 weeks old) were randomly
divided into 4 groups (Control, KJC, AOM and AOM+KJC, 10 rats/group) and
were fed either normal water or experimental water containing KJC for 12
weeks. After one week of water or KJC drinking, all rats except the
Control Group were injected with 15 mg/kg AOM (s.c., once weekly for 3
weeks). At 1617 weeks of age, urine and sera were collected for
metabolomic analysis using UPLC-QTOF/MS (ultra-HPLC coupled with
time-of-flight mass spectrometry). Rats were sacrificed at the end of KJC
administration, and colorectums collected for evaluation of aberrant
crypt (AC), aberrant crypt foci (ACF) and Crypts/focus. Spleens, thymuses
and bloods were also taken for immunological analysis. Our results show
that the numbers of AC, ACF and Crypts/focus in rats of the KJC+AOM Group
were significantly decreased, versus rats of the AOM Group (p < 0.01). No
ACF was found in rats without AOM injection. In addition, significant
metabolic alterations were observed in the groups with KJC. Although KJC
administration did not cause marked weight changes of spleens and
thymuses, the effect of KJC on levels of inflammatory cytokines and
mediators were also examined. Our results indicated that KJC
significantly inhibited AOM-induced colonic ACF formation, suggesting
that KJC might have a chemopreventive effect against colon carcinogenesis
at least in the initiation stage of CRC. Furthermore, KJC may exert the
chemopreventive effects on ACF formation by changing metabolic pathways
and modulating immunity and inflammatory responses. This warrants further
studies on the cellular and molecular mechanisms of KJC tea.

