Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Formation of uniform and reproducible 3D cancer spheroids in a
high throughput plate format


Cells grown on flat two dimensional (2D) tissue culture substrates can
differ considerably from the three dimensional (3D) physiological
environment. There is growing evidence that tumor cell aggregates or
cancer spheroids are more representative of tumors in vivo and they
exhibit several physiological traits including similar morphology, the
formation of cell-cell contacts, decreased proliferation, increased
survival rates and a hypoxic core. However, variability in cancer
spheroid culture has been a persistent problem for researchers. This
variability is linked to medium composition and volume, cell density,
duration in culture, and most importantly, the cellular interactions with
the culture dish itself. Here, we demonstrate that a hydrophilic polymer
coated surface, Thermo Scientific Nunclon Sphera, inhibits cell
attachment to the culture dish by blocking binding of the extracellular
matrix (ECM). The U bottom wells in the Nunclon Sphera plate provide the
ideal size and shape for single spheroid formation in each well, offering
consistency and reproducibility to the 3D tumor model system in vitro.
The growth of cancer spheroids in the Nunclon Sphera 96U-well plate is
superior to that of the non-treated plate with less satellite colonies
and faster cell aggregation at low seeding density. Cancer cell viability
and spheroid health are also evaluated by fluorescence- and colorimetric-
based assays in the Nunclon Sphera plates. The Nunclon Sphera 96U-well
plate provides an excellent solution for reproducibly generating uniform
3D cancer spheroids that are suitable for many cell-based drug discovery
procedures, co-culture studies, and high-throughput drug screening.

