Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of the recombinant human arginase
PEG-BCT-100 leading to arginine deprivation in sarcomas


Background: Arginine deprivation is a novel approach to limit
arginine-dependent tumour growth. The presence of enzymes involved in the
de novo synthesis of arginine from citrulline, argininosuccinate
synthetase (ASS), argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) and ornithine
transcarbamylase (OTC), can influence the sensitivity of tumour to
arginine depletion. We studied the preclinical efficacy of PEG-BCT-100
(also known as rhArg1peg5000), a PEGylated recombinant human arginase 1
on sarcoma cell lines. In this study, ASS, ASL and OTC expression were
established in sarcoma cell lines and the sensitivity of each cell line
to PEG-BCT-100 treatment was determined in order to establish their
suitability as predictive markers to determine responsiveness to
PEG-BCT-100 treatment.Methods: Cells from 5 representative soft-tissue
sarcoma (STS) cell lines (RD, GCT, HT-1080, SW872, SW982) and 1
osteosarcoma cell line (SJSA-1), either incubated in full culture medium
(control), arginine free medium or PEG-BCT-100 (1U/ml) treated medium.
They were monitored by live cell imaging for 72 hours. Their
corresponding IC50 were determined by cell viability assay. The
expression of ASS, ASL and OTC were determined by Western
blotting.Results: All sarcoma cell lines were sensitive to PEG-BCT-100
and demonstrated significant cell proliferation inhibition. Their IC50,
as determined by cell viability assay were 0.023 U/ml, 0.028 U/ml, 0.023
U/ml, 0.026 U/ml, 0.20 U/ml, 0.053 U/ml, and 0.03 U/ml for GCT, HT-1080,
RD, SJSA-1, SW872 and SW982 respectively. Western blot analysis confirmed
strong basal protein expression of ASL and low OTC expression in all
sarcoma cell lines, suggesting sensitivity to PEG-BCT-100 is not
determined by ASL but rather, OTC. On the contrary, low ASS basal protein
expression was revealed in all sarcoma cell lines except for RD. A
strongly expressed ASS was observed in RD despite of its sensitivity to
PEG-BCT-100, implying that ASS might be less important in the response
towards PEG-BCT-100.Conclusion: Arginine deprivation by PEG-BCT-100 is
effective in suppressing STS cell growth in vitro, suggesting arginine
auxotrophism in STSs. Moreover, arginase treatment can be an effective
strategy against STS. Low expression of OTC, instead of ASS and ASL, may
be a more important predictive biomarker for response to treatment.
Further in-vivo and clinical studies are warranted.

