Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical activity of dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor SPR965 in
multiple myeloma


Introduction: Relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma (MM) remains a
significant clinical challenge and drugs with new mechanisms of action to
overcome resistance are needed. Constitutive activation of the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in MM promotes tumorigenesis through propagation of
the cell cycle, protein synthesis, and inhibition of apoptosis. Anti-MM
effects of rapalogs are limited due to feedback activation of the
PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. Agents capable of targeting PI3K and mTORC1
or both mTORC1/C2 are able to partially overcome such resistance
mechanisms. However, the mTORC2 mediated increase in pAkt (Ser473) after
PI3K/mTORC1 inhibition and the activation of PI3K after mTORC1/C2
inhibition could still contribute to resistance to such agents. We sought
to investigate the effects of SPR965 (synthesized and provided by Sphaera
Pharma, Singapore under an MTA), an orally bioavailable novel small
molecule with inhibition of class 1 PI3 kinase and mTORC1/C2 kinases on
MM cell lines and patient cells.Results: SPR965 induced cytotoxicity and
inhibited proliferation in all MM cell lines examined with IC50 values
between 25-500nM. To understand if SPR965 induced apoptotic cell death,
annexin/PI staining followed by flow cytometric assays were performed,
which showed a clear increase in cells undergoing apoptosis. Western
blots showed increase in caspase-3, -9, and PARP cleavage confirming
apoptotic induction by SPR965. Importantly, SPR965 caused potent increase
in apoptosis in cytogenetically distinct MM patient cells. Next, we
examined the mechanism of action of SPR965. SPR965 caused potent mTORC1
inhibition evidenced by decreased p4E-BP1, p-p70S6K, and pS6 at doses as
low as 25nM. SPR965 was able to inhibit PI3K activity as shown by
decreased pPDK1 and pBTK at slightly higher concentrations of 75nM.
Phosphorylation of Akt S473, a TORC2 substrate, increased at initial low
concentrations of SPR965, but was attenuated at concentrations of 100 nM
and above, demonstrating dose-dependent inhibition of mTORC2. Such
effects were also observed when we performed western blots on MM patient
derived primary plasma cells. Increased levels of p27 (KIP1) were
observed suggestive of G1 growth arrest, which was confirmed on cell
cycle analysis. Since SPR965 caused an increase in pAkt (both T308 and
S473) at doses up to 75nM, we examined if SPR965 was able to synergize
with an Akt inhibitor MK2206 at doses lower than 75nM. Our results showed
potent synergy suggesting that the pAkt up regulation contributes to
partial resistance, which is inhibited by SPR965 at doses of 100nM and
higher, doses that are still clinically achievable.Conclusion: Our
findings demonstrate SPR965 induces apoptosis of MM cells through the
inhibition of PI3K and mTORC1/C2 activity. Further studies are underway
to better characterize the mechanism of action of SPR965, all of which
will be informative for the drug to be used as a single agent or in
combination with other agents in relapsed MM.

