Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Midkine as a potential target for combating drug resistance and
invasion in melanoma


Melanoma is an aggressive disease. Although about 13% of melanoma cases
are diagnosed at metastatic stage, the 5-year survival rate for these
patients is 16%. We have previously shown that metastatic melanoma cells
express high levels of Wnt5a. Wnt5a is a member of the Wnt family of
proteins, which play an important role during development and
tumorigenesis. In melanoma, Wnt5a signaling is mediated by an autocrine
loop that also modulates the activity of midkine. Midkine is a 16kDa
protein that is elevated in many different cancers. Overexpression of
midkine promotes the growth, migration, survival and angiogenic
capability of the tumors. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate
the activity of midkine are unknown, especially in metastatic melanoma.
We asked whether Wnt5a can positively regulate the functions of midkine
to promote the progression of metastatic melanoma. To address this, we
analyzed melanoma cells for midkine expression and observed that Wnt5a
high melanoma cells also express high levels of midkine. Further, an
increase in Wnt5a signaling by treatment with recombinant Wnt5a led to an
increased midkine signaling. By performing 3D spheroid assays, we
observed that higher expression of midkine is correlated with an
increased metastatic ability of the cells. The expression of midkine also
correlated with an increased resistance to BRAF inhibitors in BRAF V600E
mutated melanoma. This indicates that midkine may signal through MAPK
pathway to affect invasion and drug resistance in metastatic melanoma.
Developing adjuvant therapies targeting midkine can prolong the overall
survival of patients with metastatic melanoma.

