Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular matrix stiffness regulates metabolic state in
metastatic, but not quiescent, breast carcinoma cells


Increased breast density is associated with a 4-6 fold increased risk of
developing breast cancer, and is associated with an increase in
deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, most abundantly
collagen I. Collagen, like other ECM proteins, plays a structural role
fundamental to tissue organization. High levels of collagen deposition
correspond with a stiffer ECM, which is emerging as an important
regulator of cell proliferation and tumor progression. Our previously
reported microarray implicated changes in mammary epithelial cell
metabolism in response to increased matrix stiffness, consistent with the
expanding role of the ECM in tumor cell signaling. Here we report that
increased matrix stiffness regulates the expression of pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase 1, a key regulator between lactic acid production
and pyruvate entry into the mitochondria, in highly metastatic 4T1 breast
carcinoma cells. Interestingly, we do not observe this same metabolic
regulation in quiescent (dormant) 4T07 tumor cells of the same lineage.
These alterations in protein expression correlated to changes in cellular
NADH metabolism observed by several independent approaches, including
metabolic flux analysis and quantitative imaging fluorescence lifetime
microscopy. Thus, we find that alterations in collagen stiffness cause
metabolic shifts between oxidative phosphorylation and aerobic glycolysis
in highly metastatic cells, but not in quiescent cells. These findings
identify stiffness of the ECM as an important regulator of metabolic
state, and further identify quiescence as a dominant trait that is not
overcome by ECM stiffness.

