Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Check point kinase 1 (Chk1) targeting as a novel therapeutic
strategy in small cell lung cancer (SCLC)


Background: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is the most aggressive form of
lung cancer, accounting for 14% of lung cancers. It is associated with
poor outcomes and few effective treatments. Identification of novel
therapeutic targets is imperative for improving treatment outcomes. In
our previous work we identified several DNA repair proteins including
check point kinase 1 (Chk1) and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1)
that are overexpressed in SCLC and are high priority candidate targets.
TP53-mutant cells (a hallmark of SCLC) rely on Chk1 to arrest the S and
G2 phases of the cell cycle. Hence, inhibition of Chk1 in p53 mutant
cells abrogates the S and G2 checkpoints driving such cells to mitotic
catastrophe and apoptosis. In this study we tested the in vitro efficacy
of Chk1 inhibitors as single agents and in combination with a PARP1
inhibitor and cisplatin.Experimental design: SCLC cell lines [human cell
lines plus those from a patient derived xenograft (PDX) and genetically
engineered mouse models (GEMMs)] were treated with Chk1 inhibitors
(SCH900776, LY2603618, LY2606368) alone and in combination with olaparib
(PARP inhibitor) or cisplatin. Cell proliferation was measured by Cell
Titer Glo assay. Drug sensitivity (IC50) was correlated with baseline
expression levels of >190 total or phosphorylated proteins measured by
reverse phase protein array (RPPA) to identify potential predictive
markers.Result: Single-agent Chk1 suppression decreased proliferation of
SCLC cells in a dose-dependent manner. SCLC lines exhibited varied levels
of sensitivity to the Chk1 inhibitors, with greatest single agent
activity observed with LY2606368 (IC50 2-30nM). LY2606368 also showed
appreciable single agent activity in PDX and GEMM-derived cell lines
(IC50 2-7nM). Single agent activity was also observed with the other Chk1
inhibitors (SCH900776 IC50 0.3-10uM; LY2603618 IC50 0.2-10uM).
Combination of LY2606368 with olaparib and cisplatin revealed an additive
effect. Proteomic analysis revealed an association between Chk1 inhibitor
sensitivity and elevated basal expression of pro-apoptotic proteins
(cleaved PARP, Bax, and Caspase 3; p Background: Small cell lung cancer
(SCLC) is the most aggressive form of lung cancer, accounting for 14% of
lung cancers. It is associated with poor outcomes and few effective
treatments. Identification of novel therapeutic targets is imperative for
improving treatment outcomes. In our previous work we identified several
DNA repair proteins including check point kinase 1 (Chk1) and poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) that are overexpressed in SCLC and are
high priority candidate targets. TP53-mutant cells (a hallmark of SCLC)
rely on Chk1 to arrest the S and G2 phases of the cell cycle. Hence,
inhibition of Chk1 in p53 mutant cells abrogates the S and G2 checkpoints
driving such cells to mitotic catastrophe and apoptosis. In this study we
tested the in vitro efficacy of Chk1 inhibitors as single agents and in
combination with a PARP1 inhibitor and cisplatin.Experimental design:
SCLC cell lines [human cell lines plus those from a patient derived
xenograft (PDX) and genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs)] were
treated with Chk1 inhibitors (SCH900776, LY2603618, LY2606368) alone and
in combination with olaparib (PARP inhibitor) or cisplatin. Cell
proliferation was measured by Cell Titer Glo assay. Drug sensitivity
(IC50) was correlated with baseline expression levels of >190 total or
phosphorylated proteins measured by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) to
identify potential predictive markers.Result: Single-agent Chk1
suppression decreased proliferation of SCLC cells in a dose-dependent
manner. SCLC lines exhibited varied levels of sensitivity to the Chk1
inhibitors, with greatest single agent activity observed with LY2606368
(IC50 2-30nM). LY2606368 also showed appreciable single agent activity in
PDX and GEMM-derived cell lines (IC50 2-7nM). Single agent activity was
also observed with the other Chk1 inhibitors (SCH900776 IC50 0.3-10uM;
LY2603618 IC50 0.2-10uM). Combination of LY2606368 with olaparib and
cisplatin revealed an additive effect. Proteomic analysis revealed an
association between Chk1 inhibitor sensitivity and elevated basal
expression of pro-apoptotic proteins (cleaved PARP, Bax, and Caspase 3; p
<0.05). In contrast, Chk1 resistance was associated with higher levels of
PI3K pathway proteins (pAkt, pGSK, p Background: Small cell lung cancer
(SCLC) is the most aggressive form of lung cancer, accounting for 14% of
lung cancers. It is associated with poor outcomes and few effective
treatments. Identification of novel therapeutic targets is imperative for
improving treatment outcomes. In our previous work we identified several
DNA repair proteins including check point kinase 1 (Chk1) and poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) that are overexpressed in SCLC and are
high priority candidate targets. TP53-mutant cells (a hallmark of SCLC)
rely on Chk1 to arrest the S and G2 phases of the cell cycle. Hence,
inhibition of Chk1 in p53 mutant cells abrogates the S and G2 checkpoints
driving such cells to mitotic catastrophe and apoptosis. In this study we
tested the in vitro efficacy of Chk1 inhibitors as single agents and in
combination with a PARP1 inhibitor and cisplatin.Experimental design:
SCLC cell lines [human cell lines plus those from a patient derived
xenograft (PDX) and genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs)] were
treated with Chk1 inhibitors (SCH900776, LY2603618, LY2606368) alone and
in combination with olaparib (PARP inhibitor) or cisplatin. Cell
proliferation was measured by Cell Titer Glo assay. Drug sensitivity
(IC50) was correlated with baseline expression levels of >190 total or
phosphorylated proteins measured by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) to
identify potential predictive markers.Result: Single-agent Chk1
suppression decreased proliferation of SCLC cells in a dose-dependent
manner. SCLC lines exhibited varied levels of sensitivity to the Chk1
inhibitors, with greatest single agent activity observed with LY2606368
(IC50 2-30nM). LY2606368 also showed appreciable single agent activity in
PDX and GEMM-derived cell lines (IC50 2-7nM). Single agent activity was
also observed with the other Chk1 inhibitors (SCH900776 IC50 0.3-10uM;
LY2603618 IC50 0.2-10uM). Combination of LY2606368 with olaparib and
cisplatin revealed an additive effect. Proteomic analysis revealed an
association between Chk1 inhibitor sensitivity and elevated basal
expression of pro-apoptotic proteins (cleaved PARP, Bax, and Caspase 3; p
<0.05). In contrast, Chk1 resistance was associated with higher levels of
PI3K pathway proteins (pAkt, pGSK, p <0.05).Conclusion: Identification
and characterization of novel therapeutic targets is essential to improve
efficacy of SCLC therapy. In this preliminary study we tested Chk1
inhibitors as potential therapies in SCLC and provide evidence that
targeting Chk1 could be a promising therapeutic strategy for SCLC.
Further preclinical and clinical investigation is needed to confirm the
molecular mechanism and in vivo outcome of Chk1
targeting.Acknowledgement: 1. 2013 NCI Cancer Clinical Investigator Team
Leadership Award, P30 CA016672 (Byers) 2. UT MD Anderson Small Cell Lung
Cancer Working Group and Abell Hangar Foundation Distinguished Professor
Endowment (Glisson).

