Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiogenic profile in postmenopausal women is not associated with
breast cancer risk


Background: Angiogenesis is linked to breast cancer expansion and
metastasis, but evidence for its role in the etiology of breast cancer,
or as an early tumor marker is less clear. Women with pregnancy-induced
hypertension and/or preeclampsia are at reduced risk of subsequent breast
cancer, and the altered profile of angiogenic factors associated with
these pregnancy complications may provide a clue as to the mechanism of
this protection. Preeclampsia involves abnormal development of the
maternal-placental vasculature and endothelial cell dysfunction resulting
in high levels of the anti-angiogenic factor soluble fms-like tyrosine
kinase-1 (sFlt-1) and low levels of the angiogenic promoters, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and placental growth factor (PlGF).
Subtle defects in placental function and angiogenic imbalances
characteristic of preeclampsia can be present but undetected in
uncomplicated pregnancies, although it is not known whether
pregnancy-related imbalances between pro- and anti-antigenic factors
persist post-partum. Material and Methods: To study the role of
prediagnostic levels of circulating angiogenic factors in the development
of breast cancer, we measured levels of VEGF, sFlt-1 and PlGF in baseline
blood specimens obtained from 352 cases and an equal number of matched
controls not using hormone supplements who were identified in a breast
cancer study nested in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO)
Screening Trial between 1996 and 2005. Angiogenic factors were measured
at the Clinical & Epidemiologic Research Laboratory, Boston Children's
Hospital using highly sensitive assays (sFlt-1and PlGF, Roche, Germany
and VEGF, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Case-control differences in
baseline characteristics and natural logarithm transformed levels of
angiogenic factors were assessed by t tests or Wilcoxon rank sum tests.
Quartile-specific odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
estimated using logistic regression models. Results: No differences were
observed between cases and controls in mean levels of VEGF, sFlt-1 or
PlGF (p>0.05). Similarly, OR analyses showed no significant associations
with breast cancer for VEGF (HRQ4 v Q1 = 1.15, 95% CI = 0.75-1.76, ptrend
= 0.72), sFlt-1(HRQ4 v Q1 = 0.78, 95% CI = 0.52-1.18, ptrend = 0.14),
PlGF (HRQ4 v Q1 = 0.83, 95% CI = 0.53-1.29, ptrend = 0.68) or the ratio
of (VEGF + PlGF) to sFlt-1 (HRQ4 v Q1 = 1.38, 95% CI = 0.90-2.11, ptrend
= 0.34). Restricting analysis to cases diagnosed at least 2 years after
baseline serum donation, a modest non-significant trend of increasing
risk was suggested for VEGF (HRQ4 v Q1 = 1.23, 95% CI = 0.77-1.95, ptrend
= 0.45). Conclusion: Overall, prediagnostic circulating levels of
angiogenic factors are not significantly associated with postmenopausal
breast cancer risk in the PLCO cohort.

