Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sulforadex targets breast cancer stem-like cells in
patient-derived cells and xenograft tumors


Sulforadex (SFX) is a novel therapeutic comprising synthetic sulforaphane
(SFN) stabilised within -cyclodextrin. SFN has been studied as an
anti-cancer compound for many years however its development has hitherto
been hampered due to its inherent instability. Breast cancer stem-like
cells (CSCs) have been identified in all molecular subtypes and are
believed to be the drivers of breast cancer metastasis. We investigated
SFX effects on breast CSC activity using mammosphere formation and
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity in patient samples and
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours.Mammosphere formation efficiency
(MFE) assessed in cells from primary (n = 12) and metastatic (n = 15)
samples treated with SFX (5 M) or vehicle control (water) showed a
significant reduction in breast CSC activity following SFX treatment. A
reduction greater than 50% in the MFE was observed in both primary
(0.52%0.06 vs 0.190.02, pSulforadex (SFX) is a novel therapeutic
comprising synthetic sulforaphane (SFN) stabilised within -cyclodextrin.
SFN has been studied as an anti-cancer compound for many years however
its development has hitherto been hampered due to its inherent
instability. Breast cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been identified in
all molecular subtypes and are believed to be the drivers of breast
cancer metastasis. We investigated SFX effects on breast CSC activity
using mammosphere formation and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity in
patient samples and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours.Mammosphere
formation efficiency (MFE) assessed in cells from primary (n = 12) and
metastatic (n = 15) samples treated with SFX (5 M) or vehicle control
(water) showed a significant reduction in breast CSC activity following
SFX treatment. A reduction greater than 50% in the MFE was observed in
both primary (0.52%0.06 vs 0.190.02, p<0.001) and metastatic (0.93%0.07
vs 0.430.04, pSulforadex (SFX) is a novel therapeutic comprising
synthetic sulforaphane (SFN) stabilised within -cyclodextrin. SFN has
been studied as an anti-cancer compound for many years however its
development has hitherto been hampered due to its inherent instability.
Breast cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been identified in all
molecular subtypes and are believed to be the drivers of breast cancer
metastasis. We investigated SFX effects on breast CSC activity using
mammosphere formation and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity in
patient samples and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours.Mammosphere
formation efficiency (MFE) assessed in cells from primary (n = 12) and
metastatic (n = 15) samples treated with SFX (5 M) or vehicle control
(water) showed a significant reduction in breast CSC activity following
SFX treatment. A reduction greater than 50% in the MFE was observed in
both primary (0.52%0.06 vs 0.190.02, p<0.001) and metastatic (0.93%0.07
vs 0.430.04, p<0.001) cells treated with SFX. Importantly, SFX also
inhibits breast CSC activity of early (HBCx34) and metastatic (BB3RC31)
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours. Using a 14 day in vivo window
treatment, we observe that SFX (300mg/Kg/day) decreases ALDH+ cells using
ALDEFLUOR assay (HBCx34 6.3%0.4 vs 3%0.6, pSulforadex (SFX) is a novel
therapeutic comprising synthetic sulforaphane (SFN) stabilised within
-cyclodextrin. SFN has been studied as an anti-cancer compound for many
years however its development has hitherto been hampered due to its
inherent instability. Breast cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been
identified in all molecular subtypes and are believed to be the drivers
of breast cancer metastasis. We investigated SFX effects on breast CSC
activity using mammosphere formation and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
activity in patient samples and patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
tumours.Mammosphere formation efficiency (MFE) assessed in cells from
primary (n = 12) and metastatic (n = 15) samples treated with SFX (5 M)
or vehicle control (water) showed a significant reduction in breast CSC
activity following SFX treatment. A reduction greater than 50% in the MFE
was observed in both primary (0.52%0.06 vs 0.190.02, p<0.001) and
metastatic (0.93%0.07 vs 0.430.04, p<0.001) cells treated with SFX.
Importantly, SFX also inhibits breast CSC activity of early (HBCx34) and
metastatic (BB3RC31) patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours. Using a 14
day in vivo window treatment, we observe that SFX (300mg/Kg/day)
decreases ALDH+ cells using ALDEFLUOR assay (HBCx34 6.3%0.4 vs 3%0.6,
p<0.01; BB3RC31 3%0.6 vs 10.2, pSulforadex (SFX) is a novel therapeutic
comprising synthetic sulforaphane (SFN) stabilised within -cyclodextrin.
SFN has been studied as an anti-cancer compound for many years however
its development has hitherto been hampered due to its inherent
instability. Breast cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been identified in
all molecular subtypes and are believed to be the drivers of breast
cancer metastasis. We investigated SFX effects on breast CSC activity
using mammosphere formation and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity in
patient samples and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours.Mammosphere
formation efficiency (MFE) assessed in cells from primary (n = 12) and
metastatic (n = 15) samples treated with SFX (5 M) or vehicle control
(water) showed a significant reduction in breast CSC activity following
SFX treatment. A reduction greater than 50% in the MFE was observed in
both primary (0.52%0.06 vs 0.190.02, p<0.001) and metastatic (0.93%0.07
vs 0.430.04, p<0.001) cells treated with SFX. Importantly, SFX also
inhibits breast CSC activity of early (HBCx34) and metastatic (BB3RC31)
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours. Using a 14 day in vivo window
treatment, we observe that SFX (300mg/Kg/day) decreases ALDH+ cells using
ALDEFLUOR assay (HBCx34 6.3%0.4 vs 3%0.6, p<0.01; BB3RC31 3%0.6 vs 10.2,
p<0.05) and MFE (HBCx34 0.64%0.09 vs 0.35%0.03, pSulforadex (SFX) is a
novel therapeutic comprising synthetic sulforaphane (SFN) stabilised
within -cyclodextrin. SFN has been studied as an anti-cancer compound for
many years however its development has hitherto been hampered due to its
inherent instability. Breast cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been
identified in all molecular subtypes and are believed to be the drivers
of breast cancer metastasis. We investigated SFX effects on breast CSC
activity using mammosphere formation and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
activity in patient samples and patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
tumours.Mammosphere formation efficiency (MFE) assessed in cells from
primary (n = 12) and metastatic (n = 15) samples treated with SFX (5 M)
or vehicle control (water) showed a significant reduction in breast CSC
activity following SFX treatment. A reduction greater than 50% in the MFE
was observed in both primary (0.52%0.06 vs 0.190.02, p<0.001) and
metastatic (0.93%0.07 vs 0.430.04, p<0.001) cells treated with SFX.
Importantly, SFX also inhibits breast CSC activity of early (HBCx34) and
metastatic (BB3RC31) patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours. Using a 14
day in vivo window treatment, we observe that SFX (300mg/Kg/day)
decreases ALDH+ cells using ALDEFLUOR assay (HBCx34 6.3%0.4 vs 3%0.6,
p<0.01; BB3RC31 3%0.6 vs 10.2, p<0.05) and MFE (HBCx34 0.64%0.09 vs
0.35%0.03, p<0.01; BB3RC31 0.89%0.06 vs 0.780.04).The majority of breast
cancers express the estrogen receptor (ER) but these hormone-responsive
breast cancers frequently develop resistance to hormonal therapies (e.g.
tamoxifen). We have established that CSCs in ER+ BC lack ER expression,
representing a potential mechanism of therapeutic resistance. However,
SFX targets such surviving CSCs identified by ALDH positivity and
mammosphere-initiating capacity following tamoxifen treatment in vivo in
ER+ PDX tumours. Combinatorial treatment of tamoxifen (10 mg/kg/day) and
SFX (300mg/Kg/day) in a 14 day window treatment reduced ALDH+ cells
(HBCx34 10%0.4 vs 4.2%0.4, pSulforadex (SFX) is a novel therapeutic
comprising synthetic sulforaphane (SFN) stabilised within -cyclodextrin.
SFN has been studied as an anti-cancer compound for many years however
its development has hitherto been hampered due to its inherent
instability. Breast cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been identified in
all molecular subtypes and are believed to be the drivers of breast
cancer metastasis. We investigated SFX effects on breast CSC activity
using mammosphere formation and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity in
patient samples and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours.Mammosphere
formation efficiency (MFE) assessed in cells from primary (n = 12) and
metastatic (n = 15) samples treated with SFX (5 M) or vehicle control
(water) showed a significant reduction in breast CSC activity following
SFX treatment. A reduction greater than 50% in the MFE was observed in
both primary (0.52%0.06 vs 0.190.02, p<0.001) and metastatic (0.93%0.07
vs 0.430.04, p<0.001) cells treated with SFX. Importantly, SFX also
inhibits breast CSC activity of early (HBCx34) and metastatic (BB3RC31)
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours. Using a 14 day in vivo window
treatment, we observe that SFX (300mg/Kg/day) decreases ALDH+ cells using
ALDEFLUOR assay (HBCx34 6.3%0.4 vs 3%0.6, p<0.01; BB3RC31 3%0.6 vs 10.2,
p<0.05) and MFE (HBCx34 0.64%0.09 vs 0.35%0.03, p<0.01; BB3RC31 0.89%0.06
vs 0.780.04).The majority of breast cancers express the estrogen receptor
(ER) but these hormone-responsive breast cancers frequently develop
resistance to hormonal therapies (e.g. tamoxifen). We have established
that CSCs in ER+ BC lack ER expression, representing a potential
mechanism of therapeutic resistance. However, SFX targets such surviving
CSCs identified by ALDH positivity and mammosphere-initiating capacity
following tamoxifen treatment in vivo in ER+ PDX tumours. Combinatorial
treatment of tamoxifen (10 mg/kg/day) and SFX (300mg/Kg/day) in a 14 day
window treatment reduced ALDH+ cells (HBCx34 10%0.4 vs 4.2%0.4, p<0.01;
BB3RC31 11.3%1.1 vs 6.90.6, pSulforadex (SFX) is a novel therapeutic
comprising synthetic sulforaphane (SFN) stabilised within -cyclodextrin.
SFN has been studied as an anti-cancer compound for many years however
its development has hitherto been hampered due to its inherent
instability. Breast cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been identified in
all molecular subtypes and are believed to be the drivers of breast
cancer metastasis. We investigated SFX effects on breast CSC activity
using mammosphere formation and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity in
patient samples and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours.Mammosphere
formation efficiency (MFE) assessed in cells from primary (n = 12) and
metastatic (n = 15) samples treated with SFX (5 M) or vehicle control
(water) showed a significant reduction in breast CSC activity following
SFX treatment. A reduction greater than 50% in the MFE was observed in
both primary (0.52%0.06 vs 0.190.02, p<0.001) and metastatic (0.93%0.07
vs 0.430.04, p<0.001) cells treated with SFX. Importantly, SFX also
inhibits breast CSC activity of early (HBCx34) and metastatic (BB3RC31)
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours. Using a 14 day in vivo window
treatment, we observe that SFX (300mg/Kg/day) decreases ALDH+ cells using
ALDEFLUOR assay (HBCx34 6.3%0.4 vs 3%0.6, p<0.01; BB3RC31 3%0.6 vs 10.2,
p<0.05) and MFE (HBCx34 0.64%0.09 vs 0.35%0.03, p<0.01; BB3RC31 0.89%0.06
vs 0.780.04).The majority of breast cancers express the estrogen receptor
(ER) but these hormone-responsive breast cancers frequently develop
resistance to hormonal therapies (e.g. tamoxifen). We have established
that CSCs in ER+ BC lack ER expression, representing a potential
mechanism of therapeutic resistance. However, SFX targets such surviving
CSCs identified by ALDH positivity and mammosphere-initiating capacity
following tamoxifen treatment in vivo in ER+ PDX tumours. Combinatorial
treatment of tamoxifen (10 mg/kg/day) and SFX (300mg/Kg/day) in a 14 day
window treatment reduced ALDH+ cells (HBCx34 10%0.4 vs 4.2%0.4, p<0.01;
BB3RC31 11.3%1.1 vs 6.90.6, p<0.05) and MFE (HBCx34 0.81%0.07 vs
0.34%0.02, pSulforadex (SFX) is a novel therapeutic comprising synthetic
sulforaphane (SFN) stabilised within -cyclodextrin. SFN has been studied
as an anti-cancer compound for many years however its development has
hitherto been hampered due to its inherent instability. Breast cancer
stem-like cells (CSCs) have been identified in all molecular subtypes and
are believed to be the drivers of breast cancer metastasis. We
investigated SFX effects on breast CSC activity using mammosphere
formation and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity in patient samples
and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours.Mammosphere formation
efficiency (MFE) assessed in cells from primary (n = 12) and metastatic
(n = 15) samples treated with SFX (5 M) or vehicle control (water) showed
a significant reduction in breast CSC activity following SFX treatment. A
reduction greater than 50% in the MFE was observed in both primary
(0.52%0.06 vs 0.190.02, p<0.001) and metastatic (0.93%0.07 vs 0.430.04,
p<0.001) cells treated with SFX. Importantly, SFX also inhibits breast
CSC activity of early (HBCx34) and metastatic (BB3RC31) patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) tumours. Using a 14 day in vivo window treatment, we
observe that SFX (300mg/Kg/day) decreases ALDH+ cells using ALDEFLUOR
assay (HBCx34 6.3%0.4 vs 3%0.6, p<0.01; BB3RC31 3%0.6 vs 10.2, p<0.05)
and MFE (HBCx34 0.64%0.09 vs 0.35%0.03, p<0.01; BB3RC31 0.89%0.06 vs
0.780.04).The majority of breast cancers express the estrogen receptor
(ER) but these hormone-responsive breast cancers frequently develop
resistance to hormonal therapies (e.g. tamoxifen). We have established
that CSCs in ER+ BC lack ER expression, representing a potential
mechanism of therapeutic resistance. However, SFX targets such surviving
CSCs identified by ALDH positivity and mammosphere-initiating capacity
following tamoxifen treatment in vivo in ER+ PDX tumours. Combinatorial
treatment of tamoxifen (10 mg/kg/day) and SFX (300mg/Kg/day) in a 14 day
window treatment reduced ALDH+ cells (HBCx34 10%0.4 vs 4.2%0.4, p<0.01;
BB3RC31 11.3%1.1 vs 6.90.6, p<0.05) and MFE (HBCx34 0.81%0.07 vs
0.34%0.02, p<0.01; BB3RC31 0.47%0.06 vs 0.270.04, pSulforadex (SFX) is a
novel therapeutic comprising synthetic sulforaphane (SFN) stabilised
within -cyclodextrin. SFN has been studied as an anti-cancer compound for
many years however its development has hitherto been hampered due to its
inherent instability. Breast cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been
identified in all molecular subtypes and are believed to be the drivers
of breast cancer metastasis. We investigated SFX effects on breast CSC
activity using mammosphere formation and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
activity in patient samples and patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
tumours.Mammosphere formation efficiency (MFE) assessed in cells from
primary (n = 12) and metastatic (n = 15) samples treated with SFX (5 M)
or vehicle control (water) showed a significant reduction in breast CSC
activity following SFX treatment. A reduction greater than 50% in the MFE
was observed in both primary (0.52%0.06 vs 0.190.02, p<0.001) and
metastatic (0.93%0.07 vs 0.430.04, p<0.001) cells treated with SFX.
Importantly, SFX also inhibits breast CSC activity of early (HBCx34) and
metastatic (BB3RC31) patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumours. Using a 14
day in vivo window treatment, we observe that SFX (300mg/Kg/day)
decreases ALDH+ cells using ALDEFLUOR assay (HBCx34 6.3%0.4 vs 3%0.6,
p<0.01; BB3RC31 3%0.6 vs 10.2, p<0.05) and MFE (HBCx34 0.64%0.09 vs
0.35%0.03, p<0.01; BB3RC31 0.89%0.06 vs 0.780.04).The majority of breast
cancers express the estrogen receptor (ER) but these hormone-responsive
breast cancers frequently develop resistance to hormonal therapies (e.g.
tamoxifen). We have established that CSCs in ER+ BC lack ER expression,
representing a potential mechanism of therapeutic resistance. However,
SFX targets such surviving CSCs identified by ALDH positivity and
mammosphere-initiating capacity following tamoxifen treatment in vivo in
ER+ PDX tumours. Combinatorial treatment of tamoxifen (10 mg/kg/day) and
SFX (300mg/Kg/day) in a 14 day window treatment reduced ALDH+ cells
(HBCx34 10%0.4 vs 4.2%0.4, p<0.01; BB3RC31 11.3%1.1 vs 6.90.6, p<0.05)
and MFE (HBCx34 0.81%0.07 vs 0.34%0.02, p<0.01; BB3RC31 0.47%0.06 vs
0.270.04, p<0.05) compared to tamoxifen treatment alone. Mechanistically
SFX potently inhibited the canonical Wnt pathway in MCF-7 cells and their
endocrine-resistant derivatives and future studies will explore SFX
activity on other CSC regulatory pathways.Our data demonstrate that SFX
might produce clinically meaningful improvements to endocrine therapy in
ER+ BC by reversing CSC mediated resistance. Clinical trials of endocrine
therapy in combination with SFX are currently being planned.

