Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A topical botanical product improves recovery from chemotherapy
alopecia and persistent hair issues in cancer survivors


IntroductionWith an incidence of 65%, chemotherapy induced alopecia (CIA)
is considered by sufferers as one of the most distressing side effects of
cancer therapies.CIA has also a long-term impact. Most cancer survivors
still indeed complain from persistent hair issues (i.e. hair thinning)
after hair regrowth.In previous studies, we have demonstrated that the
product normalized follicular cell apoptosis process and attenuated scalp
micro-inflammation, two key targets for the management of CIA.Further
studies were needed to assess the potential efficacy of the product in
mitigating the impacts of CIA, through reduction of the baldness period
in chemotherapy-treated patients, and improvement of hair pattern in
cancer survivors complaining from persistent hair issues.MethodTwo
studies were conducted.1/ Female volunteers treated with chemotherapy
agents known to provoke important hair loss were provided with the
product, to be applied on the scalp twice-daily, from inclusion and for
at least 16 weeks after the end of chemotherapy treatment. Evaluation was
performed through global photographs of the scalp, and compared with
available references (n = 10).2/ Female cancer survivors complaining from
persistent hair issues were provided with the product, to be applied on
scalp twice-daily, for 6 months. Evaluation of improvement in hair
pattern was performed through global photographs of the scalp and
self-assessment (n = 21).ResultsIn the first study on women treated with
chemotherapy agents known to cause alopecia, application of the product
allowed faster recovery of hair than without treatment (based on
available references). Results show that the baldness period, usually 20
weeks, was reduced by 5 to 16 weeks in subjects using the product.
Contrary to non-treated reference, product users never experienced full
baldness (under comparable chemotherapy regimen).In the second study, 33%
of cancer survivor volunteers complaining from persistent hair issues had
first improvement within 1 month, either observed in global photographs
or reported by volunteers. After 2 months, they were 52% and 76% after 3
months.In both studies, acceptance and adherence were high (one
drop-out). No side effect was reported.ConclusionThese two studies have
demonstrated the efficacy and safety of the topical botanical product in
addressing successfully major issues: reduction of CIA baldness period,
and improvement of hair pattern in cancer survivors complaining from
persistent hair issues.

