Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous inhibition of ATR and PARP greatly sensitizes colon
cancer cell lines to irinotecan


Enhanced DNA damage repair is one mechanism behind colon cancer drug
resistance. Thus, targeting molecular components of repair pathways with
specific small molecule inhibitors may improve the efficacy of
chemotherapy. ABT-888 and VE-821, inhibitors of
poly-ADP-ribose-polymerase (PARP) and the serine/threonine-kinase Ataxia
telangiectasia related (ATR), respectively, were used to treat colon
cancer cell lines in combination with the topoisomerase-I inhibitor
irinotecan (SN38). Our findings show that each of these molecules at
nontoxic single agent concentrations synergized with SN38 to produce a
2.2 to 3 fold reduction in the 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of
SN38 (Table 1). When combined, nontoxic concentrations of ABT-888 and
VE-821 produced a 4.5 to 27 fold reduction in the IC50 of SN38.
Furthermore, the combination of all three agents was associated with
maximal G2-M arrest and enhanced DNA-damage (H2AX). The mechanism of this
enhanced synergy was associated with maximal suppression of SN38 induced
PARP activity in the presence of both inhibitors. Furthermore, VE-821
enhancement of SN38 induced DNA-PK phosphorylation was abrogated by
ABT-888, resulting in more unrepaired DNA damage. This novel combination
of DNA repair inhibitors may be useful to enhance the activity of DNA
damaging chemotherapies such as irinotecan and help circumvent resistance
to this drug in colon cancer.Table 1 Colon cancer cell lines LoVo,
HCT-116 and HT-29 were treated with SN38 alone or in combination with
various concentrations of the ATR inhibitor VE-821 and/or the PARP
inhibitor ABT-888. The IC50 values of SN38 were significantly reduced in
the presence of VE-821 and/or ABT-888 for all cell lines. Drug synergy
(I) values were determined, according to Berenbaum (1978), by calculating
the ratio:(IC50 SN38 with inhibitors/IC50 SN38 alone) + (inhibitor
concentration used/IC50 inhibitor alone); I less than 1 = synergism, I
equal to 1 = additive effect and I greater than 1 = antogonism.

