Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personal history of psoriasis and risk of incident cancer among
women: the Nurses Health Study


Background: Psoriasis has long been hypothesized to pose an increased
risk of cancer due to the chronic, inflammatory state induced by
psoriasis. Most prior studies on psoriasis and cancer were based on
clinical settings, and the interest has been remarkably focused on the
association between systemic therapies, typically only used in
moderate-to-severe psoriasis, and risk of psoriasis. The evidence linking
psoriasis with cancer is still controversial and few data are available
from prospective studies. We systemically examined the association
between a personal history of psoriasis and risk of incident cancer
(other than skin basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma).Methods and Findings: A total of 64,990 participants were
included from the Nurses Health Study (1996-2012). Diagnoses of cancers
were obtained by biannual self-reported questionnaires and all cancers
were confirmed. Clinician-diagnosed psoriasis and diagnosis year were
collected in 2008 and validated with a supplementary questionnaire. We
included 2180 cases with psoriasis and most had mild disease (92%).
During 957,359 person-years follow-up, 8,348 incident cancers were
documented. We did not find an altered risk of total cancer associated
with personal history of psoriasis (multivariate-adjusted hazard ratio
[HR] = 1.02; 95% CI: 0.89-1.17). However, for individual cancers, a
personal history of psoriasis was associated with an increased risk of
melanoma (HR = 1.94, 95% CI: 1.20-3.12) and kidney cancer (HR = 2.50, 95%
CI: 1.27-4.92). The associations appeared stronger among psoriasis with 1
or more palm body surface area (BSA, P for trend 0.003 for melanoma and
0.0004 for kidney cancer), but remained significant even after exclusion
of psoriasis with more than two palms BSA involvement.Conclusions: We
suggest a positive association between a personal history of psoriasis
and risk of melanoma and renal cancer, which appears not be entirely a
result of greater medical scrutiny or use of systemic therapies.

