Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequency of actionable gene fusions in patients with Philadelphia
chromosome-like (Ph-like) B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL): A
retrospective study from the Children's Oncology Group (COG)


Introduction: While cure rates exceed 80%, many children with B-ALL still
relapse. Many of these patients (pts) display a Ph-like gene expression
profile (GEP), but lack canonical BCR-ABL1 fusion. We have identified
alternate kinase fusions in Ph-like ALL that induce cell proliferation
sensitive to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) (Roberts, NEJM 2014). We
report retrospective analyses of 1390 B-ALL pts, 885 NCI high risk and
505 standard risk B-ALL pts with elevated minimal residual
disease.Methods: Cases were screened using an 8-gene Taqman low-density
array (LDA) PCR assay to identify the Ph-like GEP (Harvey, ASH 2013).
Ph-like cases with elevated CRLF2 expression were tested for CRLF2
rearrangement (CRLF2-R; P2RY8-CRLF2 by Taqman PCR on the LDA card and
IGH-CRLF2 by FISH). JAK mutations in CRLF2-R cases were tested by Sanger
sequencing. Ph-like cases without CRLF2-R were tested for previously
identified kinase fusions involving ABL1, ABL2, CSF1R, JAK2, NTRK3, and
PDGFRB by RT-PCR. Ph-like cases without detected fusions underwent
RNA-sequencing, either using standard Illumina library preparation or a
customized kinome capture kit (Agilent).Results: 339 (24%) pts were
Ph-like. BCR-ABL1 (N = 45) and ETV6-RUNX1 (N = 11) were excluded from
further analyses, as the former already receives TKI therapy and
ETV6-RUNX1 ALL lacks targetable kinase fusions (unpublished). Of the
remaining 283 Ph-like cases, 153 were CRLF2high (defined by CRLF2
expression levels on the LDA card). 61 (40%) had P2RY8-CRLF2 fusion, and
of the remaining 91 CRLF2high cases, 56 of 69 tested had CRLF2-R (55 to
IGH, 1 to an unknown partner). Thus, 117/130 (90%) CRLF2high Ph-like
cases had a documented CRLF2 genomic lesion and 52 (44%) of these had a
JAK mutation. Of the 130 Ph-like CRLF2low cases, 61 (47%) had a
previously reported targetable TK fusion identified by RT-PCR, kinome
capture or RNA sequencing. These included: 38 ABL class fusions (17 ABL1,
5 ABL2, 3 CSF1R, 13 PDGFRB) sensitive to imatinib/dasatinib; 14 JAK2 and
8 EPOR fusions sensitive to ruxolitinib; and 1 NTRK3 fusion sensitive to
crizotinib. Nine cases had known fusions with new alternate breakpoints,
and an additional 9 cases had fusions of novel N-terminal partners with
known actionable C-terminal kinase genes. RNA sequencing identified 8
cases with IGH-EPOR fusions not previously captured by the kinome assay,
indicating the cryptic and complex nature of this
rearrangement.Conclusion: Almost half of Ph-like pediatric B-ALL pts
lacking CRLF2-R harbor altered TKs with compelling pre-clinical data that
they are likely amenable to targeted therapy using FDA-approved TKIs. The
COG will start real-time screening with this algorithm in 2015 and
allocate pts with ABL class fusions to treatment with chemotherapy plus
dasatinib.

