Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long noncoding RNA subtype classification of human prostate
adenocarcinomas


Background: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play a key role in regulating
normal cell physiology as well as cancer progression. Although the role
of several lncRNAs has been established in prostate cancer progression,
the subtype classification of lncRNAs in human prostate cancer
adenocarcinomas remains fully uncovered.Material and Methods: We
performed a genomic analysis of GENCODE lncRNAs in prostate
adenocarcinoma (PRAD), using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) RNA-Seq
profiles of 297 primary tumors. Furthermore, we described global
correlations between lncRNAs and expression of cis-acting genes, and
established lncRNAs expression-based subtypes with distinct signatures.
In addition, lncRNAs expression-based subtypes were correlated with
copy-number alterations and somatic mutations.Results: Using stringent
criteria, we identified 1,596 lncRNAs and predicted those that are
potential drivers for cancer progression through integrative analysis.
The expression of 885 (55.4%) lncRNAs showed a significantly positive
correlation with the mRNAs expression of their neighboring genes, while
only 29 (1.8%) lncRNAs showed a significantly negative correlation. 511
lncRNAs were significantly differentially expressed between PRAD and
normal prostate; GREAT analysis showed that those lncRNAs are cis-acting
on genes involved in the establishment of apical/basal cell polarity (p =
3.5106). Unsupervised clustering of cancer differentially expressed
lncRNAs revealed three robust subtypes, which were highly related with
ERG gene fusions status (p = 2.210-16). While C2 cluster (n = 125) was
composed of 76.3% of PRAD with ERG gene fusions cluster (n = 127), C1
cluster was composed in majority of PRAD without ERG gene fusions
(83.5%). Cluster C3 (n = 45) stood out as a unique cluster with only 35%
of PRAD samples bearing ERG fusions. Of note, those 3 subtypes were not
different according to TNM stage, Gleason grade and age. Intriguingly,
only SPOP somatic mutation was found to be enriched in C1 cluster (p =
7.910-6). Using copy number changes, we identified 13 regions which were
differentially deleted between the three subgroups, including chr21q22.3
and chr8p21.3. As expected, Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed
enrichment of C2 cluster with prostate cancer TMPRSS2_ERG fusion
signature, while C1 cluster was enriched for PPAR (pBackground: Long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play a key role in regulating normal cell
physiology as well as cancer progression. Although the role of several
lncRNAs has been established in prostate cancer progression, the subtype
classification of lncRNAs in human prostate cancer adenocarcinomas
remains fully uncovered.Material and Methods: We performed a genomic
analysis of GENCODE lncRNAs in prostate adenocarcinoma (PRAD), using The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) RNA-Seq profiles of 297 primary tumors.
Furthermore, we described global correlations between lncRNAs and
expression of cis-acting genes, and established lncRNAs expression-based
subtypes with distinct signatures. In addition, lncRNAs expression-based
subtypes were correlated with copy-number alterations and somatic
mutations.Results: Using stringent criteria, we identified 1,596 lncRNAs
and predicted those that are potential drivers for cancer progression
through integrative analysis. The expression of 885 (55.4%) lncRNAs
showed a significantly positive correlation with the mRNAs expression of
their neighboring genes, while only 29 (1.8%) lncRNAs showed a
significantly negative correlation. 511 lncRNAs were significantly
differentially expressed between PRAD and normal prostate; GREAT analysis
showed that those lncRNAs are cis-acting on genes involved in the
establishment of apical/basal cell polarity (p = 3.5106). Unsupervised
clustering of cancer differentially expressed lncRNAs revealed three
robust subtypes, which were highly related with ERG gene fusions status
(p = 2.210-16). While C2 cluster (n = 125) was composed of 76.3% of PRAD
with ERG gene fusions cluster (n = 127), C1 cluster was composed in
majority of PRAD without ERG gene fusions (83.5%). Cluster C3 (n = 45)
stood out as a unique cluster with only 35% of PRAD samples bearing ERG
fusions. Of note, those 3 subtypes were not different according to TNM
stage, Gleason grade and age. Intriguingly, only SPOP somatic mutation
was found to be enriched in C1 cluster (p = 7.910-6). Using copy number
changes, we identified 13 regions which were differentially deleted
between the three subgroups, including chr21q22.3 and chr8p21.3. As
expected, Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed enrichment of C2
cluster with prostate cancer TMPRSS2_ERG fusion signature, while C1
cluster was enriched for PPAR (p<1012) and breast cancer ESR1 signatures
(pBackground: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play a key role in
regulating normal cell physiology as well as cancer progression. Although
the role of several lncRNAs has been established in prostate cancer
progression, the subtype classification of lncRNAs in human prostate
cancer adenocarcinomas remains fully uncovered.Material and Methods: We
performed a genomic analysis of GENCODE lncRNAs in prostate
adenocarcinoma (PRAD), using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) RNA-Seq
profiles of 297 primary tumors. Furthermore, we described global
correlations between lncRNAs and expression of cis-acting genes, and
established lncRNAs expression-based subtypes with distinct signatures.
In addition, lncRNAs expression-based subtypes were correlated with
copy-number alterations and somatic mutations.Results: Using stringent
criteria, we identified 1,596 lncRNAs and predicted those that are
potential drivers for cancer progression through integrative analysis.
The expression of 885 (55.4%) lncRNAs showed a significantly positive
correlation with the mRNAs expression of their neighboring genes, while
only 29 (1.8%) lncRNAs showed a significantly negative correlation. 511
lncRNAs were significantly differentially expressed between PRAD and
normal prostate; GREAT analysis showed that those lncRNAs are cis-acting
on genes involved in the establishment of apical/basal cell polarity (p =
3.5106). Unsupervised clustering of cancer differentially expressed
lncRNAs revealed three robust subtypes, which were highly related with
ERG gene fusions status (p = 2.210-16). While C2 cluster (n = 125) was
composed of 76.3% of PRAD with ERG gene fusions cluster (n = 127), C1
cluster was composed in majority of PRAD without ERG gene fusions
(83.5%). Cluster C3 (n = 45) stood out as a unique cluster with only 35%
of PRAD samples bearing ERG fusions. Of note, those 3 subtypes were not
different according to TNM stage, Gleason grade and age. Intriguingly,
only SPOP somatic mutation was found to be enriched in C1 cluster (p =
7.910-6). Using copy number changes, we identified 13 regions which were
differentially deleted between the three subgroups, including chr21q22.3
and chr8p21.3. As expected, Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed
enrichment of C2 cluster with prostate cancer TMPRSS2_ERG fusion
signature, while C1 cluster was enriched for PPAR (p<1012) and breast
cancer ESR1 signatures (p<1012). Importantly, Cluster 3 was enriched for
EZH2 targets (p = 0.004) suggesting efficacy of EZH2 inhibitors in this
subgroup. Finally, C3 cluster showed activation of UXT (Androgen receptor
Trapped clone 27 protein) pathway (p = 2.73103).Conclusion: This study
characterizes the spectrum of lncRNAs, which may be important in normal
prostate as well as in prostate adenocarcinomas. Furthermore, we
establish the foundation of lncRNAs expression-based subtype
classification in human prostate adenocarcinomas.

