Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel live cell diagnostic platform measuring phenotypic
biomarkers using objective algorithmic analysis enables further risk
stratification for intermediate-risk prostate cancer patients


Due to the inconsistencies of existing molecular, genomic, and
pathophysiologic markers for patient risk stratification, effective
prostate cancer diagnostics and treatment remains a challenge in clinical
practice. Therefore, the development of a diagnostic platform that
differentiates cancer patients who have clinically significant disease
from those who have a low risk of progression is an important area of
interest. In this study, we tested a diagnostic platform that combines a
scalable microfluidic device, an automated live cell assay, and objective
machine vision algorithms to measure phenotypic biomarkers [defined here
as functional biophysical and molecular biomarkers], which evaluate both
local growth and metastatic potential of prostate cancer.An analytical
validation study was performed on fresh prostate cancer samples (n = 100)
obtained at the time of radical prostatectomy (RP). The diagnostic
platform enables: 1) growth of patient cells ex vivo on extra cellular
matrix formulations supporting adhesion/survival for 72 hours 2)
high-throughput imaging of multiple phenotypic biomarkers such as
morphology, cytoskeleton dynamics, and protein subcellular localization &
modification states and 3) objective quantification of biomarkers via
machine vision analysis. Patient samples were imaged over a three hour
period capturing live-cell biophysical biomarkers. After three hours
cells were fixed and stained for molecular biomarkers. Machine vision
technology was then utilized to analyze phenotypic biomarkers to yield
specific metrics that quantified local tumor growth (Oncogenic
Potential-OPs) and invasive potential of the tumor to other tissues
(Metastatic Potential- MPs) that correlated with RP specimen pathologic
findings.Analysis of quantified phenotypic biomarkers distinguished
normal cells from cancer cells. The OP and MP metrics demonstrated
statistical significance in distinguishing Gleason 6 (low-risk) from
Gleason 7 (intermediate-risk) prostate cancer with 80% sensitivity and
80% specificity and concordance with relevant RP pathology
findings.Specifically, OP and MP derived from defined phenotypic
biomarker metrics, demonstrated the ability to differentiate Gleason 6
and 7 scores and correlated with, 1) seminal vesicle invasion, 2)
positive RP surgical margins, 3) vascular invasion, and 4) lymph node
involvement. This novel functional-live-cell diagnostic platform allows
for the measurement of a biomarker panel that further stratifies patients
to improve prostate cancer treatment, clinical decision-making, further
risk stratification of intermediate prostate cancer populations, and
potentially predict actionable pathological findings leading to improved
treatment outcomes for prostate cancer patients.

