Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of the cytotoxicity and increase of reactive oxygen
species and dihydroceramides of fenretinide to its major metabolites
(4-oxo- and 4-methoxyphenyl fenretinide) in T-cell lymphoid malignancy,
neuroblastoma, and ovarian cancer cell lines


Introduction: Early-phase clinical trials of fenretinide (4-HPR, a
synthetic retinoid) have demonstrated durable complete responses in
T-cell lymphoma (TCL), neuroblastoma (NB), and signals of activity in
ovarian cancer (OV). Cytotoxic mechanisms of 4-HPR include increase of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and dihydroceramides (DHCs). Major 4-HPR
metabolites are N-(4-methoxyphenyl)retinamide (MPR) and
4-oxo-N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide (oxo-HPR). MPR is more abundant in
human plasma; oxo-HPR is present in lower concentrations. We assessed the
relative cytotoxicity and increase of ROS and DHCs at equimolar
concentrations of 4-HPR, MPR, and oxo-HPR in TCL, NB, and OV cell
lines.Methods: A panel of twelve TCL, NB, and OV cell lines was studied
in room air (20% O2) and physiologic (5% O2) cultured conditions.
Cytotoxicity (0-10 M) was assessed by DIMSCAN fluorescence cytotoxicity
assay. ROS was measured via DCFDA with flow cytometry and sphingolipids
(including DHCs, ceramides, sphingoid bases, sphingomyelins, and
glycosylated ceramides) by quantitative tandem mass spectrometry.Results:
4-HPR (10 M) demonstrated >3 logs of cell kill in 6 of 12 cell lines.
Oxo-HPR demonstrated comparable cytotoxicity to that of 4-HPR in all cell
lines. MPR lacked cytotoxicity and when combined with 4-HPR, did not
increase cytotoxicity or induce antagonism. There was no observed
difference in cytotoxicity between 4-HPR and oxo-HPR in either oxygen
condition. Both 4-HPR and oxo-HPR significantly increased ROS compared to
controls (pIntroduction: Early-phase clinical trials of fenretinide
(4-HPR, a synthetic retinoid) have demonstrated durable complete
responses in T-cell lymphoma (TCL), neuroblastoma (NB), and signals of
activity in ovarian cancer (OV). Cytotoxic mechanisms of 4-HPR include
increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and dihydroceramides (DHCs).
Major 4-HPR metabolites are N-(4-methoxyphenyl)retinamide (MPR) and
4-oxo-N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide (oxo-HPR). MPR is more abundant in
human plasma; oxo-HPR is present in lower concentrations. We assessed the
relative cytotoxicity and increase of ROS and DHCs at equimolar
concentrations of 4-HPR, MPR, and oxo-HPR in TCL, NB, and OV cell
lines.Methods: A panel of twelve TCL, NB, and OV cell lines was studied
in room air (20% O2) and physiologic (5% O2) cultured conditions.
Cytotoxicity (0-10 M) was assessed by DIMSCAN fluorescence cytotoxicity
assay. ROS was measured via DCFDA with flow cytometry and sphingolipids
(including DHCs, ceramides, sphingoid bases, sphingomyelins, and
glycosylated ceramides) by quantitative tandem mass spectrometry.Results:
4-HPR (10 M) demonstrated >3 logs of cell kill in 6 of 12 cell lines.
Oxo-HPR demonstrated comparable cytotoxicity to that of 4-HPR in all cell
lines. MPR lacked cytotoxicity and when combined with 4-HPR, did not
increase cytotoxicity or induce antagonism. There was no observed
difference in cytotoxicity between 4-HPR and oxo-HPR in either oxygen
condition. Both 4-HPR and oxo-HPR significantly increased ROS compared to
controls (p<0.05) in three cell lines tested (1 each of TCL, NB, and OV).
Relative to 4-HPR, the ROS increased by oxo-HPR was equal in two cell
lines (COG-LL-317h and TX-OV-186h), and higher in one (FU-NB-2006h).
There was a significant (35 to 75-fold) increase of various DHC species
(C16-, C18-, C22-, C24-, or C24:1-DHC) with both 4-HPR and oxo-HPR in the
four cell lines tested (pIntroduction: Early-phase clinical trials of
fenretinide (4-HPR, a synthetic retinoid) have demonstrated durable
complete responses in T-cell lymphoma (TCL), neuroblastoma (NB), and
signals of activity in ovarian cancer (OV). Cytotoxic mechanisms of 4-HPR
include increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and dihydroceramides
(DHCs). Major 4-HPR metabolites are N-(4-methoxyphenyl)retinamide (MPR)
and 4-oxo-N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide (oxo-HPR). MPR is more abundant
in human plasma; oxo-HPR is present in lower concentrations. We assessed
the relative cytotoxicity and increase of ROS and DHCs at equimolar
concentrations of 4-HPR, MPR, and oxo-HPR in TCL, NB, and OV cell
lines.Methods: A panel of twelve TCL, NB, and OV cell lines was studied
in room air (20% O2) and physiologic (5% O2) cultured conditions.
Cytotoxicity (0-10 M) was assessed by DIMSCAN fluorescence cytotoxicity
assay. ROS was measured via DCFDA with flow cytometry and sphingolipids
(including DHCs, ceramides, sphingoid bases, sphingomyelins, and
glycosylated ceramides) by quantitative tandem mass spectrometry.Results:
4-HPR (10 M) demonstrated >3 logs of cell kill in 6 of 12 cell lines.
Oxo-HPR demonstrated comparable cytotoxicity to that of 4-HPR in all cell
lines. MPR lacked cytotoxicity and when combined with 4-HPR, did not
increase cytotoxicity or induce antagonism. There was no observed
difference in cytotoxicity between 4-HPR and oxo-HPR in either oxygen
condition. Both 4-HPR and oxo-HPR significantly increased ROS compared to
controls (p<0.05) in three cell lines tested (1 each of TCL, NB, and OV).
Relative to 4-HPR, the ROS increased by oxo-HPR was equal in two cell
lines (COG-LL-317h and TX-OV-186h), and higher in one (FU-NB-2006h).
There was a significant (35 to 75-fold) increase of various DHC species
(C16-, C18-, C22-, C24-, or C24:1-DHC) with both 4-HPR and oxo-HPR in the
four cell lines tested (p<0.05). Two of the four cell lines (Jurkat and
TX-OV-186h) demonstrated a greater increase in DHCs with 4-HPR compared
to oxo-HPR (pIntroduction: Early-phase clinical trials of fenretinide
(4-HPR, a synthetic retinoid) have demonstrated durable complete
responses in T-cell lymphoma (TCL), neuroblastoma (NB), and signals of
activity in ovarian cancer (OV). Cytotoxic mechanisms of 4-HPR include
increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and dihydroceramides (DHCs).
Major 4-HPR metabolites are N-(4-methoxyphenyl)retinamide (MPR) and
4-oxo-N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide (oxo-HPR). MPR is more abundant in
human plasma; oxo-HPR is present in lower concentrations. We assessed the
relative cytotoxicity and increase of ROS and DHCs at equimolar
concentrations of 4-HPR, MPR, and oxo-HPR in TCL, NB, and OV cell
lines.Methods: A panel of twelve TCL, NB, and OV cell lines was studied
in room air (20% O2) and physiologic (5% O2) cultured conditions.
Cytotoxicity (0-10 M) was assessed by DIMSCAN fluorescence cytotoxicity
assay. ROS was measured via DCFDA with flow cytometry and sphingolipids
(including DHCs, ceramides, sphingoid bases, sphingomyelins, and
glycosylated ceramides) by quantitative tandem mass spectrometry.Results:
4-HPR (10 M) demonstrated >3 logs of cell kill in 6 of 12 cell lines.
Oxo-HPR demonstrated comparable cytotoxicity to that of 4-HPR in all cell
lines. MPR lacked cytotoxicity and when combined with 4-HPR, did not
increase cytotoxicity or induce antagonism. There was no observed
difference in cytotoxicity between 4-HPR and oxo-HPR in either oxygen
condition. Both 4-HPR and oxo-HPR significantly increased ROS compared to
controls (p<0.05) in three cell lines tested (1 each of TCL, NB, and OV).
Relative to 4-HPR, the ROS increased by oxo-HPR was equal in two cell
lines (COG-LL-317h and TX-OV-186h), and higher in one (FU-NB-2006h).
There was a significant (35 to 75-fold) increase of various DHC species
(C16-, C18-, C22-, C24-, or C24:1-DHC) with both 4-HPR and oxo-HPR in the
four cell lines tested (p<0.05). Two of the four cell lines (Jurkat and
TX-OV-186h) demonstrated a greater increase in DHCs with 4-HPR compared
to oxo-HPR (p<0.05), while the increase was not statistically different
in the other two (COG-LL-317h and FU-NB-2006h).Conclusions: In contrast
to the higher cytotoxicity of oxo-HPR compared with 4-HPR reported by
Villani et al (Cancer Res, 15:3238, 2006), we observed relatively
comparable cytotoxicity and increases of ROS and DHCs with both 4-HPR and
oxo-HPR. MPR was not cytotoxic nor did it antagonize 4-HPR. These results
support that the cytotoxicity and pharmacodynamics of 4-HPR and oxo-HPR
in in vitro culture systems are equivalent.

