Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SGI-110 priming sensitizes hepatocellular carcinoma cells to
oxaliplatin


Promoter DNA hypermethylation is associated with hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), suggesting the potential utility of demethylating agents in this
disease. Here we performed preclinical evaluation of SGI-110, a second
generation hypomethylating agent (HMA) formulated as a dinucleotide of
decitabine (DAC) and deoxyguanosine that yields longer half-life and more
extended DAC exposure than DAC IV infusion, in HCC models to guide the
design of a phase I/II trial.HCC cell lines and a xenograft model were
used to determine antitumor activity of SGI-110 as a single agent and
when combined with oxaliplatin. Bromouridine-labeled RNA sequencing
(Bru-seq) was employed to elucidate the effects of SGI-110 and/or
oxaliplatin on genome-wide transcription and to identify potential
pharmacodynamics markers.We found that pretreatment with low doses of
SGI-110 significantly synergized with oxaliplatin for improved
cytotoxicity. In SNU-398 cells, low-dose oxaliplatin single treatment at
1 M only inhibited colony formation by 15%, while pretreatment with
SGI-110 at 50 nM increased the inhibition to 54%, and pretreatment with
SGI-110 at 100 nM further increased the inhibition to 94%. The
combination of SGI-110 and oxaliplatin was well tolerated in vivo and
significantly delayed tumor growth in mice compared to oxaliplatin alone.
On day 19, when average tumor sizes in control and oxaliplatin treatment
groups passed the experiment end point of 2000 mm3, the average tumor
size was 1010 247 mm3 (p = 0.0039) for SGI-110 treatment alone, and only
391 100 mm3 (p = 0.0001) for combination with oxaliplatin. Bru-seq
analysis unveiled inhibitory regulations of genes involved in WNT/EGF/IGF
signaling, which are signature pathways contributing to HCC, and certain
other cancer genes by SGI-110 and the combination treatment. DNMT1,
survivin and ephrin-B2 were identified as novel pharmacodynamics markers
for the efficacy of the combination treatment.In conclusion, SGI-110
priming efficiently sensitizes HCC cells to oxaliplatin by inhibiting
distinct signaling pathways, allowing for high antitumor activity without
systemic toxicity. These results provide a strong rationale for clinical
evaluation of SGI-110 as a single agent and in combination with
oxaliplatin at low doses in HCC patients, where the newly identified
DNMT1, survivin and ephrin B2 could be used as potential pharmacodynamics
markers. In addition, inhibition of the WNT/EGF/IGF signaling pathways by
the combination of SGI-110 and oxaliplatin provides a distinct strategy
for future design of HCC treatment.

