Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mir-29/Hsp47 regulate breast cancer progression by modulating the
ECM transcription network


The extracellular matrix (ECM), an essential component of tumor
microenvironment, play crucial roles in cancer development and
progression. Using gene co-expression network analysis, we have
identified an ECM transcription network from hundreds of human breast
cancer. In this report, we show how the molecular chaperone protein Hsp47
functions as a nodal hub in regulating an ECM gene transcription network.
We found that Hsp47 expression was activated during breast cancer
development and progression. Hsp47 silencing reprogrammed human breast
cancer cells to form growth-arrested and/or non-invasive structures in 3D
cultures, and to limit tumor growth in xenograft assays by reducing
deposition of collagen and fibronectin. Co-expression network analysis
also showed that levels of microRNA-29b and 29c were inversely correlated
with expression of Hsp47 and ECM network genes in human breast cancer
tissues. We found that miR-29 repressed expression of Hsp47 along with
multiple ECM network genes. Ectopic expression of miR-29b suppressed
malignant phenotypes of breast cancer cells in 3D culture. Clinically,
increased expression of Hsp47 and reduced levels of miR-29b and 29c were
associated with poor survival outcomes in breast cancer patients. Our
results show that Hsp47 is regulated by miR-29 during breast cancer
development and progression, and that increased Hsp47 expression promotes
cancer progression in part by enhancing deposition of ECM proteins.

