Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma and tumor pharmacokinetics of IV LMP744, a novel
indenoisoquinoline topoisomerase I inhibitor, in a canine phase I study


Introduction: LMP744 (NSC706744) is one of 3 indenoisoquinolines being
evaluated in pet dogs with lymphoma to define their safety,
pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamic modulation (COTC007b). LMP744 forms
stable DNA-topoisomerase I (Top1) cleavage complexes and induces unique
DNA cleavage sites relative to approved Top1 poisons; LMP744 is not a
substrate for ABC transporters and does not have the stability issues
inherent to camptothecins. Here we report the plasma and tumor
pharmacokinetics of LMP744 administered IV daily x 5 to patient
dogs.Methods: Eligibility included: dogs >15 kg with histologically
confirmed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with nodal presentation (stage 2 or
greater) and minimal nodes size for biopsy of 3 cm in the longest
dimension, performance status of Grade 0 or 1 and informed owner consent.
Dose levels (DL) explored were 25, 50, 75, 100, and 125 mg/m2/day through
a 3+3 dose escalation study design. LMP744 was administered over 1 h IV
daily x 5, Q28D. LMP744 was quantitated with a validated LC-MS/MS assay,
and plasma pharmacokinetic parameters determined non-compartmentally with
PK Solutions and plasma and tumor parameters compartmentally with ADAPT5
through iterated two stage (ITS) and maximum likelihood solution with the
expectation maximization algorithm (MLEM).Results: All 18 dogs had
useable pharmacokinetic data. Non-compartmental analysis suggested linear
relationships between plasma Cmax and tumor C2h vs. dose. LMP744
distributed extensively to tumor tissue and mean tumor concentrations
were at least 2 orders of magnitude higher than plasma concentrations at
equivalent time points of 2, 6 and 120 h. Compartmental modeling with a 3
compartment linear model resulted in a good fit to the plasma data. The
parameters and%CVs respectively for Clt, Vc, Cld1, Vp1, Cld2, Vp2 were
57.5 L/h/m2 (29%), 136 L/m2 (24%), 234 L/h/m2 (24%), 1180 L/m2 (27%),
30.8 L/h/m2 (63%), 5140 L/m2 (67%). Sequential plasma half-lives were
16.5 min, 13 h, and 183 (31%) h, respectively. In line with the long
t1/2, plasma accumulation was observed on this daily times-5
schedule.Conclusion: The plasma pharmacokinetics of LMP744 in dogs
display triphasic behavior, a relatively high total body clearance at
57.5 L/h/m2, and a terminal half-life of 183 h. The favorable
biodistribution to tumor may be a valuable distinction to consider in the
translation of this novel indenoisoquinoline to the clinic.Support:
N01-CM-2011-00015, N01-CM-42202 and P30-CA-47904Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

