Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alofanib, a novel allosteric FGFR2 inhibitor, shows potent
antitumor activity in ovarian cancer with FGFR2 expression


Alofanib (formerly known as RPT835) is a novel allosteric FGFR2 inhibitor
with activity in FGFR2-expressing triple-negative breast cancer
[Tjulandin S, et al. San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium 2014]. Early
data suggest that combining FGFR2 inhibitors with platinum-containing
cytotoxic agents for the treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer may yield
increased antitumor activity [Cole C, et al. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010]. We
investigated antitumor activity of alofanib in ovarian cancer in vitro
and in vivo.To assess the efficacy of alofanib on FGF-mediated cell
proliferation, ovarian cancer (SKOV-3) FGFR2-expressing cells were
incubated in a 96-well microculture plate and were treated with serially
diluted RPT835. Basic FGF was added at a concentration of 25 ng/ml.
Control wells were left untreated. Cell growth inhibition was determined
using Promega's Cell Titer-Glo assay. Immunocompromised mice were used
for xenotransplantation of FGFR2 high-expressing ovarian cancer cells
(SCOV-3). Seventy animals with measurable tumors were selected on day 10
and randomized into control groups (no treatment or chemotherapy alone
(paclitaxel + carboplatin) and treatment groups (alofanib orally or
intravenously (different dose levels) in combination with chemotherapy).
Measurements of tumor volume (mm3) were performed by digital calipers
every 3 days during 30 days after tumor inoculation.Basic FGF
significantly increased proliferation of the ovarian cancer cells in
untreated control group (P = 0.001). Alofanib treatment resulted in
growth inhibition of SKOV-3 cell line in vitro. Treatment of alofanib in
combination with paclitaxel/carboplatin demonstrated significant tumor
growth delay phenotype in all treatment groups compared to control
non-treatment groups. Alofanib exhibited a dose-dependent effect on tumor
growth. Daily intravenous regimen of alofanib (total maximum dose per
week was 350 mg/kg) demonstrated dramatic effect (inhibiting growth by
80% and by 53% in comparison with vehicle and chemotherapy group alone,
respectively (PAlofanib (formerly known as RPT835) is a novel allosteric
FGFR2 inhibitor with activity in FGFR2-expressing triple-negative breast
cancer [Tjulandin S, et al. San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium 2014].
Early data suggest that combining FGFR2 inhibitors with
platinum-containing cytotoxic agents for the treatment of epithelial
ovarian cancer may yield increased antitumor activity [Cole C, et al.
Cancer Biol Ther. 2010]. We investigated antitumor activity of alofanib
in ovarian cancer in vitro and in vivo.To assess the efficacy of alofanib
on FGF-mediated cell proliferation, ovarian cancer (SKOV-3)
FGFR2-expressing cells were incubated in a 96-well microculture plate and
were treated with serially diluted RPT835. Basic FGF was added at a
concentration of 25 ng/ml. Control wells were left untreated. Cell growth
inhibition was determined using Promega's Cell Titer-Glo assay.
Immunocompromised mice were used for xenotransplantation of FGFR2
high-expressing ovarian cancer cells (SCOV-3). Seventy animals with
measurable tumors were selected on day 10 and randomized into control
groups (no treatment or chemotherapy alone (paclitaxel + carboplatin) and
treatment groups (alofanib orally or intravenously (different dose
levels) in combination with chemotherapy). Measurements of tumor volume
(mm3) were performed by digital calipers every 3 days during 30 days
after tumor inoculation.Basic FGF significantly increased proliferation
of the ovarian cancer cells in untreated control group (P = 0.001).
Alofanib treatment resulted in growth inhibition of SKOV-3 cell line in
vitro. Treatment of alofanib in combination with paclitaxel/carboplatin
demonstrated significant tumor growth delay phenotype in all treatment
groups compared to control non-treatment groups. Alofanib exhibited a
dose-dependent effect on tumor growth. Daily intravenous regimen of
alofanib (total maximum dose per week was 350 mg/kg) demonstrated
dramatic effect (inhibiting growth by 80% and by 53% in comparison with
vehicle and chemotherapy group alone, respectively (P<0.001). Alofanib
decreased number of vessels in tumor on 49% compared with chemotherapy
alone (PAlofanib (formerly known as RPT835) is a novel allosteric FGFR2
inhibitor with activity in FGFR2-expressing triple-negative breast cancer
[Tjulandin S, et al. San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium 2014]. Early
data suggest that combining FGFR2 inhibitors with platinum-containing
cytotoxic agents for the treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer may yield
increased antitumor activity [Cole C, et al. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010]. We
investigated antitumor activity of alofanib in ovarian cancer in vitro
and in vivo.To assess the efficacy of alofanib on FGF-mediated cell
proliferation, ovarian cancer (SKOV-3) FGFR2-expressing cells were
incubated in a 96-well microculture plate and were treated with serially
diluted RPT835. Basic FGF was added at a concentration of 25 ng/ml.
Control wells were left untreated. Cell growth inhibition was determined
using Promega's Cell Titer-Glo assay. Immunocompromised mice were used
for xenotransplantation of FGFR2 high-expressing ovarian cancer cells
(SCOV-3). Seventy animals with measurable tumors were selected on day 10
and randomized into control groups (no treatment or chemotherapy alone
(paclitaxel + carboplatin) and treatment groups (alofanib orally or
intravenously (different dose levels) in combination with chemotherapy).
Measurements of tumor volume (mm3) were performed by digital calipers
every 3 days during 30 days after tumor inoculation.Basic FGF
significantly increased proliferation of the ovarian cancer cells in
untreated control group (P = 0.001). Alofanib treatment resulted in
growth inhibition of SKOV-3 cell line in vitro. Treatment of alofanib in
combination with paclitaxel/carboplatin demonstrated significant tumor
growth delay phenotype in all treatment groups compared to control
non-treatment groups. Alofanib exhibited a dose-dependent effect on tumor
growth. Daily intravenous regimen of alofanib (total maximum dose per
week was 350 mg/kg) demonstrated dramatic effect (inhibiting growth by
80% and by 53% in comparison with vehicle and chemotherapy group alone,
respectively (P<0.001). Alofanib decreased number of vessels in tumor on
49% compared with chemotherapy alone (P<0.05). There were tumor necrosis
and cell degeneration in alofanib group.These results provide strong
rationale for evaluation of alofanib in combination with paclitaxel and
carboplatin in patients with ovarian cancer.

