Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In Vivo efficacy of a novel anti-CD33 targeted thorium conjugate
(TTC) in mouse models of acute myeloid leukemia (AML)


Introduction:The sialoadhesin receptor CD33 is a well-established target
in the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). CD33 is expressed on
leukemic blasts in AML and possibly also on leukemic stem cells in some
patients (1). Thorium-227, an alpha-particle emitting radionuclide with a
half-life of 18.7 days, is being studied for use as a possible cytotoxic
agent. We have developed a novel Targeted Thorium Conjugate (TTC),
comprising an anti-CD33 monoclonal antibody conjugated to a chelator for
the efficient delivery of high-energy alpha-particles. We present data
from in vitro cell cytotoxicity assays as well as biodistribution and
efficacy data from preclinical animal models of AML.Experimental
procedures:Antibody conjugates were prepared and labeled with 227Th at
room temperature giving high radiochemical yields and purity. In vitro
cell cytotoxicity experiments were carried out on HL-60 cells and the
multi-drug resistant cell line KG-1 by measuring cell viability and
monitoring apoptosis. In vivo efficacy and biodistribution were performed
in a sub-cutaneous model of AML in athymic nude (nu/nu) mice using HL-60
cells. The 227Th-anti-CD33 conjugate was further tested in a disseminated
model of AML using HL-60 cells, injected intravenously 5 days prior to
treatment in CB.17 SCID mice with hind-leg paralysis as
endpoint.Results:The 227Th-anti-CD33 conjugate was a potent and specific
inducer of in vitro cell cytotoxicity independent of MDR-status.
Mechanistic studies demonstrated cell arrest in G2 phase with
cytotoxicity associated with apoptotic pathways. In vivo biodistribution
in a sub-cutaneous model demonstrated a high tumor to blood ratio (TBR 6)
at day 7 post injection based on measured 227Th-activity. Significant
efficacy was achieved in two models of AML using human HL-60 cells. In
athymic nude mice, a single injection of 227Th-anti-CD33 conjugate at 700
kBq/kg resulted in complete regression of established sub-cutaneous
tumors. Importantly, no significant loss in body weight was observed
during the course of the study, demonstrating that the dose was well
tolerated. In parallel, statistically significant dose dependency of
227Th-anti-CD33 conjugate was demonstrated in a disseminated model of AML
with median survival times (MST) of 90 days and 116 days for animals
receiving 50 and 150 kBq/kg. Around 80% of animals dosed with either 2
150 or 1 300 kBq/kg where still alive at the end of the study with no
gross pathological findings observed.Conclusions:The data presented are
supportive of the further investigation of the 227Th-anti-CD33 conjugate
for the treatment of AML.References:(1) Walter RB et al, Blood 2012, Vol
119, Number 26 (Acute myeloid leukemia stem cells and CD33-targeted
immunotherapy)

