Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic role of miRNAs in resectable non-small cell lung cancer


BACKGROUND MicroRNAs (miRNA) are a class of small RNAs that regulate gene
expression, and are implicated in several diseases including cancer. The
aim of this study was to analyze the prognostic implications of
deregulated miRNAs identified by NGS in a previous study performed on
resectable-NSCLC tumor samples.MATERIAL AND METHODS Fresh-frozen tumor
and normal adjacent lung tissue samples (N = 195) were obtained by
surgical resection from NSCLC patients and storage in RNAlater at -80C
until analysis. RNA was isolated biological specimens by Trizol
based-methods. 22 deregulated miRNA were analyzed in paired tumor/normal
samples by RTqPCR using TaqMan microRNA assays. Statistical analyses were
considered significant at pBACKGROUND MicroRNAs (miRNA) are a class of
small RNAs that regulate gene expression, and are implicated in several
diseases including cancer. The aim of this study was to analyze the
prognostic implications of deregulated miRNAs identified by NGS in a
previous study performed on resectable-NSCLC tumor samples.MATERIAL AND
METHODS Fresh-frozen tumor and normal adjacent lung tissue samples (N =
195) were obtained by surgical resection from NSCLC patients and storage
in RNAlater at -80C until analysis. RNA was isolated biological specimens
by Trizol based-methods. 22 deregulated miRNA were analyzed in paired
tumor/normal samples by RTqPCR using TaqMan microRNA assays. Statistical
analyses were considered significant at p<0.05.RESULTS Patient's median
age was 64 years [26-85], 88.2% were male, 66.7% had good performance
status (PS = 0), 39.5% were adenocarcinomas and 54.9% presented stage I
at the time of the diagnosis. For survival analysis, continuous variables
were dichotomized as high ( median) and low (BACKGROUND MicroRNAs (miRNA)
are a class of small RNAs that regulate gene expression, and are
implicated in several diseases including cancer. The aim of this study
was to analyze the prognostic implications of deregulated miRNAs
identified by NGS in a previous study performed on resectable-NSCLC tumor
samples.MATERIAL AND METHODS Fresh-frozen tumor and normal adjacent lung
tissue samples (N = 195) were obtained by surgical resection from NSCLC
patients and storage in RNAlater at -80C until analysis. RNA was isolated
biological specimens by Trizol based-methods. 22 deregulated miRNA were
analyzed in paired tumor/normal samples by RTqPCR using TaqMan microRNA
assays. Statistical analyses were considered significant at
p<0.05.RESULTS Patient's median age was 64 years [26-85], 88.2% were
male, 66.7% had good performance status (PS = 0), 39.5% were
adenocarcinomas and 54.9% presented stage I at the time of the diagnosis.
For survival analysis, continuous variables were dichotomized as high (
median) and low (< median), using the median expression of each miRNA as
a cutoff. Of the 22 miRNAs analyzed only miR-21 and miR-188-5p had
prognostic value. We found that patients with high levels of miR-21 and
miR-188-5p had a significant reduction in PFS and OS rates.
Interestingly, the group of patients with the combined high expression of
both miRNAs (miR-21high & miR-188-5phigh) showed shorter PFS and OS
(Table 1). Clinico-pathological and analytical variables were included in
the multivariate analysis revealing that combined miRNAs is an
independent prognostic marker for PFS (HR 0.485 [0.313-0.753]; p = 0.001)
and OS (HR 0.389 [0.237-0.638]; pBACKGROUND MicroRNAs (miRNA) are a class
of small RNAs that regulate gene expression, and are implicated in
several diseases including cancer. The aim of this study was to analyze
the prognostic implications of deregulated miRNAs identified by NGS in a
previous study performed on resectable-NSCLC tumor samples.MATERIAL AND
METHODS Fresh-frozen tumor and normal adjacent lung tissue samples (N =
195) were obtained by surgical resection from NSCLC patients and storage
in RNAlater at -80C until analysis. RNA was isolated biological specimens
by Trizol based-methods. 22 deregulated miRNA were analyzed in paired
tumor/normal samples by RTqPCR using TaqMan microRNA assays. Statistical
analyses were considered significant at p<0.05.RESULTS Patient's median
age was 64 years [26-85], 88.2% were male, 66.7% had good performance
status (PS = 0), 39.5% were adenocarcinomas and 54.9% presented stage I
at the time of the diagnosis. For survival analysis, continuous variables
were dichotomized as high ( median) and low (< median), using the median
expression of each miRNA as a cutoff. Of the 22 miRNAs analyzed only
miR-21 and miR-188-5p had prognostic value. We found that patients with
high levels of miR-21 and miR-188-5p had a significant reduction in PFS
and OS rates. Interestingly, the group of patients with the combined high
expression of both miRNAs (miR-21high & miR-188-5phigh) showed shorter
PFS and OS (Table 1). Clinico-pathological and analytical variables were
included in the multivariate analysis revealing that combined miRNAs is
an independent prognostic marker for PFS (HR 0.485 [0.313-0.753]; p =
0.001) and OS (HR 0.389 [0.237-0.638]; p<0.0001].CONCLUSION Expression of
miR-21 and miR-188-5p seems to have a prognostic role in NSCLC, and the
combination of both could be an independent prognostic marker in
early-stage NSCLC.Table 1. OS and PFS for miR-21 and miR-188-5p in NSCLC
patients (univariate analysis) Supported by grants RTICC (RD12/0036/0025
and RD06/0020/1024), TRACE (TRA09-0132) and Beca Roche Oncohematologa.

