Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decursin, a coumarin compound, inhibits the growth of human
hepatoma cells involving cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and autophagy


Although recent advances have been made for the treatment of liver
cancer, it still remains the sixth most diagnosed cancer worldwide and
second most cause of mortality related to cancer. Decursin, a naturally
occurring coumarin compound isolated from Angelica gigas Nakai is known
for its hepatoprotective activity. For the first time we show that
decursin has strong cytotoxic and growth inhibitory effects against liver
cancer cells. Decursin (1-25 M) resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition
of Hep3B cell proliferation by upto 65-85% (pAlthough recent advances
have been made for the treatment of liver cancer, it still remains the
sixth most diagnosed cancer worldwide and second most cause of mortality
related to cancer. Decursin, a naturally occurring coumarin compound
isolated from Angelica gigas Nakai is known for its hepatoprotective
activity. For the first time we show that decursin has strong cytotoxic
and growth inhibitory effects against liver cancer cells. Decursin (1-25
M) resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of Hep3B cell proliferation by
upto 65-85% (p<0.005-0.001) in 24-48 h. Similarly in HepG2 cells,
decursin (25-100 M) decreased cell number by upto 61-74% (pAlthough
recent advances have been made for the treatment of liver cancer, it
still remains the sixth most diagnosed cancer worldwide and second most
cause of mortality related to cancer. Decursin, a naturally occurring
coumarin compound isolated from Angelica gigas Nakai is known for its
hepatoprotective activity. For the first time we show that decursin has
strong cytotoxic and growth inhibitory effects against liver cancer
cells. Decursin (1-25 M) resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of Hep3B
cell proliferation by upto 65-85% (p<0.005-0.001) in 24-48 h. Similarly
in HepG2 cells, decursin (25-100 M) decreased cell number by upto 61-74%
(p<0.005-0.001) at 24-48 h. Growth inhibition was not due to the cell
death in HepG2 cells, whereas, Hep3B cells showed an increased cell death
(9-45%; pAlthough recent advances have been made for the treatment of
liver cancer, it still remains the sixth most diagnosed cancer worldwide
and second most cause of mortality related to cancer. Decursin, a
naturally occurring coumarin compound isolated from Angelica gigas Nakai
is known for its hepatoprotective activity. For the first time we show
that decursin has strong cytotoxic and growth inhibitory effects against
liver cancer cells. Decursin (1-25 M) resulted in a dose-dependent
inhibition of Hep3B cell proliferation by upto 65-85% (p<0.005-0.001) in
24-48 h. Similarly in HepG2 cells, decursin (25-100 M) decreased cell
number by upto 61-74% (p<0.005-0.001) at 24-48 h. Growth inhibition was
not due to the cell death in HepG2 cells, whereas, Hep3B cells showed an
increased cell death (9-45%; p<0.001). Decursin enhanced sub-G1
population of cells in Hep3B but not in HepG2. Further, decursin induced
G1 arrest at lower doses, however, at the higher doses cell death
prevailed over cell cycle arrest. A consistent G2/M phase arrest in HepG2
cells at all the time points, however, at 100 M, there was an induction
of S-phase arrest. Decursin strongly decreased the colony forming
efficiency of Hep3B cells. Decursin induced both apoptotic and autophagic
cell death. In flow cytometry analyses, an increase in the acidic
vesicular organelle development was observed at 24 and 48 h in Hep3B
cells. Interestingly, in decursin treated HepG2 cells, autophagic
induction occurred much later (48 h). This was further validated by MDC
staining. Mechanistic studies for cell cycle regulators showed that
decursin mediated G1 arrest could be via an increase in p21/cip1.
Concomitantly, we observed reduced levels of Cyclin A and B1 and their
respective kinases. PCNA, a marker of proliferation showed decreased in
expression. Decursin mediated induction of apoptosis involved cleavage of
caspase-3 and PARP and reduction in survivin level. This was accompanied
by an enhanced Bax/Bcl-2 ratio. Additionally, a potent decrease in the
phosphorylation of IGF-IR and its downstream effector Akt, was observed.
Decursin increased Erk1/2 phosphorylation, however, it was not associated
with cell growth or survival. Collectively, these findings suggest that
decursin strongly inhibits liver cancer growth and proliferation
involving induction of cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and autophagy and
could be further explored and developed as novel treatment option for the
hepatic malignancies.

