Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The potent ALK inhibitor AP26113 can overcome mechanisms of
resistance to first- and second-generation ALK TKIs in preclinical models


Background:Disease progression in anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive
(ALK+) non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (pts) treated with the
first-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) crizotinib, or the
second-generation inhibitors ceritinib and alectinib, is often associated
with secondary resistance mutations in ALK (such as G1202R, linked with
resistance to all 3 TKIs in pts), or relapse in the brain. AP26113 is a
highly potent ALK inhibitor with promising anti-tumor activity in pts
with crizotinib-resistant disease. Here we broadly evaluate AP26113's
ability to overcome mechanisms of resistance to first- and
second-generation ALK inhibitors, in preclinical models (including brain
cancer models), and describe a novel methodology to compare in vitro
potency, clinical pharmacokinetic parameters, and clinical
efficacy.Methods:Ba/F3 cells were engineered to express native EML4-ALK
or 17 mutants resistant to crizotinib, ceritinib, and/or alectinib in
clinical or preclinical studies. IC50s for all TKIs were compared to
clinically effective plasma concentrations (Ceff) of each inhibitor,
which were derived using average steady-state levels in pts, and
corrected for the functional effects of protein binding in vitro. In vivo
studies were performed in mice, in which Ba/F3 cells with mutant or
native EML4-ALK were injected subcutaneously, or a NSCLC line with
EML4-ALK (H2228) was injected into the brain.Results:The Ceff of
crizotinib was only 2-fold above the IC50 for native ALK, suggesting that
crizotinib may be susceptible to mutants that inhibit binding by only a
few-fold. Indeed, 8/10 mutants previously associated with clinical
resistance to crizotinib were found to have IC50s that exceed the Ceff.
Similar analyses revealed mutants with IC50s that exceeded the Ceff for
ceritinib (e.g. L1198F) and alectinib (e.g. I1171N), with G1202R being
the most recalcitrant mutant overall. In contrast, the Ceff of AP26113
was >20-fold above the IC50 for native ALK, and exceeded the IC50 for all
17 mutants, including G2102R. In vivo, among all 4 TKIs tested (at doses
effective against native ALK), only AP26113 demonstrated significant
efficacy against G1202R-mutant ALK (88% tumor growth inhibition).
Finally, compared to crizotinib, AP26113 markedly enhanced survival of
mice bearing brain tumors.Conclusion:AP26113 inhibits all 17 clinically
and preclinically observed crizotinib-, ceritinib-, and/or
alectinib-resistant ALK mutants tested in vitro, has potent effects on
the recalcitrant G1202R mutant in vivo and has activity in an orthotopic
brain model. These results suggest AP26113 may effectively address a
broad range of resistance mechanisms identified for other ALK TKIs.
AP26113 is currently in a global phase 2 registration trial in patients
with locally advanced or metastatic ALK+ NSCLC who were previously
treated with crizotinib (NCT02094573).

