Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a highly sensitive library prep method for
identifying pathogenic variants from FFPE tumor samples


The application of genomics in cancer has led to an improved
understanding of the disease. To date, 125 known driver genes have been
discovered*. These genes and their pathways have become the focus of
small-molecule drug development. While the number of available targeted
therapies is limited, an estimated 800 oncology drugs are in
development*, many of which target specific mutations. Single-analyte
companion diagnostics exist for the approved therapies, and more might be
developed as new therapeutics become available, but the need to assay
each variant individually can be ineffective.. An additional, well-known
challenge is the degradation and damage caused to DNA in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples. For these reasons, Illumina is
developing a novel method for simultaneous detection of multiple somatic
variants from FFPE specimens. This method leverages a multiplexed PCR
approach with amplicons designed to a 15-gene panel that can detect
somatic variants in 14 genes, and copy number changes in 3 genes. In our
experiments, this multiplexed PCR assay has been demonstrated to be
highly sensitive, yielding results from as little as 20 ng of DNA
extracted from FFPE tissue, even if the DNA is highly damaged and
degraded. Somatic variants can be detected down to 5% allele fraction,
and gene amplifications can be detected for 2.2-fold change in copy
number. This method, incorporating newly designed software, will be
deployed as part of the Illumina Universal Oncology Test System on the
MiSeqDx (under development), analyzing the sequencing results, and
generating reports of mutations and copy number changes in cancer samples.

