Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAK1 modulates a PPAR/NF-B cascade in intestinal inflammation


Background & Aims: P21-activated kinases (PAKs) are multifunctional
effectors of Rho GTPases with both kinase and scaffolding activity. Here,
we investigated the effects of inflammation on PAK1 signaling in
inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) including Crohn's disease (CD),
ulcerative colitis (UC), and its role in colitis-associated
carcinogenesis (CAC). Methods: PAK1 and p-PAK1 (Thr423) were assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC), immunofluorescence, and Western blot.
C57BL6/J wildtype mice were treated with a single i.p. TNF injection.
Small intestinal organoids from these mice and from PAK1-KO mice were
cultured with TNF. NF-B and PPAR were analyzed upon PAK1 overexpression
and silencing. All data are meanSD. Results: IHC revealed PAK1 expression
increased from 2.81.6 in normal mucosa to 5.21.4 in CD, 6.01.7 in UC, and
8.81.0 in CAC. In UC, PAK1 activation increased at the luminal intestinal
epithelial surface from 1.31.4 to 5.02.3. In primary colon epithelial
cells, PAK1 was phosphorylated upon treatment with IFN, IL-1, and TNF. In
vivo, mice administered with TNF showed increased p-PAK1 from 4.31.0 to
9.90.1 in intestinal villi, which co-localized with NF-B activation.
Indeed, p65 nuclear translocation downstream of TNF was strongly
inhibited in PAK1-KO small intestinal organoids. PAK1 overexpression
induced a PAK1-p65 interaction as visualized by co-immunoprecipitation,
nuclear p65 translocation, and increased NF-B transactivation four fold,
all of which were impeded upon kinase-dead PAK1. Also PAK1 overexpression
downregulated PPAR mRNA levels from 1 to 0.40.1 and mesalamine recovered
PPAR to 0.80.04 through PAK1 inhibition. On the other hand PAK1 silencing
inhibited NF-B transactivation from 1 to 0.10.02, which was recovered
upon the PPAR antagonist BADGE to 0.50.1. Conclusions: Altogether these
data demonstrate that PAK1 overexpression and activation in IBD and CAC
promote NF-B activity via suppression of PPAR in intestinal epithelial
cells.

