Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Magnolin suppresses cell migration by abrogation of ERK-mediated
RSK2/NF-B signaling pathway


Our previous study demonstrated that RSK2 directly phosphorylated IB at
ser 32, resulted in its degradation which leads to promote NF-B
activation and might be an important role in metastasis. Therefore, it is
reasonable the discovery of chemotherapeutic and/or chemopreventive
agent. Magnolin, an ingredient of magnolia species, suppressed
EGF-induced neoplastic cell transformation by targeting of ERK 1 and 2.
In this study, we found that magnolin inhibited cell migration and
invasion of normal cell and human lung cancer cells. Further, we
demonstrated that magnolin suppressed epidermal growth factor-induced
ERK/RSK2 signaling pathway, resulting in suppression of NF-B activity in
JB6Cl41 cells. The EGF-induced NF-B activity was abrogated up-regulation
of COX-2 mRNA expression and COX-2 protein levels by co-treatment of EGF
and magnolin. Interestingly, magnolin suppressed ERK-mediated MMP-2 and
NF-B-mediated MMP-9 expression. In addition, we found that the protein
expression of N-cadherin involved in metastasis was markedly attenuated
upon treatment with magnolin. Notably, magnolin suppressed the migration
and invasion of lung cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner. Taken
together, these results demonstrated that magnolin is beneficial for the
anti-invasion and -migration in cancer metastasis.

