Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of mutations detected in liquid and tissue biopsies


Circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) in plasma can be used to detect
biomarkers that show great promise for diagnosis and monitoring of
cancer, giving rise to the possibility of liquid biopsies that obviate
the need for invasive tissue collection. The low concentration and highly
fragmented nature of ccfDNA, coupled with the low frequency of potential
oncogenic biomarkers, presents challenges and will require a purification
method that is efficient and highly reproducible.Here we describe a
method for purifying nucleic acids based on novel surface and binding
chemistries. The combination of these two approaches allows for increased
binding of fragmented DNA. The method can be partially automated to
ensure highly reproducible results. Up to 4mls of plasma can be processed
and eluted in as little as 15ul, giving DNA concentrations of 1-10ul.
This greatly facilitates use in Next Generation Sequencing.Using the
automated method, ccfDNA was purified from the plasma of 7 patients who
had previously undergone surgical resection for malignancy. DNA was also
purified from the FFPE malignant tissue off of slides, following
macrodissection, from the same patients. NGS was used to interrogate both
sample types for potentially oncogenic variants. Several laboratory
developed tests, all including COLD-PCR, were also employed to verify the
presence or absence of variants. The two types of samples showed
excellent correlation on mutations, suggesting that use of a less
invasive liquid biopsy has the potential to enable actionable mutation
detection without using more invasive solid tumor biopsy means.

