Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATM genotyping modulates the risk of radiation-associated breast
cancer among atomic-bomb survivors


Objective: RERF epidemiological studies among atomic-bomb (A-bomb)
survivors have demonstrated significantly-increased incidence of selected
cancers with increased radiation dose. It is noteworthy that a great deal
of inter-individual variation in susceptibility to radiation-associated
cancers could not be explained solely by radiation dose and age at
exposure, suggesting the possibility that this variation might be partly
ascribed to inter-individual differences in DNA repair capacity. Of 11
known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the DNA repair gene ATM,
we selected a particular SNP (rs189037; located in the 5 untranslated
region and therefore thought to be associated with ATM gene expression)
and examined the association with radiation-associated breast cancer in
the context of an RERF A-bomb survivor cohort study.Materials and
Methods: A follow-up survey during 1981-2005 of 2,944 female members of
the RERF Immunogenome Study Cohort identified a total of 100 breast
cancer cases. ATM genotypes (ATM-G/G, -G/A, and -A/A) were determined by
the TaqMan assay method for all cohort members. Relative risks (RRs) of
breast cancer were estimated for radiation dose, the ATM genotypes, and
the combined categories of dose levels and genotypes.Results and
Discussion: Disregarding the genotype effects, RR of breast cancer
significantly increased with increased radiation dose (RR = 1.51/Gy, 95%
CI: 1.25-1.83). For overall radiation dose levels, A-bomb survivors with
ATM-G/G homozygote revealed a significantly-increased RR of breast cancer
(RR = 1.85, 95%CI: 1.24-2.75), using as reference the risk of those with
ATM-A/A homozygotes combined with ATM-G/A heterozygotes. When radiation
dose was categorized into three levels (530 mGy), the survivors with
ATM-A/A who were exposed to the highest dose level (>530 mGy) showed the
highest risk of breast cancer (RR = 4.76, 95%CI: 2.30-9.88), using as
reference the risk of non-exposed survivors with ATM-T/T or ATM-A/T.
These results suggest the possibility that the ATM genotyping may be
involved in individually differing susceptibility to radiation-associated
breast cancer.

