Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting relapse using CD138-independent strategy to detect
residual myeloma plasma cells


Introduction: Despite the introduction of novel therapies, majority of
multiple myeloma (MM) patients relapses. The major reason for the relapse
in MM is the presence of a minimal residual disease (MRD) population that
remains after treatment. MM cells are defined as CD138+; however, the
presence of clonogenic CD138-negative MM cells and hypoxia-driven CD138
decrease in expression were previously shown. We propose a novel set of
biomarkers (independent of CD138) to detect MRD in MM in order to predict
patient relapse.Procedures: We tested the effect of hypoxia on CD markers
expression in MM cell lines. We developed new method to detect MM cells
by flow cytometry based on CD38(APC+) gating and negatively selecting
other leukocytes including T cells, B cells, monocytes, NK cells, and
dendritic cells using CD3, CD19, CD14, CD16, and CD123, respectively
(FITC-conjugated), the MM cells were defined as APC+/FITC-. We compared
traditional method (CD138-based) with the new set of biomarkers (1) to
detect normoxic and hypoxic MM cells, (2) to detect MM cells in the
peripheral blood (PB) and the bone marrow (BM) from MM patients,
confirming cell clonality by internal staining with Kappa/Lambda light
chain antibodies, and (3) to predict relapse in MM patients whose BM was
defined a CD138-negative.Summary of data: We found that hypoxia decreased
the expression of CD138 by 50%, while CD38 was not altered by hypoxia in
MM cells. The use of CD138+ as a marker for MM detected only 60-75% of
hypoxic MM cells, whereas APC+/FITC- strategy detected close to a 100% of
the hypoxic MM cells in vitro. In patient samples, all patients had a
higher number of BM-derived and circulating MM cells as detected by
APC+/FITC- strategy compared to CD138+. In addition, the clonality of the
APC+/FITC- population in BM negative fractions was the same as the
original disease (CD138+ cells). Moreover, studies conducted on 16
patients with BM defined as a CD138-negative, showed that the novel
APC+/FITC- strategy was more successful than CD138-based method or
histology in predicting recurrence and time to relapse. The median
time-to-progression with Introduction: Despite the introduction of novel
therapies, majority of multiple myeloma (MM) patients relapses. The major
reason for the relapse in MM is the presence of a minimal residual
disease (MRD) population that remains after treatment. MM cells are
defined as CD138+; however, the presence of clonogenic CD138-negative MM
cells and hypoxia-driven CD138 decrease in expression were previously
shown. We propose a novel set of biomarkers (independent of CD138) to
detect MRD in MM in order to predict patient relapse.Procedures: We
tested the effect of hypoxia on CD markers expression in MM cell lines.
We developed new method to detect MM cells by flow cytometry based on
CD38(APC+) gating and negatively selecting other leukocytes including T
cells, B cells, monocytes, NK cells, and dendritic cells using CD3, CD19,
CD14, CD16, and CD123, respectively (FITC-conjugated), the MM cells were
defined as APC+/FITC-. We compared traditional method (CD138-based) with
the new set of biomarkers (1) to detect normoxic and hypoxic MM cells,
(2) to detect MM cells in the peripheral blood (PB) and the bone marrow
(BM) from MM patients, confirming cell clonality by internal staining
with Kappa/Lambda light chain antibodies, and (3) to predict relapse in
MM patients whose BM was defined a CD138-negative.Summary of data: We
found that hypoxia decreased the expression of CD138 by 50%, while CD38
was not altered by hypoxia in MM cells. The use of CD138+ as a marker for
MM detected only 60-75% of hypoxic MM cells, whereas APC+/FITC- strategy
detected close to a 100% of the hypoxic MM cells in vitro. In patient
samples, all patients had a higher number of BM-derived and circulating
MM cells as detected by APC+/FITC- strategy compared to CD138+. In
addition, the clonality of the APC+/FITC- population in BM negative
fractions was the same as the original disease (CD138+ cells). Moreover,
studies conducted on 16 patients with BM defined as a CD138-negative,
showed that the novel APC+/FITC- strategy was more successful than
CD138-based method or histology in predicting recurrence and time to
relapse. The median time-to-progression with <2% or 2% of MM cells
detected by novel strategy was 40 and 20 months, respectively. Moreover,
patients who relapsed within 2 years had an average 4.4% of APC+/FITC-
cells, while patients who relapse in more than 2 years had an average of
1.6% APC+/FITC- cells in their BM.Conclusion: CD138 cannot be used as a
universal marker to detect MM cells, especially when they are hypoxic. A
novel set of biomarkers CD38+/CD3-/CD19-/CD14-/CD16-/CD123- (APC+/FITC-)
was designed to detect MM cells independent of CD138 expression and
hypoxic status. This strategy was able to detect a clonal CD138-negative
MM cell population in the BM and PB from MM patients. Moreover, this
strategy predicted tumor recurrence and relapse in MM patients more
accurately compared to traditional methods such as CD138-based or
histology.

