Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delineating the role of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in the
generation and maintenance of prostate cancer stem cells


Prostate cancer cells depend on androgens for growth and survival. While
androgen-deprivation-therapy (ADT) results in regression of the tumor
bulk, in many cases, the cancers recur in aggressive androgen-independent
forms that are also resistant to standard-of-care therapies. The
prevailing hypothesis is that pre-existing androgen-independent prostate
cancer (PCa) stem-cells in the primary tumor are selectively enriched
following therapy. However, we have previously shown that induction of
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) in differentiated breast
epithelial cells can result in the generation of cells with stem-cell
properties. In the current study, we investigated if induction of EMT in
PCa promotes stem-cell features and androgen-receptor (AR) regulation,
and if targeting EMT-promoting pathways renders PCa stem-cells sensitive
to ADT.We found that LNCaP-PSAlow cells, which were previously shown to
represent the PCa stem-cell population, exhibit EMT properties. Induction
of EMT through over-expression of EMT-inducing transcription factors or
with TGF1 treatment, significantly stimulated stem-cell properties in the
androgen-sensitive LNCaP cells, whereas inhibition of EMT in the
androgen-insensitive DU145 cells using targeted shRNA or a specific
TGF1-signaling inhibitor, resulted in markedly reduced stemness. We
observed that FOXC2 expression consistently correlated with induction of
EMT and androgen-insensitivity in PCa cells. Our study demonstrates that
targeting EMT-inducing molecules and signaling pathways could represent a
tangible approach to inhibiting the generation and maintenance of
therapy-resistant PCa stem-cells, that are the prime harbingers of tumor
recurrence.

