Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epicopy: Measuring DNA copy number variation using high-density
methylation microarrays


Background:Cancers exploit changes in both genomic copy number and DNA
methylation to promote growth and escape tumor-suppressor pathways. Under
the 2-hit hypothesis, a single gene is likely to be altered by multiple
mechanisms at the same time and integrated analysis can sharpen the focus
on the most likely drivers. Requiring larger amounts of input material
and imposing additional costs may limit multiplatform analysis,
especially in studies using archival tissues with long clinical follow-up
information where the nucleic acids are degraded and yields are generally
lower than are obtained from fresh tissues. Taking advantage of
similarities between methylation arrays and SNP arrays, we developed
Epicopy, a robust computational method to identify DNA copy number
variation (CNV) using high-density Illumina Human Methylation 450K
methylation microarrays, thereby delivering two complementary genetic and
epigenetic profiles from a single chip.Methods:Epicopy was developed
using data from thyroid carcinoma samples arrayed by The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) and subsequently validated on breast and lung small cell
carcinoma TCGA datasets. Using Epicopy, we identified circumstances where
CNV information can be reliably measured by methylation
microarrays.Results:Using TCGA SNP microarrays as the gold standard to
assess the performance of methylation derived CNV data from the thyroid,
breast, and lung small cell carcinoma datasets, we showed that Epicopy is
able to detect CNVs identified by SNP arrays at a sensitivity of 0.69 and
specificity of 0.90. Frequently occurring CNVs identified using Genomic
Identification of Significant Targets in Cancer (GISTIC), were identified
with even higher accuracy.Conclusion:Epicopy provides a robust method to
obtain both copy number and methylation information from a single
methylation microarray experiment and will add value to methylation
microarrays at no additional cost to the user. Tools to highlight regions
of high sensitivity and specificity will also be provided to help users
decide on the feasibility of using Epicopy to identify CNVs in regions of
interest. Epicopy is implemented in the R statistical language and will
be made available as a freestanding package as part of the Bioconductor
bioinformatics software project.

