Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contribution of cell types and genetic alterations in breast
cancer progression


Breast cancer is classified in to different subtypes based on gene
expression profiling. Significantly distinct subtypes present different
outcome for patient survival, thus underscoring importance of
understanding the role of precursor cell and genetic alterations in
breast cancer subtypes. In the present study we are evaluating the role
of defined combination of oncogenes in two distinct cell types in
regulating the oncogenesis and metastatic behavior. We have earlier
developed two hTERT-immortalized human stem/progenitor cell lines that
are designated as K5+/K19- or K5+/K19+. We introduced different oncogenes
in these cell lines and then examined their oncogenic potential, tumor
formation and metastasis, using both in vitro and in vivo assays. We
found that combinations of mutant H-Ras(mRas) and mutant p53(mp53),
together with either wild type ErbB2(wtErbB2) or wild type EGFR(wtEGFR)
efficiently transformed both cell types. Tumors formed by these cells
were histologically heterogeneous, with variable proportions of luminal,
basal-like and claudin-low type components dependent on cell types and
oncogene combinations. Notably, K5+/K19- cells transformed with
mRas/mp53/wtEGFR combination had significantly longer latency for primary
tumor development than those expressing mRas/mp53/wtErbB2. Despite the
longer latency, overall oncogene combination mRas/mp53/wtEGFR give early
lung metastasis onset in both K5+/K19- and K5+/K19+ cells as compared to
mRas/mp53/wtErbB2 indicating higher metastatic potential of this
combination. Besides the effect of different oncogene combinations, we
also found that K5+/K19+ cells overall had shorter primary tumor latency,
and high metastatic potential than K5+/K19- cells. Histological and
biochemical characterization of metastatic tumors is underway and will be
discussed at the time of presentation. Our results suggest that both the
genetic alteration and cell type contribute to oncogenicity of breast
tumors.

