Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and evaluation of pharmacodynamic and predictive
biomarkers for anti-RSPO3, a treatment that reduces tumor growth and
cancer stem cell frequency in patient derived xenograft tumor models


R-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel family of secreted ligands that bind to
LGR receptors and are important in human tumor development. We screened
our tumor bank of close to 100 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) and
found that a subset of breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer
models highly express RSPO3, which activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway by blocking internalization and degradation of Frizzled
receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody that significantly reduces
cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in vivo serial transplantation
experiment performed in a lung PDX model. Briefly, fifty tumor cells from
four different treatment groups (control antibody, anti-RSPO3,
Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and Paclitaxel) were
injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all mice in the
control group developed palpable tumors while the mice implanted with
cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs. Ctr) or in
combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups developed fewer
and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing tumorigenicity was
observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs. Paclitaxel).We also
tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3 expressing PDX cancer
models. Our data show that compared to standard of care the combination
of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in promoting tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%R-spondins (RSPOs) are a
novel family of secreted ligands that bind to LGR receptors and are
important in human tumor development. We screened our tumor bank of close
to 100 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) and found that a subset of
breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer models highly express RSPO3,
which activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway by blocking
internalization and degradation of Frizzled receptors.We generated an
anti-RSPO3 antibody that significantly reduces cancer stem cell
frequency, as shown by an in vivo serial transplantation experiment
performed in a lung PDX model. Briefly, fifty tumor cells from four
different treatment groups (control antibody, anti-RSPO3, Paclitaxel, or
the combination of anti-RSPO3 and Paclitaxel) were injected into a new
cohort of mice. After 59 days, all mice in the control group developed
palpable tumors while the mice implanted with cells harvested from
anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs. Ctr) or in combination with Paclitaxel
(p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups developed fewer and smaller tumors. The
strongest effect in decreasing tumorigenicity was observed in the
combination group (p = 0.0046 vs. Paclitaxel).We also tested anti-RSPO3
treatment in a range of RSPO3 expressing PDX cancer models. Our data show
that compared to standard of care the combination of our antibody with
Paclitaxel is more effective in promoting tumor growth inhibition (TGI)
in both ovarian (93%<TGIR-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel family of secreted
ligands that bind to LGR receptors and are important in human tumor
development. We screened our tumor bank of close to 100 patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs) and found that a subset of breast, lung, ovarian, and
pancreatic cancer models highly express RSPO3, which activates the
Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway by blocking internalization and
degradation of Frizzled receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody
that significantly reduces cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in
vivo serial transplantation experiment performed in a lung PDX model.
Briefly, fifty tumor cells from four different treatment groups (control
antibody, anti-RSPO3, Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and
Paclitaxel) were injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all
mice in the control group developed palpable tumors while the mice
implanted with cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs.
Ctr) or in combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups
developed fewer and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing
tumorigenicity was observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs.
Paclitaxel).We also tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3
expressing PDX cancer models. Our data show that compared to standard of
care the combination of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in
promoting tumor growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and
lung (78%R-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel family of secreted ligands that
bind to LGR receptors and are important in human tumor development. We
screened our tumor bank of close to 100 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)
and found that a subset of breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer
models highly express RSPO3, which activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway by blocking internalization and degradation of Frizzled
receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody that significantly reduces
cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in vivo serial transplantation
experiment performed in a lung PDX model. Briefly, fifty tumor cells from
four different treatment groups (control antibody, anti-RSPO3,
Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and Paclitaxel) were
injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all mice in the
control group developed palpable tumors while the mice implanted with
cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs. Ctr) or in
combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups developed fewer
and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing tumorigenicity was
observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs. Paclitaxel).We also
tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3 expressing PDX cancer
models. Our data show that compared to standard of care the combination
of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in promoting tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and lung
(78%<TGIR-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel family of secreted ligands that
bind to LGR receptors and are important in human tumor development. We
screened our tumor bank of close to 100 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)
and found that a subset of breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer
models highly express RSPO3, which activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway by blocking internalization and degradation of Frizzled
receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody that significantly reduces
cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in vivo serial transplantation
experiment performed in a lung PDX model. Briefly, fifty tumor cells from
four different treatment groups (control antibody, anti-RSPO3,
Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and Paclitaxel) were
injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all mice in the
control group developed palpable tumors while the mice implanted with
cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs. Ctr) or in
combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups developed fewer
and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing tumorigenicity was
observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs. Paclitaxel).We also
tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3 expressing PDX cancer
models. Our data show that compared to standard of care the combination
of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in promoting tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and lung
(78%<TGI<93%) PDX models (Paclitaxel: 48%R-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel
family of secreted ligands that bind to LGR receptors and are important
in human tumor development. We screened our tumor bank of close to 100
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) and found that a subset of breast,
lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer models highly express RSPO3, which
activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway by blocking internalization
and degradation of Frizzled receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody
that significantly reduces cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in
vivo serial transplantation experiment performed in a lung PDX model.
Briefly, fifty tumor cells from four different treatment groups (control
antibody, anti-RSPO3, Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and
Paclitaxel) were injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all
mice in the control group developed palpable tumors while the mice
implanted with cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs.
Ctr) or in combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups
developed fewer and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing
tumorigenicity was observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs.
Paclitaxel).We also tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3
expressing PDX cancer models. Our data show that compared to standard of
care the combination of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in
promoting tumor growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and
lung (78%<TGI<93%) PDX models (Paclitaxel: 48%<TGIR-spondins (RSPOs) are
a novel family of secreted ligands that bind to LGR receptors and are
important in human tumor development. We screened our tumor bank of close
to 100 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) and found that a subset of
breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer models highly express RSPO3,
which activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway by blocking
internalization and degradation of Frizzled receptors.We generated an
anti-RSPO3 antibody that significantly reduces cancer stem cell
frequency, as shown by an in vivo serial transplantation experiment
performed in a lung PDX model. Briefly, fifty tumor cells from four
different treatment groups (control antibody, anti-RSPO3, Paclitaxel, or
the combination of anti-RSPO3 and Paclitaxel) were injected into a new
cohort of mice. After 59 days, all mice in the control group developed
palpable tumors while the mice implanted with cells harvested from
anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs. Ctr) or in combination with Paclitaxel
(p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups developed fewer and smaller tumors. The
strongest effect in decreasing tumorigenicity was observed in the
combination group (p = 0.0046 vs. Paclitaxel).We also tested anti-RSPO3
treatment in a range of RSPO3 expressing PDX cancer models. Our data show
that compared to standard of care the combination of our antibody with
Paclitaxel is more effective in promoting tumor growth inhibition (TGI)
in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and lung (78%<TGI<93%) PDX models
(Paclitaxel: 48%<TGI<69% and 60%R-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel family of
secreted ligands that bind to LGR receptors and are important in human
tumor development. We screened our tumor bank of close to 100
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) and found that a subset of breast,
lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer models highly express RSPO3, which
activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway by blocking internalization
and degradation of Frizzled receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody
that significantly reduces cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in
vivo serial transplantation experiment performed in a lung PDX model.
Briefly, fifty tumor cells from four different treatment groups (control
antibody, anti-RSPO3, Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and
Paclitaxel) were injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all
mice in the control group developed palpable tumors while the mice
implanted with cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs.
Ctr) or in combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups
developed fewer and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing
tumorigenicity was observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs.
Paclitaxel).We also tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3
expressing PDX cancer models. Our data show that compared to standard of
care the combination of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in
promoting tumor growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and
lung (78%<TGI<93%) PDX models (Paclitaxel: 48%<TGI<69% and
60%<TGIR-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel family of secreted ligands that
bind to LGR receptors and are important in human tumor development. We
screened our tumor bank of close to 100 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)
and found that a subset of breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer
models highly express RSPO3, which activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway by blocking internalization and degradation of Frizzled
receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody that significantly reduces
cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in vivo serial transplantation
experiment performed in a lung PDX model. Briefly, fifty tumor cells from
four different treatment groups (control antibody, anti-RSPO3,
Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and Paclitaxel) were
injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all mice in the
control group developed palpable tumors while the mice implanted with
cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs. Ctr) or in
combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups developed fewer
and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing tumorigenicity was
observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs. Paclitaxel).We also
tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3 expressing PDX cancer
models. Our data show that compared to standard of care the combination
of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in promoting tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and lung
(78%<TGI<93%) PDX models (Paclitaxel: 48%<TGI<69% and 60%<TGI<68%
respectively). In addition, anti-RSPO3 treatment is effective in delaying
tumor growth both as a single agent (47%R-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel
family of secreted ligands that bind to LGR receptors and are important
in human tumor development. We screened our tumor bank of close to 100
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) and found that a subset of breast,
lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer models highly express RSPO3, which
activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway by blocking internalization
and degradation of Frizzled receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody
that significantly reduces cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in
vivo serial transplantation experiment performed in a lung PDX model.
Briefly, fifty tumor cells from four different treatment groups (control
antibody, anti-RSPO3, Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and
Paclitaxel) were injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all
mice in the control group developed palpable tumors while the mice
implanted with cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs.
Ctr) or in combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups
developed fewer and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing
tumorigenicity was observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs.
Paclitaxel).We also tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3
expressing PDX cancer models. Our data show that compared to standard of
care the combination of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in
promoting tumor growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and
lung (78%<TGI<93%) PDX models (Paclitaxel: 48%<TGI<69% and 60%<TGI<68%
respectively). In addition, anti-RSPO3 treatment is effective in delaying
tumor growth both as a single agent (47%<TGIR-spondins (RSPOs) are a
novel family of secreted ligands that bind to LGR receptors and are
important in human tumor development. We screened our tumor bank of close
to 100 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) and found that a subset of
breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer models highly express RSPO3,
which activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway by blocking
internalization and degradation of Frizzled receptors.We generated an
anti-RSPO3 antibody that significantly reduces cancer stem cell
frequency, as shown by an in vivo serial transplantation experiment
performed in a lung PDX model. Briefly, fifty tumor cells from four
different treatment groups (control antibody, anti-RSPO3, Paclitaxel, or
the combination of anti-RSPO3 and Paclitaxel) were injected into a new
cohort of mice. After 59 days, all mice in the control group developed
palpable tumors while the mice implanted with cells harvested from
anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs. Ctr) or in combination with Paclitaxel
(p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups developed fewer and smaller tumors. The
strongest effect in decreasing tumorigenicity was observed in the
combination group (p = 0.0046 vs. Paclitaxel).We also tested anti-RSPO3
treatment in a range of RSPO3 expressing PDX cancer models. Our data show
that compared to standard of care the combination of our antibody with
Paclitaxel is more effective in promoting tumor growth inhibition (TGI)
in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and lung (78%<TGI<93%) PDX models
(Paclitaxel: 48%<TGI<69% and 60%<TGI<68% respectively). In addition,
anti-RSPO3 treatment is effective in delaying tumor growth both as a
single agent (47%<TGI<76%) and in combination with Irinotecan
(66%R-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel family of secreted ligands that bind
to LGR receptors and are important in human tumor development. We
screened our tumor bank of close to 100 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)
and found that a subset of breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer
models highly express RSPO3, which activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway by blocking internalization and degradation of Frizzled
receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody that significantly reduces
cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in vivo serial transplantation
experiment performed in a lung PDX model. Briefly, fifty tumor cells from
four different treatment groups (control antibody, anti-RSPO3,
Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and Paclitaxel) were
injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all mice in the
control group developed palpable tumors while the mice implanted with
cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs. Ctr) or in
combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups developed fewer
and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing tumorigenicity was
observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs. Paclitaxel).We also
tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3 expressing PDX cancer
models. Our data show that compared to standard of care the combination
of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in promoting tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and lung
(78%<TGI<93%) PDX models (Paclitaxel: 48%<TGI<69% and 60%<TGI<68%
respectively). In addition, anti-RSPO3 treatment is effective in delaying
tumor growth both as a single agent (47%<TGI<76%) and in combination with
Irinotecan (66%<TGIR-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel family of secreted
ligands that bind to LGR receptors and are important in human tumor
development. We screened our tumor bank of close to 100 patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs) and found that a subset of breast, lung, ovarian, and
pancreatic cancer models highly express RSPO3, which activates the
Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway by blocking internalization and
degradation of Frizzled receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody
that significantly reduces cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in
vivo serial transplantation experiment performed in a lung PDX model.
Briefly, fifty tumor cells from four different treatment groups (control
antibody, anti-RSPO3, Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and
Paclitaxel) were injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all
mice in the control group developed palpable tumors while the mice
implanted with cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs.
Ctr) or in combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups
developed fewer and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing
tumorigenicity was observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs.
Paclitaxel).We also tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3
expressing PDX cancer models. Our data show that compared to standard of
care the combination of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in
promoting tumor growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and
lung (78%<TGI<93%) PDX models (Paclitaxel: 48%<TGI<69% and 60%<TGI<68%
respectively). In addition, anti-RSPO3 treatment is effective in delaying
tumor growth both as a single agent (47%<TGI<76%) and in combination with
Irinotecan (66%<TGI<100%) when compared to the Irinotecan alone group
(44%R-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel family of secreted ligands that bind
to LGR receptors and are important in human tumor development. We
screened our tumor bank of close to 100 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)
and found that a subset of breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer
models highly express RSPO3, which activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway by blocking internalization and degradation of Frizzled
receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody that significantly reduces
cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in vivo serial transplantation
experiment performed in a lung PDX model. Briefly, fifty tumor cells from
four different treatment groups (control antibody, anti-RSPO3,
Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and Paclitaxel) were
injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all mice in the
control group developed palpable tumors while the mice implanted with
cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs. Ctr) or in
combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups developed fewer
and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing tumorigenicity was
observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs. Paclitaxel).We also
tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3 expressing PDX cancer
models. Our data show that compared to standard of care the combination
of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in promoting tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and lung
(78%<TGI<93%) PDX models (Paclitaxel: 48%<TGI<69% and 60%<TGI<68%
respectively). In addition, anti-RSPO3 treatment is effective in delaying
tumor growth both as a single agent (47%<TGI<76%) and in combination with
Irinotecan (66%<TGI<100%) when compared to the Irinotecan alone group
(44%<TGIR-spondins (RSPOs) are a novel family of secreted ligands that
bind to LGR receptors and are important in human tumor development. We
screened our tumor bank of close to 100 patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)
and found that a subset of breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer
models highly express RSPO3, which activates the Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway by blocking internalization and degradation of Frizzled
receptors.We generated an anti-RSPO3 antibody that significantly reduces
cancer stem cell frequency, as shown by an in vivo serial transplantation
experiment performed in a lung PDX model. Briefly, fifty tumor cells from
four different treatment groups (control antibody, anti-RSPO3,
Paclitaxel, or the combination of anti-RSPO3 and Paclitaxel) were
injected into a new cohort of mice. After 59 days, all mice in the
control group developed palpable tumors while the mice implanted with
cells harvested from anti-RSPO3 alone (p = 0.0009, vs. Ctr) or in
combination with Paclitaxel (p = 0.0007, vs. Ctr) groups developed fewer
and smaller tumors. The strongest effect in decreasing tumorigenicity was
observed in the combination group (p = 0.0046 vs. Paclitaxel).We also
tested anti-RSPO3 treatment in a range of RSPO3 expressing PDX cancer
models. Our data show that compared to standard of care the combination
of our antibody with Paclitaxel is more effective in promoting tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) in both ovarian (93%<TGI<98%) and lung
(78%<TGI<93%) PDX models (Paclitaxel: 48%<TGI<69% and 60%<TGI<68%
respectively). In addition, anti-RSPO3 treatment is effective in delaying
tumor growth both as a single agent (47%<TGI<76%) and in combination with
Irinotecan (66%<TGI<100%) when compared to the Irinotecan alone group
(44%<TGI<74%) in colorectal cancer models with and without PTPRK-RSPO3
genomic fusion. Using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) we also
identified pharmacodynamic biomarkers in xenograft tumors and surrogate
tissues. GSEA shows down-regulation of stem cell, oncogenic, and Wnt
pathway signatures. Examples of individual genes identified are: AXIN2,
LGR5 and ZNRF3 from tumors, LEF1, FZD3 and SOX4 from hair follicles and
SOX4, UBR5 and MYST3 from the blood. Similarly, several protein tumor
markers (including CA19-9, CEA and IGFBP2), were down-regulated in plasma
samples. These RSPO3-related genes and proteins from hair and blood could
be used as biomarkers to monitor target engagement in the
clinic.Collectively the efficacy observed in our PDX models suggests that
RSPO3 expression levels correlates with sensitivity to anti-RSPO3 and
could be used as a predictive biomarker. We are currently developing
assays to be used in the clinic to measure RSPO3 levels, and we intend to
initiate a phase 1a trial for anti-RSPO3 in 2015.

