Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PI3K signaling pathway for therapeutic enhancement of
verteporfin-mediated photodynamic therapy


Photodynamic therapy (PDT) induces cell injury and death through
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) after light activation.
Verteporfin is a photosensitizer that has been approved for the treatment
of age-related macular degeneration and is under investigation for
targeting tumor vasculature for therapy. Being primarily localized in
mitochondria, verteporfin-mediated PDT induced a rapid apoptotic cell
death in SVEC mouse endothelial cells by activating
mitochondria-initiated cell death pathways. However, activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway was also observed
after verteporfin-PDT, especially at a sub-lethal dose. Furthermore,
activation of PI3K signaling was correlated with cell growth after PDT.
Thus, the goal of this study is to test the hypothesis that therapeutic
outcome of verteporfin-PDT can be enhanced by targeting PDT-induced
pro-survival PI3K signaling pathway.We found that PI3K-mTOR pathway
inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 (BEZ235) significantly inhibited PDT-induced PI3K
signaling activation and combination of BEZ235 and verteporfin-PDT
resulted in more cell apoptosis and greater inhibition in cell
proliferation in SVEC cells. The combination therapy led to significantly
more tumor growth inhibition than each individual treatment in the PC-3
prostate tumor model. Examination of tumor samples for PI3K signaling
activity and functional vasculature revealed that the combination
treatment caused more inhibition in PI3K signaling and reduction in
functional blood vessels than verteporfin-PDT or BEZ235 treatment alone.
These results indicate that targeting pro-survival PI3K signaling pathway
is an effective approach for enhancing tumor response to verteporfin-PDT.

