Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sanger sequencing of low amount of genomic DNA and FFPE DNA with
PCR primers derived from the Ion AmpliSeq cancer hotspot panel


The introduction of defined Ion AmpliSeq panels for detection and
characterization of actionable mutations occurring in tumor tissue has
the potential to revolutionize translational oncology research.The Ion
Ampliseq cancer hotspot panel version 2 (CHP v2) by Ion Torrent includes
207 actionable mutation targets present in 50 genes and the more
comprehensive Ion Oncomine cancer panel (OCP) contains over 2000
mutations. A hallmark of these Ion Torrent Ampliseq cancer panels is the
low amount of input DNA needed which is critical when the clinical
specimen material is limited such as with fine needle biopsy or FFPE
samples. Typically, 10 ng of DNA obtained from these sources is
sufficient to produce informative sequencing data. Often, cancer-causing
or promoting mutations are detected at relatively low allele frequencies
like 10-20% compared to the major normal allele. Many researchers wish to
verify these findings of low frequency mutations by an orthologous method
such as traditional dye-fluorescent Sanger sequencing on a capillary
electrophoresis (CE) instrument such as the Applied Biosystems 3500
genetic analyzer. To that end, we have developed a workflow that enables
the amplification and traditional Sanger sequencing of individual Ion
AmpliSeq targets directly from the AmpliSeq library starting material.The
method requires a retainer of 1 l ( 5%) of the original AmpliSeq
preamplification material. A dilution of this aliquot is used as template
source for individualized PCR/sequencing reactions. We show that a random
selection of 48 targets from the CHPv2 panel could be successfully
amplified and Sanger-sequenced from an Ion Torrent Ampliseq library
originally prepared from 10 ng of FFPE DNA. Furthermore, we show the
successful Sanger-re-sequencing of all individual 24 targets covering the
TP53 exons from the same sample processed and pre-amplified with the
OncoMine AmpliSeq panel.Taken together, this method will enable
researchers to reflex-test potential mutations of interest from very
material-limited specimen using Sanger CE sequencing.

