Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Folate receptor targeted therapy using small molecule drug
conjugates constructed with high affinity antifolate ligands


Folate receptor (FR)-targeted small molecule drug conjugates (SMDC) have
shown promising clinical results. To date, all related SMDCs have been
constructed with folic acid. Whereas folic acid displays very high
affinity for the FR (kd 0.1 nM), antifolates with similar high binding
affinity and specificity have also been reported. This knowledge prompted
our investigation towards substituting the folic acid targeting moiety in
our SMDCs with high affinity antifolates, such as CB3717 (a thymidylate
synthase inhibitor), and the glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase
(GARFTase) inhibitors, AG94 and AG147, thereby testing the hypothesis
that greater antitumor activity should result from the combination of
inhibitors. Using mice bearing FR-positive human tumor xenografts, we
observed curative activity with a CB3717-based vinca alkaloid SMDC under
conditions where no cures resulted with vintafolide (EC145) treatment.
Similarly, tubulysin SMDCs constructed with AG94 and AG147 were found to
produce curative activity using a dosing regimen where a folic
acid-tubulysin conjugate did not. Of note, treatment of mice with simple
co-mixtures of the antifolates and untargeted drugs was found to be
ineffective, thereby confirming the need for linking the two moieties
together to produce maximal activity. Taken together, these studies
demonstrate that high affinity antifolates can be used in an SMDC format
serving as both a high affinity targeting ligand and as a second drug
having different, and perhaps a complementary mechanism of action to
yield greater antitumor activity.

