Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitor of differentiation-1 (Id1) expression correlates with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related proteins in epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC) and constitutes a novel prognostic factor


AimThe first aim of this work was to investigate the expression of
inhibitors of differentiation (ID) proteins in advanced Epithelial
Ovarian Cancer (EOC) and its relation with Epithelial to Mesenchymal
(EMT)-related markers. Secondly, we also studied their relation with
patient clinical and pathological characteristics in order to establish
their role as prognostic factors.MethodsID proteins expression was
analyzed in 59 samples from EOC patients. We performed
inmunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue microarray sections with specific
antibodies for ID1, ID2, ID3 and ID4. Immunoreactivity was H-scored for
intensity (range 0 to 3) multiplied by percentage of positive cells. It
has been previously described that ID genes are involved in EMT, so we
correlated IDs with EMT- regulators, including ECAD, ZEB1, ZEB2, SNAIL,
SLUG, LOX and LOXL2. We also explored their relation with clinical
variables in our cohort.ResultsID2 and ID3 proteins are uniformly
expressed in our EOC series. ID1 and ID2 are also overexpressed in
different proportions (41% and 88% of cases respectively). No correlation
between increased ID proteins expression and histological subtype, tumor
grading, debulking surgery status or treatment response was detected. We
have found that ID1 overexpression correlates with prognosis, for Overall
Survival (OS), HR: 1.05 (95% CI: 1.02 - 1.07) in the univariate analysis
and for Time to Treatment Failure (TTF) in both, uni- and multivariate
analysis adjusted to clinical factors (HR: 1.06; 95%CI: 1.02 - 1.1). This
finding was confirmed when specifically analyzing the worst prognosis
group of patients with high grade serous malignancies. ID1 is known to be
associated with more invasive features of cancer and with the EMT. In our
cohort, its expression is correlated with some EMT-regulators, as ECAD
and SLUG (p AimThe first aim of this work was to investigate the
expression of inhibitors of differentiation (ID) proteins in advanced
Epithelial Ovarian Cancer (EOC) and its relation with Epithelial to
Mesenchymal (EMT)-related markers. Secondly, we also studied their
relation with patient clinical and pathological characteristics in order
to establish their role as prognostic factors.MethodsID proteins
expression was analyzed in 59 samples from EOC patients. We performed
inmunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue microarray sections with specific
antibodies for ID1, ID2, ID3 and ID4. Immunoreactivity was H-scored for
intensity (range 0 to 3) multiplied by percentage of positive cells. It
has been previously described that ID genes are involved in EMT, so we
correlated IDs with EMT- regulators, including ECAD, ZEB1, ZEB2, SNAIL,
SLUG, LOX and LOXL2. We also explored their relation with clinical
variables in our cohort.ResultsID2 and ID3 proteins are uniformly
expressed in our EOC series. ID1 and ID2 are also overexpressed in
different proportions (41% and 88% of cases respectively). No correlation
between increased ID proteins expression and histological subtype, tumor
grading, debulking surgery status or treatment response was detected. We
have found that ID1 overexpression correlates with prognosis, for Overall
Survival (OS), HR: 1.05 (95% CI: 1.02 - 1.07) in the univariate analysis
and for Time to Treatment Failure (TTF) in both, uni- and multivariate
analysis adjusted to clinical factors (HR: 1.06; 95%CI: 1.02 - 1.1). This
finding was confirmed when specifically analyzing the worst prognosis
group of patients with high grade serous malignancies. ID1 is known to be
associated with more invasive features of cancer and with the EMT. In our
cohort, its expression is correlated with some EMT-regulators, as ECAD
and SLUG (p < 0,005).ConclusionsID proteins expression is frequently
deregulated in EOC patients and it seems to influence clinical prognosis,
mainly, ID1. Their usefulness as prognostic biomarkers should be further
investigated in larger series.

