Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activities of psammaplin A analogues in human lung
cancer cells


Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are considered to be potential
candicates for cancer therapeutic agents. HDACi suppresses the
progression of tumorigenesis through epigenetic regulation of target
protein acetylation. Psammaplin A (PsA), originated from a marine product
Pseudoceratina purpurea, also showed a potential HDAC inhibition. Based
on the potential anticancer activity of PsA, various PsA analogs were
designed and synthesized to explore novel candidates in the development
of anticancer agents. Among compounds tested, a -napthyl-derivertive of
PsA (compound 30) exhibited a strong growth-inhibitory activity against
human lung cancer cells and the activity was comparable to PsA. Compound
30 also effectively inhibited HDAC and up-regulated the level of
ac-Histone3, p-AKT, p-ERK in human A549 lung cancer cells. In in vivo
xenograft animal model implanted A549 cells, the administration of
compound 30 intraperitoneally for 35 days exhibited a potential growth
inhibitory activity of the tumor (47.6% inhibition at 30 mg/kg). The
immunohistochemical analysis of tumor tissues also revealed the
inhibition of the cell proliferation biomarker Ki-67 expression by
compound 30. Taken together, these data suggest that a -napthyl analog of
PsA has the potential antitumor activity and thus to be prioritized in
the development of cancer chemotherapeutic agents.

