Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of the pharmacokinetics of erlotinib administered in
complete fasting and two hours after a meal in non-small cell lung cancer
patients


[Background] The bioavailability of several oral anticancer drugs changes
with food exposure. The recommended dose of erlotinib (E) is 150 mg daily
either one hour before a meal (complete fasting) or two hours after a
meal (post-meal), because of the food effect. Although the two gastric
emptying states have been considered equivalent in clinical practice, no
study had in fact demonstrated the fed bioequivalence in the two
conditions.[Methods] We conducted a cross-over pharmacokinetic study in
Cohort A (post-meal to complete fasting) and Cohort B (complete fasting
to post-meal); seven days in each fed condition period. Blood samples
were obtained just before administration of E on days 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9,
12, and 14, and at 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 24 hours after administration
on days 7 and 14. Area under the curve from 0 to 24 hours (AUC0-24), mean
residence time (MRT) from 0 to 24 hours, peak concentration (Cmax), and
time to Cmax (Tmax) were estimated by noncompartment analysis.
Statistical analysis in the ln-transformed AUC0-24 and Cmax of E was
performed using a two-sample t-test with unequal variance, and the ratios
of geometric means (GMR) were calculated for AUC0-24 and Cmax. Time to
first skin rash was analyzed with a Kaplan-Meier curve compared with the
log-rank test, with P [Background] The bioavailability of several oral
anticancer drugs changes with food exposure. The recommended dose of
erlotinib (E) is 150 mg daily either one hour before a meal (complete
fasting) or two hours after a meal (post-meal), because of the food
effect. Although the two gastric emptying states have been considered
equivalent in clinical practice, no study had in fact demonstrated the
fed bioequivalence in the two conditions.[Methods] We conducted a
cross-over pharmacokinetic study in Cohort A (post-meal to complete
fasting) and Cohort B (complete fasting to post-meal); seven days in each
fed condition period. Blood samples were obtained just before
administration of E on days 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, and 14, and at 1, 2, 4,
6, 8, 10, and 24 hours after administration on days 7 and 14. Area under
the curve from 0 to 24 hours (AUC0-24), mean residence time (MRT) from 0
to 24 hours, peak concentration (Cmax), and time to Cmax (Tmax) were
estimated by noncompartment analysis. Statistical analysis in the
ln-transformed AUC0-24 and Cmax of E was performed using a two-sample
t-test with unequal variance, and the ratios of geometric means (GMR)
were calculated for AUC0-24 and Cmax. Time to first skin rash was
analyzed with a Kaplan-Meier curve compared with the log-rank test, with
P < 0.05 considered significant.[Results] Twenty-five patients were
randomly assigned, and 23 patients (12 in Cohort A and 11 in Cohort B)
were included in the pharmacokinetic analysis. The geometric mean of
AUC0-24 was significantly higher in the post-meal status than in the
complete fasting status (41.5 11.2 vs. 31.0 13.7 g*h/mL; P [Background]
The bioavailability of several oral anticancer drugs changes with food
exposure. The recommended dose of erlotinib (E) is 150 mg daily either
one hour before a meal (complete fasting) or two hours after a meal
(post-meal), because of the food effect. Although the two gastric
emptying states have been considered equivalent in clinical practice, no
study had in fact demonstrated the fed bioequivalence in the two
conditions.[Methods] We conducted a cross-over pharmacokinetic study in
Cohort A (post-meal to complete fasting) and Cohort B (complete fasting
to post-meal); seven days in each fed condition period. Blood samples
were obtained just before administration of E on days 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9,
12, and 14, and at 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 24 hours after administration
on days 7 and 14. Area under the curve from 0 to 24 hours (AUC0-24), mean
residence time (MRT) from 0 to 24 hours, peak concentration (Cmax), and
time to Cmax (Tmax) were estimated by noncompartment analysis.
Statistical analysis in the ln-transformed AUC0-24 and Cmax of E was
performed using a two-sample t-test with unequal variance, and the ratios
of geometric means (GMR) were calculated for AUC0-24 and Cmax. Time to
first skin rash was analyzed with a Kaplan-Meier curve compared with the
log-rank test, with P < 0.05 considered significant.[Results] Twenty-five
patients were randomly assigned, and 23 patients (12 in Cohort A and 11
in Cohort B) were included in the pharmacokinetic analysis. The geometric
mean of AUC0-24 was significantly higher in the post-meal status than in
the complete fasting status (41.5 11.2 vs. 31.0 13.7 g*h/mL; P < .001)
and GMR was 1.33, and likewise in the geometric mean of Cmax (2.64 0.77
vs. 1.83 0.82 g/mL; P [Background] The bioavailability of several oral
anticancer drugs changes with food exposure. The recommended dose of
erlotinib (E) is 150 mg daily either one hour before a meal (complete
fasting) or two hours after a meal (post-meal), because of the food
effect. Although the two gastric emptying states have been considered
equivalent in clinical practice, no study had in fact demonstrated the
fed bioequivalence in the two conditions.[Methods] We conducted a
cross-over pharmacokinetic study in Cohort A (post-meal to complete
fasting) and Cohort B (complete fasting to post-meal); seven days in each
fed condition period. Blood samples were obtained just before
administration of E on days 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, and 14, and at 1, 2, 4,
6, 8, 10, and 24 hours after administration on days 7 and 14. Area under
the curve from 0 to 24 hours (AUC0-24), mean residence time (MRT) from 0
to 24 hours, peak concentration (Cmax), and time to Cmax (Tmax) were
estimated by noncompartment analysis. Statistical analysis in the
ln-transformed AUC0-24 and Cmax of E was performed using a two-sample
t-test with unequal variance, and the ratios of geometric means (GMR)
were calculated for AUC0-24 and Cmax. Time to first skin rash was
analyzed with a Kaplan-Meier curve compared with the log-rank test, with
P < 0.05 considered significant.[Results] Twenty-five patients were
randomly assigned, and 23 patients (12 in Cohort A and 11 in Cohort B)
were included in the pharmacokinetic analysis. The geometric mean of
AUC0-24 was significantly higher in the post-meal status than in the
complete fasting status (41.5 11.2 vs. 31.0 13.7 g*h/mL; P < .001) and
GMR was 1.33, and likewise in the geometric mean of Cmax (2.64 0.77 vs.
1.83 0.82 g/mL; P < .001), and GMR was 1.44. Tmax was also significantly
longer in the post-meal status (P = .014) while MRT was significantly
longer in the complete fasting status (P [Background] The bioavailability
of several oral anticancer drugs changes with food exposure. The
recommended dose of erlotinib (E) is 150 mg daily either one hour before
a meal (complete fasting) or two hours after a meal (post-meal), because
of the food effect. Although the two gastric emptying states have been
considered equivalent in clinical practice, no study had in fact
demonstrated the fed bioequivalence in the two conditions.[Methods] We
conducted a cross-over pharmacokinetic study in Cohort A (post-meal to
complete fasting) and Cohort B (complete fasting to post-meal); seven
days in each fed condition period. Blood samples were obtained just
before administration of E on days 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, and 14, and at
1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 24 hours after administration on days 7 and 14.
Area under the curve from 0 to 24 hours (AUC0-24), mean residence time
(MRT) from 0 to 24 hours, peak concentration (Cmax), and time to Cmax
(Tmax) were estimated by noncompartment analysis. Statistical analysis in
the ln-transformed AUC0-24 and Cmax of E was performed using a two-sample
t-test with unequal variance, and the ratios of geometric means (GMR)
were calculated for AUC0-24 and Cmax. Time to first skin rash was
analyzed with a Kaplan-Meier curve compared with the log-rank test, with
P < 0.05 considered significant.[Results] Twenty-five patients were
randomly assigned, and 23 patients (12 in Cohort A and 11 in Cohort B)
were included in the pharmacokinetic analysis. The geometric mean of
AUC0-24 was significantly higher in the post-meal status than in the
complete fasting status (41.5 11.2 vs. 31.0 13.7 g*h/mL; P < .001) and
GMR was 1.33, and likewise in the geometric mean of Cmax (2.64 0.77 vs.
1.83 0.82 g/mL; P < .001), and GMR was 1.44. Tmax was also significantly
longer in the post-meal status (P = .014) while MRT was significantly
longer in the complete fasting status (P < .001). Alteration in AUC0-24,
Cmax, Tmax, and MRT on day 7 suggested that the two gastric emptying
states might differ in their absorption. However, because the
concentration of E did not reach the steady state within seven days in
the complete fasting group, we conducted further analyses only on day 14.
No significant difference between the complete fasting and post-meal
condition was seen in AUC0-24 (P = .815), nor in Cmax (P = .564). GMRs
were 1.08 in Cmax, and 1.03 in AUC. In Cohort A, a skin rash appeared in
50% in eight days, and in 83% in 15 days. In Cohort B, a skin rash was
seen in 64% in 8 days, and in 82% in 15 days. There was no significant
association between time to first skin rash of any grade and the two
conditions (P = .974).[Conclusion] Although the AUC0-24 of E increased
significantly faster in the post-meal status than in complete fasting
status, there was no significant difference in pharmacokinetics in steady
state and toxicitiy between the two clinically-used fed conditions of E.

