Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclin E amplification predicts sensitivity of primary Uterine
Serous Carcinoma (USC) cell lines to the cdk2 inhibitor CYC065


We evaluated the in vitro effectiveness of the cdk2 inhibitor CYC065 on
multiple primary chemotherapy-resistant USC cell lines with or without
CCNE1 amplification.CCNE1-amplified primary cell lines were significantly
more sensitive than wild type USC cell lines to CYC065 in vitro (i.e.,
IC50: meanSTDV = 61.7513.22 nM and 103.16 21.9 nM for CCNE1-amplified
USC-ARK-2 and USC-ARK-7 cell lines, respectively and 539.2182.1 nM for
the wild type USC-ARK-4 cell line, p = 0.0048). Consistently, low
concentrations of CYC065 (i.e., 100 - 300 nM) caused a dose dependent
arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle specifically in CCNE1-amplified
primary USC cell lines. Importantly, CCNE1 knockdown in the USC-ARK-2
cell line resulted in a 9.29-fold increase in the CYC065 IC50 when
compared to the MOCK-transfected USC-ARK-2 cell line (p = 0.021).
Finally, when primary CCNE1-amplified USC cell lines also harboring ERBB2
amplification (50% of CCNE1-amplified USC cell lines) were incubated in
vitro with the combination of CYC065 and Herceptin (a monoclonal antibody
targeting the product of the ERBB2 gene, HER2/neu), an increased
inhibitory effect was reported in the combination treatment when compared
to Herceptin or CYC065 used as single agent (i.e.,% viable cells:
meanSTDV = 71.40.85, 65.414.2, 42.22.1 for the Herceptin, the CYC065 and
the combination treatment on USC-ARK-2, respectively; p = 0.014).Together
these findings identify CYC065 as a promising drug to be considered alone
or in combination in the treatment of patients harboring CCNE1-amplified
USC.

