Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Myc driven B cell lymphomas: role of the RPL5/RPL11/5S rRNA-MDM2
inhibitory complex (L5/L11/5S-MIC)


We recently demonstrated that as a consequence of impaired ribosome
biogenesis, the L5/L11/5S pre-ribosomal complex is redirected to inhibit
Mdm2, leading to p53 stabilization (Donati et al., 2013). In seminal
studies, E-Myc mice were crossed into a hypomorphic ribosomal protein
(RP) L24 mutant background, which brought global translation rates to
normal and extended their disease-free survival, independent of p53
(Barna et. al. 2008). However, when this mouse model harbors a single
point mutation of Mdm2, which cannot bind the L5/L11/5S-MIC, mice succumb
to lymphomagenesis much more rapidly than wild type Mdm2 mice (Macias et
al, 2010). Moreover, inhibition of Pol I, which selectively transcribes
rRNA genes, suppresses Myc driven tumors, potentially through the same
L5/L11/5S-MIC (Bywater, et al, 2012). To address the role of the
L5/L11/5S-MIC versus that of global translation in the E-Myc B cell
lymphocytes, we partially depleted mRNAs for RPL11, which in other cell
types has no effect on p53 levels, or RPL7a, which is known to induce p53
stabilization in a RPL11 dependent manner. We generated stable cell lines
of inducible shRNAs against RPL11 or RPL7a using a tetracycline
(Tet)-regulated miR30-shRNA system, TRMPVIR retroviral vector. By
titrating doxycycline, we achieved 50% reduction of RPL11 or RPL7a
transcript levels, with Renilla shRNA (Ren) as a control.A 50% depletion
of RPL11 or RPL7a mRNAs led to an equal reduction in protein synthesis
and ribosome biogenesis, however, RPL11 depletion did not alter p53
levels, whereas RPL7a mRNA depletion induced p53 stabilization and
Caspase-3 dependent apoptosis. RPL7A or RPL11 depletion reduced cell
proliferation to half that of control cells, with more cell death
observed in RPL7a depleted cells versus RPL11 depleted cells. Treatment
of RPL7a depleted cells with the caspase inhibitor ZVAD, or depletion of
RPL7a in a p53 negative background suppressed cell death. Expression
levels of the anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1 were elevated in E-Myc cells
and unchanged in RPL11 depleted cells, but reduced in RPL7a depleted
cells in a p53-dependent manner. This suggests that in RPL7a depleted
cells, p53 regulates Mcl-1 levels to promote cell death and tumor
suppression. Finally, immunoprecipitation of Mdm2 revealed the presence
of L5/L11/5S-MIC in RPL7a depleted cells, but not in RPL11 depleted
cells. Although p53 was not induced in RPL11 depleted cells, reduction of
RPL11 to 95% led to acute cell death in both p53-/- and p53 +/+ E-Myc
cells, likely due to the inhibition of global translation.These findings
demonstrate a differential abrogation of ribosome biogenesis by partial
depletion of two essential RPs, which assemble at a very similar stage in
60S ribosome. For RPL7a, it led to L5/L11/5S-MIC induced p53 mediated
cell death, and this was not the case for RPL11 as it is an essential
component of the complex.

