Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cloud-based variant analysis solution using control-accessed
sequencing data


Variation analysis plays an important role in elucidating the causes of
various human diseases. The drastically reduced costs of genome
sequencing driven by next generation sequence technologies now make it
possible to analyze genetic variations with hundreds or thousands of
samples simultaneously, but currently with the cost of ever increasing
local storage requirements. The tera- and peta-byte scale footprint for
sequence data imposes significant technical challenges for data
management and analysis, including the tasks of collection, storage,
transfer, sharing, and privacy protection. Currently, each analysis group
facing these analysis tasks must download all the relevant sequence data
into a local file system before variation analysis is initiated. This
heavy-weight transaction not only slows down the pace of the analysis,
but also creates financial burdens for researchers due to the cost of
hardware and time required to transfer the data over typical academic
internet connections. To overcome such limitations and explore the
feasibility of analyzing control-accessed sequencing data in cloud
environment while maintaining data privacy and security, here we
introduce a cloud-based analysis framework that facilitates variation
analysis using direct access to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive through
NCBI sratoolkit, which allows the users to programmatically access data
housed within SRA with encryption and decryption capabilities and
converts it from the SRA format to the desired format for data analysis.
A customized machine image (swift) with preconfigured tools (including
NCBI sratoolkit) and resources essential for variant analysis has been
created for instantiating an EC2 instance or instance cluster on Amazon
cloud. Performance of this framework has been evaluated and compared with
that from traditional analysis pipeline, and security handling in cloud
environment when dealing with control-accessed sequence data has been
addressed. We demonstrate that it is cost effective to make variant calls
using control-accessed SRA sequence data without first transferring the
entire set of aligned sequence data into a local storage environment,
thereby accelerating variation discovery using control-accessed
sequencing data.

