Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer with CRLX101, an
investigational nanoparticle-drug conjugate with a camptothecin payload


Background: There has been great interest in developing novel agents and
strategies to improve chemoradiotherapy (CRT) for locally advanced rectal
cancer. Irinotecan, a campothecin (CPT) analogue, held high potential,
but the combination was clinically infeasible due to severe
gastrointestinal toxicities. CRLX101, is an investigational nanoparticle
drug conjugate (NDC). Preclinical experiments showed that CRLX101
differentially delivers CPT into cancer cells and appears to durably
suppress HIF-1 as well as topoisomerase 1, but with less gastrointestinal
toxicities than irinotecan. We therefore hypothesized that the addition
of CRLX101 to rectal CRT (5-FU + XRT) may further improve the therapeutic
index in this setting.Methods: Synergy with CRLX101 in combination with
either XRT or CRT was studied in vitro (SW480 and HT29 colorectal cancer
cell lines) and in vivo (murine flank xenograft models). Skin toxicity
and hematologic toxicity were also characterized. In order to test the
synergy hypothesis in the clinic, a Phase Ib/II clinical trial (LCCC1315)
evaluating the addition of CRLX101 to CRT in the neo-adjuvant treatment
of rectal cancer is currently underway. A standard 3 + 3 design is being
employed for the phase Ib with a CRLX101 starting dose of 12 mg/m2 in the
first cohort escalating to the CRLX101 monotherapy MTD of 15 mg/m2 in the
second. The primary phase 2 end-point is the pathological complete
response (pCR) rate from treatment.Results: CRLX101 was found to be as
potent as camptothecin in vitro. We have demonstrated that CRLX101
functions by inhibition of both DNA repair and HIF-1 signaling. The
addition of CRLX101 to radiotherapy increased and prolonged the number of
H2AX foci, even at 24 hours post radiotherapy. We also confirmed that
CRLX101 decreased HIF-1 and its downstream targets VEGF and carbonic
anhydrase IX in mice bearing HT29 xenografts. Our findings were further
validated in vivo: we demonstrated that both CRLX101+5FU+XRT and
CRLX101+XRT delayed tumor growth more than other regimens (p-values
Background: There has been great interest in developing novel agents and
strategies to improve chemoradiotherapy (CRT) for locally advanced rectal
cancer. Irinotecan, a campothecin (CPT) analogue, held high potential,
but the combination was clinically infeasible due to severe
gastrointestinal toxicities. CRLX101, is an investigational nanoparticle
drug conjugate (NDC). Preclinical experiments showed that CRLX101
differentially delivers CPT into cancer cells and appears to durably
suppress HIF-1 as well as topoisomerase 1, but with less gastrointestinal
toxicities than irinotecan. We therefore hypothesized that the addition
of CRLX101 to rectal CRT (5-FU + XRT) may further improve the therapeutic
index in this setting.Methods: Synergy with CRLX101 in combination with
either XRT or CRT was studied in vitro (SW480 and HT29 colorectal cancer
cell lines) and in vivo (murine flank xenograft models). Skin toxicity
and hematologic toxicity were also characterized. In order to test the
synergy hypothesis in the clinic, a Phase Ib/II clinical trial (LCCC1315)
evaluating the addition of CRLX101 to CRT in the neo-adjuvant treatment
of rectal cancer is currently underway. A standard 3 + 3 design is being
employed for the phase Ib with a CRLX101 starting dose of 12 mg/m2 in the
first cohort escalating to the CRLX101 monotherapy MTD of 15 mg/m2 in the
second. The primary phase 2 end-point is the pathological complete
response (pCR) rate from treatment.Results: CRLX101 was found to be as
potent as camptothecin in vitro. We have demonstrated that CRLX101
functions by inhibition of both DNA repair and HIF-1 signaling. The
addition of CRLX101 to radiotherapy increased and prolonged the number of
H2AX foci, even at 24 hours post radiotherapy. We also confirmed that
CRLX101 decreased HIF-1 and its downstream targets VEGF and carbonic
anhydrase IX in mice bearing HT29 xenografts. Our findings were further
validated in vivo: we demonstrated that both CRLX101+5FU+XRT and
CRLX101+XRT delayed tumor growth more than other regimens (p-values <
0.05). More importantly, we found CRT with CRLX101+5FU is significantly
more effective than CRT with oxaliplatin+5FU (25 days to double tumor
volume vs. 11 days), a regimen that has been extensively studied
clinically. Preclinical toxicity studies demonstrated that the addition
of CRLX101 did not increase hematologic or skin toxicities. In the
ongoing clinical trial, none of the first 6 patients enrolled have
experienced dose-limiting toxicities, and 1 out of 3 patients who
underwent surgery had a pCR. The other 2 patients had extensive treatment
response with minimal residual tumor.Conclusions: Preclinical data
suggests that CRLX101 improves the therapeutic index of CRT for rectal
cancer. Preliminary clinical data is encouraging, and supports further
clinical assessment of CRLX101+5FU+XRT in patients with locally advanced
rectal cancer.

