Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of stromal miR-125b on normal colonic epithelial cell
renewal and its putative role in tumorigenesis


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs which exert their effects by
post-transcriptionally silencing target mRNAs. Deregulation of miRNA
expression is a frequent event in tumorigenesis. MiR-125b is a highly
conserved miRNA among various species and is composed of three homologs:
hsa-miR-125a, hsa-miR-125b-1 and hsa-miR-125-2. The tumorigenic roles of
miR-125b have been studied in various cancers including prostate, colon,
glioma etc, and studies have demonstrated that it can act as a tumor
suppressor or an oncogene depending on the cellular context. It was
characterized as an oncogene in prostate cancer and glioma through
down-regulation of pro-apoptotic regulators BAK1 and Bcl-2 modifying
factor (BMF), respectively. In colon cancer, a recent
clinico-pathological study showed that high expression of miR-125b was
associated with tumor invasion and poor prognosis. However, the
localization of miR125b in normal colon and tumors is currently unknown.
Therefore, we aimed to address the precise expression and the functional
role of miR-125b in normal colon, which may provide insight on its
potential oncogenic effects during carcinogenesis.We performed gene
expression analysis of miR-125b in normal colon tissues from 16 pairs of
colon top versus basal crypts and 4 pairs of crypts versus stroma by
real-time RT-PCR. Colon top and basal crypts were microdissected from
frozen sections, whereas pure normal crypts and stromal fractions were
isolated from freshly resected human colon specimens. We found that
miR-125b was significantly enriched in the basal crypts (pMicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs which exert their effects by
post-transcriptionally silencing target mRNAs. Deregulation of miRNA
expression is a frequent event in tumorigenesis. MiR-125b is a highly
conserved miRNA among various species and is composed of three homologs:
hsa-miR-125a, hsa-miR-125b-1 and hsa-miR-125-2. The tumorigenic roles of
miR-125b have been studied in various cancers including prostate, colon,
glioma etc, and studies have demonstrated that it can act as a tumor
suppressor or an oncogene depending on the cellular context. It was
characterized as an oncogene in prostate cancer and glioma through
down-regulation of pro-apoptotic regulators BAK1 and Bcl-2 modifying
factor (BMF), respectively. In colon cancer, a recent
clinico-pathological study showed that high expression of miR-125b was
associated with tumor invasion and poor prognosis. However, the
localization of miR125b in normal colon and tumors is currently unknown.
Therefore, we aimed to address the precise expression and the functional
role of miR-125b in normal colon, which may provide insight on its
potential oncogenic effects during carcinogenesis.We performed gene
expression analysis of miR-125b in normal colon tissues from 16 pairs of
colon top versus basal crypts and 4 pairs of crypts versus stroma by
real-time RT-PCR. Colon top and basal crypts were microdissected from
frozen sections, whereas pure normal crypts and stromal fractions were
isolated from freshly resected human colon specimens. We found that
miR-125b was significantly enriched in the basal crypts (p<0.001) and the
stromal compartment (p = 0.027). Functionally, knockdown of miR-125b by a
specific miRCURY antisense oligonucleotide was able to dose dependently
inhibit the growth of a normal colon myofibroblast cell line, CCD18, and
significantly increase the mRNA level of several key Hedgehog signaling
components, including PTCH (pMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs
which exert their effects by post-transcriptionally silencing target
mRNAs. Deregulation of miRNA expression is a frequent event in
tumorigenesis. MiR-125b is a highly conserved miRNA among various species
and is composed of three homologs: hsa-miR-125a, hsa-miR-125b-1 and
hsa-miR-125-2. The tumorigenic roles of miR-125b have been studied in
various cancers including prostate, colon, glioma etc, and studies have
demonstrated that it can act as a tumor suppressor or an oncogene
depending on the cellular context. It was characterized as an oncogene in
prostate cancer and glioma through down-regulation of pro-apoptotic
regulators BAK1 and Bcl-2 modifying factor (BMF), respectively. In colon
cancer, a recent clinico-pathological study showed that high expression
of miR-125b was associated with tumor invasion and poor prognosis.
However, the localization of miR125b in normal colon and tumors is
currently unknown. Therefore, we aimed to address the precise expression
and the functional role of miR-125b in normal colon, which may provide
insight on its potential oncogenic effects during carcinogenesis.We
performed gene expression analysis of miR-125b in normal colon tissues
from 16 pairs of colon top versus basal crypts and 4 pairs of crypts
versus stroma by real-time RT-PCR. Colon top and basal crypts were
microdissected from frozen sections, whereas pure normal crypts and
stromal fractions were isolated from freshly resected human colon
specimens. We found that miR-125b was significantly enriched in the basal
crypts (p<0.001) and the stromal compartment (p = 0.027). Functionally,
knockdown of miR-125b by a specific miRCURY antisense oligonucleotide was
able to dose dependently inhibit the growth of a normal colon
myofibroblast cell line, CCD18, and significantly increase the mRNA level
of several key Hedgehog signaling components, including PTCH (p<0.001),
SMO (pMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs which exert their
effects by post-transcriptionally silencing target mRNAs. Deregulation of
miRNA expression is a frequent event in tumorigenesis. MiR-125b is a
highly conserved miRNA among various species and is composed of three
homologs: hsa-miR-125a, hsa-miR-125b-1 and hsa-miR-125-2. The tumorigenic
roles of miR-125b have been studied in various cancers including
prostate, colon, glioma etc, and studies have demonstrated that it can
act as a tumor suppressor or an oncogene depending on the cellular
context. It was characterized as an oncogene in prostate cancer and
glioma through down-regulation of pro-apoptotic regulators BAK1 and Bcl-2
modifying factor (BMF), respectively. In colon cancer, a recent
clinico-pathological study showed that high expression of miR-125b was
associated with tumor invasion and poor prognosis. However, the
localization of miR125b in normal colon and tumors is currently unknown.
Therefore, we aimed to address the precise expression and the functional
role of miR-125b in normal colon, which may provide insight on its
potential oncogenic effects during carcinogenesis.We performed gene
expression analysis of miR-125b in normal colon tissues from 16 pairs of
colon top versus basal crypts and 4 pairs of crypts versus stroma by
real-time RT-PCR. Colon top and basal crypts were microdissected from
frozen sections, whereas pure normal crypts and stromal fractions were
isolated from freshly resected human colon specimens. We found that
miR-125b was significantly enriched in the basal crypts (p<0.001) and the
stromal compartment (p = 0.027). Functionally, knockdown of miR-125b by a
specific miRCURY antisense oligonucleotide was able to dose dependently
inhibit the growth of a normal colon myofibroblast cell line, CCD18, and
significantly increase the mRNA level of several key Hedgehog signaling
components, including PTCH (p<0.001), SMO (p<0.001), GLI1 (pMicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs which exert their effects by
post-transcriptionally silencing target mRNAs. Deregulation of miRNA
expression is a frequent event in tumorigenesis. MiR-125b is a highly
conserved miRNA among various species and is composed of three homologs:
hsa-miR-125a, hsa-miR-125b-1 and hsa-miR-125-2. The tumorigenic roles of
miR-125b have been studied in various cancers including prostate, colon,
glioma etc, and studies have demonstrated that it can act as a tumor
suppressor or an oncogene depending on the cellular context. It was
characterized as an oncogene in prostate cancer and glioma through
down-regulation of pro-apoptotic regulators BAK1 and Bcl-2 modifying
factor (BMF), respectively. In colon cancer, a recent
clinico-pathological study showed that high expression of miR-125b was
associated with tumor invasion and poor prognosis. However, the
localization of miR125b in normal colon and tumors is currently unknown.
Therefore, we aimed to address the precise expression and the functional
role of miR-125b in normal colon, which may provide insight on its
potential oncogenic effects during carcinogenesis.We performed gene
expression analysis of miR-125b in normal colon tissues from 16 pairs of
colon top versus basal crypts and 4 pairs of crypts versus stroma by
real-time RT-PCR. Colon top and basal crypts were microdissected from
frozen sections, whereas pure normal crypts and stromal fractions were
isolated from freshly resected human colon specimens. We found that
miR-125b was significantly enriched in the basal crypts (p<0.001) and the
stromal compartment (p = 0.027). Functionally, knockdown of miR-125b by a
specific miRCURY antisense oligonucleotide was able to dose dependently
inhibit the growth of a normal colon myofibroblast cell line, CCD18, and
significantly increase the mRNA level of several key Hedgehog signaling
components, including PTCH (p<0.001), SMO (p<0.001), GLI1 (p<0.001) and
its downstream target BMP4 (p = 0.017). Finally, we observed a drastic
decrease in both the number and size of normal colon organoids when they
were co-cultured with myofibroblasts transfected with miR-125b antisense
oligonucleotide, as compared with negative control. Our results suggest
that expression of miR-125b in the colonic stromal basal crypt
compartment functions to inhibit Hedgehog signaling, leading to paracrine
enhancement of colon crypt proliferation and stem cell renewal. Thus,
given the well-known importance of hedgehog signaling in colon cancer,
our findings suggest that dysregulated miR-125bexpression may contribute
to carcinogenesis through disruption of this pathway.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

