Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing targeted therapy for the treatment of drug-resistant
ovarian cancer


Despite therapeutic approaches that combine surgical cytoreduction with
chemotherapy, ovarian cancer remains the principal cause of death among
women with gynecological malignancies. Virtually all patients relapse
with drug-resistant disease. To elucidate the biological mechanisms that
contribute to this resistance, we established a repository of
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of ovarian cancer in mice. We used
RNA-seq and Ingenuity Canonical Pathway software to analyze chemotherapy
induced changes in expression patterns of six of these models. We found
that the sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) signaling pathway is one of the
pathways most affected by paclitaxel and cisplatin treatment, with
altered expression in seven genes associated with the S1P pathway
(pDespite therapeutic approaches that combine surgical cytoreduction with
chemotherapy, ovarian cancer remains the principal cause of death among
women with gynecological malignancies. Virtually all patients relapse
with drug-resistant disease. To elucidate the biological mechanisms that
contribute to this resistance, we established a repository of
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of ovarian cancer in mice. We used
RNA-seq and Ingenuity Canonical Pathway software to analyze chemotherapy
induced changes in expression patterns of six of these models. We found
that the sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) signaling pathway is one of the
pathways most affected by paclitaxel and cisplatin treatment, with
altered expression in seven genes associated with the S1P pathway
(p<0.05). The biologically active lipid S1P contributes to cell growth,
survival/apoptosis, angiogenesis, migration and metastasis in normal and
tumor tissue. The S1P pathway has also been reported to be involved in
chemoresistance in several types of solid tumors.The S1P pathway depends
predominately on three core lipids: ceramide, sphingosine, and S1P. These
molecules are termed the ceramide-sphingosine-S1P rheostat, and their
expression is tightly regulated both intra- and extra-cellularly. Recent
studies suggest a correlation between aberrations in the S1P pathway and
poor prognosis, advanced stage, and resistance to chemotherapy and
radiation.Preliminary data using the sphingosine analog FTY-720 is
consistent with the hypothesis that the S1P pathway regulates cell
survival by effecting changes in the relative levels of ceramide,
sphingosine, and S1P, as a cytoprotective autophagic mechanism to evade
chemotherapy-induced cytotoxic effects. Cell proliferation assays,
immunoblots, and fluorescence microscopy results of ovarian cancer cells
exposed to FTY-720 in combination with carboplatin or paclitaxel
treatment provide evidence that the S1P pathway may evade cell death
through the induction of cytoprotective autophagy. Our data suggest that
the S1P pathway contributes to the chemoresistance of ovarian cancer
cells to conventional chemotherapeutic agents.

