Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating biomarkers of gut barrier function: Correlates and
responses to calcium supplementation among sporadic colorectal adenoma
patients in a dose-response randomized controlled trial


Gut barrier dysfunction contributes to several gastrointestinal
disorders, including inflammatory bowel diseases and colorectal cancer,
but factors associated with intestinal hyperpermeability have rarely been
assessed in human populations, and there is very limited clinical trial
evidence on whether gut barrier function may be modified by dietary
factors. To address these gaps, we 1) evaluated factors associated with
baseline circulating biomarkers of gut barrier function, and 2) tested
the effect of calcium on these biomarkers over a 4-month treatment period
among patients with previous colorectal adenoma in a randomized,
double-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial (n = 193). Patients
were randomized to placebo (n = 66), 1.0 g calcium (n = 64), or 2.0 g
calcium (n = 63) daily. Circulating levels of anti-flagellin and
anti-lipopolysaccharide (LPS) immunoglobulins (Igs) as markers of colonic
hyperpermeability were measured at baseline and at 4-month follow-up via
ELISA. At baseline, mean levels of anti-flagellin and anti-LPS IgA but
not IgG were higher among men and those with a larger body mass index
(BMI), a larger waist circumference, and higher levels of plasma
C-reactive protein. Mean anti-flagellin IgG levels were higher among
those with higher proinflammatory cytokine scores. We did not observe
effects of calcium on anti-flagellin or anti-LPS Igs: the relative change
of a combined permeability score (defined as the sum of the optical
densities of all biomarkers) from baseline to follow-up was 0.07 (95%
confidence interval [CI] -0.13, 0.27) for each treatment group relative
to the placebo group (p-values 0.5). Our results suggest that 1) men and
those with a larger BMI or waist circumference may have greater gut
permeability, 2) markers of gut permeability and systemic inflammation
may be directly associated with one another, and 3) supplemental calcium
administered for 4 months may not modify circulating levels of biomarkers
of gut barrier function.

