Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing of apoptosome regulating genes, HSP70 and TRIAP1,
induces apoptosis in MM cell lines


Introduction: Some evidences suggest that heat shock protein 70 (HSP70)
is overexpressed in many types of cancer, providing a selective advantage
for tumor cell survival, due in part, to its ability to inhibit cell
death via APAF1 (apoptosis protease activating factor 1) and Caspase 9.
The TP53 Regulated Inhibitor of Apoptosis 1 (TRIAP1) gene can modulate
apoptotic pathways by interaction with HSP70. Although there are several
studies on the role of HSP70 gene in apoptosis and drug resistance, there
is a lack of information about this gene in multiple myeloma (MM).
Objectives: To analyze the importance of HSP70 and TRIAP1 as potential
targets for MM therapy through: 1) stable silencing of HSP70 and TRIAP1
in MM cell lines; 2) evaluation of each gene silencing effect on cell
cycle and apoptosis. Methods: The expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1 genes in
MM cell lines (U266, SKO-007, SK-MM2 and RPMI8226) was examined by
quantitative real time PCR (qPCR). Cell lines were submitted to
transduction with pLKO lentiviral vector containing short hairpin RNAs
(shRNAs) for silencing the target genes (shRNAHSP70 and shRNATRIAP1) -
three independent transductions, in triplicate. Lentiviral vectors with
control sequences (scramble) were used to transduce the same cell lines.
Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry with annexin V and propidium
iodide (PI) staining. We also evaluated APAF1 and Caspase9 genes
expression by qPCR and Caspase 9 and Caspase 3/7 protein activity.
Results: The cell lines RPMI8226 (without deletion of TP53 by FISH) and
U266 (deletion of one allele of TP53 by FISH) were chosen for the
transduction experiments because they showed significant levels of
expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1. The efficiency of transduction, with GFP
reporter gene, was 70% for both cell lines. Silencing of both genes was
confirmed by qPCR and Western blotting. Inhibition of TRIAP1 increased
the percentage of cells in late apoptosis (pIntroduction: Some evidences
suggest that heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is overexpressed in many types
of cancer, providing a selective advantage for tumor cell survival, due
in part, to its ability to inhibit cell death via APAF1 (apoptosis
protease activating factor 1) and Caspase 9. The TP53 Regulated Inhibitor
of Apoptosis 1 (TRIAP1) gene can modulate apoptotic pathways by
interaction with HSP70. Although there are several studies on the role of
HSP70 gene in apoptosis and drug resistance, there is a lack of
information about this gene in multiple myeloma (MM). Objectives: To
analyze the importance of HSP70 and TRIAP1 as potential targets for MM
therapy through: 1) stable silencing of HSP70 and TRIAP1 in MM cell
lines; 2) evaluation of each gene silencing effect on cell cycle and
apoptosis. Methods: The expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1 genes in MM cell
lines (U266, SKO-007, SK-MM2 and RPMI8226) was examined by quantitative
real time PCR (qPCR). Cell lines were submitted to transduction with pLKO
lentiviral vector containing short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) for silencing
the target genes (shRNAHSP70 and shRNATRIAP1) - three independent
transductions, in triplicate. Lentiviral vectors with control sequences
(scramble) were used to transduce the same cell lines. Apoptosis was
assessed by flow cytometry with annexin V and propidium iodide (PI)
staining. We also evaluated APAF1 and Caspase9 genes expression by qPCR
and Caspase 9 and Caspase 3/7 protein activity. Results: The cell lines
RPMI8226 (without deletion of TP53 by FISH) and U266 (deletion of one
allele of TP53 by FISH) were chosen for the transduction experiments
because they showed significant levels of expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1.
The efficiency of transduction, with GFP reporter gene, was 70% for both
cell lines. Silencing of both genes was confirmed by qPCR and Western
blotting. Inhibition of TRIAP1 increased the percentage of cells in late
apoptosis (p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and PIntroduction: Some evidences suggest
that heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is overexpressed in many types of
cancer, providing a selective advantage for tumor cell survival, due in
part, to its ability to inhibit cell death via APAF1 (apoptosis protease
activating factor 1) and Caspase 9. The TP53 Regulated Inhibitor of
Apoptosis 1 (TRIAP1) gene can modulate apoptotic pathways by interaction
with HSP70. Although there are several studies on the role of HSP70 gene
in apoptosis and drug resistance, there is a lack of information about
this gene in multiple myeloma (MM). Objectives: To analyze the importance
of HSP70 and TRIAP1 as potential targets for MM therapy through: 1)
stable silencing of HSP70 and TRIAP1 in MM cell lines; 2) evaluation of
each gene silencing effect on cell cycle and apoptosis. Methods: The
expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1 genes in MM cell lines (U266, SKO-007,
SK-MM2 and RPMI8226) was examined by quantitative real time PCR (qPCR).
Cell lines were submitted to transduction with pLKO lentiviral vector
containing short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) for silencing the target genes
(shRNAHSP70 and shRNATRIAP1) - three independent transductions, in
triplicate. Lentiviral vectors with control sequences (scramble) were
used to transduce the same cell lines. Apoptosis was assessed by flow
cytometry with annexin V and propidium iodide (PI) staining. We also
evaluated APAF1 and Caspase9 genes expression by qPCR and Caspase 9 and
Caspase 3/7 protein activity. Results: The cell lines RPMI8226 (without
deletion of TP53 by FISH) and U266 (deletion of one allele of TP53 by
FISH) were chosen for the transduction experiments because they showed
significant levels of expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1. The efficiency of
transduction, with GFP reporter gene, was 70% for both cell lines.
Silencing of both genes was confirmed by qPCR and Western blotting.
Inhibition of TRIAP1 increased the percentage of cells in late apoptosis
(p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and P<0.01 for U266) and was accompanied by
increased expression of Caspase9 in both MM cell lines (pIntroduction:
Some evidences suggest that heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is
overexpressed in many types of cancer, providing a selective advantage
for tumor cell survival, due in part, to its ability to inhibit cell
death via APAF1 (apoptosis protease activating factor 1) and Caspase 9.
The TP53 Regulated Inhibitor of Apoptosis 1 (TRIAP1) gene can modulate
apoptotic pathways by interaction with HSP70. Although there are several
studies on the role of HSP70 gene in apoptosis and drug resistance, there
is a lack of information about this gene in multiple myeloma (MM).
Objectives: To analyze the importance of HSP70 and TRIAP1 as potential
targets for MM therapy through: 1) stable silencing of HSP70 and TRIAP1
in MM cell lines; 2) evaluation of each gene silencing effect on cell
cycle and apoptosis. Methods: The expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1 genes in
MM cell lines (U266, SKO-007, SK-MM2 and RPMI8226) was examined by
quantitative real time PCR (qPCR). Cell lines were submitted to
transduction with pLKO lentiviral vector containing short hairpin RNAs
(shRNAs) for silencing the target genes (shRNAHSP70 and shRNATRIAP1) -
three independent transductions, in triplicate. Lentiviral vectors with
control sequences (scramble) were used to transduce the same cell lines.
Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry with annexin V and propidium
iodide (PI) staining. We also evaluated APAF1 and Caspase9 genes
expression by qPCR and Caspase 9 and Caspase 3/7 protein activity.
Results: The cell lines RPMI8226 (without deletion of TP53 by FISH) and
U266 (deletion of one allele of TP53 by FISH) were chosen for the
transduction experiments because they showed significant levels of
expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1. The efficiency of transduction, with GFP
reporter gene, was 70% for both cell lines. Silencing of both genes was
confirmed by qPCR and Western blotting. Inhibition of TRIAP1 increased
the percentage of cells in late apoptosis (p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and
P<0.01 for U266) and was accompanied by increased expression of Caspase9
in both MM cell lines (p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and pIntroduction: Some
evidences suggest that heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is overexpressed in
many types of cancer, providing a selective advantage for tumor cell
survival, due in part, to its ability to inhibit cell death via APAF1
(apoptosis protease activating factor 1) and Caspase 9. The TP53
Regulated Inhibitor of Apoptosis 1 (TRIAP1) gene can modulate apoptotic
pathways by interaction with HSP70. Although there are several studies on
the role of HSP70 gene in apoptosis and drug resistance, there is a lack
of information about this gene in multiple myeloma (MM). Objectives: To
analyze the importance of HSP70 and TRIAP1 as potential targets for MM
therapy through: 1) stable silencing of HSP70 and TRIAP1 in MM cell
lines; 2) evaluation of each gene silencing effect on cell cycle and
apoptosis. Methods: The expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1 genes in MM cell
lines (U266, SKO-007, SK-MM2 and RPMI8226) was examined by quantitative
real time PCR (qPCR). Cell lines were submitted to transduction with pLKO
lentiviral vector containing short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) for silencing
the target genes (shRNAHSP70 and shRNATRIAP1) - three independent
transductions, in triplicate. Lentiviral vectors with control sequences
(scramble) were used to transduce the same cell lines. Apoptosis was
assessed by flow cytometry with annexin V and propidium iodide (PI)
staining. We also evaluated APAF1 and Caspase9 genes expression by qPCR
and Caspase 9 and Caspase 3/7 protein activity. Results: The cell lines
RPMI8226 (without deletion of TP53 by FISH) and U266 (deletion of one
allele of TP53 by FISH) were chosen for the transduction experiments
because they showed significant levels of expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1.
The efficiency of transduction, with GFP reporter gene, was 70% for both
cell lines. Silencing of both genes was confirmed by qPCR and Western
blotting. Inhibition of TRIAP1 increased the percentage of cells in late
apoptosis (p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and P<0.01 for U266) and was accompanied
by increased expression of Caspase9 in both MM cell lines (p<0.001 for
RPMI8226 and p<0.05 for U266). Furthermore, the inhibition of TRIAP1
resulted in accumulation of hypodiploid cells after 24 hours of
transduction in U266 cell line. Inhibition of HSP70 showed no significant
changes in the cell cycle in both MM cell lines. However, we observed an
increment in late apoptosis after inhibition of this gene in the two cell
lines (pIntroduction: Some evidences suggest that heat shock protein 70
(HSP70) is overexpressed in many types of cancer, providing a selective
advantage for tumor cell survival, due in part, to its ability to inhibit
cell death via APAF1 (apoptosis protease activating factor 1) and Caspase
9. The TP53 Regulated Inhibitor of Apoptosis 1 (TRIAP1) gene can modulate
apoptotic pathways by interaction with HSP70. Although there are several
studies on the role of HSP70 gene in apoptosis and drug resistance, there
is a lack of information about this gene in multiple myeloma (MM).
Objectives: To analyze the importance of HSP70 and TRIAP1 as potential
targets for MM therapy through: 1) stable silencing of HSP70 and TRIAP1
in MM cell lines; 2) evaluation of each gene silencing effect on cell
cycle and apoptosis. Methods: The expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1 genes in
MM cell lines (U266, SKO-007, SK-MM2 and RPMI8226) was examined by
quantitative real time PCR (qPCR). Cell lines were submitted to
transduction with pLKO lentiviral vector containing short hairpin RNAs
(shRNAs) for silencing the target genes (shRNAHSP70 and shRNATRIAP1) -
three independent transductions, in triplicate. Lentiviral vectors with
control sequences (scramble) were used to transduce the same cell lines.
Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry with annexin V and propidium
iodide (PI) staining. We also evaluated APAF1 and Caspase9 genes
expression by qPCR and Caspase 9 and Caspase 3/7 protein activity.
Results: The cell lines RPMI8226 (without deletion of TP53 by FISH) and
U266 (deletion of one allele of TP53 by FISH) were chosen for the
transduction experiments because they showed significant levels of
expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1. The efficiency of transduction, with GFP
reporter gene, was 70% for both cell lines. Silencing of both genes was
confirmed by qPCR and Western blotting. Inhibition of TRIAP1 increased
the percentage of cells in late apoptosis (p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and
P<0.01 for U266) and was accompanied by increased expression of Caspase9
in both MM cell lines (p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and p<0.05 for U266).
Furthermore, the inhibition of TRIAP1 resulted in accumulation of
hypodiploid cells after 24 hours of transduction in U266 cell line.
Inhibition of HSP70 showed no significant changes in the cell cycle in
both MM cell lines. However, we observed an increment in late apoptosis
after inhibition of this gene in the two cell lines (p<0.01 for RPMI8226
and pIntroduction: Some evidences suggest that heat shock protein 70
(HSP70) is overexpressed in many types of cancer, providing a selective
advantage for tumor cell survival, due in part, to its ability to inhibit
cell death via APAF1 (apoptosis protease activating factor 1) and Caspase
9. The TP53 Regulated Inhibitor of Apoptosis 1 (TRIAP1) gene can modulate
apoptotic pathways by interaction with HSP70. Although there are several
studies on the role of HSP70 gene in apoptosis and drug resistance, there
is a lack of information about this gene in multiple myeloma (MM).
Objectives: To analyze the importance of HSP70 and TRIAP1 as potential
targets for MM therapy through: 1) stable silencing of HSP70 and TRIAP1
in MM cell lines; 2) evaluation of each gene silencing effect on cell
cycle and apoptosis. Methods: The expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1 genes in
MM cell lines (U266, SKO-007, SK-MM2 and RPMI8226) was examined by
quantitative real time PCR (qPCR). Cell lines were submitted to
transduction with pLKO lentiviral vector containing short hairpin RNAs
(shRNAs) for silencing the target genes (shRNAHSP70 and shRNATRIAP1) -
three independent transductions, in triplicate. Lentiviral vectors with
control sequences (scramble) were used to transduce the same cell lines.
Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry with annexin V and propidium
iodide (PI) staining. We also evaluated APAF1 and Caspase9 genes
expression by qPCR and Caspase 9 and Caspase 3/7 protein activity.
Results: The cell lines RPMI8226 (without deletion of TP53 by FISH) and
U266 (deletion of one allele of TP53 by FISH) were chosen for the
transduction experiments because they showed significant levels of
expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1. The efficiency of transduction, with GFP
reporter gene, was 70% for both cell lines. Silencing of both genes was
confirmed by qPCR and Western blotting. Inhibition of TRIAP1 increased
the percentage of cells in late apoptosis (p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and
P<0.01 for U266) and was accompanied by increased expression of Caspase9
in both MM cell lines (p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and p<0.05 for U266).
Furthermore, the inhibition of TRIAP1 resulted in accumulation of
hypodiploid cells after 24 hours of transduction in U266 cell line.
Inhibition of HSP70 showed no significant changes in the cell cycle in
both MM cell lines. However, we observed an increment in late apoptosis
after inhibition of this gene in the two cell lines (p<0.01 for RPMI8226
and p<0.05 for U266) and these results were confirmed by increased
activity of Caspase3/7 (pIntroduction: Some evidences suggest that heat
shock protein 70 (HSP70) is overexpressed in many types of cancer,
providing a selective advantage for tumor cell survival, due in part, to
its ability to inhibit cell death via APAF1 (apoptosis protease
activating factor 1) and Caspase 9. The TP53 Regulated Inhibitor of
Apoptosis 1 (TRIAP1) gene can modulate apoptotic pathways by interaction
with HSP70. Although there are several studies on the role of HSP70 gene
in apoptosis and drug resistance, there is a lack of information about
this gene in multiple myeloma (MM). Objectives: To analyze the importance
of HSP70 and TRIAP1 as potential targets for MM therapy through: 1)
stable silencing of HSP70 and TRIAP1 in MM cell lines; 2) evaluation of
each gene silencing effect on cell cycle and apoptosis. Methods: The
expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1 genes in MM cell lines (U266, SKO-007,
SK-MM2 and RPMI8226) was examined by quantitative real time PCR (qPCR).
Cell lines were submitted to transduction with pLKO lentiviral vector
containing short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) for silencing the target genes
(shRNAHSP70 and shRNATRIAP1) - three independent transductions, in
triplicate. Lentiviral vectors with control sequences (scramble) were
used to transduce the same cell lines. Apoptosis was assessed by flow
cytometry with annexin V and propidium iodide (PI) staining. We also
evaluated APAF1 and Caspase9 genes expression by qPCR and Caspase 9 and
Caspase 3/7 protein activity. Results: The cell lines RPMI8226 (without
deletion of TP53 by FISH) and U266 (deletion of one allele of TP53 by
FISH) were chosen for the transduction experiments because they showed
significant levels of expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1. The efficiency of
transduction, with GFP reporter gene, was 70% for both cell lines.
Silencing of both genes was confirmed by qPCR and Western blotting.
Inhibition of TRIAP1 increased the percentage of cells in late apoptosis
(p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and P<0.01 for U266) and was accompanied by
increased expression of Caspase9 in both MM cell lines (p<0.001 for
RPMI8226 and p<0.05 for U266). Furthermore, the inhibition of TRIAP1
resulted in accumulation of hypodiploid cells after 24 hours of
transduction in U266 cell line. Inhibition of HSP70 showed no significant
changes in the cell cycle in both MM cell lines. However, we observed an
increment in late apoptosis after inhibition of this gene in the two cell
lines (p<0.01 for RPMI8226 and p<0.05 for U266) and these results were
confirmed by increased activity of Caspase3/7 (p<0.01 for RPMI8226 and
pIntroduction: Some evidences suggest that heat shock protein 70 (HSP70)
is overexpressed in many types of cancer, providing a selective advantage
for tumor cell survival, due in part, to its ability to inhibit cell
death via APAF1 (apoptosis protease activating factor 1) and Caspase 9.
The TP53 Regulated Inhibitor of Apoptosis 1 (TRIAP1) gene can modulate
apoptotic pathways by interaction with HSP70. Although there are several
studies on the role of HSP70 gene in apoptosis and drug resistance, there
is a lack of information about this gene in multiple myeloma (MM).
Objectives: To analyze the importance of HSP70 and TRIAP1 as potential
targets for MM therapy through: 1) stable silencing of HSP70 and TRIAP1
in MM cell lines; 2) evaluation of each gene silencing effect on cell
cycle and apoptosis. Methods: The expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1 genes in
MM cell lines (U266, SKO-007, SK-MM2 and RPMI8226) was examined by
quantitative real time PCR (qPCR). Cell lines were submitted to
transduction with pLKO lentiviral vector containing short hairpin RNAs
(shRNAs) for silencing the target genes (shRNAHSP70 and shRNATRIAP1) -
three independent transductions, in triplicate. Lentiviral vectors with
control sequences (scramble) were used to transduce the same cell lines.
Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry with annexin V and propidium
iodide (PI) staining. We also evaluated APAF1 and Caspase9 genes
expression by qPCR and Caspase 9 and Caspase 3/7 protein activity.
Results: The cell lines RPMI8226 (without deletion of TP53 by FISH) and
U266 (deletion of one allele of TP53 by FISH) were chosen for the
transduction experiments because they showed significant levels of
expression of HSP70 and TRIAP1. The efficiency of transduction, with GFP
reporter gene, was 70% for both cell lines. Silencing of both genes was
confirmed by qPCR and Western blotting. Inhibition of TRIAP1 increased
the percentage of cells in late apoptosis (p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and
P<0.01 for U266) and was accompanied by increased expression of Caspase9
in both MM cell lines (p<0.001 for RPMI8226 and p<0.05 for U266).
Furthermore, the inhibition of TRIAP1 resulted in accumulation of
hypodiploid cells after 24 hours of transduction in U266 cell line.
Inhibition of HSP70 showed no significant changes in the cell cycle in
both MM cell lines. However, we observed an increment in late apoptosis
after inhibition of this gene in the two cell lines (p<0.01 for RPMI8226
and p<0.05 for U266) and these results were confirmed by increased
activity of Caspase3/7 (p<0.01 for RPMI8226 and p<0.05 for U266).
Conclusion: Stable silencing of HSP70 and TRIAP1 in MM cell lines showed
a strong impact of this method on the induction of late apoptosis,
through APAF1/Caspase9 pathway, suggesting that inhibitors of both genes
could be exploited as potential targets for the treatment of MM, helping
patients whatever FISH status for TP53 (Support by FAPESP 2010/17668-6).

