Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the expression of neuroblastoma-associated genes for
bone marrow (BM) involvement and minimal residual disease (MRD) detection


Methods. Panel of 4 tumor-associated genes (TAGs): PHOX2B, TH, ELAVL4 and
GD2 was created. Normalized expression (CtABL-CtTAG) of these genes was
analyzed in neuroblastoma (NB) cell lines, in 26 BM samples from patients
without malignancies, in the discovery (331 BM samples from 57 patients)
and validation cohorts of NB patients (311 BM samples from 55 patients)
and in 23 peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) preparations. For performing
of ROC analysis BM samples were defined as positive in case of detectable
PHOX2B expression or tumor cells presence in BM smears. Threshold levels
(TL) of each gene expression were established and subsequently applied
for overall correct prediction (OCP) computation. Prognostic significance
of the BM positivity for the evaluated markers was determined using
event-free (EFS) and overall survival (OS) rates with median of follow-up
time 2.45 years.Results. Neither PHOX2B nor TH expression was detected in
the intact BM, while expression of ELAVL4 was revealed in 20 and GD2 - in
15 of 26 BM samples of patients without malignancies. In the discovery
cohort 105 analyzed BM samples were positive for PHOX2B expression, while
101 for TH. TH expression was revealed in 5 out of 224 negative BM
samples. ELAVL4 and GD2 expression was detected in all 107 positive BM
samples as well as in the majority of negative BM samples (209 and 197 of
224, respectively). TL of TH, ELAVL4 and GD2 expression established by
ROC analysis were -16.535, -7.130 and -8.459. OCP values calculated using
TL achieved 0.952, 0.828 and 0.767 correspondingly. OCP for PHOX2B was
0.994. Due to high OCP values for PHOX2B and TH expression of these genes
was analyzed in the validation cohort, where TL for TH was -13.995, while
OCP values achieved 0.997 for PHOX2B and 0.939 for TH.Presence of
PHOX2B/TH expression in BM at the time of primary NB diagnostics led to
decreased both EFS (.31SE.12 vs .81SE.06, pMethods. Panel of 4
tumor-associated genes (TAGs): PHOX2B, TH, ELAVL4 and GD2 was created.
Normalized expression (CtABL-CtTAG) of these genes was analyzed in
neuroblastoma (NB) cell lines, in 26 BM samples from patients without
malignancies, in the discovery (331 BM samples from 57 patients) and
validation cohorts of NB patients (311 BM samples from 55 patients) and
in 23 peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) preparations. For performing of
ROC analysis BM samples were defined as positive in case of detectable
PHOX2B expression or tumor cells presence in BM smears. Threshold levels
(TL) of each gene expression were established and subsequently applied
for overall correct prediction (OCP) computation. Prognostic significance
of the BM positivity for the evaluated markers was determined using
event-free (EFS) and overall survival (OS) rates with median of follow-up
time 2.45 years.Results. Neither PHOX2B nor TH expression was detected in
the intact BM, while expression of ELAVL4 was revealed in 20 and GD2 - in
15 of 26 BM samples of patients without malignancies. In the discovery
cohort 105 analyzed BM samples were positive for PHOX2B expression, while
101 for TH. TH expression was revealed in 5 out of 224 negative BM
samples. ELAVL4 and GD2 expression was detected in all 107 positive BM
samples as well as in the majority of negative BM samples (209 and 197 of
224, respectively). TL of TH, ELAVL4 and GD2 expression established by
ROC analysis were -16.535, -7.130 and -8.459. OCP values calculated using
TL achieved 0.952, 0.828 and 0.767 correspondingly. OCP for PHOX2B was
0.994. Due to high OCP values for PHOX2B and TH expression of these genes
was analyzed in the validation cohort, where TL for TH was -13.995, while
OCP values achieved 0.997 for PHOX2B and 0.939 for TH.Presence of
PHOX2B/TH expression in BM at the time of primary NB diagnostics led to
decreased both EFS (.31SE.12 vs .81SE.06, p<.001) and OS (.31SE.13 vs
.87SE.05, pMethods. Panel of 4 tumor-associated genes (TAGs): PHOX2B, TH,
ELAVL4 and GD2 was created. Normalized expression (CtABL-CtTAG) of these
genes was analyzed in neuroblastoma (NB) cell lines, in 26 BM samples
from patients without malignancies, in the discovery (331 BM samples from
57 patients) and validation cohorts of NB patients (311 BM samples from
55 patients) and in 23 peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) preparations.
For performing of ROC analysis BM samples were defined as positive in
case of detectable PHOX2B expression or tumor cells presence in BM
smears. Threshold levels (TL) of each gene expression were established
and subsequently applied for overall correct prediction (OCP)
computation. Prognostic significance of the BM positivity for the
evaluated markers was determined using event-free (EFS) and overall
survival (OS) rates with median of follow-up time 2.45 years.Results.
Neither PHOX2B nor TH expression was detected in the intact BM, while
expression of ELAVL4 was revealed in 20 and GD2 - in 15 of 26 BM samples
of patients without malignancies. In the discovery cohort 105 analyzed BM
samples were positive for PHOX2B expression, while 101 for TH. TH
expression was revealed in 5 out of 224 negative BM samples. ELAVL4 and
GD2 expression was detected in all 107 positive BM samples as well as in
the majority of negative BM samples (209 and 197 of 224, respectively).
TL of TH, ELAVL4 and GD2 expression established by ROC analysis were
-16.535, -7.130 and -8.459. OCP values calculated using TL achieved
0.952, 0.828 and 0.767 correspondingly. OCP for PHOX2B was 0.994. Due to
high OCP values for PHOX2B and TH expression of these genes was analyzed
in the validation cohort, where TL for TH was -13.995, while OCP values
achieved 0.997 for PHOX2B and 0.939 for TH.Presence of PHOX2B/TH
expression in BM at the time of primary NB diagnostics led to decreased
both EFS (.31SE.12 vs .81SE.06, p<.001) and OS (.31SE.13 vs .87SE.05,
p<.001). Persistence of TAGs expression during the treatment demonstrated
trend to reduced EFS (.27SE.12 vs .43SE.19, p = .08). No expression of
TAGs was find in the PBSC preparations while positivity for PHOX2B/TH
expression before PBSC apheresis had strongly negative prognostic impact
(EFS .00 vs .35SE.14, p = .04; OS .00 vs .36SE.15, p = .03) despite of
CD34+ selection. Predominance of PHOX2B expression over TH in BM of
primary NB patients with the difference in normalized expression greater
then 1.68 had negative prognostic significance: EFS .00 vs .56SE.12, p =
.017, OS .00 vs .72SE.11, p = .006.Conclusion. PHOX2B and TH are the most
appropriate markers for BM involvement and MRD detection in NB patients.
Presence of these TAGs expression in the BM at the time of primary
diagnostics and before PBSC apheresis had strongly negative prognostic
impact. Predominance of PHOX2B expression over TH in the BM can define
high risk patients.

