Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design, validation, and interpretation of an NGS assay for
actionable variants in solid tumors


The Jackson Laboratory Cancer Treatment Profile (JAX-CTP) is a next
generation sequencing (NGS)-based molecular diagnostic assay that detects
actionable gene variants in solid tumors to inform the selection of
targeted therapeutics for cancer treatment. We will describe the design
of the 358- gene panel, analytical validation, and the curation and
clinical reporting of actionable variants. Selection of the gene panel
was based on known drug targets, casual implications in cancer, and a
thorough pathway analysis. DNA is extracted from FFPE tumor samples and
using hybrid capture, the genes of interest are enriched and sequenced on
Illumina HiSeq 2500 or MiSeq sequencers. FASTQ files generated from
Illumina's CASAVA software are submitted to the JAX Clinical Genome
Analytics (CGA) data analysis pipeline to perform automated read quality
assessment, alignment, and variant calling. Identified variants are then
submitted for clinical curation using a combination of the in-house JAX
Clinical Knowledgebase (CKB) and the external Genetic Variant Annotation
(GVA) from CollabRx. Once clinically annotated, the variants are graded
relative to their clinical utility for the specific tumor type and
compiled into a clinical report to inform patient treatment. Extensive
analytical validation, following CAP guidelines, was conducted to assess
limit of detection, accuracy, precision, sensitivity, and specificity of
the assay. The summarized optimized sensitivity of the assay is a minimum
coverage of samples at 300X, a limit of detection of 10% for SNPs/indels
and 6 copies for CNVs, and an average of 3-4 actionable variants per
sample. The challenges of interpreting gene variants for clinical
actionability and for establishing an analytically valid bioinformatic
pipeline will be discussed in-depth.

