Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tracking genomic alterations in young patients with head and neck
carcinomas using whole-exome sequencing


Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) often affect patients over
60 years, although epidemiological studies have shown an increased
incidence in young adults (18-45 years), especially those having
oropharynx and oral cavity tumors. There is no consensus regarding the
etiology, clinical course and prognosis of HNSCC in young patients that
often do not have the risk factors frequently described as associated
with the disease (alcohol consumption, smoking and HPV infection).
Despite its importance, studies with this group of patients are scarce,
mainly focusing on the molecular aspects involved in the development and
progression of the disease. In this study, we evaluated 36-paired samples
(6 oral cavity, 12 oropharyngeal carcinomas and 18 matched blood samples)
by whole exome sequencing (WES) aiming to identify molecular markers
useful to clinical practice. Libraries were prepared (Illumina Nextera
exome Enrichment kit) for WES using the high quality DNA from tumor
tissue and peripheral blood of each patient (HiSeq2500, Illumina). The
coverage reached an average of 55x per sample. We used an in-house
pipeline for cleaning, mapping and SNP calling revealing an average of
36,494 SNPs per sample. A paired comparison of normal and tumor samples
was performed considering only the exclusive variants in tumors, after
exclusion of the common variants, based on 1000 Genomes
(http://www.1000genomes.org/), project and 6500 exomes
(evs.gs.washington.edu/). It was identified 248 variants distributed in
169 genes, with 184 (74%) classified as new (variant not described) and
64 (26%) as rare (population frequency 0.1%). Three genes, ZNF717, HYDIN
and KCNJ12, presented higher frequency of SNPs and were enriched to head
and neck carcinoma (p = 1,910-9) and calcium (p = 1.8210-3) pathways.
Considering only tongue samples (4 cases) from non-smokers and HPV
negative patients, the ZNF717 and HYDIN genes remained among those with
the highest frequency of SNPs [non-smokers: HYDIN (23 SNPs) and ZNF77 (24
SNPs); HPV-negative: HYDIN (6 SNPs) and ZNF77 (5 SNPs)]. These genes are
putative drivers in young patients with HNSCC.Financial Support: FAPESP
(2013/06897-2) and INCiTO (FAPESP: 2008/57887-9 and CNPq 573589/08-9)

