Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential values of circulating tumor cell enumeration for
clinical management of patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma


Thyroid cancer is one of the most rapidly increasing malignancies, It is
the most common endocrine cancer and the fifth most common cancer in
women. Moreover, the improved examination technologies of
ultrasonographic and thyroglobulin even 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography and nodule biopsy were insufficient to real-time
reflect the patients prognosis. For the prognostic and predictive purpose
to improve the diagnostics of thyroid cancer, circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) have been developed.Previous studies have shown that CTCs can
serve as liquid biopsies to monitoring treatment response and prognosis,
but only few articles discussed in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC)
which composed around 80% of thyroid cancer.In this study, a total of 41
cases were enrolled.In the group I (G1), we included 12 control subjects
without clinical significant thyroid disorder like thyroid nodule or
autoimmune thyroid disease or any cancer history. In the group II (G2),
11 disease free thyroid cancer patients were enrolled. In the group III
(G3), we enrolled 18 PTC patients with distant metastasis that were
confirmed by 131I whole-body scintigraphy (WBS) or other imaging methods.
The peripheral blood of control subjects and cancer patients were
analyzed by a negative selection method PowerMag system. The number of
cells with the epithelial cell adhesion molecular (EpCAM) or thyroid
stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR)expression was counted. In ROC
analysis, EpCAM+ counts showed no significantly difference between G1 and
G2 (p = 0.0728). Between G1 and G3 (pThyroid cancer is one of the most
rapidly increasing malignancies, It is the most common endocrine cancer
and the fifth most common cancer in women. Moreover, the improved
examination technologies of ultrasonographic and thyroglobulin even
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography and nodule biopsy
were insufficient to real-time reflect the patients prognosis. For the
prognostic and predictive purpose to improve the diagnostics of thyroid
cancer, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been developed.Previous
studies have shown that CTCs can serve as liquid biopsies to monitoring
treatment response and prognosis, but only few articles discussed in
papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) which composed around 80% of thyroid
cancer.In this study, a total of 41 cases were enrolled.In the group I
(G1), we included 12 control subjects without clinical significant
thyroid disorder like thyroid nodule or autoimmune thyroid disease or any
cancer history. In the group II (G2), 11 disease free thyroid cancer
patients were enrolled. In the group III (G3), we enrolled 18 PTC
patients with distant metastasis that were confirmed by 131I whole-body
scintigraphy (WBS) or other imaging methods. The peripheral blood of
control subjects and cancer patients were analyzed by a negative
selection method PowerMag system. The number of cells with the epithelial
cell adhesion molecular (EpCAM) or thyroid stimulating hormone receptor
(TSHR)expression was counted. In ROC analysis, EpCAM+ counts showed no
significantly difference between G1 and G2 (p = 0.0728). Between G1 and
G3 (p<0.0001), we had asensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 66.9%when
5.0CTCs/ml was used as the cutoff, thearea under curve (AUC) equivalent
to 0.979. To further distinguishbetween G2 and G3(p = 0.0001), we had
asensitivity of 88.9% and a specificity of 81.8%when 16.0CTCs/ml was used
as the cutoff; the AUC was equivalent to 0.934.Moreover, by using
PowerMag system we could isolate TSHR+/EpCAM- CTCs and identify the
potentialmalignancy in disease free group from control subjects.
TSHR+-CTCscountsshowedthat, between G2 and G3 (pThyroid cancer is one of
the most rapidly increasing malignancies, It is the most common endocrine
cancer and the fifth most common cancer in women. Moreover, the improved
examination technologies of ultrasonographic and thyroglobulin even
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography and nodule biopsy
were insufficient to real-time reflect the patients prognosis. For the
prognostic and predictive purpose to improve the diagnostics of thyroid
cancer, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been developed.Previous
studies have shown that CTCs can serve as liquid biopsies to monitoring
treatment response and prognosis, but only few articles discussed in
papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) which composed around 80% of thyroid
cancer.In this study, a total of 41 cases were enrolled.In the group I
(G1), we included 12 control subjects without clinical significant
thyroid disorder like thyroid nodule or autoimmune thyroid disease or any
cancer history. In the group II (G2), 11 disease free thyroid cancer
patients were enrolled. In the group III (G3), we enrolled 18 PTC
patients with distant metastasis that were confirmed by 131I whole-body
scintigraphy (WBS) or other imaging methods. The peripheral blood of
control subjects and cancer patients were analyzed by a negative
selection method PowerMag system. The number of cells with the epithelial
cell adhesion molecular (EpCAM) or thyroid stimulating hormone receptor
(TSHR)expression was counted. In ROC analysis, EpCAM+ counts showed no
significantly difference between G1 and G2 (p = 0.0728). Between G1 and
G3 (p<0.0001), we had asensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 66.9%when
5.0CTCs/ml was used as the cutoff, thearea under curve (AUC) equivalent
to 0.979. To further distinguishbetween G2 and G3(p = 0.0001), we had
asensitivity of 88.9% and a specificity of 81.8%when 16.0CTCs/ml was used
as the cutoff; the AUC was equivalent to 0.934.Moreover, by using
PowerMag system we could isolate TSHR+/EpCAM- CTCs and identify the
potentialmalignancy in disease free group from control subjects.
TSHR+-CTCscountsshowedthat, between G2 and G3 (p<0.0001),we had
asensitivity of 83.3% and the specificity was 90.9%when 30.7CTCs/ml was
used as the cutoff; theAUC was equivalent to 0.854.Remarkably, between G1
and G2 (p = 0.0013), we had asensitivity of 90.9% and a specificity of
70.6%when 7.5 CTCs/ml was used as the cutoff;the AUC equivalent to 0.869.
By counting the number of CTCs which expressed EpCAM or TSHR could
monitor the progression for the patients with thyroid cancer. CTCs
enumeration thereby has the value for clinical diagnosis in PTC and
compromises the inefficiency of the current examinations for thyroid
cancer.

