Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cell-induced vascularization of skin cancer tumors


Our previous studies identify a subpopulation of epidermal cancer stem
(ECS) cells in human squamous cell carcinoma that are efficient tumor
formers. These cells display enhanced invasion and migration, and form
large, invasive and highly aggressive tumors. We now show that ECS cells
produce highly vascularized tumors. This is confirmed visually and by
detection of increased expression of the CD31 endothelial cell marker. To
understand the molecular basis for increased vascularization, we assayed
for ECS cell and non-stem cancer cell production of angiogenic factors.
Pro-angiogenic factors, including VEGF-A, HIF-1 and MMP9, are produced at
high level in ECS cell-derived tumors, as compared to non-stem cancer
cell tumors. In addition, anti-angiogenic factor production
(thrombospondin-1, endothelin-1, serpin B5) is reduced. This is
consistent with the finding that ECS cell tumor extracts more efficiently
stimulate HUVEC cell tube formation. Moreover, these ECS tumor-derived
cells display enhanced spheroid formation, and cell migration and
invasion. Knockdown of VEGF-A or VEGFR2, or treatment with anti-VEGF-A
attenuates these events. In addition, treatment with bevacizumab
(anti-VEGF-A) suppresses tumor formation in vivo. These studies suggest
that the VEGF-A signaling pathway is enhanced in ECS cells and is in part
responsible the ability of these cells to form aggressive and highly
vascularized tumors.

