Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aging, telomere and TP53: a potential biological insight into the
mechanistic origin of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in the elderly


Telomere attrition is a recognized feature of genomically unstable cancer
genomes prevalent in older patients. Unchecked genomic instability
secondary to loss of TP53 fosters telomere attrition. The relevance of
this in older ALL patients has not been studied. Population based
cytogenetic study of adults with ALL demonstrated that aneuploidy -
reflecting genomic instability - was almost 4 fold more common in those
60 years than in younger counterparts. Preliminary data from a UK cohort
of patients with ALL aged 60 years revealed a significantly higher rate
of copy number alterations (CNA) (mostly comprising of deletions of key
B-cell differentiation/cell-cycle genes, recognized for their proximity
to recombination sequence motifs) when compared to their younger
counterparts. Correlative cytogenetic analysis notably revealed 28% of
such alterations were attributed to gross chromosomal losses rather than
true intragenic deletions in the over 60s versus 10% in the under 35s
suggesting an alternative, potentially age-related, non-RAG-mediated
driver for some of such aberrations. We hypothesize that permissive
telomere shortening is a driver. We assessed relative telomere length
(RTL) using monochrome multiplex quantitative PCR of remission DNA
samples of ALL patients aged 60 and compared it with younger counterparts
aged Telomere attrition is a recognized feature of genomically unstable
cancer genomes prevalent in older patients. Unchecked genomic instability
secondary to loss of TP53 fosters telomere attrition. The relevance of
this in older ALL patients has not been studied. Population based
cytogenetic study of adults with ALL demonstrated that aneuploidy -
reflecting genomic instability - was almost 4 fold more common in those
60 years than in younger counterparts. Preliminary data from a UK cohort
of patients with ALL aged 60 years revealed a significantly higher rate
of copy number alterations (CNA) (mostly comprising of deletions of key
B-cell differentiation/cell-cycle genes, recognized for their proximity
to recombination sequence motifs) when compared to their younger
counterparts. Correlative cytogenetic analysis notably revealed 28% of
such alterations were attributed to gross chromosomal losses rather than
true intragenic deletions in the over 60s versus 10% in the under 35s
suggesting an alternative, potentially age-related, non-RAG-mediated
driver for some of such aberrations. We hypothesize that permissive
telomere shortening is a driver. We assessed relative telomere length
(RTL) using monochrome multiplex quantitative PCR of remission DNA
samples of ALL patients aged 60 and compared it with younger counterparts
aged <35. There was a significant age-related reduction in RTL; mean RTL
for those aged Telomere attrition is a recognized feature of genomically
unstable cancer genomes prevalent in older patients. Unchecked genomic
instability secondary to loss of TP53 fosters telomere attrition. The
relevance of this in older ALL patients has not been studied. Population
based cytogenetic study of adults with ALL demonstrated that aneuploidy -
reflecting genomic instability - was almost 4 fold more common in those
60 years than in younger counterparts. Preliminary data from a UK cohort
of patients with ALL aged 60 years revealed a significantly higher rate
of copy number alterations (CNA) (mostly comprising of deletions of key
B-cell differentiation/cell-cycle genes, recognized for their proximity
to recombination sequence motifs) when compared to their younger
counterparts. Correlative cytogenetic analysis notably revealed 28% of
such alterations were attributed to gross chromosomal losses rather than
true intragenic deletions in the over 60s versus 10% in the under 35s
suggesting an alternative, potentially age-related, non-RAG-mediated
driver for some of such aberrations. We hypothesize that permissive
telomere shortening is a driver. We assessed relative telomere length
(RTL) using monochrome multiplex quantitative PCR of remission DNA
samples of ALL patients aged 60 and compared it with younger counterparts
aged <35. There was a significant age-related reduction in RTL; mean RTL
for those aged <35 and 60 years with ALL was 1.38 and 0.6. RTL of
remission DNA from 60 years ALL patients was significantly shorter than
that of age-matched controls without ALL; mean 0.6 versus 1.07, pTelomere
attrition is a recognized feature of genomically unstable cancer genomes
prevalent in older patients. Unchecked genomic instability secondary to
loss of TP53 fosters telomere attrition. The relevance of this in older
ALL patients has not been studied. Population based cytogenetic study of
adults with ALL demonstrated that aneuploidy - reflecting genomic
instability - was almost 4 fold more common in those 60 years than in
younger counterparts. Preliminary data from a UK cohort of patients with
ALL aged 60 years revealed a significantly higher rate of copy number
alterations (CNA) (mostly comprising of deletions of key B-cell
differentiation/cell-cycle genes, recognized for their proximity to
recombination sequence motifs) when compared to their younger
counterparts. Correlative cytogenetic analysis notably revealed 28% of
such alterations were attributed to gross chromosomal losses rather than
true intragenic deletions in the over 60s versus 10% in the under 35s
suggesting an alternative, potentially age-related, non-RAG-mediated
driver for some of such aberrations. We hypothesize that permissive
telomere shortening is a driver. We assessed relative telomere length
(RTL) using monochrome multiplex quantitative PCR of remission DNA
samples of ALL patients aged 60 and compared it with younger counterparts
aged <35. There was a significant age-related reduction in RTL; mean RTL
for those aged <35 and 60 years with ALL was 1.38 and 0.6. RTL of
remission DNA from 60 years ALL patients was significantly shorter than
that of age-matched controls without ALL; mean 0.6 versus 1.07, p<0.01.
We then assessed leukemic DNA RTL and compared it to that of matched
remission DNA to define leukemic telomere state, expressed as log2 ratio,
in patients aged 60 (N = 29) and Telomere attrition is a recognized
feature of genomically unstable cancer genomes prevalent in older
patients. Unchecked genomic instability secondary to loss of TP53 fosters
telomere attrition. The relevance of this in older ALL patients has not
been studied. Population based cytogenetic study of adults with ALL
demonstrated that aneuploidy - reflecting genomic instability - was
almost 4 fold more common in those 60 years than in younger counterparts.
Preliminary data from a UK cohort of patients with ALL aged 60 years
revealed a significantly higher rate of copy number alterations (CNA)
(mostly comprising of deletions of key B-cell differentiation/cell-cycle
genes, recognized for their proximity to recombination sequence motifs)
when compared to their younger counterparts. Correlative cytogenetic
analysis notably revealed 28% of such alterations were attributed to
gross chromosomal losses rather than true intragenic deletions in the
over 60s versus 10% in the under 35s suggesting an alternative,
potentially age-related, non-RAG-mediated driver for some of such
aberrations. We hypothesize that permissive telomere shortening is a
driver. We assessed relative telomere length (RTL) using monochrome
multiplex quantitative PCR of remission DNA samples of ALL patients aged
60 and compared it with younger counterparts aged <35. There was a
significant age-related reduction in RTL; mean RTL for those aged <35 and
60 years with ALL was 1.38 and 0.6. RTL of remission DNA from 60 years
ALL patients was significantly shorter than that of age-matched controls
without ALL; mean 0.6 versus 1.07, p<0.01. We then assessed leukemic DNA
RTL and compared it to that of matched remission DNA to define leukemic
telomere state, expressed as log2 ratio, in patients aged 60 (N = 29) and
<35 years (N = 35). Mean log2 ratio was significantly higher in the 60s
than in the Telomere attrition is a recognized feature of genomically
unstable cancer genomes prevalent in older patients. Unchecked genomic
instability secondary to loss of TP53 fosters telomere attrition. The
relevance of this in older ALL patients has not been studied. Population
based cytogenetic study of adults with ALL demonstrated that aneuploidy -
reflecting genomic instability - was almost 4 fold more common in those
60 years than in younger counterparts. Preliminary data from a UK cohort
of patients with ALL aged 60 years revealed a significantly higher rate
of copy number alterations (CNA) (mostly comprising of deletions of key
B-cell differentiation/cell-cycle genes, recognized for their proximity
to recombination sequence motifs) when compared to their younger
counterparts. Correlative cytogenetic analysis notably revealed 28% of
such alterations were attributed to gross chromosomal losses rather than
true intragenic deletions in the over 60s versus 10% in the under 35s
suggesting an alternative, potentially age-related, non-RAG-mediated
driver for some of such aberrations. We hypothesize that permissive
telomere shortening is a driver. We assessed relative telomere length
(RTL) using monochrome multiplex quantitative PCR of remission DNA
samples of ALL patients aged 60 and compared it with younger counterparts
aged <35. There was a significant age-related reduction in RTL; mean RTL
for those aged <35 and 60 years with ALL was 1.38 and 0.6. RTL of
remission DNA from 60 years ALL patients was significantly shorter than
that of age-matched controls without ALL; mean 0.6 versus 1.07, p<0.01.
We then assessed leukemic DNA RTL and compared it to that of matched
remission DNA to define leukemic telomere state, expressed as log2 ratio,
in patients aged 60 (N = 29) and <35 years (N = 35). Mean log2 ratio was
significantly higher in the 60s than in the <35s (1.009 and -0.7498, p =
0.0002). Based on a log2 ratio cut-off of 3.18 derived from expectation
maximization-mixture guided model to define leukemic telomere gain or
loss, 8 patients (27.6%) aged 60 had leukemic telomere gain whereas none
of those aged Telomere attrition is a recognized feature of genomically
unstable cancer genomes prevalent in older patients. Unchecked genomic
instability secondary to loss of TP53 fosters telomere attrition. The
relevance of this in older ALL patients has not been studied. Population
based cytogenetic study of adults with ALL demonstrated that aneuploidy -
reflecting genomic instability - was almost 4 fold more common in those
60 years than in younger counterparts. Preliminary data from a UK cohort
of patients with ALL aged 60 years revealed a significantly higher rate
of copy number alterations (CNA) (mostly comprising of deletions of key
B-cell differentiation/cell-cycle genes, recognized for their proximity
to recombination sequence motifs) when compared to their younger
counterparts. Correlative cytogenetic analysis notably revealed 28% of
such alterations were attributed to gross chromosomal losses rather than
true intragenic deletions in the over 60s versus 10% in the under 35s
suggesting an alternative, potentially age-related, non-RAG-mediated
driver for some of such aberrations. We hypothesize that permissive
telomere shortening is a driver. We assessed relative telomere length
(RTL) using monochrome multiplex quantitative PCR of remission DNA
samples of ALL patients aged 60 and compared it with younger counterparts
aged <35. There was a significant age-related reduction in RTL; mean RTL
for those aged <35 and 60 years with ALL was 1.38 and 0.6. RTL of
remission DNA from 60 years ALL patients was significantly shorter than
that of age-matched controls without ALL; mean 0.6 versus 1.07, p<0.01.
We then assessed leukemic DNA RTL and compared it to that of matched
remission DNA to define leukemic telomere state, expressed as log2 ratio,
in patients aged 60 (N = 29) and <35 years (N = 35). Mean log2 ratio was
significantly higher in the 60s than in the <35s (1.009 and -0.7498, p =
0.0002). Based on a log2 ratio cut-off of 3.18 derived from expectation
maximization-mixture guided model to define leukemic telomere gain or
loss, 8 patients (27.6%) aged 60 had leukemic telomere gain whereas none
of those aged <35 years had gain. Leukemic telomere gain was
statistically associated with more CNA of 8 key B-cell
differentiation/cell-cycle genes assessed by multiplex ligation probe
amplification P335-ALL IKZF1 kit (median 4 versus 1 with loss, pTelomere
attrition is a recognized feature of genomically unstable cancer genomes
prevalent in older patients. Unchecked genomic instability secondary to
loss of TP53 fosters telomere attrition. The relevance of this in older
ALL patients has not been studied. Population based cytogenetic study of
adults with ALL demonstrated that aneuploidy - reflecting genomic
instability - was almost 4 fold more common in those 60 years than in
younger counterparts. Preliminary data from a UK cohort of patients with
ALL aged 60 years revealed a significantly higher rate of copy number
alterations (CNA) (mostly comprising of deletions of key B-cell
differentiation/cell-cycle genes, recognized for their proximity to
recombination sequence motifs) when compared to their younger
counterparts. Correlative cytogenetic analysis notably revealed 28% of
such alterations were attributed to gross chromosomal losses rather than
true intragenic deletions in the over 60s versus 10% in the under 35s
suggesting an alternative, potentially age-related, non-RAG-mediated
driver for some of such aberrations. We hypothesize that permissive
telomere shortening is a driver. We assessed relative telomere length
(RTL) using monochrome multiplex quantitative PCR of remission DNA
samples of ALL patients aged 60 and compared it with younger counterparts
aged <35. There was a significant age-related reduction in RTL; mean RTL
for those aged <35 and 60 years with ALL was 1.38 and 0.6. RTL of
remission DNA from 60 years ALL patients was significantly shorter than
that of age-matched controls without ALL; mean 0.6 versus 1.07, p<0.01.
We then assessed leukemic DNA RTL and compared it to that of matched
remission DNA to define leukemic telomere state, expressed as log2 ratio,
in patients aged 60 (N = 29) and <35 years (N = 35). Mean log2 ratio was
significantly higher in the 60s than in the <35s (1.009 and -0.7498, p =
0.0002). Based on a log2 ratio cut-off of 3.18 derived from expectation
maximization-mixture guided model to define leukemic telomere gain or
loss, 8 patients (27.6%) aged 60 had leukemic telomere gain whereas none
of those aged <35 years had gain. Leukemic telomere gain was
statistically associated with more CNA of 8 key B-cell
differentiation/cell-cycle genes assessed by multiplex ligation probe
amplification P335-ALL IKZF1 kit (median 4 versus 1 with loss, p<0.01)
and hypodiploid/near triploid or complex karyotypes (5/8 versus 1/13 with
loss, pTelomere attrition is a recognized feature of genomically unstable
cancer genomes prevalent in older patients. Unchecked genomic instability
secondary to loss of TP53 fosters telomere attrition. The relevance of
this in older ALL patients has not been studied. Population based
cytogenetic study of adults with ALL demonstrated that aneuploidy -
reflecting genomic instability - was almost 4 fold more common in those
60 years than in younger counterparts. Preliminary data from a UK cohort
of patients with ALL aged 60 years revealed a significantly higher rate
of copy number alterations (CNA) (mostly comprising of deletions of key
B-cell differentiation/cell-cycle genes, recognized for their proximity
to recombination sequence motifs) when compared to their younger
counterparts. Correlative cytogenetic analysis notably revealed 28% of
such alterations were attributed to gross chromosomal losses rather than
true intragenic deletions in the over 60s versus 10% in the under 35s
suggesting an alternative, potentially age-related, non-RAG-mediated
driver for some of such aberrations. We hypothesize that permissive
telomere shortening is a driver. We assessed relative telomere length
(RTL) using monochrome multiplex quantitative PCR of remission DNA
samples of ALL patients aged 60 and compared it with younger counterparts
aged <35. There was a significant age-related reduction in RTL; mean RTL
for those aged <35 and 60 years with ALL was 1.38 and 0.6. RTL of
remission DNA from 60 years ALL patients was significantly shorter than
that of age-matched controls without ALL; mean 0.6 versus 1.07, p<0.01.
We then assessed leukemic DNA RTL and compared it to that of matched
remission DNA to define leukemic telomere state, expressed as log2 ratio,
in patients aged 60 (N = 29) and <35 years (N = 35). Mean log2 ratio was
significantly higher in the 60s than in the <35s (1.009 and -0.7498, p =
0.0002). Based on a log2 ratio cut-off of 3.18 derived from expectation
maximization-mixture guided model to define leukemic telomere gain or
loss, 8 patients (27.6%) aged 60 had leukemic telomere gain whereas none
of those aged <35 years had gain. Leukemic telomere gain was
statistically associated with more CNA of 8 key B-cell
differentiation/cell-cycle genes assessed by multiplex ligation probe
amplification P335-ALL IKZF1 kit (median 4 versus 1 with loss, p<0.01)
and hypodiploid/near triploid or complex karyotypes (5/8 versus 1/13 with
loss, p<0.01). TP53 alteration assessed by cytogenetics, FISH +/- direct
sequencing of exons 5-8 in the 60 ALL cohort was noted in 5/8 patients
with gain versus 4/17 with loss; p = 0.037. Whilst our study is currently
limited by sample size integration of CNA with telomere features of the
ALL genome and TP53 state has revealed a potential interactive link
between aging, telomere attrition and TP53-dependent adaptive response
loss which provides the first insight into disease biology of elderly ALL.

