Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obinutuzumab compared to Rituximab significantly enhances cell
death, antibody dependent cytotoxicity (ADCC) and improves overall
survival against CD20+ rituximab-sensitive/-resistant Burkitt Lymphoma
(BL) and precursor Lymphoblastic L


Background:CD20, expressed on normal and malignant B-cells, has proven to
be a useful target for immunotherapeutic approaches in hematological
malignancies. (Dalle, S et al. Mol. Can. Ther., 2011) Patients who
relapse with CD20+ BL/ B-ALL have a dismal prognosis, often associated
with chemotherapy resistance and may require alternative therapeutic
strategies (Cairo et al. Blood, 2007, Cairo et al. JCO, 2012, Barth/Cairo
et al. BJH, 2013,Goldman/Cairo et al. Leukemia, 2013). Obinutuzumab, a
novel glycoengineered type II CD20 antibody, has been shown to enhance
cell death and ADCC vs. RTX (Herter et al, Clinc Can Res, 2013), and was
recently approved by FDA and EMA for first line treatment of CLL in
combination with chlorambucil.Objective:To evaluate anti-tumor activity
of obinutuzumab vs RTX against RTX resistant/sensitive BL and pre-B-ALL
tumor targets in-vitro/ in-vivo in xenografted NSG mice.Methods:Raji
(CD20+), (ATCC, Manhass, VA), U698-M (CD20+, DSMZ, Germany) and Raji-4RH
(provided by M. Barth, Roswell Park Cancer Institute) were cultured in
RPMI with 10% FBS. Tumor cells were incubated with 100 g/ml obinutuzumab
(Hoffmann La Roche (Switzerland)), and/or RTX for 48 hrs. Cell death was
evaluated by staining with Ann.V/7AAD by flow-cytometry. ADCC were
performed with K562-IL-15-41BBL expanded NK cells at 20:1E: T ratio. Six
to 8 week old female NSG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ), were divided
into 5 groups: PBS only (control), isotype control (IgG), obinutuzumab
(10 and 30 mg/kg), and RTX (30 mg/kg). Mice were xenografted with
intravenous injections of Luc+ Raji, Raji4RH and U698M cells at 5106
tumor cells/mouse. Mice were treated every 7 days for 8 weeks. Tumor
burden was monitored by IVIS spectrum system.Results:Obinutuzumab vs. RTX
(100 g/ml), significantly enhanced cell death in Raji, 35.6 3.1 vs. 25.1
2.0% (p = 0.001), Raji2R, 18.2 0.9 vs. 7.8 2.4% (p = 0.001), Raji4RH,
19.7 2.2 vs. 7.97 3.4% (p = 0.001) and U698-M 47.3 4.9 vs 23.2 0.50%, (p
= 0.001). Obinutuzumab vs RTX also elicited a significant increase in
ADCC in expanded NK cells, Raji 73.8 8.1% vs 56.81 4.6% (p = 0.001),
Raji-2R, 38.0 2.0 vs 21.6 1.2% (p = 0.0001), Raji-4RH 40.01.6% vs
0.51.1%, (p = 0.001), and U-698-M 70.06% vs. 45.56 0.1%, (p =
0.001).Further, overall survival in mice receiving 30 mg/kg of
obinutuzumab was significantly increased when compared to mice receiving
30 mg/kg of RTX; Raji (p = 0.05), Raji4RH (p = 0.024) and U698-M (p =
0.03).Conclusion:Obinutuzumab significantly enhances cell death and NK
mediated ADCC in RTX sensitive/ resistant CD20+ BL and pre-B-ALL vs. RTX.
Furthermore, obinutuzumanb significantly increased survival and decreased
tumor burden in BL and Pre-B-ALL xenografts compared to an equal dose of
RTX.

