Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome sequencing reveals PCAT5 - new ERG-regulated
non-coding transcript in prostate cancer


Background: Prostate cancer (PC) is the second most common cancer among
men. Most PC-related deaths are due to invasive tumors that are treated
with therapies inhibiting androgen production or androgen receptor (AR)
activity. After an initial response, tumors invariably progress to
castration resistant prostate cancers (CRPCs) for which no effective cure
exists.Methods and Results: We used transcriptome sequencing to study
fresh-frozen tissue specimens from 12 benign prostatic hyperplasias
(BPHs), 28 PCs, and 13 CRPCs. Reference-based transcriptome assembly
uncovered 145 previously unannotated intergenic PC and CRPC associated
long non-coding transcripts (lncRNAs) or isoforms. One third of the
transcripts were CRPC-specific. We showed that one of the novel
transcripts, Prostate Cancer Associated Transcript 5 (PCAT5), expressed
in half of the tumors, was likely regulated by ERG, the key transcription
factor in 50% of prostate cancers. Genome-wide expression analysis of a
PCAT5-positive prostate cancer cell line after PCAT5 knockdown suggested
significant alterations in proliferation pathways. In vitro validation of
the pathway alterations revealed concordantly dramatic effects in
phenotype: stalling of cell growth, migration, invasion, and colony
forming potential, and increase in the rate of apoptosis.Conclusions: We
identified the key differences between PC and CRPC in transcriptome
level, and validated the oncogenic potential of a novel lncRNA in
ERG-positive prostate cancers, PCAT5. Our study presents a number of
putative lncRNA biomarkers for CRPC, and opportunities for therapeutic
intervention.

