Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk of bladder and kidney cancers in end-stage renal disease
patients: a nationwide, population-based study in Taiwan


Chronic kidney disease (CKD) was the tenth leading cause of death in
Taiwan. as the fifth stage of progressive CKD. Various therapeutic
modalities including hemodialysis (HD),peritoneal dialysis (PD) and renal
transplantation (RT) modify the risks of systemic chronic diseases in
end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients remains unclear.A total of 18,081
newly diagnosed ESRD patients and 54,243 controls matched for age, gender
and index date were recruited from the National Health Insurance Research
Database in Taiwan. The ESRD status was confirmed by the registry of
catastrophic illness. The incidence of cancer was identified through
cross-referencing with the National Cancer Registry Database. Hazard
ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated by a Cox
proportional hazards model. Kaplan-Meier method were used for all
analyses. Significant higher incidence rate ratios (IRRs) of bladder
cancer of 7.0, 9.5 and 14.4 were found for ESRD patients undergoing HD,
PD and RT, respectively. The IRRs of kidney cancer also represent a
similar risk pattern. We observed that significant bladder cancer risks
were observed among ESRD patients undergoing HD (HR = 10.0), PD (HR =
12.8) and RT (17.7) after the adjustment for age, gender and
co-morbidities. In addition, significant kidney cancer risks of 11.2,
17.1 and 33.7 were also found for ESRD patients undergoing HD, PD and RT,
respectively. In conclusion, different therapeutic modalities could
modify the risks of bladder and kidney cancers in ESRD patients in Taiwan.

