Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR2 regulates Mre11 expression and double-strand break repair
via the MEK-ERK-POU1F1 pathway in breast tumorigenesis


Purpose: The association between breast cancer risk and genetic variants
of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) has been identified and
repeatedly confirmed; however, the mechanism underlying FGFR2 in breast
tumorigenesis remains obscure. Given that breast tumorigenesis is
particularly related to DNA double-strand-break-repair (DSBR), we
examined the hypothesis that FGFR2 is involved in DSBR.Experimental
design: This study started with the demonstration that FGFR2 impaired
DSBR. Subsequent screening of the expression of genes functionally
related to DSBR was performed and possible signaling pathways downstream
of FGFR2 were examined. Data from independent breast cancer patient
cohorts was used to confirm that difference in progression of patients
can be explained by the findings identified in cell model.Results:
Expression of Mre11, a vital exonuclease in DSBR, is downregulated by
FGFR2, which is further linked to decreased DSBR. Analysis of the Mre11
promoter revealed that POU1F1 mediates FGFR2-induced Mre11
downregulation. Furthermore, ERK, downstream of FGFR2, directly interacts
with and phosphorylates POU1F1, increasing POU1F1 binding capacity to the
Mre11 promoter and repressing Mre11 expression, which consequently
affects DSBR and sensitizes breast cancer cells to chemotherapeutic
treatments. The importance of the FGFR2-Mre11-DSBR link in cancer
progression is suggested by the finding that genotypes of FGFR2 and Mre11
are associated with survival of breast cancer patients and that FGFR2
expression correlates with cancer prognosis specifically in patients
receiving chemotherapy.Conclusion: This study yields important insight
into the role of FGFR2 in breast tumorigenesis and may facilitate
development of a useful therapeutic approach for breast cancer. With the
move toward personalized therapy, which has gradually become a clinical
reality, the findings of the present study suggest that FGFR2 expression
may be a potential biomarker for selecting a suitable subgroup of breast
cancer patients to receive chemotherapy or to determine the optimal
chemotherapeutic dose.

