Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rspondin-1 contributes to tumor cell proliferation via Wnt
signaling pathway


Diabetes mellitus and pancreatic cancer have long been considered to be
clinically related to each other. Despite the ample epidemiological
evidences indicating relevance between two major human diseases, the
precise mechanism to link both of these diseases are still unclear. We
demonstrated altered beta-catenin and Wnt3a protein expression in
pancreas of diabetic mouse in age-dependent manner, which indicates the
chronic diabetic condition may contribute to the pancreatic cancer
progression of peri-islet region through elevated Wnt signaling. We also
identified the altered expression level of Rspondin-1, secreted agonist
of Wnt signaling pathway, in in vivo diabetic mouse model, which showed a
similar expression pattern of Wnt3a and beta-catenin. Finally we
demonstrated the effect of in vitro diabetic condition on Rspondin
expression level of mouse pancreatic beta cell(Min6) and pancreatic
cancer cell lines(Panc-1, AsPc-1). The expression level of Rspondin-1 was
down-regulated in Min6 cells cultured in high glucose condition, whereas
up-regulated in pancreatic cancer cells cultured in in vitro diabetic
condition, which correlates with in vivo Rspondin-1 expression study.
These results provide new insights about the Wnt signaling and related
proteins as molecular linkers of chronic diabetes and pancreatic cancer.

