Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delta-24-RGDOX: making cancer more visible to the immune system


Emerging evidence indicates that host immunity is critical for successful
cancer virotherapy. We found that oncolytic adenovirus Delta-24-RGD
elicited antiglioma immunity in an immunocompetent murine model. Recent
studies suggested that the therapeutic efficacy of immune checkpoint
blockade in cancer patients could be enhanced by strategies inducing
tumor inflammation. We hypothesized that highly immunogenic adenovirus
combined with targeting immune co-stimulator would result in better
anti-tumor efficiency. Thus, we used the backbone of Delta-24-RGD to
express the mouse OX40 ligand to increase the recognition of
tumor-associated antigens by immune cells. The resulting Delta-24-RGDOX
adenovirus maintained the oncolytic potency of Delta-24-RGD and
efficiently expressed OX40 ligand on infected cells. More importantly,
compared to Delta-24-RGD, Delta-24-RGDOX induced higher antiglioma
activity in immunocompetent glioma models but not in an immunodeficient
model, and accordingly mediated greater lymphocyte infiltration at tumor
sites and stronger lymphocyte antitumor activity. While blocking or
stimulating immune checkpoints with antibodies currently dominates the
clinical applications, our data demonstrate that intratumoral injection
of oncolyticviruses carrying immune co-stimulatory ligands may constitute
a powerful alternative to the use of antibodies and other strategies
targeting immune checkpoints in cancer therapy.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

