Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Near infrared photoimmunotherapy for lung metastases


Introduction and PurposeLung metastases are a leading cause of cancer
related deaths. Current therapies include surgery, chemotherapy and
radiotherapy but cause considerable side effects in the remaining normal
lung, chest wall and heart. Therefore, a new-targeted therapy for lung
metastases that results in minimal damage to adjacent structures, yet
effectively treats lung metastases, is needed. Since one interesting
property of the lung is that it transmits light better than other organs,
light therapy is a viable alternative therapy. Near infrared
photoimmunotherapy (NIR-PIT) is a new cancer treatment that combines the
specificity of intravenously injected antibodies that target tumors with
the toxicity induced by photosensitizers activated by NIR light. Herein,
we demonstrate the efficacy of NIR-PIT in a mouse model of lung
metastases.Experimental DesignIn vitro and in vivo experiments were
conducted with a HER2, luciferase and GFP expressing cell line
(3T3/HER2-luc-GFP). An antibody-photosensitizer conjugate (APC)
consisting of trastuzumab and a phthalocyanine dye, IRDye-700DX, was
synthesized. In vitro NIR-PIT cytotoxicity was assessed with dead
staining, luciferase activity, and GFP fluorescence intensity. In vivo
NIR-PIT was performed in a mouse model of lung metastases as well as a
flank model, and assessed by tumor volume and/or bioluminescence
(BLI).ResultsIn vitro NIR-PIT-induced cytotoxicity was light dose
dependent. In vivo anti-tumor effects of NIR-PIT included significant
reductions in both tumor volume (p = 0.0141 vs. APC) and BLI (p = 0.0086
vs. APC) in the flank model, and prolonged survival (p Introduction and
PurposeLung metastases are a leading cause of cancer related deaths.
Current therapies include surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy but
cause considerable side effects in the remaining normal lung, chest wall
and heart. Therefore, a new-targeted therapy for lung metastases that
results in minimal damage to adjacent structures, yet effectively treats
lung metastases, is needed. Since one interesting property of the lung is
that it transmits light better than other organs, light therapy is a
viable alternative therapy. Near infrared photoimmunotherapy (NIR-PIT) is
a new cancer treatment that combines the specificity of intravenously
injected antibodies that target tumors with the toxicity induced by
photosensitizers activated by NIR light. Herein, we demonstrate the
efficacy of NIR-PIT in a mouse model of lung metastases.Experimental
DesignIn vitro and in vivo experiments were conducted with a HER2,
luciferase and GFP expressing cell line (3T3/HER2-luc-GFP). An
antibody-photosensitizer conjugate (APC) consisting of trastuzumab and a
phthalocyanine dye, IRDye-700DX, was synthesized. In vitro NIR-PIT
cytotoxicity was assessed with dead staining, luciferase activity, and
GFP fluorescence intensity. In vivo NIR-PIT was performed in a mouse
model of lung metastases as well as a flank model, and assessed by tumor
volume and/or bioluminescence (BLI).ResultsIn vitro NIR-PIT-induced
cytotoxicity was light dose dependent. In vivo anti-tumor effects of
NIR-PIT included significant reductions in both tumor volume (p = 0.0141
vs. APC) and BLI (p = 0.0086 vs. APC) in the flank model, and prolonged
survival (p < 0.0001). BLI demonstrated a significant reduction in lung
metastases volume (p = 0.0117 vs. APC). Multiple NIR-PIT doses
significantly prolonged survival in the lung metastases model (p
Introduction and PurposeLung metastases are a leading cause of cancer
related deaths. Current therapies include surgery, chemotherapy and
radiotherapy but cause considerable side effects in the remaining normal
lung, chest wall and heart. Therefore, a new-targeted therapy for lung
metastases that results in minimal damage to adjacent structures, yet
effectively treats lung metastases, is needed. Since one interesting
property of the lung is that it transmits light better than other organs,
light therapy is a viable alternative therapy. Near infrared
photoimmunotherapy (NIR-PIT) is a new cancer treatment that combines the
specificity of intravenously injected antibodies that target tumors with
the toxicity induced by photosensitizers activated by NIR light. Herein,
we demonstrate the efficacy of NIR-PIT in a mouse model of lung
metastases.Experimental DesignIn vitro and in vivo experiments were
conducted with a HER2, luciferase and GFP expressing cell line
(3T3/HER2-luc-GFP). An antibody-photosensitizer conjugate (APC)
consisting of trastuzumab and a phthalocyanine dye, IRDye-700DX, was
synthesized. In vitro NIR-PIT cytotoxicity was assessed with dead
staining, luciferase activity, and GFP fluorescence intensity. In vivo
NIR-PIT was performed in a mouse model of lung metastases as well as a
flank model, and assessed by tumor volume and/or bioluminescence
(BLI).ResultsIn vitro NIR-PIT-induced cytotoxicity was light dose
dependent. In vivo anti-tumor effects of NIR-PIT included significant
reductions in both tumor volume (p = 0.0141 vs. APC) and BLI (p = 0.0086
vs. APC) in the flank model, and prolonged survival (p < 0.0001). BLI
demonstrated a significant reduction in lung metastases volume (p =
0.0117 vs. APC). Multiple NIR-PIT doses significantly prolonged survival
in the lung metastases model (p < 0.0001).ConclusionsNIR-PIT prolonged
survival suggesting that NIR-PIT is a potential new therapy for the local
control of lung metastases.

