Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nilotinib abrogates DNMT1-depenent DNA methylation: A novel
mechanism for induction of AML leukemia regression


Nilotinib has been approved to treat newly diagnosed, imatinib-resistant
or -intolerant leukemia, but the mechanisms underlying its antileukemia
actions remain elusive. Here, we report that nilotinib blocks AML growth
through its DNA hypomethylating activity. We showed that, in addition to
inducing a reduction of KIT and FLT3 protein expression and
phosphorylation, nilotinib downregulated DNMT1, 3a and 3b in Kasumi-1,
MV4-11 and C1498 cells. Since DNMT1 is maintenance and de novo DNMT, we
focused on DNMT1 and proved that nilotinib impaired DNMT1 expression via
Sp1 dysfunction, since the luciferase activity driven by DNMT1 promoter
containing Sp1 binding sites was decreased by 2.6 fold by nilotinib,
while increased by 10.6 fold after Sp1 overexpression. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay disclosed that nilotinib abolished Sp1 binding on
DNMT1 promoter. Dotblot using 5mC antibody revealed global DNA
hypomethylation and qPCR showed p15INK4B upregulation in Kasumi-1 (3.4
fold) or MV4-11 (5.2 fold). Bisulfite sequencing found a decrease of DNA
methylation on p15INK4B promoter from 100% to 89% in Kasumi-1 or 13% to
0% in MV4-11. The functional assays showed a decrease of colony formation
in Kasumi-1 (60%) or MV4-11 (58%), and an increase of cell apoptosis in
Kasumi-1 (6.9 fold) or MV4-11 (3.2 fold). We verified these findings in
AML patient blasts (n = 3) by showing that nilotinib treatment led to the
dephosphorylation of KIT, the downregulation of DNMT1, 3a, 3b and Sp1,
the reduction of global DNA methylation and the re-expression of p15INK4B
(4.4 fold) via promoter demethylation (from 14% to 6%), which was
followed by suppressed colony formation (77%), promoted cell apoptosis
(1.84 fold) and increased caspase-3 and caspase-8. To test if nilotinib
induces AML regression via DNA hypomethylation in vivo, 0.1106 C1498
cells were injected into C57BL/6 mice (n = 3 mice/group) via the tail
vein. The leukemic mice were treated with 5, 10 or 15 mg/kg of nilotinib
in PEG400 plus saline via intraperitoneal injection twice a week for a
total of 6 doses. No toxicity was observed for the tested drug dosage and
schedule, because of no evident change of mouse body weight. Compared to
the control group, nilotinib-treated mice had a decrease in spleen size.
H&E staining showed that the control mice exhibited increased
infiltration of AML cells into the spleen, lung and liver of recipients.
The bone marrow (BM) histopathology identified a higher degree of mature
post-mitotic cells containing metamyelocytes, bands and segmented
neutrophils in nilotinib-treated mice than control. DNMT1 was
downregulated (39%), p15INK4B was upregulated and global DNA methylation
was reduced (60%) in BM cells from nilotinib-treated mice. Thus, our
findings unveil DNA methylation machinery as an innovative target behind
nilotinib's anticancer activities, and provide a new therapeutic avenue
for nilotinib in overcoming aberrant epigenetics in AML.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

