Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical characterization of G1T28-1, a novel CDK 4/6
inhibitor for protection of bone marrow from cytotoxic chemotherapies


G1T28-1 is a clinical stage, small molecule inhibitor of cyclin dependent
kinases 4/6 (CDK4/6). Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC)
require CDK4/6 for proliferation, and CDK4/6 inhibition allows the
transient arrest of HSPC in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. This arrest
may reduce the sensitivity of HSPC to DNA damaging chemotherapies by
limiting G1 to S-phase progression in the setting of unrepaired DNA
damage. Reducing HSPC death may reduce chemotherapy-induced
myelosuppression (CIM), the major dose-limiting toxicity of most
cytotoxic anti-cancer agents. G1T28-1 was specifically designed with high
potency, exquisite selectivity, and favorable pharmacology to induce a
predictable and well-defined transient arrest of HSPC as compared to less
potent and selective CDK4/6 inhibitors. Biochemical profiling
demonstrates that G1T28-1 is a competitive inhibitor of CDK4/6 at low
nanomolar concentrations, and that G1T28-1 is highly selective for
CDK4/cyclin D1 and CDK6/cyclin D3 as compared to CDK2/cyclin A or
CDK2/cyclin E. G1T28-1 induces a clean G0/G1 arrest in CDK4/6 dependent
cell lines in vitro. Since the down-stream target of CDK4/6 is the
retinoblastoma protein (Rb), we investigated the ability of G1T28-1 to
inhibit Rb phosphorylation. In CDK4/6 dependent cell lines, G1T28-1
exposure fully blocks Rb phosphorylation by 16 hours, while no effect on
Rb in CDK4/6-independent cells is observed. To determine the duration and
reversibility of G1T28-1's effects on cells in culture, Rb competent
cells were treated with G1T28-1 for 24 hours, and then the drug was
washed out. While cells were arrested at 24 hours, they re-entered the
cell cycle by 16 hours after washout and maintained normal cell cycle
kinetics thereafter. To demonstrate that the G0/G1 arrest induced by
G1T28-1 decreases DNA damage and apoptosis following exposure to
chemotherapeutic agents, Rb competent cells were pre-treated with G1T28-1
or vehicle control for 16 hours followed by incubation with various
chemotherapies. Cells were then assayed for -H2AX formation and caspase
activation. Treatment with G1T28-1 prior to DNA damaging agents
attenuates DNA damage as measured by -H2AX formation and decreased
caspase 3/7 activation in a dose-dependent manner, indicating a decrease
in chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. In Rb null cancers, such as small cell
lung cancer (SCLC), G1T28-1 may effectively protect HSPCs without
affecting the chemotherapy's efficacy. In vitro testing with SCLC cell
lines confirmed that chemotherapy efficacy was unaffected by the addition
of G1T28-1. In summary, G1T28-1 is a novel potent and selective CDK4/6
inhibitor that induces a transient and reversible G0/G1 cell cycle arrest
in CDK4/6-sensitive cells CDK4/6-dependent cells, thereby decreasing CIM.
However, the anti-tumor activity of chemotherapy in CDK4/6-resistant
cells is unaffected by G1T28-1.

