Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone H2AX is a novel regulator of epithelial to mesenchymal
transition


The vast majority of deaths from cancer are due to its progression from
primary tumor to metastatic disease. Understanding how some cells can
migrate from the primary tumor to seed new tumors throughout the body is
a longstanding challenge in developing novel cancer treatments. Current
models propose that these migratory cells acquire an invasive phenotype
through a process known as the epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT), characterized by the loss of cell polarity and cell-to-cell
adhesion, and the acquisition of migratory and invasive properties. Such
changes allow the cells to invade the extracellular matrix and migrate
throughout the body, aided by the formation of lamellipodia, filopodia
and invadopodia. In a converse transition, the MET, mesenchymal cells may
revert back to the epithelial phenotype and establish tumors at distant
sites.We have preliminary observations showing that when one member of
the H2A family of histones, H2AX, is silenced or inactivated in HCT116
cells, these cells exhibit mesenchymal-like characteristics including
increased invasiveness. Furthermore, genome-wide expression analysis
implicates the critical EMT transcription factors, SLUG and ZEB1, as
mediators of H2AX loss-induced EMT. To make these studies more rigorous,
we generated a novel HCT116 cell line with H2AX destroyed. Our findings
show that ectopic expression of H2AX in H2AX-null cells reverses the
invasiveness induced by H2AX inactivation. Moreover, in 233 human colon
cancer samples, a strong correlation is found between the levels of H2AX
and SLUG/ZEB1 expression. These observations lead us to hypothesize that
H2AX is a key regulator of EMT and plays a critical role in the
downstream events leading to increased metastasis.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

