Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High MET and CA9 expressions define a subgroup of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) patients with poor prognosis candidates for MET
inhibition strategy


Background: In HCC, hypoxia and MET can promote tumor progression and
induce resistance to radiation, chemo or targeted therapies. The aim of
this study was to correlate MET and hypoxia marker carbonic anhydrase 9
(CA9) expression levels by immunohistochemistry with clinicopathological
characteristics and disease-free survival (DFS) in patients with
HCC.Material and methods: One-hundred HCC resection specimens were
evaluated by immunohistochemistry for MET (clone sp44, Ventana) and CA9
(rabbit polyclonal) expression. For automated evaluation, we elaborated
our own macro using ImageJ software, and compared it with H- and MetMab
validated scores. METhigh and CA9high expression were defined as moderate
to strong staining. Staining results were correlated with
clinicopathological characteristics. Univariate analyses were performed
using Fisher's exact or chi square tests, and multivariate analyses using
Cox regression model. Median DFS (mDFS) were calculated by Kaplan-Meier
method. MET amplification was assessed by FISH (zytovision probe) and
centromere 7 (CEN7) used as an internal control. Amplification was
defined as a mean ratio of MET/CEN7> 4, counting 100 nuclei.Results:
Tumors were BCLC A1 (92%), uninodular (53%), moderately differentiated
(63%), with pathological vascular invasion (71%), and had low AFP
expression (82%). METhigh expression was observed in 53% of tumors being
higher in patients with viral hepatitis-associated HCC (p = 0.02) and in
patients with AFP>400UI/L (p = 0.03). CA9high expression was observed in
41% of tumors and was correlated with viral hepatitis (p = 0.002),
pathological vascular invasion (p = 0.007), and poor differentiation (p =
0.007). MET and CA9 expression levels significantly correlated with each
other (p = 0.008). mDFS was shorter in METhigh (12.9 vs >80 months in
METlow patients; p = 0.018) and CA9high (10.2 vs 34.4 months in CA9low
patients; p = 0.02) populations. Combination of MET and CA9 status
discriminated 3 prognostic groups. In the METhigh/CA9high group mDFS was
10.7 months, whereas mDFS was not reached in the METlow/CA9low group (p =
0.003). Using H- and MetMab scores, mDFS of the METhigh group were 12.9
months and 12.4 months respectively, and not reached in the METlow group.
The METhigh/CA9low and METlow/CA9high groups were defined as intermediate
risk populations (mDFS = 19 months). In multivariate analysis, tumor
Background: In HCC, hypoxia and MET can promote tumor progression and
induce resistance to radiation, chemo or targeted therapies. The aim of
this study was to correlate MET and hypoxia marker carbonic anhydrase 9
(CA9) expression levels by immunohistochemistry with clinicopathological
characteristics and disease-free survival (DFS) in patients with
HCC.Material and methods: One-hundred HCC resection specimens were
evaluated by immunohistochemistry for MET (clone sp44, Ventana) and CA9
(rabbit polyclonal) expression. For automated evaluation, we elaborated
our own macro using ImageJ software, and compared it with H- and MetMab
validated scores. METhigh and CA9high expression were defined as moderate
to strong staining. Staining results were correlated with
clinicopathological characteristics. Univariate analyses were performed
using Fisher's exact or chi square tests, and multivariate analyses using
Cox regression model. Median DFS (mDFS) were calculated by Kaplan-Meier
method. MET amplification was assessed by FISH (zytovision probe) and
centromere 7 (CEN7) used as an internal control. Amplification was
defined as a mean ratio of MET/CEN7> 4, counting 100 nuclei.Results:
Tumors were BCLC A1 (92%), uninodular (53%), moderately differentiated
(63%), with pathological vascular invasion (71%), and had low AFP
expression (82%). METhigh expression was observed in 53% of tumors being
higher in patients with viral hepatitis-associated HCC (p = 0.02) and in
patients with AFP>400UI/L (p = 0.03). CA9high expression was observed in
41% of tumors and was correlated with viral hepatitis (p = 0.002),
pathological vascular invasion (p = 0.007), and poor differentiation (p =
0.007). MET and CA9 expression levels significantly correlated with each
other (p = 0.008). mDFS was shorter in METhigh (12.9 vs >80 months in
METlow patients; p = 0.018) and CA9high (10.2 vs 34.4 months in CA9low
patients; p = 0.02) populations. Combination of MET and CA9 status
discriminated 3 prognostic groups. In the METhigh/CA9high group mDFS was
10.7 months, whereas mDFS was not reached in the METlow/CA9low group (p =
0.003). Using H- and MetMab scores, mDFS of the METhigh group were 12.9
months and 12.4 months respectively, and not reached in the METlow group.
The METhigh/CA9low and METlow/CA9high groups were defined as intermediate
risk populations (mDFS = 19 months). In multivariate analysis, tumor <
5cm (p = 0.025), uninodular morphology (p = 0.004), and CA9-low levels (p
= 0.007) were independently associated with prolonged DFS. METhigh
expression level was associated with shorter DFS when CA9 was excluded
from the model (p = 0.024). No amplification was detected in METhigh HCC
samples.Conclusion: MET expression is a useful prognostic marker in HCC.
Patients with HCC overexpressing MET and CA9 represent a subgroup with
poor prognosis that might benefit from MET inhibition therapy.

