Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct expression, activity, regulation and gene expression
signature of NF-B subunit c-Rel and the prognostic impact of crosstalk
between p53, p63 and c-Rel in different subsets of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma


Background: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a heterogeneous
aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma and can be classified into GCB or ABC
DLBCL. Aberrant activation of NF-B has been associated with tumor
proliferation and survival ABC-DLBCL. The canonical pathway of NF-B
activation involves activities of IB kinase IKK2, which lead to
degradation of NF-B inhibitors IB// and nuclear translocation of p50/p65
and p50/c-Rel dimers from the cytoplasm.Objective: To investigate the
common mechanisms for c-Rel activation and function, and to evaluate the
prognostic significance of c-Rel in a large group of DLBCL patients (n =
460).Results: Nuclear c-Rel expression (c-Rel+) was observed in 29.6% of
DLBCL patients and correlated with higher expression levels of p50 (P =
0.12), p52 (P = 0.724E-8), p65 (P = 0.073), RelB (P = 0.013).
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis using nuclear extract purified from
primary GCB and ABC cells showed that in addition to the known p50 to
form dimers with c-Rel, p65, p52 and RelB could also form dimers with
c-Rel in some cell lines.A unique function of c-Rel in terminating NF-B
as negative feedback of IKK2 activation was suggested by the
significantly upregulated genes encoding IB//, A20 and TNIP1 at the mRNA
level in either GCB- or ABC-DLBCL. The B-cell receptor signaling (BCR)
appeared most relevant for c-Rel activation in GCB-DLBCL, with upreglated
B-cell receptors (CD19, CD20, CD79A) and downstream LYN, SYK, CARD11,
MALT1, BLNK, TAK1.The role of c-Rel in cytokine production was validated
in our study cohort, showing significant correlation between c-Rel+ and
mRNA levels of IL1, IL3, IL6, IL10, IL12, IL21 and chemokine receptor
CXCR4, mostly in GCB-DLBCL. GEP analysis showed enrichment in cytokine,
growth factors, inflammation, gene expression, metabolism, actin,
collagen, cell morphology and adhesion.c-Rel did not correlate with
prognosis in overall DLBCL. However, c-Rel+ patients with MUT-p53 had
significantly worse survival compared with other MUT-p53 DLBCL patients,
especially in in ABC-DLBCL, in which c-Rel+ was associated with
upregulated MUT-TP53 transcription (P = 0.0087). Conversely, MUT-p53
expression was associated significantly with upregulated REL mRNA
expression (P = 0.0021), predominantly in the ABC-DLBCL subtype (P =
0.0047).Furthermore, the lack of c-Rel prognostic impact is likely due to
the antagonism of p63, whose expression was correlated with c-Rel nuclear
expression, and significantly better OS and PFS in ABC-DLBCL.Conclusions:
Unique function and upstream activation regulation of c-Rel was suggested
by analysis in 460 DLBCLs. TP53 mutation status appears to a critical
determinant for c-Rel prognostic impact. p63 is another tumor suppressor
for the c-Rel oncogenic function.

