Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and in vitro and in vivo characterization of
aminopyrazoline-based SMYD2 inhibitors


SMYD2 (SET and MYND domain-containing protein 2) is a protein lysine
methyltransferase (PKMT) which was initially described as a histone H3K36
and H3K4 methyltransferase involved in transcriptional regulation. SMYD2
has recently been reported to methylate and regulate several non-histone
cancer relevant proteins such as p53, retinoblastoma protein (Rb) and the
estrogen receptor alpha. Given the reports that overexpression of SMYD2
is linked to poor prognosis in certain cancers, SMYD2 is proposed to be
an oncogene and an attractive cancer drug target.Here we report the
discovery of a novel potent and selective SMYD2 inhibitor, SMYD2-BAY-01,
by high throughput screening and extensive biophysical validation. The
co-crystal structure revealed that SMYD2-BAY-01 binds to the substrate
binding site and occupies the hydrophobic pocket for lysine binding using
an unprecedented hydrogen bond pattern. The competitive behavior of the
inhibitor in biochemical assays is consistent with the binding mode
observed in the crystal structure.Further optimization generated
SMYD2-BAY-02, which shows improved low nanomolar potency and is selective
against kinases and other PKMTs. Furthermore, SMYD2-BAY-02 specifically
inhibits SMYD2 methylation activity in a cellular assay with similar
potency and reduces methylation of the tumor suppressor protein p53.
Based on promising in vitro and in vivo DMPK data, SMYD2-BAY-02 was
further characterized in vivo for SMYD2-specific methylation inhibition.
In vivo activity could be shown upon in vivo administration at doses as
low as 30 mg/kg p.o. in a SMYD2 overexpressing esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma model. In summary, SMYD2-BAY-02 is a promising selective and
potent SMYD2 inhibitor in vitro and in vivo and may represent a new
treatment option for cancers overexpressing SMYD2.

