Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting RRM2 by siRNA inhibits cellular invasion and represents
a rational approach for inhibition of metastasis of head and neck and
lung cancers


Background: Ribonucleotide reductase subunit M2 (RRM2) has been
frequently observed to be aberrantly overexpressed in various tumors.
RRM2 is a key enzyme, and essential regulator of balanced
deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs). It is critical for DNA replication and
repair, and hence cell survival. In addition to DNA synthesis, it has
been reported to modulate cellular invasiveness. However, the mechanisms
through which RRM2 affects the invasive phenotype have not been
elucidated.Methods: We evaluated the expression of RRM2 protein in
metastatic (n = 40) and non-metastatic (n = 40) head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tissue samples using immunohistochemistry (IHC).
We identified varying degrees of RRM2 expression levels in HNSCC and
NSCLC cell lines. We also generated RRM2 overexpressing stable cell
lines; Tu686 (HNSCC) and A549 non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). In
addition, we knocked down RRM2 and Twist 1 expression by siRNA
technology.Results: Our results showed that RRM2 expression was
significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis in HNSCC (p value
Background: Ribonucleotide reductase subunit M2 (RRM2) has been
frequently observed to be aberrantly overexpressed in various tumors.
RRM2 is a key enzyme, and essential regulator of balanced
deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs). It is critical for DNA replication and
repair, and hence cell survival. In addition to DNA synthesis, it has
been reported to modulate cellular invasiveness. However, the mechanisms
through which RRM2 affects the invasive phenotype have not been
elucidated.Methods: We evaluated the expression of RRM2 protein in
metastatic (n = 40) and non-metastatic (n = 40) head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tissue samples using immunohistochemistry (IHC).
We identified varying degrees of RRM2 expression levels in HNSCC and
NSCLC cell lines. We also generated RRM2 overexpressing stable cell
lines; Tu686 (HNSCC) and A549 non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). In
addition, we knocked down RRM2 and Twist 1 expression by siRNA
technology.Results: Our results showed that RRM2 expression was
significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis in HNSCC (p value <
0.01). We also observed that highly invasive HNSCC (M4e) and NSCLC
(H1299) cell lines that feature epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
expressed the highest level of RRM2 protein and exhibited the greatest
invasive ability among the cell lines studied. Upon knockdown of RRM2 by
siRNA, we observed more than 3-fold reduction of invasive ability of M4e
and H1299 cells compared to non-targeted siRNA control (p value
Background: Ribonucleotide reductase subunit M2 (RRM2) has been
frequently observed to be aberrantly overexpressed in various tumors.
RRM2 is a key enzyme, and essential regulator of balanced
deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs). It is critical for DNA replication and
repair, and hence cell survival. In addition to DNA synthesis, it has
been reported to modulate cellular invasiveness. However, the mechanisms
through which RRM2 affects the invasive phenotype have not been
elucidated.Methods: We evaluated the expression of RRM2 protein in
metastatic (n = 40) and non-metastatic (n = 40) head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tissue samples using immunohistochemistry (IHC).
We identified varying degrees of RRM2 expression levels in HNSCC and
NSCLC cell lines. We also generated RRM2 overexpressing stable cell
lines; Tu686 (HNSCC) and A549 non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). In
addition, we knocked down RRM2 and Twist 1 expression by siRNA
technology.Results: Our results showed that RRM2 expression was
significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis in HNSCC (p value <
0.01). We also observed that highly invasive HNSCC (M4e) and NSCLC
(H1299) cell lines that feature epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
expressed the highest level of RRM2 protein and exhibited the greatest
invasive ability among the cell lines studied. Upon knockdown of RRM2 by
siRNA, we observed more than 3-fold reduction of invasive ability of M4e
and H1299 cells compared to non-targeted siRNA control (p value < 0.001).
In contrast, overexpression of RRM2 enhanced cell invasiveness 2 to
4-fold in poorly invasive HNSCC (Tu686) and NSCLC (A549) cell lines
compared to empty vector (p value Background: Ribonucleotide reductase
subunit M2 (RRM2) has been frequently observed to be aberrantly
overexpressed in various tumors. RRM2 is a key enzyme, and essential
regulator of balanced deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs). It is critical for
DNA replication and repair, and hence cell survival. In addition to DNA
synthesis, it has been reported to modulate cellular invasiveness.
However, the mechanisms through which RRM2 affects the invasive phenotype
have not been elucidated.Methods: We evaluated the expression of RRM2
protein in metastatic (n = 40) and non-metastatic (n = 40) head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tissue samples using immunohistochemistry
(IHC). We identified varying degrees of RRM2 expression levels in HNSCC
and NSCLC cell lines. We also generated RRM2 overexpressing stable cell
lines; Tu686 (HNSCC) and A549 non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). In
addition, we knocked down RRM2 and Twist 1 expression by siRNA
technology.Results: Our results showed that RRM2 expression was
significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis in HNSCC (p value <
0.01). We also observed that highly invasive HNSCC (M4e) and NSCLC
(H1299) cell lines that feature epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
expressed the highest level of RRM2 protein and exhibited the greatest
invasive ability among the cell lines studied. Upon knockdown of RRM2 by
siRNA, we observed more than 3-fold reduction of invasive ability of M4e
and H1299 cells compared to non-targeted siRNA control (p value < 0.001).
In contrast, overexpression of RRM2 enhanced cell invasiveness 2 to
4-fold in poorly invasive HNSCC (Tu686) and NSCLC (A549) cell lines
compared to empty vector (p value < 0.001). We observed molecular
modifications by utilizing Western blotting. We found that RRM2
overexpression significantly suppressed an epithelial marker E-Cadherin.
Overexpression of RRM2 induced Twist 1 protein that regulates E-Cadherin
and drives cellular migration and invasion. Our further mechanistic
studies reveal that RRM2 plays role in Twist 1 induction by protein
stabilization. We silenced Twist 1 gene to evaluate the biological effect
and found that upon knocking down Twist 1, cellular invasion and
migration was suppressed like silencing of RRM2.Conclusions: Our study
demonstrated that RRM2 substantially promoted cell invasion by
stabilizing Twist 1 and suppressing E-Cadherin. Thus, an elevated RRM2
may serve as a potential biomarker for metastasis of HNSCC and NSCLC.
Targeting RRM2 and its downstream signaling intermediaries may represent
a rational approach for developing novel anticancer therapeutics. We are
in the process of conducting an animal study to validate the strategy of
silencing of RRM2 by using RRM2-siRNA nanoparticle to inhibit metastasis.
(This work is supported by grants from NIH U01CA151802, P50CA128613).

