Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calcium channels: Potential new therapeutic targets for hormone
independent and resistant breast cancers


Estrogen receptor alpha (ER) is central to the growth and progression of
a subset of breast cancers. As such, therapies that target ER are a
standard of care in the treatment of ER -positive disease. Unfortunately,
one-third of patients receiving hormonal therapies develop resistance.
Several factors are believed to contribute to resistance including
increased hormone independent activation of ER by activated signal
transduction pathways such as the epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling
pathway. We have shown that calcium mediates the cross talk between the
EGF signaling pathway and ER by directly binding to and activating the
ligand binding domain of ER suggesting a role for calcium in the
development and progression of hormone independent and resistant breast
cancer. Preliminary results from this study show that compared to normal
(MCF10A) or hormone dependent (MCF-7) breast cells, hormone independent
and resistant breast cancer cells (MCF7-2A, LCC-9, and MCF7-RR) have
higher expression of the L-type and T-type calcium channels and higher
concentrations of intracellular calcium. When hormone resistant (LCC-9)
cells were treated with the intracellular calcium chelator BAPTA-AM, the
L-type calcium channel blocker methoxyverapamil, or the T-type calcium
channel blocker mibefradil, there was a significant decrease in the
expression of the ER regulated gene progesterone receptor that was
reversed by the addition of estradiol. More importantly, when hormone
independent (MCF7-2A) and hormone independent (LCC-9) cells were treated
with the calcium channel blockers, there was in a significant decrease in
growth and a re-sensitization of the antiestrogen resistant LCC-9 cells
to tamoxifen and fulvestrant. Taken together, the preliminary results
suggest that increased expression of calcium channels and intracellular
calcium contribute to the hormone independent activation of ER and point
to a potential new therapeutic target for hormone independent and
resistant breast cancer.

