Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a small molecule TUBB3/III-tubulin modulator in lung
cancer


Background: Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) survival rates are dismal
and chemotherapy resistance is a significant clinical problem.
III-tubulin (encoded by TUBB3 gene) is aberrantly expressed and is
associated with chemoresistance and tumor aggressiveness in NSCLC (1),
where it has been identified as a bona fide target for chemosensitisation
(2,3). In order to understand how TUBB3/III-tubulin is regulated in NSCLC
cells we sought to identify chemical small molecules that can modulate
its expression.Methods: H460 cells expressing a TUBB3 or GAPDH
promoter-luciferase reporter construct were generated and used in drug
screening and promoter activity testing. To isolate modulators of TUBB3
promoter activity, a cell-based screen of libraries of diverse chemical
small molecules (30K) and FDA-approved bioactives (3680) was performed.
Cell viability, growth and proliferation were measured using standard
methods. Cell cycle was assessed using flow cytometry, and gene and
protein expression by RT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively.
Microtubule morphology was assessed using immunostaining and confocal
microscopy. Drug-treated clonogenic assays were used to quantitate
changes in drug sensitivity.Results: Based upon their ability to modulate
TUBB3 promoter activity, we identified two hit compounds, CCI01 and
CCI02, as well as the bioactive compound, RITA. For all three leads we
observed: 1) repression in TUBB3 promoter activity which was not a result
of cell cytotoxicity; 2) no effects on cell cycle or viability, but
instead cytostatic effects; 3) significantly enhanced TUBB3 expression in
a time and dose-dependent manner. TUBB3 gene enhancement was translated
at the protein level in CCI01 treated H460, but not in CCI02 or RITA
treated cells. Additionally, CCI01 did not alter microtubule morphology
but enhanced III-tubulin immunostaining in two independent NSCLC cell
lines, H460 and H1299, compared to control. Importantly, CCI01 enhanced
III-tubulin expression was functional and led to a significant decrease
in in vitro sensitivity to DNA-damaging and tubulin-binding agents in
H460 cells.Conclusion: A novel lead small molecule TUBB3/III-tubulin
enhancer has been identified that is able to increase expression of
III-tubulin in NSCLC and significantly reduce sensitivity to tubulin
binding and DNA-damaging agents.Implications: Identification of a
modulator of TUBB3/III-tubulin expression will provide a valuable
research tool to probe III-tubulin regulation.(1) Kavallaris. Nature Rev
Cancer, 10:194-204, 2010(2) McCarroll et al., Cancer Res 70:4995-5003,
2010(3) Gan et al., Cancer Res. 67:9356-9363, 2007

