Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK5 inhibition potentiates the effects of leukemia cell
differentiation inducers by augmenting the function of master
transcription factors


ERK5, a member of MAPK family, is activated by multiple AML (Acute
Myeloid Leukemia) cell differentiation inducers including 1,25D (1,
25-dihydroxyvitamin D3), TPA (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate) and
ATRA (All-trans retinoic acid). Inhibiting ERK5 with XMD8-92 which
targets its auto phosphorylation, or BIX02188 which inhibits MEK5, a
kinase that activates ERK5, leads to more advanced cell maturation
compared to these inducers alone. Specifically, cells treated with 1,25D
and TPA combined with MEK5/ERK5 inhibitors exhibit a macrophage-like
phenotype, whereas, ATRA with MEK5/ERK5 inhibitors cause the cells to
differentiate further in the granulocytic direction. An increased
expression of the general myeloid marker CD11b was observed following
treatments with all three inducers when MEK5/ERK5 were inhibited. In this
study, we compared the underlying mechanisms of the potentiation effects
of MEK5/ERK5 inhibition by these inducers. PU1 is considered to be a
master transcription factor (TF) directing the cells to the myeloid
lineage, and sustained PU1 expression over C/EBP results in monocytic
differentiation. The role of C/EBP is controversial: it is generally
believed to be a TF favoring granulocyte differentiation, however, in
some studies, overexpression of C/EBP, together with activated estrogen
receptor, can lead to the expression of macrophage-related genes. Thus,
we measured the expression of these two TFs in HL60 and U937 cells
treated with differentiation inducers alone or together with MEK/ERK5
inhibitors. 1,25D alone was able to increase PU1 protein expression in
both cell lines; when combined with BIX02188 or XMD8-92, PU.1 expression
further increased. Interestingly, increased C/EBP expression was also
observed with XMD8-92 + 1,25D. TPA induced similar changes in PU.1
expression, as well as decreased C/EBP protein levels in the presence of
the inhibitors, which was not seen with 1,25D and the inhibitors.
Although ATRA alone or with BIX02188 increased PU1 expression, ATRA with
XMD8-92 completely abolished PU1 expression which resulted in
dramatically increased C/EBP over PU1 ratio. From the above data, we
conclude that 1) ERK5 activation acts as a brake preventing the cells
from further differentiation by all inducers studied here 2) Terminal
differentiation which results from the addition of ERK5 inhibitors can be
due to the combined effects of two master transcription factors. 3) The
same TF can function differently in different settings. (Supported by T32
CA134268 training grant and R01 CA044722-25, both from the National
Cancer Institute, NIH, and by the American Institute for Cancer Research,
grant 10A049).

