Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolite profiling reveals the glutathione biosynthetic pathway
as a therapeutic target in triple negative breast cancers


Identifying metabolic pathway alterations that are critical to support
cancer growth is a key hurdle for developing therapeutic strategies that
exploit these pathways. We have applied metabolomic and pharmacological
approaches to identify targetable pathways in triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC). TNBC is an aggressive and genomically heterogeneous subset
of breast cancer that is resistant to existing targeted therapies. To
identify dysregulated metabolic pathways in TNBC, we conducted mass
spectrometry-based metabolomics of TNBC and control cells. The relative
levels of 155 intracellular metabolites distinguished TNBC from
non-transformed breast epithelia, and revealed two metabolic subtypes
within TNBC that, unexpectedly, correlate with markers of basal-like
versus non-basal-like status. Distinguishing metabolites included amino
acids, lipids and the cellular redox buffer glutathione. Levels of
glutathione were generally lower in TNBC cell lines compared to controls,
and markedly lower in the metabolic subtype containing non-basal-like
TNBC. Further, these cell lines showed enhanced sensitivity to inhibition
of glutathione biosynthesis, showing a dependence on glutathione
production for survival. These findings demonstrate the potential of
targeting the glutathione biosynthetic pathway as a therapeutic strategy
in TNBC, and suggest that existing clinical biomarkers may provide a
means for stratifying TNBC tumors to identify likely responders to
anti-glutathione therapy.

