Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel, multimodal theranostic nanoprobe is effectively
incorporated into melanoma brain metastatic cells


Metastatic cancer is a significant cause of death worldwide, despite
continuing advances in research on diagnostics and therapy. To overcome
unsuccessful drug delivery to the tumor tissue, several different
nanoprobes have been designed, of which some have combined diagnostic and
therapeutic properties. It is an advantage to use non-toxic,
biodegradable materials in the design of nanoprobes, as such compounds
are easily eliminated from the body. In this work we report for the first
time the use of a recently developed nanoprobe to label melanoma
metastatic cell lines, for multimodal imaging of cellular uptake and drug
delivery. Our nanoprobe consisted of a backbone of glycogen, where the
red fluorescent marker Dyo-615 for fluorescence microscopy and Gadolinium
for MRI were incorporated.Fluorescence microscopy showed effective
labeling of human melanoma metastatic cells over 24 hours and cell
viability was not affected by the labeling. The nanoprobe was found in
the cytosol of the cells, and a gradual degradation of the probe inside
the lysosomes could be observed. In vitro MRI relaxivity measurements
showed significant reduction in T1 mapping times, compared to unlabeled
cells. In vivo MRI studies showed that subcutaneous melanoma tumors in
mice could be effectively visualized with T1 weighted MRI after
intravenous injection of the nanoprobe, and the contrast enhancement was
comparable to what was seen after using standard Omniscan contrast
agent.In summary, our biodegradable glycogen nanoprobe shows a high
potential to be used further as a theranostic entity. The nanoprobe may
offer additional advantages over MRI contrast agents, as tumor uptake of
pharmaceuticals attached to the nanoprobe can be traced in real-time in
vivo.

