Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RAGE/S100A7/Stat3-axis enhances breast cancer growth and
metastasis via modulating tumor microenvironment


The Receptor for Advanced Glycation Endproducts (RAGE), a
multifunctional, multi-ligand receptor, has been shown to play an
important role in inflammation. However, not much is known about its role
in breast cancer growth and metastasis. In this report, we observed that
RAGE expression is upregulated in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
cell lines, primary tumors and lymph-node metastasis samples. RAGE-/-
mice show reduced breast cancer growth. Additionally, blocking RAGE with
neutralizing-antibody inhibited lung metastasis in an intracardiac mouse
model. Further elucidation of RAGE-mediated mechanisms revealed that RAGE
binds to S100A7 and mediates S100A7-induced cell migration, Stat3 and
NF-B activation. Our results also indicate that S100A7/RAGE
axis-modulates invasion/migration through Stat3 dependent MMP9
activation. In addition, RAGE neutralizing antibody and soluble RAGE
inhibited breast cancer progression and metastasis in the inducible
mS100a7a15 mouse model system. We demonstrated that RAGE/S100A7 enhanced
mammary hyperplasia, tumor growth and metastasis through Stat3
activation. Notably, our studies revealed that RAGE/mS100a7a15 modulates
the breast tumor microenvironment through recruitment of
phospho-Stat3/MMP9-positive tumor-associated macrophages. Our studies
suggest that RAGE expression could be used as a novel biomarker for
aggressive/invasive breast cancer, especially TNBC. Collectively, these
findings suggest that RAGE/S100A7/Stat3-axis has a novel role in linking
inflammation to the development of invasive/aggressive breast cancer
including TNBC.

