Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nitroxide-aspirin conjugates: A new class of NSAIDs


Novel nitroxide-aspirin conjugates were synthesized and tested using
human lung cancer cell lines. Previously, cyclooxygenase (COX2) was found
to be elevated in lung cancer biopsy specimens relative to normal tissue
(He et al., 2012; PlosOne 7:e31087). Lung cancer cellular proliferation
is inhibited by nonsteroidal anti-inflamatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as
indomethacin and aspirin (Hida et al., 1998; Anticancer Res. 18: 775).
Dithiolethione-valproate conjugates inhibit COX-2 activity, increase
E-cadherin expression and decrease the proliferation of non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) cells (Moody et al., 2010, Lung Cancer 68: 154). Here
the effects of nitroxide-aspirin conjugates were investigated on NSCLC
cells. 1KT121A, a 4-carboxy Tempo-aspirin conjugate, inhibited the
proliferation of NCI-H1299 or A549 cells with IC50 values of 125 uM using
the MTT assay whereas aspirin and tempol had IC50 values of 750 and >1000
uM, respectively. 1KT121A, which has an ester link, was approximately
5-fold more potent at inhibiting NSCLC cellular proliferation than
aspirin plus tempol or 2KT106A, which is a Tempo-aspirin conjugate with
an amide link. 1KT121A was more potent than 2KT106A or tempol plus
aspirin at reducing prostaglandin E2 levels in A549 cells. Similar
results were obtained if the nitroxide moiety was changed from 4-carboxy
Tempo to 3-carboxy proxyl or
5-carboxy-1,1,3,3-tetramethylisoindolin-yloxyl (CTMIO). 1KT121A
potentiated the ability of gefitinib, an EGF receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, to kill NSCLC cells. Because 1KT121A increased E-cadherin and
reduced vimentin, it may impair epithelial-mesenchymal transitions of
NSCLC cells. All of the nitoxide analogues were antioxidants based on the
ability to inhibit reactive oxygen species in NSCLC cells treated with
hydrogen peroxide. Nitroxide-aspirin conjugates represent a novel class
of NSAIDs which are antioxidants that inhibit NSCLC proliferation.

