Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural requirements for the association of the ETS domain
transcription factor Elk1 and the androgen receptor in enabling the
growth of prostate cancer cells


The ETS domain transcription factor Elk1 tethers the androgen receptor
(AR) to chromatin, enabling sustained activation of a set of genes
critical for cell growth in established prostate cancer cell lines. This
role of Elk1 is independent of the ability of Elk1 to transiently
activate immediate early genes in response to phosphorylation by ERK. We
compared the structural requirements for the association of AR and Elk1
with that for activation of Elk1 by phosphorylation using mammalian one-
and two-hybrid assays. The critical polypeptide segments were mapped by
systematic deletion mutagenesis. The amino-terminal A/B domain of AR,
which lacks the ligand-binding domain (LBD), was adequate for association
with Elk1 and to activate Elk1-AR target genes in LNCaP prostate cancer
cells. The AR A/B domain also supported hormone-independent growth of
LNCaP cells reflecting the ability of overexpressed natural splice
variants of AR, which also lack LBD, to support prostate tumor growth.
The association of AR with Elk1 did not require ERK1/2 or serum response
factor (SRF), which are the known binding partners of Elk1. We identified
two sites on Elk1 that are critical for its association with the AR A/B
domain as well as the whole AR molecule. One of those sites spans amino
acid residues 297 to 317, overlapping one of two ERK docking sites. The
other site on Elk1 mapped to amino acid residues 387 to 397, adjacent to
the downstream ERK docking site. The results suggest that the association
of AR with Elk1 in situ is direct rather than through the Elk1 ternary
complex and that the association may be disrupted by small molecules to
selectively inhibit growth signaling in prostate cancer cells.

