Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitagation of potassium dichromate micronuclei induction and
kidney damage by ethanol extract of Moringa oleifera in Swiss albino rats


Chromate (VI) compounds are human carcinogen. Exposure by inhalation or
ingestion causes lung and intestinal cancers. Current therapy has side
effects, necessitating the search for antidote from medicinal plant such
as Moringa oleifera (M.oleifera). This study was undertaken to evaluate
the effect of ethanol extract of M. oleifera on potassium dichromate
(K2Cr2O7) induced clastogenicity and kidney damage. Leaves of M.oleifera
were air dried, powdered, extracted with ethanol and phytochemical
analysis carried out. Thirty male rats were grouped into 6 of 5 animals
each. Negative and positive control rats had water and 12mg/kg K2Cr2O7
once per week respectively. Test rats were exposed to 3.5 and 7.0 body
weight M.oleifera alone for 35 days and / or 12 mg/kg body wt K2Cr2O7
once a week before they were sacrificed. The frequency of micronucleated
polychromatic erythrocytes (mPCEs) was monitored in the bone marrow while
creatinine and urea levels were assessed in the serum. Kidney superoxide
dismutase (SOD), glutathione S-transferase (GST) and malondialdehyde
(MDA) levels were also determined. K2Cr2O7 significantly (p Chromate (VI)
compounds are human carcinogen. Exposure by inhalation or ingestion
causes lung and intestinal cancers. Current therapy has side effects,
necessitating the search for antidote from medicinal plant such as
Moringa oleifera (M.oleifera). This study was undertaken to evaluate the
effect of ethanol extract of M. oleifera on potassium dichromate
(K2Cr2O7) induced clastogenicity and kidney damage. Leaves of M.oleifera
were air dried, powdered, extracted with ethanol and phytochemical
analysis carried out. Thirty male rats were grouped into 6 of 5 animals
each. Negative and positive control rats had water and 12mg/kg K2Cr2O7
once per week respectively. Test rats were exposed to 3.5 and 7.0 body
weight M.oleifera alone for 35 days and / or 12 mg/kg body wt K2Cr2O7
once a week before they were sacrificed. The frequency of micronucleated
polychromatic erythrocytes (mPCEs) was monitored in the bone marrow while
creatinine and urea levels were assessed in the serum. Kidney superoxide
dismutase (SOD), glutathione S-transferase (GST) and malondialdehyde
(MDA) levels were also determined. K2Cr2O7 significantly (p <0.05)
increased mPCEs and urea while creatinine was decreased when compared
with control. MDA was also markedly increased, while SOD and GST were
significantly reduced. Severe kidney damage was observed in the same sets
of animals. However, M.oleifera mitigated the toxicity by reversing the
markers towards that of control. M.oleifera is rich in flavonoids and
phenolics which may account for the observed .protection. The results
suggest that extract of M.oleifera has valuable potentials in the
treatment/management of chromate (VI) toxicityNote: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

