Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of immuno-oncology related treatment in syngenic and
human reconstituted immune systems


Immunotherapy based on monoclonal antibodies targeting cancer cells is
now developed as a valid approach to treat cancer. Modulation of novel
immune checkpoints and other targets are highly promising approaches
against cancer and many other diseases. They have the potential to
activate the immune system and to establish an active defense against
pathological conditions. In addition, antibodies, antibody fragments, and
other biologics can also have a strong impact on the immune system which
needs to be evaluated early on. In order to develop and accurately
evaluate these immunology linked approaches, appropriate preclinical
models with relevant immunological readouts are needed at different
stages of therapy development. Ideally, methods should be available that
allow predictive readouts in vivo and ex vivo.A comprehensive panel of
tools was constructed and validated aiming at evaluating the modulation
of the immune system by new therapies.In immunocompetent mice, immune
cells were studied for the detection of their cell surface markers,
induction of proliferative phenotype, antigen-specific T lymphocyte
detection, secretion of soluble mediators using FACS phenotyping,
cytometric bead assay (CBA) or Luminex multiplex technologies and
ELISPOT. We report on a panel of syngenic tumor models (4T1, B16-F10,
CT26, EMT6, AY27, LLC1, MBT-2 and Renca) our capacity to correlate
subpopulation of immune infiltrating cells (as T cells, macrophages, NK
cells, granulocytic and monocytic cells) and the therapeutic effects of
critical antibodies directed against Cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4
(CTLA-4) and programmed death 1 membrane protein (PD-1).In
immunodeficient mice, the reconstitution of the mature human immune
system with PBMC or nave human immune system using hematopoietic stem
cells was used to evaluate the modulation of those immune cells by
therapies through human cytokine release and onset of graft versus host
disease.All of these tools were used in the context either of rodent
syngenic models or humanized mouse models. In addition to their use in
immune system modulating anti-cancer therapies, these humanized or
syngenic models also have a potential application in many other
therapeutic areas such as autoimmune diseases, inflammation,
anti-infectives.

