Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical efficacy of Hsp90 inhibition by using PF-04942847 in
osteosarcoma


This work was supported by foundation ARC and INSERM, France.Introduction
and Objective: Despite recent improvements in therapeutic management of
osteosarcoma, ongoing challenges in improving the response to
chemotherapy warrants the development of new strategies to improve
overall patient survival. Among new therapeutic approaches, Heat shock
protein (HSP) 90 is a molecular chaperone involved in the maturation and
stability of various oncogenic proteins leading to tumor cells survival.
In this study, we assessed the in vitro and in vivo antitumor properties
of a novel synthetic HSP90 inhibitor, PF-04942847 both in vitro and in
vivo in osteosarcoma.Methods: The effects of the HSP90 inhibitor were
evaluated in vitro on U2OS, SaOS2, MNNG/HOS, KHOS, MG63, G292, CAL72,
SJSA1 and 143B cell growth and apoptosis. The signaling pathways were
analyzed by western blotting. The consequence of HSP90 therapy in vivo
was evaluated in athymic mice bearing MNNG/HOS xenografts. The effect of
PF-04942847 on osteoclastogenesis was assessed in vitro on purified human
CD14+ monocytes.Results: In our panel of osteosarcoma cell lines,
PF-04942847 inhibited cell growth in a dose-dependent manner (IC50 50nM)
and induced apoptosis with an increase of sub-G1 fraction and PARP
cleavage. These biologic events were accompanied by decreased expression
of Akt, Erk, MYC, c-MET, STAT-3, and modulation of HSP expression. When
administered orally 3 times/week (25mg/kg) to mice bearing osteosarcoma
tumors, PF-04942847 significantly inhibited tumor growth by 40% and
prolonged survival compared to controls. Moreover, in contrast to 17-AAG,
the novel PF-04942847 compound inhibits osteoclast differentiation in
vitro.Conclusions: Targeting HSP90 using PF-04942847 inhibited
osteosarcoma tumor growth in vitro and in vivo and appears to inhibit
osteoclastogenesis. All these data provides a strong rationale for
clinical evaluation of PF-04942847 in osteosarcoma.

