Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of responders for Anti-CTLA4 in refractory
colorectal cancers using CANScript platform


Predicting clinical response to anticancer drugs remains a major
challenge in the treatment of cancer. Indeed, while biomarker-guided
strategies for personalizing anticancer drugs have shown strong promise
in certain cases, recent studies have shown that the tumor
microenvironment and heterogeneity can limit the predictive power of
biomarkers alone. Here we have engineered a personalized tumor
ecosystems, termed CANScript, that contextually conserve tumor
heterogeneity and phenocopy the tumor ecosystem using thin tumor explants
maintained in defined tumor grade-matched matrix support and autologous
ligands from patients. We then demonstrated that the CANScript platform
can be used to predict clinical response. Specifically, functional
readouts obtained by exposing the CANScript ecosystems from more than
1100 patients to a panel of anticancer drugs, together with the
corresponding clinical outcomes, were used to train a novel machine
learning algorithm; the learned model was then applied to predict
clinical response to anticancer drugs in a test group comprising of 900
new patients, where it achieved 100% sensitivity in its predictions while
also keeping specificity in a desired high range. We have also observed
that CANScript retains patient tumor immune environment which is
important for clinical response of not only immunomodulators but other
anti-cancer drugs. Here we report the effect of immunomodulators in
refractory CRC tumors which remains difficult to treat. Data demonstrates
that Anti-CTLA-4 has profound antitumor effect in refractory CRC tumors
by increasing cytotoxic T-Cells. In this cohort of 16 patients tumors
CANScript platform identifies 31% as responders (5/16) where conventional
tumor sections culture model shows only 6% as (1/16) responders.

