Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chemo-prevention effect of statin on hepatocellular carcinoma
cell lines


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is rated as the fifth most common
malignancy and third in cancer related deaths worldwide. Statins, HMG-CoA
reductase inhibitors, are potent cholesterol lowering drugs. Recent
epidemiology suggests that statins prevent aggressive HCC development (J
Clin. Oncol. 2012; 30:623-630). In previous cell experiments we have
shown that statins down-regulate nuclear Akt responses to insulin (J Biol
Chem 2010; 285, 27900). We showed that atorvastatin decreases nuclear
phosphorylated Akt (pAkt) levels in pancreatic and lung cancer cell lines
within minutes. This rapid effect was apparently not mediated by HMG-CoA
reductase inhibition; instead there were indications that it was mediated
by the P27 receptor. Akt has oncogenic activity in HCC and many other
cancer types, and we have now tested the possibility that the P27-Akt
pathway is of importance for the anticipated anticancer effects of
statins in HCC. We performed western blotting, immunocytochemistry and
transfections assays and found that statins decrease insulin induced pAkt
levels in the nucleus. Further, statin decrease the proliferation of
liver cells significantly. Hepatocytes lacking P27 receptor was
insensitive to these effects of statins. Overexpression of P27 restituted
the statin effect on pAkt levels. Overexpression of Hepatit B X protein
vector has been shown to increase pAkt levels (FEBS J 279, 1220) and we
found that statin counteract the Hepatit B vector-induced pAkt. These
data provide evidence for a signaling pathway by which statins decrease
pAkt and its downstream effect on pGSK3 Ser9 in hepatocytes via the P27
receptor. As the Akt pathway is deregulated and may act as a driver in
HCC development this signaling pathway may have a role in the indicated
chemo-preventive effect of statins.

