Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of H. pylori infection in regulation of miRNAs-associated
with DNA mismatch repair


It is well known that genetic and epigenetic inactivation of DNA mismatch
repair (MMR) genes might leads to mutations in cancer-related genes and
to cancer development. In gastric carcinogenesis, it has been shown that
the infection by H. pylori, the major causative agent of gastric cancer,
induces DNA damage and mutation and/or inhibits MMR DNA repair. Recently,
it has been reported that miRNAs (miRs) have an important role in
regulating genomic stability and MMR DNA repair. Thus, the aim of this
work was to identify miRs regulating MMR pathway in H. pylori-associated
gastric carcinogenesisTo evaluate the effects of H. pylori on miRs
releated with MMR, AGS gastric carcinoma cell line and the H. pylori
strains 26695, and P12 were used in co-culture experiments for 4, 8 and
12 h. As an initial screening, the AGS cells were co-cultured with H.
pylori strain 26695 and subjected to Cancer PathwayFinder miRNA PCR Array
(Qiagen) to determine the expression profile of 84 miRs. The expression
levels of EXO1, MLH1, MSH2, MSH3, MSH6, POLD3, PMS1, and PMS2 were
assessed by real-time PCR. Computational prediction of putative
interaction of selected miRs to 3UTR of MMR mRNAs were obtained from
TargetScan, mirDB and MetaCore. The target validation was evaluated using
mimics/inhibitors and luciferase gene reporter assays.The results from
the Cancer PathwayFinder PCR miRNA Array showded that H. pylori infection
(strain 26695) modulates the expression of 23% (19/84) of the miRs after
4 and 12 h of infection, of which 89% were up-regulated and 11%
down-regulated. Our data show that H. pylori infection significantly
down-regulates the expression of all selected genes. The data generated
from computational miR target prediction enriched with the gene
expression fold induction indicated that 4 miRs (miR-150-5p, miR-155-5p,
miR-3163, and miR-4775) modulated by H. pylori has at least one MMR
target gene. Regarding the target validation, our results indicated that
MLH1 and MSH2, are regulated by miR-150-5p. The miR-155-5p is involved in
down-regulation of MLH1, MSH2, MSH3 and POLD3 expression. MSH3 is
regulated by both miR-3163 and miR-4775. Briefly, this study shows that
H. pylori impairs MMR DNA repair pathway thought a modulation of miR
expression.

