Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of patient, physician, and hospital characteristics on
the receipt of guideline-concordant care for inflammatory breast cancer


Introduction: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is an aggressive and
lethal form of locally advanced breast cancer that makes up 1-6% of all
breast cancers and has a median overall survival of less than 4 years.
Physically, IBC is characterized by erythema, edema, and fine dimpling,
so treatment can be delayed due to misdiagnosis as mastitis or
dermatitis. Therapy for IBC tends to vary since no treatments are highly
effective. Because IBC is such a rare subtype, studies have been
challenged to demonstrate patterns of IBC treatment and analyze factors
affecting differences in treatment. In this study we examined factors
affecting the receipt of guideline-concordant care and survival for IBC
patients.Methods: Patients diagnosed with non-metastatic IBC in 2004 were
identified from the Breast and Prostate Cancer Data Quality and Patterns
of Care Study, containing information from cancer registry reports in
seven states supplemented through medical record re-abstraction and
physician verification. Variation in guideline-concordant care for IBC,
based on 2003 National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines,
was assessed according to patient, physician, and hospital
characteristics. Additionally, survival based on receipt of
guideline-concordant care was analyzed using Kaplan-Meier curves and
log-rank tests.Results: Of the 107 IBC patients in the study, only 25.8%
of them received treatment that was fully concordant with guidelines. The
majority of patients received guideline-concordant surgery (90.4%), with
percentages lower for chemotherapy (51.9%), radiation (40.7%), and
hormone therapy (78.0%). Guideline-concordant care was less common among
patients with extreme categories of patient age (under 40 or over 80
years; P = 0.19), non-white race (P = 0.03), lower body mass index
(BMIIntroduction: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is an aggressive and
lethal form of locally advanced breast cancer that makes up 1-6% of all
breast cancers and has a median overall survival of less than 4 years.
Physically, IBC is characterized by erythema, edema, and fine dimpling,
so treatment can be delayed due to misdiagnosis as mastitis or
dermatitis. Therapy for IBC tends to vary since no treatments are highly
effective. Because IBC is such a rare subtype, studies have been
challenged to demonstrate patterns of IBC treatment and analyze factors
affecting differences in treatment. In this study we examined factors
affecting the receipt of guideline-concordant care and survival for IBC
patients.Methods: Patients diagnosed with non-metastatic IBC in 2004 were
identified from the Breast and Prostate Cancer Data Quality and Patterns
of Care Study, containing information from cancer registry reports in
seven states supplemented through medical record re-abstraction and
physician verification. Variation in guideline-concordant care for IBC,
based on 2003 National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines,
was assessed according to patient, physician, and hospital
characteristics. Additionally, survival based on receipt of
guideline-concordant care was analyzed using Kaplan-Meier curves and
log-rank tests.Results: Of the 107 IBC patients in the study, only 25.8%
of them received treatment that was fully concordant with guidelines. The
majority of patients received guideline-concordant surgery (90.4%), with
percentages lower for chemotherapy (51.9%), radiation (40.7%), and
hormone therapy (78.0%). Guideline-concordant care was less common among
patients with extreme categories of patient age (under 40 or over 80
years; P = 0.19), non-white race (P = 0.03), lower body mass index
(BMI<25 kg/m2, P = 0.003), a surgeon graduating from medical school more
than 15 years prior (P = 0.02), and smaller hospital size (Introduction:
Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is an aggressive and lethal form of
locally advanced breast cancer that makes up 1-6% of all breast cancers
and has a median overall survival of less than 4 years. Physically, IBC
is characterized by erythema, edema, and fine dimpling, so treatment can
be delayed due to misdiagnosis as mastitis or dermatitis. Therapy for IBC
tends to vary since no treatments are highly effective. Because IBC is
such a rare subtype, studies have been challenged to demonstrate patterns
of IBC treatment and analyze factors affecting differences in treatment.
In this study we examined factors affecting the receipt of
guideline-concordant care and survival for IBC patients.Methods: Patients
diagnosed with non-metastatic IBC in 2004 were identified from the Breast
and Prostate Cancer Data Quality and Patterns of Care Study, containing
information from cancer registry reports in seven states supplemented
through medical record re-abstraction and physician verification.
Variation in guideline-concordant care for IBC, based on 2003 National
Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, was assessed according to
patient, physician, and hospital characteristics. Additionally, survival
based on receipt of guideline-concordant care was analyzed using
Kaplan-Meier curves and log-rank tests.Results: Of the 107 IBC patients
in the study, only 25.8% of them received treatment that was fully
concordant with guidelines. The majority of patients received
guideline-concordant surgery (90.4%), with percentages lower for
chemotherapy (51.9%), radiation (40.7%), and hormone therapy (78.0%).
Guideline-concordant care was less common among patients with extreme
categories of patient age (under 40 or over 80 years; P = 0.19),
non-white race (P = 0.03), lower body mass index (BMI<25 kg/m2, P =
0.003), a surgeon graduating from medical school more than 15 years prior
(P = 0.02), and smaller hospital size (<200 beds, P = 0.02).Results
suggested that IBC patients experienced longer breast cancer-specific
survival if they received guideline-concordant treatment based on 2003 (P
= 0.06) and 2013 (P = 0.06) NCCN guidelines.Conclusion: Targeting factors
associated with receipt of care that is not guideline-concordant may
reduce survival disparities in IBC patients. Further research is needed
to identify approaches to ensure that physicians are adhering to NCCN
guidelines for IBC cases and to identify reasons for non-adherence to
guidelines.

