Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA-damaging compound 0404 effectively inhibits hepatocellular
carcinoma by upregulation of miR-34a and miR-200c expression


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth most common type of cancer
and the third most common cause of cancer deaths worldwide. DNA-damaging
agents have a long history of use in cancer chemotherapy. Unfortunately,
chemotherapeutic treatment strategies against HCC are very ineffective.
We have screened of a novel DNA-damaging compounds, 0404, by using
time-dependent cellular response (TCRP) based on unique TCRP DNA-damage
signature. This new compound could induce apoptosis effectively in
hepatocellular carcinoma at nM-degree concentration. Since microRNAs
(miRNAs) have been show play critical roles in pathogenesis of HCC, the
present study was aimed to investigate the role of miRNAs in the
anticancer effects of 0404. We found that, HepG2 cells, which retain
wild-type p53, were more sensitive to 0404 treatment than Huh7 cells,
which with mutant p53. At IC50 and IC99 concentration, 0404 upregulated
the expression of miR-34a and miR-200c, two major miRNA regulated by p53,
in a dose- and time-dependent manner in HepG2 cells. Western blot
analysis further show that up-regulation of miR-34a decreased SIRT1
expression, leading to an increase in acetylated p53 levels and also an
increase in p53 targets such as p21 and PUMA. In addition, up-regulation
of miR-200c decreased the expression of EMT-inducing transcription
factors ZEB1 and ZEB2, which play key role in tumor invasion and
metastasis. Furthermore, miR-34a or miR-200c inhibitors impaired the
down-regulation of miR-34a or miR-200c target genes, respectively, by
0404 treatment, and partially impaired the tumor suppression effect of
0404. These results suggest that 0404 may be an attractive agent in
chemotherapy for HCC, especially in HCC with wt p53, by regulation of
miR-34a and miR-200c.Financial support: This study was supported by the
National Natural Science Fund (81272679) and the Major national S&T
Projects (2013ZX09041003).

