Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy-mediated degradation of nuclear envelope proteins during
oncogene-induced senescence


Cellular senescence is a stable form of cell cycle arrest triggered by a
variety of damages and stresses including oncogene expression
(oncogene-induced senescence or OIS). We and others previously
demonstrated that OIS occurs in human benign lesions, acting as a potent
tumor suppressor mechanism preventing cancer progression. Numerous
phenotypic changes occur during OIS both in the cytoplasm and in the
nucleus. These include the activation of autophagy, a catabolic process
operating in the cytoplasm, and downregulation of lamin B1, a component
of the nuclear lamina. However, it is unknown whether these changes
relate to each other. We discovered that cells entering BRAFV600E- or
H-RASV12-induced senescence downregulate not only lamin B1 but also lamin
A, as well as several other nuclear envelope (NE) proteins. This
depletion was associated with an altered NE morphology. We further found
that the global loss of NE proteins is a consequence of their degradation
by the autophagy machinery. This occurs concomitantly with autophagy
induction and increased lysosomal content and activity. Our study reveals
for the first time to our knowledge, a connection between autophagy and
the disruption of nuclear envelope integrity during OIS.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

