Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell analysis of adaptive resistance and fractional
responses of melanoma cells to RAF/MEK inhibition


Treatment of BRAFV600E melanomas with drugs, such as vemurafenib, that
inhibit RAF/MEK signaling is effective in the short term, but remission
is not durable. Acquired drug resistance is thought to involve short-term
adaptive responses that compensate for RAF/MEK inhibition via
up-regulation of other pro-growth mechanisms. Thus, understanding and
ultimately preventing adaptive responses is a key to durable therapy.
Systematic data comparing BRAFV600E tumor cells is generally lacking and
it is not known whether adaptation is fundamentally similar across cell
types or among individual cells within a cell population.We apply a
systematic approach to studying the responses of human melanoma cell
lines to five drugs, RAF and MEK inhibitors, with the overall goal of (i)
characterizing variability in adaptation with time, dose, cell type and
across individual cells, (ii) discovering new or poorly characterized
adaptive mechanisms, and (iii) demonstrating the effectiveness of a
high-throughput approach involving multiplex measurement, single-cell
analysis and computational modeling. The data involves time-course
measurement of total level and activity of signaling proteins and cell
state markers using array-based methods and single-cell
immunofluorescence assays as well as measurement of apoptosis and cell
viability under the same conditions. Statistical modeling using partial
least squares regression (PLSR) revealed which of the changes in the
200,000 point dataset were phenotypically consequential.We found that
responses to RAF inhibitors are remarkably diverse and involve multiple
pathways that can be up or down-regulated over time, with significant
variability across cell types and individual cells. We identified a role
for JNK/c-Jun signaling in altering the cell-cycle distribution of
melanoma cells, causing apoptosis-resistant cells to accumulate and drug
maximal effect (Emax) to fall; co-drugging with RAF and JNK inhibitors or
JUN knockdown reverse this effect. The primary effect of JNK inhibitors
is to minimize the cell-to-cell variability in pS6 suppression, promoting
the induction of apoptosis.Our study shows that a systems-level approach
(combining high density time-dependent measurements, quantitative
modeling and single-cell analysis) may provide a general framework for
evaluating new drugs with adaptive and paradoxical response, and
identifying potentially useful combination therapies.

