Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABT-263 is effective in a subset of non-small cell lung cancer
cell lines


Rationale:ABT-263 (Navitoclax) is one of the BH3 mimetics targeting
anti-apoptotic B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) family proteins such as Bcl-2,
Bcl-XL, and Bcl-w, thereby inducing apoptosis. It has been reported that
the response to ABT-263 is associated with expressions of myeloid cell
leukemia-1 (Mcl-1), an anti-apoptotic protein. Given its effectiveness as
a single agent in preclinical studies, ABT-263 is currently being
evaluated in clinical trials for small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and
leukemia. However, the efficacy of ABT-263 in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) has not been fully evaluated. We examined the effect of ABT-263
on cell proliferation of NSCLC cell lines and investigated the underlying
mechanisms.Methods:The following 9 NSCLC cell lines were examined:
SK-LU-1, A549, H358, Calu3, H3122, H1975, H460, H441, and BID007. The
effects of ABT-263 in NSCLC cell lines were evaluated by MTS assay.
Apoptosis was examined by flowcytometry using staining for annexin V and
propidium iodide (PI), and also western blotting for cleaved PARP.
Quantitative RT-PCR was carried out to assess the mRNA expression levels
of anti-apoptotic genes and pro-apoptotic genes. Immunoprecipitation and
western blotting were performed to compare the levels of anti-apoptotic
and pro-apoptotic proteins between the sensitive and resistant cell
lines. In addition, knockdown of Mcl-1 was performed by siRNA.Results:By
screening 9 NSCLC cell lines using MTS assay, we found Calu3 and
BID007were sensitive to ABT-263. We also confirmed that apoptosis was
induced only in the ABT-263 sensitive lines but not in the ABT-263
resistant cell lines after ABT-263 treatment. However, the expression
levels of Bcl-2 family proteins, including Mcl-1, did not differ
significantly among the ABT-263 sensitive and resistant cell lines.
Unlike the results in previous reports regarding SCLC, Mcl-1 was not
decreased in the sensitive cell lines. The ABT-263 resistant cell lines
became sensitive to ABT-263 after knockdown of Mcl-1 by siRNA, while the
ABT-263 sensitive cell lines maintained the same
sensitivity.Conclusion:We found that Calu3 and BID007 were sensitive to
ABT-263. In the sensitive NSCLC cell lines, ABT-263 induces apoptosis
irrespective of Mcl-1 expression levels.

