Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of cadmium carcinogenesis


Cadmium is a transition metal and an ubiquitous environmental and
industrial pollutant. Laboratory animal studies and epidemiological
studies have shown that exposure to cadmium is associated with various
organ toxicities and carcinogenic effects. Several national and
international regulatory agencies have classified cadmium compounds as
carcinogenic to humans. In 2012, International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC) reviewed the relevant information on cadmium exposure and
concluded that there is sufficient evidence in humans for the
carcinogenicity of cadmium and its compounds. However, the underlying
molecular mechanism(s), especially for the carcinogenicity, are unknown.
The mechanisms proposed for carcinogenicity include aberrant gene
expression, induction of oxidative DNA damage, stimulation of cell
proliferation, malignant cell transformation, inhibition of DNA damage
repair, inhibition of apoptosis and epigenetic mechanisms including
alteration of DNA methylation. Studies have shown that due to the slow
elimination, cadmium is a cumulative toxicant and past exposures could
result in toxic effect of the residual metal. To better understand the
mechanisms of cadmium carcinogenicity we have reviewed in vitro
experimental and in vivo animal studies focused on the proposed
mechanisms of carcinogenicity as well as epidemiological evidence on
carcinogenicity in lung and kidney following cadmium exposure.Disclaimer:
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views and/or policies of the U.S. EPA

