Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D regulation of glutamine metabolism in
Harvey-ras transformed MCF10A human breast epithelial cells


Breast cancer is the second most common cancer among women in the US.
Genetics, environment, as well as dietary factors are thought to have
significant impacts on breast cancer risk. Epidemiological evidence
supports a role for vitamin D in protection against breast cancer. 1,25
dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D), the active form of vitamin D, is
proposed to regulate cellular processes that are involved in breast
cancer progression. Metabolic reprogramming of glucose, termed the
Warburg effect, as well as increased glutamine uptake and metabolism for
energy use is a characteristic of many cancer cells. The current studies
were designed to investigate the effect of 1,25(OH)2D on glutamine
metabolism in mammary cells during an early stage of cancer progression.
We employed untransformed (MCF10A) and ras oncogene transformed MCF10A
human breast epithelial cells (MCF10A-ras). Intracellular glutamine and
glutamate levels, determined by nuclear magnetic resonance, were both
reduced with 1,25(OH)2D by 23% in MCF10A-ras cells. However, 1,25(OH)2D
decreased intracellular glutamine level in MCF10A cells by only 9%, with
no effect on intracellular glutamate level in MCF10A cells. Glutamine and
glutamate flux into the TCA cycle were determined using [U-13C5]
L-glutamine and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Treatment with
1,25(OH)2D decreased glutamine flux into the TCA cycle by 18% and 31% in
MCF10A and MCF10A-ras cells, respectively, and decreased glutamate flux
into the TCA cycle by 13% and 17% in MCF10A and MCF10A-ras cells,
respectively. The mRNA and protein expression of the major glutamine
transporter, solute linked carrier family 1 member A5 (SLC1A5), was
significantly decreased by 1,25(OH)2D in MCF10A-ras cells. Consistent
with these results, glutamine uptake was reduced by 1,25(OH)2D, and the
SLC1A5 inhibitor L--Glutamyl-p-nitroanilide (GPNA) inhibited the effect
of 1,25(OH)2D on glutamine uptake in both MCF10A and MCF10A-ras cells.
The mRNA level of the glutamine transporter, SLC1A5, was also decreased
by 1,25(OH)2D in MCF10A which overexpress ErbB2 (HER-2/neu) and in
malignant MCF10CA1a cells. These results suggest 1,25(OH)2D may alter
glutamine metabolism in MCF10A-ras cells by inhibiting glutamine uptake
and utilization, in part through down-regulation of SLC1A5 transcript
abundance. The 1,25(OH)2D down-regulation of the glutamine transporter,
SLC1A5, may play a role in vitamin D prevention of breast cancer.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

