Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential cellular localization of Ephrin receptor tyrosine
kinase B4 (EphB4) in melanoma progression


Background: Melanoma is an aggressive cancer with high metastatic
potential, and is the most lethal skin malignancies. Ephrin receptor
tyrosine kinase B4 (EphB4) modulates diverse physiologic and
developmental processes, and may play an important role in melanoma
tumorigenesis. In addition, Mertens-Walker et al., reported nuclear
translocalization of EphB4 and hypothesized that it may directly regulate
gene expression contributing to more aggressive biologic behavior in
prostate cancer (Cancer Res 2011; 71 (8 Suppl): Abstract nr 1085). It is
unknown whether differential cellular expression of EphB4 contributes to
the pathogenesis of melanoma.Methods: To explore the role of EphB4 in
melanomagenesis, we have performed semiquantitative immunohistochemical
analysis of EphB4 expression as measured by percentage and intensity of
cells immunoreactive with anti-EphB4 in melanocytic nevi (n = 59),
primary melanomas without metastasis during follow-up (n = 22), primary
melanomas with metastasis (n = 17), and metastatic melanoma (n =
32).Results: Melanocytic nevi had significantly higher nuclear EphB4
expression (p = 0.007) and lower cytoplasmic EphB4 expression (p = 0.002)
when compared to all categories of melanoma. In fact we observed a
dramatic decrease in nuclear EphB4 expression in metastatic melanoma
compared to melanocytic nevi (p = 0.0009). In contrast, compared to
melanocytic nevi, cytoplasmic expression for EphB4 were higher in primary
melanoma (p = 0.005) as well as in melanoma metastases (p = 0.03).
Although there was no significant difference in nuclear or cytoplasmic
EphB4 expression between primary melanomas with or without metastasis,
primary melanomas without metastasis showed significantly higher number
of tumor cells having intense nuclear immunoreactivity for EphB4 protein
than did metastatic melanomas (p = 0.006).Conclusion: In conclusion, our
data indicated that there is a gradual loss of nuclear EphB4 protein as
well as increase in the levels of cytoplasmic expression of EphB4 protein
associated with melanomagenesis. In addition, our results suggest a
potential role for EphB4 as a therapeutic target in melanoma.

