Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of MiR-21 signaling by MPS1 in human glioblastoma


Monopolar spindle 1 (MPS1) is an essential spindle assembly checkpoint
(SAC) kinase involved in determining spindle integrity. Beyond its
mitotic functions, it has been implicated in several other signaling
pathways. Its overexpression in cancer cells is known to contribute to
genomic instability and tumorigenesis. Our earlier studies have
elaborated on role of MPS1 in glioblastoma (GBM) radiosensitization. In
this study using reverse phase protein arrays (RPPA), we assessed MPS1
mediated cell signaling pathways and demonstrated that inhibiting MPS1
could upregulate the expression of the tumor suppressor genes PDCD4 and
MSH2 by downregulating micro RNA-21 (MiR-21). In GBMs MiR-21 expression
is significantly elevated and is associated with chemo and
radioresistance. Here, we show that MPS1 inhibition significantly
repressed MiR-21 levels and elevated PDCD4 and MSH2 expression in GBM
cells both in vitro and in vivo. Both MPS1 and MiR-21 depletion
suppressed GBM cell proliferation, whereas, ectopic expression of MiR-21
rescued GBM cell growth from MPS1 inhibition. Further, we demonstrate
that MPS1 mediates phosphorylation of SMAD3 but not SMAD2 in GBM cells; A
possible mechanism behind MiR-21 modulation by MPS1. Collectively, our
results shed light onto an important role of MPS1 in TGF-/SMAD signaling
via MiR-21 regulation. We also, evaluated the prognostic effect of
MiR-21, PDCD4 and MSH2 expression on survival in GBM patients of
different molecular subtypes from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
database, showing tumors with high MiR-21 expression and low PDCD4 and
MSH2 expression were associated with significantly shorter survival
times. To our knowledge this is the first report to demonstrate the role
of MPS1 in MiR-21 modulation. This scenario in which MiR-21 is modulated
by MPS1 inhibition may be exploited as a potential target for effective
GBM therapy.

