Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detroit African Americans (AA) are overrepresented among patients
with large high-grade dysplastic (HGD) adenomas (LHiGDA) versus those
with small HGD adenomas (ShiGDA)


Colorectal cancer incidence and mortality impacts African Americans more
than other ethnic group. While causes for this disparity are likely
multifactorial, etiology of carcinogenesis may be the most important. A
better understanding of these factors might enable us to design
interventions based on regional realities. In the context of screening
trials we obtained data from a cohort of patients with high-grade
dysplastic adenomas. We compared differences between those with
large-sized (>1cm) and those with smaller lesions. Methods: Patients were
selected on the basis of high CRC risk based on a brief questionnaire.
Prior to colonoscopy, stool was submitted for FOBT and anti-adenoma
antibody (Adnab-9) binding determined by ELISA. The colonoscopy outcomes
were noted for the cross-sectional element of the study. The longitudinal
component enabled collection of additional specimens to elucidate the
source of the adenoma antigen. Pathology was reviewed and antigenic
mapping of 6 colonic segments was performed by Adnab-9
immunohistochemistry. If any 2 contiguous colonic segments expressed the
antigen the colon was deemed to have a field effect. Results: 49 Patients
were found to have HGD lesions of whom 26 were AA (53%). All but 1 were
male. Mean ageSD was 6214.8 years. 28 (57%) had LHiGDA and the remainder
ShiGDA. 69% AA had LHiGDA versus 29% in the ShiGDA group (OR 5.9 CI
1.7-20.9;p = 0.03). Intragroup age differences between the AA and non-AA
patients were not statistically (NSS) different (66.38.3 versus 63.910.5
and 58.421.9 versus 61.079.9 years respectively). Intergroup age
variation by race was NSS (AA p = 0.2 and non-AA p = 0.5). Likewise
intergroup lesion size variations were NSS (p = 0.4 and p = 0.2
respectively). The proportions of TVA were also NSS between the groups (p
= 1 and p = 0.2 respectively}. The stool Adnab-9 binding was also not
significantly different (p = 0.5 and p = 0.9 respectively). There was
however a significant difference between the 2 lesion groups in terms of
the presence of a field effect which was performed in a small percentage
(14.3 versus 33%) for the large versus the small lesions (100 vs 14.3%
RR7 CI 1.1-43;pColorectal cancer incidence and mortality impacts African
Americans more than other ethnic group. While causes for this disparity
are likely multifactorial, etiology of carcinogenesis may be the most
important. A better understanding of these factors might enable us to
design interventions based on regional realities. In the context of
screening trials we obtained data from a cohort of patients with
high-grade dysplastic adenomas. We compared differences between those
with large-sized (>1cm) and those with smaller lesions. Methods: Patients
were selected on the basis of high CRC risk based on a brief
questionnaire. Prior to colonoscopy, stool was submitted for FOBT and
anti-adenoma antibody (Adnab-9) binding determined by ELISA. The
colonoscopy outcomes were noted for the cross-sectional element of the
study. The longitudinal component enabled collection of additional
specimens to elucidate the source of the adenoma antigen. Pathology was
reviewed and antigenic mapping of 6 colonic segments was performed by
Adnab-9 immunohistochemistry. If any 2 contiguous colonic segments
expressed the antigen the colon was deemed to have a field effect.
Results: 49 Patients were found to have HGD lesions of whom 26 were AA
(53%). All but 1 were male. Mean ageSD was 6214.8 years. 28 (57%) had
LHiGDA and the remainder ShiGDA. 69% AA had LHiGDA versus 29% in the
ShiGDA group (OR 5.9 CI 1.7-20.9;p = 0.03). Intragroup age differences
between the AA and non-AA patients were not statistically (NSS) different
(66.38.3 versus 63.910.5 and 58.421.9 versus 61.079.9 years
respectively). Intergroup age variation by race was NSS (AA p = 0.2 and
non-AA p = 0.5). Likewise intergroup lesion size variations were NSS (p =
0.4 and p = 0.2 respectively). The proportions of TVA were also NSS
between the groups (p = 1 and p = 0.2 respectively}. The stool Adnab-9
binding was also not significantly different (p = 0.5 and p = 0.9
respectively). There was however a significant difference between the 2
lesion groups in terms of the presence of a field effect which was
performed in a small percentage (14.3 versus 33%) for the large versus
the small lesions (100 vs 14.3% RR7 CI 1.1-43;p<0.02) but numbers were
too small for intragroup calculations. Conclusions: AA are
overrepresented in the LHiGDA group but there were no clues for differing
pathways of carcinogenesis or for the differential dwell times of these
lesions. We did not evaluate habits such as alcohol intake and smoking as
risk factors which conceivably may play a role. The morphology of the
lesion and pathway antigens suggest that the adenoma-carcinoma is the
pathway of causation but these should be further studied to design
effective intervention and screening. Screening is likely to better
detect the large than the small lesions and this may be an advantage for
the AA population who accordingly should be encouraged to actively
participate in local screening programs.

