Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular Response LLC tumor bank and patient-derived tumor
xenograft models: a powerful translational engine for discovery and
development of novel oncology therapeutics


Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models have been established from the
world's largest living tumor bank at Molecular Response and used to mimic
clinical trial settings with patients with heterogeneous populations and
heterogeneous disease within oncology indications for a faster and less
expensive path to test novel compounds in a more predictive preclinical
setting. Overall, the collection is comprised of 144 000 tumor samples
corresponding to 70 000 unique patients and continues to grow with new
patient samples added routinely. For several patients, multiple samples
were collected at different times (before and after treatment) or at
different locations (primary/ metastatic). This allows evaluation of drug
efficiency in pre and post treatment application which mimics a clinical
setting as well the ability to monitor the effect of drug on the primary
tumor and a matched metastatic tumor. For banked tumors, we have
histo-pathological and molecular data as well as FFPE slides, DNA, RNA
and chemosensitivity data from the original patient. MRL currently has
over 350 PDX models in progress and has established >300 unique PDX
models in multiple indications. Many established PDX models have
confirmed histology and mutational profiling (Next-Gen sequencing) to
demonstrate preservation of the biological characteristics of these
models to the original patient sample as well as between passages within
the model. MRL's vast collection of patient samples allows clients the
ability to focus on unique subsets of patients for a custom model build
or the ability to choose from our extensive list of established PDX
models to further drug discovery of novel compounds.

