Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-depth genomic analysis reveals complex functional consequence
of driver mutations in breast cancers


Understanding the extensive functional consequences of molecular drivers
of a cancer is challenging. We developed an in-depth genomic analytical
framework to identify the gene and pathway targets dysregulated by
somatic driver mutations. Using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) breast
cancer data, we systemically analyzed all high frequent mutation events
including amplification, deletion and point mutation across tumor
tissues. Those include the known molecular driver genes such as PIK3CA,
GATA3, PTEN and TP53. Utilizing bagging with distance-based regression
for differential gene expression analysis, we identified several
thousands gene targets associated with the somatic mutations. Integrating
gene co-expression regulatory network and the association dependence
structure among the somatic mutations, we explored a complex association
network of molecular pathway modules or sub-modules that are specific to
a mutational event or common to a set of events. Interestingly, we found
those modules commonly associated with sets of mutation events were
significantly enriched in well-known breast cancer related pathways such
as ERBB2, PI3AK and TGFB1. Combined with the publicly available data of a
genome-wide RNA-mediated interference screen in breast cancer, we further
demonstrated that those modules enriched with cell proliferation
essential genes. Our analysis strategy provides a novel view of complex
functional mechanism driven by the driver mutation events and it has high
potential to provide novel insights to the understanding of the
tumorigenesis or the development of therapeutic targets.

