Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The landscape of DNA allelic imbalance in the normal-appearing
airway field of cancerization


The phenomenon of field cancerization has been previously postulated and
observed in various cancers, including those of the lung. We have
recently demonstrated that normal-appearing airway cells carry expression
profiles that are often characteristic of the adjacent tumor. A better
understanding of the molecular mechanisms that drive these field changes
may provide important biological insights into lung cancer pathogenesis.
Loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) and other forms of acquired chromosomal
alterations (allelic imbalance; AI) have an established and profound role
in oncogenesis. However, the relationship between AI and field
cancerization has not been studied comprehensively across the genome.
Here we address this void by interrogating a rich collection of
normal-appearing airways from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients. We applied Illumina 1M SNP arrays to characterize whole genome
copy number alterations in 435 samples from 45 early-stage NSCLC patients
[31 adenocarcinomas (ADCs), 14 squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs)]. Each
patient set comprised samples from the primary tumor and adjacent
normal-appearing airways paired with blood cells and/or uninvolved normal
lung tissue. A subset of these included brushings from ipsilateral large
airways (mainstem bronchi) and from the nasal cavities as well as
multi-region tumor biopsies for intra-tumoral analysis (on 22, 27, and 20
patients, respectively). To characterize the field in normal-appearing
airways at a genome-wide scale, we applied a haplotype-based
computational program, hapLOH, to profile AI events (loss, gain, copy
neutral LOH) in a paired mode contrasting signals in the blood or normal
lung. We detected 198 AI events in normal-appearing airways of 24 of 45
patients; 92% of these events were represented in the paired tumor. Of
the 24 patients, 23 had events in the adjacent airway, 3 had events in
the large airway, and no events were observed in nasal brushings,
indicating a pronounced AI field gradient. We detected AI in the airways
of approximately 43% of ADCs regardless of smoking status (3 of 7
smokers, 10 of 24 non-smokers), and 79% (11 of 14) of SCCs, clearly
indicating squamous histology as a greater predictor of observing a
genomic field effect (P The phenomenon of field cancerization has been
previously postulated and observed in various cancers, including those of
the lung. We have recently demonstrated that normal-appearing airway
cells carry expression profiles that are often characteristic of the
adjacent tumor. A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
drive these field changes may provide important biological insights into
lung cancer pathogenesis. Loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) and other forms of
acquired chromosomal alterations (allelic imbalance; AI) have an
established and profound role in oncogenesis. However, the relationship
between AI and field cancerization has not been studied comprehensively
across the genome. Here we address this void by interrogating a rich
collection of normal-appearing airways from non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients. We applied Illumina 1M SNP arrays to characterize whole
genome copy number alterations in 435 samples from 45 early-stage NSCLC
patients [31 adenocarcinomas (ADCs), 14 squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs)].
Each patient set comprised samples from the primary tumor and adjacent
normal-appearing airways paired with blood cells and/or uninvolved normal
lung tissue. A subset of these included brushings from ipsilateral large
airways (mainstem bronchi) and from the nasal cavities as well as
multi-region tumor biopsies for intra-tumoral analysis (on 22, 27, and 20
patients, respectively). To characterize the field in normal-appearing
airways at a genome-wide scale, we applied a haplotype-based
computational program, hapLOH, to profile AI events (loss, gain, copy
neutral LOH) in a paired mode contrasting signals in the blood or normal
lung. We detected 198 AI events in normal-appearing airways of 24 of 45
patients; 92% of these events were represented in the paired tumor. Of
the 24 patients, 23 had events in the adjacent airway, 3 had events in
the large airway, and no events were observed in nasal brushings,
indicating a pronounced AI field gradient. We detected AI in the airways
of approximately 43% of ADCs regardless of smoking status (3 of 7
smokers, 10 of 24 non-smokers), and 79% (11 of 14) of SCCs, clearly
indicating squamous histology as a greater predictor of observing a
genomic field effect (P < 0.03). The most frequently observed airway
alterations were in 9p and 9q, affecting 13 smoker patients;
interestingly, these were not observed in the non-smokers. Finally, we
note that AI events were present in the adjacent airways of 4/5 (80%) of
patients with recurrence and only in 20/40 patients without recurrence,
signaling a profound prognostic value in studying the field of
cancerization in NSCLC. Although preliminary, our findings suggest that
chromosomal aberrations are common in the normal-appearing airway field
of cancerization and can potentially provide insights into the biology of
lung cancer pathogenesis and progression.

