Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker results from a clinical trial of nivolumab in patients
(pts) with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) (CA209-009): Gene
expression, serum profiling for immune markers, and multiplex tissue
immunohistochemistry (IHC)


Background. A prospective study of the programmed death-1 (PD-1)
inhibitor nivolumab, which shows clinical activity in mRCC (Motzer RJ, et
al. JCO, 2014), reported changes in serum chemokines (CXCL9, CXCL10) and
tumor T cell infiltrates consistent with PD-1 inhibition (Choueiri TK, et
al. ASCO 2014; abstract 5012). Here we expand on these findings to report
on immune biomarkers in tumor biopsies and peripheral blood.Methods.
Ninety-one eligible pts who had RCC with a clear cell component and
measurable disease received nivolumab intravenously on day 1 of each 3
week treatment cycle. Previously treated pts were randomized to 0.3 (n =
22), 2 (n = 22), or 10 mg/kg (n = 23) nivolumab; treatment-nave pts (n =
24) received 10 mg/kg. IHC was performed on tumor biopsies obtained at
baseline (BL) and at cycle 2 day 8 (C2D8) to quantify cells bearing T
cell markers (CD3/CD4/CD8/FoxP3/PD1); matched specimens were available
for 53 pts. Gene expression (18,562 loci; Affymetrix) was analyzed in
biopsies and peripheral whole blood obtained at BL and on treatment.
Pharmacodynamic effects on transcription were evaluated for connection to
immune cell lineages (Abbas AR, et al. Genes and Immunity, 2005) and for
biological impact (MetaCore). Serum at BL and time points through C4D1
was analyzed for markers of inflammation (53 analytes; Myriad RBM) and
antibodies against tumor antigens (30 antigens; Serametrix).Results. IHC
(n = 53 pairs) revealed a significant (P Background. A prospective study
of the programmed death-1 (PD-1) inhibitor nivolumab, which shows
clinical activity in mRCC (Motzer RJ, et al. JCO, 2014), reported changes
in serum chemokines (CXCL9, CXCL10) and tumor T cell infiltrates
consistent with PD-1 inhibition (Choueiri TK, et al. ASCO 2014; abstract
5012). Here we expand on these findings to report on immune biomarkers in
tumor biopsies and peripheral blood.Methods. Ninety-one eligible pts who
had RCC with a clear cell component and measurable disease received
nivolumab intravenously on day 1 of each 3 week treatment cycle.
Previously treated pts were randomized to 0.3 (n = 22), 2 (n = 22), or 10
mg/kg (n = 23) nivolumab; treatment-nave pts (n = 24) received 10 mg/kg.
IHC was performed on tumor biopsies obtained at baseline (BL) and at
cycle 2 day 8 (C2D8) to quantify cells bearing T cell markers
(CD3/CD4/CD8/FoxP3/PD1); matched specimens were available for 53 pts.
Gene expression (18,562 loci; Affymetrix) was analyzed in biopsies and
peripheral whole blood obtained at BL and on treatment. Pharmacodynamic
effects on transcription were evaluated for connection to immune cell
lineages (Abbas AR, et al. Genes and Immunity, 2005) and for biological
impact (MetaCore). Serum at BL and time points through C4D1 was analyzed
for markers of inflammation (53 analytes; Myriad RBM) and antibodies
against tumor antigens (30 antigens; Serametrix).Results. IHC (n = 53
pairs) revealed a significant (P < 0.01) increase in CD8+ T cells while
median levels of FoxP3+/PD1+ CD4+ T cells remained 1.3-fold; P 1.2-fold,
P 1.2-fold, P < 0.01) at C1D2, while multiple IFN-responsive genes were
up-regulated. Few ( 30%. By C4D1, 22/61 (36%) pts demonstrated increased
seroconversion against 5 tumor antigens.Conclusions. In this first
biomarker-based study of an immune checkpoint inhibitor in mRCC,
immunomodulatory effects consistent with PD-1 inhibition were seen in
peripheral blood and the tumor microenvironment. Ongoing phase 3 studies
will provide additional evidence of the effect of nivolumab on these
biomarkers (NCT01668784, NCT02231749).

