Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel aptamer targeting agent for prostate cancer


Background: Prostate cancer is both the most common cancer diagnosis and
the second most common cause of cancer-related death for men in the
United States. An ideal new therapy would selectively deliver the drug to
the tumor while also preventing toxicity in normal tissue.Methods and
Results: Recent exciting clinical advances with antibody drug conjugates
have resulted in FDA approval of such tumor-targeting therapies. However,
antibodies are difficult to chemically modify, require humanization, and
their large size hinders tumor penetration. Aptamers - small nucleic acid
ligands - have many advantages over traditional antibody targeting
agents, including ease of synthesis, amenability to chemical
modification, and reversibility. Moreover, they exhibit antibody-like
target affinities and specificities at a fraction of the size, allowing
more efficient tumor penetration.We have identified an aptamer, termed
E3, which selectively internalizes into prostate cancer cells, but does
not target normal cells. Additionally, E3 targets and internalizes into a
variety of other cancer types, including breast, ovarian, lung, colon,
melanoma, glioblastoma, liver, and leukemia cancers. Linking the E3
aptamer to a deimmunized version of the Pseudomonas exotoxin (PE38) kills
prostate cancer cells in vitro with an IC50 of 0.4-1.1 nM while
displaying no measured toxicity towards normal cells, and linking E3 to
the highly toxic auristatin drugs, MMAE or MMAF, kills prostate cancer
cells in vitro with an IC50 of 5-12 nM. Significantly, E3 maintains its
tumor-targeting abilities in vivo, targeting both prostate tumors and
patient-derived colon cancer tumors in mice as evidenced by near-infrared
in vivo imaging.Conclusions: Together, these studies show the potential
therapeutic benefit of E3 drug targeting for the treatment of prostate
cancer.

