Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glutamic acid and glutaminolysis mark aggressive tumorigenesis in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


The purpose of this study was to identify markers of aggressive tumor
behavior to inform processes underlying tumor aggressivity in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). To this end, metabolomic profiling
and validation of biomarkers of aggressive HNSCC tumorigenesis were
assessed in HNSCC human specimens and cell lines. Using LG/GC-MS, we
found that glutamic acid is one of the most highly differentially
elevated metabolites in HNSCC specimens. In subsequent validation
studies, where we incorporated metastatic tissues, glutamic acid was
further verified as differentially elevated in metastatic tissues
compared to primary HNSCC and normal adjacent tissues. In addition,
significantly elevated expression levels of c-Myc and glutaminase, the
enzyme that regulates glutamic acid levels, were highest in metastatic
tissues compared to primary HNSCC and normal tissues. Parallel changes in
c-Myc and glutaminase expression in HNSCC tissues suggest a link between
c-Myc regulation and glutamine metabolism. Furthermore, Western Blot
analyses show similar expression patterns for c-Myc and glutaminase in
oral cancer cell lines. Inhibiting glutamic acid levels by stably
suppressing glutaminase expression in HNSCC cells, led to suppression of
aggressive tumorigenesis in vitro, whereas enrichment with external
glutamine or glutamic acid further enhanced tumorigenesis. Together, this
data suggest that oncogenic levels of c-Myc may induce a transcriptional
program that promotes elevated levels of glutamic acid and glutaminolysis
via glutaminase to promote tumor aggressivity in head and neck cancer.

