Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting glioblastoma and its stem cells using novel small
molecule inhibitors of the mTOR pathway


Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), which functions in two distinct
multiprotein complexes, termed mTORC1 and mTORC2, is a downstream
signaling kinase in the PI3K/AKT pathway. mTOR is often deregulated in
glioblastoma (GBM), the most aggressive primary brain tumor in adults,
due to the frequent loss of tumor suppressor, PTEN. mTORC1 and mTORC2
control cell growth, proliferation, migration, survival, and stem cell
regulation in response to nutrients and growth factors. The presence of
stem cells within the tumor mass and the surrounding areas precludes the
possibility for elimination of GBM. Furthermore, the substrate of
activated AKT, the proline-rich AKT substrate of 40 kDa (PRAS40), is a
surrogate marker of activated AKT in response to mTOR inhibition therapy
in GBM patients. PRAS40 regulates mTORC1 and has recently been considered
as a target for cancer therapy. Rapamycin and its analogs failed in
clinical trials for GBM patients due to their incomplete inhibition of
mTORC1 as well as the activation of mitogenic pathways via negative
feedback loops. The aim of this study is to provide evidence that mTORC1
and mTORC2 inhibitors [Torin 1 (tricyclic benzonaphthyridinone
inhibitor), Torin 2, and XL 388
([7-(6-Amino-3-pyridinyl)-2,3-dihydro-1,4-benzoxazepin-4(5H)-yl][3-fluoro-2
-methyl-4-(methylsulfonyl)phenyl]-methanone)] effectively target
mTORC1/2, suppressing cell growth, dissemination, and altering
self-renewal properties of GBM stem cells. Results demonstrated that: 1)
A significant number of tumors showed an increased expression of
pAKTSer473 and pmTORSer2448 using immunohistochemistry, suggesting an
overactivation of mTOR pathway; 2) Co-expression of mTOR and stem cell
marker, nestin was evident in GBM tumors as shown by immunofluorescence
analysis, implying its role in stem cell regulation; 3) Torin 2, but not
Torin 1 or XL 388, was able to suppress mTORC1 activity completely as
shown by the reduced expression of its downstream substrate
pS6KSer235/236 in a dose-dependent manner; 4) Torin 1, Torin 2, and XL
388 inhibited the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and PRAS40; 5) Torin 1, Torin
2, and XL 388 suppressed the mTORC2 activity as reported by complete
dephosphorylation of pAKTSer473; 6) Functional analysis revealed that
Torin 1, Torin 2, and XL 388 effectively suppressed proliferation as
shown by MTT analysis and S-phase entry as evidenced by EdU
incorporation; 7) Both Torin 1 and Torin 2 inhibited GBM cell migration,
however XL 388 was ineffective; 8) Torin 1 and Torin 2 suppressed the
self-renewal of GBM stem cells and inhibited their proliferation, XL 388
remained ineffective. These results suggested that Torin 1 and Torin 2,
but not XL 388 are useful in suppressing mTORC1 and mTORC2, thereby
inhibiting GBM cell proliferation and dissemination. Moreover, Torin 1
and Torin 2 were effective in inhibiting stem cell self-renewal,
underscoring their potential use for the treatment of GBM.

