Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of EMT inhibitors using novel zebrafish reporter
lines


The Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) plays a crucial role
during development and aberrant reactivation of EMT in tumor cells
promotes metastasis and drug resistance. Mechanisms that control EMT
remain incompletely understood, hampering efforts to target EMT in cancer
patients. To identify upstream inducers and downstream effectors of EMT
we have developed a novel zebrafish neural crest (NC) EMT reporter line,
Tg(snail1b:GFP), for in vivo screening of EMT and cell migration
inhibitors. After screening a number of candidate kinase inhibitors for
their ability to block NC migration in live Tg(snail1b:GFP) embryos, we
found that the AXL receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, TP-0903
(HCI-2084), potently blocks hindbrain morphogenesis and cranial NC cell
migration. Treatment of embryos at the 3-somite stage with TP-0903
significantly decreases twist1a expression, a key regulator of EMT,
blocks differentiation of dlx2a-expressing chondrogenic precursors, and
instead promotes the differentiation of mitfa-expressing melanophore
precursors that form adjacent to the neural tube. RNA-Seq analysis
revealed that TP-0903 treated embryos have a significant upregulation of
retinoic acid (RA) signaling. Co-treatment of TP-0903 with DEAB, an RA
inhibitor, rescues the hindbrain and NC migration and differentiation
defects caused by TP-0903 treatment. We are currently investigating the
potential role of AXL in NC cell migration and differentiation, and
evaluating TP-0903 as a possible therapy for neuroblastoma, by using the
zebrafish neuroblastoma pre-clinical model and human neuroblastoma cells
in vitro.

