Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-215 is a tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer in vitro and in
vivo


Introduction:Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common types of
cancers worldwide and it is the third leading cause of cancer-related
death. Therefore, several efforts have been made to identify not only new
diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers, but also therapeutic
targets. One of the promising approaches is the characterization of the
tumors using microRNAs (miRNAs).Patients and Methods:We have analyzed
expression profiles of 667 miRNAs in 8 patients diagnosed for CRC and 8
paired adjacent non-tumoral tissues using TaqMan Low Density miRNA
arrays. We have found miR-215 to be one of the most deregulated miRNAs,
therefore its expression was further validated on independent cohort of
250 paired samples and correlated with clinicopathological features of
the patients. Consequently, involvement of this miRNA in CRC pathogenesis
was investigated using numerous in vitro and in vivo assays.Results:By
use of miRNA expression profiling we have identified miR-215 to be highly
down-regulated in tumor tissue of CRC patients (P Introduction:Colorectal
cancer (CRC) is one of the most common types of cancers worldwide and it
is the third leading cause of cancer-related death. Therefore, several
efforts have been made to identify not only new diagnostic, prognostic
and predictive biomarkers, but also therapeutic targets. One of the
promising approaches is the characterization of the tumors using
microRNAs (miRNAs).Patients and Methods:We have analyzed expression
profiles of 667 miRNAs in 8 patients diagnosed for CRC and 8 paired
adjacent non-tumoral tissues using TaqMan Low Density miRNA arrays. We
have found miR-215 to be one of the most deregulated miRNAs, therefore
its expression was further validated on independent cohort of 250 paired
samples and correlated with clinicopathological features of the patients.
Consequently, involvement of this miRNA in CRC pathogenesis was
investigated using numerous in vitro and in vivo assays.Results:By use of
miRNA expression profiling we have identified miR-215 to be highly
down-regulated in tumor tissue of CRC patients (P < 0,0001). Subsequent
validation on independent cohort of 250 paired samples of tumor tissues
and adjacent non-tumor tissues confirmed this result, moreover,
correlation between low expression of this miRNA and clinical stage (P
Introduction:Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common types of
cancers worldwide and it is the third leading cause of cancer-related
death. Therefore, several efforts have been made to identify not only new
diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers, but also therapeutic
targets. One of the promising approaches is the characterization of the
tumors using microRNAs (miRNAs).Patients and Methods:We have analyzed
expression profiles of 667 miRNAs in 8 patients diagnosed for CRC and 8
paired adjacent non-tumoral tissues using TaqMan Low Density miRNA
arrays. We have found miR-215 to be one of the most deregulated miRNAs,
therefore its expression was further validated on independent cohort of
250 paired samples and correlated with clinicopathological features of
the patients. Consequently, involvement of this miRNA in CRC pathogenesis
was investigated using numerous in vitro and in vivo assays.Results:By
use of miRNA expression profiling we have identified miR-215 to be highly
down-regulated in tumor tissue of CRC patients (P < 0,0001). Subsequent
validation on independent cohort of 250 paired samples of tumor tissues
and adjacent non-tumor tissues confirmed this result, moreover,
correlation between low expression of this miRNA and clinical stage (P <
0.0001) and lymph node metastasis (P Introduction:Colorectal cancer (CRC)
is one of the most common types of cancers worldwide and it is the third
leading cause of cancer-related death. Therefore, several efforts have
been made to identify not only new diagnostic, prognostic and predictive
biomarkers, but also therapeutic targets. One of the promising approaches
is the characterization of the tumors using microRNAs (miRNAs).Patients
and Methods:We have analyzed expression profiles of 667 miRNAs in 8
patients diagnosed for CRC and 8 paired adjacent non-tumoral tissues
using TaqMan Low Density miRNA arrays. We have found miR-215 to be one of
the most deregulated miRNAs, therefore its expression was further
validated on independent cohort of 250 paired samples and correlated with
clinicopathological features of the patients. Consequently, involvement
of this miRNA in CRC pathogenesis was investigated using numerous in
vitro and in vivo assays.Results:By use of miRNA expression profiling we
have identified miR-215 to be highly down-regulated in tumor tissue of
CRC patients (P < 0,0001). Subsequent validation on independent cohort of
250 paired samples of tumor tissues and adjacent non-tumor tissues
confirmed this result, moreover, correlation between low expression of
this miRNA and clinical stage (P < 0.0001) and lymph node metastasis (P <
0.0001) has been observed. In addition, significantly reduced levels of
miR-215 have been detected in metastatic tissue (P
Introduction:Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common types of
cancers worldwide and it is the third leading cause of cancer-related
death. Therefore, several efforts have been made to identify not only new
diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers, but also therapeutic
targets. One of the promising approaches is the characterization of the
tumors using microRNAs (miRNAs).Patients and Methods:We have analyzed
expression profiles of 667 miRNAs in 8 patients diagnosed for CRC and 8
paired adjacent non-tumoral tissues using TaqMan Low Density miRNA
arrays. We have found miR-215 to be one of the most deregulated miRNAs,
therefore its expression was further validated on independent cohort of
250 paired samples and correlated with clinicopathological features of
the patients. Consequently, involvement of this miRNA in CRC pathogenesis
was investigated using numerous in vitro and in vivo assays.Results:By
use of miRNA expression profiling we have identified miR-215 to be highly
down-regulated in tumor tissue of CRC patients (P < 0,0001). Subsequent
validation on independent cohort of 250 paired samples of tumor tissues
and adjacent non-tumor tissues confirmed this result, moreover,
correlation between low expression of this miRNA and clinical stage (P <
0.0001) and lymph node metastasis (P < 0.0001) has been observed. In
addition, significantly reduced levels of miR-215 have been detected in
metastatic tissue (P < 0.0001) compared to primary tumor tissue and low
expression of miR-215 was associated with shorter disease free survival
(P = 0.0403). Subsequently, in vitro analyses have been performed using
stable colorectal cancer cell lines in which the level of miR-215 was
increased using transient or stable transfection. Higher levels of
miR-215 lead to the cell cycle arrest in G1 phase of HCT-116+/+ cells (P
= 0.01) and in G2/M phase of DLD-1 cells (P = 0.05), HCT-116-/- cells (P
Introduction:Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common types of
cancers worldwide and it is the third leading cause of cancer-related
death. Therefore, several efforts have been made to identify not only new
diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers, but also therapeutic
targets. One of the promising approaches is the characterization of the
tumors using microRNAs (miRNAs).Patients and Methods:We have analyzed
expression profiles of 667 miRNAs in 8 patients diagnosed for CRC and 8
paired adjacent non-tumoral tissues using TaqMan Low Density miRNA
arrays. We have found miR-215 to be one of the most deregulated miRNAs,
therefore its expression was further validated on independent cohort of
250 paired samples and correlated with clinicopathological features of
the patients. Consequently, involvement of this miRNA in CRC pathogenesis
was investigated using numerous in vitro and in vivo assays.Results:By
use of miRNA expression profiling we have identified miR-215 to be highly
down-regulated in tumor tissue of CRC patients (P < 0,0001). Subsequent
validation on independent cohort of 250 paired samples of tumor tissues
and adjacent non-tumor tissues confirmed this result, moreover,
correlation between low expression of this miRNA and clinical stage (P <
0.0001) and lymph node metastasis (P < 0.0001) has been observed. In
addition, significantly reduced levels of miR-215 have been detected in
metastatic tissue (P < 0.0001) compared to primary tumor tissue and low
expression of miR-215 was associated with shorter disease free survival
(P = 0.0403). Subsequently, in vitro analyses have been performed using
stable colorectal cancer cell lines in which the level of miR-215 was
increased using transient or stable transfection. Higher levels of
miR-215 lead to the cell cycle arrest in G1 phase of HCT-116+/+ cells (P
= 0.01) and in G2/M phase of DLD-1 cells (P = 0.05), HCT-116-/- cells (P
< 0.001) and HT-29 cells (P = 0.01), increased apoptosis of HCT-116+/+
cells (P Introduction:Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common
types of cancers worldwide and it is the third leading cause of
cancer-related death. Therefore, several efforts have been made to
identify not only new diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers,
but also therapeutic targets. One of the promising approaches is the
characterization of the tumors using microRNAs (miRNAs).Patients and
Methods:We have analyzed expression profiles of 667 miRNAs in 8 patients
diagnosed for CRC and 8 paired adjacent non-tumoral tissues using TaqMan
Low Density miRNA arrays. We have found miR-215 to be one of the most
deregulated miRNAs, therefore its expression was further validated on
independent cohort of 250 paired samples and correlated with
clinicopathological features of the patients. Consequently, involvement
of this miRNA in CRC pathogenesis was investigated using numerous in
vitro and in vivo assays.Results:By use of miRNA expression profiling we
have identified miR-215 to be highly down-regulated in tumor tissue of
CRC patients (P < 0,0001). Subsequent validation on independent cohort of
250 paired samples of tumor tissues and adjacent non-tumor tissues
confirmed this result, moreover, correlation between low expression of
this miRNA and clinical stage (P < 0.0001) and lymph node metastasis (P <
0.0001) has been observed. In addition, significantly reduced levels of
miR-215 have been detected in metastatic tissue (P < 0.0001) compared to
primary tumor tissue and low expression of miR-215 was associated with
shorter disease free survival (P = 0.0403). Subsequently, in vitro
analyses have been performed using stable colorectal cancer cell lines in
which the level of miR-215 was increased using transient or stable
transfection. Higher levels of miR-215 lead to the cell cycle arrest in
G1 phase of HCT-116+/+ cells (P = 0.01) and in G2/M phase of DLD-1 cells
(P = 0.05), HCT-116-/- cells (P < 0.001) and HT-29 cells (P = 0.01),
increased apoptosis of HCT-116+/+ cells (P < 0.001), reduced migration of
DLD-1 cells (P Introduction:Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most
common types of cancers worldwide and it is the third leading cause of
cancer-related death. Therefore, several efforts have been made to
identify not only new diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers,
but also therapeutic targets. One of the promising approaches is the
characterization of the tumors using microRNAs (miRNAs).Patients and
Methods:We have analyzed expression profiles of 667 miRNAs in 8 patients
diagnosed for CRC and 8 paired adjacent non-tumoral tissues using TaqMan
Low Density miRNA arrays. We have found miR-215 to be one of the most
deregulated miRNAs, therefore its expression was further validated on
independent cohort of 250 paired samples and correlated with
clinicopathological features of the patients. Consequently, involvement
of this miRNA in CRC pathogenesis was investigated using numerous in
vitro and in vivo assays.Results:By use of miRNA expression profiling we
have identified miR-215 to be highly down-regulated in tumor tissue of
CRC patients (P < 0,0001). Subsequent validation on independent cohort of
250 paired samples of tumor tissues and adjacent non-tumor tissues
confirmed this result, moreover, correlation between low expression of
this miRNA and clinical stage (P < 0.0001) and lymph node metastasis (P <
0.0001) has been observed. In addition, significantly reduced levels of
miR-215 have been detected in metastatic tissue (P < 0.0001) compared to
primary tumor tissue and low expression of miR-215 was associated with
shorter disease free survival (P = 0.0403). Subsequently, in vitro
analyses have been performed using stable colorectal cancer cell lines in
which the level of miR-215 was increased using transient or stable
transfection. Higher levels of miR-215 lead to the cell cycle arrest in
G1 phase of HCT-116+/+ cells (P = 0.01) and in G2/M phase of DLD-1 cells
(P = 0.05), HCT-116-/- cells (P < 0.001) and HT-29 cells (P = 0.01),
increased apoptosis of HCT-116+/+ cells (P < 0.001), reduced migration of
DLD-1 cells (P < 0.001) and HCT-116+/+ cells (P Introduction:Colorectal
cancer (CRC) is one of the most common types of cancers worldwide and it
is the third leading cause of cancer-related death. Therefore, several
efforts have been made to identify not only new diagnostic, prognostic
and predictive biomarkers, but also therapeutic targets. One of the
promising approaches is the characterization of the tumors using
microRNAs (miRNAs).Patients and Methods:We have analyzed expression
profiles of 667 miRNAs in 8 patients diagnosed for CRC and 8 paired
adjacent non-tumoral tissues using TaqMan Low Density miRNA arrays. We
have found miR-215 to be one of the most deregulated miRNAs, therefore
its expression was further validated on independent cohort of 250 paired
samples and correlated with clinicopathological features of the patients.
Consequently, involvement of this miRNA in CRC pathogenesis was
investigated using numerous in vitro and in vivo assays.Results:By use of
miRNA expression profiling we have identified miR-215 to be highly
down-regulated in tumor tissue of CRC patients (P < 0,0001). Subsequent
validation on independent cohort of 250 paired samples of tumor tissues
and adjacent non-tumor tissues confirmed this result, moreover,
correlation between low expression of this miRNA and clinical stage (P <
0.0001) and lymph node metastasis (P < 0.0001) has been observed. In
addition, significantly reduced levels of miR-215 have been detected in
metastatic tissue (P < 0.0001) compared to primary tumor tissue and low
expression of miR-215 was associated with shorter disease free survival
(P = 0.0403). Subsequently, in vitro analyses have been performed using
stable colorectal cancer cell lines in which the level of miR-215 was
increased using transient or stable transfection. Higher levels of
miR-215 lead to the cell cycle arrest in G1 phase of HCT-116+/+ cells (P
= 0.01) and in G2/M phase of DLD-1 cells (P = 0.05), HCT-116-/- cells (P
< 0.001) and HT-29 cells (P = 0.01), increased apoptosis of HCT-116+/+
cells (P < 0.001), reduced migration of DLD-1 cells (P < 0.001) and
HCT-116+/+ cells (P < 0.001) and decreased proliferation activity of all
analyzed cell lines (P Introduction:Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the
most common types of cancers worldwide and it is the third leading cause
of cancer-related death. Therefore, several efforts have been made to
identify not only new diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers,
but also therapeutic targets. One of the promising approaches is the
characterization of the tumors using microRNAs (miRNAs).Patients and
Methods:We have analyzed expression profiles of 667 miRNAs in 8 patients
diagnosed for CRC and 8 paired adjacent non-tumoral tissues using TaqMan
Low Density miRNA arrays. We have found miR-215 to be one of the most
deregulated miRNAs, therefore its expression was further validated on
independent cohort of 250 paired samples and correlated with
clinicopathological features of the patients. Consequently, involvement
of this miRNA in CRC pathogenesis was investigated using numerous in
vitro and in vivo assays.Results:By use of miRNA expression profiling we
have identified miR-215 to be highly down-regulated in tumor tissue of
CRC patients (P < 0,0001). Subsequent validation on independent cohort of
250 paired samples of tumor tissues and adjacent non-tumor tissues
confirmed this result, moreover, correlation between low expression of
this miRNA and clinical stage (P < 0.0001) and lymph node metastasis (P <
0.0001) has been observed. In addition, significantly reduced levels of
miR-215 have been detected in metastatic tissue (P < 0.0001) compared to
primary tumor tissue and low expression of miR-215 was associated with
shorter disease free survival (P = 0.0403). Subsequently, in vitro
analyses have been performed using stable colorectal cancer cell lines in
which the level of miR-215 was increased using transient or stable
transfection. Higher levels of miR-215 lead to the cell cycle arrest in
G1 phase of HCT-116+/+ cells (P = 0.01) and in G2/M phase of DLD-1 cells
(P = 0.05), HCT-116-/- cells (P < 0.001) and HT-29 cells (P = 0.01),
increased apoptosis of HCT-116+/+ cells (P < 0.001), reduced migration of
DLD-1 cells (P < 0.001) and HCT-116+/+ cells (P < 0.001) and decreased
proliferation activity of all analyzed cell lines (P < 0.001). Using
qRT-PCR we have validated several predicted targets of miR-215 including
XIAP, CD164, ALCAM or HOXB9. Finally, we have established human tumor
xenografts in immunodeficient mice. We have observed that HCT-116+/+
transduced with vector containing precursor of miR-215 were associated
with the slower growth of the tumors in vivo (N = 5; P =
0.04).Conclusions:The reduced expression of miR-215 has been observed in
several cancers, therefore we presume that this miRNA functions as an
important tumor suppressor. The results of our study indicate that
miR-215 could serve as a new diagnostic and prognostic biomarker as well
as potential therapeutic target for the treatment of CRC patients.The
work has been supported by IGA MZCR NT13549-4/2012, NT13860-4/2012,
NT13547-4/2012 and NT13514-4/2012.

