Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ACP-196: a novel covalent Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) inhibitor
with improved selectivity and in vivo target coverage in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients


Ibrutinib, a first generation Btk inhibitor, is approved for the
treatment of CLL and mantle cell lymphoma; known toxicities include
atrial fibrillation, diarrhea, rash, arthralgia and bleeding events (1).
Recent reports show ibrutinib's off target effects may negatively impact
its potential for combined therapy with anti-CD20 antibodies (2,3). Here
we describe the pharmacologic characterization of ACP-196 a potent, novel
second generation Btk inhibitor, which binds covalently to Cys481 with
improved selectivity and in vivo target coverage.Compared to ibrutinib
and CC-292, ACP-196 demonstrated higher selectivity for Btk when profiled
against a panel of 395 non-mutant kinases (1 M) in a competitive binding
assay. IC50 determinations on 9 kinases with a Cys in the same position
as Btk showed ACP-196 to be the most selective. The improved selectivity
is related to the reduced intrinsic reactivity of ACP-196's electrophile.
Importantly, unlike ibrutinib, ACP-196 did not inhibit EGFR, Itk or Txk.
Phosphoflow assays on EGFR expressing cell lines confirmed ibrutinib's
EGFR inhibition (EC50: 47-66 nM) with no inhibition observed for ACP-196
at 10 M. These data may explain the ibrutinib-related incidence of
diarrhea and rash. Ibrutinib's potency on Itk and Txk may explain why it
interferes with cell-mediated anti-tumor activities of therapeutic CD20
antibodies and immune-mediated killing in the tumor microenvironment
(2,3).In human whole blood, ACP-196 and ibrutinib showed robust and
equipotent inhibitory activity on B-cell receptor induced responses in
the low nM range, whereas CC-292 was 10-20 fold less potent. In vivo,
oral administration of ACP-196 in mice resulted in dose-dependent
inhibition of anti-IgM-induced CD86 expression in CD19+ splenocytes with
an ED50 of 0.34 mg/kg compared to 0.91 mg/kg for ibrutinib. A similar
model was used to compare the duration of Btk inhibition after a single
oral dose of 25 mg/kg. ACP-196 and ibrutinib inhibited CD86 expression
>90% at 3h and 50% at 24h postdose. In contrast, CC-292 inhibited 50% at
3h and 20% at 24h postdose.An ELISA based Btk target occupancy assay was
developed to measure target coverage in preclinical and clinical studies.
In healthy volunteers, ACP-196 at an oral dose of 100 mg QD showed >90%
target coverage over a 24h period. Btk occupancy and regulation of the PD
markers (CD69 and CD86) correlated with PK parameters for exposure. In
CLL patients, after 7 days of dosing with ACP-196 at 200 mg QD, 94% Btk
target occupancy was observed compared with 80% reported for ibrutinib at
420 mg QD (4).In conclusion, ACP-196 is a novel Btk inhibitor with key
pharmacologic differentiators versus ibrutinib and CC-292. ACP-196 is
currently being evaluated in clinical trials.1. IMBRUVICA package insert
20142. Rajasekaran Blood 2014 Abstr # 31183. Da Roit Haematologica 20144.
Byrd NEJM 2013

