Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aspirin attenuates tumor initiating cell growth and induces
reprogramming factors of mesenchymal to epithelial transition in breast
cancer cell


Acetyl Salicylic Acid (ASA) also known as aspirin, a classic,
non-steroidal, anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs) is widely used to relieve
minor aches and pains and to reduce fever. Epidemiological studies and
other experimental studies suggest that ASA use reduces the risk of
different cancers including breast cancer (BC) and may be used as a
chemo-preventive agent against BC and other cancers. These studies have
raised the tempting possibility that ASA could serve as a preventive
medicine for BC. However, lack of in-depth knowledge of the mechanism of
action of ASA reshapes the debate of risk and benefit of using ASA in
prevention. Our studies, using in vitro and in vivo tumor xenograft
model, show a strong beneficial effect of ASA in the prevention of breast
carcinogenesis. We find ASA not only prevents breast tumor cell growth in
vitro and tumor growth in nude mice xenograft model through the induction
of apoptosis, it also significantly reduces the growth of tumor
initiating cells (TICs)/ cancer stem cells (CSCs) and delayed the
formation of a palpable tumor. Moreover, ASA regulates other
pathophysiological events in breast carcinogenesis, such as reprogramming
the mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) and delaying in vitro
migration in BC cells. The tumor growth-inhibitory as well as
reprogramming roles of ASA could be mediated through inhibition of
TGF--signaling pathway, which is associated with growth, motility,
invasion and metastasis in advanced breast cancers. Collectively, ASA has
a therapeutic or preventive potential by attacking possible target such
as TGF-- SMAD4 signaling in breast carcinogenesis.[This work is funded by
VA Merit Awarded Grant (SB and SKB)]Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

