Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual effects of podoplanin on the regulation of cancer cell gene
expression and platelet CLEC-2 signaling during cancer metastasis


Podoplanin (PDPN) is frequently up-regulated in squamous cell carcinoma
and is a marker for poor prognosis. PDPN facilitates cancer metastasis
and tumor cell-induced platelet aggregation (TCIPA) by modulating cancer
cell cytoskeleton reorganization and platelet C-type lectin-like receptor
2 (CLEC-2) activation. In this study, the effects of PDPN on the
regulation of cancer cell gene expression and platelet CLEC-2 signaling
are investigated. Using xenograft injection of the C6 glioma cells into
nude mice as a metastatic model, the cells that colonized at lung tissue
were isolated to establish a subline C6-Lung that was found to express
high levels of PDPN. Knockdown of PDPN expression in C6-Lung resulted in
the abrogation of TCIPA, indicating that PDPN plays a key role in
platelet activation and TCIPA. Microarray analyses revealed differential
gene expression signatures between low and high PDPN-expressed cells.
Several genes were up-regulated (Sncg, Timp1, Mmp3 and Pla1a) and
down-regulated (Calcb, Filip1, Agrn and Itga4) significantly in high
PDPN-expressed C6-Lung cells. On the other hand, distinct platelet
protein tyrosine phosphorylation profiles were revealed when platelets
were treated with different CLEC-2 agonists including PDPN, aggretin and
fucoidan. In addition to the activation of common CLEC-2 signaling
proteins such as Src family kinase, Syk, and phospholipase C2, Akt1/PDK1
and PKC were identified as the two novel signaling pathways activated by
PDPN, indicating the presence of SFK-independent pathway downstream of
CLEC-2. Our data together provide a definitive evidence for the presence
of a unique network for PDPN-regulated cancer cell gene expression and
platelet CLEC-2 signaling that shed a new insight for the functional
roles of PDPN in cancer metastasis.

