Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARHI plays a critical role in ovarian cancer tumor dormancy by
inhibition of angiogenesis switch


Each year in the US, more than 22,000 women develop ovarian cancer.
Despite progress in surgery and chemotherapy, the disease still proves
lethal in 70% of cases. One of the most important factors contributing to
poor outcomes is the ability of drug resistant ovarian cancer cells to
remain dormant for years after treatment, only to grow progressively and
kill their host. Judging from sites of recurrence, most dormant ovarian
cancer cells are found on the surface of the peritoneal cavity, often in
small, poorly vascularized collagenous scars observed at second look
operations. Our group has found that autophagy and tumor dormancy can be
regulated by an imprinted tumor suppressor gene, ARHI (DIRAS3), which is
downregulated in 60% of ovarian cancers.Re-expression of ARHI induces
autophagy by inhibiting PI3K and mTOR signaling, displacing Bcl-2 from
Beclin to form the autophagy initiating complex, inducing ATG4 and
decorating the autophagosome membrane, co-localizing with LC3II.
Re-expression of ARHI in cell culture produces cell death within 72 hours
associated with necroptosis, whereas re-expression of ARHI in xenografts
produces cell growth arrest and tumor dormancy. Our current experiments
were designed to determine whether ARHI inhibition of angiogenesis could
play an important role in tumor dormancy in ovarian cancer. By analysis
of cell culture lysates from SKOv3-ARHI ovarian cancer cells with
antibody array, we confirmed that induction of ARHI reduces VEGF, bFGF
and TIMP1 pro-angiogenic protein expression and increases anti-angiogenic
TSP-1. In line with this, co-culture of human ovarian SKOv3-ARHI cells
with 2H11 murine endothelial cells stimulated the formation of murine
endothelial tubes. Addition of exogenous bFGF enhanced endothelial tube
formation, while induction of ARHI markedly decreased tube formation
associated with a decrease in bFGF. Furthermore, by immunohistochemical
staining dormant (DOX) SKOv3-ARHI xenografts, we demonstrated that
Induction of ARHI in human cancer xenografts was associated with lower Ki
67 and MVD. Similarly, Ki67 and MVD were measured in primary human
ovarian cancers and in matched positive second look specimens from
archival clinical specimens (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center).
Second look specimens exhibited significantly lower Ki-67 (PEach year in
the US, more than 22,000 women develop ovarian cancer. Despite progress
in surgery and chemotherapy, the disease still proves lethal in 70% of
cases. One of the most important factors contributing to poor outcomes is
the ability of drug resistant ovarian cancer cells to remain dormant for
years after treatment, only to grow progressively and kill their host.
Judging from sites of recurrence, most dormant ovarian cancer cells are
found on the surface of the peritoneal cavity, often in small, poorly
vascularized collagenous scars observed at second look operations. Our
group has found that autophagy and tumor dormancy can be regulated by an
imprinted tumor suppressor gene, ARHI (DIRAS3), which is downregulated in
60% of ovarian cancers.Re-expression of ARHI induces autophagy by
inhibiting PI3K and mTOR signaling, displacing Bcl-2 from Beclin to form
the autophagy initiating complex, inducing ATG4 and decorating the
autophagosome membrane, co-localizing with LC3II. Re-expression of ARHI
in cell culture produces cell death within 72 hours associated with
necroptosis, whereas re-expression of ARHI in xenografts produces cell
growth arrest and tumor dormancy. Our current experiments were designed
to determine whether ARHI inhibition of angiogenesis could play an
important role in tumor dormancy in ovarian cancer. By analysis of cell
culture lysates from SKOv3-ARHI ovarian cancer cells with antibody array,
we confirmed that induction of ARHI reduces VEGF, bFGF and TIMP1
pro-angiogenic protein expression and increases anti-angiogenic TSP-1. In
line with this, co-culture of human ovarian SKOv3-ARHI cells with 2H11
murine endothelial cells stimulated the formation of murine endothelial
tubes. Addition of exogenous bFGF enhanced endothelial tube formation,
while induction of ARHI markedly decreased tube formation associated with
a decrease in bFGF. Furthermore, by immunohistochemical staining dormant
(DOX) SKOv3-ARHI xenografts, we demonstrated that Induction of ARHI in
human cancer xenografts was associated with lower Ki 67 and MVD.
Similarly, Ki67 and MVD were measured in primary human ovarian cancers
and in matched positive second look specimens from archival clinical
specimens (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center). Second look specimens
exhibited significantly lower Ki-67 (P<0.0001) and MVD (PEach year in the
US, more than 22,000 women develop ovarian cancer. Despite progress in
surgery and chemotherapy, the disease still proves lethal in 70% of
cases. One of the most important factors contributing to poor outcomes is
the ability of drug resistant ovarian cancer cells to remain dormant for
years after treatment, only to grow progressively and kill their host.
Judging from sites of recurrence, most dormant ovarian cancer cells are
found on the surface of the peritoneal cavity, often in small, poorly
vascularized collagenous scars observed at second look operations. Our
group has found that autophagy and tumor dormancy can be regulated by an
imprinted tumor suppressor gene, ARHI (DIRAS3), which is downregulated in
60% of ovarian cancers.Re-expression of ARHI induces autophagy by
inhibiting PI3K and mTOR signaling, displacing Bcl-2 from Beclin to form
the autophagy initiating complex, inducing ATG4 and decorating the
autophagosome membrane, co-localizing with LC3II. Re-expression of ARHI
in cell culture produces cell death within 72 hours associated with
necroptosis, whereas re-expression of ARHI in xenografts produces cell
growth arrest and tumor dormancy. Our current experiments were designed
to determine whether ARHI inhibition of angiogenesis could play an
important role in tumor dormancy in ovarian cancer. By analysis of cell
culture lysates from SKOv3-ARHI ovarian cancer cells with antibody array,
we confirmed that induction of ARHI reduces VEGF, bFGF and TIMP1
pro-angiogenic protein expression and increases anti-angiogenic TSP-1. In
line with this, co-culture of human ovarian SKOv3-ARHI cells with 2H11
murine endothelial cells stimulated the formation of murine endothelial
tubes. Addition of exogenous bFGF enhanced endothelial tube formation,
while induction of ARHI markedly decreased tube formation associated with
a decrease in bFGF. Furthermore, by immunohistochemical staining dormant
(DOX) SKOv3-ARHI xenografts, we demonstrated that Induction of ARHI in
human cancer xenografts was associated with lower Ki 67 and MVD.
Similarly, Ki67 and MVD were measured in primary human ovarian cancers
and in matched positive second look specimens from archival clinical
specimens (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center). Second look specimens
exhibited significantly lower Ki-67 (P<0.0001) and MVD (P<0.0001) than
did primary cancers. Altogether, our data suggested that ARHI plays a
critical role in ovarian cancer tumor dormancy by inhibition of
angiogenesis switch. Our better understanding of tumor cell dormancy will
lead to novel detection techniques in the clinic and therapeutic options
to prevent deadly tumor recurrence and metastasis.

