Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-17 and IL-17-producing cells associated with advanced stage or
poor prognosis in oral cancers, through enhancing tumor progression


Introduction: Interleukin 17 (IL-17) majorly produced by Th17 and Tc17
cells, contributes greatly in inflammatory associated diseases. However,
its presence was reported to suppress tumor growth by enhancing cytotoxic
T cell responses. On the contrary, through inducing angiogenesis, IL-17
appeared to promote tumor progression. Here we demonstrated IL-17 and
their producing cells directly correlating with advanced stage or poor
prognosis of oral cancer patients.Methods: Peripheral blood samples were
obtained from the oral patients in Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, and the
multi-color flow cytometric analysis and enzyme conjugated immunoassays
were utilized to identify the IL-17 producing T cell subsets and to
quantify the production of inflammation-associated cytokines. The effects
of IL-17 on the growth and invasion of oral cancer cells were determined
with the supplement with recombinant IL-17 (hIL-17) and cell culture
supernatant.Results: The significantly increased prevalence of
IL-17-producing T cells was correlated with clinical stage and the
patients peripheral blood mononuclear cells secreted higher amount of
IL-17 and other related factors. Such responses also appeared to be
associated with poor prognosis. Moreover, the stimulation of hIL-17
apparently induced cell proliferation, migration and invasion in oral
cancer cells, indicating that IL-17 directly contribute to tumor
progression.Conclusion: These findings suggest IL-17 and its related
factors are crucial to tumor development, and such responses may
therefore lead to the clinical impact of advanced stage or poor prognosis
in oral cancer.

