Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SHP2 expression and function in different subtypes of glioblastoma


SHP2, a Src-homology 2 domain (SH2)-containing tyrosine phosphatase
encoded by PTPN11, is a ubiquitously expressed cytoplasmic enzyme that
regulates events downstream of several growth factor and cytokine
receptors involved in survival, pro-migratory and differentiation
signaling. In the normal developing nervous system, SHP2 is involved in
neural stem cell self renewal. Dysregulation of SHP2 function has been
implicated in tumorigenesis and characterized as an activated downstream
regulator of oncogenes in gastric carcinoma, anaplastic large-cell
lymphoma, breast cancer and glioblastoma. In the context of glioblastoma,
we have shown that SHP2, and specifically its phosphatase activity, is
directly involved in EGFRvIII-induced oncogenesis. Our present research
aims at understanding the function of SHP2 within different glioma cell
types as well as the four characterized subtypes of glioblastoma (GBM).
Genomic analysis of SHP2 expression using the TCGA GBM cohort shows
differential expression among the recently characterized subtypes of
GBMs, with higher SHP2 mRNA expression in the classical subtype.
Additionally, SHP2 is preferentially expressed in glioma stem cells
versus differentiated cells isolated from the same patients. Furthermore,
our current analysis shows that reduction of SHP2 expression in glioma
stem cells affects the expression of genes linked to stemness. SHP2
PTPase function may therefore be a link between normal stem cell
proliferation and gliomagenesis induced by EGFR/RTK activated signaling.

