Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FAK inhibitors VS-6063 and VS-4718 target cancer stem cells:
Implications for TNBC sequential and combination therapies


Cancer stem cells (CSCs), a subpopulation of tumor cells characterized by
tumor-initiating capability and resistance to chemotherapy, are an
underlying cause of tumor progression and metastasis. In breast cancer,
CSCs can be identified by aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH) or CD44+/CD24-
expression separately, although combination of ALDH, CD44+, and CD24-
together may better describe the CSC population in breast cancer.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has been shown to lead to an increase in CSCs in
locally advanced breast cancer (Alamgeer et al., 2014, Br. Can. Res.
16:R14) which is associated with a significantly worse prognosis. It is
also evident that stem-like features of tumor cells are present in
metastatic breast cancer (Yu et al., 2013, Science 339:580) indicating
that targeting of CSCs may be valuable in metastatic disease. VS-6063 and
VS-4718 are orally bioavailable, potent and selective inhibitors of Focal
Adhesion Kinase (FAK). These agents preferentially target CSCs in
preclinical models and are currently in clinical development.Here we
report that VS-6063 and VS-4718 preferentially target CSCs in multiple
breast cancer models. Ex vivo treatment of explants from human breast
tumors with either VS-6063 or VS-4718 decreased the proportion of CSCs in
contrast to paclitaxel treatment which increased the proportion of CSCs.
In an MDA-MB-231 mouse xenograft model, in vivo treatment with VS-6063
decreased CSCs by more than 6-fold as demonstrated by limiting dilution
transplantation assay. Consistent with the notion that CSCs are
responsible for cancer relapse after chemotherapy, VS-6063 and VS-4718
substantially delayed tumor growth following cessation of paclitaxel or
cisplatin treatment in models of TNBC, including a patient-derived
xenograft. Furthermore, using an imaging-based 4T1-luciferase TNBC
orthotopic model, both VS-6063 and VS-4718 inhibited metastatic outgrowth
or induced regression of metastases after primary tumor resection,
whereas metastases progressed in all animals in the vehicle control
group.A multiplex assay for multiple CSC markers (ALDH1, CD44 and CD24)
was developed and validated in biopsies of primary patient tumors and
matched lymph node biopsies taken pre- and post-neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
CSCs, represented by the ALDH+ and/or CD44+/CD24- populations were
present at detectable levels in a high fraction of triple negative breast
cancer primary tumors.In summary, CSCs are readily detectable in primary
breast cancers at surgery, and VS-6063 and VS-4718 diminish the CSC
subpopulation in vitro, ex vivo and in xenograft models. This critical
subpopulation of CSCs is detectable in residual tumors after neoadjuvant
therapy, and may also be present in metastatic disease. CSC-targeted
agents such as VS-6063 or VS-4718 should be clinically tested in these
breast cancer settings to potentially delay time to relapse and improve
patient outcome.

