Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting lung cancer stem cells with inhibition of multiple drug
resistance by demethoxylcurcumin-carrying chitosan-antibody core-shell
nanoparticles


Lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) has been clinically realized to be one of the
most deadly malignant tumors with relatively low in 5-year survival rate.
High recurrence rates and drug-resistance potential have been reported in
LAC even after completion of combined therapy. Herein we demonstrate that
cisplatin treatment selecting for resistance with high self-renewal and
invasive capabilities in cisplatin-resistant LAC cell (CisR-LAC). For
overcoming the multi-drug resistance (MDR) in CisR-LAC, we designed a
multifunctional nanocarrier with enhanced targeting ability and
inhibition of MDR inhibition in CisR-LAC. The platform provide a high
anti-MDR efficacy via a facile synthesis scheme using an amphiphilic
chitosan to encapsulate a demethoxylcurcumin (DMC), as a core phase,
following surface modification of an anti-EGFR layer, forming a
CHC-DMC/anti-EGFR core-shell nanostructure. Experimental outcomes
revealed an enhanced therapeutic efficacy of the DMC, forming DMC
nano-precipitates in lysosome and endosome, as a result of efficient
cellular endocytosis of the core-shell nanoparticles, by a synergistic
action of both MDR inhibition and efficacious cell killing. Animal study
showed a significant therapeutic efficacy against CisR-LAC-xenograft lung
tumor using the core-shell nanocarriers, by a reduction of as high as
5-folded tumor volume compared with control groups. This result indicated
the multi-therapeutic efficacy of the multifunctional CHC-DMC/anti-EGFR
core-shell nanoparticle, providing a potential capability in anti-MDR LAC
for better clinical translation.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

