Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing therapies for rare tumors: Using mouse models of
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors to complement rare human samples
in drug screens


Rare cancers are defined by the US Orphan Drug Act as affecting Rare
cancers are defined by the US Orphan Drug Act as affecting <200,000
patients in the US. For patients with these cancers, there may be an
urgent need for new therapies; however, these rare cancers present
challenges to drug development. Because of the small number of patients,
the cancers are not well characterized, the molecular mechanisms may not
be well-understood, and there may not be adequate model systems available
for research and drug development.The Rare Tumors Initiative in the
Intramural Research Program at the National Cancer Institute is focusing
on overcoming hurdles in rare tumor research by developing new approaches
to treat malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST). MPNSTs occur
in younger adults with an incidence of 1 in 100,000, with a higher
incidence in patients with Neurofibromatosis type 1. Due to a limited
number of high quality human MPNST tumor lines, drug testing has been
challenging both in vitro and in vivo. A genetically engineered mouse
model carrying mutations in Nf1 and Trp53 develops MPNST spontaneously
starting around 3 months of age. We have generated tumor lines from over
30 independent mouse MPNSTs, from different sexes and genetic backgrounds
that we are using to test drugs in combination with available human MPNST
lines. We find good concordance between the mouse and human MPNST lines
in response to drugs. Furthermore, although the MPNST lines show good
dose response and high maximum response to many targeted compounds, the
concentrations of drug required to achieve inhibition is often high,
suggesting that one of the difficulties in developing MPNST therapy is
the inherent resistance of MPNST cells to drug inhibition.We will present
results of ongoing drug screens in panels of mouse and human MPNST cell
lines, using drugs that are in different phases of clinical trials or
approved for other diseases.

