Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilizing cobalt coordination chemistry as a traceless prodrug
strategy in targeted drug delivery


We recently reported the synthesis of albumin nanoparticles using cobalt
as a traceless, reductively labile crosslinker. Here, we report in vitro
characterization of particle uptake for fluorescently labeled cobalt
crosslinked albumin nanoparticles (Co-Alb-FITC NPs) via image-based flow
cytometry as well as preliminary toxicity data. Uptake of Co-Alb-FITC NPs
by gastric carcinoma cells (SNU-5) was rapid, but could be dramatically
reduced through the addition of an inhibitor of macropinocytosis. High
levels of non-specific uptake of other particle types were also observed
suggesting SNU-5 cells possess high macropinocytic activity. Cancers
harboring mutated Ras (>20% of all cancers) are known to take up protein
via macropinocytosis to satisfy metabolic demands. Because SNU-5 cells
are not known harbor mutated Ras, our findings may indicate that other
cancers rely on this mechanism as well, which would have important
implications for observing selectivity in active nanoparticle targeting
strategies. The Co-Alb NPs themselves were found to exhibit no inherent
toxicity. Based on these initial findings, Co-Alb NPs were loaded with
the active metabolite of camptothecin, SN-38, to explore their potential
as a delivery vector for hydrophobic drugs. An albumin-topotecan prodrug
conjugate was also synthesized by crosslinking the amine group in
topotecan with lysine residues in the protein, which should be applicable
to other amine-containing therapeutics. Characterization of drug loading
and release will be discussed along with preliminary in vitro
characterization.

