Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PLSCR1- a modifier of TGF signaling


The PLSCR family has been proposed to play a role in the redistribution
of plasma membrane phospholipids. Recent work on the PLSCRs has revealed
their additional functions such as signal transduction and lipid
metabolism. The most studied member of this family, PLSCR1, has been
shown to partition into lipid rafts implicating it in the regulation and
endocytic trafficking of receptor-signaling complexes, e.g. EGFR.
Additionally, PLSCR1 has been implicated in tumorigenesis although the
exact mechanism of PLSCR1 is still controversial.In a previous study, we
identified PLSCRs, as novel Cripto-1 (CR-1) binding proteins that might
modulate CR-1-dependent signaling pathways. In this study, we confirmed
that PLSCR1 and PLSCR3 bind to Cripto-1 but also that PLSCR1 also
inhibits TGF signaling via binding to the receptor complexes for the TGF
superfamily. We also showed that PLSCR1 mediates protein degradation of
type I receptors: Alk4 and TGFRI but not ActRBII, TGFBRII or
BMPRb.Additionally, we demonstrated that PLSCR1 is overexpressed in human
breast cancer tissue and in human breast cancer cell lines especially in
triple-negative MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468. We also showed that knockout
of PLSCR1 inhibits migration, invasion and anchorage independent growth
of MDA-MB-231, and that TGF influences PLSCR1 cellular distribution in
those cells.

