Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carbonylation and degradation of cardiac myosin binding protein C
serves as an indicator of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity


Dose-dependent oxidative stress by the anthracycline doxorubicin (Dox)
and other chemotherapeutic agents causes irreversible cardiac damage,
restricting their clinical effectiveness. We hypothesize that
irreversible protein oxidation caused by oxidative stress could be
correlated with physiological functional impairment. We focused our study
on protein carbonylation as an indicator of severe oxidative damage. We
identified a specific cardiac protein that showed selective carbonylation
under Dox-induced cardiotoxic conditions in a spontaneously hypertensive
rat (SHR) model and this protein was confirmed to be a 140 kDa cardiac
myosin binding protein C (MyBPC) using mass spectrometry. We further
analyzed and confirmed the carbonylation and degradation of this protein
using HL-1 cardiomyocytes under Dox-induced oxidative stress, and a
purified recombinant rat cardiac MyBPC under metal-catalyzed oxidative
stress conditions. Using HL-1 cells we demonstrated that carbonylated
MyBPC undergoes proteasome-mediated degradation under Dox-induced
oxidative stress. Using immunoprecipitation, co-sedimentation, and
actin-binding assays we confirmed the functional impairment of MyBPC as a
consequence of carbonylation. Carbonylation of recombinant MyBPC showed
significant impairment in its actin binding properties with a
dissociation constant of 7.351.9 M compared to 2.70.6 M for native MyBPC.
Overall, our findings indicate that MyBPC carbonylation serves as a
critical determinant of cardiotoxicity. We are currently investigating
the interaction of MyBPC with divalent metal ions and sites of
carbonylation under oxidative stress conditions.

