Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of TP53 mutation status with clinical outcomes in
patients with EGFR mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Introduction:Molecular characterization of tumors is critical in the
modern treatment of NSCLC. Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) and
p53 are commonly mutated genes in NSCLC with independent prognostic
implications, but the significance of the co-existence of these mutations
inpatients (pts) with Stage IV NSCLC is not well established. Herein, we
describe the relationship of EGFR and TP53 mutations (MT) in pts with
Stage 4 or recurrent NSCLC and their correlation with pt demographics and
therapeutic outcomes.Study Design:We conducted a retrospective analysis
of Stage 4 and recurrent EGFR MT (+) NSCLC pts with TP53 MT status
determined by the Gene Sequence Analysis Panel obtained at the Abramson
Cancer Center between 6/1/2012 and 2/1/2014. Overall survival (OS) and
progression-free survival (PFS) were estimated for the TP53 MT (+) and
wild type (WT) cohorts from the date of diagnosis.Results:Thirty-six EGFR
(+) pts were identified, of whom 26 (72%) were TP53 MT (+). Pt
characteristics were similar between cohorts, except for a higher rate of
bone metastasis in pts with p53 WT (p = 0.07, Table 1). Median potential
follow-up for OS was 15.1 mos. 60% of patients in TP53 WT group received
TKI compared to 69% in TP53 MT (+). Of the 36 pts, 9 (25%). have died. A
trend towards shorter median OS was seen in pts with p53 MT. (p = 0.08).
PFS did not correlate with p53 MT status (p =
0.53).Conclusion:Coexistence of p53 MT and EGFR MT may be associated with
shorter survival. Larger sample size and longer clinical follow up will
be necessary to determine if these differences are statistically
significant and whether TP53 MT status is an independent prognostic
factor in EGFR MT NSCLC.

