Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GenomeSpace: An environment for frictionless bioinformatics


Over the past several years, cancer genome characterization initiatives
such as The Cancer Genome Atlas and the International Cancer Genome
Consortium have produced an explosion of genomic data. These efforts,
together with the proliferation of repositories for small-molecule
screens and large-scale data production efforts to discover the breadth
of genomic variation in humans, offer a new era of potential for the
understanding of the basic mechanisms of cancer and identification of
novel treatments.Comprehensive analysis of these datasets requires the
coordinated use of Web-based applications and data repositories, desktop
analysis tools and visualizers, and single-purpose algorithms. However,
the effort required to transfer data between tools, convert between data
formats, and manage results often prevents researchers from utilizing the
wealth of methods available to them. Many integrative genomics and
translational bench to bedside discoveries are possible with combinations
of existing tools, but the necessary transitions between them puts them
out of the reach of most researchers.GenomeSpace,
http://www.genomespace.org, is an environment that brings together
diverse computational tools, enabling scientists without programming
skills to easily combine their capabilities. It aims to offer a common
space to create, manipulate and share an ever-growing range of genomic
analysis tools. GenomeSpace features support for cloud-based data storage
and analysis, multi-tool analytic workflows, automatic conversion of data
formats, and ease of connecting new tools to the environment. A set of
six GenomeSpace-enabled seed tools developed by collaborating
organizations provides a comprehensive platform for the analysis of
cancer data: Cytoscape (UCSD), Galaxy (Penn State University),
GenePattern (Broad Institute), Genomica (Weitzmann Institute),
Integrative Genomics Viewer (Broad Institute), and the UCSC Genome
Browser (UCSC). Its open architecture has driven its adoption by a number
of additional tools, including the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia,
Multiple Myeloma Genomics Portal, Project Achilles Portal, ArrayExpress,
and Cistrome, with new tools and resources being released regularly.We
show how researchers can use GenomeSpace to effortlessly combine the
capabilities of all of these tools in several cancer research scenarios.

