Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of miR-138 confers cancer stem cell
characteristics of renal cell carcinoma


Chemotherapy is the standard care for metastatic disease, in renal cell
carcinoma (RCC), the outcome of chemotherapy only prolongs short survival
of patients. The reason for the resistance of RCC to chemotherapy is not
fully understood, although it has been speculated that overabundance of
ATP-binding cassette (ABC)/p-glycoprotein transporter system in RCC might
be the reason to repel various chemotherapeutic agents away from the
cancer cell. Meanwhile, cancer stem cells (CSC) theory has also focused a
significant attention in recent years as a potential explanation for drug
resistance and metastasis of RCC. In this study, we demonstrate that drug
resistant RCC cells exhibit CSC phenotypes and miR-138 that is
significantly downregulated in RCC acted critical role in suppressing CSC
phenotype by targeting ABC transporter ABCA13 and oncogenic histone
methyltransferase EZH2. Importantly, miR-138 levels were significantly
enhanced by treatment of DNA hypomethylating agent (i.e., 5-aza) or
histone deactylases inhibitor (i.e., TSA). Epigenetic silencing of
tumor-suppressive micro-RNAs has been shown a key oncogenic mechanism for
the activation of oncogenes in tumors. Indeed, depletion of miR-138
promoted CSC phenotype followed by enhanced expressions of ABCA13 and
EZH2. Furthermore, a novel tumor suppressor DAB2IP can inhibit DNA
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) activity, which results in miR-138
expression. Taken together, this study identifies the new role of miR-138
in RCC-CSC and unveils a unique regulation of tumor suppressor protein in
DNMT1. Overall study provides not only a new biomarker of RCC-CSC and but
also potential therapeutic strategy of targeting drug resistant RCC.

