Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative tcga analyses identify key microRNAs involved in
chemoresistance


Objective. High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the most common
and lethal type of ovarian carcinoma. Our study aims to identify key
microRNAs (miRs) that are responsible for promoting chemoresistance in
HGSOC. Methods. We developed fast and robust computational algorithm to
identify miRs that are significantly associated with improved or worsened
survival in HGSOC patients. We subsequently used this algorithm to mine
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) ovarian cancer database to identify miRs
that are up-regulated in tumors from patients whose cancer had progressed
within 6 months of diagnosis (chemoresistant group) compared to tumors
from patients who had no disease progression for more than 2 years
(chemosensitive group). We also constructed miRNA-mRNA functional
networks for the key miRs identified. The biological roles of selected
miRs were subsequently examined in multiple chemoresistant (SKOV3-TR,
HeyA8-MDR, and A2780-CP20) ovarian cancer cell lines. Results. From our
integrative analyses, we identified several miRs being highly
up-regulated or down-regulated in chemoresistant HGSOC (pObjective.
High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the most common and lethal
type of ovarian carcinoma. Our study aims to identify key microRNAs
(miRs) that are responsible for promoting chemoresistance in HGSOC.
Methods. We developed fast and robust computational algorithm to identify
miRs that are significantly associated with improved or worsened survival
in HGSOC patients. We subsequently used this algorithm to mine The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) ovarian cancer database to identify miRs that are
up-regulated in tumors from patients whose cancer had progressed within 6
months of diagnosis (chemoresistant group) compared to tumors from
patients who had no disease progression for more than 2 years
(chemosensitive group). We also constructed miRNA-mRNA functional
networks for the key miRs identified. The biological roles of selected
miRs were subsequently examined in multiple chemoresistant (SKOV3-TR,
HeyA8-MDR, and A2780-CP20) ovarian cancer cell lines. Results. From our
integrative analyses, we identified several miRs being highly
up-regulated or down-regulated in chemoresistant HGSOC (p<0.05, top 10%).
To examine the functional roles of these miRs, we transfected miR mimics
and anti-miR constructs into taxane or platinum resistant cell lines. We
showed that anti-miR-1271 significantly enhanced the sensitivity of
taxane-resistant cancer cells (SKOV3-TR and HeyA8-MDR) to paclitaxel and
docetaxel treatments. In contrast, transfecting anti-miR-1271 did not
alter the sensitivity of A2780-CP20 cells to cisplatin treatment.
Conclusion. These data provide the first integrated and functional
approach for overcoming chemoresistance using miRs.

