Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral delivery of doxorubicin using bile enhancer for metronomic
maintenance chemotherapy


Conventional chemotherapy requires therapy holiday due to their toxic
adverse effects. However, the therapy holiday has been allowing cancer
cell to relapse and caused secondary metastasis to occur in other tissue.
On the contrast, metronomic maintenance chemotherapy (MMC) treats
anticancer drugs frequently to reduce the adverse effects from normal
tissues by maintaining low concentration in the blood. In this context,
an oral route is more suitable for MMC than a parenteral route. Our oral
delivery system that uses electrochemical property of bile acid
derivatives increases bioavailability of doxorubicin (DOX) from below 5%
to 26% by eluding p-gp. The antitumor studies showed that 5mg/kg/day oral
DOX complex inhibited 70% of tumor volume in C3H mice model bearing SCC7
tumor. The H&E staining of intestines and liver and the blood analysis
proved that there were no histological and hematological toxicities. In
addition, low dose of the DOX complex affects cell cycle regulation to
arrest cancer cells. The concentration of 10nM, 30nM of DOX restricted
the cell cycle at checkpoints in G1 phase of MCF-7 cells which are p-53
wild type and checkpoints in G2-M phase of MDA-MB 231 cells which are
p-53 disruptive type. When MK8776, a inhibitor of cell cycle checkpoints,
is treated with the low concentration of DOX, the cancer cells went
through apoptosis or senescence depending on a type of cancer. In
conclusion, our oral delivery of doxorubicin can offer safe and effective
chemotherapy.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

