Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2 overexpression in myeloma patients shortens survival and
in-vitro data supports a potential new targeted treatment strategy


Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) induces methylation at histone 3
lysine 27 (H3K27), thought to have a repressive effect on target gene
expression. Activating mutations in EZH2 have been shown to drive
lymphomas and overexpression linked to poor prognosis in solid tumors. In
normal plasma cell development EZH2 expression is downregulated on exit
from the germinal centre but in myeloma (MM) expression has been shown to
increase with disease progression. Recent work suggests high expression
of the H3K36 methyltransferase MMSET sensitizes cells to EZH2 inhibition.
We are seeking to further investigate the role of EZH2 in MM.Data were
analyzed from newly diagnosed MM patients in several large clinical
trials (Whole-exome sequencing, n = 463 UK Myeloma XI, Affymetrix gene
expression array (GEP), n = 259 UK Myeloma IX and n = 1213 UAMS Total
Therapy Protocols).Across the datasets, high expression of EZH2 mRNA
shortened patient survival (e.g. UK IX median OS, 29.9 months vs 45.1
months, Log-rank p = 0.005), remaining significant on multivariate
analyses and across GEP defined molecular subgroups. Of note, the
proliferative subgroup had a higher mean expression of EZH2 (9.56 vs
8.48, t-test p = 5.953e-42) as did high risk patients defined by GEP 70
score (9.61 vs 8.46, t-test p = 1.993e-40) suggesting a link to a more
aggressive disease phenotype.There were no mutations in EZH2. This
contrasts with frequent mutations seen in malignancies at earlier stages
of B cell development e.g. DLBCL. Of note, 3% of MM patients had a
potentially inactivating mutation or deletion in the gene encoding the
H3K27 demethylase, KDM6A and significantly shorter OS than those without
(% alive 2 yr: Mutated 51% (CI 30-85) vs 80% (CI 77-84), Log-rank p =
0.0498). Such mutations may increase H3K27 methylation, potentially
sensitizing patients to EZH2 inhibition.To study the biological
implications of our results we tested the effect of inhibition of EZH2
(EZH2i), using a small molecule EPZ005687, in a panel of MM cell lines
representing the epi/genetic diversity of MM. We saw a reduction in total
cell number and% viability at 6 days of EZH2i (2-4uM) in 5/8 cell lines
with evidence of dose dependent induction of apoptosis. All cell lines
(except LP1) had similar levels of EZH2 protein at baseline and the
responding cell lines had no unifying epi/genetic anomalies, suggesting
response is not specific to either MMSET high or KDM6A mut/del cell
lines. 6 days of EZH2i reduced H3K27me2/me3 on Western blotting in all
cell lines regardless of viability response, demonstrating the epigenetic
activity of the inhibitor. Further evaluation by Chip-seq and GEP is
ongoing to identify potential differences, e.g. in focal methylation
marks, that may account for differing viability responses.Our results
highlight the prognostic significance of EZH2 in MM and demonstrate
excellent in-vitro inhibitor activity suggesting EZH2 as a possible
future target for treatment.

