Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation at chromosome 8q24 in peripheral blood and
prostate cancer risk


Chromosome 8q24 has emerged as an important region for the genetic
susceptibility to several cancers, including prostate cancer; however,
little is known about the contribution of DNA methylation in this region
to risk. To evaluate DNA methylation levels at 8q24 in relation to the
risk of prostate cancer, we conducted a nested case-control study using
pre-diagnostic peripheral blood samples from 694 prostate cancer cases
and 703 controls in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO)
Cancer Screening Trial. We quantified DNA methylation levels at 63
specific CpG sites nearby cancer susceptibility single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) at 8q24 or the MYC oncogene using pyrosequencing
with bisulfite-treated DNA. For each of the 50 CpG sites meeting our
quality control requirements, we used logistic regression to estimate
odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the risk of
prostate cancer associated with each unit increase in percent DNA
methylation. We identified 7 CpG sites whose DNA methylation levels were
associated with prostate cancer risk (p less than 0.05), including 5 CpG
sites in POU5F1B that were moderately correlated with one another
(Spearman rho: 0.20-0.52), as well as 2 intergenic CpG sites
(Chr8:128081593 and Chr8:128513944). The most significant association was
observed for Chr8:128498079 in POU5F1B (OR = 0.97, 95% CI: 0.95-0.99,
p-value = 0.01). The five POU5F1B CpG sites found to be associated with
prostate cancer risk were significantly correlated with several
established cancer susceptibility SNPs at 8q24 from genome-wide
association studies, including rs6983267 (rho: 0.14-0.36), which has been
previously associated with prostate cancer, among other cancers.
Rs6983267 was only marginally associated with prostate cancer risk in
this study (p = 0.10). When rs6983267 was included in the models for the
five correlated CpG sites at POU5F1B, the associations for these CpG
sites with prostate cancer were attenuated, suggesting that the POU5F1B
CpG sites may be part of the same biological pathway conferring increased
prostate cancer risk. Our findings suggest that DNA methylation at 8q24
may contribute to the risk of prostate cancer, and epigenetic mechanisms
may help explain some of the SNP-associated risk in this important cancer
susceptibility region.

