Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maximize recovery of quality nucleic acid from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue samples using a novel, flexible purification
technology


Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples are a valuable
source of genetic information for gene expression and clinical research.
Extraction of nucleic acid (NA) from FFPE tissues is a challenge because
the fixation process results in cross-linking between proteins and
nucleic acid, as well as between different strands of DNA or RNA
molecules. Recent advances in sample preparation enables access to the
valuable information contained within these difficult samples. We use a
novel purification technology that does not rely on use of any harsh
organic solvents and concentrates the NA for low volume elution on a
specially designed spin column, thus maximizing concentration. Using this
technology, we examined several aspects of the purification protocol for
flexibility and adaptability: effect of de-crosslinking time on the
quality and length of nucleic acids released from diverse FFPE tissues,
effect of overnight storage between lysis and extraction steps, and
whether the technology could be adapted to extract both DNA and RNA from
the same FFPE tissue sample. Yield and quality of isolated nucleic acids
were examined by absorbance, fluorescent binding dye, and real-time qPCR
andRT-qPCR. We demonstrate that amplification-based quantitation gave the
best indication of the quality of NA recovered. We found that a short
decrosslinking time gave significant yields, but only with longer
decrosslinking, times were amplifiable yields maximized for many of the
tissue types tested. Preprocessing conditions were determined that allow
release of both DNA and RNA for subsequent capture and elution in
separate spin columns, enabling recovery of high quality DNA and RNA from
the same sample in separate tubes.In this study, we demonstrate that
de-crosslinking conditions can affect the recovery of amplifiable nucleic
acid from FFPE samples and that RNA and DNA can be recovered from the
same FFPE sample using an optimized protocol.

