Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 15-lipoxygenase-1 suppression of colitis-associated colon cancer
through inhibition of the IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway


The IL-6/STAT3 pathway is a critical signaling pathway for
colitis-associated colorectal cancer (CAC). PPAR-delta (PPAR-d), a lipid
nuclear receptor, upregulates IL-6. 15-Lipoxygenase-1 (15-LOX-1) is
crucial to produce lipid signaling mediators to terminate inflammation.
15-LOX-1 downregulates PPAR-d. 15-LOX-1 effects on IL-6/STAT3 signaling
and CAC tumorigenesis are unknown. We here report that intestinally
targeted transgenic 15-LOX-1 expression in mice (15-LOX-1-Gut mice)
inhibited azoxymethane and dextran sodium sulfate-induced CAC, IL-6
expression, STAT3 phosphorylation, and IL-6/STAT3 downstream target
expression (Notch and MUC1). 15-LOX-1 downregulation was associated with
IL-6 upregulation in human colon cancer mucosa. Re-expression of 15-LOX-1
in human colon cancer cells suppressed IL-6 mRNA expression, STAT3
phosphorylation, IL-6 promoter activity, and PPAR-d mRNA and protein
expression. PPAR-d overexpression in colonic epithelial cells (PPAR-d-Gut
mice) promoted CAC tumorigenesis in mice and increased IL-6 expression
and STAT3 phosphorylation, whereas concomitant 15-LOX-1 expression in
colonic epithelial cells (15-LOX-1-PPAR-d-Gut mice) suppressed these
effects [e.g., tumor number per mouse (mean SE) was 4.22 0.68 in
wild-type littermates, 6.67 0.83 in PPAR-d-Gut mice (p = 0.026), and 2.25
0.25 in 15-LOX-1-PPAR-d-Gut mice (p = 0.0006)]. Identification of
15-LOX-1 suppression of PPAR-d to inhibit IL-6/STAT3 signaling-driven CAC
tumorigenesis provides mechanistic insights that can be utilized to
molecularly target CAC.

