Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue distribution, excretion and pharmacokinetics of the
environmental pollutant and the tobacco smoke constituent
dibenzo[a,l]pyrene in mice


Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) has been shown to induce cancers
after metabolic activation. DB[a,l]P is the most potent carcinogenic PAH
found in tobacco smoke to date in rodent model systems. DB[a,l]P has been
identified in mainstream cigarette smoke, soil and diesel exhaust
particulate. Studies reported in the literature including our own
demonstrated that administration of DB[a,l]P by i.p. or oral application
in mice is known to induce tumors in organ sites including oral cavity,
ovary, lung, mammary and liver. We further demonstrated that DB[a,l]P
exerts its oral tumorigenicity mainly through the formation of its diol
epoxides. However, detailed studies aimed at elucidating the tissues
distribution and biological fate of DB[a,l]P remain to be determined.
Therefore, a radiotracer experiment was conducted.Six weeks old female
B6C3F1 mice received a single dose of [3H]-DB[a,l]P (1.512 Ci mmol-1 in
dimethyl sulfoxide, 1.07 mg Kg-1 body weight) via gavage and were
individually housed in metabolism cages (the same strain of mice used in
carcinogenicity studies). Mice were randomly assigned into 7 groups
(3/group) and sacrificed at0, 40 min, 2 h, 6 h, 24 h, 72 h and 1 week
after carcinogen administration. Feces, urine, blood and tissues
including ovary, mammary, uterus, liver, stomach, intestine, pancreas,
spleen, kidney, bladder, and lung were collected.Approximately 8.5 0.93%
and 73.21 9.58% of the radioactivity was eliminated in feces after 6 and
24 h, respectively. After 72 h and 1 week, 89.94 7.00% and 91.40 7.23% of
the radioactivity was recovered in feces, respectively. The total urine
excretion of the radioactivity was less than 2% after 1 week. We
constructed the log (plasma level)-time curve for [3H]-DB[a,l]P given in
a single oral dose to describe the absorption and elimination rate
process, and a linear plot was observed on the elimination phase from 6
hr to 1 week (2 = 0.999). Therefore, the pharmacokinetic analysis of
DB[a,l]P was conducted using a one compartment open model using Phoenix
WinNonlin 6.3 (Pharsignt Corp, Mt. View, CA). In Plasma, DB[a,l]P reached
its Tmax at about 10 hr and the elimination half-life (t1/2) was about 49
h. We found that tissues in digestive tract including stomach and
intestine reached their highest radioactivity after 40 min, followed by
lung after 2 hr, for remaining tissues, mammary, liver, pancreas, kidney
and blood (6 hr), and ovary, uterine, spleen and bladder (24 hr). After 1
week, the concentration of radioactivity in stomach and intestine dropped
to less than 2% of the radioactivity measured at 24 h; however, more than
20% of the radioactivity in ovary, mammary, lung and liver (target
tissues) were retained.The varied elimination rates of radioactivity
among blood, target tissues and non-target tissues may provide insights
that can, in part, account for the carcinogenicity of DB[a,l]P. Support:
CA173465 and ES020411.

