Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Processing of core protein by signal peptide peptidase
participates in propagation and pathogenesis of hepatitis C virus


Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major causative agent of chronic liver
diseases including steatosis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). The HCV core protein is cleaved off from a precursor polyprotein
by a signal peptidase and then further processed by signal peptide
peptidase (SPP) within the transmembrane region. However, the biological
significance of the processing of HCV core protein by SPP remains largely
unknown. Transgenic mice expressing HCV core protein exhibit
insulin-resistance, steatosis and finally develop HCC, suggesting that
core protein plays crucial roles in pathogenesis of HCV. In this study we
have established SPP-knockout (KO) mice and cell lines to examine the
roles of SPP on the propagation and pathogenesis of HCV. SPP KO mice were
embryonic lethal at around E13.5, therefore we prepared SPP-KO mouse
embryonic fibroblast cells (MEFs). In SPP-KO cells, HCV core protein was
quickly degraded by proteasome and propagation of HCV was severely
impaired. Treatment of cells with LY-411575, an inhibitor for SPP, also
induced degradation of HCV core protein and suppressed the production of
infectious HCV particles. PA28 or E6AP, which had been reported to
degrade core protein, were not involved in SPP-mediated degradation,
suggesting the other mechanisms were involved in SPP-induced core protein
degradation. Furthermore, oral administration of LY-411575 into HCV core
transgenic mice reduced expression of core protein and cured
insulin-resistance. The deletion of one allele of SPP gene in core
transgenic mice led to impair the expression of core protein and cure
insulin-resistance. These results suggest that SPP is a novel drug target
for chronic hepatitis C through suppression of viral propagation and
liver failures.

