Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor effect of Trametinib, a selective MEK inhibitor, in
combination with 4-methylumbelliferone, a hyaluronic acid synthesis
inhibitor, in Malignant pleural mesothelioma cell lines


Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a highly aggressive
malignancy for which no targeted therapy exists. The mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathway plays critical roles in the regulation of
tumorigenesis in multiple solid tumors, including MPM. Trametinib, a
selective MEK inhibitor, have a survival benefit in patients with V600
BRAF-mutant metastatic melanoma. The effect of trametinib on MPM cells
has not been well studied. Hyaluronan (HA) is one of the major components
of the extracellular matrix. MPM is in most cases associated with
elevated amounts of HA, which has increased the malignant properties of
MPM cells. The HA synthesis inhibitor 4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) has
antitumor effects in various malignant tumors, but its effect on MPM
cells has not been well studied.Purpose: We evaluated the effects of
trametinib, 4-MU and their combination on MPM cells in vitro and in
vivo.Experimental Design: The effects of trametinib, 4-MU, and their
combination on MPM cells were evaluated using cell viability assay,
western blot analysis, and mouse xenograft model.Results: Trametinib
exhibited an antiproliferative activity in all four MPM cell lines,
NCI-H226, NCI-H2452, NCI-H2052, and MSTO-211H, with IC50 values ranging
from 0.15 M to 12.7 M. Trametinib blocked the phosphorylation of ERK
until 72 hours and decreased the expression of CD44 in a dose-dependent
manner. In addition, the expression of CD44 was inhibited (48-72 hours)
after the suppression of ERK phosphorylation by trametinib. 4-MU
exhibited an antiproliferative activity in MPM cells. 4-MU inhibited ERK
phosphorylation but not CD44 expression. In mouse xenograft model,
trametinib and 4-MU suppressed tumor growth (trametinib vs. control, P
Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a highly aggressive
malignancy for which no targeted therapy exists. The mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathway plays critical roles in the regulation of
tumorigenesis in multiple solid tumors, including MPM. Trametinib, a
selective MEK inhibitor, have a survival benefit in patients with V600
BRAF-mutant metastatic melanoma. The effect of trametinib on MPM cells
has not been well studied. Hyaluronan (HA) is one of the major components
of the extracellular matrix. MPM is in most cases associated with
elevated amounts of HA, which has increased the malignant properties of
MPM cells. The HA synthesis inhibitor 4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) has
antitumor effects in various malignant tumors, but its effect on MPM
cells has not been well studied.Purpose: We evaluated the effects of
trametinib, 4-MU and their combination on MPM cells in vitro and in
vivo.Experimental Design: The effects of trametinib, 4-MU, and their
combination on MPM cells were evaluated using cell viability assay,
western blot analysis, and mouse xenograft model.Results: Trametinib
exhibited an antiproliferative activity in all four MPM cell lines,
NCI-H226, NCI-H2452, NCI-H2052, and MSTO-211H, with IC50 values ranging
from 0.15 M to 12.7 M. Trametinib blocked the phosphorylation of ERK
until 72 hours and decreased the expression of CD44 in a dose-dependent
manner. In addition, the expression of CD44 was inhibited (48-72 hours)
after the suppression of ERK phosphorylation by trametinib. 4-MU
exhibited an antiproliferative activity in MPM cells. 4-MU inhibited ERK
phosphorylation but not CD44 expression. In mouse xenograft model,
trametinib and 4-MU suppressed tumor growth (trametinib vs. control, P <
0.0001; 4-MU vs. control, P Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma
(MPM) is a highly aggressive malignancy for which no targeted therapy
exists. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway plays
critical roles in the regulation of tumorigenesis in multiple solid
tumors, including MPM. Trametinib, a selective MEK inhibitor, have a
survival benefit in patients with V600 BRAF-mutant metastatic melanoma.
The effect of trametinib on MPM cells has not been well studied.
Hyaluronan (HA) is one of the major components of the extracellular
matrix. MPM is in most cases associated with elevated amounts of HA,
which has increased the malignant properties of MPM cells. The HA
synthesis inhibitor 4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) has antitumor effects in
various malignant tumors, but its effect on MPM cells has not been well
studied.Purpose: We evaluated the effects of trametinib, 4-MU and their
combination on MPM cells in vitro and in vivo.Experimental Design: The
effects of trametinib, 4-MU, and their combination on MPM cells were
evaluated using cell viability assay, western blot analysis, and mouse
xenograft model.Results: Trametinib exhibited an antiproliferative
activity in all four MPM cell lines, NCI-H226, NCI-H2452, NCI-H2052, and
MSTO-211H, with IC50 values ranging from 0.15 M to 12.7 M. Trametinib
blocked the phosphorylation of ERK until 72 hours and decreased the
expression of CD44 in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, the
expression of CD44 was inhibited (48-72 hours) after the suppression of
ERK phosphorylation by trametinib. 4-MU exhibited an antiproliferative
activity in MPM cells. 4-MU inhibited ERK phosphorylation but not CD44
expression. In mouse xenograft model, trametinib and 4-MU suppressed
tumor growth (trametinib vs. control, P < 0.0001; 4-MU vs. control, P <
0.01), and their combination suppressed more strongly (combination vs.
trametinib, P Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a
highly aggressive malignancy for which no targeted therapy exists. The
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway plays critical roles in
the regulation of tumorigenesis in multiple solid tumors, including MPM.
Trametinib, a selective MEK inhibitor, have a survival benefit in
patients with V600 BRAF-mutant metastatic melanoma. The effect of
trametinib on MPM cells has not been well studied. Hyaluronan (HA) is one
of the major components of the extracellular matrix. MPM is in most cases
associated with elevated amounts of HA, which has increased the malignant
properties of MPM cells. The HA synthesis inhibitor 4-methylumbelliferone
(4-MU) has antitumor effects in various malignant tumors, but its effect
on MPM cells has not been well studied.Purpose: We evaluated the effects
of trametinib, 4-MU and their combination on MPM cells in vitro and in
vivo.Experimental Design: The effects of trametinib, 4-MU, and their
combination on MPM cells were evaluated using cell viability assay,
western blot analysis, and mouse xenograft model.Results: Trametinib
exhibited an antiproliferative activity in all four MPM cell lines,
NCI-H226, NCI-H2452, NCI-H2052, and MSTO-211H, with IC50 values ranging
from 0.15 M to 12.7 M. Trametinib blocked the phosphorylation of ERK
until 72 hours and decreased the expression of CD44 in a dose-dependent
manner. In addition, the expression of CD44 was inhibited (48-72 hours)
after the suppression of ERK phosphorylation by trametinib. 4-MU
exhibited an antiproliferative activity in MPM cells. 4-MU inhibited ERK
phosphorylation but not CD44 expression. In mouse xenograft model,
trametinib and 4-MU suppressed tumor growth (trametinib vs. control, P <
0.0001; 4-MU vs. control, P < 0.01), and their combination suppressed
more strongly (combination vs. trametinib, P < 0.01; combination vs.
4-MU, P Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a highly
aggressive malignancy for which no targeted therapy exists. The
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway plays critical roles in
the regulation of tumorigenesis in multiple solid tumors, including MPM.
Trametinib, a selective MEK inhibitor, have a survival benefit in
patients with V600 BRAF-mutant metastatic melanoma. The effect of
trametinib on MPM cells has not been well studied. Hyaluronan (HA) is one
of the major components of the extracellular matrix. MPM is in most cases
associated with elevated amounts of HA, which has increased the malignant
properties of MPM cells. The HA synthesis inhibitor 4-methylumbelliferone
(4-MU) has antitumor effects in various malignant tumors, but its effect
on MPM cells has not been well studied.Purpose: We evaluated the effects
of trametinib, 4-MU and their combination on MPM cells in vitro and in
vivo.Experimental Design: The effects of trametinib, 4-MU, and their
combination on MPM cells were evaluated using cell viability assay,
western blot analysis, and mouse xenograft model.Results: Trametinib
exhibited an antiproliferative activity in all four MPM cell lines,
NCI-H226, NCI-H2452, NCI-H2052, and MSTO-211H, with IC50 values ranging
from 0.15 M to 12.7 M. Trametinib blocked the phosphorylation of ERK
until 72 hours and decreased the expression of CD44 in a dose-dependent
manner. In addition, the expression of CD44 was inhibited (48-72 hours)
after the suppression of ERK phosphorylation by trametinib. 4-MU
exhibited an antiproliferative activity in MPM cells. 4-MU inhibited ERK
phosphorylation but not CD44 expression. In mouse xenograft model,
trametinib and 4-MU suppressed tumor growth (trametinib vs. control, P <
0.0001; 4-MU vs. control, P < 0.01), and their combination suppressed
more strongly (combination vs. trametinib, P < 0.01; combination vs.
4-MU, P < 0.0001; combination vs. control, P Introduction: Malignant
pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a highly aggressive malignancy for which no
targeted therapy exists. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway plays critical roles in the regulation of tumorigenesis in
multiple solid tumors, including MPM. Trametinib, a selective MEK
inhibitor, have a survival benefit in patients with V600 BRAF-mutant
metastatic melanoma. The effect of trametinib on MPM cells has not been
well studied. Hyaluronan (HA) is one of the major components of the
extracellular matrix. MPM is in most cases associated with elevated
amounts of HA, which has increased the malignant properties of MPM cells.
The HA synthesis inhibitor 4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) has antitumor
effects in various malignant tumors, but its effect on MPM cells has not
been well studied.Purpose: We evaluated the effects of trametinib, 4-MU
and their combination on MPM cells in vitro and in vivo.Experimental
Design: The effects of trametinib, 4-MU, and their combination on MPM
cells were evaluated using cell viability assay, western blot analysis,
and mouse xenograft model.Results: Trametinib exhibited an
antiproliferative activity in all four MPM cell lines, NCI-H226,
NCI-H2452, NCI-H2052, and MSTO-211H, with IC50 values ranging from 0.15 M
to 12.7 M. Trametinib blocked the phosphorylation of ERK until 72 hours
and decreased the expression of CD44 in a dose-dependent manner. In
addition, the expression of CD44 was inhibited (48-72 hours) after the
suppression of ERK phosphorylation by trametinib. 4-MU exhibited an
antiproliferative activity in MPM cells. 4-MU inhibited ERK
phosphorylation but not CD44 expression. In mouse xenograft model,
trametinib and 4-MU suppressed tumor growth (trametinib vs. control, P <
0.0001; 4-MU vs. control, P < 0.01), and their combination suppressed
more strongly (combination vs. trametinib, P < 0.01; combination vs.
4-MU, P < 0.0001; combination vs. control, P < 0.0001).Conclusions:
Trametinib and 4-MU exhibited antitumor activities in MPM cell lines.
Furthermore, their combination exhibited more potent antitumor
activities. These results suggests that Trametinib and 4-MU are promising
therapeutic agents in MPM, and these combination therapies may be
effective for the treatment of MPM.

