Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGF reduction facilitates angiogenesis by CXCR2


PURPOSE: With multiple pathways for angiogeneis, the purpose of the study
is to quantify the expression of angiogenic tyrosine kinase receptors
during endothelial tubule formation while inhibiting a G-protein linked
CXCR2 receptor that binds angiogenic CXC chemokines.METHODS: Using
endothelial tubule formation assays on Matrigel and Growth Factor Reduced
(GFR) Matrigel, and without added VEGF, human umbilical vascular
endothelial cells (HUVEC) were treated with a selective small molecule
non-peptide inhibitor of CXCR2 called SB225002
(N-(2-hydroxy-4-nitrophenyl)-N9-(2-bromophenyl)urea compared with
control. Previous dose-inhibition curves established optimal dosing of
SB225002. After 6 hours of incubation, endothelial tubule formation was
quantified by counting tubule length in four random microscopic fields
using the microscope camera software NIS-Elements AR 3.10 in triplicate
and compared to control. In parallel, endothelial cells were collected
from the Matrigel under the same conditions for quantification of
angiogenesis receptors and growth factors by RT-PCR in
triplicate.RESULTS: There was significant inhibition of endothelial
tubule formation on Matrigel (and GFR Matrigel) by the addition of
SB225002 (40-58% of inhibition) under conditions of no added VEGF when
compared to control. The expression of mRNA in HUVEC cells harvested from
Matrigel was not different for VEGFR1-3, FGFR1-3, and PDGFRA,B with or
without the inhibitor. Under conditions of no added VEGF, the expression
of CXCR2 mRNA was the same with or without the inhibitor, but the
endothelial tubule formation was significantly inhibited.CONCLUSION:
Under growth factor reduced conditions, including no added VEGF, the
endothelial tubule formation and angiogenenic tyrosine kinase receptor
expression was similar to standard matrigel. However, when a selective
non-peptide inhibitor of CXCR2 (SB225002) was added, endothelial tubule
formation was inhibited without change in expression of other
angiogenesis receptors from HUVEC cells retrieved from the matrigel.
Therefore, tubule formation continues with the chemokine/CXCR2 axis and
may be an additional pathway that circumvents other attempts at
angiogenesis inhibition targeting tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

