Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GenePool: A cloud-based technology for rapidly data mining
large-scale, patient-derived cancer genomic cohorts including The Cancer
Genome Atlas


GenePool is a cloud-based system for the secure storage, management,
analysis, visualization and interpretation of large-scale human genomics
data. The GenePool platform enables rapid interrogation of massive
amounts of data generated by current laboratory methods and was designed
to meet the needs of scientists engaged in cancer biomarker discovery and
characterization. The software solution provides users with an intuitive
interface, an easy way to store and select genomics datasets according to
sample-associated metadata for analysis, and an automated system for
performing routine, well-characterized genomics workflows. Results are
presented with multiple options for annotation, sorting and data export,
with a visualization tool that facilitates browsing of genomic data for
biomarker identification. We will demonstrate how GenePool removes the
data download, management, and computing burdens faced by researchers
interested in working with large amounts of patient-derived cancer
genomics exemplified by The Cancer Genome Atlas. To date, TCGA has
completed molecular characterization of more than 9,000 patient samples
from a target of 17,000, and will have released an estimated 2.5
petabytes of data at project completion.We will present case studies
using the >25 cancer cohorts worth of RNA-Seq, miRNA-Seq, Exome
Sequencing, Protein Expression, Copy Number, and DNA Methylation data
(provided to the community through the TCGA Data Portal) and made readily
available for sample selection and analysis within GenePool. As
validation of the GenePool platform, we will present results obtained
within minutes that validate knowledge reported in the literature over
the course of decades. We will then present novel findings for less
understood cancer indications.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

