Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK inhibitor diminishes nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cell
growth and NPC-induced osteoclastogenesis via modulating CCL2 and CXCL16
expression


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a common malignant cancer in Guangxi,
as well as in southern China and Southeast Asia. NPC preferentially
metastasizes to bone in advanced patients, major factor resulting in high
mortality. The molecular basis of NPC development and cancer-induced bone
lesions are still unclear. We and others have reported that chemokine,
like CCL2, CXCL16, CXCL12, and their corresponding receptors played
important roles in cancer bone metastasis. In this study, we firstly
investigated that CCR2 and CXCR6 expressions in clinical specimens. Then,
we measured CCL2, CCR2, CXCL16 and CXCR6 expression levels by RT-PCR,
ELISA and western blot in NPC cell lines. Further, we used MEK inhibitor,
U0126, to treat the NPC cell lines and found CCL2 and CXCL16 expressions
significantly decreased. The NPC cell lines proliferation were inhibited
by U0126 in dose- and time-dependently manner. Finally, we collected
conditioned medium (CM) from the NPC cell lines absent or present U0126
treatments, to treat mouse bone marrow non-adherent cells in order to
detect NPC CM-induced multinucleated osteoclast-like formation. The CMs
collected from U0126 treated NPC cells were dramatically diminished the
numbers of multinucleated osteoclasts. These results indicate that U0126
inhibits NPC cell growth and diminishes cancer-induced osteoclast
formation partially through modulating the expression of CCL2 and CXCL16.
Thus this study may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for advanced NPC
patients, especially for treatment of NPC bone metastasis.

