Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The albumin to globulin ratio predicts chemotherapeutic outcomes
in patients with unresectable metastatic CRC


Background:Markers of the systemic inflammatory response have been
recognized to correlate with prognosis in patients with various types of
cancers. The pretreatment albumin to globulin ratio (AGR) has been
reported to correlate with the long-term survival in patients with
various cancers. However, there are no reports regarding the correlation
between the pretreatment AGR and chemotherapeutic outcomes in patients
with unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer. The aim of this study was
to evaluate the prognostic significance of the pretreatment AGR in
patients with unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer.Methods:A total
of 66 patients with unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer who
underwent palliative chemotherapy for metastatic tumors were enrolled.
The AGR was calculated as follows: Albumin/(Total protein -
Albumin).Results:The median pretreatment AGR was 1.254 (range:
0.849-1.840); we set 1.25 as the cut-off according to this value. Based
on the cut-off value of 1.25, 34 patients were classified into the
high-AGR group and 32 patients were classified into the low-AGR group.
The high-AGR group had a significantly higher chemotherapeutic disease
control rate (p = 0.040) and better progression-free survival (p =
0.0171) and overall survival (p = 0.0360) rates than the low-AGR group.
Among the clinicopathological factors, the AGR was identified to be the
only prognostic factor for progression-free survival (Hazard Ratio:
2.527, 95% Confidence Interval: 1.152-5.545, p = 0.021) and overall
survival (Hazard Ratio: 1.946, 95% Confidence Interval: 1.033-3.668, p =
0.039).Conclusions:The pretreatment AGR is a useful prognostic marker in
patients with unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer who receive
palliative chemotherapy.

