Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of single cells from dissociated solid tumors


The heterogeneous nature of solid tumors, coupled with the relatively
small sample size of available biopsies, has led to an emerging need to
glean as much information as possible from these valuable specimens.
Current approaches to solid tumor analysis fail to completely reveal the
diverse range of cellular compartments that comprise the tumor
microenvironment. A comprehensive approach to tumor interrogation
requires efficient tissue dissociation to facilitate analysis at the
single-cell level. In contrast to current methods, single-cell analysis
of tumor derived cell suspensions by flow cytometry has the potential to
provide a more complete understanding of the many subpopulations within
the tumor microenvironment and the cell to cell interactions that govern
this space.Here we demonstrate an efficient workflow that enables
comprehensive single-cell analysis of solid tumors from breast cancers.
Using tumors from clinical samples and mouse models, we evaluated
different dissociation and processing techniques for their effects on
cellular viability and surface marker expression. Solid tumors were
dissociated into single-cell suspensions using a combination of
mechanical dissociation and enzymatic digestion. Phenotypic distribution
and morphology of cells within the tumor microenvironment was evaluated
using flow cytometry. As this approach evolves, and a knowledge base of
relevant surface markers is established, this technology has the
potential to significantly impact how tumor biopsies are processed to get
multiparametric information at a single cell level.

