Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequential combination of docetaxel with a novel SHP-1 agonist
enhanced anti-tumor effect in triple negative breast cancer cells


Background: Interfering the oncogenic STAT3 signaling is considered as
promising anti-cancer strategy. STAT3 signaling can be negatively
regulated by the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 through direct
dephosphorylation of p-STAT3 (Tyr705). Our previous studies have
confirmed SC-43 as a novel SHP-1 enhancer which down-regulate p-STAT3 and
STAT3-related downstream effectors (Breast CancerResearch 2013). Here, we
tested the efficacy of SC-43 in combination with docetaxel in triple
negative breast cancer cells.Methods: TNBC cell lines (HCC-1937,
MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-231) were used for in vitro studies. Cell viability
was examined by MTT assay. Combination index was determined using
Calcusyn anaysis. Apoptosis was examined by flow cytometry and western
blot. Signal transduction pathways in cells were assessed by western
blot. In vivo efficacy ofSC-43 in combination with docetaxel was tested
in nude mice with breast cancer xenografts.Results: Sequential
combination of docetaxel with SC-43 showed enhanced anti-proliferative
activity in all tested TNBC cells. Synergistic effect was demonstrated
when docetaxel combined with SC-43 at a dose ratio of 1 to 10, showing
combination index below 1.0. Sub-G1 and western blot analysis showed that
SC-43 enhanced docetaxel-induced apoptosis. In addition, combining SC-43
with docetaxel efficiently suppressed p-STAT3 and downstream effectors.
Ectopic expression of STAT3 reduced the enhanced cytotoxicity by the
combination therapy. Previous studies has shown SC-43 enhanced SHP-1
activity, here we showed that SC-43 in combination with docetaxel
significantly enhanced SHP-1 activity. More importantly, intraperitoneal
injection of SC-43 with tri-weekly docetaxel showed enhanced anti-tumor
growth in xenografted tumor mice.Conclusion: Our results suggest that the
novel SHP-1 agonist SC-43 enhanced docetaxel-induced cytotoxic killing by
SHP-1 dependent STAT3 inhibition in human triple negative breast cancer
cells. (Supported by Yen Tjing-Ling Medical Foundation CI-104-07;
NSC-102-2325-B-075-006 and MOST 103-2325-B-075-002; and
MOHW103-TD-B-111-02)

