Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting NANOG: genes, proteins and response to viral RNAi in
preclinical models


Purpose: Since the NANOG family controls stemness and neoplastic
progression in human colorectal carcinoma (CRC), our postulate is that
targeting the dominant NANOG and NANOGP8 members with viral vector
delivered shRNA will inhibit CRC progression in preclinical models and
that replicating viral vectors are more active than non-replicating
vectors.Methods: Cells were human CRC lines (Clone A, CX-1 and LS174T)
and mouse fibroblasts (3T3). shRNA specific to NANOG (shNG-1), NANOGP8
(shNp8-1) or a control (shNEG) were created in lentivirus (LV) and
chimeric adenovirus 5/3 (Ad5/3). CRC and 3T3 were cultured in monolayer
with serum-containing medium or in suspension in ultra low attachment
plates without serum. Nanostring 770 gene cancer panel was analyzed in 72
hr cultures with NMF clustering and GSEA analysis. Annexin V expression
and caspase-3, 8 or 9 activation in suspension culture assessed
Apoptosis. LV or Ad5/3 shRNAs were added to spheroids in 3-D suspension
cultures to test therapy in vitro. Intratumoral injection of LV or Ad5/3
shRNA into 5-10 mm sub cutis nodules in groups of 5-10 NOD/SCID mice
measured activity in vivo.Results: LV shNp8-1 in both Clone A and CX-1
caused significant inhibition of TGF-beta, EGFR, NRF2, E2F3 and the
Cyclin D1 pathways by NMF and GSEA analysis in monolayer culture. LV
shNp8-1 inhibited growth of LS174T, Clone A and CX-1 by 50% in 3 days in
3-D suspension cultures without further decrease. Apoptosis was due to
Caspase 9 activation. In contrast, Ad5/3-shNp8-1 decreased spheroid
growth by up to 94% at 9 -14 days while Ad5/3 decreases spheroid growth
by 80%. Ad5/3-shNp8-1 but nit Ad5/3 was active in co-cultures with 3T3 to
a 2:1 CRC:3T3 ratio. Transduction level was 50% in LV treated cells but
90% in Ad5/3 treated cells. Intratumoral injection of LVshNG-1 or
LVshNp8-1, decreased tumor size by 50% compared to LVshNEG or untreated
CX-1 tumors for 11 days after which tumor growth rebounded to match
controls. Ad5/3-shNp8-1 injection into 5-9 mm nodules inhibited CX-1 and
LS14T growth by 50% until euthanized.Conclusions: Targeting NANOGP8 more
than NANOG inhibits proliferation and activates apoptosis through
multiple pathways. Nonreplicating LV delivered shRNA inhibited tumor
growth in in vitro and in vivo preclinical models but replicating
oncolytic Ad5/3 infects more cells and promotes shRNA efficacy.
Replicating vectors targeting NANOG are important for further development.

