Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of black raspberry extract (BRB) and related compounds on
mutagenesis induced by metabolites of the tobacco carcinogen,
dibenzo(a,l)pyrene in cultured rat oral fibroblasts; and on oxidative
stress in human oral cancer cells


BRB powder, extracts and metabolites have been shown to inhibit
tumorigenesis in oral and other sites in animal models. Here we examined
the effects of an anthocyanin-enriched BRB extract, and protocatechuic
acid (PA), a major BRB anthocyanin metabolite, on mutagenesis and DNA
adduct formation by DBP-dihydrodiol, and DBP diolepoxide (DBPDE) (the
proximate and ultimate carcinogenic metabolites, resp. of DBP) in lacI
rat oral fibroblasts. DBP was poorly metabolized to genotoxic metabolites
by the oral fibroblasts, but DBP-dihydrodiol was mutagenic and produced
DNA adducts. DBP-dihydrodiol (0.5 uM) induced a mutant fraction of 14.1
+/- 3.9 mutants/10E5 pfu in the target cII gene. This was reduced in a
concentration-dependent fashion to 9.1 +/- 2.4 by 0.1-1uM PA a 35%
reduction. Mutagenesis by DBP-dihydrodiol was also reduced in a
concentration-dependent fashion by BRB extract and at the highest
concentration (20ug/ml) mutagenesis was reduced by 68%. The major DNA
adduct produced by 0.5 uM DBP-dihydrodiol was anti-DBPDE-dA, as assessed
by L.C.-M.S.-M.S. Its levels were reduced from 13.7 +/- 1.2 to 7.8 +/-
1.9 adducts/10E6 dA by 3uM protocatechuic acid, and from 6.8 +/- 0.7 to
3.2 +/- 0.4 by 66 ug/ml BRB extract. The inhibitions were statistically
significant. In contrast, no significant effect PA on mutagenesis by 140
nM DBPDE was observed, with mutant fractions similar to that of DBPDE
(3.2 +/- 0.45 mutants/10E5 pfu) being obtained over a range of 0.1 - 1 uM
PA. Similarly 10-50 ug/ml BRB extract had no effect on DBPDE-induced
mutagenesis. Consistent with these results, levels of total DBPDE adducts
were unchanged over a range of PA concentrations, with the high dose of
1uM PA yielding, 4.6 +/- 0.7 adducts/10E5 nucleotides and 4.5 +/- 0.9
without PA. Presumably the short halflife of DBPDE precludes
detoxification, or scavenging of DBPDE. The effects of PA and BRB extract
on oxidative stress in a human oral cancer cell line (SCC 1483,
retromolar trigone) were also examined. The redox sensitive fluorescent
probe, dihydrodichlorofluorescein diacetate (DHDCF) was added to the
cells at 5uM and BRB (0.5-5 ug/ml) or PA (0.02-0.2 uM) was added shortly
afterwards. 2 hr later all doses of BRB extract and PA inhibited the
oxidation of DHDCF to its fluorescent product, in a dose-dependent
manner. At 5ug/ml BRB extract the increase in fluorescence was reduced
from 304 +/- 3.3 to 177 +/- 7.1 relative fluorescence units (RFU) and at
0.2 uM PA the increase was reduced to 224 +/- 25 RFU. In summary, BRB
extract and PA inhibited mutagenesis and DNA adduct formation by
DBP-dihydrodiol, but not DBPDE. BRB extract and PA were also effective
inhibitors of oxidative stress. These mechanisms may a play a role in the
protective effects of BRB on oral and other cancers in experimental
animals. Supported by NIH grant #CA173465.

