Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of bias associated with high-multiplex, target-specific
pre-amplification


We developed a novel PCR-based pre-amplification (PreAmp) technology that
can increase the abundance of over 350 target genes one million-fold. To
assess potential bias introduced by PreAmp we utilized ERCC RNA reference
standards, a model system that quantifies measurement error in RNA
analysis. We assessed three types of bias: amplification bias, dynamic
range bias and fold-change bias. We show that our PreAmp workflow does
not introduce significant amplification and fold-change bias under
stringent conditions. We do detect dynamic range bias if a target gene is
highly abundant and PreAmp occurred for 16 or more PCR cycles; however,
this type of bias is correctable. To validate PreAmp performance in an
actual gene expression profiling experiment, we analyzed a panel of genes
that are regulated during differentiation using the NTera2 stem cell
model system. We find that results generated using PreAmp are
statistically equivalent to results obtained using standard qPCR without
the pre-amplification step. Importantly, PreAmp maintains patterns of
gene expression changes across samples; the same biological insights
would be derived from a PreAmp experiment as with a standard gene
expression profiling experiment. Our PreAmp technology can facilitate
accurate analysis of extremely limited samples in gene expression
profiling experiments.

