Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis suppression by non-KP54 kisspeptins


The KISS1 metastasis suppressor blocks metastasis by inhibiting
colonization at secondary sites. KISS1 activity requires secretion and
extracellular processing by furin into kisspeptins. Kisspeptin-54 (KP54;
G68 to F121) binds a G-protein coupled receptor, KISS1R, and the
mechanism of metastasis suppression has been assumed to be through the
receptor. However, KISS1 is cleaved into kisspeptins outside of the cell,
and KISS1R expression is not required for metastasis suppression.
Therefore, an alternate hypothesis is that a non-KISS1R binding
kisspeptin(s) is responsible for metastasis suppression. To test this
hypothesis, we engineered all ten of the possible kisspeptins predicted
from known dibasic cleavage sites (M1-Q145; M1-R56; M1-R67; M1-R124;
R56-R67; G68-F121; E55-F121; E55-Q145; G68-Q145; E125-Q145) downstream of
the KISS1 secretion signal peptide (designated KMP1 to KMP10,
respectively) and expressed each individually in B16-F10 melanoma cells.
Expression was confirmed by immunoblot and/or RT-QPCR analysis. Following
intravenous injection, experimental lung metastases were quantified. KP54
expression suppressed metastasis. Some KMP lacking the KISS1R ligand
suppressed metastasis as well as KP54 and full-length KISS1 (pThe KISS1
metastasis suppressor blocks metastasis by inhibiting colonization at
secondary sites. KISS1 activity requires secretion and extracellular
processing by furin into kisspeptins. Kisspeptin-54 (KP54; G68 to F121)
binds a G-protein coupled receptor, KISS1R, and the mechanism of
metastasis suppression has been assumed to be through the receptor.
However, KISS1 is cleaved into kisspeptins outside of the cell, and
KISS1R expression is not required for metastasis suppression. Therefore,
an alternate hypothesis is that a non-KISS1R binding kisspeptin(s) is
responsible for metastasis suppression. To test this hypothesis, we
engineered all ten of the possible kisspeptins predicted from known
dibasic cleavage sites (M1-Q145; M1-R56; M1-R67; M1-R124; R56-R67;
G68-F121; E55-F121; E55-Q145; G68-Q145; E125-Q145) downstream of the
KISS1 secretion signal peptide (designated KMP1 to KMP10, respectively)
and expressed each individually in B16-F10 melanoma cells. Expression was
confirmed by immunoblot and/or RT-QPCR analysis. Following intravenous
injection, experimental lung metastases were quantified. KP54 expression
suppressed metastasis. Some KMP lacking the KISS1R ligand suppressed
metastasis as well as KP54 and full-length KISS1 (p<0.05). Specifically,
the N-terminal kisspeptin (M1 - R56) dramatically suppressed metastasis.
This suggests that the mechanism of action for metastasis suppression by
KISS1 does not necessarily require activation of KISS1R by the peptide
ligand but also leaves the possibility for additional receptors.
Alternatively, KISS1/KMP interactions with other intracellular proteins
may be required for metastasis suppressor activity. Support: CA134981,
Natl Fndn Cancer Res, Komen SAC11037, KS Bioscience Auth, P30-CA168524,
Steiner Family Fund.

