Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tributyltin alters the production and secretion of inflammatory
cytokines from human and mouse immune cells


Tributyltin (TBT) is an environmental contaminant that has been used for
several industrial, agricultural and household purposes. Despite limited
bans on the usage of Tributyltin, the stability and toxicity of the
compound may prove to have negative effects on immune function in
terrestrial mammals. Studies show that there is an increase in the
incidences of tumors and decreased immune cell function in TBT-exposed
mammals. TBT interferes with the ability of human natural killer (NK)
cells to lyse target cells; it also alters the secretion of the
pro-inflammatory cytokines Interferon gamma (IFN) and Tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF) from human immune cells ex vivo. Any dysregulation of
the cytokine communication network may have detrimental effects on immune
function, as cytokines play a key role in the regulation of immune
responsiveness. There have been no in vivo studies on the effects of
exposure to TBT on the cytokine communication network. The effects of 24
hour exposure to TBT on the production of IFN and TNF from human immune
cells were analyzed in an ex vivo system using western blotting. The
serum of TBT-exposed mice was analyzed for changes in the levels of
cytokine secretion and production using a Milliplex mouse
cytokine/chemokine magnetic bead premixed 32 plex kit and western
blotting; the effects of TBT-exposure was assessed using a time curve of
6h, 12h, 24h, 48h and control. TBT increased the levels of the cytokines
IFN, TNF, IL1, IL5, IL7, IL12p40, IL13, IL15, MIP1, MIP2 and RANTES in
the serum at a minimum of one time point. IFN and TNF secretion and
production from human cells also increased, showing striking agreement in
the response to TBT between the human and mouse systems.Supported by: NIH
grant 5U54CA163066-03

