Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Array profiling identified upregulated miRNAs and target genes and
pathways in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is prevalent in the
Chinese population, where smoking is a major carcinogen. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) and their gene targets potentially contribute to the multistep
regulatory processes of LSCC development.Objective: The purpose of this
study is to investigate and validate aberrant expressed miRNAs in LSCC,
and analyze the putative target genes of the screened miRNAs.Methods: Six
pairs of primary Stage II-IV LSCC and adjacent non-neoplastic tissues
were surgically removed for miRNA array analysis using the Affymetrix
GeneChip miRNA Array 3.0, containing probes for 5683 miRNAs, and the
significantly altered miRNAs were validated by the qRT-PCR in an
independent cohort of 36 LSCC patients. MiRNA gene targets were predicted
using TargetScan, PITA and microRNAorg in GeneSpring 12.5 software. The
functional categories and pathways of the target genes were analyzed by
GO category and KEGG pathway database.Results: MiRNAs arrays identified
seven up-regulated miRNAs, including hsa-miR-224, hsa-miR-183,
hsa-miR-23a, hsa-miR-675, hsa-miR-27a, hsa-miR-503 and hsa-miR-4800-3p in
LSCC by the SAM method, and qRT-PCR was performed to validate the
screened miRNAs. 72 putative target genes were identified by GeneSpring
12.5 software. These putative target genes are involved in biological
processes, such as metabolic, biological regulation, membrane, protein
binding, ion binding by GO category analysis, and are the molecular
components in MAPK signaling, adherence, and junction pathways by KEGG
pathway database analysis.Conclusions: Seven upregulated miRNAs were
identified in LSCC tissues by microarrays, and validated by qRT-PCR. The
putative target genes were also identified. These up-regulated miRNAs
could serve as potential biomarkers for LSCC diagnosis and therapy.

