Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-generation brachytherapy: a preclinical study of a thermally
stabilized biopolymer gel for delivering intratumoral radionuclide
therapy in a pancreatic tumor mouse model


The intratumoral delivery of radioactive therapeutics, a clinical
technique known as brachytherapy, has proven very successful in treating
solid cancers and become a prevalent option for treating prostate,
breast, and melanoma tumors. The method typically involves the permanent
implantation of 80-120 titanium seeds encapsulating radioactive isotopes
and requires expert spatial placement to ensure full dose coverage. The
disadvantages of the seeds include a complicated implantation process,
the permanence of the implants, migration of seeds to off-target sites,
and that the titanium shielding limits the application of radionuclides
which could treat more aggressive forms of cancer. As such, we have
developed a next-generation brachytherapy alternative to solid seeds
using an injectable, biodegradable, biocompatible and thermosensitive
elastin-like polypeptide (ELP). Through recombinant design and synthesis,
ELP exhibits a thermal phase transition (soluble-to-insoluble) when
heated above 21C. This allows radionuclide-bearing ELP to be easily
handled as a fluid at room temperature, but enables spontaneous
self-assembly into a stable brachytherapy gel upon intratumoral injection
at body temperature. Previously, we demonstrated the efficacy of ELP
brachytherapy in treating both s.c. human hypopharyngeal tumors and
orthotopic human prostate tumors xenografted in mice models.Treatment
options for pancreatic cancer remain limited due to a large proportion of
patients presenting with advanced disease at the time of diagnosis.
Trials investigating the use of brachytherapy as a neo-adjuvant for
shrinking pancreatic tumors prior to surgery or as an adjuvant to inhibit
recurrence have provided encouragement. By conjugating the more potent
radionuclide 131-Iodine to ELP, we investigated the ability of ELP
brachytherapy to treat more clinically aggressive pancreatic tumors.
Utilizing a human CRL-1687 cell line transfected to express luciferase
(BxPc3-luc2), human pancreatic tumors were xenografted into an
orthotopic, athymic nu/nu mouse model. Upon reaching 150 mm^3 in size,
mice were treated either with [131I]-ELP brachytherapy (n = 6), at a dose
of 5.83 Ci/mm^3, or with an ELP-only control injection (n = 6). Tumor
response was tracked non-invasively using luminescent imaging for 60
days. The ELP brachytherapy demonstrated significant tumor inhibition (p
The intratumoral delivery of radioactive therapeutics, a clinical
technique known as brachytherapy, has proven very successful in treating
solid cancers and become a prevalent option for treating prostate,
breast, and melanoma tumors. The method typically involves the permanent
implantation of 80-120 titanium seeds encapsulating radioactive isotopes
and requires expert spatial placement to ensure full dose coverage. The
disadvantages of the seeds include a complicated implantation process,
the permanence of the implants, migration of seeds to off-target sites,
and that the titanium shielding limits the application of radionuclides
which could treat more aggressive forms of cancer. As such, we have
developed a next-generation brachytherapy alternative to solid seeds
using an injectable, biodegradable, biocompatible and thermosensitive
elastin-like polypeptide (ELP). Through recombinant design and synthesis,
ELP exhibits a thermal phase transition (soluble-to-insoluble) when
heated above 21C. This allows radionuclide-bearing ELP to be easily
handled as a fluid at room temperature, but enables spontaneous
self-assembly into a stable brachytherapy gel upon intratumoral injection
at body temperature. Previously, we demonstrated the efficacy of ELP
brachytherapy in treating both s.c. human hypopharyngeal tumors and
orthotopic human prostate tumors xenografted in mice models.Treatment
options for pancreatic cancer remain limited due to a large proportion of
patients presenting with advanced disease at the time of diagnosis.
Trials investigating the use of brachytherapy as a neo-adjuvant for
shrinking pancreatic tumors prior to surgery or as an adjuvant to inhibit
recurrence have provided encouragement. By conjugating the more potent
radionuclide 131-Iodine to ELP, we investigated the ability of ELP
brachytherapy to treat more clinically aggressive pancreatic tumors.
Utilizing a human CRL-1687 cell line transfected to express luciferase
(BxPc3-luc2), human pancreatic tumors were xenografted into an
orthotopic, athymic nu/nu mouse model. Upon reaching 150 mm^3 in size,
mice were treated either with [131I]-ELP brachytherapy (n = 6), at a dose
of 5.83 Ci/mm^3, or with an ELP-only control injection (n = 6). Tumor
response was tracked non-invasively using luminescent imaging for 60
days. The ELP brachytherapy demonstrated significant tumor inhibition (p
< 0.05, one-way ANOVA) and no appreciable side effects as determined by
weight loss. The therapy group experienced a significant survival
benefit, with a median duration of 27 days (p The intratumoral delivery
of radioactive therapeutics, a clinical technique known as brachytherapy,
has proven very successful in treating solid cancers and become a
prevalent option for treating prostate, breast, and melanoma tumors. The
method typically involves the permanent implantation of 80-120 titanium
seeds encapsulating radioactive isotopes and requires expert spatial
placement to ensure full dose coverage. The disadvantages of the seeds
include a complicated implantation process, the permanence of the
implants, migration of seeds to off-target sites, and that the titanium
shielding limits the application of radionuclides which could treat more
aggressive forms of cancer. As such, we have developed a next-generation
brachytherapy alternative to solid seeds using an injectable,
biodegradable, biocompatible and thermosensitive elastin-like polypeptide
(ELP). Through recombinant design and synthesis, ELP exhibits a thermal
phase transition (soluble-to-insoluble) when heated above 21C. This
allows radionuclide-bearing ELP to be easily handled as a fluid at room
temperature, but enables spontaneous self-assembly into a stable
brachytherapy gel upon intratumoral injection at body temperature.
Previously, we demonstrated the efficacy of ELP brachytherapy in treating
both s.c. human hypopharyngeal tumors and orthotopic human prostate
tumors xenografted in mice models.Treatment options for pancreatic cancer
remain limited due to a large proportion of patients presenting with
advanced disease at the time of diagnosis. Trials investigating the use
of brachytherapy as a neo-adjuvant for shrinking pancreatic tumors prior
to surgery or as an adjuvant to inhibit recurrence have provided
encouragement. By conjugating the more potent radionuclide 131-Iodine to
ELP, we investigated the ability of ELP brachytherapy to treat more
clinically aggressive pancreatic tumors. Utilizing a human CRL-1687 cell
line transfected to express luciferase (BxPc3-luc2), human pancreatic
tumors were xenografted into an orthotopic, athymic nu/nu mouse model.
Upon reaching 150 mm^3 in size, mice were treated either with [131I]-ELP
brachytherapy (n = 6), at a dose of 5.83 Ci/mm^3, or with an ELP-only
control injection (n = 6). Tumor response was tracked non-invasively
using luminescent imaging for 60 days. The ELP brachytherapy demonstrated
significant tumor inhibition (p < 0.05, one-way ANOVA) and no appreciable
side effects as determined by weight loss. The therapy group experienced
a significant survival benefit, with a median duration of 27 days (p <
0.005, log-rank test), when compared to control mice. These results,
while promising as a proof of concept, demonstrate that further
development is required to determine the both the appropriate radiation
dose and to intratumoral coverage for translational application.

