Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nedd4-1 is an exceptional prognostic biomarker for gastric cardia
adenocarcinoma and functionally associated with metastasis


Background: Gastric cardia adenocarcinoma (GCA) is the most aggressive
subtype of gastric carcinoma. New molecular markers and therapeutic
targets are needed for diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of GCA. This
study is to establish the E3 ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-1 as a prognostic
biomarker to predict the survival and guide the treatment of GCA
patients.Methods: Expression of Nedd4-1 in 214 GCA tumor samples was
detected by immunohistochemistry staining (IHC) using tissue microarray
assay (TMA). Association of Nedd4-1 with cumulative survival of the TNM
stages I-III patients and clinicopathological characteristics was
statistically analyzed. The role of Nedd4-1 in gastric cancer cell
migration and invasion were determined by transwell and wound healing
assays.Results: Nedd4-1 is overexpressed in 83% of the GCA tumors. The
5-year survival rate in Nedd4-1 negative GCA patients is as high as 96%.
Log-rank analysis indicated that overexpression of Nedd4-1 is inversely
correlated with cumulative survival (2 = 21.885, pBackground: Gastric
cardia adenocarcinoma (GCA) is the most aggressive subtype of gastric
carcinoma. New molecular markers and therapeutic targets are needed for
diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of GCA. This study is to establish the
E3 ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-1 as a prognostic biomarker to predict the
survival and guide the treatment of GCA patients.Methods: Expression of
Nedd4-1 in 214 GCA tumor samples was detected by immunohistochemistry
staining (IHC) using tissue microarray assay (TMA). Association of
Nedd4-1 with cumulative survival of the TNM stages I-III patients and
clinicopathological characteristics was statistically analyzed. The role
of Nedd4-1 in gastric cancer cell migration and invasion were determined
by transwell and wound healing assays.Results: Nedd4-1 is overexpressed
in 83% of the GCA tumors. The 5-year survival rate in Nedd4-1 negative
GCA patients is as high as 96%. Log-rank analysis indicated that
overexpression of Nedd4-1 is inversely correlated with cumulative
survival (2 = 21.885, p<0.001). Multivariate logistic regression analysis
showed that overexpression of Nedd4-1 is associated with an extremely low
GCA survival rate with a hazard ratio (HR) = 0.068 (p = 0.008) in TNM
stages I-III patients. Statistical analysis of association of Nedd4-1
overexpression with clinicopathological characteristics revealed that
overexpression of Nedd4-1 is tightly associated with TNM stage
(pBackground: Gastric cardia adenocarcinoma (GCA) is the most aggressive
subtype of gastric carcinoma. New molecular markers and therapeutic
targets are needed for diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of GCA. This
study is to establish the E3 ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-1 as a prognostic
biomarker to predict the survival and guide the treatment of GCA
patients.Methods: Expression of Nedd4-1 in 214 GCA tumor samples was
detected by immunohistochemistry staining (IHC) using tissue microarray
assay (TMA). Association of Nedd4-1 with cumulative survival of the TNM
stages I-III patients and clinicopathological characteristics was
statistically analyzed. The role of Nedd4-1 in gastric cancer cell
migration and invasion were determined by transwell and wound healing
assays.Results: Nedd4-1 is overexpressed in 83% of the GCA tumors. The
5-year survival rate in Nedd4-1 negative GCA patients is as high as 96%.
Log-rank analysis indicated that overexpression of Nedd4-1 is inversely
correlated with cumulative survival (2 = 21.885, p<0.001). Multivariate
logistic regression analysis showed that overexpression of Nedd4-1 is
associated with an extremely low GCA survival rate with a hazard ratio
(HR) = 0.068 (p = 0.008) in TNM stages I-III patients. Statistical
analysis of association of Nedd4-1 overexpression with
clinicopathological characteristics revealed that overexpression of
Nedd4-1 is tightly associated with TNM stage (p<0.001). Knockdown of
Nedd4-1 in gastric cancer cell lines AGS and N87 dramatically inhibited
the gastric cancer cell migration and invasion.Conclusions: Our results
indicate that Nedd4-1 is an exceptional prognostic biomarker for GCA and
suggest that Nedd4-1 may play an essential role in GCA metastasis.

