Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring of ovarian cancer recurrence and progression via
Lumipulse G CA125II assay


CA125 is useful for monitoring the course of ovarian cancer. The
correlation between CA125 serum levels and the course of the disease was
reported to be 87% (Kenemans, 1993). Persistently rising CA125 levels may
be associated with malignant disease and poor response to therapy,
whereas decreasing CA125 assay values may indicate a favorable response
to therapy (Bast, 1984; Atack, 1986; Schilthuis, 1987; Crombach, 1985).
This study was to evaluate the use of LUMIPULSE G CA125II assay with
patient serum or plasma for the monitoring of the recurrence and
progression of ovarian cancer. METHODS: LUMIPULSE G CA125II assay is a
second-generation CA125 immunoassay using monoclonal antibody (MAb) OC125
as the solid phase antibody and the MAb M11 as the labeled antibody. In
the assay, serum or plasma was added to and incubated with the MAb
OC125-linked magnetic particles. The particles were then washed and
rinsed to remove unbound materials. Alkaline phosphatase-labeled MAb M11
was added to and incubated with the CA125-bound particles. The particles
were then washed and rinsed again to remove unbound materials. Substrate
3-(2-spiroadamantane)-4-methoxy-4-(3-phosphoryloxy) phenyl-1, 2-dioxetane
disodium salt (AMPPD) solution was then added to and mixed with the
particles. Luminescence signals were thus generated by the cleavage
reaction of dephosphorylated AMPPD and converted into the amount of CA125
in the serum or plasma. RESULTS: In the monitoring study, changes in
CA125 levels in serial serum samples collected in SST tubes from 61
patients with ovarian cancer were compared to changes in disease status,
that is, progression or no progression. A total of 297 pairs of
observations were undertaken with an average number of 5.9 observations
per patient. A positive change in CA125 was defined as an increase in the
value that was at least 20% greater than the previous value of the assay.
67% of the 52 patient samples with a positive change correlated with the
disease progression of ovarian cancer while 75% of the 245 patient serial
samples with no significant change in CA125 value correlated with no
progression of ovarian cancer. The total concordance was 73%. A ROC curve
for the diagnosis of progression of ovarian cancer from the ratio of
successive CA125 readings showed an area under the ROC curve (AUC) of
0.727 with SE 0.047; this is highly statistically significantly better
than the no-association AUC of 0.5. In addition, a reference range study
of this assay showed that serum CA125 levels were 35.0 U/mL in 98% of the
healthy female subjects (n = 240), 80% of females with pregnancy (n =
40), 91% of females with benign gynecological disease (n = 300), 92% of
females with non-gynecological benign disease (n = 40), 80% of females
with congestive heart failure (n = 40), and 85% of females with
hypertension (n = 40), respectively. CONCLUSION: The LUMIPULSE G CA125II
assay has demonstrated to be useful in monitoring the course of disease
in patients with ovarian cancer.

