Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid widening of age and race health disparities in prostate
cancer outcomes within the United States, 1973-2014


IntroductionLittle is known concerning how cancer-outcome disparities
have changed over time. We investigated how age and race disparities in
prostate cancer (PCa) survival have changed in the USA over the last 40
years.MethodsWe utilized the SEER database to track PCa outcomes. Incl.
criteria: subjects with PCa diagnosed 1973 - 2008, aged 50-89 yrs. Excl.
criteria: multiple primary cancers, unknown stage.Results658,916 PCa
patients were analyzed. Median follow up for alive patients was 54m
(interquart. range 39-75m). Median age of diagnosis decreased from 73 to
60 yrs from 1973 to 2008, and the proportion aged > = 70 yrs decreased
from 62% to 40%. The proportion diagnosed with metastatic disease
decreased from 18% to 4%; likewise amongst those with M0 disease the
proportion with T3-4 decreased from 41% to 17%. The remainder of the
results are confined to M0 disease. Four-year cancer specific death
decreased progressively for all age groups. But whereas 4 year cancer
specific mortality dropped from 24% to 3% in those aged 50-54, it only
decreased from 38% to 18% in those aged 85-89. Whereas the hazard ratio
(HR) for cancer-specific death for those aged 85-89 (50-54 year old
subjects reference group) was 1.6 in 1973-9, in 2000-8 it was 10.9
(table). The widening age disparities were only marginally altered by
incorporation of tumor stage into the model. Similar widening age
disparities were seen in metastatic disease. Race-related disparities
also widened over the study period; the HR for death increasing from 1.1
(1973-79) to 1.3 (2000-8).ConclusionsAge- and Race- related health
disparities in survival outcomes in both metastatic and non-metastatic
prostate cancer have greatly widened over the past 40 years; this effect
appears to be accelerating and is not explained by delayed diagnosis.
Since outcome disparities have grown against a backdrop of improved
screening, diagnosis and treatment, it appears that measures targeted at
these populations will be needed in order to redress the imbalance.

