Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liposomes containing piperazine compounds inhibit tumor growth in
a patient-derived xenograft model of glioblastoma multiforme


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is fatal in nearly all instances, and
responds poorly to current standards of care. GBMs exhibit resistance to
chemotherapy which leads to tumor recurrence following initial surgical
debulking. We have recently developed an 80 nm liposome containing a
novel hydrophobic microtubule disrupting piperazine. This novel
nanostructure, called IM-1 nanobin, contains 500-1000 piperazine drug
molecules encapsulated in the hydrophobic inner leaflet of the lipid
bilayer in each liposome. This nanoparticle inhibited the proliferation
of GBM cells in vitro, although its cytotoxicity was reduced (3-5 fold)
compared to free drug dissolved in DMSO. Results from FACS analysis
showed that sub-micromolar concentrations of IM-1 caused G2/M phase cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis of U87 GBM cells, as well as early passage GBM
cells derived from a patient-derived xenograft (PDX). In collaboration
with the Northwestern Brain Tumor Institute, we have established a panel
of PDX. Since these tumors are not propagated in culture, they preserve
the mixture of tumor cells and stroma critical for conducting meaningful
therapy response experiments. IM-1 was evaluated in GBM PDX propagated in
subcutaneous and intracranial compartments. In mice bearing subcutaneous
PDX tumors, IM-1 treatment delayed the growth of the tumors compared to
free drug alone; orthotopic GBM PDX studies are ongoing. Our results show
that a novel liposome encapsulated piperazine, IM-1, is a promising new
nanostructure for development as a therapeutic for treating patients with
GBM.

