Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMP processing of bone metastatic prostate cancer-derived PTHrP
yields novel osteogenic peptides


Introduction: Bone metastatic prostate cancer lesions are incurable and
contain areas of extensive osteoblast (osteogenic) and osteoclast
(osteolytic) activity. Understanding how prostate cancer cells elicit
these bone effects can identify new therapeutic
targets.Rationale/Hypothesis: Parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP)
stimulates osteoblasts to promote osteoclast mediated bone resorption.
Mature PTHrP consists of 36 amino-acids and is susceptible to proteolytic
processing. For the first time, we demonstrate that matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP-2, -3, -7, and 9), can process PTHrP1-36 into
distinct peptides (PTHrP 1-17, PTHrP 18-26, and PTHrP 27-36). We posit
that MMP generated PTHrP peptides possess distinct, biological properties
and focused our efforts on osteoblasts and osteoclasts based on the well
documented effects of tumor derived PTHrP 1-36 on these cell
types.Methods: Osteoblast proliferation was determined by trypan blue and
MTT assay. Boyden chamber assays were used to study PTHrP peptide effects
on mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) and osteoblast (MC3T3) migration.
Morphological changes (10nM peptides for 1 hour) were determined by
confocal imaging of actin (phalloidin-488). ERK activity was analyzed by
Western blot while cyclic AMP and calcium flux assays were used to
examine PTHrP signaling. In vitro osteogenic assays were carried out for
16-days in the presence of PTHrP peptides (10nM) followed by alizarin red
staining/quantification. For in vivo calvarial assays, 2g of PTHrP
peptide was injected over the calvaria every 6 hours for 72 hours.
Calvariae were subsequently isolated and processed for histological
analysis.Results: MMP generated peptides did not impact osteoblast
proliferation. However, migration assays demonstrated that PTHrP 1-17 and
PTHrP 1-36 significantly enhanced MSC and MC3T3 migration compared to
control (pIntroduction: Bone metastatic prostate cancer lesions are
incurable and contain areas of extensive osteoblast (osteogenic) and
osteoclast (osteolytic) activity. Understanding how prostate cancer cells
elicit these bone effects can identify new therapeutic
targets.Rationale/Hypothesis: Parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP)
stimulates osteoblasts to promote osteoclast mediated bone resorption.
Mature PTHrP consists of 36 amino-acids and is susceptible to proteolytic
processing. For the first time, we demonstrate that matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP-2, -3, -7, and 9), can process PTHrP1-36 into
distinct peptides (PTHrP 1-17, PTHrP 18-26, and PTHrP 27-36). We posit
that MMP generated PTHrP peptides possess distinct, biological properties
and focused our efforts on osteoblasts and osteoclasts based on the well
documented effects of tumor derived PTHrP 1-36 on these cell
types.Methods: Osteoblast proliferation was determined by trypan blue and
MTT assay. Boyden chamber assays were used to study PTHrP peptide effects
on mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) and osteoblast (MC3T3) migration.
Morphological changes (10nM peptides for 1 hour) were determined by
confocal imaging of actin (phalloidin-488). ERK activity was analyzed by
Western blot while cyclic AMP and calcium flux assays were used to
examine PTHrP signaling. In vitro osteogenic assays were carried out for
16-days in the presence of PTHrP peptides (10nM) followed by alizarin red
staining/quantification. For in vivo calvarial assays, 2g of PTHrP
peptide was injected over the calvaria every 6 hours for 72 hours.
Calvariae were subsequently isolated and processed for histological
analysis.Results: MMP generated peptides did not impact osteoblast
proliferation. However, migration assays demonstrated that PTHrP 1-17 and
PTHrP 1-36 significantly enhanced MSC and MC3T3 migration compared to
control (p<0.05) and had profound effects on morphology whereas PTHrP
18-26 and PTHrP 27-36 had no effect on these processes. Focusing further
on PTHrP 1-17, we observed rapid ERK phosphorylation and calcium flux
within 10 minutes of peptide treatment (10nM), indicating potent
biological activity of PTHrP 1-17. PTHrP 1-17 and PTHrP 1-36 also
significantly stimulated osteoblast differentiation compared to control
(1.6 and 2-fold respectively, pIntroduction: Bone metastatic prostate
cancer lesions are incurable and contain areas of extensive osteoblast
(osteogenic) and osteoclast (osteolytic) activity. Understanding how
prostate cancer cells elicit these bone effects can identify new
therapeutic targets.Rationale/Hypothesis: Parathyroid hormone-related
peptide (PTHrP) stimulates osteoblasts to promote osteoclast mediated
bone resorption. Mature PTHrP consists of 36 amino-acids and is
susceptible to proteolytic processing. For the first time, we demonstrate
that matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-2, -3, -7, and 9), can process
PTHrP1-36 into distinct peptides (PTHrP 1-17, PTHrP 18-26, and PTHrP
27-36). We posit that MMP generated PTHrP peptides possess distinct,
biological properties and focused our efforts on osteoblasts and
osteoclasts based on the well documented effects of tumor derived PTHrP
1-36 on these cell types.Methods: Osteoblast proliferation was determined
by trypan blue and MTT assay. Boyden chamber assays were used to study
PTHrP peptide effects on mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) and osteoblast
(MC3T3) migration. Morphological changes (10nM peptides for 1 hour) were
determined by confocal imaging of actin (phalloidin-488). ERK activity
was analyzed by Western blot while cyclic AMP and calcium flux assays
were used to examine PTHrP signaling. In vitro osteogenic assays were
carried out for 16-days in the presence of PTHrP peptides (10nM) followed
by alizarin red staining/quantification. For in vivo calvarial assays, 2g
of PTHrP peptide was injected over the calvaria every 6 hours for 72
hours. Calvariae were subsequently isolated and processed for
histological analysis.Results: MMP generated peptides did not impact
osteoblast proliferation. However, migration assays demonstrated that
PTHrP 1-17 and PTHrP 1-36 significantly enhanced MSC and MC3T3 migration
compared to control (p<0.05) and had profound effects on morphology
whereas PTHrP 18-26 and PTHrP 27-36 had no effect on these processes.
Focusing further on PTHrP 1-17, we observed rapid ERK phosphorylation and
calcium flux within 10 minutes of peptide treatment (10nM), indicating
potent biological activity of PTHrP 1-17. PTHrP 1-17 and PTHrP 1-36 also
significantly stimulated osteoblast differentiation compared to control
(1.6 and 2-fold respectively, p<0.05), but had little or no effect on
direct osteoclast formation or activity in vitro. However, in vivo we
observed that PTHrP 1-36 induced a robust osteolytic response, an effect
that was not observed with PTHrP 1-17.Conclusion: Our data demonstrate
that MMPs can generate distinct PTHrP peptides, of which PTHrP 1-17
significantly stimulates osteoblast migration and differentiation.
However, unlike PTHrP 1-36, PTHrP 1-17 does not impact osteoclast
activity suggesting a novel role for MMPs in regulating the
osteolytic-osteogenic responses commonly observed in bone metastatic
prostate cancer.

