Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of HPV integration sites in the human genome


Background. Persistent infection with carcinogenic human papillomaviruses
(HPV) is known to be cause of the majority of anogenital cancers as well
as some head and neck cancers. With the progression of the disease, the
HPV genome is commonly integrated within the host DNA, although the
mechanism by which integration may promote the progression of the disease
is not well-understood. We performed a systematic review of integration
events in HPV-related cancers and analyzed the genomic regions where
these events occur.Methods. A PubMed search was performed to collect all
published data on integration loci. A total of 29 articles were eligible
for the analysis. Determination of genomic integration sites for papers
that provided exact nucleotide sequences of integration sites or viral
fusion regions was done by using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool
(BLAST, http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) for the GRCh37/hg19
build. We used the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) data to
investigate if certain genetic features clustered with integrations
sites. The Wilcoxon rank sum test was computed to compare the observed
and expected distributions of minimal distances from the integration
sites with known nucleotide positions to the different genetic
features.Results. As of November 2014, approximately 1,200 integration
events were reported in the literature from both tumors and cell lines.
The majority of integrations sites (53%) were reported in cervical
tumors, 9% in head and neck tumors, 4% of oropharyngeal tumors and 23% in
cell lines,. Six percent and 2% of the integration sites were found in
high-grade and low-grade cervical lesions, respectively. The majority of
reported integration events (77%) were related to HPV16. We found that
integration sites from tumors were closer to known genes (p Background.
Persistent infection with carcinogenic human papillomaviruses (HPV) is
known to be cause of the majority of anogenital cancers as well as some
head and neck cancers. With the progression of the disease, the HPV
genome is commonly integrated within the host DNA, although the mechanism
by which integration may promote the progression of the disease is not
well-understood. We performed a systematic review of integration events
in HPV-related cancers and analyzed the genomic regions where these
events occur.Methods. A PubMed search was performed to collect all
published data on integration loci. A total of 29 articles were eligible
for the analysis. Determination of genomic integration sites for papers
that provided exact nucleotide sequences of integration sites or viral
fusion regions was done by using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool
(BLAST, http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) for the GRCh37/hg19
build. We used the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) data to
investigate if certain genetic features clustered with integrations
sites. The Wilcoxon rank sum test was computed to compare the observed
and expected distributions of minimal distances from the integration
sites with known nucleotide positions to the different genetic
features.Results. As of November 2014, approximately 1,200 integration
events were reported in the literature from both tumors and cell lines.
The majority of integrations sites (53%) were reported in cervical
tumors, 9% in head and neck tumors, 4% of oropharyngeal tumors and 23% in
cell lines,. Six percent and 2% of the integration sites were found in
high-grade and low-grade cervical lesions, respectively. The majority of
reported integration events (77%) were related to HPV16. We found that
integration sites from tumors were closer to known genes (p <1014) and
CpG islands (p Background. Persistent infection with carcinogenic human
papillomaviruses (HPV) is known to be cause of the majority of anogenital
cancers as well as some head and neck cancers. With the progression of
the disease, the HPV genome is commonly integrated within the host DNA,
although the mechanism by which integration may promote the progression
of the disease is not well-understood. We performed a systematic review
of integration events in HPV-related cancers and analyzed the genomic
regions where these events occur.Methods. A PubMed search was performed
to collect all published data on integration loci. A total of 29 articles
were eligible for the analysis. Determination of genomic integration
sites for papers that provided exact nucleotide sequences of integration
sites or viral fusion regions was done by using the Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool (BLAST, http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) for the
GRCh37/hg19 build. We used the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) data
to investigate if certain genetic features clustered with integrations
sites. The Wilcoxon rank sum test was computed to compare the observed
and expected distributions of minimal distances from the integration
sites with known nucleotide positions to the different genetic
features.Results. As of November 2014, approximately 1,200 integration
events were reported in the literature from both tumors and cell lines.
The majority of integrations sites (53%) were reported in cervical
tumors, 9% in head and neck tumors, 4% of oropharyngeal tumors and 23% in
cell lines,. Six percent and 2% of the integration sites were found in
high-grade and low-grade cervical lesions, respectively. The majority of
reported integration events (77%) were related to HPV16. We found that
integration sites from tumors were closer to known genes (p <1014) and
CpG islands (p <109) than expected by chance. Among repetitive elements,
long terminal repeats (LTR) were enriched in integration sites (P =
0.001). Open chromatin based on the FAIRE-seq peaks showed significant
enrichment in integration sites (p Background. Persistent infection with
carcinogenic human papillomaviruses (HPV) is known to be cause of the
majority of anogenital cancers as well as some head and neck cancers.
With the progression of the disease, the HPV genome is commonly
integrated within the host DNA, although the mechanism by which
integration may promote the progression of the disease is not
well-understood. We performed a systematic review of integration events
in HPV-related cancers and analyzed the genomic regions where these
events occur.Methods. A PubMed search was performed to collect all
published data on integration loci. A total of 29 articles were eligible
for the analysis. Determination of genomic integration sites for papers
that provided exact nucleotide sequences of integration sites or viral
fusion regions was done by using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool
(BLAST, http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) for the GRCh37/hg19
build. We used the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) data to
investigate if certain genetic features clustered with integrations
sites. The Wilcoxon rank sum test was computed to compare the observed
and expected distributions of minimal distances from the integration
sites with known nucleotide positions to the different genetic
features.Results. As of November 2014, approximately 1,200 integration
events were reported in the literature from both tumors and cell lines.
The majority of integrations sites (53%) were reported in cervical
tumors, 9% in head and neck tumors, 4% of oropharyngeal tumors and 23% in
cell lines,. Six percent and 2% of the integration sites were found in
high-grade and low-grade cervical lesions, respectively. The majority of
reported integration events (77%) were related to HPV16. We found that
integration sites from tumors were closer to known genes (p <1014) and
CpG islands (p <109) than expected by chance. Among repetitive elements,
long terminal repeats (LTR) were enriched in integration sites (P =
0.001). Open chromatin based on the FAIRE-seq peaks showed significant
enrichment in integration sites (p <1011).Conclusions. In summary,
integration sites occur in genomic regions with enrichment for genetic
elements, such as gene-rich regions, CpG sites, repetitive elements and
open chromatin regions. This corroborates that accessible regions of the
genome are preferentially targeted by integration and suggests that host
genes may be functionally altered in development of HPV-related cancers.

