Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonist 5F 203 induces oxidative stress
triggering DNA damage and cytoglobin up-regulation in human breast cancer
cells


Breakthroughs are needed in breast cancer therapy to improve clinical
outcomes. Emerging evidence suggests that tumorigenesis stems, in part,
from epigenetically silenced tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) and restoring
TSGs may represent a viable strategy to treat breast cancer. We
previously found that aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) agonist
2-(4-amino-3-methylphenyl)-5-fluorobenzothiazole (5F 203) exhibits potent
cytotoxicity, increases reactive oxygen species (ROS), induces DNA damage
and up-regulates the expression of putative tumor suppressor gene
cytoglobin in breast cancer cells. In the current study, we seek to
delineate the mechanism by which 5F 203 induces DNA damage and cytoglobin
expression in susceptible breast cancer cells. We found that 5F 203
activated p38 mitogen activated protein kinase (p38) and c-Jun-N terminal
kinase (JNK) signaling in breast cancer cells. Pretreatment with
antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine or AhR inhibitor -naphthoflavone
diminished 5F 203-mediated p38 or JNK activation in a cell
context-dependent fashion. Pretreatment with pharmacological inhibitors
of p38 or JNK suppressed 5F 203-mediated increases in intracellular ROS
to suggest the presence of a positive feedback loop. 5F 203 induced
oxidative DNA damage in breast cancer cells but not breast epithelial
MCF-10A cells unlike AhR agonist benzo[a]pyrene which induced oxidative
DNA damage more indiscriminately. Pretreatment with p38 or JNK inhibitors
suppressed 5F 203-induced single strand break formation and cytoglobin
mRNA expression in breast cancer cells. Our data show 5F 203 confers
anticancer activity in breast cancer cells in part by increasing ROS via
a positive feedback loop to sustain p38 and JNK activation resulting in
DNA damage and cytoglobin restoration.

