Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-penetrating bispecific antibodies for targeting androgen
receptor signaling in advanced prostate cancer


Androgen receptor (AR) plays a critical role in the development and
progression of prostate cancer (PCa). Current therapies target the
ligand-binding domain (LBD) of AR by inhibiting production or binding of
ligand. In castration-resistant PCa (CRPC), AR isoforms lacking the LBD
are highly expressed, resulting in constitutive, ligand-independent AR
signaling. Therapies to block ligand-independent AR signaling have not
been introduced into clinical use. We have developed bispecific
antibodies (bsAbs) that penetrate PCa cells and bind to the N-terminal
domain of the AR, inhibiting AR signaling. The 3E10-AR441 bsAb was
engineered by connecting two single-chain variable fragments (scFv) with
a linker. One half of the bsAb molecule is scFv 3E10, derived from a
lupus anti-DNA antibody. This module enters cells through the ENT2
nucleoside salvage receptor and locates in the nucleus. The other half is
an scFv based on the anti-AR monoclonal antibody AR441. The 3E10-AR441
bsAb is expressed in yeast as a single recombinant protein. Treatment of
LNCaP with bsAb resulted in nuclear accumulation of the antibody,
visualized by confocal microscopy. The 3E10-AR441 bsAb also engaged its
target under denaturing and non-denaturing conditions. The bsAb could
detect AR when used to probe an AR immunoblot. It could also
immunoprecipitate WT AR, as well as mutant/variant AR lacking the LBD
(AR(Q640X), Arv7). The scFv 3E10 alone did not bind to AR. BsAb binding
affinity to AR was assessed using a competitive sandwich-type ELISA. An
anti-AR antibody-coated microtiter plate was used to capture WT AR or
mutant\variant AR from cell lysates. AR441-HRP antibody conjugate was
mixed with increasing concentrations of 3E10-AR441 or AR441 as
competitors. Binding affinity of 3E10-AR441 to WT AR (180nM) was higher
than that of the parental AR441 MoAb (7nM). Affinity of bsAb was 3 fold
higher to WT AR than to an AR(Q640X) mutant. The bsAb blocked genomic AR
signaling in LNCaP cells, as measured by dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
activation of both artificial (ARE-luciferase) and endogenous (PSA)
reporters. The magnitude of inhibition was similar to that seen with
enzalutamide at 5 M. The 3E10 scFv alone had minimal effect on reporter
gene expression. Non-genomic AR signaling was measured by calcium release
upon DHT treatment. Calcium5 dye was added to LNCap treated with variable
doses of bsAb or 3E10. The fluorescence intensity is proportional to the
amount of calcium released. 3E10-AR441 blocked DHT-induced release of
calcium while 3E10 did not. Current work is focused on the design of
3E10-AR441 derivatives with enhanced binding affinity towards AR mutants
lacking the LBD. 3E10-AR441 bsAb is an attractive therapeutic agent due
to its ability to inhibit AR function in a ligand-independent manner.

