Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetically engineered NY-ESO-1-specific T cells in HLA-A2+
patients with synovial sarcoma


NY-ESO-1 is expressed in 70% of synovial sarcomas and not expressed in
vital tissues. We report interim results of NCT01343043 evaluating safety
and activity of autologous T cells engineered to express an HLA-A2+
restricted, affinity-enhanced T cell receptor (TCR) targeting NY-ESO-1.
HLA-A2+ patients with unresectable, metastatic, or recurrent synovial
sarcoma were eligible if tumors expressed NY-ESO-1 by IHC. Lymphocytes
were activated using anti-CD3/28 microbeads, genetically modified with a
lentivector, then cryopreserved. Subjects received fludarabine 30mg/m2/d
(D-6 to -2) and cyclophosphamide 1800mg/m2/d (D-3,-2), and infusion of
engineered T cells. Systemic IL-2 was not administered. Nine subjects
have received NY-ESO-1 cell infusions. Median transduced T cell dose was
3.4 109 cells (range 0.4-14.4), 60106 cells/kg (range 5.7-165.5), and
median transduction efficiency was 45.8%. Toxicity likely attributable to
the T cells included fever, and grade 1-2 cytokine release syndrome. No
autoimmune toxicity has been observed. Circulating engineered NY-ESO-1
cells were detected in all patients, peaking 3-21 days post-infusion.
Persistence has been evaluated beyond 3 months in 4 subjects, all of whom
had detectable NY-ESO-1 cells at 4 mos, 6 mos+, 12 mos+ and 12 mos+. We
identified persisting NY-ESO-1 T cells using dextamer and/or anti-v13.1
mAbs, and observed that a high fraction of CD4+ and CD8+ NY-ESO-1 TCR
expressing T cells were CD45RA+CCR7+CD95+, consistent with a stem cell
memory phenotype. Persisting cells also demonstrate a polyfunctional
(IFN- and TNF-) and cytotoxic (CD107a and granzyme B) signature without
overexpression of exhaustion markers (PD-1, LAG-3, and TIM-3). Of 8
patients whose follow-up is sufficient to assess response, 4 experienced
objective responses (1CR x 9 mos, 1PR x 9 mos, 2PR x 6 mos). Tumor
shrinkage could not be attributed to chemotherapy alone as progressive
decreases in tumor size were observed over several months following
completion of the lymphodepleting regimen. All PR patients (2 upon signs
of progression and 1 still responding to therapy) ultimately underwent
resection for residual disease and two remain without evidence of
disease. Adoptive immunotherapy with NY-ESO-1 engineered T cells shows
promising results in synovial sarcoma with acceptable toxicity. High dose
IL-2 is not required for therapeutic benefit with this regimen.

