Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral administration of a traditional herbal remedy, JC001,
suppresses pancreatic tumorigenesis in mice via regulating immune cell
functions


The traditional Chinese herbal medicine JC001 is widely used as an
effective liver-protecting remedy in Taiwan and China for decades. We
have first examined the antitumor effects of JC001 using both mouse
xenograft and oncogene-induced tumor models. Our results indicated that
the numbers of M1-type macrophages, mitogen-stimulated T cell
proliferation and natural killer cell activity were increased in
wild-type mice with oral administration of JC001. Interestingly,
continuous administration of JC001 for a month markedly reduced the
numbers and the sizes of tumor nodules in a mouse pancreatic xenograft
model. In contrast to this observation in immune-competent mice, our data
revealed that the average tumor size in JC001-administrated nude mice was
comparable with that of the control tumor-bearing nude mice without JC001
treatment, suggesting that JC001-induced antitumor activity is mediated
by T cells. Adoptive transfer of the splenocytes isolated from
immune-competent mice with JC001 treatment into tumor-bearing nude mice
reduced tumor growth in these T cell-deficient mice. Moreover, increased
cytotoxic activity of natural killer (NK) cells was also observed in mice
treated with JC001. In an oncogene-induced tumor model, orally
administered JC001 significantly suppressed caerulein-triggered
development of pancreatic neoplasias and cancer cell metastasis in
KrasG12D/w Pdx-Cre transgenic mice. Together, our results clearly suggest
that JC001 exerts immunomodulatory activity mainly through regulating T
and NK cell responses to suppress pancreatic cancer development and
metastasis.

