Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of 3D-microtissues suitable for drug screening with
lentivirally GFP-labelled CD44+CD24- breast cancer cells enriched by
irradiation


A stem cell like subpopulation of human T47D and MDA-MB-361 breast cancer
cells (CD44+CD24-) was enriched by irradiation (2 Gy) and isolated using
magnetic activated cell sorting. As an additional stem cell model,
primary murine mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were isolated from the bone
marrow of C3HxBL mice. We confirmed the stemness phenotype by
repopulating heterogeneous cancer cell lines from isolated CD44+CD24-
cells or by inducing differentiation of MSCs to the osteocyte, adipocyte
and chondrocyte lineage.For gene delivery in cancer research, lentiviral
transduction protocols are widely used though low transduction
efficiencies of especially primary cells force the use of high lentiviral
titers. In search for an optimized transduction protocol we came across a
poloxamer-based chemical adjuvant to increase lentiviral gene delivery in
primary cells [Hfig et al, Journal of Gene Medicine, 2012 and Hfig et al,
Biomaterials, 2014]. Next we aimed to expand these benefits to transduce
cells with a stem cell phenotype. After lentiviral transduction of a GFP
encoding lentivirus in the presence of the poloxamer-based chemical
adjuvant we could detect highest numbers of GFP expressing cells. Neither
the chemical adjuvant nor the transgenic GFP expression altered the
stemness phenotype of those cells analysed by repopulation or
differentiation assays and by detection of stem cell markers on mRNA
level (CD133 and Sox2). To monitor the fate of GFP-expressing CD44+CD24-
cells, we cultured them in 3D-microtissues in mix with unlabelled bulk
cells and analysed the effect of irradiation on cell number and location
of CD44+CD24- cells within the spheroid.In this study we present a method
for induction and isolation of human breast cancer cells with a stem cell
like phenotype and developed an improved lentiviral transduction method
by a chemical adjuvant preserving the stemness character in human and
murine cells. Efficient lentiviral transduction enabled the generation of
3D-microtissues with GFP-labeled CD44+CD24- cells that both can be
studied in cancer research and shall have applications for drug screening.

