Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mutational burdens and evolutionary ages of early gastric
cancers are comparable to those of advanced gastric cancers


Early gastric cancers (EGCs) precede advanced gastric cancers (AGCs),
with a favourable prognosis compared to AGC. To understand the
progression mechanism of EGC to AGC, it is required to disclose EGC and
AGC genomes in mutational and evolutionary perspectives. We performed
whole-exome sequencing and copy number profiling of nine microsatellite
(MS)-unstable (MSI-H) (five EGCs and four AGCs) and eight MS-stable (MSS)
gastric cancers (four EGCs and four AGCs). In the cancers, we observed
well-known driver mutations (TP53, APC, PIK3CA, ARID1A, and KRAS) that
were enriched in cancer-related pathways, including chromatin remodelling
and tyrosine kinase activity. The MSI-H genomes harboured ten times more
mutations, but were largely depleted of copy number alterations (CNAs)
compared to the MSS cancers. Interestingly, EGC genomes showed a
comparable level of mutations to AGC in terms of the number, sequence
composition, and functional consequences (potential driver mutations and
affected pathways) of mutations. Furthermore, the CNAs between EGC and
AGC genomes were not significantly different in either MSI-H and MSS.
Evolutionary analyses using somatic mutations and MSI as molecular clocks
further identified that EGC genomes were as old as AGC genomes in both
MSS and MSI-H cancers. Our results suggest that the genetic makeup for
gastric cancer may already be achieved in EGC genomes and that the time
required for transition to AGC may be relatively short. Also, the data
suggest a possibility that the mutational profiles obtained from early
biopsies may be useful in the clinical settings for the molecular
diagnosis and therapeutics of gastric cancer patients.

