Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RET and integrins cooperate in cell-microenvironment response


The RET receptor tyrosine kinase is expressed in neural crest-derived
cell types, where it is activated by soluble ligands of the Glial
Cell-derived Neurotrophic Factor (GDNF) family and signals through
multiple downstream pathways, contributing to cell growth, survival, and
migration during embryonic development. In addition to its normal
developmental roles, oncogenic mutations or aberrant expression of RET
are also linked to tumour spread and metastasis in multiple human tumour
types. Thus, a consistent feature of RET involvement in these disease
processes is its contribution to directional cell motility. We have
previously shown that RET-mediated cell-adhesion and migration requires
multiple members of the integrin family of cell adhesion molecules,
including integrin 1 (ITGB1) and 3 (ITGB3) subunits, however the
regulation of cell migration and invasion by RET and integrins has not
been explored.In this study, we showed that GDNF-mediated RET activation
induced rapid ITGB1 and ITGB3 activation with transiently increased cell
adhesion, followed by enhanced cell protrusion formation and reduced
adhesion typical of more migratory cells. In addition, we showed that
directional cell migration in response to GDNF requires the presence of
both extracellular matrix and a GDNF concentration gradient. Our data
also suggest that ITGB1 and ITGB3 play complementary but non-compensatory
roles in the initiation of RET-mediated cell migration and invasion, and
that the inhibition of either ITGB1 or ITGB3 resulted in impaired
migration and invasion in both 2D and 3D culture conditions. We have also
shown that multiple signaling pathways downstream of RET are involved in
these processes and that these pathways contribute differently to
migration in 2D vs 3D microenvironments. These data highlight the ability
of tumour cells to leverage different signaling pathways to mediate cell
migration and invasion downstream of RET, and reveal ways in which
cooperation between RET and integrins might affect aspects of tumour
progression. Our data, together with other studies which have shown
combination therapy targeting integrins and RTKs to be more effective
than monotherapy, suggest that adjuvant treatment with agents targeting
integrin function may further enhance therapeutic options for tumours
where RET is expressed.

