Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining Ibrutinib with immune checkpoint blockade to induce
therapeutic antitumor immune response in solid tumors


The ability of T-cell responses to effectively attack tumors is
restricted by multiple negative checkpoint regulators. Monoclonal
antibodies blocking negative regulators of T -cells, such as CTLA-4 and
PD-L1 can amplify pre-existing immune responses and evoke new therapeutic
responses. Ibrutinib (Imbruvica), a covalent inhibitor of BTK has shown
therapeutic efficacy in several blood cancers, by a mechanism thought to
be a direct effect on a critical signaling pathway intrinsic to the
malignant B cell. Since BTK is predominantly expressed in hematopoietic
cells, solid tumors have not been an obvious target of this drug. An
additional target of ibrutinib is the inhibition of ITK, a key enzyme in
the survival of Th2 T cells. It has been reported that ibrutinib can
alter the balance of Th1 and Th2 T cells leading to enhanced immune
responses.Here we report that the combination of ibrutinib and a-PD-L1
antibody suppresses tumor growth, reduces lung metastasis and improves
survival of mice bearing solid tumors such as 4T1-triple negative breast
cancer and CT26-colon cancer. Moreover, the combination of ibrutinib and
a-PD-L1 was able to overcome ibrutinib resistance in mouse models of
lymphoma and myeloma. We present evidence that the synergistic
therapeutic activity of Ibrutinib with anti PD1 blockade results in
enhanced T cell anti-tumor immune responses.In preclinical models, by
combining inhibitory checkpoint blockade while shifting the immune
response towards CD4 Th1 with ibrutinib, immune tolerance to tumors can
be overcome. These results provide rationale for several newly planned
clinical trials combining ibrutinib with PD-1 blockade in solid tumor and
exploration of such a combination in hematologic malignancies.

