Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discerning the PARP-dependent AR cistrome/transcriptome in
prostate cancer


Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) is an abundant nuclear enzyme
that modifies substrates by poly (ADP-ribose)-ylation. Although PARP-1
has a number of well-described roles in the response to and repair of DNA
damage (especially as associated with base excision repair), significant
studies have demonstrated that PARP-1 functions in transcriptional
regulation in multiple contexts. In the context of prostatic
adenocarcinoma (PCa), our group recently discovered that PARP-1 enzymatic
activity is a critical effector of androgen receptor (AR) function, and
is recruited to regulatory sites of select AR target genes.
Pharmacological inhibition of PARP-1 enzymatic activity results in
diminished AR and PARP-1 residency at AR target gene regulatory loci,
reduced AR target gene expression, and reduced AR-driven, PCa-associated
phenotypes, including castrate-resistant PCa (CRPC) AR function, tumor
cell growth, and transition to CRPC. Accordingly, to gain further
mechanistic insight in to the PARP-1-dependent AR cistrome/transcriptome,
unbiased genome-wide analyses were undertaken in both hormone
therapy-sensitive PCa and CRPC model systems. Data to be discussed
provide essential insight into the mechanisms by which PARP-1 modulates
gene regulation and AR function, but also identifies new and unexpected
functions of PARP-1 in human malignancies.

