Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determinants of hypomethylation and clinical responses in
relapsed/refractory AML patients treated with SGI-110, a novel
hypomethylating agent in a phase 1/2 study


Introduction: SGI-110 is a dinucleotide of decitabine and deoxyguanosine
and a novel subcutaneous (SQ) hypomethylating agent. In a previous Phase
1 (dose escalation) study, we found in relapsed/refractory (r/r) AML
patients who were treated with SGI-110 (36 mg/m2-125 mg/m2)
subcutaneously (SQ) daily for 5 days a correlation between low LINE-1
demethylation induction, a three gene expression classifier score (low
CDA, low P15 and high DNMT3B) and resistance to SGI-110. Here, we
analyzed r/r AML patients (n = 122) from Phase 1/2 studies treated at
pharmacologically effective doses of SGI-110 looking for determinants of
hypomethylation and response.Methods: Phase 1 patients with r/r AML (n =
27) who were treated at a therapeutic dose range of SGI-110 (35 mg/m2 -
125 mg/m2) by SQ daily for 5 days. Phase 2 study r/r AML patients
received 60 mg/m2 SQ daily for 5 days (n = 22), 90 mg/m2 SQ daily for 5
days (n = 25) and 60 mg/m2 SQ daily for 10 days (n = 48). Global DNA
methylation at pre/post treatment was estimated by
bisulfite-pyrosequencing for the LINE-1 repetitive sequence. We also
examined expression of a panel of genes (CDA, P15, P21, DNMT3B, DNMT3A,
DNMT1, and CTCF) at baseline by quantitative RT-PCR.Results: We analyzed
samples from 122 patients with r/r AML. Median age was 59.6 (range,
23-86), 75 were males (61.5%). Overall, peak LINE-1 demethylation
generally occurred on day 8 after daily x 5 treatment, or on day 8 or 15
after daily x 10 treatment. In individual patients, peak LINE-1
demethylation ranged from +4.9% to -56.3%. In 122 r/r AML patients, 28
showed overall remission (23.0%, 15 CR and 13 CRi/CRp). Unsupervised
clustering by expression of a panel of genes at baseline grouped the
patients into two clusters: A (N = 95, response rate = 29.5%) and B (N =
27, response rate = 0%). Cluster B is characterized by high DNMT3b
expression, low P15 expression, low CDA expression (average Z-score 1.44
0.26 in cluster B compared to -1.26 0.14 in clusters A, pIntroduction:
SGI-110 is a dinucleotide of decitabine and deoxyguanosine and a novel
subcutaneous (SQ) hypomethylating agent. In a previous Phase 1 (dose
escalation) study, we found in relapsed/refractory (r/r) AML patients who
were treated with SGI-110 (36 mg/m2-125 mg/m2) subcutaneously (SQ) daily
for 5 days a correlation between low LINE-1 demethylation induction, a
three gene expression classifier score (low CDA, low P15 and high DNMT3B)
and resistance to SGI-110. Here, we analyzed r/r AML patients (n = 122)
from Phase 1/2 studies treated at pharmacologically effective doses of
SGI-110 looking for determinants of hypomethylation and response.Methods:
Phase 1 patients with r/r AML (n = 27) who were treated at a therapeutic
dose range of SGI-110 (35 mg/m2 - 125 mg/m2) by SQ daily for 5 days.
Phase 2 study r/r AML patients received 60 mg/m2 SQ daily for 5 days (n =
22), 90 mg/m2 SQ daily for 5 days (n = 25) and 60 mg/m2 SQ daily for 10
days (n = 48). Global DNA methylation at pre/post treatment was estimated
by bisulfite-pyrosequencing for the LINE-1 repetitive sequence. We also
examined expression of a panel of genes (CDA, P15, P21, DNMT3B, DNMT3A,
DNMT1, and CTCF) at baseline by quantitative RT-PCR.Results: We analyzed
samples from 122 patients with r/r AML. Median age was 59.6 (range,
23-86), 75 were males (61.5%). Overall, peak LINE-1 demethylation
generally occurred on day 8 after daily x 5 treatment, or on day 8 or 15
after daily x 10 treatment. In individual patients, peak LINE-1
demethylation ranged from +4.9% to -56.3%. In 122 r/r AML patients, 28
showed overall remission (23.0%, 15 CR and 13 CRi/CRp). Unsupervised
clustering by expression of a panel of genes at baseline grouped the
patients into two clusters: A (N = 95, response rate = 29.5%) and B (N =
27, response rate = 0%). Cluster B is characterized by high DNMT3b
expression, low P15 expression, low CDA expression (average Z-score 1.44
0.26 in cluster B compared to -1.26 0.14 in clusters A, p<0.0001) and
reduced demethylation (demethylation average -14.2 1.90% in cluster B
compared to -26.1 1.38% in clusters A, pIntroduction: SGI-110 is a
dinucleotide of decitabine and deoxyguanosine and a novel subcutaneous
(SQ) hypomethylating agent. In a previous Phase 1 (dose escalation)
study, we found in relapsed/refractory (r/r) AML patients who were
treated with SGI-110 (36 mg/m2-125 mg/m2) subcutaneously (SQ) daily for 5
days a correlation between low LINE-1 demethylation induction, a three
gene expression classifier score (low CDA, low P15 and high DNMT3B) and
resistance to SGI-110. Here, we analyzed r/r AML patients (n = 122) from
Phase 1/2 studies treated at pharmacologically effective doses of SGI-110
looking for determinants of hypomethylation and response.Methods: Phase 1
patients with r/r AML (n = 27) who were treated at a therapeutic dose
range of SGI-110 (35 mg/m2 - 125 mg/m2) by SQ daily for 5 days. Phase 2
study r/r AML patients received 60 mg/m2 SQ daily for 5 days (n = 22), 90
mg/m2 SQ daily for 5 days (n = 25) and 60 mg/m2 SQ daily for 10 days (n =
48). Global DNA methylation at pre/post treatment was estimated by
bisulfite-pyrosequencing for the LINE-1 repetitive sequence. We also
examined expression of a panel of genes (CDA, P15, P21, DNMT3B, DNMT3A,
DNMT1, and CTCF) at baseline by quantitative RT-PCR.Results: We analyzed
samples from 122 patients with r/r AML. Median age was 59.6 (range,
23-86), 75 were males (61.5%). Overall, peak LINE-1 demethylation
generally occurred on day 8 after daily x 5 treatment, or on day 8 or 15
after daily x 10 treatment. In individual patients, peak LINE-1
demethylation ranged from +4.9% to -56.3%. In 122 r/r AML patients, 28
showed overall remission (23.0%, 15 CR and 13 CRi/CRp). Unsupervised
clustering by expression of a panel of genes at baseline grouped the
patients into two clusters: A (N = 95, response rate = 29.5%) and B (N =
27, response rate = 0%). Cluster B is characterized by high DNMT3b
expression, low P15 expression, low CDA expression (average Z-score 1.44
0.26 in cluster B compared to -1.26 0.14 in clusters A, p<0.0001) and
reduced demethylation (demethylation average -14.2 1.90% in cluster B
compared to -26.1 1.38% in clusters A, p<0.0001). Peak LINE-1
demethylation was significantly higher in responders than non-responders
(average demethylation -32.33 1.91% in responders compared to -21.25
1.42% in non-responders, p = 0.0001). A three gene classifier score (low
CDA, low P15 and high DNMT3B) was associated with low LINE-1
demethylation (R = 0.27, p = 0.0034) as well as resistance to SGI-110
(mean Z-score -0.75 in non-responders compared to -1.67 in responders, p
= 0.014).Conclusions: In a phase 1/2 study of SGI-110, we identified in
r/r AML patients a gene expression signature (high DNMT3B, low P15, and
low CDA) associated with reduced demethylation and resistance to SGI-110
and we found strong trends for associations between demethylation and
response.

