Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using protein chips to develop a highly specific HER2 antibody for
HER2 amplification testing


Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is an orphan receptor
tyrosine kinase member of the EGFR families and is found to be a key
tumor driver gene. In breast cancer and gastric cancer, HER2
amplification can be effectively treated by its neutralizing antibody,
trastuzumab. In clinic, the HER2 immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used as
the primary screening method to diagnose HER2 amplification. However,
recent evidence suggested that the frequently used rabbit HER2 antibody
4B5 cross reacted to another family member HER4. IHC staining also
indicated that it has strong non-specific cytoplasmic and nucleus
staining in normal gastric mucosal cells and some gastric cancer samples.
Using a protein lysate array which covers 85% of the human proteome, we
have successfully identified and confirmed that the 4B5 bound to HER4 and
a nuclear protein ZSCAN18 besides HER2. The non-specific binding accounts
for the unexpected cytoplasmic and unclear staining of 4B5 on normal
gastric epithelium. Finally, we have developed a novel HER2 mouse
monoclonal antibody UMAB36 with similar sensitivity to 4B5 but only
reacted to HER2 across the 17,000 proteins on the protein chip. In 129
breast cancer and 158 gastric cancer samples, UMAB36 showed 100%
sensitivity and specificity comparing to the HER2 FISH reference results
with no unspecific staining in the gastric mucosa layer. UMAB36 could
provide an alternative high specific IHC reagent for HER2 amplification
testing in gastric cancer population.

