Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal growth factor-induced cyclooxygenase-2 enhances head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma metastasis through fibronectin up-regulation


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation is a major cause of
cell metastasis in many cancers, such as head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). However, whether the induction of cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2) correlates with EGF-enhanced HNSCC metastasis remains unclear.
Interestingly, we found that EGF induced COX-2 expression mainly in
HNSCC. The tumor cell transformation induced by EGF was repressed with
COX-2 knockdown, and this repression was reversed by simultaneously
treating the cells with EGF and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). The
down-regulation of COX-2 expression or inhibition of COX-2 activity
significantly blocked EGF-enhanced cell migration and invasion, but the
addition of PGE2 compensated for this blockage in COX-2-knockdown cells.
Interestingly, COX-2 depletion inhibited EGF-induced matrix
metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1), MMP3 and fibronectin expression and
Rac1/cdc42 activation; this reduction in MMPs and the
fibronectin/Rac1/cdc42 axis by the depletion of COX-2 was also rescued
when the cells were treated with PGE2. Furthermore, the depletion of
fibronectin impeded the COX-2-enhanced binding of HNSCC cells to
endothelial cells and tumor cells metastatic seeding of the lungs. These
results provide new insight that EGF-induced COX-2 enhances HNSCC
metastasis via activation of the fibronectin signaling pathway. The
inhibition of COX-2 expression and activation suggests a potential
strategy for the treatment of EGFR-mediated HNSCC metastasis.

