Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and proteogenomic investigation of genetic variants in
human cancers


A significant fraction of cancers have a heritable component, and require
an interplay between somatic and germline variants. Common and rare
germline variants have been investigated by previous GWAS and family
based studies. However, a comprehensive analysis of both somatic and
germline variants in cancer using high throughput sequencing data to
discover genetic variants of functional relevance is lacking. Herein, we
investigated the potential role of somatic and germline variants from
over 20 major cancer types from large-scale studies such as TCGA and ICGC
and discovered thousands of somatic and germline variants in cancer
genomes. To link these genetic variants to cancer phenotypes, we analyzed
the proteomics data in breast, ovarian and colorectal cancers generated
by the Clinical Proteomic Tumour Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) using a
PepScan pipeline that can detect whether a genomic variant is observed at
the peptide level. The pipeline incorporated QUILTS to construct
patient-specific protein database and MS-GF+ to identify peptide
sequences in the database from MS spectra. Our analysis validated roughly
2% of non-synonymous genetic variants in peptides with matched spectra.
We correlated the effect of genetic mutations on proteomic subtypes based
on global protein expression levels. Additionally, we assessed the role
of genetic variations in kinase genes using phosphoproteome profiles, and
identified downstream markers that may be candidate targets for diagnosis
or treatment. This analysis also helped us prioritize kinase variants
that are likely functional candidates for experimental validation. In
conclusion, the comprehensive study of genetic variants utilizing an
integrated proteogenomic approach revealed genetic variants with
potential functional impacts in cancer.

