Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-targeted nanotherapeutics


Directing anticancer agents specifically to tumors and/or cancer cells by
targeting specific extracellular receptors fulfills the following three
most important tasks: (1) preventing or at least substantially limiting
adverse side effects on healthy tissues, (2) enhancing drug
internalization by cancer cells, and (3) overcoming (at least in part)
resistance mechanisms that are based on the active efflux of exogenous
drugs from cancer cells.We developed several tumor-targeted
nanoscale-based formulations: various nanocarriers (liposomes, lipid
nanoparticles, dendrimers, polymers, quantum dots, mesoporous silica and
supermagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles); different anticancer drugs
(doxorubicin, paclitaxel, camptothecin, and cisplatin); suppressors of
cellular drug resistance and tumor grows (antisense oligonucleotides or
siRNA targeted to BCL2, MDR1, MRP1, HIF1A, CD44 mRNA); and
tumor-targeting agent - luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH).The
proposed nanotherapeutics were tested in vitro and in vivo using
established lung and ovarian cancer cell lines and highly metastatic
cancer cells isolated from malignant intraperitoneal ascites from
patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma. These cells were used to
initiate orthotopic models of lung and ovarian cancers in nude mice that
were often accompanied by the development of metastases. Tumor-targeted
nanoscale-based drug formulations were delivered intravenously and
intraperitoneally (for ovarian cancer) or intravenously and by inhalation
(for lung cancer). Treatment with the developed therapeutics led to the
suppression of targeted proteins, efficient induction of cell death,
effective tumor shrinkage, prevention the development of metastases and
limitation of adverse side effects.Acknowledgements: The work was
supported by R01CA100098, R01CA111766, and R01CA138533 grants from
NIH.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

