Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison and interpretation of variants in RNA and DNA from
sarcoma cancer sample


Identification and interpretation of somatic variants using DNA from
matched tumor/normal pairs is crucial for understanding the mechanisms
behind cancer.Studies have shown that a large proportion of variants
present in the DNA are not present in the RNA and vice versa due to
RNA-editing and other unknown molecular processes. In addition, recent
publications show that RNA-editing plays an important role in cancer.
These findings can have strong implications for clinical diagnostics
where correct identification and interpretation of somatic variants from
matched tumor/normal samples is essential.In this study we will
investigate somatic variants that are only present in the DNA or the RNA
of pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma. For this approach we will first
identify somatic variants in the DNA using Exome Sequencing data and in
the RNA using RNA-Seq data from a matched tumor/normal pair. Somatic
variants in DNA as well as RNA are then again filtered for germline
variants using the DNA of the normal sample and the RNA of the normal
sample. Somatic variants found in only DNA or only RNA are further
investigated using Ingenuity's large Knowledge Base as well as HGMD and
PGMD. We will show which class of proteins is mainly affected by the RNA
editing events and which pathways are mainly affected. We will also
highlight implications for clinical diagnostics using DNA only.The
complete analysis will be done using the new integrated QIAGEN tool suite
of CLC Cancer Research Workbench, Ingenuity Variant Analysis and Biobase
Genome Trax.

