Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ang-(1-7) decreases HIF-1 and migration of oral squamous cell
carcinoma


induced by cobaltous chloride and the underlying mechanism.Methods and
ResultsWe first confirmed that Ang-(1-7) decreases HIF-1 signaling in a
newly developed hydroxypropyl--cyclodextrin (HPBCD)-based Ang-(1-7)
nano-formulation in a novel transgenic rat model of inducible insulin
resistance and DM2. The chronic administration of this compound prevented
the marked elevation of HIF-1 in diabetic rat kidney. Next, mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and SCC-9 cells were incubated in a well
humidified incubator with 5% CO2 and 95% air at 37 C (normoxic
condictions). For hypoxic cultures, cells were incubated 150 M CoCl2 for
24 hours and maintained in a 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37C. Then, we divided
cells into 4 groups including control, CoCl2, Ang-(1-7) and CoCl2 +
Ang-(1-7). HIF-1 protein expression and AKT phosphorylation were
decreased in hypoxic cells after treatment with Ang-(1-7). Besides,
Ang-(1-7) decreased SCC-9 cell migration in hypoxic
condition.ConclusionsIn conclusion, our current findings suggest that
Ang-(1-7) attenuates HIF-1 protein stabilization via AKT and Mas
receptor-dependent mechanism. In addition, we found that the
Ang-(1-7)/Mas receptor inhibit oral cancer cell migration.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

