Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The autotaxin-lysophosphatidic acid signaling pathways in ovarian
carcinoma


Ovarian carcinoma ranks as the fifth most common cancer among women. This
is attributed to late presentation of the patients. The disease is
characterized by widespread intraperitoneal metastases and accumulation
of effusion fluids mainly in the peritoneal cavityLysophosphatidic acid
(LPA) is a bioactive phospholipid with mitogenic and growth factor-like
activities affecting cell invasion, cancer progression and resistance
that act via specific cell-surface receptors present in many transformed
cell types. LPA is produced by two main pathways, by PLA-2 and by
Autotaxin (LysoPLD). Once its produced, it acts on six specific G protein
coupled receptors, LPAR1-6. LPA has recently been implicated as a growth
factor present in ascites of ovarian cancer patients. Previous studies
have shown high levels of LPA in the effusions of ovarian carcinoma
patients.The aim of our study was to examine the role of ATX-LPA
signaling in the progression of serous ovarian carcinoma. A total of 230
samples of serous ovarian carcinoma from the three different anatomic
sites of the disease, were used .Effusion fluids were frozen and stored
separately. All specimens were submitted for routine diagnostic purpose
to the Division of Pathology at the Norwegian Radium Hospital during the
period 1998-2008. mRNA levels of the six different LPA receptors were
measured by RT-PCR, protein levels of Autotaxin were measured by Western
blotting.Results show that LPA2R is higher in effusion-derived tumor
cells compared to solid lesions (pOvarian carcinoma ranks as the fifth
most common cancer among women. This is attributed to late presentation
of the patients. The disease is characterized by widespread
intraperitoneal metastases and accumulation of effusion fluids mainly in
the peritoneal cavityLysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a bioactive
phospholipid with mitogenic and growth factor-like activities affecting
cell invasion, cancer progression and resistance that act via specific
cell-surface receptors present in many transformed cell types. LPA is
produced by two main pathways, by PLA-2 and by Autotaxin (LysoPLD). Once
its produced, it acts on six specific G protein coupled receptors,
LPAR1-6. LPA has recently been implicated as a growth factor present in
ascites of ovarian cancer patients. Previous studies have shown high
levels of LPA in the effusions of ovarian carcinoma patients.The aim of
our study was to examine the role of ATX-LPA signaling in the progression
of serous ovarian carcinoma. A total of 230 samples of serous ovarian
carcinoma from the three different anatomic sites of the disease, were
used .Effusion fluids were frozen and stored separately. All specimens
were submitted for routine diagnostic purpose to the Division of
Pathology at the Norwegian Radium Hospital during the period 1998-2008.
mRNA levels of the six different LPA receptors were measured by RT-PCR,
protein levels of Autotaxin were measured by Western blotting.Results
show that LPA2R is higher in effusion-derived tumor cells compared to
solid lesions (p<0.001), while the opposite was found for LPA3R (pOvarian
carcinoma ranks as the fifth most common cancer among women. This is
attributed to late presentation of the patients. The disease is
characterized by widespread intraperitoneal metastases and accumulation
of effusion fluids mainly in the peritoneal cavityLysophosphatidic acid
(LPA) is a bioactive phospholipid with mitogenic and growth factor-like
activities affecting cell invasion, cancer progression and resistance
that act via specific cell-surface receptors present in many transformed
cell types. LPA is produced by two main pathways, by PLA-2 and by
Autotaxin (LysoPLD). Once its produced, it acts on six specific G protein
coupled receptors, LPAR1-6. LPA has recently been implicated as a growth
factor present in ascites of ovarian cancer patients. Previous studies
have shown high levels of LPA in the effusions of ovarian carcinoma
patients.The aim of our study was to examine the role of ATX-LPA
signaling in the progression of serous ovarian carcinoma. A total of 230
samples of serous ovarian carcinoma from the three different anatomic
sites of the disease, were used .Effusion fluids were frozen and stored
separately. All specimens were submitted for routine diagnostic purpose
to the Division of Pathology at the Norwegian Radium Hospital during the
period 1998-2008. mRNA levels of the six different LPA receptors were
measured by RT-PCR, protein levels of Autotaxin were measured by Western
blotting.Results show that LPA2R is higher in effusion-derived tumor
cells compared to solid lesions (p<0.001), while the opposite was found
for LPA3R (p<0.001) and LPA6R (pOvarian carcinoma ranks as the fifth most
common cancer among women. This is attributed to late presentation of the
patients. The disease is characterized by widespread intraperitoneal
metastases and accumulation of effusion fluids mainly in the peritoneal
cavityLysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a bioactive phospholipid with
mitogenic and growth factor-like activities affecting cell invasion,
cancer progression and resistance that act via specific cell-surface
receptors present in many transformed cell types. LPA is produced by two
main pathways, by PLA-2 and by Autotaxin (LysoPLD). Once its produced, it
acts on six specific G protein coupled receptors, LPAR1-6. LPA has
recently been implicated as a growth factor present in ascites of ovarian
cancer patients. Previous studies have shown high levels of LPA in the
effusions of ovarian carcinoma patients.The aim of our study was to
examine the role of ATX-LPA signaling in the progression of serous
ovarian carcinoma. A total of 230 samples of serous ovarian carcinoma
from the three different anatomic sites of the disease, were used
.Effusion fluids were frozen and stored separately. All specimens were
submitted for routine diagnostic purpose to the Division of Pathology at
the Norwegian Radium Hospital during the period 1998-2008. mRNA levels of
the six different LPA receptors were measured by RT-PCR, protein levels
of Autotaxin were measured by Western blotting.Results show that LPA2R is
higher in effusion-derived tumor cells compared to solid lesions
(p<0.001), while the opposite was found for LPA3R (p<0.001) and LPA6R
(p<0.001). Clinico-pathological analysis showed that LPA3R levels are
significantly higher in pre-chemo patients (p = 0.038). LPA2R (p = 0.021)
and LPA5R (p = 0.035) were found higher in cases with larger residual
disease volume. LPA5R (p = 0.032) was higher in cases with primary
chemo-resistance and LPA1R (p = 0.05) was marginally associated with
better overall survival.Autotaxin protein levels were lower in
effusion-derived tumor cells compared to solid lesions (pOvarian
carcinoma ranks as the fifth most common cancer among women. This is
attributed to late presentation of the patients. The disease is
characterized by widespread intraperitoneal metastases and accumulation
of effusion fluids mainly in the peritoneal cavityLysophosphatidic acid
(LPA) is a bioactive phospholipid with mitogenic and growth factor-like
activities affecting cell invasion, cancer progression and resistance
that act via specific cell-surface receptors present in many transformed
cell types. LPA is produced by two main pathways, by PLA-2 and by
Autotaxin (LysoPLD). Once its produced, it acts on six specific G protein
coupled receptors, LPAR1-6. LPA has recently been implicated as a growth
factor present in ascites of ovarian cancer patients. Previous studies
have shown high levels of LPA in the effusions of ovarian carcinoma
patients.The aim of our study was to examine the role of ATX-LPA
signaling in the progression of serous ovarian carcinoma. A total of 230
samples of serous ovarian carcinoma from the three different anatomic
sites of the disease, were used .Effusion fluids were frozen and stored
separately. All specimens were submitted for routine diagnostic purpose
to the Division of Pathology at the Norwegian Radium Hospital during the
period 1998-2008. mRNA levels of the six different LPA receptors were
measured by RT-PCR, protein levels of Autotaxin were measured by Western
blotting.Results show that LPA2R is higher in effusion-derived tumor
cells compared to solid lesions (p<0.001), while the opposite was found
for LPA3R (p<0.001) and LPA6R (p<0.001). Clinico-pathological analysis
showed that LPA3R levels are significantly higher in pre-chemo patients
(p = 0.038). LPA2R (p = 0.021) and LPA5R (p = 0.035) were found higher in
cases with larger residual disease volume. LPA5R (p = 0.032) was higher
in cases with primary chemo-resistance and LPA1R (p = 0.05) was
marginally associated with better overall survival.Autotaxin protein
levels were lower in effusion-derived tumor cells compared to solid
lesions (p<0.001), yet higher levels of Autotaxin were found in
peritoneal lesions compared to pleural ones (p = 0.033).In this study we
showed significant changes in mRNA LPAR levels and Autotaxin protein
levels with the progression of the disease that correlates to
clinic-pathological parameters.To our best knowledge, this is the first
description of the ATX-LPA signaling pathway in ovarian carcinoma with
clinical relevance.

