Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KIR3DL1 and HLA-B subtype combinations predict the efficacy of 3F8
monoclonal antibody therapy for neuroblastoma


Background: Treatment of high-risk neuroblastoma (NB) with anti-GD2
monoclonal antibody (3F8) recruits Natural Killer (NK) cells for
antibody-dependent-cell mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). NK reactivity is
triggered when the signals for activation outweigh inhibition; principal
among the inhibitory ligands for NK cells are HLA, detected by inhibitory
killer Ig-like receptors (KIR).Among receptor-ligand partnerships,
KIR3DL1 and HLA-B exhibit the greatest diversity. Variation in KIR3DL1
surface expression (null, low or high) and dimorphism at HLA-Bw4
amino-acid sequence 80 (isoleucine v. threonine) are associated with
varied strengths of interaction. We hypothesized that KIR3DL1/HLA-Bw4
partnerships could influence the outcome of 3F8 treatment by varying the
strength of inhibitory signaling.Methods: KIR3DL1 and HLA-B subtype
combinations were assessed in a cohort of 245 patients with high-risk NB
treated with 3F8 by medium-resolution PCR. Patients were grouped based on
strength of interaction expected from KIR3DL1 subtype/HLA-Bw4:
Strong-interactors (3DL1-high+Bw4-80I; 3DL1-low+Bw4-80T);
weak-interactors (3DL1-high+Bw4-80T; 3DL1-low+Bw4-80I); and the
non-interactors, where no KIR3DL1/Bw4 interaction is expected (3DL1-null
or KIR3DS1 + any HLA-Bw4; Bw6/Bw6 + any 3DL1) were compared for their
influences on overall and progression-free survival.Results: The
frequency of KIR3DL1/HLA-B partnerships were: strong-interactors 25.3%,
weak-interactors 22.4%, and non-interactors 52.2%. The 5-year
progression-free survival (PFS) for strong-interactors, weak-interactors,
and non-interactors was 28.6% [95% CI:19.3-42.2%], 34.1% [95%
CI:23.5-49.4%] and 52.2% [95% CI:44.1-61.7%], respectively (p = 0.005).
The 5-year overall survival (OS) for strong-interactors,
weak-interactors, and non-interactors was 49.2% [95% CI: 38.3-63.2%],
44.8% [95% CI:33.3-60.3%] and 63.1% [95% CI:55.2-72.2%] (p = 0.013). When
controlling for age, lactate dehydrogenase, and disease status at time of
treatment the benefit of non-interacting subtypes was maintained for PFS
(HR 0.41, [95% CI: 0.27-0.62], p = Background: Treatment of high-risk
neuroblastoma (NB) with anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody (3F8) recruits
Natural Killer (NK) cells for antibody-dependent-cell mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC). NK reactivity is triggered when the signals for
activation outweigh inhibition; principal among the inhibitory ligands
for NK cells are HLA, detected by inhibitory killer Ig-like receptors
(KIR).Among receptor-ligand partnerships, KIR3DL1 and HLA-B exhibit the
greatest diversity. Variation in KIR3DL1 surface expression (null, low or
high) and dimorphism at HLA-Bw4 amino-acid sequence 80 (isoleucine v.
threonine) are associated with varied strengths of interaction. We
hypothesized that KIR3DL1/HLA-Bw4 partnerships could influence the
outcome of 3F8 treatment by varying the strength of inhibitory
signaling.Methods: KIR3DL1 and HLA-B subtype combinations were assessed
in a cohort of 245 patients with high-risk NB treated with 3F8 by
medium-resolution PCR. Patients were grouped based on strength of
interaction expected from KIR3DL1 subtype/HLA-Bw4: Strong-interactors
(3DL1-high+Bw4-80I; 3DL1-low+Bw4-80T); weak-interactors
(3DL1-high+Bw4-80T; 3DL1-low+Bw4-80I); and the non-interactors, where no
KIR3DL1/Bw4 interaction is expected (3DL1-null or KIR3DS1 + any HLA-Bw4;
Bw6/Bw6 + any 3DL1) were compared for their influences on overall and
progression-free survival.Results: The frequency of KIR3DL1/HLA-B
partnerships were: strong-interactors 25.3%, weak-interactors 22.4%, and
non-interactors 52.2%. The 5-year progression-free survival (PFS) for
strong-interactors, weak-interactors, and non-interactors was 28.6% [95%
CI:19.3-42.2%], 34.1% [95% CI:23.5-49.4%] and 52.2% [95% CI:44.1-61.7%],
respectively (p = 0.005). The 5-year overall survival (OS) for
strong-interactors, weak-interactors, and non-interactors was 49.2% [95%
CI: 38.3-63.2%], 44.8% [95% CI:33.3-60.3%] and 63.1% [95% CI:55.2-72.2%]
(p = 0.013). When controlling for age, lactate dehydrogenase, and disease
status at time of treatment the benefit of non-interacting subtypes was
maintained for PFS (HR 0.41, [95% CI: 0.27-0.62], p = <0.001) and OS (HR
0.42, [95% CI:0.26-0.67], p = Background: Treatment of high-risk
neuroblastoma (NB) with anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody (3F8) recruits
Natural Killer (NK) cells for antibody-dependent-cell mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC). NK reactivity is triggered when the signals for
activation outweigh inhibition; principal among the inhibitory ligands
for NK cells are HLA, detected by inhibitory killer Ig-like receptors
(KIR).Among receptor-ligand partnerships, KIR3DL1 and HLA-B exhibit the
greatest diversity. Variation in KIR3DL1 surface expression (null, low or
high) and dimorphism at HLA-Bw4 amino-acid sequence 80 (isoleucine v.
threonine) are associated with varied strengths of interaction. We
hypothesized that KIR3DL1/HLA-Bw4 partnerships could influence the
outcome of 3F8 treatment by varying the strength of inhibitory
signaling.Methods: KIR3DL1 and HLA-B subtype combinations were assessed
in a cohort of 245 patients with high-risk NB treated with 3F8 by
medium-resolution PCR. Patients were grouped based on strength of
interaction expected from KIR3DL1 subtype/HLA-Bw4: Strong-interactors
(3DL1-high+Bw4-80I; 3DL1-low+Bw4-80T); weak-interactors
(3DL1-high+Bw4-80T; 3DL1-low+Bw4-80I); and the non-interactors, where no
KIR3DL1/Bw4 interaction is expected (3DL1-null or KIR3DS1 + any HLA-Bw4;
Bw6/Bw6 + any 3DL1) were compared for their influences on overall and
progression-free survival.Results: The frequency of KIR3DL1/HLA-B
partnerships were: strong-interactors 25.3%, weak-interactors 22.4%, and
non-interactors 52.2%. The 5-year progression-free survival (PFS) for
strong-interactors, weak-interactors, and non-interactors was 28.6% [95%
CI:19.3-42.2%], 34.1% [95% CI:23.5-49.4%] and 52.2% [95% CI:44.1-61.7%],
respectively (p = 0.005). The 5-year overall survival (OS) for
strong-interactors, weak-interactors, and non-interactors was 49.2% [95%
CI: 38.3-63.2%], 44.8% [95% CI:33.3-60.3%] and 63.1% [95% CI:55.2-72.2%]
(p = 0.013). When controlling for age, lactate dehydrogenase, and disease
status at time of treatment the benefit of non-interacting subtypes was
maintained for PFS (HR 0.41, [95% CI: 0.27-0.62], p = <0.001) and OS (HR
0.42, [95% CI:0.26-0.67], p = <0.001).Conclusions: In patients with NB
treated with 3F8, non-interacting subtypes are predictive of improved
progression-free and overall survival. Comparatively, patients whose
KIR3DL1 and HLA-B allele subtypes predict for strong and weak interaction
exhibit high and intermediate risk for disease progression. Collectively,
our findings support KIR3DL1 and HLA-B subtype analysis for
prognostication and indicate disinhibition of NK cells as a therapeutic
target.

