Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KIR3DL2 is a novel target for antibody-therapy of T cell lymphomas


Intro:The killer immunoglobulin-like receptor, three domains, long
cytoplasmic tail 2 (KIR3DL2) is a transmembrane glycoprotein expressed by
natural killer (NK) cells and subsets of T cells. On NK cells, KIRD3L2
modulates NK cell activation by transducing inhibitory signals upon
ligation by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules.
Interestingly, KIR3DL2 is also expressed on several subtypes of T cell
lymphomas/leukemias, such as Szary Syndrome and transformed Mycosis
Fungoides. This expression pattern provides a promising target for
antibody-based therapy. Recently, antibody-based therapies have been
shown to synergize with co-stimulatory immunomodulation via agonistic
immunotherapeutic antibodies, such as anti-CD137.Methods:We evaluated the
efficacy of an anti-KIR3DL2 monoclonal antibody, IPH4102 (Innate Pharma
S.A.), in inducing effector cell cytotoxicity of KIR3DL2+ tumors. In
vitro experiments utilized primary samples and three KIR3DL2+ cell lines:
HUT78, a Szary cell line with constitutive KIR3DL2 expression; a
RAJI-KIR3DL2 high-expression sub clone with 28,000 KIR3DL2 antigen sites
per cell; and a RAJI-KIR3DL2 low-expression sub clone with 6,000 antigens
sites per cell. All antibody-mediated cell cytotoxicity (ADCC)
experiments used 7-AAD and Annexin-V to identify apoptotic
cells.Results:In a CD107a /IFN- assay, NK cells co-cultured with
IPH4102-coated HUT78 cells demonstrated increased activation profiles
relative to NK cells co-cultured with untreated HUT78 cells. Activated NK
cells displayed elevated expression of CD137, OX40, and CD69 and produced
more CD107a and IFN-. In allo-ADCC assays using HUT78 cells at varying
target to effector ratios, IPH4102 treatment induced more target
apoptosis than treatment with positive control anti-CD52 alemtuzumab. In
additional allo-ADCC assays, RAJI-KIR3DL2 high-expression tumors
demonstrated more apoptosis than RAJI-KIR3DL2 low-expression tumors. The
IPH4102-mediated cytotoxicity could be enhanced by the concurrent
administration of an agonistic anti-CD137 monoclonal antibody. In ADCC
assays of primary Szary cells with autologous NK cells, we confirmed the
upregulation of KIR3DL2 and observed enhanced NK cytotoxicity following
tumor treatment with IPH4102. Again, the combination of anti-KIR3DL2 and
anti-CD137 therapy proved synergistic leading to increased tumor
eradication relative to either therapy alone.Conclusion:Our findings
support a role for anti-KIR3DL2 monoclonal antibodies in the treatment of
KIR3DL2+ tumors. IPH4102 effectively increased ADCC of KIR3DL2+ tumors by
NK cells. The addition of agonistic anti-CD137 antibodies will further
augment the anti-tumor efficacy of this therapeutic strategy.

