Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-exome sequencing of gastric cancer identifies germline
PIK3R1 variant as a novel genetic biomarker for a PI3K beta-isoform
selective inhibitor, GSK2636771


BACKGROUND: PI3K signaling is one of the most frequently altered pathways
in gastric cancer (GC), and PI3K beta-isoform selective inhibitors have
anti-tumor effects with tolerable toxicities in PTEN loss driven tumors.
This study aimed to identify novel genetic predictive factors for a PI3K
beta-isoform selective inhibitor through a whole-exome analysis of GC
cell lines.METHODS: We comprehensively analyzed the genetic alterations
in 40 GC cell lines using whole-exome sequencing (WES) and identified
specific genetic alterations with sensitivity to GSK2636771, a PI3K
beta-isoform selective inhibitor.RESULTS: We identified frequent genetic
alterations in PI3K family genes (PIK3CA: 20%, PIK3C2B: 15%, PIK3CD 13%,
PIK3CG: 25%, PIK3R1: 30%, PIK3R2: 100%). While no deletion or mutation of
PTEN was detected, 40% exhibited a loss of PTEN protein expression.
Intriguingly, we noticed germline PIK3R1 variant, M326I (rs3730089), was
significantly related to the increased sensitivity to GSK2636771 (IC50:
20.69.0 vs 43.526.8 M, p = 0.001), with a stronger association than that
of PTEN loss (IC50: 27.513.9 vs. 41.728.0 M, p = 0.047). GC cell lines
with higher variant allele frequency of PIK3R1 tended to be more
sensitive to GSK2636771. Moreover, PIK3R1 M326I was associated with
increased p85 expression (p = 0.0198) and decreased PTEN expression in GC
cell lines (p = 0.008); same findings were also confirmed in human GC
tissues. Furthermore, a correlation analysis of PIK3R1 and PTEN
expressions in GC tissues revealed the reciprocal association between
these two proteins (R2 = 0.223, p = 0.002), suggesting the possible
mechanistic role of PIK3R1 as a negative regulator of PTEN, or vice versa
in GC. Next, among various cytotoxics, oxaliplatin was significantly more
effective in PIK3R1 M326I variant GC cells (p = 0.028), supporting the
combination of GSK2636771 and oxaliplatin for further clinical
development in GC. Finally, by using both the PIK3R1 M326I and PTEN loss
in combination, we were able to predict the response to GSK2636771 more
accurately in GC cells.CONCLUSION: Through WES analysis of GC cell
panels, we identified a germline PIK3R1 variant, M326I, as a novel
genetic biomarker that provides a more accurate prediction of response to
GSK2636771 when used in combination with PTEN loss.

