Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant expression of CYR61 in bladder cancer and its
preoperative diagnostic potential in muscle invasive bladder cancer


Cysteine-rich 61 (CYR61) is involved in development and progression in
different types of human cancer. Nonetheless, the role of CYR61 in
bladder cancer has not been reported. In this study, we explored CYR61
expression in tumor tissues of urothelial carcinoma of bladder and
evaluated its diagnostic potential for the muscle invasive bladder cancer
in preoperative urine.The global gene expression analysis was applied
with the tumor tissues of 16 non-muscle invasive bladder cancers (NMIBCs)
and 14 muscle invasive bladder cancers (MIBCs) using microarrays (the
Agilent). After bioinformatic analysis, 10 genes that their expression
signatures showed significant differences between the invasive and
non-invasive tumors were selected, and then verified using RT-qPCR in the
aforementioned 30 bladder cancer samples. Seven out of the10 genes was
further validated in an independent cohort of 54 bladder cancers (32
NMIBCs and 22 MIBCs). Among the 4 genes that sustained significantly
associated with tumor invasiveness through the validation, CYR61 was
investigated in protein level by immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining in
115 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissues (59 NMIBCs and 56
MIBCs); followed by enzyme-linked immune sorbent assay (ELISA) applied in
preoperative urine sample of 104 patients with bladder cancer (21 NMIBCs
and 83 MIBCs).The mRNA transcription of CYR61 was significantly
up-regulated in tumor tissues of MIBCs compared to those NMIBCs (fold
change>2.0 and P value Cysteine-rich 61 (CYR61) is involved in
development and progression in different types of human cancer.
Nonetheless, the role of CYR61 in bladder cancer has not been reported.
In this study, we explored CYR61 expression in tumor tissues of
urothelial carcinoma of bladder and evaluated its diagnostic potential
for the muscle invasive bladder cancer in preoperative urine.The global
gene expression analysis was applied with the tumor tissues of 16
non-muscle invasive bladder cancers (NMIBCs) and 14 muscle invasive
bladder cancers (MIBCs) using microarrays (the Agilent). After
bioinformatic analysis, 10 genes that their expression signatures showed
significant differences between the invasive and non-invasive tumors were
selected, and then verified using RT-qPCR in the aforementioned 30
bladder cancer samples. Seven out of the10 genes was further validated in
an independent cohort of 54 bladder cancers (32 NMIBCs and 22 MIBCs).
Among the 4 genes that sustained significantly associated with tumor
invasiveness through the validation, CYR61 was investigated in protein
level by immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining in 115 formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues (59 NMIBCs and 56 MIBCs); followed by
enzyme-linked immune sorbent assay (ELISA) applied in preoperative urine
sample of 104 patients with bladder cancer (21 NMIBCs and 83 MIBCs).The
mRNA transcription of CYR61 was significantly up-regulated in tumor
tissues of MIBCs compared to those NMIBCs (fold change>2.0 and P value <
0.001) in both the discovery phase (microarray study) and the validation
phase. The IHC staining further confirmed that expression of CYR61
protein was significantly associated with MIBCs. An intensive expression
of CYR61 was observed in 64.9% of MIBCs, but in only 17.2% of NMIBCs (p =
0.001). On the other hand, we did not find any association between CYR61
expression and other analyzed clinicopathologic parameters, such as tumor
size, tumor grade, tumor recurrence, patient's age, gender, drinking or
smoking. CYR61 protein levels in the urine collected from the
preoperative patients were determined by ELISA and measured as the ratio
of urinary creatinine. We found an average 2.5 fold CYR61 urinary content
in the MIBCs than that in the NMIBCs (10.489.36 ng/mg VS 4.122.26 ng/mg,
pCysteine-rich 61 (CYR61) is involved in development and progression in
different types of human cancer. Nonetheless, the role of CYR61 in
bladder cancer has not been reported. In this study, we explored CYR61
expression in tumor tissues of urothelial carcinoma of bladder and
evaluated its diagnostic potential for the muscle invasive bladder cancer
in preoperative urine.The global gene expression analysis was applied
with the tumor tissues of 16 non-muscle invasive bladder cancers (NMIBCs)
and 14 muscle invasive bladder cancers (MIBCs) using microarrays (the
Agilent). After bioinformatic analysis, 10 genes that their expression
signatures showed significant differences between the invasive and
non-invasive tumors were selected, and then verified using RT-qPCR in the
aforementioned 30 bladder cancer samples. Seven out of the10 genes was
further validated in an independent cohort of 54 bladder cancers (32
NMIBCs and 22 MIBCs). Among the 4 genes that sustained significantly
associated with tumor invasiveness through the validation, CYR61 was
investigated in protein level by immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining in
115 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissues (59 NMIBCs and 56
MIBCs); followed by enzyme-linked immune sorbent assay (ELISA) applied in
preoperative urine sample of 104 patients with bladder cancer (21 NMIBCs
and 83 MIBCs).The mRNA transcription of CYR61 was significantly
up-regulated in tumor tissues of MIBCs compared to those NMIBCs (fold
change>2.0 and P value < 0.001) in both the discovery phase (microarray
study) and the validation phase. The IHC staining further confirmed that
expression of CYR61 protein was significantly associated with MIBCs. An
intensive expression of CYR61 was observed in 64.9% of MIBCs, but in only
17.2% of NMIBCs (p = 0.001). On the other hand, we did not find any
association between CYR61 expression and other analyzed clinicopathologic
parameters, such as tumor size, tumor grade, tumor recurrence, patient's
age, gender, drinking or smoking. CYR61 protein levels in the urine
collected from the preoperative patients were determined by ELISA and
measured as the ratio of urinary creatinine. We found an average 2.5 fold
CYR61 urinary content in the MIBCs than that in the NMIBCs (10.489.36
ng/mg VS 4.122.26 ng/mg, p<0.001). Urinary CYR61 had 87.0% sensitivity
and 61.7% specificity to predicate MIBCs (AUC 0.815, 95% CI 0.722-0.908,
pCysteine-rich 61 (CYR61) is involved in development and progression in
different types of human cancer. Nonetheless, the role of CYR61 in
bladder cancer has not been reported. In this study, we explored CYR61
expression in tumor tissues of urothelial carcinoma of bladder and
evaluated its diagnostic potential for the muscle invasive bladder cancer
in preoperative urine.The global gene expression analysis was applied
with the tumor tissues of 16 non-muscle invasive bladder cancers (NMIBCs)
and 14 muscle invasive bladder cancers (MIBCs) using microarrays (the
Agilent). After bioinformatic analysis, 10 genes that their expression
signatures showed significant differences between the invasive and
non-invasive tumors were selected, and then verified using RT-qPCR in the
aforementioned 30 bladder cancer samples. Seven out of the10 genes was
further validated in an independent cohort of 54 bladder cancers (32
NMIBCs and 22 MIBCs). Among the 4 genes that sustained significantly
associated with tumor invasiveness through the validation, CYR61 was
investigated in protein level by immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining in
115 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissues (59 NMIBCs and 56
MIBCs); followed by enzyme-linked immune sorbent assay (ELISA) applied in
preoperative urine sample of 104 patients with bladder cancer (21 NMIBCs
and 83 MIBCs).The mRNA transcription of CYR61 was significantly
up-regulated in tumor tissues of MIBCs compared to those NMIBCs (fold
change>2.0 and P value < 0.001) in both the discovery phase (microarray
study) and the validation phase. The IHC staining further confirmed that
expression of CYR61 protein was significantly associated with MIBCs. An
intensive expression of CYR61 was observed in 64.9% of MIBCs, but in only
17.2% of NMIBCs (p = 0.001). On the other hand, we did not find any
association between CYR61 expression and other analyzed clinicopathologic
parameters, such as tumor size, tumor grade, tumor recurrence, patient's
age, gender, drinking or smoking. CYR61 protein levels in the urine
collected from the preoperative patients were determined by ELISA and
measured as the ratio of urinary creatinine. We found an average 2.5 fold
CYR61 urinary content in the MIBCs than that in the NMIBCs (10.489.36
ng/mg VS 4.122.26 ng/mg, p<0.001). Urinary CYR61 had 87.0% sensitivity
and 61.7% specificity to predicate MIBCs (AUC 0.815, 95% CI 0.722-0.908,
p<0.001).In conclusion, aberrant over-expression of CYR61 was associated
with muscle invasion of bladder urothelial carcinoma in both mRNA and
protein levels. The abundance of CYR61 protein in urine sample could be a
potential biomarker for preoperatively differentiating MIBCs or NMIBCs,
while its merits still need further investigation in large cohorts of the
bladder cancer.

