Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constitutive NF-kB-activation loop enhances resistance to
trastuzumab in HER2 positive luminal B breast cancer


[Purpose]Luminal B breast cancer patients are significantly at the risk
of relapse with in 5 years. Acquired resistance to the receptor tyrosine
kinase HER2 targeting antibody trastuzumab is a major clinical problem in
the treatment of recurrent HER2-positive breast cancer. The molecular
mechanisms leading to trastuzumab resistance (TZR) remain unclear in
luminal B breast cancer. Here, we investigated the mechanism of TZR in
HER2-positive luminal B breast cancer cells with acquired
resistance.[Methods and Results]We generated trastuzumab resistant breast
cancer cell line (BT-474-R) by treating BT-474 cells with trastuzumab for
over long-term. Initial validation showed that HER2 overexpression in the
BT-474-R cells remained unaltered suggesting that probably HER2
independent signaling pathway is involved in the development of TZR. We
demonstrated that NF-B is constitutively activated in the BT-474-R cells
by quantitative realtime RT-PCR, western blotting and immunofluorescent
microscopy. Expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines were also
demonstrated. Pharmacologic inhibition of NF-B improved sensitivity to
trastuzumab in BT-474-R cells. We identified both IKK- and IKK- as the
major determinants of the activation of the NF-B signaling in the
resistant cells.[Conclusion]Our study suggests by activating NF-B
pathway, luminal B cells may facilitate acquiring basal-like, Her2+
phenotype a notion consistent with progression through grade hypothesis.
Finally, our study suggests that blocking NF-B will provide a new
treatment option to limit relapse in HER2 positive breast cancer patients
treated with trastuzumab.

