Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Baseline quality of life and genetic determinants and the impact
on five-year lung cancer survival


Patient-reported health-related quality of life (QOL) is an important
part of a cancer patient's treatment plan and has been linked to overall
cancer survival. We aimed to identify the impact of QOL and potential
genetic factors on five-year lung cancer survival using a lung cancer
patient cohort from MD Anderson Cancer Center. QOL data was obtained from
the SF-12 questionnaire. Patient responses were used to calculate
Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS)
scores, with a lower score indicating a worse QOL. Mean baseline QOL
scores were calculated for demographic factors in 7,135 patients, and
individuals with a college degree (PCS = 42.0, compared to less than a
high school degree PCS = 35.1, PPatient-reported health-related quality
of life (QOL) is an important part of a cancer patient's treatment plan
and has been linked to overall cancer survival. We aimed to identify the
impact of QOL and potential genetic factors on five-year lung cancer
survival using a lung cancer patient cohort from MD Anderson Cancer
Center. QOL data was obtained from the SF-12 questionnaire. Patient
responses were used to calculate Physical Component Summary (PCS) and
Mental Component Summary (MCS) scores, with a lower score indicating a
worse QOL. Mean baseline QOL scores were calculated for demographic
factors in 7,135 patients, and individuals with a college degree (PCS =
42.0, compared to less than a high school degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001),
current alcohol drinkers (PCS = 42.0, compared to never drinkers PCS =
37.3, PPatient-reported health-related quality of life (QOL) is an
important part of a cancer patient's treatment plan and has been linked
to overall cancer survival. We aimed to identify the impact of QOL and
potential genetic factors on five-year lung cancer survival using a lung
cancer patient cohort from MD Anderson Cancer Center. QOL data was
obtained from the SF-12 questionnaire. Patient responses were used to
calculate Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary
(MCS) scores, with a lower score indicating a worse QOL. Mean baseline
QOL scores were calculated for demographic factors in 7,135 patients, and
individuals with a college degree (PCS = 42.0, compared to less than a
high school degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001), current alcohol drinkers (PCS =
42.0, compared to never drinkers PCS = 37.3, P<0.0001), and those with no
significant medical history (PCS = 40.8, compared to a significant
history PCS = 38.4, PPatient-reported health-related quality of life
(QOL) is an important part of a cancer patient's treatment plan and has
been linked to overall cancer survival. We aimed to identify the impact
of QOL and potential genetic factors on five-year lung cancer survival
using a lung cancer patient cohort from MD Anderson Cancer Center. QOL
data was obtained from the SF-12 questionnaire. Patient responses were
used to calculate Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component
Summary (MCS) scores, with a lower score indicating a worse QOL. Mean
baseline QOL scores were calculated for demographic factors in 7,135
patients, and individuals with a college degree (PCS = 42.0, compared to
less than a high school degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001), current alcohol
drinkers (PCS = 42.0, compared to never drinkers PCS = 37.3, P<0.0001),
and those with no significant medical history (PCS = 40.8, compared to a
significant history PCS = 38.4, P<0.0001) reported an improved PCS.
Individuals greater than 70 years old (MCS = 47.8, compared to those less
than 50 MCS = 45.2, PPatient-reported health-related quality of life
(QOL) is an important part of a cancer patient's treatment plan and has
been linked to overall cancer survival. We aimed to identify the impact
of QOL and potential genetic factors on five-year lung cancer survival
using a lung cancer patient cohort from MD Anderson Cancer Center. QOL
data was obtained from the SF-12 questionnaire. Patient responses were
used to calculate Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component
Summary (MCS) scores, with a lower score indicating a worse QOL. Mean
baseline QOL scores were calculated for demographic factors in 7,135
patients, and individuals with a college degree (PCS = 42.0, compared to
less than a high school degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001), current alcohol
drinkers (PCS = 42.0, compared to never drinkers PCS = 37.3, P<0.0001),
and those with no significant medical history (PCS = 40.8, compared to a
significant history PCS = 38.4, P<0.0001) reported an improved PCS.
Individuals greater than 70 years old (MCS = 47.8, compared to those less
than 50 MCS = 45.2, P<0.0001), with a college degree (MCS = 48.0,
compared to less than a high school degree MCS = 45.2, PPatient-reported
health-related quality of life (QOL) is an important part of a cancer
patient's treatment plan and has been linked to overall cancer survival.
We aimed to identify the impact of QOL and potential genetic factors on
five-year lung cancer survival using a lung cancer patient cohort from MD
Anderson Cancer Center. QOL data was obtained from the SF-12
questionnaire. Patient responses were used to calculate Physical
Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS) scores, with a
lower score indicating a worse QOL. Mean baseline QOL scores were
calculated for demographic factors in 7,135 patients, and individuals
with a college degree (PCS = 42.0, compared to less than a high school
degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001), current alcohol drinkers (PCS = 42.0,
compared to never drinkers PCS = 37.3, P<0.0001), and those with no
significant medical history (PCS = 40.8, compared to a significant
history PCS = 38.4, P<0.0001) reported an improved PCS. Individuals
greater than 70 years old (MCS = 47.8, compared to those less than 50 MCS
= 45.2, P<0.0001), with a college degree (MCS = 48.0, compared to less
than a high school degree MCS = 45.2, P<0.0001), Asian Pacific Islanders
(MCS = 48.5, compared to whites MCS = 46.3, P = 0.033), and current
alcohol drinkers (MCS = 47.4, compared to never drinkers MCS = 45.9,
PPatient-reported health-related quality of life (QOL) is an important
part of a cancer patient's treatment plan and has been linked to overall
cancer survival. We aimed to identify the impact of QOL and potential
genetic factors on five-year lung cancer survival using a lung cancer
patient cohort from MD Anderson Cancer Center. QOL data was obtained from
the SF-12 questionnaire. Patient responses were used to calculate
Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS)
scores, with a lower score indicating a worse QOL. Mean baseline QOL
scores were calculated for demographic factors in 7,135 patients, and
individuals with a college degree (PCS = 42.0, compared to less than a
high school degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001), current alcohol drinkers (PCS =
42.0, compared to never drinkers PCS = 37.3, P<0.0001), and those with no
significant medical history (PCS = 40.8, compared to a significant
history PCS = 38.4, P<0.0001) reported an improved PCS. Individuals
greater than 70 years old (MCS = 47.8, compared to those less than 50 MCS
= 45.2, P<0.0001), with a college degree (MCS = 48.0, compared to less
than a high school degree MCS = 45.2, P<0.0001), Asian Pacific Islanders
(MCS = 48.5, compared to whites MCS = 46.3, P = 0.033), and current
alcohol drinkers (MCS = 47.4, compared to never drinkers MCS = 45.9,
P<0.0001) reported a better MCS. We then analyzed the association between
baseline QOL and lung cancer survival using survival data obtained from
MD Anderson Tumor Registry. A PCS or MCS score less than 50 was
associated with an increased risk of five-year mortality (HR = 1.20, 95%
CI: 1.08-1.33, P = 0.001; HR = 1.13, 95%CI: 1.03-1.24, P = 0.008,
respectively) and there was a significant difference between median
survival time (MST) (PCS50 MST = 30.42 months, PCSPatient-reported
health-related quality of life (QOL) is an important part of a cancer
patient's treatment plan and has been linked to overall cancer survival.
We aimed to identify the impact of QOL and potential genetic factors on
five-year lung cancer survival using a lung cancer patient cohort from MD
Anderson Cancer Center. QOL data was obtained from the SF-12
questionnaire. Patient responses were used to calculate Physical
Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS) scores, with a
lower score indicating a worse QOL. Mean baseline QOL scores were
calculated for demographic factors in 7,135 patients, and individuals
with a college degree (PCS = 42.0, compared to less than a high school
degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001), current alcohol drinkers (PCS = 42.0,
compared to never drinkers PCS = 37.3, P<0.0001), and those with no
significant medical history (PCS = 40.8, compared to a significant
history PCS = 38.4, P<0.0001) reported an improved PCS. Individuals
greater than 70 years old (MCS = 47.8, compared to those less than 50 MCS
= 45.2, P<0.0001), with a college degree (MCS = 48.0, compared to less
than a high school degree MCS = 45.2, P<0.0001), Asian Pacific Islanders
(MCS = 48.5, compared to whites MCS = 46.3, P = 0.033), and current
alcohol drinkers (MCS = 47.4, compared to never drinkers MCS = 45.9,
P<0.0001) reported a better MCS. We then analyzed the association between
baseline QOL and lung cancer survival using survival data obtained from
MD Anderson Tumor Registry. A PCS or MCS score less than 50 was
associated with an increased risk of five-year mortality (HR = 1.20, 95%
CI: 1.08-1.33, P = 0.001; HR = 1.13, 95%CI: 1.03-1.24, P = 0.008,
respectively) and there was a significant difference between median
survival time (MST) (PCS50 MST = 30.42 months, PCS<50 MST = 20.70 months,
Plog-rankPatient-reported health-related quality of life (QOL) is an
important part of a cancer patient's treatment plan and has been linked
to overall cancer survival. We aimed to identify the impact of QOL and
potential genetic factors on five-year lung cancer survival using a lung
cancer patient cohort from MD Anderson Cancer Center. QOL data was
obtained from the SF-12 questionnaire. Patient responses were used to
calculate Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary
(MCS) scores, with a lower score indicating a worse QOL. Mean baseline
QOL scores were calculated for demographic factors in 7,135 patients, and
individuals with a college degree (PCS = 42.0, compared to less than a
high school degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001), current alcohol drinkers (PCS =
42.0, compared to never drinkers PCS = 37.3, P<0.0001), and those with no
significant medical history (PCS = 40.8, compared to a significant
history PCS = 38.4, P<0.0001) reported an improved PCS. Individuals
greater than 70 years old (MCS = 47.8, compared to those less than 50 MCS
= 45.2, P<0.0001), with a college degree (MCS = 48.0, compared to less
than a high school degree MCS = 45.2, P<0.0001), Asian Pacific Islanders
(MCS = 48.5, compared to whites MCS = 46.3, P = 0.033), and current
alcohol drinkers (MCS = 47.4, compared to never drinkers MCS = 45.9,
P<0.0001) reported a better MCS. We then analyzed the association between
baseline QOL and lung cancer survival using survival data obtained from
MD Anderson Tumor Registry. A PCS or MCS score less than 50 was
associated with an increased risk of five-year mortality (HR = 1.20, 95%
CI: 1.08-1.33, P = 0.001; HR = 1.13, 95%CI: 1.03-1.24, P = 0.008,
respectively) and there was a significant difference between median
survival time (MST) (PCS50 MST = 30.42 months, PCS<50 MST = 20.70 months,
Plog-rank<0.0001) (MCS50 MST = 26.12 months, MCSPatient-reported
health-related quality of life (QOL) is an important part of a cancer
patient's treatment plan and has been linked to overall cancer survival.
We aimed to identify the impact of QOL and potential genetic factors on
five-year lung cancer survival using a lung cancer patient cohort from MD
Anderson Cancer Center. QOL data was obtained from the SF-12
questionnaire. Patient responses were used to calculate Physical
Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary (MCS) scores, with a
lower score indicating a worse QOL. Mean baseline QOL scores were
calculated for demographic factors in 7,135 patients, and individuals
with a college degree (PCS = 42.0, compared to less than a high school
degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001), current alcohol drinkers (PCS = 42.0,
compared to never drinkers PCS = 37.3, P<0.0001), and those with no
significant medical history (PCS = 40.8, compared to a significant
history PCS = 38.4, P<0.0001) reported an improved PCS. Individuals
greater than 70 years old (MCS = 47.8, compared to those less than 50 MCS
= 45.2, P<0.0001), with a college degree (MCS = 48.0, compared to less
than a high school degree MCS = 45.2, P<0.0001), Asian Pacific Islanders
(MCS = 48.5, compared to whites MCS = 46.3, P = 0.033), and current
alcohol drinkers (MCS = 47.4, compared to never drinkers MCS = 45.9,
P<0.0001) reported a better MCS. We then analyzed the association between
baseline QOL and lung cancer survival using survival data obtained from
MD Anderson Tumor Registry. A PCS or MCS score less than 50 was
associated with an increased risk of five-year mortality (HR = 1.20, 95%
CI: 1.08-1.33, P = 0.001; HR = 1.13, 95%CI: 1.03-1.24, P = 0.008,
respectively) and there was a significant difference between median
survival time (MST) (PCS50 MST = 30.42 months, PCS<50 MST = 20.70 months,
Plog-rank<0.0001) (MCS50 MST = 26.12 months, MCS<50 MST = 20.17 months,
Plog-rankPatient-reported health-related quality of life (QOL) is an
important part of a cancer patient's treatment plan and has been linked
to overall cancer survival. We aimed to identify the impact of QOL and
potential genetic factors on five-year lung cancer survival using a lung
cancer patient cohort from MD Anderson Cancer Center. QOL data was
obtained from the SF-12 questionnaire. Patient responses were used to
calculate Physical Component Summary (PCS) and Mental Component Summary
(MCS) scores, with a lower score indicating a worse QOL. Mean baseline
QOL scores were calculated for demographic factors in 7,135 patients, and
individuals with a college degree (PCS = 42.0, compared to less than a
high school degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001), current alcohol drinkers (PCS =
42.0, compared to never drinkers PCS = 37.3, P<0.0001), and those with no
significant medical history (PCS = 40.8, compared to a significant
history PCS = 38.4, P<0.0001) reported an improved PCS. Individuals
greater than 70 years old (MCS = 47.8, compared to those less than 50 MCS
= 45.2, P<0.0001), with a college degree (MCS = 48.0, compared to less
than a high school degree MCS = 45.2, P<0.0001), Asian Pacific Islanders
(MCS = 48.5, compared to whites MCS = 46.3, P = 0.033), and current
alcohol drinkers (MCS = 47.4, compared to never drinkers MCS = 45.9,
P<0.0001) reported a better MCS. We then analyzed the association between
baseline QOL and lung cancer survival using survival data obtained from
MD Anderson Tumor Registry. A PCS or MCS score less than 50 was
associated with an increased risk of five-year mortality (HR = 1.20, 95%
CI: 1.08-1.33, P = 0.001; HR = 1.13, 95%CI: 1.03-1.24, P = 0.008,
respectively) and there was a significant difference between median
survival time (MST) (PCS50 MST = 30.42 months, PCS<50 MST = 20.70 months,
Plog-rank<0.0001) (MCS50 MST = 26.12 months, MCS<50 MST = 20.17 months,
Plog-rank<0.0001). Finally, using a subset of the study population (N =
588), we completed a preliminary analysis of 218 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the p38 MAPK signaling pathway, activated in
response to cellular and environmental stress, as a potential genetic
determinant of QOL and five-year lung cancer survival. Using a score of
50 as the cut-off, twenty-five SNPs were associated with PCS,
twenty-three SNPs were associated with MCS, and 28 SNPs were associated
with five-year lung cancer survival (PPatient-reported health-related
quality of life (QOL) is an important part of a cancer patient's
treatment plan and has been linked to overall cancer survival. We aimed
to identify the impact of QOL and potential genetic factors on five-year
lung cancer survival using a lung cancer patient cohort from MD Anderson
Cancer Center. QOL data was obtained from the SF-12 questionnaire.
Patient responses were used to calculate Physical Component Summary (PCS)
and Mental Component Summary (MCS) scores, with a lower score indicating
a worse QOL. Mean baseline QOL scores were calculated for demographic
factors in 7,135 patients, and individuals with a college degree (PCS =
42.0, compared to less than a high school degree PCS = 35.1, P<0.0001),
current alcohol drinkers (PCS = 42.0, compared to never drinkers PCS =
37.3, P<0.0001), and those with no significant medical history (PCS =
40.8, compared to a significant history PCS = 38.4, P<0.0001) reported an
improved PCS. Individuals greater than 70 years old (MCS = 47.8, compared
to those less than 50 MCS = 45.2, P<0.0001), with a college degree (MCS =
48.0, compared to less than a high school degree MCS = 45.2, P<0.0001),
Asian Pacific Islanders (MCS = 48.5, compared to whites MCS = 46.3, P =
0.033), and current alcohol drinkers (MCS = 47.4, compared to never
drinkers MCS = 45.9, P<0.0001) reported a better MCS. We then analyzed
the association between baseline QOL and lung cancer survival using
survival data obtained from MD Anderson Tumor Registry. A PCS or MCS
score less than 50 was associated with an increased risk of five-year
mortality (HR = 1.20, 95% CI: 1.08-1.33, P = 0.001; HR = 1.13, 95%CI:
1.03-1.24, P = 0.008, respectively) and there was a significant
difference between median survival time (MST) (PCS50 MST = 30.42 months,
PCS<50 MST = 20.70 months, Plog-rank<0.0001) (MCS50 MST = 26.12 months,
MCS<50 MST = 20.17 months, Plog-rank<0.0001). Finally, using a subset of
the study population (N = 588), we completed a preliminary analysis of
218 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the p38 MAPK signaling
pathway, activated in response to cellular and environmental stress, as a
potential genetic determinant of QOL and five-year lung cancer survival.
Using a score of 50 as the cut-off, twenty-five SNPs were associated with
PCS, twenty-three SNPs were associated with MCS, and 28 SNPs were
associated with five-year lung cancer survival (P<0.05). Individuals with
at least one variant allele of rs2715815 in MAP2K6 showed a decreased
risk of poor PCS and MCS score (OR = 0.49, 95% CI = 0.26-0.90, P = 0.022;
OR = 0.41, 95% CI = 0.22-0.76, P = 0.005, respectively). At least one
variant allele of FASLG: rs5030772 was associated with a decreased risk
of poor MCS score (OR = 0.51, 95% CI = 0.27-0.96, P = 0.038) and a
decreased risk of lung cancer death (HR = 0.68, 95% CI = 0.46-1.00, P =
0.049). These findings suggest that baseline QOL in lung cancer patients
as well as genetic determinants may impact lung cancer survival.

