Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of human lung enzymes involved in the reduction
of 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK)


4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) is the primary
tobacco-specific nitrosamine (TSNA) related to cancer. The major
metabolic pathway for NNK is carbonyl reduction to
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanol (NNAL) which, like NNK, is
a potent lung and pancreatic carcinogen in rodents, with it estimated
that 39-100% of NNK is converted to NNAL in cigarette smokers. NNAL is
formed as both (R)- and (S)-NNAL enantiomers; while (S)-NNAL is more
readily formed from NNK, it is also more readily glucuronidated and
detoxified by the phase II UGTs than is (R)-NNAL in monkeys and probably
in humans. Therefore, both (S)- and (R)-NNAL are likely to be important
metabolites in the NNK carcinogenic process. In the present study, we
demonstrated that while (S)-NNAL is the major form (>90%) produced using
lung cytosolic fractions, lung microsomes formed primarily (R)-NNAL
(>95%). Consistent with previous studies using placenta-fractionated
cytosolic enzymes, we demonstrated that several cytosolic enzymes
including the aldo-keto reductases (AKRs) 1C1, 1C2, and 1C4, as well as
carbonyl reductase I (CBR1) were active against NNK, with all of them
forming primarily (>90%) (S)-NNAL. This pattern is consistent with that
observed for lung cytosolic fractions. Using HEK293 cells over-expressing
microsomal enzymes HSD111, HSD112, HSD1712, SDR5A1, SDR5A3, HSD171,
HSD172 or HSD37, only HSD111 and HSD1712, all of which were reported to
be expressed in lung, exhibited activity against NNK. Most interestingly,
both enzymes formed primarily (R)-NNAL (>80%), which is consistent with
that observed in lung microsomes. Real-time PCR showed that HSD1712 was
expressed at a level that, on average, was three-fold higher than that
observed for HSD111 in a screening of normal lung tissue specimens from
five individuals. These data suggest that both cytosolic and microsomal
enzymes are active against NNK and that HSD111 and HSD1712 are the active
microsomal reductases in human lung microsomes, contributing to the
exclusive formation of (R)-NNAL

