Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prohibitin 1 regulates apoptosis via its interaction with XIAP


Prohibitin 1 (PHB1) belongs to an evolutionarily highly conserved family
of proteins that share the stomatin/prohibitin/flotillin/HflK/C (SPFH)
domain. PHB1 has been implicated in the regulation of diverse cellular
processes, including cell-cycle progression, transcriptional regulation,
apoptosis, mitochondrial biogenesis, and as a cell-surface receptor. To
better understand the function of PHB1, we analyzed PHB1 protein
interactors using Immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry
analysis (IP-MS). We identified the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis
protein (XIAP) as a novel PHB1-binding partner. The interaction of
PHB1-XIAP has been confirmed both in vitro and in vivo. Using
immunofluorescence staining, We observed that PHB1 and XIAP colocalized
upon induction of apoptosis. Using various XIAP mutant constructs, we
showed that PHB1 binds principally to the BIR3 domain of XIAP. In
addition, silencing of either PHB1 or XIAP sensitized cells to
chemotherapeutic drug-induced cell apoptosis and partially rescued the
chemosensitivity of resistant cancer cells. The observation that PHB1
silencing decreased XIAP levels with a concomitant increase in XIAP
cleavage suggests that the formation of a PHB1-XIAP complex inhibits
apoptosis by enhancing XIAP stability. Our findings indicate that the
PHB1-XIAP complex promotes an anti-apoptotic response in cancer cells and
reinforces the potential of PHB1 as a therapeutic target.

