Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A study of pulmonary and peripheral vein blood as sources of
circulating tumor cells in early lung cancer


Lung cancer is one of the most prevalent cancers world-wide. It is
usually diagnosed at an advanced stage with low survival rates. Early
detection and intervention can have a profound impact in improving
survival. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs), or cells shed by the tumor into
the blood circulation, offer a less invasive method of tumor biopsy.
Surgical lobectomy for early stage lung cancers provides access to the
pulmonary vein (PV) draining the affected lobe, and is presumably an
enriched source of CTCs shed by the primary lung tumor. Analyzing
peripheral (Pe) and pulmonary vein (PV) blood combined could potentially
shed light onto optimal markers and disease progression. We hypothesize
that blood from the pulmonary vein has a higher abundance of CTCs than
peripheral blood, thereby providing a larger yield of CTCs from early
lung cancer patients for downstream analysis. A cohort of greater than 30
lung cancer patients was enrolled in a pilot study. PV and Pe blood
specimens from these patients were obtained at different time points in
the perioperative time period, and were processed through a
high-throughput microfluidic device, the OncoBean Chip that isolates CTCs
by immuno-affinity based capture. A higher number of PV CTCs were
detected than from Pe. In addition, rare CTC clusters were observed in
the PV blood in some cases, which were further characterized for protein
expression. Gene expression analysis was performed for comparison of CTCs
obtained from these two different sources. Evaluating different CTC
sources along the venous drainage of a tumor could potentially offer an
insight into CTC biology and spread of the disease.

