Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The identification of BMS-595, an orally active
imidazo[1,2-b]pyridazine CK2 inhibitor with in vivo anti-tumor activity


CK2 is a highly conserved, and constitutively active family of
serine/threonine kinases abnormally elevated in a wide variety of cancers
and linked to poor prognosis and disease progression. The enzymes form as
hetero-tetrameric complexes comprised of two highly related catalytic
subunits ( or ) with two regulatory subunits in various combinations and
distributions, depending on cell type. While CK2 plays a role in normal
growth and development, deregulation of the enzymes has been shown to
promote and maintain a malignant phenotype through mechanisms in both the
anti-apoptotic and the pro-proliferative signaling pathways. CK2 has been
reported to modulate the activity of several oncogenic transcription
factors including CREB, Myc, Jun and Fos. Studies with RNAi and small
molecule compounds have demonstrated tumor cell dependence on CK2.We
sought to identify potent CK2 inhibitors to probe the function of CK2 in
cancer-linked pathways and for evaluation in CK2 dependent tumor
xenograft models. Herein we report SAR studies in the
imidazo[1,2-b]pyridazine chemotype leading to the discovery of BMS-595, a
highly potent and selective ATP-competitive CK2 inhibitor with a
commensurate level of cellular potency. BMS-595 demonstrates strong PK/PD
correlations and robust, oral anti-tumor efficacy in CK2-driven xenograft
models at tolerated doses.

