Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the TRPM7 kinase domain inhibits breast cancer cell
migration and invasion and tumor metastasis


TRPM7 (transient receptor potential melastatin 7) is a non-selective
cation channel fused to protein kinase domain at the C-terminal whose
activity is linked to the control of actomyosin contractility. TRPM7
mediates adhesion and migration of breast cancer cells and promotes
breast tumor metastasis. The lack of cell-permeable inhibitors of the
kinase domain represents a barrier to understand the kinase function.
Herein, we discovered the first small molecule (KD-1) that targets TRPM7
kinase activity. Mg2+ starvation, which promotes TRPM7 kinase activity,
induces phosphorylation of eEF2. Treatment of Mg2+-starved HEK293 cells
with KD-1 decreased eEF2 phosphorylation, consistent with TRPM7 kinase
activity suppression in-cells. KD-1 decreased the binding of Myosin IIB
to TRPM7 in HEK293 and MDA-MB-231 cells. And when MDA-MB-231 cells were
treated with increasing doses of KD-1, no change in cell viability was
seen. Interestingly, KD-1 inhibited MDA-MB-231 cells migration and
invasion that is reportedly regulated by TRPM7 kinase activity. Finally,
the bioluminescent signals (to assess metastasis) were significantly
lower in KD-1-treated mice (25 and 50 mg/kg/day) than in mice treated
with vehicle control (P 0.05, 2-sided t-test.). in conclusion, inhibition
of TRPM7 kinase activity may reduce or block breast tumor progression
and/or metastasis.

