Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of predictive and pharmacodynamic biomarker strategies
for GDC-0425, a checkpoint kinase 1 inhibitor, in combination with
gemcitabine


GDC-0425 is a potent and selective small molecule inhibitor of checkpoint
kinase 1 (Chk1) recently evaluated in the DPM4957g phase I study in
combination with the nucleoside analog gemcitabine. The cytotoxic effect
of gemcitabine, elicited through the induction of genotoxic stress, is
limited by Chk1 activation, which leads to cell cycle arrest and allows
time for repair of damaged DNA. Chk1 inhibition by GDC-0425 can convert a
genotoxic insult into a cytotoxic event by overriding cell cycle arrest
and thereby driving cancer cells into mitotic catastrophe.A panel of
nearly 200 cancer cell lines was screened to evaluate potential benefit
of combining GDC-0425 and gemcitabine. Elastic net modeling was applied
to cell line data including exome-seq, RNA-seq, DNA copy number, and loss
of heterozygosity to perform a broad and unbiased search for predictors
of drug activity and synergy. In the model for GDC-0425 and gemcitabine
synergy, TP53 mutations were found to be the highest-ranking features,
followed by mRNA expression of SLFN11, a gene encoding a putative
helicase implicated in sensitizing cells to DNA-damaging agents.
Expression levels of several p53-regulated transcripts were also found to
be high-ranking features in this model, underscoring the value of p53
pathway functionality as a predictor of synergy between GDC-0425 and
gemcitabine.In consideration of pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarkers,
phosphorylated CDK2 (pCDK2) and phosphorylated H2AX (pH2AX), located at
proximal and distal points in the Chk1 pathway, respectively, were found
to be modulated by GDC-0425 and gemcitabine in cell line and xenograft
models in a dose-dependent fashion. The GDC-0425 dose response for these
biomarkers correlated with anti-tumor activity.Finally, to understand why
GDC-0425 and gemcitabine synergy is more pronounced in some TP53 mutant
cell lines than in others, a screen was performed to evaluate engagement
of the Chk1 and p53 pathways in response to gemcitabine in a
representative panel of cell lines. Chk1 activation was evaluated using
pCDK2, whereas p53 activation was evaluated using expression of known p53
transcriptional targets. Higher synergy was generally observed when
gemcitabine activated Chk1 and not p53, regardless of TP53 mutational
status.These studies provide a foundation for predictive and PD biomarker
strategies to support the evaluation of GDC-0425 with gemcitabine in
early stage clinical trials that are based on markers of p53 pathway
functionality and Chk1 pathway modulation.

