Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASP8273 selectively inhibits mutant EGFR signal pathway and
induces tumor shrinkage in EGFR mutated tumor models


Activating mutations of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are
associated with the high sensitivity of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) like
erlotinib. However, acquired resistance limits the clinical efficacy of
EGFR-TKIs, which is the most commonly caused by T790M mutation in EGFR.
Second generation EGFR-TKIs such as afatinib are able to inhibit T790M
mutation but the clinical efficacy in T790M positive patients is limited
due to severe side effects associated with wild type (WT) EGFR
inhibition.ASP8273 is a mutant-selective irreversible EGFR inhibitor
currently in clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02113813,
NCT02192697). We have previously reported that ASP8273 covalently binds
to mutant EGFR via C797 and inhibits kinase activity of mutant EGFR,
which results in anti-tumor activity in xenograft models. To further
explore the selectivity and the activity of ASP8273 on mutant EGFR, we
evaluated effects of ASP8273 and other EGFR-TKIs on EGFR signal pathway,
cell growth and anti-tumor activity.Phosphorylation of EGFR, ERK and Akt
was determined by Western blot after treatment with EGFR-TKIs at 10, 100
and 1000nM. Apoptosis induction was analyzed by detecting caspase
activity after 24h treatment with EGFR-TKIs. Anti-tumor activity of
ASP8273 was evaluated in mice xenografted with HCC827 (deletion in exon
19 [del ex19]), NCI-H1975 (T790M/L858R), A431 (WT), and a patient derived
LU1868 (T790M/L858R).ASP8273 selectively inhibited phosphorylation of
EGFR and its down-stream signal pathway, ERK and Akt from 10nM in HCC827
and NCI-H1975 while inhibitory effects were only detected at 1000nM in
A431.In NCI-H1650 (del ex19), ASP8273 inhibited cell growth with an IC50
value of 70nM while other EGFR-TKIs were only partially effective. ERK
and Akt phosphorylation were diminished after ASP8273 treatment at
1000nM, however, other EGFR-TKIs only partially reduced the
phosphorylation levels of these proteins. ASP8273 potently enhanced the
caspase activity in NCI-H1650 after 24h treatment, which is concordant
with signal and cell growth inhibitory effect.In HCC827 and NCI-H1975
xenograft models, ASP8273 induced tumor regression at 10, 30 and 100mg/kg
without affecting body weight. ASP8273 also produced tumor growth
inhibition from 10mg/kg in the NSCLC patient derived tumor xenograft,
LU1868 which express T790M/L858R. On the other hand, ASP8273 did not
produce significant tumor growth inhibition at 10 and 30mg/kg in A431
xenograft model.ASP8273 selectively inhibited mutant EGFR compared to WT
EGFR in preclinical models, showing activity in mutant EGFR cell line
which is resistant to other EGFR-TKIs including AZD9291 and CO-1686.
These results indicate the potential of ASP8273 to induce tumor shrinkage
in patients with mutant EGFR positive tumors including those that do not
respond to other EGFR-TKIs despite EGFR mutation.

