Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The imprinted tumor suppressor gene NDN inhibits cell motility in
ovarian cancer by reactivating FAK and RhoA


Ovarian cancers exhibit a distinctive pattern of metastasis over the
surface of the peritoneum. The ability of tumor cells to migrate and
invade is a prerequisite for metastasis and cancer progression. Imprinted
tumor suppressor genes are of particular interest in that only a single
allele is expressed and function can be lost in a single event. Here we
report that an imprinted tumor suppressor gene, NDN, can suppress ovarian
cancer cell migration and inhibit cell motility. NDN is a maternally
imprinted gene consistently expressed in normal ovarian epithelium, but
dramatically downregulated in the majority of ovarian cancers. Little or
no NDN expression could be detected by immunohistochemistry in 73% of 351
epithelial ovarian cancers. NDN was also downregulated in 10 ovarian
cancer cell lines with total loss in 6 of 10. Re-expression of NDN in
SKOv3ip cells significantly inhibited cell migration and invasion by
wound healing and Boyden Chamber assays. NDN re-expression disrupted
actin stress fiber formation and prevented focal adhesion kinase (FAK)
and paxillin assembly at the focal adhesion site by fluorescence
microscopy. NDN re-expression reduced FAKY397 autophosphorylation by 50%
and reduced SrcY416 phosphorylation by 25%. NDN re-expression also
blocked RhoA signaling pathway by decreasing levels of active GTP-RhoA.
Our results indicate that NDN deactivates FAK-RhoA signaling pathway in
ovarian cancer cells, leading to disruption in stress fiber and focal
adhesion formation, and thus suppresses cancer cell motility.

