Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC, dominant negative p53 and AKT transform human neural stem
cells into primitive neuro-ectodermal tumors sensitive to glutaminase
inhibitors


Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) are highly aggressive tumors that
can arise in different regions of the brain. A subset of PNET have
genomic amplification of MYC, and the MYC-regulator LIN28A is known to
define a group of PNET. Both MYC and LIN28 regulate metabolism in normal
and malignant cells. We hypothesized that a combination of dominant
negative R248Wp53, MYC, AKT and hTERT would transform human neural stem
cells into PNET-like tumors. We used lentiviral vectors to infect human
neural stem cells derived from hindbrain and cortex with the same
packages of oncogenic elements. Hindbrain neural stem cells transduced
with MYC/R248Wp53/AKT/hTERT proliferated at an increased rate compared to
control cells as measured by BrdU incorporation (Hindbrain pBABE vs.
Hindbrain MYC/R248Wp53/AKT/hTERT: 4% vs. 50% BrdU positive, t-test p =
0.001). Similar results were observed in cortex derived human neural stem
cells transduced with MYC/R248Wp53/AKT/hTERT (Cortex pBABE vs Cortex
MYC/R248Wp53/AKT/hTERT: 5% vs. 24% BrdU positive, t-test p = 0.027). Both
hindbrain and cortex derived human neural stem cells transformed with MYC
/R248Wp53/hTERT, and MYC/R248Wp53/hTERT/AKT formed aggressive orthotopic
xenograft tumors with histologic characteristics of PNET. The latency of
tumor formation decreased with increasing addition of oncogenes. We
detected increased glutaminase (GLS) in our MYC-driven human neural stem
cell models compared to SV40 immortalized neural stem cells, and
hypothesized that GLS inhibitors would inhibit the growth of MYC-driven
and LIN28 driven brain tumors. The glutaminase inhibitors DON
(6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine) and acivicin suppressed the growth of our
MYC-driven neural stem cell models of PNET as well as the PNET cell line
PFSK (p = 0.003) as measured by BrdU and MTT growth assay. Cell cycle
analysis of MYC-transduced human neural stem cell models showed increased
cell death as measured by sub G1 population after treatment with DON and
acivicin. This data shows that glutaminase inhibition may be a useful
therapeutic modality in PNET.

