Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGF2 from the bone marrow promotes resistance to FLT3 inhibitors
in AML


Introduction: Activating mutations in the FLT3 kinase are present in 25%
of newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (FLT3+ AML) patients and confer
a poor prognosis. Treatment with FLT3 inhibitors is initially effective,
but residual leukemia cells survive in the bone marrow microenvironment
and clinical resistance develops within months. We tested proteins from
the bone marrow microenvironment for their ability to protect FLT3-ITD+
MOLM14 cells from AC220, and found that FLT3 ligand (FL) and fibroblast
growth factor 2 (FGF2) were among the most protective.Results: Consistent
with previous reports, FL restored downstream FLT3 phosphorylation and
signaling in the presence of the FLT3 inhibitor quizartinib (AC220). In
contrast, FGF2 activated FGFR1 and the MAPK pathway, circumventing the
effects of AC220 on MOLM14 cells and increasing cell survival. To model
the effect of prolonged contact with the bone marrow microenvironment,
MOLM14 cells were cultured continuously in FGF2 and AC220. Under these
conditions, 4/4 cultures developed AC220 resistance and resumed
exponential growth after 7 weeks. Development of FGF2-mediated resistance
was accelerated compared to MOLM14 cultured continuously in AC220 alone
(only 2/4 resistant cultures,12 weeks). Long-term resistant cultures
grown in FGF2 were protected from AC220 across a wide range of
concentrations, but concurrent treatment with the FGFR inhibitor PD173074
synergistically overcame FGF2-mediated protection.Serial bone marrow
biopsies of patients on the AC220 phase II clinical trial were analyzed
by immunohistochemistry. Quantification of FGF2 revealed a significant
increase in AC220 during treatment (34% to 51% after one month,
pIntroduction: Activating mutations in the FLT3 kinase are present in 25%
of newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (FLT3+ AML) patients and confer
a poor prognosis. Treatment with FLT3 inhibitors is initially effective,
but residual leukemia cells survive in the bone marrow microenvironment
and clinical resistance develops within months. We tested proteins from
the bone marrow microenvironment for their ability to protect FLT3-ITD+
MOLM14 cells from AC220, and found that FLT3 ligand (FL) and fibroblast
growth factor 2 (FGF2) were among the most protective.Results: Consistent
with previous reports, FL restored downstream FLT3 phosphorylation and
signaling in the presence of the FLT3 inhibitor quizartinib (AC220). In
contrast, FGF2 activated FGFR1 and the MAPK pathway, circumventing the
effects of AC220 on MOLM14 cells and increasing cell survival. To model
the effect of prolonged contact with the bone marrow microenvironment,
MOLM14 cells were cultured continuously in FGF2 and AC220. Under these
conditions, 4/4 cultures developed AC220 resistance and resumed
exponential growth after 7 weeks. Development of FGF2-mediated resistance
was accelerated compared to MOLM14 cultured continuously in AC220 alone
(only 2/4 resistant cultures,12 weeks). Long-term resistant cultures
grown in FGF2 were protected from AC220 across a wide range of
concentrations, but concurrent treatment with the FGFR inhibitor PD173074
synergistically overcame FGF2-mediated protection.Serial bone marrow
biopsies of patients on the AC220 phase II clinical trial were analyzed
by immunohistochemistry. Quantification of FGF2 revealed a significant
increase in AC220 during treatment (34% to 51% after one month, p<0.01)
and FGF2 expression peaked at 61% after 4 months (pIntroduction:
Activating mutations in the FLT3 kinase are present in 25% of newly
diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (FLT3+ AML) patients and confer a poor
prognosis. Treatment with FLT3 inhibitors is initially effective, but
residual leukemia cells survive in the bone marrow microenvironment and
clinical resistance develops within months. We tested proteins from the
bone marrow microenvironment for their ability to protect FLT3-ITD+
MOLM14 cells from AC220, and found that FLT3 ligand (FL) and fibroblast
growth factor 2 (FGF2) were among the most protective.Results: Consistent
with previous reports, FL restored downstream FLT3 phosphorylation and
signaling in the presence of the FLT3 inhibitor quizartinib (AC220). In
contrast, FGF2 activated FGFR1 and the MAPK pathway, circumventing the
effects of AC220 on MOLM14 cells and increasing cell survival. To model
the effect of prolonged contact with the bone marrow microenvironment,
MOLM14 cells were cultured continuously in FGF2 and AC220. Under these
conditions, 4/4 cultures developed AC220 resistance and resumed
exponential growth after 7 weeks. Development of FGF2-mediated resistance
was accelerated compared to MOLM14 cultured continuously in AC220 alone
(only 2/4 resistant cultures,12 weeks). Long-term resistant cultures
grown in FGF2 were protected from AC220 across a wide range of
concentrations, but concurrent treatment with the FGFR inhibitor PD173074
synergistically overcame FGF2-mediated protection.Serial bone marrow
biopsies of patients on the AC220 phase II clinical trial were analyzed
by immunohistochemistry. Quantification of FGF2 revealed a significant
increase in AC220 during treatment (34% to 51% after one month, p<0.01)
and FGF2 expression peaked at 61% after 4 months (p<0.01), indicating
that residual leukemia cells exist in a microenvironment abundant in
FGF2. To test if FGFR inhibition could overcome FGF2-mediated protection
from bone marrow stroma, we grew MOLM14 cells in co-culture with an
FGF2-expressing stromal cell line (HS-5). HS-5 co-culture increased
viability in MOLM14 in AC220 treatment, however concurrent PD173074
treatment abrogated stromal cell protection suggesting that combination
of FLT3 and FGFR inhibitors may overcome resistance mediated by the
microenvironment.Conclusions: FGF2 ligand-induced activation of the
FGFR1/MAPK pathway leads to protection from AC220 in vitro and eventual
development of resistance. FGF2-mediated resistance can be overcome by
concurrent FLT3 and FGFR inhibition. Consistent with our in vitro model,
patients treated with AC220 had increasing FGF2 in their bone marrow,
which peaked prior to resistance and relapse, suggesting that combined
FLT3 and FGFR inhibitors may improve the durability of response. Our
results provide an approach to develop rational inhibitor combinations
that cirucumvent ligand-mediated pathways of resistance.

