Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coactivator PPARGC1B Ala203Pro polymorphism is linked with
estrogen-related receptor function and breast cancer outcome


BackgroundThe estrogen-related receptors (ERRs) are orphan nuclear
receptors (NRs) with high sequence similarity to the estrogen receptor
(ER). Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1 beta
(PERC) specifically activates ER and ERRs, thus providing a link with
breast cancer growth. Here we functionally characterized a non-synonymous
PERC polymorphism, rs7732671, previously associated with increased risk
for familial breast cancer, and tested its clinical relevance for breast
cancer progression.MethodsA mammalian two-hybrid assay was used to
identify protein interactions using full-length and truncated NR (ER,
ERR, ERR) and PERC. PERC rs7732671 variant allele (649G>C_A203P) was
created by site-directed mutagenesis. Expression of genes involved in
cell glycolysis and/or direct ERR targets Eno1, PKM, LDHA and IDH3A, were
analyzed in breast cancer cells and in breast tumors (N = 84). Cell
supernatants were quantitated for lactate formation using liquid
chromatography coupled mass spectrometry. PERC rs7732671 was genotyped in
896 postmenopausal early breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant
tamoxifen and clinical outcome was analyzed using Kaplan-Meier and Cox
regression analyses.ResultsTruncated PERC (aa129-426) containing the
649G>C_A203P variant did not interact with ER, but ERR and ERR
ligand-binding domains were activated. The PERC129-426-C allele enhanced
ERR activity by 21% and ERR by 67%, compared to the PERC129-426-G major
allele (PBackgroundThe estrogen-related receptors (ERRs) are orphan
nuclear receptors (NRs) with high sequence similarity to the estrogen
receptor (ER). Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1 beta (PERC) specifically activates ER and ERRs, thus
providing a link with breast cancer growth. Here we functionally
characterized a non-synonymous PERC polymorphism, rs7732671, previously
associated with increased risk for familial breast cancer, and tested its
clinical relevance for breast cancer progression.MethodsA mammalian
two-hybrid assay was used to identify protein interactions using
full-length and truncated NR (ER, ERR, ERR) and PERC. PERC rs7732671
variant allele (649G>C_A203P) was created by site-directed mutagenesis.
Expression of genes involved in cell glycolysis and/or direct ERR targets
Eno1, PKM, LDHA and IDH3A, were analyzed in breast cancer cells and in
breast tumors (N = 84). Cell supernatants were quantitated for lactate
formation using liquid chromatography coupled mass spectrometry. PERC
rs7732671 was genotyped in 896 postmenopausal early breast cancer
patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen and clinical outcome was
analyzed using Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression analyses.ResultsTruncated
PERC (aa129-426) containing the 649G>C_A203P variant did not interact
with ER, but ERR and ERR ligand-binding domains were activated. The
PERC129-426-C allele enhanced ERR activity by 21% and ERR by 67%,
compared to the PERC129-426-G major allele (P<0.005). Expression of ERR
downstream genes Eno1, LDHA, IDH3A and lactate concentrations were
increased in MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 overexpressing PERC-C as compared to
PERC-G. In breast tumors, glycolytic or ERR target gene expression was
increased in patients carrying the PERC-C allele. Patients carrying the
PERC-C showed higher distant recurrence rates compared with patients of
the G/G genotype (P = 0.01), which was confirmed in Cox regression
adjusted to tumor size, nodal status, and grade (Hazard Ratio 2.06; 95%
CI 1.26-3.38, P = 0.005 per C allele).ConclusionPERC rs7732671 variant
649C_203P enhances ERR and ERR signaling independent of ER. Higher
lactate concentrations in cells and increased ERR target gene expression
in vitro and in patients with the PERC-C allele point to a modulation of
aerobic glycolysis. The ERR/PERC axis is possibly linked with disease
progression in breast cancer.

