Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alterations in chromatin remodeling pathways as a predictive
biomarker of cisplatin therapy in non-small cell lung cancer


BRG1 (SMARCA4) and BRM (SMARCA2) are two important catalytic (ATPase)
components of the mammalian chromatin remodeling complex SWI/SNF.
Alterations of these components have been implicated in many cancers
including lung, prostate, pancreatic, breast, and colon. Several studies
have reported that both BRG1 and BRM actively participate in DNA damage
repair by inducing phosphorylation of -H2AX, stimulating nucleotide
excision repair, and also regulating interstand cross-link repair. BRG1
is frequently deleted in many primary tumors and lung cancer cell lines.
Therefore, we hypothesized that reduced DNA repair capacity due to loss
of BRG1 may enhance the sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents and may serve
as predictive biomarkers of sensitivity for these agents. The purpose of
this study was to evaluate the association between BRG1 and/or BRM
alterations and the outcome of platinum-based chemoradiation in resected
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Using the gene profiling of the
patient tumor samples from the North American Intergroup phase III trial
of adjuvant cisplatin plus vinorelbine (JBR.10), we found that patients
with low BRG1 (SMARCA4) or low BRM (SMARCA2) had significantly longer
overall survival (OS) if they had adjuvant chemotherapy (both pBRG1
(SMARCA4) and BRM (SMARCA2) are two important catalytic (ATPase)
components of the mammalian chromatin remodeling complex SWI/SNF.
Alterations of these components have been implicated in many cancers
including lung, prostate, pancreatic, breast, and colon. Several studies
have reported that both BRG1 and BRM actively participate in DNA damage
repair by inducing phosphorylation of -H2AX, stimulating nucleotide
excision repair, and also regulating interstand cross-link repair. BRG1
is frequently deleted in many primary tumors and lung cancer cell lines.
Therefore, we hypothesized that reduced DNA repair capacity due to loss
of BRG1 may enhance the sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents and may serve
as predictive biomarkers of sensitivity for these agents. The purpose of
this study was to evaluate the association between BRG1 and/or BRM
alterations and the outcome of platinum-based chemoradiation in resected
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Using the gene profiling of the
patient tumor samples from the North American Intergroup phase III trial
of adjuvant cisplatin plus vinorelbine (JBR.10), we found that patients
with low BRG1 (SMARCA4) or low BRM (SMARCA2) had significantly longer
overall survival (OS) if they had adjuvant chemotherapy (both p<0.05, vs
no-adjuvant treatment patients). Interestingly, no significant
differences in the OS were observed with high SMARCA4 or high SMARCA2
expression. Collectively, this study suggests that reduced expression of
SMARCA4 and SMARCA2 may serve as putative predictive biomarkers of
cisplatin therapy and warrants further investigation.This study was
supported by funds from the Lung Cancer Research Foundation (to EB), the
Paul P. Carbone Memorial Foundation (to EB), The Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center (to AC); NIH/NCI 1U10CA180850-01(to AC);
NIH/NCI 1RC2CA148190 (to AC); NIH/NCI 2K12CA133250-06 (to AC);
NIH/NCI/CTEP 1R01CA169368 (to AC); NIH/NCI 1R01CA11522358 (to AC), and
RTOG (to AC).

