Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic PIK3CA mutations reprogram glutamine metabolism in
colorectal cancers


Glutamine addiction is a major metabolic reprogramming event that occurs
in cancer cells. Many tumors exhibit oncogene-dependent addiction to
glutamine. PIK3CA, which encodes the p110 catalytic subunit of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase , is the most frequently mutated oncogene
in human cancers. However, whether PIK3CA mutations reprogram cancer
metabolism is an important unaddressed question. Here we show that
oncogenic PIK3CA mutations reprogram glutamine metabolism by
up-regulating glutamate pyruvate transaminase 2 (GPT2) in colorectal
cancer (CRC) cells, thereby rendering them addicted to glutamine. We
demonstrated that induction of GPT2 by mutant p110 is necessary and
sufficient to render CRC cells addicted to glutamine. Moreover,
aminooxyacetate, which inhibits enzymatic activity of aminotransferases
including GPT2, suppresses xenograft tumor growth of CRCs with PIK3CA
mutations, but not CRCs with WT PIK3CA. Thus our data suggest that
targeting glutamine metabolism may be an effective approach to treat CRC
patients harboring PIK3CA mutations. Mutant p110 up-regulates GPT2 gene
expression through an AKT-independent PDK1-RSK2-ATF4 signaling axis. We
showed that ATF4 is a transcription factor that activates GPT2 gene
expression. We further demonstrated that mutant p110 activates RSK2
kinase through PDK1. Activated RSK2 then phosphorylates ATF4 at the
serine residue 245, which in turn recruits deubiquitinase USP8 and
protects ATF4 from ubiquitin-mediated degradation. Lastly, using
[13C5-]glutamine isotope-tracing technology, we showed that PIK3CA mutant
CRCs convert more glutamine to -keto-glutarate to replenish the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle to generate ATP. Together, our data
establish oncogenic PIK3CA mutations as a cause of glutamine addiction in
CRCs.

