Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Conversion to stem cell state in response to microenvironmental
cues is regulated by balance between epithelial and mesenchymal features
in lung cancer


Epithelial cancers consist in heterogeneous populations of cells
characterized by different phenotypic and biological features. Neoplastic
progression is driven by a subpopulation of cells within the tumor bulk
defined as cancer initiating cells(CICs) with stemness features.
Modulation of cancer initiating properties is a consequence of genetic
and epigenetic changes in cancer cells combined with their interaction
with the surrounding microenvironment.To investigate how
microenvironmental signals could influence the stemness properties and
how these signals are integrated in tumors with different phenotypic
features, eight non-small cell lung cancer cell lines were exposed to
external stimuli such as TGF.The frequency of CD133, previously
identified as a marker of stemness in lung cancer, was evaluated by flow
cytometry and the expression of epithelial and mesenchymal genes was
analyzed by Real-Time PCR and immunofluorescence (IF) or
immunohystochemistry (IHC).TGF treatment resulted in heterogeneous
increased of CD133+ cells and the extent of response was strictly
dependent on the ratio between epithelial and mesenchymal features,
estimated by the expression of E-cadherin and SNAI2 genes. Only cells
that reached a critical threshold in the balance between epithelial and
mesenchymal traits were able to generate CICs, acquiring increased in
vivo tumorigenic properties in response to external stimuli.
Consistently, in cell lines that reached the critical threshold by
modulating the epithelial-mesenchymal balance through over expression of
miR-200c or demethylation of E-cadherin promoter, the ability to acquire
stemness phenotype under microenvironmental stimuli was restored.
Single-cell analysis showed the presence of a sub-population of cells
expressing both epithelial and mesenchymal markers that could be
responsible of the phenotypic plasticity within different cell lines.
Moreover, the evaluation of 60 primary lung tumors by IHC discovered a
specific pattern of E-cadherin a SNAI2 that identify patients with worst
prognosis.Together these findings provided new insight to understand how
dynamic modulation of epithelial and mesenchymal properties determines
the plasticity of lung cancer cells through the generation of cancer
initiating cells in response to microenviromental stimuli.

