Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of Ibuprofen loaded solid lipid nanoparticles and its
combination regimens for pancreatic cancer chemoprevention


The objective of the present study was to establish the individual and
combined chemopreventive potential of a widely used non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug, ibuprofen (IBU), encapsulated in solid lipid
nanoparticles (SLNs) for the chemoprevention of pancreatic cancer. The
synergistic effect of combination of IBU with sulforaphane (SFN) was also
evaluated. Cell viability studies were conducted followed by colony
formation and NF-B DNA binding assays. The IC50 concentration of free IBU
in human pancreatic cancer cells Panc-1 and MIA PaCa-2 were 1.25mM and
1.26 mM, respectively. SLN optimization study of IBU revealed stearic
acid (1:2 drug to lipid ratio) formulated with Poloxamer 188 to be the
most efficacious in cell viability study. Upon encapsulation in SLNs,
IC50 concentration of IBU-SLN was 113.8 M and 122.6 M for Panc-1 and MIA
PACa-2 cells respectively, reflecting a 10-fold reduction compared to
free IBU. Combinations of low doses of free IBU (250 M) and SFN (5 M)
reduced cell viability by 55% (PThe objective of the present study was to
establish the individual and combined chemopreventive potential of a
widely used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, ibuprofen (IBU),
encapsulated in solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) for the chemoprevention
of pancreatic cancer. The synergistic effect of combination of IBU with
sulforaphane (SFN) was also evaluated. Cell viability studies were
conducted followed by colony formation and NF-B DNA binding assays. The
IC50 concentration of free IBU in human pancreatic cancer cells Panc-1
and MIA PaCa-2 were 1.25mM and 1.26 mM, respectively. SLN optimization
study of IBU revealed stearic acid (1:2 drug to lipid ratio) formulated
with Poloxamer 188 to be the most efficacious in cell viability study.
Upon encapsulation in SLNs, IC50 concentration of IBU-SLN was 113.8 M and
122.6 M for Panc-1 and MIA PACa-2 cells respectively, reflecting a
10-fold reduction compared to free IBU. Combinations of low doses of free
IBU (250 M) and SFN (5 M) reduced cell viability by 55% (P<0.01), whereas
a lower dose of encapsulated IBU-SLN (62.5 M) and free SFN (5 M) reduced
cell viability by 80% (PThe objective of the present study was to
establish the individual and combined chemopreventive potential of a
widely used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, ibuprofen (IBU),
encapsulated in solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) for the chemoprevention
of pancreatic cancer. The synergistic effect of combination of IBU with
sulforaphane (SFN) was also evaluated. Cell viability studies were
conducted followed by colony formation and NF-B DNA binding assays. The
IC50 concentration of free IBU in human pancreatic cancer cells Panc-1
and MIA PaCa-2 were 1.25mM and 1.26 mM, respectively. SLN optimization
study of IBU revealed stearic acid (1:2 drug to lipid ratio) formulated
with Poloxamer 188 to be the most efficacious in cell viability study.
Upon encapsulation in SLNs, IC50 concentration of IBU-SLN was 113.8 M and
122.6 M for Panc-1 and MIA PACa-2 cells respectively, reflecting a
10-fold reduction compared to free IBU. Combinations of low doses of free
IBU (250 M) and SFN (5 M) reduced cell viability by 55% (P<0.01), whereas
a lower dose of encapsulated IBU-SLN (62.5 M) and free SFN (5 M) reduced
cell viability by 80% (P<0.001) for both Panc-1 and MIA PaCa-2 cells.
These results reflect 4-fold reduction in IBU-SLN dose in combination
compared to free IBU. Moreover, IBU-SLN and free SFN combination reduced
number of colonies by 50% (PThe objective of the present study was to
establish the individual and combined chemopreventive potential of a
widely used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, ibuprofen (IBU),
encapsulated in solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) for the chemoprevention
of pancreatic cancer. The synergistic effect of combination of IBU with
sulforaphane (SFN) was also evaluated. Cell viability studies were
conducted followed by colony formation and NF-B DNA binding assays. The
IC50 concentration of free IBU in human pancreatic cancer cells Panc-1
and MIA PaCa-2 were 1.25mM and 1.26 mM, respectively. SLN optimization
study of IBU revealed stearic acid (1:2 drug to lipid ratio) formulated
with Poloxamer 188 to be the most efficacious in cell viability study.
Upon encapsulation in SLNs, IC50 concentration of IBU-SLN was 113.8 M and
122.6 M for Panc-1 and MIA PACa-2 cells respectively, reflecting a
10-fold reduction compared to free IBU. Combinations of low doses of free
IBU (250 M) and SFN (5 M) reduced cell viability by 55% (P<0.01), whereas
a lower dose of encapsulated IBU-SLN (62.5 M) and free SFN (5 M) reduced
cell viability by 80% (P<0.001) for both Panc-1 and MIA PaCa-2 cells.
These results reflect 4-fold reduction in IBU-SLN dose in combination
compared to free IBU. Moreover, IBU-SLN and free SFN combination reduced
number of colonies by 50% (P<0.01). Further, IBU-SLN and SFN combinations
showed down-regulation of DNA binding activity of the p50 subunit of
NF-B. In conclusion, these preliminary results demonstrate the potential
of IBU as a chemopreventive agent against pancreatic cancer. Furthermore,
when encapsulated in nanotechnology-based SLN delivery systems and
delivered in combination with SFN provide evidence of a promising
approach for pancreatic cancer prevention and therapy.

