Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiling of a panel of apoptosis-associated microRNAs
in acute myeloid leukemia identifies differentially expressed microRNAs
that target epigenetic modifiers


Introduction: Identifying molecular aberrations in Acute Myeloid Leukemia
(AML) is still an unmet research target. We evaluated the expression of a
panel of apoptosis-associated microRNAs (miRNAs) in leukemic blasts
isolated from AML patients and investigated their predicted
targets.Methods: We used bone marrow or peripheral blood that were
donated by eight AML patients (5 male, 3 female) at diagnosis.
Mononuclear cells were isolated by Ficoll-Histopaque (Sigma Aldrich)
density gradient centrifugation and were cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen
at the Cancer Biobank Center of the University of Ioannina. MicroBeads
technology was used for magnetic cell sorting of CD34+ cells of patients
samples, while mononuclear blood cells from healthy individuals were used
as controls. Small RNA (Introduction: Identifying molecular aberrations
in Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is still an unmet research target. We
evaluated the expression of a panel of apoptosis-associated microRNAs
(miRNAs) in leukemic blasts isolated from AML patients and investigated
their predicted targets.Methods: We used bone marrow or peripheral blood
that were donated by eight AML patients (5 male, 3 female) at diagnosis.
Mononuclear cells were isolated by Ficoll-Histopaque (Sigma Aldrich)
density gradient centrifugation and were cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen
at the Cancer Biobank Center of the University of Ioannina. MicroBeads
technology was used for magnetic cell sorting of CD34+ cells of patients
samples, while mononuclear blood cells from healthy individuals were used
as controls. Small RNA (< 200 b) was isolated using the NucleoSpin miRNA
kit (Macherey Nagel). Simultaneous quantification of 84
apoptosis-associated miRNAs was performed by using the miScript miRNA PCR
Array Human Apoptosis (MIHS-114ZF, Qiagen) in a LightCycler 480
instrument (Roche AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland), and relative quantitation
of expression was determined by the comparative CT method. For miRNA
target prediction we used the RNA22 tool: http://cm.jefferson.edu/rna22v2
and http://cm.jefferson.edu/rna22v2.0.Results: We found 51 downregulated
and 12 upregulated miRNAs compared to control. Among the downregulated
miRNAs was the miR-29 family and among the upregulated was the miR-181
family, both of which have been previously implicated in AML. The top 10
downregulated miRNAs were miR-31-5p, miR-451a, miR-144-3p, miR-29b-3p,
miR-204-5p, miR-9-5p, miR-409-3p, miR-542-3p, miR-29c-3p and miR-29a-3p,
whereas the top 10 upregulated miRNAs were miR-186-3p, miR-149-3p,
let-7c-5p, miR-222-3p, miR-214-3p, miR-181c-5p, miR-181a-5p, miR-181b-5p,
miR-34a-5p and miR-181d-5p. Deepest downregulation (over -50fold) was
seen for miR-144-3p, miR-451a and miR-31-5p. We used RNA22 to identify
genes that are predicted to be simultaneously targeted by all of the 10
top downregulated miRNAs and also the genes that are predicted to be
simultaneously targeted by all of the 10 top upregulated miRNAs. The
predicted targets for all top 10 downregulated miRNAs include NSD1, KAT6B
and SACS. NSD1 is an histone methyltransferase, whereas KAT6B is an
histone acetyltransferase. The predicted targets of all top 10
upregulated miRNAs include 36 genes among which are DICER1, ZNF507,
ZNF704 and MLLT6.Conclusions: A variety of microRNAs are dysregylated in
patients with AML. We confirm that the miR-29 family and the miR-181
family have altered expression in AML. Among predicted targets of the
downregulated miRNAs are genes involved in chromatin remodelling,
suggesting that altered function of epigenetic modifiers in AML may be
due to dysregylation of miRNAs.

