Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rictor/mTORC2 drives formation, progression and therapeutic
resistance of HER2-amplified breast cancers


The phosphatidyl inositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway is
aberrantly activated in nearly 60% of breast cancers, through HER2
amplification, PIK3CA mutation, PTEN inactivation, and other alterations.
The mTOR complexes mTORC1 and mTORC2 operate as activators (mTORC2) or
effectors (mTORC1) of Akt. We found that mRNA upregulation in the mTORC2
cofactors RICTOR and MAPKAP1 correlated with poor survival in breast
cancer patients, while upregulation in the mTORC1 cofactor RPTOR did not.
Genomic gains of RICTOR and MAPKAP1 occurred more frequently in breast
cancers with PI3K pathway alterations than genomic RPTOR gains.
Importantly, Rictor protein levels were increased in invasive over
non-invasive breast tumors, while Raptor levels were not. RICTOR gene
ablation in a transgenic mouse model of HER2-amplified breast cancer
delayed tumorigenesis and decreased lung metastasis, Akt-S473
phosphorylation, cell growth and survival. In human HER2-amplified breast
cancer cells, Rictor loss, but not Raptor loss, decreased Akt-S473
phosphorylation, reducing cell survival and motility/invasion.
Interestingly, Rictor/mTORC2 loss or treatment with a dual mTORC1/2
inhibitor improved lapatinib-induced cell killing in parental and
lapatinib-resistant tumor cells to a greater extent than mTORC1
inhibition. Akt re-activation rescued cell survival, but not
motility/invasion, in Rictor-depleted cells. However, Rictor loss caused
accumulation of the Rac inhibitor RhoGDI2, thus impairing Rac1-dependent
invasion. We conclude that HER2-amplified breast cancers use
Rictor/mTORC2 to drive Akt-mediated cell survival and Rac1-mediated
cellular invasion. These studies support additional studies into
mTORC2-specific inhibitors.

