Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of genetic variants in high and moderate-penetrance
breast cancer susceptibility genes in East Asians


Breast cancer is the most common invasive cancer in females worldwide.
Over the past 20 years, pathogenic mutations in high-penetrance genes
(BRCA1, BRCA2, PTEN and TP3) and moderate-penetrance genes (CHEK2, ATM,
BRIP1, PALB2, RAD51C, STK11, CDH1, RAD50, and NBN) have been identified
for breast cancer. Most of these germline mutations were discovered in
women of European ancestry. In the present study, we aimed to investigate
whether there were additional variants in these genes associated with
breast cancer among women of Asian ancestry. Genotype data of up to 584
SNPs from the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC) including 6,269
cases and 6,624 controls and Shanghai Breast Cancer Genetics Study
(SBCGS) including 5,768 cases and 5,703 controls were analyzed. Among 18
reported pathogenic mutations included in the dataset, 12 were
monomorphic. Rare allele was observed for the remaining 6 mutations and
one of them showed a significant association with P value of 0.0096.
Among the remaining SNPs that were not previously reported to be
pathogenic, 17 SNPs showed nominal association with PBreast cancer is the
most common invasive cancer in females worldwide. Over the past 20 years,
pathogenic mutations in high-penetrance genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, PTEN and
TP3) and moderate-penetrance genes (CHEK2, ATM, BRIP1, PALB2, RAD51C,
STK11, CDH1, RAD50, and NBN) have been identified for breast cancer. Most
of these germline mutations were discovered in women of European
ancestry. In the present study, we aimed to investigate whether there
were additional variants in these genes associated with breast cancer
among women of Asian ancestry. Genotype data of up to 584 SNPs from the
Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC) including 6,269 cases and
6,624 controls and Shanghai Breast Cancer Genetics Study (SBCGS)
including 5,768 cases and 5,703 controls were analyzed. Among 18 reported
pathogenic mutations included in the dataset, 12 were monomorphic. Rare
allele was observed for the remaining 6 mutations and one of them showed
a significant association with P value of 0.0096. Among the remaining
SNPs that were not previously reported to be pathogenic, 17 SNPs showed
nominal association with P<0.05 in the Asian populations. Notably, SNP
rs80359065 in the BRCA2 gene showed significant association with OR (95%
CI) of 1.46 (1.15-1.84) and P value of 1.8 103 in the BCAC, and OR (95%
CI) of 1.14 (1.03-1.27) and P value of 1.3 102 in the SBCGS. In the
combined data, the OR (95% CI) was 1.23 (1.13-1.32) and the P value
reached 7.0 105, lower than the bonferroni corrected P value (9.1 105).
This SNP has a minor allele frequency (MAF) of 1% in the present study,
more prevalent than reported pathogenic mutations. Another variant in the
BRCA2 gene, rs80358978, was also associated with breast cancer with P
value of 5.8 103 in the combined dataset. In the BRCA1 gene, three
low-frequency variants with MAF10% in the RAD50 gene were also associated
with breast cancer with P value of 1.0 103 and 2.1 103 for rs17772583 and
rs2244012, respectively. Our study identified several new risk variants
in the BRCA1, BRCA2 and RAD50 genes in relation to breast cancer risk in
East Asian women and showed that many of the previously reported
pathogenic mutations in the high/moderate penetrance genes of breast
cancer are rare in our study population comprising largely sporadic
breast cancer patients of East Asian ancestry.

