Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor is an independent prognostic marker of breast
cancer in ethnically diverse women from Chicago


Androgen receptor (AR) has been demonstrated to be a prognostic marker in
invasive breast cancer; higher expression levels of AR is associated with
better prognosis among breast cancer patients. The goal of this analysis
was to examine the extent to which AR was associated with specific breast
cancer subtypes, and whether it could serve as an additional prognostic
marker above and beyond breast cancer subtype, in an ethnically diverse
sample of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84 Hispanic and 116
African American). Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on tissue
microarrays constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from
the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago study. Tissue samples were tested for
the expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR),
HER2. From these results, breast cancers were classified as Luminal A
(ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched
(ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). Tumor tissues
were also analyzed for the expression of other proliferative and
apopototic markers (i.e. Ki67, P53 and bcl2) as well as BRCA1 protein
expression. AR expression was evaluated based on the percentage of
positive tumor cells and staining intensity using the H-score. The H
score is a product of the percentage of cells (0-100%) in each intensity
category (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+). The final score is on a continuous scale
between 0 and 300. AR expression was then classified as low (Androgen
receptor (AR) has been demonstrated to be a prognostic marker in invasive
breast cancer; higher expression levels of AR is associated with better
prognosis among breast cancer patients. The goal of this analysis was to
examine the extent to which AR was associated with specific breast cancer
subtypes, and whether it could serve as an additional prognostic marker
above and beyond breast cancer subtype, in an ethnically diverse sample
of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84 Hispanic and 116 African
American). Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on tissue
microarrays constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from
the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago study. Tissue samples were tested for
the expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR),
HER2. From these results, breast cancers were classified as Luminal A
(ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched
(ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). Tumor tissues
were also analyzed for the expression of other proliferative and
apopototic markers (i.e. Ki67, P53 and bcl2) as well as BRCA1 protein
expression. AR expression was evaluated based on the percentage of
positive tumor cells and staining intensity using the H-score. The H
score is a product of the percentage of cells (0-100%) in each intensity
category (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+). The final score is on a continuous scale
between 0 and 300. AR expression was then classified as low (<60%) or
high (60%) using the mean of the AR score as a cutoff. Among the 287
breast cancer cases, 59% were expressing low levels of AR while 41% were
expressing high AR. The percentage of tumor samples with high AR
expression was much higher for luminal A (52%) than for luminal B, HER2,
and TN subtypes (43, 29, and 9%, respectively(PAndrogen receptor (AR) has
been demonstrated to be a prognostic marker in invasive breast cancer;
higher expression levels of AR is associated with better prognosis among
breast cancer patients. The goal of this analysis was to examine the
extent to which AR was associated with specific breast cancer subtypes,
and whether it could serve as an additional prognostic marker above and
beyond breast cancer subtype, in an ethnically diverse sample of 287
patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84 Hispanic and 116 African American).
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on tissue microarrays
constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from the Breast
Cancer Care in Chicago study. Tissue samples were tested for the
expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2.
From these results, breast cancers were classified as Luminal A
(ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched
(ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). Tumor tissues
were also analyzed for the expression of other proliferative and
apopototic markers (i.e. Ki67, P53 and bcl2) as well as BRCA1 protein
expression. AR expression was evaluated based on the percentage of
positive tumor cells and staining intensity using the H-score. The H
score is a product of the percentage of cells (0-100%) in each intensity
category (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+). The final score is on a continuous scale
between 0 and 300. AR expression was then classified as low (<60%) or
high (60%) using the mean of the AR score as a cutoff. Among the 287
breast cancer cases, 59% were expressing low levels of AR while 41% were
expressing high AR. The percentage of tumor samples with high AR
expression was much higher for luminal A (52%) than for luminal B, HER2,
and TN subtypes (43, 29, and 9%, respectively(P<0.0001). High AR
expression significantly correlated with early stage (P = 0.01), lower
nuclear grade (PAndrogen receptor (AR) has been demonstrated to be a
prognostic marker in invasive breast cancer; higher expression levels of
AR is associated with better prognosis among breast cancer patients. The
goal of this analysis was to examine the extent to which AR was
associated with specific breast cancer subtypes, and whether it could
serve as an additional prognostic marker above and beyond breast cancer
subtype, in an ethnically diverse sample of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic
White, 84 Hispanic and 116 African American). Immunohistochemical
analysis was performed on tissue microarrays constructed from invasive
breast cancer samples obtained from the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago
study. Tissue samples were tested for the expression of estrogen receptor
(ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2. From these results, breast
cancers were classified as Luminal A (ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B
(ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched (ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN)
(ER-/PR-/HER2-). Tumor tissues were also analyzed for the expression of
other proliferative and apopototic markers (i.e. Ki67, P53 and bcl2) as
well as BRCA1 protein expression. AR expression was evaluated based on
the percentage of positive tumor cells and staining intensity using the
H-score. The H score is a product of the percentage of cells (0-100%) in
each intensity category (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+). The final score is on a
continuous scale between 0 and 300. AR expression was then classified as
low (<60%) or high (60%) using the mean of the AR score as a cutoff.
Among the 287 breast cancer cases, 59% were expressing low levels of AR
while 41% were expressing high AR. The percentage of tumor samples with
high AR expression was much higher for luminal A (52%) than for luminal
B, HER2, and TN subtypes (43, 29, and 9%, respectively(P<0.0001). High AR
expression significantly correlated with early stage (P = 0.01), lower
nuclear grade (P<0.0001), ER and PR positivity (PAndrogen receptor (AR)
has been demonstrated to be a prognostic marker in invasive breast
cancer; higher expression levels of AR is associated with better
prognosis among breast cancer patients. The goal of this analysis was to
examine the extent to which AR was associated with specific breast cancer
subtypes, and whether it could serve as an additional prognostic marker
above and beyond breast cancer subtype, in an ethnically diverse sample
of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84 Hispanic and 116 African
American). Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on tissue
microarrays constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from
the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago study. Tissue samples were tested for
the expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR),
HER2. From these results, breast cancers were classified as Luminal A
(ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched
(ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). Tumor tissues
were also analyzed for the expression of other proliferative and
apopototic markers (i.e. Ki67, P53 and bcl2) as well as BRCA1 protein
expression. AR expression was evaluated based on the percentage of
positive tumor cells and staining intensity using the H-score. The H
score is a product of the percentage of cells (0-100%) in each intensity
category (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+). The final score is on a continuous scale
between 0 and 300. AR expression was then classified as low (<60%) or
high (60%) using the mean of the AR score as a cutoff. Among the 287
breast cancer cases, 59% were expressing low levels of AR while 41% were
expressing high AR. The percentage of tumor samples with high AR
expression was much higher for luminal A (52%) than for luminal B, HER2,
and TN subtypes (43, 29, and 9%, respectively(P<0.0001). High AR
expression significantly correlated with early stage (P = 0.01), lower
nuclear grade (P<0.0001), ER and PR positivity (P<0.0001), bcl2
positivity(PAndrogen receptor (AR) has been demonstrated to be a
prognostic marker in invasive breast cancer; higher expression levels of
AR is associated with better prognosis among breast cancer patients. The
goal of this analysis was to examine the extent to which AR was
associated with specific breast cancer subtypes, and whether it could
serve as an additional prognostic marker above and beyond breast cancer
subtype, in an ethnically diverse sample of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic
White, 84 Hispanic and 116 African American). Immunohistochemical
analysis was performed on tissue microarrays constructed from invasive
breast cancer samples obtained from the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago
study. Tissue samples were tested for the expression of estrogen receptor
(ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2. From these results, breast
cancers were classified as Luminal A (ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B
(ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched (ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN)
(ER-/PR-/HER2-). Tumor tissues were also analyzed for the expression of
other proliferative and apopototic markers (i.e. Ki67, P53 and bcl2) as
well as BRCA1 protein expression. AR expression was evaluated based on
the percentage of positive tumor cells and staining intensity using the
H-score. The H score is a product of the percentage of cells (0-100%) in
each intensity category (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+). The final score is on a
continuous scale between 0 and 300. AR expression was then classified as
low (<60%) or high (60%) using the mean of the AR score as a cutoff.
Among the 287 breast cancer cases, 59% were expressing low levels of AR
while 41% were expressing high AR. The percentage of tumor samples with
high AR expression was much higher for luminal A (52%) than for luminal
B, HER2, and TN subtypes (43, 29, and 9%, respectively(P<0.0001). High AR
expression significantly correlated with early stage (P = 0.01), lower
nuclear grade (P<0.0001), ER and PR positivity (P<0.0001), bcl2
positivity(P<0.0001), higher levels of BRCA1 expression (PAndrogen
receptor (AR) has been demonstrated to be a prognostic marker in invasive
breast cancer; higher expression levels of AR is associated with better
prognosis among breast cancer patients. The goal of this analysis was to
examine the extent to which AR was associated with specific breast cancer
subtypes, and whether it could serve as an additional prognostic marker
above and beyond breast cancer subtype, in an ethnically diverse sample
of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84 Hispanic and 116 African
American). Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on tissue
microarrays constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from
the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago study. Tissue samples were tested for
the expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR),
HER2. From these results, breast cancers were classified as Luminal A
(ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched
(ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). Tumor tissues
were also analyzed for the expression of other proliferative and
apopototic markers (i.e. Ki67, P53 and bcl2) as well as BRCA1 protein
expression. AR expression was evaluated based on the percentage of
positive tumor cells and staining intensity using the H-score. The H
score is a product of the percentage of cells (0-100%) in each intensity
category (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+). The final score is on a continuous scale
between 0 and 300. AR expression was then classified as low (<60%) or
high (60%) using the mean of the AR score as a cutoff. Among the 287
breast cancer cases, 59% were expressing low levels of AR while 41% were
expressing high AR. The percentage of tumor samples with high AR
expression was much higher for luminal A (52%) than for luminal B, HER2,
and TN subtypes (43, 29, and 9%, respectively(P<0.0001). High AR
expression significantly correlated with early stage (P = 0.01), lower
nuclear grade (P<0.0001), ER and PR positivity (P<0.0001), bcl2
positivity(P<0.0001), higher levels of BRCA1 expression (P<0.0001), lower
Ki67 index (PAndrogen receptor (AR) has been demonstrated to be a
prognostic marker in invasive breast cancer; higher expression levels of
AR is associated with better prognosis among breast cancer patients. The
goal of this analysis was to examine the extent to which AR was
associated with specific breast cancer subtypes, and whether it could
serve as an additional prognostic marker above and beyond breast cancer
subtype, in an ethnically diverse sample of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic
White, 84 Hispanic and 116 African American). Immunohistochemical
analysis was performed on tissue microarrays constructed from invasive
breast cancer samples obtained from the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago
study. Tissue samples were tested for the expression of estrogen receptor
(ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2. From these results, breast
cancers were classified as Luminal A (ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B
(ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched (ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN)
(ER-/PR-/HER2-). Tumor tissues were also analyzed for the expression of
other proliferative and apopototic markers (i.e. Ki67, P53 and bcl2) as
well as BRCA1 protein expression. AR expression was evaluated based on
the percentage of positive tumor cells and staining intensity using the
H-score. The H score is a product of the percentage of cells (0-100%) in
each intensity category (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+). The final score is on a
continuous scale between 0 and 300. AR expression was then classified as
low (<60%) or high (60%) using the mean of the AR score as a cutoff.
Among the 287 breast cancer cases, 59% were expressing low levels of AR
while 41% were expressing high AR. The percentage of tumor samples with
high AR expression was much higher for luminal A (52%) than for luminal
B, HER2, and TN subtypes (43, 29, and 9%, respectively(P<0.0001). High AR
expression significantly correlated with early stage (P = 0.01), lower
nuclear grade (P<0.0001), ER and PR positivity (P<0.0001), bcl2
positivity(P<0.0001), higher levels of BRCA1 expression (P<0.0001), lower
Ki67 index (P<0.0001), and lower P53 expression (PAndrogen receptor (AR)
has been demonstrated to be a prognostic marker in invasive breast
cancer; higher expression levels of AR is associated with better
prognosis among breast cancer patients. The goal of this analysis was to
examine the extent to which AR was associated with specific breast cancer
subtypes, and whether it could serve as an additional prognostic marker
above and beyond breast cancer subtype, in an ethnically diverse sample
of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84 Hispanic and 116 African
American). Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on tissue
microarrays constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from
the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago study. Tissue samples were tested for
the expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR),
HER2. From these results, breast cancers were classified as Luminal A
(ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched
(ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). Tumor tissues
were also analyzed for the expression of other proliferative and
apopototic markers (i.e. Ki67, P53 and bcl2) as well as BRCA1 protein
expression. AR expression was evaluated based on the percentage of
positive tumor cells and staining intensity using the H-score. The H
score is a product of the percentage of cells (0-100%) in each intensity
category (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+). The final score is on a continuous scale
between 0 and 300. AR expression was then classified as low (<60%) or
high (60%) using the mean of the AR score as a cutoff. Among the 287
breast cancer cases, 59% were expressing low levels of AR while 41% were
expressing high AR. The percentage of tumor samples with high AR
expression was much higher for luminal A (52%) than for luminal B, HER2,
and TN subtypes (43, 29, and 9%, respectively(P<0.0001). High AR
expression significantly correlated with early stage (P = 0.01), lower
nuclear grade (P<0.0001), ER and PR positivity (P<0.0001), bcl2
positivity(P<0.0001), higher levels of BRCA1 expression (P<0.0001), lower
Ki67 index (P<0.0001), and lower P53 expression (P<0.0001). A hormone
receptor expression score (HRES) with a high internal reliability
(Cronbach's alpha = 0.7035) was created based on standardized variables
for ER, PR and AR expression. Using an ordinal logistic regression model,
the HRES was a highly significant predictor of tumor grade (PAndrogen
receptor (AR) has been demonstrated to be a prognostic marker in invasive
breast cancer; higher expression levels of AR is associated with better
prognosis among breast cancer patients. The goal of this analysis was to
examine the extent to which AR was associated with specific breast cancer
subtypes, and whether it could serve as an additional prognostic marker
above and beyond breast cancer subtype, in an ethnically diverse sample
of 287 patients (86 Non-Hispanic White, 84 Hispanic and 116 African
American). Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on tissue
microarrays constructed from invasive breast cancer samples obtained from
the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago study. Tissue samples were tested for
the expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR),
HER2. From these results, breast cancers were classified as Luminal A
(ER+/PR+/HER2-), Luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+), HER2 enriched
(ER-/PR-/HER2+), and triple negative (TN) (ER-/PR-/HER2-). Tumor tissues
were also analyzed for the expression of other proliferative and
apopototic markers (i.e. Ki67, P53 and bcl2) as well as BRCA1 protein
expression. AR expression was evaluated based on the percentage of
positive tumor cells and staining intensity using the H-score. The H
score is a product of the percentage of cells (0-100%) in each intensity
category (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+). The final score is on a continuous scale
between 0 and 300. AR expression was then classified as low (<60%) or
high (60%) using the mean of the AR score as a cutoff. Among the 287
breast cancer cases, 59% were expressing low levels of AR while 41% were
expressing high AR. The percentage of tumor samples with high AR
expression was much higher for luminal A (52%) than for luminal B, HER2,
and TN subtypes (43, 29, and 9%, respectively(P<0.0001). High AR
expression significantly correlated with early stage (P = 0.01), lower
nuclear grade (P<0.0001), ER and PR positivity (P<0.0001), bcl2
positivity(P<0.0001), higher levels of BRCA1 expression (P<0.0001), lower
Ki67 index (P<0.0001), and lower P53 expression (P<0.0001). A hormone
receptor expression score (HRES) with a high internal reliability
(Cronbach's alpha = 0.7035) was created based on standardized variables
for ER, PR and AR expression. Using an ordinal logistic regression model,
the HRES was a highly significant predictor of tumor grade (P<0.0001). In
conclusion, in this multi-ethnic sample of breast cancer patients, we
found that AR was a significant independent predictor of less aggressive,
lower grade disease, even after accounting for molecular subtype. AR
might serve as a useful additional marker for the classification of
breast cancer into molecular subtypes.

