Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Critical role of lysine 134 methylation on histone H2AX for -H2AX
production and DNA repair


-H2AX, the serine 139-phosphorylated form of the histone protein H2AX, is
a marker of activation of the DNA damage machinery and is often
overexpressed in many malignancies. Although -H2AX deregulation in cancer
has previously been reported, the relevant molecular functions during
carcinogenesis as well as its relationship with other histone
modifications are still largely unknown. In the present study, we found
that the histone methyltransferase Suppressor of Variegation 3-9 Homolog
2 (SUV39H2) methylated lysine 134 on histone H2AX, which is located in a
unique portion of H2AX among the histone H2A family. When lysine 134 of
histone H2AX was substituted to alanine, the amount of -H2AX production
was significantly abolished. We also found lower -H2AX activity after
introduction of the double-strand breakage in Suv39h2-double null cells
or when SUV39H2 was knocked down. Concordantly, tissue microarray
analysis of clinical lung tissues demonstrated a significantly positive
correlation between K134-methylated H2AX and -H2AX levels. Furthermore,
introduction of K134-substituted histone H2AX enhanced radio- and
chemo-sensitivity of cancer cells, implying a critical role of
methylation on the regulation of -H2AX production and the DNA repair
pathways in cancer cells. This is the first report describing the
functions of methylation on histone H2AX and its important role in the
regulation of -H2AX production in cancer.

