Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential roles of OCT3/4, SOX2 and NANOG for constitutive high
NOXA expression levels in embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells


Recently we found that hypersensitivity of embryonal carcinoma (EC) to
chemotherapy is mediated by high constitutive levels of NOXA protein.
This pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein primes EC cells to undergo rapid and
massive apoptosis in response to p53 activation. Both hypersensitivity as
well as high NOXA protein levels were lost upon differentiation in these
cells. We here investigated the role of three key regulators of
pluripotency, namely OCT3/4, SOX2 and NANOG for NOXA protein and
transcript (PMAIP1) expression in two EC cell lines, the pluripotent
NTERA-2D1 and the nullipotent 2102EP. We found that siRNA-mediated
silencing of POU5F1 (OCT3/4) led to a down-regulation of PMAIP1 mRNA by
80% and to an almost complete loss of NOXA protein (by >90%). On the
other hand, silencing of SOX2 or NANOG only slightly reduced transcript
levels (by 20% and 30%, respectively). At the same time, a distinct
down-regulation of NOXA protein levels (by 75%) was observed in SOX2- and
NANOG-deprived cells, respectively. These data indicate that the high
constitutive levels of NOXA in EC cells depend on two independent
mechanisms, (1) transcriptional regulation predominantly mediated by
OCT3/4, and (2) post-transcriptional regulation mediated by either one of
the stem cell factors. Indeed, we found that siRNA-mediated loss of one
stem cell factor led to a 2fold reduction of NOXA protein stability in
both cell lines reaching a NOXA half-life of approximately 2 hours, which
was comparable to that observed in PHA stimulated lymphocytes from normal
donors.These data demonstrate that the high constitutive levels of NOXA
protein in EC cells are due to OCT3/4 dependent induction of the PMAIP1
transcript and a prolonged NOXA protein stability mediated by either one
of the stem cell factors.

