Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a focused non-hydrolyzable phosphopeptide library
based on a high affinity SHP2 substrate


The Src homology-2 domain containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-2
(SHP2), a widely expressed cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase with two
src-homology 2 (SH2) domains, has received much attention in the signal
transduction field. SHP2 is a transducer of growth factor, cytokine,
integrin, and hormone signaling pathways that regulate processes such as
cell proliferation, differentiation, adhesion, migration, and apoptosis
and plays a pivotal role in growth factor and cytokine signaling.
Gain-of-function SHP2 mutations are associated with several types of
leukemias, and solid tumors; this makes SHP2 is an attractive target for
cancer therapy Several small molecules have been developed for inhibition
of this important phosphatase, which serve as chemical tools to probe the
role of SHP2 in disease and lead compounds for optimization. Nevertheless
it is challenging to improve these lead compounds with better potency,
selectivity and cell permeability. To gain structural insights for
development of potent and selective SHP2 inhibitors, we synthesized a
non-hydrolyzable phosphotyrosine peptide mimetic based on reported SHP2
substrate peptide sequence (10-mer). The non-hydrolyzable phosphopeptide,
containing the phosphotyrosyl surrogate difluoromethylphosphonate, was
synthesized using solid phase peptide synthesis methods from the known
building block N-FMOCF2Pmp and we improved the coupling reaction
conditions to generate a peptide library of difluoromethylphosphonate to
understand the SHP2 affinity. We will present the synthesis of the
peptide library, analysis of SHP2 phosphatase inhibition, and the binding
mode (X-ray crystal structure) of the phosphopeptide mimic to SHP2.

