Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mass spectrometry based serum test for the detection of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in high risk patients


Improved screening protocols (SP) for patients at high risk of developing
HCC could lead to improved patient outcome and possibly cure if detected
early. The current SPs, ultrasound with the possible addition of
alphafetoprotein (AFP) measurement, suffer from insufficient sensitivity
and specificity, and less than 30% of patients are diagnosed early enough
to be suitable candidates for resection or transplantation. An easy to
use biomarker for the early detection of HCC is clearly needed.We used
mass spectrometry analysis of serum samples combined with specialized
deep learning techniques to train and validate such a test. The
development cohort consisted of patients undergoing transplant or
resection for HCC (N = 52; median MELD = 14), and patients with advanced
cirrhosis undergoing liver transplant (N = 53; median MELD = 25).
Underlying cause of liver disease was 51% hepatitis C infection. The
validation cohort consisted of patients with advanced HCC (N = 103;
70/26/7 Child-Pugh A/B/C) and liver disease but no HCC (N = 77; 68/7/2
Child-Pugh A/B/C), with 68% of patients having hepatitis B infection
(HBV). The classifier was trained especially to avoid confounding by
liver function.The resulting test showed a sensitivity/specificity of
73%/95% in cross validation in the development set overall. In the subset
of T1 patients (or lesion size Improved screening protocols (SP) for
patients at high risk of developing HCC could lead to improved patient
outcome and possibly cure if detected early. The current SPs, ultrasound
with the possible addition of alphafetoprotein (AFP) measurement, suffer
from insufficient sensitivity and specificity, and less than 30% of
patients are diagnosed early enough to be suitable candidates for
resection or transplantation. An easy to use biomarker for the early
detection of HCC is clearly needed.We used mass spectrometry analysis of
serum samples combined with specialized deep learning techniques to train
and validate such a test. The development cohort consisted of patients
undergoing transplant or resection for HCC (N = 52; median MELD = 14),
and patients with advanced cirrhosis undergoing liver transplant (N = 53;
median MELD = 25). Underlying cause of liver disease was 51% hepatitis C
infection. The validation cohort consisted of patients with advanced HCC
(N = 103; 70/26/7 Child-Pugh A/B/C) and liver disease but no HCC (N = 77;
68/7/2 Child-Pugh A/B/C), with 68% of patients having hepatitis B
infection (HBV). The classifier was trained especially to avoid
confounding by liver function.The resulting test showed a
sensitivity/specificity of 73%/95% in cross validation in the development
set overall. In the subset of T1 patients (or lesion size <2 cm) accuracy
was 72% (75%). Performance was good across all represented causes of
liver disease. The test was shown not to be confounded by liver function
by classifying healthy patients (N = 17) as no cancer. In the validation
set the performance was 89%/73%, with 91%/78% in the HBV subgroup and
90%/75% in the Child-Pugh A subgroup.The developed test shows promise in
the early detection of HCC as a screening tool in high risk patients
independent of the cause of underlying liver disease. While further
validation will be necessary to conclusively prove its clinical validity,
we believe such a test could substantially improve early detection of HCC.

