Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polarizing tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) towards an
anti-tumor phenotype with a novel compound reveals a new subset of TAMs
within breast tumors which facilitate tumor regression


Manipulation of the innate immune system is a relatively understudied
strategy for anti-cancer immunotherapy. The current focus on
immunotherapy is centered on the adaptive immune system. However, there
is growing evidence that manipulation of the innate immune system,
including macrophages, is also a promising method to combat cancer.Tumor
associated macrophages (TAMs) are one of the major infiltrating leukocyte
populations associated with solid tumors. There are two major types of
macrophages: classically activated macrophages, which can kill bacteria,
pathogens, and similarly tumor cells; and alternatively activated
macrophages which facilitate wound repair and are generally found in the
tumor microenvironment. TAMs are generally alternatively activated cells
with immunosuppressive properties that have been shown to enhance
tumorogenesis by facilitating metastasis, angiogenesis, and inhibiting a
protecting adaptive immune response. The presence of macrophages in the
tumor microenvironment correlates with poor prognosis. Here we describe a
novel, first in class compound that activates macrophages to an
anti-tumor phenotype. While this compound has no direct cytotoxic
activity, we show in the PyMT mouse model of breast cancer that breast
tumors regress in response to therapy in a manner dependent on myeloid
cells. Through the use of flow cytometry, we have been able to identify
different subpopulations of TAMs using the markers CD45, MHCII, and
CD11b. Correlating with tumor regression, we see an increase in PARP and
cleaved caspase 3, indicating apoptotic cell death. Here we show that a
novel compound effectively polarize macrophages to an anti-tumor
phenotype to induce tumor regression. This strategy may have great
therapeutic promise.

