Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gefitinib [epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor] plus
etoricoxib (COX-2 inhibitor) versus oral methotrexate in advanced,
recurrent head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC): results of a
randomized pilot study


Background: There are very few options for the treatment of patients of
SCCHN who relapse after surgery and/or radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy
other than best supportive care (BSC). Over expression of the EGFR has
been demonstrated in more than 80% of patients with SCCHN. In the present
study, we compared the response rates, overall survival, toxicity profile
and quality of life in patients of recurrent SCCHN receiving oral
methotrexate versus a combination of EGFR inhibitor (Gefitinib) + COX II
inhibitor (Etoricoxib).Patients and Methods: Twenty five patients of
Advanced and Recurrent HNSCC were included in each group. Patients were
randomly assigned to receive Gefitinib (250 mg twice a day before meals)
plus Etoricoxib (120 mg/day) [Group A] or Oral Methotrexate (15 mg/week)
[Group B]. All patients received BSC. Patients were follow-up 4 weekly
with routine blood investigations and quality of life questionnaires -
QLQ C-30 and QLQ H & N-35. CT scan of Head and Neck was done every 8
weeks. EGFR mutation studies were not performed.Results : Partial
Response (PR) was seen in 6.25% of patients in group-A; and 0% from
group-B. Stable Disease (SD) observed in 25% of patients from group-A and
10% patients from group-B. At the end of study, mean overall survival
(OS) in group-A was 107.15 days; whereas mean overall survival in group-B
was 73.95 days. The difference in survival was statistically significant
(PBackground: There are very few options for the treatment of patients of
SCCHN who relapse after surgery and/or radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy
other than best supportive care (BSC). Over expression of the EGFR has
been demonstrated in more than 80% of patients with SCCHN. In the present
study, we compared the response rates, overall survival, toxicity profile
and quality of life in patients of recurrent SCCHN receiving oral
methotrexate versus a combination of EGFR inhibitor (Gefitinib) + COX II
inhibitor (Etoricoxib).Patients and Methods: Twenty five patients of
Advanced and Recurrent HNSCC were included in each group. Patients were
randomly assigned to receive Gefitinib (250 mg twice a day before meals)
plus Etoricoxib (120 mg/day) [Group A] or Oral Methotrexate (15 mg/week)
[Group B]. All patients received BSC. Patients were follow-up 4 weekly
with routine blood investigations and quality of life questionnaires -
QLQ C-30 and QLQ H & N-35. CT scan of Head and Neck was done every 8
weeks. EGFR mutation studies were not performed.Results : Partial
Response (PR) was seen in 6.25% of patients in group-A; and 0% from
group-B. Stable Disease (SD) observed in 25% of patients from group-A and
10% patients from group-B. At the end of study, mean overall survival
(OS) in group-A was 107.15 days; whereas mean overall survival in group-B
was 73.95 days. The difference in survival was statistically significant
(P<0.05). Comparing the QOL between two groups by EORTC QLQ C-30 and
EORTC H & N-35 at 4 and 8 weeks, patients of group-A had better quality
of life. No dose-limiting toxicities were seen in group-A or B. Most
common toxicity observed in group A were skin rash and diarrhoea while on
group B it was mucositits.Conclusions: In this small pilot study, in
patients with advanced and recurrent SCCHN, dual targeted treatment (EGFR
and COX II) with combination of Gefitinib plus Etoricoxib improved
response rates, quality of life and overall survival as compared to oral
methotrexate. The combination was well tolerated with minor side-effects
and should be considered in this poor prognostic subset of patients.
Larger, multi-centric studies are needed to confirm these results.

