Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct roles of CXCR3 isoforms in promoting breast cancer
stem-like cell properties and metastasis


Growing evidence has demonstrated that the two major isoforms of
chemokine receptor CXCR3 (CXCR3-A, CXCR3-B) both contribute to breast
cancer pathogenesis and metastasis, however, in different ways.
Understanding the relative contribution of each isoform is critical to
optimize therapeutic strategies targeting CXCR3. Furthermore, the
possible involvement of either CXCR3 isoform in cancer stem-like
properties has not been reported. We examined the contribution of each
isoform to metastasis using a panel of breast cell lines and a xenograft
model of breast cancer; we also explored the role of major CXCR3 isoforms
in the behavior of stem-like cells. CXCR3-A is more abundantly expressed
than CXCR3-B in both primary human breast cancer tissue and in breast
cancer cell lines. On the contrary, immortalized normal MCF-10A cells are
CXCR3-B dominant. In basal-like MDA-MB-231 cells, CXCR3 ligand-stimulated
proliferation is inhibited by CXCR3-B overexpression, with concurrent
reduced activation of ERK1/2 and p38 kinases. Similarly, higher levels of
CXCR3-B inhibit migration and invasion in vitro and metastasis in vivo.
Accordingly, reduced CXCR3-B expression by gene-silencing enhances lung
colonization in the xenograft model. Although exhibiting
anti-proliferative and anti-metastatic roles in the non-stem cell
population, CXCR3-B supports a cancer stem-like cell phenotype. In
mammosphere-forming MDA-MB-231 cells, CXCR3-B is markedly up-regulated
and mammosphere-forming capacity is further increased when overexpressing
CXCR3-B. Likewise, soft agar growth is promoted by CXCR3-B
overexpression. Accordingly, silencing CXCR3-B by shRNA inhibits
stem-like properties. In conclusion, both isoforms need to be targeted to
inhibit the pro-proliferative and pro-metastasis functions of CXCR3-A and
the stem cell-promoting actions of CXCR3-B.

