Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vascular remodeling is associated with increased permeability of
experimental brain metastases of breast cancer


Approximately 1 in 8 women will develop breast cancer. Of these women, a
subset develop metastatic breast cancer, of which 10-16% develop brain
metastases. Treatment options are limited. The blood-brain barrier (BBB)
serves as a physical barrier, limiting drug entry into the brain, as well
as the active efflux of drugs by P-Glycoprotein, Breast Cancer Resistance
Protein, and/or Multidrug Resistance-associated Protein located on the
capillary endothelial cell membranes composing the BBB. Active remodeling
occurs when cancer cells extravasate through the BBB and begin to
metastasize forming fully colonized tumors, creating the Blood-Tumor
Barrier (BTB). In order for active remodeling to occur, induction of
angiogenesis must be initiated, resulting in formation of new blood
vessels. These new blood vessels undergo active remodeling, and are
associated with increased permeability when compared to intact BBB. By
measuring vascular density, our goals were to understand permeability as
it relates to vascular density, determine if increases in lesion
permeability facilitate paclitaxel uptake into the lesion, and evaluate
permeability as it relates to vascular remodeling. In this study, we
utilize two experimental models (murine: 4T1-BR5; and human:
MDA-MB-231-BR-Her2) to analyze permeability, drug uptake and vascular
characteristics. In an analysis of over 2,000 metastatic lesions, we
observed an increased permeability (a range over 30 fold) of nearly all
lesions, with paclitaxel concentrations elevated (pApproximately 1 in 8
women will develop breast cancer. Of these women, a subset develop
metastatic breast cancer, of which 10-16% develop brain metastases.
Treatment options are limited. The blood-brain barrier (BBB) serves as a
physical barrier, limiting drug entry into the brain, as well as the
active efflux of drugs by P-Glycoprotein, Breast Cancer Resistance
Protein, and/or Multidrug Resistance-associated Protein located on the
capillary endothelial cell membranes composing the BBB. Active remodeling
occurs when cancer cells extravasate through the BBB and begin to
metastasize forming fully colonized tumors, creating the Blood-Tumor
Barrier (BTB). In order for active remodeling to occur, induction of
angiogenesis must be initiated, resulting in formation of new blood
vessels. These new blood vessels undergo active remodeling, and are
associated with increased permeability when compared to intact BBB. By
measuring vascular density, our goals were to understand permeability as
it relates to vascular density, determine if increases in lesion
permeability facilitate paclitaxel uptake into the lesion, and evaluate
permeability as it relates to vascular remodeling. In this study, we
utilize two experimental models (murine: 4T1-BR5; and human:
MDA-MB-231-BR-Her2) to analyze permeability, drug uptake and vascular
characteristics. In an analysis of over 2,000 metastatic lesions, we
observed an increased permeability (a range over 30 fold) of nearly all
lesions, with paclitaxel concentrations elevated (p< 0.05) in 85% of the
lesions; however, only 10% of the lesions received enough paclitaxel to
induce cytotoxicity (greater than 10-fold and 1000 ng/g) within the
lesion. Analysis of the lesion vasculature revealed decreased vessel
density (n = 86 for Her2 and n = 40 for 4T1), as well as the presence of
tortuous and abnormal vessels, with nearly all blood vessels associated
with the metastatic lesions showing structural changes to some extent.
Furthermore, with immunofluorescent analysis, we observed a decreased
(1.5 fold) expression of the vascular endothelial tight junction protein
zonula occludens-1 (pApproximately 1 in 8 women will develop breast
cancer. Of these women, a subset develop metastatic breast cancer, of
which 10-16% develop brain metastases. Treatment options are limited. The
blood-brain barrier (BBB) serves as a physical barrier, limiting drug
entry into the brain, as well as the active efflux of drugs by
P-Glycoprotein, Breast Cancer Resistance Protein, and/or Multidrug
Resistance-associated Protein located on the capillary endothelial cell
membranes composing the BBB. Active remodeling occurs when cancer cells
extravasate through the BBB and begin to metastasize forming fully
colonized tumors, creating the Blood-Tumor Barrier (BTB). In order for
active remodeling to occur, induction of angiogenesis must be initiated,
resulting in formation of new blood vessels. These new blood vessels
undergo active remodeling, and are associated with increased permeability
when compared to intact BBB. By measuring vascular density, our goals
were to understand permeability as it relates to vascular density,
determine if increases in lesion permeability facilitate paclitaxel
uptake into the lesion, and evaluate permeability as it relates to
vascular remodeling. In this study, we utilize two experimental models
(murine: 4T1-BR5; and human: MDA-MB-231-BR-Her2) to analyze permeability,
drug uptake and vascular characteristics. In an analysis of over 2,000
metastatic lesions, we observed an increased permeability (a range over
30 fold) of nearly all lesions, with paclitaxel concentrations elevated
(p< 0.05) in 85% of the lesions; however, only 10% of the lesions
received enough paclitaxel to induce cytotoxicity (greater than 10-fold
and 1000 ng/g) within the lesion. Analysis of the lesion vasculature
revealed decreased vessel density (n = 86 for Her2 and n = 40 for 4T1),
as well as the presence of tortuous and abnormal vessels, with nearly all
blood vessels associated with the metastatic lesions showing structural
changes to some extent. Furthermore, with immunofluorescent analysis, we
observed a decreased (1.5 fold) expression of the vascular endothelial
tight junction protein zonula occludens-1 (p<0.05), and increased
expression of two vascular proteins: nestin (25% in permeable lesions
compared with non-permeable) and plasmalemma vesicle associated protein-1
(18 2% in permeable lesions compared to non-permeable lesions at 8.5 2%,
pApproximately 1 in 8 women will develop breast cancer. Of these women, a
subset develop metastatic breast cancer, of which 10-16% develop brain
metastases. Treatment options are limited. The blood-brain barrier (BBB)
serves as a physical barrier, limiting drug entry into the brain, as well
as the active efflux of drugs by P-Glycoprotein, Breast Cancer Resistance
Protein, and/or Multidrug Resistance-associated Protein located on the
capillary endothelial cell membranes composing the BBB. Active remodeling
occurs when cancer cells extravasate through the BBB and begin to
metastasize forming fully colonized tumors, creating the Blood-Tumor
Barrier (BTB). In order for active remodeling to occur, induction of
angiogenesis must be initiated, resulting in formation of new blood
vessels. These new blood vessels undergo active remodeling, and are
associated with increased permeability when compared to intact BBB. By
measuring vascular density, our goals were to understand permeability as
it relates to vascular density, determine if increases in lesion
permeability facilitate paclitaxel uptake into the lesion, and evaluate
permeability as it relates to vascular remodeling. In this study, we
utilize two experimental models (murine: 4T1-BR5; and human:
MDA-MB-231-BR-Her2) to analyze permeability, drug uptake and vascular
characteristics. In an analysis of over 2,000 metastatic lesions, we
observed an increased permeability (a range over 30 fold) of nearly all
lesions, with paclitaxel concentrations elevated (p< 0.05) in 85% of the
lesions; however, only 10% of the lesions received enough paclitaxel to
induce cytotoxicity (greater than 10-fold and 1000 ng/g) within the
lesion. Analysis of the lesion vasculature revealed decreased vessel
density (n = 86 for Her2 and n = 40 for 4T1), as well as the presence of
tortuous and abnormal vessels, with nearly all blood vessels associated
with the metastatic lesions showing structural changes to some extent.
Furthermore, with immunofluorescent analysis, we observed a decreased
(1.5 fold) expression of the vascular endothelial tight junction protein
zonula occludens-1 (p<0.05), and increased expression of two vascular
proteins: nestin (25% in permeable lesions compared with non-permeable)
and plasmalemma vesicle associated protein-1 (18 2% in permeable lesions
compared to non-permeable lesions at 8.5 2%, p<0.05). When plotting
nestin expression versus fold increase in permeability, a correlation of
r2 = 0.33, pApproximately 1 in 8 women will develop breast cancer. Of
these women, a subset develop metastatic breast cancer, of which 10-16%
develop brain metastases. Treatment options are limited. The blood-brain
barrier (BBB) serves as a physical barrier, limiting drug entry into the
brain, as well as the active efflux of drugs by P-Glycoprotein, Breast
Cancer Resistance Protein, and/or Multidrug Resistance-associated Protein
located on the capillary endothelial cell membranes composing the BBB.
Active remodeling occurs when cancer cells extravasate through the BBB
and begin to metastasize forming fully colonized tumors, creating the
Blood-Tumor Barrier (BTB). In order for active remodeling to occur,
induction of angiogenesis must be initiated, resulting in formation of
new blood vessels. These new blood vessels undergo active remodeling, and
are associated with increased permeability when compared to intact BBB.
By measuring vascular density, our goals were to understand permeability
as it relates to vascular density, determine if increases in lesion
permeability facilitate paclitaxel uptake into the lesion, and evaluate
permeability as it relates to vascular remodeling. In this study, we
utilize two experimental models (murine: 4T1-BR5; and human:
MDA-MB-231-BR-Her2) to analyze permeability, drug uptake and vascular
characteristics. In an analysis of over 2,000 metastatic lesions, we
observed an increased permeability (a range over 30 fold) of nearly all
lesions, with paclitaxel concentrations elevated (p< 0.05) in 85% of the
lesions; however, only 10% of the lesions received enough paclitaxel to
induce cytotoxicity (greater than 10-fold and 1000 ng/g) within the
lesion. Analysis of the lesion vasculature revealed decreased vessel
density (n = 86 for Her2 and n = 40 for 4T1), as well as the presence of
tortuous and abnormal vessels, with nearly all blood vessels associated
with the metastatic lesions showing structural changes to some extent.
Furthermore, with immunofluorescent analysis, we observed a decreased
(1.5 fold) expression of the vascular endothelial tight junction protein
zonula occludens-1 (p<0.05), and increased expression of two vascular
proteins: nestin (25% in permeable lesions compared with non-permeable)
and plasmalemma vesicle associated protein-1 (18 2% in permeable lesions
compared to non-permeable lesions at 8.5 2%, p<0.05). When plotting
nestin expression versus fold increase in permeability, a correlation of
r2 = 0.33, p<0.05 was observed. Increased expression of nestin and
plasmalemma vesicle associated protein-1, and decreased expression of
zonula occludes-1 correlate to increased permeability. We hypothesize the
changes in these vascular proteins are a contributory cause to vascular
destabilization and/or vascular remodeling in brain metastases of breast
cancer, resulting in an increased permeability of the BTB.

