Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage-dependent activation of a non-canonical NOTCH-RhoA
signaling pathway regulates tumor cell intravasation


Intravital imaging of rodent mammary tumors has shown that direct
contacts between a Mena expressing tumor cell, a perivascular macrophage
and an endothelial cell forms a microanatomical structure named TMEM
(Tumor Microenvironment of Metastasis). Clinical studies have shown that
the number of TMEM is correlated with an increased risk of developing
distant metastasis in breast cancer patients. While TMEM is an excellent
prognostic marker for predicting metastasis the mechanisms of TMEM
assembly and function are not understood. Recently, we showed that
heterotypic cell contact between tumor cells and macrophages induces the
formation of invadopodia in tumor cells, invasive structures necessary
for matrix degradation and required for tumor cell intravasation. Using
high resolution FRET imaging, we further found that macrophage-induced
invadopodium formation is dependent on RhoA activation in the tumor cell.
However, what remained to be determined was the signaling pathway that
regulated this heterotypic cell contact-mediated phenomenon. We explored
the role of NOTCH, a known receptor involved in heterotypic cell contact
signaling, in stimulating macrophage-dependent tumor cell invadopodium
formation and transendothelial migration. We found that, in the absence
of Notch signaling, macrophage-induced invadopodium formation and tumor
cell intravasation are abolished. Moreover, RhoA is no longer activated
in tumor cells upon macrophage contact when Notch signaling is perturbed.
These results show that Notch signaling regulates heterotypic cell
contact mediated invadopodium formation through RhoA activation, and
reveals a novel non-canonical NOTCH/RhoA pathway as a molecular target to
prevent TMEM function and therefore metastasis.

