Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New approaches to overcome tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistances
in chronic myeloid leukemia


Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is driven by the hyperactive fusion kinase
Bcr-Abl, generated by a chromosomal translocation between chromosome 9
and 22. This oncogenic tyrosine kinase builds up its own signaling
network with various proteins such as the docking protein Gab2 or the Src
kinase Lyn. As a result, the cells become addicted to the constant
signals derived from this fusion kinase. This is the reason why selective
Bcr Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as Imatinib mesylate or
dasatinib, became so successful in the therapy of CML. Despite the great
success of these TKIs in CML treatment, TKI resistance remains a serious
clinical problem. These resistances can be caused by mutations in the
Bcr-Abl oncogene, like the clinical relevant T315I mutation or by
aberrant activity of components of the Bcr-Abl signaling network. In that
regard, we could show that the overexpression of Gab2 or the expression
of a hyperactive mutant of Lyn can confer TKI resistance.Using different
CML cell lines and models we aimed to identify new approaches to overcome
TKI resistances caused by Bcr-Abl mutations or aberrant downstream
signaling. Therefore, we screened inhibitors for their ability to
overcome Gab2 mediated resistance or to inhibit the activity of T315I
mutated Bcr-Abl. We identified the multikinase inhibitors sorafenib and
axitinib, both clinical approved as second line drugs in renal cell or
hepatocellular carcinoma, as compounds reducing the viability of
Bcr-AblT315I transformed cells. Interestingly, these inhibitors were
highly active against TKI resistant Bcr-Abl positive cells in contrast to
non-transformed cells. These results invite for the further evaluation of
sorafenib and axitinib in the treatment of TKI-resistant CML.

