Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CTC categorization: Subpopulations of CTCs and their potential
clinical significance


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) were previously rare events difficult to
identify. In clinical practice, CTC enumeration has now been recognized
for its prognostic value. Furthermore, as CTC technology has rapidly
improved, CTCs are now readily available for further investigation. The
tumor cells isolated from CTC instruments may be analyzed for molecular
profiles and mutation screening. Here we propose three new subsets of
CTCs: elongated CTC (EL-CTC), miniature CTC (Mini-CTC) and cluster CTC
(CL-CTC). Elongated CTC have an elongated shape and some of these cells
have an enlarged tail composed of the nucleus. The enlarged tail is
formed during intravasation because of the less flexible nuclear membrane
and these cells represent highly motile tumor cells. The mini-CTCs are
much smaller than regular tumor cells and may be dormant and gain the
advantage of escaping immune surveillance. The CTC clusters are formed by
a group of tumor cells and lymphocytes as well as macrophages. There is
strong evidence that these clusters are highly malignant. These three
subsets are recognized morphologically and their unique features may
directly relate to their functionality and clinical significance.
Additional investigation in the area of CTC research, specifically
enhanced understanding of CTC subpopulations, may lead to novel
therapeutic approaches in oncology.

