Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative surface proteomics of NCI-H2122 cells reveals distinct
cell surface phenotype of a metastatic NSCLC cell line expressing
oncogenic KRASG12C


Oncogenic KRAS mutations are found in 40% of non-small cell lung
carcinomas (NSCLC). In order to expand the treatment options for NSCLC
harboring oncogenic K-Ras, new therapeutic cell surface targets need to
be identified and characterized. Towards this goal we carried out
comparative cell surface analysis of the NSCLC cell line H2122-KRASG12C
and the BL2122 cell line (i.e., control), which has been established from
the peripheral blood lymphocytes of the same NSCLC patient. Here, we
describe optimized hydrazide-based glycoproteomics for mapping of the
cell surface proteome of the NSCLC H2122 cell line harboring oncogenic
KRASG12C. Our comparative glycoproteomics revealed 632 proteins
identified by LC-MS at the surface of both H2122-KRASG12C and BL2122 cell
lines. Subtractive proteomics revealed 215 proteins detected solely at
the H2122-KRASG12C cell surface while 214 proteins were found germane to
the cell surface of BL2122 cells. A total of 203 proteins were commonly
identified at the surface of both cell lines. Spectral counting based
quantitation revealed 44 proteins showing 3-fold increase in their
relative concentration at the cell surface of H2122-KRASG12C cells.
Subsequent meta-analysis via Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) revealed
significant activation of canonical pathways known to be involved in
NSCLC biology (e.g., EGFR/neuregulin, and PI3K/AKT signaling). From a
subset of proteins showing significant up-regulation at the surface of
H2122-KRASG12C cells, we further cross-validated CD147 using
immunofluorescence analysis (IFA) and Western blotting (WB).
Interestingly, subsequent IFA confirmed the over-expression of CD147 at
the cell surface of pancreatic KP-3, lung H2444, and colon SW620 cancer
cell lines, each harboring constitutively activated KRAS. Importantly,
amongst 215 proteins identified solely at the cell surface of
H2122-KRASG12C cells, proteins upstream of K-Ras, epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2 (ERBB2),
receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-3 (ERBB3), and disintegrin
metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 17 (ADAM17) were
unambiguously identified. Using WB analysis, we first confirmed the
expression K-Ras in the membrane preparation of H2122-KRASG12C cells.
Interestingly, insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor, (IGF1R), and
mesothelin (MSLN) were also detected exclusively at the cell surface of
the H2122-KRASG12C. We further cross-validated the expression of
mesothelin using WB. Taken together, present approach greatly extends the
known cell surface phenotype of the NSCLC H2122-KRASG12C cells and can be
readily employed as a primary proteomic screen to provide the basis for
discovery and characterization of novel cell surface therapeutic targets
or diagnostic assays in cells/tissues harboring oncogenic K-Ras.

