Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of EYA4 as a candidate risk locus in familial lung
cancer families linked to 6q


Recently, Wilson et al. (doi:10.1038/onc.2013.396) found that EYA4 was
frequently inactivated biallelically in sporadic lung cancer, displays
tumor suppressor gene-like properties and affects DNA repair, and that 5
of 17 common SNPs in this 0.3Mb region showed nominal association to
familial lung cancer (FLC, pRecently, Wilson et al.
(doi:10.1038/onc.2013.396) found that EYA4 was frequently inactivated
biallelically in sporadic lung cancer, displays tumor suppressor
gene-like properties and affects DNA repair, and that 5 of 17 common SNPs
in this 0.3Mb region showed nominal association to familial lung cancer
(FLC, p<0.05) although these associations are not genome-wide significant
after correction for multiple testing.. However, this is an interesting
candidate gene for FLC risk because it is located on chromosome 6q in a
region where we previously showed evidence of linkage to FLC (PMID:
15272417, 20215501). Here, we sequenced 75 individuals from our 9 most
strongly 6q-linked families, using Illumina technology and a custom
Agilent kit to capture 37Mb of chromosome 6 from 130Mb to 167Mb. We
closely examined a region around EYA4, between 133Mb and 135Mb. This
region contains a number of other genes in addition to EYA4, including
the Vanin cluster; ribosomal protein S12; the tumor suppressor gene TCF21
and its antisense RNA TARID which directs methylation and activation of
TCF21; solute carriers SLC18B1 and SLC2A12 and the serum/glucocorticoid
regulated kinase SGK1. To detect sharing of variants among affecteds in
each family while allowing for phenocopies, singlepoint affected-only
linkage analysis was performed on lung cancer affection status for all
sequence variants using the Elston-Stewart algorithm implemented in the R
package paramlink assuming penetrance of 0.01, 0.1 and 0.1 for dd/Dd/DD
and a disease allele (D) frequency of 0.01, at a recombination fraction
(theta) of 0.The highest total LOD score (summed over all 9 families) in
the entire 37Mb targeted region was not near EYA4. In only one family was
there any variant in EYA4 that appeared on the linked haplotype with
close to the highest family-specific LOD score: Family 30 had a LOD of
0.6514 at several EYA4 variants (max LOD across region 0.6519). However,
many variants across the region had similar LODs. In the remaining
families, all EYA4 variants had LODs much lower than the maximum
family-specific LOD score in the region. Thus, EYA4 variants are unlikely
to explain our 6q linkage peak in these 6q-linked families.The second
highest total LOD score for the entire 37Mb targeted region was found
near EYA4 at 133.9Mb (LOD = 3.82), in the middle of the TARID antisense
RNA gene. This variant appears to be entirely novel, as it is not present
in any of the online variant databases, such as NHLBI's ESP or 1000
Genomes. In two families, the family LOD score at this locus was at or
close to the highest in the region: in Family 44 the LOD score was 1.206
(max LOD across entire region 1.207) and in Family 35 the LOD score was
0.3958 (max LOD across region 0.3959). Therefore this variant in the
TARID antisense RNA is a candidate in some of our families most strongly
linked to chromosome 6q.

