Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A biomarker study of lapatinib in the neoadjuvant treatment of
HER2 over expressing esophago-gastric adenocarcinoma (EGA)


Introduction16% of EGA over-express HER2 and Trastuzumab with
chemotherapy improves survival in metastatic patients. Lapatinib, a dual
EGFR and HER2 inhibitor has shown disappointing results in EGA, and in
vitro studies suggest MET, IGFR and HER3 confer resistance. This trial
investigated the toxicity of neoadjuvant lapatinib plus chemotherapy,
feasibility of additional endoscopy for biomarker endpoints and molecular
biomarkers to elucidate resistance mechanisms in vivo.MethodsPatients
with operable HER2 over expressing EGAs (IHC3+ or IHC2+ with FISH
amplification) were treated with 10 days of lapatinib (1250mg od). PET
imaging and biopsies were done at D0 and D10. 3 cycles (q21) of
Capecitabine (850mg/m2 bd D1-14) and Oxaliplatin (130mg/m2 D1) were then
given, followed by surgery at D108-115. The Collaborative Enhanced
Reactive Immunoassay (CEER) assessed receptor activation and downstream
signalling. A D0 biopsy was treated ex vivo with lapatinib and formalin
fixed for drug sensitivity assessment by P-HER2 immunohistochemistry
(IHC). The trial was powered to assess for molecular endpoints (n =
13).ResultsThe trial closed early due to anastamotic leaks in 2/10 for
which a drug effect could not be excluded. Lapatinib monotherapy did not
cause Grade3+ toxicity, whilst toxicities during chemotherapy were as
expected, except for grade3+ diarrhoea (20%). The ex vivo and D10 P-HER2
IHC showed on target effects (77%) with good correlation (k0.63). PI3K (p
= 0.0037) and Erk (p = 0.005) activation correlated with MET activation,
but not with IGFR or HER3. A molecular response did not correlate with
D10 PET (no response seen), radiological or pathological responses (1
CPR), although median overall survival has not been reached.ConclusionsIn
view of the leak-rate a longer washout period prior to surgery should be
considered. Real-time biomarker assays on endoscopic biopsies are
feasible. MET appears to be a significant in vivo mechanism of resistance
and may represent a therapeutic target.

