Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-518c-5p promotes the metastasis of oral cancer cells in a
CXCR4-dependent and -independent manner


We have demonstrated that CXCR4 system is involved in the metastatic
process of oral cancer. Recently, we identified the miR-518c-5p as a
downstream target of the CXCR4 system, which was involved in the
metastasis of B88, a CXCR4-expressing oral cancer cell line (2014 AACR
annual meeting). In this study, we examined the function of miR-518c-5p
in an oral cancer cell line, CAL27, which did not express CXCR4 and did
not exhibit metastatic potential in vivo. We transfected a miR-518c
expression vector into parental CAL27 cells and isolated a stable
transfectant, CAL27-518c. We could detect the upregulation of miR-518c-5p
in the miR-518c transfectants compared with mock cells, which was
completely inhibited by treatment with the miR-518c-5p LNA inhibitor. The
growth and migration of CAL27-518c cells were significantly enhanced
compared with those of mock cells. The miR-518c-5p inhibitor
significantly impaired the enhanced cell growth and migration of
CAL27-518c cells, indicating that these phenomena were mainly dependent
on the expression of miR-518c-5p. Next, we examined the function of
miR-518c-5p in vivo. miR-518c or mock transfectants were inoculated into
the masseter muscle or the blood vessels of nude mice. Tumor volume,
lymph nodes metastasis, and lung metastasis were significantly increased
in the mice inoculated with miR-518c transfectants. These results
indicate miR-518c-5p promotes the metastasis of oral cancer in a
CXCR4-dependent and -independent manner.

