Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BP1 protein, a transcription factor, is secreted by breast cancer
cells


Background. BP1 is a homeobox gene which is normally expressed during
early hematopoiesis. Homeotic proteins regulate the expression of
multiple genes involved in development and differentiation. We have
previously shown that BP1 mRNA and protein levels are elevated in 80% of
women with invasive ductal breast cancer. Furthermore, BP1 protein (pBP1)
overexpression is associated with larger and more aggressive breast
tumors. In cultured breast cancer cell lines overexpressing pBP1, we
observe decreased cell death and increased proliferation. BP1
overexpression has also been found to stimulate known oncogenes including
BCL2 and c-MYC. Methods. Levels of pBP1 were detected in cell extracts
(CE) and conditioned media (CM) using Western Blot analysis. Depleted
media (DM), in which the pBP1 was removed, and recombinant BP1 protein
(rpBP1) were used as controls. Cell viability was assessed using MTT
assays. Real-time qPCR was used to measure expression of selected
oncogenes.Results. Our results show that: (a) pBP1 is secreted from three
breast cancer cell lines but not from two normal breast epithelial cell
lines. (b) pBP1 exhibits mitogenic activity towards breast cancer cells
and normal breast cells, whether cells are grown in media containing 10x
conditioned medium (CM) from cells secreting pBP1 or in media containing
purified recombinant pBP1 (rpBP1). (c) Growth of breast cancer cells or
normal breast epithelial cells in CM or rpBP1 leads to up-regulation of
selected oncogenes known to be targets of BP1. These oncogenes include
BCL2 and MET. BP1 itself was stimulated, but only in normal breast
epithelial cells. The mechanism of secretion is under
investigation.Conclusions. Our data suggest that secreted pBP1 can
stimulate cell proliferation and gene expression in tumor cells as well
as in nearby normal cells.

