Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA promoter hypermethylation of genes as potential diagnostic and
prognostic biomarkers for ovarian cancer


Till recently, epithelial ovarian cancers were thought to arise from the
ovarian surface epithelial cells. However, recent studies suggest that
the majority of high grade serous carcinomas (HGSCs) arise from lesions
in the fallopian tubes. DNA promoter hypermethylation of certain genes is
often an early event in tumorigenesis, and it can be detected in blood
and other bodily fluids, making it a feasible biomarker strategy for
early detection of tumors. Therefore, we sought to determine the
methylation profile of HGSCs as compared to fallopian tube epithelium,
using the Infinium HumanMethylation 450 Array. We compared the
methylation in 12 HGSC tissue samples to 15 fallopian tube epithelium
samples. In addition, we compared the methylation profile among long-term
survivors (more than 5 years) and short-term survivors (2-3 years) of
HGSCs. Our results identified the promoter regions of HIST1H2BB, MAGI2,
and EPSTI1 to be differentially methylated when comparing HGSC with
normal fallopian tube samples. Furthermore, these genes were
differentially methylated in HGSC patients with long-term survival when
compared to patients with short-term survival. Quantitative methylation
specific PCR analysis confirmed our results of differential methylation
among short-term and long-term survivors, and show that these genes are
also methylated in ovarian cancer cell lines. Taken together, we have
identified genes that could have potential as diagnostic and prognostic
biomarkers. Our findings could lead to the development of a biomarker
panel for the diagnosis and/or prognosis of ovarian cancer.

