Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial DNA copy number and risk of second primary tumors in
long-term breast cancer survivors


Background. Mitochondria is constantly exposed to reactive oxygen species
(ROS), an important factor in carcinogenesis. Altered mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) copy number in peripheral blood has been associated with
increased risks of several cancers, including breast cancer. However, the
association of mtDNA copy number with clinical outcomes of breast cancer
has not been reported. This study aimed to assess the association of
mtDNA copy number with second primary tumors (SPT) in long-term breast
cancer survivors.Methods. We measured mtDNA by quantitative PCR in
patients in 68 long-term breast cancer survivors with SPT, 100 long-term
breast cancer survivors without SPT and 97 newly diagnosed breast cancer
cases. Cases with and without SPT were matched by years since diagnosis,
age at time of sample collection and race. Differences between mtDNA copy
number among groups were analyzed using the Wilcoxon rank sum
test.Results. MtDNA copy number was significantly higher in long-term
breast cancer survivors (either with SPT or not SPT) compared with newly
diagnosed breast cancer patients (Mean (SD), 1.03 0.25 vs 0.95 0.27; p =
0.005). We did not observe significant differences of mtDNA copy number
between long-term survivors with SPT and without SPT. However, in
stratified analyses by epidemiological and clinical variables, we
observed lower mtDNA copy number in HER2-positive long-term survivors
with SPT than those without SPT (0.84 0.13 vs 1.27 0.44; p = 0.010) and
in pre-menopause long-term survivors with SPT than those without SPT
(0.95 0.20 vs 1.06 0.22; p = 0.034). A borderline significance of mtDNA
copy number between SPT and non-SPT ER-negative long-term survivors was
also noted (0.90 0.17 vs 1.18 0.41, p = 0.056).Conclusion. Higher mtDNA
copy number was found in long-term breast cancer survivors compared to
newly diagnosed cases. There were significant associations between lower
mtDNA copy number and SPT in long-term breast cancer survivors who are
HER2+ or are pre-menopause. These results indicate a role of mtDNA copy
number in long-term breast cancer survivorship.

