Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic effects of TOPK inhibitor on triple-negative breast
cancer


TOPK (T-LAK cell-originated protein kinase) is a novel mitotic kinase and
frequently up-regulated in multiple types of cancer, including
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), but not expressed in normal organs
except testis. We previously showed that knockdown of TOPK using siRNAs
induced cytokinesis defect in dividing cancer cells with elongated
intercellular bridge. In addition, we recently reported that a potent
TOPK inhibitor (OTS964) caused the cytokinesis defect and subsequently
induced apoptosis of cancer cells in vitro as well as in in vivo
xenograft models of human lung cancer. More importantly, liposomal
formulation of OTS964 led to complete regression of transplanted tumors
without any detectable adverse reactions in mice. Since the TOPK gene is
up-regulated in the great majority of TNBCs, we examined therapeutic
effect of OTS964 on TNBC cell lines. Western blot analysis revealed that
TOPK was highly expressed in all of five TNBC cell lines examined. OTS964
was effective to MDA-MB-231 cells with the IC50 value of 73 nM, and
caused cytokinesis defect and apoptosis. Moreover, in MDA-MB-231
xenograft model, oral administration of 75 mg/kg OTS964 for 2 weeks
achieved 65% tumor growth inhibitory (TGI) effect at day 15, without any
body weight loss. Collectively, our findings imply that targeting TOPK is
a very promising therapeutic option for the treatment of TNBC patients
who still have very limited treatment modalities.

