Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NR5A2 is essential for pancreas development and affects pancreas
carcinogenesis


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains one of the most lethal
cancers today. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) has implicated the
nuclear receptor NR5A2 in modulating risk for pancreatic cancer. While a
role for this gene in pancreatic cancer has not been previously
recognized, it plays an important role in stem cell pluripotency and
metabolism. Using the zebrafish model, we demonstrate that genetic or
pharmacologic inhibition of nr5a2 activity results in absence of exocrine
pancreas, while leaving endocrine pancreas unaffected, indicating an
essential role in pancreas organ formation. Further, we localize nr5a2
expression to the endodermal bud that gives rise to the exocrine
pancreas, consistent with a role for nr5a2 in regulating differentiation
of pancreas progenitors. In resected human PDAC specimens and in vitro
cell lines, we find that NR5A2 expression is altered compared to normal
ductal epithelium. Moreover, shRNA knockdown of NR5A2 dramatically alters
proliferation of PDAC cell lines, supporting the hypothesis that NR5A2 is
involved in pancreatic carcinogenesis. These data support a model that
NR5A2 regulates the proliferation and differentiation of exocrine
pancreas progenitor cells during development. We postulate that
loss-of-function of NR5A2 results in dysregulation of these processes in
the adult pancreas by driving acinar cells to acquire properties of
progenitor cells, and therefore is an important step in pancreas
oncogenesis.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

