Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of HGF knockin microenvironment on epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and cancer stem cells in a non-small cell lung cancer
xenograft model


We previously reported the generation of rabbit monoclonal antibodies to
twelve EMT (epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition) transcription factors
and cancer stem cell (CSC) markers for the development of pharmacodynamic
assays to inform clinical trials of new anticancer therapies (Pfister et
al., AACR 2013). Here we demonstrate the functional utility of some of
these reagents in detecting HGF-induced changes in EMT and CSC biology in
a xenograft tumor model. Initial antibody characterization was performed
in vitro and a subset [including SNAIL, SLUG, SOX9, Goosecoid (GSC),
NANOG and CD133] was selected for further testing of functional utility
in FFPE tissues by quantitative multiplex IFA. The antibodies were
applied to xenograft tissues derived from the non-small cell lung cancer
tumor line, NCI-H596, implanted in hHGFscid/scid, hHGFki/scid or
hHGFki/ki mice to examine HGF-induced changes in EMT factors, CSC
markers, as well as pY1235-MET expression in vivo. H596 tumors grown in
either hHGFki/scid or hHGFki/ki mice exhibited enhanced EMT particularly
in tumor microenvironments adjacent to mouse stroma containing the HGF
knockin gene, compared to those in hHGFscid/scid mice. By quantitative
immunofluorescence, H596 tumors showed increased Vimentin:E-cadherin
ratio when grown in hHGFki/scid (PWe previously reported the generation
of rabbit monoclonal antibodies to twelve EMT (epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition) transcription factors and cancer stem cell (CSC) markers for
the development of pharmacodynamic assays to inform clinical trials of
new anticancer therapies (Pfister et al., AACR 2013). Here we demonstrate
the functional utility of some of these reagents in detecting HGF-induced
changes in EMT and CSC biology in a xenograft tumor model. Initial
antibody characterization was performed in vitro and a subset [including
SNAIL, SLUG, SOX9, Goosecoid (GSC), NANOG and CD133] was selected for
further testing of functional utility in FFPE tissues by quantitative
multiplex IFA. The antibodies were applied to xenograft tissues derived
from the non-small cell lung cancer tumor line, NCI-H596, implanted in
hHGFscid/scid, hHGFki/scid or hHGFki/ki mice to examine HGF-induced
changes in EMT factors, CSC markers, as well as pY1235-MET expression in
vivo. H596 tumors grown in either hHGFki/scid or hHGFki/ki mice exhibited
enhanced EMT particularly in tumor microenvironments adjacent to mouse
stroma containing the HGF knockin gene, compared to those in
hHGFscid/scid mice. By quantitative immunofluorescence, H596 tumors
showed increased Vimentin:E-cadherin ratio when grown in hHGFki/scid
(P<0.0006) or hHGFki/ki (PWe previously reported the generation of rabbit
monoclonal antibodies to twelve EMT (epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition) transcription factors and cancer stem cell (CSC) markers for
the development of pharmacodynamic assays to inform clinical trials of
new anticancer therapies (Pfister et al., AACR 2013). Here we demonstrate
the functional utility of some of these reagents in detecting HGF-induced
changes in EMT and CSC biology in a xenograft tumor model. Initial
antibody characterization was performed in vitro and a subset [including
SNAIL, SLUG, SOX9, Goosecoid (GSC), NANOG and CD133] was selected for
further testing of functional utility in FFPE tissues by quantitative
multiplex IFA. The antibodies were applied to xenograft tissues derived
from the non-small cell lung cancer tumor line, NCI-H596, implanted in
hHGFscid/scid, hHGFki/scid or hHGFki/ki mice to examine HGF-induced
changes in EMT factors, CSC markers, as well as pY1235-MET expression in
vivo. H596 tumors grown in either hHGFki/scid or hHGFki/ki mice exhibited
enhanced EMT particularly in tumor microenvironments adjacent to mouse
stroma containing the HGF knockin gene, compared to those in
hHGFscid/scid mice. By quantitative immunofluorescence, H596 tumors
showed increased Vimentin:E-cadherin ratio when grown in hHGFki/scid
(P<0.0006) or hHGFki/ki (P<0.022) vs. HGFscid/scid mice. Moreover,
significant increases in nuclear pY1235-MET, measured by%NAP (percentage
nuclear area positive), were observed in H596 tumors in hHGFki/scid (PWe
previously reported the generation of rabbit monoclonal antibodies to
twelve EMT (epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition) transcription factors
and cancer stem cell (CSC) markers for the development of pharmacodynamic
assays to inform clinical trials of new anticancer therapies (Pfister et
al., AACR 2013). Here we demonstrate the functional utility of some of
these reagents in detecting HGF-induced changes in EMT and CSC biology in
a xenograft tumor model. Initial antibody characterization was performed
in vitro and a subset [including SNAIL, SLUG, SOX9, Goosecoid (GSC),
NANOG and CD133] was selected for further testing of functional utility
in FFPE tissues by quantitative multiplex IFA. The antibodies were
applied to xenograft tissues derived from the non-small cell lung cancer
tumor line, NCI-H596, implanted in hHGFscid/scid, hHGFki/scid or
hHGFki/ki mice to examine HGF-induced changes in EMT factors, CSC
markers, as well as pY1235-MET expression in vivo. H596 tumors grown in
either hHGFki/scid or hHGFki/ki mice exhibited enhanced EMT particularly
in tumor microenvironments adjacent to mouse stroma containing the HGF
knockin gene, compared to those in hHGFscid/scid mice. By quantitative
immunofluorescence, H596 tumors showed increased Vimentin:E-cadherin
ratio when grown in hHGFki/scid (P<0.0006) or hHGFki/ki (P<0.022) vs.
HGFscid/scid mice. Moreover, significant increases in nuclear pY1235-MET,
measured by%NAP (percentage nuclear area positive), were observed in H596
tumors in hHGFki/scid (P<0.0041) or hHGFki/ki (PWe previously reported
the generation of rabbit monoclonal antibodies to twelve EMT
(epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition) transcription factors and cancer
stem cell (CSC) markers for the development of pharmacodynamic assays to
inform clinical trials of new anticancer therapies (Pfister et al., AACR
2013). Here we demonstrate the functional utility of some of these
reagents in detecting HGF-induced changes in EMT and CSC biology in a
xenograft tumor model. Initial antibody characterization was performed in
vitro and a subset [including SNAIL, SLUG, SOX9, Goosecoid (GSC), NANOG
and CD133] was selected for further testing of functional utility in FFPE
tissues by quantitative multiplex IFA. The antibodies were applied to
xenograft tissues derived from the non-small cell lung cancer tumor line,
NCI-H596, implanted in hHGFscid/scid, hHGFki/scid or hHGFki/ki mice to
examine HGF-induced changes in EMT factors, CSC markers, as well as
pY1235-MET expression in vivo. H596 tumors grown in either hHGFki/scid or
hHGFki/ki mice exhibited enhanced EMT particularly in tumor
microenvironments adjacent to mouse stroma containing the HGF knockin
gene, compared to those in hHGFscid/scid mice. By quantitative
immunofluorescence, H596 tumors showed increased Vimentin:E-cadherin
ratio when grown in hHGFki/scid (P<0.0006) or hHGFki/ki (P<0.022) vs.
HGFscid/scid mice. Moreover, significant increases in nuclear pY1235-MET,
measured by%NAP (percentage nuclear area positive), were observed in H596
tumors in hHGFki/scid (P<0.0041) or hHGFki/ki (P<0.0058) vs.
hHGFscid/scid. We detected varying levels of EMT/CSC marker expression,
including CD44, CD133, ALDH, and GSC in the membrane or cytoplasm of
noninvasive regions of H596 tumors in hHGFscid/scid mice. Sox9 was also
co-expressed with GSC in some tumor cells but was predominantly in the
nuclei. In tissues collected from hHGFki/scid or hHGFki/ki mice, Slug,
Snail and Sox9 expression were increased in transitioning tissue regions,
adjacent to HGF-containing stroma, coincident with diminished E-Cadherin
expression and enhanced Vimentin expression. While Slug expression was
predominantly cytoplasmic in invading tumor fronts, the expression was
mutually exclusive with CD133 within non-invasive regions. Snail and Sox9
showed enhanced nuclear expression in tumor cells undergoing EMT. These
markers are currently being investigated in additional tumor samples from
human TNBC or CRC xenograft models treated with various drug
combinations. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of EMT
and changes in cancer stem cell biology in NSCLC induced by an
HGF-knockin stromal microenvironment. Funded by NCI Contract No.
HHSN261200800001E.

