Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A plasma microRNAs test predicts prognosis and disease status at
follow-up in screening-detected lung cancer patients


Background: We previously reported that a miRNA signature classifier
(MSC) based on 24 plasma circulating microRNAs is a sensitive and early
biomarker for lung cancer, able to increase the specificity of low dose
computed tomography (LDCT) in screening trials (Boeri et al. PNAS 2011;
Sozzi et al. JCO 2014). In the present study, we have investigated the
capacity of plasma MSC to predict prognosis and monitor the disease
status at follow-up in LDCT screening detected lung cancer
patients.Methods: Between 2000 and 2010, 3411 heavy smokers were enrolled
in a screening program, with annual (2225) or biennial (1186) LDCT.
During the first five years of screening, a total of 77 lung cancer
patients underwent plasma MSC analysis, with three levels of risk: High,
Intermediate or Low. Median follow-up of the alive patients was 4.5 years
(Inter Quartile Range, IQR = 6.5). Changes of MSC risk profile at
follow-up was assessed in 33 patients, with longitudinal plasma samples
(n = 96) collected before and after surgical resection.Results: Five-year
survival was 78% for low- to intermediate risk MSC (median nc), and 35%
for High risk MSC (median 2.9 yrs, pBackground: We previously reported
that a miRNA signature classifier (MSC) based on 24 plasma circulating
microRNAs is a sensitive and early biomarker for lung cancer, able to
increase the specificity of low dose computed tomography (LDCT) in
screening trials (Boeri et al. PNAS 2011; Sozzi et al. JCO 2014). In the
present study, we have investigated the capacity of plasma MSC to predict
prognosis and monitor the disease status at follow-up in LDCT screening
detected lung cancer patients.Methods: Between 2000 and 2010, 3411 heavy
smokers were enrolled in a screening program, with annual (2225) or
biennial (1186) LDCT. During the first five years of screening, a total
of 77 lung cancer patients underwent plasma MSC analysis, with three
levels of risk: High, Intermediate or Low. Median follow-up of the alive
patients was 4.5 years (Inter Quartile Range, IQR = 6.5). Changes of MSC
risk profile at follow-up was assessed in 33 patients, with longitudinal
plasma samples (n = 96) collected before and after surgical
resection.Results: Five-year survival was 78% for low- to intermediate
risk MSC (median nc), and 35% for High risk MSC (median 2.9 yrs, p<0.01).
The prognostic power of MSC persisted when the analysis was restricted to
LDCT-detected cases after exclusion of interval cancers (5-years
survival: 87% vs. 38% respectively, pBackground: We previously reported
that a miRNA signature classifier (MSC) based on 24 plasma circulating
microRNAs is a sensitive and early biomarker for lung cancer, able to
increase the specificity of low dose computed tomography (LDCT) in
screening trials (Boeri et al. PNAS 2011; Sozzi et al. JCO 2014). In the
present study, we have investigated the capacity of plasma MSC to predict
prognosis and monitor the disease status at follow-up in LDCT screening
detected lung cancer patients.Methods: Between 2000 and 2010, 3411 heavy
smokers were enrolled in a screening program, with annual (2225) or
biennial (1186) LDCT. During the first five years of screening, a total
of 77 lung cancer patients underwent plasma MSC analysis, with three
levels of risk: High, Intermediate or Low. Median follow-up of the alive
patients was 4.5 years (Inter Quartile Range, IQR = 6.5). Changes of MSC
risk profile at follow-up was assessed in 33 patients, with longitudinal
plasma samples (n = 96) collected before and after surgical
resection.Results: Five-year survival was 78% for low- to intermediate
risk MSC (median nc), and 35% for High risk MSC (median 2.9 yrs, p<0.01).
The prognostic power of MSC persisted when the analysis was restricted to
LDCT-detected cases after exclusion of interval cancers (5-years
survival: 87% vs. 38% respectively, p<0.01). Within stage I, the 5-years
survival was 100% in Low to Intermediate risk MSC and 77% in High risk
MSC (p = 0.10). Reduction of MSC risk profile after surgery was observed
in 73% of the 26 analyzable subjects who remained disease free, at median
time of 18 months (IQR = 24). In all relapsing patients the MSC test
returned to Intermediate or High risk at the time of second primary or
metastatic progression.Conclusions: Plasma MSC predicted lung cancer
outcome and tumor recurrence at follow-up, showing potential efficacy in
LDCT screening and lung cancer management.

