Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cisplatin and Chal-24 combination synergistically kills cancer
cells through IAP and c-FLIP degradation, Ripoptosome formation and
autophagy-mediated apoptosis


Because chemoresistance is the major hurdle of anticancer therapy,
sensitizing cancer cells to chemotherapy is a main challenge for
improving survival in cancer patients. Combined therapy by using drugs
with distinct functioning mechanisms may increase anticancer efficacy. We
have recently identified the novel chalcone derivative chalcone-24
(Chal-24) as a potential therapeutic that kills cancer cells through
activation of an autophagy-mediated necroptosis pathway. In this study,
we investigated if Chal-24 can be combined with the frontline genotoxic
anticancer drug cisplatin for cancer therapy. The combination of Chal-24
and cisplatin synergistically induced apoptotic cytotoxicity in lung
cancer cell lines, which was dependent on Chal-24-induced autophagy.
While cisplatin slightly potentiated the JNK/Bcl2/Beklin1 pathway for
autophagy activation, it strongly triggered Chal-24-induced proteasomal
degradation of the cellular inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (c-IAPs) and
formation of the Ripoptosome complex that contains RIP1, FADD and caspase
8. Furthermore, cisplatin induced dramatic degradation of cellular FLICE
(FADD-like IL-1-converting enzyme)-inhibitory protein large (cFLIPL)
which suppresses Ripoptosome-mediated apoptosis activation. These results
establish a dual mechanism for potentiation of anticancer activity with
combination of Chal-24 and cisplatin: to enhance apoptosis signaling
through Ripoptosome formation and to release the apoptosis brake through
c-FLIP degradation. Altogether, our work suggests that combination of
Chal-24 and cisplatin could be employed for improving chemotherapy
efficacy. (Supported by R01ES017328 (NIEHS/NIH) and DE-FG02-09ER64783
(DOE).

