Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinations of ARQ087 with chemotherapeutic agents are safe and
show a striking antitumor activity in different xenograft models


ARQ087 is a non ATP-competitive tyrosine kinase inhibitor with activity
against the FGFR receptor family, and currently in Phase I clinical
studies for the treatment of advanced solid tumors. It potently inhibits
FGFR1, 2, and 3, as well as mutant FGFR2 (N549H) and FGFR3 (K650E/M) with
IC50 values in the low nanomolar range in biochemical assays. ARQ 087 has
shown potent anti-proliferative activity in a panel of cancer cells with
deregulated FGFR1 and FGFR2 pathways and exerted a dose-dependent
antitumor activity in in vivo systems with FGFR1/FGFR2-driven xenografts
model (H1581 and SNU-16 respectively) and models harboring
FGFR2-activating mutation (AN3CA and MFE296). Given orally in a 15 daily
administration, ARQ 087 has shown a very safe profile while inducing
tumor regressions in FGFR driven models. The feasibility of combining
ARQ087 with chemotherapy was investigated in H1581 FGFR1-amplified lung
xenograft and in SNU16-FGFR2 driven gastric xenografts. Tumor bearing
mice, were randomized to receive vehicle, ARQ087, paclitaxel, carboplatin
as single agents, ARQ087 and paclitaxel, ARQ087 and carboplatin,
paclitaxel and carboplatin as doublets; and the triple combination of
ARQ087 with carboplatin and paclitaxel. Similar experimental setting was
applied in nude mice bearing SUN16 xenografts, but instead of paclitaxel,
capecitabine was given. The choice of the anticancer agents to be
combined with ARQ087 was supported by the fact that these drugs are
currently used for the treatment of various cancers clinically. In both
experimental settings the drugs given as single agents showed moderate
anti-tumor activity. Combination of two agents was more active than the
single ones alone and combination of three agents has shown the most
antitumor activity. In particular, combination of ARQ 087 with paclitaxel
and carboplatin in H1581 bearing mice resulted in tumor regression and
only 1/8 tumor re-grew after 30 days from the last drug administration
versus 6/8, 4/8 e 5/8 in treatment groups with paclitaxel alone,
combination of ARQ087 with paclitaxel, and combination of paclitaxel with
carboplatin respectively. Of importance, no toxic deaths nor premature
stopping or delaying of drug administration occurred. These data clearly
suggest that ARQ087 can be safely combined with chemotherapy and that the
combinations are much more active than the monotherapies.

