Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Piwi genes and tissue/serum piR-651 are related to
clinicopathologic features of renal cell carcinoma


Introduction: Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) consists a newly discovered
class of non-coding RNA. PiRNAs were first identified in the germ cells
of various animal species. They bind to Piwi proteins which are a
subfamily of Argonaut proteins. In humans were identified four Ago genes
and four Piwi genes. Human Piwi genes include PIWIL1, PIWIL2, PIWIL3 and
PIWIL4. Recent studies suggest that deregulated expression of Piwi
proteins is common to many types of tumors and also correlate with
clinicopathologic features and worse prognosis in patients with breast,
cervical, ovarian, colorectal and other cancers. PiRNAs are short
single-stranded RNAs with 26-31 nucleotides in length. They are involved
in silencing of transposable elements and it is assumed that also
participate in sequence-specific chromatin modifications. The
differential expression of piRNAs was found in gastric and breast cancer.
In our pilot study we analyzed expression of Piwi genes and piR-651,
which was previously found to be deregulated in various types of
tumors.Patients and Methods: In our study, we have used the tumor tissue
and the paired renal parenchyma tissue of 56 patients with renal cell
carcinoma (RCC). From the tissue was isolated total RNA and by RT-qPCR
were examined the expression of Piwi genes and piR-651. For the analysis
of circulating piR-651, blood serum samples of 75 patients with RCC and
75 age, gender-matched healthy donors were used. We have compared
expression levels of the studied genes in tumor and non-tumor tissues,
serum samples, and also correlated them with clinicopathologic features
of RCC patients (stage, grade, RFS, OS).Results: We found a significant
down-regulation of PIWIL1 (pIntroduction: Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs)
consists a newly discovered class of non-coding RNA. PiRNAs were first
identified in the germ cells of various animal species. They bind to Piwi
proteins which are a subfamily of Argonaut proteins. In humans were
identified four Ago genes and four Piwi genes. Human Piwi genes include
PIWIL1, PIWIL2, PIWIL3 and PIWIL4. Recent studies suggest that
deregulated expression of Piwi proteins is common to many types of tumors
and also correlate with clinicopathologic features and worse prognosis in
patients with breast, cervical, ovarian, colorectal and other cancers.
PiRNAs are short single-stranded RNAs with 26-31 nucleotides in length.
They are involved in silencing of transposable elements and it is assumed
that also participate in sequence-specific chromatin modifications. The
differential expression of piRNAs was found in gastric and breast cancer.
In our pilot study we analyzed expression of Piwi genes and piR-651,
which was previously found to be deregulated in various types of
tumors.Patients and Methods: In our study, we have used the tumor tissue
and the paired renal parenchyma tissue of 56 patients with renal cell
carcinoma (RCC). From the tissue was isolated total RNA and by RT-qPCR
were examined the expression of Piwi genes and piR-651. For the analysis
of circulating piR-651, blood serum samples of 75 patients with RCC and
75 age, gender-matched healthy donors were used. We have compared
expression levels of the studied genes in tumor and non-tumor tissues,
serum samples, and also correlated them with clinicopathologic features
of RCC patients (stage, grade, RFS, OS).Results: We found a significant
down-regulation of PIWIL1 (p<0,0001) and piR-651 (pIntroduction:
Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) consists a newly discovered class of
non-coding RNA. PiRNAs were first identified in the germ cells of various
animal species. They bind to Piwi proteins which are a subfamily of
Argonaut proteins. In humans were identified four Ago genes and four Piwi
genes. Human Piwi genes include PIWIL1, PIWIL2, PIWIL3 and PIWIL4. Recent
studies suggest that deregulated expression of Piwi proteins is common to
many types of tumors and also correlate with clinicopathologic features
and worse prognosis in patients with breast, cervical, ovarian,
colorectal and other cancers. PiRNAs are short single-stranded RNAs with
26-31 nucleotides in length. They are involved in silencing of
transposable elements and it is assumed that also participate in
sequence-specific chromatin modifications. The differential expression of
piRNAs was found in gastric and breast cancer. In our pilot study we
analyzed expression of Piwi genes and piR-651, which was previously found
to be deregulated in various types of tumors.Patients and Methods: In our
study, we have used the tumor tissue and the paired renal parenchyma
tissue of 56 patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC). From the tissue
was isolated total RNA and by RT-qPCR were examined the expression of
Piwi genes and piR-651. For the analysis of circulating piR-651, blood
serum samples of 75 patients with RCC and 75 age, gender-matched healthy
donors were used. We have compared expression levels of the studied genes
in tumor and non-tumor tissues, serum samples, and also correlated them
with clinicopathologic features of RCC patients (stage, grade, RFS,
OS).Results: We found a significant down-regulation of PIWIL1 (p<0,0001)
and piR-651 (p<0,0001) expression levels in tumor tissue when compared to
paired renal parenchyma samples. The expression levels of PIWIL2, PIWIL3
and PIWIL4 were not significantly deregulated in tumor tissue.
Interestingly, levels of PIWIL2 and PIWIL4 correlated significantly with
the stage (p = 0,002 and p = 0,003, resp.) and grade (p = 0.007 and
pIntroduction: Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) consists a newly discovered
class of non-coding RNA. PiRNAs were first identified in the germ cells
of various animal species. They bind to Piwi proteins which are a
subfamily of Argonaut proteins. In humans were identified four Ago genes
and four Piwi genes. Human Piwi genes include PIWIL1, PIWIL2, PIWIL3 and
PIWIL4. Recent studies suggest that deregulated expression of Piwi
proteins is common to many types of tumors and also correlate with
clinicopathologic features and worse prognosis in patients with breast,
cervical, ovarian, colorectal and other cancers. PiRNAs are short
single-stranded RNAs with 26-31 nucleotides in length. They are involved
in silencing of transposable elements and it is assumed that also
participate in sequence-specific chromatin modifications. The
differential expression of piRNAs was found in gastric and breast cancer.
In our pilot study we analyzed expression of Piwi genes and piR-651,
which was previously found to be deregulated in various types of
tumors.Patients and Methods: In our study, we have used the tumor tissue
and the paired renal parenchyma tissue of 56 patients with renal cell
carcinoma (RCC). From the tissue was isolated total RNA and by RT-qPCR
were examined the expression of Piwi genes and piR-651. For the analysis
of circulating piR-651, blood serum samples of 75 patients with RCC and
75 age, gender-matched healthy donors were used. We have compared
expression levels of the studied genes in tumor and non-tumor tissues,
serum samples, and also correlated them with clinicopathologic features
of RCC patients (stage, grade, RFS, OS).Results: We found a significant
down-regulation of PIWIL1 (p<0,0001) and piR-651 (p<0,0001) expression
levels in tumor tissue when compared to paired renal parenchyma samples.
The expression levels of PIWIL2, PIWIL3 and PIWIL4 were not significantly
deregulated in tumor tissue. Interestingly, levels of PIWIL2 and PIWIL4
correlated significantly with the stage (p = 0,002 and p = 0,003, resp.)
and grade (p = 0.007 and p<0.0001, resp.) of RCC. We found also a
correlation between higher levels of PIWIL1 and overall survival
(pIntroduction: Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) consists a newly
discovered class of non-coding RNA. PiRNAs were first identified in the
germ cells of various animal species. They bind to Piwi proteins which
are a subfamily of Argonaut proteins. In humans were identified four Ago
genes and four Piwi genes. Human Piwi genes include PIWIL1, PIWIL2,
PIWIL3 and PIWIL4. Recent studies suggest that deregulated expression of
Piwi proteins is common to many types of tumors and also correlate with
clinicopathologic features and worse prognosis in patients with breast,
cervical, ovarian, colorectal and other cancers. PiRNAs are short
single-stranded RNAs with 26-31 nucleotides in length. They are involved
in silencing of transposable elements and it is assumed that also
participate in sequence-specific chromatin modifications. The
differential expression of piRNAs was found in gastric and breast cancer.
In our pilot study we analyzed expression of Piwi genes and piR-651,
which was previously found to be deregulated in various types of
tumors.Patients and Methods: In our study, we have used the tumor tissue
and the paired renal parenchyma tissue of 56 patients with renal cell
carcinoma (RCC). From the tissue was isolated total RNA and by RT-qPCR
were examined the expression of Piwi genes and piR-651. For the analysis
of circulating piR-651, blood serum samples of 75 patients with RCC and
75 age, gender-matched healthy donors were used. We have compared
expression levels of the studied genes in tumor and non-tumor tissues,
serum samples, and also correlated them with clinicopathologic features
of RCC patients (stage, grade, RFS, OS).Results: We found a significant
down-regulation of PIWIL1 (p<0,0001) and piR-651 (p<0,0001) expression
levels in tumor tissue when compared to paired renal parenchyma samples.
The expression levels of PIWIL2, PIWIL3 and PIWIL4 were not significantly
deregulated in tumor tissue. Interestingly, levels of PIWIL2 and PIWIL4
correlated significantly with the stage (p = 0,002 and p = 0,003, resp.)
and grade (p = 0.007 and p<0.0001, resp.) of RCC. We found also a
correlation between higher levels of PIWIL1 and overall survival
(p<0.05). We have observed significantly decreased expression levels of
piR-651 in blood serum samples of RCC patients when compared to healthy
donors and accordingly to ROC analysis we were able to distinguish blood
serum of RCC patients and control subjects with the sensitivity of 77.33%
and a specificity of 72.37%. Expression levels of serum piR-651 were not
in correlation with the stage and grade of RCC.Conclusion: Accordingly to
our pilot data expression of Piwi genes is altered in tumor tissue and is
correlated to selected clinicopathologic features of RCC. We also suggest
the potential of piR-651 in blood serum as novel non-invasive diagnostic
biomarker in RCC.Acknowledgments: IGA MZCR No: NT/13860-4/2012,
NT/13549-4/2012, NT/13547-4/2012, NT/13514-4/2012

