Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK inhibition enhances immune checkpoint blockade treatment of
murine models of neuroblastoma


Background: The tumor microenvironment (TME) plays an important role in
neuroblastoma (NBL) biology. Infiltrations of tumor-associated
macrophages with alterations in patterns of pro-inflammatory genes are
associated with poor prognosis in NBL. However, the role of regulatory
T-cells in NBL remains unknown. As several genes in MAPK pathway are
among recurrent mutations in neuroblastomas, and the production of
pro-inflammatory mediators in immune cells is MAPK-dependent, we
hypothesized targeted kinase inhibitor in combination with check-point
blockade could exert synergistic effects on the TME's response to tumor
cells. Therefore, we assessed the efficacy of combined therapy using a
transgenic MYCN non-amplified neuroblastoma murine model driven by SV40
large T antigen (NB-Tag).Methods: Three human neuroblastoma cell lines
and two NB-Tag derived mouse cell-lines were used for in vitro cell
proliferation assay. For in vivo tumor growth models, combinations of
cyclophosphamide, topotecan, trametinib, anti-CTLA4, and anti-PD1
therapies were studied in NB-Tag transgenic and transplantable
subcutaneous (NB-SQ) murine models.Results: In vitro studies demonstrated
trametinib had the highest anti-proliferative activity compared to other
kinase inhibitors, and it effectively blocked cell cycle arrest in G1
phase. These anti-proliferative effects could not be rescued by
co-culturing tumor cells with murine or human macrophages. In NB-Tag
mice, which develop neuroblastoma spontaneously at 12 weeks, daily oral
administration of trametinib (0.6mg/Kg) at pre-tumoral age (10 wk)
significantly impaired tumor growth by 17 weeks (1424 mm3 in controls vs.
43 mm3 in treated mice). Treatment of 15 week-old NB-Tag mice (visible
tumor by MRI) with trametinib after chemotherapy administration (5-days
of Cyclophosphamide + Topotecan) also significantly impaired tumor
regrowth (volume four weeks post-chemo, 491 vs. 42 mm3, p = 0.037), and
more importantly, treatment increased the survival of NB-Tag mice
compared to control (median survival: control = 24.5 wk, treated = 35 wk,
pBackground: The tumor microenvironment (TME) plays an important role in
neuroblastoma (NBL) biology. Infiltrations of tumor-associated
macrophages with alterations in patterns of pro-inflammatory genes are
associated with poor prognosis in NBL. However, the role of regulatory
T-cells in NBL remains unknown. As several genes in MAPK pathway are
among recurrent mutations in neuroblastomas, and the production of
pro-inflammatory mediators in immune cells is MAPK-dependent, we
hypothesized targeted kinase inhibitor in combination with check-point
blockade could exert synergistic effects on the TME's response to tumor
cells. Therefore, we assessed the efficacy of combined therapy using a
transgenic MYCN non-amplified neuroblastoma murine model driven by SV40
large T antigen (NB-Tag).Methods: Three human neuroblastoma cell lines
and two NB-Tag derived mouse cell-lines were used for in vitro cell
proliferation assay. For in vivo tumor growth models, combinations of
cyclophosphamide, topotecan, trametinib, anti-CTLA4, and anti-PD1
therapies were studied in NB-Tag transgenic and transplantable
subcutaneous (NB-SQ) murine models.Results: In vitro studies demonstrated
trametinib had the highest anti-proliferative activity compared to other
kinase inhibitors, and it effectively blocked cell cycle arrest in G1
phase. These anti-proliferative effects could not be rescued by
co-culturing tumor cells with murine or human macrophages. In NB-Tag
mice, which develop neuroblastoma spontaneously at 12 weeks, daily oral
administration of trametinib (0.6mg/Kg) at pre-tumoral age (10 wk)
significantly impaired tumor growth by 17 weeks (1424 mm3 in controls vs.
43 mm3 in treated mice). Treatment of 15 week-old NB-Tag mice (visible
tumor by MRI) with trametinib after chemotherapy administration (5-days
of Cyclophosphamide + Topotecan) also significantly impaired tumor
regrowth (volume four weeks post-chemo, 491 vs. 42 mm3, p = 0.037), and
more importantly, treatment increased the survival of NB-Tag mice
compared to control (median survival: control = 24.5 wk, treated = 35 wk,
p<0.0001). Trametinib treatment also showed similar results in the NB-SQ
model. Addition of immune checkpoint blockade of NB-SQ mice with
anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD1 to treatment with trametinib further increased
survival compared to controls (pBackground: The tumor microenvironment
(TME) plays an important role in neuroblastoma (NBL) biology.
Infiltrations of tumor-associated macrophages with alterations in
patterns of pro-inflammatory genes are associated with poor prognosis in
NBL. However, the role of regulatory T-cells in NBL remains unknown. As
several genes in MAPK pathway are among recurrent mutations in
neuroblastomas, and the production of pro-inflammatory mediators in
immune cells is MAPK-dependent, we hypothesized targeted kinase inhibitor
in combination with check-point blockade could exert synergistic effects
on the TME's response to tumor cells. Therefore, we assessed the efficacy
of combined therapy using a transgenic MYCN non-amplified neuroblastoma
murine model driven by SV40 large T antigen (NB-Tag).Methods: Three human
neuroblastoma cell lines and two NB-Tag derived mouse cell-lines were
used for in vitro cell proliferation assay. For in vivo tumor growth
models, combinations of cyclophosphamide, topotecan, trametinib,
anti-CTLA4, and anti-PD1 therapies were studied in NB-Tag transgenic and
transplantable subcutaneous (NB-SQ) murine models.Results: In vitro
studies demonstrated trametinib had the highest anti-proliferative
activity compared to other kinase inhibitors, and it effectively blocked
cell cycle arrest in G1 phase. These anti-proliferative effects could not
be rescued by co-culturing tumor cells with murine or human macrophages.
In NB-Tag mice, which develop neuroblastoma spontaneously at 12 weeks,
daily oral administration of trametinib (0.6mg/Kg) at pre-tumoral age (10
wk) significantly impaired tumor growth by 17 weeks (1424 mm3 in controls
vs. 43 mm3 in treated mice). Treatment of 15 week-old NB-Tag mice
(visible tumor by MRI) with trametinib after chemotherapy administration
(5-days of Cyclophosphamide + Topotecan) also significantly impaired
tumor regrowth (volume four weeks post-chemo, 491 vs. 42 mm3, p = 0.037),
and more importantly, treatment increased the survival of NB-Tag mice
compared to control (median survival: control = 24.5 wk, treated = 35 wk,
p<0.0001). Trametinib treatment also showed similar results in the NB-SQ
model. Addition of immune checkpoint blockade of NB-SQ mice with
anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD1 to treatment with trametinib further increased
survival compared to controls (p<0.0001). Tumors and macrophages
collected from mice treated with trametinib showed effective block in
phosphorylation of ERK. Transgenic animals that grew despite trametinib
treatment showed strong STAT3 phosphorylation suggesting this pathway as
an escape mechanism.Conclusions: Our results provide strong evidence that
MEK inhibition combined with checkpoint blockade significantly inhibited
tumor formation in a syngeneic subcutaneous model. These findings
indicate opportunities to enhance antitumor immunity with the potential
to produce durable clinical responses in children with neuroblastomas.

