Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIRT1 regulates the function of the KRAB-associated protein 1
(KAP1) in DNA damage response signaling


KRAB-Associated Protein 1 (KAP1) is a master regulator for genome
stability, heterochromatin formation, and target gene silencing. Many
studies have suggested that post-translational modification is required
for KAP1 to execute pleiotropic effects. Here, we have identified the
physical interaction between KAP1 and SIRT1, which is a widely recognized
NAD+-dependent deacetylase in DNA damage response. Therefore, the
objective of this study was to characterize the functional significance
of KAP1 deacetylation in DNA damage repair signaling.In this study, SIRT1
was identified as a major interacting partner of KAP1 via biochemical
approaches. Inhibition of SIRT1 activity by shRNA or selective inhibitor
was able to upregulate the total acetylation level on KAP1, suggesting
that KAP1 is a novel target of SIRT1. The major SIRT1-regulated KAP1
deacetylation sites (Lys266, Lys377, Lys469, and Lys770) were detected by
quantitative mass spectrometric analysis. Next, to explore the functional
significance of KAP1 deacetylation in NHEJ-mediated repair, KAP1 depleted
cells reconstituted with wild-type KAP1 or 4KR acetylation mutant were
used in the in vivo end-joining reporter system. Compare to wild-type
KAP1, the 4KR mutant presented higher activity in promoting NHEJ
efficiency. Furthermore, 4KR mutant showed stronger binding affinity to
53BP1, a crucial NHEJ promoting factor, and stabilized the 53BP1 foci
formation in response to DNA damage.In summary, this study unambiguously
established KAP1 as a target of SIRT1 and that the deacetylation of KAP1
on Lys266, Lys377, Lys469, and Lys770 stabilizes the formation of 53BP1
foci on sites of double-strand breaks, thereby promotes NHEJ-mediated
repair pathway.

