Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-translational regulation of cyclins by Aspirin through 26S
proteasome: Implications in chemoprevention


Recent studies have shown that, regular use aspirin for 5 years or more,
decreases the occurrence of cancer of the colon, skin, breast, prostate
and lung tissues. However, the mechanism of its anti-cancer effects are
not completely understood. We hypothesized that Aspirin's chemo
preventive action may involve proteins important in the regulation of
cell cycle. Using multiple colon and skin cancer cells, we studied
whether aspirin modulates the expression of cyclin B1. Cyclin B1 is a
regulatory protein involved in mitosis and promotes the passage of cell
cycle from G2 to M phase. Cyclin B1 along with Cyclin dependent Kinase
1(CDK1) regulates chromosomal condensation, nuclear envelope break down
and spindle pole assembly in early mitosis. We demonstrate that, in HT-29
human colon and Sk-Mel 28 skin cancer cells, aspirin dose dependently
decreased the levels of cyclin B1. This was further confirmed using
immunofluorescence studies. To determine the involvement of proteases, we
determined whether the lactacystin, a 26S proteasomal inhibitor, would
reverse the inhibitory effect of aspirin on cyclin B1. We observed that
pretreatment of cells with lactacystin completely reversed the decrease
in levels of cyclin B1 in aspirin treated cells. Transfection of the DDK
tagged cyclin B1 into HT-29 cells were carried out to establish whether
the decrease observed occurs through a nuclear independent and
post-translational mechanism. We observed that, aspirin significantly
decreased the exogenously transfected DDK tagged cyclin B1 protein. Our
results, for the first time show that anticancer effects of aspirin may
occur through cyclin B1 degradation mediated by 26S proteasomes.

