Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrin v is necessary for skin tissue generation and SCC tumor
invasion, but dispensable for tissue maintenance


Integrin heterodimers play crucial roles in epithelial adhesion,
proliferation, differentiation, wound healing and tumorigenesis. However,
the effects of acute loss of many of the 26 integrin subunits in
epidermis have not been determined. This information is critical since
many inhibitors for specific integrin heterodimers are entering clinical
trials for various cancers. We performed an shRNA-based multiplexed
screen to define roles for each integrin subunit in a 3-dimensional in
vitro organotypic skin model. In this screen, we transduced individual
populations of human keratinocytes with shRNAs against each integrin
subunit. We then quantitatively determined the fitness of each cell
population in a competition assay in reconstituted human skin. This
screen identified the integrin v class of heterodimers as essential for
generation of human skin tissue: the population of keratinocytes lacking
v was selected against 125-fold compared to non-silencing control cells
(pIntegrin heterodimers play crucial roles in epithelial adhesion,
proliferation, differentiation, wound healing and tumorigenesis. However,
the effects of acute loss of many of the 26 integrin subunits in
epidermis have not been determined. This information is critical since
many inhibitors for specific integrin heterodimers are entering clinical
trials for various cancers. We performed an shRNA-based multiplexed
screen to define roles for each integrin subunit in a 3-dimensional in
vitro organotypic skin model. In this screen, we transduced individual
populations of human keratinocytes with shRNAs against each integrin
subunit. We then quantitatively determined the fitness of each cell
population in a competition assay in reconstituted human skin. This
screen identified the integrin v class of heterodimers as essential for
generation of human skin tissue: the population of keratinocytes lacking
v was selected against 125-fold compared to non-silencing control cells
(p<0.001). An identical screen in human melanocytes showed no change in
fitness upon loss of integrin v, indicating cell-intrinsic functions for
this subunit. Loss of integrin v alone in keratinocytes leads to cell
cycle arrest with a 4-5 fold increase in the G1/S ratio. Surprisingly, we
found that integrin v is not localized within focal adhesions in human
keratinocytes and does not control focal adhesion dynamics in this cell
type. Instead, it forms an independent signaling complex at the cellular
membrane that controls keratinocyte growth through a FAK c-myc signaling
axis. Both FAK and c-myc total protein levels are lost upon v knock down,
and re-expression of c-myc in v-null keratinocytes is sufficient to
completely rescue the cell cycle defects and skin tissue phenotypes. The
effects of integrin v loss are dependent on v's binding partners 5 and 6,
but not 1 or 8. Using a doxycycline-inducible system, we show that v loss
plays a crucial role in tissue generation and tumor invasion, but is not
necessary for epidermal tissue maintenance. Furthermore, both 5 and 6
binding partners are required for tumor invasion, thus identifying v5 and
v6 as therapeutic targets for metastatic squamous cell carcinoma.

