Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Super-enhancers define breast cancer subclasses and identify novel
tumor cell vulnerabilities


Breast cancer cell state is driven by genomic mutational events, aberrant
signaling cascades and transcriptional misregulation. The profound
clinical impact of ER-modulatory drugs underscores the importance of
understanding and targeting the transcriptional dependencies of breast
cancer cells in an effort to create new therapeutics. Recently, large
clusters of cis-acting enhancers, termed Super-enhancers, have emerged as
dominant transcriptional regulators of oncogenes and other key tumor
drivers in cancer cells, indicating that these elements control and
maintain breast tumor cell state. Mapping these elements and the genes
they control in patient tumors can provide insight into breast cancer
classification and identify therapeutic targets.We have discovered
Super-enhancers in breast cancer patient tissue and have characterized
their roles in enforcing tumor cell state. We find that Super-enhancers
define known clinical subgroups in invasive ductal carcinoma and pinpoint
the putative transcriptional drivers of each subgroup.
Super-enhancer-associated genes encode both known and novel therapeutic
targets including kinases, phosphatases, chromatin regulators and
transmembrane proteins, including key drivers such as ERRB2 in HER2+
patient samples, ESR1 in estrogen receptor positive samples, and CCND1 in
samples of luminal subtype. shRNA knockdown confirms that Super-enhancer
regulated genes are indeed essential for tumor cell survival and that
Super-enhancer analysis in primary patient samples can be used to define
new subtype specific cancer vulnerabilities.In sum, we describe the
biological and disease relevance of Super-enhancer-associated genes in
the context of tumor cell state, genome mutational landscape and drug
target discovery.

