Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decreased tumor progression by the knockdown of interleukin 17
receoptor A in the B16F10 melanoma model


Introduction: Interleukin 17 (IL-17), correlating with advanced stage or
poor prognosis of cancer patients, appears to contribute to tumor
progression. Here we demonstrated the presence of IL-17 receptor A
(IL-17RA) on the tumor cells directly promoting tumor growth,
angiogenesis and metastasis.Methods: B16F10 and its derived IL-17RA
deficient melanoma cells were stimulated with recombinant IL-17 (mIL-17)
or subcutaneously implanted into C57BL/6 mice. Cell proliferation, cell
invasion, tumor growth, metastasis and angiogensis were monitored and
anti-tumor immunity was also assessed.Results: As compared with those in
the control B16F10 cells, the mIL-17 inducing cell proliferation,
migration and invasion were significantly reduced in the derived
IL-17RA-deficient cells. The tumor growth and metastasis were also
apparently reduced in the mice bearing the IL-17RA deficient tumors. In
fact, not ony the expression of MMP2 and MMP9 but also the production of
VEGF and HGF were reduced both in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, the
increased levels of IFN+ and Granzyme B+ immune cells as well as the
reduced numbers of Tregs and MDSCs appeared in the mice bearing the
IL-17RA deficient tumors, indicating the lack of IL-17 enhancing the CTL
activity and other anti-tumor immunity.Conclusion: These findings support
the hypothesis that IL-17/IL-17RA signaling directly promotes tumor
growth as well as recruits MDSCs and Treg cells, resulting in tumor
progression. It suggests IL-17RA on tumors as a potential therapeutic
target for cancer therapy.

