Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: INCB050465, a novel PI3K inhibitor, synergizes with PIM protein
kinase inhibition to cause tumor regression in a model of DLBCL


Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks) belong to a family of lipid
signaling kinases that phosphorylate
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), giving rise to
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3). PIP3 functions as a
second messenger that controls a number of cellular processes, including
growth, survival, adhesion and migration. The delta isoform of PI3K
(PI3K) plays an essential role in both B cell development and function,
and has now been validated as a therapeutic target in CLL and indolent
NHL upon the approval of idelalisib, a selective PI3K inhibitor. However,
despite the demonstrated activity of PI3K inhibitors in several subtypes
of B cell malignancies, the effectiveness of the approach as a single
agent for the treatment of DLBCL, the largest subtype of NHL, has not
been demonstrated. We hypothesized that an optimal treatment strategy in
this histology would require combined inhibition of PI3K with additional
agents that target B cells through distinct signaling pathways.INCB050465
is a novel, small molecule inhibitor of PI3K. In biochemical assays, it
potently inhibits PI3K (IC50 = 1 nM at 1 mM ATP) with approximately
20,000-fold selectivity for PI3K, PI3K, PI3K and 57 other kinases. In
various PI3K functional assays, including B cell proliferation induced by
activation of BCR, BAFF-R, IL-4R, CD40 and TLRs as well as T cell
differentiation assays, INCB050465 demonstrates potent activity with IC50
values ranging from 0.2 to 2 nM. In addition, INCB050465 blocks the
proliferation of several DLBCL and MCL cell lines in vitro (EC50
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks) belong to a family of lipid
signaling kinases that phosphorylate
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), giving rise to
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3). PIP3 functions as a
second messenger that controls a number of cellular processes, including
growth, survival, adhesion and migration. The delta isoform of PI3K
(PI3K) plays an essential role in both B cell development and function,
and has now been validated as a therapeutic target in CLL and indolent
NHL upon the approval of idelalisib, a selective PI3K inhibitor. However,
despite the demonstrated activity of PI3K inhibitors in several subtypes
of B cell malignancies, the effectiveness of the approach as a single
agent for the treatment of DLBCL, the largest subtype of NHL, has not
been demonstrated. We hypothesized that an optimal treatment strategy in
this histology would require combined inhibition of PI3K with additional
agents that target B cells through distinct signaling pathways.INCB050465
is a novel, small molecule inhibitor of PI3K. In biochemical assays, it
potently inhibits PI3K (IC50 = 1 nM at 1 mM ATP) with approximately
20,000-fold selectivity for PI3K, PI3K, PI3K and 57 other kinases. In
various PI3K functional assays, including B cell proliferation induced by
activation of BCR, BAFF-R, IL-4R, CD40 and TLRs as well as T cell
differentiation assays, INCB050465 demonstrates potent activity with IC50
values ranging from 0.2 to 2 nM. In addition, INCB050465 blocks the
proliferation of several DLBCL and MCL cell lines in vitro (EC50 < 10 nM)
and can slow tumor growth in the Pfeiffer model of DLBCL in vivo. In
cells, INCB050465 blocks constitutive PI3K signaling, including
phosphorylation of Akt and FOXO3a, with potencies similar to those for
inhibiting proliferation. More importantly, the ability of INCB050465 to
inhibit DLBCL cell proliferation in vitro can be further potentiated by
inhibition of PIM (Proviral Integration sites for Moloney virus) protein
kinases, which were also found to be important for B cell development and
to phosphorylate substrates which overlap with those of the PI3K pathway.
The combined inhibition of PI3K by INCB050465 with the potent and
selective PIM protein kinase inhibitor, INCB053914, results in profound
tumor regression in the Pfeiffer cell model of DLBCL. Taken together,
these results provide evidence for cross-talk between the PIM and PI3K
pathways, and support a mechanistic rationale for the clinical evaluation
of combined PIM and PI3Kd inhibition in B cell malignancies, including
DLBCL.

