Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAIL pathway inducer ONC201/TIC10 primes multiple myeloma cells
(MM) for apoptosis by downregulating X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis


MM cells inherently have a high protein turnover rate that makes them
heavily dependent on the proteasome and uniquely sensitive to ER stress
induction. Proteasome inhibitors, such as bortezomib, are used in
front-line therapy for MM to elicit the ER stress response that results
in apoptosis of MM cells. Despite significantly improved clinical
outcomes in MM patients treated with proteasome inhibitors, resistance to
therapy invariably emerges and MM remains an incurable disease. The
objective of this study is to assess the utility of the TRAIL pathway
inducer ONC201/TIC10 in MM due to preliminary evidence that suggests
ONC201/TIC10 activates the integrated stress response (ISR) in tumor
cells. We found that MM cells are uniquely sensitive to ONC201/TIC10,
with EC50 values in the nanomolar range. In addition, ONC201/TIC10 was
effective as a single agent against bortezomib-resistant MM cells and
exhibited an additive effect with bortezomib against these cells. Sub-G1
analyses of MM cells co-treated with ONC201/TIC10 and a pan-caspase
inhibitor indicated that MM cells undergo ONC201/TIC10-induced apoptosis
in a caspase-dependent manner. Given that ONC201/TIC10 can inactivate
both Akt and ERK signaling pathways, we assessed Akt and ERK
phosphorylation in ONC201/TIC10-treated KMS18 and MM1S MM cells. These MM
cell lines showed no inhibition of Akt and ERK phosphorylation or
decrease in the downstream phosphorylation of Fox3a in response to
ONC201/TIC10 treatment. These results suggested that alternative
mechanisms of cytotoxicity are operative in myeloma cells treated with
ONC201/TIC10. Given that downregulation of X-linked inhibitor of
apoptosis (XIAP) has been linked to the ISR, we assessed the effect of
ONC201/TIC10 treatment on XIAP expression. In agreement with ISR
activation, XIAP levels were significantly downregulated in MM cells in
response to ONC201/TIC10. Ongoing experiments are unraveling the
mechanistic basis for lowered XIAP expression in ONC201/TIC10-treated MM
cells. In summary, our results indicate that ONC201/TIC10 is highly
effective in preclinical MM models by engaging antitumor mechanisms that
include the ISR and downstream attenuation of XIAP expression.
ONC201/TIC10 appears to have significant therapeutic potential in MM as a
monoagent and in combination with bortezomib.

