Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-221 ans miR-222 expression in salivary gland tumors


Background: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of short noncoding RNAs, that
regulate the gene expression by binding to the 3 - untranslated region of
target mRNAS and by blocking the translation or degradation of the mRNAs
that mediate various pathophysiological process including the
pathogenesis of diverse human cancers and important cellular functions
such as proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, and cell signaling.
Salivary gland tumors are complex, due to their broad histological
spectrum resulting from multiple tumor cell differentiation. We
previously detected that the protein c-kit is involved in the process of
salivary gland morphogenesis and tumorigenesis; other recent studies
reported alterations in KIT gene in adenoid cystic carcinoma. The aim of
the present study is to determine the expression of microRNAs targeting
KIT in pleomorphic adenoma (PA) and adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC), the
most common benign and malignant salivary gland neoplasms, respectively,
and that originate from the intercalated duct region. Material and
Methods: Twenty-five pleomorphic adenoma, 14 adenoid cystic carcinoma and
10 non-neoplastic salivary gland samples were used and miRNA expression
was evaluated by Real Time RT-PCR using TaqMan miRNA Assays (miR- 221 and
222). Results: Expression of miR-221 was detected in 13 CAC samples and
19 PA samples. In CAC, expression of miR-221 was downregulated in 4 out
of 13 (30,77%) samples, upregulated in 4 out of 13 (30,77%) samples, and
normal in 5 out of 13 (38,46%) samples. In PA, miR-221 expression was
downregulated in 7 out of 19 (36,84%) samples, upregulated in 2 out of 19
(10,53%) samples, and normal in 10 out of 19 (52,63%) samples. Expression
of miR-222 was detected in 14 CAC samples and 22 PA samples. In the
majority of CAC samples, the expression of miR-222 was similar to that
observed in non-neoplastic samples. In PA samples, expression of miR-222
was downregulated in 7 out of 22 (31,8%) samples, upregulated in 8 out of
22 (36,4%) samples, and normal in 7 out of 22 (31,8%) samples.
Conclusion: The expression of miRNAs 221 and 222 do not present a
definite pattern to discriminate PA from ACC. This might be due to
different mechanisms involved in their tumor biology or due to their
common site of origin (the intercalated duct) which could add some
similar biological features to both neoplasms.

