Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel antibody-drug conjugate that induces long-term tumor
regression and anticancer stem cell activity


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) selectively deliver cytotoxic agents to
tumors and provide the potential for increased clinical benefit to cancer
patients. We have developed an ADC consisting of an antibody against a
target expressed on the surface of tumor cells that is site-specifically
conjugated with a pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) dimer payload (PBD-ADC).
The tumor-associated antigen is overexpressed in many carcinomas, on both
bulk tumor cells and cancer stem cells (CSCs), while normal tissue
expression is limited, thus making it an ideal ADC target. The PBD
payload was selected due to its picomolar potency and because, unlike
tubulin inhibitors, it could be cytotoxic to CSCs as well as bulk tumor
cells. The PBD-ADC is significantly efficacious in target-positive in
vivo tumor models of gastric, breast and lung carcinomas, inducing
long-term tumor regressions and demonstrates greater potency compared to
ADCs conjugated with either tubulysin or auristatin payloads, both
tubulin inhibitors. Additionally, the PBD-ADC significantly reduced the
CSC population of tumors in vivo, unlike ADCs bearing tubulin inhibitor
payloads. The PBD-ADC appears to be efficacious against tumors that have
acquired resistance to a tubulysin-based ADC, however possible mechanisms
of resistance to this PBD-ADC are being investigated. Collectively, this
novel ADC represents a promising therapy that may deliver durable
clinical responses in indications with unmet medical need.

