Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CEP55 is a determinant of genomic instability in aneuploid breast
cancer cells and facilitates anti-mitotic drugs resistance by interacting
directly with HSF1


Centrosomal proteins have long been known to act as a scaffolds, spindle
checkpoint regulators as well as key regulating elements of microtubule
organizing centre, hence as an essential component of cell cycle
progression. CEP55 is a centrosomal protein originally identified as an
indispensable regulator of cytokinesis, the final stage of cell division
that divides cytoplasm equally amongst two daughter cells. Failure to
faithfully complete cytokinesis due to loss of CEP55 resulted in primary
genetic lesion leading to multinucleated cells, thus promotes
tumourigenesis and aneuploidy. CEP55 has been to shown elevated in wide
range of cancers including breast cancer, however the molecular
mechanisms on how CEP55 mediated genomic instability in cancers are still
not well understood. To decipher the functional role of CEP55 in
regulating genomic instability in breast cancer, through a series of
in-vitro and in-vivo experiments we found that high levels of CEP55 is
significantly associates with basal-like breast cancer subtype with poor
overall survival, relapse free survival and distant-metastasis free
survival. Furthermore, we found that depletion of CEP55 decreased cell
viability due to induction of apoptosis and hamper primary tumour growth
due to clearance of aneuploid cells that are particularly important in
oncogenic transformation. In addition, depletion of CEP55 hindered
premature exit of mitotic arrested cells and this is partly mediated
through CEP55-dependent interaction with HSF1 during mitosis to
facilitate development of aneuploidy. Strikingly, we found that CEP55
mediates anti-mitotic drug resistance to docetaxel and PLK1 inhibition.
Depletion of CEP55 increased sensitivity to anti-mitotic drugs in
particular docetaxel or PLK1 inhibitor, providing a rationale to target
CEP55 and its dependent-pathways in aggressive and aneuploid breast
cancer.

