Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AGT mutations as a prognosis factor in patients with astrocytoma


Background: Astrocytomas are the most common and lethal brain tumors. The
median survival of patients is 15 months. The study of genetic
alterations may help to understand the mechanisms of development and
behavior of the disease and thus understand the risk factors and
prognostic factors. AGT gene and its peptide derivatives, are involved in
cell proliferation and neoangiogenesis and resistance to apoptosis, hence
the pathogenesis of astrocytomas. Objective: To identify somatic and
germinal AGT gene variations in from patients with astrocytoma. Material
and methods: 155 randomly selected files from patients diagnosed with
astrocytoma between 2008-2014 were revised to determined clinical
prognosis factor in Mexican population. In 25 patients, the molecular
analysis of the whole codification region, 5UTR and 3UTR of the gene AGT
was done in tumors biopsy and blood. Each amplified region had a depth of
minimum 1500x. IonReporter software was utilize to analyze the genetic
variants and using Integrative Genomic Viewer we confirmed that each
variant had a Phred higher than 25. Genotypic frequencies were compared
with HapMapMex. Results The clinical variants associated with prognosis
were age (OR 0.01 IC 95% 1.02-1.07, p = 0.000), Grade IV (OR 17.11, IC
95% 1.89-132.13 p = 0.011), location of tumor (OR 1.17, IC 1.2-6.3, p =
0.016), total resection (OR = .186, IC 95% .098-.622, p = 0.003,
Karnofsky (OR = .05, IC 95% 0.024-0.24, p = 0.003), motor deficiency (OR
= 3.5, IC = 1.1-10.5, p = 0.025). In blood were found 11 genetic
variants. rs4049, rs2148582, rs699, rs4762 and rs1926723 were associated
with risk of tumor in the codominant model. rs5050 (- A20C) was
statistically associated with the prognosis (OR 10.8, IC 1.16-100.51 p =
0.036). These variant it is part of a haplotype related to low expression
of angiotensinogen. In biopsies of 2 patients missense mutations were
found p.Arg477His in one patient and Gly226Ala -Pro165Ser in another one.
Conclusion: In 8% of the tumors samples new somatic mutations were found.
The genetic variant rs5050 of AGT is a prognosis biomarker in patients
with astrocytoma.

