Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 1,25(OH)2D3 deficiency accelerates colon cancer progression via
microenvironmental regulation


Epidemiologic studies have revealed that low serum vitamin D levels are
associated with an increased risk of colon cancer and inflammatory
diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) while underlying
biological mechanisms remain largely unknown. It is also well established
that tumor microenvironment plays an essential role in tumor progression.
In this study, we sought to determine whether 1,25(OH)2D3 deficiency has
a direct impact on colon cancer by using 25-hydroxyvitamin D
1-hydroxylase knockout [1(OH)ase/] mice that had been fed with a rescue
diet (high calcium, phosphate and lactose) from weaning. We injected
CT26.WT cells (a murine colon cancer cell line) into 1(OH)ase/- and
wild-type (WT) mice repectively and found that 1,25(OH)2D3 deficiency
accelerated the growth of xenografted colon tumors. In the AOM/DSS model,
heterozygous 1(OH)ase+/ mice increased the multiplicity and size of colon
tumors. Compared to WT mice, 1(OH)ase/ mice exhibited an increase of DNA
damage, cellular senescence and the production of senescence-associated
inflammatory cytokines in their colon stromal cells. These results
suggest that 1,25(OH)2D3 deficiency may have a direct effect on colon
cancer development, at least in part, by influencing tumor
microenvironment.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

