Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic interrogation of druggable pathways in pancreatic
adenocarcinomas using pooled gene-knockdown lentiviral libraries


Despite significant advances in the development of cancer treatment in
the last 20 years the best available therapies have marginally improved
the survival rate of treated pancreatic cancer patients (from 3% to 6%
five-year survival), making it still one the deadliest malignancies.
Single standard of care cytotoxic and targeted therapies demonstrate
little to no effect on patient survival. Even though we now understand
some of the main genetic factors that are mutatated in pancreatic tumors,
their role in drug response remains poorly understood. To identify
drug-sensitizing genetic targets in cancer cells we have developed a
high-throughput screening platform. In this methodology, pooled
lentiviral libraries containing hundreds of knockout constructs specific
for cancer-related genes are used to infect cancer cells. By treating the
infected populations with therapeutic agents we are able to identify
genetic targets that when inhibited synergize with existing drugs to
cause increased cell death. We piloted this type of screening platform in
HCT-116 cells, a KRAS mutant, MEK inhibitor resistant colorectal cancer
cell line, using the MEK-inhibitor AZD-2644 and a pooled shRNA library.
This study identified 4-7 target genes that when knocked down sensitized
the previously resistant HCT-116 cells to AZD-2644. To conduct a more
robust and representative sensitization screen we developed a lentiviral
CRISPR-Cas9 library. By performing screens in a panel of pancreatic
cancer cell lines, we have identified both cell line dependencies and
sensitizers to targeted and cytotoxic chemotherapies. The findings from
these screens provide potential mechanistic insights into the key
survival signaling programs in pancreatic cancer as well as new
therapeutic strategies.

