Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aryl hydrocarbon receptor activates NDRG1 transcription under
hypoxia in breast cancer cells


Hypoxia has been intensively investigated over past decades based on the
observations that hypoxic tumors were more resistant to therapy and had a
worse prognosis. Previously, we reported that N-myc downstream-regulated
gene 1 (NDRG1) was strongly up-regulated under hypoxia and may play an
important role in tumor adaptation to fluctuation of oxygen
concentrations. However, the regulatory mechanism of NDRG1 under hypoxia
remains elusive. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to identify the
novel transcription factors that regulate NDRG1 and to investigate the
functional roles of NDRG1 in hypoxia. In silico analysis predicted
binding sites of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) existing in the NDRG1
promoter. Western blotting showed that nuclear AHR was up-regulated in
the presence of cobalt and hypoxia. Immunofluorescence staining and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that AHR translocated to
nuclei and bound to NDRG1 promoter in hypoxia. Luciferase reporter assays
further showed that the binding site of AHR at -412 -388 bp played a
crucial role in regulating NDRG1 under hypoxia-mimicking conditions.
Moreover, hypoxia-mimetic induction of NDRG1 by was attenuated by
knockdown of AHR expression using short interfering RNA. Also,
overexpression of AHR facilitated cell proliferation and migration via
up-regulation of NDRG1, whereas shRNA knockdown of NDRG1 reduced cell
growth and motility. In summary, these results showed for the first time
that AHR positively regulates NDRG1 transcription through a AHR binding
site by hypoxia-mimetic signaling, which may lead to development of a
specific therapeutic regime to prevent tumor malignancy under hypoxia.

