Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiproliferative and apoptotic effects of some African natural
products in solid and hematopoietic malignant cell lines


Background: Natural products have played a very important role in health
care from time immemorial in curation and prevention of diseases.
Antiproliferative and apoptotic effects of extracts of some African
natural products like Hymelocardia acida, Moringa oleifera leaves as well
as Pleurotus pulmonarius mushroom metabolites were studied in a panel of
solid and hematopoietic malignant derived cell lines such as SUIT2-007,
MDA-MB 231, SW480, K562 and HL60 cells.Methods: MTT assay was used to
determine the growth inhibition of respective cells in vitro. Apoptosis
of the cells was demonstrated by fluorescence microscopy and Hoechst
33342 staining, DNA ladder formation assay and flow cytometry with
propidium iodide staining.Results: MTT results showed that extracts of
Hymelocardia acida stem, Moringa oleifera leaves as well as Pleurotus
pulmonarius metabolites could inhibit the proliferation of SUIT2-007,
MDA-MB 231, SW480, K562 and HL60 cells in a time and dose dependent
manner. Our results show that the ethanol extract of Hymelocardia acida
stem had a positive effect and induced apoptosis as shown by fluorescence
microscopy and flow cytometry assay. Apoptotic effects were demonstrated
by nuclear staining with Hoechst showing clear signs for nuclear
fragmentation in cells treated with Hymelocardia acida stem and Moringa
oleifera leaves extracts. FACS analysis with propidium iodide showed that
the sub G1 fraction increased in treated cells. DNA ladder formation,
however, showed no clear DNA fragmentation, which does not exclude a
clearer picture with isolated compounds.Conclusion: The present study
indicates that the extracts studied can effectively inhibit proliferation
and induce apoptosis in cells of panel of tumor cell lines investigated.

