Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of DNA methylation pattern between peripheral blood
cell and normal breast tissue


Aberrant DNA methylation in peripheral blood cells (PBCs) may be a
potential noninvasive biomarker for breast cancer risk. Whether
methylations at CpG sites in PBCs can serve as proxies in normal breast
tissues are unknown. We evaluated the correlation of DNA methylation
between PBC DNA and breast cancer adjacent normal tissue using data and
samples from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Study. Genome-wide DNA
methylation profiles in PBCs and matched tumor adjacent normal tissues
from 31 breast cancer patients were assayed using Illumina
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip, which includes >485,000 CpG sites and
covers 99% of RefSeq genes with multiple probes per gene. After quality
control filtering, a total of 432,513 CpG sites were retained for
analysis. We evaluated the association of methylation for each CpG site
between DNA samples for PBCs and normal breast tissue using Spearman's
rank correlation (r). The overall median correlation (r) is 0.35. A total
of 99,928 (23.1%) and 18,290 (4.2%) of CpG sites had a high correlation
between PBC DNA and normal breast tissue DNA with r > 0.50 and r > 0.75,
respectively. Interestingly, we found that the correlation was negatively
associated with both methylation levels (mean) and inter-person
variability (standard deviation) in normal breast tissues ( = -0.14 and
-0.19; P Aberrant DNA methylation in peripheral blood cells (PBCs) may be
a potential noninvasive biomarker for breast cancer risk. Whether
methylations at CpG sites in PBCs can serve as proxies in normal breast
tissues are unknown. We evaluated the correlation of DNA methylation
between PBC DNA and breast cancer adjacent normal tissue using data and
samples from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Study. Genome-wide DNA
methylation profiles in PBCs and matched tumor adjacent normal tissues
from 31 breast cancer patients were assayed using Illumina
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip, which includes >485,000 CpG sites and
covers 99% of RefSeq genes with multiple probes per gene. After quality
control filtering, a total of 432,513 CpG sites were retained for
analysis. We evaluated the association of methylation for each CpG site
between DNA samples for PBCs and normal breast tissue using Spearman's
rank correlation (r). The overall median correlation (r) is 0.35. A total
of 99,928 (23.1%) and 18,290 (4.2%) of CpG sites had a high correlation
between PBC DNA and normal breast tissue DNA with r > 0.50 and r > 0.75,
respectively. Interestingly, we found that the correlation was negatively
associated with both methylation levels (mean) and inter-person
variability (standard deviation) in normal breast tissues ( = -0.14 and
-0.19; P < 2.2 x10-16 for both). In 926 previously reported methylation
quantitative trait loci, the correlations between PBCs and normal breast
tissue were significantly higher (median r = 0.42) than the remaining
loci (median r = 0.34) (Wilcoxon test, P Aberrant DNA methylation in
peripheral blood cells (PBCs) may be a potential noninvasive biomarker
for breast cancer risk. Whether methylations at CpG sites in PBCs can
serve as proxies in normal breast tissues are unknown. We evaluated the
correlation of DNA methylation between PBC DNA and breast cancer adjacent
normal tissue using data and samples from the Shanghai Breast Cancer
Study. Genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in PBCs and matched tumor
adjacent normal tissues from 31 breast cancer patients were assayed using
Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip, which includes >485,000 CpG sites
and covers 99% of RefSeq genes with multiple probes per gene. After
quality control filtering, a total of 432,513 CpG sites were retained for
analysis. We evaluated the association of methylation for each CpG site
between DNA samples for PBCs and normal breast tissue using Spearman's
rank correlation (r). The overall median correlation (r) is 0.35. A total
of 99,928 (23.1%) and 18,290 (4.2%) of CpG sites had a high correlation
between PBC DNA and normal breast tissue DNA with r > 0.50 and r > 0.75,
respectively. Interestingly, we found that the correlation was negatively
associated with both methylation levels (mean) and inter-person
variability (standard deviation) in normal breast tissues ( = -0.14 and
-0.19; P < 2.2 x10-16 for both). In 926 previously reported methylation
quantitative trait loci, the correlations between PBCs and normal breast
tissue were significantly higher (median r = 0.42) than the remaining
loci (median r = 0.34) (Wilcoxon test, P < 2.2 x10-16), suggesting that
methylation variations controlled by genetic variations exhibited a
robust correlation between PBC and normal breast tissue DNA. In summary,
our results suggest that the methylation status of CpG sites with large
inter-person variations or genetically-controlled variations in PBC DNA
correlate well with those in normal breast tissue. This supports the
conduct of a genome-wide methylation study for breast cancer using PBC
DNA.

