Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nek6 and Hif-1 cooperate with the cytoskeletal gateway of drug
resistance to drive outcome in serous ovarian cancer


Hypoxia selects the most aggressive and drug-resistant clones in solid
malignancies. One of the pivotal transcription factors induced by hypoxia
is Hif-1. However, in serous ovarian cancer (SEOC), Hif-1 expression is
not a prognostic biomarker. This study aims to assess the hypothesis that
the serine-threonine kinase Nek6 functions as a downstream effector
cooperating with Hif-1 in driving ovarian cancer aggressiveness.Nek6 was
overexpressed and Hif-1 was silenced in A2780 cells. Nek6 was also stably
silenced in Hey cells. The dependence of Nek6 expression on Hif-1 was
assayed as a function of hypoxic growth conditions. Nek6 interaction with
the cytoskeletal gateway of drug resistance was investigated with far
western blot. The co-expression of NEK6, HIF1A, TUBB3 and GBP1
transcripts was quantified with qPCR in two cohorts of SEOC patients (346
locally treated patients and 344 from the TCGA dataset).Nek6 expression
is induced by hypoxia in a Hif-1 dependent fashion. Nek6 directly
interacts with GBP-1, thus being a component of the cytoskeletal gateway
of drug resistance. Nek6 overexpression increases and silencing decreases
the anchorage-independent growth of cultured cells. In SEOC patients,
NEK6 expression is significantly correlated with HIF1A. Co-expression of
NEK6, HIF1A, TUBB3 and GBP1 transcripts identifies a subset of SEOC
patients characterized by poor outcome and drug resistance.This study
demonstrates the functional relevance of Nek6 in the context of the
adaptive response to hypoxia in SEOC. This finding may help identify a
sub-population of patients at high risk of relapse to standard first-line
chemotherapy.

