Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: More than a biomarker: Studying the role of vimentin in lung
cancer metastasis


A major mechanism of metastasis is the epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) where epithelial cells from the primary site undergo
genetic and epigenetic alterations to become motile and mesenchymal. A
canonical marker of EMT and a clinical marker of metastasis is the
intermediate filament protein, vimentin. Vimentin expression correlates
with increased metastatic potential and poor patient prognosis across
most solid tumor types including lung, prostate, and breast cancers;
however little is known about how vimentin functions to promote the
metastatic cascade. Here we use a lung cancer mouse model to study the
role of vimentin in lung cancer metastasis in vivo. We have re-developed
an LSL-KrasG12D,LKB1fl/fl mouse model whereby intranasal administration
of lentiviral Cre recombinase causes a KrasG12D mutation and LKB1
knockout in the lungs. Consequently, about half of the mice that develop
primary lung tumors after 10 weeks also develop metastasis to the
mediastinal lymph nodes by week 16. We crossed this mouse with a Vim-/-
mouse to create a LSL-KrasG12D,LKB1fl/fl, Vim-/- (termed here KLV) mouse
to determine if loss of vimentin prevents lung cancer metastasis in this
model. Our findings show that the KLV mouse exhibits significantly less
metastasis to the mediastinal lymph nodes (12%) as compared with its
vimentin wild type counterpart but does not show a decrease in primary
tumor formation. These knockout mice also exhibit less focal invasion at
the primary tumor site while maintaining a well-differentiated
adenocarcinoma histology independent of vimentin genotype. Taken
together, our work indicates that vimentin is critical for lung cancer
metastasis but not primary tumor formation.

