Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Medication exposures and subsequent development of Ewing sarcoma:
a review of FDA adverse event reports


BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) are rare but deadly
cancers of unknown etiology. Few risk factors have been identified. This
study was undertaken to ascertain any possible association between
exposure to therapeutic drugs and ESFT.METHODS: A query of the FDA
Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) was conducted from January 1, 1998
through December 31, 2013 for all case reports of ESFT. Report narratives
were individually reviewed for patient characteristics, underlying
conditions, and drug exposures.RESULTS: Over the past 16 years, 134 ESFT
reports were identified, including 25 cases of ESFT following therapeutic
drug use. Reported drugs and biologics associated with these cases
included immunosuppressive agents and hormones. Many cases were
confounded by concomitant medications and other therapies.CONCLUSIONS:
This study provides a closer look at medication use and underlying
disorders in patients who later developed ESFT. While we found no clear
causative association between ESFT and prior use of a single product or
drug class, many associated drugs were used to treat immune-related
disease, and growth or hormonal disturbances. Further studies are needed
to better understand possible immune or neuroendocrine abnormalities that
may predispose to the later development of ESFT.Table: Summary of FAERS
reports of medication use prior to Ewing Sarcoma Family of Tumor (ESFT)
diagnosis, 1997-2013Underlying conditions12 Immune-related: 3 Crohns
disease, 3 multiple sclerosis, 1 renal transplant, 1 rheumatoid
arthritis, 1 nephrotic syndrome, 1 ankylosing spondylitis, 1 psoriasis
vulgaris, 1 chronic hepatitis B5 Endocrine: 2 Growth disorders, 1
menopause, 1 osteoporosis, 1 birth control (patient morbidly obese but no
underlying condition reported)3 Neurologic: 1 each of narcolepsy, seizure
disorder, fibromyalgia with sciatica/neuropathic pain3 Psychiatric: 1
each of unspecified depression, psychoses, ADHD2 Other: 1 each of
familial hypercholesterolemia, acne

