Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of combined EGFR and Src inhibitor in colon
cancer cell migration


EGFR signaling plays the important role in cancer cell proliferation and
cell migration. Cetuximab which is the antibody against EGFR was approved
for colon cancer treatment. Recently, Src inhibitor, dasatinib has been
demonstrated to improve drug sensitivity to cetuximab in KRAS mutant
colorectal cancer cell growth. Src is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase
which is necessary for full activation of EGFR and also functions in
focal adhesion kinase activity in cell migration, therefore, the
combination of cetuximab and dasatinib may has effect on colon cell
migration. In this study, cetuximab and dasatinib were applied to SW480
colon cell which is KRAS mutant cell line. Cell viability and cell
migration were analyzed, localization of Src and focal adhesion kinase
(FAK) were observed by confocal microscopy. In the result, Combination of
5M cetuximab and 40 nM dasatinib treatment resulted in synergistic effect
on cell viability. However, when cetuximab combined with 25nM dasatinib
was applied in trans-well migration assay, the synergistic inhibition on
cell migration was observed. The immunofluorescence confocal microscopic
image demonstrated cetuximab treatment induced phospho-Src accumulation
on the cell membrane and colocalized with phospho-FAK. When the
combination of 5M cetuximab and 25 uM dasatinib were applied in the cell,
the membrane accumulation of phospho-Src and Phospho-FAK were decreased.
Taken together, cetuximab combined with dasatinib has synergistic
efficacy in colon cancer cell proliferation, however, cetuximab combined
with lower concentration of dasatinib (25nM) suppressed cell migration by
inhibited FAK membrane localization through Src inactivation.

