Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating candidate genomic alteration which affects the local
recurrence in patients with desmoid fibromatosis


BACKGROUND Desmoid tumor (DT) is known as a locally aggressive tumor
caused by altered Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway. Although high
frequency of mutations are observed in APC and CTNNB1, its values as a
predictive marker of local recurrence is controversial and only serine to
phenyalanie substitution at codone 45 (S45F) in CTNNB1 is reported. We
designed a study to investigate candidate mutations which affect the
local recurrence in DT.METHODS Tissues from 25 patients, treated with
mass excision, were acquired and targeted gene sequencing (TGS) were
performed for the 45 genes in COSMIC data set. Patients were divided into
2 groups, subjects with recurred DT and subjects without disease
recurrence. Locus, previous reported in COSMIC data set, with altered
frequency > 0.01 was considered as a significant alteration. Statistical
significance of each altered locus and candidate genes were tested by
Cox-regression analysis and fisher's exact test. Time to recurrence is
used in survival analysis and P under 0.05 is considered as a significant
result. Primary endpoint of this study is evaluating a hazard ratio (HR)
for each alteration.RESULTS Out of 25 patients, 13 patients (52.0%) have
recurred after initial treatment. APC mutation is observed in 13 patients
(52.0%) and CTNNB1 mutation in 21 patients (84.0%) with no CTNNB1 S45F
mutation observed. Median follow up duration was 72.3 months. More
subjects were recurred with HRAS mutation (38.5% vs 0%, P = 0.039) and HR
was increased (HR = 3.65, 95% confidential interval [CI] 1.09-12.15, P =
0.035). However, other genes, including CTNNB1 and APC, did not satisfied
statistical significance. Among the 575 alterations detected by TGS, 9
missense mutation in 5 genes showed increased HR by Cox-proportional
analysis and values are followed: (1) CTNNB1 S45G (HR 27.6, P = 0.007)
(2) FGFR3 V266M (HR 14.8, P = 0.008); (3) CDKN2A P81L (HR 5.1, P =
0.020), D105E (HR 11.1, P = 0.049), R107C (HR 23.5, P = 0.026); (4)
PTPN11 S502L (HR 23.5, P = 0.026); (5) TP53 A189V (HR 23.5, P = 0.026),
C182Y (HR 23.5, P = 0.026), S96G (HR 23.5, P = 0.026). Out of 5 subjects
with above alterations, 4 subjects recurred within 15.0 months and median
time to relapse was shorter compared to the subjects without alteration
(10.5 months vs 18 months, P = 0.057).CONCLUSIONS In this study, we
identified 6 genes and 9 specific locus which are related with recurrence
of desmoid tumor. Our result is coincidence with previous result that an
alteration in codon 45 of CTNNB1 is related with desmoid tumor
recurrence. Values of other significant alteration in our report should
be validated with confirmatory studies.

