Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Factors associated with HPV vaccine initiation among males aged
11-26 years attending outpatient clinics in the Baltimore Metro Area
during 2012 - 2013


Introduction: Few studies have examined factors associated with HPV
vaccine initiation among males, particularly after the Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices upgraded their recommendation in late 2011. The
aim of our study was to identify demographic characteristics and
care-seeking behaviors associated with HPV vaccine initiation among a
large clinical population of age-eligible males.Methods: This is a
cross-sectional analysis of electronic health record data from 15,970
males aged 11-26 years attending 24 Johns Hopkins Community Physicians
clinics from January 2012 - April 2013 in Baltimore, MD. Our outcome was
receipt of first dose of the HPV vaccine series (initiation). We
calculated mutually adjusted odds ratios (aOR) of initiation and 95%
Confidence Intervals (95% CI) using multivariate logistic regression
models with generalized estimating equations to account for clustering
within clinics for age (continuous), race (black, Asian, other vs.
white), insurance type (public, military, vs. private), number of clinic
visits (1 vs. 2+), attendance to a preventive care visit during the study
period (vs. not), and practice specialty (Internal Medicine, Pediatrics,
Med-Peds vs. Family Practice). Results were stratified by the following
age groups: 11-12 years (target age for vaccination, target), 13-21 years
(catch-up age for vaccination, catch-up), and 22-26 years (permissive age
for vaccination, permissive).Results: A total of 2,193 (14%) males
initiated the HPV vaccine. Initiation varied by age; 23.2%, 16.5%, and
1.9% in the target, catch-up, and permissive age groups respectively.
Among the target age group, black race (aOR 1.3; 95% CI 1.0-1.7), 1
clinic visit (aOR 0.7; 95% CI 0.5-0.9), and attendance to a preventive
care visit (aOR 8.1; 95% CI 4.9-13.4) were significantly associated with
odds of initiation. Among the catch-up age group, age (aOR 0.9; 95% CI
0.9-0.95), black race (aOR 1.2; 95% CI 1.0 - 1.4), 1 clinic visit (aOR
0.6; 95% CI 0.5-0.7), attendance to a preventive care visit (aOR 4.6; 95%
CI 3.6-5.8) and Internal Medicine practice (aOR 0.4; 95% CI 0.3-0.5) were
significantly associated with odds of initiation. Among the permissive
age group, age (aOR 0.8; 95% CI 0.7 - 1.0), 1 clinic visit (aOR 0.4, 95%
CI 0.3-0.5) attendance to a preventive care visit (aOR 5.1; 95% CI
3.0-8.9), military insurance (aOR 3.0; 95% CI 1.4 - 6.4) and Internal
Medicine practice (aOR 0.5; 95% CI 0.3-0.8) were significantly associated
with odds of initiation.Discussion: Overall, HPV vaccine initiation rates
fell below state and national averages. In line with other studies,
initiation was highest among black males. Among all ages, preventive care
visits were associated with initiation. More education on the value of
catch-up vaccination among adult-focused specialties (e.g. Internal
Medicine) may increase HPV vaccination initiation among males aged 13 -
26 years.

