Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blood-based molecular landscapes of resistance to EGFR blockade in
colorectal cancer patients


The molecular landscape of colorectal cancers (CRC) is presently assessed
by genotyping neoplastic tissue obtained through surgical or bioptic
procedures. We evaluated whether blood-based molecular profiles could be
used to perform diagnostic determinations and monitor resistance to
therapy in colorectal cancer patients. We find that RAS pathway
mutations, which are commonly evaluated prior to administration of
anti-EGFR antibodies, can be ascertained directly in the blood.
Sequencing of circulating DNA identified genomic alterations in KRAS,
NRAS, MET, ERBB2, FLT3, and MEK1 in patients with primary or acquired
resistance to cetuximab or panitumumab. Secondary resistance to EGFR
blockade is frequently accompanied by emergence of mutant RAS clones,
which can be tracked in blood. We find that upon withdrawal of anti-EGFR
antibodies, KRAS alleles decline in circulating DNA indicating that
clonal evolution continues beyond clinical progression. Functional
analysis of CRC cell populations, which had acquired resistance to
cetuximab, revealed that KRAS mutant clones can decay when EGFR blockade
is suspended. These results establish proof of principle that genotyping
colorectal cancers using circulating DNA can inform therapeutic
decisions, identify mechanisms of drug resistance and provide insights
for further lines of therapy.

