Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variants within super-enhancer regulatory elements associate with
epithelial ovarian cancer risk


Background: Cell-type-specific super enhancers, or large clusters of
mediator-rich enhancers, are highly transcribed regions of the genome
with key functions in the maintenance of cell identity and control. These
regulatory elements are easily perturbed and enriched for
disease-associated sequence variation. Identification of
disease-associated super-enhancers and investigation of their sequence
variants may help identify important, biologically relevant associations
previously overlooked by genome-wide studies. Thus, we sought to identify
variants within ovarian tissue specific super-enhancers and investigate
their association with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
susceptibility.Methods: We utilized genotype data from a European
population of 11,000 invasive EOC cases and 22,000 healthy controls from
the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium. A public catalog of 478
super-enhancers, identified by peak histone H3K27ac ChIP-seq signal in
ovarian tissue, was used to identify 72,116 variants located within 344
super-enhancer regions. Unconditional logistic regression (log-additive
model) was used to assess individual SNP-EOC risk associations.
Additionally, we reviewed associations within 500 kb of super-enhancer
regions to identify proximal associated variants. When LD structure
indicated, we employed conditional analysis to determine independence of
the super-enhancer signal. Gene-EOC risk associations were assessed with
the Admixture Maximum Likelihood (AML) test and Sequence-Kernel
Association Test (SKAT) for the combined effect of common and rare
(MAFBackground: Cell-type-specific super enhancers, or large clusters of
mediator-rich enhancers, are highly transcribed regions of the genome
with key functions in the maintenance of cell identity and control. These
regulatory elements are easily perturbed and enriched for
disease-associated sequence variation. Identification of
disease-associated super-enhancers and investigation of their sequence
variants may help identify important, biologically relevant associations
previously overlooked by genome-wide studies. Thus, we sought to identify
variants within ovarian tissue specific super-enhancers and investigate
their association with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
susceptibility.Methods: We utilized genotype data from a European
population of 11,000 invasive EOC cases and 22,000 healthy controls from
the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium. A public catalog of 478
super-enhancers, identified by peak histone H3K27ac ChIP-seq signal in
ovarian tissue, was used to identify 72,116 variants located within 344
super-enhancer regions. Unconditional logistic regression (log-additive
model) was used to assess individual SNP-EOC risk associations.
Additionally, we reviewed associations within 500 kb of super-enhancer
regions to identify proximal associated variants. When LD structure
indicated, we employed conditional analysis to determine independence of
the super-enhancer signal. Gene-EOC risk associations were assessed with
the Admixture Maximum Likelihood (AML) test and Sequence-Kernel
Association Test (SKAT) for the combined effect of common and rare
(MAF<0.01) variants. Models were adjusted for population stratification
using the first five principal components. To adjust for multiple
comparisons, a false discovery rate of 10% was used.Results: The most
significant SNP observed was rs147487657 (p = 7.7106) on locus 2q37.3 in
the HDAC4 gene and there were an additional 12 SNPs with pBackground:
Cell-type-specific super enhancers, or large clusters of mediator-rich
enhancers, are highly transcribed regions of the genome with key
functions in the maintenance of cell identity and control. These
regulatory elements are easily perturbed and enriched for
disease-associated sequence variation. Identification of
disease-associated super-enhancers and investigation of their sequence
variants may help identify important, biologically relevant associations
previously overlooked by genome-wide studies. Thus, we sought to identify
variants within ovarian tissue specific super-enhancers and investigate
their association with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
susceptibility.Methods: We utilized genotype data from a European
population of 11,000 invasive EOC cases and 22,000 healthy controls from
the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium. A public catalog of 478
super-enhancers, identified by peak histone H3K27ac ChIP-seq signal in
ovarian tissue, was used to identify 72,116 variants located within 344
super-enhancer regions. Unconditional logistic regression (log-additive
model) was used to assess individual SNP-EOC risk associations.
Additionally, we reviewed associations within 500 kb of super-enhancer
regions to identify proximal associated variants. When LD structure
indicated, we employed conditional analysis to determine independence of
the super-enhancer signal. Gene-EOC risk associations were assessed with
the Admixture Maximum Likelihood (AML) test and Sequence-Kernel
Association Test (SKAT) for the combined effect of common and rare
(MAF<0.01) variants. Models were adjusted for population stratification
using the first five principal components. To adjust for multiple
comparisons, a false discovery rate of 10% was used.Results: The most
significant SNP observed was rs147487657 (p = 7.7106) on locus 2q37.3 in
the HDAC4 gene and there were an additional 12 SNPs with p<1.0104,
although not significant at 10% FDR. Gene-level analyses identified two
super-enhancers significantly associated with EOC risk. An enhancer at
the previously reported 2q31 locus, containing HOXD8 and HOXD-AS2,
associated (SKAT p = 4.3105; AML pC); pC); p<2.08105). Conditional
analysis did not identify an independent association within the
super-enhancer region. The second EOC-associated super-enhancer
identified was at locus 1q32 (SKAT p = 0.00052, AML p = 0.001) containing
the CSRP1 gene. There were 6 SNPs with pC); p<2.08105). Conditional
analysis did not identify an independent association within the
super-enhancer region. The second EOC-associated super-enhancer
identified was at locus 1q32 (SKAT p = 0.00052, AML p = 0.001) containing
the CSRP1 gene. There were 6 SNPs with p<0.001 and 16 SNPs with pC (OR =
0.94; 95% CI: 0.90-0.97; p = 2.1104). Associations varied by histologic
subtype, possibly due to variance in disease relevant super-enhancer
cell-type.Conclusion: These findings suggest germline variation within
super-enhancer regions may contribute to EOC susceptibility

