Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of UGT1A1 genotype on pharmacokinetics and toxicities of
belinostat administered by continuous infusion in two clinical trials


Background: Belinostat (B), a histone deacetylase inhibitor recently
approved for peripheral T-cell lymphoma, is extensively glucuronidated by
UGT1A1. Genotypes with reduced UGT1A1 function could lead to higher B
exposure and toxicities (tox).Methods: In a Phase I (BPE) and Phase I/II
trial (BPAC), B (400-1000 mg/m2/24 h) was administered as a 48 h
continuous infusion in combination with either cisplatin (P) and
etoposide (E), or P, doxorubicin (A) and cyclophosphamide (C),
respectively. Pts with small cell lung cancer and other cancers of
neuroendrocrine origin (n = 25 in BPE) or advanced or unresectable thymic
epithelial tumors (n = 26 in BPAC) underwent genotyping for UGT1A1
variants associated with reduced function: UGT1A1*6, *28 and *60. In both
trials PK of B was analyzed and during Cycle 1 clinical outcomes were
monitored. In 9 pts the Drug Metabolizing Enzymes and Transporter (DMET)
genotyping array was carried out to study relationships between drug
metabolizing enzymes and transporters with B PK or tox.Results: Pts
carrying 1 or 2 UGT1A1*60 variants (n = 18) in BPE, had significantly
higher B AUCs than WT pts (n = 5): median 11.4 vs 8.3 ng/mL*h/mg, P =
0.043. Consistent with greater exposure, pts carrying at least 1 variant
UGT1A1*60 allele (n = 18) were at significantly higher risk for
developing Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia vs. WT pts (n = 5): OR (95%CI) = 21.2
(1.01-445.30), P = 0.014. A trend towards an increased risk of Gr 3-4
thrombocytopenia (P = 0.038), Gr 3-4 neutropenia (P = 0.045) and QTc
prolongation (P = 0.030) was observed for UGT1A1*28. For Gr 3-4
neutropenia a marginal trend was also seen in *60 carriers (P = 0.088).In
the BPAC trial UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A1*60 status did not significantly
affect B PK (AUC, Cmax and CL, P>0.05) nor the incidence of most tox
(P>0.05). Only Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia occurred more frequently in *28
carriers (n = 11) than in WTs (n = 15): OR (95%CI) = 18.6 (0.88-392.7), P
= 0.022.The DMET array revealed significant associations between SNPs in
SLC15A1 and CYP24A1 and B PK (PBackground: Belinostat (B), a histone
deacetylase inhibitor recently approved for peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
is extensively glucuronidated by UGT1A1. Genotypes with reduced UGT1A1
function could lead to higher B exposure and toxicities (tox).Methods: In
a Phase I (BPE) and Phase I/II trial (BPAC), B (400-1000 mg/m2/24 h) was
administered as a 48 h continuous infusion in combination with either
cisplatin (P) and etoposide (E), or P, doxorubicin (A) and
cyclophosphamide (C), respectively. Pts with small cell lung cancer and
other cancers of neuroendrocrine origin (n = 25 in BPE) or advanced or
unresectable thymic epithelial tumors (n = 26 in BPAC) underwent
genotyping for UGT1A1 variants associated with reduced function:
UGT1A1*6, *28 and *60. In both trials PK of B was analyzed and during
Cycle 1 clinical outcomes were monitored. In 9 pts the Drug Metabolizing
Enzymes and Transporter (DMET) genotyping array was carried out to study
relationships between drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters with B
PK or tox.Results: Pts carrying 1 or 2 UGT1A1*60 variants (n = 18) in
BPE, had significantly higher B AUCs than WT pts (n = 5): median 11.4 vs
8.3 ng/mL*h/mg, P = 0.043. Consistent with greater exposure, pts carrying
at least 1 variant UGT1A1*60 allele (n = 18) were at significantly higher
risk for developing Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia vs. WT pts (n = 5): OR
(95%CI) = 21.2 (1.01-445.30), P = 0.014. A trend towards an increased
risk of Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia (P = 0.038), Gr 3-4 neutropenia (P =
0.045) and QTc prolongation (P = 0.030) was observed for UGT1A1*28. For
Gr 3-4 neutropenia a marginal trend was also seen in *60 carriers (P =
0.088).In the BPAC trial UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A1*60 status did not
significantly affect B PK (AUC, Cmax and CL, P>0.05) nor the incidence of
most tox (P>0.05). Only Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia occurred more frequently
in *28 carriers (n = 11) than in WTs (n = 15): OR (95%CI) = 18.6
(0.88-392.7), P = 0.022.The DMET array revealed significant associations
between SNPs in SLC15A1 and CYP24A1 and B PK (P<0.01). SNPs in SLCO1B3,
SLCO1B1 and ABCB4 were significantly associated with the incidence of
lymphocytopenia (PBackground: Belinostat (B), a histone deacetylase
inhibitor recently approved for peripheral T-cell lymphoma, is
extensively glucuronidated by UGT1A1. Genotypes with reduced UGT1A1
function could lead to higher B exposure and toxicities (tox).Methods: In
a Phase I (BPE) and Phase I/II trial (BPAC), B (400-1000 mg/m2/24 h) was
administered as a 48 h continuous infusion in combination with either
cisplatin (P) and etoposide (E), or P, doxorubicin (A) and
cyclophosphamide (C), respectively. Pts with small cell lung cancer and
other cancers of neuroendrocrine origin (n = 25 in BPE) or advanced or
unresectable thymic epithelial tumors (n = 26 in BPAC) underwent
genotyping for UGT1A1 variants associated with reduced function:
UGT1A1*6, *28 and *60. In both trials PK of B was analyzed and during
Cycle 1 clinical outcomes were monitored. In 9 pts the Drug Metabolizing
Enzymes and Transporter (DMET) genotyping array was carried out to study
relationships between drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters with B
PK or tox.Results: Pts carrying 1 or 2 UGT1A1*60 variants (n = 18) in
BPE, had significantly higher B AUCs than WT pts (n = 5): median 11.4 vs
8.3 ng/mL*h/mg, P = 0.043. Consistent with greater exposure, pts carrying
at least 1 variant UGT1A1*60 allele (n = 18) were at significantly higher
risk for developing Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia vs. WT pts (n = 5): OR
(95%CI) = 21.2 (1.01-445.30), P = 0.014. A trend towards an increased
risk of Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia (P = 0.038), Gr 3-4 neutropenia (P =
0.045) and QTc prolongation (P = 0.030) was observed for UGT1A1*28. For
Gr 3-4 neutropenia a marginal trend was also seen in *60 carriers (P =
0.088).In the BPAC trial UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A1*60 status did not
significantly affect B PK (AUC, Cmax and CL, P>0.05) nor the incidence of
most tox (P>0.05). Only Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia occurred more frequently
in *28 carriers (n = 11) than in WTs (n = 15): OR (95%CI) = 18.6
(0.88-392.7), P = 0.022.The DMET array revealed significant associations
between SNPs in SLC15A1 and CYP24A1 and B PK (P<0.01). SNPs in SLCO1B3,
SLCO1B1 and ABCB4 were significantly associated with the incidence of
lymphocytopenia (P<0.01). Significant trends were observed between SNPs
in UGT1A1, CYP2C19, CHST7, ABCB7 and ATP7A and the incidence of
neutropenia. A SNP in XDH significantly trended with the incidence of
thrombocytopenia (PBackground: Belinostat (B), a histone deacetylase
inhibitor recently approved for peripheral T-cell lymphoma, is
extensively glucuronidated by UGT1A1. Genotypes with reduced UGT1A1
function could lead to higher B exposure and toxicities (tox).Methods: In
a Phase I (BPE) and Phase I/II trial (BPAC), B (400-1000 mg/m2/24 h) was
administered as a 48 h continuous infusion in combination with either
cisplatin (P) and etoposide (E), or P, doxorubicin (A) and
cyclophosphamide (C), respectively. Pts with small cell lung cancer and
other cancers of neuroendrocrine origin (n = 25 in BPE) or advanced or
unresectable thymic epithelial tumors (n = 26 in BPAC) underwent
genotyping for UGT1A1 variants associated with reduced function:
UGT1A1*6, *28 and *60. In both trials PK of B was analyzed and during
Cycle 1 clinical outcomes were monitored. In 9 pts the Drug Metabolizing
Enzymes and Transporter (DMET) genotyping array was carried out to study
relationships between drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters with B
PK or tox.Results: Pts carrying 1 or 2 UGT1A1*60 variants (n = 18) in
BPE, had significantly higher B AUCs than WT pts (n = 5): median 11.4 vs
8.3 ng/mL*h/mg, P = 0.043. Consistent with greater exposure, pts carrying
at least 1 variant UGT1A1*60 allele (n = 18) were at significantly higher
risk for developing Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia vs. WT pts (n = 5): OR
(95%CI) = 21.2 (1.01-445.30), P = 0.014. A trend towards an increased
risk of Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia (P = 0.038), Gr 3-4 neutropenia (P =
0.045) and QTc prolongation (P = 0.030) was observed for UGT1A1*28. For
Gr 3-4 neutropenia a marginal trend was also seen in *60 carriers (P =
0.088).In the BPAC trial UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A1*60 status did not
significantly affect B PK (AUC, Cmax and CL, P>0.05) nor the incidence of
most tox (P>0.05). Only Gr 3-4 thrombocytopenia occurred more frequently
in *28 carriers (n = 11) than in WTs (n = 15): OR (95%CI) = 18.6
(0.88-392.7), P = 0.022.The DMET array revealed significant associations
between SNPs in SLC15A1 and CYP24A1 and B PK (P<0.01). SNPs in SLCO1B3,
SLCO1B1 and ABCB4 were significantly associated with the incidence of
lymphocytopenia (P<0.01). Significant trends were observed between SNPs
in UGT1A1, CYP2C19, CHST7, ABCB7 and ATP7A and the incidence of
neutropenia. A SNP in XDH significantly trended with the incidence of
thrombocytopenia (P<0.01).Conclusion: This is the first report of UGT1A1
polymorphisms effect on the PK and tox of B in combination with PE or
PAC. In the BPE trial UGT1A1 status was associated with the extent of
systemic exposure to B and the incidence of hematological tox. These
associations were less profound in the BPAC trial and possible
explanations are still under investigation. The DMET results indicate
that besides UGT1A1 other drug transporters or enzymes could affect B PK
and tox. Based on these findings, a population PK model accounting for
genotype has been developed to titrate B dose based on UGT1A1 genotype.

