Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different receptor tyrosine kinases mediate EMT and
erlotinib-resistance in NSCLC cell lines through bypass signalling


Introduction: Erlotinib is a potent drug in the treatment of EGFR-driven
lung cancer. Many patients initially benefit from erlotinib treatment,
but nearly all acquires resistance and die of the disease. Several
mechanisms related to erlotinib-resistance have been described including
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Signalling by TGF, Wnt or
through receptor tyrosine kinases can initiate EMT, but not much is known
about the trigger in relation to erlotinib-resistance. In this study, we
investigate how EMT is initiated in two erlotinib-sensitive NSCLC cell
lines developing erlotinib-resistance.Methods: HCC827 (EGFR mutated) and
Calu-3 (HER2 amplified) were treated with erlotinib in escalating
concentrations (0.01 M - 5 M) over approximately 3 months, and erlotinib
resistant (ER) sublines were established and investigated.Results: Both
HCC827ER and Calu-3ER gained EMT features including upregulation of SLUG,
SNAIL and ZEB1. These changes were accompanied by increased IGF1R
signalling in Calu-3ER and HCC827ER gained a MET amplification. To detect
the relevance of MET and IGF1R signalling in accordance to EMT, we
treated the cells with the tyrosine kinase inhibitors crizotinib (MET)
and linsitinib (IGF1R). In both cases, we saw a decrease in EMT-marker
transcription after the treatment. In addition, HCC827ER showed growth
inhibition when treated with the MET-inhibitor crizotinib, but linsitinib
did not inhibit the growth of Calu-3ER. Conclusion: Our study
demonstrates how different receptor tyrosine kinase signalling pathways
can induce EMT during the development of erlotinib-resistance.
Furthermore, we show that EMT can accompany well-know resistance
mechanisms such as MET-amplification and hereby contribute to the
phenotype of the resistant cells.

