Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abundant expression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in small cell
lung cancer


Background: Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is a catalytic component
of polycomb repressive complexes and functions as a histon
methyltransferase for H3 lysine 27 residues. EZH2 overexpression promotes
tumor progression and metastasis, leading to a poor prognosis. Small cell
lung cancer (SCLC) is characterized by highly invasive and metastatic
potentials compared with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), whereas
these are very limited information about whether EZH expression is
associated with clinical and biological differences between both tumor
types. The objective of the current study is to elucidate the role of
EZH2 in the phenotypic characteristics of SCLCMethod: EZH2 expressions in
staging-matched tumor samples from 34 patients with SCLC and NSCLC
consisting of adenocarcinoma (Ad) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) were
evaluated using immunohistochemistry. The extent and location of
immunohistochemical staining for EZH2 was assessed according to the
immunoreactive score (IRS) evaluating the proportion of cells that
express EZH2 protein and the intensity of its staining. Percentage of the
cancer area stained in high-power fields was measured. Staining intensity
was graded as 0 (negative), 1 (weak), 2 (moderate), and 3 (strong);
percentage of positive cells was scored as 0 (negative), 2 (from 11 to
50%), 3 (from 51 to 80%), and 4 (> 80%). The IRS taken from the
multiplication of these two scores (values from 0-12) was defined as
follows: 0 as negative, values 1-3 as weak, values 4, 6 as positive, and
multiplication values 8, 9, 12 as strongly positive.Results:Thirty-four
patients analyzed contained, 16 (47%) of surgical stage I, 10 (29%) of
Stage II, 7 (21%) of Stage III, and one (3%) of Stage IV. The patient's
clinical characteristic among three groups (SCLC, Ad, and SCC group) are
summarized. Sex (M/F) = (27/7, 20/14, and 31/3). Mean Age = (68.2, 65.3,
and 70.4). Mean Smoking Index (the number of cigarettes per daysmoking
years) = (1236, 526, and 1222). Negative staining was noted in one SCLC,
five Ads, and four SCCs, weakly positive in 0 SCLC, 17 Ads, and 15 SCCs,
positive in 8 SCLCs, 2 Ads, and 9 SCCs and strongly positive in 25 SCLCs,
10 Ads, and 6 SCCs. Mean IRS was 9.5 in SCLCs, 4.5 in Ads, and 3.8 in
SCCs. The immunohistochemical analysis of EZH2 expression levels based on
the staining intensity and the percentage of positive cells was
significantly higher with SCLC (pBackground: Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2
(EZH2) is a catalytic component of polycomb repressive complexes and
functions as a histon methyltransferase for H3 lysine 27 residues. EZH2
overexpression promotes tumor progression and metastasis, leading to a
poor prognosis. Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is characterized by highly
invasive and metastatic potentials compared with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), whereas these are very limited information about whether
EZH expression is associated with clinical and biological differences
between both tumor types. The objective of the current study is to
elucidate the role of EZH2 in the phenotypic characteristics of
SCLCMethod: EZH2 expressions in staging-matched tumor samples from 34
patients with SCLC and NSCLC consisting of adenocarcinoma (Ad) and
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) were evaluated using immunohistochemistry.
The extent and location of immunohistochemical staining for EZH2 was
assessed according to the immunoreactive score (IRS) evaluating the
proportion of cells that express EZH2 protein and the intensity of its
staining. Percentage of the cancer area stained in high-power fields was
measured. Staining intensity was graded as 0 (negative), 1 (weak), 2
(moderate), and 3 (strong); percentage of positive cells was scored as 0
(negative), 2 (from 11 to 50%), 3 (from 51 to 80%), and 4 (> 80%). The
IRS taken from the multiplication of these two scores (values from 0-12)
was defined as follows: 0 as negative, values 1-3 as weak, values 4, 6 as
positive, and multiplication values 8, 9, 12 as strongly
positive.Results:Thirty-four patients analyzed contained, 16 (47%) of
surgical stage I, 10 (29%) of Stage II, 7 (21%) of Stage III, and one
(3%) of Stage IV. The patient's clinical characteristic among three
groups (SCLC, Ad, and SCC group) are summarized. Sex (M/F) = (27/7,
20/14, and 31/3). Mean Age = (68.2, 65.3, and 70.4). Mean Smoking Index
(the number of cigarettes per daysmoking years) = (1236, 526, and 1222).
Negative staining was noted in one SCLC, five Ads, and four SCCs, weakly
positive in 0 SCLC, 17 Ads, and 15 SCCs, positive in 8 SCLCs, 2 Ads, and
9 SCCs and strongly positive in 25 SCLCs, 10 Ads, and 6 SCCs. Mean IRS
was 9.5 in SCLCs, 4.5 in Ads, and 3.8 in SCCs. The immunohistochemical
analysis of EZH2 expression levels based on the staining intensity and
the percentage of positive cells was significantly higher with SCLC
(p<0.001).Conclusion:EZH2 expression may determine the clinical and
biological characteristics of SCLC.

