Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relapsed/refractory AML responds robustly to IACS-10759, a novel
OXPHOS inhibitor


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a highly aggressive disease that is made
up of several genetically and clinically diverse hematological
malignancies that are characterized by clonal expansion of malignant
stem/progenitor cells with limited ability to differentiate into mature
blood cells. Standard of care for AML has progressed minimally in the
past 30 years for relapse/refractory AML, with survival rates of 65
years. Therefore, novel, highly effective therapeutics are needed for
this population. Growing evidence suggests that in AML, metabolism is
altered and that the tumor cells become highly dependent of mitochondria
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) for their survival. We developed
IACS-10759 as a novel small molecule inhibitor of complex I that potently
inhibits oxygen consumption, eliminates hypoxia, and strongly inhibits
the proliferation of cells grown in galactose medium with EC50 values
between 1-10 nM. When AML cell lines as well as primary AML cells from
relapsed/refractory patients were treated ex vivo with IACS-10759,
apoptosis was robustly induced with EC50 values also ranging between 1-10
nM. It is noteworthy, that while apoptosis was induced in primary AML
cells, normal patient-derived bone marrow cells were not sensitive. In
AML orthotopic xenografts, daily oral dosing with 15 mg/kg IACS-10759
extended median survival to 70 days from 18 days in control animals.
Taken together, the robust response in AML cell lines, primary AML
samples ex vivo, and efficacy in orthotopic xenografts, IACS-10759 has
entered IND enabling studies with first-in-human studies targeted for
third quarter of 2015.

