Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating proteins in response to combined-modality therapy in
locally advanced rectal cancer identified by antibody array screening


Background: In treatment of locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) with
chemoradiotherapy (CRT) followed by surgery, local recurrence rates are
low but development of metastatic disease remains a dominant cause of
failure. The attempt of improving survival outcome by increasingly
complex multimodality programs is at the price of extended limits of
treatment intensity and patient tolerance. Prediction biomarkers of
efficacy and toxicity might therefore assist in achieving more
individualized treatment in LARC.Methods: In a prospective LARC study
(NCT00278694) composed of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT; two cycles of
the Nordic FLOX regimen) before long-course CRT in order to intensify
treatment, serial serum samples were collected from 87 cases at baseline,
following NACT (post-NACT), at CRT completion (post-CRT), and at
evaluation of the neoadjuvant treatment 2-4 weeks before surgery.
Anticipating that proteins were released into the circulation from the
tumor as well as from other tissues as an adverse response to the
combined-modality therapy, the serum samples were analyzed using an
antibody array detecting a variety of 507 proteins (RayBiotech AHH-BLG-1
array). Alterations in circulating protein profiles during the
neoadjuvant treatment were correlated to progression-free survival (PFS)
and treatment toxicities as assessed by Common Terminology Criteria for
Adverse Events (CTCAE) scoring. Median follow-up was 63 months.Results:
Significant changes in serum protein levels (as compared to baseline)
were observed during the treatment course, with the numerically greater
alterations found post-CRT. Gene ontology analysis of the altered
proteins showed that the majority were involved in immune system
processes and extracellular matrix organization. Interestingly, the
levels of lipocalin-2 (LCN2) and matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9) were
significantly lowered during the entire treatment course with post-NACT
median fold change decline to 0.46 and 0.38 for LCN2 and MMP9
respectively, followed by a gradual increase towards baseline values
post-CRT and at evaluation before surgery. On univariate cox regression
analysis, post-NACT values (fold change from baseline) of LCN2 and MMP9
were entered as continuous data, and for both factors, the lower the
value the better PFS with a hazard ratio for a PFS event of 2.8 and 2.3,
respectively. Both components (the Nordic FLOX regimen and pelvic CRT) of
the neoadjuvant treatment protocol would cause intestinal toxicity, but
the individual patient's post-NACT decline in LCN2 and MMP9 serum levels
did not predict CTCAE grade 3 diarrhea at CRT completion when the highest
incidence of treatment-induced enteropathy was recorded.Conclusion:
Antibody array analysis of serial serum samples from the neoadjuvant
treatment course represented a liquid biopsy insight into systemic
responses to intensified combined-modality therapy in LARC.

