Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methodology for single copy detection and quantitative monitoring
of clinically actionable circulating tumor DNA mutations in urine from
cancer patients


Background: Non-invasive detection and monitoring of circulating tumor
DNA (ctDNA) mutations for personalized treatment of cancer patients can
be realized by combining the practical advantages of urine as a ctDNA
sample source with high throughput of next-generation sequencing
(NGS).Methods: Our platform couples an extraction process capable of
isolating ctDNA from the entire void volume of a urine sample (100ml)
with an ultra-sensitive NGS-integrated mutation enrichment method with
single copy detection sensitivity. Assays have been developed and
validated to interrogate clinically actionable mutations/deletions in the
KRAS, BRAF and EGFR (Exons 19, 20, 21) oncogenes in both urine and plasma
samples. For mutation detection with high sensitivity, a novel
allele-specific competitive cycling (ASCC) method was used prior to NGS
to amplify ultra-short target DNA (31-45 bp) using kinetically-favorable
binding conditions for a wild type (WT) blocking oligonucleotide.
Enriched amplicons were sequenced and a proprietary algorithm was used to
quantify the mutant ctDNA input level in analytical and clinical
samples.Results: An extraction method optimized for enrichment of
fragmented urine ctDNA enabled isolation of large amounts of DNA (mean 2
g) from advanced stage patients with different cancer types. Analytical
performance characterization demonstrated sensitivity of 0.0047 - 0.01%
mutant copies in WT/mutant DNA blends. To show that our assays have a
true single copy detection threshold, we used DNA blends with defined
mutant spike-in levels of 2 - 60 copies distributed over 20 wells (to
obtain 0 - 3 mutant copies/well). The observed distribution of positive
and negative hits matched the theoretical hit rate of an ideal Poisson
distribution for these replicates, confirming single copy sensitivity of
our assays. Using the KRAS ASCC assay, 1 to 17,555 mutant fragments were
detected per 1 mL of urine collected from KRAS tissue biopsy-positive
advanced cancer patients. Analysis of serial patient-matched urine and
plasma longitudinal samples from KRAS, BRAF, or EGFR tissue positive
patients demonstrated a high level of concordance between urine and
plasma samples and feasibility of monitoring mutation load in a variety
of clinical settings, including monitoring post-surgery and
responsiveness to targeted therapy or chemotherapy.Conclusion: The
analytical characterization and clinical feasibility studies demonstrate
that this methodology can successfully detect and quantitate mutational
load in urinary ctDNA, thus enabling for the dynamic monitoring of
therapy response, drug resistance, and minimal residual disease in cancer
patients from a truly non-invasive sample.

