Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The RNA binding protein, HuR, regulates pancreatic cancer cell
metabolism


Introduction: Few proteins have been found to be master-regulators of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) cell metabolism (e.g., LKB1,
KRAS). We recently demonstrated that the regulatory RNA binding protein,
HuR, binds to numerous metabolic mRNA transcripts and regulates their
expression. Additionally, HuR silencing with small interfering
RNAs(siRNAs) inhibited growth of PDA cells in vitro under glucose
deprivation. Herein, we manipulated HuR expression levels in PDA cells
and performed isotope tracer fate association studies to better
understand HuR's role in metabolic reprogramming.Methods: We used
13C-labeled nutrients to map carbon flux in BxPC3 pancreatic cancer cells
that were either transiently transfected with siRNA oligos against HuR
(siHuR) or scrambled control (siCTRL). Cells were incubated with standard
DMEM or mild glucose deprivation (5 mM glucose) for 48 hours, and media
were supplemented with [1,2-13C2]-D-glucose or [U-13C5]-L-glutamine
tracers for the final 24 hours. A total of 24 samples were snap frozen
and prepared for GC-MS isotopomer analysis (3 replicates X 2 different
siRNA oligos X 2 isotope tracers X 2 glucose concentrations).
Transfection experiments were validated for reduced HuR expression (>70%
reduction) and reduced protein expression of at least one metabolic and
established HuR target (e.g., IDH1) by immunoblot.Results: HuR silencing
directly impaired fatty acid (Table, line 1-3), ribose (line 5) and
glycogen synthesis (line 6). Reductive carboxylation of glutamine-derived
isocitrate was impaired and futile carbon exchange fluxes were prevalent
(not shown).Conclusions: HuR enhances metabolic efficiency in PDA cells
by directly regulating multiple metabolic pathways. Ongoing microarray
studies will highlight which metabolic transcripts are
post-transcriptionally regulated by HuR, resulting in the observed
phenotype.

