Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concerted epigenetic and signaling mechanisms regulate normal stem
cell radiosensitivity


Side effects resulting from ionizing radiation (IR) during cancer
radiotherapy often involve normal tissue injury including depletion of
tissue regenerative capacity. Utilizing multiple in vivo tissue niches
and cell culture models, we demonstrate that normal stem cells are highly
radiosensitive while differentiated progeny are radioresistant, and
IR-induced apoptosis of stem cells is observed broadly throughout the
cell cycle independent of proliferation status.Our study demonstrates
that normal stem cells fail to activate the DDR, do not display
IR-induced foci in vivo as well as in culture, and exhibit severely
attenuated DNA repair. Despite normal sensing of DNA breaks, recruitment/
retention of repair factors at DNA break sites is repressed in stem
cells. Stem cells are unable to eliminate constitutive phosphorylation of
H2AX-Y142 around break sites, abetting stem cells toward an apoptotic
instead of repair pathway. The abrogated DDR in normal stem cells is
associated with a constitutively enhanced histone-3 lysine-56
acetylation, which epigenetically contributes to muted retention of
repair factors. Reinforced PP2A phosphatase expression was also
identified as substantial regulators of stem cell radiosensitivity and
transient inhibition of phosphatase activity restores stem cell
survival.We thus identify pluralistic interacting molecular and
epigenetic mechanisms that collectively control and impart IR
hypersensitive phenotype to the normal stem cells. These insights will be
crucial in development of prevention and intervention therapeutic
strategies to minimize IR-induced stem cell dropout and increase the
efficacy of radiotherapy.

