Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship between transcription factor TWIST1 and microRNA34a
in metastatic cancer cells


Background: Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are the important tools in
RNA-interference (RNAi) technology, which is comparatively recent but one
of the most promising bio-molecular tools for gene regulation. MiRNAs can
interfere with certain genes in target specific manner, and they are
being extensively investigated for cancer therapeutics. This study
investigated the role of miR-34a on the expression of transcription
factor TWIST1, which is involved in metastatic carcinomas.Methods: The
expression of miR34a and TWIST1 was measured by quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) analysis in different cancer cell lines and breast
cancer tissues. Then we have transfected the precursor and inhibitor of
miR-34a into another TWIST1 rich 4T1 cancer cell, and isolated the total
RNA and miRNAs for the analysis of TWIST1 expression, as well as
miR-34a.Results: Initially, we have observed that miR34a is highly
expressed in lower invasive MCF7 and T47D cancer cells, whereas its
expression in higher invasive MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-435 and BT-549 cancer
cells is low. Oppositely, TWIST1 expression is relatively lower in MCF7
and T47D cells, but higher in MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-435 and BT-549 cells.
This inverse relationship indicated that TWIST1 might be a target of
miR-34a. Interestingly transfection of miR34a precursor inhibited TWIST1
expression in 4T1 cancer cells.Conclusions: This study reports that
miR-34a has reverse correlation with the high TWIST1 expression in
metastatic breast cancer. Regulation of TWIST1 by miR-34a might be a
potential tool in cancer diagnostics and therapeutics, especially for the
treatment of metastatic cancers.Funding support: This work was supported
in part by the NSFC (81172049), the Science and Technology Innovation
Team of Colleges and Universities of Sichuan Province (13TD0032), the
Applied Basic Research Program of Science and Technology Department of
Sichuan Province (14JC0797,)and Luzhou City Special Foundation
(2013LZLY-J10).Corresponding author email:fujunjiang@hotmail.com

