Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel, selective DNA-PK inhibitor sensitizes poor prognosis
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells to mitoxantrone


Approximately 20% of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia (CLL) cases carry 11q
deletions and 10% carry 17p deletions (associated with loss of p53
function), both of which are poor prognostic markers. Ataxia
telangiectasia mutated kinase (ATM) is located on chromosome 11q23 and
30% of del11q patients lack ATM function. Previous work has shown that
the DNA-PK inhibitor NU7441 chemosensitises CLL cells to fludarabine ex
vivo (Willmore E et al 2008), and monotherapy with KU60648, a dual
inhibitor of PI3k and DNA-PK has been shown to be effective in ATM
deficient cells (Riabinska A et al 2013). Furthermore, a dual DNA-PK/mTOR
inhibitor, CC-115, is now in clinical trials (NCT01353625).Here, we aimed
to validate the selective inhibition of DNA-PK over related kinases as a
therapeutic approach in CLL, using a novel, more selective compound
(NDD0004, cell-free IC50 10nM). Both primary CLL cells and an isogenic
pair of DNA-PK-deficient and proficient HCT116 cells were used as
models.Primary CLL cells were cultured ex vivo and treated with the
topoisomerase II poison mitoxantrone in the presence and absence of
NU7441 and NDD0004. Cell viability was determined after 48h by XTT assay.
Apoptosis and DNA damage (yH2AX foci) were measured by caspase
3/7GloAssay and immunofluorescence, respectively. ATM function was
determined by the cells ability to autophosphorylate ATM on serine 1981
after ionising radiation.Chemosensitisation to mitoxantrone in primary
CLL cells was substantial and it was higher with NDD0004 than with NU7441
(mean 202- vs. 69-fold, ranges 1-1000 vs. 1-543-fold). Intriguingly,
cells lacking ATM or p53 function were also sensitised by DNA-PK
inhibition (mean 15- and 21-fold, respectively). HCT116 cells lacking
DNA-PK were not chemosensitised by NDD0004 but DNA-PK proficient cells
were sensitised 5-fold. Mitoxantrone-induced DSBs (as measured by yH2AX
foci) were repaired by 24h, but persisted in the presence of DNA-PK
inhibitors. In keeping with this observation, apoptosis as measured by
caspase 3/7 activity was potentiated by DNA-PK inhibitors.NDD0004 and
KU60648 were also evaluated in a panel of ATM deficient (HT144, H1395)
and ATM proficient (A549, A375) cell lines. ATM status had no impact on
(a) the level of chemosensitisation to mitoxantrone by both inhibitors
and (b) single agent activity for NDD0004 and KU60648.In conclusion, our
data show that selective inhibition of DNA-PK chemosensitises primary CLL
cells even when p53 is mutated or ATM function is lost. Current work is
focused on identifying biomarkers which predict good response to DNA-PK
inhibitors.

