Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical performance of the AccuCyte - CyteFinder System, a
dual-technology platform for comprehensive collection and high resolution
imaging of circulating tumor cells


High numbers of circulating tumor cells (CTC) predict poor prognosis. In
addition, serial monitoring of CTC numbers may be used to assess response
to therapy or progressing disease. The AccuCyte - CyteFinder (AC/CF)
system combines density-based collection of all nucleated blood cells
with high-resolution digital microscopic imaging, image analysis and
single-cell retrieval. The AccuCyte kit contains a novel separation tube,
transfer device, and spreader for simple collection of nucleated cells
onto microscopic slides compatible with automated immunostaining.
CyteFinder is a high-resolution fluorescent scanner with image analysis,
review software and integrated CytePicker module for single-cell
retrieval. In a blinded study we directly compared the AC/CF platform to
the CellSearch System (Veridex), the only FDA-cleared CTC platform, which
relies on magnetic capture of cells that express EpCAM. We first compared
recovery of model CTCs (mCTCs) using tumor cell lines with high EpCAM
expression (MCF7 and LNCaP) or low EpCAM expression (PC3 and A549) in
paired spike-in samples. CTCs were identified by positive cytokeratin and
nuclear staining and an absence of CD45 staining. AC/CF and CellSearch
detected similar numbers of mCTCs from high-EpCAM lines (AC/CF average:
91.5% for MCF7 and 92% for LNCaP; CellSearch average: 87% for MCF7 and
85% for LNCaP). AC/CF detected more cells from low-EpCAM lines, finding
an average of 69% more PC3 cells and 57% more A549 cells. These results
suggest that CellSearch captures low-EpCAM cells inefficiently. We next
compared the assays using samples from cancer patients. Paired blood
samples were obtained from patients with metastatic cancer under the
University of Washington (UW) IRB. Samples were processed by UW using the
CellSearch assay and the AC/CF assay was performed in parallel by
RareCyte using AC/CF. RareCyte was blinded to CellSearch counts until
after AC/CF analysis was performed and documented. On average the AC/CF
System found 34% more CTCs in 17 prostate cancer patients, 47% more in 15
breast cancer patients, and 70% more in 8 lung cancer patients. In
samples where there was more than a 10% difference in CTC count, AC/CF
detected >60% more cells with these combined indications. Very low EpCAM
expression was confirmed in CTCs from several of the patients where the
AC/CF system found greater numbers of cells. These results demonstrate
that the AC/CF platform is capable of high CTC recoveries in clinical
samples, outperforming the current FDA-cleared platform, especially when
CTCs express low levels of EpCAM.

