Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calmodulin-DR5 binding in breast cancer: Independent of TRA-8
sensitivity


Breast cancer is estimated to be the leading cause of new cancer cases
and second in cancer related deaths among American women (Cancer: 63,
1153-1154, 2013). Classification of breast cancers into receptor-based
subtypes, including estrogen receptor (ER) positive or triple negative
breast cancers, establish targets that guide individualized treatment for
patients (J Clin Oncol: 27,1153-1154, 2009). Drug resistant ER positive
breast cancers and triple-negative breast cancers are prolific breast
cancers with poor clinical outcome. TRA-8 is a death receptor-5 (DR5)
specific agonistic antibody with tumoricidal activity in vitro and in
vivo without inducing normal hepatocyte apoptosis (Nature Med: 7,
954-960, 2001). ER positive and triple negative breast cancer cell lines
have a range of in vitro sensitivity to TRA-8 mediated cytotoxicity (Clin
Cancer Res: 9, 3731-3741, 2003, Breast Cancer Res Treat: 133, 417-426,
2012). Calmodulin (CaM) is overexpressed in breast cancer (J Clin Oncol:
4, 994-1012, 1986, Cancer Res: 42, 2571-2574, 1982). Our lab has shown
CaM binds to DR5 and plays a role in DR5 mediated DISC formation in ER
positive MCF-7 and triple negative MDA-MB231 breast cancer cell lines
(Proc. AACR; 2014, Abstract nr 2282). The goal of this study is to
characterize an interaction between CaM and DR5 in a panel of ER positive
and triple negative breast cancer cell lines representing a range of
sensitivity to TRA-8 mediated cytotoxicity. CaM-DR5 interaction was
characterized in a panel of triple negative breast cancer cell lines:
MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, HCC1937, and HCC1143 and ER positive breast
cancer cell lines: ZR-75-1, T47D, and MCF-7 representing the range of
sensitivity to TRA-8 (Clin Cancer Res: 9, 3731-3741, 2003, Breast Cancer
Res Treat: 133, 417-426 2012). DR5 was immunoprecipitated, using TRA-8
conjugated beads, from the panel of breast cancer cell lines lysates. CaM
co-immunoprecipitated with DR5 from all breast cancer cell lines lysates,
showing endogenous CaM and DR5 form a complex. CaM pull-down of DR5 from
the breast cancer lysates in the presence of 1 mM Ca2+ or 2 mM EGTA
showed CaM/DR5 interaction is calcium dependent. We present evidence for
a Ca2+ dependent interaction between CaM and DR5 in a panel of ER
positive and triple negative breast cancer cell lines independent of
TRA-8 sensitivity. Results from this study provide the basis to further
characterization of CaM-DR5 interactions and to investigate the role of
CaM/DR5 binding in DR5-mediated DISC formation, which could lead to novel
strategies to overcome drug resistance in breast cancers. Results suggest
that direct interaction between CaM and DR5 could represent a potential
site for breast cancer chemotherapeutics.

