Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparative efficacy study of Saquinavir in combination with
cisplatin or paclitaxel in platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cells


Background and Objective: Ovarian cancer is the 7th most common cancer
affecting women Worldwide which has a 5-year survival rate of 45%. First
line therapy, platinum and taxol compounds, produces 60% to 80% response
rates in platinum sensitive ovarian cancer. However, incidence of
resistance to this therapy is high resulting in poor prognosis. The
present study evaluated the comparative efficacy of Saquinavir (SAQ) in
combination with Cisplatin (CIS) or Paclitaxel (TAX) versus first line
therapy, CIS+TAX, in platinum-resistant OVCAR-3 cells.Method:
OVCAR-3cells were treated with varying concentrations of SAQ (20M, 40M,
60M and 100M). OVCAR-3 cells were treated with SAQ (100M), SAQ+CIS(26M),
SAQ+TAX(1.5nM) and CIS+TAX. Cells were treated over a 24hr period in
triplicate. Media only and DMSO only treated cells were used as controls.
The cytotoxic effect of each treatment was determined using the automated
Trypan Blue exclusion protocol and DNA fragmentation assay was performed
to evaluate the mechanisms of induced cell death.Results: Dose dependent
and statistically significant (p Background and Objective: Ovarian cancer
is the 7th most common cancer affecting women Worldwide which has a
5-year survival rate of 45%. First line therapy, platinum and taxol
compounds, produces 60% to 80% response rates in platinum sensitive
ovarian cancer. However, incidence of resistance to this therapy is high
resulting in poor prognosis. The present study evaluated the comparative
efficacy of Saquinavir (SAQ) in combination with Cisplatin (CIS) or
Paclitaxel (TAX) versus first line therapy, CIS+TAX, in
platinum-resistant OVCAR-3 cells.Method: OVCAR-3cells were treated with
varying concentrations of SAQ (20M, 40M, 60M and 100M). OVCAR-3 cells
were treated with SAQ (100M), SAQ+CIS(26M), SAQ+TAX(1.5nM) and CIS+TAX.
Cells were treated over a 24hr period in triplicate. Media only and DMSO
only treated cells were used as controls. The cytotoxic effect of each
treatment was determined using the automated Trypan Blue exclusion
protocol and DNA fragmentation assay was performed to evaluate the
mechanisms of induced cell death.Results: Dose dependent and
statistically significant (p <0.05) cytotoxic effects were seen with SAQ
in OVCAR-3 cells. An IC50 value of 84M for SAQ was determined in OVCAR-3
cells. Significant cytotoxic effects (pBackground and Objective: Ovarian
cancer is the 7th most common cancer affecting women Worldwide which has
a 5-year survival rate of 45%. First line therapy, platinum and taxol
compounds, produces 60% to 80% response rates in platinum sensitive
ovarian cancer. However, incidence of resistance to this therapy is high
resulting in poor prognosis. The present study evaluated the comparative
efficacy of Saquinavir (SAQ) in combination with Cisplatin (CIS) or
Paclitaxel (TAX) versus first line therapy, CIS+TAX, in
platinum-resistant OVCAR-3 cells.Method: OVCAR-3cells were treated with
varying concentrations of SAQ (20M, 40M, 60M and 100M). OVCAR-3 cells
were treated with SAQ (100M), SAQ+CIS(26M), SAQ+TAX(1.5nM) and CIS+TAX.
Cells were treated over a 24hr period in triplicate. Media only and DMSO
only treated cells were used as controls. The cytotoxic effect of each
treatment was determined using the automated Trypan Blue exclusion
protocol and DNA fragmentation assay was performed to evaluate the
mechanisms of induced cell death.Results: Dose dependent and
statistically significant (p <0.05) cytotoxic effects were seen with SAQ
in OVCAR-3 cells. An IC50 value of 84M for SAQ was determined in OVCAR-3
cells. Significant cytotoxic effects (p<0.05) in OVCAR-3 treated cells
were observed with SAQ, SAQ+TAX, SAQ+CIS AND CIS+TAX combinations when
compared to controls. However, SAQ+CIS was the only combination that
showed more significant cytotoxicity when compared to CIS+TAX (p =
0.041). SAQ+CIS combination produced an average percentage cell death of
73.25% in OVCAR-3 cells. Cell death by apoptosis was confirmed from
observed fragmented DNA in OVCAR-3 cells treated with SAQ+TAX, SAQ+CIS
and CIS+TAX.Conclusion: SAQ+CIS produced more significant cytotoxic
effect than first line therapy, CIS+TAX, in platinum-resistant ovarian
cancer cells. This data supports further evaluation of SAQ for its
potential utilization in the treatment of platinum-resistant ovarian
cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

