Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem cell mutagenesis and carcinogenesis in the colon of wild type
and immune compromised mice


To test the hypothesis that a role of inflammation in the etiology of
cancer is associated with the production of RONS and subsequent DNA
damage, we determined the mutation frequency (MF) in colonic stem cells
in C57Bl/6 mice exposed to dextran sulfate sodium (DSS), an inflammatory
agent that is used in combination with azoxymethane (AOM) to produce
colon tumors in mice. AOM produces promutagenic O6-methylguanine lesions
in DNA but does not induce colon tumors in C57Bl/6 mice as a single
agent. The MF's in the untreated and DSS treated WT and TCR-/- mice were
To test the hypothesis that a role of inflammation in the etiology of
cancer is associated with the production of RONS and subsequent DNA
damage, we determined the mutation frequency (MF) in colonic stem cells
in C57Bl/6 mice exposed to dextran sulfate sodium (DSS), an inflammatory
agent that is used in combination with azoxymethane (AOM) to produce
colon tumors in mice. AOM produces promutagenic O6-methylguanine lesions
in DNA but does not induce colon tumors in C57Bl/6 mice as a single
agent. The MF's in the untreated and DSS treated WT and TCR-/- mice were
<10-5 indicating that DSS and subsequent inflammation does not generate
stem cell mutations in mice that are WT for DNA repair. AOM yielded
mutant crypts in WT and TCR-/- mice with MF's of 410-4 and 210-4,
respectively, which represents a statistically significance decrease in
the MF in the immune compromised mice. These results suggest enhanced
survival of AOM damaged stem cells in WT vs. TCR-/- mice. The combined
treatment of AOM+DSS afforded fully mutated crypts in both strains but
with a lower MF than observed with AOM alone indicating that DSS induced
inflammation destroyed pre-existing AOM mutated crypts. Using the MF in
WT mice, the efficiency for the conversion of an O6-methylguanine lesion
into a stem cell mutation was estimated to be 0.03%. The carcinogenicity
of AOM and/or DSS was evaluated in WT, TCR-/-, TCR-/- and TCR-/-TCR-/-
mice. At lower DSS exposure (1.5%), there was a significant reduction in
tumor incidence, multiplicity and tumor progression in the TCR-/- and
TCR-/-TCR-/- vs. WT B6 mice. However, at higher DSS concentration (2%)
the difference between the mouse strains disappeared because of an
increase in the TCR null mice without a concomitant increase in the WT
mice.

