Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metarrestin effectively disassembles PNCs and inhibits metastasis


The perinucleolar compartment (PNC) is a nuclear body that forms
specifically in highly malignant cancer cells. PNC prevalence is shown to
reflect metastatic potential of cancer cells from solid tissue origins. A
high-content screen was performed to identify small molecules that reduce
PNC prevalence. Medicinal chemistry optimizations of confirmed hits yield
metarrestin, having 95% of oral bioavailability and a PNC disassembly
IC50 between 100 to 400 nM across multiple cancer cell lines. Metarrestin
inhibits soft agar growth and the invasive capabilities of cancer cells
in vitro. In vivo mouse xenograft metastatic studies showed that
metarrestin effectively inhibits lung and/or liver metastasis of prostate
cancer (PC3M), pancreatic cancer (organotypic spheroids of PANC1), and a
breast cancer patient xenograft (PDX) model derived from metastatic cells
isolated from a pleural effusion. Treated animals tolerate metarrestin
well with no discernable impact on animal well-being including weight
compared with control animals. These data supports the idea that the
pharmacological disassembly of PNC produces the inhibition of malignant
behavior of cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo. Cellular and
molecular analyses of the mechanisms of action of metarrestin show that
this compound induces significant and reversible changes in the nucleolar
structure, accompanied by a selective reduction of pol I transcription.
These studies suggest that PNC structural integrity directly associates
with pol I function and nucleolar structure. Experiments are currently
underway to identify the cellular factors and pathways by which
metarrestin reduces PNCs, disrupts nucleolar structure, regulates
transcriptions, and blocks malignant behaviors.

