Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silver nanoparticles protect human keratinocytes from deleterious
effects of ultraviolet radiation: Implications for skin cancer
chemoprevention


Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer worldwide and its incidence
has been increasing at an alarming rate in the United States. A solar
ultraviolet (UV) radiation, particularly UVB, is the main etiological
cause of skin carcinogenesis due to its DNA damaging ability. Therefore,
multidisciplinary scientific research has placed specific emphasis on
finding novel ways for skin cancer chemoprevention. Here, we provide
first experimental evidence for chemopreventive efficacy of
silver-nanoparticles (AgNPs) against UVB-induced DNA damage and apoptosis
in immortalized human epidermal keratinocytes (HaCaT). AgNPs synthesized
by chemical reduction method were characterized for their physicochemical
properties. The nanoparticles were spherical (> 90%) in shape, in the
size range of 20-50 nm, and had net negative surface charge with an
average zeta potential of - 47.7 mV. AgNPs were largely non-toxic to
HaCaT cells and their pretreatment protected them from UVB-induced
apoptosis. Significant reduction in cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD)
formation upon UVB exposure was also observed in AgNPs-pretreated HaCaT
cells. In addition, AgNPs pre-treatment leads to G1 phase arrest of cell
cycle in UVB-exposed HaCaT cells thus allowing sufficient time for CPDs
repair. Moreover, enhanced AgNPs internalization and localization into
cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments was observed by UVB irradiated HaCaT
cells. Furthermore, AgNPs pretreatment altered the expression of various
genes involved in cell-cycle, apoptosis and nucleotide-excision repair in
UVB-irradiated HaCaT cells. Together, these findings clearly suggest the
potential utility of AgNPs as novel chemopreventive agents against
UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis.

