Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Household stove improvement and lung cancer mortality in Xuanwei,
China: A 33-years follow-up study


Background: Household stove improvement from unvented stoves to stoves
with chimney (vented stoves) and portable stoves has been shown to reduce
lung cancer mortality in our prior cohort study in Xuanwei county, China
(1976-1992). It remains unclear whether the protective effects against
lung cancer mortality persist over time with extended follow-up
(1993-2009). In our study, we examined the associations between vented
stove and portable stove use with risk of lung cancer mortality based on
a 33 years follow-up in Xuanwei.Methods: A total of 42,422 individuals in
Xuanwei were retrospectively followed from 1976 through 1992, and
prospectively followed to 2009. Extensive information on household stove
and fuel use at different age periods during the lifetime was collected
in the 1992 and 2009 follow-up surveys. Lung cancer mortality data were
obtained by integrating the information from hospital records and death
certificates. Multivariable Cox regression models were used to estimate
the hazard ratio (HR) of lung cancer mortality associated with stove
improvement, adjusting for potential confounders.Results: We observed a
significant reduction in lung cancer mortality associated with
improvement to vented stoves (multivariate-adjusted HR = 0.43, 95%
confidence interval (CI) = 0.40-0.47) and portable stoves
(multivariate-adjusted HR = 0.21, 95% CI = 0.19-0.24). There was a
monotonic trend towards a decreased risk of lung cancer mortality with
increasing years since stove improvement to vented stoves and portable
stoves (P-trend for both Background: Household stove improvement from
unvented stoves to stoves with chimney (vented stoves) and portable
stoves has been shown to reduce lung cancer mortality in our prior cohort
study in Xuanwei county, China (1976-1992). It remains unclear whether
the protective effects against lung cancer mortality persist over time
with extended follow-up (1993-2009). In our study, we examined the
associations between vented stove and portable stove use with risk of
lung cancer mortality based on a 33 years follow-up in Xuanwei.Methods: A
total of 42,422 individuals in Xuanwei were retrospectively followed from
1976 through 1992, and prospectively followed to 2009. Extensive
information on household stove and fuel use at different age periods
during the lifetime was collected in the 1992 and 2009 follow-up surveys.
Lung cancer mortality data were obtained by integrating the information
from hospital records and death certificates. Multivariable Cox
regression models were used to estimate the hazard ratio (HR) of lung
cancer mortality associated with stove improvement, adjusting for
potential confounders.Results: We observed a significant reduction in
lung cancer mortality associated with improvement to vented stoves
(multivariate-adjusted HR = 0.43, 95% confidence interval (CI) =
0.40-0.47) and portable stoves (multivariate-adjusted HR = 0.21, 95% CI =
0.19-0.24). There was a monotonic trend towards a decreased risk of lung
cancer mortality with increasing years since stove improvement to vented
stoves and portable stoves (P-trend for both <0.0001). Similar
associations were observed for both men and women.Conclusions: Household
stove improvement to both vented stoves and portable stoves were
inversely associated with risk of lung cancer mortality. These findings
have important public health implications for nearly 3 million people who
still use solid fuels for cooking and heating in homes, particularly in
developing countries.

