Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triptolide inhibits Wnt signaling due to DNA methylation
alteration that is determined by dynamic histone 3 K79 lysine methylation
in NSCLC


Epigenetic alterations including DNA methylation and histone
modifications have been associated with virtually every step of tumor
development and progression. This realization has triggered an impressive
quest for the development of epigenetic drugs and epigenetic therapies.
Here we present data demonstrating that triptolide, with a unique
mechanism, has anticancer effect in lung cancer development and
progression. With the use of our unique non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) mouse model (ED160, Fen1 mutation), data shows triptolide
decreases lung cancer incidence from 70% to 10%. In addition, triptolide
effectively inhibits lung cancer growth and metastasis in NSG mouse
Xenograft. Triptolide inactivates Wnt signaling by restoring WIF1
expression which is due to WIF1 gene demethylation. Furthermore, we
revealed histone 3 lysine methylation alteration determines DNA
methylation status by the communication between DNMT1 and histone 3.
Together, these evidences indicated that sequential histone and DNA
methylation active Wnt signaling; further it contributes to NSCLC
development and progression. This discovery potentially is yielding
epigenetic therapeutic opportunities for NSCLC.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

