Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
prescriptions after diagnosis and upper aerodigestive tract cancer
survival


Aspirin and other NSAIDs are widely used as analgesics and preventative
agents for vascular events. Research evidence supports an effect of
aspirin in reducing overall cancer incidence and mortality in the general
population. Data on the chemo preventative role of these drugs on the
mortality in patients with upper aerodigestive tract cancer (UADT) are
insufficient.The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of
aspirin and other NSAIDs prescriptions after cancer diagnosis on the
survival in UADT cancer patients.Patients with UADT cancer (oral cavity,
oropharynx, hypopharynx, larynx or esophagus) were identified from the
Primary Care Clinical Informatics Unit (PCCIU) database which contains
information from a sample of general medical practices in Scotland,
United Kingdom. Cox regression was used for statistical data
analysis.There were 2,392 cases of UADT cancer diagnosed between 1996 and
2010 from 131 general medical practices. The mean age of patients was 66
years (SD 12), and most were male (63%). Median survival in head and neck
cancer (HNC) patients was 94 months, while median survival in oesophageal
cancer patients was 10 months.For HNC, improved survival was observed
with aspirin prescription (ever vs never Hazard Ration (HR) = 0.5 95%
Confidence Interval (CI) 0.4, 0.7) and other NSAIDs prescription (ever vs
never HR = 0.7 95% CI 0.6, 0.9), however there was no association with
COX-2 prescriptions. For oesophageal cancer patients, improved survival
was observed with aspirin prescriptions (ever vs never HR = 0.5 95% CI
0.5, 0.6), Cox-2 prescriptions (HR = 0.8 95% CI 0.6, 0.9) and other
NSAIDs (HR = 0.7 95% CI 0.6, 0.8).Conclusion: Aspirin and other NSAIDs
prescriptions after diagnosis may reduce all-cause mortality in UADT
cancer patients.

