Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of PI3K inhibitor CAL-101 and JNK inhibitor
SP600125 on glioblastoma cell proliferation


Glioblastoma multiform (GBM) is the most aggressive malignant primary
tumor in the central nervous system. Due to the hyperactivation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
pathways in GBM, their respective inhibitors become promising and
actively researched therapeutic agents. Our previous study showed that
the PI3K catalytic isoform p110 is highly expressed in GBM cell lines,
indicating that p110 may be a potential target for therapy. However, a
single drug may not be sufficient to affect all pathogenic processes such
as proliferation, migration and invasion in GBM cells. Therefore, we
aimed to evaluate the combination effect of PI3K inhibitor CAL-101 and
JNK inhibitor SP600125 on glioma cells. The half maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) of CAL-101 and SP600125 was first determined by the
MTT method in GBM cell line U-87 MG. The combination effect of these 2
inhibitors on cell proliferation was analyzed using Compusyn software and
the combination index (CI) was calculated. CI 1.1 indicates an
antagonistic effect, and CI between 0.9 and 1.1 indicates an additive
effect. Cell migration and invasion capacity of U-87 MG cells were then
evaluated under combined treatment with CAL-101 and SP600125. Our results
showed that the effect of CAL-101 or SP600125 on cell proliferation was
dose- and time-dependent. The IC50 of CAL-101 and SP600125 were 10.15 M
and 19.60 M respectively. Treatment with SP600125 alone significantly
suppressed U-87 MG cell proliferation, and combining 10 M of CAL-101 and
20 M of SP600125 showed a moderate synergistic effect. The cytotoxicity
of CAL-101 or SP600125 alone, as well as combining them together was low
on normal astrocytes. Western blot analysis of the PI3K/Akt and JNK
pathways indicated that CAL-101 inhibited Akt phosphorylation at Ser473
and Thr308, whereas SP600125 suppressed JNK activity and Akt
phosphorylation at Thr308. Combination of CAL-101 and SP600125 further
inhibited Akt phosphorylation at Thr308, but showed no effect on the
inhibition of Akt phosphorylation at Ser473 and c-Jun phosphorylation.
CAL-101 significantly reduced migration but had no effect on invasion of
U-87 MG cells, whereas SP600125 significantly suppressed both their
migration and invasion abilities. Combining CAL-101 and SP600125
augmented the inhibitory effect on migration but showed no enhancement on
invasion. In conclusion, combination treatment with CAL-101 and SP600125
showed a moderate synergistic effect on GBM cell proliferation, and
enhanced the inhibition of cell migration. Our results suggest that GBM
patients may benefit from combination therapy targeting both PI3K and JNK.

