Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of C5a receptor becomes risk factor in gastric
cancer


Background: C5a is one of the important factors produced on complement
pathway and a strong chemokine. There is emerging evidence that C5a is
generated in the cancer microenvironment and C5a receptor (C5aR) is
expressed in various cancer cells and associated with invasive ability in
several cancer cells. However, the role of C5aR in gastric cancer (GC) is
still mostly unknown.Aim: To investigate the clinical significance of
C5aR expression in human GC.Method: 168 patients underwent gastrectomy
after the diagnosis of gastric cancer from January 1st 2001 to December
31th 2009. C5aR-expression of GC cells was investigated in all 168
patients and was analyzed in regard to an association with
clinicopathological factors and outcomes in the patients. Additionally,
in vitro experiments were used to examine the proliferation and invasion
of GC cells by using the GC cell lines that had high-expression of
C5aR.Result: High-expression of C5aR was found in 55 patients (32.7%).
High-expression of C5aR was significantly related to depth of invasion,
stage, lymphatic and vascular invasion. Among the 146 patients with a
tumor stage lower than stageIV, the 5-years recurrence-free and overall
survival rates of patients in the high-expression of C5aR group were
significantly lower than those in the low-expression of C5aR group (91.0%
vs 52.4%, p = 0.007 and 87.2% vs 59.1%, p = 0.003, respectively). The
high-expression of C5aR group had more frequently distant metastasis than
the low-expression of C5aR group during the follow-up time, presenting
itself mainly in liver metastasis and peritoneal dissemination (p = 0.020
and p = 0.026). We found that the gastric cancer cell lines MKN1 and MKN7
had the high-expression of C5aR with western blotting in vitro. Moreover,
matrigel chamber assay revealed that 10 nM of recombinant C5a enhances
cell invasiveness of MKN1 by 2.55-fold and the cell invasiveness of MKN7
by 2.90-fold, but such an enhancement by C5a was not observed in control
cells.Conclusions: The gastric cancer patients with a high expression of
C5aR were associated with poor prognosis, and the invasive ability of
gastric cancer cell lines highly expressing of C5aR were promoted by C5a.
Thus, targeting this C5a-C5aR axis might provide a useful therapeutic
option for gastric cancer treatment.

