Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGF induces epithelial to mesenchymal transition and cancer
stem-like cell properties in human head and neck cancer cells via
promoting Warburg Effect


Head and neck cancer is one of the 10 most common cancers worldwide.
Over-expression of EGFR has been demonstrated in approximately 90% of
head and neck cancers, which is associated with progressive tumor growth,
metastasis, recurrence, and resistance to chemo- and radiation therapies.
Recurrent tumors are often therapy-resistant and may have their origin in
resistant cancer stem cells (CSCs) and/or in tumor cells with an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype. Recently it is
increasingly accepted that metabolic changes in cancer cells can drive
tumor formation and progression.In our study, we used 20ng/ml EGF to
treat human tongue cancer cell line, SCC-1 cells. Our results
demonstrated that EGF induces EMT in oral SCC cells as characterized by a
downregulation of E-cadherin (an epithelial marker), an upregulation of
vimentin (a mesenchymal marker), increased invasive and metastatic
capacities, and acquisition of stem-like properties such as the increased
expression of ALDH1 and enrichment of CD44+/CD24 proportion of cancer
cells. We also found that EGF treatment concomitantly enhanced L-lactate
production and blocking glycolysis by 2-DG robustly reversed EGF-induced
EMT and CSC-like phenotypes of OSCC cells. Then we further demonstrated
that EGF regulates glycolysis/EMT/CSCs axis through downstream EGFR/PI3K
signaling pathways in an EGFR/PI3K-dependent but AKT-independent manner.
Importantly, we showed that in vivo treatment with 2-DG remarkably
reduced the expression of ALDH1 and vimentin at both the in situ tumors
and regional lymph nodes.Taken together, these findings have demonstrated
that EGF drives tumor growth and metastasis through induction of EMT and
CSC generation, which is orchestrated by an enhanced glycolytic metabolic
program in OSCC cells. This work was supported by National Institute of
Health Research Grant, R01DE 019932, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Foundation (OMSF) Research Grant, and the Schoenleber funding support

