Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A sensitive immunohistochemistry method for in vivo autophagy
biomarker detection and pharmacodynamic studies


Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a powerful tool for studying
pharmacodynamic biomarkers in tissue samples. However, IHC using standard
methodologies to monitor autophagy has met with limited success due to
the technical difficulties involved in detecting transient and low
abundance autophagy markers. To address this issue, we have applied a
highly sensitive IHC method using a tyramide-based signal amplification
system to detect autophagy pathway proteins in paraffin sections of human
tumor cell line and xenograft tissues. We were able to detect basal
levels of punctate staining LC3B and NBR1 on both HCT116 and Calu-6
xenograft tumors using the tyramide-based signal amplification method
whereas standard IHC showed little to no specific staining. Consistent
with in vitro observations, lipidated LC3B, as detected by puncta
formation, was elevated following autophagy induction using mTOR
inhibitor treatment, and decreased following ATG7 knockout or knock down
in both cell lines and xenograft tumors. As a result of autophagy pathway
interruption following ATG7 inhibition, accumulation of the adapter
proteins NBR1 and p62 was also detected. Our data demonstrate the
feasibility of using high sensitivity IHC assays to reliably measure low
abundant autophagy markers in xenograft tissues and may aid the
exploration of autophagy regulation in cancer development.

