Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptidylarginine deiminase 2 as a novel therapeutic target for
breast cancer


Peptidylarginine deiminases (PADIs) enzymes are calcium-dependent enzymes
that post-translationally convert positively charged protein arginine
residues to a neutrally charged citrulline in a process known as
citrullination or deimination. This loss of charge can alter the tertiary
structure of proteins and affect protein-protein and protein-DNA
interactions. We, and others, have found that PADI-mediated histone tail
citrullination alters chromatin structure and regulates gene expression.
For example, we found that PADI2 interacts with estrogen receptor (ER)
and that PADI2-mediated citrullination of histone H3 arginine 26 residues
at ER binding sites regulates target gene expression. In addition, we
also found that PADI2 is often co-expressed with HER2 in both breast
cancer cell lines and in tumor tissue. Our molecular studies suggest that
PADI2 activates HER2 expression via histone citrullination at the HER2
gene locus and that HER2 signaling appears to induce PADI2 expression,
thus potentially forming an oncogenic positive feedback loop with HER2.
These findings suggest an important role for PADI2 in breast cancer
progression. This prediction is supported by our finding that PADI2
expression is upregulated in cancer cells and that depletion of PADI2
from breast cancer cells results in reduced tumorigenicity. In addition,
we found that transgenic overexpression of PADI2 promotes carcinogenesis
and that the PADI inhibitor, Cl-Amidine, slows tumor growth in mouse
models of breast cancer. Furthermore, we found that Cl-Amidine also
maintains basement membrane integrity in xenograft tumors, preventing
initiation of metastasis. Together, these findings suggest that PADI2
represents a novel therapeutic target and biomarker for early stage
breast cancer.

