Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The hypoxia-activated EGFR-TKI TH-4000 overcomes
erlotinib-resistance in preclinical NSCLC models at plasma levels
achieved in a Phase 1 clinical trial


Clinical data indicate that mutant EGFR NSCLC is often heterozygous (PLoS
ONE 2013; 8: e54170; PLoS ONE 2009; 4: e7464) and the presence of wild
type (WT) EGFR allele is associated with limited response to
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy (Cancer Sci 2008; 99:929).
Tumor hypoxia upregulates WT EGFR protein and its cognate ligand TGF via
several HIF-dependent mechanisms (reviewed in: Curr Pharm Des 2013;
19:907). NSCLC is known to be a hypoxic tumor, and thus hyperactivation
of WT EGFR may be an important cause of resistance to EGFR-TKI therapy.
TH-4000 (formerly called PR610) is a clinical-stage hypoxia-activated
prodrug that releases an irreversible EGFR-TKI under hypoxic conditions
and may overcome resistance to conventional TKI therapy. We tested this
hypothesis using the heterozygous WT/19 EGFR PC9 tumor model and found it
to be resistant to clinically relevant doses of the EGFR-TKI erlotinib;
100% of tumors progressed during treatment with human matched plasma PK
exposures of erlotinib. In contrast, the homozygous 19 mutant EGFR tumor
HCC827 was readily controlled by erlotinib (100% tumor regression).
TH-4000 (15 mg/kg) produced 100% tumor regressions in both models. In
vitro, PC9 cells exposed to hypoxia had elevated EGFR protein and were
more resistant to erlotinib as measured by EGFR phosphorylation. In nude
mice, single-dose administration of 15 mg/kg TH-4000 achieved a plasma
AUC equivalent to 32 mg/m2 in human subjects, one-fifth of the maximum
tolerated dose (MTD) defined in the Phase 1 trial (MTD = 150 mg/m2/week;
NCT01631279). A single dose of TH-4000 (15 mg/kg) cleared rapidly from
mouse plasma (T = 0.37 h) but had durable residency in PC9 tumors (T = 39
h), releasing TKI above efficacious levels for 7 days (T = 84 h).
Consistent with these PK properties, tumor shutdown of EGFR signalling
was durable, with no recovery by day 7. To confirm the mechanism of
action, TH-4000 was shown to be metabolized efficiently under hypoxia
using a panel of human NSCLC cell lines (rate of TKI release 0.4-2.1
nmol/hr/106 cells), a process that was inhibited by oxygen (TKI release
80% (538 vs 99 nmol/kg; p 80% (538 vs 99 nmol/kg; p <0.01) compared to
air breathing controls. Collectively, these data further validate that
TH-4000 is a hypoxia-activated irreversible EGFR-TKI, and show that
TH-4000 has greater activity compared with erlotinib in a heterozygous
xenograft model of mutant EGFR NSCLC. Thus, TH-4000 may overcome
hypoxia-induced resistance to erlotinib at plasma exposures readily
achieved in human subjects.

