Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endoxifen inhibits polyamine biosynthetic enzyme activity and
up-regulates metabolizing enzymes, spermine oxidase (SMO) and acetyl
spermine oxidase (APAO)in breast cancer


Tamoxifen is the most widely used selective estrogen receptor modulator
for anti-estrogen therapy for women with estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha)-positive breast cancer. Clinical trials recognized that
tamoxifen was a pro-drug and got converted to active metabolites in the
human body. Earlier studies recognized 4-hydroxytamoxifen as the active
metabolite of tamoxifen, although recent studies showed that the
concentration of another metabolite, endoxifen was up to 10-fold higher
than that of 4-hydorxytamoxifen in patients treated with tamoxifen. These
metabolites are formed by the action of cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6). To
elucidate the mechanism of action of endoxifen, we determined its effects
on cell growth, activity of polyamine biosynthetic and metabolizing
enzymes, and oncogene expression in ERalpha-positive MCF-7 breast cancer
cells. Polyamines (putrescine, spermidine and spermine) are ubiquitous
cellular components and play important roles in cell proliferation.
Estradiol (4 nM) increased the proliferation of MCF-7 cells by 2- to
3-fold by 3 days of treatment. Endoxifen significantly suppressed the
effects of estradiol at 100 nM and higher concentrations (P Tamoxifen is
the most widely used selective estrogen receptor modulator for
anti-estrogen therapy for women with estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha)-positive breast cancer. Clinical trials recognized that
tamoxifen was a pro-drug and got converted to active metabolites in the
human body. Earlier studies recognized 4-hydroxytamoxifen as the active
metabolite of tamoxifen, although recent studies showed that the
concentration of another metabolite, endoxifen was up to 10-fold higher
than that of 4-hydorxytamoxifen in patients treated with tamoxifen. These
metabolites are formed by the action of cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6). To
elucidate the mechanism of action of endoxifen, we determined its effects
on cell growth, activity of polyamine biosynthetic and metabolizing
enzymes, and oncogene expression in ERalpha-positive MCF-7 breast cancer
cells. Polyamines (putrescine, spermidine and spermine) are ubiquitous
cellular components and play important roles in cell proliferation.
Estradiol (4 nM) increased the proliferation of MCF-7 cells by 2- to
3-fold by 3 days of treatment. Endoxifen significantly suppressed the
effects of estradiol at 100 nM and higher concentrations (P < 0.01; n =
3). Estradiol increased the activity of the polyamine biosynthetic
enzymes, ornithine decarboxlase (ODC) and S-adenosylmethionine
decarboxlase (AdoMetDC), whereas endoxifen suppressed ODC and AdoMetDC
activities in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. The change in
biosynthetic enzyme activities was reflected in polyamine pools, as
estradiol increased and endoxifen suppressed the levels of putrescine and
spermidine in MCF-7 cells. There was no significant change in spermine
level. Endoxifen had a significant effect on increasing the activities of
two polyamine metabolizing enzymes, SMO and APAO. Estradiol suppressed
the activities of SMO and APAO by 40% compared to control group at 24
hours of treatment. Endoxifen increased SMO and APAO activities by 2- to
4-fold compared to the activities of these enzymes in estradiol treated
group. The expression of c-myc, c-fos and Tiff1 genes was significantly
increased by 4 nM estradiol, while the addition of endoxifen suppressed
estradiol-mediated increase in gene expression, as measured by
quantitative real-time PCR analysis. These results indicate that the
polyamine pathway plays an important role in the growth inhibitory and
anti-estrogenic effects of endoxifen in breast cancer cells. Upregulation
of SMO and APAO might be useful biomarkers for the action of endoxifen.

