Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel combination treatment with 13-cis-retinoic acid and
tolfenamic acid induces anti-proliferative response in high-risk
neuroblastoma cells


High-risk neuroblastoma (HRNB) is an aggressive extra-cranial solid tumor
of childhood. 13-cis-retinoic acid (RA) is commonly used in adjuvant
therapy and helpful in reducing the reoccurrence of this malignancy. Due
to the very poor prognosis, there is an urgent need to establish more
effective strategies for treating NB. In this study we evaluated the
effect of the small molecule Tolfenamic Acid (TA) for enhancing the
anti-proliferative effect of RA in NB cells, LA1-55n and SH-SY5Y. TA is
known to induce degradation of Specificity protein1 (Sp1) transcription
factor which regulates several genes associated with cell proliferation
and cell cycle. After testing the dose/time-dependent response of
individual agents, the optimized doses were used for the combination
experiments. LA1-55n and SH-SY5Y cells were treated with TA (30 uM) or RA
(20 uM) or both for 48 hour and tested to assess the effect on cell
growth, apoptosis and selected molecular markers including Sp1, survivin,
AKT and ERK1/2. Cell viability and caspase activity were measured with
Cell TiterGlo and Caspase Glo kits. The apoptotic cell population was
determined by flow cytometry using Annexin-V staining. The expression of
Sp1, survivin, AKT, ERK1/2 and c-PARP were evaluated by western blot
analysis. Combination treatment with TA and RA caused significant
inhibition of cell viability (p High-risk neuroblastoma (HRNB) is an
aggressive extra-cranial solid tumor of childhood. 13-cis-retinoic acid
(RA) is commonly used in adjuvant therapy and helpful in reducing the
reoccurrence of this malignancy. Due to the very poor prognosis, there is
an urgent need to establish more effective strategies for treating NB. In
this study we evaluated the effect of the small molecule Tolfenamic Acid
(TA) for enhancing the anti-proliferative effect of RA in NB cells,
LA1-55n and SH-SY5Y. TA is known to induce degradation of Specificity
protein1 (Sp1) transcription factor which regulates several genes
associated with cell proliferation and cell cycle. After testing the
dose/time-dependent response of individual agents, the optimized doses
were used for the combination experiments. LA1-55n and SH-SY5Y cells were
treated with TA (30 uM) or RA (20 uM) or both for 48 hour and tested to
assess the effect on cell growth, apoptosis and selected molecular
markers including Sp1, survivin, AKT and ERK1/2. Cell viability and
caspase activity were measured with Cell TiterGlo and Caspase Glo kits.
The apoptotic cell population was determined by flow cytometry using
Annexin-V staining. The expression of Sp1, survivin, AKT, ERK1/2 and
c-PARP were evaluated by western blot analysis. Combination treatment
with TA and RA caused significant inhibition of cell viability (p <0.001)
causing an anti-proliferative response in a time/dose-dependent manner.
This anti-proliferative effect is accompanied by a decline in Sp1 and
survivin expression. Furthermore, TA and RA combination treatment
resulted in a significant increase in apoptotic (Annexin-V positive)
cells, caspase 3/7 activation (p High-risk neuroblastoma (HRNB) is an
aggressive extra-cranial solid tumor of childhood. 13-cis-retinoic acid
(RA) is commonly used in adjuvant therapy and helpful in reducing the
reoccurrence of this malignancy. Due to the very poor prognosis, there is
an urgent need to establish more effective strategies for treating NB. In
this study we evaluated the effect of the small molecule Tolfenamic Acid
(TA) for enhancing the anti-proliferative effect of RA in NB cells,
LA1-55n and SH-SY5Y. TA is known to induce degradation of Specificity
protein1 (Sp1) transcription factor which regulates several genes
associated with cell proliferation and cell cycle. After testing the
dose/time-dependent response of individual agents, the optimized doses
were used for the combination experiments. LA1-55n and SH-SY5Y cells were
treated with TA (30 uM) or RA (20 uM) or both for 48 hour and tested to
assess the effect on cell growth, apoptosis and selected molecular
markers including Sp1, survivin, AKT and ERK1/2. Cell viability and
caspase activity were measured with Cell TiterGlo and Caspase Glo kits.
The apoptotic cell population was determined by flow cytometry using
Annexin-V staining. The expression of Sp1, survivin, AKT, ERK1/2 and
c-PARP were evaluated by western blot analysis. Combination treatment
with TA and RA caused significant inhibition of cell viability (p <0.001)
causing an anti-proliferative response in a time/dose-dependent manner.
This anti-proliferative effect is accompanied by a decline in Sp1 and
survivin expression. Furthermore, TA and RA combination treatment
resulted in a significant increase in apoptotic (Annexin-V positive)
cells, caspase 3/7 activation (p <0.001) and c-PARP levels. Notably, our
results also revealed that TA and RA combination treatment caused down
regulation of AKT and ERK1/2 suggesting a distinct impact on survival and
proliferation pathways. Even though the individual agents also showed
anti-proliferative response, the combination of both agents effect was
significantly higher. TA and RA combination treatment-induced cell growth
inhibition was 40-50% more when compared to TA alone and almost doubled
as compared to RA alone. These results indicate that combination
treatment was highly effective and exhibited anti-cancer activity at
doses lower than known physiological concentrations of individual drugs.
Together, this study marks the importance for the development of a novel
strategy involving TA and RA combination for the effective treatment of
high-risk neuroblastoma in children.

