Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of orally bioavailable formulation of WP1066 and its
evaluation in vivo


Background: Our drug discovery program has led to the development of a
series of diverse, unique small molecule drugs targeting the key
oncogenic transcription factor STAT3 which drives diverse human cancers.
WP1066 was selected as a lead drug because of its drug-like properties,
therapeutic window and validated in vivo activity in a broad range of
tumor models. During the process of WP1066 development as a clinical
phase new agent, we developed and further characterized an orally
bioavailable formulation of WP1066 using a spray dried oral
formulation.Methods: The spray dried formulation of WP1066 (SDD1) was
prepared using Hypermellose acetate succinate (HPMCAS) as an enteric
coating film. HPMCAS is a mixture of acetic and monosuccinic acid esters
of hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose. While insoluble in gastric fluids, the
SDD1 formulation swells and leads to rapid dissolution in the higher pH
found in upper small intestine, and subsequent release of the drug. For
theses studies SDD1 was characterized for size, stability and
purity.Single and multiple-dose toxicity studies were done in female CD-1
mice, using 5% dextrose as a vehicle. Single dose PK and organ
distribution analysis was performed after oral gavage administration of
200 mg/kg after 12 hour fasting. Animals were sacrifice at different
time-points (2 min to 24 hours). Plasma, brain and pancreas were isolated
and the apparent concentration of WP1066 was determined using HPLC/MS/MS
analysis. For multi-dose PK analysis, animals were fasted for six hours,
dosed with SDD1 at 200 mg/kg. Animals were euthanized at different time
intervals after the second dose (given six hours after first
dose).Results: Mice dosed with SDD1 did not show any apparent toxicity
when administered up to 200 mg/kg. For multiple doses, mice received 50,
100 or 200 mg/kg of WP1066 in SDD1 every day for 28 days. No apparent
toxicity or significant weight lost was observed. In a similar way,
animals dosed twice a day with 200 mg/kg of WP1066 (SDD1) for 15 doses
did not show any symptoms of toxicity. Pilot PK analysis confirmed
dose-dependent absorption of WP1066. Single-dose PK analysis revealed
rapid GI absorption with a TMAX = 45 min and CMAX in plasma 1.5 g/ml
(which corresponds to 4 M). The estimated half-life was approximately 3
hrs. Similar parameters were obtained from PK analysis performed in
canines. SDD1 dosing led to significant accumulation of WP1066 in intact
brain and pancreatic tissues in mice. These results support further
preclinical development of SDD1 formulated WP1066 aimed the initiation of
clinical studies in pancreatic, brain cancer and melanoma metastasis to
brain patients.Acknowledgment: These studies were supported in part by
the grants: Brain SPORE (2 P50 CA127001), Melanoma SPORE (2 P50
CA093459); Viragh Foundation, Houston Pharmaceuticals.

