Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The new and rapid technique of detecting breast cancer cells using
new fluorescent probe gGlu-HMRG and its clinical application


MethodAfter spraying with gGlu-HMRG reagent to the samples, we took
images within 5 minutes and analyzed the fluorescence intensity of them.
Comparing the changes of fluorescence intensity and pathological
evaluations, we examined how this fluorescent method could reflect the
pathological status in resected breast tissues (n = 108 from 36 cases),
margins of breast conserving surgery specimens (n = 7 from 5 cases) and
axillary lymph nodes (n = 149 from 38 cases).Result1. The sensitivity and
specificity were 92% and 94% respectively for binary classification
(normal / abnormal) of various breast tissues.2. We could detect all
malignant lesions in the surface of surgical margins of breast conserving
surgery specimens. Additionally, we could detect large tumor-free lesions
as fluorescent negative regions.3. The sensitivity and specificity were
97% and 79% respectively for diagnosing metastatic and non-metastatic
axillary lymph nodes.Discussion and conclusionIt was well feasible to
distinguish breast tumor tissues from normal surrounding tissues by this
new method. Since it is simple and non-tissue-destructive, it could be
readily adopted in the clinical setting. We anticipate that it will
reduce costs and the burden on histopathology services in the
intraoperative pathological diagnosis of breast conserving surgery and
sentinel lymph node biopsy. This technical innovation enable us to
visualize tumor cells in the body intraoperatively and evolve the cancer
surgery that needs the complete resection of cancer cells.*1 Urano, Y. et
al. Rapid cancer detection by topically spraying a
-glutamyltranspeptidase-activated fluorescent probe. Sci. Trans. Med. 3,
110ra119 (2011).

