Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal microenvironment modulates mitochondrial metabolism in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells and is abrogated by PI3K and inhibition


Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) is characterized by the accumulation
of replicationally quiescent mature B cells, as they fail to undergo
apoptosis. Supporting stromal cells in the microenvironment provide
survival advantage to CLL cells. We hypothesized that stromal cells may
have an active role in energy metabolism of malignant B-cells in order to
cope with their energy demands and is driven by PI3K pathway. We assessed
the two major energy generating pathways (glycolysis and mitochondrial
Oxidative Phosphorylation (OXPHOS)), in primary CLL cells using
Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience), in presence of three
different stromal cell lines. Glycolysis measured as ECAR did not show
stroma-induced increase, which is commonly upregulated in most cancers. A
decrease in glucose uptake in coculture experiments, further suggested
that glycolysis was not upregulated in CLL cells (n = 7, pChronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) is characterized by the accumulation of
replicationally quiescent mature B cells, as they fail to undergo
apoptosis. Supporting stromal cells in the microenvironment provide
survival advantage to CLL cells. We hypothesized that stromal cells may
have an active role in energy metabolism of malignant B-cells in order to
cope with their energy demands and is driven by PI3K pathway. We assessed
the two major energy generating pathways (glycolysis and mitochondrial
Oxidative Phosphorylation (OXPHOS)), in primary CLL cells using
Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience), in presence of three
different stromal cell lines. Glycolysis measured as ECAR did not show
stroma-induced increase, which is commonly upregulated in most cancers. A
decrease in glucose uptake in coculture experiments, further suggested
that glycolysis was not upregulated in CLL cells (n = 7, p<0.01).
Surprisingly, OXPHOS measured as OCR in CLL cells from 29 patients showed
a statistically significant increase, (pChronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
(CLL) is characterized by the accumulation of replicationally quiescent
mature B cells, as they fail to undergo apoptosis. Supporting stromal
cells in the microenvironment provide survival advantage to CLL cells. We
hypothesized that stromal cells may have an active role in energy
metabolism of malignant B-cells in order to cope with their energy
demands and is driven by PI3K pathway. We assessed the two major energy
generating pathways (glycolysis and mitochondrial Oxidative
Phosphorylation (OXPHOS)), in primary CLL cells using Extracellular Flux
Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience), in presence of three different stromal
cell lines. Glycolysis measured as ECAR did not show stroma-induced
increase, which is commonly upregulated in most cancers. A decrease in
glucose uptake in coculture experiments, further suggested that
glycolysis was not upregulated in CLL cells (n = 7, p<0.01).
Surprisingly, OXPHOS measured as OCR in CLL cells from 29 patients showed
a statistically significant increase, (p<0.01) upon coculture and contact
with NK-Tert stromal cells. Similar OCR induction was observed in
presence of M2-10B4 and HS-5 stromal cell lines. However, no significant
changes were observed in mitochondrial mass, membrane potential and ROS,
upon co-culture. All four ribonucleotide triphosphate pools (ATP, CTP,
GTP, and UTP), showed a 2-fold and statistically significant increase
after interacting with stroma cell line for 48hr. Changes in metabolomics
and NTP pools were not due to cell growth as stroma cocultures did not
impact proliferation index (Ki-67 staining) of CLL cells. In parallel to
these changes in metabolomics, stromal microenvironment increased AKT
phosphorylation at Thr308 and Ser473 indicating upregulation of PI3K
pathway. Consistently, inhibition of PI3K axis by IPI-145 (duvelisib), a
PI3K and inhibitor, currently in phase III trials for CLL, decreased
phospho-AKT in CLL samples (n = 6) and dramatically reduced OCR (n = 7)
and ECAR in CLL cells in suspension cultures without causing
cytotoxicity. Importantly, stroma-mediated increase in OCR in CLL cells
was significantly compromised by IPI-145 treatment (n = 5; pChronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) is characterized by the accumulation of
replicationally quiescent mature B cells, as they fail to undergo
apoptosis. Supporting stromal cells in the microenvironment provide
survival advantage to CLL cells. We hypothesized that stromal cells may
have an active role in energy metabolism of malignant B-cells in order to
cope with their energy demands and is driven by PI3K pathway. We assessed
the two major energy generating pathways (glycolysis and mitochondrial
Oxidative Phosphorylation (OXPHOS)), in primary CLL cells using
Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience), in presence of three
different stromal cell lines. Glycolysis measured as ECAR did not show
stroma-induced increase, which is commonly upregulated in most cancers. A
decrease in glucose uptake in coculture experiments, further suggested
that glycolysis was not upregulated in CLL cells (n = 7, p<0.01).
Surprisingly, OXPHOS measured as OCR in CLL cells from 29 patients showed
a statistically significant increase, (p<0.01) upon coculture and contact
with NK-Tert stromal cells. Similar OCR induction was observed in
presence of M2-10B4 and HS-5 stromal cell lines. However, no significant
changes were observed in mitochondrial mass, membrane potential and ROS,
upon co-culture. All four ribonucleotide triphosphate pools (ATP, CTP,
GTP, and UTP), showed a 2-fold and statistically significant increase
after interacting with stroma cell line for 48hr. Changes in metabolomics
and NTP pools were not due to cell growth as stroma cocultures did not
impact proliferation index (Ki-67 staining) of CLL cells. In parallel to
these changes in metabolomics, stromal microenvironment increased AKT
phosphorylation at Thr308 and Ser473 indicating upregulation of PI3K
pathway. Consistently, inhibition of PI3K axis by IPI-145 (duvelisib), a
PI3K and inhibitor, currently in phase III trials for CLL, decreased
phospho-AKT in CLL samples (n = 6) and dramatically reduced OCR (n = 7)
and ECAR in CLL cells in suspension cultures without causing
cytotoxicity. Importantly, stroma-mediated increase in OCR in CLL cells
was significantly compromised by IPI-145 treatment (n = 5; p<0.05). In
parallel, stroma-driven AKT phosphorylation in CLL samples (n = 6) was
also reduced with IPI-145. Preliminary data also indicates a decline in
NTP pools, upon drug treatment. Collectively, these data suggest that
stroma impacts metabolomics in quiescent CLL cells which is in part
driven by PI3K/AKT pathway.

