Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating immune/inflammation markers in Chinese workers
occupationally exposed to formaldehyde


Background: Formaldehyde has been proposed to be a human myeloid
leukemogen. However, the exact mechanism for the basis for this link is
still debated. We aimed to evaluate whether circulating
immune/inflammation markers were different in workers occupationally
exposed to formaldehyde.Methods: Using a multiplexed bead-based assay, we
measured serum levels of 38 immune/inflammation markers in a
cross-sectional study of 43 formaldehyde-exposed and 51 unexposed factory
workers in Guangdong, China. Linear regression models adjusting for
potential confounders were used to compare marker levels in exposed and
unexposed workers.Results: We found significantly lower circulating
levels of four markers among exposed factory workers compared to
unexposed controls that remained significant after adjusting for multiple
comparisons, including thymus and activation regulated chemokine
(TARC;52pg/ml in exposed versus 75pg/ml in controls,P = 0.0015),
TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL;11.7pg/ml in exposed versus
22.1pg/ml in controls,P = 0.011), C-reactive protein (CRP;797.3ng/ml in
exposed versus 3269.1ng/ml in controls,P = 0.013) and chemokine (C-X-C
motif) ligand 11 (CXCL11;36.2pg/ml in exposed versus 48.4pg/ml in
controls,P = 0.017), suggesting immunosuppression among
formaldehyde-exposed workers.Conclusions: Our findings are consistent
with recently emerging understanding that immunosuppression might be
associated with myeloid diseases. These findings, if replicated in a
larger study, may provide insights into the mechanism by which
formaldehyde promotes leukemogenesis.

