Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced anti-tumor activity of an Auristatin-based antibody-drug
conjugate in combination with PI3K/mTOR inhibitors or taxanes:
Translational implications and mechanistic insights


Targeted treatment with antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) can lead to
dramatic regressions of solid tumors; combination therapies with the ADCs
that could potentially help achieve long-term disease control remain
largely unexplored. The aim of the study is to investigate most promising
combination regimens of auristatin-based conjugates in preclinical models
of cancer.A tool ADC, an auristatin-based anti-5T4 antibody conjugate
(5T4-ADC) and permeable auristatin analogs were combined with dual
PI3K/mTOR catalytic site inhibitor PF-05212384 (PF-384) or taxanes in a
panel of common cancer cell lines of breast, lung or ovarian origin. Drug
combinations were tested for their effects in vitro on cell viability,
apoptosis, cell cycle or modulation of PI3K/mTOR pathway markers.
Anti-tumor efficacy of selected combinations was also evaluated in a
5T4-positive human breast or lung tumor xenografts in vivo.Remarkably,
ADC and auristatin analogs resulted in synergistic or additive effects on
cell cytotoxicity when combined with PF-384 or with taxanes in vitro.
ADC/PF-384, auristatin/PF-384 and ADC/Paclitaxel (PTX), auristatin/PTX
combinations showed enhanced induction of apoptosis and selective
attenuation of the downstream phospho-markers of the PI3K/mTOR pathway.
Quantitative proteomic analysis of cells treated with auristatin-based
agents and PF-384 alone or in combination revealed novel and unique
effects on key components of mRNA translation, including translation
initiation or elongation factors. In human lung or breast cancer
xenograft models, dual targeting with 5T4-ADC/PF-384 or 5T4-ADC/PTX
produced substantially greater antitumor effects with longer average
survival as compared to monotherapy treatments.Our results provide strong
rationale for combining 5T4-ADC with PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors or
taxanes. New biological insights into molecular mechanisms underlying
synergistic effects of ADC - drug combinations suggest/reveal that
synergies are mediated by payload's mode of action. These findings can be
applicable to several ADCs employing microtubule inhibitors that are
undergoing clinical evaluation.

