Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in non-small cell lung
cancer with a T-type Ca2+ channels inhibitor


This study's aim was to define a novel molecular target and to develop an
effective agent capable of overcoming intrinsic and acquired resistance
to anti-EGFR therapy. Despite introduction of new therapies, lung cancer
is a major cause of cancer death. One of its characteristics is the
expression and activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).
Activating mutations in EGFR are present in approximately 20% of patients
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), mostly in never-smokers. While
most patients initially respond to treatment with anti-EGFR therapy,
essentially all patients develop acquired drug resistance. T-type calcium
channels, are present in lung cancer and support cell proliferation.
Importantly, their expression often coincides with abnormal expression or
mutations in EGFR. In this study, we investigated the effects of T-type
channel inhibition on NSCLC survival and resistance to targeted therapy
in vitro. We used a panel of cell lines differing in EGFR mutation status
and sensitivity to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Our results
show that T-type channel inhibitors alone arrest cells in the G1/G0 phase
of the cell cycle and induce cell death. The treatment reduces activity
of both PI3K/AKT/mTOR and JAK2/STAT5 pathways, often upregulated as a
mechanism of acquired resistance to TKIs. Importantly, combined treatment
with TKI, gefitinib, and T-type channels inhibitor, mibefradil, resulted
in synergistic growth inhibition. Our results demonstrate a connection
between T-type Ca2+ channels and aberrant EGFR activity in NSCLC, and
provide the rationale for future use of two targeted therapies together.
Since T-type calcium channel inhibitors are already undergoing clinical
trials, our discoveries could be quickly translated into clinical
practice.

