Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: lincRNA-UFC1 facilitates cell proliferation and tumor growth in
hepatocellular carcinoma by upregulating HuR/-catenin expression


BACKGROUND & AIMS: Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been identified as
novel regulators of biologic behaviors in various cancers. However, the
oncogenic mechanisms of lincRNA-UFC1 associated with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) growth and progression are still unknown. Here, we delved
into the mechanistic aspects of lincRNA-UFC1in HCC progression.METHODS:
LncRNA expression profiles are assessed by microarray analysis.
Expression of lincRNA-UFC1 was examined in 2 HCC cohorts (cohort 1, n =
49; cohort 2, n = 131) by quantitative real-time PCR or by in situ
hybridization. The functions of lincRNA-UFC1 in HCC cells were elucidated
by in vitro and in vivo gain- and loss-of-function experiments. The
mechanism by which lincRNA-UFC1 contributes to HCC progression was
explored through luciferase reporter assays, RNA immunoprecipitation and
RNA pull-down assays.RESULTS: LincRNA-UFC1 was strongly upregulated in
HCC tissues, compared with corresponding non-tumor tissues in patients
from 2 cohorts. LincRNA-UFC1 expression is associated with tumor size,
Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) stage and poor prognosis. Enhanced
lincRNA-UFC1 expression promotes cell proliferation and tumor growth,
inhibits apoptosis, and induces cell cycle progression, whereas decreased
lincRNA-UFC1 expression represented the opposite effects. Furthermore,
lincRNA-UFC1 directly interacts with HuR and regulates -catenin
expression. The level of lincRNA-UFC1 is positively correlated with that
of -catenin in HCC tissues.CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that
lincRNA-UFC1 promotes HCC development and progression, indicating its
role as a potential therapeutic target for HCC.

