Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of a radiation inducible tax-interaction protein 1 (Tip
1) as a novel molecule for cancer treatment


Ionizing radiation (IR) can achieve cell killing and elicit phenotype
changes in tumor cells resulting in molecules being expressed on the
surface of cells. These molecules can be exploited as targets for tumor
imaging and therapy without side effects. We observed Tip1 to be an IR
inducible protein (1). Here we report that several clones of anti Tip 1
monoclonal antibodies have been developed and characterized. These
antibodies can be used to deliver anti-tumor drugs or radio-isotopes to
cancer for Bio-Therapy.Recombinant human Tip 1 produced and used as
antigen for McAb production. An IgG2b anti-Tip 1 antibody, 2C6F3, has
been characterized and chosen for further studies. Data indicated this
McAb had high specificity and affinity to Tip 1. It recognizes a 14 kDa
protein corresponding to Tip 1 protein by W-B.Tip1 expression increased
at 8 and 24 hours after IR treatment in a panel of tumor cell lysate of
LLC, D54, A549, PC-3 and GL261. Further, IR increased Tip 1 expression on
cultured tumor cell surface. This antibody binds to a panel of tumor cell
lines of LLC, D54, A549 and H460 as determined by flow cytometry. A549
cells showed approximately 4 fold increases in Tip1 surface expression
and 2 fold increases in D54 cells. The level of Tip1 expressed on H460
cells surface increased 24 hours after irradiation and is dose dependent
with 2Gy, 4Gy and up to 8Gy compared with sham treatment (1).Purified
monoclonal antibody was conjugated to AF750 and injected intravenously
into LLC and GL261 tumor bearing nude mice exposed to either 3Gy x 3 or
sham 0Gy treatment. The signal of labeled antibody bound to irradiate
tumor was measured and the intensity increased after 24 hours and the
signal duration is at least one week. 0Gy sham treated tumor had minor
tumor binding and diminished within 24 - 48 hours. The control normal
mouse IgG showed no tumor binding over entire course of imaging. IHC data
showed that the antibody bound to tumor cells and vasculature in human
tumor mouse model.Conjugating the antibody to radio-isotope of 64Cu,
111In, 90Y, 125I was effective for in vivo imaging. The labeling
specificity and efficiency was evaluated by ELISA and thin layer
chromatography. The radio-isotope conjugated antibody was injected into
GL261and LLC tumor bearing mice model for in vivo distribution and micro
PET/CT or nano- CT/SPECT imaging. We found that this antibody bound to
3Gy treated GL261 tumors while 0Gy had minimal binding. SPECT imaging
showed enhanced tumor binding of 111In and 125I labeled Ab on irradiated
LLC tumor in C57/BL at 48 hours. The distribution data reveled high
binding of 111In - Ab after 24 -48 hours post irradiation. Also, a dose
dependent assay was performed with 90Y conjugated antibody and the data
showed 300Ci of labeled 2C6F3 had higher binding on A549 tumor bearing
mice model. *Corresponding Author

