Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recognition of tumor cells by Dectin-1 orchestrates innate immune
cells for anti-tumor responses


The eradication of cancer cells requires communication between cells
which constitute the complex immune system. Natural killer (NK) cells are
essential tumor-killing effector cells of the innate arm of the immune
system; however, little is known about whether or how other immune cells
recognize tumor cells to assist NK cells. In addition, although
signal-transducing pattern recognition receptors are known to play
important roles in innate immune responses against invading pathogens
through recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), it
is still enigmatic whether and how these receptors contribute to
anti-tumor immune responses. In this study, we show that the innate
immune pattern recognition receptor Dectin-1 expressed on dendritic cells
(DCs) and macrophages is critical to NK-mediated killing of tumor cells.
We also show that tumor cell-mediated Dectin-1 signaling is instigated by
the receptor recognition of N-glycan structures on tumor cells, which we
term tumor-associated molecular patterns (TAMPs). As such, the
TAMP-Dectin-1 signaling causes activation of the Interferon Regulatory
Factor 5 (IRF5) transcription factor and subsequent induction of genes
required for the full-blown killing activity of NK cells. The importance
of these events is underscored by the observation of massive tumor
metastasis in mice genetically deficient in either Dectin-1 or IRF5.
Thus, these results reveal a hitherto unrecognized facet of pattern
recognition receptors in the orchestration of anti-tumor innate immune
responses; recognition of TAMPs. This study is the first demonstration
that an innate immune pattern recognition receptor potentiates anti-tumor
immune responses, offering new insight into anti-tumor activity of the
innate immune system with implications for anti-tumor immunotherapy.

