Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variation in genes involved in the immune response and prostate
cancer risk in the placebo arm of the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial


Background: We previously found that inflammation in benign prostate
tissue is associated with increased odds of prostate cancer especially
higher-grade disease. To understand this link, we evaluated the
association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in immune
response genes and prostate cancer risk in the placebo arm of the
Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT).Men were screened yearly and if
not diagnosed with prostate cancer during the trial, underwent an
end-of-study biopsy. Thus, in a subanalysis, we were able to study
associations in men with low PSA; i.e., men in whom bias due to any link
between inflammation and elevated PSA, an indication for biopsy, is
reduced.Methods:We genotyped 16 candidate SNPs in IL1b, IL2, IL4, IL6,
IL8, IL10, IL12(p40), IFNG, MSR1, RNASEL, TLR4, and TNFA and 7 tagSNPs in
IL10 in 881 prostate cancer cases and 848 controls negative for cancer on
an end-of-study biopsy. Cases and controls were non-Hispanic white and
frequency matched on age and family history. We classified cases as lower
(Gleason sum Background: We previously found that inflammation in benign
prostate tissue is associated with increased odds of prostate cancer
especially higher-grade disease. To understand this link, we evaluated
the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in immune
response genes and prostate cancer risk in the placebo arm of the
Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT).Men were screened yearly and if
not diagnosed with prostate cancer during the trial, underwent an
end-of-study biopsy. Thus, in a subanalysis, we were able to study
associations in men with low PSA; i.e., men in whom bias due to any link
between inflammation and elevated PSA, an indication for biopsy, is
reduced.Methods:We genotyped 16 candidate SNPs in IL1b, IL2, IL4, IL6,
IL8, IL10, IL12(p40), IFNG, MSR1, RNASEL, TLR4, and TNFA and 7 tagSNPs in
IL10 in 881 prostate cancer cases and 848 controls negative for cancer on
an end-of-study biopsy. Cases and controls were non-Hispanic white and
frequency matched on age and family history. We classified cases as lower
(Gleason sum <7; N = 674) and higher (7-10; N = 172) grade. We used
logistic regression to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) adjusting for age and family history.Results: The minor
allele (C) of rs3212227 in IL12(p40) was associated with an increased
risk of total (log additive: OR = 1.30, 95% CI 1.10-1.53; P-trend =
0.0017) and lower-grade (OR = 1.36, 95% CI 1.15-1.62; P-trend = 0.0004)
prostate cancer. The minor allele (A) of rs4073 in IL8 was possibly
associated with a decreased risk of higher-grade (OR = 0.81, 95% CI
0.64-1.02; P-trend = 0.07), but not total disease. None of the other
candidates was associated with risk. The minor alleles of IL10 tagSNPs
rs1800890 (A; OR = 0.87, 95% CI: 0.75-0.99; P-trend = 0.04) and rs3021094
(C; OR = 1.31, 95% CI 1.03-1.66, P-trend = 0.03) were associated with
prostate cancer risk; the latter also with lower- (P-trend = 0.04) and
possibly higher- (P-trend = 0.06) grade disease. These patterns were
generally similar among men with prostate specific antigen
(PSA)Background: We previously found that inflammation in benign prostate
tissue is associated with increased odds of prostate cancer especially
higher-grade disease. To understand this link, we evaluated the
association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in immune
response genes and prostate cancer risk in the placebo arm of the
Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT).Men were screened yearly and if
not diagnosed with prostate cancer during the trial, underwent an
end-of-study biopsy. Thus, in a subanalysis, we were able to study
associations in men with low PSA; i.e., men in whom bias due to any link
between inflammation and elevated PSA, an indication for biopsy, is
reduced.Methods:We genotyped 16 candidate SNPs in IL1b, IL2, IL4, IL6,
IL8, IL10, IL12(p40), IFNG, MSR1, RNASEL, TLR4, and TNFA and 7 tagSNPs in
IL10 in 881 prostate cancer cases and 848 controls negative for cancer on
an end-of-study biopsy. Cases and controls were non-Hispanic white and
frequency matched on age and family history. We classified cases as lower
(Gleason sum <7; N = 674) and higher (7-10; N = 172) grade. We used
logistic regression to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) adjusting for age and family history.Results: The minor
allele (C) of rs3212227 in IL12(p40) was associated with an increased
risk of total (log additive: OR = 1.30, 95% CI 1.10-1.53; P-trend =
0.0017) and lower-grade (OR = 1.36, 95% CI 1.15-1.62; P-trend = 0.0004)
prostate cancer. The minor allele (A) of rs4073 in IL8 was possibly
associated with a decreased risk of higher-grade (OR = 0.81, 95% CI
0.64-1.02; P-trend = 0.07), but not total disease. None of the other
candidates was associated with risk. The minor alleles of IL10 tagSNPs
rs1800890 (A; OR = 0.87, 95% CI: 0.75-0.99; P-trend = 0.04) and rs3021094
(C; OR = 1.31, 95% CI 1.03-1.66, P-trend = 0.03) were associated with
prostate cancer risk; the latter also with lower- (P-trend = 0.04) and
possibly higher- (P-trend = 0.06) grade disease. These patterns were
generally similar among men with prostate specific antigen (PSA)<2 ng/mL
at biopsy. Conclusion: Our study suggests that variation in some immune
response genes possibly may be associated with prostate cancer risk.
These associations were not fully explained by PSA-associated detection
bias as they remained in men with low PSA. Our findings provide some
support to inflammation's role in the etiology of prostate
cancer.Funding: P01 CA108964, U10 CA37429, UM1 CA182883, T32 CA009314. *A
SWOG-Coordinated Study S9217

