Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of p53/miR-34a tumor suppressor network by Chinese
herbal recipe JP-1 in human lung cancer cells


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the most common cancers
worldwide. In spite of the recent progress in targeted therapy, most of
the patients eventually expired due to the inevitable recurrence and drug
resistance. New integrated therapeutics with evidence based molecular
mechanism is urgently needed. MiR-34a, a direct target of p53, is a
well-characterized tumor suppressor miRNA in a variety of cancers. How to
restore the p53/miR-34a regulatory axis has becomes an important novel
strategy for cancer therapy. Here, we show that a Chinese herbal recipe
JP-1 activates p53/miR-34a tumor suppressor network in human NSCLC A549
cells (p53 wild type). Treatment of A549 cells with JP-1 extract (38%
ethanol) induced profound apoptosis accompanied with marked elevation of
p53 and its downstream p21 and Bax protein levels. Accordingly, increase
of miR-34a was also observed. Analyzing the miR-34a downstream targets in
JP-1-treated cells, we found the decrease of survival factors such as
Sirt1 and survivn. Nevertheless, JP-1 also decreased Axl, an important
invasion-related miR-34a downstream, while increased E-cadherin
expression. The JP-1-activated p53/miR-34a tumor suppressor network
coincided with mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis induction and EMT
(epithelial-mesenchymal transition) inhibition. In agreement with this,
JP-1 induced phospho-AMPK but inhibited phospho-AKT protein level. Our
results might interpret the clinical benefit observed in JP-1-treated
patients and suggest its potential as a complementary medicine for
NSCLC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

