Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the transcription factor ZNF217 in ER+ subset of
BC: A functional relationship with the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway


ZNF217 gene encodes for a Krppel-like finger protein transcription
factor. Here we report an amplification of ZNF217 gene in breast cancer
(BC) patients. Retrospective study of 72 BC patients showed that ZNF217
gene was amplified in 12.5% of patients enrolled in our center over last
ten months from February 2014 through November 2014. We found a similar
level of amplification of ZNF217 gene at 20q13 in different epithelial
cancers including lung, uterus, ovary, stomach, bladder and breast using
data from c-Bioportal. The observed percentage of the amplification of
ZNF217 gene in our patients (12.5%) was comparable to the c-BioPortal
data which showed that this gene is altered (amplification, mutation,
heterozygous deletion) in 12.1% (Breast Invasive Carcinoma; TCGA,
Provisional; tumors with sequencing and CNA data; 962 samples) and in
13.3% (Breast Invasive Carcinoma; TCGA, Nature 2012; 825 samples) of all
cases. In contrast to the cBioPortal data, we have observed only an
amplification of ZNF217 gene in our patient samples. Amplification of
ZNF217 gene was predominantly encountered in our ER+ patients (16.6%).
Similarly 11% of the luminal A patients showed alterations in the ZNF217
gene while 24% of the luminal B showed alterations in the ZNF217 (Breast
Invasive Carcinoma; TCGA, Nature 2012; 235 luminal A samples & 131
luminal B samples; cBioPortal). A comparable trend of higher mRNA
expression (DASL analyses from FFPE; Dey et al. BMC Cancer 2013) for
ZNF217 was also observed in the ER+/PR+/HER2+ tumor samples from our
previously reported BC cohorts. The amplification of ZNF217 was validated
by IHC expression in patient samples. The functional significance of
ZNF217 in BC progression is not clear yet. In the cell line based models,
Western blot data revealed the presence of this transcription factor in a
number of BC cell lines including MCF7, MCF7-aro, MCF7-letrozole
resistant, T-47D and BT-474. The function of ZNF217 was studied using
ZNF217-SiRNA. SiRNA mediated downregulation of ZNF217 perturbed the
metastasis-associated phenotypes including integrin-directed
migration/invasion in a number of ER+ BC cells. The abrogation of
migration was found to be associated with the inhibition of RAC1-GTPase
activity. Better understanding of the mechanistic involvement of ZNF217
and its associated pathways may provide a novel target for future
therapeutic intervention in breast carcinogenesis. The tumorigenic role
of ZNF217 in the ER+ BC in the context of PIK3CA mutation and / or PTEN
alterations is currently being worked out, the result of which will be
presented at the meeting.

