Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FoxM1 drives a feed-forward STAT3-activation signaling loop to
promote the self-renewal and tumorigenicity of glioblastoma stem cells


The STAT3 signaling pathway is a nodal hub of gliomagenesis, but the
mechanisms underlying elevated expression and activation of STAT3 are
largely unknown. Here, we showed that FoxM1 was critical for STAT3 gene
expression and protein activation. First, the expression of PDGF-A, one
of the growth factor upstream of STAT3 directly correlated with the
expression of FoxM1 in GBMs. FoxM1 bound to PDGF-A promoter to upregulate
PDGF-A expression in GBM stem cells (GSCs) and mouse neural stem cells
(NSCs). FoxM1 maintains stemness of GSCs partially via PDGF-A. Second,
data from TCGA showed that GBMs expressed high levels of STAT3 as
compared with normal brain. STAT3 expression directly correlated with the
expression of FoxM1 in GBMs. FoxM1 regulated STAT3 expression by
interacting with the -catenin/TCF4 complex at STAT3 promoter. FoxM1
deficiency decreased both PDGF-A and STAT3 expressions in GSCs and NSCs
and inhibited STAT3 activation by PDGF-A, EGF and IL-6, thereby abolished
the stemness and tumorigenesis of GSCs. Moreover, constitutively active
STAT3 rescued the inhibitory effects of FoxM1 knockdown on the stemness
and tumorignecity of GSCs, suggesting FoxM1 regulates the stemness of
GSCs by affecting STAT3 Furthermore, overexpression of FoxM1 reprogrammed
glioma cells to GSCs-like cells, whereas inhibition of STAT3 diminished
FoxM1-induced stemness and tumorigenesis. Collectively, these findings
indicated that FoxM1 regulated the expression of both PDGF-A and STAT3
hence drived a feed-forward STAT3-activation signaling loop which was
required for maintenance of self-renewal and tumorigenicity of GSCs.

