Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFRvIII T-cell TandAbs are specific and highly potent drug
candidates for the treatment of a variety of solid tumors


To harness the cytotoxic capacity of immune effector cells for the
treatment of several types of solid tumors, we developed tetravalent
bifunctional antibodies that recognize EGFRvIII, the deletion variant III
of EGFR. Their second functionality binds with high affinity to CD3,
thereby directing T-cells to eliminate EGFRvIII+ cancer cells. The
expression of EGFRvIII on various solid tumor types, and its absence from
healthy tissues, provides an opportunity to develop cytotoxic antibodies
that solely target cancer; these would spare normal tissues, and
substantially reduce the side effects associated with EGFR therapy.Using
phage display, we identified scFvs that selectively bind to EGFRvIII but
not to EGFR. The binding affinities of these highly EGFRvIII-specific
antibodies were substantially improved, employing affinity maturation
techniques, and achieved KDs in the 100pM range and lower.We engineered a
panel of bispecific EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAbs with a broad range of binding
and cytotoxic properties. Mono- and bivalent binding, specificity for
both EGFRvIII and CD3, T cell-mediated cytotoxic activity, and
target-mediated T-cell activation were characterized in a panel of in
vitro assays. EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAbs exhibit exquisite specificity towards
the EGFRvIII antigen in Western Blot, SPR, ELISA, and FACS assays of
EGFRvIII+ cells. No specific binding was observed to recombinant EGFR
antigen or to EGFR-expressing cells. Apparent affinities of EGFRvIII/CD3
TandAbs to EGFRvIII were up to 25fold improved relative to the
monovalently binding scFvs, and achieved a KD of 11pM for the best
binding EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAb. Improvement of the binding affinities in the
bivalent TandAb format was largely due to slower dissociation.TandAbs
with high affinity for EGFRvIII were most potent in killing assays,
displaying cytotoxicity towards EGFRvIII-expressing F98 glioma and CHO
cells with EC50 in the range of 1pM-10pM. No cytotoxicity was observed on
EGFR+ cells or EGFRvIII- cells up to the maximally-evaluated TandAb
concentration of 0.5M (which is 100000 fold higher than the EC50)
demonstrating the high selectivity of EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAbs for the
tumor-specific EGFRvIII. High affinity binding to CD3 was necessary for
efficacious T cell recruitment as shown by the correlation of CD3-binding
and cytotoxic potency of EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAbs. Importantly, in the
absence of EGFRvIII+ target cells in vitro, TandAbs did not elicit T cell
activation, as demonstrated by their lack of proliferation: this
specificity contributed to a good preclinical safety profile. Biophysical
and pharmacological characterization of several candidates is currently
ongoing, whereby the first EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAbs demonstrated a robust
dose-dependent growth retardation of EGFRvIII+ subcutaneous xenograft
tumors.In summary, EGFRvIII/CD3 TandAbs are specific and highly potent
drug candidates for the treatment of EGFRvIII+ malignancies.

