Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived xenograft model using peritoneal fluid of gastric
cancer patients


Peritoneal metastasis is the most frequent pattern of recurrence in
patients with gastric cancer (GC). Patient derived xenograft (PDX) models
using peritoneal fluid have been required to understand its biology and
for the drug screening. So, we established the PDX model by peritoneal
fluid in stage IV GC patients. First, we confirmed the preparation
condition of peritoneal fluid cells for PDX model as approximately 1107
cells in PBS. Then, we observed the engraftment rate of PDX which was
15.8% (3 of 19 patients, P2, P10 and P11). The time to 100 mm3 tumor size
at F1 of 3 models was 47 1, 26.7 0.6 and 68 days respectively. Then, we
checked the change of serial engraftment rate until F3. The more passage
was progressed, the higher engraft rate was, 75% (3 of 4 mice) to 90% (9
of 10 mice) at P2, 60% (3 of 5 mice) to 85% (17 of 20 mice) at P10 and
33.3% (1 of 3 mice) to 86.7% (13 of 15 mice) at P11. In addition, time to
100mm3 tumor size of engrafted PDXs was faster at F3 than F1 in all 3
cases (41.1% in P2, 46.4% in P10 and 47.5% in P11). Also, tumor doubling
time showed decreased in all engrafted PDXs according to passage (70.8%
in P2, 11.5% in P10 and 71.5% in P12). Then, we checked the
re-engraftment rate after thawing the frozen F3 tissue section of P2. F4
PDXs were re-engrafted 100% (3/ 3 mice) after thawing, and time to 100mm3
tumor size and tumor doubling times were not different between F3 and F4.
It means that freezing and thawing of tumor fragment did not affect to
engraft. After that, we compared the characterization of F0 peritoneal
fluid of patient, F1F3 PDX tumor and the cell line established from F0.
The morphologies of them were comparable by H&E staining. Also, molecule
expressions ofF0 to F3 and cell lines were analogous. The genetic
alterations according to passages in F0 to F3 are on-going. As a result,
we observed PDX from peritoneal fluid of advanced gastric cancer is
feasible but various according to each patient. The PDX model by
peritoneal fluid of GC patients might be helpful the biological
understanding and drug development for personalized therapies.

