Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated level of Fibrillarin induces chemoresistance by
interfering p53 pathway in cancers


Fibrillarin (FBL), an rRNA 2-O-methyltransferase, has long been
recognized as the enzymatic unit of the C/D box small nucleolar
ribonucleoprotein (snoRNP) involved in the first step of pre-rRNA
processing. It is not until recently that the link between FBL and
cancers has been unveiled. As a direct regulatory target of Myc and p53,
FBL is frequently upregulated in breast cancers and prostate cancers.
High expression of FBL has also been shown to be associated with poor
survival in patients with breast cancer. Our recent study found that FBL
overexpression contributes to tumorigenesis and confers cellular
resistance to chemodrugs. However, the underlying mechanism of
chemoresistance elicited by FBL upregulation is still elusive. Here, we
studied the molecular roles of FBL on p53 response. The p53 pathway in
response to etoposide and actinomycin D were examined in a variety cell
lines including U-2OS, MCF7, H1299, ZR75-1, A549 and an FBL inducible
cell line. Western blotting and immunofluorescent staining were employed
to examine protein level and their cellular localization. We found that
ectopic expression of FBL enhanced the protein level of MDM2, resulting
in decreased p53 accumulation and activity in response to chemodrugs.
Interestingly, MDM2 was partially recruited to the nucleoli under
stimuli. FBL depletion abrogated the nucleolar recruitment of MDM2 and
subsequently dampened p53 activation. In conclusion, physiological level
of FBL sequesters and stabilizes MDM2 in the nucleoli, therefore inhibits
p53 degradation. When upregulated in cancers, FBL stabilizes nucleus MDM2
and promotes the degradation of p53

