Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-486 (miR-486) promotes invasion by targeting RECK in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a common cancer in Taiwanese and people
living in the southeastern region of China. In order to investigate NPC
pathogenesis, our laboratory has previously established NPC-TW01 cell
line, which was derived from a Taiwanese NPC patient. We also established
a NPC-TW01N1 cell line, which was derived from the NPC xenograft in SCID
mouse. Both NPC-TW01 and NPC-TW01N1 cell lines have an identical DNA
profile (STR). NPC-TW01N1 cell line has higher malignant potency than
NPC-TW01 line. For example, the proliferation and invasion capabilities
of NPC-TW01N1 line were higher than that of NPC-TW01 line. When we used
microRNA microarray to compare the endogenous microRNA expression
profiles between NPC-TW01 and NPC-TW01N1 lines, the miR-486, miR-200a and
other miRNAs showed higher expression in NPC-TW01N1 cell. Transfection of
exogenous miR-486 or anti-miR-486 into NPC-TW01 cells or NPC-TW01N1 cells
revealed that miR-486 involves in the regulation of NPC cell progression
and invasion. To determine whether miR-486 targeted gene involves in
progression and invasion, we analyzed microRNA targeted gene database,
Ingenuity pathway databases, and cDNA expression microarrays from miR-486
transfected cells. We found that the RECK gene is one of miR-486
candidate targeted genes that involves in NPC cell progression and
invasion. We used pmirGLO luciferase reporter vector assays to
demonstrate that miR-486 directly targets RECK 3 UTR. When we transfected
miR-486 or RECK siRNA into NPC cells, we found that they can accelerate
tumor progression and invasion. It is concluded that miR-486 and RECK
genes maybe potential targets for NPC therapy.

