Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Introduction of PTEN pseudogene in murine breast cancer
upregulates PTEN, p53 and activating protein 2 gamma and delays tumor
growth


Background:While PTEN is frequently downregulated in breast cancer, the
mechanism remains obscure. PTEN pseudogene (PTENP1) is reported to
function as a decoy adsorbing micro RNAs (miRNAs) targeting PTEN for
degradation in prostate cancer cells. A potential role of PTENP1 in PTEN
regulation in breast cancer has not been assessed
systematically.Method:We transfected murine C3HBA breast cancer cells
lacking endogenous PTENP1 with a lentiviral PTENP1 construct to
investigate the influence of the pseudogene on PTEN and Akt-mTOR
downstream signaling, global gene expression, as well as in vitro and in
vivo tumor growth characteristics.Results:Upregulated PTENP1 3UTR by
lentiviral transfection increased PTEN protein levels and reduced cell
cycle progression in vitro, but despite this increased Akt
phosphorylation was observed. Similarily, PTENP1 transfection decreased
tumor growth in C3HBA murine breast cancer in syngeneic, immunocompetent
C3H mice, corresponding with upregulated PTEN, but without inhibition of
Akt-mTOR signaling. In stead, increased protein levels of p53 and its
downstream target activating protein-2 gamma (AP-2) was observed as
possible tumor suppressors in this setting.Conclusion:In the murine C3HBA
breast cancer cell line, PTENP1 transfection was associated with
upregulated endogenous PTEN, p53 and AP-2 protein levels and tumor growth
inhibition.

