Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aurora kinase inhibitors require PUMA to induce apoptosis and
preferentially kill KRAS-mutant colon cancer cells


Aurora kinases play a key role in mitosis and are frequently
overexpressed in a variety of tumor cells. Inhibition of aurora kinases
results in mitotic arrest and death of cancer cells, and has been
explored as an anti-cancer strategy. However, how aurora inhibition kills
cancer cells is poorly understood. In this study, we found that
inhibition of aurora kinases by siRNA or small-molecule inhibitors led to
induction of p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA), a BH3-only
BCL-2 family protein, in colorectal cancer cells irrespective of p53
status. Deficiency in PUMA increased polyploidy and abrogated
mitochondria-mediated apoptosis induced by aurora kinase inhibitors. In
response to aurora kinase inhibition, PUMA was directly activated by p65
through the canonical NF-kB pathway following AKT inhibition.
Interestingly, aurora kinase inhibitors were found to preferentially kill
KRAS-mutant colon cancer cells, which is associated with enhanced
induction of PUMA and another BH3-only protein NOXA. Furthermore, PUMA
was necessary for the chemo-sensitization and in vivo anti-tumor effects
of aurora kinase inhibitors in colon cancer cells. These results suggest
that PUMA induction mediates the apoptotic response to mitotic arrest
imposed by aurora kinase inhibition, and may be a useful indicator for
the anti-cancer activity of aurora kinase inhibitors.

