Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive biomarkers of tumor sensitivity to STEAP1 antibody-drug
conjugate (ADC) in patients (pts) with metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer (mCRPC)


ADCs hold promise for enhancing the therapeutic index of cytotoxics.
STEAP1 is overexpressed in mCRPC and is the target of an ADC currently
under clinical development. To identify pts most likely to benefit from
the ADC, we explored STEAP1 expression as a predictive biomarker in tumor
tissue using a CLIA-certified IHC assay, and on circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) in blood using the CellSearch and EPIC platforms. Sixty pts with
progressive mCRPC received doses ranging from 0.3 to 2.8 mg/kg once every
three weeks. Response was defined as a 50% decline in PSA from baseline,
and time on study for >6 months was consistent with continued clinical
benefit. At doses of 2 mg/kg, the response rate (RR) was 10/45 (22%, 95%
CI 9.9-34.1) and was highest in the STEAP1 IHC 3+ group, as was the
fraction of patients who remained on study for >6 months. At 2 mg/kg,
20/45 pts (44%, 95% CI 29.5-58.5) had unfavorable CTC counts of 5/7.5mL
at baseline and were considered evaluable. After treatment, conversions
from unfavorable to favorable CTC counts of ADCs hold promise for
enhancing the therapeutic index of cytotoxics. STEAP1 is overexpressed in
mCRPC and is the target of an ADC currently under clinical development.
To identify pts most likely to benefit from the ADC, we explored STEAP1
expression as a predictive biomarker in tumor tissue using a
CLIA-certified IHC assay, and on circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in blood
using the CellSearch and EPIC platforms. Sixty pts with progressive mCRPC
received doses ranging from 0.3 to 2.8 mg/kg once every three weeks.
Response was defined as a 50% decline in PSA from baseline, and time on
study for >6 months was consistent with continued clinical benefit. At
doses of 2 mg/kg, the response rate (RR) was 10/45 (22%, 95% CI 9.9-34.1)
and was highest in the STEAP1 IHC 3+ group, as was the fraction of
patients who remained on study for >6 months. At 2 mg/kg, 20/45 pts (44%,
95% CI 29.5-58.5) had unfavorable CTC counts of 5/7.5mL at baseline and
were considered evaluable. After treatment, conversions from unfavorable
to favorable CTC counts of <5/7.5mL were seen in 11/20 patients (55%, 95%
CI 33.2-76.8) and were significantly correlated with PSA declines
(Spearman rank r = 0.74). STEAP1 expression in tissues and on CTCs as it
related to clinical activity is presented in the following table:An
immuno-fluorescence-based assay developed to measure STEAP1 expression
levels on CTCs showed readily detectable signal in 18/42 samples (43%,
95% CI 28-58), with a range from 1-56% of STEAP1-positive CTCs per case.
After treatment, a decrease in the fraction of patients with
STEAP1-positive and an increase in the STEAP1-negative CTCs was observed
compared to baseline (see Table). We are prospectively selecting pts with
STEAP1 IHC 2+/3+ tumors and assessing STEAP1 levels on CTCs in an ongoing
Ph1 expansion study with the goal of developing a companion diagnostic to
enrich for mCRPC pts most likely to benefit from treatment with the
STEAP1 ADC.

