Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -arrestin-2 regulates CXCR7-mediated EGFR transactivation and
tumor cell proliferation in prostate cancer cells


We have previously shown that the chemokine receptor CXCR7
trans-activates the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and is
implicated in prostate tumor growth. However, the molecular mechanisms of
CXCR7 mediated EGFR-trans-activation are not known. In the present work
we show that CXCR7 induced EGFR transactivation is independent of
EGF-like ligands such as amphiregulin and heparin-bound EGF. Importantly,
treatment with pertussis toxin, a known G-protein inhibitor, had no
effect on EGFR phosphorylation, indicating that G-protein signaling was
not involved in CXCR7 mediated EGFR transactivation. Since CXCR7 is known
to signal through -arrestin-2 in its ligand dependent manner, we
evaluated the role of -arrestin-2 in CXCR7 induced EGFR trans-activation
in prostate cancer cells. We used shRNA to stably down regulate
-arrestin-2 in LNCaP cells to evaluate the role of -arrestin-2 in CXCR7
mediated induction of EGFR and downstream mitogenic signaling such as
ERK1/2 and the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt pathway. Interestingly, down
regulation of -arrestin-2 significantly induced phosphorylation of EGFR
at Y1110 and Y1068 along with the phosphorylation/activation of ERK and
AKT and an induction of proliferation/colony formation in prostate tumor
cells. Moreover, shRNA mediated down regulation of -arrestin-2 resulted
in a decrease of p21 which is in accordance with the observed increased
proliferation rate. The results of our study suggest that -arrestin-2 is
crucial negative regulator of CXCR7/EGFR signaling and underscore the
importance of -arrestin-2 in regulation of CXCR7/EGFR mediated tumor cell
proliferation.

