Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small G protein Rac GTPases regulate the maintenance of
glioblastoma stem-like cells


Glioblastoma is the most common and aggressive malignant primary brain
tumor in adults. Its invasiveness and resistance to traditional therapies
make it a highly recurrent malignant disease with poor prognosis. The
existence of glioblastoma stem cells (GSC) may account for its
invasiveness and high recurrence, so GSCs become a suitable target for
developing new treatments. Rac proteins belong to the Rho small GTPase
subfamily, which major functions include regulation of cell movement,
proliferation, and survival. However, most of the studies focused on Rac1
but not other Rac family proteins. To investigate whether other Rac
proteins, Rac2 and Rac3, can serve as new therapeutic targets for
glioblastoma, especially for glioblastoma stem cells, we examined the
effects of Rac1-3 on glioblastoma cells-derived tumorspheroids
(glioblastoma stem-like cells). We found that Rac1-3 are important for
cell proliferation and colony formation of glioblastoma stem-like cells.
We also established the zebrafish xenotransplantation model to further
study the effects of Rac proteins in glioblastoma, and observed that the
cells expressing control scramble short-hairpin RNA sequence induced
angiogenesis in the egg yolk of the fish, while the cells expressing
siRacs shrank inside the fish and did not induce angiogenesis. The
overall survival rates of fishes were also higher in the fishes injected
with siRac cells instead of fishes with control scramble RNA cells.
Furthermore, Rac proteins also involve in STAT3 and ERK activation, and
regulate the GSC marker expression such as CD133, Sox2 and HIF-2 in
glioblastoma stem-like cells. In conclusion, Rac proteins can serve as
the potential therapeutic targets against glioblastoma and its stem cells.

