Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A simple method for selectively isolating small size circulating
cell-free DNA


Elevated levels of circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) in plasma/serum
have been associated with several pathological and clinical disorders
such as cancer. It was demonstrated that ccfDNA of clinical importance
exists predominantly as 170 bp fragments in mononucleosomal complexes and
isolation of this DNA is challenging. Traditional methods for isolation
of ccfDNA have been unreliable since they cannot selectively capture
small size DNA from mononucleosomes. Here we describe a simple and
reliable method which can be used for selectively isolating ccfDNA from
plasma/serum. Different amounts of HeLa mononucleosomes (10-500 ng) were
spiked into 0.5 ml of bovine plasma to mimic ccfDNA. First, nucleosomal
complexes were captured using size-fractionation magnetic beads. The DNA
in the captured nucleosomal complexes was then purified with DNA
purification beads. As a control, 500 ng of polynucleosomes (DNA size
2270 bps) were simultaneously spiked with mononucleosomes into 0.5 ml of
plasma and subjected to the isolation procedures described above.
Fluorescent quantification showed 70-100% recovery of DNA from plasma
with the highest recovery (100%) at lower concentrations of spiked
mononucleosomes (10 ng). Bioanalyzer results further showed that only 170
bp peak size fragments were present for mononucleosomes alone or for both
mono- and poly-nucleosomes spiked into plasma. No peak was observed for
polynucleosomes spiked into plasma. These results demonstrate that this
method is highly selective and specific for isolation of small size
ccfDNA generated from mononucleosomes in plasma and would benefit early
cancer detection that uses ccfDNA as biomarkers.

