Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: History of oral contraceptive use in breast cancer patients and
risk for early breast cancer events


Whether previous oral contraceptive (OC) use impacts on prognosis women
who subsequently develops breast cancer is unclear. The aim was to study
history of OC use in relation to breast cancer events in a prospective
population-based cohort.Between 2002 and 2011, primary breast cancer
patients without preoperative treatment were enrolled in Lund, Sweden and
followed until December 2012. Tumor characteristics, clinical data, and
date of death were obtained from pathology reports, patient charts, and
population registries. History of OC use was obtained from preoperative
questionnaires.Among the 948 patients with invasive cancer and no
metastasis detected on the postoperative screen, 74% had ever used OCs.
Patients were followed for up to nine years and 100 breast cancer events
were recorded. Ever OC users had significantly smaller tumors than
patients who never used OCs (Ptrend = 0.013). However, there was a
significantly higher frequency of grade III tumors in patients with OCs
use before age 20 (Ptrend = 0.013), compared to patients with later start
or never use. Ever OC use was not associated with prognosis, irrespective
of duration. However, any OC use before age 20 was associated with a
3-fold increased risk for breast cancer events in patients younger than
50 years at diagnosis (adjusted HR 3.26: 95% CI 1.06-10.01) adjusted for
age, tumor size, axillary lymph node involvement, histological grade,
estrogen receptor status, and body mass index, but not in patients 50
years or older at diagnosis (Pinteraction = 0.009). In conclusion, these
findings warrant confirmation in an independent cohort. If confirmed,
history of OC use may yield prognostic information in addition to
currently used criteria.

