Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variations in vitamin D-related pathways and breast cancer
risk in African American women


Background: Experimental studies support anti-tumor properties of vitamin
D for breast cancer (BC), which have yet to be conclusively demonstrated
in epidemiological studies. Common genetic variations in the vitamin
D-related pathways have also been studied with BC risk, mostly in
populations of European ancestry. Studies in populations of African
ancestry (AA), known for a high prevalence of vitamin D deficiency due to
high skin pigmentation, have been sparse.Methods: We examined 69 genes
from three vitamin D-related pathways: vitamin D metabolism and
signaling, pigmentation synthesis and metabolism, and UV exposure
response in the African American Breast Cancer Epidemiology and Risk
(AMBER) Consortium. Tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
selected and genotyped in a customized Illumina Exome Array, followed by
systematic imputation using 1000 Genomes haplotypes. The analytical
dataset included 25,295 variants with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of
0.006 or above from the targeted genetic regions in 3,663 breast cancer
cases and 4,687 controls. Odds ratios (OR) were derived from
multivariable logistic regression models for risk associated with overall
BC as well as by estrogen receptor (ER) status (1,983 ER positive and
1,098 ER negative). Case-case analyses were also performed.Results: Among
the three vitamin D-related pathways, genes involved in UV exposure
response appear to be the top ones associated with BC risk overall and by
ER status. The most significant genes in this pathway included: REV1 for
overall BC (OR for the T allele of rs9308822 = 0.86, p = 1e-4), similar
for both ER+ and ER- BC; ERCC6 for ER-positive BC (OR for the T allele of
rs114723899 = 0.62, p = 4e-5); and DDB2 for ER-negative BC (OR for the G
allele of rs4647707 = 1.26, p = 4e-5). For the skin pigmentation pathway,
the most significant genes were SLC24A2 with ER-negative BC (top SNP
rs4900134 p = 1e-4), and OCA2 associated with ER-negative vs. ER-positive
status (top SNP rs144465989 p = 6e-5). For the vitamin D metabolism and
signaling pathway, the most significant gene was CASR associated with
ER-negative vs. ER-positive status (top SNP rs112594756 p = 7e-5). Only
one of the commonly studied VDR SNPs, ApaI or rs7975232, was marginally
associated with ER-positive BC (OR = 1.11, p = 0.05) in this study of AA
women. Gene-level and pathway-level analyses and for multiple testing
correction are ongoing.Conclusion: In a comprehensive study of vitamin
D-related genetic variations in AA women, we found several genes involved
in UV exposure response most significantly associated with BC risk
overall and by ER status. Because those genes are also involved in DNA
damage and repair pathways, findings should be interpreted with caution
due to their roles in cutaneous synthesis of vitamin D.

