Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel regulation of pro-migratory genes by nuclear Src in
pancreatic cancer cells


Pancreatic cancer is an exceptionally lethal malignancy with a poor
prognosis, and there is little known about the molecular mechanisms that
lead to the disease and its progression. Several reports have implicated
dysregulated Src tyrosine kinase function in pancreatic tumorigenesis and
progression. However, except for the classic role of Src in promoting
events that contribute to invasiveness, not much is known of how the
tyrosine kinase supports pancreatic cancer progression and the poor
response of the disease to therapy. In previous reports, we showed that
Src is present in the cell nucleus of pancreatic cancer cells in
association with gene promoter sequences. Mass spectrometry analysis of
Src co-immune complex from nuclear lysate preparations from pancreatic
cancer cells identified p300 as a novel Src-interacting protein.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to human promoter microarray
(ChIP-chip) analysis showed that nuclear Src is associated with the
promoters of SMYD3 and HMGA2 in pancreatic cancer cells. Inhibition of
Src tyrosine kinase or p300 lysine acetyltransferase activity decreased
the expression of SMYD3 and HMGA2 mRNA and protein levels in pancreatic
cancer cells in a time-dependent manner and blocked pancreatic cancer
cell migration. Current data altogether show that Src at the inner
nuclear envelope is physically associated with and regulates the
expression of SMYD3 and HMGA2, through interaction with p300. The studies
identify a novel Src function through epigenetic regulation of
pro-metastatic genes and provide additional potential avenues for
developing new treatment strategies for metastatic pancreatic cancer.

