Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic and functional implications of FABP4 in ovarian cancer
metastasis


Purpose:The purpose of this study was to identify molecular predictors of
residual disease (RD) in high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) and
further understand their role in promoting cancer metastasis.Method:The
current study analyzed Affymetrix gene expression data of 504 HGSC cases
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data to identify differentially
expressed genes in tumors from patients with no gross residual disease
after surgery (NRD) or presence of RD following initial debulking
surgery. It was followed by qRT-PCR analysis of tumor samples for
validation purposes. RPPA data of 354 patients from TCGA were analyzed.
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on the patient samples to
determine the expression at the protein level (cancer versus stromal
cells). Gene array was carried out after overexpressing the selected gene
in ovarian cancer cells and the data was analyzed by Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA). In vitro (migration and invasion) and in vivo (orthotopic
mouse models) assays were used to determine the biological roles of
gene(s) identified from the above analyses.Results: In TCGA data set,
97/107 (90.6%) of the patients with high expression of FABP4 gene had
residual disease. In the validation cohort, among the 35 patients
predicted to be at high risk for residual disease, 30 (86%) did have
residual disease. In contrast, only 54 of the 104 patients with FABP4
values below the decision threshold (52%) had incomplete resection (p =
0.0002). RPPA analysis indicated that expression of FABP4 was positively
correlated (Spearman correlation analysis) with expression of several
other proteins known to increase tumor cell infiltration and metastasis
such as JNK2 (p = 0.194), transglutaminase (p = 0.199), c-kit (p =
0.173), fibronectin (p = 0.364), PKC-A (p = 0.178), collagen-6 (p =
0.197) and paxillin (p = 0.239). It was negatively correlated with
E-cadherin (p = -0.246) and claudin-7 (p = -0.201) expression.
Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed that apart from endothelial cells
and adipocytes, cancer cells also express significant amount of FABP4. In
vitro assays showed significant reduction in invasion and migration after
silencing FABP4 in HGSC cell lines (pPurpose:The purpose of this study
was to identify molecular predictors of residual disease (RD) in high
grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) and further understand their role in
promoting cancer metastasis.Method:The current study analyzed Affymetrix
gene expression data of 504 HGSC cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) data to identify differentially expressed genes in tumors from
patients with no gross residual disease after surgery (NRD) or presence
of RD following initial debulking surgery. It was followed by qRT-PCR
analysis of tumor samples for validation purposes. RPPA data of 354
patients from TCGA were analyzed. Immunohistochemical analysis was
performed on the patient samples to determine the expression at the
protein level (cancer versus stromal cells). Gene array was carried out
after overexpressing the selected gene in ovarian cancer cells and the
data was analyzed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). In vitro
(migration and invasion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse models) assays
were used to determine the biological roles of gene(s) identified from
the above analyses.Results: In TCGA data set, 97/107 (90.6%) of the
patients with high expression of FABP4 gene had residual disease. In the
validation cohort, among the 35 patients predicted to be at high risk for
residual disease, 30 (86%) did have residual disease. In contrast, only
54 of the 104 patients with FABP4 values below the decision threshold
(52%) had incomplete resection (p = 0.0002). RPPA analysis indicated that
expression of FABP4 was positively correlated (Spearman correlation
analysis) with expression of several other proteins known to increase
tumor cell infiltration and metastasis such as JNK2 (p = 0.194),
transglutaminase (p = 0.199), c-kit (p = 0.173), fibronectin (p = 0.364),
PKC-A (p = 0.178), collagen-6 (p = 0.197) and paxillin (p = 0.239). It
was negatively correlated with E-cadherin (p = -0.246) and claudin-7 (p =
-0.201) expression. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed that apart
from endothelial cells and adipocytes, cancer cells also express
significant amount of FABP4. In vitro assays showed significant reduction
in invasion and migration after silencing FABP4 in HGSC cell lines
(p<0.0001). On the other hand, overexpression of FABP4 led to increased
invasion and migration (pPurpose:The purpose of this study was to
identify molecular predictors of residual disease (RD) in high grade
serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) and further understand their role in
promoting cancer metastasis.Method:The current study analyzed Affymetrix
gene expression data of 504 HGSC cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) data to identify differentially expressed genes in tumors from
patients with no gross residual disease after surgery (NRD) or presence
of RD following initial debulking surgery. It was followed by qRT-PCR
analysis of tumor samples for validation purposes. RPPA data of 354
patients from TCGA were analyzed. Immunohistochemical analysis was
performed on the patient samples to determine the expression at the
protein level (cancer versus stromal cells). Gene array was carried out
after overexpressing the selected gene in ovarian cancer cells and the
data was analyzed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). In vitro
(migration and invasion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse models) assays
were used to determine the biological roles of gene(s) identified from
the above analyses.Results: In TCGA data set, 97/107 (90.6%) of the
patients with high expression of FABP4 gene had residual disease. In the
validation cohort, among the 35 patients predicted to be at high risk for
residual disease, 30 (86%) did have residual disease. In contrast, only
54 of the 104 patients with FABP4 values below the decision threshold
(52%) had incomplete resection (p = 0.0002). RPPA analysis indicated that
expression of FABP4 was positively correlated (Spearman correlation
analysis) with expression of several other proteins known to increase
tumor cell infiltration and metastasis such as JNK2 (p = 0.194),
transglutaminase (p = 0.199), c-kit (p = 0.173), fibronectin (p = 0.364),
PKC-A (p = 0.178), collagen-6 (p = 0.197) and paxillin (p = 0.239). It
was negatively correlated with E-cadherin (p = -0.246) and claudin-7 (p =
-0.201) expression. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed that apart
from endothelial cells and adipocytes, cancer cells also express
significant amount of FABP4. In vitro assays showed significant reduction
in invasion and migration after silencing FABP4 in HGSC cell lines
(p<0.0001). On the other hand, overexpression of FABP4 led to increased
invasion and migration (p<0.01). In vivo stable overexpression of FABP4
increased the tumor weight by 3.5 fold (pPurpose:The purpose of this
study was to identify molecular predictors of residual disease (RD) in
high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) and further understand their role
in promoting cancer metastasis.Method:The current study analyzed
Affymetrix gene expression data of 504 HGSC cases from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) data to identify differentially expressed genes in tumors
from patients with no gross residual disease after surgery (NRD) or
presence of RD following initial debulking surgery. It was followed by
qRT-PCR analysis of tumor samples for validation purposes. RPPA data of
354 patients from TCGA were analyzed. Immunohistochemical analysis was
performed on the patient samples to determine the expression at the
protein level (cancer versus stromal cells). Gene array was carried out
after overexpressing the selected gene in ovarian cancer cells and the
data was analyzed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). In vitro
(migration and invasion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse models) assays
were used to determine the biological roles of gene(s) identified from
the above analyses.Results: In TCGA data set, 97/107 (90.6%) of the
patients with high expression of FABP4 gene had residual disease. In the
validation cohort, among the 35 patients predicted to be at high risk for
residual disease, 30 (86%) did have residual disease. In contrast, only
54 of the 104 patients with FABP4 values below the decision threshold
(52%) had incomplete resection (p = 0.0002). RPPA analysis indicated that
expression of FABP4 was positively correlated (Spearman correlation
analysis) with expression of several other proteins known to increase
tumor cell infiltration and metastasis such as JNK2 (p = 0.194),
transglutaminase (p = 0.199), c-kit (p = 0.173), fibronectin (p = 0.364),
PKC-A (p = 0.178), collagen-6 (p = 0.197) and paxillin (p = 0.239). It
was negatively correlated with E-cadherin (p = -0.246) and claudin-7 (p =
-0.201) expression. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed that apart
from endothelial cells and adipocytes, cancer cells also express
significant amount of FABP4. In vitro assays showed significant reduction
in invasion and migration after silencing FABP4 in HGSC cell lines
(p<0.0001). On the other hand, overexpression of FABP4 led to increased
invasion and migration (p<0.01). In vivo stable overexpression of FABP4
increased the tumor weight by 3.5 fold (p<0.05). It also increased the
number of nodules by 2.5 fold (pPurpose:The purpose of this study was to
identify molecular predictors of residual disease (RD) in high grade
serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) and further understand their role in
promoting cancer metastasis.Method:The current study analyzed Affymetrix
gene expression data of 504 HGSC cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) data to identify differentially expressed genes in tumors from
patients with no gross residual disease after surgery (NRD) or presence
of RD following initial debulking surgery. It was followed by qRT-PCR
analysis of tumor samples for validation purposes. RPPA data of 354
patients from TCGA were analyzed. Immunohistochemical analysis was
performed on the patient samples to determine the expression at the
protein level (cancer versus stromal cells). Gene array was carried out
after overexpressing the selected gene in ovarian cancer cells and the
data was analyzed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). In vitro
(migration and invasion) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse models) assays
were used to determine the biological roles of gene(s) identified from
the above analyses.Results: In TCGA data set, 97/107 (90.6%) of the
patients with high expression of FABP4 gene had residual disease. In the
validation cohort, among the 35 patients predicted to be at high risk for
residual disease, 30 (86%) did have residual disease. In contrast, only
54 of the 104 patients with FABP4 values below the decision threshold
(52%) had incomplete resection (p = 0.0002). RPPA analysis indicated that
expression of FABP4 was positively correlated (Spearman correlation
analysis) with expression of several other proteins known to increase
tumor cell infiltration and metastasis such as JNK2 (p = 0.194),
transglutaminase (p = 0.199), c-kit (p = 0.173), fibronectin (p = 0.364),
PKC-A (p = 0.178), collagen-6 (p = 0.197) and paxillin (p = 0.239). It
was negatively correlated with E-cadherin (p = -0.246) and claudin-7 (p =
-0.201) expression. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed that apart
from endothelial cells and adipocytes, cancer cells also express
significant amount of FABP4. In vitro assays showed significant reduction
in invasion and migration after silencing FABP4 in HGSC cell lines
(p<0.0001). On the other hand, overexpression of FABP4 led to increased
invasion and migration (p<0.01). In vivo stable overexpression of FABP4
increased the tumor weight by 3.5 fold (p<0.05). It also increased the
number of nodules by 2.5 fold (p<0.05). Overexpression also led to
increase in metastasis sites including liver, spleen, diaphragm and
omentum, while the tumor in the control group was confined to ovary and
peritoneal cavity. Histological analysis of tumor tissues showed
infiltrative phenotype after overexpression of FABP4.Conclusion:These
findings provide a new understanding of ovarian cancer metastasis and
identify a potentially important target for therapeutic intervention.

