Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptomic profile analysis of PANC-1 cells in response to
metformin and aspirin


The commonly used drugs, metformin and aspirin have been studied
extensively as cancer preventative and therapeutic agents. However, the
underlying molecular mechanisms for the inhibitory effects of pancreatic
cancer development remain largely unknown. To gain further insight into
their biological function in pancreatic cancer, we conducted a
transcriptomic analysis using RNA sequencing to assess the differential
gene expression induced by metformin (5 mM) and aspirin (2 mM), alone or
in combination, after treatment of PANC-1 cells for 48 hours. Compared to
untreated control, metformin alone up-regulated 109 genes, and
down-regulated 78 genes, aspirin alone down-regulated 43 genes only,
while the combination of metformin and aspirin up-regulated 499 genes,
and down-regulated 702 genes (fold-change > 2, P 10, P 10, P < 1010)
regulated by the combination of metformin and aspirin, NGFR, NPTX1, and
UNC5B were up-regulated more than 10-fold, while PCDH18, CCL2, RASL11A,
FAM111B, BMP5, SKIDA1, and CDH18 were down-regulated more than 15-fold.
The ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) was applied to explore the top
signaling pathways regulated by metformin and aspirin. The top canonical
pathways, cholesterol biosynthesis, cell cycle: G1/S checkpoint
regulation, and axonal guidance signaling were the most statistical
significant pathways that were modulated by the combination of metformin
and aspirin. It is worth noting that the axon guidance signaling and the
cholesterol biosynthesis pathways have recently been reported to play an
important role in the development of pancreatic cancer. Further studies
are warranted to explore the effects of metformin and aspirin on these
two pathways. Although results are preliminary and need further
functional validation, these data provide, for the first time, a
transcriptional profile of pancreatic cancer cells in response to
metformin and aspirin.

