Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-MET as a potential target in ovarian clear-cell carcinoma


Purpose: Recent reports revealed that c-MET activation is associated with
epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) and is association with poor
prognosis. In this study, we investigated the effects of therapeutic
targeting for c-MET in ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC).Experimental
Design: Expression levels of c-MET in the epithelial ovarian carcinomas
and normal ovarian tissues were evaluated using real-time PCR. To test
c-MET inhibitors in CCC cell lines, we performed in vitro experiments
including MTT and apoptosis assay. We performed Western blots to evaluate
the c-MET expression and down-stream pathway. In addition, we performed
in vivo therapy experiments in orthotopic ovarian cancer mice model
(RMG1) and patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDX) models of CCC to confirm
these effects.Results: The c-MET expression was significantly increased
in CCCs compared with serous carcinomas and normal ovarian tissues (P
Purpose: Recent reports revealed that c-MET activation is associated with
epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) and is association with poor
prognosis. In this study, we investigated the effects of therapeutic
targeting for c-MET in ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC).Experimental
Design: Expression levels of c-MET in the epithelial ovarian carcinomas
and normal ovarian tissues were evaluated using real-time PCR. To test
c-MET inhibitors in CCC cell lines, we performed in vitro experiments
including MTT and apoptosis assay. We performed Western blots to evaluate
the c-MET expression and down-stream pathway. In addition, we performed
in vivo therapy experiments in orthotopic ovarian cancer mice model
(RMG1) and patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDX) models of CCC to confirm
these effects.Results: The c-MET expression was significantly increased
in CCCs compared with serous carcinomas and normal ovarian tissues (P <
0.05). CCC cells treated with c-MET inhibitors (SU11274 or crizotinib)
demonstrated significantly decreased cell viability and increased
apoptosis. Western blot assay showed that the protein expressions for
c-MET signaling pathway were decreased by c-MET inhibitor. Moreover,
tumor weight was significant decreased in both in vivo RMG1 and PDX
models receiving SU11274 treatment compared with control (P Purpose:
Recent reports revealed that c-MET activation is associated with
epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) and is association with poor
prognosis. In this study, we investigated the effects of therapeutic
targeting for c-MET in ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC).Experimental
Design: Expression levels of c-MET in the epithelial ovarian carcinomas
and normal ovarian tissues were evaluated using real-time PCR. To test
c-MET inhibitors in CCC cell lines, we performed in vitro experiments
including MTT and apoptosis assay. We performed Western blots to evaluate
the c-MET expression and down-stream pathway. In addition, we performed
in vivo therapy experiments in orthotopic ovarian cancer mice model
(RMG1) and patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDX) models of CCC to confirm
these effects.Results: The c-MET expression was significantly increased
in CCCs compared with serous carcinomas and normal ovarian tissues (P <
0.05). CCC cells treated with c-MET inhibitors (SU11274 or crizotinib)
demonstrated significantly decreased cell viability and increased
apoptosis. Western blot assay showed that the protein expressions for
c-MET signaling pathway were decreased by c-MET inhibitor. Moreover,
tumor weight was significant decreased in both in vivo RMG1 and PDX
models receiving SU11274 treatment compared with control (P <
0.05).Conclusion: These results show that c-MET inhibitor has the
significant anti-tumor effects in ovarian CCC, and suggested that c-MET
could have the potential agent in the therapy for this cancer.

