Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of oncogenic Zeb1 by microRNA-23b in bladder cancer


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNAs that regulate gene
expression by targeted repression of transcription and translation. In
this study we show that miRNA-23b (miR-23b) acts as a tumor suppressor in
bladder cancer. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis showed that miR-23b
is significantly down-regulated in bladder cancer cell lines and tumor
tissues compared to non-malignant cells and normal tissue samples. We
also demonstrate that miR-23b expression has a potential to be diagnostic
and prognostic biomarker in bladder cancer. High miR-23b expression is
positively correlated with higher overall survival of bladder cancer
patients as revealed by Kaplan-Meier analysis. ROC analysis showed that
miR-23b expression can distinguish between normal and bladder cancer
tissues. Further we elucidated the biological significance of miR-23b in
bladder cancer. Over-expression of miR-23b in bladder cancer cells
inhibited cell proliferation and impaired colony formation. Fluorescence
activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis revealed that re-expression of
miR-23b in bladder cancer cells induced G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis while inhibiting cell migration and invasion. Luciferase
reporter assays demonstrated that Zeb1, a crucial regulator of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), is a direct target of miR-23b
in bladder cancer. These results show that loss of miR-23b confers a
proliferative advantage and promotes bladder cancer cell migration and
invasion. Furthermore, re-expression of miR-23b may be a beneficial
therapeutic strategy for the treatment of human bladder cancer.

