Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of Notch1 inhibits tumor cell proliferation, migration,
and invasion and reverses epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Despite a large bodies of evidences support an oncogenic role of Notch
signaling in several human solid cancers, however, the pleiotropic
effects and molecular mechanisms of blockage of Notch signaling on
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) remain unclear. In this study, Real-time
RT-PCR and western blotting were firstly used to examine the expression
of Notch1 receptor in a panel of NPC cell lines. CNE1 and CNE2 cells
expressed a higher level of Notch1 compared to HONE1, SUNE1 and HK cells.
Then Notch1 expression was specifically knocked down in CNE1 and CNE2
cells by Notch1 short hairpin RNA (shRNA). This resulted in a significant
inhibition of cell proliferation, migration, and invasion; and
interestingly, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was reversed in
these Notch1-transfected cells along with demonstration of
epithelialioid-like morphology change and increase of E-cadherin and
decrease of Vimentin expressions. In addition, targeted knockdown of
Notch1 dramatically inhibited expression of urokinase plasminogen
activator (uPA) and its receptor uPAR, chemokine CCL2 and CXCL16
indicating that these factors are downstream targets of Notch1. Finally,
knockdown of Notch1 significantly diminished CNE1 cell growth in a murine
model concomitant with inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of
apoptosis. Taken together, these results suggest Notch1 may become a
therapeutic target in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.Note: This abstract was
not presented at the meeting.

