Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch3-mediated squamous cell differentiation shows anti-tumor
effect on esophageal squamous cell carcinoma as well as reduces its
resistance to 5-Fluorouracil


BACKGROUND: We have shown that Notch3 plays an important role in the
regulation of esophageal squamous cell differentiation. However, it
remains unclear how Notch3-mediated squamous cell differentiation
influences the tumorigenicity of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) or its sensitivity to anti-cancer agents, including 5-Fluorouracil
(5-FU).METHODS: We used 5-FU-resistant human ESCC cells, TE-11R,
established by the step-wise continuous exposure of parental TE-11 cells
to 5-FU. The TE-11R cells were stably transduced with intracellular
domain of Notch3 (ICN3), an active form of Notch3, in a regulatable
manner (Tet-On system). The anti-tumor effect of Notch3-overexpression
was evaluated by implanting those cells into NOD SCID mice. 5-FU
resistance was determined by calculating the 50% inhibitory concentration
(IC50) of 5-FU using the WST-1 assay. Gene expression of squamous
differentiation markers such as involucrin and cytokeratin 13 (CK13) as
well as proliferative activity were determined.RESULTS: TE-11R cells
formed bulky tumors in NOD SCID mice, and the tumor formation rate of
TE-11R cells (6/6: 100%) was higher than that of TE-11 cells (1/8:
12.5%). TE-11R-derived tumors showed a less differentiated and more
proliferative phenotype represented by fewer keratin pearl formations
with lower involucrin and Notch3 expressions as well as higher Ki67
expression in comparison with TE-11-derived tumors. Consistent with this,
TE-11R cells showed lower gene expressions of Notch3, involucrin, and
CK13, and exhibited approximately 1.4-fold higher proliferative activity
than parental TE-11 cells in vitro. Notch3 overexpression resulted in the
promotion of cell differentiation accompanied by increased expressions of
involucrin and CK13, and suppressed cell growth in vitro as well as
tumorigenicity in vivo. Finally, it clearly reduced the 5-FU resistance
of TE-11R cells in vitro. IC50 values of TE-11R-ICN3 (DOX-) and
TE-11R-ICN3 (DOX+) were 96.0 19.7 and 21.6 10.4 M (P BACKGROUND: We have
shown that Notch3 plays an important role in the regulation of esophageal
squamous cell differentiation. However, it remains unclear how
Notch3-mediated squamous cell differentiation influences the
tumorigenicity of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) or its
sensitivity to anti-cancer agents, including 5-Fluorouracil
(5-FU).METHODS: We used 5-FU-resistant human ESCC cells, TE-11R,
established by the step-wise continuous exposure of parental TE-11 cells
to 5-FU. The TE-11R cells were stably transduced with intracellular
domain of Notch3 (ICN3), an active form of Notch3, in a regulatable
manner (Tet-On system). The anti-tumor effect of Notch3-overexpression
was evaluated by implanting those cells into NOD SCID mice. 5-FU
resistance was determined by calculating the 50% inhibitory concentration
(IC50) of 5-FU using the WST-1 assay. Gene expression of squamous
differentiation markers such as involucrin and cytokeratin 13 (CK13) as
well as proliferative activity were determined.RESULTS: TE-11R cells
formed bulky tumors in NOD SCID mice, and the tumor formation rate of
TE-11R cells (6/6: 100%) was higher than that of TE-11 cells (1/8:
12.5%). TE-11R-derived tumors showed a less differentiated and more
proliferative phenotype represented by fewer keratin pearl formations
with lower involucrin and Notch3 expressions as well as higher Ki67
expression in comparison with TE-11-derived tumors. Consistent with this,
TE-11R cells showed lower gene expressions of Notch3, involucrin, and
CK13, and exhibited approximately 1.4-fold higher proliferative activity
than parental TE-11 cells in vitro. Notch3 overexpression resulted in the
promotion of cell differentiation accompanied by increased expressions of
involucrin and CK13, and suppressed cell growth in vitro as well as
tumorigenicity in vivo. Finally, it clearly reduced the 5-FU resistance
of TE-11R cells in vitro. IC50 values of TE-11R-ICN3 (DOX-) and
TE-11R-ICN3 (DOX+) were 96.0 19.7 and 21.6 10.4 M (P < 0.01),
respectively.CONCLUSION: Our study showed that Notch3-mediated squamous
cell differentiation reduced both the tumorigenicity and 5-FU resistance
of ESCC cells. We suggest that a strategy to promote squamous cell
differentiation may ameliorate the outcome associated with 5-FU-resistant
ESCC.

