Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RAD17 loss of function is synthetically lethal with the checkpoint
kinase inhibitors AZD7762 or MK-1775


Synthetic lethal interactions are a type of genetic interaction in which
the simultaneous loss of function of two genes in combination results in
cell death. Recently, there has been much interest in the discovery of
drugs that are selectively toxic to cancer cells by targeting proteins
that form synthetic lethal interactions with tumor specific mutations. He
we have identified that RAD17 loss of function is synthetically lethal
with AZD7762, an inhibitor of Chk1 and Chk2, and with MK-1775, an
inhibitor of Wee1. HeLa or LN428 glioblastoma cells were selectively
responsive to AZD7762 or MK-1775 following shRNA-mediated depletion of
RAD17. Cells with dual knockdown of CHEK1 and CHEK2 or knockdown of WEE1
were also sensitized to RAD17 knockdown. At baseline, cells with RAD17
knockdown had greater expression of the DNA damage marker H2AX, an effect
that was magnified by either chemical inhibition or siRNA-mediated
knockdown of CHEK1/2 or WEE1. Accumulation of H2AX was observed primarily
in S and G2 phases, RAD17 loss did not have a significant effect on cell
cycle progression. The combination of AZD7762 and MK-1775 resulted in
synergistic toxicity in RAD17 knockdown but not control cells.
Collectively, these results demonstrate that RAD17 loss of function
sensitizes cells to inhibition of S and G2/M checkpoint kinases,
resulting in greater accumulation of DNA damage and ultimately cell
death. We suggest that AZD7762 and MK-1775 may have greater clinical
efficacy in tumors with RAD17 mutation or deletion.

