Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a noninvasive and sensitive urine screening test
for liver cancer targeting circulation-derived cancer DNA biomarkers


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), or liver cancer, is an aggressive disease
and is regarded as one of the fastest growing cancers in the United
States in incidence. The 5-year survival rate of HCC patients drops
dramatically from a poor 26%, in early-stage cancer, to a mere 2% in late
stages of this disease. The only available early detection biomarker is
serum alpha-fetoprotein, which can detect only 40-60% of cases. Our goal
is to develop a screening test for early detection of liver cancer, in
order to meet this urgent need for new and better biomarkers for HCC.
Cancer is a disease of the genome and epigenome, and if we can detect
these underlying genetic mutations and epigenetic modifications in the
periphery, we can effectively detect cancer early. Hence, we chose a
panel of both HCC-associated genetic and DNA methylation biomarkers. We
have previously shown that urine contains fragmented cell-free DNA
derived from the circulation and that we can detect cancer-related DNA,
both mutated and methylated DNA, in the urine of such patients. We have
also demonstrated that the concentration of tumor-derived DNA in plasma
and in urine is similar in patients with tumors. In order to demonstrate
the feasibility of detecting HCC DNA biomarkers in the circulation
derived urine DNA, we have developed short amplicon (50 bp) PCR-based
assays targeting HCC-specific mutations in TP53 and CTNNB1 genes and
HCC-specific methylation in GSTP1, RASSF1A and CDKN2A genes. Urine DNA
isolated from samples of hepatitis, cirrhosis, and HCC patients were
tested in each of the assays and analyzed for individual marker and panel
performance. The performance of the markers and our approach towards the
development of a targeted next generation urine DNA based HCC screening
test is discussed.

