Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The phosphorylation of p53 at serine 46 is essential to induce
cell death through palmdelphin in response to DNA damage


Tumor suppressor p53 plays a pivotal role in cell cycle arrest, DNA
repair, and apoptosis in response to DNA damage. Promoter selectivity of
p53 depends mainly on post-translational modification. Notably, the
apoptotic function of p53 is related to its phosphorylation at serine-46
(ser46) to promote pro-apoptotic genes. However, little is known about
the pro-apoptotic genes induced by Ser46 phosphorylation. Our research
achieved to investigate the pro-apoptotic genes induced by p53 in a
phospho-ser46-specific manner using microarray and ChIP sequencing in
human cancer cell lines. As a result, palmdelphin (PALMD), an isoform of
paralemmin protein, was strongly elicited from the phosphorylation of
ser46. The mRNA and protein expression of PALMD increased only in wild
type p53 transfected cells, but not in ser46-mutated cells. Importantly,
PALMD moved to the nucleus in response to DNA damage and the apoptotic
function of PALMD was tightly exerted with localization into nucleus.
Interestingly, down-regulation of PALMD by siRNA resulted in
necroptosis-like cell death through ATP depletion. Moreover, we found
vimentin as a PALMD interacting protein and the depletion of vimentin
increased PALMD level to accelerate apoptosis. These results demonstrate
that p53 regulates cell death fate (apoptosis or necroptosis-like cell
death) through promoting PALMD expression in a phospho-ser46-specific
manner in response to DNA damage.

