Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A long non-coding RNA activated by TGF- can predict the prognosis
of gastric cancer patients


Background:Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) is known to play important roles
in proliferation or metastasis in several human cancers. A recent study
reported that lncRNA activated by TGF- (lncRNA-ATB) induced
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) through the TGF-/miR-200s/ZEB
axis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), therefore the high lncRNA-ATB
patients in HCC had poor prognosis. EMT through the TGF-/miR-200s/ZEB
axis reported to be involved in invasion, metastasis, or dessemination in
gastric cancer. Therefore, we focused on the clinical significance of
lncRNA-ATB expression in gastric cancer.Materials and Methods:qRT-PCR was
performed to examine expression of lncRNA-ATB, miR-200b, and miR-200c in
gastric cancer tissues (n = 183). Then we divided patients into high and
low lncRNA-ATB expression groups using lncRNA-ATB/GAPDH 0.55 or
Background:Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) is known to play important roles
in proliferation or metastasis in several human cancers. A recent study
reported that lncRNA activated by TGF- (lncRNA-ATB) induced
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) through the TGF-/miR-200s/ZEB
axis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), therefore the high lncRNA-ATB
patients in HCC had poor prognosis. EMT through the TGF-/miR-200s/ZEB
axis reported to be involved in invasion, metastasis, or dessemination in
gastric cancer. Therefore, we focused on the clinical significance of
lncRNA-ATB expression in gastric cancer.Materials and Methods:qRT-PCR was
performed to examine expression of lncRNA-ATB, miR-200b, and miR-200c in
gastric cancer tissues (n = 183). Then we divided patients into high and
low lncRNA-ATB expression groups using lncRNA-ATB/GAPDH 0.55 or <0.55 to
determine the clinicopathological significance of lncRNA-ATB in gastric
cancer. Moreover we evaluated expressions of lncRNA-ATB, miR-200s and
ZEB1 in gastric cancer cell lines by qRT-PCR. Gastric cancer cell lines
with low lncRNA-ATB expression were treated by recombinant TGF-1 to
examine morphologic changes andgenetic alterations, such as lncRNA-ATB,
miR-200s, and ZEB1 levels, with respect to the EMT
phenotype.Results:LncRNA-ATB expression levels in gastric cancer patients
weren't associated with the clinicopathological factors, gender, age,
tumor size, histological type, depth of tumor invasion, lymph node
metastasis, lymphatic invasion, vascular invasion, liver metastasis,
peritoneal dissemination, or distant metastasis. However, the high
lncRNA-ATB group experienced a lower 5-year survival rate compared to the
low lncRNA-ATB group (P = 0.003), and multivariate analysis indicated
that lncRNA-ATB was an independent prognostic factor (HR = 3.18; 95%CI:
1.47-7.29; P = 0.0031). The lncRNA-ATB level was inversely associated
with miR-200s in gastric cancer cell lines. The inverse association was
validated in miR-200c and lncRNA-ATB in gastric cancer patients.
Moreover, lncRNA-ATB and ZEB1 levels increased and miR-200c levels
reduced in low lncRNA-ATB cells treated with TGF-1 after 10 d of
treatment. Morphologies also changed from epithelial to mesenchymal
form.Conclusions:LncRNA-ATB plays an important role in EMT to promote
invasion and metastasis through the TGF-/miR-200s/ZEB axis, resulting in
a poor prognosis in gastric cancer.Further investigations will
demonstrate the significance of lncRNA-ATB as a novel lncRNA biomarker
indicative of a poor prognosis in gastric cancer patients.

