Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD133 and LGR5 characterize stem-cell like subtype of colorectal
cancer


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) has recently been divided into six
subtypes with cluster mRNA expression analysis. The subtype characterized
as stem-like subtype exhibit the highest degree of stemness with poorest
prognosis. Prominin-1 (CD133) and leucine-rich-repeat-containing G
protein-coupled receptor (LGR5) mark cancer stem cells. High CD133
expression is associated with higher rate of metastases and disease
progression. In mouse models, tumor cells expressing CD133 are enriched
in chemotherapeutic-resistant colorectal cancer. LGR5+ cells characterize
fast-cycling columnar-based stem cells of colon which are instrumental in
neoplasia formation. Further, the LGR5+ cells are associated with
metastasis formation.Material and methods: A prospective randomized
multicenter randomized trial in Norway recruited from December 1992 to
October 1996. 412 colorectal cancer patients stage II and III were
treated with surgery alone or 5-fluoruracil (5-FU) and levamisole (Lev)
after surgical resection. The patients were followed up by routine
clinical examination until five years after surgery. We constructed
tissue microarrays from 409 patient samples. CD133 protein expression was
assessed by mouse anti-CD133 ([clone AC133], Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch
Gladbach, Germany) at a dilution 1:10. LGR5 mRNA expression was assessed
by RNAscope 2.0 HD Detection Kit-Brown (Advanced Cell Diagnostics,
Hayward, CA, USA).Results: Colon cancer stage III patients negative for
CD133 had better five-year disease-free survival (DFS) when they received
5-FU/Lev (P = .016). In contrast, the patients did not respond to
adjuvant therapy when CD133 was expressed (P = .500). LGR5 was a
prognostic marker for colon cancer stage II (P = .045). In colon stage
III, mRNA expression of LGR5 was associated with better DFS (P = .046)
and patients with positive LGR5 responded to chemotherapy (P = .025). In
stage II, LGR5 mRNA expression was associated with lower tumor diameter
(P = .005), while in stage III there was no statistically significant
association.In conclusion, CD133 expression was associated with
chemotherapy resistance in the colon stage III cohort. LGR5 was
associated with a metastatic phenotype in CRC stage II and colon cancer
stage III. In addition, LGR5 expression predicted response to
chemotherapy in colon cancer stage III.

