Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preadipocyte exosomes promote early stage breast cancer formation
by enhancing cancer stem cell renewal signaling


The tumor microenvironment plays a critical role in regulating breast
cancer progression. Adipocytes differentiate from preadipocytes, which
possess mesenchymal stem cell properties. Preadipocytes and adipocytes
are essential components of the tumor microenvironment, and signaling
between preadipocytes and breast cancer cells has been found to promote
breast tumor formation and metastasis. Exosomes secreted from
preadipocytes are also important components of the cancer stem cell
niche. The primary goal of our studies is to examine how
preadipocyte-derived exosomes can regulate early-stage breast cancer
formation via regulating stem cell renewal. We use human and mouse
preadipocytes and early-stage breast cancer cells (ductal carcinoma in
situ, DCIS), as well as xenografts in immunodeficient mice to determine
the role of preadipocyte secreted exosomes in DCIS stem cell behavior and
tumor formation. By using protein arrays, we reveal CD81 and FLOT-1 as
key exosomal protein markers and SOX2 and SOX9 as exosomal secretion of
stem cell renewal regulators. We identify a key miR-140/SOX2/SOX9 axis
that regulates differentiation, stemness, and migration in the tumor
microenvironment. Next, we find that the natural antitumor compound
shikonin can suppress preadipocyte signaling, inhibiting nearby DCIS
cells. Through co-culture experiments we show that shikonin treated
preadipocytes secrete exosomes containing high levels of miR-140 that can
impact nearby DCIS cells through targeting SOX9 signaling. We demonstrate
that preadipocyte-derived exosomes promote tumorigenesis in vivo,
providing strong support for the importance of exosomal signaling in the
tumor microenvironment. Finally, our data also show that targeting the
tumor microenvironment may assist in blocking tumor formation.

