Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic stress promotes lung cancer development via IGF-1R pathway


Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Although
smoking is a main cause, approximately 25% of lung cancer cases are not
attributable to tobacco use. Epidemiological studies strongly suggest
that chronic stress influences cancer development and progression. Recent
mechanistic studies showed that biological signaling pathways could
contribute to such effects. But the underlying mechanisms for the
association between chronic stress and lung cancer development are poorly
understood. The purpose of this study is to investigate whether chronic
stress can induce lung cancer development and, if so, what is the
mechanism underlying the chronic stress-induced lung cancer development.
We observed that stress hormone, norepinephrine (NE) increased cell
viability in the absence of growth factors, foci formation, and colony
formation in human bronchial epithelial cells and activated the type 1
insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-1R) pathway. We found that
chronic stress resulted in high levels of NE in serum, activation of
IGF-1R in lung tissue and promoted urethane-induced lung tumor formation
in vivo. Moreover, inhibition of the IGF-1R pathway suppressed NE-induced
transformed phenotypes in vitro. We further confirmed that chronic
stress-induced lung tumor formation was greater in mice carrying
lung-specific human IGF-1R transgene (Tg) than in wild type mice. Our
results indicate that chronic stress may promote lung cancer development
via the IGF-1R pathway, suggesting that IGF-1R is an effective target for
the chemoprevention of stress-induced lung cancer.

