Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A population-based survey of excess cancers observed in Ewing's
sarcoma and in their first-, second-, and third-degree relatives


Purpose: The purpose of this study is to investigate whether individuals
with Ewing's sarcoma are at increased risk of developing other cancers.
The presence of excess cancers in first-, second-, and third-degree
relatives of ES cases is also investigated.Background: Ewing's sarcoma
(ES) is a rare, aggressive bone cancer that affects children and young
adults. In 85% of ES cases, a chromosomal translocation between the EWSR1
gene on chromosome 22 and the FLI1 gene on chromosome 7 is observed in
somatic cells. In the remainder of cases, the EWSR1 gene fuses to other
ETS family gene members. The resulting EWS/ETS fusion protein formed in
ES cases dysregulates target genesthereby promoting oncogenesis.Methods:
The Utah Population Database (UPDB) is a population-based genealogy
linked to both the Utah Cancer Registry and to hospital data from the
University of Utah Health Sciences Center. We used the UPDB to calculate
the relative risks (RR) of 35 cancer sites in ES cases and in their
relatives. RR was calculated using age-, birth-state- (Utah vs.
non-Utah), birth county- (urban vs. rural) and birth-year-specific cancer
rates.Results: We identified 133 individuals with ES who had ancestors in
the UPDB. Brain cancer and complex genotype/karyotype sarcomas were
observed at significant excess in more than one ES case (RR = 10.26; 95%
CI: 1.24, 37.05; RR = 28.33, 95%CI: 3.43, 102.33, respectively).
Individuals with ES had 695 first-degree, 2129 second-degree, and 6285
third-degree relatives in the UPDB. RRs for four cancer sites were
significantly elevated in first-degree relatives: prostate (1.75; 1.06,
2.94), female genital (6.38; 1.13, 23.06), brain (3.68; 1.26, 9.42), and
lung (2.31; 1.01, 5.04). In second-degree relatives, there was a
significantly increased risk of four cancers: Non-Hodgkins lymphoma
(2.07; 1.16, 3.42), breast (1.47; 1.11, 2.01), malignant peripheral nerve
sheath (15.63; 1.89, 56.45), and tongue (4.02; 1.10, 11.75). Lastly,
third-degree relatives had a significantly increased risk for five cancer
sites: acute lymphocytic leukemia (3.74; 1.75, 7.70), stomach (1.87;
1.17, 3.03), prostate (1.23; 1.04, 1.49), brain (1.86; 1.07, 3.24), and
gallbladder (2.73; 1.08, 6.37).Conclusion: The increased risk of several
cancers other than ES in ES cases and in their relatives suggests the
possibility of an inherent genetic predisposition to mutagenesis that
predisposes both to observed mutations and chromosomal rearrangements
seen in ES cases and to additional cancers (primarily brain and prostate)
in individuals who do not have ES.

