Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 peptide-specific immunogenicity correlates with pathologic
response following HER2-pulsed dendritic cell vaccination for early
breast cancer


Introduction:We have developed an autologous HER2-pulsed dendritic cell
(DC) vaccine that induces robust T-cell responses in early breast cancer.
We have also previously demonstrated anti-HER2 Th1 responses to select
class II peptides are preferentially lost early in HER2pos breast
tumorigenesis. We aimed to compare peptide-specific Th1 responses between
pathologic complete (pCR) and incomplete responders (Introduction:We have
developed an autologous HER2-pulsed dendritic cell (DC) vaccine that
induces robust T-cell responses in early breast cancer. We have also
previously demonstrated anti-HER2 Th1 responses to select class II
peptides are preferentially lost early in HER2pos breast tumorigenesis.
We aimed to compare peptide-specific Th1 responses between pathologic
complete (pCR) and incomplete responders (<pCR) following HER2-pulsed DC
vaccination.Methods:Patients with HER2pos DCIS (n = 37) or stage I
invasive breast cancer (IBC) (n = 10) received neoadjuvant HER2-pulsed DC
vaccine prior to surgery. Specimens were examined for residual disease on
pathology. CD4 Th1 responses to 6 HER2 Class II peptides (p42-56,
p98-114, p328-345, p776-790, p927-941, p1166-1180) were measured using
IFN- production by ELISPOT. Th1 response metrics were: (1) anti-HER2
responsivity, (2) response repertoire (i.e. no. of reactive peptides),
and (3) cumulative response. Th1 responses post-vaccination were compared
between pCR (n = 11) and Introduction:We have developed an autologous
HER2-pulsed dendritic cell (DC) vaccine that induces robust T-cell
responses in early breast cancer. We have also previously demonstrated
anti-HER2 Th1 responses to select class II peptides are preferentially
lost early in HER2pos breast tumorigenesis. We aimed to compare
peptide-specific Th1 responses between pathologic complete (pCR) and
incomplete responders (<pCR) following HER2-pulsed DC
vaccination.Methods:Patients with HER2pos DCIS (n = 37) or stage I
invasive breast cancer (IBC) (n = 10) received neoadjuvant HER2-pulsed DC
vaccine prior to surgery. Specimens were examined for residual disease on
pathology. CD4 Th1 responses to 6 HER2 Class II peptides (p42-56,
p98-114, p328-345, p776-790, p927-941, p1166-1180) were measured using
IFN- production by ELISPOT. Th1 response metrics were: (1) anti-HER2
responsivity, (2) response repertoire (i.e. no. of reactive peptides),
and (3) cumulative response. Th1 responses post-vaccination were compared
between pCR (n = 11) and <pCR (n = 36).Results:Forty-three of 47 (91.5%)
vaccinated subjects mounted CD4 Th1 responses post-vaccination. Eleven of
47 (23.4%) achieved pCR; no significant difference in pCR rates were
observed between IBC and DCIS patients (10% vs 27.0%; p = 0.41). pCR and
Introduction:We have developed an autologous HER2-pulsed dendritic cell
(DC) vaccine that induces robust T-cell responses in early breast cancer.
We have also previously demonstrated anti-HER2 Th1 responses to select
class II peptides are preferentially lost early in HER2pos breast
tumorigenesis. We aimed to compare peptide-specific Th1 responses between
pathologic complete (pCR) and incomplete responders (<pCR) following
HER2-pulsed DC vaccination.Methods:Patients with HER2pos DCIS (n = 37) or
stage I invasive breast cancer (IBC) (n = 10) received neoadjuvant
HER2-pulsed DC vaccine prior to surgery. Specimens were examined for
residual disease on pathology. CD4 Th1 responses to 6 HER2 Class II
peptides (p42-56, p98-114, p328-345, p776-790, p927-941, p1166-1180) were
measured using IFN- production by ELISPOT. Th1 response metrics were: (1)
anti-HER2 responsivity, (2) response repertoire (i.e. no. of reactive
peptides), and (3) cumulative response. Th1 responses post-vaccination
were compared between pCR (n = 11) and <pCR (n = 36).Results:Forty-three
of 47 (91.5%) vaccinated subjects mounted CD4 Th1 responses
post-vaccination. Eleven of 47 (23.4%) achieved pCR; no significant
difference in pCR rates were observed between IBC and DCIS patients (10%
vs 27.0%; p = 0.41). pCR and <pCR patients did not differ by anti-HER2
responsivity (90.9% pCR vs 91.7% 0.05). We previously reported a
significant loss of anti-HER2 Th1 responses to p42-56 and p927-941 very
early in breast tumorigenesis (i.e. from healthy donors to DCIS
ultimately to IBC). In this study, compared to Introduction:We have
developed an autologous HER2-pulsed dendritic cell (DC) vaccine that
induces robust T-cell responses in early breast cancer. We have also
previously demonstrated anti-HER2 Th1 responses to select class II
peptides are preferentially lost early in HER2pos breast tumorigenesis.
We aimed to compare peptide-specific Th1 responses between pathologic
complete (pCR) and incomplete responders (<pCR) following HER2-pulsed DC
vaccination.Methods:Patients with HER2pos DCIS (n = 37) or stage I
invasive breast cancer (IBC) (n = 10) received neoadjuvant HER2-pulsed DC
vaccine prior to surgery. Specimens were examined for residual disease on
pathology. CD4 Th1 responses to 6 HER2 Class II peptides (p42-56,
p98-114, p328-345, p776-790, p927-941, p1166-1180) were measured using
IFN- production by ELISPOT. Th1 response metrics were: (1) anti-HER2
responsivity, (2) response repertoire (i.e. no. of reactive peptides),
and (3) cumulative response. Th1 responses post-vaccination were compared
between pCR (n = 11) and <pCR (n = 36).Results:Forty-three of 47 (91.5%)
vaccinated subjects mounted CD4 Th1 responses post-vaccination. Eleven of
47 (23.4%) achieved pCR; no significant difference in pCR rates were
observed between IBC and DCIS patients (10% vs 27.0%; p = 0.41). pCR and
<pCR patients did not differ by anti-HER2 responsivity (90.9% pCR vs
91.7% 0.05). We previously reported a significant loss of anti-HER2 Th1
responses to p42-56 and p927-941 very early in breast tumorigenesis (i.e.
from healthy donors to DCIS ultimately to IBC). In this study, compared
to <pCR, pCR patients demonstrated a significantly higher anti-HER2
responsivity (72.7% pCR vs 33.0% Introduction:We have developed an
autologous HER2-pulsed dendritic cell (DC) vaccine that induces robust
T-cell responses in early breast cancer. We have also previously
demonstrated anti-HER2 Th1 responses to select class II peptides are
preferentially lost early in HER2pos breast tumorigenesis. We aimed to
compare peptide-specific Th1 responses between pathologic complete (pCR)
and incomplete responders (<pCR) following HER2-pulsed DC
vaccination.Methods:Patients with HER2pos DCIS (n = 37) or stage I
invasive breast cancer (IBC) (n = 10) received neoadjuvant HER2-pulsed DC
vaccine prior to surgery. Specimens were examined for residual disease on
pathology. CD4 Th1 responses to 6 HER2 Class II peptides (p42-56,
p98-114, p328-345, p776-790, p927-941, p1166-1180) were measured using
IFN- production by ELISPOT. Th1 response metrics were: (1) anti-HER2
responsivity, (2) response repertoire (i.e. no. of reactive peptides),
and (3) cumulative response. Th1 responses post-vaccination were compared
between pCR (n = 11) and <pCR (n = 36).Results:Forty-three of 47 (91.5%)
vaccinated subjects mounted CD4 Th1 responses post-vaccination. Eleven of
47 (23.4%) achieved pCR; no significant difference in pCR rates were
observed between IBC and DCIS patients (10% vs 27.0%; p = 0.41). pCR and
<pCR patients did not differ by anti-HER2 responsivity (90.9% pCR vs
91.7% 0.05). We previously reported a significant loss of anti-HER2 Th1
responses to p42-56 and p927-941 very early in breast tumorigenesis (i.e.
from healthy donors to DCIS ultimately to IBC). In this study, compared
to <pCR, pCR patients demonstrated a significantly higher anti-HER2
responsivity (72.7% pCR vs 33.0% <pCR, p = 0.04) and response magnitude
(354 vs 110; p = 0.04) to vaccination with p42-56; in addition, there was
a trend toward higher response magnitude (318 pCR vs 168 Introduction:We
have developed an autologous HER2-pulsed dendritic cell (DC) vaccine that
induces robust T-cell responses in early breast cancer. We have also
previously demonstrated anti-HER2 Th1 responses to select class II
peptides are preferentially lost early in HER2pos breast tumorigenesis.
We aimed to compare peptide-specific Th1 responses between pathologic
complete (pCR) and incomplete responders (<pCR) following HER2-pulsed DC
vaccination.Methods:Patients with HER2pos DCIS (n = 37) or stage I
invasive breast cancer (IBC) (n = 10) received neoadjuvant HER2-pulsed DC
vaccine prior to surgery. Specimens were examined for residual disease on
pathology. CD4 Th1 responses to 6 HER2 Class II peptides (p42-56,
p98-114, p328-345, p776-790, p927-941, p1166-1180) were measured using
IFN- production by ELISPOT. Th1 response metrics were: (1) anti-HER2
responsivity, (2) response repertoire (i.e. no. of reactive peptides),
and (3) cumulative response. Th1 responses post-vaccination were compared
between pCR (n = 11) and <pCR (n = 36).Results:Forty-three of 47 (91.5%)
vaccinated subjects mounted CD4 Th1 responses post-vaccination. Eleven of
47 (23.4%) achieved pCR; no significant difference in pCR rates were
observed between IBC and DCIS patients (10% vs 27.0%; p = 0.41). pCR and
<pCR patients did not differ by anti-HER2 responsivity (90.9% pCR vs
91.7% 0.05). We previously reported a significant loss of anti-HER2 Th1
responses to p42-56 and p927-941 very early in breast tumorigenesis (i.e.
from healthy donors to DCIS ultimately to IBC). In this study, compared
to <pCR, pCR patients demonstrated a significantly higher anti-HER2
responsivity (72.7% pCR vs 33.0% <pCR, p = 0.04) and response magnitude
(354 vs 110; p = 0.04) to vaccination with p42-56; in addition, there was
a trend toward higher response magnitude (318 pCR vs 168 <pCR, p = 0.06)
to p927-941 vaccination. No differences were observed in the remaining
four peptide responses between pCR and Introduction:We have developed an
autologous HER2-pulsed dendritic cell (DC) vaccine that induces robust
T-cell responses in early breast cancer. We have also previously
demonstrated anti-HER2 Th1 responses to select class II peptides are
preferentially lost early in HER2pos breast tumorigenesis. We aimed to
compare peptide-specific Th1 responses between pathologic complete (pCR)
and incomplete responders (<pCR) following HER2-pulsed DC
vaccination.Methods:Patients with HER2pos DCIS (n = 37) or stage I
invasive breast cancer (IBC) (n = 10) received neoadjuvant HER2-pulsed DC
vaccine prior to surgery. Specimens were examined for residual disease on
pathology. CD4 Th1 responses to 6 HER2 Class II peptides (p42-56,
p98-114, p328-345, p776-790, p927-941, p1166-1180) were measured using
IFN- production by ELISPOT. Th1 response metrics were: (1) anti-HER2
responsivity, (2) response repertoire (i.e. no. of reactive peptides),
and (3) cumulative response. Th1 responses post-vaccination were compared
between pCR (n = 11) and <pCR (n = 36).Results:Forty-three of 47 (91.5%)
vaccinated subjects mounted CD4 Th1 responses post-vaccination. Eleven of
47 (23.4%) achieved pCR; no significant difference in pCR rates were
observed between IBC and DCIS patients (10% vs 27.0%; p = 0.41). pCR and
<pCR patients did not differ by anti-HER2 responsivity (90.9% pCR vs
91.7% 0.05). We previously reported a significant loss of anti-HER2 Th1
responses to p42-56 and p927-941 very early in breast tumorigenesis (i.e.
from healthy donors to DCIS ultimately to IBC). In this study, compared
to <pCR, pCR patients demonstrated a significantly higher anti-HER2
responsivity (72.7% pCR vs 33.0% <pCR, p = 0.04) and response magnitude
(354 vs 110; p = 0.04) to vaccination with p42-56; in addition, there was
a trend toward higher response magnitude (318 pCR vs 168 <pCR, p = 0.06)
to p927-941 vaccination. No differences were observed in the remaining
four peptide responses between pCR and <pCR
patients.Conclusion:HER2-pulsed DC vaccination induces pathologic
responses in early breast cancer patients, supporting further clinical
development. The key immunogenic HER2 class II peptides that appear to
drive pCR following DC vaccination are incidentally lost very early in
tumorigenesis, suggesting that immune restoration targeting these select
peptides may enable control of early breast cancer.

