Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Emergence of epigenetic regulation of tight junction genes in
recurrent serous epithelial ovarian cancer


Purpose: Despite a complete clinical response following treatment with
surgery and first-line chemotherapy, about 70-90% of advanced ovarian
cancer (OC) patients experience cancer recurrence. Our objective was to
identify potential new therapeutic targets to prevent recurrence by
identifying changes in gene regulation that occur in recurrent versus
matched primary tumors.Procedures: We used 16 primary-recurrent tumor
pairs from patients with stage III/IV serous epithelial OC from the Duke
Gynecologic Oncology Tissue Bank. Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450
BeadChip was used to quantify DNA methylation and Affymetrix Human Genome
U133A arrays were used to quantify gene expression. Methylation data were
analyzed using Illumina's GenomeStudio software and Pearson's r values
for correlation between gene expression (log2 RMA normalized) and
methylation beta values were generated using Prism 6. Genes with
significant correlation between expression and methylation (pPurpose:
Despite a complete clinical response following treatment with surgery and
first-line chemotherapy, about 70-90% of advanced ovarian cancer (OC)
patients experience cancer recurrence. Our objective was to identify
potential new therapeutic targets to prevent recurrence by identifying
changes in gene regulation that occur in recurrent versus matched primary
tumors.Procedures: We used 16 primary-recurrent tumor pairs from patients
with stage III/IV serous epithelial OC from the Duke Gynecologic Oncology
Tissue Bank. Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip was used to
quantify DNA methylation and Affymetrix Human Genome U133A arrays were
used to quantify gene expression. Methylation data were analyzed using
Illumina's GenomeStudio software and Pearson's r values for correlation
between gene expression (log2 RMA normalized) and methylation beta values
were generated using Prism 6. Genes with significant correlation between
expression and methylation (p<0.05) were entered into GATHER to identify
pathways. Gene expression was further analyzed by tumor stage using an
independent dataset. Expression of CLDNs in 28 OC cell lines following
treatment by DNA methyltransferase inhibitor decitabine (DEC) was
analyzed using Affymetrix U133A arrays and RT-PCR. RT-PCR and Western
Blotting were performed for gene expression in siCLDN1 cells.Results:
Methylation-expression relationships for 67 tight junction genes,
including multiple CLDN family genes, emerged as significantly enriched
in recurrent but not primary OCs (Bayes factor 7; pPurpose: Despite a
complete clinical response following treatment with surgery and
first-line chemotherapy, about 70-90% of advanced ovarian cancer (OC)
patients experience cancer recurrence. Our objective was to identify
potential new therapeutic targets to prevent recurrence by identifying
changes in gene regulation that occur in recurrent versus matched primary
tumors.Procedures: We used 16 primary-recurrent tumor pairs from patients
with stage III/IV serous epithelial OC from the Duke Gynecologic Oncology
Tissue Bank. Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip was used to
quantify DNA methylation and Affymetrix Human Genome U133A arrays were
used to quantify gene expression. Methylation data were analyzed using
Illumina's GenomeStudio software and Pearson's r values for correlation
between gene expression (log2 RMA normalized) and methylation beta values
were generated using Prism 6. Genes with significant correlation between
expression and methylation (p<0.05) were entered into GATHER to identify
pathways. Gene expression was further analyzed by tumor stage using an
independent dataset. Expression of CLDNs in 28 OC cell lines following
treatment by DNA methyltransferase inhibitor decitabine (DEC) was
analyzed using Affymetrix U133A arrays and RT-PCR. RT-PCR and Western
Blotting were performed for gene expression in siCLDN1 cells.Results:
Methylation-expression relationships for 67 tight junction genes,
including multiple CLDN family genes, emerged as significantly enriched
in recurrent but not primary OCs (Bayes factor 7; p<0.0001). These
Claudins were also upregulated following DEC treatment, supporting that
DNA methylation regulates their expression. CLDNs expression correlated
with tumor stage and most showed higher expression in tumors as compared
to normal fallopian tube fimbriae and ovarian epithelia (pPurpose:
Despite a complete clinical response following treatment with surgery and
first-line chemotherapy, about 70-90% of advanced ovarian cancer (OC)
patients experience cancer recurrence. Our objective was to identify
potential new therapeutic targets to prevent recurrence by identifying
changes in gene regulation that occur in recurrent versus matched primary
tumors.Procedures: We used 16 primary-recurrent tumor pairs from patients
with stage III/IV serous epithelial OC from the Duke Gynecologic Oncology
Tissue Bank. Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip was used to
quantify DNA methylation and Affymetrix Human Genome U133A arrays were
used to quantify gene expression. Methylation data were analyzed using
Illumina's GenomeStudio software and Pearson's r values for correlation
between gene expression (log2 RMA normalized) and methylation beta values
were generated using Prism 6. Genes with significant correlation between
expression and methylation (p<0.05) were entered into GATHER to identify
pathways. Gene expression was further analyzed by tumor stage using an
independent dataset. Expression of CLDNs in 28 OC cell lines following
treatment by DNA methyltransferase inhibitor decitabine (DEC) was
analyzed using Affymetrix U133A arrays and RT-PCR. RT-PCR and Western
Blotting were performed for gene expression in siCLDN1 cells.Results:
Methylation-expression relationships for 67 tight junction genes,
including multiple CLDN family genes, emerged as significantly enriched
in recurrent but not primary OCs (Bayes factor 7; p<0.0001). These
Claudins were also upregulated following DEC treatment, supporting that
DNA methylation regulates their expression. CLDNs expression correlated
with tumor stage and most showed higher expression in tumors as compared
to normal fallopian tube fimbriae and ovarian epithelia (p<0.05), while
CLDN1 showed lower in tumor than in normal. Treatment with PIKfyve
Inhibitor YM201636, which blocks continuous recycling of CLDN1/2 to cell
membrane, prevented spheroid formation under stem cell culture
conditions. Specifically, knockdown CLDN1 downregulates CD44 and CD133,
and represses spheroid formation in OC cells. CLDN1 knockdown
significantly reduces cell proliferation, migration and wound healing. In
addition, CD44 and CLDN1 expression are inversely correlated in primary
OC but positively correlated in recurrent OC (pPurpose: Despite a
complete clinical response following treatment with surgery and
first-line chemotherapy, about 70-90% of advanced ovarian cancer (OC)
patients experience cancer recurrence. Our objective was to identify
potential new therapeutic targets to prevent recurrence by identifying
changes in gene regulation that occur in recurrent versus matched primary
tumors.Procedures: We used 16 primary-recurrent tumor pairs from patients
with stage III/IV serous epithelial OC from the Duke Gynecologic Oncology
Tissue Bank. Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip was used to
quantify DNA methylation and Affymetrix Human Genome U133A arrays were
used to quantify gene expression. Methylation data were analyzed using
Illumina's GenomeStudio software and Pearson's r values for correlation
between gene expression (log2 RMA normalized) and methylation beta values
were generated using Prism 6. Genes with significant correlation between
expression and methylation (p<0.05) were entered into GATHER to identify
pathways. Gene expression was further analyzed by tumor stage using an
independent dataset. Expression of CLDNs in 28 OC cell lines following
treatment by DNA methyltransferase inhibitor decitabine (DEC) was
analyzed using Affymetrix U133A arrays and RT-PCR. RT-PCR and Western
Blotting were performed for gene expression in siCLDN1 cells.Results:
Methylation-expression relationships for 67 tight junction genes,
including multiple CLDN family genes, emerged as significantly enriched
in recurrent but not primary OCs (Bayes factor 7; p<0.0001). These
Claudins were also upregulated following DEC treatment, supporting that
DNA methylation regulates their expression. CLDNs expression correlated
with tumor stage and most showed higher expression in tumors as compared
to normal fallopian tube fimbriae and ovarian epithelia (p<0.05), while
CLDN1 showed lower in tumor than in normal. Treatment with PIKfyve
Inhibitor YM201636, which blocks continuous recycling of CLDN1/2 to cell
membrane, prevented spheroid formation under stem cell culture
conditions. Specifically, knockdown CLDN1 downregulates CD44 and CD133,
and represses spheroid formation in OC cells. CLDN1 knockdown
significantly reduces cell proliferation, migration and wound healing. In
addition, CD44 and CLDN1 expression are inversely correlated in primary
OC but positively correlated in recurrent OC (p<0.05), indicating a shift
in regulatory mechanisms that may involve stem cells. Thus, CLDNs may be
important for OC stem cell survival and function, which is postulated as
an underlying cause of tumor recurrence.Conclusion: Our findings indicate
that methylation-regulated expression of CLDNs are significantly
associated with recurrent OC and suggest that changes in DNA methylation
modulate emergence of these relationships. CLDNs regulation may play an
important role in tumor recurrence and may offer new therapeutic
opportunities.

