Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BLU-285, the first selective inhibitor of PDGFR D842V and KIT Exon
17 mutants


The advent of imatinib therapy in gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)
has been transformative, altering the treatment of advanced disease in
the majority of patients from supportive care and poor prognosis to a
median 24-month progression free survival in the first line setting.
However, for 20% of patients with gastric GIST, imatinib shows no
therapeutic benefit. These patients are characterized by the amino acid
substitution D842V in the PDGFR protein; this mutation results in
ligand-independent activation of PDGFR and is insensitive to all small
molecule inhibitors approved for GIST. When metastatic, the prognosis for
PDGFR D842V GIST is dire, with median overall survival of 12 months.
Starting with a novel chemical library optimized for kinase selectivity
and potency, we have identified BLU-285, a small molecule kinase
inhibitor that potently inhibits PDGFR D842V mutant activity in vitro
(IC50 = 0.5 nM) and PDGFR D842V autophosphorylation in the cellular
setting (IC50 = 30 nM). We have observed that in addition to PDGFR D842V,
BLU-285 is also a potent inhibitor of the analogous KIT mutation, D816V
in KIT Exon 17 (IC50 = 0.5nM). KIT D816 mutations have been identified in
several human diseases such as systemic mastocytosis (SM), acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), and as resistance mutations in second and third line
GIST, after imatinib and sunitinib failure. Cellular assays measuring
inhibition of KIT mutant autophosphorylation confirm the activity of
BLU-285 against the KIT D816 mutants D816V (HMC1.2 cells, IC50 = 3 nM)
and D816Y (P815 cells, IC50 = 22 nM) as well as other KIT Exon 17 mutants
such as N822K (Kasumi cells, IC50 = 40 nM) found in treatment-refractory
GIST. In vivo, BLU-285 is a well-tolerated, orally bioavailable agent
that achieves dose dependent tumor growth inhibition in a D816Y-driven
xenograft model. A PK-PD-efficacy relationship with BLU-285 has been
established demonstrating that tumor regression results from >90% target
suppression and is observed with 30 mg/kg once daily dosing. Furthermore,
in non-clinical toxicology studies, projected human efficacious exposures
were well tolerated. With potent activity against PDGFR D842V and KIT
Exon 17 mutants, BLU-285 targets previously unaddressed genomic drivers
of disease and provides promise for the treatment of PDGFR D842V-driven
GIST or SM, where more than 90% of patients carry the KIT D816V mutation.
Besides single agent activity, the highly selective BLU-285 offers an
opportunity for combination with other agents in GIST to cover the
entirety of KIT primary and resistance mutants. This approach of pairing
potent, selective kinase inhibitors with defined disease-driving kinase
mutants is designed to fulfill the promise of personalized medicine and,
if clinically proven, may provide maximum benefit to patients. BLU-285 is
scheduled to enter first-in-human phase 1 clinical trials for both the
GIST and SM patient populations in the first half of 2015.

