Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of indenoisoquinoline LMP400
(Indotecan) in BALB/c female mice bearing CT-26 colon tumors


Introduction: The indenoisoquinoline, LMP400 (NSC743400, indotecan), is
currently in Phase I clinical trials for the treatment of solid tumors
and is administered as an IV infusion. The compound is an inhibitor of
topoisomerase I (TOP1) and does not appear to be a substrate for BCRP
(ABCG2) or P-gp (ABCB1). In this study, we evaluated the plasma
pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of LMP400 and the tumor
expression of TOP1 and H2AX in mice bearing CT26 murine colon tumors
after either IV or PO administration of LMP400.Methods: CT26 murine colon
tumors were implanted in female BALB/c mice and 3 weeks after tumor
implantation, the mice were administered 18 mg/kg LMP400 IV or PO. Blood
and tissues were collected between 5 and 2880 min after IV dosing or 5
and 1440 min after PO dosing. Blood was centrifuged to obtain plasma.
Tumor samples for TOP1 ELISA were snap-frozen within 2 min after
euthanasia of the mice while other tissues were weighed prior to being
frozen in liquid N2. Concentrations of LMP400 were determined by LC-MS/MS
and non-compartmental analysis was performed using PK solutions.
Bioavailability was calculated from plasma AUC (0-). Tumor samples were
analyzed by western blot for TOP1 and H2AX concentrations and by ELISA
for TOP1.Results: Plasma Cmax occurred at 5 min (4633 505 ng/mL) after IV
and 15 min (890 279 ng/mL) after PO administration. Plasma AUC0- for IV
and PO were 1639 or 628 gmin/mL, respectively. Plasma t1/2 for IV and PO
were 1515 min and 312 min, respectively. Clearances for LMP400 IV and PO
in plasma were 16 and 29 mL/min/kg, respectively. Oral bioavailability
was 58%. After administration of LMP400 IV, AUC0- in tumor, liver,
kidney, lung, brain, skeletal muscle and fat were 11324, 48670, 54789,
65242, 3009, 5710 and 10849 gmin/mL, respectively. After administration
of LMP400 PO, AUC0- in tumor, liver, kidney, lung, brain, skeletal muscle
and fat were 2711, 6802, 4037, 3715,1066, 804, and 5882 gmin/mL,
respectively. TOP1 in tumor was inhibited while H2AX/H2AX was increased
between 2h and 24h after either IV or PO dosing.Conclusion: LMP400 is
bioavailable after PO administration to mice and results in tumor
inhibition of TOP1 and increases in H2AX/H2AX ratios, suggesting that
LMP400 could be effective if administered as an oral formulation.Support:
UM1CA186690 and P30-CA-47904Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

