Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Naturally occurring mutations in the MPS1 gene predispose cells to
kinase inhibitor drug-resistance


Acquired resistance is the greatest challenge to the effectiveness of
targeted anti-cancer therapies in the clinic. With several MPS1
inhibitors under pre-clinical development, we aimed to investigate how
cancer cells will develop resistance against these inhibitors; therefore
we modeled acquired resistance using a range of MPS1 inhibitors. We
identified and characterized five point mutations in the kinase domain of
MPS1 that confer resistance against multiple inhibitors. Structural
studies showed that several MPS1 mutants conferred resistance by causing
steric hindrance to inhibitor binding. One mutation in particular,
p.C604W, which is close to the gatekeeper residue, rendered MPS1
resistant to all the inhibitors we tested. However, we were able to
design new compounds to specifically overcome this mutation, which in
fact targeted the mutant with more potency than the wild-type MPS1
protein. Importantly, we show that these mutations are present in
untreated cancer cell lines and primary tumour samples, and also
pre-exist in normal lymphoblast and breast tissues. Furthermore, to
confirm this is not specific to MPS1, we show that the EGFR p.T790M
mutation is also pre-existing in cancer cell lines and normal tissue. Our
data therefore suggest that mutations conferring resistance to targeted
therapy are naturally occurring mutations in normal and cancer cells that
are not introduced due to cancer cells being more mutagenic.

