Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KLF5 inhibits angiogenesis in PTEN-deficient prostate cancer by
attenuating AKT activation and subsequent HIF1 accumulation


Background: KLF5 is a basic transcriptional factor that regulates
multiple physiopathological processes. Our recent study showed that
deletion of Klf5 in mouse prostates promotes tumorigenesis initiated by
the deletion of Pten. While molecular characterization of Klf5-null
tumors suggested that angiogenesis was partially responsible for tumor
promotion, the precise function and mechanism of KLF5 deletion in
prostate tumor angiogenesis remain unclear.Results: Using histological
staining of Pten-null mouse prostates, we observed that deletion of Klf5
significantly increased the number of microvessels, which was accompanied
by the upregulation of multiple angiogenesis-related genes based on
microarray analysis with MetaCore software. In human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HuVECs), tube formation and migration, both of which
are indicators of angiogenic activities, were decreased by conditioned
media from PC-3 and DU 145 human prostate cancer cells with KLF5
overexpression, but increased by media from cells with KLF5 knockdown.
HIF1, a key angiogenesis inducer, was upregulated by KLF5 loss at the
protein but not the mRNA level in both mouse tissues and human cell
lines, as examined by immunohistochemical staining, real-time RT-PCR and
Western blotting. Consistently, KLF5 loss also upregulated VEGF and PDGF,
two pro-angiogenic mediators of HIF1 function, as analyzed by
immunohistochemical staining in mouse tissues and ELISA in conditioned
media. Mechanistically, AKT activity, which caused the accumulation of
HIF1, was increased by KLF5 knockout or knockdown but decreased by KLF5
overexpression. Consistently, PI3K/AKT inhibitors abolished the effects
of KLF5 knockdown on angiogenic activity, HIF1 accumulation, and VEGF and
PDGF expression.Conclusion: KLF5 loss enhances tumor angiogenesis by
attenuating PI3K/AKT signaling and subsequent accumulation of HIF1 in
PTEN deficient prostate tumors.

