Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive screen for protein kinases involved in histone
phosphorylation using a biochemical in-vitro approach


Gene expression is regulated by multiple mechanisms. The structure of the
chromatin has been identified as one major regulator of gene expression.
Histone proteins constitute the core of the nucleosomal particles, which
are essential for structuring the DNA into chromatin. Various
post-translational modifications of histones mainly in the N-terminal
region of these proteins will compact or loosen the chromatin which in
turn changes the accessibility of the DNA.Such histone modifications like
methylation, acetylation and phosphorylation can therefore result either
in activation or in repression of the transcription of the respective
genes, depending on the specific amino acid residues modified. While
histone-acetylases and histone-methyl-transferases as well as their
corresponding counterparts, histone-deacetylases and
histone-demethylases, are currently in the focus of epigenetic research,
it is also well documented that histones are extensively modified and
regulated by phosphorylation.In order to identify protein kinases able to
phosphorylate histones we have generated a series of N-terminal peptides
of human histone proteins H1, H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 as well as recombinant
histone proteins. In a biochemical in-vitro activity assay (KinaseFinder)
we tested these peptides and proteins as potential substrates against a
panel of 339 recombinant human serine-threonine- and tyrosine-kinases.
The results of the screens will be presented showing different protein
kinases able to phosphorylate various histones in vitro. Additional data
of approaches to verify and to characterize hit kinases, e.g. with
respect to the specific target amino acid sequences, will be shown.

