Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting and depletion of circulating cancer cells by lipophilic
antibody-modified erythrocytes


There is a great interest in targeting and selective ablation of
populations of circulating cells for research or therapeutic purposes.
Red blood cells (RBCs) are readily available and fully biocompatible
long-circulating intravascular carriers (natural life is 120 days) that
are amenable to chemical modifications, drug loading and reinjection.
Here we demonstrate that using our previously described lipophilic ligand
painting strategy, red blood cells (RBCs) could be in one step converted
into targeted entities that selectively seek and bind various cells in
vitro and in vivo. In vitro, RBCs modified with lipophilic anti-EpCAM or
anti-CD45 antibodies efficiently bound to cancer cells and leukocytes,
forming characteristic rosettes. In vivo, intravenously injected RBCs
painted with anti-CD45 antibody immediately associated with CD45 positive
cells in blood, forming RBC-leukocyte rosettes. Moreover,
anti-CD45-modified RBCs, but not the same amount of anti-CD45 antibody or
anti-CD45-lipid conjugate (1-2 microgram per mouse), depleted over 50% of
CD45+ leukocytes from circulation, with main clearance organs of
leukocytes being liver and spleen with no visible deposition in kidneys
and lungs. Anti-CD20 (rituximab)-painted RBCs efficiently (over 90%)
depleted CD19+/CD20+/CD45+ human lymphoma cells in mantle cell lymphoma
(MCL) JeKo-1 model, while the same amount of rituximab-lipid (2 microgram
per mouse) was much less efficient in lymphoma cell depletion. Treatment
of MCL mice with rituximab-modified RBCs carrying only 2 g of the
antibody resulted in a significant prolongation of survival as compared
to the same amount of antibody control. Lipophilic ligand-painted RBCs is
a novel tool that can be utilized for targeting blood borne cells for
experimental immunology and cancer therapy applications.

