Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting GSK-3: a new approach for the treatment of neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma is a devastating pediatric cancer and most patients older
than 18 months present with multi-organ metastatic disease. High grade or
recurrent disease is refractory to treatment with chemotherapy and almost
uniformly fatal. Because GSK-3beta has been shown to be a positive
regulator of NF-kappaB-mediated survival and chemoresistance in cancer
cells, we hypothesize that the inhibition of GSK-3 may have potential
therapeutic effects in neuroblastoma. To test this premise we used small
molecule inhibitors, Western blotting, apoptotic and MTS assays to study
the effect(s) of GSK-3 inactivation in neuroblastoma cell lines SK-N-DZ
and SK-N-BE(2). Using chemically distinct GSK-3 inhibitors (AR-A014418,
TDZD8 and 9-ING-41), we found that pharmacological inhibition of GSK-3
led to a decrease in proliferation and survival of neuroblastoma cells.
We observed that inhibition of GSK-3 results in decreased expression of
the anti-apoptotic molecules Bcl-XL and XIAP (NF-kappaB target genes) and
a subsequent increase in neuroblastoma cell apoptosis. Moreover, we show
that our novel GSK-3 inhibitor 9-ING-41 enhances the antitumor effects of
irinotecan in neuroblastoma cells. Our results demonstrate that GSK-3
positively regulates neuroblastoma cell survival and proliferation and
suggest that the inhibition of GSK-3 is a promising new approach for the
treatment of neuroblastoma.

