Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glutamate dehydrogenase 1 signals through antioxidant glutathione
peroxidase 1 to regulate redox homeostasis and tumor growth


How mitochondrial glutaminolysis contributes to redox homeostasis in
cancer cells remains unclear. Here we report that the mitochondrial
enzyme glutamate dehydrogenase 1 (GDH1), commonly upregulated in human
cancers, is predominantly important for redox homeostasis in cancer cells
by controlling the intracellular levels of its product
alpha-ketoglutarate (a-KG) and subsequent metabolite fumarate.
Mechanistically, fumarate binds to and activates a ROS scavenging enzyme
glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPx1) to regulate redox homeostasis, which
provides a proliferative advantage to cancer cells and tumor growth. Our
findings not only provide novel insights into understanding of the role
of glutaminolysis in redox homeostasis but also suggest a novel signaling
function of fumarate that regulates GPx1, allowing additional crosstalk
between glutaminolysis, TCA cycle and redox status. Targeting GDH1 by
shRNA or a newly identified small molecule inhibitor R162 resulted in
imbalanced redox homeostasis, leading to attenuated cancer cell
proliferation and tumor growth. Thus, our findings provide
proof-of-principle suggesting GDH1 as a promising therapeutic target in
the treatment of human cancers associated with elevated glutamine
metabolism.

