Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role and regulation of CYP24A1 in endometrial cancer


The cytochrome P450 enzyme, 24-hydroxylase, encoded by CYP24A1 is
critical for the catabolism of 1,25(OH)2D3 (calcitriol). The unbalanced
high levels of CYP24A1 seem to be a determinant of calcitriol resistance
in tumors. We have previously shown that progesterone enhances calcitriol
antitumor activity by upregulating vitamin D receptor expression and
promoting apoptosis in endometrial cancer cells. In the present study, we
evaluated CYP24A1 protein expression in normal and endometrial tumor
tissues, assessed the effect of progesterone and calcitriol on CYP24A1
and its spliced variant expression in endometrial cancer cell lines and
correlated this with tumor cell growth. Expression of CYP24A1 was
assessed in tissue microarrays by immunohistochemistry. A grade-dependent
increase of CYP24A1 expression was found in endometrial carcinomas.
Endometrial cancer cells expressed high levels of CYP24A1 compared to
immortalized endometrial epithelial cells. Furthermore, CYP24A1 is
induced in cells in response to calcitriol. Regulation of CYP24A1 by
progesterone, progestin derivatives, calcitriol and their combination was
examined by RT-PCR and Western blotting following 8, 24, 72 and 120 h
exposure of cells to hormones. In all cancer cell lines, progesterone,
medroxyprogesterone acetate and norgestrol attenuatedcalcitriol-induced
CYP24A1, spliced variant CYP24SV transcripts and protein expression at 72
and 120 h of treatment. Furthermore, knockdown of CYP24A1 gene expression
by siRNA sensitized endometrial cancer cells to the growth suppressive
effect of calcitriol. The data suggest that CYP24A1 overexpression limits
calcitriol anti-proliferative signaling in cancer cells, and provide
evidence that progestins may be beneficial in preserving calcitriol
action in endometrial cancer.

