Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of race and age on choice of surgery in newly diagnosed
breast cancer patients who tested negative for BRCA 1/2 mutation


Introduction:The benefit of bilateral mastectomies in breast cancer
patients who test negative for a deleterious BRCA mutation has not been
proven. In spite of this, a significant number of women with unilateral
breast cancer who test negative for BRCA mutation choose bilateral
mastectomies. We aimed to evaluate the role of age and race in such
decision making.Methodology:Records of 323 patients referred to Cancer
Genetics between January 01,2012 and June 30,2014 for pre-operative
genetic evaluation were analyzed. This cohort consisted of patients with
newly diagnosed breast cancer who met genetic testing criteria. Patients
were excluded if their surgical records were not available, they declined
genetic testing, they underwent surgery prior to their test results being
available or they were positive for BRCA mutation. A total of 148
patients met our inclusion criteria and were evaluated for final
analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS21.Results:Of the
148 women with breast cancer who tested negative for a deleterious BRCA
mutation, 116(78%) were Caucasian, 9(6%) were African-American, 5(3%)
were Asian, 4(3%) were Arab, 3(2%) were Indian, 2(2%) were
American-Indian and 1(1%) was Hispanic. The race or ethnicity could not
be identified in 8(5%) patients.A total of 47(32%) patients ultimately
underwent bilateral mastectomies in this cohort. Of these, 40(27%)
underwent bilateral mastectomies as their initial surgery while 7(5%)
underwent bilateral mastectomies eventually after undergoing partial
mastectomy or simple mastectomy initially.There was no statistically
significant difference between the mean ages of the group that underwent
bilateral mastectomy (48.9 yrs) and the group that underwent partial or
simple mastectomy (49.1 yrs).All of the 8 patients with an unknown
ethnicity underwent bilateral mastectomy. The rest of the mastectomies
(39) were performed in Caucasian patients. None of the non-Caucasian
patients underwent bilateral mastectomy. This difference was
statistically significant (pIntroduction:The benefit of bilateral
mastectomies in breast cancer patients who test negative for a
deleterious BRCA mutation has not been proven. In spite of this, a
significant number of women with unilateral breast cancer who test
negative for BRCA mutation choose bilateral mastectomies. We aimed to
evaluate the role of age and race in such decision
making.Methodology:Records of 323 patients referred to Cancer Genetics
between January 01,2012 and June 30,2014 for pre-operative genetic
evaluation were analyzed. This cohort consisted of patients with newly
diagnosed breast cancer who met genetic testing criteria. Patients were
excluded if their surgical records were not available, they declined
genetic testing, they underwent surgery prior to their test results being
available or they were positive for BRCA mutation. A total of 148
patients met our inclusion criteria and were evaluated for final
analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS21.Results:Of the
148 women with breast cancer who tested negative for a deleterious BRCA
mutation, 116(78%) were Caucasian, 9(6%) were African-American, 5(3%)
were Asian, 4(3%) were Arab, 3(2%) were Indian, 2(2%) were
American-Indian and 1(1%) was Hispanic. The race or ethnicity could not
be identified in 8(5%) patients.A total of 47(32%) patients ultimately
underwent bilateral mastectomies in this cohort. Of these, 40(27%)
underwent bilateral mastectomies as their initial surgery while 7(5%)
underwent bilateral mastectomies eventually after undergoing partial
mastectomy or simple mastectomy initially.There was no statistically
significant difference between the mean ages of the group that underwent
bilateral mastectomy (48.9 yrs) and the group that underwent partial or
simple mastectomy (49.1 yrs).All of the 8 patients with an unknown
ethnicity underwent bilateral mastectomy. The rest of the mastectomies
(39) were performed in Caucasian patients. None of the non-Caucasian
patients underwent bilateral mastectomy. This difference was
statistically significant (p<0.001).Conclusion:Our study demonstrates
that a significant proportion(32%) of BRCA negative women with breast
cancer undergo bilateral mastectomies. Furthermore, Caucasian patients
with BRCA negative breast cancer are more likely to choose bilateral
mastectomies than non-Caucasians. However, this result has to be
interpreted with caution as our sample size of non-Caucasians was
small(24). Considering our catchment population, this small sample brings
concerns that a significant proportion of non-Caucasian patients may not
be undergoing genetic testing despite meeting criteria. We did not find a
significant impact of age on choice of surgery in BRCA negative women
with breast cancer. Further studies with larger sample size are needed to
better understand the role of race and age in access to genetic testing
and surgical decision making.

