Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 isoforms in prostate cancer
bone metastases


Bone metastases dominate the clinical picture of men with advanced
prostate cancer (PCa). The fibroblast growth factor (FGF)/FGF receptor
(FGFR) complex is commonly altered during PCa progression. Four highly
conserved genes (FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, and FGFR4) encode a repertoire of
alternatively spliced variants of FGFRs that vary in the extracellular
ligand-binding and intracellular kinase domains. A previous study from
our group implicated FGFR1 as a therapy target for PCa bone metastases
(Sci Transl Med 2014; 6:252ra122). One of the most important mechanisms
by which FGFRs determine specificity for different FGFs is by alternative
exon usage of the immunoglobulin-like (Ig-like) motif of the
extracellular domain. We analyzed FGFR1 transcripts in 183 human PCa
samples and in PCa patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) assessed by RNA
sequencing. We identified eight different protein coding transcript to be
the most abundantly expressed, namely ENST00000326324; ENST00000356207;
ENST00000397103 (with a predicted protein length of 731 to 733 aa) and
ENST00000397091; ENST00000397108; ENST00000397113; ENST00000425967;
ENST00000532791 (with a predicted protein length of 820 to 853aa).
Probably reflecting FGFR1alpha/beta isoforms: FGFR1alpha, containing
three Ig-like domains and FGFR1beta, containing only two Ig-like domains.
Interestingly, different PCa tissue samples expressed different
isoforms.We subsequently assessed, by real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction, the expression of FGFR1alpha and beta in three
PCa cell lines (PC3, DU145 and C4-2B) and seven PCa PDXs (MDA PCa 2b, MDA
PCa 118b, MDA PCa 155-12; MDA PCa 146-10; MDA PCa 146-12; MDA PCa 150-3
and MDA PCa 183) derived from primary PCa, bone metastases and brain
metastases and reflecting the typical adenocarcinoma as well as,
adenocarcinomas with neuroendrocrine differentiation and small cell
carcinomas of PCa. We found that all PDXs express primarily FGFR1alpha
isoform while PCa cell lines express FGFR1beta.We stably transfected PC3
cells with FGFR1alpha (NM_023110.2) and FGFR1beta (NM_023105.2) isoforms.
After clones were established, we placed the cells for 10 days in culture
and found that tissue culture plates containing PC3 expressing FGFR1alpha
had significantly more cells compared with dishes containing PC3
expressing FGF1beta isoform as assessed by direct cell counting in a
phase contrast microscope. Furthermore, PC3 cells transfected with FGFR1
alpha display a more adhesive phenotype than cells transfected with
FGFR1beta or empty vector as assessed by cell attachment in a 24-well
plate.We conclude that FGFR1 isoforms are involved in the pathogenesis of
PCa and can be used to develop markers of response to FGFR1 blockade.
These results warrant further studies to fully understand the biological
implications of FGFR1 isoforms in the pathogenesis of PCa.

