Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-based study to overcome cross-reactivity of novel
androgen receptor inhibitors


The mutation-driven transformation of clinically used anti-androgens into
agonists of human androgen receptor (AR) represents a major challenge in
the current treatment of prostate cancer (PCa). To address this problem,
we have developed a novel class of AR inhibitors targeting the
DNA-binding domain (DBD) of the receptor, which is distanced from the
mutations-prone androgen binding site (ABS) in the ligand-binding domain
(LBD) of the AR, targeted by all conventional antiandrogens. While many
members of the developed phenyl-thiazol-2-yl-morpholine series
demonstrated potent sub-micromolar inhibition of the wild-type AR, some
compounds also exhibited an undesired partial agonistic effect toward the
T877A mutated form of the receptor, implying their cross-interaction with
the AR ABS.To study the molecular basis of the cross-reactivity, we have
solved the T877A mutated form of the AR LBD in complex with one developed
compound exhibiting such unwanted partial agonism. Based on the resolved
crystal structure, we have identified critical protein-ligand
interactions and conformational changes in wild-type and T877A forms of
AR that drive observed agonistic effects. The identified structural basis
has further been used to modify the scaffold of developed AR DBD binders
to eliminate their cross-reactivity toward T877A mutated AR LBD. In
particular, the replacement of the phenyl ring with less hydrophobic
heterocycles resulted in a series of inhibitors that did not demonstrate
affinity toward ABS or exhibit an undesired agonistic effect on AR. This
study provides insights into the development of AR inhibitors with high
specificity, which may help overcome the mutation-driven resistance of
anti-AR drugs in the treatment of PCa.

