Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical results of SGN-CD19A in combination with R-ICE or
R-CHOP in non-Hodgkin lymphoma models


SGN-CD19A is an antibody drug conjugate (ADC) that recognizes CD19, a
B-cell specific marker expressed in B-cell malignancies including
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). SGN-CD19A is currently in a phase I clinical
trial for adult patients with relapsed refractory B-cell NHL (CT.gov
NCT01786135) in which it has shown evidence of single-agent activity (1).
This ADC binds CD19, internalizes, and releases cys-mcMMAF, which
ultimately induces apoptosis in targeted cells (2). Lymphoma tumor
xenografts treated with SGN-CD19A show growth delay in a dose dependent
manner. Here we show that SGN-CD19A in combination with standard of care
[rituximab/ifosfamide/carboplatin/etoposide (R-ICE),
rituximab/cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vincristine/prednisone (R-CHOP),
or components] exceeds the activity of SGN-CD19A alone and results in
impressive anti-tumor activity in multiple xenograft models. It was
notable that in some xenograft models, SGN-CD19A + R-CHOP or SGN-CD19A +
R-ICE yielded activity that was similar to SGN-CD19A plus rituximab
alone. This strong interaction between rituximab and SGN-CD19A was
modeled in vitro. SGN-CD19A synergized with rituximab, in the absence of
cross-linking, to cause decreased cell viability in NHL cell lines. These
data suggest that cell autonomous signaling contributes to the unique
interaction between rituximab and SGN-CD19A. Our in vivo and in vitro
data support R-CHOP, R-ICE, or rituximab as viable combination therapies
for NHL patients with SGN-CD19A.1) Uma Borate et al. A first-in-human
phase 1 study of the antibody-drug conjugate SGN-CD19A in relapsed or
refractory B-lineage acute leukemia and highly aggressive lymphoma. Blood
2013 122:14372) Che-Leung Law et al. Preclinical characterization of an
auristatin-based anti-CD19 drug conjugate, SGN-19A. Abstract number 625.
In: Proceedings of the 102th Annual Meeting of the American Association
for Cancer Research; 2011 Apr 2-6; Orlando, FL.

