Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ELTD1 and Plexin-B2 as novel antibody therapies against glioma
biomarkers


PURPOSE: Gliomas consist of up to 80% of malignant brain tumors that are
invasive and typically resistant to radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
Finding biomarkers to high-grade gliomas can enable better diagnosis and
therapeutic intervention for this disease. Through bioinformatics and
microarray experiments, we have identified ELTD1 and Plexin-B2 as
biomarkers for high-grade human gliomas. Here, we report our findings in
vivo using anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2 antibodies on mouse GL261 glioma
models. Using MRI we investigate tumor growth and animal survival rate,
and as well as report histological findings using mouse tumor
tissue.METHODS: Mice were implanted with GL261 cells and were either
untreated or administered anti-ELTD1, anti-VEGF or anti-c-Met antibodies.
MRI experiments were performed on a magnet imaging system. Animals were
immobilized by using isoflurane and O2 and placed in a coil for signal
transmission. MRI was used to assess tumor growth and calculate tumor
volumes over a 21 day time period. Percent survival was obtained from
time-points when mice are euthanized 1-2 days prior to expected
disease-initiated deaths. Additionally, representative histology slides
(H&E) obtained from GL261 glioma-bearing mice that were either untreated
(UT) or treated with anti-ELTD1, anti-c-Met, or mouse anti-VEGF
antibodies. Histogram of mitotic index and atypical mitosis were
identified. Lastly, representative IHC slides for CD-31 obtained from
GL261 glioma-bearing mice that were either untreated (UT), or treated
with anti-ELTD1, anti-c-Met, or mouse anti-VEGF antibodies to compare MVD
(number of vessels/m2) for each group.RESULTS: There was a significance
increase in animal survival for anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2 and
anti-VEGF antibodies when compared to untreated mice. There was a
significance decrease in tumor volumes for anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2
anti-VEGF and anti-c-Met (***pPURPOSE: Gliomas consist of up to 80% of
malignant brain tumors that are invasive and typically resistant to
radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Finding biomarkers to high-grade gliomas
can enable better diagnosis and therapeutic intervention for this
disease. Through bioinformatics and microarray experiments, we have
identified ELTD1 and Plexin-B2 as biomarkers for high-grade human
gliomas. Here, we report our findings in vivo using anti-ELTD1 and
anti-Plexin-B2 antibodies on mouse GL261 glioma models. Using MRI we
investigate tumor growth and animal survival rate, and as well as report
histological findings using mouse tumor tissue.METHODS: Mice were
implanted with GL261 cells and were either untreated or administered
anti-ELTD1, anti-VEGF or anti-c-Met antibodies. MRI experiments were
performed on a magnet imaging system. Animals were immobilized by using
isoflurane and O2 and placed in a coil for signal transmission. MRI was
used to assess tumor growth and calculate tumor volumes over a 21 day
time period. Percent survival was obtained from time-points when mice are
euthanized 1-2 days prior to expected disease-initiated deaths.
Additionally, representative histology slides (H&E) obtained from GL261
glioma-bearing mice that were either untreated (UT) or treated with
anti-ELTD1, anti-c-Met, or mouse anti-VEGF antibodies. Histogram of
mitotic index and atypical mitosis were identified. Lastly,
representative IHC slides for CD-31 obtained from GL261 glioma-bearing
mice that were either untreated (UT), or treated with anti-ELTD1,
anti-c-Met, or mouse anti-VEGF antibodies to compare MVD (number of
vessels/m2) for each group.RESULTS: There was a significance increase in
animal survival for anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2 and anti-VEGF
antibodies when compared to untreated mice. There was a significance
decrease in tumor volumes for anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2 anti-VEGF and
anti-c-Met (***p<0.001) when compared to untreated animals. Significant
decreases in the mitotic index were also found for anti-ELTD1 and
anti-c-Met treatment groups compared to untreated mice (pPURPOSE: Gliomas
consist of up to 80% of malignant brain tumors that are invasive and
typically resistant to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Finding biomarkers
to high-grade gliomas can enable better diagnosis and therapeutic
intervention for this disease. Through bioinformatics and microarray
experiments, we have identified ELTD1 and Plexin-B2 as biomarkers for
high-grade human gliomas. Here, we report our findings in vivo using
anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2 antibodies on mouse GL261 glioma models.
Using MRI we investigate tumor growth and animal survival rate, and as
well as report histological findings using mouse tumor tissue.METHODS:
Mice were implanted with GL261 cells and were either untreated or
administered anti-ELTD1, anti-VEGF or anti-c-Met antibodies. MRI
experiments were performed on a magnet imaging system. Animals were
immobilized by using isoflurane and O2 and placed in a coil for signal
transmission. MRI was used to assess tumor growth and calculate tumor
volumes over a 21 day time period. Percent survival was obtained from
time-points when mice are euthanized 1-2 days prior to expected
disease-initiated deaths. Additionally, representative histology slides
(H&E) obtained from GL261 glioma-bearing mice that were either untreated
(UT) or treated with anti-ELTD1, anti-c-Met, or mouse anti-VEGF
antibodies. Histogram of mitotic index and atypical mitosis were
identified. Lastly, representative IHC slides for CD-31 obtained from
GL261 glioma-bearing mice that were either untreated (UT), or treated
with anti-ELTD1, anti-c-Met, or mouse anti-VEGF antibodies to compare MVD
(number of vessels/m2) for each group.RESULTS: There was a significance
increase in animal survival for anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2 and
anti-VEGF antibodies when compared to untreated mice. There was a
significance decrease in tumor volumes for anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2
anti-VEGF and anti-c-Met (***p<0.001) when compared to untreated animals.
Significant decreases in the mitotic index were also found for anti-ELTD1
and anti-c-Met treatment groups compared to untreated mice (p<0.05 for
both). Significant decreases in MVD were found for the anti- ELTD1
treatment group compared to untreated mice (pPURPOSE: Gliomas consist of
up to 80% of malignant brain tumors that are invasive and typically
resistant to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Finding biomarkers to
high-grade gliomas can enable better diagnosis and therapeutic
intervention for this disease. Through bioinformatics and microarray
experiments, we have identified ELTD1 and Plexin-B2 as biomarkers for
high-grade human gliomas. Here, we report our findings in vivo using
anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2 antibodies on mouse GL261 glioma models.
Using MRI we investigate tumor growth and animal survival rate, and as
well as report histological findings using mouse tumor tissue.METHODS:
Mice were implanted with GL261 cells and were either untreated or
administered anti-ELTD1, anti-VEGF or anti-c-Met antibodies. MRI
experiments were performed on a magnet imaging system. Animals were
immobilized by using isoflurane and O2 and placed in a coil for signal
transmission. MRI was used to assess tumor growth and calculate tumor
volumes over a 21 day time period. Percent survival was obtained from
time-points when mice are euthanized 1-2 days prior to expected
disease-initiated deaths. Additionally, representative histology slides
(H&E) obtained from GL261 glioma-bearing mice that were either untreated
(UT) or treated with anti-ELTD1, anti-c-Met, or mouse anti-VEGF
antibodies. Histogram of mitotic index and atypical mitosis were
identified. Lastly, representative IHC slides for CD-31 obtained from
GL261 glioma-bearing mice that were either untreated (UT), or treated
with anti-ELTD1, anti-c-Met, or mouse anti-VEGF antibodies to compare MVD
(number of vessels/m2) for each group.RESULTS: There was a significance
increase in animal survival for anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2 and
anti-VEGF antibodies when compared to untreated mice. There was a
significance decrease in tumor volumes for anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2
anti-VEGF and anti-c-Met (***p<0.001) when compared to untreated animals.
Significant decreases in the mitotic index were also found for anti-ELTD1
and anti-c-Met treatment groups compared to untreated mice (p<0.05 for
both). Significant decreases in MVD were found for the anti- ELTD1
treatment group compared to untreated mice (p<0.01) and finally,
anti-ELTD1 therapy also had a significantly decreased MVD compared to
anti-c- Met or anti-VEGF therapies.DISCUSSION: ELTD1 is found to be
associated with angiogenesis and Plexin-B2 is associated with cell
proliferation and angiogenesis. Our in vivo studies have found that
anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2 antibodies to decrease tumor volumes and
increase animal survival in mouse GL261 glioma models. Additionally,
anti-ELTD1 therapy was found to decrease the mitotic index and MVD in
mouse GL261 glioma model. Future studies will investigate anti-ELTD1 and
anti-Plexin-B2 antibody therapies in human xenografts. Our results
indicate that anti-ELTD1 and anti-Plexin-B2 antibodies could be potential
therapies for high-grade gliomas in humans.

