Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of DNA hypermethylation in two cases of
peritoneal mesothelioma


Background: Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a rare disease with a poor
prognosis. Pleural mesothelioma, which is the most common type of MM, is
considered to be caused by asbestos exposure and is increasing in
incidence, with about 15,000 new cases diagnosed worldwide annually. On
the other hand, peritoneal mesothelioma is a very rare type of MM; thus
its pathogenesis is even less understood than pleural mesothelioma.
Recent research on the pathogenesis of malignant pleural mesothelioma has
indicated that both epigenetic and genetic alterations contribute to
tumorigenesis. Here, we hypothesize that peritoneal mesothelioma also has
an epigenetic alteration in the same genes (KAZALD1, TMEM30B and MAPK13).
Our goal is to identify DNA methylation of these three candidate genes in
two peritoneal mesothelioma cases. Methods: Laser capture microdissection
(LCM) was used to separate diseased sections of formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples from one surgically resected tissue
(epithelial type) and one autopsy tissue (sarcomatous type). Genomic DNA
was subsequently extracted by the standard phenol chloroform method. The
DNA was then treated with sodium bisulfite, and pyrosequencing analysis
was used to quantitatively analyze the methylation of candidate genes
reported to be hypermethylated in malignant pleural mesothelioma
(KAZALD1, TMEM30B and MAPK13). Results: TMEM30B and MAPK13 were not
methylated in either case. However, KAZALD1 was highly methylated in
sarcomatoid type peritoneal mesothelioma. Discussion: We first report
that the KAZALD1 gene was hypermethylated in sarcomatoid type malignant
peritoneal mesothelioma.

