Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent gain-of-function CCR4 mutations in adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL)


High expression of CC chemokine receptor 4 (CCR4) has been identified as
a hallmark gene in ATLL, an aggressive peripheral T-cell neoplasm. CCR4
is a chemokine receptor, which has a critical role in immune cell
trafficking. CCR4 ligands, CCL17 and CCL22, were produced in lymph nodes
and skin from dendritic cells, macrophages and Langerhans cells. Most
ATLL cases express surface CCR4 (90%) and infiltrate to lymph nodes and
skin. These observations suggest that CCR4 could have a role in ATLL
biology, but it is still unclear whether dysregulation of CCR4 function
contributes to ATLL pathogenesis.We performed RNA-Seq for two primary
ATLL cases and discovered recurrent non-sense mutations in CCR4. Though
an extended analysis using Sanger sequencing, CCR4 mutations were
detected in 14/53 ATLL samples (26%) and consisted exclusively of
nonsense or frameshift mutations that truncated the coding region at
C329, Q330 or Y331 in the carboxy-terminus. In 5 cases for which paired
normal DNA was available, three different CCR4 mutations were detected
only in the ATLL cells (Q330*; Q330 frameshift; Y331*), demonstrating
that they were acquired somatically during malignant transformation or
progression. Chemotaxic assay using 32D, a mouse myeloid cell line, and
ED40515(+), an ATLL cell line, clarified that the ectopic expression of
CCR4-Q330* enhanced the chemotactic ability of the transduced cells
toward CCL17 and CCL22 rather than CCR4-WT transduced cells. To
understand the mechanism of this enhanced chemotactic ability, we studied
the change in surface CCR4 levels after CCL22 exposure in CCR4-WT-and
CCR4-Q330*-reconstituted ED40515(+) cells. Compared with CCR4-WT, CCR4
internalization in CCR4-Q330*-reconstituted cells was significantly
impaired. Thus, the ATLL CCR4 mutants impair desensitization by ligand,
which likely contributes to the enhanced chemotaxis of cells bearing
these mutants.We explored the influence of the ATLL CCR4 mutants on
PI3K/AKT signaling by immunoblot analysis and phosphor-flow analysis.
CCR4-Q330*-reconstituted ED40515(+) showed strong activation of AKT with
CCL22 ligation compared with CCR4-WT-reconstituted cell. Furthermore, we
tested whether the acquisition of CCR4 mutations by ATLL cells imparts a
selective growth advantage relative to cells with wild type CCR4.
CCR4-Q330*-reconstituted cells had a selective growth advantage in the
presence of CCL22, supporting at least in part the hypothesis that CCR4
mutation are able to provide the affected cells a positive selection
pressure through CCL22 ligation and contributes to ATLL pathogenesis.Our
findings implicate somatic gain-of-function CCR4 mutations in the
pathogenesis of ATLL and suggest that inhibition of CCR4 signaling might
have therapeutic potential in this refractory malignancy.

