Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of intrinsic apoptotic pathway gene polymorphisms on the
development and progression of acute myeloid leukemia: Case-control study


Background: Apoptosis plays a pivotal role in maintaining cellular
homeostasis mainly in rapidly proliferating tissue like hematopoietic
tissue. Defective apoptosis is one of the hallmarks of cancer as it plays
a crucial role in malignant transformation through disruption of
homeostasis mechanism resulting in acquired chemo-resistance.Aim: The
functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in apoptotic genes can
influence the gene expression leading to altered apoptosis that may
promote malignancy. Moreover, these SNPs might also influence the
treatment outcome, since most of the chemotherapeutic drugs being used
are aimed to induce apoptosis of malignant cells. The present study
mainly aims to evaluate the role of SNPs in BCL2 (-938C>A (rs2279115);
BAX (-248G>A (rs4645878), CASP9 [-1263A>G (rs4645978); -712C>T
(rs4645981); -293del (rs4645982); Ex5+32G>A (rs1052576)] with development
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and treatment outcome in terms of disease
free survival (DFS) among patients who have achieved complete
remission(CR) rates after first induction chemotherapy.Methods: The study
includes 225 AML cases and 307 age-gender matched controls for
case-control comparison. The study was approved by ethical committee of
Osmania University. Before collecting 5ml of blood sample, each
participant had provided written informed consent. Baseline line clinical
characteristics and follow-up data were collected from the tumor
registries with the help of oncologist. Genomic DNA was extracted and
SNPs were genotyped using PCR, RFLP, Tetra primer techniques. The
genotype data was subjected to various statistical analyses to correlate
with disease occurrence and treatment outcome in terms of CR and DFS
rates using SPSS Software. We have also performed non parametric analysis
to know gene-gene interaction through Multi Dimensionality Reduction
(MDR).Results: The single SNP analysis had revealed that BCL2
(rs2279115), BAX (rs4645878), CASP9 (rs4645978) and CASP9 (rs4645982)
were significantly associated with the origin of AML. Survival analysis
had shown that minor alleles of both CASP9 (rs4645978 and rs4645982) SNPs
were associated with reduced DFS rates (log rank p = 0.02). Further, cox
regression analysis had also confirmed these observations where CASP9
rs4645978 (HR = 1.91; 95%CI = 1.19-3.07; p = 0.008) and rs4645982 (HR =
1.88; 95%CI = 1.06-3.35; p = 0.03) had elevated risk for relapse and
shorter DFS rates. The MDR analysis had revealed that CASP9 (rs4645981)
is the highest predicting variable. The best interaction model was found
to be CASP9 (-1263A>G (rs4645978); -712C>T (rs4645981); and BCL2
(rs2279115) with CVC = 8/10 and TAB = 0.604.Conclusion: Our results
suggest that CASP9 (rs4645978 and rs4645982) SNPs might influence the AML
development and DFS rates after first induction chemotherapy.

