Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting low molecular weight (LMW) cyclin E-Cdk2 pathway for the
prevention of breast cancer


Our laboratory was first to discover that full length cyclin E is
proteolytically cleaved into low-molecular weight isoforms (LMW-E)
specifically in tumor cells. The LMW-E isoforms are hyperactive and
over-expressed in 70% of all triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
compared to only 30% of non-TNBC patients. Overexpression of LMW-E in
transgenic mice induces mammary tumors similar to the basal subtype of
breast cancer, which accounts for 70% of all human TNBCs. We have
reported that Cdk2 deficient mice were completely resistant to LMW-cyclin
E mediated mammary tumors. In this study, we have interrogated the
ability of roscovitine in preventing the development of triple negative
mammary tumors in the MMTV-LMW-E; p53+/- mouse model. Initially, a group
of mice were treated from age 3 months with vehicle (DMSO/PBS, 40:60v/v,
N = 8) or roscovitine (100 mg/kg, N = 8) once every 4 and 5 days
alternatively by intraperitoneal injection and were followed up for
mammary tumor development. Mice did not show any signs of toxicity. In
this schedule of treatment, we did not find any difference in time to
tumor formation or survival between the 2 groups (8.3 vs 7.9 months, P =
0.70, and 8.9 vs 8.4 months, P = 0.98, respectively). However, we found a
2.8-fold increase in tumor doubling time in the roscovitine-treated group
indicating that roscovitine treatment decreased tumor growth (12.1+/-4.4
vs 4.4+/-0.9 days, POur laboratory was first to discover that full length
cyclin E is proteolytically cleaved into low-molecular weight isoforms
(LMW-E) specifically in tumor cells. The LMW-E isoforms are hyperactive
and over-expressed in 70% of all triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
compared to only 30% of non-TNBC patients. Overexpression of LMW-E in
transgenic mice induces mammary tumors similar to the basal subtype of
breast cancer, which accounts for 70% of all human TNBCs. We have
reported that Cdk2 deficient mice were completely resistant to LMW-cyclin
E mediated mammary tumors. In this study, we have interrogated the
ability of roscovitine in preventing the development of triple negative
mammary tumors in the MMTV-LMW-E; p53+/- mouse model. Initially, a group
of mice were treated from age 3 months with vehicle (DMSO/PBS, 40:60v/v,
N = 8) or roscovitine (100 mg/kg, N = 8) once every 4 and 5 days
alternatively by intraperitoneal injection and were followed up for
mammary tumor development. Mice did not show any signs of toxicity. In
this schedule of treatment, we did not find any difference in time to
tumor formation or survival between the 2 groups (8.3 vs 7.9 months, P =
0.70, and 8.9 vs 8.4 months, P = 0.98, respectively). However, we found a
2.8-fold increase in tumor doubling time in the roscovitine-treated group
indicating that roscovitine treatment decreased tumor growth (12.1+/-4.4
vs 4.4+/-0.9 days, P<0.05). This was due to a decreased proliferation as
measured by BrdU immunohistochemistry (IHC) (13.6+/-0.9% vs 30.0 +/-
7.7%, POur laboratory was first to discover that full length cyclin E is
proteolytically cleaved into low-molecular weight isoforms (LMW-E)
specifically in tumor cells. The LMW-E isoforms are hyperactive and
over-expressed in 70% of all triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
compared to only 30% of non-TNBC patients. Overexpression of LMW-E in
transgenic mice induces mammary tumors similar to the basal subtype of
breast cancer, which accounts for 70% of all human TNBCs. We have
reported that Cdk2 deficient mice were completely resistant to LMW-cyclin
E mediated mammary tumors. In this study, we have interrogated the
ability of roscovitine in preventing the development of triple negative
mammary tumors in the MMTV-LMW-E; p53+/- mouse model. Initially, a group
of mice were treated from age 3 months with vehicle (DMSO/PBS, 40:60v/v,
N = 8) or roscovitine (100 mg/kg, N = 8) once every 4 and 5 days
alternatively by intraperitoneal injection and were followed up for
mammary tumor development. Mice did not show any signs of toxicity. In
this schedule of treatment, we did not find any difference in time to
tumor formation or survival between the 2 groups (8.3 vs 7.9 months, P =
0.70, and 8.9 vs 8.4 months, P = 0.98, respectively). However, we found a
2.8-fold increase in tumor doubling time in the roscovitine-treated group
indicating that roscovitine treatment decreased tumor growth (12.1+/-4.4
vs 4.4+/-0.9 days, P<0.05). This was due to a decreased proliferation as
measured by BrdU immunohistochemistry (IHC) (13.6+/-0.9% vs 30.0 +/-
7.7%, P<0.05) and an increased apoptotic index as measured by cleaved
caspase 3 IHC (49.6+/-9.4 CC3+ cells/x40 field vs 25.9 +/- 9.9, POur
laboratory was first to discover that full length cyclin E is
proteolytically cleaved into low-molecular weight isoforms (LMW-E)
specifically in tumor cells. The LMW-E isoforms are hyperactive and
over-expressed in 70% of all triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
compared to only 30% of non-TNBC patients. Overexpression of LMW-E in
transgenic mice induces mammary tumors similar to the basal subtype of
breast cancer, which accounts for 70% of all human TNBCs. We have
reported that Cdk2 deficient mice were completely resistant to LMW-cyclin
E mediated mammary tumors. In this study, we have interrogated the
ability of roscovitine in preventing the development of triple negative
mammary tumors in the MMTV-LMW-E; p53+/- mouse model. Initially, a group
of mice were treated from age 3 months with vehicle (DMSO/PBS, 40:60v/v,
N = 8) or roscovitine (100 mg/kg, N = 8) once every 4 and 5 days
alternatively by intraperitoneal injection and were followed up for
mammary tumor development. Mice did not show any signs of toxicity. In
this schedule of treatment, we did not find any difference in time to
tumor formation or survival between the 2 groups (8.3 vs 7.9 months, P =
0.70, and 8.9 vs 8.4 months, P = 0.98, respectively). However, we found a
2.8-fold increase in tumor doubling time in the roscovitine-treated group
indicating that roscovitine treatment decreased tumor growth (12.1+/-4.4
vs 4.4+/-0.9 days, P<0.05). This was due to a decreased proliferation as
measured by BrdU immunohistochemistry (IHC) (13.6+/-0.9% vs 30.0 +/-
7.7%, P<0.05) and an increased apoptotic index as measured by cleaved
caspase 3 IHC (49.6+/-9.4 CC3+ cells/x40 field vs 25.9 +/- 9.9, P<0.05).
A second group of mice were treated at age 3 months with the same
schedule but were killed after 2 months of treatment and the mammary
glands were collected to investigate the effects of drug treatment on
normal and premalignant mammary cells. The BrdU staining showed that 2
months of roscovitine treatment caused a 3-fold decrease in the number of
BrdU positive cells (5.4+/-1.5% vs 14.6+/-3.8%, POur laboratory was first
to discover that full length cyclin E is proteolytically cleaved into
low-molecular weight isoforms (LMW-E) specifically in tumor cells. The
LMW-E isoforms are hyperactive and over-expressed in 70% of all triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) compared to only 30% of non-TNBC patients.
Overexpression of LMW-E in transgenic mice induces mammary tumors similar
to the basal subtype of breast cancer, which accounts for 70% of all
human TNBCs. We have reported that Cdk2 deficient mice were completely
resistant to LMW-cyclin E mediated mammary tumors. In this study, we have
interrogated the ability of roscovitine in preventing the development of
triple negative mammary tumors in the MMTV-LMW-E; p53+/- mouse model.
Initially, a group of mice were treated from age 3 months with vehicle
(DMSO/PBS, 40:60v/v, N = 8) or roscovitine (100 mg/kg, N = 8) once every
4 and 5 days alternatively by intraperitoneal injection and were followed
up for mammary tumor development. Mice did not show any signs of
toxicity. In this schedule of treatment, we did not find any difference
in time to tumor formation or survival between the 2 groups (8.3 vs 7.9
months, P = 0.70, and 8.9 vs 8.4 months, P = 0.98, respectively).
However, we found a 2.8-fold increase in tumor doubling time in the
roscovitine-treated group indicating that roscovitine treatment decreased
tumor growth (12.1+/-4.4 vs 4.4+/-0.9 days, P<0.05). This was due to a
decreased proliferation as measured by BrdU immunohistochemistry (IHC)
(13.6+/-0.9% vs 30.0 +/- 7.7%, P<0.05) and an increased apoptotic index
as measured by cleaved caspase 3 IHC (49.6+/-9.4 CC3+ cells/x40 field vs
25.9 +/- 9.9, P<0.05). A second group of mice were treated at age 3
months with the same schedule but were killed after 2 months of treatment
and the mammary glands were collected to investigate the effects of drug
treatment on normal and premalignant mammary cells. The BrdU staining
showed that 2 months of roscovitine treatment caused a 3-fold decrease in
the number of BrdU positive cells (5.4+/-1.5% vs 14.6+/-3.8%, P<0.05) but
did not completely block cyclin E-induced proliferation. This result may
explain why the roscovitine-treated mice developed tumor with similar
kinetics as the control group. Our ongoing work is to use gene expression
profiling to determine the RNA changes induced by roscovitine for the
discovery of potential biomarkers. The results from the first trial is
suggestive that the mice need to be treated on a continued schedule to
ensure that proliferation of the cyclin E overexpressing mammary tissue
is completely inhibited. To this end, we are now treating the mice twice
a day, 7 days on, 21 days off. We predict that the new treatment schedule
will be more efficacious in inhibiting tumor formation. These preliminary
data could support the development of a clinical trial testing
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors for the prevention of human triple
negative breast cancer especially those with LMW-E overexpression.

