Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of a serum HPV16 IgG signature and risk of
oropharyngeal cancer


Introduction: Human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) infection is
associated with an increasing fraction of oropharyngeal cancer. The aim
of our study was to determine the association of HPV16 antibodies (Abs)
and oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) risk in sera obtained prior to clinical
diagnosis.Methods: We identified 92 participants with incident
oropharyngeal cancers and 460 age-, gender-, region- and year- matched
controls from the Janus Serumbank in Norway. Serum samples were collected
from cases, on average, 9.2 years before diagnosis (range, -0.6-14.9
years). 11 cases had serum samples from multiple time points. IgG Abs to
the HPV16 antigens E1, E4, E5, E6, E7, L1, L2, and the N-terminal and
C-terminal fragments of E2 (NE2, CE2) were quantified in blinded fashion
using a custom RAPID ELISA assay. Full-length genes were expressed as GST
fusion proteins with a mammalian protein expression system, incubated
with sera, and bound IgG was measured. The ratio of relative luminescence
units (RLU) values for each antigen to control GST protein was
determined. Cutoff values were pre-established as 3 SD>median of 247
healthy controls. A logistic regression classifier of a 7-Ab biomarker
panel (E1, NE2, CE2, E4, E5, E6, E7) for the predictive diagnosis of OPC
was trained on an independent sample set, and applied to these samples.
P-values were calculated by Fisher's exact test. Odds ratios (ORs) of
cancer and 95% CIs were calculated.Results: HPV16 early antigen
seropositivity was present in 13% of patients with OPC and 1% of controls
(OR, 17.0; 95% CI, 5.0-74.0, p10 years, 5.4). Abs to CE2 were strongly
associated with cases 0-2 years pre-diagnosis (OR, 112.0; 95% CI,
15.0-971.2, p10 years, 5.4). Abs to CE2 were strongly associated with
cases 0-2 years pre-diagnosis (OR, 112.0; 95% CI, 15.0-971.2,
p<0.0001).Conclusion: HPV16 Abs to multiple early viral antigens are
detectable years prior to diagnosis of oropharyngeal cancer, and the
probability of seropositivity increases closer to diagnosis. A model for
screening would help identify individuals at risk for whom interventions
and surveillance may be evaluated.

