Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor status is highly conserved during tumor
progression of breast cancer


Introduction: Many clinical trails are ongoing targeting androgen
receptor (AR) in breast cancer (BC). Anti-androgen therapy is
increasingly accepted in BC patients since the new compounds have less
androgenic side effects. The assessment of AR status is generally
performed on the primary tumor even when treating metastatic disease. To
the best of our knowledge, nothing is known regarding discrepancies of AR
status between the primary tumor and the metastatic site. Therefore, we
investigated AR status on a large cohort of primary BCs and matched
metastases.Method: A next-generation Tissue Microarray (ngTMA) was
constructed harboring 356 primary BCs, 133 matched metastases and 11
recurrences. A commercially available monoclonal AR antibody (DAKO) was
used to evaluate AR-Status by immunohistochemistry. AR positivity was
defined as 1% of nuclear staining in tumor cells. The results of the
primary tumor and metastases/recurrences were compared. Additionally, the
results of AR status were correlated with other pathological tumor
features.Result: AR could be evaluated in 353/356 (99.2%) of primary BCs
and a positivity was detected in 307 (87%). A discordant result was seen
in 4.3% metastasized BC's with informative results (5/117). Three
negative BCs were positive in the metastases representing 16.7% of all
negative BCs with informative results (3/18). Two BCs were positive in
the primary and negative in the metastases representing 2.0% of all
positive BCs with metastases and informative results (2/99). No
discrepancies were seen between primary and loco-regional recurrences.
Further, AR expression was significantly correlated with a positive
estrogen (pIntroduction: Many clinical trails are ongoing targeting
androgen receptor (AR) in breast cancer (BC). Anti-androgen therapy is
increasingly accepted in BC patients since the new compounds have less
androgenic side effects. The assessment of AR status is generally
performed on the primary tumor even when treating metastatic disease. To
the best of our knowledge, nothing is known regarding discrepancies of AR
status between the primary tumor and the metastatic site. Therefore, we
investigated AR status on a large cohort of primary BCs and matched
metastases.Method: A next-generation Tissue Microarray (ngTMA) was
constructed harboring 356 primary BCs, 133 matched metastases and 11
recurrences. A commercially available monoclonal AR antibody (DAKO) was
used to evaluate AR-Status by immunohistochemistry. AR positivity was
defined as 1% of nuclear staining in tumor cells. The results of the
primary tumor and metastases/recurrences were compared. Additionally, the
results of AR status were correlated with other pathological tumor
features.Result: AR could be evaluated in 353/356 (99.2%) of primary BCs
and a positivity was detected in 307 (87%). A discordant result was seen
in 4.3% metastasized BC's with informative results (5/117). Three
negative BCs were positive in the metastases representing 16.7% of all
negative BCs with informative results (3/18). Two BCs were positive in
the primary and negative in the metastases representing 2.0% of all
positive BCs with metastases and informative results (2/99). No
discrepancies were seen between primary and loco-regional recurrences.
Further, AR expression was significantly correlated with a positive
estrogen (p<0.001) and progesterone receptor (pIntroduction: Many
clinical trails are ongoing targeting androgen receptor (AR) in breast
cancer (BC). Anti-androgen therapy is increasingly accepted in BC
patients since the new compounds have less androgenic side effects. The
assessment of AR status is generally performed on the primary tumor even
when treating metastatic disease. To the best of our knowledge, nothing
is known regarding discrepancies of AR status between the primary tumor
and the metastatic site. Therefore, we investigated AR status on a large
cohort of primary BCs and matched metastases.Method: A next-generation
Tissue Microarray (ngTMA) was constructed harboring 356 primary BCs, 133
matched metastases and 11 recurrences. A commercially available
monoclonal AR antibody (DAKO) was used to evaluate AR-Status by
immunohistochemistry. AR positivity was defined as 1% of nuclear staining
in tumor cells. The results of the primary tumor and
metastases/recurrences were compared. Additionally, the results of AR
status were correlated with other pathological tumor features.Result: AR
could be evaluated in 353/356 (99.2%) of primary BCs and a positivity was
detected in 307 (87%). A discordant result was seen in 4.3% metastasized
BC's with informative results (5/117). Three negative BCs were positive
in the metastases representing 16.7% of all negative BCs with informative
results (3/18). Two BCs were positive in the primary and negative in the
metastases representing 2.0% of all positive BCs with metastases and
informative results (2/99). No discrepancies were seen between primary
and loco-regional recurrences. Further, AR expression was significantly
correlated with a positive estrogen (p<0.001) and progesterone receptor
(p<0.001) status and a low proliferation (15%) (pIntroduction: Many
clinical trails are ongoing targeting androgen receptor (AR) in breast
cancer (BC). Anti-androgen therapy is increasingly accepted in BC
patients since the new compounds have less androgenic side effects. The
assessment of AR status is generally performed on the primary tumor even
when treating metastatic disease. To the best of our knowledge, nothing
is known regarding discrepancies of AR status between the primary tumor
and the metastatic site. Therefore, we investigated AR status on a large
cohort of primary BCs and matched metastases.Method: A next-generation
Tissue Microarray (ngTMA) was constructed harboring 356 primary BCs, 133
matched metastases and 11 recurrences. A commercially available
monoclonal AR antibody (DAKO) was used to evaluate AR-Status by
immunohistochemistry. AR positivity was defined as 1% of nuclear staining
in tumor cells. The results of the primary tumor and
metastases/recurrences were compared. Additionally, the results of AR
status were correlated with other pathological tumor features.Result: AR
could be evaluated in 353/356 (99.2%) of primary BCs and a positivity was
detected in 307 (87%). A discordant result was seen in 4.3% metastasized
BC's with informative results (5/117). Three negative BCs were positive
in the metastases representing 16.7% of all negative BCs with informative
results (3/18). Two BCs were positive in the primary and negative in the
metastases representing 2.0% of all positive BCs with metastases and
informative results (2/99). No discrepancies were seen between primary
and loco-regional recurrences. Further, AR expression was significantly
correlated with a positive estrogen (p<0.001) and progesterone receptor
(p<0.001) status and a low proliferation (15%) (p<0.001). Negative AR
status was significantly (pIntroduction: Many clinical trails are ongoing
targeting androgen receptor (AR) in breast cancer (BC). Anti-androgen
therapy is increasingly accepted in BC patients since the new compounds
have less androgenic side effects. The assessment of AR status is
generally performed on the primary tumor even when treating metastatic
disease. To the best of our knowledge, nothing is known regarding
discrepancies of AR status between the primary tumor and the metastatic
site. Therefore, we investigated AR status on a large cohort of primary
BCs and matched metastases.Method: A next-generation Tissue Microarray
(ngTMA) was constructed harboring 356 primary BCs, 133 matched metastases
and 11 recurrences. A commercially available monoclonal AR antibody
(DAKO) was used to evaluate AR-Status by immunohistochemistry. AR
positivity was defined as 1% of nuclear staining in tumor cells. The
results of the primary tumor and metastases/recurrences were compared.
Additionally, the results of AR status were correlated with other
pathological tumor features.Result: AR could be evaluated in 353/356
(99.2%) of primary BCs and a positivity was detected in 307 (87%). A
discordant result was seen in 4.3% metastasized BC's with informative
results (5/117). Three negative BCs were positive in the metastases
representing 16.7% of all negative BCs with informative results (3/18).
Two BCs were positive in the primary and negative in the metastases
representing 2.0% of all positive BCs with metastases and informative
results (2/99). No discrepancies were seen between primary and
loco-regional recurrences. Further, AR expression was significantly
correlated with a positive estrogen (p<0.001) and progesterone receptor
(p<0.001) status and a low proliferation (15%) (p<0.001). Negative AR
status was significantly (p<0.001) associated with a higher tumor grade.
Triple negative BCs were in 11.4% AR positive (4/35).Conclusion: AR
positivity is frequent in primary BCs (87%) and AR status is highly
conserved during tumor progression. In a small fraction AR status changes
(4.3%) either from positive to negative status or vise versa. However,
even AR status is highly preserved we would recommend reevaluation of the
metastatic site in negative BC's since a positive AR status can be seen
in 16.7% of this subgroup.

