Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The baffling effect of bafilomycin on Notch signaling in
triple-negative breast cancer


Triple Negative Breast Cancers (TNBC) constitute 15 to 20% of all breast
cancers and lack expression of ER/PR and Her2 receptors. Owing to an
aggressive phenotype and lack of targeted therapies, TNBC has poor
prognosis. Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved signaling
pathway known to be important for normal mammary development and breast
cancer progression. Although there has been considerable research on the
role of Notch in TNBC, little is known about its regulation. Identifying
novel molecules that regulate Notch can lead to the development of
effective combinatorial treatments. The Vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase) is a
proton pump responsible for maintaining pH. Expression of V-ATPase is
upregulated in tumor cells, promoting cancer proliferation and
metastasis. We have previously identified the role of V-ATPase a2 isoform
(V0a2) in pregnancy and cancer. Here, we report that V-ATPase regulates
Notch Signaling in TNBC. Upon treatment with Bafilomycin A1 (BafA1), a
specific V-ATPase inhibitor, Notch and Wnt Signaling genes were
significantly upregulated in TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468
(pTriple Negative Breast Cancers (TNBC) constitute 15 to 20% of all
breast cancers and lack expression of ER/PR and Her2 receptors. Owing to
an aggressive phenotype and lack of targeted therapies, TNBC has poor
prognosis. Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved signaling
pathway known to be important for normal mammary development and breast
cancer progression. Although there has been considerable research on the
role of Notch in TNBC, little is known about its regulation. Identifying
novel molecules that regulate Notch can lead to the development of
effective combinatorial treatments. The Vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase) is a
proton pump responsible for maintaining pH. Expression of V-ATPase is
upregulated in tumor cells, promoting cancer proliferation and
metastasis. We have previously identified the role of V-ATPase a2 isoform
(V0a2) in pregnancy and cancer. Here, we report that V-ATPase regulates
Notch Signaling in TNBC. Upon treatment with Bafilomycin A1 (BafA1), a
specific V-ATPase inhibitor, Notch and Wnt Signaling genes were
significantly upregulated in TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468
(p<0.005) as determined by PCR arrays. BafA1 induced dose dependent
increase of Notch pathway genes as measured by Notch luciferase reporter
assay. To investigate the hypothesis that V-ATPase inhibition activates
Notch Signaling by autophagy, we tested the expression of LC3B. BafA1
treatment in MDA-MB-231 cells led to accumulation of LC3B, thereby
inhibiting autophagy. V-ATPase inhibition also induced a cytoprotective
response by increasing expression of Hif1, a gene recently reported to
activate Notch signaling. Given that both Notch pathway and V-ATPases are
involved in tumor cell proliferation, we tested the effect of Baf A1 and
Notch Signaling inhibitor - GSI on TNBC cell viability. MDA-MB-231 cells
showed a significant decrease in proliferation upon treatment with Baf A1
(pTriple Negative Breast Cancers (TNBC) constitute 15 to 20% of all
breast cancers and lack expression of ER/PR and Her2 receptors. Owing to
an aggressive phenotype and lack of targeted therapies, TNBC has poor
prognosis. Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved signaling
pathway known to be important for normal mammary development and breast
cancer progression. Although there has been considerable research on the
role of Notch in TNBC, little is known about its regulation. Identifying
novel molecules that regulate Notch can lead to the development of
effective combinatorial treatments. The Vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase) is a
proton pump responsible for maintaining pH. Expression of V-ATPase is
upregulated in tumor cells, promoting cancer proliferation and
metastasis. We have previously identified the role of V-ATPase a2 isoform
(V0a2) in pregnancy and cancer. Here, we report that V-ATPase regulates
Notch Signaling in TNBC. Upon treatment with Bafilomycin A1 (BafA1), a
specific V-ATPase inhibitor, Notch and Wnt Signaling genes were
significantly upregulated in TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468
(p<0.005) as determined by PCR arrays. BafA1 induced dose dependent
increase of Notch pathway genes as measured by Notch luciferase reporter
assay. To investigate the hypothesis that V-ATPase inhibition activates
Notch Signaling by autophagy, we tested the expression of LC3B. BafA1
treatment in MDA-MB-231 cells led to accumulation of LC3B, thereby
inhibiting autophagy. V-ATPase inhibition also induced a cytoprotective
response by increasing expression of Hif1, a gene recently reported to
activate Notch signaling. Given that both Notch pathway and V-ATPases are
involved in tumor cell proliferation, we tested the effect of Baf A1 and
Notch Signaling inhibitor - GSI on TNBC cell viability. MDA-MB-231 cells
showed a significant decrease in proliferation upon treatment with Baf A1
(p<0.0001) or GSI (pTriple Negative Breast Cancers (TNBC) constitute 15
to 20% of all breast cancers and lack expression of ER/PR and Her2
receptors. Owing to an aggressive phenotype and lack of targeted
therapies, TNBC has poor prognosis. Notch signaling is an evolutionarily
conserved signaling pathway known to be important for normal mammary
development and breast cancer progression. Although there has been
considerable research on the role of Notch in TNBC, little is known about
its regulation. Identifying novel molecules that regulate Notch can lead
to the development of effective combinatorial treatments. The Vacuolar
ATPase (V-ATPase) is a proton pump responsible for maintaining pH.
Expression of V-ATPase is upregulated in tumor cells, promoting cancer
proliferation and metastasis. We have previously identified the role of
V-ATPase a2 isoform (V0a2) in pregnancy and cancer. Here, we report that
V-ATPase regulates Notch Signaling in TNBC. Upon treatment with
Bafilomycin A1 (BafA1), a specific V-ATPase inhibitor, Notch and Wnt
Signaling genes were significantly upregulated in TNBC cell lines
MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 (p<0.005) as determined by PCR arrays. BafA1
induced dose dependent increase of Notch pathway genes as measured by
Notch luciferase reporter assay. To investigate the hypothesis that
V-ATPase inhibition activates Notch Signaling by autophagy, we tested the
expression of LC3B. BafA1 treatment in MDA-MB-231 cells led to
accumulation of LC3B, thereby inhibiting autophagy. V-ATPase inhibition
also induced a cytoprotective response by increasing expression of Hif1,
a gene recently reported to activate Notch signaling. Given that both
Notch pathway and V-ATPases are involved in tumor cell proliferation, we
tested the effect of Baf A1 and Notch Signaling inhibitor - GSI on TNBC
cell viability. MDA-MB-231 cells showed a significant decrease in
proliferation upon treatment with Baf A1 (p<0.0001) or GSI (p<0.001) as
measured by MTT assay. However, combinatorial treatment with BafA1 and
GSI was not as efficient, an effect that can be attributed to enhanced
Notch Signaling through V-ATPase inhibition. A similar trend was observed
with apoptosis induction as measured by Caspase 3/7 activation assay.
Effect of V-ATPase inhibition on cell proliferation was corroborated by
Concanamycin A, another V-ATPase inhibitor. In summary, our results show
that V-ATPase regulates cell survival pathways like Notch Signaling in
TNBC. Through this study, we have deciphered a novel role of V-ATPase
inhibitors in cell signaling regulation, a finding that may be useful for
combinatorial therapy regimens.

