Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of MRE11A/ATM/CHEK1 DNA damage response
genes in oral cavity squamous cell carcinomas


Oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the most common
cancers in Taiwan and worldwide. Except cigarette smoking and alcohol
drinking, areca quid (AQ) chewing is also the major risk factor of OSCC
in Southeast Asia including Taiwan. Despite better methods of diagnosis
and new treatment procedures, there has not been a significant
improvement in the five year survival rate for OSCC in the past 30 years.
To explore some clues for clinical management of OSCC, we carried out
whole genome loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and copy number alterations
(CNAs) analysis and found high frequency of minimal deleted region (MDR)
in11q13.4-q25 and significant CNA region in 11q22.3-q24.3. In this
region, several DNA damage response (DDR) genes are located including
MRE11A, ATM, H2AFX and CHEK1. The DDR pathway represents a complex
network of multiple signaling pathways involving cell cycle checkpoints,
DNA repairs, transcriptional programs, and apoptosis, through which cells
maintain genomic integrity following various endogenous or environmental
stress. To investigate the clinical significance of DDR pathway in OSCC,
CNAs and LOH of ATM, MRE11A, and CHEK1 gene were analyzed in the present
study. A total number of 324 OSCCs were first examined for CNAs using
TaqMan CNV analysis and the copy number neutral cases were then examined
for LOH using TaqMan SNP analysis and denaturing high performance liquid
chromatography (DHPLC). Preliminary results indicated that only 8%
(26/324) of OSCCs did not have any alterations in these 3 genes. The
frequency of loss of MRE11A, ATM and CHEK1 gene was 7.10% (23/324),
15.74% (51/324) and 13.89% (45/324), respectively. Loss of MRE11A, ATM,
and CHEK1 was associated with tumor differentiation and lymph node
metastasis. The frequency of LOH in MRE11A, ATM, and CHEK1 gene was
37.84% (42/111), 50% (61/122) and 58.28% (95/163), respectively and LOH
of MRE11A was associated with tumor differentiation. Combined the loss
and LOH as the alteration event, we found that alterations of MRE11A,
ATM, and CHEK1 gene were associated with tumor differentiation.
Alterations of MRE11A and ATM were associated with early lymph node
metastasis, while alterations of CHEK1 were associated with late lymph
node metastasis. Alterations of MRE11A, ATM, and CHEK1 gene were
associated with poor disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival
(OS) and gene loss had a stronger effect than LOH. Furthermore,
alterations of MRE11A/ATM/CHEK1 as a whole were strongly associated with
poor DFS and OS. These results confirmed our previous MDR findings and
indicated that MRE11A/ATM/CHEK1 pathway might play a crucial role in the
development and progression of OSCCs.

