Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imputation and meta-analysis of five genome-wide association
studies identify multiple new loci associated with testicular germ cell
tumor


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have already identified 21 genetic
loci associated with testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT). Many of the loci
contain biologically plausible genes that function in male germ cell
maturation and differentiation, as well as KIT-MAPK signaling and
chromosomal segregation. We recently formed the international TEsticular
CAncer Consortium (TECAC), and pooled data from the three published and
one unpublished GWAS (3,556 TGCT cases and 13,969 controls) to identify
additional novel susceptibility loci. We imputed across the data set
using the 1,000 Genomes Project version 3 and conducted a fixed effects
meta-analysis, including the first analysis of the X chromosome. Eleven
new loci achieved genome-wide significance level (pGenome-wide
association studies (GWAS) have already identified 21 genetic loci
associated with testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT). Many of the loci
contain biologically plausible genes that function in male germ cell
maturation and differentiation, as well as KIT-MAPK signaling and
chromosomal segregation. We recently formed the international TEsticular
CAncer Consortium (TECAC), and pooled data from the three published and
one unpublished GWAS (3,556 TGCT cases and 13,969 controls) to identify
additional novel susceptibility loci. We imputed across the data set
using the 1,000 Genomes Project version 3 and conducted a fixed effects
meta-analysis, including the first analysis of the X chromosome. Eleven
new loci achieved genome-wide significance level (p<5e-8), mapping to the
following regions: 2q14.2, 3q26.2, 4q35.2, 7q36.3, 10q26.13, 15q21.3,
15q22.31, 16q24.2, 17q12, 19p12 and Xq28, most of which harbor
biologically plausible genes. The per allele odds ratios associated with
these SNPs continue to be higher than those associated with other cancer
types, ranging from 1.2 to 1.6. The signal at 17q12 maps to a region
which includes HNF1B, a locus already associated with risk of endometrial
and prostate cancer. Two of the signals are in the introns of genes known
to be involved in embryonal stem cell pluripotency (TFCLP1 - 2q14.2 and
ZFPA2/REX1 - 4q35.2), one in the intron of a chromosomal segregation gene
(NCAPG - 27q36.3), and one proximate to MEK1 (MAP2K1 - 15q22.31). The
identification of these loci provides additional evidence of the
importance of the previously implicated biological pathways. Heritability
analysis indicated that these eleven new loci explain approximately 7%
more familial (father-to-son) risk in addition to 26% explained by
previously established 21 loci. Our new findings substantially increase
the number of known TGCT susceptibility alleles, thus moving the field
closer to a comprehensive understanding of the underlying genetic
architecture of TGCT, and providing further clues into the biological
etiology of TGCT.

