Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targetting VPAC1 for intestinal cancer prevention


Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) is a neurotransmitter that primarily
functions as a vasodilator. VIP plays its role through binding to its
receptors known as VIP/pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide
receptors (VPACs). In this study, we examined the expression of VPAC1 in
human colon cancer tissues, analyzed the relationship between VPAC1
expression and cancer malignancy, and explored the possible mechanisms
using immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence double staining. The
results showed that: 1) poorly-differentiated colon cancers have
significantly higher VPAC1 expression than well-differentiated colon
cancers do (pVasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) is a neurotransmitter
that primarily functions as a vasodilator. VIP plays its role through
binding to its receptors known as VIP/pituitary adenylate
cyclase-activating peptide receptors (VPACs). In this study, we examined
the expression of VPAC1 in human colon cancer tissues, analyzed the
relationship between VPAC1 expression and cancer malignancy, and explored
the possible mechanisms using immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
double staining. The results showed that: 1) poorly-differentiated colon
cancers have significantly higher VPAC1 expression than
well-differentiated colon cancers do (p<0.01); 2) phospho-EGFR
overexpression/activation in the cytoplasm of cancer cells is related to
VPAC1 overexpression; 3) blood vessels surrounding colon cancer have
significantly more VPAC1-positive than normal colon mucosa does; 4)
Tumor-Associated Macrophages (TAMs) of colon cancer have a higher level
of VPAC1 expression than macrophages in normal colon mucosa do. These
data suggest that VPAC1 overexpression is associated with poorer
differentiation of colon cancer, which is likely caused by subsequent
EGFR activation in cancer cells. In addition, VPAC1 overexpression in
both blood vessels and macrophages in tumors may also play an important
role in the development of aggressive cancer.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

