Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel target capture approach for next generation sequencing and
its application to oncogenic mutation detection


Due to the complexity and heterogeneity of cancer genetics, next
generation sequencing has played an increasingly important role in cancer
diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutics. An effective target enrichment
strategy further simplifies data analysis associated with NGS and further
reduces costs.We have developed a novel target capture technique that
offers advantages over traditional in-solution hybridization and
multiplex PCR protocols. With this method, genomic DNA is first
enzymatically nicked to generate single stranded DNA of desirable length,
in a sequence independent manner. The DNA fragments are then rapidly
hybridized to short probes that can be captured by beads. The off target
sequence of the captured DNA, defined by the probes, is subsequently
removed via enzymatic digestion. The resulting targeted sequence are
ligated with NGS platform specific adaptors and amplified by PCR. With
our method, genomic DNA can be converted into libraries ready for
sequencing within 6 hours; and the procedure is easily scalable for
automation.To demonstrate the efficacy of this method, we have designed a
cancer panel to interrogate 50 genes that are commonly mutated in cancer,
and tested it on various DNA samples including FFPE. The results
demonstrate that our approach captures targeted sequence with high
specificity and uniformity, and detects variants with great accuracy and
sensitivity.

