Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Race/ethnicity, genetic ancestry, and breast cancer-related
lymphedema


Background: Breast cancer-related lymphedema (BCRL) is a serious chronic
condition that can occur in about 30% of patients after breast cancer
(BC) surgery and treatment. Patient risk factors include younger age,
higher BMI, and less physical activity. With few studies to date, it is
largely unknown if BCRL risk varies by race/ethnicity.Methods: In a
prospective study of 2,953 BC patients, we examined the association of
self-reported BCRL status at 12 and 48 months post-BC diagnosis with
self-reported race/ethnicity and genetic ancestry. We also assessed
associations with other clinical and patient factors. Race/ethnicity
(White, African American (AA), Hispanic, Asian, and Other) was asked in
the baseline interview at cohort entry. Genetic ancestry was estimated
based on a validated panel of 124 ancestry informative markers (AIMs)
using the STRUCTURE program. Hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) were calculated by multivariable Cox proportional hazards
models, with follow-up until date of BCRL self-report or last patient
contact, whichever occurred first.Results: 342 (11.6%) women reported
having BCRL at 12 or 48 month follow-up, with 204 who were White, 37 AA,
41 Hispanic, 49 Asian, and 11 Other. Younger age at BC diagnosis, higher
BMI at baseline, and less moderate-vigorous physical activity were
associated with greater BCRL risk. After adjusting for sociodemographic
and clinical factors, AA women had a significant 1.6-fold increased risk
of BCRL (HR = 1.57; 95% CI: 1.09, 2.26) and Hispanic women had a
borderline 1.4-fold increased risk (HR = 1.37; 95% CI: 0.99, 1.89),
compared with White women. Consistent with self-reported race/ethnicity,
African ancestry was associated with a 1.8-fold increased risk of BCRL
(HR = 1.80; 95% CI: 1.15, 2.81). When the race/ethnicity and ancestry
models were further adjusted for BCRL risk factors, i.e., age at BC
diagnosis, BMI, and physical activity, associations became attenuated and
non-significant among AA (HR = 1.26, 95% CI: 0.87-1.83) and Hispanic
women (HR = 1.19, 95% CI: 0.85-1.68), and with African ancestry (HR =
1.38, 95% CI: 0.88-2.19). Results were similar when excluding BCRL events
within 6 months of BC diagnosis to rule out transient post-operative
swelling, except a suggestive increased risk of BCRL remained among AA
women (HR = 1.47, 95% CI: 0.94-2.28) and with African ancestry (HR =
1.70, 95% CI: 0.99-2.91) after adjustment for BCRL risk factors. Further,
the elevated BCRL risk seen in AA or Hispanic women, and with African
ancestry, appeared to be stronger in non-obese compared with obese
women.Discussion: AA women had increased risk of BCRL compared with White
women, which is partly attributed to differences in age at BC diagnosis,
BMI, and physical activity. This is the first large-scale, prospective
study to examine a racial/ethnic disparity of BCRL risk with self-report
and genetic ancestry data.Funded by R01 CA105274.

