Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new approach to cancer therapy based on dynamic anchor-mediated
activation of tumor-specific T cells


Although it has been shown that T cells can play a key role in the
control of tumor progression, tumor-specific T cells almost universally
suffer from a poor capacity to recognize tumor antigen due to intricate
mechanisms of central and peripheral immune tolerance. It has become
clear that in order for immune-based cancer therapy to be successful, the
major obstacle of immune tolerance to tumor self-antigen must be
overcome. Here we report a strategy to accomplish this by engineering
molecular events at the interface between antigen peptide-MHC (pMHC) and
TCR. In particular, our approach is based on fusion of pMHC to the
protein annexin V (ANXA5), which behaves as a dynamic anchor. The dynamic
anchor, in a synchronized and synergistic manner, couples the early onset
of TCR signaling by cognate pMHC with a boost in pMHC-TCR affinity, with
serial pMHC binding, and with extensive TCR crosslinking. In our system,
the dynamic anchor is linked to pMHC and strongly attaches to the plasma
membrane of cognate T cells upon (and only upon) the early onset of TCR
signaling. This anchor in turn exerts a mechanical force that stabilizes
interactions at the pMHC-TCR interface. Furthermore, once the dynamic
anchor attaches to these T cells, it facilitates repeated, serial pMHC
binding and quickly arranges into uniform 2D matrices, thereby prompting
TCR crosslinking. We found that fusion of ANXA5 to pMHC augments
activation of cognate T cells by several orders of magnitude
(>1,000-fold), bypasses the need for costimulation, and breaks tolerance
against a model self-antigen in vivo. Our study opens the door to a new
class of vaccination that can raise a robust immune response against low
affinity tumor self-antigen.

