Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel agent for HCC treatment by GNMT-promoter
orientated cell-based drug screening platform


Glycine N-methyltransferase (GNMT) a tumor suppressor gene for
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) plays very important role in liver
detoxification and tumorigenisis. GNMT expression is highly
down-regulated in HCC. Recent studies have shown that overexpression of
GNMT reduce tumor growth and sensitize HuH-7 cells to rapamycin treatment
in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, enhancing GNMT expression is an
attractive approach for HCC therapy. In present study we developed a
GNMT-promoter driven luciferase reporter assay as a drug screen platform
for the identification of novel drugs for prevention and treatment of
HCC. We identified crude extract 317 as highest activator of GNMT
promoter activity from a Chinese medicine library containing 472 herbal
extracts. Partial purified fraction F2-6 was isolated by bioassay-guided
fractionation from crude extract 317 and validated for enhancement of
endogenous GNMT expression at both mRNA and protein levels. Fraction F2-6
inhibited growth of liver cancer cell lines in vitro. Moreover, orally
administrated F2-6 can delay and reduce growth of HCC xenograft tumor in
vivo. Next, we identified the active component in fraction F2-6 named as
compound P. Furthermore, we demonstrated that combination of sorafenib
with compound P led to additive toxicity on HCC cells in vitro and in
vivo. The cDNA microarray and real time PCR analysis showed that compound
P altered cell cycle-associated genes such as CDK6, CCND1, CDKN1C, MYC
and PLK1. Finally, Compound P treatment induced apoptosis in huh7 cells
were confirmed by increased sub-G1 population and caspase 3/7 activity.
Collectively, our results suggest that compound P has potential to be a
novel agent for prevention and treatment of HCC.

