Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ginger consumption may delay the onset of prostate cancer


Ginger active components are widely known for being a potent antioxidant
and recently as a potential anticancer agent. To date, the precise
mechanism(s) for the antitumor effect of ginger is not well understood.
An active chemical component of ginger, 6-gingerol, was recently shown to
inhibit angiogenesis and tumorigenesis. In this study we investigated the
role of ginger in prostate cancer growth and proliferation using PCa cell
lines from African American (AA) and Caucasian American (CA) men. To that
end, MDA-PCa 2b (AA), LnCap (CA) and PC-3 (CA) cells were treated with
different concentrations of 6-gingerol or 6-shogaol for 24 hours and cell
proliferations were measured by XTT assay. To determine the effect of
6-gingerol in cell signaling, cell lysates were assayed for -arrestin 1
and 2 expression, MAP kinase and caspase activity by Western Blotting.
The data demonstrated that 6-gingerol inhibits cellular proliferation and
promotes apoptosis in both AA and CA PCa cell lines. These effects
correlated with decrease in -arrestin 2, not -arrestin 1, expression and
Akt phosphorylation but increased caspase activity. Taken together the
data suggests that 6-gingerol inhibits PCa growth and promotes PCa
apoptosis via a arr-2/Akt-dependent mechanism. Since PC-3 cells do not
express AR, the data likely indicates that 6-gingerol effect is
independent of AR activation and PSA expression.

