Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 5-nitrobenzoate-derived compound elicits anti-cancer metastatic
activity by inhibition of poloplanin-stimulated tumor cell-induced
platelet aggregation


Tumor cells dissemination and survival within the vascular system play an
important role in cancer metastasis and is a clinical challenge for
post-surgical cancer management. Podoplanin (PDPN) is one of the
frequently over-expressed proteins in squamous cell carcinoma. By binding
to platelet C-type lectin-like receptor 2 (CLEC-2), PDPN stimulates tumor
cell-induced platelet aggregation (TCIPA) and facilitates cancer cell
metastasis. In this study, a series of 5-nitrobenzoate-derived compounds
were synthesized to screen for anti-cancer metastasis compounds that
elicit functional blockage of PDPN-stimulated CLEC-2 activation and
TCIPA. Platelet aggregation assays indicate that the small molecule
compound 2CP selectively inhibited PDPN-induced platelet aggregation and
the TCIPA of C6/Lung and osteosarcoma cells which expressed high levels
of PDPN protein. Mouse tail bleeding time assay revealed that 2CP did not
cause deleterious effects on normal blood hemostasis. In xenograft
experimental metastasis model, 2CP possessed in vivo anti-cancer
metastatic activity and augments the therapeutic efficacy of cisplatin;
both the formation of pulmonary tumor foci and the body weight loss
associated with the increased tumor burden were attenuated by combined
treatment of 2CP and cisplatin. In conclusion, we present a novel and
non-cytotoxic small molecule compound 2CP that elicits specific
inhibitory effects on tumor cells-platelet interaction through
intervening PDPN/CLEC-2 interaction and PDPN-mediated TCIPA. The findings
are valuable for future application of 2CP in the prevention and
treatment of cancer metastasis.

