Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FP-208, a novel mTOR inhibitor with potent antitumor activities


The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a master regulator of cell
growth, proliferation and survival. The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)/mTOR pathway is commonly dysregulated in cancer. FP-208,
animidazolone derivatives, is a novel small molecule that primarily
inhibits mTOR with potent antitumor activity. The compound is soluble
with a good oral PK profile and excellent bioavailability in mice and
rats. Here we report the in vitro and in vivo effects of FP-208 in
multiple cancer cell lines and in xenograft tumor models. FP-208
inhibited mTOR enzymatic activity in vitro (IC50 = 0.3nM) in a kinase
assay and cell proliferation in multiple cancer cell lines. Western blot
analysis to examine the effect of FP-208 showed significant blockade of
phosphorylation of S6 and AKTS473, suggesting inhibition of both mTORC1
and mTORC2 activities. The antitumor activity of FP-208 was evaluated in
human cancer xenograft models as well. Oral administration of the
compound in tumor bearing mice strongly inhibited tumor growth as a
single agent. Further analysis demonstrated that treatment with FP-208
inhibited phosphorylation of mTORC1/2 pathway markers, S6 and AKTS473 in
the tumors. Taken together, our data from both in vitro and in vivo
studies suggest that FP-208 is a drug candidate for the treatment of
human cancers.

