Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonclinical activity of the FGFR, VEGFR and PDGFR inhibitor
lucitanib in FGFR3 translocated tumor models


Lucitanib (S 80881, E-3810, CO-3810) is an oral, potent inhibitor of the
tyrosine kinase activity of fibroblast growth factor receptors 1 through
3 (FGFR1-3), vascular endothelial growth factor receptors 1 through 3
(VEGFR1-3) and platelet-derived growth factor receptors alpha and beta
(PDGFR-). A Phase 1/2 clinical study (Soria et al., 2014, Ann. Oncol.
25(11):2244-51) showed compelling activity of lucitanib in solid tumors
and, in particular, a 50% (6 of 12 patients) RECIST partial response rate
in breast cancer patients with FGF-aberrant (FGFR1 and/or FGF3/4/19 gene
amplified) tumors. On-going clinical studies are further defining the
activity of lucitanib in breast (NCT02053636; NCT02202746) and lung
cancer (NCT02109016). FGFR gene translocations (fusions; e.g.
FGFR3-TACC3) resulting in constitutively active FGFR signaling and tumor
proliferation are observed in a wide variety of cancers (Stransky et al.,
2014; Nat. Comm. (5):5006), and inhibition of FGFR signaling in FGFR
translocated tumors with lucitanib may be a potential new therapeutic
strategy. We evaluated the nonclinical activity of lucitanib in FGFR3
translocated models with the hypothesis that the combined blockade of
FGFR and VEGFR signaling would be more effective than targeting each
receptor tyrosine kinase independently. The in vitro activity of
lucitanib was first evaluated in a panel of bladder carcinoma cell lines
(n = 8) with and without FGFR3 translocation. Lucitanib preferentially
inhibited the growth of cell lines with FGFR3 translocations in 2D and 3D
cell culture, with GI50 values of 80-120 nM in a 72-hour cell viability
assay, coincident with a reduction in phosphorylated FGFR3 with an IC50
of 60 nM. Minimal activity was observed in five wild-type FGFR3 cell
lines (GI50 > 5 M) with the exception of the JMSU1 bladder cell line that
is reported to be dependent on FGFR1 signaling for proliferation
(Tomlinson et al., 2009, Cancer Res. 69(11):4613-20). The anti-tumor
activity of lucitanib dosed orally at 20 mg/kg/day was evaluated in three
bladder carcinoma cell-line derived xenografts with FGFR3 translocation
(RT112/84, RT4 and SW780) and a patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model of
glioblastoma (BN2289; Crown Bioscience) harboring a FGFR3-TACC3 fusion.
Administration of lucitanib resulted in significant (pLucitanib (S 80881,
E-3810, CO-3810) is an oral, potent inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase
activity of fibroblast growth factor receptors 1 through 3 (FGFR1-3),
vascular endothelial growth factor receptors 1 through 3 (VEGFR1-3) and
platelet-derived growth factor receptors alpha and beta (PDGFR-). A Phase
1/2 clinical study (Soria et al., 2014, Ann. Oncol. 25(11):2244-51)
showed compelling activity of lucitanib in solid tumors and, in
particular, a 50% (6 of 12 patients) RECIST partial response rate in
breast cancer patients with FGF-aberrant (FGFR1 and/or FGF3/4/19 gene
amplified) tumors. On-going clinical studies are further defining the
activity of lucitanib in breast (NCT02053636; NCT02202746) and lung
cancer (NCT02109016). FGFR gene translocations (fusions; e.g.
FGFR3-TACC3) resulting in constitutively active FGFR signaling and tumor
proliferation are observed in a wide variety of cancers (Stransky et al.,
2014; Nat. Comm. (5):5006), and inhibition of FGFR signaling in FGFR
translocated tumors with lucitanib may be a potential new therapeutic
strategy. We evaluated the nonclinical activity of lucitanib in FGFR3
translocated models with the hypothesis that the combined blockade of
FGFR and VEGFR signaling would be more effective than targeting each
receptor tyrosine kinase independently. The in vitro activity of
lucitanib was first evaluated in a panel of bladder carcinoma cell lines
(n = 8) with and without FGFR3 translocation. Lucitanib preferentially
inhibited the growth of cell lines with FGFR3 translocations in 2D and 3D
cell culture, with GI50 values of 80-120 nM in a 72-hour cell viability
assay, coincident with a reduction in phosphorylated FGFR3 with an IC50
of 60 nM. Minimal activity was observed in five wild-type FGFR3 cell
lines (GI50 > 5 M) with the exception of the JMSU1 bladder cell line that
is reported to be dependent on FGFR1 signaling for proliferation
(Tomlinson et al., 2009, Cancer Res. 69(11):4613-20). The anti-tumor
activity of lucitanib dosed orally at 20 mg/kg/day was evaluated in three
bladder carcinoma cell-line derived xenografts with FGFR3 translocation
(RT112/84, RT4 and SW780) and a patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model of
glioblastoma (BN2289; Crown Bioscience) harboring a FGFR3-TACC3 fusion.
Administration of lucitanib resulted in significant (p<0.0001) tumor
growth inhibition and, in some cases, tumor regression. The anti-tumor
activity of lucitanib in these xenograft models was greater than that
observed with either sunitinib (VEGFR/PDGFR inhibitor; 40 mg/kg/day) or
BGJ398 (FGFR1-4 inhibitor; 20 mg/kg/day). Together, these results provide
a strong nonclinical rationale for further exploration of lucitanib in
tumors with FGFR translocations in clinical studies.

