Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of breast cancer cell proliferation by diarylthiourea
analog, SL1-18


Breast cancer is the most common malignancy that occurs in women in the
US and has the second highest cancer-associated mortality rate. Depending
on the expression of estrogen receptor (ER), breast cancer can be
classified as ER positive or negative. Current drugs used to treat ER+
cancers include selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) and
selective estrogen receptor down-regulators (SERDs). Unfortunately,
prolonged exposure to these drugs often leads to the development of
acquired resistance. Consequently, there is a great need to develop
alternative therapeutic options. Flexible heteroarotinoids (Flex-Hets)
are compounds derived from retinoids that have been shown to display
anti-cancer activity. These compounds tend to exhibit lower toxicity in
comparison to their retinoid precursor. The objective of this study is to
investigate the anti-cancer effects of SL1-18 a novel heteroarotinoid on
ER+ breast cancer. Our data suggest that treatment of MCF-7 with SL1-18
inhibit cell growth with a GI50 of 5M. In order to understand the
mechanism of action, we evaluated the effects of SL1-18 on the expression
of cell cycle regulators, and our results suggest that SL1-18 decreases
the expression of cyclin A, cyclin B, cyclin D1 and cdk2. Furthermore,
cell cycle analysis revealed that SL1-18 reduces the number of cells
going through the S phase when compared to mock-treated controls. Taken
together, these preliminary results suggest that the SL1-18 may be a
potent inhibitor of breast cancer cell growth, but further research is
necessary to determine its mechanism of action.

