Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy, cancer stem cells, and trastuzumab resistance in three
dimensional cultures of HER2+ breast cancer cells


HER2 is overexpressed in 20% invasive breast tumors and correlates with
low free disease survival. Trastuzumab (Tz), monoclonal antibody anti
HER2, is used to treat HER2+ tumors; however more than half of the
patients are resistant or acquire resistance during treatment.
Multicellular tumor spheroids (MS) are a 3D growth model that mimics the
structure of in vivo avascular tumors. Autophagy has been proposed as a
tumoral escape mechanism. The cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis
postulates that tumor growth is maintained by a small fraction of cells
with unlimited proliferative potential that are also able to
differentiate into cell populations that become the bulk of the tumor.
CSCs are thought to be more resistant to chemotherapy and radiotherapy
and related with tumor recurrence. We have previously demonstrated that
MS present different subpopulations showing basal autophagy and apoptosis
that increase towards the center of the spheroid, and these
characteristics make them more resistant to Tz than monolayers. We also
observed that Tz inhibited basal apoptosis in MS and was capable of
inducing autophagy. Our aim was to analyze alternative mechanisms of
resistance of HER2+ breast cancer cells against Tz. For this purpose, we
used BT474 (HER2+) human breast cancer cell line, from which we developed
a resistant subline (BT474-MR). MS were cultured one per well in agar
covered plates. We observed that cells from BT474 MS treated with Tz for
15 days upregulated the autophagy marker LC3 and showed 100% Tz
resistance when compared with cells from MS treated with non-related
human IgG as control. BT474 cells were treated with the autophagy
inhibitor 3-metyiladenine that was dose dependently cytotoxic both in 2D
and 3D cultures. Interestingly, the higher concentration used was
critical for spheroids survival but not for monolayers. BT474-MR cells
were more sensitive to autophagy inhibition than parental cells (75.7 vs
100% cell viability, pHER2 is overexpressed in 20% invasive breast tumors
and correlates with low free disease survival. Trastuzumab (Tz),
monoclonal antibody anti HER2, is used to treat HER2+ tumors; however
more than half of the patients are resistant or acquire resistance during
treatment. Multicellular tumor spheroids (MS) are a 3D growth model that
mimics the structure of in vivo avascular tumors. Autophagy has been
proposed as a tumoral escape mechanism. The cancer stem cell (CSC)
hypothesis postulates that tumor growth is maintained by a small fraction
of cells with unlimited proliferative potential that are also able to
differentiate into cell populations that become the bulk of the tumor.
CSCs are thought to be more resistant to chemotherapy and radiotherapy
and related with tumor recurrence. We have previously demonstrated that
MS present different subpopulations showing basal autophagy and apoptosis
that increase towards the center of the spheroid, and these
characteristics make them more resistant to Tz than monolayers. We also
observed that Tz inhibited basal apoptosis in MS and was capable of
inducing autophagy. Our aim was to analyze alternative mechanisms of
resistance of HER2+ breast cancer cells against Tz. For this purpose, we
used BT474 (HER2+) human breast cancer cell line, from which we developed
a resistant subline (BT474-MR). MS were cultured one per well in agar
covered plates. We observed that cells from BT474 MS treated with Tz for
15 days upregulated the autophagy marker LC3 and showed 100% Tz
resistance when compared with cells from MS treated with non-related
human IgG as control. BT474 cells were treated with the autophagy
inhibitor 3-metyiladenine that was dose dependently cytotoxic both in 2D
and 3D cultures. Interestingly, the higher concentration used was
critical for spheroids survival but not for monolayers. BT474-MR cells
were more sensitive to autophagy inhibition than parental cells (75.7 vs
100% cell viability, p<0.05). In order to investigate if the increase in
autophagy after Tz treatment could favor a CSCs propagation, we used a
mammosphere assay, which enriches for mammary progenitor cells and
mammary CSCs. BT474 cells were cultured in low-attachment plates without
serum and supplemented with B27; formed mammospheres were treated with Tz
for 7 days, after which they were disaggregated and cultured again as
secondary mammospheres. We found that Tz, rather than favor CSC growth,
was able to effectively target this cell population, significantly
decreasing secondary mammosphere-forming efficiency compare to IgG
control (227 vs 164 respectively, pHER2 is overexpressed in 20% invasive
breast tumors and correlates with low free disease survival. Trastuzumab
(Tz), monoclonal antibody anti HER2, is used to treat HER2+ tumors;
however more than half of the patients are resistant or acquire
resistance during treatment. Multicellular tumor spheroids (MS) are a 3D
growth model that mimics the structure of in vivo avascular tumors.
Autophagy has been proposed as a tumoral escape mechanism. The cancer
stem cell (CSC) hypothesis postulates that tumor growth is maintained by
a small fraction of cells with unlimited proliferative potential that are
also able to differentiate into cell populations that become the bulk of
the tumor. CSCs are thought to be more resistant to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy and related with tumor recurrence. We have previously
demonstrated that MS present different subpopulations showing basal
autophagy and apoptosis that increase towards the center of the spheroid,
and these characteristics make them more resistant to Tz than monolayers.
We also observed that Tz inhibited basal apoptosis in MS and was capable
of inducing autophagy. Our aim was to analyze alternative mechanisms of
resistance of HER2+ breast cancer cells against Tz. For this purpose, we
used BT474 (HER2+) human breast cancer cell line, from which we developed
a resistant subline (BT474-MR). MS were cultured one per well in agar
covered plates. We observed that cells from BT474 MS treated with Tz for
15 days upregulated the autophagy marker LC3 and showed 100% Tz
resistance when compared with cells from MS treated with non-related
human IgG as control. BT474 cells were treated with the autophagy
inhibitor 3-metyiladenine that was dose dependently cytotoxic both in 2D
and 3D cultures. Interestingly, the higher concentration used was
critical for spheroids survival but not for monolayers. BT474-MR cells
were more sensitive to autophagy inhibition than parental cells (75.7 vs
100% cell viability, p<0.05). In order to investigate if the increase in
autophagy after Tz treatment could favor a CSCs propagation, we used a
mammosphere assay, which enriches for mammary progenitor cells and
mammary CSCs. BT474 cells were cultured in low-attachment plates without
serum and supplemented with B27; formed mammospheres were treated with Tz
for 7 days, after which they were disaggregated and cultured again as
secondary mammospheres. We found that Tz, rather than favor CSC growth,
was able to effectively target this cell population, significantly
decreasing secondary mammosphere-forming efficiency compare to IgG
control (227 vs 164 respectively, p<0.05). In conclusion, Tz exerted a
differential effect in cells cultured as MS, inducing autophagy related
to resistance. Since BT474 CSCs were a specifically aim of this
immunotherapy, it is valid to propose that autophagy addiction of
resistant cells could be associated with an increase in CSCs that are no
longer eliminated by Tz.

