Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MK2461 suppress progression of pancreatic cancer disrupting
interaction between pancreatic cancer cells and stellate cells


Pancreatic cancer is characterized excessive desmoplasia, which occupies
80% of pancreatic cancer tissue and mainly consists of pancreatic
stellate cells (PSCs). Desmoplasia has been shown to play an important
role in the progression, invasion, and metastasis of pancreatic cancer
and has been implicated in the development of resistance to chemotherapy
and radiotherapy. Growth factors are one of the components modulating the
interactions between pancreatic cancer cells (PCCs) and PSCs. Therefore,
blocking growth factor signaling could suppress cancer progression. In
this study, we profiled the expression of receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs) with quantitative targeted absolute proteomics using liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in PCCs and PSCs. In
PCCs, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and hepatocyte growth
factor receptor (MET) levels were elevated compared with those in PSCs.
In PSCs, platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFR) and MET
were upregulated compared with other RTKs. Conditioned medium from PSCs
promoted the proliferation of PCCs, and vice versa. In addition, MK2461,
a multikinase inhibitor targeting MET and PDGFR, suppressed the effects
of conditioned medium on PCCs and PSCs. In addition, MK2461 significantly
inhibited tumor growth in mice xenograft model. In conclusion, PDGFR and
MET may play a critical role in the interaction between PCCs and PSCs.
Moreover, MK2461 may have therapeutic potential in the treatment of
pancreatic cancer by targeting the interaction between PCCs and PSCs.

