Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial disparities of genome-wide DNA methylation profiles and
association with breast tissues biomarkers in healthy women


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women, with more aggressive
disease observed among African Americans (AA) compared to European
Americans (EA). It is a complex and heterogeneous disease, characterized
by genetic and epigenetic alterations. Racial differences in DNA
methylation have been shown in breast cancers, but it is not clear if
these differences exist in healthy women who have not had breast cancer.
We identified genome-wide differentially methylated (DM) CpGs by race, in
order to: 1) understand methylation patterns of promoter and non-promoter
related DM CpGs; 2) study their association with tissue biomarkers of
proliferation and differentiation; and 3) examine if these correlations
were similar for AA and EA. Normal breast tissues were collected from
healthy women undergoing reduction mammoplasty (N = 83). Tissue DNA was
analyzed using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip for differential
genome-wide methylation between AA (N = 22) and EA (N = 61). Analysis
methods included age and BMI-adjusted Generalized Linear Regression
models, hierarchical clustering and Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
Correction for multiple comparisons was performed. We further evaluated
the performance of the threshold for classification between EA and AA
using the area under the curve (AUC) and by 10-fold cross validation.
Biological functions of the DM genes were assigned using the Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA). Partial correlation analysis was performed
between the DM CpGs and proliferation (Ki-67, Leptin, IGF1, and IGFBP3)
or differentiation (Adiponectin)-related tissue biomarkers. 485 or 23 DM
CpGs were identified after FDR or Bonferroni correction at pBreast cancer
is the most common cancer in women, with more aggressive disease observed
among African Americans (AA) compared to European Americans (EA). It is a
complex and heterogeneous disease, characterized by genetic and
epigenetic alterations. Racial differences in DNA methylation have been
shown in breast cancers, but it is not clear if these differences exist
in healthy women who have not had breast cancer. We identified
genome-wide differentially methylated (DM) CpGs by race, in order to: 1)
understand methylation patterns of promoter and non-promoter related DM
CpGs; 2) study their association with tissue biomarkers of proliferation
and differentiation; and 3) examine if these correlations were similar
for AA and EA. Normal breast tissues were collected from healthy women
undergoing reduction mammoplasty (N = 83). Tissue DNA was analyzed using
the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip for differential genome-wide
methylation between AA (N = 22) and EA (N = 61). Analysis methods
included age and BMI-adjusted Generalized Linear Regression models,
hierarchical clustering and Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
Correction for multiple comparisons was performed. We further evaluated
the performance of the threshold for classification between EA and AA
using the area under the curve (AUC) and by 10-fold cross validation.
Biological functions of the DM genes were assigned using the Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA). Partial correlation analysis was performed
between the DM CpGs and proliferation (Ki-67, Leptin, IGF1, and IGFBP3)
or differentiation (Adiponectin)-related tissue biomarkers. 485 or 23 DM
CpGs were identified after FDR or Bonferroni correction at p<0.05,
respectively. The AUC was 0.8 and 1 and% correct rates were 78% and 100%,
respectively. A heat map and PCA showed distinct methylation patterns
between EA and AA. A larger variation was observed in promoters while
relatively consistent methylation levels were found in intergenic
regions. IPA among 177 DM CpGs in promoter regions showed 136 genes
associated with cancers that play roles in cell death and survival,
cellular development, and cell-to-cell signaling. Of the 23 DM CpGs, 9
CpGs are known oncogenes or tumor suppressors in breast or other cancers.
8 CpGs were significantly correlated with at least one biomarker in EA
(pBreast cancer is the most common cancer in women, with more aggressive
disease observed among African Americans (AA) compared to European
Americans (EA). It is a complex and heterogeneous disease, characterized
by genetic and epigenetic alterations. Racial differences in DNA
methylation have been shown in breast cancers, but it is not clear if
these differences exist in healthy women who have not had breast cancer.
We identified genome-wide differentially methylated (DM) CpGs by race, in
order to: 1) understand methylation patterns of promoter and non-promoter
related DM CpGs; 2) study their association with tissue biomarkers of
proliferation and differentiation; and 3) examine if these correlations
were similar for AA and EA. Normal breast tissues were collected from
healthy women undergoing reduction mammoplasty (N = 83). Tissue DNA was
analyzed using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip for differential
genome-wide methylation between AA (N = 22) and EA (N = 61). Analysis
methods included age and BMI-adjusted Generalized Linear Regression
models, hierarchical clustering and Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
Correction for multiple comparisons was performed. We further evaluated
the performance of the threshold for classification between EA and AA
using the area under the curve (AUC) and by 10-fold cross validation.
Biological functions of the DM genes were assigned using the Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA). Partial correlation analysis was performed
between the DM CpGs and proliferation (Ki-67, Leptin, IGF1, and IGFBP3)
or differentiation (Adiponectin)-related tissue biomarkers. 485 or 23 DM
CpGs were identified after FDR or Bonferroni correction at p<0.05,
respectively. The AUC was 0.8 and 1 and% correct rates were 78% and 100%,
respectively. A heat map and PCA showed distinct methylation patterns
between EA and AA. A larger variation was observed in promoters while
relatively consistent methylation levels were found in intergenic
regions. IPA among 177 DM CpGs in promoter regions showed 136 genes
associated with cancers that play roles in cell death and survival,
cellular development, and cell-to-cell signaling. Of the 23 DM CpGs, 9
CpGs are known oncogenes or tumor suppressors in breast or other cancers.
8 CpGs were significantly correlated with at least one biomarker in EA
(p<0.05), but not in AA. One CpG site was significantly correlated in AA
only (pBreast cancer is the most common cancer in women, with more
aggressive disease observed among African Americans (AA) compared to
European Americans (EA). It is a complex and heterogeneous disease,
characterized by genetic and epigenetic alterations. Racial differences
in DNA methylation have been shown in breast cancers, but it is not clear
if these differences exist in healthy women who have not had breast
cancer. We identified genome-wide differentially methylated (DM) CpGs by
race, in order to: 1) understand methylation patterns of promoter and
non-promoter related DM CpGs; 2) study their association with tissue
biomarkers of proliferation and differentiation; and 3) examine if these
correlations were similar for AA and EA. Normal breast tissues were
collected from healthy women undergoing reduction mammoplasty (N = 83).
Tissue DNA was analyzed using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip
for differential genome-wide methylation between AA (N = 22) and EA (N =
61). Analysis methods included age and BMI-adjusted Generalized Linear
Regression models, hierarchical clustering and Principal Component
Analysis (PCA). Correction for multiple comparisons was performed. We
further evaluated the performance of the threshold for classification
between EA and AA using the area under the curve (AUC) and by 10-fold
cross validation. Biological functions of the DM genes were assigned
using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Partial correlation analysis
was performed between the DM CpGs and proliferation (Ki-67, Leptin, IGF1,
and IGFBP3) or differentiation (Adiponectin)-related tissue biomarkers.
485 or 23 DM CpGs were identified after FDR or Bonferroni correction at
p<0.05, respectively. The AUC was 0.8 and 1 and% correct rates were 78%
and 100%, respectively. A heat map and PCA showed distinct methylation
patterns between EA and AA. A larger variation was observed in promoters
while relatively consistent methylation levels were found in intergenic
regions. IPA among 177 DM CpGs in promoter regions showed 136 genes
associated with cancers that play roles in cell death and survival,
cellular development, and cell-to-cell signaling. Of the 23 DM CpGs, 9
CpGs are known oncogenes or tumor suppressors in breast or other cancers.
8 CpGs were significantly correlated with at least one biomarker in EA
(p<0.05), but not in AA. One CpG site was significantly correlated in AA
only (p<0.05). 4 DM CpGs were differentially correlated between EA and AA
at P-interactionBreast cancer is the most common cancer in women, with
more aggressive disease observed among African Americans (AA) compared to
European Americans (EA). It is a complex and heterogeneous disease,
characterized by genetic and epigenetic alterations. Racial differences
in DNA methylation have been shown in breast cancers, but it is not clear
if these differences exist in healthy women who have not had breast
cancer. We identified genome-wide differentially methylated (DM) CpGs by
race, in order to: 1) understand methylation patterns of promoter and
non-promoter related DM CpGs; 2) study their association with tissue
biomarkers of proliferation and differentiation; and 3) examine if these
correlations were similar for AA and EA. Normal breast tissues were
collected from healthy women undergoing reduction mammoplasty (N = 83).
Tissue DNA was analyzed using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip
for differential genome-wide methylation between AA (N = 22) and EA (N =
61). Analysis methods included age and BMI-adjusted Generalized Linear
Regression models, hierarchical clustering and Principal Component
Analysis (PCA). Correction for multiple comparisons was performed. We
further evaluated the performance of the threshold for classification
between EA and AA using the area under the curve (AUC) and by 10-fold
cross validation. Biological functions of the DM genes were assigned
using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Partial correlation analysis
was performed between the DM CpGs and proliferation (Ki-67, Leptin, IGF1,
and IGFBP3) or differentiation (Adiponectin)-related tissue biomarkers.
485 or 23 DM CpGs were identified after FDR or Bonferroni correction at
p<0.05, respectively. The AUC was 0.8 and 1 and% correct rates were 78%
and 100%, respectively. A heat map and PCA showed distinct methylation
patterns between EA and AA. A larger variation was observed in promoters
while relatively consistent methylation levels were found in intergenic
regions. IPA among 177 DM CpGs in promoter regions showed 136 genes
associated with cancers that play roles in cell death and survival,
cellular development, and cell-to-cell signaling. Of the 23 DM CpGs, 9
CpGs are known oncogenes or tumor suppressors in breast or other cancers.
8 CpGs were significantly correlated with at least one biomarker in EA
(p<0.05), but not in AA. One CpG site was significantly correlated in AA
only (p<0.05). 4 DM CpGs were differentially correlated between EA and AA
at P-interaction<0.05. This is the first genome-wide study to show
differences in methylation between AA and EA in normal breast tissues. A
subset of the CpGs was correlated with breast tissue biomarkers of
proliferation and differentiation and these correlation patterns were
different by race. These findings may provide further insights on the
contribution of DNA methylation differences as determinants of racial
disparities in breast cancer.

