Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of TGF-mediated tumor suppression in a Tpl2 model of
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma


Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer in the United States, with
an estimated two million cases diagnosed annually, and incidence
continues to increase. Tpl2 (Map3k8) is a serine threonine protein kinase
in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal transduction
cascade. Previous studies have shown that Tpl2-/- mice develop
significantly more skin tumors than matched wildtype controls and
keratinocytes harvested from Tpl2-/- mice display multiple biomarkers for
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC.) We have previously established
that crosstalk between Tpl2-/- keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts
contributes to the transformative potential of our model, and we
hypothesized that one of the possible mechanisms driving this
transformation was dysregulation of the TGF pathway, which plays multiple
roles in carcinogenesis but is known to have an anti-proliferative
function in noncancerous cells. Using various techniques, including
real-time polymerase chain reaction, matrix-metalloproteinase zymography,
in vitro angiogenesis assays, and immunoblotting, we saw that both
Tpl2-/- keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts secreted less TGF and
displayed significant dysregulation of multiple components of the TGF
pathway. In summary, our studies demonstrate that loss of Tpl2 results in
disruption of TGF-mediated tumor suppression, and that disruption is in
part caused by abnormal signalling from fibroblasts in the tumor
microenvironment.

