Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comorbidity and cause of death in patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)


Introduction. CLL has a highly heterogeneous clinical course. In fact,
while some patients experience a very aggressive disease, others may
present with an indolent form, and eventually die of other causes. Here
we report the findings of a prospective cohort study evaluating the
comorbidities and causes of death in newly diagnosed patients with
CLL.Methods. Clinical information was collected from 1174 patients with
newly diagnosed CLL (within 9 months of diagnosis), who consented to
participate in a prospectively observational trial with standardized
longitudinal follow-up between 01/2002 and 11/2014. All comorbidities
were diagnosed before presentation.Results. Baseline characteristics are
shown in the Table. Co-existent health conditions included: cardiac (28%
of patients), respiratory (18%), endocrinological (14%), rheumatologic
(42%), gastrointestinal (33%), genitourinary (35%), and psychiatric
diseases (17%), diabetes (10%), hyperlipidemia (41%), other cancers
(20%), stroke (3%), hypertension (40%), venous thromboembolism (3%),
substance abuse (5%), sexually-transmitted infections (3%), and obesity
(32%). After a median follow up of 4 years, 197 patients died and the
cause of death could be accurately determined in 135 patients. Among
these, death was due to CLL progression in 69 (51%) patients, infections
in absence of CLL progression in 7 (5%), other cancers in 29 (21%), and
other comorbid health conditions in 30 (22%).Conclusions. Despite the
advanced age at CLL diagnosis, the frequent presence of comorbidities,
and the indolent nature of the disease, CLL progression is the ultimate
cause of death in 51% of newly diagnosed CLL patients, with an additional
26% dying of causes potentially related to CLL, such as infections and
second cancers. The influence of comorbidities and other clinical factors
at diagnosis (e.g. smoking, Charlson Comorbidity Index) on survival and
ultimate cause of death are being abstracted, and will be presented at
the meeting.

