Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Host variation in OATP1B1 is associated with treatment outcome in
pediatric AML


Improvements in survival have been achieved for children and adolescents
with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), with the 5-year survival rate
increasing between 1975 and 2010 from T), a gene encoding the
hepatocellular uptake transporter OATP1B1. This SNP was not correlated
with gene expression in leukemic blasts (P = 0.58), suggesting the
association might be due to a host rather than a leukemia effect. Since
this SNP is in strong linkage disequilibrium (PT), a gene encoding the
hepatocellular uptake transporter OATP1B1. This SNP was not correlated
with gene expression in leukemic blasts (P = 0.58), suggesting the
association might be due to a host rather than a leukemia effect. Since
this SNP is in strong linkage disequilibrium (P<0.0001) with two
non-synonymous coding variants in SLCO1B1 that encode known functional
variants OATP1B1*1B (Asn130Asp) and OATP1B1*5 (Val174Ala), we
hypothesized that one or more of the AML drugs may be a substrate of
OATP1B1. In vitro transport studies using mammalian cells stably
transfected with OATP1B1*1A (wild-type) revealed that the intracellular
uptake of Ara-C, Dauno, VP16 and MTZ was enhanced compared with control
cells in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Moreover, the
efficiency of drug transport was impaired in cells expressing either
OATP1B1*1B or OATP1B1*5, or both (OATP1B1*15) compared with OATP1B1*1A.
To test whether Ara-C, Dauno, VP16 and/or MTZ are transported by
OATP1B-type carriers in vivo, we determined the pharmacokinetic profile
of these agents (1-100 mg/kg; i.v. or i.p.) in mice deficient in the
ortholog transporter Oatp1b2 [Oatp1b2(-/-) mice]. We found the
concentrations of Dauno, VP16 and MTZ in livers of Oatp1b2(-/-) mice were
reduced (1.4-2.8 fold) compared to wild-type mice, and this phenomenon
was accompanied by significant increases in plasma area under the curve.
Despite being a transported substrate of OATP1B1*1A and Oatp1b2 in vitro
(4.7-fold vs control), plasma concentrations of Ara-C were not affected
by Oatp1b2 deficiency, which may reflect a differential contribution of
the liver in drug elimination between different species. Collectively,
these findings indicate an important role for OATP1B1 in the systemic
pharmacokinetics of multiple drugs used in the treatment of pediatric AML
and suggest that inherited variability in host transporter function may
indirectly regulate the effectiveness of therapy.

