Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-489 function as tumor suppressor miRNA by targeting HER2 in
HER2-positive breast cancer


Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a receptor tyrosine
kinase overexpressed in 20-30% of all breast cancer and associated with
poor prognosis and outcome. Previous studies have shown that
dysregulation of several micro RNAs (miRs), play a key role in breast
cancer progression and metastasis. In this study, we evaluated 330 miRs,
to find specific miRs dysregualted by HER2 signaling. After further
screening we focused our study on miR-489, whose expression was 6-7 fold
downregulated specifically by HER2 signaling. Restoration of miR-489
expression in several HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines resulted in
increased cell death and cell cycle arrest. To investigate the molecular
mechanism of action of miR-489, we studied effect of miR-489 on HER2
signaling pathway and found that higher expression of miR-489 led to the
decreased levels of HER2 (both mRNA and protein) and decreased Akt
activation. Furthermore, we for the first time demonstrated that HER2 is
a direct target of miR-489 and therefore HER2 and miR-489 signaling
pathways form a mutual regulatory loop. To further demonstrate clinical
relevance of miR-489, we analyzed both normal and tumor human breast
tissue samples using Fluorescent in situ hybridization technique (FISH).
Our imaging data indicated that miR-489 is expressed at much lower level
in tumor tissues compared to that of the normal breast tissue. Overall,
our data indicates that miR-489 acts as a tumor suppressor miR at least
partially by directly targeting HER2 in HER2 positive breast cancer cells.

