Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatotoxicity and oxidative stress biomarker study of peg-coated
and non-coated gold nanoparticles in Sprague-Dawley rats


Nanoparticles (NPs) offer a great possibility for biomedical application,
not only to deliver pharmaceutics, but also to be used as novel
diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. Currently, there are no data
available regarding to what extent the degree of the toxicity and the
accumulation of gold nanoparticles (GNPs) are present in in vivo model.
The aim of this study was to assess the effects, after oral
administration, of poly-ethylene-glycol (PEG) coated and non-coated GNPs
on various hepatotoxicity and oxidative stress markers such as alanine
(ALT), aspartate aminotransferases and alkaline phosphatase, lipid hydro
peroxide (LHP) in the mouse model. Sprague -Dawley rats were exposed to
four different concentrations of PEG-coated and non-coated GNPs (12.5,
25, 50 and 100 mg/kg BW) and a control. Samples were collected 24 hours
after the last treatment following standard protocols. Exposure to
PEG-coated and non-coated GNPs enhanced the activities of serum
amino-transferases (ALT/AST), alkaline phosphatases (ALP) and
concentration of lipid hydro peroxide compared to control. However,
PEG-coated GNPs demonstrated enhanced hepatotoxic effect than non-coated
GNPs. The scientific findings reported here suggest that both GNPs have
the potential to induce hepatotoxicity in Sprague-Dawley rats through
activation of the mechanisms of oxidative stress at a higher level of
exposure. However, more studies to clarify the role of encapsulation in
the in vivo toxicity of GNPs, are required and parallel comparison is
preferred.Keywords: gold nanoparticle (GNP), poly-ethylene-glycol, lipid
hydroperoxide, serum aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatases,
Sprague-Dawley rats, hepatotoxicity.

