Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The decoy receptor interleukin-1 receptor type 2 acts as an
angiogenic factor in human colorectal cancer


We previously demonstrated that interleukin-1 receptor type 2 (IL1R2), an
IL-1 decoy receptor that inhibits exogenous IL-1 signaling,
intracellularly activates the expression of several pro-inflammatory
cytokines. In this study, we observed that IL1R2 was overexpressed in
human colon cancer cells (CRC) compared to normal colon cells. In
addition, we observed that the IL1R2 level was higher in late-stage
clinical CRC patients and that a high level of IL1R2 was associated with
a poor 5-year survival rate in CRC patients. Furthermore, we observed
that the levels of IL1R2 and IL-6 were strongly correlated in 40 CRC
patients. To elucidate the oncogenic roles of intracellular IL1R2, we
modulated its expression levels in human CRC cell lines. We verified that
the intracellular level of IL1R2 was correlated with the migration
ability of CRC, cells. We observed that the VEGF-A and IL-6 levels were
significantly increased in conditioned media harvested from
IL1R2-overexpressing cells, and these elevated VEGF-A and IL-6 levels
enhanced the proliferation, migration, and tube formation of cultured
endothelial cells. We further demonstrated that intracellular IL1R2
levels were positively associated with tumor growth and microvessel
density in xenograft mouse models. Furthermore, we observed that IL1R2
formed a complex with c-Fos. This complex bound to the AP-1 site at the
IL-6 and VEGF-A promoters. Together, these results reveal that
intracellular IL1R2 acts with c-Fos to enhance the transcription of IL-6
and VEGF-A, which promotes tumor malignancy and angiogenesis.

