Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome sequencing of sequentially acquired lung and lymph
node metastatic sites from a never smoker lung adenocarcinoma patient
revealed extensive genomic heterogeneity


Recent large-scale cancer genome sequencing studies have uncovered
extensive diverse mutational landscapes in lung cancer patients.
Furthermore, tumor heterogeneity has been widely recognized and it has
significant clinical implications in selection of targeted treatment
strategies as well as treatment response. Using whole genome sequencing,
we demonstrate an unprecedented genomic heterogeneity between
sequentially acquired lung and lymph node metastatic sites from an
African American never-smoker lung adenocarcinoma patient who has
survived with metastatic disease for over seven years while being treated
with single or combination HER2-directed therapies. We determined that
less than 1% of somatic variants were common between the two tumor sites.
Copy number variations were more intense in the lung tumor than in the
metastatic lymph node. We identified several novel somatic mutations in
key cancer genes in both sites. Interestingly, one novel translocation,
PLAG1-ACTA2 was highly expressed in both the lung and lymph node
metastases resulting in overexpression of ACTA2, which has been suggested
to increase the metastatic potential in lung adenocarcinoma. Using ultra
deep targeted re-sequencing, we validated all non-synonymous variants,
and approximately 80% of those identified in the metastatic lymph node
were also present in a second lymph node biopsied two years after the
first one. Although this degree of tumor heterogeneity was surprising,
somatic variants affected key hallmarks of tumorigenesis in both sites.
These findings suggest a model of early metastatic spread and parallel
clonal evolution in disparate metastatic sites.

