Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Up-regulation of CD44 in the development of metastasis, recurrence
and drug resistance of ovarian cancer


Purpose: The clinical significance of Cluster of differentiation 44
(CD44) remains controversial in human ovarian cancer. The aim of this
study is to evaluate the clinical significance of CD44 expression by
using a unique tissue microarray, and then to determine the biological
functions of CD44 in ovarian cancer.Experimental Design: A unique ovarian
cancer tissue microarray (TMA) was constructed with paired primary,
metastatic, and recurrent tumor tissues from 26 individual patients. CD44
expression in TMA was assessed by immunohistochemistry. Western blotting
and Immunofluorescence assay determined the expression of CD44 and/or
P-glycoprotein (Pgp) in ovarian cancer cell lines and the tumor tissues
of a paclitaxel treated ovarian cancer xenograft mouse model. MTT assay,
wound healing assay, and matrigel invasion assay were utilized to assess
the proliferation, drug sensitivity, and migration/invasion ability,
respectively.Results: Both the metastatic and recurrent ovarian cancer
tissues expressed higher level of CD44 than the patient-matched primary
tumor. A significant association has been shown between CD44 expression
and both the disease free survival and overall survival. A strong
increase of CD44 was found in the tumor recurrence of mouse model.
Finally, when CD44 was knocked down, proliferation, migration/invasion
activity, and spheroid formation were significantly suppressed, while
drug sensitivity was enhanced.Conclusions: Up-regulation of CD44
represents a crucial event in the development of metastasis, recurrence,
and drug resistance to current treatments in ovarian cancer. Developing
strategies to target CD44 may prevent metastasis, recurrence, and drug
resistance in ovarian cancer.

