Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Familial Hodgkin lymphoma by relationship, sex, age and histology:
a joint study from five Nordic countries


Background: We aimed to estimate lifetime (0-79 years) cumulative risk
(CR) of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) in relatives of patients with HL by
relationship, sex, age and histology.Design: A population-based cohort of
57,475 first-degree relatives of 13,922 HL patients diagnosed in
1955-2009 in Nordic countries was followed for cancer incidence.
Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) were calculated using histology-,
age-, sex-, period-, and country-specific incidence rates as the
reference.Results: The overall CR of HL in first-degree relatives of a
patient with Hodgkin lymphoma was 0.6%, which represents 3-fold (SIR =
3.3, 95%CI = 2.8-3.9) increase over the general population risk (men
0.3%; women 0.2%). Significantly high CR (1%) was found among sisters
with early-onset HL and unlike-sex siblings with HL diagnosed at age
30-59. The familial risk in sisters (9-fold) was higher than in brothers
(4.5-fold) or unlike-sex siblings (6-fold). In general, the risk in
siblings (6-fold) was higher than in parents/children (2-fold). Very high
risk of HL was found for few men with two HL first-degree relatives
(3-8%) and for twin brothers (18%). For the first time we found high
familial risk of concordant histological subtypes of HL [lymphocyte-rich
(81-fold, n = 6) and nodular sclerosis (4.6-fold, n = 22)] and also
discordant subtypes.Conclusions: Lymphocytic-rich histology type of HL
showed highest familial risk. The absolute risk of familial HL was
generally less than 1.5%, except for men with multiple affected
first-degree relatives (3-8%), twin brothers (18%), or brothers with
early-onset HL (2%).

