Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of Zyxin in aggressiveness of human prostate cancer


Many epidemiological studies have shown that abdominal obesity was
associated with an increased risk in several malignancies. The
association between prostate cancer risk and obesity has been also
investigated, but has been in dispute. The involvement of adipocytokines
as putative molecular mediators between prostate cancer and obesity has
been also investigated. We have already shown effects of conditioned
medium (CM) from adipocyte culture in behaviors of prostate cancer cells
(DU145). In this study, Phospho-peptide in DU145 cells cultured in CM was
analyzed using Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).
Zyxin was identified as a CM-related phosphor-peptide. Zyxin is a
conserved protein that has two major domains, an N-terminal half
containing proline-rich sequences and a C-terminal LIM domain region. Its
functions are involved in regulation of cell adhesion and motility. This
protein also appears to have tumor suppressor activity with a few
reports, however in dispute. We analyzed the involvement of Zyxin in
behavior of DU145 cells. Functional analysis of Zyxin in cell migration,
invasive potential and others of DU145 cells was conducted using Zyxin
siRNA. Knockdown of Zyxin by siRNA in DU145 cells inhibited cell
migration and invasion. As for clinical paired samples, Zyxin expression
in tumor tissues was higher than in normal tissues by real-time PCR.
These results suggest that Zyxin may play an important role in
aggressiveness of human prostate cancer.

