Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carboplatin therapeutic monitoring in preterm and full-term
neonates


Background: Administration of the most appropriate dose of chemotherapy
to neonates with cancer is particularly challenging and in many cases is
not standardized based on any scientific rationale. We report on the
clinical utility of carboplatin therapeutic drug monitoring in preterm
and full-term neonates within the first month of life and use the data
generated to provide guidance for the treatment of future
patients.Patients and methods: Carboplatin therapeutic monitoring was
performed to achieve target drug exposures (AUC values) in nine preterm
and full-term neonates diagnosed with retinoblastoma or neuroblastoma
over an 8 year period. Carboplatin was administered over 3 days of
treatment with therapeutic drug monitoring utilized to target AUC values
of 5.2 - 7.8mg/ml.min.Results: AUC values achieved following therapeutic
monitoring were within 15% of the target value for the individual courses
of treatment in all but one patient (12/13 courses of treatment), with
dose modifications of up to 215% required to achieve target AUC values,
based on the initial mg/kg dosing schedule implemented. Carboplatin
clearance values determined across three consecutive courses of
chemotherapy in two patients increased from 3.4 to 7.1ml/min and 7.2 to
16.5 ml/min, representing increases of 210% and 230% over periods of 7
and 8 weeks respectively. Complete remission was observed in all seven
patients treated for retinoblastoma and in one patient with
neuroblastoma, with no renal toxicity reported and only one patient
experiencing ototoxicity.Conclusion: The study highlights the benefits of
utilising therapeutic drug monitoring to achieve cumulative target
carboplatin AUC values in preterm and full-term neonates treated within
the first few weeks of life, particularly in view of the marked increases
in drug clearance observed over consecutive courses of chemotherapy.
Reducing the likelihood of sensorineural hearing loss may be particularly
relevant in the case of neonates with retinoblastoma, where it is likely
to have an even greater impact on the quality of life of a child who may
also have some degree of visual impairment. In the absence of therapeutic
drug monitoring, body-weight based dosing is recommended, with dosing
guidance provided for both approaches to inform the treatment of future
patients.Acknowledgements: Work supported by Cancer Research UK, the
North of England Children's Cancer Research Fund and the Experimental
Cancer Medicine Centre Network.

