Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progestin-driven regulatory T cells directly promote an aggressive
and metastatic phenotype in triple-negative breast cancer


The immune system plays key roles in the recognition and elimination of
most tumors. Progesterone (Pg) can shape the immune response favoring a
tolerogenic rather than a pro-inflammatory adaptive response. As hormone
replacement therapies, supplementation and hormone-based contraceptives
have been associated with an increase of malignant breast neoplasia we
decided to investigate how progestins can regulate different key immune
cell populations in the tumor microenvironment and their influence to
tumor progression. To address this issue we used the highly metastatic,
triple-negative 4T1 breast tumor. Balb/c mice treated with Pg or its
synthetic analog, medroxyprogesterone acetate, showed an increased
frequency of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) in draining lymph nodes
(DLN) and an impaired antitumor response elicited by a decreased
production of IL-17 and IFN- by CD4+ T cells (pThe immune system plays
key roles in the recognition and elimination of most tumors. Progesterone
(Pg) can shape the immune response favoring a tolerogenic rather than a
pro-inflammatory adaptive response. As hormone replacement therapies,
supplementation and hormone-based contraceptives have been associated
with an increase of malignant breast neoplasia we decided to investigate
how progestins can regulate different key immune cell populations in the
tumor microenvironment and their influence to tumor progression. To
address this issue we used the highly metastatic, triple-negative 4T1
breast tumor. Balb/c mice treated with Pg or its synthetic analog,
medroxyprogesterone acetate, showed an increased frequency of Foxp3+
regulatory T cells (Tregs) in draining lymph nodes (DLN) and an impaired
antitumor response elicited by a decreased production of IL-17 and IFN-
by CD4+ T cells (p<0,01). Tregs in DLN of progestin-treated animals
showed increased expression of CD44 and CTLA-4. CD44+ Tregs were more
suppressive in vitro than their CD44- counterpart. Concordantly,
progestin-treated tumor-bearing mice showed a higher frequency of CD44+
Tregs and PD1+TIM3+ exhausted CD8 T cells in the tumor (pThe immune
system plays key roles in the recognition and elimination of most tumors.
Progesterone (Pg) can shape the immune response favoring a tolerogenic
rather than a pro-inflammatory adaptive response. As hormone replacement
therapies, supplementation and hormone-based contraceptives have been
associated with an increase of malignant breast neoplasia we decided to
investigate how progestins can regulate different key immune cell
populations in the tumor microenvironment and their influence to tumor
progression. To address this issue we used the highly metastatic,
triple-negative 4T1 breast tumor. Balb/c mice treated with Pg or its
synthetic analog, medroxyprogesterone acetate, showed an increased
frequency of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) in draining lymph nodes
(DLN) and an impaired antitumor response elicited by a decreased
production of IL-17 and IFN- by CD4+ T cells (p<0,01). Tregs in DLN of
progestin-treated animals showed increased expression of CD44 and CTLA-4.
CD44+ Tregs were more suppressive in vitro than their CD44- counterpart.
Concordantly, progestin-treated tumor-bearing mice showed a higher
frequency of CD44+ Tregs and PD1+TIM3+ exhausted CD8 T cells in the tumor
(p<0,05). Both progestins favored in vitro Treg stable differentiation
and expansion which resulted in a more robust suppression activity (pThe
immune system plays key roles in the recognition and elimination of most
tumors. Progesterone (Pg) can shape the immune response favoring a
tolerogenic rather than a pro-inflammatory adaptive response. As hormone
replacement therapies, supplementation and hormone-based contraceptives
have been associated with an increase of malignant breast neoplasia we
decided to investigate how progestins can regulate different key immune
cell populations in the tumor microenvironment and their influence to
tumor progression. To address this issue we used the highly metastatic,
triple-negative 4T1 breast tumor. Balb/c mice treated with Pg or its
synthetic analog, medroxyprogesterone acetate, showed an increased
frequency of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) in draining lymph nodes
(DLN) and an impaired antitumor response elicited by a decreased
production of IL-17 and IFN- by CD4+ T cells (p<0,01). Tregs in DLN of
progestin-treated animals showed increased expression of CD44 and CTLA-4.
CD44+ Tregs were more suppressive in vitro than their CD44- counterpart.
Concordantly, progestin-treated tumor-bearing mice showed a higher
frequency of CD44+ Tregs and PD1+TIM3+ exhausted CD8 T cells in the tumor
(p<0,05). Both progestins favored in vitro Treg stable differentiation
and expansion which resulted in a more robust suppression activity
(p<0,01). Progestin-induced Treg differentiation could not be inhibited
by the nuclear progesterone receptor (nPR) antagonist, Zk230211.
Interestingly, T cells did not express detectable levels of nPR by qPCR
but did express membrane progesterone receptor alfa, gamma and
progesterone receptor membrane component type 1. In the presence of
progestins, in vitro differentiated Tregs expressed higher levels of
RANKL, a protein involved in breast stem cell maintenance and malignant
transformation of tumors. When cocultured, ex vivo sorted- or in vitro
differentiated Tregs increased 4T1 cells invasiveness both in vitro and
in vivo following the downregulation of E-cadherin and increased
expression of Snail (p = 0,05). Concordantly we observed a stable
expansion of the CD44+ stem cell-like population when cocultured with
progestin-iTregs. The CD44+ 4T1 population formed tumor spheres,
exhibited an EMT molecular signature and had augmented tumorigenicity and
a metastatic phenotype. Although primary tumor volume was not altered,
the number of lung metastases was notably increased in animals treated
with progestins (pThe immune system plays key roles in the recognition
and elimination of most tumors. Progesterone (Pg) can shape the immune
response favoring a tolerogenic rather than a pro-inflammatory adaptive
response. As hormone replacement therapies, supplementation and
hormone-based contraceptives have been associated with an increase of
malignant breast neoplasia we decided to investigate how progestins can
regulate different key immune cell populations in the tumor
microenvironment and their influence to tumor progression. To address
this issue we used the highly metastatic, triple-negative 4T1 breast
tumor. Balb/c mice treated with Pg or its synthetic analog,
medroxyprogesterone acetate, showed an increased frequency of Foxp3+
regulatory T cells (Tregs) in draining lymph nodes (DLN) and an impaired
antitumor response elicited by a decreased production of IL-17 and IFN-
by CD4+ T cells (p<0,01). Tregs in DLN of progestin-treated animals
showed increased expression of CD44 and CTLA-4. CD44+ Tregs were more
suppressive in vitro than their CD44- counterpart. Concordantly,
progestin-treated tumor-bearing mice showed a higher frequency of CD44+
Tregs and PD1+TIM3+ exhausted CD8 T cells in the tumor (p<0,05). Both
progestins favored in vitro Treg stable differentiation and expansion
which resulted in a more robust suppression activity (p<0,01).
Progestin-induced Treg differentiation could not be inhibited by the
nuclear progesterone receptor (nPR) antagonist, Zk230211. Interestingly,
T cells did not express detectable levels of nPR by qPCR but did express
membrane progesterone receptor alfa, gamma and progesterone receptor
membrane component type 1. In the presence of progestins, in vitro
differentiated Tregs expressed higher levels of RANKL, a protein involved
in breast stem cell maintenance and malignant transformation of tumors.
When cocultured, ex vivo sorted- or in vitro differentiated Tregs
increased 4T1 cells invasiveness both in vitro and in vivo following the
downregulation of E-cadherin and increased expression of Snail (p =
0,05). Concordantly we observed a stable expansion of the CD44+ stem
cell-like population when cocultured with progestin-iTregs. The CD44+ 4T1
population formed tumor spheres, exhibited an EMT molecular signature and
had augmented tumorigenicity and a metastatic phenotype. Although primary
tumor volume was not altered, the number of lung metastases was notably
increased in animals treated with progestins (p<0,01). Additonally,
overall survival of mice was decreased when injected with 4T1 cells
cocultured with progestin-induced Tregs compared with 4T1 cocultured with
control Tregs. Our findings highlight the relevance of progestins in
modulating immunoregulatory checkpoints and harnessing immunosurveillance
in the tumor microenvironment and suggest a mechanism through which Tregs
could directly promote a metastatic and aggressive phenotype on tumor
cells.

