Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel and selective PI3K inhibitor, RV1001, displays single
agent biologic activity in spontaneous canine NHL


Background: Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) is the most common cancer in
dogs with over 70,000 new cases diagnosed each year. Evidence suggests
that canine NHL is an excellent spontaneous large animal model of human
NHL, particularly for the evaluation of new therapeutics. The purpose of
this work was to establish the preclinical profile and clinical efficacy
of the novel, potent, and selective PI3K inhibitor RV1001 in canine NHL
with ultimate goal of informing the development of such inhibitors in
human NHL.Methods: Activity of RV1001 on individual PI3K isoforms was
determined using a Homogenous Time Resolved Fluorescence assay
(Millipore, Billerica, MA). Potency of the compound on the delta isoform
was further corroborated in anti-FcR1 induced CD63 expression studies
using human whole blood. Ability of RV1001 to arrest growth across
several cell lines was determined by a MTT assay. Inhibition of
endogenous pAKT in cell lines and primary canine NHL cells was determined
by Western blotting. A phase I study of RV1001 was performed in dogs with
T and B nave and drug resistant NHL to assess safety, pharmacokinetic
profile and response to therapy.Results: RV1001 demonstrated significant
potency against PI3K (39.3 nM) with several fold selectivity over the
(>250), (>30), and (>20) isoforms. In addition, RV1001 inhibited
anti-FcR1 induced CD63 expression, a marker of PI3K signaling, in human
whole blood basophils with an EC50 of 94.7 nM. Proliferation assays in
leukemic cells indicated that the compound arrested growth at
concentrations between 1.5 and 13 M. Reduced PI3K signaling was
manifested by a reduction in pAKT with half-maximal inhibition noticed
between 10 and 100 nM. Oral administration of 100 mg/kg RV1001 to healthy
dogs over a 14-day period resulted in significant accumulation (Cmax = 70
M on Day 1 versus 186 M on Day 14; PI3K = 69 M on Day 14). To date, 9
dogs have been entered into the Phase I clinical trial beginning at a
dose of 10 mg/kg SID using a standard 33 design. One dog with T cell NHL
has had a durable complete response to therapy (10 mg/kg), and 3
additional dogs have had partial responses (15 mg/kg n = 2 and 25 mg/kg n
= 1) for an objective response rate of 44%. Adverse events associated
with RV1001 administration include grade 1 anorexia and grade 3 and 4 LFT
elevation. Pharmacokinetic analyses revealed Cmax concentrations of 10-25
M with AUC0-t ranging from 50 to 100 M.hr with accumulation evident after
3-4 weeks of dosing. Exploration of alternative dosing regimens is
ongoing to eliminate the drug accumulation and thus circumvent the
observed hepatotoxicity.Conclusions: RV1001 exhibits potent activity
against PI3K with associated inhibition of AKT phosphorylation, excellent
oral bioavailability, and strong single agent efficacy in dogs with both
B and T NHL. Data generated from these studies will have broad
applicability to the further development of isoform specific PI3K
inhibitors in people with NHL.

