Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DCLK1 is a broadly dysregulated target against
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, focal adhesion, and stemness in clear
cell renal carcinoma


Renal clear cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer
and the 8th most common cancer overall in the US. RCC survival rates drop
precipitously with regional and distant spread and recent studies have
demonstrated that RCC presents an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
phenotype linked to increased recurrence and decreased survival. EMT is a
key characteristic of tumor stem cells (TSCs) along with chemo-resistance
and radio-resistance, which are also phenotypic of RCC.Targeting these
factors is key to increasing the survival of RCC
patients.Doublecortin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1) marks TSCs in pancreatic and
colorectal cancer and regulates EMT and stemness. Analysis of the Cancer
Genome Atlas RCC dataset revealed that DCLK1 is overexpressed and
dysregulated on the mRNA and epigenetic level in more than 93% of RCC
tumors relative to adjacent normal tissue. Immunohistochemistry using
-DCLK1 antibody confirmed overexpression and demonstrated a major
increase in immunoreactivity in stage II-III tumors compared to normal
kidney and stage I tumors. Small-interfering RNA (siRNA) mediated
knockdown of DCLK1 resulted in decreased expression of EMT and
pluripotency factors and significantly reduced invasion, migration, focal
adhesion, drug-resistance, and clonogenic capacity. These findings
suggest that DCLK1 is a novel, overexpressed factor in RCC progression
that may be targeted to suppress EMT, metastasis, and stemness in
early-stage and advanced RCC to increase patient survival. Moreover, the
possibility that DCLK1 may mark a population of tumor stem-like cells in
RCC should be further investigated in light of these findings.

