Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of immunotargets in Hedgehog medulloblastoma for
immunotherapy


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor.
Although approximately 75% of patients survive with current therapies,
the associated complications drastically affect their quality of life,
including severe neurological impairment and secondary
cancers.Approximately 30% of MB cases exhibit activated hedgehog
signaling pathway (HH-MB). Recent clinical trials using small molecular
HH inhibitors exhibit promising results. Unfortunately, there are also
indications of high rates of resistance and relapses, affirming the
pressing need to develop complimentary therapies.Although immunotherapy
has previously been proposed to treat MB, unique antigens are rare and
monoclonal antibody therapies may not ensure tumor cytotoxicity, without
additional adjuvants and associated severe side effects. However, recent
successful developments of various cancer immunotherapies, especially the
chimeric antigen receptor modified T-cell therapy, have rekindled
interest in MB immunotherapies.To address the heterogeneity of MB and to
develop a precision immunotherapy, we propose to identify uniquely or
differentially overexpressed cell surface proteins in HH-MB, using human
MB microarray and RNA-Seq data. Our preliminary studies have identified
39 potential candidates that are differentially expressed in HH-MB. We
are currently confirming the presence and cellular localization of these
candidate proteins using human MB tissue microarrays.This work is
supported by NIH (T32 HL07915 [GST]) and Stand Up To Cancer - St.
Baldrick's Pediatric Dream Team Translational Research Grant
(SU2C-AACR-DT1113). Stand Up To Cancer is a program of the Entertainment
Industry Foundation administered by the American Association for Cancer
Research.

