Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of phosphodiesterase 10A as a cancer target


Phosphodiesterase 10A (PDE10) is a cAMP and cGMP degrading PDE isozyme
that is highly expressed in the brain striatum where it plays an
important role in cognition and psychomotor activity. PDE10 inhibitors
are being developed for the treatment of schizophrenia and Huntington's
disease and are generally well tolerated, likely because of low
expression levels in peripheral tissues. We recently reported high levels
of PDE10 in tumors and that genetic silencing by siRNA inhibits tumor
cell growth with a high degree of selectivity over normal cells (Li et
al., Oncogene 2014). These observations suggest that PDE10 may have an
unrecognized role in tumorigenesis and represents a novel cancer target.
To further test this possibility, we studied the effects of a highly
specific PDE10 inhibitor, Pf-2545920 (MP-10) on colon tumor cell growth.
Here we show that Pf-2545920 selectively inhibits tumor cell growth,
causes G1 cell cycle arrest, and induces apoptosis. The concentration
range by which Pf-2545920 inhibits tumor cell growth parallels the
concentration range required to increase intracellular cyclic nucleotide
levels and activate PKA and PKG. Moreover, PDE10 knockdown by siRNA
reduces the sensitivity of tumor cells to the growth inhibitory activity
of Pf-2545920. Using the crystal structure of PDE10 to design novel
inhibitors, a series of compounds were synthesized and screened for tumor
cell growth inhibitory activity and PDE10 isozyme specificity. A lead
compound, ADT-030 was found to inhibit tumor cell growth and PDE10
enzymatic activity with IC50 values in the nanomolar range, but did not
significantly affect the growth of normal cells. Unlike Pf-2545920,
ADT-030 exhibits high selectivity for activating PKG signaling without
affecting PKA signaling. Inhibitors of PKA and PKG were used to confirm
that the tumor cell growth inhibitory activity associated with PDE10
inhibition involves PKG activation, while PKA activation appears to be
ancillary. These findings serve to validate PDE10 as a cancer target,
whereby novel inhibitors can be designed to specifically activate
cGMP/PKG signaling with a high degree of tumor cell selectivity.
Supported by NIH grants 1R01CA155638 and 1R01CA131378 (Piazza).

