Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WAVE3 is associated with chemoresistance in TNBC by activating
tumor angiogenesis downstream of the STAT1/Hif-1/VEGF-A signaling axis


Chemoresistance is the main cause of disease recurrence and eventual
death of breast cancer patients, particularly those harboring
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) tumors for which effective
FDA-approved drugs currently do not exist. However, a recent study
determined that TNBCs can be segregated into 6 genetically distinct
subtypes that do in fact exhibit differential rates of pathological
complete response (pCR) to standard-of-care chemotherapies.
Interestingly, the mesenchymal and mesenchymal stem-like subtypes of
TNBCs exhibit the lowest rates of pCR when treated with standard-of-care
chemotherapies. WAVE3 is an actin-cytoskeleton remodeling protein, and
recent studies have highlighted a potential role for WAVE3 in promoting
tumor progression and metastasis in TNBC. However, whether WAVE3 activity
is involved in the development of chemoresistance in TNBCs, remains
unclear. Here we show that loss of WAVE3 expression resensitizes human
TNBC cells to Doxorubicin and Docetaxel, as measured by increased
apoptosis and cell death. We also show that WAVE3 knockdown in the
chemotherapy-treated TNBC cells results in inhibition of STAT1
phosphorylation, as well as a significant decrease in expression levels
of its downstream effector Hif-1. Since Hif-1 is a major activator of
VEGF-A production, and therefore, a stimulator of tumor angiogenesis,
loss of Hif-1 in the WAVE3-knocdown cells resulted in the inhibition the
chemotherapy-mediated VEGF-A secretion and the downstream activation of
angiogenesis, a phenomenon that often accompanies chemoresistance. Our
data identify a critical role of WAVE3 in sensitizing TNBC to
chemotherapy by inhibiting the STAT1Hif-1VEGF-A signaling axis, and
support the possibility of WAVE3 inhibition as a promising approach for
TNBC cancer therapy.

