Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity of icotinib (BPI-2009H) and BPI-403B in the
BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cell line


Introduction: The purpose of this research was to investigate the
anti-tumor effect of BPI-2009H and BPI-403B, an epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) in the human pancreatic
cancer cell lines BxPC-3 and Panc-1, in vitro and in vivo and determine
the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of the compound in mouse.Experimental
Design: In vitro, human pancreatic cancer cell lines, BxPC-3 and Panc-1
were exposed to varying concentrations of BPI-2009H and BPI-403B, the
concentration of compound required to inhibit growth by fifty percent
(IC50) was estimated. In vivo, tumor growth inhibition of low dose
BPI-2009H was tested in xenografted nude mice with BxPC-3 pancreatic
cancer tumors. The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was established via oral
administration of low, mid and high doses to Harlan mice of both
BPI-2009H and BPI-403B. Upon determination of the MTD, the in vivo
efficacy of high dose BPI-2009H was evaluated via tumor growth inhibition
study on xenografted nude mice with BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer
tumors.Results: BPI-2009H, as a single agent, inhibited the growth of
BxPC-3 cells in a dose dependent manner, with a relative IC50 value of
25.8 M. BPI-403B, as a single agent, inhibited growth of BxPC-3 cells in
a dose dependent manner as well, with a relative IC50 value of 2.7 M.
BPI-2009H and BPI-403B were tested up to 50M in Panc-1 cells with no
apparent effect at the upper limit of the study for either of the
compounds. In vivo, the mice treated with BPI-403B demonstrated a
statistically significant tumor growth delay, 14.3 days. 20% of the mice
experienced tumor regression. The compound was well tolerated with
minimal body weight loss. At low doses, BPI-2009H did not show any
statistically significant tumor growth delay, but upon increasing the
dose to the MTD, significant signs of anticancer activity was
demonstrated, with an increase in tumor growth delay.Conclusions: The in
vitro and in vivo findings show that both BPI-2009H and BPI-403B have
antiproliferative effects against BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cells. These
compounds are both well tolerated and may prove to be an alternative
option of EGFR-TKI to erlotinib treatment in pancreatic cancer cases.

