Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Measuring antitumor effect of c-Myc-Max heterodimerization
inhibitor 100258-F4 on ovarian cancer cells using cellometer image
cytometry


Epithelial ovarian carcinoma is the most lethal gynecological cancer due
to its silent onset and recurrence with resistance to chemotherapy.
Overexpression of oncogene c-Myc is one of the most frequently
encountered events present in ovarian carcinoma. Disrupting the function
of c-Myc and its downstream target genes is a promising strategy for
cancer therapy. In this work, we aimed to evaluate the potential effects
of small-molecule c-Myc inhibitor, 10058-F4, on ovarian cancer cells and
the underlying mechanisms by which 10058-F4 exerts its actions. Using
Cellometer image cytometry for cell cycle and Annexin V apoptosis assays,
flow cytometry, MTT assay, and colony formation, we found that 10058-F4
significantly inhibited cell proliferation of both SKOV3 and Hey ovarian
cancer cells in a dose dependent manner through induction of apoptosis
and cell cycle G1 arrest. Treatment with 10058-F4 reduced cellular ATP
production and ROS levels in SKOV3 and Hey cells. Consistently, primary
cultures of ovarian cancer treated with 10058-F4 showed induction of
caspase-3 activity and inhibition of cell proliferation in 15 of 18
cases. These novel findings suggest that targeting c-Myc-Max
heterodimerization could be a potential therapeutic strategy for ovarian
cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

