Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome characterization by RNA sequencing identifies
molecular and clinical subgroups in high risk neuroblastoma


Background/objectives: Neuroblastoma (NBL) is characterized with its
heterogeneous clinical and biological behavior. Despite improvement of
survival rate with multimodal chemo- and immunotherapy, high mortality
and morbidity is still substantial for patients with metastatic disease.
Previous DNA sequencing studies characterized the genetic basis of the
disease and revealed a very low somatic mutation burden and surprisingly
few recurrently somatic mutated genes comparing to adult solid tumors. In
order to identify the novel molecular therapeutic target and understand
the biology of the high-risk neuroblastoma, we investigated gene
expression profiles of tumors from a cohort of high-risk neuroblastoma
patient using RNA sequencing as an integral part of the Therapeutically
Applicable Research to Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET)
project.Methods: We performed RNA sequencing in a cohort of 150 high risk
patients (97 survival and 53 death) using polyA selected mRNA. Gene and
transcript isoform expression was used to correlate to the clinical
parameters for this clinically well-annotated patient cohort. Whole exome
sequencing (WES) data was available for 106 of the 150 patients cohort
for combined analysis of DNA and RNA sequencing to identify expressed
mutation.Results: On average, we found 12.5% of the human genome, which
include 63.7% of exon, 18.0% of intron, and 4.6% of intergenic regions
covered by RNA-seq reads in NB samples. Preliminary gene expression
analysis showed four molecular subgroups of NB tumors with distinct
outcomes (log-ranked p = 0.002). Sixty-two percent of somatic mutations
identified by WES was present (>10% VAF) in the RNA transcriptome when
the locus was expressed (10X). We found that some of the important
pathogenic somatic mutations such as TP53 p.R243W can be only detectable
by integrated analysis of the sequencing data of RNA and DNA, possibly
due to low tumor purity.Future directions: We will assess the expressed
mutations, fusion genes, mRNA expression, and splicing profiles to
provide clinically relevant classification and offer insight into the
tumor biology especially for those without detectable oncogenic driver
mutation by DNA sequencing.

