Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of miRNAs in breast cancer varies with patient
race and molecular subtype


Background: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) may serve as biomarkers for breast cancer
(BC) diagnosis and prognosis. Since their clinical value based on
race/ethnicity and molecular subtypes has not been studied, we evaluated
the prognostic significance of a panel of miRNAs in luminal and
triple-negative BCs (TNBCs) of African Americans (AAs) and non-Hispanic
Caucasians (CAs).Methods: TaqMan assays were used to quantify levels of
miR-21, miR-106a, miR-206, miR-155, miR-210, and miR-335 in 151 BCs and
corresponding normal tissues of 80 AAs (luminal = 24 and TNBCs = 56) and
71 CAs (luminal = 27 and TNBC = 44). Fold changes in levels between
tumor-normal pairs were used to categorize the tumors into high- and
low-expression groups. The levels of miRNAs were correlated with
molecular subtype, patient race/ethnicity, and overall survival by
Kaplan-Meier univariate and Cox regression multivariate analyses.
Further, the added predictive value of these miRNAs to a baseline
prediction model consisting of standard clinical risk factors was
evaluated at 2-, 5-, and 8-years post-surgery based on positive
predictive curves.Results: In BC tissues, miR-21, miR-106a, miR-155,
miR-206, and miR-210 were up-regulated, and miR-335 was down-regulated.
For the combined population, univariate and multivariate analyses showed
that high levels of miR-21 (adjusted HR = 2.91, 95% CI: 1.27-6.62) and
miR-106a (adjusted HR = 2.49, 95% CI: 1.04-5.97) and down-regulation of
miR-335 (adjusted HR = 2.97, 95% CI: 1.35-5.54) were associated with poor
survival. In multivariate analyses by race, high miR-21 (HR = 7.35, 95%
CI: 2.46-21.98) and low miR-335 (HR = 14.13, 95% CI: 2.93-68.13) were
indicators of poor survival in only CA patients. Additionally, expression
levels of miR-21 aided in identifying risk of death in CA patients with
either molecular subtype. In CAs, differences in the area under the
positive predictive curve (AUC) between the models with and without
miR-21 were 0.077 (95% CI = 0.007-0.154) and 0.053 (95% CI = 0.002-0.128)
at 5 and 8 years after surgery, respectively. In TNBCs of both racial
groups, addition of miR-106a increased predictive accuracy at 5 (AUC =
0.026, 95% CI = 0.001-0.068) and 8 years (AUC = 0.022, 95% CI = 0-0.061)
post-surgery. No miRNA was helpful in identifying patients at high risk
of death due to luminal BCs or to AA ethnicity.Conclusions: High levels
of miR-106a and miR-21 and low levels of miR-335 are independent
prognostic markers of BCs. Furthermore, miR-21 has added predictive value
above the standard clinical risk factors for CAs and miR-106a has added
predictive value for TNBCs. In evaluation of the clinical utility of
miRNAs, patient race and molecular types of BCs should be considered.
This work was supported by a pilot grant from UAB Breast SPORE grant of
the National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute
(5P50CA089019).

