Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of a pan-cyclin dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor and
its combination with cisplatin in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC)


Undifferentiated NPC is a unique epithelial malignancy endemic to
South-east Asia and North Africa. Cell cycle dysregulation, mediated by
mechanisms such as over-expression of cyclin D1 and down-regulation of
p16INK4A is frequently found in NPC. Our previous work suggest that NPC
cells are sensitive to the effects of cell cycle inhibition. BAY1000394
(BAY) is a potent pan-CDK inhibitor exhibiting broad anti-proliferation
activity across a number of different cancer types. In this study, the
anti-tumor effects of BAY alone and in combination with cisplatin on NPC
cell lines were examined in vitro (MTS assay) and in a xenograft model.
Cell cycle effects and apoptosis were examined via flowcytometry. Protein
levels of relevant cell cycle regulators and mediators of apoptosis were
assessed via Western Blot.Time-dependent inhibition of NPC cell lines
HONE-1 and HK-1 by BAY was evaluated and demonstrated that growth
inhibition of 50% of the cell population occurred by 48hrs of treatment.
Mean IC50 of 30nM was seen. BAY inhibits phosphorylation of cellular CDK
target proteins such as retinoblastoma (Ser807/811) (Rb), nucleophosmin
(Thr199) (NPM) and RNA polymerase II (Ser2) (p-RNA POL II).
Dephosphorylation of RNA POL II inhibits transcription of gene products
resulting in rapid decline of MCL-1. Direct caspase-3 activation was
observed with the concomitant appearance of active caspase-3; inducing
PARP cleavage and inhibition of survivin. BAY was able to induce cell
cycle arrest at multiple checkpoints thus enhancing apoptosis. Annexin V
and PI staining after 96hrs of BAY exposure showed apoptosis of >80% of
BAY treated cell. In vivo dosing of BAY1000394 at 0.5mg/kg and 1mg/kg
showed significant growth inhibition as compared to control (p-value
Undifferentiated NPC is a unique epithelial malignancy endemic to
South-east Asia and North Africa. Cell cycle dysregulation, mediated by
mechanisms such as over-expression of cyclin D1 and down-regulation of
p16INK4A is frequently found in NPC. Our previous work suggest that NPC
cells are sensitive to the effects of cell cycle inhibition. BAY1000394
(BAY) is a potent pan-CDK inhibitor exhibiting broad anti-proliferation
activity across a number of different cancer types. In this study, the
anti-tumor effects of BAY alone and in combination with cisplatin on NPC
cell lines were examined in vitro (MTS assay) and in a xenograft model.
Cell cycle effects and apoptosis were examined via flowcytometry. Protein
levels of relevant cell cycle regulators and mediators of apoptosis were
assessed via Western Blot.Time-dependent inhibition of NPC cell lines
HONE-1 and HK-1 by BAY was evaluated and demonstrated that growth
inhibition of 50% of the cell population occurred by 48hrs of treatment.
Mean IC50 of 30nM was seen. BAY inhibits phosphorylation of cellular CDK
target proteins such as retinoblastoma (Ser807/811) (Rb), nucleophosmin
(Thr199) (NPM) and RNA polymerase II (Ser2) (p-RNA POL II).
Dephosphorylation of RNA POL II inhibits transcription of gene products
resulting in rapid decline of MCL-1. Direct caspase-3 activation was
observed with the concomitant appearance of active caspase-3; inducing
PARP cleavage and inhibition of survivin. BAY was able to induce cell
cycle arrest at multiple checkpoints thus enhancing apoptosis. Annexin V
and PI staining after 96hrs of BAY exposure showed apoptosis of >80% of
BAY treated cell. In vivo dosing of BAY1000394 at 0.5mg/kg and 1mg/kg
showed significant growth inhibition as compared to control (p-value
<0.05).Combination studies of BAY with cisplatin displayed synergistic
cell kill. Cell cycle analysis of HONE-1 cells treated at 10nM and 20nM
BAY with doses of cisplatin ranging from 0.5M to 2M showed marked
increase in cell death as compared to control and NP69 epithelial cells.
Protein expression of activated caspase-3, PARP cleavage and MCL-1
inhibition were observed in dual drug treatment groups. No change in
expressions these proteins were seen in treated NP69 cells. In vivo
assays of both drugs also demonstrated growth inhibition of tumor bearing
mice at BAY 0.5mg/kg and 1.0mg/kg with cisplatin 6mg/kg with good
tolerance. Tumor protein expression of p-RNA POL II, NPM and MCL-1
expression were suppressed, suggesting inhibition of CDK9/cyclin T1.Our
data suggest that BAY inhibits NPC tumor cell proliferation in a time-
and dose- dependent manner through inhibition of cell-cycle progression
and induction of apoptosis. Combination studies with cisplatin suggest
synergistic anti-tumor effect. This preliminary study strongly suggests
that BAY and its combination with cisplatin has therapeutic potential in
the treatment of NPC.

