Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of ED-71, an analogue of Vitamin D3, on intestinal
neoplasia in the Apc+/Min-FCCC mouse model


Numerous studies have demonstrated an inverse relationship between
circulating Vitamin D levels and risk of colorectal cancer. Although
calcitriol, the most active form of Vitamin D3, exhibits promising
antitumorigenic activity, its use as a chemopreventive agent has been
restricted by its hypercalcemic effect at therapeutic doses. Eldecalcitol
(1,25-dihydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyloxy) Vitamin D3 or ED-71), a novel
analog of calcitriol, is more potent than calcitriol in stimulating bone
modeling and is approved for the treatment of osteoporosis in Japan. The
goal of the present study was to assess the activity of ED-71 against
colorectal adenomas in a unique mouse model of spontaneous multiple
intestinal neoplasia (Apc+/Min-FCCC mice). In a preliminary dose-finding
study, male Apc+/Min-FCCC mice (6 weeks old, 6-7/group) were treated with
vehicle (medium chain triglyceride (MCT)), calcitriol (0.25 g/kg body
weight (bw)), or ED-71 (0.2, 0.1, 0.05, 0.025, 0.0125 g/kg bw) every
other day by gavage for 6 weeks. Body weight was recorded weekly and mice
were euthanized at the end of the study. ED-71 was well tolerated at all
doses tested, with no significant difference in body weight observed in
treated animals as compared to controls. Drug toxicity was assessed by
measuring serum calcium levels by colorimetric assay (BioVision Inc.) and
hepatic alkaline phosphatase (ALP) by ELISA (Antibodies-online.com). No
significant effect of ED-71 on serum calcium levels and hepatic ALP
activity was observed. However, because some concern exists regarding the
ability of mice treated with high-dose ED-71 (0.2 g/kg bw) to maintain
their body weight long-term, ED-71 doses of 0.05 and 0.1 g/kg bw were
selected for the long-term efficacy study. Prior to entry on this study,
male Apc+/Min-FCCC mice (6 weeks old) were prescreened endoscopically to
determine tumor-bearing status. Mice were randomized based on tumor
status (tumor-free or tumor-bearing) and body weight to one of four
treatment groups: vehicle (MCT), calcitriol (0.25 g/kg bw), ED-71 (0.05
g/kg bw) or ED-71 (0.1 g/kg bw). Drugs were administered by gavage every
other day for 14 weeks. At the end of the study, intestinal tissue was
examined grossly and tumor multiplicity was recorded. No significant
effect of ED-71 on tumor multiplicity was observed in tumor-bearing mice.
However, in tumor-free mice (11-13/group), treatment with ED-71 (0.1 g/kg
bw) reduced the incidence of gross tumors by 36% (P = 0.017) and colon
tumor multiplicity by 30% as compared to that of controls (63.6% vs.
100%, 1.4 0.4 vs. 2.0 0.4, respectively). These findings suggest that
ED-71 is effective in inhibiting colon tumorigenesis when given to mice
prior to tumor formation. These promising data provide support for future
studies to determine the potential utility of ED-71 for the prevention of
colorectal cancer in high-risk subjects. (Supported by NCI
HHSN261201200015I)

