Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activin receptor-like kinase 1 ligand trap reduces microvascular
density and improves chemotherapy efficiency to various solid tumors


Anti-angiogenic therapy, mostly targeting vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), has been clinical applied in cancer patients for the last
decade. However, often resistance to anti-VEGF therapy and/or no
significant benefit as monotherapeutic agent is often observed.
Therefore, new anti-angiogenic strategies are needed. In this study we
analyzed the potential anti-angiogenic effects of activin-receptor-like
kinase (ALK)1-Fc protein. ALK1-Fc sequesters bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP)-9 and -10 and prevents binding of these ligands to endothelial
ALK1, which controls angiogenesis. Treatment of mice with breast cancer,
head and neck cancer, or melanomas strongly decreased the tumors
microvascular density, but this effect was not accompanied by a reduction
in tumor volume. In contrast to anti-VEGF therapy, we observed decreased
hypoxia, and increased staining for pericytes, consistent with the notion
that ALK1-Fc may have induced a normalization of the remaining tumor
vessels. Next we found that combined regimen of ALK1-Fc with chemotherapy
inhibited tumor growth in the breast- and head and neck cancer models
more efficiently than chemotherapy alone. Our results provide strong
rational to explore combined targeting of ALK1 with chemotherapy in a
clinical setting, especially in the ongoing phase-II clinical trials with
ALK1-Fc.

