Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Informatics framework for clustering and deriving gene signatures
for prognostic stratification of cancer patients


Stratification of cancer patients into different molecular groups is
essential for developing targeted therapies. High-throughput
technologies, such as microarrays and next-generation sequencing, have
been extensively used for generating multi-omics data. Indeed, The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) consortium, one of the most comprehensive and popular
databases of cancer, has been accumulating large volumes of invaluable
data for more than 30 cancer types, offering unprecedented opportunity to
attain new insights in cancer biology. Despite the technological
advances, analyzing, integrating and translating the gene signatures
across different platforms remains a computationally challenging
task.Here, we developed a novel computational framework that integrates
genomic and clinical data to stratify cancer patients into different
molecular subgroups and predict clinically applicable phenotypes, such as
survival. Application of this user-friendly framework derives
platform-independent isoform-level gene signatures that can be translated
from high-dimensional platforms (e.g., RNA-Seq) to clinically adaptable
low-dimensional molecular assays (e.g., RT-PCR) for prognostic
stratification. We applied the pipeline on two TCGA lung cancer
datasets_Lung Adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and Lung Squamous Cell Carcinoma
(LUSC). Using independent test data, we achieved about 93% (LUAD) and 98%
(LUSC) classification accuracy using less than 70 isoform-level gene
signature. The proposed informatics platform is applicable to other
cancer types in TCGA data portal.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

