Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression analysis of the LOT1 gene in head and neck cancer


Head and neck cancer (HNC) which is the sixth most common type of cancer
worlwide, comprise a diverse group of tumors including neoplasias of the
paranasal sinuses, the oral cavity, the trachea, the pharynx and the
larynx. The most well known environmental risk factors for developing HNC
are tobacca, alcohol and betel nut use and sexually transmitted viral
pathogens such as human papilloma viruses (HPV). In addition to
environmental factors, genetic factors may play a key role in the
development of HNC. Therofore, genetic abnormalities have been studied
extensively.The LOT1 (Lost-on-transformation 1) gene is localized on
human chromosome 6q24-25, a chromosomal region that is frequently deleted
in many types of human cancer including squamous cell carcinomas of the
head and neck. The product of the LOT1 gene is a 463 amino acid protein
which contains 7 C2H2-type zinc-finger motifs at the amino terminal, as
well as proline and glutamine rich areas at the carboxyl terminal.
Functional analysis of LOT1 demonstrated that it may play a significant
role as a transcription factor modulating growth suppression through
mitogenic signaling pathways.To elucidate the role of the LOT1 gene in
tumorigenesis, many studies analyzing alterations of the gene expression
were performed. As a result of these studies, the absence or reduced
expression of LOT1 gene was reported in many types of tumors including
breast, ovarian, pituitary and lung tumors.In this study, we analyzed the
role of the LOT1 gene in head and neck carcinogenesis. For this purpose,
we investigated the expression level of LOT1 gene in tumor tissue and
adjacent non-cancerous tissue samples from 81 patients with HNC by
quantitative RT-PCR.We found that LOT1 gene expression was decreased in
64 of 81 tumor tissues (79%) when compared to normal tissue.
Statistically, downregulation of the LOT1 gene mRNA expression was
significant (p0.05).Our data indicate that loss of the LOT1 gene function
may play a role in the etiology of head and neck carcinogenesis.

