Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of Vitamin D related polymorphisms with hereditary
breast cancer in 1025 subjects undergoing BRCA 1/2 testing


Background: Vitamin D plays an important role in many normal body
functions, including regulation of cell growth, bone formation,
inflammation, neuromuscular and immune function. Lower serum levels of
25-hydroxyvitamin D, an index of vitamin D status, are associated with
greater risk of cancer. Genetic variants in vitamin D related genes have
been linked to breast cancer (BC) risk. These include the vitamin D
receptor (VDR) and the GC gene that encodes for the vitamin D binding
protein.Aims: To determinate the frequency of 5 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of VDR and GC in a large cohort of subjects
candidate to BRCA 1/2 genetic testing and to assess any interaction
between vitamin D and BRCA pathways on disease outcome.Methods: From 2002
to 2012 blood samples from 1025 subjects with family history of ovarian
cancer (OC) or BC were collected after informed consent was signed during
the genetic counseling. DNA was extracted from whole EDTA treated blood
and Allelic Discrimination (Applied Biosystems Taqman assays) of VDR
(BsmI, FokI, TaqI, ApaI) and GC SNPs is ongoing.Results: At last
follow-up in February 2014 our cohort included 272 unaffected subjects
(117 BRCA carriers, 37 WT and 118 true negative) and 753 affected
subjects (276 BRCA1/2 carriers, 469 WT and 1 true negative subjects).
Amongst BC patients (N = 675), 221 were BRCA carriers, 446 WT, and 8 true
negative. Those affected ofBC and OC (N = 27), included 23 BRCA carriers
and 4 WT, while OC patients (N = 51) included 32 BRCA carriers and 19 WT.
Here we present the preliminary data obtained for VDR and GC SNPs in 833
and 710 subjects, respectively. None of the genotypes deviated from the
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. At the AACR meeting the genotyping of all
subjects will be completed.Conclusions: Our results of vitamin D
genotyping will be correlated with BC tumor molecular subtype in affected
subjects, and any association with BRCA mutation and outcome will be
assessed. The study was funded by IEO Foundation and AVON.

