Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving CAR T cell function by reversing the immunosuppressive
tumor microenvironment of pancreatic cancer


Adoptive transfer of T cells redirected to tumor-associated antigens
(TAAs) by expression of chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) can produce
tumor responses, even in patients with resistant malignancies. To target
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), we generated T cells expressing
a CAR directed to the TAA prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA). T cells
expressing this CAR were able to kill PSCA(+) tumor cell lines CAPAN1 and
K562-PSCA but not PSCA(-)293T cells (744%, 736% and 93% specific lysis,
respectively, 10:1 E:T, n = 3). Although these CAR-T cells had potent
anti-tumor activity, pancreatic tumors employ immune evasion strategies
such as the production of inhibitory cytokines, which limit in vivo CAR-T
cell persistence and effector function. Indeed, when we examined the
serum of patients with pancreatic cancer (n = 8) we found the levels of
the immunosuppressive cytokine IL4 to be elevated relative to patients
with benign pancreatic disorders or normal healthy controls (14.2519.48
pg/mL vs 7.289.03 vs 1.131.42 pg/mL). Thus, to protect our CAR-PSCA T
cells from the negative influences of IL-4, we generated a chimeric
cytokine receptor in which the IL4 receptor exodomain was fused to the
IL7 receptor endodomain (IL4/7 ChR). Transgenic expression of this
molecule in CAR-PSCA T cells should invert the inhibitory effects of
tumor-derived IL4 and instead promote the proliferation of the effector
CAR T cells. In preliminary experiments we successfully co-expressed both
CAR-PSCA and IL4/7 ChR (47.512.3% double-positive cells, n = 4) on
primary T cells. These T cells retained their tumor-specific activity
(808% specific lysis against CAPAN1, 10:1 E:T, n = 3) and when cultured
in conditions that mimic the tumor milieu (IL4 12.5 ng/ml), CAR-PSCA 4/7R
ChR-modified T cells continued to expand (increase from 210e6 cells on
day 0 to 5.538.4610e10 cells on day 28), unlike unmodified CAR-PSCA T
cells which plateaued at 3.845.4310e8 cells (n = 4). Indeed, in the
presence of IL4, transgenic cells had a selective advantage (comprising
44.811.0% of the population on day 0 and 87.610.0% on day 28; n = 4).
However, even after prolonged cytokine exposure these T cells remained
both antigen- and cytokine-dependent. In conclusion, CAR-PSCA 4/7
ChR-modified tumor-specific T cells can effectively target pancreatic
cancer cells and should be equipped to expand, persist, and retain their
cytotoxic function even in the presence of high levels of IL4 in the
tumor microenvironment.

