Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of TP53 mutations, single nucleotide variants and global
methylation patterns on pre-menopausal breast cancer risk


INTRODUCTION: Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a cancer predisposition
syndrome that confers a high lifetime risk of developing malignancies,
including pre-menopausal breast cancer. Over 80% of LFS patients harbor
germline mutations of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene.OBJECTIVE: We sought
to determine if the spectrum of TP53 variants, as well as global
methylation methylation patterns, correlates with the presence of TP53
mutations or influences cancer risk in pre-menopausal breast cancer
patients.METHODS: Constitutional DNA was obtained from peripheral blood
lymphocytes (PBL) of 10 patients with pre-menopausal breast cancer
harboring germline TP53 mutations, 10 patients diagnosed with
pre-menopausal breast cancer that are non-mutation carriers, 15 TP53
mutation carriers who do not have cancer, and 15 healthy female controls.
Genome-wide methylation analysis of PBL-derived DNA was performed using
the Illumina 450K array. Sanger sequencing of exons 2-11, and flanking
intron regions of the TP53 gene was performed.RESULTS: The most commonly
observed single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in TP53 across all samples
was at c.215C>G (p.Pro72Arg) in exon 4 (rs1042522). We observed a G
allele frequency of 66.0% in our study group. Three additional
low-frequency variants in TP53 were observed: the exon 4: c.108G>A
(p.Pro36Pro) variant was found in 2 patients, exon 6: c.639A>G
(p.Arg213Arg) was found in 9 patients and intron 9: c.993+12T>C was found
in 4 patients. Methylation patterns were not associated with a specific
TP53 mutation or variant; however, distinct methylation patterns were
observed in TP53 mutation carriers when compared to either TP53 wild-type
healthy individuals or patients with early-onset breast
cancer.DISCUSSION: This study represents an epigenome-wide analysis and
targeted genetic survey of germline TP53 in early-onset, pre-menoupausal
breast cancer. As a result of the mutation frequency observed, germline
mutations in TP53 may need to be included in the genetic work-up of
patients with early-onset breast cancer. Parallel studies of genome-wide
methylation demonstrate these patterns may serve as an independent
biomarker of early-onset breast cancer risk.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

