Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole pelvis versus prostate-only radiotherapy with or without
short course androgen deprivation therapy and mortality risk


Purpose: To determine whether extent of prostate radiotherapy (i.e.
whole-pelvic radiotherapy (WPRT) versus prostate/seminal-vesicle
radiotherapy [PSVRT]) is associated with all-cause mortality (ACM) in men
treated with or without androgen deprivation therapy (ADT).Methods: A
multi-institutional cohort of 3,709 prostate cancer patients was
prospectively assembled from 1991-2006. Median age was 72 years and all
patients had T1c-T3N0M0 adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Patients were
treated with WPRT or PSVRT followed by a brachytherapy boost, with or
without neoadjuvant ADT (median duration 4.2months). 70% of patients had
unfavorable-risk disease (Gleason 7; PSA 10ng/mL; or stage T2b). Cox
regression was applied to determine whether the radiation treatment
volume affected the risk of ACM. A test for interaction between radiation
volume and ADT use was conducted.Results: After a median follow-up of 3.3
years, 561 deaths were observed. A decreased risk of ACM was noted with
the use of WPRT versus PSVRT (adjusted hazard ratio [AHR] 0.58; 95%
confidence interval [CI] 0.38-0.89; p = 0.01), or with ADT (AHR 0.71;
95%CI 0.58-0.90; p = 0.004). However, combining WPRT and ADT did not
further improve ACM in comparison to either WPRT alone or PSVRT with ADT.
Moreover, there was a significant interaction between the RT treatment
volume and ADT (AHR 1.61; 95%CI 1.004-2.58; p = 0.048).Conclusions:
Treatment with WPRT or short-course ADT is associated with a decreased
risk of ACM, though combining the two does not yield greater benefit.
This observation suggests a shared mechanism for this risk-reduction
which we hypothesize to be sterilization of micrometastatic disease
within the pelvic lymph nodes.

