Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-hydroxymethylcytosine alterations at H3K9me3 marked genomic
regions serve as potential biomarker for renal cell carcinoma patients


Background: Epigenetic alterations are frequently encountered in many
malignancies. Control of DNA methylation is thought to play a critical
role in the global epigenetic reprogramming observed during development
and carcinogenesis. DNA demethylation is initiated by the transition from
5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC). While 5mC
patterns are relatively well characterized in many malignancies, not much
is known about 5hmC patterns and the potential usefulness as biomarkers.
We thus sought out to identify 5hmC alterations in renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) and assess their potential usefulness as urine biomarkers.Results:
We performed genome-wide 5hmC MethylCap-seq on one pooled RCC tissue
sample (n = 3) and the corresponding pooled matched normal kidney tissue
(n = 3), as well as on one pooled urine sample obtained from RCC patients
(n = 52) and one pooled urine sample obtained from control patients
without malignancy (n = 65). Global 5hmC levels were dramatically reduced
in RCC tissues compared to matched normal adjacent kidney tissues, and in
urine samples compared to tissue samples. Assessing histone marked
regions we found 5hmC levels to be highly enriched in H3K9me3 marked
repressive genomic regions of RCC tissue compared to normal adjacent
tissues. Given the low 5hmC signal in these regions in normal tissues,
this difference was also clearly identified comparing urine samples from
RCC patients to control patients without RCC.Conclusions: We
characterized the 5hmC distribution of RCC and normal human renal tissue
as well as of urine samples from RCC patients and control patients
without RCC. We identified dramatic genome-wide 5hmC changes to occur
during carcinogenesis, which have potential for development as
non-invasive urine biomarkers.

