Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isorhapontigenin (ISO) inhibits cancer invasion by enhancing FOXO1
transcription through targeting STAT1 phosphorylation at Tyr701


Muscle invasion of bladder cancer can progress to life threatening
metastases. Isorhapontigenin (ISO) is a novel derivative of stilbene that
isolated from a Chinese herb Gnetum cleistostachyum, which has been used
for centuries as treatment for several cancers including bladder cancer.
However, nothing is known whether ISO possesses an inhibitory effect on
invasion in human cancers. Here, we found that 10 to 20 mmol/L of ISO,
which were relevant to in vivo study, inhibited human bladder cancer cell
invasion accompanied by up-regulation of the forkhead box class O1
(FOXO1) mRNA transcription. Accordingly, FOXO1 was significantly
down-regulated in invasive human bladder cancer tissues, and forced
expression of FOXO1 specifically suppressed invasion of human bladder
cancer cells. Moreover, knockdown of FOXO1 expression abolished the ISO
inhibition of invasion. Further studies showed that increased FOXO1
transcription was accompanied by reduction of STAT1 phosphorylation at
Tyr701, and repressing STAT1 phosophorylation by the overexpression of
dominant negative STAT1 could mimic the effect of ISO treatment on FOXO1
transcription, while the mutation of STAT1's binding site in the FOXO1
promoter profoundly impaired ISO-induced up-regulation of FOXO1
transcription. Furthermore, this study revealed that metalloproteinase-2
(MMP-2) was a FOXO1 downstream effector mediating its effect on bladder
cancer invasion. These findings not only provide a novel insight into the
understanding of underlying mechanism of bladder cancer's propensity to
invasion, but also identify a new role and mechanisms underlying the
natural compound ISO that specifically suppresses such invasion through
targeting the STAT1-FOXO1-MMP2 axis.

