Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo ERK1/2 pathway reporting during acquired resistance to
combined RAF/MEK inhibition


The MEK-ERK1/2 signaling pathway is constitutively activated in BRAF
V600E/K melanomas. Concurrent BRAF and MEK inhibitor treatment was
recently FDA-approved for BRAF V600E melanoma; however, acquired
resistance to the drug combination limits durable responses. Our lab has
developed a luciferase reporter system that temporally and non-invasively
quantitates ERK1/2 activity in mutant BRAF melanoma xenografts. We used
this reporter system to examine the temporal kinetics of ERK1/2 activity
in vivo upon treatment with combined BRAF/MEK inhibition. Using a 1205Lu
reporter system, all established tumors regressed to levels that were not
detectable visually. After prolonged treatment with BRAF and MEK
inhibitors, only 2 out of 8 mice regrew resistant tumors. In similar
experiments with A375 xenografts, only 1 out 12 tumors developed
resistance. In 1205Lu tumors, re-activation of the ERK1/2 pathway was
evident prior to re-growth. Additionally, cell lines generated from these
resistant tumors exhibited elevated levels of ERK1/2 suggesting that
resistance to BRAF + MEK inhibitors involves re-activation of ERK1/2
signaling. In comparison to parental cells, resistant cells in vitro
displayed reduced levels of apoptosis, increased proliferation, and
increased viability in the presence of BRAF plus MEK inhibitor.
Furthermore, when removed from drugs, combination-resistant cells showed
increased apoptosis and reduced proliferation and viability, suggesting
that the resistant lines may be addicted to the dual therapy. RPPA
analysis and whole exome sequencing to elucidate mechanisms of resistance
are ongoing.

