Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel covalent inhibitor of mutant but not wild-type (WT)
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has activity in vitro and in vivo
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) models


Background: Mutations in the EGFR kinase are common in NSCLC. Patients
with first-line EGFR mutations (exon 19 deletions, L858R mutations, exon
20 variants, codon 719 variants) initially respond to the reversible EGFR
inhibitors erlotinib and gefitinib, but then relapse as additional
mutations emerge. EGFR T790M is the most common of these mutations and is
found in > 50% of refractory tumors. We assessed the in vitro and in vivo
activity of CPD 24, a newly developed, covalent, small-molecule inhibitor
of both first-line and T790M mutant EGFR, but not WT EGFR. Inhibition of
WT EGFR in normal tissues can be a source of dose-limiting
toxicities.Methods: The effects of CPD 24 were evaluated on H1975 (EGFR
T790M/L858R), HCC827 (EGFR exon 19 deletion), and A431 (WT) cell lines.
Inhibition of EGFR phosphorylation was measured in serum-starved cells
using an MSD assay. Viability was assessed by measuring ATP in cells
using a CellTiter-Glo assay. Dose- and time-dependent pharmacodynamic
effects were evaluated by treating mice bearing matrigel plugs containing
H1975 cells. Drug levels were measured in plasma samples by LC-MS. CPD 24
was administered to athymic nude mice bearing H1975, HCC827, or A431
xenografts (3, 10, and 30 mg/kg, QD, PO) and tumor growth was measured
twice per week with digital calipers. CPD 24 was also formulated in PLGA
microspheres and administered subcutaneously (SC) as a sustained release
formulation to mice bearing H1975 or A431 xenografts (30 and 100 mg/kg,
Q3D, SC). Proliferation of H1975 and HCC827 cells in the presence of CPD
24, growth factors, and a MET inhibitor was measured with an IncuCyte
live-cell imaging system.Results: The IC50 of CPD 24 for p-EGFR
inhibition was 4 nM on L858R/T790M mutant EGFR (H1975 cells), 17 nM on
the exon 19 deletion EGFR (HCC827 cells), and 510 nM on WT EGFR (A431
cells). CPD 24 inhibited the growth of tumor cells in vitro and led to
both dose- and time-dependent p-EGFR inhibition in vivo. Phosphorylation
of EGFR in H1975 cells growing in matrigel plugs was inhibited by > 75%
for 12 hours by a single 30 mg/kg dose. Tumor growth inhibition (TGI) was
observed in two EGFR mutant NSCLC xenograft models (H1975, 89% TGI;
HCC827, 139% TGI) but not in a WT EGFR model (A431). CPD 24 formulated in
PLGA microspheres achieved drug levels above the IC50 for 72 hours after
a single SC dose. Tumor regression was observed with this formulation in
H1975 xenografts but not in WT tumors. HGF was able to confer resistance
to CPD 24 inhibition in both H1975 and HCC827 cells in vitro. This
resistance was prevented by the addition of a selective MET
inhibitor.Conclusion: CPD 24 is a covalent inhibitor of both first-line
and T790M mutant EGFR while maintaining > 100-fold selectivity over WT
EGFR. The antiproliferative effects of CPD 24 can be reversed by HGF, and
this resistance can be prevented by treatment with a MET inhibitor.

