Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of PARP inhibitor ABT-888 with NO-donor SNAP
sensitizes BRCA1 positive cancer cell lines to ionizing radiation


Loss or inhibition of Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) activity
results in accumulation of DNA single-strand breaks, which are
subsequently converted to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by the cellular
replication and/or transcription machinery. Breast cancer type 1
susceptibility protein (BRCA1) is essential for homologous recombination
repair (HRR) of DNA DSB. In BRCA-positive cells, DSBs are repaired by
HRR, but they cannot be properly repaired in BRCA-deficient cells,
leading to genomic instability, chromosomal rearrangements, and cell
death.The role of PARP1 in the DNA damage response promoted the
development of PARP inhibitors (PARPi) as chemo- and radio-sensitizers
for the treatment of cancers harboring mutations in the BRCA genes.
However, inherited BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations account for 5-10% of breast
cancers and 10-15% of ovarian cancers. Hence, a low frequency of BRCA1
loss in non-hereditary tumors can limit the clinical use of this
approach.Our recent work revealed significant down-regulation of BRCA1
gene expression by nitric oxide donors (NO-d) (Yakovlev, 2013). Hence, we
assumed that combination of NO-d with PARP inhibitors could be effective
in sensitization of the BRCA1-positive tumors to DNA-damaging therapy.We
identified the optimal concentrations of PARPi ABT-888 at 20M and NO-d
SNAP at 200M, which don't affect cell survival, but effectively block
PARP1 activity or BRCA1 expression accordingly. Next, cancer cell lines
were pretreated with ABT-888 or SNAP, or with they combination and
irradiated. Survival curves were determined by clonogenic assay.Our
preliminary data demonstrates significant radiosensitization when
combining an NO-d with a PARPi in BRCA1 positive tumor cell lines (Table
1). We plan to test this drug combination on the additional cancer cell
lines and on animal models for sensitization to ionizing radiation and to
the different chemotherapeutic agents.Clonogenic assay for A-549 and
MDA-MB-231 cell lines: survival fraction.

