Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer fluorescence-guided surgery with a
fluorophore-conjugated antibody to carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
improves surgical resection and increases disease-free and overall
survival in orthotopic mouse models


We established nude mouse models of human pancreatic cancer with surgical
orthotopic implantation of the human BxPC3 pancreatic cancer for
fluorescence-guided surgery (FGS). After 2 weeks, mice then underwent
bright-light surgery (BLS) or FGS 24 hours after intravenous injection of
anti CEA-Alexa Fluor 488. Completeness of resection was assessed from
postoperative imaging. Mice were followed postoperatively until premorbid
to determine disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS).
Complete resection was achieved in 92% of mice in the FGS group compared
to 45.5% in the BLS group (p = 0.001). FGS resulted in a smaller
postoperative tumor burden (p = 0.01). Cure rates with FGS compared to
BLS improved from 4.5 to 40%, respectively (p = 0.01), and 1year
postoperative survival rates increased from 0% with BLS to 28% with FGS
(p = 0.01). Median DFS increased from 5 weeks with BLS to 11 weeks with
FGS (p = 0.0003). Median OS increased from 13.5 weeks with BLS to 22
weeks with FGS (p = 0.001). FGS resulted in greater cure rates and longer
DFS and OS using a fluorophore-conjugated anti CEA antibody. The present
results demonstrate that FGS has potential to improve the surgical
treatment of pancreatic cancer.

