Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The correlation between CXCR7 expression and EGFR mutation in
non-small cell lung cancer


Objective: To explore the correlation between CXCR7 expression and EGFR
mutation in NSCLC.Materials and Methods: Forty-nine paired cases of NSCLC
carcinoma and para-carcinoma tissues were analyzed for the expression of
CXCR7 mRNA by RT-PCR and CXCR7 protein by IHC. EGFR mutations were
detected in carcinoma tissues by ARMS. T-test, one-way ANOVA and
correlation analysis were used to analyze the data with SPSS software
version 18.0.Results: In NSCLC, CXCR7 protein expression in carcinoma
tissues was higher than in para-carcinoma tissues (144502049 vs 52061066,
pObjective: To explore the correlation between CXCR7 expression and EGFR
mutation in NSCLC.Materials and Methods: Forty-nine paired cases of NSCLC
carcinoma and para-carcinoma tissues were analyzed for the expression of
CXCR7 mRNA by RT-PCR and CXCR7 protein by IHC. EGFR mutations were
detected in carcinoma tissues by ARMS. T-test, one-way ANOVA and
correlation analysis were used to analyze the data with SPSS software
version 18.0.Results: In NSCLC, CXCR7 protein expression in carcinoma
tissues was higher than in para-carcinoma tissues (144502049 vs 52061066,
p<0.0001), while CXCR7 mRNA was not. In NSCLC, CXCR7 mRNA and CXCR7
protein expression levels were both related to the TNM stage (p = 0.007,
p = 0.008) and metastatic status (pObjective: To explore the correlation
between CXCR7 expression and EGFR mutation in NSCLC.Materials and
Methods: Forty-nine paired cases of NSCLC carcinoma and para-carcinoma
tissues were analyzed for the expression of CXCR7 mRNA by RT-PCR and
CXCR7 protein by IHC. EGFR mutations were detected in carcinoma tissues
by ARMS. T-test, one-way ANOVA and correlation analysis were used to
analyze the data with SPSS software version 18.0.Results: In NSCLC, CXCR7
protein expression in carcinoma tissues was higher than in para-carcinoma
tissues (144502049 vs 52061066, p<0.0001), while CXCR7 mRNA was not. In
NSCLC, CXCR7 mRNA and CXCR7 protein expression levels were both related
to the TNM stage (p = 0.007, p = 0.008) and metastatic status (p<0.0001;
pObjective: To explore the correlation between CXCR7 expression and EGFR
mutation in NSCLC.Materials and Methods: Forty-nine paired cases of NSCLC
carcinoma and para-carcinoma tissues were analyzed for the expression of
CXCR7 mRNA by RT-PCR and CXCR7 protein by IHC. EGFR mutations were
detected in carcinoma tissues by ARMS. T-test, one-way ANOVA and
correlation analysis were used to analyze the data with SPSS software
version 18.0.Results: In NSCLC, CXCR7 protein expression in carcinoma
tissues was higher than in para-carcinoma tissues (144502049 vs 52061066,
p<0.0001), while CXCR7 mRNA was not. In NSCLC, CXCR7 mRNA and CXCR7
protein expression levels were both related to the TNM stage (p = 0.007,
p = 0.008) and metastatic status (p<0.0001; p<0.0001), but not to gender,
age, smoking index and pathology. EGFR and CXCR7 protein were positively
correlated (r = 0.289,p = 0.044) Conclusion: Like EGFR, CXCR7 can be used
as a marker to predict the prognosis and guide clinical therapy in
NSCLC.Keywords: CXCR7 RDC1 EGFR NSCLCNote: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

