Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leveraging global gene expression patterns to identify gene sets
that predict expression of large numbers of unmeasured genes


Large collections of formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue are a rich
resource to test hypotheses based on gene expression patterns; however,
measurement of genome-wide expression is cost-prohibitive on a large
scale, and a reduced set of candidate genes must be selected and assayed
with platforms such as NanoString nCounter. Using the known expression
correlation structure within a given tissue (high grade serous ovarian
cancer; HGSC), we sought to determine whether reduced sets of directly
measured genes could accurately predict a maximized number of unmeasured
genes. To maximize the number of unmeasured genes that can be inferred
from reduced set assays, we developed an algorithm with three key
parameters: the number of genes to directly measure; Pearson correlation
thresholds between genes (rP); and the number of directly measured genes
that must be correlated with the unmeasured genes (ie, redundancy). We
evaluated this algorithm across a range of parameter values: 10-400
directly assayed genes, redundancy of 1-3, and |rP| of 0.60, 0.65, and
0.70. In a training partition of the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) HGSC
Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 gene expression data (n = 386), we used the
selected directly measured genes to build linear models of predicted gene
expression. We then evaluated the predicted expression values using true
expression values from the following HGSC datasets: TCGA testing
partition (n = 159); GSE9891 (Australian, U133 Plus 2.0 array, n = 264);
and GSE32062 (Japanese, Agilent 444k microarray, n = 258). After
restricting to genes with median absolute deviation (MAD) > 0.5 and using
our most conservative parameters (|rP| = 0.7; redundancy = 3), 400
directly measured genes predicted an additional 198 unmeasured genes,
with average Spearman rank coefficients (rS) and bootstrapped standard
errors between predicted and true expression values of 0.854 (0.005) in
the testing partition of TCGA, 0.871 (0.006) in the Australian data, and
0.832 (0.010) in the Japanese data. Removing MAD filtering predicted 332
unmeasured genes but lowered accuracy, with respective average rS values
of 0.800 (0.009), 0.816 (0.011), and 0.750 (0.015). Relaxing redundancy
to 2 and |rP| to 0.65 predicted 701 unmeasured genes, but respective
average rS values decreased to 0.732 (0.007), 0.733 (0.008), and 0.686
(0.009). The number of predicted genes increases as the parameters become
less conservative, with a concomitant decrease in accuracy. In summary,
we show that for a given disease type a minimal set of directly measured
genes can be used to maximize the amount of gene expression information
captured in data sets across populations and assay platforms. Genes
selected using this method can be combined with candidate gene sets as a
cost-effective way to increase the amount of gene expression information
obtained in large studies where using a genome-wide measurement platform
is not feasible.

