Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel device to perform rapid high-throughput in vivo drug
sensitivity testing and identify optimal drug therapy for personalized
cancer treatment


We have developed an implantable device that can perform drug sensitivity
testing of a large number of anti-cancer agents inside the living tumor.
This device contains reservoirs that release microdoses of single agents
or drug combinations into distinct spatial regions of the tumor in local
concentrations that are representative of concentrations achieved during
systemic drug treatment. Local efficacy and drug concentration profile
are evaluated for each drug or combination on the device, and the local
efficacy was confirmed to be an excellent predictor of systemic efficacy
across multiple drugs and tumor models.Currently up to 16 individual
drugs or combinations can be assessed independently, without systemic
drug exposure, through minimally invasive biopsy of a small region of a
single tumor. Moreover, this assay takes into consideration physiologic
effects that contribute to drug response by allowing drugs to interact
with the living tumor in its native microenvironment. Because these
effects are crucial to predicting drug response we envision that these
devices will help identify optimal drug therapy before systemic treatment
is initiated and could significantly extend drug response prediction
beyond the predictive biomarkers used today. These devices may also
potentially be used in clinical drug development to safely gather
efficacy data on new compounds before pharmacological optimization.Note:
This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

