Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predominance of EGFR mutations responsible for resistance to
tyrosine kinase inhibitors among tumor DNAs assessed by picoliter droplet
digital PCR analysis of cell-free plasma DNAs


Introduction & Objectives: The new generation EGFR-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs), which suppress the kinase activity of EGFR proteins
with secondary T790M substitution, are being developed to overcome
resistance to therapy using conventional EGFR-TKI. Non-invasive
monitoring of EGFR gene mutations conferring sensitive (i.e., L858R and
various types of exon 19 deletion mutations) and T790M mutations to TKIs
are inevitable for efficient therapy of lung adenocarcinoma (LADC) using
conventional and/or new generation EGFR-TKIs. We aimed to evaluate the
utility of picoliter droplet digital PCR (pdPCR)-based cell-free plasma
DNA (cfDNA) examination to assess the tumor progression status of LADC
patients against EGFR-TKI treatments.Experimental Design: cfDNAs from
eight LADC patients acquiring resistance to EGFR-TKIs including gefitinib
or erlotinib were subjected to pdPCR assay that enables us to assess
fractions of EGFR DNAs with T790M, L858R and representative exon 19
deletion mutations among all EGFR DNAs. Each cfDNA sample was subjected
to two pdPCR assays, one for T790M mutation and the other for either of
TKI-sensitive exon 19 deletion or L858R mutation (determined before
EGFR-TKI therapy). Mutation positivity was decided according to a
threshold set based on cfDNAs from mutation-negative LADC patients, and
fractions of T790M mutated EGFR DNAs among EGFR DNAs with TKI-sensitive
mutations were estimated. The pdPCR assay for exon 19 deletion was
designed to detect loss of the wild-type signal and therefore could
detect exon 19 deletions of representative exon 19 in-flame deletion
mutations while the L858R and T790M assays were designed to specifically
detect DNA with corresponding single nucleotide variations.Results: All
eight patients examined after acquiring resistance to EGFR-TKIs showed
positivity for TKI-sensitive mutations, and five of them (62.5%) also for
T790M mutations. The mutation status of cfDNAs from four patients was
consistent with those of their re-biopsied tissues from the lesion
acquiring resistance. T790M mutation was deduced to have occurred in a
variety of fractions (7-97%) of tumor DNAs.Conclusions: pdPCR-based
examination of cfDNAs will present a robust non-invasive assessment of
tumor progression status against EGFR-TKI treatments by informing us of
the predominance of T790M mutated DNAs among tumor DNAs. A prospective
study to validate the utility of the pdPCR assay is on-going on patients
with NSCLC receiving EGFR-TKI therapy.

