Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APR-246 reactivates mutant p53 in non-small cell lung cancer cell
lines and sensitizes cells for CDDP treatment under normoxic and hypoxic
conditions


Introduction: Tumors are often characterized by inactivating mutations in
the TP53 gene. Mutations in this gene occur in about 50% of non-small
cell lung cancers (NSCLC), and influence the response to common
chemotherapeutics like CDDP (cisplatin). In addition, as hypoxic stress,
which is often found in tumors, is able to induce p53 accumulation and
p53 dependent apoptosis, the reactivation of mutant p53 might induce a
strong cytotoxic effect in hypoxic tumor regions. Therefore, we treated
NSCLC tumor cells with APR-246, a known activator of mutant p53, under
normoxic and hypoxic conditions. In addition, we combined APR-246 with
CDDP, to determine whether reactivation of mutant p53 could enhance the
cytotoxic response of CDDP.Materials & Methods: The NSCLC cell line
CRL-5908, harboring a R273H p53 mutation, was used. To determine the role
of mutant p53 in response to APR-246, CRL-5908 was transduced with a p53
shRNA lentiviral vector to obtain a p53 deficient sub cell line. The
SRB-assay was used to determine the cytotoxic effect of both mono-and
combination therapies after which possible synergism was calculated by
the Chou-Talalay method, both under normoxic and hypoxic conditions (0%
O2, 5% CO2, 95% N2). In addition, we determined the p53 protein level as
well as the mRNA and protein levels of its main transcription targets
MDM2, p21, PUMA and BAX. The induction of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest
were determined by flowcytometric analysis.Results: Our results show a
clear response of CRL-5908 to APR-246, which was stronger under hypoxic
conditions compared to normoxic conditions (IC50: 9.5 2.5 vs. 16.3 3.4).
We observed that CRL-5908 was less sensitive to CDDP monotherapy than the
p53 wild type cell line A549 (IC50: 15.2 3.3 vs. 6.2 1.6). We were able
to overcome this resistance to CDDP by combining the drug with APR-246
(IC20, IC40, IC60), which resulted in CDDP IC50 values of respectively
11.5 4.0; 5.0 2.2 and 6.5 2.0 under normoxic conditions.Discussion: Our
initial results show that APR-246 monotherapy is promising for the
treatment of p53 mutant NSCLC, particularly under hypoxic conditions. In
addition, APR-246 seems to sensitize cells for CDDP treatment when
combined simultaneously. We will further study the underlying mechanisms,
like the activation of p53 and the transcription of its main
transcription target MDM2, p21, PUMA and BAX as well as apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest. Moreover, we will compare simultaneous treatment of
CDDP and APR-246 with sequential treatment in which CDDP is followed by
APR-246 treatment, and further sort out the response of this combination
therapy under hypoxic conditions, as well as the role of mutant p53.

