Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lower mortality among married cancer patients: How much of the
effect is explained by socioeconomic and health insurance status


Background: Cancer patients who are married at diagnosis have lower
mortality than the unmarried. Although this effect has been attributed to
increased social support among married patients, whether economic
resources influence this association remains unclear.Purpose: We assessed
whether overall mortality differences between married and unmarried
cancer patients is modified by neighborhood socioeconomic status (nSES)
and mediated by health insurance status.Methods: We studied patients
newly diagnosed (first invasive primary) with one of the 10 most common
causes of cancer deaths from 2000 through 2009 in California. Information
on patient nSES (based on block-group- level Census 2000 or 2007-2011
American Community Survey data), insurance (primary and secondary payer
source), demographic and tumor characteristics, and follow-up through
2012 were obtained from the California Cancer Registry. Using Cox
proportional hazards regression, we estimated overall mortality [hazard
ratio (HR)] associated with marital status among N = 377,932 males
(194,216 deaths) and N = 378,447 females (175,414 deaths), stratified on
stage and adjusting for age, race/ethnicity, cancer site, nSES, insurance
status, and treatment.Results: Prior to adjustment for insurance status,
unmarried patients had higher overall mortality than married patients [HR
(males) = 1.28 (1.27-1.29), HR (females) = 1.20 (1.19-1.21)]. This
association was marginally stronger among patients from higher SES
neighborhoods [HR (males) = 1.30 (1.28-1.32), HR (females) = 1.21
(1.20-1.23)] than from lower SES neighborhoods [HR (males) = 1.27
(1.26-1.29), HR (females) = 1.19 (1.18-1.21)] and only slightly lower
after adjustment for insurance status. The magnitude of the associations
varied by race/ethnicity and cancer site, with the largest marital status
effect sizes seen for: high SES non-Hispanic White males with non-Hodgkin
lymphoma [1.62 (1.52-1.73)], low SES Black males with pancreatic cancer
[1.40 (1.20-1.63)], high SES Hispanic males with prostate cancer [1.50
(1.33-1.69)], high SES Asian males with pancreatic cancer [1.57
(1.28-1.92)], high SES non-Hispanic White females with breast cancer
[1.34 (1.29-1.38)] or NHL [1.34 (1.24-1.44)], low SES Black females with
NHL [1.43 (1.13-1.81)], and high SES Hispanic [1.44 (1.12-1.86)] and
Asian [1.59 (1.24-2.05)] females with leukemia. The largest attenuation
of HRs after adjustment for insurance was seen among Blacks, regardless
of nSES [males: from 1.26 (1.22-1.30) to 1.20 (1.16-1.24), females: from
1.15 (1.11-1.20) to 1.10 (1.06-1.15)].Conclusions: Neighborhood SES and
insurance status had no considerable impact on the association between
marital status and mortality after cancer diagnosis.

