Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDM4 SNP 34091 (rs4245739) effect on risk of breast, colon, lung,
prostate, endometrial and ovarian cancer


BackgroundMDM4 enhances MDM2's E3 ligase activity causing
ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent degradation of p53. Thus, elevated levels
of both MDM4 and MDM2 may result in p53 inactivation and elevated cancer
risk. A single nucleotide polymorphism in the MDM4 3 UTR (SNP34091A>C;
rs4245739) has been found to exert biological function as the SNP34091C
allele creates a putative target site for hsa-miR-191 leading to specific
hsa-miR-191 down-regulation of MDM4. Further, the SNP34091AA genotype is
associated with increased risk for both recurrence and tumor related
death in estrogen negative ovarian cancer patients. In the present study
we assessed the potential effect of MDM4 SNP34091A>C on cancer risk in
six major cancer forms.Materials and methodsWe analyzed 1717 breast-,
1331 lung-, 1531 colon-, 2501 prostate cancer cases and 3747 healthy
controls form the same population based study (CONOR) as well as 1404
endometrial- and 1699 ovarian cancer cases from hospital based
studies.All samples were genotyped for MDM4 SNP34091A>C using custom
Light-SNiP assay on a LightCycler 480 II instrument. Potential
associations between MDM4 SNP34091 and cancer risk were estimated by
calculating Odds Ratio (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI). All
statistical analyses were performed using the IBM SPSS 19
software.ResultsWe observed no significant association between MDM4
SNP34091A>C status and cancer risk in any of the analyzed cancer forms.
Interestingly, stratifying the ovarian cancer samples according to grade
and histology, we observed a reduced risk of high grade serous ovarian
cancer in patients harboring the MDM4 SNP34091AA genotype (OR = 0.80; 95%
CI = 0.65 - 0.98). Stratifying according to MDM2 SNP309 status we found
the MDM4 SNP34091A allele to be associated with increased risk for breast
cancer (OR = 2.10; 95% CI = 1.08 - 4.10) in patients carrying the SNP309
GG genotype.ConclusionsThe data presented here indicate that the effect
of MDM4 SNP34091 on cancer risk may be tissue specific and that there may
be cooperative effects with MDM2 SNP309.

