Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alview (ALignment VIEWer): A software tool to visualize next
generation sequencing (NGS) data


Widespread use of NGS has led to the increasing sizes of high throughput
sequencing data of various types from different platforms. Review of
alignment data by experienced genomics researchers is an important
quality control element in this process. Key to this activity is visual
inspection of the sequencing data in order to eliminate false positives
and document the likelihood of true positives. Furthermore, such manual,
or visual, examination of data must occur at extremely rapid
speeds.Alview (for ALignment VIEWer) is a compiled to native architecture
software tool for visualizing the alignment of sequencing data. The
inputs data are in the SAM/BAM format short read sequences that are
aligned to a reference genome sequence. Outputs are images representing
these short reads aligned to the reference genome. Alview is written in
portable C with optional Graphical User Interface (GUI) code written in
C,C++ or Objective C. Alview can be compiled to run in three different
ways: (1) as a webserver, (2) as a command line tool, or (3) Alview is
executable as a native graphical user interface. Alview is compatible
with Microsoft Windows, Linux, and Apple OS X. Our new tool saves time
and addresses specific regions of interest (for example, regions
containing known or novel mutations or SNPS) and peruses these regions in
the manner of a slideshow, enabling the scanning of a large number of
samples in a short time

