Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subcellular distribution of RAGE affects its functions in melanoma
growth and progression


The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) is known to act
as a central driver of tumorigenesis by sustaining a chronic inflammatory
tumor microenvironment. Until to date, RAGE has been exclusively
described as a cell surface receptor being activated upon engagement with
its various extra-cellular ligands, e.g. S100B, S100A8/A9, HMGB1, and
others. This study aimed at elucidating the functional role of RAGE and
its isoforms depending on their subcellular distribution in the context
of melanoma development, growth and progression. Therefore, various in
vitro models using melanoma cells or melanocytes and melanoma mouse
models as well as tissue-microarrays representing human specimens of
malignant melanoma and benign nevi were applied.The expression analyses
revealed an overexpression of RAGE in melanoma cells compared to
melanocytes/nevocytes. Moreover, RAGE protein was found to be localized
primarily in the nucleus of melanocytes/nevocytes whereas a predominant
cell surface/cytoplasmic localization of RAGE is observed in melanoma
cells. Nuclear translocation of RAGE depends on the nuclear transport
machinery and site-directed mutagenesis of predicted DNA binding sites
within the RAGE protein was applied in order to study its functional role
in the nucleus. Furthermore, knockdown of RAGE indicated its central
function in apoptosis induction.In conclusion, RAGE and its isoforms are
overexpressed and aberrantly localized in malignant melanoma cells
compared to melanocytes/nevocytes. Our data point towards a novel
tumor-protective function of RAGE in melanoma development depending on
its nuclear localization.

