Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional mechanism of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha-mediated
Dicer down-regulation


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are generated by a multiple steps process that
post-transcriptionally regulate the expression of target genes.
Dysregulation of miRNAs is linked to human diseases including the
development of human cancer. Abrogation of cellular global miRNAs
maturation has been proposed to promote tumorigenesis and cancer
metastasis. Hypoxia stress is the major cause of dysregulation of miRNAs
and promotes tumor angiogenesis, metastasis and tumorigenesis which is a
pivotal factor to switch on the cellular oncogenic features during tumor
progression. Although hypoxia stress regulates expression of a subset of
miRNAs, the upstream regulators controlling miRNAs regulation under
hypoxia remain unclear. This study demonstrates the molecular mechanism
of post-translational regulation of Dicer under hypoxia. Our results show
that knockdown of hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1) up-regulates
Dicer expression in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Overexpression of
HIF-1 enhances ubiquitination of Dicer and subsequently promotes it
recognition by autophagic receptor for autophagy-lysosomal degradation.
We also find that HIF-1 enhances cancer cell migration by regulating
Dicer-regulated miRNAs. In conclusion, we demonstrated that HIF-1
down-regulated Dicer and abolishes miRNA biogenesis to enhance cancer
cell migration. This study may provide a potential therapeutic direction
that targets the dysregulated miRNAs in tumor hypoxia for patients with
poor prognosis and metastatic CRC.

