Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing BCL6B inactivates p53 signaling and causes
human hepatocellular carcinoma cell resist to 5-FU


BCL6B is a potential tumor suppressor in human gastric cancer, but the
regulation and mechanism of BCL6B in human hepatocellular carcinogenesis
remain unclear. This study is to explore the epigenetic change and
mechanism of BCL6B in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 14 hepatic
cancer cell lines, 8 cases of normal hepatic tissue and 149 cases of HCC
were employed. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR, methylation specific PCR (MSP),
gene expression array, flow cytometry assay, colony formation, western
blot and immunohistochemistry were used. BCL6B is methylated in 100%
(14/14) of human HCC cell lines and 86.6% (129/149) of primary cancer
samples. Methylation of BCL6B is associated with HBV positive (pBCL6B is
a potential tumor suppressor in human gastric cancer, but the regulation
and mechanism of BCL6B in human hepatocellular carcinogenesis remain
unclear. This study is to explore the epigenetic change and mechanism of
BCL6B in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 14 hepatic cancer cell
lines, 8 cases of normal hepatic tissue and 149 cases of HCC were
employed. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR, methylation specific PCR (MSP), gene
expression array, flow cytometry assay, colony formation, western blot
and immunohistochemistry were used. BCL6B is methylated in 100% (14/14)
of human HCC cell lines and 86.6% (129/149) of primary cancer samples.
Methylation of BCL6B is associated with HBV positive (p<0.05). But no
association was found with age, sex, tumor size, differentiation, TNM
stage, recurrence and survival. Loss of BCL6B expression was found in 14
of completely methylated HCC cell lines. BCL6B was re-expressed after
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-AZA) treatment. Restoration of BCL6B expression
suppressed cell proliferation, induced apoptosis and G1/S arrest in HCC
cells. The expression of EGR1, a key component of p53 signaling, was
increased after re-expression BCL6B in HCC cells. Re-expression of BCL6B
activated P53 signaling and sensitized HepG2 and SNU449cells to
5-fluorouracil (5-FU). BCL6B is frequently methylated in human HCC and
the expression of BCL6B is regulated by promoter region hypermethylation.
BCL6B suppresses cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in HCC cells.
BCL6B activates P53 signaling by increasing EGR1 expression in HCC. BCL6B
sensitizes HCC cells to 5-FU by activating P53 signaling.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

