Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A circulating cell free DNA workflow for targeted sequencing -
from isolation through validation


Circulating cell free DNA has been shown to have the potential as a
non-invasive substrate for the detection of cancer and its progression as
well as the determination of therapeutic resistance. As circulating tumor
DNA is often present at low frequencies within circulating cell free DNA,
targeted sequencing is an optimal tool for mutation detection. Here, we
demonstrate a complete workflow from isolation through validation of
circulating tumor DNA.We have optimized a protocol using magnetic beads
to isolate circulating cell free DNA. This protocol is easily automated
to process up to 192 samples a day. It is also easily scalable for any
input volume and can elute in volumes down to 15 L resulting in no loss
of low frequency alleles. We demonstrate comparable performance between
this bead based isolation and column based isolation.We then completed
molecular characterization of the isolated circulating cell free DNA
using the multiplexing capabilities of AmpliSeq and the Ion PGM. With the
Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2, we performed targeted sequencing of
50 genes of interest, covering 2800 COSMIC mutations. We demonstrate good
reproducibility of amplicon representation as well as allelic
frequencies. Through saturation studies and subsampling, we have
determined the limit of detection of hotspots circulating cell free DNA
on the Ion PGM to be below 1%. We further demonstrate proof of principle
of this workflow on circulating cell free DNA and matched FFPE samples
complete with TaqMan validation.Our results validate the accuracy and
ease of our workflow. This protocol, from isolation through targeted
sequencing and validation, will not only result in a simple sample
preparation for circulating cell free DNA but also facilitate rapid
mutation detection to advance cancer research.

