Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4 is a novel target of cancer chemopreventative
isothiocyanates in prostate cancer cells


Isothiocyanates (ITCs) derived from cruciferous vegetables, including
phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC) and sulforaphane (SFN), exhibit in vivo
activity against prostate cancer in xenograft and transgenic mouse
models, and thus are appealing for chemoprevention of this disease.
Watercress constituent PEITC and SFN-rich broccoli sprout extract are
under clinical investigation but the molecular mechanisms underlying
their cancer chemopreventive effects are not fully understood. The
present study demonstrates that chemokine receptor CXCR4 is a novel
target of ITCs in prostate cancer cells. Exposure of prostate cancer
cells (LNCaP, 22Rv1, C4-2, and PC-3) to pharmacologically applicable
concentrations of PEITC, benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC), and SFN (2.5 and 5
mol/L) resulted in downregulation of CXCR4 expression. None of the
isothiocyanates affected secretion of CXCR4 ligand (stromal-derived
factor-1). In vivo inhibition of PC-3 xenograft growth upon PEITC
treatment was associated with a significant decrease in CXCR4 protein
level. A similar trend was discernible in the tumors from SFN-treated
TRAMP mice compared with those of control mice, but the difference was
not significant. Stable overexpression of CXCR4 in PC-3 cells conferred
significant protection against wound healing, cell migration, and cell
viability inhibition by ITCs. Inhibition of cell migration resulting from
PEITC and BITC exposure was significantly augmented by RNA interference
of CXCR4. This study demonstrates, for the first time, that cancer
chemopreventive ITCs suppress CXCR4 expression in prostate cancer cells
in vitro as well as in vivo. These results suggest that CXCR4
downregulation may be an important pharmacodynamic biomarker of cancer
chemopreventative ITCs in prostate adenocarcinoma.

