Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct immune cell composition for lung squamous cell carcinoma
(SCCA) and adenocarcinoma (ADCA)


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide, with 15% of
lung cancer patients surviving for five years. Recent approaches in
cancer therapy target immunosuppressive factors in the tumor
microenvironment (TME) capable of derailing an effective immune response,
using checkpoint inhibitors (e.g. anti-PD-1/PDL-1). Unfortunately, only
20% of patients benefit from these treatments and appropriate studies are
of importance to determine the underlying molecular mechanisms.Lung
cancer is a heterogeneous disease classified by multiple histologic
subtypes, with ADCA and SCCA representing the majority of non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC).To evaluate the complexity of the immune cell
composition of the TME of human NSCLC we examined tumor and non-adjacent
lung tissue from the same patients. Tissue specimen (n = 43) with
corresponding clinicopathologic information were analyzed by flow
cytometry and immunohistochemistry. Next generation sequencing for TCRs
was performed to assess the TCR repertoire.Surprisingly we found that
immune cells comprise 80% of the tumor mass in NSCLC. Many immune cell
types are significantly increased in tumor tissue, when compared to
normal lung, such as CD3+ and CD4+ T-cells, as well as B-cells. Notably,
CD4+ cell subtypes including Th17 and regulatory T cells (Treg), and
IL-17-expressing T cells are increased. In contrast, decreased presence
of Th1 cells was observed in tumor tissue.Remarkably, immune cell
compositions are unique for lung ADCA and SCCA. In SCCA we observed a
Treg (pLung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide, with
15% of lung cancer patients surviving for five years. Recent approaches
in cancer therapy target immunosuppressive factors in the tumor
microenvironment (TME) capable of derailing an effective immune response,
using checkpoint inhibitors (e.g. anti-PD-1/PDL-1). Unfortunately, only
20% of patients benefit from these treatments and appropriate studies are
of importance to determine the underlying molecular mechanisms.Lung
cancer is a heterogeneous disease classified by multiple histologic
subtypes, with ADCA and SCCA representing the majority of non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC).To evaluate the complexity of the immune cell
composition of the TME of human NSCLC we examined tumor and non-adjacent
lung tissue from the same patients. Tissue specimen (n = 43) with
corresponding clinicopathologic information were analyzed by flow
cytometry and immunohistochemistry. Next generation sequencing for TCRs
was performed to assess the TCR repertoire.Surprisingly we found that
immune cells comprise 80% of the tumor mass in NSCLC. Many immune cell
types are significantly increased in tumor tissue, when compared to
normal lung, such as CD3+ and CD4+ T-cells, as well as B-cells. Notably,
CD4+ cell subtypes including Th17 and regulatory T cells (Treg), and
IL-17-expressing T cells are increased. In contrast, decreased presence
of Th1 cells was observed in tumor tissue.Remarkably, immune cell
compositions are unique for lung ADCA and SCCA. In SCCA we observed a
Treg (p<0.0001) predominant signature with additional increased
infiltration of PMNs (p = 0.047) and significant decreases in Th1 (p =
0.034) and Th17 cells (p = 0.035) when compared to ADCA. SCCA displays
immune suppressive cell content indicated by low levels of CD8 effector
memory RA cells (CD8+CCR7CD45RA+, p = 0.0081), high expression of
exhaustion markers on CD8 cells (e.g. PD-1, p = 0.089) as well as
significantly more EpCAM+ cells expressing PDL-1 (p = 0.0073). Further, a
more clonal TCR -chain repertoire (p = 0.018) and higher frequency of the
top 10 clones (p = 0.049) were observed in SCCA. The presence of PMNs at
the sites of tumorigenesis inversely correlates with CD8+ cell content
(ADCA: R2 = 0.24, p = 0.022; SCCA R2 = 0.84, p = 0.0002).In contrast,
ADCA represents a Th17 signature, revealing elevated levels of
IL17-expressing CD4+ T-cells and T cells. While SCCA immune cell content
clusters well, immune cell composition in ADCA is very heterogeneous.
Preliminary data suggest that driver-mutations in ADCA such as EGFR
predict distinct immune cell composition.These data provide evidence that
the immune cell composition present within different NSCLC subtypes
displays unique phenotypes and identifying the immunosuppressive factors
in different subsets will be important for successful immune-based
therapy.

