Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radioresistance in glioma stem cells driven by Rad51 dependent
homologous recombination repair


A cell population with stem cell like characteristics is thought to
underlie treatment resistance and local recurrence in glioma. In this
work we investigate the role of the DNA repair protein RAD51 in these
cells and the impact of inhibiting homologous recombination repair on
radiation resistance in vitro and in vivo.We used a model of inducible
differentiation of patient derived glioma cells to investigate repair
protein levels, repair foci formation and kinetics in clonogenic,
stem-like populations and their differentiated counterparts. We examined
co-expression of stem cell markers with RAD51 protein at whole population
level using western blotting, immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR in cultured
cells and immunohistochemistry in tumor material. Single cell expression
was analysed using the Fluidigm C1 platform. We examined the effect of
two specific inhibitors of RAD51 (B02, RI-1) on the same cell pairs in
vitro and used the H2AX assay to assess differences in repair kinetics.
We used subcutaneous models of glioma to evaluate the effect of one of
these agents (RI-1) on tumour growth delay with and without fractionated
radiation doses in vivo.Primary glioma stem cells expressed high levels
of RAD51 protein and exhibited high numbers of foci per nucleus following
radiation exposure. Levels of both protein and repair foci fell after
cells were transferred to differentiating conditions (serum+BMP4), as did
expression of stem cell markers (NESTIN, SOX2). Single cell analysis
showed a highly significant association between SOX2 and RAD51 expression
(PA cell population with stem cell like characteristics is thought to
underlie treatment resistance and local recurrence in glioma. In this
work we investigate the role of the DNA repair protein RAD51 in these
cells and the impact of inhibiting homologous recombination repair on
radiation resistance in vitro and in vivo.We used a model of inducible
differentiation of patient derived glioma cells to investigate repair
protein levels, repair foci formation and kinetics in clonogenic,
stem-like populations and their differentiated counterparts. We examined
co-expression of stem cell markers with RAD51 protein at whole population
level using western blotting, immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR in cultured
cells and immunohistochemistry in tumor material. Single cell expression
was analysed using the Fluidigm C1 platform. We examined the effect of
two specific inhibitors of RAD51 (B02, RI-1) on the same cell pairs in
vitro and used the H2AX assay to assess differences in repair kinetics.
We used subcutaneous models of glioma to evaluate the effect of one of
these agents (RI-1) on tumour growth delay with and without fractionated
radiation doses in vivo.Primary glioma stem cells expressed high levels
of RAD51 protein and exhibited high numbers of foci per nucleus following
radiation exposure. Levels of both protein and repair foci fell after
cells were transferred to differentiating conditions (serum+BMP4), as did
expression of stem cell markers (NESTIN, SOX2). Single cell analysis
showed a highly significant association between SOX2 and RAD51 expression
(P< 0.0001). A similar association between RAD51 expression and stem cell
marker expression was demonstrated in a series of glioblastoma specimens.
When primary glioma cultures were treated with B02, RI-1 or siRNA
targeting RAD51 in vitro, significant radiosensitisation was achieved
with dose modifying factors 1.4 after single radiation doses. Delayed
repair of DNA double strand breaks was also apparent, with a higher
proportion of H2AX foci unresolved in treated cells at 24 hours post
irradiation. We also demonstrated significantly enhanced tumor growth
delay in vivo when RI-1 was combined with fractionated radiation therapy
(5Gy x 3) in a subcutaneous model.These data suggest that RAD51 dependent
DNA repair by homologous recombination represents a specific target in
the stem-like fraction of glioblastoma and inhibiting this pathway is a
promising approach to radiosensitisation.

