Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of the hedgehog signal pathway to Gefitinib
sensitivity in a 3D cancer cell lines screening


Drug profiling of cancer cell lines is a useful tool for predictive
biomarker discovery, traditional done in two-dimensional cultures, a
growing body of evidence suggests that results cannot always be
translated into xenografts or in the clinic due to the lack of complexity
of the culture conditions. 3D cultures offer the ability to carry out the
same type of studies with the added benefit of incorporating the
3-dimentional cellular interactions and physiological gradients normally
seen in a tumor microenvironment. In this study we used Numira's 3D cell
line screening platform on Gefitinib, a selective inhibitor of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR). We determined IC50 of Gefitinib in a panel
of 60 cell lines grown as spheroids and used this information to
investigate genes associated with sensitivity. Two mutated genes were
associated with sensitivity to Gefitinb, as expected, the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) was one of them, since mutations on EGFR
are required for clinical efficacy. The second gene was smoothened (SMO),
a G protein-coupled receptor of the hedgehog signaling pathway. It has
been suggested that blockade of the hedgehog signaling pathway enhances
anti-proliferative effects of EGFR inhibitors, we explored this potential
synergy in a combination studies of Gefitinib and SMO inhibitors,
Cyclopamine and GDC0449, the results are discussed.

