Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The preclinical profile of the duocarmycin-based HER2-targeting
ADC SYD985 predicts for clinical benefit in low HER2-expressing breast
cancers


SYD985 is a HER2-targeting ADC based on trastuzumab and vc-seco-DUBA,
Synthon's proprietary cleavable linker-duocarmycin payload. Vc-seco-DUBA
was coupled to cysteines after partial reduction on the interchain
disulfides of trastuzumab. SYD985 was obtained after purification by
Hydrophobic Interaction Chromatography to yield a well-defined ADC
consisting of predominantly DAR 2 and DAR 4 species.To evaluate the
therapeutic potential of this new ADC, and to prepare clinical
development, mechanistic in vitro studies and in vivo PDX studies were
conducted to compare SYD985 head-to-head to T-DM1 (Kadcyla), another
trastuzumab-based ADC with a toxin of the maytansinoid class in
combination with a non-cleavable linker. SYD985 and T-DM1 had similar
binding-affinities to HER2 and showed similar internalization. In vitro
cytotoxicity assays showed similar potencies and efficacies in HER2 3+
cell lines, but in cell lines with low HER2 expression, SYD985 was 3 to
50-fold more potent than T-DM1. In contrast to T-DM1, SYD985 efficiently
induced bystander killing in vitro of HER2 negative (HER2 0) cells when
mixed with HER2 3+, 2+, or 1+ cells. SYD985 efficiently killed HER2 0
cells, even in the presence of only 20% of HER2 3+ cells. At pH
conditions relevant for tumors, cathepsin B cleavage studies showed
efficient release of the active toxin from SYD985 but not from T-DM1.
These in vitro data suggest that SYD985 might be a more potent ADC in
HER2 expressing tumors in vivo, allowing the treatment of tumor tissues
with low or heterogeneous membrane expression of HER2. In line with this,
in vivo anti-tumor studies in breast cancer PDX models showed that SYD985
is very active in HER2 3+, 2+, and 1+ models whereas T-DM1 only showed
significant anti-tumor activity in HER2 3+ breast cancer PDX models.We
conclude that the properties of SYD985 may enable expansion of the target
population to patients who have low HER2 expressing breast cancer, a
patient population with unmet high medical need.Early phase clinical
evaluation with SYD985 is ongoing.

