Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SL-401 activity against AML blasts correlates with CD123 levels
and does not down-regulate CD123 expression


Despite the progress, the current therapies for acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) are not curative partly due to failure to eradicate the leukemic
stem cells (LSCs) that repopulate the leukemia. CD123 is the alpha-chain
of interleukin-3 receptor (IL-3R) that is expressed on AML and AML LSCs,
while it is undetectable in normal hematopoietic stem cells. We report
here time and dose dependent cytotoxic activity of SL-401(Stemline
Therapeutics, Inc), a diphtheria toxin interleukin-3 fusion protein which
is designed to selectively bind, internalize and induce apoptosis of
CD123+ primary AML cells isolated from patients.AML blasts were obtained
from leukapheresis of patients and cultured in RPMI1640 with 20% fetal
bovine serum and antibiotics and supplemented with growth factors GM-CSF
and SCF (10ng/ml) overnight before treatment with increasing
concentrations of SL-401. CD123 expression of AML blasts was analyzed
using multicolor flow cytometry before and 24 hours after treatment with
SL-401. The viability of the cells before and after treatment with
increasing concentrations of SL-401 was measured by annexinV-FITC and
propidium iodide staining.SL-401 induced dose-dependent (SL-401: 10, 100,
1000ng/ml) cytotoxicity in primary AML in nanomolar range (trend p =
0.0002 at 48hr), which correlated with surface expression levels of
CD123. AML CD34+CD33+ blasts showed high CD123 expression levels and were
susceptible to cytotoxicity with SL-401 (PDespite the progress, the
current therapies for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) are not curative
partly due to failure to eradicate the leukemic stem cells (LSCs) that
repopulate the leukemia. CD123 is the alpha-chain of interleukin-3
receptor (IL-3R) that is expressed on AML and AML LSCs, while it is
undetectable in normal hematopoietic stem cells. We report here time and
dose dependent cytotoxic activity of SL-401(Stemline Therapeutics, Inc),
a diphtheria toxin interleukin-3 fusion protein which is designed to
selectively bind, internalize and induce apoptosis of CD123+ primary AML
cells isolated from patients.AML blasts were obtained from leukapheresis
of patients and cultured in RPMI1640 with 20% fetal bovine serum and
antibiotics and supplemented with growth factors GM-CSF and SCF (10ng/ml)
overnight before treatment with increasing concentrations of SL-401.
CD123 expression of AML blasts was analyzed using multicolor flow
cytometry before and 24 hours after treatment with SL-401. The viability
of the cells before and after treatment with increasing concentrations of
SL-401 was measured by annexinV-FITC and propidium iodide staining.SL-401
induced dose-dependent (SL-401: 10, 100, 1000ng/ml) cytotoxicity in
primary AML in nanomolar range (trend p = 0.0002 at 48hr), which
correlated with surface expression levels of CD123. AML CD34+CD33+ blasts
showed high CD123 expression levels and were susceptible to cytotoxicity
with SL-401 (P<0.0001,1000ng/ml at 48hr). CD34CD33+ committed leukemic
cells were also CD123+ and responded to SL-401. To determine if SL-401
modulated CD123 levels after exposure, AML blasts pre-treated with SL-401
for 24hr were analyzed by flow cytometry for receptor expression.
Importantly, SL-401 treatment after 24 hours did not down-regulate CD123
expression on primary AML blasts indicating a lack of an escape mechanism
for malignant cells.These results provide evidence that time- and
dose-dependent activity of SL-401 against CD123+ AML blasts correlates
with CD123 expression. Moreover, treatment does not down-regulate IL-3R
expression. Clinical studies of SL-401 in patients with
relapsed/refractory AML with evaluation of CD123 expression and blastic
plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) are ongoing.

