Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triple-negative breast cancer in Algerian population:
clinicopathological and molecular study


Background:Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC),defined by the absence of
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR),and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) expression, accounts for 12% to 20% of
all breast cancers.Its prevalence differs between races.TNBC shows
substantial overlap with basal-type and BRCA1-related breast cancers and
it is associated with early recurrence of disease and poor outcome.In the
current study, we sought to compare some clinical and tumor
characteristics of breast cancer patients with or without TNBC. We also
screened for the prevalence of germline BRCA1 mutations in TNBC patients.
Materials and Methods: Clinical and tumor characteristics data of 3403
breast cancer patients were collected from cancer registries of
anticancer center of Blida, public hospital of Oued Amizour, anticancer
center of Batna and public hospital of Rouiba. Breast cancers were
diagnosed between 2007 and 2014. All histopathologic and
immunohistochemical diagnoses were reviewed by pathologists. Patients
were divided in two groups: those with TNBC and those with other breast
cancer subtypes. Differences between the two groups with regard to
clinicopathologic parameters: age at diagnosis, menopausal status,
histological grade and histological type, were examined using Chi-square
test. BRCA1 was screened by PCR-direct sequencing in 56 TNBC patients (26
with a family history of breast cancer and 30 sporadic cases) including
all exons where a mutation was previously found in Algerian population
(exons 2, 3, 5, 11). Results: The median age at diagnosis for TNBC and
non-TNBC patients was 46.96 years and 49.01 years, respectively.The
overall prevalence of TNBC was 21.65% (737/3403). Our data showed
significant differences in the distribution of age at diagnosis
(PBackground:Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC),defined by the absence
of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR),and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) expression, accounts for 12% to 20% of
all breast cancers.Its prevalence differs between races.TNBC shows
substantial overlap with basal-type and BRCA1-related breast cancers and
it is associated with early recurrence of disease and poor outcome.In the
current study, we sought to compare some clinical and tumor
characteristics of breast cancer patients with or without TNBC. We also
screened for the prevalence of germline BRCA1 mutations in TNBC patients.
Materials and Methods: Clinical and tumor characteristics data of 3403
breast cancer patients were collected from cancer registries of
anticancer center of Blida, public hospital of Oued Amizour, anticancer
center of Batna and public hospital of Rouiba. Breast cancers were
diagnosed between 2007 and 2014. All histopathologic and
immunohistochemical diagnoses were reviewed by pathologists. Patients
were divided in two groups: those with TNBC and those with other breast
cancer subtypes. Differences between the two groups with regard to
clinicopathologic parameters: age at diagnosis, menopausal status,
histological grade and histological type, were examined using Chi-square
test. BRCA1 was screened by PCR-direct sequencing in 56 TNBC patients (26
with a family history of breast cancer and 30 sporadic cases) including
all exons where a mutation was previously found in Algerian population
(exons 2, 3, 5, 11). Results: The median age at diagnosis for TNBC and
non-TNBC patients was 46.96 years and 49.01 years, respectively.The
overall prevalence of TNBC was 21.65% (737/3403). Our data showed
significant differences in the distribution of age at diagnosis
(P<0.0005) and tumor histological grade (PBackground:Triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC),defined by the absence of estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR),and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) expression, accounts for 12% to 20% of all breast cancers.Its
prevalence differs between races.TNBC shows substantial overlap with
basal-type and BRCA1-related breast cancers and it is associated with
early recurrence of disease and poor outcome.In the current study, we
sought to compare some clinical and tumor characteristics of breast
cancer patients with or without TNBC. We also screened for the prevalence
of germline BRCA1 mutations in TNBC patients. Materials and Methods:
Clinical and tumor characteristics data of 3403 breast cancer patients
were collected from cancer registries of anticancer center of Blida,
public hospital of Oued Amizour, anticancer center of Batna and public
hospital of Rouiba. Breast cancers were diagnosed between 2007 and 2014.
All histopathologic and immunohistochemical diagnoses were reviewed by
pathologists. Patients were divided in two groups: those with TNBC and
those with other breast cancer subtypes. Differences between the two
groups with regard to clinicopathologic parameters: age at diagnosis,
menopausal status, histological grade and histological type, were
examined using Chi-square test. BRCA1 was screened by PCR-direct
sequencing in 56 TNBC patients (26 with a family history of breast cancer
and 30 sporadic cases) including all exons where a mutation was
previously found in Algerian population (exons 2, 3, 5, 11). Results: The
median age at diagnosis for TNBC and non-TNBC patients was 46.96 years
and 49.01 years, respectively.The overall prevalence of TNBC was 21.65%
(737/3403). Our data showed significant differences in the distribution
of age at diagnosis (P<0.0005) and tumor histological grade (P<0.0001)
between TNBC and non-TNBC patients.Among tumor with histological grade
III,TNBC accounted for 50.54% for all TNBC patients and non-TNBC
accounted for 25.28% for all non-TNBC patients.Premenopausal women
accounted for 60.71% and 58.9% for all TNBC patients and all non-TNBC
patients, respectively. Our data analysis revealed no difference in the
distribution of histological tumor type between the two groups.Two BRCA1
mutations, c.83_84delTG and c.2125_2126insA have been detected in two
young TNBC patients with a family history of breast cancer.
Interestingly, the mutation c.2125_2126insA has been detected in 4
relatives of TNBC proband.Conclusions:This largest Algerian
population-based study showed that the prevalence of TNBC in Algerian
women is similar to that in African-American patients and higher than
reported in white women in Europe and America. The high prevalence of
TNBC in Algerian women compared to western countries could be linked to
environmental factors and genetic background. Further research is needed
to determine long term survival rates in the two groups of breast cancer
patients.

