Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-content screen to identify novel chromosome instability
genes


Chromosome instability (CIN) is defined as an increase in the rate at
which whole chromosomes or large chromosomal fragments are gained or
lost. It is a characteristic of virtually all cancer types that is
frequently observed in highly aggressive, drug resistant tumors. Despite
this, the majority of human CIN genes have yet to be elucidated,
highlighting the need for studies aimed at identifying the defective
genes that underlie CIN. In this study we developed image-based
approaches capable of detecting CIN-associated phenotypes following
RNAi-based silencing of candidate CIN genes. The first assay involves
quantifying nuclear areas following silencing, where changes in mean
nuclear area relative to controls act as a surrogate marker of CIN. The
second approach monitors micronucleus (MN) formation where increases in
the number of micronuclei are indicative of CIN. These assays were
employed in a high-content screen of 164 human candidate CIN genes in two
unrelated cell lines, HT1080 and hTERT. In HT1080, the nuclear area and
MN enumeration assays identified 43 and 83 putative CIN genes,
respectively. In hTERT, the nuclear area and MN assays identified 55 and
48 putative CIN genes, respectively. Preliminary data collected through
Western blotting, mitotic spreads and flow cytometry, has provided
evidence to support the validation of a subset of these putative CIN
genes (e.g. SKP1), as bona fide human CIN genes. Identifying novel CIN
genes will provide critical insights into CIN and tumorigenesis, as well
as identify potential targets that could be exploited for the development
of superior therapeutic strategies.

