Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of AMG 337, a highly selective small
molecule MET inhibitor, in hepatocellular carcinoma


Purpose: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of
cancer-related deaths worldwide. Aberrant hepatocyte growth factor / MET
signaling has been implicated in hepatocarcinogenesis, suggesting that
MET may serve as an attractive therapeutic target in HCC. The purpose of
this study was to investigate the anti-tumor activity in vitro and in
vivo of AMG 337, a potent and highly selective small molecule MET kinase
inhibitor, in preclinical models of HCC.Experimental Design: The
anti-proliferative activity of AMG 337 was evaluated across a panel of 40
HCC cell lines in a 72-hour viability assay. Daily oral administration of
AMG 337 at doses of 3, 10 and 30 mg/kg was used to evaluate the in vivo
anti-tumor activity of AMG 337 in two patient-derived mouse xenograft
(PDX) models of HCC, LI0612 and LI1078. Effects on MET signaling were
assessed by western blot analysis of downstream effector proteins
including p-GAB1, p-AKT and p-ERK. MET protein levels and gene copy
number for both PDX models and a subset of HCC cell lines were assessed
by immunohistochemistry (IHC; Dako) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH; Dako), respectively. High MET expression was defined
as the presence of any tumor cells with membrane staining at 3+
intensity. MET amplification was defined as MET:CEN-7 ratio >2.0 or MET
SNP array log2 copy number >2.5.Results: AMG 337 displayed potent
anti-proliferative activity in two of 40 HCC cell lines (MHCC97H and
HCCLM3) (IC50 0.015 M and 0.025 M, respectively); both cell lines were
amplified for MET (MET/CEN-7 >2.0) and showed high MET expression (3+
IHC). AMG 337 potently inhibited p-MET in all cell lines with detectable
levels of total MET. However, dose-dependent inhibition of p-GAB1, p-AKT
and p-ERK was limited to those cell lines that were sensitive to AMG 337
in viability assays. AMG 337 significantly inhibited tumor growth at all
doses tested (p Purpose: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third
leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Aberrant hepatocyte
growth factor / MET signaling has been implicated in
hepatocarcinogenesis, suggesting that MET may serve as an attractive
therapeutic target in HCC. The purpose of this study was to investigate
the anti-tumor activity in vitro and in vivo of AMG 337, a potent and
highly selective small molecule MET kinase inhibitor, in preclinical
models of HCC.Experimental Design: The anti-proliferative activity of AMG
337 was evaluated across a panel of 40 HCC cell lines in a 72-hour
viability assay. Daily oral administration of AMG 337 at doses of 3, 10
and 30 mg/kg was used to evaluate the in vivo anti-tumor activity of AMG
337 in two patient-derived mouse xenograft (PDX) models of HCC, LI0612
and LI1078. Effects on MET signaling were assessed by western blot
analysis of downstream effector proteins including p-GAB1, p-AKT and
p-ERK. MET protein levels and gene copy number for both PDX models and a
subset of HCC cell lines were assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC;
Dako) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH; Dako), respectively.
High MET expression was defined as the presence of any tumor cells with
membrane staining at 3+ intensity. MET amplification was defined as
MET:CEN-7 ratio >2.0 or MET SNP array log2 copy number >2.5.Results: AMG
337 displayed potent anti-proliferative activity in two of 40 HCC cell
lines (MHCC97H and HCCLM3) (IC50 0.015 M and 0.025 M, respectively); both
cell lines were amplified for MET (MET/CEN-7 >2.0) and showed high MET
expression (3+ IHC). AMG 337 potently inhibited p-MET in all cell lines
with detectable levels of total MET. However, dose-dependent inhibition
of p-GAB1, p-AKT and p-ERK was limited to those cell lines that were
sensitive to AMG 337 in viability assays. AMG 337 significantly inhibited
tumor growth at all doses tested (p < 0.001) in the MET-amplified and
MET-high expressing HCC PDX model LI0612. However, AMG 337 had no effect
on tumor growth in the non-MET-amplified and MET-low expressing HCC PDX
model LI1078. Analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data identified
four of 164 (2.4%) HCC tumor samples with MET amplification
(https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga), representing a patient population
with potential to derive clinical benefit from AMG 337.Conclusions: These
preclinical studies show that the efficacy of AMG 337 in HCC was highly
associated with MET amplification. AMG 337 represents a promising, novel
clinical therapeutic strategy for targeting HCC with a dependence on the
MET pathway.

