Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Persistent alterations of gene expression profiling of human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from smokers


The number of validated biomarkers of tobacco smoke exposure is limited,
and none exist for tobacco-related cancer. Additional biomarkers for
smoke effects on cellular systems in vivo are needed to improve early
detection of lung cancer, and to assist the Food and Drug Administration
in regulating exposures to tobacco products. We assessed the effects of
smoking on the gene expression in vitro and in vivo using human cell
cultures and blood from a cross-sectional study. We profiled global
transcriptional changes in cultured smokers peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) treated with cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) in vitro and
from well-characterized smokers blood (n = 36). ANOVA and linear
regression with adjustment for covariates were used for statistical
analysis. CSC in vitro altered the expression of 1178 genes (177 genes
with > 1.5 fold-change) at P 1.5 fold-change) at P 1.5 fold-change) at P
< 0.05 (309 remaining significant after adjustment for age, race and
gender). Seventy eight genes had a significant linear correlation (P 1.5
fold-change) at P < 0.05 (309 remaining significant after adjustment for
age, race and gender). Seventy eight genes had a significant linear
correlation (P < 0.01) with cigarettes per day and 28 genes were linearly
correlated with cumulative pack-year smoking. Forty-one genes were
persistently altered both in vitro and in vivo, 22 having the same
expression pattern reported for non-small cell lung cancer. Our data
provides evidence that persistent alterations of gene expression in vitro
and in vivo may relate to carcinogenic effects of cigarette smoke, and
the identified genes may serve as potential biomarkers for cancer. The
use of an in vitro model to corroborate results from human studies
provides direct evidence for a cause and effect.

