Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression signatures of isolated circulating tumor cells
from metastatic breast cancer patients reveal presence of breast cancer
stem cells with EMT or MET phenotypes


Breast cancer stem cells are responsible for tumor recurrence, metastasis
and drug resistance. One of the important steps in metastasis is entry of
tumor cells into the blood circulation. These circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) may serve as markers of cancer progression and as a liquid biopsy
to provide information on tumor biology at single cell resolution.
Current methods of CTC capture are not fully inclusive to isolate all
phenotypic variations of cancer stem cells (CSCs) among the CTCs. Using
newly developed microfluidic methods to isolate CTCs from blood samples
of metastatic breast cancer patients, we assessed gene expression
profiles in these cells. The gene expression signatures of isolated CTCs
were determined using a highly sensitive microfluidic-based 96-plex
RT-qPCR method. Analyzed multiplex RT-qPCR data revealed distinct gene
expression patterns among CTCs isolated from different patients. Cancer
stem cell markers such as ALDH1a1, ALDH1a2 and ALDH1a3 as well as CD44
and CD24 genes were differentially expressed in isolated CTCs. In
addition, markers of the epithelial to mesenchymal (EMT) and mesenchymal
to epithelial (MET) phenotypes such as Vimentin, EpCAM, HER2, CDH1, CDH2,
TGFb1 and cytokeratins were also expressed variably in the CTC samples.
Furthermore, MMP9, TIMP1, CD90, CD14, SPARC, BRAF, KRAS, PI3K and ERCC1
genes which play a role in cancer initiation, promotion, metastasis and
drug resistance were also differentially expressed in the isolated CTCs.
Overall, these studies further our understanding into the heterogeneity
of CTCs and CSCs as well as providing a potential tool for real-time
monitoring of cancer patients on clinical trials.

