Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new class of immunomodulators derivatized from the Tat protein
of HIV-1 in a murine breast cancer model


Introduction: Immunotherapies such as immune checkpoint inhibitors have
had limited success in treating breast cancers. We observed that women
with HIV infection and even AIDS have an unusually low incidence of
breast cancer. The Tat protein of HIV-1 modulates innate immunity through
activation of antigen presenting cells (APCs), and thus could be the
reason for this finding. A Tat protein derivative designed to eliminate
elements contributing to HIV-1 mediated immunosuppression was expressed
as a recombinant protein in E. coli and found to stimulate monocytes to
differentiate into antigen presenting cells. This protein, designated
PIN-2, was tested in the syngeneic 4T1 murine breast cancer model, a
poorly immunogenic and invasive triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell
line.Methods: In vitro activity of PIN-2 was confirmed using a human
monocyte activation assay that determined cell surface expression of CD80
and CD86 by flow cytometry after 72h of incubation with PIN-2, compared
with controls. BALB/c mice were implanted orthotopically in the mammary
fat pad with 10000 4T1 cells (ATCC No. CRL-2593). Treatment was initiated
7 days after implantation. Mice were administered 100ng PIN-2
intravenously 3x/week for 3 weeks. Tumors were measured 2x/week starting
12 days after implantation using a standard caliper method. Mice were
sacrificed 29 days after implantation and examined macroscopically for
spontaneous pulmonary metastases.Results: PIN-2 significantly increased
human monocyte cell surface expression of costimulatory molecules CD80
and CD86 in vitro at concentrations as low as 30ng/mL culture compared to
the negative control (PIntroduction: Immunotherapies such as immune
checkpoint inhibitors have had limited success in treating breast
cancers. We observed that women with HIV infection and even AIDS have an
unusually low incidence of breast cancer. The Tat protein of HIV-1
modulates innate immunity through activation of antigen presenting cells
(APCs), and thus could be the reason for this finding. A Tat protein
derivative designed to eliminate elements contributing to HIV-1 mediated
immunosuppression was expressed as a recombinant protein in E. coli and
found to stimulate monocytes to differentiate into antigen presenting
cells. This protein, designated PIN-2, was tested in the syngeneic 4T1
murine breast cancer model, a poorly immunogenic and invasive triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell line.Methods: In vitro activity of
PIN-2 was confirmed using a human monocyte activation assay that
determined cell surface expression of CD80 and CD86 by flow cytometry
after 72h of incubation with PIN-2, compared with controls. BALB/c mice
were implanted orthotopically in the mammary fat pad with 10000 4T1 cells
(ATCC No. CRL-2593). Treatment was initiated 7 days after implantation.
Mice were administered 100ng PIN-2 intravenously 3x/week for 3 weeks.
Tumors were measured 2x/week starting 12 days after implantation using a
standard caliper method. Mice were sacrificed 29 days after implantation
and examined macroscopically for spontaneous pulmonary
metastases.Results: PIN-2 significantly increased human monocyte cell
surface expression of costimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86 in vitro at
concentrations as low as 30ng/mL culture compared to the negative control
(P<0.01). The activation was dose dependent. In vivo, PIN-2 treatment
reduced tumor volume to less than 60% of the tumor volume of untreated
mice 29 days after tumor implantation (686 mm3 tumor size in placebo vs.
407mm3 in treated mice, pIntroduction: Immunotherapies such as immune
checkpoint inhibitors have had limited success in treating breast
cancers. We observed that women with HIV infection and even AIDS have an
unusually low incidence of breast cancer. The Tat protein of HIV-1
modulates innate immunity through activation of antigen presenting cells
(APCs), and thus could be the reason for this finding. A Tat protein
derivative designed to eliminate elements contributing to HIV-1 mediated
immunosuppression was expressed as a recombinant protein in E. coli and
found to stimulate monocytes to differentiate into antigen presenting
cells. This protein, designated PIN-2, was tested in the syngeneic 4T1
murine breast cancer model, a poorly immunogenic and invasive triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell line.Methods: In vitro activity of
PIN-2 was confirmed using a human monocyte activation assay that
determined cell surface expression of CD80 and CD86 by flow cytometry
after 72h of incubation with PIN-2, compared with controls. BALB/c mice
were implanted orthotopically in the mammary fat pad with 10000 4T1 cells
(ATCC No. CRL-2593). Treatment was initiated 7 days after implantation.
Mice were administered 100ng PIN-2 intravenously 3x/week for 3 weeks.
Tumors were measured 2x/week starting 12 days after implantation using a
standard caliper method. Mice were sacrificed 29 days after implantation
and examined macroscopically for spontaneous pulmonary
metastases.Results: PIN-2 significantly increased human monocyte cell
surface expression of costimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86 in vitro at
concentrations as low as 30ng/mL culture compared to the negative control
(P<0.01). The activation was dose dependent. In vivo, PIN-2 treatment
reduced tumor volume to less than 60% of the tumor volume of untreated
mice 29 days after tumor implantation (686 mm3 tumor size in placebo vs.
407mm3 in treated mice, p<0.01). Moreover, PIN-2 significantly inhibited
the development of spontaneous 4T1 lung metastases (pIntroduction:
Immunotherapies such as immune checkpoint inhibitors have had limited
success in treating breast cancers. We observed that women with HIV
infection and even AIDS have an unusually low incidence of breast cancer.
The Tat protein of HIV-1 modulates innate immunity through activation of
antigen presenting cells (APCs), and thus could be the reason for this
finding. A Tat protein derivative designed to eliminate elements
contributing to HIV-1 mediated immunosuppression was expressed as a
recombinant protein in E. coli and found to stimulate monocytes to
differentiate into antigen presenting cells. This protein, designated
PIN-2, was tested in the syngeneic 4T1 murine breast cancer model, a
poorly immunogenic and invasive triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell
line.Methods: In vitro activity of PIN-2 was confirmed using a human
monocyte activation assay that determined cell surface expression of CD80
and CD86 by flow cytometry after 72h of incubation with PIN-2, compared
with controls. BALB/c mice were implanted orthotopically in the mammary
fat pad with 10000 4T1 cells (ATCC No. CRL-2593). Treatment was initiated
7 days after implantation. Mice were administered 100ng PIN-2
intravenously 3x/week for 3 weeks. Tumors were measured 2x/week starting
12 days after implantation using a standard caliper method. Mice were
sacrificed 29 days after implantation and examined macroscopically for
spontaneous pulmonary metastases.Results: PIN-2 significantly increased
human monocyte cell surface expression of costimulatory molecules CD80
and CD86 in vitro at concentrations as low as 30ng/mL culture compared to
the negative control (P<0.01). The activation was dose dependent. In
vivo, PIN-2 treatment reduced tumor volume to less than 60% of the tumor
volume of untreated mice 29 days after tumor implantation (686 mm3 tumor
size in placebo vs. 407mm3 in treated mice, p<0.01). Moreover, PIN-2
significantly inhibited the development of spontaneous 4T1 lung
metastases (p< 0.05 when compared to placebo). Preliminary examination
indicates that 90% of the mice in the control group had visible nodules
on the surface of the lungs. Macroscopically visible metastases were
reduced to only 50% of the PIN-2 treated mice. There was no evidence of
weight loss or apparent toxicity by PIN-2.Conclusion: PIN-2 stimulates
cell surface expression of costimulatory molecules that serve as markers
for activated antigen presenting cells and are essential for cytotoxic
T-cell activation. It reduces primary and metastatic tumor burden in an
orthotopic murine model of TNBC. These data suggest that PIN-2 functions
as an innate immune agonist to facilitate adaptive anti-tumor immune
responses in a poorly immunogenic model of breast cancer. Moreover, PIN-2
appears to be well tolerated, supporting further evaluation of PINS in
human breast cancer clinical trials.

