Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mcph1/Brit1 deficiency promotes genomic instability and tumor
formation in a mouse model


MCPH1, also known as BRIT1, has recently been identified as a novel key
regulatory gene of the DNA damage response pathway. MCPH1 is located on
human chromosome 8p23.1, where human cancers frequently show loss of
heterozygosity. As such, MCPH1 is aberrantly expressed in many
malignancies, including breast and ovarian cancers, and the function of
MCPH1 has been implicated in tumor suppression. However, it remains
poorly understood whether MCPH1 deficiency leads to tumorigenesis. Here,
we generated and studied both Mcph1/ and Mcph1/p53/ mice; we showed that
Mcph1/ mice developed tumors with long latency, and that primary lymphoma
developed significantly earlier in Mcph1/p53/ mice than in Mcph11+/+p53/
and Mcph1+/p53/- mice. The Mcph1/p53/ lymphomas and derived murine
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were both more sensitive to irradiation.
Mcph1 deficiency resulted in remarkably increased chromosome and
chromatid breaks in Mcph1/p53/ lymphomas and MEFs, as determined by
metaphase spread assay and spectral karyotyping analysis. Additionally,
Mcph1 deficiency significantly enhanced aneuploidy as well as abnormal
centrosome multiplication in Mcph1/p53/ cells. Meanwhile, Mcph1
deficiency impaired double strand break (DSB) repair in Mcph1/p53/ MEFs
as demonstrated by neutral Comet assay. Compared with Mcph1+/+p53/ MEFs,
homologous recombination and non-homologous end joining activities were
significantly decreased in Mcph1/p53/ MEFs. Notably, reconstituted MCPH1
rescued the defects of DSB repair and alleviated chromosomal aberrations
in Mcph1/p53/- MEFs. Taken together, our data demonstrate MCPH1
deficiency promotes genomic instability and increases cancer
susceptibility. Our study using knockout mouse models provides convincing
genetic evidence that MCPH1 is a bona fide tumor suppressor gene. Its
deficiency leading to defective DNA repair in tumors can be utilized to
develop novel targeted cancer therapies in the future.

