Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Can prostate cancer derived neuromodulators regulate intratumoral
axonogenesis


Well-developed angiolymphatic network in solid malignant tumors has been
proven as an important requirement for tumor growth and progression.
However, the level of innervation of the tumor mass is not a well-known
factor in tumor development and spreading. Several mechanisms may be
responsible for activation and inhibition of neural elements in the tumor
microenvironment, including numerous neurotrophic factors (NF) that have
axon attractive and axon repellent properties. We have examined 40 cases
of human prostate adenocarcinoma by immunohistochemical stains,
highlighting neural elements (S-100, PGP9.5, neurofilament) and blood
vessels (CD31, CD34). The result revealed that while blood vessels were
abundant in the tumor tissue, the neural structures were very scarce
compared to benign prostate tissue. Next, in a model system, cell-free
supernatants from TRAMP C2 and RM-1murine prostate cancer cell lines were
added to the murine neuron cultures, and morphology of the neurons was
analyzed by assessing the number of cells with neurites, the number of
neuritis per cell, and the lengths of neurites. The data showed that
tumor-conditioned media of TRAMP-C2 and RM-1 cells significantly inhibit
the neurite growth in mouse neuron cultures. Analysis of gene expression
in murine prostatic adenocarcinoma by RT-PCR revealed expression of
Semaphorin 4A, Semaphorin 3F, Ephrin A1, Ephrin B2, and Slit2. Finally,
the transfection of murine prostate cancer cells with Ephrin 1A and Slit2
siRNAs has prevented their neuron-inhibiting effect. Together, our
results suggest that prostate carcinoma cells express NF factors that may
inhibit neurite growth and lead to down-regulated innervation of tumor
mass. The role of this phenomenon in tumor growth and metastatic
potential is under investigation.

