Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methods for developing patient derived xenografts in athymic nude
mice


Patient derived xenografts (PDX) mouse models for many types of cancer
have been developed recapitulating therapeutic responses in the patient
for which the PDX model was derived. Essentially, live surgically
resected or biopsy tumor tissues are directly implanted into immune
incompetent mice to develop in vivo models to test therapies, follow
tumor progression (gene mutations that occur with patient tumor
progression do so in mice) or to better understand drug resistance.
However, the use of PDX models also has its limitations and challenges.
Our laboratory has attempted to develop PDX models in athymic nude mice
for numerous cancer histotypes such as bladder, brain, breast, colon,
kidney, lung, melanoma, ovarian, pancreas, sarcoma and thyroid. While
melanoma and colon cancers have very high tumor take rates (73 - 100%),
the other cancer histotypes do not (14 - 50%). We share our experience
for each cancer histotype and the techniques used to enhance the success
rates in athymic nude mice. We also address the other challenges that
include expansion of tumors after cryopreservation and conversion of
human tumors to mouse tumors and spontaneous lymphomas. We provide
methods to test for human versus mouse content that include QPCR and
immunohistochemistry

