Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D tissue-engineered bone marrow niche as novel method to study
pathophysiology and drug resistance in multiple myeloma


INTRODUCTION: Current methods to assess multiple myeloma (MM) cancer
treatments are often inaccurate, in part, due to these methods cannot
take into consideration the variability of every patient, and fail to
recreate the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment. In this study we
developed a patient-derived three-dimensional tissue-engineered BM
(3DTEBM) niche as novel model that will allow better evaluation of
interactions of MM cells and their microenvironment and how these
interactions may affect MM drug resistance in the specific
patient.METHODS & RESULTS: 3DTEBM cultures were made by crosslinking of
patient-derived BM supernatants; the 3D-scaffold included MM cell lines
or primary CD138+ MM cells and other accessory cells (stromal cells and
endothelial cells, or CD138- cells). 3DTEBM cultures were studied for
cell proliferation by flow cytometry, and compared with 2D cultures and
other commercial 3D systems including PLGA microspheres, Algimatrix, and
Matrigel, and imaged for 2 weeks using a confocal microscope. 3DTEBM
cultures promoted the proliferation of MM cells more than 2D cultures and
commercial 3D systems. 3DTEBM cultures supported the growth of fresh and
frozen primary MM cells and allowed the use of these cells ex vivo at
least 2 weeks. In addition, we found a natural development of
polarization in the cellularity of the scaffold, with the bottom rich of
stromal cells, top rich of endothelial cells, and MM cells through all
the parts of the scaffold, reflecting the pathophysiological development
of MM in the BM niche.The effect of 3DTEBM cultures on cytokine
expression was determined by cytokine antibody arrays and 3D-tissue depth
effects in drug gradients, oxygenation levels and proliferation (HIF-1,
PIM, Ki67, CXCR4, and CD138 expression) were determined using flow
cytometry or IHC. 3DTEBM cultures showed that 23 out of 80 cytokines
tested were highly expressed with at least 3-fold increase in the 3D
cultures vs 2D cultures. Furthermore, 3DTEBM cultures recreated the BM
niche drug gradients and oxygenation levels due to depth of tissue; MM
cells showed lower drug uptake and higher hypoxia levels (PIM and HIF-1)
with depth of tissue, and hypoxia-associated decreased CD138 and
increased CXCR4 expression. We also found that MM cells were quiescent
(lower Ki67 expression) in the hypoxic niche.Finally, drug resistance of
MM cell lines or primary MM cells in 3DTEBM cultures was analyzed by flow
cytometry. 3DTEBM cultures induced drug resistance in MM cells more than
2D cultures and commercial 3D systems, and preliminary results indicate
that drug resistance profile in the 3DTEBM matched the clinical
manifestation of the disease in the specific patient, while 2D cultures
did not.CONCLUSION: The patient-derived 3DTEBM is a more biologically
relevant model for evaluation of interactions of MM cells and their
microenvironment in the BM niche, especially in the context of drug
resistance.

