Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk loci in telomere structure and maintenance genes across five
cancer types: GAME-ON Consortium


Telomeres are complex structures that cap chromosome ends, protecting
them from degradation, double strand breaks and end-to-end fusions.
Telomeres are maintained by the enzyme telomerase, which is made up of a
reverse transcriptase encoded by TERT, and an RNA template encoded by
TERC. The telomere structure itself is composed of proteins encoded by
ACD, ACYP2, BICD1, DKC1, DCLRE1B, MPHOSPH6, NAF1, NOLA1, NOLA2, NOLA3,
OBFC1, PIK3C3, POT1, RTEL1, TEP1, TERF1, TERF2, TERF21P, TINF2,
TNKS/PINX1, TPP1 and ZNF208. Several single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the TERT and adjoining CLPTM1L gene region are associated with
multiple cancer types, and some are associated with both increased and
decreased risks across different cancer types. We systematically
characterized the patterns of association between variants in these 25
telomere structure and maintenance genes and risk across five cancer
types in the Genetic Association and Mechanisms in Oncology (GAME-ON)
consortium.We performed a subset-based meta-analysis (ASSET) of 209,367
directly measured and imputed SNPs, one megabase up- and downstream of
these genes, across genome-wide association studies of colorectal (5,100
cases, 4,831 controls), lung (12,160 cases, 16,838 controls), breast
(15,748 cases, 18,084 controls), ovarian (4,369 cases, 9,123 controls)
and prostate (14,160 cases, 12,724 controls) cancers. Correlations (r2)
between SNPs were examined in Haploview using the 1000 Genomes Project
CEU population.A total of 87 TERT, 123 TERC and 26 DCLRE1B SNPs were
associated with cancer risk at gene-level Bonferroni-corrected p-values
of 4.2-7.8106. Patterns of association were similar for prostate and
colorectal cancers in DCLRE1B. Much stronger associations were observed
in TERT and TERC, with 63 and 24 SNPs reaching genome-wide significance
(pTelomeres are complex structures that cap chromosome ends, protecting
them from degradation, double strand breaks and end-to-end fusions.
Telomeres are maintained by the enzyme telomerase, which is made up of a
reverse transcriptase encoded by TERT, and an RNA template encoded by
TERC. The telomere structure itself is composed of proteins encoded by
ACD, ACYP2, BICD1, DKC1, DCLRE1B, MPHOSPH6, NAF1, NOLA1, NOLA2, NOLA3,
OBFC1, PIK3C3, POT1, RTEL1, TEP1, TERF1, TERF2, TERF21P, TINF2,
TNKS/PINX1, TPP1 and ZNF208. Several single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the TERT and adjoining CLPTM1L gene region are associated with
multiple cancer types, and some are associated with both increased and
decreased risks across different cancer types. We systematically
characterized the patterns of association between variants in these 25
telomere structure and maintenance genes and risk across five cancer
types in the Genetic Association and Mechanisms in Oncology (GAME-ON)
consortium.We performed a subset-based meta-analysis (ASSET) of 209,367
directly measured and imputed SNPs, one megabase up- and downstream of
these genes, across genome-wide association studies of colorectal (5,100
cases, 4,831 controls), lung (12,160 cases, 16,838 controls), breast
(15,748 cases, 18,084 controls), ovarian (4,369 cases, 9,123 controls)
and prostate (14,160 cases, 12,724 controls) cancers. Correlations (r2)
between SNPs were examined in Haploview using the 1000 Genomes Project
CEU population.A total of 87 TERT, 123 TERC and 26 DCLRE1B SNPs were
associated with cancer risk at gene-level Bonferroni-corrected p-values
of 4.2-7.8106. Patterns of association were similar for prostate and
colorectal cancers in DCLRE1B. Much stronger associations were observed
in TERT and TERC, with 63 and 24 SNPs reaching genome-wide significance
(p<5.0108), respectively. Of these, 9 TERT and 9 TERC SNPs were
correlated at r2Telomeres are complex structures that cap chromosome
ends, protecting them from degradation, double strand breaks and
end-to-end fusions. Telomeres are maintained by the enzyme telomerase,
which is made up of a reverse transcriptase encoded by TERT, and an RNA
template encoded by TERC. The telomere structure itself is composed of
proteins encoded by ACD, ACYP2, BICD1, DKC1, DCLRE1B, MPHOSPH6, NAF1,
NOLA1, NOLA2, NOLA3, OBFC1, PIK3C3, POT1, RTEL1, TEP1, TERF1, TERF2,
TERF21P, TINF2, TNKS/PINX1, TPP1 and ZNF208. Several single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TERT and adjoining CLPTM1L gene region are
associated with multiple cancer types, and some are associated with both
increased and decreased risks across different cancer types. We
systematically characterized the patterns of association between variants
in these 25 telomere structure and maintenance genes and risk across five
cancer types in the Genetic Association and Mechanisms in Oncology
(GAME-ON) consortium.We performed a subset-based meta-analysis (ASSET) of
209,367 directly measured and imputed SNPs, one megabase up- and
downstream of these genes, across genome-wide association studies of
colorectal (5,100 cases, 4,831 controls), lung (12,160 cases, 16,838
controls), breast (15,748 cases, 18,084 controls), ovarian (4,369 cases,
9,123 controls) and prostate (14,160 cases, 12,724 controls) cancers.
Correlations (r2) between SNPs were examined in Haploview using the 1000
Genomes Project CEU population.A total of 87 TERT, 123 TERC and 26
DCLRE1B SNPs were associated with cancer risk at gene-level
Bonferroni-corrected p-values of 4.2-7.8106. Patterns of association were
similar for prostate and colorectal cancers in DCLRE1B. Much stronger
associations were observed in TERT and TERC, with 63 and 24 SNPs reaching
genome-wide significance (p<5.0108), respectively. Of these, 9 TERT and 9
TERC SNPs were correlated at r2<0.75. The most strongly associated SNPs
in TERT (rs37004, p = 2.61011) and TERC (rs76925190, p = 1.51015) are in
regions containing documented risk loci for lung and prostate cancers,
respectively. TERT rs37004 (p = 1.21013) and 6 of the other 9 SNPs in
TERT were associated only with lung cancer risk. For the other 2 SNPs,
there was a suggestion that patterns of risk were opposite for lung and
prostate cancers. While TERC rs76925190 was strongly associated with
prostate cancer risk (p = 5.4 x1017), it was also suggestively associated
with colorectal cancer risk (pTelomeres are complex structures that cap
chromosome ends, protecting them from degradation, double strand breaks
and end-to-end fusions. Telomeres are maintained by the enzyme
telomerase, which is made up of a reverse transcriptase encoded by TERT,
and an RNA template encoded by TERC. The telomere structure itself is
composed of proteins encoded by ACD, ACYP2, BICD1, DKC1, DCLRE1B,
MPHOSPH6, NAF1, NOLA1, NOLA2, NOLA3, OBFC1, PIK3C3, POT1, RTEL1, TEP1,
TERF1, TERF2, TERF21P, TINF2, TNKS/PINX1, TPP1 and ZNF208. Several single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TERT and adjoining CLPTM1L gene
region are associated with multiple cancer types, and some are associated
with both increased and decreased risks across different cancer types. We
systematically characterized the patterns of association between variants
in these 25 telomere structure and maintenance genes and risk across five
cancer types in the Genetic Association and Mechanisms in Oncology
(GAME-ON) consortium.We performed a subset-based meta-analysis (ASSET) of
209,367 directly measured and imputed SNPs, one megabase up- and
downstream of these genes, across genome-wide association studies of
colorectal (5,100 cases, 4,831 controls), lung (12,160 cases, 16,838
controls), breast (15,748 cases, 18,084 controls), ovarian (4,369 cases,
9,123 controls) and prostate (14,160 cases, 12,724 controls) cancers.
Correlations (r2) between SNPs were examined in Haploview using the 1000
Genomes Project CEU population.A total of 87 TERT, 123 TERC and 26
DCLRE1B SNPs were associated with cancer risk at gene-level
Bonferroni-corrected p-values of 4.2-7.8106. Patterns of association were
similar for prostate and colorectal cancers in DCLRE1B. Much stronger
associations were observed in TERT and TERC, with 63 and 24 SNPs reaching
genome-wide significance (p<5.0108), respectively. Of these, 9 TERT and 9
TERC SNPs were correlated at r2<0.75. The most strongly associated SNPs
in TERT (rs37004, p = 2.61011) and TERC (rs76925190, p = 1.51015) are in
regions containing documented risk loci for lung and prostate cancers,
respectively. TERT rs37004 (p = 1.21013) and 6 of the other 9 SNPs in
TERT were associated only with lung cancer risk. For the other 2 SNPs,
there was a suggestion that patterns of risk were opposite for lung and
prostate cancers. While TERC rs76925190 was strongly associated with
prostate cancer risk (p = 5.4 x1017), it was also suggestively associated
with colorectal cancer risk (p<0.005). This pattern was similar for
another 2 of the 9 SNPs, while for the rest, associations were limited to
prostate cancer.The complex patterns of association in telomere structure
and maintenance genes observed across cancer types may provide insight
about the mechanisms through which telomere dysfunction in different
tissues influences cancer risk.

