Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of serpin B2, neuroserpin and L1CAM in association with
metastasis and survival in non-small cell lung cancer


Background: Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer related deaths
worldwide, and finding new prognostic and predictive biomarkers are of
utmost importance.Previous studies have shown that different serpins and
adhesion molecules have an impact on disease progression and development
of metastasis, especially to the brain. Here, we examined whether
expression of the anti-plasminogen activators Serpin B2 and Neuroserpin,
and the adhesion molecule L1CAM was associated with patient prognosis,
brain metastasis or other clinicopathologic characteristics, in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Study design: The material consists of surgical
specimens from 100 NSCLC patients treated during 1993-1999 at Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. Sections from tumor blocks were
stained with antibodies to Serpin B2, Neuroserpin, and L1CAM.Results:
There were 66 men and 34 women, with a mean age at diagnosis of 65.7 (41
adenocarcinomas, 38 squamous cell carcinomas, and 21 carcinomas of other
types).Observation time ranged from 0 to 254 months (mean 74 months). 12
patients were fully recovered, 46 died of lung cancer, and 34 died from
other causes. 11 of 89 patients developed brain metastasis.Low expression
of Serpin B2 was associated with reduced overall survival (pBackground:
Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer related deaths worldwide, and
finding new prognostic and predictive biomarkers are of utmost
importance.Previous studies have shown that different serpins and
adhesion molecules have an impact on disease progression and development
of metastasis, especially to the brain. Here, we examined whether
expression of the anti-plasminogen activators Serpin B2 and Neuroserpin,
and the adhesion molecule L1CAM was associated with patient prognosis,
brain metastasis or other clinicopathologic characteristics, in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Study design: The material consists of surgical
specimens from 100 NSCLC patients treated during 1993-1999 at Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. Sections from tumor blocks were
stained with antibodies to Serpin B2, Neuroserpin, and L1CAM.Results:
There were 66 men and 34 women, with a mean age at diagnosis of 65.7 (41
adenocarcinomas, 38 squamous cell carcinomas, and 21 carcinomas of other
types).Observation time ranged from 0 to 254 months (mean 74 months). 12
patients were fully recovered, 46 died of lung cancer, and 34 died from
other causes. 11 of 89 patients developed brain metastasis.Low expression
of Serpin B2 was associated with reduced overall survival (p<0.05) in
adenocarcinomas, and with a trend for all types combined (p = 0.10),
whereas there was no significant difference in survival related to
expression of Neuroserpin or L1CAM.Expression of Neuroserpin was
associated with adrenal metastasis (OR 13.3 (95%CI 1.5-119.7),
pBackground: Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer related deaths
worldwide, and finding new prognostic and predictive biomarkers are of
utmost importance.Previous studies have shown that different serpins and
adhesion molecules have an impact on disease progression and development
of metastasis, especially to the brain. Here, we examined whether
expression of the anti-plasminogen activators Serpin B2 and Neuroserpin,
and the adhesion molecule L1CAM was associated with patient prognosis,
brain metastasis or other clinicopathologic characteristics, in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Study design: The material consists of surgical
specimens from 100 NSCLC patients treated during 1993-1999 at Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. Sections from tumor blocks were
stained with antibodies to Serpin B2, Neuroserpin, and L1CAM.Results:
There were 66 men and 34 women, with a mean age at diagnosis of 65.7 (41
adenocarcinomas, 38 squamous cell carcinomas, and 21 carcinomas of other
types).Observation time ranged from 0 to 254 months (mean 74 months). 12
patients were fully recovered, 46 died of lung cancer, and 34 died from
other causes. 11 of 89 patients developed brain metastasis.Low expression
of Serpin B2 was associated with reduced overall survival (p<0.05) in
adenocarcinomas, and with a trend for all types combined (p = 0.10),
whereas there was no significant difference in survival related to
expression of Neuroserpin or L1CAM.Expression of Neuroserpin was
associated with adrenal metastasis (OR 13.3 (95%CI 1.5-119.7), p<0.05),
and there were trends for associations between expression of Serpin B2
and metastases to skin and bone (p = 0.072 and p = 0.068, respectively).
There were no significant associations between these markers and presence
of brain metastasis.Conclusions: Low expression of Serpin B2 in lung
adenocarcinoma was associated with reduced overall survival in our
cohort. In contrast to previous findings by others, we did not find a
relationship between L1CAM expression and overall survival or metastasis.
Neither was there any association between expression of Neuroserpin and
survival, although we found an increase in adrenal metastasis in this
group. Low expression of Serpin B2 could be a biomarker for prognosis in
lung adenocarcinomas and should be studied in other cohorts.

