Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rotating 3D projections of prostate lesions imaged by Cu-64-VPAC1
ligand PET and CT


Surgeons are obliged to examine multiple planar images of fine needle
biopsies, CT, and PET images for diagnosis and evaluation of prostate
cancer. We hypothesize that optimal comprehension of prostate lesions in
the prostate, as they present in the surrounding tissue, will be achieved
by 3D registration and presentation of all available images. In
particular, PET imaging of a cancer cell surface marker maximizes
specificity, relative to imaging of F-18-deoxyglucose uptake. We have
demonstrated specific PET imaging in patients of vasoactive intestinal
peptide and pituitary adenylate cyclase activating peptide receptor 1
(VPAC1), which is overexpressed on breast cancer and prostate cancer
cells. Our PET agent is Cu-64-TP3805, a peptide derived from vasoactive
intestinal peptide. From our ongoing prostate cancer patient imaging
study, we segmented and co-registered CT image slices and TP3805 PET
image slices, then created moving 3D images. Viewing the rotating 3D
images from all sides revealed clear delineation of prostate lesions from
the adjoining bladder. The lesion images colocalized in space with
intraprostatic tumor foci identified from H&E staining of whole mount
slices after prostatectomy. Thus, rapid 3D presentation of anatomical,
histological, and molecular images could be a useful preparative tool to
minimize complications during prostate cancer surgery. This result
supports proceeding to 3D analysis of a larger prostate cancer cohort.

