Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK-3 is a novel target of CREB and GSK-3-CREB signaling
participates in cell survival in lung cancer


The transcription factor cyclic AMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB) regulates diverse cellular processes, including cell
differentiation, proliferation, survival, glucose metabolism, immune
regulation, and synaptic plasticity associated with memory. Previously,
we showed that CREB is critical on the regulation of mucous
differentiation of normal human tracheobronchial epithelial (NHTBE)
cells. In addition, the overexpression of CREB is associated with
negative prognosis of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Further studies showed that the knockdown of CREB suppresses the growth
of lung cancer cells. It has been demonstrated that genes regulated by
CREB have been reported to be involved in the suppression of apoptosis,
induce cell proliferation, inflammation and tumor metastasis. However,
the critical target genes of CREB in lung cancer have not been well
understood. In this study, we identified GSK-3 as one of the CREB target
genes critical for the growth and survival of lung cancer cells. The CREB
knockdown significantly reduced the expression of GSK-3 and the direct
binding of CREB on the promoter of GSK-3 was identified. Kaplan-Meier
analysis with a public database showed a prognostic significance of
aberrant GSK-3 expression in lung cancer. Inhibition of GSK-3 suppressed
cell proliferation, colony formation and tumor growth. Although GSK-3 has
been studied as a tumor suppressor in certain types of cancer, there is
increasing evidence that GSK-3 plays an oncogenic role in various human
cancers. Here, for the first time, we demonstrated that GSK-3 is
regulated by CREB in lung cancer and is required for the survival of lung
cancer cells. These findings implicate CREB-GSK-3 axis as a novel
therapeutic target for lung cancer treatment.

