Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The changing role of GDF15 (growth/differentiation factor 15)
during prostate carcinogenesis


GDF15 (growth/differentiation factor 15) is a divergent member of the TGF
superfamily of cytokines and is highly expressed in prostate tumors, but
its role in prostate carcinogenesis and utility as a prognostic biomarker
is unclear. We studied 58 prostate cancer cases (35 Whites and 23 African
Americans) that underwent surgery as their primary treatment and were
then subsequently followed for biochemical recurrence (BCR). In these
cases, which also had a benign prostate biopsy at least one year before
their prostate cancer diagnosis, we quantified GDF15 expression in their
pre-malignant benign prostate, prostate tumor and tumor adjacent benign
prostate tissue. GDF15 expression levels were analyzed for association
with high grade prostate cancer and BCR. Twenty-six percent of cases had
high grade cancer defined as Gleason score 8 or higher or a Gleason score
of 7 and a primary Gleason of 4. During follow-up, 11 cases (19%)
experienced BCR (80 percent of men without BCR had at least 2 years of
follow-up). GDF15 expression was not associated high grade cancer in any
prostate tissue types. GDF15 expression was associated with BCR, but the
direction of the association was dependent upon the type of prostate
tissue expression measured. Evidence of GDF15 expression in pre-malignant
benign prostate was associated with an almost 9-fold increased risk of
BCR (Hazard Ratio (HR) = 8.90; 95% confidence interval (CI) =
1.09-72.49), even after adjusting for race, tumor grade and stage. When
we stratified men into low and high expression groups, we also found a
significant gradient of risk with increased GDF15 expression (p = 0.03).
The opposite was found for GDF15 expression in tumor tissue, where men
with low GDF15 expression had a decreased risk of BCR (HR = 0.30; 95% CI
= 0.06- 1.59), and men with high GDF15 expression were at an even lower
risk (HR = 0.10; 95% CI = 0.02-0.61). Expression of GDF15 in tumor
adjacent benign prostate tissue was not associated with BCR. The role
GDF15 plays in prostate carcinogenesis is complex and may change during
the course of tumor development. Our results suggest GDF15 exerts a
pro-tumorgenic effect very early in prostate carcinogenesis, but later
after the tumor becomes clinically apparent, GDF15 may act more in an
anti-tumorgenic manner.

