Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-HT promotes hepatocellular carcinoma by influencing -catenin


5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), a neurotransmitter and vasoactive factor, has
been reported to promote proliferation of serum-deprived human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells (HCC) but the detailed intracellular
mechanism is still unknown. As Wnt/-catenin signaling is highly
dysregulated in a majority of HCC, this study explored the regulation of
Wnt/-catenin signaling by 5-HT. 5-HT promoted proliferation of
serum-deprived HuH-7 and HepG2 cells and also increased total -catenin
levels, and active -catenin protein levels compared to just control cells
under serum free medium without 5-HT. Furthermore, 5-HT increased
-catenin levels in the presence of cycloheximide, a protein synthesis
inhibitor, suggesting increased -catenin levels due to inhibition of
-catenin degradation. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) showed increased -catenin downstream target genes, Axin1, cyclin
D1, dickoppf-1 (DKK1) and glutamine synthetase (GS), in serum-deprived
HCC cell lines treated with 5-HT. We next studied the expression of
various 5-HT were receptors (5-HT1D, 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, 5-HT5 and 5-HT7) by
qPCR in 33 pairs of HCC tumors and corresponding adjacent non-tumor
tissues. Receptors 5-HT1D (21/33, 64%), 5-HT2B (12/33, 36%) and 5-HT7
(15/33, 45%) were overexpressed in HCC tumour tissues whereas receptor
5-HT5 was reduced (30/33, 91%) in HCC tumour tissues. Receptor 5-HT2A did
not show any significant statistical difference between HCC tumour and
corresponding non-tumour tissues. We further investigated whether
antagonists of the 5-HT receptors attenuated the activity of 5-HT both in
vitro and in vivo and we narrowed our study to 5-HT7 antagonist as the
expression of 5-HT7 was found to be significantly associated to liver
histology and venous infiltration. Antagonist of receptor 5-HT7,
SB258719, attenuated growth of serum-deprived HCC cell lines and primary
tumor tissues in the presence of 5-HT. Furthermore, SB258719 reduced
tumor growth in a xenograft mouse model accompanied by reduced -catenin
and increased GSK-3 levels as observed by immunohistochemical analysis.
Conclusion: This study provides evidence of Wnt/-catenin signaling
activation in 5-HT induced proliferation of serum-deprived HCC cells. The
proliferation is inhibited by 5-HT7 antagonist, SB258719, which may
represent a potential therapeutic target for hepatocarcinogenesis.

