Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of silicon phthalocyanine 4 photodynamic therapy in
human cervical cancer cells


Introduction: Cervical cancer is the second most common cancer in women
worldwide. In the US there will be approximately 12,360 new cases and
4,040 deaths in 2014. Treatment of locally advanced disease with
concomitant- chemoradiation is suboptimal and leaves 40% of patients with
residual disease. There are limitations on the total radiation dose that
can be administered. There has been little progress examining novel
therapeutic modalities for locally advanced cervical cancer. Photodynamic
therapy (PDT) is a potential adjuvant to standard treatment. PDT requires
a light source, a photosensitizer and oxygen to generate reactive oxygen
species that kill cells. Silicon phthalocyanine 4 (Pc 4) is a second
generation photosensitizer that has been evaluated in clinical trials. In
this study we evaluated the effectiveness of in vitro Pc 4 PDT in human
cervical cancer cells.Methods: CaSki and ME180, human metastatic cervical
cancer cell lines expressing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGRF),
were obtained from ATCC. Cells (104 cells/100 L) were grown as monolayers
in 96 well plates in RPMI 1640 medium without phenol red containing 100
IU Penicillin and 100 g/ ml Streptomycin at 37C, 5% CO2, 95% humidity.
Cell growth was measured using a Methylthiazol Tetrazolium (MTT) assay.
Pc 4 cellular uptake was determined at 0.3 M Pc 4 by fluorescence back
calculated against Pc 4 standard curves (excitation 350 nm, emission 670
nm) and expressed as % Pc 4. For the Pc 4 PDT experiments, concentrations
of Pc 4 from 0.001 to 10 M were added starting 24 hours after cells were
plated. Forty-eight hours after Pc 4 addition, cells were irradiated with
a diode laser at 667 nm at a fluence of 2.5 J/cm2. A control plate was
shielded from the laser. Twenty-four hours after PDT, cell viability was
assessed via MTT assay. Percent inhibition was calculated from observed
data and the IC50 was calculated from the Hill equation using ADAPT 5.
Confocal imaging was performed to determine the intracellular
distribution of Pc 4; mitochondria and lysosomes were imaged using
MitoTracker (Cell Signaling) and LysoTracker (Life Technologies),
respectively.Results: ME180 cells have a doubling time of approximately
21 hours, while CaSki cells double in approximately 48 hours. Pc 4 is
taken up by each cell line and the majority of uptake occurs by
approximately 6 hours. Pc 4 was not toxic to the cells at concentration
below 10 M. Following Pc 4 PDT, the IC50s for CaSki and ME180 cells were,
respectively, 0.413 M (%CV 11.9) and 0.088 M (%CV 119,000). Pc 4
distributed throughout the cells, overlapping with both the mitochondrial
and lysosomal markers, as well being present within the
cytoplasm.Conclusion: Pc4 PDT is effective for the treatment of human
cervical cancer cells. Additional studies will evaluate Pc 4 PDT using
EGFR targeted, Pc 4 loaded nanoparticles as well as cervical cancer
spheroids.Support: P30-CA47904, CTSI BaCCoR Pilot Program

