Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Xenograft rebound kinetics are consistent with the founder effect


IntroductionTumors are often composed of a heterogeneous cell population
growing over time subject to the forces of evolutionary dynamics. These
principles offer insights not only for bulk tumor growth, but also for
small cell populations such as in metastases or de-bulked tumors
following treatment. In this work, we investigate whether the
evolutionary effects of small population sizes are evident in in vivo
pre-clinically through a meta-analysis of xenograft rebound growth
kinetics following treatment.MethodsWe first used a HCT116 cell fitness
distribution we have previously measured in soft agar to demonstrate the
expected population fitness trajectory as a function of starting
population size. We sampled subclone fitnesses from this distribution to
initialize either large or small theoretical tumors, and simulated tumor
growth as a Moran process to find the probability distribution of
expected outcomes in final tumor population fitness.Since initial tumor
volumes in xenografts experiments have a narrow range of volume
(equivalently, population size), we next identified tumor volume
measurements following suspension of treatment with anticancer agents
from in-house historical xenograft growth datasets. Each of 1359 tumor
volume trajectories after treatment was fit using non-linear regression
to determine the exponential growth rate (population fitness), and
compared to both the volume at treatment end as well as the average
control group growth rate from the corresponding experiment.ResultsThe
simulated tumors demonstrate the founder effect in heterogeneous
populations: large populations become dominated by the fastest growing,
most fit subclones while small populations are sensitive to initial
clonal sampling as well as random births and deaths. Rebound growth in
xenografts post-treatment displayed large variability compared to the
growth of the corresponding experimental control group. Post-treatment
and untreated growth rates are poorly correlated (R2 = 0.1) consistent
with a significant change in the tumor cell population following a period
of selective pressure. Two additional observations are coherent with a
founder effect following a bottleneck event (i.e., treatment). The
relationship between post-treatment starting volume and growth rate has a
positive slope (p = 0.01, F-test) while growth rate variance decreases
with starting volume (p IntroductionTumors are often composed of a
heterogeneous cell population growing over time subject to the forces of
evolutionary dynamics. These principles offer insights not only for bulk
tumor growth, but also for small cell populations such as in metastases
or de-bulked tumors following treatment. In this work, we investigate
whether the evolutionary effects of small population sizes are evident in
in vivo pre-clinically through a meta-analysis of xenograft rebound
growth kinetics following treatment.MethodsWe first used a HCT116 cell
fitness distribution we have previously measured in soft agar to
demonstrate the expected population fitness trajectory as a function of
starting population size. We sampled subclone fitnesses from this
distribution to initialize either large or small theoretical tumors, and
simulated tumor growth as a Moran process to find the probability
distribution of expected outcomes in final tumor population fitness.Since
initial tumor volumes in xenografts experiments have a narrow range of
volume (equivalently, population size), we next identified tumor volume
measurements following suspension of treatment with anticancer agents
from in-house historical xenograft growth datasets. Each of 1359 tumor
volume trajectories after treatment was fit using non-linear regression
to determine the exponential growth rate (population fitness), and
compared to both the volume at treatment end as well as the average
control group growth rate from the corresponding experiment.ResultsThe
simulated tumors demonstrate the founder effect in heterogeneous
populations: large populations become dominated by the fastest growing,
most fit subclones while small populations are sensitive to initial
clonal sampling as well as random births and deaths. Rebound growth in
xenografts post-treatment displayed large variability compared to the
growth of the corresponding experimental control group. Post-treatment
and untreated growth rates are poorly correlated (R2 = 0.1) consistent
with a significant change in the tumor cell population following a period
of selective pressure. Two additional observations are coherent with a
founder effect following a bottleneck event (i.e., treatment). The
relationship between post-treatment starting volume and growth rate has a
positive slope (p = 0.01, F-test) while growth rate variance decreases
with starting volume (p < 0.01 F-test). Both results concur with the
Moran simulations showing smaller populations have more stochastic
outcomes while larger populations deterministically drift to greater
fitness.ConclusionsWe find that xenograft growth kinetics following
cessation of treatment with anticancer agents are consistent with a
selection process and the founder effect. Application of evolutionary
theory to small cell populations in preclinical models may yield new
strategies to combat metastases and resistance emergence.

