Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physician receptivity to molecular diagnostic testing in planning
treatment for early-stage colon cancer patients


Molecular diagnostic testing is an emergent biomedical technology that
can help physicians and patients make treatment decisions. We
administered a survey questionnaire to surgeons and medical oncologists
to assess physician receptivity to use of a molecular diagnostic test
(GUCY2C) to identify early stage (pN0) colon cancer patients at risk for
recurrence. We identified 104 physicians who treat such patients; and 43
(41%) physicians returned a completed survey. The survey included items
on practice environment (e.g., hospital-versus community-based practice),
physician background (e.g., sociodemographic characteristics), physician
experience (exposure to pN0 colon cancer patients), and current practice
for staging pN0 colon cancer patients (e.g., histopathology, molecular
diagnostic testing). We also asked respondents to report how accurate
(very accurate, somewhat accurate, not accurate) they thought
histopathology and molecular diagnostic testing were in staging pN0 colon
cancer patients. Items using a Likert-type response set (Strongly
Disagree - 1 to Strongly Agree -5) were used to elicit responses to
statements about stress related to making treatment recommendations, and
confidence in recommending treatment. To measure the dependent variable,
we used two items with the same type of response set, and asked
physicians to indicate their readiness to incorporate GUCY2C testing into
treatment planning. Responses were summed, averaged, and categorized into
Agree (>3) and Do Not Agree (Molecular diagnostic testing is an emergent
biomedical technology that can help physicians and patients make
treatment decisions. We administered a survey questionnaire to surgeons
and medical oncologists to assess physician receptivity to use of a
molecular diagnostic test (GUCY2C) to identify early stage (pN0) colon
cancer patients at risk for recurrence. We identified 104 physicians who
treat such patients; and 43 (41%) physicians returned a completed survey.
The survey included items on practice environment (e.g., hospital-versus
community-based practice), physician background (e.g., sociodemographic
characteristics), physician experience (exposure to pN0 colon cancer
patients), and current practice for staging pN0 colon cancer patients
(e.g., histopathology, molecular diagnostic testing). We also asked
respondents to report how accurate (very accurate, somewhat accurate, not
accurate) they thought histopathology and molecular diagnostic testing
were in staging pN0 colon cancer patients. Items using a Likert-type
response set (Strongly Disagree - 1 to Strongly Agree -5) were used to
elicit responses to statements about stress related to making treatment
recommendations, and confidence in recommending treatment. To measure the
dependent variable, we used two items with the same type of response set,
and asked physicians to indicate their readiness to incorporate GUCY2C
testing into treatment planning. Responses were summed, averaged, and
categorized into Agree (>3) and Do Not Agree (< = 3) categories.
Frequencies and percentages for categorical variables, and means and
standard deviation for continuous variables were determined. Fisher's
Exact testing was used to assess statistically significant associations
between categorical variables and the dependent variable; and the
Wilcoxon test was used to identify continuous variable differences.
Covariates at p Molecular diagnostic testing is an emergent biomedical
technology that can help physicians and patients make treatment
decisions. We administered a survey questionnaire to surgeons and medical
oncologists to assess physician receptivity to use of a molecular
diagnostic test (GUCY2C) to identify early stage (pN0) colon cancer
patients at risk for recurrence. We identified 104 physicians who treat
such patients; and 43 (41%) physicians returned a completed survey. The
survey included items on practice environment (e.g., hospital-versus
community-based practice), physician background (e.g., sociodemographic
characteristics), physician experience (exposure to pN0 colon cancer
patients), and current practice for staging pN0 colon cancer patients
(e.g., histopathology, molecular diagnostic testing). We also asked
respondents to report how accurate (very accurate, somewhat accurate, not
accurate) they thought histopathology and molecular diagnostic testing
were in staging pN0 colon cancer patients. Items using a Likert-type
response set (Strongly Disagree - 1 to Strongly Agree -5) were used to
elicit responses to statements about stress related to making treatment
recommendations, and confidence in recommending treatment. To measure the
dependent variable, we used two items with the same type of response set,
and asked physicians to indicate their readiness to incorporate GUCY2C
testing into treatment planning. Responses were summed, averaged, and
categorized into Agree (>3) and Do Not Agree (< = 3) categories.
Frequencies and percentages for categorical variables, and means and
standard deviation for continuous variables were determined. Fisher's
Exact testing was used to assess statistically significant associations
between categorical variables and the dependent variable; and the
Wilcoxon test was used to identify continuous variable differences.
Covariates at p < 0.2 were included in a multivariable logistic
regression model. Overall, 56% of respondents were receptive to GUC2YC
testing. Multivariable analyses show that physicians who thought that
making treatment decisions was easy were significantly less receptive to
GUCY2C testing than those who did not (OR = 0.04, CI: 0.004, 0.30); and,
physicians who said they that would treat patients with an abnormal
GUCY2C test result aggressively were significantly more receptive to
GUCY2C testing (OR = 16.91, CI: 2.62, 109.11). Physician receptivity to
molecular diagnostic testing was associated with uncertainty about
treatment planning and readiness to act on test results.

