Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The germline TP53 p.R337H mutation: a putative selective advantage


Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a hereditary cancer predisposition disorder
related to germline TP53 mutations. Although it is considered to be a
rare condition worldwide, a high occurrence of a founder mutation, the
p.R337H TP53, is present in 0.3% of Southern Brazilian population. In a
subgroup of p.R337H carriers, specific characteristics associated with
late aging were clinically observed, such as a lower frequency of
metabolic alterations and diseases typical of aging. However, despite of
these particular features no study has clinically characterized these
individuals until the moment. Therefore, our aim was to evaluate clinical
features of p.R337H carriers and compare them with a control group. We
used a clinical form composed by information on physical characteristics,
personal habits, clinical history of diseases and physical activity
throughout life. After IRB approval, we applied it in 48 p.R337H carriers
(mean age: 46,8; range: 16-100) and in 38 carrier's relatives who were
mutation-negative, as controls, (mean age 52,7; range: 18-90). Fisher's
exact test was performed for statistical analysis. Regarding personal
characteristics and habits, no difference was found between groups
neither among p.R337H asymptomatic and affected carriers. However, some
diseases discrepancies were found: In individuals older than 55 years of
age, prevalence of osteoporosis was significantly lower in the p.R337H
group when compared to controls (12% vs 59%; pLi-Fraumeni syndrome is a
hereditary cancer predisposition disorder related to germline TP53
mutations. Although it is considered to be a rare condition worldwide, a
high occurrence of a founder mutation, the p.R337H TP53, is present in
0.3% of Southern Brazilian population. In a subgroup of p.R337H carriers,
specific characteristics associated with late aging were clinically
observed, such as a lower frequency of metabolic alterations and diseases
typical of aging. However, despite of these particular features no study
has clinically characterized these individuals until the moment.
Therefore, our aim was to evaluate clinical features of p.R337H carriers
and compare them with a control group. We used a clinical form composed
by information on physical characteristics, personal habits, clinical
history of diseases and physical activity throughout life. After IRB
approval, we applied it in 48 p.R337H carriers (mean age: 46,8; range:
16-100) and in 38 carrier's relatives who were mutation-negative, as
controls, (mean age 52,7; range: 18-90). Fisher's exact test was
performed for statistical analysis. Regarding personal characteristics
and habits, no difference was found between groups neither among p.R337H
asymptomatic and affected carriers. However, some diseases discrepancies
were found: In individuals older than 55 years of age, prevalence of
osteoporosis was significantly lower in the p.R337H group when compared
to controls (12% vs 59%; p<0,05). Anemia was also less frequent in
p.R337H carriers (0% vs 13%; pLi-Fraumeni syndrome is a hereditary cancer
predisposition disorder related to germline TP53 mutations. Although it
is considered to be a rare condition worldwide, a high occurrence of a
founder mutation, the p.R337H TP53, is present in 0.3% of Southern
Brazilian population. In a subgroup of p.R337H carriers, specific
characteristics associated with late aging were clinically observed, such
as a lower frequency of metabolic alterations and diseases typical of
aging. However, despite of these particular features no study has
clinically characterized these individuals until the moment. Therefore,
our aim was to evaluate clinical features of p.R337H carriers and compare
them with a control group. We used a clinical form composed by
information on physical characteristics, personal habits, clinical
history of diseases and physical activity throughout life. After IRB
approval, we applied it in 48 p.R337H carriers (mean age: 46,8; range:
16-100) and in 38 carrier's relatives who were mutation-negative, as
controls, (mean age 52,7; range: 18-90). Fisher's exact test was
performed for statistical analysis. Regarding personal characteristics
and habits, no difference was found between groups neither among p.R337H
asymptomatic and affected carriers. However, some diseases discrepancies
were found: In individuals older than 55 years of age, prevalence of
osteoporosis was significantly lower in the p.R337H group when compared
to controls (12% vs 59%; p<0,05). Anemia was also less frequent in
p.R337H carriers (0% vs 13%; p<0,05) when all ages are considered.
Although non-statistically significant, lower frequencies of
neurodegenerative disorders, gastritis and thyroid dysfunction were also
observed in the p.R337H group. These findings provide further information
about a better overall health in p.R337H carriers, suggesting a possible
selective advantage. This could be a plausible explanation for why this
deleterious mutation has persisted throughout successive generations.
More detailed clinical characterization studies are under way as well as
molecular approaches looking for interactions between the p.R337H
mutation and cellular senescence mechanisms.

