Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High allele frequency of KRAS functional mutations predicts
resistance to MEK inhibitors: Evidence from cell lines and human tumor
xenograft models


IntroductionKRAS mutant tumors represent a high unmet need for effective
therapy. Even though there is no targeted therapy for KRAS, inhibitors of
downstream targets like MEK have shown efficacy in preclinical studies.
However, clinical trials of MEK inhibitors in KRAS-mutant tumors have not
been successful, although there have been some responders. We sought to
understand resistance to MEK inhibition in KRAS-mutant tumors and to
develop biomarkers for patient stratification.ResultsUsing DNA and RNA
sequencing data from cell lines, we found that high variant allele
frequency (>50%) of KRAS functional mutations (G12, G13, Q61) was
associated with baseline resistance to MEK inhibitors AZD6244 and MEK162
across multiple tumor types. Low allele frequency of KRAS mutation was
found to be necessary but not sufficient for sensitivity to MEK
inhibitors, suggesting the existence of additional resistance mechanisms.
Comparison of copy number and variant allele frequency of KRAS showed
that MEK inhibitor-resistant cell lines have either amplified mutant
alleles or lost WT alleles.This prediction of high KRAS mutant allele
frequency being associated with MEKi resistance was successfully
validated in vivo in 19 primary colorectal tumor xenograft models treated
with MEK162. High KRAS mutant allele frequency and high KRAS expression
were also associated with acquired resistance to BKM120+MEK162
combination treatment in an in vivo model of HeyA8, an ovarian cell line
with a KRAS G12D mutation.This prediction was also supported by the
observation in a Phase II clinical trial with MEK inhibitor refametinib +
gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer [1]. Patients with disease progression
had a significantly higher KRAS mutant allele frequency compared to
partial responders and stable disease.ConclusionHigh allele frequency of
KRAS functional mutations is associated with resistance to MEK
inhibitors. Excluding patients with high KRAS mutant allele frequency has
the potential to improve clinical trial outcomes and benefit patients,
with the added benefit that it may not require any additional screening
or novel biomarkers.References[1] Reiss et al., J Clin Oncol 32:5s, 2014
(suppl; abstr 4129)

