Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX11 promotes protective microenviromental nixes in agressive MCL


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is considered one of the most aggressive
lymphoid neoplasms and althought MCL represents only a 5-10% of all
non-Hodgkins lymphomas, the aggressive clinical evolution with short
responses to treatment, frequent relapses and the poor response to
current therapies of the MCL patients, makes this lymphoma one of the
tumors most studied internationally. Recent clinical observations have
identified some patients with a more indolent form of this disease that
have a long survival even without the need for treatment. Gene expression
profiling (GEP) studies have identified the aberrant expression of the
transcription factor SOX11 in aggressive MCL and absent in MCL with an
indolent outcome, other lymphomas or normal B-cells, suggesting that
SOX11 might play a relevant pathogenic role in the development and
progression of this tumor. We have recently demonstrated in experimental
studies that SOX11 blocks the maturation of the MCL cells and promotes
the growth and angiogenesis of these tumors confirming the clinical
observations that SOX11 may play an important role in the aggressive
behavior of MCL. We have now generated preliminary results suggesting
that SOX11 may regulate the migration and adhesion of the tumor cells
increasing tumor dissemination and homing to different tissues
compartments, protective microenvironment niches, the proliferation of
new vessels bringing nutrients to the tumor and modulating an immature
cellular status with more stemness capacity and drugs resistance known as
cancer stem cell status. The understanding of these mechanisms will
provide new potential candidates for therapeutic interventions.

