Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MUC1-mediated metabolism sensitizes pancreatic cancer
cells to radiation therapy


Overexpression of MUC1 promotes growth promoting metabolic alterations in
pancreatic cancer cells. We investigated the role played by MUC1-mediated
metabolic alterations in radiation response of pancreatic cancer cells.
Our findings indicate that cell survival and clonogenicity of pancreatic
cancer cells upon radiation treatment correlate with MUC1 expression.
MUC1 expression reduced radiation-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production and DNA damage, whereas, increased glucose uptake and lactate
secretion upon irradiation. Metabolomic analysis through liquid
chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry approach revealed that
pancreatic cancer cells exhibit spontaneous metabolic alterations upon
irradiation. MUC1 expression further altered radiation-induced carbon
flux especially in glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathway. We further
investigated radiation-sensitization of MUC1-expressing cells by
targeting glycolysis or pentose phosphate pathway using metabolic
inhibitors, and observed that pre-treatment with 3-bromopyruvate (BrPA)
effectively abrogates MUC1-mediated radiation-resistance by elevating ROS
and DNA damage. BrPA treatment also reduced MUC1-induced carbon flux into
glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathway, upon irradiation. Hence, our
findings demonstrate that MUC1-mediated radiation-resistance in
pancreatic cancer cells can be effectively targeted through inhibition of
glycolysis.

