Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An isoform of BARD1, associated with many types of cancer, is a
driver of oncogenesis by inducing telomere aberrations in vitro and in
vivo


BARD1 has tumor suppressor functions by binding to BRCA1 and to p53 via
RING finger and ankyrin repeats, respectively. The BARD1-BRCA1
heterodimer has E3 ligase activity, and the BARD1-p53 interaction
promotes apoptosis. The expression of N-terminally truncated RING-less
BARD1 isoforms, however, was correlated with poor prognosis in various
cancers.We performed overexpression experiments with various isoforms of
BARD1 and found that BARD1, lacking RING and ANK regions, induces cell
cycle arrest, multipolar mitotic spindles, genomic instability, and
telomere aberrations. Co-localization studies and interaction assays in
HeLa, MCF7, or HEK 293 cells, using tagged BARD1 and full length (FL)
BARD1, showed that the BRCT domains, present in BARD1 and FL BARD1,
interact with centrosome binding proteins and telomere binding proteins.
BARD1 overexpressing cells showed multipolar spindles and telomere
alterations. Similar telomere alterations were observed in cells with
reduced expression of FL BARD1 by siRNA. This is consistent with the
observed distinct telomeric abnormalities in blood cells of patients with
a BARD1 germline mutation that causes translation of a truncated protein
lacking the BRCT domains. CRE-inducible BARD1 transgenic mice showed
dose-dependent growth arrest and tumor formation in various organs. These
in vitro and in vivo observations suggest that BARD1 plays a significant
role in tumorigenesis by inducing genomic and telomere instability.

