Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gastric cancer associated variant of DNA polymerase Beta
(Leu22Pro) induce genomic instability and cellular transformation


DNA polymerase beta (Pol ) is a key enzyme for the protection of
oxidative DNA lesions via its role in base excision repair (BER).
Approximately 1/3 of tumors studied to date express Pol variant proteins,
and several tumors overexpress Pol . Pol possesses DNA polymerase and dRP
lyase activities, both of which are known to be important for efficient
BER. The dRP lyase activity resides within the 8kDa amino terminal domain
of pol , is responsible for removal of the 5 phosphate group and the
polymerase domain at subsequent steps fills the gaps. Previously, we
demonstrated that gastric cancer-associated variant of pol (Leu22Pro
(L22P)) lacks dRP lyase function in-vitro. Here, we have employed DNA
fiber labeling to quantify, for the first time, the extent to which the
normal function of dRP lyase of DNA polymerase beta is critical to
maintain global replication fork rates in normal gastric epithelial
cells. We report that replication fork rates in L22P expressing cells are
on average half of those observed with wild-type cells. In addition, we
show that L22P variant promotes replication dependent double strand
breaks that may likely responsible for chromosomal aberrations. These
data may implicate normal function of dRP lyase is critical to stabilize
replication fork stall and prevent replication fork collapse to DNA
double strand breaks.

