Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary intake of phytoestrogens and the risk of prostate cancer
in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial


Prostate cancer is the most common non-cutaneous cancer and second
leading cause of cancer death among men in the U.S. Although ecologic and
migrant studies suggest that diet plays a role in the etiology of
prostate cancer, few specific nutrients that alter its occurrence have
been identified in case-control and cohort studies. Phytoestrogens are a
family of bioactive compounds that are abundant in soy products and some
other food groups (e.g. legumes and chick peas). Experimental studies
revealed that phytoestrogen intake may modulate the risk of prostate
cancer due to their structural similarity to 17-estradiol and the
resulting competitive binding to estrogen receptors. Despite biological
plausibility, it still remains elusive whether phytoestrogen intake
influences prostate cancer risk in human populations. Therefore, the
objective of the present study was to investigate the associations
between dietary intake of phytoestrogens and the risk of total and
advanced prostate cancer among 30,097 participants in the Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO). A total of 3628
cases of prostate cancer (including 396 advanced cases) have been
documented during a median follow up of 11.5 years. Advanced prostate
cancer were defined as stage II cancer with a Gleason score of 8, or
stage III or stage IV cancer. Dietary intake of phytoestrogens was
assessed with a validated food frequency questionnaire. Cox proportional
hazards regression was performed to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) for dietary intake of phytoestrogens in
relation to prostate cancer risk. After adjustment for confounders, an
increased risk of advanced prostate cancer was found for the higher
dietary intake of isoflavones (HR: 1.58; 95% CI: 1.11, 2.24), genistein
(HR: 1.42; 95% CI: 1.02, 1.98), daidzein (HR: 1.62; 95% CI: 1.13, 2.32),
and glycitein (HR: 1.53; 95% CI: 1.09, 2.15). Conversely, it appears that
the higher dietary intake of genistein was associated with a reduced risk
of non-advanced prostate cancer (HR: 0.88; 95% CI: 0.78, 0.99) and total
prostate cancer (HR: 0.90; 95% CI: 0.81, 1.00). The risk estimates
presented above were obtained for comparisons between the quintile 5 and
quintile 1 of respective phytoestrogen intake. In summary, our analysis
of this national prospective cohort study suggests that dietary intake of
phytoestrogens modulated the risk of prostate cancer and that some of
these effects may differ by the aggressiveness of the disease.

