Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput profiling of actionable mutations in salivary duct
carcinoma


Salivary duct carcinoma (SDC) is a highly aggressive subtype of salivary
gland cancers and there is no established standard therapy for this
disease. Thus, development of molecular markers for SDC will be important
to guide the diagnosis and therapy of this aggressive tumor. We performed
next-generation sequencing using the Ion Torrent AmpliSeq cancer panel,
which explores the mutational status of hotspot regions in 50
cancer-associated genes, and we analyzed copy number variations (CNVs) of
21 genes by NanoString nCounter for 37 patients with SDC. Fluorescent in
situ hybridization was also conducted to confirm ERBB2 gene
amplification. Clinical records and tumor histopathology of the patients
were retrospectively reviewed. Genetic alterations were detected in 29 of
37 (78.3%) tumors, including mutations in PIK3CA (N = 9, 24.3%), ERBB2 (N
= 4, 10.8%), and EGFR (N = 4, 10.8%). To our knowledge, this is the first
time that ERBB2 mutations have been reported in this tumor type. Both
PIK3CA and ERBB2 mutation status were associated with poor overall
survival, but without statistical significance. ERBB2 amplification was
strong and common in SDC and almost all cases also exhibited EGFR and
ERBB3 amplifications. This study reports the largest and most
comprehensive analysis of DNA aberrations in SDC. Our results show that
PIK3CA and/or ERBB2 alterations in the development of SDC might be a
useful diagnostic tool and could serve as a potential therapeutic
target.Key words: Salivary duct carcinoma, next-generation sequencing,
molecular markers, PIK3CA, ERBB2, EGFR

