Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy induction contributes to cisplatin resistance in ovarian
cancer and is independent of AKT pathway activity


Advanced ovarian cancer eventually becomes resistant to platinum based
chemotherapy. We studied mechanisms of platinum resistance using two
paired ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780; A2780Cis and PE01; PE04
(relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6 respectively by 96h SRB assay). While
cisplatin dependent DNA damage and repair govern initial disease
sensitivity, adaptation to stress by upregulation of pro-survival
mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin resistance. Analysis of
A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by western blot showed a
significant increase in expression of autophagy proteins LC3BII and
Beclin (PAdvanced ovarian cancer eventually becomes resistant to platinum
based chemotherapy. We studied mechanisms of platinum resistance using
two paired ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780; A2780Cis and PE01; PE04
(relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6 respectively by 96h SRB assay). While
cisplatin dependent DNA damage and repair govern initial disease
sensitivity, adaptation to stress by upregulation of pro-survival
mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin resistance. Analysis of
A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by western blot showed a
significant increase in expression of autophagy proteins LC3BII and
Beclin (P<0.05, n = 4). Cisplatin treatment caused a PepA/E64D dependent
increase in LC3BII expression in A2780 and A2780Cis cell lines
demonstrating an increase in autophagic flux. Furthermore the use of two
autophagy inhibitors, 3-MA and hydroxychloroquine, enhanced the
cytotoxicity of cisplatin when used in combination (pAdvanced ovarian
cancer eventually becomes resistant to platinum based chemotherapy. We
studied mechanisms of platinum resistance using two paired ovarian cancer
cell lines: A2780; A2780Cis and PE01; PE04 (relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6
respectively by 96h SRB assay). While cisplatin dependent DNA damage and
repair govern initial disease sensitivity, adaptation to stress by
upregulation of pro-survival mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin
resistance. Analysis of A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by
western blot showed a significant increase in expression of autophagy
proteins LC3BII and Beclin (P<0.05, n = 4). Cisplatin treatment caused a
PepA/E64D dependent increase in LC3BII expression in A2780 and A2780Cis
cell lines demonstrating an increase in autophagic flux. Furthermore the
use of two autophagy inhibitors, 3-MA and hydroxychloroquine, enhanced
the cytotoxicity of cisplatin when used in combination (p<0.05 &
pAdvanced ovarian cancer eventually becomes resistant to platinum based
chemotherapy. We studied mechanisms of platinum resistance using two
paired ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780; A2780Cis and PE01; PE04
(relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6 respectively by 96h SRB assay). While
cisplatin dependent DNA damage and repair govern initial disease
sensitivity, adaptation to stress by upregulation of pro-survival
mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin resistance. Analysis of
A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by western blot showed a
significant increase in expression of autophagy proteins LC3BII and
Beclin (P<0.05, n = 4). Cisplatin treatment caused a PepA/E64D dependent
increase in LC3BII expression in A2780 and A2780Cis cell lines
demonstrating an increase in autophagic flux. Furthermore the use of two
autophagy inhibitors, 3-MA and hydroxychloroquine, enhanced the
cytotoxicity of cisplatin when used in combination (p<0.05 & p<0.01
respectively, n = 3, SRB). These data demonstrate autophagy is
upregulated by cisplatin as a pro-survival mechanism in two ovarian
cancer cell lines and platinum sensitivity can be partially restored
through the use of autophagy inhibitors. AKT has been implicated in
platinum resistance and upregulation of AKT has been reported to
negatively regulate autophagy. We therefore compared the status of the
AKT signalling pathway in the A2780 and A2780Cis cells. Phosphorylation
of S473 AKT and its direct substrates, GSK-3 and FOX01, were
significantly increased in platinum resistant A2780Cis cells (pAdvanced
ovarian cancer eventually becomes resistant to platinum based
chemotherapy. We studied mechanisms of platinum resistance using two
paired ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780; A2780Cis and PE01; PE04
(relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6 respectively by 96h SRB assay). While
cisplatin dependent DNA damage and repair govern initial disease
sensitivity, adaptation to stress by upregulation of pro-survival
mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin resistance. Analysis of
A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by western blot showed a
significant increase in expression of autophagy proteins LC3BII and
Beclin (P<0.05, n = 4). Cisplatin treatment caused a PepA/E64D dependent
increase in LC3BII expression in A2780 and A2780Cis cell lines
demonstrating an increase in autophagic flux. Furthermore the use of two
autophagy inhibitors, 3-MA and hydroxychloroquine, enhanced the
cytotoxicity of cisplatin when used in combination (p<0.05 & p<0.01
respectively, n = 3, SRB). These data demonstrate autophagy is
upregulated by cisplatin as a pro-survival mechanism in two ovarian
cancer cell lines and platinum sensitivity can be partially restored
through the use of autophagy inhibitors. AKT has been implicated in
platinum resistance and upregulation of AKT has been reported to
negatively regulate autophagy. We therefore compared the status of the
AKT signalling pathway in the A2780 and A2780Cis cells. Phosphorylation
of S473 AKT and its direct substrates, GSK-3 and FOX01, were
significantly increased in platinum resistant A2780Cis cells (p<0.05,
pAdvanced ovarian cancer eventually becomes resistant to platinum based
chemotherapy. We studied mechanisms of platinum resistance using two
paired ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780; A2780Cis and PE01; PE04
(relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6 respectively by 96h SRB assay). While
cisplatin dependent DNA damage and repair govern initial disease
sensitivity, adaptation to stress by upregulation of pro-survival
mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin resistance. Analysis of
A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by western blot showed a
significant increase in expression of autophagy proteins LC3BII and
Beclin (P<0.05, n = 4). Cisplatin treatment caused a PepA/E64D dependent
increase in LC3BII expression in A2780 and A2780Cis cell lines
demonstrating an increase in autophagic flux. Furthermore the use of two
autophagy inhibitors, 3-MA and hydroxychloroquine, enhanced the
cytotoxicity of cisplatin when used in combination (p<0.05 & p<0.01
respectively, n = 3, SRB). These data demonstrate autophagy is
upregulated by cisplatin as a pro-survival mechanism in two ovarian
cancer cell lines and platinum sensitivity can be partially restored
through the use of autophagy inhibitors. AKT has been implicated in
platinum resistance and upregulation of AKT has been reported to
negatively regulate autophagy. We therefore compared the status of the
AKT signalling pathway in the A2780 and A2780Cis cells. Phosphorylation
of S473 AKT and its direct substrates, GSK-3 and FOX01, were
significantly increased in platinum resistant A2780Cis cells (p<0.05,
p<0.05 & pAdvanced ovarian cancer eventually becomes resistant to
platinum based chemotherapy. We studied mechanisms of platinum resistance
using two paired ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780; A2780Cis and PE01;
PE04 (relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6 respectively by 96h SRB assay). While
cisplatin dependent DNA damage and repair govern initial disease
sensitivity, adaptation to stress by upregulation of pro-survival
mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin resistance. Analysis of
A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by western blot showed a
significant increase in expression of autophagy proteins LC3BII and
Beclin (P<0.05, n = 4). Cisplatin treatment caused a PepA/E64D dependent
increase in LC3BII expression in A2780 and A2780Cis cell lines
demonstrating an increase in autophagic flux. Furthermore the use of two
autophagy inhibitors, 3-MA and hydroxychloroquine, enhanced the
cytotoxicity of cisplatin when used in combination (p<0.05 & p<0.01
respectively, n = 3, SRB). These data demonstrate autophagy is
upregulated by cisplatin as a pro-survival mechanism in two ovarian
cancer cell lines and platinum sensitivity can be partially restored
through the use of autophagy inhibitors. AKT has been implicated in
platinum resistance and upregulation of AKT has been reported to
negatively regulate autophagy. We therefore compared the status of the
AKT signalling pathway in the A2780 and A2780Cis cells. Phosphorylation
of S473 AKT and its direct substrates, GSK-3 and FOX01, were
significantly increased in platinum resistant A2780Cis cells (p<0.05,
p<0.05 & p<0.01, respectively, n3). This is consistent with upregulation
of the AKT pathway and increased survival through inhibition of FOX01
dependent apoptosis. Despite this, the phosphorylation status of AKT
substrates PRAS40 and TSC2 (that regulate mTOR) were unchanged in
A2780Cis cells suggesting no apparent AKT-driven upregulation of mTOR
activity. Moreover, expression of the mTOR substrates S6RP, p70S6K and
4E-BP1 were decreased in A2780Cis cells when compared to the parental
A2780 cells (pAdvanced ovarian cancer eventually becomes resistant to
platinum based chemotherapy. We studied mechanisms of platinum resistance
using two paired ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780; A2780Cis and PE01;
PE04 (relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6 respectively by 96h SRB assay). While
cisplatin dependent DNA damage and repair govern initial disease
sensitivity, adaptation to stress by upregulation of pro-survival
mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin resistance. Analysis of
A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by western blot showed a
significant increase in expression of autophagy proteins LC3BII and
Beclin (P<0.05, n = 4). Cisplatin treatment caused a PepA/E64D dependent
increase in LC3BII expression in A2780 and A2780Cis cell lines
demonstrating an increase in autophagic flux. Furthermore the use of two
autophagy inhibitors, 3-MA and hydroxychloroquine, enhanced the
cytotoxicity of cisplatin when used in combination (p<0.05 & p<0.01
respectively, n = 3, SRB). These data demonstrate autophagy is
upregulated by cisplatin as a pro-survival mechanism in two ovarian
cancer cell lines and platinum sensitivity can be partially restored
through the use of autophagy inhibitors. AKT has been implicated in
platinum resistance and upregulation of AKT has been reported to
negatively regulate autophagy. We therefore compared the status of the
AKT signalling pathway in the A2780 and A2780Cis cells. Phosphorylation
of S473 AKT and its direct substrates, GSK-3 and FOX01, were
significantly increased in platinum resistant A2780Cis cells (p<0.05,
p<0.05 & p<0.01, respectively, n3). This is consistent with upregulation
of the AKT pathway and increased survival through inhibition of FOX01
dependent apoptosis. Despite this, the phosphorylation status of AKT
substrates PRAS40 and TSC2 (that regulate mTOR) were unchanged in
A2780Cis cells suggesting no apparent AKT-driven upregulation of mTOR
activity. Moreover, expression of the mTOR substrates S6RP, p70S6K and
4E-BP1 were decreased in A2780Cis cells when compared to the parental
A2780 cells (p<0.001, pAdvanced ovarian cancer eventually becomes
resistant to platinum based chemotherapy. We studied mechanisms of
platinum resistance using two paired ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780;
A2780Cis and PE01; PE04 (relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6 respectively by
96h SRB assay). While cisplatin dependent DNA damage and repair govern
initial disease sensitivity, adaptation to stress by upregulation of
pro-survival mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin resistance.
Analysis of A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by western blot
showed a significant increase in expression of autophagy proteins LC3BII
and Beclin (P<0.05, n = 4). Cisplatin treatment caused a PepA/E64D
dependent increase in LC3BII expression in A2780 and A2780Cis cell lines
demonstrating an increase in autophagic flux. Furthermore the use of two
autophagy inhibitors, 3-MA and hydroxychloroquine, enhanced the
cytotoxicity of cisplatin when used in combination (p<0.05 & p<0.01
respectively, n = 3, SRB). These data demonstrate autophagy is
upregulated by cisplatin as a pro-survival mechanism in two ovarian
cancer cell lines and platinum sensitivity can be partially restored
through the use of autophagy inhibitors. AKT has been implicated in
platinum resistance and upregulation of AKT has been reported to
negatively regulate autophagy. We therefore compared the status of the
AKT signalling pathway in the A2780 and A2780Cis cells. Phosphorylation
of S473 AKT and its direct substrates, GSK-3 and FOX01, were
significantly increased in platinum resistant A2780Cis cells (p<0.05,
p<0.05 & p<0.01, respectively, n3). This is consistent with upregulation
of the AKT pathway and increased survival through inhibition of FOX01
dependent apoptosis. Despite this, the phosphorylation status of AKT
substrates PRAS40 and TSC2 (that regulate mTOR) were unchanged in
A2780Cis cells suggesting no apparent AKT-driven upregulation of mTOR
activity. Moreover, expression of the mTOR substrates S6RP, p70S6K and
4E-BP1 were decreased in A2780Cis cells when compared to the parental
A2780 cells (p<0.001, p<0.05 & pAdvanced ovarian cancer eventually
becomes resistant to platinum based chemotherapy. We studied mechanisms
of platinum resistance using two paired ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780;
A2780Cis and PE01; PE04 (relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6 respectively by
96h SRB assay). While cisplatin dependent DNA damage and repair govern
initial disease sensitivity, adaptation to stress by upregulation of
pro-survival mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin resistance.
Analysis of A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by western blot
showed a significant increase in expression of autophagy proteins LC3BII
and Beclin (P<0.05, n = 4). Cisplatin treatment caused a PepA/E64D
dependent increase in LC3BII expression in A2780 and A2780Cis cell lines
demonstrating an increase in autophagic flux. Furthermore the use of two
autophagy inhibitors, 3-MA and hydroxychloroquine, enhanced the
cytotoxicity of cisplatin when used in combination (p<0.05 & p<0.01
respectively, n = 3, SRB). These data demonstrate autophagy is
upregulated by cisplatin as a pro-survival mechanism in two ovarian
cancer cell lines and platinum sensitivity can be partially restored
through the use of autophagy inhibitors. AKT has been implicated in
platinum resistance and upregulation of AKT has been reported to
negatively regulate autophagy. We therefore compared the status of the
AKT signalling pathway in the A2780 and A2780Cis cells. Phosphorylation
of S473 AKT and its direct substrates, GSK-3 and FOX01, were
significantly increased in platinum resistant A2780Cis cells (p<0.05,
p<0.05 & p<0.01, respectively, n3). This is consistent with upregulation
of the AKT pathway and increased survival through inhibition of FOX01
dependent apoptosis. Despite this, the phosphorylation status of AKT
substrates PRAS40 and TSC2 (that regulate mTOR) were unchanged in
A2780Cis cells suggesting no apparent AKT-driven upregulation of mTOR
activity. Moreover, expression of the mTOR substrates S6RP, p70S6K and
4E-BP1 were decreased in A2780Cis cells when compared to the parental
A2780 cells (p<0.001, p<0.05 & p<0.001, respectively, n3). In addition,
ULK1, a substrate of mTOR, which negatively regulates autophagy when
phosphorylated on S757, was hypophosphorylated at S757 in A2780Cis cells
(pAdvanced ovarian cancer eventually becomes resistant to platinum based
chemotherapy. We studied mechanisms of platinum resistance using two
paired ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780; A2780Cis and PE01; PE04
(relative resistance 5.2 & 3.6 respectively by 96h SRB assay). While
cisplatin dependent DNA damage and repair govern initial disease
sensitivity, adaptation to stress by upregulation of pro-survival
mechanisms, such as autophagy, may underpin resistance. Analysis of
A2780Cis and PE04 platinum resistant cells by western blot showed a
significant increase in expression of autophagy proteins LC3BII and
Beclin (P<0.05, n = 4). Cisplatin treatment caused a PepA/E64D dependent
increase in LC3BII expression in A2780 and A2780Cis cell lines
demonstrating an increase in autophagic flux. Furthermore the use of two
autophagy inhibitors, 3-MA and hydroxychloroquine, enhanced the
cytotoxicity of cisplatin when used in combination (p<0.05 & p<0.01
respectively, n = 3, SRB). These data demonstrate autophagy is
upregulated by cisplatin as a pro-survival mechanism in two ovarian
cancer cell lines and platinum sensitivity can be partially restored
through the use of autophagy inhibitors. AKT has been implicated in
platinum resistance and upregulation of AKT has been reported to
negatively regulate autophagy. We therefore compared the status of the
AKT signalling pathway in the A2780 and A2780Cis cells. Phosphorylation
of S473 AKT and its direct substrates, GSK-3 and FOX01, were
significantly increased in platinum resistant A2780Cis cells (p<0.05,
p<0.05 & p<0.01, respectively, n3). This is consistent with upregulation
of the AKT pathway and increased survival through inhibition of FOX01
dependent apoptosis. Despite this, the phosphorylation status of AKT
substrates PRAS40 and TSC2 (that regulate mTOR) were unchanged in
A2780Cis cells suggesting no apparent AKT-driven upregulation of mTOR
activity. Moreover, expression of the mTOR substrates S6RP, p70S6K and
4E-BP1 were decreased in A2780Cis cells when compared to the parental
A2780 cells (p<0.001, p<0.05 & p<0.001, respectively, n3). In addition,
ULK1, a substrate of mTOR, which negatively regulates autophagy when
phosphorylated on S757, was hypophosphorylated at S757 in A2780Cis cells
(p<0.05, n = 3) consistent with downregulation of mTOR activity and
consequent upregulation of autophagy function. In conclusion we present a
novel relationship between autophagy and AKT and show that differential
activation of the AKT substrates which control mTOR, has resulted in the
upregulation of autophagy as a pro-survival mechanism, despite the active
AKT status. This likely provides cells with an increased ability to cope
with cisplatin mediated cellular damage. Our study reveals a novel
insight into the regulation of autophagy and provides a rationale for the
use of autophagy inhibitors in the treatment of platinum resistant
ovarian cancer.

