Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autocrine regulation of stress-induced cytotoxic Alu RNA
expression in TNBC cells


Breast tumor cells are often subject to various forms of proteotoxic
stress in their microenvironment mainly presented by the stromal cells.
We found that the highly aggressive breast cancer cells of the triple
negative subtype (TNBC) are significantly more tolerant to environmental
stress than the non-aggressive breast cancer cells. Major objective of
the research presented here is to understand the mechanism of induction
of cytotoxic Alu RNA in the stressed breast cancer cells and how the TNBC
cells pacify this non-coding RNA-mediated cytotoxicity. We present
evidence that stress-induced activation of HSF1 in the breast cancer
cells stimulate the RNA polymerase III-mediated transcription of Alu RNA
genes in these cells resulting in induction of severe cytotoxicity and
apoptosis of these cells. Highly aggressive stress-tolerant TNBC cells
secrete the matrix metalloprotease MMP1 which activates the G-protein
coupled receptor PAR1 on their cell surface. Activation of PAR1 through
the Galpha-q/PIPLC/PIP3 pathway raises the cytosolic concentration of
Ca2+ thereby activating the Ca2+-dependent protease mu-calpain.
Mu-calpain then proteolytically degrades the RNA polymerase III
transcription factor TFIIIC110 at the PES sequence. As TFIIIC110 is
required for the transcription of Alu RNA genes, its degradation
ameliorates stress-induced elevation of Alu RNA and thus its
cytotoxicity. We propose that inhibition of MMP1, PAR1 or mu-calpain in
the TNBC cells will prevent this pacification mechanism promoting
stress-induced demise of these cells. This research is supported in part
by NIH/NCI grant 1R21CA181920-01 to GC.

