Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Warfarin-dependent gamma-carboxylation regulates androgen receptor
activity


The anti-coagulant warfarin prevents the gamma-carboxylation (gla) of
target proteins by interfering with the vitamin K cycle through its
inhibition of the vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR). Most known gla
proteins are found in the blood clotting cascade, but we demonstrate
using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry that the androgen
receptor (AR) can also be gamma-carboxylated. This modification occurs at
amino acid 2E and can be prevented by warfarin treatment. This residue
has been found to be mutated in partial androgen insensitivity syndrome
patients. Warfarin, likely through its ability to control carboxylation,
alters AR conformation and inhibits AR transcriptional activity, as does
siRNA-mediated knockdown of VKOR, the target of warfarin. We further
demonstrate that warfarin treatment reduces AR target gene expression in
benign mouse prostate tissue in vivo. Interestingly, retrospective
studies have shown that prolonged use of warfarin reduces the incidence
of prostate cancer, an effect that is not observed for other cancers. In
a small series of patients at our institution, we found that one allele
of a functional SNP in VKOR is found at a significantly higher rate in
prostate cancer patients than would be expected in the general
population. We also found that VKOR is highly expressed in normal human
prostate epithelia but is lost in cancerous tissue, a pattern of
expression that appears to be unique to prostate cancer. We hypothesize
that the lower prostate cancer incidence observed in men taking warfarin
is due to the ability of warfarin to reduce AR activity, similar to the
effect of 5-alpha reductase inhibitors. Importantly, we show for the
first time that a nuclear receptor and transcription factor can be
regulated by gamma-carboxylation.

