Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel tumor suppressor miRNA co-regulating EMT and
p53-independent cell survival in breast cancer


Breast cancer is the most common cancer and the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths among women. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to
be key regulators of cancer-related processes including cell
proliferation, survival, migration and invasion. Here, we performed a
small scale miRNA mimic screen to identify miRNAs leading to inhibition
of cell survival and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), both of
which are key parameters for tumor growth and metastasis. We identified a
miRNA (miR-644) which leads to apoptosis in p53-mutated breast cancer
cell lines, but not in p53-wild type ones. Furthermore, in vitro
migration and invasion assays revealed that miR-644 inhibits both
migration and invasion by interfering with the EMT process. Then, we
combined whole genome mRNA profiling with target prediction algorithms to
determine the potential targets of this miRNA, and identified
transcriptional co-repressor CTBP1 as a novel direct target which is
already known for limiting apoptosis by repressing Bax transcription.
CTBP1 has also been reported to bind ZEB transcription factors and
assists EMT by enhancing ZEB-mediated downregulation of E-Cadherin. We
showed that silencing of CTBP1 phenocopies the effects of miR-644 in
induction of p53-independent apoptosis and blocking EMT and cell
invasion. Currently, we are testing the role of miR-644 and its target
CTBP1 in tumor growth and metastasis in in vivo assays. Overall, our
results suggest that miR-644 is a novel tumor suppressor miRNA
co-regulating EMT and cell survival and it could be a potential target
for breast cancer therapy.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

