Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TaqMan rare mutation assays for QuantStudio 3D digital PCR system


Detection and quantification of mutant alleles in tumor tissue allow for
research disease monitoring and the research of drug efficacy. Detection
of emerging secondary mutations in the same tumor tissue causing
resistance to potential treatment will help guide decisions on future
treatment plans. A less invasive research method than using tumor tissue
is testing for the presence of mutations in circulating free DNA
(cfDNA).We created a research tool for mutation detection at a
sensitivity level of 1% and below. This allows researchers to find
correlation between types of mutations and types of tumors and
determination of potential secondary mutations.The tool combines TaqMan
SNP Genotyping Assays with digital PCR. A set of assays was optimized for
use in digital PCR with the QuantStudio 3D Digital PCR System. In digital
PCR, partitioning the sample into many individual reaction wells
facilitates detection and quantification of rare mutant alleles. TaqMan
SNP Genotyping Assays ensure reliable discrimination of mutant and
wild-type allele.Our initial set of 38 assays covers mutations commonly
found in tumor tissues: BRAF V600E, mutations in EGFR exons 19, 20 and
21, KRAS codons 12 and 13, PIK3CA exons 9 and 20, and the JAK2 V617F
mutations.All assays were wet-lab tested at a 10% mutation rate and a 1%
mutation rate using mutant plasmid spiked into wild-type genomic DNA.
Additionally, selected assays were tested at the 0.1% mutation rate using
mutant cell lines spiked into wild-type genomic DNA.Wet-lab results
confirm that all assays showed superior performance discriminating mutant
and wild-type alleles. Mutant alleles were successfully detected as low
as 0.1%.For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.

