Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic copy number variations characterize prognosis of
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma, including p16 positive subset,
after surgery-based treatment


Background High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV)-related (+) oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) exhibits unique clinical and molecular
characteristics, compared to HPV-unrelated - OSCCs. As different patterns
of genomic instability is expected in HPV-driven carcinogenesis, we
questioned if patterns of genomic copy number variations (CNVs) differ
depending on HPV association, and predict prognosis, after surgery-based
treatment for OSCCs in Korean population. Methods Fifty-eight OSCCs
patients, who underwent surgery-based treatment and followed for 42
months on median, were enrolled. HPV status was determined by p16
immunohistochemistry (IHC), and HPV DNA PCR. Genome-wide CNV analysis was
performed using array-based comparative genomic hybridization of genomic
DNA from paraffin-embedded specimen. Clinical association and survival
analyses were followed. Results p16 predicted the overall survival (HR =
0.27, CI: 0.39-0.80, p = 0.0006), better than HPV DNA PCR (HR = 0.83, CI:
0.66-1.29, p = 0.64) or smoking history (HR = 2.18, CI: 0.92-5.18, p =
0.071). In overall, number of CNVs did not significantly differed between
p16+/- groups. However, 30 locus showed different CNV pattern between
these groups. PRDM2 was amplified only in p16+ group, while EGFR and
11q13.3 was more amplified in p16- patients. Loss of FGF18 lead to worse
prognosis, and gain of CDK10 and RAD18 was linked to better prognosis in
all patients. Amplification of HRAS and loss of KDR lead to better OS in
p16+ group. Conclusions After surgery-based treatment, p16+ OSCCs
exhibits different CNV patterns at some loci, compared with p16-
counterpart. Specific patterns of CNVs do predict better survival,
especially in p16+ OSCCs. In the future, clinical trials should stratify
patients based on these patterns to apply escalated treatment to obtain
better survival.

