Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The landscape of long non-coding RNAs in cancer


Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are emerging as important players in
cancer. The emergence of high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq)
technology provides a revolutionary means for systematic discovery of
transcribed elements. However, efforts to catalog lncRNAs have thus far
failed to appreciate the transcriptional robustness and complexity in the
human genome because they were confined to select cell lines or small
numbers of mostly normal tissue.In order to delineate genome-wide lncRNA
expression, we curated 7,256 RNA-Seq libraries comprising over 43
terabases of sequence from 25 independent studies including tumors,
normal tissues, and cell lines. The data were processed using ab initio
transcriptome meta-assembly methodologies to develop a consensus of
91,013 expressed genes. Over 68% (58,648) of genes were classified as
lncRNAs, of which 79% (48,952) were previously unannotated. About 1%
(597) of the lncRNAs harbor ultraconserved elements and 7% (3,900)
overlap disease-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). To
prioritize lineage-specific, disease-associated lncRNA expression, we
developed a non-parametric method for differential expression testing
called Sample Set Enrichment Analysis (SSEA), and nominated 7,942
lineage- or cancer-associated lncRNA genes. In order to interrogate
potential functionality for these lncRNAs, gene set enrichment testing
was performed on genes correlated with each lncRNA.By uncovering this
expansive landscape of cancer-associated lncRNAs, we provide the
scientific community a powerful starting point to begin investigating
their biological relevance. We anticipate that the lncRNAs identified by
this study, as well as the computational tools developed herein, will
provide a foundation for lncRNA genomics, biomarker development, and the
delineation of cancer disease mechanisms.

