Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC9 and 11 contribute to UV resistance in melanoma cells


We have previously shown that the Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor (HDACi)
trichostatin A (TSA) can sensitize cancer cells to UV radiation by
facilitating the formation of Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) without
increasing the levels of HDAC1. Here we show that HDAC9 and HDAC11 are
upregulated in response to UV radiation in a number of human melanoma
cell lines. Both HDAC9 and HDAC11 have an hnRNP A18 signature motif in
their 3UTR. hnRNP A18 is a new regulator of protein translation that can
confer growth advantages to tumor cells by specifically increasing the
stability and translation of mRNA transcripts harboring its signature
motif. Our data indicate that HDAC9 and 11 levels correspond to hnRNP A18
level in response to UV radiation in several melanoma cell lines while
hnRNP A18 and HDAC 9 and 11 are not upregulated in response to UV
radiation in the normal human fibroblasts Malme cells or the normal
melanocytes HEMa-LP. Moreover, clonogenic colony survival assays indicate
that melanoma cells expressing higher hnRNP A18 endogenous levels are
more resistant to UV radiation than cells expressing lower hnRNP A18
levels. In addition, down regulation of hnRNP A18 prevents HDAC 9 and 11
upregulation in response to UV radiation. Furthermore, overexpression of
hnRNP A18 increases further the levels of HDAC 9 and 11 in response to UV
radiation. These data suggest that upregulation of HDAC9 and 11 in
response to hnRNP A18 activation contribute to UV resistance and may
increase sensitization to UV-induced cell killing by HDACi.

