Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted delivery of a synthetic microRNA-based mimic as an
approach to cancer therapy


MicroRNA expression is commonly suppressed in cancer, contributing to
tumor cell biology. Recently we demonstrated that multiple members of the
miR-15/16 family are downregulated and have tumor suppressor functions in
malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM), an asbestos-related cancer for
which few treatments are available. These results are similar to previous
findings in prostate and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Using mimics
to restore levels of miR 15a, miR-15b or miR-16 led to growth inhibition
and induction of apoptosis of MPM cells in vitro. The miR-16 mimic,
packaged in bacterially-derived, EGFR antibody-targeted,
EDV(TM)nanocells, inhibited xenograft tumor growth in vivo. As multiple
microRNAs from the same family are downregulated in MPM, we investigated
whether a single synthetic mimic based on the consensus sequence of all
family members could restore activity of the entire family. To this end
we generated four novel mimics derived from the consensus sequence of the
miR-15/16 family and tested them in a range of tumor cell lines. Compared
with a mimic corresponding in sequence to native miR-16, the consensus
mimics had enhanced growth inhibitory activity in MPM, NSCLC and prostate
cancer lines, three tumor types in which miR-15/16 expression is
suppressed. They were also active in cell lines derived from breast and
colon cancer. When packaged in minicells, the synthetic mimics inhibited
growth of MPM xenograft tumors in vivo. Based on these preclinical
studies a Phase I clinical trial has been initiated for patients with MPM
or NSCLC failing standard therapy. This represents only the second trial
of microRNA replacement as a cancer therapy, and the first for thoracic
cancer.

