Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protection from CTL mediated killing by iNOS expression in a mouse
model of melanoma


The presence of peroxynitrite (PNT) in tumor tissue, as measured by its
surrogate tissue marker, nitrotyrosine (NT), is correlated with poor
clinical prognosis and poor response to immunotherapy. The production of
PNT at the tissue can be attributed to multiple sources. For example,
many tumors are characterized by extensive infiltration by immature
myeloid cells with robust immuno-suppresive activity. These myeloid
derived suppressor cells (MDSC) are known to produce high level of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS), and
the reaction of these two species is a major source of PNT at the tumor
site. In addition to MDSC, iNOS expression in tumor cells themselves can
act as a major source of PNT. Here we show that B16 melanoma cells are
protected from CTL mediated lysis via iNOS expression. This effect is
independent of effects on the T cells themselves as ability to lyse iNOS
expressing and non-expressing cells was assessed in the same culture.
Previously it was shown that peroxynitrite treated cells bound certain
exogenous MHC class I peptides with lower affinity than their non-treated
counterparts. Using a system of endogenous iNOS expression, our data
supports the existence of a similar phenomenon for endogenously processed
and presented peptide antigens, suggesting that the repertoire of surface
bound immunogenic peptides is different in tumors when compared to the
presentation of those same antigens in the tumor draining lymph node,
where PNT is less prevalent. As a result, immune responses generated in
the lymph node are against antigens which are not relevant and will fail
to control tumor growth. Additionally, our data suggests that
pharmaceutical intervention to reduce intratumoral PNT levels may buoy
concurrent immunotherapy.

