Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis of SIAH2 E3 ligase complex in oncogenic
K-Ras-driven cell transformation in human cancer


Affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) is a highly effective
method of identifying and quantifying the individual constituents of
molecular machines that are dynamically regulated by diverse cellular
stimuli during tumor initiation, progression and metastasis. Seven In
absentia homolog 2 (SIAH2) is an evolutionarily conserved E3 ubiquitin
ligase and a key component of a molecular machine called SIAH2-dependent
proteolytic machinery that serves as the most downstream signaling module
critical for proper oncogenic ERBB/RAS signal transduction. As a newly
identified promising anti-K-RAS and anticancer drug target, it is
important to understand the dynamic regulation of SIAH function,
substrate recognition and complex formation during tumor initiation,
progression and metastasis. Our aim was to delineate the molecular
regulation, substrate selection and target recognition of the SIAH
proteolytic machinery in K-Ras-driven cellular transformation and
oncogenesis; and to explore the SIAH-dependent K-RAS oncogene addiction
and its future therapeutic application.In this study, affinity
purification was conducted in triplicates to isolate the SIAH2 protein
complexes from two panels of human epithelial cells: For the lung
epithelial cells: we used the normal bronchial epithelial cells
(BEAS-2B), RAS-transformed BEAS-2B (BZR) and non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) A549 cells with oncogenic K-RAS activation. For the mammary
epithelial cells: we used normal mammary epithelial cells (HMEC and
MCF-10A), benign breast tumor cells (MCF-7), MDA-MB-231 that carries both
oncogenic K-RAS and B-RAF activation and MDA-MB-468. The extracted
proteins were trypsin-digested and peptides subjected to high throughput
liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.SIAH2
was observed to propagate downstream RAS signals by affecting proteins
involved in cellular junctions, focal adhesion, metabolism, mitochondrial
function and kinase activities. Using Western blots, immunofluorescence
staining and co-immunoprecipitation assays, we have verified and
confirmed that focal adhesion proteins, TRIP6 (Thyroid Receptor
Interacting Protein 6) and FHL2 (Four and Half Lim domain protein) are
SIAH2 substrates in human cancer cell lines lung cancer (A549) and triple
negative breast cancer (MDA-MB-231) and breast cancer (MDA-MB-468). We
found that TRIP6 primarily localizes to the focal adhesions, cell
junctions and the nucleus of the cells. Overexpression of SIAH2 induces
the degradation of exogenous and endogenous TRIP6 while Inhibition of
SIAH2 enzymatic function results in a stabilization of TRIP6 and
mis-localization of TRIP6 in human cancer cells.In conclusion, we report
that SIAH2 regulates focal adhesion, cell junction and cellular
attachment by down regulating TRIP6 expression levels and may induce a
more motile and aggressive phenotype in human cancer cells.

