Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A population-based approach to address clinical cancer care: The
national genomics platform


Our understanding of the genetic basis for cancer is advancing at a rapid
rate due to the application of next generation sequencing (NGS)
technologies. It is becoming common to sequence tumors and patients in an
attempt to find actionable mutations that could offer the patient a more
targeted and effective treatment. However, the genomics of cancer is very
complex and only a handful of actionable mutations have been
characterized. Larger-scale studies are needed to understand the
pathogenic spectrum of cancer variants and deliver reliable clinical
decision-making support to providers.Several large-scale sequencing
projects are underway to collect NGS data on tumors (e.g. TCGA, ICGC, and
TARGET) but a national platform for analysis, interpretation, and
reporting does not exist. We propose that a consolidated informatics
platform for the collection of outcomes data with genomics and clinical
data would accelerate research and provide patients with the opportunity
for personalized cancer treatment. In addition, with 1,665,540 new cancer
cases predicted in the US for 2014, a national-scale genomics platform is
needed, capable of sequencing 3 million genomes per year, storing
exabytes of data, while supporting over 20,000 oncologists, researchers,
and analysts.At Lockheed Martin, we deliver highly scalable and reliable
information systems for a variety of missions and citizen services. Here,
we will present our vision for a national cancer genomics platform to
include NGS data collection, cost-efficient storage, scalable and modular
processing pipelines, and collaborative analytics and data sharing
capabilities, within a compliant privacy and security framework. In
conclusion, by leveraging the scale of clinical cancer sequencing and
capturing these data into a case management system for translational
research, this platform provides data at-scale needed for finding
actionable mutations, designing effective treatments and implementing
prevention strategies, faster.

