Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity and genomic changes in patients with myelodysplastic
syndromes


Obesity is rapidly overtaking smoking as the leading preventable cause of
cancer, particularly in cancers of the breast and colon. In a large
cohort of individuals participating in the National Institutes of
Health-AARP Diet and Health Study, a higher incidence of MDS and an
increased mortality was observed in individuals with body mass index
(BMI) >30 compared to those with BMI Obesity is rapidly overtaking
smoking as the leading preventable cause of cancer, particularly in
cancers of the breast and colon. In a large cohort of individuals
participating in the National Institutes of Health-AARP Diet and Health
Study, a higher incidence of MDS and an increased mortality was observed
in individuals with body mass index (BMI) >30 compared to those with BMI
<25 (HR 2.18 (95% CI: 1.51, 3.17; P 30) were combined in one group
(BMI-H).Of 205 pts with MDS treated at our institution between 1/2000 -
1/2013, 146 (71%) were BMI-H. Interestingly, only 2 patients had BMI 30)
were combined in one group (BMI-H).Of 205 pts with MDS treated at our
institution between 1/2000 - 1/2013, 146 (71%) were BMI-H. Interestingly,
only 2 patients had BMI <18.5 (underweight) and were combined with normal
BMI group (BMI-N). BMI-H pts presented with lower white blood count
(median 3.6 vs. 4.4, p = .03), but other clinical characteristics were
similar. With median follow up of 33.6 months (mo) (range 0.4-128.5), a
trend toward inferior survival was observed in BMI-H group compared to
BMI-N (32.9 mo vs. 34.8 mo, p = .07). Furthermore, higher rates of
progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) were seen in the BMI-H as
compared to BMI-N pts (23% vs. 19%, p = .02).Overall, 74% of pts had at
least one of the 62 screened mutations, the most common being: SF3B1
(17%), TET2 (17%), ASXL1 (14%), STAG2 (12%), DNMT3A (9%), U2AF1/2 (8%),
GPR98 (8%), and RUNX1(7%). Mutations in IDH1/2 (5% vs. 0%), DNMT3A (11%
vs. 5%), TET2 (18% vs. 14%) occurred more frequently in BMI-H, where
SF3B1 (25% vs. 13%), and NRAS (7% vs. 2%) mutations were more common in
BMI-N. Within functional groups, mutations in splicing machinery genes
were less common in BMI-H compared to BMI-N (32% vs. 41%, p = .05) and
mutations in DNA methylation genes were more common in BMI-H (20% vs.
34%, p = .02). Clonal architecture analysis points to the presence of
different dominant clones between the two groups. In the dominant MDS
clones, mutations in TET2 and DNMT3A were observed more frequently in pts
with BMI-H, whereas mutations in SF3B1 were more frequently observed in
BMI-N pts.In conclusion, overweight and obese pts with MDS have a trend
for inferior survival and higher rate of progression to AML as compared
to MDS pts with normal weight. Genomic differences in clonal architecture
and distribution of somatic mutations were observed in the BMI-H group.
Further exploration including germline mutations and previously described
familial obesity genes is needed to expound on the interaction between
the biology of obesity and leukemogenesis of MDS.

