Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-level amplification of chromosome 9p24 targeting PD-L1 and
JAK2 correlates with worse DFS and OS in triple negative breast cancer


Introduction: Overexpression and amplification of PD-L1 has been reported
in a subset of cancers, including lymphoma, and gastric cancer. We have
recently described amplification of chromosome 9p24 targeting PD-L1 in a
subset of triple negative breast cancers (TNBC), as well as 1-3% of
colorectal carcinomas and glioblastomas. The clinical impact of these
amplifications is not known.Methods: Tumor samples from 41 subjects with
TNBC were evaluated for copy number aberrations. We performed DNA-based
flow cytometry to sort nuclei from diploid, tetraploid, and aneuploid
populations of tumor cells. The genomes of each sorted tumor cell
population were then interrogated with oligonucleotide CGH arrays. Copy
number intervals were identified and their genomic boundaries mapped
using a step gram algorithm. Clinical data was available on 36 of 45
(80%) patients.Results: A recurring top ranked high level (log2ratio >1)
amplicon that spanned 9p24.1 was detected in 12/41 (29.3%) of TNBCs. In
contrast this amplicon was absent in ER+ (n = 8) and Her2+ (N = 15)
breast tumors. The shortest region of overlap (SRO) spanned 777 kb and
always included the PD-1 ligands PD-L1, PD-L2, and Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)
loci, termed the PDJ amplicon. Additional genes in this amplicon include
RCL1, MIR101-2, INSL6, INSL4, RLN2, RLN1, and C9orf46. The height of the
PDJ amplicon included mean log2ratios of >4, consistent with genomic
drivers such as Her2 and Myc. Patients with PD-L1 amplification (n = 8)
were noted to have larger tumors (mean 3.9 vs. 1.9 cm, p = 0.04) and a
higher incidence of lymph node metastases (75% vs. 26%, p = 0.01).
Lymphocytic infiltration was only noted in 4 patients, all without PDJ
amplification. Almost all patients received chemotherapy after definitive
surgical therapy. The recurrence rate at 5 years was 62.5% in the PDJ
amplified patients, and 25% in the unamplified patients (p = 0.02).
Overall survival at 5 years was 37.5% in the PDJ amplified patients,
compared with 78.2% in the unamplified patients (p = 0.02).Conclusion: We
identified a focal amplification of chromosome 9p24.1 involving PD-L1,
PD-L2, and JAK2 in a significant proportion of TNBCs. The high level of
amplification and inverse correlation with survival suggests that the PDJ
amplicon is a genetic driver event in these cancers, and warrants
confirmation in larger studies.

