Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinical outcome of patients with FOXL2 402C->G mutation
positive adult-type Granulosa Cell Tumor of the ovary - a population
based study with analysis of tissue and plasma ctDNA


Adult-type Granulosa Cell Tumors (AGCTs) are rare ovarian neoplasms
comprising of 5% of all ovarian cancers. The FOXL2 (C->G) C134W mutation
has been identified in 95% of all AGCTs, making it a pathognomonic
defining feature. The histological diagnosis of AGCT is challenging;
false diagnoses have been reported in up to 30-50% of cases in historical
series. AGCTs behave unpredictably, and recurrences occur in 30-60% of
the patients. The clinical outcome of molecularly defined, FOXL2-mutation
positive AGCTs remains unknown.We conducted a partially prospective,
population-based study of 248 AGCT patients diagnosed or treated at
Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland, during 3/1956-10/2013.
Clinical data were collected from hospital records and the causes of
death from the Finnish Causes of Death registry. FOXL2 mutation was
analyzed from DNA extracted from FFPE (n = 171), and fresh tumor tissue
samples (n = 51). Histological diagnosis was re-evaluated in Helsinki,
and differential diagnostic cases (n = 24) were subjected to a blinded
histological review in Vancouver. Serial plasma samples (n = 120) were
collected prospectively during 8/2007- 4/2013 from 37 AGCT patients. The
extracted ctDNA was preamplified using the C134W FOXL2 Taqman
primer/probe. Tissue and plasma DNA were analyzed with Raindance Raindrop
digital PCR technology. Statistical analyses were performed with
Kaplan-Meier, and comparison of ctDNA positivity to tumor diameter with
oneway ANOVA using JMP software.Of the original cohort, 165 (74%) tumors
were positive and 57 (26%) tumors were negative for the FOXL2 402C->G
mutation. Upon pathological review, an alternate diagnosis was set for 35
mutation negative patients in the first review (Helsinki), and for 41
patients in the final review (Vancouver). The vast majority (n = 149,
90%) of the FOXL2 mutation positive AGCT patients were diagnosed at stage
I. The 5-, 10, and 15-year disease-specific survival (DSS) rates were
99%, and 93%, and 89% for the FOXL2 positive AGCT patients, compared to
58%, 53%, and 51% for the FOXL2 wild-type/misdiagnosed other tumors
(pAdult-type Granulosa Cell Tumors (AGCTs) are rare ovarian neoplasms
comprising of 5% of all ovarian cancers. The FOXL2 (C->G) C134W mutation
has been identified in 95% of all AGCTs, making it a pathognomonic
defining feature. The histological diagnosis of AGCT is challenging;
false diagnoses have been reported in up to 30-50% of cases in historical
series. AGCTs behave unpredictably, and recurrences occur in 30-60% of
the patients. The clinical outcome of molecularly defined, FOXL2-mutation
positive AGCTs remains unknown.We conducted a partially prospective,
population-based study of 248 AGCT patients diagnosed or treated at
Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland, during 3/1956-10/2013.
Clinical data were collected from hospital records and the causes of
death from the Finnish Causes of Death registry. FOXL2 mutation was
analyzed from DNA extracted from FFPE (n = 171), and fresh tumor tissue
samples (n = 51). Histological diagnosis was re-evaluated in Helsinki,
and differential diagnostic cases (n = 24) were subjected to a blinded
histological review in Vancouver. Serial plasma samples (n = 120) were
collected prospectively during 8/2007- 4/2013 from 37 AGCT patients. The
extracted ctDNA was preamplified using the C134W FOXL2 Taqman
primer/probe. Tissue and plasma DNA were analyzed with Raindance Raindrop
digital PCR technology. Statistical analyses were performed with
Kaplan-Meier, and comparison of ctDNA positivity to tumor diameter with
oneway ANOVA using JMP software.Of the original cohort, 165 (74%) tumors
were positive and 57 (26%) tumors were negative for the FOXL2 402C->G
mutation. Upon pathological review, an alternate diagnosis was set for 35
mutation negative patients in the first review (Helsinki), and for 41
patients in the final review (Vancouver). The vast majority (n = 149,
90%) of the FOXL2 mutation positive AGCT patients were diagnosed at stage
I. The 5-, 10, and 15-year disease-specific survival (DSS) rates were
99%, and 93%, and 89% for the FOXL2 positive AGCT patients, compared to
58%, 53%, and 51% for the FOXL2 wild-type/misdiagnosed other tumors
(p<0.0001, log-rank test). 51 (31%) of the FOXL2 positive AGCT patients
had a recurrence at a median time of 7.6 years (range 1-26 years) after
the diagnosis. FOXL2 mutation was detected in the plasma of 17% (n = 8)
of samples from patients with primary or recurrent AGCT. ctDNA FOXL2
mutation was more likely detected in patients with large tumors (p =
0.003).We have characterized the largest population based cohort of AGCT
patients, and shown that the outcome of the patients with FOXL2 mutation
positive AGCT was superior to those with original AGCT misdiagnosis.
ctDNA is a promising tool to diagnose AGCT in a non-invasive manner.
Testing FOXL2 mutation should be used as standard of care, especially in
differential diagnostic cases.

