Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adolescent and mid-life diet: risk of pancreatic cancer in the
NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study


Background: To date, the data concerning diet and pancreatic cancer risk
has focused on diet assessed during adulthood. Given the long latency
period of this malignancy, examining diet during adolescence and midlife
may shed light on the diet - pancreatic cancer association. Methods: We
examined the associations between diet at ages 12-13 years, 10 years
before baseline (ages 40-61 years), and the joint effects of both with
risk of pancreatic cancer in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study. Six
months after baseline, 303,094 individuals (175,991 men and 127,103
women) completed two 37-item food frequency questionnaires that assessed
diet at ages 12-13 years and 10 years previously. Cox proportional
hazards regression was used to estimate smoking, body mass index, and
diabetes adjusted multivariable hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) for pancreatic cancers (n = 1,322 by the end of 2006).
Results: Comparing highest to the lowest tertile (T3 vs. T1),
carbohydrate intake at age 12-13 (HR (95% CI): 0.86 (0.75, 0.98), P-trend
= 0.06) and 10 years before baseline (HR (95% CI): 0.87 (0.76, 1.00),
P-trend = 0.05) were inversely associated with pancreatic cancer. Intake
of total fat at ages 12-13 (HR (95% CI): 1.15 (1.00, 1.33), P-trend =
0.07) and 10 years before baseline (HR (95% CI): 1.18 (1.03, 1.35),
P-trend = 0.02) were positively associated with risk. High intake of fat
in both adolescence and midlife was positively associated with risk (HR
(95% CI): 1.32 (1.08, 1.62)). Calcium intake 10 years before baseline was
associated with reduced risk (T3 vs T1 HR (95% CI): 0.88 (0.77, 1.00),
P-trend = 0.05) as was changing from low intake in adolescence to high
intake in midlife (HR (95% CI): 0.71 (0.54, 0.93)). Solid fat (butter and
margarine) intake 10 years before baseline was associated with increased
risk (T3 vs T1 HR (95% CI): 1.23 (1.06, 1.42), P-trend = 0.005) as was
consumption of solid fats at both time points (HR (95% CI): 1.31 (1.08,
1.60)). Conclusion: Diet during adolescence and midlife may play a role
in the etiology of pancreatic cancer.

