Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in cell-cycle related genes modify the effect of
NSAIDs on the risk of colorectal cancer


The risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) is determined by the interplay of
genetic and environmental factors. The aim of this study was to identify
the association between polymorphisms in cell-cycle related genes and
risk of colorectal cancer, and to evaluate the interaction with
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use.Patients with incident
CRC were recruited in the framework of DACHS, a German population based
case-control study. Altogether, 1756 cases and 1781 controls were
genotyped for 223 candidate or tagging SNPs in 30 cell-cycle related
genes using the Illumina GoldenGate Assay. The associations between
polymorphisms and the risk of colorectal cancer were assessed with
multivariate logistic regression. Effect modification by NSAIDs (use
>1/month for >1 year) was tested by using a multiplicative interaction
term. Haplotype analysis was performed using the haplo.stats R
package.None of the studied SNPs were significantly associated with CRC
after multiple test correction. NSAID use lowered the risk of colorectal
cancer with an odds ratio (OR) of 0.59 (Confidence interval, CI:
0.51-0.69, p = 9.58*10-11). Several polymorphisms in and near
cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) and cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2)
showed interaction with NSAID use. However, only one signal remained
significant after FDR correction; the homozygous wild genotype (GG) of
rs2069408 neutralizes the protective effect of NSAID use (interaction
pThe risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) is determined by the interplay of
genetic and environmental factors. The aim of this study was to identify
the association between polymorphisms in cell-cycle related genes and
risk of colorectal cancer, and to evaluate the interaction with
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use.Patients with incident
CRC were recruited in the framework of DACHS, a German population based
case-control study. Altogether, 1756 cases and 1781 controls were
genotyped for 223 candidate or tagging SNPs in 30 cell-cycle related
genes using the Illumina GoldenGate Assay. The associations between
polymorphisms and the risk of colorectal cancer were assessed with
multivariate logistic regression. Effect modification by NSAIDs (use
>1/month for >1 year) was tested by using a multiplicative interaction
term. Haplotype analysis was performed using the haplo.stats R
package.None of the studied SNPs were significantly associated with CRC
after multiple test correction. NSAID use lowered the risk of colorectal
cancer with an odds ratio (OR) of 0.59 (Confidence interval, CI:
0.51-0.69, p = 9.58*10-11). Several polymorphisms in and near
cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) and cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2)
showed interaction with NSAID use. However, only one signal remained
significant after FDR correction; the homozygous wild genotype (GG) of
rs2069408 neutralizes the protective effect of NSAID use (interaction
p<0.001, FDR q = 0.018). The effect of NSAID use on CRC risk according
the rs2069408 genotypes were the following (OR, 95%CI): 0.82 (0.65-1.02)
for GG, 0.51 (0.42-0.61) for GA and 0.31 (0.22-0.45) for AA genotypes.
Although non-significant after multiple test correction, interactions
with NSAID use was observed at the rs4134950 polymorphism of the E2F3
gene (interaction p = 0.003, FDR q = 0.152) and at rs17187428
(interaction p = 0.004, FDR q = 0.164) and rs773108 (interaction p =
0.005, FDR q = 0.166) in MYC. The haplotype analysis revealed six
haplotype blocks in and near the genes E2F3, CDK2, CDK1, CDK6 and MYC
that showed significant interaction with NSAID use regarding the risk of
colorectal cancer.A possible mechanism of the interaction between NSAIDs
and cell-cycle genes could be mediated via the cell-cycle related effects
of MYC, the expression of which is regulated by the Wnt/-catenin pathway.
This pathway plays a central role in colorectal cancer and was previously
found to be inhibited by NSAIDs. The analyses of additional SNPs are
ongoing to better understand the mechanism of the interaction between
NSAID use and cell-cycle related genes.

