Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and biological evaluation of novel 6-substituted
pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidines as targeted antifolates


Reduced folates are essential cofactors for the biosynthesis of purines
and pyrimidines. Since humans do not synthesize folate, it is necessary
to obtain these cofactors from dietary sources. In mammals, three
specialized systems exist that mediate membrane transport of folates and
antifolates across biological membranes. These include the reduced folate
carrier (RFC), the primary route for the uptake of folates and
antifolates in mammalian cells, folate receptors (FRs) and , and the
proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT). Whereas RFC is ubiquitously
expressed, FRs and PCFT show a narrower pattern of tissue expression.
Toxicity of clinically used antifolates is attributed to their lack of
selectivity for tumor cells over normal cells, likely due in part to
their RFC transport. Antifolates with tumor-selective FR and/or PCFT drug
uptake would circumvent major toxicities of currently used antifolates.
We previously described the synthesis and biological activity of AGF23, a
6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine. Against FR- and PCFT-expressing
KB human tumor cells, AGF23 was potently inhibitory (IC50 = 1.9 nM). Two
novel isosteres of AGF23, AGF215 and AGF234 with oxygen and nitrogen in
place of carbon at C11, respectively, were designed and synthesized. This
simple isosteric replacement of carbon with heteroatoms in the bridge
affords compounds with different chain lengths, angles, conformations and
extra hydrogen bond donors and/or acceptors compared to the parent carbon
chain analog. AGF215 and AGF234 were compared to AGF23 as inhibitors of
proliferation of engineered Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells expressing
human PCFT (R2/PCFT4), FR (RT16), or RFC (PC43-10). AGF215 and AGF234,
like AGF23, were inactive toward PC43-10 cells. AGF23 and AGF234 showed
low level activity toward R2/PCFT4 cells (IC50200 nM), whereas AGF215 was
inactive. Toward FR-expressing RT16 cells, all the analogs were potently
active with IC50 values of 1-6 nM. Toward KB tumor cells, AGF215 and
AGF234 were highly potent with IC50 values of 3 and 1.3 nM, respectively.
AGF215 and AGF234 are potential analogs for further preclinical studies
and analog design.

