Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S49076, a MET, AXL, FGFR inhibitor, potentiates radiation therapy
in subcutaneous and orthotopic models of lung cancer


S49076 is an oral ATP-competitive inhibitor of the receptor tyrosine
kinases MET, AXL, and FGFR1-3 currently in phase I/II clinical
development in patients with advanced solid tumors. Here, we investigated
the effect of S49076 on both MET- and non-MET- dependent cell lines alone
and in association with ionizing radiation (IR) both in vitro and in
vivo. We performed proliferation and clonogenic survival assays using the
low MET-expressing H460 and A549 non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell
lines, the high MET-expressing H441 NSCLC cell line and the MET-dependent
GTL16 gastric cancer cell line. Activity against the MET receptor and
Aurora B kinase was assessed by analyzing the phosphorylation status of
MET Tyr1234/1235 and Histone H3 Ser10 residues. Pharmacologic and RNA
interference approaches against Aurora B and MET were used to determine
the molecular mechanism of the cell response to S49076.S49076 inhibited
MET activity in the nanomolar range (1 - 100 nM). At higher, but still
clinically-relevant concentrations (0.5 - 1 M), S49076 was also found to
inhibit Aurora B kinase activity in all cell lines tested. In non
MET-dependent cell lines, the antiproliferative and anti-clonogenic
effects of the drug correlated with its activity against Aurora B,
whereas in the MET-dependent cell line, these effects could be attributed
to direct inhibition of the MET receptor. When treatment with S49076 was
combined with IR, an enhancement of IR effects was observed in all cell
lines tested in vitro. In vivo, a significant growth delay of
subcutaneous tumors was observed at 50 mg/kg bid oral S49076 in non-MET
dependent models and at 3 mg/kg bid oral S49076 in the GTL16
MET-dependent model. For non MET-dependent models, immunohistochemistry
revealed that treatment with S49076 reduced Histone H3 phosphorylation on
Ser10. This is consistent with the finding that S49076 concentrations
above 1 M were attained in the tumors, as determined by LC-MS/MS
analysis. In all tumors tested, S49076 treatment significantly delayed
tumor growth when combined to a fractionated IR (4 fractions of 2.5 Gy)
compared to IR alone. An orthotopic model of lung cancer using
luciferase-expressing H460 NSCLC cells was also used to evaluate the
combination of S49076 (50mg/kg bid) and locally fractionated thoracic IR
(4*2.5 Gy). In this model, the median survival after cell implantation
was 22 days for control mice, 29.5 and 29 days for S49076 treated and
irradiated mice respectively and 41 days for mice receiving the combined
treatment (pS49076 is an oral ATP-competitive inhibitor of the receptor
tyrosine kinases MET, AXL, and FGFR1-3 currently in phase I/II clinical
development in patients with advanced solid tumors. Here, we investigated
the effect of S49076 on both MET- and non-MET- dependent cell lines alone
and in association with ionizing radiation (IR) both in vitro and in
vivo. We performed proliferation and clonogenic survival assays using the
low MET-expressing H460 and A549 non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell
lines, the high MET-expressing H441 NSCLC cell line and the MET-dependent
GTL16 gastric cancer cell line. Activity against the MET receptor and
Aurora B kinase was assessed by analyzing the phosphorylation status of
MET Tyr1234/1235 and Histone H3 Ser10 residues. Pharmacologic and RNA
interference approaches against Aurora B and MET were used to determine
the molecular mechanism of the cell response to S49076.S49076 inhibited
MET activity in the nanomolar range (1 - 100 nM). At higher, but still
clinically-relevant concentrations (0.5 - 1 M), S49076 was also found to
inhibit Aurora B kinase activity in all cell lines tested. In non
MET-dependent cell lines, the antiproliferative and anti-clonogenic
effects of the drug correlated with its activity against Aurora B,
whereas in the MET-dependent cell line, these effects could be attributed
to direct inhibition of the MET receptor. When treatment with S49076 was
combined with IR, an enhancement of IR effects was observed in all cell
lines tested in vitro. In vivo, a significant growth delay of
subcutaneous tumors was observed at 50 mg/kg bid oral S49076 in non-MET
dependent models and at 3 mg/kg bid oral S49076 in the GTL16
MET-dependent model. For non MET-dependent models, immunohistochemistry
revealed that treatment with S49076 reduced Histone H3 phosphorylation on
Ser10. This is consistent with the finding that S49076 concentrations
above 1 M were attained in the tumors, as determined by LC-MS/MS
analysis. In all tumors tested, S49076 treatment significantly delayed
tumor growth when combined to a fractionated IR (4 fractions of 2.5 Gy)
compared to IR alone. An orthotopic model of lung cancer using
luciferase-expressing H460 NSCLC cells was also used to evaluate the
combination of S49076 (50mg/kg bid) and locally fractionated thoracic IR
(4*2.5 Gy). In this model, the median survival after cell implantation
was 22 days for control mice, 29.5 and 29 days for S49076 treated and
irradiated mice respectively and 41 days for mice receiving the combined
treatment (p<0.002 for combined treatment versus the irradiated arm or
the S49076 treated arm).Our findings indicate that S49076 improves the
efficacy of radiotherapy in both MET- and non-MET- dependent cell,
supporting the use of combined treatment with S49076 and radiation in
clinical trials without patient selection.

