Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subclonal structure of breast cancer subtypes determined by
quantitative analyses of activating mutations


Little is known about the role of low-frequency somatic mutations in
breast cancer, a cancer that is quite variable in terms of clinical
features, prognosis and response to treatment. Because undetected mutant
subpopulations have the potential to cause resistance to
molecularly-targeted cancer therapies, this study investigated whether
different subtypes of ductal carcinomas (DCs) encompass subpopulations of
cells with cancer-driver mutations known to impact response to targeted
therapies. Using the sensitive and quantitative ACB-PCR approach PIK3CA
H1047R and BRAF V600E point mutations were quantified in 82 DCs,
consisting of ER/PR+/HER2- (n = 20), ER/PR+/HER2+ (n = 20), ER/PR-/HER2+
(n = 21), and ER/PR-/HER2- (TNBC; n = 21) subtypes. Considering all
subtypes together, the geometric mean mutant fraction (MF) measurements
[provided along with (5th to 95th percentiles)] were: PIK3CA H1047R, 6.8
106 (2.5 108 to 6.3 102) and BRAF V600E, 1.9 105 (5.1 106 to 1.6 104).
The PIK3CA H1047R and BRAF V600E mutations were detected (i.e., had MFs >
105) in 41% and 37% of DCs, respectively. In addition, normal breast
tissues were analyzed by ACB-PCR to define the background levels of these
mutations. For normal breast (n = 10), the geometric mean MF measurements
[provided along with (5th to 95th percentiles)] were: PIK3CA H1047R, 8.0
104 (1.6 105 to 3.8 102) and BRAF V600E, 2.0 106 (9.7 107 to 1.7 104). DC
subtype analyses revealed ER/PR+/HER2- and TNBC subtypes had
significantly greater BRAF V600E MFs relative to that measured in normal
breast. The ACB-PCR data indicated 15% of DCs carry BRAF V600E mutation
at a level greater than the upper 95% confidence interval for the
mutation in normal breast. Interestingly, for PIK3CA H1047R mutation,
ER/PR+/HER2-, ER/PR+/HER2+ and TNBC subtypes had significantly less
PIK3CA H1047R mutation relative to that measured in normal breast. We
hypothesize that pre-existing PIK3CA mutation can cooperate with other
clones to drive tumor initiation and early progression, but is lost or
outgrown by clones carrying other cancer driver mutations in advanced
breast cancers. Data from the COSMIC database supports this idea that the
level of PIK3CA mutation decreases as disease progression ensues, with
PIK3CA mutation detected in 47% of hyperplasia, 29% of DCIS, and 21% in
ductal carcinomas. Furthermore, TNBCs had significantly less PIK3CA
H1047R mutation relative to that measured in each of the other subtypes,
suggesting individuals with these tumors may have a lower response to
inhibitors of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Analyses of other cancer driver
hotspot point mutations in the different DC subtypes is ongoing and will
provide additional information regarding the role of low-frequency
somatic mutations in breast cancer.

