Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of NT-1044, a novel AMPK activator, on endometrial
cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis


Objectives: Obesity and diabetes are associated with increased risk and
worse outcomes in endometrial cancer (EC). Anti-diabetic biguanide drugs
such as metformin may have anti-tumorigenic effects by behaving as AMPK
activators and mTOR inhibitors. Metformin requires organic cation
transporters (OCTs) for entry into cells, and NT-1044 (NovaTarg
Therapeutics) is an AMPK activator designed to have greater affinity for
two of these transporters, OCT1 and 3. We sought to compare the effects
of NT-1044 on cell proliferation and apoptosis in human EC cell
lines.Methods: Cell proliferation was assessed in two EC cell lines,
ECC-1 and Ishikawa, by MTT assay after exposure to NT-1044. Apoptosis was
analyzed by Annexin V-FITC assay. Cell cycle progression was evaluated by
flow cytometry. Phosphorylated (phos)-S6, phos-AMPK, Cyclin D-1 and CDK-6
were evaluated by Western immunoblotting.Results: NT-1044 significantly
inhibited proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in both EC cell lines
after 72 hours of exposure (IC50 218 uM for ECC-1; 87 uM for Ishikawa).
Treatment with NT-1044 resulted in G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
both cell lines. NT-1044 increased phosphorylation of AMPK and decreased
phosphorylation of S6, a key downstream target of the mTOR pathway.
Expression of Cyclin-D1 and CDK-6 also decreased in a dose
dependent-fashion in both cell lines.Conclusions: NT-1044 suppressed EC
cell growth through G1 cell cycle arrest, inducing apoptosis, and
inhibition of the mTOR pathway. More work is needed to determine if this
novel biguanide will be beneficial in the treatment of women with EC, a
disease strongly impacted by obesity and diabetes.

