Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of EphA2 signaling in PC-3
prostate cancer cells


The receptor tyrosine kinase EphA2 is frequently upregulated in cancer,
where it plays an intriguing dichotomous role that may lend itself to
therapeutic intervention. However, much remains to be understood about
how ephrin-mediated activation of EphA2 signaling can reverse its
tumour-promoting ligand-independent effects and instead inhibit migration
and invasion. We used quantitative phosphoproteomics to analyze EphA2
signaling in PC-3 prostate cancer cells with the aim to further elucidate
its downstream signaling and pinpoint phosphorylation-dependent cellular
processes that may explain its dichotomous role. Stable isotope labeling
by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) combined with liquid
chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was used to quantify
changes in relative phosphosite abundance in response to EphA2
activation. We identified 113 significantly regulated phosphosites
comprising 73 phosphoproteins, including many novel and several
previously described downstream effector proteins of EphA2 signaling.
More than two thirds of the regulated phosphosites showed reduced
phosphorylation in response to EphA2 activation. This is consistent with
EphA2 activation inhibiting oncogenic signaling pathways, including Akt
and ERK-MAPK signaling. Protein association analysis using the STRING
database showed that a large proportion of these differentially regulated
proteins are downstream targets of Akt and ERK-MAPK, respectively. Gene
ontology enrichment analysis found our dataset to be strongly enriched in
proteins associated with the cytoskeleton and its regulation. Overall,
our data suggest that diminished phosphorylation of cytoskeletal
regulators downstream of Akt and ERK-MAPK signaling may be a major
mechanism by which stimulation of EphA2 can alter cell morphology and
inhibit cell motility.

