Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coordinated regulation of cap-dependent translation and microRNA
function by convergent signaling through the PI3K/Akt/mTOR and
Jak/Stat/Pim signaling pathways


Growth and proliferation of tumor cells requires coordinated activation
of many cellular processes, including cap-dependent mRNA translation.
MicroRNAs oppose cap-dependent translation to set thresholds for
expression of target proteins. Emerging data suggest that microRNA
function, like cap-dependent translation, is enhanced by activation of
cancer-associated signaling due, at least in part, to induction of GW182
protein expression. In the current study, we demonstrate that increased
expression of GW182 in normal and transformed hematopoietic cells
contributes to enhanced microRNA function by increasing overall capacity
for microRNA-mediated target repression. Furthermore, expression of GW182
was found to be regulated post-transcriptionally by the translation
initiation complex downstream of convergent signaling through the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR and Jak/Stat/Pim signaling pathways, both of which are
commonly activated in hematopoietic malignancies. PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling
contributed to GW182 expression primarily by stimulating eIF4E binding to
GW182 mRNA, while Jak/Stat/Pim signaling enhanced GW182 expression by
additionally increasing eIF4A-dependent unwinding of G-quadraplexes in
the 5 untranslated region (UTR) of GW182 mRNA. Inhibition of either
eIF4E-dependent translation initiation by treatment with rapamycin or
eIF4A-dependent unwinding of the GW182 5 UTR by treatment with silvestrol
led to decreased GW182 expression and microRNA function. Our data provide
a mechanism by which microRNA function is linked to cap-dependent
translation, allowing thresholds for expression of microRNA targeted
proteins to be maintained despite changes in protein synthesis.

