Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective accumulation and specific tumor damage by folate
receptor-targeted CA-4 prodrug as part of a combination of photodynamic
therapy and site-specific chemotherapy


A non-invasive or minimally invasive tumor ablation regimen is an
attractive tool with which to control tumors. This approach is
complementary to primary treatment options without causing systemic side
effects or severe physical burdens from the treatment itself. Clinically
approved photodynamic therapy (PDT) is one such regimen. In PDT,
photosensitizers are activated by visible and near IR light to destroy
tumors. However, the therapeutic efficacy of PDT is limited due to the
spatial and temporal restrictions of the effector of PDT, singlet oxygen.
We have been developing a new prodrug strategy that can overcome these
limits by using a unique combination of PDT and site-specific
chemotherapy. The prodrug is composed of photosensitizer and anticancer
drug via a singlet oxygen-cleavable linker. Upon illumination, the
prodrugs cause PDT damage and simultaneously release anticancer drugs
only at the illuminated target area. In our previous publications, we
reported 1) the design and synthesis of prodrugs of combretastatin A-4,
2) visible/ near IR light-controlled release of the drug from the
prodrug, 3) bystander effects from the released anticancer drug, and 4)
the superior antitumor effect of the prodrug compared to a simple
combination of PDT and chemotherapy. Recently, a more advanced CA-4
prodrug was developed to achieve selective delivery to tumors via folate
receptors (FRs) overexpressed in numerous cancer cell lines. The targeted
prodrug showed FR-mediated uptake to FR-expressing cancer cells (colon 26
cells) in vitro and to FR-expressing tumors in vivo. Notably, the
targeted CA-4 prodrug effectively ablated the tumors without causing
collateral damage to the surrounding skin.

