Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational study of F14512, a novel vectorised
epipodophyllotoxin, which demonstrates a marked activity on ovarian
cancer models from patients


Epithelial ovarian cancer is the fourth cause of death among
cancer-bearing women, frequently associated with carboplatin resistance,
underlining the need of more efficient and targeted therapies. F14512 is
a novel concept of drug vectorization that we propose here to investigate
in ovarian cancer models. F14512 is an epipodophyllotoxin-core linked to
a spermine chain, which enters selectively tumor cells via the polyamine
transport system (PTS), currently in clinical phase II evaluation in AML.
We compared the effects of F14512 versus etoposide against OVCAR-3,
IGROV-1, SKOV-3, A2780S and A2780R cancer cell lines. Using the F17073
PTS fluorescent probe, we determined the PTS activity of these cells and
of 18 clinical samples. As results, F14512 displayed strong
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic activities in carboplatin-resistant
models, being increased in cell lines with high levels of PTS.
Consistently, at a dose of 1.25 mg/kg, F14512 significantly inhibited
tumor growth in cisplatin-resistant SKOV-3 xenograft model.
Interestingly, ex vivo analysis indicated that 15 patients sample out of
18 presented a higher F17073 fluorescent probe incorporation into
CD326-positive tumor cells as compared to normal cells, even in the case
of 2 platinum-refractory patients. Therefore, F14512 is a targeted drug
with a potent anti-tumor efficacy regardless the status of cisplatin
resistance. The high PTS activity detected in fresh clinical samples
highlights the potential of F14512 as a new therapy for PTS-positive and
platinum resistant ovarian cancer patients.

