Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyaluronan (HA) depletion increases tumor accessibility of T cell
and therapeutic PD-L1 monoclonal antibody in HAhigh tumors


Tumor initiation and progression is a complex interaction between host
and tumor. One of the essential elements for tumor progression is evasion
of the host immune system. Among the mechanisms important for host immune
cell evasion is the amplification of receptor tyrosine kinases, and tumor
secretion of immune suppressive cytokines, like TGF-, suppression of
activated T cells by various intrinsic immune response regulatory
mechanisms 1-3. Additionally, tumor cells evolve to express
cell-associated programmed death 1 (PD1) ligands (PD-L1 or LD-L2), which
promotes tumor cell growth by inactivating PD1 expressing activated T
cells 3-4. Recent reports suggest a role of the tumor microenvironment
(TME) as an immunosuppressive environment by accumulating hyaluronan
(HA)5-7, which then results in accumulation of water and resulting high
interstitial fluid pressure and sequelae, including blood vessel
compression, and decreased perfusion8-10. Hyaluronan depletion from solid
tumors with high levels of HA (HAhigh) reverses these physiological
effects, resulting in increased chemotherapeutic drug penetration and
tumor growth inhibition in preclinical animal models 8-10. In this report
we investigated whether increasing the access of therapeutic immune
checkpoint monoclonal antibodies and effector T cells into the HAhigh
tumor can enhance activated T cell-mediated tumor cell lysis. We have
generated human hyaluronan synthase and PD-L1 overexpressing tumor cell
lines to study (i) the role of HA in PD-1 and PD-L1 interaction in HAhigh
tumor cells, and (ii) whether HA depletion increases the efficacy of
tumor cell killing by PD-1 positive cytotoxic T lymphocytes in the
presence of PD-L1 blocking monoclonal antibody. Our data show that HAhigh
tumor cells form an HA-rich barrier that restricts T cell access to tumor
cell and HA depletion by PEGPH20, a pegylated PH20, allowed T cells to
access tumor cell. HA depletion increases HAhigh PD-L1 positive tumor
cells killing by activated T cell in the presence of anti-human PD-L1
monoclonal antibody (MAb). Furthermore, HA depletion by PEGPH20 increased
the access of T cell and anti-human PD-L1 MAb in HAhigh xenograft tumors,
suggesting that PEGPH20 may enhance efficacy of immune check point
blocking therapeutic PD-L1 MAb in HAhigh tumors.References:1. Rabinovich
et al. Annu Rev Immunol., 2007;25:267-96.2. Hudzika et al. Cell Growth
Differ. 1990; 1:129-34.3. Quezada et al. British Journal of Cancer, 2013;
108: 1560-1565.4. Zou et al. Nature Reviews Immunology, 2008; 8:
467-477.5. Sironen et al. Exp Cell Res 2011;317:383-91.6. Kultti et al.
Cancers 2012;4:873-903.7. Tlsty et al. Annu Rev Pathol 2006;1:119-50.8.
Thompson et al. Mol Cancer Ther 2010;9:3052-64.9. Jacobetz et al. Gut
2013;62:112-20.10. Provenzano et al. Cancer Cell 2012;21:418-29.

