Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting glycolytic pathway with 2-Deoxy-glucose enhances
lapatinib sensitivity in HER2-amplified breast cancer


Background: Aerobic glycolysis, commonly used by cancer cells, converts
glucose to lactate regardless of available oxygen. 2-Deoxyglucose (2DG),
a glucose metabolism inhibitor, inhibits hexokinase enzyme activity, and
can be used in functional tumor imaging, which can enhance efficacy of
chemotherapy and radiotherapy in solid tumors. Lapatinib, a HER kinase
inhibitor, is used for HER2+ breast cancer treatment, but is limited in
efficacy due to emergence of therapeutic resistance. However, data
investigating combination of 2DG + lapatinib in HER2+ BC are limited. In
this study, we evaluated whether 2DG enhances lapatinib sensitivity in
lapatinib-sensitive and resistant HER2+ cells.Materials and methods:
SKBR3 and BT474 cells were treated with increasing dose of lapatinib to
develop lapatinib-resistant cells: SKBR3-LapR and BT474-LapR. Potential
synergism between 2DG and lapatinib was evaluated by viability assays,
and calculated via CalcuSyn software or relative risk ratios (RRRs).
Glycolysis was monitored in response to drug treatments via western blots
and assays for lactate production, glucose uptake, and hexokinase
activity.Results: Lapatinib treatment significantly inhibited glycolysis
in SKBR3 and BT474 cell lines (P Background: Aerobic glycolysis, commonly
used by cancer cells, converts glucose to lactate regardless of available
oxygen. 2-Deoxyglucose (2DG), a glucose metabolism inhibitor, inhibits
hexokinase enzyme activity, and can be used in functional tumor imaging,
which can enhance efficacy of chemotherapy and radiotherapy in solid
tumors. Lapatinib, a HER kinase inhibitor, is used for HER2+ breast
cancer treatment, but is limited in efficacy due to emergence of
therapeutic resistance. However, data investigating combination of 2DG +
lapatinib in HER2+ BC are limited. In this study, we evaluated whether
2DG enhances lapatinib sensitivity in lapatinib-sensitive and resistant
HER2+ cells.Materials and methods: SKBR3 and BT474 cells were treated
with increasing dose of lapatinib to develop lapatinib-resistant cells:
SKBR3-LapR and BT474-LapR. Potential synergism between 2DG and lapatinib
was evaluated by viability assays, and calculated via CalcuSyn software
or relative risk ratios (RRRs). Glycolysis was monitored in response to
drug treatments via western blots and assays for lactate production,
glucose uptake, and hexokinase activity.Results: Lapatinib treatment
significantly inhibited glycolysis in SKBR3 and BT474 cell lines (P <
0.01). Combination lapatinib + 2DG was synergistic in inhibiting SKBR3
and BT474 proliferation, with average IC50 values of 0.530.16 and
0.550.01, respectively. SKBR3-LapR cells exhibited higher rates of
lactate production, glucose uptake and hexokinase activity compared to
lapatinib-sensitive cells (P Background: Aerobic glycolysis, commonly
used by cancer cells, converts glucose to lactate regardless of available
oxygen. 2-Deoxyglucose (2DG), a glucose metabolism inhibitor, inhibits
hexokinase enzyme activity, and can be used in functional tumor imaging,
which can enhance efficacy of chemotherapy and radiotherapy in solid
tumors. Lapatinib, a HER kinase inhibitor, is used for HER2+ breast
cancer treatment, but is limited in efficacy due to emergence of
therapeutic resistance. However, data investigating combination of 2DG +
lapatinib in HER2+ BC are limited. In this study, we evaluated whether
2DG enhances lapatinib sensitivity in lapatinib-sensitive and resistant
HER2+ cells.Materials and methods: SKBR3 and BT474 cells were treated
with increasing dose of lapatinib to develop lapatinib-resistant cells:
SKBR3-LapR and BT474-LapR. Potential synergism between 2DG and lapatinib
was evaluated by viability assays, and calculated via CalcuSyn software
or relative risk ratios (RRRs). Glycolysis was monitored in response to
drug treatments via western blots and assays for lactate production,
glucose uptake, and hexokinase activity.Results: Lapatinib treatment
significantly inhibited glycolysis in SKBR3 and BT474 cell lines (P <
0.01). Combination lapatinib + 2DG was synergistic in inhibiting SKBR3
and BT474 proliferation, with average IC50 values of 0.530.16 and
0.550.01, respectively. SKBR3-LapR cells exhibited higher rates of
lactate production, glucose uptake and hexokinase activity compared to
lapatinib-sensitive cells (P < 0.05), and BT474-LapR cells exhibited
higher hexokinase activity (P Background: Aerobic glycolysis, commonly
used by cancer cells, converts glucose to lactate regardless of available
oxygen. 2-Deoxyglucose (2DG), a glucose metabolism inhibitor, inhibits
hexokinase enzyme activity, and can be used in functional tumor imaging,
which can enhance efficacy of chemotherapy and radiotherapy in solid
tumors. Lapatinib, a HER kinase inhibitor, is used for HER2+ breast
cancer treatment, but is limited in efficacy due to emergence of
therapeutic resistance. However, data investigating combination of 2DG +
lapatinib in HER2+ BC are limited. In this study, we evaluated whether
2DG enhances lapatinib sensitivity in lapatinib-sensitive and resistant
HER2+ cells.Materials and methods: SKBR3 and BT474 cells were treated
with increasing dose of lapatinib to develop lapatinib-resistant cells:
SKBR3-LapR and BT474-LapR. Potential synergism between 2DG and lapatinib
was evaluated by viability assays, and calculated via CalcuSyn software
or relative risk ratios (RRRs). Glycolysis was monitored in response to
drug treatments via western blots and assays for lactate production,
glucose uptake, and hexokinase activity.Results: Lapatinib treatment
significantly inhibited glycolysis in SKBR3 and BT474 cell lines (P <
0.01). Combination lapatinib + 2DG was synergistic in inhibiting SKBR3
and BT474 proliferation, with average IC50 values of 0.530.16 and
0.550.01, respectively. SKBR3-LapR cells exhibited higher rates of
lactate production, glucose uptake and hexokinase activity compared to
lapatinib-sensitive cells (P < 0.05), and BT474-LapR cells exhibited
higher hexokinase activity (P < 0.001) and glucose uptake (P Background:
Aerobic glycolysis, commonly used by cancer cells, converts glucose to
lactate regardless of available oxygen. 2-Deoxyglucose (2DG), a glucose
metabolism inhibitor, inhibits hexokinase enzyme activity, and can be
used in functional tumor imaging, which can enhance efficacy of
chemotherapy and radiotherapy in solid tumors. Lapatinib, a HER kinase
inhibitor, is used for HER2+ breast cancer treatment, but is limited in
efficacy due to emergence of therapeutic resistance. However, data
investigating combination of 2DG + lapatinib in HER2+ BC are limited. In
this study, we evaluated whether 2DG enhances lapatinib sensitivity in
lapatinib-sensitive and resistant HER2+ cells.Materials and methods:
SKBR3 and BT474 cells were treated with increasing dose of lapatinib to
develop lapatinib-resistant cells: SKBR3-LapR and BT474-LapR. Potential
synergism between 2DG and lapatinib was evaluated by viability assays,
and calculated via CalcuSyn software or relative risk ratios (RRRs).
Glycolysis was monitored in response to drug treatments via western blots
and assays for lactate production, glucose uptake, and hexokinase
activity.Results: Lapatinib treatment significantly inhibited glycolysis
in SKBR3 and BT474 cell lines (P < 0.01). Combination lapatinib + 2DG was
synergistic in inhibiting SKBR3 and BT474 proliferation, with average
IC50 values of 0.530.16 and 0.550.01, respectively. SKBR3-LapR cells
exhibited higher rates of lactate production, glucose uptake and
hexokinase activity compared to lapatinib-sensitive cells (P < 0.05), and
BT474-LapR cells exhibited higher hexokinase activity (P < 0.001) and
glucose uptake (P < 0.05). RRRs were less than 1 with 2DG + lapatinib
combination in SKBR3-LapR (0.88-0.98) and BT474-LapR (0.76-0.96) cells.
Moreover, 2DG + lapatinib induced greater apoptosis, especially in
lapatinib-resistant cells (P = 0.004 and 0.003 for SKBR3-LapR and
BT474-LapR cells, respectively). Finally, 2DG + lapatinib inhibited
several steps of the glycolytic pathway, namely: reduction of hexokinase
II expression levels, inhibition of lactate production, decreased glucose
uptake and impaired hexokinase activity, in both lapatinib-sensitive and
resistant cells.Conclusion: 2DG can enhance lapatinib sensitivity by
inhibiting aerobic glycolysis in both nave and lapatinib-resistant HER2+
breast cancer cells. 2DG impinges on multiple steps of glycolysis, and
combination with lapatinib may serve to prevent and/ or ameliorate
therapeutic resistance in patients treated with lapatinib.

