Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity of TNF-gold nanodrugs tagged with tumor
vasculature-homing peptides containing the NGR or isoDGR motives


Colloidal gold (Au) is a well-tolerated nanomaterial currently exploited
for several applications in the field of nanomedicine. In particular,
gold nanoparticles loaded with tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF), a
cytokine endowed with anti tumor activity, have a therapeutic index
higher than that of TNF. For this reason TNF-gold nanoparticles are
currently tested in cancer patients.We have addressed the hypothesis that
TNF-gold nanoparticles tagged with tumor vasculature homing peptides have
improved therapeutic properties.To this aim we have tagged TNF-gold
nanoparticles with albumin-peptide conjugates containing the NGR
(Asn-Gly-Arg) or isoDGR (isoAsp-Gly-Arg) motives, i.e. with ligands of
CD13 and integrin alphavbeta3, respectively, expressed by the tumor
neovasculature.The therapeutic properties of the resulting nanodrugs
(called NGR-HSA/Au/TNF and isoDGR-HSA/Au/TNF) were then investigated in
fibrosarcoma- or lymphoma-bearing mice and compared with those a nanodrug
lacking the targeting peptide (called HSA/Au/TNF). The results showed
that intravenous administration of extremely low doses of NGR-HSA/Au/TNF
or isoDGR-HSA/Au/TNF (equivalent to 5 pg of bioactive TNF/mouse) were
sufficient to induce anti-tumor effects, whereas similar doses of
HSA/Au/TNF were minimally active. Low-dose NGR-HSA/Au/TNF and
isoDGR-HSA/Au/TNF, but not HSA/Au/TNF, could also exert synergistic
anti-tumor effects with melphalan, a chemotherapeutic drug. These
findings support the concept that tagging TNF-gold nanoparticles with
tumor vasculature homing peptides have an improved antitumor activity,
likely because of an active targeting mechanism.

