Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of GalNAc-conjugated generation 2.5 ASOs in DEN
and DEN/CCL4-induced HCC tumors


The worldwide rate of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) occurrence is rising
rapidly; however, outside of transplantation, few effective treatment
options are available. Hepatocellular carcinogenesis is a complex,
multistep process involving many genetic alterations, often occurring in
targets that are considered undruggable by conventional therapeutic
modalities. Antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) technology offers the
potential to target these undruggable pathways in HCC tumors in vivo and
to determine the sensitivity of HCC to the ablation of these pathways.
Using either the diethylnitrosamine (DEN) induced mouse HCC model or DEN
in combination with the profibrotic agent carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), we
first examined gene expression changes in induced HCC tumors. DEN-induced
HCC has a very long latency period (8 months). We demonstrate that mice
injected with DEN and CCl4 developed HCC with a shorter latency and a
higher tumor incidence. We also identified several genes of interest that
could potentially be HCC drivers and targets for ASO therapy. Conjugation
of ASOs with N-acetyl D-galactosamine (GalNAc) has been shown to increase
ASO activity >10x in normal liver. Here we demonstrate that GalNAc
conjugated ASOs show similar increased potency in HCC tumors and the
complete depletion of Myd88 protein levels. Importantly, in addition to
the ability to potently inhibit Myd88 levels in tumors, GalNAc-conjugated
Myd88 ASOs also resulted in significantly reduced tumor burden. These
data demonstrate that GalNAc-conjugated Gen 2.5 ASOs have potent activity
in HCC tumors and that Myd88 maybe be an attractive therapeutic target in
this disease.

