Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synaptonemal complex protein 3 is associated with
lymphangiogenesis in non-small cell lung cancer


Lymphangiogenesis is a key component for tumor growth and metastasis in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and is a promising target in cancer
therapy strategy. The axis of vascular endothelial growth factor-C
(VEGF-C)/VEGF-D/VEGFR-3 is considered to be a major driver of
lymphangiogenesis but the detailed mechanism of this process remains
unclear. We recently showed that the expression of synaptonemal complex
protein 3 (SCP3) is associated with poor prognosis and linked with lymph
node metastasis in NSCLC. To investigate the possible lymphangiogenic
significance of SCP3 in NSCLC, we assessed SCP3, VEGF-A, VEGF-B, VEGF-C,
and VEGF-D expressions in archival tumor tissues from 89 NSCLC patients
with lymph node metastasis by immunohistochemical staining. The positive
staining of SCP3, VEGF-A, VEGF-B, VEGF-C and VEGF-D expressions were
detected in 24 (27.0%), 22 (24.7%), 27 (30.3%), and 24 cases (27.0%),
respectively. Notably, we have identified that the SCP3 expression is
positively correlated with VEGF-C and VEGF-D (for both, p
Lymphangiogenesis is a key component for tumor growth and metastasis in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and is a promising target in cancer
therapy strategy. The axis of vascular endothelial growth factor-C
(VEGF-C)/VEGF-D/VEGFR-3 is considered to be a major driver of
lymphangiogenesis but the detailed mechanism of this process remains
unclear. We recently showed that the expression of synaptonemal complex
protein 3 (SCP3) is associated with poor prognosis and linked with lymph
node metastasis in NSCLC. To investigate the possible lymphangiogenic
significance of SCP3 in NSCLC, we assessed SCP3, VEGF-A, VEGF-B, VEGF-C,
and VEGF-D expressions in archival tumor tissues from 89 NSCLC patients
with lymph node metastasis by immunohistochemical staining. The positive
staining of SCP3, VEGF-A, VEGF-B, VEGF-C and VEGF-D expressions were
detected in 24 (27.0%), 22 (24.7%), 27 (30.3%), and 24 cases (27.0%),
respectively. Notably, we have identified that the SCP3 expression is
positively correlated with VEGF-C and VEGF-D (for both, p < 0.001)
whereas its expression is negatively correlated with VEGF-A and VEGF-B (p
= 0.029 and p = 0.026, respectively). Furthermore, we have also detected
the linkage between SCP3 and VEGF-C or VEGF-D expressions in human lung
cancer cell lines. In multivariate analysis of patients with lymph node
metastasis, SCP3 expression displayed the worse overall survival (HR =
1.86, p = 0.008). These data suggest that SCP3 is linked with
lymphangiogenesis and provide insight into the SCP3-VEGF-C/VEGF-D axis
based anti-lymphangiogenic therapy strategy.

