Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer stem cell through blocking the Erk pathway with
Kazinol-E from Broussonetia kazinoki


Growing evidence suggests that a small population of cells, called cancer
stem cells (CSCs) contribute to the heterogeneity, recurrence and
resistance to chemotherapy in breast cancer. In this regard, CSC is
considered to be a good target to cure breast cancers. The extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway is one of the major
determinants in the control of diverse cellular process including the
maintenance of CSCs. Kazinol-E is an antioxidant flavan purified from the
root bark of Broussonetia kazinoki (Moraceae, paper mulberry). In this
study, we found the anti CSC effect of Kazinol-E through targeting ERK
pathway. It decreased the population of a breast cancer cell (MCF-7) CSCs
which are CD44+/CD24- or aldehyde dehydrogenase positive, at the
concentration that does not influence the growth of general MCF-7 cells
cultured with serum. It targeted and inhibited ERK kinase activities in
vivo in both CSC and in regular cultured cells suggesting the CSCs depend
more than the rest of cancer cells do on Erk signaling for the survival.
In vitro kinase assay using purified Erk-1 and p90RSK2, as the substrate,
and the molecular docking study suggest that the Kazinol-E suppress the
Erk activity by direct binding to the ATP binding pocket of Erk-1.
Interestingly, a Kazinol-C which is very similar with Kazinol-E in
structure did not show the Erk-1 inhibition nor anti CSC activity. These
results collectively suggest that Kazinol-E may be a specific anti CSC
agent targeting Erk pathway.

