Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of chromatin condensation by mitotic checkpoint protein
MAD2


The process of cell division is stringently regulated by spindle and
mitotic checkpoint components mainly MAD2, MAD1, CDC20, BUBR1, BUB3 and
MAD3. These checkpoint proteins detect unattached or improperly attached
kinetochore-microtubule binding sites and generate an anaphase-wait
signal by inhibiting the anaphase-promoting complex (APC/C). Activation
of checkpoint signaling arrests the cells at metaphase until the
attachment errors are rectified and all the chromosomes are properly
bi-oriented at the metaphase plate. Together with these checkpoint
proteins, the expression of checkpoint-regulatory factors such as p31
(comet) and recently identified, WT1 can hypo- or hyper-activate the
signaling pathway, respectively and regulate the timing of mitotic exit.
Recently we found that WT1 can interact with MAD2 and regulate the
mitotic checkpoint function. Furthermore our studies show that MAD2 and
WT1 can also influence the chromatin condensation process required for
mitotic progression. We analyzed the effect of MAD2 and WT1 perturbations
on the epigenetic mark (phosphorylation of histone H3) associated with
condensed chromatin state. Our results show that MAD2 regulates the
recruitment of chromatin modifying enzyme Aurora kinase B during mitosis.
We further show that MAD2 is an important factor required for
synchronization of key events beyond the checkpoint signaling sites to
ensure the fidelity of chromosome segregation.

