Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics of OTX015 in a phase Ib dose-finding study of
patients with hematologic malignancies: Preliminary results of a
population PK analysis


Background: OTX015 (OncoEthix SA, Switzerland) is a novel oral
bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) protein family inhibitor, with in
vitro and in vivo activity in a variety of hematologic and solid tumor
cells. A phase Ib study with OTX015 in patients with hematologic
malignancies is underway including a pharmacokinetic (PK) investigation.
The PK objectives of this study were to determine the PK profile of oral
OTX015 using a population approach.Materials and Methods: A multicenter,
dose escalation study in cohorts of 3 to 6 patients with acute leukemia
or other hematologic malignancies was performed with a dose escalation
step followed by expansion cohorts at the recommended dose. Patients
received oral OTX015 from 10 to 160 mg different schedules. PK blood
samples from 7 time points were collected over 24 h post-administration
on Day 1 for leukemia patients (complete PK) and 4 blood samples over 8 h
post-administration for patients with other hematologic malignancies
(limited PK). OTX015 plasma concentrations were measured using validated
ultra-performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry
detection with a concentration range 1-250ng/mL. Analyses and population
PK (PPK) modeling were performed with the nonlinear mixed effect modeling
software program Monolix version 4.3. The following parameters were
calculated absorption constant (Ka); apparent distribution volume (V/F);
apparent clearance (CL/F) and lean body mass (LBM; calculated considering
patient sex, weight and height) was considered as covariate.Results: 85
patients enrolled and treated from January 2013 to August 2014,
randomized to six dose levels (10, 20, 40, 80, 120 and 160 mg) QD and 40
mg BID were evaluated. Among them, 81 patients with 630 plasma
concentrations (607 + 23 BLQ) were evaluable for PK assessment. A
1-compartment open model adequately described the total OTX015
concentration-time curve. The PPK parameters obtained for the structural
model were Ka = 0.74 h1 (12%); V/F = 71.7 L (6.0%) and CL/F = 8.45 L/h
(5.0%). The best correlation between OTX015 AUC values and dose was
observed from 10 to 120 mg dose levels (R2 = 0.71). The absorption phase
was linear and Tmax was between 1 and 4 h. Mean elimination half-life of
OTX015 for all patients was 5.8 h ( 1.1). In the PPK study, the best
descriptive model was obtained when LBM was considered in the analysis. A
correlation between CL/F and V/F was also observed for
OTX015.Conclusions: The PK of OTX015 is best described by a
one-compartment model. Preliminary PPK analysis considering only the dose
escalation cohort of the Phase I trial indicates that LBM is a good
predictor of the OTX015 PK profile. This model should be validated in the
ongoing expansion cohorts treated at 80mg QD.

