Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of EGFR mutation analysis performed by Sanger
sequencing versus real-time PCR (EGFR RGQ PCR Kit)


EGFR mutation analysis of exons 18, 19 and 21 is a standard analysis in
routine molecular pathology for prediction of response of EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The
aim of this study was to evaluate the mutation detection using two widely
used mutation analysis systems. For this purpose we analyzed exons 18, 19
and 21 of EGFR in 718 NSCLC with both nested PCR followed by direct
Sanger sequencing and the EGFR RGQ PCR Kit (Qiagen). 694/718 samples were
amplifiable and 676 samples allowed interpretable results by both
methods. We found mutations in 74/676 (10,1%) samples by Sanger
sequencing and in 91/676 (13,0%) using the RGQ Kit. There were 10/676
(1,5%) cases showing mutations only by Sanger Sequencing but not by the
RGQ Kit. These mutations comprised four common EGFR-TKI sensitivity
mutations in Exon21 (p.L858R (n = 2) and p.L861Q (n = 2)) as well as a
complex deletion-insertion in exon 19 (n = 1). The other 5 mutations
detected only by Sanger sequencing were uncommon and very rare mutations
located in exon 18 and 21 which cannot be detected by the RGQ Kit due to
its primer design. Vice versa, we found mutations in 21/676 samples using
the RGQ Kit but not with Sanger sequencing. 20 of these mutations were
common EGFR-TKI sensitivity mutations in exon 19 (deletions or complex
delins, n = 15) and in exon 21 (p.L858R, n = 5) as well as a p.G719X
mutation (n = 1) in exon 18. According to these data which includes
mutations only in exons 18, 19 and 21 but not in exon 20 the mutation
detection rate is higher using the RGQ-Kit than using the Sanger
sequencing method (13,0% vs. 10,1%) especially in detecting common EGFR
mutations associated with EGFR-TKI sensitivity. However the RGQ Kit fails
in detecting uncommon and rare EGFR mutations for that this Kit is not
designed and may produce non-informative results in some cases when CT
values are out of valid ranges whereas nested PCR followed by Sanger
sequencing may still work.

