Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biochemical alterations in BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi) resistant
melanoma cells increase their vulnerability to arginine deprivation


The BRAFi, has been applied to treat melanomas harboring (V600E)
mutation. While the response rate is high, resistance is inevitable.
Despite combination with MEK inhibitor which enhances the antitumor
efficacy as well as increases duration of response, patients ultimately
relapse. Therefore, there is an urgent need for second line treatment for
melanoma patients who are resistant to BRAFi treatment.In this study, we
found that BRAFi-resistant (BR) melanoma cells are susceptible to
arginine deprivation due to their inability to turn on argininosuccinate
synthetase (ASS), a key enzyme for arginine synthesis as well as their
inability to undergo autophagy. Thus, arginine deprivation using
pegylated arginine deiminase (ADI-PEG20, supplied by Polaris Inc.) which
degrades arginine to citrulline results in cell death. We established 6
BR cell lines from BRAF mutant (V600E) cell lines including ASS-negative
cell lines such as A375 and MEL-1220 (derived from a patient) and
ASS-positive and/or inducible cell lines include UACC-62, SK-MEL28,
A2058, and MEL-GP (derived from a patient) by continuous exposure to
vemurafenib at IC50 over 30 weeks. MTT, caspase activity, and Annexin
V/PI analyses showed that treatment with ADI-PEG20 (100ng/ml) for 72 hr
induced 2-3 fold increase in growth inhibition and 10-30% increase in
apoptosis in BR cells compared to their parental cells counterpart. The
xenograft mouse model also confirmed that ADI-PEG20 abrogated tumor
growth of A2058BR cells but only retarded growth seen in A2058 cells
(tumor growth inhibition (T/C ratio) in A2058 and A2058BR is 38.7% vs.
8.3%; T/CThe BRAFi, has been applied to treat melanomas harboring (V600E)
mutation. While the response rate is high, resistance is inevitable.
Despite combination with MEK inhibitor which enhances the antitumor
efficacy as well as increases duration of response, patients ultimately
relapse. Therefore, there is an urgent need for second line treatment for
melanoma patients who are resistant to BRAFi treatment.In this study, we
found that BRAFi-resistant (BR) melanoma cells are susceptible to
arginine deprivation due to their inability to turn on argininosuccinate
synthetase (ASS), a key enzyme for arginine synthesis as well as their
inability to undergo autophagy. Thus, arginine deprivation using
pegylated arginine deiminase (ADI-PEG20, supplied by Polaris Inc.) which
degrades arginine to citrulline results in cell death. We established 6
BR cell lines from BRAF mutant (V600E) cell lines including ASS-negative
cell lines such as A375 and MEL-1220 (derived from a patient) and
ASS-positive and/or inducible cell lines include UACC-62, SK-MEL28,
A2058, and MEL-GP (derived from a patient) by continuous exposure to
vemurafenib at IC50 over 30 weeks. MTT, caspase activity, and Annexin
V/PI analyses showed that treatment with ADI-PEG20 (100ng/ml) for 72 hr
induced 2-3 fold increase in growth inhibition and 10-30% increase in
apoptosis in BR cells compared to their parental cells counterpart. The
xenograft mouse model also confirmed that ADI-PEG20 abrogated tumor
growth of A2058BR cells but only retarded growth seen in A2058 cells
(tumor growth inhibition (T/C ratio) in A2058 and A2058BR is 38.7% vs.
8.3%; T/C<42% indicates significant inhibition). The results observed by
cyto-ID staining combined with fluorescent microscope and electron
microscope also exhibited 40-80% decrease in autophagosome formation in
BR cells compared to parental cells after treatment with ADI-PEG20.We
further found that BRAFi-resistance attenuated autophagy and ASS
re-expression due to loss of Atg5 and c-Myc. Atg5-overexpressed plasmid
rescued 12-35% apoptosis in MEL-1220BR and A2058BR cells through
autophagic process as evidenced by more autophagosome formation following
treatment with ADI-PEG20. The other mechanism leading to attenuated ASS
re-expression is decreased c-Myc (positive regulator of ASS
transcription). It is known that c-Myc stability is governed by
ubiquitination-dependent proteasomal degradation. Using
immunoprecipitation assay, our results showed that the levels of
deubiquitinating enzyme, USP28, were too low to prevent c-Myc from
ubiquitination. Overall, our data suggest that attenuated Atg5 which
halted autophagy and decreased c-Myc which prevented re-expression of ASS
made the BR cells vulnerable to cell death upon arginine deprivation.
Thus, ADI-PEG20 is a potential candidate for salvage therapy in BR
patients (Supported by R01CA152197).

