Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of microRNAs in the epigenetic silencing of CHD5, a tumor
suppressor in neuroblastoma


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB) is a tumor of the sympathetic nervous
system that is the most common extracranial solid tumor of childhood. NBs
show remarkable clinical heterogeneity, and we, along with others, have
identified different patterns of genomic change that underlie these
diverse clinical behaviors. We first identified 1p deletion as a
characteristic change in advanced stage NBs. CHD5, a tumor suppressor
gene, was first identified because of its location on 1p36. However,
mutation of the remaining allele of CHD5 is rare in these tumors.
Therefore, it is likely that epigenetic mechanisms play important roles
in CHD5 downregulation. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small RNAs that bind to
the 3 UTR to mediate downregulation of target gene expression by
translational repression or cleavage of the target gene message.
Dysregulation of CHD5 via miR-211 has been reported in colon cancer. In
order to understand the role of miRNA regulation of CHD5 in NBs, we
wanted to assess the function of all miRNAs that are predicted to target
CHD5.Method/approach: We used TargetScan, miRanda, MirTarget2 and other
prediction algorithms to identify miRNAs that were predicted to bind to
the CHD5-3UTR. We identified 18 miRNAs that were predicted by 2 or more
programs: miR-204-5p, -211, -216b, -17, -19ab, -20ab, -93, -106ab,
-130ab, -301ab, -454, -519d, -3666. We used a renilla-luciferase reporter
plasmid that contains 103 bp of the 3UTR of CHD5 targeted by all miRNAs
except miR-204, -211, - 219b, and -3666. We also created control plasmids
with no CHD5 3UTR insert and a mutated CHD5 3UTR with mutated miRNA
binding sites. Allstar siRNA served as an additional negative control. We
performed transient transfections in two NB cell lines, NLF (a MYCN
amplified cell line) and SY5Y (a MYCN nonamplified cell line), with the
reporter plasmid and miRNA mimic. We measured luciferase (internal
control) and renilla (reporter) activity.Results: Our results from the
luciferase reporter assay indicate that four miRNAs are strong candidates
for CHD5 downregulation in NB: miR-17, -93, -20b, and miR-106b. Each
exhibited a significant decrease of fluorescence activity in cells
transfected with CHD5 3UTR in comparison to cells transfected with either
of the control plasmids. Interestingly, MYCN upregulates three of the
four miRNA candidates: miR-17, -93, & -20b. We further confirmed
consistent downregulation of the CHD5 by all four miRNAs.Conclusion: CHD5
expression is downregulated by miR-17, -93, -2b, and 106b. MYCN
amplification and overexpression leads to upregulation of miR-17, -93,
and -20b, and this may lead to down regulation of CHD5.

