Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel integrated approach for deciphering the mitochondrial
mutation enigma in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common adult primary brain
tumor. It is highly malignant with 2-year survival of just 27.2%
following diagnosis. Treatment is hampered by its unique underlying
biology, including differential inter- and intra-tumor responses to
therapy.Impaired mitochondrial function is a common feature of cancer
cells in comparison to healthy cells. However, the precise contribution
of single mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations to this impairment, and
consequently to the development, progression and chemosensitivity of GBM
remains poorly described.To address this we have developed a novel
integrated approach where we have: (1) obtained complete mitochondrial
genomes from multiple GBM samples, (2) employed 3D structural mapping and
analysis to predict the function of non-synonymous mtDNA-encoded complex
III and IV mutations; (3) measured oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)
enzyme complex activities of GBM cell lines. Finally, to circumvent the
current inability to genetically transform human mtDNA, we have employed
humanized yeast technology to decipher the specific impact of single key
mtDNA mutations on cellular growth and OXPHOS complex activity.Over 200
mutations were identified in 42 GBM-mtDNAs using next generation
sequencing. This included 9 functional candidates in complexes III and
IV, with highly variable mutation loads, which were predicted to affect
corresponding enzyme activity. Most were GBM-specific and not found in
the general population, two were present in the germ-line and 43% of
tumors carried at least one functional candidate.Preliminary
spectrophotometric measurements indicate a striking diversity of OXPHOS
enzyme complex activity profiles between the GBM cell lines. One cell
line exhibited a combined increase in complex I, II, linked II/III and IV
activity compared to control. In 5 GBM cell lines, all complex I
activities were altered (either elevated or reduced) and all complex IV
activities were altered (mostly decreased), while the remaining cell line
exhibited decreases in both complex I and IV activity combined with an
increase in linked complex II/III activity.Analysis of yeast cells that
were genetically transformed to contain a single mutation that mimics the
most prevalent functional candidate identified in GBM to date: F18L,
revealed an alteration of complex III activity (quinol-cytochrome c
reduction) probably caused by a modification of the substrate quinol
binding.Using our approach, we show for the first time that a single
GBM-associated mtDNA mutation can have a direct effect on mitochondrial
function, raising the possibility that small mitogenomic elements could
contribute to the heterogeneous biology of GBM. This study paves the way
for the systematic study of other functional candidates using humanized
yeast technology, as well as other studies that explore their
contribution to GBM cell behavior and drug sensitivity.

