Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP53 mutations are mutually exclusive with FLT3 and NPM mutations
in AML patients and are strongly associated with complex karyotype and
poor outcome


AML is a heterogeneous disease with a variety of structural and numerical
chromosomal and genetic alterations that provided important prognostic
information capable to guide therapy and predict outcome. The reported
TP53 mutation rate in AML is low (2.1%). By contrast, the incidence of
FLT3 disruption is frequent (20-30%) and is an independent predictor of
unfavourable outcome of acquired clinical resistance to FLT3 inhibitors.
TP53 mutations in AML with a complex karyotype (CK) is higher (69-78%),
but few data are available for association between the most common AML
associated lesions such as FLT3, NPM1, DNMT3A, IDH2 and TP53 mutation or
CK.Aims: To investigate the frequency, the types of mutations, the
associated cytogenetic, the molecular abnormalities, the correlation with
known molecular alterations (FLT3, NPM, etc.) and the prognostic role
TP53 mutations in adult AML pts.Patients and Methods: 886 AML patients
were analysed for cytogenetic and for a panel of genetic alterations
(FLT3, NPM, WT1, DNMT3A, IDH1-2 etc). Of these, 200 adult AML pts were
also examined for TP53 mutations using several methods, including Sanger
sequencing, NGS and HiSeq 2000 platform (38/200) and were correlated with
cytogenetic analysis.Results: 55 pts (27.5%) showed 3 or more chromosome
abnormalities (CK-AML), 83 (41.5%) presented one or two cytogenetic
abnormalities (other-AML) and 43 pts (21.5%) have normal karyotype (nK).
In 19 cases the karyotype was not available.Sanger sequencing analysis
detected TP53 mutations on 29 patients with 36 different types of
mutations (32 deleterious point mutations; 4 deletions); seven pts (4%)
have 2 mutations. Mostly (23/29) of the TP53 mutated pts (79.3%) had CK
while only 6/29 (21%) mutated pts have no CK. Overall, between pts with
CK, TP53 frequency is 41.8% (P>0,0001).120 pts were analysed for
concomitant presence of TP53 mutations and FLT3/NPM1 disruption/mutation:
revealing a significant relation between pts with FLT3-ITD or NPM1 and
TP53 wild-type (p = 0.043 and 0.022 respectively).As for clinical outcome
alterations of TP53 were significantly associated with poor outcome (OS
and EFS pAML is a heterogeneous disease with a variety of structural and
numerical chromosomal and genetic alterations that provided important
prognostic information capable to guide therapy and predict outcome. The
reported TP53 mutation rate in AML is low (2.1%). By contrast, the
incidence of FLT3 disruption is frequent (20-30%) and is an independent
predictor of unfavourable outcome of acquired clinical resistance to FLT3
inhibitors. TP53 mutations in AML with a complex karyotype (CK) is higher
(69-78%), but few data are available for association between the most
common AML associated lesions such as FLT3, NPM1, DNMT3A, IDH2 and TP53
mutation or CK.Aims: To investigate the frequency, the types of
mutations, the associated cytogenetic, the molecular abnormalities, the
correlation with known molecular alterations (FLT3, NPM, etc.) and the
prognostic role TP53 mutations in adult AML pts.Patients and Methods: 886
AML patients were analysed for cytogenetic and for a panel of genetic
alterations (FLT3, NPM, WT1, DNMT3A, IDH1-2 etc). Of these, 200 adult AML
pts were also examined for TP53 mutations using several methods,
including Sanger sequencing, NGS and HiSeq 2000 platform (38/200) and
were correlated with cytogenetic analysis.Results: 55 pts (27.5%) showed
3 or more chromosome abnormalities (CK-AML), 83 (41.5%) presented one or
two cytogenetic abnormalities (other-AML) and 43 pts (21.5%) have normal
karyotype (nK). In 19 cases the karyotype was not available.Sanger
sequencing analysis detected TP53 mutations on 29 patients with 36
different types of mutations (32 deleterious point mutations; 4
deletions); seven pts (4%) have 2 mutations. Mostly (23/29) of the TP53
mutated pts (79.3%) had CK while only 6/29 (21%) mutated pts have no CK.
Overall, between pts with CK, TP53 frequency is 41.8% (P>0,0001).120 pts
were analysed for concomitant presence of TP53 mutations and FLT3/NPM1
disruption/mutation: revealing a significant relation between pts with
FLT3-ITD or NPM1 and TP53 wild-type (p = 0.043 and 0.022 respectively).As
for clinical outcome alterations of TP53 were significantly associated
with poor outcome (OS and EFS p<0.0001). The very worsened outcome of
TP53 mutations overcome the negative prognostic role of FLT3 mutations
(P0.0001).WES analysis done in 38 pts (33 TP53 wt and 5 pts TP53 mutated)
revealed no genes exclusively mutated in the 5 TP53 mutated
pts.Conclusions: Our data demonstrated that TP53 mutations occur in 14.5%
of AML with a higher frequency in the subgroup of CK-AML (pAML is a
heterogeneous disease with a variety of structural and numerical
chromosomal and genetic alterations that provided important prognostic
information capable to guide therapy and predict outcome. The reported
TP53 mutation rate in AML is low (2.1%). By contrast, the incidence of
FLT3 disruption is frequent (20-30%) and is an independent predictor of
unfavourable outcome of acquired clinical resistance to FLT3 inhibitors.
TP53 mutations in AML with a complex karyotype (CK) is higher (69-78%),
but few data are available for association between the most common AML
associated lesions such as FLT3, NPM1, DNMT3A, IDH2 and TP53 mutation or
CK.Aims: To investigate the frequency, the types of mutations, the
associated cytogenetic, the molecular abnormalities, the correlation with
known molecular alterations (FLT3, NPM, etc.) and the prognostic role
TP53 mutations in adult AML pts.Patients and Methods: 886 AML patients
were analysed for cytogenetic and for a panel of genetic alterations
(FLT3, NPM, WT1, DNMT3A, IDH1-2 etc). Of these, 200 adult AML pts were
also examined for TP53 mutations using several methods, including Sanger
sequencing, NGS and HiSeq 2000 platform (38/200) and were correlated with
cytogenetic analysis.Results: 55 pts (27.5%) showed 3 or more chromosome
abnormalities (CK-AML), 83 (41.5%) presented one or two cytogenetic
abnormalities (other-AML) and 43 pts (21.5%) have normal karyotype (nK).
In 19 cases the karyotype was not available.Sanger sequencing analysis
detected TP53 mutations on 29 patients with 36 different types of
mutations (32 deleterious point mutations; 4 deletions); seven pts (4%)
have 2 mutations. Mostly (23/29) of the TP53 mutated pts (79.3%) had CK
while only 6/29 (21%) mutated pts have no CK. Overall, between pts with
CK, TP53 frequency is 41.8% (P>0,0001).120 pts were analysed for
concomitant presence of TP53 mutations and FLT3/NPM1 disruption/mutation:
revealing a significant relation between pts with FLT3-ITD or NPM1 and
TP53 wild-type (p = 0.043 and 0.022 respectively).As for clinical outcome
alterations of TP53 were significantly associated with poor outcome (OS
and EFS p<0.0001). The very worsened outcome of TP53 mutations overcome
the negative prognostic role of FLT3 mutations (P0.0001).WES analysis
done in 38 pts (33 TP53 wt and 5 pts TP53 mutated) revealed no genes
exclusively mutated in the 5 TP53 mutated pts.Conclusions: Our data
demonstrated that TP53 mutations occur in 14.5% of AML with a higher
frequency in the subgroup of CK-AML (p<0.0001) and are mutually exclusive
with FLT3 and/or NPM1; they predicted to be deleterious and significantly
correlated with worse prognosis and may confer resistance to conventional
and innovative therapy. For these reasons, TP53 mutation screening should
be recommended at least in CK-AML pts. ELN, AIL, AIRC, PRIN, 2010-12 L.
Bolondi, FP7 NGS-PTL project.

