Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Supramolecular assembly of antibody-drug conjugates using CORDLink
platform for targeted drug delivery


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) have emerged as a promising class of
cancer therapeutics for targeted drug delivery. However, the synthesis of
novel linkers for generating stable ADCs remains a key goal in the
development of effective ADCs. Here we describe a unique linker
(CORDLink) platform technology based on coordination chemistry that
maintains the integrity of the antibody without impacting binding to the
target. Using an anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody and camptothecin, as
examples of the targeting antibody and a highly cytotoxic payload
respectively, we demonstrate that the linker enables the formation of a
stable ADC via supramolecular coordinate bond. The robustness of our
process and consistency was characterized through a variety of analytical
tools, such as SE-HPLC, CEX-HPLC and HI-HPLC, while peptide mapping was
done to elucidate the exact site of attachment. The ADCs were found to
remain intact in media and serum using a fluorescence-based RP-HPLC
method. The anti-HER2 antibody recognizes HER2 receptors on cancer cells
inducing internalization of the conjugate. The ADC showed significant
cytotoxicity in cells expressing HER2 receptor but not in HER2 negative
cell lines with IC50s in the nM range. We have established robust
characterization methods to validate and confirm the integrity of the
prototype ADCs in vitro. Studies are underway to further evaluate these
molecules in vivo. The CORDLink technology offers a highly versatile
platform that can be leveraged to deliver a broad range of payloads to
selected cells using different targeting molecules.

