Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preparation of peptide-based Shp2 substrates with phosphatase
activity-dependent fluorescence


The Shp2 protein tyrosine phosphatase mediates signal transduction of
growth factor receptors and regulates cellular activities critical to
tumor growth and metastasis. Shp2-activating mutations are associated
with several types of leukemias and solid tumors, making Shp2 an
attractive target for anticancer development. While there are reports of
Shp2 inhibitors, there is a need for compounds with higher potency and
improved selectivity. One approach to the discovery of new Shp2
inhibitors is via high throughput screening (HTS) of small molecule
libraries. The small molecule probe 6,8-difluoro-4-methylumbelliferyl
phosphate (DiFMUP) is currently a widely used substrate for phosphatases
and has been used to assay Shp2 activity. However, DIFMUP binds only the
catalytic site of the phosphatase and is unlikely to reveal compounds
that are selective for Shp2 in an HTS. There is clearly a need to develop
probes that are more sensitive and more specific for a particular
phosphatase to identify Shp2 selective inhibitors and to measure Shp2
activity. We have developed a new phosphopeptide-like Shp2 substrate that
becomes fluorescent upon enzyme-mediated hydrolysis, based on a
phosphopeptide sequence that has high affinity for Shp2. We will report
details of the novel Shp2 activity probe and its use as a reagent for HTS
and determination of Shp2 inhibitor potency. We will also report on its
suitability for HTS and preliminary results from screening and its
potential for the discovery of novel Shp2 inhibitors. We will discuss the
binding mode of the probe, based on novel co-crystal structures of
related peptides with Shp2.

