Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increase of MET gene copy number confers resistance to a
monovalent MET antibody and establishes drug dependence


The tyrosine kinase receptor encoded by the MET oncogene is one of the
most frequently altered oncogenes in human cancer. The relevant role
played by the MET oncogene in cancer progression led to the development
of specific inhibitors targeting MET, some of which are now in advanced
phases of clinical trials.Previous experience has shown that the main
limit to the efficacy of most targeted treatments is the advent of
resistance. Mechanisms underlying resistance to MET-specific small
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have been already described, while
nothing is known about resistance to MET monoclonal antibodies, nor about
bypassing resistance to chemical TKIs by antibodies or vice-versa.A
monovalent form of an anti-MET monoclonal antibody (MV-DN30) was
previously generated to target MET by promoting receptor shedding,
inactivation and by inhibiting the MET-mediated invasive growth program
both in vitro and in vivo cancer models. In our study EBC1 lung cancer
cells that are MET-addicted as a consequence of gene amplification and
thus sensitive to MET inhibitors, including the MV-DN30 were used as cell
model. Upon prolonged treatment of these cells with the MV-DN30 we
generated EBC1 cells resistant to this antibody and found that resistance
was due to a further increase of MET gene copy number and a dramatic
over-expression of the MET receptor. Such an excess of expression
saturated the shedding activity of MV-DN30, and prevented both the
efficient down-regulation of the MET receptor from the surface and the
inhibition of the ensuing constitutive activation.Notably,
antibody-resistant cells became drug-dependent, since the removal of
MV-DN30 led them to death due to an excess of MET signal and a
concomitant p38MAPK activation. Moreover, antibody-resistant cells
remained MET-addicted and were still sensitive to MET TKIs.Finally, cells
made resistant to MET specific TKIs were still sensitive to treatment
with the antibody MV-DN30.These findings suggest that a discontinuous or
combined treatment by antibodies and chemical kinase inhibitors may
increase the clinical response and bypass resistance to anti-MET targeted
therapies.

