Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LRH-1 expression in breast cancer tissue and its association with
phenotype and DNA methylation


IntroductionThe LRH-1 gene (NR5A2) located on chromosome 1q codes for a
transcription factor implicated in promoting cell proliferation and
migration in breast cancer. The gene contains five CpG islands and codes
for several mRNA isoforms. However, little is known about its expression
in breast cancer tissues. In this study, we examine LRH-1 expression
patterns in breast cancer tissue by immunohistochemistry, its association
with phenotypic features, and the relationship of DNA methylation with
LRH-1 expression.MethodsLRH-1 immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was
performed on tissue microarray sections containing 329 cases of breast
cancer (175 ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), 154 invasive carcinomas).
Methylation was assessed using methylation sensitive high resolution
melting assays targeted towards regions in the second and fifth CpG
islands of LRH-1. These CpG islands are situated immediately upstream of
the transcription start sites of mRNA transcripts 1 and 3, respectively.
CpG island 2 (CpG2) methylation was assessed in 96 cases (65 DCIS, 31
invasive carcinoma), methylation of CpG island 5 (CpG5) was assessed in
99 cases (66 DCIS, 33 invasive carcinoma), and methylation data for both
CpG islands was obtained in 85 cases (55 DCIS, 30 invasive
carcinoma).ResultsIHC staining revealed four patterns of nuclear staining
in breast cancer tissues. Nuclear staining was present as either in a
finely granular pattern (pattern 1), a sparse punctate pattern (pattern
2), a dense punctate pattern (pattern 2+), or as a coarse granular
pattern (pattern 3). Patterns 1 and 2 were considered LRH-1 low and
patterns 2+ and 3 were considered LRH-1 high. LRH-1 high staining was
significantly associated with adverse phenotypic features including high
grade (pIntroductionThe LRH-1 gene (NR5A2) located on chromosome 1q codes
for a transcription factor implicated in promoting cell proliferation and
migration in breast cancer. The gene contains five CpG islands and codes
for several mRNA isoforms. However, little is known about its expression
in breast cancer tissues. In this study, we examine LRH-1 expression
patterns in breast cancer tissue by immunohistochemistry, its association
with phenotypic features, and the relationship of DNA methylation with
LRH-1 expression.MethodsLRH-1 immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was
performed on tissue microarray sections containing 329 cases of breast
cancer (175 ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), 154 invasive carcinomas).
Methylation was assessed using methylation sensitive high resolution
melting assays targeted towards regions in the second and fifth CpG
islands of LRH-1. These CpG islands are situated immediately upstream of
the transcription start sites of mRNA transcripts 1 and 3, respectively.
CpG island 2 (CpG2) methylation was assessed in 96 cases (65 DCIS, 31
invasive carcinoma), methylation of CpG island 5 (CpG5) was assessed in
99 cases (66 DCIS, 33 invasive carcinoma), and methylation data for both
CpG islands was obtained in 85 cases (55 DCIS, 30 invasive
carcinoma).ResultsIHC staining revealed four patterns of nuclear staining
in breast cancer tissues. Nuclear staining was present as either in a
finely granular pattern (pattern 1), a sparse punctate pattern (pattern
2), a dense punctate pattern (pattern 2+), or as a coarse granular
pattern (pattern 3). Patterns 1 and 2 were considered LRH-1 low and
patterns 2+ and 3 were considered LRH-1 high. LRH-1 high staining was
significantly associated with adverse phenotypic features including high
grade (p<0.0005), non-luminal phenotype (p = 0.003), estrogen receptor
(ER) negativity (p = 0.008), progesterone receptor (PgR) negativity (p =
0.003) and HER2 amplification (p = 0.039). The presence of CpG5
methylation together with absent or low levels of CpG2 methylation was
significantly associated with LRH-1-high IHC expression (p = 0.033) and
aggressive phenotypic features of high grade (p = 0.001), non-luminal
intrinsic subtype (p = 0.021), ER negativity (p = 0.010), PgR negativity
(p = 0.021), and HER2 amplification (p = 0.043).ConclusionsThis study
identifies, for the first time, distinct nuclear IHC staining patterns in
breast cancer tissue and the association of LRH-1 IHC-high patterns with
aggressive phenotypic features. Differential DNA methylation of two
regions is associated with LRH-1 IHC staining pattern, indicating a role
for DNA methylation in the control of differential mRNA isoform
expression and thus protein expression.

