Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a method to measure acetylated histone H4 in the
nuclei of circulating myeloid cells as a surrogate tissue for the
pharmacodynamics of HDAC inhibitors in the treatment of solid tumors


Valproate has been used clinically as an anticonvulsant for the last 50
years and is one of the major drugs used in the management of epilepsy.
More recently it has been observed that valproate also functions as a
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, and this has kindled interest in
the drug as an anti-cancer agent. We have developed and validated an
assay to measure the proportion of myeloid cells in peripheral blood with
nuclei localised acetylated Histone H4 detectable by immunofluorescence
and imaging flow cytometry. Whole blood samples from healthy volunteers
were incubated for 4 hours with 0, 50, 150 or 300 g/ml of sodium
valproate at 37C with agitation. Following ex vivo exposure the samples
were transferred to Transfix stabilising tubes and stored at 4C to mimic
collection from the clinic. Leukocytes were isolated from the fixed and
EDTA anti-coagulated blood by red blood cell lysis and centrifugation
prior to permeabilisation with ice cold methanol and staining with PE
conjugated anti-acH4 and DAPI. The stained cells were run through an
Imagestream MkII imaging flow cytometer with excitation at 488 and 405nm.
Images of myeloid and lymphoid cells were resolved by area of the cell
and side scatter. An x/y plot of acH4 staining intensity over bright
detail similarity between acH4 and DAPI staining was used to identify
myeloid cells with nuclear acH4 staining.Ex vivo incubation of whole
blood samples with pharmacologically relevant concentrations of valproate
resulted in a measurable increase in the proportion of myeloid cells with
acH4 positive nuclei in 4/5 samples. The percentage of myeloid cells with
acH4 positive nuclei increased from 0.01-0.29% in untreated samples to
0.75-7.0% following exposure to 300 g/ml valproate. Validation
experiments were carried out to assess variance due to staining and
imaging of single incubations with 0 and 300 g/ml valproate when
processed independently. Coefficient of variation values were high, 110%
(0.6 0.67%) and 42% (3.1 1.3%), respectively. However, the 5 fold
increase in positive myeloid cells retained statistical significance (p
Valproate has been used clinically as an anticonvulsant for the last 50
years and is one of the major drugs used in the management of epilepsy.
More recently it has been observed that valproate also functions as a
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, and this has kindled interest in
the drug as an anti-cancer agent. We have developed and validated an
assay to measure the proportion of myeloid cells in peripheral blood with
nuclei localised acetylated Histone H4 detectable by immunofluorescence
and imaging flow cytometry. Whole blood samples from healthy volunteers
were incubated for 4 hours with 0, 50, 150 or 300 g/ml of sodium
valproate at 37C with agitation. Following ex vivo exposure the samples
were transferred to Transfix stabilising tubes and stored at 4C to mimic
collection from the clinic. Leukocytes were isolated from the fixed and
EDTA anti-coagulated blood by red blood cell lysis and centrifugation
prior to permeabilisation with ice cold methanol and staining with PE
conjugated anti-acH4 and DAPI. The stained cells were run through an
Imagestream MkII imaging flow cytometer with excitation at 488 and 405nm.
Images of myeloid and lymphoid cells were resolved by area of the cell
and side scatter. An x/y plot of acH4 staining intensity over bright
detail similarity between acH4 and DAPI staining was used to identify
myeloid cells with nuclear acH4 staining.Ex vivo incubation of whole
blood samples with pharmacologically relevant concentrations of valproate
resulted in a measurable increase in the proportion of myeloid cells with
acH4 positive nuclei in 4/5 samples. The percentage of myeloid cells with
acH4 positive nuclei increased from 0.01-0.29% in untreated samples to
0.75-7.0% following exposure to 300 g/ml valproate. Validation
experiments were carried out to assess variance due to staining and
imaging of single incubations with 0 and 300 g/ml valproate when
processed independently. Coefficient of variation values were high, 110%
(0.6 0.67%) and 42% (3.1 1.3%), respectively. However, the 5 fold
increase in positive myeloid cells retained statistical significance (p <
0.05, t-test). We have developed a semi-quantitative cell based imaging
method to identify increased histone H4 acetylation of myeloid cells
following exposure to valproate. This assay will be used to detect
valproate HDAC inhibition in myeloid cells as a surrogate tissue in
children being treated as part of the European SIOP Ependymoma 2012 trial.

