Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective cytotoxicty and mechanism of Myrothamnus flabellifolius,
an edible medicinal plant, on acute myeloid leukemia cells


Current therapies for acute myeloid leukemia involve chemotherapy and
radiation, which cause damage to normal and cancerous cells. There is a
dire need to discover novel drugs that target only cancer cells.
Myrothamnus flabellifolius is a South African resurrection plant known
for its anti-viral, anti-microbial and anti-inflammatory properties.
Human myeloid leukemia (HL-60) cells and normal (TK-6) lymphocytes were
treated with the methanolic extract of M. flabellifolius. Cancer cells
treated with extract depicted a significant reduction in viability as
compared to normal cells. The first part of this project involved
fractionation of the methanolic extract using HPLC and testing each
fraction on the normal and leukemic cell lines to find a fraction that
selectively killed the cancer cells. A phytochemical analysis was also
conducted for characterization of the anticancer compounds. In terms of
mechanism, the loss in HL-60 viability was accompanied by the induction
of caspase dependent apoptosis by way of caspase-7 cleavage. Heat shock
proteins are molecular chaperones that aid in protein reassembly under
stressful conditions and protect cells from apoptosis. TK-6 cells express
heat shock protein 70 at a high level while HL-60 cells do not express
the protein under normal conditions. The expression of HSP70 exhibits a
positive correlation with the viability of cells post treatment with
extract, indicating that this vital protein plays an important role in
the survival of cells post treatment with M. flabellifolius extract.

