Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergism from combinations of monofunctional platinums with
phytochemicals in human ovarian cancer cell lines


AimsTo apply combinations of monofunctional platinums with selected
phytochemicals in human ovarian tumor models towards overcoming platinum
resistance.Recently research has been directed at combinations of
platinum drugs with tumor active phytochemicals towards a means of
overcoming platinum resistance in ovarian cancer. In this study, two
designed monofunctional planaramineplatinum(II) complexes,
tris(8-hydroxyquinoline)monochloroplatinum(II) chloride (LH3) and
tris(benzimidazole)chloroplatinum(II) chloride (LH4), were investigated
for activity against human ovarian A2780, cisplatin-resistant A2780
(A2780cisR) and ZD0473-resistant A2780 (A2780ZD0473R) cancer cell lines,
alone and in combination with curcumin, genistein, querceitin, capsaicin
and resveratrol.MethodsLH3 and LH4 were synthesized starting with
potassium tetracloroplatinate and phytochemicals were obtained from
commercial sources. Cytotoxicity was determined using MTT reduction
assay. Cellular levels of glutathione before and after treatment were
also determined. Interaction of the designed compounds with pBR322
plasmid DNA and damage to DNA in A2780 and A2780cisR cell lines due to
interaction with designed compounds alone and in combination with
phytochemicals were also investigated. Proteomic studies involving 2D-gel
electrophoresis and mass spectrometry were carried out to identify key
proteins associated with drug resistance in A2780 and A2780cisR cell
lines.Results and DiscussionLH3 and LH4 were found to be much more active
than cisplatin against the resistant tumour models and greatest synergism
in activity was observed when combinations of LH3 and LH4 with the
phytochemicals were administered as a bolus. For combinations of LH3 and
LH4 with the phytochemicals, platinum accumulation and the level of
Pt-DNA binding were greater in the resistant A2780cisR cell line than in
the parental A2780 cell line.Proteomic studies confirmed significant
changes in expression of a number of proteins in A2780cisR cell line
compared to the A2780 parent cell line. Greater activity of LH3 and LH4
than cisplatin against the resistant ovarian cell lines indicates that
monofunctional platinums can be novel drug candidates with different
cytotoxicity profiles from those of Pt drugs currently in use. The steric
properties conveyed by the heterocylic ligands play a significant role in
modulating their cytotoxicities and binary combination with tumour active
phytochemicals can serve to further enhance drug
efficacy.ConclusionMonofunctional platinums containing bulky planaramine
ligands in combination with tumor active phytochemicals have the
potential of overcoming platinum resistance in ovarian cancer cell
lines.AcknowledgmentThis research was partly supported by Biomedical
Science Research Initiative Grant and Biomedical Science Cancer Research
Donation Fund.

