Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting prostate cancer metastasis with novel small molecule
agonists of EphA2


During tumor progression, EphA2 receptor can gain ligand-independent
pro-oncogenic functions due to Akt activation and reduced ephrin-A ligand
engagement. The effects can be reversed by ligand stimulation, which
triggers the intrinsic tumor suppressive signaling pathways of EphA2
including inhibition of PI3/Akt and Ras/ERK pathways. These observations
argue for development of small molecule agonists for EphA2 as potential
tumor intervention agents. Through virtual screening and cell-based
assays, we report here the identification and characterization of
doxazosin as a novel small molecule agonist for EphA2 and EphA4, but not
for other Eph receptors tested. NMR studies revealed extensive contacts
of doxazosin with EphA2/A4, recapitulating both hydrophobic and
electrostatic interactions recently found in the EphA2/ephrin-A1 complex.
Clinically used as an 1-adrenoreceptor antagonist (Cardura) for treating
hypertension and benign prostate hyperplasia, doxazosin activated EphA2
independent of 1-adrenoreceptor. Similar to ephrin-A1, doxazosin
inhibited Akt and ERK kinase activities in an EphA2-dependent manner.
Treatment with doxazosin triggered EphA2 receptor internalization, and
suppressed haptotactic and chemotactic migration of prostate cancer,
breast cancer, and glioma cells. Moreover, in an orthotopic xenograft
model, doxazosin reduced distal metastasis of human prostate cancer cells
and prolonged survival in recipient mice. More potent and selective
derivatives of doxazosin have been developed with enhanced efficacy
against prostate cancer and glioblastoma. To our knowledge, this is the
first example of small molecule agonists of a receptor tyrosine kinase
that is capable of inhibiting malignant behaviors in vitro and in vivo.

