Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aa intake reduces the aberrant crypt foci development in a
colitis-associated carcinogenesis model in male Wistar rats


Colorectal cancer is a main cause of cancer death in the western world.
In Brazil, it is the third more common neoplasia in both men and women
(INCA, 2014). In our previous study (Fragoso et al., Food Chem Toxicol.,
2013), we showed that spray-dried aa (Euterpe oleraceae Mart.) pulp
intake retarded the development of colon cancer in male Wistar rats.
Therefore, the objective of this research was to evaluate the potential
protection of dietary freeze-dried aa pulp using a chemically-induced
colon carcinogenesis and colitis-associated model in male Wistar rats.
The animals were randomly distributed into four groups: G1, DMH
[dimethylhydrazine] + TNBS [2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid] + basal
diet; G2, DMH + TNBS + basal diet with 5% aai pulp; G3, DMH + TNBS +
basal diet with 7.5% aai pulp; G4, DMH + TNBS + basal diet with 0.2% of
NAC [N-acetylcysteine]. The acute colitis was induced with the
administration of 10 mg of TNBS dissolved in 0.25 ml 50% ethanol (v/v) by
means of a Teflon cannula inserted 8 cm into the anus. At the end of the
25th week, animals were sacrificed for evaluation of Aberrant Crypt Foci
(ACF) in the colon. Unsenctioned and fixed colons were analyzed for total
aberrant crypt (AC) and total ACF and ACF multiplicity under methylene
blue staining. The results were analyzed by ANOVA followed by post hoc
Tukey test. A significant reduction in total ACF and AC for G2 when
compared to G1 (p 0.001) was seen. Regarding the ACF multiplicity, it was
observed a significant reduction in ACF with 4-10 aberrant crypts for G2
and G4 and for ACF with >10 aberrant crypts for G2-G4 groups in relation
to the G1 group (p = 0.001, respectively). Also, it was observed a
significant reduction in the number of total AC in the distal colon from
the G2 and G4 groups compared to G1 group (p = 0.003) and in the medial
colon from the G2 group compared to G1 group (p = 0.016). These results
suggest that aa intake may reduce the number of AC and ACF and the number
of ACF with more than four aberrant crypts in this chemically-induced
colon carcinogenesis and colitis-associated model in rats.

