Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Emergence of multiple EGFR extracellular mutations during
cetuximab treatment in colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer (CRC) patients who respond to the anti-EGFR antibody
cetuximab often develop resistance within several months of initiating
therapy. To design new lines of treatment the molecular landscape of
resistant tumors must be ascertained. We investigated the role of
mutations in the EGFR signalling axis on the acquisition of resistance to
cetuximab in patients and cellular models.Mutational profiling was
performed on both biopsies collected from 37 CRC patients who became
refractory to cetuximab and on a collection of cetuximab-resistant
derivatives obtained from CRC cells sensitive to EGFR blockade.The
genetic profile of tumor specimens obtained after cetuximab treatment
revealed the emergence of a complex pattern of mutations in EGFR, KRAS,
NRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA genes, including two novel EGFR ectodomain
mutations. Mutational profiling of cetuximab resistant cells
recapitulated the molecular landscape observed in clinical samples and
revealed three additional EGFR ectodomain alleles.Structural modelling
showed that these mutations are located in the cetuximab-binding region,
except for one mutant. Functionally, EGFR ectodomain mutations prevent
binding to cetuximab but a subset is permissive for interaction with
panitumumab.In conclusion, we reported that colorectal tumors evade EGFR
blockade by constitutive activation of downstream signalling effectors
and through mutations affecting receptor-antibody binding. Both
mechanisms of resistance may occur concomitantly. Our data have
implications for designing additional lines of therapy for CRC patients
who relapse upon treatment with anti-EGFR antibodies.

