Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quality assessment of circulating cell-free DNA using multiplexed
droplet-digital PCR


Recent proof-of-principle studies have demonstrated potential utility of
sequencing cell-free DNA in cancer diagnostics. However, little is
understood about the effect of fragment size distributions in plasma DNA
on the performance of sequencing-based assays. We developed a multiplexed
assay to perform one-step analysis of DNA quantity and integrity from
minute amounts of cell-free DNA using picoliter droplet digital PCR.
Primers were designed to amplify 5 short PCR products (67-71 bp) and 4
long PCR products (439-522 bp) from independent quiescent regions of the
human genome. Oligonucleotide probes targeting each of the short and long
products were labeled with fluorescent dyes FAM and TET respectively. We
evaluated the performance of our assay using control human genomic DNA
sheared using sonication to an average of 150 bp, 300 bp, 500 bp and 1000
bp fragment sizes. We observed that relative quantities of short and long
PCR products reflect integrity of sheared input DNA. We further observed
that accurate quantification and assessment of integrity could be
achieved using picogram amounts of cell-free DNA (as few as 200 pg in
current assessments). Finally, our results were predictive of diversity
and obtainable depth-of-coverage in next-generation sequencing libraries
made from cell-free DNA samples.

