Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo analysis of RAD51 foci induction in fresh tumor tissue: a
promising new tool for the identification of homologous
recombination-deficient tumors


Purpose. BRCA1 and BRCA2 related breast and ovarian tumors respond very
well to treatment with PARP inhibitors (PARPi) because of their
deficiency in homologous recombination (HR). We have indications that a
substantial number of ovarian tumors might have deficiencies in HR
unrelated to germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. A functional assay to
assess HR efficacy might therefore allow identification of additional
ovarian cancer patients that could benefit from PARPi
treatment.Experimental procedure. Unselected fresh ovarian tumor samples
were collected from patients undergoing surgery or ascites/pleural fluid
drainage. Samples were irradiated with ionizing radiation ex vivo, fixed
after 2 hours and embedded in paraffin. Sections were stained with
hematoxylin and eosin and examined by pathologist. The presence of RAD51
foci in replicating cells as visualized by immunofluorescence was used as
a functional read out for HR proficiency.Results. We determined the
ability to induce RAD51 foci following radiation in ex vivo cultured
ovarian tumor samples that contained sufficient numbers of replicating
cells (n = 13). RAD51 foci formation was absent (A). Genetic and
epigenetic analyses of the other samples are ongoing.Conclusion. The ex
vivo analysis of RAD51 foci induction in fresh tumor tissue is a
promising new tool to identify HR deficient tumors. Not only is it an
important time saving strategy compared to BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation analysis,
it may also identify a much broader patient population that will be
eligible for the treatment with PARP inhibitors.

