Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reducing amplification artifacts in highly multiplex amplicon
sequencing by using molecular barcodes


BackgroundPCR amplicon sequencing has been widely used as a targeted
approach for both DNA and RNA sequence analysis. Highly multiplex PCR has
further enabled the enrichment of hundreds of amplicons in one simple
reaction. At the same time, the performance of PCR amplicon sequencing
can be negatively affected by issues such as high duplicate reads,
polymerase artifacts and PCR amplification bias. Recently, people have
made good progress at addressing those shortcomings by incorporating
molecular barcodes into PCR primer design. So far, most work has been
demonstrated using one to a few pairs of primers, which limits the size
of the region one can analyze at one time.ResultsWe described a simple
protocol, which enables the use of molecular barcodes in highly multiplex
PCR with hundreds of amplicons. Using this protocol and reference
materials, we studied how molecular barcodes can increase the accuracy of
variant calling at very low allelic frequency and reduce PCR
amplification bias. We also evaluated its utility in profiling FFPE
samples.ConclusionsWe demonstrated the successful implementation of
molecular barcodes in highly multiplex PCR, at a scale many folds beyond
earlier work. We showed that the new protocol combined the benefits of
both highly multiplex PCR and molecular barcodes, i.e. the analysis of a
very large region, low DNA input requirement, very good reproducibility
and the ability to detect as low as 1% mutation with minimal false
positives.

