Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quercetin overcomes chemotherapy resistance in triple negative
breast cancer


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is one of the most aggressive breast
cancers and is characterized by poor prognosis and high possibilities of
tumor relapse. TNBC lacks specific receptors that are targets for breast
cancer treatment options. Plant flavonoids have been identified to
inhibit tumor growth and metastasis in various cancers. Our study
revealed that quercetin, one of the major flavonoids present in fruits,
vegetables, green tea, and red wine inhibit TNBC migration and invasion.
Our data indicate that quercetin is able to induce the expression of
E-cadherin and also down regulate vimentin levels in TNBC cells. Further
the cellular localization of -catenin is also altered by quercetin
treatment. Also, studies identified that quercetin is capable of
inhibiting the chemotherapy induced TGF- signaling in TNBC cells, and
that it would decrease the development of chemotherapy resistance in
TNBC. Quercetin inhibits the TGF- induced phosphorylation status of
smad-2 in drug resistant cells. Further, quercetin is able to inhibit the
enhanced migration and mammosphere formation of chemoresistant TNBC
cells. Taken together, our findings revealed that quercetin is a
promising natural product that increases the anti-cancer effect of
chemotherapy drug in TNBC. Future studies in TNBC animal models are
needed to confirm the therapeutic efficacy of quercetin in TNBC.

