Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New antimicrotubule phenyl
4-(2-oxo-3-alkylimidazolidin-1-yl)benzenesulfonate prodrugs bioactivated
selectively in breast cancer cells by CYP1A1: An innovative approach for
the personalized treatment of breast cancer


Breast cancers are the most common cancers among American women.
Unfortunately, they are patient developing chemoresistance against
conventional treatments or are diagnosed with more aggressive tumours and
poorer prognosis. Novel therapeutic approaches are therefore required to
treat patients that do not respond to current therapies.To this end, we
developed a new family of highly potent antimitotics referred to as
phenyl 4-(2-oxoimidazolidin-1-yl)benzenesulfonates (PIB-SOs). To improve
the biopharmaceutical properties of these new antimicrotubule agents, we
modified their 1-phenylimidazolidin-2-one moiety by substituting the -NH
group of the imidazolidone moiety with linear and branched alkyl chains
that lead to prodrugs referred to as phenyl
4-(2-oxo-3-alkylimidazolidin-1-yl)benzenesulfonates (PAIB-SOs). PAIB-SOs
are highly selective (ratio >1000) and cytocidal toward specific
hormono-, non-hormono- and chemoresistant human breast cancer cells such
as MCF-7, SK-BR-3, T47D and the triple negative MDA-MB-468 cells.
PAIB-SOs arrest cell cycle progression in G2/M phase and disrupt the
cytoskeleton in sensitive lines.Co-incubation of PAIB-SOs such as 22,
with CYP1A1 inhibitors at subtoxic concentrations with MDA-MB-468 cells
significantly reduced their antiproliferative activity. Moreover, using
the ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase assay and CYP1A1 Supersome, 22 shows
high affinity toward CYP1A1 and its selective biotransformation into its
parent cytocidal PIB-SO (CEU-602). Furthermore, 22 induces CYP1A1
expression in MCF7 by 3-folds. Finally, 22 was also found to be active in
vivo in a CAM assay on HT-1080 cells stably transfected with CYP1A1 while
being inactive in the same cell line not expressing CYP1A1.These results
suggest that PAIB-SO are prodrugs that could be use as an innovative
approach for future personalized breast cancer treatments.

