Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of the steroid inactivating UGT2B28 enzyme is
associated with high circulating androgens, tumor aggressiveness and
adverse prostate cancer outcome


Androgen inactivation occurs mainly through the glucuronidation
conjugative reaction mediated by uridine
diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase enzymes, namely UGT2B28. This metabolic
pathway controls systemic and local androgen bioavailability along with
other biotransformation and transport pathways. In this study, we
examined the relationship between UGT2B28 protein expression, circulating
steroid levels and prostate cancer phenotype. To study distribution of
the UGT2B28 protein in prostatic tissues, we used a specific antipeptide
antibody displaying no cross-reactivity against highly identical UGT2B
family members. Findings revealed that UGT2B28 cytoplasmic staining of
secretory cells was distinctive of early stage tumorigenesis (i.e.
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia) and cancer cells with a variable
nuclear staining, whereas normal prostate presented only nuclear enzyme
expression. Using tissue microarray analysis, we analyzed 239 localized
prostate cancer cases that underwent radical prostatectomy. Compared to
patients with prostate tumors displaying absent or weak UGT2B28 staining,
those with tumors presenting strong UGT2B28 nuclear expression had
significantly lower PSA levels at diagnosis (20%; p = 0.043). UGT2B28
expression in the cytoplasm was also correlated with Gleason scores
(p0.03) and nodal invasion status (p = 0.024). After adjustments for
known prognostic markers including PSA, Gleason score, margin and nodal
status, tumor size, smoking and germline UGT2B28 deletion status,
overexpression of the UGT2B28 protein was an adverse and independent
prognostic factor associated with disease recurrence and/or death (HR =
2.82; 95%CI, 1.09-7.36; p = 0.033). Remarkably, prostatic overexpression
of UGT2B28 concurs with 30% higher circulating levels of testosterone (p
= 0.004) and dihydrotestosterone (p = 0.002), measured by mass
spectrometry. Our observations demonstrate that an increased expression
of the UGT2B28 enzyme is associated with circulating steroid hormone
levels, disease aggressiveness and risk of cancer progression.

