Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphodiesterase 10A inhibition suppresses lung tumor cell growth
by activating PKG to inhibit ras and Wnt signaling


We recently reported that phosphodiesterase 10A (PDE10) is overexpressed
in colon tumors and essential for colon tumor cell growth (Li et al.,
Oncogene 2014), but a role in lung cancer has not been well studied.
Human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines were found to express
appreciably higher PDE10 levels compared with normal airway epithelial
cells, while silencing of PDE10 expression with siRNA or inhibition of
PDE10 activity with small molecule inhibitors selectively inhibits NSCLC
cell growth. Here we study the mechanism by which PDE10 inhibitors
suppress NSCLC cell growth. At concentrations effective for inhibiting
NSCLC cell growth, the PDE10 inhibitor, PQ10 rapidly increases
intracellular cGMP levels as determined by a luminescence biosensor
assay. Within the same concentration range and time period, PQ10
activates PKA and PKG, demonstrated by an increase in phosphorylation of
the substrate, VASP at Ser157 and Ser239, respectively. Under the same
conditions, PQ10 suppresses the phosphorylation of Erk1/2
(Thr202/Tyr204), MEK1/2 (Ser217/Ser221) and down-stream p90RSK (Ser380).
Similarly, PQ10 increases the phosphorylation of -catenin at Ser552, but
showed no effect on phospho-Ser675 levels. After longer durations of
treatment, PQ10 reduces -catenin levels, as well as proteins that are
regulated by -catenin-dependent TCF/LEF-transcriptional activity, such as
survivin and cyclin D1. These effects were mimicked by a novel
structurally unrelated PDE10 inhibitor, ADT-020 that selectively inhibits
the growth of NSCLC cells and increases cGMP levels in a manner similar
to PQ10. ADT-020 also activates PKG in NSCLC cells demonstrated by higher
phospho-Ser239 VASP levels and lower -catenin and survivin levels. These
observations suggest that PDE10 inhibition and activation of PKG can
simultaneously suppress ras and Wnt signaling that are essential for lung
tumor cell growth. Supported by NIH grants 1R01CA155638 and 1R01CA131378
(Piazza).

