Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic and predictive value of plasma protein signatures in a
phase I/II trial of abituzumab combined with cetuximab/irinotecan in
second-line KRAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC)


The humanized monoclonal IgG2 antibody abituzumab (EMD 525797, DI17E6)
inhibits integrin heterodimers. The phase I/II POSEIDON trial
(NCT01008475) demonstrated a trend toward improved overall survival (OS)
in codon 2 KRAS wild-type mCRC. Integrin 6 expression
(immunohistochemistry based) above median identified a poor prognosis
patient (pt) subgroup and was predictive of improved OS. Previous
exploratory analysis identified individual plasma proteins as negatively
prognostic and predictive for OS with abituzumab treatment. We report
here the results of exploratory bioinformatic analyses aimed at
identifying prognostic or predictive pretreatment plasma protein
signatures.Plasma proteins were analyzed (highly protein-specific
aptamers [SomaLogic system]) in samples taken at pretreatment screening.
Analyses focused on 888 proteins that passed quality control. Groups of
genes, termed signatures, with common function or regulation captured in
the MSigDB database formed the basis for our analyses. We identified a
set of signatures comprising genes with coherent expression patterns that
we analyzed for the association of their scores with OS in the treatment
arms. Cox models were analyzed per signature to assess the association of
continuous and median-thresholded signature scores with OS in the
standard of care (SoC) arm to identify prognostic markers, in the
biomarker high/low groups, or across all patients to identify predictive
markers.Pretreatment plasma samples from 192/216 pts (122 samples from
pts treated with abituzumab; 70 from pts treated with SoC alone) with
full SomaLogic data were available for analysis of protein levels and
signature scores. Sixty-two signatures comprised genes with coherent
expression patterns across samples. Among these, we identified a
poor-prognosis signature comprising five proteins expressed in
neutrophils (CD48, MPO, ELANE, CTSG, PECAM1; HR = 3.28 [1.72-6.28];
uncorrected p = 0.0003; Bonferroni-corrected p = 0.02). Other signatures
predicted benefit from abituzumab when scores were higher (or lower) than
median, but were not prognostic in the SoC arm. These signatures yielded
HRs of 0.40-0.55 and uncorrected p values The humanized monoclonal IgG2
antibody abituzumab (EMD 525797, DI17E6) inhibits integrin heterodimers.
The phase I/II POSEIDON trial (NCT01008475) demonstrated a trend toward
improved overall survival (OS) in codon 2 KRAS wild-type mCRC. Integrin 6
expression (immunohistochemistry based) above median identified a poor
prognosis patient (pt) subgroup and was predictive of improved OS.
Previous exploratory analysis identified individual plasma proteins as
negatively prognostic and predictive for OS with abituzumab treatment. We
report here the results of exploratory bioinformatic analyses aimed at
identifying prognostic or predictive pretreatment plasma protein
signatures.Plasma proteins were analyzed (highly protein-specific
aptamers [SomaLogic system]) in samples taken at pretreatment screening.
Analyses focused on 888 proteins that passed quality control. Groups of
genes, termed signatures, with common function or regulation captured in
the MSigDB database formed the basis for our analyses. We identified a
set of signatures comprising genes with coherent expression patterns that
we analyzed for the association of their scores with OS in the treatment
arms. Cox models were analyzed per signature to assess the association of
continuous and median-thresholded signature scores with OS in the
standard of care (SoC) arm to identify prognostic markers, in the
biomarker high/low groups, or across all patients to identify predictive
markers.Pretreatment plasma samples from 192/216 pts (122 samples from
pts treated with abituzumab; 70 from pts treated with SoC alone) with
full SomaLogic data were available for analysis of protein levels and
signature scores. Sixty-two signatures comprised genes with coherent
expression patterns across samples. Among these, we identified a
poor-prognosis signature comprising five proteins expressed in
neutrophils (CD48, MPO, ELANE, CTSG, PECAM1; HR = 3.28 [1.72-6.28];
uncorrected p = 0.0003; Bonferroni-corrected p = 0.02). Other signatures
predicted benefit from abituzumab when scores were higher (or lower) than
median, but were not prognostic in the SoC arm. These signatures yielded
HRs of 0.40-0.55 and uncorrected p values <0.05 when OS of treated and
untreated pts were compared in signature-selected populations (results
did not withstand multiple testing corrections).The functional coherence
of the identified prognostic signature, i.e. all proteins are expressed
in neutrophils, is striking. High neutrophil protein levels identify poor
prognosis pts. This signature may indicate an antitumor neutrophilic
response in these pts, and may be a surrogate for tumor burden. The
predictive plasma protein signatures constitute stratification hypotheses
to be assessed in future exploratory biomarker analyses in abituzumab
trials in mCRC.

