Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing intratumoral cellular heterogeneity in human
glioblastoma xenografts by 30+ parameter single-cell mass cytometry


Introduction: Glioblastoma tumors contain dramatic intratumoral
heterogeneity at the level of cellular phenotypes. High-parameter
single-cell platforms such as mass cytometry offer an opportunity to
simultaneously measure tumor subpopulations with unexpected combinations
of differentiation markers, as well as stromal cells, vasculature, and
infiltrating immune cells.Methods: A subcutaneous patient-derived
xenograft from an adult with glioblastoma was enzymatically digested into
a single-cell suspension. Half of the cells were treated with epidermal
growth factor (EGF) at 20 ng/mL for 15 minutes. Both samples were then
stained with a 32-marker antibody panel and measured by single-cell mass
cytometry. The antibody panel included surface-expressed markers of
stemness and differentiation, as well as intracellular markers to monitor
cell cycle, apoptosis, and growth factor signaling. Unsupervised spectral
clustering was used to segregate >200,000 tumor cells into 13 tumor cell
subsets. Inducible signaling phenotypes were quantified in these subsets
by comparing binding of phospho-specific antibodies in the stimulated
sample, relative to the unstimulated control.Results: Many previously
reported markers of cancer stem cells were detectable, but they did not
agree on a single population of cells. Although the CD133+ fraction was
rare (Introduction: Glioblastoma tumors contain dramatic intratumoral
heterogeneity at the level of cellular phenotypes. High-parameter
single-cell platforms such as mass cytometry offer an opportunity to
simultaneously measure tumor subpopulations with unexpected combinations
of differentiation markers, as well as stromal cells, vasculature, and
infiltrating immune cells.Methods: A subcutaneous patient-derived
xenograft from an adult with glioblastoma was enzymatically digested into
a single-cell suspension. Half of the cells were treated with epidermal
growth factor (EGF) at 20 ng/mL for 15 minutes. Both samples were then
stained with a 32-marker antibody panel and measured by single-cell mass
cytometry. The antibody panel included surface-expressed markers of
stemness and differentiation, as well as intracellular markers to monitor
cell cycle, apoptosis, and growth factor signaling. Unsupervised spectral
clustering was used to segregate >200,000 tumor cells into 13 tumor cell
subsets. Inducible signaling phenotypes were quantified in these subsets
by comparing binding of phospho-specific antibodies in the stimulated
sample, relative to the unstimulated control.Results: Many previously
reported markers of cancer stem cells were detectable, but they did not
agree on a single population of cells. Although the CD133+ fraction was
rare (<5% of cells), it contained three distinct subpopulations of
phenotypically distinct cells. The most informative markers for
discriminating the tumor subsets were markers of stemness (i.e. CD133,
CD44, Sox2) or integrin expression (i.e. CD49e, CD49f, CD51). The
primitive cells (i.e. Sox2+) exhibited higher basal kinase activity
across multiple pathways, including markers of cell division (i.e.
Histone H3 pSer28). Short-term stimulation with EGF induced distinct
responses in each of the different CD133+ subsets.Conclusions:
Single-cell phenotyping by mass cytometry produced rich developmental and
functional profiles of glioblastoma cell subsets. Subpopulations of
primitive (CD133+) cells can exist in a single glioblastoma tumor and
exhibit distinct signaling responses to external stimulation. Altogether,
these results validate the use of this platform for investigation of the
intratumoral cellular heterogeneity of solid neural tumors with this
platform. Work is underway to identify correlations between intratumoral
cellular phenotypes and upstream driver mutations in a larger cohort.

