Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An agonistic antibody to EphA2 exhibits anti-tumor effect to human
melanoma


EphA2 is a member of the Eph family of receptor tyrosine kinases and is
highly expressed in aggressive human cancers, including melanoma.
Recently, EphA2 has been found to be integral player in cancer formation
and expected as a target for antibody therapy. In this study, we have
investigated the therapeutic effect of various anti-EphA2 mAbs that were
recently established in our laboratory. Cell surface expression of EphA2
on melanoma cell lines was analyzed by flow cytometry and therapeutic
effects of anti-EphA2 mAbs were investigated using cell proliferation,
cell migration, invasion and antibody-mediated drug cytotoxicity assays.
We found that human melanoma cell lines expressed EphA2 on their surface,
while normal dermal fibroblasts and melanocytes were negative for EphA2.
Recombinant human protein of EphrinA1 (a natural ligand for EphA2) and
anti-EphA2 mAbs could not suppress melanoma cell proliferation, however,
one of agonistic anti-EphA2 mAb, termed SHM16, inhibited metastatic
potential such as migration and invasive properties of human melanoma. In
contrast, an antagonistic anti-EphA2 mAb, SHM17, had no effect on
migration and invasive assay. In addition, drastic growth inhibition and
cell cytotoxicity were found in targeted delivery of immunotoxin by
SHM16. In conclusion, these findings indicate a promising role for EphA2
as a target for antibody treatment in melanoma and enhance the
therapeutic effect as an agonistic antibody to EphA2.

