Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic effect of sorafenib is attenuated by
tumor-infiltrating Ly6G+ myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and is
restored by anti-interleukin-6 (IL-6) antibody treatment in an orthotopic
mouse liver cancer model


Purpose: CD11b+Gr1+ MDSC, a subset of bone marrow cells with
immune-suppressive and proangiogenic activities, has been shown to
mediate resistance to antiangiogenic therapy in various cancer models.
The significance of tumor-infiltrating MDSCs in mediating the resistance
to sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has not been
elucidated.Experimental designs: We adopted an orthotopic mouse liver
cancer model by implanting BNL murine liver cancer cells in BALB/c mice,
which were treated with sorafenib at the dose of 5 mg/Kg/d from day 8
after tumor cells implantation for 1 week or 3 weeks.Results: Both
proportion and number of CD11b+Gr1+Ly6G+Ly6Clo MDSCs markedly increased
in liver tumors, but not in spleens. This increment of tumor-infiltrating
CD11b+Gr1+Ly6G+Ly6Clo MDSCs was found at one week of sorafenib treatment,
when intra-tumor levels of multiple proangiogenic factors including VEGF,
MCP-1 and IL-6 significantly increased, and the ratios of immune
suppressors versus interferon-gamma expressing effectors tilted toward
immune-suppression. CD11b+Gr1+Ly6G+Ly6Clo MDSCs isolated from liver
tumors treated with sorafenib expressed higher levels of CD115, CD124,
CD274 or CCR2 on cell surface and higher transcripts of pro-angiogenic
factors, including VEGF, COX2, Bv8/Prok2, STAT3, S100A8, S100A9, or NOX2
than those from liver tumors treated with vehicle. Tumor-derived
CD11b+Gr1+Ly6G+Ly6Clo MDSCs from sorafenib-treated mice were capable of
suppressing specific tumor cell killing of CD8+ T cells and inducing the
generation of immunosuppressive CD4+ T cells. These MDSCs also induced
angiogenesis, as demonstrated in increased vascular density and
hemoglobin. In sorafenib- treated mice, the concomitant use of anti-IL-6
antibody alleviated the early infiltration of CD11b+Gr1+Ly6G+Ly6Clo MDSCs
in liver tumors, decreased the levels of anti-angiogenic factors, reduced
vascular density, restored the proliferative activity of
tumor-infiltrating T cells and suppressed the liver tumor growth
synergistically.Conclusions: Our data indicate that intratumor
infiltration of CD11b+Gr1+Ly6G+Ly6Clo MDSCs impaired the therapeutic
efficacy of sorafenib through promoting immune-suppression and
angiogenesis. Targeting this subset of MDSCs by anti-IL-6 antibody could
improve the anti-HCC efficacy of sorafenib.(This work was supported by
Grant. NSC 102-2314-B-002 -144 -)

