Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased expression of PDK4 in bladder cancer cells


Introduction and Objectives. Cancer cells have a high rate of glucose
metabolism due to an increased requirement for biomolecules and energy.
In some solid tumors, cancer cells divert pyruvate to lactate even in the
presence of oxygen (Warburg effect) providing a survival advantage in an
acidic and anaerobic environment. Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC)
catalyzes oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA and links
glycolysis to energetic and anabolic functions of the tricarboxylic acid
cycle. PDC activity is regulated by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK)
and pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase (PDP). In a laser capture,
microarray pilot study we found PDK4 expression to be increased 33-fold
in high-grade invasive vs low-grade bladder cancers. The aim of this
study was to examine the expression of PDK and PDP genes in bladder
cancer cells.Methods. Bladder cancer (HTB2, HTB4, HTB5, HTB9, HT1376) and
benign urothelial (UROtsa) cell lines were cultured in defined media.
Total RNA was extracted and quantitative PCR performed. Cell numbers were
counted using a Coulter counter. Cell cycle and apoptosis analyses were
performed using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Transient
transfections with PDK4 gene specific siRNAs were performed.Results. In
the present study, PDK4 expression was increased (20-100 fold;
pIntroduction and Objectives. Cancer cells have a high rate of glucose
metabolism due to an increased requirement for biomolecules and energy.
In some solid tumors, cancer cells divert pyruvate to lactate even in the
presence of oxygen (Warburg effect) providing a survival advantage in an
acidic and anaerobic environment. Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC)
catalyzes oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA and links
glycolysis to energetic and anabolic functions of the tricarboxylic acid
cycle. PDC activity is regulated by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK)
and pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase (PDP). In a laser capture,
microarray pilot study we found PDK4 expression to be increased 33-fold
in high-grade invasive vs low-grade bladder cancers. The aim of this
study was to examine the expression of PDK and PDP genes in bladder
cancer cells.Methods. Bladder cancer (HTB2, HTB4, HTB5, HTB9, HT1376) and
benign urothelial (UROtsa) cell lines were cultured in defined media.
Total RNA was extracted and quantitative PCR performed. Cell numbers were
counted using a Coulter counter. Cell cycle and apoptosis analyses were
performed using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Transient
transfections with PDK4 gene specific siRNAs were performed.Results. In
the present study, PDK4 expression was increased (20-100 fold; p<0.01) in
bladder tumor vs. benign cell lines. Expression of the other three PDK
isoforms was increased 3-5 fold. Investigation of transcription factors
known to regulate the expression of PDK4 revealed overexpression of PPAR
(8-22 fold; pIntroduction and Objectives. Cancer cells have a high rate
of glucose metabolism due to an increased requirement for biomolecules
and energy. In some solid tumors, cancer cells divert pyruvate to lactate
even in the presence of oxygen (Warburg effect) providing a survival
advantage in an acidic and anaerobic environment. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex (PDC) catalyzes oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to
acetyl-CoA and links glycolysis to energetic and anabolic functions of
the tricarboxylic acid cycle. PDC activity is regulated by pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) and pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase (PDP).
In a laser capture, microarray pilot study we found PDK4 expression to be
increased 33-fold in high-grade invasive vs low-grade bladder cancers.
The aim of this study was to examine the expression of PDK and PDP genes
in bladder cancer cells.Methods. Bladder cancer (HTB2, HTB4, HTB5, HTB9,
HT1376) and benign urothelial (UROtsa) cell lines were cultured in
defined media. Total RNA was extracted and quantitative PCR performed.
Cell numbers were counted using a Coulter counter. Cell cycle and
apoptosis analyses were performed using fluorescence-activated cell
sorting. Transient transfections with PDK4 gene specific siRNAs were
performed.Results. In the present study, PDK4 expression was increased
(20-100 fold; p<0.01) in bladder tumor vs. benign cell lines. Expression
of the other three PDK isoforms was increased 3-5 fold. Investigation of
transcription factors known to regulate the expression of PDK4 revealed
overexpression of PPAR (8-22 fold; p<0.05-0.001) and HIF1 (3.7 - 13.4
fold; pIntroduction and Objectives. Cancer cells have a high rate of
glucose metabolism due to an increased requirement for biomolecules and
energy. In some solid tumors, cancer cells divert pyruvate to lactate
even in the presence of oxygen (Warburg effect) providing a survival
advantage in an acidic and anaerobic environment. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex (PDC) catalyzes oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to
acetyl-CoA and links glycolysis to energetic and anabolic functions of
the tricarboxylic acid cycle. PDC activity is regulated by pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) and pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase (PDP).
In a laser capture, microarray pilot study we found PDK4 expression to be
increased 33-fold in high-grade invasive vs low-grade bladder cancers.
The aim of this study was to examine the expression of PDK and PDP genes
in bladder cancer cells.Methods. Bladder cancer (HTB2, HTB4, HTB5, HTB9,
HT1376) and benign urothelial (UROtsa) cell lines were cultured in
defined media. Total RNA was extracted and quantitative PCR performed.
Cell numbers were counted using a Coulter counter. Cell cycle and
apoptosis analyses were performed using fluorescence-activated cell
sorting. Transient transfections with PDK4 gene specific siRNAs were
performed.Results. In the present study, PDK4 expression was increased
(20-100 fold; p<0.01) in bladder tumor vs. benign cell lines. Expression
of the other three PDK isoforms was increased 3-5 fold. Investigation of
transcription factors known to regulate the expression of PDK4 revealed
overexpression of PPAR (8-22 fold; p<0.05-0.001) and HIF1 (3.7 - 13.4
fold; p<0.01 only in HT1376). Expression of PDP1 and PDP2 was also
assessed (0.4 - 2.2 fold, not significant). The ratio of PDK/PDP
expression was found to be 101 (PDK4/PDP1) and 138 (PDK4/PDP2) for HTB9;
196 and 42 for HT1376; 94 and 50 for HTB5 and 57 and 26.3 for HTB4. To
examine the impact of PDK4 inhibition, cells were treated with a known
inhibitor, dichloroacetate (DCA), for 0-72 h. A significant decrease in
cell number was detected in a dose dependent manner (10-50 mM). HTB2, a
low grade cell line, showed a significant decline in cell number (70%)
when incubated with 50 mM DCA for 72 h (pIntroduction and Objectives.
Cancer cells have a high rate of glucose metabolism due to an increased
requirement for biomolecules and energy. In some solid tumors, cancer
cells divert pyruvate to lactate even in the presence of oxygen (Warburg
effect) providing a survival advantage in an acidic and anaerobic
environment. Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) catalyzes oxidative
decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA and links glycolysis to
energetic and anabolic functions of the tricarboxylic acid cycle. PDC
activity is regulated by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) and pyruvate
dehydrogenase phosphatase (PDP). In a laser capture, microarray pilot
study we found PDK4 expression to be increased 33-fold in high-grade
invasive vs low-grade bladder cancers. The aim of this study was to
examine the expression of PDK and PDP genes in bladder cancer
cells.Methods. Bladder cancer (HTB2, HTB4, HTB5, HTB9, HT1376) and benign
urothelial (UROtsa) cell lines were cultured in defined media. Total RNA
was extracted and quantitative PCR performed. Cell numbers were counted
using a Coulter counter. Cell cycle and apoptosis analyses were performed
using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Transient transfections with
PDK4 gene specific siRNAs were performed.Results. In the present study,
PDK4 expression was increased (20-100 fold; p<0.01) in bladder tumor vs.
benign cell lines. Expression of the other three PDK isoforms was
increased 3-5 fold. Investigation of transcription factors known to
regulate the expression of PDK4 revealed overexpression of PPAR (8-22
fold; p<0.05-0.001) and HIF1 (3.7 - 13.4 fold; p<0.01 only in HT1376).
Expression of PDP1 and PDP2 was also assessed (0.4 - 2.2 fold, not
significant). The ratio of PDK/PDP expression was found to be 101
(PDK4/PDP1) and 138 (PDK4/PDP2) for HTB9; 196 and 42 for HT1376; 94 and
50 for HTB5 and 57 and 26.3 for HTB4. To examine the impact of PDK4
inhibition, cells were treated with a known inhibitor, dichloroacetate
(DCA), for 0-72 h. A significant decrease in cell number was detected in
a dose dependent manner (10-50 mM). HTB2, a low grade cell line, showed a
significant decline in cell number (70%) when incubated with 50 mM DCA
for 72 h (p< 0.01). HTB5, a high-grade cell line with a higher PDK4
expression, had a greater decline (92%) with same treatment
(pIntroduction and Objectives. Cancer cells have a high rate of glucose
metabolism due to an increased requirement for biomolecules and energy.
In some solid tumors, cancer cells divert pyruvate to lactate even in the
presence of oxygen (Warburg effect) providing a survival advantage in an
acidic and anaerobic environment. Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC)
catalyzes oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA and links
glycolysis to energetic and anabolic functions of the tricarboxylic acid
cycle. PDC activity is regulated by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK)
and pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase (PDP). In a laser capture,
microarray pilot study we found PDK4 expression to be increased 33-fold
in high-grade invasive vs low-grade bladder cancers. The aim of this
study was to examine the expression of PDK and PDP genes in bladder
cancer cells.Methods. Bladder cancer (HTB2, HTB4, HTB5, HTB9, HT1376) and
benign urothelial (UROtsa) cell lines were cultured in defined media.
Total RNA was extracted and quantitative PCR performed. Cell numbers were
counted using a Coulter counter. Cell cycle and apoptosis analyses were
performed using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Transient
transfections with PDK4 gene specific siRNAs were performed.Results. In
the present study, PDK4 expression was increased (20-100 fold; p<0.01) in
bladder tumor vs. benign cell lines. Expression of the other three PDK
isoforms was increased 3-5 fold. Investigation of transcription factors
known to regulate the expression of PDK4 revealed overexpression of PPAR
(8-22 fold; p<0.05-0.001) and HIF1 (3.7 - 13.4 fold; p<0.01 only in
HT1376). Expression of PDP1 and PDP2 was also assessed (0.4 - 2.2 fold,
not significant). The ratio of PDK/PDP expression was found to be 101
(PDK4/PDP1) and 138 (PDK4/PDP2) for HTB9; 196 and 42 for HT1376; 94 and
50 for HTB5 and 57 and 26.3 for HTB4. To examine the impact of PDK4
inhibition, cells were treated with a known inhibitor, dichloroacetate
(DCA), for 0-72 h. A significant decrease in cell number was detected in
a dose dependent manner (10-50 mM). HTB2, a low grade cell line, showed a
significant decline in cell number (70%) when incubated with 50 mM DCA
for 72 h (p< 0.01). HTB5, a high-grade cell line with a higher PDK4
expression, had a greater decline (92%) with same treatment (p< 0.01).
Further, we observed growth inhibition by cell count with siRNA knockdown
of PDK4. Our preliminary data on cell cycle analysis showed an enhanced
number of tumor cells in G1 phase and a decrease in S-phase.Conclusions.
PDK4 gene expression was found to be higher in bladder cancer cell lines.
Both inhibition and knock down of PDK4 resulted in impaired cell growth
with cell cycle arrest at the G1 phase. Taken together these data suggest
that PDK4 may prove to be a novel therapeutic target in the management of
bladder cancer.Source of Funding. The Leo & Anne Albert Charitable Trust

