Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of miR-30c-2* in clinical outcome and drug resistance in
HPV-infected non-small cell lung cancer


Lung cancer is leading cause of cancer death in Taiwanese women who are
mostly to be life-time never smokers. Majority of drugs and combinations
are used to treat with smoking lung cancer patients, not for nonsmokers.
However, the 5-year survival rate in lung cancer patients remains 15%
during the past three decades. Therefore, dissolving tumor recurrence and
drug resistance is urgent needed for improving outcome in lung cancer,
especially in nonsmokers. Mir-30c-2* has been considered to be tumor
suppressor gene in various cancers. MiR-30c-2* levels were associated
with in gemcitabine sensitivity of lung cancer cells. Down-regulation of
miR-30c promotes tumor invasion via an increased in MTA1 expression. Our
previous reports have indicated that HPV16/18 infection may be involved
in Taiwanese lung tumorigenesis. Preliminary data showed that miR-30C-2*
levels were elevated 45-fold in E6-knockdown TL-1 cells as compared with
parental cells with non-specific RNAi tranfection. More interestingly,
MTA-1 expression was negatively correlated with miR-30C-2* in lung tumors
from lung cancer patients. Expression levels of MTA-1 were positive
correlated with tumor stage and nodal metastasis in tumor tissues of lung
cancer patients. Our cell model studies also found that miR-30C-2*
suppressed by E6 could contribute to tumor metastasis and drug resistance
via an increased in MTA-1 expression. These results were showed that
miR-30C-2* levels in patients tumor tissues could be useful to predict
outcome and therapeutic response and to select useful therapy drugs for
lung cancer patients, especially in patients with HPV-infection.

