Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDM2 silencing promotes tumor-initiating cells in osteosarcoma and
breast cancer


Chemotherapy has made remarkable strides in the past century to alleviate
tumor burden across most cancer types, yet it remains ineffective at
achieving complete tumor remission. To improve chemotherapy efficacy and
patient survival, novel drugs will require a greater mechanistic
understanding of tumor initiating cell (TIC) regulatory pathways.
Intratumoral heterogeneity is a major obstacle for conventional targeted
treatment modalities, which select for aggressive phenotypes with
acquired drug resistance and TIC enrichment. Here we focus on elucidating
the role of Mdm2 in mediating TIC levels in osteosarcoma (MG-63, Saos2)
and breast cancer (MDA 231, MDA 468, and BT474) cell lines. We
demonstrate Mdm2 silencing by ShRNA results in increased levels of Nanog,
Oct4a, and Sox2, and diminished expression of ER and ER by western blot.
We observed an increase in the immunophenotypic expression of CD133 in
ShMdm2 osteosarcoma and breast cancer cell lines by flow cytometry. Our
data provides the first evidence that loss of Mdm2 results in increased
TIC population. Further analysis will examine the affects of TIC using
small molecular inhibitors to Mdm2. This insight will contribute to the
molecular foundations defining the role of Mdm2 in TIC and will determine
if targeting Mdm2 therapeutically is a prognostic indicator for
recurrence.

