Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A monoclonal antibody against laminin alpha 4 inhibits both MCAM
and integrin-a6b1 binding, blocks tumor cell adhesion in vitro and slows
melanoma tumor growth in vivo


Laminin is an extracellular matrix molecule that is secreted as a
trimeric protein composed of an , and chain. There are five distinct
laminin chains that impart distinct binding and signaling activities for
cell adhesion, migration, and differentiation in a tissue-specific
fashion. Laminin a4 (LAMA4) is expressed by vascular endothelial cells
throughout the body, but is also overexpressed by cells within tumors of
different origin compared to healthy human tissue. LAMA4 serves as a
ligand for the cell adhesion receptors MCAM and a6b1 integrin, as well as
for cell surface heparin sulfate proteoglycans. In order to probe how the
MCAM/Laminin interaction contributes to tumor growth, we screened for
LAMA4-specific monoclonal antibodies that block MCAM binding. We
identified several such antibodies, and found that a subset also inhibits
LAMA4 binding to a6b1 integrin, indicating that MCAM and a6b1 integrin
recognize a similar region of LAMA4. Examining cells from multiple types
of tumors, we found that these antibodies were potent inhibitors of tumor
cell adhesion to LAMA4 in vitro. Finally, with in vivo administration, we
demonstrated dose-dependent inhibition of human melanoma tumor growth in
a mouse xenograft model, accompanied by morphologic changes in LAMA4
tumor distribution. These findings suggest that the MCAM/a6b1 integrin
binding activity of LAMA4 contributes to both tumor adhesion and growth
and that LAMA4 may provide a therapeutic drug target for several
different oncology indications.

