Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SYD985, a novel HER2-targeting antibody-drug conjugate, shows
strong antitumor activity in primary USC cell lines with low (1+) and
moderate (2+) HER2/Neu expression


Introduction:Uterine serous carcinoma (USC) is an aggressive form of
endometrial cancer which carries an extremely poor prognosis. Up to 35%
of USC may overexpress the HER2/neu oncogene at strong (i.e., 3+) levels
and and additional 45% of USC express HER2/Neu at moderate (2+) or low
(1+) levels. For tumors with moderate/low HER2/neu expression, there is
no sufficient targeted therapy. SYD985 (Synthon Biopharmaceuticals BV,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands) is a novel HER2-targeting antibody-drug
conjugate (ADC) composed of the mAb trastuzumab linked to a highly potent
DNA-alkylating agent (i.e., duocarmycin). The objective of this study was
to explore the anti-tumor activity of SYD985 and to compare it to
trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) in USC in in vitro and in vivo
studies.Methods:Nine primary USC cell lines were evaluated for HER2/neu
surface expression by IHC and flow cytometry and gene amplification using
FISH assays. The cytotoxicity of SYD985 and T-DM1 was evaluated using
cell lines with differential HER2/Neu expression (i.e., 1+, 2+, and 3+).
Proliferation and viability experiments were performed using propidium
iodide-based, flow cytometry assays. In vivo activity of SYD985 in mouse
xenograft models is ongoing.Results:SYD985 was 55 to 115 times more
potent when compared to T-DM1 in primary USC cell lines with 1+ and 2+
HER2/neu expression. Specifically, in the HER2/neu 1+ the IC50's for
SYD985 and T-DM1 were 0.065 g/mL and 3.58 g/mL, respectively (p = 0.004).
In the HER2/neu 2+ cell lines the IC50's of SYD985 and T-DM1 were 0.016
g/mL and 1.82 g/mL, respectively (p = 0.005). In the HER2/neu 3+ cell
lines a statistical trend was noted when comparing the cytotoxicity of
SYD985 with T-DM1; the IC50's were 0.011 g/mL and 0.035 g/mL,
respectively (p = 0.06).Conclusions:SYD985 is a novel ADC endowed with
remarkable activity against not only USC with strong (3+) HER2/neu
overexpression but also (as previously shown for SYD985 in breast cancer)
versus USC with low to moderate (i.e., 1+/2+) HER2/neu expression. SYD985
is significantly more potent than T-DM1 in comparative in vitro
experiments. Currently, in vivo experiments in USC xenografts not
responsive to T-DM1 are ongoing. This is a significant discovery as we do
not currently have an adequate targeted therapy to HER2/neu 1+ and 2+
expressing tumors. Thus, clinical studies with SYD985 in patients with
biologically aggressive endometrial cancer (e.g., USC) resistant to
standard salvage chemotherapy are warranted.

