Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analysis of genetic variations of genes involved in
DNA damage response pathways or cell cycle checkpoints and treatment
outcome in non-small cell lung cancer patients treated with platinum
doublets


Genes involved in DNA damage response (DDR) pathways or cell cycles
checkpoints (CCC) are thought to be closely related to effect of platinum
doublets, backbone in treatment for lung cancer patients. We tried to
evaluate validity of germ-line variations of all genes related to DDR or
CCC as potential predictive biomarker of treatment outcome in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with platinum
doublets. A total of 967 NSCLC patients treated with platinum doublets as
front line chemotherapy was enrolled and divided randomly into three
sets: screening, training and validation. For screening set, whole exons,
-1,000 bps upstreams, and splicing junctions in the 170 genes related to
DDR or CCC were analyzed using next generation sequencing, then genetic
variations were selected with several criterions such as minor allele
frequency > 5%, call rate > 90%, p value for HWE > 0.001, and impact of
genetic variation. Their effects on progression free survival or response
to platinum doublets were evaluated in two phases: training and
validation process. Clinical characteristics were not different between
training (n = 372) and validation (n = 381) cohorts. A total of 4,697
genetic variations and 7 In/Del were identified in screening set, then
232 genetic variations and 7 In/Del from 118 genes were finally selected
with predefined criterions. In training cohort, 29 genetic variations
were found to be associated with progression free survival or response.
However, the effects of these genetic variations were not failed to be
validated. In subgroup analysis with non-adenocarcinoma patients, CLSPN
(rs79083467), MSH3 (rs32952), and RAD51C (rs12946397) were shown to be
associated with progression free survival of the patients (cox p values
for CLSPN, MSH3, RAD51C: 0.028, 0.022, 0.035 in training cohort; 0.046,
0.026, 0.008, respectively in validation cohort). In this study, we have
failed to show validity of the germ-line variations in predicting
treatment outcome of NSCLC patients treated with platinum doublets. This
result show germ-line variations related to pharmacodynamics have a
limited value in predicting platinum effect.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

