Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evolutionary novel genes expressed in fish tumors determine
progressive evolutionary characters


The origin of evolutionary novel genes is connected with the origin and
evolution of the novel organismal functions and the increase in
morphological complexity of multicellular organisms. Novel gene acquire
new or altered functions. Here we describe that evolutionary novel genes,
expressed predominantly in transgenic fish tumors after their induced
regression, determine progressive evolutionary characters and are
conserved in human.We used a sample of genes, which were activated in
inducible krasV12 transgenic zebrafish tumors according to the results of
RNASeq data. Genes from our sample were expressed after HCC regression
upon kras inactivation. The search of orthologs by different tools, such
as blastx and psiblast, with e-value cut off not less than 10-3 and query
coverage more than 50%, discovered that considerable proportion of
tumor-specifically expressed genes are evolutionary novel, i.e. their
orthologs are not found in Lamprey. 63 of these novel genes have
orthologs in humans. Gene ontology (GO) data were used to analyze their
functions. According to the results of GO some of the genes have
functions not characteristic to fish. Among known functions of the human
orthologues of evolutionary novel genes of zebrafish (vs. Lamprey) there
are some important morphogenetic functions. For example, genes ccdc40,
lmx1ba and lepa acquired functions in lung, embryonic utera and placenta,
i.e. organs originated in taxa higher than fish. A large proportion of
genes from our sample are connected with retina type eye, heart and brain
development.

