Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting interdependent signaling pathways to increase the
durability and magnitude of response: promising combination therapy with
dual mTORC1/2 inhibitors and CDK4/6 inhibitors


Two emerging mechanisms of endocrine resistance in estrogen receptor
positive (ER+) breast cancers include the activation of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) / mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) pathway and the de-coupling of cell cycle control from ER
signaling via de-regulation of the cyclin D/cyclin dependent kinase
(CDK4/6) pathway. In this study, we hypothesized that combining
inhibitors of both pathways using the dual mTORC1 and mTORC2 inhibitor
AZD2014 and the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib would elicit an improved
tumor response over agents that inhibit either pathway alone. Moreover,
we hypothesized that combined inhibition of CDK4/6 and TORC1/2 together
with inhibition of ER signaling, would cause a profound anti-tumor effect
in breast cancer models.In breast cancer cell lines, the combination of
AZD2014 and palbociclib caused a synergistic inhibitory effect on cell
growth. These effects occurred under conditions where addition of 300nM
AZD2014 resulted in significant blockade on both TORC1 and TORC2
downstream effectors (>80% inhibition of p-AKT, p-S6 and p-4EBP1) as well
as significant down-regulation of cyclin D1 levels (>70%). Similarly,
inhibition of CDK4/6 using palbociclib (300nM) caused >80% inhibition of
p-RB and subsequent cell cycle blockade.The effects observed in breast
cancer cell lines were recapitulated in vivo using the MCF7 xenograft
model, where tumor regressions (>105%) were observed with the
combination. Furthermore, combining AZD2014, palbociclib and fulvestrant
in this model also caused tumor regressions.To assess bone marrow
tolerability of this combination, we investigated the response of human
bone marrow multipotent progenitors (CD34+) in vitro. Palbociclib caused
transient cell cycle G1 arrest. The combination of palbociclib with
AZD2014 delayed entry into cell cycle, but did not have significant
impact on the cell viability (Two emerging mechanisms of endocrine
resistance in estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancers include the
activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) / mammalian target
of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway and the de-coupling of cell cycle control
from ER signaling via de-regulation of the cyclin D/cyclin dependent
kinase (CDK4/6) pathway. In this study, we hypothesized that combining
inhibitors of both pathways using the dual mTORC1 and mTORC2 inhibitor
AZD2014 and the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib would elicit an improved
tumor response over agents that inhibit either pathway alone. Moreover,
we hypothesized that combined inhibition of CDK4/6 and TORC1/2 together
with inhibition of ER signaling, would cause a profound anti-tumor effect
in breast cancer models.In breast cancer cell lines, the combination of
AZD2014 and palbociclib caused a synergistic inhibitory effect on cell
growth. These effects occurred under conditions where addition of 300nM
AZD2014 resulted in significant blockade on both TORC1 and TORC2
downstream effectors (>80% inhibition of p-AKT, p-S6 and p-4EBP1) as well
as significant down-regulation of cyclin D1 levels (>70%). Similarly,
inhibition of CDK4/6 using palbociclib (300nM) caused >80% inhibition of
p-RB and subsequent cell cycle blockade.The effects observed in breast
cancer cell lines were recapitulated in vivo using the MCF7 xenograft
model, where tumor regressions (>105%) were observed with the
combination. Furthermore, combining AZD2014, palbociclib and fulvestrant
in this model also caused tumor regressions.To assess bone marrow
tolerability of this combination, we investigated the response of human
bone marrow multipotent progenitors (CD34+) in vitro. Palbociclib caused
transient cell cycle G1 arrest. The combination of palbociclib with
AZD2014 delayed entry into cell cycle, but did not have significant
impact on the cell viability (<15%).We hypothesized that inhibition of
CDK4/6 in combination with AZD2014 would also significantly affect
pathway outputs and the transcriptional events downstream of the
transcription factors E2F (e.g. CENPE, CCNA2, CDC6 and E2F1) and ER (e.g.
PR). We therefore measured specific gene signatures downstream of these
receptors in breast cancer cell lines. The ability to dose AZD2014
intermittently compared with rapalogues, together with its ability to
block signaling from both TORC1 and 2, make this compound an ideal
candidate for combining with CDK4/6 inhibitors such as palbociclib.
Furthermore, addition of anti-hormonal therapies such as fulvestrant to
this combination may provide additional benefit to breast cancer patients.

