Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the progression of cutaneous melanoma by the molecular
immune response of the sentinel lymph node


Introduction: The sentinel node (SN) has become the standard diagnostic
tool for staging melanoma. With the recent development of several potent
immunotherapies we hypothesized that the early immune events in melanoma
maybe first seen in the SN.Methods: 81 SN from 79 patients were evaluated
with microarray technology, qPCR, routine H&E & IHC. We identified immune
genes that are present by qPCR in SNs from a random section of the SN,
away from the blue dye. Statistical analysis assessed the utility of
these markers to predict tumor progression by increasing primary
thickness and tumor-positive SN.Results: Of the 79 patients, 48 (61%)
were men. Median age was 59 (range 6-95 years). Primary melanomas were
most commonly from the trunk (51%) and extremities (40%). The median
thickness of the primaries was 0.95mm. In 7 cases the tumor thickness was
not measured. 13% of the patients had ulcerated primaries. 29% of the
primary tumors had at least 1 mitosis/mm2. 9 (11%) patients had SN
metastasis, as determined by conventional H&E and IHC. The incidence of
SN positivity was directly related to tumor thickness; the higher the
T-stage the greater percentage of SN positivity: 2% T1, 19% T2, 20% T3
and 60% T4 melanoma. 33% of ulcerated primaries and 30% with increased
mitotic rate had a tumor-positive SN. Increased mitotic rate (>1
mitosis/mm2) and decreased gene expression of CD80 and ARG2 correlated
with T3/4 primaries. By univariate analyses: age (pIntroduction: The
sentinel node (SN) has become the standard diagnostic tool for staging
melanoma. With the recent development of several potent immunotherapies
we hypothesized that the early immune events in melanoma maybe first seen
in the SN.Methods: 81 SN from 79 patients were evaluated with microarray
technology, qPCR, routine H&E & IHC. We identified immune genes that are
present by qPCR in SNs from a random section of the SN, away from the
blue dye. Statistical analysis assessed the utility of these markers to
predict tumor progression by increasing primary thickness and
tumor-positive SN.Results: Of the 79 patients, 48 (61%) were men. Median
age was 59 (range 6-95 years). Primary melanomas were most commonly from
the trunk (51%) and extremities (40%). The median thickness of the
primaries was 0.95mm. In 7 cases the tumor thickness was not measured.
13% of the patients had ulcerated primaries. 29% of the primary tumors
had at least 1 mitosis/mm2. 9 (11%) patients had SN metastasis, as
determined by conventional H&E and IHC. The incidence of SN positivity
was directly related to tumor thickness; the higher the T-stage the
greater percentage of SN positivity: 2% T1, 19% T2, 20% T3 and 60% T4
melanoma. 33% of ulcerated primaries and 30% with increased mitotic rate
had a tumor-positive SN. Increased mitotic rate (>1 mitosis/mm2) and
decreased gene expression of CD80 and ARG2 correlated with T3/4
primaries. By univariate analyses: age (p<0.001), primary site
(Introduction: The sentinel node (SN) has become the standard diagnostic
tool for staging melanoma. With the recent development of several potent
immunotherapies we hypothesized that the early immune events in melanoma
maybe first seen in the SN.Methods: 81 SN from 79 patients were evaluated
with microarray technology, qPCR, routine H&E & IHC. We identified immune
genes that are present by qPCR in SNs from a random section of the SN,
away from the blue dye. Statistical analysis assessed the utility of
these markers to predict tumor progression by increasing primary
thickness and tumor-positive SN.Results: Of the 79 patients, 48 (61%)
were men. Median age was 59 (range 6-95 years). Primary melanomas were
most commonly from the trunk (51%) and extremities (40%). The median
thickness of the primaries was 0.95mm. In 7 cases the tumor thickness was
not measured. 13% of the patients had ulcerated primaries. 29% of the
primary tumors had at least 1 mitosis/mm2. 9 (11%) patients had SN
metastasis, as determined by conventional H&E and IHC. The incidence of
SN positivity was directly related to tumor thickness; the higher the
T-stage the greater percentage of SN positivity: 2% T1, 19% T2, 20% T3
and 60% T4 melanoma. 33% of ulcerated primaries and 30% with increased
mitotic rate had a tumor-positive SN. Increased mitotic rate (>1
mitosis/mm2) and decreased gene expression of CD80 and ARG2 correlated
with T3/4 primaries. By univariate analyses: age (p<0.001), primary site
(<0.001), mitotic rate and increasing gene expression of CTLA-4
(pIntroduction: The sentinel node (SN) has become the standard diagnostic
tool for staging melanoma. With the recent development of several potent
immunotherapies we hypothesized that the early immune events in melanoma
maybe first seen in the SN.Methods: 81 SN from 79 patients were evaluated
with microarray technology, qPCR, routine H&E & IHC. We identified immune
genes that are present by qPCR in SNs from a random section of the SN,
away from the blue dye. Statistical analysis assessed the utility of
these markers to predict tumor progression by increasing primary
thickness and tumor-positive SN.Results: Of the 79 patients, 48 (61%)
were men. Median age was 59 (range 6-95 years). Primary melanomas were
most commonly from the trunk (51%) and extremities (40%). The median
thickness of the primaries was 0.95mm. In 7 cases the tumor thickness was
not measured. 13% of the patients had ulcerated primaries. 29% of the
primary tumors had at least 1 mitosis/mm2. 9 (11%) patients had SN
metastasis, as determined by conventional H&E and IHC. The incidence of
SN positivity was directly related to tumor thickness; the higher the
T-stage the greater percentage of SN positivity: 2% T1, 19% T2, 20% T3
and 60% T4 melanoma. 33% of ulcerated primaries and 30% with increased
mitotic rate had a tumor-positive SN. Increased mitotic rate (>1
mitosis/mm2) and decreased gene expression of CD80 and ARG2 correlated
with T3/4 primaries. By univariate analyses: age (p<0.001), primary site
(<0.001), mitotic rate and increasing gene expression of CTLA-4 (p<0.001)
and PD-1 (pIntroduction: The sentinel node (SN) has become the standard
diagnostic tool for staging melanoma. With the recent development of
several potent immunotherapies we hypothesized that the early immune
events in melanoma maybe first seen in the SN.Methods: 81 SN from 79
patients were evaluated with microarray technology, qPCR, routine H&E &
IHC. We identified immune genes that are present by qPCR in SNs from a
random section of the SN, away from the blue dye. Statistical analysis
assessed the utility of these markers to predict tumor progression by
increasing primary thickness and tumor-positive SN.Results: Of the 79
patients, 48 (61%) were men. Median age was 59 (range 6-95 years).
Primary melanomas were most commonly from the trunk (51%) and extremities
(40%). The median thickness of the primaries was 0.95mm. In 7 cases the
tumor thickness was not measured. 13% of the patients had ulcerated
primaries. 29% of the primary tumors had at least 1 mitosis/mm2. 9 (11%)
patients had SN metastasis, as determined by conventional H&E and IHC.
The incidence of SN positivity was directly related to tumor thickness;
the higher the T-stage the greater percentage of SN positivity: 2% T1,
19% T2, 20% T3 and 60% T4 melanoma. 33% of ulcerated primaries and 30%
with increased mitotic rate had a tumor-positive SN. Increased mitotic
rate (>1 mitosis/mm2) and decreased gene expression of CD80 and ARG2
correlated with T3/4 primaries. By univariate analyses: age (p<0.001),
primary site (<0.001), mitotic rate and increasing gene expression of
CTLA-4 (p<0.001) and PD-1 (p<0.001) in SN were predictive of SN
positivity. Multivariate analysis demonstrates mitoses in the primary and
CTLA-4 and PD-1 gene expression in the SN were predictive of metastases
in the SN. The up-regulation of CTLA-4 and PD-1 gene expression, in
combination with increased mitoses was an accurate determinate of SN
metastasis. The AUC values of CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression and increased
mitoses at the primary site were 0.8 and 0.73. The positive and negative
predictive values of the assays varied with level of gene expression but
approached 100% and 90% respectively.Conclusions: The immune molecular
profile of the sentinel lymph node in melanoma is altered in the presence
or absence of metastases in the lymph node and by progression of the
primary melanoma. These alterations in immune profiles may be important
for distinguishing the patterns of metastases and ultimately the response
to therapy in melanoma.

