Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in ERG and ANXA2 expression between Caucasian
Americans and African Americans highlight distinct pathologic features of
prostate cancer progression


Introduction: Annexin A2 (ANXA2) is a Ca2+-dependent phospholipid binding
protein with multiple cellular functions that include the maintenance of
epithelial cell polarity. It is expressed in the luminal and basal
prostate epithelium. In PIN and in moderately differentiated tumors, it
is either absent or expressed focally. In contrast, a high level of ANXA2
is detected in poorly differentiated high-grade tumors. TMPRSS2:ERG gene
fusion that occurs in a majority of prostate cancers results in the
overexpression of ERG. We have previously reported a reciprocal
correlation between ERG and ANXA2 expression in tumor specimens from a
cohort 40 Caucasian American (CA) patients and showed that this is
regulated through transcriptional repression of ANXA2 by ERG. This study
compares the correlation of ERG and ANXA2 status in CA and African
Americans (AA) to prostate cancer progression.Methods: ERG and ANXA2
expression were evaluated on whole-mounted prostate sections from 40 CA
and 40 AA patients and on tissue microarrays (TMA) derived from the
radical prostatectomies (RP) of 99 patients (59 CA and 40 AA) by
immunochemistry. Both cohorts were matched for post RP follow-up and
pathologic stage. Patients were defined as ERG- or ANXA2+ when all of the
TMA cores of a given subject were ERG- or ANXA2+. Conversely, patients
were defined as ERG+ or ANXA2- when any of the cores were ERG+ or ANXA-.
The ERG and ANXA2 status of tumors were correlated to Gleason score and
prostate cancer recurrence. Recurrence was defined as 0.2 ng/ml of serum
PSA, eight weeks after RP followed by a second PSA measurement of 0.2
ng/ml, the initiation of radiation or hormonal therapy, or
metastasis.Results: In whole mount sections, a reciprocal correlation of
ERG and ANXA2 expression was noted in a majority (80%) of the CAs.
However, this was observed only in 55% of AA cases. ERG+ tumors were
detected in 65% of CAs as compared to 25% of AAs. In the TMAs, tumor
cores from CAs are more likely to be ERG+ (46%) than those from AAs
(30%). When scored by patients, CA cases were twice as likely to be
ERG+/ANXA2- than ERG-/ANXA2-, while AA cases were half as likely to be
ERG+/ANXA2- than ERG-/ANXA2- (p = 0.02). Intriguingly, ERG+/ANXA2- status
in AAs was associated with higher pathologic stage (p = 0.03) and higher
recurrence rate (p = 0.04).Conclusion: A higher frequency of ERG+/ANXA2-
tumors was observed in CA men, while ERG-/ANXA2- tumors were more
frequent among AA men. Surprisingly, ERG+/ANXA2- status in AAs is
associated with poorer pathologic stage and prostate cancer recurrence.
Taken together, our results suggest potential utility of ERG+/ANXA2-
status for early identification of prostate cancer progression in AA men.

