Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of angiotensin II type 1 receptor induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and promotes tumorigenesis of human
breast cancer cells


Propose: Accumulating evidence suggests that angiotensin II type 1
receptor (AGTR1) is involved in tumorigenesis and metastasis in many
types of cancer, however little is known about its role in breast cancer.
Our objective of the present study is to investigate the effect of AGTR1
overexpression on cell proliferation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), migration, invasion, angiogenesis and tumorigenesis of human
breast cancer.Methods: To determine the role of AGTR1, MCF7 cells were
stably transfected with an expression construct carrying the GFP cDNA for
AGTR1. MTS assay, Matrigel invasion assay, wound healing assay, Western
blotting and immunofluorescence were used. For in vivo study, parental
MCF7 or AGTR1-MCF7 cells were subcutaneously injected into the left and
right flanks of nude mice. Tumor growth and angiogenesis were
determined.Results and conclusion: AGTR1-MCF7 cells, expressing high
level of AGTR1 exhibited significant increases in cell proliferation,
migration and invasion capacities compared with parental MCF7 cells.
Furthermore, AGTR1-MCF7 cells displayed the mesenchymal phenotype, as
evidenced by elongated spindle morphology, decreased E-cadherin level,
increased N-cadherin and snail, and nuclear accumulation of smad3 and
smad4. Interestingly, blockade of smad4 using small interfering RNA
strongly induced mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) and
restoration of E-cadherin expression in AGTR1-MCF7 cells, suggesting that
AGTR1-induced EMT is ultimately mediated by smad4 activation. Finally, we
showed that AGTR1 overexpression enhanced tumor volume (pPropose:
Accumulating evidence suggests that angiotensin II type 1 receptor
(AGTR1) is involved in tumorigenesis and metastasis in many types of
cancer, however little is known about its role in breast cancer. Our
objective of the present study is to investigate the effect of AGTR1
overexpression on cell proliferation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), migration, invasion, angiogenesis and tumorigenesis of human
breast cancer.Methods: To determine the role of AGTR1, MCF7 cells were
stably transfected with an expression construct carrying the GFP cDNA for
AGTR1. MTS assay, Matrigel invasion assay, wound healing assay, Western
blotting and immunofluorescence were used. For in vivo study, parental
MCF7 or AGTR1-MCF7 cells were subcutaneously injected into the left and
right flanks of nude mice. Tumor growth and angiogenesis were
determined.Results and conclusion: AGTR1-MCF7 cells, expressing high
level of AGTR1 exhibited significant increases in cell proliferation,
migration and invasion capacities compared with parental MCF7 cells.
Furthermore, AGTR1-MCF7 cells displayed the mesenchymal phenotype, as
evidenced by elongated spindle morphology, decreased E-cadherin level,
increased N-cadherin and snail, and nuclear accumulation of smad3 and
smad4. Interestingly, blockade of smad4 using small interfering RNA
strongly induced mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) and
restoration of E-cadherin expression in AGTR1-MCF7 cells, suggesting that
AGTR1-induced EMT is ultimately mediated by smad4 activation. Finally, we
showed that AGTR1 overexpression enhanced tumor volume (p<0.001, n = 10)
and weight (pPropose: Accumulating evidence suggests that angiotensin II
type 1 receptor (AGTR1) is involved in tumorigenesis and metastasis in
many types of cancer, however little is known about its role in breast
cancer. Our objective of the present study is to investigate the effect
of AGTR1 overexpression on cell proliferation, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), migration, invasion, angiogenesis and tumorigenesis of
human breast cancer.Methods: To determine the role of AGTR1, MCF7 cells
were stably transfected with an expression construct carrying the GFP
cDNA for AGTR1. MTS assay, Matrigel invasion assay, wound healing assay,
Western blotting and immunofluorescence were used. For in vivo study,
parental MCF7 or AGTR1-MCF7 cells were subcutaneously injected into the
left and right flanks of nude mice. Tumor growth and angiogenesis were
determined.Results and conclusion: AGTR1-MCF7 cells, expressing high
level of AGTR1 exhibited significant increases in cell proliferation,
migration and invasion capacities compared with parental MCF7 cells.
Furthermore, AGTR1-MCF7 cells displayed the mesenchymal phenotype, as
evidenced by elongated spindle morphology, decreased E-cadherin level,
increased N-cadherin and snail, and nuclear accumulation of smad3 and
smad4. Interestingly, blockade of smad4 using small interfering RNA
strongly induced mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) and
restoration of E-cadherin expression in AGTR1-MCF7 cells, suggesting that
AGTR1-induced EMT is ultimately mediated by smad4 activation. Finally, we
showed that AGTR1 overexpression enhanced tumor volume (p<0.001, n = 10)
and weight (p<0.01) as well as increased angiogenesis in human breast
cancer xenograft in vivo. In summary, we demonstrate that AGTR1
overexpression promotes cell proliferation, EMT, angiogenesis and
tumorigenic properties of breast cancer cells. Our findings suggest that
AGTR1 could be a useful target of therapy in breast cancer.

