Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel mechanism of areca nut-induced oral cancer is through the
conversion of cancer stem cells to acquire malignant phenotypes


Areca nut is one of the most commonly used psychoactive substance
worldwide. It is has been identified as a primary carcinogen of oral
cancer in Southeast Asia. Previous studies to examine the effects of this
carcinogen often used short-term and high-dose treatment of area nut
extract (ANE) as a research model. To elucidate the molecular effects of
areca nut and mimic patient chronic exposure situation, we established
four areca nut extract (ANE)-trained oral cancer sublines by treating
cells with low-dose of ANE (IC30, dose for 30% growth inhibition) for 2
months. Without evidence of cellular senescence, these sublines exhibited
significant increases in invasive ability, along with the up-regulation
of MMP1 and the reversed expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
markers. These sublines also showed more resistant to chemotherapeutics
and irradiation, which was associated with the over-expression of ABCG2
transporters, increased production of anti-oxidative enzymes, and
insensitive to ROS induction. Furthermore, these chronically treated
cells possessed characteristics of cancer stem cells, as indicated by
enrichment of CD24-/CD44+ population, enhancing spheroid cell formation,
and increasing expressions of stemness associated molecules, including
Slug, Twist1, Sox9, and Grp78. Thus, we concluded that chronic areca nut
exposure induces a pleotropic effect on stemness regulators that
facilitates the conversion of cancer stem cells to acquire malignant
transformation in oral cancer. This novel finding provides valuable
knowledge on areca nut-induced oral carcinogenesis.

