Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Renal cell carcinoma patients have altered HLA expression patterns
which show correlations to clinical parameter


The aim of this study was to evaluate altered HLA (Human Leukocyte
Antigen) expression patterns of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients and
healthy control persons (blood donors).Peripheral blood samples from RCC
patients and from healthy controls were investigated for the incidence of
HLA groups. The frequency of HLA groups was analyzed statistically and
correlated with relevant clinical data. In addition, HLA subtypes were
analyzed for RCC patients and for healthy blood donors. A
multidimensional statistical comparison was performed. An update of the
follow up for RCC patients was conducted in 2014.After following the CD45
autoMACS depletion protocol, we identified CTCs in 96 out of 233
peripheral blood samples (41%), which originated from 81 out of 154 (53%)
RCC patients. We detected two HLA groups, HLA-Cw*07 and HLA-DRB1*04 that
were significantly higher in healthy controls than in RCC patients (p The
aim of this study was to evaluate altered HLA (Human Leukocyte Antigen)
expression patterns of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients and healthy
control persons (blood donors).Peripheral blood samples from RCC patients
and from healthy controls were investigated for the incidence of HLA
groups. The frequency of HLA groups was analyzed statistically and
correlated with relevant clinical data. In addition, HLA subtypes were
analyzed for RCC patients and for healthy blood donors. A
multidimensional statistical comparison was performed. An update of the
follow up for RCC patients was conducted in 2014.After following the CD45
autoMACS depletion protocol, we identified CTCs in 96 out of 233
peripheral blood samples (41%), which originated from 81 out of 154 (53%)
RCC patients. We detected two HLA groups, HLA-Cw*07 and HLA-DRB1*04 that
were significantly higher in healthy controls than in RCC patients (p <
0.05), respectively. In a Kaplan-Meier survival analysis these results
were confirmed (p The aim of this study was to evaluate altered HLA
(Human Leukocyte Antigen) expression patterns of renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) patients and healthy control persons (blood donors).Peripheral
blood samples from RCC patients and from healthy controls were
investigated for the incidence of HLA groups. The frequency of HLA groups
was analyzed statistically and correlated with relevant clinical data. In
addition, HLA subtypes were analyzed for RCC patients and for healthy
blood donors. A multidimensional statistical comparison was performed. An
update of the follow up for RCC patients was conducted in 2014.After
following the CD45 autoMACS depletion protocol, we identified CTCs in 96
out of 233 peripheral blood samples (41%), which originated from 81 out
of 154 (53%) RCC patients. We detected two HLA groups, HLA-Cw*07 and
HLA-DRB1*04 that were significantly higher in healthy controls than in
RCC patients (p < 0.05), respectively. In a Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis these results were confirmed (p < 0.05). On the one hand, RCC
patients had less alleles HLA-Cw*07 (p The aim of this study was to
evaluate altered HLA (Human Leukocyte Antigen) expression patterns of
renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients and healthy control persons (blood
donors).Peripheral blood samples from RCC patients and from healthy
controls were investigated for the incidence of HLA groups. The frequency
of HLA groups was analyzed statistically and correlated with relevant
clinical data. In addition, HLA subtypes were analyzed for RCC patients
and for healthy blood donors. A multidimensional statistical comparison
was performed. An update of the follow up for RCC patients was conducted
in 2014.After following the CD45 autoMACS depletion protocol, we
identified CTCs in 96 out of 233 peripheral blood samples (41%), which
originated from 81 out of 154 (53%) RCC patients. We detected two HLA
groups, HLA-Cw*07 and HLA-DRB1*04 that were significantly higher in
healthy controls than in RCC patients (p < 0.05), respectively. In a
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis these results were confirmed (p < 0.05).
On the one hand, RCC patients had less alleles HLA-Cw*07 (p < 0.05;
2-test) and HLA-DRB1*04 (p The aim of this study was to evaluate altered
HLA (Human Leukocyte Antigen) expression patterns of renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) patients and healthy control persons (blood donors).Peripheral
blood samples from RCC patients and from healthy controls were
investigated for the incidence of HLA groups. The frequency of HLA groups
was analyzed statistically and correlated with relevant clinical data. In
addition, HLA subtypes were analyzed for RCC patients and for healthy
blood donors. A multidimensional statistical comparison was performed. An
update of the follow up for RCC patients was conducted in 2014.After
following the CD45 autoMACS depletion protocol, we identified CTCs in 96
out of 233 peripheral blood samples (41%), which originated from 81 out
of 154 (53%) RCC patients. We detected two HLA groups, HLA-Cw*07 and
HLA-DRB1*04 that were significantly higher in healthy controls than in
RCC patients (p < 0.05), respectively. In a Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis these results were confirmed (p < 0.05). On the one hand, RCC
patients had less alleles HLA-Cw*07 (p < 0.05; 2-test) and HLA-DRB1*04 (p
< 0.05; 2-test) compared to healthy blood donors. On the other hand, RCC
patients showed an increased occurrence of the allele HLA-Cw*12 compared
to healthy blood donors.There are HLA groups that occur less often in RCC
patients than in healthy controls. But it needs larger study populations
and further immunological studies to investigate if special HLA-types can
have a protective effect against RCC carcinogenesis. Occurrence of the
alleles HLA-Cw*07, and HLA-DRB1*04 was significantly altered in RCC
patients compared to healthy blood donors and may change the risk to
suffer from a RCC.The integration of our results in systematic functional
studies will help to earlier identify persons with an increased risk of
RCC development and may have an impact in future patient care.

