Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Converging molecular effectors of airway lineage specification and
metastasis in lung cancer


Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is a deadly and heterogeneous subtype of
non-small cell lung cancer. During LUAD progression, the emergence of
alternate epithelial lineage fates in primary tumors correlates with poor
outcome. The underlying mechanisms and biological consequences of these
phenomena are poorly understood.Using an integrated approach, we
previously examined the molecular relationship between cell
differentiation states, lung cancer subtypes, and clinical outcome, to
discover a novel role for several lineage-restricted transcription
factors in the pathogenesis of LUAD (1). Specifically, we identified the
alveolar specification factor, HOPX, as an inhibitor of metastatic
progression. Herein we show that down-regulation of its function in a
subset of human tumors correlates with DNA hypermethylation, aberrant
tumor differentiation, and relapses. HOPX restricts the metastatic
potential of LUAD cells, by modulating converging transcriptional
programs of airway epithelial differentiation, malignant invasion, and
metabolic adaptation in response to the extracellular microenvironment.
Mechanistically, HOPX mediates its functions in part through the
regulation of previously uncharacterized long-intergenic long non-coding
RNAs with potential roles in lung development.Our findings demonstrate
that perturbation of intrinsic cell lineage pathways is a determinant of
metastasis in specific lung cancers. The implications of these findings
for the origin(s) and treatment of LUAD metastasis will be further
discussed.(1) Cheung, W.K.C., Zhao, M., Liu, Z., Stevens, L.E., Cao,
P.D., Fang, J.E., Westbrook, T.F., and Nguyen, D.X. (2013). Cancer Cell,
23 (6): 725-738.

