Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Noncanonical NF-B activation mediates STAT3-stimulated IDO
up-regulation in myeloid-derived suppressor cells in breast cancer


Immunotherapy for cancer treatment is achieved through the activation of
competent immune effector cells and the inhibition of immunosuppressive
cells, such as myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). While MDSCs have
been shown to contribute to breast cancer development, the mechanism
underlying MDSCs-mediated immunosuppression is unclear. We have
identified a poorly differentiated MDSC subset in breast cancer
suppressing T-cell function through signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 3-dependent indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase (IDO)
up-regulation. Here we investigated the mechanisms underlying aberrant
expression of IDO in MDSCs. MDSCs were induced by co-culturing human
CD33+ myeloid progenitors with MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Increased
STAT3 activation in MDSCs was correlated with activation of the
noncanonical nuclear factor-B (NF-B) pathway, including increased
NF-B-inducing kinase (NIK) protein level, phosphorylation of cytoplasmic
inhibitor of NF-B kinase (IKK) and p100, and RelB-p52 nuclear
translocation. Blocking STAT3 activation with the small molecule
inhibitor JSI-124 significantly inhibited the accumulation of NIK and IDO
expression in MDSCs. Knock-down of NIK in MDSCs suppressed IDO
expression, but not STAT3 activation. RelB-p52 dimers were found to
directly bind to the IDO promoter, leading to IDO expression in MDSCs.
IL-6 was found to stimulate STAT3-dependent, NF-B-mediated IDO
up-regulation in MDSCs. Furthermore, significant positive correlation
between the numbers of pSTAT3+ MDSCs, IDO+ MDSCs, and NIK+ MDSCs was
observed in human breast cancers. These results demonstrate a
STAT3-NF-B-IDO pathway in breast cancer-derived MDSCs, which provides
insight into understanding immunosuppressive mechanisms of MDSCs in
breast cancer.

