Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in clinically localized prostate
cancer (PCa): searching a prognostic tool


BackgroundIf PCa screening has reduced advanced disease and
disease-specific mortality, the tradeoff is an over-diagnosis of cases
that would not have caused clinical consequences during a man's lifetime
if left untreated. Conversely, a vast numbers of men, which harbor occult
extra-prostatic extension, develop recurrence after surgery.Despite it
looks like an addressable question by quantifying Circulating Tumor Cells
(CTCs), unlike breast cancer, in which prognostic and predictive impact
of tumor cells in peripheral blood or bone marrow (Disseminated Tumor
Cells, DTCs) was largely provided, their role in localized PCa is far
from clear.MethodsFrom July 2011 to August 2013, we quantify the tumor
burden at diagnosis in peripheral blood of 153 PCa patients stage
T2a-T3b, enrolled at three clinical sites (Roma, Orbassano and Padova).
All the patients were candidate to undergo radical prostatectomy because
of positive biopsy for cancer. Two labs (Orbassano and Padova) performed
the CellSearch assay.In patients enrolled in Roma (Janus trial, a phase
II study for the use of zoledronic acid as neoadjuvant treatment of
invasive PCa), we evaluated in parallel the DTCs.ResultsWe used data
obtained in patients enrolled in Orbassano (n = 50) and Roma (n = 15) as
training set, meanwhile we used patients of Padova (n = 88) as validation
set. Consistently with previous reports (Kraan, Sleijfer et al. 2011)
reporting low inter-test and inter-lab variability, the baseline CTC
count in the two sets did not significantly differ (Mann-Whitney Rank Sum
Test, p = 0.170), so that they were further analyzed altogether.Overall,
we found that 74 out of 153 PC patients (48,4%) had at least 1 CTC per
7.5 ml of peripheral blood; 45 PC (29,4%) patients had > 2 cells and 21
PC patients (13,7%) had > 3 cells. Interestingly, 8 out of 153 PC
patients (5,2%) had > 5 cells at the first blood draw, before
surgery.When we synchronously detected CTCs and DTCs, we found consistent
results in 64% of patients (Wilcoxon signed Rank Test, p =
0.339).ConclusionsEven when the PCa is pathologically organ confined at
surgery, it was reported 5% to 20% of these patients harbor foci of
micro-metastatic disease that will later manifest itself as recurrent
disease. Here we show CTCs by CellSearch assay in close to 50% of
biopsy-confirmed PCa patients, obtaining evidence of a systemic
disease.Prospective studies will be required to investigate whether
CTC-status is associated with worst outcome in the M0 setting of PCa, as
already provided in early breast cancer patients (Lucci, Hall et al.
2012).

