Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylated HER3 levels associated with trastuzumab resistance
in HER2 gene amplified uterine serous carcinoma xenograft tumors


Uterine serous carcinoma (USC) is an aggressive subtype of endometrial
cancer that commonly harbors HER2 gene amplification. Clinical trial has
demonstrated that USC is impervious to trastuzumab therapy, though the
mechanism is poorly understood. Since HER3 mediated signaling has been
implicated in trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer, we sought to
understand the relevance of HER3 activation in USC xenografts derived
from the HER2 gene amplified (HER2:Chr 17 > 15) non-immortalized USC cell
line ARK2. Cohorts of mice harboring xenografts derived from ARK2 were
treated with either vehicle, trastuzumab (10 mg/kg IP BIW), lapatinib
(150 mg/kg QD oral gavage) or the combination of trastuzumab and
lapatinib for 21 days. Acute and chronic post treatment tumor samples
were assessed for downstream signaling alterations. Single agent
trastuzumab had no impact on xenograft growth compared to vehicle.
Lapatinib alone resulted in significant tumorstatic effects (p Uterine
serous carcinoma (USC) is an aggressive subtype of endometrial cancer
that commonly harbors HER2 gene amplification. Clinical trial has
demonstrated that USC is impervious to trastuzumab therapy, though the
mechanism is poorly understood. Since HER3 mediated signaling has been
implicated in trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer, we sought to
understand the relevance of HER3 activation in USC xenografts derived
from the HER2 gene amplified (HER2:Chr 17 > 15) non-immortalized USC cell
line ARK2. Cohorts of mice harboring xenografts derived from ARK2 were
treated with either vehicle, trastuzumab (10 mg/kg IP BIW), lapatinib
(150 mg/kg QD oral gavage) or the combination of trastuzumab and
lapatinib for 21 days. Acute and chronic post treatment tumor samples
were assessed for downstream signaling alterations. Single agent
trastuzumab had no impact on xenograft growth compared to vehicle.
Lapatinib alone resulted in significant tumorstatic effects (p < 0.01)
and dual therapy with trastuzumab and lapatinib induced synergistic
activity that significantly decreased tumor volume compared to all other
arms (p Uterine serous carcinoma (USC) is an aggressive subtype of
endometrial cancer that commonly harbors HER2 gene amplification.
Clinical trial has demonstrated that USC is impervious to trastuzumab
therapy, though the mechanism is poorly understood. Since HER3 mediated
signaling has been implicated in trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer,
we sought to understand the relevance of HER3 activation in USC
xenografts derived from the HER2 gene amplified (HER2:Chr 17 > 15)
non-immortalized USC cell line ARK2. Cohorts of mice harboring xenografts
derived from ARK2 were treated with either vehicle, trastuzumab (10 mg/kg
IP BIW), lapatinib (150 mg/kg QD oral gavage) or the combination of
trastuzumab and lapatinib for 21 days. Acute and chronic post treatment
tumor samples were assessed for downstream signaling alterations. Single
agent trastuzumab had no impact on xenograft growth compared to vehicle.
Lapatinib alone resulted in significant tumorstatic effects (p < 0.01)
and dual therapy with trastuzumab and lapatinib induced synergistic
activity that significantly decreased tumor volume compared to all other
arms (p < 0.01). Single agent trastuzumab was associated with rapid
elevation in pHER3 levels with unchanged pAKT and pERK expression
compared to vehicle. These elevated pHER3 levels were similarly elevated
after the 21 day treatment. Anti-tumor activity observed in the lapatinib
and dual lapatinib/trastuzumab arm was not associated with any
alterations in pHER3 levels following 21 day treatment, though acute
elevations in pHER3 were noted in the dual HER2 blockade arm at 24 hours
after treatment. In conclusion, trastuzumab alone failed to impact USC
xenograft growth and this innate resistance was associated with an
elevation in pHER3 levels that was still evident in xenografts at the end
of the treatment period. Unlike single agent trastuzumab, treatment arms
that utilized lapatinib demonstrated significant anti-tumor activity with
no increase in pHER3 above vehicle over the course of treatment. These
data highlight HER3 activation as a possible trastuzumab resistance
mechanism in USC that can be abrogated through the addition of lapatinib.

