Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nivolumab and urelumab enhance antitumor activity of human T
lymphocytes engrafted in Rag2-/-IL2Rnull immunodeficient mice


To evaluate the pharmacodynamics effects and antitumor activities of
immunostimulatory mAb, we have developed a humanized murine model in
which the receptors targeted by such mAbs become expressed. Human
lymphocytes transferred into immunodeficient mice undergo activation and
redistribute to organs with surface expression of hCD137 and hPD-1.
Systemic lymphocyte infiltrations result in lethal xenograft-versus-host
disease, which is aggravated when mice are given clinical-grade
anti-hCD137 (urelumab) and anti-hPD-1 (nivolumab) mAbs. In mice engrafted
with either a human colorectal carcinoma cell line (HT-29) and allogeneic
human PBMCs or a primary gastric carcinoma and PBMCs from the patient,
urelumab and nivolumab significantly slowed tumor growth (pTo evaluate
the pharmacodynamics effects and antitumor activities of
immunostimulatory mAb, we have developed a humanized murine model in
which the receptors targeted by such mAbs become expressed. Human
lymphocytes transferred into immunodeficient mice undergo activation and
redistribute to organs with surface expression of hCD137 and hPD-1.
Systemic lymphocyte infiltrations result in lethal xenograft-versus-host
disease, which is aggravated when mice are given clinical-grade
anti-hCD137 (urelumab) and anti-hPD-1 (nivolumab) mAbs. In mice engrafted
with either a human colorectal carcinoma cell line (HT-29) and allogeneic
human PBMCs or a primary gastric carcinoma and PBMCs from the patient,
urelumab and nivolumab significantly slowed tumor growth (p<0.01).
Increased activated human T lymphocytes producing IFN- and decreased
human regulatory T lymphocytes in the xenografted tumors may explain such
therapeutic activities. These mouse models permit surrogate analyses to
test and make predictions on immunotherapy strategies encompassing
immunostimulatory mAbs and their combinations.

