Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Are young adults with colorectal cancer doing enough to stay
healthy


BackgroundColorectal cancer (CRC) arises from complex interactions
between inherited susceptibility and environmental factors. Modifiable
risk factors include smoking, obesity, physical inactivity, increased red
meat intake, and excessive alcohol consumption. The dramatic rise in CRC
incidence currently observed among young adults (aged 18-50) has been
attributed to obesity and other lifestyle factors, but the health
behavior of young patients is unknown. The purpose of this study was to
examine the health behavior of young adults with CRC in order to identify
key areas for risk modification.MethodsBetween 2011- 2014, 201 young
adults diagnosed with CRC without an inherited polyposis phenotype were
prospectively enrolled into an institutional protocol. Participants
health and lifestyle behavior (during the preceding month) were
prospectively assessed via a self-administered questionnaire, which was
modified from the National Cancer Institute CRC Risk Assessment Tool.
Patients whose CRC showed evidence of DNA mismatch repair deficiency
(dMMR) vs. not were compared in a subgroup analysis.ResultsThe median age
at CRC diagnosis was 40.5, 52% of the tumors arose from the colon and 48%
in the rectum. The majority (87%) of the patients were White; 118 (59%)
were female; and 86 (43%) had a bachelor or higher degree. Two in three
of these young adults (134, 67%) were overweight or obese, with 22%
meeting the definition for obesity (BMI 30-34.9), and 17% meeting that
for morbidly obesity (BMI >35). The physical activity level recommended
by the US Preventive Task Force (2.5 hours of moderate and 1.25 hours of
vigorous activity/week) were met by only 142 (71%) and 118 (59%) of the
young adults for moderate and vigorous activities respectively. Only half
(107, 53%) of the young adults consumed 5 servings of fruits and
vegetables per week, a minimum recommendation from the American Cancer
Society. Finally, one in ten (21, 10%) of the young adults were active
smokers; and only 135 (67%) had never smoked. Among the 45 (22%)
self-reported former smokers, 29 (64%) had smoked for >10 years prior to
quitting. In subgroup analysis, no statistically significant differences
in health behavior were detected between patients with (n = 91) vs.
without (n = 110) dMMR CRCs.ConclusionsSignificant gaps were identified
between the health behaviors of young CRC patients when compared to
standard US recommendations. The high prevalence of potentially
modifiable risk factors indicates that increased resources should be
devoted to targeted health counseling and behavioral interventions. Their
institution may help curtail the currently rising burden of CRC among
young adults.

