Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of wild type kinases driving
prostate cancer metastasis


Despite numerous oncogenic alterations implicated in metastatic prostate
cancer, mutations or DNA amplifications of kinases are rare. We
previously demonstrated that 1) expression of wild type (wt) Src in
combination with the androgen receptor synergizes to produce aggressive
prostate adenocarcinoma, 2) tyrosine phosphorylation increases with
prostate cancer stage, and 3) the phosphoproteomic profile of metastatic
prostate cancer is different from localized disease. However, the
question still remains as to whether wt kinases can drive prostate cancer
metastasis and should be regarded as therapeutic targets. To identify wt
kinases driving prostate cancer metastasis, we performed
phospho-tyrosine, threonine and serine peptide enrichment and
quantitative mass spectrometry on metastatic prostate cancer tissues
obtained at rapid autopsy. Analysis of this phosphoproteomic dataset
combined with bioinformatic analyses of genomic datasets identified 140
kinases differentially expressed or activated in prostate cancer
metastases. To determine which of these kinases function to promote
prostate cancer metastasis, we developed an in vitro and in vivo
metastasis screen. Out of 140 kinases, 20 kinases promote resistance to
anoikis in vitro and metastatic colonization in vivo. Positive kinases
include Src, Lyn, and EGFR which have been previously reported to be
important in prostate cancer metastasis and thus provide strength to the
validity of our screen. In addition we identified kinases with
uncharacterized roles in prostate cancer metastasis and of particular
interest, several of these kinases promote bone metastasis. We expect our
findings will improve our understanding of the mechanistic role of kinase
activation in prostate cancer and identify promising new therapeutic
targets for metastatic disease.

