Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of mutational spectra in metastatic tumors and
cell-free DNA in breast cancer patients


While massively parallel sequencing technology has greatly expanded the
number of molecular genetic tests available in oncology, little is known
about the spectrum and clinical utility of findings obtained from testing
tumors and circulating tumor material in specific patient populations.
Here we report findings from the METAMORPH study, in which stage IV
breast cancer patients had metastatic tumor biopsies (metDNA) and
concurrently collected cell-free circulating tumor DNA (cfDNA). Illumina
TruSeq Cancer Panel (for metDNA) and Guardant360 (for cfDNA) were
performed. 28 patients had both tests; results are shown in the Table.
68% of patients had at least one alteration in metDNA and 86% in cfDNA.
PIK3CA mutations were most common, occurring in 43% and 36% of patients
metDNA and cfDNA, respectively. Overall, 16 of 28 (57%) of patients had
the same alterations identified in both metDNA and cfDNA. Excluding ERBB2
amplifications in HER2+ patients, 43% of patients metDNA and 57% of
patients cfDNA contained pathogenic mutations or variants of uncertain
significance (VUS) for which there are approved targeted therapies or
clinical trials. Overall, 80 alterations were identified, 23 of which
were detected by both assays. Multiple reasons for discordance in calls
between metDNA and cfDNA assays were identified. While biological
phenomena (e.g. tumor heterogeneity) may contribute to discordance,
technical issues played an important role. Additional studies using whole
exome sequencing and other platforms to further assess biological
evolution of metastatic disease and clinical utility of molecular
profiling of metastatic tumors and cell-free DNA are needed.Table 1

