Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relapsed neuroblastomas show frequent RAS-MAPK pathway mutations


BackgroundThe majority of high-risk neuroblastomas initially respond to
chemotherapy, but over half of patients experience therapy-resistant
relapses. The molecular defects driving relapse and drug resistance are
unknown.MethodsWe performed Illumina or Complete Genomics whole genome
sequencing of 23 paired diagnostic and relapsed neuroblastomas, and
corresponding normal lymphocyte DNA, to define genetic alterations
associated with relapse. A panel of 18 neuroblastoma cell lines was
analyzed for the presence of RAS-MAPK mutations and sensitivity to small
molecule inhibitors of this pathway.ResultsNeuroblastomas that relapsed
after chemotherapy showed dramatic clonal evolution, with only 33% of
primary tumor mutations also detected at relapse. In 21 out of 23
patients, more somatic coding mutations were observed at relapse (median:
29 unique to relapse, range: 4-129). Unbiased pathway analysis of the
somatic mutations detected in the relapse tissues identified a strong
enrichment in genes associated with RAS-MAPK signaling (p = 6.1107). 18
of the 23 cases (78%) showed somatic mutations (N = 15) or structural
alterations (N = 3) predicted to activate the MAPK pathway, and these
were mutually exclusive: ALK (N = 10), NRAS (N = 1), KRAS (N = 1), HRAS
(N = 1), BRAF (N = 1), PTPN11 (N = 1), FGRF1 (N = 1) and NF1 (N = 2).
These RAS-MAPK mutations were clonally enriched at relapse and exist
within clonal or major subclonal tumor populations. Seven of these
RAS-MAPK mutations were detected only in the relapse tumor by whole
genome sequencing (50X coverage), and only 2 of these 7 mutations were
detectable in the primary tumor with targeted detection methods (104-105X
coverage). Similar MAPK pathway mutations were detected in 11 of 18 human
neuroblastoma-derived cell lines, and these lesions are predicted to be
sensitive to small molecule inhibition of MEK in vitro (pBackgroundThe
majority of high-risk neuroblastomas initially respond to chemotherapy,
but over half of patients experience therapy-resistant relapses. The
molecular defects driving relapse and drug resistance are
unknown.MethodsWe performed Illumina or Complete Genomics whole genome
sequencing of 23 paired diagnostic and relapsed neuroblastomas, and
corresponding normal lymphocyte DNA, to define genetic alterations
associated with relapse. A panel of 18 neuroblastoma cell lines was
analyzed for the presence of RAS-MAPK mutations and sensitivity to small
molecule inhibitors of this pathway.ResultsNeuroblastomas that relapsed
after chemotherapy showed dramatic clonal evolution, with only 33% of
primary tumor mutations also detected at relapse. In 21 out of 23
patients, more somatic coding mutations were observed at relapse (median:
29 unique to relapse, range: 4-129). Unbiased pathway analysis of the
somatic mutations detected in the relapse tissues identified a strong
enrichment in genes associated with RAS-MAPK signaling (p = 6.1107). 18
of the 23 cases (78%) showed somatic mutations (N = 15) or structural
alterations (N = 3) predicted to activate the MAPK pathway, and these
were mutually exclusive: ALK (N = 10), NRAS (N = 1), KRAS (N = 1), HRAS
(N = 1), BRAF (N = 1), PTPN11 (N = 1), FGRF1 (N = 1) and NF1 (N = 2).
These RAS-MAPK mutations were clonally enriched at relapse and exist
within clonal or major subclonal tumor populations. Seven of these
RAS-MAPK mutations were detected only in the relapse tumor by whole
genome sequencing (50X coverage), and only 2 of these 7 mutations were
detectable in the primary tumor with targeted detection methods (104-105X
coverage). Similar MAPK pathway mutations were detected in 11 of 18 human
neuroblastoma-derived cell lines, and these lesions are predicted to be
sensitive to small molecule inhibition of MEK in vitro (p<0.001) and in
vivo (pBackgroundThe majority of high-risk neuroblastomas initially
respond to chemotherapy, but over half of patients experience
therapy-resistant relapses. The molecular defects driving relapse and
drug resistance are unknown.MethodsWe performed Illumina or Complete
Genomics whole genome sequencing of 23 paired diagnostic and relapsed
neuroblastomas, and corresponding normal lymphocyte DNA, to define
genetic alterations associated with relapse. A panel of 18 neuroblastoma
cell lines was analyzed for the presence of RAS-MAPK mutations and
sensitivity to small molecule inhibitors of this
pathway.ResultsNeuroblastomas that relapsed after chemotherapy showed
dramatic clonal evolution, with only 33% of primary tumor mutations also
detected at relapse. In 21 out of 23 patients, more somatic coding
mutations were observed at relapse (median: 29 unique to relapse, range:
4-129). Unbiased pathway analysis of the somatic mutations detected in
the relapse tissues identified a strong enrichment in genes associated
with RAS-MAPK signaling (p = 6.1107). 18 of the 23 cases (78%) showed
somatic mutations (N = 15) or structural alterations (N = 3) predicted to
activate the MAPK pathway, and these were mutually exclusive: ALK (N =
10), NRAS (N = 1), KRAS (N = 1), HRAS (N = 1), BRAF (N = 1), PTPN11 (N =
1), FGRF1 (N = 1) and NF1 (N = 2). These RAS-MAPK mutations were clonally
enriched at relapse and exist within clonal or major subclonal tumor
populations. Seven of these RAS-MAPK mutations were detected only in the
relapse tumor by whole genome sequencing (50X coverage), and only 2 of
these 7 mutations were detectable in the primary tumor with targeted
detection methods (104-105X coverage). Similar MAPK pathway mutations
were detected in 11 of 18 human neuroblastoma-derived cell lines, and
these lesions are predicted to be sensitive to small molecule inhibition
of MEK in vitro (p<0.001) and in vivo (p<0.05).ConclusionsIn this study
of 23 neuroblastoma cases selected based solely on having
diagnostic-relapse specimens available for analysis, MAPK pathway
mutations were highly enriched in the relapsed genomes, providing a
potential biomarker for new therapeutic approaches to chemotherapy
refractory disease. The fact that several ALK-RAS-MAPK mutations were
found in the relapse but not in the corresponding primary tumors favors a
model in which rare subclones with secondary driver mutations expand over
time. However, it remains to be determined whether these mutations
occurred de novo after treatment, were present in rare subclones below
detection limits, or were undetectable due to spatial heterogeneity of
the primary tumor, which will impact the clinical utility of targeted
sequencing at diagnosis. Our study provides strong rationale for
performing biopsies on relapse neuroblastoma tumors in order to
comprehensively characterize the molecular lesions that underlie
treatment-refractory disease, determine their prognostic relevance, and
guide treatment decisions for patients.

