Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human papillomavirus 16 oncoprotein E6 upregulates c-Met partially
through p53 in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck


Background: Human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (OPSCC) carries a distinct clinical behavior. The c-Met
oncogene is an important driver for tumorigenesis, however, its
relationship with HPV oncoproteins remains unclear. The present study
aims to uncover the role of HPV in regulation of c-Met in OPSCC. Methods:
We first knocked down the HPV oncogene E6 by siRNA to check alteration of
c-Met expression through western blot and qRT-PCR in several HPV-positive
HNSCC cell lines and the cervical cancer cell line CaSki. Next, we tested
if E6 regulated c-Met expression is p53 dependent. Simultaneous knockdown
of p53 and E6 was compared to E6 knockdown alone for the impact of p53 on
c-Met expression using western blot analysis. In addition, the effects of
c-Met inhibition by both siRNA and a c-Met specific inhibitor SU11274 on
cell proliferation, migration, and colony formation were tested by
sulforhodamine B colorimetric assay (SRB), wound healing assay, and
colony formation assay, respectively, in HPV-positive cancer cell lines.
Using retrospectively collected tissue specimens from 78 patients with
OPSCC (N = 58 for HPV-positive vs. N = 20 for HPV-negative), we stained
for c-Met and p53 by immunohistochemistry and correlated their expression
with HPV status determined by HPV DNA in situ hybridization as well as
other clinical characteristics. Results: E6 knockdown significantly
decreased c-Met protein and mRNA expression in HPV-associated HNSCC and
CaSki cell lines. E6 regulated c-Met expression was partially blocked by
the elimination of p53. c-Met inhibition significantly decreased cell
proliferation, migration, and colony formation. In patient samples,
multivariate analysis revealed a significant association of c-Met
expression with HPV status (positive vs. negative, OR = 4.11, 95%CI:
1.16-14.55, P = 0.028) as well as tumor stage (T1/2 vs. T3/4, OR = 0.27,
95%CI: 0.08-0.93, P = 0.039). In T3/T4 stage patients (N = 21), c-Met
expression was significantly higher in HPV-positive patients and
inversely related with p53 levels, supporting an axis of E6-p53-c-Met
regulation. Conclusion: Our results show that c-Met expression is
upregulated by HPV E6, which is partially mediated by p53. The data
suggest that targeting c-Met may serve as a novel approach for treating
HPV-associated OPSCC.(This study was supported by grants from Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program (HHSN261201200097C), National
Institutes of Health (R33 CA161873), and National Cancer Institute (NCI
P50 CA 128613, Head and Neck SPORE).

