Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective estrogen receptor degrader (SERD) activity in ESR1
mutant models


The majority of breast cancers express and rely on ER for tumor growth,
thus endocrine therapy is the mainstay of ER-positive breast cancer
treatment. Despite the effectiveness of current therapies, many patients
relapse with tumors still dependent on ER for growth via both
estrogen-dependent and estrogen-independent mechanisms. Acquired
mutations in ESR1 were recently identified in the ligand-binding domain
of ER in patients who progressed after aromatase inhibitors and
tamoxifen. It is estimated that more than 20% of relapsed ER-positive
breast cancer patients acquire activating mutations in ESR1. We created a
variety of model systems to study the functional consequences of ESR1
mutations. In stable overexpressing cell lines, the mutant ER protein
eventually becomes down-regulated, thus we generated cell lines with
dox-inducible and CRISPR engineered ESR1 hotspot mutations. We confirmed
ligand-independent transcriptional activity of ESR1 hotspot mutations
including Y537S and D538G. Cell lines and patient derived xenograft (PDX)
models were utilized in ER ChIP-seq studies. Additionally, we
investigated therapeutic response and resistance in the context of ESR1
activating mutations for tamoxifen, fulvestrant, and next generation oral
SERDs including ARN-810, also known as GDC-0810. ARN-810 is efficacious
in MCF7 ESR1 Y537S xenografts and WHIM20 Y537S PDX tumors, indicating
that SERDs may be effective for ER mutants.

