Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Attempts to synthesize 5,7-dihydroxy-3H-1,2-dithiolo[4,3-d]-
pyrimidine, M-47, a potential new treatment for drug- resistant breast
cancer


M-47, 5,7-Dihydroxy-3H-1,2-dithiolo[4,3-d]pyrimidine, represents a novel
class of antineoplastic agents both in structure and apparent mechanism
of action. The synthesis of M-47 has been shown to be problematic. Mass
spectroscopy and HPLC suggest the presence of certain oxidative
byproducts in minor quantities along with the desired analog. Repeated
efforts to purify M-47 via crystallization, extraction, chemical
modification, and various forms of chromatography have failed. Although
enrichment of the sample in excess of 90% is possible, absolute purity
has not been achieved. Despite the presence of minor impurities this
analog was tested against a variety of cancer cell lines in vitro.
Interestingly, M-47 displayed equipotent activity against certain breast
cancer lines and their multidrug resistant progeny Furthermore, in vitro
testing of various ratios of M-47 with its oxidative byproducts indicated
that they possessed similar IC50's suggesting that cellular oxidation of
M-47 might be a necessary step in its cytotoxic pathway. The profound
activity of M-47, especially against drug-resistant tumor cells, warrants
further investigation into the chemistry of these compounds, their
biological activity and their possible mechanism of action.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

