Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PredICT: a novel solution for capturing, assembling and combining
in vivo data


Historically, within large pharmaceutical R&D organisations, the inherent
complexity and diversity of preclinical in vivo PKPD and efficacy data
has encouraged a culture in which data capture and storage is generally
informal and spreadsheet-based. This makes data sets both hard to find
and hard to accurately interpret and limits the useful lifetime of the
data. Cross-study analysis becomes inherently difficult, time-consuming
and error-prone due to the manual effort required to identify, obtain,
understand, collate and transform data sets from multiple studies into
appropriate formats for visualisation and analysis.With ever more
sophisticated studies being generated exploring doses, schedules and
combinations, and with the increased reliance on quantitative systems
pharmacology approaches to support drug projects, there is considerable
need to treat data as the vital asset it is recognised to be, and to
secure and exploit it in an effective way. PredICT is a novel platform
built to integrate, manage and analyse in vivo data in a much more
coherent fashion.The requirements in terms of the data workflow tools of
in vivo pharmacologists and modelling scientists were determined which
required the development of features that enable effective data
organisation and flow. Specifically (1) data capture tools that integrate
into the existing scientist workflow enabling efficient and automated
data upload; (2) a generalised language and database for storing in vivo
studies including the full details of the dosing regime and measured
endpoints; (3) a data query tool and interface to quickly and efficiently
identify the studies and data of interest in order to collate and present
a summarised set of results; (4) an automated export feature to deliver
data into formats that can be directly imported into visualisation and
modelling software. Complex Oncology in vivo studies assessing multiple
dose and schedule groups can be expressed in the database, providing all
the primary and meta-data to re-create the experiment numerically. These
studies can then be visualised in a query tool that collates data from
across multiple studies to enable integrated analysis.PredICT platform
has transformed the way in which all project scientists handle in vivo
data at AstraZeneca. For in vivo pharmacology scientists the benefits are
a more streamlined workflow for the capture and storage of data, along
with an effective and efficient tool for identifying and retrieving data
from across multiple studies, projects and in vivo models into a single
data table. For modelling & simulation scientists, it has reduced the
proportion of time spent dealing with data organisation from
approximately 50% to less than 5%, allowing them to focus on deriving
scientific insight rather than hunting for and manually collating data
sets. More broadly, the platform secures in vivo data in a consistent and
robust manner, which ensures data integrity for long term use and
reference.

