Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A snapshot of pan-cellular PTM in response to Sorafenib-mediated
multikinase inhibition


More fundamentally than regulating specific functions or cascades, PTM
affords proteins the mechanical complexity necessary to make human cells
function. We believe that specifically modified forms of proteins are
what conduct the cells business, and that by monitoring these proteoforms
we can gain unique insight into cellular physiology. To test this, we
treated HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells with the multi-kinase
inhibitor Sorafenib, and observed pharmacodynamic changes to PTM across
the cellular proteome. Our novel approach, referred to as Snapshot
Proteomics, revealed changes in phosphorylation to known targets of this
drug. Intriquingly, we also observed changes to proteins whose roles make
them strong candidates for mediating the clinical side effects of
Sorafenib treatment. We also observed that the changes mediating the
therapeutic response were far from the most dramatic ones observed,
suggesting other, unexpected proteins as better putative pharmacodynamic
biomarkers. Finally, we found that manipulating cellular phosphorylation
pharmacologically had dramatic and interesting effects on other PTM
pathways as well, ubiquitin in particular. This confirmed the already
established crosstalk between these pathways, and supports our contention
that no PTM occurs in a vacuum.

