Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hormone replacement therapy and genome-wide DNA methylation among
post-menopausal women


Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) has been associated with increased
risks of cancers of the breast, ovary, endometrium and colon. The exact
mechanism underlying these associations remains unknown, though changes
to DNA methylation have been suggested to play a role. To explore this
compelling mechanism, we examined genome-wide DNA methylation in blood
among 92 women with and without a history of long-term HRT use that were
recruited as controls for a previous case-control study of breast cancer.
HRT exposure was defined as estrogen use for at least 10 years among
women with hysterectomy (n = 23) and as estrogen and progesterone use for
at least 5 years among women without hysterectomy (n = 23). Women with
and without hysterectomy and no history of HRT use were selected for
comparison (n = 46). Genome-wide methylation was measured in DNA from
blood using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip platform.
After excluding loci on sex chromosomes, loci with detection p-values 1%,
and loci with cross-reactive probes, 343,349 loci were included for
analysis. Separately for the hysterectomy and non-hysterectomy groups,
the M-value for each locus (defined as the logit of methylated probe
intensity and overall intensity using a 0.001 threshold) was regressed
against HRT status in linear models to adjust for age and BMI. The
Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) method was used to account for
multiple comparisons by controlling the false discovery rate. Preliminary
analyses have revealed significant differential methylation at four loci,
including cg19987229, cg22610211, cg08440572, and cg11372436. For
example, estrogen and progesterone users among women without hysterectomy
were found to have 74% greater methylation at a locus near the
transcription start site of the SOD3 gene (q1%, and loci with
cross-reactive probes, 343,349 loci were included for analysis.
Separately for the hysterectomy and non-hysterectomy groups, the M-value
for each locus (defined as the logit of methylated probe intensity and
overall intensity using a 0.001 threshold) was regressed against HRT
status in linear models to adjust for age and BMI. The Significance
Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) method was used to account for multiple
comparisons by controlling the false discovery rate. Preliminary analyses
have revealed significant differential methylation at four loci,
including cg19987229, cg22610211, cg08440572, and cg11372436. For
example, estrogen and progesterone users among women without hysterectomy
were found to have 74% greater methylation at a locus near the
transcription start site of the SOD3 gene (q<0.001). This may lead to
decreased expression of the SOD3 gene which is involved in oxidative
stress response. Data analyses at the level of gene, gene region, and CpG
island are currently in progress. Differentially methylated loci
identified in this study should be evaluated in association with breast
cancer risk in a prospective study of breast cancer with detailed data on
HRT use. If significant associations are observed, these loci could
conceivably be used in screening efforts to identify HRT users that may
be particularly susceptible to developing breast cancer.

