Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of triple miRNAs, miR-9, miR-221, and
miR-200c in breast cancer


MicroRNAs (miRNA) mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition have been
considered as a major event in cancer aggression and accounted for cancer
progression. However, clinical association between synergistic effect of
deregulated expression levels of the EMT-related miRNAs, including miR-9,
miR-221, and miR-200c, and breast cancer prognoses remains
underestimated. Initially, tissue samples were from 184 enrolled female
patients, with invasive ductal carcinoma, followed up for more than ten
years. miRNA expression levels between paired laser capture
microdissected tumor and non-tumor cells from the primary tumor site was
analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Differentially
expressed status of the target miRNA in tumors relative to non-tumor
parts (T/N ratio) was assessed their relationship with pathological
characteristics and clinical outcomes of breast cancer. While miR-9 or
miR-221 showed significantly higher expression level in tumor cells
compared to the non-tumor ones, miR-200c exhibited the opposite
(pMicroRNAs (miRNA) mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition have been
considered as a major event in cancer aggression and accounted for cancer
progression. However, clinical association between synergistic effect of
deregulated expression levels of the EMT-related miRNAs, including miR-9,
miR-221, and miR-200c, and breast cancer prognoses remains
underestimated. Initially, tissue samples were from 184 enrolled female
patients, with invasive ductal carcinoma, followed up for more than ten
years. miRNA expression levels between paired laser capture
microdissected tumor and non-tumor cells from the primary tumor site was
analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Differentially
expressed status of the target miRNA in tumors relative to non-tumor
parts (T/N ratio) was assessed their relationship with pathological
characteristics and clinical outcomes of breast cancer. While miR-9 or
miR-221 showed significantly higher expression level in tumor cells
compared to the non-tumor ones, miR-200c exhibited the opposite (p<0.05).
Based on the ROC curve, T/N ratio of 2.80- and 1.96-fold increase for
miR-9 and miR-221, whereas, 1.80-fold decrease for miR-200c as risk
genotypes, respectively. According to these cutoffs, high miR-9
expression in tumors was associated with advanced tumor stages
(pMicroRNAs (miRNA) mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition have been
considered as a major event in cancer aggression and accounted for cancer
progression. However, clinical association between synergistic effect of
deregulated expression levels of the EMT-related miRNAs, including miR-9,
miR-221, and miR-200c, and breast cancer prognoses remains
underestimated. Initially, tissue samples were from 184 enrolled female
patients, with invasive ductal carcinoma, followed up for more than ten
years. miRNA expression levels between paired laser capture
microdissected tumor and non-tumor cells from the primary tumor site was
analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Differentially
expressed status of the target miRNA in tumors relative to non-tumor
parts (T/N ratio) was assessed their relationship with pathological
characteristics and clinical outcomes of breast cancer. While miR-9 or
miR-221 showed significantly higher expression level in tumor cells
compared to the non-tumor ones, miR-200c exhibited the opposite (p<0.05).
Based on the ROC curve, T/N ratio of 2.80- and 1.96-fold increase for
miR-9 and miR-221, whereas, 1.80-fold decrease for miR-200c as risk
genotypes, respectively. According to these cutoffs, high miR-9
expression in tumors was associated with advanced tumor stages (p<0.05);
significant risk associations were shown between LNM-positive tumors and
miR-9 (OR = 3.12) or miR-221 (OR = 1.88) (pMicroRNAs (miRNA) mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition have been considered as a major event
in cancer aggression and accounted for cancer progression. However,
clinical association between synergistic effect of deregulated expression
levels of the EMT-related miRNAs, including miR-9, miR-221, and miR-200c,
and breast cancer prognoses remains underestimated. Initially, tissue
samples were from 184 enrolled female patients, with invasive ductal
carcinoma, followed up for more than ten years. miRNA expression levels
between paired laser capture microdissected tumor and non-tumor cells
from the primary tumor site was analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR). Differentially expressed status of the target miRNA in tumors
relative to non-tumor parts (T/N ratio) was assessed their relationship
with pathological characteristics and clinical outcomes of breast cancer.
While miR-9 or miR-221 showed significantly higher expression level in
tumor cells compared to the non-tumor ones, miR-200c exhibited the
opposite (p<0.05). Based on the ROC curve, T/N ratio of 2.80- and
1.96-fold increase for miR-9 and miR-221, whereas, 1.80-fold decrease for
miR-200c as risk genotypes, respectively. According to these cutoffs,
high miR-9 expression in tumors was associated with advanced tumor stages
(p<0.05); significant risk associations were shown between LNM-positive
tumors and miR-9 (OR = 3.12) or miR-221 (OR = 1.88) (p<0.05). A joint
effect on risk elevation of tumor invasion and nodal metastasis was seen
in tumors having miR-9 overexpression alongside increased miR-221 or
reduced miR-200c expression (p-trendMicroRNAs (miRNA) mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition have been considered as a major event
in cancer aggression and accounted for cancer progression. However,
clinical association between synergistic effect of deregulated expression
levels of the EMT-related miRNAs, including miR-9, miR-221, and miR-200c,
and breast cancer prognoses remains underestimated. Initially, tissue
samples were from 184 enrolled female patients, with invasive ductal
carcinoma, followed up for more than ten years. miRNA expression levels
between paired laser capture microdissected tumor and non-tumor cells
from the primary tumor site was analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR). Differentially expressed status of the target miRNA in tumors
relative to non-tumor parts (T/N ratio) was assessed their relationship
with pathological characteristics and clinical outcomes of breast cancer.
While miR-9 or miR-221 showed significantly higher expression level in
tumor cells compared to the non-tumor ones, miR-200c exhibited the
opposite (p<0.05). Based on the ROC curve, T/N ratio of 2.80- and
1.96-fold increase for miR-9 and miR-221, whereas, 1.80-fold decrease for
miR-200c as risk genotypes, respectively. According to these cutoffs,
high miR-9 expression in tumors was associated with advanced tumor stages
(p<0.05); significant risk associations were shown between LNM-positive
tumors and miR-9 (OR = 3.12) or miR-221 (OR = 1.88) (p<0.05). A joint
effect on risk elevation of tumor invasion and nodal metastasis was seen
in tumors having miR-9 overexpression alongside increased miR-221 or
reduced miR-200c expression (p-trend<0.05). Considering the combined
effect of these three miRNAs, patients harboring greater numbers of
deregulated expression levels in tumors were found to have a higher risk
of poor prognoses (high-stage (p-trend = 0.003) and LNM (p-trend =
0.028)) and reduced probability of 10-year overall survival, showing
hazard ratio of 2.39 (pMicroRNAs (miRNA) mediated epithelial-mesenchymal
transition have been considered as a major event in cancer aggression and
accounted for cancer progression. However, clinical association between
synergistic effect of deregulated expression levels of the EMT-related
miRNAs, including miR-9, miR-221, and miR-200c, and breast cancer
prognoses remains underestimated. Initially, tissue samples were from 184
enrolled female patients, with invasive ductal carcinoma, followed up for
more than ten years. miRNA expression levels between paired laser capture
microdissected tumor and non-tumor cells from the primary tumor site was
analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Differentially
expressed status of the target miRNA in tumors relative to non-tumor
parts (T/N ratio) was assessed their relationship with pathological
characteristics and clinical outcomes of breast cancer. While miR-9 or
miR-221 showed significantly higher expression level in tumor cells
compared to the non-tumor ones, miR-200c exhibited the opposite (p<0.05).
Based on the ROC curve, T/N ratio of 2.80- and 1.96-fold increase for
miR-9 and miR-221, whereas, 1.80-fold decrease for miR-200c as risk
genotypes, respectively. According to these cutoffs, high miR-9
expression in tumors was associated with advanced tumor stages (p<0.05);
significant risk associations were shown between LNM-positive tumors and
miR-9 (OR = 3.12) or miR-221 (OR = 1.88) (p<0.05). A joint effect on risk
elevation of tumor invasion and nodal metastasis was seen in tumors
having miR-9 overexpression alongside increased miR-221 or reduced
miR-200c expression (p-trend<0.05). Considering the combined effect of
these three miRNAs, patients harboring greater numbers of deregulated
expression levels in tumors were found to have a higher risk of poor
prognoses (high-stage (p-trend = 0.003) and LNM (p-trend = 0.028)) and
reduced probability of 10-year overall survival, showing hazard ratio of
2.39 (p<0001 for trend test). In conclusion, deregulated levels of miR-9,
miR-221, and miR-200c, may serve as prognostic biomarkers to predict
disease progression and shorter OS in breast cancer.

