Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in dynamic modulation of CoQ10 redox status and
intracellular localization between non-disease and cancer cell lines


Although it is well recognized that Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) is present in
all cellular membrane structures, its effects on cellular functions other
than mitochondrial regulation is poorly understood. The present study was
aimed at gleaning insights into effect on CoQ10 on sub-cellular
metabolism, regulation of the redox status, as well as gene regulation. A
series of fluorescent probes were developed with the ability to report on
the consequence of specific biological events in which CoQ10 was
involved. The probes constituted fluorescently labeled CoQ10 analogues
designed to track the distribution, biochemical and redox behaviour of
CoQ10 in a non-invasive manner providing real time information in live
cells. Compartmentalization of fluorescent labeled CoQ10 probe
incorporated within BPM 31510 liposomal formulation was characterized in
human derived primary non-disease and cancer cell lines. Cellular
distribution of the fluorescent CoQ10 varied depending upon cell type.
The fluorescent CoQ10 probes were designed and utility to provide a time
resolved assessment on the redox state of CoQ10 in whole cells and
organelles as a measure of the cell's overall and intracellular location
specific metabolic micro-environments. The ratio of reduced and oxidized
form of fluorescent CoQ10 was also examined in relation to ROS production
in cancer cells. The overall results describes the presence of a constant
redox flux influencing the redox state of CoQ10 within cancer and normal
cells with significant variation depending on cell type and disease
status.

