Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progress in The Cancer Genome Atlas bladder cancer project


In 2014, as part of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Project, we reported
molecular profiling of 131 chemotherapy-naive, muscle-invasive urothelial
bladder cancers for DNA copy number variants (CNVs), somatic mutations by
whole exome sequencing (WES), DNA methylation, mRNA expression, microRNA
expression, protein expression and phosphorylation, transcript splicing,
gene fusion, viral integration, pathway perturbation, clinical
correlates, and histopathology (TCGA Research Network, Nature 507:315,
2014). Since that time, the number of tumors (from 19 tissue source
sites) profiled comprehensively has doubled, and the final analyzed
cohort will total 412 by February 2015. Unsupervised consensus clustering
for the data from miRNAseq on the first 310 tumor samples shows five
robust clusters, with miR-99a, miR-100, and miR-200 family members
differentially abundant across the clusters. mRNA clusters I-IV remained
stable as well. For the 266 tumour samples for which we have both miRNA
and mRNA data, potential miRNA-mRNA targeting relationships supported by
functional validation publications include miR-100-5p targeting FGFR3.
The data also highlight the miR-200 family, miR-29abc, miR-17-92 and
106b-25 complexes, as well as miR-34a, miR-155, and miR-21. At this time,
mutation analysis of WES data has been completed for 238 samples
(including the first 131). Seven additional significantly mutated genes
(using MutSig) have been identified: ASXL2 (11%), HSP90AA1 (7%), PSIP1
(5%), ZFP36L2 (5%), ZNF513 (5%), PTEN (4%), CEBPB (2%) (mutant frequency
in parentheses). A sample with a POLE exonuclease domain mutation (P286R)
exhibited an ultra-mutant phenotype (mutation rate 100 per MB). Many of
the 38 (total) SMGs have not previously been described in bladder cancer.
Combining copy number variation and somatic mutation data, 69% of tumors
harbor one or more potentially actionable targets. Three mutation
clusters were identified and characterized as: 1) Focally amplified -
enriched in focal copy number alterations (e.g., 3p loss/PPARG) and MLL2
mutations; 2) Enriched for TP53 and RB1 mutations, E2F3 amplifications;
and 3) Papillary histology, FGFR3 mutant CDKN2A-deficient.This work was
supported by the following grants from the United States National
Institutes of Health: U54HG003273, U54 HG003067, U54 HG003079, U24
CA143799, U24 CA143835, U24CA143840, U24 CA143843, U24 CA143845, U24
CA143848, U24 CA143858, U24CA143866, U24 CA143867, U24 CA143882, U24
CA143883, U24 CA144025 and P01 CA120964, as well as multiple other
funding sources for the individual authors.

