Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The codon 72 polymorphism in p53 is a gain-of-function alteration
leading to activation of map kinase signaling and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in colon cancer


Background: The codon 72 polymorphism in p53 has been implicated in
several human malignancies and cancer health disparities. In this study,
we determine the functional role of this frequently occurring
polymorphism using an in-vitro cell based system in colon
cancer.Experimental Design: Plasmids (pCMV6) that express different
phenotypes of p53 [p53 wild type (wt) at codon 72 (R72wt), R72wt with
mutation at codon 273 cysteine (R72273Cys), p53 mutation at codon 72
(P72wt) and P72wt with mutation at codon 273 (P72273Cys)] were
constructed. We selected a colon cancer cell line Caco2, which does not
express p53. After transfection, the expression of p53 phenotypes was
confirmed by western blot analysis. Clones resistant to geneticin were
assessed for cell survival; colonies were stained with 0.5% crystal
violet and counted. Western blot or immunostaining analyses for proteins
of MAP kinase signaling, Akt and/or epithelial mesenchymal transition
mechanisms were performed to assess the gain-of-function (GOF) of P72
phenotype of p53.Results: Our study demonstrated that there was a
significant increased cell survival in cells that express P72wt phenotype
compared to cells that express R72wt phenotype. This cell survival was
also increased in cells that express R72273Cys mutant phenotype. The
P72wt phenotype induces morphological changes including cell polarization
and extension of invadopodia associated with tumor progression. Western
blot analyses revealed that P72wt and mutant phenotypes effectively
induced the activation of p38 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) MAP kinases. Up-regulation of phosphorylated SEK1/MKK4, or
phosphorylated MEK1/2, upstream kinases of p38 MAPK, p44/42 MAPK
respectively has been found to be associated with P72wt or mutant
phenotypes. This activation was accompanied by up-regulation of
phosphorylated-MAPKAPK-2 and phosphorylated-Hsp27, downstream targets of
p38 MAPK. Furthermore, suppression of Akt activation was significantly
higher in cells that express R72wt phenotype compared to cells that
express P72wt or mutant phenotypes. This suppression was accompanied by
down-regulation of phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase-3, a
downstream target of p-Akt. The expression of P72wt and mutant phenotypes
displayed decreased expression of E cadherin (loss of epithelial nature)
and/or an increased expression of vimentin, fibrinectin (gain of
mesenchymal nature).Conclusions: Collectively, these findings show that
the P72 polymorphism of p53 in colon cancer is a GOF alteration leading
to activation of tumor promoting phenotype. The possibility of P72
blockade may be considered in patients with colon cancer that are
unresponsive to conventional treatments. This work was supported by
NIH/NCI Workforce Diversity Grant R21-CA171251.

