Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimized treatment schedule with the new generation
CD22-targeting immunotoxin LMB11 induces near MRD-negativity in an ALL
mouse model


Objective: The Pseudomonas exotoxin (PE) based anti-CD22 immunotoxin
Moxetumomab pasudotox (HA22) has a response rate of 95% in hairy cell
leukemia (HCL) (Kreitman et al 2012), but only about 25% of children with
multiply relapsed ALL achieve a complete response (CR) (Wayne et al AACR
2014). HA22 is highly cytotoxic to B-lineage leukemia and lymphoma lines
in vitro and in subcutaneous mouse models (Onda et al 2011). HA22 is also
active vs primary blasts from 24/35 (68%) children with ALL (Mussai et al
2010). Since there is a significant difference between ALL patient cells
in vitro and response rate in patients, we have investigated possible
mechanisms of HA22 resistance in mice to aid development of methods to
increase response rates in humans.Methods: We used a modified anti-CD22
immunotoxin, LMB11, which can be safely given to mice at a 10-fold higher
dose than HA22 (Bera et al Leuk Lymph 2014). NSG mice were inoculated
with 5 million KOPN8 cells I.V. on day 1 and treated on days 8, 10, 12,
14 and 16 with 50 g LMB11. Bone marrow (BM) samples were analyzed by FLOW
for KOPN8 infiltration and apoptosis. Bio-distribution studies used
Alexa647-coupled LMB11 and Alexa647 beads to quantify number of LMB11
molecules taken up per cell. Cells were treated with LMB11 for various
times, washed, re-plated for 3d, and cell death measured by Annexin
V-PE/7-AAD in Flow.Results: KOPN8 cells are very sensitive to LMB11
(IC50, 0.5 ng/ml) in vitro. Maximal ADP-ribosylation of EF2 occurs at 6h,
protein synthesis stops at 8h, MCL1 levels fall at 8h, and PARP cleavage
begins at 10h. Untreated KOPN8-inoculated NSG mice survived 21.5 d. When
treated with 50ug x 5 of LMB11, mice survived 30 d. There was no
significant apoptosis of KOPN8 cells in murine BM during LMB11 dosing.
ALL BM infiltration remained at 5% during dosing. Four days after the
last dose, BM infiltration increased rapidly. Cellular uptake of LMB11
was 200-fold over the amount required to kill cells in vitro.To identify
potential resistance mechanisms, we treated KOPN8 for various times in
vitro and found that KOPN8 needed a 9h exposure to LMB11 for >95% of
cells to die. There was p38 MAPK activation at 6h, which is probably
responsible for cell cycle arrest of KOPN8 cells in the BM.Because LMB11
has a short half-life (30 min) in mice and because long exposure time is
needed to induce apoptosis in vitro, we treated with 4 doses of 25 ug
LMB11 every 3h for 3 days to maintain adequate blood levels. This
resulted in near MRD-negative BM (0.004%) by flow.We screened many drugs
for their ability to shorten the exposure time needed to induce >95% cell
death by LMB11 and found that H89, nilotinib, imatinib and verapamil were
active.Conclusion: KOPN8 cells need prolonged immunotoxin exposure to
drive cells into apoptosis. HA22 given more frequently or combined with
sensitizing agents might increase CR rates in patients with ALL.

