Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Visceral abdominal fat is associated with incisional hernia
occurrence after colorectal cancer surgery - the ColoCare Study


Introduction:Abdominal surgery for tumor removal is essential in the
treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC). Incisional hernias (IH) are a
common long-term complication after abdominal surgery with an incidence
of 9-20%. Several risk factors for developing IH have been identified,
including a higher body mass index (BMI). However, it is unknown whether
specific abdominal fat compartments, such as subcutaneous or visceral
fat, are associated with IH occurrence. Thus, the aim of this study was
to explore whether subcutaneous or visceral fat compartments might be
predictors of IH occurrence in CRC patients after oncologic
surgery.Methods:This study was conducted on 139 newly-diagnosed
colorectal cancer patients of the prospective cohort study ColoCare (NCT,
Heidelberg, Germany) who underwent oncologic surgery at the surgical
clinics of the University Hospital Heidelberg. Self-administered
questionnaires were used to assess hernia occurrence at 3, 6, 12 and 24
months post-surgery. BMI was calculated (kg/m^2) and abdominal fat
compartments were assessed by routine computed tomography (CT) scans. The
total (TFA), subcutaneous (SFA) and visceral fat area (VFA) was
quantified as area (cm^2) on level L3/L4 and L4/L5. Before analyses, fat
data were grouped into two categories (high vs. low) by the median.
Logistic regression was used to measure the association between BMI, TFA,
SFA or VFA and IH occurrence.Results:Patients were on average 61.3 (12.5)
years old with 37% being female and 63% being male. Patients were
diagnosed with either colon/rectosigmoid (53%) or rectal (47%) primary
cancer. CT data on abdominal fat compartments were available for 56% (n =
80) of patients as CT scans were not performed on every subject during
clinical routine. BMI was a statistically significant predictor of IH
occurrence after adjusting for gender and age (Wald p-value
Introduction:Abdominal surgery for tumor removal is essential in the
treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC). Incisional hernias (IH) are a
common long-term complication after abdominal surgery with an incidence
of 9-20%. Several risk factors for developing IH have been identified,
including a higher body mass index (BMI). However, it is unknown whether
specific abdominal fat compartments, such as subcutaneous or visceral
fat, are associated with IH occurrence. Thus, the aim of this study was
to explore whether subcutaneous or visceral fat compartments might be
predictors of IH occurrence in CRC patients after oncologic
surgery.Methods:This study was conducted on 139 newly-diagnosed
colorectal cancer patients of the prospective cohort study ColoCare (NCT,
Heidelberg, Germany) who underwent oncologic surgery at the surgical
clinics of the University Hospital Heidelberg. Self-administered
questionnaires were used to assess hernia occurrence at 3, 6, 12 and 24
months post-surgery. BMI was calculated (kg/m^2) and abdominal fat
compartments were assessed by routine computed tomography (CT) scans. The
total (TFA), subcutaneous (SFA) and visceral fat area (VFA) was
quantified as area (cm^2) on level L3/L4 and L4/L5. Before analyses, fat
data were grouped into two categories (high vs. low) by the median.
Logistic regression was used to measure the association between BMI, TFA,
SFA or VFA and IH occurrence.Results:Patients were on average 61.3 (12.5)
years old with 37% being female and 63% being male. Patients were
diagnosed with either colon/rectosigmoid (53%) or rectal (47%) primary
cancer. CT data on abdominal fat compartments were available for 56% (n =
80) of patients as CT scans were not performed on every subject during
clinical routine. BMI was a statistically significant predictor of IH
occurrence after adjusting for gender and age (Wald p-value <0.001, OR =
1.19). Of all fat values, only VFA on level L3/L4 was statistically
significant associated with IH occurrence after adjusting for gender and
age (Wald p-value Introduction:Abdominal surgery for tumor removal is
essential in the treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC). Incisional hernias
(IH) are a common long-term complication after abdominal surgery with an
incidence of 9-20%. Several risk factors for developing IH have been
identified, including a higher body mass index (BMI). However, it is
unknown whether specific abdominal fat compartments, such as subcutaneous
or visceral fat, are associated with IH occurrence. Thus, the aim of this
study was to explore whether subcutaneous or visceral fat compartments
might be predictors of IH occurrence in CRC patients after oncologic
surgery.Methods:This study was conducted on 139 newly-diagnosed
colorectal cancer patients of the prospective cohort study ColoCare (NCT,
Heidelberg, Germany) who underwent oncologic surgery at the surgical
clinics of the University Hospital Heidelberg. Self-administered
questionnaires were used to assess hernia occurrence at 3, 6, 12 and 24
months post-surgery. BMI was calculated (kg/m^2) and abdominal fat
compartments were assessed by routine computed tomography (CT) scans. The
total (TFA), subcutaneous (SFA) and visceral fat area (VFA) was
quantified as area (cm^2) on level L3/L4 and L4/L5. Before analyses, fat
data were grouped into two categories (high vs. low) by the median.
Logistic regression was used to measure the association between BMI, TFA,
SFA or VFA and IH occurrence.Results:Patients were on average 61.3 (12.5)
years old with 37% being female and 63% being male. Patients were
diagnosed with either colon/rectosigmoid (53%) or rectal (47%) primary
cancer. CT data on abdominal fat compartments were available for 56% (n =
80) of patients as CT scans were not performed on every subject during
clinical routine. BMI was a statistically significant predictor of IH
occurrence after adjusting for gender and age (Wald p-value <0.001, OR =
1.19). Of all fat values, only VFA on level L3/L4 was statistically
significant associated with IH occurrence after adjusting for gender and
age (Wald p-value <0.05, OR = 2.36), while TFA and SFA on level L3/L4 and
all level L4/L5 fat values were not associated with IH
occurrence.Conclusion:Our findings underline BMI as a known predictive
risk factor for IH. In addition, our study newly identified visceral, but
not total or subcutaneous fat, as risk factors for IH. Further studies
with an increased sample size are needed to test these associations in
subgroups of patients, e.g. by gender or surgical procedures. In the
future, these findings may help to preoperatively decide on prophylactic
interventions, such as intraoperative mesh implantations, to reduce
hernia occurrence.

