Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cabazitaxel chemotherapy targets mitotic kinesins resulting in
multi-nucleation of prostate cancer cells: A novel mechanism of
cross-resistance with antiandrogens in advanced CRPC


Progression to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is
characterized by increased androgen receptor (AR) and activated AR
signaling despite castrate levels of androgens. The FDA-approved next
generation microtubule stabilizing taxane, Cabazitaxel (CBZ) and novel
anti-androgen Enzalutamide (MDV) have demonstrated additional survival
benefits for patients with advanced CRPC. The present study pursued the
mechanism of therapeutic resistance to CBZ and antiandrogen treatment in
models of CRPC. The effect CBZ and/or MDV was examined in human prostate
cancer cells: androgen independent (DU145 and PC3), androgen responsive
(LNCaP and VCaP) and CRPC (22Rv1 and PC3-ARv567, harboring AR variants).
Cell viability assessment revealed that CRPC PC3-ARv567es and the
androgen-sensitive VCaP cells exhibited resistance to CBZ; however the
22Rv1 cells responded to CBZ and MDV combination with a significant
increase in growth (PProgression to castration-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) is characterized by increased androgen receptor (AR) and activated
AR signaling despite castrate levels of androgens. The FDA-approved next
generation microtubule stabilizing taxane, Cabazitaxel (CBZ) and novel
anti-androgen Enzalutamide (MDV) have demonstrated additional survival
benefits for patients with advanced CRPC. The present study pursued the
mechanism of therapeutic resistance to CBZ and antiandrogen treatment in
models of CRPC. The effect CBZ and/or MDV was examined in human prostate
cancer cells: androgen independent (DU145 and PC3), androgen responsive
(LNCaP and VCaP) and CRPC (22Rv1 and PC3-ARv567, harboring AR variants).
Cell viability assessment revealed that CRPC PC3-ARv567es and the
androgen-sensitive VCaP cells exhibited resistance to CBZ; however the
22Rv1 cells responded to CBZ and MDV combination with a significant
increase in growth (P<0.05). Confocal microscopy and Western blot
analysis were used to establish the subcellular localization and protein
expression in prostate cancer cells. Antiandrogen (MDV) treatment
(24hrs;1uM) led to a cytoplasmic accumulation of AR, while treatment with
CBZ (72hrs, 35 -100nM) decreased AR expression, but it did not inhibit
its nuclear localization. Furthermore CBZ induced mono-astral spindle
formation, centrosomal clustering and multi-nucleation, potentially via
targeting the pro-mitotic kinesins, MCAK and HSET, regardless of androgen
status. To determine the in vivo efficacy of CBZ and androgen axis
targeting, we used a transgenic mouse model of prostate cancer (Dominant
negative TGFRII/TRAMP) that is driven to metastasis by
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Immunohistochemical profiling of
prostate tumors from untreated control and CBZ treated mice demonstrated
that combination of CBZ and castration-induced androgen depletion reduced
kinesin and AR expression and reversed EMT, impairing prostate cancer
progression. Furthermore, CBZ treatment restored normal glandular
differentiation (by H&E), without significant effect on apoptosis in
tumor epithelial cells. Cell proliferation was significantly decreased in
response to castration-induced androgen depletion in combination with CBZ
(2wks) (PProgression to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is
characterized by increased androgen receptor (AR) and activated AR
signaling despite castrate levels of androgens. The FDA-approved next
generation microtubule stabilizing taxane, Cabazitaxel (CBZ) and novel
anti-androgen Enzalutamide (MDV) have demonstrated additional survival
benefits for patients with advanced CRPC. The present study pursued the
mechanism of therapeutic resistance to CBZ and antiandrogen treatment in
models of CRPC. The effect CBZ and/or MDV was examined in human prostate
cancer cells: androgen independent (DU145 and PC3), androgen responsive
(LNCaP and VCaP) and CRPC (22Rv1 and PC3-ARv567, harboring AR variants).
Cell viability assessment revealed that CRPC PC3-ARv567es and the
androgen-sensitive VCaP cells exhibited resistance to CBZ; however the
22Rv1 cells responded to CBZ and MDV combination with a significant
increase in growth (P<0.05). Confocal microscopy and Western blot
analysis were used to establish the subcellular localization and protein
expression in prostate cancer cells. Antiandrogen (MDV) treatment
(24hrs;1uM) led to a cytoplasmic accumulation of AR, while treatment with
CBZ (72hrs, 35 -100nM) decreased AR expression, but it did not inhibit
its nuclear localization. Furthermore CBZ induced mono-astral spindle
formation, centrosomal clustering and multi-nucleation, potentially via
targeting the pro-mitotic kinesins, MCAK and HSET, regardless of androgen
status. To determine the in vivo efficacy of CBZ and androgen axis
targeting, we used a transgenic mouse model of prostate cancer (Dominant
negative TGFRII/TRAMP) that is driven to metastasis by
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Immunohistochemical profiling of
prostate tumors from untreated control and CBZ treated mice demonstrated
that combination of CBZ and castration-induced androgen depletion reduced
kinesin and AR expression and reversed EMT, impairing prostate cancer
progression. Furthermore, CBZ treatment restored normal glandular
differentiation (by H&E), without significant effect on apoptosis in
tumor epithelial cells. Cell proliferation was significantly decreased in
response to castration-induced androgen depletion in combination with CBZ
(2wks) (P<0.05). These findings support the ability of CBZ to target
pro-mitotic kinesins, providing an insight into a new mechanism of action
of this taxane that can be exploited for targeting CRPC patients with
kinesin overexpression. Moreover, the in vivo evidence identified that
CBZ chemotherapy has novel effects beyond suppressing tumor growth, by
inducing prostate glandular differentiation. This study is of
translational significance in introducing a novel mechanism to overcome
cross-resistance to CBZ chemotherapy and anti-androgens in advanced CRPC.

