Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to P450c17 inhibitors in castration-resistant prostate
cancer may result from the DHEA-S depot that remains and can be used by
AKR1C3 for intratumoral androgen biosynthesis


Localized intermediate and high-risk prostate cancer can be treated with
androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). Initially, patients undergo remission
but inevitably relapse due to the emergence of castration resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). Newer agents such as the P450c17 inhibitor,
abiraterone acetate (AA), have gained approval for the treatment of CRPC
and increased median survival by 4 months. We have developed a novel and
validated stable isotope dilution liquid chromatography selected reaction
monitoring mass spectrometry (SID-LC/ESI/SRM/MS) method for the
quantification of conjugated and unconjugated keto-androgens in human
serum (J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (2013) 138:281). This method was
applied to human serum from patients enrolled in a neoadjuvant AA
clinical trial (J Clin Oncol (2014) 32:3705). We found that testosterone
(T) and 5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) did not always decrease in tandem,
which suggests that pathways that bypass T may lead to DHT. These may
include the alternative pathway (4-androstene-3,17-dione ->
5-androstane-3,17-dione -> DHT) or the backdoor pathway (androsterone ->
5-androstane-3,17-diol -> DHT). Second, despite achieving >90% inhibition
of P450c17, the level of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S) that
remains (20,000 ng/dL) is 4,000-fold higher than castrate levels of T
achieved in the trial. We hypothesize that the DHEA-S depot that remains
is sufficient to feed intratumoral androgen biosynthesis and that this
could account for the clinical failure of P450c17 inhibitors in CRPC.
Adaptive intratumoral androgen biosynthesis may be facilitated by the
up-regulation of AKR1C3 (type 5 17-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase). In
order to test our hypothesis, we have developed a panel of isogenic
prostate cancer cell lines that either express AKR1C3 or are AKR1C3 null.
These cell lines are then challenged with post-AA levels of circulating
androgens (DHEA-S, DHEA and 4-androstene-3,17-dione) to determine whether
they can still make sufficient androgens to activate the androgen
receptor (AR), where androgen metabolism is measured using
SID-LC/ESI/SRM/MS. Using LNCaP and LNCaP-AKR1C3 cells, we find that the
level of T detected as T-17-glucuronide in the AKR1C3 expressing cells
could be sufficient to activate the AR. These results would suggest that
AKR1C3 inhibitors in combination with AA could benefit patients who might
otherwise fail AA treatment. [Supported by grants: R25-CA101871 to DT;
P30-ES-13508 to TMP; P01-CA-163337 to SPB, EM, TMP and PSN)]

