Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analgesic effect of quetiapine on the cancer induced bone pain
animal model


Background: Cancer induced bone pain is one of the most common pain in
patients with advanced cancer. Because of treatment associated side
effects, it has been reported that more than half of cancer patients have
inadequate and undermanaged pain control. Therefore, new mechanism-based
therapies need to be developed to reduce cancer pain. Quetiapine is a
commonly used atypical antipsychotic drug that has superior therapeutic
effects in patients with schizophrenia and other neurological disorders
like depression. We reported that a study of anti-inflammatory effect of
quetiapine on collagen induced arthritis mouse model. Now we focused on
the potential analgesic effects of quetiapine on the cancer induced bone
pain (CIBP) animal model and the mechanism of bone pain evaluated by
various nociceptors expression.Methods: Fifteen male C3H/HeN mice were
randomly divided into five groups: Control, CIBP, CIBP + quetiapine
treatment, CIBP + opioid treatment and CIBP + melatonin treatment.
Treatments were started when mouse showed positive signs of bone tumor
until the day 28, according to the protocol, daily for 12 days. Pain
thresholds of CIBP mouse model were measured by aesthesiometer for each
group. At the end of the treatment period, tissue of mouse tibia were
removed and quantitative and qualitative evaluation of TRPV1, TRPV4,
ASIC1, ASIC2, and ASIC3 expression were done.Results: The data showed
that mouse behavior about pain thresholds was marked improved in CIBP +
quetiapine treatment group compared with CIBP group. The expression of
TRPV1, TRPV4, ASIC1, ASIC2, and ASIC3 in CIBP + quetiapine treatment
group was significantly lower than those in CIBP groups.Conclusions:
These results suggest analgesic effect of quetiapine on CIBP animal model
and provide the possibility that TRPV and ASICs could be a potential
target of cancer pain management.

