Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel luminescent system for monitoring intracellular
protein:protein interactions


Protein:protein interactions (PPIs) are essential to the cellular signal
transduction pathways that contribute to cancer. Although numerous
approaches exist to monitor protein:protein interactions in vitro,
methods for intracellular detection have been more limited. We developed
a system for the detection of PPIs based on NanoLuc luciferase. Proteins
are fused to either an 18 kDa or 1 kDa subunit. PPI facilitates
interaction of the subunits, leading to increased luminescence.
Intracellular PPIs are measured using a non-lytic assay protocol by
providing a cell permeable substrate. The interaction status can be
monitored at a single time point or followed continuously over 1-2 hours.
Unlike related approaches where a luciferase enzyme is simply split, the
subunits of this system were optimized for structural stability and
minimal binding affinity. The result is a luminescence signal that is
orders of magnitude brighter than approaches using split luciferase,
allowing use of fusion protein expression levels at or near physiological
levels. The low affinity interaction between subunits (Kd 200 M)
minimizes assay background by preventing non-specific association, and
the system shows rapid reversibility using model systems such as protein
kinase A catalytic and regulatory subunits. We have successfully applied
this system to several PPIs related to cancer research, including
TP53:MDM2, MYC:MAX, and members of the RAS-RAF signaling pathway.

