Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic combination of lurbinectedin and PARP inhibitors in
breast cancer tumor cell lines


Lurbinectedin (PM1183) is a new tetrahydroisoquinoline derivative
currently evaluated in phase II trials in BRCA1-mutated breast cancer and
NSCLC patients. Two pivotal trials (in platinum-resistant ovarian cancer
and in SCLC) will be launched in 2015. PM1183 shows antitumor activity
against a wide variety of tumor cells with mean IC50 values in the low
nanomolar range. In living cells, PM1183 inhibits trans-activated
transcription and blocks NER-dependent DNA repair inducing the formation
of dsDNA breaks and the collapse of replication forks that need to be
repaired by homologous recombination (HR). As expected, PM1183 is more
active against homologous recombination (HR)-deficient cell lines. In
this work, we evaluated the in vitro antitumor effect of PM1183 when
combined with the PARP inhibitors ABT-88 (Veliparib, PARP-1 and -2),
AZD-2281 (Olaparib, PARP-1), BSI-201 (Iniparib, PARP-1) and BMN-673
(PARP-1 and -2) (Selleck Chemicals, Houston, TX, USA) in a panel of human
breast carcinoma cells with different BRCA1 status, including MCF-7
(BRCA1 +/+), MDA-MB-231 (BRCA1 +/-), HCC-1937 (BRCA1 -/-) and MDA-MB-436
(BRCA1 -/-). The combination index (CI) of each different drug-drug
combination was calculated by applying the Chou and Talalay method.
Different degrees of synergism (CI Lurbinectedin (PM1183) is a new
tetrahydroisoquinoline derivative currently evaluated in phase II trials
in BRCA1-mutated breast cancer and NSCLC patients. Two pivotal trials (in
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer and in SCLC) will be launched in 2015.
PM1183 shows antitumor activity against a wide variety of tumor cells
with mean IC50 values in the low nanomolar range. In living cells, PM1183
inhibits trans-activated transcription and blocks NER-dependent DNA
repair inducing the formation of dsDNA breaks and the collapse of
replication forks that need to be repaired by homologous recombination
(HR). As expected, PM1183 is more active against homologous recombination
(HR)-deficient cell lines. In this work, we evaluated the in vitro
antitumor effect of PM1183 when combined with the PARP inhibitors ABT-88
(Veliparib, PARP-1 and -2), AZD-2281 (Olaparib, PARP-1), BSI-201
(Iniparib, PARP-1) and BMN-673 (PARP-1 and -2) (Selleck Chemicals,
Houston, TX, USA) in a panel of human breast carcinoma cells with
different BRCA1 status, including MCF-7 (BRCA1 +/+), MDA-MB-231 (BRCA1
+/-), HCC-1937 (BRCA1 -/-) and MDA-MB-436 (BRCA1 -/-). The combination
index (CI) of each different drug-drug combination was calculated by
applying the Chou and Talalay method. Different degrees of synergism (CI
< 1) were recorded when PM1183 was combined with AZD-2281 (Olaparib) and
BMN-673, depending on the tumor cell line and the conditions tested. The
highest degree of synergism with Olaparib was observed in MDA-MB-436
cells followed by MDA-MB-231, MCF7 and HCC-1937 cells. The highest degree
of synergism with BMN-673 was observed in MCF-7 cells followed by
MDA-MB-231 and HCC-1937 cells. In MDA-MB-231 cells, both combinations led
to a synergistic induction of -H2AX expression and PARP-1 cleavage, as
analyzed by western blot. Collectively, our results indicate that the
combination of PM1183 and PARP inhibitors (Olaparib and BMN673) induces
an artificial synthetic lethality that can be advantageously used to kill
several breast cancer cells, independently from their BRCA1 status.

