Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 3q amplification gene signature associated with triple negative
breast cancer lung-specific metastasis


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC), devoid of expression of the
estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptors, are among the most aggressive
and deadly breast cancers, with high rates of tumor recurrence and
metastatic spread. New prognostic markers are needed to identify patients
who are at the highest risk for developing metastases, which might assist
in tailoring treatment strategies. We previously identified 20 candidate
driver genes in Chromosome 3q26-29, a critical amplified region in many
human cancers including breast and lung cancer. The aim of this study was
to assess the prognostic power of this 20-gene signature in TNBC
patients. 855 breast tumors combined from four breast cancer cohorts
(GSE12276, GSE2603, GSE2034 and NKI295) were used to evaluate the
signature for prediction of organ-specific distant metastasis free
survival (DMFS). The predictive ability of the 20-gene signature was
evaluated by Cox proportional hazards model and was compared against
other published breast cancer gene signatures including MammaPrint
(70-gene), Veridex (76-gene), PAM50, 54 lung metastasis signature genes,
HIF1 hypoxia pathway (8-gene), TGF pathway (153-gene), BACH1 pathway
metastasis gene signature (25-gene) and Gene Expression Prognostic Index
Using Subtypes (GENIUS). The 20-gene signature was strongly associated
with worse lung-specific metastasis-free survival (HR, 2.0, 95%CI, 1.4 to
2.87, P=0.00014) in TNBC patients (n = 131), independently of intrinsic
subtype or published gene signatures and less so in non-TNBC patients (n
= 724, HR, 1.3, 95%CI, 1.01 to 1.69, P=0.04). In conclusion, we
discovered an amplified 20-gene signature in 3q26-29 that are associated
with lung metastasis in patients with TNBC, suggesting on a potential
role of 3q genes in the mechanism of lung-specific metastasis and
incriminating cancer driver genes in this location as potential
attractive novel therapeutic targets in this disease. The work is
supported by the NIH Grant R01 CA102353 to PPM.

