Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative genomic hybridization reveals complex genomic changes
in plasmacytoid urothelial carcinoma


Introduction The WHO classification of 2004 defined several histologic
subtypes of urothelial carcinoma (UC) such as plasmacytoid UC (PUC).
Since this definition, molecular characterization of these different
tumor types has gained increasing attention. For the majority of
histologic variants, it seems that they are associated with an even worse
clinical outcome than conventional UC. However, PUC in particular is
reported to be associated with an aggressive clinical course and advanced
disease at the time of diagnosis. Nevertheless, genomic characterization
of PUC, which examined genomic imbalances and chromosomal aberrations, is
still missing.Material and Methods We analyzed formalin-fixed archival
tissue of 25 PUCs using metaphase comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)
for detecting genomic imbalances. Aberrant chromosomal regions were
defined as characteristic when they were found in at least 20% of the
tumors analyzed. Representative genes in aberrant chromosomal regions
were additionally analyzed for copy number variations (CNV) using
quantitative PCR to explore their possible roles in PUC
carcinogenesis.Results Chromosomal aberrations were detected in every PUC
analyzed and the average number of aberrations was 10.24 (ranging from
1-15). Characteristic aberrations were gains on 1q (48%), 3p (20%), 6p
(32%), 11q (72%), 15q (36%), 16q (44%), 17p (76%), 17q (88%), and 20q
(88%) and losses on 2q (24%) 4p (36%), 4q (84%), 5q (44%), 6q (68%), 13q
(20%), and Xq (52%). PCR based analysis of CNV for CCND1 (11q13) showed a
deletion in 73% of the cases. CDH1 (16q22) was deleted in 72% and
amplified in 5%. ERBB2 (17q12) displayed remarkably few copy number
alterations, with only 14% showing an amplification. SNAI1 (20q13) showed
reduced gene copy numbers in 59.1% of the cases, while no copy number
gains were detected. FOXO3 (6q21) exhibited the lowest number of copy
number alterations, with 9% of all cases showing an
amplification.Conclusions In PUCs, the frequency of aneuploidy and the
complexity of genomic changes per tumor are greater than those described
in conventional UC. The aberrations described in PUC involve the same
regions that are associated with aggressive biological behavior in
conventional UC. Gains on 11q, 17q, 17p and 20q and losses on 4q and 6q
affect the majority of PUCs and seem to harbor important chromosomal
regions for PUC carcinogenesis. Large-scale deletions on chromosome 9
were not detected. CNV analysis indicates heterozygous deletion of CDH1
as one underlying mechanism of loss of membranous E-cadherin in PUC. Loss
of CCND1 and SNAI1 are common molecular features and could contribute to
the aggressive biological behavior of PUC.Acknowledgements This study was
supported by a grant from the ELAN Funds of the University Hospital
Erlangen to BK and RS.

