Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Participation of Crk-associated substrate (CAS) in human
pancreatic cancer cell migration, invasion and metastatic processes


Introduction; Crk-associated substrate (CAS, p130Cas) is a major tyrosine
phosphorylated protein in cells transformed by v-crk and v-src oncogenes.
In non-transformed cells, CAS localizes to focal adhesions and undergoes
tyrosine phosphorylation in response to integrin-mediated signaling. In
the current study, we evaluate the role of CAS in cell migration,
invasion and metastatic processes in human pancreatic cancer cells.
Materials and Methods; We investigated that CAS tyrosine kinase activity
and tumor cell migration, invasion to endothelial cell monolayer in human
pancreatic cancer cell lines, in vitro. CAS tyrosine phosphorylation were
measured by immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation using anti-CAS
monoclonal antibody and anti-phosphotyrosine antibody. Tumor cell
migration was measured with Matrigel-coated modified-Boyden's chamber
assay. Tumor cell invasion to endothelial cell monolayer was assayed with
a co-culture invasion bioassay. Results; Tyrosine phosphorylation of CAS
in human pancreatic cancer cells were induced during tumor cell migration
and invasion. Phosphorylated tyrosine level of CAS was coincident with
invasion capability in human pancreatic cancer cell lines, PSN-1,
MiaPacaII, Panc1, despite of similar protein expression level. Protein
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Herbimycin A, had an inhibitory effect on
migration and invasion as well as CAS tyrosine phosphorylation in tumor
cells. Conclusion; These results indicated that CAS tyrosine
phosphorylation in pancreatic tumor cells was correlated with invasive
capability, suggesting a pivotal role of CAS in migration, invasion and
metastatic processes.

