Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contextual combination of PARP inhibitors with p110beta
inhibitors: Functional logistics to tame PTEN null tumors


Background: Hyper-activation of the PI3K pathway due to a functional loss
of PTEN is a characteristic feature of many tumors including TNBC and
GBM. Although p110b rarely undergoes activating mutations in these
cancers, loss of PTEN function makes these tumor cells dependent
specifically on p110b. In a mechanism-based study we have recently
established an integral role of the PI3K pathway in DNA damage repair
(DDR)-mediated anti-tumor efficacy of PARP inhibitor wherein we have
demonstrated that PTEN-nullness confers in vivo sensitivity to the
combination as compared to tumors carrying PTEN WT (De et al., Neoplasia,
2014). Thus here we hypothesize that PTEN-null tumors will be more
susceptible to a combination of p110b inhibitor (p110b i) plus PARP
inhibitor (PARP i). Method: To test our hypothesis we used PTEN-null TNBC
and GBM models. Isogenic cell lines as well as SiRNA-directed
PTEN-knockdown cells were tested for the (a) IC50 (MTT) (b) real-time
confluence assay (Incucyte) (c) cell cycle (flow cytometry) (d)
clonogenecity (ON-TOP assay) (e) cytosolic proliferation and apoptotic
signals and (f) nuclear HRD signals for DDR using 3 p110b i (TGX221,
AZD6482, GSK2636771) and 5 PARPi (BMN673, Niraparib, Olaparib, Rucaparib,
Veliparib) (procured from Selleckchem, USA). Results: Individually (1)
AZD6482 was the most effective among p110b i in controlling the cell
cycle when tested in PTEN null U87MG GBM cells and (2) AZD6482 had the
lowest dose (1-10 uM) for achieving the minimum effective dose (MED) in
the confluence studies in TNBC and GBM models as compared to other p110b
i. The MED of 5 PARPi for TNBC and GBM cells were determined by
clonogenic assay (7-10 days). The most potent among 5 PARPi was BMN673
with a dose range of 100 nM-500 nM. Based on the effectiveness of
individual drugs, we used a combination dose range of 500 nM-10 uM of 5
PARPi with 10 uM fixed dose of p110b i, AZD6482, and tested the effect of
this combination using (1) real time apoptosis assay (Incucyte) and (2)
3D clonogenic assay. The combination of each PARPi with AZD6482 was more
effective in perturbing clonogenic growth of PTEN-null TNBC and GBM cells
as compared to the individual agent(s) which can be corroborated with the
increased apoptosis in the cells treated with the combination and their
effect on cell cycle. Significance: Better understanding of the
mechanistic involvement of the combination of p110b i and PARPi in
BRCA-competent PTEN null tumors may provide a novel target for future
therapeutic intervention and provide insight to PTEN-mediated
carcinogenesis in these tumors which eventually will extend the realm of
PARP i use in cancer therapy.

