Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of highly-multiplexed custom panels for targeted
massively parallel semiconductor sequencing on paraffin DNA


Background: Targeted massively parallel sequencing (MPS) is increasingly
applied for tumor genotyping on routinely processed paraffin tissues,
mostly with commercially available, predesigned multigene panels. In
comparison, custom panels remain poorly addressed, despite that this
approach would increase genotyping flexibility, especially in
translational research in Oncology. Methods: Two custom multigene panels
(B, 373 amplicons; T, 286 amplicons) were designed and evaluated with
semiconductor sequencing on paired DNA sample series from 158 paraffin
breast tumors and 133 matched peripheral blood samples (total n samples =
316, total n libraries = 332). The two panels shared 26.6% targeted
regions (common or shifted amplicons). Amplicon performance and variant
(coding and non-coding) concordance were evaluated in paired groups of
samples and datasets. Results: Amplicon read ratios strongly correlated
in blood and paraffin samples with Spearman's rho = 0.6055 for the B- and
0.8212 for the T-panel (both p's 75 and Background: Targeted massively
parallel sequencing (MPS) is increasingly applied for tumor genotyping on
routinely processed paraffin tissues, mostly with commercially available,
predesigned multigene panels. In comparison, custom panels remain poorly
addressed, despite that this approach would increase genotyping
flexibility, especially in translational research in Oncology. Methods:
Two custom multigene panels (B, 373 amplicons; T, 286 amplicons) were
designed and evaluated with semiconductor sequencing on paired DNA sample
series from 158 paraffin breast tumors and 133 matched peripheral blood
samples (total n samples = 316, total n libraries = 332). The two panels
shared 26.6% targeted regions (common or shifted amplicons). Amplicon
performance and variant (coding and non-coding) concordance were
evaluated in paired groups of samples and datasets. Results: Amplicon
read ratios strongly correlated in blood and paraffin samples with
Spearman's rho = 0.6055 for the B- and 0.8212 for the T-panel (both p's
75 and <25, while it also differed between panels for common targets
(both p's Background: Targeted massively parallel sequencing (MPS) is
increasingly applied for tumor genotyping on routinely processed paraffin
tissues, mostly with commercially available, predesigned multigene
panels. In comparison, custom panels remain poorly addressed, despite
that this approach would increase genotyping flexibility, especially in
translational research in Oncology. Methods: Two custom multigene panels
(B, 373 amplicons; T, 286 amplicons) were designed and evaluated with
semiconductor sequencing on paired DNA sample series from 158 paraffin
breast tumors and 133 matched peripheral blood samples (total n samples =
316, total n libraries = 332). The two panels shared 26.6% targeted
regions (common or shifted amplicons). Amplicon performance and variant
(coding and non-coding) concordance were evaluated in paired groups of
samples and datasets. Results: Amplicon read ratios strongly correlated
in blood and paraffin samples with Spearman's rho = 0.6055 for the B- and
0.8212 for the T-panel (both p's 75 and <25, while it also differed
between panels for common targets (both p's <0.0001). In paired blood -
tumor series, variant concordance excluding somatic variants was 92.7%
with the B and 89.1% with the T panel. The highest variant concordance
was observed for intra-run duplicates (99.6% for the B, and 95.8% for the
T panel), with identical genotypes in 9/14 matched pairs. Genotypes
obtained with different panels on the same sample were up to 81%
concordant, and up to 59.9% when the same panel was applied on different
samples from the same tumor. Variant frequency (VF) was constant in
paraffin samples tested with the same or different panel (rho 0.959;
pBackground: Targeted massively parallel sequencing (MPS) is increasingly
applied for tumor genotyping on routinely processed paraffin tissues,
mostly with commercially available, predesigned multigene panels. In
comparison, custom panels remain poorly addressed, despite that this
approach would increase genotyping flexibility, especially in
translational research in Oncology. Methods: Two custom multigene panels
(B, 373 amplicons; T, 286 amplicons) were designed and evaluated with
semiconductor sequencing on paired DNA sample series from 158 paraffin
breast tumors and 133 matched peripheral blood samples (total n samples =
316, total n libraries = 332). The two panels shared 26.6% targeted
regions (common or shifted amplicons). Amplicon performance and variant
(coding and non-coding) concordance were evaluated in paired groups of
samples and datasets. Results: Amplicon read ratios strongly correlated
in blood and paraffin samples with Spearman's rho = 0.6055 for the B- and
0.8212 for the T-panel (both p's 75 and <25, while it also differed
between panels for common targets (both p's <0.0001). In paired blood -
tumor series, variant concordance excluding somatic variants was 92.7%
with the B and 89.1% with the T panel. The highest variant concordance
was observed for intra-run duplicates (99.6% for the B, and 95.8% for the
T panel), with identical genotypes in 9/14 matched pairs. Genotypes
obtained with different panels on the same sample were up to 81%
concordant, and up to 59.9% when the same panel was applied on different
samples from the same tumor. Variant frequency (VF) was constant in
paraffin samples tested with the same or different panel (rho 0.959;
p<0.0001). High VF, coverage, and amplicon performance were significantly
associated with variant concordance (all p's Background: Targeted
massively parallel sequencing (MPS) is increasingly applied for tumor
genotyping on routinely processed paraffin tissues, mostly with
commercially available, predesigned multigene panels. In comparison,
custom panels remain poorly addressed, despite that this approach would
increase genotyping flexibility, especially in translational research in
Oncology. Methods: Two custom multigene panels (B, 373 amplicons; T, 286
amplicons) were designed and evaluated with semiconductor sequencing on
paired DNA sample series from 158 paraffin breast tumors and 133 matched
peripheral blood samples (total n samples = 316, total n libraries =
332). The two panels shared 26.6% targeted regions (common or shifted
amplicons). Amplicon performance and variant (coding and non-coding)
concordance were evaluated in paired groups of samples and datasets.
Results: Amplicon read ratios strongly correlated in blood and paraffin
samples with Spearman's rho = 0.6055 for the B- and 0.8212 for the
T-panel (both p's 75 and <25, while it also differed between panels for
common targets (both p's <0.0001). In paired blood - tumor series,
variant concordance excluding somatic variants was 92.7% with the B and
89.1% with the T panel. The highest variant concordance was observed for
intra-run duplicates (99.6% for the B, and 95.8% for the T panel), with
identical genotypes in 9/14 matched pairs. Genotypes obtained with
different panels on the same sample were up to 81% concordant, and up to
59.9% when the same panel was applied on different samples from the same
tumor. Variant frequency (VF) was constant in paraffin samples tested
with the same or different panel (rho 0.959; p<0.0001). High VF,
coverage, and amplicon performance were significantly associated with
variant concordance (all p's <0.0001). However, among constantly
discordant variants in paired datasets, high coverage almost exclusively
corresponded to VF Background: Targeted massively parallel sequencing
(MPS) is increasingly applied for tumor genotyping on routinely processed
paraffin tissues, mostly with commercially available, predesigned
multigene panels. In comparison, custom panels remain poorly addressed,
despite that this approach would increase genotyping flexibility,
especially in translational research in Oncology. Methods: Two custom
multigene panels (B, 373 amplicons; T, 286 amplicons) were designed and
evaluated with semiconductor sequencing on paired DNA sample series from
158 paraffin breast tumors and 133 matched peripheral blood samples
(total n samples = 316, total n libraries = 332). The two panels shared
26.6% targeted regions (common or shifted amplicons). Amplicon
performance and variant (coding and non-coding) concordance were
evaluated in paired groups of samples and datasets. Results: Amplicon
read ratios strongly correlated in blood and paraffin samples with
Spearman's rho = 0.6055 for the B- and 0.8212 for the T-panel (both p's
75 and <25, while it also differed between panels for common targets
(both p's <0.0001). In paired blood - tumor series, variant concordance
excluding somatic variants was 92.7% with the B and 89.1% with the T
panel. The highest variant concordance was observed for intra-run
duplicates (99.6% for the B, and 95.8% for the T panel), with identical
genotypes in 9/14 matched pairs. Genotypes obtained with different panels
on the same sample were up to 81% concordant, and up to 59.9% when the
same panel was applied on different samples from the same tumor. Variant
frequency (VF) was constant in paraffin samples tested with the same or
different panel (rho 0.959; p<0.0001). High VF, coverage, and amplicon
performance were significantly associated with variant concordance (all
p's <0.0001). However, among constantly discordant variants in paired
datasets, high coverage almost exclusively corresponded to VF <20%. Based
on the above, genotypes for registered mutations, and hence, tumor
heterogeneity were partially panel-specific. Conclusions:
Highly-multiplexed custom panels with semiconductor sequencing are
applicable on paraffin DNA. Efficiency and shortcomings are similar to
those reported for commercially available panels. Raw data allowing for
the simultaneous evaluation of amplicon performance and corresponding
annotated variants would facilitate interpretation of results. The issue
of panel-specific genotypes merits further investigation for all
highly-multiplexed MPS applications.

