Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adverse effects of erythropoietin stimulates tumor growth via EphB4


Abstract: While recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEpo) has been widely
used to treat anemia in cancer patients, concerns about its adverse
effects on patient survival have emerged. However the lack of correlation
between expression of the canonical EpoR and rhEpo's effects on cancer
cells prompted us to consider the existence of an alternative Epo
receptor. Methods: We analyzed the membrane-bound portion of the proteome
for candidate receptors possessing structural, regulatory, and functional
features consistent with Epo binding and tumorigenic signaling. To
examine the potential for EphB4 binding to Epo, we generated EpoR/- MEFs
from EpoR/- mice. We injected A2780-shControl and-shEpoR cells, shEphB4
or -shEpoR/shEphB4 cells in nude mice to study rhEpo induced tumor
progression. We also assessed potential effects of tumoral EpoR or EphB4
expression on the effects of ESA treatment in patients with ovarian (N =
175) or breast (N = 88) cancer. Results: Through systems-based approaches
we identified EphB4 as an alternate Epo receptor. MST experiments with
fluorophore labeled rhEpo demonstrated binding to EpoR with an apparent
dissociation constant (KD,app) of 28.0 14.0 nM and EphB4 with a KD,app
value of 880.6 128.6 nM. EphB4 and EphrinB2 bound with a KD,app value of
140.5 28.3 nM. We showed that [I125]rhEpo can bind to these cells EpoR/-
MEFs cells.EphB4 triggered the downstream signaling via STAT3 and
promoted rhEpo-induced tumor growth and progression. rhEpo stimulated in
vivo growth of A2780-shControl (pAbstract: While recombinant human
erythropoietin (rhEpo) has been widely used to treat anemia in cancer
patients, concerns about its adverse effects on patient survival have
emerged. However the lack of correlation between expression of the
canonical EpoR and rhEpo's effects on cancer cells prompted us to
consider the existence of an alternative Epo receptor. Methods: We
analyzed the membrane-bound portion of the proteome for candidate
receptors possessing structural, regulatory, and functional features
consistent with Epo binding and tumorigenic signaling. To examine the
potential for EphB4 binding to Epo, we generated EpoR/- MEFs from EpoR/-
mice. We injected A2780-shControl and-shEpoR cells, shEphB4 or
-shEpoR/shEphB4 cells in nude mice to study rhEpo induced tumor
progression. We also assessed potential effects of tumoral EpoR or EphB4
expression on the effects of ESA treatment in patients with ovarian (N =
175) or breast (N = 88) cancer. Results: Through systems-based approaches
we identified EphB4 as an alternate Epo receptor. MST experiments with
fluorophore labeled rhEpo demonstrated binding to EpoR with an apparent
dissociation constant (KD,app) of 28.0 14.0 nM and EphB4 with a KD,app
value of 880.6 128.6 nM. EphB4 and EphrinB2 bound with a KD,app value of
140.5 28.3 nM. We showed that [I125]rhEpo can bind to these cells EpoR/-
MEFs cells.EphB4 triggered the downstream signaling via STAT3 and
promoted rhEpo-induced tumor growth and progression. rhEpo stimulated in
vivo growth of A2780-shControl (p<0.01) and-shEpoR cells (pAbstract:
While recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEpo) has been widely used to
treat anemia in cancer patients, concerns about its adverse effects on
patient survival have emerged. However the lack of correlation between
expression of the canonical EpoR and rhEpo's effects on cancer cells
prompted us to consider the existence of an alternative Epo receptor.
Methods: We analyzed the membrane-bound portion of the proteome for
candidate receptors possessing structural, regulatory, and functional
features consistent with Epo binding and tumorigenic signaling. To
examine the potential for EphB4 binding to Epo, we generated EpoR/- MEFs
from EpoR/- mice. We injected A2780-shControl and-shEpoR cells, shEphB4
or -shEpoR/shEphB4 cells in nude mice to study rhEpo induced tumor
progression. We also assessed potential effects of tumoral EpoR or EphB4
expression on the effects of ESA treatment in patients with ovarian (N =
175) or breast (N = 88) cancer. Results: Through systems-based approaches
we identified EphB4 as an alternate Epo receptor. MST experiments with
fluorophore labeled rhEpo demonstrated binding to EpoR with an apparent
dissociation constant (KD,app) of 28.0 14.0 nM and EphB4 with a KD,app
value of 880.6 128.6 nM. EphB4 and EphrinB2 bound with a KD,app value of
140.5 28.3 nM. We showed that [I125]rhEpo can bind to these cells EpoR/-
MEFs cells.EphB4 triggered the downstream signaling via STAT3 and
promoted rhEpo-induced tumor growth and progression. rhEpo stimulated in
vivo growth of A2780-shControl (p<0.01) and-shEpoR cells (p<0.01), but
not -shEphB4 or -shEpoR/shEphB4 cells. In human ovarian and breast cancer
samples, expression of EphB4 rather than the canonical EpoR correlated
with decreased disease-specific survival in rhEpo-treated patients.
Conclusion: These results identify EphB4 as a critical mediator of
erythropoietin-induced tumor progression in cancer patients and further
provide a novel and clinically significant dimension to the biology of
erythropoietin.

