Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A highly multiplexed control material to satisfy the complex needs
of targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) oncology assays


Introduction: Application of targeted NGS assays to comprehensively
screen cancer genes has highlighted the need for a well-characterized
control to ensure consistency in variant calls. CLIA and CAP guidelines
mandate that labs utilize positive run controls which are currently
limited to known patient samples or cell lines containing 10's of
mutations. These materials do not cover the breadth of potential
mutations that could be observed in current highly mutliplexed NGS
tests.Materials and Methods: AcroMetrix Oncology Hotspot Control is a DNA
control containing more than 500 COSMIC (Catalogue of Somatic Mutations
in Cancer) variants in 53 genes. Covering SNP and indels, the control is
designed to function on many platforms and technologies. Formulated as a
mixture of synthetic and genomic DNA, the control mimics the complexity
of patient samples. Variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing and
quantified by digital PCR. To benchmark product performance, two lots of
the contro were tested in 19 labs worldwide. Testing was performed using
the Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 (CHPv2) on the Ion Torrent
Personal Genome Machine as well as with the Illumina TruSeq Amplicon
Cancer Panel (TruSeq) and TruSight Tumor Panel (TruSight) on the MiSeq
instrument. Each lab utilized an established assay and their in house
bioinformatics pipeline.Results: In internal tests, good concordance was
observed between expected and detected SNP's with greater than 90% being
detected on the CHPv2 (382/385), TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel (TSCAP)
(319/351) and TruSight Tumor Panel (TSTP) (209/230). For deletions,
detection varied from 66.7%(12/18) for CHPv2 and TruSight to 76%(16/21)
for TruSeq tests. For insertions, detection was 70%(7/10) for TruSight
and 54% each for CHPv2(6/11) and TruSeq (7/13). Labs varied in their
ability to detect variants; while some labs, running the TSTP, detected
over 87% (241/277) of total variants, others detected less than half of
expected variants (122/277). Similar variations in detections rates were
observed in TSCAP (38%-86%) and CHPv2 (40%-90%). Refining the
bioinformatics in variant calling allowed one lab to improve their
variant detection by 130% (157 variants detected prior and 410 variants
after improvement).Conclusions: AcroMetrix Oncology Hotspot Control
provides a wide variety of variants, including many that are difficult to
source. This control will enable laboratories to monitor variation
between assay lots and operators, and will facilitate result comparison
across laboratories. The control also ensures that bioinformatics
pipelines are performing acceptably over time and through updates to
ensure reliable variant calling. The availability of controls that target
clinically-relevant mutations will significantly improve NGS adoption
rates and confidence in NGS results.AcroMetrix Oncology Hotspot Control
is For In Vitro Diagnostic Use.

