Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MVA viral platform for the treatment of cancer and chronic
infectious diseases: Clinical experience from four randomized controlled
phase II studies


The modified vaccinia strain Ankara (MVA) is attenuated and
non-propagative but retains infectivity and immunogenicity, its large DNA
genome allows the insertion of several full-length coding sequences for
disease associated antigens or other transgenes of interest. MVA based
targeted immunotherapeutics are designed to induce a cytolytic cellular
immune response.TG4010 expresses the full-length sequences of MUC1 and
IL2 and was tested in combination with first line platin-based
chemotherapy in stage IV non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) versus
chemotherapy alone (NCT00415818 and NCT01383148); 108 plaque forming
units (pfu) was given S/C weekly for 6 weeks then every three weeks up to
progression. TG4001 expressing E6 and E7 of HPV16, and IL2 was assessed
versus placebo in women with cervical intra-epithelial neoplasia (CIN2/3)
(NCT01022346) at the dose of 5.107 pfu, three S/C injections a week
apart. TG4040 expresses the HCV antigens NS3, NS4 and NS5B and was
evaluated in combination with peg-interferon- and ribavirin versus the
same treatment alone in treatment-nave patients with chronic hepatitis C,
(107 pfu). Two distinct schedules of administration were evaluated: with
or without immunotherapy run-in phase (NCT01055821).A total of 729
patients were included and randomized in these four studies: 443 in
active arms (185 NSCLC, 136 CIN2/3, 122 HCV) and 286 in control arms. In
all studies the repeated S/C administration of the MVA vectors alone or
in combination therapies appeared feasible and well tolerated, neither
dose reduction nor modification of the schedules of administration have
been necessary. Injection site reactions have been the most frequent
adverse events associated with treatment, mild to moderate in the
majority of cases. Despite lower doses they seemed more prevalent for
vectors expressing xenoantigens (TG4001 99% pts, TG4040 42% pts) than for
TG4010 (31%). The phase II studies with TG4010 met their primary
endpoints based respectively on 6 month progression free survival (PFS)
and overall PFS. The primary endpoint of improvedcomplete early viral
response (cEVR) was also achieved in the study with TG4040. These studies
had in common 1/ to combine the MVA from the beginning of standard of
care and 2/ to use a schedule of administration with a run-in phase of 6
or more weekly injections followed by at least monthly injections. The
study with TG4001 did not meet its threshold-based primary endpoint of
complete response but significantly more women in the experimental arm
had a clearance of their cervical lesions at a conization performed 6
months later.Three MVA-based immunotherapeutics have shown meaningful
clinical activity in different settings. Their favorable safety profile
allows the combination of these products with standard of care therapies
and also with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ongoing).

