Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MI130004, a new antibody-drug conjugate, induces strong,
long-lasting antitumor effect in HER2 expressing breast tumor models


Background: Antibody-drug conjugates (ADC`s) have emerged as powerful
tools for the treatment of cancer, combining the potency of cytotoxic
molecules with the selectivity of antibodies targeted towards specific
antigens. Marine compounds represent an interesting opportunity worth
exploring as they possess the requirements needed to be considered
promising payloads. The in vivo results obtained with a new ADC,
MI130004, in HER2 expressing breast tumors are presented here.Materials
and Methods: To evaluate the long lasting antitumor effect induced by
MI130004, immunodefficient female mice were subcutaneously implanted with
HER2 expressing breast lines namely, JIMT-1, BT-474 and MAXF574.Tumor
(ca. 100 mm3) bearing animals were randomly allocated (Day 0) to receive
MI130004 (10mg/kg), trastuzumab (30 or 10 mg/kg) or placebo (N =
8-10/group). Intravenous treatments were weekly administered for 5
consecutive weeks and then, tumor volume growth was recorded 2-3 times
per week. For survival evaluation, time to endpoint was define as the
time from Day 0 to death as a results of tumor growth (>2000 mm3) or any
other cause (e.g., tumor necrosis). Statistical differences were assessed
by Kaplan-Meier curves with the log rank test. The follow-up period was
extended until 90 (MAXF574) or 120 days (JIMT-1 and BT-474) after the
initiation day (Day 0). Then, surviving animals were sacrificed, tumor
(or skin around the former tumor site) dissected free, formalin fixed and
paraffin embedded for histopathology evaluations.Results: The treatment
with MI130004 induced a long lasting antitumor effect with statistically
significant increases in median survival time compared to either placebo
(P = 0.0336, P = 0.0001 and PBackground: Antibody-drug conjugates (ADC`s)
have emerged as powerful tools for the treatment of cancer, combining the
potency of cytotoxic molecules with the selectivity of antibodies
targeted towards specific antigens. Marine compounds represent an
interesting opportunity worth exploring as they possess the requirements
needed to be considered promising payloads. The in vivo results obtained
with a new ADC, MI130004, in HER2 expressing breast tumors are presented
here.Materials and Methods: To evaluate the long lasting antitumor effect
induced by MI130004, immunodefficient female mice were subcutaneously
implanted with HER2 expressing breast lines namely, JIMT-1, BT-474 and
MAXF574.Tumor (ca. 100 mm3) bearing animals were randomly allocated (Day
0) to receive MI130004 (10mg/kg), trastuzumab (30 or 10 mg/kg) or placebo
(N = 8-10/group). Intravenous treatments were weekly administered for 5
consecutive weeks and then, tumor volume growth was recorded 2-3 times
per week. For survival evaluation, time to endpoint was define as the
time from Day 0 to death as a results of tumor growth (>2000 mm3) or any
other cause (e.g., tumor necrosis). Statistical differences were assessed
by Kaplan-Meier curves with the log rank test. The follow-up period was
extended until 90 (MAXF574) or 120 days (JIMT-1 and BT-474) after the
initiation day (Day 0). Then, surviving animals were sacrificed, tumor
(or skin around the former tumor site) dissected free, formalin fixed and
paraffin embedded for histopathology evaluations.Results: The treatment
with MI130004 induced a long lasting antitumor effect with statistically
significant increases in median survival time compared to either placebo
(P = 0.0336, P = 0.0001 and P<0.0001 for BT-474, JIMT-1 and MAXF574,
respectively) or trastuzumab treatments (P = 0.0005 and PBackground:
Antibody-drug conjugates (ADC`s) have emerged as powerful tools for the
treatment of cancer, combining the potency of cytotoxic molecules with
the selectivity of antibodies targeted towards specific antigens. Marine
compounds represent an interesting opportunity worth exploring as they
possess the requirements needed to be considered promising payloads. The
in vivo results obtained with a new ADC, MI130004, in HER2 expressing
breast tumors are presented here.Materials and Methods: To evaluate the
long lasting antitumor effect induced by MI130004, immunodefficient
female mice were subcutaneously implanted with HER2 expressing breast
lines namely, JIMT-1, BT-474 and MAXF574.Tumor (ca. 100 mm3) bearing
animals were randomly allocated (Day 0) to receive MI130004 (10mg/kg),
trastuzumab (30 or 10 mg/kg) or placebo (N = 8-10/group). Intravenous
treatments were weekly administered for 5 consecutive weeks and then,
tumor volume growth was recorded 2-3 times per week. For survival
evaluation, time to endpoint was define as the time from Day 0 to death
as a results of tumor growth (>2000 mm3) or any other cause (e.g., tumor
necrosis). Statistical differences were assessed by Kaplan-Meier curves
with the log rank test. The follow-up period was extended until 90
(MAXF574) or 120 days (JIMT-1 and BT-474) after the initiation day (Day
0). Then, surviving animals were sacrificed, tumor (or skin around the
former tumor site) dissected free, formalin fixed and paraffin embedded
for histopathology evaluations.Results: The treatment with MI130004
induced a long lasting antitumor effect with statistically significant
increases in median survival time compared to either placebo (P = 0.0336,
P = 0.0001 and P<0.0001 for BT-474, JIMT-1 and MAXF574, respectively) or
trastuzumab treatments (P = 0.0005 and P<0.0001 for JIMT-1 and MAXF574,
respectively). Seventy one percent of mice xenografted with JIMT-1 and
treated with MI130004 survived up to Day 120. Out of them, 40%
experienced a complete tumor remission (tumor Background: Antibody-drug
conjugates (ADC`s) have emerged as powerful tools for the treatment of
cancer, combining the potency of cytotoxic molecules with the selectivity
of antibodies targeted towards specific antigens. Marine compounds
represent an interesting opportunity worth exploring as they possess the
requirements needed to be considered promising payloads. The in vivo
results obtained with a new ADC, MI130004, in HER2 expressing breast
tumors are presented here.Materials and Methods: To evaluate the long
lasting antitumor effect induced by MI130004, immunodefficient female
mice were subcutaneously implanted with HER2 expressing breast lines
namely, JIMT-1, BT-474 and MAXF574.Tumor (ca. 100 mm3) bearing animals
were randomly allocated (Day 0) to receive MI130004 (10mg/kg),
trastuzumab (30 or 10 mg/kg) or placebo (N = 8-10/group). Intravenous
treatments were weekly administered for 5 consecutive weeks and then,
tumor volume growth was recorded 2-3 times per week. For survival
evaluation, time to endpoint was define as the time from Day 0 to death
as a results of tumor growth (>2000 mm3) or any other cause (e.g., tumor
necrosis). Statistical differences were assessed by Kaplan-Meier curves
with the log rank test. The follow-up period was extended until 90
(MAXF574) or 120 days (JIMT-1 and BT-474) after the initiation day (Day
0). Then, surviving animals were sacrificed, tumor (or skin around the
former tumor site) dissected free, formalin fixed and paraffin embedded
for histopathology evaluations.Results: The treatment with MI130004
induced a long lasting antitumor effect with statistically significant
increases in median survival time compared to either placebo (P = 0.0336,
P = 0.0001 and P<0.0001 for BT-474, JIMT-1 and MAXF574, respectively) or
trastuzumab treatments (P = 0.0005 and P<0.0001 for JIMT-1 and MAXF574,
respectively). Seventy one percent of mice xenografted with JIMT-1 and
treated with MI130004 survived up to Day 120. Out of them, 40%
experienced a complete tumor remission (tumor < 63 mm3). All animals
originally xenografted with BT-474 experienced complete tumor remissions
by Day 120. On Day 90, 90.0% of the population xenografted with MAXF574
survived and 55.6% of these experienced complete tumor
remission.Conclusions: The treatment with MI130004 on mice bearing HER2
expressing breast tumors resulted in strong, long lasting antitumor
activity, including complete tumor remissions. These results strongly
suggest that MI130004 is a new ADC with extraordinary therapeutic
anti-cancer properties.

