Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of CDC25B in inhibition of cellular
proliferation


CDC25B is a dual specificity phosphatase that activates cyclin-dependent
kinases to trigger entry into mitosis and is required for re-entry into
mitosis after DNA damage. Four isoforms of CDC25B are known to be
expressed and some differences in their role in dividing cells versus
continuation of the cell cycle after DNA damage have been shown.As an
oncogene, CDC25B is upregulated by c-Myc and activated by Aurora-A. In
humans, CDC25B is overexpressed in multiple tumor types and increased
levels correlate with worsening tumor grade. In a transgenic mouse model,
overexpression of CDC25B in the mammary glands led to accelerated mammary
epithelial proliferation resulting in hyperplasia and the formation of
tumors when exposed to the carcinogen DMBA. In vitro, co-transfection of
CDC25B with Ras allows for transformation of MEFs.Surprisingly, given the
establishment of CDC25B as an oncogene, colony formation assays using
ectopic expression of CDC25B in transformed cell lines reveal an
anti-proliferative effect. Although CDC25B has been shown to cause DNA
damage and activates p53, our data show that colony formation is
decreased independent of p53 status. Preliminary data reveal a role for
Ras inhibition as a cause of this anti-proliferative effect.
Co-transfection of CDC25B and activated Ras results in decreased
expression of the ectopic Ras protein in several cell lines tested.
Furthermore overexpression of CDC25B abrogates the G2 arrest and
decreases cell viability after pulse treatment with doxorubicin. Taken
together, these data suggest a novel mechanism by which CDC25B may
inhibit proliferation by decreasing Ras expression.

