Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Stat3 vs Stat5 in the differentiation of HC11, mouse
breast epithelial cells


The Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (Stat)3 and Stat5
are transcription factors involved in normal breast development, and are
hyperactivated in 30-50% of breast cancers. Stat5 is required for breast
epithelial cell differentiation and is over-expressed in breast cancers
with a more differentiated phenotype. On the other hand, constitutive
over-activation of Stat3 can drive expression of genes involved in
survival, migration and angiogenesis, while mutationally activated Stat3
(Stat3C) can transform cultured cells, indicating that Stat3 may play an
important role in cancer etiology. Following activation of a number of
growth factor or cytokine receptors such as interleukin-6 or expression
of oncogenes such as Src, Stat3 is phosphorylated at tyr-705, dimerizes
and migrates to the nucleus where it activates transcription from a
number of genes involved in cell division and survival, such as survivin,
Bcl-xL, Mcl1 and myc, while it downregulates expresssion of the tumor
suppressor p53. We recently discovered a novel pathway of activation of
Stat3: Engagement of cadherins (E-, N-cadherin or cadherin-11), cell to
cell adhesion proteins induces a dramatic increase in the levels of the
Rac1 and Cdc42 small GTPases, and this leads to interleukin-6
transcription, hence Stat3 activation.The differentiation of HC11,
nonneoplastic mouse breast epithelial cells requires prolactin,
hydrocortisone and insulin, added at confluence. Since confluence
activates Stat3, we examined the role of Stat3 upon breast epithelial
cell differentiation, measured by cellular morphology and expression of
the milk proteins, -casein or whey acidic protein. Through
pharmacological inhibition with CPA7 or S3I-201, our results demonstrate
that Stat3 is, in fact, required for HC11 cell differentiation. In
contrast, constitutive expression of mutationally activated Rac1 was
found to block differentiation while inducing transformation.In sharp
contrast, our results indicate that Stat5 is upregulated by the
differentiation cocktail but is unaffected by cell density, while
expression of activated Stat5 promotes a more differentiated phenotype.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that Stat3 and Stat5 may
constitute independent prognostic markers as well as treatment targets
for breast cancer.

