Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of immune cell subsets of cancer patients treated with
a fully human IgG1 anti-PD-L1 MAb (MSB0010718C) capable of mediating ADCC
of human tumor cells


Background: Several monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) with demonstrated
clinical anti-cancer activities have been engineered as fully human IgG1
entities to also encompass their potential to mediate antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) of human tumor cells. MSB0010718C is a
fully human IgG1 MAb targeting the co-regulatory protein Programmed
Death-Ligand 1 (PD-L1), and is thus distinct from other MAbs targeting
the PD-L1/PD-1 axis currently being evaluated in clinical trials. One
possibility is that an anti-PD-L1 antibody capable of inducing ADCC may
negatively affect PD-L1 expressing immune cell subtypes. This work is
intended to determine if there is any validity to this concern. Methods:
The clinical activity of MSB0010718C, observed in several tumor types in
ongoing clinical studies such as NCT01772004, has been and will be
reported elsewhere. In the studies reported here, MSB0010718C is shown to
mediate ADCC of several types of human tumor cell lines (e.g., breast,
lung, bladder carcinomas) in vitro, with tumor cell lysis mediated mainly
by human CD16+ monocytes and natural killer (NK) cells. Since some human
immune cell subsets express PD-L1 on their cell surface (albeit at
relatively low levels compared to many tumor cells), studies were
undertaken to evaluate changes in the frequency of immune cell subsets in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from cancer patients pre- vs
post-treatment with MSB0010718C. Immune cells evaluated were PD-L1
positive and PD-L1 negative subsets of the following: CD4+ T cells, CD8+
T cells, NK cells, regulatory T cells (Tregs), myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSC), natural killer T cells (NKT), plasmacytoid dendritic cells
(DC), conventional DC, and B cells. Results: Forty-two post-treatment
PBMC samples were evaluated as follows: pre vs 1 dose of MSB0010718C (day
15, n = 19); pre vs 3 doses of MSB0010718C (day 43, n = 14); and pre vs 9
doses of MSB0010718C (day 127, n = 9). In all cases there were no
statistical differences pre- vs post-treatment in any immune cell subset,
and at any time point analyzed, regardless of whether the immune subset
expressed PD-L1 or not. In addition, no changes were observed in absolute
lymphocyte counts at any time point analyzed. Conclusion: While immune
cell subsets pre- vs post-treatment continue to be analyzed in various
patient cohorts, these studies provide evidence that MSB0010718C, a fully
human IgG1 MAb, capable of mediating ADCC, can be administered safely to
cancer patients without altering the balance of numerous PBMC immune cell
subsets.

