Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy with EGFR-TKI and cMET-TKIs in non-small cell
lung cancer: the golden duo


Intro: The use of targeted therapies confers great responses in non-small
cell lung cancer patients, but ultimately results in acquired resistance,
e.g. against epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(EGFR-TKIs) due to cMET amplification. Therefore, combination therapy
with EGFR-TKI and cMET TKIs in cell lines with a different EGFR and cMET
background was investigated.Materials & methods: All experiments were
performed in 5 cell lines with a different EGFR and cMET background: the
cMET amplified squamous lung cancer cell line EBC-1, the HGF-secreting
myeloma cell line JJN3, the HCC827 and H1975 lung adenocarcinoma cell
lines with an activating EGFR exon 19 deletion and an L858 as well as a
T790M resistance mutation, respectively. Finally LUDLU-1 is a squamous
lung cancer cell line, wild-type for both EGFR and cMET.The cytotoxicity
of combination therapy with erlotinib (EGFR-TKI) and crizotinib
(cMET-ALK-ROS1-TKI) or PHA665752 (cMET-TKI) was determined by the
sulforhodamine B assay after 72h of simultaneous/sequential treatment
(Table 1).Results: For all treatments, the JJN3, EBC-1 and HCC827 cell
lines showed no synergistic effect. For the H1975, a decrease in
resistance could be observed, albeit not significant. For LUDLU-1, a
trend towards synergism was observed when erlotinib was administered
simultaneously with crizotinib (p = 0.074) and PHA665752 (p = 0.055).
Also a significantly synergistic effect was observed when treatment with
erlotinib was followed by PHA665752 (p = 0.014).Discussion: Synergism
between erlotinib and crizotinib/PHA665752 depends on the genetic
background of the cells and the treatment schedule. This was most
pronounced in the EGFR and cMET wild-type cell line. These results open
up the discussion to include EGFR and cMET wild-type patients into future
clinical trials.Table 1: Therapeutic concentrations per cell line &
treatment schedule: control-IC20-IC40.

