Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High infiltration of mast cells predicts worse outcome following
resection of colorectal liver metastases


Background.Tumor infiltrating mast cells (MCs) are considered a primary
host immune response against cancer. From some reports, their roles are
not determined yet and vary with the type of cancer. There was no report
about tumor infiltrating MCs in colorectal liver metastases (CRLM). Aim
of this study is to determine whether peritumoral MCs infiltration of
CRLM become a predictive factor of survival after curative resection of
CRLM.Methods. A total of 135 patients who underwent potentially curative
resection for CRLM between 2001 and 2010 were included in our
retrospective study. Expression of tryptase, MAC387, CD83, and CD31,
which are markers for MCs, macrophages, mature dendritic cells, and
vascular endothelial cells, respectively, was determined via
immunohistochemistry of resected tumor specimens. The different types of
immune cells in the 3 most abundant peritumoral areas and normal liver
areas were counted, and the each cell number was utilized to predict a
good prognosis. Peritumoral was defined as the division between normal
liver tissue and the tumor. The cut-off point of each immune cell number
was calculated to select a group of good prognosis after liver resection
by using the Youden index from the ROC curve. Using these cut-off points,
135 patients were classified into 2 groups and statistic difference of
prognosis was calculated by Kaplan-Meier analysis and the log rank test,
and statistic difference of clinic-pathological feature was calculated by
chi square test and cox proportional hazard regression. This study was
approved by the Yokohama City University Ethics
Committee.Results.Cancer-specific survival (CSS) at 1, 3, and 5 years
were 91.0%, 62.4%, and 37.4%, respectively. The cut-off points were fixed
26 of MCs, 176 of Ms, and 17 of DCs. Only the cut-off point of MCs
classified 2 groups which showed significantly different prognosis. 54%
(73 of 135) of patients were classified in the high MC group. Five-year
disease free survival (DFS) of the high MC group and the low MC group was
1.6% and 42.6%, respectively (PBackground.Tumor infiltrating mast cells
(MCs) are considered a primary host immune response against cancer. From
some reports, their roles are not determined yet and vary with the type
of cancer. There was no report about tumor infiltrating MCs in colorectal
liver metastases (CRLM). Aim of this study is to determine whether
peritumoral MCs infiltration of CRLM become a predictive factor of
survival after curative resection of CRLM.Methods. A total of 135
patients who underwent potentially curative resection for CRLM between
2001 and 2010 were included in our retrospective study. Expression of
tryptase, MAC387, CD83, and CD31, which are markers for MCs, macrophages,
mature dendritic cells, and vascular endothelial cells, respectively, was
determined via immunohistochemistry of resected tumor specimens. The
different types of immune cells in the 3 most abundant peritumoral areas
and normal liver areas were counted, and the each cell number was
utilized to predict a good prognosis. Peritumoral was defined as the
division between normal liver tissue and the tumor. The cut-off point of
each immune cell number was calculated to select a group of good
prognosis after liver resection by using the Youden index from the ROC
curve. Using these cut-off points, 135 patients were classified into 2
groups and statistic difference of prognosis was calculated by
Kaplan-Meier analysis and the log rank test, and statistic difference of
clinic-pathological feature was calculated by chi square test and cox
proportional hazard regression. This study was approved by the Yokohama
City University Ethics Committee.Results.Cancer-specific survival (CSS)
at 1, 3, and 5 years were 91.0%, 62.4%, and 37.4%, respectively. The
cut-off points were fixed 26 of MCs, 176 of Ms, and 17 of DCs. Only the
cut-off point of MCs classified 2 groups which showed significantly
different prognosis. 54% (73 of 135) of patients were classified in the
high MC group. Five-year disease free survival (DFS) of the high MC group
and the low MC group was 1.6% and 42.6%, respectively (P<0.001) and CSS
of the 2 was 38.1% and 55.6%, respectively (PBackground.Tumor
infiltrating mast cells (MCs) are considered a primary host immune
response against cancer. From some reports, their roles are not
determined yet and vary with the type of cancer. There was no report
about tumor infiltrating MCs in colorectal liver metastases (CRLM). Aim
of this study is to determine whether peritumoral MCs infiltration of
CRLM become a predictive factor of survival after curative resection of
CRLM.Methods. A total of 135 patients who underwent potentially curative
resection for CRLM between 2001 and 2010 were included in our
retrospective study. Expression of tryptase, MAC387, CD83, and CD31,
which are markers for MCs, macrophages, mature dendritic cells, and
vascular endothelial cells, respectively, was determined via
immunohistochemistry of resected tumor specimens. The different types of
immune cells in the 3 most abundant peritumoral areas and normal liver
areas were counted, and the each cell number was utilized to predict a
good prognosis. Peritumoral was defined as the division between normal
liver tissue and the tumor. The cut-off point of each immune cell number
was calculated to select a group of good prognosis after liver resection
by using the Youden index from the ROC curve. Using these cut-off points,
135 patients were classified into 2 groups and statistic difference of
prognosis was calculated by Kaplan-Meier analysis and the log rank test,
and statistic difference of clinic-pathological feature was calculated by
chi square test and cox proportional hazard regression. This study was
approved by the Yokohama City University Ethics
Committee.Results.Cancer-specific survival (CSS) at 1, 3, and 5 years
were 91.0%, 62.4%, and 37.4%, respectively. The cut-off points were fixed
26 of MCs, 176 of Ms, and 17 of DCs. Only the cut-off point of MCs
classified 2 groups which showed significantly different prognosis. 54%
(73 of 135) of patients were classified in the high MC group. Five-year
disease free survival (DFS) of the high MC group and the low MC group was
1.6% and 42.6%, respectively (P<0.001) and CSS of the 2 was 38.1% and
55.6%, respectively (P<0.01). In the clinicopathological feature, only
the peritumoral vessel density showed significant difference,
significantly higher in the high MC group. Multivariate analyses
indicated that hypoalbuminemia and high peritumoral MC infiltration were
significant predictors of unfavorable CSS.Conclusion. High peritumoral MC
infiltration predicts poor prognosis in patients after resection of liver
metastases of colorectal cancer. High MC infiltration might be related
with peritumoral neovascularization.

