Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: All-trans retinoic acid enhances the effector functions of the
anti-CD38 antibody SAR650984


SAR650984 is a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody selectively targeting
CD38 that is in clinical development for the treatment of multiple
myeloma (MM). SAR650984 eliminates MM cells through different mechanisms,
including antibody dependent cytotoxicity and phagocytosis (ADCC and
ADCP, respectively), complement dependent cytotoxicity (CDC), and direct
induction of apoptosis. The aim of this study was to assess the cell
killing activity of SAR650984 following genetic and chemical manipulation
of CD38 expression in MM cells.We established several MM cell lines
engineered to overexpress CD38; median levels of CD38 were 537,000
receptors/cell, versus 29,000 receptors/cell in the parental cell lines.
ADCC, ADCP, CDC, and apoptosis induced by SAR650984 treatment were all
significantly increased in the CD38-overexpressing lines compared with
the parental cell lines.Based on these data, we hypothesized that
pre-treatment of MM cells with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) would
enhance the activity of SAR650984, since ATRA can induce up-regulation of
CD38 expression. Treatment of the MM cell lines JJN-3, ARH-77, U266,
Karpas-620, SKMM-2, RPMI-8226, NCI-H929, KMS-12PE and MOLP-8 with ATRA
resulted in a dose-dependent 1.4- to 6.7-fold up-regulation of cell
surface expressed CD38. Pretreatment of MM cells with ATRA for 48 hours
resulted in enhanced SAR650984-mediated ADCC and ADCP compared to
non-pretreated cells. The enhancement of ADCC and ADCP activity by ATRA
pretreatment was recorded in all the cell lines tested.In conclusion,
these in vitro data are supportive of further evaluation of the
combination of SAR650984 and ATRA for the treatment of MM.

