Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic and predictive biomarkers of clinical response to
Bevacizumab in recurrent WHO grade 3 malignant glioma patients


Background: Bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A), has proven activity in treatment of
recurrent high-grade glioma. High response rates have been demonstrated,
but particularly in WHO grade 3 malignant gliomas, efforts to identify
predictors of clinical response have been limited. Predictive biomarkers
and prognostic models are required in order to individualize treatment
for this patient population. The primary end-point of this study was
identification of prognostic and potentially predictive clinical and
paraclinical factors of response. The secondary end-point was to identify
prognostic factors associated with progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS).Materials and methods: A total of 64 recurrent
grade 3 glioma patients treated with bevacizumab and irinotecan were
retrospectively evaluated. Eligible patients from our center had a WHO
performance status of 0-2 and were administered bevacizumab and
irinotecan between December 2005 and November 2014 according to a
previously published clinical protocol.The possibly relevant prognostic
baseline factors screened for included: Age, gender, WHO grade 3
diagnosis, tumor size and location, multifocal disease, extent of
resection, number of prior chemotherapy regiments, response to prior
chemotherapy, first-line treatment, number of previous recurrences,
neurological deficit, corticosteroid use, performance status, necrosis,
vascular proliferation, neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio, and expression of
p53, EGFR, Mib-1, MGMT, IDH-1 and ATRX.Candidate factors were subjected
to univariate analysis and factors with P-values below 0.10 were
considered for multivariate analysis. Prognostic models were generated by
logistic regression and Cox regression, modeling response and survival
end-points. P-values below 0.05 were considered statistically
significant.Results will be presented.

