Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early hepatocellular carcinoma as another entity from classical
hepatocellular carcinoma by integrated genomic analysis


Early hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is defined as a very well
differentiated cancer containing Glisson's triad with stromal invasion
of, which originates from chronic liver disease and develops into
classical HCC with accumulation of genetic aberrations. To identify
sequential genetic alterations in stepwise hepatocarcinogenesis,
transcriptome and whole-exome sequences were performed on 47 early and
105 classical HCCs, and molecular aberrations were compared between the
two groups. Integrated analysis of transcriptome and exome sequences
showed that distinct expression profile in early HCC would define it as
another molecular entity from classical HCC due to its different mutation
pattern, and was more similar to the chronic liver disease rather than
classical HCC. By exome sequence, prevalence of somatic mutations of WNT
(25.5 vs 42.9%, P = 0.047), p53/RB pathway (31.9 vs 41.9%, P = 0.242),
and methyltransferase genes (17.0 vs 20.0%, P = 0.665) was common, while
those of SWI/SNF complexes (8.5 vs 27.6% P = 0.026) and AKT/PI3K pathway
(8.5 vs 29.5%, P = 0.045) genes were significantly frequent in classical
HCC. Unexpectedly, WNT target genes were up-regulated only in classical
HCC with CTNNB1 mutation but not in early HCC, and even down-regulated in
those with AXIN1 mutation. Similarly, cell cycle genes related with
p53/RB pathway were up-regulated only in classical HCC. Taken together,
despite of frequent mutations in CTNNB1 and TP53 genes in early HCC,
additional mutational events such as SWI/SNF complexes and AKT/PI3K
pathway will be required for transcriptional activation of downstream
targets in HCC progression. Furthermore, transcriptome sequence showed
that TERT is the most frequently up-regulated in early HCC by various
mechanisms: recurrent gene fusion including 3 prime portion of TERT such
as SLC12A7-TERT (8.5% vs 0%), focal gain of 5p15.33 (19.1 vs 12.3%),
hepatitis B virus integration (2.1 vs 3.8%), and TERT promoter mutation
(63.8 vs 59.0%). In total, at least one or more aberrations in
chromosomal genetic aberrations occurred in early (85.1%) and classical
(74.2%) HCCs. Taken together, frequent driver gene mutations and TERT
gene up-regulation due to diverse kinds of mechanisms were elucidated by
transcriptome and exome sequences in early HCC. On the other hand,
despite of frequent mutations in CTNNB1 and TP53 in early HCC, additional
mutational events will be required for transcriptional activation of
downstream targets in HCC progression, which suggests that early HCC is
not a real cancer but a precursor of liver malignancy in accordance with
clinical characteristics.

