Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promotion of colon cancer invasion and metastasis via activation
of Notch-Dab1-Abl-RhoGEF protein Trio


We have recently identified a metastasis suppressor gene for colorectal
cancer (CRC); AES/Aes which encodes an endogenous inhibitor of Notch
signaling. When Aes is knocked out in the adenomatous epithelium of
intestinal polyposis mice, their tumors become malignant, showing marked
submucosal invasion and intravasation. Here we show that one of the genes
induced by Notch signaling in CRC is DAB1/Dab1. Genetic depletion of Dab1
suppresses cancer invasion and metastasis in the Notch
signaling-activated mice. Dab1 is phosphorylated by Abl tyrosine kinase,
which activates Abl reciprocally. Consistently, inhibition of Abl
suppresses cancer invasion in mice. Furthermore, we show that one of the
targets of Abl Tyr-kinase is Rac/Rho-GEF protein Trio, and that
phosphorylation at its Tyr residue 2681 (pY2681) causes Rho activation in
CRC cells. Its unphosphorylatable mutation Trio(Y2681F) reduces the
RhoGEF activity, and inhibits invasion of CRC cells. Importantly,
Trio(pY2681) correlates with significantly poorer prognosis of CRC
patients after surgery. These results indicate that Trio(pY2681) is one
of the downstream effects by Notch signaling activation in CRC, and can
be a prognostic marker, helping determine the therapeutic modality of CRC
patients.

