Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unique pattern of copy number changes including chromothripsis in
pulmonary adenocarcinoma with EML4-ALK fusion


Background: A subset of lung adenocarcinomas harbors an ALK fusion gene
resulting in dominant oncogenic activity. Gene inversion may play a main
role in forming the fusion, not producing copy number changes. But its
detailed mechanism leading to gene fusion remains unsolved.MATERIAL AND
METHODS: To elucidate the underlying mechanisms resulting in gene fusion,
two cancer cell lines positive for EML4-ALK fusion and surgically
resected frozen specimens (33 ALK fusion-positive and 95 ALK
fusion-negative adenocarcinomas) were analyzed using Affymetrix CytoScan
HD Array with Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) software for cell lines
(JFCR-LC649 and JFCR-LC654) and Affymetrix GeneChip Mapping 250K arrays
for surgical specimens.RESULTS: One (JFCR-LC649) of the two cell lines
with gene fusion showed an extremely frequent change of copy number, or
copy number oscillation, which we thought was chromothripsis. In surgical
materials, 30% (10/33) of adenocarcinomas with ALK fusion harbored
frequent copy number changes at various degrees, but not like the
oscillation pattern. None of the 95 resected cases without ALK fusion
showed similar genomic aberrations. These results from the JFCR-LC649
line and the 10 surgical cases indicated that genomic changes resulting
in copy number alterations (including chromothripsis) as well as a simple
inversion may cause gene fusion.CONCLUSION: As well as genome inversion,
copy number alterations such as chromothripsis contribute to gene
rearrangements resulting in the EML4-ALK fusion.

