Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MHY-449 induces apoptotic cell death through ROS- and
caspase-dependent pathways in AGS human gastric cancer cells


We previously reported on the anticancer effect of the diastereoisomeric
compound MHY-449, a novel dihydrobenzofuro[4,5-b][1,8] naphthyridin-6-one
derivative, in various human cancer cells such as HCT116 human colon
cancer cells (Int J Oncol 41: 2057-64, 2012) and PC3 human prostate
cancer cells (Int J Oncol 44: 905-11, 2014). In this study, we
investigated whether MHY-449 has anticancer properties in AGS human
gastric cancer cells, and if so, what the molecular mechanisms are.
Treatment with MHY-449 inhibited cell growth and induced apoptotic cell
death in a concentration-dependent manner. The induction of apoptosis was
determined by morphological changes, Hoechst 33342 staining, DNA
fragmentation, increase of late apoptosis and sub-G1 DNA which were
detected by flow cytometry analysis. Western blot analysis showed that
MHY-449 upregulated the levels of Fas, FasL, p53, p21WAF1/CIP1, p27KIP1
and the ratio of Bax/Bcl-2 and downregulated the levels of procaspase-8,
-9 and -3 and the cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). The
apoptotic cell death induced by MHY-449 was accompanied by the activation
of caspase-8, -9 and -3, which was completely abrogated by the
pan-caspase inhibitor, z-VAD-FMK. In addition, treatment with MHY-449
elevated the level of cellular ROS generation. These data were further
confirmed by incubating the cells with N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), which
is a scavenger of ROS. Pretreatment with NAC protected against
MHY-449-induced cytotoxicity. Similarly, pretreatment of NAC abolished
MHY-449-induced downregulation of pro-caspase-8, -9 and -3 and PARP
cleavage. Taken together, these findings suggest that MHY-449 induces
apoptosis via caspase- and ROS-dependent pathways in AGS human gastric
cancer cells.

