Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence for modulation of FoxM1 by p21 in ovarian cancer


The oncogenic transcription factor forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is
overexpressed in many cancers, including 84% of ovarian cancer and plays
a role in DNA repair, mitotic checkpoint, cell proliferation, and cancer
drug resistance. Similar to Her2 in breast cancer, the constitutive
expression of FoxM1 makes it a plausible gene target for novel
anti-cancer therapies, but the regulation of FoxM1 has yet to be
elucidated. Evidence suggests FoxM1 up-regulation is a result of TP53
mutations, however, no TP53 response element has been found within the
FoxM1 promoter, thus there is likely another molecule mediating
p53-induced FoxM1 overexpression. We hypothesize that cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor 1a, p21, is involved in the regulation of FoxM1 by p53
in ovarian cancer. To test this hypothesis, we knocked down p21
expression with siRNA and shRNA in two wild-type p53 cancer cell lines,
NCI-H23 and A2780. Knock down of p21 resulted in a mirrored increase in
FoxM1 protein level in both cell lines as detected by Western blot. The
addition of nutlin-3 (10 M), a p53 stabilizer, to these p21 knocked down
cell lines restored some p21 expression 24 hour post-treatment, which led
to a subsequent decrease in FoxM1 levels compared to the corresponding
DMSO-treated p21 knock down. These results suggest p21 is a negative
regulator of FoxM1 in cancer cell lines. To further investigate this
pathway, the same two cancer cell lines were treated with the FoxM1
inhibitor thiostrepton (10 M) and protein levels were measured over a
time course of 48 hours. FoxM1 protein levels were reduced following 8
hours, a time point where p21 protein levels peaked. This finding was
further support by qRT-PCR analysis of A2780 ovarian cancer cell mRNA
collected 0, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 hours following thiostrepton (10 M)
treatment. In this experiment, p21 mRNA levels peaked 6 hours
post-treatment, with FoxM1 mRNA levels reduced at 8 hours post-treatment,
relative to control. Although thiostrepton has been shown to directly
bind and inhibit the transcription of FoxM1, these results suggest that
thiostrepton may also induce p21, potentiating FoxM1 inhibition.
Thiostrepton has previously been shown to induce cancer cell death and
reduce tumor burden, therefore further supporting FoxM1 as a potential
drug target as well as encouraging the need to understand regulators
involved in this pathway.

