Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Actionable somatic mutations in head and neck cancer prognosis


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a devastating illness
with racial/ethnic disparities in survival. Using a retrospective study
design, we evaluated 210 somatic mutation sties of 10 cancer genes (i.e.,
CDKN2A, EGFR, FGFR3, HRAS, KRAS, MET, NOTCH1, PIK3CA, STK11, and TP53) in
214 HNSCC patients: 98 Non-Hispanic Whites (NHW; 46%), 72 Hispanic Whites
(HW; 34%), and 44 African Americans (AA; 20%). HW and AA had
significantly higher mutation rates for EGFR, HRAS, KRAS, and TP53
compared to that in NHW. Significantly higher proportions of HW (30%) and
AA (18%) had at least 3 mutations compared to that in NHW (pHead and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a devastating illness with
racial/ethnic disparities in survival. Using a retrospective study
design, we evaluated 210 somatic mutation sties of 10 cancer genes (i.e.,
CDKN2A, EGFR, FGFR3, HRAS, KRAS, MET, NOTCH1, PIK3CA, STK11, and TP53) in
214 HNSCC patients: 98 Non-Hispanic Whites (NHW; 46%), 72 Hispanic Whites
(HW; 34%), and 44 African Americans (AA; 20%). HW and AA had
significantly higher mutation rates for EGFR, HRAS, KRAS, and TP53
compared to that in NHW. Significantly higher proportions of HW (30%) and
AA (18%) had at least 3 mutations compared to that in NHW (p<0.001). In
logistic regression models using 2-year as the cut-off for early death,
we evaluated the overall and racial/ethnic-specific somatic mutations
that are associated with early death. Although there was no significant
association between somatic mutation and early death in the total
population, NOTCH1 mutations were significantly associated with early
death in NHW (odds ratio [OR] = 5.51, 95% confidence internal [CI] =
1.22, 24.83). More importantly, the NOTCH1 mutation C6814T (P2272S)
within the PEST domain was associated with early death (OR = 13.13 (95%CI
= 1.61, 107.36). TP53 mutations were significantly associated with early
death in HW (OR = 3.84; 95%CI = 1.08, 13.68) in multivariate analysis
after adjustment for age, gender, tumor site, and tumor stage. With
limited sample size, no association was observed in AA. This is the first
pilot study evaluating the association between somatic mutations and
HNSCC early death in a tri-racial/ethnic population. Our data suggest
that HW and AA have higher EGFR mutations and these patients may benefit
from mutation-targeted precision medicine to improve survival.

