Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of p62/ubiquitin IHC expression with clinicopathologic
outcome in gastrointestinal carcinomas


Background:P62 and ubiquitin are small regulatory proteins demonstrated
to have implications in the prognosis and survival of various
malignancies including: hepatocellular, breast, ovarian, and some
gastrointestinal carcinomas. They play a vital role in controlling the
process of cell death and survival. In order to understand the roles
p62/ubiquitin play in gastrointestinal carcinomas, we carried out
immunohistochemical analyses of p62/ubiquitin expression in a cohort of
patients with annotated clinicopathologic data.Methods:Tissue microarrays
(TMAs) of two 1mm cores each of 130 gastrointestinal carcinomas were
immunostained for p62 and ubiquitin expression. Normal gastric, colon and
pancreatic tissues were included as negative controls. Subjects were
categorized into positive and negative groups based on the 20% cutoff of
staining area. The staging of these three types of cancer were classified
into early (Stage 0-3A) and advanced stage (equal or more than stage
3B).Chi-square or Fisher's exact test was used for assessing the
comparability of cancer staging (pathologic stage, tumor size, lymph node
metastases, and distant metastases) between positive and negative groups.
A two-sample t-test was used to evaluate the association between
log-transformed survival time and the positivity of tumor cells. All the
statistical analyses were conducted using SAS statistical software
version 9.3 (SAS Institute, Inc.,Cary, NC), and PBackground:P62 and
ubiquitin are small regulatory proteins demonstrated to have implications
in the prognosis and survival of various malignancies including:
hepatocellular, breast, ovarian, and some gastrointestinal carcinomas.
They play a vital role in controlling the process of cell death and
survival. In order to understand the roles p62/ubiquitin play in
gastrointestinal carcinomas, we carried out immunohistochemical analyses
of p62/ubiquitin expression in a cohort of patients with annotated
clinicopathologic data.Methods:Tissue microarrays (TMAs) of two 1mm cores
each of 130 gastrointestinal carcinomas were immunostained for p62 and
ubiquitin expression. Normal gastric, colon and pancreatic tissues were
included as negative controls. Subjects were categorized into positive
and negative groups based on the 20% cutoff of staining area. The staging
of these three types of cancer were classified into early (Stage 0-3A)
and advanced stage (equal or more than stage 3B).Chi-square or Fisher's
exact test was used for assessing the comparability of cancer staging
(pathologic stage, tumor size, lymph node metastases, and distant
metastases) between positive and negative groups. A two-sample t-test was
used to evaluate the association between log-transformed survival time
and the positivity of tumor cells. All the statistical analyses were
conducted using SAS statistical software version 9.3 (SAS Institute,
Inc.,Cary, NC), and P<0.05 was considered statistically
significant.Results:Of 130 carcinoma, there were 45 gastric, 70
colorectal and 15 pancreatic carcinoma.In gastric carcinoma (45),
positive p62 nuclear expression was noted in 25 (53%) and cytoplasmic in
26 (57%), while positive ubiquitin was nuclear expressed in 36 (80%), and
cytoplasmic in 11 (24%). In colon carcinoma (70), positive p62 nuclear
expression was noted in 29 (41%) and cytoplasmic in 48 (68.5%), while
positive ubiquitin was nuclear in 40 (57%) and cytoplasmic in 30 (42%).
In pancreatic cancer (15), positive p62 nuclear expression was noted in
13 (86%) and cytoplasmic in 9 (60%), while positive ubiquitin was nuclear
in 15 (100%) and cytoplasmic in 12 (80%). Normal gastric (6), colon (4)
and pancreatic (4) tissues were negative for both p62 and ubiquitin
(nuclear and cytoplasmic staining Background:P62 and ubiquitin are small
regulatory proteins demonstrated to have implications in the prognosis
and survival of various malignancies including: hepatocellular, breast,
ovarian, and some gastrointestinal carcinomas. They play a vital role in
controlling the process of cell death and survival. In order to
understand the roles p62/ubiquitin play in gastrointestinal carcinomas,
we carried out immunohistochemical analyses of p62/ubiquitin expression
in a cohort of patients with annotated clinicopathologic
data.Methods:Tissue microarrays (TMAs) of two 1mm cores each of 130
gastrointestinal carcinomas were immunostained for p62 and ubiquitin
expression. Normal gastric, colon and pancreatic tissues were included as
negative controls. Subjects were categorized into positive and negative
groups based on the 20% cutoff of staining area. The staging of these
three types of cancer were classified into early (Stage 0-3A) and
advanced stage (equal or more than stage 3B).Chi-square or Fisher's exact
test was used for assessing the comparability of cancer staging
(pathologic stage, tumor size, lymph node metastases, and distant
metastases) between positive and negative groups. A two-sample t-test was
used to evaluate the association between log-transformed survival time
and the positivity of tumor cells. All the statistical analyses were
conducted using SAS statistical software version 9.3 (SAS Institute,
Inc.,Cary, NC), and P<0.05 was considered statistically
significant.Results:Of 130 carcinoma, there were 45 gastric, 70
colorectal and 15 pancreatic carcinoma.In gastric carcinoma (45),
positive p62 nuclear expression was noted in 25 (53%) and cytoplasmic in
26 (57%), while positive ubiquitin was nuclear expressed in 36 (80%), and
cytoplasmic in 11 (24%). In colon carcinoma (70), positive p62 nuclear
expression was noted in 29 (41%) and cytoplasmic in 48 (68.5%), while
positive ubiquitin was nuclear in 40 (57%) and cytoplasmic in 30 (42%).
In pancreatic cancer (15), positive p62 nuclear expression was noted in
13 (86%) and cytoplasmic in 9 (60%), while positive ubiquitin was nuclear
in 15 (100%) and cytoplasmic in 12 (80%). Normal gastric (6), colon (4)
and pancreatic (4) tissues were negative for both p62 and ubiquitin
(nuclear and cytoplasmic staining <20%). Ubiquitin high expression was
associated with worse pancreatic adenocarcinoma overall survival (1.37 vs
2.26 mos, P = 0.04). P62 and ubiquitin expression did not correlate with
clinicopathologic parameters in gastric and colon
adenocarcinomas.Conclusion:This study revealed that both p62 and
ubiquitin are highly expressed in nuclei and cytoplasm of
gastrointestinal carcinomas (gastric, colonic and pancreatic carcinomas).
High ubiquitin expression was noted to have an impact on overall survival
in patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

