Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nrf2-keap1 axis: uncovers molecular profile in lung carcinoids


Introduction. The Keap1/Nrf2 pathway is a master regulator of
antioxidants and cellular stress re-sponses implicated in resistance of
tumour cells against chemotherapeutic drugs. Recent data suggest that
genetic and epigenetic mechanisms may play a pivotal role in the
regulation of KEAP1 expression in Non Small Cell Lung Cancer. At present,
the data concerning the mechanism of alteration of Nrf2-Keap1 pathway in
the Carcinoids of the lung remain almost incomplete.Materials and
methods. Here we report a comprehensive molecular characterization of
Keap1/Nrf2 axis in cell lines and 48 tissues from Lung Carcinoid affected
patients by integrating data from altera-tions at DNA, transcript and
protein levels.Results. An hypermethylation of the CpGs island located
into the P1 promoter region of the KEAP1 was detected in 16 out of the 32
Typical Carcinoids (50%) and 8 out of the 16 Atypical Carcinoids (50%).
No somatic mutations were detected both in the kelch-repeats region of
the KEAP1 gene and in the Nhe2 domain of NFE2L2 gene, whereas LOH at the
KEAP1 locus (19p13.2) was found in more than 50% of cases, suggesting
that biallelic inactivation of KEAP1 in lung cancer is a common event in
lung carcinoids. Decreased of the KEAP1 expression in methylated cancer
cells induced greater nuclear accumulation of Nrf2, causing enhanced
transcriptional xenobiotic metabolism enzymes.Conclusions. This is the
first study to our knowledge that provides new insights into the
mechanism of deregulation of Nrf2/Keap1 detoxification pathway in lung
carcinoids. Loss of KEAP1 function leading to constitutive activation of
Nrf2-mediated gene expression in cancer suggests that deregulation of the
Keap1/Nrf2 system could play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of
carcinoids.

