Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-resistance to 1st, 2nd, and 3rd generation EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors in vitro is characterized by MET amplification and PTEN
loss


Reversible EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as erlotinib and
gefitinib offer significant clinical benefit to patients with EGFR
mutation positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) compared to
chemotherapy alone, but high rates of resistance especially at EGFR T790M
(50-60% of resistant cases) underscore the need for better targeted
treatments for NSCLC patients. Third generation irreversible TKIsAZD9291
and CO-1686were developed for efficacy in the T790M setting. However,
resistance to the new class of EGFR TKIs is inevitable, prompting us to
investigate the relationship between erlotinib and AZD9291 resistance
mechanisms and explore novel ones. NSCLC cell lines harboring activating
EGFR mutations with (NCI-H1975) or without T790M (HCC4006, HCC827, and
PC-9) were exposed to erlotinib, dacomitnib, or AZD9291 at IC 75 or
greater for three months to generate resistance. We observed
cross-resistance to other EGFR TKIs in nearly all resistant lines,
suggesting that T790M was not the main driver of resistance in the
erlotinib-treated lines and that a common mechanism might account for
resistance in each cell line set. An epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) was observed and a corresponding increase in vimentin staining was
seen in resistant lines, consistent with cross-resistance. Previous
studies showed that MET amplification caused erlotinib resistance in
HCC827; our data suggest MET amplification also accounted for the AZD9291
and dacomitnib resistance in HCC827. In AZD9291-resistant HCC4006 and
H1975 lines, PTEN levels were substantially reduced compared to the
parental line, with a corresponding increase in PIK3 pathway markers.
Whole exome sequencing data support homozygous deletion of PTEN loss as a
mechanism of acquired resistance to AZD9291 in NCI-H1975. The PTEN null
line NCI-H1650 was found to be resistant to all three TKIs without
long-term drug exposure, implicating PTEN loss as a mechanism of de novo
resistance. An analysis of EGFR mutation status, PTEN status, MET
expression, and the kinetics of acquired resistance will be presented and
clinical implications will be discussed.

