Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential transcript expression in nasopharyngeal carcinoma by
cDNA microarray analysis


By cDNA microarray, gene expression profiling was carried out in 360
paired tumor & normal biopsies from 60 nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC)
patients at 3 time points, namely, at diagnosis of NPC, on treatment with
an anti-inflammatory drug, Celecoxib (Celec) and on radiotherapy (RT). We
found 1 cluster of 82 transcripts with statistically significant
difference in expression between tumor & normal tissues at diagnosis, a
second cluster of 214 tumor versus normal transcripts on Celec treatment
and finally a third cluster of 202 tumor versus normal transcripts on RT.
Differential expression of selected tumor associated transcripts was
confirmed by RT-PCR. These include 8 tumor up-regulated transcripts with
3 encoding for immunological/inflammatory molecules, IL8, CXCL9 & CXCL10,
1 matrix metallopeptidase, MMP12, which breaks down extracellular matrix
and thus is associated with cancer metastasis, 1 osteonectin protein
which is involved in cell shape changes and thus related to cancer
invasion, SPARC, 1 bone morphogenic protein with a role in tissue
differentiation, GREM1, 1 GTPase-activating protein for phorbol ester
receptor, CHN1 and a sorting nexin family member with a role in
intracellular trafficking, SNX10. Genes which were prominently
down-regulated in tumor were a variety of polymorphic xenobiotic
detoxification enzyme genes or genes with antioxidant function (e.g.
GSTA1, GSTA2, GSTA3, CYP4B1, ALDH1A1, ADHFE1, MAOB, NQO1 & OAT). Many
genes were also down-regulated by RT in tumor tissues and one notable
example was TOP2A which encodes topoisomerase 2A involving in chromosome
condensation & chromatid separation during DNA replication, CLDN1 which
has tight junction adhesion function, ANLN which is required for
cytokinesis, and STMN1 which can regulate microtubule filament. These
genes had good potential in applying for clinical applications in
diagnosis or treatment of NPC in the future. Further exploration of the
clinical applications of these genes is underway.

