Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-134 targets programmed cell death 7 (PDCD7) gene to modulate
the pathogenesis of head and neck carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is one of the prevalent
malignancies in the world. microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in the
neoplastic process of various malignancies including HNSCC to mediate
post-transcriptional down-regulation of target genes. This study shows
that miR-134 enhances the proliferation, migration and invasion of HNSCC
cells. In silico modules predict that programmed cell death 7 (PDCD7)
gene could be one of the targets of miR-134. In stable HNSCC cell
subclones, ectopic miR-134 expression decreased PDCD7 expression; while
the ectopic miR-134Zip expression increased PDCD7 expression. Reporter
assays confirmed the binding of miR-134 to the wild type 3UTR of PDCD7,
which decreased reporter activity. The targeting of miR-134 to the 3UTR
of PDCD7 was abolished by the mutations in targeted sequences. Moreover,
miR-134Zip expression increased the activity of wild type reporter.
Down-regulation of PDCD7 was identified in around 70% of HNSCC tumors,
which was significantly opposite to miR-134 expression. A trend of
reverse expression between miR-134 and PDCD7 was also present in HNSCC
cell lines. PDCD7 was up-regulated following the apoptosis induced by
cis-platin. Ectopic PDCD7 expression decreased the proliferation and
migration of HNSCC cells, but it was unable to affect apoptosis or drug
resistance status. Moreover, miR-134 associated oncogenicity was
attenuated by PDCD7 expression. Taking together, this study concludes
that the oncogenic potential of miR-134 in head and neck carcinoma is
able to be mediated by targeting PDCD7.

