Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ectopic expression of truncated IFIT2 at C-terminal
tetratricopeptide repeats enhances the migration activity of oral
squamous cell carcinoma cells


Interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 2 (IFIT2)
belongs to one of interferon-stimulated gene family that comprise of
tetratricopeptide repeats (TPR). TPR repeats are thought to mediate
protein-protein interaction. Our previous report suggests that depletion
of IFIT2 enhances cell migration and metastatic activity in oral squamous
cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells via activation of atypical PKC signaling.
However, the exact mechanism by which IFIT2 depletion activates the aPKC
signaling pathway also remains unknown. Since IFIT2 comprises of nine TPR
repeats, this study aims to explore the role of TPR in functioning of
IFIT2. To address the above questions, different stable cell lines of
truncated forms of IFIT2 were subjected to cell migration assay.
Interestingly, C-terminal depleted cells exhibited increased migration
ability and also showed loss of cell polarity thus leading to random cell
orientation. Furthermore, these depleted cells also showed altered
expression of junction proteins such as Claudin-1 and E-cadherin in
comparison to IFIT2 overexpressed cells. Taken together, C-terminal
depleted cells exhibit features of loss of function of IFIT2 suggesting
the possible role of terminal TPR domain in maintaining the functional
role of IFIT2. To identify specific TPR domain, different mutation
construct are generated and its functional role is under study.

