Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase 1 study: Ipilimumab (anti CTLA-4) in combination with
Lenalidomide in patients with advanced cancers


Background: Ipilimumab, a cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4)
blocking antibody potentiates an antitumor T-cell response. Lenalidomide,
a derivative of thalidomide possesses immunomodulatory, antiangiogenic,
and antineoplastic properties and thereby inhibits the growth of blood
vessels and exhibits an anti-inflammatory effect. The potential
synergistic effect of stimulating one's own immune system to attack
cancer in combination with depriving further tumor growth provides
rationale for combining Ipilimumab and Lenalidomide.Methods: We designed
a phase I study (3+3 design) to determine the safety of Ipilimumab
(1.5-3mg/kg IV q 28 days x 4) and Lenalidomide (10-25mg PO daily x 21 q
28 days) until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity in advanced
cancers. Endpoints included maximum tolerated (MTD), dose limiting
toxicities (DLT), safety, and response per immune response criteria
(iRC).Results: To date, 21 patients (men, n = 8; women, n = 13), median
age 56 (19-75) years, median of 3 (0-6) prior therapies (including 3
patients with prior ipilimumab) were enrolled in 3 of 5 dose levels
ranging from 1.5-3mg of Ipilimumab and Lenalidomide 10-15 mg. The MTD has
not been reached yet. DLT included grade (G) 3 macular rash in 2 patients
(dose levels 2 and 3) and G3 pancreatitis (dose level 2). Other G3/4 drug
related toxicities included G4 hypopituitarism (n = 1) and G3 pulmonary
embolism (n = 1). Of 21 treated patients, 11 (52%) patients had stable
disease. The median change in size of target lesions per iRC was 13%
(-44% to +86%) with 5 (24%) of patients with at least -10% shrinkage
(Hodgkin lymphoma, n = 2; melanoma, n = 1; follicular thyroid carcinoma,
n = 1; teratoma, n = 1) lasting for 0.9 to 12.3+ months. The median
time-to-treatment failure was 2.1 months (95% CI 1.4-2.8).Conclusion:
Ipilimumab and Lenalidomide have manageable side effect profile and
demonstrate possible activity in patients with refractory Hodgkin
lymphoma, melanoma, follicular thyroid cancer and teratoma.

