Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromosomal instability as a prognostic marker in cervical cancer


Previous studies have demonstrated that chromosomal instability (CIN) is
a consistent feature of the majority of solid tumors. In this current
study, we sought to examine the published CIN70 gene signature in a
cohort of cervical cancer patients treated at the Princess Margaret (PM)
Cancer Centre (n = 79) and an independent cohort of The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) cervical cancer patients (n = 130). Patients with a high
CIN70 score had a higher number of copy number alterations (Spearman's
correlation coefficient (r) = 0.28, pPrevious studies have demonstrated
that chromosomal instability (CIN) is a consistent feature of the
majority of solid tumors. In this current study, we sought to examine the
published CIN70 gene signature in a cohort of cervical cancer patients
treated at the Princess Margaret (PM) Cancer Centre (n = 79) and an
independent cohort of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cervical cancer
patients (n = 130). Patients with a high CIN70 score had a higher number
of copy number alterations (Spearman's correlation coefficient (r) =
0.28, p<0.001), and a higher percentage of genome altered (r = 0.19, p =
0.016). According to Kaplan-Meier analysis, the CIN70 signature achieved
borderline significance for para-aortic nodal or distant relapse, with a
hazard ratio of 3.02 and Wald p-value of 0.05, but not significant for
overall, disease-free survival, or local relapse. In summary, these
findings demonstrate that chromosomal instability plays an important role
in cervical cancer, and is significantly associated with patient outcome.
For the first time, this CIN70 gene signature provided prognostic value
for patients with cervical cancer.

