Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic analyses and novel models validate CDK4 as a therapeutic
target in imatinib-resistant dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans


Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) is an aggressive PDGFB-dependent
cutaneous sarcoma characterized by an infiltrative growth and high rate
of local recurrence. Some DFSP progress to a higher-grade
fibrosarcomatous form, with rapid growth and increased risk of
metastasis. Imatinib provides clinical benefit in 50% of patients with
unresectable or metastatic DFSP. Efficacious medical therapies have not
been developed for imatinib-resistant DFSP. To this end, we established
the first patient-derived models of imatinib-resistant DFSP.Cell lines
and mouse xenografts were established from DFSP105, an imatinib-resistant
fibrosarcomatous DFSP, and were characterized by SNP arrays and
sequencing to identify targetable genomic alterations. Findings were
validated in vitro and in vivo, and confirmed in a case series including
12 DFSP and 6 fibrosarcomatous DFSP. SNP analysis of DFSP105 revealed a
homozygous deletion encompassing CDKN2A. The resultant p16 loss
implicated CDK4/6 as a potential therapeutic target in DFSP. In further
studies, we demonstrated CDKN2A homozygous deletion in 1 of 12
conventional DFSP vs. 2 of 6 fibrosarcomatous DFSP. In vitro treatment of
DFSP105 with two structurally distinct selective CDK4/6 inhibitors,
PD-0332991 and LEE011, led to inhibition of RB1 phosphorylation and
proliferation (GI50 160 nM and 276 nM, respectively). In vivo treatment
of DFSP105 with PD-0332991 (150 mg/kg) inhibited xenograft growth in
mice, in comparison with imatinib-treated or untreated tumors.In
conclusion, CDKN2A deletion is a novel mechanism of DFSP genetic
progression. CDK4/6 inhibition is a preclinically effective treatment
against p16-negative, imatinib-resistant fibrosarcomatous DFSP, and
should be evaluated as a therapeutic strategy in patients with
imatinib-resistant DFSP.

