Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-17B promotes chemoresistance of breast tumors through
ERK1/2 anti-apoptotic pathway


Interleukin-17B (IL-17B) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that belongs to a
family encompassing 6 interleukins (IL-17A to F) and binds to the IL-17
receptor B (IL-17RB). Little is known about the potential role of
IL-17B/IL-17RB signaling pathway in cancer. Both IL-17B and IL-17RB are
up-regulated in breast tumors and are associated with a poor prognosis in
patients. We thus focused on their implication in breast cancer. We
demonstrated that recombinant IL-17B induces resistance to conventional
chemotherapeutic agents such as taxol, an effect that is totally
abrogated by disrupting IL-17RB signaling. To further understand the
molecular events involved in IL-17B-induced chemoresistance, we focused
on signaling pathways activated under stimulation of human breast cancer
cell lines by recombinant IL-17B. We observed that IL-17B induces the
activation of both ERK1/2 and NFkB pathways, leading to an up-regulation
of anti-apoptotic proteins of the Bcl-2 family. Interestingly we showed
that the inhibition of ERK1/2 pathway totally prevents IL-17B-induced
chemoresistance of breast cancer cell lines. Relevance of these data is
currently under investigation in tumor mouse models. Altogether our
results demonstrate the implication of the IL-17B/IL-17RB signaling
pathway in breast tumors and identify IL-17B and its receptor as
potential therapeutic targets for cancer.

