Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained inhibition of HER3 and EGFR is necessary to induce
regression of HER2-amplified gastrointestinal carcinomas


Purpose: Preclinical studies in HER2-amplified gastrointestinal cancer
models have shown that co-targeting HER2 with a monoclonal antibody and a
small molecule is superior to monotherapy with either inhibitor, but the
underlying cooperative mechanisms remain unexplored. We investigated the
molecular underpinnings of this synergy to identify key vulnerabilities
susceptible to alternative therapeutic opportunities.Experimental Design:
The signaling consequences of HER2, HER3 and EGFR (HERs) blockade were
evaluated in HER2-overexpressing colorectal and gastric cancer cell lines
by Western blotting. HERs canonical downstream transducers were
quantitatively gauged by multiplex phospho-proteomics. The in vivo
outcome of antibody-mediated HER2 blockade by trastuzumab, reversible
HER2 inhibition by lapatinib, and irreversible HER2 inhibition by
afatinib was assessed in patient-derived tumorgrafts and cell-line
xenografts by monitoring tumor growth curves and by using antibody-based
proximity assays for phosphoprotein analysis.Results: Trastuzumab
monotherapy reduced HER3 phosphorylation, with minor consequences on
downstream transducers. Lapatinib alone acutely inhibited all HER
receptors and effectors but led to delayed rephosphorylation of HER3 and
EGFR and partial restoration of ERK and AKT activity. When combined with
lapatinib, trastuzumab prevented HER3/EGFR reactivation and caused
prolonged inhibition of ERK/AKT. Afatinib alone was as effective as
trastuzumab plus lapatinib in counteracting the reinstatement of HER3,
EGFR, and downstream signaling activation. In vivo, the combination of
trastuzumab and lapatinib - or monotherapy with afatinib - resulted in
overt tumor shrinkage.Conclusions: Only prolonged inhibition of HER3 and
EGFR, achievable by dual blockade with trastuzumab and lapatinib or
irreversible HER2 inhibition by single-agent afatinib, led to regression
of HER2-amplified gastrointestinal carcinomas.

