Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pasireotide reduces chemoresistance in pancreatic tumor cells by
inhibiting the synthesis and secretion of growth factors from tumor
associated fibroblasts


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is extremely rich in stroma. By
secreting tremendous amounts of soluble and un-soluble proteins, stromal
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) can induce tumor chemoresistance by
activating survival signals in cancer cells and preventing drug delivery
through increased fibrosis. Our results demonstrate that chemoresistance
triggered by the CAF secretome is strongly reduced upon inhibition of CAF
protein synthesis. This is achieved by impinging upon the
PI3K/mTOR/4E-BP1 pathway that we found highly activated in primary
cultures of alpha-SMA-positive CAFs isolated from human PDAC. CAFs, but
not normal pancreatic fibroblasts, express primarily the sstr1
somatostatin receptor subtype whose activation by the somatostatin
analogue SOM230 (Pasireotide) strongly inhibits the PI3K/mTOR/4E-BP1
pathway and the resulting synthesis of secreted proteins including IL-6
and collagen-I. As a consequence, the growth and chemoresistance of
pancreatic tumors provided by co-injection of CAFs in nude mice are
overcome when chemotherapy (such as gemcitabine) is combined to
pasireotide treatment. While gemcitabine or pasireotide alone have
marginal effects, the combined treatment markedly decreases fibrosis and
strongly enhances cancer cell apoptosis due to increased cell sensitivity
to gemcitabine. We propose that selective inhibition of CAF protein
synthesis and secretion with sstr1-directed pharmacological compounds
represents an anti-stromal targeted therapy with a promising potential in
chemosensitization.

