Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of methyltransferase, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)
in mouse hepatocyte and human hepatocellular carcinoma


To investigate the role of EZH1 and EZH2 in liver homeostasis, mice were
generated that carried Ezh1-/- and EZH2fl/fl alleles and an Alb-Cre
transgene. Only combined loss of EZH1 and EZH2 in mouse hepatocytes
caused a depletion of global H3K27me3 marks and the specific loss over
1900 genes at 3 months of age. Ezh1-/-,Ezh2fl/flAlb-Cre mice exhibited
progressive liver abnormalities manifested by development of regenerative
nodules and concomitant periportal fibrosis, inflammatory infiltration
and activation of A6-positive hepatic progenitor cells at 8 months of
age. In response to chronic treatment with CCl4, all experimental mice
but none of the controls (n = 27 each) showed increased hepatic
degeneration associated with liver dysfunction and reduced ability to
proliferate. After 2/3ds partial hepatectomy, mutant mice (n = 5)
displayed increased liver injury and a blunted regenerative response.
Genome-wide analyses at 3-months of age identified 51 genes that had lost
H3K27me3 marks and their expression was significantly increased. These
genes were involved in regulation of cell survival, fibrosis, and
proliferation. H3K27me3 levels and liver physiology were unaffected in
mice lacking either EZH1 globally or EZH2 specifically in hepatocytes.
This work demonstrates a critical redundancy of EZH1 and EZH2 in
maintaining hepatic homeostasis and regeneration. Next, we checked the
expression EZH2 and H3K27me3 status in 67 human hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) samples. We also checked the gene expression by the next-generation
sequencing based on EZH2 expression. This work demonstrates candidate
EZH2 target genes in human HCC.

