Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo loss of function screening reveals carbonic anhydrase IX
(CAIX) as a key modulator of tumor initiating potential in primary
pancreatic tumors


Re-programming of energy metabolism is one of the emerging hallmarks of
cancer. Upregulation of energy metabolism pathways fuels cell growth and
division, a key characteristic of neoplastic disease, and can lead to
dependency on specific metabolic pathways. Thus targeting energy
metabolism pathways might offer the opportunity for novel therapeutics.
Here we describe the application of a novel in vivo screening approach
for the identification of genes involved in cancer metabolism using a
patient derived pancreatic xenograft model. Lenti-viruses expressing
shRNAs targeting twelve different cell surface protein transporters were
separately transduced into the primary pancreatic tumor cells. Transduced
cells were pooled and implanted into mice. Tumors were harvested at
different times and the frequency of each shRNA was determined as a
measure of which ones prevented tumor growth. Several targets including
CAIX, MCT4, and xCT were identified in these studies and shown to be
required for tumor initiation and growth. Interestingly, CAIX was
overexpressed in the tumor initiating cell population. CAIX expression
alone correlated with a highly tumorigenic subpopulation of cells.
Furthermore, CAIX expression was essential for tumor initiation since
shRNA knockdown eliminated the ability of cells to grow in vivo. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first parallel in vivo assessment of
multiple novel oncology target genes using a patient derived pancreatic
tumor model.

