Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKAP12 is elevated in paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells
and correlates with poor ovarian cancer patient survival


Objective: Although most ovarian cancer patients respond initially to the
standard of care involving carboplatinum/paclitaxel-based chemotherapy,
the majority will recur with chemotherapeutically resistant disease.
Unfortunately, no clinical biomarker(s) for predicting or monitoring
chemotherapeutic resistance are available. We sought to identify shed
and/or secreted proteins from paclitaxel-resistant human ovarian cancer
cells and identify whether any of these correlate with ovarian cancer
patient outcome.Methods: A proteomic analysis of secretomes from high
grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) cells (OV90) was compared to that
from a syngeneic paclitaxel-resistant variant (OV90-TR) and a cancer cell
line developed from a chemorefractory HGSOC patient. Associations between
the identified candidates and patient outcome were assessed from publicly
available transcript expression data (n = 545 ovarian cancer patients)
and validated independently (n = 795 ovarian cancer patients).Results:
Among the 81 differentially abundant proteins identified (qObjective:
Although most ovarian cancer patients respond initially to the standard
of care involving carboplatinum/paclitaxel-based chemotherapy, the
majority will recur with chemotherapeutically resistant disease.
Unfortunately, no clinical biomarker(s) for predicting or monitoring
chemotherapeutic resistance are available. We sought to identify shed
and/or secreted proteins from paclitaxel-resistant human ovarian cancer
cells and identify whether any of these correlate with ovarian cancer
patient outcome.Methods: A proteomic analysis of secretomes from high
grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) cells (OV90) was compared to that
from a syngeneic paclitaxel-resistant variant (OV90-TR) and a cancer cell
line developed from a chemorefractory HGSOC patient. Associations between
the identified candidates and patient outcome were assessed from publicly
available transcript expression data (n = 545 ovarian cancer patients)
and validated independently (n = 795 ovarian cancer patients).Results:
Among the 81 differentially abundant proteins identified (q<0.05) from
paclitaxel-sensitive vs -resistant HGSOC cell secretomes, AKAP12 was
verified to be elevated at the protein and transcript level in all models
of paclitaxel-resistant HGSOC. Further, elevated AKAP12 transcript
expression was found to significantly correlate with poor
progression-free (Hazard Ratio = 1.487 ( 0.148), p = 0.0085 ( 0.002) and
overall (Hazard Ratio = 1.22 ( 0.08), p = 0.009 ( 0.013)
survival.Conclusions: These findings suggest that elevation and efflux of
AKAP12 is characteristic of paclitaxel-resistant HGSOC cells and that
elevated AKAP12 expression correlates with poor ovarian cancer patient
survival.

