Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A functional microRNA screening approach that identifies microRNAs
affecting melanoma cell invasion


Melanoma is a fast progressing tumor which tends to metastasize at small
size and at early time point. miRNA profiling has been performed for a
variety of cancer types, however, the results obtained differ
substantially among published studies. Therefore, it is of major interest
to unravel miRNA networks involved in melanoma progression as, for
example, in tumor cell invasion. In order to follow this aim, we
established a functional screening approach based on a high-throughput
invasion assay using a human miRNA mimics library consisting of 988
miRNAs (miRBase Version 13.0). Applying this strategy, we could identify
miRNAs that enhanced the invasive capacity of A375 melanoma cells
(oncogenic miRNAs), as well as miRNAs with a lowering effect on
invasiveness, latters found predominantly down-regulated in melanoma and
thus considered as tumor-suppressors. miR-339-3p was one of the promising
candidates which inhibited invasion when transfected into different
melanoma cell lines. In addition, miR-339-3p expression was significantly
decreased in melanoma cell lines compared to normal human melanocytes.
Furthermore, the myeloid leukemia cell differentiation protein (MCL-1)
was identified as a novel target of miR-339-3p and found to be
down-regulated by miR-339-3p both on protein and on mRNA level. MCL1
down-regulation by siRNA could mimic inhibited invasion as observed after
miR-339-3p transfection. Our findings indicate that miR-339-3p can act as
a tumor suppressor in melanoma and its expression might contribute to the
varying degrees of aggressiveness among different melanomas. We believe
that our approach can unravel possible therapeutics checkpoints which
might be used therapeutically, to counteract tumor spread.

