Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo and in vitro effect of Withania somnifera extract on the
proliferation of side population (CD44HIGH /CD24LOW) cells sorted from
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells


Invasive breast cancer is considered a great challenge for treatment of
cancer in women. In 2013, an estimated 232,340 new cases of invasive
breast cancer were expected to be diagnosed in the U.S., along with
64,640 new cases of non-invasive breast cancer. For women under 45,
breast cancer is more common in African-American women than white women,
and, overall, African-American women are more likely to die of breast
cancer. CD44high/CD24low cells have been associated with invasiveness of
breast cancers, in particular basal-like breast cancers. In nude mice
xenografted with MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, CD44high/CD24low cells
are the side population associated with metastasis to the bones and are
considered to be cancer stem cells. The side population cells are not
only involved in invasiveness of breast cancer but are resistant to
chemotherapeutic drugs such as mitoxantrone and doxorubicin.The effects
of an alcoholic extract of the roots of Withania somnifera (WS), a
traditional herbal remedy, was tested in the sorted side population,
CD44high/CD24low, of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. WS caused a
concentration-dependent inhibition of the sorted cells, with 95, 65, and
35% inhibition of the proliferation of cells after incubation with
concentrations of 100, 50, and 25 g/ml, respectively. Two groups of nude
mice (10 mice ineach group) were xenografted with luciferase transfected
CD44high/CD24low cells. Group1 served as control has been dosed with 10%
DMSO via drinking water for 8 weeks. Group 2 has been given WS (300
mg/kg) via drinking water for 8 weeks. This experiment is on going and
will end after 8 weeks. Tumoror size will be assessed each week using an
in vivo imaging system. In conclusion, on, Withania somnifera extract
showed a concentration-dependent inhibition of CD44high/CD24low cells and
it is anticipated that the extract will be effective in inhibition of
cell proliferation in treated mice. These findings serve as preliminary
data for further preclinical studies evaluating the effects of WS.Grant
support: Research supported by NIH-NCI-U54-118948 at Tuskegee University
and the University of Alabama at Birmingham.

