Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of telomere length in classic and variant hairy cell
leukemia


Telomeres are ribonucleoprotein structures which protect the ends of
chromosomes from aberrant recombination events and have been reported to
be relatively short in several hematologic malignancies; adverse
prognosis has been documented in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and several
non-B-cell malignancies. However, their association with prognosis of
classic and variant hairy cell leukemia (HCL and HCLv) has not been
described. To study telomeres in HCL and HCLv, DNA from leukemic cells of
patients was measured by monochrome multiplex quantitative PCR (MMQPCR)
to determine relative telomere length (RTL). Of 46 patients in the
cohort, 5 of 27 HCL (19%) vs. 12 of 19 HCLv (63%) patients had unmutated
(>98% homology to germline sequence) immunoglobulin rearrangements (p =
0.0045). IGHV4-34+ rearrangements were present in 12 of the 17 (70%)
unmutated cases, including five HCL and seven HCLv. RTL was shown to be
shorter in unmutated HCL (p = 0.03) and in patients who had died of their
disease (p = 0.03). RTL negatively correlated with IGHV homology to
germline sequence (r = -0.331; p = 0.025), and age (r = -0.315; p =
0.035). Shorter RTL was associated with death from disease in either HCL
(p = 0.0063) or HCLv (p = 0.0034), in patients with mutated IGHV
rearrangements (p = 0.005), or in all patients combined (p = 0.0008).
Median survival from diagnosis was less in time in patients with shorter
RTL (p = 0.016) and this significant difference persisted when examining
just the 19 patients with HCLv (p = 0.029). Gene expression profiling
identified several genes related to telomere maintenance with
significantly different expression levels between mutated and unmutated
cases. This first of kind study in HCL/HCLv suggests that telomeres play
a role in the relative pathology of HCL and HCLv and RTL could be used as
a prognostic biomarker in gauging the indolent course of these cancers.

