Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting clinical response based on ex vivo drug response in
renal cell carcinoma using kinase activity profiling


Introduction: Sunitinib, a potent multitargeted receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, is the first line treatment for metastatic renal cell
carcinoma (mRCC). Because sunitinib responses and toxicity are highly
variable, there is a need for biomarkers predicting sunitinib response or
predicting the optimal sequence preference when using alternative
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The aim of this study was to investigate the
correlation between ex vivo drug response and clinical response in renal
cell carcinoma (RCC) and to explore alternative treatment options. This
study has received funding from the European Union's Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no 259939.Methods:
Protein tyrosine kinase activity profiles were generated on PamChip
peptide microarrays of lysed tumor resection tissues (1-5mm3) from 22
mRCC patients. The ex vivo effect of kinase inhibitors (sunitinib,
axitinib, sorafenib, pazopanib, erlotinib and crenolanib) was determined
and analyzed with Bionavigator software. A two-group (sunitinib
responders versus non-responders) comparison applied on the inhibition
ratios identified the significantly different peptide phosphorylations.
Peptides were clustered according to their correlation with clinical
response.Results: As little as 5 g protein input (0.05 mm3 tissue) was
used per kinase activity profile. The ex vivo sunitinib effect positively
correlated with clinical responses especially in the subgroup which
received sunitinib as 1st line treatment (4 responders vs. 4
non-responders). 18 of the 105 peptides were significantly
(pIntroduction: Sunitinib, a potent multitargeted receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, is the first line treatment for metastatic renal cell
carcinoma (mRCC). Because sunitinib responses and toxicity are highly
variable, there is a need for biomarkers predicting sunitinib response or
predicting the optimal sequence preference when using alternative
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The aim of this study was to investigate the
correlation between ex vivo drug response and clinical response in renal
cell carcinoma (RCC) and to explore alternative treatment options. This
study has received funding from the European Union's Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no 259939.Methods:
Protein tyrosine kinase activity profiles were generated on PamChip
peptide microarrays of lysed tumor resection tissues (1-5mm3) from 22
mRCC patients. The ex vivo effect of kinase inhibitors (sunitinib,
axitinib, sorafenib, pazopanib, erlotinib and crenolanib) was determined
and analyzed with Bionavigator software. A two-group (sunitinib
responders versus non-responders) comparison applied on the inhibition
ratios identified the significantly different peptide phosphorylations.
Peptides were clustered according to their correlation with clinical
response.Results: As little as 5 g protein input (0.05 mm3 tissue) was
used per kinase activity profile. The ex vivo sunitinib effect positively
correlated with clinical responses especially in the subgroup which
received sunitinib as 1st line treatment (4 responders vs. 4
non-responders). 18 of the 105 peptides were significantly (p<0.05) less
phosphorylated upon ex vivo sunitinib treatment in 4 responders compared
to 4 non-responders. Pathway analysis of the peptide phosphorylation
patterns revealed sunitinib target involvement. Ex vivo erlotinib,
axitinib or crenolanib showed reversed inhibition patterns i.e. more
inhibition in the non-responder than in the responder group.In summary,
we have shown that predicting clinical response to sunitinib based on the
ex vivo response to sunitinib is feasible. This requires further
investigation with a larger sample set. Furthermore, the ex vivo response
to a drug panel suggests that identification of novel treatment options
for non-responders might be feasible.

