Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A second round for concomitant resistance in human cancer: A
restraint upon metastasis


Concomitant tumor resistance (CR) is the phenomenon according to which a
tumor-bearing host inhibits the growth of secondary tumor implants.
Ehrlich first described it in 1906, but this phenomenon remained
forgotten for about 60 years. After its renascence, some groups have
demonstrated that both immunogenic and non-immunogenic tumors can induce
CR in different animal models. Metastases could be considered as
secondary tumor implants developed spontaneously during the primary tumor
growth, thus CR could be relevant for cancer progression. Clinical and
experimental evidence suggest that the removal of human and murine tumors
might be followed by an abrupt increase in metastatic growth, hence the
primary tumor could exert a controlling action on its metastases. In
previous papers we demonstrated that, in mice, two temporally separate
peaks of CR can be detected during murine T-lymphoma (LB) primary tumor
growth. The second peak of CR is mediated by most large-sized immunogenic
and non-immunogenic tumors and is associated with the anti-tumor and
anti-metastatic serum factor meta-tyrosine (m-tyr), an isomer of tyrosine
not present in normal proteins. Based on this background, in this work we
assessed whether CR was also occurring in human tumor experimental
models.Athymic nude mice were inoculated s.c. in the right flank, with
the human prostate cancer cell line PC3 (1 106, primary implant). After
14 days the animals received a second inoculation of PC3 cells in the
left flank (1 106, secondary implant). The control group only received
the secondary implant. The growth of the secondary implant was
significantly reduced (92%; PConcomitant tumor resistance (CR) is the
phenomenon according to which a tumor-bearing host inhibits the growth of
secondary tumor implants. Ehrlich first described it in 1906, but this
phenomenon remained forgotten for about 60 years. After its renascence,
some groups have demonstrated that both immunogenic and non-immunogenic
tumors can induce CR in different animal models. Metastases could be
considered as secondary tumor implants developed spontaneously during the
primary tumor growth, thus CR could be relevant for cancer progression.
Clinical and experimental evidence suggest that the removal of human and
murine tumors might be followed by an abrupt increase in metastatic
growth, hence the primary tumor could exert a controlling action on its
metastases. In previous papers we demonstrated that, in mice, two
temporally separate peaks of CR can be detected during murine T-lymphoma
(LB) primary tumor growth. The second peak of CR is mediated by most
large-sized immunogenic and non-immunogenic tumors and is associated with
the anti-tumor and anti-metastatic serum factor meta-tyrosine (m-tyr), an
isomer of tyrosine not present in normal proteins. Based on this
background, in this work we assessed whether CR was also occurring in
human tumor experimental models.Athymic nude mice were inoculated s.c. in
the right flank, with the human prostate cancer cell line PC3 (1 106,
primary implant). After 14 days the animals received a second inoculation
of PC3 cells in the left flank (1 106, secondary implant). The control
group only received the secondary implant. The growth of the secondary
implant was significantly reduced (92%; P<0.05) at 27 days, in animals
carrying the primary implant. Moreover, m-tyr was detected in the serum
of mice bearing the RC phenomenon. The tumor growth inhibition was
recapitulated in animals inoculated with the primary tumors and injected
with m-tyr. Strikingly the RC phenomenon was reversed when secondary
implants were injected with phenylalanine, a protective amino acid highly
present in primary tumors. In vitro results also showed that exposure of
PC3 cells to m-tyr inhibited cell growth and a G0/G1 cell cycle arrest,
which was concomitant with alterations in the mRNA expression levels of
survivin (apoptosis inhibitor), Ki67 (proliferation marker), Hes1
(transcription factor involved in Notch pathway) and STAT3 (prostate
cancer survival factor) (PConcomitant tumor resistance (CR) is the
phenomenon according to which a tumor-bearing host inhibits the growth of
secondary tumor implants. Ehrlich first described it in 1906, but this
phenomenon remained forgotten for about 60 years. After its renascence,
some groups have demonstrated that both immunogenic and non-immunogenic
tumors can induce CR in different animal models. Metastases could be
considered as secondary tumor implants developed spontaneously during the
primary tumor growth, thus CR could be relevant for cancer progression.
Clinical and experimental evidence suggest that the removal of human and
murine tumors might be followed by an abrupt increase in metastatic
growth, hence the primary tumor could exert a controlling action on its
metastases. In previous papers we demonstrated that, in mice, two
temporally separate peaks of CR can be detected during murine T-lymphoma
(LB) primary tumor growth. The second peak of CR is mediated by most
large-sized immunogenic and non-immunogenic tumors and is associated with
the anti-tumor and anti-metastatic serum factor meta-tyrosine (m-tyr), an
isomer of tyrosine not present in normal proteins. Based on this
background, in this work we assessed whether CR was also occurring in
human tumor experimental models.Athymic nude mice were inoculated s.c. in
the right flank, with the human prostate cancer cell line PC3 (1 106,
primary implant). After 14 days the animals received a second inoculation
of PC3 cells in the left flank (1 106, secondary implant). The control
group only received the secondary implant. The growth of the secondary
implant was significantly reduced (92%; P<0.05) at 27 days, in animals
carrying the primary implant. Moreover, m-tyr was detected in the serum
of mice bearing the RC phenomenon. The tumor growth inhibition was
recapitulated in animals inoculated with the primary tumors and injected
with m-tyr. Strikingly the RC phenomenon was reversed when secondary
implants were injected with phenylalanine, a protective amino acid highly
present in primary tumors. In vitro results also showed that exposure of
PC3 cells to m-tyr inhibited cell growth and a G0/G1 cell cycle arrest,
which was concomitant with alterations in the mRNA expression levels of
survivin (apoptosis inhibitor), Ki67 (proliferation marker), Hes1
(transcription factor involved in Notch pathway) and STAT3 (prostate
cancer survival factor) (P<0.01). We have further validated the RC
phenomenon in two other human cancer models: anaplastic carcinoma of the
lung (CALU-6), and nasopharyngeal carcinoma (KB), exhibiting also high
levels of m-tyr in serum from nu/nu mice bearing CALU-6 or KB tumors.
Altogether, we showcase for the first time that CR is triggered in human
solid tumors, that this phenomenon is mediated by m-tyr and provide the
molecular mechanisms that drive this process. These results offer an
alternative therapeutic avenue in the management of metastatic cancers.

