Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule compound NCI-8 induces ERK2-dependent mutant-p53
protein degradation


The tumor suppressor p53 is mutated in over 50% of human cancers leading
not only to loss of wild-type p53 function, but also to gain-of-function
(GOF) mutant p53 which acts as an oncogene. Mutant p53 is expressed at
very high levels and can inhibit residual wild-type p53 activity as well
as the function of p53 family member proteins such as p73 or p63.
Therefore, targeting mutant p53 by either restoring the p53 pathway or
depleting its GOF is an attractive strategy for cancer therapy. NCI-8 is
a small molecule compound with dual abilities to induce p53 signal
pathway and destabilize mutant p53 protein (deplete GOF) in mutant p53
expressing colorectal cancer cells. It remains unclear how NCI-8
regulates mutant p53 protein degradation. ERK2 is a member of the MAP
kinase family which plays a critical role in regulating cell growth and
differentiation by phosphorylating substrates including wild-type p53. We
demonstrate that NCI-8-induces mutant p53 protein degradation via
activation of ERK2 signaling. We observed a sustained phosphorylation of
ERK2 upon NCI-8 treatment of cancer cells, but not in normal cells. MEK
inhibitor U0126 treatment completely blocked NCI-8-mediated
phosphorylation of ERK2 in cancer cells. These results, taken together,
suggest that NCI-8 activates the ERK2 signaling pathway in cancer cells.
There was a correlation between mutant p53 degradation and
phosphorylation of ERK2 in cancer cells treated with NCI-8. We further
examined the role of ERK2 phosphorylation in NCI-8- mediated mutant p53
protein degradation. Cancer cells were treated with U0126 to block ERK2
phosphorylation or transiently transfected with siRNA to knockdown ERK2.
U0126 treatment or knockdown of ERK2 rescued mutant p53 from
NCI-8-mediated protein degradation, suggesting that NCI-8-mediated
phosphorylation of ERK2 is required for mutant p53 degradation. We
further found that U0126 treatment inhibited NCI-8 induction of p21, puma
and Noxa expressions in cancer cells. Consistently, transient
over-expression of exogenous mutant p53 blocked NCI-8-mediated
restoration of p53 pathway signaling in mutant-p53 expressing cancer
cells. These results suggest that NCI-8 restores p53 signal pathway via
ERK2-dependent mutant p53 protein degradation. Correlated with the
U0126-rescue of mutant p53 protein, the percentage of cells with sub-G1
content induced by NCI-8 is decreased in response to U0126 treatment in
cancer cells, suggesting that cell death induced by NCI-8 depends on
ERK2-mediated mutant p53 degradation. Furthermore, combinational indices
showed that U0126 antagonized NCI-8- induced cell death, but no
antagonism was found in combinational treatment of NCI-8 and EGFR
inhibitors in cancer cells. Our data indicate an important role of
NCI-8-phosphorylated ERK2 in regulation of mutant p53 protein degradation
and cell death in cancer cells, and provide a rationale for clinical
testing of NCI-8 and ERK2 pathway-related factors in cancer therapy.

