Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profile of OTX015, a BET bromodomain inhibitor, in
preclinical models of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small-cell
lung cancer (SCLC) models


Background. BET bromodomain proteins recognize chromatin modifications
and act as epigenetic readers contributing to gene transcription. OTX015,
a novel BET bromodomain inhibitor currently in clinical Phase Ib studies
in hematologic malignancies and solid tumors, including lung cancer. We
have shown in vitro and in vivo activity of OTX015 in NSCLC and SCLC
models (Riveiro et al; EORTC 2014), however the mechanism of action and
relevant affected genes are not fully characterized. This study aimed to
elucidate pathways and genes affecting response/resistance to OTX015 in
lung models.Methods. OTX015 (OncoEthix SA, Switzerland), GI50 values were
determined with the MTT assay after 72h exposure in 5 NSCLC cell lines
(H2228, H3122, A549, HOP62, HOP92) and 4 SCLC cell lines (H82, H69,
DMS79, DMS114). For cell cycle analysis, cells were stained with
propidium iodide and analyzed with a FACScan flow cytometer. RNA was
isolated after treatment with DMSO or OTX015 (500 nM) for 2, 4, 8 or 12
and 24h and gene expression profiles (GEP) were obtained in all NSCLC and
2 SCLC (H82 and DMS114) cell lines with Illumina HumanHT-12 Expression
BeadChips.Results. OTX015 displayed antiproliferative effects in 4 of the
5 NSCLC cell lines with GI50 values from 110 to 940 nM, whereas A549
cells (harboring mutations in KRAS and LKB1 genes) were resistant to
OTX015. Among SLCL models, DMS114 cells showed dose-dependent sensitivity
to OTX015 [GI50 = 120nM], while H82, H69, and DMS79 cells were resistant
[GI50 >6 M], despite overexpressing CMYC and/or NMYC. In sensitive-NSCLC
models we observed an increase in cells in the S phase after OTX015
treatment, whereas an increase in the G1 phase was observed in the
sensitive DMS114 cell line. GEP showed that changes in expression levels
of EFR3B and genes related to RNA biogenesis were higher in SCLC cells
with reduced sensitivity to OTX015 than in sensitive cells. On the other
hand, genes related to histones and chromatin structure were the most
differentially expressed after OTX015 exposure in both sensitive and
resistant cell lines. In NSCLC models, EFR3B and FOS gene up-regulation,
IL7R and IL6-related gene down-regulation were associated with higher
OTX015 sensitivity Expression changes more prominent in OTX015-resistant
cells affected the transcription factor FOXD1 and genes related to RNA
processing.Conclusions. Our data contribute to elucidate the mechanisms
associated with OTX015 sensitivity in several lung cancer in vitro
models, supporting the rationale for the ongoing clinical Phase Ib study
in solid tumors including NSCLC patients (KRAS+; ALK+).

