Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Independent prognostic role of chromosome 12p deletion in prostate
cancer


Deletion of chromosome 12p is a recurrent alteration in prostate cancer,
but the prevalence and clinical significance of this alteration is
unclear. More than 7,000 prostate cancers with clinical follow-up data in
a tissue microarray (TMA) format were analyzed by dual labeling
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using probes for 12p13 (CDKN1B;
p27) and for centromere 12 as a reference. CDKN1B was selected as a probe
because this gene is located in the center of the deletion, which spans
>10 Mb and includes >50 genes in 80% of cancers with 12p deletion. In
13.7% of prostate cancers a deletion of 12p was found (13.5% hemizygeous;
0.2% homozygeous deletions). 12p deletions were linked to advanced tumor
stage (pDeletion of chromosome 12p is a recurrent alteration in prostate
cancer, but the prevalence and clinical significance of this alteration
is unclear. More than 7,000 prostate cancers with clinical follow-up data
in a tissue microarray (TMA) format were analyzed by dual labeling
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using probes for 12p13 (CDKN1B;
p27) and for centromere 12 as a reference. CDKN1B was selected as a probe
because this gene is located in the center of the deletion, which spans
>10 Mb and includes >50 genes in 80% of cancers with 12p deletion. In
13.7% of prostate cancers a deletion of 12p was found (13.5% hemizygeous;
0.2% homozygeous deletions). 12p deletions were linked to advanced tumor
stage (p<0.0001), high Gleason grade (pDeletion of chromosome 12p is a
recurrent alteration in prostate cancer, but the prevalence and clinical
significance of this alteration is unclear. More than 7,000 prostate
cancers with clinical follow-up data in a tissue microarray (TMA) format
were analyzed by dual labeling fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
using probes for 12p13 (CDKN1B; p27) and for centromere 12 as a
reference. CDKN1B was selected as a probe because this gene is located in
the center of the deletion, which spans >10 Mb and includes >50 genes in
80% of cancers with 12p deletion. In 13.7% of prostate cancers a deletion
of 12p was found (13.5% hemizygeous; 0.2% homozygeous deletions). 12p
deletions were linked to advanced tumor stage (p<0.0001), high Gleason
grade (p<0.0001), lymph node metastasis (p = 0.0004), rapid tumor cell
proliferation (pDeletion of chromosome 12p is a recurrent alteration in
prostate cancer, but the prevalence and clinical significance of this
alteration is unclear. More than 7,000 prostate cancers with clinical
follow-up data in a tissue microarray (TMA) format were analyzed by dual
labeling fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using probes for 12p13
(CDKN1B; p27) and for centromere 12 as a reference. CDKN1B was selected
as a probe because this gene is located in the center of the deletion,
which spans >10 Mb and includes >50 genes in 80% of cancers with 12p
deletion. In 13.7% of prostate cancers a deletion of 12p was found (13.5%
hemizygeous; 0.2% homozygeous deletions). 12p deletions were linked to
advanced tumor stage (p<0.0001), high Gleason grade (p<0.0001), lymph
node metastasis (p = 0.0004), rapid tumor cell proliferation (p<0.0001),
and early biochemical recurrence (BCR) (p = 0.0027). Multivariate
analysis including pT stage (pDeletion of chromosome 12p is a recurrent
alteration in prostate cancer, but the prevalence and clinical
significance of this alteration is unclear. More than 7,000 prostate
cancers with clinical follow-up data in a tissue microarray (TMA) format
were analyzed by dual labeling fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
using probes for 12p13 (CDKN1B; p27) and for centromere 12 as a
reference. CDKN1B was selected as a probe because this gene is located in
the center of the deletion, which spans >10 Mb and includes >50 genes in
80% of cancers with 12p deletion. In 13.7% of prostate cancers a deletion
of 12p was found (13.5% hemizygeous; 0.2% homozygeous deletions). 12p
deletions were linked to advanced tumor stage (p<0.0001), high Gleason
grade (p<0.0001), lymph node metastasis (p = 0.0004), rapid tumor cell
proliferation (p<0.0001), and early biochemical recurrence (BCR) (p =
0.0027). Multivariate analysis including pT stage (p<0.0001), Gleason
grade (pDeletion of chromosome 12p is a recurrent alteration in prostate
cancer, but the prevalence and clinical significance of this alteration
is unclear. More than 7,000 prostate cancers with clinical follow-up data
in a tissue microarray (TMA) format were analyzed by dual labeling
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using probes for 12p13 (CDKN1B;
p27) and for centromere 12 as a reference. CDKN1B was selected as a probe
because this gene is located in the center of the deletion, which spans
>10 Mb and includes >50 genes in 80% of cancers with 12p deletion. In
13.7% of prostate cancers a deletion of 12p was found (13.5% hemizygeous;
0.2% homozygeous deletions). 12p deletions were linked to advanced tumor
stage (p<0.0001), high Gleason grade (p<0.0001), lymph node metastasis (p
= 0.0004), rapid tumor cell proliferation (p<0.0001), and early
biochemical recurrence (BCR) (p = 0.0027). Multivariate analysis
including pT stage (p<0.0001), Gleason grade (p<0.0001), pN status (p =
0.0001), preoperative PSA levels (p = 0.0001), and resection margin
status (p = 0.0001) revealed an independent prognostic value of 12p
deletion (p = 0.0014). There was no association with ERG fusion status.
Deletion of 12p deletion was only minimally linked to p27 expression
status, which by itself was unrelated to clinical outcome. This argues
against p27 as the key target gene of 12p deletions. Since none of the
involved 12p genes is recurrently mutated in next generation sequencing
studies, simultaneous dosage reduction of multiple genes may exert a
relevant biological effect in 12p deleted cancers. In summary, the
results of our study demonstrate that 12p deletion is frequent and
provides independent prognostic information in prostate cancer.

