Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Joint relationship between iron and retinoids in patients at
high-risk for liver cancer


Approximately 3.2 million Americans are chronically infected with
Hepatitis C, forming the largest group of persons at high risk for HCC,
with an annual incidence of 3-4%. Increased oxidative stress is regarded
as the major mechanism of progression in chronic liver disease (CLD) and
subsequent HCC. Hepatic iron overload facilitates the production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), thereby inducing liver damage and
fibrosis. We have previously shown that retinoid and carotenoid depletion
occurs early in disease and may represent a major modifiable risk. This
study aims to determine, in CLD patients and controls, whether retinoid
levels modify the association between serum iron concentrations and: (a)
oxidative stress biomarkers in urine (b) tissue changes associated with
hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation, and (c) CLD progression.Patients
with HCV undergoing liver biopsy (n = 69) provided fasting blood, fresh
tissue, urine and completed a diet history questionnaire (DHQ). Serum and
questionnaire data from healthy volunteers (n = 11), normal liver tissue
from public repositories and patients without liver disease (n = 11) were
also collected. Urinary isoprostanes, serum and tissue retinoid
concentrations were obtained by LC-MS-MS. Serum iron, ferritin and
transferrin were quantitated. Immunohistochemistry for SMA was performed
on FFPE sections and subsequently quantified via digital image analysis.
Associations between urinary isoprostanes, SMA levels, serum iron, serum
and tissue retinoids were assessed using Spearman correlation
coefficients and non-parametric tests were utilized to test differences
among disease severity groups.There was a significant increasing trend
for serum transferrin levels with progressive fibrosis, but not for serum
iron and ferritin concentrations. All subjects had transferrin saturation
within the normal range. Serum -carotene and lycopene were inversely
associated with serum ferritin concentrations (r = -0.29, P Approximately
3.2 million Americans are chronically infected with Hepatitis C, forming
the largest group of persons at high risk for HCC, with an annual
incidence of 3-4%. Increased oxidative stress is regarded as the major
mechanism of progression in chronic liver disease (CLD) and subsequent
HCC. Hepatic iron overload facilitates the production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS), thereby inducing liver damage and fibrosis. We have
previously shown that retinoid and carotenoid depletion occurs early in
disease and may represent a major modifiable risk. This study aims to
determine, in CLD patients and controls, whether retinoid levels modify
the association between serum iron concentrations and: (a) oxidative
stress biomarkers in urine (b) tissue changes associated with hepatic
stellate cell (HSC) activation, and (c) CLD progression.Patients with HCV
undergoing liver biopsy (n = 69) provided fasting blood, fresh tissue,
urine and completed a diet history questionnaire (DHQ). Serum and
questionnaire data from healthy volunteers (n = 11), normal liver tissue
from public repositories and patients without liver disease (n = 11) were
also collected. Urinary isoprostanes, serum and tissue retinoid
concentrations were obtained by LC-MS-MS. Serum iron, ferritin and
transferrin were quantitated. Immunohistochemistry for SMA was performed
on FFPE sections and subsequently quantified via digital image analysis.
Associations between urinary isoprostanes, SMA levels, serum iron, serum
and tissue retinoids were assessed using Spearman correlation
coefficients and non-parametric tests were utilized to test differences
among disease severity groups.There was a significant increasing trend
for serum transferrin levels with progressive fibrosis, but not for serum
iron and ferritin concentrations. All subjects had transferrin saturation
within the normal range. Serum -carotene and lycopene were inversely
associated with serum ferritin concentrations (r = -0.29, P < 0.01; r =
-0.29, P Approximately 3.2 million Americans are chronically infected
with Hepatitis C, forming the largest group of persons at high risk for
HCC, with an annual incidence of 3-4%. Increased oxidative stress is
regarded as the major mechanism of progression in chronic liver disease
(CLD) and subsequent HCC. Hepatic iron overload facilitates the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), thereby inducing liver
damage and fibrosis. We have previously shown that retinoid and
carotenoid depletion occurs early in disease and may represent a major
modifiable risk. This study aims to determine, in CLD patients and
controls, whether retinoid levels modify the association between serum
iron concentrations and: (a) oxidative stress biomarkers in urine (b)
tissue changes associated with hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation,
and (c) CLD progression.Patients with HCV undergoing liver biopsy (n =
69) provided fasting blood, fresh tissue, urine and completed a diet
history questionnaire (DHQ). Serum and questionnaire data from healthy
volunteers (n = 11), normal liver tissue from public repositories and
patients without liver disease (n = 11) were also collected. Urinary
isoprostanes, serum and tissue retinoid concentrations were obtained by
LC-MS-MS. Serum iron, ferritin and transferrin were quantitated.
Immunohistochemistry for SMA was performed on FFPE sections and
subsequently quantified via digital image analysis. Associations between
urinary isoprostanes, SMA levels, serum iron, serum and tissue retinoids
were assessed using Spearman correlation coefficients and non-parametric
tests were utilized to test differences among disease severity
groups.There was a significant increasing trend for serum transferrin
levels with progressive fibrosis, but not for serum iron and ferritin
concentrations. All subjects had transferrin saturation within the normal
range. Serum -carotene and lycopene were inversely associated with serum
ferritin concentrations (r = -0.29, P < 0.01; r = -0.29, P < 0.01)
however, this relationship was not observed for other serum iron
measurements. Serum iron measurements were not associated with hepatic
retinoids/carotenoids, SMA expression or urinary isoprostanes. Tissue
retinyl palmitate was inversely and significantly correlated with hepatic
SMA expression (r = -0.3, P Approximately 3.2 million Americans are
chronically infected with Hepatitis C, forming the largest group of
persons at high risk for HCC, with an annual incidence of 3-4%. Increased
oxidative stress is regarded as the major mechanism of progression in
chronic liver disease (CLD) and subsequent HCC. Hepatic iron overload
facilitates the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), thereby
inducing liver damage and fibrosis. We have previously shown that
retinoid and carotenoid depletion occurs early in disease and may
represent a major modifiable risk. This study aims to determine, in CLD
patients and controls, whether retinoid levels modify the association
between serum iron concentrations and: (a) oxidative stress biomarkers in
urine (b) tissue changes associated with hepatic stellate cell (HSC)
activation, and (c) CLD progression.Patients with HCV undergoing liver
biopsy (n = 69) provided fasting blood, fresh tissue, urine and completed
a diet history questionnaire (DHQ). Serum and questionnaire data from
healthy volunteers (n = 11), normal liver tissue from public repositories
and patients without liver disease (n = 11) were also collected. Urinary
isoprostanes, serum and tissue retinoid concentrations were obtained by
LC-MS-MS. Serum iron, ferritin and transferrin were quantitated.
Immunohistochemistry for SMA was performed on FFPE sections and
subsequently quantified via digital image analysis. Associations between
urinary isoprostanes, SMA levels, serum iron, serum and tissue retinoids
were assessed using Spearman correlation coefficients and non-parametric
tests were utilized to test differences among disease severity
groups.There was a significant increasing trend for serum transferrin
levels with progressive fibrosis, but not for serum iron and ferritin
concentrations. All subjects had transferrin saturation within the normal
range. Serum -carotene and lycopene were inversely associated with serum
ferritin concentrations (r = -0.29, P < 0.01; r = -0.29, P < 0.01)
however, this relationship was not observed for other serum iron
measurements. Serum iron measurements were not associated with hepatic
retinoids/carotenoids, SMA expression or urinary isoprostanes. Tissue
retinyl palmitate was inversely and significantly correlated with hepatic
SMA expression (r = -0.3, P < 0.02).Serum iron overload was not evident
in this population even though a depletion of serum retinoids/carotenoids
is observed. The inverse correlation observed between serum ferritin and
retinoids/carotenoids suggests a possible joint effect in CLD patients.
Our data provide confirmation that hepatic retinoid loss is accompanied
by HSC activation, a key player in fibrosis. Further evaluation of
hepatic iron status is warranted to assess the relationships between iron
and retinoids in HCV.

