Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In utero polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons exposure and genome-wide
DNA methylation modifications at birth in children who develop acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


IntroductionPreviously, residential dust content of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) was associated with an increased risk of acute
lymphoblastic childhood leukemia (ALL), and PAHs exposure levels have
been associated with differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in
candidate genes studies. Thus, we hypothesized that in utero exposure to
residential PAHs may be associated with genome-wide DMRs in genes that
may influence ALL development.MethodsPAHs were measured in dust samples
collected using a high-volume surface sampler or household vacuum
cleaners from homes of California Childhood Leukemia Study participants
who have lived in the same home since diagnosis. The different PAHs were
summed according to their toxic equivalency. DNA was extracted from
archived neonatal blood spots of participants, then treated with
bisulfite and assayed on Illumina Infinium 450K genome-wide DNA
methylation arrays. Following removal of cross-reacting probes,
SNP-related and polymorphic CpGs, we analyzed the association of
residential PAH levels with methylation intensity of 319,265 CpGs in two
independent case-only datasets (model #1: set 1 cases n = 84, set 2 cases
n = 51). We used a false discovery rate with random resampling to reduce
the number of false-positive findings and cross-validated the results
between sets. This first step of the analysis gave 11 significant and
sign concordant CpGs. Then we assessed interactions between case/control
status and PAHs levels with methylation intensities at those 11 CpGs in
set 1 (model #2: total cases and controls n = 306). Models were adjusted
for cell mixture, sex, gestational age, race and the first 2 principal
components of the models residuals.ResultsIn model #1, methylation levels
at 11 CpGs were significantly associated with residential PAH levels and
sign concordant in both sets with a corresponding q-value
IntroductionPreviously, residential dust content of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) was associated with an increased risk of acute
lymphoblastic childhood leukemia (ALL), and PAHs exposure levels have
been associated with differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in
candidate genes studies. Thus, we hypothesized that in utero exposure to
residential PAHs may be associated with genome-wide DMRs in genes that
may influence ALL development.MethodsPAHs were measured in dust samples
collected using a high-volume surface sampler or household vacuum
cleaners from homes of California Childhood Leukemia Study participants
who have lived in the same home since diagnosis. The different PAHs were
summed according to their toxic equivalency. DNA was extracted from
archived neonatal blood spots of participants, then treated with
bisulfite and assayed on Illumina Infinium 450K genome-wide DNA
methylation arrays. Following removal of cross-reacting probes,
SNP-related and polymorphic CpGs, we analyzed the association of
residential PAH levels with methylation intensity of 319,265 CpGs in two
independent case-only datasets (model #1: set 1 cases n = 84, set 2 cases
n = 51). We used a false discovery rate with random resampling to reduce
the number of false-positive findings and cross-validated the results
between sets. This first step of the analysis gave 11 significant and
sign concordant CpGs. Then we assessed interactions between case/control
status and PAHs levels with methylation intensities at those 11 CpGs in
set 1 (model #2: total cases and controls n = 306). Models were adjusted
for cell mixture, sex, gestational age, race and the first 2 principal
components of the models residuals.ResultsIn model #1, methylation levels
at 11 CpGs were significantly associated with residential PAH levels and
sign concordant in both sets with a corresponding q-value < 1008. In
model #2, the interaction terms between PAH and case/control status were
significant (pIntroductionPreviously, residential dust content of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) was associated with an increased
risk of acute lymphoblastic childhood leukemia (ALL), and PAHs exposure
levels have been associated with differentially methylated regions (DMRs)
in candidate genes studies. Thus, we hypothesized that in utero exposure
to residential PAHs may be associated with genome-wide DMRs in genes that
may influence ALL development.MethodsPAHs were measured in dust samples
collected using a high-volume surface sampler or household vacuum
cleaners from homes of California Childhood Leukemia Study participants
who have lived in the same home since diagnosis. The different PAHs were
summed according to their toxic equivalency. DNA was extracted from
archived neonatal blood spots of participants, then treated with
bisulfite and assayed on Illumina Infinium 450K genome-wide DNA
methylation arrays. Following removal of cross-reacting probes,
SNP-related and polymorphic CpGs, we analyzed the association of
residential PAH levels with methylation intensity of 319,265 CpGs in two
independent case-only datasets (model #1: set 1 cases n = 84, set 2 cases
n = 51). We used a false discovery rate with random resampling to reduce
the number of false-positive findings and cross-validated the results
between sets. This first step of the analysis gave 11 significant and
sign concordant CpGs. Then we assessed interactions between case/control
status and PAHs levels with methylation intensities at those 11 CpGs in
set 1 (model #2: total cases and controls n = 306). Models were adjusted
for cell mixture, sex, gestational age, race and the first 2 principal
components of the models residuals.ResultsIn model #1, methylation levels
at 11 CpGs were significantly associated with residential PAH levels and
sign concordant in both sets with a corresponding q-value < 1008. In
model #2, the interaction terms between PAH and case/control status were
significant (p<0.05) in 7 of these 11 CpGs, and the 3 most significant
were: cg13484813 (p IntroductionPreviously, residential dust content of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) was associated with an increased
risk of acute lymphoblastic childhood leukemia (ALL), and PAHs exposure
levels have been associated with differentially methylated regions (DMRs)
in candidate genes studies. Thus, we hypothesized that in utero exposure
to residential PAHs may be associated with genome-wide DMRs in genes that
may influence ALL development.MethodsPAHs were measured in dust samples
collected using a high-volume surface sampler or household vacuum
cleaners from homes of California Childhood Leukemia Study participants
who have lived in the same home since diagnosis. The different PAHs were
summed according to their toxic equivalency. DNA was extracted from
archived neonatal blood spots of participants, then treated with
bisulfite and assayed on Illumina Infinium 450K genome-wide DNA
methylation arrays. Following removal of cross-reacting probes,
SNP-related and polymorphic CpGs, we analyzed the association of
residential PAH levels with methylation intensity of 319,265 CpGs in two
independent case-only datasets (model #1: set 1 cases n = 84, set 2 cases
n = 51). We used a false discovery rate with random resampling to reduce
the number of false-positive findings and cross-validated the results
between sets. This first step of the analysis gave 11 significant and
sign concordant CpGs. Then we assessed interactions between case/control
status and PAHs levels with methylation intensities at those 11 CpGs in
set 1 (model #2: total cases and controls n = 306). Models were adjusted
for cell mixture, sex, gestational age, race and the first 2 principal
components of the models residuals.ResultsIn model #1, methylation levels
at 11 CpGs were significantly associated with residential PAH levels and
sign concordant in both sets with a corresponding q-value < 1008. In
model #2, the interaction terms between PAH and case/control status were
significant (p<0.05) in 7 of these 11 CpGs, and the 3 most significant
were: cg13484813 (p <0.001) in LGR5 (chr12q21.1) which is differentially
expressed in pre-B cell vs. leukemia cells; cg23196133 (p
IntroductionPreviously, residential dust content of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) was associated with an increased risk of acute
lymphoblastic childhood leukemia (ALL), and PAHs exposure levels have
been associated with differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in
candidate genes studies. Thus, we hypothesized that in utero exposure to
residential PAHs may be associated with genome-wide DMRs in genes that
may influence ALL development.MethodsPAHs were measured in dust samples
collected using a high-volume surface sampler or household vacuum
cleaners from homes of California Childhood Leukemia Study participants
who have lived in the same home since diagnosis. The different PAHs were
summed according to their toxic equivalency. DNA was extracted from
archived neonatal blood spots of participants, then treated with
bisulfite and assayed on Illumina Infinium 450K genome-wide DNA
methylation arrays. Following removal of cross-reacting probes,
SNP-related and polymorphic CpGs, we analyzed the association of
residential PAH levels with methylation intensity of 319,265 CpGs in two
independent case-only datasets (model #1: set 1 cases n = 84, set 2 cases
n = 51). We used a false discovery rate with random resampling to reduce
the number of false-positive findings and cross-validated the results
between sets. This first step of the analysis gave 11 significant and
sign concordant CpGs. Then we assessed interactions between case/control
status and PAHs levels with methylation intensities at those 11 CpGs in
set 1 (model #2: total cases and controls n = 306). Models were adjusted
for cell mixture, sex, gestational age, race and the first 2 principal
components of the models residuals.ResultsIn model #1, methylation levels
at 11 CpGs were significantly associated with residential PAH levels and
sign concordant in both sets with a corresponding q-value < 1008. In
model #2, the interaction terms between PAH and case/control status were
significant (p<0.05) in 7 of these 11 CpGs, and the 3 most significant
were: cg13484813 (p <0.001) in LGR5 (chr12q21.1) which is differentially
expressed in pre-B cell vs. leukemia cells; cg23196133 (p <0.01) in ZBTB4
(chr17p13.1) which is a transcription factor linked to p53; and
cg07617339 (p IntroductionPreviously, residential dust content of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) was associated with an increased
risk of acute lymphoblastic childhood leukemia (ALL), and PAHs exposure
levels have been associated with differentially methylated regions (DMRs)
in candidate genes studies. Thus, we hypothesized that in utero exposure
to residential PAHs may be associated with genome-wide DMRs in genes that
may influence ALL development.MethodsPAHs were measured in dust samples
collected using a high-volume surface sampler or household vacuum
cleaners from homes of California Childhood Leukemia Study participants
who have lived in the same home since diagnosis. The different PAHs were
summed according to their toxic equivalency. DNA was extracted from
archived neonatal blood spots of participants, then treated with
bisulfite and assayed on Illumina Infinium 450K genome-wide DNA
methylation arrays. Following removal of cross-reacting probes,
SNP-related and polymorphic CpGs, we analyzed the association of
residential PAH levels with methylation intensity of 319,265 CpGs in two
independent case-only datasets (model #1: set 1 cases n = 84, set 2 cases
n = 51). We used a false discovery rate with random resampling to reduce
the number of false-positive findings and cross-validated the results
between sets. This first step of the analysis gave 11 significant and
sign concordant CpGs. Then we assessed interactions between case/control
status and PAHs levels with methylation intensities at those 11 CpGs in
set 1 (model #2: total cases and controls n = 306). Models were adjusted
for cell mixture, sex, gestational age, race and the first 2 principal
components of the models residuals.ResultsIn model #1, methylation levels
at 11 CpGs were significantly associated with residential PAH levels and
sign concordant in both sets with a corresponding q-value < 1008. In
model #2, the interaction terms between PAH and case/control status were
significant (p<0.05) in 7 of these 11 CpGs, and the 3 most significant
were: cg13484813 (p <0.001) in LGR5 (chr12q21.1) which is differentially
expressed in pre-B cell vs. leukemia cells; cg23196133 (p <0.01) in ZBTB4
(chr17p13.1) which is a transcription factor linked to p53; and
cg07617339 (p <0.01) in ATF6B (chr6p21.3) which encodes a transcription
factor.ConclusionsFor the first time, our genome-wide methylation
investigation found that residential PAH levels were associated with 11
CpGs at birth among children who later developed ALL. Moreover, the
future cases had significantly different DNA methylation responses to PAH
exposures than the unaffected controls for 7 CpGs. This may suggest a
case/control difference present at birth in the sensitivity to PAHs in
particular cell-cycle and tumor-suppressor genes. These CpGs may be good
candidates to further investigate with respect to leukemogenesis.

