Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of PHLPP expression promotes glycolysis in colon cancer cells


Increased glycolysis is considered as one of the most important metabolic
alterations adapted by cancer cells in order to generate high levels of
glycolytic intermediates to support proliferation. PHLPP belongs to a
novel family of Ser/Thr protein phosphatases. Our previous studies have
shown that PHLPP serves as a tumor suppressor to inhibit cell
proliferation, promote apoptosis and increase therapeutic sensitivity in
colon cancer cells. Here, we further examined the role of PHLPP in
regulating metabolic pathways in colon cancer. Our results showed that
the rate of glucose consumption and lactate production was significantly
increased in PHLPP knockdown colon cancer cells and in PHLPP knockout MEF
cells. Metabolic analysis using Seahorse XF96 analyzer revealed that
decreased PHLPP expression resulted in an increase in the extracellular
acidification rate (ECAR) suggesting enhanced glycolysis. To determine
the underlying molecular mechanism, we found that the Akt-mediated
phosphorylation of HK2 was elevated in PHLPP knockdown colon cancer cells
and the amount of mitochondria-associated hexokinase 2 (HK2) was
increased. This is consistent with previous finding that Akt-mediated
phosphorylation of HK2 increases its activity by promoting mitochondria
translocation. Furthermore, PHLPP, Akt and HK2 were found in the same
mitochondria fraction and PHLPP co-immunoprecipitated with HK2 in colon
cancer cells. As HK2 is the key enzyme that determines the direction and
magnitude of glucose flux, our studies identified PHLPP as a novel
regulator of glucose metabolism by controlling Akt-mediated regulation of
HK2 activity.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

