Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting non-coding RNAs with the CRISPR/Cas9 system in human
cell lines


The clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated (Cas) system (CRISPR/Cas) has been recently
shown to be a powerful genome-editing tool in a variety of organisms.
However, these studies are mainly focused on protein-coding genes. The
present study aims to determine whether this technology can be applied to
non-coding genes. One of the challenges for knockout of non-coding genes
is that a small deletion or insertion generated by the standard
CRISPR/Cas system may not necessarily lead to functional loss of a given
non-coding gene because of lacking an open reading frame, especially in
polyploidy human cell lines. To overcome this challenge, we adopt a
selection system that allows for marker genes to integrate into the
genome through homologous recombination (HR). Moreover, we construct a
dual guide RNA vector that can make two cuts simultaneously at designated
sites such that a large fragment can be deleted. With these approaches,
we are able to successfully generate knockouts for miR-21, miR-29a,
lncRNA-21A, UCA1 and AK023948 in various human cell lines. Finally, we
show that the HR-mediated targeting efficiency can be further improved by
suppression of the non-homologous end joining pathway. Together, these
results demonstrate the feasibility of knockout for non-coding genes by
the CRISPR/Cas system in human cell lines.

