Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of markers predictive of phosphoramide mustard (PM)
cellular sensitivity in lymphoblast cell lines


Cyclophosphamide (Cy) a DNA alkylating agent, is commonly used for
treatment of several malignancies such as breast cancer and lymphoma. It
is also widely used in conditioning regimens for bone marrow
transplantation. Cy is a prodrug requiring activation to
4-hydroxycyclophosphamide by hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes.
4-hydroxy-Cy non-enzymatically converts to active phosphoramide mustard
(PM), which produces inter and intra-strand DNA crosslinks causing DNA
breaks and hence the cytotoxicity. Although of great clinical utility the
dose limiting side effects of Cy as myelosuppression, nephrotoxicity,
cardiotoxicity, neurotoxicity and bladder toxicity posses clinical
challenge. Genetic polymorphisms in P450 enzymes especially CYP2B6 as
well as phase II drug metabolizing enzymes has been shown to partially
explain the inter-patient variation in response in some studies however
role of pharmacodynamics players is still not clear. Thus, we designed
the present study to identify genes predictive of phosphoramide mustard
response. We utilized EBV transformed lymphoblast cell lines (LCLs) that
are part of International HapMap project as the model system and treated
these with PM to by pass the CYP mediated activation of Cy. Since most of
the Cy metabolizing genes (CYPs) are expressed in liver but not as much
in LCLs, use of PM instead of Cy in the present study enriched our
ability to identify genes of relevance to the pharmacodynamic
significance. Briefly we treated LCLs with six different concentrations
of PM (100, 50, 20, 10, 1, and 0.1 M), due to stability issues PM was
prepared fresh for each experiment. Cell viability was determined 48 hr
post drug treatment by MTT assays. Genome-wide gene expression and
genotype data was obtained from publically available source and was
evaluated for association with PM cellular sensitivity. Top 100 SNPs
(pCyclophosphamide (Cy) a DNA alkylating agent, is commonly used for
treatment of several malignancies such as breast cancer and lymphoma. It
is also widely used in conditioning regimens for bone marrow
transplantation. Cy is a prodrug requiring activation to
4-hydroxycyclophosphamide by hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes.
4-hydroxy-Cy non-enzymatically converts to active phosphoramide mustard
(PM), which produces inter and intra-strand DNA crosslinks causing DNA
breaks and hence the cytotoxicity. Although of great clinical utility the
dose limiting side effects of Cy as myelosuppression, nephrotoxicity,
cardiotoxicity, neurotoxicity and bladder toxicity posses clinical
challenge. Genetic polymorphisms in P450 enzymes especially CYP2B6 as
well as phase II drug metabolizing enzymes has been shown to partially
explain the inter-patient variation in response in some studies however
role of pharmacodynamics players is still not clear. Thus, we designed
the present study to identify genes predictive of phosphoramide mustard
response. We utilized EBV transformed lymphoblast cell lines (LCLs) that
are part of International HapMap project as the model system and treated
these with PM to by pass the CYP mediated activation of Cy. Since most of
the Cy metabolizing genes (CYPs) are expressed in liver but not as much
in LCLs, use of PM instead of Cy in the present study enriched our
ability to identify genes of relevance to the pharmacodynamic
significance. Briefly we treated LCLs with six different concentrations
of PM (100, 50, 20, 10, 1, and 0.1 M), due to stability issues PM was
prepared fresh for each experiment. Cell viability was determined 48 hr
post drug treatment by MTT assays. Genome-wide gene expression and
genotype data was obtained from publically available source and was
evaluated for association with PM cellular sensitivity. Top 100 SNPs (p<
210-5) mapped to 10 genes of biological significance including CREBBP,
DPP10, HYAL3, XRCC1, SNAPC3, CCDC21, PSIP1, RASSF1, and SALL4 CREBBP
(CREB binding protein) is a major transcriptional regulator for both
estrogen dependent breast cancer signaling and Lymphotoxin b receptor
signaling pathways. CREBBP has an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase
activity that acts as a scaffold to stabilize additional protein
interactions with the transcription complex. Gene-expression association
analysis identified 34 genes significantly associated with PM
cytotoxicity including EIF4E2, MMP16, MUC6, NDUFA2, NDUFA9 and SDHB.
Identification of SNPs in XRCC1 further confirmed the impact of altered
DNA damage repair/response pathway in compromising PM response. Our
results identified genetic markers of pharmacodynamic significance to Cy
response thus opening up opportunities for clinical validation of these
in patients receiving Cy and moving a step closer to personalized
medicine.

