Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: hENT1 testing in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: Are we ready
yet? A comparative analysis of the murine and the rabbit antibodies


IntroductionHuman equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 (hENT1) level of
expression in pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC) may predict survival in
gemcitabine-treated patients after resection. These results have been
obtained with a murine anti-hENT1 antibody (10D7G2), which is not
commercially available. Another antibody, rabbit-derived (SP120), appears
to have no predictive value in local, advanced or metastatic PAC. This
raises the question of the equivalence of the antibodies.Patients and
MethodsMurine (10D7G2) and rabbit (SP120) monoclonal anti-hENT1
antibodies were applied on the same tissue microarrays of resected PAC.
Two sets of patients from 2 separate institutions (n = 147 each) were
used to compared hENT1 expression with both antibodies on two different
immunochemistry automates. An additional amplification technique was
performed on the second set. hENT1 expression was scored as previously
reported. Results were correlated with overall survival (OS) following
gemcitabine treatment.ResultsThe rate of hENT1 high cases was lower with
the SP120 clone (set 1: 7 versus 48%, set 2:11 versus 38%). With the
amplification technique, the rate of hENT1 high cases was globally
similar between both antibodies. However, the concordance between the
antibodies was found in only 50% of cases. High hENT1 expression was
predictive of OS with the 10D7G2 antibody (HR = 0.49; 95% CI: 0.24-0.98;
P = 0.045) but not with the SP120 (HR = 1.61; 95% CI: 0.80-3.21; P =
0.18).ConclusionOur data suggest that the two antibodies are not
equivalent. Further studies are ongoing and will be presented at the
meeting: 1/ Comparative analysis of the rabbit antibody on a larger
series (n = 471) with staining performed by Ventana (Roche), 2/
Comparative analysis of 3 additional anti-hENT1 antibody together with
mRNA level correlation, 3/ Comparative expression of hENT1 in a series of
matched primary tumors-metastases.

