Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RRD-251 enhances retinoic acid induced differentiation of
myeloblastic leukemic cells


All-trans-retinoic acid (RA) is known to induce terminal granulocytic
differentiation and cell cycle arrest in HL-60 cells. This is driven by
sustained activation of the MAPK pathway, where Raf-1 (MAPKKK) acts as a
critical signaling molecule. RRD-251 is a small molecule that binds to
the Rb protein and prevents its interaction with Raf-1.
Hyperphosphorylation of Rb leads to a conformational change, inhibiting
its ability to sequester the E2F family of transcription factors. To
determine the effect of RRD-251 on RA-induced differentiation, cells were
treated with RA and/or RRD-251 and then analyzed for proliferation,
expression of key markers of differentiation, cell cycle arrest, and
modifications in protein levels. RRD-251 by itself significantly
inhibited proliferation, but cells treated with both RA and RRD-251
showed even further reduction in cellular growth. Similarly, both RA and
RRD-251 induce cell cycle arrest, but cells treated with both show higher
levels of G0/G1 than singly treated cells. Expression of CD11b is used a
late classical marker for differentiation in HL-60. RRD-251 does not
induce expression of CD11b, but cultures treated with RRD-251 and RA have
nearly double the amount of cells expressing CD11b as compared to RA
treated cells alone 72 hours after treatment. Additionally, we had wanted
to see the relationship between specific Rb phosphorylation, the cell
cycle, and treatment of RA and RRD-251. At 72 hours after treatment, RA
induces the formation of a population of cells with no phosphorylation at
serine 608 of Rb, which was 99.9% in G0/G1. The appearance of two
populations for Rb phosphorylation was unique to serine 608 out of the
four phospho-sites that we studied: serine 608, serine 780, serine 795,
serine 807/811. Cells treated with both RA and RRD-251 had more cells in
the no-phosphorylation population at 72 hours, as well as the appearance
of this population at 48 hours. Finally, we observed the changes in
protein amounts and localizations by western blotting. RA is known to
cause the phosphorylation of Raf-1 at serine 621 and its translocation to
the nucleus at 48 hours. This was observed on our blots and that cells
treated with both RA and RRD-251 had increased amounts of total nuclear
Raf-1 and of pS621 Raf-1 at 48 and 72 hours. The results reported here
further support the usefulness of RRD-251 as an anti-cancer drug, from
reducing tumor size and preventing angiogenesis in drug-resistant
melanoma, to enhancing retinoic acid-induced differentiation in
myeloblastic leukemic cells.

