Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NAMPT inhibition induces mitochondrial dysfunction leading to
apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells


We have previously shown that the NAD depletion following inhibition of
NAMPT by the NA-mimetic FK866 leads to loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential, depletion of cellular ATP, cytochrome C release and caspase
activation in primary Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) cells in vitro,
and that these events are coupled with an increased production of
reactive oxygen species uncharacteristic of metabolic inhibition. In the
present study we characterize the effect of NAD depletion on CLL
mitochondria and the downstream mechanism of cell death.We profiled the
mitochondrial respiration of CLL cells and control B-lymphocytes, by
extracellular flux analysis, over the 48 hours following FK866 treatment
and found time-dependant inhibition of respiratory capacity consistent
with disruption of the electron transport chain (ETC) in CLL cells. This
led to suppression of basal respiration concomitant with the rise in ROS
and approximately one day before loss of cellular viability.
Interestingly, Zap70-positive CLL cells exhibited increased mitochondrial
respiration and respiratory capacity over Zap70-negative CLL cells, but
responded similarly to NAMPT inhibition. Additionally, mitochondrial
respiration was not effected by NAMPT inhibition in control
B-lymphocytes.Increase autophagic flux, caspase-dependant apoptosis and
mitochondrio-nuclear translocation of Apoptosis Inducing Factor (AIF)
were detected by western blot. However, neither pan-caspase inhibition
with Z-VAD-fmk nor inhibition of autophagy with 3-methyladenine were
sufficient to prevent FK866-induced CLL cell death. We conclude that NAD
depletion following inhibition of NAMPT leads to disruption of the
mitochondrial ETC in CLL cells, leading to mitochondrial initiation of
the intrinsic apoptosis pathway. As healthy B-lymphocytes are resistant
to this NAD depletion, these downstream effects are also selective for
malignant cells.We are currently working to characterize the roles of NAD
and Zap70 in the regulation and function of the CLL ETC. This will not
only lead to an improved understanding of CLL metabolism, but will also
inform new therapeutic strategies that will effectively employ NAMPT
inhibition to treat this yet-incurable disease.

