Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel integrated i-FISH technology to detect and characterize
non-hematopoietic heteroploid CTC subtypes with or without expressing
vimentin or other tumor biomarkers


Most of the current circulating tumor cell (CTC) detection technologies
rely on expression of EpCAM and cytokeratins (CK) as well as the size of
tumor cells shed into peripheral blood of cancer patients or tumor animal
models. However, it has been demonstrated that expression of EpCAM and/or
cytokeratins in CTCs might be down-regulated or absent during
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), potentially resulting in
significant false negative detection of CTCs. Whereas expression of
vimentin in EMT tumor cells has been reported. In this study, a new
strategy integrating phenotypic immunofluorescent staining of vimentin
and karyotypic FISH has been well developed to detect and characterize
CTC and its subtypes isolated by subtraction enrichment in various
biofluid samples including blood, bone marrow, malignant pleural effusion
and ascites as well as cerebrospinal fluid of cancer patients or blood
samples of mice bearing human tumors. Both large and small and clusters
of vimentin positive or negative non-hematopoietic CTCs with heteroploid
chromosome(s) were identified. The similar procedure has also been
successfully extended to other desired single or combined tumor
biomarkers in addition to vimentin as needed. The established SET-iFISH
platform will help identify and characterize diversified CTC subtypes
which may possess distinct clinical significance in terms of drug
sensitivity, resistance, and tumor metastasis as well as recurrence,
respectively.

