Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The polymorphisms of XRCC1 Arg194Trp and the XRCC1Arg399Gln affect
the clinical features and the prognosis of MDS


Background: X-ray repair cross-complementing group 1 (XRCC1) is involved
an important role in base excision repair (BER) system of DNA repair.
Polymorphism in DNA repair genes may be modified of DNA repair capacity.
However, it is unclear that the polymorphisms of XRCC1alter the clinical
features of MDS patients. Our study was performed to evaluate the effect
of the XRCC1Arg194Trp and the XRCC1Arg399Gln with the susceptibility and
clinical features of MDS.Methods: We genotyped the polymorphisms by using
polymerase chain reaction -restriction fragment-length polymorphism
(PCR-RFLP) analysis in 119 patients with MDS [median 67.9 years, range
17.1-86.5 years; male/female 81/38; RCUD (n = 40), RARS (n = 6), RCMD (n
= 21), MDS-U (n = 13), RAEB-1(n = 14), RAEB-2 (n = 12), others (n = 13)]
and 202-health controls.Results: In the allele and genotype frequencies
of the XRCC1Arg194Trp and the XRCC1Arg399Gln were not statistically
significant difference in patients and the controls. However, Arg/Arg
genotypes of XRCC1 194 and the XRCC1 399 were significantly associated
with lower Hb. In addition, XRCC1 399 non Arg/Arg genotype was
significantly associated with previous history of radiotherapy and
multiple cancers. Furthermore, XRCC1Arg194Trp non Arg/Arg genotype and
XRCC1Arg399Gln Arg/Arg genotype were significantly associated with poor
prognosis of MDS patients.Conclusion: We found that the polymorphisms of
XRCC1 may be affected the clinical features and the prognosis of MDS.

