Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trastuzumab-induced normalization in a HER2+ murine model of
breast cancer


Introduction: The primary goal of this study is to quantitatively map the
vascular and cellular response to trastuzumab treatment in a murine model
of HER2+ breast cancer. We report longitudinal dynamic contrast enhanced
magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) and immunohistochemical studies
hypothesized to identify timing windows of trastuzumab-induced vascular
normalization.Experimental Design: Mice were subcutaneously implanted
with BT474 breast cancer cells and randomly assigned to treated (10 mg/kg
trastuzumab) and control (saline) groups. After tumors reached 225 mm3,
animals (n = 20) were imaged (7.0 T MRI) before treatment (day 0), and 24
hours after each treatment (day 1 and day 4). Subgroups were sacrificed
for histology between days 0 through 10 (n = 45). DCE-MRI analysis
yielded parametric maps of blood vessel perfusion and permeability
(Ktrans) and the extravascular extracellular volume fraction (ve). Tumor
sections were paraffin-embedded and stained with CD31, -SMA, Ki67 and
H&E. Slides were scanned in high resolution (20) and quantitatively
analyzed with Leica SCN400 software.Results: Compared to controls,
treated tumors exhibited a significant increase in Ktrans (p = 0.03) on
day 4, indicative of enhanced vessel perfusion and/or permeability.
Additionally at day 4, treated tumors exhibited a significant increase in
extravascular extracellular volume fraction measured via ve (p = 0.01),
indicating increased cell death. These significant changes occurred prior
to a significant change in tumor size at day 4 (p = 0.11). Decreased Ki67
proliferation staining (p = 0.02) at day 3 and a significant decrease in
tumor volume at day 7 (p = 0.04) in the treated group confirmed tumor
response to trastuzumab. The increase in Ktrans suggests properties of
vessel normalization with potential to improve delivery of systemic
therapies. Immunohistochemical analyses showed treated tumors have a
significant decrease in microvessel density (CD31 staining, p
Introduction: The primary goal of this study is to quantitatively map the
vascular and cellular response to trastuzumab treatment in a murine model
of HER2+ breast cancer. We report longitudinal dynamic contrast enhanced
magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) and immunohistochemical studies
hypothesized to identify timing windows of trastuzumab-induced vascular
normalization.Experimental Design: Mice were subcutaneously implanted
with BT474 breast cancer cells and randomly assigned to treated (10 mg/kg
trastuzumab) and control (saline) groups. After tumors reached 225 mm3,
animals (n = 20) were imaged (7.0 T MRI) before treatment (day 0), and 24
hours after each treatment (day 1 and day 4). Subgroups were sacrificed
for histology between days 0 through 10 (n = 45). DCE-MRI analysis
yielded parametric maps of blood vessel perfusion and permeability
(Ktrans) and the extravascular extracellular volume fraction (ve). Tumor
sections were paraffin-embedded and stained with CD31, -SMA, Ki67 and
H&E. Slides were scanned in high resolution (20) and quantitatively
analyzed with Leica SCN400 software.Results: Compared to controls,
treated tumors exhibited a significant increase in Ktrans (p = 0.03) on
day 4, indicative of enhanced vessel perfusion and/or permeability.
Additionally at day 4, treated tumors exhibited a significant increase in
extravascular extracellular volume fraction measured via ve (p = 0.01),
indicating increased cell death. These significant changes occurred prior
to a significant change in tumor size at day 4 (p = 0.11). Decreased Ki67
proliferation staining (p = 0.02) at day 3 and a significant decrease in
tumor volume at day 7 (p = 0.04) in the treated group confirmed tumor
response to trastuzumab. The increase in Ktrans suggests properties of
vessel normalization with potential to improve delivery of systemic
therapies. Immunohistochemical analyses showed treated tumors have a
significant decrease in microvessel density (CD31 staining, p < 0.01),
with a simultaneous significant increase in -SMA staining (pericyte
coverage, p = 0.05) on day 4; thus, there was an overall increase in the
vessel maturation index (ratio of -SMA to CD31 staining) compared to
controls (p = 0.01).Conclusion: These concordant (though preliminary)
imaging and histological data suggest that trastuzumab treatment promotes
vascular normalization, providing motivation for future studies designed
to improve the efficacy of combination therapies in HER2+ breast cancer.
For example, DCE-MRI has the potential to identify windows of vascular
normalization thereby indicating optimal timing for treatment dosing with
a cytotoxic therapy. As trastuzumab is currently given clinically in
combination with various chemotherapies for HER2+ cancer,
trastuzumab-induced vascular normalization could be utilized to improve
drug delivery efficiency and enhance overall patient response without
increasing dose or systemic toxicity.

