Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the molecular mechanism of targeted kinase inhibitor
resistance mediated by the FGFR1 gatekeeper mutation


Human fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) can serve as drivers of
oncogenesis and are a target of several inhibitors in clinical trials.
Unfortunately, resistance severely hampers the long-term success of
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), with mutations at the gatekeeper
residue often serving as an early means of resistance to cancer therapy,
resulting in tumor progression. Here we show the first crystal structures
of the FGFR1 gatekeeper mutation, V561M FGFR1, and use kinetic and
structural methods to explore the mechanisms of the catalytic activation
we observe for this mutation. We show that while the FGFR1 gatekeeper
mutation confers resistance to two inhibitors currently in clinical
trials, the extent of change in efficacy differ, indicating two unique
resistance profiles. We show that some affinity for one inhibitor is
maintained by the V561M mutation due to a flexible linker that allows
multiple binding conformations. This is the first example showing the
same inhibitor binding in unique ways to the WT and gatekeeper mutant
forms of FGFR, highlighting some regions of drug design flexibility both
within the binding pocket and in the linker of the inhibitor. Identifying
this flexibility in the context of the structural features of an active
conformation of V561M FGFR1, the form most kinase inhibitors target, will
provide critical insights for designing future inhibitors effective
against the FGFR gatekeeper mutations.

