Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chitosan amphiphile nanoparticles reduced the myelosuppressive
effects of lomustine


Myelosuppression is the most important dose-limiting toxic effect of many
cytotoxic agents. In this study we show that a nano-enabled formulation
of lomustine based on glycol-chitosan amphiphile nanoparticles reduce the
myelosuppressive effects of lomustine. Previously, we have shown that the
chitosan amphiphile nanoparticles enabled dose intensification in the
form of a ten-fold increase in the dose administered resulting in
significant improvement in tumoricidal activity in an intracranial model
of glioblastoma, without significant detriment to the health of the bone
marrow.The myelosuppressive effects of lomustine formulations were
assessed in healthy CD-1 male mice. Mice were assigned to treatment
groups to receive either a high dose (13 mg/kg) nano-enabled formulation,
a low dose (1.2 mg/kg) ethanolic formulation, or no drug treatment. The
mice received the appropriate formulation by tail vein injection once
daily for 10 consecutive days, after which they were sacrificed at
pre-determined time points for analysis of blood parameters. A portion of
blood samples was analysed using a clinical hemocytometer and a further
portion of the samples was analysed using a flow cytometer. We
hypothesise that a low propensity of these systems for cell uptake may
contribute to their effect.Flow cytometry studies suggest low uptake of
the chitosan amphiphile nanoparticles in macrophage (J774 A.1) cells.
Bone marrow macrophages have been shown to be involved in maintaining the
hematopoietic stem cell niche and may have a role in hematopoiesis. Our
data support the hypothesis that this may contribute to the relatively
low myelosuppression observed for the nano-enabled formulation (Table
1).Analysis of blood samplesWhile the overall study shows that the
chitosan amphiphile nanoparticles based lomustine (13 mg/kg) formulation
produced relatively low myelosuppression, we also report that flow
cytometry could provide a means to readily evaluate myelosuppression in
preclinical animal models.

