Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy with MEK inhibition is efficacious in
intracranial triple negative breast cancer models


Introduction: Nearly half of metastatic triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) patients develop brain metastases (BM) and face a poor prognosis.
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) prevents many treatments from reaching
intracranial tumors, and there are no FDA-approved systemic therapies to
treat TNBC BM. In this study, we evaluated the efficacy of BBB-permeable,
clinically-available inhibitors of MEK and identified rational co-target
pathways in preclinical models of intracranial (IC) TNBC.Methods: In
vitro IC50s, synergy, and siRNA screens (700 kinase genes) were conducted
in 4 human-derived TNBC lines (SUM149, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-436,
MDA-MB-231Br). We evaluated the efficacy of the MEK1/2 inhibitor AZD6244
(AZD), the pan-PI3K inhibitor BKM120 (BKM), and the PDGFR inhibitor
Pazopanib (Pazo) in IC TNBC mouse models. Tumor burden was monitored via
bioluminescence, and IC tumors were frozen for gene expression analyses
using custom human 444K Agilent microarrays or of kinome activity
profiles using multiplex kinase inhibitor beads and mass spectrometry. To
determine drivers of AZD sensitivity, DNA copy number data (Broad CCLE)
was analyzed using SWITCHplus to identify copy number alterations that
differ between sensitive (n = 8) vs. resistant (n = 12) TNBC lines based
on their IC50s (Sanger Cancerxgene).Results: In vitro, SUM149 and 231Br
TNBC cells exhibited lower (40 uM). Several genes synthetically enhanced
lethality in SUM149 and 231Br cells: PI3K genes and PDGFR/ with AZD, and
MAPK/MAP2K/MAP3K genes with BKM, suggesting MEK+PI3K and MEK+PDGFR
inhibition as rational combinations. AZD plus BKM or Pazo were
synergistic in vitro in sensitive cell lines.In vivo, AZD reduced tumor
burden and improved survival in the SUM149 (72 vs. 45 days in controls, p
40 uM). Several genes synthetically enhanced lethality in SUM149 and
231Br cells: PI3K genes and PDGFR/ with AZD, and MAPK/MAP2K/MAP3K genes
with BKM, suggesting MEK+PI3K and MEK+PDGFR inhibition as rational
combinations. AZD plus BKM or Pazo were synergistic in vitro in sensitive
cell lines.In vivo, AZD reduced tumor burden and improved survival in the
SUM149 (72 vs. 45 days in controls, p < 0.005) and 231Br (37 vs. 30 days,
p 40 uM). Several genes synthetically enhanced lethality in SUM149 and
231Br cells: PI3K genes and PDGFR/ with AZD, and MAPK/MAP2K/MAP3K genes
with BKM, suggesting MEK+PI3K and MEK+PDGFR inhibition as rational
combinations. AZD plus BKM or Pazo were synergistic in vitro in sensitive
cell lines.In vivo, AZD reduced tumor burden and improved survival in the
SUM149 (72 vs. 45 days in controls, p < 0.005) and 231Br (37 vs. 30 days,
p < 0.02) models, with no benefit in the other two models. Single agent
BKM or Pazo resulted in little to no improvement in any model. However,
in AZD-sensitive models, combined AZD+BKM inhibition increased survival
(SUM149: 87 vs 45 days, p 40 uM). Several genes synthetically enhanced
lethality in SUM149 and 231Br cells: PI3K genes and PDGFR/ with AZD, and
MAPK/MAP2K/MAP3K genes with BKM, suggesting MEK+PI3K and MEK+PDGFR
inhibition as rational combinations. AZD plus BKM or Pazo were
synergistic in vitro in sensitive cell lines.In vivo, AZD reduced tumor
burden and improved survival in the SUM149 (72 vs. 45 days in controls, p
< 0.005) and 231Br (37 vs. 30 days, p < 0.02) models, with no benefit in
the other two models. Single agent BKM or Pazo resulted in little to no
improvement in any model. However, in AZD-sensitive models, combined
AZD+BKM inhibition increased survival (SUM149: 87 vs 45 days, p < 0.0001;
MDA-MB-231Br: 52 vs 30 days, p 40 uM). Several genes synthetically
enhanced lethality in SUM149 and 231Br cells: PI3K genes and PDGFR/ with
AZD, and MAPK/MAP2K/MAP3K genes with BKM, suggesting MEK+PI3K and
MEK+PDGFR inhibition as rational combinations. AZD plus BKM or Pazo were
synergistic in vitro in sensitive cell lines.In vivo, AZD reduced tumor
burden and improved survival in the SUM149 (72 vs. 45 days in controls, p
< 0.005) and 231Br (37 vs. 30 days, p < 0.02) models, with no benefit in
the other two models. Single agent BKM or Pazo resulted in little to no
improvement in any model. However, in AZD-sensitive models, combined
AZD+BKM inhibition increased survival (SUM149: 87 vs 45 days, p < 0.0001;
MDA-MB-231Br: 52 vs 30 days, p < 0.001) as did AZD+Pazo (SUM149: 88 vs.
35 days, p 40 uM). Several genes synthetically enhanced lethality in
SUM149 and 231Br cells: PI3K genes and PDGFR/ with AZD, and
MAPK/MAP2K/MAP3K genes with BKM, suggesting MEK+PI3K and MEK+PDGFR
inhibition as rational combinations. AZD plus BKM or Pazo were
synergistic in vitro in sensitive cell lines.In vivo, AZD reduced tumor
burden and improved survival in the SUM149 (72 vs. 45 days in controls, p
< 0.005) and 231Br (37 vs. 30 days, p < 0.02) models, with no benefit in
the other two models. Single agent BKM or Pazo resulted in little to no
improvement in any model. However, in AZD-sensitive models, combined
AZD+BKM inhibition increased survival (SUM149: 87 vs 45 days, p < 0.0001;
MDA-MB-231Br: 52 vs 30 days, p < 0.001) as did AZD+Pazo (SUM149: 88 vs.
35 days, p < 0.0001).Several DNA segments were significantly altered in
sensitive vs. resistant TNBC cell lines. Notably, MEK-pathway genes were
lost in the resistant lines. Ongoing work will complete characterization
of therapies in all models in vitro and in vivo and will compare genetic,
transcriptional, and kinome activity alterations.Conclusions: TNBC models
exhibit different innate sensitivities to the BBB-permeable MEK inhibitor
AZD6244. In sensitive models, AZD improves survival and reduces
intracranial tumor burden, and rational combined inhibition of PI3K or
PDGFR further increases survival. Identification of predictive biomarkers
will enable translation of our results to biomarker-driven clinical
trials for patients with TNBC BM.

