Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of gefitinib-induced EMT in EGFR mutant NSCLC
preferentially selects for acquired T790M


Activating EGFR mutations in non-small lung cancer (NSCLC) confer
sensitivity to reversible EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs),
including gefitinib and erlotinib. Despite promising initial response
acquired resistance develops mediated by the emergence of the secondary
T790M mutation or by focal amplification of MET. An
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is clinically linked to NSCLCs
with acquired EGFR TKI resistance. The exact mechanisms of EGFR TKI
resistance with EMT phenotype remain elusive; therefore, we attempted to
develop a strategy to prevent the emergence of EGFR TKI resistance with
EMT phenotype. In order to mimic the development of acquired EGFR TKI
resistance in NSCLC patients, TKI-sensitive HCC4006 cells harboring
mutated-EGFR were exposed to increasing concentrations of gefitinib to
generate resistant cells with mesenchymal phenotype. After 6 months, the
cells became resistant to gefitinib (HCC4006GeR) with no MET copy number
increase and with no apparent gain of secondary T790M mutation.
Subsequent genomics and proteomics analyses of HCC4006GeR confirmed
enrichment of genes distinctive to mesenchymal cells. Multiplex Luminex
growth factor assays identified increased secretion of TGF1 from
HCC4006Ge-R cells. We discovered that the depletion of EGFR by shRNA or
inactivation of mutated EGFR activity by EGFR TKI promoted TGF1 secretion
and subsequent induction of EMT, which modulate signaling and apoptosis
pathways contributing to the development of the resistance. Consequently,
we hypothesized that concurrent inhibition of EGFR and TGF receptor in
HCC4006 cells should prevent the emergence of gefitinib resistance with
mesenchymal phenotype. After culturing HCC4006 cells in EGFR (gefitinib)
and TGF receptor (SB431542) inhibitors, we successfully prevented EMT,
although those cells were still resistant to gefitinib (HCC4006GeSB-R).
Interestingly, the cells remain sensitive to irreversible EGFR TKI
AZD9291 and CO-1686, suggesting the presence of T790M mutation. DNA
sequencing of EGFR expressed in HCC4006GeSB-R detected secondary T790M
mutation. Droplet digital PCR analysis detected that the frequencies of
EGFR allele coding for T790M in HCC4006Ge-R and HCC4006GeSB-R cells are
1.2% and 18.3%, respectively, which were increased from 0.015% in HCC4006
cells harboring heterozygous Del L747-E749+A750P/T790M mutation. The
frequency of T790M allele in HCC4006 was higher than the frequency in PC9
cells (0.001%) which reproducibly develop EGFR T790M as a mechanism of
EGFR TKI resistance. Taken together, we discovered that suppression of
gefitinib-induced EMT in EGFR mutant HCC4006 NSCLC cells preferentially
selects for the previously unreported and rare subpopulation of HCC4006
harboring T790M. These results also underscore heterogeneity within
HCC4006 cells that give rise to the divergent resistance mechanisms
according to treatment.

