Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR and HER3 are important in the interaction between lung cancer
cells and fibroblasts


Introduction: The cancer microenvironment has been recognised as a major
factor in the development and treatment of lung cancer. Fibroblasts have
gained attention owing to their ability to stimulate the growth of cancer
cells and to change the response to chemotherapy. Though, not much is
known about the underlying mechanisms.Methods: Lung cancer cell lines
(H1568, Calu-3 and HCC827) and a lung fibroblast cell line (WI-38) were
grown in co-culture using a Boyden chamber assay.Results: The presence of
lung fibroblasts markedly increased growth of the lung cancer cells
during co-culture. We investigated the activation of 49 different
receptor tyrosine kinases and found that H1568 activated only EGFR and
HER3. Activation of EGFR and HER3 was confirmed in Calu-3 and HCC827
after co-culture with fibroblasts. To account for this activation, we
measured the expression of all EGFR ligands in the cell lines. We found
that all lung cancer cell lines had increased levels of amphiregulin mRNA
after co-culture with fibroblasts. ELISA confirmed increased protein
production. We also found that the amount of available amphiregulin in
the media of the co-culture is increased compared to controls.Conclusion:
Lung fibroblasts stimulate the growth of lung cancer cells lines. We
suggest that this effect is obtained by activation of EGFR and HER3.
Furthermore we show that co-culture induce increased amphiregulin
production in the cancer cells. This study identifies EGFR and HER3 as
important components in the interaction between lung cancer cells and
fibroblasts.

