Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Corilagin, an anti-tumor herb medicine, sensitizes paclitaxel and
carboplatin by primarily inhibiting glycolysis pathways in epithelial
ovarian cancer


We have identified that Corilagin is a major anti-tumor active component
extracted from a well-known hepatoprotective and antiviral medicinal
herb, Phyllanthus niruri L. Our previous works found that Corilagin
inhibited the growth of ovarian cancer cells via TGF-/AKT/ERK signaling
pathways. Recently, we have examined if Corilagin could enhance the
sensitivity of chemotherapy in ovarian cancer cells. Different
concentration of Corilagin were used in combination assays with
paclitaxel and carboplatin in ovarian cancer cell lines SKOv3ip, Hey and
HO-8910PM. Corilagin distinctly increased inhibition effects of
paclitaxel and carboplatin (pWe have identified that Corilagin is a major
anti-tumor active component extracted from a well-known hepatoprotective
and antiviral medicinal herb, Phyllanthus niruri L. Our previous works
found that Corilagin inhibited the growth of ovarian cancer cells via
TGF-/AKT/ERK signaling pathways. Recently, we have examined if Corilagin
could enhance the sensitivity of chemotherapy in ovarian cancer cells.
Different concentration of Corilagin were used in combination assays with
paclitaxel and carboplatin in ovarian cancer cell lines SKOv3ip, Hey and
HO-8910PM. Corilagin distinctly increased inhibition effects of
paclitaxel and carboplatin (p<0.001 in all concentrations), specially at
lower doses of drugs. To understand the mechanisms of sensitization by
Corilagin, we performed reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis, it
showed that both paclitaxel and carboplatin treatment upregulated several
apoptotic and death proteins (Caspase 3, Caspase 7, PDCD4), while
combined with Corilagin, these apoptotic effects were enhanced.
Meanwhile, Corilagin presented different pathways with paclitaxel and
carboplatin. In HO-8910PM cells, Corilagin inhibited the expression of
Snail, PLK1, DUSP4, ERA1, RB1, MDM2, and enhanced the expression of E2F1,
HIF1A, NDRG1 All these changes suggested that Corilagin acts not only via
apoptotic pathways, but also via its distinct pathways. We also performed
isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) proteomics
analysis in Corilagen treated ovarian cancer cells. In total, with FDRWe
have identified that Corilagin is a major anti-tumor active component
extracted from a well-known hepatoprotective and antiviral medicinal
herb, Phyllanthus niruri L. Our previous works found that Corilagin
inhibited the growth of ovarian cancer cells via TGF-/AKT/ERK signaling
pathways. Recently, we have examined if Corilagin could enhance the
sensitivity of chemotherapy in ovarian cancer cells. Different
concentration of Corilagin were used in combination assays with
paclitaxel and carboplatin in ovarian cancer cell lines SKOv3ip, Hey and
HO-8910PM. Corilagin distinctly increased inhibition effects of
paclitaxel and carboplatin (p<0.001 in all concentrations), specially at
lower doses of drugs. To understand the mechanisms of sensitization by
Corilagin, we performed reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis, it
showed that both paclitaxel and carboplatin treatment upregulated several
apoptotic and death proteins (Caspase 3, Caspase 7, PDCD4), while
combined with Corilagin, these apoptotic effects were enhanced.
Meanwhile, Corilagin presented different pathways with paclitaxel and
carboplatin. In HO-8910PM cells, Corilagin inhibited the expression of
Snail, PLK1, DUSP4, ERA1, RB1, MDM2, and enhanced the expression of E2F1,
HIF1A, NDRG1 All these changes suggested that Corilagin acts not only via
apoptotic pathways, but also via its distinct pathways. We also performed
isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) proteomics
analysis in Corilagen treated ovarian cancer cells. In total, with
FDR<0.01 and P-valueWe have identified that Corilagin is a major
anti-tumor active component extracted from a well-known hepatoprotective
and antiviral medicinal herb, Phyllanthus niruri L. Our previous works
found that Corilagin inhibited the growth of ovarian cancer cells via
TGF-/AKT/ERK signaling pathways. Recently, we have examined if Corilagin
could enhance the sensitivity of chemotherapy in ovarian cancer cells.
Different concentration of Corilagin were used in combination assays with
paclitaxel and carboplatin in ovarian cancer cell lines SKOv3ip, Hey and
HO-8910PM. Corilagin distinctly increased inhibition effects of
paclitaxel and carboplatin (p<0.001 in all concentrations), specially at
lower doses of drugs. To understand the mechanisms of sensitization by
Corilagin, we performed reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis, it
showed that both paclitaxel and carboplatin treatment upregulated several
apoptotic and death proteins (Caspase 3, Caspase 7, PDCD4), while
combined with Corilagin, these apoptotic effects were enhanced.
Meanwhile, Corilagin presented different pathways with paclitaxel and
carboplatin. In HO-8910PM cells, Corilagin inhibited the expression of
Snail, PLK1, DUSP4, ERA1, RB1, MDM2, and enhanced the expression of E2F1,
HIF1A, NDRG1 All these changes suggested that Corilagin acts not only via
apoptotic pathways, but also via its distinct pathways. We also performed
isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) proteomics
analysis in Corilagen treated ovarian cancer cells. In total, with
FDR<0.01 and P-value<0.05 cutoff, we identified 108 proteins that were
differentially expressed and mainly down-regulated (28 up, 80 down) by
Corilagin treatment. The targeted proteins are cytoskeletal proteins and
related enzymes (lipase, ATPase and kinase), mainly involved in
glycolysis pathway. Enrichment results of both biological processes and
KEGG pathways revealed that several pathways such as: glycolysis pathway,
Focal adhesion, also the HIF-1 signaling pathway and proteoglycans were
inhibited. Moreover, Corilagen may block glycolysis by inhibits several
key proteins, such as: ENO1, LDHA, GPI, PGK1; further down regulates
CD44, Cortactin, STAT3 and Filamin, and inhibits tumor cell growth and
migration. Further investigations of direct targets are required to
better understand the underlying molecular mechanism of Corilagen's
pharmaceutical effects. In summary, our observations indicate that
Corilagin sensitizes paclitaxel and carboplatin by primarily inhibiting
glycolysis pathways in epithelial ovarian cancer cells. Corilagin is an
herb medicine with lower toxic effects to normal cells, especially
hepatoprotective, which could be an ideal complimentary medicine when
combinating with highly toxic chemo-drugs.

