Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-induced activation of the Wnt/-catenin/TCF4 pathway in
dendritic cells promotes immune tolerance


Tumors actively suppress host antitumor immune response and this
represents a fundamental barrier to successful cancer immunotherapy.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying tumor-induced immune
tolerance are largely unknown. In the present study, we show that Wnt
ligands in the tumor microenvironment activate the -catenin/TCF4 pathway
within dendritic cells (DCs) rendering them tolerogenic and able to
suppress host antitumor immunity against melanoma. This was because
Wnt/-catenin/TCF4 signaling in DCs induced retinoic acid synthesizing
enzymes, which induced T regulatory responses and suppressed effector T
cells. Consistent with this observation, DC-specific deletion of key
downstream mediators of canonical Wnt signaling (Wnt co-receptors
low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 and 6 (LRP5/6),
-catenin and transcription factor 4 (TCF4)) in mice markedly delayed
melanoma growth and enhanced host anti-tumor immunity. Likewise,
pharmacological inhibition of the Wnt/-catenin/TCF4 pathway in vivo had
similar effects on tumor growth and effector T cell responses. Hence,
Wnt/-catenin/TCF4 pathway links together DCs, Tregs and the retionoic
acid pathway, and is an important target for anticancer
immunotherapy.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

