Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: USP15 regulates SMURF2 kinetics through C-lobe mediated
deubiquitination


Transforming growth factor- (TGF) is a multifunctional cytokine that acts
as a tumour suppressor in normal cells and as an oncogene in advanced
tumour cells. In the later scenario, TGF signaling enhances pro-invasive
and pro-metastatic properties of the cancer cell. Ubiquitin modification
of the TGF- pathway components is emerging as a key mechanism of TGF-
pathway regulation. To limit TGF- responses, TGF- signaling is regulated
through a negative feedback loop whereby the E3 ligase SMURF2 targets the
TGF- receptor (TR) complex for ubiquitin-mediated degradation.
Counteracting this process, a number of deubiquitinating (DUBs) enzymes
have recently been identified that deubiquitinate and stabilize the TR.
However the precise mechanism by which these DUBs act on TR function
remains poorly defined. Here, we demonstrate that apart from targeting
the TBR complex directly USP15 also deubiquitinates SMURF2 resulting in
enhanced TR stability and downstream pathway activation. Through
proteomic analysis, we show that USP15 modulates the ubiquitination of
Lys734, a residue required for SMURF2 catalytic activity. Our results
show that SMURF2 is a critical target of USP15 in the TGF- pathway and
may also explain how USP15 and SMURF2 target multiple complementary
protein complexes in other pathways.

