Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role and therapeutic potential of miRNAs in colorectal liver
metastasis


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of cancer related deaths
worldwide. Liver metastasis occurs in 60% of CRC patients and usually
responds poorly to treatment - contributing to mortality rate. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are highly conserved, endogenously encoded small, non-coding RNA
molecules regulating global gene expression. Their role in cancer
pathogenesis, including CRC, has been well documented. Detailed miRNA
expression analysis on a large cohort of CRC tumors is needed to identify
clinically relevant miRNAs and explore their potential to target liver
metastases.We analyzed miRNA expression data of 406 CRC tumors from
publically available CRC genome sequencing project and identified 58
miRNAs, which were significantly downregulated. Using miRNA target
prediction analysis, 10 miRNAs were selected for further studies as they
were either known to target genes in cellular pathways associated with
CRC liver metastases, or located within a chromosomal loci commonly lost
in colorectal liver metastases. qPCR analysis of these 10 selected miRNAs
in primary and colorectal liver metastasis tissues and in CRC cell lines
demonstrated four miRNAs; miR-132, miR-378f, miR-605, and miR-1976 that
are significantly down-regulated with 0.05). To investigate the
anti-tumorigenic and metastatic properties of miR-132, -378f, -605, and
-1976, we transfected 3 different CRC cell lines (SW620, HCT-116, and
CT-26) with miR-mimics and subjected them to cell proliferation,
apoptosis, soft agar, invasion, and migration assays. Ectopic expression
of miR-378f, -605, and -1976 suppressed CRC cell proliferation, anchorage
independent growth, migration, and invasion and increased apoptosis.
Interestingly, CRC patients with high miR-378f and miR-1976 had better
survival compared to low expressing patients (p0.05). To investigate the
anti-tumorigenic and metastatic properties of miR-132, -378f, -605, and
-1976, we transfected 3 different CRC cell lines (SW620, HCT-116, and
CT-26) with miR-mimics and subjected them to cell proliferation,
apoptosis, soft agar, invasion, and migration assays. Ectopic expression
of miR-378f, -605, and -1976 suppressed CRC cell proliferation, anchorage
independent growth, migration, and invasion and increased apoptosis.
Interestingly, CRC patients with high miR-378f and miR-1976 had better
survival compared to low expressing patients (p<0.044).In conclusion, our
in vitro findings suggest anti-tumorigenic/metastatic properties of
miR-378f, -605, and -1976 in CRC. A further understanding of their
function and in vivo therapeutic evaluation may help in developing novel
therapeutic strategies for this malignancy.

