Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ESE-1 controls transformation properties in HER2+ breast cancer
cells, and predicts poor prognostic status and survival in breast cancer
patients


The ETS transcription factor ESE-1 belongs to the top 5% of all
overexpressed genes in ductal and lobular breast carcinomas. We have
previously established that cytoplasmic expression of ESE-1 initiates
transformation in benign MCF10A and MCF12A mammary epithelial cells,
while nuclear ESE-1 maintains the transformed phenotype in luminal MCF7
and ZR-75-1 breast cancer cells. ESE-1 is also a transcriptional
regulator of HER2 gene expression, and is highly expressed in HER2+ BT474
and SKBR3 cells. In this study we have delineated how ESE-1 controls
transformation properties in HER2+ breast cancer cells, and have
validated the clinical significance of ESE-1 overexpression in breast
cancer patients. Here we show that ESE-1 not only maintains
transformation properties in HER2-dependent, Herceptin (anti-HER2)
sensitive HER2+ breast cancer cell lines BT474 and SKBR3, but also in
HER2-independent, Herceptin-resistant clones of BT474 and SKBR3 cells,
named BT474/HR20 and SKBR3/pool2 respectively. Using crystal violet
growth assays, BrdU labeling, 2D clonogenic assays, and 3D colony
formation in soft agar we show that knocking down ESE-1 inhibits
proliferation, clonogenicity, and anchorage independent growth in SKBR3,
BT474, BT474/HR20, and SKBR3/pool2 cell lines in-vitro. Mechanistically,
ESE-1 knocked down Herceptin sensitive cells evinced a delay in cell
cycle progression through G1, along with down-regulation of cyclin D1.
Long-term stable inhibition of ESE-1 in these cells resulted in
down-regulation of pAKT, which was not always correlated with inhibition
of HER2 and pHER2. In the HER2-independent BT474/HR20 and SKBR3/pool2
cells, stable ESE-1 knockdown inhibited pAKT independent of HER2
down-regulation. Evaluation of the clinical significance of ESE-1
expression was done by IHC analysis on 319 patient tumor samples. While
20% nuclear ESE-1 expression associated with aggressive LN metastasis,
30% of cytoplasmic ESE-1 associated with poor prognosis in LN+ breast
cancer patients. High cytoplasmic ESE-1 significantly associated with 27%
of ER-negative, 35% of PR-negative, and 25% of HER2+ metastatic tumors.
Log-rank analysis of disease free survival (DFS) in LN+ patients revealed
that patients with 30% cytoplasmic ESE-1 had half the length of median
DFS compared to LN+ patients with 30% cytoplasmic ESE-1 (p = 0.027).
Analysis in all patients irrespective of their prognostic status depicted
that patients expressing 20% nuclear ESE-1 or 30% cytoplasmic ESE-1
associated with poor median DFS compared to patients with The ETS
transcription factor ESE-1 belongs to the top 5% of all overexpressed
genes in ductal and lobular breast carcinomas. We have previously
established that cytoplasmic expression of ESE-1 initiates transformation
in benign MCF10A and MCF12A mammary epithelial cells, while nuclear ESE-1
maintains the transformed phenotype in luminal MCF7 and ZR-75-1 breast
cancer cells. ESE-1 is also a transcriptional regulator of HER2 gene
expression, and is highly expressed in HER2+ BT474 and SKBR3 cells. In
this study we have delineated how ESE-1 controls transformation
properties in HER2+ breast cancer cells, and have validated the clinical
significance of ESE-1 overexpression in breast cancer patients. Here we
show that ESE-1 not only maintains transformation properties in
HER2-dependent, Herceptin (anti-HER2) sensitive HER2+ breast cancer cell
lines BT474 and SKBR3, but also in HER2-independent, Herceptin-resistant
clones of BT474 and SKBR3 cells, named BT474/HR20 and SKBR3/pool2
respectively. Using crystal violet growth assays, BrdU labeling, 2D
clonogenic assays, and 3D colony formation in soft agar we show that
knocking down ESE-1 inhibits proliferation, clonogenicity, and anchorage
independent growth in SKBR3, BT474, BT474/HR20, and SKBR3/pool2 cell
lines in-vitro. Mechanistically, ESE-1 knocked down Herceptin sensitive
cells evinced a delay in cell cycle progression through G1, along with
down-regulation of cyclin D1. Long-term stable inhibition of ESE-1 in
these cells resulted in down-regulation of pAKT, which was not always
correlated with inhibition of HER2 and pHER2. In the HER2-independent
BT474/HR20 and SKBR3/pool2 cells, stable ESE-1 knockdown inhibited pAKT
independent of HER2 down-regulation. Evaluation of the clinical
significance of ESE-1 expression was done by IHC analysis on 319 patient
tumor samples. While 20% nuclear ESE-1 expression associated with
aggressive LN metastasis, 30% of cytoplasmic ESE-1 associated with poor
prognosis in LN+ breast cancer patients. High cytoplasmic ESE-1
significantly associated with 27% of ER-negative, 35% of PR-negative, and
25% of HER2+ metastatic tumors. Log-rank analysis of disease free
survival (DFS) in LN+ patients revealed that patients with 30%
cytoplasmic ESE-1 had half the length of median DFS compared to LN+
patients with 30% cytoplasmic ESE-1 (p = 0.027). Analysis in all patients
irrespective of their prognostic status depicted that patients expressing
20% nuclear ESE-1 or 30% cytoplasmic ESE-1 associated with poor median
DFS compared to patients with < 20% nuclear ESE-1 or The ETS
transcription factor ESE-1 belongs to the top 5% of all overexpressed
genes in ductal and lobular breast carcinomas. We have previously
established that cytoplasmic expression of ESE-1 initiates transformation
in benign MCF10A and MCF12A mammary epithelial cells, while nuclear ESE-1
maintains the transformed phenotype in luminal MCF7 and ZR-75-1 breast
cancer cells. ESE-1 is also a transcriptional regulator of HER2 gene
expression, and is highly expressed in HER2+ BT474 and SKBR3 cells. In
this study we have delineated how ESE-1 controls transformation
properties in HER2+ breast cancer cells, and have validated the clinical
significance of ESE-1 overexpression in breast cancer patients. Here we
show that ESE-1 not only maintains transformation properties in
HER2-dependent, Herceptin (anti-HER2) sensitive HER2+ breast cancer cell
lines BT474 and SKBR3, but also in HER2-independent, Herceptin-resistant
clones of BT474 and SKBR3 cells, named BT474/HR20 and SKBR3/pool2
respectively. Using crystal violet growth assays, BrdU labeling, 2D
clonogenic assays, and 3D colony formation in soft agar we show that
knocking down ESE-1 inhibits proliferation, clonogenicity, and anchorage
independent growth in SKBR3, BT474, BT474/HR20, and SKBR3/pool2 cell
lines in-vitro. Mechanistically, ESE-1 knocked down Herceptin sensitive
cells evinced a delay in cell cycle progression through G1, along with
down-regulation of cyclin D1. Long-term stable inhibition of ESE-1 in
these cells resulted in down-regulation of pAKT, which was not always
correlated with inhibition of HER2 and pHER2. In the HER2-independent
BT474/HR20 and SKBR3/pool2 cells, stable ESE-1 knockdown inhibited pAKT
independent of HER2 down-regulation. Evaluation of the clinical
significance of ESE-1 expression was done by IHC analysis on 319 patient
tumor samples. While 20% nuclear ESE-1 expression associated with
aggressive LN metastasis, 30% of cytoplasmic ESE-1 associated with poor
prognosis in LN+ breast cancer patients. High cytoplasmic ESE-1
significantly associated with 27% of ER-negative, 35% of PR-negative, and
25% of HER2+ metastatic tumors. Log-rank analysis of disease free
survival (DFS) in LN+ patients revealed that patients with 30%
cytoplasmic ESE-1 had half the length of median DFS compared to LN+
patients with 30% cytoplasmic ESE-1 (p = 0.027). Analysis in all patients
irrespective of their prognostic status depicted that patients expressing
20% nuclear ESE-1 or 30% cytoplasmic ESE-1 associated with poor median
DFS compared to patients with < 20% nuclear ESE-1 or < 30% cytoplasmic
ESE-1. Overall we established that ESE-1 is critical in both
HER2-dependent, and HER2-independent tumorigenesis and provided novel
mechanistic insights into ESE-1's mode of transformation. Finally, the
data warrants a global role for ESE-1 as a prognostic marker in all
breast cancer patients.

