Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycogen synthase kinase inhibition associated with Notch-1
reduction in cholangiocarcinoma


Introduction: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is the most common biliary cancer
and the second most common hepatic malignancy after hepatocellular
carcinoma with incidence in the United States steadily increasing. It is
a highly malignant adenocarcinoma characterized by poor prognosis and
chemotherapeutic inefficacy with 5-year survival rates remaining at less
than 10%. Currently, surgical resection is the only effective strategy;
however, the majority of patients (90%) are not candidates due to
metastasis and concomitant liver disease. Furthermore, local and distant
recurrence and high morbidity rates are common following resection.
Therefore, new targeted molecular strategies against CCA are imperative.
The glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) pathway is a potential therapeutic
target as it is overexpressed in various cancer types including CCA
acting as an oncogene in these cancers. However, the role of the GSK-3
isoform and their interaction with Notch-1 remains unclear in CCA. Our
findings and other reports demonstrate that the inhibition of Notch-1 in
CCA leads to growth suppression. We hypothesize that GSK-3 stabilizes
Notch-1 and thereby promoting cellular proliferation in CCA. In this
study, we investigated the effect of the GSK-3 inhibitor AR-A014418 (AR)
on the levels of GSK-3 isoforms and further delineated the effect of
specific GSK-3 inhibition on Notch-1 signaling and growth in CCA.Methods:
The effects of AR on CCA cell lines (CCLP-1 and SG-231) were assessed by
MTT assay and live cell imaging. Cell lysates were analyzed via Western
blotting for active and total GSK-3, -catenin, Notch-1, pro-apoptotic and
anti-apoptotic proteins. Transient knockout against Notch-1 was used to
determine the interaction of Notch-1 in CCA whereas knockout of GSK-3 or
was used to analyze the interaction with Notch-1 and delineate isoform
specificity in CCA.Results: Increasing AR treatment (0M - 20M) had a
significant dose-dependent growth reduction (pIntroduction:
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is the most common biliary cancer and the second
most common hepatic malignancy after hepatocellular carcinoma with
incidence in the United States steadily increasing. It is a highly
malignant adenocarcinoma characterized by poor prognosis and
chemotherapeutic inefficacy with 5-year survival rates remaining at less
than 10%. Currently, surgical resection is the only effective strategy;
however, the majority of patients (90%) are not candidates due to
metastasis and concomitant liver disease. Furthermore, local and distant
recurrence and high morbidity rates are common following resection.
Therefore, new targeted molecular strategies against CCA are imperative.
The glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) pathway is a potential therapeutic
target as it is overexpressed in various cancer types including CCA
acting as an oncogene in these cancers. However, the role of the GSK-3
isoform and their interaction with Notch-1 remains unclear in CCA. Our
findings and other reports demonstrate that the inhibition of Notch-1 in
CCA leads to growth suppression. We hypothesize that GSK-3 stabilizes
Notch-1 and thereby promoting cellular proliferation in CCA. In this
study, we investigated the effect of the GSK-3 inhibitor AR-A014418 (AR)
on the levels of GSK-3 isoforms and further delineated the effect of
specific GSK-3 inhibition on Notch-1 signaling and growth in CCA.Methods:
The effects of AR on CCA cell lines (CCLP-1 and SG-231) were assessed by
MTT assay and live cell imaging. Cell lysates were analyzed via Western
blotting for active and total GSK-3, -catenin, Notch-1, pro-apoptotic and
anti-apoptotic proteins. Transient knockout against Notch-1 was used to
determine the interaction of Notch-1 in CCA whereas knockout of GSK-3 or
was used to analyze the interaction with Notch-1 and delineate isoform
specificity in CCA.Results: Increasing AR treatment (0M - 20M) had a
significant dose-dependent growth reduction (p<0.001); starting at 5M in
CCA cells, compared to control. Upon Western analysis, growth suppression
due to apoptosis was evidenced by increased expression of pro-apoptotic
and reduced anti-apoptotic proteins. Inhibition of GSK-3 by AR reduced
the levels of active GSK-3 expression with concomitant reduction in
Notch-1 expression in a dose-dependent manner. Importantly, specific
knock-down of GSK-3 resulted in Notch-1 reduction compared to GSK-3
knock-down. However, shRNA against Notch-1 had no effect on the
expression of either GSK-3 isoform.Conclusion: AR-A014418, a GSK-3
inhibitor, effectively inhibits CCA growth in cell culture through both
GSK-3 and Notch-1 pathways. Transient knockout of GSK-3 isoforms
demonstrated specificity toward GSK-3 in reducing Notch-1 suggesting
GSK-3 may be required for Notch-1 stability. This is the first study to
effectively correlate GSK-3 with Notch-1 in cholangiocarcinoma.

