Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of mRNA of CD80, FOXP3, NKG2D and PD-L1 in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells is associated with metastatic breast cancer
patients


BACKGROUND:Immune cells in the blood circulation may directly or
indirectly interact with cancer cells including circulating tumor cells
(CTCs), local and metastatic lesions during immune surveillance. Upon
such interactions, the immune cells might be activated or inhibited in
anti-rumor responses with several immune checkpoint pathways.However,
little is known about alteration of immune checkpoint pathways in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in the process of breast
cancer progression.In the current study, we investigated the alteration
of mRNA expression which is associated to immune checkpoint pathways in
PBMCs of early and late stage breast cancer patients by comparing with
healthy populations.PATIENTS AND METHODS:Twelve early operable breast
cancer (EBC) patients, 30 metastatic breast cancer (MBC) patients in
Kyoto University Hospital and 6 healthy volunteers (HV)
participated.PBMCs were isolated by using cell preparation tubes
according to the manufacturer's instruction. RNA was extracted from the
total PBMCs and relative mRNA expressions of CD4, CD8, CD40, CD56, CD80.
CTLA4, FOXP3, IDO1, IDO2, NKG2D, NRP1, PD-1, and PD-L1 were evaluated by
quantitative RT-PCR.RESULT:The expressions of mRNA were not significantly
changed between HV and EBC. By contrast, between HV or EBC and MBC,
significant differences were detected in mRNA expression in CD80, FOXP3,
NKG2D and PD-L1. All of them were upregulated in MBC, compared with HV
or/and EBC (Reference Table 1).CONCLUSION:Based on the findings of the
correlation between up-regulation of the immune check point molecules
tested and metastatic cancer samples, it suggested that the development
of breast cancer burden should be relevant to some specific immune
resistance mechanism. Further careful evaluations of the current study
will provide novel prospects for diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic
targets for management of breast cancer patients.

