Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular subgroup analysis of clinical outcomes in a phase 3
study of gemcitabine and oxaliplatin with or without erlotinib in
advanced biliary tract cancer


BACKGROUND. We previously reported that the addition of erlotinib to
gemcitabine and oxaliplatin (GEMOX) resulted in greater antitumor
activity and might be a treatment option for patients with biliary tract
cancers. Molecular subgroup analysis of treatment outcomes in patients
who had specimens available for analysis was undertaken.METHODS. EGFR,
KRAS, and PIK3CA mutations were evaluated using peptide nucleic
acid-locked nucleic acid (PNA-LNA) PCR clamp reactions. Survival and
response rates were analyzed according to the mutational status. 64
patients (48.1%) were available for mutational analysis in the
chemotherapy alone group and 61 (45.1%) in the chemotherapy plus
erlotinib group.RESULTS. 1.6% (2/116) harboured an EGFR mutation (2
patients; exon 20), 9.6% (12/121) harboured a KRAS mutation (12 patients;
exon 2), and 9.6% (12/118) a PIK3CA mutation (10 patients; exon 9 and 2
patients; exon 20). The addition of erlotinib to GEMOX in patients with
KRAS wild type disease (n = 109) resulted in significant improvements in
overall response compared with GEMOX alone (30.2% vs. 12.5%, P = 0.024).
In 95 patients with both wild type KRAS and PIK3CA, there was evidence of
a benefit associated with the addition of erlotinib to GEMOX with respect
to response rate (RR) as compared with GEMOX alone (P = 0.04).CONCLUSION.
This study demonstrates that KRAS mutational status might be considered a
predictive biomarker for the response to erlotinib in biliary tract
cancers (BTCs). Additionally, the mutation status of PIK3CA may be a
determinant for adding erlotinib to chemotherapy in KRAS wild type
BTCs.Keywords: KRAS, PIK3CA, Erlotinib

