Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IFITM1 overexpression enhances the aggressive phenotype of
inflammatory breast cancer in a STAT2-dependent manner


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a highly metastatic, aggressive, and
fatal form of breast cancer that accounts for about 1 to 5% of all breast
cancers diagnosed in the United States. At present, the molecular
mechanisms that underlie the aggressive phenotype of IBC are not known.
Interferon induced transmembrane protein1 (IFITM1) is a member of
interferon stimulated genes (ISGs), whose overexpression has been linked
to several malignancies, but its role in inflammatory breast cancer is
not known. The primary role of IFITM1 is to stop the spread of viral
pathogens in the host's cells, but its constitutive overexpression has
been shown to enhance malignancy. IFITM1 expression is known to be
regulated by type 1 interferon through activation of the canonical
JAK-STAT pathway; however, recent studies suggest that non-canonical
signaling pathways involving STAT2 homodimers can also regulate IFITM1
expression. In the present study, we determined whether IFITM1 plays a
critical role in driving the aggressive phenotype of three IBC cell
lines; SUM149; MDA-IBC-3, and SUM190.Western blot and RT-PCR analyses
indicated that IFITM1 was constitutively overexpressed at the protein (5-
to 10-fold) and mRNA (4-fold) level, respectively, in SUM149 and
MDA-IBC-3 cells but not expressed in non-IBC MCF-7 luminal breast cancer
cells, and that its overexpression strongly correlated with increased
proliferation, migration and invasion, and enhanced colony
formation.Notably, the aggressive phenotype of SUM149 and MDA-IBC-3 cells
was completely reversed by siRNA knockdown of IFITM1. Specifically, we
found that suppression of IFITM1 significantly reduced the ability of
SUM149 and MDA-IBC-3 cells to proliferate, migrate and invade, and form
colonies. Furthermore, we found that IFITM1 expression and promoter
activity were completely abolished due to STAT2 knockdown and that BRG1
(Brahma-related-gene 1) was crucial for the expression of IFITM1 and
STAT2 in the IBC cells.Moreover, we found that knockdown of BRG1; a
member of the mammalian chromatin-remodeling complex markedly reduced
IFITM1 and STAT2 proteins, but not STAT1, in SUM149 and MDA-IBC-3 cells,
thus supporting a critical role for STAT2/BRG1 in the regulation of
IFITM1 expression in these cells. Taken together, this data suggests that
constitutive overexpression of IFITM1 in inflammatory breast cancer cells
enhances the aggressive phenotype of these cells, and that STAT2 and BRG1
play pivotal roles in driving IFITM1 overexpression.Additionally, this
data suggests that IFITM1 may be a suitable candidate as a novel
therapeutic target and a potential prognostic maker for inflammatory
breast cancer.

