Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prolonged survival of the TH-MYCN murine model of high-risk
neuroblastoma, in response to the histone deacetylase inhibitor
panobinostat, is the result of both apoptosis and differentiation


Background/Aims: Deregulated acetylation of histones plays a key role in
the pathogenesis of hematological as well as solid tumors by changing the
chromatin structure and consequently altering transcription of genes
involved in cell cycle control, differentiation and apoptosis. Inhibitors
of histone deacetylases (HDACs) can therefore result in multiple cellular
responses, including cell death and differentiation. The aim of this
study was to investigate the mechanism of major prolongation in survival
induced by the HDAC-inhibitor panobinostat, in the TH-MYCN mouse model
for neuroblastoma,Methods: Mice homozygous for the TH-MYCN transgene
underwent abdominal ultrasounds (US) from five weeks of age until
neuroblastomas of between 50mm3 and 200 mm3 were detected. Mice were then
randomized to receive the pan-HDAC inhibitor, panobinostat or vehicle
daily for nine weeks. Tumor volume was monitored by serial US. One
hundred days following cessation of therapy tumors were harvested for
immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of key markers for differentiation.
For short-term experiments, tumors were harvested after 24hr for western
blot and IHC analysis of key proteins of the apoptosis pathways as well
as biomarkers of HDAC inhibition. RNA-seq analysis was performed on
tumors harvested at baseline, 14 hr and 24 hr post panobinostat
treatment. Gene set enrichment, and pathway analysis was then performed
to investigate changes in the expression of genes associated with
apoptosis, differentiation and NMYC expression.Results: Treatment with
panobinostat significantly improved survival with 100% of TH-MYCN mice
alive at day 63 compared with vehicle (0.0%, mean survival 7 days;
pBackground/Aims: Deregulated acetylation of histones plays a key role in
the pathogenesis of hematological as well as solid tumors by changing the
chromatin structure and consequently altering transcription of genes
involved in cell cycle control, differentiation and apoptosis. Inhibitors
of histone deacetylases (HDACs) can therefore result in multiple cellular
responses, including cell death and differentiation. The aim of this
study was to investigate the mechanism of major prolongation in survival
induced by the HDAC-inhibitor panobinostat, in the TH-MYCN mouse model
for neuroblastoma,Methods: Mice homozygous for the TH-MYCN transgene
underwent abdominal ultrasounds (US) from five weeks of age until
neuroblastomas of between 50mm3 and 200 mm3 were detected. Mice were then
randomized to receive the pan-HDAC inhibitor, panobinostat or vehicle
daily for nine weeks. Tumor volume was monitored by serial US. One
hundred days following cessation of therapy tumors were harvested for
immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of key markers for differentiation.
For short-term experiments, tumors were harvested after 24hr for western
blot and IHC analysis of key proteins of the apoptosis pathways as well
as biomarkers of HDAC inhibition. RNA-seq analysis was performed on
tumors harvested at baseline, 14 hr and 24 hr post panobinostat
treatment. Gene set enrichment, and pathway analysis was then performed
to investigate changes in the expression of genes associated with
apoptosis, differentiation and NMYC expression.Results: Treatment with
panobinostat significantly improved survival with 100% of TH-MYCN mice
alive at day 63 compared with vehicle (0.0%, mean survival 7 days;
p<0.0001). One hundred days after the withdrawal of drug 88.9% of
panobinostat treated mice remained alive (pBackground/Aims: Deregulated
acetylation of histones plays a key role in the pathogenesis of
hematological as well as solid tumors by changing the chromatin structure
and consequently altering transcription of genes involved in cell cycle
control, differentiation and apoptosis. Inhibitors of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) can therefore result in multiple cellular responses,
including cell death and differentiation. The aim of this study was to
investigate the mechanism of major prolongation in survival induced by
the HDAC-inhibitor panobinostat, in the TH-MYCN mouse model for
neuroblastoma,Methods: Mice homozygous for the TH-MYCN transgene
underwent abdominal ultrasounds (US) from five weeks of age until
neuroblastomas of between 50mm3 and 200 mm3 were detected. Mice were then
randomized to receive the pan-HDAC inhibitor, panobinostat or vehicle
daily for nine weeks. Tumor volume was monitored by serial US. One
hundred days following cessation of therapy tumors were harvested for
immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of key markers for differentiation.
For short-term experiments, tumors were harvested after 24hr for western
blot and IHC analysis of key proteins of the apoptosis pathways as well
as biomarkers of HDAC inhibition. RNA-seq analysis was performed on
tumors harvested at baseline, 14 hr and 24 hr post panobinostat
treatment. Gene set enrichment, and pathway analysis was then performed
to investigate changes in the expression of genes associated with
apoptosis, differentiation and NMYC expression.Results: Treatment with
panobinostat significantly improved survival with 100% of TH-MYCN mice
alive at day 63 compared with vehicle (0.0%, mean survival 7 days;
p<0.0001). One hundred days after the withdrawal of drug 88.9% of
panobinostat treated mice remained alive (p<0.0001) with no evidence of
disease progression on US. Panobinostat induced rapid tumor regression as
determined by US, and significant apoptosis mediated through the
caspase-dependent pathway via up-regulation of the BH3 only pro-apoptotic
proteins, BMF and BIM. Panobinostat also induced differentiation of
malignant neuroblastomas into benign ganglioneuromas as evidenced by H&E
and IHC analysis of markers of differentiation including S100 and SSTR2.
Correspondingly tumors had reduced expression of NMYC compared with
untreated tumors. The findings confirmed up-regulation of genes
associated with apoptosis and differentiation, as well as down-regulation
of NMYC expression.Conclusions: Treatment of TH-MYCN mice with continuous
panobinostat significantly improved survival and reduced tumor burden,
primarily via induction of apoptosis and differentiation. These
preclinical findings indicate that HDAC inhibition is a promising
therapeutic strategy, and supports the further study of panobinostat as a
treatment option for high-risk neuroblastoma.

