Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anticancer effect of Noscapine and Camptothecin is
mediated through apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in A549 lung cancer


Background:The aim of this study was to evaluate the anticancer activity
of a natural product Noscapine (Nos) and Camptothecin (CMP) combination
(Nos+CMP) against non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and to elucidate the
underlying mechanism of action.Methods: A549 cells were treated with Nos,
CMP or their combination and combination index (CI) values were
calculated using isobolographic method. The apoptotic proportion of the
cells and cell cycle effects were analyzed using flow cytometry. The
expression of apoptotic proteins was detected by western blot analysis
such as anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2, cell survival marker survivin,
extracellular matrix proteins like MMP-2, MMP-9 and cell cycle regulatory
proteins like p21 and cyclin dependent kinase 2 (CDK2).Results: The CI
values (Background:The aim of this study was to evaluate the anticancer
activity of a natural product Noscapine (Nos) and Camptothecin (CMP)
combination (Nos+CMP) against non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and to
elucidate the underlying mechanism of action.Methods: A549 cells were
treated with Nos, CMP or their combination and combination index (CI)
values were calculated using isobolographic method. The apoptotic
proportion of the cells and cell cycle effects were analyzed using flow
cytometry. The expression of apoptotic proteins was detected by western
blot analysis such as anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2, cell survival marker
survivin, extracellular matrix proteins like MMP-2, MMP-9 and cell cycle
regulatory proteins like p21 and cyclin dependent kinase 2
(CDK2).Results: The CI values (<0.61) were suggestive of synergistic
behavior between Nos and CMP. To investigate the underlying mechanism of
the Nos antiproliferative effect, cell cycle-analysis was conducted with
A549 cells. Nos+CMP treatment group induced G2/M phase arrest (using the
the fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis) and the number of
apoptotic cells were also increased significantly in a dose-dependent
manner compared to Nos and CMP alone and control treatments. Furthermore,
western blot analysis revealed that Nos+CMP treatment significantly
upregulated 0.9 fold (pBackground:The aim of this study was to evaluate
the anticancer activity of a natural product Noscapine (Nos) and
Camptothecin (CMP) combination (Nos+CMP) against non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) and to elucidate the underlying mechanism of
action.Methods: A549 cells were treated with Nos, CMP or their
combination and combination index (CI) values were calculated using
isobolographic method. The apoptotic proportion of the cells and cell
cycle effects were analyzed using flow cytometry. The expression of
apoptotic proteins was detected by western blot analysis such as
anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2, cell survival marker survivin, extracellular
matrix proteins like MMP-2, MMP-9 and cell cycle regulatory proteins like
p21 and cyclin dependent kinase 2 (CDK2).Results: The CI values (<0.61)
were suggestive of synergistic behavior between Nos and CMP. To
investigate the underlying mechanism of the Nos antiproliferative effect,
cell cycle-analysis was conducted with A549 cells. Nos+CMP treatment
group induced G2/M phase arrest (using the the fluorescence-activated
cell sorting analysis) and the number of apoptotic cells were also
increased significantly in a dose-dependent manner compared to Nos and
CMP alone and control treatments. Furthermore, western blot analysis
revealed that Nos+CMP treatment significantly upregulated 0.9 fold
(p<0.05) the expression of tumor suppressor protein p21 Waf1/Cip1
(suggesting inhibition of cell cycle progression) compared to single
agent treated and control groups. Expression of CDK2 (an important
component of cell machinery) and cyclin D1 (another important regulator
of cell cycle progression) was significantly downregulated 1.03 fold
(pBackground:The aim of this study was to evaluate the anticancer
activity of a natural product Noscapine (Nos) and Camptothecin (CMP)
combination (Nos+CMP) against non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and to
elucidate the underlying mechanism of action.Methods: A549 cells were
treated with Nos, CMP or their combination and combination index (CI)
values were calculated using isobolographic method. The apoptotic
proportion of the cells and cell cycle effects were analyzed using flow
cytometry. The expression of apoptotic proteins was detected by western
blot analysis such as anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2, cell survival marker
survivin, extracellular matrix proteins like MMP-2, MMP-9 and cell cycle
regulatory proteins like p21 and cyclin dependent kinase 2
(CDK2).Results: The CI values (<0.61) were suggestive of synergistic
behavior between Nos and CMP. To investigate the underlying mechanism of
the Nos antiproliferative effect, cell cycle-analysis was conducted with
A549 cells. Nos+CMP treatment group induced G2/M phase arrest (using the
the fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis) and the number of
apoptotic cells were also increased significantly in a dose-dependent
manner compared to Nos and CMP alone and control treatments. Furthermore,
western blot analysis revealed that Nos+CMP treatment significantly
upregulated 0.9 fold (p<0.05) the expression of tumor suppressor protein
p21 Waf1/Cip1 (suggesting inhibition of cell cycle progression) compared
to single agent treated and control groups. Expression of CDK2 (an
important component of cell machinery) and cyclin D1 (another important
regulator of cell cycle progression) was significantly downregulated 1.03
fold (p<0.05) and 0.7 fold (pBackground:The aim of this study was to
evaluate the anticancer activity of a natural product Noscapine (Nos) and
Camptothecin (CMP) combination (Nos+CMP) against non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) and to elucidate the underlying mechanism of
action.Methods: A549 cells were treated with Nos, CMP or their
combination and combination index (CI) values were calculated using
isobolographic method. The apoptotic proportion of the cells and cell
cycle effects were analyzed using flow cytometry. The expression of
apoptotic proteins was detected by western blot analysis such as
anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2, cell survival marker survivin, extracellular
matrix proteins like MMP-2, MMP-9 and cell cycle regulatory proteins like
p21 and cyclin dependent kinase 2 (CDK2).Results: The CI values (<0.61)
were suggestive of synergistic behavior between Nos and CMP. To
investigate the underlying mechanism of the Nos antiproliferative effect,
cell cycle-analysis was conducted with A549 cells. Nos+CMP treatment
group induced G2/M phase arrest (using the the fluorescence-activated
cell sorting analysis) and the number of apoptotic cells were also
increased significantly in a dose-dependent manner compared to Nos and
CMP alone and control treatments. Furthermore, western blot analysis
revealed that Nos+CMP treatment significantly upregulated 0.9 fold
(p<0.05) the expression of tumor suppressor protein p21 Waf1/Cip1
(suggesting inhibition of cell cycle progression) compared to single
agent treated and control groups. Expression of CDK2 (an important
component of cell machinery) and cyclin D1 (another important regulator
of cell cycle progression) was significantly downregulated 1.03 fold
(p<0.05) and 0.7 fold (p<0.05) respectively in Nos+CMP compared to other
groups. Also, expression of Bcl2, survivin, MMP-2 and MMP-9 was
significantly downregulated in Nos+CMP treated cells (pBackground:The aim
of this study was to evaluate the anticancer activity of a natural
product Noscapine (Nos) and Camptothecin (CMP) combination (Nos+CMP)
against non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and to elucidate the
underlying mechanism of action.Methods: A549 cells were treated with Nos,
CMP or their combination and combination index (CI) values were
calculated using isobolographic method. The apoptotic proportion of the
cells and cell cycle effects were analyzed using flow cytometry. The
expression of apoptotic proteins was detected by western blot analysis
such as anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2, cell survival marker survivin,
extracellular matrix proteins like MMP-2, MMP-9 and cell cycle regulatory
proteins like p21 and cyclin dependent kinase 2 (CDK2).Results: The CI
values (<0.61) were suggestive of synergistic behavior between Nos and
CMP. To investigate the underlying mechanism of the Nos antiproliferative
effect, cell cycle-analysis was conducted with A549 cells. Nos+CMP
treatment group induced G2/M phase arrest (using the the
fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis) and the number of apoptotic
cells were also increased significantly in a dose-dependent manner
compared to Nos and CMP alone and control treatments. Furthermore,
western blot analysis revealed that Nos+CMP treatment significantly
upregulated 0.9 fold (p<0.05) the expression of tumor suppressor protein
p21 Waf1/Cip1 (suggesting inhibition of cell cycle progression) compared
to single agent treated and control groups. Expression of CDK2 (an
important component of cell machinery) and cyclin D1 (another important
regulator of cell cycle progression) was significantly downregulated 1.03
fold (p<0.05) and 0.7 fold (p<0.05) respectively in Nos+CMP compared to
other groups. Also, expression of Bcl2, survivin, MMP-2 and MMP-9 was
significantly downregulated in Nos+CMP treated cells (p<0.05). Further,
investigations are currently being conducted to evaluate the synergistic
anticancer effect of Nos and CMP in lung tumor xenografts in nude
mice.Conclusion: Nos potentiated the anticancer activity of CMP in an
additive to synergistic manner against lung cancer via cell cycle and
apoptotic pathways. These findings suggest potential benefit for use of
Nos+CMP in treatment of lung cancer.

