Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Folate-mediated one-carbon metabolism polymorphisms associated
with risk and survival of colorectal cancer


IntroductionFolate-mediated one-carbon metabolism (FOCM) is a key pathway
necessary for nucleotide synthesis, DNA methylation, replication and
repair. Genetic variants in FOCM genes, especially the MTHFR-C677T
polymorphism, have been associated with colorectal neoplasia. Moreover,
FOCM is an important target for chemotherapeutic drugs for the treatment
of colorectal cancer (CRC), such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). We performed a
comprehensive assessment of FOCM-related genetic variation in relation to
CRC risk and survival in an unfortified population.MethodsAssociations of
457 tagging and candidate SNPs in 47 FOCM-related genes with CRC risk and
survival were investigated within a German population-based case-control
study (the DACHS- study). Using multivariate adjusted logistic (n = 1754
incident cases and 1781 matched controls) and Cox regression (5 years
follow-up of CRC cases only; 585 deceased), we evaluated co-dominant,
dominant, and log-additive modes of inheritance. SNPs were genotyped
using the Illumina GoldenGate Assay. Correction for multiple testing was
performed using false discovery rates (FDR).ResultsIndividuals having
both variant alleles of a candidate SNP in the ADH1C gene (rs1693482) had
a significantly decreased risk of developing CRC (ORhet = 0.94 [95% CI =
0.81-1.10]; ORhzv = 0.74 [95% CI = 0.59-0.92]; p-trend = 0.013). Before
correction for multiple testing, 19 nominally significant genetic main
effects on CRC risk were observed. None of the studied tagging SNPs was
significantly associated with risk after multiple test correction. One
polymorphism in the PON1 gene (rs3917538) was significantly associated
with overall survival (HRhet = 1.22 [95% CI = 1.03-1.45]; HRhzv = 2.00
[95% CI = 1.48-2.71]; p-trend = 0.01), after correction for multiple
testing. Effect modification by 5-FU chemotherapy was observed between
two polymorphisms (MTHFR-rs4846047 [Int-pFDR = 0.02] and TK1-rs1811086
[Int-pFDR = 0.02]) for the endpoint overall survival. Cases with variant
alleles of these SNPs had a reduced effect of 5-FU on overall
survival.ConclusionGenetic variation in FOCM appears to be associated
with CRC risk and survival. Furthermore, 5-FU might interact with FOCM
polymorphisms. Further large investigations are required to replicate our
findings.

