Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-time assessment of uptake and utilization of lactate in
intact human breast cancer cells using a 1H-NMR-based assay


Objective: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of
monitoring lactate uptake and utilization in intact human cancer cells
using a dynamic 1H-NMR assay and [3-13C]-lactate. This would provide a
simple, real-time method for monitoring enzyme kinetics in cells as an
alternative to spectrophotometry - which cannot be applied to intact
cells - or dynamic nuclear polarisation-NMR, which requires complex
mathematical modelling. The ability to better understand and measure
lactate metabolism in cancer cells could be applied to monitor MCT1
inhibition.Methods: 310^7 MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells were
suspended in 400l serum-free DMEM plus 100l D2O in a 5mm NMR tube. A
mixture of 10mM [3-13C]-lactate combined with varying concentrations of
unlabelled 12C-pyruvate (0mM, 5mM or 10mM) was added and proton spectra
were acquired every minute for 30 minutes on a 500MHz Bruker
spectrometer. For comparison, cells were also incubated with 10mM
[3-13C]-pyruvate and either 0mM or 10mM 12C-lactate.Results: The presence
of 13C-pyruvate was detected in real-time following addition of
[3-13C]-lactate indicating that 13C-label had been exchanged from lactate
to pyruvate via the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase. The optimisation of
reagent concentrations, however, revealed that this observation was
dependent on the addition of unlabelled 12C-pyruvate and the apparent
rate of 13C-label exchange was proportional to the concentration of
12C-pyruvate added.The data show that no 13C-pyruvate signal is detected
when 10mM 13C-lactate is added alone. However, 6% of the 10mM 13C-lactate
is exchanged with 13C-pyruvate when 5mM 12C-pyruvate is added (rate =
1.110-3mM s-1). This increases to 12% when the 12C-pyruvate concentration
was increased to 10mM (rate = 2.210-3 mM s-1). The total pyruvate
concentration (12C + 13C-pyruvate) remained constant, which suggests that
there is no net production of pyruvate. In comparison, the 13C-pyruvate
experiment was less dependent on the addition of unlabelled 12C-lactate
for 13C-label exchange to be observed.Conclusion: The fact that
unlabelled pyruvate was required for a reaction to be observed following
addition of 13C-lactate suggests that the position of the isotopic
equilibrium favours the label to remain in the lactate pool. Therefore a
large amount of unlabelled pyruvate is required for the exchange process
to be observed. This would also explain why the addition of unlabelled
lactate was not required in the 13C-pyruvate experiment, since to reach
isotopic equilibrium, a large proportion of the 13C-pyruvate needs to
immediately exchange with the naturally larger lactate pool.
Nevertheless, these findings demonstrate the feasibility of using this
1H-NMR assay to measure [3-13C]-lactate uptake in real-time. This could
inform on metabolic pathway activity in response to MCT1 inhibition in
intact cells.

