Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expansion of CTCs from early stage lung cancer patients using a
microfluidic co-culture model


Establishing the role of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in tumor
progression and metastasis depends both on enumeration and on obtaining
sufficient numbers of cells for downstream assays. The numbers of CTCs
are few in early stages of cancer, limiting detailed molecular
characterization. One approach to overcome this limitation is to expand
CTCs, i.e. increase their numbers as a result of cell division. Herein,
we have developed a novel in-situ capture and culture methodology for
ex-vivo expansion of CTCs using a three dimensional co-culture model,
simulating a tumor microenvironment to support tumor development. We have
successfully identified CTCs isolated from 14 of 19 early stage lung
cancer patients. Expanded lung CTCs expressed tumor specific markers and
formed spheroids in culture. CTCs derived xenograft demonstrated
tumorigenic capability of these cells. Furthermore, CTCs carried
mutations of the TP53 gene identical to those observed in the matched
primary tumors. Next-generation sequencing further revealed additional
matched mutations between primary tumor and CTCs of cancer-related genes.
This strategy sets the stage to further characterize the biology of CTCs
derived from patients with early lung cancers, thereby leading to a
better understanding of these putative drivers of metastasis.

