Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 dose on
keratinocyte proliferation and Np63 stabilization


1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (VD3) is a secosteriod that has been explored
as an anti-cancer agent, but has also been shown to promote cell
survival. Its receptor, Vitamin D Receptor (VDR), is a direct target of
the oncogene Np63, which is overexpressed in non-melanoma skin cancers.
The interconnection between VDR/VD3 signaling and Np63, led us to examine
whether VDR/VD3 signaling promotes keratinocyte proliferation by
regulating Np63 levels. We show that VDR regulates Np63 expression at
both the transcript and protein level. Interestingly, while low doses of
VD3 led to an increase in Np63 protein levels and keratinocyte
proliferation, high doses of VD3 failed to increase Np63 protein levels
and resulted in reduced proliferation. Increased levels of Np63 by low
dose VD3 was shown to be VDR dependent and critical for the
pro-proliferative effects of VD3. Furthermore, VD3 mediated increases in
Np63 protein levels occur via p38 activation. Analysis of squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and precursors to invasive
SCC demonstrated a significant correlation between p63 and VDR levels
when compared to normal skin samples. In this study we demonstrated a
differential dose effect of VD3 on Np63 stability, which directly
resulted in differential effects on cell growth. Delineation of the
mechanisms by which VD3 exerts its effect on Np63 will be critical for
determining the future of VD3 in cancer therapies.

