Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lack of expression of FOXO3 correlates with poor prognosis on
uterine sarcomas


Background: Uterine sarcomas are rare mesodermic tumors that represent
approximately 3% of all uterine cancers. They display histological
diversity and aggressive behavior, with early dissemination and high
mortality when compared with epithelial tumors. Due to their diversity
and rarity, there is no consensus related to risk factors for poor
prognostic and appropriated treatment. The knowledge of the gene
expression regulation can contribute to a better understanding of these
neoplasms. Recently it was demonstrated an essential role for the
forkhead transcription factor FOXO3 in the regulation of diverse cellular
functions and tumors development. Our aim was to study the expression
profile of the transcription factor FOXO3 in several histological types
of uterine sarcoma. Method: we evaluated 100 samples of uterine sarcomas
(including leiomyosarcomas, carcinosarcomas, adenosarcomas and
endometrial stromal sarcomas), leiomyomas and myometrium obtained from
patients during the period of 2000 to 2012. FOXO3 protein expression was
assessed by immunohistochemistry. mRNA expression was evaluated by
quantitative Real Time PCR. The results were submitted to statistical
analyses together with patient's data. Results: We observed that
carcinosarcomas (CSS) and adenosarcomas (ADS) showed the highest FOXO3
protein signal, considering exclusively the mesenchymal component.
Concerning to muscular tumors (leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma), we found an
increasing enhancement of this protein expression from the myometrium to
myoma and leiomiosarcoma, both in protein and transcriptional levels.
Statistical analysis showed that tumors with weak or lack of FOXO3
protein present poor prognosis, regardless of their histological type.
Conclusion: FOXO3 protein expression seems to be a relevant role in
uterine sarcomas, however further analyses are needed.

