Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-Test: a blood test for lung cancer early detection


Background:Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. As
lung cancer is asymptomatic in its early stages, the majority of patients
are diagnosed with advanced disease, when the tumor is unresectable.
Consequently, the survival rate is very low: 15% at 5 years. It is vital,
therefore, that screening programs and novel diagnostic tools are
developed, which will increase the detection of lung cancer in its early
stages (stage I-II), when the tumor is still curable, to reduce lung
cancer mortality. Recently, we described a serum microRNA signature
diagnostic for asymptomatic, early stage, lung cancer. The availability
of reliable biomarkers to identify high-risk individuals might help to
reduce the size of the target population for LDCT-based programs, thereby
reducing costs and probably increasing complianceMethods:We performed a
large-scale validation study of a miRNA blood test based on our signature
(the miR-Test) in a population of high-risk individuals (N = 1115)
enrolled in the lung cancer screening program COSMOS (Continuous
Observation of SMOking Subjects), and other 74 lung cancer patients
diagnosed outside of screening.Results:The miR-Test showed overall
accuracy, specificity and sensitivity of 75%, 78%, and 75%, respectively,
with an AUC of 0.85. The test appears to have a dual origin: the first
from epithelial cells (the epithelial-like component); the second from
cells of hematopoietic origin (the inflammatory-like component). Of note,
we found that both components are needed to maintain a good performance
of the miR-Test.Conclusions:The relatively high sensitivity of the
miR-Test in detecting asymptomatic lung cancer and its high negative
predictive value (NPV > 99%), confirm the effectiveness of the test, both
interms of its ability to identify asymptomatic lung cancer patients and
to reduce significantly unnecessary CTs on healthy individuals.

