Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TROY-EGFR signaling complex mediates glioblastoma cells invasion
and survival


Glioblastoma (GBM) is a highly lethal CNS malignancy in adults with a
median survival of about 15 months. Effective therapeutic control of GBM
is thwarted by the invasive nature of the tumor, which prevents complete
surgical removal and results in tumor recurrence. Thus, there is a dire
need to develop innovative approaches to target the invasive tumor cells
for improved treatment of this disease. Expression of TROY, a member of
the TNFR family, increases with glial tumor grade and inversely
correlates with patient survival. Increased expression of TROY stimulates
glioblastoma cell invasion and increases resistance to temozolomide (TMZ)
and radiation treatment. We have demonstrated that TROY forms a novel
complex with EGFR and modulates EGFR survival signaling. IHC analysis of
GBM specimens showed that tumors with elevated TROY expression had a
statistically positive correlation with increased EGFR expression. TROY
expression enhanced EGFR phosphorylation, stabilized EGFR surface
expression in the presence of ligand, and significantly increased
EGF-stimulated GBM cell invasion. Consistent with invasion, co-expression
of TROY with EGFR increased cell survival to TMZ. Moreover, we have shown
that in cells treated with EGF, the TROY and ErbB4 receptor are recruited
to the EGFR complex. Although the role of ErbB4 in GBM is not well
defined, inhibition of ErbB4 expression suppressed tumor growth and
invasion in multiple tumor subtypes, decreased EGFR surface retention,
and limited EGF-induced cell migration. These data suggest that the
TROY-EGFR-ErbB4 complex may represent an unappreciated therapeutic target
to inhibit glioma invasion and decrease therapeutic resistance.

