Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation sequencing demonstrates association between tumor
suppressor gene aberrations and poor outcome in patients with cancer


Next generation sequencing is advancing at a breathtaking pace, and is
transforming patient care by allowing physicians to customize and match
treatment to their patients tumor alterations. Our goal was to study the
association between key molecular alterations and outcome parameters. We
retrospectively reviewed the clinicopathologic and clinical outcomes of
392 patients for whom molecular testing had been performed. Potential
associations between clinical characteristics and outcome parameters
(overall survival (OS), time to metastasis/recurrence, and best
progression-free survival (PFS)) were examined. The Kaplan-Meier method
and Cox regression models were used for our analysis, and results were
subjected to internal validation using a resampling method (bootstrap
analysis). In a multivariable analysis (Cox regression model), the
parameters that were statistically associated with a poorer overall
survival were the presence of metastases at diagnosis (P = 0.014),
gastrointestinal histology (PNext generation sequencing is advancing at a
breathtaking pace, and is transforming patient care by allowing
physicians to customize and match treatment to their patients tumor
alterations. Our goal was to study the association between key molecular
alterations and outcome parameters. We retrospectively reviewed the
clinicopathologic and clinical outcomes of 392 patients for whom
molecular testing had been performed. Potential associations between
clinical characteristics and outcome parameters (overall survival (OS),
time to metastasis/recurrence, and best progression-free survival (PFS))
were examined. The Kaplan-Meier method and Cox regression models were
used for our analysis, and results were subjected to internal validation
using a resampling method (bootstrap analysis). In a multivariable
analysis (Cox regression model), the parameters that were statistically
associated with a poorer overall survival were the presence of metastases
at diagnosis (P = 0.014), gastrointestinal histology (P<0.0001), PTEN
(PNext generation sequencing is advancing at a breathtaking pace, and is
transforming patient care by allowing physicians to customize and match
treatment to their patients tumor alterations. Our goal was to study the
association between key molecular alterations and outcome parameters. We
retrospectively reviewed the clinicopathologic and clinical outcomes of
392 patients for whom molecular testing had been performed. Potential
associations between clinical characteristics and outcome parameters
(overall survival (OS), time to metastasis/recurrence, and best
progression-free survival (PFS)) were examined. The Kaplan-Meier method
and Cox regression models were used for our analysis, and results were
subjected to internal validation using a resampling method (bootstrap
analysis). In a multivariable analysis (Cox regression model), the
parameters that were statistically associated with a poorer overall
survival were the presence of metastases at diagnosis (P = 0.014),
gastrointestinal histology (P<0.0001), PTEN (P<0.0001), and CDKN2A
alterations (P = 0.0001). The variables associated with a shorter time to
metastases/recurrence were gastrointestinal histology (P = 0.004), APC (P
= 0.008), PTEN (P = 0.026) and TP53 (P = 0.044) alterations. TP53 (P =
0.003) and PTEN (P = 0.034) alterations were independent predictors of a
shorter best PFS. A personalized treatment approach (matching the
molecular aberration with a cognate targeted drug) also correlated with a
longer best PFS (P = 0.046). Our study demonstrated that, across diverse
cancers, anomalies in specific tumor suppressor genes (PTEN, CDKN2A, APC,
and/or TP53) were independently associated with a worse outcome, as
reflected by time to metastases/recurrence, best PFS on treatment, and/or
overall survival. These observations suggest that molecular diagnostic
tests may provide important prognostic information in patients with
cancer.

