Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunomodulatory activity of aza-podophyllotoxin derivatives


Derivatives of podophyllotoxin, namely etoposide (2), etopophos (3) and
teniposide (4) have been developed and are currently used in clinic for
the treatment of a variety of malignancies. Due to structural complexity
of podophyllotoxin, commercial synthesis, further derivative synthesis
and structural modifications of podophyllotoxin are limited. We have
developed some heterocyclic analogues of podophyllotoxin i.e.
N-hydroxyethyl-4-aza-podophyllotoxin derivatives (AZPs). Advantage of
these compounds is their easy and fast synthesis as compared to the
parent natural lignin i.e. podophyllotoxin. Owing to their promising
activity against 60 cell lines at NCI, we further expanded the library of
AZPs substituted at ring A and E. This was followed by a screen of in
vivo activity using a panel of tumor hollow-grafts implanted in mice
consisting of breast (MDA-MB-231), non-small lung (NCI-H23 and NCI-H522),
colon (SW-620 and COLO 205), melanoma (UACC-62, MDA-MB-435 and LOXIMVI),
ovarian (OVCAR-5 and OVCAR-3) and CNS (U251 and SF-295) cell lines. These
new compounds shows comparatively excellent activity against several
human cancer cell lines at NCI. We recently reported activity of AZPs in
MTA resistant Cancer Cells.We are now reporting immunomodulatory effect
of our AZPs for the first time, assessed by in-vitro stimulation of mouse
lymphocytes for five days. Specifically, our preliminary data shows
AP-102, AP-103, AP-104, and AP-205 to induce 2208, 2575, 2071, and 7166
pg/mL of G-CSF, respectively, and the AP-311, AP-312, AP-102, AP-103,
AP-104, and AP-205 induced 551, 810, 772, 1125, 782, and 4351 pg/mL of
IL-6, respectively. These data demonstrate the immunostimulatory ability
of our AP compounds. Further experiments need to be performed to study
the impact of these compounds in the modulation of the immune system.

