Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A targetable GATA2-IGF2 axis confers aggressiveness in lethal
prostate cancer


Castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is a significant cause of
mortality worldwide. In recent years, treatment modalities that improve
survival have emerged including taxane chemotherapy and second generation
androgen signaling inhibitors, among others. Indeed, today the first line
chemotherapeutic docetaxel as well as the second line agent cabazitaxel
are mainstays of treatment. However, CRPC inexorably progresses to a
chemotherapy resistant state that ultimately precedes lethality.
Elucidating the molecular determinants of aggressiveness in chemotherapy
resistant CRPC may therefore stimulate new therapeutic strategies that
improve clinical outcomes. We used laboratory models and clinical
databases to identify GATA2 as a regulator of chemotherapy resistance and
tumorigenicity in this context. Whole genome expression profiling,
clinical validation and genetic screening approaches revealed that GATA2
regulates a consensus signature of cancer progression associated genes.
Mechanistically, direct upregulation of the growth hormone IGF2 emerged
as a significant mediator of the aggressive properties regulated by
GATA2. IGF2 in turn activated IGF1R and INSR as well as a downstream
polykinase program. The characterization of this axis prompted a novel
combination strategy whereby dual IGF1R/INSR inhibition restored the
efficacy of chemotherapy and improved survival in preclinical models.
These studies reveal a GATA2-IGF2 aggressiveness axis in chemotherapy
resistant prostate cancer and identify a therapeutic opportunity in this
challenging disease.

