Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple -omic analyses of a pair of primary HCC tumor cell lines
with different drug response revealed the mechanisms of drug resistance


Previously we reported the establishment of a pair of primary HCC cell
lines from LIX-004, a patient-derived HCC xenograft model. LIXC004-NA was
developed from an untreated PDX tumor; LIXC004-SR was generated from a
PDX tumor progressed despite long term in vivo treatment with sorafenib.
The two cell lines displayed similar response to sorafenib treatment in
vitro. However, LIXC004-NA is sensitive and LIXC004-SR is resistant to
sorafenib treatment in vivo. IHC and in vitro functional studies revealed
activation of alternative angiogenic pathways as one of the potential
reasons for the sorafenib resistance of LIXC004-SR. To fully explore
different mechanisms/pathways, we performed a) micro-array analyses; b)
whole exome sequencing; c) RNA-seq analyses of the two cell lines; d)
metabolomic analyses of the cell lines in vitro culture in the presence
and absence of different therapeutics; e) RNAseq analyses of the tumors
derived from these two cell lines. The combination of different types of
-omic analyses is our systematic approach to address the potential
mechanisms of drug resistance without bias. The two cell lines shared a
lot of the genetic mutation and expression profile for most genes.
Differentially mutated or expressed genes were also identified at basal
level. More changes were observed with the treatment of different
therapeutics as well as analyses of the xenograft derived from the cell
lines. Pathway analyses are performed to explore the underlying
mechanisms for the development of drug resistance.

