Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The decrease in global cancer mortality


Background: A decrease in cancer mortality has been reported in the
United States, Europe and other developed regions of the world during the
last two decades. Whether similar trends apply to less-developed
countries - and globally - is unclear.Methods: We aimed to describe the
global patterns of cancer mortality by conducting a systematic analysis
of the WHO mortality database for countries for which high- or
intermediate-quality data on death certifications are available for a
period of at least 10 years (typically 2003-2012). We included 60
countries in the analysis, and calculated age-specific and age-adjusted
mortality rates.Results: A decrease in overall cancer mortality of
approximately 1% per year was present in both developed and
less-developed regions, and in both genders. For cancers of the
esophagus, stomach, larynx and thyroid, the average decrease in global
mortality rate was greater than 2% per year. Individual cancers which
showed an increase in mortality rates on a global scale are limited to
pancreas and brain (both genders), lung (women), melanoma and kidney
(men) and endometrium.Conclusions: Reasons for the decrease in cancer
mortality in less-developed countries may include decrease in cancer
incidence, shift in the stage distribution, shift in the proportional
contribution of individual cancers, and improved therapy. The increase in
the number of cancer deaths, globally and in less-developed countries, is
primarily driven by changes in the demographic structure of the
population, but the risk of the individual of dying from cancer appears
to decrease in all countries with reliable data. Cancers with increasing
mortality rates should be given priority for research.

