Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling of lung microbial communities in lung cancer and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients


Background: The composition and structure of site-specific microbiota
have recently been described as a biomarker associated with a variety of
high impact diseases including cancer. This study sought to identify lung
microbial signatures in smokers with lung cancer (LC) and/or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).Material and Methods: We employed
16S rRNA gene compositional analysis to compare the microbiota in Optimal
Cutting Temperature (OCT) embedded biopsies of lung-tissue from 30
smokers, including 10 patients with LC only, 10 patients with COPD only,
and 10 patients with both LC and COPD, selected from a longitudinal study
of COPD exacerbation conducted in Houston, Texas, during 2005 to
2012.Results: Microbial signatures calculated based on the 16S rRNA gene
data showed that patients with COPD only presented a very distinct
microbial structure defined by a significantly lower Shannon Diversity
Index compared to patients with LC only (P = 0.04), and patients with
both LC and COPD (P = 0.003), suggesting lower bacterial richness and
evenness. Furthermore, biopsies from patients with COPD only were
characterized by an increased prevalence of Acinetobacter (P Background:
The composition and structure of site-specific microbiota have recently
been described as a biomarker associated with a variety of high impact
diseases including cancer. This study sought to identify lung microbial
signatures in smokers with lung cancer (LC) and/or chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).Material and Methods: We employed 16S rRNA gene
compositional analysis to compare the microbiota in Optimal Cutting
Temperature (OCT) embedded biopsies of lung-tissue from 30 smokers,
including 10 patients with LC only, 10 patients with COPD only, and 10
patients with both LC and COPD, selected from a longitudinal study of
COPD exacerbation conducted in Houston, Texas, during 2005 to
2012.Results: Microbial signatures calculated based on the 16S rRNA gene
data showed that patients with COPD only presented a very distinct
microbial structure defined by a significantly lower Shannon Diversity
Index compared to patients with LC only (P = 0.04), and patients with
both LC and COPD (P = 0.003), suggesting lower bacterial richness and
evenness. Furthermore, biopsies from patients with COPD only were
characterized by an increased prevalence of Acinetobacter (P < 0.0001)
and Acidovorax (P Background: The composition and structure of
site-specific microbiota have recently been described as a biomarker
associated with a variety of high impact diseases including cancer. This
study sought to identify lung microbial signatures in smokers with lung
cancer (LC) and/or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).Material
and Methods: We employed 16S rRNA gene compositional analysis to compare
the microbiota in Optimal Cutting Temperature (OCT) embedded biopsies of
lung-tissue from 30 smokers, including 10 patients with LC only, 10
patients with COPD only, and 10 patients with both LC and COPD, selected
from a longitudinal study of COPD exacerbation conducted in Houston,
Texas, during 2005 to 2012.Results: Microbial signatures calculated based
on the 16S rRNA gene data showed that patients with COPD only presented a
very distinct microbial structure defined by a significantly lower
Shannon Diversity Index compared to patients with LC only (P = 0.04), and
patients with both LC and COPD (P = 0.003), suggesting lower bacterial
richness and evenness. Furthermore, biopsies from patients with COPD only
were characterized by an increased prevalence of Acinetobacter (P <
0.0001) and Acidovorax (P < 0.0001), and a lower prevalence of
Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus, and Ruminococcus species compared to
patients with LC only and those with both LC and COPD. However, patients
with both COPD and LC were indistinguishable from those with LC
only.Conclusions: This study is the first and largest to examine the
composition of the lung microbiome in smokers with LC and/or COPD.
Specific bacterial signatures were identified in patients with LC only
and those with both COPD and LC demonstrating that the lung microbiome
can be used as a biomarker for the two diseases. Altogether, we observed
altered lung microbiota of COPD and LC, but whether this is involved in
disease causation or is a consequence of host selection remains unclear.

