Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of discoidin domain receptor 2 (DDR2) and its
relationship with procollagen alpha 1 type 1(Col1A1) in malignant glioma


We have previously shown that Col1A1 expression is found more frequently
in low to intermediate grade glioma than high grade glioma(Cancer invest.
23:577,2005). On the other hand, its receptor DDR1 is found in high grade
glioma and often signifies poor prognosis. We hypothesize that DDR2 which
also binds to Col1A1 may play a role in mediating this complex
relationship. We have investigated this relationship using 3 cell lines
(2 cell lines, Glioma 1 and U-118, both express both Col1A1 and DDR1&2,
A-172 which does not express Col1A1 but does express both DDR1&2). All
cell lines were maintained in EMEM with 10% FCS. Treatment with Befeldin
A (BFA), which blocks Col1a1 to the cell surface, results in ER stress
with increase in GRP78 and growth inhibition in all three cell lines.
U-118 was the most sensitive (ID50 of 9 ng/ml for U- 118, Glioma 1
(13ng/ml), and A-172 (24ng/ml)). Silencing Col1A1 resulted in decreased
DDR1 & 2 in Glioma 1 and U-118 and decreased sensitivity to BFA by 20%
for Glioma 1 and 10% in U-118. Silencing Col1 A1 resulted in G2M arrest
and decrease in ERK1/2, JNK, and c-Jun, but increase in PDGF, CREB and
P70 by protein array analysis and confirmed by Western blot. We further
investigated the biological effect of silencing either DDR1 (primary
DDR1a which is the major isoform found in Glioma 1 and DDR2). We found
that silencing DDR 1 had no effect on DDR2 expression and vice versa.
Interestingly, in contrast to silencing Col1A1, silencing either DDR1 or
2 had no effect on Col1A1 expression in Glioma 1 and U-118 and also no
effect on cell cycle or cellular proliferation. In addition, silencing
DDR1 or 2 led to decreased sensitivity to BFA for both Glioma and U-118
with increase in ID50 by 35-50% respectively. Furthermore, we have also
found an increase in p-AKT, p-38, JNK and p-Jun after 48-hr post
silencing of DDR2 while silencing DDR1 had minor effect. However, these
proteins decreased after BFA treatment. In contrast, silencing DDR1 or
DDR2 led to increased sensitivity to BFA in A-172 cells with reduction of
ID50 by 20%. In addition, a decrease in p-AKT, p-38 and ERK were also
seen. Silencing DDR1 or DDR2 also showed significant reduction in
invasion in A-172 cell line, while minimal changes were seen in Glioma 1
and U-118. Since DDR1 has multiple subfamilies, while DDR1a is the most
common one in brain tumor, it is possible that silencing one subfamily
may upregulate the other subfamily. However, DDR2 has only one family and
may explain the more profound effect in silencing DDR2. Taken together,
our data suggest that the function of DDR2 is different among cell lines,
and may be dictated by the presence of Col1A1 which is present in certain
malignant glioma. We are currently investigating the possible
mechanism(s) involved. Future targeted therapy in malignant glioma will
need to take into consideration the different functions of DDR2.
(Supported by Wanfang Hospital-Taipei medical university fellowship award
and VA research grant)

