Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gluconeogenesis, lipogenesis, and HBV replication are commonly
regulated by PGC-1-dependent pathway


Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor- coactivator 1 (PGC-1), a
major metabolic regulator of gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis, is known to
be strongly induced to coactivate HBV gene expression in the liver of
fasting mice. In this study, we found that the combination of 8-Br-cAMP
and glucocorticoids showed the synergistic induction of PGC-1 and its
downstream gene expression, including the expression of
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase
(G6Pase). Moreover, HBV corepromoter activity was synergistically
enhanced by the combination of 8-Br-cAMP and glucocorticoid treatment.
Graptopetalum paraguayense (GP), a herbal medicine, is commonly used in
Taiwan to treat liver disorders. Here, we found that a partially purified
fraction of GP (named HH-F3) dose dependently suppressed
8-Br-cAMP/glucocorticoid-induced G6Pase, PEPCKand PGC-1 expression as
well as suppressed HBV core promoter activity. Additionally, HH-F3
blocked HBV core promoter activity via the inhibition of PGC-1
expression. The ectopic expression of PGC-1 effectively reversed the
HH-F3-mediated inhibition of HBV core promoter activity.HH-F3-reduced HBV
surface antigen expression, HBV mRNA production, core protein level, and
HBV replication were drastically rescued by ectopically expressed PGC-1.
In addition, HH-F3 could also inhibit fatty acid synthase (FASN)
expression as well as decrease lipid accumulation by the down-regulation
of PGC-1 in human hepatocarcinoma cell lines. In conclusion, HH-F3 could
inhibit HBV replication, gluconeogenesis, and lipogenesis through the
down-regulation of PGC-1. Our study indicates that targeting PGC-1 may be
a novel therapeutic strategy for HBV infection. Together, HH-F3mighthave
potential use for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B patients with
associated metabolic syndrome.

