Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of an autophagy protein, microtubule-associated
protein light chain 3 (LC3), in gastric cancer


Background: Autophagy is an intracellular degradation system that is
induced under starvation or hypoxia. Recently, autophagy has been
reported to be associated with carcinogenesis and tumor progression. The
significance of autophagy in gastric cancer progression remains
controversial. Microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 (LC3) is a
component of autophagosomes that stimulate autophagy. There are 3 types
of LC3 gene family members, LC3A, LC3B and LC3C. LC3A and LC3B were
recently reported to be associated with autophagy in LC3 members. The aim
of this study was to evaluate the significance of an autophagy protein,
LC3, in gastric cancer.Materials and Methods: A diffuse-type gastric
cancer cell line, OCUM-2MD3, was used in this study. Effect of starvation
on the expression level of LC3A and LC3B mRNA of OCUM-2MD3 cells was
examined by RT-PCR under glucose free condition. A total of 528 patients
who underwent resection of a primary gastric cancer were enrolled. The
correlation between the clinicopathological features of 528 primary
gastric carcinomas and LC3 expression was examined by
immunohistochemistry.Results: Expression level of LC3A and LC3B mRNA
significantly increased five and two times respectively in OCUM-2MD3
under glucose free conditions compared to that under high glucose
conditions. Immunohistochemical study showed that LC3 expression was
positive in 94 (17.8%) of 528 gastric cancers. There was a statistically
significant correlation between LC3 positive-expression and histologic
type (p = 0.002), lymphatic invasion (pBackground: Autophagy is an
intracellular degradation system that is induced under starvation or
hypoxia. Recently, autophagy has been reported to be associated with
carcinogenesis and tumor progression. The significance of autophagy in
gastric cancer progression remains controversial. Microtubule-associated
protein light chain 3 (LC3) is a component of autophagosomes that
stimulate autophagy. There are 3 types of LC3 gene family members, LC3A,
LC3B and LC3C. LC3A and LC3B were recently reported to be associated with
autophagy in LC3 members. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
significance of an autophagy protein, LC3, in gastric cancer.Materials
and Methods: A diffuse-type gastric cancer cell line, OCUM-2MD3, was used
in this study. Effect of starvation on the expression level of LC3A and
LC3B mRNA of OCUM-2MD3 cells was examined by RT-PCR under glucose free
condition. A total of 528 patients who underwent resection of a primary
gastric cancer were enrolled. The correlation between the
clinicopathological features of 528 primary gastric carcinomas and LC3
expression was examined by immunohistochemistry.Results: Expression level
of LC3A and LC3B mRNA significantly increased five and two times
respectively in OCUM-2MD3 under glucose free conditions compared to that
under high glucose conditions. Immunohistochemical study showed that LC3
expression was positive in 94 (17.8%) of 528 gastric cancers. There was a
statistically significant correlation between LC3 positive-expression and
histologic type (p = 0.002), lymphatic invasion (p<0.001), venous
invasion (pBackground: Autophagy is an intracellular degradation system
that is induced under starvation or hypoxia. Recently, autophagy has been
reported to be associated with carcinogenesis and tumor progression. The
significance of autophagy in gastric cancer progression remains
controversial. Microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 (LC3) is a
component of autophagosomes that stimulate autophagy. There are 3 types
of LC3 gene family members, LC3A, LC3B and LC3C. LC3A and LC3B were
recently reported to be associated with autophagy in LC3 members. The aim
of this study was to evaluate the significance of an autophagy protein,
LC3, in gastric cancer.Materials and Methods: A diffuse-type gastric
cancer cell line, OCUM-2MD3, was used in this study. Effect of starvation
on the expression level of LC3A and LC3B mRNA of OCUM-2MD3 cells was
examined by RT-PCR under glucose free condition. A total of 528 patients
who underwent resection of a primary gastric cancer were enrolled. The
correlation between the clinicopathological features of 528 primary
gastric carcinomas and LC3 expression was examined by
immunohistochemistry.Results: Expression level of LC3A and LC3B mRNA
significantly increased five and two times respectively in OCUM-2MD3
under glucose free conditions compared to that under high glucose
conditions. Immunohistochemical study showed that LC3 expression was
positive in 94 (17.8%) of 528 gastric cancers. There was a statistically
significant correlation between LC3 positive-expression and histologic
type (p = 0.002), lymphatic invasion (p<0.001), venous invasion
(p<0.001), and hepatic metastasis (p = 0.033). The Kaplan-Meier survival
curve showed that LC3 expression was significantly associated with poor
overall survival (pBackground: Autophagy is an intracellular degradation
system that is induced under starvation or hypoxia. Recently, autophagy
has been reported to be associated with carcinogenesis and tumor
progression. The significance of autophagy in gastric cancer progression
remains controversial. Microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 (LC3)
is a component of autophagosomes that stimulate autophagy. There are 3
types of LC3 gene family members, LC3A, LC3B and LC3C. LC3A and LC3B were
recently reported to be associated with autophagy in LC3 members. The aim
of this study was to evaluate the significance of an autophagy protein,
LC3, in gastric cancer.Materials and Methods: A diffuse-type gastric
cancer cell line, OCUM-2MD3, was used in this study. Effect of starvation
on the expression level of LC3A and LC3B mRNA of OCUM-2MD3 cells was
examined by RT-PCR under glucose free condition. A total of 528 patients
who underwent resection of a primary gastric cancer were enrolled. The
correlation between the clinicopathological features of 528 primary
gastric carcinomas and LC3 expression was examined by
immunohistochemistry.Results: Expression level of LC3A and LC3B mRNA
significantly increased five and two times respectively in OCUM-2MD3
under glucose free conditions compared to that under high glucose
conditions. Immunohistochemical study showed that LC3 expression was
positive in 94 (17.8%) of 528 gastric cancers. There was a statistically
significant correlation between LC3 positive-expression and histologic
type (p = 0.002), lymphatic invasion (p<0.001), venous invasion
(p<0.001), and hepatic metastasis (p = 0.033). The Kaplan-Meier survival
curve showed that LC3 expression was significantly associated with poor
overall survival (p<0.001). Univariate analysis showed that LC3
expression was associated with poor prognosis in gastric cancer patients
(p = 0.040), while multivariate analysis found that LC3 expression was
not statistically significant (p = 0.255).Conclusion: LC3 might play an
important role for autophagy of gastric cancer cells in starvation
condition. LC3 is associated with progression of gastric cancer, and is a
useful prognostic marker for patients with gastric cancer.

