Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The long noncoding RNA MALAT1 promotes hypoxia-driven angiogenesis
by upregulating pro-angiogenic gene expression in neuroblastoma cells


Neuroblastoma is the most common solid tumour during early childhood, and
accounts for 15% of all childhood cancer death. One of the key features
of neuroblastoma is aggressive progression due to tumour-driven
angiogenesis. However, the mechanism through which neuroblastoma cells
drive angiogenesis is unclear. Here we showed that the long noncoding RNA
MALAT1 was over-expressed in human neuroblastoma cells under hypoxic
condition, the condition which triggers pro-angiogenic switch and
angiogenesis. In vitro angiogenesis assays demonstrated that conditioned
medium from neuroblastoma cells transfected with MALAT1 siRNAs, compared
with conditioned medium from neuroblastoma cells transfected with control
siRNAs, induced considerably less endothelial cell migration, invasion
and vascular sprouting under hypoxic condition. Affymetrix microarray
differential gene expression study showed that one of the genes most
significantly down-regulated by MALAT1 siRNAs in human neuroblastoma
cells under hypoxic condition, was fibroblast growth factor (FGF). RT-PCR
and immunoblot analyses confirmed that MALAT1 siRNAs reduced FGF mRNA and
protein expression, and in vitro angiogenesis assays demonstrated that
forced over-expression of FGF in neuroblastoma cells blocked MALAT1
siRNA-mediated reduction in endothelial cell migration, invasion and
vascular sprouting. Taken together, our data suggest that over-expression
of MALAT1 in human neuroblastoma cells plays an important role
hypoxia-driven angiogenesis by up-regulating FGF mRNA expression.

