Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T-type Ca2+ channel inhibitors sensitize ovarian cancer to
carboplatin through downregulation of survivin gene expression


Recent studies by our group and others have shown that T-type Ca2+
channels play a reinforcing role in cancer cell proliferation, cell cycle
progression and apoptosis evasion. We have demonstrated drug
cooperativity between T-type Ca2+ channel inhibitor, mibefradil and
carboplatin in vivo in ovarian cancer xenografts. To investigate the
molecular mechanism by which T-type Ca2+ channels affect tumor growth, we
used a panel of ovarian cancer cell lines together with mibefradil or
small interfering RNA (siRNA) to silence the T-channels gene expression.
Inhibition of T-type Ca2+ channels with mibefradil or by silencing
expression resulted in growth suppression in ovarian cancer with
simultaneous increase in apoptosis and decrease in expression of the
anti-apoptotic gene survivin (BIRC5). Combining carboplatin with
mibefradil resulted in increased apoptosis. Analysis of intracellular
signaling revealed T-type Ca2+ channel inhibitors induced changes in the
levels of FOXO proteins, which regulate BIRC5 gene expression. Mibefradil
treatment caused greater nuclear retention of FoxO1 and FoxO3a, two
transcription factors that repress BIRC5 expression, while protein
expression of the transcription factor that activates BIRC5 expression,
FoxM1, decreased. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of FOXO proteins from
mibefradil treated ovarian cancer cells demonstrated binding of FoxM1 and
FoxO1 within the BIRC5 (survivin) promoter. Together, the data show that
T-type Ca2+ channels support ovarian cancer cell cycle, proliferation and
regulate pro-survival pathways through the FOXO-survivin signaling axis,
which has been reported to be deregulated in ovarian cancer. Moreover,
our results provide the rationale for future use of T-type antagonists as
sensitizing agents in combination with standard chemotherapeutics.

