Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snail and serpinA1 promote tumor progression and predict prognosis
in colorectal cancer


Purpose: Snail and serpin peptidase inhibitor clade A member 1 (serpinA1)
are involved in tumor progression. In this study, we investigated the
role of Snail and serpinA1 in colorectal cancer (CRC) and examined the
mechanisms through which these proteins mediate CRC
progression.Experimental Design: Tumors from 528 patients with CRC were
examined to determine the clinicopathological significance of Snail and
serpinA1 expression. Cell migration and invasion were assessed to
determine the functional roles of Snail and serpinA1. Snail binding to
the serpinA1 promoter was analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays.Results: Immunohistochemical analysis of 528 samples from
patients with CRC showed that elevated expression of Snail or serpinA1
was correlated with advanced stage, lymph node metastasis, and poor
prognosis. Moreover, we detected a correlation between Snail and serpinA1
expression. Functional studies performed using the CRC cell lines DLD-1
and SW-480 showed that overexpression of Snail or serpinA1 significantly
increased CRC cell invasion and migration. Conversely, knockdown of Snail
or serpinA1 expression suppressed CRC cell invasion and migration. ChIP
analysis revealed that Snail regulated serpinA1 by binding to its
promoter. In addition, fibronectin mediated Snail and serpinA1 signaling
and was involved in CRC cell invasion and migration.Conclusion: Taken
together, our data showed that Snail and serpinA1 promoted CRC
progression through fibronectin. These findings suggested that Snail and
serpinA1 were novel prognostic biomarkers and candidate therapeutic
targets in CRC.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

