Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discrete clones cooperate to promote tumor progression through a
non-cell-autonomous mechanism in intestinal cancers


Background: The process of tumor evolution has often been described as a
single initiated cell propagating a tumor with subclones of that cell
acquiring distinct molecular changes and competing for dominance within
the tumor. However, colon tumors are now known to often be derived from
multiple initiated progenitor cells. Distinct initiated clones might
cooperate or alternatively compete during tumorigenesis, progression, and
therapy.Methods: Mice carrying the Min allele of Apc and expressing an
oncogenic form of PI3K in a subset of colonic epithelial cells develop
multiple adenomas and adenocarcinomas in the colon. We utilized cell
lineage tracing to follow the progeny of individual progenitor cells
through tumor establishment, progression, and treatment with GDC 0941, a
PI3K inhibitor.Results: Nearly half (44%; 30/68) of the tumors were
derived from at least two progenitor clones, one of which expressed the
oncogenic form of PI3K and one of which did not. The presence of both
types of clones correlated to an increased frequency of either clone
becoming invasive (p = 0.0002). Additionally, the presence of both clones
appeared to protect susceptible clones from targeted therapy.Conclusions:
Taken together, these data indicate that genetically distinct tumor
progenitors can establish a single lesion, and moreover cooperation
amongst diverse clonal populations provides a fitness advantage during
tumor progression and therapy.

