Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic polymorphisms in the vitamin D pathway in relation to lung
cancer risk and survival


Studies have suggested that vitamin D may have protective effects against
cancer development or tumor progression. To search for additional
evidence, we investigated the role of genetic polymorphisms involved in
the vitamin D pathway in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We evaluated
common genetic polymorphisms associated with the vitamin D pathway in
relation to NSCLC in a case-control study of 603 newly diagnosed NSCLC
patients and 661 matched healthy controls. Seven single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped, the expression of CYP27B1 and
CYP24A1 were measured in 153 tumor samples and their associations with
genotypes and patient survival were also analyzed. In the case-control
comparison, we found SNP rs3782130 (CYP27B1), rs7041 (GC), rs6068816 and
rs4809957 (CYP24A1) associated with NSCLC risk. The risk of NSCLC was
increased with the number of risk alleles. CYP27B1 and CYP24A1 expression
were significantly different between tumor and normal tissues in NSCLC.
High CYP27B1 expression was associated with better overall survival, and
the expression was different by the rs3782130 genotype. The study
suggests that some genetic polymorphisms involved in the vitamin D
pathway may associate with NSCLC risk, and one of the polymorphisms
(rs3782130) may affect gene expression and patient survival.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

