Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteome-wide analysis of gain-of-function mutant p53 targets in
breast cancer implicates PARP, PCNA and MCM4 as oncogenic drivers


Gain-of-function mutant p53 (mtp53) changes the cancer cell
transcriptome. However no analysis of mtp53-associated proteome diversity
has been carried out. We coupled cell fractionation with stable isotope
labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and inducible knockdown
of endogenous mtp53 to determine the mtp53 driven proteome. Using SILAC
followed by tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) we identified that R273H
mtp53 expression in MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells both up and
down-regulated multiple proteins and metabolic pathways. We sequenced
73,154 peptide pairs that corresponded to 3010 proteins detected under
reciprocal labeling conditions. Importantly the high impact regulated
targets included the previously identified transcriptionally regulated
mevalonate pathway proteins but also identified two new levels of mtp53
protein regulation for non-transcriptional targets. Interestingly, mtp53
depletion profoundly influenced poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1)
localization, with increased cytoplasmic and decreased
chromatin-associated PARP1. An enzymatic PARP shift occurred with high
mtp53 expression resulting in increased poly-ADP-ribosylated proteins in
the nucleus. Mtp53 increased the level of PCNA and MCM4 protein without
changing the amount of pcna or mcm4 transcript. Pathway enrichment
analysis ranked the DNA replication pathway above the cholesterol
biosynthesis pathway as an R273H mtp53 activated proteomic target.
Knowledge of the proteome diversity driven by mtp53 suggests DNA
replication and repair pathways are major targets of mtp53 and highlights
consideration of combination chemotherapeutic strategies targeting
cholesterol biosynthesis and PARP inhibition.Acknowledgements. This work
was supported by a grant to JB from the Breast Cancer Research Foundation.

