Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical activity of the AKT inhibitor AZD5363 in
PTEN-deficient mouse models of prostate cancer


Increased phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway activity is commonly
observed in human prostate cancer and constitutes a potential target for
therapeutic intervention. AZD5363 is a potent pan-AKT kinase inhibitor
that is currently being investigated in phase 1 and 2 clinical trials in
solid cancers including prostate. AZD5363 has demonstrated strong
anti-tumor activity against human prostate cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo. Genetically engineered mouse models mimic the genetic and
biological evolution of human prostate cancer and address deficiencies
encountered with xenograft models. In the present study, we examined in
vivo target validation, pharmacodynamics, and antitumor responses of
AZD5363 monotherapy in a PTEN-deficient mouse model of prostate cancer,
and show the survival benefit in an advanced prostate cancer model driven
by PTEN/P53 inactivation. Downstream targets of AKT were inhibited in a
dose-dependent manner and activity of AZD5363 at was observed up to 8
hours after a single dose of 100 mg/kg. Tumor cell proliferation and the
induction of apoptosis paralleled the activity of AZD5363. Compared to
vehicle treated mice, chronic administration of AZD5363 at 100 mg/kg
B.I.D. 5 times per week for 4 weeks inhibited growth of castration-nave
and castration-resistant prostate cancers by 15.9% 4.3 and 20.2% 4.4,
respectively. Inhibition of S6 phosphorylation was effectively maintained
the after chronic administration of AZD5363 and was accompanied by
decreased proliferation rates and increase in apoptosis. Furthermore, in
a long-term survival study of PTEN/P53 double knockout mice, treatment
with AZD5363 significantly improved survival rates from 24 to 37 days,
PIncreased phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway activity is commonly
observed in human prostate cancer and constitutes a potential target for
therapeutic intervention. AZD5363 is a potent pan-AKT kinase inhibitor
that is currently being investigated in phase 1 and 2 clinical trials in
solid cancers including prostate. AZD5363 has demonstrated strong
anti-tumor activity against human prostate cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo. Genetically engineered mouse models mimic the genetic and
biological evolution of human prostate cancer and address deficiencies
encountered with xenograft models. In the present study, we examined in
vivo target validation, pharmacodynamics, and antitumor responses of
AZD5363 monotherapy in a PTEN-deficient mouse model of prostate cancer,
and show the survival benefit in an advanced prostate cancer model driven
by PTEN/P53 inactivation. Downstream targets of AKT were inhibited in a
dose-dependent manner and activity of AZD5363 at was observed up to 8
hours after a single dose of 100 mg/kg. Tumor cell proliferation and the
induction of apoptosis paralleled the activity of AZD5363. Compared to
vehicle treated mice, chronic administration of AZD5363 at 100 mg/kg
B.I.D. 5 times per week for 4 weeks inhibited growth of castration-nave
and castration-resistant prostate cancers by 15.9% 4.3 and 20.2% 4.4,
respectively. Inhibition of S6 phosphorylation was effectively maintained
the after chronic administration of AZD5363 and was accompanied by
decreased proliferation rates and increase in apoptosis. Furthermore, in
a long-term survival study of PTEN/P53 double knockout mice, treatment
with AZD5363 significantly improved survival rates from 24 to 37 days,
P<0.011. In conclusion, our findings indicate that AZD5363 is effective
against autochthonous models of mouse prostate cancer and support further
investigation of the AKT inhibitor for the treatment of PTEN-deficient
prostate cancer.

