Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In whole-exome sequencing analysis, alternations of P-selectin
glycoprotein ligand 1 (SELPLG) significantly associates with inflammation
and survival outcomes


SELPLG is type I transmembrane receptor found on the surface of
neutrophils, monocytes, and most lymphocytes. SELPLG interacts with P
-selectin mediates the tethering and rolling of neutrophils, monocytes,
and/or lymphocytes on endothelial cells. In whole exome sequencing
analysis, we found that somatic mutation of SELPLG (2%) was found. Also
its alternation (37%) was found in germline control group. rs201851784 of
SELPLG polymorphism (43%) was determined in 118 adult AML patients and
its polymorphism (12%) was determined in 1000 genome. The prevalence of
the rs201851784 polymorphism was significantly different between AML
patients and normal control (AA genotype vs. GG + AG genotype).
Comparison analysis of SELPLG showed X-squared = 208.4140, df = 1 and p
SELPLG is type I transmembrane receptor found on the surface of
neutrophils, monocytes, and most lymphocytes. SELPLG interacts with P
-selectin mediates the tethering and rolling of neutrophils, monocytes,
and/or lymphocytes on endothelial cells. In whole exome sequencing
analysis, we found that somatic mutation of SELPLG (2%) was found. Also
its alternation (37%) was found in germline control group. rs201851784 of
SELPLG polymorphism (43%) was determined in 118 adult AML patients and
its polymorphism (12%) was determined in 1000 genome. The prevalence of
the rs201851784 polymorphism was significantly different between AML
patients and normal control (AA genotype vs. GG + AG genotype).
Comparison analysis of SELPLG showed X-squared = 208.4140, df = 1 and p <
2.2e-16. After the IL-6 expression levels among AML patients were
detected by ELISA, the allelic status and IL-6 expression on bone marrow
serum of AML patients were analyzed. AML patient having A/G alternation
was found to be associated with lower levels of IL-6 compared with AML
patients having A/A. Those with persistence had higher IL-6 expression
levels compared with those with CR in 1st induction (P SELPLG is type I
transmembrane receptor found on the surface of neutrophils, monocytes,
and most lymphocytes. SELPLG interacts with P -selectin mediates the
tethering and rolling of neutrophils, monocytes, and/or lymphocytes on
endothelial cells. In whole exome sequencing analysis, we found that
somatic mutation of SELPLG (2%) was found. Also its alternation (37%) was
found in germline control group. rs201851784 of SELPLG polymorphism (43%)
was determined in 118 adult AML patients and its polymorphism (12%) was
determined in 1000 genome. The prevalence of the rs201851784 polymorphism
was significantly different between AML patients and normal control (AA
genotype vs. GG + AG genotype). Comparison analysis of SELPLG showed
X-squared = 208.4140, df = 1 and p < 2.2e-16. After the IL-6 expression
levels among AML patients were detected by ELISA, the allelic status and
IL-6 expression on bone marrow serum of AML patients were analyzed. AML
patient having A/G alternation was found to be associated with lower
levels of IL-6 compared with AML patients having A/A. Those with
persistence had higher IL-6 expression levels compared with those with CR
in 1st induction (P < 0.05). In addition, there is a significant
correlation between levels and SELPLG rs201851784, as analyzed by linear
correlation assay. The AA genotype correlated with higher IL-6 levels (P
SELPLG is type I transmembrane receptor found on the surface of
neutrophils, monocytes, and most lymphocytes. SELPLG interacts with P
-selectin mediates the tethering and rolling of neutrophils, monocytes,
and/or lymphocytes on endothelial cells. In whole exome sequencing
analysis, we found that somatic mutation of SELPLG (2%) was found. Also
its alternation (37%) was found in germline control group. rs201851784 of
SELPLG polymorphism (43%) was determined in 118 adult AML patients and
its polymorphism (12%) was determined in 1000 genome. The prevalence of
the rs201851784 polymorphism was significantly different between AML
patients and normal control (AA genotype vs. GG + AG genotype).
Comparison analysis of SELPLG showed X-squared = 208.4140, df = 1 and p <
2.2e-16. After the IL-6 expression levels among AML patients were
detected by ELISA, the allelic status and IL-6 expression on bone marrow
serum of AML patients were analyzed. AML patient having A/G alternation
was found to be associated with lower levels of IL-6 compared with AML
patients having A/A. Those with persistence had higher IL-6 expression
levels compared with those with CR in 1st induction (P < 0.05). In
addition, there is a significant correlation between levels and SELPLG
rs201851784, as analyzed by linear correlation assay. The AA genotype
correlated with higher IL-6 levels (P < 0.05). Reverse correlation
between SELPLG rs201851784 and IL-6 levels was found. SELPLG rs201851784
and IL-6 levels were also significantly correlated with OS. In
conclusion, a polymorphism in the SELPLG gene related to cell
dissemination and tissue infiltration is shown for the first time to be
associated with susceptibility of AML and the overall survival.

