Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gas6/Axl mediation of prostate cancer cell dormancy requires
cooperation with additional bone marrow niche components


Early metastatic events are often responsible for the recurrence and
lethality of prostate cancer. The most frequent site of metastasis is the
bone marrow, where small populations of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs)
preferentially take residence in the hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) niche.
These micro-metastases may survive in a benign, dormant state for years
before they become reawakened to form full metastases, and are thus
difficult to detect and treat. It is unknown what induces and maintains
DTC dormancy, and it remains a key question with regard to metastatic
prostate cancer treatment and prevention strategies. An essential
component of the HSC niche is the osteoblast population to which DTCs
bind for support and uptake of secreted factors. We have previously shown
that dormant DTCs in the HSC niche display high levels of the receptor
tyrosine kinase Axl, and are bound to osteoblasts that secrete its
ligand, Gas6. The requirement of Gas6/Axl in DTC dormancy is striking in
vivo, but in vitro is not replicable. Addition of Gas6 to prostate cancer
cells expressing Axl does not have a significant inhibitory effect on
cell proliferation, suggesting the cooperation with other niche factors
absent in culture. As the elements of the DTC niche are still being
actively explored, this study further supports the complex nature of the
mechanisms governing DTC dormancy and preferential survival in the bone
marrow niche. Selective targeting of these elements may allow for long
term maintenance of the benign, dormant state of DTCs, or coerced
reawakening to a more chemotherapy-sensitive state.

