Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of intakes of magnesium and calcium and survival
among women with breast cancer: Results from Western New York Exposures
and Breast Cancer (WEB) Study


Background: Magnesium (Mg) and calcium (Ca) antagonizes each other in
(re)absorption, cell cycle regulation, inflammation, and many other
physiologic activities. However, few studies have investigated the
association between Mg and Ca intakes and breast cancer survival, and the
interaction between Ca and Mg intake.Method: In a cohort of 1,170 women
with primary, incident, and histologically confirmed breast cancer from
Western New York State, we examined the relationship between intakes of
these two minerals and survival. Cox regression models were used to
estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (95%
CI).Results: Mean follow-up time was 87.4 months after breast cancer
diagnosis; there were 170 deaths identified. After adjustment for known
prognostic factors, and intakes of energy, total vitamin D and total Ca,
higher dietary intake of Mg was inversely associated with risk of
all-cause mortality (HR = 0.50, 95% CI, 0.28-0.90 for highest vs. lowest
tertile; p trend = 0.02). Likewise, a marginal association was found for
total Mg intake from foods and supplements combined (HR = 0.58, 95% CI,
0.31-1.08; p trend = 0.09). The inverse association of higher total Mg
intake with all-cause mortality was primarily presented among
postmenopausal women and was stronger among women who had a high Ca:Mg
intake ratio (>2.59). There were no clear associations for prognosis with
intake of Ca.Conclusion: We found that Mg intake alone may improve
overall survival following breast cancer, and the association may be
stronger among those with high Ca:Mg intake ratio.

