Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptotic resistance in arsenic transformed cells attributed to
decreased SIRT3-FOXO3A signaling


SIRT3 is the primary mitochondrial protein deacetylase that regulates
mitochondrial proliferation and DNA integrity. SIRT3 is the only sirtuin
whose increased expression was shown to be associated with extended
lifespan in humans. Interestingly, very few studies have examined the
role of SIRT3 in cancers. Here, we report cellular function of SIRT3 in
Beas-2B cells under arsenic stress, and in AT cells. Upon treatment with
arsenic, in Beas-2B cells, SIRT3 levels increased and induced apoptosis -
nuclear translocation and binding of SIRT3 to FOXO3A - while AT cells
exhibited lower levels of SIRT3 which can be attributed to apoptotic
resistance, as over-expression of SIRT3 restores sensitivity to
apoptosis. In AT cells, lower expression of SIRT3 caused hyperacetylation
and aberrant localization of its target protein - FOXO3A. One of the
consequences of low SIRT3 levels is absence of SIRT3-FOXO3A interaction
in AT cells, which increases the proportion of transcriptionally
hyperactive, highly depolarized mitochondria (high m) with higher
mitochondrial DNA content compared to passage matched parent Beas-2B
cells. Conversely, Resveratrol-induced high expression of SIRT3 improves
nuclear-mitochondrial crosstalk (increased FOXO3A binding in the D-loop
region) and raises sensitivity towards apoptosis. By disconnecting
crosstalk between nucleus and mitochondria (SIRT3-FOXO3A interactions),
AT cells increase depolarized mitochondrial number, so that the
transformed cells maintain low basal ROS and proliferate rapidly. This is
the first time that a study has shown functional role of SIRT3-FOXO3A in
promoting apoptosis in Beas-2B cells under arsenic stress, and in AT
cells.

