Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2-Hydroxyflavanone inhibits lung cancer growth by inhibiting tumor
cell proliferation and angiogenesis


Lung cancer remains the number one cause of cancer mortality in the US.
Although systemic chemotherapy and novel biologic agents have been shown
to improve survival, toxicities are often severe and effective preventive
therapy has not been defined. Intake of flavonoids from citrus fruits has
been shown to decrease the risk of lung cancer in large scale
epidemiologic studies. Hence, we studied the biologic anti-lung cancer
effects of 2HF, a naturally occurring compound in citrus fruits. Our
in-vitro investigations revealed that 2HF inhibits the growth of
bronchogenic adeno-, squamous and small cell lung carcinoma. This was
associated with G2/M arrest, collapse in mitochondrial membrane potential
(m), and apoptosis. We demonstrated a down-regulation of fibronectin and
key signaling proteins of the PI3K pathway. RLIP76 expression was
significantly reduced by 2HF, and the survival as well as 14C-DOX
transport on purified reconstituted-proteoliposomes prepared from H1618
and H358 cells was significantly inhibited, an effect which was
synergistic with anti-RLIP76 IgG. Our in-vivo studies in mice xenografts
confirmed our in-vitro results by marked reduction of tumor growth, which
was paralleled by a reduction in Ki67 and CD31, as proliferative and
angiogenic markers, respectively. Importantly, 2HF also reduced the level
of vimentin and increased E-cadherin, reversing the phenotype of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. In summary, 2HF demonstrated strong
anti-proliferative, anti-angiogenic and pro-differentiation effects on
in-vitro and in-vivo lung cancer models, whilst sparing normal cells.
This holds not only great promise for therapeutic use but also suggests a
role for 2HF in the prevention of lung cancer (Supported by NIH grant CA
77495 and Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope).

