Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic modification of LY6K in CGI shore and CGI regulates
LY6K gene activation and metastatic function in breast cancer


LY6K is associated with development of the immune response and
carcinogenesis. Elevated LY6K by AP-1 activation induces invasion and
metastasis by activating the ERK signaling pathway. However, the exact
epigenetic mechanism of LY6K gene expression has not been clarified. The
CpG island and 5CGI shore in the region around the transcription start
site of the LY6K were predicted using the UCSC genome browser and
Methprimer software to elucidate the epigenetic mechanism of LY6K gene
regulation and expression. We performed the methylation-specific PCR,
bisulfite pyro-sequencing, and bisulfite sequencing to investigate the
DNA methylation status of CpG sites from 400 to +500 on the LY6K CpG
island and 5CGI shore. ChIP and ChIP-MSP analysis were performed to
confirm the histone modification and DNA methylation status. To validate
the inverse correlation between LY6K 5CGI shore methylation and LY6K
expression in vivo, we performed bisulfite pyro-sequencing and tissue
microarray using breast carcinoma samples. LY6K expression was inversely
correlated with methylation status of CGI and 5CGI shore in the LY6K of
human breast cancer. Moreover, DNA methylation status of LY6K was
correlated with histone modification. Treatment of 5-Aza-dC with low LY6K
expression caused elevated LY6K expression leading to wound healing. An
understanding of epigenetic changes in LY6K may contribute to diagnosing
carcinogenic risk and to predict the outcome of patients with breast
cancer.

