Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting NF-B by the curcumin and its analogs EF-31 and UBS-109
decreases growth and angiogenesis of colon cancer


Purpose/Objective:NF-B plays an essential role in cancer cell growth and
metastasis by stimulating angiogenesis. Curcumin decreases the activity
of several oncogenic transcriptional factors including NF-B and HIF-1,
thus we investigated whether curcumin and its analogs EF-31 and UBS-109,
could disrupt angiogenesis using colorectal cancer cells
(CRC).Methods:HCT-116 and HT-29 cells were used in these experiments.
HUVEC tube formation assay, Matrigel plug assay, Western blotting, and
VEGF activity assay were carried out to determine the curcumin, EF-31 and
UBS-109 role in angiogenesis. A subcutaneous xenograft mouse model was
used to evaluate the in vivo effects of curcumin
analogues.Results:Conditioned medium from HCT-116 or H-T29 cells exposed
to curcumin, EF-31 and UBS-109 in vitro significantly blocked HUVEC tube
assembly in comparison to control. In vivo, EF-31 and UBS-109 blocked the
vascularization of subcutaneous matrigel plugs and the growth of CRC
xenografts. We observed significant inhibition of VEGF synthesis and
secretion in both colon cell lines treated with curcumin, EF-31 and
UBS-109 in concert with the loss of HIF-1 expression, of which
transcriptionally regulated by NF-B. Similar effects were observed in
tumors from animals treated with EF-31 and UBS-109. Further, EF-31 and
UBS-109 treatment significantly decreased the tumor growth compared to
untreated tumors. These results suggesting that curcumin, EF-31 and
UBS-109 inhibits VEGF production in part through the degradation of HIF-1
and increased the cytoplasmic accumulation of NF-B.Conclusion:Taken
together, destabilization of HIF-1 and inhibition of NF-B from cytoplasm
to nuclear translocation may be important contributing factors to the
antiangiogenic action of curcumin, EF-31 and UBS-109 in CRC.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

