Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD169-positive sinus macrophages in regional lymph nodes are
associated with better survival in patients with malignant melanoma


CD169 (sialoadhesin) is a sialic acid receptor that is expressed on the
particular macrophages such as lymph node sinus macrophages. Animal
studies suggested that CD169+ macrophages in lymph nodes have
tumor-preventing properties, but the role of these cells in human tumors
has not been clarified. Therefore, we speculated that CD169+ macrophages
in regional lymph nodes (RLNs) are suggested to be essential to the
anti-tumor immunity and involved in the prognosis of cancer patients. To
determine the significance of CD169+ macrophages in patients with
malignant melanoma (MM), we examined the expression of CD169 in
paraffin-embedded tissue samples from 93 patients by immunohistochemistry
and their relationship with overall survival and clinicopathological
factors. A high density of CD169+ cells was significantly associated with
longer overall survival in patients with MM (P = 0.001). Multivariate
analysis showed that the density of CD169+ cells was an independent
prognostic factor. We also found that the density of CD169+ macrophage
was positively correlated with the number of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells
infiltrating into tumor tissues. Furthermore, interferon (IFN)- induced
strong CD169 expression on human macrophages in vitro, and IFN--producing
cells were indeed detected surrounding CD169+ cells in lymph node. Our
data support that IFN--producing cells may be plasmacytoid dendritic
cells (pDCs) known to produce IFN-. These results suggest that CD169+
macrophages in RLNs are intimately involved in T-cell-mediated antitumor
immunity and may be a helpful marker for assessing clinical prognosis and
monitoring antitumor immunity in patients with MM.

