Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implications of MAPK pathway inhibition on monocytes and
tumor-associated macrophages in melanoma


Plasticity in T-cell populations during response and onset of resistance
to targeted therapy has been well documented. More recently,
macrophage-derived tumor necrosis factor has been described to drive
resistance to MAPK pathway inhibition, yet little is known on the
adaptation of tumor-associated macrophage populations to treatment and
disease progression in human melanoma.To test for alterations in
macrophage abundance following resistance to MAPK pathway inhibition, we
applied a fluorescence-based co-staining strategy on melanoma specimens,
representing tissue collected from patients before treatment and at
relapse. In addition, we established in vitro co-culture systems to study
the paracrine effects of melanoma cells on various aspects of monocyte
differentiation and macrophage activation in the background of MAPK
inhibition and resistance.Resistance to targeted therapy was found to be
associated with an increase in the number of tumor-resident macrophages.
In vitro co-culture of melanoma cell lines with monocytes isolated from
the peripheral blood of healthy donors or with CSF1-differentiated
macrophages in the presence or absence of MAPK inhibition led to profound
changes in monocyte/macrophage marker expression, indicating a direct
interplay between the two cell populations upon MAPK pathway inhibition.
Our data show that macrophages play an integral role in the changing
immune-microenvironment during the course of MAPK pathway inhibition.
Elucidation of mechanisms driving these processes will result in
strategies to optimize treatment combinations and consecutive treatment
outcomes for melanoma patients.Note: This abstract was not presented at
the meeting.

