Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a synthetic organic peroxide, RA1, that overcomes
p53 and Bcl-2 resistance mechanisms


Mutations in p53 and elevated expression of Bcl-2 proteins are associated
with therapy resistance in many human tumors. A lead compound capable of
bypassing these resistance pathways, RA1, was identified from several
synthetic peroxides tested at the National Cancer Institute through the
In Vitro Cell Line Screening Project. The 1,2-dioxolane scaffold of RA1
differs from that of the peroxide containing anti-malarial agent
artemisinin. The lowest concentration of RA1 to cause 50% growth
inhibition (GI50) was observed in an ovarian cancer line, IGROV-1 (GI50
435 nM), and the highest in a lung cancer line, NCI-H322M (GI50 42 M).
Eighteen out of the fifty-nine cell lines tested showed a GI50 below 2.5
M. In cell lines with altered p53 status, RA1 exhibited a potent effect
(GI50 for NCI-H522, HOP-92, and HL-60: 1.2 M, 1.4 M, and 2.2 M,
respectively). RA1 showed a high selectivity index, inducing >90% cell
death at 40 M in a transformed cancerous cell line (BJ-ELR: LC50 30 M);
while only 20% cell death was observed in non-transformed cells of the
same origin (BJ-hTERT: LC50 55 M).Using a B-lymphoblastic cell leukemia
line, RS4:11 (LC50 7 M; wild type p53), as a model system, we
investigated the mechanism of action of RA1. No increase in p53 protein
expression was observed upon treatment with RA1. Unlike conventional
chemotherapy drugs, overexpression of the Bcl-2 protein to prevent
mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP) had no effect on
RA1's ability to induce cell death. The LC50 of GFP control and Bcl-2
overexpressing cells with RA1 is 7.7 and 7.4 M, respectively, compared to
the control (etoposide: LC50 0.6 M and >4 M). No change in cell cycle
distribution was observed. No activation of the executioner caspases was
seen by Western Blot; however, pretreatment with a caspase-2 inhibitor
(z-VDVAD-FMK) prevented cell death. Electron microscopy images showed no
morphological features characteristic of apoptosis, necrosis, or
autophagy. Ferroptosis, an iron and reactive oxygen species (ROS)
dependent form of cell death also lacks these morphological
characteristics. While no organic peroxides are known to induce
ferroptosis, the use of an iron chelator and Ferrostatin (a lipophillic
anti-oxidant known to inhibit ferroptosis) inhibited cell death induced
by RA1. Similar to some ferroptosis inducing compounds, a water soluble
anti-oxidant had no effect on cell death; however, use of a ROS detection
kit indicated oxidative stress is occurring.RA1 demonstrates potential
therapeutic activity for the treatment of cancer. It is capable of
overcoming two common chemo-resistance pathways: p53 mutation and
inhibition of MOMP by modulation of the Bcl-2 family of proteins. RA1
targets cancer cells by a unique mechanism distinct from other peroxide
compounds, as well as conventional chemotherapies. Current experimental
data suggests RA1 is inducing a form of ferroptotic cell death.

