Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Emerging technology of Yb2Ti2O7
electrolyte-insulator-semiconductor biosensors for rapid screening of
targeted mutation


Genetic mutations play an important role in the development of most
cancers; thus, they have become key targets of investigation in the
discovery of new biomarkers to help with cancer diagnostic and prognostic
prediction, as well as monitor the development of drug resistance in
cancer cells. We have now developed a technique by designing several
probes that contain with different types of mutations, including
substitution, insertion and deletion mutations for 6 or 12 bps (Table 1).
Following this, we then mapped a colorectal cancer wild type KRAS cell
line Caco2. To screen for different types of gene alterations,an
electrolyte-insulator-semiconductor (EIS) device, incorporating a high-
Yb2Ti2O7 sensing membrane deposited on Si substrates through
co-sputtering to screen the genetic mutations, was made. X-ray
diffraction and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy were used to explore the
structural features of these films annealed at various temperatures. The
Yb2Ti2O7 EIS device, which annealed at 900 C, exhibited a higher
sensitivity of 59.4 mV/pH (in the solutions from pH = 2 to pH = 12), a
lower hysteresis voltage of 1.6 mV (in the pH = 747107), and a smaller
drift rate of 0.16 mV/h (in the pH = 7 buffer solution) than those of the
other annealing temperatures. We successfully demonstrated that
high-Yb2Ti2O7 EIS devices with DNA-immobilized alginate films were able
to screen all the designed mutation probes in Caco2 cells, and there was
clear distinction from wild type based lines. In addition, even the
substitution mutations were presented high resolution. Current
measurement system provides a simple and inexpensive method for rapid and
accurate detection of genetic changes in target genes; therefore it
provided the high potential to serve as a diagnosis tool in clinical
practice in the future.Design oligonucleotide probes.

