Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stool proteomics reveals novel candidate biomarkers for colorectal
cancer screening


Introduction and objectives: Early detection of colorectal cancer (CRC)
and its precursor lesions is an effective approach to reduce CRC
mortality rates. The fecal immunochemical test (FIT) is a non-invasive
CRC screening test that detects small traces of the blood protein
hemoglobin. Although beneficial in its current form, the FIT test
characteristics leave room for improvement. The aim of the present study
was to identify and validate novel protein biomarkers in stool that
complement or outperform the current hemoglobin-based test, to improve
its diagnostic accuracy.Methods: Proteins isolated from stool from 10
subjects without any signs of colorectal neoplasia (controls) at
colonoscopy and from 12 CRC patients were analyzed by GeLC-MS/MS
(discovery set). Data were analyzed by comparing protein abundancies,
measured as spectral counts. Analysis of differential proteins was
performed using the beta-binomial test. Findings were validated by mass
spectrometry (Q-Exactive) in an independent series of 292 stool samples
obtained from control subjects (n = 109) and subjects with adenomas (n =
55), advanced adenomas (n = 53), or CRCs (n = 75).Results and Discussion:
In total 830 human proteins were identified in the discovery set, of
which 134 were significantly enriched in CRC. These included 78 proteins
that were significantly more enriched in FIT-negative CRC stool samples
compared to controls. Preliminary analysis of the validation set
indicates that more than half of these markers are significantly more
abundant in CRC samples compared to controls.Conclusion: Proteome
profiling of stool samples revealed novel candidate biomarkers to improve
current CRC screening tests. More data analysis is currently ongoing to
select most promising protein biomarkers for clinical assay development.

