Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variations in CDKN1A and RHPN2 associated with prognosis
for patients with colorectal cancer


Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have already identified at least
22 common susceptibility loci associated with an increased risk of
colorectal cancer (CRC). This study examined the relationship between
these single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and the clinical outcomes of
patients with colorectal cancer. Seven hundred seventy-six patients with
surgically resected colorectal adenocarcinoma were enrolled in the
present study. Twenty-two of the GWAS-identified SNPs were genotyped
using a Sequenom MassARRAY. Among the 22 SNPs, two (rs1321311G>T in
CDKN1A and rs10411210C>T in RHPN2) were significantly associated with the
survival outcomes of CRC in a multivariate survival analysis. In a
recessive model, the rs1321311 TT genotype (vs. GG + GT) and rs10411210
TT genotype (vs. CC + CT) were associated with a worse prognosis for
disease-free survival (adjusted HR = 1.90; 95% confidence interval =
1.00-3.60; P = 0.050, adjusted HR = 1.94; 95% confidence interval =
1.05-3.57; P = 0.034, respectively) and overall survival (adjusted HR =
2.05; 95% confidence interval = 1.00-4.20; P = 0.049, adjusted HR = 2.06;
95% confidence interval = 1.05-4.05; P = 0.036, respectively). None of
the other SNPs was significantly associated with any clinicopathologic
features or survival. The present results suggest that the genetic
variants of the CDKN1A (rs1321311) and RHPN2 (rs10411210) genes can be
used as prognostic biomarkers for patients with surgically resected
colorectal cancer.

