Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a mass spectrometry based antibody-drug conjugate
biomarker panel


Background: Antibody-Drug Conjugates (ADCs) are poised to become an
extremely important class of therapeutics in oncology. By conjugating
cytotoxic payloads to antibodies that target proteins found primarily on
cancer cells, ADCs represent a novel mechanism for directing extremely
toxic small molecules specifically to tumor cells. Due to the unique
mechanism of ADCs, patient selection should involve screening not only
for the presence of the antibody target, but also screening for the
presence of any markers of resistance or response to the payload. Several
proteins, such as multi-drug effluxers and tubulin-beta 3, have been
implicated in resistance to small molecule cytotoxins and microtubule
inhibitor drugs. OncoPlex Diagnostics has built a multiplexed ADC
biomarker panel that simultaneously quantifies the levels of the antibody
target and putative resistance markers for several known payloads, such
as maytansinoids, auristatins and taxanes, as well as response markers
for the topoisomerase inhibitor payloads SN-38 and doxorubicin.Methods:
Liquid Tissue-Selected Reaction Monitoring (LT-SRM) is a multiplexed,
quantitative method that uses mass spectrometry to quantify proteins
based on a unique sequence of amino acids, and thus does not have the
same limitations as traditional antibody-based, semi-quantitative protein
detection methods, such as immunohistochemistry. We developed a LT-SRM
assay to quantify protein levels of EGFR, FRalpha, Her2, CD30 and
Mesothelin (antibody targets) and MCL1, MDR, MRP1, tubulin-beta3, Topo1
and Topo2a (payload response and resistance markers) simultaneously from
FFPE biopsies. Calibration curves for all the proteins in the ADC panel
are linear over 5-orders of magnitude, with limits of detection for each
analyte between 25 and 400 amol/ug of tissue.Results: Analysis of FFPE
tumor tissues show a broad range of expression for the ADC proteins, with
some tissues showing no detectable levels of some payload markers.
Clinical analysis of FRalpha showed a range of expression from
Background: Antibody-Drug Conjugates (ADCs) are poised to become an
extremely important class of therapeutics in oncology. By conjugating
cytotoxic payloads to antibodies that target proteins found primarily on
cancer cells, ADCs represent a novel mechanism for directing extremely
toxic small molecules specifically to tumor cells. Due to the unique
mechanism of ADCs, patient selection should involve screening not only
for the presence of the antibody target, but also screening for the
presence of any markers of resistance or response to the payload. Several
proteins, such as multi-drug effluxers and tubulin-beta 3, have been
implicated in resistance to small molecule cytotoxins and microtubule
inhibitor drugs. OncoPlex Diagnostics has built a multiplexed ADC
biomarker panel that simultaneously quantifies the levels of the antibody
target and putative resistance markers for several known payloads, such
as maytansinoids, auristatins and taxanes, as well as response markers
for the topoisomerase inhibitor payloads SN-38 and doxorubicin.Methods:
Liquid Tissue-Selected Reaction Monitoring (LT-SRM) is a multiplexed,
quantitative method that uses mass spectrometry to quantify proteins
based on a unique sequence of amino acids, and thus does not have the
same limitations as traditional antibody-based, semi-quantitative protein
detection methods, such as immunohistochemistry. We developed a LT-SRM
assay to quantify protein levels of EGFR, FRalpha, Her2, CD30 and
Mesothelin (antibody targets) and MCL1, MDR, MRP1, tubulin-beta3, Topo1
and Topo2a (payload response and resistance markers) simultaneously from
FFPE biopsies. Calibration curves for all the proteins in the ADC panel
are linear over 5-orders of magnitude, with limits of detection for each
analyte between 25 and 400 amol/ug of tissue.Results: Analysis of FFPE
tumor tissues show a broad range of expression for the ADC proteins, with
some tissues showing no detectable levels of some payload markers.
Clinical analysis of FRalpha showed a range of expression from <LOD to
13500 amol/ug. An examination of Her2 positive tissue showed a wide range
of Her2 expression (over 20-orders of magnitude), as well as a wide range
of expression for the payload markers. The differences seen in the
payload markers suggest differing responses to Her2-targeted ADCs,
independent of Her2 levels, and indicate that different patient
populations might respond better to different payloads, depending on
tumor biology.Conclusions: The OncoPlexDx ADC panel can determine of a
cutoff for expression levels of the antibody-target protein necessary for
ADC response as well as identify markers of payload response or
resistance to further understand how these markers affect therapeutic
efficacy. This panel can be used to predict which patients will derive
the most benefit from ADC therapy based on the specific biology of their
tumor.

