Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fucoidan from Turbinaria conoides attenuates pancreatic cancer
progession by regulating p53 - NFB crosstalk


Poor prognosis of pancreatic cancer (PC) has been attributed to its
resistance to apoptosis and propensity for early systemic dissemination.
Existing therapeutic strategies are often circumvented by the molecular
crosstalk between cell signaling pathways. The fact that p53 is mutated
in more than 50% of PC tissues and NFB is constitutively activated in
therapy resistant residual PC accounts for the evaded cell death and
dissemination. In this study, we examined the benefit of fucoidan from a
marine brown alga, Turbinaria conoides against PC progression. Five
fractions of fucoidan isolated and fractionated using ion exchange
chromatography were tested for their potential in this setting using two
(MiaPaCa-2, Panc-1) genetically diverse human PC cell-lines. All
fractions investigated exerted significant dose dependent and time
dependent regulation of cell survival. Coherently, fucoidans induced
apoptosis and activated caspase -3, -8 and -9 and cleaved PARP.
Pathway-specific transcriptional analysis (QPCR profiling) recognized
inhibition of 57 and 38 NFB pathway molecules with fucoidan-F5 in
MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells, respectively. In addition, fucoidan-F5 was
also found to inhibit both the constitutive and TNF mediated NFB
DNA-binding activity (EMSA) in PC cells. Upregulation of cytoplasmic IB
levels and significant reduction of NFB dependent luciferase activity
further substantiate inhibitory potential of seaweed fucoidans on NF-B.
Moreover, fucoidan(s) treatment increases cellular p53 in PC cells.
Together, the results suggests that fucoidan regulates PC progression and
further imply that fucoidans may selectively target p53-NFB crosstalk and
dictate apoptosis in PC cells.

