Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 1,25D3 inhibits migration and invasion through miR-101-3p in human
bladder cancer cells


Bladder cancer is the fourth most common cancer diagnosed and eighth
leading cause of cancer death in men. Metastasis is the primary reason
for mortality. The 5-year survival rates for localized and metastatic
bladder cancers are 94% and 6%, respectively. Therefore, more effective
strategies to prevent and inhibit bladder cancer invasion and metastasis
are needed to prolong survival. Epidemiological and experimental studies
support a role for 1,25(OH) 2D3 (1,25D3) in cancer prevention and
treatment. More recently, 1,25D3 has also been reported to inhibit tumor
cell invasion and metastasis in several model systems. To study the
anti-tumor effect of 1,25D3 in bladder cancer, we selected four human
bladder cell lines including T24, 253J, 253J-BV and TCC-SUP cells.
253J-BV is a metastatic line generated from 253J cells through a series
of orthotopic inoculation. Vitamin D receptor was expressed and induced
by 1,25D3 in all four cell lines. However, treatment with 1,25D3 did not
significantly affect the proliferation of the bladder cancer cell lines.
To investigate the impact of 1,25D3 on bladder cancer cell migration and
invasion, the cells were treated with control EtOH or 1,25D3 in the wound
healing assay or chamber-based migration or invasion assays. 1,25D3
suppressed migration and invasion of 253J-BV and TCC-SUP cells but
neither 253J nor T24 cells. MiRNAs play critical regulatory roles in
cancer cell migration and invasion. We selected 253J and 253J-BV cells
for further investigation of the role of miRNAs in 1,25D3 regulation of
migration and invasion. Our previous PCR panel studies showed that 1,25D3
differentially regulated miRNA expression profiles in 253J and 253J-BV
cells. From the markedly regulated miRNAs, we chose miR-101-3p and
miR-126-3p to examine their potential contribution to the inhibition of
migration and invasion by 1,25D3. 1,25D3 induced the expression of
miR-101-3p and reduced miR-126-3p expression in 253J-BV cells but not
253J cells. To investigate the role of the two miRNAs, we employed
pre-miR and miRNA inhibitors. Transfection with miR-101-3p inhibitor
vector suppressed migration and invasion in 253J-BV cells. In addition,
miR-101-3p inhibitor rescued 1,25D3-induced inhibition of migration and
invasion in 253J-BV cells. On the other hand, pre-miR-101-3p transfection
followed by 1,25D3 treatment resulted in further reduction of migration
and invasion in 253J-BV cells. However, transfection with miR-126-3p
inhibitor or pre-miR-126-3p did not alter 1,25D3-inhibition of migration
and invasion in 253J-BV cells. These results indicate that 1,25D3
suppresses migration and invasion through the induction of miR-101-3p in
human bladder cancer 253J-BV cells.

