Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of the long non-coding RNA PVT1 and its role in
cervical carcinogenesis


Although it is becoming increasingly clear that long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNAs) are intricately involved in numerous cancer types, the
mechanisms by which they influence carcinogenesis remain poorly
understood. The plasmacytoma variant translocation 1 gene (PVT1) is a
lncRNA that has been designated as an oncogene due to its contribution to
the phenotype of multiple cancers. Further, our lab has recently
demonstrated that human papillomavirus (HPV) integration, a hallmark of
invasive cervical cancer (ICC), into the PVT1 locus occurs in multiple
cervical tumors. The present study was designed to investigate the role
of PVT1 in cervical carcinogenesis. PVT1 expression was measured by
quantitative PCR (qPCR) in 41 ICC samples, 20 normal cervix samples, and
four cervical cell lines (SiHa, HeLa, DoTc2, and E6/E7-transformed
ectocervical epithelial cells). Further, we used siRNA-targeted knockdown
in conjunction with functional assays to examine PVT1's effects on
cervical cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion, apoptosis,
and cisplatin-resistance. Our results demonstrate that PVT1 expression is
significantly increased in ICC tissue versus normal cervix. PVT1
knockdown in cervical cancer cell lines resulted in significantly
decreased cell proliferation, migration and invasion. Further, apoptosis
and cisplatin cytotoxicity were significantly increased in PVT1
siRNA-transfected cells. Collectively, our data suggest that PVT1 may
play a crucial role in cervical carcinogenesis. Future work will focus on
determining the mechanism(s) by which this lncRNA exerts its multiple
effects on cancer-related processes.

