Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of increased O-GlcNAcylated p53 levels in MCF-7 cells
after O-GlcNAcase inhibitor treatment using antibodies specific for
Ser-149-O-GlcNAcylated p53 proteins


Protein O-GlcNAcylation (N-acetylglucosamine modification) plays a
critical role in cell-cycle regulation, apoptosis and signal
transduction. Most serine (Ser) and threonine (Thr) sites for
O-GlcNAcylation are on or near to phosphorylation sites, which creates a
system of mutual elimination. O-GlcNAcylation of p53, a tumor suppressor
protein, at Ser-149 prevents p53 degradation and stabilizes p53 proteins
expressed in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells whereas phosphorylation of
the p53 at Thr-155 induces ubiquitin-dependent degradation, which
decreases p53 levels. Accumulation of the p53 protein in cancer cells
induces arrest of cell growth and apoptosis in response to DNA damage.
Ser-149 site-specific anti-peptide antibodies have been produced using
KLH conjugated with p53 peptides with and without O-GlcNAcylation at
Ser-149 by immunization of rabbits for polyclonal and mice for monoclonal
antibodies. Whereas polyclonal antibodies and hybridoma media for
O-GlcNAcylated p53 cross-reacted with BSA conjugated with
Ser-149-O-GlcNAcylated p53 peptides in ELISA or Western blot analysis,
the antibodies did not cross-react with BSA conjugated with p53 peptides
without O-GlcNAcylation. Anti-peptide polyclonal antibodies produced for
the unmodified p53 peptides did not cross-react with BSA conjugated with
Ser-149 O-GlcNAcylated p53 peptides. Using the hybridoma media for
Ser-149-O-GlcNAcylated p53, Western blot analysis was carried out with
nuclear lysates and cytosol-containing supernatant obtained from MCF10A
(normal breast cancer cell line) and MCF-7 cells. It was found that, in
MCF-10A cells, Ser-149-O-GlcNAcylated p53 proteins (55 kDa) were
minimally expressed in the nuclear fraction but highly expressed in the
cytosolic fraction whereas, in MCF-7 cells, the level of cytosolic
Ser-149-O-GlcNAcylated p53 protein was low compared with the level in
MCF-10A cells. MCF-7 cells were treated for 24 hr with 1% DMSO or 2 mM
-N-acetylglucosaminidase (O-GlcNAcase) inhibitor, acetazolamide,
dissolved in DMSO and levels of Ser-149-O-GlcNAcylated p53 were
determined by Western blot analysis using antibodies for the
Ser-149-O-GlcNAcylated p53. Whereas the level of O-GlcNAcylated p53 did
not increase after 1% DMSO treatment, the level dramatically increased
after treatment of acetazolamide in 1% DMSO and induced cell death. Our
results showed that acetazolamide treatment increased
Ser-149-O-GlcNAcylated p53 level and induced cell death in MCF-7 cells,
which may decrease invasiveness of the breast cancer cells. Supported by
NCI SBIR Phases I and II Contracts No. N261201100073C and N261201300058C.

