Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of a murine iNKT cell-activating antibody and
IL-12 exhibits antitumor activity in a mouse melanoma model


Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are innate-like T cells with an
invariant iTCR with potent anti-tumor activity. Current anti-tumor
clinical trials using the iNKT cell ligand, a-galactosylceramide
(a-GalCer) have had limited success. One major limitation of
a-GalCer-based therapies is the bioavailability of lipid drugs and
current therapies require isolation and a-GalCer loading of dendritic
cells prior to administration (Richter et al Blood 121:423, 2013). We
have engineered a murine iNKT TCR-targeting monoclonal antibody (NKT14m)
that activates iNKT cells directly without dendritic cells or
glycolipids. We have evaluated the in vivo anti-tumor efficacy with the
established B16 mouse melanoma model. Based on preliminary results that
the potency of NKT14m is less than that of a-GalCer, we reasoned that the
addition of IL-12 stimulation would be beneficial for iNKT cell
activation (Yue et al PNAS 102:11811, 2005). Currently, the toxicity of
IL-12 has restricted its use in clinical trials. We evaluated a non-toxic
dose of IL-12 alone and in combination with NKT14m. C57BL/6 mice were
injected with 400K B16F10 melanoma cells on Day 0. On Day 2 they were
divided into untreated, IL-12 treated (0.1 ug/mouse/day for 12 days),
NKT14m treated (100 ug/mouse once on Day 2) and the combination of
NKT14m+IL-12 using the same dose regimens. On Day 14 mice were sacrificed
and lung tumors counted. We detected a synergistic effect in the
combination of NKT14m+IL-12 (Table 1). These findings represent a new
paradigm of iNKT cell activation for their anti-tumor function.Table 1 -
Lung Tumors in Treatment Groups

