Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved clinical response in patients with advanced melanoma
treated with nivolumab combined with ipilimumab compared to ipilimumab
alone


Background: Blockade of the immune checkpoints PD-1 and CTLA-4 each
results in improved overall survival in patients (pts) with metastatic
melanoma using monotherapy. In a phase 1 dose-escalation study, dual
inhibition of these pathways by nivolumab (NIVO) and ipilimumab (IPI)
demonstrated encouraging antitumor activity.Methods: Treatment-nave pts
with advanced melanoma were randomized (double-blind) 2:1 to IPI 3 mg/kg
combined with either NIVO 1 mg/kg (NIVO+IPI combination group) or placebo
(PBO; IPI alone group) every 3 weeks (Q3W) for 4 doses, followed by NIVO
3 mg/kg or PBO, respectively, Q2W until disease progression or
unacceptable toxicity. Primary endpoint was investigator-assessed
objective response rate (ORR) in BRAF wild-type (WT) pts. Secondary
endpoints included progression-free survival (PFS), ORR in BRAF V600
mutation-positive (MT) pts, and safety.Results: In BRAF WT pts, ORR was
60% (43/72) in the NIVO+IPI group vs 11% (4/37) in the IPI group
(PBackground: Blockade of the immune checkpoints PD-1 and CTLA-4 each
results in improved overall survival in patients (pts) with metastatic
melanoma using monotherapy. In a phase 1 dose-escalation study, dual
inhibition of these pathways by nivolumab (NIVO) and ipilimumab (IPI)
demonstrated encouraging antitumor activity.Methods: Treatment-nave pts
with advanced melanoma were randomized (double-blind) 2:1 to IPI 3 mg/kg
combined with either NIVO 1 mg/kg (NIVO+IPI combination group) or placebo
(PBO; IPI alone group) every 3 weeks (Q3W) for 4 doses, followed by NIVO
3 mg/kg or PBO, respectively, Q2W until disease progression or
unacceptable toxicity. Primary endpoint was investigator-assessed
objective response rate (ORR) in BRAF wild-type (WT) pts. Secondary
endpoints included progression-free survival (PFS), ORR in BRAF V600
mutation-positive (MT) pts, and safety.Results: In BRAF WT pts, ORR was
60% (43/72) in the NIVO+IPI group vs 11% (4/37) in the IPI group
(P<0.0001); complete response reported in 12 (17%) and 0 pts,
respectively. Median change in target lesions was 57% reduction for
NIVO+IPI vs 4% increase for IPI alone. Median duration of response was
not reached in either group. In BRAF WT pts, median PFS was 8.9 months
for NIVO+IPI; 4.7 months for IPI (HR 0.40, 95% CI 0.22-0.71; P = 0.0012).
Similar results for ORR and PFS favoring the combination were observed in
BRAF MT pts (Table). A higher rate of drug-related grade 3-4 adverse
events was observed in the NIVO+IPI group compared to IPI (Table),
leading to more frequent discontinuation. Pts who discontinued NIVO+IPI
due to study drug toxicity had a 67% response rate; most continue to
respond. Immune-mediated AEs were manageable by standard treatment
interventions, and the majority resolved with immune-modulating
medication.Conclusion: NIVO+IPI significantly improved ORR and PFS
compared to IPI alone in treatment-nave pts with advanced melanoma, and
had a manageable safety profile.aPBackground: Blockade of the immune
checkpoints PD-1 and CTLA-4 each results in improved overall survival in
patients (pts) with metastatic melanoma using monotherapy. In a phase 1
dose-escalation study, dual inhibition of these pathways by nivolumab
(NIVO) and ipilimumab (IPI) demonstrated encouraging antitumor
activity.Methods: Treatment-nave pts with advanced melanoma were
randomized (double-blind) 2:1 to IPI 3 mg/kg combined with either NIVO 1
mg/kg (NIVO+IPI combination group) or placebo (PBO; IPI alone group)
every 3 weeks (Q3W) for 4 doses, followed by NIVO 3 mg/kg or PBO,
respectively, Q2W until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity.
Primary endpoint was investigator-assessed objective response rate (ORR)
in BRAF wild-type (WT) pts. Secondary endpoints included progression-free
survival (PFS), ORR in BRAF V600 mutation-positive (MT) pts, and
safety.Results: In BRAF WT pts, ORR was 60% (43/72) in the NIVO+IPI group
vs 11% (4/37) in the IPI group (P<0.0001); complete response reported in
12 (17%) and 0 pts, respectively. Median change in target lesions was 57%
reduction for NIVO+IPI vs 4% increase for IPI alone. Median duration of
response was not reached in either group. In BRAF WT pts, median PFS was
8.9 months for NIVO+IPI; 4.7 months for IPI (HR 0.40, 95% CI 0.22-0.71; P
= 0.0012). Similar results for ORR and PFS favoring the combination were
observed in BRAF MT pts (Table). A higher rate of drug-related grade 3-4
adverse events was observed in the NIVO+IPI group compared to IPI
(Table), leading to more frequent discontinuation. Pts who discontinued
NIVO+IPI due to study drug toxicity had a 67% response rate; most
continue to respond. Immune-mediated AEs were manageable by standard
treatment interventions, and the majority resolved with immune-modulating
medication.Conclusion: NIVO+IPI significantly improved ORR and PFS
compared to IPI alone in treatment-nave pts with advanced melanoma, and
had a manageable safety profile.aP<0.0001; estimated odds ratio for
objective response 12.23 (95% CI, 3.69-51.40)bDue to the small sample
size in the BRAF MT subgroup, no P-value is provided NE = not estimable

