Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survivin is a novel target of the Hedgehog/GLI signaling pathway
in human tumor cell lines


Survivin, a pivotal antiapoptotic protein is expressed in tumors whereas
its expression in normal tissues is extremely low. It is believed that
transcription of the survivin gene is driven mainly by the transcription
factor Sp1. We have identified 11 potential consensus sites for GLI
trancription factors in the survivin promoter, albeit non of them has
been a full consensus. Interestingly, the distal part of the promoter
(-1765 to -941, ending at +39) containing 4 GLI sites showed about 2-fold
higher activity than the proximal promoter (-941 to +39). The survivin
promoter-reporter has been found to be upregulated mainly by plasmids
encoding GLI2 and deltaN-GLI2, a more active GLI2 truncated mutant. Its
activity was even higher than the Sp1 activity. The promoter-reporter
plasmid is also inhibited by the GLI1/2 inhibitor GANT61. Moreover, by
analyzing 40 human tumor cell lines of various origin, we have found that
the endogenous survivin protein level substantially decreases after the
incubation with GANT61 in most cell lines. Real-time PCR for the survivin
mRNA in GANT61-sensitive cell lines showed a decrease by up to about 50
per cent. These data suggest that survivin may be a novel important
target regulated by the Hedgehog/GLI signaling pathway, which has been
reported previously to be deregulated in the majority of tumor types. The
work was supported by the grant NT/14005 from IGA, Ministry of Health,
Czech Republic.

