Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing of PMEPA1, a NEDD4 E3 ubiquitin ligase binding protein,
stabilizes androgen receptor and confers resistance to AR inhibitors


INTRODUCTION: The androgen receptor (AR) dysfunctions contribute to
prostate cancer (CaP) development and progression. Earlier we defined the
regulation of AR protein levels by a negative feed-back loop between AR
and the androgen regulated PMEPA1, a NEDD4 E3 ubiquitin ligase binding
protein. Our data also revealed decreased or absent PMEPA1 transcripts in
65% prostate tumors. This study focuses on the relationship of PMEPA1
protein with AR and its transcriptional targets (PSA) in human CaP, as
well as the impact of PMEPA1 silencing on growth of PMEPA1-shRNA LNCaP
cells derived tumors in nave and castrated nude mice.METHODS: Ten weeks
old athymic Ncr-nu/nu mice were evaluated for the growth of tumor
xenografts derived from PMPEA1-shRNA LNCaP (N = 20) and control-shRNA
LNCaP cells (N = 20). Each mouse received 4106 cells by subcutaneous
injection to right flank side. The mice with tumors were castrated at 9th
week post-injection. The tumor sizes were monitored twice per week until
16th week post-injection. The xenograft tissues were assayed by
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for PMEPA1, AR and PSA protein levels.
The AR, PMEPA1 and PSA expressions in whole mount human prostate
specimens were evaluated by IHC staining and QRT-PCR.RESULTS: The PMEPA1
shRNA-LNCaP and control shRNA-LNCaP cells started to form subcutaneous
tumors at 4 weeks after injections. However, the growth rate of PMEPA1
shRNA-LNCaP derived tumors was significantly faster than control derived
tumors (PINTRODUCTION: The androgen receptor (AR) dysfunctions contribute
to prostate cancer (CaP) development and progression. Earlier we defined
the regulation of AR protein levels by a negative feed-back loop between
AR and the androgen regulated PMEPA1, a NEDD4 E3 ubiquitin ligase binding
protein. Our data also revealed decreased or absent PMEPA1 transcripts in
65% prostate tumors. This study focuses on the relationship of PMEPA1
protein with AR and its transcriptional targets (PSA) in human CaP, as
well as the impact of PMEPA1 silencing on growth of PMEPA1-shRNA LNCaP
cells derived tumors in nave and castrated nude mice.METHODS: Ten weeks
old athymic Ncr-nu/nu mice were evaluated for the growth of tumor
xenografts derived from PMPEA1-shRNA LNCaP (N = 20) and control-shRNA
LNCaP cells (N = 20). Each mouse received 4106 cells by subcutaneous
injection to right flank side. The mice with tumors were castrated at 9th
week post-injection. The tumor sizes were monitored twice per week until
16th week post-injection. The xenograft tissues were assayed by
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for PMEPA1, AR and PSA protein levels.
The AR, PMEPA1 and PSA expressions in whole mount human prostate
specimens were evaluated by IHC staining and QRT-PCR.RESULTS: The PMEPA1
shRNA-LNCaP and control shRNA-LNCaP cells started to form subcutaneous
tumors at 4 weeks after injections. However, the growth rate of PMEPA1
shRNA-LNCaP derived tumors was significantly faster than control derived
tumors (P<0.05). PMEPA1 shRNA-LNCaP tumors expressed higher levels of AR
and PSA proteins as assessed by IHC. At 7 weeks after castration the
tumor sizes increased by 69% in the control group in contrast to 304% in
the PMEPA1-shRNA harboring xenografts (PINTRODUCTION: The androgen
receptor (AR) dysfunctions contribute to prostate cancer (CaP)
development and progression. Earlier we defined the regulation of AR
protein levels by a negative feed-back loop between AR and the androgen
regulated PMEPA1, a NEDD4 E3 ubiquitin ligase binding protein. Our data
also revealed decreased or absent PMEPA1 transcripts in 65% prostate
tumors. This study focuses on the relationship of PMEPA1 protein with AR
and its transcriptional targets (PSA) in human CaP, as well as the impact
of PMEPA1 silencing on growth of PMEPA1-shRNA LNCaP cells derived tumors
in nave and castrated nude mice.METHODS: Ten weeks old athymic Ncr-nu/nu
mice were evaluated for the growth of tumor xenografts derived from
PMPEA1-shRNA LNCaP (N = 20) and control-shRNA LNCaP cells (N = 20). Each
mouse received 4106 cells by subcutaneous injection to right flank side.
The mice with tumors were castrated at 9th week post-injection. The tumor
sizes were monitored twice per week until 16th week post-injection. The
xenograft tissues were assayed by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for
PMEPA1, AR and PSA protein levels. The AR, PMEPA1 and PSA expressions in
whole mount human prostate specimens were evaluated by IHC staining and
QRT-PCR.RESULTS: The PMEPA1 shRNA-LNCaP and control shRNA-LNCaP cells
started to form subcutaneous tumors at 4 weeks after injections. However,
the growth rate of PMEPA1 shRNA-LNCaP derived tumors was significantly
faster than control derived tumors (P<0.05). PMEPA1 shRNA-LNCaP tumors
expressed higher levels of AR and PSA proteins as assessed by IHC. At 7
weeks after castration the tumor sizes increased by 69% in the control
group in contrast to 304% in the PMEPA1-shRNA harboring xenografts
(P<0.05). In human CaP, decreased PMEPA1 mRNA expression significantly
correlated with increased levels of AR transcription target PSA, as a
surrogate for elevated AR. Focally increased PSA and AR protein levels
were detected in a subset of low PMEPA1 expressing tumors.CONCLUSIONS:
PMEPA1 silencing in CaP cells leads to gain of AR, increased tumor growth
with potential to induce resistance to AR inhibition targeted therapy.
Decreased PMEPA1 in human CaP correlated with increased AR activity.
Thus, monitoring PMEPA1 expression in CaP cells offers new opportunities
in therapeutic stratification of CaP. Further, restoring PMEPA1 in CaP
cells may provide a new strategy for AR degradation focused therapy.

