Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secreted proteins from breast cancer cell lines as a source of
cancer biomarkers


Introduction:Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease whose molecular
diversity is not well reflected in clinical and microscopic markers used
for prognostic information and treatment decisions. Traditionally, most
biomarkers are based on tissue samples. To increase efficiency, precise
liquid biopsies are needed to detect breast cancer at an early stage
including its molecular phenotype, to monitor disease progression, and to
predict treatment response. Cell line secretomes are enriched with
proteins already linked to tumorigenesis, many of which will be present
in biological fluids.Methods:Here, we studied the secreted proteins in
conditioned media (CM) from two basal-like (HS-578, MB-231) and two
luminal-like breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, BT-474), using liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The resulting data were analyzed
using SearchGUI, PeptideShaker, Progenesis software and DAVID.Results:In
total, 954 proteins were identified, of which 93 significantly
differentially abundant (P-value 0.05 Mann-Whitney U, two or more
peptides quantified) in the CM between basal-like and luminal-like cell
lines. 76 proteins were more abundant in the CM from basal-like cell
lines, including several proteins related to angiogenesis and
extra-cellular matrix remodeling.Conclusion:This study shows the
potential for using the secretome of breast cancer cell lines combined
with mass-spectrometry for biomarker discovery.

