Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The risk prediction for esophageal cancer by drinking, smoking,
and the polymorphisms of ALDH2 and ADH1B


Background: The impact of drinking and smoking on the risk of esophageal
cancer has been established worldwide (IACR, 2012 updated). In our
previous study, we found that the polymorphisms ofalcohol dehydrogenases
1B (ADH1B - rs1229984) and aldehyde dehydrogenases 2 (ALDH2 - rs671) were
associated with esophageal cancer risk in a Japanese population (Matsuo
K, 2001 & Oze I, 2009). However, the extent to which these environmental
and genetic risk factors contribute as predictors of esophageal cancer
among Japanese is unknown. The objective of our study was to evaluate the
performance of a risk assessment model that incorporates both
environmental and genetic risk factors in a Japanese population.Methods:
We conducted a case-control study with 265 cases and age- and sex-
matched 530 controls within the framework of the Hospital-based
Epidemiological Research Program at Aichi Cancer Center (HERPACC). We fit
regression models with the risk factors. For discrimination assessment,
we compared the area under the curves (AUC) in the receiver - operating
curve (ROC) analysis of Environmental model (E-model), Genetic model
(G-model), and Inclusive model. In addition, we evaluated contribution to
risk prediction for each risk factor by calculating the integrated
discrimination improvement (IDI) index.Results: We created a risk
prediction model for esophageal cancer by polymorphisms of ADH1B and
ALDH2, drinking and smoking. The AUCs were 0.873 (0.847-0.898) for
E-model and 0.747 (0.711-0.782) for G-model. The Inclusive model
including all risk factors, with an AUC of 0.931 (0.912-0.949), showed
promise for stratifying people into different risk groups. We found that
each risk factor statistically significantly contributed to risk
prediction for esophageal cancer (pBackground: The impact of drinking and
smoking on the risk of esophageal cancer has been established worldwide
(IACR, 2012 updated). In our previous study, we found that the
polymorphisms ofalcohol dehydrogenases 1B (ADH1B - rs1229984) and
aldehyde dehydrogenases 2 (ALDH2 - rs671) were associated with esophageal
cancer risk in a Japanese population (Matsuo K, 2001 & Oze I, 2009).
However, the extent to which these environmental and genetic risk factors
contribute as predictors of esophageal cancer among Japanese is unknown.
The objective of our study was to evaluate the performance of a risk
assessment model that incorporates both environmental and genetic risk
factors in a Japanese population.Methods: We conducted a case-control
study with 265 cases and age- and sex- matched 530 controls within the
framework of the Hospital-based Epidemiological Research Program at Aichi
Cancer Center (HERPACC). We fit regression models with the risk factors.
For discrimination assessment, we compared the area under the curves
(AUC) in the receiver - operating curve (ROC) analysis of Environmental
model (E-model), Genetic model (G-model), and Inclusive model. In
addition, we evaluated contribution to risk prediction for each risk
factor by calculating the integrated discrimination improvement (IDI)
index.Results: We created a risk prediction model for esophageal cancer
by polymorphisms of ADH1B and ALDH2, drinking and smoking. The AUCs were
0.873 (0.847-0.898) for E-model and 0.747 (0.711-0.782) for G-model. The
Inclusive model including all risk factors, with an AUC of 0.931
(0.912-0.949), showed promise for stratifying people into different risk
groups. We found that each risk factor statistically significantly
contributed to risk prediction for esophageal cancer (p< 0.001, the IDI
indexes of 0.064 for rs1229984, 0.066 for rs671, 0.220 for drinking and
0.101 for smoking).Conclusion: The risk prediction model that includes
these environmental and genetic factors could be useful to classify
Japanese into relevant risk groups of esophageal cancer for personalized
prevention programs.

