Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An ARMS PCR assay for detection of PI3KCA mutations in FFPE tumor
samples


The activating mutations of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase subunit pl10a
(PIK3CA) occur in a variety of cancer types and serve as the predictive
markers for response to inhibitors targeting a number of receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and PI3K/AKT pathway. Therefore detection of
PI3KCA mutations will guide patient selection for effective personalized
cancer therapy. Here we reported a new method for the rapid and reliable
detection of PI3KCA mutations by using modified mutation-specific ARMS
primers.In this real-time PCR system, the mutant gene is selectively
amplified by the modified ARMS primers and the amplicon extending signals
are collected by the taqman-probe at the same time.The ARMS assay could
detect 5 mutations on PI3KCA gene with a sensitivity of 0.5% under the
background of a total of 10ng wild-type genomicDNA. By using this assay,
we analyzed the PI3KCA mutations in 113 Chinese breast cancer FFPE
samples in comparison with Sanger sequencing. Our results indicated that
the positive rates were 27.4%, while 24.8% when measured by Sanger
sequencing. The coincidence rates of the two methods were 89.3% for the
positive samples and 96.5% for the negative samples. The total
coincidence rate was 97.3%. In conclusion, our study provides a basis for
the detection of somatic mutations in PI3KCA in a routine clinical
setting. TheARMS PCR assay allows the detection of the PI3KCA mutations
in FFPE samples with better sensitivity and feasibility than the current
assays used in clinic.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

