Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitory effect of phytochemicals on oncostatin-M-induced tumor
invasion and migration in human esophageal carcinoma


An epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is one of important
phenomenon in tumor metastasis. Oncostatin-M (OSM) belonging to the IL-6
family is a cytokine that participates in invasion and migration of
various cancer cells. It is produced by macrophage and stimulates the
JAK/STAT signal transduction pathway. In this study, we examined the
effect of OSM on EMT of human esophageal carcinoma cells and found a way
to inhibit cell metastasis. We first observed morphological changes of
tumor cells from an epithelial-like phenotype to a more spindle-shaped,
mesenchymal phenotype by OSM. Consistent with these findings, OSM also
promoted cell motility using a wound scratch assay and matrigel invasion
assay. Moreover, we observed that intracellular stat3 phosphorylation was
promoted by the stimulation of OSM by Western blotting. To confirm the
contribution of p-stat3, we used a selective JAK2/STAT3 inhibitor
cucurbitacin I. As a result, cucurbitacin I strongly inhibited
OSM-induced tumor cell invasion and migration. Then, we used two dietary
phytochemical resveratrol (polyphenol in grapes) and sulforaphane
(isothiocyanate in broccolis), both were reported as candidates of stat3
inhibitor. By the addition of resveratrol or sulforaphane, we found that
these markedly inhibited OSM-induced stat3 phosphorylation, the
expression of EMT-related genes (snail, slug and vimentin) and tumor cell
migration. Overall, our findings provide new evidence that these
phytochemicals suppress OSM-induced tumor invasion and migration through
inhibiting stat3 phosphorylation and EMT pathway.

