Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic biomarkers for progression-free survival in
glioblastoma multiforme: quantitative imaging and gene expressions


Prognostic biomarkers at initial diagnosis of untreated Glioblastoma
Multiforme (GBM) are an important step towards development of predictive
biomarkers in this patient pool for personalized medicine. We hypothesize
that quantitative imaging biomarkers are independent to gene expression
biomarkers in progression-free-survival (PFS) prognosis and overall
survival (OS). It is known that patient with large strong enhancing tumor
have a shorter PFS and OS. Weak enhancing tumor, which is believed to be
more infiltrative in nature, has rarely been studied due to the
difficulties in identifying them visually.Method: We developed an
automated image analysis technique to quantify weak enhancing tumor,
strongly enhancing tumor, edema and necrosis from a single source site (n
= 25) of TCIA with gene expression from TCGA. We define tumor volume (in
cm3) of Zone1A as the enhancing tumor plus necrosis; Zone1B as necrosis
plus weak enhancing tumor; and Zone2 as total tumor load of necrosis,
strong enhancing and weak enhancing tumor. Cox proportional hazard model
was used to determine prognostic significance of imaging parameters to
PFS and OS. Level 1 gene expression data from Affymetrix platform were
processed in R. We filter the gene probe list to 7277 probes (31.9%)
based on biological variability and take the probes that are >2-fold
upregulated compared to normal control (n = 10) (t-test, pPrognostic
biomarkers at initial diagnosis of untreated Glioblastoma Multiforme
(GBM) are an important step towards development of predictive biomarkers
in this patient pool for personalized medicine. We hypothesize that
quantitative imaging biomarkers are independent to gene expression
biomarkers in progression-free-survival (PFS) prognosis and overall
survival (OS). It is known that patient with large strong enhancing tumor
have a shorter PFS and OS. Weak enhancing tumor, which is believed to be
more infiltrative in nature, has rarely been studied due to the
difficulties in identifying them visually.Method: We developed an
automated image analysis technique to quantify weak enhancing tumor,
strongly enhancing tumor, edema and necrosis from a single source site (n
= 25) of TCIA with gene expression from TCGA. We define tumor volume (in
cm3) of Zone1A as the enhancing tumor plus necrosis; Zone1B as necrosis
plus weak enhancing tumor; and Zone2 as total tumor load of necrosis,
strong enhancing and weak enhancing tumor. Cox proportional hazard model
was used to determine prognostic significance of imaging parameters to
PFS and OS. Level 1 gene expression data from Affymetrix platform were
processed in R. We filter the gene probe list to 7277 probes (31.9%)
based on biological variability and take the probes that are >2-fold
upregulated compared to normal control (n = 10) (t-test, p<0.05, multiple
comparison corrected), resulted to 167 probes. Gene probes prognostic to
PFS are selected based on unadjusted log-rank test (pPrognostic
biomarkers at initial diagnosis of untreated Glioblastoma Multiforme
(GBM) are an important step towards development of predictive biomarkers
in this patient pool for personalized medicine. We hypothesize that
quantitative imaging biomarkers are independent to gene expression
biomarkers in progression-free-survival (PFS) prognosis and overall
survival (OS). It is known that patient with large strong enhancing tumor
have a shorter PFS and OS. Weak enhancing tumor, which is believed to be
more infiltrative in nature, has rarely been studied due to the
difficulties in identifying them visually.Method: We developed an
automated image analysis technique to quantify weak enhancing tumor,
strongly enhancing tumor, edema and necrosis from a single source site (n
= 25) of TCIA with gene expression from TCGA. We define tumor volume (in
cm3) of Zone1A as the enhancing tumor plus necrosis; Zone1B as necrosis
plus weak enhancing tumor; and Zone2 as total tumor load of necrosis,
strong enhancing and weak enhancing tumor. Cox proportional hazard model
was used to determine prognostic significance of imaging parameters to
PFS and OS. Level 1 gene expression data from Affymetrix platform were
processed in R. We filter the gene probe list to 7277 probes (31.9%)
based on biological variability and take the probes that are >2-fold
upregulated compared to normal control (n = 10) (t-test, p<0.05, multiple
comparison corrected), resulted to 167 probes. Gene probes prognostic to
PFS are selected based on unadjusted log-rank test (p<0.05).Result: There
are 19 matched cases with imaging and gene expression with one living
patient. MGMT is methylated in 4 patients and unmethylated in 10
patients. All cases are non-G-CIMP and IDH1 WT or unknown. The age and
karnofsky score (kps) distribution are 5515 yo and 8511. Tumor size
measurements are strongly prognostic for PFS adjusted by age and kps:
Zone1A (HR = 1.04 [1.01, 1.07], p = 0.0137, log-rank p = 0.063), Zone1B
(HR = 1.08 [1.03, 1.13], p = 0.0014, log-rank p = 0.00020), Zone 2 (HR =
1.037 [1.012 1.063], p = 0.0034, log-rank p = 0.011). Only 18 gene probes
are prognostic to PFS, which are CASP4, CD44, COL5A1, COL6A2, HCP5,
IL10RB, IL15, LOXL2, LY75, PTX3, SERPINEH1, SLC16A3, STC1, TNC. These
genes are involved in ECM-receptor interaction, focal adhesion and
cytokine mediated inflammation pathway. After adjusting for age and kps,
only CD44, COL5A1, COL6A2, LOXL2, IL10RB, STC1 are significant based on
log-rank test while the HR of age and kps are not significant. Adjusting
for age, kps and Zone1B resulted to log-rank significance of CASP4,
LOXL2, TNC, IL10RB, IL15, PTX3, STC1, HCP5, SLC16A3, with HR significance
of Zone1B, gene, age and sometimes kps. The mean HR of Zone1B is
1.0850.013 and the maximum log-rank p = 0.0002567 for all these
genes.Conclusion: Total tumor load of necrosis and weak enhancing tumor
is a strong independent prognostic biomarker of PFS in addition to gene,
age and kps.

