Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase 8 impairs insulin sensitivity and activates
-catenin signaling in NAFLD-associated hepatocellular carcinoma


Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is characterized by hepatic fat
accumulation tightly associated with central obesity, insulin resistance
and other features of the metabolic syndrome that elevates the risk of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Emerging evidence suggests that
deregulated metabolic pathways can trigger epigenetic changes, thereby
modifying the expression of critical genes associated with carcinogenesis
(ref 1). However, the role of epigenetic regulation in NAFLD-associated
HCC remains elusive. Here we identified and characterized a novel
epigenetic regulator that contributes to insulin resistance and
tumorigenesis in NAFLD. Gene expression profiling revealed histone
deacetylase 8 (Hdac8) as the sole commonly up-regulated chromatin
regulator in both murine dietary and genetic obesity-promoted HCC models.
HDAC8 was up-regulated by the lipogenic transcription factor sterol
regulatory element-binding protein-1 (SREBP-1) via direct promoter
binding. In a murine dietary-induced NAFLD model and an insulin resistant
cell model, RNA interference and pharmacological inhibition by a
selective HDAC8 inhibitor, PCI-34051, significantly rescued insulin
sensitivity (pNon-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is characterized
by hepatic fat accumulation tightly associated with central obesity,
insulin resistance and other features of the metabolic syndrome that
elevates the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Emerging evidence
suggests that deregulated metabolic pathways can trigger epigenetic
changes, thereby modifying the expression of critical genes associated
with carcinogenesis (ref 1). However, the role of epigenetic regulation
in NAFLD-associated HCC remains elusive. Here we identified and
characterized a novel epigenetic regulator that contributes to insulin
resistance and tumorigenesis in NAFLD. Gene expression profiling revealed
histone deacetylase 8 (Hdac8) as the sole commonly up-regulated chromatin
regulator in both murine dietary and genetic obesity-promoted HCC models.
HDAC8 was up-regulated by the lipogenic transcription factor sterol
regulatory element-binding protein-1 (SREBP-1) via direct promoter
binding. In a murine dietary-induced NAFLD model and an insulin resistant
cell model, RNA interference and pharmacological inhibition by a
selective HDAC8 inhibitor, PCI-34051, significantly rescued insulin
sensitivity (p<0.05). Further functional characterization demonstrated
the oncogenic activities of HDAC8 via inhibition of apoptosis, G2/M-phase
arrest and stimulation of -catenin-dependent proliferation.
Mechanistically, HDAC8 was found to physically interact with the polycomb
protein EZH2 to cooperatively repress Wnt antagonists via histone H4
deacetylation and H3 lyine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). To further
validate the oncogenicity of HDAC8 in NAFLD-associated HCC, we infected
lentivirus expressing short-hairpin RNA against Hdac8 in the dietary
obesity-promoted HCC model. Notably, knockdown of HDAC8 restored the
metabolic profiles (blood glucose, cholesterol, triglyceride and
non-esterified fatty acid) to normal states and dramatically reduced
hepatic tumorigenicity (pNon-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is
characterized by hepatic fat accumulation tightly associated with central
obesity, insulin resistance and other features of the metabolic syndrome
that elevates the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Emerging
evidence suggests that deregulated metabolic pathways can trigger
epigenetic changes, thereby modifying the expression of critical genes
associated with carcinogenesis (ref 1). However, the role of epigenetic
regulation in NAFLD-associated HCC remains elusive. Here we identified
and characterized a novel epigenetic regulator that contributes to
insulin resistance and tumorigenesis in NAFLD. Gene expression profiling
revealed histone deacetylase 8 (Hdac8) as the sole commonly up-regulated
chromatin regulator in both murine dietary and genetic obesity-promoted
HCC models. HDAC8 was up-regulated by the lipogenic transcription factor
sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1 (SREBP-1) via direct promoter
binding. In a murine dietary-induced NAFLD model and an insulin resistant
cell model, RNA interference and pharmacological inhibition by a
selective HDAC8 inhibitor, PCI-34051, significantly rescued insulin
sensitivity (p<0.05). Further functional characterization demonstrated
the oncogenic activities of HDAC8 via inhibition of apoptosis, G2/M-phase
arrest and stimulation of -catenin-dependent proliferation.
Mechanistically, HDAC8 was found to physically interact with the polycomb
protein EZH2 to cooperatively repress Wnt antagonists via histone H4
deacetylation and H3 lyine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). To further
validate the oncogenicity of HDAC8 in NAFLD-associated HCC, we infected
lentivirus expressing short-hairpin RNA against Hdac8 in the dietary
obesity-promoted HCC model. Notably, knockdown of HDAC8 restored the
metabolic profiles (blood glucose, cholesterol, triglyceride and
non-esterified fatty acid) to normal states and dramatically reduced
hepatic tumorigenicity (p<0.01). In 24 pairs of human NAFLD-associated
HCC specimens, SREBP-1, HDAC8, EZH2, H3K27me3 and active -catenin were
found to be concordantly up-regulated in tumors compared to non-tumor
tissues. In conclusions, our findings demonstrated the functional
significance of HDAC8 in NAFLD-associated hepatocarcinogenesis and
unveiled the molecular basis for its regulation and oncogenicity,
providing a strong impetus for therapeutic intervention against the
rapidly rising incidence of HCC in obese and diabetic patients.Reference:
1. Tian Y et al., Semin Cancer Biol 2013

