Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NY-ESO T cells administered post ASCT for MM exhibit extended
functionality without exhaustion in a natural pattern of effector and
memory programming


Adoptive immunotherapy for cancer has been limited by a lack of antigen
specificity, low levels of target expression, and failure to break
self-tolerance. We hypothesized that infusion of genetically modified
tumor-specific T cells following autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT)
may overcome these barriers for multiple myeloma (MM). To test this, we
conducted a phase I/II clinical trial (NCT01352286) in which T cells
engineered with an HLA-A*0201 restricted, affinity-enhanced TCR
recognizing NY-ESO-1 / LAGE-1 peptides (NY-ESOc259-T), were infused in
the setting of profound lymphodepletion that accompanies high-dose
chemotherapy given with ASCT.HLA-A*0201 MM patients eligible for ASCT,
with antigen positive tumor were enrolled. NY-ESOc259-T was manufactured
in a 10 day process using anti-CD3/CD28 microbeads and lentiviral vector,
and was administered two days following ASCT. IMWG criteria were used to
assess response at day 100 with the addition of a near complete response
category (nCR) due to the common occurrence of oligoclonal banding
observed following rapid post-ASCT immune reconstitution. Blood and
marrow samples were taken at multiple timepoints for serum cytokine
analysis, NY-ESOc259-T persistence and trafficking, multiparameter flow
analysis to examine the phenotype and function of NY-ESOc259-T, and tumor
biomarker analysis. 25 of 29 enrolled patients were infused. A mean of
2.8 109 engineered cells were administered (range 8.3 108-4.2 109), and
the average transduction efficiency was 33% (range 30%-45%). Patients
tended to have advanced disease (64% chromosomal abnormalities, and 24%
prior ASCT). At 3 months, 67% (16/24) and 58% (14/24) of patients were in
VGPR and nCR or better, respectively. Infusions were well-tolerated and
no cytokine release syndrome was reported. NY-ESOc259-T persisted at 6
months in all but one patient, and in a subset of patients at 2 years;
marrow infiltration was consistently observed from day 7 through day 180.
NY-ESOc259-T initially displayed a dominant activated effector phenotype
which converted towards a dominant effector memory phenotype by 1 year
post infusion, in a pattern that mirrored clinical responses. Persisting
cells demonstrated a polyfunctional response (IFN- and TNF-) with a
cytotoxic (CD107a and granzyme B) signature without overexpression of
exhaustion markers (PD-1, LAG-3, and TIM-3). Tumor biomarker analysis is
ongoing. MM relapse occurred in 13/25 patients.This data show that
NY-ESOc259-T cells exhibit robust trafficking and expansion, durable
persistence without exhaustion, and follow a natural immune expansion and
contraction pattern consistent with an antigen-driven mechanism of
action. Relapse correlated with a loss of persistence or tumor antigen
escape, suggesting that targeting multiple antigens and maintenance
infusions may increase durable remissions.

