Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-15 increases NK functions in the PCa-lymphocyte
microenvironment by a profound increase in shedding of MICA from PCa
cells - a novel paradigm


INTRODUCTIONThe immunosuppressive Prostate Cancer (PCa) microenvironment
has a major influence on the progression of the disease and is a key
challenge for immunotherapy considering that immune effector cells
activated by such modalities, will be rendered anergic or regulatory once
they enter this microenvironment. We have previously shown that IL-15 can
activate NK and NKT cells to mediate cytotoxicity against PCa cells in
lymphocyte-PCa cocultures and also that IL-15 can modulate NK receptors
to shift the balance between activation and inhibition of NK cells. From
initial data in PCa-lymphocyte cocultures, we also observed that IL-15
downregulated the inhibitory NK ligand HLA-BW4 on PCa cells, whereas the
ligands MICA/MICB were not significantly affected. Due to the critical
role of MICA and other activatory NK receptor ligands (aNKRL) such as
Nectin-2 and ULBP1 on NK cell function we have now studied effects of
IL-15 on the expression of aNKRLs MICA, Nectin-2 and ULBP1 both on the
cell surface of PCa cells and in the supernatants of PCa-lymphocyte
co-cultures.METHODSPC-3 and LNCaP PCa cell-lines were incubated with
non-adherent PBMCs at effector:target ratios of 8:1 and cytokines IL-2 or
IL-15. After 1 week, tumour cells were stained with antibodies to
Nectin-2, MICA, and ULBP1 ligands. Flow cytometric analysis followed
staining. MICA, Nectin-2 and ULBP1 ELISAs were performed with
supernatants from these co-cultures of PCa cells and lymphocytes (and
from PCa cells alone, treated with or without cytokines) to determine
whether there was any effect of IL-15 on shedding of these ligands from
the PCa cells.RESULTSWe now show that MICA, Nectin-2 and ULBP1 ligands
expressed on PC-3 cells were not significantly changed with IL-15
treatment in PCa-lymphocyte cocultures, however, on LNCaP cells, IL-15,
(but not IL-2) downregulated MICA, Nectin-2 and ULBP1 ligands by upto
90%* (* = pINTRODUCTIONThe immunosuppressive Prostate Cancer (PCa)
microenvironment has a major influence on the progression of the disease
and is a key challenge for immunotherapy considering that immune effector
cells activated by such modalities, will be rendered anergic or
regulatory once they enter this microenvironment. We have previously
shown that IL-15 can activate NK and NKT cells to mediate cytotoxicity
against PCa cells in lymphocyte-PCa cocultures and also that IL-15 can
modulate NK receptors to shift the balance between activation and
inhibition of NK cells. From initial data in PCa-lymphocyte cocultures,
we also observed that IL-15 downregulated the inhibitory NK ligand
HLA-BW4 on PCa cells, whereas the ligands MICA/MICB were not
significantly affected. Due to the critical role of MICA and other
activatory NK receptor ligands (aNKRL) such as Nectin-2 and ULBP1 on NK
cell function we have now studied effects of IL-15 on the expression of
aNKRLs MICA, Nectin-2 and ULBP1 both on the cell surface of PCa cells and
in the supernatants of PCa-lymphocyte co-cultures.METHODSPC-3 and LNCaP
PCa cell-lines were incubated with non-adherent PBMCs at effector:target
ratios of 8:1 and cytokines IL-2 or IL-15. After 1 week, tumour cells
were stained with antibodies to Nectin-2, MICA, and ULBP1 ligands. Flow
cytometric analysis followed staining. MICA, Nectin-2 and ULBP1 ELISAs
were performed with supernatants from these co-cultures of PCa cells and
lymphocytes (and from PCa cells alone, treated with or without cytokines)
to determine whether there was any effect of IL-15 on shedding of these
ligands from the PCa cells.RESULTSWe now show that MICA, Nectin-2 and
ULBP1 ligands expressed on PC-3 cells were not significantly changed with
IL-15 treatment in PCa-lymphocyte cocultures, however, on LNCaP cells,
IL-15, (but not IL-2) downregulated MICA, Nectin-2 and ULBP1 ligands by
upto 90%* (* = p<0.01,1-way-anova, post-hoc Newman-Keuls,n = 5).In ELISAs
measuring concentrations of MICA and Nectin-2 in the PCa-lymphocyte
co-culture sups, IL-15, but not IL-2, upregulated concentrations of MICA
by upto 145%* (* = pINTRODUCTIONThe immunosuppressive Prostate Cancer
(PCa) microenvironment has a major influence on the progression of the
disease and is a key challenge for immunotherapy considering that immune
effector cells activated by such modalities, will be rendered anergic or
regulatory once they enter this microenvironment. We have previously
shown that IL-15 can activate NK and NKT cells to mediate cytotoxicity
against PCa cells in lymphocyte-PCa cocultures and also that IL-15 can
modulate NK receptors to shift the balance between activation and
inhibition of NK cells. From initial data in PCa-lymphocyte cocultures,
we also observed that IL-15 downregulated the inhibitory NK ligand
HLA-BW4 on PCa cells, whereas the ligands MICA/MICB were not
significantly affected. Due to the critical role of MICA and other
activatory NK receptor ligands (aNKRL) such as Nectin-2 and ULBP1 on NK
cell function we have now studied effects of IL-15 on the expression of
aNKRLs MICA, Nectin-2 and ULBP1 both on the cell surface of PCa cells and
in the supernatants of PCa-lymphocyte co-cultures.METHODSPC-3 and LNCaP
PCa cell-lines were incubated with non-adherent PBMCs at effector:target
ratios of 8:1 and cytokines IL-2 or IL-15. After 1 week, tumour cells
were stained with antibodies to Nectin-2, MICA, and ULBP1 ligands. Flow
cytometric analysis followed staining. MICA, Nectin-2 and ULBP1 ELISAs
were performed with supernatants from these co-cultures of PCa cells and
lymphocytes (and from PCa cells alone, treated with or without cytokines)
to determine whether there was any effect of IL-15 on shedding of these
ligands from the PCa cells.RESULTSWe now show that MICA, Nectin-2 and
ULBP1 ligands expressed on PC-3 cells were not significantly changed with
IL-15 treatment in PCa-lymphocyte cocultures, however, on LNCaP cells,
IL-15, (but not IL-2) downregulated MICA, Nectin-2 and ULBP1 ligands by
upto 90%* (* = p<0.01,1-way-anova, post-hoc Newman-Keuls,n = 5).In ELISAs
measuring concentrations of MICA and Nectin-2 in the PCa-lymphocyte
co-culture sups, IL-15, but not IL-2, upregulated concentrations of MICA
by upto 145%* (* = p<0.01, 1-way-anova, post-hoc Newman-Keuls,n = 5), but
also directly increased shed MICA in LNCaP without the presence of
lymphocytes. Concentrations of Nectin-2 in the sups were however, not
affected by IL-15 or IL-2. Shed ULBP1 is being currently
investigated.CONCLUSIONSIn contrast to previous findings with IL-15 where
aNKRLs (e.g. MICA, ULBP1) on certain cell types are upregulated, we see a
downregulation of MICA, ULBP1 and Nectin-2 ligand expression on LNCaP
cells with a concomitant increase in shed MICA. Although the current
paradigm has been that shed MICA can inhibit NK cell function, other
groups are now showing that the shed ligand may actually activate NKG2D
on NK cells and our findings that IL-15 dramatically increases NK cell
functions against PCa cells may confirm this alternative paradigm.

