Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ESR1 mutations evolve during the treatment of metastatic breast
cancer, and detection in ctDNA predicts sensitivity to subsequent hormone
therapy


Purpose: Mutations in the estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) have recently
been described as a major mechanism of resistance to aromatase inhibitor
(AI) therapy. We utilised digital PCR circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA)
assays to investigate the clinical significance and origin of ESR1
mutations in advanced breast cancer (BC).Methods: Multiplex Digital PCR
assays were optimised for hotspot mutations in the ESR1 ligand binding
domain (LBD), and plasma samples assayed from a cohort of 171 women with
advanced BC. All plasma samples were taken off treatment, at disease
progression. A separate cohort of recurrent tumour biopsies from ER
positive BC patients pre-treated with AI was analysed for
validation.Results: ESR1 mutations were detected in the plasma of 14%
(18/128) women with advanced ER positive and in 0% (0/43, p = 0.0074)
women with advanced ER negative BC. ESR1 ctDNA analysis had 97% agreement
(p = 0.0009) with contemporaneous recurrent tissue biopsies, and there
was 100% agreement (pPurpose: Mutations in the estrogen receptor gene
(ESR1) have recently been described as a major mechanism of resistance to
aromatase inhibitor (AI) therapy. We utilised digital PCR circulating
tumour DNA (ctDNA) assays to investigate the clinical significance and
origin of ESR1 mutations in advanced breast cancer (BC).Methods:
Multiplex Digital PCR assays were optimised for hotspot mutations in the
ESR1 ligand binding domain (LBD), and plasma samples assayed from a
cohort of 171 women with advanced BC. All plasma samples were taken off
treatment, at disease progression. A separate cohort of recurrent tumour
biopsies from ER positive BC patients pre-treated with AI was analysed
for validation.Results: ESR1 mutations were detected in the plasma of 14%
(18/128) women with advanced ER positive and in 0% (0/43, p = 0.0074)
women with advanced ER negative BC. ESR1 ctDNA analysis had 97% agreement
(p = 0.0009) with contemporaneous recurrent tissue biopsies, and there
was 100% agreement (p<0.0001) between technical repeat plasma samples.
ESR1 mutations were shown to be polyclonal in 21% of ESR1 mutant
patients, and apparently monoclonal in the remaining 79% patients.
Patients with ESR1 mutations had a substantially shorter progression-free
survival on subsequent AI-based therapy, both for AI given after disease
progression (p = 0.008; HR 3.711, 95%CI 1.995-76.94) and including AI
maintenance therapy (p = 0.0041; HR 3.068, 95%CI 1.867-23.08). The
prevalence of ESR1 mutations differed markedly between cancers exposed to
AI during the adjuvant and metastatic settings (5.8% vs 36.4%
respectively, p = 0.0002). In an independent cohort of patients with
recurrent breast cancer, ESR1 mutations were identified in 0% (0/32)
tumour biopsies taken after progression on adjuvant AI. In patients with
serial samples taken during metastatic treatment, ESR1 mutations were
shown to be selected through AI therapy, supporting our observation that
ESR1 mutations are acquired during the metastatic treatment of
BC.Conclusions: ESR1 mutations can be robustly identified with ctDNA
analysis, and predict for resistance to subsequent aromatase inhibitor
therapy. ESR1 mutations are rarely acquired during adjuvant AI therapy,
but are commonly selected by therapy for metastatic disease, providing
evidence that the mechanisms of resistance to targeted therapy may be
substantially different between the treatment of micro-metastatic and
overt metastatic cancer.

