Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA 200c regulates cytochrome P450 1B1-mediated docetaxel
resistance in renal cell cancers


Cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) is up-regulated in many types of cancer. It
has been suggested that CYP1B1 may be a general tumor biomarker and have
an important function in cancers. Despite its high protein expression and
enzymatic activity in renal cell cancer (RCC), functional significance of
CYP1B1 has not been elucidated. Here we explored the functional role and
regulatory mechanism of CYP1B1 in RCC. Reduction of CYP1B1 levels fail to
prevent in vitro tumorigenicity such as proliferation, apoptosis, and
cell cycle progression of RCC cells. Moreover, the expression levels are
not associated with tumor type, stage, Fuhrman grade and 5-year survival
probability after surgery. Instead, alteration of CYP1B1 expression
regulates the chemosensitivity of RCC cells to docetaxel suggesting its
critical contribution to the RCC chemoresistance. Additionally, miR-200c,
which is significantly down-regulated in RCC tissues and cell lines
regulates CYP1B1 mRNA, protein and enzyme activity. An inverse
association was also observed between the expression levels of miR-200c
and CYP1B1 protein in RCC tissues. Thus, high expression of CYP1B1 could
be a result of decreased miR-200c expression in RCC. Finally, alteration
of miR-200c levels affects the chemosensitivity of RCC cells. Restoration
of docetaxel resistance by exogenous expression of CYP1B1 in
miR-200c-over-expressing cells indicates that CYP1B1 is a functional
target of miR-200c. These results suggest that CYP1B1 up-regulation
mediated by low miR-200c is one of the mechanisms underlying resistance
of RCC cells to docetaxel. Therefore, expression of CYP1B1 and miR-200c
in RCC may be useful as a prediction for docetaxel response.

