Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DCLK1 labeling a unique pancreatic cellular lineage contributes to
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm development


BACKGROUND & AIMS: Recently DCLK1 has been controversial as a biomarker
of progenitor cells in both intestinal tract and pancreas. Pancreatic
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), in contrast to pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN), has been relatively less investigated.
Here, we explored whether DCLK1-expressing cells were involved in the
genesis of pancreatic IPMNs using mouse models. METHODS: We compared the
incidence of DCLK1-positive cells in pancreatic tissue samples derived
from mouse models for IPMNs, PanINs, acinar to ductal metaplasia (ADM),
and human IPMN samples by immunohistochemistry. And how the DCLK1+ cells
engage ADM and IPMNs and its origin were investigated by in vitro culture
and in vivo lineage tracing. RESULTS: The DCLK1+ cells were identified
exclusively in the pancreatic tissues with activated oncogene compared to
wild-type. Mouse lineage tracing experiments showed that DCLK1+ cells
might originate from a cell lineage distinct from pancreatic PDX1 (+)
progenitors. The pancreatic DCLK1+ cells shared the features of tuft
cells but absence of IPMN tumor biomarkers. DCLK1+ cells presented in the
acinar clusters prior to formation of metaplastic ductal cells, and
enriched in the IPMN niches. Oncogenic signaling pathways such as SHH and
DLL4 were activated or upregulated in the tumor cells but not the DCLK1+
cells of IPMNs. DCLK1 was also expressed in a subpopulation of tumor
cells in 20% of human IPMN patients. CONCLUSIONS: DCLK1 labels a unique
pancreatic cellular lineage in mouse. The clustering of DCLK1+ cells is
an early event in oncogene-induced tumorigenesis. Pancreatic DCLK1+ cells
may contribute to the initiation of ADM and its progression to IPMNs.Key
words: Pancreatic IPMN; ADM; DCLK1; SOX9.

