Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-induced transition from collective to amoeboid single cell
dissemination in epithelial cancer cells


Tumor hypoxia, by elevating hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), is an
established inducer of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
subsequent cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Using epithelial
carcinoma spheroids in 3D fibrillar collagen, we characterized the
invasion patterns as well as cellular and molecular mechanisms of
hypoxia-induced cancer cell migration modes. While epithelial cancer
cells show collective invasion under normoxic conditions, hypoxia or
pharmacological stabilization of HIF-1 using the prolyl hydroxylase
inhibitor dimethyloxalylglycine (DMOG) induced EMT-like detachment and
migration of single cells. Besides mesenchymal movement, most epithelial
cells converted to amoeboid migration with characteristic actin-rich
filopodal or distinctive blebby protrusions towards the direction of
migration. Whereas mesenchymal migrating cells moved with low velocities
in a directionally persistent manner, amoeboid migrating cells generated
a broad spectrum of low to high velocities, but with less persistent
invasion paths. Sub-cellular molecular analysis showed typical amoeboid
features particularly in hypoxic blebby single cell migration, including
low to lacking collagen degradation along the migration path and
insensitivity to broad-spectrum matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-inhibitor
GM6001, non-focalized cortical actin cytoskeleton within blebs that
interacted with collagen structures and low-beta1 integrin expression
with lack of integrin focalization. Thus, tumor hypoxia induces a
diversity of single-cancer cell invasion modes, including blebby amoeboid
migration, thereby enhancing predominantly MMP- and integrin-independent
amoeboid dissemination in parallel to EMT induction.

