Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI 3-Kinase inhibitors enhance the synthetic lethality of Parp
inhibitors


Introduction: Clinical trials have shown promising responses of
BRCA-linked breast and ovarian cancers to PARP inhibitor therapy, but
remissions are often short-lived and incomplete. Frequent loss of INPP4B
and PTEN leads to activation in the PI3K pathway in TNBC, making the PI3K
pathway an attractive treatment target. Here we present mechanistic data
that explain how PI3K- and PARP-inhibition enhance each other.Methods: We
examined the effects of PI3K-inhibitors BKM120 or BYL719 and
PARP-inhibitor Olaparib on the metabolism of HCC1937 cells (BRCA1 5382C
mutation and homozygous deletion of PTEN and p53) measuring lactic acid
production, via seahorse analysis, carbon metabolism using targeted Mass
Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and DNA synthesis. PI3K- but not Akt- or
SGK-inhibition induced a DNA damage response in this BRCA1 mutant cell
line as well as in a mouse model of BRCA1-related breast cancer (K14-Cre
BRCA1f/f p53f/f) mouse model.Summary: Metabolic profiling showed that
PI3K-inhibition decreased flux through glycolysis and specifically
through the non-oxidative pentose-phosphate pathway, the main source of
ribose-5-phosphate required for the de novo synthesis of nucleotides in
BRCA1-mutant breast cancer cells. Nucleotide shortage led to replication
stress with the appearance of H2AX, increased poly-ADP-ribosylation and
an acute drop in DNA synthesis in cell cultures as well as in vivo. PI3K
inhibition led to a reduced and error-prone S-phase due to a decrease in
nucleotide biosynthesis which could be rescued upon exogenous supply of
nucleosides. In a mouse model (K14-Cre BRCA1f/fp53f/f induced breast
cancers) we could confirm that both BKM120 and BYL719 enhanced the
efficacy of Parp-inhibitor Olaparib (median PFS for Olaparib 50 days, for
BKM120 4 days, for BYL719 6 days and for both combinations,
BKM120+Olaparib and BYL719+Olaparib > 120 days).Conclusion: Preceding
cell cycle arrest, PI3K-inhibition leads to a decrease in DNA synthesis
due to decreased Ribose-5-phosphate production required for nucleotide
synthesis. PI3K-inhibitors lower nucleotide pools, lead to impaired DNA
damage repair and S-phase progression and further augment the synthetic
lethality of Parp-inhibitors in BRCA1-related breast cancer.

