Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation sequencing performance for the detection of
mutations in plasma cell free DNA


The identification of mutations in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) can
serve as a biomarker for non-invasive diagnosis and real time therapeutic
monitoring. Although next generation sequencing (NGS) is a promising
technology, the intrinsic low abundance of ctDNA in the high background
of wild-type cell free DNA (cfDNA) makes the detection and quantification
of such mutations in plasma a challenging task. This study aims to
measure the performance of NGS analysis when applied to the
identification of somatic mutations in plasma samples.Plasma samples from
two healthy controls were used to isolate cfDNA. Constitutional genomic
DNA from these controls was previously genotyped using the Human
OmniExpress BeadChip. A custom multiplex PCR panel was designed to target
420 unique variants. To cover a broad range (0.5%-100%) of minor allele
frequencies (MAF), as expected for somatic mutations in the plasma of
cancer patients, the cfDNA samples from the two controls were mixed at
five different rations (7:25, 1:6, 1:8, 1:20 and 1:100). Because sequence
coverage is a key driver of accuracy, 5 different coverage profiles
(100x, 500x, 1000x, 2000x and 5000x) were established for each of the
cfDNA pools. On total 25 libraries were generated, pooled and sequenced
with the Ion PGM system. Ion Reporter software was used for data
analysis.The observed MAFs were compared with expected results for all
the variants of each cfDNA pool. Median exon sequencing coverage of 133x,
650x, 1312x, 2628x and 5466x was obtained for each of the 5 cfDNA pools,
with >99% of the amplicons covered. Overall base substitution and indel
detection performance was high (>95% of the variants were detected across
the different coverage levels). A direct correlation between expected and
observed MAFs for the known variants was observed. For variants present
at MAF 5%, a sensitivity of 91.4% and 100% was achieved at 100x and 500x
coverage levels, respectively. For variants with 5% MAF 10% at 100x of
coverage, the average quality score was The identification of mutations
in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) can serve as a biomarker for
non-invasive diagnosis and real time therapeutic monitoring. Although
next generation sequencing (NGS) is a promising technology, the intrinsic
low abundance of ctDNA in the high background of wild-type cell free DNA
(cfDNA) makes the detection and quantification of such mutations in
plasma a challenging task. This study aims to measure the performance of
NGS analysis when applied to the identification of somatic mutations in
plasma samples.Plasma samples from two healthy controls were used to
isolate cfDNA. Constitutional genomic DNA from these controls was
previously genotyped using the Human OmniExpress BeadChip. A custom
multiplex PCR panel was designed to target 420 unique variants. To cover
a broad range (0.5%-100%) of minor allele frequencies (MAF), as expected
for somatic mutations in the plasma of cancer patients, the cfDNA samples
from the two controls were mixed at five different rations (7:25, 1:6,
1:8, 1:20 and 1:100). Because sequence coverage is a key driver of
accuracy, 5 different coverage profiles (100x, 500x, 1000x, 2000x and
5000x) were established for each of the cfDNA pools. On total 25
libraries were generated, pooled and sequenced with the Ion PGM system.
Ion Reporter software was used for data analysis.The observed MAFs were
compared with expected results for all the variants of each cfDNA pool.
Median exon sequencing coverage of 133x, 650x, 1312x, 2628x and 5466x was
obtained for each of the 5 cfDNA pools, with >99% of the amplicons
covered. Overall base substitution and indel detection performance was
high (>95% of the variants were detected across the different coverage
levels). A direct correlation between expected and observed MAFs for the
known variants was observed. For variants present at MAF 5%, a
sensitivity of 91.4% and 100% was achieved at 100x and 500x coverage
levels, respectively. For variants with 5% MAF 10% at 100x of coverage,
the average quality score was <Q20. For variants occurring at low MAF
(The identification of mutations in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) can
serve as a biomarker for non-invasive diagnosis and real time therapeutic
monitoring. Although next generation sequencing (NGS) is a promising
technology, the intrinsic low abundance of ctDNA in the high background
of wild-type cell free DNA (cfDNA) makes the detection and quantification
of such mutations in plasma a challenging task. This study aims to
measure the performance of NGS analysis when applied to the
identification of somatic mutations in plasma samples.Plasma samples from
two healthy controls were used to isolate cfDNA. Constitutional genomic
DNA from these controls was previously genotyped using the Human
OmniExpress BeadChip. A custom multiplex PCR panel was designed to target
420 unique variants. To cover a broad range (0.5%-100%) of minor allele
frequencies (MAF), as expected for somatic mutations in the plasma of
cancer patients, the cfDNA samples from the two controls were mixed at
five different rations (7:25, 1:6, 1:8, 1:20 and 1:100). Because sequence
coverage is a key driver of accuracy, 5 different coverage profiles
(100x, 500x, 1000x, 2000x and 5000x) were established for each of the
cfDNA pools. On total 25 libraries were generated, pooled and sequenced
with the Ion PGM system. Ion Reporter software was used for data
analysis.The observed MAFs were compared with expected results for all
the variants of each cfDNA pool. Median exon sequencing coverage of 133x,
650x, 1312x, 2628x and 5466x was obtained for each of the 5 cfDNA pools,
with >99% of the amplicons covered. Overall base substitution and indel
detection performance was high (>95% of the variants were detected across
the different coverage levels). A direct correlation between expected and
observed MAFs for the known variants was observed. For variants present
at MAF 5%, a sensitivity of 91.4% and 100% was achieved at 100x and 500x
coverage levels, respectively. For variants with 5% MAF 10% at 100x of
coverage, the average quality score was <Q20. For variants occurring at
low MAF (<5%) the detection sensitivity and the quality score dropped as
coverage decreased. At 1000x coverage and above, more than 94% of the
variants present at MAF Q30. Overall, positive predictive value remained
high (>98%), with an average of 5 false-positive calls across the full
coverage range. To validate our approach we analyzed 10 pairs of primary
tumour/plasma samples. All cases carried known mutations of the EGFR gene
detected during routine analysis. We were able to detect the
corresponding mutation in the plasma samples in all cases. MAF in plasma
samples ranged from 3% to 85%.Here we demonstrate that NGS can be used to
detect mutations in cfDNA. Our approach with controlled data sets also
enabled us to define allele frequency, allele depth, and allele quality
score cutoffs for a reliable detection of low MAF variants in ctDNA.

