Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclic AMP signaling in melanoma: Paradoxical downregulation of
pCREB upon activation of adenylate cyclase confers resistance to MAPK
inhibition


Melanoma, which arises from malignant transformation of melanocytes, has
proven to be difficult to treat due its intrinsic and acquired resistance
for chemotherapy. Although polymorphisms in the melanocortin receptor 1
(MC1R), which result in impairment of cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling, are
associated with increased risk for melanoma development, the role of cAMP
signaling in melanoma, specifically in drug resistance, is not fully
understood. Given the importance of cAMP signaling in melanocytes
proliferation and differentiation, we investigated the role of cAMP
signaling in melanoma cell proliferation, survival and drug resistance.
We found that upregulation of cAMP signaling, through activation of
adenylate cyclase with forskolin (FSK), has both positive and negative
effects on proliferation and survival of melanoma cells. The effect of
FSK on melanoma proliferation and survival was not dependent on oncogenic
(RAS vs. BRAF) mutation. Moreover, upregulation of cAMP conferred
resistance to Selumetinib (AZD6244)-mediated MAPK inhibition by restoring
the pERK levels. We also show that FSK-mediated resistance is
paradoxically related to a downregulation of phosphorylated cAMP
Responsive Element Binding Protein (pCREB), suggesting a CREB-independent
mechanism of FSK-induced MAPK reactivation in acquired drug resistance.

