Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDM2 antagonist-based therapeutic response is discriminated by a
4-gene signature in acute myeloid leukemia patients


The activity of p53, a key tumor suppressor is tightly controlled by
MDM2-mediated ubiquination and degradation. Nutlins, a class of
small-molecule MDM2 antagonists, have been characterized as drivers of
p53 re-activation. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is uniquely sensitive to
p53 re-activation as 90% of cases have wild-type TP53 and frequent MDM2
overexpression to overcome mechanisms of oncogene addiction. Personalized
theranostic strategies may distinguish patients likely to clinically
benefit from MDM2-antagonist therapy.Association between MDM2 antagonist
(RG7112) growth inhibition (IC50s) in 287 human cancer cell lines (Cell
Lines for Oncology/Chugai Accumulative Tumor Encyclopedia), and
pretreatment RNAseq profiling established a classifier comprising MDM2,
XPC, BBC3, and CDKN2A. This signature significantly associated with
cell-line efficacy to MDM2 antagonist (odds ratio = 2.53; PThe activity
of p53, a key tumor suppressor is tightly controlled by MDM2-mediated
ubiquination and degradation. Nutlins, a class of small-molecule MDM2
antagonists, have been characterized as drivers of p53 re-activation.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is uniquely sensitive to p53 re-activation
as 90% of cases have wild-type TP53 and frequent MDM2 overexpression to
overcome mechanisms of oncogene addiction. Personalized theranostic
strategies may distinguish patients likely to clinically benefit from
MDM2-antagonist therapy.Association between MDM2 antagonist (RG7112)
growth inhibition (IC50s) in 287 human cancer cell lines (Cell Lines for
Oncology/Chugai Accumulative Tumor Encyclopedia), and pretreatment RNAseq
profiling established a classifier comprising MDM2, XPC, BBC3, and
CDKN2A. This signature significantly associated with cell-line efficacy
to MDM2 antagonist (odds ratio = 2.53; P<0.001) and discriminated MDM2
antagonist-sensitive (IC50 10 uM) better than MDM2 mRNA or TP53 mutation
status alone (AUC = 0.92). Multivariate logistic regression indicated
signature scores were significant (odds ratio = 1.84; PThe activity of
p53, a key tumor suppressor is tightly controlled by MDM2-mediated
ubiquination and degradation. Nutlins, a class of small-molecule MDM2
antagonists, have been characterized as drivers of p53 re-activation.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is uniquely sensitive to p53 re-activation
as 90% of cases have wild-type TP53 and frequent MDM2 overexpression to
overcome mechanisms of oncogene addiction. Personalized theranostic
strategies may distinguish patients likely to clinically benefit from
MDM2-antagonist therapy.Association between MDM2 antagonist (RG7112)
growth inhibition (IC50s) in 287 human cancer cell lines (Cell Lines for
Oncology/Chugai Accumulative Tumor Encyclopedia), and pretreatment RNAseq
profiling established a classifier comprising MDM2, XPC, BBC3, and
CDKN2A. This signature significantly associated with cell-line efficacy
to MDM2 antagonist (odds ratio = 2.53; P<0.001) and discriminated MDM2
antagonist-sensitive (IC50 10 uM) better than MDM2 mRNA or TP53 mutation
status alone (AUC = 0.92). Multivariate logistic regression indicated
signature scores were significant (odds ratio = 1.84; P<0.001) when
adjusted for TP53 mutation status.RG7112 treatment was assessed in a
phase 1 dose escalation trial in relapsed/refractory AML patients
(NO21279). Signature scores of AML patient blood specimens at baseline
significantly associated with clinical response (PDThe activity of p53, a
key tumor suppressor is tightly controlled by MDM2-mediated ubiquination
and degradation. Nutlins, a class of small-molecule MDM2 antagonists,
have been characterized as drivers of p53 re-activation. Acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) is uniquely sensitive to p53 re-activation as 90% of cases
have wild-type TP53 and frequent MDM2 overexpression to overcome
mechanisms of oncogene addiction. Personalized theranostic strategies may
distinguish patients likely to clinically benefit from MDM2-antagonist
therapy.Association between MDM2 antagonist (RG7112) growth inhibition
(IC50s) in 287 human cancer cell lines (Cell Lines for Oncology/Chugai
Accumulative Tumor Encyclopedia), and pretreatment RNAseq profiling
established a classifier comprising MDM2, XPC, BBC3, and CDKN2A. This
signature significantly associated with cell-line efficacy to MDM2
antagonist (odds ratio = 2.53; P<0.001) and discriminated MDM2
antagonist-sensitive (IC50 10 uM) better than MDM2 mRNA or TP53 mutation
status alone (AUC = 0.92). Multivariate logistic regression indicated
signature scores were significant (odds ratio = 1.84; P<0.001) when
adjusted for TP53 mutation status.RG7112 treatment was assessed in a
phase 1 dose escalation trial in relapsed/refractory AML patients
(NO21279). Signature scores of AML patient blood specimens at baseline
significantly associated with clinical response (PD<HIThe activity of
p53, a key tumor suppressor is tightly controlled by MDM2-mediated
ubiquination and degradation. Nutlins, a class of small-molecule MDM2
antagonists, have been characterized as drivers of p53 re-activation.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is uniquely sensitive to p53 re-activation
as 90% of cases have wild-type TP53 and frequent MDM2 overexpression to
overcome mechanisms of oncogene addiction. Personalized theranostic
strategies may distinguish patients likely to clinically benefit from
MDM2-antagonist therapy.Association between MDM2 antagonist (RG7112)
growth inhibition (IC50s) in 287 human cancer cell lines (Cell Lines for
Oncology/Chugai Accumulative Tumor Encyclopedia), and pretreatment RNAseq
profiling established a classifier comprising MDM2, XPC, BBC3, and
CDKN2A. This signature significantly associated with cell-line efficacy
to MDM2 antagonist (odds ratio = 2.53; P<0.001) and discriminated MDM2
antagonist-sensitive (IC50 10 uM) better than MDM2 mRNA or TP53 mutation
status alone (AUC = 0.92). Multivariate logistic regression indicated
signature scores were significant (odds ratio = 1.84; P<0.001) when
adjusted for TP53 mutation status.RG7112 treatment was assessed in a
phase 1 dose escalation trial in relapsed/refractory AML patients
(NO21279). Signature scores of AML patient blood specimens at baseline
significantly associated with clinical response (PD<HI<MLFSThe activity
of p53, a key tumor suppressor is tightly controlled by MDM2-mediated
ubiquination and degradation. Nutlins, a class of small-molecule MDM2
antagonists, have been characterized as drivers of p53 re-activation.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is uniquely sensitive to p53 re-activation
as 90% of cases have wild-type TP53 and frequent MDM2 overexpression to
overcome mechanisms of oncogene addiction. Personalized theranostic
strategies may distinguish patients likely to clinically benefit from
MDM2-antagonist therapy.Association between MDM2 antagonist (RG7112)
growth inhibition (IC50s) in 287 human cancer cell lines (Cell Lines for
Oncology/Chugai Accumulative Tumor Encyclopedia), and pretreatment RNAseq
profiling established a classifier comprising MDM2, XPC, BBC3, and
CDKN2A. This signature significantly associated with cell-line efficacy
to MDM2 antagonist (odds ratio = 2.53; P<0.001) and discriminated MDM2
antagonist-sensitive (IC50 10 uM) better than MDM2 mRNA or TP53 mutation
status alone (AUC = 0.92). Multivariate logistic regression indicated
signature scores were significant (odds ratio = 1.84; P<0.001) when
adjusted for TP53 mutation status.RG7112 treatment was assessed in a
phase 1 dose escalation trial in relapsed/refractory AML patients
(NO21279). Signature scores of AML patient blood specimens at baseline
significantly associated with clinical response (PD<HI<MLFS<CR; Spearman
correlation coefficient 0.58; PThe activity of p53, a key tumor
suppressor is tightly controlled by MDM2-mediated ubiquination and
degradation. Nutlins, a class of small-molecule MDM2 antagonists, have
been characterized as drivers of p53 re-activation. Acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) is uniquely sensitive to p53 re-activation as 90% of cases
have wild-type TP53 and frequent MDM2 overexpression to overcome
mechanisms of oncogene addiction. Personalized theranostic strategies may
distinguish patients likely to clinically benefit from MDM2-antagonist
therapy.Association between MDM2 antagonist (RG7112) growth inhibition
(IC50s) in 287 human cancer cell lines (Cell Lines for Oncology/Chugai
Accumulative Tumor Encyclopedia), and pretreatment RNAseq profiling
established a classifier comprising MDM2, XPC, BBC3, and CDKN2A. This
signature significantly associated with cell-line efficacy to MDM2
antagonist (odds ratio = 2.53; P<0.001) and discriminated MDM2
antagonist-sensitive (IC50 10 uM) better than MDM2 mRNA or TP53 mutation
status alone (AUC = 0.92). Multivariate logistic regression indicated
signature scores were significant (odds ratio = 1.84; P<0.001) when
adjusted for TP53 mutation status.RG7112 treatment was assessed in a
phase 1 dose escalation trial in relapsed/refractory AML patients
(NO21279). Signature scores of AML patient blood specimens at baseline
significantly associated with clinical response (PD<HI<MLFS<CR; Spearman
correlation coefficient 0.58; P<0.001); and with pharmacodynamic
biomarker response, defined as change in MDM2 mRNA expression in blood
(Spearman correlation coefficient 0.41; P = 0.02). Patient response was
discriminated by the signature with 100% sensitivity/71% specificity
(Wilcoxon p = .0007, AUC = 0.72). Monitoring of signature with clinical
response in a second AML Phase 1/1b clinical trial NP28679 with a next
generation nutlin-class MDM2 Antagonist RG7388 validated this panel as
significantly discriminating MDM2 antagonist therapeutic responders and
non-responders in AML patients (Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test P = 0.008; AUC =
.75).In summary, we demonstrate that a biological classifier
discriminates response broadly to MDM2-antagonist therapy. The level of
evidence attained by cell line efficacy modeling and response assessments
in trial NO21279 (with MDM2 antagonist RG7112) and now in trial NP28679
(with MDM2 antagonist RG7388) adds substantial weight to the validity of
this panel.

