Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multiplexed marker-based algorithm for diagnosis of carcinoma of
unknown primary using circulating tumor cells


Abstract: Real-time, single-cell multiplex immunophenotyping of
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) is hypothesized to inform diagnosis of
tissue of origin in patients with carcinoma of unknown primary (CUP). In
20 to 50% of CUP patients, the primary site remains unidentified,
presenting a challenge for clinicians in diagnosis and treatment.
Invasive tissue biopsy is the gold standard for diagnosis but improved
methodology is needed. We developed a post-CellSearch CTC assay using
multiplexed Q-dot or DyLight conjugated antibodies with the goal of
detecting multiple markers in single cells within a CTC population. We
adapted our approach to size-based CTC enrichment protocols for capturing
CTCs and subsequent immunofluorescence (IF) using a minimal set of
markers to predict the primary sites for common metastatic tumors. The
carcinomas are diagnosed with cytokeratin 7 (CK7), cytokeratin 20 (CK20),
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), estrogen receptor (ER) or
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) as the minimal set of informative
markers. IF has been optimized in cultured tumor cells with individual
antibodies, then with conjugated antibodies to form a multiplex antibody
set. With IF, we evaluated antibodies specific to these 5 markers in
lung, breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer cell lines and blood
samples from metastatic prostate and breast cancer patients. Our
technological advance provides a noninvasive, inexpensive, diagnostic
blood test as an adjunct to routine tissue biopsy. Its further
implementation requires prospective clinical testing.

