Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of bexarotene and the retinoid CD1530 reduces murine
oral-cavity carcinogenesis induced by the carcinogen 4-nitroquinoline
1-oxide


We investigated the effects of bexarotene (a retinoid X receptor
agonist), CD1530 (a retinoic acid receptor selective agonist), and the
combination of these two drugs for the prevention of oral carcinogenesis
induced by the carcinogen 4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide (4-NQO) in a mouse
model of human oral-cavity and esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma
previously generated in our laboratory. We observed decreased numbers of
neoplastic tongue lesions and reduced lesion severity in the 4-NQO plus
CD1530 (4N+C) and 4-NQO plus bexarotene plus CD1530 (4N+B+C) groups
compared with the 4-NQO group. RNA-Seq analyses showed increases in
transcripts in cell proliferation/cell cycle progression pathways in the
4-NQO vs. the untreated group. In addition, -catenin and matrix
metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9) protein levels and reactive oxygen species
(ROS), as assessed by 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) staining, were elevated in
tongue tissues 17 wk after the termination of the 4-NQO treatment. The
4N+B, 4N+C, and 4N+B+C groups showed dramatically lower levels of
-catenin, MMP9, and 4-HNE staining compared with the 4-NQO group. The
major reduction in 4-HNE staining in the retinoid treatment groups
suggests a novel mechanism of action, reduction of ROS, by which
bexarotene and CD1530 inhibit carcinogenesis.

