Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low-frequency coding variants in BAT2, HIST1H1E and BPIFB1 are
associated with lung cancer risk in Chinese populations


Objective: Genome-wide association studies have successfully identified a
subset of common variants associated with lung cancer risk. However,
these variants explain only a fraction of lung cancer heritability.
Alternatively, it is proposed that uncommon variants may have strong
effects and contribute to the missing heritability. The aim of the study
was to evaluate the role of low-frequency or rare variants in lung cancer
development.Methods: We analyzed exome chips with a total of 247,870
variants in 1,348 lung cancer cases and 1,998 controls in discovery stage
and subsequently validated promising associations in additional 3,581
cases and 3,669 controls in replication stages. Single-variant and
gene-based analyses were carried out in coding variants with minor allele
frequency less than 0.05.Results: We identified three low-frequency
missense variants in BAT2 (OR = 0.54, P = 1.0210-9), HIST1H1E (OR = 0.49,
P = 5.6610-7) and BPIFB1 genes (OR = 1.79, P = 3.9910-7) significantly
associated with lung cancer risk. The risk allele of variant in BPIFB1
was also associated with early onset of lung cancer. BAT2 and HIST1H1E
located at MHC III region across 6p22.2-6p21.31 and BPIFB1 at 20q11.21
were frequently associated with inflammation/immune-related diseases, and
were found to be differentially expressed between lung tumors and paired
normal tissues. In addition, down-regulation of BPIFB1 was significantly
associated with poor prognosis of lung cancer patients.Conclusions: Our
results highlight importance of uncommon variants in lung cancer
susceptibility, and indicate potential biology of candidate genes at
6p22.2-6p21.31 and 20q11.21 in the process of lung carcinogenesis.

