Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative screening of serum protein biomarkers by reversed
phase protein serum arrays


Protein biomarkers can be key indicators for cancer diagnosis,
prediction, and selection of successful cancer treatments. Protein
biomarkers can be identified by 2 methods: antibody arrays which profile
protein expression levels from a patient's serum, or reversed phase
protein arrays to measure single or limited sets of proteins from many
patients sera. The reversed phase protein arrays have been widely used
for detection of signaling molecules in cell lysates, however, this
approach has been difficult to adapt to serum samples. Several years ago,
we developed a sensitive method called the enhanced protein array to
quantitatively measure serum protein levels from large numbers of patient
samples. Here, we further refine the technology on several fronts: 1.
simplifying the experimental procedure; 2. optimizing multiple parameters
to make the assay more robust; 3. establishing a method for more accurate
quantification. Using this technology, we quantitatively measured the
protein expression levels of Nidogen-1 and CEACAM-1 from 164 serum
samples from hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and equal number of control
and found that both Nidogen-1 and CEACAM-1 expression levels are
significantly increased in HCC patients. Our work reveals promise for
using reversed phase protein serum arrays for biomarker discovery and
validation.

