Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrantly hypermethylated Homeobox A2 derepresses
metalloproteinase-9 through TBP and promotes invasion in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is notorious for its high invasiveness and
metastatic ability. In this study, we identified a differential
hypermethylated transcription repressor, Homeobox A2 (HOXA2), which helps
explain such observation. Aberrant hypermethylation of HOXA2 led to low
RNA expression in NPC tumors and cells. Addition of methylation inhibitor
5Aza restored HOXA2 RNA expression in NPC cells. Methylated HOXA2
promoter reduces the binding affinity of the transcriptional co-activator
p300, causing transcriptional repression of HOXA2. In NPC cells,
re-expression of ectopic HOXA2 was correlated with decreased invasive
ability and reduced metalloproteinase MMP-9 RNA and protein expression.
Promoter, ChIP and DNA-pull down assays indicated that HOXA2 competes
with the transcription activator, TATA-box binding protein (TBP) for a
recognition sequence near the MMP-9 transcription start site, and
suppresses MMP-9 transcription. Our results reveal a novel mechanism
wherein HOXA2 acts as a suppressor or TBP-antagonist to inhibit MMP-9
expression; while methylation-mediated inactivation of HOXA2 in NPC
derepresses MMP-9 production and increases invasion of NPC cells. In NPC
plasma samples, increased plasma EBV copy number was correlated with
increased in cell-free HOXA2 hypermethylation and elevated MMP-9 levels.
Plasma EBV DNA and methylated cell-free HOXA2 may use as biomarkers for
monitoring NPC treatment.

