Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signaling pathway profiling in multiple myeloma


Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable malignancy of terminally
differentiated B cells. The disease develops from preclinical stages,
i.e. MGUS/SMM, to symptomatic MM and eventually becomes refractory to
therapy. Recent data indicate relevant clusters of mutational hotspots
within signaling pathways, yet only very limited data is available on
actual signaling profiles. Therefore, we aimed to characterize the
activation of five oncogenic signaling pathways (RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK,
JAK-STAT, NF-B, PI3K/AKT and cMYC) in primary MM biopsies and to
correlate the data with disease stage and clinical outcome.We used
immunohistochemistry to assess key activation markers of respective
signaling pathways in a discovery cohort (DC) of patients with SMM/MGUS
(n = 32), symptomatic MM (n = 195) and refractory MM (n = 50).
Furthermore, an independent validation cohort (VC, n = 84) of newly
diagnosed MM, enrolled in two clinical trials, was employed. Activation
scores included signal intensity as well as the percentage of positive
versus total tumor cells per sample to account for potential clonal
heterogeneity. A non-linear principal component analysis was applied to
integrate signaling scores per pathway and sample.Overall, NF-B was
activated in 90% of cases; ERK or AKT in 45%, MYC and STAT3 activation in
44% and 27%, respectively. At diagnosis, strong activation of single
pathways was found in a mutually exclusive pattern. In refractory MM, the
signaling pathways were more frequently activated, except for NF-B (NF-B,
MYC, AKT pMultiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable malignancy of terminally
differentiated B cells. The disease develops from preclinical stages,
i.e. MGUS/SMM, to symptomatic MM and eventually becomes refractory to
therapy. Recent data indicate relevant clusters of mutational hotspots
within signaling pathways, yet only very limited data is available on
actual signaling profiles. Therefore, we aimed to characterize the
activation of five oncogenic signaling pathways (RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK,
JAK-STAT, NF-B, PI3K/AKT and cMYC) in primary MM biopsies and to
correlate the data with disease stage and clinical outcome.We used
immunohistochemistry to assess key activation markers of respective
signaling pathways in a discovery cohort (DC) of patients with SMM/MGUS
(n = 32), symptomatic MM (n = 195) and refractory MM (n = 50).
Furthermore, an independent validation cohort (VC, n = 84) of newly
diagnosed MM, enrolled in two clinical trials, was employed. Activation
scores included signal intensity as well as the percentage of positive
versus total tumor cells per sample to account for potential clonal
heterogeneity. A non-linear principal component analysis was applied to
integrate signaling scores per pathway and sample.Overall, NF-B was
activated in 90% of cases; ERK or AKT in 45%, MYC and STAT3 activation in
44% and 27%, respectively. At diagnosis, strong activation of single
pathways was found in a mutually exclusive pattern. In refractory MM, the
signaling pathways were more frequently activated, except for NF-B (NF-B,
MYC, AKT p< 0.001; ERK p = 0.002; STAT3 p = 0.008). Moreover,
simultaneous activation of multiple pathways was detectable in 72% of
refractory MM compared to 38.5% of MM and only 9.4% of SMM/MGUS. In the
VC, MYC and STAT3 activation was associated with a higher ISS score (p =
0.05 and p = 0.0011, respectively). In addition, activated STAT3
correlated with shorter overall survival (HR 2.97, p = 0.020) and
progression-free survival (HR 2.31, p = 0.026), MYC activation with
shorter overall survival (HR 2.41, p = 0.028). Furthermore, pathway
activation clustering revealed a prognostic hierarchy with isolated NF- B
activation being favorable; ERK or AKT activation being neutral and MYC
or STAT3 activation being indicative for poor outcome.To conclude, this
is the first systematic analysis of oncogenic signaling patterns on
primary MM samples. Our data reveal a mutually exclusive landscape of
most strongly activated pathways in newly diagnosed MM and proof to be of
prognostic significance, while simultaneous pathway activation appears to
be associated with disease progression.

