Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal up-regulation of gene expression in prostate cancer cells:
Role of microenvironment


Recently, tumor microenvironment has been reported to be important in
carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Especially in prostate cancer (PC),
it has been suggested that tumor microenvironment plays an important role
in progression, acquisition of androgen independence, and distant
metastasis. However, little is known about the genetic basis of human PC
microenvironment. To clarify the mechanism of PC progression and
metastasis, we previously reported the analysis of genome-wide gene
expression profiles using human PC cells (LNCaP), normal human prostate
epithelial cells (PrEC), and normal human prostate stromal cells (PrSC).
In that study, we identified genes that were up-regulated in LNCaP when
co-cultured with PrSC, which included alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase
(AMACR), homeobox B13 (HOXB13), and UDP glucuronosyltransferase 2 family,
polypeptide B17 (UGT2B17). We often confront the discrepancy in the
difference of gene expression between cancer cells and tissues. Our data
reveals that stromal cells could affect on PC cells to increase their
gene expression, which might contribute to aggressiveness of PC cells. We
then focused on secreted proteins that can mutually affect in this
experimental design and identified genes that were overexpressed only in
stromal cells. They included chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2),
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), insulin-like growth factor binding
protein 5 (IGFBP5), wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 5A
(WNT5A), and collagens (COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, COL6A3, COL15A1). We
further investigated the influence of these genes on the expression of
AMACR, HOXB13, and UGT2B17 in PC cells to identify crucial signaling
pathways in this process. This study provides potential candidate genes
the products of which might serve as microenvironmental targets for the
treatment of PC.

