Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide tissue-based microRNA signature in healthy women
predicting breast cancer risk


Introduction: Small non-coding microRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in
both normal breast development and breast carcinogenesis. The goal of
this study is to identify miRNAs in normal breast tissues which are
related to breast cancer risk.Materials and Methods: We used a
high-throughput digital counting of miRNAs without amplification
(Nanostring) to examine miRNA expression in 161 reduction mammoplasty
(RM) tissues from two independent studies. A multivariate model was used
to identify miRNAs associated with breast cancer risk (based upon Gail
risk scores) in a training study (n = 90) then the model was validated in
a replication study (n = 71). Risk-related microRNAs were then evaluated
in serum for associations with real breast cancer cases using publically
available prospective cohort (Sister Study, n = 410).Results: We
identified a 41-miRNA signature in healthy women distinguishing high risk
from low risk women with a prediction accuracy of 82% (95% CI = 80% to
87%) in the training study. Predictive accuracy was 69% (95% CI = 65% to
73%) in the replication study. 34 of 41 serum miRNAs that mapped to
public data predicted women who developed breast cancer within 18 months
after blood draw from those who remained cancer free with accuracy of 59%
(95% CI = 57% to 61%). We have also shown that these accuracies were
significantly higher than random chance (P Introduction: Small non-coding
microRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in both normal breast development
and breast carcinogenesis. The goal of this study is to identify miRNAs
in normal breast tissues which are related to breast cancer
risk.Materials and Methods: We used a high-throughput digital counting of
miRNAs without amplification (Nanostring) to examine miRNA expression in
161 reduction mammoplasty (RM) tissues from two independent studies. A
multivariate model was used to identify miRNAs associated with breast
cancer risk (based upon Gail risk scores) in a training study (n = 90)
then the model was validated in a replication study (n = 71).
Risk-related microRNAs were then evaluated in serum for associations with
real breast cancer cases using publically available prospective cohort
(Sister Study, n = 410).Results: We identified a 41-miRNA signature in
healthy women distinguishing high risk from low risk women with a
prediction accuracy of 82% (95% CI = 80% to 87%) in the training study.
Predictive accuracy was 69% (95% CI = 65% to 73%) in the replication
study. 34 of 41 serum miRNAs that mapped to public data predicted women
who developed breast cancer within 18 months after blood draw from those
who remained cancer free with accuracy of 59% (95% CI = 57% to 61%). We
have also shown that these accuracies were significantly higher than
random chance (P < 0.0001). IPA canonical pathway analysis revealed that
the risk-related microRNAs targets were significantly enriched for HER-2
signaling in breast cancer, and estrogen-dependent breast cancer
signaling, and other important cancer pathways such as molecular
mechanisms of cancer, PI3K/AKT signaling, PTEN signaling, and TGF-beta
signaling.Conclusion: Our results indicate that miRNA profiling from
breast tissue of healthy patients may identify clinically useful
predictors of breast cancer risk and these miRNAs may also work as
non-invasive biomarker for early breast cancer prediction.

