Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KB-164, a novel and highly potent Src family kinase inhibitor,
reduces cancer cell invasion and abrogates downstream oncogenic pathways
in triple negative breast cancer


Src is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase, which acts as an integrator of
diverse signaling pathways used by cancer cells for cell proliferation,
migration and metastasis. Recent interest in developing target specific
therapy for improved benefits with manageable toxic effects has sharply
increased the interest in testing new Src family kinase inhibitors for
their potential anticancer therapeutic properties.In this study, we
sought to investigate the chemical characteristics and the biological
effects of the novel Src family kinase inhibitor KB-164, in Src
expressing triple negative breast cancer cells. We show that KB-164 acts
as a potent Src kinase inhibitor (IC50 1.3 nmol/L) in MDA-MB 231 cells,
100-fold more potent than the most widely used Src family kinase
inhibitor dasatinib. At concentrations of 50nmol/L, KB-164 led to
complete inhibition of Src activation for 48 hours. Analysis of
downstream effectors of Src revealed that treatment with KB-164 inhibits
the phosphorylation of several oncogenic pathways i.e. EGFR, ERK1/2,
P38MAPK and AKT. A dramatic decrease in cancer cell motility and invasion
was observed on treatment with KB-164 in both SUM 149 and MDA-MB 231
triple negative breast cancer cell lines. We also show that triple
negative breast cancer cells derived from the patients are equally
sensitive to growth inhibition by KB-164 within an IC50 of 1.8-nmol
range. No cytotoxicity was observed both in vitro (18 micro mol/L in
normal human mammary epithelial cells) and in vivo (70mg/kg in mice). Our
findings indicate that KB-164 inhibits signaling pathways involved in
controlling tumor cell proliferation and survival, suggesting that KB-164
might prove to be a promising therapeutic agent for breast cancer.

