Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal microRNA in cell-free urine samples as a source for
liquid prostate cancer biopsy


MicroRNAs constitute a class of small cellular RNAs (typically 19-23 nt)
that function as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression.
Current estimates indicate that more than one third of the human cellular
transcriptome is regulated by this small class of RNA (2000 miRNA).
MicroRNAs have been shown to be actively exported from tissues into the
circulation through a variety of mechanisms including complexing with RNA
binding proteins or HDL and through active exosome transport.Exosomes are
nanovesicles secreted into the extracellular environment by a wide range
of cell types under normal and pathological conditions. As the profile of
exosomal microRNAs may be a fingerprint of the releasing cell type and
because they are released in easily accessible body fluids such as blood
and urine, their microRNA content holds potential as biomarkers for early
detection of malignancy.Cell free urine samples are an obvious liquid
biopsy source for microRNA markers in prostate cancer and could serve as
diagnostic tools as well as treatment response markers. Yet microRNA
levels in urine samples are extremely sparse and cannot be detected
reliable by conventional sample preparation methods. It has been reported
that tumour derived exosomes carrying genetic information specific for
prostate cancer can be measured in urine samples following prostate
massage. However, a methodology eliminating the need for prostate massage
of every patient to be tested in a clinical setting is highly
desirable.The purpose of this study was to combine a simple exosomal
enrichment method with our highly sensitive LNA-based qPCR platform for
detection of microRNAs and apply this to a cohort consisting of more than
300 cell free urine samples from prostate cancer cases and controls. In
conclusion, cell free urine samples holds potential as a liquid biopsy
source for exosomal microRNA markers in prostate cancer, showing miRNA
signatures of strong diagnostic potential. Analysis is pending and data
will be presented.

