Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of ion channels in a cervical cancer mouse model


Introduction. Because some ion channels have been suggested as early
tumor markers and therapeutic targets, in the present study we examined
the expression of ion channels in the cervical cancer transgenic mouse
model K14E7 expressing the HPV16 E7 oncogene under the control of the
human keratin 14 promoter.Methods. We used the K14E7 transgenic mouse;
some groups were treated with 17-estradiol. Continuous release pellets
delivering 0.05 mg of 17-estradiol were implanted into 4-6 weeks old
female mice during 90 days to obtain low grade cervical dysplasia or
during 180 days to produce cervical cancer. The cervix was removed at the
end of the treatment. Protein and mRNA expression of 4 ion channels
(Cav3.1, Cav3.2, Kv10.1, KCa1.1) were analyzed by qRT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry, respectively.Results. We found increased expression
of Cav3.1, Kv10.1 and KCa1.1 in mice with cervical dysplasia in
comparison to control animals. This increase was even higher in animals
with cervical cancer. In contrast, Cav3.2 expression decreased in animals
with cervical dysplasia and increased in mice with cervical cancer. We
also found overexpression of the KCa1.1 protein in the transformed zone
of the cervical cancer group, but not in the control group.Conclusions.
The channel expression profile here studied might serve as a cervical
cancer marker. This work was partially supported by Conacyt grant 141126
to JC.

