Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fitness of T cells for use in cellular therapy of pediatric
malignancies


Despite promising clinical trial results, many patients are ineligible to
receive cellular therapy, either due to an inability to harvest
sufficient lymphocytes, or that the harvested cells fail to yield a
clinically viable product. The ideal time to harvest these cells remains
unclear, and is of significant clinical relevance.We collected blood from
pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) or non-Hodgkin
lymphomas (NHL) at time of diagnosis and after each cycle of
chemotherapy. We plated these samples overnight to deplete adherent
cells, quantified the CD3+ T cell population by flow cytometry, combined
these T cells with CD3/CD28 stimulatory beads at a ratio of 3 beads/cell,
and measured expansion over time. These studies (Table 1) revealed that
ALL samples harvested earlier in therapeutic course demonstrated enhanced
ex vivo expansion. We stratified our samples into standard (SR) and
high-risk (HR+VHR) disease and found that SR patients have even more
robust early expansion and that this expansion ability is maintained,
while high-risk samples lose ex vivo expansion ability after
consolidation. Broadening this analysis to lymphoma revealed that only a
fraction of NHL diagnosis samples expand ex vivo, and nearly no expansion
is observed after initiation of chemotherapy.We also examined T cell
phenotype from our ALL samples, and found a correlation between expansion
capability and presence of nave T cells, and that larger terminal
effector pools correlate with poor expansion.These data represent the
most detailed analysis of T cell number, function and phenotype during
chemotherapy for pediatric B cell malignancies to date. They suggest that
T cell fitness is considerably affected by type of chemotherapy as well
as underlying malignancy, and that fitness may correlate with phenotype.
These findings have direct clinical relevance, suggesting that T cells
should be harvested as early as possible after diagnosis. This practice
has the potential to significantly expand the pool of patients eligible
for cellular therapy.Table 1. Percentage of samples with >5-fold ex vivo
expansion*pDespite promising clinical trial results, many patients are
ineligible to receive cellular therapy, either due to an inability to
harvest sufficient lymphocytes, or that the harvested cells fail to yield
a clinically viable product. The ideal time to harvest these cells
remains unclear, and is of significant clinical relevance.We collected
blood from pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) or
non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) at time of diagnosis and after each cycle of
chemotherapy. We plated these samples overnight to deplete adherent
cells, quantified the CD3+ T cell population by flow cytometry, combined
these T cells with CD3/CD28 stimulatory beads at a ratio of 3 beads/cell,
and measured expansion over time. These studies (Table 1) revealed that
ALL samples harvested earlier in therapeutic course demonstrated enhanced
ex vivo expansion. We stratified our samples into standard (SR) and
high-risk (HR+VHR) disease and found that SR patients have even more
robust early expansion and that this expansion ability is maintained,
while high-risk samples lose ex vivo expansion ability after
consolidation. Broadening this analysis to lymphoma revealed that only a
fraction of NHL diagnosis samples expand ex vivo, and nearly no expansion
is observed after initiation of chemotherapy.We also examined T cell
phenotype from our ALL samples, and found a correlation between expansion
capability and presence of nave T cells, and that larger terminal
effector pools correlate with poor expansion.These data represent the
most detailed analysis of T cell number, function and phenotype during
chemotherapy for pediatric B cell malignancies to date. They suggest that
T cell fitness is considerably affected by type of chemotherapy as well
as underlying malignancy, and that fitness may correlate with phenotype.
These findings have direct clinical relevance, suggesting that T cells
should be harvested as early as possible after diagnosis. This practice
has the potential to significantly expand the pool of patients eligible
for cellular therapy.Table 1. Percentage of samples with >5-fold ex vivo
expansion*p<0.01 compared to ALL (SR)

