Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial differences in quantitative measures of area and volumetric
breast density


Introduction: Breast density is a strong risk factor for breast cancer.
Several studies found Black women to have lower breast density than white
women on average, which may be partly due to racial differences in BMI,
which is inversely associated with density. Our study utilizes
fully-automated, validated quantitative measurements of both area and
volumetric breast density. We assess racial differences in these novel
measures, accounting for age, BMI, and other established breast cancer
risk factors.Methods: From women who underwent mammography screening at
our institution in 2010-11, we analyzed all available raw digital
mammograms for women who had BMI recorded in electronic medical records
at the time of screening. A previously-validated, publically-available,
fully-automated software algorithm developed in our institution was used
to generate per-woman estimates of absolute and percent area density.
Volumetric estimates of absolute and percent dense tissue were obtained
using FDA-cleared software (Quantra, Hologic, Inc). Women identified as
White or Black/African American with no prior history of breast cancer
were included (N = 2845). Patient characteristics and mean density
measures were compared by race using Chi-square tests and t-tests.
Density measures were log-transformed and z-score standardized. Linear
regression was performed to assess racial differences in mean density
measures, adjusted for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors (prior
biopsy, age at menarche, menopause status, family history, age at first
birth, HRT use). We also tested the interaction of race and BMI on
density.Results: The mean age of patients was 57, and was similar for
white and black women (p = .159). Black women had higher mean BMI than
white women (32.0 kg/m2 vs. 26.0 kg/m2, pIntroduction: Breast density is
a strong risk factor for breast cancer. Several studies found Black women
to have lower breast density than white women on average, which may be
partly due to racial differences in BMI, which is inversely associated
with density. Our study utilizes fully-automated, validated quantitative
measurements of both area and volumetric breast density. We assess racial
differences in these novel measures, accounting for age, BMI, and other
established breast cancer risk factors.Methods: From women who underwent
mammography screening at our institution in 2010-11, we analyzed all
available raw digital mammograms for women who had BMI recorded in
electronic medical records at the time of screening. A
previously-validated, publically-available, fully-automated software
algorithm developed in our institution was used to generate per-woman
estimates of absolute and percent area density. Volumetric estimates of
absolute and percent dense tissue were obtained using FDA-cleared
software (Quantra, Hologic, Inc). Women identified as White or
Black/African American with no prior history of breast cancer were
included (N = 2845). Patient characteristics and mean density measures
were compared by race using Chi-square tests and t-tests. Density
measures were log-transformed and z-score standardized. Linear regression
was performed to assess racial differences in mean density measures,
adjusted for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors (prior biopsy, age
at menarche, menopause status, family history, age at first birth, HRT
use). We also tested the interaction of race and BMI on density.Results:
The mean age of patients was 57, and was similar for white and black
women (p = .159). Black women had higher mean BMI than white women (32.0
kg/m2 vs. 26.0 kg/m2, p<.001). Black women had higher absolute area (40.1
vs. 33.1 cm2, pIntroduction: Breast density is a strong risk factor for
breast cancer. Several studies found Black women to have lower breast
density than white women on average, which may be partly due to racial
differences in BMI, which is inversely associated with density. Our study
utilizes fully-automated, validated quantitative measurements of both
area and volumetric breast density. We assess racial differences in these
novel measures, accounting for age, BMI, and other established breast
cancer risk factors.Methods: From women who underwent mammography
screening at our institution in 2010-11, we analyzed all available raw
digital mammograms for women who had BMI recorded in electronic medical
records at the time of screening. A previously-validated,
publically-available, fully-automated software algorithm developed in our
institution was used to generate per-woman estimates of absolute and
percent area density. Volumetric estimates of absolute and percent dense
tissue were obtained using FDA-cleared software (Quantra, Hologic, Inc).
Women identified as White or Black/African American with no prior history
of breast cancer were included (N = 2845). Patient characteristics and
mean density measures were compared by race using Chi-square tests and
t-tests. Density measures were log-transformed and z-score standardized.
Linear regression was performed to assess racial differences in mean
density measures, adjusted for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors
(prior biopsy, age at menarche, menopause status, family history, age at
first birth, HRT use). We also tested the interaction of race and BMI on
density.Results: The mean age of patients was 57, and was similar for
white and black women (p = .159). Black women had higher mean BMI than
white women (32.0 kg/m2 vs. 26.0 kg/m2, p<.001). Black women had higher
absolute area (40.1 vs. 33.1 cm2, p<.001) and volume (187.2 vs. 181.6
cm3, pIntroduction: Breast density is a strong risk factor for breast
cancer. Several studies found Black women to have lower breast density
than white women on average, which may be partly due to racial
differences in BMI, which is inversely associated with density. Our study
utilizes fully-automated, validated quantitative measurements of both
area and volumetric breast density. We assess racial differences in these
novel measures, accounting for age, BMI, and other established breast
cancer risk factors.Methods: From women who underwent mammography
screening at our institution in 2010-11, we analyzed all available raw
digital mammograms for women who had BMI recorded in electronic medical
records at the time of screening. A previously-validated,
publically-available, fully-automated software algorithm developed in our
institution was used to generate per-woman estimates of absolute and
percent area density. Volumetric estimates of absolute and percent dense
tissue were obtained using FDA-cleared software (Quantra, Hologic, Inc).
Women identified as White or Black/African American with no prior history
of breast cancer were included (N = 2845). Patient characteristics and
mean density measures were compared by race using Chi-square tests and
t-tests. Density measures were log-transformed and z-score standardized.
Linear regression was performed to assess racial differences in mean
density measures, adjusted for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors
(prior biopsy, age at menarche, menopause status, family history, age at
first birth, HRT use). We also tested the interaction of race and BMI on
density.Results: The mean age of patients was 57, and was similar for
white and black women (p = .159). Black women had higher mean BMI than
white women (32.0 kg/m2 vs. 26.0 kg/m2, p<.001). Black women had higher
absolute area (40.1 vs. 33.1 cm2, p<.001) and volume (187.2 vs. 181.6
cm3, p<.001) density than white women, but lower area (19.6% vs. 23.5%,
pIntroduction: Breast density is a strong risk factor for breast cancer.
Several studies found Black women to have lower breast density than white
women on average, which may be partly due to racial differences in BMI,
which is inversely associated with density. Our study utilizes
fully-automated, validated quantitative measurements of both area and
volumetric breast density. We assess racial differences in these novel
measures, accounting for age, BMI, and other established breast cancer
risk factors.Methods: From women who underwent mammography screening at
our institution in 2010-11, we analyzed all available raw digital
mammograms for women who had BMI recorded in electronic medical records
at the time of screening. A previously-validated, publically-available,
fully-automated software algorithm developed in our institution was used
to generate per-woman estimates of absolute and percent area density.
Volumetric estimates of absolute and percent dense tissue were obtained
using FDA-cleared software (Quantra, Hologic, Inc). Women identified as
White or Black/African American with no prior history of breast cancer
were included (N = 2845). Patient characteristics and mean density
measures were compared by race using Chi-square tests and t-tests.
Density measures were log-transformed and z-score standardized. Linear
regression was performed to assess racial differences in mean density
measures, adjusted for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors (prior
biopsy, age at menarche, menopause status, family history, age at first
birth, HRT use). We also tested the interaction of race and BMI on
density.Results: The mean age of patients was 57, and was similar for
white and black women (p = .159). Black women had higher mean BMI than
white women (32.0 kg/m2 vs. 26.0 kg/m2, p<.001). Black women had higher
absolute area (40.1 vs. 33.1 cm2, p<.001) and volume (187.2 vs. 181.6
cm3, p<.001) density than white women, but lower area (19.6% vs. 23.5%,
p<.001) and volume percent density (11.6% vs. 13.4%, pIntroduction:
Breast density is a strong risk factor for breast cancer. Several studies
found Black women to have lower breast density than white women on
average, which may be partly due to racial differences in BMI, which is
inversely associated with density. Our study utilizes fully-automated,
validated quantitative measurements of both area and volumetric breast
density. We assess racial differences in these novel measures, accounting
for age, BMI, and other established breast cancer risk factors.Methods:
From women who underwent mammography screening at our institution in
2010-11, we analyzed all available raw digital mammograms for women who
had BMI recorded in electronic medical records at the time of screening.
A previously-validated, publically-available, fully-automated software
algorithm developed in our institution was used to generate per-woman
estimates of absolute and percent area density. Volumetric estimates of
absolute and percent dense tissue were obtained using FDA-cleared
software (Quantra, Hologic, Inc). Women identified as White or
Black/African American with no prior history of breast cancer were
included (N = 2845). Patient characteristics and mean density measures
were compared by race using Chi-square tests and t-tests. Density
measures were log-transformed and z-score standardized. Linear regression
was performed to assess racial differences in mean density measures,
adjusted for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors (prior biopsy, age
at menarche, menopause status, family history, age at first birth, HRT
use). We also tested the interaction of race and BMI on density.Results:
The mean age of patients was 57, and was similar for white and black
women (p = .159). Black women had higher mean BMI than white women (32.0
kg/m2 vs. 26.0 kg/m2, p<.001). Black women had higher absolute area (40.1
vs. 33.1 cm2, p<.001) and volume (187.2 vs. 181.6 cm3, p<.001) density
than white women, but lower area (19.6% vs. 23.5%, p<.001) and volume
percent density (11.6% vs. 13.4%, p<.001). After adjusting for age, BMI,
and breast cancer risk factors, black women had higher breast density
across all measures (absolute area density = 0.211 pIntroduction: Breast
density is a strong risk factor for breast cancer. Several studies found
Black women to have lower breast density than white women on average,
which may be partly due to racial differences in BMI, which is inversely
associated with density. Our study utilizes fully-automated, validated
quantitative measurements of both area and volumetric breast density. We
assess racial differences in these novel measures, accounting for age,
BMI, and other established breast cancer risk factors.Methods: From women
who underwent mammography screening at our institution in 2010-11, we
analyzed all available raw digital mammograms for women who had BMI
recorded in electronic medical records at the time of screening. A
previously-validated, publically-available, fully-automated software
algorithm developed in our institution was used to generate per-woman
estimates of absolute and percent area density. Volumetric estimates of
absolute and percent dense tissue were obtained using FDA-cleared
software (Quantra, Hologic, Inc). Women identified as White or
Black/African American with no prior history of breast cancer were
included (N = 2845). Patient characteristics and mean density measures
were compared by race using Chi-square tests and t-tests. Density
measures were log-transformed and z-score standardized. Linear regression
was performed to assess racial differences in mean density measures,
adjusted for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors (prior biopsy, age
at menarche, menopause status, family history, age at first birth, HRT
use). We also tested the interaction of race and BMI on density.Results:
The mean age of patients was 57, and was similar for white and black
women (p = .159). Black women had higher mean BMI than white women (32.0
kg/m2 vs. 26.0 kg/m2, p<.001). Black women had higher absolute area (40.1
vs. 33.1 cm2, p<.001) and volume (187.2 vs. 181.6 cm3, p<.001) density
than white women, but lower area (19.6% vs. 23.5%, p<.001) and volume
percent density (11.6% vs. 13.4%, p<.001). After adjusting for age, BMI,
and breast cancer risk factors, black women had higher breast density
across all measures (absolute area density = 0.211 p<0.001, area percent
density = 0.099 p = .021, absolute volume density = 0.242 pIntroduction:
Breast density is a strong risk factor for breast cancer. Several studies
found Black women to have lower breast density than white women on
average, which may be partly due to racial differences in BMI, which is
inversely associated with density. Our study utilizes fully-automated,
validated quantitative measurements of both area and volumetric breast
density. We assess racial differences in these novel measures, accounting
for age, BMI, and other established breast cancer risk factors.Methods:
From women who underwent mammography screening at our institution in
2010-11, we analyzed all available raw digital mammograms for women who
had BMI recorded in electronic medical records at the time of screening.
A previously-validated, publically-available, fully-automated software
algorithm developed in our institution was used to generate per-woman
estimates of absolute and percent area density. Volumetric estimates of
absolute and percent dense tissue were obtained using FDA-cleared
software (Quantra, Hologic, Inc). Women identified as White or
Black/African American with no prior history of breast cancer were
included (N = 2845). Patient characteristics and mean density measures
were compared by race using Chi-square tests and t-tests. Density
measures were log-transformed and z-score standardized. Linear regression
was performed to assess racial differences in mean density measures,
adjusted for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors (prior biopsy, age
at menarche, menopause status, family history, age at first birth, HRT
use). We also tested the interaction of race and BMI on density.Results:
The mean age of patients was 57, and was similar for white and black
women (p = .159). Black women had higher mean BMI than white women (32.0
kg/m2 vs. 26.0 kg/m2, p<.001). Black women had higher absolute area (40.1
vs. 33.1 cm2, p<.001) and volume (187.2 vs. 181.6 cm3, p<.001) density
than white women, but lower area (19.6% vs. 23.5%, p<.001) and volume
percent density (11.6% vs. 13.4%, p<.001). After adjusting for age, BMI,
and breast cancer risk factors, black women had higher breast density
across all measures (absolute area density = 0.211 p<0.001, area percent
density = 0.099 p = .021, absolute volume density = 0.242 p<.001, volume
percent density = 0.221 pIntroduction: Breast density is a strong risk
factor for breast cancer. Several studies found Black women to have lower
breast density than white women on average, which may be partly due to
racial differences in BMI, which is inversely associated with density.
Our study utilizes fully-automated, validated quantitative measurements
of both area and volumetric breast density. We assess racial differences
in these novel measures, accounting for age, BMI, and other established
breast cancer risk factors.Methods: From women who underwent mammography
screening at our institution in 2010-11, we analyzed all available raw
digital mammograms for women who had BMI recorded in electronic medical
records at the time of screening. A previously-validated,
publically-available, fully-automated software algorithm developed in our
institution was used to generate per-woman estimates of absolute and
percent area density. Volumetric estimates of absolute and percent dense
tissue were obtained using FDA-cleared software (Quantra, Hologic, Inc).
Women identified as White or Black/African American with no prior history
of breast cancer were included (N = 2845). Patient characteristics and
mean density measures were compared by race using Chi-square tests and
t-tests. Density measures were log-transformed and z-score standardized.
Linear regression was performed to assess racial differences in mean
density measures, adjusted for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors
(prior biopsy, age at menarche, menopause status, family history, age at
first birth, HRT use). We also tested the interaction of race and BMI on
density.Results: The mean age of patients was 57, and was similar for
white and black women (p = .159). Black women had higher mean BMI than
white women (32.0 kg/m2 vs. 26.0 kg/m2, p<.001). Black women had higher
absolute area (40.1 vs. 33.1 cm2, p<.001) and volume (187.2 vs. 181.6
cm3, p<.001) density than white women, but lower area (19.6% vs. 23.5%,
p<.001) and volume percent density (11.6% vs. 13.4%, p<.001). After
adjusting for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors, black women had
higher breast density across all measures (absolute area density = 0.211
p<0.001, area percent density = 0.099 p = .021, absolute volume density =
0.242 p<.001, volume percent density = 0.221 p<.001). The interaction
between race and BMI was significant for area percent (p = .001) and
volume percent density (pIntroduction: Breast density is a strong risk
factor for breast cancer. Several studies found Black women to have lower
breast density than white women on average, which may be partly due to
racial differences in BMI, which is inversely associated with density.
Our study utilizes fully-automated, validated quantitative measurements
of both area and volumetric breast density. We assess racial differences
in these novel measures, accounting for age, BMI, and other established
breast cancer risk factors.Methods: From women who underwent mammography
screening at our institution in 2010-11, we analyzed all available raw
digital mammograms for women who had BMI recorded in electronic medical
records at the time of screening. A previously-validated,
publically-available, fully-automated software algorithm developed in our
institution was used to generate per-woman estimates of absolute and
percent area density. Volumetric estimates of absolute and percent dense
tissue were obtained using FDA-cleared software (Quantra, Hologic, Inc).
Women identified as White or Black/African American with no prior history
of breast cancer were included (N = 2845). Patient characteristics and
mean density measures were compared by race using Chi-square tests and
t-tests. Density measures were log-transformed and z-score standardized.
Linear regression was performed to assess racial differences in mean
density measures, adjusted for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors
(prior biopsy, age at menarche, menopause status, family history, age at
first birth, HRT use). We also tested the interaction of race and BMI on
density.Results: The mean age of patients was 57, and was similar for
white and black women (p = .159). Black women had higher mean BMI than
white women (32.0 kg/m2 vs. 26.0 kg/m2, p<.001). Black women had higher
absolute area (40.1 vs. 33.1 cm2, p<.001) and volume (187.2 vs. 181.6
cm3, p<.001) density than white women, but lower area (19.6% vs. 23.5%,
p<.001) and volume percent density (11.6% vs. 13.4%, p<.001). After
adjusting for age, BMI, and breast cancer risk factors, black women had
higher breast density across all measures (absolute area density = 0.211
p<0.001, area percent density = 0.099 p = .021, absolute volume density =
0.242 p<.001, volume percent density = 0.221 p<.001). The interaction
between race and BMI was significant for area percent (p = .001) and
volume percent density (p<.001), and near significant for volume density
(p = .085). For all three measures, BMI was more strongly associated with
density among white women than black women.Conclusions: Black women had
significantly higher breast density than whites using quantitative
measurements which was not explained by BMI or recognized breast cancer
risk factors. Furthermore, the association of BMI with density was weaker
in black women than white women. Such racial differences in breast
density and its association with BMI may have implications for disease
risk and prevention strategies.

