Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilizing a pathway based analysis of genome wide association data
to identify biomarkers of toxicity in breast cancer patients


Breast cancer is the most common invasive cancer in women worldwide and
treatment related toxicity has high inter-patient variability. Our goal
was to identify additional genetic predictors of toxicity by completing a
pathway based analysis taking advantage of the genotyping results
obtained through a GWAS of the same patients. For our analysis, we have
utilized GWA data from the SUCCESS-A trial in which 3,754 breast cancer
patients were treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. We have included SNPs
associated with 112 genes involved in drug disposition and 375 genes in
selected cancer pathways.We identified 35 SNPs associated with
neutropenia (P-value Breast cancer is the most common invasive cancer in
women worldwide and treatment related toxicity has high inter-patient
variability. Our goal was to identify additional genetic predictors of
toxicity by completing a pathway based analysis taking advantage of the
genotyping results obtained through a GWAS of the same patients. For our
analysis, we have utilized GWA data from the SUCCESS-A trial in which
3,754 breast cancer patients were treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. We
have included SNPs associated with 112 genes involved in drug disposition
and 375 genes in selected cancer pathways.We identified 35 SNPs
associated with neutropenia (P-value <1104). These patients initially
received three cycles consisting of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU),
cyclophosphamide, and epirubicin. Currently we are characterizing the
function of three SNPs located within an intron of the hyaluronan
mediated motility receptor (HMMR) gene that are associated with the
neutropenia phenotype (P-value Breast cancer is the most common invasive
cancer in women worldwide and treatment related toxicity has high
inter-patient variability. Our goal was to identify additional genetic
predictors of toxicity by completing a pathway based analysis taking
advantage of the genotyping results obtained through a GWAS of the same
patients. For our analysis, we have utilized GWA data from the SUCCESS-A
trial in which 3,754 breast cancer patients were treated with adjuvant
chemotherapy. We have included SNPs associated with 112 genes involved in
drug disposition and 375 genes in selected cancer pathways.We identified
35 SNPs associated with neutropenia (P-value <1104). These patients
initially received three cycles consisting of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU),
cyclophosphamide, and epirubicin. Currently we are characterizing the
function of three SNPs located within an intron of the hyaluronan
mediated motility receptor (HMMR) gene that are associated with the
neutropenia phenotype (P-value <1104). These SNPs are highly associated
with the expression of a gene encoding a B-cell survival factor,
TNFSF13B, (P-value Breast cancer is the most common invasive cancer in
women worldwide and treatment related toxicity has high inter-patient
variability. Our goal was to identify additional genetic predictors of
toxicity by completing a pathway based analysis taking advantage of the
genotyping results obtained through a GWAS of the same patients. For our
analysis, we have utilized GWA data from the SUCCESS-A trial in which
3,754 breast cancer patients were treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. We
have included SNPs associated with 112 genes involved in drug disposition
and 375 genes in selected cancer pathways.We identified 35 SNPs
associated with neutropenia (P-value <1104). These patients initially
received three cycles consisting of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU),
cyclophosphamide, and epirubicin. Currently we are characterizing the
function of three SNPs located within an intron of the hyaluronan
mediated motility receptor (HMMR) gene that are associated with the
neutropenia phenotype (P-value <1104). These SNPs are highly associated
with the expression of a gene encoding a B-cell survival factor,
TNFSF13B, (P-value <1105).Our in vitro studies using lymphoblastoid cell
lines (LCLs) selected based on the genotypes of HMMR gene showed that
heterozygous and homozygous variant cells (n = 6) have an increased
sensitivity to 5-fluorouracil, but not cyclophosphamide or epirubicin
when compared with homozygous wild-type cells (n = 6). LCLs exposed to
the previously mentioned chemotherapeutic agents resulted in an
upregulation of TNFSF13B gene expression and downregulation of HMMR gene
expression.We have utilized a pathway based approach to analyzing GWA
data to identify several SNPs in the HMMR gene highly associated with the
expression of one of the top signals in the cytopenia GWAS. Our goal is
to further characterize the role of HMMR gene variants in chemotherapy
response by assessing whether combinations of these agents in vitro
(including 5-FU) also have a genotype dependent response to cytotoxicity.

