Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of a humanized CXCR4 monoclonal antibody for
therapeutic monitoring and intervention in experimental NSCLC and TNBC
mouse models


The CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) is over-expressed in lung and breast
tumors, leading to increased metastasis, poor prognosis and survival
rates. Considering the limited treatment options for triple negative
breast (TNBC) and non-small cell lung (NSCLC) cancers, CXCR4-based
therapy, guided by targeted imaging, will provide a more effective and
optimal therapeutic strategy. Here, a humanized anti-CXCR4 antibody (mAb)
and its 89Zr-labeled counterpart ([89Zr]mAb) were evaluated for
therapeutic efficacy and CXCR4-specific tumor accumulation by positron
emission tomography (PET) imaging with the aim to establish a correlation
between imaging and therapy in NSCLC and TNBC xenografts in mice.The
specificity of the [89Zr]mAb was evaluated in vitro using the NSCLC
(CXCR4high H1155, CXCR4low A549) and TNBC (CXCR4high DU4775, CXCR4med
MDA-MB-231) cancer cell lines. These cell lines were also used to
establish subcutaneous and orthotopic breast and lung cancer xenografts
in immunocompromised mice. The firefly luciferase-expressing MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cell line (231-Luc) was used to generate a spontaneous
metastatic mouse model. PET imaging and ex vivo biodistribution studies
were performed to evaluate [89Zr]mAb uptake in tumors and metastases.
CXCR4 expression was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. For therapy, mice
harboring lung and breast tumors were randomized (150mm3) and treated
with vehicle (saline), control IgG4 mAb or targeted mAb (10mg/kg every
third day, 5x, n = 7/group,). Weight of mice and tumor growth were
monitored throughout the study.In vitro binding studies demonstrated
CXCR4-specific radiotracer uptake and correlated with CXCR4 expression as
determined by flow cytometry. PET imaging and biodistribution studies in
subcutaneous lung cancer xenografts showed a%ID/g of 32.9 6.2 in H1155
and 6.8 0.9 in A549 tumors, 24 h p.i. Preferential H1155 tumor uptake was
observed over 120 h with a consistent H1155/A549 ratio of 4.5-5. Similar
results were observed in orthotopic lung and breast tumors. PET imaging
of 231-Luc xenografted mice demonstrated a [89Zr]mAb uptake [percentage
injected dose (%ID)/cc] of 15.7 1.9 and 16.1 2.9 in primary tumors and
lymph node metastases, respectively, at 24 h post-injection (p.i.).
Therapeutic doses significantly reduced tumor growth in CXCR4high H1155,
but not in CXCR4low A549 xenografts. A similar but less pronounced effect
was observed in TNBC xenografts that have comparatively lower CXCR4
expression.[89Zr]mAb-PET demonstrated CXCR4 uptake in primary tumors and
metastases in experimental models of NSCLC and TNBC that correlated with
therapeutic efficacy of the non-labeled mAb. [89Zr]mAb is a promising and
translatable candidate for imaging of CXCR4 expression in various CXCR4
over-expressing cancers, which, in conjunction with the non-labeled
antibody, can be utilized for therapeutic intervention and monitoring.

