Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of miRNAs classify two distinct stages of
epithelial cell differentiation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC)


Background Analyses of microRNA expression profiles have revealed that
many microRNAs are expressed aberrantly and correlate with tumorigenesis,
progression, and prognosis of various solid tumors. However, several
miRNA analyses of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have been
inconsistent among studies due to the small sample size.Method366 HNSCC
samples from two independent subsets of patients from UNC and The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) were analyzed by the different platforms, microRNA
microarray and miRNA Seq, respectively. Using the integrative
correlations method, 41 miRNAs were selected as highly reliable across
the different platforms. Tumor statistically significant subtypes were
identified using consensus clustering and miRNA SigClust test statistic.
miRNA clusters were validated across independent cohorts using centroids.
Clinical and pathway associations of the subtypes were evaluated using
logistic regression and gene ontology approaches.Results We identified
two clinically relevant and genetically different subclasses of HNSCC
that each related to a different stage of epithelial cell differentiation
and were independently validated (P Background Analyses of microRNA
expression profiles have revealed that many microRNAs are expressed
aberrantly and correlate with tumorigenesis, progression, and prognosis
of various solid tumors. However, several miRNA analyses of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have been inconsistent among studies due
to the small sample size.Method366 HNSCC samples from two independent
subsets of patients from UNC and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) were
analyzed by the different platforms, microRNA microarray and miRNA Seq,
respectively. Using the integrative correlations method, 41 miRNAs were
selected as highly reliable across the different platforms. Tumor
statistically significant subtypes were identified using consensus
clustering and miRNA SigClust test statistic. miRNA clusters were
validated across independent cohorts using centroids. Clinical and
pathway associations of the subtypes were evaluated using logistic
regression and gene ontology approaches.Results We identified two
clinically relevant and genetically different subclasses of HNSCC that
each related to a different stage of epithelial cell differentiation and
were independently validated (P < 0.001). These were named epithelial and
stromal subtypes according to their respective correlations with
functional target gene ontology. Each subclass demonstrated significant
differences in terms of mRNA signature (P Background Analyses of microRNA
expression profiles have revealed that many microRNAs are expressed
aberrantly and correlate with tumorigenesis, progression, and prognosis
of various solid tumors. However, several miRNA analyses of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have been inconsistent among studies due
to the small sample size.Method366 HNSCC samples from two independent
subsets of patients from UNC and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) were
analyzed by the different platforms, microRNA microarray and miRNA Seq,
respectively. Using the integrative correlations method, 41 miRNAs were
selected as highly reliable across the different platforms. Tumor
statistically significant subtypes were identified using consensus
clustering and miRNA SigClust test statistic. miRNA clusters were
validated across independent cohorts using centroids. Clinical and
pathway associations of the subtypes were evaluated using logistic
regression and gene ontology approaches.Results We identified two
clinically relevant and genetically different subclasses of HNSCC that
each related to a different stage of epithelial cell differentiation and
were independently validated (P < 0.001). These were named epithelial and
stromal subtypes according to their respective correlations with
functional target gene ontology. Each subclass demonstrated significant
differences in terms of mRNA signature (P < 0.001), primary tumor sites
(P Background Analyses of microRNA expression profiles have revealed that
many microRNAs are expressed aberrantly and correlate with tumorigenesis,
progression, and prognosis of various solid tumors. However, several
miRNA analyses of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have been
inconsistent among studies due to the small sample size.Method366 HNSCC
samples from two independent subsets of patients from UNC and The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) were analyzed by the different platforms, microRNA
microarray and miRNA Seq, respectively. Using the integrative
correlations method, 41 miRNAs were selected as highly reliable across
the different platforms. Tumor statistically significant subtypes were
identified using consensus clustering and miRNA SigClust test statistic.
miRNA clusters were validated across independent cohorts using centroids.
Clinical and pathway associations of the subtypes were evaluated using
logistic regression and gene ontology approaches.Results We identified
two clinically relevant and genetically different subclasses of HNSCC
that each related to a different stage of epithelial cell differentiation
and were independently validated (P < 0.001). These were named epithelial
and stromal subtypes according to their respective correlations with
functional target gene ontology. Each subclass demonstrated significant
differences in terms of mRNA signature (P < 0.001), primary tumor sites
(P < 0.001), and a model of normal epithelial development. Multivariate
analysis revealed that stromal subtype was independently associated with
poor prognosis (hazard ratio of 1.677, P = 0.014.) We also found several
microRNAs as strong regulators of subclass-specific gene expression
networks in HNSCC. Among these miRNAs, the miR-200 family suppresses
mesenchymal differentiation in HNSCC by downregulating expression of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.Conclusion Our findings assume that
microRNAs are significant determinants of HNSCC subclass through their
ability to regulate developmental growth and differentiation programs in
epithelial cells. Taken together, our results delineate developmental
microRNA expression signatures that both characterize and yield the
phenotypic diversity of HNSCC subclasses, thus providing an expanded
framework for understanding the pathogenesis of HNSCC.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

