Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of CBP (CREB-binding protein) in prostatic
adenocarcinomas (PACs): CBP is associated with high grade, advanced stage
and biochemical disease recurrence


Background: CREB-binding protein (CBP), encoded by the CREBBP gene
functions as an activator of a variety of transcription factors that play
critical roles in normal embryonic growth and development, tumorigenesis
and homeostasis by coupling chromatin remodeling to transcription factor
recognition. Whether CBP functions as a tumor suppressor or an oncogene
in cancer progression remains unclear. In this study, we assessed the
prognostic significance of CBP protein expression in PACs.Design:
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections from 115 PACs were
immunostained by a manual method (DAKO EnVision+ Dual Link System-HRP)
using rabbit polyclonal CBP (Santa Cruz Biotech, Santa Cruz, CA).
Cytoplasmic and/or nuclear immunoreactivity was scored based on intensity
and percentage of positive cells in both the tumor (T) and adjacent
benign (B) epithelium in each case. Cases were assessed as tumor>benign
(T>B), tumor = benign (T = B), tumorBackground: CREB-binding protein
(CBP), encoded by the CREBBP gene functions as an activator of a variety
of transcription factors that play critical roles in normal embryonic
growth and development, tumorigenesis and homeostasis by coupling
chromatin remodeling to transcription factor recognition. Whether CBP
functions as a tumor suppressor or an oncogene in cancer progression
remains unclear. In this study, we assessed the prognostic significance
of CBP protein expression in PACs.Design: Formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue sections from 115 PACs were immunostained by a
manual method (DAKO EnVision+ Dual Link System-HRP) using rabbit
polyclonal CBP (Santa Cruz Biotech, Santa Cruz, CA). Cytoplasmic and/or
nuclear immunoreactivity was scored based on intensity and percentage of
positive cells in both the tumor (T) and adjacent benign (B) epithelium
in each case. Cases were assessed as tumor>benign (T>B), tumor = benign
(T = B), tumor<benign (TB 41%, T = B 37%, T = Gleason 7) vs low (LGB 52%
HG vs 33% LG, T = B 19% HG vs 51% LG, TB 51% adv vs 31% early, T = B 23%
adv vs 52% early, TB 53% recurr vs 28% non recurr, T = B 26% recurr vs
49% non recurr, TB 42%, T = B 7%, T = Gleason 7) vs low (LGB 58% HG vs
30% LG, T = B 6% HG vs 7% LG, N 36% HG vs 63% LG; p = 0.008] and advanced
(stage III, IV) vs early (stage I, II) tumor stage [T>B 54% adv vs 29%
early, T = B 7% adv vs 7% early, N 39% adv vs 64% early; p = 0.019]. On
multivariate analysis, high tumor grade independently predicted
biochemical disease recurrence (p = 0.006).Conclusion: CBP
immunoreactivity is a biomarker of adverse prognosis in PAC, correlating
with high tumor grade and advanced stage disease. Cytoplasmic CBP
expression is also associated with biochemical disease recurrence.
Further study of CBP expression and its potential role in prostate cancer
appears warranted.

