Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted next-generation resequencing in pediatric osteosarcoma
patients


Background: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant bone tumor in
children and adolescents. Recent genomic analysis demonstrated that OS
are characterized as a high frequency of structural variations and
chromosomal copy number changes. Meanwhile, specific genomic alterations
such as RB1 or TP53 have been identified, although driver gene mutation
for OS tumorigenesis has yet to be found. The aim of this study is to
identify specific somatic mutations in OS patients by the method of
comprehensive targeted resequencing.Patients and Methods: 13 pairs of
tumor and non-tumor frozen tissues taken from the patients diagnosed as a
primary conventional OS were subjected to this study. All tumor samples
were collected at the time of preoperative biopsy and confirmed
pathologically the tumor cell content more than 80%. We utilized a next
generation sequencing technique with the Ion AmpliSeq Comprehensive
Cancer Panel (CCP) containing 409 cancer-related genes. 40 ng of DNAs
were used for multiplex PCR amplification and sequencing was run on the
Ion Torrent Proton loaded with PIv2 chip. Data analysis including
alignment to the hg19 human reference genome and variant calling was done
using the Torrent Suite Software. Obtained genomic data was validated by
visualizing in Integrative Genomics Viewer and candidate mutations were
annotated by wANNOVAR database.Results: An adequate library was obtained
from all samples for subsequent sequencing. Mean read length was 110 base
pairs and an average coverage was approx.1500 for tumors and 400 for
paired non-tumors. A total of 153 candidate non-synonymous somatic SNVs
(median; 13.9 per tumor) were found with the threshold of over 5%
frequency. After validation analysis and filtering process of variants,
at least 12 SNVs were confirmed in 8 patients. Recurrent SNVs have not
been observed among the 13 patients. There was a trend toward increased
number of SNVs in dead patients comparing to alive patients (median 0 vs
1), although no significant difference was observed (P = .23, Wilcoxon
test). Pathway analysis of the candidate SNVs showed significant
correlations with three gene function categories including cell cycle,
ATP binding and ligand-dependent nuclear receptors (pBackground:
Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant bone tumor in children and
adolescents. Recent genomic analysis demonstrated that OS are
characterized as a high frequency of structural variations and
chromosomal copy number changes. Meanwhile, specific genomic alterations
such as RB1 or TP53 have been identified, although driver gene mutation
for OS tumorigenesis has yet to be found. The aim of this study is to
identify specific somatic mutations in OS patients by the method of
comprehensive targeted resequencing.Patients and Methods: 13 pairs of
tumor and non-tumor frozen tissues taken from the patients diagnosed as a
primary conventional OS were subjected to this study. All tumor samples
were collected at the time of preoperative biopsy and confirmed
pathologically the tumor cell content more than 80%. We utilized a next
generation sequencing technique with the Ion AmpliSeq Comprehensive
Cancer Panel (CCP) containing 409 cancer-related genes. 40 ng of DNAs
were used for multiplex PCR amplification and sequencing was run on the
Ion Torrent Proton loaded with PIv2 chip. Data analysis including
alignment to the hg19 human reference genome and variant calling was done
using the Torrent Suite Software. Obtained genomic data was validated by
visualizing in Integrative Genomics Viewer and candidate mutations were
annotated by wANNOVAR database.Results: An adequate library was obtained
from all samples for subsequent sequencing. Mean read length was 110 base
pairs and an average coverage was approx.1500 for tumors and 400 for
paired non-tumors. A total of 153 candidate non-synonymous somatic SNVs
(median; 13.9 per tumor) were found with the threshold of over 5%
frequency. After validation analysis and filtering process of variants,
at least 12 SNVs were confirmed in 8 patients. Recurrent SNVs have not
been observed among the 13 patients. There was a trend toward increased
number of SNVs in dead patients comparing to alive patients (median 0 vs
1), although no significant difference was observed (P = .23, Wilcoxon
test). Pathway analysis of the candidate SNVs showed significant
correlations with three gene function categories including cell cycle,
ATP binding and ligand-dependent nuclear receptors (p<0.02). We also
calculated relative copy number changes in tumors using the coverage
analysis data and found at least three gene amplification on chromosome
1p, 17p and 19p.Conclusion: We identified at least 12 non-synonymous
somatic SNVs of cancer-related genes on the CCP panel in pediatric OS
patients. Targeted sequencing is a useful and cost-effective tool to
quickly survey known cancer-related mutations of pediatric OS.

