Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PF-06463922, a novel next generation ALK/ROS1 inhibitor, overcomes
resistance to 1st and 2nd generation ALK inhibitors in pre-clinical models


Overcoming resistance to targeted kinase inhibitors is a major clinical
challenge in oncology.For 1st and 2nd generation ALK inhibitors acquired
resistance due to ALK kinase domain mutations and/or pharmacological drug
resistance are major causes for disease relapse. Here, we report the
preclinical evaluation of PF-06463922, a potent and brain penetrant
ALK/ROS1 inhibitor with sub to low nanomolar cell potency against ALK
fusions and all known clinically-acquired resistant mutations.
PF-06463922 exhibited marked cytoreductive activity in tumor xenografts
driven by various ALK mutants. Furthermore, PF-06463922 led to
significant regression of EML4-ALK driven lung cancer brain metastasis
and prolonged mouse survival. Compared to other clinically available ALK
inhibitors, PF-06463922 is unique in its superior potency against a broad
spectrum of acquired ALK mutations, including the highly resistant G1202R
mutant and its robust antitumor activity in the brain. Furthermore,
PF-06463922 demonstrated remarkable selectivity and safety margins in a
variety of preclinical studies. These results suggest that PF-06463922
may be highly effective for the treatment of patients with ALK-driven
lung cancers, including those who relapsed on clinically available ALK
inhibitors due to ALK secondary mutations and/or brain metastases.

