Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel multiplex droplet digital PCR approach to KRAS mutation
detection in circulating tumor DNA


Microdroplet digital PCR can be used to detect low frequency mutations in
oncogene-driven lung cancer. Detection of circulating tumour DNA in
plasma can be limited by paucity of material, particularly during
response to anti-cancer therapy. The range of KRAS point mutations
observed in NSCLC necessitates a multiplex approach for efficient
mutation detection in circulating DNA.We designed and optimised 3 droplet
digital PCR multiplex assays investigating 9 different KRAS mutations
using PrimePCR ddPCR Mutation Assays and the Bio-Rad QX100 system. DNA
was extracted from FFPE tissue and plasma from patients with advanced
lung adenocarcinoma and was analysed to assess for the presence of these
KRAS activating mutations.Multiple sub-clonal KRAS mutant populations
were detectable in both tissue and circulating tumour DNA at low
frequency (up to 0.1%). Similar KRAS allele frequency was observed using
multiplex or duplex assays (r2 = 0.99). Sub-clonal population
representation varied over the disease course.Multiplex microdroplet
digital PCR assays can be adapted to be used to efficiently identify
tissue and circulating KRAS mutations in advanced lung adenocarcinoma.
Variation in sub-clonal populations between tissue and plasma, and at
different time points over the disease course, illustrates the potential
use of circulating DNA analysis as a more readily accessible,
non-invasive and accurate representation of the molecular profile of
NSCLC throughout treatment.

