Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Conversion of abiraterone to D4A drives antitumor activity in
castration-resistant prostate cancer


Castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) still relies on androgens for
progression. Abiraterone, an FDA approved CYP17A inhibitor, blocks
androgen synthesis and prolongs survival. Abiraterone metabolites are
generally thought to be inactive. We have identified a novel abiraterone
metabolite, D4A, which inhibits three steroidogenic enzymes and androgen
receptor (AR) itself. After abiraterone acetate administration, plasma
from mice and patients were analyzed with liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry (LC-MS). The LC-MS results indicate that abiraterone is
converted to D4A at detectable concentrations in both mice and patients.
To test the function of D4A, the androgen synthesis pathway was analyzed
in cell lines and xenografts. After incubation with [3H] labeled
androgens, metabolites from cell lines and xenografts were analyzed by
HPLC. We found that D4A inhibits activity of the steroidogenic enzymes
CYP17A, 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3[[Unsupported Character - Symbol
Font ]]HSD) and 5-reductase. Furthermore D4A competes with the AR agonist
R1881 and binds to AR directly. D4A inhibits DHT-induced AR occupancy on
the PSA enhancer as detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation and reduces
PSA expression. Our findings suggest that D4A is an abiraterone
metabolite and a potent inhibitor of the androgen pathway.

