Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: d16HER2 splice variant regulates the activity of HER2-positive
breast cancer-initiating cells


The transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor HER2, overexpressed in 20% of
human breast cancers (BCs), identifies an aggressive tumor subtype and is
reportedly an important regulator of breast cancer-initiating cell
activity (BCIC). We found that 90% of HER2+ BC patients constitutively
express a splice isoform of wild-type HER2 (WTHER2) gene characterized by
the lack of exon 16 (d16HER2), a deletion that promotes the generation of
a particularly aggressive HER2 isoform and that forms stable and
constitutively activated d16HER2 homodimers. Our comparison of the
tumorigenic potential of the human d16HER2 and WTHER2 genes in the
corresponding transgenic mouse models revealed a significantly shorter
tumor latency period (pThe transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor HER2,
overexpressed in 20% of human breast cancers (BCs), identifies an
aggressive tumor subtype and is reportedly an important regulator of
breast cancer-initiating cell activity (BCIC). We found that 90% of HER2+
BC patients constitutively express a splice isoform of wild-type HER2
(WTHER2) gene characterized by the lack of exon 16 (d16HER2), a deletion
that promotes the generation of a particularly aggressive HER2 isoform
and that forms stable and constitutively activated d16HER2 homodimers.
Our comparison of the tumorigenic potential of the human d16HER2 and
WTHER2 genes in the corresponding transgenic mouse models revealed a
significantly shorter tumor latency period (p< 0.001) and a higher tumor
incidence in the d16HER2 mice (pThe transmembrane tyrosine kinase
receptor HER2, overexpressed in 20% of human breast cancers (BCs),
identifies an aggressive tumor subtype and is reportedly an important
regulator of breast cancer-initiating cell activity (BCIC). We found that
90% of HER2+ BC patients constitutively express a splice isoform of
wild-type HER2 (WTHER2) gene characterized by the lack of exon 16
(d16HER2), a deletion that promotes the generation of a particularly
aggressive HER2 isoform and that forms stable and constitutively
activated d16HER2 homodimers. Our comparison of the tumorigenic potential
of the human d16HER2 and WTHER2 genes in the corresponding transgenic
mouse models revealed a significantly shorter tumor latency period (p<
0.001) and a higher tumor incidence in the d16HER2 mice (p<0.001),
suggesting a role for this variant in HER2-driven activation of BCICs. In
this context, our preliminary analyses of HER2-positive primary mammary
tumor cell lines MI6 and MI7 derived from spontaneous transgenic d16HER2
mice showed a significantly higher mammosphere-forming efficiency and
higher levels of stem cell marker transcripts, including CD44, Wnt, Notch
and Bmi1, compared to transgenic mouse WTHER2 tumor cells (WTHER2_1 and
WTHER2_2). Mammospheres generated from human HER2-overexpressing breast
cancer cell lines BT474 and MDA-MB-361, which also express the d16HER2
variant, exhibited an increase in the relative abundance of d16HER2 mRNA
compared with that in the same parental cells cultured in adhesion
conditions, as indicated by qPCR analyses. Experiments in mice injected
into the mammary fat pad with the d16HER2- and WTHER2-positive cell lines
at different serial dilutions indicate a consistently higher stemness
potential of MI6 and MI7 cells compared to WTHER2_1 and WTHER2_2 cells,
strongly suggesting that the d16HER2 variant plays a greater role than
WTHER2 in regulating BCICs of HER2-driven mammary tumors.Supported by
Minister of Health and AIRC

