Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor efficacy of EC1456 in patient derived xenograft models
of ovarian, endometrial, NSCLC and TNBC


EC1456, a potent folate-targeted tubulysin conjugate, is currently being
evaluated in a phase 1 dose escalation study in patients with advanced
solid tumors. To assist in upcoming cancer indication selection decisions
for advanced trials, we tested EC1456 against eight patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) cancer models. Thus, EC1456 was evaluated as a single
agent or in combination with standard of care (SOC) treatments against
two folate receptor (FR)-positive models each of ovarian, endometrial,
non-small cell lung (NSCLC) and triple negative breast (TNBC) tumor
models. Nude mice engrafted subcutaneously with PDX tumors received 4
mol/kg/week EC1456 for two weeks, following a once a week (SIW) or two
times a week (BIW) schedules, either alone or in combination with 15
mg/kg, SIW x 2 Paclitaxel (ovarian and endometrial), 1 mg/kg SIW x 2
eribulin mesylate (TNBC) or 15 mg/kg, SIW docetaxel (NSCLC). EC1456 alone
demonstrated tumor growth suppression or stasis in most of the tumor
models and significantly greater anti-tumor activity (including cures)
with no detectable increase in toxicity when tested in combination with
the SOC agents. Overall, EC1456 significantly augmented the growth
inhibitory effects of SOC treatments against all four PDX cancer
indications examined, thus lending support to future clinical development
of this novel FR-targeted agent.

