Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p120 catenin: A novel regulator of epithelial cell delamination in
early Kras-driven pancreatic cancer


By 2020, pancreatic cancer is estimated to climb from the 4th to the 2nd
most common cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. This
deadly disease has continued to remain largely refractory to
chemotherapeutic and treatment regimens, and patients often experience a
heavy metastatic burden. A study combining the Sleeping beauty transposon
random insertion mutagenesis system with an oncogenic KrasG12D allele in
mice as a screen to identify candidate pancreatic cancer genes identified
genes enriched in adherens and tight junctions as significantly enriched
in Kras-driven neoplasia with Ctnnd1 as a locus commonly mutated in mice
developing metastatic progression of pancreatic cancer. Ctnnd1 encodes
the adherens junction protein p120 catenin, which is integral in
stabilization of cadherin molecules at cell membranes. p120 catenin is
misexpressed in an estimated 60% primary pancreatic tumors and low/absent
expression levels and predominant cytoplasmic localization of p120
catenin in primary resected pancreatic tumors correlates with worse
survival in pancreatic cancer patients. Yet, the mechanisms by which p120
catenin contributes to the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer are not
clear. We have comprehensively examined p120 catenin staining in human
Pancreatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia (PanIN) and identified
mislocalization of p120 catenin to the cytoplasm as early as PanIN2. 3/5
PanIN3 examined had predominant cytoplasmic staining, which led us to
hypothesize that p120 catenin might play a critical role in early
pancreatic neoplasia, before the onset of Pancreatic Ductal
Adenocarcinoma. To examine the role of p120 catenin during early
Kras-driven pancreatic neoplasia, we ablated p120 catenin in a mouse
model of preinvasive pancreatic cancer, KCiMist1. KCiMist1p120f/f
pancreases display significant acceleration of acinar to ductal
metaplasia (ADM) and PanIN formation when compared to KCiMist1p120wt/wt
pancreases one month post tamoxifen injection. KCiMist1p120f/f pancreases
are significantly larger than KCiMist1p120wt/wt pancreases with 92.89%
pancreatic area occupied by Fibrostroma one month post tamoxifen
injection. As a result, KCiMist1p120f/f animals have severe exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency and die on average 8 weeks earlier than their
KCiMist1p120wt/wt controls. Lineage tracing revealed a prominent
epithelial cell delamination phenotype in KCiMist1p120f/f pancreases.
Quantification of epithelial cells in the extensive stroma revealed a
striking 832/7000 CK19+ cells in KCiMist1p120f/f pancreases vs 15/7000
CK19+ cells in KCiMist1p120wt/wt pancreases. Microarray analysis showed
>1263 differentially expressed genes! IPA pathway analysis revealed
significant gene expression changes in PI3K/AKT and Cdc42 signaling.
Taken together, our results suggest a critical role for p120 catenin in
regulating epithelial cell delamination in early pancreatic cancer.

