Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide comparison of PU.1 and Spi-B binding sites in a mouse
B lymphoma cell line


Background. The E26-transformation-specific (ETS) transcription factor
Spi-B is required for the survival of Activated B Cell-type Diffuse Large
B Cell Lymphoma cell lines and is recurrently amplified in B cell
lymphoma. The ETS transcription factor PU.1 is highly related to Spi-B.
Both PU.1 and Spi-B are expressed in B lymphoma cell lines, and have been
demonstrated to redundantly activate transcription of genes required for
differentiation and function. We hypothesized that Spi-B and PU.1 occupy
similar regions of chromatin within the genome of a B lymphoma cell line.
Results. To compare binding regions of Spi-B and PU.1, murine WEHI-279
lymphoma cells were infected with retroviral vectors encoding
3XFLAG-tagged PU.1 or Spi-B. Anti-FLAG chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by next generation sequencing (ChIP-seq) was performed. Analysis
for high-stringency enriched genomic regions demonstrated that PU.1
occupied 4528 regions and Spi-B occupied 3360 regions. 1900 of these
regions exhibited at least 100 base pairs of overlap for both factors.
Regions bound by Spi-B and PU.1 were frequently located within genes
associated with immune response and activation of B cells. Motif-finding
revealed that both transcription factors were predominantly located at
the ETS core domain (GGAA), however, other unique motifs were identified
when examining regions associated with only one of the two factors.
Motifs associated with unique PU.1 binding included POU2F2, while unique
motifs in the Spi-B regions contained a combined ETS-IRF motif.
Conclusions. Our results suggest that complementary biological functions
of PU.1 and Spi-B may be explained by their interaction with a similar
set of regions in the genome of B lymphoma cells. However, sites uniquely
occupied by PU.1 or Spi-B provide insight into their unique functions.

