Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exercise inhibits the growth of breast cancer and reduces fat mass
in postmenopausal obese mice associated with a circulating angiostatic
phenotype and the inhibition of angiogenesis in those tissues


Obesity and physical inactivity are important risk factors for cancers,
especially for postmenopausal breast cancer. However, potential
mechanisms of exercise in reducing obesity and preventing postmenopausal
breast cancer are poorly understood. The animal models in this area are
very limited. In the present study, we used a postmenopausal obese mouse
model inoculated with mouse breast cancer (E0771) cells to examine the
potential effects of long-term exercise in reducing fat mass and breast
cancer progression. Ovariectomy (OVX) was performed in 12 sixty week-old
female mice (C57BL/6J), then followed by a high-fat (60%) diet for 12
weeks. In the eighth week of the dietary program, the body weight (BW)
was significantly increased from 32.11.8 to 42.52.3 g; PObesity and
physical inactivity are important risk factors for cancers, especially
for postmenopausal breast cancer. However, potential mechanisms of
exercise in reducing obesity and preventing postmenopausal breast cancer
are poorly understood. The animal models in this area are very limited.
In the present study, we used a postmenopausal obese mouse model
inoculated with mouse breast cancer (E0771) cells to examine the
potential effects of long-term exercise in reducing fat mass and breast
cancer progression. Ovariectomy (OVX) was performed in 12 sixty week-old
female mice (C57BL/6J), then followed by a high-fat (60%) diet for 12
weeks. In the eighth week of the dietary program, the body weight (BW)
was significantly increased from 32.11.8 to 42.52.3 g; P<0.01), then 10^6
E0771 (mouse breast cancer) cells were injected in the left fourth
mammary gland. The mice were randomized into two groups, exercise and
sedentary (n = 6). The exercise was conducted in a voluntary running cage
system, i.e., 19.72.8 m/min, 30 min in the morning and 30 min in the
afternoon, 7days/week, for 4 weeks. The lean mass (LM) or fat mass (FM)
composition was monitored by EchoMRI weekly. In the end of experiment,
the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 2 hours after the last exercise,
and blood samples, visceral fat and tumors were collected for measuring
the expression of endostatin, sFlt-1 and free-VEGF using ELISA and blood
vessel density (BVD) using CD31 immunochemistry. There was a significant
decrease in BW (40.51.9 vs. 45.72.3 g; PObesity and physical inactivity
are important risk factors for cancers, especially for postmenopausal
breast cancer. However, potential mechanisms of exercise in reducing
obesity and preventing postmenopausal breast cancer are poorly
understood. The animal models in this area are very limited. In the
present study, we used a postmenopausal obese mouse model inoculated with
mouse breast cancer (E0771) cells to examine the potential effects of
long-term exercise in reducing fat mass and breast cancer progression.
Ovariectomy (OVX) was performed in 12 sixty week-old female mice
(C57BL/6J), then followed by a high-fat (60%) diet for 12 weeks. In the
eighth week of the dietary program, the body weight (BW) was
significantly increased from 32.11.8 to 42.52.3 g; P<0.01), then 10^6
E0771 (mouse breast cancer) cells were injected in the left fourth
mammary gland. The mice were randomized into two groups, exercise and
sedentary (n = 6). The exercise was conducted in a voluntary running cage
system, i.e., 19.72.8 m/min, 30 min in the morning and 30 min in the
afternoon, 7days/week, for 4 weeks. The lean mass (LM) or fat mass (FM)
composition was monitored by EchoMRI weekly. In the end of experiment,
the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 2 hours after the last exercise,
and blood samples, visceral fat and tumors were collected for measuring
the expression of endostatin, sFlt-1 and free-VEGF using ELISA and blood
vessel density (BVD) using CD31 immunochemistry. There was a significant
decrease in BW (40.51.9 vs. 45.72.3 g; P<0.01) and tumor weight (1.950.41
vs. 2.630.11 g; PObesity and physical inactivity are important risk
factors for cancers, especially for postmenopausal breast cancer.
However, potential mechanisms of exercise in reducing obesity and
preventing postmenopausal breast cancer are poorly understood. The animal
models in this area are very limited. In the present study, we used a
postmenopausal obese mouse model inoculated with mouse breast cancer
(E0771) cells to examine the potential effects of long-term exercise in
reducing fat mass and breast cancer progression. Ovariectomy (OVX) was
performed in 12 sixty week-old female mice (C57BL/6J), then followed by a
high-fat (60%) diet for 12 weeks. In the eighth week of the dietary
program, the body weight (BW) was significantly increased from 32.11.8 to
42.52.3 g; P<0.01), then 10^6 E0771 (mouse breast cancer) cells were
injected in the left fourth mammary gland. The mice were randomized into
two groups, exercise and sedentary (n = 6). The exercise was conducted in
a voluntary running cage system, i.e., 19.72.8 m/min, 30 min in the
morning and 30 min in the afternoon, 7days/week, for 4 weeks. The lean
mass (LM) or fat mass (FM) composition was monitored by EchoMRI weekly.
In the end of experiment, the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 2
hours after the last exercise, and blood samples, visceral fat and tumors
were collected for measuring the expression of endostatin, sFlt-1 and
free-VEGF using ELISA and blood vessel density (BVD) using CD31
immunochemistry. There was a significant decrease in BW (40.51.9 vs.
45.72.3 g; P<0.01) and tumor weight (1.950.41 vs. 2.630.11 g; P<0.01) in
exercised-group compared to sedentary group, respectively. Exercise
significantly decreased FM (17.80.9 vs. 22.71.1 g; PObesity and physical
inactivity are important risk factors for cancers, especially for
postmenopausal breast cancer. However, potential mechanisms of exercise
in reducing obesity and preventing postmenopausal breast cancer are
poorly understood. The animal models in this area are very limited. In
the present study, we used a postmenopausal obese mouse model inoculated
with mouse breast cancer (E0771) cells to examine the potential effects
of long-term exercise in reducing fat mass and breast cancer progression.
Ovariectomy (OVX) was performed in 12 sixty week-old female mice
(C57BL/6J), then followed by a high-fat (60%) diet for 12 weeks. In the
eighth week of the dietary program, the body weight (BW) was
significantly increased from 32.11.8 to 42.52.3 g; P<0.01), then 10^6
E0771 (mouse breast cancer) cells were injected in the left fourth
mammary gland. The mice were randomized into two groups, exercise and
sedentary (n = 6). The exercise was conducted in a voluntary running cage
system, i.e., 19.72.8 m/min, 30 min in the morning and 30 min in the
afternoon, 7days/week, for 4 weeks. The lean mass (LM) or fat mass (FM)
composition was monitored by EchoMRI weekly. In the end of experiment,
the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 2 hours after the last exercise,
and blood samples, visceral fat and tumors were collected for measuring
the expression of endostatin, sFlt-1 and free-VEGF using ELISA and blood
vessel density (BVD) using CD31 immunochemistry. There was a significant
decrease in BW (40.51.9 vs. 45.72.3 g; P<0.01) and tumor weight (1.950.41
vs. 2.630.11 g; P<0.01) in exercised-group compared to sedentary group,
respectively. Exercise significantly decreased FM (17.80.9 vs. 22.71.1 g;
P<0.01), tumor VEGF levels (44.12.1 vs. 65.43.3 pg/mg protein; PObesity
and physical inactivity are important risk factors for cancers,
especially for postmenopausal breast cancer. However, potential
mechanisms of exercise in reducing obesity and preventing postmenopausal
breast cancer are poorly understood. The animal models in this area are
very limited. In the present study, we used a postmenopausal obese mouse
model inoculated with mouse breast cancer (E0771) cells to examine the
potential effects of long-term exercise in reducing fat mass and breast
cancer progression. Ovariectomy (OVX) was performed in 12 sixty week-old
female mice (C57BL/6J), then followed by a high-fat (60%) diet for 12
weeks. In the eighth week of the dietary program, the body weight (BW)
was significantly increased from 32.11.8 to 42.52.3 g; P<0.01), then 10^6
E0771 (mouse breast cancer) cells were injected in the left fourth
mammary gland. The mice were randomized into two groups, exercise and
sedentary (n = 6). The exercise was conducted in a voluntary running cage
system, i.e., 19.72.8 m/min, 30 min in the morning and 30 min in the
afternoon, 7days/week, for 4 weeks. The lean mass (LM) or fat mass (FM)
composition was monitored by EchoMRI weekly. In the end of experiment,
the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 2 hours after the last exercise,
and blood samples, visceral fat and tumors were collected for measuring
the expression of endostatin, sFlt-1 and free-VEGF using ELISA and blood
vessel density (BVD) using CD31 immunochemistry. There was a significant
decrease in BW (40.51.9 vs. 45.72.3 g; P<0.01) and tumor weight (1.950.41
vs. 2.630.11 g; P<0.01) in exercised-group compared to sedentary group,
respectively. Exercise significantly decreased FM (17.80.9 vs. 22.71.1 g;
P<0.01), tumor VEGF levels (44.12.1 vs. 65.43.3 pg/mg protein; P<0.01),
and BVD (147.26.3 vs. 168.35.1 BV#/mm^2; PObesity and physical inactivity
are important risk factors for cancers, especially for postmenopausal
breast cancer. However, potential mechanisms of exercise in reducing
obesity and preventing postmenopausal breast cancer are poorly
understood. The animal models in this area are very limited. In the
present study, we used a postmenopausal obese mouse model inoculated with
mouse breast cancer (E0771) cells to examine the potential effects of
long-term exercise in reducing fat mass and breast cancer progression.
Ovariectomy (OVX) was performed in 12 sixty week-old female mice
(C57BL/6J), then followed by a high-fat (60%) diet for 12 weeks. In the
eighth week of the dietary program, the body weight (BW) was
significantly increased from 32.11.8 to 42.52.3 g; P<0.01), then 10^6
E0771 (mouse breast cancer) cells were injected in the left fourth
mammary gland. The mice were randomized into two groups, exercise and
sedentary (n = 6). The exercise was conducted in a voluntary running cage
system, i.e., 19.72.8 m/min, 30 min in the morning and 30 min in the
afternoon, 7days/week, for 4 weeks. The lean mass (LM) or fat mass (FM)
composition was monitored by EchoMRI weekly. In the end of experiment,
the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 2 hours after the last exercise,
and blood samples, visceral fat and tumors were collected for measuring
the expression of endostatin, sFlt-1 and free-VEGF using ELISA and blood
vessel density (BVD) using CD31 immunochemistry. There was a significant
decrease in BW (40.51.9 vs. 45.72.3 g; P<0.01) and tumor weight (1.950.41
vs. 2.630.11 g; P<0.01) in exercised-group compared to sedentary group,
respectively. Exercise significantly decreased FM (17.80.9 vs. 22.71.1 g;
P<0.01), tumor VEGF levels (44.12.1 vs. 65.43.3 pg/mg protein; P<0.01),
and BVD (147.26.3 vs. 168.35.1 BV#/mm^2; P<0.01) in comparison with the
sedentary, respectively. Exercise significantly decreased a ratio of
capillaries to adipocytes of visceral fat in comparison with sedentary
group (0.630.02 vs. 0.890.05; PObesity and physical inactivity are
important risk factors for cancers, especially for postmenopausal breast
cancer. However, potential mechanisms of exercise in reducing obesity and
preventing postmenopausal breast cancer are poorly understood. The animal
models in this area are very limited. In the present study, we used a
postmenopausal obese mouse model inoculated with mouse breast cancer
(E0771) cells to examine the potential effects of long-term exercise in
reducing fat mass and breast cancer progression. Ovariectomy (OVX) was
performed in 12 sixty week-old female mice (C57BL/6J), then followed by a
high-fat (60%) diet for 12 weeks. In the eighth week of the dietary
program, the body weight (BW) was significantly increased from 32.11.8 to
42.52.3 g; P<0.01), then 10^6 E0771 (mouse breast cancer) cells were
injected in the left fourth mammary gland. The mice were randomized into
two groups, exercise and sedentary (n = 6). The exercise was conducted in
a voluntary running cage system, i.e., 19.72.8 m/min, 30 min in the
morning and 30 min in the afternoon, 7days/week, for 4 weeks. The lean
mass (LM) or fat mass (FM) composition was monitored by EchoMRI weekly.
In the end of experiment, the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 2
hours after the last exercise, and blood samples, visceral fat and tumors
were collected for measuring the expression of endostatin, sFlt-1 and
free-VEGF using ELISA and blood vessel density (BVD) using CD31
immunochemistry. There was a significant decrease in BW (40.51.9 vs.
45.72.3 g; P<0.01) and tumor weight (1.950.41 vs. 2.630.11 g; P<0.01) in
exercised-group compared to sedentary group, respectively. Exercise
significantly decreased FM (17.80.9 vs. 22.71.1 g; P<0.01), tumor VEGF
levels (44.12.1 vs. 65.43.3 pg/mg protein; P<0.01), and BVD (147.26.3 vs.
168.35.1 BV#/mm^2; P<0.01) in comparison with the sedentary,
respectively. Exercise significantly decreased a ratio of capillaries to
adipocytes of visceral fat in comparison with sedentary group (0.630.02
vs. 0.890.05; P<0.01). Exercise significantly increased endostatin
(33.31.6 vs. 24.11.2 ng/ml; PObesity and physical inactivity are
important risk factors for cancers, especially for postmenopausal breast
cancer. However, potential mechanisms of exercise in reducing obesity and
preventing postmenopausal breast cancer are poorly understood. The animal
models in this area are very limited. In the present study, we used a
postmenopausal obese mouse model inoculated with mouse breast cancer
(E0771) cells to examine the potential effects of long-term exercise in
reducing fat mass and breast cancer progression. Ovariectomy (OVX) was
performed in 12 sixty week-old female mice (C57BL/6J), then followed by a
high-fat (60%) diet for 12 weeks. In the eighth week of the dietary
program, the body weight (BW) was significantly increased from 32.11.8 to
42.52.3 g; P<0.01), then 10^6 E0771 (mouse breast cancer) cells were
injected in the left fourth mammary gland. The mice were randomized into
two groups, exercise and sedentary (n = 6). The exercise was conducted in
a voluntary running cage system, i.e., 19.72.8 m/min, 30 min in the
morning and 30 min in the afternoon, 7days/week, for 4 weeks. The lean
mass (LM) or fat mass (FM) composition was monitored by EchoMRI weekly.
In the end of experiment, the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 2
hours after the last exercise, and blood samples, visceral fat and tumors
were collected for measuring the expression of endostatin, sFlt-1 and
free-VEGF using ELISA and blood vessel density (BVD) using CD31
immunochemistry. There was a significant decrease in BW (40.51.9 vs.
45.72.3 g; P<0.01) and tumor weight (1.950.41 vs. 2.630.11 g; P<0.01) in
exercised-group compared to sedentary group, respectively. Exercise
significantly decreased FM (17.80.9 vs. 22.71.1 g; P<0.01), tumor VEGF
levels (44.12.1 vs. 65.43.3 pg/mg protein; P<0.01), and BVD (147.26.3 vs.
168.35.1 BV#/mm^2; P<0.01) in comparison with the sedentary,
respectively. Exercise significantly decreased a ratio of capillaries to
adipocytes of visceral fat in comparison with sedentary group (0.630.02
vs. 0.890.05; P<0.01). Exercise significantly increased endostatin
(33.31.6 vs. 24.11.2 ng/ml; P<0.01) and sFlt-1 (59.53.1 vs. 48.32.5
pg/ml; PObesity and physical inactivity are important risk factors for
cancers, especially for postmenopausal breast cancer. However, potential
mechanisms of exercise in reducing obesity and preventing postmenopausal
breast cancer are poorly understood. The animal models in this area are
very limited. In the present study, we used a postmenopausal obese mouse
model inoculated with mouse breast cancer (E0771) cells to examine the
potential effects of long-term exercise in reducing fat mass and breast
cancer progression. Ovariectomy (OVX) was performed in 12 sixty week-old
female mice (C57BL/6J), then followed by a high-fat (60%) diet for 12
weeks. In the eighth week of the dietary program, the body weight (BW)
was significantly increased from 32.11.8 to 42.52.3 g; P<0.01), then 10^6
E0771 (mouse breast cancer) cells were injected in the left fourth
mammary gland. The mice were randomized into two groups, exercise and
sedentary (n = 6). The exercise was conducted in a voluntary running cage
system, i.e., 19.72.8 m/min, 30 min in the morning and 30 min in the
afternoon, 7days/week, for 4 weeks. The lean mass (LM) or fat mass (FM)
composition was monitored by EchoMRI weekly. In the end of experiment,
the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 2 hours after the last exercise,
and blood samples, visceral fat and tumors were collected for measuring
the expression of endostatin, sFlt-1 and free-VEGF using ELISA and blood
vessel density (BVD) using CD31 immunochemistry. There was a significant
decrease in BW (40.51.9 vs. 45.72.3 g; P<0.01) and tumor weight (1.950.41
vs. 2.630.11 g; P<0.01) in exercised-group compared to sedentary group,
respectively. Exercise significantly decreased FM (17.80.9 vs. 22.71.1 g;
P<0.01), tumor VEGF levels (44.12.1 vs. 65.43.3 pg/mg protein; P<0.01),
and BVD (147.26.3 vs. 168.35.1 BV#/mm^2; P<0.01) in comparison with the
sedentary, respectively. Exercise significantly decreased a ratio of
capillaries to adipocytes of visceral fat in comparison with sedentary
group (0.630.02 vs. 0.890.05; P<0.01). Exercise significantly increased
endostatin (33.31.6 vs. 24.11.2 ng/ml; P<0.01) and sFlt-1 (59.53.1 vs.
48.32.5 pg/ml; P<0.05), and decreased free-VEGF (42.52.1 vs. 61.33.1
pg/ml; PObesity and physical inactivity are important risk factors for
cancers, especially for postmenopausal breast cancer. However, potential
mechanisms of exercise in reducing obesity and preventing postmenopausal
breast cancer are poorly understood. The animal models in this area are
very limited. In the present study, we used a postmenopausal obese mouse
model inoculated with mouse breast cancer (E0771) cells to examine the
potential effects of long-term exercise in reducing fat mass and breast
cancer progression. Ovariectomy (OVX) was performed in 12 sixty week-old
female mice (C57BL/6J), then followed by a high-fat (60%) diet for 12
weeks. In the eighth week of the dietary program, the body weight (BW)
was significantly increased from 32.11.8 to 42.52.3 g; P<0.01), then 10^6
E0771 (mouse breast cancer) cells were injected in the left fourth
mammary gland. The mice were randomized into two groups, exercise and
sedentary (n = 6). The exercise was conducted in a voluntary running cage
system, i.e., 19.72.8 m/min, 30 min in the morning and 30 min in the
afternoon, 7days/week, for 4 weeks. The lean mass (LM) or fat mass (FM)
composition was monitored by EchoMRI weekly. In the end of experiment,
the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane 2 hours after the last exercise,
and blood samples, visceral fat and tumors were collected for measuring
the expression of endostatin, sFlt-1 and free-VEGF using ELISA and blood
vessel density (BVD) using CD31 immunochemistry. There was a significant
decrease in BW (40.51.9 vs. 45.72.3 g; P<0.01) and tumor weight (1.950.41
vs. 2.630.11 g; P<0.01) in exercised-group compared to sedentary group,
respectively. Exercise significantly decreased FM (17.80.9 vs. 22.71.1 g;
P<0.01), tumor VEGF levels (44.12.1 vs. 65.43.3 pg/mg protein; P<0.01),
and BVD (147.26.3 vs. 168.35.1 BV#/mm^2; P<0.01) in comparison with the
sedentary, respectively. Exercise significantly decreased a ratio of
capillaries to adipocytes of visceral fat in comparison with sedentary
group (0.630.02 vs. 0.890.05; P<0.01). Exercise significantly increased
endostatin (33.31.6 vs. 24.11.2 ng/ml; P<0.01) and sFlt-1 (59.53.1 vs.
48.32.5 pg/ml; P<0.05), and decreased free-VEGF (42.52.1 vs. 61.33.1
pg/ml; P<0.01) in the circulation in comparison with sedentary group,
respectively. In postmenopausal obese mice, a long term exercise
significantly 1) inhibited breast tumor angiogenesis and growth, 2)
limited fat mass accumulation by reducing a ratio of capillaries to
adipocytes, and 3) induced a circulating angiostatic phenotype
characterized by increased endostatin and sFlt-1 and decreased free VEGF.
These findings support the hypothesis that exercise-induced circulating
angiostatic phenotype may contribute to the prevention of breast cancer
progression and obesity in postmenopausal women.

