Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retinoblastoma protein 1 implication in the monocytic -
granulocytic transition


Alterations in the myeloipoiesis during cancer lead to production of
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC). MDSC are comprised of two
subsets: monocytic MDSC (M-MDSC) and polymorphonuclear MDSC (PMN-MDSC).
Both subsets contribute to the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment.
Therefore elimination of MDSC could potentially improve the clinical
success of cancer immune therapy. Direct targeting of MDSC progenitors is
an attractive possibility. Our laboratory has recently discovered that
M-MDSC from the bone-marrow can give rise to PMN-MDSC and that this
phenomenon is mediated by the loss of retinoblastoma protein 1 (Rb1)
expression. However, a full phenotypic and molecular characterization of
these MDSC progenitors has not been established. To identify the
subpopulation able to give rise to PMN-MDSC within the M-MDSC population,
we used Rb1-GFP reporter mice to track Rb1 expression in vivo. We found
that Rb1 low M-MDSC express the stem cell marker c-Kit and low levels of
CD115. These Rb1 low c-Kit + M-MDSC are substantially expanded in
tumor-bearing mice. Interestingly, this population is also present in
naive mice, albeit at very low frequency. Rb1 low c-Kit + monocytic cells
from nave and tumor bearing mice can give rise to granulocytic cells in
vitro. These preliminary results indicate that these cells are indeed
granulocytic progenitor and are expanded during tumor development.
Although this monocyte-granulocyte conversion is associated with a
decrease in Rb1 expression, it seems that a minimal Rb1 level is required
to ensure this process, at least in nave mice. Further characterization
of the phenotype and molecular profiles of this new MDSC progenitor could
lead to the development of new ways to target MDSC.

