Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF signaling deficiency enhances tumor associated inflammation in
colon cancer


In early colon cancer development, there is considerable evidence
suggesting that transforming growth factor- (TGF) serves as a tumor
suppressor due to its growth-inhibitory effects in the epithelium. This
is in contrast to observations suggesting that in advanced disease, TGF
promotes tumor progression by contributing to metastasis. Therefore, to
better understand the effects of TGF signaling on colon cancer, we
examined the effect of global or epithelial reduction in TGF signaling on
tumor progression in the APC murine model of colon cancer. Initially, we
examined the relationship between TGF signaling and inflammation in human
colon cancer specimens. We found that loss of SMAD4 in epithelial cells
correlates with increased inflammation in tissue from colon cancer
patients. Moreover, APC mice with global TGFBR deficiency (ATG mice)
demonstrated increased inflammation that was also associated with loss of
SMAD4 in epithelial cells. In contrast, APC mice with epithelial loss of
TGFBR signaling (ATC mice) do not demonstrate loss of SMAD4, but have
even more pronounced inflammation concomitant with rectal bleeding and
prolapse, significant weight loss, the presence of crypt abscesses and
lymphoid aggregates, and increased mortality. Similarly, ATC mice, in
contrast to the ATG and the APC mice, show markedly increased tumor
infiltrating macrophages, splenic macrophages, and serum levels of the
cancer-associated cytokines IL8, TGF1, and TNF. Overall, these findings
demonstrate that loss of TGF signaling, particularly in epithelial cells,
dramatically worsens tumor progression. Yet, the attempt to reduce
metastasis by treating colon cancer patients with TGF inhibitors may
result in worse outcome by invoking a robust inflammatory response.

