Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor beta as a tractable therapeutic target


Nuclear receptors (NRs) regulate a variety of biological processes and
are critically important in the emergence, prevention, and treatment of
cancers. Many NRs represent well-validated drug targets as their ligands
are used extensively in medicine. However, there still remains an active
search for novel agonists and antagonists with enhanced selectivity.
Estrogen receptor (ER) is an attractive target for drug development. It
plays different roles in gene expression from ER, implicated in breast
and uterine cancers, and displays overlapping but distinctive tissue
distributions from ER and non-redundant roles. Further, emerging evidence
indicates that ER plays anti-proliferative and anti-apoptotic roles in a
variety of cancers. These considerations have led to the suggestion that
ER is an appealing tractable target for development of selective agonists
to treat and prevent colon, breast, prostate, lung, and skin cancer and
natural and synthetic estrogens for ER are being studied in colon,
breast, and lung cancers. However, because of the high sequence
similarities between ER and ER, preferentially targeting one subtype can
prove challenging. Repositioning of existing approved drugs with known
side effect profiles can provide advantages because de novo drug design
suffers from high developmental failure rates and undesirable side
effects which have dramatically increased costs. Our research strategy is
to identify and develop an ER agonist lead compound by using a systematic
step-wise hit-to-lead campaign. We have identified a series of
ER-selective lead compounds derived from screening libraries of
clinically relevant compounds and have shown that some of these compounds
display interesting and desirable selective modulator activities.

