Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid in situ RNA analysis of circulating tumor cells using
magnetic micropore-based sorting and Turbo FISH


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of cancer-related death
in the US, with a five year survival rate of only 6%. Recently, we have
shown that circulating pancreatic cells can be detected at the onset of
the disease cycle (pre-Stage 1). Thus, there is both a great need for
early diagnosis and an opportunity, due to the early presence of
circulating tumor cells (CTCs).Currently, the gold standard for CTC
detection cannot resolve these extremely sparse, heterogeneous CTCs,
which do not have any single surface marker that allows them to be
targeted. Additionally, conventional downstream analyses are limited to
either protein expression of individual cells on-chip, which has limited
sensitivity to relevant biomarkers, or genetic testing off-chip, which
has limited practical clinical use.To address these challenges, we have
developed a rapid (10x greater flow rates and an insensitivity to
clogging, enabling use directly on whole blood. The TEMPO filter consists
of an electroplated 1.25m NiFe, 30 m pores, and 5.110E5 pores total.Using
this chip, we have demonstrated extremely high sensitivity to rare cells
(LOD 1 cell / 7.5 mL blood) and exponentially improved sorting efficiency
by stacking multiple TEMPO filters in series. Furthermore, single
molecules of targeted RNA in each individual CTC could be resolved.

