Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms of inverse association between cancer and
Alzheimer's disease


Apoptosis has been implicated in both cancer and neurodegenerative
disease such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). Defective or inefficient
apoptosis is an acquired hallmark of cancer cells, while cytochrome
c-dependent apoptosis is a crucial pathway in AD related neuronal cell
death. Notably, recent studies have revealed an inverse correlation
between development of cancer and ADAD patients show a reduced risk of
cancer, while cancer survivors are less likely to acquire AD. Here we
propose that amyloid (A), a widely accepted pathological culprit of AD,
hijacks the intrinsic apoptotic pathway eliciting different symptoms for
cancer and AD. By developing an in vitro single-vesicle cytochrome c
release assay, we show that even in the absence of death signal the
oligomeric form of synthetic A directly interacts with a pro-apoptotic
bcl-2 family protein BAK and induces apoptotic pores sufficient for
cytochrome c release. Furthermore, A oligomers not only cause neuronal
cell death in HT-22 cells but also the apoptotic effect was significantly
reduced with suppressed BAK expression via siRNA, further substantiating
its apoptotic interaction with BAK. Moreover, a significant reduction of
cytochrome c release was also observed with isolated mitochondria from
BAK siRNA-treated HT-22 cells which specifically identifies the target
machinery. These results demonstrate A oligomers efficacy as a potent
apoptotic ligand. In collection, we suggest that while A oligomers may
cause neuronal cell death in AD it may also ameliorate tumor
proliferation in relation to cancer. Thus, providing molecular level
evidence for the inverse association reported between cancer and AD
patients.

