Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GM-CSF and MMP9, targets of metformin, are crucial mediators of
the tumor-promoting role of adipose tissue cells in breast cancer


The white adipose tissue (WAT) promotes breast cancer (BC) progression
with mechanisms that are only partially understood. We have found that
WAT cells with progenitor-like phenotype (CD45-CD34+) are able to promote
angiogenesis, motility, invasiveness, local and metastatic neoplastic
progression in orthotopic murine models of triple negative BC
(Martin-Padura et al., 2012; Orecchioni et al., 2013). Here we report the
results of our screening for molecular signals involved in human WAT and
BC interplay. Subpopulations of human WAT CD34+CD45- cells were cultured
with several triple negative BC cell lines. An up-regulation of more than
10 proteins was detected in WAT- cells, suggesting a strong impact on
their secretoma. In cellular supernatants two molecules were
significantly up-regulated: GM-CSF and MMP9. Results were further
confirmed by ELISA and western blotting using WAT cells from 10 different
BC patients. GM-CSF was found to be 2 to 47 fold up-regulated both in
transwell and in direct co-culture systems, thus suggesting a soluble
factor implication. MMP9 showed up to 12 fold up-regulation in direct
co-culture and a weak up-regulation in transwell system, suggesting a
prevalent cell-to-cell mechanism. Quantitative RT-PCR revealed that
WAT-progenitors were responsible for the observed up-regulation for both
GM-CSF and MMP9, whereas BC cells did not change their basal expression
levels of the two factors. Up-regulation was conserved among species both
at RNA and protein levels. As we reported (Orecchioni et al., 2013) WAT
CD45-CD34+ cells include two sub-populations of progenitors formally
identified as mesenchymal (ASCs) and endothelial (EPCs). Both populations
were able to contribute to GM-CSF and MMP9 up-release in a synergistic
manner. In vivo studies in NODSCIDIL2Rgnull (NSG) mice orthotopic BC
models confirmed the up-regulation of both factors: a significant
increase of circulating human GM-CSF was detected in the plasma of mice
injected with human WAT progenitors and BC compared to mice injected with
BC alone. This up-regulation was statistically significant (pThe white
adipose tissue (WAT) promotes breast cancer (BC) progression with
mechanisms that are only partially understood. We have found that WAT
cells with progenitor-like phenotype (CD45-CD34+) are able to promote
angiogenesis, motility, invasiveness, local and metastatic neoplastic
progression in orthotopic murine models of triple negative BC
(Martin-Padura et al., 2012; Orecchioni et al., 2013). Here we report the
results of our screening for molecular signals involved in human WAT and
BC interplay. Subpopulations of human WAT CD34+CD45- cells were cultured
with several triple negative BC cell lines. An up-regulation of more than
10 proteins was detected in WAT- cells, suggesting a strong impact on
their secretoma. In cellular supernatants two molecules were
significantly up-regulated: GM-CSF and MMP9. Results were further
confirmed by ELISA and western blotting using WAT cells from 10 different
BC patients. GM-CSF was found to be 2 to 47 fold up-regulated both in
transwell and in direct co-culture systems, thus suggesting a soluble
factor implication. MMP9 showed up to 12 fold up-regulation in direct
co-culture and a weak up-regulation in transwell system, suggesting a
prevalent cell-to-cell mechanism. Quantitative RT-PCR revealed that
WAT-progenitors were responsible for the observed up-regulation for both
GM-CSF and MMP9, whereas BC cells did not change their basal expression
levels of the two factors. Up-regulation was conserved among species both
at RNA and protein levels. As we reported (Orecchioni et al., 2013) WAT
CD45-CD34+ cells include two sub-populations of progenitors formally
identified as mesenchymal (ASCs) and endothelial (EPCs). Both populations
were able to contribute to GM-CSF and MMP9 up-release in a synergistic
manner. In vivo studies in NODSCIDIL2Rgnull (NSG) mice orthotopic BC
models confirmed the up-regulation of both factors: a significant
increase of circulating human GM-CSF was detected in the plasma of mice
injected with human WAT progenitors and BC compared to mice injected with
BC alone. This up-regulation was statistically significant (p<0.001) in
the early phases of tumor growth. BC investigation revealed an increased
expression of MMP9 in mice injected with WAT progenitors. Accordingly,
the qRT-PCR on tumor tissues did not detect an up-regulation of the two
factors, confirming that the observed up-regulation were due to WAT
cells. As we recently published (Orecchioni et al, 2014), metformin can
target in vitro and in vivo WAT progenitors. In this context, we found in
vitro that metformin targeted GM-CSF and MMP9, significantly reducing
mRNA in WAT progenitors and protein levels in co-culture systems.
Moreover, in our NSG orthotopic BC models metformin significantly reduced
BC-specific circulating human GM-CSF. We are currently investigating the
effect of GM-CSF and MMP9 inhibition in vivo, alone or in combination
with metformin.

