Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UV-induced Wnt7a in the human skin microenvironment specifies the
fate of neural crest -like cells via suppression of Notch


Multipotent stem cells with neural crest-like properties have been
identified in the dermis of human skin. These neural crest stem cell
(NCSC)-like cells display self-renewal capacity and differentiate into
neural crest derivatives including epidermal pigment-producing
melanocytes. NCSC-like cells share many properties with aggressive
melanoma cells, such as high migratory capabilities and expression of the
neural crest markers. However, little is known about which intrinsic or
extrinsic signals determine the proliferation or differentiation of these
neural crest-like stem cells. Here, we show that in NCSC-like cells,
Notch signaling is highly activated, similar to melanoma cells.
Inhibition of Notch signaling reduced proliferation of NCSC-like cells,
induced cell death, and down-regulated non-canonical Wnt5a, suggesting
that the Notch pathway contributes to the maintenance and motility of
these stem cells. In three-dimensional skin reconstructs, canonical Wnt
signaling promoted the differentiation of NCSC-like cells into
melanocytes. This differentiation was triggered by the endogenous Notch
inhibitor Numb, which is up-regulated in the stem cells by Wnt7a derived
from UV-irradiated keratinocytes. Together, these data reveal a novel
crosstalk between the two conserved developmental pathways in postnatal
human skin, and highlight the role of the skin microenvironment in
specifying the fate of stem cells.

