Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-oncogenic role of NOTCH1 in early tongue squamous cell
carcinoma


Notch pathway play a context-dependent tumor-suppressive or pro-oncogenic
role in solid tumors and hematological malignancies. In head and neck
cancer, inactivating mutations in NOTCH1 are associated with poor
prognosis. Here we perform meta-analysis of DNA copy number and gene
expression profiling of NOTCH signaling pathway genes in 35 paired
primary T1 and T2 stage tongue tumors, comprising of Notch ligands,
receptors and target genes. We find 32% of primary tongue squamous cell
carcinoma (TSCC) tumors amplify NOTCH signaling pathway components; and
over express activated NOTCH1based on immuno-histochemical staining in an
additional series of 50 surgically resected paired TSCC tumors.
Interestingly, these alterations: amplification at Notch ligand DLL3 (2 =
7.575, P = 0.023); over expression of Notch pathway target gene HEY2
transcript (2 = 9.885, P = 0.007); and expression of activated NOTCH1 (2
= 7.575, P = 0.023) positively correlate with N+ve and non- smoking
status of patients. In a parallel effort, we characterized four HNSCC
cell lines NT8E, OT9, AW13516, and AW8507 established from Indian
patients using whole exome, whole transcriptome sequencing and SNP array
assays. Significant amplification and over expression of NOTCH signaling
pathway components were observed in AW13516 and NT8E cells. Inhibition of
NOTCH activation by gamma secretase inhibitor or shRNA mediated knockdown
of NOTCH1 could inhibit transformation, survival, migration and invasion
of NT8E cells. Taken together, we present that activation of Notch
signaling pathway in a subset of TSCC patients is associated with nodal
positivity and non-smoking status among early tongue cancer patients.

