Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor effects of dovitinib, a multi-target kinase inhibitor,
in patient-derived gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) xenograft models


Background: The majority of GISTs are driven by KIT/PDGFRA gain of
function mutations. Advanced GIST is routinely treated with tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKI; e.g imatinib, sunitinib and regorafenib).
However, with time, heterogeneous resistance to these agents occurs,
mainly due to acquired mutations in KIT. We tested the efficacy of
dovitinib, which acts against VEGFR, FGFR, FLT3, PDGFRB and KIT, using
patient-derived GIST xenograft models.Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice (n = 47)
were bilaterally transplanted with the human GIST xenografts: a
dose-dependent-imatinib-sensitive model UZLX-GIST2 (KIT: p.A502_Y503dup)
or a model resistant to both imatinib and sunitinib, UZLX-GIST9 (KIT:
p.P577del+p.W557LfsX5+p.D820G). Mice were divided to four treatment
groups: control (untreated), imatinib (50 mg/kg/bid p.o.), imatinib (100
mg/kg/bid p.o.) and dovitinib (30 mg/kg/qd p.o.). Efficacy was assessed
by tumor volume measurement (3x/week), histopathology [hematoxylin &
eosin staining (H&E)], immunohistochemistry [Ki67, phospho-Histone H3
(pHH3), cleaved PARP] and Western blotting analysis of KIT signaling.
Histologic response (HR) was graded as previously described1.
Microvascular density (MVD) was assessed by counting CD31 positive
vessels. Mann Whitney U test was used for statistical analysis.Results:
After three weeks of treatment, dovitinib caused tumor volume reduction
(to 37%) in UZLX-GIST2 and disease stabilization in UZLX-GIST9. Only
minimal HR was observed in imatinib-treated cohorts, whereas dovitinib
induced grade 2-3 HR in >50% of tumors in both models. Compared to
control, dovitinib reduced mitotic activity by 22.6 fold (pBackground:
The majority of GISTs are driven by KIT/PDGFRA gain of function
mutations. Advanced GIST is routinely treated with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKI; e.g imatinib, sunitinib and regorafenib). However, with
time, heterogeneous resistance to these agents occurs, mainly due to
acquired mutations in KIT. We tested the efficacy of dovitinib, which
acts against VEGFR, FGFR, FLT3, PDGFRB and KIT, using patient-derived
GIST xenograft models.Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice (n = 47) were bilaterally
transplanted with the human GIST xenografts: a
dose-dependent-imatinib-sensitive model UZLX-GIST2 (KIT: p.A502_Y503dup)
or a model resistant to both imatinib and sunitinib, UZLX-GIST9 (KIT:
p.P577del+p.W557LfsX5+p.D820G). Mice were divided to four treatment
groups: control (untreated), imatinib (50 mg/kg/bid p.o.), imatinib (100
mg/kg/bid p.o.) and dovitinib (30 mg/kg/qd p.o.). Efficacy was assessed
by tumor volume measurement (3x/week), histopathology [hematoxylin &
eosin staining (H&E)], immunohistochemistry [Ki67, phospho-Histone H3
(pHH3), cleaved PARP] and Western blotting analysis of KIT signaling.
Histologic response (HR) was graded as previously described1.
Microvascular density (MVD) was assessed by counting CD31 positive
vessels. Mann Whitney U test was used for statistical analysis.Results:
After three weeks of treatment, dovitinib caused tumor volume reduction
(to 37%) in UZLX-GIST2 and disease stabilization in UZLX-GIST9. Only
minimal HR was observed in imatinib-treated cohorts, whereas dovitinib
induced grade 2-3 HR in >50% of tumors in both models. Compared to
control, dovitinib reduced mitotic activity by 22.6 fold (p<0.0001) in
UZLX-GIST2, whereas no significant difference was observed in UZLX-GIST9
model. Results were confirmed by pHH3 and Ki67 immunostainings. Apoptotic
activity was decreased in dovitinib treated UZLX-GIST2 tumors compared to
control. MVD was reduced both in UZLX-GIST2 (1.6 fold; pBackground: The
majority of GISTs are driven by KIT/PDGFRA gain of function mutations.
Advanced GIST is routinely treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI;
e.g imatinib, sunitinib and regorafenib). However, with time,
heterogeneous resistance to these agents occurs, mainly due to acquired
mutations in KIT. We tested the efficacy of dovitinib, which acts against
VEGFR, FGFR, FLT3, PDGFRB and KIT, using patient-derived GIST xenograft
models.Methods: NMRI nu/nu mice (n = 47) were bilaterally transplanted
with the human GIST xenografts: a dose-dependent-imatinib-sensitive model
UZLX-GIST2 (KIT: p.A502_Y503dup) or a model resistant to both imatinib
and sunitinib, UZLX-GIST9 (KIT: p.P577del+p.W557LfsX5+p.D820G). Mice were
divided to four treatment groups: control (untreated), imatinib (50
mg/kg/bid p.o.), imatinib (100 mg/kg/bid p.o.) and dovitinib (30 mg/kg/qd
p.o.). Efficacy was assessed by tumor volume measurement (3x/week),
histopathology [hematoxylin & eosin staining (H&E)], immunohistochemistry
[Ki67, phospho-Histone H3 (pHH3), cleaved PARP] and Western blotting
analysis of KIT signaling. Histologic response (HR) was graded as
previously described1. Microvascular density (MVD) was assessed by
counting CD31 positive vessels. Mann Whitney U test was used for
statistical analysis.Results: After three weeks of treatment, dovitinib
caused tumor volume reduction (to 37%) in UZLX-GIST2 and disease
stabilization in UZLX-GIST9. Only minimal HR was observed in
imatinib-treated cohorts, whereas dovitinib induced grade 2-3 HR in >50%
of tumors in both models. Compared to control, dovitinib reduced mitotic
activity by 22.6 fold (p<0.0001) in UZLX-GIST2, whereas no significant
difference was observed in UZLX-GIST9 model. Results were confirmed by
pHH3 and Ki67 immunostainings. Apoptotic activity was decreased in
dovitinib treated UZLX-GIST2 tumors compared to control. MVD was reduced
both in UZLX-GIST2 (1.6 fold; p<0.05) and in UZLX-GIST9 (1.3 fold; p =
0.059) under dovitinib treatment. Furthermore, it partially inhibited
KIT, AKT and 4EBP-1 activation in UZLX-GIST2.Conclusion: The multi-kinase
inhibitor dovitinib showed anti-tumor efficacy in GIST xenograft models,
though the effect was more pronounced in KIT exon 9 mutant (UZLX-GIST2).
The decrease in MVD in both models suggested that the anti-tumor effect
in these models was at least partially mediated by an anti-angiogenic
effect of dovitinib.1 Antonescu et al. Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11:4182-90

