Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: USP8 modulates ubiquitination of LRIG1 for Met degradation


The Met receptor tyrosine kinase is an attractive target for cancer
therapy as it promotes invasive tumor growth. SAIT301 is a novel anti-Met
antibody, which induces LRIG1-mediated Met degradation and inhibits tumor
growth. However, detailed downstream mechanism by which LRIG1 mediates
target protein down-regulation is unknown. In the present study, we
discovered that SAIT301 induces ubiquitination of LRIG1, which in turn
promotes recruitment of Met and LRIG1 complex to the lysosome through its
interaction with Hrs, resulting in concomitant degradation of both LRIG1
and Met. We also identified USP8 as a LRIG1-specific deubiquitinating
enzyme, reporting the interaction between USP8 and LRIG1 for the first
time. SAIT301 triggers degradation of LRIG1 by inhibiting the interaction
of LRIG1 and USP8, which regulates ubiquitin modification and stability
of LRIG1. In summary, SAIT301, a Met targeting antibody, employs
ubiquitination of LRIG1 for its highly effective Met degradation. This
unique feature of SAIT301 enables it to function as a fully antagonistic
antibody without Met activation. We found that USP8 is involved in
deubiquitination of LRIG1, influencing the efficiency of Met degradation.
The relation of Met, LRIG1 and USP8 strongly supports the potential
clinical benefit of a combination treatment of a USP8 inhibitor and a Met
inhibitor, such as SAIT301.

