Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression and significance of proliferation markers
phosphohistone H3, Ki-67/MIB-1, and survivin in gastrointestinal stromal
tumors


Background: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common
mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Mitotic index (MI) is
an essential risk factor for predicting recurrence of GIST. However, the
inter-observer disagreement and the selection bias of the area for
counting limit the reliability and reproducibility of risk-stratification
based on traditional MI counting method. Phosphohistone H3 (PHH3), a
novel mitosis-specific antibody, has been proven as a promising marker
for facilitating MFs identification in several types of tumors. The
purpose of present study is to explore the feasibility and reliability of
PHH3-based mitosis counting methods in GISTs and to study the correlation
between PHH3 and other two proliferation markers Ki67/MIB-1 and
survivin.Methods: 83 GIST formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
specimens were enrolled in this study. The mitotic count was assessed
either on hematoxylin and eosin sections (H&E) or on PHH3 immuno-stained
sections. The proliferation activity of tumors was also evaluated by
immuno-staining of Ki67/MIB-1 and survivin. The interrelationship between
these indices was analyzed statistically with Spearman rank coeffcients.
Continuous variables not following the normal distribution were compared
using Mann-Whitney U test between two groups or using Kruskal-Wallis H
test among more than two groups. SPSS statistical software program,
version 20.0 was used and all results were considered significant if
pBackground: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common
mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Mitotic index (MI) is
an essential risk factor for predicting recurrence of GIST. However, the
inter-observer disagreement and the selection bias of the area for
counting limit the reliability and reproducibility of risk-stratification
based on traditional MI counting method. Phosphohistone H3 (PHH3), a
novel mitosis-specific antibody, has been proven as a promising marker
for facilitating MFs identification in several types of tumors. The
purpose of present study is to explore the feasibility and reliability of
PHH3-based mitosis counting methods in GISTs and to study the correlation
between PHH3 and other two proliferation markers Ki67/MIB-1 and
survivin.Methods: 83 GIST formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
specimens were enrolled in this study. The mitotic count was assessed
either on hematoxylin and eosin sections (H&E) or on PHH3 immuno-stained
sections. The proliferation activity of tumors was also evaluated by
immuno-staining of Ki67/MIB-1 and survivin. The interrelationship between
these indices was analyzed statistically with Spearman rank coeffcients.
Continuous variables not following the normal distribution were compared
using Mann-Whitney U test between two groups or using Kruskal-Wallis H
test among more than two groups. SPSS statistical software program,
version 20.0 was used and all results were considered significant if
p<0.05.Results: PHH3-based mitosis counting showed better inter-rate
reliability (ICC 0.909 vs 0.821, pBackground: Gastrointestinal stromal
tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumors of the
gastrointestinal tract. Mitotic index (MI) is an essential risk factor
for predicting recurrence of GIST. However, the inter-observer
disagreement and the selection bias of the area for counting limit the
reliability and reproducibility of risk-stratification based on
traditional MI counting method. Phosphohistone H3 (PHH3), a novel
mitosis-specific antibody, has been proven as a promising marker for
facilitating MFs identification in several types of tumors. The purpose
of present study is to explore the feasibility and reliability of
PHH3-based mitosis counting methods in GISTs and to study the correlation
between PHH3 and other two proliferation markers Ki67/MIB-1 and
survivin.Methods: 83 GIST formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
specimens were enrolled in this study. The mitotic count was assessed
either on hematoxylin and eosin sections (H&E) or on PHH3 immuno-stained
sections. The proliferation activity of tumors was also evaluated by
immuno-staining of Ki67/MIB-1 and survivin. The interrelationship between
these indices was analyzed statistically with Spearman rank coeffcients.
Continuous variables not following the normal distribution were compared
using Mann-Whitney U test between two groups or using Kruskal-Wallis H
test among more than two groups. SPSS statistical software program,
version 20.0 was used and all results were considered significant if
p<0.05.Results: PHH3-based mitosis counting showed better inter-rate
reliability (ICC 0.909 vs 0.821, p< 0.03) and stronger correlation with
risk grade and clinical outcome than H&E-based mitoses counting. Both the
labeling indices (LI) of Ki67/MIB-1 and survivin (r = 0.737, pBackground:
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal
tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Mitotic index (MI) is an essential
risk factor for predicting recurrence of GIST. However, the
inter-observer disagreement and the selection bias of the area for
counting limit the reliability and reproducibility of risk-stratification
based on traditional MI counting method. Phosphohistone H3 (PHH3), a
novel mitosis-specific antibody, has been proven as a promising marker
for facilitating MFs identification in several types of tumors. The
purpose of present study is to explore the feasibility and reliability of
PHH3-based mitosis counting methods in GISTs and to study the correlation
between PHH3 and other two proliferation markers Ki67/MIB-1 and
survivin.Methods: 83 GIST formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
specimens were enrolled in this study. The mitotic count was assessed
either on hematoxylin and eosin sections (H&E) or on PHH3 immuno-stained
sections. The proliferation activity of tumors was also evaluated by
immuno-staining of Ki67/MIB-1 and survivin. The interrelationship between
these indices was analyzed statistically with Spearman rank coeffcients.
Continuous variables not following the normal distribution were compared
using Mann-Whitney U test between two groups or using Kruskal-Wallis H
test among more than two groups. SPSS statistical software program,
version 20.0 was used and all results were considered significant if
p<0.05.Results: PHH3-based mitosis counting showed better inter-rate
reliability (ICC 0.909 vs 0.821, p< 0.03) and stronger correlation with
risk grade and clinical outcome than H&E-based mitoses counting. Both the
labeling indices (LI) of Ki67/MIB-1 and survivin (r = 0.737, p<0.0001)
were strongly correlated to risk grade, clinical outcome, and PHH3-based
mitoses count, which was also validated by immunofluorescence and
immunocytochemical staining (r = 0.644, pBackground: Gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumors of the
gastrointestinal tract. Mitotic index (MI) is an essential risk factor
for predicting recurrence of GIST. However, the inter-observer
disagreement and the selection bias of the area for counting limit the
reliability and reproducibility of risk-stratification based on
traditional MI counting method. Phosphohistone H3 (PHH3), a novel
mitosis-specific antibody, has been proven as a promising marker for
facilitating MFs identification in several types of tumors. The purpose
of present study is to explore the feasibility and reliability of
PHH3-based mitosis counting methods in GISTs and to study the correlation
between PHH3 and other two proliferation markers Ki67/MIB-1 and
survivin.Methods: 83 GIST formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
specimens were enrolled in this study. The mitotic count was assessed
either on hematoxylin and eosin sections (H&E) or on PHH3 immuno-stained
sections. The proliferation activity of tumors was also evaluated by
immuno-staining of Ki67/MIB-1 and survivin. The interrelationship between
these indices was analyzed statistically with Spearman rank coeffcients.
Continuous variables not following the normal distribution were compared
using Mann-Whitney U test between two groups or using Kruskal-Wallis H
test among more than two groups. SPSS statistical software program,
version 20.0 was used and all results were considered significant if
p<0.05.Results: PHH3-based mitosis counting showed better inter-rate
reliability (ICC 0.909 vs 0.821, p< 0.03) and stronger correlation with
risk grade and clinical outcome than H&E-based mitoses counting. Both the
labeling indices (LI) of Ki67/MIB-1 and survivin (r = 0.737, p<0.0001)
were strongly correlated to risk grade, clinical outcome, and PHH3-based
mitoses count, which was also validated by immunofluorescence and
immunocytochemical staining (r = 0.644, p<0.002).Conclusion: PHH3 could
significantly facilitate determining the mitotic rate in GIST evaluation
with superior inter-rate reliability. PHH3, Ki67/MIB-1, and survivin are
co-expressed in GIST and their expressions are strongly correlated.
Combined use of these markers is a promising technique for evaluating the
prognosis of GIST and tailoring the treatment.

