Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BMP-6 regulates expression of androgen receptor via NF-B signaling
pathway and activated macrophages


Prostate cancer (CaP) is the most common non-cutaneous cancer among men
in the United States (US). Recent report estimated that around 233,000
new CaP cases will be occurred in 2014 and about 29,480 men will be death
because of CaP in the US. Despite recent progress in CaP treatment,
metastatic CaP patients still have a poor prognosis due to the inevitable
emergence of castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). It has been
reported that androgen hypersensitivity and tumor microenvironment were
critical factors for developing CRPC. In the present study, we
investigate the role of BMP-6 on androgen hypersensitivity in the context
of macrophages. Initially, we co-cultured androgen responsive murine CaP
cell lines TRAMP-C1 and PTEN-CaP8 with RAW 264.7 murine macrophage cell
lines and treated with BMP-6. We found that androgen receptor (AR)
expression was increased in both cell lines by treatment of BMP-6 and BAY
11-7082 NF-B inhibitor neutralized this augmentation. The result
indicates that NF-B signaling pathway is involved in up-regulation of AR
in CaP cells. To find which NF-B is activated, we analyzed NF-B signaling
pathway with immunoblot and found that canonical NF-B pathway was
activated in CaP cells. Cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF- are potential
inducer of NF-B signaling pathway and these cytokines were up-regulated
in RAW cells in our co-culture system. Based on these observations, we
suggest that BMP-6 potentially regulates expression of AR in CaP cells
via activated macrophages and canonical NF-B pathway.

