Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The homeobox gene DLX4 promotes inflammatory signaling and
peritoneal metastasis of ovarian cancer


The lethality of ovarian cancer stems from the propensity of the disease
to involve the peritoneal cavity. However, the mechanisms that drive
peritoneal metastasis of ovarian cancer are poorly understood. We
previously identified that high expression of the homeobox gene DLX4 in
ovarian cancer is strongly associated with advanced disease stage and
reduced survival. In this study, we identified that DLX4 stimulates the
attachment of ovarian cancer cells to mesothelial cells that line the
peritoneal cavity. DLX4 induced expression of the cell adhesion molecule
CD44 which interacts with hyaluronic acid, a glycosaminoglycan that is
produced by peritoneal mesothelial cells. Neutralization of CD44
abrogated the ability of DLX4 to stimulate tumor-mesothelial cell
interactions. The induction of CD44 expression by DLX4 was found to be
largely due to the ability of DLX4 to transcriptionally activate the gene
encoding the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) which
in turn stimulated the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB) signaling pathway.
Furthermore, inhibition of IL-1beta or of NF-kB activity abrogated the
stimulatory effect of DLX4 on tumor-mesothelial cell interactions. This
study provides insights into the mechanisms of inflammatory signaling and
peritoneal metastasis of ovarian cancer, and raises the possibility that
targeting inflammatory signaling might be a strategy for treatment of
advanced-stage ovarian cancer.

