Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary nitrate and nitrite, micronutrients, and postmenopausal
breast cancer risk in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study


Background: Ingested nitrate and nitrite are precursors in the endogenous
formation of N-nitroso compounds (NOCs), potential human carcinogens.
Vitamin C inhibits and heme iron enhances NOC formation. To date,
interactions between dietary nitrate and nitrite intakes and these
micronutrients have not been evaluated in relation to the risk for breast
cancer in prospective cohort studies.Methods: We followed 191,926
postmenopausal women in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study for incident
breast cancer. Dietary intake was assessed using a food frequency
questionnaire at baseline (1995). Daily nitrate and nitrite intakes were
computed for total, animal, and processed meat sources, and adjusted for
energy intake using a density method. We computed multivariable-adjusted
hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) by quintiles of
nitrate and nitrite for all breast cancers, by estrogen/progesterone
receptor (ER/PR) status, and by stage (localized, regional/distant) using
Cox proportional hazards regression. We stratified analyses by low or
high ( or > median) heme iron (138 mg/1,000kcal) and total vitamin C (273
mg/d) intakes.Results: We identified 7,508 incident invasive breast
cancers (1995-2006). On average, 95% of nitrate and 70% of nitrite
intakes were from plant sources. Red processed meat intake was not
associated with risk of all breast cancer but was positively associated
with risk of localized breast cancer (adjusted HR = 1.35 for Q5, CI =
1.11-1.42, p-trendBackground: Ingested nitrate and nitrite are precursors
in the endogenous formation of N-nitroso compounds (NOCs), potential
human carcinogens. Vitamin C inhibits and heme iron enhances NOC
formation. To date, interactions between dietary nitrate and nitrite
intakes and these micronutrients have not been evaluated in relation to
the risk for breast cancer in prospective cohort studies.Methods: We
followed 191,926 postmenopausal women in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health
Study for incident breast cancer. Dietary intake was assessed using a
food frequency questionnaire at baseline (1995). Daily nitrate and
nitrite intakes were computed for total, animal, and processed meat
sources, and adjusted for energy intake using a density method. We
computed multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) by quintiles of nitrate and nitrite for all breast
cancers, by estrogen/progesterone receptor (ER/PR) status, and by stage
(localized, regional/distant) using Cox proportional hazards regression.
We stratified analyses by low or high ( or > median) heme iron (138
mg/1,000kcal) and total vitamin C (273 mg/d) intakes.Results: We
identified 7,508 incident invasive breast cancers (1995-2006). On
average, 95% of nitrate and 70% of nitrite intakes were from plant
sources. Red processed meat intake was not associated with risk of all
breast cancer but was positively associated with risk of localized breast
cancer (adjusted HR = 1.35 for Q5, CI = 1.11-1.42, p-trend<0.001). Heme
iron intake was positively associated with risk of all breast cancer (HR
= 1.12 for Q5, CI = 1.04-1.21, p-trend = 0.004). Total nitrate intake was
associated with higher risk of all breast cancer, particularly among
women with high heme iron intake (HR = 1.15, CI = 1.01-1.30 for Q5,
p-trend = 0.02), but not among women with low heme iron intake (p-trend =
0.63, p-interaction = 0.17); similar associations were observed when
evaluating total nitrate intake in relation to hormone receptor positive
cancers (p-interaction = 0.09 for total nitrate x heme iron in relation
to ER+/PR+ positive cancer). Total nitrite intake was not associated with
overall breast cancer risk. Nitrite intake from processed red meats was
associated with higher risk of localized (HR = 1.23, 95%CI = 1.09-1.39
for Q5, p-trendBackground: Ingested nitrate and nitrite are precursors in
the endogenous formation of N-nitroso compounds (NOCs), potential human
carcinogens. Vitamin C inhibits and heme iron enhances NOC formation. To
date, interactions between dietary nitrate and nitrite intakes and these
micronutrients have not been evaluated in relation to the risk for breast
cancer in prospective cohort studies.Methods: We followed 191,926
postmenopausal women in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study for incident
breast cancer. Dietary intake was assessed using a food frequency
questionnaire at baseline (1995). Daily nitrate and nitrite intakes were
computed for total, animal, and processed meat sources, and adjusted for
energy intake using a density method. We computed multivariable-adjusted
hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) by quintiles of
nitrate and nitrite for all breast cancers, by estrogen/progesterone
receptor (ER/PR) status, and by stage (localized, regional/distant) using
Cox proportional hazards regression. We stratified analyses by low or
high ( or > median) heme iron (138 mg/1,000kcal) and total vitamin C (273
mg/d) intakes.Results: We identified 7,508 incident invasive breast
cancers (1995-2006). On average, 95% of nitrate and 70% of nitrite
intakes were from plant sources. Red processed meat intake was not
associated with risk of all breast cancer but was positively associated
with risk of localized breast cancer (adjusted HR = 1.35 for Q5, CI =
1.11-1.42, p-trend<0.001). Heme iron intake was positively associated
with risk of all breast cancer (HR = 1.12 for Q5, CI = 1.04-1.21, p-trend
= 0.004). Total nitrate intake was associated with higher risk of all
breast cancer, particularly among women with high heme iron intake (HR =
1.15, CI = 1.01-1.30 for Q5, p-trend = 0.02), but not among women with
low heme iron intake (p-trend = 0.63, p-interaction = 0.17); similar
associations were observed when evaluating total nitrate intake in
relation to hormone receptor positive cancers (p-interaction = 0.09 for
total nitrate x heme iron in relation to ER+/PR+ positive cancer). Total
nitrite intake was not associated with overall breast cancer risk.
Nitrite intake from processed red meats was associated with higher risk
of localized (HR = 1.23, 95%CI = 1.09-1.39 for Q5, p-trend<0.001) but not
regional/distant breast cancers (p-trend = 0.41). Vitamin C intake did
not interact with nitrate or nitrite intake in relation to breast cancer
risk.Conclusions: Our findings suggest that high nitrate intake and
nitrite intake from processed meats may increase postmenopausal women's
risk of breast cancer, especially for those with high heme iron intake.

