Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC4 is negatively regulated by hypoxia in ROS-dependent manner in
pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer (PC) stands as the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related death in the United States, with the 5-year survival rate
of less than 6%. Hypoxia is one of the most prominent features of the PC
microenvironment, which is also characterized by the presence of
extremely high desmoplasia. Emerging evidence demonstrates that HIF-1
regulates MUC1 expression under hypoxia in PC. It enhances hypoxia driven
angiogenesis and tumor cells survival by regulating the metabolic
programming of PC cells. Our group has demonstrated that MUC4, which
remains undetectable in the normal pancreas, is aberrantly overexpressed
in the precursor lesions and progressively increase with the severity of
PC. It is one of the most differentially expressed transmembrane proteins
and has strongly been implicated in the progression, metastasis and
chemoresistance of PC.Given the substantial increase in hypoxia and MUC4
in PC, we hypothesized that hypoxia positively regulates MUC4 expression.
To investigate the role of hypoxia on MUC4 expression, we treated PC cell
lines (CD18/HPAF, T3M4 and CAPAN1) with 1% hypoxia. On contrary to our
anticipation, we observed significant (pPancreatic cancer (PC) stands as
the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States,
with the 5-year survival rate of less than 6%. Hypoxia is one of the most
prominent features of the PC microenvironment, which is also
characterized by the presence of extremely high desmoplasia. Emerging
evidence demonstrates that HIF-1 regulates MUC1 expression under hypoxia
in PC. It enhances hypoxia driven angiogenesis and tumor cells survival
by regulating the metabolic programming of PC cells. Our group has
demonstrated that MUC4, which remains undetectable in the normal
pancreas, is aberrantly overexpressed in the precursor lesions and
progressively increase with the severity of PC. It is one of the most
differentially expressed transmembrane proteins and has strongly been
implicated in the progression, metastasis and chemoresistance of PC.Given
the substantial increase in hypoxia and MUC4 in PC, we hypothesized that
hypoxia positively regulates MUC4 expression. To investigate the role of
hypoxia on MUC4 expression, we treated PC cell lines (CD18/HPAF, T3M4 and
CAPAN1) with 1% hypoxia. On contrary to our anticipation, we observed
significant (p<0.05) downregulation (two-fold) of MUC4 at the protein
level in all tested PC cell lines. To explore whether hypoxia mediated
downregulation of MUC4 is HIF-1 dependent, HIF-1 was selectively
inhibited by ShRNA and YC1 inhibitor in PC cells, and interestingly,
significant downregulation of MUC4 was observed which further goes down
under hypoxic condition, suggesting that MUC4 is positively regulated by
HIF-1 and the observed negative effect of hypoxia on MUC4 expression is
HIF-1 independent. Our clinical data also revealed positive correlation
between MUC4 and HIF-1 expression. As hypoxia also induces ROS
production, our next objective was to observe the effect of exogenous
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2; 50 M) and hypoxia in combination with free
radical scavenger N-acetyl cysteine (NAC; 5 mM) compound on MUC4
expression, and noticed significant reduction in MUC4 expression, which
was attenuated in the presence of NAC. In order to relate our findings
with the PC phenotype, we performed MTT assay and growth kinetics for 48
hours for cells treated with H2O2 and hypoxia, and observed significant
(pPancreatic cancer (PC) stands as the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related death in the United States, with the 5-year survival rate
of less than 6%. Hypoxia is one of the most prominent features of the PC
microenvironment, which is also characterized by the presence of
extremely high desmoplasia. Emerging evidence demonstrates that HIF-1
regulates MUC1 expression under hypoxia in PC. It enhances hypoxia driven
angiogenesis and tumor cells survival by regulating the metabolic
programming of PC cells. Our group has demonstrated that MUC4, which
remains undetectable in the normal pancreas, is aberrantly overexpressed
in the precursor lesions and progressively increase with the severity of
PC. It is one of the most differentially expressed transmembrane proteins
and has strongly been implicated in the progression, metastasis and
chemoresistance of PC.Given the substantial increase in hypoxia and MUC4
in PC, we hypothesized that hypoxia positively regulates MUC4 expression.
To investigate the role of hypoxia on MUC4 expression, we treated PC cell
lines (CD18/HPAF, T3M4 and CAPAN1) with 1% hypoxia. On contrary to our
anticipation, we observed significant (p<0.05) downregulation (two-fold)
of MUC4 at the protein level in all tested PC cell lines. To explore
whether hypoxia mediated downregulation of MUC4 is HIF-1 dependent, HIF-1
was selectively inhibited by ShRNA and YC1 inhibitor in PC cells, and
interestingly, significant downregulation of MUC4 was observed which
further goes down under hypoxic condition, suggesting that MUC4 is
positively regulated by HIF-1 and the observed negative effect of hypoxia
on MUC4 expression is HIF-1 independent. Our clinical data also revealed
positive correlation between MUC4 and HIF-1 expression. As hypoxia also
induces ROS production, our next objective was to observe the effect of
exogenous hydrogen peroxide (H2O2; 50 M) and hypoxia in combination with
free radical scavenger N-acetyl cysteine (NAC; 5 mM) compound on MUC4
expression, and noticed significant reduction in MUC4 expression, which
was attenuated in the presence of NAC. In order to relate our findings
with the PC phenotype, we performed MTT assay and growth kinetics for 48
hours for cells treated with H2O2 and hypoxia, and observed significant
(p<0.05) cell death (by 20%-30%), which was abolished by NAC treatment as
it was able to neutralize hypoxia induced ROS, as determined by DCFDA
florescence measurement. This hypoxia mediated inhibitory effect on PC
cell survival and proliferation was attributed to inhibition on Akt
pathway.In spite of commonly perceived cancer promoting role of hypoxia,
growing bodies of evidence start pointing towards the inhibitory effects
of hypoxia on cancer cell survival, which is further strengthened by our
findings. This study demonstrates the novel role of ROS on MUC4
regulation in PC and emphasizes the need to optimize antioxidant
therapies against PC.

