Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunogenicity and genomic profiling reveal sub-clonal diversity
of a murine acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line


In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), clonal heterogeneity at diagnosis and
the presence of minor sub-clones were shown to be responsible for minimal
residual disease and relapses in patients. Several studies have proposed
that their persistence could be due to their dormant state (i.e.
quiescence and/or control of their growth by immune cells). As
contribution of immunity to clonal persistence could not be evaluated in
xenografts models, we assessed for the clonal diversity of a murine AML
cell line. Genomic analyses revealed heterogeneity among the parental
cell line and its derived clones. Injected individually into
immune-deficient mice, all clones induced AML with different kinetics.
However, when administered into immune-competent animals, some clones
triggered AML with no mice survival, whereas others elicited reduced
lethality rates. The leukemia-surviving mice presented an efficient
anti-tumoral CTL activity and reduced lymphopenia. Investigating for
residual leukemic cells in the organs of these mice, elimination rather
than persistence was observed. Thus, we showed that genetic heterogeneity
among the clones led to differential immunogenicity resulting either in
their immune escape or elimination. Such findings could have potent
implications for new immunotherapeutic strategies in patients.

