Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemically delivered human telomerase reverse transcriptase
(hTERT)-targeting p53-laden adenovirus shows strong antitumor effects in
intrahepatic Hep3B xenograft mouse model


Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) RNA and p53 tumour
suppressor were previously suggested as useful targets for cancer gene
therapy. In this study, we investigated the effects of systemically
delivered adenoviruses harboring trans-splicing ribozyme that could
target hTERT and induce p53 transcript in targeted cancer cells in vivo
using mice with Hep3B human hepatocellular carcinoma cells that
metastasized to the liver. We observed that intravenous injection of this
virus (0.5 X1011 Virus) produced efficient regression of Hep 3B tumor
metastasized nodules. Next we performed in vitro study to know whether it
has a synergistic effects with CDDP, we observed that CDDP (2.5 ug/ml)
increased cytotoxic effects in vitro given with the virus (10 MOI), but
in vivo study revealed that addition of CDDP or arsenic hexoxide (As4O6)
did not improve the therapeutic efficacy of the virus treatment. Next we
performed toxicity test with 4 doses (0.5 X1011, 1 X1011, 2 X1011, and 5
X1011, Virus), which revealed that there were no toxic death, but 2-4
fold increased in AST and ALT with no changes in bilirubin, BUN,
Creatinine levels. In conclusion, this study demonstrates that the
adenoviruses harboring trans-splicing ribozyme targeting hTERT and
inducing p53 transcript represents a safe and promising cancer treatment
for hepatocellular carcinoma. [This study was supported by a grant from
the National R&D Program for Cancer Control, Ministry for Health, Welfare
& Family Affairs, Republic of Korea. (0820050), and National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MEST)
(20120002631).]Keywords: Adenovirus, trans-splicing ribozyme, p53 tumour
suppressor, Human Telomerase Reverse Transcriptase, cancer

