Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PPM1D encoded phosphatase Wip1 is a novel oncogene and
potential therapeutic target in neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma


Background:The most common cytogenetic lesions in the embryonal neural
tumors medulloblastoma (MB) and neuroblastoma (NB) affect chromosome 17,
with 17q+ or isochromosome 17q, in approximately one-third of MB with
these aberrations being a significant indicator of poor clinical outcome.
Similarly, in NB gain of 17q is the most powerful genetic predictor of
adverse clinical outcome. 17q+ correlates with poor survival in our
population-based material where we found aberrations of chromosome 17 in
85% of primary neuroblastomas, specifically, gain of PPM1D/Wip1 at 17q23.
Wip1 is a serine/threonine phosphatase encoded by the gene PPM1D,
described as a gatekeeper in the Mdm2-p53 regulatory loop involved in
genetic stability, inflammation and a potential oncogene contributing to
carcinogenesis.Methods:Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was used
to examine PPM1D/Wip1 in neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma tumors and
cell lines. Stable Wip1 knockdown SK-N-BE(2) cells were generated by
shRNA transfections and tested in vivo in tumor xenografts.
Pharmacological inhibition with the p53-mdm2 modulating inhibitors RITA,
Nutlin-3 and a new PPM1D/Wip1 inhibitor, was used to evaluate the
function of PPM1D/Wip1 in preclinical neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma
models.Results:CGH-array analysis detected PPM1D/Wip1 extra copies in all
tumors and cell lines containing 17q-gain. Tumor neuroblastoma xenograft
development was significantly delayed showing median tumor development
(0.10 mL) to be more than doubled (median 15 days, vs. 33 days,
pBackground:The most common cytogenetic lesions in the embryonal neural
tumors medulloblastoma (MB) and neuroblastoma (NB) affect chromosome 17,
with 17q+ or isochromosome 17q, in approximately one-third of MB with
these aberrations being a significant indicator of poor clinical outcome.
Similarly, in NB gain of 17q is the most powerful genetic predictor of
adverse clinical outcome. 17q+ correlates with poor survival in our
population-based material where we found aberrations of chromosome 17 in
85% of primary neuroblastomas, specifically, gain of PPM1D/Wip1 at 17q23.
Wip1 is a serine/threonine phosphatase encoded by the gene PPM1D,
described as a gatekeeper in the Mdm2-p53 regulatory loop involved in
genetic stability, inflammation and a potential oncogene contributing to
carcinogenesis.Methods:Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was used
to examine PPM1D/Wip1 in neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma tumors and
cell lines. Stable Wip1 knockdown SK-N-BE(2) cells were generated by
shRNA transfections and tested in vivo in tumor xenografts.
Pharmacological inhibition with the p53-mdm2 modulating inhibitors RITA,
Nutlin-3 and a new PPM1D/Wip1 inhibitor, was used to evaluate the
function of PPM1D/Wip1 in preclinical neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma
models.Results:CGH-array analysis detected PPM1D/Wip1 extra copies in all
tumors and cell lines containing 17q-gain. Tumor neuroblastoma xenograft
development was significantly delayed showing median tumor development
(0.10 mL) to be more than doubled (median 15 days, vs. 33 days, p<0.001)
after Wip1 downregulation compared to scrambled controls. A novel Wip1
inhibitor was highly potent in cytotoxic/cytostatic effect in a variety
of neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma cell lines. Furthermore, this Wip1
inhibitor significantly inhibited growth of established human
neuroblastoma- and medulloblastoma tumors in nude mice after treatment
(PBackground:The most common cytogenetic lesions in the embryonal neural
tumors medulloblastoma (MB) and neuroblastoma (NB) affect chromosome 17,
with 17q+ or isochromosome 17q, in approximately one-third of MB with
these aberrations being a significant indicator of poor clinical outcome.
Similarly, in NB gain of 17q is the most powerful genetic predictor of
adverse clinical outcome. 17q+ correlates with poor survival in our
population-based material where we found aberrations of chromosome 17 in
85% of primary neuroblastomas, specifically, gain of PPM1D/Wip1 at 17q23.
Wip1 is a serine/threonine phosphatase encoded by the gene PPM1D,
described as a gatekeeper in the Mdm2-p53 regulatory loop involved in
genetic stability, inflammation and a potential oncogene contributing to
carcinogenesis.Methods:Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was used
to examine PPM1D/Wip1 in neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma tumors and
cell lines. Stable Wip1 knockdown SK-N-BE(2) cells were generated by
shRNA transfections and tested in vivo in tumor xenografts.
Pharmacological inhibition with the p53-mdm2 modulating inhibitors RITA,
Nutlin-3 and a new PPM1D/Wip1 inhibitor, was used to evaluate the
function of PPM1D/Wip1 in preclinical neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma
models.Results:CGH-array analysis detected PPM1D/Wip1 extra copies in all
tumors and cell lines containing 17q-gain. Tumor neuroblastoma xenograft
development was significantly delayed showing median tumor development
(0.10 mL) to be more than doubled (median 15 days, vs. 33 days, p<0.001)
after Wip1 downregulation compared to scrambled controls. A novel Wip1
inhibitor was highly potent in cytotoxic/cytostatic effect in a variety
of neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma cell lines. Furthermore, this Wip1
inhibitor significantly inhibited growth of established human
neuroblastoma- and medulloblastoma tumors in nude mice after treatment
(P<0.01).Conclusions:Our results show that PPM1D/Wip1 is oncogenic in
neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma development and provides a novel
therapeutic target in these two childhood cancers of the nervous system.
More studies investigating the effects of PPM1D/Wip1 inhibition are
needed to evaluate its clinical significance.

