Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunohistochemical expression of CD44/ERM complex proteins in
penile carcinoma


Background: The loco-regional involvement is considered the main
complication and cause of death in the natural history of penile
carcinoma. Understanding the molecular processes that may be involved in
metastatic dissemination would improve the prognostic tools to better
evaluate the patients, avoiding the morbidity of unnecessary surgery.
Some studies have emphasized the influence of cellular adhesion in the
development of tumorigenesis and metastasis as the proteins of complex
CD44/ERM (Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin). Therefore, this study aimed to analyze
the expression of proteins CD44 and its variant CD44v6, Ezrin and Moesin
in squamous cell penile carcinoma, correlating their expression with the
clinical-pathological criteria.Material and Methods: Eighty four patients
were selected, retrospectively, undergoing surgery for squamous cell
penile carcinoma at AC Camargo Cancer Center. The expression evaluation
for CD44, CD44v6 Ezrin and Moesin was performed by immunohistochemistry
using Ventana equipment, subsequently analyzed by digital microscopy in
Aperio system. The immunoreactivity of each protein was categorized as
positive and negative using a cut-off criteria established by the average
percentage obtained.Results: CD44 expression was present in 19 (22.6%)
positive cases, CD44v6 in 50 (59.5%), Ezrin in 30 (35.7%) and Moesin in
53 (63.1%). It was observed that the loss of CD44 expression was
significantly correlated with recurrence (p = 0.002) and with the glans
invasion (p = 0.035); the positive expression of CD44v6 was significantly
correlated with the tumor size (p = 0.009) and with recurrence (p =
0.018); the loss of Ezrin expression was significantly correlated with
macroscopic invasion (p = 0.028) and with foreskin of invasion (p =
0.015); the positive expression of Moesin was significantly correlated
with macroscopic invasion (p = 0.010) and the loss of its expression was
significantly correlated with recurrence (p = 0.035). Disease-free
survival was significantly influenced by CD44, CD44v6 and
Moesin.Conclusion: The expression of CD44, CD44v6, Ezrin and Moesin seems
to significantly influence the prognostic factors of penile carcinoma and
could be an important molecular marker in the identification of
recurrence risk.

