Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel HSP70 inhibitor demonstrates potent anti-myeloma activity


Multiple myeloma (MM) is a hematological cancer characterized by clonal
proliferation of malignant plasma cells that produce monoclonal
immunoglobulin. Because they secrete excess amounts of immunoglobulins,
MM cells are typically under proteotoxic stress and utilize multiple
mechanisms including molecular chaperones to maintain protein
homeostasis. The chaperone HSP70 (heat shock protein 70) is overexpressed
in MM. Therefore, we sought to evaluate whether targeting HSP70 with a
novel HSP70 inhibitor would have a therapeutic benefit in MM. Toward this
end, a panel of human MM cells lines including H929, RPMI-8226, MY-5,
U266 and MM1s were tested for the IC50 to PET-16, an HSP70 inhibitor.
Treatment with PET-16 resulted in a significant decrease in the viability
of all MM cells tested with an IC50 value range from 3.5-7.2uM as was
determined by the Alamar Blue assay. Decreased MM cell viability after
treatment with PET-16 was due to induction of cellular apoptosis as was
determined by Annexin V binding assay using flow cytometry. Because MM
cells typically exist under hypoxic conditions, and hypoxia is known to
decrease the efficacy of some chemotherapeutic agents, we analyzed the
efficacy of PET-16 under hypoxia (1% oxygen). There was no difference in
anti-MM effect of PET-16 in cells cultured under hypoxia as compared to
those cultured in normoxic conditions. Taken together, our data suggest
that targeting HSP70 with the novel HSP70 inhibitor PET-16 could be a
viable potential strategy for treatment of MM.

