Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PP4C plays a braking role in Akt-driven cancer migration/invasion


Treatment of lung cancer cells with growth factors and PGE2 activates
phospho-AktS473 to transiently up-regulate phosphorylation of IKK and
NF-B within 1 hour, resulting in the elevation of cellular COX-2/PGE2,
E-cadherin suppressor Snail and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
24-31 hours later. In this study, we further found that in the cells
treated with PGE2 or growth factors, the activated phospho-AktS473
declined to basal level 2 hours after treatment and increased again to
reach a plateau 24-31 hours later but this resurgence of phospho-AktS473
was no longer associated with phosphorylation of IKK and NF-B. To
identify which factors or proteins cause dephosphorylation of IKK and
NF-B during phospho-AktS473 resurgence, we used immunoprecipitation,
immunoblotting and activity assay approaches. Our results showed that
during 12-31 hours of PGE2 treatment, the activity of protein phosphatase
(PP) 4C and its association with IKK was increased. In comparison, there
was no association between PP1, PP2A and PP5 with IKK. PP4C knockdown in
PGE2 treated lung cancer cells increased their IKK/IB/NF-B signaling
leading to the sustainment of COX-2 and Snail for much longer time.
Knockdown of PP4C also increased the cellular EMT, migration and invasion
of the lung cancer cells significantly. These findings demonstrated that
PP4C downregulates IKK/IB/NF-B signaling to play a braking role in the
Akt-driven lung cancer migration/invasion.

