Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIRT1 silencing suppresses prostate cancer growth and metastasis
in an orthotopic prostate cancer mouse model


Tumor environment is critical for tumor growth and progression, and
orthotopic mouse model allows accurately study tumor development in an
appropriate tumor environment. SIRT1, a class III histone deacetylase,
has been shown overexpressed in prostate cancer and is a biomarker for
prostate cancer recurrence. Although these data have suggested the
importance of the role SIRT1 plays in prostate cancer progression, the
role of SIRT1 in tumor growth and progression within, specifically, a
prostate tumor environment has not been established.In this study, we
established an advanced prostate cancer PC3MM2 orthotopic mouse model to
study the effects of SIRT1 silencing on prostate cancer growth and
progression. Our data has shown that SIRT1 knockdown greatly suppresses
tumor formation within a prostate tumor environment, along with an
inhibition of metastasis to bone and liver. To further study the
mechanism by which SIRT1 controls tumor growth and progression, we
demonstrated that SIRT1 silencing reduces prostate cancer cell adhesion
to cell matrix, and that this silencing also suppresses cancer cell
growth and colony formation in a cell matrix dependent manner. Moreover,
our data showed that SIRT1 regulates integrin expression and focal
adhesion complex formation. Furthermore, we shows that SIRT1 silencing
from prostate cancer cell significantly inhibited human umbilical vein
endothelial cell (HUVEC) tube formation, suggests an important role of
SIRT1 in prostate cancer angiogenesis. Thus, we have reported for the
first time that SIRT1 plays a critical role in prostate cancer growth and
progression using orthotopic mouse model, and demonstrated for the first
time that SIRT1 regulates integrin expression, focal adhesion formation,
tumor cell and matrix interaction, and angiogenesis. These results
suggest SIRT1 regulates prostate cancer growth and progression through
multiple mechanisms and that SIRT1 is a potential target in prostate
cancer treatment.

