Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular changes in the EGFR pathway and RAS/RAF genes identify
subtypes of metastatic and nonmetastatic colorectal cancer associated
with different outcomes


Background: Categorization of colon cancers into distinct subtypes using
a combination of pathway-based biomarkers and RAS/RAF mutations provides
better insight into the variability in patient outcomes. We assessed the
incidence, prognostic and predictive values of KRAS/BRAF mutations and
some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non- metastatic CRC (mCRC and
nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC patients (240 metastatic& 156
non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF mutations by conventional PCR
and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K, MEK and ERK expressions were
assessed by quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) and IHC. Results were
correlated to standard prognostic factors, response to treatment overall
and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results: We detected KRAS mutations in
47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13 and 14.3% in 12/13), BRAF in
31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS and EGFR were significantly
higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045). Tumors were categorized into
4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+, EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-,
EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%). Significant correlations were found
between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non
metastatic CRC (0.02&Background: Categorization of colon cancers into
distinct subtypes using a combination of pathway-based biomarkers and
RAS/RAF mutations provides better insight into the variability in patient
outcomes. We assessed the incidence, prognostic and predictive values of
KRAS/BRAF mutations and some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non-
metastatic CRC (mCRC and nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC
patients (240 metastatic& 156 non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF
mutations by conventional PCR and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K,
MEK and ERK expressions were assessed by quantitative real time PCR
(qPCR) and IHC. Results were correlated to standard prognostic factors,
response to treatment overall and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results:
We detected KRAS mutations in 47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13
and 14.3% in 12/13), BRAF in 31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS
and EGFR were significantly higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045).
Tumors were categorized into 4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+,
EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%).
Significant correlations were found between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and
PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC,
correlations were found between 1) RAS mutations and all markers except
EGFR (0.028&Background: Categorization of colon cancers into distinct
subtypes using a combination of pathway-based biomarkers and RAS/RAF
mutations provides better insight into the variability in patient
outcomes. We assessed the incidence, prognostic and predictive values of
KRAS/BRAF mutations and some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non-
metastatic CRC (mCRC and nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC
patients (240 metastatic& 156 non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF
mutations by conventional PCR and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K,
MEK and ERK expressions were assessed by quantitative real time PCR
(qPCR) and IHC. Results were correlated to standard prognostic factors,
response to treatment overall and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results:
We detected KRAS mutations in 47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13
and 14.3% in 12/13), BRAF in 31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS
and EGFR were significantly higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045).
Tumors were categorized into 4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+,
EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%).
Significant correlations were found between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and
PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC,
correlations were found between 1) RAS mutations and all markers except
EGFR (0.028&<0.001), 2) RAF and MEK/EGFR (0.045&Background:
Categorization of colon cancers into distinct subtypes using a
combination of pathway-based biomarkers and RAS/RAF mutations provides
better insight into the variability in patient outcomes. We assessed the
incidence, prognostic and predictive values of KRAS/BRAF mutations and
some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non- metastatic CRC (mCRC and
nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC patients (240 metastatic& 156
non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF mutations by conventional PCR
and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K, MEK and ERK expressions were
assessed by quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) and IHC. Results were
correlated to standard prognostic factors, response to treatment overall
and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results: We detected KRAS mutations in
47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13 and 14.3% in 12/13), BRAF in
31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS and EGFR were significantly
higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045). Tumors were categorized into
4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+, EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-,
EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%). Significant correlations were found
between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non
metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC, correlations were found between 1)
RAS mutations and all markers except EGFR (0.028&<0.001), 2) RAF and
MEK/EGFR (0.045&<0.005), 3) PI3K and all genes (Background:
Categorization of colon cancers into distinct subtypes using a
combination of pathway-based biomarkers and RAS/RAF mutations provides
better insight into the variability in patient outcomes. We assessed the
incidence, prognostic and predictive values of KRAS/BRAF mutations and
some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non- metastatic CRC (mCRC and
nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC patients (240 metastatic& 156
non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF mutations by conventional PCR
and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K, MEK and ERK expressions were
assessed by quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) and IHC. Results were
correlated to standard prognostic factors, response to treatment overall
and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results: We detected KRAS mutations in
47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13 and 14.3% in 12/13), BRAF in
31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS and EGFR were significantly
higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045). Tumors were categorized into
4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+, EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-,
EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%). Significant correlations were found
between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non
metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC, correlations were found between 1)
RAS mutations and all markers except EGFR (0.028&<0.001), 2) RAF and
MEK/EGFR (0.045&<0.005), 3) PI3K and all genes (<0.001) except BRAF, 4)
ERK and MEK (Background: Categorization of colon cancers into distinct
subtypes using a combination of pathway-based biomarkers and RAS/RAF
mutations provides better insight into the variability in patient
outcomes. We assessed the incidence, prognostic and predictive values of
KRAS/BRAF mutations and some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non-
metastatic CRC (mCRC and nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC
patients (240 metastatic& 156 non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF
mutations by conventional PCR and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K,
MEK and ERK expressions were assessed by quantitative real time PCR
(qPCR) and IHC. Results were correlated to standard prognostic factors,
response to treatment overall and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results:
We detected KRAS mutations in 47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13
and 14.3% in 12/13), BRAF in 31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS
and EGFR were significantly higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045).
Tumors were categorized into 4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+,
EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%).
Significant correlations were found between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and
PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC,
correlations were found between 1) RAS mutations and all markers except
EGFR (0.028&<0.001), 2) RAF and MEK/EGFR (0.045&<0.005), 3) PI3K and all
genes (<0.001) except BRAF, 4) ERK and MEK (<0.001). In nmCRC,
correlations were reported between 1) PI3K and EGFR (pBackground:
Categorization of colon cancers into distinct subtypes using a
combination of pathway-based biomarkers and RAS/RAF mutations provides
better insight into the variability in patient outcomes. We assessed the
incidence, prognostic and predictive values of KRAS/BRAF mutations and
some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non- metastatic CRC (mCRC and
nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC patients (240 metastatic& 156
non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF mutations by conventional PCR
and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K, MEK and ERK expressions were
assessed by quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) and IHC. Results were
correlated to standard prognostic factors, response to treatment overall
and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results: We detected KRAS mutations in
47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13 and 14.3% in 12/13), BRAF in
31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS and EGFR were significantly
higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045). Tumors were categorized into
4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+, EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-,
EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%). Significant correlations were found
between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non
metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC, correlations were found between 1)
RAS mutations and all markers except EGFR (0.028&<0.001), 2) RAF and
MEK/EGFR (0.045&<0.005), 3) PI3K and all genes (<0.001) except BRAF, 4)
ERK and MEK (<0.001). In nmCRC, correlations were reported between 1)
PI3K and EGFR (p<0.001), 2) RAS and MEK/ERK (pBackground: Categorization
of colon cancers into distinct subtypes using a combination of
pathway-based biomarkers and RAS/RAF mutations provides better insight
into the variability in patient outcomes. We assessed the incidence,
prognostic and predictive values of KRAS/BRAF mutations and some EGFR
pathway genes in metastatic and non- metastatic CRC (mCRC and nmCRC)
patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC patients (240 metastatic& 156 non
metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF mutations by conventional PCR and
immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K, MEK and ERK expressions were
assessed by quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) and IHC. Results were
correlated to standard prognostic factors, response to treatment overall
and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results: We detected KRAS mutations in
47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13 and 14.3% in 12/13), BRAF in
31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS and EGFR were significantly
higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045). Tumors were categorized into
4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+, EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-,
EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%). Significant correlations were found
between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non
metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC, correlations were found between 1)
RAS mutations and all markers except EGFR (0.028&<0.001), 2) RAF and
MEK/EGFR (0.045&<0.005), 3) PI3K and all genes (<0.001) except BRAF, 4)
ERK and MEK (<0.001). In nmCRC, correlations were reported between 1)
PI3K and EGFR (p<0.001), 2) RAS and MEK/ERK (p<0.001), 3) MEK and ERK
(pBackground: Categorization of colon cancers into distinct subtypes
using a combination of pathway-based biomarkers and RAS/RAF mutations
provides better insight into the variability in patient outcomes. We
assessed the incidence, prognostic and predictive values of KRAS/BRAF
mutations and some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non- metastatic
CRC (mCRC and nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC patients (240
metastatic& 156 non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF mutations by
conventional PCR and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K, MEK and ERK
expressions were assessed by quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) and IHC.
Results were correlated to standard prognostic factors, response to
treatment overall and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results: We detected
KRAS mutations in 47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13 and 14.3% in
12/13), BRAF in 31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS and EGFR were
significantly higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045). Tumors were
categorized into 4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+,
EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%).
Significant correlations were found between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and
PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC,
correlations were found between 1) RAS mutations and all markers except
EGFR (0.028&<0.001), 2) RAF and MEK/EGFR (0.045&<0.005), 3) PI3K and all
genes (<0.001) except BRAF, 4) ERK and MEK (<0.001). In nmCRC,
correlations were reported between 1) PI3K and EGFR (p<0.001), 2) RAS and
MEK/ERK (p<0.001), 3) MEK and ERK (p<0.001), 4) EGFR and PI3K
(pBackground: Categorization of colon cancers into distinct subtypes
using a combination of pathway-based biomarkers and RAS/RAF mutations
provides better insight into the variability in patient outcomes. We
assessed the incidence, prognostic and predictive values of KRAS/BRAF
mutations and some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non- metastatic
CRC (mCRC and nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC patients (240
metastatic& 156 non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF mutations by
conventional PCR and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K, MEK and ERK
expressions were assessed by quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) and IHC.
Results were correlated to standard prognostic factors, response to
treatment overall and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results: We detected
KRAS mutations in 47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13 and 14.3% in
12/13), BRAF in 31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS and EGFR were
significantly higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045). Tumors were
categorized into 4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+,
EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%).
Significant correlations were found between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and
PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC,
correlations were found between 1) RAS mutations and all markers except
EGFR (0.028&<0.001), 2) RAF and MEK/EGFR (0.045&<0.005), 3) PI3K and all
genes (<0.001) except BRAF, 4) ERK and MEK (<0.001). In nmCRC,
correlations were reported between 1) PI3K and EGFR (p<0.001), 2) RAS and
MEK/ERK (p<0.001), 3) MEK and ERK (p<0.001), 4) EGFR and PI3K (p<0.001).
DFS significantly correlated with K13RAS mutations, PI3K and positive
family history (pBackground: Categorization of colon cancers into
distinct subtypes using a combination of pathway-based biomarkers and
RAS/RAF mutations provides better insight into the variability in patient
outcomes. We assessed the incidence, prognostic and predictive values of
KRAS/BRAF mutations and some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non-
metastatic CRC (mCRC and nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC
patients (240 metastatic& 156 non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF
mutations by conventional PCR and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K,
MEK and ERK expressions were assessed by quantitative real time PCR
(qPCR) and IHC. Results were correlated to standard prognostic factors,
response to treatment overall and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results:
We detected KRAS mutations in 47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13
and 14.3% in 12/13), BRAF in 31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS
and EGFR were significantly higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045).
Tumors were categorized into 4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+,
EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%).
Significant correlations were found between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and
PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC,
correlations were found between 1) RAS mutations and all markers except
EGFR (0.028&<0.001), 2) RAF and MEK/EGFR (0.045&<0.005), 3) PI3K and all
genes (<0.001) except BRAF, 4) ERK and MEK (<0.001). In nmCRC,
correlations were reported between 1) PI3K and EGFR (p<0.001), 2) RAS and
MEK/ERK (p<0.001), 3) MEK and ERK (p<0.001), 4) EGFR and PI3K (p<0.001).
DFS significantly correlated with K13RAS mutations, PI3K and positive
family history (p<0.05). OS correlated with K13 RAS/BRAF mutation, PI3K
and age (pBackground: Categorization of colon cancers into distinct
subtypes using a combination of pathway-based biomarkers and RAS/RAF
mutations provides better insight into the variability in patient
outcomes. We assessed the incidence, prognostic and predictive values of
KRAS/BRAF mutations and some EGFR pathway genes in metastatic and non-
metastatic CRC (mCRC and nmCRC) patients from Egypt.Methods: 396 CRC
patients (240 metastatic& 156 non metastatic) were assessed for KRAS/BRAF
mutations by conventional PCR and immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR, PI3K,
MEK and ERK expressions were assessed by quantitative real time PCR
(qPCR) and IHC. Results were correlated to standard prognostic factors,
response to treatment overall and disease free survival (OS&DFS).Results:
We detected KRAS mutations in 47.7% (27% in codon 12, 35.6% in codon 13
and 14.3% in 12/13), BRAF in 31.3% and EGFR in 54.6% of the cases. KRAS
and EGFR were significantly higher in mCRC cases (p = 0.012& p = 0.045).
Tumors were categorized into 4 genetically different groups: EGFR-/KRAS+,
EGFR-/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS-, EGFR+/KRAS+ (30.3%,28.3%,24%, 17.4%).
Significant correlations were found between EGFR, KRAS/BRAF mutations and
PI3K-RNA in metastatic and non metastatic CRC (0.02&<0.001). In mCRC,
correlations were found between 1) RAS mutations and all markers except
EGFR (0.028&<0.001), 2) RAF and MEK/EGFR (0.045&<0.005), 3) PI3K and all
genes (<0.001) except BRAF, 4) ERK and MEK (<0.001). In nmCRC,
correlations were reported between 1) PI3K and EGFR (p<0.001), 2) RAS and
MEK/ERK (p<0.001), 3) MEK and ERK (p<0.001), 4) EGFR and PI3K (p<0.001).
DFS significantly correlated with K13RAS mutations, PI3K and positive
family history (p<0.05). OS correlated with K13 RAS/BRAF mutation, PI3K
and age (p<0.05).Conclusions: KRAS/BRAF mutations and aberrations in EGFR
pathway contribute differently to the development and progression of
metastatic and non metastatic CRC cases in Egypt. These markers could be
used for monitoring patients during treatment with conventional
chemotherapy regimens and can provide candidates for targeted therapy.

