Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term and recent recreational physical activity reduces risk
of triple negative and other subtypes of invasive breast cancer in the
California Teachers Study


Background. Evidence has accumulated showing that physical activity
reduces breast cancer risk. Whether risk reduction pertains to all breast
cancer or specific receptor-defined subtypes is unclear. Moreover, few
studies have examined whether changes in the amount of physical activity
during adulthood influence breast cancer risk.Methods. Among 108,907
women, ages 22 to 79 years with no history of breast cancer when they
joined the California Teachers Study in 1995-1996 (baseline), 5,578 women
were diagnosed with invasive breast cancer during follow-up through
December, 2011. Subtypes were defined by the expression status of
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Cox proportional hazards models were fit
to data to estimate adjusted hazard rate ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) associated with long-term and recent (within 3 years of
baseline) recreational physical activity. Among 54,690 women who provided
updated information on physical activity in 2005-2008, we also assessed
whether changes in the level of physical activity since baseline
influenced breast cancer risk (654 cases diagnosed during
follow-up).Results. Long-term and recent recreational physical activity
were inversely associated with risk of triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC, both Ptrend 0.05), but not other subtypes (all Ptrend 0.07). The
reduced risk of TNBC was limited to strenuous physical activity. A 50%
(HR = 0.50, 95% CI = 0.29-0.86) lower risk of TNBC was observed among
women in the highest (5.01 h/wk) versus lowest category (0.50 h/wk) of
long-term strenuous recreational physical activity; this was not modified
by baseline body mass index (Background. Evidence has accumulated showing
that physical activity reduces breast cancer risk. Whether risk reduction
pertains to all breast cancer or specific receptor-defined subtypes is
unclear. Moreover, few studies have examined whether changes in the
amount of physical activity during adulthood influence breast cancer
risk.Methods. Among 108,907 women, ages 22 to 79 years with no history of
breast cancer when they joined the California Teachers Study in 1995-1996
(baseline), 5,578 women were diagnosed with invasive breast cancer during
follow-up through December, 2011. Subtypes were defined by the expression
status of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Cox proportional hazards
models were fit to data to estimate adjusted hazard rate ratios (HRs) and
95% confidence intervals (CIs) associated with long-term and recent
(within 3 years of baseline) recreational physical activity. Among 54,690
women who provided updated information on physical activity in 2005-2008,
we also assessed whether changes in the level of physical activity since
baseline influenced breast cancer risk (654 cases diagnosed during
follow-up).Results. Long-term and recent recreational physical activity
were inversely associated with risk of triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC, both Ptrend 0.05), but not other subtypes (all Ptrend 0.07). The
reduced risk of TNBC was limited to strenuous physical activity. A 50%
(HR = 0.50, 95% CI = 0.29-0.86) lower risk of TNBC was observed among
women in the highest (5.01 h/wk) versus lowest category (0.50 h/wk) of
long-term strenuous recreational physical activity; this was not modified
by baseline body mass index (<25 kg/m2 vs. 25 kg/m2), menopausal hormone
therapy (MHT) use (never vs. ever), or the cessation of MHT use (former
vs. recent). An inverse association between strenuous recreational
physical activity and risk of luminal A-like (ER+ or PR+ plus HER2-)
breast cancer was observed only among former MHT users (Ptrend: 0.02 for
both long-term and baseline strenuous physical activity). Women who
increased their level of recent recreational physical activity from 0.50
h/wk at baseline to 4.51 h/wk in 2005-2008 had a 32% (HR = 0.68, 95% CI =
0.47-0.99) lower risk of breast cancer overall than those who stayed at
the lowest level.Conclusions. This study suggests that long-term
strenuous physical activity is associated with lower risk of TNBC.
Further, it shows that substantially increasing the amount of total
recreational physical activity in adulthood decreases the risk of breast
cancer.

