Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A model system to treat T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia with
JAK inhibitors


The IL-7 Receptor signaling pathway is necessary for the proliferation
and survival of T cells. Together with collaborators, we have shown that
9% of patients with T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) have gain
of function mutations in IL-7R exon 6. These mutations promote
homodimerization of IL-7R subunits, resulting in constitutive activation
of this pathway via JAK1. Approximately 20% of T-ALL patients fail to
respond to conventional chemotherapy, so there is a need for additional
options for these patients. We hypothesized that JAK inhibitors could be
used to treat T-ALL patients, particularly those with IL-7R mutations. We
established a cell line model of T-ALL driven by constitutive IL-7R
signaling which grew as a leukemia in RAG1-/- mice. The model cells were
established by transforming the D1 thymocyte cell line with a mutated
IL-7R derived from a patient sequence. These cells termed D1_hIL7R_P1 are
also GFP+ which allows us to monitor the proliferation of the cells in
vivo. D1_hIL7R_P1 cells delivered intravenously result in an aggressive
leukemia with morbidity within 18-21 days. Currently we are studying the
chemotherapeutic effects of two JAK inhibitors, Ruxolitinib and
Tofacitinib on T-ALL. The maximum tolerated doses for Tofacitinib and
Ruxolitinib are 50 mg/kg and 150 mg/kg, respectively. Ruxolitinib appears
to be the most effective, showing a reduction of leukemogenesis detected
in blood and tissues after just three days of oral treatment.
Additionally, we have obtained samples derived from pediatric T-ALL
patients. Once growth kinetics in NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice
is established, we will proceed to study the efficacy of the JAK
inhibitors with human leukemia cells.

