Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Compound screen identifies PIM kinases as therapeutic targets for
melanoma


Current treatments against malignant melanoma, including the use of small
molecule inhibitors, are displaying encouraging results in the clinic.
However, tumor resistance develops even for patients who initially
respond favorably. To identify novel drug targets and compounds with
anti-melanoma activity, we screened a panel of genetically distinct
human-derived metastatic melanoma cell lines against structurally diverse
organometallic kinase inhibitors. We observed a compound that
preferentially inhibits melanoma cell proliferation compared to normal
primary fibroblasts and melanocytes in adherent and three-dimensional
(3D) cultures. We further showed that this compound (SM200) is
pro-apoptotic and anti-invasive in 3D melanoma cell cultures. A kinome
screen to identify the targets responsible for the anti-melanoma effects
of SM200 revealed PIM kinases to be highly inhibited. PIM1 knockdown
studies to validate this target in human metastatic melanoma indicate
that PIM1 contributes to melanoma growth in 3D culture and in a xenograft
model. We then evaluated the clinically available PIM kinase inhibitor
SGI-1776 in our melanoma models and observed reduced cell proliferation
in 2D, 3D, and in vivo melanoma models (as seen for SM200) suggesting an
important role for PIM kinases in melanoma pathobiology. Taken together,
our findings suggest that PIM kinases are valid targets for melanoma and
PIM kinase inhibitors could enhance the effects of current therapies in
the clinic.

