Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: International cancer genome consortium (ICGC)


The International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) was established to
bring together researchers from around the globe to comprehensively
analyze the genomic, transcriptomic, and epigenomic changes in 50
different tumour types or subtypes that are of clinical and societal
importance across the globe (International network of cancer genome
projects. Nature 464, 993-998 (15 April 2010)).As of December 2014, the
ICGC has received commitments from researchers and funding organizations
in Asia, Australia, Europe, North America and South America for 77
project teams in 17 jurisdictions to study more than 25,000 tumour
genomes.More than 27,000 tumours that meet ICGC requirements for consent
have been obtained and research pathologists have approved over 27,000
samples as meeting ICGC standards.Processed data is available via the
Data Coordination Centre (http://dcc.icgc.org) based at the Ontario
Institute for Cancer Research and is updated quarterly. The data release
(Version 17) in October 2014 included datasets from 42 ICGC members. The
ICGC Data Portal has been improved to provide enhanced support to the
research community browsing this vast dataset.The ICGC and The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) PanCancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) project
is committing more than 2,500 tumour-normal whole genome pairs from 23
different tumour types to uniform alignment and variant calling. More
than 600 researchers will contribute to the interpretation of the data
and writing of papers that will focus on specific analyses covering:
Identification of driver mutations outside coding regions, including
those that affect cis-regulatory regions and non-coding RNAs; and
identification of gene regulatory pathways altered by non-coding
mutations. Because the projected size of the pan-cancer dataset for 5,000
WGS is very large, PCAWG is using a distributed compute cloud environment
(at different computing centres in the USA, Europe and Asia) that meet
technical requirements of the project and the bioethical framework of
ICGC and its member projects. More information can be found on
www.icgc.org.

