Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical features of transcriptional factor Helios expression on
regulatory T cells in patients with non-small cell lung cancer


IntroductionFoxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) have been thought to have
at least two subsets: natural Tregs (nTregs) and induced Tregs (iTregs).
Recently, expression of the transcription factor Helios, a member of the
Ikaros gene family, has been expected to be a molecular marker of nTregs,
but this is still controversial. To date, several in vitro studies and
animal model studies regarding Helios have been reported, but there has
been no examination of the clinical impact of Helios expression on Tregs
in patients with lung cancer to date.MethodsA total of 45 non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who underwent surgical resection and 19
advanced/recurrent NSCLC patients was evaluated. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) taken from these patients were examined by
flow-cytometry. Of these 45 patients, 18 who were evaluable for tumor
tissue underwent immunohistochemical investigation for tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes.ResultsHelios-negative Tregs of CD4+ T cells were
significantly higher not only in all cancer patients (2.4%), but also in
stage IA patients (2.6%) as compared with normal controls (1.5%,
pIntroductionFoxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) have been thought to have
at least two subsets: natural Tregs (nTregs) and induced Tregs (iTregs).
Recently, expression of the transcription factor Helios, a member of the
Ikaros gene family, has been expected to be a molecular marker of nTregs,
but this is still controversial. To date, several in vitro studies and
animal model studies regarding Helios have been reported, but there has
been no examination of the clinical impact of Helios expression on Tregs
in patients with lung cancer to date.MethodsA total of 45 non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients who underwent surgical resection and 19
advanced/recurrent NSCLC patients was evaluated. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) taken from these patients were examined by
flow-cytometry. Of these 45 patients, 18 who were evaluable for tumor
tissue underwent immunohistochemical investigation for tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes.ResultsHelios-negative Tregs of CD4+ T cells were
significantly higher not only in all cancer patients (2.4%), but also in
stage IA patients (2.6%) as compared with normal controls (1.5%,
p<0.001). Patients who had a lower level of Helios-negative Tregs in
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes had significantly longer survival (p =
0.038).DiscussionHelios-negative Tregs may be involved in immune
suppression, even in early-stage NSCLC. The frequency of Helios-negative
Tregs could be a useful prognostic biomarker in patients with NSCLC. The
biological functions of Helios-negative Tregs in immune suppression
should be further examined.

