Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LT receptor and NIK signaling activates the alternative NF-kB
pathway in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are highly inflammatory
and preferentially metastasize to lymph nodes. NF-B, a key target and
regulator of inflammatory and cancer genes is constitutively activated in
HNSCC, but the upstream regulation, especially for activation of
alternative pathway involving LT/LTR is not clear. We hypothesized that
LT/LTR mediated alternative NF-kB pathway signaling is an important
mechanism for activation of downstream target genes, and promotion of
malignant and metastatic phenotypes in HNSCC. In this study, we have
found that LT and LTR are overexpressed in subsets of HNSCC (UM-SCC)
tissues and cell lines. In UM-SCC cell lines, LT mainly activated the
alternative NF-kB pathway, enhancing nuclear translocation of RELB and
NF-B2/p52, in contrast to TNF induced activation of classical NF-B
pathway. Knockdown of LTR by Si RNA decreased LTR mRNA by quantitative
RT-PCR and protein expression by Western blots. Knockdown of LTR
decreased its target kinase NIK, and downstream NF-B subunits RELB and
NF-B2/p52 protein expression. Knockdown of NIK protein decreased RELB and
p52 protein expression, while LT treatment stabilized NIK, RELB and
NF-B2/p52 expression. LTB mediated NF-B activity was examined by
transient luciferase reporter assay or using stably transfected NF-B
reporter cell line through beta lactamase Fret Blazer activity. Knockdown
of LTBR and NIK functionally decreased NF-B reporter activity, while
treatment of LTB partially restored the NF-B reporter activity. Our data
have shown that constitutive and LT induce activation of NIK and
downstream NF-B alternate pathway proteins, RELB and NF-kB2/p52 in HNSCC.
LT and NIK activation of the alternative NF-B pathway may contribute to
the malignant phenotype and metastasis of HNSCC.

