Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of methylation profiles reveals distinct
epigenomic patterns in SCLC and NSCLC


Background: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly lethal malignancy
characterized by rapid growth, early metastasis and poor prognosis. SCLC
shows distinct molecular and clinical features when compared to other
lung cancer subtypes. Previous analyses by us and others have identified
genomic and proteomic differences between SCLC and Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC). Epigenetic alterations are some of the earliest events
that could also lead to oncogenic changes and thus play an essential role
in tumor initiation and progression. However, epigenetic differences
between SCLC and NSCLC contributing to the alterations in gene and
protein expression patterns, distinct biological features and therapeutic
response have not been well characterized. Here, we investigate the
differences in the methylation patterns of SCLC and NSCLC to provide
novel insights into epigenetic associated gene alterations to identify
potential therapeutic targets in SCLC.Material and Methods: A genome-wide
DNA methylation profiling of SCLC and NSCLC cell lines was used for this
investigation. We correlated DNA methylation status with gene expression
and protein expression levels in 31 SCLC and 73 NSCLC lines to identify
the relationship of epigenetic with genomic and proteomic features
distinguishing SCLC from NSCLC.Results: SCLC and NSCLC lines exhibited
different methylation profiles and we identified 484 genes that had a
significant inverse correlation between methylation status and mRNA
expression levels (Rho -0.5 and FDR = 0.01), (genes regulated by
methylation, GRM) that distinguished SCLC from NSCLC. Ingenuity pathway
analysis of the 484 genes identified significant associations with
neuregulin signaling, immune trafficking, integrin signaling, glioma
invasiveness canonical pathways. Proteomic profiling by Reverse Phase
Protein Array (RPPA) validated the different expression of some of the
484 genes identifying nine that were hypermethylated and downregulated at
protein levels in SCLC compared to NSCLC lines (PTEN, CyclinD1, Caveolin,
Notch3, TAZ, HSP27, STAT6 and both total and phosphorylated levels of
receptor tyrosine kinases such Her2 and, MET).Conclusions: Genome wide
methylation, mRNA expression, and detailed proteomic analyses have
identified specific epigenic differences between SCLC and NSCLC that
impact on important signaling pathways including widespread loss of PTEN
function and receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) expression in SCLCs which
need to be considered in developing new rationale therapies for SCLC.

