Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical validation for treatment with RG7787 in ovarian cancer


RG7787 is composed of a Fab fragment from an anti-MSLN antibody fused to
a de-immunized and truncated pseudomonas endotoxin A variant. Once RG7787
is bound and internalized by MSLN positive cells, the toxin is
transported to the cytosol, where it inhibits protein synthesis,
eventually causing tumor cell death.Mesothelin (MSLN) is a tumor specific
differentiation antigen. On normal tissue, its expression is restricted
to differentiated mesothelial cells that line as single cell layer body
cavities and major organs (e.g. pleura, pericardium, and peritoneum). In
cancer, MSLN is highly expressed not only on mesotheliomas but also on a
number of other types of solid tumors like ovarian and pancreatic cancer.
In both indications patients frequently also have significant serum
levels of the cancer antigen-125 (CA-125), sometimes even >1000 U/ml.MSLN
has been described to bind CA-125 and this interaction has been suggested
to play a role for the ability of cancer cells to metastasize e.g. to the
peritoneum. The region in MSLN that is responsible for its interaction
with CA-125 has been reported to overlap with the binding epitope of
RG7787 potentially resulting in competition between CA-125 and RG7787 for
binding to MSLN. The high percentage of MSLN positive cases as well as a
clear unmet medical need makes ovarian and pancreatic cancer promising
indications for clinical development of RG7787. We investigated, whether
abundance of CA-125 can negatively affect ability of RG7787 to bind and
be taken up by tumor cells thereby antagonizing RG7787 treatment.We found
that indeed RG7787 competes with CA-125 for binding to mesothelin.
However, in SPR experiments, the interaction of MSLN with CA-125 was not
strong enough to block binding of the anti-MSLN Fab moiety that targets
RG7787 to tumor cells. At 20C the absolute affinity (KD) of RG7787 for
human MSLN was determined to be 12.5 pM using two orthogonal affinity in
solution methods, ELISA and SPR. In agreement with such high affinity
binding, we found that adding soluble CA-125 to cell viability assays did
not reduce the cytotoxic potency of RG7787. In one set of assays, ascites
fluid containing a 10 fold excess of CA-125 compared to the average
levels observed in sera of ovarian patients was used for competition. In
another set of assays, we used a 100 fold excess of a truncated
recombinant CA-125 fragment, containing the domain that interacts with
MSLN. Neither the ascites fluid, nor the recombinant CA-125 fragment had
any effect on the in-vitro potency of RG7787, indicating that soluble
CA-125 levels in patients will not antagonize RG7787 treatment. Finally
we demonstrated in cell-cell interaction assays that RG7787 can
efficiently block the attachment of MSLN positive cells to OVCAR3 cells
that express high levels of CA-125 on their surface. Based on these
encouraging data we are currently evaluating in-vivo efficacy of RG7787
in a patient-derived ovarian cancer model.

