Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the novel immune checkpoint CEACAM1 enhances
antitumor immunological activity


Blockade of co-inhibitory immune receptors has become a promising
approach for the activation of anti-tumor immunity. CEACAM1, a recently
characterized immune checkpoint, is a member of the Ig superfamily
expressed by activated effector lymphocytes and cancer cells. Expression
of CEACAM1 on cancer cells induces a co-inhibitory signal to T and NK
cells through homophilic CEACAM1 interactions. CEACAM1 is expressed
across multiple tumor types and its presence is independent of PD-L1
expression.CM-24 is a humanized anti-CEACAM1 IgG4 antibody with high
affinity and selectivity for CEACAM1. We investigated the activity of
CM-24 and its ability to reverse CEACAM1-induced immune evasion alone and
in combination with other checkpoint inhibitors. CM-24 was demonstrated
to be a potent blocker of intercellular CEACAM1-CEACAM1 interactions and
reversed inhibition of activated lymphocytes by restoring the
phosphorylation signal of ZAP70. CM-24 enhanced the cytotoxic activity of
cytotoxic T cell and NK cells against various cancer types, which was
accompanied by higher secretion of Granzyme B and IFN. In addition, a
synergistic activity with various immune checkpoint blockers was
observed, including ones that target the PD-1 pathway. Various in vivo
tumor xenograft models demonstrated that CM-24 has clear anti-tumor
activity accompanied by an increase in immunological activity of T cells
within the tumor. Collectively, preclinical data show that CM-24 has
effective anti-tumor activity in various in vitro and in vivo models and
demonstrate that CM-24 has the potential to enhance the cytotoxic
activity of lymphocytes against malignant cells. CM-24 is now moving
towards phase 1 clinical study.

