Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Occult and clinical pancreatic cancers in elderly patients


Objectives: This study aimed to investigate the clinicopathological
features of pancreatic cancer at different stages using autopsy results.
Methods: We retrospectively evaluated 8399 consecutive cases of autopsy
performed between 1972 and 2013 at our geriatric hospital. Results:
Macroscopic pancreatic lesions were detected in 6.13% of cases. Primary
and secondary pancreatic tumors were observed in 2.88% and 2.10% of
cases, respectively. Most primary tumors were invasive ductal
adenocarcinomas (193 cases, 2.31%, mean patient age: 78.09 years) with a
peak incidence at 50-59 years. Occult invasive ductal adenocarcinoma was
discovered incidentally in 15 cases (Table), with distant metastasis
present in 26.67% of those. Microscopically, occult and advanced tumors
exhibited similar characteristics such as hyalinized fibrous stroma;
necrosis; and invasion into vessels, peripancreatic fat tissues, and
extrapancreatic nerve plexus. Mucin 1 and 2 immunohistochemical
expression levels were also similar. Occult cancer incidence increased
with age. Patients aged 85 years had shorter survival, a small tumor
size, and a low incidence of lymph node metastasis. Approximately 8% of
pancreatic invasive ductal adenocarcinomas progressed asymptomatically
and were discovered incidentally at autopsy. Conclusions: Pancreatic
cancers in elderly patients tend to progress asymptomatically, but once
symptoms develop, they are more often fatal than those in younger
patients.

