Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between insertional polymorphisms of human endogenous
retrovirus K113 and K115 and breast cancer risk in African American and
European American women


Background: Human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) are remnants of ancient
virus infection. The majority of them are disabled due to mutation and/or
deletion. However, HERV K113 and K115 have been shown to have full-length
insertion in human genome and retain the ability to encode functional
virus proteins in some individuals. Considering the potential role of
HERVs in carcinogenesis and a high genetic homology between HERV K and
mouse mammary tumor virus, the study is designed to investigate the
distribution of HERV K113 and K115 in African American (AA) and European
American (EA) women, and their association with breast cancer
risk.Methods: Built on a funded multi-center case-control study, the
Women's Circle of Health Study, the study included 1242 cases (608 AA and
634 EA) and 1422 controls (783 AA and 639 EA). PCR followed by fragment
analysis was used for insertional polymorphism assay. For each HERV,
three PCRs were performed to determine whether the insertion is partial
or full length. Indeed, a subset of individuals showed insertion of long
terminal repeat (LTR) of HERV, instead of whole virus insertion. The
distribution of insertional polymorphisms was compared between AA and EA
as well as between cases and controls. Logistic regression was used to
calculate odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) with
adjustment for age at diagnosis and proportion of European
ancestry.Results: For both K113 and K115, with or without including LTR
insertion, the distribution was significantly different between AA and EA
women. A two-fold higher prevalence of HERVs was observed in AA women,
showing 51.5% of individuals with at least one copy of either K113 or
K115 compared to 23.3% in EA women among controls. The prevalence of
HERVs was inversely associated with proportions of European ancestry,
showing a decrease from averagely 66% European ancestry in individuals
without insertion to 42.9%, 23.2%, 13.3% with one, two, or more
insertions of HERV K113 or K115, respectively.Between cases and controls,
the prevalence of K113 was slightly higher in controls, but not for K115.
Furthermore, both K113 and K115 insertion were significantly associated
with the reduced risk of breast cancer in both AA and EA women. Near 50%
reduction of breast cancer risk was observed in AA and EA women with
homozygous insertion of K113 (combined OR, 0.45; 95% CI, 0.25-0.80).A
trend of a reduction in breast cancer risk with an increase of copy
number of HERV K insertion was observed in both AA and EA women. However,
there was no association with breast cancer subtypes.Conclusion: This is
the first study to document the prevalence of HERV K113 and K115 in AA
and EA population, and to report an inverse association with breast
cancer risk. Validation of the findings in a relatively large study is
warranted in the future.Funded by 5R03CA156645, K07CA148888, P01151135,
and R01CA100598.

