Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-25/IL-17E does not induce breast tumor cell apoptosis and both
IL-17A and IL-25/IL-17E contribute to breast cancer survival and
proliferation associated with generation of pro-oncogenic low molecular
forms of cyclin E


Pro-inflammatory IL-17 cytokines were initially described for their
pathogenic role in chronic inflammatory diseases and subsequent
accumulating evidence indicated their involvement in carcinogenesis. In
the present study we focused our work on IL-17A and IL-17E which are
found in the breast tumoral microenvironment. Cell proliferation and
cytotoxic assays as well as Quantitative PCR and Western Blot analysis of
oncogenic pathways were performed using several breast cancer cell lines
and primary tumor cells. We report that IL-17A and IL-17E receptor
subunits (IL17RA, RB and RC chains) are up-regulated in breast cancers
versus normal samples. Moreover, IL-17E, which is undetectable in most
normal breast tissues tested, is expressed at higher levels in tumors. We
studied the molecular signaling following the stimulation of cell lines
with IL-17A and IL-17E. We found that both cytokines induced cell
proliferation and activation of pathways involved in cells survival.
Accordingly, IL-17A and IL-17E promoted resistance to Docetaxel but
failed to induce apoptosis as previously reported for IL-17E.
Interestingly, we also revealed that both cytokines induced the
generation of tumorigenic low molecular weight forms of cyclin E (LMW-E),
high levels of which correlate strongly with a poor survival in breast
cancer patients. These results show for the first time some of the
molecular pathways activated by IL-17A and IL-17E that may participate to
their pro-oncogenic activity in breast cancers.

