Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclin E as a prognostic marker and predictor of response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy and adjuvant hormonal therapy in patients with
stage II-III breast cancer


Purpose: While we know that many cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents act to
modulate the cell cycle, the role of cyclin E as a predictive marker of
response to chemotherapy is unknown. Given that the cell cycle is
compromised in tumors that overexpress cyclin E, we hypothesized that
cyclin E overexpression would predict decreased response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy and increased risk of relapse in the subset of patients with
pathologic complete response (pCR).Experimental Design: 286 women with a
diagnosis of clinical stage II-III invasive breast cancer that had
received neoadjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel (or docetaxel) and FAC,
FEC or AC followed by surgery were enrolled into this study. Histological
sections from the pre- and post-therapy tissue sections of the patient
samples were analyzed for cyclin E using immunohistochemistry (IHC). In
breast cancers, high levels of cyclin E result in the expression of its
low molecular weight isoforms (LMW-E) which are predominantly cytoplasmic
due to the loss of the nuclear localization signal. LMW-E expression can
be measured by cytoplasmic staining of cyclin E on IHC. The expression of
cyclin E was correlated with response to treatment using multivariable
logistic regression. Clinical-Pathological factors, disease-free (DFS),
recurrence-free (RFS), and overall survival (OS) rates were also
evaluated.Results: A complete pCR was obtained in 79 of 286 cases (31%).
Patients with high pretreatment cytoplasmic cyclin E expression on IHC
had a decreased pCR rate as compared to those patients with low
cytoplasmic cyclin E levels (32.3% vs 67.7%). On multivariable logistic
regression analysis, the strongest predictors of poor response to therapy
(failure to attain pathologic complete response) were the cytoplasmic
cyclin E expression and negative Her-2 status (pPurpose: While we know
that many cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents act to modulate the cell
cycle, the role of cyclin E as a predictive marker of response to
chemotherapy is unknown. Given that the cell cycle is compromised in
tumors that overexpress cyclin E, we hypothesized that cyclin E
overexpression would predict decreased response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy and increased risk of relapse in the subset of patients with
pathologic complete response (pCR).Experimental Design: 286 women with a
diagnosis of clinical stage II-III invasive breast cancer that had
received neoadjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel (or docetaxel) and FAC,
FEC or AC followed by surgery were enrolled into this study. Histological
sections from the pre- and post-therapy tissue sections of the patient
samples were analyzed for cyclin E using immunohistochemistry (IHC). In
breast cancers, high levels of cyclin E result in the expression of its
low molecular weight isoforms (LMW-E) which are predominantly cytoplasmic
due to the loss of the nuclear localization signal. LMW-E expression can
be measured by cytoplasmic staining of cyclin E on IHC. The expression of
cyclin E was correlated with response to treatment using multivariable
logistic regression. Clinical-Pathological factors, disease-free (DFS),
recurrence-free (RFS), and overall survival (OS) rates were also
evaluated.Results: A complete pCR was obtained in 79 of 286 cases (31%).
Patients with high pretreatment cytoplasmic cyclin E expression on IHC
had a decreased pCR rate as compared to those patients with low
cytoplasmic cyclin E levels (32.3% vs 67.7%). On multivariable logistic
regression analysis, the strongest predictors of poor response to therapy
(failure to attain pathologic complete response) were the cytoplasmic
cyclin E expression and negative Her-2 status (p<0.0001, OR: 9.0 and
pPurpose: While we know that many cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents act
to modulate the cell cycle, the role of cyclin E as a predictive marker
of response to chemotherapy is unknown. Given that the cell cycle is
compromised in tumors that overexpress cyclin E, we hypothesized that
cyclin E overexpression would predict decreased response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy and increased risk of relapse in the subset of patients with
pathologic complete response (pCR).Experimental Design: 286 women with a
diagnosis of clinical stage II-III invasive breast cancer that had
received neoadjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel (or docetaxel) and FAC,
FEC or AC followed by surgery were enrolled into this study. Histological
sections from the pre- and post-therapy tissue sections of the patient
samples were analyzed for cyclin E using immunohistochemistry (IHC). In
breast cancers, high levels of cyclin E result in the expression of its
low molecular weight isoforms (LMW-E) which are predominantly cytoplasmic
due to the loss of the nuclear localization signal. LMW-E expression can
be measured by cytoplasmic staining of cyclin E on IHC. The expression of
cyclin E was correlated with response to treatment using multivariable
logistic regression. Clinical-Pathological factors, disease-free (DFS),
recurrence-free (RFS), and overall survival (OS) rates were also
evaluated.Results: A complete pCR was obtained in 79 of 286 cases (31%).
Patients with high pretreatment cytoplasmic cyclin E expression on IHC
had a decreased pCR rate as compared to those patients with low
cytoplasmic cyclin E levels (32.3% vs 67.7%). On multivariable logistic
regression analysis, the strongest predictors of poor response to therapy
(failure to attain pathologic complete response) were the cytoplasmic
cyclin E expression and negative Her-2 status (p<0.0001, OR: 9.0 and
p<0.0001, OR: 6.5 respectively). Patients with high cytoplasmic cyclin E
expression were significantly correlated with poor DFS, RFS and OS in
both pretreatment and posttreatment groups.Conclusions: Cytoplasmic
cyclin E expression is a strong predictive factor for pCR in breast
cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant anthracycline-based
chemotherapy. Routine clinical assessment of cyclin E could be used to
identify patients at high risk for poor response to neoadjuvant therapy
or recurrence and stratified for more personalized therapy.

