Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Occupational exposure to trichloroethylene and LINE-1 methylation


Trichloroethylene (TCE) is a volatile chlorinated organic compound that
is commonly used in industrial settings as a degreaser. Epidemiologic
studies suggest that TCE exposure is associated with an increased risk of
kidney cancer and may also be associated with non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
However, the mechanisms for these associations are still not clear. To
evaluate the relationship between occupational exposure to
trichloroethylene (TCE) and LINE-1 methylation, a measure of global
methylation, we conducted a cross-sectional molecular epidemiology study
of 79 workers exposed to TCE and 81 comparable unexposed controls in
Guangdong, China. Personal air exposure measurements and urine samples
were collected prior to phlebotomy. The urine TCE metabolite,
trichloroacetic acid (TCA), was measured by liquid chromatography
electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry in urine samples and
LINE-1 methylation was assessed by pyrosequencing DNA isolated from
peripheral blood. LINE-1 methylation levels [median (range) in percent]
were 78.40 (75.80-81.20) in controls, 77.80 (76.10-81.00) in lower
exposed, and 77.50 (74.20-80.20) in higher exposed workers based on
median urine TCA level (p trend = 0.012). These results suggest that TCE
may be associated with a decrease in global methylation measured by the
LINE-1 assay. Gene-specific methylation is currently being conducted to
follow up these findings.

