Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRB7 promotes doxorubicin resistance in triple-negative breast
cancer cells via multiple signaling pathways


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacks expression of the estrogen and
progesterone steroid receptors and HER2; thus TNBC patients cannot
benefit from the recent successes of targeted therapies, and instead rely
on cytotoxic chemotherapeutic cocktails. As such, tumor recurrence is
high and patient prognosis is poor.GRB7 is a soluble adaptor protein
required for cell migration, invasion, and proliferation in TNBC. We have
previously reported that a high GRB7 mRNA level was the strongest
predictor of tumor recurrence in a cohort of 246 TNBC patients treated
with doxorubicin. GRB7 was confirmed in a smaller, independent cohort as
an indicator of poor prognosis. After the observation of both decreased
doxorubicin sensitivity and elevated GRB7 expression levels in TNBC
tumors, we hypothesized that GRB7 was mediating a signaling pathway
critical for drug resistance and cell survival.The current study utilizes
isogenic MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines to examine the impact of
altered GRB7 levels on TNBC cell signaling and chemosensitivity. Through
stable overexpression and knock-down of GRB7, we have identified multiple
downstream kinases with altered phosphorylation in basal growth
conditions (Akt, Erk, and Jnk) that remain responsive to EGF stimulation.
Treatment of TNBC cell lines with G7-18NATE, a specific peptide inhibitor
of GRB7, sensitized TNBC cells to doxorubicin. Therefore, we created
stable cell lines with constitutively active Akt and Map2k1 and the
overexpression of MKK7 in order to determine whether the activation of
these kinases individually have novel roles in GRB7-mediated
chemoresistance and TNBC cell biology associated with the malignant
phenotype, such as cell migration and invasion.This study provides a
strong rationale for targeting GRB7 or GRB7-dependent pathways in
combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy for GRB7-high TNBC patients.
Delineating the signaling events downstream of GRB7 in TNBC could provide
further insight into improving the therapeutic index with combinatorial
approaches.

