Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subsequent gastrointestinal cancer risks of childhood and early
adulthood cancer survivors


Introduction: The number of childhood/early adulthood cancer survivors
has been growing due to improved cancer treatment, but subsequent
malignant neoplasms (SMN) in the digestive system are an important cause
of morbidity and mortality. Few studies have examined these survivors
risks of developing various subsequent primary gastrointestinal (GI)
cancers. In addition, although there have been SMN studies exclusively on
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) survivors, none have compared the GI cancer risks
of young HL survivors with that of other young first primary cancer
survivors. We used the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance,
Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) Program registries to perform the
largest analysis on the risks of developing various GI cancers in
childhood/early adulthood cancer survivors.Methods: Among the patients
reported to 9 SEER registries from 1973 to 2010, there were 28,858
children/young adults diagnosed with first primary cancer before 21 years
of age and survived a minimum of 5 years. From these survivors, 103 GI
SMNs were included in this analysis, of which 39 developed from 3,330 HL
survivors. Standardized incidence ratios (SIR) were calculated using
age-, sex-, race-, and calendar year-matched SEER incidence
rates.Results: Relative to the general population, childhood/early
adulthood cancer survivors had significantly higher risks of developing
GI cancers (N = 103, SIR = 3.6, 95% CI: 2.9-4.3), esophageal cancer (N =
7, SIR = 7.0, 95% CI: 2.8-14.4), stomach cancer (N = 15, SIR = 5.6, 95%
CI: 3.1-9.2), pancreatic cancer (N = 15, SIR = 5.9, 95% CI: 3.3-9.7), and
colorectal cancer (N = 41, SIR = 2.5, 95% CI: 1.8-3.4). HL survivors had
6.8-fold higher risk of developing GI cancers (N = 39, 95% CI: 4.9-9.3),
whereas survivors of other first primary cancers had 2.8-fold higher risk
(N = 64, 95% CI: 2.1-3.5) (P-homogeneityIntroduction: The number of
childhood/early adulthood cancer survivors has been growing due to
improved cancer treatment, but subsequent malignant neoplasms (SMN) in
the digestive system are an important cause of morbidity and mortality.
Few studies have examined these survivors risks of developing various
subsequent primary gastrointestinal (GI) cancers. In addition, although
there have been SMN studies exclusively on Hodgkin lymphoma (HL)
survivors, none have compared the GI cancer risks of young HL survivors
with that of other young first primary cancer survivors. We used the
National Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results
(SEER) Program registries to perform the largest analysis on the risks of
developing various GI cancers in childhood/early adulthood cancer
survivors.Methods: Among the patients reported to 9 SEER registries from
1973 to 2010, there were 28,858 children/young adults diagnosed with
first primary cancer before 21 years of age and survived a minimum of 5
years. From these survivors, 103 GI SMNs were included in this analysis,
of which 39 developed from 3,330 HL survivors. Standardized incidence
ratios (SIR) were calculated using age-, sex-, race-, and calendar
year-matched SEER incidence rates.Results: Relative to the general
population, childhood/early adulthood cancer survivors had significantly
higher risks of developing GI cancers (N = 103, SIR = 3.6, 95% CI:
2.9-4.3), esophageal cancer (N = 7, SIR = 7.0, 95% CI: 2.8-14.4), stomach
cancer (N = 15, SIR = 5.6, 95% CI: 3.1-9.2), pancreatic cancer (N = 15,
SIR = 5.9, 95% CI: 3.3-9.7), and colorectal cancer (N = 41, SIR = 2.5,
95% CI: 1.8-3.4). HL survivors had 6.8-fold higher risk of developing GI
cancers (N = 39, 95% CI: 4.9-9.3), whereas survivors of other first
primary cancers had 2.8-fold higher risk (N = 64, 95% CI: 2.1-3.5)
(P-homogeneity<0.001). Those who received radiation treatment without
chemotherapy for first primary cancer had 4.8-fold higher risk of
developing GI cancers (N = 31, 95% CI: 3.2-6.8), with 8.1-fold higher
risk for HL survivors (N = 23, 95% CI: 5.1-12.1) versus 2.2-fold higher
risk for survivors of other primary cancers (N = 8, 95% CI: 1.0-4.3)
(P-homogeneityIntroduction: The number of childhood/early adulthood
cancer survivors has been growing due to improved cancer treatment, but
subsequent malignant neoplasms (SMN) in the digestive system are an
important cause of morbidity and mortality. Few studies have examined
these survivors risks of developing various subsequent primary
gastrointestinal (GI) cancers. In addition, although there have been SMN
studies exclusively on Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) survivors, none have
compared the GI cancer risks of young HL survivors with that of other
young first primary cancer survivors. We used the National Cancer
Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) Program
registries to perform the largest analysis on the risks of developing
various GI cancers in childhood/early adulthood cancer survivors.Methods:
Among the patients reported to 9 SEER registries from 1973 to 2010, there
were 28,858 children/young adults diagnosed with first primary cancer
before 21 years of age and survived a minimum of 5 years. From these
survivors, 103 GI SMNs were included in this analysis, of which 39
developed from 3,330 HL survivors. Standardized incidence ratios (SIR)
were calculated using age-, sex-, race-, and calendar year-matched SEER
incidence rates.Results: Relative to the general population,
childhood/early adulthood cancer survivors had significantly higher risks
of developing GI cancers (N = 103, SIR = 3.6, 95% CI: 2.9-4.3),
esophageal cancer (N = 7, SIR = 7.0, 95% CI: 2.8-14.4), stomach cancer (N
= 15, SIR = 5.6, 95% CI: 3.1-9.2), pancreatic cancer (N = 15, SIR = 5.9,
95% CI: 3.3-9.7), and colorectal cancer (N = 41, SIR = 2.5, 95% CI:
1.8-3.4). HL survivors had 6.8-fold higher risk of developing GI cancers
(N = 39, 95% CI: 4.9-9.3), whereas survivors of other first primary
cancers had 2.8-fold higher risk (N = 64, 95% CI: 2.1-3.5)
(P-homogeneity<0.001). Those who received radiation treatment without
chemotherapy for first primary cancer had 4.8-fold higher risk of
developing GI cancers (N = 31, 95% CI: 3.2-6.8), with 8.1-fold higher
risk for HL survivors (N = 23, 95% CI: 5.1-12.1) versus 2.2-fold higher
risk for survivors of other primary cancers (N = 8, 95% CI: 1.0-4.3)
(P-homogeneity<0.001).Conclusion: Childhood/early adulthood cancer
survivors have significantly higher risks of developing GI cancers
relative to the general population, with particularly high risks for
upper GI sites and HL survivors. These novel findings may contribute to
the clinical follow-up guidelines for young cancer survivors.

