Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation of EZH2 at T416 by CDK2 promotes development of
mammary tumors with basal-like phenotype


Basal-like breast cancer, also referred to as triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) due to the lack of expression of ErbB2, PR, and ER alpha
receptors, is considered to be one of the most aggressive breast cancers,
which display high rates of tumor cell proliferation, metastasis, and
post-surgical re-occurrence. This subtype of breast cancer presents a
major challenge for breast cancer oncologists as currently there is no
effective therapy available. Here, we show that Cyclin E and EZH2, the
methyltransferase component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)
are exclusively co-expressed in TNBC tumor tissues. We further show that
CDK2, the only known enzymatic partner of Cyclin E, can phosphorylate
EZH2 at T416 in vivo. CDK2-mediated modification of EZH2 at T416 leads to
gain-of-function, enhancing its ability to promote breast cancer cell
migration/invasion, expansion and self-renewal of tumor sphere in vitro,
and tumor growth in vivo. In addition, our immunohistochemistry-staining
of 247 primary breast tumor tissues validates that high EZH2/T416
phosphorylation correlates with poor survival in TNBC but not in non-TNBC
patients. To further attest the oncogenic role of EZH2/T416
phosphorylation by CDK2 in vivo, we generated transgenic mice expressing
EZH2T416D mutant, a mimicking phosphorylated form of EZH2, in mammary
glands. In contrast to previously reported EZH2WT transgenic mice, which
did not develop mammary tumors, our EZH2T416D-expressing mice developed
malignant mammary tumor with basal-like and highly metastatic potential
phenotypes. These genetic evidence revealed that CDK2/Cyclin E mediated
site-specific phosphorylation of EZH2 is capable of inducing the
basal-like/TNBC phenotype and maintaining cancer stem cell population of
breast cancers so that the T416 phosphorylation of EZH2 might serve as a
biomarker for TNBC prognosis and effective therapy.

