Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-beta promotes angiogenesis in an RB-deficient, Kras-driven
mouse model of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a deadly disease that is
projected to become the 2nd leading cause of cancer deaths by 2030. PDACs
are associated with a high frequency of KRAS mutations (95%) and
overexpression of many pro-angiogenic cytokines and growth factors. Using
a genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM) that we established in which
oncogenic Kras is combined with loss of RB (KRC), we have determined that
PDACs arising in these mice (mPDACs) harbor many endothelial cells (ECs)
and sinusoidal-like vessels that have blood flow, as determined by
intravital confocal microscopy. Array analysis of pancreatic cancer cells
(PCCs) derived from KRC tumors revealed gene expression profiles that
correlate with active TGF- signaling pathways, as determined by gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA), and include increased expression of multiple
pro-angiogenic genes. In silico analysis indicated that many of these
pro-angiogenic genes were TGF- targets, and inhibition of the type I TGF-
receptor (TRI) with SB505124 confirmed that TGF-s drive pro-angiogenic
gene expression in KRC PCCs. Moreover, TGF- increased the levels of
pro-angiogenic cytokines in conditioned media (CM) prepared from KRC
PCCs, which when added to ECs, activated canonical TGF- signaling
pathways and stimulated EC proliferation and migration. Although SB505124
blocked TGF- pathway activation in ECs, it failed to suppress CM-enhanced
EC proliferation and migration. By contrast, SB505124 attenuated tumor
angiogenesis, growth and metastasis in a syngeneic orthotopic mouse model
using KRC PCCs. Taken together, these results suggest that TGF- promotes
angiogenesis in an indirect manner, by up-regulating pro-angiogenic
factors in PCCs that act on ECs in a paracrine manner. Therefore,
targeting TGF- in PDAC could be a beneficial anti-angiogenic strategy.

