Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discerning the role of USP22 in prostate cancer development and
progression


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related death
for men in the United States. While organ-confined disease is manageable,
advanced and disseminated PCa currently has no durable treatment options.
Thus, understanding the causes and consequences of the transition from
early stage to late stage castrate-resistant PCa (CRPC) are critical.
While this transition has a requisite for the androgen receptor (AR)
activity, the mechanisms by which AR and other oncogenes are functionally
increased, even after initial treatment with androgen deprivation therapy
(ADT) have not been completely characterized. USP22, a known
deubiquitinase associated with the SAGA transcriptional activation
complex, was originally designated in a death from cancer gene signature.
Importantly, USP22 is significantly upregulated in PCa patients with
late-stage disease, and specifically indicates for poor outcome in PCa
patients. Moreover, tumor-associated USP22 increases AR levels and
activity as well as the oncogene MYC function, partially defining the
mechanism by which tumor-associated USP22 drives PCa progression. Thus,
while certain consequences of tumor-associated USP22 expression have been
elucidated, the remaining downstream effects have not been thoroughly
characterized. Newly generated data begin to establish the biochemical
events controlled by USP22 that confer proliferation and survival on PCa
cells. Through use of novel proteomic technology, specifically Ubiscan
analysis, tumor-associated USP22 will be shown to participate in driving
PCa development and progression as well as therapeutic bypass through
differential regulation of the ubiquitylome.

