Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-like breast cancer stem cells are preferentially
sensitive to nanoparticle-mediated hyperthermia


Recent studies suggest that breast cancer stem cells (CSCs) exist in
distinct mesenchymal-like and epithelial-like states, characterized by
the CSC markers CD44+/CD24- and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
respectfully, and maintain the plasticity to transition between these
states in a process regulated by the tumor microenvironment. While
initial research investigating the effect of nanoparticle-mediated
hyperthermia on CSCs was prompted as the treatment advanced to clinical
trials, it is unclear how the two breast CSC populations will respond to
such treatment. We examine the efficacy of photothermal therapy (PTT)
mediated by degradable iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) against the
epithelial-like (mesenchymal-epithelial transition [MET]) ALDH+ and
mesenchymal-like (epithelial-mesenchymal transition [EMT])
CD44+/CD24-/EpCAM+ breast CSC populations.Highly crystallized IONPs were
synthesized by thermal decomposition and heated with 885 nm near infrared
(NIR) laser light. The in vitro effects of PTT using IONPs and NIR laser
were first tested in triple negative SUM159 cells using the alamarBlue
cell viability assay. With 10 minute PTT at 42 C as a baseline, increases
in either PTT time or temperature decreased the number of viable cells
compared to non-treated controls (p Recent studies suggest that breast
cancer stem cells (CSCs) exist in distinct mesenchymal-like and
epithelial-like states, characterized by the CSC markers CD44+/CD24- and
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) respectfully, and maintain the plasticity
to transition between these states in a process regulated by the tumor
microenvironment. While initial research investigating the effect of
nanoparticle-mediated hyperthermia on CSCs was prompted as the treatment
advanced to clinical trials, it is unclear how the two breast CSC
populations will respond to such treatment. We examine the efficacy of
photothermal therapy (PTT) mediated by degradable iron oxide
nanoparticles (IONPs) against the epithelial-like (mesenchymal-epithelial
transition [MET]) ALDH+ and mesenchymal-like (epithelial-mesenchymal
transition [EMT]) CD44+/CD24-/EpCAM+ breast CSC populations.Highly
crystallized IONPs were synthesized by thermal decomposition and heated
with 885 nm near infrared (NIR) laser light. The in vitro effects of PTT
using IONPs and NIR laser were first tested in triple negative SUM159
cells using the alamarBlue cell viability assay. With 10 minute PTT at 42
C as a baseline, increases in either PTT time or temperature decreased
the number of viable cells compared to non-treated controls (p < 0.01).
Control treatments (IONP-only, laser-only) showed no change.We examined
the efficacy of increasing PTT temperatures on MET and EMT CSCs with flow
cytometry. Strikingly, the MET ALDH+ CSCs were more sensitive to PTT (10
min) than bulk SUM159 cells, with the CSC percentage decreasing 3.5-fold
with 48 C PTT. In contrast, the proportion of EMT CD44+/CD24-/EpCAM+ CSCs
remained unchanged. Inhibition of CSC self-renewal was demonstrated by
mammosphere formation using MCF7 cells. PTT temperatures above 42 C (10
min) significantly reduced both primary and secondary sphere formation (p
Recent studies suggest that breast cancer stem cells (CSCs) exist in
distinct mesenchymal-like and epithelial-like states, characterized by
the CSC markers CD44+/CD24- and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
respectfully, and maintain the plasticity to transition between these
states in a process regulated by the tumor microenvironment. While
initial research investigating the effect of nanoparticle-mediated
hyperthermia on CSCs was prompted as the treatment advanced to clinical
trials, it is unclear how the two breast CSC populations will respond to
such treatment. We examine the efficacy of photothermal therapy (PTT)
mediated by degradable iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) against the
epithelial-like (mesenchymal-epithelial transition [MET]) ALDH+ and
mesenchymal-like (epithelial-mesenchymal transition [EMT])
CD44+/CD24-/EpCAM+ breast CSC populations.Highly crystallized IONPs were
synthesized by thermal decomposition and heated with 885 nm near infrared
(NIR) laser light. The in vitro effects of PTT using IONPs and NIR laser
were first tested in triple negative SUM159 cells using the alamarBlue
cell viability assay. With 10 minute PTT at 42 C as a baseline, increases
in either PTT time or temperature decreased the number of viable cells
compared to non-treated controls (p < 0.01). Control treatments
(IONP-only, laser-only) showed no change.We examined the efficacy of
increasing PTT temperatures on MET and EMT CSCs with flow cytometry.
Strikingly, the MET ALDH+ CSCs were more sensitive to PTT (10 min) than
bulk SUM159 cells, with the CSC percentage decreasing 3.5-fold with 48 C
PTT. In contrast, the proportion of EMT CD44+/CD24-/EpCAM+ CSCs remained
unchanged. Inhibition of CSC self-renewal was demonstrated by mammosphere
formation using MCF7 cells. PTT temperatures above 42 C (10 min)
significantly reduced both primary and secondary sphere formation (p <
0.01).NOD/SCID mice bearing SUM159 xenografts were subjected to 10 minute
PTT. Tumor surface temperatures reached 60.1 5.1 C and 41.8 1.6 C for 1.0
and 0.5 Watt laser powers, respectively. PTT efficacy on CSCs was
analyzed by tumor formation in NOD/SCID mice after secondary
implantation. At 72 hours after PTT in primary mice, tumors were
harvested, digested, isolated by fluorescence activated cell sorting
(FACS), and implanted into secondary mice at limiting dilutions. While
both PTT treatments slightly reduced the fraction of tumors formed
compared to control secondary mice after 50 days, they delayed tumor
formation and drastically reduced tumor volumes. These results suggest
that ALDH+ CSCs that drive tumor cell proliferation are highly sensitive
to PTT. Together our in vitro and in vivo breast cancer models reveal
that MET ALDH+ CSCs are preferentially susceptible to IONP-mediated PTT
at 42 C or higher versus EMT CD44+/CD24-/EpCAM+ CSCs or bulk cancer cells.

