Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Bcr-Abl in human leukemic cells with a coiled coil
protein delivered by a leukemia-specific cell penetrating peptide


The oncoprotein Bcr-Abl is the cause of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
Current CML therapies target the tyrosine kinase domain of Bcr-Abl, but
due to their non-curative nature, resistance to these drugs is common.
Therefore, new treatments are needed for those patients refractive to
available therapies. Bcr-Abl homo-oligomerization via its N-terminal
coiled coil (CC) domain is required for tyrosine kinase activity. Our
previous work has shown that it is possible to inhibit Bcr-Abl activity
by targeting the CC domain with a altered version of the CC domain, known
as CCmut3, delivered as a plasmid. In this study, CCmut3 is delivered to
cells as a protein by utilizing a leukemia-specific cell-penetrating
peptide (CPP). Here, recombinant CPP-CCmut3 was expressed, purified, and
tested for its anti-oncogenic activity. CPP-CCmut3 was able to enter two
leukemic cell lines (K562 and Ba/F3-P210) and inhibit Bcr-Abl activity as
shown by induction of necrosis/apoptosis via 7-AAD/Annexin V staining,
reduction of oncogenic potential in colony forming assays, reduction of
cell proliferation, and inhibition of Bcr-Abl phosphorylation (kinase
activity). Further, CPP-CCmut3 did not enter non-leukemic cell lines
(HEK293 and MCF-7). While CPP-CCmut3 was able to enter the parental,
non-leukemic Bcr-Abl- Ba/F3 pro-B cell line, it revealed no signs of
activity in the assays performed, as expected. These results indicate the
feasibility of using CPP-CCmut3 as a therapeutic against CML.

