Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular diagnostics of drug resistant multiple myeloma cases
using targeted next generation sequencing


In multiple myeloma (MM), there are two distinct genetic subtypes based
on copy number alterations and translocations. About half of all MM cases
are a hyperdiploid type, which is characterized by multiple trisomies of
chromosomes 3, 5, 7, 9 11, 15, 19 and 21 and a lower prevalence of
primary translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH)
locus at 14q32. The remaining cases are the non-hyperdiploid type, and
chromosomes 8, 13, 14, and 16 are frequently lost. Non-hyperdiploid
myeloma is strongly association with translocations of IgH alleles with
various partner chromosomes, such as t(11;14)(q13;q32), t(4;14)(p16.3;
q32), t(14;16)(q32;q23), t(6;14)(p21;q32) or t(14;20) (q32;q11). The copy
number alterations in other chromosome regions such as 1q, 6q, 8p, and
16q occur in both subtypes. Overall, non-hyperdiploid MM is associated
with worse survival than hyperdiploid MM. In this study, we sequenced all
exons of 409 cancer-related genes in matched tumor and normal DNA from 5
non-hyperdiploid MM patients using a next-generation semiconductor
sequencing protocol. DNA was extracted from magnetic bead-enriched bone
marrow CD138 positive tumor cells from the patients and CD138 negative
cells were used as matched normal cells. We detected both point mutations
and copy number variations (CNVs). One individual with refractory MM (IgG
type, ISS stage II) displayed 8 non-synonymous somatic mutations in
addition to numbers of CNVs including CCND1 and RB1. We observed 2 point
mutations and 3 CNVs, affecting NF-kB pathway genes: IKBKB, CYLD, IKBKE,
CD79B and SYK. Although the basis of NF-kB pathway activation is only
partially understood, our findings greatly expand the mechanisms by which
NF-kB may be activated in this patient. We also detected several gene
alterations, which may be associated with poor prognosis and poor
response to chemotherapy in patients with refractory MM. Although its
value should be further confirmed in larger samples, the targeted next
generation sequencing is a valuable tool for high-throughput genetic
testing in clinical research.

