Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PQR309: Structure-based design, synthesis and biological
evaluation of a novel, selective, dual pan-PI3K/mTOR inhibitor


Phosphoinositide 3-kinase/mammalian target of rapamycin (PI3K/mTOR)
signaling is key to the control of many physiological and
pathophysiological processes, and promotes cancer and inflammatory
disease. Therefore, targeting of PI3K and/or mTOR pathways is currently
explored in numerous clinical studies. PQR309 is a novel, brain
penetrant, potent and selective pan-PI3K/mTOR inhibitor with PK
properties suitable for once a day oral dosing in humans.Structure
activity relationship studies for PI3K and mTOR interactions are
presented, including X-Ray analysis of PI3Kgamma co-crystal structures,
modeling of PI3Kalpha and mTOR structures, and chemical derivatization.
This led to the identification of PQR309 as a potent pan-PI3K and
moderate mTOR inhibitor. PQR309 displays excellent selectivity versus
PI3K-related lipid kinases (PIKKs) and protein kinases (KINOMEscan), as
well as excellent selectivity versus unrelated targets (Cerep
expresSProfile).PQR309 features excellent cell permeability, and was
characterized as a BCS class II compound due to its limited water
solubility (40 M). Moreover, PQR309 is not a substrate for P-glycoprotein
1 (P-gp). In A2058 melanoma cells PQR309 demonstrated inhibition of
protein kinase B (PKB/Akt; pS473) and ribosomal protein S6 (S6,
pSer235/236) phosphorylation with IC50 values of 0.13 M and 0.58 M,
respectively. In IGF-stimulated MCF7 breast cancer cells, PQR309 at 1 M
inhibited phosphorylation of downstream substrates of PI3K including
PKB/Akt, S6, p70S6 kinase, GSK3 and Bad by 60-95%. PQR309 inhibited
proliferation of all 58 cell lines of the NCI60 panel (GI50 from 50 to
3300 nM), of the NTRC Oncoline panel (44 cell lines, GI50 from 100-6700
nM) and of a lymphoma cell line panel (40 lymphoma cell lines, GI50 from
25-1740 nM). A concise 4-step synthetic process utilizing a novel
protective group strategy provides a robust and scalable supply of PQR309
for clinical trials.In summary, PQR309 is a novel, potent, dual
pan-PI3K/mTOR inhibitor with a balanced PI3K vs. mTOR profile, and
displays excellent physico-chemical and pharmacological properties. The
safety profile of PQR309 is currently addressed in Phase I clinical
studies.

