Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor effect of Dasatinib in HER2 positive breast cancer with
Trastuzumab resistance


[Background]Overexpression of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) was observed in approximately 20%-25% of breast cancers and they
are classified in HER2-positive breast cancer. Trastuzumab is a
therapeutic drug for the first choice for HER2-positive breast cancer,
showing good response. However, acquired resistance to trastuzumab is one
of the critical clinical issues in breast cancer treatment, especially in
the patients with recurrent breast cancer. Therefore it is necessary to
develop the effective therapy to overcome resistance. In this study, we
established a trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer cell line from a
trastumab-sensitive cell line with HER2 amplification (BT-474), and
demonstrated anti-tumor effect of dasatinib in the breast cancer cell
with trastuzumab resistance.[Methods]Trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer
cell line (BT-474-R) was established by treating BT-474 cells for
long-term exposing with trastuzumab. We performed cell viability assay to
analyze drug sensitivity. Then, we performed quantitative PCR and western
blotting to investigate expression and activation of HER2 and related
molecules. Cell viability assay and signal analysis were performed with
or without trastuzumab and/or dasatinib treatment.[Results]Proto-oncogene
tyrosine-protein kinase Src was up-regulated and activated in BT-474-R.
Signaling molecules, such as Akt and MAPK, were also activated.
Dasatinib, which is known as a Src inhibitor, suppressed the activation
of signal molecules and cell survival of BT-474-R. Moreover, dasatinib
treatment recovered sensitivity to trastumab in the BT-474-R with
down-regulation of Src phosphorylation.[Conclusion]Src plays an important
role in acquired resistance to trastumab in breast cancer. Our data also
suggest that inhibition of Src may become the new strategy to overcome
trastuzumab resistance.

