Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel roles for GNA13 and RHOA as tumor suppressor genes


G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) and G-proteins are critical signal
transduction molecules that regulate cell survival, proliferation,
motility and differentiation. However, mutations and disruptions in the
expression or function of these molecules have been linked to growth,
progression and metastasis of various cancers. Recently, major efforts in
the area of genome-wide sequencing of tumors have unveiled numerous
previously uncharacterized mutations in G-proteins and GPCRs, which could
have significant implications to cancer initiation and progression. In
particular, mutations in the gene encoding the G-protein G13 (GNA13)
and/or its downstream effector, RhoA, have been identified in B cell
lymphomas (particularly Burkitt's lymphoma and Diffuse Large B cell
Lymphoma), T cell lymphomas, and Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas
(HNSCCs). Our analyses indicate that these mutations are highly
statistically significant over background cancer gene mutation rate, and
mutations in GNA13 alone occur in 10-15% of patients with Burkitt's
lymphoma and Diffuse Large B cell Lymphoma. Surprisingly, although G13
and RhoA have previously been linked to cellular transformation and
metastatic potential of epithelial cancers, our data suggests that the
mutations in GNA13 and/or RHOA in these B cell lymphomas and HNSCC are
inhibitory in nature. Furthermore, our results indicate a tumor
suppressive function for wild-type GNA13 and RHOA in in vivo cancer
models. Overall, our data suggest a novel function tumor suppressive
function for the G13/RhoA axis in multiple human malignancies.

