Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid Cancer Imaging By GGT-targeted Fluorescence Probe For
Primary Lung Cancer


IntroductionLung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in Japan,
however, it has been difficult to detect and diagnose precisely lung
cancer with a diameter less than 1cm to date. The purpose of this study
is to investigate clinical application of novel GGT-targeted fluorescence
probe for detecting the primary lung cancer in an intraoperative
manner.MethodsAs a fluorescence probe for -glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT),
-glutamyl hydroxymethyl rhodamine green (gGlu-HMRG) was used. gGlu-HMRG
is non-fluorescent, but is converted to a highly fluorescent
hydroxymethyl rhodamine green (HMRG) upon reaction with the enzyme, which
tends to accumulate in GGT-overexpressing cancer cells. First, we
examined GGT activity of lung cancer cell lines, A549, H460, H441, H82
and H226, by applying gGlu-HMRG and evaluating fluorescence intensities
by confocal fluorescence microscopy. We also compared mRNA expression
level of GGT1 (one of the subtypes of GGT) by qRT-PCR. Further, by
transfecting siRNA targeted to GGT1, we investigated the target of
gGlu-HMRG. Next we performed in vivo imaging of orthotopic A549 lung
cancer xenograft model in nude mouse to confirm the validity of
fluorescence imaging. Finally, we carried out ex vivo fluorescence
imaging of 73 human lung cancers and normal lung tissues which were
surgically resected, and the fluorescence intensities were analyzed by
Receiver Operating Characteristics curve.ResultsA549, H460 and H441 cells
with high GGT1 expression could be visualized with high fluorescence
intensity after application of gGlu-HMRG within several minutes, whereas
H82 and H226 cells with relatively low GGT1 expression could not. We
ascertained that the target of gGlu-HMRG was GGT1 by fluorescence imaging
and qRT-PCR with lung cancer cell lines transfected with siRNA for GGT1.
In lung cancer xenograft model, pleural dissemination, hilar and
mediastinal lymph node metastasis and the surface of lung cancer were
clearly detected within 15 minutes after topical drip of gGlu-HMRG. We
confirm that every fluorescent lesion was adenocarcinoma pathologically.
In ex vivo human lung cancer fluorescence imaging, the sensitivity,
specificity and accuracy were calculated to be 43.8% (32/73cases), 84.9%
(62/73cases) and 64.4% (94/146), respectively. The adenocarcinomas,
cancer of female or never smoker were more significantly detected by
fluorescence imaging (pIntroductionLung cancer is the leading cause of
cancer death in Japan, however, it has been difficult to detect and
diagnose precisely lung cancer with a diameter less than 1cm to date. The
purpose of this study is to investigate clinical application of novel
GGT-targeted fluorescence probe for detecting the primary lung cancer in
an intraoperative manner.MethodsAs a fluorescence probe for
-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT), -glutamyl hydroxymethyl rhodamine green
(gGlu-HMRG) was used. gGlu-HMRG is non-fluorescent, but is converted to a
highly fluorescent hydroxymethyl rhodamine green (HMRG) upon reaction
with the enzyme, which tends to accumulate in GGT-overexpressing cancer
cells. First, we examined GGT activity of lung cancer cell lines, A549,
H460, H441, H82 and H226, by applying gGlu-HMRG and evaluating
fluorescence intensities by confocal fluorescence microscopy. We also
compared mRNA expression level of GGT1 (one of the subtypes of GGT) by
qRT-PCR. Further, by transfecting siRNA targeted to GGT1, we investigated
the target of gGlu-HMRG. Next we performed in vivo imaging of orthotopic
A549 lung cancer xenograft model in nude mouse to confirm the validity of
fluorescence imaging. Finally, we carried out ex vivo fluorescence
imaging of 73 human lung cancers and normal lung tissues which were
surgically resected, and the fluorescence intensities were analyzed by
Receiver Operating Characteristics curve.ResultsA549, H460 and H441 cells
with high GGT1 expression could be visualized with high fluorescence
intensity after application of gGlu-HMRG within several minutes, whereas
H82 and H226 cells with relatively low GGT1 expression could not. We
ascertained that the target of gGlu-HMRG was GGT1 by fluorescence imaging
and qRT-PCR with lung cancer cell lines transfected with siRNA for GGT1.
In lung cancer xenograft model, pleural dissemination, hilar and
mediastinal lymph node metastasis and the surface of lung cancer were
clearly detected within 15 minutes after topical drip of gGlu-HMRG. We
confirm that every fluorescent lesion was adenocarcinoma pathologically.
In ex vivo human lung cancer fluorescence imaging, the sensitivity,
specificity and accuracy were calculated to be 43.8% (32/73cases), 84.9%
(62/73cases) and 64.4% (94/146), respectively. The adenocarcinomas,
cancer of female or never smoker were more significantly detected by
fluorescence imaging (p<0.05-0.001). Limited to 19 cases of
adenocarcinomas, cancer of female and never smoker, sensitivity,
specificity, and accuracy were 78.9% (15/19), 73.7% (14/19) and 76.3%
(29/38), respectively.ConclusionsWe suggest that intraoperative
application of gGlu-HMRG to detect pleural dissemination, small
mediastinal lymph nodal metastasis, or other small foci of the lung
cancer cells on surgical margin might be feasible when the cancer cells
overexpress GGT. Intraoperative application of fluorescence probe is
highly expected in near future.

