Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leveraging bronchial airway gene expression to develop a nasal
biomarker for lung cancer detection


Rationale: Using nasal gene expression to predict the presence of lung
cancer would offer a less invasive alternative to diagnostic approaches
we have pioneered using bronchial airway epithelial (BE) gene expression.
We have previously demonstrated that cytologically normal BE and nasal
epithelial (NE) cells harbor gene expression differences that reflect
tobacco-related lung disease and that these changes in the BE form the
basis of a clinically informative lung cancer biomarker. Given the
concordance of BE and NE gene-expression, we hypothesized that gene
signatures associated with the presence of lung cancer extend from the
airway to the nose and that lung cancer associated BE gene-expression
could be leveraged to develop more accurate nasal lung cancer
biomarkers.Methods: BE (n = 676) and NE (n = 280) brushings were
collected from current and former smokers undergoing bronchoscopy for
clinical suspicion of lung cancer. We leveraged two methods to determine
the concordance between BE and NE gene-expression signal for cancer.
First we applied the bronchial gene expression-based diagnostic test
directly to our nasal cohort. Second, we used Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) to quantify the relationship between the BE and NE. To
develop the nasal gene expression biomarker, we examined the correlation
of each gene between the BE and NE. Genes passing our selection criteria
were passed to a biomarker discovery pipeline in which we examined the
performance of different biomarker algorithm configurations using
cross-validation.Results: Direct application of the bronchial airway
gene-expression classifier to an independent set of nasal samples (n =
109) resulted in an AUC of 0.67. GSEA revealed high concordance
(pRationale: Using nasal gene expression to predict the presence of lung
cancer would offer a less invasive alternative to diagnostic approaches
we have pioneered using bronchial airway epithelial (BE) gene expression.
We have previously demonstrated that cytologically normal BE and nasal
epithelial (NE) cells harbor gene expression differences that reflect
tobacco-related lung disease and that these changes in the BE form the
basis of a clinically informative lung cancer biomarker. Given the
concordance of BE and NE gene-expression, we hypothesized that gene
signatures associated with the presence of lung cancer extend from the
airway to the nose and that lung cancer associated BE gene-expression
could be leveraged to develop more accurate nasal lung cancer
biomarkers.Methods: BE (n = 676) and NE (n = 280) brushings were
collected from current and former smokers undergoing bronchoscopy for
clinical suspicion of lung cancer. We leveraged two methods to determine
the concordance between BE and NE gene-expression signal for cancer.
First we applied the bronchial gene expression-based diagnostic test
directly to our nasal cohort. Second, we used Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) to quantify the relationship between the BE and NE. To
develop the nasal gene expression biomarker, we examined the correlation
of each gene between the BE and NE. Genes passing our selection criteria
were passed to a biomarker discovery pipeline in which we examined the
performance of different biomarker algorithm configurations using
cross-validation.Results: Direct application of the bronchial airway
gene-expression classifier to an independent set of nasal samples (n =
109) resulted in an AUC of 0.67. GSEA revealed high concordance (p<0.001)
between cancer-associated nasal and bronchial gene expression profiles
from the same patients. Using a cross-validation approach, we found that
nasal biomarkers built from sets of genes showing significant correlation
(pRationale: Using nasal gene expression to predict the presence of lung
cancer would offer a less invasive alternative to diagnostic approaches
we have pioneered using bronchial airway epithelial (BE) gene expression.
We have previously demonstrated that cytologically normal BE and nasal
epithelial (NE) cells harbor gene expression differences that reflect
tobacco-related lung disease and that these changes in the BE form the
basis of a clinically informative lung cancer biomarker. Given the
concordance of BE and NE gene-expression, we hypothesized that gene
signatures associated with the presence of lung cancer extend from the
airway to the nose and that lung cancer associated BE gene-expression
could be leveraged to develop more accurate nasal lung cancer
biomarkers.Methods: BE (n = 676) and NE (n = 280) brushings were
collected from current and former smokers undergoing bronchoscopy for
clinical suspicion of lung cancer. We leveraged two methods to determine
the concordance between BE and NE gene-expression signal for cancer.
First we applied the bronchial gene expression-based diagnostic test
directly to our nasal cohort. Second, we used Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) to quantify the relationship between the BE and NE. To
develop the nasal gene expression biomarker, we examined the correlation
of each gene between the BE and NE. Genes passing our selection criteria
were passed to a biomarker discovery pipeline in which we examined the
performance of different biomarker algorithm configurations using
cross-validation.Results: Direct application of the bronchial airway
gene-expression classifier to an independent set of nasal samples (n =
109) resulted in an AUC of 0.67. GSEA revealed high concordance (p<0.001)
between cancer-associated nasal and bronchial gene expression profiles
from the same patients. Using a cross-validation approach, we found that
nasal biomarkers built from sets of genes showing significant correlation
(p<0.05) between the BE and NE as well as significance for cancer in both
tissues (pRationale: Using nasal gene expression to predict the presence
of lung cancer would offer a less invasive alternative to diagnostic
approaches we have pioneered using bronchial airway epithelial (BE) gene
expression. We have previously demonstrated that cytologically normal BE
and nasal epithelial (NE) cells harbor gene expression differences that
reflect tobacco-related lung disease and that these changes in the BE
form the basis of a clinically informative lung cancer biomarker. Given
the concordance of BE and NE gene-expression, we hypothesized that gene
signatures associated with the presence of lung cancer extend from the
airway to the nose and that lung cancer associated BE gene-expression
could be leveraged to develop more accurate nasal lung cancer
biomarkers.Methods: BE (n = 676) and NE (n = 280) brushings were
collected from current and former smokers undergoing bronchoscopy for
clinical suspicion of lung cancer. We leveraged two methods to determine
the concordance between BE and NE gene-expression signal for cancer.
First we applied the bronchial gene expression-based diagnostic test
directly to our nasal cohort. Second, we used Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) to quantify the relationship between the BE and NE. To
develop the nasal gene expression biomarker, we examined the correlation
of each gene between the BE and NE. Genes passing our selection criteria
were passed to a biomarker discovery pipeline in which we examined the
performance of different biomarker algorithm configurations using
cross-validation.Results: Direct application of the bronchial airway
gene-expression classifier to an independent set of nasal samples (n =
109) resulted in an AUC of 0.67. GSEA revealed high concordance (p<0.001)
between cancer-associated nasal and bronchial gene expression profiles
from the same patients. Using a cross-validation approach, we found that
nasal biomarkers built from sets of genes showing significant correlation
(p<0.05) between the BE and NE as well as significance for cancer in both
tissues (p<0.05) perform better, on average, than biomarkers built from
genes significant for cancer (pRationale: Using nasal gene expression to
predict the presence of lung cancer would offer a less invasive
alternative to diagnostic approaches we have pioneered using bronchial
airway epithelial (BE) gene expression. We have previously demonstrated
that cytologically normal BE and nasal epithelial (NE) cells harbor gene
expression differences that reflect tobacco-related lung disease and that
these changes in the BE form the basis of a clinically informative lung
cancer biomarker. Given the concordance of BE and NE gene-expression, we
hypothesized that gene signatures associated with the presence of lung
cancer extend from the airway to the nose and that lung cancer associated
BE gene-expression could be leveraged to develop more accurate nasal lung
cancer biomarkers.Methods: BE (n = 676) and NE (n = 280) brushings were
collected from current and former smokers undergoing bronchoscopy for
clinical suspicion of lung cancer. We leveraged two methods to determine
the concordance between BE and NE gene-expression signal for cancer.
First we applied the bronchial gene expression-based diagnostic test
directly to our nasal cohort. Second, we used Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) to quantify the relationship between the BE and NE. To
develop the nasal gene expression biomarker, we examined the correlation
of each gene between the BE and NE. Genes passing our selection criteria
were passed to a biomarker discovery pipeline in which we examined the
performance of different biomarker algorithm configurations using
cross-validation.Results: Direct application of the bronchial airway
gene-expression classifier to an independent set of nasal samples (n =
109) resulted in an AUC of 0.67. GSEA revealed high concordance (p<0.001)
between cancer-associated nasal and bronchial gene expression profiles
from the same patients. Using a cross-validation approach, we found that
nasal biomarkers built from sets of genes showing significant correlation
(p<0.05) between the BE and NE as well as significance for cancer in both
tissues (p<0.05) perform better, on average, than biomarkers built from
genes significant for cancer (p<0.05) in the NE alone.Conclusions. We
have demonstrated concordance between BE and NE gene expression
differences associated with lung cancer. We have further shown that gene
expression in the NE reflects the presence of lung cancer and can serve
as a diagnostic biomarker. These results demonstrate the feasibility of
leveraging cancer-associated gene expression changes throughout the
airway to develop a minimally invasive and robust nasal gene expression
biomarker for lung cancer diagnosis.

