Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of erythrocyte -3 fatty acids with breast tissue -3
and inflammation


Large, prospective studies have shown that chronic inflammation is
associated with increased breast cancer risk. Long-chain -3
polyunsaturated fatty acids [(LC-3PUFA); including eicosapentaenoic (EPA;
20:53), docosapentaenoic (DPA; 22:53), and docosahexaenoic acids (DHA;
22:63)], derived from intakes of fatty fish and fish oil supplements,
have anti-inflammatory properties. Epidemiologic studies of circulating
LC-3PUFA are suggestive of an inverse association with breast cancer.
However, it is not known what, if any, relationship there is between
LC-3PUFA in blood and in breast tissues. Further, no study has examined
the association between circulating LC-3PUFA and inflammatory markers
within breast tissue.We conducted a cross-sectional analysis in blood and
breast tissues from 132 cancer-free women undergoing elective reduction
mammoplasty. Women, ages 18 years (17 with parental permission) with no
prior history of cancer, were recruited between 1997 and 2009 and
completed a comprehensive questionnaire. Surgically removed breast
tissues, erythrocytes and heparinized plasma samples were collected.
Fatty acid analysis of erythrocyte membrane and breast tissue EPA, DPA,
DHA, and -linolenic acid (ALA; 18:33), a short-chain -3 PUFA that does
not hold anti-inflammatory properties, were performed using gas
chromatography. Breast tissue C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukins
(IL) -6 and -8 were measured using ELISA assays. T-tests and analysis of
variance (ANOVA) were used to evaluate differences in mean total LC-3PUFA
(defined here as the sum of EPA, DPA and DHA) and CRP concentrations by
participant characteristics. Multiple-regression models were fitted to
examine the associations of circulating -3 with breast tissue -3 and
inflammation.Erythrocyte -3 concentrations were positively associated
with the same fatty acids in breast tissue. The strongest association was
for DHA; women in the highest quartile of erythrocyte DHA had 39% higher
tissue DHA compared to those in the lowest quartile (Ratio 1.39, 95% CI:
1.08-1.79; P-trendLarge, prospective studies have shown that chronic
inflammation is associated with increased breast cancer risk. Long-chain
-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids [(LC-3PUFA); including eicosapentaenoic
(EPA; 20:53), docosapentaenoic (DPA; 22:53), and docosahexaenoic acids
(DHA; 22:63)], derived from intakes of fatty fish and fish oil
supplements, have anti-inflammatory properties. Epidemiologic studies of
circulating LC-3PUFA are suggestive of an inverse association with breast
cancer. However, it is not known what, if any, relationship there is
between LC-3PUFA in blood and in breast tissues. Further, no study has
examined the association between circulating LC-3PUFA and inflammatory
markers within breast tissue.We conducted a cross-sectional analysis in
blood and breast tissues from 132 cancer-free women undergoing elective
reduction mammoplasty. Women, ages 18 years (17 with parental permission)
with no prior history of cancer, were recruited between 1997 and 2009 and
completed a comprehensive questionnaire. Surgically removed breast
tissues, erythrocytes and heparinized plasma samples were collected.
Fatty acid analysis of erythrocyte membrane and breast tissue EPA, DPA,
DHA, and -linolenic acid (ALA; 18:33), a short-chain -3 PUFA that does
not hold anti-inflammatory properties, were performed using gas
chromatography. Breast tissue C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukins
(IL) -6 and -8 were measured using ELISA assays. T-tests and analysis of
variance (ANOVA) were used to evaluate differences in mean total LC-3PUFA
(defined here as the sum of EPA, DPA and DHA) and CRP concentrations by
participant characteristics. Multiple-regression models were fitted to
examine the associations of circulating -3 with breast tissue -3 and
inflammation.Erythrocyte -3 concentrations were positively associated
with the same fatty acids in breast tissue. The strongest association was
for DHA; women in the highest quartile of erythrocyte DHA had 39% higher
tissue DHA compared to those in the lowest quartile (Ratio 1.39, 95% CI:
1.08-1.79; P-trend<0.01). Increasing concentrations of erythrocyte
LC-3PUFA, particularly DHA, were inversely associated with breast CRP.
Women in the upper 50th percentile of DHA had statistically significantly
reduced breast CRP (Ratio 0.60, 95% CI: 0.37-0.99). There were no clear
associations between any -3 PUFA and IL-6 or IL-8.To our knowledge, this
is the first observational study examine the association between
circulating and breast tissue -3, and the first study to examine
associations between circulating -3 and breast tissue inflammation. Our
findings provide evidence of the biological mechanisms linking -3 intake,
inflammation, and breast cancer susceptibility.

