Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low proteasome activity and cancer stemness in colorectal cancer


Background and aims:Emerging evidence indicates that existence of cancer
stem-like cells (CSCs) is one of the main reasons of treatment
resistance. Recently, several reports have indicated that some CSCs would
be characterized by low proteasome activity.Material and methods:We
engineered human colorectal cancer (CRC) cells to express a green
fluorescent molecule fused to the degron of ornithine decarboxylase
(Gdeg) from a retroviral vector; the fluorescent Gdeg supposed to be
accumulated in CSCs as a result of low activity of the 26S proteasome.
The feature of Gdeghigh cells (low proteasome activity cells; LPACs) were
analyzed by sphere formation assay, surface marker analysis, reactive
oxygen species (ROS) analysis and assessment of chemotherapy and
radiation therapy sensitivity. In addition, we explored the mechanism of
treatment resistance of LPACs by using microarray analysis and clinical
samples.Results:LPACs of CRC cells had significant radioresistance and
chemoresistance (5-FU and oxaliplatin). Cancer stemness of LPACs was
confirmed by CSC marker, sphere formation assay, ROS activity analysis,
cell cycle assay, and in vivo tumorigenicity examination. Microarray
analysis identified EID3 (EP300 Interacting Inhibitor of Differentiation
3) as a key factor related to treatment resistance of LPACs. Functional
analyses of EID3 and analysis using clinical samples confirmed the role
of EID3 in LPACs.Conclusions:CRC with low proteasome activity had
character of treatment resistance and capacity of stemness. EID3 was a
key factor related to treatment resistance of LPACs, and might be a novel
therapeutic target.

