Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA isoforms come of age: Going beyond the
one-locus-one-microRNA paradigm in cancer biology


Background: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short noncoding RNAs that are key
posttranscriptional regulators of transcript abundance. During the last
decade, their dysregulation has been linked to many human cancers and
other human conditions. Similarly to messenger RNAs miRNAs have isoforms
(isomiRs). In terms of abundance, one of the isomiRs from a given locus
typically dominates. In terms of sequence, any two isomiRs from the same
locus typically differ by 2-3 nucleotides (nts) at either the 5 end, the
3 end, or both. We recently reported on the isomiR profiles (isomiR-omes)
of lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from 500 healthy individuals.
We found that each miRNA locus gives rise to multiple isomiRs; often, the
most abundant isoform was not the one listed in the miRBase database.
Importantly, we demonstrated that many isomiRs exhibited gender-dependent
expression whereas other isomiRs exhibited population-dependent or
race-dependent expression. Are isomiRs prevalent in the cancer context?
And if so, are they relevant? Methods: We analyzed deep sequencing data
obtained from healthy and diseased tissues seeking to characterize in
each case the respective isomiR-ome by studying all transcribed miRNA
loci. The datasets were obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
repository and included short RNA profiles from breast cancer (BRCA) and
other cancers. To investigate isomiR-ome differences between various
subsets among the samples we used multivariate statistical analyses.
Results: The isomiR-ome differences that we observed in our analyses of
LCLs prompted us to extend the analyses to the disease context. Indeed,
such isomiR differences can potentially lead to posttranscriptional
regulation differences by altering the set of targeted transcripts,
especially since isomiRs can differ in their 5 end. We first analyzed the
BRCA TCGA datasets and identified hundreds of distinct and abundant
isomiRs. In several instances, a miRNA locus generated between five and
ten significantly expressed isomiRs the most abundant of which generally
did not match the representative miRBase sequence. Notably, we found that
isomiR abundance profiles could distinguish among BRCA subtypes. Also
importantly, several isomiRs showed differential expression across racial
boundaries. Preliminary analyses of other TCGA cancer datasets led to
similar results. Conclusions: Our findings reveal that miRNA isoforms are
present and abundant in cancer tissues and differentially expressed among
cancer sub-types. This suggests that isomiRs likely play significant
roles in the cancer context. Their omni-presence and characteristic
expression profiles also suggest that they should be taken into account
when studying the miRNA-mediated post-transcriptional regulation layer of
cancers. Lastly, our findings also suggest possible uses for isomiRs as
molecules for cancer therapeutic and diagnostic purposes.

