Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Advanced paternal age as a possible risk factor for retinoblastoma


Retinoblastoma is a pediatric tumor arising in the retina with an
incidence of 1 in 15000 to 18000 live births. Retinoblastoma is initiated
by the inactivation of both the alleles of RB1 and it may be inherited or
sporadic. There are several possible risk factors suggested for sporadic
retinoblastoma including advanced paternal age.We evaluated the father's
age in 42 children with retinoblastoma attending the Aravind Eye
Hospital, Madurai, India from Mar 2013 to Feb 2014 retrospectively.
Fathers with age 40 and above at the time of conception were included in
the analysis. Patients with a positive family history were excluded from
the analysis. Genetic analysis of RB1 was carried out in the tumor and
blood samples of these patients of older father and their family.There
were 5 patients (3 unilateral and 2 bilateral) having fathers with age 40
years and above. Genetic analysis identified RB1 mutations in the tumor
samples of 4 patients and these mutations were not present in the blood
samples of patient and family members. Since all these patients had
somatic mutations, the involvement of paternal age impact was ruled out.
In blood sample of one bilateral patient, we found de novo germline RB1
mutation possibly suggesting a role of advanced paternal age.In
conclusion, the advanced paternal age seems to be a minor risk factor for
retinoblastoma. Further study of large number of patients may provide a
better understanding of the impact of advanced paternal age in
retinoblastoma.

