Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Helicobacter pylori induces phosphorylation of STAT3 at Ser727 to
promote mitophagy in gastric cancer cells


Chronic Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection has been considered to
be one of the high risk factors of gastric cancer, but the exact
mechanism underlying H. pylori-mediated carcinogenesis has not been
completely elucidated. Constitutive activation of the signal transducer
and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is implicated in
inflammation-associated carcinogenesis. In a canonical STAT3 pathway,
phosphorylation of STAT3 at Tyr705 is a major event of STAT3 activation.
In the present study, we found that H. pylori induced phosphorylation of
STAT3 at not only Tyr705 but also Ser727. Notably, STAT3 Ser727
phosphorylation occurred at late time independently of Tyr705
phosphorylation followed by migration to mitochondrion. It has been
reported that mitophagy is a specialized form of autophagy that removes
damaged mitochondria to maintain efficient cellular metabolism and
reduces cellular stress. In our study, H. pylori infection induced
mitophagy with upregulation of LC3 (microtubule-associated chain3), which
is an autophagy marker, in mitochondria. H. pylori-induced Ser727
phosphorylation appears to regulate expression of LC3 based on the
experiment utilizing the STAT3 mutant vector in which Ser727 is replaced
by alanine, suggesting a potential link between mitophagy and STAT3
phosphorylation at Ser727. Furthermore, we found that STAT3
phosphorylated at Ser727 bound to Grim19 which is a component of complex
I and heat shock protein 90 in mitochondria. How this binding contributes
to mitopagy is under investigation. In conclusion, H. pylori induced
STAT3 phosphorylation at Ser727 to promote mitophagy

