Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNORD76, a box C/D snoRNA, acts as a tumor suppressor in
glioblastoma


BackgroundGliomblastoma (GBM) is associated with disproportionately high
morbidity and mortality, reflecting the need to develop new diagnostic
and therapeutic targets for this disease. Recently, accumulating evidence
has suggested that small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are gaining prominence
and are more actively involved in tumorigenesis than previously thought.
However, no report concerning the implication of snoRNAs in glioma has
been published to date.MethodsThe expression of SNORD76 and its host
gene, GAS5, in glioma patients were evaluated by quantitative PCR. Flow
cytometry was used to analyze to cell cycle distribution after SNORD76
over-expression. After SNORD76 over-expression in GBM cell lines, cell
growth and anti-tumor effect were investigated in vitro and in
vivo.ResultsSNORD76 expression was selectively decreased in glioblastoma
(WHO grade IV) compared with low grades glioma (WHO grade II and III).
Forcibly expressed SNORD76 inhibited proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth of glioma cells. Flow cytometry demonstrated
that enforced SNORD76 expression arrested the cells at S phase of the
cell cycle. Western blot Cell cycle-associated proteins cyclin A1, cyclin
B1 and p107 were down-regulated after SNORD76 over-expression, while the
expression of Rb and pRb increased. The growth of orthotopic tumors was
significantly inhibited by forced expression of SNORD76.ConclusionIn
summary, engineered restoration of SNORD76 caused marked repression of
glioma growth in vitro and in vivo. The tumor suppression could be
achieved at least partially through inducing S phase arrest in an
Rb-associated manner. Thus, SNORD76 may act as a potential tumor
suppressive gene in the development and progression of glioblastoma and
may be a potential specific glioblastoma biomarker.

