Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decrease in phospho-S6 expression under MEK inhibitor (MEKi)
treatment as a potential predictive biomarker of response to MEKi alone
or in combination with PI3K-mTOR pathway inhibitor in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma in vitro and ex vivo models


Context: Activating KRAS mutations are frequent (>90%) in PDAC and drive
downstream deregulation of both MAPK and PI3K-mTOR pathways. MEK
inhibitors (MEKi) are under clinical evaluation in PDAC, in combination
with other agents including PI3K-mTOR inhibitors. RAS and BRAF mutations,
EMT, PI3K-mTOR activation, and pERK inhibition under treatment have been
suggested as predictive markers for MEKi, but remain unvalidated in PDAC.
We explored the cellular and molecular effects of MEKi GSK1120212
(GSK212) alone or in combination with PI3K-mTOR inhibitors, in PDAC cell
lines and ex vivo culture system.Material and methods: GSK212 is an
allosteric non-ATP competitive MEKi. Everolimus (Ev) is a mTORC1
inhibitor and BKM120 a pan-class PI3K inhibitor. Effects on proliferation
were evaluated by MTT assay. Combinations were analyzed by the
Chou-Talalay method. Protein expression was assessed by Western blot. Ex
vivo drug evaluation used selected concentrations of drugs on cultures of
fresh tissue slices from patient surgical specimens. Apoptosis and
proliferation were evaluated by caspase 3 and MIB-1 (Ki67)
immunostaining, respectively. Correlations between protein expressions
were explored using linear regression.Results: MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 are
two mesenchymal KRAS mutated/BRAF wild-type PDAC cell lines with very
different response to GSK212, MIAPaCa-2 being sensitive (72h-IC50 =
0.009M) and PANC-1 resistant (72h-IC50 = 33M). MIAPaCa-2 was more
sensitive than PANC-1 to Ev (IC50 = 23.3M vs 47.0M) and BKM120 (IC50 =
4.19M vs 31.6M). Combination of GSK212 and Ev or BKM120 for 72h resulted
in synergistic effects in MIAPaCa-2 sensitive cell line but not in
PANC-1. GSK212 (0.1M) treatment resulted in pERK extinction in both cell
lines but in decreased pS6 expression in MIAPaCa-2 sensitive cell line
only. Combination therapy resulted in extinction of pERK and pS6
expression in both cell lines. Apoptosis induction in MIAPaCa-2 was
confirmed by PARP cleavage from 48h. Two tumor specimens were cultured ex
vivo: (a) GSK212 (0.1 M) treatment for 48h induced apoptosis (caspase 3
expression) concomitantly with a decrease in pS6 expression; (b) Ev (1M)
or BKM120 (0.1M) exerted antiproliferative effects but did not induce
apoptosis; (c) combinations resulted in higher caspase 3 expression
associated with a higher decrease in pS6 expression compared to MEKi
alone. Linear regression showed significant correlation between caspase 3
and pS6 (R2 = 0.5798, p = 0.0282, and R2 = 0.9423, p = 0.013, for tumor 1
and 2, respectively).Conclusion: Response to combined MEK/mTOR pathway
inhibition was not correlated with classical biomarkers of response to
MEKi. Decrease in pS6 expression under MEKi treatment may be an early
monitoring biomarker of response to MEKi and MEK/mTOR pathway inhibitor
combination.

