Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysregulation of microRNA-mRNA regulatory networks in the
bronchial airway epithelium of smokers with lung cancer


We have previously shown that gene expression alterations in
cytologically normal epithelial cells from the bronchial airway can be
used as an early detection biomarker for lung cancer in smokers. We
hypothesize that bronchial epithelial expression of microRNAs, as
regulators of gene expression, may also be affected by the presence of
cancer and may regulate some of these gene expression differences.We
propose a novel method to identify microRNAs functionally associated with
disease that leverages the relationship between microRNA and mRNA
expression by determining the differential connectivity (DC) of
microRNA-mRNA association networks between disease and normal
states.Bronchial epithelial brushes were collected from 220 former and
current smokers who underwent bronchoscopy for suspicion of lung cancer
(120 lung cancer patients and 100 healthy controls). For these subjects,
we profiled microRNA expression via small RNA sequencing and gene
expression via microarray.Each microRNA node is assigned a DC score,
which captures the overall difference in the pairwise microRNA-gene
correlation strengths between lung cancer and control subjects. We
quantify the change in both the directionality and strength of the
correlations between a microRNA and the gene nodes. Then, the observed DC
scores are compared to the DC scores obtained with permuted class labels
to identify microRNAs with signinficant disease-specific differences in
microRNA-mRNA connectivity.The proposed DC method identifies 54 microRNAs
which are significantly differentially connected in lung cancer cases
compared to controls (FDRWe have previously shown that gene expression
alterations in cytologically normal epithelial cells from the bronchial
airway can be used as an early detection biomarker for lung cancer in
smokers. We hypothesize that bronchial epithelial expression of
microRNAs, as regulators of gene expression, may also be affected by the
presence of cancer and may regulate some of these gene expression
differences.We propose a novel method to identify microRNAs functionally
associated with disease that leverages the relationship between microRNA
and mRNA expression by determining the differential connectivity (DC) of
microRNA-mRNA association networks between disease and normal
states.Bronchial epithelial brushes were collected from 220 former and
current smokers who underwent bronchoscopy for suspicion of lung cancer
(120 lung cancer patients and 100 healthy controls). For these subjects,
we profiled microRNA expression via small RNA sequencing and gene
expression via microarray.Each microRNA node is assigned a DC score,
which captures the overall difference in the pairwise microRNA-gene
correlation strengths between lung cancer and control subjects. We
quantify the change in both the directionality and strength of the
correlations between a microRNA and the gene nodes. Then, the observed DC
scores are compared to the DC scores obtained with permuted class labels
to identify microRNAs with signinficant disease-specific differences in
microRNA-mRNA connectivity.The proposed DC method identifies 54 microRNAs
which are significantly differentially connected in lung cancer cases
compared to controls (FDR<0.1). Among the 54 microRNAs we find those
previously associated with lung cancer, such as known dysregulated
oncomirs, regulators of drug sensitivity to anticancer agents or targets
for DNA methylation in non-small cell lung cancers. In addition, the
genes that are significantly correlated with the DC microRNAs are
enriched in cancer and immune system related pathways, such as membrane
trafficking, apoptosis, mitotic cell cycle, hemostasis, FC gamma R
mediated phagocytosis and signaling by Rho GTPases (FDRWe have previously
shown that gene expression alterations in cytologically normal epithelial
cells from the bronchial airway can be used as an early detection
biomarker for lung cancer in smokers. We hypothesize that bronchial
epithelial expression of microRNAs, as regulators of gene expression, may
also be affected by the presence of cancer and may regulate some of these
gene expression differences.We propose a novel method to identify
microRNAs functionally associated with disease that leverages the
relationship between microRNA and mRNA expression by determining the
differential connectivity (DC) of microRNA-mRNA association networks
between disease and normal states.Bronchial epithelial brushes were
collected from 220 former and current smokers who underwent bronchoscopy
for suspicion of lung cancer (120 lung cancer patients and 100 healthy
controls). For these subjects, we profiled microRNA expression via small
RNA sequencing and gene expression via microarray.Each microRNA node is
assigned a DC score, which captures the overall difference in the
pairwise microRNA-gene correlation strengths between lung cancer and
control subjects. We quantify the change in both the directionality and
strength of the correlations between a microRNA and the gene nodes. Then,
the observed DC scores are compared to the DC scores obtained with
permuted class labels to identify microRNAs with signinficant
disease-specific differences in microRNA-mRNA connectivity.The proposed
DC method identifies 54 microRNAs which are significantly differentially
connected in lung cancer cases compared to controls (FDR<0.1). Among the
54 microRNAs we find those previously associated with lung cancer, such
as known dysregulated oncomirs, regulators of drug sensitivity to
anticancer agents or targets for DNA methylation in non-small cell lung
cancers. In addition, the genes that are significantly correlated with
the DC microRNAs are enriched in cancer and immune system related
pathways, such as membrane trafficking, apoptosis, mitotic cell cycle,
hemostasis, FC gamma R mediated phagocytosis and signaling by Rho GTPases
(FDR<0.1).We propose a novel approach for integrating microRNA and gene
expression data to identify disease-associated changes in gene regulation
by microRNAs and show that the microRNA-mRNA networks are significantly
different between disease and normal states. These data suggest that
changes in microRNA expression may drive some of the gene expression
alterations observed in the cytologically normal epithelium from the
proximal airway of patients with lung cancer and that airway
microRNA-mRNA expression changes may ultimately serve as a biomarker for
lung cancer detection.

