Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Health behaviors of cancer survivors: higher alcohol drinking,
lower smoking and physical inactivity pattern in survivors with higher
household income


Background: This study investigated the prevalence of smoking, alcohol
consumption, and physical activity in cancer survivors and examined the
sociodemographic factors affecting these health-related
behaviors.Methods: We used data from the fourth and fifth Korean National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey conducted between 2007 and 2012,
which identified 1,153 cancer cases and 34,368 non-cancer controls 20
years of age. We used a structured questionnaire to obtain information
concerning cancer diagnosis and sociodemographic characteristics.Results:
The proportion of cancer survivors who were current drinkers, heavy
drinkers, current smokers, or engaged in physical activity were 49.1,
9.0, 9.2, or 50.7%, respectively. Compared with non-cancer controls,
cancer survivors were less likely to be current drinkers, heavy drinkers,
or current smokers (odds ratio [OR] = 0.56; 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.47-0.66; OR = 0.58; 95% CI, 0.44-0.78; and OR = 0.44, 95% CI,
0.34-0.59, respectively). Cancer survivors with higher household incomes
had higher odds of current drinking and heavy drinking (P trend = 0.04
and 0.03, respectively) and were less likely to be current smokers or
physically inactive (P trend Background: This study investigated the
prevalence of smoking, alcohol consumption, and physical activity in
cancer survivors and examined the sociodemographic factors affecting
these health-related behaviors.Methods: We used data from the fourth and
fifth Korean National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey conducted
between 2007 and 2012, which identified 1,153 cancer cases and 34,368
non-cancer controls 20 years of age. We used a structured questionnaire
to obtain information concerning cancer diagnosis and sociodemographic
characteristics.Results: The proportion of cancer survivors who were
current drinkers, heavy drinkers, current smokers, or engaged in physical
activity were 49.1, 9.0, 9.2, or 50.7%, respectively. Compared with
non-cancer controls, cancer survivors were less likely to be current
drinkers, heavy drinkers, or current smokers (odds ratio [OR] = 0.56; 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.47-0.66; OR = 0.58; 95% CI, 0.44-0.78; and OR
= 0.44, 95% CI, 0.34-0.59, respectively). Cancer survivors with higher
household incomes had higher odds of current drinking and heavy drinking
(P trend = 0.04 and 0.03, respectively) and were less likely to be
current smokers or physically inactive (P trend <0.01 and 0.03,
respectively). Age, gender, employment status, the type of cancer, and
the duration of cancer diagnosis affected the health behaviors.
Furthermore, we confirmed that these unhealthy behaviors are
interrelated. Conclusions: We found that household income had a
bidirectional effect on health behaviors and confirmed an aggregation of
unhealthy lifestyles. Identification of survivors vulnerable to unhealthy
lifestyles would allow intervention programs to be more effective.

