Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutralizing CD47 in cancer cells with dual targeting kappa/lambda
bodies


Neutralizing CD47, the don't eat me signal hijacked by different tumor
types, is a novel generally applicable therapeutic strategy. Because of a
distinct mechanism of action and the ability to stimulate the innate
anti-tumor immunity, CD47-neutralizing agents are poised as attractive
candidates for combination therapies in association with other
immunotherapies. However, the development of general CD47 antagonists
could be hindered by the ubiquitous and abundant expression of CD47 on
virtually all healthy cells. To overcome potential pharmacological and
clinical liabilities of a general CD47 antagonist, we have developed
bispecific kappa/lambda bodies, which selectively target CD47 in cancer
cells. These kappa/lambda bodies:(i) are full-length bispecific IgGs,
(ii) bind with high affinity and neutralize the CD47-SIRP alpha
interaction in cancer cells expressing a tumor-associated antigen (TAA),
and (iii) mediate efficient cell killing of TAA-positive cancer cells in
vitro through Fc-dependent mechanisms such as ADCP (antibody mediated
cellular phagocytosis) and ADCC (antibody mediated cellular
cytotoxicity).We are currently developing two molecules of this type, one
targeting CD47 and CD19 (for B cell malignancies), the other targeting
CD47 and mesothelin (for various mesothelin-positive solid tumors). The
efficacy of the CD47/CD19 kappa/lambda body was demonstrated in vivo,
using two B-cell lymphoma xenograft models in NOD/SCID mice. We also
performed a pharmacokinetics study in non-human primates with the
CD47/CD19 lead candidate, with the objective of assessing the potential
antigen sink effect related to ubiquitous CD47 expression on
erythrocytes, platelets and other cells. Encouragingly, the CD47/CD19
kappa/lambda body administered in a single dose to cynomolgus monkeys, at
0.5 and 10 mg/kg, showed an acceptable pharmacokinetic profile and the
absence of hematological toxicities. The example of the CD47/CD19
kappa/lambda body illustrates the power of the dual-targeting approach
for addressing a ubiquitous cell surface receptor such as CD47.

