Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D-models of patient-derived colon tumors for the identification
of genetic factors important in the regulation of cancer stem cells


Colon cancer is a heterogeneous tumour entity. Growing evidence supports
a subpopulation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) as both the drivers of tumour
growth and the source of relapse following treatment. Elucidation of the
cellular heterogeneity within a tumour would therefore facilitate better
characterization of patient subtypes and lead to more personalized and
effective treatments. Here, as part of the OncoTrack* consortium, we
report the use of a Matrigel-based 3D in vitro model for the
identification of genetic factors important in the regulation of CSCs.The
identity and frequency of CSCs within each patient-derived culture model
was determined by separating cells using fluorescence assisted cell
sorting (FACS) based on expression of previously defined markers of colon
CSCs (ALDH+ CD44+ CD166+). Isolated subpopulations of cells are
functionally tested for CSC properties in vitro (limiting dilution serial
passage and population dynamics analysis) and in vivo (limiting dilution
serial xenotransplantation). These studies reveal ALDH+ colon cancer
cells to be highly enriched for CSCs and demonstrate large levels of
variation in CSC frequency between patients.To identify genes and
pathways that could be used to specifically target CSC function, ALDH+
tumour cell subpopulations were subjected to genome-wide analyses using
next-generation sequencing for detailed characterization at the level of
the transcriptome and methylome. To date, genes important in the
regulation of normal stem cells and CSCs, such as BMI1, EPHB2 and the WNT
signalling pathway, were found to be highly expressed in CSCs. CRISPR
(Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats) mediated gene
technology was used to knock out genes of interest and their role in
regulating CSC function was confirmed using established functional
assays.These studies provide insight into the relationship between
variable tumour composition and the variable response of tumours to
treatment. Ultimately, these studies will facilitate the more accurate
classification and personalized treatment of colon tumours.*The research
leading to these results has received funding from the European Union's
Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) for the Innovative Medicine
Initiative under grant agreement n115234.

