Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective genomic characterization of small cell lung cancer by
targeted next generation sequencing


INTRODUCTION: Recent studies using next generation sequencing (NGS)
technologies have provided insights into the molecular landscape of small
cell lung cancer (SCLC), including frequent inactivation of TP53 and RB1.
However, molecular profiling of SCLC has been impeded by lack of tissue.
We performed prospective genomic profiling of patients with advanced
SCLC, demonstrating the ability to test small biopsy specimens, and we
report trends associated with clinical characteristics.METHODS: Formalin
fixed paraffin embedded surgical resections, core biopsies, and fine
needle aspirates from 50 patients with SCLC were subjected to FGFR1 FISH
testing, PTEN immunohistochemistry (IHC), and deep-coverage targeted NGS
(median 420x) to identify single nucleotide variants, indels, and copy
number alterations in a common set of 222 cancer-associated genes.
Demographic and clinical data were collected. Genotyping data were
stratified by smoking status, stage, and response to therapy.RESULTS: Of
the 50 patients with SCLC, 58% had extensive stage disease, and 30% were
resistant to first line therapy. We observed diverse genetic profiles in
SCLC, with alterations occurring in 202 of 222 targeted genes. The median
number of non-synonymous somatic mutations was 7. Of 526 total
non-synonymous mutations, 5% were hotspot COSMIC mutations, 25% were
loss-of-function, and 47% were G-to-T transversions indicative of
tobacco-induced carcinogenesis. Recurrent loss-of-function mutations in
RB1 (96%) and TP53 (92%) were observed. Other frequent genomic events
included alterations in SOX2 (26%), EPHA5 (22%), CDKN2C (20%), MYCL1
(20%), and PIK3CA (18%). Actionable point mutations in PIK3CA,
amplifications of FGFR1, amplifications of MYC, and loss of PTEN were
confirmed by independent clinically validated assays. The genotyping data
showed differences based on disease stage, response to therapy, and
smoking status. Patients with limited disease had a higher median number
of mutations detected (9 mut/tumor) than patients with extensive disease
(5 mut/tumor). Tumors refractory to chemotherapy were more likely to
harbor homozygous deletions including on chromosome 3p, while tumors
sensitive to chemotherapy had more diversified amplifications, deletions,
and mutations. The median number of mutations detected for never smokers
(0 pack years), moderate smokers (INTRODUCTION: Recent studies using next
generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have provided insights into the
molecular landscape of small cell lung cancer (SCLC), including frequent
inactivation of TP53 and RB1. However, molecular profiling of SCLC has
been impeded by lack of tissue. We performed prospective genomic
profiling of patients with advanced SCLC, demonstrating the ability to
test small biopsy specimens, and we report trends associated with
clinical characteristics.METHODS: Formalin fixed paraffin embedded
surgical resections, core biopsies, and fine needle aspirates from 50
patients with SCLC were subjected to FGFR1 FISH testing, PTEN
immunohistochemistry (IHC), and deep-coverage targeted NGS (median 420x)
to identify single nucleotide variants, indels, and copy number
alterations in a common set of 222 cancer-associated genes. Demographic
and clinical data were collected. Genotyping data were stratified by
smoking status, stage, and response to therapy.RESULTS: Of the 50
patients with SCLC, 58% had extensive stage disease, and 30% were
resistant to first line therapy. We observed diverse genetic profiles in
SCLC, with alterations occurring in 202 of 222 targeted genes. The median
number of non-synonymous somatic mutations was 7. Of 526 total
non-synonymous mutations, 5% were hotspot COSMIC mutations, 25% were
loss-of-function, and 47% were G-to-T transversions indicative of
tobacco-induced carcinogenesis. Recurrent loss-of-function mutations in
RB1 (96%) and TP53 (92%) were observed. Other frequent genomic events
included alterations in SOX2 (26%), EPHA5 (22%), CDKN2C (20%), MYCL1
(20%), and PIK3CA (18%). Actionable point mutations in PIK3CA,
amplifications of FGFR1, amplifications of MYC, and loss of PTEN were
confirmed by independent clinically validated assays. The genotyping data
showed differences based on disease stage, response to therapy, and
smoking status. Patients with limited disease had a higher median number
of mutations detected (9 mut/tumor) than patients with extensive disease
(5 mut/tumor). Tumors refractory to chemotherapy were more likely to
harbor homozygous deletions including on chromosome 3p, while tumors
sensitive to chemotherapy had more diversified amplifications, deletions,
and mutations. The median number of mutations detected for never smokers
(0 pack years), moderate smokers (<20 pack years), and heavy smokers (20+
pack years) were 3, 4.5, and 8 mut/tumor, respectively (PINTRODUCTION:
Recent studies using next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have
provided insights into the molecular landscape of small cell lung cancer
(SCLC), including frequent inactivation of TP53 and RB1. However,
molecular profiling of SCLC has been impeded by lack of tissue. We
performed prospective genomic profiling of patients with advanced SCLC,
demonstrating the ability to test small biopsy specimens, and we report
trends associated with clinical characteristics.METHODS: Formalin fixed
paraffin embedded surgical resections, core biopsies, and fine needle
aspirates from 50 patients with SCLC were subjected to FGFR1 FISH
testing, PTEN immunohistochemistry (IHC), and deep-coverage targeted NGS
(median 420x) to identify single nucleotide variants, indels, and copy
number alterations in a common set of 222 cancer-associated genes.
Demographic and clinical data were collected. Genotyping data were
stratified by smoking status, stage, and response to therapy.RESULTS: Of
the 50 patients with SCLC, 58% had extensive stage disease, and 30% were
resistant to first line therapy. We observed diverse genetic profiles in
SCLC, with alterations occurring in 202 of 222 targeted genes. The median
number of non-synonymous somatic mutations was 7. Of 526 total
non-synonymous mutations, 5% were hotspot COSMIC mutations, 25% were
loss-of-function, and 47% were G-to-T transversions indicative of
tobacco-induced carcinogenesis. Recurrent loss-of-function mutations in
RB1 (96%) and TP53 (92%) were observed. Other frequent genomic events
included alterations in SOX2 (26%), EPHA5 (22%), CDKN2C (20%), MYCL1
(20%), and PIK3CA (18%). Actionable point mutations in PIK3CA,
amplifications of FGFR1, amplifications of MYC, and loss of PTEN were
confirmed by independent clinically validated assays. The genotyping data
showed differences based on disease stage, response to therapy, and
smoking status. Patients with limited disease had a higher median number
of mutations detected (9 mut/tumor) than patients with extensive disease
(5 mut/tumor). Tumors refractory to chemotherapy were more likely to
harbor homozygous deletions including on chromosome 3p, while tumors
sensitive to chemotherapy had more diversified amplifications, deletions,
and mutations. The median number of mutations detected for never smokers
(0 pack years), moderate smokers (<20 pack years), and heavy smokers (20+
pack years) were 3, 4.5, and 8 mut/tumor, respectively (P<0.05). None of
the mutations detected in tumors from never smokers were G-to-T
transversions.CONCLUSION: Comprehensive molecular profiling is feasible
on clinical SCLC specimens. Our study illustrates the molecular diversity
and mutational patterns in SCLC. We confirmed previously reported
recurring events, and further identified associations between genomic
profiles and clinical features including stage, response, and smoking
status.

