Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysregulation of bone morphogenetic protein 2 serves as a
candidate molecular marker in human renal cell carcinoma


Introduction and ObjectiveBone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) has been
shown to function as a tumor suppressor with several different cancers,
while its expression level is down-regulated by CpG hypermethylation. We
hypothesized that impaired regulation of BMP-2 through epigenetic
pathways is associated with the pathogenesis of renal cell carcinoma
(RCC).MethodsTo test our hypothesis, CpG methylation of the BMP-2 gene
was analyzed using 2 RCC cell lines, and 96 matched RCC and normal renal
tissues. We also performed functional analysis using BMP-2 restored RCC
cells.ResultsBMP-2 mRNA expression was significantly enhanced in the RCC
cells by 5-aza-2-deoxycitidie treatment. The prevalence of BMP-2 promoter
methylation was significantly higher, while BMP-2 mRNA expression was
significantly lower in RCC samples as compared to normal kidney samples.
Furthermore, a significant correlation was found between BMP-2 promoter
methylation and mRNA transcription in the tumors. There was also a
significant association of BMP-2 mRNA expression with tumor stage and
lymph node involvement, while lower BMP-2 mRNA expression was
significantly associated with poor overall survival after a radical
nephrectomy. In RCC cells, BMP-2 restoration significantly inhibited cell
proliferation, migration, invasion, and colony formation. In addition,
BMP-2 overexpression effectively induced p21WAF1/CIP1 and p27KIP1
expression, and cellular apoptosis in RCC cells.ConclusionThis is the
first study to show inactivation of the BMP-2 gene via epigenetic
pathways in RCC. Aberrant BMP-2 methylation and the resultant loss of
BMP-2 expression may be useful as a molecular marker for designing
improved diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for RCC.

