Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Onodera's prognostic nutritional Index predicts survival in
patients with unresectable advanced or recurrent colorectal cancer


Background: Nutrition and immunity significantly affect the progression
of cancer in cancer patients. Therefore, the evaluation of the
nutritional and immune status would be useful as a prognostic factor and
to determine the optimal treatment strategy for patients with
unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer who are receiving chemotherapy.
The aim of this retrospective study was to evaluate the prognostic
significance of the nutritional and immune status in patients with
unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer treated with chemotherapy.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 80 patients with colorectal cancer.
A total of 22 patients had metachronous unresectable cancer and 58
patients had synchronous unresectable cancer. All patients underwent
combination chemotherapy with oxaliplatin or irinotecan plus
5-fluorouracil/leucovorin as first-line chemotherapy for unresectable
metastatic colorectal cancer. We then examined the correlations between
the Onodera's Prognostic Nutritional Index (OPNI) and the patients
clinicopathological features. The OPNI was calculated as follows: 10
serum albumin (g/dl) + 0.005 total lymphocyte count (per mm3). According
to the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, the
cut-off value for OPNI was 44.5. Results: Patients with a pretreatment
OPNI of 44.5 demonstrated a longer OS than those with a pretreatment OPNI
of Background: Nutrition and immunity significantly affect the
progression of cancer in cancer patients. Therefore, the evaluation of
the nutritional and immune status would be useful as a prognostic factor
and to determine the optimal treatment strategy for patients with
unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer who are receiving chemotherapy.
The aim of this retrospective study was to evaluate the prognostic
significance of the nutritional and immune status in patients with
unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer treated with chemotherapy.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 80 patients with colorectal cancer.
A total of 22 patients had metachronous unresectable cancer and 58
patients had synchronous unresectable cancer. All patients underwent
combination chemotherapy with oxaliplatin or irinotecan plus
5-fluorouracil/leucovorin as first-line chemotherapy for unresectable
metastatic colorectal cancer. We then examined the correlations between
the Onodera's Prognostic Nutritional Index (OPNI) and the patients
clinicopathological features. The OPNI was calculated as follows: 10
serum albumin (g/dl) + 0.005 total lymphocyte count (per mm3). According
to the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, the
cut-off value for OPNI was 44.5. Results: Patients with a pretreatment
OPNI of 44.5 demonstrated a longer OS than those with a pretreatment OPNI
of <44.5. Moreover, we categorized these patients into four groups
according to the combination of the pre- and post-treatment OPNI. The
patients in the group with both OPNIs 44.5 exhibited a better prognosis
compared to the other group (p = 0.001). Conclusion: The OPNI is
considered to be a useful marker for predicting the long-term outcome in
patients who receive chemotherapy for unresectable metastatic colorectal
cancer.

