Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic profiling of breast cancer confirms a pivotal Role of EGFR
pathway in the development of acquired resistance to Tamoxifen in locally
recurrent and metastatic breast cancer patients


Background: Acquisition of resistance to Tamoxifen is a major drawback in
the treatment of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer (BC)
patients. The role of CYP2D6 in predicting response to Tamoxifen is
debatable. We assessed the involvement of aberrant EGFR pathway genes
expressions and CYP2D6 polymorphism in predicting response to Tamoxifen
in a cohort of BC patients from Egypt.Patients and methods: This
prospective study included 157 females with hormone receptor positive,
locally recurrent inoperable and/or metastatic BC patients treated in the
National Cancer Institute, Cairo. Patients were categorized according to
their response to Tamoxifen into: responders and refractory groups. RNA
and DNA were extracted from tumour and normal tissue samples obtained
from all patients. The expression of 92 genes in the EGFR pathway was
evaluated using the SABioscience array (Qiagen) with four house-keeping
genes and CYP2D6 polymorphism was assessed by PCR.Results: We found that
58.6% of the patients were ER/PR positive, 32.48% were ER positive and
8.91% were PR positive. Response to Tamoxifen correlated significantly
with the site of the disease (patients with bone only disease
demonstrated better and maintained response compared to those with
visceral involvement; p. = 0.005) and CYP2D6 polymorphism (p. = 0.034).
CYP2D6 *3, *4 were significantly prevalent in the refractory group
(86.6%), whereas variants *10/*10 and *10/*3 were more common in the in
the responders (85.5%) (p. = 0.027). RNA profiling of the EGFR pathway
showed that 56 genes were differentially over-expressed in the refractory
group compared to the responders, of which only JAK1, COL1A1, GAB1, FN1,
MKNK1, AKT1, EGFR, NFKB1 and HGDC showed a significant difference between
the groups (pBackground: Acquisition of resistance to Tamoxifen is a
major drawback in the treatment of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast
cancer (BC) patients. The role of CYP2D6 in predicting response to
Tamoxifen is debatable. We assessed the involvement of aberrant EGFR
pathway genes expressions and CYP2D6 polymorphism in predicting response
to Tamoxifen in a cohort of BC patients from Egypt.Patients and methods:
This prospective study included 157 females with hormone receptor
positive, locally recurrent inoperable and/or metastatic BC patients
treated in the National Cancer Institute, Cairo. Patients were
categorized according to their response to Tamoxifen into: responders and
refractory groups. RNA and DNA were extracted from tumour and normal
tissue samples obtained from all patients. The expression of 92 genes in
the EGFR pathway was evaluated using the SABioscience array (Qiagen) with
four house-keeping genes and CYP2D6 polymorphism was assessed by
PCR.Results: We found that 58.6% of the patients were ER/PR positive,
32.48% were ER positive and 8.91% were PR positive. Response to Tamoxifen
correlated significantly with the site of the disease (patients with bone
only disease demonstrated better and maintained response compared to
those with visceral involvement; p. = 0.005) and CYP2D6 polymorphism (p.
= 0.034). CYP2D6 *3, *4 were significantly prevalent in the refractory
group (86.6%), whereas variants *10/*10 and *10/*3 were more common in
the in the responders (85.5%) (p. = 0.027). RNA profiling of the EGFR
pathway showed that 56 genes were differentially over-expressed in the
refractory group compared to the responders, of which only JAK1, COL1A1,
GAB1, FN1, MKNK1, AKT1, EGFR, NFKB1 and HGDC showed a significant
difference between the groups (p<0.05).. Thirty four genes were
differentially reduced, of which only STAT5A, RHOA, MAPK9, MAPK10, CCND1
showed significant difference between groups (pBackground: Acquisition of
resistance to Tamoxifen is a major drawback in the treatment of estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer (BC) patients. The role of CYP2D6 in
predicting response to Tamoxifen is debatable. We assessed the
involvement of aberrant EGFR pathway genes expressions and CYP2D6
polymorphism in predicting response to Tamoxifen in a cohort of BC
patients from Egypt.Patients and methods: This prospective study included
157 females with hormone receptor positive, locally recurrent inoperable
and/or metastatic BC patients treated in the National Cancer Institute,
Cairo. Patients were categorized according to their response to Tamoxifen
into: responders and refractory groups. RNA and DNA were extracted from
tumour and normal tissue samples obtained from all patients. The
expression of 92 genes in the EGFR pathway was evaluated using the
SABioscience array (Qiagen) with four house-keeping genes and CYP2D6
polymorphism was assessed by PCR.Results: We found that 58.6% of the
patients were ER/PR positive, 32.48% were ER positive and 8.91% were PR
positive. Response to Tamoxifen correlated significantly with the site of
the disease (patients with bone only disease demonstrated better and
maintained response compared to those with visceral involvement; p. =
0.005) and CYP2D6 polymorphism (p. = 0.034). CYP2D6 *3, *4 were
significantly prevalent in the refractory group (86.6%), whereas variants
*10/*10 and *10/*3 were more common in the in the responders (85.5%) (p.
= 0.027). RNA profiling of the EGFR pathway showed that 56 genes were
differentially over-expressed in the refractory group compared to the
responders, of which only JAK1, COL1A1, GAB1, FN1, MKNK1, AKT1, EGFR,
NFKB1 and HGDC showed a significant difference between the groups
(p<0.05).. Thirty four genes were differentially reduced, of which only
STAT5A, RHOA, MAPK9, MAPK10, CCND1 showed significant difference between
groups (p<0.05)..Conclusion: The EGFR pathway contributes significantly
to patients response to Tamoxifen in locally advanced/ metastatic breast
cancer. A panel of 13 genes (JAK1, COL1A1, GAB1, FN1, MKNK1, EGFR, NFKB1,
HGDC, STAT5A, RHOA, MAPK9, MAPK10, CCND1) in this pathway together with
CYP2D6 polymorphisms can predict response to Tamoxifen though this has to
be verified in a larger study.

