Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic epigenetic regulation of glioblastoma tumorigenicity
through LSD1 modulation of MYC expression


Glioblastoma is the most common form of primary brain cancer and remains
one of the deadliest of human cancers with near-uniform fatality.
Increasing evidence suggests that the lethality of glioblastoma is driven
by small subpopulations of cells with self-renew ability and
tumorigenicity, termed as tumor initiating cells. The mechanism how the
tumor initiating cells maintain and gain tumorigenicity in glioblastoma
still remains unclear.Here, we used sphere formation and tumor
propagating potential to measure the tumorigenicity in established cell
line and primary glioblastoma cells. The results indicated that
glioblastoma tumorigenicity appears largely deterministic, though
spontaneous gain and loss of this property occur at low frequency.
Mechanically, this dynamic transition in tumorigenicity was governed by
MYC level which was modulated epigenetically by the lysine-specific
demethylase 1 (LSD1). Elevated MYC expression, in turn, regulates OLIG2,
SOX2 and POU3F2, a core set of transcription factors required for
reprogramming glioblastoma cells into stem-like states. Our model
suggests epigenetic regulation of key transcription factors facilitates
transitions between tumorigenic states and provides a framework for
glioblastoma therapeutic development.Importantly, the effect of LSD1 on
tumorigenity is Janus-like; partial depletion of LSD1 caused increased
MYC expression and a pro-tumorigenic state. In contrast, complete
suppression of LSD1 induced cell death. As such, therapeutic strategies
targeting LSD1 and other targets manifesting similar Janus effect should
be designed to prevent unintended induction of tumorigenesis during
treatment.

