Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The course of fatigue and its correlates in colorectal cancer
survivors: A prospective cohort study of the PROFILES registry


Objective: Cancer survivors who remain fatigued during long-term
follow-up are at risk for worse health outcomes. To achieve personalized
management of cancer-related fatigue, insight into its correlates among
long-term survivors is needed to identify survivors at risk of remaining
fatigued and also the correlates for intervention.Methods: Colorectal
cancer (CRC) survivors diagnosed between 2000-2009, as registered in the
population-based Eindhoven Cancer Registry, completed three annual
surveys that included the Fatigue Assessment Scale, the EORTC Quality of
Life (EORTC-QLQ-C30) questionnaire, Hospital Anxiety and Depression
Scale, and physical activity levels. Linear mixed-model were used to
assess the course of fatigue and identify its correlates.Results: 1734
(66%) CRC survivors completed at least 2 surveys. Fatigue levels were
relatively stable over time. Being female, young (65 years old), single,
low education, chemotherapy treatment, or having 1 comorbid condition was
associated with higher fatigue scores. Years since diagnosis,
radiotherapy treatment and disease stage were not related to fatigue
scores. Significant between- and within-subjects effects were found for
well-being factors (social, emotional, and cognitive function, and global
quality of life), symptoms (anxiety, depression, pain, and insomnia) and
functional status (physical and role function, and physical activity
levels) in relation to fatigue. Differences in fatigue could be largely
attributed to behavior/well-being (59%) and functional status (37%), and
to some extent to sociodemographic (4%) and clinical (8%)
factors.Conclusion: This study showed that behavior/well-being and
functional status explained more variance in fatigue levels among CRC
survivors than sociodemographic and clinical factors.

