Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variants associated with longer telomere length are
associated with increased lung cancer risk among never-smoking women in
Asia: A report from the Female Lung Cancer Consortium in Asia


Recent evidence from several relatively small nested case-control studies
in prospective cohorts shows an association between longer telomere
length measured phenotypically in peripheral white blood cell (WBC) DNA
and increased lung cancer risk. We sought to further explore this
relationship by examining a panel of 7 telomere-length associated genetic
variants in a large study of 5,457 never-smoking female Asian lung cancer
cases and 4,493 never-smoking female Asian controls using data from a
previously reported genome-wide association study. Using a group of 1,536
individuals with phenotypically measured telomere length in WBCs in the
prospective Shanghai Women's Health study, we demonstrated the utility of
a genetic risk score (GRS) of 7 telomere-length associated variants to
predict telomere length in an Asian population. We then found that GRSs
used as instrumental variables to predict longer telomere length were
associated with increased lung cancer risk (OR = 1.51 (95% CI =
1.34-1.69) for upper vs. lower quartile of the weighted GRS, P-value =
4.541014) even after removing rs2736100 (P-value = 4.81103), a SNP in the
TERT locus robustly associated with lung cancer risk in prior association
studies. Stratified analyses suggested the effect of the
telomere-associated GRS is strongest among younger individuals. We found
no difference in GRS effect between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
subtypes. Our results indicate that a genetic background that favors
longer telomere length may increase lung cancer risk, which is consistent
with earlier prospective studies relating longer telomere length with
increased lung cancer risk.

