Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: lncRNA profiling and its potential usage as thyroid cancer
biomarker


Thyroid nodules are detected in as high as 67% of the population.
Distinguishing thyroid cancers from benign lesions is crucial for
determining appropriate and timely treatment. Fast and accurate detection
using a simple screening method could greatly contribute to minimizing
unnecessary surgery while increasing the accuracy of cancer detection.
Several long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been linked to cancer
development as either oncogenes or tumor suppressors, and their potential
use as cancer biomarkers has been suggested. Unfortunately, limited
analyses have been performed on the expression of lncRNA in thyroid
cancer. Here, we explored the possible use of lncRNA as a specific
thyroid cancer biomarker. The expression of 84 human cancer-related
lncRNAs were evaluated in RNA samples from 9 thyroid cancer (PTC and
FVPTC) patients and 13 non-cancer controls (NH and FA) with a simple
real-time RT-PCR strategy. PTCSC1, an lncRNA previously linked to thyroid
cancer, was found to be down regulated in patient 3.4 fold (pThyroid
nodules are detected in as high as 67% of the population. Distinguishing
thyroid cancers from benign lesions is crucial for determining
appropriate and timely treatment. Fast and accurate detection using a
simple screening method could greatly contribute to minimizing
unnecessary surgery while increasing the accuracy of cancer detection.
Several long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been linked to cancer
development as either oncogenes or tumor suppressors, and their potential
use as cancer biomarkers has been suggested. Unfortunately, limited
analyses have been performed on the expression of lncRNA in thyroid
cancer. Here, we explored the possible use of lncRNA as a specific
thyroid cancer biomarker. The expression of 84 human cancer-related
lncRNAs were evaluated in RNA samples from 9 thyroid cancer (PTC and
FVPTC) patients and 13 non-cancer controls (NH and FA) with a simple
real-time RT-PCR strategy. PTCSC1, an lncRNA previously linked to thyroid
cancer, was found to be down regulated in patient 3.4 fold (p<0.005). In
addition, we observed dysregulation of other lncRNA such as BANCR (down 3
fold, pThyroid nodules are detected in as high as 67% of the population.
Distinguishing thyroid cancers from benign lesions is crucial for
determining appropriate and timely treatment. Fast and accurate detection
using a simple screening method could greatly contribute to minimizing
unnecessary surgery while increasing the accuracy of cancer detection.
Several long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been linked to cancer
development as either oncogenes or tumor suppressors, and their potential
use as cancer biomarkers has been suggested. Unfortunately, limited
analyses have been performed on the expression of lncRNA in thyroid
cancer. Here, we explored the possible use of lncRNA as a specific
thyroid cancer biomarker. The expression of 84 human cancer-related
lncRNAs were evaluated in RNA samples from 9 thyroid cancer (PTC and
FVPTC) patients and 13 non-cancer controls (NH and FA) with a simple
real-time RT-PCR strategy. PTCSC1, an lncRNA previously linked to thyroid
cancer, was found to be down regulated in patient 3.4 fold (p<0.005). In
addition, we observed dysregulation of other lncRNA such as BANCR (down 3
fold, p<0.005) and SNHG16 (down 2 fold, pThyroid nodules are detected in
as high as 67% of the population. Distinguishing thyroid cancers from
benign lesions is crucial for determining appropriate and timely
treatment. Fast and accurate detection using a simple screening method
could greatly contribute to minimizing unnecessary surgery while
increasing the accuracy of cancer detection. Several long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNAs) have been linked to cancer development as either oncogenes or
tumor suppressors, and their potential use as cancer biomarkers has been
suggested. Unfortunately, limited analyses have been performed on the
expression of lncRNA in thyroid cancer. Here, we explored the possible
use of lncRNA as a specific thyroid cancer biomarker. The expression of
84 human cancer-related lncRNAs were evaluated in RNA samples from 9
thyroid cancer (PTC and FVPTC) patients and 13 non-cancer controls (NH
and FA) with a simple real-time RT-PCR strategy. PTCSC1, an lncRNA
previously linked to thyroid cancer, was found to be down regulated in
patient 3.4 fold (p<0.005). In addition, we observed dysregulation of
other lncRNA such as BANCR (down 3 fold, p<0.005) and SNHG16 (down 2
fold, p<0.005). We next used the lncRNA expression data for signature
panel development to classify benign and malignant thyroid patient tissue
samples. With a random forest classification model, a fine tuned
classification signature of 16 target genes was reasonably successful
(Accuracy 95%, sensitivity 92%, PPV = 90% and NPV = 100%). Our results
suggested that in addition to the role that lncRNA plays in thyroid
cancer, analysis of lncRNA expression represents a promising path towards
a simple test for thyroid cancer detection.

