Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiproliferative activity of bacterial proteins against
MDA-MB-231 human breast adenocarcinoma and HEPG-2 human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells


Background:Cancer remains one of the most dangerous human diseases.
According to International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) (WHO)
Global burden rises to 14.1 million new cases and 8.2 million cancer
deaths in 2012 and nearly 13.3 million people are likely to die annually
of cancer by 2030. Further due to ever emerging drug resistance in
cancers and increasing number of cancer deaths there is a need to
recognize new therapeutic molecules against the cancer cells. Bacterial
strains have been shown to possess anticancer potential in the past few
years. Bacterial proteins from strains Lactobacillus sps, Bacillus
cereus, Serratia marcence and Shigella flexneri have been tested for
anticancer activity.MethodsProtein extracts of Lactobacillus sps (MTCC
4184, 9496, and 10093), Bacillus cereus (MTCC 7166, 9017 and 10202),
Serratia marcence (MTCC 7641, 7298 and 7729), Shigella flexneri (MTCC
1457 and 9543) were evaluated for their anticancer potential against
human cancer cell lines Breast Cancer (MDA-MB-231) and Hep-G2 (Liver
Cancer). Inhibition of Cancer Cells proliferation was confirmed by MTT
Cell Viability Assay, Fluorescent Staining, Caspase-3 activity by Western
blotting, DNA Fragmentation and Flow Cytometery. Chromatography and
electrophoresis techniques were used for protein fractionation and
analysis.ResultsIn general, most of the bacterial protein extracts were
found to be effective against one or more cancer cell lines. Protein
extract of Lactobacillus sps (MTCC 4184), Bacillus cereus (MTCC 10202)
and Shigella flexneri (MTCC 9543) inhibited both the cancer cell lines.
Lactobacillus sps (MTCC 9496) was effective only against MDA-MB-231.
Serratia marcence (MTCC 7298 and 7729) protein extract inhibited growth
MDA-MB-231, while no effect on HepG2 was observed. Bacillus cereus (MTCC
7166) inhibited MDA-MB-231 and not HepG2. Protein extract of
Lactobacillus sps (MTCC 10093), Bacillus cereus (MTCC 2763), Serratia
marcence (MTCC 7641) and Shigella flexneri (MTCC1457) were none effective
to both the cell lines. The cancer cell mortality was observed from 52%
to 71% + 2%. Fluorescent staining and increased Caspase-3 activity
confirmed by western blotting, DNA fragmentation and detection of cell
cycle arrest by Flow Cytometry suggested that apoptosis was the major
mechanism in inhibition of MDA-MB-231 and Hep-G2 cancer cells. Further,
protein purification and analysis suggest that these are the low
molecular mass bacterial protein which potentially inhibit cancer cell
proliferation and act as anticancer molecules. The study confirms the
anticancer potential of bacterial proteins which may constitute valuable
candidates for development of novel anticancer drugs.ConclusionThe study
confirms the anticancer potential of bacterial proteins which may
constitute valuable candidates for designing and development of novel
anticancer drugs.

