Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Both programmed cell death protein 1 and programmed death-ligand 1
molecules can be expressed on the cell surface of small-cell lung cancer


Background: Programmed cell death protein-1 (PD-1) and programmed death
ligand-1 (PD-L1) play a major role in suppressing the immune system by
forming the PD-1/PD-L1 complex, which transmits an inhibitory signal to
reduce T-cell activity. PD-L1 is often expressed in various malignant
tumors. On the other hand, PD-1 is generally observed in activated
lymphocytes and myeloid-derived dendritic cells. Of the malignant cells,
only Jurkat cells (under special conditions) and angioimmunoblastic
T-cell lymphoma tissue cells express PD-1 on their surface.Purpose: To
clarify whether PD-1/PD-L1 complex participates in the immunotolerance on
small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) cells.Materials and methods: We examined
the expression levels of PD-1 and PD-L1 on the cell surface of SCLC cell
lines using flowcytometry and reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. Subsequently, the soluble PD-L1 (sPD-L1) concentration was
measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and the cell growth
inhibitory effect of IFN- was determined by direct cell counting using a
hemocytometer and Trypan blue staining.Results: Among the four SCLC cell
lines examined, only SBC-3 cells expressed both PD-1 and PD-L1. The
sPD-L1 concentrations in culture medium gradually increased according to
cell growth. Although IFN- alone inhibited the growth of SBC-3 cells,
PD-L1 expression on the cell surface was not induced by IFN-.Conclusions:
We demonstrated that both PD-1 and PD-L1 molecules are co-expressed on
the surface of SCLC cells. Although the biological implications of this
remain unclear, we speculate that PD-1 and its ligand on the SCLC cells
may participate in the growth inhibition of tumor cells as is reported in
cytotoxic T cells.

