Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Super-enhancer landscapes specify molecular subtypes and novel
targets in acute myeloid leukemia


AML is a highly genotypically and phenotypically heterogeneous cancer
with many subtypes of the disease currently lacking clear targeted
therapies. While several genetic alterations currently serve to stratify
patients into prognostic subgroups and guide treatment decisions, the
classification and treatment options for AML patients remain
unsatisfactory. Numerous genome-wide analyses have provided evidence
linking recurring genetic mutations in de novo AML to perturbations in
epigenomic signaling, transcriptional regulation, and
post-transcriptional mRNA processing, indicating that misregulation of
gene expression is a key molecular feature of AML pathogenesis yet the
diagnostic value and clinical utility of these findings remain
unclear.Recently, a novel class of densely clustered cis-regulatory
elements termed super-enhancers have emerged as key effectors initiating
and maintaining cell type-specific gene expression in a variety of
physiological and disease settings, including cancer. Tumor-specific
super-enhancers regulate expression of key oncogenes and other
cancer-essential genes, providing a novel strategy for detecting both
known and unrecognized cancer dependencies of high diagnostic and
therapeutic value.Here we describe the discovery and characterization of
super-enhancer domains across a large cohort of AML patients and relevant
normal hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell controls. To this end, we
profiled over 60 primary samples at both the level of epigenomic activity
and transcript abundance and identify transcriptionally hyperactive
regions in AML patients compared to normal healthy donors. By combining
patient-specific super-enhancer landscapes with gene expression profiles,
we elucidate the transcription factor repertoires controlling chromatin
dynamics and lineage specification in cellular derivatives of normal
hematopoietic development and purified AML samples. Further analyses
yield a striking delineation of disease-unique transcriptional subtypes
which are specified by distinct patterns of super-enhancers at well-known
AML-related genes such as HOXA9, MEIS1, ETV6, and HOXB3. In addition, we
identify clusters of AML cases with shared super-enhancer domains
suggesting convergence on common key drivers of AML.Together, our results
provide the biological and disease relevance of super-enhancers in the
context of normal and tumor cell states and demonstrate how the
comprehensive mapping of gene regulatory elements elucidate clinically
relevant subtypes and new therapeutic targets in AML.

