Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Status and clinical relavence of G1/S cell cycle regulatory
proteins in Ocular Surface Squamous Neoplasia


Purpose: Ocular Surface Squamous Neoplasia (OSSN) is a common tumour of
ocular surface arising from the limbus, cornea or conjunctiva. It
includes conjunctival intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC). Although confined to ocular surface, they have
capability to recur (5-53%), metastasize (0-16%) and even cause death
(8%).One of the most important issues still unresolved in the treatment
and management of OSSN is the inability to determine factors causing
disease progression. Identification of reliable biomarkers which could
detect progression as well as identify high risk cases is an urgent
necessity. The Cyclin D1/p16INK4a/pRb pathway plays a critical role in
tumorigenesis and alterations in these proteins have been reported in
various malignancies.This study was designed to explore the status of
pRb, p16INK4a and cyclin D1 in various clinical stages of OSSN
patients.Methods:Sixty-four histopathologically confirmed OSSN cases (44
squamous cell carcinomas and 20 conjunctival intraepithelial neoplasias)
were included in this study. AJCC TNM staging was done and patients were
followed up for 36 to 58 months (median 46 months). Immunohistochemical
expression of total pRb (clone-13A10), phosphorylated Rb
(clone-Phospho-Ser780), p16INK4a (clone-6H12), and cyclin D1 (clone-SP4)
protein was evaluated. Kaplan-Meier survival and Cox regression analysis
was done to assess the prognostic significance of these proteins.Results:
Immunoexpression of the targeted proteins demonstrated loss /inactive
form of pRb in 87% OSSN cases, p16INK4a and cyclin D1 overexpression in
28% in 63% cases respectively. From T1 to T3 AJCC category there was a
progressive increase of p16INK4a (0%in T1 to 100% in T3) (P = 0.007) and
cyclin D1 overexpression (25% in T1 to 88% in T4). Loss of pRb (75% in T1
to 100% in T4) (P = 0.03) was also seen. Loss of pRb expression was the
earliest change which was detected in 75% cases in T1.The Kaplan Meier
survival curves revealed loss of pRb (P = 0.0002, log rank analysis) as
well as p16INK4a(P = 0.11, log rank analysis) and cyclin D1 over
expression (P = 0.06, log rank analysis) adversely affected the disease
free survival. pRb loss however emerged as the single most sensitive poor
prognostic indicator in all AJCC stages of OSSN patients.Conclusion: G1/S
cell cycle proteins (retinoblastoma, p16INK4aand cyclin D1) have
prognostic relevance in OSSN patients. Of these pRb loss is the most
useful indicator of aggressive behavior and is therefore recommended for
detecting high risk OSSN patients. The dysregulation of p16INK4a, cyclin
D1 and pRb proteins also plays an important role in pathogenesis of OSSN
patients.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

