Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput molecular profiling of Multiple Myeloma clonotypic
CD19+ B cells highlights pathways potentially involved in the disease
endurance


The bulk of current knowledge on Multiple myeloma (MM) disease is mainly
based on the molecular characterization of 138+ plasma cells, but we
become aware that MM heterogeneity has more deepen roots. Recent studies
support that Myeloma Propagating Cells (MPCs) might be responsible of
relapses and they residing in the 138- compartment.In order to
molecularly characterize mature and precursor cell fractions, we
collected the 138+ and 138-19+27+ cell fractions from bone marrow (BM)
and peripheral blood (PBL) of 50 newly diagnosed MM patients (pts).
Clonogenic assays were performed by plating cell fractions of MM cell
lines. The molecular characterization included: IgH rearrangement
sequencing, analysis of genomic aberrations and gene expression profiling
by Affymetrix 6.0 SNPs array and HG-U133 Plus 2.0 microarray.Clonogenic
assays showed that 138- cells were able to form colonies more efficiently
than 138+ cells. By VDJ gene rearrangement sequencing, a clonal
relationship between the 138+ clone and precursor ones was confirmed.
SNPs arrays showed that both BM and PBL 138+ cell fractions carried the
same genomic macro-alterations. On the contrary, in the 138-19+27+ cell
fractions from BM and PBL any macro-alteration was detected, whereas
several micro-alterations unique of the memory B cells clone were
highlighted. An enrichment analysis revealed that genes are involved in
DNA repair mechanisms, transcriptional regulation, negative regulation of
apoptosis and angiogenesis. Interestingly, KRAS, WWOX and XIAP genes are
located in the amplified regions of immature cells. Moreover, we observed
several LOH regions that covered important tumor suppressor genes,
including TP53, CDKN2C and RASSF1A.The involvement of immature cells in
MM pathogenesis was confirmed by the analysis of the 19+ cells
transcriptome profiles. 20 MM 19+ cells samples (12 from PBL, 8 from BM)
were compared both to their normal counterpart and to the mature 138+
cell fractions. In particular, unsupervised analysis by hierarchical
clustering discriminated the differential expression of 11480 and 11360
probes in the PBL and BM 19+ clones, respectively (2; FDR = 0,05; p The
bulk of current knowledge on Multiple myeloma (MM) disease is mainly
based on the molecular characterization of 138+ plasma cells, but we
become aware that MM heterogeneity has more deepen roots. Recent studies
support that Myeloma Propagating Cells (MPCs) might be responsible of
relapses and they residing in the 138- compartment.In order to
molecularly characterize mature and precursor cell fractions, we
collected the 138+ and 138-19+27+ cell fractions from bone marrow (BM)
and peripheral blood (PBL) of 50 newly diagnosed MM patients (pts).
Clonogenic assays were performed by plating cell fractions of MM cell
lines. The molecular characterization included: IgH rearrangement
sequencing, analysis of genomic aberrations and gene expression profiling
by Affymetrix 6.0 SNPs array and HG-U133 Plus 2.0 microarray.Clonogenic
assays showed that 138- cells were able to form colonies more efficiently
than 138+ cells. By VDJ gene rearrangement sequencing, a clonal
relationship between the 138+ clone and precursor ones was confirmed.
SNPs arrays showed that both BM and PBL 138+ cell fractions carried the
same genomic macro-alterations. On the contrary, in the 138-19+27+ cell
fractions from BM and PBL any macro-alteration was detected, whereas
several micro-alterations unique of the memory B cells clone were
highlighted. An enrichment analysis revealed that genes are involved in
DNA repair mechanisms, transcriptional regulation, negative regulation of
apoptosis and angiogenesis. Interestingly, KRAS, WWOX and XIAP genes are
located in the amplified regions of immature cells. Moreover, we observed
several LOH regions that covered important tumor suppressor genes,
including TP53, CDKN2C and RASSF1A.The involvement of immature cells in
MM pathogenesis was confirmed by the analysis of the 19+ cells
transcriptome profiles. 20 MM 19+ cells samples (12 from PBL, 8 from BM)
were compared both to their normal counterpart and to the mature 138+
cell fractions. In particular, unsupervised analysis by hierarchical
clustering discriminated the differential expression of 11480 and 11360
probes in the PBL and BM 19+ clones, respectively (2; FDR = 0,05; p
<0,05). An overall de-regulation of pathways involved in self-renewal
mechanisms was highlighted, with Notch and Wnt signaling over-expressed
and Hedgehog pathway overall down-regulated.Interestingly, the protein
homeostasis deregulation possibly caused by ER stress, resulted
particularly evident in the BM 19+ cells (p = 7,25E-14; FDR = 2,98E-11);
moreover, the down-regulation of genes related to the unfolded protein
response (e.g. IRE1 and XBP1 FC = -18,0; -19,96. pThe bulk of current
knowledge on Multiple myeloma (MM) disease is mainly based on the
molecular characterization of 138+ plasma cells, but we become aware that
MM heterogeneity has more deepen roots. Recent studies support that
Myeloma Propagating Cells (MPCs) might be responsible of relapses and
they residing in the 138- compartment.In order to molecularly
characterize mature and precursor cell fractions, we collected the 138+
and 138-19+27+ cell fractions from bone marrow (BM) and peripheral blood
(PBL) of 50 newly diagnosed MM patients (pts). Clonogenic assays were
performed by plating cell fractions of MM cell lines. The molecular
characterization included: IgH rearrangement sequencing, analysis of
genomic aberrations and gene expression profiling by Affymetrix 6.0 SNPs
array and HG-U133 Plus 2.0 microarray.Clonogenic assays showed that 138-
cells were able to form colonies more efficiently than 138+ cells. By VDJ
gene rearrangement sequencing, a clonal relationship between the 138+
clone and precursor ones was confirmed. SNPs arrays showed that both BM
and PBL 138+ cell fractions carried the same genomic macro-alterations.
On the contrary, in the 138-19+27+ cell fractions from BM and PBL any
macro-alteration was detected, whereas several micro-alterations unique
of the memory B cells clone were highlighted. An enrichment analysis
revealed that genes are involved in DNA repair mechanisms,
transcriptional regulation, negative regulation of apoptosis and
angiogenesis. Interestingly, KRAS, WWOX and XIAP genes are located in the
amplified regions of immature cells. Moreover, we observed several LOH
regions that covered important tumor suppressor genes, including TP53,
CDKN2C and RASSF1A.The involvement of immature cells in MM pathogenesis
was confirmed by the analysis of the 19+ cells transcriptome profiles. 20
MM 19+ cells samples (12 from PBL, 8 from BM) were compared both to their
normal counterpart and to the mature 138+ cell fractions. In particular,
unsupervised analysis by hierarchical clustering discriminated the
differential expression of 11480 and 11360 probes in the PBL and BM 19+
clones, respectively (2; FDR = 0,05; p <0,05). An overall de-regulation
of pathways involved in self-renewal mechanisms was highlighted, with
Notch and Wnt signaling over-expressed and Hedgehog pathway overall
down-regulated.Interestingly, the protein homeostasis deregulation
possibly caused by ER stress, resulted particularly evident in the BM 19+
cells (p = 7,25E-14; FDR = 2,98E-11); moreover, the down-regulation of
genes related to the unfolded protein response (e.g. IRE1 and XBP1 FC =
-18,0; -19,96. p<0,05) suggests the expression of a proteasome
inhibitor-resistant phenotype of these cells.Presented data support the
emerging role of the immature cell compartment in the MM disease course,
where the putative 19+ MPCs might be involved in the neoplastic clone
supply.

