Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD70 as a target in non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and renal cell
carcinoma (RCC)


BackgroundCD70 is a member of the TNF superfamily expressed primarily on
activated lymphocytes. CD70 interacts with CD27 to regulate B and T cell
functions. Among normal, nonlymphoid tissues, CD70 is only expressed on
stromal cells of the thymic medulla and mature dendritic cells. CD70
expression in RCC and NHL highlights its potential as a target for cancer
therapy.MethodsAn indirect immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay was developed
using an anti-CD70 mouse monoclonal antibody (Ryan 2010), and validated
in a CLIA-compliant laboratory. Control cell lines had receptor numbers
and IHC staining intensities of 190,000 (3+), 21000 (3+), 4000 (1+) and 0
(0). Archived tumor tissue from consenting patients with
relapsed/refractory (RR) NHL or metastatic RCC were stained and read by a
board-certified pathologist at Quest Diagnostics, reporting the
percentage of cells staining for CD70, intensity, and subcellular
localization of the stain.ResultsThe rates and homogeneity of combined
membrane and non-membrane CD70 staining intensity 1+ and 3+ for each
tumor type are shown in the table below. The majority of NHL (88%) and
RCC (80%) samples exhibited membranous CD70 staining 1+; >75% exhibited
3+ staining. Among the NHL and RCC subtypes sampled, high levels of 3+
intensity were observed in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL; N = 44,
84%), follicular lymphoma (FL; N = 26, 77%), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL; N
= 6, 67%), clear cell RCC (ccRCC; N = 138, 93%), and papillary RCC (pRCC;
N = 15, 67%). No chromophobe RCC samples showed membranous staining (N =
5).ConclusionsCD70 is expressed in the majority of DLBCL, FL, MCL, ccRCC,
and pRCC samples tested. Based on the unmet medical needs of these
diseases, limited expression of CD70 on normal tissues, predominant
membrane expression of CD70, and observed preclinical antitumor activity
(Jeffrey 2013), a CD70-targeted antibody-drug conjugate, SGN-CD70A, has
been advanced into clinical development in CD70-positive RR NHL and
metastatic RCC (NCT# NCT02216890).

