Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of SC10914: a highly potent, selective and orally active
PARP inhibitor for the treatment of BRCA1/2 deficient cancer


Poly(ADP ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors are a class of anticancer
agents that target DNA base excision repair and radio-sensitize cells
through impaired DNA repair. When PARP function was impaired,
double-stranded DNA breaks accumulated in the absence of effective BER.
In cells deficient in homologous recombination (HR), especially in the
setting of BRCA-deficiency, these breaks cannot be accurately repaired,
resulting in synthetic lethality. Here, we described the identification
and characterization of SC10914- a novel, highly potent oral active PARP
inhibitor with favorable pharmacokinetic properties. SC10914 is a highly
potent PARP inhibitor (PARP1 IC50 = 7.87 nM) with potent
anti-proliferative activity against human BRCA deficient tumor cells
(MDA-MB-436, BRCA1 deficient, IC50 = 4.03 nM, Capan-1 BRCA2 deficient,
IC50 = 11.66 nM) and PTEN deficient tumor cells (HGC-27,PTEN deficient,
IC50 = 0.35 M).Methods and Results:MDA-MB-436 xenograft was derived from
human breast cancer cells. Fragments of MDA-MB-436 tumor (approximately
1.5mm3) were implanted into the flank of female BALB/cA nude-mice which
were randomized into four groups. Oral treatment with vehicle only,
AZD2281 (75 mg/kg qd), SC10914 (25 mg/kg qd) or SC10914 (75 mg/kg qd)
were carried out for 21 days. Vc8 xenograft was derived from Chinese
hamster Vc8 (BRCA2 deficient) cells, fragments of Vc8 tumor
(approximately 1.5mm3) were implanted into the flank of female BALB/cA
nude-mice which were randomized into four groups; oral treatment with
vehicle only, SC10914 (75 mg/kg qd), SC10914 (25 mg/kg qd) or SC10914 (5
mg/kg qd) were carried out for 21 days. SC10914 showed convincing in vivo
efficacy at tolerated doses and resulted in robust dose-dependent
anti-tumor efficacy in two xenograft models in nude-mice. Once daily oral
treatment of SC10914 led to completed tumor stasis in established
MDA-MB-436 xenografts and Vc-8 xenografts. In MDA-MB-436 xenografts, the
low dose group (25mg/Kg) had the same efficacy with AZD2281 control group
(75mg/Kg). SC10914 displayed a better pharmacokinetics profile compared
with AZD2281 on SD rats with a single dosage of 15mg/Kg (oral
bioavailability (%): 45.6% vs 26.2%, AUCinf (ng/mL/h): 3123 vs 1721, T1/2
(min): 160 vs 63.6). The pharmacokinetics profile displayed a positive
correlation between the dosage of SC10914, drug plasma exposure (AUC0-t)
and peak concentration (Cmax) when the dosages were in the range of
40-400mg/Kg. SC10914 has no hERG inhibition (IC50 > 30 M). Ames tests
suggested SC10914 has no mutagenic effects which were carried out in
Salmonella typhimurium strains TA98 and TA100. In conclusion, our data
indicated that SC10914, a potent inhibitor of PARP with potent anti-tumor
activity in BRCA1/2 mutant tumor models and better pharmacokinetics
profile has the potential to be selected as the clinical candidate for
the treatment of treatment of BRCA1/2 deficient cancers.

