Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional imaging tests vs. computed tomography scan: detection
of new metastases and clinical usefulness in digestive neuroendocrine
neoplasms follow-up


Background: Digestive Neuroendocrine Neoplasms (DNENs) express in up to
80% of cases somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), that are detected by
Functional Imaging Tests (FITs). FITs are needed at DNENs first diagnosis
to define therapy but their role in follow-up (FU) is unclear. Moreover,
with the introduction of targeted therapies, RECIST criteria are showing
difficulties to assess tumor response to these drugs. The aim of this
study was to compare the accuracy in detecting new distant metastases
(primary outcome) and the clinical usefulness (secondary outcome) of FITs
and Computed Tomography scan (CT) in metastatic DNENs FU. Methods
Retrospective analysis of stage IV DNENs expressing SSTRs with at least
24 month-FU. From 1995 to 2008 FIT performed was Octreoscan (OCT), from
2008 to 2013 it was 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT (GaPET). CT was repeated every
6-12 months, FIT yearly. FU time was divided into 12 month-units, in
which each patient had at least 1 CT and 1 FIT. Units were analyzed
separately and then compared to each other. The gold standard adopted was
the result of the imaging tests, the surgical and pathology findings
collected for each patient during FU. Clinical usefulness was defined as
appropriate changes in management (indication to new imaging test,
therapy, surgery or biopsy) due to CT and/or FITs during FU. Results 323
units (median 3 per patient, range 2-7) derived from 99 patients included
(66% metastatic since the first diagnosis). New lesions were detected by
CT alone in 86.4% of cases, with a positive predictive value (PPV) of
93.3% and a negative predictive value (NPV) of 91.9%; adding OCT, the
diagnostic yield was 10.34% (PBackground: Digestive Neuroendocrine
Neoplasms (DNENs) express in up to 80% of cases somatostatin receptors
(SSTRs), that are detected by Functional Imaging Tests (FITs). FITs are
needed at DNENs first diagnosis to define therapy but their role in
follow-up (FU) is unclear. Moreover, with the introduction of targeted
therapies, RECIST criteria are showing difficulties to assess tumor
response to these drugs. The aim of this study was to compare the
accuracy in detecting new distant metastases (primary outcome) and the
clinical usefulness (secondary outcome) of FITs and Computed Tomography
scan (CT) in metastatic DNENs FU. Methods Retrospective analysis of stage
IV DNENs expressing SSTRs with at least 24 month-FU. From 1995 to 2008
FIT performed was Octreoscan (OCT), from 2008 to 2013 it was 68Ga-DOTANOC
PET/CT (GaPET). CT was repeated every 6-12 months, FIT yearly. FU time
was divided into 12 month-units, in which each patient had at least 1 CT
and 1 FIT. Units were analyzed separately and then compared to each
other. The gold standard adopted was the result of the imaging tests, the
surgical and pathology findings collected for each patient during FU.
Clinical usefulness was defined as appropriate changes in management
(indication to new imaging test, therapy, surgery or biopsy) due to CT
and/or FITs during FU. Results 323 units (median 3 per patient, range
2-7) derived from 99 patients included (66% metastatic since the first
diagnosis). New lesions were detected by CT alone in 86.4% of cases, with
a positive predictive value (PPV) of 93.3% and a negative predictive
value (NPV) of 91.9%; adding OCT, the diagnostic yield was 10.34%
(P<0.05; PPV 100%, NPV 98.8%;), while adding GaPET it was 21.7%
(PBackground: Digestive Neuroendocrine Neoplasms (DNENs) express in up to
80% of cases somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), that are detected by
Functional Imaging Tests (FITs). FITs are needed at DNENs first diagnosis
to define therapy but their role in follow-up (FU) is unclear. Moreover,
with the introduction of targeted therapies, RECIST criteria are showing
difficulties to assess tumor response to these drugs. The aim of this
study was to compare the accuracy in detecting new distant metastases
(primary outcome) and the clinical usefulness (secondary outcome) of FITs
and Computed Tomography scan (CT) in metastatic DNENs FU. Methods
Retrospective analysis of stage IV DNENs expressing SSTRs with at least
24 month-FU. From 1995 to 2008 FIT performed was Octreoscan (OCT), from
2008 to 2013 it was 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT (GaPET). CT was repeated every
6-12 months, FIT yearly. FU time was divided into 12 month-units, in
which each patient had at least 1 CT and 1 FIT. Units were analyzed
separately and then compared to each other. The gold standard adopted was
the result of the imaging tests, the surgical and pathology findings
collected for each patient during FU. Clinical usefulness was defined as
appropriate changes in management (indication to new imaging test,
therapy, surgery or biopsy) due to CT and/or FITs during FU. Results 323
units (median 3 per patient, range 2-7) derived from 99 patients included
(66% metastatic since the first diagnosis). New lesions were detected by
CT alone in 86.4% of cases, with a positive predictive value (PPV) of
93.3% and a negative predictive value (NPV) of 91.9%; adding OCT, the
diagnostic yield was 10.34% (P<0.05; PPV 100%, NPV 98.8%;), while adding
GaPET it was 21.7% (P<0.05; PPV 100%, NPV 100%). Appropriate changes were
due to CT alone in 84.9% of cases; adding OCT, the diagnostic yield was
11.6% (PBackground: Digestive Neuroendocrine Neoplasms (DNENs) express in
up to 80% of cases somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), that are detected by
Functional Imaging Tests (FITs). FITs are needed at DNENs first diagnosis
to define therapy but their role in follow-up (FU) is unclear. Moreover,
with the introduction of targeted therapies, RECIST criteria are showing
difficulties to assess tumor response to these drugs. The aim of this
study was to compare the accuracy in detecting new distant metastases
(primary outcome) and the clinical usefulness (secondary outcome) of FITs
and Computed Tomography scan (CT) in metastatic DNENs FU. Methods
Retrospective analysis of stage IV DNENs expressing SSTRs with at least
24 month-FU. From 1995 to 2008 FIT performed was Octreoscan (OCT), from
2008 to 2013 it was 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT (GaPET). CT was repeated every
6-12 months, FIT yearly. FU time was divided into 12 month-units, in
which each patient had at least 1 CT and 1 FIT. Units were analyzed
separately and then compared to each other. The gold standard adopted was
the result of the imaging tests, the surgical and pathology findings
collected for each patient during FU. Clinical usefulness was defined as
appropriate changes in management (indication to new imaging test,
therapy, surgery or biopsy) due to CT and/or FITs during FU. Results 323
units (median 3 per patient, range 2-7) derived from 99 patients included
(66% metastatic since the first diagnosis). New lesions were detected by
CT alone in 86.4% of cases, with a positive predictive value (PPV) of
93.3% and a negative predictive value (NPV) of 91.9%; adding OCT, the
diagnostic yield was 10.34% (P<0.05; PPV 100%, NPV 98.8%;), while adding
GaPET it was 21.7% (P<0.05; PPV 100%, NPV 100%). Appropriate changes were
due to CT alone in 84.9% of cases; adding OCT, the diagnostic yield was
11.6% (P<0.05), while with GaPET it was 33.3% (PBackground: Digestive
Neuroendocrine Neoplasms (DNENs) express in up to 80% of cases
somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), that are detected by Functional Imaging
Tests (FITs). FITs are needed at DNENs first diagnosis to define therapy
but their role in follow-up (FU) is unclear. Moreover, with the
introduction of targeted therapies, RECIST criteria are showing
difficulties to assess tumor response to these drugs. The aim of this
study was to compare the accuracy in detecting new distant metastases
(primary outcome) and the clinical usefulness (secondary outcome) of FITs
and Computed Tomography scan (CT) in metastatic DNENs FU. Methods
Retrospective analysis of stage IV DNENs expressing SSTRs with at least
24 month-FU. From 1995 to 2008 FIT performed was Octreoscan (OCT), from
2008 to 2013 it was 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT (GaPET). CT was repeated every
6-12 months, FIT yearly. FU time was divided into 12 month-units, in
which each patient had at least 1 CT and 1 FIT. Units were analyzed
separately and then compared to each other. The gold standard adopted was
the result of the imaging tests, the surgical and pathology findings
collected for each patient during FU. Clinical usefulness was defined as
appropriate changes in management (indication to new imaging test,
therapy, surgery or biopsy) due to CT and/or FITs during FU. Results 323
units (median 3 per patient, range 2-7) derived from 99 patients included
(66% metastatic since the first diagnosis). New lesions were detected by
CT alone in 86.4% of cases, with a positive predictive value (PPV) of
93.3% and a negative predictive value (NPV) of 91.9%; adding OCT, the
diagnostic yield was 10.34% (P<0.05; PPV 100%, NPV 98.8%;), while adding
GaPET it was 21.7% (P<0.05; PPV 100%, NPV 100%). Appropriate changes were
due to CT alone in 84.9% of cases; adding OCT, the diagnostic yield was
11.6% (P<0.05), while with GaPET it was 33.3% (P<0.05). Conclusions The
addition of FIT to CT during FU significantly improves the detection rate
of new lesions and the clinical management of patients affected by
metastatic DNENs.

