Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-200c reduces P-gp mediated MDR and metastasis by targeting
JNK2/c-Jun signaling pathway in colon cancer


MicroRNA-200c (miR-200c) recently emerged as an important regulator of
tumorigenicity and cancer metastasis, however, its role in regulating
multidrug resistance (MDR) remains unknown. In the current study, we
found that the expression levels of miR-200c in recurred and metastatic
colorectal cancers (CRC) were significantly lower, while the JNK2
expression was higher compared to primary tumors. We showed that in MDR
CRC cells, miR-200c targeted the 3UTR of JNK2 gene. Over-expression of
miR-200c attenuated the levels of p-JNK, p-c-Jun, P-gp and MMP-2/-9, the
downstream factors of JNK signaling pathway, resulting in increased
sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs, which was accompanied by
heightened apoptosis and decreased cell invasion and migration. Moreover,
in an orthotopic MDR CRC mouse model, we demonstrated that
over-expression of miR-200c effectively inhibited the tumor growth and
metastasis. At last, in the tumor samples from locally advanced CRC
patients with routine post-surgical chemotherapy, we observed an inverse
correlation between the levels of mRNA expression of miR-200c and JNK2,
ABCB1, MMP-9 thus predicting patient therapeutic outcomes. In summary, we
found that miR-200c negatively regulated the expression of JNK2 gene and
increased the sensitivity of MDR CRC cells to chemotherapeutic drugs, via
inhibiting the JNK2/p-JNK/p-c-Jun/ABCB1 signaling. Restoration of
miR-200c expression in MDR CRC may serve as a promising therapeutic
approach in MDR induced metastasis.

