Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ganetespib sensitizes colorectal cancer in vitro and in vivo to a
clinically relevant regimen of radiation and chemotherapy


Purpose: We describe the efficacy of the second generation HSP90
inhibitor ganetespib in combination with radiation and chemotherapy
against colorectal adenocarcinoma in vitro and in vivo.Methods and
Materials: Ganetespib's effects on colorectal adenocarcinoma
proliferation and ability to sensitize to radiation and/or chemotherapy
were analyzed in the colorectal cell lines HCT-116 and HT-29.
Ganetespib's ability to modulate apoptosis when combined with radiation
and chemotherapy was characterized, and its effects on the AKT, ERK and
PI3K pathways were investigated. Tumor growth delay of colorectal
adenocarcinoma with ganetespib alone and in combination with radiation
and chemotherapy was analyzed in xenografts. Lastly, immunohistochemical
analyses of HSP90 and p-AKT levels where performed in paired normal and
tumor colorectal tissue samples from 10 patients.Results: At the
clinically achievable dose of 50 nM, ganetespib inhibited colorectal
cancer cells proliferation (pPurpose: We describe the efficacy of the
second generation HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib in combination with
radiation and chemotherapy against colorectal adenocarcinoma in vitro and
in vivo.Methods and Materials: Ganetespib's effects on colorectal
adenocarcinoma proliferation and ability to sensitize to radiation and/or
chemotherapy were analyzed in the colorectal cell lines HCT-116 and
HT-29. Ganetespib's ability to modulate apoptosis when combined with
radiation and chemotherapy was characterized, and its effects on the AKT,
ERK and PI3K pathways were investigated. Tumor growth delay of colorectal
adenocarcinoma with ganetespib alone and in combination with radiation
and chemotherapy was analyzed in xenografts. Lastly, immunohistochemical
analyses of HSP90 and p-AKT levels where performed in paired normal and
tumor colorectal tissue samples from 10 patients.Results: At the
clinically achievable dose of 50 nM, ganetespib inhibited colorectal
cancer cells proliferation (p<0.014), potentiated 5-FU chemotherapy and
2Gy of ionizing radiation (pPurpose: We describe the efficacy of the
second generation HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib in combination with
radiation and chemotherapy against colorectal adenocarcinoma in vitro and
in vivo.Methods and Materials: Ganetespib's effects on colorectal
adenocarcinoma proliferation and ability to sensitize to radiation and/or
chemotherapy were analyzed in the colorectal cell lines HCT-116 and
HT-29. Ganetespib's ability to modulate apoptosis when combined with
radiation and chemotherapy was characterized, and its effects on the AKT,
ERK and PI3K pathways were investigated. Tumor growth delay of colorectal
adenocarcinoma with ganetespib alone and in combination with radiation
and chemotherapy was analyzed in xenografts. Lastly, immunohistochemical
analyses of HSP90 and p-AKT levels where performed in paired normal and
tumor colorectal tissue samples from 10 patients.Results: At the
clinically achievable dose of 50 nM, ganetespib inhibited colorectal
cancer cells proliferation (p<0.014), potentiated 5-FU chemotherapy and
2Gy of ionizing radiation (p<0.0001), increased pro-apoptotic signaling
proteins, and decreased levels of p-AKT, PI3K, and p-ERK in vitro.
Combinations of ganetespib, 5-FU, and radiation therapy exhibited
synergistic efficacy in human xenograft models in vivo (pPurpose: We
describe the efficacy of the second generation HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib
in combination with radiation and chemotherapy against colorectal
adenocarcinoma in vitro and in vivo.Methods and Materials: Ganetespib's
effects on colorectal adenocarcinoma proliferation and ability to
sensitize to radiation and/or chemotherapy were analyzed in the
colorectal cell lines HCT-116 and HT-29. Ganetespib's ability to modulate
apoptosis when combined with radiation and chemotherapy was
characterized, and its effects on the AKT, ERK and PI3K pathways were
investigated. Tumor growth delay of colorectal adenocarcinoma with
ganetespib alone and in combination with radiation and chemotherapy was
analyzed in xenografts. Lastly, immunohistochemical analyses of HSP90 and
p-AKT levels where performed in paired normal and tumor colorectal tissue
samples from 10 patients.Results: At the clinically achievable dose of 50
nM, ganetespib inhibited colorectal cancer cells proliferation (p<0.014),
potentiated 5-FU chemotherapy and 2Gy of ionizing radiation (p<0.0001),
increased pro-apoptotic signaling proteins, and decreased levels of
p-AKT, PI3K, and p-ERK in vitro. Combinations of ganetespib, 5-FU, and
radiation therapy exhibited synergistic efficacy in human xenograft
models in vivo (p<0.0001). Finally, HSP90 and p-AKT were both
co-overexpressed in human colorectal cancer tissue samples relative to
normal colon tissue. Conclusion: Altogether, these data show the
clinically relevant combination of ganetespib with chemotherapy and
radiation is effective in colorectal adenocarcinoma in vitro and in vivo.
We are currently evaluating ganetespib's safety with chemotherapy and
radiation therapy in a phase I study of patients with localized
colorectal adenocarcinoma.

