Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide chromatin profiling in bladder and prostate cancers


Mutations in a few driver genes can cause cancer, and a main goal of
cancer genome analysis has been the identification of these cancer genes.
Recent findings, however, indicate that deregulation of enhancers can
play a major role in carcinogenesis. In this study, we aim to understand
how enhancer networks evolve during cancer initiation and progression and
to identify epigenetic states that are predictive of cancer stage and
drug response. We surveyed 15 bladder cell lines, including the T24
lineage (T24, T24T, FL, and SL) and the UMUC3 lineage (UMUC3 and LUL2),
and 10 prostate cancer cell lines including BPH1, DU145 and LNCap. These
cell lines display different tumorigenic and metastatic potentials, and
thus present a model for cancer progression and development of
castration-resistance. DNase-seq was performed to map genome-wide
regulatory profiles in these cells. The enhancers detected as DNase I
hypersensitivity sites (DHSs) showed large-scale changes in the chromatin
accessibility landscape during the acquisition of tumorigenic and
metastatic phenotypes. Selective sets of gained or lost DHSs were
identified. Among the changes during the T24 to T24T transition, the loss
of DHSs was remarkable. Some of these DHSs were found near genes that are
in the downstream response to HDACs. Induction of expression by the HDAC
inhibitor, Na butyrate, was correlated with DNase-seq signal for these
genes. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis also indentified a set of
genes neighboring lost DHSs that belong to the focal adhesion class in GO
category. This study identified a set of DHSs that were associated with
cancer progression in bladder and prostate cancer, and the potential
clinical application of the identified DHSs will be discussed.

