Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-146a inhibits epithelial mesenchymal transition in non
small cell lung cancer by targeting insulin receptor substrate 2


BACKGROUND: During cancer progression, some tumor cells show changes in
their plasticity by morphological and phenotypical conversions, as an
expression of mesenchymal markers and loss of epithelial markers,
collectively referred to as epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT
has been increasingly recognized as a critical phenomenon in lung cancer
progression. The goal of this study was to identify microRNAs involved in
lung cancer progression.METHODS: A microarray and qRT-PCR were performed
to investigate the miRNA expression profiles in mesenchymal like lung
cancer cells. The role of miR-146a in lung cancer progression was
measured by invasion and migration assays in vitro. Bioinformatics and
luciferase report assays were used to identify the target of
miR-146a.RESULTS: The expression of miR-146a was reduced in mesenchymal
like lung cancer cell lines. The over-expression of miR-146a induced a
marked reduction of mesenchymal marker and increase epithelial marker in
lung cancer cell lines. Moreover, the over-expression of miR-146a
suppressed lung cancer cells migration and invasion. The expression of
miR-146a was down-regulated in advanced lung cancer tissues. Insulin
receptor substrate 2 (IRS2), an adaptor proteins that modulates normal
growth, metabolism, survival, and differentiation, was identified as a
target of miR-146a. miR-146a regulated the expression of IRS2 at the mRNA
and protein levels.CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate for the first time
that miR-146a suppresses lung cancer progression by repressing IRS2
expression. This provides a new insight into the post-transcriptional
regulation of lung cancer progression by miRNAs, a potential approach for
the treatment of lung cancer.

