Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How to fish a good micro-marker out from a worthless lake: The
case of cell-free miR-181a-5p and breast cancer


The hypothesis to use microRNAs (miRNAs) circulating in blood as cancer
biomarkers was formulated some years ago based on promising initial
results. After some exiting discoveries, however, it became evident that
the accurate quantification of cell-free miRNAs (i.e. that retrieved in
serum or plasma) was more challenging than expected. Difficulties were
linked to the strong impact that many, if not all, pre- and post-
analytical variables (i.e. tissue preparation, storage condition,
extraction method, quantification technique, normalization approach) have
on the final result.In this study, we used currently available
high-throughput technologies to identify miRNAs present in plasma and
serum of patients with breast, colorectal, lung and melanoma tumors, and
healthy controls. Then, we used droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) technology to
get an accurate absolute quantification of specific cell-free miRNAs. We
assessed the level of 8 different miRNAs (miR-320a, miR-21-5p,
miR-378a-3p, miR-181a-5p, miR-3156-5p, miR-2110, miR-125a-5p, miR-425-5p,
miR-766-3p) in 180 samples from healthy controls and cancer patients. We
identified miRNAs specifically modulated in one or more cancer types.
Plasma and serum from the same patient provided different results in
terms of absolute miRNA amount and modulation. The significant reduction
of miR-181a-5p levels in serum of breast cancer patients was further
validated using two independent cohorts, one from Italy (n = 70) and one
from US (n = 90). This study finally powers the use miR-181a-5p as a
breast cancer biomarker.

