Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-551b amplification regulates STAT3 expression and resistance
to anoikis of ovarian cancer cells


Background and Hypothesis: The 3q26.2 locus is highly amplified in high
grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC). Recently we identified two
microRNAs, miR569 and miR551b are located in the 3q26 amplicon are highly
expressed in the HGSOC due to the 3q26.2 amplification. However, the
potential role of microRNAs amplified at 3q26 amplicon and their
functions in tumorigenesis have not been well studied. In this study we
have identified the mechanism how miR551b promote the tumor growth and
metastasis of ovarian cancer cells.Methods and Results: High-resolution
SNP-based copy number analysis of 533 high-grade serous ovarian cancer
samples demonstrated that miR551b is highly amplified in 35% of HGSOC
patients samples. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis of
ovarian cancer samples demonstrated a marked increase in the level of
mature miR551b in tumors with the 3q26.2 amplicon, relative to the
non-amplified tumor samples as a consequence of the 3q26.2 amplicon. Of
note, miR551b is expressed highly in the metastatic tumors than the
primary tumors of ovary. Our reverse phase protein array (RPPA)
demonstrated that enforced expression of miR551b increased the expression
c-KIT, STAT3 and PCNA proteins. Importantly miR551b expression activated
the ERK signaling pathway and inhibited the expression of BIM protein.
Strikingly, the expression of miR551b induced the survival and
proliferation of ovarian surface epithelial cells detached from
extracellular matrix. Knock down of STAT3 using target specific siRNA
abrogate the miR551b mediated c-KIT and PCNA expression and abolished the
resistance to anoikis.Summary: Our results posit that copy number
alterations (CNAs) of miR551b primarily regulate the increased levels of
mature miR551b. Mechanistic studies revealed that miR-551b regulate the
expression of important oncogenes such as STAT3 and c-KIT, in turn causes
resistance to anoikis. Resistance to anoikis is the key mechanism
enhances the survival and metastasis of ovarian cancer cells in the
peritoneal cavity. Of note our results demonstrates that miR-551b
regulate c-Kit expression in STAT3 dependent manner. In conclusion, our
results propose that the STAT3 expression induced by miR551b is the key
mechanism regulates survival and metastasis of HGSOC cells.

