Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of death receptor 5 (DR5) in apoptosis induced by anticancer
agents in colon cancer cells


The tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
receptor, also called death receptor 5 (DR5; TRAIL receptor2), is a
member of the death receptor family that shares a cysteine-rich
extracellular domain and a cytoplasmic death domain. DR5 is located on
cell surface, becomes activated upon binding to its ligand TRAIL or
overexpression, and then signals apoptosis initiation through an
FADD/caspase 8-dependant caspase activation cascade. A number of previous
studies showed that DR5 expression is induced upon chemotherapy
treatment. However, whether DR5 induction is necessary for apoptosis
induction has remained unclear. To determine its functional role in
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis, we used homologous recombination to knock
out (KO) DR5 in HCT116 colon cancer cells, and then analyzed response of
DR5 KO cells to a panel of anticancer agents. Compared to parental HCT116
cells, DR5 KO cells are less sensitive to TRAIL, the DNA damaging drug
5-FU, the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) sulindac, as well
as several other classes of anticancer agents. We also investigated how
these agents induce apoptosis through DR5. Together, our results indicate
a critical role of DR5 in mediating therapeutic response of colorectal
cancer cells.

