Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining Pemetrexed with methoxyamine to enhance the
radiosensitization of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC): Preclinical
studies in vivo


Combining Pemetrexed with Methoxyamine to Enhance the Radiosensitization
of Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC): Preclinical Studies in
vivoBACKGROUND: Stage III lung cancer is often treated with radiation
therapy (RT) and a platin, and recent clinical trials have found benefit
for tumors of non-squamous histology of adding Pemetrexed on stage IV
disease. Since the cytotoxic effects of Pemetrexed are amplified in the
presence of methoxyamine, we tested the ability of methoxyamine to also
amplify the radiosensitization provided by Pemetrexed. METHODS: Human
lung cancer cells (A549, expressing wild-type p53, or H1299, p53 null)
were inoculated into the right flank of female athymic nude mice. When
the xenografts reached 100-175 mm3, the mice were randomized (Day 0) into
4 arms, which were given 5 daily doses (Days 1-5) of Pemetrexed (150
mg/kg) and/or methoxyamine (4 mg/kg) or no drugs. On Day 6, half of the
tumors of each arm were irradiated (8 Gy single fraction, Cs-137
-radiation). Twice weekly the animals were weighed and tumor growth was
monitored by calipers. RESULTS: None of the treatments caused animals to
lose weight. For A549 xenografts, growth rates for all treatment arms
differed significantly from the untreated control growth rate (pCombining
Pemetrexed with Methoxyamine to Enhance the Radiosensitization of
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC): Preclinical Studies in
vivoBACKGROUND: Stage III lung cancer is often treated with radiation
therapy (RT) and a platin, and recent clinical trials have found benefit
for tumors of non-squamous histology of adding Pemetrexed on stage IV
disease. Since the cytotoxic effects of Pemetrexed are amplified in the
presence of methoxyamine, we tested the ability of methoxyamine to also
amplify the radiosensitization provided by Pemetrexed. METHODS: Human
lung cancer cells (A549, expressing wild-type p53, or H1299, p53 null)
were inoculated into the right flank of female athymic nude mice. When
the xenografts reached 100-175 mm3, the mice were randomized (Day 0) into
4 arms, which were given 5 daily doses (Days 1-5) of Pemetrexed (150
mg/kg) and/or methoxyamine (4 mg/kg) or no drugs. On Day 6, half of the
tumors of each arm were irradiated (8 Gy single fraction, Cs-137
-radiation). Twice weekly the animals were weighed and tumor growth was
monitored by calipers. RESULTS: None of the treatments caused animals to
lose weight. For A549 xenografts, growth rates for all treatment arms
differed significantly from the untreated control growth rate (p<0.0001);
tumors treated with Pemetrexed/methoxyamine/RT grew at the slowest rate
(8 mm3/day), which was significantly slower than that for RT alone (18
mm3/day), methoxyamine/RT (19.3 mm3/day), or Pemetrexed/RT (15 mm3/day)
(pCombining Pemetrexed with Methoxyamine to Enhance the
Radiosensitization of Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC): Preclinical
Studies in vivoBACKGROUND: Stage III lung cancer is often treated with
radiation therapy (RT) and a platin, and recent clinical trials have
found benefit for tumors of non-squamous histology of adding Pemetrexed
on stage IV disease. Since the cytotoxic effects of Pemetrexed are
amplified in the presence of methoxyamine, we tested the ability of
methoxyamine to also amplify the radiosensitization provided by
Pemetrexed. METHODS: Human lung cancer cells (A549, expressing wild-type
p53, or H1299, p53 null) were inoculated into the right flank of female
athymic nude mice. When the xenografts reached 100-175 mm3, the mice were
randomized (Day 0) into 4 arms, which were given 5 daily doses (Days 1-5)
of Pemetrexed (150 mg/kg) and/or methoxyamine (4 mg/kg) or no drugs. On
Day 6, half of the tumors of each arm were irradiated (8 Gy single
fraction, Cs-137 -radiation). Twice weekly the animals were weighed and
tumor growth was monitored by calipers. RESULTS: None of the treatments
caused animals to lose weight. For A549 xenografts, growth rates for all
treatment arms differed significantly from the untreated control growth
rate (p<0.0001); tumors treated with Pemetrexed/methoxyamine/RT grew at
the slowest rate (8 mm3/day), which was significantly slower than that
for RT alone (18 mm3/day), methoxyamine/RT (19.3 mm3/day), or
Pemetrexed/RT (15 mm3/day) (p<0.0001). Similar differences in growth rate
were found for the H1299 xenografts. The data were also analyzed as the
time for the volume of A549 xenografts to reach 400 mm3 or H1299
xenografts to reach 600 mm3. For A549, the median time for the
Pemetrexed/methoxyamine/RT arm (38 days) was greater than those produced
by no treatment (14 days with 2 cures; pCombining Pemetrexed with
Methoxyamine to Enhance the Radiosensitization of Non-Small-Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC): Preclinical Studies in vivoBACKGROUND: Stage III lung
cancer is often treated with radiation therapy (RT) and a platin, and
recent clinical trials have found benefit for tumors of non-squamous
histology of adding Pemetrexed on stage IV disease. Since the cytotoxic
effects of Pemetrexed are amplified in the presence of methoxyamine, we
tested the ability of methoxyamine to also amplify the radiosensitization
provided by Pemetrexed. METHODS: Human lung cancer cells (A549,
expressing wild-type p53, or H1299, p53 null) were inoculated into the
right flank of female athymic nude mice. When the xenografts reached
100-175 mm3, the mice were randomized (Day 0) into 4 arms, which were
given 5 daily doses (Days 1-5) of Pemetrexed (150 mg/kg) and/or
methoxyamine (4 mg/kg) or no drugs. On Day 6, half of the tumors of each
arm were irradiated (8 Gy single fraction, Cs-137 -radiation). Twice
weekly the animals were weighed and tumor growth was monitored by
calipers. RESULTS: None of the treatments caused animals to lose weight.
For A549 xenografts, growth rates for all treatment arms differed
significantly from the untreated control growth rate (p<0.0001); tumors
treated with Pemetrexed/methoxyamine/RT grew at the slowest rate (8
mm3/day), which was significantly slower than that for RT alone (18
mm3/day), methoxyamine/RT (19.3 mm3/day), or Pemetrexed/RT (15 mm3/day)
(p<0.0001). Similar differences in growth rate were found for the H1299
xenografts. The data were also analyzed as the time for the volume of
A549 xenografts to reach 400 mm3 or H1299 xenografts to reach 600 mm3.
For A549, the median time for the Pemetrexed/methoxyamine/RT arm (38
days) was greater than those produced by no treatment (14 days with 2
cures; p<0.0001), RT alone (21 days with 1 cure; p = 0.05) and
Pemetrexed/RT (26 days with no cures; p = 0.055). For H1299, a similar
ranking of time-to-endpoint was found. Based on our studies of the two
cell lines in vitro, it appears that the radiosensitizing effect of
Pemetrexed + methoxyamine results from cell cycle redistribution to the
G1/S border and early S-phase along with inhibition of DNA damage repair.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of methoxyamine to the pre-irradiation
treatment of A549 and H1299 xenografts significantly reduced the tumor
growth rate after RT and extended the tumor growth delay. Since
methoxyamine enhanced the radiosensitization by Pemetrexed in both tumor
types, p53 is not necessary for this response.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

