Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In situ activity of tumor specific CTL is a prognostic factor in
colorectal cancer


The extent of T cell infiltrates in the primary tumor is one of the most
important prognostic factors in colorectal cancer (CRC). Still, a
putative causal role of T cell infiltrates for prolonged patient survival
remains unclear. To answer this question, we studied the presence and
functional activity of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) together with
their specificity in CRC patients and correlated the obtained results to
long term survival.We have utilized intracytoplasmic cytokine staining,
conjointly with human leukocyte antigen (HLA)- multimers loaded with
peptides derived from tumor antigen (TA), as well as antigen specific
cytokine secretion assays, to demonstrate that tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF) expression characterizes a population of TA specific, in situ
active cytotoxic T cells. TNF was increased in CRC tumors only when
patients develop spontaneous systemic T cell responses, as elucidated by
IFN- Elispot, and this increase correlated with the number of TNF
expressing tumor infiltrating T cells. Based on these observations we
concluded that intratumoral TNF can be a direct indicator of the in situ
functionality of tumor specific effector T cells in CRC.In accordance,
intratumoral TNF concentration was an independent long term prognostic
factor in a retrospective multivariate analysis of a cohort of 102 CRC
patients involving various other immune parameters, such as CD4+, CD8+ T
cell infiltration, presence of regulatory T cells or mast cells.In
conclusion, our findings provide evidence for a causal relationship
between T cell infiltrates and improved survival in CRC patients as the
prognostic impact of T cell infiltrates depends on small subpopulations
of in situ active TA specific T cells. Furthermore TNF, as an indicator
for the functionality of TIL, might be better and more accurate
prognostic parameter in CRC than mere T cell infiltration.

