Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel adjuvants from seaweed impede autophagy signaling in
therapy-resistant residual pancreatic cancer


Background: Identifying the drug-deliverables that target autophagy is
crucial to finding a cure for pancreatic cancer (PC), as activated
autophagy is associated with poor patient outcomes. Our recent studies
recognized the anti-PC potential of an antioxidant-rich collection of
seaweed polyphenols and identified potential compounds for the treatment
of PC. Accordingly, we investigated whether such compounds could regulate
autophagy in therapy-resistant PC cells in vitro and in residual PC in
vivo.Results: Human Panc-3.27 and MiaPaCa-2 cells were exposed to FIR
with/without polyphenol from Spatoglossum asperum (SA-EA), Padina
tetrastromatica (PT-EA), or Hormophysa triquerta (HT-EA). The cells were
subjected to QPCR to examine transcriptional alterations in the following
autophagy functional regulators: ATG3, ATG5, ATG7, ATG5, LC3A, LC3B,
Beclin, Myd88, HMGB1, Rage, and TLRs 1-9. Using a clinically relevant
mouse model of residual PC, we use tissue microarray (TMA) and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) procedures to investigate the potential of
polyphenol(s) to target ATG3, ATG5, ATG12, LC3A, LC3B, BECN1, and
survivin after clinical radiotherapy. Radiation significantly increased
the transcription of autophagy functional regulators in both lines.
Seaweed polyphenols completely suppressed all investigated regulators in
both lines. TMA-IHC analysis revealed the complete regulation of ATG3,
ATG5, 12, LC3A, LC3B, BECN1, and survivin in residual PC following SA-EA,
PT-EA, and HT-EA treatment.Conclusions: These data demonstrate the
autophagy blue print in therapy-resistant PC cells for the first time.
Moreover, the data strongly suggest that the selected polyphenols could
serve as effective adjuvants for current PC treatment modalities and may
inhibit tumor relapse by comprehensively targeting therapy-orchestrated
autophagy in residual cells.

