Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JAK inhibitors as new drugs for treatment of paclitaxel-resistant
anaplastic thyroid cancer


Background: Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is a rare but particularly
aggressive solid tumor that has a poor prognosis, despite multimodal
treatment approaches. New chemotherapy agents are being developed and
taxanes have efficacy against ATC. Targeted agents including
fosbretabulin, imatinib, erlotinib and gefitinib have also been examined,
but were unsuccessful. These results suggest that innovative strategies
are required for treatment of ATC. Therefore, our primary aim was to
determine the genes and pathways related to sensitivity to paclitaxel as
biomarkers in ATC. Our secondary aim was to identify new genes and
pathways as therapeutic targets in ATC.Materials and Methods: We analyzed
differences in gene expression profiles before and after treatment with
paclitaxel in two ATC cell lines: KTA-3 cells, which are sensitive to
paclitaxel, and TTA-2 cells, which are resistant to paclitaxel.
Parametric Analysis of Gene Set Enrichment (PAGE) using the Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and the Transcriptional
Regulatory Element Database (TRED) were performed to detect significant
differences at the level of functional categories such as pathway genes
and transcriptionally regulated genes.Results: Genes in the Janus
kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT)
pathway (KEGG classification) were downregulated significantly in KTA-3
cells compared with TTA-2 cells after treatment with paclitaxel. PAGE
showed that breast cancer susceptibility gene (BRCA)1-related genes
including Janus kinase (JAK)1, JAK2 and signal transducer and activator
of transcription (STAT)3 were downregulated most significantly in KTA-3
cells compared with TTA-2 cells after paclitaxel treatment. Several JAK
inhibitors inhibited cell growth in paclitaxel-resistant ATC
cells.Conclusions: JAK-STAT pathway may be a biomarker of paclitaxel
sensitivity in ATC and may represent a new target in drug development for
ATC therapy.

