Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Receptor-Interacting protein kinase 1 functions as an oncogenic
regulator in human melanoma


Although many studies in recent years have uncovered an important role of
receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIP1) in mediating cell survival
and death signaling, its potential part in the pathogenesis of cancer
remains less understood. Here we report that RIP1 functions as an
oncogenic regulator in human melanoma. While the expression of RIP1 was
commonly upregulated in melanoma, knockdown of RIP1 inhibited melanoma
cell proliferation in vitro, and retarded melanoma growth in a xenograft
model. Conversely, despite induction of apoptosis in a small proportion
of melanoma cells, overexpression of RIP1 enhanced proliferation in the
remaining cells. The promoting effect of RIP1 on melanoma cell
proliferation was mediated by activation of NF-B, as blockade of NF-B
activation eliminated RIP1 overexpression-triggered increase in cell
proliferation, whereas hyperactivation of NF-B abolished inhibition of
cell proliferation caused by RIP1 knockdown. In support, RIP1 knockdown
led to reduction, whereas its overexpression caused an increase, in NF-B
activation. Strikingly, ectopic expression of RIP1 enhanced melanocyte
proliferation and triggered anchorage-independent growth of the cells
similarly in a NF-B-dependent manner. While upregulation of RIP1 was
associated with DNA copy number gain in a subset of melanomas,
constitutive ubiquitination and subsequent stabilization of the RIP1
protein driven by TNF autocrine appeared to be another mechanism commonly
responsible for upregulation of RIP1 in melanoma cells. Collectively,
these results identify RIP1 as an oncogenic regulator in melanoma, and
points to the possibility of targeting the NF-B activating mechanism of
RIP1 as a novel approach in the treatment of the disease.

