Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biophysical evidence for the existence of a functional interaction
between the small GTPase Rac-1 and the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2


We recently reported a novel mechanism of anti-apoptotic activity of
Bcl-2 by demonstrating a link between an altered mitochondrial metabolism
and apoptosis resistance in cells overexpressing Bcl-21. This increase in
mitochondrial metabolism was linked to induction of complex IV activity
(Cytochrome C oxidase) as well as oxygen consumption2. The pro-oxidant
activity of Bcl-2 was a function of an interaction with the small GTPase
Rac1. This interaction was validated in a small number of clinical
tissues derived from patients with aggressive B cell lymphomas.
Interestingly, interrupting the interaction between Bcl-2 and Rac1
restored apoptosis sensitivity of Bcl-2 overexpressing cell lines3. In
the present study we set out to identify the domains within the two
proteins responsible for the interaction. We show that the pro-oxidant
activity of Bcl-2 and its interaction with Rac1 are dependent on the
phosphorylation of Bcl-2 at serine 70 within the non-structured loop
region adjacent to the BH3 domain. Also, the activation status of Rac1
appears important in this interaction as GDP loading almost completely
inhibits, whereas GTP loading facilitates interaction. To further
substantiate those findings, isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) was
carried out using Rac1-GTPS and Bcl-2 BH3 peptides to gain insight into
the energetics of binding of BH3 peptide to Rac1-GTPS. Indeed, the
thermodynamic parameters H and S in the ITC experiments of Rac1- GTPS and
BH3 peptide were -2.55 104 Joules/mol and +35.6 joules/mol/deg,
respectively, and the G values were negative, indicating that the binding
of Rac1-GTPS with BH3 peptide was spontaneous and exothermic and that
hydrophobic interactions played a major role; however, hydrogen bonds
could not be discounted due to the positive S value and the presence of
polar amino acids in the peptide. Similar results were obtained with the
S70 phosphorylation mimetic peptide of Bcl-2 (S70E) but not with the S70A
phosphorylation dead peptide. Furthermore, the fluorescence intensity of
Rac1 decreased steadily with increasing Bcl-2 peptide concentration,
indicating an interaction between Rac1 and Bcl-2 peptides. These data
provide strong evidence for the existence of a functional interaction
between Bcl-2 and Rac1 and for the translational relevance of this
interaction in human cancers that are refractory to chemotherapy due to
the overexpression of Bcl-2. 1. Chen, Z, X. and Pervaiz, S. Cell Death
Diff. 14(9): 1617-27, 2007. 2. Chen ZX, and Pervaiz S. Cell Death Differ.
2010 Mar;17(3):408-20. 3. Velaithan R, et al. Blood. 2011 Jun
9;117(23):6214-26.

