Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS-mediated epigenetic reprogramming upregulates RELB-dependent
CXCR2 expression to promote transformation


In addition to genetic aberrations, cancer cells harbor global epigenetic
abnormalities. Mutant KRAS expression has been shown to induce aberrant
DNA methylation and silencing of key tumor suppressors. However, nearly
all attempts to directly target oncogenic KRAS have been unsuccessful,
yielding an impetus for alternative strategies. Furthermore, in the
majority of KRAS-driven tumors, the NF-B pathway is constitutively active
and contributes to cellular transformation. Previously, our lab has shown
that knocking out the p65 subunit of NF-B significantly reduces tumor
development in a mouse model of KRAS-induced lung cancer. Here we aim to
better understand KRAS-mediated epigenetic reprogramming and uncover
novel effects on the NF-B pathway. Our data suggests that KRAS-mediated
epigenetic reprogramming alters the NF-B pathway to promote
transformation. Using the Infinium DNA Methylation Assay, we uncovered
genome-wide changes in lung and pancreatic cells expressing KRAS(G12V)
compared to wild-type cells. Expression of oncogenic KRAS was accompanied
by promoter hypermethylation of tumor suppressors (e.g. FAS, BRCA1,
IRAK3) and hypomethylation of oncogenes. Interestingly, we observed
hypomethylation at the promoter of the RELB subunit of NF-B in cells
expressing KRAS(G12V). Hypomethylation at the RELB promoter correlated
with increased expression of CXCR2, an NF-B target gene. RNAi against
RELB and CXCR2 significantly decreased colony growth in lung and
pancreatic cancer cell lines expressing mutant KRAS. Together, these
results support a role for KRAS in epigenetic reprogramming and suggest
that RELB-dependent CXCR2 expression may be critical in KRAS-driven
cancers. RELB and CXCR2 represent potential therapeutic targets that
could lead to more effective treatments in the context of KRAS-driven
malignancies.

