Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analyses of protein expression of PI 3-kinase/AKT signaling in
response to altered expression of motor protein MYO1C


In the previous work, a minimal region of recurrent deletion distal to
the Tp53 gene was identified in BDII rat model for endometrial
adenocarcinoma and the MYO1C gene was singled out as the tumor suppressor
candidate in this region. Myo1c can bind to PIP2, the substrate of
PI3-kinase, as well as to the mTOR complex, indicating a role for MYO1C
in the PI3-kinase pathway. In this study, we assessed protein levels of
12 members of PI3-kinase/AKT signaling pathways in transient transfected
HeLa cells expressing increasing amounts of MYO1C using Western blotting
and densitometry analyses. Results revealed decreased protein levels of
PTEN, AKT, and phosphorylated AKT, at both residues T308 and S473, and an
increased expression of p110 protein in the cells transfected with the
MYO1C gene expression constructs compared to the control cells
transfected with empty plasmid. We next investigated potential effect of
MYO1C protein depletion on serum-induced activation (phosphorylation) of
AKT in the MCF10A cells that has de novo expression of MYO1C protein.
Following serum stimulation, AKT was rapidly phosphorylated in its
residue S473 (pAKTS473) in the cells transfected with MYO1C-siRNA, but
with significantly lesser extent in the control cells. Overall, a
negative correlation between the protein expression of MYO1C and AKT
expression/activation was suggested, signifying a role for MYO1C as a
negative regulator of PI3-kinsase/AKT signaling pathway. This is in
agreement with the initial hypothesis of involvement of MYO1C in
tumorigenesis pathways through its potential tumor suppressor activity.
Further studies are required to fully understand the functional
contribution of MYO1C to tumor development.

