Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR is transferred from triple negative breast cancer cells to
immune cells via trogocytosis and expression of EGFR on immune cells is
associated with high tumor grade of triple negative breast cancer patients


We and others previously reported that HER2 was transferred from HER2
overexpressing breast cancer cells to CD14+ monocytes via trastuzumab
dependent trogocytosis. In the current study, we report that EGFR of
MDA-MB-231 (triple negative human breast cancer cell line) is also
transferred to immune cells via trogocytosis and those immune cells
express EGFR on the cell surface without antibody administration.
Interestingly, the EGFR-trogocytosed MDA-MB-231 cells reduced the
expression of EGFR and changed their morphology to the spindle shape
(well known as mesenchymal transition) and acquired greater cell
motility. These cancer cell properties are representative as higher
malignant potentials in breast cancer patients. Thus, we hypothesized
that EGFR expression on tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), which
probably is caused via EGFR trogocytosis by TILs, is correlated with
higher tumor grade. We evaluated the EGFR expression of TILs in 36 triple
negative breast cancer specimens and found the correlation between EGFR
expression status on TILs and higher tumor grade (P = 0.02). These
findings may explain the reason why triple negative breast cancer with
greater proportion of TILs exhibit higher tumor grade and poor prognosis.

