Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GD2+ breast cancer stem cell growth is dependent on NFB signaling
and suppressed by the IKK inhibitor BMS345541 in vitro and in vivo


Recurrence of breast cancer after treatment could be caused by breast
cancer stem-like cells (BCSCs) or breast cancer-initiating cells.
Therefore, targeting BCSCs is an important strategy that could complement
standard chemotherapy. We recently reported that the ganglioside GD2 is
exclusively expressed on BCSCs and that targeting its metabolic enzyme
(GD3 synthase, GD3S), reduced breast tumor growth and metastasis in
immuno-deficient mice (Battula et al., JCI, 2012). To identify signaling
pathways that are activated in GD2+ BCSCs, we performed proteomic
analysis in GD2+/- cells from breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and
SUM159 cells using Kinexus antibody arrays. Data analysis employing
Ingenuity pathway analysis revealed activation of NFB signaling in GD2+
cells in both cell lines. To validate the array data, we tested
activation of NFB (phospho p65) by CyTOF mass cytometry using metal
tagged antibodies and found that NFB was indeed activated in GD2+ but not
in GD2- cells, suggesting activation of canonical NFB signaling in GD2+
BCSCs. Systemic phospho- and total-protein analyses by immuno blotting
revealed that proteins involved in non-canonical signaling, including
RelB, NFB2, and Traf2, were also up-regulated (2-3 fold) in GD2+ compared
to GD2- cells. These data suggest that both canonical and non-canonical
NFB signaling are active in GD2+ cells and that it may require inhibition
of both pathways to block GD2+ BCSC growth. We found that BMS345541 (IC50
for IKK = 0.4M (canonical) and IC50 for IKK = 4M (canonical and
non-canonical) reduced GD2+ cells and inhibited GD3S expression
(determined by qRT-PCR) in a dose- and time-dependent fashion. Treatment
with BMS345541 at 5M for 72hrs reduced GD2+ cell frequency from 18.52.5%
to 1.70.4% (P 90% reduction of GD2+ cells in a dose-dependent manner. In
contrast, treatment with doxorubicin increased the percentage of GD2+
cells, from 13.52.5% to 212.6% in MDA-MB-231 cells, suggesting that GD2+
cells are resistant to doxorubicin. BCSCs generate mammospheres under low
adhesion conditions. Treatment with the BMS compound inhibited the
ability of breast cancer cells to form mammospheres app.12 fold in vitro.
To test if BMS345541 inhibits in vivo tumor growth, NOD/SCID mice were
transplanted with MDA-MB-231 cells (0.5106) injected into the mammary fat
pad. Following engraftment (2 weeks after transplantation), mice were
treated with 50mg/kg of BMS345541 or with DMSO daily for only 5 days (IP,
n = 5). The BMS345541-treated group showed a significant decrease (P 90%
reduction of GD2+ cells in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast,
treatment with doxorubicin increased the percentage of GD2+ cells, from
13.52.5% to 212.6% in MDA-MB-231 cells, suggesting that GD2+ cells are
resistant to doxorubicin. BCSCs generate mammospheres under low adhesion
conditions. Treatment with the BMS compound inhibited the ability of
breast cancer cells to form mammospheres app.12 fold in vitro. To test if
BMS345541 inhibits in vivo tumor growth, NOD/SCID mice were transplanted
with MDA-MB-231 cells (0.5106) injected into the mammary fat pad.
Following engraftment (2 weeks after transplantation), mice were treated
with 50mg/kg of BMS345541 or with DMSO daily for only 5 days (IP, n = 5).
The BMS345541-treated group showed a significant decrease (P <0.01) in
tumor volume, and prolonged survival compared to the control group:
median survival was 78 days for the BMS345541-treated group vs. 58 days
for controls (P90% reduction of GD2+ cells in a dose-dependent manner. In
contrast, treatment with doxorubicin increased the percentage of GD2+
cells, from 13.52.5% to 212.6% in MDA-MB-231 cells, suggesting that GD2+
cells are resistant to doxorubicin. BCSCs generate mammospheres under low
adhesion conditions. Treatment with the BMS compound inhibited the
ability of breast cancer cells to form mammospheres app.12 fold in vitro.
To test if BMS345541 inhibits in vivo tumor growth, NOD/SCID mice were
transplanted with MDA-MB-231 cells (0.5106) injected into the mammary fat
pad. Following engraftment (2 weeks after transplantation), mice were
treated with 50mg/kg of BMS345541 or with DMSO daily for only 5 days (IP,
n = 5). The BMS345541-treated group showed a significant decrease (P
<0.01) in tumor volume, and prolonged survival compared to the control
group: median survival was 78 days for the BMS345541-treated group vs. 58
days for controls (P<0.002). Our data suggest that NFB inhibition by
BMS345541 reduces tumor growth in vivo and prolongs survival of
tumor-bearing mice by inhibiting NFB-mediated GD2+ BCSC growth.

