Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rational combination of PF-06463922 (next-generation ALK
inhibitor) with PI3K pathway inhibitors overcomes ALKi resistance in
EML4-ALK+ NSCLC models


Crizotinib (PF-02341066) is a small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor of
ALK, ROS1 and c-MET that is approved in over 70 countries for the
treatment of ALK fusion positive non-small cell lung cancer (ALK+ NSCLC).
Crizotinib achieved robust objective response rates of approximately 60%
in ALK+ NSCLC and significantly improved progression free survival
compared to chemotherapy. The emergence of secondary mutations within the
ALK kinase domain or the activation of compensatory signaling pathways in
crizotinib and other ALKi refractory tumors prompted searches for next
generation of ALKi active against resistance mutations as single agents
or in combination with other treatments. Such effort led to our recent
discovery of PF-06463922, an ALK/ROS1 inhibitor with greatly improved ALK
potency, brain penetration, and broad spectrum activity against all known
clinical ALKi-resistant mutations. PF-06463922 is being tested in a Phase
I clinical trial in both ALK+ and ROS1 fusion positive NSCLC in treatment
naive or ALKi relapsed patients.In our current preclinical study, we
explored rational combination strategies to further improve the efficacy
of PF-06463922 in ALKi resistant cells or tumors. Our results show that
compared to PF-06463922 alone, the combination of this compound with PI3K
pathway inhibitors, such as PF-05212384 (PI3K/mTOR), GDC0941 (pan-PI3K)
or GDC0032 (beta-sparing) leads to more robust anti-proliferative
activity in vitro and greater duration of efficacy in vivo in the ALKi
resistant models. These PI3K pathway inhibitors also partially overcome
EGF or HGF ligand-induced resistance to PF-06463922. Interestingly, in
addition to AKT signaling, both compounds inhibit ERK signaling as well,
which may be essential for their enhancement of PF-06463922 cell activity
or tumor efficacy in combination settings. Studies are ongoing to
identify optimal partners for PF-06463922 combination using isoform
selective PI3Ki, AKTi and mTORi. We are also exploring the breadth of
efficacy of this combination in overcoming resistance to crizotinib,
PF-06463922 or other ALKi. The findings provide important evidence that
will help define the clinical development path for PF-06463922. This
research effort may ultimately lead to more effective approaches to treat
ALKi refractory patients in the clinic.

