Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and activity of a novel antibody-drug conjugate for
the treatment of P-cadherin expressing cancers


The cell surface glycoprotein P-cadherin is an attractive target for an
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) therapy as it is known to be highly
expressed in a number of malignancies, including those arising in the
epithelium of the breast, lung, bladder, esophagus, stomach, endometrium
and colon, among others. In breast cancer, P-cadherin is frequently
overexpressed in high grade invasive tumors and is a reliable marker of
the basal-like breast cancer molecular subtype, a disease with no
effective therapeutic treatment options. Based on the expression profile
of P-cadherin in human cancer, a highly selective and potent ADC was
developed to target cancer types overexpressing this glycoprotein. This
ADC consists of a fully human anti-P-cadherin-specific antibody
conjugated to the potent maytansine-derived microtubule-disruptor, DM1,
via an SMCC non-cleavable thioether linkage (technology licensed from
ImmunoGen, Inc.). In vitro, the ADC was demonstrated to selectively bind
P-cadherin expressing cell lines, to rapidly internalize and traffic to
lysosomes, and to release a sufficient amount of activated payload to
potently induce a cytotoxic response in cell viability assays. Profiling
of activity in a cell line panel indicated that this ADC can effectively
target and kill P-cadherin-positive cancer cells representing breast,
head and neck, and bladder carcinomas. In vivo, the ADC was highly
efficacious in numerous relevant xenograft models of P-cadherin
expressing cancers, including breast, head and neck, bladder and lung.
From this promising cellular and in vivo activity, this ADC may be an
effective treatment for patients with P-cadherin positive cancers of high
unmet medical need.

