Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of IL-8/CXCR2 network in the tumor microenvironment of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Background: IL-8, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, and its receptor, CXCR2,
are expressed in various cancer cells. The IL-8/CXCR2 network is believed
to be involved in angiogenesis, tumor cell proliferation and invasion.
However, its role in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains
unclear. In this study, we investigated the role of the IL-8/CXCR2
network in the tumor microenvironment of ESCC. Methods: CXCR2 expression
was investigated immunohistochemically in 82 primary ESCCs with R0
resection but without any preoperative treatment. We evaluated the
intensity of the staining in four grades; grades 3 (strong) and 2
(medium) were deemed positive, and 1 (weak) and 0 (negative) as negative.
The concentration of IL-8 and CXCR2 were investigated using the human
ESCC cell lines TE1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14 and 15. IL-8/CXCR2
signaling was stimulated by IL-8 addition, and suppressed by SB225002
(Cayman Chemical) treatment, a selective antagonist of CXCR2. Stable IL-8
over-expressing TE4 cells were established, and cell proliferation assays
were performed. To evaluate tumor growth in vivo, we subcutaneously
inoculated 1.0106 TE4 cells or transfectant into nude mice, and half of
the transfectant-inoculated mice received 1mg/kg of SB225002 by
intraperitoneal injection thrice weekly. The size and incidence of
subcutaneous tumors were recorded.Result: Thirty-two (38.6%) patients
were positive for CXCR2 immunostaining and 50 (61.4%) patients were
negative. CXCR2 expression was related to poor survival in ESCC patients
(P = 0.063). IL-8 concentration was high in TE4, 5, 10 and 14
supernatant, and low in that of TE1, 6, 8, 9, 11 and 15. CXCR2 expression
was high in TE1, 4, 5, and 14 cells, and low in TE6, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 15.
We chose TE1 and TE4 cells for further investigation. Stimulation or
inhibition of the IL-8/CXCR2 network resulted in significant enhancement
or suppression of cell proliferation in both cell lines (PBackground:
IL-8, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, and its receptor, CXCR2, are expressed
in various cancer cells. The IL-8/CXCR2 network is believed to be
involved in angiogenesis, tumor cell proliferation and invasion. However,
its role in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unclear. In
this study, we investigated the role of the IL-8/CXCR2 network in the
tumor microenvironment of ESCC. Methods: CXCR2 expression was
investigated immunohistochemically in 82 primary ESCCs with R0 resection
but without any preoperative treatment. We evaluated the intensity of the
staining in four grades; grades 3 (strong) and 2 (medium) were deemed
positive, and 1 (weak) and 0 (negative) as negative. The concentration of
IL-8 and CXCR2 were investigated using the human ESCC cell lines TE1, 4,
5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14 and 15. IL-8/CXCR2 signaling was stimulated by
IL-8 addition, and suppressed by SB225002 (Cayman Chemical) treatment, a
selective antagonist of CXCR2. Stable IL-8 over-expressing TE4 cells were
established, and cell proliferation assays were performed. To evaluate
tumor growth in vivo, we subcutaneously inoculated 1.0106 TE4 cells or
transfectant into nude mice, and half of the transfectant-inoculated mice
received 1mg/kg of SB225002 by intraperitoneal injection thrice weekly.
The size and incidence of subcutaneous tumors were recorded.Result:
Thirty-two (38.6%) patients were positive for CXCR2 immunostaining and 50
(61.4%) patients were negative. CXCR2 expression was related to poor
survival in ESCC patients (P = 0.063). IL-8 concentration was high in
TE4, 5, 10 and 14 supernatant, and low in that of TE1, 6, 8, 9, 11 and
15. CXCR2 expression was high in TE1, 4, 5, and 14 cells, and low in TE6,
8, 9, 10, 11 and 15. We chose TE1 and TE4 cells for further
investigation. Stimulation or inhibition of the IL-8/CXCR2 network
resulted in significant enhancement or suppression of cell proliferation
in both cell lines (P<0.05) in a dose-dependent manner. IL-8
over-expressing TE4 cells showed significantly higher proliferative
activity than the parental line (PBackground: IL-8, a pro-inflammatory
cytokine, and its receptor, CXCR2, are expressed in various cancer cells.
The IL-8/CXCR2 network is believed to be involved in angiogenesis, tumor
cell proliferation and invasion. However, its role in esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the
role of the IL-8/CXCR2 network in the tumor microenvironment of ESCC.
Methods: CXCR2 expression was investigated immunohistochemically in 82
primary ESCCs with R0 resection but without any preoperative treatment.
We evaluated the intensity of the staining in four grades; grades 3
(strong) and 2 (medium) were deemed positive, and 1 (weak) and 0
(negative) as negative. The concentration of IL-8 and CXCR2 were
investigated using the human ESCC cell lines TE1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11,
14 and 15. IL-8/CXCR2 signaling was stimulated by IL-8 addition, and
suppressed by SB225002 (Cayman Chemical) treatment, a selective
antagonist of CXCR2. Stable IL-8 over-expressing TE4 cells were
established, and cell proliferation assays were performed. To evaluate
tumor growth in vivo, we subcutaneously inoculated 1.0106 TE4 cells or
transfectant into nude mice, and half of the transfectant-inoculated mice
received 1mg/kg of SB225002 by intraperitoneal injection thrice weekly.
The size and incidence of subcutaneous tumors were recorded.Result:
Thirty-two (38.6%) patients were positive for CXCR2 immunostaining and 50
(61.4%) patients were negative. CXCR2 expression was related to poor
survival in ESCC patients (P = 0.063). IL-8 concentration was high in
TE4, 5, 10 and 14 supernatant, and low in that of TE1, 6, 8, 9, 11 and
15. CXCR2 expression was high in TE1, 4, 5, and 14 cells, and low in TE6,
8, 9, 10, 11 and 15. We chose TE1 and TE4 cells for further
investigation. Stimulation or inhibition of the IL-8/CXCR2 network
resulted in significant enhancement or suppression of cell proliferation
in both cell lines (P<0.05) in a dose-dependent manner. IL-8
over-expressing TE4 cells showed significantly higher proliferative
activity than the parental line (P<0.05), which was markedly suppressed
by inhibition of the IL-8/CXCR2 network using SB225002 (PBackground:
IL-8, a pro-inflammatory cytokine, and its receptor, CXCR2, are expressed
in various cancer cells. The IL-8/CXCR2 network is believed to be
involved in angiogenesis, tumor cell proliferation and invasion. However,
its role in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unclear. In
this study, we investigated the role of the IL-8/CXCR2 network in the
tumor microenvironment of ESCC. Methods: CXCR2 expression was
investigated immunohistochemically in 82 primary ESCCs with R0 resection
but without any preoperative treatment. We evaluated the intensity of the
staining in four grades; grades 3 (strong) and 2 (medium) were deemed
positive, and 1 (weak) and 0 (negative) as negative. The concentration of
IL-8 and CXCR2 were investigated using the human ESCC cell lines TE1, 4,
5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14 and 15. IL-8/CXCR2 signaling was stimulated by
IL-8 addition, and suppressed by SB225002 (Cayman Chemical) treatment, a
selective antagonist of CXCR2. Stable IL-8 over-expressing TE4 cells were
established, and cell proliferation assays were performed. To evaluate
tumor growth in vivo, we subcutaneously inoculated 1.0106 TE4 cells or
transfectant into nude mice, and half of the transfectant-inoculated mice
received 1mg/kg of SB225002 by intraperitoneal injection thrice weekly.
The size and incidence of subcutaneous tumors were recorded.Result:
Thirty-two (38.6%) patients were positive for CXCR2 immunostaining and 50
(61.4%) patients were negative. CXCR2 expression was related to poor
survival in ESCC patients (P = 0.063). IL-8 concentration was high in
TE4, 5, 10 and 14 supernatant, and low in that of TE1, 6, 8, 9, 11 and
15. CXCR2 expression was high in TE1, 4, 5, and 14 cells, and low in TE6,
8, 9, 10, 11 and 15. We chose TE1 and TE4 cells for further
investigation. Stimulation or inhibition of the IL-8/CXCR2 network
resulted in significant enhancement or suppression of cell proliferation
in both cell lines (P<0.05) in a dose-dependent manner. IL-8
over-expressing TE4 cells showed significantly higher proliferative
activity than the parental line (P<0.05), which was markedly suppressed
by inhibition of the IL-8/CXCR2 network using SB225002 (P<0.05). In vivo,
tumor sizes were smaller in the SB225002-treated group than in the
untreated group.Conclusion: Our results demonstrated that stimulation of
the IL-8/CXCR2 network clearly enhanced ESCC cell proliferation, while
its inhibition obviously suppressed ESCC cell proliferation in vitro.
These results indicate that control of IL-8/CXCR2 network signaling may
be a new therapeutic strategy for ESCC.

