Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-generation site-specific antibody-drug conjugates using the
SMARTagTM technology platform


The two clinically-approved antibody-drug conjugates, AdcetrisTM and
KadcylaTM, demonstrate that targeting cytotoxic payloads directly to
tumors is an effective clinical approach. However, at the molecular
level, these therapeutics are composed of heterogeneous mixtures
resulting from the nonselective ligation of cytotoxic payload to cysteine
and lysine residues, respectively. The nonselective ligation approaches
used to generate these two ADCs render it difficult to optimize their
biological, physical, and pharmacological properties. Redwood Bioscience
creates site-selective, stable linkages that allow us to design ADCs with
enhanced efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics. Additionally, we are
able to control payload stoichiometry and placement. Redwood Bioscience
creates homogeneous ADCs using the SMARTagTM technology, in which a
genetically encoded 5 amino acid aldehyde-tag sequence contains a
cysteine that is cotranslationally converted to formylglycine via an
enzymatic transformation. This method affords control over the placement
of the reactive formylglycine aldehyde side chain, which can then be
ligated using carbonyl bioconjugation methods. Here, we will present our
novel protein modification platformincluding our new conjugation
chemistries and linker librariesand its application to ADC generation. We
will address SMARTagTM ADC safety, pharmacokinetics, and efficacy in
preclinical tumor models, and discuss how these parameters are impacted
by linker selection and payload placement on the antibody.

