Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aneuploidy predicts aggressiveness and poor prognosis in
endometrial cancer, and is reflected in a 9-gene signature


Introduction: Ploidy is among the most frequently studied biomarkers in
endometrial cancer (EC), but lacks validation in larger studies.
Mechanisms leading to tumor aneuploidy are only partly understood, and
few studies have examined the molecular distinctions between diploid and
aneuploid tumors in EC. Loss of the cohesin subunit STAG2 has been
proposed as a driver of aneuploidy in several cancer types, but has not
yet been explored for EC.Aims: In this study, we wanted to investigate
ploidy status in primary EC in relation to standard clinicopathologic
variables including FIGO stage, grade, histologic type and age, as well
as outcome. Further, we wanted to evaluate genes differentially expressed
between aneuploid and diploid primary tumor samples, and the proposed
aneuploidy marker STAG2 in EC.Materials and methods: DNA ploidy was
determined by flow cytometry in fresh tumor tissue for 794 patients,
enrolled from 1980 - 2013. For expression analysis, RNA was extracted
from fresh frozen primary tumor tissue from 144 samples, and measured
with Agilent DNA microarrays (cat. no G4 112F). Significance Analysis of
Microarrays (SAM) was run to identify differentially expressed genes
between diploid and aneuploid cases. In order to identify the signature
genes reflecting the differences between the two groups with highest
accuracy, support vector machine (SVM) with 10-fold cross validation was
applied. An aneuploidy score was calculated by subtracting the sum of
expression of down-regulated genes from the sum of expression of
up-regulated genes in the signature. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was
performed on tissue microarrays from 526 patients, with STAG2 antibody
SA-2 (J12): sc-81852 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). TCGA EC data were
explored, and used for external validation.Results: Aneuploidy was
significantly associated with predictors of poor outcome including FIGO
stage, grade, histologic subtype and age (pIntroduction: Ploidy is among
the most frequently studied biomarkers in endometrial cancer (EC), but
lacks validation in larger studies. Mechanisms leading to tumor
aneuploidy are only partly understood, and few studies have examined the
molecular distinctions between diploid and aneuploid tumors in EC. Loss
of the cohesin subunit STAG2 has been proposed as a driver of aneuploidy
in several cancer types, but has not yet been explored for EC.Aims: In
this study, we wanted to investigate ploidy status in primary EC in
relation to standard clinicopathologic variables including FIGO stage,
grade, histologic type and age, as well as outcome. Further, we wanted to
evaluate genes differentially expressed between aneuploid and diploid
primary tumor samples, and the proposed aneuploidy marker STAG2 in
EC.Materials and methods: DNA ploidy was determined by flow cytometry in
fresh tumor tissue for 794 patients, enrolled from 1980 - 2013. For
expression analysis, RNA was extracted from fresh frozen primary tumor
tissue from 144 samples, and measured with Agilent DNA microarrays (cat.
no G4 112F). Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) was run to
identify differentially expressed genes between diploid and aneuploid
cases. In order to identify the signature genes reflecting the
differences between the two groups with highest accuracy, support vector
machine (SVM) with 10-fold cross validation was applied. An aneuploidy
score was calculated by subtracting the sum of expression of
down-regulated genes from the sum of expression of up-regulated genes in
the signature. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on tissue
microarrays from 526 patients, with STAG2 antibody SA-2 (J12): sc-81852
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology). TCGA EC data were explored, and used for
external validation.Results: Aneuploidy was significantly associated with
predictors of poor outcome including FIGO stage, grade, histologic
subtype and age (p<0.001), and worse 5-year disease specific survival
(DSS, pIntroduction: Ploidy is among the most frequently studied
biomarkers in endometrial cancer (EC), but lacks validation in larger
studies. Mechanisms leading to tumor aneuploidy are only partly
understood, and few studies have examined the molecular distinctions
between diploid and aneuploid tumors in EC. Loss of the cohesin subunit
STAG2 has been proposed as a driver of aneuploidy in several cancer
types, but has not yet been explored for EC.Aims: In this study, we
wanted to investigate ploidy status in primary EC in relation to standard
clinicopathologic variables including FIGO stage, grade, histologic type
and age, as well as outcome. Further, we wanted to evaluate genes
differentially expressed between aneuploid and diploid primary tumor
samples, and the proposed aneuploidy marker STAG2 in EC.Materials and
methods: DNA ploidy was determined by flow cytometry in fresh tumor
tissue for 794 patients, enrolled from 1980 - 2013. For expression
analysis, RNA was extracted from fresh frozen primary tumor tissue from
144 samples, and measured with Agilent DNA microarrays (cat. no G4 112F).
Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) was run to identify
differentially expressed genes between diploid and aneuploid cases. In
order to identify the signature genes reflecting the differences between
the two groups with highest accuracy, support vector machine (SVM) with
10-fold cross validation was applied. An aneuploidy score was calculated
by subtracting the sum of expression of down-regulated genes from the sum
of expression of up-regulated genes in the signature.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on tissue microarrays from 526
patients, with STAG2 antibody SA-2 (J12): sc-81852 (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology). TCGA EC data were explored, and used for external
validation.Results: Aneuploidy was significantly associated with
predictors of poor outcome including FIGO stage, grade, histologic
subtype and age (p<0.001), and worse 5-year disease specific survival
(DSS, p<0.001). SVM identified 9 genes (3 up- and 6 down-regulated)
yielding a good accuracy for identifying aneuploid tumor status. The
aneuploidy score was significantly associated with all standardly applied
clinicopathologic surrogate markers for outcome (pIntroduction: Ploidy is
among the most frequently studied biomarkers in endometrial cancer (EC),
but lacks validation in larger studies. Mechanisms leading to tumor
aneuploidy are only partly understood, and few studies have examined the
molecular distinctions between diploid and aneuploid tumors in EC. Loss
of the cohesin subunit STAG2 has been proposed as a driver of aneuploidy
in several cancer types, but has not yet been explored for EC.Aims: In
this study, we wanted to investigate ploidy status in primary EC in
relation to standard clinicopathologic variables including FIGO stage,
grade, histologic type and age, as well as outcome. Further, we wanted to
evaluate genes differentially expressed between aneuploid and diploid
primary tumor samples, and the proposed aneuploidy marker STAG2 in
EC.Materials and methods: DNA ploidy was determined by flow cytometry in
fresh tumor tissue for 794 patients, enrolled from 1980 - 2013. For
expression analysis, RNA was extracted from fresh frozen primary tumor
tissue from 144 samples, and measured with Agilent DNA microarrays (cat.
no G4 112F). Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) was run to
identify differentially expressed genes between diploid and aneuploid
cases. In order to identify the signature genes reflecting the
differences between the two groups with highest accuracy, support vector
machine (SVM) with 10-fold cross validation was applied. An aneuploidy
score was calculated by subtracting the sum of expression of
down-regulated genes from the sum of expression of up-regulated genes in
the signature. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on tissue
microarrays from 526 patients, with STAG2 antibody SA-2 (J12): sc-81852
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology). TCGA EC data were explored, and used for
external validation.Results: Aneuploidy was significantly associated with
predictors of poor outcome including FIGO stage, grade, histologic
subtype and age (p<0.001), and worse 5-year disease specific survival
(DSS, p<0.001). SVM identified 9 genes (3 up- and 6 down-regulated)
yielding a good accuracy for identifying aneuploid tumor status. The
aneuploidy score was significantly associated with all standardly applied
clinicopathologic surrogate markers for outcome (p<0.01) and DSS (p =
0.001). No association was found between STAG2 expression by IHC and
ploidy status, however loss of STAG2 was associated with better DSS than
intact STAG2 (p = 0.05). In TCGA data, 8.1% of EC patients had STAG2
mutations, with slightly better DSS compared to patients without mutation
(p = 0.05).Conclusions: DNA ploidy estimated by flow cytometry adds
prognostic information in EC. Loss of STAG2 expression is not associated
with aneuploidy. A 9-gene signature reflects ploidy status and predicts
aggressive tumor behavior. The role of the 9 genes will be further
explored to unveil potential involvement in aneuploidy development in EC.

