Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100A10 as a novel biomarker in hepatocellular carcinoma


Background and Objective: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the dominant
form of primary liver tumor and the second most lethal malignancy in
worldwide. From transcriptome sequencing analysis, we observed that
S100A10 was overexpressed in our cohort of 16 HCC patients. S100A10 is a
calcium binding protein and accumulating studies have indicated that
annexin A2- S100A10 heterotetramer on the cell surface is important for
the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, which promotes activation of
matrix metalloproteinases and degradation of extracellular matrix. This
enhances cancer invasion and migration. While annexin A2 overexpression
has been documented in various malignancies and shows significant
association with local invasion and metastasis, information regarding the
expression of S100A10 in human cancers is scarce. Furthermore, how
S100A10 was regulated remains unexplored. Hypoxia is a common phenomenon
in HCC microenvironment and stabilizies transcription factors, hypoxia
inducible factor (HIF)-1 and -2, to initiate transcription of a wide
repertoire of genes for cancer progression. The major aim of this study
is to evaluate the possible clinical relevance and diagnostic value of
S100A10 in HCC and study the molecular mechanism that drives S100A10
overexpression under the influence of hypoxia in HCC.Experimental
Procedures: We evaluated S100A10 expression in human HCC and the
corresponding non-tumorous liver (NT) tissues in a cohort of 67 HCC
patients by RT-PCR. S100A10 expression was correlated with various HCC
clinico-pathological features by Student's t-test and survival outcome of
HCC patients by Kaplan-Meier plot followed by log rank test. Promoter of
S100A10 was analyzed for potential hypoxia responsive elements -A/GCGTG-
and confirmed by ChIP assay with HIF antibodies. To evaluate the impact
of HIF on S100A10 expression, we knocked-down (shRNA) and knocked-out
(TALEN) HIF-1/2 in a HCC cell line, MHCC97L and evaluated S100A10 mRNA
and protein expression.Results: S100A10 was significantly upregulated (P
= 0.001, Wilcoxon signed rank test) in HCC as compared to NT tissues.
Overexpression of S100A10 ( 2 fold) was found in 50.746% (34/67) of HCC
patients and was closely correlated with direct liver invasion (P =
0.038), tumor microsatellite formation (P = 0.050) and absence of tumor
encapsulation (P = 0.048). More importantly, S100A10 overexpression was
associated with poorer 5-year survival rate in HCC patients (P = 0.062).
ROC analysis suggested that S100A10 could be a potential diagnostic
marker for HCC detection (Area Under Curve = 0.685, P = 0.001). Hypoxia
induced S100A10 mRNA and protein expression levels in multiple HCC cell
lines and this was abolished in HIF-1/2 knockdown or knockout HCC
cells.Conclusion: Our current data have presented evidence that S100A10
can be a potential diagnostic and prognostic marker in HCC and S100A10 is
a transcriptional target of HIF.

