Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-1207-3p-induced downregulation of fibronectin is a novel
regulatory pathway in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PC) is the most commonly diagnosed male cancer in the
western world. The molecular mechanisms underlying its development and
progression are still unclear. Recent studies have established an
important role for micro RNAs (miRNAs) in human cancers. miRNAs play a
crucial role in post-transcriptional gene regulation. Some miRNAs have
been implicated in PC. MicroRNA-1207-3p (miR-1207-3p) is encoded at the
non-protein coding gene locus PVT1 on the 8q24 human chromosomal region,
an established PC susceptibility locus. This study aims to determine the
role of miR-1207-3p in PC. miR-1207-3p expression was investigated in a
panel of five PC cell lines representative of different characteristics
of PC: WEP1-NA22 (derived from RWPE1, indolent, androgen dependent, White
male), VCaP (aggressive, androgen-dependent, White male), MDA PCa 2b
(aggressive, androgen-dependent, Black male), and PC-3 (aggressive,
androgen-independent, White male), and compared to a non-tumorigenic
prostate epithelial cell line, RWPE1 (White male). To evaluate the role
of miR-1207-3p, effects of gain of expression and loss of expression on
cell proliferation, migration and apoptosis were performed using an
oligonucleotide mimic, an oligonucleotide inhibitor or a non-targeting
negative control oligonucleotide. A target prediction algorithm was used
to identify a putative target of miR-1207-3p, and confirmation of the
target was done by assessing the effect of miR-1207-3p mimic on putative
target expression using real-time PCR (qPCR) and western blotting.
miR-1207-3p is significantly underexpressed (by almost 2-fold) in both
indolent (WPE1-NA22) and aggressive (MDA PCa 2b, PC-3 and VCaP) human PC
cell lines in comparison to normal prostate epithelial cells (RWPE1).
This indicates that loss of miR-1207-3p may be an early event in PC
development. Increased expression of miR-1207-3p in PC cells
significantly inhibits proliferation, induces apoptosis and inhibits
migration. Inhibition of miR-1207-3p expression in prostate epithelial
cells causes a significant increase in proliferation, and a significant
inhibition of apoptosis. Inhibition of miR-1207-3p expression led to a
4-fold increase in the migratory capacity of prostate epithelial cells.
The miSVR computer algorithm identified fibronectin as a putative
molecular target of miR-1207-3p. Forced expression of miR-1207-3p in
prostate epithelial cells significantly reduced fibronectin expression.
Fibronectin is significantly overexpressed in the PC cell lines in
comparison to the non-tumorigenic prostate epithelial cell line.
miR-1207-3p may have tumor suppressive effects in PC. These effects may
be via direct targeting of fibronectin. In conclusion, we uncovered a
miR-1207-3p-induced downregulation of fibronectin as a possible novel
regulatory pathway in PC. Therefore, strategies to increase miR-1207-3p
expression in PC cells may have therapeutic efficacy in PC.

