Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A-803467, a tetrodotoxin-resistant sodium channel blocker,
modulates ABCG2-mediated MDR in vitro and in vivo


ABCG2 is a member of the ABC transporter superfamily, which has been
implicated in the development of multidrug resistance (MDR) in cancer.
Its diverse range of substrates includes many antineoplastic agents such
as topotecan, doxorubicin and mitoxantrone. ABCG2 expression has been
significantly increased in some solid tumors and hematologic
malignancies, which is correlated to poorer clinical outcomes. In
addition, ABCG2 expression is a distinguishing feature of cancer stem
cells, whereby this membrane transporter impacts resistance to the
chemotherapeutic drugs. To enhance the chemosensitivity of cancer cells,
attention has been focused on MDR modulators. In this study, we
investigated the ability of a tetrodotoxin-resistant sodium channel
blocker, A-803467 to reverse ABCG2-mediated MDR. We found that A-803467
at non-toxic concentration could significantly increase the cellular
sensitivity to ABCG2 substrates in drug-resistant cells overexpressing
either wild-type or mutant ABCG2. Mechanistic studies indicated that
A-803467 (7.5 M) significantly increased the intracellular accumulation
of mitoxantrone by inhibiting the transport activity of ABCG2, without
altering its expression level. In addition, A-803467 stimulated the
ATPase activity of ABCG2 in a concentration-dependent manner, indicating
that A-803467 might be a substrate of ABCG2. Binding interactions of
A-803467 were found to be in transmembrane region of homology modeled
human ABCG2. Interactions of A-803467 with ABCG2 were relatively stronger
when compared to the interactions of topotecan with ABCG2. Furthermore,
A-803467 (30 mg/kg) with topotecan (3 mg/kg) significantly decreased the
growth rate and tumor size of ABCG2 overexpressing tumors in a xenograft
nude mouse model. Our findings indicate that A-803467 has the potential
to be used in combination with ABCG2 chemotherapeutic substrates to
improve the response in drug resistant cancers.

