Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of a simple low-cost method to monitor ctDNA in
patients with solid cancers


Background: Detection of circulation tumor DNA (ctDNA) in plasma has
become a viable option for non-invasive monitoring of patients. Also
termed liquid biopsy the approach is applicable for pre-diction of
response and prediction of resistance to biological therapy (1, 2).
Various techniques have been used for ctDNA detection, frequently
employing clonal amplification on a digital PCR format (3) with limits of
detection (LOD) below 0.01% of mutant alleles. However, these techniques
suffer from high complexity, expensive instrumentation, and a
considerable cost per sample. We hereby present a simple low-cost
alternative that is implementable to routine ctDNA testing.Methods: A
panel of PCR amplicons (106 - 174bp) was resolved by denaturing capillary
electrophoresis (DCE) revealing minute presence of mutation specific
hetero-duplexes. The final panel consisted of clinically relevant
oncogenic mutations KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA and EGFR as well as
cancer-related mutations in tumor suppressors TP53, APC and CTNNB1. A
total of 299 patients was subsequently examined for presence of ctDNA in
plasma including 194 with colorectal cancer (CRC), 26 with NSCLC and 79
with pancreatic cancer (PanC). CtDNA status was correlated to TNM stage
and tumor markers (CEA and Ca19-9). In a subset of CRC patients (n = 20)
the ctDNA was monitored in 2 - 6 month intervals and correlated to the
therapy response.Results: The experimental LOD value was in the range
between 0.03 - 1% for all tested mutations within the panel. A minimum
input amount of DNA was 5 pg (0,005 ng).. The overall rate of ctDNA
detection was 32% for CRC (stages I - IV), 31% for NSCLC (stages III -
IV) and 27% for PanC (stages II - IV). The highest detection rate, 69%,
was observed in Stage IV CRC patients. Comparison with tumor markers (TM)
revealed 62% of cases positive for both TM and ctDNA and 13% TM-negative
cases with ctDNA positivity. Post-operative absence or persistence of
ctDNA was related to the radicality of the surgical treatment and the
ctDNA levels were concordant with the response to adjuvant chemotherapy.
In several patients a disease progression was signalized based on ctDNA
even prior to actual clinical detection by CT imaging.Conclusion: DCE is
a simple technique applicable for detection of ctDNA in cancer patients
without a need for costly hardware/software equipment. The detection
rates are 10 - 15% lower compared to the dedicated dPCR techniques,
however, the method requires ca 100x less input DNA, the cost per patient
is about 10-fold lower and the turnaround time per test is under 5
hours.Supported by the Czech Ministry of Health Grant 14383.Literature1.
Bettegowda C et al. Sci Transl Med. 2014,6(224):224ra242. Douillard JY et
al. J Thorac Oncol. 2014, 9(9):1345-1353.3. Benesova L et al. Anal
Biochem 2013,433(2):227-234.

