Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis of the novel prostamide, 15-deoxy-12,14 prostaglandin
J2-ethanolamide, and characterization of its anti-tumor activity


Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), is the most prevalent form of cancer in
the United States. Many epithelial cancers including NMSC over-express
the enzyme cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). COX-2 converts arachidonic acid (AA)
to prostaglandins including prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). The interaction of
PGE2 with the EP receptor has been shown to promote cancer by activating
anti-apoptotic signals and angiogenesis. AA is also metabolized by COX-2
to 15deoxy, 12,14 prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) which promotes apoptosis
via mechanisms including oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.
Arachidonoylethanolamide (AEA) is an endogenous cannabinoid that causes
death in numerous cancer cell lines. Our lab previously demonstrated that
AEA-induced apoptosis in NMSC cells occurs in a COX-2-dependent manner.
Furthermore, mass spectral analysis of the products of AEA metabolism by
COX-2 reveal the presence of a novel ethanolamide-conjugated J-series
prostaglandin, (15d-PGJ2-EA). We hypothesize that the apoptotic effects
of AEA are mediated by its primary cytotoxic metabolite, 15d-PGJ2-EA. To
determine if 15d-PGJ2-EA mediates the effects of AEA we synthesized
15d-PGJ2-EA using 15d-PGJ2 as a substrate. The synthesis was accomplished
using an uronium coupling reagent in the presence of ethanolamine with
verification performed by H1-NMR. Tumorigenic JWF2 and non-tumorigenic
HaCaT cell lines were treated with various concentrations of 15d-PGJ2-EA
or 15d-PGJ2 and viability was measured using MTS assays. At 5 M
15d-PGJ2-EA there was a 4.1-fold differencewhile at10 Mthere wasa217-
fold difference in JWF-2 cell comparedwith HaCaT cell survival. In cells
treated the AA metabolite, 15d-PGJ2, a 1.4-fold difference at 5 M and a
1.7 fold difference at 10 M in JWF2 compared to HaCaT cell survival was
observed. To verify that cell death was due to apoptosis, the cleavage of
caspase-3 and PARP was examined by conducting Western blot analysis.
15d-PGJ2-EA and 15d-PGJ2 increased caspase-3 and PARP cleavage in the
tumorigenic but not in the non-tumorigenic cell line. To evaluate the
mechanism of apoptosis, we examined oxidative- and ER-stress production
in tumorigenic JWF2 cells. 15d-PGJ2-EA treated cells showed a 300%
increase in DCF fluorescence (oxidative stress) and an 8.5-fold increase
in CHOP-10 expression (ER stress) while 15d-PGJ2 treated cells showed
200% increase in DCF and a 3.5 fold increase in CHOP-10. Collectively,
these findings suggest that AEA-induced apoptosis is mediated by
15d-PGJ2-EA since 15d-PGJ2-EA and AEA exhibit the same molecular effects.
In addition, 15d-PGJ2-EA selectively induced cell death in tumorigenic
but not non-tumorigenic keratinocytes. Furthermore, 15d-PGJ2-EA was more
potent than 15d-PGJ2. Hence, the endocannabinoid metabolite 15d-PGJ2-EA
may be an effective agent for eliminating cancer.

