Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A research approach for the detection of somatic mutations at 0.5%
frequency from cfDNA and cTc DNA using a multiplex sequencing assay
targeting 2000 tumor mutations


Background:Availability of effective blood screening for tracking of
recurrence and resistance of tumors may improve outcomes. Research
studies suggest that virtually all tumors carry somatic DNA mutations,
and these may serve as biomarkers that may be tracked from blood. The two
well-characterized sources of tumor DNA in blood are circulating tumor
cells (cTc) and cell-free tumor DNA (ctDNA). The abundance of cTc and/or
ctDNA in blood may be very low at critical stages such as early
recurrence or development of resistance. Hence there is great interest in
being able to detect biomarkers at very low frequency from blood, and in
characterizing the relationship between somatic mutations present in the
tumor and those in cTc or ctDNA.Method:We present a research use only
analysis workflow that facilitates researchers in detecting low frequency
variants in blood. We developed an analysis algorithm, using statistical
modeling of next generation sequencing reads, and optimizing parameters
and filters to enable sensitive and specific detection of somatic
mutations to 0.5% allele ratio.We demonstrate the analysis on a blood
sample split into 3 sub-samples comprising germline blood cells, cTc, and
ctDNA.We barcode the 3 sub-samples and run them on a single Ion PGM 318
sequencing chip using Ion AmpliSeq CHPv2 cancer hot-spot panel, that
enables very deep (10,000x coverage) and accurate sequencing.This panel
allows interrogation of 2000 relevant biomarkers from COSMIC and FDA
actionable databases, and de-novo variant detection at 20,000 genomic
positions. Mutations were annotated using the Oncomine database in Ion
Reporter software.The assay requires a small amount of input DNA (10ng),
and has a fast turn around time from sample to variants of less than 24
hr.Results:We tested the limits of variant detection in a dilution
series; in cTc; and in ctDNA.First, we diluted an engineered DNA sample
from Acrometrix into a control sample (NA12878) down to 0.5% frequency.
The Acrometrix sample contains 500 common cancer mutations from COSMIC
and FDA actionable databases. We achieved >99% sensitivity and
specificity for variants present at frequency above 0.5%.Next, we spiked
cTc cells from cancer cell lines into normal blood samples at ratio
1:1,000,000, obtaining 40% purity of cTc after enrichment, and
demonstrated > 99% sensitivity and specificity of variant
detection.Finally, we performed analytical validation of variant
detection performance in ctDNA using a dilution series of two normal
blood samples, and we were able to detect in all 20 variants present in
either sample in ctDNA when their frequency was above
0.5%.Conclusions:The analysis workflow may facilitate researchers to
study biomarkers in DNA from germline, cTc, and ctDNA, all available from
a single blood sample, and to explore the relationship between biomarkers
observed in solid tumor and those in blood.

