Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-terminal truncated hepatitis B virus X protein promotes
hepatocarcinogenesis through enhanced stemness and resistance to therapy


Tumor relapse after chemotherapy typifies hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
and is believed to be attributable to residual cancer stem cells (CSCs)
that survive initial treatment. Chronic infection with hepatitis B virus
(HBV) has long been linked to the development of HCC. Upon chronic
infection, random HBV genome integration can lead to truncation of
hepatitis B virus X (HBx) protein at the C-terminus. The resulting
C-terminal-truncated HBx (HBx-C) was previously shown to confer enhanced
invasiveness and diminished apoptotic response in HCC cells. In this
study, we found HBx-C to be more frequently detected in HCC clinical
samples than their matched non-tumor counterparts. In addition, we also
identified a strong positive correlation between HBx-C and the liver
cancer stem cell marker CD133, in a panel of liver cell line tested.
Subsequently, we delineated the role of a naturally occurring HBx-C
(HBx-14) in promoting stemness and aggressive behaviors in HCC cells. The
stable overexpression of HBx-14 in HCC cell line (Huh7) and immortalized
normal liver cell line (MIHA) promoted expression of stemness markers,
EpCAM and SOX2. In vitro functional studies with HBx-14 stably
overexpressed in Huh7 demonstrated an increased ability to self-renew,
resist chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil) and targeted therapy (sorafenib),
migrate and induce capillary tube formation in endothelial cells. Similar
functional results were also obtained when HBx-14 was stably
overexpressed in MIHA cells. Taken together, in addition to its role in
enhancing HCC metastasis, we find HBx-14 to confer cancer and stem
cell-like features in HCC, and to play an important role in driving tumor
relapse in this deadly disease.

