Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel mitochondria-targeted Doxorubicin Prodrug for colorectal
cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma: In vitro studies


Purpose:The 18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO) in mitochondria is
proapoptotic and upregulated in several types of cancers, particularly in
colorectal cancer (CRC). This study aimed to develop a
mitochondria-targeted doxorubicin prodrug and to investigate its
cytotoxicity in human CRC (TSPO positive) and HCC (TSPO negative) cell
lines.Methods:Mitochondria-targeted Doxorubicin Prodrug was synthesized
by conjugation of a functional TSPO ligand with doxorubicin via an
enzyme-cleavable linkage. Fluorescence cell viability assays in HT29,
HCT116, HepG2 and Hep3B cells incubated with 5, 10, 25 and 50M of Prodrug
vs. Doxorubicin alone were performed using the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent
Cell Viability Assay (Promega, Madison, MI, USA) at 6, 12, 24, 48, 60 and
72 hrs. T-tests were used for all comparisons (significance Purpose:The
18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO) in mitochondria is proapoptotic and
upregulated in several types of cancers, particularly in colorectal
cancer (CRC). This study aimed to develop a mitochondria-targeted
doxorubicin prodrug and to investigate its cytotoxicity in human CRC
(TSPO positive) and HCC (TSPO negative) cell
lines.Methods:Mitochondria-targeted Doxorubicin Prodrug was synthesized
by conjugation of a functional TSPO ligand with doxorubicin via an
enzyme-cleavable linkage. Fluorescence cell viability assays in HT29,
HCT116, HepG2 and Hep3B cells incubated with 5, 10, 25 and 50M of Prodrug
vs. Doxorubicin alone were performed using the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent
Cell Viability Assay (Promega, Madison, MI, USA) at 6, 12, 24, 48, 60 and
72 hrs. T-tests were used for all comparisons (significance
<.05).Results:Significantly decreased cell viability in TSPO positive CRC
cell lines (HCT116 and HT-29) with both the prodrug and doxorubicin vs.
controls was observed (pPurpose:The 18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO) in
mitochondria is proapoptotic and upregulated in several types of cancers,
particularly in colorectal cancer (CRC). This study aimed to develop a
mitochondria-targeted doxorubicin prodrug and to investigate its
cytotoxicity in human CRC (TSPO positive) and HCC (TSPO negative) cell
lines.Methods:Mitochondria-targeted Doxorubicin Prodrug was synthesized
by conjugation of a functional TSPO ligand with doxorubicin via an
enzyme-cleavable linkage. Fluorescence cell viability assays in HT29,
HCT116, HepG2 and Hep3B cells incubated with 5, 10, 25 and 50M of Prodrug
vs. Doxorubicin alone were performed using the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent
Cell Viability Assay (Promega, Madison, MI, USA) at 6, 12, 24, 48, 60 and
72 hrs. T-tests were used for all comparisons (significance
<.05).Results:Significantly decreased cell viability in TSPO positive CRC
cell lines (HCT116 and HT-29) with both the prodrug and doxorubicin vs.
controls was observed (p<0.05). In HCT116, 10 and 25M prodrug
demonstrated significantly higher cytotoxicity vs. doxorubicin at 48 and
60 hrs, with plateau in effect at 72 hrs; 50M prodrug had significantly
higher cytotoxicity vs. doxorubicin alone at all time points
(pPurpose:The 18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO) in mitochondria is
proapoptotic and upregulated in several types of cancers, particularly in
colorectal cancer (CRC). This study aimed to develop a
mitochondria-targeted doxorubicin prodrug and to investigate its
cytotoxicity in human CRC (TSPO positive) and HCC (TSPO negative) cell
lines.Methods:Mitochondria-targeted Doxorubicin Prodrug was synthesized
by conjugation of a functional TSPO ligand with doxorubicin via an
enzyme-cleavable linkage. Fluorescence cell viability assays in HT29,
HCT116, HepG2 and Hep3B cells incubated with 5, 10, 25 and 50M of Prodrug
vs. Doxorubicin alone were performed using the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent
Cell Viability Assay (Promega, Madison, MI, USA) at 6, 12, 24, 48, 60 and
72 hrs. T-tests were used for all comparisons (significance
<.05).Results:Significantly decreased cell viability in TSPO positive CRC
cell lines (HCT116 and HT-29) with both the prodrug and doxorubicin vs.
controls was observed (p<0.05). In HCT116, 10 and 25M prodrug
demonstrated significantly higher cytotoxicity vs. doxorubicin at 48 and
60 hrs, with plateau in effect at 72 hrs; 50M prodrug had significantly
higher cytotoxicity vs. doxorubicin alone at all time points (p<.05 for
all). In HT-29, 25 and 50M prodrug had significantly higher cytotoxicity
vs. doxorubicin at 48 and 60 hrs (pPurpose:The 18-kDa translocator
protein (TSPO) in mitochondria is proapoptotic and upregulated in several
types of cancers, particularly in colorectal cancer (CRC). This study
aimed to develop a mitochondria-targeted doxorubicin prodrug and to
investigate its cytotoxicity in human CRC (TSPO positive) and HCC (TSPO
negative) cell lines.Methods:Mitochondria-targeted Doxorubicin Prodrug
was synthesized by conjugation of a functional TSPO ligand with
doxorubicin via an enzyme-cleavable linkage. Fluorescence cell viability
assays in HT29, HCT116, HepG2 and Hep3B cells incubated with 5, 10, 25
and 50M of Prodrug vs. Doxorubicin alone were performed using the
CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (Promega, Madison, MI,
USA) at 6, 12, 24, 48, 60 and 72 hrs. T-tests were used for all
comparisons (significance <.05).Results:Significantly decreased cell
viability in TSPO positive CRC cell lines (HCT116 and HT-29) with both
the prodrug and doxorubicin vs. controls was observed (p<0.05). In
HCT116, 10 and 25M prodrug demonstrated significantly higher cytotoxicity
vs. doxorubicin at 48 and 60 hrs, with plateau in effect at 72 hrs; 50M
prodrug had significantly higher cytotoxicity vs. doxorubicin alone at
all time points (p<.05 for all). In HT-29, 25 and 50M prodrug had
significantly higher cytotoxicity vs. doxorubicin at 48 and 60 hrs
(p<.05). In TSPO negative HCC cell lines (Hep3B and HepG2), prodrug and
doxorubicin vs. control showed significantly decreased cell viability at
all time points except for 10M at 24 hrs; 25 and 50M prodrug demonstrated
similar cytotoxicity vs. doxorubicin at all time points except at 60
hours (pPurpose:The 18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO) in mitochondria is
proapoptotic and upregulated in several types of cancers, particularly in
colorectal cancer (CRC). This study aimed to develop a
mitochondria-targeted doxorubicin prodrug and to investigate its
cytotoxicity in human CRC (TSPO positive) and HCC (TSPO negative) cell
lines.Methods:Mitochondria-targeted Doxorubicin Prodrug was synthesized
by conjugation of a functional TSPO ligand with doxorubicin via an
enzyme-cleavable linkage. Fluorescence cell viability assays in HT29,
HCT116, HepG2 and Hep3B cells incubated with 5, 10, 25 and 50M of Prodrug
vs. Doxorubicin alone were performed using the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent
Cell Viability Assay (Promega, Madison, MI, USA) at 6, 12, 24, 48, 60 and
72 hrs. T-tests were used for all comparisons (significance
<.05).Results:Significantly decreased cell viability in TSPO positive CRC
cell lines (HCT116 and HT-29) with both the prodrug and doxorubicin vs.
controls was observed (p<0.05). In HCT116, 10 and 25M prodrug
demonstrated significantly higher cytotoxicity vs. doxorubicin at 48 and
60 hrs, with plateau in effect at 72 hrs; 50M prodrug had significantly
higher cytotoxicity vs. doxorubicin alone at all time points (p<.05 for
all). In HT-29, 25 and 50M prodrug had significantly higher cytotoxicity
vs. doxorubicin at 48 and 60 hrs (p<.05). In TSPO negative HCC cell lines
(Hep3B and HepG2), prodrug and doxorubicin vs. control showed
significantly decreased cell viability at all time points except for 10M
at 24 hrs; 25 and 50M prodrug demonstrated similar cytotoxicity vs.
doxorubicin at all time points except at 60 hours (p<.05 for
all).Conclusion:Our novel mitochondria-targeted doxorubicin prodrug
demonstrated superior cytotoxicity compared to doxorubicin in human CRC
cell lines.

