Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic efficacy of cancer stem cell vaccine in an adjuvant
setting


The inability to target cancer stem cells (CSC) may be a significant
factor contributing to treatment failure. Novel therapeutic strategies
are needed to immunologically target CSCs. We have developed a strategy
to target the CSC populations in melanoma and squamous cell carcinoma
using CSC lysate-pulsed dendritic cells (DC). Using mouse models we
demonstrate that DC pulsed with CSCs enriched by virtue of their
expression of the CSC marker ALDH (CSC-DC) significantly inhibited local
tumor growth, reduced development of pulmonary metastases and prolonged
survival in the minimal tumor models. The effect was associated with down
regulation of CCR7 and CCR10 in tumor cells and decreased CCL27 and CCL28
expression in lung tissue. CSC-DC vaccine significantly reduced ALDHhigh
CSCs. Direct targeting of CSCs was demonstrated by specific binding of
IgG produced by ALDHhigh CSC-DC vaccine-primed B cells to ALDHhigh CSCs,
resulting in lysis of these target cells in the presence of complement.
When administered in the adjuvant setting after surgical excision of the
bulk tumor mass, administration of CSC-DC vaccine reduced development of
local tumor growth as well as systemic disease and prolonged survival
demonstrating the efficacy of this approach. These data suggest that the
CSC-DC vaccine approach may be useful in the adjuvant setting where local
and systemic relapse are high after surgery.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

