Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual ErbB blockade with KTN3379 and cetuximab yields enhanced
antitumor activity by inhibiting parallel signaling pathways in SCCHN


The receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB3/HER3 has been implicated as an
oncogenic driver in pre-clinical models of solid tumors, and is the
target of several monoclonal antibodies currently in clinical
development. In squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN),
ErbB3 activation is regulated by its ligand neuregulin (NRG). Studies,
including our own, have reported high NRG expression in a significant
subset of SCCHN, providing a scientific rationale for the use of ErbB3
targeted therapies in this disease setting. Here we show that KTN3379, a
potent human ErbB3 monoclonal antibody with a dual mechanism of action,
demonstrates significant monotherapy activity in NRG expressing xenograft
models of SCCHN and enhances cetuximab anti-tumor activity. Using a panel
of SCCHN cell lines, we demonstrate that KTN3379 inhibits PI3K/AKT
signaling whereas cetuximab chiefly suppresses the ERK pathway, providing
an explanation for the increased anti-tumor activity of combining both
drugs. Our data also suggest that ErbB3 and EGFR act independently of one
another at the receptor level. Interestingly, mRNA analysis of 303 SCCHN
human tumor samples shows a strong correlation between NRG expression and
the EGFR ligands Amphiregulin (AREG) and TGF. Moreover, KTN3379 activity
correlates with expression of ErbB3, its ligand NRG, and both of these
EGFR ligands. Overall, our data support evaluation of the combination of
KTN3379 and cetuximab in SCCHN.

