Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The homeobox gene DLX4 stimulates inducible nitric oxide
synthase-mediated angiogenesis in ovarian cancer


Increasing evidence indicates that the free radical gas nitric oxide
plays an important role in stimulating angiogenesis. However, the
mechanisms that control nitric oxide-mediated angiogenesis in tumors are
poorly understood. We previously identified that DLX4, a transcription
factor encoded by a homeobox gene, stimulates ovarian tumor progression
and correlates with poor outcomes of ovarian cancer patients. In this
study, we identified that high DLX4 expression in ovarian cancer
specimens is strongly associated with elevated expression of inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), an enzyme that generates nitric oxide. DLX4
induced iNOS expression in ovarian cancer cells in vitro and in xenograft
models. We identified that DLX4 interacts with STAT1 and induces iNOS
expression in a STAT1-dependent manner. In in vitro studies, inhibition
of iNOS abrogated the stimulatory effects of DLX4 on nitric oxide
production, vascular endothelial growth factor expression and endothelial
cell growth. Furthermore, inhibition of iNOS abrogated the stimulatory
effects of DLX4 on tumor microvessel density and ascites formation in
ovarian cancer xenograft models. Collectively, our findings indicate that
DLX4 contributes to ovarian tumor progression in part by promoting nitric
oxide-mediated angiogenesis. This is the first report that functionally
links the aberrant expression of a developmental patterning gene in
tumors with free radical gas generation.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

