Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of methylation biomarkers for colon cancer using normal
tissues


We have identified DNA methylation biomarkers that discriminate patients
with colon cancer from patients without colon cancer using array-based
profiling methods. Most DNA-based biomarkers for colon cancer rely on the
detection of cancer cell-specific or cancer cell-prevalent mutations or
DNA methylation changes in small numbers of tumor cells or small amounts
of tumor cell-free DNA that are present in stool or lavage samples. Our
hypothesis is that an individual's cancer-predisposing exposure history
is recorded in normal tissues as field cancerization-related DNA
methylation changes and that these changes will be present in normal
colon, as well as other normal tissues, including peripheral blood.
Consistent with the notion of changes based on individual exposure
history, the bulk of the candidate biomarkers identified are genes
involved in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, as expected from
epidemiological associations between colon cancer and western diets. We
have now validated that our candidate methylation biomarkers are
effective at discriminating cancer patients from controls using normal
colon tissue from an independent population, and irrespective of whether
the patients have left-side or right-side cancers. We have also found
that a significant fraction of our candidate biomarkers also discriminate
cancer patients from controls, using peripheral blood DNA analyzed by
bisulfite pyrosequencing.

