Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New computerized image analyzing technique for analysis of bone
marrow microvessel density in multiple myeloma


Background: Angiogenesis is important in proliferation and survival of
neoplastic cells in multiple myeloma (MM). Microvessel density (MVD) is a
useful angiogenesis marker, which can be detected by anti-CD34
immunohistochemical stain. However, counting the MVD of bone marrow (BM)
by light microscopy has a limitation in standardization due to
inter-observer differences. Consistent method for MVD assessment has been
required to resolve the variation in number. Here we developed the MVD
counting method using computerized image analyzer (CIA) and light
microscopy.Methods: A total of 21 patients with primary diagnosed with MM
were evaluated. MVD was assessed by screening three hot spots of CD34
positive vessels on BM biopsy section (x40 magnification). MVD was
measured by three different ways. First, the number of vessels was
counted using light microscope at the time of diagnosis by several
hematopathologists (MVD-A). Second, the total count of microvessels per
14435.2 m2 (1388 1040m) of marrow area was measured by a Zeiss microscope
using AxioVison LE Image Analyzer with developed image analyzer program
(MVD-B). In addition, manual count of captured image by CIA with one
observer was examined (MVD-C). Software was developed using Microsoft
visual studio (ver. 2010, Microsoft, USA) and VTK (ver. 5.10.0, Kitware,
USA) library. Captured image was labeled via pre-processing for image
enhancement and seed region growing algorithm to detect the MVD
candidates. Using histogram texture analysis, each candidate was
determined to MVD.Results: The range of MVD was as followings: MVD-A
(range 3-52; mean 16.5; SD 12.8), MVD-B (range 4-38; mean 19.6; SD 10.0),
and MVD-C (range 5-34; mean 14.8; SD 7.8).There was a significant
correlation between theses angiogenesis parameters. Pearson's correlation
coefficient of MVD-A with MVD-B was 0.535 (P = 0.01), MVD-A with MVD-C
was 0.581 (P Background: Angiogenesis is important in proliferation and
survival of neoplastic cells in multiple myeloma (MM). Microvessel
density (MVD) is a useful angiogenesis marker, which can be detected by
anti-CD34 immunohistochemical stain. However, counting the MVD of bone
marrow (BM) by light microscopy has a limitation in standardization due
to inter-observer differences. Consistent method for MVD assessment has
been required to resolve the variation in number. Here we developed the
MVD counting method using computerized image analyzer (CIA) and light
microscopy.Methods: A total of 21 patients with primary diagnosed with MM
were evaluated. MVD was assessed by screening three hot spots of CD34
positive vessels on BM biopsy section (x40 magnification). MVD was
measured by three different ways. First, the number of vessels was
counted using light microscope at the time of diagnosis by several
hematopathologists (MVD-A). Second, the total count of microvessels per
14435.2 m2 (1388 1040m) of marrow area was measured by a Zeiss microscope
using AxioVison LE Image Analyzer with developed image analyzer program
(MVD-B). In addition, manual count of captured image by CIA with one
observer was examined (MVD-C). Software was developed using Microsoft
visual studio (ver. 2010, Microsoft, USA) and VTK (ver. 5.10.0, Kitware,
USA) library. Captured image was labeled via pre-processing for image
enhancement and seed region growing algorithm to detect the MVD
candidates. Using histogram texture analysis, each candidate was
determined to MVD.Results: The range of MVD was as followings: MVD-A
(range 3-52; mean 16.5; SD 12.8), MVD-B (range 4-38; mean 19.6; SD 10.0),
and MVD-C (range 5-34; mean 14.8; SD 7.8).There was a significant
correlation between theses angiogenesis parameters. Pearson's correlation
coefficient of MVD-A with MVD-B was 0.535 (P = 0.01), MVD-A with MVD-C
was 0.581 (P < 0.01), and MVD-B with MVD-C was 0.897 (P Background:
Angiogenesis is important in proliferation and survival of neoplastic
cells in multiple myeloma (MM). Microvessel density (MVD) is a useful
angiogenesis marker, which can be detected by anti-CD34
immunohistochemical stain. However, counting the MVD of bone marrow (BM)
by light microscopy has a limitation in standardization due to
inter-observer differences. Consistent method for MVD assessment has been
required to resolve the variation in number. Here we developed the MVD
counting method using computerized image analyzer (CIA) and light
microscopy.Methods: A total of 21 patients with primary diagnosed with MM
were evaluated. MVD was assessed by screening three hot spots of CD34
positive vessels on BM biopsy section (x40 magnification). MVD was
measured by three different ways. First, the number of vessels was
counted using light microscope at the time of diagnosis by several
hematopathologists (MVD-A). Second, the total count of microvessels per
14435.2 m2 (1388 1040m) of marrow area was measured by a Zeiss microscope
using AxioVison LE Image Analyzer with developed image analyzer program
(MVD-B). In addition, manual count of captured image by CIA with one
observer was examined (MVD-C). Software was developed using Microsoft
visual studio (ver. 2010, Microsoft, USA) and VTK (ver. 5.10.0, Kitware,
USA) library. Captured image was labeled via pre-processing for image
enhancement and seed region growing algorithm to detect the MVD
candidates. Using histogram texture analysis, each candidate was
determined to MVD.Results: The range of MVD was as followings: MVD-A
(range 3-52; mean 16.5; SD 12.8), MVD-B (range 4-38; mean 19.6; SD 10.0),
and MVD-C (range 5-34; mean 14.8; SD 7.8).There was a significant
correlation between theses angiogenesis parameters. Pearson's correlation
coefficient of MVD-A with MVD-B was 0.535 (P = 0.01), MVD-A with MVD-C
was 0.581 (P < 0.01), and MVD-B with MVD-C was 0.897 (P <
0.01).Conclusions: We developed the computer aided diagnostic tools to
measure MVD more objectively. MVD count using image analyzer was well
correlated with manual count and more accurate than MVD count on light
microscope. Further studies with continuous upgrades on counting program
are now in progress. Finally, we tried to apply this method in practice
to predict the prognostic impact on MM patient at the time of diagnosis.

