Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nevus count and dermoscopic pattern associated with MC1R
RHC-variant alleles in a case-control study of melanoma


The total number of acquired melanocytic nevi (TNC) is the strongest
known risk factor for cutaneous malignant melanoma (CMM). An increased
risk of CMM is also seen with individuals with red hair, fair skin and
poor tanning ability (RHC phenotype); and who carry variant alleles of
the MC1R gene designated as R. High freckling scores but reduced nevus
counts have been reported in individuals with the RHC phenotype. The
relationship between these reciprocal phenotypes of lower vs higher nevus
counts, both with increased risk of CMM, is complex and supports
hypotheses of different pathways to melanoma formation. We have reported
on a case-control study of nevi in volunteers from the South-east
Queensland area combining an assessment of pigmentation characteristics,
nevus phenotype including dermoscopic nevus subtypes with genotypic
comparisons and melanoma risk for 573 individuals. This sample set has
been further examined to delineate the nevus characteristics of 46
individuals who are homozygous MC1R RHC allele carriers R/R. We wished to
determine if there is any commonality in the pigmentation or melanocytic
nevus phenotype including number, size, distribution, profile and colour
that may distinguish these patients. Body mass index (BMI), body surface
area (BSA), TNC and MC1R genotype were analysed and found that
participants with personal melanoma history had higher TNC (PThe total
number of acquired melanocytic nevi (TNC) is the strongest known risk
factor for cutaneous malignant melanoma (CMM). An increased risk of CMM
is also seen with individuals with red hair, fair skin and poor tanning
ability (RHC phenotype); and who carry variant alleles of the MC1R gene
designated as R. High freckling scores but reduced nevus counts have been
reported in individuals with the RHC phenotype. The relationship between
these reciprocal phenotypes of lower vs higher nevus counts, both with
increased risk of CMM, is complex and supports hypotheses of different
pathways to melanoma formation. We have reported on a case-control study
of nevi in volunteers from the South-east Queensland area combining an
assessment of pigmentation characteristics, nevus phenotype including
dermoscopic nevus subtypes with genotypic comparisons and melanoma risk
for 573 individuals. This sample set has been further examined to
delineate the nevus characteristics of 46 individuals who are homozygous
MC1R RHC allele carriers R/R. We wished to determine if there is any
commonality in the pigmentation or melanocytic nevus phenotype including
number, size, distribution, profile and colour that may distinguish these
patients. Body mass index (BMI), body surface area (BSA), TNC and MC1R
genotype were analysed and found that participants with personal melanoma
history had higher TNC (P<0.005). We found no association between MC1R
genotype and BMI but there exists a weak association between BSA and
higher TNC. Within the MC1R R/R cohort, melanoma patients are more likely
to have high TNC than controls (PThe total number of acquired melanocytic
nevi (TNC) is the strongest known risk factor for cutaneous malignant
melanoma (CMM). An increased risk of CMM is also seen with individuals
with red hair, fair skin and poor tanning ability (RHC phenotype); and
who carry variant alleles of the MC1R gene designated as R. High
freckling scores but reduced nevus counts have been reported in
individuals with the RHC phenotype. The relationship between these
reciprocal phenotypes of lower vs higher nevus counts, both with
increased risk of CMM, is complex and supports hypotheses of different
pathways to melanoma formation. We have reported on a case-control study
of nevi in volunteers from the South-east Queensland area combining an
assessment of pigmentation characteristics, nevus phenotype including
dermoscopic nevus subtypes with genotypic comparisons and melanoma risk
for 573 individuals. This sample set has been further examined to
delineate the nevus characteristics of 46 individuals who are homozygous
MC1R RHC allele carriers R/R. We wished to determine if there is any
commonality in the pigmentation or melanocytic nevus phenotype including
number, size, distribution, profile and colour that may distinguish these
patients. Body mass index (BMI), body surface area (BSA), TNC and MC1R
genotype were analysed and found that participants with personal melanoma
history had higher TNC (P<0.005). We found no association between MC1R
genotype and BMI but there exists a weak association between BSA and
higher TNC. Within the MC1R R/R cohort, melanoma patients are more likely
to have high TNC than controls (P<0.01). The signature dermoscopic
pattern for the individuals in the MC1R R/R group is at increased odds of
being a non-specific pattern (PThe total number of acquired melanocytic
nevi (TNC) is the strongest known risk factor for cutaneous malignant
melanoma (CMM). An increased risk of CMM is also seen with individuals
with red hair, fair skin and poor tanning ability (RHC phenotype); and
who carry variant alleles of the MC1R gene designated as R. High
freckling scores but reduced nevus counts have been reported in
individuals with the RHC phenotype. The relationship between these
reciprocal phenotypes of lower vs higher nevus counts, both with
increased risk of CMM, is complex and supports hypotheses of different
pathways to melanoma formation. We have reported on a case-control study
of nevi in volunteers from the South-east Queensland area combining an
assessment of pigmentation characteristics, nevus phenotype including
dermoscopic nevus subtypes with genotypic comparisons and melanoma risk
for 573 individuals. This sample set has been further examined to
delineate the nevus characteristics of 46 individuals who are homozygous
MC1R RHC allele carriers R/R. We wished to determine if there is any
commonality in the pigmentation or melanocytic nevus phenotype including
number, size, distribution, profile and colour that may distinguish these
patients. Body mass index (BMI), body surface area (BSA), TNC and MC1R
genotype were analysed and found that participants with personal melanoma
history had higher TNC (P<0.005). We found no association between MC1R
genotype and BMI but there exists a weak association between BSA and
higher TNC. Within the MC1R R/R cohort, melanoma patients are more likely
to have high TNC than controls (P<0.01). The signature dermoscopic
pattern for the individuals in the MC1R R/R group is at increased odds of
being a non-specific pattern (P<0.01). A significant difference in MC1R
R/R TNC dependent on melanoma history exists and there is a
predisposition towards a non-specific signature nevus pattern.

