Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of epigenetic drugs on chromatin remodeling complexes
disrupted in cancer


Chromatin remodeling complexes undergo dynamic assembly of chromatin to
facilitate the access to DNA packed in nucleosomes during DNA-template
cellular processes. They present genetic alterations in multiple of its
components in a broad range of hematological and solid malignancies. The
SWI/SNF ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex subunits BRG1 and
ARID1A were reported to act as tumor suppressors and they are mutated in
a variety of human cancers including breast cancer, prostate cancer, lung
cancer and pancreatic cancer.In contrast with the irreversible genomic
mutations, epigenetic modifications can be reversed by therapeutic
treatment. New generation of epigenetic drugs consists on specific
inhibitors against chromatin associated proteins which present abnormal
expression in tumors. Bromodomain and BET inhibitors block the assembly
of a protein complex at a particular gene locus by impairing the
interaction of the bromodomain with the acetylated lysine of a histone
tail. To date, some BET inhibitors have been tested for the treatment of
the rare NUT midline carcinoma disease, acute myeloid leukemia and
multiple myeloma.Our aim was to find new potential biomarkers for a
personalized cancer treatment with new generation epigenetic drugs. Thus,
we tested whether cell lines with a component of the SWI/SNF complex
disrupted (BRG1 or ARID1A) present more sensitivity to bromodomain
inhibitors.

