Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G quadruplex stabilization induces mitophagy in S. cerevisiae


G-quadruplex (G4) DNA structures are stable planar structures held
together by multiple G-G base pairs. G4 structures are thought to affect
transcription and other chromosomal processes but their presence in vivo
is also expected to slow replication fork progression. Previous work from
our lab demonstrates that the S. cerevisiae Pif1 5 to 3 DNA helicase is a
particularly potent unwinder of G4 structures in vitro1. In addition,
cells lacking the Pif1 helicase exhibit replication fork slowing and DNA
breakage at G4 motifs, chromosomal sequences that form intra-molecular G4
structures in vitro1,2. In addition, treating yeast in vivo with the G4
stabilizing drug PhenDC3 increases G4-mediated genome instability3.We
treated a collection of 4,783 S. cerevisiae strains that each contained a
single gene deletion with PhenDC3 to search for genes that are sensitive
or resistant to PhenDC3. We will discuss results showing that several
yeast genes that affect maintenance of mitochondrial DNA and autophagy
induction are hypersensitive to PhenDC3. Using fluorescent microscopy and
immunoblotting, we further demonstrate that treatment of wild type S.
cerevisiae cells with PhenDC3 induces autophagy, and more specifically,
mitophagy. Moreover, cells lacking Pif1 are themselves activated for
autophagy.Reference:1 Paeschke, K. et al. Pif1 family helicases suppress
genome instability at G-quadruplex motifs. Nature 497, 458-+,
doi:10.1038/nature12149 (2013).2 Paeschke, K., Capra, J. A. & Zakian, V.
A. DNA replication through G-quadruplex motifs is promoted by the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pif1 DNA helicase. Cell 145, 678-691,
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.015 (2011).3 Piazza, A. et al. Genetic
instability triggered by G-quadruplex interacting Phen-DC compounds in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nucleic Acids Res 38, 4337-4348,
doi:10.1093/nar/gkq136 (2010).

