Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining AZD8186, an inhibitor of PI3Kbeta, with inhibitors of
PI3Kalpha and mTORC1/2 gives comprehensive pathway suppression and
enhanced antitumor activity in PTEN null tumors


The PI3K pathway drives the progression of many human tumours via
mutation of PI3KCA or AKT, loss of tumour suppressors PTEN or TSC1/2, or
over-expression of receptor tyrosine kinases, such as EGFR, Erb2, or
IGFR. Targeting the PI3K pathway has been challenging due to toxicities
with the first generation compounds. Despite this, positive clinical
activity has been achieved, particularly in combination. Maximum benefit
with inhibitors of the PI3K pathway is likely to be in combination, with
agents that target other pathways, or PI3K signalling at different
nodes.In cells, AZD8186 inhibits PI3Kbeta- and PI3Kdelta-dependent
phosphorylation of AKT with IC50s of 3nM and 17nM respectively. Tumour
cells can become dependent on PI3Kbeta when they lose PTEN protein
function. PI3Kbeta inhibitors are differentiated from PI3Kalpha, mTOR and
AKT inhibitors as they do not modulate peripheral glucose and other
aspects of the canonical PI3Kalpha signalling pathway. Therefore in
tumours where PI3Kbeta is activated it may be possible to combine AZD8186
with other inhibitors of the PI3K pathway to achieve comprehensive
pathway suppression. Delivering comprehensive pathway suppression has
become critically important with the realisation that resistance to the
PI3K inhibitors can occur through feedback-mediated or mutation-mediated
reactivation of the pathway through alternate PI3K isoforms. We have
explored intra-pathway combinations of AZD8186 with inhibitors of
PI3Kalpha (AZD8835 and BYL719) and mTOR (AZD2014 and everolimus) in PTEN
protein deficient models. In particular, combining AZD8186 with
inhibitors of mTOR increased efficacy across a range of tumour models. In
TNBC (HCC-70) or renal (786-0) xenograft models, combined inhibition
resulted in tumour regression. The degree of tumour regression was
influenced by dose and schedule. For example, intermittent dosing of
AZD8186 with continuous AZD2014 regressed 786-0 tumours by between 38%
and 82%, while HCC70 showed a 21% regression. Tumour regressions were
also observed when AZD8186 and AZD2014 were dosed intermittently, a 5 day
on AZD8186 with 2 day on AZD2014 concurrent dosing schedule in 786-0 gave
41% and 22% regression respectively in HCC70. The anti-tumour effects
were associated with increased depth and duration of inhibition of AKT
pathway biomarkers, but significantly also modification of biomarkers
associated with cellular metabolic function and survival pathways. The
ability of intermittent doses of the combination regimen to deliver
tumour regression establishes the principle that it is possible to move
away from chronic pathway suppression, offering the flexibility to
mitigate potential tolerability challenges, potential acute resistance
mechanisms, but also drive increased phenotypic effects in the tumour.

