Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HO1 induction interrupts the glucocorticoid receptor signaling in
prostate cancer cells


Although initially treatable, prostate cancer can recur in a hormone
refractory form that is not responsive to current available therapies.
The mortality rate associated with hormone refractory prostate cancer is
high, and there is an urgent need for new therapeutic agents to treat
prostate cancer. In order to overcome the toxicity of chemotherapy,
glucocorticoids have long been used in the treatment of hormone-resistant
prostate cancer. Nevertheless, many authors reported that the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) can substitute the androgen receptor and
activate a similar but distinguishable set of genes. A common feature of
prostate cancer is the dependence on activated signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), a transcription factor for survival
and a coactivator of GR signaling. We have previously demonstrated that
the induction of HO1, an antioxidant and anti-inflammatory protein,
increases STAT3 cytoplasmic retention, interfering with its signaling and
promotes HO1 nuclear localization. Our aim is to study the effect of HO1
induction on GR signaling in prostate cancer. PC3 cells were treated with
Dexamethasone (Dex) at different concentrations (107, 108 and 109 M)
during 24 h in 10% charcoaled-serum media and were exposed to the
pharmacological inducer of HO1 (hemin, 80 uM, 24 h). Control cells were
treated with vehicles. No significant differences in cell viability were
detected by MTT assay. In order to investigate whether HO1 interrupts the
GR transcriptional activity, PC3 cells were transfected with a luciferase
reporter plamid containing three glucocorticoid response elements.
Transfected cells were treated either with hemin (80 uM, 24 h), Dex (108
M, 6 h) or the combination of both drugs. The GR transcriptional
activation was confirmed when cells were treated with the agonist Dex
(pAlthough initially treatable, prostate cancer can recur in a hormone
refractory form that is not responsive to current available therapies.
The mortality rate associated with hormone refractory prostate cancer is
high, and there is an urgent need for new therapeutic agents to treat
prostate cancer. In order to overcome the toxicity of chemotherapy,
glucocorticoids have long been used in the treatment of hormone-resistant
prostate cancer. Nevertheless, many authors reported that the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) can substitute the androgen receptor and
activate a similar but distinguishable set of genes. A common feature of
prostate cancer is the dependence on activated signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), a transcription factor for survival
and a coactivator of GR signaling. We have previously demonstrated that
the induction of HO1, an antioxidant and anti-inflammatory protein,
increases STAT3 cytoplasmic retention, interfering with its signaling and
promotes HO1 nuclear localization. Our aim is to study the effect of HO1
induction on GR signaling in prostate cancer. PC3 cells were treated with
Dexamethasone (Dex) at different concentrations (107, 108 and 109 M)
during 24 h in 10% charcoaled-serum media and were exposed to the
pharmacological inducer of HO1 (hemin, 80 uM, 24 h). Control cells were
treated with vehicles. No significant differences in cell viability were
detected by MTT assay. In order to investigate whether HO1 interrupts the
GR transcriptional activity, PC3 cells were transfected with a luciferase
reporter plamid containing three glucocorticoid response elements.
Transfected cells were treated either with hemin (80 uM, 24 h), Dex (108
M, 6 h) or the combination of both drugs. The GR transcriptional
activation was confirmed when cells were treated with the agonist Dex
(p<0.01). HO1 induction significantly reduced either the GR basal
transcriptional activity (pAlthough initially treatable, prostate cancer
can recur in a hormone refractory form that is not responsive to current
available therapies. The mortality rate associated with hormone
refractory prostate cancer is high, and there is an urgent need for new
therapeutic agents to treat prostate cancer. In order to overcome the
toxicity of chemotherapy, glucocorticoids have long been used in the
treatment of hormone-resistant prostate cancer. Nevertheless, many
authors reported that the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) can substitute the
androgen receptor and activate a similar but distinguishable set of
genes. A common feature of prostate cancer is the dependence on activated
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), a
transcription factor for survival and a coactivator of GR signaling. We
have previously demonstrated that the induction of HO1, an antioxidant
and anti-inflammatory protein, increases STAT3 cytoplasmic retention,
interfering with its signaling and promotes HO1 nuclear localization. Our
aim is to study the effect of HO1 induction on GR signaling in prostate
cancer. PC3 cells were treated with Dexamethasone (Dex) at different
concentrations (107, 108 and 109 M) during 24 h in 10% charcoaled-serum
media and were exposed to the pharmacological inducer of HO1 (hemin, 80
uM, 24 h). Control cells were treated with vehicles. No significant
differences in cell viability were detected by MTT assay. In order to
investigate whether HO1 interrupts the GR transcriptional activity, PC3
cells were transfected with a luciferase reporter plamid containing three
glucocorticoid response elements. Transfected cells were treated either
with hemin (80 uM, 24 h), Dex (108 M, 6 h) or the combination of both
drugs. The GR transcriptional activation was confirmed when cells were
treated with the agonist Dex (p<0.01). HO1 induction significantly
reduced either the GR basal transcriptional activity (p<0.01) as well as
the Dex induced (pAlthough initially treatable, prostate cancer can recur
in a hormone refractory form that is not responsive to current available
therapies. The mortality rate associated with hormone refractory prostate
cancer is high, and there is an urgent need for new therapeutic agents to
treat prostate cancer. In order to overcome the toxicity of chemotherapy,
glucocorticoids have long been used in the treatment of hormone-resistant
prostate cancer. Nevertheless, many authors reported that the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) can substitute the androgen receptor and
activate a similar but distinguishable set of genes. A common feature of
prostate cancer is the dependence on activated signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), a transcription factor for survival
and a coactivator of GR signaling. We have previously demonstrated that
the induction of HO1, an antioxidant and anti-inflammatory protein,
increases STAT3 cytoplasmic retention, interfering with its signaling and
promotes HO1 nuclear localization. Our aim is to study the effect of HO1
induction on GR signaling in prostate cancer. PC3 cells were treated with
Dexamethasone (Dex) at different concentrations (107, 108 and 109 M)
during 24 h in 10% charcoaled-serum media and were exposed to the
pharmacological inducer of HO1 (hemin, 80 uM, 24 h). Control cells were
treated with vehicles. No significant differences in cell viability were
detected by MTT assay. In order to investigate whether HO1 interrupts the
GR transcriptional activity, PC3 cells were transfected with a luciferase
reporter plamid containing three glucocorticoid response elements.
Transfected cells were treated either with hemin (80 uM, 24 h), Dex (108
M, 6 h) or the combination of both drugs. The GR transcriptional
activation was confirmed when cells were treated with the agonist Dex
(p<0.01). HO1 induction significantly reduced either the GR basal
transcriptional activity (p<0.01) as well as the Dex induced (p<0.01).
The expression of Ikb, a GR regulated gene, was screened by RT-qPCR and
was confirmed its inhibition in hemin exposed cells treated or not with
dexamethasone. The repressive activity of HO1 was also demonstrated using
an NFkB luciferase reporter assay. Using confocal fluorescence
microscopy, GR nuclear translocation upon Dex treatment was confirmed,
and a decrease of GR nuclear localization was demonstrated under
hemin+Dex treatment (pAlthough initially treatable, prostate cancer can
recur in a hormone refractory form that is not responsive to current
available therapies. The mortality rate associated with hormone
refractory prostate cancer is high, and there is an urgent need for new
therapeutic agents to treat prostate cancer. In order to overcome the
toxicity of chemotherapy, glucocorticoids have long been used in the
treatment of hormone-resistant prostate cancer. Nevertheless, many
authors reported that the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) can substitute the
androgen receptor and activate a similar but distinguishable set of
genes. A common feature of prostate cancer is the dependence on activated
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), a
transcription factor for survival and a coactivator of GR signaling. We
have previously demonstrated that the induction of HO1, an antioxidant
and anti-inflammatory protein, increases STAT3 cytoplasmic retention,
interfering with its signaling and promotes HO1 nuclear localization. Our
aim is to study the effect of HO1 induction on GR signaling in prostate
cancer. PC3 cells were treated with Dexamethasone (Dex) at different
concentrations (107, 108 and 109 M) during 24 h in 10% charcoaled-serum
media and were exposed to the pharmacological inducer of HO1 (hemin, 80
uM, 24 h). Control cells were treated with vehicles. No significant
differences in cell viability were detected by MTT assay. In order to
investigate whether HO1 interrupts the GR transcriptional activity, PC3
cells were transfected with a luciferase reporter plamid containing three
glucocorticoid response elements. Transfected cells were treated either
with hemin (80 uM, 24 h), Dex (108 M, 6 h) or the combination of both
drugs. The GR transcriptional activation was confirmed when cells were
treated with the agonist Dex (p<0.01). HO1 induction significantly
reduced either the GR basal transcriptional activity (p<0.01) as well as
the Dex induced (p<0.01). The expression of Ikb, a GR regulated gene, was
screened by RT-qPCR and was confirmed its inhibition in hemin exposed
cells treated or not with dexamethasone. The repressive activity of HO1
was also demonstrated using an NFkB luciferase reporter assay. Using
confocal fluorescence microscopy, GR nuclear translocation upon Dex
treatment was confirmed, and a decrease of GR nuclear localization was
demonstrated under hemin+Dex treatment (p<0.01). These results correlate
with the diminished luciferase activity of the MMTV-luc plasmid in the
presence of hemin+Dex vs Dex alone. Strikingly this is the first report
showing the immunoprecipitation of GR and HO1, showing physical
interaction between these proteins, both in the nucleus and in the
cytoplasm. In conclusion, these results provide a novel function for HO1
downmodulating GR transcriptional activity, repressing the expression of
its target genes and interfering with the receptor's nuclear localization
in prostate cancer cells.

