Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Type II transglutaminase is an epidermal squamous cell carcinoma
stem cell survival protein


Cancer stem cells are thought to be responsible for rapid tumor growth,
metastasis and enhanced tumor survival following drug treatment. For this
reason, there is a major emphasis on identifying proteins that can be
targeted to kill cancer stem cells or control their growth. Our studies
suggest that transglutaminase type II (TG2) is such a target in epidermal
squamous cell carcinoma. TG2 was originally described as a transamidase
that catalyzes formation of -(-glutamyl)lysine bonds. However, subsequent
studies reveal that TG2 is a GTP binding protein that plays an important
role in cell signaling and survival. In the present study we show that
TG2 is a target for anti-stem cell therapy in human squamous cell
carcinoma. We identify TG2 as highly elevated in epidermal cancer stem
cells (ECS cells) and show that TG2 knockdown or suppression of TG2
function with inhibitors reduces ECS cell survival, spheroid formation,
matrigel invasion and migration. The reduction in survival is associated
with activation of apoptosis. Mechanistic studies, using TG2 mutants
suggest that the GTP-binding activity is required for maintenance of ECS
cell growth and survival. These studies suggest that TG2 has an important
role in maintaining cancer stem cell survival, invasive and metastatic
behavior, and is an important therapeutic target to reduce survival of
cancer stem cells in epidermal squamous cell carcinoma.

