Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival of skin cancer tumor initiating cells requires the Ezh2
polycomb group protein


Epidermal squamous cell carcinoma is among the most common cancers in
humans. These tumors are comprised of phenotypically diverse of cells
that display varying potential for proliferation and differentiation.
Polycomb group (PcG) proteins, including Ezh2, are important candidate
stem cell maintanence proteins. Our previous study showed that
Ezh2-enriched epidermal cancer stem cells (ECS cells) represent a
minority of cells in tumors, yet drive aggressive tumor formation. In the
present study, we show that Ezh2 is required for ECS cell survival,
migration, invation and tumor formatiom and this is associated with
increased histone H3 trimethylationon lysine 27, a mark of Ezh2 action.
We also show that Ezh2 knockdown or treatment with Ezh2-selective
inhibitors, GSK126 or EP-6438, reduce Ezh2 level and activity, leading to
reduced spheroid formation, migration, invasion and tumor formation. Use
of these inhibitors was associated with reduced ECS cell vaibility and
induction of apoptosis. These studies indicate that epidermal squamous
cell carcinoma cells contain a subpopulation of cancer stem cells-like
tumor initiating cells that are enriched in Ezh2 expression and that Ezh2
is required for optimal survival of these cells and tumor formation.
These studies suggest that treatment with Ezh2 inhibitors may be a
strategy for reducing epidermal cancer stem cell survival and supressing
tumor formation.

