Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of miRNA profiling and bioinformatics reveals
the potential key miRNAs in gastric cancer


Supported by: National Natural Science Foundation of China, No.81172282;
National Natural Youth Science Foundation of China, No.81302151; Shenzhen
Peacock Plan, No.KQCX20130621101141669; Planned Science and Technology
Project of Shenzhen, No.GJHS20120621142654087; the Key Laboratory Project
of Shenzhen, No.ZDSY20130329101130496; Technological innovation group of
SZU grants, No.T201202; NIH grants DK087454, CA146799, CA173390; an
American Cancer Society Clinical Research Professorship.Gastric cancer
(GC) remains a major health threat worldwide, and is one of the leading
causes of cancer-related deaths in China. The discovery of microRNAs
(miRNAs) has provided a new and powerful tool for studying diagnostic
biomarkers and effective therapeutic targets in GC. By using microarray
analyses of benign and malignant gastric epithelial cell lines (HFE145,
NCI-N87, MKN28, RF1, KATO III and RF48), we discovered dysregulated 16
miRNAs, of which 11 were validated by real-time qRT-PCR. Based on miRWalk
online database scans, 2532 potential mRNA targets of these 16 miRNAs
were identified. Bioinformatic analyses suggested that these predicted
targets were principally involved in tumor pathogenesis, MAPK signaling,
and apoptosis. Finally, miRNA-gene network analyses identified miRNA-
125b as being potentially vitally important in GC.

