Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age-dependent DNA methylation in normal breast epithelium and
breast cancer


Breast cancer risk factors include age, genetic alterations, weight, diet
and others. More recently accumulating evidence suggests that epigenetic
alterations are frequent and play important role in breast cancer
development and progression. Epigenetic alterations include changes in
DNA methylation, histone modifications and miRNA expression in the
absence of changes in DNA sequence. The epigenetic changes in cancer
include global loss of DNA methylation that might lead to genomic
instability and gain of methylation at many promoters of tumor suppressor
genes that leads to gene silencing. Interestingly, work from our own
laboratory and others have established that in many different tissues,
DNA methylation changes due to age have similar patterns as to changes
that occur in cancer. Therefore, the goal of this study is to identify
and characterize age-dependent DNA methylation changes in normal breast
epithelium and their contribution to breast cancer development. To
differentiate between age-dependent and independent DNA methylation
changes, we utilized DNA extracted from 27 primary human mammary
epithelial cells (age range 33-82 years old) derived from adjacent or
contralateral normal mammary tissue of breast cancer patients. We
measured DNA methylation using a highly sensitive methodology developed
in our laboratory called Digital Restriction Enzyme Analysis of
Methylation (DREAM). We also studied DNA methylation in six different
breast cancer cell lines by DREAM. We also used publically available 450K
TCGA data for 685 breast tumor and 98 normal samples. Using bioinformatic
approach, we have defined age dependent (Spearman R > |0.38|, p Breast
cancer risk factors include age, genetic alterations, weight, diet and
others. More recently accumulating evidence suggests that epigenetic
alterations are frequent and play important role in breast cancer
development and progression. Epigenetic alterations include changes in
DNA methylation, histone modifications and miRNA expression in the
absence of changes in DNA sequence. The epigenetic changes in cancer
include global loss of DNA methylation that might lead to genomic
instability and gain of methylation at many promoters of tumor suppressor
genes that leads to gene silencing. Interestingly, work from our own
laboratory and others have established that in many different tissues,
DNA methylation changes due to age have similar patterns as to changes
that occur in cancer. Therefore, the goal of this study is to identify
and characterize age-dependent DNA methylation changes in normal breast
epithelium and their contribution to breast cancer development. To
differentiate between age-dependent and independent DNA methylation
changes, we utilized DNA extracted from 27 primary human mammary
epithelial cells (age range 33-82 years old) derived from adjacent or
contralateral normal mammary tissue of breast cancer patients. We
measured DNA methylation using a highly sensitive methodology developed
in our laboratory called Digital Restriction Enzyme Analysis of
Methylation (DREAM). We also studied DNA methylation in six different
breast cancer cell lines by DREAM. We also used publically available 450K
TCGA data for 685 breast tumor and 98 normal samples. Using bioinformatic
approach, we have defined age dependent (Spearman R > |0.38|, p <0.05)
and independent (Spearman R 0.05) sites that exhibit DNA methylation
changes in normal breast epithelium. Interestingly, we found that the
age-related genes are more seeded (exhibit low level of methylation) in
their promoter CpG islands and are enriched for polycomb group target
genes compared to the non-age related genes (p value = 0.032).
Furthermore, these age-related genes (for example HOXD9, TDRD10, MYOD1,
DPYS, GDA, GIPC2, FAM162B, LAMA1, PKDREJ, etc) have increased DNA
methylation in tumors compared to the normal samples in TCGA with a
methylation difference of up to 50%. These changes are significantly
different compared to not-age related genes or random genes (p0.05) sites
that exhibit DNA methylation changes in normal breast epithelium.
Interestingly, we found that the age-related genes are more seeded
(exhibit low level of methylation) in their promoter CpG islands and are
enriched for polycomb group target genes compared to the non-age related
genes (p value = 0.032). Furthermore, these age-related genes (for
example HOXD9, TDRD10, MYOD1, DPYS, GDA, GIPC2, FAM162B, LAMA1, PKDREJ,
etc) have increased DNA methylation in tumors compared to the normal
samples in TCGA with a methylation difference of up to 50%. These changes
are significantly different compared to not-age related genes or random
genes (p<0.0001). The age-related genes that gained DNA methylation in
tumors in TCGA dataset, were also hypermethylated in breast cancer cell
lines compared to immortalized human mammary epithelial cells. Thirty one
percent of the common genes between TCGA data set and breast cancer cell
lines, showed decreased mRNA expression in RNA-seq data available through
the TCGA data portal. Therefore, in this study we have characterized
age-dependent epigenetic changes in normal breast epithelium as potential
breast cancer risk associated alterations.

