Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of polymorphisms in TP53, CXCL2, MDM2, MDM4 and BCL2
genes and proliferative prostate diseases among Lebanese men


Specific Aims: To investigate possible relationships between certain
polymorphisms in p53 protein (TP53) gene, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand
2 (CXCL-2) gene, mouse double minute 2 homologue (MDM2) gene, MDM4
protein (MDM4) gene and B cell lymphoma 2 protein (BCL2) gene and benign
prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate cancer (PCa) among middle-aged
Lebanese men.Methods: Blood was collected from volunteer prostate disease
screening campaign participants ages 50-70. DNA was extracted from
peripheral blood leucocytes of 85 donors diagnosed with clinical PCa, 178
donors diagnosed with BPH, and 140 donors with no prostrate-related
pathologies. The 72 Arg/pro polymorphism of TP53 gene, 801 G/A
polymorphism of CXCL2 gene, 309 G/T polymorphism of MDM2 gene, 103 T/C
and D153G polymorphisms of MDM4 gene and 938 C/A polymorphism of BCL2
genes was investigated by polymerase chain reaction/restriction
fragment-length polymorphism analysis. The genotype of the subjects for
each of the genes was determined and allelic frequency was calculated.
Association between the genotypes and PCa and BPH was estimated by
calculating the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). The
relative risk (RR) of PCa or BPH for having a particular genotype was
also calculated using MedCalc statistical software. The null hypotheses
were rejected with a p value of Specific Aims: To investigate possible
relationships between certain polymorphisms in p53 protein (TP53) gene,
chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 (CXCL-2) gene, mouse double minute 2
homologue (MDM2) gene, MDM4 protein (MDM4) gene and B cell lymphoma 2
protein (BCL2) gene and benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate
cancer (PCa) among middle-aged Lebanese men.Methods: Blood was collected
from volunteer prostate disease screening campaign participants ages
50-70. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes of 85 donors
diagnosed with clinical PCa, 178 donors diagnosed with BPH, and 140
donors with no prostrate-related pathologies. The 72 Arg/pro polymorphism
of TP53 gene, 801 G/A polymorphism of CXCL2 gene, 309 G/T polymorphism of
MDM2 gene, 103 T/C and D153G polymorphisms of MDM4 gene and 938 C/A
polymorphism of BCL2 genes was investigated by polymerase chain
reaction/restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis. The genotype
of the subjects for each of the genes was determined and allelic
frequency was calculated. Association between the genotypes and PCa and
BPH was estimated by calculating the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI). The relative risk (RR) of PCa or BPH for having a
particular genotype was also calculated using MedCalc statistical
software. The null hypotheses were rejected with a p value of
<0.05%.Results: There is no association between the examined
polymorphisms of the TP53 gene, CXCL2 gene, MDM2 gene and BCL2 gene and
BPH or PCa. The ratio of C/T alleles for the 103 T/C locus and the ratio
of D/G alleles for D153G locus of MDM4 are lower for subjects with PCa
and BPH compared to the controls (pSpecific Aims: To investigate possible
relationships between certain polymorphisms in p53 protein (TP53) gene,
chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 (CXCL-2) gene, mouse double minute 2
homologue (MDM2) gene, MDM4 protein (MDM4) gene and B cell lymphoma 2
protein (BCL2) gene and benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate
cancer (PCa) among middle-aged Lebanese men.Methods: Blood was collected
from volunteer prostate disease screening campaign participants ages
50-70. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes of 85 donors
diagnosed with clinical PCa, 178 donors diagnosed with BPH, and 140
donors with no prostrate-related pathologies. The 72 Arg/pro polymorphism
of TP53 gene, 801 G/A polymorphism of CXCL2 gene, 309 G/T polymorphism of
MDM2 gene, 103 T/C and D153G polymorphisms of MDM4 gene and 938 C/A
polymorphism of BCL2 genes was investigated by polymerase chain
reaction/restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis. The genotype
of the subjects for each of the genes was determined and allelic
frequency was calculated. Association between the genotypes and PCa and
BPH was estimated by calculating the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI). The relative risk (RR) of PCa or BPH for having a
particular genotype was also calculated using MedCalc statistical
software. The null hypotheses were rejected with a p value of
<0.05%.Results: There is no association between the examined
polymorphisms of the TP53 gene, CXCL2 gene, MDM2 gene and BCL2 gene and
BPH or PCa. The ratio of C/T alleles for the 103 T/C locus and the ratio
of D/G alleles for D153G locus of MDM4 are lower for subjects with PCa
and BPH compared to the controls (p<0.01 for both loci). The ratio of
(CC+CT)/TT is lower for subjects with PCa compared to the control (OR =
0.12, 95% CI = 0.06-0.22, RR = 0.39, pSpecific Aims: To investigate
possible relationships between certain polymorphisms in p53 protein
(TP53) gene, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 (CXCL-2) gene, mouse double
minute 2 homologue (MDM2) gene, MDM4 protein (MDM4) gene and B cell
lymphoma 2 protein (BCL2) gene and benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and
prostate cancer (PCa) among middle-aged Lebanese men.Methods: Blood was
collected from volunteer prostate disease screening campaign participants
ages 50-70. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes of 85
donors diagnosed with clinical PCa, 178 donors diagnosed with BPH, and
140 donors with no prostrate-related pathologies. The 72 Arg/pro
polymorphism of TP53 gene, 801 G/A polymorphism of CXCL2 gene, 309 G/T
polymorphism of MDM2 gene, 103 T/C and D153G polymorphisms of MDM4 gene
and 938 C/A polymorphism of BCL2 genes was investigated by polymerase
chain reaction/restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis. The
genotype of the subjects for each of the genes was determined and allelic
frequency was calculated. Association between the genotypes and PCa and
BPH was estimated by calculating the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI). The relative risk (RR) of PCa or BPH for having a
particular genotype was also calculated using MedCalc statistical
software. The null hypotheses were rejected with a p value of
<0.05%.Results: There is no association between the examined
polymorphisms of the TP53 gene, CXCL2 gene, MDM2 gene and BCL2 gene and
BPH or PCa. The ratio of C/T alleles for the 103 T/C locus and the ratio
of D/G alleles for D153G locus of MDM4 are lower for subjects with PCa
and BPH compared to the controls (p<0.01 for both loci). The ratio of
(CC+CT)/TT is lower for subjects with PCa compared to the control (OR =
0.12, 95% CI = 0.06-0.22, RR = 0.39, p<0.01), and BPH compared to the
controls (OR = 0.17, 95% CI = 0.10-0.28, RR = 0.50, pSpecific Aims: To
investigate possible relationships between certain polymorphisms in p53
protein (TP53) gene, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 (CXCL-2) gene,
mouse double minute 2 homologue (MDM2) gene, MDM4 protein (MDM4) gene and
B cell lymphoma 2 protein (BCL2) gene and benign prostate hyperplasia
(BPH) and prostate cancer (PCa) among middle-aged Lebanese men.Methods:
Blood was collected from volunteer prostate disease screening campaign
participants ages 50-70. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood
leucocytes of 85 donors diagnosed with clinical PCa, 178 donors diagnosed
with BPH, and 140 donors with no prostrate-related pathologies. The 72
Arg/pro polymorphism of TP53 gene, 801 G/A polymorphism of CXCL2 gene,
309 G/T polymorphism of MDM2 gene, 103 T/C and D153G polymorphisms of
MDM4 gene and 938 C/A polymorphism of BCL2 genes was investigated by
polymerase chain reaction/restriction fragment-length polymorphism
analysis. The genotype of the subjects for each of the genes was
determined and allelic frequency was calculated. Association between the
genotypes and PCa and BPH was estimated by calculating the odds ratio
(OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). The relative risk (RR) of PCa or
BPH for having a particular genotype was also calculated using MedCalc
statistical software. The null hypotheses were rejected with a p value of
<0.05%.Results: There is no association between the examined
polymorphisms of the TP53 gene, CXCL2 gene, MDM2 gene and BCL2 gene and
BPH or PCa. The ratio of C/T alleles for the 103 T/C locus and the ratio
of D/G alleles for D153G locus of MDM4 are lower for subjects with PCa
and BPH compared to the controls (p<0.01 for both loci). The ratio of
(CC+CT)/TT is lower for subjects with PCa compared to the control (OR =
0.12, 95% CI = 0.06-0.22, RR = 0.39, p<0.01), and BPH compared to the
controls (OR = 0.17, 95% CI = 0.10-0.28, RR = 0.50, p<0.01); and the
ratio of (GG+GD)/DD is higher for subjects with PCa compared to the
control (RR = 1.86, pSpecific Aims: To investigate possible relationships
between certain polymorphisms in p53 protein (TP53) gene, chemokine
(C-X-C motif) ligand 2 (CXCL-2) gene, mouse double minute 2 homologue
(MDM2) gene, MDM4 protein (MDM4) gene and B cell lymphoma 2 protein
(BCL2) gene and benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate cancer
(PCa) among middle-aged Lebanese men.Methods: Blood was collected from
volunteer prostate disease screening campaign participants ages 50-70.
DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes of 85 donors diagnosed
with clinical PCa, 178 donors diagnosed with BPH, and 140 donors with no
prostrate-related pathologies. The 72 Arg/pro polymorphism of TP53 gene,
801 G/A polymorphism of CXCL2 gene, 309 G/T polymorphism of MDM2 gene,
103 T/C and D153G polymorphisms of MDM4 gene and 938 C/A polymorphism of
BCL2 genes was investigated by polymerase chain reaction/restriction
fragment-length polymorphism analysis. The genotype of the subjects for
each of the genes was determined and allelic frequency was calculated.
Association between the genotypes and PCa and BPH was estimated by
calculating the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). The
relative risk (RR) of PCa or BPH for having a particular genotype was
also calculated using MedCalc statistical software. The null hypotheses
were rejected with a p value of <0.05%.Results: There is no association
between the examined polymorphisms of the TP53 gene, CXCL2 gene, MDM2
gene and BCL2 gene and BPH or PCa. The ratio of C/T alleles for the 103
T/C locus and the ratio of D/G alleles for D153G locus of MDM4 are lower
for subjects with PCa and BPH compared to the controls (p<0.01 for both
loci). The ratio of (CC+CT)/TT is lower for subjects with PCa compared to
the control (OR = 0.12, 95% CI = 0.06-0.22, RR = 0.39, p<0.01), and BPH
compared to the controls (OR = 0.17, 95% CI = 0.10-0.28, RR = 0.50,
p<0.01); and the ratio of (GG+GD)/DD is higher for subjects with PCa
compared to the control (RR = 1.86, p<0.01) and subjects with BPH
compared to the controls (RR = 1.85, pSpecific Aims: To investigate
possible relationships between certain polymorphisms in p53 protein
(TP53) gene, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 (CXCL-2) gene, mouse double
minute 2 homologue (MDM2) gene, MDM4 protein (MDM4) gene and B cell
lymphoma 2 protein (BCL2) gene and benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and
prostate cancer (PCa) among middle-aged Lebanese men.Methods: Blood was
collected from volunteer prostate disease screening campaign participants
ages 50-70. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes of 85
donors diagnosed with clinical PCa, 178 donors diagnosed with BPH, and
140 donors with no prostrate-related pathologies. The 72 Arg/pro
polymorphism of TP53 gene, 801 G/A polymorphism of CXCL2 gene, 309 G/T
polymorphism of MDM2 gene, 103 T/C and D153G polymorphisms of MDM4 gene
and 938 C/A polymorphism of BCL2 genes was investigated by polymerase
chain reaction/restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis. The
genotype of the subjects for each of the genes was determined and allelic
frequency was calculated. Association between the genotypes and PCa and
BPH was estimated by calculating the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI). The relative risk (RR) of PCa or BPH for having a
particular genotype was also calculated using MedCalc statistical
software. The null hypotheses were rejected with a p value of
<0.05%.Results: There is no association between the examined
polymorphisms of the TP53 gene, CXCL2 gene, MDM2 gene and BCL2 gene and
BPH or PCa. The ratio of C/T alleles for the 103 T/C locus and the ratio
of D/G alleles for D153G locus of MDM4 are lower for subjects with PCa
and BPH compared to the controls (p<0.01 for both loci). The ratio of
(CC+CT)/TT is lower for subjects with PCa compared to the control (OR =
0.12, 95% CI = 0.06-0.22, RR = 0.39, p<0.01), and BPH compared to the
controls (OR = 0.17, 95% CI = 0.10-0.28, RR = 0.50, p<0.01); and the
ratio of (GG+GD)/DD is higher for subjects with PCa compared to the
control (RR = 1.86, p<0.01) and subjects with BPH compared to the
controls (RR = 1.85, p<0.01).Conclusions: There is no statistically
significant association between polymorphisms in TP53 gene, CXCL2 gene,
MDM2 gene and BCL2 gene and PCa or BPH but the C allele of 103 T/C locus
and the G allele of the D153G locus of MDM4 are risk factors for both PCa
and BPH among Lebanese men.

