Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inverse regulation of p53 by atypical PKC inhibitors in ovarian
cancer cells


Ovarian cancers are highly lethal tumors which account for approximately
four percent of all women's cancers and are the fifth leading cause of
cancer-related death among women. At diagnosis, the majority of patients
have metastatic disease and the long-term survival remains low. Certain
ovarian cancers are highly lethal tumors due to the emergence of
therapy-resistant ovarian cancer cells. Protein kinase C-iota (PKC-) has
been shown to aid in the ability of cancer cells to resist drug-induced
apoptosis. Recently, it has been reported that PKC-, which is located in
chromosome 3 at 3q26.2, is the most common genomic amplicon as identified
by comparative genomic hybridization [Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
102:12519-12524(2005)]. Additionally, an increase in PKC- DNA copy number
was associated with decreased progression-free survival of ovarian cancer
patients. Moreover, only PKC- gene amplification is highly correlated
with protein overexpression, tumor size, lymph node metastasis and
clinical stage out of four genes studied on the 3q26 amplification [Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 47:127-136(2008)]. The focus of this research was to
determine the regulation of p53 by pan-atypical PKC inhibitor,
2-acetyl-1,3-cyclopentanedione (ACPD) [Diabetes. 63:2690-2701 (2014)] and
the novel PKC- inhibitor, ICA-1, (1H-imidazole-4-carboxamide,
5-amino-1-[2,3-dihydroxy-4-[(phosphonooxy) methyl]cyclopentyl]-,[1R-(1,
2, 3 , 4 ) [The Inter. J. Biochem. & Cell Biol. 43:784-794(2011)]. In
contrast to ACPD which inhibits both PKC- and PKC-zeta (PKC-z), ICA-1
specifically inhibits the activity of PKC-. The effects of ACPD and ICA-1
on HEY (serous surface epithelial tumor cells) and T80 (non-malignant
ovarian cells) proliferation was quantified by Trypan blue exclusion
assay. Results showed that incubation of HEY ovarian cancer cells with
ICA-1 (1 m) decreased proliferation by 12% compared to controls at 72
hours post-treatment. In contrast, ACPD (2 M) inhibited proliferation by
81% compared to controls at 24 hours post-treatment. Incubation of T80
cells with ICA-1 resulted in increased proliferation, which is the
opposite effect seen in the malignant cells. Through Western blot
analysis, we found that HEY cells treated with 2M ICA had lower levels of
phosphorylated p53 compared to the control while T80 cells treated with
2M ICA-1 had higher levels of phosphorylated p53 compared to the control.
This pattern was also seen with phosphorylated PKC-. We propose that the
mechanism involves inverse regulation of p53 by atypical PKC inhibitor
ICA-1 in the normal ovarian cancer cells versus the malignant cells.
Normally, MDM2 negatively regulates and degrades p53, but this phenomenon
is reversed in the non-malignant cells after treatment with ICA-1. These
results suggest that PKC- is involved in the regulation of p53.

