Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel form of mimic microRNA for lung cancer therapy


Exogenously supplied tumor suppressor miR-34a induces apoptosis and cell
cycle arrest in lung cancer cell lines. It is suggested that miRNA
replacement therapy of miR-34a is a promising approach for the treatment
of lung cancer. On the one hand, the immunological response to nucleic
acid via Toll like receptors (TLRs) and RIG-I like receptors (RLRs) that
restrict the practical use of nucleic acid drugs in the clinical setting.
It is known that the immunological response to the nucleic acid is
strongly depends the length of nucleic acid. Therefore, we have tried to
develop a shorter nucleic acid drugs that can escape immune surveillance.
The deletion of nucleotide with maintenance of the secondary structure of
short miR-34a keeps the activity and the target specificity of miR-34a.
Finally, miR-34a can be shortened from 44 to 30 nucleobase. The shortened
30 nucleotides miR-34a was named Guide hairpin RNA (ghR) -34a and
analyzed in detail. The inhibitory activity against miR-34a targets genes
such as AXL, MET and CDK6 were comparable between ghR-34a and
physiological form of miR-34a at both the mRNA and protein levels.
Similarly, there is no difference in the antiproliferative activity
against lung cancer cell line between ghR-34a and miR-34a. On the other
hand, the ghR-34a does not induce inflammatory response and unwanted gene
inhibition by passenger strand. These data indicated that ghR-34a can
inhibits lung cancer with low side effects. Furthermore, the shortening
methods can be broadly applied to the other miRNAs. Thus, the shortening
methods of miRNA developed in the study may be provide a novel, safe and
effective nucleic acid drug platform and promote the clinical usefulness
of nucleic acid therapy.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

