Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of Phosphatase toward the Retinoblastoma protein in
breast and colorectal cancer cell spheroids


Excessive phosphorylation of the Retinoblastoma protein is found in most
cancer tumor types. Several cyclin dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitors are
in development or in clinical trials at the present time. Our previous
studies have focused on the regulation of Rb phosphorylation by the
phosphatase, PP1. Specificity toward substrates is imparted onto PP1 by
many different interacting proteins. In proliferating cells, PP1 is
associated with a regulatory protein called PNUTS (Phosphatase Nuclear
Targeting Subunit). Our previous experiments have shown that PNUTS
inhibits PP1 activity toward specific Rb phosphorylation sites. Further
we have demonstrated that siRNA mediated knockdown of PNUTS in several
cancer cell types (colon, breast, ovarian) leads to an increase in Rb
specific PP1 activity, Rb dephosphorylation on several sites, and a
dramatic induction of apoptosis. Furthermore, the ability of PNUTS siRNA
to induce apoptosis was shown to be dependent on Rb expression.
Interestingly, further studies showed that PNUTS knockdown had no effect
on non-transformed breast and colorectal cells, in which Rb is not
hyperphosphorylated. Thus we have developed a method to activate the Rb
phosphatase in cells by knockdown of the PP1 binding protein, PNUTS. The
current study was undertaken to analyze the effect of PNUTS knockdown in
cancer cells grown in three-dimensional spheroids grown by incubation of
cells in hanging drop plates. The effect of PNUTS knockdown on Rb
phosphorylation, cell proliferation and cell viability using this model
system will be presented.

