Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKT inhibition sensitizes tumor cells to rapamycin by enhancing
the repressive function of PRS40 on mTORC1/4E-BP1 axis


The mTORC1 inhibitors, rapamycin and its analogs, have been used for the
treatment of a variety of cancers, but the clinical performance of these
drugs has fallen short of expectations due to only modest efficacy in
tumors. The underlying mechanisms of rapamycin resistance remain largely
elusive. Here, we found that activated AKT signaling is associated with
rapamycin resistance in breast and colon cancers by sustained
phosphorylation of the translational repressor 4E-BP1. Treatment of tumor
cells with rapamycin or the AKT inhibitor MK2206 shows incomplete
inhibition of 4E-BP1 phosphorylation, and is functionally manifest as
cap-dependent translation, cell growth and motility. However, treatment
with both drugs provides profound effects in vitro and in vivo.
Mechanistically, we demonstrate that the combination treatment is
required to effectively inhibit PRAS40 phosphorylation on both Ser183 and
Thr246 mediated by mTORC1 and AKT respectively, and with the combined
treatment, dephosphorylated PRAS40 binding to the raptor/mTOR complex is
enhanced, leading to dramatic repression of mTORC1-regulated 4E-BP1
phosphorylation and translation. Knockdown of PRAS40 or 4E-BP1 expression
markedly reduces the dependence of tumor cells on AKT/mTORC1 signaling
for translational control of cell proliferation, survival and motility.
Together, these findings reveal a critical role of PRAS40 as a key
integrator of mTORC1 and AKT signaling for the translational regulation
of tumor cell growth and motility, and highlight PRAS40 phosphorylation
as a potential surrogate marker to evaluate the therapeutic response to
mTOR inhibitors.

