Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of IQS019, a novel BCR kinase inhibitor, in
in vitro and in vivo models of non-Hodgkin lymphoma


Constitutive activation of B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling is a hallmark
of several B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL), including diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), follicular lymphoma
(FL) and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Despite the promising
clinical activity of the first BCR kinase inhibitors in some of these
entities, the design of new compounds is warranted to improve the
survival of B-NHL patients who are poorly responsive, and/or who
eventually develop resistance to current BCR-targeting therapies. In this
context, we recently described the synthesis of IQS019, a
4-aminopyrido[2,3-d]pyrimidine with improved inhibition pattern against
the three BCR-related kinases Lyn, Syk and Btk, when compared to
reference BCR kinase inhibitors. Here, by assessing the activity of
IQS019 in a panel of 21 human cell lines and 17 primary samples
representative of the main B-NHL subtypes, we show that doses of IQS019
in the micromolar range allowed to a rapid and dose-dependent
de-phosphorylation of both constitutive and Ig-activated Syk, Lyn and Btk
in CLL, MCL, FL and DLBCL cell lines and CLL primary cultures. IQS019
treatment impairs cell proliferation and CXCL12-dependent cell migration,
and leads to the induction of caspase-dependent apoptosis. Of interest,
in CLL primary cells, these effects were independently of IGVH mutational
status. In xenotransplant mouse models of MCL and FL, daily dosing of 2
mg/kg IQS019 for two weeks demonstrated to be safe for the animals and
allowed to a 50-60% reduction in tumor outgrowth and glucose uptake,
together with a 52% decrease in cell infiltration into the spleen (p
Constitutive activation of B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling is a hallmark
of several B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL), including diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), follicular lymphoma
(FL) and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Despite the promising
clinical activity of the first BCR kinase inhibitors in some of these
entities, the design of new compounds is warranted to improve the
survival of B-NHL patients who are poorly responsive, and/or who
eventually develop resistance to current BCR-targeting therapies. In this
context, we recently described the synthesis of IQS019, a
4-aminopyrido[2,3-d]pyrimidine with improved inhibition pattern against
the three BCR-related kinases Lyn, Syk and Btk, when compared to
reference BCR kinase inhibitors. Here, by assessing the activity of
IQS019 in a panel of 21 human cell lines and 17 primary samples
representative of the main B-NHL subtypes, we show that doses of IQS019
in the micromolar range allowed to a rapid and dose-dependent
de-phosphorylation of both constitutive and Ig-activated Syk, Lyn and Btk
in CLL, MCL, FL and DLBCL cell lines and CLL primary cultures. IQS019
treatment impairs cell proliferation and CXCL12-dependent cell migration,
and leads to the induction of caspase-dependent apoptosis. Of interest,
in CLL primary cells, these effects were independently of IGVH mutational
status. In xenotransplant mouse models of MCL and FL, daily dosing of 2
mg/kg IQS019 for two weeks demonstrated to be safe for the animals and
allowed to a 50-60% reduction in tumor outgrowth and glucose uptake,
together with a 52% decrease in cell infiltration into the spleen (p <
0.05). These effects were accompanied by a significant (p Constitutive
activation of B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling is a hallmark of several
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL), including diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), follicular lymphoma (FL)
and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Despite the promising clinical
activity of the first BCR kinase inhibitors in some of these entities,
the design of new compounds is warranted to improve the survival of B-NHL
patients who are poorly responsive, and/or who eventually develop
resistance to current BCR-targeting therapies. In this context, we
recently described the synthesis of IQS019, a
4-aminopyrido[2,3-d]pyrimidine with improved inhibition pattern against
the three BCR-related kinases Lyn, Syk and Btk, when compared to
reference BCR kinase inhibitors. Here, by assessing the activity of
IQS019 in a panel of 21 human cell lines and 17 primary samples
representative of the main B-NHL subtypes, we show that doses of IQS019
in the micromolar range allowed to a rapid and dose-dependent
de-phosphorylation of both constitutive and Ig-activated Syk, Lyn and Btk
in CLL, MCL, FL and DLBCL cell lines and CLL primary cultures. IQS019
treatment impairs cell proliferation and CXCL12-dependent cell migration,
and leads to the induction of caspase-dependent apoptosis. Of interest,
in CLL primary cells, these effects were independently of IGVH mutational
status. In xenotransplant mouse models of MCL and FL, daily dosing of 2
mg/kg IQS019 for two weeks demonstrated to be safe for the animals and
allowed to a 50-60% reduction in tumor outgrowth and glucose uptake,
together with a 52% decrease in cell infiltration into the spleen (p <
0.05). These effects were accompanied by a significant (p < 0.05)
downregulation of p-Syk, p-Lyn and p-Btk, and consequent mitotic arrest
and induction of apoptosis in human malignant B cells. Altogether, these
results define the BCR kinase inhibitor IQS019 as a potential candidate
in antitumor therapy against a variety of B-NHL subtypes with aberrant
activation of BCR pathway.

