Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineered protein nanocage for targeted delivery of siRNA to
cancer cells


Considering the problems of small interfering RNA (siRNA) delivery using
traditional viral and non-viral vehicles, a new siRNA delivery system to
enhance efficiency and safety needs to be developed. Here we genetically
engineered human ferritin based protein nanocage to simultaneously
display various functional peptides on the surface of protein nanocage:
cationic peptide to capture siRNA, tumor cell targeting and penetrating
peptides, and enzymatically cleaved peptide to release siRNA inside tumor
cell. In particular, we easily changed the tumor cell targeting peptide
depending on target moiety [epidermal growth factor receptor or vimentin
in this case] on the tumor cell surface. The polymerized siRNA (poly
siRNA) tightly bound to the engineered protein nanocage and formed stable
and condensed structure (poly siRNA-protein nanocage complex) without
cytotoxicity problem. Furthermore, siRNAs in the condensed complex were
effectively protected from endonuclease due to a shielding effect of
protein nanocage. In the in vitro treatment of poly siRNA-protein
nanocage complex, both of the tumor cell targeting and penetrating
peptides were important for efficient delivery of siRNA, and the red
fluorescent protein (RFP) expression in RFP-expressing tumor cells was
notably suppressed by the delivered siRNA with the complementary sequence
to RFP mRNA. It seems that the human ferritin-based protein nanocage is
an efficient, stable, and safe tool for siRNA delivery, having a great
potential for application to in vivo cancer treatment. The unique feature
of protein nanocage is that multiple and functional peptides can be
simultaneously and evenly placed and also easily switched on the protein
nanocage surface through a simple genetic modification, which is likely
to make protein nanocage appropriate for targeted delivery of siRNA to a
wide range of cancer cells.

