Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune checkpoint inhibitors enhance benefits of modified vaccinia
virus Ankara to improve survival in preclinical models of cancer


TG4010 is a Modified Vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) expressing human
interleukin 2 and the human mucin1 (MUC1) tumor associated antigen.
TG4010 has demonstrated clinical benefit for advanced non small cell lung
cancer patients in combination with standard of care chemotherapy in two
phase 2 randomized and controlled clinical trials (NCT00415818 and
NCT1383148).Immunotherapy based on the use of immune checkpoint blockers
such as anti PD-1 and anti PD-L1 has also demonstrated efficacy in phase
2 trials. Hence, the combination of both approaches appears to be of
great interest considering the high unmet medical need of this pathology.
We developed experimental primary tumor and lung metastasis models to
evaluate the rationale of combining both approaches at the preclinical
level. Using two CT26 cell lines expressing different target antigens
(-galactosidase and MUC1) we evaluated the impact on overall survival of
combined MVA-based and immune checkpoint-based immunotherapies.
Synergistic increase in overall survival was observed in the therapeutic
CT26-CL25 primary tumor and lung metastasis models upon treatment of mice
with the combination of MVA-gal and anti CTLA4 or anti PD-1 in comparison
with either treatment alone. We provide evidence that TG4010 synergized
with immune checkpoint inhibitors to increase overall survival in the
therapeutic CT26-MUC1 tumor models in comparison with either treatment
administrated independently. These observations were associated with an
increase in the frequency and the quality of antigen-specific tumor
infiltrating CD8+ T cells.These studies pave the way for the evaluation
of combinatorial therapies including TG4010 and immune checkpoint
blockers in the clinic.

