Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SKP2 supports cell proliferation and is regulated by Notch
signaling in myoblasts and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma


Background:Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) in a pediatric tumor of myogenic
origin. It includes two subtypes: embryonal and alveolar. Embryonal RMS
(ERMS) cells express key myogenic factors such as MyoD and Myogenin, but
proliferate indefinitely and have lost the ability to terminally
differentiate into skeletal myofibers. Differently from the alveolar
tumors bearing specific chromosomal translocations, ERMS has cytogenetic
aberrations and molecular deregulations of pathways regulating
senescence, proliferation and differentiation. It has been shown that
SKP2, an F-box protein and a component of the ubiquitin protein ligase
complex SCFs (SKP1-cullin-F-box), is over-expressed in RMS primary
samples and correlates with a dismal outcome. Therefore, we sought here
to investigate the regulation of SKP2 and its role in ERMS.Methods:We
modulated SKP2 expression through silencing, by using a siRNA validated
in the literature, and forcing its expression through retroviral
infection. In parallel, we investigate the effect of Notch signaling
modulation on SKP2 expression.Results:SKP2 silencing resulted in cell
cycle slowdown in both normal myoblasts and ERMS cells. Down-regulation
of Notch1 led to SKP2 reduction while that of Notch3 supported SKP2
expression. Cosilencing SKP2 and Notch3 gave raise to myoblast-like
structure formation in ERMS and facilitated myoblasts fusion. Finally,
using a SKP2 inhibitor ERMS cell proliferation was completely
blocked.Conclusion:Altogether, these preliminary experiments suggest that
SKP2 could be regulated by Notch signaling in ERMS and that its
inhibition hampers tumor cell proliferative capability.Note: This
abstract was not presented at the meeting.

