Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGFR and play critical roles in mediating Foxq1-driven breast
cancer stemness and chemoresistance


Many epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-promoting transcription
factors have been implicated in tumorigenesis and metastasis, as well as
chemoresistance of cancer. However, the underlying mechanisms mediating
these processes are unclear. Here we report that Foxq1, a forkhead
box-containing transcription factor and EMT-inducing gene, promotes
stemness traits and chemoresistance in mammary epithelial cells. Using an
expression profiling assay, we identified Twist1, Zeb2, and PDGFR and as
Foxq1 downstream targets. We further show that PDGFR and can be directly
regulated by Foxq1 or indirectly regulated through the Foxq1/Twist1 axis.
Knockdown of both PDGFR and results in more significant effects on
reversing Foxq1-promoted oncogenesis in vitro and in vivo than knockdown
of either PDGFR or alone. In addition, PDGFR is a more potent mediator of
Foxq1-promoted stemness traits than PDGFR. Finally, pharmacological
inhibition or gene silencing of PDGFRs sensitizes mammary epithelial
cells to chemotherapeutic agents in vitro and in vivo. These findings
collectively implicate PDGFRs as critical mediators of breast cancer
oncogenesis and chemoresistance driven by Foxq1, and may have important
implications for the development of novel combinational therapeutics
against breast cancer.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

