Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ALDH1 and podoplanin expression in oral leukoplakia: Correlate
with malignant transformaion risk


Oral leukoplakia (OL) is the clinically diagnosed preneoplastic lesion in
the oral cavity with an increased oral cancer risk. However, the risk of
malignant transformation of OL is still difficult to assess. The
objective of this study was to examine the expression patterns of ALDH1
and Podoplanin (PD) and determine their role in predicting oral cancer
development in patients with OL. In a retrospective follow-up study, the
expression patterns of ALDH1 and PD were determined using
immunohistochemistry in samples from 79 patients with OL, including
patients with untransformed lesions (n = 42) and patients with malignant
transformed lesions (n = 37). The association between protein expression
patterns and clinicopathologic parameters including oral cancer free
survival (OCFS) was analyzed during a mean follow up period of 3.5 years.
ALDH1 and PD expression was observed in 48 (61%) and 53 (67%) patients
respectively. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that the expression of ALDH1
and PD was correlated with the risk of progression to oral cancer (P =
Oral leukoplakia (OL) is the clinically diagnosed preneoplastic lesion in
the oral cavity with an increased oral cancer risk. However, the risk of
malignant transformation of OL is still difficult to assess. The
objective of this study was to examine the expression patterns of ALDH1
and Podoplanin (PD) and determine their role in predicting oral cancer
development in patients with OL. In a retrospective follow-up study, the
expression patterns of ALDH1 and PD were determined using
immunohistochemistry in samples from 79 patients with OL, including
patients with untransformed lesions (n = 42) and patients with malignant
transformed lesions (n = 37). The association between protein expression
patterns and clinicopathologic parameters including oral cancer free
survival (OCFS) was analyzed during a mean follow up period of 3.5 years.
ALDH1 and PD expression was observed in 48 (61%) and 53 (67%) patients
respectively. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that the expression of ALDH1
and PD was correlated with the risk of progression to oral cancer (P = <
0.05). Multivariate analysis revealed that ALDH1 and PD expression was
associated with 3.02 folds and 2.62 folds of increase risk of malignant
transformation, respectively. Meanwhile, the malignant transformation
risk of OL was considerably higher in cases with both ALDH1 and PD
expression (P = 0.000). Taken together, our data indicated that ALDH1 and
PD expression patterns in OL were associated with oral cancer
development, suggesting that ALDH1 and PD could be useful biomarkers to
identify OL patient with substantially high oral cancer risk.

