Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Menopausal hormone therapy and risk of primary liver cancer in the
UK Clinical Practice Research Datalink


Background: The incidence of primary liver cancer (PLC) is three to four
times higher among males than females in almost all countries. The
discrepancy in rates is particularly notable prior to menopause,
suggesting that estrogen exposure may be associated with lower risk. The
relationship of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) use to risk of PLC among
women, however, has not been extensively examined.Methods: We conducted a
nested case-control study among women in the U.K.'s Clinical Practice
Research Datalink (CPRD). Women diagnosed with primary liver cancer (n =
339) between 1988 and 2011 were matched to controls at a 4:1 ratio on
age, index year, general practice and length of history in the CPRD. Odds
ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) for associations of MHT
with PLC were estimated using conditional logistic regression. All models
were conditioned on the matching factors and adjusted for body mass
index, HBV, HCV, smoking, alcohol-related disorders, diabetes, rare
metabolic disorders, history of a bilateral oophorectomy, and use of
certain medications, including paracetamol, aspirin, anti-diabetes
therapies, and statins.Results: Use of MHT for 6 months or longer was
associated with a significantly lower risk of PLC (OR = 0.60, 95%CI =
0.39-0.92). Examination by length of MHT use found that use between 6-30
months was associated with significantly reduced risk (OR = 0.47, 95%CI =
0.24-0.91), while use greater than 30 months did not attain statistical
significance (OR = 0.68, 95%CI = 0.41-1.13). When MHT was stratified by
formulation (estrogen-only vs estrogen/progesterone), estrogen-only use
was associated with significantly lower risk of PLC (OR = 0.51, 95%CI =
0.26-0.97) while estrogen/progesterone use did not attain statistical
significance (OR = 0.65, 95%CI = 0.39-1.08).Conclusion: MHT use, in
particular estrogen-only MHT use, may be associated with lower risk of
PLC. These findings are consistent with rodent models which have reported
suppression of both fatty liver and hepatocarcinogenesis with
administration of estrogen. As the association in the current study was
apparent among users of 6-30 months, even short-term use of estrogen-only
MHT may reduce risk.

