Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-depth quantitative analysis of protein glycoforms in human
prostate cancer plasma


In this study, a novel analytical workflow was used to interrogate
differences in the expressed levels of proteins and glycoproteins
detectable in plasma in men with benign prostate hyperplasia versus those
diagnosed with low- to high-grade prostate cancer. Currently, the use of
early detection techniques such as measuring the level of
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in the blood lead to over-diagnosis and
over-treatment in men with slow-growing or none-threatening prostate
tumors, making evident the need for a biomarker that is indicative of
cancer aggressiveness. Using the in-depth chromatographic separations and
LC-MS/MS methods described below, circulating levels of moderate- to
low-abundant proteins and their glycoforms were measured, providing the
opportunity to observe alterations in the patterns of glycosylation - a
posttranslational modification known to be aberrant with tumorigenesis -
in those who developed more aggressive prostate cancers. We hypothesize
that alterations in protein glycosylation with the development of
prostate cancer are measurable in the blood, and, once identified,
quantified, and verified, can be used as early molecular indicators of
prostate cancer grade, aggressiveness, and overall risk.Twenty blinded
plasma samples collected from men with benign, low-, or high-grade
prostate cancer biopsies, along with a pooled plasma sample from healthy
men for reference, were first depleted of the fourteen most abundant
proteins, as these have been extensively studied. The depleted prostate
samples and the reference pooled plasma were respectively isotopically
labeled with 13C and 12C acrylamide for quantitation, and combined.
Multi-lectin affinity chromatography was used to target various
glycoforms, specifically those containing core-fucosylated (Aleuria
aurantia lectin or AAL), or branched complex-type glycans (Phaseolus
vulgaris Leucoagglutinin and Phaseolus vulgaris Erythroagglutinin lectin,
or PHA-L/E). For further sample decomplexing, each lectin fraction was
subjected to reversed-phase fractionation prior to tryptic digestion.
Peptides were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on a C18 column
coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Alterations in the
glycoprotein profiles were then correlated to disease status as
determined by prostate biopsies.Using this approach, an average of 270
proteins were identified in the protein fraction bound to AAL, and 285
proteins were identified in the fraction bound to PHA-L/E, as well as the
fraction of proteins unbound to either lectin. The preliminary data
demonstrate significant differences between case and control samples in
the types and levels of the targeted glycoforms present in each lectin
fraction in comparison to the reference plasma, suggesting there are
measurable alterations in the glycosylation of several plasma proteins
between men with benign, indolent and aggressive prostate tumors.

