Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of lysophosphatidic acid receptors (LPARs)
between benign and malignant tissues in humans


Background: Lysophosphatidic acid receptors (LPARs) are important to
normal cellular functions and implicated in the pathogenesis and survival
of various cancers recently. Previous studies were mostly focused on one
LPAR using experiments on animal models and cell cultures. This study was
executed to investigate systemic distribution of LPAR1, LPAR2, and LPAR3
in human organs/tissues and to compare the expression levels of these
receptors between benign and malignant changes in major human
organs/tissues.Method: Tissue Microarrays TMAs) were constructed with 384
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded benign and malignant specimens from
33 different human organs/tissues. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for each
LPAR was performed on the TMA slides. In addition to observing the
subcellular localization of each LPAR, the expression level of each LPAR
at each subcellular localization was recorded as final IHC score,
calculated by IHC intensity score (0 to3) multiplied with IHC area score
(0 to 3). A 2-sample t test was used to statistical analysis.Results: All
three LPARs were widely distributed throughout human organs/tissues. All
LPARs were expressed higher in nuclei than in cytoplasm. Nuclear
expressed LPARs were all higher in overall malignant changes than in
overall benign changes, which is especially true for nuclear expressed
LPAR1 (LPAR1N): the IHC score for LPAR1N was 6.38 in overall malignant
changes and 5.84 in overall benign changes (p = 0.016). The expression
level of LPAR1 in nuclei or in cytoplasm is significantly (pBackground:
Lysophosphatidic acid receptors (LPARs) are important to normal cellular
functions and implicated in the pathogenesis and survival of various
cancers recently. Previous studies were mostly focused on one LPAR using
experiments on animal models and cell cultures. This study was executed
to investigate systemic distribution of LPAR1, LPAR2, and LPAR3 in human
organs/tissues and to compare the expression levels of these receptors
between benign and malignant changes in major human
organs/tissues.Method: Tissue Microarrays TMAs) were constructed with 384
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded benign and malignant specimens from
33 different human organs/tissues. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for each
LPAR was performed on the TMA slides. In addition to observing the
subcellular localization of each LPAR, the expression level of each LPAR
at each subcellular localization was recorded as final IHC score,
calculated by IHC intensity score (0 to3) multiplied with IHC area score
(0 to 3). A 2-sample t test was used to statistical analysis.Results: All
three LPARs were widely distributed throughout human organs/tissues. All
LPARs were expressed higher in nuclei than in cytoplasm. Nuclear
expressed LPARs were all higher in overall malignant changes than in
overall benign changes, which is especially true for nuclear expressed
LPAR1 (LPAR1N): the IHC score for LPAR1N was 6.38 in overall malignant
changes and 5.84 in overall benign changes (p = 0.016). The expression
level of LPAR1 in nuclei or in cytoplasm is significantly (p<0.05) or
obviously (p0.05) different between benign and malignant changes in eight
organs/tissues. The number of organs/tissues with such difference was
five for LPAR2 and six for LPAR3.Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) had
significantly higher expression level of LPAR1N (p = 0.000000001), LPAR2N
(p = 0.00002) and LPAR3N (p = 0.00001) as compared with benign hepatic
changes. The malignancies showed obviously alterations in expression
level of two LPARs in three organs/tissues and one LPAR in eight
organs/tissues. The malignancies in the rest organs/tissues, including
breast and prostate showed no obvious difference between benign and
malignant changes.Conclusions: This study is first to investigate
systemic distribution of the LPAR1, LPAR2 and LPAR3 in benign and
malignant changes throughout human organs/tissues. The results indicate
that each LPAR has a unique expression pattern in a spectrum of
organs/tissues. Differentially expressed LPARs between benign and
malignant changes in different organs/tissues will help to understand the
involvement of LPARs in the pathogenesis of cancer, and to find
therapeutic targets in treatment of cancer.

