Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100A4/metastasin-1 promotes lung cancer cell invasion and
associates with decreased overall survival among patients with
adenocarcinoma


The metastatic nature of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is
associated with therapeutic resistance, quick time to progression, and
poor prognosis. This dismal outcome remains until we gain a better
understanding of the crucial drivers of the metastatic process and the
power to effectively target them. S100A4 (metastasin-1) is a tumor
metastasis associated protein and an epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) marker. S100A4 contributes to several hallmarks of cancer such as
anti-apoptosis, proliferation, and therapeutic resistance. This protein
has been implicated in the progression of different types of cancer,
including breast, colon and pancreas. However, the impacts of S100A4
signaling in lung cancer progression and its potential use as a target
for therapy have not been properly explored. Here, using established lung
cancer cell lines, we demonstrate that S100A4 is overexpressed in about
45% of lung cancer cell lines tested, both at the mRNA and protein
levels. To address the biological action of S100A4 overexpression in lung
cancer cells, loss-of function and gain-of function experiments were
performed. We found that inhibition of S100A4 by shRNA in A549 and H460
lung cancer cell lines reduced cell proliferation and invasion and
decreased 3D invasive growth, while exogenous overexpression of S100A4 in
H1299 cells increased invasive potential. In order to examine S100A4
expression in patient-derived tissues, we constructed a lung cancer
tissue microarray (TMAs, N = 212) and analyzed it using
immunohistochemistry. We found that S100A4 is preferentially
overexpressed in lung adenocarcinoma (P = 0.0007) when compared to
squamous cell carcinoma, which was confirmed using publicly available
gene expression datasets (TCGA). Furthermore, we found that S100A4
overexpression is associated with the presence of lymphovascular invasion
(P = 0.0189) and with decreased overall survival (Hazard ratio 2.14, 95%
confidence interval 1.08-4.22, P = 0.0243) among patients with lung
adenocarcinoma. To elucidate the mechanisms by which S100A4 promotes lung
cancer invasive capacity, we focused on the NF-B pathway. We observed
that depletion of S100A4 by shRNA inhibited NF-B activity and decreased
TNF-induced MMP9 expression. Furthermore, inhibition of the NF-B/MMP9
axis decreased lung cancer cell invasive potential. Collectively, this
study highlights the importance of the S100A4/NF-B/MMP9 axis in lung
cancer invasion and metastasis and provides rationale for targeting
S100A4 to combat lung cancer.

