Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common functional mechanisms underlying pleiotropy at the 19p13.1
breast and ovarian cancer cusceptibility locus


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified several
susceptibility regions that confer risk of two or more cancers. A region
at 19p13 is associated with both breast and ovarian cancer risk in the
general population as well as in BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers. Using the
iCOGs custom genotyping array, we analyzed 438 SNPs in this region in
7,435 ER-negative breast cancer cases and 42,599 controls from BCAC, and
15,347 ovarian cancer cases and 30,845 controls from OCAC and 15,252
BRCA1 mutation carriers. We identified two significant peaks of
association. Peak 1, consisting of 13 highly correlated SNPs (r2>0.95),
spans a 19.4kb region harboring the BABAM1, ANKLE1 and ABHD8 genes. Peak
1 SNPs are associated with serous ovarian cancer (top hit rs4808075, P =
9.210-20), ER-negative breast cancer (rs61494113, P = 1.110-13) and
breast cancer in BRCA1 mutation carriers (rs61494113, P = 7.710-16). Peak
2 spans over 100kb and contains 7 SNPs associated with breast cancer in
BRCA1 mutation carriers only (rs4464206, P = 8.910-8). Multiple assays
were used to establish the putative functional roles of risk SNPs and
candidate susceptibility genes in this region. Expression quantitative
trait locus (eQTL) analyses identified significant genotype-gene
expression correlations between genotype at the Peak 1 SNP rs480816 and
ABHD8 expression in ovarian tumors (P = 3.010-5) and normal breast
tissues (P = 2.810-3). The Peak 2 SNP, rs7246243, was significantly
associated with BABAM1 expression (P = 510-3) in normal breast tissue
only. Overexpression of BABAM1 in normal ovarian and breast cells did not
modulate neoplastic phenotypes, whereas overexpression of ABHD8 induced a
significant reduction in migration in both cell types in vitro.
Differentially expressed genes in ABHD8 models, identified by RNAseq,
were associated with cellular movement (PGenome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have identified several susceptibility regions that confer risk of
two or more cancers. A region at 19p13 is associated with both breast and
ovarian cancer risk in the general population as well as in BRCA1/BRCA2
mutation carriers. Using the iCOGs custom genotyping array, we analyzed
438 SNPs in this region in 7,435 ER-negative breast cancer cases and
42,599 controls from BCAC, and 15,347 ovarian cancer cases and 30,845
controls from OCAC and 15,252 BRCA1 mutation carriers. We identified two
significant peaks of association. Peak 1, consisting of 13 highly
correlated SNPs (r2>0.95), spans a 19.4kb region harboring the BABAM1,
ANKLE1 and ABHD8 genes. Peak 1 SNPs are associated with serous ovarian
cancer (top hit rs4808075, P = 9.210-20), ER-negative breast cancer
(rs61494113, P = 1.110-13) and breast cancer in BRCA1 mutation carriers
(rs61494113, P = 7.710-16). Peak 2 spans over 100kb and contains 7 SNPs
associated with breast cancer in BRCA1 mutation carriers only (rs4464206,
P = 8.910-8). Multiple assays were used to establish the putative
functional roles of risk SNPs and candidate susceptibility genes in this
region. Expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) analyses identified
significant genotype-gene expression correlations between genotype at the
Peak 1 SNP rs480816 and ABHD8 expression in ovarian tumors (P = 3.010-5)
and normal breast tissues (P = 2.810-3). The Peak 2 SNP, rs7246243, was
significantly associated with BABAM1 expression (P = 510-3) in normal
breast tissue only. Overexpression of BABAM1 in normal ovarian and breast
cells did not modulate neoplastic phenotypes, whereas overexpression of
ABHD8 induced a significant reduction in migration in both cell types in
vitro. Differentially expressed genes in ABHD8 models, identified by
RNAseq, were associated with cellular movement (P<1.8210-44). Chromosome
conformation capture (3C) identified an interaction between the ABHD8
promoter and a region containing 4 risk SNPs (rs4808075, rs10419397,
rs56069439 and rs4808076) in breast and ovarian normal and cancer cells
but only rs56069439 coincides with epigenetic enhancer marks in breast
and ovarian cells. CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing was used to delete a 57bp
region containing rs56069439 and expression of BABAM1, ANKLE1 and ABHD8
were measured. Taken together, these data suggest a common functional
mechanism underlying risk of breast and ovarian cancer at this locus,
mediated by rs56069439 variants differentially regulating expression of
ABHD8, a gene involved in cell motility.

