Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ureidomustine, a novel DNA-crosslinking agent shows activity in
sarcoma preclinical models and lacks toxicity in normal tissues


Ureidomustine (BO-1055) is a water-soluble N- mustard derivative that has
antitumor activity against a number of human tumors including prostate,
colon cancers and gliomas. In this study, we investigated its
pre-clinical activity in sarcoma models.We tested the activity of BO-1055
on early passages from Ewing sarcoma patient samples and patient-derived
xenografts, preclinical models of rhabdomyosarcoma, desmoplastic small
round cell tumor (DSRCT) and osteosarcoma. We used cell proliferation,
viability, clonogenicity and cell death assays, and immunoblotting for
differential expression of proteins in cells that are sensitive and
resistant to BO-1055. We studied the toxicity of BO-1055 on cardiac
myocytes, hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs), epithelial,
mesenchymal and endothelial cells, and performed animal toxicity
experiments in mice. Efficacy of BO-1055 was tested in NSG mice bearing
A673 xenografts (Ewing sarcoma) treated at doses of 10mg/kg, 20mg/kg and
30mg/kg, Q2D5, via i.v. injection after the tumors grew to 250-500 mm3.
We also investigated the efficacy of this agent in NSG mice bearing A204
xenografts and Ewing sarcoma patient-derived xenografts that were
resistant to cyclophosphamide. The antitumor effects of BO-1055 in
combination with standard chemotherapeutic agents were also
evaluated.Ureidomustine exhibited significant cytotoxicity against the in
vitro growth of Ewing sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma with sub M IC50 values
and was more cytotoxic than conventional DNA damaging agents. BO-1055 had
less cytotoxicity against a panel of normal HSPCs. BO-1055 had moderate
activity (IC50 = 2-4 M) on DSRCT cells and had only weak activity
(IC50>10M) against osteosarcoma cell lines. Notably, this agent has no
cross-resistance to Taxol and Vinblastine. Growth arrest in G2/M phase
was noted at 24h and maximal apoptosis and cell death at 48h and 72h
after exposure of A673 cells. Apoptosis was due to the induction of
caspase 3 and 7 activity in a dose- and time- dependent manner.
Cardiotoxicity was evaluated by binding of BO-1055 to hERG, which was
significantly less than that of Astemizole indicating that BO-1055 has
less propensity for QTc prolongation. BO-1055 significantly suppressed
Ewing sarcoma patient-derived xenografts that were resistant to
cyclophosphamide. Remarkably, this agent induced complete suppression of
tumors in nude mice bearing A204 xenografts, without significant weight
loss. In two-drug combination studies, BO-1055 exhibited synergism with
etoposide, SN-38 (active metabolite of irinotecan), doxorubicin and
PU-H71 (HSP-90 inhibitor).Because of its broad therapeutic window, lack
of cross-resistance, better safety profile and synergistic cytotoxicity
with standard drugs, BO-1055 has high potential for clinical application
for treatment of Ewing sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma patients.

