Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PAK4 attenuates renal cell carcinoma (RCC) growth


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is an increasingly prevalent cancer type that
is frequently asymptomatic on presentation and is associated with poor
responses and resistance even to the current targeted therapies. Thus,
novel therapeutic approaches to treat this disease are urgently needed.
P21-activated kinase 4 (PAK4) is a mediator of filopodia formation and
stabilizes -catenin transcriptional activity. PAK4 lies in a pathway
integral to both nephrogenesis and cancer. We hypothesized that
inhibitors of the PAK4 signaling pathway would result in salutary effects
on RCC. To test this, we evaluated the in vitro response of RCC cells to
the specific PAK4 Allosteric Modulators (PAMs; KPT-8752 and KPT-9274).
Similar to cells of other cancer types, 786-O (VHL-mutant RCC) showed
decreases of both Phospho-PAK4 and Phospho--catenin after 24 h of
incubation with 10 M KPT-8752. In addition, both 786-O and ACHN
(VHL-wildtype RCC cells) showed a marked time-dependent decrease in cell
viability from 24 to 72 h of incubation from 2 to 10 M of KPT-8752.
KPT-9274 was orally administered at 25 and 100 mg/kg twice a day for 5
days/week to Caki-1 (VHL-wildtype RCC) and 786-O subcutaneous nude mouse
xenograft models. In these studies the tumor growth rate was attenuated
at both doses in the 786-O cells and at the higher dose for Caki-1 cells.
There was no obvious change in the health of any of the animals
suggesting manageable tolerability. We are currently evaluating
combination therapy in our laboratory. In summary, PAK4 inhibitors show
considerable promise as novel treatments of RCC as a single agent and
warrant further investigation.

