Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting inflammation and pancreatitis blocks tumor-initiating
stem cells and pancreatic cancer progression


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a deadly disease with the lowest survival of
all cancers. Recent development of genetically engineered mouse models
(GEMs) for PC that recapitulate human disease progression has enabled
development of new strategies to delay or inhibit pancreatic cancer and
testing of experimental interventions in preclinical trials. Pancreatic
tumor-initiating or cancer stem cell (CSC) populations contribute to
tumor growth, metastasis, and resistance to therapy. We first found that
expression of the CSC marker DclK1 occurs at an early stage of PC in both
early and late pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanINs) and
increases as the disease progresses. Genome-wide next generation
sequencing of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) from GEMs revealed
significantly increased DclK1 along with inflammatory genes. Genetic
ablation of cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 decreased the DclK1 in GEMs.
Induction of inflammation with cerulein induced pancreatitis in GEMs
increased DclK1, and Dclk1 was reduced by the novel anti-inflammatory
dual COX/5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) inhibitor licofelone. We investigated the
long term pharmacologic inhibitory efficacy of licofelone on PDAC in vivo
using a GEM model. GEM (n = 86) and wild type mice (n = 24) were fed a
diet containing different doses of licofelone for 300 days and evaluated
for formation of PanINs and for their progression to PDAC. Dietary
licofelone at tested doses significantly inhibited the incidence of PDAC
(60-90%; pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a deadly disease with the lowest
survival of all cancers. Recent development of genetically engineered
mouse models (GEMs) for PC that recapitulate human disease progression
has enabled development of new strategies to delay or inhibit pancreatic
cancer and testing of experimental interventions in preclinical trials.
Pancreatic tumor-initiating or cancer stem cell (CSC) populations
contribute to tumor growth, metastasis, and resistance to therapy. We
first found that expression of the CSC marker DclK1 occurs at an early
stage of PC in both early and late pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia
(PanINs) and increases as the disease progresses. Genome-wide next
generation sequencing of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) from
GEMs revealed significantly increased DclK1 along with inflammatory
genes. Genetic ablation of cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 decreased the DclK1 in
GEMs. Induction of inflammation with cerulein induced pancreatitis in
GEMs increased DclK1, and Dclk1 was reduced by the novel
anti-inflammatory dual COX/5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) inhibitor licofelone.
We investigated the long term pharmacologic inhibitory efficacy of
licofelone on PDAC in vivo using a GEM model. GEM (n = 86) and wild type
mice (n = 24) were fed a diet containing different doses of licofelone
for 300 days and evaluated for formation of PanINs and for their
progression to PDAC. Dietary licofelone at tested doses significantly
inhibited the incidence of PDAC (60-90%; p<0.0001) with a profound
suppression of carcinoma in situ (35-60%; pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a
deadly disease with the lowest survival of all cancers. Recent
development of genetically engineered mouse models (GEMs) for PC that
recapitulate human disease progression has enabled development of new
strategies to delay or inhibit pancreatic cancer and testing of
experimental interventions in preclinical trials. Pancreatic
tumor-initiating or cancer stem cell (CSC) populations contribute to
tumor growth, metastasis, and resistance to therapy. We first found that
expression of the CSC marker DclK1 occurs at an early stage of PC in both
early and late pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanINs) and
increases as the disease progresses. Genome-wide next generation
sequencing of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) from GEMs revealed
significantly increased DclK1 along with inflammatory genes. Genetic
ablation of cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 decreased the DclK1 in GEMs.
Induction of inflammation with cerulein induced pancreatitis in GEMs
increased DclK1, and Dclk1 was reduced by the novel anti-inflammatory
dual COX/5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) inhibitor licofelone. We investigated the
long term pharmacologic inhibitory efficacy of licofelone on PDAC in vivo
using a GEM model. GEM (n = 86) and wild type mice (n = 24) were fed a
diet containing different doses of licofelone for 300 days and evaluated
for formation of PanINs and for their progression to PDAC. Dietary
licofelone at tested doses significantly inhibited the incidence of PDAC
(60-90%; p<0.0001) with a profound suppression of carcinoma in situ
(35-60%; p<0.001) in male and female GEMs. Licofelone caused a
dose-dependent suppression of pancreatic tumor COX-2 and 5-LOX activities
and modulated miRNAs for inflammation markers and CSCs, including DclK1,
CD133, CD44, and Lgr5 (pPancreatic cancer (PC) is a deadly disease with
the lowest survival of all cancers. Recent development of genetically
engineered mouse models (GEMs) for PC that recapitulate human disease
progression has enabled development of new strategies to delay or inhibit
pancreatic cancer and testing of experimental interventions in
preclinical trials. Pancreatic tumor-initiating or cancer stem cell (CSC)
populations contribute to tumor growth, metastasis, and resistance to
therapy. We first found that expression of the CSC marker DclK1 occurs at
an early stage of PC in both early and late pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PanINs) and increases as the disease progresses. Genome-wide
next generation sequencing of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
from GEMs revealed significantly increased DclK1 along with inflammatory
genes. Genetic ablation of cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 decreased the DclK1 in
GEMs. Induction of inflammation with cerulein induced pancreatitis in
GEMs increased DclK1, and Dclk1 was reduced by the novel
anti-inflammatory dual COX/5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) inhibitor licofelone.
We investigated the long term pharmacologic inhibitory efficacy of
licofelone on PDAC in vivo using a GEM model. GEM (n = 86) and wild type
mice (n = 24) were fed a diet containing different doses of licofelone
for 300 days and evaluated for formation of PanINs and for their
progression to PDAC. Dietary licofelone at tested doses significantly
inhibited the incidence of PDAC (60-90%; p<0.0001) with a profound
suppression of carcinoma in situ (35-60%; p<0.001) in male and female
GEMs. Licofelone caused a dose-dependent suppression of pancreatic tumor
COX-2 and 5-LOX activities and modulated miRNAs for inflammation markers
and CSCs, including DclK1, CD133, CD44, and Lgr5 (p<0.001) in correlation
with the PDAC inhibition. Licofelone also inhibited inflammation-induced
CSCs in vitro. These studies provide the first evidence that modulation
of inflammation with a dual COX-LOX inhibitor effectively blocks CSCs and
inhibits pancreatic tumorigenesis. In summary, our preclinical data
indicate that licofelone has potential for chemoprevention of PC and
should be evaluated in other PDAC models in anticipation of future
clinical trials. {Supported by NCI-CN-53300}

