Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human mammary tumor virus(HMTV) is deeply involved in breast
cancer and metastasis


Human Mammary Tumor Virus (HMTV), a betaretrovirus 90-95% homologous to
Mouse Mammary Tumor Virus (MMTV), present in 40% of American women's
breast cancers, but not in the normal tissue from the same breast
indicates an infection (Cancer Res 1995, 55:5173-79). Absence of murine
intracisternal particles and murine cyclo-oxygenase 2 by PCR and
nanoString excludes contemporaneous mouse DNA, and thus MMTV
contamination (Proc AACR 2014 #1595). We have detected the entire 9.9 kb
proviral sequence. Proviral DNA is visible in nuclei by FISH, and budding
virus was observed by EM. HMTV in cells is present in the milk of 8% of
unselected American women, but in 21% if they had had a prior biopsy
based upon clinical or radiologic suspicion of a mass. (Infectious Agents
and Cancer 2014, 9:20).HMTV has been found in cells of 30 of 32 (94%)
metastatic breast cancer effusions (MSSM cells). HMTV protein and virion
RNA were detected in MSSM cells but not in normal human mammary
epithelium. (J Virol Methods 2010,163:157-61). HMTV isolated from MSSM
cells is infectious for B and T lymphocytes, MCF10A andF and human
mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). Infection led to proviral insertion
sites with different flanking sequences. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition was observed with upregulation of vimentin and downregulation
of E-cadherin. Restriction factors including the cytidine deaminase
APOBEC G and F, TRIM 5, 21 and 25 and Tetherin were also increased after
in vitro HMTV infection.Epidemiologically, breast cancer is less frequent
in 5 countries of Central and East and Asia (28-43/100,000/y. World
Cancer Report 2014) where HMTV positivity in breast cancers ranges from 0
to 20%, compared to 7 countries of Western Europe and its former colonies
in North and South America and Australia (47-92/100,000/y op.cit.) where
30 to 60% are positive. This correlates with indigenous mouse species,
Mus musclus and M.castaneus in the East, and M. domesticus with much more
HMTV in its genome in the West.HMTV positive lymphomas have been reported
in patients with HMTV positive breast cancers (Clin Cancer Res 2004
10:56565-64). The parallel with MMTV behavior in the mouse with respect
to breast cancer and lymphomas is striking. These composite data support
a significant role of HMTV in human breast cancer and its metastatic
process.

