Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of compounds developed against the TAM family kinases


The TAM family receptor tyrosine kinases, consisting of Tyro3, Axl and
Mer, are implicated in a diverse range of cellular processes such as cell
survival, proliferation, migration, angiogenesis, and inflammatory
response. Despite the debates over their role as a driver in
carcinogenesis owing to some recent findings, their link to human cancer
is strongly supported by direct correlation of the level of
expression/activity with tumor grade and prognosis. In particular, Axl
was found to underlie metastasis as an essential regulator of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process and also to confer
acquired resistance to the TKI-mediated targeted therapies by
up-regulation of associated kinases. Currently, none of FDA-approved
kinase drugs were developed for the TAM family kinases. In our effort to
develop such small-molecule inhibitors targeting the TAM kinases for
oncology indications, we uncovered a series of novel potent compounds
with low nM potency against Axl and Tyro3. Effect of these compounds in
human cancer cell lines of different tissue origins was mediated mainly
through the Axl-dependent signaling pathways. Detailed analysis of
signaling proteins downstream of Axl revealed different mechanisms of
action for these compounds. In addition to suppression of cell
proliferation, these compounds inhibited anchorage-independent colony
formation, cell migration and invasion. Four compounds were selected to
be evaluated in pharmacokinetic studies in mice and the results indicated
that these compounds possess reasonable PK properties with high exposure,
reasonably long half-life, and good bioavailability. The results of the
efficacy studies in suppressing tumor growth in a xenograft and an
orthotropic mouse models will be discussed.

