Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reconstructing the itraconazole scaffold towards improved
specificity for hedeghog signaling inhibition


Inappropriate regulation of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway
contributes to the development and progression of a number of human
cancers; most notably, basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and medulloblastoma
(MB). Clinical validation of small molecule mediated silencing of the Hh
pathway was recently demonstrated by the FDA approval of vismodegib for
the treatment of locally advanced BCC, representing a first-in-class
inhibitor of the Hh signaling pathway. Vismodegib antagonizes Hh
signaling by directly binding smoothened (SMO), a critical regulator of
the pathway and target of numerous small molecule preclinical and
clinical drug candidates. Vismodegib treatments in MB patients revealed
novel SMO mutants that demonstrated resistance to vismodegib therapy,
which underscores the need for continued development of novel Hh pathway
inhibitors. Recently, itraconazole (ITZ) was identified as an inhibitor
of Hh signaling in vitro and in vivo. Characterization indicated ITZ, a
clinically used antifungal agent, maintains Hh inhibition against
vismodegib-resistant SMO mutants. Ongoing structure-activity analysis for
the ITZ scaffold is currently being investigated to identify analogues
with improved potency and reduced non-specific toxicity. Results from
these studies to identify candidates with improved pharmacological
profiles and selectivity for Hh signaling modulation will be described
herein.

