Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ataxia telangiectasia mutated relates to epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in colorectal cancer


Background: The Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is a serine/threonine
protein kinase that is recruited and activated by DNA double-strand
breaks. Recently, ATM was reported to correlate with breast cancer
metastasis by regulating phosphorylated Snail which was known as a marker
of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), however, it remains unclear
in colorectal cancer (CRC). In this study we attempted to clarify the
impact of ATM on the mechanism of EMT in CRC.Methods: Potential ATM
levels were evaluated in human CRC cells (HT29 and SW480) by qPCR and
western blot analysis. Cells were induced EMT by treated with TGF-b, were
confirmed by the change of EMT markers (i.e. N-cadherin, E-cadherin,
Snail and twist). Next, ATM levels were down-regulated by siRNA and the
impact on EMT were evaluated by EMT markers. Invasive potential was
evaluated by scratch assay.Results: HT29 showed significantly higher
levels of ATM comparing to SW480 (p = 0.042). N-cadherin (p = 0.065),
Snail (p = 0.034) and twist (p = 0.052) were highly observed in HT-29,
while similar level of E-cadherin in SW480 (p = 0.692). Scratch assay
revealed that approximately 4 times high migration was observed in HT29.
TGF-b induced EMT such as elevation of N-cadherin and Snail (E-cadherin
was not affected), leading to promotion of cell migration in SW480. ATM
was successfully 48.4% down-regulated (p = 0.001) in SW480, which
resulted in reducing cell migration (p = 0.033).Conclusions: ATM might be
a critical regulator of EMT in colorectal cancer invasion.

