Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL17 favours carcinogenesis and limits the anti-tumor responses in
pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a fatal medical condition with
few advances in therapy and patient survival. The role of IL17 and Th17
in cancer progression and anti-tumor immunity is still controversial. In
this study we have investigated the role of IL17 and Th17 in PDA
carcinogenesis and anti-tumor responses.IL-17 production and Th17
percentage in blood from PDA patients and control subjects as well from
genetically engineered mice (GEM) that spontaneously develop PDA, were
analysed by ELISA and FACS respectively. Survival of GEM mice crossed
with IL-17 KO mice (GEM/IL17KO) was analysed by Kaplan-Meier analysis. WT
or IL17KO mice that were prophylactically vaccinated with a plasmid
coding for the PDA-associated antigen -enolase (ENO1) (1-3), were
subsequently injected with PDA cell line derived from GEM. Tumor growth
and the induction of an antigen-specific immune response were
monitored.We have found a statistically significant increase of
peripheral Th17 cells and a decrease of Th1 in PDA patients compared to
healthy subjects. GEM mice showed 3-fold more RORT+ cells at the onset of
duct transformation, which dropped to the level of control mice at 20
weeks and lasted until 35 weeks. Notably, GEM/IL17 KO mice survived
significantly more than GEM mice, even if there were no changes in the
tumor onset. In addition, in GEM/IL17 KO mice, we observed an increased
fibrotic reaction compared to GEM mice starting from early stage of
disease. Lastly, ENO-1 DNA vaccination in IL17KO mice significantly
decreased PDA cells growth and enhanced the CD8 T cell response compared
to that observed in WT mice.Our data suggest that the absence of IL17
does not affect the tumor onset but the progression, likely affecting the
immune response, which seems to be able to better counteract tumor growth
in the absence of this cytokine.Tomaino et al., J Proteome Res.
2007;6:4025-31; Cappello et al, Int. J. Cancer. 2009;125:639-48; Cappello
P et al, Gastroenterology. 2013;144:1098-106.

