Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Bromodomain inhibitors regulate long noncoding RNAs
controlling glioblastoma progression


Bromodomain and extra-terminal domain (BET) proteins have emerged as
promising therapeutic targets in glioblastoma and many other cancers.
Small molecule mimics of acetylated histones inhibit BET protein function
and reduce expression of several oncogenes required for glioblastoma
(GBM) progression. However, the mechanism through which BET protein
inhibition reduces GBM growth is not completely understood. Long
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are important epigenetic regulators with
critical roles in cancer initiation and malignant progression but
mechanistic insight into their expression and regulation by bromodomain
inhibitors remains elusive. In this study we utilized single molecule
sequencing (SMS) to comprehensively profile lncRNAs differentially
expressed in GBM and we identified a subset of GBM-specific lncRNAs whose
expression is regulated by BET proteins. Treatment of GBM cells with the
BET protein inhibitor I-BET151 reduced levels of the tumor-promoting
lncRNA HOTAIR and restored the expression of several other
GBM-down-regulated lncRNAs. Conversely, overexpression of HOTAIR in
conjunction with I-BET treatment rescues the antiproliferative activity
of I-BET151. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
demonstrated binding of Brd4 to the HOTAIR promoter suggesting that BET
proteins can directly regulate lncRNA expression. Our data unravel a
previously unappreciated mechanism through which BET proteins control
tumor growth of glioblastoma cells and suggest that lncRNA networks may,
in part, mediate the anti-proliferative effects of many epigenetic
inhibitors currently in clinical trials for cancer and other
diseases.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

