Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of melanoma GWAS data suggests specific risk loci
influencing age of onset of melanoma


Introduction/Purpose: The average age of diagnosis of melanoma is younger
than that of other major cancers. In addition, melanoma is the second
most common cancer among individuals in their 20s. Analyzing GWAS data by
wide-locus region (i.e. analyzing multiple nearby single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) together) increases statistical power compared to
single-SNP analyses. This approach has uncovered new associations in GWAS
data for diseases other than melanoma. By applying wide-locus analysis to
GWAS data from melanoma cases, we aimed to discover common genetic risk
variants related to age of melanoma onset.Procedures: We re-analyzed data
from the 1977 melanoma cases of European ancestry made available by the
MD Anderson Cancer Center study (accession: phs000187.v1.p1). Patients
were genotyped on the Illumina OMNI1-Quad chip. Biostatistical analysis
was performed from a window moving across the whole genome using
u-statistics for multivariate, genetically structured wide-locus data to
derive genetic risk scores to determine if any gene regions were
associated with age of onset in melanoma patients. This statistical
approach resulted in a genome-wide significance level of
pIntroduction/Purpose: The average age of diagnosis of melanoma is
younger than that of other major cancers. In addition, melanoma is the
second most common cancer among individuals in their 20s. Analyzing GWAS
data by wide-locus region (i.e. analyzing multiple nearby single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) together) increases statistical power
compared to single-SNP analyses. This approach has uncovered new
associations in GWAS data for diseases other than melanoma. By applying
wide-locus analysis to GWAS data from melanoma cases, we aimed to
discover common genetic risk variants related to age of melanoma
onset.Procedures: We re-analyzed data from the 1977 melanoma cases of
European ancestry made available by the MD Anderson Cancer Center study
(accession: phs000187.v1.p1). Patients were genotyped on the Illumina
OMNI1-Quad chip. Biostatistical analysis was performed from a window
moving across the whole genome using u-statistics for multivariate,
genetically structured wide-locus data to derive genetic risk scores to
determine if any gene regions were associated with age of onset in
melanoma patients. This statistical approach resulted in a genome-wide
significance level of p<105.64.Results: Common variants in several genes
were associated with melanoma age-of-onset at the level of genome-wide
significance. The most significant functional risk loci were located at
DLEU1 (pIntroduction/Purpose: The average age of diagnosis of melanoma is
younger than that of other major cancers. In addition, melanoma is the
second most common cancer among individuals in their 20s. Analyzing GWAS
data by wide-locus region (i.e. analyzing multiple nearby single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) together) increases statistical power
compared to single-SNP analyses. This approach has uncovered new
associations in GWAS data for diseases other than melanoma. By applying
wide-locus analysis to GWAS data from melanoma cases, we aimed to
discover common genetic risk variants related to age of melanoma
onset.Procedures: We re-analyzed data from the 1977 melanoma cases of
European ancestry made available by the MD Anderson Cancer Center study
(accession: phs000187.v1.p1). Patients were genotyped on the Illumina
OMNI1-Quad chip. Biostatistical analysis was performed from a window
moving across the whole genome using u-statistics for multivariate,
genetically structured wide-locus data to derive genetic risk scores to
determine if any gene regions were associated with age of onset in
melanoma patients. This statistical approach resulted in a genome-wide
significance level of p<105.64.Results: Common variants in several genes
were associated with melanoma age-of-onset at the level of genome-wide
significance. The most significant functional risk loci were located at
DLEU1 (p<106.75), NRP1 (pIntroduction/Purpose: The average age of
diagnosis of melanoma is younger than that of other major cancers. In
addition, melanoma is the second most common cancer among individuals in
their 20s. Analyzing GWAS data by wide-locus region (i.e. analyzing
multiple nearby single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) together)
increases statistical power compared to single-SNP analyses. This
approach has uncovered new associations in GWAS data for diseases other
than melanoma. By applying wide-locus analysis to GWAS data from melanoma
cases, we aimed to discover common genetic risk variants related to age
of melanoma onset.Procedures: We re-analyzed data from the 1977 melanoma
cases of European ancestry made available by the MD Anderson Cancer
Center study (accession: phs000187.v1.p1). Patients were genotyped on the
Illumina OMNI1-Quad chip. Biostatistical analysis was performed from a
window moving across the whole genome using u-statistics for
multivariate, genetically structured wide-locus data to derive genetic
risk scores to determine if any gene regions were associated with age of
onset in melanoma patients. This statistical approach resulted in a
genome-wide significance level of p<105.64.Results: Common variants in
several genes were associated with melanoma age-of-onset at the level of
genome-wide significance. The most significant functional risk loci were
located at DLEU1 (p<106.75), NRP1 (p<106.66), PTPN11P
(pIntroduction/Purpose: The average age of diagnosis of melanoma is
younger than that of other major cancers. In addition, melanoma is the
second most common cancer among individuals in their 20s. Analyzing GWAS
data by wide-locus region (i.e. analyzing multiple nearby single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) together) increases statistical power
compared to single-SNP analyses. This approach has uncovered new
associations in GWAS data for diseases other than melanoma. By applying
wide-locus analysis to GWAS data from melanoma cases, we aimed to
discover common genetic risk variants related to age of melanoma
onset.Procedures: We re-analyzed data from the 1977 melanoma cases of
European ancestry made available by the MD Anderson Cancer Center study
(accession: phs000187.v1.p1). Patients were genotyped on the Illumina
OMNI1-Quad chip. Biostatistical analysis was performed from a window
moving across the whole genome using u-statistics for multivariate,
genetically structured wide-locus data to derive genetic risk scores to
determine if any gene regions were associated with age of onset in
melanoma patients. This statistical approach resulted in a genome-wide
significance level of p<105.64.Results: Common variants in several genes
were associated with melanoma age-of-onset at the level of genome-wide
significance. The most significant functional risk loci were located at
DLEU1 (p<106.75), NRP1 (p<106.66), PTPN11P (p<106.49) and
BAT1/ATP6/NFKBIL (pIntroduction/Purpose: The average age of diagnosis of
melanoma is younger than that of other major cancers. In addition,
melanoma is the second most common cancer among individuals in their 20s.
Analyzing GWAS data by wide-locus region (i.e. analyzing multiple nearby
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) together) increases statistical
power compared to single-SNP analyses. This approach has uncovered new
associations in GWAS data for diseases other than melanoma. By applying
wide-locus analysis to GWAS data from melanoma cases, we aimed to
discover common genetic risk variants related to age of melanoma
onset.Procedures: We re-analyzed data from the 1977 melanoma cases of
European ancestry made available by the MD Anderson Cancer Center study
(accession: phs000187.v1.p1). Patients were genotyped on the Illumina
OMNI1-Quad chip. Biostatistical analysis was performed from a window
moving across the whole genome using u-statistics for multivariate,
genetically structured wide-locus data to derive genetic risk scores to
determine if any gene regions were associated with age of onset in
melanoma patients. This statistical approach resulted in a genome-wide
significance level of p<105.64.Results: Common variants in several genes
were associated with melanoma age-of-onset at the level of genome-wide
significance. The most significant functional risk loci were located at
DLEU1 (p<106.75), NRP1 (p<106.66), PTPN11P (p<106.49) and
BAT1/ATP6/NFKBIL (p<106.41). Of note, none of these risk loci have been
shown to be associated with risk of developing melanoma overall, or
longevity in prior GWAS. The NRP1 and PTPN11P genes have been linked to
the RAS pathway, an important driver of melanoma
pathogenesis.Conclusions: Our analysis revealed novel associations
between several common genetic variants and earlier age of melanoma
diagnosis. Some of these loci interact with the RAS pathway. Additional
studies of common genetic variants and age of cancer diagnosis using this
approach may reveal similar findings in other melanoma cohorts and
possibly other cancer types.

