Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination treatment of PARP inhibitor, BMN 673 and DNMT
inhibitor, Azacytidine: A potential therapy for BRCA negative and
positive, triple negative breast cancers


Poly-ADP-ribose polymerase inhibitors (PARPis) represent one of the most
exciting recent developments in cancer therapy and have shown efficacy in
a minority (5-10%) of triple negative (estrogen, progesterone and
herceptin receptor negative) breast cancers (TNBCs) with inherited
mutations in breast cancer genes BRCA1/2 (BRCA-ve). In PARPi clinical
trials, approximately of 60% BRCA-ve patients showed responses, while a
significant proportion did not. In addition, sporadic TNBCs with intact
BRCA1/2 have failed PARPi therapy. This suggests the urgent need for
additional novel therapies for breast cancer.Our studies are underpinned
by 4 important findings: (1) the development of a new class of potent
PARPis exemplified by BMN 673, (2) the mechanism of cytotoxicity of
PARPis, including BMN 673, is attributed to its ability to trap PARP-DNA
complexes in chromatin, (3) unpublished findings by our group that PARP
interacts with epigenetic factors such as DNMT1 in a high molecular
weight complex on chromatin in response to DNA damage and (4) DNMT
inhibitors (DNMTis) such as FDA approved Azacytidine (AzaC) covalently
trap DNMTs in DNA as their mechanism of action. Therefore, the
interaction of PARP and DNMT1 suggest a therapeutic opportunity for
combining PARPis and DNMTis in an effort to enhance the effects of PARPi
therapy. We first set out to determine whether a combination of these two
drugs would enhance trapping of PARP-DNA complexes in chromatin, leading
to increased cytotoxicity of TNBC. We treated MDA-MB-231 with BMN 673
(10-100nM) or AzaC (150nM) alone, or the two drugs in combination, and
measured PARP trapping in chromatin extracts following induction of DNA
damage by radiation (2Gy) after 72hrs. As expected, BMN 673 treatment
leads to PARP trapping as determined by western blotting of proteins from
chromatin extracts. Interestingly, treatment with AzaC treatment alone
also leads to the presence of PARP in chromatin. Importantly, AzaC in
combination with BMN 673 treatment shows an at least a 2-fold increase in
PARP trapping, compared to the individual drug treatments. To determine
whether PARP trapping correlates with cytotoxicity and cell death,
BRCA+ve TNBC lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 and BRCA-ve TNBC lines
SUM149PT and HCC1937 cells were treated with the drugs alone and in
combination and placed in colony forming assays. Compared with single
drug treatments, the combination treatment showed a significant
(pPoly-ADP-ribose polymerase inhibitors (PARPis) represent one of the
most exciting recent developments in cancer therapy and have shown
efficacy in a minority (5-10%) of triple negative (estrogen, progesterone
and herceptin receptor negative) breast cancers (TNBCs) with inherited
mutations in breast cancer genes BRCA1/2 (BRCA-ve). In PARPi clinical
trials, approximately of 60% BRCA-ve patients showed responses, while a
significant proportion did not. In addition, sporadic TNBCs with intact
BRCA1/2 have failed PARPi therapy. This suggests the urgent need for
additional novel therapies for breast cancer.Our studies are underpinned
by 4 important findings: (1) the development of a new class of potent
PARPis exemplified by BMN 673, (2) the mechanism of cytotoxicity of
PARPis, including BMN 673, is attributed to its ability to trap PARP-DNA
complexes in chromatin, (3) unpublished findings by our group that PARP
interacts with epigenetic factors such as DNMT1 in a high molecular
weight complex on chromatin in response to DNA damage and (4) DNMT
inhibitors (DNMTis) such as FDA approved Azacytidine (AzaC) covalently
trap DNMTs in DNA as their mechanism of action. Therefore, the
interaction of PARP and DNMT1 suggest a therapeutic opportunity for
combining PARPis and DNMTis in an effort to enhance the effects of PARPi
therapy. We first set out to determine whether a combination of these two
drugs would enhance trapping of PARP-DNA complexes in chromatin, leading
to increased cytotoxicity of TNBC. We treated MDA-MB-231 with BMN 673
(10-100nM) or AzaC (150nM) alone, or the two drugs in combination, and
measured PARP trapping in chromatin extracts following induction of DNA
damage by radiation (2Gy) after 72hrs. As expected, BMN 673 treatment
leads to PARP trapping as determined by western blotting of proteins from
chromatin extracts. Interestingly, treatment with AzaC treatment alone
also leads to the presence of PARP in chromatin. Importantly, AzaC in
combination with BMN 673 treatment shows an at least a 2-fold increase in
PARP trapping, compared to the individual drug treatments. To determine
whether PARP trapping correlates with cytotoxicity and cell death,
BRCA+ve TNBC lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 and BRCA-ve TNBC lines
SUM149PT and HCC1937 cells were treated with the drugs alone and in
combination and placed in colony forming assays. Compared with single
drug treatments, the combination treatment showed a significant (p<0.05)
decrease in colony formation in both BRCA positive and negative cell
lines indicating BMN 673 could potentially be used in combination with
AzaC to improve treatment of TNBCs. In vivo xenograft studies are
underway to determine the efficacy of the drug combination compared with
single treatments and vehicle controls.

