Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trends in tobacco use and prostate cancer mortality in four US
states, 1999-2010


Background: In the US, prostate cancer mortality rates have declined in
past decades. Cigarette smoking, a risk factor for prostate cancer death,
has also declined. It is unknown whether declines in smoking prevalence
produced detectable declines in prostate cancer mortality in the
population.Objective: To examine prostate cancer mortality rates in
relation to changes in tobacco use in the population.Methods: We studied
men 35 years of age from California, Kentucky, Maryland and Utah. State
smoking prevalences were obtained from the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System (BRFSS). Mortality rates for prostate cancer and
external causes, as a control condition, were obtained from the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention's Wide-ranging Online Data for
Epidemiologic Research (CDC WONDER) system. The average annual percent
change for smoking and prostate cancer mortality for 1999 to 2010 was
estimated using joinpoint analysis.Results: In 1999, the smoking
prevalence among men 35 years of age was 31.7%, 20.9%, 19.9% and 14.8% in
Kentucky, Maryland, California and Utah, respectively. Between 1999 and
2010, smoking in Kentucky declined by 3.0% per year (95% CI: -4.0%,
-1.9%) and prostate cancer mortality declined by 3.5% per year (95% CI:
-4.3%, -2.7%). In Maryland, smoking declined non-significantly by 3.0%
per year (95% CI: -7.0%, 1.2%) and prostate cancer mortality declined by
3.5% per year (95% CI: -4.1%, -3.0%). In California, smoking declined by
3.5% per year (95% CI: -4.4%, -2.5%) and prostate cancer mortality
declined by 2.5% per year (95% CI: -2.9%, -2.2%). In Utah, smoking
declined by 3.5% per year (95% CI: -5.6%, -1.3%) and prostate cancer
mortality declined by 2.1% per year (95% CI: -3.8%, -0.4%). No such
patterns were observed for smoking and external causes of death in any of
the states.Conclusion: Similar declines were observed in the prevalence
of smoking and prostate cancer mortality. Although ecological, this study
suggests that declines in prostate cancer mortality rates are consistent
with a beneficial effect of reducing tobacco use at the population level.

