Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF beta regulates tumor resistance to antiangiogenic therapy
through POSTN in glioma stem cell models


Periostin (osteoblast-specific factor 2, POSTN) is a 90-kDa ECM
(extracellular matrix) protein containing an amino-terminal EMI, tandem
repeat of four fascilin-domains and carboxyl-terminal domain including a
heparin-binding site. Stromal POSTN plays a key role in regulating cancer
stem cell (CSC) maintenance and expansion during metastatic colonization.
Recently, it has been reported that POSTN functions as a progression
associated and prognostic biomarker in glioma via inducing an invasive
and proliferative phenotype. POSTN mRNA expression was significantly
higher in grade IV gliomas than in grade II and grade III tumors. POSTN
interacts with several integrin receptors such as v1 and v3 to regulate
cellular response including cell proliferation, EMT
(epithelial-mesenchymal transition) and cell migration.We demonstrated in
previous studies that bevacizumab (Bevacizumab, Roche/Genentech)
increased glioblastoma invasion in vivo. In the present study, we
investigated the role of POSTN and its receptor in tumor invasion and
resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. POSTN expression after treatment
with avastin in vivo was increased as measured by Western blot and
immunofluorescence. Stable knockdown of POSTN expression using specific
shRNA abrogated expression of EMT (CAMK2N1, COL1A2, KRT14, COL3A1 and
MMP-9) and angiogenesis-related (ANGPTL4, VEGFA, CXCL5, HPSE and EFNA3)
genes compared to controls. VEGF expression was decreased in POSTN shRNA,
and POSTN shRNA infected cells decreased invasion in both GSC11 and
GSC272 glioma stem cell lines. TGF beta1 increased secretion of POSTN and
phosphorylation of smad3 through a decrease in POSTN binding to smad3.
Moreover, recombinant POSTN increased glioma cell invasion in an
intergrin 1 receptor-dependent fashion. In animal experiments, median
survival of animals implanted with GSC272-control cells was 63 days,
while GSC272-bevacizumab was 84.5 days and knock down of POSTN was 84
days (pPeriostin (osteoblast-specific factor 2, POSTN) is a 90-kDa ECM
(extracellular matrix) protein containing an amino-terminal EMI, tandem
repeat of four fascilin-domains and carboxyl-terminal domain including a
heparin-binding site. Stromal POSTN plays a key role in regulating cancer
stem cell (CSC) maintenance and expansion during metastatic colonization.
Recently, it has been reported that POSTN functions as a progression
associated and prognostic biomarker in glioma via inducing an invasive
and proliferative phenotype. POSTN mRNA expression was significantly
higher in grade IV gliomas than in grade II and grade III tumors. POSTN
interacts with several integrin receptors such as v1 and v3 to regulate
cellular response including cell proliferation, EMT
(epithelial-mesenchymal transition) and cell migration.We demonstrated in
previous studies that bevacizumab (Bevacizumab, Roche/Genentech)
increased glioblastoma invasion in vivo. In the present study, we
investigated the role of POSTN and its receptor in tumor invasion and
resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. POSTN expression after treatment
with avastin in vivo was increased as measured by Western blot and
immunofluorescence. Stable knockdown of POSTN expression using specific
shRNA abrogated expression of EMT (CAMK2N1, COL1A2, KRT14, COL3A1 and
MMP-9) and angiogenesis-related (ANGPTL4, VEGFA, CXCL5, HPSE and EFNA3)
genes compared to controls. VEGF expression was decreased in POSTN shRNA,
and POSTN shRNA infected cells decreased invasion in both GSC11 and
GSC272 glioma stem cell lines. TGF beta1 increased secretion of POSTN and
phosphorylation of smad3 through a decrease in POSTN binding to smad3.
Moreover, recombinant POSTN increased glioma cell invasion in an
intergrin 1 receptor-dependent fashion. In animal experiments, median
survival of animals implanted with GSC272-control cells was 63 days,
while GSC272-bevacizumab was 84.5 days and knock down of POSTN was 84
days (p<0.05). Treatment with bevacizumab increased survival of POSTN
shPOSTN tumors to 114.5 days compare to control (pPeriostin
(osteoblast-specific factor 2, POSTN) is a 90-kDa ECM (extracellular
matrix) protein containing an amino-terminal EMI, tandem repeat of four
fascilin-domains and carboxyl-terminal domain including a heparin-binding
site. Stromal POSTN plays a key role in regulating cancer stem cell (CSC)
maintenance and expansion during metastatic colonization. Recently, it
has been reported that POSTN functions as a progression associated and
prognostic biomarker in glioma via inducing an invasive and proliferative
phenotype. POSTN mRNA expression was significantly higher in grade IV
gliomas than in grade II and grade III tumors. POSTN interacts with
several integrin receptors such as v1 and v3 to regulate cellular
response including cell proliferation, EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal
transition) and cell migration.We demonstrated in previous studies that
bevacizumab (Bevacizumab, Roche/Genentech) increased glioblastoma
invasion in vivo. In the present study, we investigated the role of POSTN
and its receptor in tumor invasion and resistance to antiangiogenic
therapy. POSTN expression after treatment with avastin in vivo was
increased as measured by Western blot and immunofluorescence. Stable
knockdown of POSTN expression using specific shRNA abrogated expression
of EMT (CAMK2N1, COL1A2, KRT14, COL3A1 and MMP-9) and
angiogenesis-related (ANGPTL4, VEGFA, CXCL5, HPSE and EFNA3) genes
compared to controls. VEGF expression was decreased in POSTN shRNA, and
POSTN shRNA infected cells decreased invasion in both GSC11 and GSC272
glioma stem cell lines. TGF beta1 increased secretion of POSTN and
phosphorylation of smad3 through a decrease in POSTN binding to smad3.
Moreover, recombinant POSTN increased glioma cell invasion in an
intergrin 1 receptor-dependent fashion. In animal experiments, median
survival of animals implanted with GSC272-control cells was 63 days,
while GSC272-bevacizumab was 84.5 days and knock down of POSTN was 84
days (p<0.05). Treatment with bevacizumab increased survival of POSTN
shPOSTN tumors to 114.5 days compare to control (p<0.01). Tumor volume
was decreased in the bevacizumab treatment (1.35 mm3) and POSTN shRNA
(0.05 mm3) groups compared to controls (7.04 mm3). However, no tumor was
observed in mice treated with both POSTN shRNA and bevacizumab.
Bevacizumab increased TGF beta expression in GSC272 tumor tissue whereas
tumors from POSTN shRNA mice treated with bevacizumab did not show
evidence of TGF beta expression.Collectively, our data suggests that TGF
beta increases POSTN secretion which appears to play an important role in
glioma invasion and resistance to antiangiogenic therapy.

