Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short-term blockade of EGF signaling improves immune-mediated
cytotoxicity of NSCLC cells


One of the manifestations of tumor plasticity is the acquisition of
mesenchymal-like features by epithelial tumor cells via the phenomenon of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This phenotypic conversion of
tumor cells is known to be associated with tumor resistance to multiple
cancer therapies, including chemotherapy, radiation and some small
molecule-targeted therapies. Recent work from our group demonstrated that
tumor cells undergoing the EMT may also become resistant to
immune-mediated cytotoxicity involving antigen-specific and innate
effector cells. As signaling through the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) is a major inducer of EMT in epithelial cells, in the present
study we sought to investigate the effect of short-term EGFR inhibition
with erlotinib on tumor phenotype, and provide rationale for combination
with immune-mediated therapies. Our data shows that pretreatment with the
EGFR TKI erlotinib for less than 72 hours modulates tumor plasticity and
immune-mediated cytotoxicity in NSCLCs harboring a sensitizing EGFR
mutation. A significant modulation in expression of multiple EMT markers
can be observed, including significant changes in the levels of
expression of the transcription factor brachyury, a driver of human tumor
EMT and a target for immunotherapeutic interventions. In addition,
significant modulation of immune-relevant molecules on the surface of
tumor cells can be observed, including changes in the levels of
TRAIL-receptors, co-stimulatory and checkpoint molecules. The observed
phenotypic changes in response to short-term erlotinib treatment
correlate with an enhancement of immune-mediated tumor cell lysis,
without any observed adverse affect on effector cell populations. Taking
into account that brachyury-based cancer vaccines are currently being
evaluated in clinical trials, modulation of brachyury levels and the
observed enhancement of immune-mediated lysis in erlotinib-treated tumors
may provide the rationale for future combinations of erlotinib and
brachyury-based vaccines for the treatment of lung carcinomas.

