Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro results and electric fields simulations suggest Tumor
Treating Fields (TTFields) to be an effective treatment against
Mesothelioma


Mesothelioma is an aggressive cancer affecting the membrane lining of the
lungs and abdomen, and is associated with poor prognosis. Current
available treatment options for Mesothelioma, including surgery,
radiation therapy and chemotherapy, offer only modest improvement in
survival, therefore emphasizing the desperate need for new treatment
options. Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields) is a treatment modality based
on non-invasive application of low intensity intermediate frequency
alternating electric fields that disrupt mitosis.The goal of the present
work was to determine whether TTFields in combination with standard of
care drugs, could serve as an effective treatment against
Mesothelioma.TTFields were applied to Mesothelioma cell cultures using
the inovitro system. Cytotoxicity and effect on clonogenicity were
determined following 72 hours of TTFields treatment. Combination index
(CI) was calculated for the treatment of TTFields with each of the
following drugs: Paclitaxel, Cisplatin, Pemetrexed and Vinorelbine.
Finite Element Mesh (FEM) simulations were performed using the Sim4life
software package (ZMT, Zurich, Switzerland) for the calculations of the
electric fields intensities in the mesothelium of a realistic human
computational phantom.Frequency titration experiments revealed 150 kHz to
be the optimal TTFields frequency for Mesothelioma cell cultures, leading
to 69% reduction in the number of cells (pMesothelioma is an aggressive
cancer affecting the membrane lining of the lungs and abdomen, and is
associated with poor prognosis. Current available treatment options for
Mesothelioma, including surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy,
offer only modest improvement in survival, therefore emphasizing the
desperate need for new treatment options. Tumor Treating Fields
(TTFields) is a treatment modality based on non-invasive application of
low intensity intermediate frequency alternating electric fields that
disrupt mitosis.The goal of the present work was to determine whether
TTFields in combination with standard of care drugs, could serve as an
effective treatment against Mesothelioma.TTFields were applied to
Mesothelioma cell cultures using the inovitro system. Cytotoxicity and
effect on clonogenicity were determined following 72 hours of TTFields
treatment. Combination index (CI) was calculated for the treatment of
TTFields with each of the following drugs: Paclitaxel, Cisplatin,
Pemetrexed and Vinorelbine. Finite Element Mesh (FEM) simulations were
performed using the Sim4life software package (ZMT, Zurich, Switzerland)
for the calculations of the electric fields intensities in the
mesothelium of a realistic human computational phantom.Frequency
titration experiments revealed 150 kHz to be the optimal TTFields
frequency for Mesothelioma cell cultures, leading to 69% reduction in the
number of cells (p<0.001) and 78% reduction in clonogenicity
(pMesothelioma is an aggressive cancer affecting the membrane lining of
the lungs and abdomen, and is associated with poor prognosis. Current
available treatment options for Mesothelioma, including surgery,
radiation therapy and chemotherapy, offer only modest improvement in
survival, therefore emphasizing the desperate need for new treatment
options. Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields) is a treatment modality based
on non-invasive application of low intensity intermediate frequency
alternating electric fields that disrupt mitosis.The goal of the present
work was to determine whether TTFields in combination with standard of
care drugs, could serve as an effective treatment against
Mesothelioma.TTFields were applied to Mesothelioma cell cultures using
the inovitro system. Cytotoxicity and effect on clonogenicity were
determined following 72 hours of TTFields treatment. Combination index
(CI) was calculated for the treatment of TTFields with each of the
following drugs: Paclitaxel, Cisplatin, Pemetrexed and Vinorelbine.
Finite Element Mesh (FEM) simulations were performed using the Sim4life
software package (ZMT, Zurich, Switzerland) for the calculations of the
electric fields intensities in the mesothelium of a realistic human
computational phantom.Frequency titration experiments revealed 150 kHz to
be the optimal TTFields frequency for Mesothelioma cell cultures, leading
to 69% reduction in the number of cells (p<0.001) and 78% reduction in
clonogenicity (p<0.05) as compared to control. The combined treatment of
TTFields with Paclitaxel, Cisplatin, Pemetrexed and Vinorelbine resulted
in combination index of 0.99, 0.88, 1.29 and 1.13, respectively. FEM
simulations demonstrated that electric field intensities within the
mesothelium are approximately 2 V/cm RMS which is above the minimal
threshold required for TTFields effect.Taken together, these results
suggest that combining TTFields therapy with systemic chemotherapy may be
an approach that offers enhanced treatment efficacy for Mesothelioma. A
clinical study testing the combined efficacy of TTFields Cisplatin and
Pemetrexed is under development.

