Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive guide for managing large-scale collaborative
genomics research projects


Globally applicable best practices guidelines for managing large-scale
collaborative genomics projects have been established using lessons
learned from the successes and challenges of The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA). As the cost of genomic sequencing is decreasing, more and more
researchers are leveraging genomic data to inform the biology of disease.
The amount of genomic data generated is growing exponentially, and
protocols need to be established for the long-term storage,
dissemination, and regulation of these data for research. The authors aim
to create a comprehensive guide to managing research projects involving
genomic data, as learned through the evolution of the TCGA program over
the last decade. This project was primarily carried out in the US, but
the impact and lessons learned can be applied to an international
audience.The guide will serve to: Establish a framework for managing
large-scale genomic research projects involving multiple
collaboratorsDescribe lessons learned through TCGA to prepare for
potential roadblocksEvaluate policy considerations that are needed to
avoid pitfallsRecommend strategies to make project management more
efficient Educate readers on practical considerations and stakeholder
applications regarding each step of the projectThe guide will cover
operational procedures, policy considerations, and lessons learned
through TCGA on topics such as:Sample acquisitionData generation Data
storage and disseminationData analysis effortsQuality control, auditing
and reportingFormation of analysis working groups for consortium
publicationsAnalysis of TCGA's programmatic and policy decisions since
2006 provides insight into successful practices. Collaborative spirit,
vital to its success, was maintained through incentivizing participation
in analysis working groups, publishing with a single network author, and
allowing participants to gain early access to project data. TCGA was
managed centrally by NIH offices, which streamlined project management
activities overall. Sample and clinical data quality was maintained by
evaluation of tissue provider practices through a review board, use of a
central repository for sample receipt and distribution, and the use of
multi-stage payment plan per sample enrolled. Streamlined data analysis,
storage, and dissemination occurred through a tightly controlled data
coordination center, which among other activities, provided to the public
precise datasets used for each analysis publication.Analysis of
large-scale genomic information is a complex undertaking with many
pitfalls. Best practices guidelines based upon experience in genomics,
industrial psychology, data management, and project management will
provide a foundation for successful implementation of these
projects.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

