Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A red-shifted fluorescent substrate for aldehyde dehydrogenase,
AldeRed 588-A, for labeling viable ALDH-positive cells


Normal and cancer stem cells can be isolated based upon the enzymatic
activity of aldehyde dehydrogenase I (ALDH1), a detoxifying enzyme
responsible for oxidation of hazardous aldehyde byproducts. ALDH1 has
been used to isolate cancer stem cells of various human malignancies
including bladder, breast, cervical, colon, head and neck, liver, lung,
pancreas, prostate and ovary. Currently, the ALDEFLUORTM assay which uses
a fluorescent substrate is the only commercially available reagent for
ALDH detection. The substrate used in this assay primarily emits in the
green region of the electromagnetic spectrum (512nm). For researchers
with valuable cell and transgenic animal models in which the target gene
of interest has been tagged with eGFP, ALDEFLUOR therefore cannot be
used. Selection of cells positive for aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
activity from a green fluorescent background is thus difficult with
existing reagents. We now describe a red-shifted fluorescent substrate
for ALDH, AldeRed 588-A, that provides additional flexibility for
utilizing ALDH as a marker for stem cell and cancer stem cell isolation.
The activity of AldRed 588-A was compared with the ALDEFLUOR reagent and
demonstrated similar ability to fractionate ALDHpos cells in a number of
cell lines tested.

