Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary intake of vitamin B6 and choline are inversely associated
with pancreatic cancer risk: The Singapore Chinese Health Study


Background. Dietary nutrients involved in one-carbon metabolism, either
as methyl donors or as enzyme co-factors are hypothesized to protect
against pancreatic cancer development. Animal studies showed that diets
deficient in one carbon metabolism-related nutrients, such as vitamin B6
and choline, were able to induce DNA damage in the pancreas and enhance
the development of carcinogen-initiated pancreatic cancers in rodents.
Although there is a strong rationale that one carbon metabolism-related
nutrients may alter pancreatic cancer risk in human, prospective studies
with well-characterized dietary intake that test the hypothesis are
lacking. Methods. Between 1993 and 1998, 63,257 men and women aged 45-74
years were recruited into the Singapore Chinese Health Study. By the end
of 2013, 271 incident pancreatic cancer cases were identified during up
to 20 years of follow-up, after excluding individuals with extreme
calorie intake or a history of cancer at enrollment (N = 2,959). The
daily intakes of betaine, choline, folate, methionine, and vitamins B2,
B6 & B12 were assessed at baseline by a 165-item semi-quantitative food
frequency questionnaire that was developed for, and validated in the
study population. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
for pancreatic cancer risk associated with total calorie-adjusted intake
levels of one carbon nutrients were calculated using the Cox-proportional
hazard regression method with the adjustment for established risk factors
for pancreatic cancer including age, sex, body mass index (BMI), smoking,
alcohol drinking, and diabetes. Results. Higher intake of vitamin B6 and
choline were associated with a statistically significant decrease in the
risk of developing pancreatic cancer. Compared with the lowest quartile,
HRs (95% CIs) for the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th quartiles of vitamin B6 were 0.71
(0.51-0.98), 0.80 (0.58-1.11), and 0.52 (0.36-0.74), respectively (P
trend = 0.001). Similarly, the corresponding HRs (95% CIs) for choline
were 0.57 (0.40-0.80), 0.72 (0.52-1.00), and 0.67 (0.48-0.93),
respectively (P trend = 0.04). There was no overall statistically
significant relationship between dietary intake of betaine, folate,
methionine, vitamins B2 or B12 and pancreatic cancer risk. In stratified
analyses by sex, the statistically significant, inverse associations
between dietary choline and vitamin B6 and pancreatic cancer risk were
present among men only (both P trend 0.02). Among men, these inverse
associations were more apparent in smokers and nondrinkers of alcoholic
beverages. Conclusion. Our prospective findings are consistent with in
vivo evidence for protective roles of vitamin B6 and choline on
pancreatic cancer development. These dietary compounds may be developed
as potential chemopreventive agents against pancreatic cancer development
in humans.

