Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRP78 / BiP / HSPA5 expression and those of other chaperone
proteins is rapidly degraded by OSU-03012 and Viagra exposure:
Implications for anti-cancer and anti-pathogen therapies


We examined the interaction between the non-coxib OSU-03012 with
phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) inhibitors to determine the role of the
chaperone GRP78/BiP/HSPA5 in the response of cells. Sildenafil (Viagra)
interacted in a greater than additive fashion with OSU-03012 to kill
tumor cells including stem-like and anoikis resistant cells. Treatment of
cells with OSU-03012/sildenafil: abolished the expression of growth
factor receptors and plasma membrane drug efflux pumps; and caused a more
rapid degradation of GRP78 and of other important chaperone proteins e.g.
HSP27, HSP40, HSP60, HSP70 and HSP90. Decreased expression of receptors
and pumps was dependent upon enhanced PERK-eIF2 signaling and blocked by
GRP78 over-expression. The combination of OSU-03012/sildenafil synergized
with sorafenib to kill tumor cells. GRP78 is also a protein required for
human virus reproduction. Pre-treatment of mammalian cells with
OSU-03012/sildenafil reduced expression of the coxsakie and adenovirus
receptor in parallel with also reducing the ability of a serotype 5
adenovirus or coxsakie virus B4 to infect and to reproduce. Similar data
were obtained using Cytomegalovirus and Influenza viruses.
OSU-03012/sildenafil decreased the expression of: NPC1 and TIM1; LAMP1;
and NTCP1, receptors for Ebola / Hepatitis A, Lassa fever, and Hepatitis
B viruses, respectively. Bacteria express a GRP78 homologue and
phosphodiesterases, and treatment of multi-antibiotic resistant E. coli
and N. gonorrhoeae with OSU-03012/PDE5 inhibitor combinations was
bactericidal and restored antibiotic sensitivity. Thus modulation of
GRP78 function may be of therapeutic use in multiple human pathologies.

