Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biobran/MGN-3, arabinoxylan from rice bran, sensitizes breast
adenocarcinoma tumor cells to paclitaxol in mice


Purpose: While chemotherapy is considered the cornerstone of treatment
for various types of cancers, the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents can
be restricted by dose-limiting toxicities. Therefore, there is increasing
interest in identifying agents that may increase the sensitivity of
cancer cells to conventional chemotherapeutic agents. We have shown that
Biobran/MGN-3 sensitizes different breast cancer cell lines towards
paclitaxel (taxol) In vitro. The objective of this study is to examine
the chemosensitizing ability of Biobran/MGN-3 in breast adenocarcinoma in
vivo and its mechanism of action.Materials and Methods: Mice were
transplanted subcutaneously with Ehrlich ascites carcinoma (EAC) cells, a
breast adenocarcinoma of mouse origin. Mice bearing solid tumors were
treated with Biobran/MGN-3 and/or paclitaxel. Tumor growth was monitored
for 30 days, cell cycle distribution was analyzed using flow cytometry of
propidium iodide(PI)-stained cells. Tumor cell proliferation, DNA damage,
and apoptosis were quantitatively evaluated by flow cytometry and
examined by light and electron microscopy.Results: Co-treatment of tumor
bearing mice with Biobran/MGN-3 + paclitaxel resulted in a marked
inhibition of tumor growth: tumor weight was reduced by 93% of control (p
Purpose: While chemotherapy is considered the cornerstone of treatment
for various types of cancers, the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents can
be restricted by dose-limiting toxicities. Therefore, there is increasing
interest in identifying agents that may increase the sensitivity of
cancer cells to conventional chemotherapeutic agents. We have shown that
Biobran/MGN-3 sensitizes different breast cancer cell lines towards
paclitaxel (taxol) In vitro. The objective of this study is to examine
the chemosensitizing ability of Biobran/MGN-3 in breast adenocarcinoma in
vivo and its mechanism of action.Materials and Methods: Mice were
transplanted subcutaneously with Ehrlich ascites carcinoma (EAC) cells, a
breast adenocarcinoma of mouse origin. Mice bearing solid tumors were
treated with Biobran/MGN-3 and/or paclitaxel. Tumor growth was monitored
for 30 days, cell cycle distribution was analyzed using flow cytometry of
propidium iodide(PI)-stained cells. Tumor cell proliferation, DNA damage,
and apoptosis were quantitatively evaluated by flow cytometry and
examined by light and electron microscopy.Results: Co-treatment of tumor
bearing mice with Biobran/MGN-3 + paclitaxel resulted in a marked
inhibition of tumor growth: tumor weight was reduced by 93% of control (p
< 0.01), which represents a 3.7 fold decrease as compared to tumor weight
of paclitaxel alone. In addition, following co-treatment, 20% of the
animals showed complete tumor regression. Inhibition of tumor growth was
associated with a decrease in cell proliferation by 43%, elevation of DNA
damage by 76%, and an enhancement of the apoptotic tumor cells by 157%,
of control values (pPurpose: While chemotherapy is considered the
cornerstone of treatment for various types of cancers, the efficacy of
chemotherapeutic agents can be restricted by dose-limiting toxicities.
Therefore, there is increasing interest in identifying agents that may
increase the sensitivity of cancer cells to conventional chemotherapeutic
agents. We have shown that Biobran/MGN-3 sensitizes different breast
cancer cell lines towards paclitaxel (taxol) In vitro. The objective of
this study is to examine the chemosensitizing ability of Biobran/MGN-3 in
breast adenocarcinoma in vivo and its mechanism of action.Materials and
Methods: Mice were transplanted subcutaneously with Ehrlich ascites
carcinoma (EAC) cells, a breast adenocarcinoma of mouse origin. Mice
bearing solid tumors were treated with Biobran/MGN-3 and/or paclitaxel.
Tumor growth was monitored for 30 days, cell cycle distribution was
analyzed using flow cytometry of propidium iodide(PI)-stained cells.
Tumor cell proliferation, DNA damage, and apoptosis were quantitatively
evaluated by flow cytometry and examined by light and electron
microscopy.Results: Co-treatment of tumor bearing mice with Biobran/MGN-3
+ paclitaxel resulted in a marked inhibition of tumor growth: tumor
weight was reduced by 93% of control (p < 0.01), which represents a 3.7
fold decrease as compared to tumor weight of paclitaxel alone. In
addition, following co-treatment, 20% of the animals showed complete
tumor regression. Inhibition of tumor growth was associated with a
decrease in cell proliferation by 43%, elevation of DNA damage by 76%,
and an enhancement of the apoptotic tumor cells by 157%, of control
values (p<0.01). Cell cycle analysis showed a marked increase in the
sub-G0/G1 population (hypodiploid DNA content), which is a hallmark of
apoptosis, by 3.6 fold of control group and 1.8 fold of paclitaxel group.
AnnexinV-PI confirmed the potential increase of apoptosis in tumor cells.
Concomitant treatment of Biobran/MGN-3 + paclitaxel also increased the
number of infiltrating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells within the tumor,
down-regulated Ki67 expression in the tumor cells, and significantly
maximized the Apoptosis/Proliferation ratio. Light and electron
microscopy studies indicated the mechanism of apoptosis rather than
necrosis in the inhibition of tumor tissues of mice treated with
Biobran/MGN-3 + paclitaxel.Conclusion:This study demonstrated that
treatment with Biobran/MGN-3 markedly improved the efficacy of paclitaxel
therapy. These results suggest that Biobran/MGN-3 is an effective
chemosensitizer in vivo and may represent a novel adjuvant for the
treatment of breast cancer. Biobran/MGN-3 was provided by Daiwa
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Tokyo, Japan.

