Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utility of mir-21 detection by rapid chromogenic in-situ
hybridization in the diagnosis of well and moderately differentiated
hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: An estimated 80-90% of all hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC)
arise from cirrhotic liver in chronic hepatitis B or C infection.
Identifying well-differentiated HCC arising in the background of
cirrhosis is a challenging task relying solely on morphology of core
biopsies. In addition, presence of dysplasia (micro/macro) in cirrhotic
nodules makes the task more difficult. In HCC, microRNAs (miRNAs) have an
aberrant expression profile with possible applications in diagnosis,
especially for early, symptomatic disease. Sub-cellular and tissue
localization of miRNAs may help us understand their biological roles and
contribution to disease along with aiding diagnosis.Design: The aim of
this study was to evaluate the utility of mir-21 detection by rapid
chromogenic in-situ hybridization (CISH) as a diagnostic tool in the
setting of well and moderately differentiated HCCs. Archival blocks and
slides were retrieved and reviewed after obtaining IRB approval (table
1). Manufacturers guidelines were followed for CISH (NAR-1, FAM-labeled
Has-miR-21 probe) on a total of 202 cases. Nuclear mir-21 CISH stain was
graded as: negative (-), weak (1+), moderate (2+) or strong (3+) and
distribution was graded as: focal (50%).Table showing cases considered
for mir-21 detection by CISH.Results: Neoplastic cells in HCC showed a
strong (2-3) multifocal to diffuse nuclear staining for mir-21 in 100% of
the cases of whole tissue slides and 91% of HCC cases in tissue
microarray slides when compared to the staining pattern seen in normal
liver cells (0%). As expected, 85% of cases with liver metastases from
colonic and gallbladder adenocarcinoma showed strong nuclear staining for
mir-21.Conclusion: Rapid CISH technique can clearly identify increased
nuclear expression of mir-21 and aid in diagnosis of well and moderately
differentiated HCC.

