Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of IL-1 production and release in pancreatic cancer
cells


Pancreatic Ductal AdenoCarcinoma (PDAC) is a very aggressive disease,
characterized by desmoplasia and Th2-inflammation. Th2-inflammation
correlates with poor prognosis and it is driven by the release of the
Thymic Stromal LymphoPoietin (TSLP) from Cancer Associated Fibroblasts
(CAFs) activated by tumor-derived pro-inflammatory cytokines.The aims of
our study are: i) to verify which tumor-derived cytokines are responsible
for CAFs activation, ii) to understand the stimuli/mechanisms of
tumor-derived cytokine production in pancreatic cancer cells.Analyzing a
series of 9 PDAC cell lines by both Real-time PCR and immunofluorescence,
we found heterogeneous expression of IL-1, IL-1 and TNF-. Furthermore,
ELISA tests revealed that some PDAC cell lines could either actively
secrete or release during necrosis these pro-inflammatory cytokines.
Next, we treated CAFs obtained from surgical patient samples with rhIL-1,
rhIL-1, rhTNF- and PDAC cell supernatants. Interestingly, we observed an
induction in TSLP secretion that was significantly reduced by anti-IL1
and Anakinra (the recombinant form of IL-1Ra), suggesting a predominant
role of the IL-1/IL-1R axis.It is known that IL-1 and TLRs ligands can
activate NF-kB that in turn induces the synthesis of proIL-1 that is
cleaved to matureIL-1 by caspase-1, upon inflammasome activation.In line
with this, we performed Western Blot analysis and we observed
constitutive activation of both NF-kB and inflammasome. We also
demonstrated that IL-1 is able to increase IL-1 production in PDAC cells,
with an autocrine loop. Furthermore, treating THP1 cells (a monocytic
cell line that secrete IL-1 only upon stimulation) with PDAC cell
supernatants we found that both IL-1-expressing and non-IL-1-expressing
cells can release inflammasome-activating factors.Since pancreatic cancer
is highly hypoxic, we cultured PDAC cell lines in hypoxic conditions and
we demonstrated that prolonged severe hypoxia, in combination with
starvation, induces an increase in both IL-1 and IL-1 secretion.In
conclusion, our study demonstrates that PDAC cells can constitutively
express IL-1, IL-1 and TNF-, thus inducing TSLP secretion from CAFs and
eventually Th2-inflammation. PDAC cells secrete inflammasome-activating
factors that sustain cytokine production with an autocrine loop, and that
could induce cytokine release from infiltrating macrophages. Finally, the
hypoxic environment of pancreatic cancer can further increase IL-1 and
IL-1 secretion.Our findings support the development of clinical studies
combining the use of Anakinra with conventional chemotherapy, in order to
interfere with the IL-1/IL-1R axis and therefore Th2-inflammation, thus
improving the prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients.

