Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of pro-survival pathways in lung cancer cells with
functional defects in the Fanconi Anemia pathway


There is a growing appreciation that defects in homologous recombination
repair may increase sensitivity of tumors to certain DNA-damaging agents,
plausibly through a synthetic lethal interaction. The Fanconi Anemia (FA)
pathway is a major mechanism of homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair.
Deficiencies in FA pathway have been reported as a predictor of
cisplatin, mitomycin C (MMC) or PARP inhibitor sensitivity in cancer
cells. The novel PARP inhibitor BMN-673 has emerged from preclinical
studies as a best in class PARP trapping agent. BMN-673 has also
demonstrated single-agent cytotoxicity in BRCA mutant cells, and activity
in cancer patients with BRCA germ line deficiency.To evaluate novel
targeted agents in the background of FA deficiency we utilized RNAi
technology to generate several lung cancer cell lines with FANCD2
deficiency. Successful FANCD2 knockdown was confirmed by reduction in the
FANCD2 protein. Cell viability was evaluated with MTT assay.We treated
the FA defective H1299D2-down and A549D2-down non-small cell lung cancer
cells and their FA competent counterparts H1299E and A549E (empty vector
controls) with the PARP inhibitors veliparib (ABT-888, 5M) and BMN673
(0.5M), as well as with the CHK1 inhibitor Arry-575 at a dose of 0.5M. We
also treated the BCL2 expressing small cell lung cancer cells
H719D2-down, H792D2-down and their controls H719E and H792E with the
BCL2/XL inhibitor navitoclax (ABT263) at a dose of 2M. The treated cells
were harvested at 24, 48 and 72 hours (h) post treatment.Cell viability
analysis showed that H1299D2-down cells had 80% of viable cells compared
to 100% viable cells in H1299E controls 72h post treatment with
veliparib. The A549D2-down cells had 68% viable cells compared to 83%
viable cells in the A549E cells 72 h post veliparib treatment. FA
defective cells were also more sensitive to treatment of BMN-673 (25% for
H1299D2-down vs 62% for H1299E; 29% for A549D2-down vs 46% for A549E) 72
h post BMN-673 treatment at dose of 0.5M. BMN-673 was more potent
compared to veliparib.FA defective cells were also more sensitive to the
treatment of CHK1 or BCL2/XL inhibition. H1299D2-down cells had 38% of
viable cells comparing to 60% viable cells in the H1299E cells post
treatment of CHK1 inhibitor Arry-575 at a dose of 0.5 M. In addition, MTT
analysis showed that BCL2/XL inhibitor navitoclax was more cytotoxic to
the H719D2-down (51%) as compared to H719E (85%) 48 h post treatment.
Similarly, the H792D2-down cells were more sensitive to the treatment of
navitoclax (58% viable cell) as compared to H792E cells (86% viable cell)
48 h post treatment at dose of 2M.Given that FA pathway plays essential
roles in response to DNA damage, our results suggest that a subset of
lung cancer patients are likely to be more susceptible to treatments in
which additional pathways (e.g PARP, CHK1 and BCL2/XL) are targeted.
Clinical trials to evaluate this therapeutic concept are needed.

