Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of mTOR and p53 signaling using rapamycin plus CP-31398
inhibits growth and progression of urothelial carcinoma in-vivo


Bladder cancer is the second most common genitourinary cancer worldwide.
Despite multidisciplinary treatment advances, muscle-invasive bladder
cancer continues to have high mortality. Since dysregulation of p53 and
mTOR signaling in urothelium is associated with tumor initiation, growth
and invasiveness, we investigated whether up-regulation of TP53 plus
inhibition of mTOR additively or synergistically inhibits tumor growth
and progression in vivo. Transgenic UPII-SV40T male mice (n = 15/group)
were generated, genotyped and fed control or experimental diets
containing the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin (8 or 16 ppm) and/or the p53
stabilizing agent CP31398 (150 ppm) starting at 6 weeks of age. After 34
weeks, control diet fed transgenic mice developed urothelium-specific
high-grade, invasive transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) with significant
increase in bladder weights (140.2 9.8 mg; p70%. The combination of
CP31398 with 8 ppm rapamycin decreased tumor weight by 83% (16.47 5.4 mg;
p70%. The combination of CP31398 with 8 ppm rapamycin decreased tumor
weight by 83% (16.47 5.4 mg; p<0.0001). Rapamycin (8 or 16 ppm)
suppressed tumor invasion by 53% (p70%. The combination of CP31398 with 8
ppm rapamycin decreased tumor weight by 83% (16.47 5.4 mg; p<0.0001).
Rapamycin (8 or 16 ppm) suppressed tumor invasion by 53% (p<0.005) or 66%
(p71% (p71% (p<0.0001). Molecular analysis of tumors via real-time PCR,
IHC and western blotting showed synergistic inhibition by the drug
combination of tumor growth and invasion with suppression of mTOR
signaling (mTOR, pmTOR, raptor, rictor, Akt, pAkt); induction of p53
expression; and decreased expression of proliferation (PCNA), cell cycle
regulators (cyclin D1, cyclin A), pro-survival molecules (Hif1a, Vegf)
and androgen receptor. The combination of CP-31398 and rapamycin appears
to be a promising approach for preventing urothelial TCC invasion.
(Supported in part by NCI-CN53300)Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

