Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel germline copy number variations in patients with hereditary
colorectal carcinoma with no mutation in the mismatch repair genes


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is estimated to be the third most frequent of
cancer worldwide in both sexes combined (http://globocan.iarc.fr). Lynch
Syndrome (LS), the main hereditary disease related to CRC, is associated
with germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes in 50% of the
patients. Therefore, a significant number of cases have no mutations in
known genes suggesting that other genetic and epigenetic alterations may
play a role in the molecular etiology of CRC predisposition. In this
study, we evaluated copy number variations (CNVs) in 58 individuals from
families with LS with no pathogenic mutations in the MMR genes using the
Agilent 4180K microarray platform. Genomic data were analyzed using
Genomic Workbench v6.5 (Agilent Technologies) software and compared with
the Database of Genomic Variants (DGV), 100 healthy Brazilian individuals
(evaluated with 180K Agilent platform) and 1038 phenotypically healthy
individuals (Affymetrix database). It was identified 263 CNVs: 86 were
classified as rare ( 1% of reference databases) and 10 (in different
chromosomes and cases) were completely new. Eleven out of 58 cases were
re-evaluated using a higher-density microarray platform (Affymetrix
CytoScan HD, 2.6 million probes), being the data analyzed with the
Chromosome Analysis Suite v2.1 (Affymetrix) software. We identified more
CNVs per case with the Affymetrix platform compared to the Agilent
platform (179 to 68). Six rare CNVs were confirmed by both microarray
platforms in five different cases: gains of 8p23.3 (95Kb/two genes),
9p21.2 (104Kb/three genes) and 9p24.3 (152Kb/two genes), and loss of
2p23.3 (324Kb/three genes), 2q21.2 (49Kb/one gene) and 3p12.3 (43Kb/one
gene). Five of these genes, mapped in four regions, have been related to
cancer development. By using Affymetrix CytoScan HD platform, two
unrelated cases presented a rare duplication of 82kb on chromosome 2p22.3
encompassing two genes and one microRNA, that were previously associated
with CRC. The differences in the detection of both array platforms may be
explained in part by the technical procedures used, location of probes
and the type of analysis performed to call CNVs. In overall, the findings
suggest that rare CNVs might be associated with CRC predisposition in LS
patients negative for mutations in MMR genes.Financial Support: FAPESP
(2011/07742-7 and INCiTO (FAPESP: 2008/57887-9 and CNPq 573589/08-9.)

