Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome hypo- and hyper-methylation sequencing among Africa
American patients with colorectal cancer


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) involves epigenetic changes including
DNA hypomethylation, a paradigm shift in the role of DNA methylation
alterations in colorectal carcinogenesis.Aim: Here we performed Reduced
Representation Bisulfite Sequencing (RRBS) on a normal, and a tumor
patient's tissue DNA to elucidate hyper- and hypomethylaed target genes
in colorectal cancer progression in this population.Methods: Genomic DNA
was isolated from fresh frozen surgical tissues from a patient with
normal colon, and from a carcinoma patient. RRBS was performed on these
DNA samples for hyper- and hypomethylation targets identification.
Alignment, mapping and CpG methylation analyses were performed.
Preferential hypomethylated pathways were determined using Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA).Results: We identified the hyper (6360 CpG sites)
and hypo-methylation (4845 CpG sites) status of top genes in the CpG
Island within promoter regions (19 and 18 genes respectively). Top hyper-
and hypomethylated CpG Island outside promoter regions (16 and 18 genes,
respectively) were also identified. Among these top genes, CDH4 and SOX21
were reported to be hypermethylated in CRC and SCUBE2 (112 methylated
CpG) mapped by IPA to the Hedgehog, TGF-, and VEGF Signaling pathways was
reported to play a role in breast cancer. Among the top hypomethylated
genes, ACOT9 (97 CpGI sites) and RIN2 (40 CpGI sites) might play a
significant role in CRC in AAs, since IPA mapped these markers to the
Wnt/-catenin, VEGF and PTEN signaling pathways. ACOT9 was found to play a
role in breast cancer.Conclusion: This work provides insight into
differential CpG island hyper- and hypo-methylation profiles in CRC and
provides a window into the more complex epigenetic events associated with
CRC, including the hypomethylation of known and novel genes.
Investigations into the possible roles of the novel gene targets in the
context of early and prognostic methylation biomarkers are underway.

