Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New perspectives on the use of polo-like kinase 1 as a prognostic
biomarker in non-small cell lung cancer


Introduction: Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) overexpression is observed in
various tumors, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and is
correlated with poor patient prognosis and metastasis, suggesting a role
in aggressive tumors. Previous studies reported Plk1 downregulation by
P53 upon DNA damage, suggesting that TP53 mutations might have an
influence on Plk1 expression. In this study, we determined the Plk1
protein level in NSCLC patients and correlated these results with the
TP53 status, presence of hypoxia (carbonic anhydrase 9, CA-9) and
apoptosis induction (cleaved caspase 3).Material & methods: Tumor tissues
of 84 NSCLC patients and 16 control samples were obtained from the
Antwerp University Hospital. Immunohistochemistry was performed using
antibodies to Plk1 (208G4, 1/50), CA-9 (EPR4151(2), 1/350) and cleaved
caspase 3 (9579S, 1/250). Based on the% positive cells and staining
intensity, an overall score of negative, weak, moderate or strong
expression was assigned for both the Plk1 and CA-9 protein. For the TP53
mutation analysis, DNA was isolated using the QIAamp DNA FFPE tissue kit.
For each sample, DNA concentration and purity were assessed using
NanoDrop measurement. The relation between DNA input and FFPE derived DNA
quality was determined using the QC-plex assay from Multiplicom. Samples
were considered to be usable when the DNA quality coefficient was higher
than 0.2. Determination of the TP53 mutation status was performed using
Multiplicom's TP53 MASTRTM Plus test with MID for Illumina Miseq.Results
& discussion: Plk1 and CA-9 positivity was detected in 95% and 83% of all
tumor samples, respectively. Of the 16 control samples, all samples
stained negative, except for 4/16 and 1/16 samples that showed a low
expression for Plk1 and CA-9, respectively. In a next phase, cleaved
caspase 3 staining will be scored and both CA-9 and cleaved caspase 3
expression patterns will be correlated to Plk1 expression. Furthermore,
results will be correlated with clinicopathological parameters, including
incidence age, smoking behavior, tumor differentiation and stage,
metastasis and survival. For the TP53 mutation analysis, sufficient DNA
with acceptable purity was isolated from 82 patients. A QC plex reaction
has already been performed for 20 samples, 12 of them showed an
acceptable DQC value and 8 sampled were marked as low DNA quality
samples. Nonetheless, the latter could be used for further analysis by
increasing the DNA input. At present, 15 samples have been sequenced
successfully. Besides polymorphisms, 5 exon mutations (c.536A>G,
c.916C>T, c.734G>A, c.578A>C, c.559+1G>T) and 4 intron mutations
(c.920-2A>T, c.993+352C>T, c.559+1G>T) were observed. As soon as all
samples have been processed, it will be evaluated whether a link between
Plk1 overexpression and TP53 mutations can be evidenced.

