Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LPA stimulates glycolytic shift of ovarian cancer cells via gip2
oncogenes


Ovarian cancer patients show increased levels of lysophosphatidic acid
(LPA) in their serum and ascitic fluid. Our previous studies have
established a critical role for LPA in inducing proliferation as well as
migration of ovarian cancer cells. In the present study, we focused on
identifying novel therapeutic targets in the oncogenic signaling pathway
regulated by LPA. Using a commercial pathway reporter array of 45
transcription factors, we found that hypoxia-induced factor-1 alpha
(HIF-1 alpha) was the most activated transcription factor induced by LPA.
Both stable as well as transient silencing of Galphai2, a downstream
signaling mediator for LPA, abrogates LPA induced increase in HIF-1 alpha
expression. In addition, our results indicate that LPA stimulated an
increase in the expression of Hexokinase-2 (HK2) and Glucose transporter
1 (GLUT1), which are targets of HIF-1 alpha, are also mediated via
Galphai2 signaling pathway. To determine the outcome LPA induced increase
in HK2 and GLUT1 on glycolytic rates, we measured the extracellular
acidification rate (ECAR) in ovarian cancer cells following treatment
with LPA, using an XFe analyzer. In both SKOV3-ip and OVCA429 cells, LPA
increased ECAR in a dose-dependent manner. Silencing Galphai2 as well as
HIF-1 alpha in ovarian cancer cells reduced ECAR indicative of reduced
glycolytic rate. The current study, points to the identification of
LPA(R)-Galphai2-HIF-1 alpha-GLUT1 signaling axis as potential
metabolism-targets in ovarian cancer treatment.

