Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A large prostate cancer tissue microarray showed significant
downregulation of hZIP1 in African American as compared to Caucasian men


Prostate cancer (PC) originates mainly in the peripheral zone, where the
majority of zinc (Zn) accumulating cells are located. The underlying
basis of our study focuses on the essential trace element Zn which is
needed in relatively high amounts for reproductive processes. PC is
significantly more common in African American men (AAM) as compared to
European American Men (EAM). Currently, the reason for this racial
disparity is not understood, but like similar diseases, may develop due
to the interaction of diverse risk factors including age, race, genetics,
socioeconomic and lifestyle choices, broadly defined to include
geographical and nutritional factors. Previous studies we have
investigated the accumulation of Zn within the prostate gland of AAM and
EAM, which showed that AA lose zinc levels in the glandular epithelia at
an earlier age and have a relatively lower accumulation of Zn within the
gland. Here, we present analyses of the ethnicity tissue microarray (TMA)
of 267 core biopsies from AA and EA men. We carried out in situ RP PCR
for hZIP1, hZIP2, hZIP3 and hZIP4 in all the TMAs and discovered that
hZIP1 gene expression was significantly down-regulated and
correspondingly, the cellular level of Zn was also depleted in the same
areas where the hZIP1 was down-regulated. These effects occur in early
and late stages of malignant development in the peripheral zone. Most
importantly, we provide the evidence for the first time in a large TMA
core biopsies that AAs have down-regulated their hZIP1 at a relatively
higher degree than the age-and Gleason score matched EAs and that may
explain why AAs have twice as much incident rate of PC than EAs, by
utilizing two in situ detection methods. The following are the summary of
our data: 1) The relative degree of hZIP1 is differentially expressed in
the prostate tissues between stroma versus glandular areas. 2) The hZIP1
is downregulated in the glandular malignant tissues of the prostate. 3)
The hZIP1 is also downregulated in the stromal areas in the malignant
glands. 4) The degree of expression downregulation is significantly
(pProstate cancer (PC) originates mainly in the peripheral zone, where
the majority of zinc (Zn) accumulating cells are located. The underlying
basis of our study focuses on the essential trace element Zn which is
needed in relatively high amounts for reproductive processes. PC is
significantly more common in African American men (AAM) as compared to
European American Men (EAM). Currently, the reason for this racial
disparity is not understood, but like similar diseases, may develop due
to the interaction of diverse risk factors including age, race, genetics,
socioeconomic and lifestyle choices, broadly defined to include
geographical and nutritional factors. Previous studies we have
investigated the accumulation of Zn within the prostate gland of AAM and
EAM, which showed that AA lose zinc levels in the glandular epithelia at
an earlier age and have a relatively lower accumulation of Zn within the
gland. Here, we present analyses of the ethnicity tissue microarray (TMA)
of 267 core biopsies from AA and EA men. We carried out in situ RP PCR
for hZIP1, hZIP2, hZIP3 and hZIP4 in all the TMAs and discovered that
hZIP1 gene expression was significantly down-regulated and
correspondingly, the cellular level of Zn was also depleted in the same
areas where the hZIP1 was down-regulated. These effects occur in early
and late stages of malignant development in the peripheral zone. Most
importantly, we provide the evidence for the first time in a large TMA
core biopsies that AAs have down-regulated their hZIP1 at a relatively
higher degree than the age-and Gleason score matched EAs and that may
explain why AAs have twice as much incident rate of PC than EAs, by
utilizing two in situ detection methods. The following are the summary of
our data: 1) The relative degree of hZIP1 is differentially expressed in
the prostate tissues between stroma versus glandular areas. 2) The hZIP1
is downregulated in the glandular malignant tissues of the prostate. 3)
The hZIP1 is also downregulated in the stromal areas in the malignant
glands. 4) The degree of expression downregulation is significantly
(p<0.001) in AA as compared to EA. 5) Downregulation of hZIP1 is
significantly (pProstate cancer (PC) originates mainly in the peripheral
zone, where the majority of zinc (Zn) accumulating cells are located. The
underlying basis of our study focuses on the essential trace element Zn
which is needed in relatively high amounts for reproductive processes. PC
is significantly more common in African American men (AAM) as compared to
European American Men (EAM). Currently, the reason for this racial
disparity is not understood, but like similar diseases, may develop due
to the interaction of diverse risk factors including age, race, genetics,
socioeconomic and lifestyle choices, broadly defined to include
geographical and nutritional factors. Previous studies we have
investigated the accumulation of Zn within the prostate gland of AAM and
EAM, which showed that AA lose zinc levels in the glandular epithelia at
an earlier age and have a relatively lower accumulation of Zn within the
gland. Here, we present analyses of the ethnicity tissue microarray (TMA)
of 267 core biopsies from AA and EA men. We carried out in situ RP PCR
for hZIP1, hZIP2, hZIP3 and hZIP4 in all the TMAs and discovered that
hZIP1 gene expression was significantly down-regulated and
correspondingly, the cellular level of Zn was also depleted in the same
areas where the hZIP1 was down-regulated. These effects occur in early
and late stages of malignant development in the peripheral zone. Most
importantly, we provide the evidence for the first time in a large TMA
core biopsies that AAs have down-regulated their hZIP1 at a relatively
higher degree than the age-and Gleason score matched EAs and that may
explain why AAs have twice as much incident rate of PC than EAs, by
utilizing two in situ detection methods. The following are the summary of
our data: 1) The relative degree of hZIP1 is differentially expressed in
the prostate tissues between stroma versus glandular areas. 2) The hZIP1
is downregulated in the glandular malignant tissues of the prostate. 3)
The hZIP1 is also downregulated in the stromal areas in the malignant
glands. 4) The degree of expression downregulation is significantly
(p<0.001) in AA as compared to EA. 5) Downregulation of hZIP1 is
significantly (p<0.001) downregulated in the glandular epithelia of AAs
as compared to EAs. 6) hZIP2 and hZIP3 are also downregulated in the
adenocarcinoma of both EA and AA but there were no significant
differences between the two ethnic group with regards to degrees of
expressions of these two zinc transporters (pProstate cancer (PC)
originates mainly in the peripheral zone, where the majority of zinc (Zn)
accumulating cells are located. The underlying basis of our study focuses
on the essential trace element Zn which is needed in relatively high
amounts for reproductive processes. PC is significantly more common in
African American men (AAM) as compared to European American Men (EAM).
Currently, the reason for this racial disparity is not understood, but
like similar diseases, may develop due to the interaction of diverse risk
factors including age, race, genetics, socioeconomic and lifestyle
choices, broadly defined to include geographical and nutritional factors.
Previous studies we have investigated the accumulation of Zn within the
prostate gland of AAM and EAM, which showed that AA lose zinc levels in
the glandular epithelia at an earlier age and have a relatively lower
accumulation of Zn within the gland. Here, we present analyses of the
ethnicity tissue microarray (TMA) of 267 core biopsies from AA and EA
men. We carried out in situ RP PCR for hZIP1, hZIP2, hZIP3 and hZIP4 in
all the TMAs and discovered that hZIP1 gene expression was significantly
down-regulated and correspondingly, the cellular level of Zn was also
depleted in the same areas where the hZIP1 was down-regulated. These
effects occur in early and late stages of malignant development in the
peripheral zone. Most importantly, we provide the evidence for the first
time in a large TMA core biopsies that AAs have down-regulated their
hZIP1 at a relatively higher degree than the age-and Gleason score
matched EAs and that may explain why AAs have twice as much incident rate
of PC than EAs, by utilizing two in situ detection methods. The following
are the summary of our data: 1) The relative degree of hZIP1 is
differentially expressed in the prostate tissues between stroma versus
glandular areas. 2) The hZIP1 is downregulated in the glandular malignant
tissues of the prostate. 3) The hZIP1 is also downregulated in the
stromal areas in the malignant glands. 4) The degree of expression
downregulation is significantly (p<0.001) in AA as compared to EA. 5)
Downregulation of hZIP1 is significantly (p<0.001) downregulated in the
glandular epithelia of AAs as compared to EAs. 6) hZIP2 and hZIP3 are
also downregulated in the adenocarcinoma of both EA and AA but there were
no significant differences between the two ethnic group with regards to
degrees of expressions of these two zinc transporters (p<0.31). 7) hZIP4
appears to be absent in the prostate glands. 8) Zinc accumulation is
depleted in the glandular regions of adenocarcinoma of prostate as
compared to normal tissues. With the current technology we are unable to
determine the degrees of zinc depletion in EA Vs AA. These data lead to
the likelihood that the lost expression in the adenocarcinomatous glands
may be due to down-regulation of hZIP1 that occurs in the in situ
environment of the peripheral zone.

