Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of KIFC1 in spheroid formation of gastric cancer cells


Spheroid colony formation is a typically method to identify cancer stem
cells (CSC). The growth of spherical colonies is considered indicative of
self-renewal ability, and is consistent with a CSC phenotype. However,
mechanism of spheroid formation remains unclear in gastric cancer (GC).
In the present study, we analyzed spheroid formation associated genes in
GC. Comprehensive gene expression profile of MKN-45 and MKN-74 GC cell
lines that were grown as monolayers or spheroids was obtained by
Affymetrix GeneChip, and we found several kinds of genes whose expression
was up-regulated or down-regulated in cells that were grown as spheroids.
Among these, 10 kinds of kinesin genes were up-regulated in both MKN-45
and MKN-74 cells that were grown as spheroids. Kinesins are categorized
into 14 subfamilies and classified as mitotic kinesins, which are
involved in cell division, and non-mitotic kinesins, which are
principally involved in intracellular transport. In spheroids, mitotic
kinesins were up-regulated. In the present study, we focused on KIFC1,
because antibody against KIFC1 is available. qRT-PCR analysis revealed
that up-regulation of KIFC1 in both MKN-45 and MKN-74 cells that were
grown as spheroids. Immunohistochemical analysis of KIFC1 was performed
in 20 GC cases. Expression of KIFC1 was up-regulated in GC tissues in
comparison with corresponding non-neoplastic mucosa. These results
suggest that KIFC1 plays an important role in gastric carcinogenesis and
may be a therapeutic target of GC.

