Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in plasma circulating DNA composition during focal
ablative therapy for liver cancer


Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) may potentially serve as a diagnostic
or therapeutic biomarker. We tested our established methodologies for
cfDNA profiling on blood samples obtained during focal ablative
treatments for liver cancer, given that such interventions may cause
abrupt spillage of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) into the
bloodstream.Following written informed consent, serial blood samples from
13 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) were drawn into
cfDNA-optimized collection tubes before treatment, 2-3 hours
post-treatment, and a few weeks after. Nine patients underwent
radiofrequency ablation and 4 patients received transarterial
chemoembolization. The cfDNA concentration was assessed by quantitative
PCR of Alu-amplicons (Alu-101 and Alu-226) on 13 pre-treatment samples,
12 immediate post-treatment samples and 8 follow-up samples. Aberrant
cfDNA methylation at genes GSTP1 and RASSF1 was assessed by
pyrosequencing to investigate tumor-specific cfDNA.Mean cfDNA levels of
patients with HCC increased by an average of 3.6-fold (up to 9.3-fold)
from baseline immediately after treatment (p = 0.0019). Levels measured
1-15 weeks after treatment returned to on average 87% of the baseline.
Each specimen contained both high molecular weight DNA (consistent with
abrupt release of DNA from disrupted cells) and smaller apoptotic cfDNA
fragments that ranged in size of 160-180 bp. DNA integrity
(Alu-226/Alu-101) was similar before treatment, immediately after, and in
the follow-up samples. Compared to the paired leukocyte DNA methylation
levels, higher methylation levels at RASSF1 and/or GSTP1 were observed in
all 13 pre-treatment cfDNA samples, supporting at least partial tumor
origin of the isolated cfDNA. RASSF1 methylation moderately correlated
with GSTP1 methylation (r = 0.55, pCirculating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) may
potentially serve as a diagnostic or therapeutic biomarker. We tested our
established methodologies for cfDNA profiling on blood samples obtained
during focal ablative treatments for liver cancer, given that such
interventions may cause abrupt spillage of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA)
into the bloodstream.Following written informed consent, serial blood
samples from 13 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) were drawn
into cfDNA-optimized collection tubes before treatment, 2-3 hours
post-treatment, and a few weeks after. Nine patients underwent
radiofrequency ablation and 4 patients received transarterial
chemoembolization. The cfDNA concentration was assessed by quantitative
PCR of Alu-amplicons (Alu-101 and Alu-226) on 13 pre-treatment samples,
12 immediate post-treatment samples and 8 follow-up samples. Aberrant
cfDNA methylation at genes GSTP1 and RASSF1 was assessed by
pyrosequencing to investigate tumor-specific cfDNA.Mean cfDNA levels of
patients with HCC increased by an average of 3.6-fold (up to 9.3-fold)
from baseline immediately after treatment (p = 0.0019). Levels measured
1-15 weeks after treatment returned to on average 87% of the baseline.
Each specimen contained both high molecular weight DNA (consistent with
abrupt release of DNA from disrupted cells) and smaller apoptotic cfDNA
fragments that ranged in size of 160-180 bp. DNA integrity
(Alu-226/Alu-101) was similar before treatment, immediately after, and in
the follow-up samples. Compared to the paired leukocyte DNA methylation
levels, higher methylation levels at RASSF1 and/or GSTP1 were observed in
all 13 pre-treatment cfDNA samples, supporting at least partial tumor
origin of the isolated cfDNA. RASSF1 methylation moderately correlated
with GSTP1 methylation (r = 0.55, p<0.001). Excluding one patient with
exceptionally high RASSF1 and GSTP1 methylation levels, the averaged
amount of RASSF1/GSTP1-methylated ctDNA correlated with the tumor size
prior to the procedure (r = 0.72, p = 0.008), while no association was
found between the AFP levels and tumor burden.The characteristics of
cfDNA in cancer patients may change significantly following therapeutic
interventions. We have established an improved workflow for cfDNA
quantification and characterization in plasma that can be applied to the
peri-treatment setting and are in the process of evaluating ctDNA
analysis protocols for EDTA blood as well. These preliminary observations
in a limited number of specimens support the potential of quantifying
ctDNA as a marker of tumor cell destruction. Preliminary observation of a
correlation between aberrantly-methylated cfDNA levels and HCC tumor size
suggests that pre-treatment cfDNA profiling may inform on tumor burden.
Further research will be needed to validate the clinical significance of
the quantitative and epigenetic changes in cfDNA samples from patients
with HCC.

