Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone methytransferase SMYD3 promotes invasion in ovarian
carcinoma spheroids


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) metastasis is a direct contributor to
high recurrence and low survival for patients with this disease. The
ovarian carcinoma spheroids are cells shed from primary tumors and
aggregate in ascites, bearing the main responsibility for metastasis.
Epigenetic plasticity refers to the capability of mammalian cells to
alter their differentiation status via chromatin remodeling-associated
alterations in gene expression. In the current study, we extend this
attribute of epigenetic plasticity to aggressive ovarian cancer cells.
Upon a simple alteration in the microenvironment, transition from two- to
three-dimensional culture, we mimicked the in-vivo spheroids formation
and found that a batch of histone markers and their enzymes experienced a
marvelous elevation, among which, H3K4Me3 and its methyltransferase SMYD3
emerged as focal points for their concordant change. Using
siRNA-SMYD3-depletion, we proved SMYD3 was attributed to the enhanced
invasion and adhesion abilities in spheroids compared to monolayer cells.
Gene array results further discovered that integrin-related molecules
were suppressed after SMYD3 depletion. By ChIP assay, we confirmed SMYD3
and H3K4me3 binding increased at ITGA8, ITGB6 and ITGAM's promoter,
indicating that SMYD3 regulated those downstream genes through
methylating H3K4. At last, we reconfirmed the SMYD3 and integrin-mediated
adhesion molecules were both activated in in vitro model, in vivo
intraperitoneal xenograft model and EOC patients spheroids. Overall, our
results indicated that ovarian cancer cell epigenetic plasticity reflects
an inherent transcriptional flexibility for context-responsive
alterations in phenotype and SMYD3 could be a promising epigenetic marker
for anti-tumor treatment.

