Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chloroquine potentiates carfilzomib but not bortezomib effects on
myeloma cells


Proteasomal inhibition has proven good clinical effect in Multiple
Myeloma; however, some patients are resistant to treatment and most
patients acquire resistance during the disease course. It is well known
that cells degrade proteins by two distinct but interconnected pathways;
one is protein degradation by proteasomes, which may be clinically
targeted by proteasome inhibitors, the other is by formation of
autophagosomes and lysosomal degradation, which can be inhibited by
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ). Assuming that the two arms of protein
degradation may compensate for each other, there is a rationale to
simultaneously target both arms. We tested the combined effects of HCQ
and the reversible proteasome inhibitor bortezomib or the irreversible
inhibitor carfilzomib on myeloma cell lines and primary cells. As
expected, HCQ potentiated carfilzomib-induced myeloma cell death, but
surprisingly, HCQ had little or no effect on bortezomib activity. We also
found that HCQ potentiated the effect of the irreversible proteasome
inhibitor oprozomib, but not the effect of the reversible inhibitor
ixazomib. Thus, the sensitivity towards the irreversible proteasome
inhibitors carfilzomib or oprozomib is to a larger extent affected by the
autophagic system than the reversible inhibitors bortezomib and ixazomib.
In conclusion, we here suggest that in attempts to increase the clinical
efficacy of proteasome inhibitors, inhibitors of autophagy and lysosomal
degradation such as HCQ should be combined with an irreversible
proteasome inhibitor such as carfilzomib, and not with bortezomib.

