Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CEP-37440, a highly selective and potent dual inhibitor of ALK and
FAK1 inhibits the proliferation of inflammatory breast cancer cells


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a very aggressive type of advanced
breast cancer with a poor prognosis. Due to its propensity to rapidly
metastasize, IBC is responsible for a disproportionate number of breast
cancer-related deaths; 15% of all breast cancer deaths result from this
disease. Approximately 30% of IBC patients have distant metastases at
time of diagnosis, in contrast to 5% of patients with non-IBC breast
cancers. Currently, there is no adequate adjuvant therapy to reduce the
risk of recurrence and mortality in IBC patients. We recently found that
FAK1, also known as PTK2, is amplified, up-regulated and phosphorylated
(active) in some inflammatory breast cancer cells [1]. The focal adhesion
kinase FAK1 is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase that localizes to focal
adhesions, and controls a number of cell pathways including
proliferation, viability and survival. Activated FAK1 is absent or low in
normal tissue and benign neoplasms and up-regulated in invasive and
metastatic tumors. In this study, we investigated a new dual FAK1/ALK
inhibitor, CEP-37440, in vitro and in vivo using preclinical models of
IBC. We found that 300 nM CEP-37440 was able to decrease the
proliferation of the triple negative FC-IBC02 cell line and, 1000 nM
CEP-37440 was able to complete inhibit the proliferation of these cells.
SUM190 showed a 50% decreased in proliferation when these cells were
treated with 1000 nM CEP-37440. Genes involved in functions such as
cellular growth and proliferation, cell cycle, cell death and survival
and cellular movement and cell-to cell signaling and interaction were
differentially regulated by CEP-37440 in sensitive IBC cell lines. Among
them, TGF1 and MMP3 were down-regulated and DKK3, CAV1 and TFPI2 were
up-regulated by CEP-37440. In FC-IBC02 orthotopic breast cancer xenograft
models, CEP-37440 was able to reduce the growth of the primary tumor and
inhibit the development of spontaneous metastases in brain. In
conclusion, CEP-37440 was highly effective in reducing the proliferation
in vitro and in vivo of IBC cells that expressed high levels of
phospho-FAK (Tyr397).References1. Fernandez S, Robertson F, Pei J,
Aburto-Chumpitaz L, Mu Z, Chu K, Alpaugh K, Huang Y, Cao Y, Ye Z et al:
Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC): clues for targeted therapies. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 2013, 140:23-33.

