Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK4/6 as a therapeutic target in malignant melanoma


Melanoma is the most deadly form of skin cancer and FDA-approved
therapies such as vemurafenib and ipilimumab are associated with
short-term responses and/or severe toxicities for patients. Recent
favorable clinical data with cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4/6 inhibitor,
palbociclib (PD991) in ER+ breast cancer has rekindled an interest in
targeting cell cycle progression to stop aberrant cell growth. Thus, we
set out to analyze the potential use of CDK4/6 inhibitors in melanoma.
Due to the inability of CDK4/6 inhibitors to induce apoptosis as a single
agent, we explored viable combinatorial strategies that will trigger both
pro-senescent and pro-apoptotic pathways that may lead to an effective
treatment modality for melanoma patients. Here, we demonstrate the
benefit of combining a MEK inhibitor, trametinib (GSK212) with PD991 both
in vitro and in vivo. We did not observe any enhanced effects of
combining both GSK212 and PD991 in cells that are wild-type for BRAF and
NRAS or an RB1-null BRAF mutant line. However, B-RAF and N-RAS mutant
cells exhibited an enhanced response to the combinatorial agents as
compared to single agents. Furthermore, we observed a dramatic increase
in apoptosis in cell lines that are sensitive to combined GSK212 and
PD991 treatment. Expression of Inhibitor-of-Apoptosis (IAP) protein,
survivin, was associated with response. Finally, because it is important
to understand how resistance develops, we have validated a novel E2F
reporter system in vivo to quantitatively and temporally measure the
efficacy of CDK4/6 inhibitors and possible re-activation of the pathway
during acquired drug resistance.

