Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Body mass index, weight gain, and physical activity during
adulthood in relation to colorectal cancer risk


Background: The impact of obesity/overweight, weight gain, and physical
activity during adulthood on colorectal cancer (CRC) risk is not clear.
To examine the associations between body mass index (BMI), weight gain,
and physical activity during adulthood and CRC risk, we conducted a
case-control study of incident CRC.Methods: Incident CRC case subjects
were recruited from the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in
Houston, Texas; healthy control subjects without a history of cancer,
except non-melanoma skin cancer, were identified and recruited using
random digit dialing. Epidemiologic data were collected by in-person
interview. Unconditional logistic regression and regression spline were
performed to obtain odds ratios (ORs). All statistical tests were
two-sided.Results: A total of 524 non-Hispanic white case subjects and
1,053 healthy control subjects who were 40 years or older were included.
In multivariate analysis, obesity (BMI 30) and overweight (BMI between 25
and 30) at age 20 years were significantly associated with a 2.4-fold (OR
= 2.39, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.38 - 4.13, P = .002) and
1.6-fold (OR = 1.60, 95% CI = 1.19 - 2.14, P = .002) increased risk of
CRC, respectively. Similarly, obesity and overweight at age 40 years were
each significantly associated with a 2.1-fold (OR = 2.11, 95% CI = 1.49 -
2.99, P Background: The impact of obesity/overweight, weight gain, and
physical activity during adulthood on colorectal cancer (CRC) risk is not
clear. To examine the associations between body mass index (BMI), weight
gain, and physical activity during adulthood and CRC risk, we conducted a
case-control study of incident CRC.Methods: Incident CRC case subjects
were recruited from the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in
Houston, Texas; healthy control subjects without a history of cancer,
except non-melanoma skin cancer, were identified and recruited using
random digit dialing. Epidemiologic data were collected by in-person
interview. Unconditional logistic regression and regression spline were
performed to obtain odds ratios (ORs). All statistical tests were
two-sided.Results: A total of 524 non-Hispanic white case subjects and
1,053 healthy control subjects who were 40 years or older were included.
In multivariate analysis, obesity (BMI 30) and overweight (BMI between 25
and 30) at age 20 years were significantly associated with a 2.4-fold (OR
= 2.39, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.38 - 4.13, P = .002) and
1.6-fold (OR = 1.60, 95% CI = 1.19 - 2.14, P = .002) increased risk of
CRC, respectively. Similarly, obesity and overweight at age 40 years were
each significantly associated with a 2.1-fold (OR = 2.11, 95% CI = 1.49 -
2.99, P < .0001) and 1.7-fold (OR = 1.74, 95% CI = 1.32 - 2.30, P
Background: The impact of obesity/overweight, weight gain, and physical
activity during adulthood on colorectal cancer (CRC) risk is not clear.
To examine the associations between body mass index (BMI), weight gain,
and physical activity during adulthood and CRC risk, we conducted a
case-control study of incident CRC.Methods: Incident CRC case subjects
were recruited from the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in
Houston, Texas; healthy control subjects without a history of cancer,
except non-melanoma skin cancer, were identified and recruited using
random digit dialing. Epidemiologic data were collected by in-person
interview. Unconditional logistic regression and regression spline were
performed to obtain odds ratios (ORs). All statistical tests were
two-sided.Results: A total of 524 non-Hispanic white case subjects and
1,053 healthy control subjects who were 40 years or older were included.
In multivariate analysis, obesity (BMI 30) and overweight (BMI between 25
and 30) at age 20 years were significantly associated with a 2.4-fold (OR
= 2.39, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.38 - 4.13, P = .002) and
1.6-fold (OR = 1.60, 95% CI = 1.19 - 2.14, P = .002) increased risk of
CRC, respectively. Similarly, obesity and overweight at age 40 years were
each significantly associated with a 2.1-fold (OR = 2.11, 95% CI = 1.49 -
2.99, P < .0001) and 1.7-fold (OR = 1.74, 95% CI = 1.32 - 2.30, P <
.0001) increased risk of CRC. In addition, moderate and massive weight
gain from age 20 to 40 years were associated with increased CRC risks,
although this increase did not reach statistical significance. Moderate
physical activity was significantly associated with a reduced risk of CRC
(OR = 0.60, 95% CI = 0.44 - 0.81, P = .001).Conclusions:
Obesity/overweight and physical activity during adulthood may influence
susceptibility to CRC; also, our data suggest that weight gain during
childhood and adolescence may play a more important role than weight gain
during adulthood in CRC development.

