Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical validation of Myc inhibition by a new generation of
Omomyc-based inhibitors


Deregulated Myc is associated with most human cancers suggesting that its
inhibition would be a useful therapeutic strategy. Indeed, we have shown
that Myc inhibition displays extraordinary therapeutic benefit in various
transgenic mouse models of cancer (i.e. skin, lung, pancreatic cancer and
glioma) and causes only mild, well-tolerated and reversible side effects
in normal tissues. Furthermore, we demonstrated that Myc has a
non-degenerate function in cancer that cannot be replaced by other
pathways, even in the most aggressive p53-null tumors. Therefore, Myc
could be targeted safely and successfully without eliciting resistance to
therapy.For these studies we employed a dominant negative inhibitor of
Myc, called Omomyc, which is an effective inhibitor of Myc
transactivation function both in vitro and in vivo. Omomyc has so far
been utilized exclusively as a transgene and served as a successful proof
of principle. Here we discuss our current research with Omomyc and our
efforts to develop a clinically viable approach to Myc inhibition. One is
based on the direct use of Omomyc itself as a peptide since we have
discovered that it natively possesses cell-penetrating activity and it
rapidly biodistributes to the lung and brain after intranasal
administration. We are finding that the Omomyc peptide - like its
transgenic counterpart before - has a therapeutic impact and we are
continuing with the preclinical validation of this innovative therapeutic
approach to pharmacological Myc inhibition. The second approach takes
advantage of state-of-the-art nanocarrier technology to deliver Omomyc
systemically, that can be combined with tumour-targeting ligands. These
two novel Myc inhibition strategies have the potential to be translated
rapidly to the clinic.

