Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single nucleotide variants in metastasis-related genes are
associated with breast cancer risk, by lymph node involvement and ER
status, in women with European and African ancestry


Inherited genetic variation may partially explain inter-patient
variability in prognosis by influencing lymph node involvement and
estrogen receptor (ER) status in breast cancer patients, which may differ
by ancestral background. We examined 154 tagging single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 12 metastasis-related genes (BRMS1, CDH1, CD82,
CTNNB1, KISS1, MTA1, MTA2, MTA3, NME1, SATB1, SIPA1, SNAI1) for
associations with risk of breast cancer, stratified by lymph node and ER
status.Genotyping was performed in 2,671 European-American (EA) and
African-American (AA) women enrolled in the Women's Circle of Health
case-control study (WCHS) using Illumina GoldenGate assays. Single-SNP
and haplotype associations were analyzed using logistic regression.
Pathway analyses were conducted using the adaptive rank truncated product
(ARTP) method, with p0.10 as significant. To estimate risk, multiallelic
scores were created using the SNPs in the significant gene(s). All models
were adjusted for age and ancestry; multiallelic score models also
included demographic covariates. P-values were corrected using the false
discovery rate (FDR) method.Single-SNP and haplotype associations were
not significant after FDR adjustment at pInherited genetic variation may
partially explain inter-patient variability in prognosis by influencing
lymph node involvement and estrogen receptor (ER) status in breast cancer
patients, which may differ by ancestral background. We examined 154
tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 12 metastasis-related
genes (BRMS1, CDH1, CD82, CTNNB1, KISS1, MTA1, MTA2, MTA3, NME1, SATB1,
SIPA1, SNAI1) for associations with risk of breast cancer, stratified by
lymph node and ER status.Genotyping was performed in 2,671
European-American (EA) and African-American (AA) women enrolled in the
Women's Circle of Health case-control study (WCHS) using Illumina
GoldenGate assays. Single-SNP and haplotype associations were analyzed
using logistic regression. Pathway analyses were conducted using the
adaptive rank truncated product (ARTP) method, with p0.10 as significant.
To estimate risk, multiallelic scores were created using the SNPs in the
significant gene(s). All models were adjusted for age and ancestry;
multiallelic score models also included demographic covariates. P-values
were corrected using the false discovery rate (FDR) method.Single-SNP and
haplotype associations were not significant after FDR adjustment at
p<0.05. In AA women, significant ARTP gene-level associations included
CDH1 with risk of lymph node positive breast cancer (p = 0.10) and SIPA1
with ER negative breast cancer in both case-control (p = 0.10) and
case-case (p = 0.09) analyses. Multiallelic scores computed from SNPs in
CDH1 and SIPA1 were associated with node positive (OR = 1.13, 95% CI
1.07-1.19, pFDR = 0.0003) and ER negative (OR = 1.16, 95% CI 1.02-1.31,
pFDR = 0.03) breast cancer, respectively.In EA women, MTA2 was associated
with overall risk of breast cancer at the ARTP gene-level (p = 0.004),
regardless of ER status, and with node negative breast cancer (p = 0.01).
SATB1 and KISS1 were also significant in ER negative (ARTP gene-level p =
0.03) and node negative (ARTP gene-level p = 0.10) analyses,
respectively. Among EA lymph node positive cases, significant ARTP
gene-level associations were observed for SNAI1 (p = 0.10), CD82 (p =
0.05), NME1 (p = 0.10), and CTNNB1 (p = 0.09). The SNAI1-CD82-NME1-CTNNB1
multiallelic risk score was associated with node positive (OR = 1.09, 95%
CI 1.04-1.14, pFDR = 0.001) and the MTA2-KISS1 score with node negative
breast cancer (OR = 1.18, 95% CI 1.08-1.29, pFDR = 0.002). Stratified by
ER status, the MTA2 score was associated with ER positive (OR = 1.16, 95%
CI 1.05-1.30, pFDR = 0.01) and the MTA2-SATB1 score with ER negative
breast cancer (OR = 1.12, 95% CI 1.05-1.20, pFDR = 0.003).Our findings
suggest that genetic variants in several metastasis genes may affect risk
of breast cancer by lymph node or ER status. These results require
verification in larger studies, particularly those that can evaluate
long-term prognosis.

