Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-exome sequencing analysis of primary central nervous system
lymphoma reveals recurrent MYD88 and PIM1 mutations


Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is defined as diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) confined to the central nervous system.
Although PCNSL cannot be histologically distinguished from extracerebral
DLBCL, its prognosis is quite poor. To gain insights into the
transforming mechanism of PCNSL, we conducted whole-exome sequencing for
44 PCNSL specimens.Genomic DNA was extracted from tumors and their
matched normal samples. Exome fragments were captured by using
SureSelectXT Human All ExonV5+lncRNA, and subjected to deep sequencing
with the HiSeq 2000 system.There were 8 cases with germinal center
B-cell-like (GCB) subtype and 34 cases with non-GCB subtype. Whole-exome
sequencing of tumor and paired normal yielded sequencing data with a mean
coverage of 156X and 80X, with 98% and 99% of the targeted bases covered
by 20 independent reads, respectively. Of 17,832 somatic mutations
identified in the PCNSL specimens, 11,611 (65%) were nonsynonymous single
nucleotide variations. Predominant nucleotide substitution was a C>T
transition (57%) especially in the context of the sequence GCG. We also
identified 798 insertions/deletions. Interestingly, MYD88 mutations were
detected in 35 of 44 patients (79.5%), and PIM1 mutations were detected
in 42 patients (95.5%). Also, a number of genetic aberrations were shown
to activate the NF-B pathway.These results suggest that MYD88 and PIM1
mutations have important roles in the development of PCNSL and could be
the therapeutic targets of this intractable disorder.

