Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Keratin 17 mediates p27KIP1-nuclear export, proliferative
signaling and tumor growth


One of the most fundamental traits of cancer cells is the ability to
sustain proliferation by circumventing cell cycle regulatory programs
normally controlled by tumor suppressors. Keratin 17 (K17) is not
expressed in most somatic tissues but is overexpressed and is a negative
prognostic marker in cervical, breast, ovarian, and gastric carcinomas.
The mechanisms by which K17 contributes to cancer-related signaling,
however, remain unknown. Here, we report that nuclear-localized K17
interacts with tumor suppressor p27KIP1 and mediates its nuclear export,
maintaining proliferation.After validating K17 is a prognostic marker in
cervical cancer, independent of tumor stage, we performed in vitro and in
vivo experiments to investigate the role of K17 in proliferative
signaling and tumor growth using loss- and gain- of function approaches
in cervical cancer and other cancer-derived cell lines. We found that K17
expression maintains proliferation, while silencing K17 induces G1 arrest
by nuclear accumulation and stabilization of tumor suppressors p27KIP1
and pRb. During G1, K17 localizes in the nucleus, mediated by a classical
bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS) (AA385-400) that was
identified by in silico analysis. This NLS is specific among keratins and
present only in primates but not in other species. To our knowledge, this
is the first report that a keratin has a NLS and is capable of undergoing
nuclear translocation.During G1, p27KIP1is exported from the nucleus in a
CRM1-dependent manner and is subsequently degraded, triggering G1/S
transition. p27KIP1 lacks the classical leucine-rich nuclear export
signal (NES) and requires an adaptor for CRM1-exportin binding. After
confirming the binding of K17 and p27KIP1 within the nucleus, we
performed in silico analyses and identified a leucine-rich NES required
for CRM1-binding in K17 (AA194-199), which was further validated by a
3-fold nuclear retention of K17 and p27KIP1 after leptomycin B treatment.
We introduced point mutations within the K17-NES (mNES) and the K17-NLS
(mNLS). Nuclear p27KIP1 was lost in cells expressing wild-type K17. In
contrast, nuclear p27KIP1 levels were 3-fold higher in cells expressing
either mNLS or mNES. Furthermore, nuclear localization of K17 was
abolished in mNLS cells.Xenografts of cervical cancer cells showed that
tumors derived from K17 expressing cells were 3-times larger than those
derived from K17 knockdown cells, the latter showing increased nuclear
p27KIP1 and decreased PCNA and Ki67 expression. Finally, we identified an
inverse correlation between K17 and p27KIP1 expression in human cervical
cancer specimens, intertumorally and intratumorally.These data suggest a
model in which nuclear-localized K17 acts as an oncoprotein promoting
G1/S transition in cancer cells, by mediating exportin binding and
nuclear translocation of tumor suppressor p27KIP1, contributing to
sustained proliferation, tumor aggressiveness and poor-patient outcome.

