Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of forced expression of k-ras mutation on
gastrointestinal cancer cells and IGF-IR targeting therapy


Background & Aims: Mutation in k-ras plays important roles in both the
progression and the resistance for anti-EGFR therapy in gastrointestinal
tumors. Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling is
required for carcinogenicity and proliferation of many tumors. We have
previously shown successful therapy for gastrointestinal cancer cell
lines with k-ras mutation using recombinant adenoviruses expressing
dominant negative IGF-IR (IGF-IR/dn) and an anti-IGF-IR monoclonal
antibody. In this study, we sought to evaluate the effect of k-ras
mutation on gastrointestinal cancer cell lines and IGF-IR targeting
therapies for those cells. Methods: We made stable transfectants of
mutated k-ras in gastrointestinal cancer cell lines. We assessed the
effect of forced expression of mutated k-ras on proliferartion, apoptosis
induction, migration, and invasion in gastrointestinal cancer cell lines.
Then we assessed the anti-tumor effect of IGF-IR/dn on mutated k-ras
transfctomas. Results: Overexpression of mutated k-ras let
gastrointestinal cancer cell lines be more agrressive phenotypes, such as
more proliferative, more anti-apoptotic, more movable, and more invasive.
IGF-IR/dn inhibited cell growth, colony formation, migration, and
invasion, but induceed apoptosis of gastrointestinal cancer cells with or
without mutated k-ras expression. Conclusions: K-ras mutation might be
inportant for progressive phonotype in gastrointestinal cancers. IGF-IR
might be a good molecular therapeutic target for gastrointestinal cancers
even if k-ras is mutated.

