Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple myeloma susceptibility loci examined in African and
European ancestry populations


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of multiple myeloma (MM) in
Northern Europeans have identified seven novel risk loci (2p23.3, 3p22.1,
3q26.2, 6p21.33, 7p15.3, 17p11.2, 22q13.1). We performed a multiethnic
meta-analysis of these regions in 1,274 MM patients and 1,486 controls of
European ancestry (EA) and 1,049 MM patients and 7,080 controls of
African ancestry (AA), leveraging the differential linkage-disequilibrium
of these populations in order to better localize the putative functional
variants. We observed directionally consistent effects for all seven
index SNPs in both populations, with four significantly associated
(pGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) of multiple myeloma (MM) in
Northern Europeans have identified seven novel risk loci (2p23.3, 3p22.1,
3q26.2, 6p21.33, 7p15.3, 17p11.2, 22q13.1). We performed a multiethnic
meta-analysis of these regions in 1,274 MM patients and 1,486 controls of
European ancestry (EA) and 1,049 MM patients and 7,080 controls of
African ancestry (AA), leveraging the differential linkage-disequilibrium
of these populations in order to better localize the putative functional
variants. We observed directionally consistent effects for all seven
index SNPs in both populations, with four significantly associated
(p<0.05) with risk in EAs (3p22.1, 7p15.3, 17p11.2, 22q13.1), and two
significantly associated with risk in AAs (7p15.3 and 22q13.1). In a
fixed effects meta-analysis of six regions (excluding the HLA region on
chromosome 6), variation in five of the regions (2p33.3, 3p22.1, 7p15.3,
17p11.2, 22q13.1) had statistically significant associations with risk
(Table 1). In one region, the index variant had the strongest association
[rs4487645 at 7p15.3, (OR = 1.30, p = 8.7108)]. Five of the six most
significantly associated variants identified in the multiethnic analyses
overlapped with biologically relevant features indicating regulatory
activity based on CD20+ (B lymphocyte) cells, showing evidence of
potential function; those included a missense variant in (17p11.2,
rs34562254, Pro251Leu) in TNFRSF13B, which encodes a lymphocyte-specific
protein in the tumor necrosis factor receptor family that interacts with
the NF-kb pathway. Our study shows that these regions are important in MM
risk across ethnicities and further supports the use of multiple ethnic
groups in genetic studies to enhance identification of risk variants.Most
significant associations for each region in the multiethnic meta-analysis.

