Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired resistance to pegylated liposomal doxorubicin


BackgroundPegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) is advantageous over
doxorubicin because of its preferential accumulation to tumor through
their leaky vessel walls. However, the development of acquired resistant
to PLD often results in insufficient clinical outcome. To date, the
mechanisms of acquired resistance to PLD have not yet been explored.
While free chemotherapeutics can penetrate and diffuse across biological
barriers, such as vessel walls including endothelial cells and basement
membrane (composed mainly of type IV collagen) which provide a formidable
barrier to PLD. We have previously shown that Matrix metallopeptidase 9
(MMP-9), the enzyme to degrade type IV collagen, and its inhibitor,
metallopeptidase inhibitor 1 (TIMP-1) play a crucial role to control
vessel leakiness. Our objective is to seek the mechanisms of acquired
resistant to PLD by comparing the contexts of biological barriers in
tumor microenvironment.Materials/Methods4T1 murine breast cancer cells
were inoculated into mfp of BALB/c mice. Mice were treated with PLD (6.5
mg/kg) through intravenous injection when tumor volumes had reached a
size of approximately 100-200 mm3. The tumors after the initial treatment
and tumors which progressed after second and third treatments were
subjected as nave (control) and resistant tumors, respectively. Mice were
sacrificed after 24 hours of PLD injection. Serum levels of MMP-9 and
TIMP-1 were measured by ELISA. Immunofluorescence (IF) staining was
performed to evaluate the expression of efflux pump associated
p-glycoprotein (P-gp), MMP-9, endothelial cells and type IV collagen.
Positive area was quantified by ImageJ. Statistical differences were
tested by t-test. P-value BackgroundPegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD)
is advantageous over doxorubicin because of its preferential accumulation
to tumor through their leaky vessel walls. However, the development of
acquired resistant to PLD often results in insufficient clinical outcome.
To date, the mechanisms of acquired resistance to PLD have not yet been
explored. While free chemotherapeutics can penetrate and diffuse across
biological barriers, such as vessel walls including endothelial cells and
basement membrane (composed mainly of type IV collagen) which provide a
formidable barrier to PLD. We have previously shown that Matrix
metallopeptidase 9 (MMP-9), the enzyme to degrade type IV collagen, and
its inhibitor, metallopeptidase inhibitor 1 (TIMP-1) play a crucial role
to control vessel leakiness. Our objective is to seek the mechanisms of
acquired resistant to PLD by comparing the contexts of biological
barriers in tumor microenvironment.Materials/Methods4T1 murine breast
cancer cells were inoculated into mfp of BALB/c mice. Mice were treated
with PLD (6.5 mg/kg) through intravenous injection when tumor volumes had
reached a size of approximately 100-200 mm3. The tumors after the initial
treatment and tumors which progressed after second and third treatments
were subjected as nave (control) and resistant tumors, respectively. Mice
were sacrificed after 24 hours of PLD injection. Serum levels of MMP-9
and TIMP-1 were measured by ELISA. Immunofluorescence (IF) staining was
performed to evaluate the expression of efflux pump associated
p-glycoprotein (P-gp), MMP-9, endothelial cells and type IV collagen.
Positive area was quantified by ImageJ. Statistical differences were
tested by t-test. P-value < 0.05 was considered to be statistically
significant.ResultsThe tumor volume in all the mice was reduced after
initial PLD injection. Then, tumor started to grow again after 30 days
and became resistant to the second/third injection of PLD. Although the
expression of P-gp was not increased in the resistant tumors, PLD
accumulation was significantly less compared to control tumor (p =
0.016). Endothelial cells in the resistant tumors were covered more
tightly by type IV collagen as to those in control tumors
(pBackgroundPegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) is advantageous over
doxorubicin because of its preferential accumulation to tumor through
their leaky vessel walls. However, the development of acquired resistant
to PLD often results in insufficient clinical outcome. To date, the
mechanisms of acquired resistance to PLD have not yet been explored.
While free chemotherapeutics can penetrate and diffuse across biological
barriers, such as vessel walls including endothelial cells and basement
membrane (composed mainly of type IV collagen) which provide a formidable
barrier to PLD. We have previously shown that Matrix metallopeptidase 9
(MMP-9), the enzyme to degrade type IV collagen, and its inhibitor,
metallopeptidase inhibitor 1 (TIMP-1) play a crucial role to control
vessel leakiness. Our objective is to seek the mechanisms of acquired
resistant to PLD by comparing the contexts of biological barriers in
tumor microenvironment.Materials/Methods4T1 murine breast cancer cells
were inoculated into mfp of BALB/c mice. Mice were treated with PLD (6.5
mg/kg) through intravenous injection when tumor volumes had reached a
size of approximately 100-200 mm3. The tumors after the initial treatment
and tumors which progressed after second and third treatments were
subjected as nave (control) and resistant tumors, respectively. Mice were
sacrificed after 24 hours of PLD injection. Serum levels of MMP-9 and
TIMP-1 were measured by ELISA. Immunofluorescence (IF) staining was
performed to evaluate the expression of efflux pump associated
p-glycoprotein (P-gp), MMP-9, endothelial cells and type IV collagen.
Positive area was quantified by ImageJ. Statistical differences were
tested by t-test. P-value < 0.05 was considered to be statistically
significant.ResultsThe tumor volume in all the mice was reduced after
initial PLD injection. Then, tumor started to grow again after 30 days
and became resistant to the second/third injection of PLD. Although the
expression of P-gp was not increased in the resistant tumors, PLD
accumulation was significantly less compared to control tumor (p =
0.016). Endothelial cells in the resistant tumors were covered more
tightly by type IV collagen as to those in control tumors (p< 0.01),
which indicates a reduction in vasculature permeability. MMP-9 expression
was reduced in the resistant tumors, suggesting less degradation of
basement membranes. The ratio of MMP-9/TIMP-1 in the serum of resistant
tumor bearing mice decreased significantly as compared to that in the
control tumor mice (pBackgroundPegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) is
advantageous over doxorubicin because of its preferential accumulation to
tumor through their leaky vessel walls. However, the development of
acquired resistant to PLD often results in insufficient clinical outcome.
To date, the mechanisms of acquired resistance to PLD have not yet been
explored. While free chemotherapeutics can penetrate and diffuse across
biological barriers, such as vessel walls including endothelial cells and
basement membrane (composed mainly of type IV collagen) which provide a
formidable barrier to PLD. We have previously shown that Matrix
metallopeptidase 9 (MMP-9), the enzyme to degrade type IV collagen, and
its inhibitor, metallopeptidase inhibitor 1 (TIMP-1) play a crucial role
to control vessel leakiness. Our objective is to seek the mechanisms of
acquired resistant to PLD by comparing the contexts of biological
barriers in tumor microenvironment.Materials/Methods4T1 murine breast
cancer cells were inoculated into mfp of BALB/c mice. Mice were treated
with PLD (6.5 mg/kg) through intravenous injection when tumor volumes had
reached a size of approximately 100-200 mm3. The tumors after the initial
treatment and tumors which progressed after second and third treatments
were subjected as nave (control) and resistant tumors, respectively. Mice
were sacrificed after 24 hours of PLD injection. Serum levels of MMP-9
and TIMP-1 were measured by ELISA. Immunofluorescence (IF) staining was
performed to evaluate the expression of efflux pump associated
p-glycoprotein (P-gp), MMP-9, endothelial cells and type IV collagen.
Positive area was quantified by ImageJ. Statistical differences were
tested by t-test. P-value < 0.05 was considered to be statistically
significant.ResultsThe tumor volume in all the mice was reduced after
initial PLD injection. Then, tumor started to grow again after 30 days
and became resistant to the second/third injection of PLD. Although the
expression of P-gp was not increased in the resistant tumors, PLD
accumulation was significantly less compared to control tumor (p =
0.016). Endothelial cells in the resistant tumors were covered more
tightly by type IV collagen as to those in control tumors (p< 0.01),
which indicates a reduction in vasculature permeability. MMP-9 expression
was reduced in the resistant tumors, suggesting less degradation of
basement membranes. The ratio of MMP-9/TIMP-1 in the serum of resistant
tumor bearing mice decreased significantly as compared to that in the
control tumor mice (p<0.01).ConclusionThe acquired resistance to PLD can
be developed by reducing drug accumulation to tumor as a result of
changing in microenvironment such as vasculatures and basement membranes,
which is controlled by MMP-9/TIMP-1. Furthermore, serum levels of
MMP-9/TIMP-1 can be used to monitor the development of resistance.

