Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondria dysfunction-mediated apoptosis resistance associates
with defective heat shock protein response in African American prostate
cancer


African American (AA) patients with prostate cancer (PCa) respond poorly
to current therapy compared to Caucasian American (CA) patients. Although
underlying mechanisms are not clearly defined, mitochondria dysfunction
is a key reason for PCa disparity. We observed that glycolytic pathway
inhibitor dichloroacetate (DCA) inhibited cell proliferation in both AA
PCa cells (AA cells) and CA PCa cells (CA cells). CA cells were arrested
at G1 and G2/M phases whereas S-phase arrest was observed in AA cells. AA
cells showed resistance to cell death upon DCA exposure in spite of
higher caspase activation than in CA cells. AA cells possess reduced
level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and mitochondrial membrane
potential (mtMP) compared to CA cells. DCA induced cellular and
mitochondrial ROS in AA cells but were unchanged in CA cells. DCA
upregulated the levels of mtMP in both cell types. DCA enhanced
taxol-induced cell death only in CA cells, but DCA sensitized
doxorubicin-induced AA cell death. Expression of heat shock proteins
(HSPs) were inhibited only in AA cells upon doxorubicin alone or combined
treatment of DCA with doxorubicin, whereas Taxol alone or in combination
with DCA did not show any changes in the levels of HSPs. DCA suppressed
the metastatic features and reduced the population of cancer stem
cell-like cells in CA cells but had a little effect on AA cells.
Therefore, anticancer agents that can effectively restore mitochondria
function may provide new therapeutic potential in reducing PCa health
disparity and poor prognosis in AA men with PCa.

