Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional role of NRF2 signaling in sphere cultured carcinoma
cells


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are known to express high levels of antioxidant
proteins and ABC transporters. In this study, we investigated the
potential involvement of NF-E2-related factor 2 (NRF2) in CSC survival
and stress response by using the MCF7 mammosphere culture, which is
accepted as a CSCs-enriched system. The levels of NRF2 protein, reporter
transcription activity, and target gene expression such as efflux
transporters were higher in mammospheres than in the monolayer. We
observed that proteasome activity as well as catalytic subunits
expression was decreased in the mammospheres. Additionally, mammospheres
showed an elevated p62 protein level and p62-knockdown suppressed NRF2
activation. The role of NRF2 in mammospheres could be demonstrated in
NRF2-knockdown mammospheres. Sphere growth was retarded in knockdown
group and anticancer drugs resistance was not obtained in NRF2-knockdown
mammospheres in contrast to the control mammospheres. NRF2 activation
could be confirmed in spheres-culture of colon cancer and ovarian cancer
cells. These results show that reduced proteasome function and elevated
p62 level contributed to NRF2 activation in CSCs-enriched mammospheres.
The study further suggests a potential role of NRF2 in CSCs survival and
stress resistance.

