Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS-regulated P4HA1 in pancreatic tumor and its hydroxylated
peptide as a serum biomarker for early diagnosis


Protein posttranslational modification (PTM) plays a pivotal role in
cancer progression through regulating gene expression, protein activities
and stabilization. These chemistry events are regarded as potential
biomarkers for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutic efficacy
evaluation. Hydroxylated proline is the most common PTM amino acid
residue in the proteome. However, this modification is often overlooked.
Here, we demonstrate the expression level of prolyl-4-hydroxylase
alpha-1(P4HA1) in tumor tissues and the ratio of its catalyst
(hydroxyprolyl-3-bradykinin, Hyp-BK) to its substrate (bradykinin, BK) in
blood can serve as biomarkers for early pancreatic cancer diagnosis.
First, we found that the P4HA1 expression level responds to the
activation of KRAS which is commonly observed in pancreatic cancer cells.
Immunohistochemistry testing for tumor tissue array reveals that
pancreatic cancer tumor tissues, even in stage I tumor, present higher
P4HA1 expression levels than tissues with chronic pancreatitis and
healthy control. Peptidomic studies on clinical blood samples revealed
that the Hyp-BK/BK value was 2.3 fold higher in pancreatic cancer
patients than chronic pancreatitis patients and control group. The
results were further validated in an independent sample cohort with blind
information. We combined CA19-9 and the Hyp-BK/BK value as a biomarker
panel obtaining an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.742 and 0.813 in the
comparison of pancreatic cancer to pancreatitis patients and controls,
respectively. Our results demonstrate that the measurement of Hyp-BK/BK
value in blood, which reflects the hydroxylation level regulated by
tumor-localized P4HA1, can be used as a biomarker for early detection of
pancreatic cancer.

