Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase (heparan glucosaminyl) 4, a novel
tumor suppressor, suppresses tumorigenesis and liver metastasis of
colorectal cancer cells in mice


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common causes of cancer deaths
in the world, and most of CRC arise sporadically by the emergence of
multiple chromosomal aberrations. Allelic losses in the long arm of
chromosome 4 are commonly encountered in many human malignancies, but few
tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) are identified. By loss of heterozygosity
study at chromosome 4 in 114 colorectal carcinomas, we identified
N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase (heparan glucosaminyl) 4 (NDST4) as a
novel TSG that had been published recently. We demonstrated for the first
time that the genetic loss of NDST4 was significantly associated with
advanced pathological stage and poorer overall survival of patients.
Meanwhile, gene expression of NDST4 was obviously decreased in 30 (57.7%)
of 52 CRC tumors when compared with their matched normal mucosae. In the
present study, tumor suppressor activity of NDST4 was identified by in
vitro cell models and mouse xenograft tumor models. Ectopic expression of
NDST4 in the human CRC cells induced a significant suppression in cell
proliferation, anchorage-independent growth and invasion in vitro.
Subcutaneous injection of NDST4-inducible CRC cells in nude mice showed
alleviated tumor growth in doxycycline treated mice when compared with
doxycycline untreated mice. More importantly, via intrasplenic
implantation, re-expression of NDST4 in silenced cells restrained liver
metastasis, and also improved survival in nude mice. Taken together,
these results indicate that NDST4 is a tumor suppressor gene associated
with CRC, and its downregulation might promote tumor progression and
distant metastasis. In addition, allelic loss of NDST4 gene could serve
as a molecular predictor of metastasis and poor prognosis in patients
with CRC.

