Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD73 expression on tumor-infiltrating breast cancer leukocytes


Recent studies have shown that CD73 could be a new promising target in
breast cancer (BC). CD73 is a cell surface ecto-nucleotidase, expressed
by both tumor cells and immune cells, that catalyses the hydrolysis of
AMP into adenosine in the tumor microenvironment. Adenosine has
immunosuppressive and tumor-promoting effects and is therefore implicated
in the mechanism of tumor immune escape. High CD73 gene expression has
recently been associated with a poor prognosis in triple negative
BC.While tumor expression of CD73 is well documented, expression of CD73
on tumor-infiltrating immune cells remains poorly characterized. We
evaluated the expression of CD73 on immune cells present in fresh tissue
homogenates (GentleMACS with no enzymatic digestion) from untreated
primary breast tumors and compared to its expression to peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) from patients with breast cancer. In the
peripheral blood, CD73 was found mostly expressed on CD4+ (mean
percentage: 13.2412.88%) and CD8+T cells (mean percentage: 40.7819.42%)
and a major subset of B cells (mean percentage: 51.9321.83%). Analysis of
fresh tumor tissues revealed that less than 25% of CD45+ tumor immune
infiltrates express CD73 (mean percentage: 17.63 5,1%) and was relatively
similar to its expression on PBMC (mean percentage: 14.87 9.5%). In the
tumor immune infiltrates, B cells were the immune subset with the higher
proportion of CD73+ cells (mean percentage: 53.2714.63%) while the
proportion of CD73+ was lower on tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells compared
to CD8+ PBMC (p value: 0.022). Notably, we observed that CD73 expression
was significantly higher on tumor-infiltrating NK cells and CD14+ myeloid
cells compared to peripheral cells (p = 0.005 for NK cells, and p = 0.015
for CD14+ cells). Immunofluorescence analysis confirmed that CD73 is
expressed by both tumor cells, CD45+ immune cells and stromal cells in
breast cancer.These results suggest that CD73 is differentially expressed
on tumor-infiltrating leukocytes compared to PBMCs. Modulation of CD73
activity on tumor-infiltrating leukocytes may therefore contribute to the
mechanism-of-action of anti-CD73 therapies.

