Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional crosstalk between histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5) and
lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) as a novel therapeutic target in
triple-negative breast cancer cells


Our previous work has shown that HDAC5 knockdown led to significant
increase of H3K4me2 in the TNBC cell line, MDA-MB-231, suggesting a
potential role of HDAC5 in regulating LSD1 activity in breast cancer. In
this study, we demonstrated that HDAC5 physically interacts with LSD1 in
MDA-MB-231 cells. Overexpression of HDAC5 increased LSD1 protein level
through a reduction of LSD1 polyubiquitination. siRNA-mediated knockdown
of HDAC5 mRNA, but not other class II HDACs or LSD1-containing complex
members (HDAC1, HDAC2 and CoREST), significantly decreased LSD1 protein
expression and half-life. HDAC5 overexpression reduced levels of
H3K4me1/2, suggesting that HDAC5 acts as a positive regulator of
LSD1-mediated H3K4 demethylation activity. Enhanced proliferation
mediated by HDAC5 overexpression in MDA-MB-231 cells was diminished by
LSD1-KD, suggesting a critical role of LSD1 in regulating oncogenic
activity of HDAC5. We also observed that high-grade tumorigenic
MCF10A-CA1a cells (triple negative) expressed higher levels of LSD1 and
HDAC5 compared with parental counterpart MCF10A cells. By gain- and
loss-of-function studies using this TNBC progression model, we observed
that HDAC5 possesses a critical oncogenic function in driving TNBC
development by blocking LSD1 protein degradation and re-shaping
epigenetic landscape. Several HDAC inhibitors were tested for their
ability to inhibit LSD1 and HDAC5 interaction. Treatment with
sulforaphane, a natural HDAC inhibitor found in cruciferous vegetables,
blocked the association of HDAC5 and LSD1 through down-regulation of
HDAC5 mRNA and protein expression that led to LSD1 protein
destabilization. Sulforaphane treatment also re-expressed a unique subset
of tumor suppressor genes (RGS16, BIK, PCDH1, CDKN1a, ING1, etc), which
are abnormally silenced in TNBC cells, but are expressed in other breast
cancer subtypes and normal breast cells. Addition of a novel LSD1
inhibitor, HCI-2509, significantly promoted antineoplastic efficacy of
sulforaphane in breast cancer cells, and TNBC cells were more susceptible
than other subtypes to the combination therapy. In an in vivo study,
while treatment with either sulforaphane or HCI-2509 alone each displayed
significant anti-tumor effects against MDA-MB-231 xenografts, combined
treatment with both compounds exhibited synergistic inhibitory effect on
tumor growth in the MDA-MB-231 xenografts. Taken together, these results
suggest that HDAC5 promotes LSD1 protein stabilization, leading to a
dysregulated chromatin landscape which functions as an antibraking system
in TNBC development. Crosstalk between LSD1 and HDAC5 may represent a
novel and effective therapeutic target for this devastating disease.
(Supported by DOD W81XWH-14-1-0237/W81XWH-14-1-0238, Breast Cancer
Research Foundation, and UPCI Core Grant NIH P30CA047904)

