Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxic effect of ginsenosides C-K and PPD on glioblastoma cells
through cell cycle arrest and down-regulation of cell adhesion proteins


Ginsenosides, pharmacologically active components of ginseng have been
shown to have strong anticancer effects; however, their effect on
glioblastoma has not been extensively evaluated. Here, we investigated
the anticancer effect and the molecular mechanisms of ginsenosides on
glioblastoma. Among 12 ginsenosides tested, compound-K (C-K) and
protopanaxadiol (PPD), significantly reduced U251MG cell viability in
dose- and time-dependent manner. This cytotoxic effect was accompanied by
decreased expression of cell adhesion proteins including N-Cadherin and
Integrin 1, which led to reduced phosphorylation of focal adhesion
kinase. Furthermore, we observed the reduction of Cyclin D1 and
subsequent G1-phase cell cycle arrest. We further demonstrated that C-K
and PPD inhibited the phosphorylation of Akt and extracellular signal
regulated kinase. Conversely, C-K and PPD stimulated phosphorylation of
JNK and cleavage of PARP.These results collectively indicate that
ginsenosides C-K and PPD may provide a new strategy to treat malignant
glioblastoma that are quite resistant to conventional anti-cancer
treatment. (This research was supported by a grant of the Korea Health
Technology R&D Project through the Korea Health Industry Development
Institute (KHIDI), funded by the Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic
of Korea;grant number : HI14C0042)

