Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapy alters the natural history of metastatic progression


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive malignancy with
a 5-year survival rate of less than 6%. Metastatic disease accounts for a
majority of PDAC-related deaths, even for patients with no evidence of
metastasis at the time of resection. In this study we sought to
understand the natural history of metastatic colonization and the
cellular mechanisms governing the metastatic cascade. Using an
autochthonous PDAC mouse model combined with a lineage-labeling approach,
we have tracked and characterized the various stages of metastatic
progression, from single cells to macroscopic lesions. PDAC tumors
primarily metastasize to the liver, where small lesions of 10 cells or
less reside closest to portal veins and exhibit a high frequency of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Larger metastatic lesions
exhibit reduced EMT and are hypovascular, resembling primary PDAC tumors.
Metastases gradually accumulate desmoplasia as they grow, which consists
of myofibroblasts, leukocytes and extracellular matrix components
including collagen, hyaluronic acid, fibronectin and SPARC. Treatment
with gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel reduces overall metastatic burden and
shifts the size distribution of metastases toward small lesions of 10
cells or less. Single seeded cells in particular seem to be protected
from chemotherapy-induced killing, while larger lesions that have
accumulated a desmoplastic stroma are more susceptible. Our results
demonstrate that chemotherapy has direct measurable effects on metastatic
burden, which may explain the improved outcomes for PDAC patients who
receive adjuvant chemotherapy.

