Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ER-886046, an antagonist of PGE2 receptor type-4, induces an
effective antitumor immune response in mice by attenuating intratumoral
MDSCs and TAMs


One of the hallmarks of an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment is
the presence of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and type 2
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). These myeloid cells derive from
immature monocytes and their differentiation is highly regulated by the
engagement of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) receptor type 4 (EP4) with PGE2 in
the tumor microenvironment. To understand the importance of EP4 for tumor
support, we implanted mouse tumors in EP4 inducible knockout mice and
found that these tumors grew significantly more slowly than in wild type
mice, indicating an important role of host cell EP4 signaling for tumor
progression. Here we report the development and evaluation of ER-886046,
a novel and specific EP4 antagonist, for cancer treatment. Daily oral
administration of ER-886046 inhibited the growth of multiple mouse
syngeneic tumor models with an inhibitory activity up to 100%. The
anti-tumor activity of ER-886046 was T cell-dependent since it was not
observed in T cell deficient mice. Furthermore, we found in vitro and in
vivo mechanistic evidence that ER-886046 interferes with tumor-induced
monocyte differentiation into immunosuppressive type 2 macrophages and
MDSCs, instead supporting monocyte differentiation into APCs and
facilitating intratumoral T cell accumulation. Importantly, ER-886046 has
a desirable pharmacokinetic and metabolism profile in mice, rats and dogs
which qualifies it as a good candidate for clinical studies in humans.
Thus, the preclinical data support further investigation of targeting EP4
signaling by ER-886046 as a novel immune therapy for cancer treatment in
clinical setting.

