Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: piRNA and glioma risk: Evidence from a post-GWAS analysis of the
GliomaScan Cohort


Background: Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) comprise a large but
relatively understudied class of small non-coding RNAs that are
transcribed from >600,000 loci and act in the silencing of transposable
elements in the germline. While a single piRNA sequence may be encoded in
thousands of genomic locations, our previous research has demonstrated
that piRNAs of moderate copy number (100 or fewer) may also have the
capacity to regulate protein-coding genes including oncogenes and/or
tumor suppressors in somatic cells. The objective of this study was to
explore the association of inherited variants in moderate copy-number
piRNA sequences and glioma risk.Methods: Genotype data from 1,840
predominantly high grade glioma cases and 2,401 controls of European
ancestry in the GliomaScan Cohort-Based GWAS were downloaded from the
dbGaP database. After QC of the Illumina660-QuadV1-generated data,
550,600 SNPs were used to impute the genotypes of 2,361 piRNA SNPs with
minor allele frequency 0.01 identified from a search of all 48,478
moderate copy-number piRNA sequences. Imputation was performed with
IMPUTE2 using 1,000 Genomes Phase 3 haplotypes as the reference panel.
Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for SNP-glioma risk associations
were estimated using unconditional logistic regression under an additive
model while controlling for gender, age, study design (case/control or
cohort), and the first two principal components as estimated by
EIGENSTRAT (genomic inflation = 1.00). An expression array covering
23,677 piRNAs was used to profile expression in seven grade IV glioma and
seven normal brain specimens obtained from the Cooperative Human Tissue
Network (CHTN), pooled by tissue type.Results: After exclusion of
poorly-imputed SNPs, 1,384 piRNA SNPs were examined for association with
glioma risk. Five SNPs were associated with glioma at FDR-adjusted P
Background: Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) comprise a large but
relatively understudied class of small non-coding RNAs that are
transcribed from >600,000 loci and act in the silencing of transposable
elements in the germline. While a single piRNA sequence may be encoded in
thousands of genomic locations, our previous research has demonstrated
that piRNAs of moderate copy number (100 or fewer) may also have the
capacity to regulate protein-coding genes including oncogenes and/or
tumor suppressors in somatic cells. The objective of this study was to
explore the association of inherited variants in moderate copy-number
piRNA sequences and glioma risk.Methods: Genotype data from 1,840
predominantly high grade glioma cases and 2,401 controls of European
ancestry in the GliomaScan Cohort-Based GWAS were downloaded from the
dbGaP database. After QC of the Illumina660-QuadV1-generated data,
550,600 SNPs were used to impute the genotypes of 2,361 piRNA SNPs with
minor allele frequency 0.01 identified from a search of all 48,478
moderate copy-number piRNA sequences. Imputation was performed with
IMPUTE2 using 1,000 Genomes Phase 3 haplotypes as the reference panel.
Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for SNP-glioma risk associations
were estimated using unconditional logistic regression under an additive
model while controlling for gender, age, study design (case/control or
cohort), and the first two principal components as estimated by
EIGENSTRAT (genomic inflation = 1.00). An expression array covering
23,677 piRNAs was used to profile expression in seven grade IV glioma and
seven normal brain specimens obtained from the Cooperative Human Tissue
Network (CHTN), pooled by tissue type.Results: After exclusion of
poorly-imputed SNPs, 1,384 piRNA SNPs were examined for association with
glioma risk. Five SNPs were associated with glioma at FDR-adjusted P <
0.10 (rs149336947 in piR-2799, rs62435800 in piR-18913, rs147061479 in
piR-598, rs142742690 in piR-11714, and rs35712968 in piR-3266). Rare
variant rs149336947 in piR-2799 was most strongly associated with glioma
risk, yielding an odds ratio of 2.54 (95% CI: 1.65-3.91, P = 2.34 10-5,
significant after Bonferroni correction). The potential functional role
of this SNP is supported by the finding that piR-2799 was expressed in
both grade IV glioma and normal brain specimens (piR-18913, piR-598, and
piR-11714 were also expressed; piR-3266 was not included on the array).
Intriguingly, rs149336947 is located in a region encoding both piR-2799
and an alternative exon of CASP8 and FADD-like apoptosis regulator
(CFLAR), however the functional interrelatedness of these genetic
elements in glioma has yet to be elucidated.Conclusions: Together, these
results draw a novel link between inherited piRNA variants and the risk
of glioma development. Functional analyses are ongoing to specify the
biological mechanisms underlying the observed associations.

