Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calorie-induced silencing of the tumor suppressive guanylin-GUCY2C
paracrine axis underlies colorectal cancer in obesity


Despite a well-characterized epidemiological association, mechanisms
underlying the relationship between obesity and colorectal cancer remain
incompletely defined. An emerging paradigm suggests that colorectal
cancer arises through silencing of the GUCY2C tumor suppressor by loss of
the hormone guanylin, a gene product universally lost in colorectal
cancer. The present studies demonstrate that obesity is linked to
colorectal cancer through suppression of guanylin expression, resulting
in silencing of the GUCY2C tumor suppressor and epithelial dysfunction
underlying tumorigenesis. In mice, obesogenic diets suppress the
expression of guanylin protein, silencing GUCY2C and increasing
epithelial dysfunction including DNA damage, crypt hyperproliferation and
metabolic reprogramming, associated with amplification of colorectal
tumorigenesis. Mouse models uncoupling caloric intake and weight revealed
that suppression of guanylin by obesogenic diets reflected ingested
calories, rather than the endocrine, adipokine and inflammatory milieu
associated with obesity. Further, suppression of guanylin expression by
obesogenic diets in wild type mice could be reversed by switching to a
lean diet. Importantly, genetically enforced tissue-specific expression
of guanylin eliminated epithelial dysfunction and colorectal
tumorigenesis in transgenic mice. Taken together, the present studies
highlight the guanylin-GUCY2C axis as a principle mechanistic link
between colorectal cancer and the increased caloric intake characterizing
obesity. Moreover, they highlight a unique opportunity to prevent
colorectal cancer in obese patients by oral replacement with FDA-approved
GUCY2C ligands.

