Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of tumor-initiating cell populations in the KPC mouse
model of pancreatic cancer


There continue to be many questions about the frequency and phenotype of
tumor-initiating cells or cancer stem cells (CSCs) which may play an
important role in cancer metastasis and drug resistance in several tumor
types, including pancreatic cancer. The KrasG12D, Trp53R172H, and
Pdx-1-Cre (KPC) induced model of pancreatic cancer has gained
considerable attention for its ability to replicate the clinical features
of the disease. Here, we report the generation of a novel syngeneic
xenograft model of luciferase-tagged pancreatic tumor cells (KPCL) to
facilitate the investigation of the tumorigenic capacity of this cancer
model. Limiting dilution analysis of bulk KPCL tumor cells revealed that
1/87 cells were capable of forming new tumors, a number considerably
higher than reported for human pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Cell surface
markers CD44, CD24, CD133, c-Met, and functional ALDEFLUOR activity,
previously shown to mark CSC populations in human and mouse pancreatic
tumors, were heterogeneous across a large panel of spontaneous KPCL
tumors. Additional testing of CD133 and ALDEFLUOR populations were unable
to enrich for tumorigenic populations when transplanted into syngeneic
mice. Additionally, spheroid cultures initiated from KPCL tumors did not
enrich for cells with stem-like characteristics and were not
significantly more tumorigenic than KPCL cells cultured as monolayers.
These studies demonstrate that the tumor-forming potential of KPC cells
is common, and may not fit the hierarchically organized CSC model that is
reported for the human disease.

