Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduction of oxidative stress promotes daunorubicin resistance in
acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells


The regulation of oxidative stress is fundamental to cell survival and
function. Oxidative stress is a result of accumulation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS), which are produced by cell metabolism and in response to
certain stressors. Cancer cells have higher than normal ROS levels and
elevated antioxidant defense mechanisms. Daunorubicin (DNR), a widely
used chemotherapy, is a topoisomerase II inhibitor that induces cell
death through DNA double strand breaks and increased ROS. We have
previously shown that adipocytes protect acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) cells against DNR in vitro and that media cultured by both
adipocytes and ALL cells together (ALCM) can protect ALL cells from DNR.
We hypothesize that this protection is in part mediated by adipocytes
alleviating oxidative stress in ALL cells.Murine pre-B ALL cells isolated
from a BCR/ABL transgenic mouse (8093) and human leukemia cell lines
(BV173, Nalm6, REH, SEM, RS4;11, HL60, and Molt4) were used. The ALL
cells were co-cultured with 3T3-L1 adipocytes using a transwell system.
Cells were collected for gene expression analysis using qPCR.
Intracellular ROS was measured by flow cytometry with
2-7-dichlorodihydrofluorescein (DCFH-DA). Four of the six human leukemia
cell lines tested were protected by adipocytes against DNR treatment.
Western blots showed that DNR induced a significant increase in the
cleaved to procaspase-3 ratio, which was reversed by ALCM (No drug:
0.240.2, DNR: 0.830.14, ALCM+DNR: 0.240.19; p = 0.004 for DNR vs.
ALCM+DNR, n = 4). Expression of the oxidative stress response genes gclc,
gclm and p21 was upregulated in 8093 cells upon DNR treatment (fold
change over baseline: 1.820.37, 2.350.73, 5.551.50; pThe regulation of
oxidative stress is fundamental to cell survival and function. Oxidative
stress is a result of accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
which are produced by cell metabolism and in response to certain
stressors. Cancer cells have higher than normal ROS levels and elevated
antioxidant defense mechanisms. Daunorubicin (DNR), a widely used
chemotherapy, is a topoisomerase II inhibitor that induces cell death
through DNA double strand breaks and increased ROS. We have previously
shown that adipocytes protect acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells
against DNR in vitro and that media cultured by both adipocytes and ALL
cells together (ALCM) can protect ALL cells from DNR. We hypothesize that
this protection is in part mediated by adipocytes alleviating oxidative
stress in ALL cells.Murine pre-B ALL cells isolated from a BCR/ABL
transgenic mouse (8093) and human leukemia cell lines (BV173, Nalm6, REH,
SEM, RS4;11, HL60, and Molt4) were used. The ALL cells were co-cultured
with 3T3-L1 adipocytes using a transwell system. Cells were collected for
gene expression analysis using qPCR. Intracellular ROS was measured by
flow cytometry with 2-7-dichlorodihydrofluorescein (DCFH-DA). Four of the
six human leukemia cell lines tested were protected by adipocytes against
DNR treatment. Western blots showed that DNR induced a significant
increase in the cleaved to procaspase-3 ratio, which was reversed by ALCM
(No drug: 0.240.2, DNR: 0.830.14, ALCM+DNR: 0.240.19; p = 0.004 for DNR
vs. ALCM+DNR, n = 4). Expression of the oxidative stress response genes
gclc, gclm and p21 was upregulated in 8093 cells upon DNR treatment (fold
change over baseline: 1.820.37, 2.350.73, 5.551.50; p<0.05, n = 3), while
the presence of adipocytes prevented this upregulation (fold change over
baseline: 0.830.11, 0.880.02, 1.750.57; pThe regulation of oxidative
stress is fundamental to cell survival and function. Oxidative stress is
a result of accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are
produced by cell metabolism and in response to certain stressors. Cancer
cells have higher than normal ROS levels and elevated antioxidant defense
mechanisms. Daunorubicin (DNR), a widely used chemotherapy, is a
topoisomerase II inhibitor that induces cell death through DNA double
strand breaks and increased ROS. We have previously shown that adipocytes
protect acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells against DNR in vitro and
that media cultured by both adipocytes and ALL cells together (ALCM) can
protect ALL cells from DNR. We hypothesize that this protection is in
part mediated by adipocytes alleviating oxidative stress in ALL
cells.Murine pre-B ALL cells isolated from a BCR/ABL transgenic mouse
(8093) and human leukemia cell lines (BV173, Nalm6, REH, SEM, RS4;11,
HL60, and Molt4) were used. The ALL cells were co-cultured with 3T3-L1
adipocytes using a transwell system. Cells were collected for gene
expression analysis using qPCR. Intracellular ROS was measured by flow
cytometry with 2-7-dichlorodihydrofluorescein (DCFH-DA). Four of the six
human leukemia cell lines tested were protected by adipocytes against DNR
treatment. Western blots showed that DNR induced a significant increase
in the cleaved to procaspase-3 ratio, which was reversed by ALCM (No
drug: 0.240.2, DNR: 0.830.14, ALCM+DNR: 0.240.19; p = 0.004 for DNR vs.
ALCM+DNR, n = 4). Expression of the oxidative stress response genes gclc,
gclm and p21 was upregulated in 8093 cells upon DNR treatment (fold
change over baseline: 1.820.37, 2.350.73, 5.551.50; p<0.05, n = 3), while
the presence of adipocytes prevented this upregulation (fold change over
baseline: 0.830.11, 0.880.02, 1.750.57; p<0.05, n = 3). To investigate
the oxidative stress induced by DNR, Nalm6 cells were treated with five
doses of DNR for 6 hours alone or in the presence of pre-adipocytes or
adipocytes. There was a dose-dependent increase in%ROShigh cells
regardless of feeder type. At 200nM DNR, there were significantly
fewer%ROShigh cells when co-cultured with adipocytes compared to no
feeder or pre-adipocytes (pThe regulation of oxidative stress is
fundamental to cell survival and function. Oxidative stress is a result
of accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are produced by
cell metabolism and in response to certain stressors. Cancer cells have
higher than normal ROS levels and elevated antioxidant defense
mechanisms. Daunorubicin (DNR), a widely used chemotherapy, is a
topoisomerase II inhibitor that induces cell death through DNA double
strand breaks and increased ROS. We have previously shown that adipocytes
protect acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells against DNR in vitro and
that media cultured by both adipocytes and ALL cells together (ALCM) can
protect ALL cells from DNR. We hypothesize that this protection is in
part mediated by adipocytes alleviating oxidative stress in ALL
cells.Murine pre-B ALL cells isolated from a BCR/ABL transgenic mouse
(8093) and human leukemia cell lines (BV173, Nalm6, REH, SEM, RS4;11,
HL60, and Molt4) were used. The ALL cells were co-cultured with 3T3-L1
adipocytes using a transwell system. Cells were collected for gene
expression analysis using qPCR. Intracellular ROS was measured by flow
cytometry with 2-7-dichlorodihydrofluorescein (DCFH-DA). Four of the six
human leukemia cell lines tested were protected by adipocytes against DNR
treatment. Western blots showed that DNR induced a significant increase
in the cleaved to procaspase-3 ratio, which was reversed by ALCM (No
drug: 0.240.2, DNR: 0.830.14, ALCM+DNR: 0.240.19; p = 0.004 for DNR vs.
ALCM+DNR, n = 4). Expression of the oxidative stress response genes gclc,
gclm and p21 was upregulated in 8093 cells upon DNR treatment (fold
change over baseline: 1.820.37, 2.350.73, 5.551.50; p<0.05, n = 3), while
the presence of adipocytes prevented this upregulation (fold change over
baseline: 0.830.11, 0.880.02, 1.750.57; p<0.05, n = 3). To investigate
the oxidative stress induced by DNR, Nalm6 cells were treated with five
doses of DNR for 6 hours alone or in the presence of pre-adipocytes or
adipocytes. There was a dose-dependent increase in%ROShigh cells
regardless of feeder type. At 200nM DNR, there were significantly
fewer%ROShigh cells when co-cultured with adipocytes compared to no
feeder or pre-adipocytes (p<0.05, n = 3). To test whether alleviating
oxidative stress alone would cause DNR resistance, BV173, Nalm6 and REH
cells were treated with DNR (100, 200 and 300nM, respectively) or a
combination of DNR and the anti-oxidant, N-acetyl cysteine (NAC; 20mM).
The addition of NAC significantly protected the cells from DNR (pThe
regulation of oxidative stress is fundamental to cell survival and
function. Oxidative stress is a result of accumulation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS), which are produced by cell metabolism and in response to
certain stressors. Cancer cells have higher than normal ROS levels and
elevated antioxidant defense mechanisms. Daunorubicin (DNR), a widely
used chemotherapy, is a topoisomerase II inhibitor that induces cell
death through DNA double strand breaks and increased ROS. We have
previously shown that adipocytes protect acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) cells against DNR in vitro and that media cultured by both
adipocytes and ALL cells together (ALCM) can protect ALL cells from DNR.
We hypothesize that this protection is in part mediated by adipocytes
alleviating oxidative stress in ALL cells.Murine pre-B ALL cells isolated
from a BCR/ABL transgenic mouse (8093) and human leukemia cell lines
(BV173, Nalm6, REH, SEM, RS4;11, HL60, and Molt4) were used. The ALL
cells were co-cultured with 3T3-L1 adipocytes using a transwell system.
Cells were collected for gene expression analysis using qPCR.
Intracellular ROS was measured by flow cytometry with
2-7-dichlorodihydrofluorescein (DCFH-DA). Four of the six human leukemia
cell lines tested were protected by adipocytes against DNR treatment.
Western blots showed that DNR induced a significant increase in the
cleaved to procaspase-3 ratio, which was reversed by ALCM (No drug:
0.240.2, DNR: 0.830.14, ALCM+DNR: 0.240.19; p = 0.004 for DNR vs.
ALCM+DNR, n = 4). Expression of the oxidative stress response genes gclc,
gclm and p21 was upregulated in 8093 cells upon DNR treatment (fold
change over baseline: 1.820.37, 2.350.73, 5.551.50; p<0.05, n = 3), while
the presence of adipocytes prevented this upregulation (fold change over
baseline: 0.830.11, 0.880.02, 1.750.57; p<0.05, n = 3). To investigate
the oxidative stress induced by DNR, Nalm6 cells were treated with five
doses of DNR for 6 hours alone or in the presence of pre-adipocytes or
adipocytes. There was a dose-dependent increase in%ROShigh cells
regardless of feeder type. At 200nM DNR, there were significantly
fewer%ROShigh cells when co-cultured with adipocytes compared to no
feeder or pre-adipocytes (p<0.05, n = 3). To test whether alleviating
oxidative stress alone would cause DNR resistance, BV173, Nalm6 and REH
cells were treated with DNR (100, 200 and 300nM, respectively) or a
combination of DNR and the anti-oxidant, N-acetyl cysteine (NAC; 20mM).
The addition of NAC significantly protected the cells from DNR (p<0.05, n
= 3).These findings demonstrate that adipocytes contribute to drug
resistance by alleviating oxidative stress in ALL cells. Further research
is required to identify the soluble factors responsible for these
protective effects.

