Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct genotyping of CYP2A6 whole gene deletion: A new biomarker
for prognosis of lung adenocarcinoma in Japanese smoking male


Purpose: Cytochrome P450 (CYP2A6) is known as an enzyme responsible for
the metabolism of activation of tobacco-specific nitrosamines to their
ultimate carcinogenic forms and metabolism of nicotine. We here report
that the genetic polymorphisms of human CYP2A6*4 is associated with
primary lung cancer and their overall survival.Experimental Design: We
prepared genomic DNA samples from 387 Japanese patients with primary lung
cancer and the genetic polymorphisms of human CYP2A6*4 (whole gene
deletion) by the rapid genetic testing method we developed in this study.
We analyzed the association between the CYP2A6*4 gene, NRF2 gene and
overall survival.Results: Patients harboring wild-type CYP2A6*1 and whole
gene deletion CYP2A6*4/*4 numbered 380 (98.2%) and 7 (1.8%),
respectively. Its frequency was four-fold higher in male patients than in
female (P = 0.038).Multivariate logistic regression models revealed that
the genetic polymorphisms of human CYP2A6*4 were significantly related to
gender and smoking behavior. Interestingly, lung cancer patients carrying
CYP2A6*4/*4 (whole gene deletion), the NRF2 SNP heterozygous (c.-617C/A)
and wild-type homozygous (c.-617C/C) exhibited remarkable survival over
1,500 days after surgical operation.Conclusion: CYP2A6*4/*4 whole gene is
considered to be a prognostic biomarker for assessing both the
gender-related risk of lung adenocarcinoma in the smoking sub-population
and their overall survival.

