Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quercetin inhibits prostate cancer by modulating molecules
involved in apoptosis and cell proliferation


Prostate cancer (PCa) remains the second leading cause of death in men,
despite the multimodal options offered in the clinics. Long latency and
indolent nature of PCa provides window of opportunity for preventive
interventions using natural and synthetic agents. Quercetin, a
bioflavonoid abundant in fruits and vegetables, has been reported to
inhibit growth in cancer and reduce inflammation in conditions like
prostatitis. Considering this, we investigated the chemo-preventive
effects of Quercetin on PCa. The effects of Quercetin on apoptosis and
associated proteins on both RNA and protein levels were determined using
apoptosis assay, real-time qPCR and western blot, respectively.
Furthermore, an antibody microarray was performed to observe changes
induced by Quercetin on signaling molecules and possible mechanism of
cell survival/apoptosis in PCa. PCa cells treated with Quercetin showed
decreased cell proliferation in a time and dose dependent manner, while
no significant effect was seen on normal prostate cells. Quercetin
treatment also significantly induced apoptosis in PCa cells, as compared
with untreated controls. Different phosphorylation status of key
molecules (Bcl-2, Akt-1 and NF-k B) was observed following Quercetin
treatment in PCa cell lines, as compared with untreated controls, which
are known to be involved in supporting PCa progression. These results
suggest that Quercetin could be a potential chemo-preventative agent
capable of slowing down the progression of PCa, by increasing apoptosis
and decreasing cell proliferation.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

