Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of the receptor for advanced glycation end-products
in breast cancer patients previous chemotherapy


The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) is a newly
recognized factor regulating cancer cell invasion and metastasis. RAGE
has recently been recognized as a cancer-associated protein responsible
for cancer progression and metastasis in gastrointestinal and epithelial
cancers. The aim was to examine the role of RAGE in breast cancer
previous to chemotherapy treatment.Methods: A retrospective study in
surgical specimens obtained from 68 consecutive patients who underwent
surgery for stage II-III breast cancer at the Oncology Hospital at
National Medical Center SXXI, between 2008 and 2009. RAGE expression was
examined by immunohistochemistry (IHQ) and PCR in 68 patients with stage
II or III breast cancer previous chemotherapy treatment. RAGE expression
was compared with clinicopathological parameters including clinical
stage, invasive depth, nodal metastasis, disease recurrence and
disease-free survival. The positive expression rate of RAGE was defined
as 50% or more of stain in IHQ.Results: In all 68 samples no RAGE
membrane expression was found significantly. Just one specimen was 50%
positive in tumor IHQ and no clinicopathological correlation was found.
In PCR the results were more significant. Our findings shows suggestive
no evidence for the presence of RAGE in membrane, but possibly RAGE gene
expression could had relationship in the progression of breast cancer in
stages II and III.

