Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of carbon ion beam and gemcitabine causes unrepairable
DNA damage and death of radioresistant pancreatic cancer stem-like cells
in vitro and in vivo


PurposeTo elucidate whether carbon ion beam alone or in combination with
gemcitabine has advantages over X-ray irradiation in targeting putative
human pancreatic cancer stem cells (CSCs).Materials and MethodsHuman
pancreatic CSCs sorted from PANC1 and PK45 cells were treated with carbon
ion beam, X-ray alone or in combination with gemcitabine, and then
colony, spheroid and tumor formation assays, RT Profiler PCR Array assay,
immunofluorescence H2AX foci assay as well as in vivo tumor control
analysis were performed.ResultsThe colony, spheroid formation as well as
tumorigenicity assays confirmed that CD44+/ESA+ cells exactly have CSC
properties compared to CD44-/ESA- cells. CSCs were more highly enriched
after X-ray or gemcitabine compared to carbon ion beam alone, but
extremely enhanced either X-ray or carbon ion beam in combination with
gemcitabine. The number of colony and spheroid formed from CSCs after
carbon ion beam was significantly reduced compared to that of X-ray, and
it was extremely suppressed when combined with gemcitabine. The relative
biological effectiveness (RBE) values for the carbon ion beam relative to
X-ray at the D10 levels for CSCs were 2.13-2.78. RT Profiler PCR Array
analysis showed that expressions of apoptosis-related genes (Bax,
Cytochrome c), autophagy-related genes (LC3, p62), and senescence-related
gene p21 were remarkably induced after carbon ion beam combined with
gemcitabine compared to carbon ion beam alone or X-ray combined with
gemcitabine. Immunofluorescence assay showed that not only the number but
also the size of H2AX foci in CSCs were lager 24 h after carbon ion beam
combined with gemcitabine compared to carbon ion beam alone or X-ray
combined with gemcitabine. Xenograft tumor control analysis showed that
the tumors were not completely controlled even treated with 60 Gy of
X-ray, but it was destroyed with 25 Gy of carbon ion beam combined with
50 mg/kg gemcitabine.ConclusionsCarbon ion beam combined with gemcitabine
has superior potential to kill pancreatic CSCs via unrepairable clustered
DSB, and multiple cell death pathways at relatively lower doses compared
to carbon ion alone or X-ray combined ith gemcitabine.

