Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating peptides for predicting subsequent cardiotoxicity in
cancer patients with chemotherapies


In recent years with the development of new anticancer therapies,
cardiotoxicity has been a known adverse event resulting from direct
myocyte damage, and leads to increased treatment-associated mortality.
However, the effective approach of early diagnosis and monitoring
treatment-induced cardiac dysfunction is not available because its
underlying mechanism is still unclear. Traditional screening that relied
on left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) is lack of sensitivity to
early detect subclinical changes or predict the subsequent declines in
cardiac functions with treatment. A more noninvasive approach to early
diagnose and monitor treatment-induced cardiotoxicity is in an urgent
need. Our group has developed nanoporous silica thin films (Nanotraps)
for peptide enrichment prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis as a
robust technology platform for accurate and reproducible peptide
biomarkers detection. Cancer patients with chemotherapies were split into
three groups, non-toxicity (NT, n = 36), slight cardiotoxicity (SCT, n =
26) and cardiotoxicity (CT, n = 23). After statistical analysis and
sequencing by LC-MS/MS, two peptides candidates (a fragment from serum
amyloid A-1525 (SAA-1525)) and Hepcidin-25) were identified with
significant up-regulation in cardiotoxic groups (with the cut off ratio
of 1.5-fold and p-value 0.01 among cohorts). The area under curve (AUC)
values of SAA-1525 and hepcidin-25 are 0.929 and 0.844 for distinguishing
CT from NT, respectively (95% CI = 0.839-1.000 and 0.696-0.993); if
combining two peptides as a biomarker pattern, the AUC value can be
increased to 0.942 (95% CI = 0.864-1.00). SCT patients could also be
classified by this two-marker pattern (AUC = 0.771, 95%CI = 0.606-0.936).
In addition, we investigated the proteolytic process analysis of
cathepsin B, which was identified as the key protease to generate
SAA-1525. SAA-1525 was detected in the mixture of recombinant SAA1 full
protein and purified cathepsin B, and its expression level increased with
reaction time and enzyme amount. Both cathepsin B inhibitors, E64 and
ALLM, could stop the generation of SAA-1525. Our study provides strong
evidence to support the application of circulating peptides as minimally
invasive way for predicting/monitoring chemotherapy-induced
cardiotoxicity.

