Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BubbleTree: an intuitive visualization to elucidate tumoral
aneuploidy and clonality in somatic mosaicism using copy number ratio and
allele frequency


BackgroundTumors are characterized by properties of instability,
heterogeneity, and significant oligoclonality. Elucidating these patterns
of tumor clonal evolution is critical to our understanding of neoplastic
development, which can ultimately improve diagnosis and treatment
decisions in cancer therapy.MethodsBubbleTree is an intuitive tree-like
graph used to simultaneously illustrate tumor cell prevalence,
allele-specific copy number, and clonality in human tumor specimens. This
method evaluates somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs) at the focal
genomic segment level to determine allele-specific copy number and
elucidate the clonal hierarchy within tumors. Further, BubbleTree can
longitudinally track genetic alterations in clonality during tumor
progression and/or recurrence. Two models, a Bayesian and finite mixture
distribution-based method, were developed to automate the interpretation
of the BubbleTree graph. Both whole genome and whole exome sequencing
(WGS and WES, respectively) data from three case studies are presented
using the BubbleTree method: paired primary tumors in the lung and ovary
from a patient, matched primary and recurrent liver tumors from a
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patient, and matched primary liver and
metastatic lung tumors in a second HCC patient.ResultsBubbleTree
accurately identified both inherited and altered karyotypes, as well as
their prevalence between primary and recurrent liver tumors in two HCC
patients, which suggests that the recurrent HCC malignancy post
orthotopic liver transplantation originated from the primary tumor, with
novel subclonal expansion during metastasis. Furthermore, BubbleTree
accurately reveals the dominant clone and instable subclones in the lung
tumor of a patient with synchronous double malignancies; these results
were validated by fluorescent in situ hybridization.ConclusionsOur model
is robust for both WGS and WES data, with consistency demonstrated on
both data types from the same tumor biopsy. The BubbleTree diagram and
model presented here is a powerful approach to provide a comprehensive
spectrum of the heterogeneous tumor karyotype in tumors. Further, this
tool is a free R package available for download at Bioconductor.

