Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity of luminal breast cancer characterized by
immunohistochemical expression of basal markers


Data from epidemiologic studies demonstrated that some established breast
cancer risk factors such as parity and obesity had differential effect on
luminal (estrogen receptor (ER) positive or progesterone receptor (PR)
positive, and HER2 negative) and CBP subtypes (ER-, PR-, HER2- and
express basal markers [cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6) (or CK5) and/or the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)], known as the core basal
phenotype), suggesting that luminal and CBP subtypes may have different
underlying etiology. Recent data suggest that a subset of ER+ tumors with
preexisting CK5+ cells may be resistant to hormone therapies and
represent a clinically unique entity. In addition, luminal tumors
expressing basal markers (luminal-basal) were associated with poorer
prognosis compared to luminal tumors negative for basal markers. To
assess whether luminal-basal tumors represent a distinct disease entity
from an etiologic perspective, we pooled individual data for 6,112
invasive breast cancer cases contributed by five studies participating in
the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC), with risk factor
information and ER, PR, HER2, and basal marker data. We used
unconditional logistic regression to evaluate relationships between risk
factors and tumor subtypes by comparing luminal-basal tumors (ER+ or PR+,
HER2-, CK5/6+ and/or EGFR+) to pure luminal A tumors (ER+ or PR+, HER2-,
CK5/6-, EGFR-) in case-only analyses and to estimate odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the associations between risk
factors and specific tumor subtypes in 3 population-based studies
including up to 4,732 cases and 13,242 controls. In case-only analyses,
we found that postmenopausal cases with luminal-basal tumors were more
likely to be parous (ORparous vs. nulliparous = 1.72; 95% CI = 1.06-2.78;
P = 0.03), have higher number of full term births (ORtrend = 1.33; 95% CI
= 1.07-1.66; P = 0.01), and lower frequency of obesity (ORBMI 30 kg/m2
vs. Data from epidemiologic studies demonstrated that some established
breast cancer risk factors such as parity and obesity had differential
effect on luminal (estrogen receptor (ER) positive or progesterone
receptor (PR) positive, and HER2 negative) and CBP subtypes (ER-, PR-,
HER2- and express basal markers [cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6) (or CK5) and/or
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)], known as the core basal
phenotype), suggesting that luminal and CBP subtypes may have different
underlying etiology. Recent data suggest that a subset of ER+ tumors with
preexisting CK5+ cells may be resistant to hormone therapies and
represent a clinically unique entity. In addition, luminal tumors
expressing basal markers (luminal-basal) were associated with poorer
prognosis compared to luminal tumors negative for basal markers. To
assess whether luminal-basal tumors represent a distinct disease entity
from an etiologic perspective, we pooled individual data for 6,112
invasive breast cancer cases contributed by five studies participating in
the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC), with risk factor
information and ER, PR, HER2, and basal marker data. We used
unconditional logistic regression to evaluate relationships between risk
factors and tumor subtypes by comparing luminal-basal tumors (ER+ or PR+,
HER2-, CK5/6+ and/or EGFR+) to pure luminal A tumors (ER+ or PR+, HER2-,
CK5/6-, EGFR-) in case-only analyses and to estimate odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the associations between risk
factors and specific tumor subtypes in 3 population-based studies
including up to 4,732 cases and 13,242 controls. In case-only analyses,
we found that postmenopausal cases with luminal-basal tumors were more
likely to be parous (ORparous vs. nulliparous = 1.72; 95% CI = 1.06-2.78;
P = 0.03), have higher number of full term births (ORtrend = 1.33; 95% CI
= 1.07-1.66; P = 0.01), and lower frequency of obesity (ORBMI 30 kg/m2
vs. <25 kg/m2 = 0.62; 95% CI = 0.40-0.95; P = 0.03) compared to cases
with pure luminal A tumors. In case-control analysis, obesity,
particularly postmenopausal obesity, was significantly associated with
decreased risk of luminal-basal tumors (ORBMI 30 kg/m2 vs. Data from
epidemiologic studies demonstrated that some established breast cancer
risk factors such as parity and obesity had differential effect on
luminal (estrogen receptor (ER) positive or progesterone receptor (PR)
positive, and HER2 negative) and CBP subtypes (ER-, PR-, HER2- and
express basal markers [cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6) (or CK5) and/or the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)], known as the core basal
phenotype), suggesting that luminal and CBP subtypes may have different
underlying etiology. Recent data suggest that a subset of ER+ tumors with
preexisting CK5+ cells may be resistant to hormone therapies and
represent a clinically unique entity. In addition, luminal tumors
expressing basal markers (luminal-basal) were associated with poorer
prognosis compared to luminal tumors negative for basal markers. To
assess whether luminal-basal tumors represent a distinct disease entity
from an etiologic perspective, we pooled individual data for 6,112
invasive breast cancer cases contributed by five studies participating in
the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC), with risk factor
information and ER, PR, HER2, and basal marker data. We used
unconditional logistic regression to evaluate relationships between risk
factors and tumor subtypes by comparing luminal-basal tumors (ER+ or PR+,
HER2-, CK5/6+ and/or EGFR+) to pure luminal A tumors (ER+ or PR+, HER2-,
CK5/6-, EGFR-) in case-only analyses and to estimate odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the associations between risk
factors and specific tumor subtypes in 3 population-based studies
including up to 4,732 cases and 13,242 controls. In case-only analyses,
we found that postmenopausal cases with luminal-basal tumors were more
likely to be parous (ORparous vs. nulliparous = 1.72; 95% CI = 1.06-2.78;
P = 0.03), have higher number of full term births (ORtrend = 1.33; 95% CI
= 1.07-1.66; P = 0.01), and lower frequency of obesity (ORBMI 30 kg/m2
vs. <25 kg/m2 = 0.62; 95% CI = 0.40-0.95; P = 0.03) compared to cases
with pure luminal A tumors. In case-control analysis, obesity,
particularly postmenopausal obesity, was significantly associated with
decreased risk of luminal-basal tumors (ORBMI 30 kg/m2 vs. <25 kg/m2 =
0.57; 95% CI = 0.35-0.93; P = 0.02). In contrast, postmenopausal obesity
was associated with increased risk of pure luminal A tumors, and
premenopausal obesity was associated with increased risk of CBP tumors.
In conclusion, our study suggests that luminal-basal cancers are more
frequent among lean and parous postmenopausal women than pure luminal A
cancers. Future studies with larger number of subjects and detailed
annotation of subtype and risk factor information are needed to validate
our findings and to more accurately assess etiologic and clinical
heterogeneity within luminal A tumors.

