Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity, comorbidity and endometrial cancer survival: the
multiethnic cohort


Background: Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecologic cancer
diagnosed in the United States. With >750,000 survivors in 2014, EC
comprises the second largest group of female cancer survivors. Higher
body mass index (BMI) and other medical comorbidities have been suggested
to negatively impact EC survival; however, data in minority populations
with rising EC incidence and mortality (i.e. Asian Americans, African
Americans, Latinas, etc.) are scarce. We examined the association of
pre-diagnostic BMI and obesity-related comorbidities with overall
survival in African-American, Japanese, Native Hawaiian, Latino and white
women in the Multiethnic Cohort.Methods: Women with complete risk factor
data who developed endometrial cancer during follow up were included in
the analysis (N = 998). BMI and obesity-related comorbidities (diabetes,
hypertension, heart attack and stroke) were self-reported at cohort entry
and at subsequent follow-ups. Cox's models were used to calculate hazard
ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) with time-varying
exposures in relation to all-cause mortality while adjusting for age at
diagnosis, tumor characteristics, treatment, and education.Results: The
mean age at EC diagnosis was 67.7 8.5 years. The mean follow-up period
was 7.3 5.3 years from diagnosis to death or end of follow up during
which time a total of 323 deaths were observed, 84 (26%) of which were
due to EC. The mean BMI was 29.9 kg/m2 and 53% of women had at least one
comorbid condition. The prevalence of obesity and comorbid conditions
varied across ethnic groups (PBackground: Endometrial cancer (EC) is the
most common gynecologic cancer diagnosed in the United States. With
>750,000 survivors in 2014, EC comprises the second largest group of
female cancer survivors. Higher body mass index (BMI) and other medical
comorbidities have been suggested to negatively impact EC survival;
however, data in minority populations with rising EC incidence and
mortality (i.e. Asian Americans, African Americans, Latinas, etc.) are
scarce. We examined the association of pre-diagnostic BMI and
obesity-related comorbidities with overall survival in African-American,
Japanese, Native Hawaiian, Latino and white women in the Multiethnic
Cohort.Methods: Women with complete risk factor data who developed
endometrial cancer during follow up were included in the analysis (N =
998). BMI and obesity-related comorbidities (diabetes, hypertension,
heart attack and stroke) were self-reported at cohort entry and at
subsequent follow-ups. Cox's models were used to calculate hazard ratios
(HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) with time-varying exposures in
relation to all-cause mortality while adjusting for age at diagnosis,
tumor characteristics, treatment, and education.Results: The mean age at
EC diagnosis was 67.7 8.5 years. The mean follow-up period was 7.3 5.3
years from diagnosis to death or end of follow up during which time a
total of 323 deaths were observed, 84 (26%) of which were due to EC. The
mean BMI was 29.9 kg/m2 and 53% of women had at least one comorbid
condition. The prevalence of obesity and comorbid conditions varied
across ethnic groups (P<0.0001). The prevalence of obesity (BMI 30 kg/m2)
ranged from 18% in Japanese Americans to 69% in Hawaiians. The prevalence
of women with at least one comorbid condition ranged from 38% in whites
to 76% in African Americans. Women with a BMI 35 kg/m2 had an increased
risk of all-cause mortality [HR = 1.55 (95% CI: 1.06, 2.28)] compared
with women with BMI Background: Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most
common gynecologic cancer diagnosed in the United States. With >750,000
survivors in 2014, EC comprises the second largest group of female cancer
survivors. Higher body mass index (BMI) and other medical comorbidities
have been suggested to negatively impact EC survival; however, data in
minority populations with rising EC incidence and mortality (i.e. Asian
Americans, African Americans, Latinas, etc.) are scarce. We examined the
association of pre-diagnostic BMI and obesity-related comorbidities with
overall survival in African-American, Japanese, Native Hawaiian, Latino
and white women in the Multiethnic Cohort.Methods: Women with complete
risk factor data who developed endometrial cancer during follow up were
included in the analysis (N = 998). BMI and obesity-related comorbidities
(diabetes, hypertension, heart attack and stroke) were self-reported at
cohort entry and at subsequent follow-ups. Cox's models were used to
calculate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) with
time-varying exposures in relation to all-cause mortality while adjusting
for age at diagnosis, tumor characteristics, treatment, and
education.Results: The mean age at EC diagnosis was 67.7 8.5 years. The
mean follow-up period was 7.3 5.3 years from diagnosis to death or end of
follow up during which time a total of 323 deaths were observed, 84 (26%)
of which were due to EC. The mean BMI was 29.9 kg/m2 and 53% of women had
at least one comorbid condition. The prevalence of obesity and comorbid
conditions varied across ethnic groups (P<0.0001). The prevalence of
obesity (BMI 30 kg/m2) ranged from 18% in Japanese Americans to 69% in
Hawaiians. The prevalence of women with at least one comorbid condition
ranged from 38% in whites to 76% in African Americans. Women with a BMI
35 kg/m2 had an increased risk of all-cause mortality [HR = 1.55 (95% CI:
1.06, 2.28)] compared with women with BMI <25 kg/m2. Women with two or
more comorbid conditions also had a higher risk of all-cause mortality
(HR = 1.61; 95% CI: 1.12, 2.31) compared to those with no medical
comorbidities. There was evidence of ethnic differences in the
comorbidity and all-cause mortality association (P interaction = 0.02);
the presence of two or more comorbidities was significantly associated
with all-cause mortality in whites (HR = 2.98; 95% CI: 1.34, 6.63) and
Japanese Americans (HR = 3.47; 95% CI: 1.19, 10.14), but not in African
Americans (HR = 0.88; 95% CI: 0.42, 1.82), Latinas (HR = 1.16; 95% CI:
0.45, 2.96), and Native Hawaiians (HR = 0.95; 95% CI: 0.22,
4.02).Conclusions: Our results show that higher pre-diagnosis BMI and the
presence of two or more comorbidities increase the risk of overall death
among multiethnic women diagnosed with EC. Clear identification and
targeted managements of these conditions may improve overall survival
after EC diagnosis.

