Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increasing sensitivity of SAIT301, a specific monoclonal antibody
of c-Met, with paclitaxel combination in c-Met positive gastric cancer


The c-Met is frequently overexpressed and related to a worse prognosis in
gastric carcinoma (GC). This study aimed to determine a c-Met targeting
monoclonal antibody (SAIT301) with effects on the proliferation and to
increase efficacy of SAIT301 administered in combination with paclitaxel
in gastric cancer cell lines. Anticancer effect of SAIT301 was assessed
using CCK-8 assay in 52 GC cell lines. c-Met status was identified using
RTK array and qPCR. Cell cycle distribution was determined with flow
cytometry. Expression levels of c-Met and cleaved PARP, apoptosis
induction marker, were determined by western blot analysis. Combination
index (CI) evaluated by CalcuSyn software. We screened 52 cell lines for
growth inhibition by SAIT301.Among 11 c-Met positive GC cells, 5 cell
lines were sensitive to SAIT301 (5/11, 45%) with 4060% inhibition rate at
5 g/ml.SAIT301 sensitivity of 5 cell lines has a tendency of correlation
between MET amplification, c-Met/p-Met co-expression, low Cbl level or
exon14 deletion of MET. Next, we performed combination treatment with
SAIT301 and paclitaxel in 5 cell lines. The results exhibited increasing
anti-proliferative effects with synergism. In cell cycle analysis,
SAIT301 increased the percentage of cells in the G1 phase, while
paclitaxel increased the G2/M phase(3-19%). Combination of SAIT301 and
paclitaxel significantly increased in sub G1(2-17%) and G2/M
arrest(4-19%). Western blot analysis showed paclitaxel induced c-Met
expression. In addition, SAIT301 and paclitaxel combination
down-regulated c-Met expression and enhanced PARP cleavage more than
monotherapy. Our results indicate that the SAIT301 combined with
paclitaxel therapy had synergistic effects in the treatment of c-Met
positive gastric cancer.

