Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DOT1L is a human chromosome stability gene


The loss of genome stability is an early event that drives the
development and progression of virtually all tumor types. Recent studies
have revealed that certain histone post-translational modifications
exhibit dynamic and global increases in abundance that coincide with
mitosis and exhibit essential roles in maintaining genomic stability.
Histone H2B ubiquitination at lysine 120 (H2Bub1) is regulated by RNF20,
an E3 ubiquitin ligase that is mutated/altered in numerous tumor types.
Through an evolutionarily conserved trans-histone pathway, H2Bub1 is an
essential pre-requisite for subsequent downstream di-methylation events
at lysines 4 (H3K4me2) and 79 (H3K79me2) of histone H3. Although the role
that RNF20 plays in tumorigenesis has garnered much attention, the
downstream components of the trans-histone pathway, H3K4me2 and H3K79me2,
and their potential contributions to genome stability remain largely
overlooked. In this study, we employ single-cell imaging, and biochemical
approaches to investigate the spatial and temporal patterning of RNF20,
H2Bub1, H3K4me2 and H3K79me2 throughout the cell cycle. Using two
independent human cell lines, we show that H2Bub1, H3K4me2 and H3K79me2
exhibit distinct temporal progression patterns throughout the cell cycle.
Most notably, we demonstrate that H3K79me2 is a highly dynamic histone
PTM that reaches maximal abundance during mitosis in an
H2Bub1-independent manner. Using RNAi and chemical genetic approaches, we
identify DOT1L as the histone methyltransferase responsible for
mitotic-associated increases in H3K79me2. We also demonstrate that the
loss of mitotic H3K79me2 levels correlates with increases in chromosome
numbers and increases in mitotic defects. Collectively, these data
suggest that H3K79me2 dynamics during mitosis are normally required to
maintain genome stability and further implicate the loss of H3K79me2
during mitosis as a pathogenic event that contributes to the development
and progression of tumors.

