Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Syndecan-1 targeted mesoporous silica-coated gold nanorods act as
theranostic agents for in vivo detection of orthotopic pancreatic tumors
using multispectral optoacoustic tomography


Detection of pancreatic cancer is especially challenging in comparison to
many cancers due to severe limitations of both contrast agent delivery to
pancreatic tumors and limitations of traditional imaging techniques such
as poor resolution and low depth penetration. Theranostic nanoparticles
encompassing both therapeutic and diagnostic capabilities can overcome
limitations associated with conventional cancer diagnosis and therapy. In
this study, we compared mesoporous silica coated gold nanorods (MS-GNR)
and polyacrylic acid coated gold nanorods (PAA-GNR) targeted to tumor
cells via Syndecan-1 ligand for detection of orthotopic pancreatic cancer
in vivo. Because one of the major difficulties for translation of
theranostic nanoparticles to the clinic is an inability track performance
of nanoparticles in vivo, especially at depths required of orthotopic
tumors, we will overcome this impediment by utilizing multispectral
optoacoustic tomography (MSOT). Multispectral optoacoustic tomography
provides high optical contrast images at a microscale resolution and
reasonable penetration depth by combining the advantages of optical (high
sensitivity) and ultrasound (increased depth of penetration). Our results
indicate that the Syndecan-1 MS-GNR were superior to Syndecan-1 PAA-GNR,
untargeted MS-GNR, or untargeted PAA-GNR as contrast agents to identify
pancreatic cancer in vivo via MSOT. The Syndecan-1 MS-GNR particles also
resulted in reduced off-target accumulation compared to Syndecan-1
PAA-GNR. This study is among the first to evaluate biodistribution of
ligand-targeted nanoparticles in the context of orthotopic pancreatic
cancer using multispectral optoacoustic tomography. The MS GNR can be
utilized as theranostic platform due to ability of mesoporous silica to
encapsulate drug and easy surface modification with cancer recognizing
motif peptide.

