Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the mechanism of bile acid-induced activation of
estrogen receptor in colorectal adenocarcinoma


In previous studies, Ursodeoxycholic Acid (UDCA) was investigated as a
chemopreventive drug for the prevention of colorectal adenoma recurrence.
These studies revealed that the efficacy of UDCA was gender-specific. The
use of UDCA in men significantly lowered the odds of advanced lesions in
men, but significantly increased the odds of advanced lesions in women,
more specifically, in females who were younger, obese, or whose diet was
high in fat. The gender specific role of UDCA led us to investigate this
bile acids, along with deoxycholic acid's (DCA), ability to activate the
estrogen receptor in colon cancer.Estrogen receptor (ER) is the
predominant estrogen receptor in both normal and malignant human colon
tissue, and loss of ER has been shown to be critical for tumor cell
differentiation. Elevated concentrations of bile acids have previously
been shown to promote colon cancer and growing evidence indicates that
these molecules play a vital role in regulating cell signaling and gene
expression. In our current studies, through western blot and qRT-PCR
analysis, we have shown that DCA-treated HT-29 colorectal adenocarcinoma
cells significantly induce the phosphorylation of ER, as well as increase
gene expression of the pS2 estrogen response element (ERE). UDCA was also
shown to induce phosphorylation of ER, but much later than DCA. However,
UDCA increases gene expression of pS2 at much earlier time points than
DCA. In addition, we have also shown that when pre-treating HT-29 cells
with the MEK 1/2 inhibitor, PD98059, bile acid-induced phosphorylation of
ER is significantly reduced, along with ERE gene up-regulation.
Collectively, this data suggests that bile acids are inducing the
activation of ER through a ligand-independent mechanism via the MAPK
signaling cascade.

