Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotine reduces survival via augmentation of paracrine HGF-MET
signaling in the pancreatic cancer microenvironment


Smoking is an established risk factor for the development of pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (PC). However, the relationship between smoking and PC
tumor biology is incompletely defined. We report reduced overall survival
(OS) in PC patients who continued smoking after surgical resection with
curative intention (HR 1.93; P = .040). We further demonstrate augmented
paracrine signaling via the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-Met pathway
as a result of nicotine exposure in the PC microenvironment.
Specifically, HGF, secreted by patient-derived PC tumor associated stroma
(TAS), activates the c-Met receptor in PC cells. This paracrine
activation subsequently leads to downstream induction of inhibitor of
differentiation-1 (Id1) in PC cells, previously established as a mediator
of chemoresistance. Further delineation of the signaling pathway
demonstrates HGF-induced Id1 expression is abrogated by silencing of
c-Met or pharmacologic inhibition. In patient-derived PC xenografts,
nicotine treatment augmented tumor growth and metastasis; tumor lysates
from nicotine-treated mice demonstrated elevated HGF expression and
phospho-Met levels. Additionally, patients with high intratumoral
phospho-Met levels exhibited reduced overall survival compared to those
with low phospho-Met levels (Median OS 6.1 vs. 15.2 months, respectively;
P = .028). Taken together, our data reveal that nicotine promotes the
progression of PC via a microenvironment-dependent, paracrine signaling
mechanism.

