Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Omics approach to identify driver genes for peritoneal
dissemination of gastric cancer cells


BackgroundLittle is known about the molecular mechanisms of peritoneal
dissemination in gastric cancer cells. In this study, to clear the
molecular mechanisms of accelerating the peritoneal dissemination, we
performed to identify significant genes which give rise to peritoneal
dissemination and poor prognosis of gastric cancer. We conducted
expression array analysis in mice model of peritoneal dissemination and
in 200 cases of gastric cancer cases, and compared with each other to
identify driver genes.MethodsAs described previously, three parental
scirrhous gastric carcinoma-derived cell lines (HSC-39, HSC-44PE and
HSC-58) were established from human scirrhous gastric carcinoma.
Moreover, inoculating each parental cell lines into the gastric wall of
nude mice, four matched highly peritoneal-metastatic cell lines
(HSC-39As8, HSC-44As3, HSC-58As1 and HSC-58As9) were established after 12
cycles of stepwise selection. To identify gene expression signatures for
peritoneal dissemination, we performed expression analysis for matched
parental and each resultant cell line. Next, to examine the relationship
between gene expression signatures and clinical behaviors, we performed
synthetic analysis of gene expression signatures from in vivo peritoneal
dissemination mouse model data and expression data set containing 200
gastric tumors from the Singapore cohort.Results(1) Our synthetic
analysis, EEM analysis, which tested the functionality of the input genes
sets on the basis of their coherence, showed that one gene set from the
58As9 cell line harbored a coherently expressed subset of significant
size.(2) We found 57 genes in the coherent subset which had clinical
correlation.(3) We found that peritoneal metastases patients tended to
show higher expression of such genes, and patients prognosis with higher
expression of such genes tended to be poor.(4) Among such genes, we
focused on chemokine(C-X-C motif) receptor 7(CXCR7). CXCR7 expression was
significantly higher in 58As9 than in HSC58(PBackgroundLittle is known
about the molecular mechanisms of peritoneal dissemination in gastric
cancer cells. In this study, to clear the molecular mechanisms of
accelerating the peritoneal dissemination, we performed to identify
significant genes which give rise to peritoneal dissemination and poor
prognosis of gastric cancer. We conducted expression array analysis in
mice model of peritoneal dissemination and in 200 cases of gastric cancer
cases, and compared with each other to identify driver genes.MethodsAs
described previously, three parental scirrhous gastric carcinoma-derived
cell lines (HSC-39, HSC-44PE and HSC-58) were established from human
scirrhous gastric carcinoma. Moreover, inoculating each parental cell
lines into the gastric wall of nude mice, four matched highly
peritoneal-metastatic cell lines (HSC-39As8, HSC-44As3, HSC-58As1 and
HSC-58As9) were established after 12 cycles of stepwise selection. To
identify gene expression signatures for peritoneal dissemination, we
performed expression analysis for matched parental and each resultant
cell line. Next, to examine the relationship between gene expression
signatures and clinical behaviors, we performed synthetic analysis of
gene expression signatures from in vivo peritoneal dissemination mouse
model data and expression data set containing 200 gastric tumors from the
Singapore cohort.Results(1) Our synthetic analysis, EEM analysis, which
tested the functionality of the input genes sets on the basis of their
coherence, showed that one gene set from the 58As9 cell line harbored a
coherently expressed subset of significant size.(2) We found 57 genes in
the coherent subset which had clinical correlation.(3) We found that
peritoneal metastases patients tended to show higher expression of such
genes, and patients prognosis with higher expression of such genes tended
to be poor.(4) Among such genes, we focused on chemokine(C-X-C motif)
receptor 7(CXCR7). CXCR7 expression was significantly higher in 58As9
than in HSC58(P<0.005). We also found that overall survival of patients
with CXCR7 high expression gastric cancer tended to be poorer than that
with CXCR7 low expression gastric cancer in both the Singapore and
Japanese cohorts.ConclusionsIn conclusion, synthetic analysis from two
data sets indicated several candidate driver genes for strongly
accelerating gastric cancer peritoneal dissemination, the current
approach to compare gene signatures in vivo and clinical samples with
accurate clinical annotations enabled us to identify brand-new driver
candidate genes. Among them, CXCR7 might play an important role in
peritoneal dissemination and CXCR7 might be a therapeutic target for
suppression of gastric cancer peritoneal dissemination in the near
future.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

