Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploration of mechanisms for chromothripsis by irradiation


Chromothripsis is the massive but highly localized chromosome
rearrangements within a one-step catastrophic event rather than a series
of subsequent and random alterations. Chromothripsis occurs commonly in
various human cancers and it is thought to be associated with increasing
malignancy and oncogenesis. However the causes and consequences of
chromothripsis remain unclear. Therefore, to explore mechanisms of
chromothripsis, we investigated whether chromothripsis was artificially
induced by irradiation. We elicited DNA double-strand breaks in the oral
cancer cell line HOC313, or its highly metastatic subline HOC313-LM by
The Single Particle Irradiation system to Cell (SPICE), a focused
vertical micro-beam system designed to irradiate the nuclei of adhesive
cells. We established irradiated monoclonal sublines and analyzed the
copy number variations (CNVs) and SNPs using SNP array. Chromosomal
alterations, induced by irradiation including CNVs, were detected in some
monoclonal sublines. Interestingly SNP array analysis showed that one
subline named LM200-#25 had multiple chromosomal alterations which
happened locally in chromosome 7. Moreover, we detected several
chromosomal alterations such as t(12;7;11) translocation in LM200-#25
subline by Multi-Color FISH analysis. These results suggested that
chromothripsis might be induced by irradiation in LM200-#25 subline.

