Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Production and biochemical characterization of farnesylated and
methylated KRAS4b using engineered baculovirus


KRAS4b, which is frequently mutated in pancreatic, colon and lung
cancers, is processed in several steps including farnesylation by
farnesyl-transferase (FNT); proteolytic cleavage at the C-terminus by ras
converting enzyme 1 (RCE1) and carboxymethylation by isoprenylcysteine
carboxymethyl transferase (ICMT). Plasma membrane localization of KRAS4b
requires this processing as does KRAS4b-dependent RAF kinase activation.
Previous attempts to produce modified KRAS have relied on protein
engineering approaches or in vitro farnesylation of bacterially expressed
KRAS protein. The proteins produced by these methods do not completely
replicate the final KRAS protein found in mammalian cells and the yield
and quality of the protein are typically low. Using an engineered
baculovirus containing the two subunits of farnesyl-transferase (FNTA/B)
and a maltose-binding protein (MBP)-KRAS4b fusion we are able to produce
highly purified, farnesylated, and methylated KRAS4b (FMe-KRAS4b) in
insect cells at yields of approximately 10mg/L. This protein has been
extensively characterized by electrospray-ionization mass spectrometry,
analytical ultracentrifugation, and circular dichroism. In addition, we
demonstrate that FMe-KRAS4b is fully active in hydrolyzing GTP, binding
to RAF-RBD, and interacting with lipid nanodiscs.

