Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of tumorgraft models to characterize novel tumor
suppressor genes implicated in lung carcinogenesis


The extremely poor prognosis and lack of efficient treatments throw lung
cancer (LC) to the top of the deadliest types of cancer worldwide.
Throughout the years, the role played by host genetic variation has been
constantly highlighted as the key in determining tumor onset and
progression. In this regard, the discovery of LC-related genes paved the
way to the development of targeted therapies that nowadays are benefiting
patients harboring specific mutational patterns, such as EGFR mutations
or ALK rearrangements.Here, aiming to characterize novel tumor suppressor
genes in LC, 8 patient-derived tumors were subcutaneously or
orthotopically engrafted in nude mice for growing and subsequently carry
out exome and transcriptome sequencing. The strategy avoided the common
admixture exhibited by the presence of normal cells in the sample, which
were successfully swept away in the engrafting step, as determined by
microsatellite analyses. Among the 4430 mutations detected by exome-seq,
we focused on the 79 ones that would presumably lead to biallelic gene
inactivation, a common feature exhibited by tumor suppressors: homozygous
frameshift indels, nonsense and splicing site mutations. We then chose to
characterize one particular candidate gene, which codifies for a globular
protein that might be involved in the ability of tumors to escape the
action of the immune system. The genetic screening performed resulted in
a mutation rate of 5.1% in 79 tested LC cell lines and of 3.9% in a panel
of 179 lung primary tumors. The complete coding region was cloned in
constitutive and inducible systems in order to restore the expression of
the protein in gene-depleted LC-cell lines, and preliminary results
pinpoint that it may indeed trigger an anti-tumoral effect. This in vitro
approach is currently ongoing and hopefully, will enlighten us about its
tumor suppressive potential in the near future.

