Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical and clinical validation of an EpCAM-independent assay
for CTC detection in peripheral blood of early breast cancer patients
based on Cytokeratin-19 (CK-19) RT-qPCR


Introduction: The aim of our study was to evaluate the prognostic
significance of our previously developed EpCAM independent RT-qPCR assay
for CK-19 mRNA (Stathopoulou et al, Int J Cancer 2006) and validate its
analytical and clinical performance in early breast cancer.Methods:
Quality control on analytical sensitivity and specificity, linearity,
intra- and inter-assay reproducibility, and stability of the external
standard used for the preparation of the calibration curves was
performed. Reproducibility of the assay between our labs was evaluated by
analyzing 26 cDNAs. The prognostic significance of the assay in respect
to DFI and OS was evaluated by analysing peripheral blood of 179 patients
with stage I/II breast cancer postoperatively, before the administration
of adjuvant chemotherapy.Results: The limit of detection (LOD) is 3
copies/reaction and limit of Quantitation (LOQ) 10 copies/reaction. The
linear range of the calibration curve was 10-105copies/reaction and the
intra- and inter-assay reproducibility are shown below:The inter-lab
reproducibility of the assay was evaluated by analyzing 26 cDNA samples
in both labs and there was a 100% concordance. During the follow up
period (8 years) 32/179 (17.9%) patients relapsed and 18/179 (10%)
patients died from the disease. 45/179 (25.1%) samples were found
positive for CK-19 and 134/179 (74.9%) negative. In the group of CK-19
positive patients 15/45(33.3%) relapsed and 9/45(20.0%) died while in the
group of CK-19 negative patients 17(12.7%) patients relapsed and 9(6.7%)
died. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that CK-19 mRNA positivity was
significantly associated with DFI (P = 0.014) and OS (P =
0.051).Conclusions: This EpCAM independent assay can be used for a
high-throughput detection of CTCs in peripheral blood and has prognostic
significance in early breast cancer.

