Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abiraterone acetate (AA) treatment of prostate cancer
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) demonstrates heterogeneity of responses
and identifies potential biomarkers of adaptive resistance


AA, a prodrug of the CYP17A1 inhibitor abiraterone, is the first
second-line hormonal agent shown to improve survival in metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC); however, as with all
available treatments, responding tumors eventually develop resistance.
This highlights the importance of identification of mechanisms involved
in tumor response and resistance to AA. We evaluated the efficacy of AA
in LuCaP CRPC PDXs and investigated mechanisms of response and/or
resistance, focusing on androgen receptor (AR) and glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) signaling.Mice bearing CRPC LuCaP 35CR, 96CR, 77CR, and
136CR PDXs were treated with AA (0.5 mmol/kg/d), and tumor responses and
body weights were monitored. Tumors were harvested 7 days after the
beginning of the treatment (d7) and at end of study (EOS) (sacrifice when
tumor > 1000 mg). Gene expression analyses using Affymetrix HG-U219 gene
array and qPCR were performed to evaluate the validity of established
biomarkers and identify novel biomarkers related to AA response.Linear
regression model analyses showed that AA inhibited tumor progression in 3
of 4 LuCaP PDXs (96CR, 77CR, 136CR), but the initial response was
followed by development of resistance. Corresponding analyses of serum
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels demonstrated a decrease post AA
(96CR: p = 0.051; 77CR: p = 0.001; 136CR: undetectable at baseline). AA
improved median survival (77CR: 7 vs 9.5 weeks, p = 0.022; and 136CR: 6.8
vs 21.6 weeks, p AA, a prodrug of the CYP17A1 inhibitor abiraterone, is
the first second-line hormonal agent shown to improve survival in
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC); however, as with
all available treatments, responding tumors eventually develop
resistance. This highlights the importance of identification of
mechanisms involved in tumor response and resistance to AA. We evaluated
the efficacy of AA in LuCaP CRPC PDXs and investigated mechanisms of
response and/or resistance, focusing on androgen receptor (AR) and
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) signaling.Mice bearing CRPC LuCaP 35CR,
96CR, 77CR, and 136CR PDXs were treated with AA (0.5 mmol/kg/d), and
tumor responses and body weights were monitored. Tumors were harvested 7
days after the beginning of the treatment (d7) and at end of study (EOS)
(sacrifice when tumor > 1000 mg). Gene expression analyses using
Affymetrix HG-U219 gene array and qPCR were performed to evaluate the
validity of established biomarkers and identify novel biomarkers related
to AA response.Linear regression model analyses showed that AA inhibited
tumor progression in 3 of 4 LuCaP PDXs (96CR, 77CR, 136CR), but the
initial response was followed by development of resistance. Corresponding
analyses of serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels demonstrated a
decrease post AA (96CR: p = 0.051; 77CR: p = 0.001; 136CR: undetectable
at baseline). AA improved median survival (77CR: 7 vs 9.5 weeks, p =
0.022; and 136CR: 6.8 vs 21.6 weeks, p < 0.0001), and highly variable
responses were observed for 96CR (5.75 vs 10 weeks, p = 0.25). 35CR did
not exhibit significant growth inhibition, reduction in PSA, or decreased
median survival on AA. Evaluation of gene signatures revealed a negative
association of proliferation-associated genes with AA at d7 for 35CR and
136CR, while at EOS these signatures were negatively associated with AA
for 96CR and 136CR. Signatures of AR-regulated genes were negatively
associated with AA at d7 for 35CR and 136CR, while at EOS they were
negatively associated with AA for 96CR and 136CR. Targeted sequencing of
the AR ligand binding domain coding sequence did not detect any mutations
in any PDX at EOS. Trends toward increased expression of full length AR
(ARFL) and splice variant ARv7 were associated with AA at d7 for 136CR.
At EOS, trends toward increased ARFL and ARv7 expression were associated
with AA for 35CR and 96CR. Significantly increased GR expression was
associated with AA at EOS for 96CR and 77CR, and a trend was observed for
136CR.Our results demonstrate model-specific heterogeneity of
physiological and molecular responses to AA in CRPC. However, our data
indicate that increased ARFL, ARv7, and/or GR could be biomarkers of
adaptive resistance and potentially play functional roles in conferring
resistance.

