Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER3 mediates acquired resistance to HER2-targeted therapy in
esophageal adenocarcinoma


Esophageal adenocarcinoma is an aggressive malignancy and its incidence
is rapidly increasing. Despite multimodality treatment, patients face a
poor 5-year survival of 15-25%, underscoring the urgency to improve
treatment strategies. Receptor tyrosine kinases of the HER-family are
involved in the development and progression of multiple epithelial
tumors, and have consequently become widely used targets for the
development of new anti-cancer therapies. Trastuzumab, an antibody
against HER2, has shown potent growth inhibitory effects on HER2
overexpressing tumors, including gastro-esophageal cancer, however,
resistance to this therapy is inevitable. Unfortunately, a paucity of
data on cellular mechanisms of resistance to targeted therapeutic agents
exist in esophageal adenocarcinoma. In order to study the effect of HER2
inhibition in vitro and in vivo, we established unique primary cultures
of esophageal adenocarcinoma and patient-derived xenograft models. Using
these novel tools, we demonstrate a conserved, hard-wired mechanism in
which HER3 is upregulated upon trastuzumab-induced resistance in
esophageal adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, blocking upregulated HER3
effectively resulted in a strong decrease in cell viability and induced
cell death. Taken together, our data provide preclinical insight that
strategies targeting HER3 in combination with trastuzumab could possibly
prevent acquired resistance.

