Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic potential of epithelial to mesenchymal transition in
prostate cancer at first presentation


Introduction and Objective: Metastatic progression of prostate cancer
requires a change of state, epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT),
reducing cell to cell adherence and contact, with associated cell
motility and invasion. EMT is one of the hallmarks of cancer and
characterisation of the EMT process has defined a panel of EMT
biomarkers. Here we investigate the potential of an EMT panel of
biomarkers in an unscreened population at first presentation with
prostate cancer.Methods: A prostate Tissue Micro Array (TMA) comprising
2,450 cores containing normal adjacent, prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia and malignant prostate tissue from 524 diagnostic biopsies,
linked to an extensive clinical database with long-term outcome, was
studied. Expression of a panel of EMT biomarkers, including E-cadherin
and vimentin, was assessed using an automated, high throughput
fluorescent staining (Leica BOND-MAX), image capture (Carl Zeiss
Microimaging Mirax scanner) and quantitative image analysis (Definiens
Tissue Studio) protocol. Definiens H-Score was converted to pathological
scores prior to univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards
regression analysis in SPSS.Results: Expression of an EMT profile
predicted a significant reduction in both overall and cancer specific
survival. In univariate analysis, low or negative E-cadherin staining was
associated with a reduction in median overall survival by 45 months (95%
CI: 10.4-79.6; PIntroduction and Objective: Metastatic progression of
prostate cancer requires a change of state, epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), reducing cell to cell adherence and contact, with
associated cell motility and invasion. EMT is one of the hallmarks of
cancer and characterisation of the EMT process has defined a panel of EMT
biomarkers. Here we investigate the potential of an EMT panel of
biomarkers in an unscreened population at first presentation with
prostate cancer.Methods: A prostate Tissue Micro Array (TMA) comprising
2,450 cores containing normal adjacent, prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia and malignant prostate tissue from 524 diagnostic biopsies,
linked to an extensive clinical database with long-term outcome, was
studied. Expression of a panel of EMT biomarkers, including E-cadherin
and vimentin, was assessed using an automated, high throughput
fluorescent staining (Leica BOND-MAX), image capture (Carl Zeiss
Microimaging Mirax scanner) and quantitative image analysis (Definiens
Tissue Studio) protocol. Definiens H-Score was converted to pathological
scores prior to univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards
regression analysis in SPSS.Results: Expression of an EMT profile
predicted a significant reduction in both overall and cancer specific
survival. In univariate analysis, low or negative E-cadherin staining was
associated with a reduction in median overall survival by 45 months (95%
CI: 10.4-79.6; P<0.0001) and a cancer specific mean survival of 80.1
months (95% CI: 45.7-114.5; PIntroduction and Objective: Metastatic
progression of prostate cancer requires a change of state, epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT), reducing cell to cell adherence and
contact, with associated cell motility and invasion. EMT is one of the
hallmarks of cancer and characterisation of the EMT process has defined a
panel of EMT biomarkers. Here we investigate the potential of an EMT
panel of biomarkers in an unscreened population at first presentation
with prostate cancer.Methods: A prostate Tissue Micro Array (TMA)
comprising 2,450 cores containing normal adjacent, prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia and malignant prostate tissue from 524
diagnostic biopsies, linked to an extensive clinical database with
long-term outcome, was studied. Expression of a panel of EMT biomarkers,
including E-cadherin and vimentin, was assessed using an automated, high
throughput fluorescent staining (Leica BOND-MAX), image capture (Carl
Zeiss Microimaging Mirax scanner) and quantitative image analysis
(Definiens Tissue Studio) protocol. Definiens H-Score was converted to
pathological scores prior to univariate and multivariate Cox proportional
hazards regression analysis in SPSS.Results: Expression of an EMT profile
predicted a significant reduction in both overall and cancer specific
survival. In univariate analysis, low or negative E-cadherin staining was
associated with a reduction in median overall survival by 45 months (95%
CI: 10.4-79.6; P<0.0001) and a cancer specific mean survival of 80.1
months (95% CI: 45.7-114.5; P<0.0001) when compared to high and
intermediate E-cadherin staining. Similarly, high EMT expression, defined
as loss of E-cadherin and presence of vimentin, was compared to low EMT
expression, defined as preserved E-cadherin and the absence of vimentin.
There was a greater reduction in overall median survival in high EMT
tumours of 54 months (95% CI: 12.5-95.5; pIntroduction and Objective:
Metastatic progression of prostate cancer requires a change of state,
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), reducing cell to cell
adherence and contact, with associated cell motility and invasion. EMT is
one of the hallmarks of cancer and characterisation of the EMT process
has defined a panel of EMT biomarkers. Here we investigate the potential
of an EMT panel of biomarkers in an unscreened population at first
presentation with prostate cancer.Methods: A prostate Tissue Micro Array
(TMA) comprising 2,450 cores containing normal adjacent, prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia and malignant prostate tissue from 524
diagnostic biopsies, linked to an extensive clinical database with
long-term outcome, was studied. Expression of a panel of EMT biomarkers,
including E-cadherin and vimentin, was assessed using an automated, high
throughput fluorescent staining (Leica BOND-MAX), image capture (Carl
Zeiss Microimaging Mirax scanner) and quantitative image analysis
(Definiens Tissue Studio) protocol. Definiens H-Score was converted to
pathological scores prior to univariate and multivariate Cox proportional
hazards regression analysis in SPSS.Results: Expression of an EMT profile
predicted a significant reduction in both overall and cancer specific
survival. In univariate analysis, low or negative E-cadherin staining was
associated with a reduction in median overall survival by 45 months (95%
CI: 10.4-79.6; P<0.0001) and a cancer specific mean survival of 80.1
months (95% CI: 45.7-114.5; P<0.0001) when compared to high and
intermediate E-cadherin staining. Similarly, high EMT expression, defined
as loss of E-cadherin and presence of vimentin, was compared to low EMT
expression, defined as preserved E-cadherin and the absence of vimentin.
There was a greater reduction in overall median survival in high EMT
tumours of 54 months (95% CI: 12.5-95.5; p<0.0001) and cancer specific
survival of 93.2 months (95% CI: 62.8-123.7; pIntroduction and Objective:
Metastatic progression of prostate cancer requires a change of state,
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), reducing cell to cell
adherence and contact, with associated cell motility and invasion. EMT is
one of the hallmarks of cancer and characterisation of the EMT process
has defined a panel of EMT biomarkers. Here we investigate the potential
of an EMT panel of biomarkers in an unscreened population at first
presentation with prostate cancer.Methods: A prostate Tissue Micro Array
(TMA) comprising 2,450 cores containing normal adjacent, prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia and malignant prostate tissue from 524
diagnostic biopsies, linked to an extensive clinical database with
long-term outcome, was studied. Expression of a panel of EMT biomarkers,
including E-cadherin and vimentin, was assessed using an automated, high
throughput fluorescent staining (Leica BOND-MAX), image capture (Carl
Zeiss Microimaging Mirax scanner) and quantitative image analysis
(Definiens Tissue Studio) protocol. Definiens H-Score was converted to
pathological scores prior to univariate and multivariate Cox proportional
hazards regression analysis in SPSS.Results: Expression of an EMT profile
predicted a significant reduction in both overall and cancer specific
survival. In univariate analysis, low or negative E-cadherin staining was
associated with a reduction in median overall survival by 45 months (95%
CI: 10.4-79.6; P<0.0001) and a cancer specific mean survival of 80.1
months (95% CI: 45.7-114.5; P<0.0001) when compared to high and
intermediate E-cadherin staining. Similarly, high EMT expression, defined
as loss of E-cadherin and presence of vimentin, was compared to low EMT
expression, defined as preserved E-cadherin and the absence of vimentin.
There was a greater reduction in overall median survival in high EMT
tumours of 54 months (95% CI: 12.5-95.5; p<0.0001) and cancer specific
survival of 93.2 months (95% CI: 62.8-123.7; p<0.0001) when compared to
low EMT tumours. Stage, grade, PSA at diagnosis and EMT status was
included in the multivariate analysis for cancer specific survival. Both
Gleason grade (p = 0.017) and EMT status (p = 0.030) were found to be
significant prognostic factors in predicting cancer specific
survival.Conclusions: Loss of E-cadherin and concomitant expression of
the EMT marker vimentin are powerful predictors of prostate cancer
outcome at first presentation.

