Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel PAK4 allosteric modulators (PAMs) provide potential
therapeutic options in human gastric cancer


Expression of PAK4 (p21-activated serine/threonine kinase 4) is
associated with gastric tumorigenesis. Overexpression of PAK4 is
correlated with metastasis of gastric cancer and in part confers
cisplatin resistance in gastric cancer patients. We transduced the human
gastric cancer cell line AGS with CRISPR/cas9 targeting PAK4, and
observed reduced cell proliferation and motility. Novel PAK4 allosteric
modulators (PAMs) were evaluated for their potential therapeutic use for
gastric cancer. A panel of human gastric cancer cell lines was screened
with four PAMs (KPT-7189, -7349, -7657, -8752). MTS assay showed
inhibition of cell viability by PAMs in 6 of 10 gastric cancer cell lines
(IC50 ranged from 50 to 5000 nM). Cell cycle analysis and annexin V assay
indicated a combination of cell growth arrest at G1 phase and cell
apoptosis after treatment with PAMs. Furthermore, PAMs diminished
expression levels of PAK4, induced apoptosis-related molecule caspase-3,
and suppressed PI3K/Akt and MEK/Erk signaling. Wound assay showed
inhibition of cell migration and soft agar assay demonstrated suppression
of colony formation for gastric cancer cells treated with PAMs. Mouse
xenograft models are currently under investigation. Remarkably, PAMs in
combination with cisplatin induced cell death in cisplatin-resistant
gastric cancer cells in a synergistic manner. This study demonstrates
PAMs have anti-tumor activity against gastric cancer cells and suggests
their potential use for the treatment of gastric cancer.

