Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of anti-melanoma effect of BRAF and MEK inhibition by
metformin


Introduction: Metformin has been shown to inhibit human cancer cell
growth via activation of MAP kinase with resultant inhibition of mTOR
signaling pathway. Recent clinical evidence demonstrated the
anti-melanoma effect of combined mutant BRAF inhibition and MEK
inhibition. We determined the effect of metformin in combination with
mutant BRAF and MEK inhibition on melanoma proliferation and the possible
mechanisms.Methods: Human melanoma cells (SK-23, Mel888, Mel1861) were
treated with Metformin (1-20 mM), PLX4032 (a mutant BRAF inhibitor, 1-20
uM), AZD6244 (a MEK inhibitor, 1-20 uM), or combination. Cell
proliferation assay was performed using Cell Titer Blue assay. Western
blotting was performed to determine the expression of PARP, caspases-9,
LC3A/B,Beclin1, pERK, pMEK, AMPKa, p70S6, and p4E-BP1. GAPDH was used as
internal control. Autophagy was further analyzed with immunofluorescence
with LC-3 and NECN1 anti-antibody for visualization of lysosomal
morphology and evaluated under the Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope (20). DAPI
was used to counter stain the nucleus. Apoptosis was further analyzed
with flow cytometry using FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit (BD
Biosciences). Data were presented as means SD for the three separate
experiments. For comparison between groups, the student's t test was used
and pIntroduction: Metformin has been shown to inhibit human cancer cell
growth via activation of MAP kinase with resultant inhibition of mTOR
signaling pathway. Recent clinical evidence demonstrated the
anti-melanoma effect of combined mutant BRAF inhibition and MEK
inhibition. We determined the effect of metformin in combination with
mutant BRAF and MEK inhibition on melanoma proliferation and the possible
mechanisms.Methods: Human melanoma cells (SK-23, Mel888, Mel1861) were
treated with Metformin (1-20 mM), PLX4032 (a mutant BRAF inhibitor, 1-20
uM), AZD6244 (a MEK inhibitor, 1-20 uM), or combination. Cell
proliferation assay was performed using Cell Titer Blue assay. Western
blotting was performed to determine the expression of PARP, caspases-9,
LC3A/B,Beclin1, pERK, pMEK, AMPKa, p70S6, and p4E-BP1. GAPDH was used as
internal control. Autophagy was further analyzed with immunofluorescence
with LC-3 and NECN1 anti-antibody for visualization of lysosomal
morphology and evaluated under the Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope (20). DAPI
was used to counter stain the nucleus. Apoptosis was further analyzed
with flow cytometry using FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit (BD
Biosciences). Data were presented as means SD for the three separate
experiments. For comparison between groups, the student's t test was used
and p< 0.05 was considered to be statically significant.Results: There
was dose-dependent inhibition of melanoma cell proliferation with either
metformin(M), PLX4032(P), and AZD6244(A). Addition of M to PA combination
had synergistic effect on the anti-melanoma proliferative effect of PA.
Significantly increased expression (pIntroduction: Metformin has been
shown to inhibit human cancer cell growth via activation of MAP kinase
with resultant inhibition of mTOR signaling pathway. Recent clinical
evidence demonstrated the anti-melanoma effect of combined mutant BRAF
inhibition and MEK inhibition. We determined the effect of metformin in
combination with mutant BRAF and MEK inhibition on melanoma proliferation
and the possible mechanisms.Methods: Human melanoma cells (SK-23, Mel888,
Mel1861) were treated with Metformin (1-20 mM), PLX4032 (a mutant BRAF
inhibitor, 1-20 uM), AZD6244 (a MEK inhibitor, 1-20 uM), or combination.
Cell proliferation assay was performed using Cell Titer Blue assay.
Western blotting was performed to determine the expression of PARP,
caspases-9, LC3A/B,Beclin1, pERK, pMEK, AMPKa, p70S6, and p4E-BP1. GAPDH
was used as internal control. Autophagy was further analyzed with
immunofluorescence with LC-3 and NECN1 anti-antibody for visualization of
lysosomal morphology and evaluated under the Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope
(20). DAPI was used to counter stain the nucleus. Apoptosis was further
analyzed with flow cytometry using FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit
(BD Biosciences). Data were presented as means SD for the three separate
experiments. For comparison between groups, the student's t test was used
and p< 0.05 was considered to be statically significant.Results: There
was dose-dependent inhibition of melanoma cell proliferation with either
metformin(M), PLX4032(P), and AZD6244(A). Addition of M to PA combination
had synergistic effect on the anti-melanoma proliferative effect of PA.
Significantly increased expression (p<0.05) of apoptosis markers (PARP
and caspases-9) and autophagy markers (LC3B and Beclin1) were observed in
cells treated with PAM compared with PA. Enhanced induction of autophagy
with the triple drugs was confirmed by visualization of autophagosome and
autolysosome formation on immunofluorescence. Synergistic effect on
apoptosis was confirmed on Annexin V assay. The PAM combination treatment
also lead to significant enhancement of AMPK activation and increased
phosphorylation of AMPK at Thr-172 compared with metformin alone
(pIntroduction: Metformin has been shown to inhibit human cancer cell
growth via activation of MAP kinase with resultant inhibition of mTOR
signaling pathway. Recent clinical evidence demonstrated the
anti-melanoma effect of combined mutant BRAF inhibition and MEK
inhibition. We determined the effect of metformin in combination with
mutant BRAF and MEK inhibition on melanoma proliferation and the possible
mechanisms.Methods: Human melanoma cells (SK-23, Mel888, Mel1861) were
treated with Metformin (1-20 mM), PLX4032 (a mutant BRAF inhibitor, 1-20
uM), AZD6244 (a MEK inhibitor, 1-20 uM), or combination. Cell
proliferation assay was performed using Cell Titer Blue assay. Western
blotting was performed to determine the expression of PARP, caspases-9,
LC3A/B,Beclin1, pERK, pMEK, AMPKa, p70S6, and p4E-BP1. GAPDH was used as
internal control. Autophagy was further analyzed with immunofluorescence
with LC-3 and NECN1 anti-antibody for visualization of lysosomal
morphology and evaluated under the Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope (20). DAPI
was used to counter stain the nucleus. Apoptosis was further analyzed
with flow cytometry using FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit (BD
Biosciences). Data were presented as means SD for the three separate
experiments. For comparison between groups, the student's t test was used
and p< 0.05 was considered to be statically significant.Results: There
was dose-dependent inhibition of melanoma cell proliferation with either
metformin(M), PLX4032(P), and AZD6244(A). Addition of M to PA combination
had synergistic effect on the anti-melanoma proliferative effect of PA.
Significantly increased expression (p<0.05) of apoptosis markers (PARP
and caspases-9) and autophagy markers (LC3B and Beclin1) were observed in
cells treated with PAM compared with PA. Enhanced induction of autophagy
with the triple drugs was confirmed by visualization of autophagosome and
autolysosome formation on immunofluorescence. Synergistic effect on
apoptosis was confirmed on Annexin V assay. The PAM combination treatment
also lead to significant enhancement of AMPK activation and increased
phosphorylation of AMPK at Thr-172 compared with metformin alone
(p<0.01). The addition of M to PA combination resulted in inhibition of
mTOR signaling with decreased phosphorylation of p70S6K and 4E-BP1 in
treated cancer cells, when compared with PA or M alone.Conclusion: We
have observed a synergistic effect on suppressing human melanoma
proliferation with the addition of metformin to combined inhibition of
mutant BRAF and MEK. The synergism is due to enhanced inhibition of mTOR
signaling pathways.

