Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated comparative analysis of TCGA lung adenocarcioma and
lung squamous cell carcinoma copy number and RNA-Seq expression data


The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) contains various types of genomic data
from a wide variety of cancers, several of which affect the same tissue
site. Here we analyze copy number and RNA-Seq data from TCGA for lung
adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC). Level 1
(raw) data, rather than Level 3 (segmented) data, from TCGA was used for
an integrated analysis of copy number and gene expression profiles of the
two cancers. Using the copy number and SNP- probes, re-processed tumor
profiles were more consistent with a control set in terms of median
number of copy number events, sample ploidy, and breakpoint genes than
with the published level 3 TCGA data. Probe-level data were analyzed
using Nexus Copy Number SNP-FASST2 (a multi-state HMM algorithm that uses
both SNP and copy number probes in making state assignments), with
systematic correction applied to correct for GC biases. Additionally we
performed manual baseline adjustment to correct for sample ploidy based
on whole-genome B-alelle frequency data for each sample. Overall, the
median number of copy number events in the LUAD TCGA data set was reduced
from 371 (in the level 3 set) to 299, and from 681 (in the level 3 set)
to 177 in the LUSC TCGA data set. After manual inspection, more than 38%
of the TCGA LUAD samples and 50% of the TCGA LUSC samples available at
level 3 were found to have incorrect baseline ploidy assignments. The
resultant re-analyzed copy number data sets were used for an integrated
analysis between the two tumor types. Comprehensive comparative analysis
using Fisher's Exact Test revealed statistically significant differences
(percent differential = 25%, pThe Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) contains
various types of genomic data from a wide variety of cancers, several of
which affect the same tissue site. Here we analyze copy number and
RNA-Seq data from TCGA for lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and lung squamous
cell carcinoma (LUSC). Level 1 (raw) data, rather than Level 3
(segmented) data, from TCGA was used for an integrated analysis of copy
number and gene expression profiles of the two cancers. Using the copy
number and SNP- probes, re-processed tumor profiles were more consistent
with a control set in terms of median number of copy number events,
sample ploidy, and breakpoint genes than with the published level 3 TCGA
data. Probe-level data were analyzed using Nexus Copy Number SNP-FASST2
(a multi-state HMM algorithm that uses both SNP and copy number probes in
making state assignments), with systematic correction applied to correct
for GC biases. Additionally we performed manual baseline adjustment to
correct for sample ploidy based on whole-genome B-alelle frequency data
for each sample. Overall, the median number of copy number events in the
LUAD TCGA data set was reduced from 371 (in the level 3 set) to 299, and
from 681 (in the level 3 set) to 177 in the LUSC TCGA data set. After
manual inspection, more than 38% of the TCGA LUAD samples and 50% of the
TCGA LUSC samples available at level 3 were found to have incorrect
baseline ploidy assignments. The resultant re-analyzed copy number data
sets were used for an integrated analysis between the two tumor types.
Comprehensive comparative analysis using Fisher's Exact Test revealed
statistically significant differences (percent differential = 25%,
p<0.001) in copy number profiles between the two lung tumor types; copy
number changes include differential loss of chromosome 1p, loss of
chromosome 3p, gain of chromosome 3q, loss of chromosome 4 and loss of
chromosome 5. These correlated to changes in overall survival:
individuals with loss of chromosome 1p and/or loss of 5q resulted in a
significantly poorer prognosis (pThe Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) contains
various types of genomic data from a wide variety of cancers, several of
which affect the same tissue site. Here we analyze copy number and
RNA-Seq data from TCGA for lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and lung squamous
cell carcinoma (LUSC). Level 1 (raw) data, rather than Level 3
(segmented) data, from TCGA was used for an integrated analysis of copy
number and gene expression profiles of the two cancers. Using the copy
number and SNP- probes, re-processed tumor profiles were more consistent
with a control set in terms of median number of copy number events,
sample ploidy, and breakpoint genes than with the published level 3 TCGA
data. Probe-level data were analyzed using Nexus Copy Number SNP-FASST2
(a multi-state HMM algorithm that uses both SNP and copy number probes in
making state assignments), with systematic correction applied to correct
for GC biases. Additionally we performed manual baseline adjustment to
correct for sample ploidy based on whole-genome B-alelle frequency data
for each sample. Overall, the median number of copy number events in the
LUAD TCGA data set was reduced from 371 (in the level 3 set) to 299, and
from 681 (in the level 3 set) to 177 in the LUSC TCGA data set. After
manual inspection, more than 38% of the TCGA LUAD samples and 50% of the
TCGA LUSC samples available at level 3 were found to have incorrect
baseline ploidy assignments. The resultant re-analyzed copy number data
sets were used for an integrated analysis between the two tumor types.
Comprehensive comparative analysis using Fisher's Exact Test revealed
statistically significant differences (percent differential = 25%,
p<0.001) in copy number profiles between the two lung tumor types; copy
number changes include differential loss of chromosome 1p, loss of
chromosome 3p, gain of chromosome 3q, loss of chromosome 4 and loss of
chromosome 5. These correlated to changes in overall survival:
individuals with loss of chromosome 1p and/or loss of 5q resulted in a
significantly poorer prognosis (p<0.05). While more frequent in the LUSC
sample population, this change in overall survival outcome was extended
to samples with chromosome 1p loss in LUAD samples as well. Integration
with RNA-Seq expression data from each tumor type revealed statistically
significant correlations (pThe Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) contains
various types of genomic data from a wide variety of cancers, several of
which affect the same tissue site. Here we analyze copy number and
RNA-Seq data from TCGA for lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and lung squamous
cell carcinoma (LUSC). Level 1 (raw) data, rather than Level 3
(segmented) data, from TCGA was used for an integrated analysis of copy
number and gene expression profiles of the two cancers. Using the copy
number and SNP- probes, re-processed tumor profiles were more consistent
with a control set in terms of median number of copy number events,
sample ploidy, and breakpoint genes than with the published level 3 TCGA
data. Probe-level data were analyzed using Nexus Copy Number SNP-FASST2
(a multi-state HMM algorithm that uses both SNP and copy number probes in
making state assignments), with systematic correction applied to correct
for GC biases. Additionally we performed manual baseline adjustment to
correct for sample ploidy based on whole-genome B-alelle frequency data
for each sample. Overall, the median number of copy number events in the
LUAD TCGA data set was reduced from 371 (in the level 3 set) to 299, and
from 681 (in the level 3 set) to 177 in the LUSC TCGA data set. After
manual inspection, more than 38% of the TCGA LUAD samples and 50% of the
TCGA LUSC samples available at level 3 were found to have incorrect
baseline ploidy assignments. The resultant re-analyzed copy number data
sets were used for an integrated analysis between the two tumor types.
Comprehensive comparative analysis using Fisher's Exact Test revealed
statistically significant differences (percent differential = 25%,
p<0.001) in copy number profiles between the two lung tumor types; copy
number changes include differential loss of chromosome 1p, loss of
chromosome 3p, gain of chromosome 3q, loss of chromosome 4 and loss of
chromosome 5. These correlated to changes in overall survival:
individuals with loss of chromosome 1p and/or loss of 5q resulted in a
significantly poorer prognosis (p<0.05). While more frequent in the LUSC
sample population, this change in overall survival outcome was extended
to samples with chromosome 1p loss in LUAD samples as well. Integration
with RNA-Seq expression data from each tumor type revealed statistically
significant correlations (p<0.05) with these copy number alterations,
identifying potential driver genes of interest among each subtype and
lung tumors in general.

