Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-expression of ULBP1 and NKG2D are related to better overall
survival in patients with gastric cancer


ObjectiveThe relationship between expressions of ULBP1/NKG2D and their
clinicopathological outcome in patients with gastric cancer were
investigated.BackgroundULBP1 which is one of NKG2D ligand and expressing
on tumor cell surface binds to the NKG2D receptor presenting on NK, CD8+
T and gamma delta T cell. It was considered that innate immunity is
mainly induced through the interaction between ULBP1 and NKG2D. The role
of this immune response is not clear yet, and is controversial whether it
is inhibited or activated signal.MethodsWe performed immunohistochemical
staining of gastric cancer tissue with antibody against ULBP1 and NKG2D
in 98 patients who received surgery in 2004 to 2008. We investigated
expression of ULBP1 in tumor and NKG2D in mononuclear cells around tumor
by multiple points observation. These results were compared to their
association with histological and clinical outcome.ResultsThe positive
group of NKG2D expression on mononuclear cells around gastric cancer
tissue had significantly longer overall survival (OS) than the negative
group (p = 0.0217). Although it was not recognized significant difference
of ULBP1 expression on gastric cancer cells, in a combination of ULBP1
and NKG2D expression, both positive group had best OS, and both negative
group had poorest OS in this study.ConclusionThe interaction between
ULBP1 and NKG2D in gastric cancer may have positive signal which relates
to good OS. Although the mechanism of immune system through ULBP1/NKG2D
is controversial, we obtained an interesting result according to this
mechanism.

