Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene copy number and protein expression of growth factor receptors
EGFR and HER2 and their prognostic potential in penile squamous cell
carcinoma


BACKGROUND: Penile squamous cell carcinoma (PSCC) is a disease typical of
less developed regions of the globe, and its molecular mechanisms are not
clearly understood. Novel EGFR-targeted therapies have arisen as a
potential treatment alternative and, although the mechanisms of EGFR
activation in PSCC are unknown. For that, we have addressed the protein
expression and gene copy number (CGN) of EGFR and HER2 in a large cohort
of PSCC patients.METHODS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) against EGFR and
HER2 was performed in samples from 183 PSCC patients using the
biotin-free polymer method. Overexpressing cases were those showing
strong and complete membrane staining in more than 10% of the tumor
cells. Seventy-three cases were submitted to dual color fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) for evaluation of GCN of both genes (and their
respective centromere) and were classified as disomy (2 signals of the
gene and chromosome centromere in each nucleus), polysomy (more than 2
signals of the gene and centromere), or gene gains (cases with a gene
signal:centromeric signal ratio exceeding 2).RESULTS: Regarding EGFR,
almost half of cases (91, or 49.7%) overexpressed the marker, 81 (54.5%)
presented low expression, and 9 (4.9%) showed no staining at all.
Overexpression associated with presence of recurrence (p = 0.031). Most
cases presented disomy of chromosome 7 (46/68, or 67.6%), 16 cases
(23.5%) were polysomies, and 6 cases (9.9%) EGFR gains (up to 6 copies of
the gene x 2 signals of chromosome 7 centromere). Increased EGFR copies
due to polysomy or amplification was associated with higher histologic
grade and shorter cancer-specific survival (p = 0.008 and p = 0.019,
respectively) but not with protein overexpression (p = 0.403). No
membrane expression of HER2 was seen, but a cytoplasmic staining was
found in 214.9% (28) of cases, all of them high grade tumors. Cytoplasmic
HER2 (cHER2) associated with EGFR overexpression (p = 0.017), and reduced
cancer-specific survival (p = 0.014). No amplifications of HER2 were
seen, but chromosome 17 polysomy was present in 16 (21.9%) of 73 valid
cases. Cases presenting polysomy of chromosome 17 (P17) presented
recurrence (p = 0.008), higher histological grade tumors (p = 0.030) and
perineural invasion (p = 0.045) more frequently. Cancer-specific survival
of P17 patients was also shorter (p = 0.014).CONCLUSIONS: Our results
suggest a possible prognostic role for EGFR overexpression and HER2
cytoplasmic staining, stratifying patients at increased risk of disease
recurrence or death. GCN analysis of the studied genes showed that
increased EGFR gene copies is a strong predictor of cancer death, as well
as polysomy of chromosome 17 is. We believe an important unbalance in
chromosome number might explain the poor outcome seen in
patients.Funding: Capes and FAPESP.Note: This abstract was not presented
at the meeting.

