Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting metastatic prostate cancer with polyisoprenylated
cysteinyl amides


Background: Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) poses
a major clinical management challenge due to lack of effective therapies.
Monomeric G- proteins of the Ras superfamily such as Rho, Rac and Cdc42
are critical mediators in prostate cancer progression and metastasis, due
to their effect on F-actin organization in cell migration. These proteins
are polyisoprenylated and subject to regulation by polyisoprenylated
methylated protein methyl esterase (PMPMEase). We hypothesized that
metabolism of monomeric G-proteins by PMPMEase regulates growth, survival
and differentiation as well as cell migration and invasion through its
effects on F-actin assembly.Methods: The effects of polyisoprenylated
cysteinyl amides (PCAIs), NSL-RD-036, NSL-BA-040, NSL-BA-055 and
NSL-BA-056 on the viability and proliferation of prostate cancer cell
lines were investigated using the MTS assay. Docetaxel and paclitaxel
were used as positive controls. Metastatic PC -3 cell migration and
invasion in the presence of NSL-RD-036 were determined using the scratch
and matrigel invasion assays. The effect of NSL-RD-040 on F-actin
organization in TagRFP F-actin marker-transfected PC 3 cells was also
investigated.Results: The PCAIs were cytotoxic to all prostate cancer
cell lines (PC-3, DU 145, LNCaP and 22Rv1). In all the cell lines,
NSL-BA-040 showed the highest activity (EC50 4.3 - 5.0 M) followed by
NSL-RD-036 (EC50 2.0 - 9.2 M), NSL-BA-056 (EC50 4.8 - 7.5 M) and
NSL-BA-055 (EC50 2.9 - 11.2 M) while docetaxel and paclitaxel were not as
effective (EC50 >100 M). Metastatic PC-3 cell proliferation was inhibited
in a concentration-dependent manner by NSL-RD-036 and at 2 M PC-3 cell
proliferation was halted. Exposure of PC-3 cells to NSL-BA-040 induced
apoptosis and disrupted F-actin cytoskeleton organization in TagRFP
F-actin marker transfected metastatic PC-3 cells. NSL-RD-036 also
significantly inhibited PC-3 cell migration and invasion through
matrigel.Conclusions: Polyisoprenylated small molecules suppress
migration and invasion as well as disrupt F-actin organization of
metastatic PC-3 cells. Polyisoprenylated small molecules could serve as a
new class of therapeutic agents in metastatic castration resistant
prostate cancer.

