Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Surface accumulation of receptor tyrosine kinases upon treatment
with tyrosine kinase inhibitors and resulting enhancement of activity
upon treatment cessation


Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) constitute the largest family of
structurally related oncogenes and are often involved in the initiation,
maintenance and/or metastasis of various human cancers. The genes
encoding RTKs are frequently amplified, fused, mutated, or the ligands
are expressed at high levels, causing abnormal activation and downstream
signaling. Two major types of drugs have been used with success to treat
cancers with abnormal RTK activation, recombinant monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) and small molecule inhibitors of the tyrosine kinases (TKIs). TKIs
have proven most successful against cancers driven by gene fusions or
mutations, whereas mAbs dominate in cancers driven by gene amplifications
or ligand-mediated RTK activation. Recent studies show that the two types
of treatment modalities may often be synergistic, but the reason for this
is not well characterized.Here, we demonstrate that surface levels of
various RTKs increase in cancer cell lines upon treatment with TKIs
specific for the individual RTKs. The effect was most pronounced in cell
lines with amplification or autocrine ligand production and occurred at
inhibitor concentrations suboptimal for inhibition of growth. Removal of
the TKIs resulted in an increase in RTK activity and cancer cell
proliferation as a result of the increased RTK levels.MAbs, especially
mAb mixtures, when given in combination with the TKIs were found to
prevent RTK accumulation and led to enhanced efficacy. Due to the
increased number of receptors, the combination also resulted in
enhancement of secondary effector functions, such as ADCC.In conclusion,
our results demonstrate that in certain contexts TKI treatment leads to
RTK accumulation and that this accumulation has the potential to enhance
tumor growth. Antibody mixtures, when given together with the TKIs, can
prevent RTK accumulation and even enhance the TKI activity.

