Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YAP protein expression and subcellular localization in pediatric
liver tumors


Purpose: Currently, there is no effective chemotherapy for the treatment
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Both HCC and hepatoblastoma (HB)
remain lethal in their metastatic forms. Therefore, understanding the
molecular mechanisms of tumor survival and proliferation is critical for
developing novel therapies. Our lab has shown that YAP, a transcription
factor, is involved in liver regeneration. Specifically, increases in
nuclear YAP have been coupled with expression of genes important for cell
proliferation. We therefore sought to examine whether there is increased
nuclear localization of YAP in liver tumors.Methods: Tumor tissue and
normal liver tissue from 3 pediatric patients with HCC (all males, mean
age 10.63 years), and 6 HB patients (4 males and 2 females, mean age 2.99
years) were stained for YAP using immunohistochemistry. Multiple
high-power fields were photographed for each sample. Using ImageJ
software, the number of YAP-positive nuclei were counted and expressed as
a mean percentage of total nuclei.Results: The percentage of nuclei
staining positive for YAP was increased in tumor cells compared to normal
liver in 3/3 of the HCC tumors. In addition, YAP nuclear staining was
significantly increased in 2/6 of the HB tumors.Conclusion: All HCC
tumors and 33% of the HB showed an increase in the nuclear localization
of transcription factor YAP. The increased activity of YAP in the nuclei
of tumor cells may indicate a crucial role for YAP in tumor proliferation
and survival. Targeting YAP or its upstream pathway (Hippo) may provide a
novel target for therapy.

