Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ribosome biogenesis is reduced by oncogenic stress in normal cells
and is sufficient to trigger cellular senescence


Senescence is a stable arrest of cell proliferation in which the cells
remain viable and metabolically active but display a constitutive
activation of the DNA damage response and of the tumor suppressors p53
and RB. The senescent phenotype can be induced by multiple stresses
including short telomeres and oncogenes. We have shown that senescence
involves the ERK-dependent degradation of selective proteins involved in
cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis. We called this process
senescence associated protein degradation (SAPD) and it involves many
nucleolar proteins that play a role in ribosome biogenesis. Using tritium
pulse labelling we found a strong decrease of rRNA synthesis in senescent
cells. In addition, qPCR with primers flanking known rRNA processing
sites demonstrated defects in the processing of rRNA in senescent cells.
Knocking down some of the nucleolar proteins degraded in senescence was
sufficient to trigger the process indicating that a decrease in ribosome
biogenesis is causal to cellular senescence. Senescence induced by
depletion of ribosome biogenesis factors was characterized by
accumulation of p53 and in some cases rescued by inhibition of p53 using
shRNAs or the viral oncoprotein E6. We will discuss how reduced ribosome
biogenesis impact protein biosynthesis in senescent cells.

