Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capsaicin inhibits invasion of human non-small cell lung cancer
cells in a TRPV1 receptor independent manner


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) comprises 85% of lung cancer cases and
is characterized by aggressive clinical course and rapid metastasis. One
of the challenges of NSCLCs is that the tumor has frequently metastasized
to distant organs at the time of diagnosis. The invasion of tumor cells
is a key step in the metastatic cascade. Dietary compounds like capsaicin
have been known to cause apoptosis in human NSCLCs. However, the effect
of capsaicin on the pro-invasive ability of NSCLC cells has not yet been
studied. The present study investigates the impact of capsaicin on the
invasion of human NSCLCs. Boyden chamber assays show that capsaicin
inhibits the invasion of NSCLC in a concentration-dependent and
time-dependent manner. The pro-invasive activity of capsaicin was
verified by a second invasion assay, the spherical invasion assay, and
similar results were obtained. The anti-invasive activity of capsaicin
was independent of its growth-inhibitory activity and manifested at a
lower concentration. The heat-sensation activity of capsaicin is mediated
by the transient receptor potential vanilloid (TRPV) family of proteins.
Capsaicin functions as an agonist of the TRPV1 receptor. However, the
anti-invasive activity of capsaicin was not affected by the generalized
TRPV receptor antagonist ruthenium red. Specific antagonists to TRPV1,
namely capsazepine and SB36671, did not reverse the anti-invasive
activity of capsaicin. Taken together, capsaicin potently suppresses
invasion of human NSCLCs independent of the TRPV receptor family.

