Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hsa-miR-140-5p inhibits colorectal cancer stem cell invasion and
metastasis by suppressing Smad2 and autophagy


Colorectal cancer is one of the most common cancers and frequently
metastasizes to the liver. TGF- signaling has been shown to regulate
cancer metastasis by promoting epithelial to mesenchymal transition and
cancer stem cell (CSC) phenotypes. Smad2 is a key element downstream of
TGF-. In this study, we showed that hsa-hsa-miR-140-5p-5p directly
targets Smad2 and overexpression of hsa-miR-140-5p in colorectal cancer
cell lines decreases Smad2 expression level, which leads to decreased
level of cell invasion and proliferation, as well as increasing cell
cycle arrest. Ectopic expression of hsa-miR-140-5p in colorectal CSCs
inhibited CSC growth and sphere formation in vitro by disrupting
autophagy, an essential process for cancer cell survival and
chemoresistance. We have systematically identified the targets of
hsa-miR-140-5p involved in autophagy. Furthermore, overexpression of
hsa-miR-140-5p in CSCs abolished the tumor formation as well as
metastasis in vivo by using subcutaneous xenografts and tail vein
injection of CSCs in NOD/SCID mice. In addition, there is a progressive
loss of hsa-miR-140-5p expression from normal colorectal mucosa to
primary tumor tissues, with further reduction in liver metastatic
tissues, quantified by qRT-PCR. The functional and clinical significance
of hsa-miR-140-5p suggests that it is a key regulator in colorectal
cancer progression and metastasis. As a result, it may have potential as
a novel therapeutic molecule to treat colorectal cancer.

