Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Array-CGH and miRNA expression profiling of triple negative breast
cancer in African-American women


In the African-American (AA) population, an increased incidence and
shorter survival rate of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) has been
reported when compared to White women, with their cancer usually
diagnosed in more advanced stages and with non-localized disease. The
main objective of our study is to identify molecular markers in TNBC in
AA patients that may be associated with their observed disparity in
incidence and mortality rates. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor
sections were obtained from 26 and 28 cases of TNBC from AA and Caucasian
breast cancer patients, respectively, and analyzed for DNA copy number
(Agilent-SurePrint G3 Human CGH Microarray 860K) and miRNA expression
(Nanostring System) alterations. The cases were obtained with clinically
annotated data from the Histopathology Shared Resources at the Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center. The miRNA data was directly integrated with
the array-CGH data from the same cases. Combinatorial target predicted
algorithms in conjunction with functional and pathway annotation
enrichment systems were performed to identify predicted target functions.
A distinct DNA copy number profile was observed between TNBC of AA and
Caucasian cases: the cytobands differentially involved in the AA-TNBC
cases were 7p22.3-22.1, 12p13.33-p11.1, 17q25.3 and 17p13.3-p11.2. Common
cytobands in both groups were 1q21.1-q44, 8q22.1-q24.3, 16p13.33-p11.1
and 20q11.2-q13.12. An average of 30.5 and 16.8 DNA copy alterations were
observed between the AA and Caucasian cases respectively and the miRNA
profiling revealed 209 miRNAs differentially expressed between the
groups. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis separated the cases
by ethnicity (with the exception of 6 cases). Among the miRNAs observed
with higher and lower expression levels in the AA cases were miR150-5p,
miR4286, miR29b3p and miR1283, miR1253, miR378e, respectively. Ingenuity
pathway analysis identified molecular and cellular functions mostly
related to cellular development, growth, proliferation and movement, and
cell death and survival. Clinical pathological data analysis revealed
higher tumor grades and stages in the TNBC of AA women when compared to
Caucasians; association of these parameters with the genomic and
expression miRNA data is being performed. In conclusion, a distinct DNA
copy number and miRNA profile was observed in the AA-TNBC cases when
compared to the Caucasians cases of our study. These initial findings
will provide the basis for the functional analysis of the identified
molecular markers and their potential prognostic and therapeutic impact
for this group. In addition to providing a better understanding of the
biology of their tumors, these analyses can reveal molecular targets for
tailored and ethnic-based clinical trials, which can ultimately lead to
the reduction of the observed cancer disparity.Support: FDA U01 FD004319,
NIH-NIGMS GM101997 and Susan Komen Foundation.

