Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stemness property incurred by inflammatory cytokine confers
poor prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma


Purpose: To unravel the role of inflammatory cytokine IL-6 and IGF-1
receptor (IGF-1R) in expressing stemness-related properties and to
evaluate the prognostic values of pluripotent transcription factor
OCT4/NANOG, and IGF-1R in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).Experimental
Design: Frozen liver and HCC tissue samples were obtained from 191
patients who received curative hepatectomy between 2004 and 2012. Serum
levels of IL-6 were detected using ELISA assays (n = 120). The effects of
IL-6/IGF-1 on stemness expression in HCC were examined using OCT4/NANOG
promoter luciferase reporter, RNA interference, secondary sphere
formation, side population, and xenograft animal models. The OCT4/NANOG
protein and phospho-IGF-1 receptor (p-IGF-1R) in tissues were detected by
western blotting (n = 8) and immunohistochemical staining (n = 85). OCT4,
NANOG, and IGF-1R expression levels in tissues (n = 191) were analyzed by
real-time Q-PCR and was correlated with early tumor recurrence using
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis.Results: A high positive correlation
between the expression levels of OCT4/NANOG and IGF-1R/p-IGF-1R in human
HCC tissues was observed. The concurrent expression of OCT4/NANOG/IGF-1R
was mostly confined to HBV-related HCC (HBV-HCC) and was significantly
correlated with early tumor recurrence. High serum levels of IL-6 were
significantly correlated with high OCT4/NANOG expression. IL-6 stimulated
an autocrine IGF-1/IGF-1R expression STAT3-dependently, which stimulated
stemness-related properties in both the cell lines and the xenografted
mouse tumors. The inhibition of IGF-1R activation by either RNA
interference or by treatment with the inhibitor picropodophyllin (PPP)
significantly suppressed the IL-6-induced stemness-related properties
both in vitro and in vivo.Conclusions: The expression of
pluripotency-related genes is associated with early tumor recurrence and
is regulated by IL-6-induced IGF/IGF-1R activation, particularly in
HBV-HCC.

