Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epistasis analysis of the PTHLH region in European subjects of the
iCOGS breast cancer GWAS suggest multiple genes may be implicated in its
role in breast cancer


Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP), the product of the PTHLH
gene, has long been implicated in breast cancer. Its expression is
thought to favour and, potentially, facilitate metastasis to bone.
Paradoxically, a prospective clinical study clinical suggests that its
production in primary breast cancers is actually protective, affording a
better prognosis than its absence. Multiple recent Genome-Wide
Association Studies (GWAS) have confirmed a single susceptibility locus
immediately upstream of the PTHLH gene to be associated with breast
cancer. This was again reproduced in the recent iCOGS GWAS, which
involved over 90,000 European subjects. In spite of a single SNP,
rs10771399, being uniquely reported and reproduced by prior studies,
comprehensive analysis of the region reveals multiple significant SNPs
stretching for hundreds of kbp across the locus. Epistasis analysis of
this region versus the entire iCOGS array was performed using Plink!.
These results suggest multiple genes may be implicated in the causation
of this signal. Many known functional partners of PTHLH were identified,
including IPO8, RUNX1, RUNX3, S100P, SOX9, SOX11, and SOX14. Multiple
putative functional partners of PTHLH were likewise identified, including
PBXIP1, PMVK, KCNN3, STX12, PPP1R8, CAMTA1, PRKCZ, TGIF1, SPHKAP, MYC,
and STAT3. When taken together, these results offer novel potential
insights into the function of the locus at PTHLH in breast cancer that
may be further investigated.

