Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of intrinsic and acquired resistance to third
generation inhibitors in EGFR mutant NSCLC


Acquired resistance is a fundamental problem limiting the efficacy of
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in EGFR mutant NSCLC. In over half of
the cases of acquired resistance to the first generation inhibitors
gefitinib and erlotinib, a secondary mutation to EGFR, T790M, promotes
resistance by preventing these drugs from fully suppressing the receptor.
The recent development of next generation EGFR TKIs has proven to be a
major breakthrough in the treatment of these patients. In clinical trials
testing the third generation EGFR inhibitors CO-1686 and AZD9291,
response rates of greater than 50% in T790M+ patients have been reported.
While these drugs hold a great deal of promise, they too will be limited,
initially by intrinsic resistance, and eventually by acquired resistance.
To study intrinsic resistance in this setting, we have developed a panel
of cell lines derived from biopsies of T790M+ erlotinib-resistant
patients, tested their sensitivity to third generation inhibitors and
identified biomarkers that predict a lack of response. To study acquired
resistance, we have generated resistance in these cells lines in vitro
and derived additional models directly from patient biopsies following
progression on the clinical trial. Using a combination of functional,
sequencing, and drug screening approaches we have begun to identify
resistance mechanisms to third generation inhibitors.

