Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent TERT promoter mutations in primary central nervous
system lymphoma


Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is a rare extranodal
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) restricted to the CNS and
associated with a poor prognosis. Despite a notable effort contributing
to better characterize the genomic basis of these tumors, few molecular
abnormalities were proposed as predictive or prognostic biomarkers.
Recently, two hotspot mutations, C228T and C250T, and the polymorphism
rs2853669, located within TERT core promoter region have known a growing
interest due to their prognostic value in a wide range of tumors,
including melanoma, hepatocellular carcinoma or glioblastoma.Forty-one
PCNSL tumor samples of newly diagnosed PCNSL were sequenced for C228T and
C250T TERT somatic mutations. TERT promoter mutations status was
correlated with clinical outcome and rs2853669 genotype.We identified
C228T and C250T mutations and rs2853669 genotype in 20%, 9.4% and 50%,
respectively. No case with co-occurrence of C228T and C250T mutations was
identified. C228T mutations, but not C250T, were significantly associated
with shorter overall survival (OS) (median OS = 4.5 months vs 33 months
for non-mutated, p = 0.0048) and progression free survival (PFS) (median
PFS = 3 months vs 11.5 months for non-mutated, p = 0.0260). We found no
association between TERT promoter mutations and the rs2853669 genotype.To
our knowledge, we showed the presence of TERT promoter mutations in PCNSL
for the first time. In addition, C228T promoter mutation was associated
with a poor outcome. Considering that these mutations are known to confer
enhanced TERT promoter activity, we speculate that an increased
telomerase activity could play a role in PCNSL aggressiveness.This work
was granted by the LOC study group network (rseau national de centres
experts des lymphomes primitifs du SNC, INCa), the Ligue contre le Cancer
(Comit du Val dOise), the Fondation pour la Recherche Mdicale
(FDT20140930968), the APHP-CRIC 2013 (assistance publique - hpitaux de
Paris), and the Association pour la Recherche sur les Tumeurs Crbrales.

