Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of N- ZEB1 in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)


Background: ZEB1 (Zn Finger E-box Binding Homeobox) transcription factor
is important in both development and disease, including the TGF-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by which many tumors undergo
metastasis. ZEB1 contains 2 Zn finger domains (ZD1-ZD2) which bind DNA
independently. ZEB1 expresses as two phosphorylated forms important for
its biological role. We had characterized the role of phosphorylated
C-term ZEB1. Aim: Our goal is to uncover the role of signaling pathway/s
in the phosphorylation on N-term ZD1 (N-ZEB1) and characterize the
functional role of N-ZEB1 in the process of EMT in mammary epithelial
cells NMuMG. Results: A 728 aa fragment of N-ZEB1 was overexpressed in
HEK293T cells and Immunoprecipitation with N-ZEB1 antibodies followed by
western blot analysis with anti phospho kinases (AKT, MEK/ERK, PKC or
PKA) substrate Antibodies. The results revealed that N-ZEB1 is solely
phosphorylated by PI3K (AKT), MAPK and PKC pathways. IGF1-mediated
phosphorylation can regulate nuclear localization of C-term ZEB1. Two
N-ZEB1-GFP clones harboring first 490aa (eGFPZ1) and a 2nd clone of 130
aa, eGFPZ2 (included in the former) were transfected to CHO-K1 cells and
treated with inhibitors and activators of kinase pathways for 15-60
minutes in serum free medium. Fluorescence microscopy techniques showed
that IGF-1 induced relocation of a nuclear eGFPZ1 into the cytosol of
CHO-K1 cells; on the contrary, eGFPZ2 was unresponsive to IGF-1. PMA/IONO
(activator of PKC) treatment relocated both clones in the cytosol. Later
on, NMuMG cells were used to investigate the role of N-ZEB1 in EMT. These
epithelial cells, that can turn into mesenchymal type under TGF
treatment, were stably transfected with eGFPZ2 or empty vector (control).
The epithelial markers E-cadherin and actin assessed by Western blot and
confocal microscopy were diminished or absent in eGFPZ2 cells. The
activity of Matrix Metallo Proteases 2 was also increased in NMuMG-GFPZ2
cells. Also, proliferation, migration and invasion were significantly
increased (PBackground: ZEB1 (Zn Finger E-box Binding Homeobox)
transcription factor is important in both development and disease,
including the TGF-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by
which many tumors undergo metastasis. ZEB1 contains 2 Zn finger domains
(ZD1-ZD2) which bind DNA independently. ZEB1 expresses as two
phosphorylated forms important for its biological role. We had
characterized the role of phosphorylated C-term ZEB1. Aim: Our goal is to
uncover the role of signaling pathway/s in the phosphorylation on N-term
ZD1 (N-ZEB1) and characterize the functional role of N-ZEB1 in the
process of EMT in mammary epithelial cells NMuMG. Results: A 728 aa
fragment of N-ZEB1 was overexpressed in HEK293T cells and
Immunoprecipitation with N-ZEB1 antibodies followed by western blot
analysis with anti phospho kinases (AKT, MEK/ERK, PKC or PKA) substrate
Antibodies. The results revealed that N-ZEB1 is solely phosphorylated by
PI3K (AKT), MAPK and PKC pathways. IGF1-mediated phosphorylation can
regulate nuclear localization of C-term ZEB1. Two N-ZEB1-GFP clones
harboring first 490aa (eGFPZ1) and a 2nd clone of 130 aa, eGFPZ2
(included in the former) were transfected to CHO-K1 cells and treated
with inhibitors and activators of kinase pathways for 15-60 minutes in
serum free medium. Fluorescence microscopy techniques showed that IGF-1
induced relocation of a nuclear eGFPZ1 into the cytosol of CHO-K1 cells;
on the contrary, eGFPZ2 was unresponsive to IGF-1. PMA/IONO (activator of
PKC) treatment relocated both clones in the cytosol. Later on, NMuMG
cells were used to investigate the role of N-ZEB1 in EMT. These
epithelial cells, that can turn into mesenchymal type under TGF
treatment, were stably transfected with eGFPZ2 or empty vector (control).
The epithelial markers E-cadherin and actin assessed by Western blot and
confocal microscopy were diminished or absent in eGFPZ2 cells. The
activity of Matrix Metallo Proteases 2 was also increased in NMuMG-GFPZ2
cells. Also, proliferation, migration and invasion were significantly
increased (P<0.001, PBackground: ZEB1 (Zn Finger E-box Binding Homeobox)
transcription factor is important in both development and disease,
including the TGF-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by
which many tumors undergo metastasis. ZEB1 contains 2 Zn finger domains
(ZD1-ZD2) which bind DNA independently. ZEB1 expresses as two
phosphorylated forms important for its biological role. We had
characterized the role of phosphorylated C-term ZEB1. Aim: Our goal is to
uncover the role of signaling pathway/s in the phosphorylation on N-term
ZD1 (N-ZEB1) and characterize the functional role of N-ZEB1 in the
process of EMT in mammary epithelial cells NMuMG. Results: A 728 aa
fragment of N-ZEB1 was overexpressed in HEK293T cells and
Immunoprecipitation with N-ZEB1 antibodies followed by western blot
analysis with anti phospho kinases (AKT, MEK/ERK, PKC or PKA) substrate
Antibodies. The results revealed that N-ZEB1 is solely phosphorylated by
PI3K (AKT), MAPK and PKC pathways. IGF1-mediated phosphorylation can
regulate nuclear localization of C-term ZEB1. Two N-ZEB1-GFP clones
harboring first 490aa (eGFPZ1) and a 2nd clone of 130 aa, eGFPZ2
(included in the former) were transfected to CHO-K1 cells and treated
with inhibitors and activators of kinase pathways for 15-60 minutes in
serum free medium. Fluorescence microscopy techniques showed that IGF-1
induced relocation of a nuclear eGFPZ1 into the cytosol of CHO-K1 cells;
on the contrary, eGFPZ2 was unresponsive to IGF-1. PMA/IONO (activator of
PKC) treatment relocated both clones in the cytosol. Later on, NMuMG
cells were used to investigate the role of N-ZEB1 in EMT. These
epithelial cells, that can turn into mesenchymal type under TGF
treatment, were stably transfected with eGFPZ2 or empty vector (control).
The epithelial markers E-cadherin and actin assessed by Western blot and
confocal microscopy were diminished or absent in eGFPZ2 cells. The
activity of Matrix Metallo Proteases 2 was also increased in NMuMG-GFPZ2
cells. Also, proliferation, migration and invasion were significantly
increased (P<0.001, P<0.001 and PBackground: ZEB1 (Zn Finger E-box
Binding Homeobox) transcription factor is important in both development
and disease, including the TGF-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) by which many tumors undergo metastasis. ZEB1 contains 2 Zn finger
domains (ZD1-ZD2) which bind DNA independently. ZEB1 expresses as two
phosphorylated forms important for its biological role. We had
characterized the role of phosphorylated C-term ZEB1. Aim: Our goal is to
uncover the role of signaling pathway/s in the phosphorylation on N-term
ZD1 (N-ZEB1) and characterize the functional role of N-ZEB1 in the
process of EMT in mammary epithelial cells NMuMG. Results: A 728 aa
fragment of N-ZEB1 was overexpressed in HEK293T cells and
Immunoprecipitation with N-ZEB1 antibodies followed by western blot
analysis with anti phospho kinases (AKT, MEK/ERK, PKC or PKA) substrate
Antibodies. The results revealed that N-ZEB1 is solely phosphorylated by
PI3K (AKT), MAPK and PKC pathways. IGF1-mediated phosphorylation can
regulate nuclear localization of C-term ZEB1. Two N-ZEB1-GFP clones
harboring first 490aa (eGFPZ1) and a 2nd clone of 130 aa, eGFPZ2
(included in the former) were transfected to CHO-K1 cells and treated
with inhibitors and activators of kinase pathways for 15-60 minutes in
serum free medium. Fluorescence microscopy techniques showed that IGF-1
induced relocation of a nuclear eGFPZ1 into the cytosol of CHO-K1 cells;
on the contrary, eGFPZ2 was unresponsive to IGF-1. PMA/IONO (activator of
PKC) treatment relocated both clones in the cytosol. Later on, NMuMG
cells were used to investigate the role of N-ZEB1 in EMT. These
epithelial cells, that can turn into mesenchymal type under TGF
treatment, were stably transfected with eGFPZ2 or empty vector (control).
The epithelial markers E-cadherin and actin assessed by Western blot and
confocal microscopy were diminished or absent in eGFPZ2 cells. The
activity of Matrix Metallo Proteases 2 was also increased in NMuMG-GFPZ2
cells. Also, proliferation, migration and invasion were significantly
increased (P<0.001, P<0.001 and P<0.05, respectively) in NMuMG-GFPZ2
cells vs. controls. Taking together, these results show that the cells
were induced to EMT by N-ZEB1.Conclusions: We have identified a small
fragment in N-ZEB1 that is able to elicit the EMT program in a TGF
independent manner. In addition, changes in ZEB1 cellular localization
induced by either PKC or IGF-1 could regulate this transcription factor
biological activity.

