Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in young osteosarcoma
cases


Osteosarcoma, the most common primary bone malignancy, has a bimodal age
distribution, with a primary peak in adolescence and a smaller peak in
the elderly. The etiologic contribution of germline genetic variation to
osteosarcoma is not well-understood. It occurs at higher than expected
frequencies in individuals with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) cancer
predisposition syndrome. Approximately 70% of classic LFS families have
germline TP53 mutations. Two previous studies reported that 3% of young
osteosarcoma cases (Osteosarcoma, the most common primary bone
malignancy, has a bimodal age distribution, with a primary peak in
adolescence and a smaller peak in the elderly. The etiologic contribution
of germline genetic variation to osteosarcoma is not well-understood. It
occurs at higher than expected frequencies in individuals with the
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) cancer predisposition syndrome. Approximately
70% of classic LFS families have germline TP53 mutations. Two previous
studies reported that 3% of young osteosarcoma cases (<20 years old, N =
235) and 7% of all aged cases (N = 95) had germline TP53 mutations.We
determined the prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in 765 unselected
osteosarcoma cases. DNA was extracted from blood and TP53 sequenced using
custom Ampliseq panels. Variants were validated with Sanger sequencing.
The IARC germline TP53 database was used to identify TP53 mutations
reported in families with LFS (LFS-associated mutations). Variants were
considered likely LFS-associated mutations if absent from publically
available databases (ESP and 1,000 Genomes Project) and predicted
non-functional or deleterious using in silico algorithms. Variants were
considered rare exonic variants if their minor allele frequency (MAF) was
Osteosarcoma, the most common primary bone malignancy, has a bimodal age
distribution, with a primary peak in adolescence and a smaller peak in
the elderly. The etiologic contribution of germline genetic variation to
osteosarcoma is not well-understood. It occurs at higher than expected
frequencies in individuals with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) cancer
predisposition syndrome. Approximately 70% of classic LFS families have
germline TP53 mutations. Two previous studies reported that 3% of young
osteosarcoma cases (<20 years old, N = 235) and 7% of all aged cases (N =
95) had germline TP53 mutations.We determined the prevalence of germline
TP53 mutations in 765 unselected osteosarcoma cases. DNA was extracted
from blood and TP53 sequenced using custom Ampliseq panels. Variants were
validated with Sanger sequencing. The IARC germline TP53 database was
used to identify TP53 mutations reported in families with LFS
(LFS-associated mutations). Variants were considered likely
LFS-associated mutations if absent from publically available databases
(ESP and 1,000 Genomes Project) and predicted non-functional or
deleterious using in silico algorithms. Variants were considered rare
exonic variants if their minor allele frequency (MAF) was <2% in public
databases and they had uncertain clinical significance.There were 32
LFS-associated or rare TP53 variants in 62 osteosarcoma cases. The
frequency of cases with an LFS or likely LFS-associated mutation and/or
rare exonic variant was 8.1%. Notably, all 32 TP53 variants were present
in cases Osteosarcoma, the most common primary bone malignancy, has a
bimodal age distribution, with a primary peak in adolescence and a
smaller peak in the elderly. The etiologic contribution of germline
genetic variation to osteosarcoma is not well-understood. It occurs at
higher than expected frequencies in individuals with the Li-Fraumeni
syndrome (LFS) cancer predisposition syndrome. Approximately 70% of
classic LFS families have germline TP53 mutations. Two previous studies
reported that 3% of young osteosarcoma cases (<20 years old, N = 235) and
7% of all aged cases (N = 95) had germline TP53 mutations.We determined
the prevalence of germline TP53 mutations in 765 unselected osteosarcoma
cases. DNA was extracted from blood and TP53 sequenced using custom
Ampliseq panels. Variants were validated with Sanger sequencing. The IARC
germline TP53 database was used to identify TP53 mutations reported in
families with LFS (LFS-associated mutations). Variants were considered
likely LFS-associated mutations if absent from publically available
databases (ESP and 1,000 Genomes Project) and predicted non-functional or
deleterious using in silico algorithms. Variants were considered rare
exonic variants if their minor allele frequency (MAF) was <2% in public
databases and they had uncertain clinical significance.There were 32
LFS-associated or rare TP53 variants in 62 osteosarcoma cases. The
frequency of cases with an LFS or likely LFS-associated mutation and/or
rare exonic variant was 8.1%. Notably, all 32 TP53 variants were present
in cases <30 years of age (young cases, N = 505), 9.5% of young cases,
compared with none in older cases (N = 51; POsteosarcoma, the most common
primary bone malignancy, has a bimodal age distribution, with a primary
peak in adolescence and a smaller peak in the elderly. The etiologic
contribution of germline genetic variation to osteosarcoma is not
well-understood. It occurs at higher than expected frequencies in
individuals with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) cancer predisposition
syndrome. Approximately 70% of classic LFS families have germline TP53
mutations. Two previous studies reported that 3% of young osteosarcoma
cases (<20 years old, N = 235) and 7% of all aged cases (N = 95) had
germline TP53 mutations.We determined the prevalence of germline TP53
mutations in 765 unselected osteosarcoma cases. DNA was extracted from
blood and TP53 sequenced using custom Ampliseq panels. Variants were
validated with Sanger sequencing. The IARC germline TP53 database was
used to identify TP53 mutations reported in families with LFS
(LFS-associated mutations). Variants were considered likely
LFS-associated mutations if absent from publically available databases
(ESP and 1,000 Genomes Project) and predicted non-functional or
deleterious using in silico algorithms. Variants were considered rare
exonic variants if their minor allele frequency (MAF) was <2% in public
databases and they had uncertain clinical significance.There were 32
LFS-associated or rare TP53 variants in 62 osteosarcoma cases. The
frequency of cases with an LFS or likely LFS-associated mutation and/or
rare exonic variant was 8.1%. Notably, all 32 TP53 variants were present
in cases <30 years of age (young cases, N = 505), 9.5% of young cases,
compared with none in older cases (N = 51; P<0.001). TP53 variants did
not have an even distribution within the first three age decades in young
cases. LFS or likely LFS-associated mutations, which confer significant
cancer risk, had the highest frequency in patients aged 0-9 years (4.8%
of all cases, and 6.1% of European cases), and rare exonic variants were
most frequent in patients aged 10-19 years (6.1% of all cases, and 5.6%
of European cases).A logistic regression case-case analysis identified a
novel significant association between a rare TP53 variant, rs1800372
(p.R213R), and metastasis at diagnosis in cases of European ancestry
(odds ratio [OR] 4.27, 95% CI 1.2-15.5, P = 0.026). We additionally
confirmed that a common exonic variant, rs1042522 (p.P72R), was
significantly associated with osteosarcoma risk (OR 1.22, 95% CI 1.1-1.4,
P = 0.0098) and poorer survival (HR 1.35, 95% CI 1.00-1.83, P =
0.048).Our data suggest that genetic susceptibility to young onset
osteosarcoma is distinct from adult onset osteosarcoma. The high TP53
mutation prevalence we identified in osteosarcoma cases aged
Osteosarcoma, the most common primary bone malignancy, has a bimodal age
distribution, with a primary peak in adolescence and a smaller peak in
the elderly. The etiologic contribution of germline genetic variation to
osteosarcoma is not well-understood. It occurs at higher than expected
frequencies in individuals with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) cancer
predisposition syndrome. Approximately 70% of classic LFS families have
germline TP53 mutations. Two previous studies reported that 3% of young
osteosarcoma cases (<20 years old, N = 235) and 7% of all aged cases (N =
95) had germline TP53 mutations.We determined the prevalence of germline
TP53 mutations in 765 unselected osteosarcoma cases. DNA was extracted
from blood and TP53 sequenced using custom Ampliseq panels. Variants were
validated with Sanger sequencing. The IARC germline TP53 database was
used to identify TP53 mutations reported in families with LFS
(LFS-associated mutations). Variants were considered likely
LFS-associated mutations if absent from publically available databases
(ESP and 1,000 Genomes Project) and predicted non-functional or
deleterious using in silico algorithms. Variants were considered rare
exonic variants if their minor allele frequency (MAF) was <2% in public
databases and they had uncertain clinical significance.There were 32
LFS-associated or rare TP53 variants in 62 osteosarcoma cases. The
frequency of cases with an LFS or likely LFS-associated mutation and/or
rare exonic variant was 8.1%. Notably, all 32 TP53 variants were present
in cases <30 years of age (young cases, N = 505), 9.5% of young cases,
compared with none in older cases (N = 51; P<0.001). TP53 variants did
not have an even distribution within the first three age decades in young
cases. LFS or likely LFS-associated mutations, which confer significant
cancer risk, had the highest frequency in patients aged 0-9 years (4.8%
of all cases, and 6.1% of European cases), and rare exonic variants were
most frequent in patients aged 10-19 years (6.1% of all cases, and 5.6%
of European cases).A logistic regression case-case analysis identified a
novel significant association between a rare TP53 variant, rs1800372
(p.R213R), and metastasis at diagnosis in cases of European ancestry
(odds ratio [OR] 4.27, 95% CI 1.2-15.5, P = 0.026). We additionally
confirmed that a common exonic variant, rs1042522 (p.P72R), was
significantly associated with osteosarcoma risk (OR 1.22, 95% CI 1.1-1.4,
P = 0.0098) and poorer survival (HR 1.35, 95% CI 1.00-1.83, P =
0.048).Our data suggest that genetic susceptibility to young onset
osteosarcoma is distinct from adult onset osteosarcoma. The high TP53
mutation prevalence we identified in osteosarcoma cases aged <20 years of
9.7% is significantly greater than the previously reported prevalence of
3% in unselected cases (P = 0.002). Based on these findings, genetic
counseling and TP53-mutation testing of all young patients with
osteosarcoma should be considered.

