Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining androgen deprivation with immune checkpoint blockade
delays the development of castration resistance in a murine model of
prostate cancer


Androgen deprivation therapy induces immune cell infiltration in human
prostate cancer. These findings suggest that immunotherapy may be most
efficacious when administered concurrently with androgen deprivation,
early in disease progression. We used a subcutaneous allograft model of
murine prostate cancer (Myc-Cap), which mimics the development of human
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progression to study the
anti-tumor effects of concurrent hormonal/immunotherapy. Implanted
Myc-Cap tumors initially respond to androgen deprivation (degarelix
acetate or bilateral orchiectomy), but mice eventually progress with
CRPC. To test the hypothesis that the combination of androgen deprivation
and immune checkpoint blockade could mediate pre-clinical benefit, we
treated mice with either anti-PD-1, a depleting anti-CTLA-4 antibody
(IgG2A), a non-depleting anti-CTLA-4 antibody (IgG1 D265A) or antibody
combinations in the peri-castration period, then followed mice for the
development of castration-resistant disease. Interestingly, the depleting
anti-CTLA-4 antibody with/without anti-PD-1 antibody was strikingly
effective in preventing the emergence of castration-resistant disease.
The median castration-resistance free survival was 22 days in mice
treated with androgen deprivation alone versus 32 days in mice treated
with androgen deprivation and depleting anti-CTLA-4 antibody (PAndrogen
deprivation therapy induces immune cell infiltration in human prostate
cancer. These findings suggest that immunotherapy may be most efficacious
when administered concurrently with androgen deprivation, early in
disease progression. We used a subcutaneous allograft model of murine
prostate cancer (Myc-Cap), which mimics the development of human
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progression to study the
anti-tumor effects of concurrent hormonal/immunotherapy. Implanted
Myc-Cap tumors initially respond to androgen deprivation (degarelix
acetate or bilateral orchiectomy), but mice eventually progress with
CRPC. To test the hypothesis that the combination of androgen deprivation
and immune checkpoint blockade could mediate pre-clinical benefit, we
treated mice with either anti-PD-1, a depleting anti-CTLA-4 antibody
(IgG2A), a non-depleting anti-CTLA-4 antibody (IgG1 D265A) or antibody
combinations in the peri-castration period, then followed mice for the
development of castration-resistant disease. Interestingly, the depleting
anti-CTLA-4 antibody with/without anti-PD-1 antibody was strikingly
effective in preventing the emergence of castration-resistant disease.
The median castration-resistance free survival was 22 days in mice
treated with androgen deprivation alone versus 32 days in mice treated
with androgen deprivation and depleting anti-CTLA-4 antibody (P<0.05,
compared to androgen deprivation alone) versus 30 days in mice treated
with androgen deprivation, depleting anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 (PAndrogen
deprivation therapy induces immune cell infiltration in human prostate
cancer. These findings suggest that immunotherapy may be most efficacious
when administered concurrently with androgen deprivation, early in
disease progression. We used a subcutaneous allograft model of murine
prostate cancer (Myc-Cap), which mimics the development of human
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progression to study the
anti-tumor effects of concurrent hormonal/immunotherapy. Implanted
Myc-Cap tumors initially respond to androgen deprivation (degarelix
acetate or bilateral orchiectomy), but mice eventually progress with
CRPC. To test the hypothesis that the combination of androgen deprivation
and immune checkpoint blockade could mediate pre-clinical benefit, we
treated mice with either anti-PD-1, a depleting anti-CTLA-4 antibody
(IgG2A), a non-depleting anti-CTLA-4 antibody (IgG1 D265A) or antibody
combinations in the peri-castration period, then followed mice for the
development of castration-resistant disease. Interestingly, the depleting
anti-CTLA-4 antibody with/without anti-PD-1 antibody was strikingly
effective in preventing the emergence of castration-resistant disease.
The median castration-resistance free survival was 22 days in mice
treated with androgen deprivation alone versus 32 days in mice treated
with androgen deprivation and depleting anti-CTLA-4 antibody (P<0.05,
compared to androgen deprivation alone) versus 30 days in mice treated
with androgen deprivation, depleting anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 (P<0.05,
compared to androgen deprivation alone; non-significant, compared to
androgen deprivation and depleting anti-CTLA-4 antibody).
Immunologically, we found that castration increases intratumoral
infiltration of helper, cytotoxic and regulatory T cells (Tregs), natural
killer cells, and macrophages, as well as effector cytokine production of
T cells. We also found up-regulated expression of CTLA-4 and PD-1 as well
as their respective ligands. Mechanistic studies showed that androgen
deprivation combined with depleting anti-CTLA-4 /anti-PD-1 significantly
reduces intratumoral Tregs and increases interferon-- or tumor necrosis
factor-- producing T cells in the tumor and its draining lymph node. In
conclusion, while androgen deprivation renders the tumor microenvironment
more immunogenic; the combination of androgen deprivation and depleting
anti-CTLA-4 antibody with/without anti-PD-1 can significantly delay the
development of CRPC.

