Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of long-term chloroquine chemotherapy in a preclinical
model of PTEN-deficient prostate cancer


Chloroquine (CQ) and its derivative hydroxychloroquine are drugs that
have been used to treat malaria and rheumatism. These drugs are also
capable of producing antitumor effects in preclinical cancer models. In
addition to mediating antitumor effects by impairing autophagy in certain
cancer cells types, these agents have also been shown to effect antitumor
responses independent of autophagy inhibition. Treatment strategies using
CQ and its derivative alone or in combination with other anticancer drugs
are being considered for clinical applications. However, the safety and
long-term effects of CQ therapy for the treatment of cancers are unknown.
In this study, we investigated the safety and efficacy of long-term CQ
therapy in a PTEN-deficient model of prostate cancer.
Twenty-eight-week-old tumor-bearing PTEN conditional knockout mice
(PSA-CRE+/PTENf/f) were treated with CQ in the drinking water. Based on
daily water consumption, the daily oral dose was adjusted to 100 mg/kg in
distilled water. Timed sacrifices were scheduled 2, 4, 8, 16 and 32 weeks
after the initiation of treatments and subset of mice was used for
survival analysis. Mice receiving CQ were healthy in appearance and
normal in demeanor. Compared to controls, mice receiving CQ began to
exhibit lower body weights over the course of treatment beginning at 5
weeks after the initiation of treatment. At the completion of the study,
mice receiving CQ averaged 27.3 grams of bodyweight compared to 33.8
grams in the control group (PChloroquine (CQ) and its derivative
hydroxychloroquine are drugs that have been used to treat malaria and
rheumatism. These drugs are also capable of producing antitumor effects
in preclinical cancer models. In addition to mediating antitumor effects
by impairing autophagy in certain cancer cells types, these agents have
also been shown to effect antitumor responses independent of autophagy
inhibition. Treatment strategies using CQ and its derivative alone or in
combination with other anticancer drugs are being considered for clinical
applications. However, the safety and long-term effects of CQ therapy for
the treatment of cancers are unknown. In this study, we investigated the
safety and efficacy of long-term CQ therapy in a PTEN-deficient model of
prostate cancer. Twenty-eight-week-old tumor-bearing PTEN conditional
knockout mice (PSA-CRE+/PTENf/f) were treated with CQ in the drinking
water. Based on daily water consumption, the daily oral dose was adjusted
to 100 mg/kg in distilled water. Timed sacrifices were scheduled 2, 4, 8,
16 and 32 weeks after the initiation of treatments and subset of mice was
used for survival analysis. Mice receiving CQ were healthy in appearance
and normal in demeanor. Compared to controls, mice receiving CQ began to
exhibit lower body weights over the course of treatment beginning at 5
weeks after the initiation of treatment. At the completion of the study,
mice receiving CQ averaged 27.3 grams of bodyweight compared to 33.8
grams in the control group (P<0.001). However, chronic treatment with CQ
for 32 weeks inhibited tumor burden by 18.4% (P = 0.0118). For the
long-term survival studies, median survival for control and CQ treated
mice was 83.4 and 82.0 days, respectively (P = 0.782). Bodyweights of CQ
mice were significantly reduced (44.8% of control, P = 0.029). Tumor
burden at time of death decreased from 15.9% 5.9 of bodyweight in control
mice to 2.5% 0.6 in CQ-treated mice (PChloroquine (CQ) and its derivative
hydroxychloroquine are drugs that have been used to treat malaria and
rheumatism. These drugs are also capable of producing antitumor effects
in preclinical cancer models. In addition to mediating antitumor effects
by impairing autophagy in certain cancer cells types, these agents have
also been shown to effect antitumor responses independent of autophagy
inhibition. Treatment strategies using CQ and its derivative alone or in
combination with other anticancer drugs are being considered for clinical
applications. However, the safety and long-term effects of CQ therapy for
the treatment of cancers are unknown. In this study, we investigated the
safety and efficacy of long-term CQ therapy in a PTEN-deficient model of
prostate cancer. Twenty-eight-week-old tumor-bearing PTEN conditional
knockout mice (PSA-CRE+/PTENf/f) were treated with CQ in the drinking
water. Based on daily water consumption, the daily oral dose was adjusted
to 100 mg/kg in distilled water. Timed sacrifices were scheduled 2, 4, 8,
16 and 32 weeks after the initiation of treatments and subset of mice was
used for survival analysis. Mice receiving CQ were healthy in appearance
and normal in demeanor. Compared to controls, mice receiving CQ began to
exhibit lower body weights over the course of treatment beginning at 5
weeks after the initiation of treatment. At the completion of the study,
mice receiving CQ averaged 27.3 grams of bodyweight compared to 33.8
grams in the control group (P<0.001). However, chronic treatment with CQ
for 32 weeks inhibited tumor burden by 18.4% (P = 0.0118). For the
long-term survival studies, median survival for control and CQ treated
mice was 83.4 and 82.0 days, respectively (P = 0.782). Bodyweights of CQ
mice were significantly reduced (44.8% of control, P = 0.029). Tumor
burden at time of death decreased from 15.9% 5.9 of bodyweight in control
mice to 2.5% 0.6 in CQ-treated mice (P<0.05). In summary, our studies
show that long-term chronic administration of CQ was capable of
inhibiting growth of PTEN-deficient tumors, however, CQ was poorly
tolerated by mice and did not improve overall survival. Thus, caution
should be exercised to carefully assess the safety and tolerability of
this drug when using it long-term in human clinical trials.

