Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OTX015, a novel BET-bromodomain (BET-BRD) inhibitor, displays
antitumoral effects in orthotopic and heterotopic models of human
glioblastoma


Background: BRD2 and BRD4, members of the BET family of bromodomains,
were recently described to be significantly increased in glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM), the most common primary adult brain cancer. OTX015
(OncoEthix SA, Switzerland), a novel BET-BRD2/3/4 inhibitor, is currently
being evaluated in clinical Phase Ib studies in hematologic malignancies
and solid tumors, including GBM. Here, we report the effects of OTX015 in
vitro as a single agent and in combination with temozolomide (TMZ) in
human U87MG cells, along with in vivo activity in heterotopic and
orthotopic U87MG models.Material and Methods: GI50s were determined in
U87MG cells after 72 h with OTX015 or JQ1 with MTT assays. Combination
indexes of simultaneous and sequential schedules of OTX015 with TMZ were
determined using Chou & Talalay analysis. For orthotopic in vivo
experiments, 105 U87MG cells were injected in the frontal lobe of nude
mice and 5 days later mice were randomized. For the xenograft model,
5.106 U87MG cells were injected into the right lateral flank and mice
were randomized when tumors reached 100 mm3. Treatment groups (n = 6)
were: vehicle PBS, OTX015 50 mg/kg/BID and 100 mg/kg/daily, or TMZ 100
mg/kg/daily (ip, days 6-10). Median survival was determined in the
orthotopic model by the Kaplan-Meier method. Tumor volume was evaluated 3
times weekly in the flank model. An independent in vivo experiment was
done for the evaluation of OTX015 levels in tumor and normal tissues,
animals were sacrificed after 7 days of treatment at 50 mg/kg/BID, using
ultra performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass
spectrometry.Results: OTX015 displayed antiproliferative effects in U87MG
cells with GI50 values of 0.9M versus 2.1M for JQ1. OTX015/TMZ
combination studies revealed synergistic activity when TMZ was
administered after OTX015. OTX015 significantly increased survival in
mice bearing orthotopic U87MG cells, with median survival of 28 and 25
days for 50 and 100 mg/kg/daily OTX015, respectively vs 19.5 days in
control mice. Furthermore, in the heterotopic model, OTX015 treatment at
both doses, significantly decreased tumor growth at day 22. No major side
effects were seen during in vivo OTX015 treatment. In orthotopic models,
OTX015 plasmatic levels were 1365.3 (481)ng/mL, while in tumor and
peritumoral brain tissues OTX015 levels were 995.0(549) and
62.97(10.3)ng/g tissue, respectively. In the flank model, OTX015 tumor
levels were about 1.2 times higher than in peripheral muscle tissue and
plasma levels [848.1(127)ng/mL] and about 7 times higher than in normal
brain tissue.Conclusion: We demonstrated the passage of OTX015 across the
blood-brain barrier, as well as preferential binding of OTX015 to tumor
tissue. Oral OTX015 treatment significantly enhanced survival and
decreased tumor growth in GBM xenograft models, highlighting the
therapeutic potential of OTX015 in GBM patients.

