Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Checkpoint inhibitor combinations in a human mixed leukocyte
reaction


In an effort to identify effective target combinations, molecules
specific for several immuno-oncology targets were combined in vitro using
a mixed leukocyte reaction (MLR) assay. Briefly, 20 different healthy
human peripheral blood mononuclear cell donor pairs were tested for
proliferation and cytokine release in the presence of each molecule alone
and in combination. The collection of agents targeted CTLA-4, PD-1,
PD-L1, and CD73. Examples of significant (pIn an effort to identify
effective target combinations, molecules specific for several
immuno-oncology targets were combined in vitro using a mixed leukocyte
reaction (MLR) assay. Briefly, 20 different healthy human peripheral
blood mononuclear cell donor pairs were tested for proliferation and
cytokine release in the presence of each molecule alone and in
combination. The collection of agents targeted CTLA-4, PD-1, PD-L1, and
CD73. Examples of significant (p<0.05) synergy as well as antagonism and
additivity were observed. In addition the phenotype and genotype of the
MLR donor PBMCs were characterized. The results from this study are
significant for at least two reasons: 1) In contrast to murine syngeneic
models they represent aspects of multiple different human donor immune
responses and 2) In contrast to purified T-cell assays they represent an
assay system in which both the lymphoid and myeloid/innate immune
compartments play a crucial role, and so better recapitulate a
physiological T-cell response. Furthermore, these results provide
information at the human population level, offering a glimpse of
responder and non-responder population profiles. This information is
impossible to obtain from the currently available collection of syngeneic
mouse models.

