Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation of SLAP by the KIT-D816V oncogenic mutant
suppresses SLAP-mediated negative regulation of KIT signaling


The SRC-like-adaptor protein (SLAP) is a negative regulator of mitogenic
signaling. SLAP shares considerable structural homology with SRC, apart
from lacking a kinase domain. SLAP is known to be expressed in a variety
of cells and regulates cell surface receptor signaling by direct
association. Here we show that SLAP interacts with the type III receptor
tyrosine kinase KIT and also with its oncogenic mutant KIT-D816V. This
mutant has been described as a driving mutant in several cancers
including mastocytosis and certain types of acute myeloid leukemia. The
association is mediated through phosphotyrosine residues in KIT and the
SLAP-SH2 domain. Despite high structural similarity between SLAP and SRC,
these tyrosine residues are different from the ones mediating SRC binding
to KIT. This association results in increased ubiquitination and
degradation of KIT. siRNA-mediated depletion of SLAP selectively
potentiates wild-type KIT downstream signaling but not KIT-D816V
signaling. Although SLAP displays similar localization pattern with both
ligand-stimulated KIT and KIT-D816V, only KIT-D816V can phosphorylate
SLAP on three tyrosine residues (Y120, Y258 and Y273). This
phosphorylation takes place when SLAP interacts with KIT-D816V. Mutations
on these tyrosine residues in SLAP restores normal SLAP regulation on
oncogenic KIT-D816V. Taken together, our data suggest that the oncogenic
mutant of KIT can bypass normal cellular regulation of signaling by
phosphorylating regulatory proteins such as SLAP.

