Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of existing targeted agents that inhibit NTRK and
ROS1 in lung cancer


All patients with oncogenic driver mutations in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) who are treated with a targeted agent will eventually
develop resistance. In an effort to identify inhibitors of NTRK1 and
ROS1, which are inappropriately activated in NSCLC, we created and
screened a library of existing targeted drugs against BaF3 cells
transformed with these oncogenes. This screen identified the FDA-approved
drug cabozantinib as a potent inhibitor of CD74-ROS1 (IC50 = 9 nM),
including the crizotinib-resistant mutants G2032R (IC50 = 26 nM) and
L2026M (IC50 = 11 nM), with no inhibition of the parental BaF3 cells
(IC50 > 10 M). AP26113, a dual ALK/EGFR inhibitor undergoing phase I/II
clinical trials, also potently inhibited CD74-ROS1 (IC50 = 4 nM),
including the crizotinib-resistant mutants G2032R (IC50 = 206 nM) and
L2026M (IC50 = 84 nM), with weak inhibition of the parental BaF3 cells
(IC50 > 1 M). Both cabozantinib and AP26113 inhibited ROS1
autophosphorylation and downstream ERK activation in CD74-ROS transformed
BaF3 cells and in the ROS1-rearranged NSCLC cell line HCC78. The FGFR3
inhibitor dovitinib, which is in phase III clinical trials for renal cell
carcinoma, potently inhibited NTRK1 compared to parental BaF3 cells (IC50
= 69 nM vs > 1 M), and blocked NTRK1 autophosphorylation and ERK
activation. While acquired resistance to targeted therapies is a major
clinical problem, this study highlights other existing agents that may
overcome resistance, and identifies several promising candidates for
clinical trials.

