Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIM-1 kinase regulates vitamin D receptor signaling in human renal
carcinoma cells


Dysregulation of vitamin D signaling and metabolism enzymes is a frequent
change in many cancers and may confound approaches to vitamin -D based
therapies. The mechanisms by which aberrant vitamin D signaling and
metabolism lead to resistance to vitamin D action are poorly understood.
The kidney plays a critical role in vitamin D synthesis and metabolism;
in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cells vitamin D metabolism is dysregulated.
Recently, we discovered that an oncogenic protein kinase PIM-1 is
involved in vitamin D-induced expression of 24-hydroxylase, a key
catalytic enzyme of vitamin D encoded by CYP24A1 gene, in bladder and
prostate cancer. To study the impact of PIM1 on vitamin D signaling and
vitamin D-mediated anti-tumor activity in RCC, we analyzed 4 human renal
cell carcinoma cell lines (Caki-1, ACHN, A498 and 786-O) and 25 samples
of human RCC tumor tissue and 13 benign kidney tissues (including 10
matched tumor and benign tissue samples) by qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry
(IHC), Western blot analysis, MTT and clonogenic assays. VDR mRNA and
protein were detected in all RCC cell lines. IHC showed that VDR was
strongly expressed in the normal kidney tissues, but decreased in RCC
tissues. As expected, VDR expression was significantly increased by
treatment with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D3) in RCC cell lines. MTT
and clonogenic assays showed that 1,25D3 inhibited RCC cell growth
(pDysregulation of vitamin D signaling and metabolism enzymes is a
frequent change in many cancers and may confound approaches to vitamin -D
based therapies. The mechanisms by which aberrant vitamin D signaling and
metabolism lead to resistance to vitamin D action are poorly understood.
The kidney plays a critical role in vitamin D synthesis and metabolism;
in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cells vitamin D metabolism is dysregulated.
Recently, we discovered that an oncogenic protein kinase PIM-1 is
involved in vitamin D-induced expression of 24-hydroxylase, a key
catalytic enzyme of vitamin D encoded by CYP24A1 gene, in bladder and
prostate cancer. To study the impact of PIM1 on vitamin D signaling and
vitamin D-mediated anti-tumor activity in RCC, we analyzed 4 human renal
cell carcinoma cell lines (Caki-1, ACHN, A498 and 786-O) and 25 samples
of human RCC tumor tissue and 13 benign kidney tissues (including 10
matched tumor and benign tissue samples) by qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry
(IHC), Western blot analysis, MTT and clonogenic assays. VDR mRNA and
protein were detected in all RCC cell lines. IHC showed that VDR was
strongly expressed in the normal kidney tissues, but decreased in RCC
tissues. As expected, VDR expression was significantly increased by
treatment with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D3) in RCC cell lines. MTT
and clonogenic assays showed that 1,25D3 inhibited RCC cell growth
(p<0.05). We also noted a significant increase of CYP24A1 expression
induced by vitamin D3 (pDysregulation of vitamin D signaling and
metabolism enzymes is a frequent change in many cancers and may confound
approaches to vitamin -D based therapies. The mechanisms by which
aberrant vitamin D signaling and metabolism lead to resistance to vitamin
D action are poorly understood. The kidney plays a critical role in
vitamin D synthesis and metabolism; in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cells
vitamin D metabolism is dysregulated. Recently, we discovered that an
oncogenic protein kinase PIM-1 is involved in vitamin D-induced
expression of 24-hydroxylase, a key catalytic enzyme of vitamin D encoded
by CYP24A1 gene, in bladder and prostate cancer. To study the impact of
PIM1 on vitamin D signaling and vitamin D-mediated anti-tumor activity in
RCC, we analyzed 4 human renal cell carcinoma cell lines (Caki-1, ACHN,
A498 and 786-O) and 25 samples of human RCC tumor tissue and 13 benign
kidney tissues (including 10 matched tumor and benign tissue samples) by
qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry (IHC), Western blot analysis, MTT and
clonogenic assays. VDR mRNA and protein were detected in all RCC cell
lines. IHC showed that VDR was strongly expressed in the normal kidney
tissues, but decreased in RCC tissues. As expected, VDR expression was
significantly increased by treatment with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
(1,25D3) in RCC cell lines. MTT and clonogenic assays showed that 1,25D3
inhibited RCC cell growth (p<0.05). We also noted a significant increase
of CYP24A1 expression induced by vitamin D3 (p<0.0001); and effect which
would be expected to promote the catabolism of 1,25D3. qRT-PCR and
Western blot analysis demonstrated that PIM-1 is expressed in RCC cells.
PIM-1 inhibition by siRNA or PIM-1 inhibitor JP_11646 significantly
reduced 1,25D3-induced CYP24A1 expression (pDysregulation of vitamin D
signaling and metabolism enzymes is a frequent change in many cancers and
may confound approaches to vitamin -D based therapies. The mechanisms by
which aberrant vitamin D signaling and metabolism lead to resistance to
vitamin D action are poorly understood. The kidney plays a critical role
in vitamin D synthesis and metabolism; in renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
cells vitamin D metabolism is dysregulated. Recently, we discovered that
an oncogenic protein kinase PIM-1 is involved in vitamin D-induced
expression of 24-hydroxylase, a key catalytic enzyme of vitamin D encoded
by CYP24A1 gene, in bladder and prostate cancer. To study the impact of
PIM1 on vitamin D signaling and vitamin D-mediated anti-tumor activity in
RCC, we analyzed 4 human renal cell carcinoma cell lines (Caki-1, ACHN,
A498 and 786-O) and 25 samples of human RCC tumor tissue and 13 benign
kidney tissues (including 10 matched tumor and benign tissue samples) by
qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry (IHC), Western blot analysis, MTT and
clonogenic assays. VDR mRNA and protein were detected in all RCC cell
lines. IHC showed that VDR was strongly expressed in the normal kidney
tissues, but decreased in RCC tissues. As expected, VDR expression was
significantly increased by treatment with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
(1,25D3) in RCC cell lines. MTT and clonogenic assays showed that 1,25D3
inhibited RCC cell growth (p<0.05). We also noted a significant increase
of CYP24A1 expression induced by vitamin D3 (p<0.0001); and effect which
would be expected to promote the catabolism of 1,25D3. qRT-PCR and
Western blot analysis demonstrated that PIM-1 is expressed in RCC cells.
PIM-1 inhibition by siRNA or PIM-1 inhibitor JP_11646 significantly
reduced 1,25D3-induced CYP24A1 expression (p<0.05). Therefore, we
hypothesized that targeting PIM-1 kinase activity with a PIM-1 inhibitor
may be an effective strategy to reduce 1,25D3 metabolism, thereby
enhancing vitamin D-mediated anti-tumor activity. Inhibition of PIM1
kinase activity by JP_11646 reduced CYP24A1 expression at the
transcriptional level in RCC cells. We further evaluated the efficacy of
the PIM1 inhibitor alone or in combination with 1,25D3. Inhibition of
PIM1 kinase activity by JP_11646 reduced cell growth in RCC cell lines in
a dose-dependent manner as measured by MTT and clonogenic assays.
Furthermore, inhibition of PIM1 kinase activity enhances 1,25D3-mediated
inhibitory effect on cell growth in RCC cells (pDysregulation of vitamin
D signaling and metabolism enzymes is a frequent change in many cancers
and may confound approaches to vitamin -D based therapies. The mechanisms
by which aberrant vitamin D signaling and metabolism lead to resistance
to vitamin D action are poorly understood. The kidney plays a critical
role in vitamin D synthesis and metabolism; in renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
cells vitamin D metabolism is dysregulated. Recently, we discovered that
an oncogenic protein kinase PIM-1 is involved in vitamin D-induced
expression of 24-hydroxylase, a key catalytic enzyme of vitamin D encoded
by CYP24A1 gene, in bladder and prostate cancer. To study the impact of
PIM1 on vitamin D signaling and vitamin D-mediated anti-tumor activity in
RCC, we analyzed 4 human renal cell carcinoma cell lines (Caki-1, ACHN,
A498 and 786-O) and 25 samples of human RCC tumor tissue and 13 benign
kidney tissues (including 10 matched tumor and benign tissue samples) by
qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry (IHC), Western blot analysis, MTT and
clonogenic assays. VDR mRNA and protein were detected in all RCC cell
lines. IHC showed that VDR was strongly expressed in the normal kidney
tissues, but decreased in RCC tissues. As expected, VDR expression was
significantly increased by treatment with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
(1,25D3) in RCC cell lines. MTT and clonogenic assays showed that 1,25D3
inhibited RCC cell growth (p<0.05). We also noted a significant increase
of CYP24A1 expression induced by vitamin D3 (p<0.0001); and effect which
would be expected to promote the catabolism of 1,25D3. qRT-PCR and
Western blot analysis demonstrated that PIM-1 is expressed in RCC cells.
PIM-1 inhibition by siRNA or PIM-1 inhibitor JP_11646 significantly
reduced 1,25D3-induced CYP24A1 expression (p<0.05). Therefore, we
hypothesized that targeting PIM-1 kinase activity with a PIM-1 inhibitor
may be an effective strategy to reduce 1,25D3 metabolism, thereby
enhancing vitamin D-mediated anti-tumor activity. Inhibition of PIM1
kinase activity by JP_11646 reduced CYP24A1 expression at the
transcriptional level in RCC cells. We further evaluated the efficacy of
the PIM1 inhibitor alone or in combination with 1,25D3. Inhibition of
PIM1 kinase activity by JP_11646 reduced cell growth in RCC cell lines in
a dose-dependent manner as measured by MTT and clonogenic assays.
Furthermore, inhibition of PIM1 kinase activity enhances 1,25D3-mediated
inhibitory effect on cell growth in RCC cells (p<0.05). This study
indicates that PIM-1 is involved in the regulation of vitamin D signaling
in RCC. Inhibition of PIM kinase activity combined with vitamin D may be
an attractive new therapeutic strategy for RCC.

