Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin suppresses GRP78-dependent PI3-Kinase activity in
clonogenic side population to enhance the anti-myeloma benefit of
bortezomib


Multiple myeloma (MM) patients invariably relapse through mechanisms that
remain elusive. Disease recurrence after treatment suggests that rare,
tumor-initiating subpopulations with chemoresistant phenotypes persist or
emerge to propagate and mediate tumor regrowth. Stem cell-like side
population (SP) cells were isolated from myeloma cell lines and patient
samples and exhibited resistance to proteasome inhibitors relative to the
main population (MP). SP cell-based high-throughput screening detected
pharmacologics that enhanced the anti-proliferative effect of bortezomib
and revealed the anti-diabetic agent metformin. Bortezomib treatment
increased levels of the molecular chaperone glucose-regulated protein
GRP78 but metformin co-treatment suppressed bortezomib-induced GRP78
upregulation. Bortezomib treatment also promoted GRP78 co-localization
with the signal transducer phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) that
activates cell growth and survival pathways. SP cells displayed greater
levels of the PI3K product phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate
(PIP3) and enhanced PI3K-mediated phosphorylation of protein kinase B/AKT
compared to MP cells. Metformin treatment or knockdown of GRP78-encoding
HSPA5 enhanced sensitivity to bortezomib preferentially in SP cells.
Tumor growth was significantly delayed and overall survival prolonged
after metformin co-treatment with bortezomib in mice injected with
parental or SP cells. Taken together, the results support the
pharmacologic repositioning of metformin to inhibit GRP78 induction in
therapy-resistant cells and enhance the anti-myeloma benefit of
bortezomib.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

