Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA 141: A novel regulator of brain metastasis from breast
cancer


Purpose: Brain metastasis poses a major treatment challenge and remains
an unmet clinical need. Finding novel therapies to prevent and treat
brain metastases requires an understanding of the biology and molecular
basis of the process, which currently is constrained by a dearth of
experimental models and specific therapeutic targets. The purpose of this
study was to identify molecular mediators of brain metastasis from breast
cancer using novel preclinical brain metastasis models we developed
recently.Methods: GFP-labeled cells were injected via tail vein into
SCID/beige mice and metastatic colonization to the brain and lung was
evaluated by fluorescent stereomicroscope and histology 8-weeks after
injection. miRNA microarray was performed with miRNA 3.0 Array. Stable
knockdown and overexpression of miR-141 was achieved with lentiviral
vectors. miR-141 serum levels in patients with metastatic breast cancer
was measured using quantitative PCR and was associated with outcome
data.Results: We developed novel brain metastasis models in which
tail-vein injection of parental triple-negative and a HER2-overexpressing
inflammatory breast cancer lines led to a high rate of brain metastases
(67%) in SCID/Beige mice (SUM149, 6 of 9 mice; MDA-MB-IBC3, 10 of 15
mice). Sub-lines derived from brain metastasis (BrMS) or lung metastasis
(LuMS) tissues were morphologically and molecularly distinct. The BrMS
showed epithelial morphology and overexpressed epithelial markers and
miR-141 while the LuMS showed mesenchymal morphology and overexpressed
mesenchymal markers. Knockdown of miR-141 significantly inhibited
metastatic colonization to the brain in both cell lines (miR-141
knockdown vs. control: SUM149, 0 of 8 mice vs. 6 of 9 mice, p = 0.009;
MDA-MB-IBC3, 2 of 14 mice vs. 10 of 15 mice, p = 0.007). Ectopic
expression of miR-141 in non-expressing MDA-MB-231 significantly enhanced
brain metastatic colonization via tail-vein injection (5 of 9 mice vs. 0
of 10 mice, P = 0.02). On multivariate analyses high serum level of
miR-141 was an independent predictor of progression free survival [HR 4.8
(95%CI, 2.6-8.7), PPurpose: Brain metastasis poses a major treatment
challenge and remains an unmet clinical need. Finding novel therapies to
prevent and treat brain metastases requires an understanding of the
biology and molecular basis of the process, which currently is
constrained by a dearth of experimental models and specific therapeutic
targets. The purpose of this study was to identify molecular mediators of
brain metastasis from breast cancer using novel preclinical brain
metastasis models we developed recently.Methods: GFP-labeled cells were
injected via tail vein into SCID/beige mice and metastatic colonization
to the brain and lung was evaluated by fluorescent stereomicroscope and
histology 8-weeks after injection. miRNA microarray was performed with
miRNA 3.0 Array. Stable knockdown and overexpression of miR-141 was
achieved with lentiviral vectors. miR-141 serum levels in patients with
metastatic breast cancer was measured using quantitative PCR and was
associated with outcome data.Results: We developed novel brain metastasis
models in which tail-vein injection of parental triple-negative and a
HER2-overexpressing inflammatory breast cancer lines led to a high rate
of brain metastases (67%) in SCID/Beige mice (SUM149, 6 of 9 mice;
MDA-MB-IBC3, 10 of 15 mice). Sub-lines derived from brain metastasis
(BrMS) or lung metastasis (LuMS) tissues were morphologically and
molecularly distinct. The BrMS showed epithelial morphology and
overexpressed epithelial markers and miR-141 while the LuMS showed
mesenchymal morphology and overexpressed mesenchymal markers. Knockdown
of miR-141 significantly inhibited metastatic colonization to the brain
in both cell lines (miR-141 knockdown vs. control: SUM149, 0 of 8 mice
vs. 6 of 9 mice, p = 0.009; MDA-MB-IBC3, 2 of 14 mice vs. 10 of 15 mice,
p = 0.007). Ectopic expression of miR-141 in non-expressing MDA-MB-231
significantly enhanced brain metastatic colonization via tail-vein
injection (5 of 9 mice vs. 0 of 10 mice, P = 0.02). On multivariate
analyses high serum level of miR-141 was an independent predictor of
progression free survival [HR 4.8 (95%CI, 2.6-8.7), P<0.001] and overall
survival [HR 7.0 (95%CI 3.5-15.1), PPurpose: Brain metastasis poses a
major treatment challenge and remains an unmet clinical need. Finding
novel therapies to prevent and treat brain metastases requires an
understanding of the biology and molecular basis of the process, which
currently is constrained by a dearth of experimental models and specific
therapeutic targets. The purpose of this study was to identify molecular
mediators of brain metastasis from breast cancer using novel preclinical
brain metastasis models we developed recently.Methods: GFP-labeled cells
were injected via tail vein into SCID/beige mice and metastatic
colonization to the brain and lung was evaluated by fluorescent
stereomicroscope and histology 8-weeks after injection. miRNA microarray
was performed with miRNA 3.0 Array. Stable knockdown and overexpression
of miR-141 was achieved with lentiviral vectors. miR-141 serum levels in
patients with metastatic breast cancer was measured using quantitative
PCR and was associated with outcome data.Results: We developed novel
brain metastasis models in which tail-vein injection of parental
triple-negative and a HER2-overexpressing inflammatory breast cancer
lines led to a high rate of brain metastases (67%) in SCID/Beige mice
(SUM149, 6 of 9 mice; MDA-MB-IBC3, 10 of 15 mice). Sub-lines derived from
brain metastasis (BrMS) or lung metastasis (LuMS) tissues were
morphologically and molecularly distinct. The BrMS showed epithelial
morphology and overexpressed epithelial markers and miR-141 while the
LuMS showed mesenchymal morphology and overexpressed mesenchymal markers.
Knockdown of miR-141 significantly inhibited metastatic colonization to
the brain in both cell lines (miR-141 knockdown vs. control: SUM149, 0 of
8 mice vs. 6 of 9 mice, p = 0.009; MDA-MB-IBC3, 2 of 14 mice vs. 10 of 15
mice, p = 0.007). Ectopic expression of miR-141 in non-expressing
MDA-MB-231 significantly enhanced brain metastatic colonization via
tail-vein injection (5 of 9 mice vs. 0 of 10 mice, P = 0.02). On
multivariate analyses high serum level of miR-141 was an independent
predictor of progression free survival [HR 4.8 (95%CI, 2.6-8.7), P<0.001]
and overall survival [HR 7.0 (95%CI 3.5-15.1), P<0.001], and was
associated with shorter brain metastasis free survival (P =
0.03).Conclusion: We have generated novel brain metastasis models,
demonstrated miR-141 as a key regulator of brain metastasis and provided
clinical evidence supporting the prognostic relevance of miR-141 in
patients with brain metastasis. We propose that miR-141 should be
examined as a biomarker and potential target for the prevention and
treatment of brain metastases from breast cancer.

