Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal stem cells promote osteogenesis and the evolution of
apoptosis resistant bone metastatic prostate cancer


Introduction: Bone metastasis is common in men with advanced prostate
cancer. The resultant lesions are incurable and hallmarked by extensive
osteoblast activity and osteogenesis. To generate efficacious therapies a
better understanding of the mechanisms governing prostate cancer-bone
interaction are required. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can give rise to
multiple cell types including osteoblasts. Given that bone is a reservoir
for MSCs, we reasoned that MSCs may contribute to the prostate cancer
induced bone formation.Rationale/Hypothesis. Our in vitro data
demonstrated that MSCs are highly migratory towards prostate cancer
cells. Human and rodent specimens of bone metastatic prostate cancer
contain -smooth muscle actin positive MSC infiltrates. Based on these
data, we hypothesized that MSCs contribute to prostate cancer induced
osteogenesis.Methodology. Primary murine bone derived MSCs (CD29+,
SCA-1+, CD45-) were isolated. In vivo we used an osteogenic bone
metastatic prostate cancer rodent model. Mice were intratibially
inoculated with PAIIIs, PAIIIs/MSCs (1:1), or MSCs (n = 8/group,
1104total cells). Tumor growth was measured via luminescence imaging.
Subsequently the tibias were collected for x-ray, CT and, histological
analysis. To delineate cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
MSC-prostate cancer interaction we measured PAIII induced MSC
differentiation (alizarin red staining) as well as MSC effects on PAIII
growth (luminescence) and apoptosis using cleaved caspase 3 (CC3)
(immunoblot and immunofluorescence).Results. Surprisingly, we observed
that MSCs significantly suppressed PAIII prostate cancer growth in-vivo
at day 11 (pIntroduction: Bone metastasis is common in men with advanced
prostate cancer. The resultant lesions are incurable and hallmarked by
extensive osteoblast activity and osteogenesis. To generate efficacious
therapies a better understanding of the mechanisms governing prostate
cancer-bone interaction are required. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can
give rise to multiple cell types including osteoblasts. Given that bone
is a reservoir for MSCs, we reasoned that MSCs may contribute to the
prostate cancer induced bone formation.Rationale/Hypothesis. Our in vitro
data demonstrated that MSCs are highly migratory towards prostate cancer
cells. Human and rodent specimens of bone metastatic prostate cancer
contain -smooth muscle actin positive MSC infiltrates. Based on these
data, we hypothesized that MSCs contribute to prostate cancer induced
osteogenesis.Methodology. Primary murine bone derived MSCs (CD29+,
SCA-1+, CD45-) were isolated. In vivo we used an osteogenic bone
metastatic prostate cancer rodent model. Mice were intratibially
inoculated with PAIIIs, PAIIIs/MSCs (1:1), or MSCs (n = 8/group,
1104total cells). Tumor growth was measured via luminescence imaging.
Subsequently the tibias were collected for x-ray, CT and, histological
analysis. To delineate cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
MSC-prostate cancer interaction we measured PAIII induced MSC
differentiation (alizarin red staining) as well as MSC effects on PAIII
growth (luminescence) and apoptosis using cleaved caspase 3 (CC3)
(immunoblot and immunofluorescence).Results. Surprisingly, we observed
that MSCs significantly suppressed PAIII prostate cancer growth in-vivo
at day 11 (p<0.05). However, between days 11 and 15 MSCs contributed to a
significantly faster prostate cancer growth rate compared to PAIII alone
(pIntroduction: Bone metastasis is common in men with advanced prostate
cancer. The resultant lesions are incurable and hallmarked by extensive
osteoblast activity and osteogenesis. To generate efficacious therapies a
better understanding of the mechanisms governing prostate cancer-bone
interaction are required. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can give rise to
multiple cell types including osteoblasts. Given that bone is a reservoir
for MSCs, we reasoned that MSCs may contribute to the prostate cancer
induced bone formation.Rationale/Hypothesis. Our in vitro data
demonstrated that MSCs are highly migratory towards prostate cancer
cells. Human and rodent specimens of bone metastatic prostate cancer
contain -smooth muscle actin positive MSC infiltrates. Based on these
data, we hypothesized that MSCs contribute to prostate cancer induced
osteogenesis.Methodology. Primary murine bone derived MSCs (CD29+,
SCA-1+, CD45-) were isolated. In vivo we used an osteogenic bone
metastatic prostate cancer rodent model. Mice were intratibially
inoculated with PAIIIs, PAIIIs/MSCs (1:1), or MSCs (n = 8/group,
1104total cells). Tumor growth was measured via luminescence imaging.
Subsequently the tibias were collected for x-ray, CT and, histological
analysis. To delineate cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
MSC-prostate cancer interaction we measured PAIII induced MSC
differentiation (alizarin red staining) as well as MSC effects on PAIII
growth (luminescence) and apoptosis using cleaved caspase 3 (CC3)
(immunoblot and immunofluorescence).Results. Surprisingly, we observed
that MSCs significantly suppressed PAIII prostate cancer growth in-vivo
at day 11 (p<0.05). However, between days 11 and 15 MSCs contributed to a
significantly faster prostate cancer growth rate compared to PAIII alone
(p<0.05) suggesting that MSCs could be contributing to the evolution of a
resistant or faster growing clone. Ex vivo analyses with CT and
histomorphometry demonstrated that MSCs significantly enhance prostate
cancer induced osteogenesis with an 81% increase in bone formation
compared to PAIII alone (pIntroduction: Bone metastasis is common in men
with advanced prostate cancer. The resultant lesions are incurable and
hallmarked by extensive osteoblast activity and osteogenesis. To generate
efficacious therapies a better understanding of the mechanisms governing
prostate cancer-bone interaction are required. Mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) can give rise to multiple cell types including osteoblasts. Given
that bone is a reservoir for MSCs, we reasoned that MSCs may contribute
to the prostate cancer induced bone formation.Rationale/Hypothesis. Our
in vitro data demonstrated that MSCs are highly migratory towards
prostate cancer cells. Human and rodent specimens of bone metastatic
prostate cancer contain -smooth muscle actin positive MSC infiltrates.
Based on these data, we hypothesized that MSCs contribute to prostate
cancer induced osteogenesis.Methodology. Primary murine bone derived MSCs
(CD29+, SCA-1+, CD45-) were isolated. In vivo we used an osteogenic bone
metastatic prostate cancer rodent model. Mice were intratibially
inoculated with PAIIIs, PAIIIs/MSCs (1:1), or MSCs (n = 8/group,
1104total cells). Tumor growth was measured via luminescence imaging.
Subsequently the tibias were collected for x-ray, CT and, histological
analysis. To delineate cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
MSC-prostate cancer interaction we measured PAIII induced MSC
differentiation (alizarin red staining) as well as MSC effects on PAIII
growth (luminescence) and apoptosis using cleaved caspase 3 (CC3)
(immunoblot and immunofluorescence).Results. Surprisingly, we observed
that MSCs significantly suppressed PAIII prostate cancer growth in-vivo
at day 11 (p<0.05). However, between days 11 and 15 MSCs contributed to a
significantly faster prostate cancer growth rate compared to PAIII alone
(p<0.05) suggesting that MSCs could be contributing to the evolution of a
resistant or faster growing clone. Ex vivo analyses with CT and
histomorphometry demonstrated that MSCs significantly enhance prostate
cancer induced osteogenesis with an 81% increase in bone formation
compared to PAIII alone (p<0.05). In vitro, PAIII conditioned media (CM)
significantly stimulated osteoblast differentiation of MSCs
(pIntroduction: Bone metastasis is common in men with advanced prostate
cancer. The resultant lesions are incurable and hallmarked by extensive
osteoblast activity and osteogenesis. To generate efficacious therapies a
better understanding of the mechanisms governing prostate cancer-bone
interaction are required. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can give rise to
multiple cell types including osteoblasts. Given that bone is a reservoir
for MSCs, we reasoned that MSCs may contribute to the prostate cancer
induced bone formation.Rationale/Hypothesis. Our in vitro data
demonstrated that MSCs are highly migratory towards prostate cancer
cells. Human and rodent specimens of bone metastatic prostate cancer
contain -smooth muscle actin positive MSC infiltrates. Based on these
data, we hypothesized that MSCs contribute to prostate cancer induced
osteogenesis.Methodology. Primary murine bone derived MSCs (CD29+,
SCA-1+, CD45-) were isolated. In vivo we used an osteogenic bone
metastatic prostate cancer rodent model. Mice were intratibially
inoculated with PAIIIs, PAIIIs/MSCs (1:1), or MSCs (n = 8/group,
1104total cells). Tumor growth was measured via luminescence imaging.
Subsequently the tibias were collected for x-ray, CT and, histological
analysis. To delineate cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
MSC-prostate cancer interaction we measured PAIII induced MSC
differentiation (alizarin red staining) as well as MSC effects on PAIII
growth (luminescence) and apoptosis using cleaved caspase 3 (CC3)
(immunoblot and immunofluorescence).Results. Surprisingly, we observed
that MSCs significantly suppressed PAIII prostate cancer growth in-vivo
at day 11 (p<0.05). However, between days 11 and 15 MSCs contributed to a
significantly faster prostate cancer growth rate compared to PAIII alone
(p<0.05) suggesting that MSCs could be contributing to the evolution of a
resistant or faster growing clone. Ex vivo analyses with CT and
histomorphometry demonstrated that MSCs significantly enhance prostate
cancer induced osteogenesis with an 81% increase in bone formation
compared to PAIII alone (p<0.05). In vitro, PAIII conditioned media (CM)
significantly stimulated osteoblast differentiation of MSCs (p<0.05).
5-hour treatment of PAIIIs with MSC CM promoted a 3-fold increase in
PAIII apoptosis (CC3 positive cells) compared to controls (pIntroduction:
Bone metastasis is common in men with advanced prostate cancer. The
resultant lesions are incurable and hallmarked by extensive osteoblast
activity and osteogenesis. To generate efficacious therapies a better
understanding of the mechanisms governing prostate cancer-bone
interaction are required. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can give rise to
multiple cell types including osteoblasts. Given that bone is a reservoir
for MSCs, we reasoned that MSCs may contribute to the prostate cancer
induced bone formation.Rationale/Hypothesis. Our in vitro data
demonstrated that MSCs are highly migratory towards prostate cancer
cells. Human and rodent specimens of bone metastatic prostate cancer
contain -smooth muscle actin positive MSC infiltrates. Based on these
data, we hypothesized that MSCs contribute to prostate cancer induced
osteogenesis.Methodology. Primary murine bone derived MSCs (CD29+,
SCA-1+, CD45-) were isolated. In vivo we used an osteogenic bone
metastatic prostate cancer rodent model. Mice were intratibially
inoculated with PAIIIs, PAIIIs/MSCs (1:1), or MSCs (n = 8/group,
1104total cells). Tumor growth was measured via luminescence imaging.
Subsequently the tibias were collected for x-ray, CT and, histological
analysis. To delineate cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
MSC-prostate cancer interaction we measured PAIII induced MSC
differentiation (alizarin red staining) as well as MSC effects on PAIII
growth (luminescence) and apoptosis using cleaved caspase 3 (CC3)
(immunoblot and immunofluorescence).Results. Surprisingly, we observed
that MSCs significantly suppressed PAIII prostate cancer growth in-vivo
at day 11 (p<0.05). However, between days 11 and 15 MSCs contributed to a
significantly faster prostate cancer growth rate compared to PAIII alone
(p<0.05) suggesting that MSCs could be contributing to the evolution of a
resistant or faster growing clone. Ex vivo analyses with CT and
histomorphometry demonstrated that MSCs significantly enhance prostate
cancer induced osteogenesis with an 81% increase in bone formation
compared to PAIII alone (p<0.05). In vitro, PAIII conditioned media (CM)
significantly stimulated osteoblast differentiation of MSCs (p<0.05).
5-hour treatment of PAIIIs with MSC CM promoted a 3-fold increase in
PAIII apoptosis (CC3 positive cells) compared to controls (p<0.05).
However, successive exposure of PAIIIs to MSC conditioned media yielded
apoptotic resistant PAIIIs. Cytokine array analysis of MSC CM revealed
the presence of factors such as Fas ligand that potentially can mediate
the observed apoptotic effects.Conclusions. MSCs contribute to metastatic
prostate cancer induced osteogenesis but also can promote the evolution
of apoptosis resistant cancer cells. Defining the potential mechanisms
involved can lead to new therapies to eradicate incurable bone metastatic
prostate cancer.

