Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new generation of dendritic cells to improve cancer therapy
shows prolonged progression-free survival in patients with solid tumors


We have previously used different protocols for GMP production of
monocyte derived dendritic cells (DCs), loaded them with mRNA and
conducted several clinical trials to investigate their therapeutic impact
in treatment of different solid tumors like prostate carcinoma,
glioblastoma or melanoma. These studies showed that only a group of
patients mounted an immune response after DC vaccination within a
timeframe of 3 to 6 months.A new generation of IL-12p70 producing DCs
gave superior immunological responses in pre-clinical data when compared
with DCs generated according to the standard protocol used for DC
production so far.Aim one of our study is to show the feasibility of
generating IL-12p70 producing monocyte derived DCs with starting material
from patients with different types of malignancies in a large scale GMP
setting and aim two is to investigate the clinical response of these new
generation DCs in patients suffering from different types of cancer and
acute myeloid leukemia (AML).Autologous mature DCs were loaded with mRNA
(messenger Ribonucleic Acid) either encoding the tumor specific antigens
hTERT and survivin, plus where available, autologous tumor mRNA, or the
AML specific antigens WT-1 or PRAME. Patients received 4 initial
vaccinations in weekly intervals, a delayed type hypersensitivity
challenge in week 6 and further boost vaccinations every month. With each
vaccination either 2,5 x10^6 or 510^6 DCs were injected intradermal.So
far we have started treatment of one lung cancer patient, one prostate
cancer patient, 4 glioblastoma patients and 3 AML-patients.The lung
cancer patient suffering from stage IV disease with lung and brain
metastases has now been vaccinated since 12/2011 and remained in stable
disease. The glioblastoma patients, also with stage IV diseases, have
been vaccinated for 16, 12, 12 and 11 months. All of them are in complete
remission. One patient developed a pseudo relapse after 7 and again after
9 months of non-malignant origin.The Prostate cancer patient progressed
before an immune response could be expected and immediately dropped out
of the vaccination program after start of DC treatment.The first AML
patient has started DC treatment in May 2014, the other two just recently
and therefore are still too early to evaluate.Our investigations show
that mRNA loaded new generation DCs can successfully be produced from
patients with different types of cancer.All patients tolerated DC
vaccination well. Some patients developed flu-like symptoms on the day of
vaccination. Strong DTH responses at the injection sites appeared 2 to 4
days after DC injection from the second vaccination time point on
indicating the presence of specific immune responses. Solid tumor
patients suffering from advanced disease treated with our DC vaccines
have a prolonged progression free survival, showing that this
immunotherapeutic approach will be a promising alternative to current
standard therapies.

