Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostaglandin E-2 promotes resistance to oxaliplatin in colorectal
cancer cells


Oxaliplatin, a platinum-based DNA crosslinking agent, has been used
successfully as a first-line chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC). However, long-term treatment with
oxaliplatin results in resistance in nearly all patients, limiting its
therapeutic efficacy. Previous studies have shown that treatment of CRC
cells with selective inhibitors of the enzyme Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
leads to the development of drug resistance. One of the terminal products
of the COX-2 pathway, prostaglandin E-2 (PGE2), is a pro-inflammatory
lipid that has been implicated in colorectal tumorigenesis; however, it
is unknown whether PGE2 plays a role in the development of drug
resistance. In this study, we have begun to investigate the relationship
between PGE2 and oxaliplatin resistance using the human CRC cell lines,
HT29 and HCT116. Oxaliplatin-resistant HT29 cells (HT29-OXR) were
generated by continuous exposure of parental HT29 cells to increasing
concentrations of oxaliplatin over a period of 3 months. We have found
that HT29-OXR cells produce significantly higher levels of PGE2 (3-fold
increase, pOxaliplatin, a platinum-based DNA crosslinking agent, has been
used successfully as a first-line chemotherapeutic agent for the
treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC). However, long-term
treatment with oxaliplatin results in resistance in nearly all patients,
limiting its therapeutic efficacy. Previous studies have shown that
treatment of CRC cells with selective inhibitors of the enzyme
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) leads to the development of drug resistance. One
of the terminal products of the COX-2 pathway, prostaglandin E-2 (PGE2),
is a pro-inflammatory lipid that has been implicated in colorectal
tumorigenesis; however, it is unknown whether PGE2 plays a role in the
development of drug resistance. In this study, we have begun to
investigate the relationship between PGE2 and oxaliplatin resistance
using the human CRC cell lines, HT29 and HCT116. Oxaliplatin-resistant
HT29 cells (HT29-OXR) were generated by continuous exposure of parental
HT29 cells to increasing concentrations of oxaliplatin over a period of 3
months. We have found that HT29-OXR cells produce significantly higher
levels of PGE2 (3-fold increase, p<0.05) compared to the parental HT29
cell line. In addition, we have observed concomitantly elevated levels of
the terminal PGE2 synthase, microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1
(mPGES-1). Furthermore, we have demonstrated that the addition of
exogenous PGE2 to both parental HT29 and HCT116 cells significantly
(pOxaliplatin, a platinum-based DNA crosslinking agent, has been used
successfully as a first-line chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC). However, long-term treatment with
oxaliplatin results in resistance in nearly all patients, limiting its
therapeutic efficacy. Previous studies have shown that treatment of CRC
cells with selective inhibitors of the enzyme Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
leads to the development of drug resistance. One of the terminal products
of the COX-2 pathway, prostaglandin E-2 (PGE2), is a pro-inflammatory
lipid that has been implicated in colorectal tumorigenesis; however, it
is unknown whether PGE2 plays a role in the development of drug
resistance. In this study, we have begun to investigate the relationship
between PGE2 and oxaliplatin resistance using the human CRC cell lines,
HT29 and HCT116. Oxaliplatin-resistant HT29 cells (HT29-OXR) were
generated by continuous exposure of parental HT29 cells to increasing
concentrations of oxaliplatin over a period of 3 months. We have found
that HT29-OXR cells produce significantly higher levels of PGE2 (3-fold
increase, p<0.05) compared to the parental HT29 cell line. In addition,
we have observed concomitantly elevated levels of the terminal PGE2
synthase, microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 (mPGES-1). Furthermore,
we have demonstrated that the addition of exogenous PGE2 to both parental
HT29 and HCT116 cells significantly (p<0.0001) decreased their
sensitivity (IC50) to oxaliplatin, measured by the MTT cell viability
assay. These findings suggest that PGE2 promotes resistance to
oxaliplatin in CRC cells. FACS analysis showed that co-treatment of HT29
cells with exogenous PGE2 for 24 hours leaded to 27% reduction in
oxaliplatin-induced Annexin V staining for early apoptosis, while
exogenous PGE2 maintained G2/M arrest and simultaneously reduced the
proportion of dead sub-G1 cells by approximately 80.4% in parental HCT116
cells. Our findings reveal a role for PGE2 in oxaliplatin resistance,
possibly via regulation of apoptosis, and provide new data suggesting
that targeting mPGES-1 may be a useful strategy for overcoming
oxaliplatin resistance.

