Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the cytotoxic effects of taxol,camptothecin and
Lobostemon fruticosus extracts on non-small cell lung cancer


Lung cancer is reportedly the most common form of cancer worldwide, with
a 13-15% occurrence of all known cancers being reported daily. Lung
cancer is also the most deadly form of cancer as it has been observed to
be resistant to most therapeutic treatments and it demonstrates a
metastasis within lymph nodes. An alternative approach is to identify the
cytotoxic effects of non-invasive medicinal plant extracts on NSCLC. Thus
the aim of the study was to compare the cytotoxic effects of the invasive
anti-cancer drugs, taxol and camptothecin, with less invasive plant
extracts of L. fruticosus on cell line A549. Cells seem to show a degree
of cell death after treatment however some degree of cells still remain
viable indicating usefulness in chemotherapy. The following techniques
were used, exCELLigence RTCA, Cell cycle, Annexin V apoptosis analysis
and LC-MS to identify the compound. Cells treated with camptothecin,
Methanol and butanol extracts indicate some degree of early apoptosis
which was indicative of little to no DNA fragmentation. Cell cycle arrest
was observed in both camptothecin and taxol treated cells, however there
was little evidence to suggest the same for L. Fruticosus extracts as
there was a high degree of cell death that was observed during the cell
cycle analysis. Apoptotic genes that were found in A549 treated cells
upregulated in the absence of p53. Phytochemical screening of the L.
Fruticosus plant extracts indicated that the plant possesses compounds
that display apoptotic activity. These findings suggest that
camptothecin, taxol and extract of L. fruticosus display cytotoxic
activity on A549 cells. The upregulation of genes in absence of p53 seem
to suggest that treatments induce apoptosis using an alternative
apoptotic pathway.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

