Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High complexity flow cytometry panels to monitor target
expression, T-cell activation and suppresssion by novel immunotherapies
in hematomalignancy clinical trials


The renaissance of cancer immunotherapies and the positive clinical
responses observed with chimeric antigen receptor modified T cells in the
hematomalignancy setting has stimulated substantial interest in
monitoring immune cell activation and suppression to determine efficacy,
prognosis and safety in new agent investigational trials. However,
immunophenotyping capacity has been limited and required multi-test tube
panels. To address the growing needs of clinical trials, we have
developed three fit-for-purpose high complexity (10 or more markers)
T-cell phenotyping flow cytometry panels on a qualified LSR FortessaTM
platform that enables detection of up to 15 markers in a single test
tube. The first panel allows identification of multiple phenotypes along
the T-cell differentiation pathway, namely, T-naive (TN), T-stem cell
memory (TSCM), T-effector memory (TEM) and T-central memory (TCM) and
T-effector memory RA+ (TEMRA). The second panel identifies the most
common helper T-cell phenotypes such as Th1, Th2, Treg, and Th17. A third
panel determines the functional status of T-cells (e.g., activation vs.
suppression) but also enables quantitation of important checkpoint
inhibitor expression (e.g., PD-1) on T-cells of interest. These high
complexity flow cytometry panels can serve as powerful tools for
comprehensive examination of T-cells in a small volume of patient
specimen. We believe these new flow cytometry panels will have a
substantial impact on the determination of efficacy and safety correlates
of immunomodulating agents administered alone or in combination to
patients with leukemia.

