Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective internal radiation (SIRT) is most effective when
comparing local treatment to control progressive liver metastases of
gastro-intestinal stromal tumors beyond treatment with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors


Objective: The liver and the peritoneum are the main area of metastatic
spread in gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). Liver surgery plays a
minor role for hepatic metastases in comparison to f.e. colorectal
cancer. However, once the metastases are resistant to 1st line TKI,
surgery, 2nd line therapy, interventional ablation techniques like RFA or
selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) are treatment options. We
were interested to analyze the contribution of the different modalities
in controlling hepatic progression.Methods: 731 pts with biopsy proven
GIST were followed since 2004 (median follow-up 43.6 months); data were
prospectively documented. There were 337 males (46.1%) and 101 (13.8%)
pts. presented with M1 disease initially. Of the remaining 630 pts, 358
pts (56.8%) developed tumor recurrence after a median time interval of 22
months. 312/358 pts (87%) developed metastases within the abdomen: liver
n = 96, peritoneal n = 97, liver+peritoneal n = 78, locoregional n = 10,
locoreg.+hep/per n = 21. Imatinib was the initial treatment in all
patients with M1 disease.Results: Out of 205 patients with liver
metastases, 118 remained controlled by drug therapy or showed multi-site
progression. In the remaining 87 pts., 26 pts each underwent liver
resection or 2nd/3rd line drug therapy (sunitinib, regorafenib), 22 pts
had RFA and 13 pts were treated by SIRT. Follow-up was done via dynamic
MRI and contrast-enhanced (CE)-CT. The median hepatic-progression free
survival (H-PFS) was 15.9 months (4-29) after SIRT (with 3 CR, 6 PR),
however, only 5.6 (range, 2 - 13) months after 2nd line drug, 8.2 (3-15)
months after surgery, and 7.7 (5-14) months after RFA, pObjective: The
liver and the peritoneum are the main area of metastatic spread in
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). Liver surgery plays a minor role
for hepatic metastases in comparison to f.e. colorectal cancer. However,
once the metastases are resistant to 1st line TKI, surgery, 2nd line
therapy, interventional ablation techniques like RFA or selective
internal radiation therapy (SIRT) are treatment options. We were
interested to analyze the contribution of the different modalities in
controlling hepatic progression.Methods: 731 pts with biopsy proven GIST
were followed since 2004 (median follow-up 43.6 months); data were
prospectively documented. There were 337 males (46.1%) and 101 (13.8%)
pts. presented with M1 disease initially. Of the remaining 630 pts, 358
pts (56.8%) developed tumor recurrence after a median time interval of 22
months. 312/358 pts (87%) developed metastases within the abdomen: liver
n = 96, peritoneal n = 97, liver+peritoneal n = 78, locoregional n = 10,
locoreg.+hep/per n = 21. Imatinib was the initial treatment in all
patients with M1 disease.Results: Out of 205 patients with liver
metastases, 118 remained controlled by drug therapy or showed multi-site
progression. In the remaining 87 pts., 26 pts each underwent liver
resection or 2nd/3rd line drug therapy (sunitinib, regorafenib), 22 pts
had RFA and 13 pts were treated by SIRT. Follow-up was done via dynamic
MRI and contrast-enhanced (CE)-CT. The median hepatic-progression free
survival (H-PFS) was 15.9 months (4-29) after SIRT (with 3 CR, 6 PR),
however, only 5.6 (range, 2 - 13) months after 2nd line drug, 8.2 (3-15)
months after surgery, and 7.7 (5-14) months after RFA, p<0.02.Conclusion:
90Y radiation loaded particles (SIRT) provides the best hepatic
progression free survival when compared to 2nd line drugs, RFA or even
surgery in imatinib resistant GIST liver metastases. The effect could be
mediated by eliminating small (subclinical, micro-) metastases. In
patients known to have a GIST resistant to known TKIs, such as wildtype
(non-KIT, non-PDGFRA mutated f.e. NF1-associated) lesions, SIRT could be
used in earlier treatment lines.

