Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of tight junction polarity genes in human
colon cancer


Tight junctions perform significant and multifactorial functions in
cellular polarity maintenance and paracellular transport. A number of
studies have found structural disruption of epithelial colon cells can
significantly impact early tumorigenesis and progression. However, little
is known about the direct contribution of polarity gene expression in
human colon cancer development. We compared the expression of tight
junction genes in colon cancer with normal control mucosa. Total RNA was
extracted from fresh frozen tissue biopsies of six white male patients (N
= 3 for early stage tumore, N = 3 for late stage tumor, and N = 2 for
normal adjacent controls) and four unrelated normal colon mucosa from
polyp-free individuals. We used the Qiagen RT2 Profiler PCR array to
determine the expression of 84 genes in the tight junction pathway.
Student's t test was used to compare the expression levels between
different groups (control vs. early-stage tumor and late-stage tumor)
using normalized gene expression data. Functional annotation clustering
of statistically significant genes by group was conducted using DAVID.
Significant (P 2; while CLDN1 (FC = 15) was only significantly
upregulated (P = 0.0007) in early-stage tumor. Down regulation (FC>2) of
polarity complex gene PARD6A (P 2; while CLDN1 (FC = 15) was only
significantly upregulated (P = 0.0007) in early-stage tumor. Down
regulation (FC>2) of polarity complex gene PARD6A (P<.001) and associated
genes (JAM2, P 2; while CLDN1 (FC = 15) was only significantly
upregulated (P = 0.0007) in early-stage tumor. Down regulation (FC>2) of
polarity complex gene PARD6A (P<.001) and associated genes (JAM2, P<.001
and JAM3, P 2; while CLDN1 (FC = 15) was only significantly upregulated
(P = 0.0007) in early-stage tumor. Down regulation (FC>2) of polarity
complex gene PARD6A (P<.001) and associated genes (JAM2, P<.001 and JAM3,
P <.001) were present in both early and late-stage tumors along with
associated down-regulation of tumor suppressor PTEN (P 2; while CLDN1 (FC
= 15) was only significantly upregulated (P = 0.0007) in early-stage
tumor. Down regulation (FC>2) of polarity complex gene PARD6A (P<.001)
and associated genes (JAM2, P<.001 and JAM3, P <.001) were present in
both early and late-stage tumors along with associated down-regulation of
tumor suppressor PTEN (P<.0001). We found differential expression of
tight junction genes in normal versus colon tumor. Down regulation of
polarity genes is likely to affect apico-basal polarity and promote
random non-coordinated migration which can lead to disruption of
epithelial structure and to carcinogenic tissue infiltration. Further
larger studies are warranted to investigate the role of tight junction
proteins in the progression of human colon tumor.

