Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-503 promotes tumor progression and acts as a novel
biomarkers for early recurrence and poor prognosis in human colorectal
cancer


Background:MicroRNA (miRNA)-503 is known to be down-regulated in several
types of cancer, including oral, hepatocellular, gastric, and
endometrial, suggesting that it plays a tumor-suppressor role in
carcinogenesis. In contrast, other recent reports have demonstrated
up-regulation of miR-503 in adrenocortical carcinoma, parathyroid
carcinoma, and retinoblastoma, compared with adjacent normal tissues.
Collectively, miR-503 shows tissue- or disease-specific expression
patterns. However, to the best of our knowledge, miR-503 expression
pattern, its clinical significance and molecular mechanism in colorectal
cancer (CRC) have not been investigated.Materials and Methods:We analyzed
miR-503 expression in a subset of 69 tissue samples from normal colonic
mucosa (n = 20), adenoma (n = 29) and CRC (n = 20). Next, we further
quantified miR-503 expression in a larger, independent cohort, which
included CRC tissues from 181 patients, and investigated the clinical
significance of miR-503 in CRC. In addition, CRC cell lines were
transfected with anti-miR against miR-503 for the assessment of its
function.Results:MiR-503 expression stepwise increased according to
adenoma-carcinoma sequence, and its expression in adenoma and CRC was
significantly higher than that in normal colonic mucosa, respectively
(adenoma: p = 0.001, CRC: p40mm), high grade of T stage (T3/4), lymphatic
and venous invasion positive and lymph node metastasis. In addition,
Kaplan Meier survival curves revealed that the CRC patients with high
miR-503 expression were significantly poorer disease free survival (DFS)
and overall survival (OS) than that with low expression, respectively
(DFS: p = 0.01, OS: p = 0.003). Our in vitro study demonstrated that
attenuated miR-503 expression resulted in inhibition of proliferation,
invasion and migration capacity of CRC cell lines and acquiring capacity
of anoikis.Conclusions:We, for the first time, demonstrated that miR-503
in CRC acts as onco-miRNAs that is supported by several evidences from
our in vitro analysis and clinical data. MiR-503 is significantly
associated with malignant potential of CRC and can be biomarkers for
predicting early recurrence and poor prognosis in patients with CRC.

