Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glucose regulates chemoresistance and stemness via Wnt/-catenin
signaling in ovarian cancer cells


Glucose metabolic alteration is one of the hallmarks of ovarian cancer.
Here, we first demonstrated the function of glucose as a signature
molecule that regulated chemosensitivities in ovarian cancer cells. To
verify the role of glucose on the chemoresistance in ovarian cancer
cells, we used various concentrations of glucose containing media (0 mM
to 20 mM). Glucose reduction inhibited proliferation of various ovarian
cancer cell types; irrespective of p53 status and cisplatin (CDDP)
sensitivities. Interestingly, CDDP (10 to 20 M) induced apoptosis were
increased and expressions of p-glycoprotein (multidrug resistance protein
1, MDR1) and ABCG2 (ATP-binding cassette sub-family G member 2) were
decreased in both mRNA and protein levels by glucose free conditions.
Moreover, sphere forming capacities and stemness related gene
expressions, SOX2, OCT4, BMI1 and Nanog, were also decreased in ovarian
cancer cells in response to glucose starvation. Suppression of CDDP
resistance and stemness in ovarian cancer was found to be associated with
the activation of GSK3 in response to limitation of glucose
availabilities, as confirmed by the function of the GSK3 inhibitors (LiCl
and SB SB216763) and also downstream molecules, -catenin and cyclin D1.
In contrast, high glucose (20 mM) environment enhanced CDDP resistance in
ovarian cancer cells via elevation of p-glycoprotein and ABCG2
expressions, sphere forming capacities and stemness related gene
expressions. Moreover, CDDP (10 to 20 M) in high concentration of glucose
media induced apoptotic cell death were significantly decreased. This
study described the novel function of glucose in chemoresistance in
ovarian cancer cells by deregulation of multidrug efflux pumps and
stemness through Wnt/ -catenin signaling cascades.

