Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alteration of aldo-keto reductase family 1, member B10 (AKR1B10)
expression among tumor and background non-tumorous tissue of curatively
resected hepatocellular carcinoma is associated with worse prognosis


Background and Objectives:When assessing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
it is quite important to examine prognostic factors in the background non
tumorous liver tissue as well as HCC tissue itself. We tried to elucidate
molecular prognostic predictors which have some relation with both tumor
and background tissue for curatively resected HCC.Methods: Candidate
genes were extracted from the background non tumorous liver samples via
microarray analysis. Control samples, termed super normal (SN) liver,
were obtained from 11 cases of metastatic liver cancer. Corresponding non
tumorous liver tissue (CN) was surgically obtained from a typical HCC
patient with chronic hepatitis C background for comparison. Expression
profiling microarray demonstrated 4 genes as candidates for prognostic
factors. Among them, Aldo-keto reductase family 1, member B10 (AKR1B10)
was extracted to investigate in 158 consecutive curatively resected HCC
cases by real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. The relation between AKR1B10 expression and clinicopathological
factors were assessed and statistical analyses were performed with
Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the log-rank test. Univariate and
multivariate Cox proportional hazards models were used to determine the
independent risk factors associated with the RFS and OS.Results: The
expression level of AKR1B10 (expression score/GAPDH1000) was
significantly higher in HCC tissues (median: 9.22 [range: 0.0003-611.02],
n = 158) than in CN (0.5461[0.0018-69.03], n = 158) tissues (P Background
and Objectives:When assessing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), it is quite
important to examine prognostic factors in the background non tumorous
liver tissue as well as HCC tissue itself. We tried to elucidate
molecular prognostic predictors which have some relation with both tumor
and background tissue for curatively resected HCC.Methods: Candidate
genes were extracted from the background non tumorous liver samples via
microarray analysis. Control samples, termed super normal (SN) liver,
were obtained from 11 cases of metastatic liver cancer. Corresponding non
tumorous liver tissue (CN) was surgically obtained from a typical HCC
patient with chronic hepatitis C background for comparison. Expression
profiling microarray demonstrated 4 genes as candidates for prognostic
factors. Among them, Aldo-keto reductase family 1, member B10 (AKR1B10)
was extracted to investigate in 158 consecutive curatively resected HCC
cases by real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. The relation between AKR1B10 expression and clinicopathological
factors were assessed and statistical analyses were performed with
Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the log-rank test. Univariate and
multivariate Cox proportional hazards models were used to determine the
independent risk factors associated with the RFS and OS.Results: The
expression level of AKR1B10 (expression score/GAPDH1000) was
significantly higher in HCC tissues (median: 9.22 [range: 0.0003-611.02],
n = 158) than in CN (0.5461[0.0018-69.03], n = 158) tissues (P < 0.001).
158 HCC cases were subsequently divided into two groups based on AKR1B10
expression in tumor and CN in each case: one consisting of the T CN cases
(n = 132) and the other of the T Background and Objectives:When assessing
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), it is quite important to examine
prognostic factors in the background non tumorous liver tissue as well as
HCC tissue itself. We tried to elucidate molecular prognostic predictors
which have some relation with both tumor and background tissue for
curatively resected HCC.Methods: Candidate genes were extracted from the
background non tumorous liver samples via microarray analysis. Control
samples, termed super normal (SN) liver, were obtained from 11 cases of
metastatic liver cancer. Corresponding non tumorous liver tissue (CN) was
surgically obtained from a typical HCC patient with chronic hepatitis C
background for comparison. Expression profiling microarray demonstrated 4
genes as candidates for prognostic factors. Among them, Aldo-keto
reductase family 1, member B10 (AKR1B10) was extracted to investigate in
158 consecutive curatively resected HCC cases by real-time quantitative
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The relation between
AKR1B10 expression and clinicopathological factors were assessed and
statistical analyses were performed with Kaplan-Meier method and compared
using the log-rank test. Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional
hazards models were used to determine the independent risk factors
associated with the RFS and OS.Results: The expression level of AKR1B10
(expression score/GAPDH1000) was significantly higher in HCC tissues
(median: 9.22 [range: 0.0003-611.02], n = 158) than in CN
(0.5461[0.0018-69.03], n = 158) tissues (P < 0.001). 158 HCC cases were
subsequently divided into two groups based on AKR1B10 expression in tumor
and CN in each case: one consisting of the T CN cases (n = 132) and the
other of the T < CN (n = 26). T Background and Objectives:When assessing
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), it is quite important to examine
prognostic factors in the background non tumorous liver tissue as well as
HCC tissue itself. We tried to elucidate molecular prognostic predictors
which have some relation with both tumor and background tissue for
curatively resected HCC.Methods: Candidate genes were extracted from the
background non tumorous liver samples via microarray analysis. Control
samples, termed super normal (SN) liver, were obtained from 11 cases of
metastatic liver cancer. Corresponding non tumorous liver tissue (CN) was
surgically obtained from a typical HCC patient with chronic hepatitis C
background for comparison. Expression profiling microarray demonstrated 4
genes as candidates for prognostic factors. Among them, Aldo-keto
reductase family 1, member B10 (AKR1B10) was extracted to investigate in
158 consecutive curatively resected HCC cases by real-time quantitative
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The relation between
AKR1B10 expression and clinicopathological factors were assessed and
statistical analyses were performed with Kaplan-Meier method and compared
using the log-rank test. Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional
hazards models were used to determine the independent risk factors
associated with the RFS and OS.Results: The expression level of AKR1B10
(expression score/GAPDH1000) was significantly higher in HCC tissues
(median: 9.22 [range: 0.0003-611.02], n = 158) than in CN
(0.5461[0.0018-69.03], n = 158) tissues (P < 0.001). 158 HCC cases were
subsequently divided into two groups based on AKR1B10 expression in tumor
and CN in each case: one consisting of the T CN cases (n = 132) and the
other of the T < CN (n = 26). T < CN cases demonstrated significant
correlation with worse recurrence-free survival (P = 0.0074) and overall
survival (PBackground and Objectives:When assessing hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), it is quite important to examine prognostic factors in
the background non tumorous liver tissue as well as HCC tissue itself. We
tried to elucidate molecular prognostic predictors which have some
relation with both tumor and background tissue for curatively resected
HCC.Methods: Candidate genes were extracted from the background non
tumorous liver samples via microarray analysis. Control samples, termed
super normal (SN) liver, were obtained from 11 cases of metastatic liver
cancer. Corresponding non tumorous liver tissue (CN) was surgically
obtained from a typical HCC patient with chronic hepatitis C background
for comparison. Expression profiling microarray demonstrated 4 genes as
candidates for prognostic factors. Among them, Aldo-keto reductase family
1, member B10 (AKR1B10) was extracted to investigate in 158 consecutive
curatively resected HCC cases by real-time quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. The relation between AKR1B10
expression and clinicopathological factors were assessed and statistical
analyses were performed with Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the
log-rank test. Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards
models were used to determine the independent risk factors associated
with the RFS and OS.Results: The expression level of AKR1B10 (expression
score/GAPDH1000) was significantly higher in HCC tissues (median: 9.22
[range: 0.0003-611.02], n = 158) than in CN (0.5461[0.0018-69.03], n =
158) tissues (P < 0.001). 158 HCC cases were subsequently divided into
two groups based on AKR1B10 expression in tumor and CN in each case: one
consisting of the T CN cases (n = 132) and the other of the T < CN (n =
26). T < CN cases demonstrated significant correlation with worse
recurrence-free survival (P = 0.0074) and overall survival (P<0.0001).
Furthermore, multivariate analysis identified AKR1B10 expression
TBackground and Objectives:When assessing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
it is quite important to examine prognostic factors in the background non
tumorous liver tissue as well as HCC tissue itself. We tried to elucidate
molecular prognostic predictors which have some relation with both tumor
and background tissue for curatively resected HCC.Methods: Candidate
genes were extracted from the background non tumorous liver samples via
microarray analysis. Control samples, termed super normal (SN) liver,
were obtained from 11 cases of metastatic liver cancer. Corresponding non
tumorous liver tissue (CN) was surgically obtained from a typical HCC
patient with chronic hepatitis C background for comparison. Expression
profiling microarray demonstrated 4 genes as candidates for prognostic
factors. Among them, Aldo-keto reductase family 1, member B10 (AKR1B10)
was extracted to investigate in 158 consecutive curatively resected HCC
cases by real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. The relation between AKR1B10 expression and clinicopathological
factors were assessed and statistical analyses were performed with
Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the log-rank test. Univariate and
multivariate Cox proportional hazards models were used to determine the
independent risk factors associated with the RFS and OS.Results: The
expression level of AKR1B10 (expression score/GAPDH1000) was
significantly higher in HCC tissues (median: 9.22 [range: 0.0003-611.02],
n = 158) than in CN (0.5461[0.0018-69.03], n = 158) tissues (P < 0.001).
158 HCC cases were subsequently divided into two groups based on AKR1B10
expression in tumor and CN in each case: one consisting of the T CN cases
(n = 132) and the other of the T < CN (n = 26). T < CN cases demonstrated
significant correlation with worse recurrence-free survival (P = 0.0074)
and overall survival (P<0.0001). Furthermore, multivariate analysis
identified AKR1B10 expression T<CN as an independent prognostic factor in
overall survival (P = 0.0011). The alteration of AKR1B10 expression level
in T and CN was significantly correlated between liver damage score (B or
C / A) (P = 0.035) and infiltration to capsule (+ / -) (P = 0.0284)
respectively.Conclusions:Our findings suggested that basically, AKR1B10
expression is much higher in T than in CN but once AKR1B10 expression
inversion between tumor and CN occurs; its prognosis becomes
significantly worse. This TBackground and Objectives:When assessing
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), it is quite important to examine
prognostic factors in the background non tumorous liver tissue as well as
HCC tissue itself. We tried to elucidate molecular prognostic predictors
which have some relation with both tumor and background tissue for
curatively resected HCC.Methods: Candidate genes were extracted from the
background non tumorous liver samples via microarray analysis. Control
samples, termed super normal (SN) liver, were obtained from 11 cases of
metastatic liver cancer. Corresponding non tumorous liver tissue (CN) was
surgically obtained from a typical HCC patient with chronic hepatitis C
background for comparison. Expression profiling microarray demonstrated 4
genes as candidates for prognostic factors. Among them, Aldo-keto
reductase family 1, member B10 (AKR1B10) was extracted to investigate in
158 consecutive curatively resected HCC cases by real-time quantitative
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The relation between
AKR1B10 expression and clinicopathological factors were assessed and
statistical analyses were performed with Kaplan-Meier method and compared
using the log-rank test. Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional
hazards models were used to determine the independent risk factors
associated with the RFS and OS.Results: The expression level of AKR1B10
(expression score/GAPDH1000) was significantly higher in HCC tissues
(median: 9.22 [range: 0.0003-611.02], n = 158) than in CN
(0.5461[0.0018-69.03], n = 158) tissues (P < 0.001). 158 HCC cases were
subsequently divided into two groups based on AKR1B10 expression in tumor
and CN in each case: one consisting of the T CN cases (n = 132) and the
other of the T < CN (n = 26). T < CN cases demonstrated significant
correlation with worse recurrence-free survival (P = 0.0074) and overall
survival (P<0.0001). Furthermore, multivariate analysis identified
AKR1B10 expression T<CN as an independent prognostic factor in overall
survival (P = 0.0011). The alteration of AKR1B10 expression level in T
and CN was significantly correlated between liver damage score (B or C /
A) (P = 0.035) and infiltration to capsule (+ / -) (P = 0.0284)
respectively.Conclusions:Our findings suggested that basically, AKR1B10
expression is much higher in T than in CN but once AKR1B10 expression
inversion between tumor and CN occurs; its prognosis becomes
significantly worse. This T<CN change may well expressed both CN ill
status and T malignancy. This alteration might be one of the good and
suggestive prognostic predictors for resected HCC.

