Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting localization and function of the RNA helicase DDX5/p68
with 1-(3,5-dimethoxyphenyl)-4-[(6-fluoro-2-methoxyquinoxalin-3-yl)
aminocarbonyl] piperazine (RX-5902)


The DEAD box RNA helicase DDX5/p68 is aberrantly expressed and
post-translationally modified in several cancers. Several studies have
indicated that p68 plays important roles in cell proliferation and tumor
progression; in particular, p68 that is phosphorylated on Tyr593 has been
shown to be associated with cell transformation, epithelial mesenchymal
transition and cell migration. Therefore, p68 may be a promising target
for novel anti-cancer therapeutics.We previously reported that
1-(3,5-dimethoxyphenyl)-4-[(6-fluoro-2-methoxyquinoxalin-3-yl)
aminocarbonyl] piperazine (RX-5902) inhibits the growth cancer cell lines
by interacting and interfering with the function of phosphorylated p68 at
low nanomolar concentrations, and inhibit tumor growth in several human
xenograft models in nude mice.Although p68 is largely a nuclear protein,
it has been found to shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm in cells,
a function that appears to be critical for its role in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Furthermore, our previous work
demonstrated that the nuclear localization of p68 alters during the cell
cycle suggesting that alterations in localization of p68 may also be
important for cell cycle control and proliferation.We therefore
investigated the effect of RX-5902 on the cellular localization of
phosphorylated p68 in cancer cell lines. Our results suggest that
treatment with RX5902 results in a significant alteration in the
localization of phosphorylated p68, providing a possible mechanism(s) by
which RX-5902 may affect phosphorylated p68 function. Further ongoing
studies are aimed at examining the effect of RX-5902 on cellular motility
in wound healing assays to determine whether RX-5902 could additionally
affect the potential function of phosphorylated p68 in cell migration.

