Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atypical protein kinase C inhibition in prostate cancer cells: A
study of ICA-1 and ACPD


Aggressive and metastatic prostate cancers are highly lethal tumors and
are one of the leading causes of death among men. Certain prostate
cancers are highly lethal tumors due to the emergence of
therapy-resistant cancer cells. There is a gap in knowledge relating to
which intracellular chemicals confer the emergence of therapy-resistant
prostate cancer cells, which intracellular chemicals are responsible for
prostate cancer survival and which chemicals regulate intracellular
signaling pathways in prostate cancer. To address this critical problem,
we investigated two drugs that act as inhibitors of atypical protein
kinase C. The objective of this study was to test the effectiveness of
ACPD [Diabetes. 63:2690-2701 (2014)] as an atypical PKC inhibitor and
ICA-1 as an inhibitor of PKC-iota [The Inter. J. Biochem. & Cell Biol.
43:784-794(2011)]. DU-145 prostate carcinoma cells and non-malignant
prostate RWPE-1 cells were each cultivated in separate flasks. They were
treated with drugs of interest for three consecutive days. The cells were
counted before and after the treatments and a statistical analysis was
performed. The cells were lysed and levels of PKC-iota and PKC-zeta were
measured by Western blotting and immunoprecipitation. Our preliminary
results demonstrated that treatment of DU-145 showed a statistically
significant decrease in cells that was proportional to the concentration
in both drugs. Treatment of the RWPE-1 cells showed no statistically
significant change in population. Western blotting showed that both drugs
decreased PKC-iota. In conclusion ACPD is an effective inhibitor of
PKC-iota and PKC-zeta and consequently significantly reduced the
neogenesis of the prostate DU-145 carcinoma cells while having negligible
effect on the non-malignant prostate RWPE-1 cells.

