Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a universal target retrieval solution and protocol for
RNA in situ hybridization based on RNAscope technology


Heat induced target retrieval (HITR) is a widely adopted approach for
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH) applications
on formalin fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues to facilitate
target access and increase detection sensitivity. A variety of factors,
such as fixative type, fixation time, tissue type, epitope abundance,
antibody affinity, and probe length greatly affect the efficiency of
HITR. Given such variability, over the decades, multiple HITR buffer
formulations and protocols were invented to fit the needs in different
experimental scenarios.We have developed a novel HITR solution that
allows highly efficient target retrieval for RNA ISH application based on
the RNAscope technology. When tested on 15 different tumor types, the new
HITR solution resulted in significantly better sensitivity and/or tissue
morphology comparing to using traditional HITR buffers, including
Citrate, EDTA, and Tris based buffers with various pH. Furthermore, this
new HITR solution is highly tolerant to sample variability. When used on
multiple human tumor tissue microarrays (TMAs), including breast, colon,
lung, and gastric cancers, the new HITR solution improved overall
signal-to-noise ratio and reduced core disqualification rate, compared to
traditional citrate based HITR buffer for ISH. Moreover, when tested on
multiple mouse tissues fixed with different types of fixatives for
varying periods of time (6 - 72 hours), a single experimental condition
with the new HITR solution showed comparable results in both detection
sensitivity and morphological integrity in all the samples. It also
allowed detection of a target (Tbp) with extremely low abundance (Heat
induced target retrieval (HITR) is a widely adopted approach for
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH) applications
on formalin fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues to facilitate
target access and increase detection sensitivity. A variety of factors,
such as fixative type, fixation time, tissue type, epitope abundance,
antibody affinity, and probe length greatly affect the efficiency of
HITR. Given such variability, over the decades, multiple HITR buffer
formulations and protocols were invented to fit the needs in different
experimental scenarios.We have developed a novel HITR solution that
allows highly efficient target retrieval for RNA ISH application based on
the RNAscope technology. When tested on 15 different tumor types, the new
HITR solution resulted in significantly better sensitivity and/or tissue
morphology comparing to using traditional HITR buffers, including
Citrate, EDTA, and Tris based buffers with various pH. Furthermore, this
new HITR solution is highly tolerant to sample variability. When used on
multiple human tumor tissue microarrays (TMAs), including breast, colon,
lung, and gastric cancers, the new HITR solution improved overall
signal-to-noise ratio and reduced core disqualification rate, compared to
traditional citrate based HITR buffer for ISH. Moreover, when tested on
multiple mouse tissues fixed with different types of fixatives for
varying periods of time (6 - 72 hours), a single experimental condition
with the new HITR solution showed comparable results in both detection
sensitivity and morphological integrity in all the samples. It also
allowed detection of a target (Tbp) with extremely low abundance (<5
copies/cell).Given that all the RNAscope probes are synthetic
oligonucleotide probes with length shorter than 60 bases, the new HITR
solution, in combination with the RNAscope technology, will allow
universal detection of any RNA targets with single molecule detection
sensitivity in FFPE tissues with minimal requirement for analytical
condition optimization.

