Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The AdnaCellector, a new fully automated selection for circulating
tumor cells in blood of primary and metastatic breast cancer patients


Background: The utility of circulating tumor cells (CTC) as promising
prognostic biomarker to predict the risk of relapse in primary and
metastatic breast cancer (BC) patients as well as to monitor disease
progression has already been shown over the last years. Nevertheless, the
clinical utility of CTC highly depends on a robust and standardized
selection method which can be easily integrated in clinical routine. To
adress this medical need, the AdnaCellector, a fully automated
immunomagnetic cell capturing device, was developed to a prototype stage.
Here we present a pilot study in a clinical setting to investigate the
general assay performance of the AdnaCellector and the overall agreement
with the manual AdnaTest BreastCancerSelect.Materials and Methods: In
total, CTC were isolated from EDTA blood of 13 primary and 20 metastatic
BC patients with the AdnaCellector and the manual AdnaTest
BreastCancerSelect (AdnaGen GmbH, Langenhagen, Germany) in duplicates of
5ml. The lysates generated from both selection variants were processed
manually with the AdnaTest BreastCancerDetect. Established cDNA was used
for multiplex PCR (MUC-1, GA733-2, HER2). Resulting PCR fragments were
analyzed with the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100. Patients were classified as
CTC positive if at least one marker was detected with a concentration
0.15 ng/l. Assay positivity among the same patient was evaluated with
regard to the selection method. To further estimate the ease of use of
both methods a non-experienced trainee was choosen to perform the
procedure.Results: Comparing all clinical samples, the detection rate was
32% (20/61) for the manual workflow and 42% (25/60) using the
AdnaCellector with an overall concordance of 81% (pBackground: The
utility of circulating tumor cells (CTC) as promising prognostic
biomarker to predict the risk of relapse in primary and metastatic breast
cancer (BC) patients as well as to monitor disease progression has
already been shown over the last years. Nevertheless, the clinical
utility of CTC highly depends on a robust and standardized selection
method which can be easily integrated in clinical routine. To adress this
medical need, the AdnaCellector, a fully automated immunomagnetic cell
capturing device, was developed to a prototype stage. Here we present a
pilot study in a clinical setting to investigate the general assay
performance of the AdnaCellector and the overall agreement with the
manual AdnaTest BreastCancerSelect.Materials and Methods: In total, CTC
were isolated from EDTA blood of 13 primary and 20 metastatic BC patients
with the AdnaCellector and the manual AdnaTest BreastCancerSelect
(AdnaGen GmbH, Langenhagen, Germany) in duplicates of 5ml. The lysates
generated from both selection variants were processed manually with the
AdnaTest BreastCancerDetect. Established cDNA was used for multiplex PCR
(MUC-1, GA733-2, HER2). Resulting PCR fragments were analyzed with the
Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100. Patients were classified as CTC positive if at
least one marker was detected with a concentration 0.15 ng/l. Assay
positivity among the same patient was evaluated with regard to the
selection method. To further estimate the ease of use of both methods a
non-experienced trainee was choosen to perform the procedure.Results:
Comparing all clinical samples, the detection rate was 32% (20/61) for
the manual workflow and 42% (25/60) using the AdnaCellector with an
overall concordance of 81% (p<0.001). If samples were separately analyzed
for blood from primary or metastatic patients, the manual procedure
detected 35% (8/23) positive samples vs 30% (7/23) positivity by the
AdnaCellector in primary blood samples and 33% (12/36) vs 50% (18/37) in
metastatic blood samples, respectively. The overall concordance was 76%
(p = 0.05) in the primary setting and 86% (pBackground: The utility of
circulating tumor cells (CTC) as promising prognostic biomarker to
predict the risk of relapse in primary and metastatic breast cancer (BC)
patients as well as to monitor disease progression has already been shown
over the last years. Nevertheless, the clinical utility of CTC highly
depends on a robust and standardized selection method which can be easily
integrated in clinical routine. To adress this medical need, the
AdnaCellector, a fully automated immunomagnetic cell capturing device,
was developed to a prototype stage. Here we present a pilot study in a
clinical setting to investigate the general assay performance of the
AdnaCellector and the overall agreement with the manual AdnaTest
BreastCancerSelect.Materials and Methods: In total, CTC were isolated
from EDTA blood of 13 primary and 20 metastatic BC patients with the
AdnaCellector and the manual AdnaTest BreastCancerSelect (AdnaGen GmbH,
Langenhagen, Germany) in duplicates of 5ml. The lysates generated from
both selection variants were processed manually with the AdnaTest
BreastCancerDetect. Established cDNA was used for multiplex PCR (MUC-1,
GA733-2, HER2). Resulting PCR fragments were analyzed with the Agilent
Bioanalyzer 2100. Patients were classified as CTC positive if at least
one marker was detected with a concentration 0.15 ng/l. Assay positivity
among the same patient was evaluated with regard to the selection method.
To further estimate the ease of use of both methods a non-experienced
trainee was choosen to perform the procedure.Results: Comparing all
clinical samples, the detection rate was 32% (20/61) for the manual
workflow and 42% (25/60) using the AdnaCellector with an overall
concordance of 81% (p<0.001). If samples were separately analyzed for
blood from primary or metastatic patients, the manual procedure detected
35% (8/23) positive samples vs 30% (7/23) positivity by the AdnaCellector
in primary blood samples and 33% (12/36) vs 50% (18/37) in metastatic
blood samples, respectively. The overall concordance was 76% (p = 0.05)
in the primary setting and 86% (p<0.001) for the metastatic
samples.Discussion: For CTC detection in a clinical setting, we were able
to demonstrate a good concordance of the fully automated AdnaCellector
prototype and the manual workflow of the AdnaTest BreastCancer.Most
interestingly, in the metastatic setting we observed even substantial
higher sensitivity vs the manual procedure which may indicate that this
automated and, therefore, standardized procedure may provide better test
performance if the AdnaTest is used by non-experienced personel.

