Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cumulative incidence rates of breast cancer for Filipinos and
Chamorros in Guam and the United States


BackgroundBreast cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death
among women on Guam. However incidence rates vary between Chamorros and
Filipinos, the two predominant ethnic groups on Guam.ObjectiveOur
objective was to compare age-specific cumulative incidence rates among
ethnic groups in Guam and US. Cumulative incidence rates are relatively
stable and thus provide a good estimate of cumulative risk of breast
cancer.MethodsThis study included all breast cancer cases (n = 576)
reported to the Guam Cancer Registry from 2000 to 2009 and all breast
cancer cases (n = 678,637) reported to the Surveillance, Epidemiology,and
End Results (SEER) 18-Registry Database. Cumulative incidence rates were
calculated for Filipinos and Chamorros for two time periods: 2000-2004
and 2005-2009. For comparison, cumulative incidence rates were also
calculated for all women in Guam and the US, and for Filipino only in the
US.ResultsRemarkable differences were seen in cumulative incidence rates
by age and ethnicity. During the 2000-2004 time period, the cumulative
incidence rates by age 40 in Filipinos on Guam were the highest (0.7%)
and almost threefold higher than the rate in Chamorros (0.24%). But after
age 40, the rates for Chamorros increased rapidly. The lifetime
cumulative incidence rates (age 0-75) for Chamorros was highest in Guam
(11.4%) and close to the US rate (12%). Interestingly, there was a marked
difference in lifetime cumulative incidence rates between Filipino women
in Guam and Filipinos in the US (7% and 10.9% respectively). Similar
results were found for the 2005-2009 time period.ConclusionsThe observed
disparity among ethnic groups suggests ethnic differences in exposure or
response to certain risk factors. Further study is needed to examine
possible differences in risk behaviors between Filipinos and Chamorros in
Guam, as well as between Filipinos in Guam and Filipinos in the US.

