Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DR5-targeting sensitizes Lgr5+ stem cells to p53 and
Chk2-dependent chemotherapy-induced cell death and produces dose-limiting
gastrointestinal toxicity (GIT)


Current ongoing clinical trials are exploring combined targeting of the
TRAIL-death receptor DR5 with radiochemotherapy. It is not clear
mechanistically why targeting of the DR5 increasingly sensitizes cancer
cells to cell death without affecting cells in normal tissues.
Preclinical data suggests that integration of DR5 agonist antibodies into
chemotherapy protocols has the promise to significantly improve cancer
specific responses without negatively impacting dose-limiting toxicities.
Here we show that targeting of DR5 in mice with the mouse-specific mAb
MD5-1 in combination with chemotherapy triggers synergistic
gastrointestinal toxicities (GIT) that is associated with the death of
Lgr5+ crypt basal columnar (CBC) cells. This type of GIT is mediated by
p53 and in the case of irinotecan, the cell cycle checkpoint kinase 2
(Chk2). Pharmacologic targeting of Chk2 sensitized syngeneic mouse
colorectal cancer tumors lacking P53 to the irinotecan/MD5-1 combination
while at the same time protecting the gastrointestinal tract from injury.
Our data indicates that blockade of cell cycle checkpoint kinases can
help prevent GIT triggered by a combination of DNA damaging chemotherapy
and DR5 agonists. Pharmacologic targeting of Chk2 can improve the
anti-tumor response of such drug combinations and subsequently provides a
rationale on how to improve therapeutic indices of DR5-targeting in the
context of chemotherapy usage.

