Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BPR2P001S0, a Coumarin derivative, induced cell cycle arrest in
A549 through inhibiting PDPK1 activity


Lung cancer is one of the most common causes of cancer deaths in the
world, and the emergence of resistant lung cancer cells can lead to
treatment failure. The development of new drugs to treat lung cancer,
especially those resistant lung cancer cells, is urgent. Previously we
identified that coumarin could inhibit replication of human lung cancer
A549 cells. The efficacy of 284 coumarin derivatives on human lung cancer
A549 cells was examined, and BPR2P001S0 was the most potent compound.
BPR2P001S0 exhibited growth inhibition and apoptotic activity on A549
cells with an IC50 of 10 nM. A similar level of inhibitory effects was
also observed in cisplatin-resistant A549 cells (IC50 = 12.5 nM). The
ability of colony formation and migration capability of A549 cells
decreased significantly in the presence of BPR2P001S0. In cell cycle
analysis, BPR2P001S0 induced cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase through
down-regulation of cyclin D1 and Cdk4 protein expression. The expression
of cyclinD1/Cdk4 regulatory protein, Akt, was also decreased.
Subsequently, we found that the expression level of Ser241 phosphorated
PDPK1 protein, an Akt activator in Akt pathway, was also reduced. By
molecular docking analysis, we found that the reduced PDPK1
phosphorylation is likely resulted from the allosteric effect of
interactions between BPRHIV001 and PDPK1. In conclusion, our results
suggest that the anti-tumor activity of BPR2P001S0 is likely resulting
from its ability to interfere with PDPK1 autophosphorylation at Ser241,
which leads to reduced Akt protein and subsequent cyclin D1 degradation.

