Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultrasensitive detection of the pretreatment EGFR T790M mutation
in non-small cell lung cancer patients with an EGFR-activating mutation
using picodroplet digital PCR


Purpose: The resistance of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) to
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) is a major concern in non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment. T790M mutation in EGFR accounts for nearly
50% of the acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs. Earlier studies suggested
that EGFR T790M mutation was also detected in TKI-naive NSCLCs in a small
cohort and the prevalence of a de novo EGFR T790M mutation in patients
with EGFR-mutant NSCLC remains unclear. Here, we use an ultra-sensitive
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) technique to address the incidence and
clinical significance of pretreatment EGFR T790M mutation in a larger
cohort.Experimental design: ddPCR was established as follows: EGFR
wild-type or T790M mutation-containing DNA fragments were cloned into
plasmids. Candidate threshold was identified using wild-type plasmid,
normal human genomic DNA, and human A549 cell line DNA, which expresses
wild-type EGFR. Surgically resected tumor tissues from 373 early-stage
NSCLC patients with EGFR-activating mutations detected by Cycleave PCR
method were then examined for the presence of pretreatment EGFR T790M
mutation using ddPCR.Results: Preclinical model data revealed a linear
performance for this ddPCR method (R2 = 0.998) with an analytical
sensitivity of 0.001%. The overall incidence of the pretreatment EGFR
T790M mutation was 79.9% (298/373) and the frequency ranged from 0.009%
to 26.9%, while only five patients were diagnosed positive for EGFR T790M
mutation by Cycleave PCR method. The EGFR T790M mutation was detected
more frequently in patients with a larger tumor size (p = 0.019) and
those with common EGFR-activating mutations (p = 0.022), as compared to
the others. Among the 69 patients who had co-incident mutations in EGFR
and p53, 61 patients (88.4%) had the EGFR T790M mutation (p = 0.096).
Moreover, all 11 patients with mutations in PIK3CA and EGFR had the EGFR
T790M mutation (p = 0.097). These results, while not statistically
significant, suggest that tumors with the pretreatment EGFR T790M
mutation may manifest greater genomic complexity.Conclusions: To our
knowledge, this is the largest study thus far using an ultra-sensitive
method for detecting the pretreatment EGFR T790M mutation that has
demonstrated associations between the incidence of the pretreatment T790M
mutation and clinicopathological as well as genetic features in
early-stage NSCLC. The ultra-sensitive ddPCR assay revealed that
pretreatment EGFR T790M mutation was found in the majority of NSCLC
patients with EGFR-activating mutations. ddPCR should be utilized for
detailed assessment of the impact of the low frequency pretreatment EGFR
T790M mutation on treatment with EGFR-TKIs, allowing the possibility of
developing strategies for personalized cancer therapies in NSCLC patients.

