Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific mtDNA variants and colorectal adenopolyps


The clinical frequency of colorectal cancer occurrence increase in
adenomas with a predominant villous histopathology: tubular (5%),
tubulovillous (22%) and villous (40%). Adenoma may develop throughout the
gastrointerestinal tract with coarse lobulations formed by branching
tubular glands whose lumens open on the surface which are rare in most
patient gastrointerestinal tract areas other than the colorectum. The
adenoma-carcinoma sequence is clinically associated in patients with
polyposis and ulcerative colitis since their predilection for developing
carcinoma in adenomatous epithelium is greatly increased. This study
focused on COX, ATPase, rRNA, Cytb and ND genes of the mitochondrial
genome that have been associated as modifying risks of cancer. Using
PCR-based sequence and High resolution restriction endonuclease, we
investigated the potential role of mtDNA alterations in colorectal
adenopolyps (Tubular, Tubulovillous, and Villous) and carcinoma.
Fifty-eight primary tissues of colorectal adenopolyps, carcinoma and
their matched normal controls were used in this study. Twenty-two
variants were observed and most of these variants were germline and
homoplasmic transitions. Unreported germline variants Cytb-A14782T (90%)
and MT-ATPase 8 A9169C (75%) were associated with tubular adenomas. Also,
MT-ATPase 6- variant T8994A (85%) was associated with tubulovillous
adenomas. Moreover, in the highly conservative region of rRNA, variant
T1738C was found in colorectal carcinoma only. Results suggest that some
specific mtDNA variants may exert their effects on colorectal adenopolyps
to gain a proliferative advantage in patients bearing CRC.

