Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retrospective evaluation, of the randomized Phase 3 MARQUEE trial
of tivantinib (T) + erlotinib (E) versus placebo (P) + erlotinib (E)
using VeriStrat in patients with previously treated nonsquamous NSCLC


Background: MET, the high-affinity receptor for hepatocyte growth factor,
is frequently deregulated in human cancer and is thought to be involved
in resistance to EGFR TKIs. Tivantinib is an orally administered MET
inhibitor currently under development as a cancer therapy. The Phase 3
MARQUEE trial enrolled 1048 subjects with locally-advanced or metastatic
non-squamous NSCLC who had received one or two lines of prior systemic
therapy. Patients were randomized 1:1 to T+E (N = 526) or P+E (N = 522)
until disease progression. In the ITT population, addition of tivantinib
to erlotinib significantly improved PFS and ORR but did not improve OS,
the primary endpoint. VeriStrat (VS) is a multivariate serum protein test
that utilizes MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry to assign a GOOD (VS-G) or POOR
(VS-P) classification and has demonstrated broad prognostic and
predictive utility for EGFR TKI treatment regimens.Methods: Pre-treatment
serum samples from the MARQUEE study were blinded to clinical outcome and
analyzed by VeriStrat. Clinical benefit of T+E vs. P+E was analyzed as a
function of VS status, in the ITT population as well as in pre-defined
subgroups.Results: A total of 996 subjects were classified: 718 as VS-G
and 278 as VS-P. Subjects testing VS-G had superior outcomes to those
testing VS-P in both the T+E arm (OS HR = 0.32, CI: 0.26-0.41,
pBackground: MET, the high-affinity receptor for hepatocyte growth
factor, is frequently deregulated in human cancer and is thought to be
involved in resistance to EGFR TKIs. Tivantinib is an orally administered
MET inhibitor currently under development as a cancer therapy. The Phase
3 MARQUEE trial enrolled 1048 subjects with locally-advanced or
metastatic non-squamous NSCLC who had received one or two lines of prior
systemic therapy. Patients were randomized 1:1 to T+E (N = 526) or P+E (N
= 522) until disease progression. In the ITT population, addition of
tivantinib to erlotinib significantly improved PFS and ORR but did not
improve OS, the primary endpoint. VeriStrat (VS) is a multivariate serum
protein test that utilizes MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry to assign a GOOD
(VS-G) or POOR (VS-P) classification and has demonstrated broad
prognostic and predictive utility for EGFR TKI treatment
regimens.Methods: Pre-treatment serum samples from the MARQUEE study were
blinded to clinical outcome and analyzed by VeriStrat. Clinical benefit
of T+E vs. P+E was analyzed as a function of VS status, in the ITT
population as well as in pre-defined subgroups.Results: A total of 996
subjects were classified: 718 as VS-G and 278 as VS-P. Subjects testing
VS-G had superior outcomes to those testing VS-P in both the T+E arm (OS
HR = 0.32, CI: 0.26-0.41, p<0.0001; PFS HR = 0.55, CI: 0.44-0.69,
pBackground: MET, the high-affinity receptor for hepatocyte growth
factor, is frequently deregulated in human cancer and is thought to be
involved in resistance to EGFR TKIs. Tivantinib is an orally administered
MET inhibitor currently under development as a cancer therapy. The Phase
3 MARQUEE trial enrolled 1048 subjects with locally-advanced or
metastatic non-squamous NSCLC who had received one or two lines of prior
systemic therapy. Patients were randomized 1:1 to T+E (N = 526) or P+E (N
= 522) until disease progression. In the ITT population, addition of
tivantinib to erlotinib significantly improved PFS and ORR but did not
improve OS, the primary endpoint. VeriStrat (VS) is a multivariate serum
protein test that utilizes MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry to assign a GOOD
(VS-G) or POOR (VS-P) classification and has demonstrated broad
prognostic and predictive utility for EGFR TKI treatment
regimens.Methods: Pre-treatment serum samples from the MARQUEE study were
blinded to clinical outcome and analyzed by VeriStrat. Clinical benefit
of T+E vs. P+E was analyzed as a function of VS status, in the ITT
population as well as in pre-defined subgroups.Results: A total of 996
subjects were classified: 718 as VS-G and 278 as VS-P. Subjects testing
VS-G had superior outcomes to those testing VS-P in both the T+E arm (OS
HR = 0.32, CI: 0.26-0.41, p<0.0001; PFS HR = 0.55, CI: 0.44-0.69,
p<0.0001) and P+E arm (OS HR = 0.43, CI: 0.34-0.55, pBackground: MET, the
high-affinity receptor for hepatocyte growth factor, is frequently
deregulated in human cancer and is thought to be involved in resistance
to EGFR TKIs. Tivantinib is an orally administered MET inhibitor
currently under development as a cancer therapy. The Phase 3 MARQUEE
trial enrolled 1048 subjects with locally-advanced or metastatic
non-squamous NSCLC who had received one or two lines of prior systemic
therapy. Patients were randomized 1:1 to T+E (N = 526) or P+E (N = 522)
until disease progression. In the ITT population, addition of tivantinib
to erlotinib significantly improved PFS and ORR but did not improve OS,
the primary endpoint. VeriStrat (VS) is a multivariate serum protein test
that utilizes MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry to assign a GOOD (VS-G) or POOR
(VS-P) classification and has demonstrated broad prognostic and
predictive utility for EGFR TKI treatment regimens.Methods: Pre-treatment
serum samples from the MARQUEE study were blinded to clinical outcome and
analyzed by VeriStrat. Clinical benefit of T+E vs. P+E was analyzed as a
function of VS status, in the ITT population as well as in pre-defined
subgroups.Results: A total of 996 subjects were classified: 718 as VS-G
and 278 as VS-P. Subjects testing VS-G had superior outcomes to those
testing VS-P in both the T+E arm (OS HR = 0.32, CI: 0.26-0.41, p<0.0001;
PFS HR = 0.55, CI: 0.44-0.69, p<0.0001) and P+E arm (OS HR = 0.43, CI:
0.34-0.55, p<0.0001; PFS HR = 0.70, CI: 0.55-0.88, pBackground: MET, the
high-affinity receptor for hepatocyte growth factor, is frequently
deregulated in human cancer and is thought to be involved in resistance
to EGFR TKIs. Tivantinib is an orally administered MET inhibitor
currently under development as a cancer therapy. The Phase 3 MARQUEE
trial enrolled 1048 subjects with locally-advanced or metastatic
non-squamous NSCLC who had received one or two lines of prior systemic
therapy. Patients were randomized 1:1 to T+E (N = 526) or P+E (N = 522)
until disease progression. In the ITT population, addition of tivantinib
to erlotinib significantly improved PFS and ORR but did not improve OS,
the primary endpoint. VeriStrat (VS) is a multivariate serum protein test
that utilizes MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry to assign a GOOD (VS-G) or POOR
(VS-P) classification and has demonstrated broad prognostic and
predictive utility for EGFR TKI treatment regimens.Methods: Pre-treatment
serum samples from the MARQUEE study were blinded to clinical outcome and
analyzed by VeriStrat. Clinical benefit of T+E vs. P+E was analyzed as a
function of VS status, in the ITT population as well as in pre-defined
subgroups.Results: A total of 996 subjects were classified: 718 as VS-G
and 278 as VS-P. Subjects testing VS-G had superior outcomes to those
testing VS-P in both the T+E arm (OS HR = 0.32, CI: 0.26-0.41, p<0.0001;
PFS HR = 0.55, CI: 0.44-0.69, p<0.0001) and P+E arm (OS HR = 0.43, CI:
0.34-0.55, p<0.0001; PFS HR = 0.70, CI: 0.55-0.88, p<0.028). VeriStrat
status was a significant, independent predictor of OS, in these erlotinib
treated patients, after adjustment for EGFR mutation, KRAS mutation, or
MET IHC status. However, VeriStrat did not predict OS or PFS benefit for
T+E vs. P+E (treatment * VS interaction p-value for OS of p = 0.09 and
PFS of p = 0.19). VS was neither predictive nor prognostic for tivantinib
effect in any molecular subgroup.Conclusion: These data support the
previously demonstrated ability of VS to be both prognostic and
predictive for survival in erlotinib treated patients, but not for
tivantinib treated patients.

