Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical monitoring of prostate cancer lesions in bone by
intravital multiphoton microscopy


Bone metastases are a major complication in patients with advanced
prostate cancer (PCa) and frequent cause of therapy resistance. Besides
cell intrinsic mechanisms, signals received from the bone
microenvironment critically contribute to support PCa cell survival and
growth. Recent advances in intravital microscopy enable to investigate
this complex PCa cell-microenvironment interaction and allow preclinical
examination of tumor responses to both conventional and targeted
therapy.We developed a window model amenable to intravital multiphoton
microscopy (MPM) to longitudinally monitor PCa lesions in humanized
neobone established in the dermis of the mouse. Tissue engineered bone
constructs, TEBCs, were generated by functionalizing polymeric
polycaprolactone scaffolds with human mesenchymal stem cells
differentiated to osteoblasts, and characterized in vitro for cell
distribution and calcium deposition. After in vivo implantation, TEBC
maturation was monitored by CT, MPM and histological analysis over time
to generate a miniaturized-neobone with defined cortical thickness (50-60
m) suitable for intravital imaging through a body window. PCa (PC3)
lesions, after implantation into the bone cavity, were longitudinally
monitored for growth and niche development, using multi-parameter
recording of: collagen/bone matrix (SHG), bone surface (THG), blood
vessels/stromal phagocytes (fluorescent dextran), and PC3 cells (nuclear
H2BeGFP, cytoplasmatic DsRed2).By combining innovative tissue engineering
with optical windows, state-of-the-art fluorescence reporter technology
and intravital MPM, this model will provide mechanistic and applied
insight into the therapy response of bone metastasis.

