Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ezrin enhances signaling and nuclear translocation of the
epidermal growth factor receptor in non-small cell lung cancer cells


The cytoskeletal cross linker protein ezrin is a member of the
ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) family and plays important roles not only in
cell motility, cell adhesion, and apoptosis, but also in various
cell-signaling pathways. Ezrin interacts with EGFR in the cell membrane
and involves in cell motility events, but little is known about the
effects of this interaction on the EGFR signaling pathway. We
investigated the role of Ezrin in EGFR signaling and nuclear trafficking
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines. The ligand induced
interaction between Ezrin and EGFR was evaluated by immunoprecipitation
(IP) and immunofluorescence (IF) in H292 and A549 cells. Ezrin levels
were reduced using siRNA in these two cell lines. Downstream signaling
protein phosphorylation and nuclear localization of EGFR were detected
after EGF treatment. Expressions of nuclear EGFR target genes were
evaluated by qPCR. Endogenous Ezrin was found in a complex with EGFR in
IP and IF. When Ezrin protein expression was inhibited, phosphorylation
levels of EGFR at Y1068, Y1101 and Y845 were reduced as well as
phosphorylation levels of downstream signaling pathway proteins ERK and
STAT3. Cell fractionation revealed that EGFR nuclear translocation after
EGF treatment significantly reduced in Ezrin-knockdown cells. Further,
mRNA levels of EGFR target genes AuroraK-A, COX2, Cyclin D1 and iNOS were
decreased in Ezrin-knockdown A549 cells. Small molecule ezrin inhibitors
showed strong synergy with EGFR inhibitors in cytotoxicity assays. These
results suggest that Ezrin has a role as an enhancer in the EGFR pathway
and targeting ezrin may potentiate anti-EGFR based therapies in NSCLC.

