Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASCT2: A novel metabolic target for cancer therapy


Uncontrolled proliferation of cancer cells is often fueled by the
deregulation of various cellular signaling pathways. Such deregulation
also frequently rewires the metabolism of cancer cells in order to meet
their increased need for energy and nutrients required for growth and
proliferation. In the process, tumor cells produce high levels of
anabolic intermediates required for biosynthesis of macromolecules and
redox homeostasis. Many of these building blocks are derived from
tri-carboxylic acid cycle (TCA) intermediates that need to be replenished
in a process called anapleurosis. Glutaminolysis, the process in which
glutamine (Gln) is converted into TCA intermediates by glutaminase is one
of the key pathways that feeds anapleurosis in cancers. Many tumor cell
lines fail to grow in the absence of glutamine and are therefore addicted
to this nutrient. Glutamine is a preferred substrate for ASCT2, a member
of ASC family of amino acid transporters, and thus this transporter may
play a role in this addiction. We screened a variety of cancer cells for
their dependence on Gln and determined that a significant subset of cell
lines require this important nutrient. Biochemical experiments indicated
that the ASCT2 family of proteins is the main driver of Gln transport. In
agreement with these findings, shRNA-mediated knock down of ASCT2
significantly inhibited 14C-Gln uptake and tumor cell proliferation.
Expression of an shRNA-resistant ASCT2 gene rescued both the inhibition
of cell proliferation and transport of Gln. Furthermore, stable knockdown
of ASCT2 induced autophagy and significantly slowed growth in vivo of
various tumor types such as colon carcinoma, prostate carcinoma, and in
neuroblastoma. The above findings identify ASCT2 as an attractive target
for therapeutic intervention.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

