Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of promoter methylation levels of COX2 gene in Turkish
patients with head and neck cancer


Purpose: Methylation of CpG islands in the promoter regions of genes
plays an important role in head and neck carcinogenesis. Overexpression
of COX2 gene was recorded in various types of cancer in literature. In
addition, the promoter region of the COX2 gene displayed high methylation
in normal colorectal tissue and normal gastric tissue samples. On the
other hand, it has recently been reported in two different
gastrointestinal cancer studies, that low expression of COX2 was observed
in some colorectal/gastric cancers and hypermethylation/related
transcriptional silencing of COX2 gene is common in colorectal cancer.
There is no study investigating the COX2 methylation status on head and
neck cancer (HNC) in the literature. In our study we evaluated the COX2
gene promoter methylation in patients with HNC.Experimental Design:
Methylation of the COX2 was investigated by bisulfite
modification/methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction in tumors and
matched normal tissue samples from 99 Turkish patients with HNC.Results:
The promoter region of the COX2 was methylated in 53.5% and 65.6% of the
primary tumors and the corresponding normal tissue samples, respectively
[p = 0.082, 2 = 3.02, OR(95%CI) = 0.602 (0.34-1.06)]. Considering the
methylation levels observed in our previous studies, and published data
on different cancer types, methylation levels 25%) were 30.3% and 58.6%
in the tumor and normal tissues, respectively (p = 0.00006, 2 = 19.24).
The results were similar when a subgroup of 60 patients with larynx
cancer from this cohort, were analyzed separately (p = 0.0006, 2 =
14.87).Conclusions: Methylation may play an important role in HNC
carcinogenesis. Although we found that there was no significant
association between the methylation levels of tumor and adjacent normal
tissues, high methylation levels of the COX2 gene were observed (>25%) in
normal matched tissues when compared to the levels in HNC tumors.

