Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retinoic acid signal and annexins: A vicious circle of breast
tumorigenesis


Physiological retinoic acid (RA), the bioactive derivative of Vitamin A,
is a signal necessary for epithelial cell morphogenesis. During acinar
morphogenesis of normal breast epithelial cells in three dimensional (3D)
culture, physiological RA activates in a spatiotemporal fashion both
genomic and non-genomic RA receptor alpha (RARA) signalings, thus leading
to growth-arrested acini with a lumen lined by a layer of polarized
cells. In contrast, lack of activation of genomic RARA by physiological
RA results in the formation of 3D amorphous acini without lumen and with
uncontrolled proliferation of the luminal cells. This is similar to what
is observed in early in situ breast cancer lesions, such as ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS). Different factors that, directly or indirectly,
affect genomic RARA in normal breast epithelial cells and, consequently,
the morphogenetic action of RA signal, lead to deregulation of members of
the Annexin family, including Annexin A8 (ANXA8). Interestingly,
upregulation of ANXA8 is sufficient to affect the genomic RARA-mediated
RA signaling with consequent development of 3D amorphous acini. Thus,
ANXA8 upregulation consequent to functional inhibition of genomic RARA by
different factors seems to reinforce through a feedback loop the extent
of functional inhibition of genomic RARA itself. It is of significance
that ANXA8 upregulation in DCIS does correlate with tumor grade and
stage.Acknowledgements: Funding for this study was provided by the NCI
R01 CA127614 grant, the Susan Komen Foundation, the Breast Cancer
Coalition of Rochester, the Friends for an Earlier Breast Cancer Test,
the Terri Brodeur Breast Cancer Foundation.

