Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune checkpoint expression score is an independent prognostic
biomarker in resectable non-small cell lung cancer


BACKGROUNDImmune checkpoints blockade, which activate antitumor immunity,
has demonstrated promising clinical results in NSCLC. In this study we
have investigated the prognostic role of immune checkpoint expression
markers and its correlation with immune-cells infiltration and
clinico-pathological characteristics in a cohort of resectable NSCLC
patients.MATERIAL AND METHODSRNA was isolated from fresh-frozen lung
specimens (tumor and normal lung) (n = 178). RTqPCR was performed to
analyze the expression of CTLA-4, PD-1 and PD-L1 by the use of hydrolysis
probes. Relative gene expression was assessed by Pfaffl formula and
normalized by the use of CDKN1B, GUS and ACTB as endogenous genes
(selected by GeNorm algorithm). These data was used to develop a gene
expression score. Furthermore, the presence of CD4+, CD8+ and FOXP3+
lymphocytes was also assessed in FFPE samples from 63 of these patients
by immunohistochemistry (IHC). All statistical analysis were considered
significant at pBACKGROUNDImmune checkpoints blockade, which activate
antitumor immunity, has demonstrated promising clinical results in NSCLC.
In this study we have investigated the prognostic role of immune
checkpoint expression markers and its correlation with immune-cells
infiltration and clinico-pathological characteristics in a cohort of
resectable NSCLC patients.MATERIAL AND METHODSRNA was isolated from
fresh-frozen lung specimens (tumor and normal lung) (n = 178). RTqPCR was
performed to analyze the expression of CTLA-4, PD-1 and PD-L1 by the use
of hydrolysis probes. Relative gene expression was assessed by Pfaffl
formula and normalized by the use of CDKN1B, GUS and ACTB as endogenous
genes (selected by GeNorm algorithm). These data was used to develop a
gene expression score. Furthermore, the presence of CD4+, CD8+ and FOXP3+
lymphocytes was also assessed in FFPE samples from 63 of these patients
by immunohistochemistry (IHC). All statistical analysis were considered
significant at p< 0.05.RESULTSPatient's median age was 65 years [26-85],
86.5% were male and 43.8% were adenocarcinomas (ADC). Since CTLA-4 and
PD-1 were moderately associated with prognosis based on COX regression
analysis (|Z-score|BACKGROUNDImmune checkpoints blockade, which activate
antitumor immunity, has demonstrated promising clinical results in NSCLC.
In this study we have investigated the prognostic role of immune
checkpoint expression markers and its correlation with immune-cells
infiltration and clinico-pathological characteristics in a cohort of
resectable NSCLC patients.MATERIAL AND METHODSRNA was isolated from
fresh-frozen lung specimens (tumor and normal lung) (n = 178). RTqPCR was
performed to analyze the expression of CTLA-4, PD-1 and PD-L1 by the use
of hydrolysis probes. Relative gene expression was assessed by Pfaffl
formula and normalized by the use of CDKN1B, GUS and ACTB as endogenous
genes (selected by GeNorm algorithm). These data was used to develop a
gene expression score. Furthermore, the presence of CD4+, CD8+ and FOXP3+
lymphocytes was also assessed in FFPE samples from 63 of these patients
by immunohistochemistry (IHC). All statistical analysis were considered
significant at p< 0.05.RESULTSPatient's median age was 65 years [26-85],
86.5% were male and 43.8% were adenocarcinomas (ADC). Since CTLA-4 and
PD-1 were moderately associated with prognosis based on COX regression
analysis (|Z-score|<1.5), a multivariate model including these two genes
was created. Absolute regression coefficients from this analysis were
used in order to calculate the immune checkpoint score: (PD1 0.116) +
(CTLA4 0.058) for each case. We found a significant association between
the high immune checkpoint score and the presence of cytotoxic (CD8+)
infiltrating lymphocytes in the tumor microenvironment (p = 0.030).
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that patients with high immune
checkpoint score have longer overall survival (OS) [NR vs 40.4 months, p
= 0.008] and longer progression free survival (PFS) [82.6 vs 23 months, p
= 0.009]. A stratified analysis by histology was performed, showing a
strong association between the high immune checkpoint score and better
outcomes [OS p = 0.002; PFS pBACKGROUNDImmune checkpoints blockade, which
activate antitumor immunity, has demonstrated promising clinical results
in NSCLC. In this study we have investigated the prognostic role of
immune checkpoint expression markers and its correlation with
immune-cells infiltration and clinico-pathological characteristics in a
cohort of resectable NSCLC patients.MATERIAL AND METHODSRNA was isolated
from fresh-frozen lung specimens (tumor and normal lung) (n = 178).
RTqPCR was performed to analyze the expression of CTLA-4, PD-1 and PD-L1
by the use of hydrolysis probes. Relative gene expression was assessed by
Pfaffl formula and normalized by the use of CDKN1B, GUS and ACTB as
endogenous genes (selected by GeNorm algorithm). These data was used to
develop a gene expression score. Furthermore, the presence of CD4+, CD8+
and FOXP3+ lymphocytes was also assessed in FFPE samples from 63 of these
patients by immunohistochemistry (IHC). All statistical analysis were
considered significant at p< 0.05.RESULTSPatient's median age was 65
years [26-85], 86.5% were male and 43.8% were adenocarcinomas (ADC).
Since CTLA-4 and PD-1 were moderately associated with prognosis based on
COX regression analysis (|Z-score|<1.5), a multivariate model including
these two genes was created. Absolute regression coefficients from this
analysis were used in order to calculate the immune checkpoint score:
(PD1 0.116) + (CTLA4 0.058) for each case. We found a significant
association between the high immune checkpoint score and the presence of
cytotoxic (CD8+) infiltrating lymphocytes in the tumor microenvironment
(p = 0.030). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that patients with
high immune checkpoint score have longer overall survival (OS) [NR vs
40.4 months, p = 0.008] and longer progression free survival (PFS) [82.6
vs 23 months, p = 0.009]. A stratified analysis by histology was
performed, showing a strong association between the high immune
checkpoint score and better outcomes [OS p = 0.002; PFS p<0.001] in the
group of ADCs (n = 78). Multivariate analysis in the entire cohort
indicated that the immune checkpoint score was an independent biomarker
of prognosis for OS [HR: 0.308; 95%CI, 0.156-0.609; p = 0.001] and PFS
[HR: 0.527; 95%CI, 0.298-0.933; p = 0.028] in early-stage NSCLC
patients.CONCLUSIONSThe immune checkpoint score based on the expression
levels of CTLA-4 and PD-1 correlates with the presence of CD8+
infiltrating lymphocytes in the tumor microenvironment. This score
provides relevant prognostic information for a better characterization of
early-stage NSCLC patients with strikingly different outcomes who may be
candidates for immune-based therapies.Supported by grants PS09-01149 and
RD12/0036/0025 from ISCIII.

