Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor irradiation induced a phenotype change of monocytes to
facilitate vascular regrowth


We and others have previously shown that tumor irradiation mobilizes
CD11b+ myeloid cells from bone marrow into the tumor thereby facilitating
vascular regrowth and tumor recurrence. However, how these CD11b+ cells
promote vasculature growth remains largely undefined. In this study, we
found that CD11b+ cells in a 12Gy-irradiated U251 glioblastoma tumor
model were largely Ly6g negative, suggesting that these cells are not in
the granulocyte lineage, but rather are monocyte/macrophages
(CD11b+Ly6g-). Interestingly, we found that the proportion of Ly6c+
monocytes in the irradiated tumor remained unchanged compared to that in
the pre-irradiate tumor. However, the proportion of Ly6c- monocytes rose,
driving the increase of total CD11b+ cells post-irradiation. Compared to
Ly6c+ monocytes, Ly6c- cells in irradiated tumors were the major cells
expressing VEGF. In vitro culture of murine bone marrow enriched Ly6c+
monocyte with colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) downregulated Ly6c
expression and increased in vitro angiogenic capability as demonstrated
by the tube formation assay. Adding PLX3397, a CSF-1 receptor inhibitor
to irradiation, which has been shown to delay tumor growth previously,
decreased the Ly6c- monocytes more than the Ly6c+ monocytes. Given that
we and others have previously shown that CSF-1 expression was increased
in irradiated tumors, we conclude that tumor irradiation induced a
phenotype change of monocytes from Ly6c+ to Ly6c- and that the latter,
which are more pro-angiogenic, promote tumor vascular regrowth and
recurrence post-irradiation.

