Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The acetylcholine signaling pathway: A novel molecular target for
lung cancers


Cigarette smoking is a major risk factor for all types of lung cancers.
Nicotine, the addictive component of cigarettes, accelerates the growth
and angiogenesis of human lung cancers. The biological activity of
nicotine is mediated by nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). The
endogenous ligand of nAChRs is acetylcholine (ACh). We show that both
human SCLCs and NSCLCs contain all proteins of the acetylcholine
signaling pathway, namely nAChRs, choline acetyltransferase (ChAT),
vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT), choline transporter (ChT1)
and acetylcholinesterase (AChE). ACh functions as an autocrine growth
factor for human lung cancer cells. Lung adenocarcinoma (LAC), squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC-L) and invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (IMA) express
a diverse array of nAChRs. In addition, normal human lung cells also
express nAChRs and other ACh signaling proteins. Nicotine amplifies the
ACh signaling loop in human lung cancer cells. It increases the levels of
alpha7-nAChR subunit in human SCC-Ls. The alpha7-nAChR is responsible for
the proliferative and pro-angiogenic activity of nicotine in lung cancer.
The level of alpha7-nAChR was analyzed in human SCC-L samples isolated
from patients. It was found that the level of alpha7-nAChR in SCC-L
patients (who are heavy smokers) was much higher than that of moderate
smoker suffering from SCC-Ls. Nicotine was also found to elevate the
levels of ChAT and VAChT in human lung cancers. The acetylcholine
signaling pathway may be a useful molecular target for the diagnosis and
therapy of human lung cancers in smokers. Our results are also relevant
to lung cancer patients who are exposed to nicotine via secondhand smoke,
nicotine patches, gums or electronic cigarettes.

