Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAL101553 (prodrug of BAL27862): the spindle assembly checkpoint
is required for anticancer activity


Background: BAL101553 is a highly soluble prodrug of BAL27862, a novel,
small molecule, microtubule (MT)-depolymerizing agent with a broad in
vitro anti-proliferative activity against human tumor lines refractory to
standard MT-targeting agents. The prodrug has anti-cancer activity in
diverse tumor models when given orally or iv; alone or in combination
therapy. In this study, the role of the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint (SAC)
in the mechanism of action of BAL27862 was evaluated.Methods: To evaluate
BAL27862-resistance mechanisms, tumor lines were selected in vitro by
increasing drug levels. Anti-proliferative activity was analyzed using
Crystal Violet assay. siRNA transfection for 24 h was followed by drug
treatment (50 nM) for 48 h. Mitotic index was evaluated after 18 h
treatment by p-Histone H3 staining (pHH) or flow cytometry (FC). SAC
complex formation was assessed by BubR1 immunoprecipitation (IP) and
immunoblotting for SAC components.Results: The SAC ensures cell cycle
arrest upon spindle disruption, promoting tumor cell death after
prolonged mitotic arrest. SAC formation involves phosphorylation and
assembly of a multiprotein complex, of which BubR1 and Mad2 are essential
components. Using siRNA approaches, BubR1 was shown to be required for
BAL27862 anti-proliferative activity in 5 BAL27862 sensitive tumor lines
(IC50s: 8-20 nM). A similar analysis of Mad2 in 3 lines resulted in
almost identical attenuation of the effect of BAL27862. For example,
non-targeting control siRNA (NTC)-treated H460 lung cancer cells entered
a cell death program following BAL27862 treatment (45% cell death vs.
starting cell number); a response attenuated by BubR1 and Mad2 down
regulation (71% and 62% proliferation resp. vs. DMSO controls). The
accumulation of mitotic arrested (pHH positive) cells associated with
BAL27862 treatment was also absent after BubR1 or Mad2 siRNA
transfection.To investigate whether BAL27862 (50 nM, 18 h) induces the
formation of the SAC, BubR1 IPs from 3 sensitive tumor lines (IC50: HeLa
cervical: 20 nM; A549 lung: 15 nM; SKOV3 ovarian: 12 nM) were analyzed
for SAC components. In all cases, complex formation was observed,
consistent with a concomitant mitotic accumulation as measured by FC.
Strikingly, in variants of the same lines selected for BAL27862
resistance (resistance factors: 3.2-9.4) no SAC formation or mitotic
accumulation was observed under the same conditions. Moreover,
BAL27862-induced protein mobility shifts, consistent with activating
phosphorylation of SAC components, were also absent in the resistant
variants.Conclusions: The association of SAC activation with
BAL101553sensitivity suggests prediction of cancer response may lie in
its tumor checkpoint control function.BAL101553 is currently in Phase 2a
clinical evaluation in advanced cancer patients. Exploratory biomarkers
are being evaluated to aid selection of patients most likely to respond.

