Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of urinary pseudo-targeted LC-MS based metabolomics
method and its application in hepatocellular carcinoma biomarker discovery


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the pestilent malignancies
leading to cancer-related death. Discovering effective biomarkers for HCC
diagnosis is an urgent demand. To identify potential metabolites
biomarkers, we developed a urinary pseudo-targeted method based on liquid
chromatography- triple quadrupole linear ion Q-trap 5500 mass
spectrometry (LC-QTRAP- MS). Compared with non-targeted method, the
pseudo-targeted method can achieve better data quality which benefits
differential metabolites discovery. The established method was applied to
cirrhosis (CIR) and HCC investigation. It was found that urinary
nucleosides, bile acids, citric acid and several amino acids were
significantly changed in liver disease groups compared with the controls,
featuring the dysregulation of purine metabolism, energy metabolism and
amino metabolism in liver diseases. Furthermore, some metabolites such as
cycle cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP), glutamine and, short- and
medium-chain acylcarnitines were the differential metabolites of HCC and
CIR. Based on binary logistic regression, butyrylcarnitine (carnitine
C4:0) and hydantoin-5-propionic acid were defined as a combinational
marker to distinguish HCC from CIR. The area under curve (AUC) was 0.786
and 0.773 for discovery stage and validation stage samples, respectively.
These data show that the established pseudo-targeted method is a
complementary one of targeted and non-targeted methods for metabolomics
study.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

