Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A panel of mass spectrometry based serum protein tests for
predicting graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) and its severity


Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (AHSCT) has been shown
to provide longterm disease-free survival for otherwise fatal malignant
or nonmalignant hematological disorders. Acute and chronic
graft-versus-host disease (aGvHD and cGvHD) are a major complication
following AHSCT and are associated with a substantial morbidity and
mortality. Identification of patients (pts) likely to develop severe
forms of GvHD could allow the selection of more aggressive therapeutic
regimens for patients assessed to be at high risk.Serum samples and
clinical data were available from 124 pts (age 18-70) who had received
AHSCT. Five pts suffered no GvHD, 15 de novo cGvHD, 21 aGvHD but no cGvHD
and 83 both aGvHD and cGvHD (overlap). Of pts with aGvHD 51% had grade I
disease and of pts with cGvHD 53% had limited disease. Matrix assisted
laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectra were acquired from the
samples using the deep MALDI method, allowing a deep probing of the
proteome. Spectra were preprocessed and spectral features defined. The
integrated intensities of these features were combined with the clinical
data using deep learning based machine learning to create classifiers
able to stratify patients into groups depending on occurrence and
severity of GvHD.Classifiers could be developed with significant power to
predict occurrence and severity of GvHD. The area under the curves (AUCs)
obtained for the clinical questions investigated and examples of the
sensitivity and specificity achievable are summarized in the table.It is
possible to provide information on occurrence and severity of GvHD from
mass spectral analysis of post-transplant serum samples. If validated,
this panel of tests could provide additional information useful for
clinicians choosing treatment regimens for pts following AHSCT.

