Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic studies on the anti-tumor effect of jacaric acid on
murine macrophage-like leukemia PU5-1.8 cells


This study aims at demonstrating the in vitro and in vivo anti-tumor
effect and action mechanisms of jacaric acid, a conjugated linolenic acid
isomer which is present in jacaranda seed oil, on murine macrophage-like
leukemia PU5-1.8 cells. Our results demonstrated the growth-inhibitory
effect of jacaric acid on PU5-1.8 cells in a time- and
concentration-dependent manner, as measured by MTT reduction and
fluorometric cell proliferation assays, while it exerted minimal
cytotoxicity on normal murine cells. Pre-treatment of PU5-1.8 cells with
jacaric acid significantly decreased the leukemic cell growth in
syngeneic BALB/c mice, while consumption of jacaric acid is apparently
non-toxic to the mice. Flow cytometric analysis revealed the induction of
G0/G1 cell cycle arrest, accompanied by a decrease in cyclin E and CDK2
proteins as demonstrated by Western blotting. Jacaric acid also triggered
apoptosis in PU5-1.8 cells as reflected by induction of DNA
fragmentation, phosphatidylserine externalization and mitochondrial
membrane depolarization, which was quantified by ELISA, Annexin V assay
and JC-1 dye staining method, respectively. Up-regulation of Bax and
down-regulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL proteins might account for the
occurrence of apoptotic events. Collectively, our results suggest that
the growth-inhibitory effect of jacaric acid on PU5-1.8 cells might be
mediated through inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of the leukemia
cells. Therefore, jacaric acid represents a naturally-occurring potential
candidate for the treatment of some forms of myeloid leukemia with
minimal toxicity and fewer side effects.

