Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the role of autophagy during cancer metastasis


Introduction:Autophagy is a catabolic process that involves the lysosomal
degradation and recycling of cellular components. It acts as a cell
protective mechanism to promote cellular homeostasis or survival during
nutrient deprivation. Studies in the past decade have shown the
involvement of autophagy during tumorigenesis, but much are left to be
debated on its controversial role as a tumour suppressor or a potential
protective role in promoting cancer cell survival. Knockout of autophagic
core machinery proteins in mice models showed increase potential of
tumorigenic development. Recent findings also suggested that autophagy
plays a part during cancer cell metastasis, but till date, there is no
significant evidence to clearly define the involvement of autophagy and
the mechanistic behind it. Our study involves defining the role of
autophagy during metastasis and the molecular drivers behind the
process.Material & Methods:Using human squamous cell carcinoma cell
lines, we induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) with three
different methods to study the change in the autophagy level during the
process.Results:Our unpublished data have demonstrated a higher autophagy
level during our three models of EMT induction. Guided by the microarray
data, we investigated the molecular drivers behind the change in
autophagy levels and showed evidence that knocking down of certain
molecular drivers reverses the effect and delay EMT.

