Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the first small molecule PRMT6 inhibitor tool
compound


PRMT6 is a nuclear-localized arginine methyl transferase (RMT) capable of
adding omega-N(G)-monomethylarginine and asymmetric
omega-N(G),N(G)-dimethylarginine derivatives to histone and other protein
substrates containing a GAR motif. PRMT6 can methylate both histone and
non-histone substrates and is the only RMT known to methylate the H3R2
mark. This mark can act in opposition to the activating H3K4me3 mark,
effectively acting as a transcriptional repressor.PRMT6 overexpression
has been reported in several cancer types including melanoma and bladder,
lung, and prostate carcinoma suggesting that inhibition of PRMT6 activity
might have therapeutic utility. However, until now no small molecule
PRMT6 inhibitor has been available to carry out in vitro and in vivo
studies.Here we report identification of an aryl pyrazole as the first
small molecule PRMT6 inhibitor. This tool compound has an IC50 of 10nM in
a PRMT6 biochemical assay and the binding mode has been elucidated
through crystallography. The compound inhibited methylation of H3R2 in a
dose dependent manner in an engineered model in which PRMT6 was
transiently expressed in the A375 cell line. The tool compound showed a
half-life (t) of 8.54 1.43 h after a 1 mg/kg intravenous administration
to rats and bioavailability of 65.6 4.3% for a 5 mg/kg subcutaneous dose,
enabling its use in further in vitro and in vivo target validation.

