Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin induces apoptosis in H-Ras transformed human mammary
epithelial cells: Cysteine 259 of STAT3 as a putative target


Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a
transcription factor that is latent but constitutively activated in many
types of cancers. It is well known that STAT3 plays a key role in
inflammation-associated tumorigenesis. Curcumin, a natural compound
isolated from the traditional Indian spice turmeric (Curcuma
longa.,Zingiberaceae), has anti-tumor, anti-proliferative and
anti-inflammatory properties. This compound has been extensively used in
traditional herbal medicine over the centuries mainly due to its
pronounced anti-inflammatory effects. Many studies suggest that curcumin
regulates various cancer-related intracellular signaling pathways without
damaging normal cells and tissues. Here, we report that curcumin
effectively inhibits activation of STAT3 in dose- and time-dependent
manners and causes apoptosis of H-Ras transformed breast epithelial cells
(H-Ras MCF10A). Specific cysteine residues present in STAT3 appear to be
critical for the activity as well as conformation of this transcription
factor. We identified the cysteine residue 259 as a putative target of
curcumin. We found that the ,-unsaturated carbonyl moiety of curcumin
appears to be essential in its direct binding to STAT3.
Tetrahydrocurcumin that lacks the electrophilic ,-unsaturated carbonyl
moiety failed to inhibit STAT3 activation and to induce apoptosis in the
same cell line. Taken together, our findings suggest that curcumin can
abrogate persistently activated STAT3 signaling through direct
interaction, thereby inhibiting STAT3-mediated mammary carcinogenesis.

