Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of colorectal cancer cell proliferation by resveratrol
involves upregulation of the non-canonical ligand Wnt9a


Our previous studies showed that the suppression of colorectal cancer
(CRC) cell proliferation by resveratrol (RV) was accompanied by a
disproportionate increase of the non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway
(N-CAN) components relative to the canonical Wnt signaling pathway (CAN)
components. Wnt signaling, which consists of CAN and N-CAN is an
intricate ensemble of signaling components involved with various cellular
processes. The CAN utilizes -catenin and stimulates cell proliferation
whereas the N-CAN is independent of -catenin and is instrumental in cell
differentiation.These opposing mechanisms act in concert to maintain
homeostasis in healthy tissues which is dysregulated in cancer. These
observations have led us to propose a novel hypothesis that suppression
of CRC proliferation may be mediated by the activation of the
non-canonical Wnt pathway by nutritional supplements (NNS) such as RV. As
far as we know, no known studies have determined the effects of RV on the
non-canonical pathways in human CRC. The aim of this study was to
determine whether suppression of CRC cell proliferation by RV involves
non-canonical Wnt pathway components. CRC cells derived from surgical
specimens (n = 5) were treated with RV (5ug/ml) for 72h. Cell
proliferation was determined using MTS assay and gene expression was
performed using commercially available quantitative RT-PCR Wnt pathway
gene expression arrays. RV significantly increased N-CAN ligand Wnt A and
Wnt 11(pOur previous studies showed that the suppression of colorectal
cancer (CRC) cell proliferation by resveratrol (RV) was accompanied by a
disproportionate increase of the non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway
(N-CAN) components relative to the canonical Wnt signaling pathway (CAN)
components. Wnt signaling, which consists of CAN and N-CAN is an
intricate ensemble of signaling components involved with various cellular
processes. The CAN utilizes -catenin and stimulates cell proliferation
whereas the N-CAN is independent of -catenin and is instrumental in cell
differentiation.These opposing mechanisms act in concert to maintain
homeostasis in healthy tissues which is dysregulated in cancer. These
observations have led us to propose a novel hypothesis that suppression
of CRC proliferation may be mediated by the activation of the
non-canonical Wnt pathway by nutritional supplements (NNS) such as RV. As
far as we know, no known studies have determined the effects of RV on the
non-canonical pathways in human CRC. The aim of this study was to
determine whether suppression of CRC cell proliferation by RV involves
non-canonical Wnt pathway components. CRC cells derived from surgical
specimens (n = 5) were treated with RV (5ug/ml) for 72h. Cell
proliferation was determined using MTS assay and gene expression was
performed using commercially available quantitative RT-PCR Wnt pathway
gene expression arrays. RV significantly increased N-CAN ligand Wnt A and
Wnt 11(p<0.01) and CAN ligand Wnt 10A (pOur previous studies showed that
the suppression of colorectal cancer (CRC) cell proliferation by
resveratrol (RV) was accompanied by a disproportionate increase of the
non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway (N-CAN) components relative to the
canonical Wnt signaling pathway (CAN) components. Wnt signaling, which
consists of CAN and N-CAN is an intricate ensemble of signaling
components involved with various cellular processes. The CAN utilizes
-catenin and stimulates cell proliferation whereas the N-CAN is
independent of -catenin and is instrumental in cell differentiation.These
opposing mechanisms act in concert to maintain homeostasis in healthy
tissues which is dysregulated in cancer. These observations have led us
to propose a novel hypothesis that suppression of CRC proliferation may
be mediated by the activation of the non-canonical Wnt pathway by
nutritional supplements (NNS) such as RV. As far as we know, no known
studies have determined the effects of RV on the non-canonical pathways
in human CRC. The aim of this study was to determine whether suppression
of CRC cell proliferation by RV involves non-canonical Wnt pathway
components. CRC cells derived from surgical specimens (n = 5) were
treated with RV (5ug/ml) for 72h. Cell proliferation was determined using
MTS assay and gene expression was performed using commercially available
quantitative RT-PCR Wnt pathway gene expression arrays. RV significantly
increased N-CAN ligand Wnt A and Wnt 11(p<0.01) and CAN ligand Wnt 10A
(p<0.05) by 18, 9 and 4-folds, respectively. RV treatment resulted in a
significant decrease of CRC cell proliferation (56% inhibition; pOur
previous studies showed that the suppression of colorectal cancer (CRC)
cell proliferation by resveratrol (RV) was accompanied by a
disproportionate increase of the non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway
(N-CAN) components relative to the canonical Wnt signaling pathway (CAN)
components. Wnt signaling, which consists of CAN and N-CAN is an
intricate ensemble of signaling components involved with various cellular
processes. The CAN utilizes -catenin and stimulates cell proliferation
whereas the N-CAN is independent of -catenin and is instrumental in cell
differentiation.These opposing mechanisms act in concert to maintain
homeostasis in healthy tissues which is dysregulated in cancer. These
observations have led us to propose a novel hypothesis that suppression
of CRC proliferation may be mediated by the activation of the
non-canonical Wnt pathway by nutritional supplements (NNS) such as RV. As
far as we know, no known studies have determined the effects of RV on the
non-canonical pathways in human CRC. The aim of this study was to
determine whether suppression of CRC cell proliferation by RV involves
non-canonical Wnt pathway components. CRC cells derived from surgical
specimens (n = 5) were treated with RV (5ug/ml) for 72h. Cell
proliferation was determined using MTS assay and gene expression was
performed using commercially available quantitative RT-PCR Wnt pathway
gene expression arrays. RV significantly increased N-CAN ligand Wnt A and
Wnt 11(p<0.01) and CAN ligand Wnt 10A (p<0.05) by 18, 9 and 4-folds,
respectively. RV treatment resulted in a significant decrease of CRC cell
proliferation (56% inhibition; p<0.01) compared to untreated cells.This
inhibition was partially reversed by IWP-2, a Wnt ligand production
inhibitor. Conditioned media from CRC cells treated with RV significantly
suppressed CRC cell proliferation (pOur previous studies showed that the
suppression of colorectal cancer (CRC) cell proliferation by resveratrol
(RV) was accompanied by a disproportionate increase of the non-canonical
Wnt signaling pathway (N-CAN) components relative to the canonical Wnt
signaling pathway (CAN) components. Wnt signaling, which consists of CAN
and N-CAN is an intricate ensemble of signaling components involved with
various cellular processes. The CAN utilizes -catenin and stimulates cell
proliferation whereas the N-CAN is independent of -catenin and is
instrumental in cell differentiation.These opposing mechanisms act in
concert to maintain homeostasis in healthy tissues which is dysregulated
in cancer. These observations have led us to propose a novel hypothesis
that suppression of CRC proliferation may be mediated by the activation
of the non-canonical Wnt pathway by nutritional supplements (NNS) such as
RV. As far as we know, no known studies have determined the effects of RV
on the non-canonical pathways in human CRC. The aim of this study was to
determine whether suppression of CRC cell proliferation by RV involves
non-canonical Wnt pathway components. CRC cells derived from surgical
specimens (n = 5) were treated with RV (5ug/ml) for 72h. Cell
proliferation was determined using MTS assay and gene expression was
performed using commercially available quantitative RT-PCR Wnt pathway
gene expression arrays. RV significantly increased N-CAN ligand Wnt A and
Wnt 11(p<0.01) and CAN ligand Wnt 10A (p<0.05) by 18, 9 and 4-folds,
respectively. RV treatment resulted in a significant decrease of CRC cell
proliferation (56% inhibition; p<0.01) compared to untreated cells.This
inhibition was partially reversed by IWP-2, a Wnt ligand production
inhibitor. Conditioned media from CRC cells treated with RV significantly
suppressed CRC cell proliferation (p<0.05) compared to cells treated with
conditioned media from untreated cells and that from cells treated with
conditioned media from RV+IWP treated cells. Proliferation was not
different in cells treated with conditioned media from untreated cells,
IWP-2 or RV+IWP-2-treated cells. Wnt 9A antibody partially reversed the
RV-mediated suppression of CRC cell proliferation relative to cells
treated with IgG controls. To the best of our knowledge this is the first
known study to show the involvement of a non-canonical Wnt pathway
ligand, Wnt9A, in the suppression of CRC proliferation mediated by a NNS,
resveratrol. This study suggests the presence of a novel mechanism for
the suppression of CRC proliferation which entails activation of the
non-canonical pathway. Given the excellent tolerance profile of NNS such
as RV, the capacity of such agents to activate the non-canonical pathway
to inhibit tumor proliferation, offers the opportunity to investigate the
effects of chronic administration of these agents on tumor growth and
progression in patients.

