Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of metastatic potential through adiponectin-stimulated
induction of autophagy


Each year, an unacceptable number of deaths occur in women because of the
lack of curative approaches for metastatic breast cancer. Some of the key
regulators of breast cancer progression are molecules within the tumor
microenvironment including adipokines, a broad array of autocrine-,
endocrine-, and paracrine-acting bioactive molecules secreted by
adipocytes. Adiponectin is one of the most abundant adipokines and, while
multiple widely cited epidemiological studies have indicated that low
levels of circulating plasma adiponectin portend poorer prognosis, recent
work has reported that elevated adiponectin expression in breast tissue
is, in fact, correlated with more advanced disease. Thus, the purpose of
this work is to better understand how adiponectin in breast tissue acts
directly on tumor cells to regulate the early steps of breast cancer
metastasis. Our hypothesis is that adiponectin alters metastatic
potential of breast cancer cells via induction of autophagy. To begin to
test this premise, we discerned the effect of globular versus full-length
adiponectin on invasive and migratory phenotypes of a human metastatic
breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231). In transwell assays with and
without Matrigel, globular adiponectin increased invasion (91%; p Each
year, an unacceptable number of deaths occur in women because of the lack
of curative approaches for metastatic breast cancer. Some of the key
regulators of breast cancer progression are molecules within the tumor
microenvironment including adipokines, a broad array of autocrine-,
endocrine-, and paracrine-acting bioactive molecules secreted by
adipocytes. Adiponectin is one of the most abundant adipokines and, while
multiple widely cited epidemiological studies have indicated that low
levels of circulating plasma adiponectin portend poorer prognosis, recent
work has reported that elevated adiponectin expression in breast tissue
is, in fact, correlated with more advanced disease. Thus, the purpose of
this work is to better understand how adiponectin in breast tissue acts
directly on tumor cells to regulate the early steps of breast cancer
metastasis. Our hypothesis is that adiponectin alters metastatic
potential of breast cancer cells via induction of autophagy. To begin to
test this premise, we discerned the effect of globular versus full-length
adiponectin on invasive and migratory phenotypes of a human metastatic
breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231). In transwell assays with and
without Matrigel, globular adiponectin increased invasion (91%; p <
0.001) and migration (222%; p Each year, an unacceptable number of deaths
occur in women because of the lack of curative approaches for metastatic
breast cancer. Some of the key regulators of breast cancer progression
are molecules within the tumor microenvironment including adipokines, a
broad array of autocrine-, endocrine-, and paracrine-acting bioactive
molecules secreted by adipocytes. Adiponectin is one of the most abundant
adipokines and, while multiple widely cited epidemiological studies have
indicated that low levels of circulating plasma adiponectin portend
poorer prognosis, recent work has reported that elevated adiponectin
expression in breast tissue is, in fact, correlated with more advanced
disease. Thus, the purpose of this work is to better understand how
adiponectin in breast tissue acts directly on tumor cells to regulate the
early steps of breast cancer metastasis. Our hypothesis is that
adiponectin alters metastatic potential of breast cancer cells via
induction of autophagy. To begin to test this premise, we discerned the
effect of globular versus full-length adiponectin on invasive and
migratory phenotypes of a human metastatic breast cancer cell line
(MDA-MB-231). In transwell assays with and without Matrigel, globular
adiponectin increased invasion (91%; p < 0.001) and migration (222%; p <
0.05) compared to untreated cells, whereas full length adiponectin had no
significant effect. Rapamycin, an established autophagy inducer, elicited
effects similar to globular adiponectin (increase of 210%; p Each year,
an unacceptable number of deaths occur in women because of the lack of
curative approaches for metastatic breast cancer. Some of the key
regulators of breast cancer progression are molecules within the tumor
microenvironment including adipokines, a broad array of autocrine-,
endocrine-, and paracrine-acting bioactive molecules secreted by
adipocytes. Adiponectin is one of the most abundant adipokines and, while
multiple widely cited epidemiological studies have indicated that low
levels of circulating plasma adiponectin portend poorer prognosis, recent
work has reported that elevated adiponectin expression in breast tissue
is, in fact, correlated with more advanced disease. Thus, the purpose of
this work is to better understand how adiponectin in breast tissue acts
directly on tumor cells to regulate the early steps of breast cancer
metastasis. Our hypothesis is that adiponectin alters metastatic
potential of breast cancer cells via induction of autophagy. To begin to
test this premise, we discerned the effect of globular versus full-length
adiponectin on invasive and migratory phenotypes of a human metastatic
breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231). In transwell assays with and
without Matrigel, globular adiponectin increased invasion (91%; p <
0.001) and migration (222%; p < 0.05) compared to untreated cells,
whereas full length adiponectin had no significant effect. Rapamycin, an
established autophagy inducer, elicited effects similar to globular
adiponectin (increase of 210%; p < 0.001 in invasion and 238%; p Each
year, an unacceptable number of deaths occur in women because of the lack
of curative approaches for metastatic breast cancer. Some of the key
regulators of breast cancer progression are molecules within the tumor
microenvironment including adipokines, a broad array of autocrine-,
endocrine-, and paracrine-acting bioactive molecules secreted by
adipocytes. Adiponectin is one of the most abundant adipokines and, while
multiple widely cited epidemiological studies have indicated that low
levels of circulating plasma adiponectin portend poorer prognosis, recent
work has reported that elevated adiponectin expression in breast tissue
is, in fact, correlated with more advanced disease. Thus, the purpose of
this work is to better understand how adiponectin in breast tissue acts
directly on tumor cells to regulate the early steps of breast cancer
metastasis. Our hypothesis is that adiponectin alters metastatic
potential of breast cancer cells via induction of autophagy. To begin to
test this premise, we discerned the effect of globular versus full-length
adiponectin on invasive and migratory phenotypes of a human metastatic
breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231). In transwell assays with and
without Matrigel, globular adiponectin increased invasion (91%; p <
0.001) and migration (222%; p < 0.05) compared to untreated cells,
whereas full length adiponectin had no significant effect. Rapamycin, an
established autophagy inducer, elicited effects similar to globular
adiponectin (increase of 210%; p < 0.001 in invasion and 238%; p < 0.05
in migration). Likewise, three-dimensional growth in Matrigel revealed
that cells treated with globular adiponectin and rapamycin developed
extended spikes indicative of a more invasive phenotype, whereas those
treated with full-length adiponectin maintained a less invasive
grape-like structure. Neither adiponectin isoform altered proliferation.
Biochemical assays of autophagic induction supported these observations,
demonstrating increases in LC3B-II expression (immunoblot) and in the
number of intracellular LC3B puncta (immunofluorescence) upon treatment
with globular, but not full-length, adiponectin. Together, these results
suggest a plausible model linking a specific adiponectin isoform with
induction of autophagy to stimulate breast cancer metastasis. Our
findings will advance the field by revealing distinct, novel roles for
key microenvironmental regulatory molecules, potentially opening up new
avenues for therapeutic development. This work is timely considering
recent interest in adiponectin and adiponectin receptor agonists as
therapeutic strategies. In addition, noting that an aberrant level of
adiponectin is a putative mechanism linking obesity to poor breast cancer
prognosis and metastasis, our results may provide mechanistic insight to
guide lifestyle interventions that will reduce breast cancer's heavy
morbidity and mortality burden.

