Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of cancer-associated mutations on MDM2 function


MDM2 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that functions as a negative regulator of
the tumor suppressor p53. MDM2 can promote the ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation through 26S proteasome. In addition to p53, MDM2
can ubiquitinate and promote the degradation of other proteins including
SLUG, PCNA, and TERT. Although MDM2 has a well accepted role as an
oncogene in human cancer, it also exhibits the ability to suppress the
SLUG-driven epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) that is a key
component of the metastasis process. The fact that MDM2 is required to
suppress the SLUG-driven epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) led us
to speculate that mutations in the MDM2 gene might impair the proteasomal
degradation of key regulatory proteins that control biological events and
thereby contribute to tumorogenesis. Here, we studied twenty-one somatic
point mutants in MDM2 that occur in human cancer. We find that seven of
these MDM2 mutants have lost the capacity to degrade p53. Of these
mutants, three have lost the capacity to polyubiquitinate and two do not
interact with p53. Additionally, we found that two of the mutants exhibit
enhanced ability to degrade p53. We also assessed whether these mutants
impacted the ability of mdm2 to degrade SLUG. Although previous studies
have shown that MDM2 needs to form a trimeric complex with p53 and SLUG
in order for degradation of the latter, we find that MDM2 efficiently
degraded SLUG in the absence of p53. Furthermore, MDM2 mutants that do
not interact with p53 still retain the ability to degrade SLUG. Our study
indicates that mutations in MDM2 can yield mutant proteins that exhibit
distinct capacities to degrade its substrates. Further, in vitro and in
vivo studies will address the impact of these mutations on the oncogenic
properties of MDM2.

