Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of scaffold on drug sensitivity of multicellular spheroids:
Which method is close to in vivo and suitable for HTS


Background: Three-dimensional (3D) cell culture models are more extensive
to be better models than two-dimensional (2D) cell culture models due to
enriched cellular signaling pathways, cell to-cell contact, more
representative of tissue morphology, and predictive of drug responses in
vivo. Different drugs screening and various biological responses between
2D and 3D cell culture models have been reported. However, very little
information is available on cell function and/or drug susceptibility
caused by a difference in methodology of three dimensional culture. Here,
we compared drug responses of various cancer cells against distinctive
anti-cancer drugs when grown in monolayer, scaffold 3D culture (Matrigel,
NanoCuluture Plate (NCP)) or scaffold-free 3D culture models (ultra-low
attachment round bottom plate), and also confirmed which method is
suitable for high-throughput screening for robust three-dimensional
screening model.Method: We examined drug sensitivities of different lung
cancer (A549, H226, H1650), breast cancer (SKBR-3, JIMT1), and prostate
cancer (DU145) cell lines under monolayer or 3D cell culture conditions
against several anti-cancer agents i.e. molecular targeted agent
(Gefitinib, Afatinib, Temsirolimus, Vemurafenib, Vismodegib, Sorafenib),
demethylation agent (Azacytidine, Decitabine), anti-microtubule agent
(Docetaxel), alkylating agent (Cisplatin, Irinotecan), antimetabolite
agent (5-FU, Gemcitabine, Methotrexate). The conditions of these assays
are optimized for each culture method. Cell proliferation was measured by
ATP assay. Furthermore, we analyzed the biological/ morphological
differences among 3D culture methods (scaffold or scaffold-free culture
models).Result: Large variations in drug responses were observed among
the different cell culture models. Cells grown in 3D scaffold culture
model (NCP) were more drug sensitive than other cell culture models.
Especially docetaxel, 5-FU, and methotrexate showed clear growth
inhibition in three dimensional scaffold culture models (NCP) than
scaffold-free culture models (round-bottom).Conclusion: In this study, we
showed that scaffold 3D culture is appropriate for anti-cancer
drug-susceptibility test. We also proposed that NanoCuluture plate which
is 3D scaffold culture model, can be used as a sophisticated
high-throughput three-dimensional drug screening model.

