Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell analysis of ascites macrophages in ovarian cancer


Macrophages compose a major part of the tumor microenvironment (TME) in
several types of cancer, including ovarian cancer [1]. Studies have shown
that a high percentage of tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) correlates
with a poor prognosis in ovarian cancer [2], due to the crucial role of
TAMs in promoting tumor growth and angiogenesis [3,4]. Yet not much
investigation has been executed to reveal the function of macrophages in
ovarian cancer ascites, a hallmark of ovarian cancer.Previous gene
expression analysis in TAMs often used bulk samples [5,6]. However, due
to the complexity of the peritoneal environment, this approach had the
effect of dampening rare and potentially informative signals from a
heterogeneous population such as ascites macrophages. Therefore, we
resorted to single-cell expression analysis to dissect the heterogeneity
of ascites macrophages.Recent breakthroughs in single cell RNA-seq
techniques have made it more cost effective to process a large number of
samples at single cell resolutions. Here we used Fluidigm's Single-Cell
Auto Prep System, a state-of-art technology for automate single cell cDNA
synthesis [7]. We sequenced single ascites macrophages from ID8 murine
ovarian cancer model and single alternatively activated bone marrow
derived macrophages (BMDM-M2). When comparing the single cell expression
profiles of ascites macrophages to BMDM using principle component
analysis (PCA), we observed that the ascites macrophages scattered
broadly and could be further divided into two groups, whereas BMDM were
tightly clustered into one group. Furthermore, gene oncology (GO)
analysis of highly expressed genes in each group revealed that ascites
macrophages had a distinct gene expression profile from BMDM,
highlighting the metabolic pathways, especially catabolic process. We are
currently working on validating these findings in human patients with
ovarian carcinoma. In summary, this work sheds light on the understanding
of the role of ascites macrophages in ovarian cancer.1. Qian BZ, Pollard
JW. Cell. 2010;141:39-51.2. He YF, Zhang MY, Wu X, et al. PLoS One.
2013;8:e79769.3. Mantovani A, Germano G, Marchesi F, et al. Eur J Immunol
2011;41:2522-25.4. Murray PJ, Wynn TA. Nat Rev Immunol, 2011;11:723-37.5.
The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Nature. 2014;511:543-50.6. The
Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Nature. 2014;513:202-9.7. Wu AR,
Neff NF, Kalisky T, et al. Nat Methods. 2014;11:41-6.

