Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Truncated HBx-dependent silencing of growth arrest-specific 2
promotes hepatocarcinogenesis through inhibition of p53-mediated apoptosis


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a worldwide threat to public health,
especially in China where chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is
found in 80-90% of all HCCs. The HBV encoded X antigen (HBx) is a
trans-regulatory protein involved in the virus-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis. Although the carboxyl-terminus truncated HBx,
rather than the full-length counterpart, is frequently overexpressed in
human HCCs, its functional mechanisms have yet been fully defined. In
this study, we investigated the molecular pathogenesis of a
naturally-occurring HBx variant which has 35 amino acids deleted at
C-terminus (HBx35). By performing genome-wide scanning analysis and PCR
validation, we identified growth arrest-specific 2 (GAS2) as a direct
target of HBx35 at transcriptional level in human immortalized liver
cells. HBx35 was found to bind the promoter region of GAS2 and suppress
its expression to promote hepatocellular proliferation and
tumorigenicity. Further functional assays showed that overexpression of
GAS2 inhibited tumor growth both in vitro and in vivo by inducing
p53-dependent apoptosis. Conversely, siRNA-mediated knockdown of GAS2 in
hepatocytes attenuated apoptotic response and reduced cell susceptibility
to etoposide-induced apoptosis. Notably, GAS2 expression was
significantly down-regulated in truncated HBx-expressing HCCs compared
with the corresponding normal tissues. In conclusion, our integrated
study uncovered a novel viral mechanism in hepatocarcinogenesis, wherein
HBx35 ablates p53-driven apoptosis via direct silencing of GAS2, and
thereby provides survival advantage for pre-neoplastic hepatocytes to
facilitate cancer development.

