Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K/Akt inhibition decreases oxygen consumption In tumor cells by
phosphorylating and inactivating pyruvate dehydrogenase PDH E1 subunit


The PI3K/mTOR pathway plays a central role in coupling metabolic
processes to the cellular proliferative state. Pharmacologic inhibitors
of the PI3K/mTOR pathway or genetic inhibition of Akt/PI3K decreased the
oxygen consumption rate (OCR) in transformed cell lines in vitro by
30-40%. Pharmacologic inhibition of this pathway increased
phosphorylation of the E1 subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH)
complex on Ser293, an inhibitory modification of this critical gatekeeper
of mitochondrial respiration. Expressing wild type PTEN in a
doxycycline-inducible manner in a glioblastoma cell line with mutant PTEN
led to an increase in PDH E1 phosphorylation and a decrease in OCR. The
decrease in OCR with PI3K/Akt/mTOR inhibition was recapitulated by
knocking down PDH E1 expression using siRNA. Pre-treatment with
dichloroacetate (DCA), a known inhibitor of the pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinases (PDKs) that phosphorylate PDH E1, prevented the upregulation in
PDH E1 phosphorylation, induced by inhibition of the pathway and also
blunted the decrease in OCR. Likewise, introduction of exogenous PDH-E1
that contains serine to alanine mutations, which can no longer be
regulated by phosphorylation, also blunted the decrease in OCR seen with
PI3K/mTOR inhibition. Our findings highlight an association between the
PI3K/mTOR pathway and tumor cell oxygen consumption that is regulated in
part by PDH phosphorylation. These results have important implications
for understanding the effects PI3K pathway activation in tumor metabolism
and also in designing cancer therapy trials that use inhibitors of this
pathway.

