Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caloric restriction can increase the efficacy of radiation in both
hormone-sensitive and hormone-resistant prostate cancers by
downregulating the IGF-1R pathway


Locally advanced prostate cancers (LAPC) are aggressive, have poor
prognosis, and are associated with high recurrence rates and conversion
to castrate resistance. The molecular underpinnings of LAPC are being
investigated to identify novel therapeutics. Animal models have shown
that caloric restriction (CR) can potentially prevent the initiation of
prostate cancer. We propose that CR may be used as a novel therapeutic
intervention to enhance outcomes of radiation treatment by altering the
molecular profile of prostate tumors.To assess the effect of CR with
radiation in vivo, eighty 6 week old male nude mice were injected with
LNCaP (hormone sensitive) or PC3 (hormone refractory) tumor cells. Once
tumors were palpable, mice were randomized to be treated with one of 4
conditions: ad libitum (AL) diet, 8Gy of radiation (RT), 30% reduction in
caloric intake (CR), or CR+RT. CR was associated with significant
reduction in tumors. After PC3 tumor injection, compared with AL, the
mice had a 22% reduction in tumor size with radiation, 77% with CR
(pLocally advanced prostate cancers (LAPC) are aggressive, have poor
prognosis, and are associated with high recurrence rates and conversion
to castrate resistance. The molecular underpinnings of LAPC are being
investigated to identify novel therapeutics. Animal models have shown
that caloric restriction (CR) can potentially prevent the initiation of
prostate cancer. We propose that CR may be used as a novel therapeutic
intervention to enhance outcomes of radiation treatment by altering the
molecular profile of prostate tumors.To assess the effect of CR with
radiation in vivo, eighty 6 week old male nude mice were injected with
LNCaP (hormone sensitive) or PC3 (hormone refractory) tumor cells. Once
tumors were palpable, mice were randomized to be treated with one of 4
conditions: ad libitum (AL) diet, 8Gy of radiation (RT), 30% reduction in
caloric intake (CR), or CR+RT. CR was associated with significant
reduction in tumors. After PC3 tumor injection, compared with AL, the
mice had a 22% reduction in tumor size with radiation, 77% with CR
(p<0.01 by Student's t-test) and an 80% reduction with CR+RT (pLocally
advanced prostate cancers (LAPC) are aggressive, have poor prognosis, and
are associated with high recurrence rates and conversion to castrate
resistance. The molecular underpinnings of LAPC are being investigated to
identify novel therapeutics. Animal models have shown that caloric
restriction (CR) can potentially prevent the initiation of prostate
cancer. We propose that CR may be used as a novel therapeutic
intervention to enhance outcomes of radiation treatment by altering the
molecular profile of prostate tumors.To assess the effect of CR with
radiation in vivo, eighty 6 week old male nude mice were injected with
LNCaP (hormone sensitive) or PC3 (hormone refractory) tumor cells. Once
tumors were palpable, mice were randomized to be treated with one of 4
conditions: ad libitum (AL) diet, 8Gy of radiation (RT), 30% reduction in
caloric intake (CR), or CR+RT. CR was associated with significant
reduction in tumors. After PC3 tumor injection, compared with AL, the
mice had a 22% reduction in tumor size with radiation, 77% with CR
(p<0.01 by Student's t-test) and an 80% reduction with CR+RT (p<0.01).
After LNCaP tumor injection, compared with ad libitum, the mice had a 49%
reduction in tumor size with CR and a 55% reduction with CR+RT (pLocally
advanced prostate cancers (LAPC) are aggressive, have poor prognosis, and
are associated with high recurrence rates and conversion to castrate
resistance. The molecular underpinnings of LAPC are being investigated to
identify novel therapeutics. Animal models have shown that caloric
restriction (CR) can potentially prevent the initiation of prostate
cancer. We propose that CR may be used as a novel therapeutic
intervention to enhance outcomes of radiation treatment by altering the
molecular profile of prostate tumors.To assess the effect of CR with
radiation in vivo, eighty 6 week old male nude mice were injected with
LNCaP (hormone sensitive) or PC3 (hormone refractory) tumor cells. Once
tumors were palpable, mice were randomized to be treated with one of 4
conditions: ad libitum (AL) diet, 8Gy of radiation (RT), 30% reduction in
caloric intake (CR), or CR+RT. CR was associated with significant
reduction in tumors. After PC3 tumor injection, compared with AL, the
mice had a 22% reduction in tumor size with radiation, 77% with CR
(p<0.01 by Student's t-test) and an 80% reduction with CR+RT (p<0.01).
After LNCaP tumor injection, compared with ad libitum, the mice had a 49%
reduction in tumor size with CR and a 55% reduction with CR+RT (p<0.01).
Tissue evaluation of mice treated with CR or CR+RT from both the LNCaP
and PC3 models revealed decreased proliferation via Ki-67 and increased
apoptosis with cleaved caspase-3 levels. In addition, significant
downregulation of multiple members of the IGF-1R pathway was seen,
including downregulation of IGF-1R, IRS-1, PI3K and pAKT. Serum
evaluation revealed decreased IGF-1:IGF-BP3 in serum.For the first time,
we have shown that the efficacy of radiation can be increased by
decreasing calories by 30% in both hormone-sensitive and
hormone-refractory prostate cancer models. Future clinical trials for
both hormone-sensitive and hormone-resistant prostate cancers should
consider the innovative use of CR to augment standard cancer therapy as
it has the potential to change the biology of tumors and enhance the
opportunity for clinical benefit.

