Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin inhibits proliferation and acts synergistically with
paclitaxel and doxorubicin in triple negative breast cancer cell lines


Background: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a subtype of breast
cancer (BC) characterized by its unique molecular profile, aggressive
behavior, distinct patterns of metastasis and unavailability of effective
target therapy. Indeed, despite good initial response to chemotherapy,
even platinum- or anthracyclines-based, TNBC relapse and mortality rates
are high even in early-stage disease. Metformin, one of the most commonly
used medications for treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus, has emerged
as a potential anticancer agent. This study aimed to evaluate the
combination treatment of metformin, at lower concentrations (10uM), with
conventional chemotherapeutic agents on TNBC cell lines. We investigated
the combination effect of metformin with doxorubicin (DOX), cisplatin
(CDDP) and paclitaxel (PTX). Methods: Three TNBC cell lines (MDAMB-231,
HCC-70, HCC-1937) and one luminal BC cell line (MCF-7) were used. Cell
proliferation was determined by MTT assay. Clonogenic assay was conducted
and apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC assay. Western
immunoblotting was performed to determine the expression of the
downstream targets of PI3K, MAPK and AMPK pathways. Findings: Metformin
potently inhibited the proliferation of all BC cell lines in a
dose-dependent manner. Likewise, metformin caused a significant
dose-dependent reduction in clonogenicity of TNBC cell lines
(PBackground: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a subtype of breast
cancer (BC) characterized by its unique molecular profile, aggressive
behavior, distinct patterns of metastasis and unavailability of effective
target therapy. Indeed, despite good initial response to chemotherapy,
even platinum- or anthracyclines-based, TNBC relapse and mortality rates
are high even in early-stage disease. Metformin, one of the most commonly
used medications for treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus, has emerged
as a potential anticancer agent. This study aimed to evaluate the
combination treatment of metformin, at lower concentrations (10uM), with
conventional chemotherapeutic agents on TNBC cell lines. We investigated
the combination effect of metformin with doxorubicin (DOX), cisplatin
(CDDP) and paclitaxel (PTX). Methods: Three TNBC cell lines (MDAMB-231,
HCC-70, HCC-1937) and one luminal BC cell line (MCF-7) were used. Cell
proliferation was determined by MTT assay. Clonogenic assay was conducted
and apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC assay. Western
immunoblotting was performed to determine the expression of the
downstream targets of PI3K, MAPK and AMPK pathways. Findings: Metformin
potently inhibited the proliferation of all BC cell lines in a
dose-dependent manner. Likewise, metformin caused a significant
dose-dependent reduction in clonogenicity of TNBC cell lines (P<0.05),
but no difference was noted with regard to MCF-7. The lowest significant
inhibitory concentration of metformin for MDAMB-231, HCC-70 and HCC-1937
was 1mM, 100 M and 1mM, respectively. Of clinical relevance, the
combination of metformin, at low concentration (10uM), with PTX or DOX
promoted synergistic effects on the inhibition of TNBC cell viability
measured by MTT (PBackground: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a
subtype of breast cancer (BC) characterized by its unique molecular
profile, aggressive behavior, distinct patterns of metastasis and
unavailability of effective target therapy. Indeed, despite good initial
response to chemotherapy, even platinum- or anthracyclines-based, TNBC
relapse and mortality rates are high even in early-stage disease.
Metformin, one of the most commonly used medications for treatment of
type 2 diabetes mellitus, has emerged as a potential anticancer agent.
This study aimed to evaluate the combination treatment of metformin, at
lower concentrations (10uM), with conventional chemotherapeutic agents on
TNBC cell lines. We investigated the combination effect of metformin with
doxorubicin (DOX), cisplatin (CDDP) and paclitaxel (PTX). Methods: Three
TNBC cell lines (MDAMB-231, HCC-70, HCC-1937) and one luminal BC cell
line (MCF-7) were used. Cell proliferation was determined by MTT assay.
Clonogenic assay was conducted and apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin
V-FITC assay. Western immunoblotting was performed to determine the
expression of the downstream targets of PI3K, MAPK and AMPK pathways.
Findings: Metformin potently inhibited the proliferation of all BC cell
lines in a dose-dependent manner. Likewise, metformin caused a
significant dose-dependent reduction in clonogenicity of TNBC cell lines
(P<0.05), but no difference was noted with regard to MCF-7. The lowest
significant inhibitory concentration of metformin for MDAMB-231, HCC-70
and HCC-1937 was 1mM, 100 M and 1mM, respectively. Of clinical relevance,
the combination of metformin, at low concentration (10uM), with PTX or
DOX promoted synergistic effects on the inhibition of TNBC cell viability
measured by MTT (P<0.05). The combination of CDDP and metformin did not
affect the viability in comparison with CDDP alone. Metformin also
potentiated PTX and DOX-induced apoptosis (PBackground: Triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) is a subtype of breast cancer (BC) characterized by
its unique molecular profile, aggressive behavior, distinct patterns of
metastasis and unavailability of effective target therapy. Indeed,
despite good initial response to chemotherapy, even platinum- or
anthracyclines-based, TNBC relapse and mortality rates are high even in
early-stage disease. Metformin, one of the most commonly used medications
for treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus, has emerged as a potential
anticancer agent. This study aimed to evaluate the combination treatment
of metformin, at lower concentrations (10uM), with conventional
chemotherapeutic agents on TNBC cell lines. We investigated the
combination effect of metformin with doxorubicin (DOX), cisplatin (CDDP)
and paclitaxel (PTX). Methods: Three TNBC cell lines (MDAMB-231, HCC-70,
HCC-1937) and one luminal BC cell line (MCF-7) were used. Cell
proliferation was determined by MTT assay. Clonogenic assay was conducted
and apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC assay. Western
immunoblotting was performed to determine the expression of the
downstream targets of PI3K, MAPK and AMPK pathways. Findings: Metformin
potently inhibited the proliferation of all BC cell lines in a
dose-dependent manner. Likewise, metformin caused a significant
dose-dependent reduction in clonogenicity of TNBC cell lines (P<0.05),
but no difference was noted with regard to MCF-7. The lowest significant
inhibitory concentration of metformin for MDAMB-231, HCC-70 and HCC-1937
was 1mM, 100 M and 1mM, respectively. Of clinical relevance, the
combination of metformin, at low concentration (10uM), with PTX or DOX
promoted synergistic effects on the inhibition of TNBC cell viability
measured by MTT (P<0.05). The combination of CDDP and metformin did not
affect the viability in comparison with CDDP alone. Metformin also
potentiated PTX and DOX-induced apoptosis (P<0.05). However, there was no
significant increase in apoptosis with the combination of metformin and
CDDP when compared with CDDP alone. In parallel, treatment of TNBC cells
with metformin decreased phosphorylation of the pS6K protein, a key
target of the mTOR pathway. Metformin was also found to decrease the
phosphorylation of ERK1/2. Furthermore, the combination of metformin and
PTX significantly inhibited the phosphorylation of ERK 1/2 and AKT
compared with PTX alone in TNBC cells. Conclusions: We herein demonstrate
a synergistic effect of metformin, at low and safe concentration, with
PTX or DOX in suppressing human TNBC cell lines proliferation and
activation of key targets in cancer therapy. Moreover, this combination
is appealing because metformin is a low cost drug, with known
pharmacokinetics and a favorable safety profile. Our results support the
continued investigation of the addition of metformin to anthracyclines-
and taxanes-based therapies against TNBC.

