Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear expression of antizyme inhibitor is associated with poor
prostate cancer prognosis


Novel molecular markers that are associated with prostate cancer
progression are needed to provide more useful information for the
diagnosis and treatment of this disease. The antizyme inhibitor (AZI), a
non-enzymatic homologue of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), is upregulated
in many cancer types, including: prostate cancer, breast cancer,
hepatocellular carcinoma and non-small cell lung cancer. In this study,
we examined the distribution of AZI in benign prostate tissues and in
prostate cancers at differing stages. We were interested specifically in
the possible correlation between AZI expression and patient survival. We
found that AZI can reside in the cytoplasm and/or nuclear space in
prostate cancer tissue. Nuclear AZI was observed in nearly all of the
prostate cancer specimens but not in benign prostate tissue. Cytoplasmic
AZI was found both in tumor cells and in adjacent benign prostate tissue.
Nuclear AZI was associated significantly with prostate-specific antigen
recurrence-free survival but not with overall survival. Further, we found
that the presence of nuclear AZI could distinguish poor survival in lower
grade patients (Gleason score 7), especially in samples with
non-cribriform tumors. Our results demonstrate a potential role for
nuclear AZI as an independent marker of patient outcome in prostate
cancer patients.

