Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune expression profiling of MAPK inhibitor resistant tumors
based upon mechanisms of resistance


Purpose: To evaluate the association between the immunoreactivity of the
immune inhibitory ligand PD-L1 with tumour infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) and known mechanisms of MAPK inhibitor (MAPKi) resistance in tumor
biopsies resected at the time of MAPKi disease progression.Experimental
Design: 23 patients with disease progression on MAPKi (vemurafenib,
dabrafenib, and combination dabrafenib and trametinib) each had a
progressing tumor biospied. All tumors underwent MAPKi resistance
screening including RNA expression profiling. Morphological features,
PD-L1 immunohistochemical immunoreactivity, and RNA expression profile
were correlated with mechanisms of resistance (including mutations in
NRAS and MEK, and amplification and aberrant splicing of BRAF).Results:
PD-L1 immunoreactivity was significantly higher in tumors that harbored
an aberrant BRAF splicing variant (n = 8) or MEK mutations (n = 5) than
those with BRAF amplification (n = 4), NRAS mutations (n = 2) or those
with unknown resistance mechanisms (n = 4) (mean 27% vs 1%, p = 0.049).
Additionally, the PD-L1 immunoreactivity in tumors with known
MAPK-reactivating mechanisms (n = 19) tended to be higher than those with
unknown resistance mechanisms (n = 4) (mean 17% vs 0%, p = 0.283). The
immunoreactivity of PDL1 in progressed lesions was independent of
BRAFV600 genotype, RECIST response and type of MAPK inhibitor.
Correlations with TIL subsets, RNA expression, and response to subsequent
anti-PD-1 therapy are underway.Conclusions: The induction of PD-L1
immunoreactivity following MAPKi treatment in human melanoma is variable,
however specific mechanisms of MAPKi resistance may confer increased
expression of the inhibitory ligand. Further study is underway examining
the association of the above with TIL infiltration, the RNA expression
profile, and the response to subsequent anti-PD1 therapy.

