Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incidence trend of NPC using age-period-cohort analysis from1987
to 2011 in Sihui County, southern China


In the past several decades, declining incidence rates of NPC have been
observed in Chinese populations in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Los Angeles, and
Singapore.However, the incidents rates in southern China have remained
stable.This study describes the incidence trend of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC) using age-period-cohort (APC) analysis from 1987 to 2011
in Sihui County, southern China. Age-standardized incidence rates
compared with the world standard population were examined in both males
and females. A Joinpoint regression analysis was conducted to quantify
the changes in incidence trends. A Poisson regression APC model was used
to assess the age, period, and birth cohort effects on incidence.
Age-standardized incidence rates during the study period were 30.29 and
13.09 per 100,000 for males and females, respectively. The incidence
rates of NPC remained stable with a non statistical significant average
annual percentage change of 0.2% for males and -1.6% for females
throughout the entire period. A statistically significant increase
(estimated annual percentage change, 6.8%; 95% confidence interval,
0.1%-14.0%) was observed from 2003 to 2009 for males. The incidence of
NPC increased with advancing age up to ages 50-59 and decreased at ages
>60 years. The curves of NPC incidence by period were virtually flat for
males and females. The curve for males by birth cohort showed an increase
from the 1922 to 1952 cohort and a decrease thereafter. In females, there
was an undulating increase in relative risks from the 1922 to 1972
cohort. In conclusion, the incidence trends for NPC remained generally
stable in Sihui from 1987 to 2011, with an increase during 2003-2009. The
relative risks of NPC increased in younger female cohorts, the underlying
reason of which is expected to be further explored.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

