Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of clinical applications of circulating tumor DNA using
an enhanced TAm-Seq platform


Novel biomarkers are required to assess tumor burden and response in
cancer as conventional biopsies are invasive, costly and only provide a
snapshot of the mutational profile at a given time and location. A
promising biomarker is the detection of genomic material released from
tumors into the blood plasma of patients, known as circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA). ctDNA has been detected in plasma for a wide range of solid
tumors and can be distinguished from other (germline) cell-free DNA by
the presence of tumor-specific DNA alterations or known hotspot
mutations. However, the potential of ctDNA as a biomarker has not yet
been fully realized due to technical challenges associated with its
detection and analysis, including the short fragment sizes (140-170 bp),
small number of amplifiable copies and low/variable allele fractions of
ctDNA.We have developed an enhanced platform for tagged-amplicon deep
sequencing (TAm-Seq). Using a combination of improved library preparation
and bespoke data analysis methods, this platform can be used to sequence
established cancer hotspots and the entire coding regions of selected
genes, while preserving high levels of specificity and sensitivity. Using
this approach, we have developed an assay that analyzes 20 kb of the
genome (including regions of interest in more than 30 genes) with
sensitivity down to a few mutant copies. Performance of this assay has
been demonstrated using spike-in experiments, dilution series and
clinical sample cohorts. Proof of concept studies have shown the
potential of ctDNA to be used to assess tumor mutation status, monitor
tumor dynamics, assess response to treatment and identify mutations
associated with acquired drug resistance and disease progression. This
non-invasive approach - a liquid biopsy - offers a revolution in how
cancer can be detected, monitored and treated.

