Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intracellular detection of hypoxia in live cells


Hypoxia is an important phenomenon in many physiological processes and
involved in many human diseases including cancer. Inflammation can lead
to significant hypoxia in tissues. The study of hypoxia has been
complicated with the lack of proper instrumentation to induce hypoxia in
cells and image cells under hypoxic conditions. Here, we describe a live
cell-based method to conveniently measure hypoxia using a new Image-iT
Hypoxia Probe and a specialized microscope incubator which can control
oxygen concentrations down to 1%, The Image-iT Hypoxia Probe is an oxygen
sensing fluorescent probe, is quenched with increasing oxygen
concentrations, and has excitation and emission peaks of 483 and 616 nm
respectively. The probe is sensitive to varying concentrations of oxygen
and can detect as low as 1% O2 concentrations in cells. Imaging of cells
with the Image-iT Hypoxia Probe in the incubator prevents re-oxygenation
of cells and gives more precise measurement of hypoxia in cells, allowing
for reversible and dynamic measurements of hypoxia in cells. Using this
system, we measured hypoxia in several cell lines including A549, HeLa
and U-2 OS. The Image-iT Hypoxia Probe is also very good at detecting
hypoxia in 3D tumor spheroids generated using different methods. The new
hypoxia probe gives good signal to noise with more than 3-fold changes at
5% O2 levels with robust statistics. The Image-iT Hypoxia Probe provides
a good system for precise, robust and reproducible measurements of
hypoxia in cells.

