Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CPX-351 (cytarabine:daunorubicin liposome for injection)
anti-leukemia activity is potentiated by Chk1 inhibition


Background: Cytarabine and an anthracycline, the mainstay of AML therapy,
affords a five-year survival below 30%. Accordingly, there is a
continuing need for improved AML therapies. CPX-351 encapsulates within
liposomes a fixed 5:1 molar ratio of cytarabine and daunorubicin that is
synergistic (in vitro) and markedly improved in anti-leukemic activity
(in vivo). Promising evidence of improved remission and survival rates
with CPX-351 compared to standard of care treatments has also been
observed clinically and a pivotal Phase 3 trial is currently ongoing.
Because Chk1 inhibition has been shown to enhance the actions of both
cytarabine and anthracyclines, there has been interest in assessing the
effect of CPX-351 when combined with Chk1 inhibitors. Here we describe
the evaluation of CPX-351 alone and in combination with the Chk1
inhibitors MK-8776 and LY2603618 in AML cell lines and in clinical AML
samples ex vivo. Methods: Effects of CPX-351 on Chk1 phosphorylation and
cell cycle distribution in the human AML lines U937 and HL-60 were
analyzed by immunoblotting and flow cytometry. Effects of Chk1 inhibitors
on CPX-351-induced apoptosis were assessed by flow cytometry after
propidium iodide staining (DNA cleavage), Hoechst staining (nuclear
fragmentation) and colony formation in soft agar (long-term survival).
Effects CPX-351 MK-8776 on clinical AML samples were assayed using
clonogenic assays. Results: Treatment of U937 cells with CPX-351 resulted
in phosphorylation of Chk1 on Ser317 and Ser296 (sites of ATR-mediated
phosphorylation and autophosphorylation, respectively) as well as S phase
slowing consistent with Chk1 activation. Co-treatment of AML cell lines
with Chk1 inhibitors + CPX-351 resulted in increased apoptotic
morphological changes and DNA fragmentation as well as diminished
clonogenic survival compared to CPX-351 alone. The CPX-351/MK-8776
combination displayed enhanced antiproliferative effects against some
clinical AML isolates ex vivo compared to CPX-351 alone, with additional
assays ongoing. Conclusions: Collectively, these results show that Chk1
inhibition enhances the cytotoxicity of CPX-351 in AML cell lines and
some clinical AML samples, offering the possibility that CPX-351 may be
well suited for combining with such molecularly targeted agents.

