Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization and isolation of antigen-responding T cells in
Sipuleucel-T treated patients


Sipuleucel-T is an FDA-approved autologous cellular therapy for men with
asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic metastatic castrate resistant
prostate (mCRPC). Sipuleucel-T is manufactured from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) cultured with PA2024, a fusion antigen composed
of prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) fused to granulocyte
macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF). We have demonstrated that
following three infusions this therapy results in T cell antigen specific
responses directed against both PA2024 and PAP in treated patients. In
this study we utilized the cellular dye Carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl
ester (CSFE) and flow cytometric analysis to further characterize antigen
responding T cells in Sipuleucel-T treated patients. We observed that
CD4+ T cells predominate the antigen-responding T cell population
following treatment, confirming our previous studies. Importantly, this
approach has allowed us to also visualize a previously undetected
population of antigen responding CD8+ T cells. The frequency of both of
these populations is enhanced following treatment relative to baseline
responses and the responding T cells display increased surface expression
of the prototypical T cell activation markers CD134 and CD137 relative to
non-proliferating T cells. Additionally, we are exploiting the increased
surface expression of these activation markers on antigen-responding T
cells to isolate these cells in an HLA and epitope-independent manner.
Using this methodology we have demonstrated Sipuleucel-T is capable of
inducing both CD4+ and CD8+ antigen-specific T cell responses in treated
patients, and that we are capable of isolating these antigen-responding T
cells specifically and with minimal manipulation.

