Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antagonism of sorafenib and regorafenib actions by epidermal
growth factor in hepatoma cells


Background. Platelet numbers are related to growth and aggressiveness of
several tumor types, including hepatoma (hepatocellular carcinoma). We
previously found that platelet lysates also stimulated growth and
migration of hepatoma lines in vitro and antagonized the
growth-inhibitory effects on hepatoma cells of both multikinase
inhibitors sorafenib and regorafenib (BMC Cancer 2014; 14:351).Aims. To
investigate the mechanisms for the platelet-mediated multikinase drug
resistance, we examined the actions of several mitogens that are known to
be contained by platelets (PDGF, VEGF, TGF beta, FGF, IGF-1,
EGF).Results. We found that epidermal growth factor (EGF) alone
antagonized the growth inhibitory actions of Sorafenib or Regorafenib on
HepG2, PLC/PRF/5 and Hep3B human hepatoma cells, using an MTT assay.
Detailed studies revealed that EGF also antagonized Regorafenib-mediated
inhibition of cell migration and invasion. Furthermore, EGF also blocked
regorafenib-induced apoptosis, measured by Annexin V using a MUSE cell
analyzer. These effects of EGF were antagonized by concomitant addition
to the cultures of EGF receptor antagonist Erlotinib, showing that the
EGF receptor was involved in the mechanisms of EGF-mediated blocking of
Regorafenib effects. In addition, Erlotinib also partially blocked the
effects of platelet lysates in antagonizing regorafenib-mediated growth
inhibition. Similar antagonism was found using IGF-1, and those effects
were blocked by GSK IGF-1 receptor antagonist. Other platelet factors had
only weak actions in these assays.Conclusions. EGF antagonized
regorafenib-mediated growth and migration inhibition and apoptosis
induction in hepatoma cells. These EGF actions were mediated via the EGF
receptor, as were the similar platelet lysate actions.

