Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin C3 prevents ultraviolet B radiation-induced acute damage
in JB6 keratinocytes and mouse skin via FGF-2/mTOR/NF-KB pathway


Background and Significance: Aggressive Cutaneous Squamous cell carcinoma
(CSCC) of the face has become the second most common type of skin cancer
in the USA due to ultraviolet B (UVB) exposure in tanning booths and sun
exposure of our military personnel. UVB is a carcinogen and our previous
studies established oral administration of Curcumin C3 complex (C3), a
standardized preparation of three curcumonoids - Curcumin (76.07%),
Demethoxycurcumin (20.28%) and Bisdemethoxycurcumin (3.63%), delayed
UVB-induced tumor onset and multiplicity, but not tumor progression.
Accordingly, we sort to determine the preventative efficacy of C3 against
UVB-induced photodamage in promotion sensitive JB6 skin keratinocytes and
SKH-1 hairless mouse epidermis on the early neoplastic events in the
development of UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis.Methods: SKH-1 mice were
either administered vehicle or C3 (100mg/kg/b.w) complex orally for 14
days followed by a single exposure to UVB radiation (180mj/cm2). Mice
were euthanized 24 hours after UVB exposure and skin tissues and serum
were collected. For in vitro studies, promoter-sensitive JB6 mouse
epithelial cells were pre-treated with C3 for 2 h and the effects on
UVB-induced early molecular signaling events were assessed.Results: C3
attenuated UVB-induced epidermal hyperplasia and significantly decreased
epidermal and plasma levels of fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2); an
important mitogen implicated in proliferation and differentiation of skin
keratinocytes. In vitro, C3blocked UVB-dependent FGF-2 induction and
proliferation of cultured keratinocytes via down regulation of nuclear
factor kappa B (NF-KB) and Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling
pathways.Conclusion: Our findings suggest C3 has the ability to protect
mice from UVB-induced acute damage. Further the photo-preventive effects
of C3 are mediated, at least in part, via modulation of FGF-2/mTOR/NF-KB
signaling.

