Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic cytometry: Single cell mutation analysis combining PCR
with flow cytometry


Genomic cytometry is a new technology field combining the high-throughput
capabilities of flow cytometry and cell sorting with single-cell
multiplex genomic analysis in microfluidic drops. The genomic cytometry
method we will describe is PCR-activated cell sorting (PACS). PACS is
analogous to Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting (FACS) in throughput and
the ability to analyze single cells; however, unlike conventional flow
cytometric immunophenotyping, PACS uses extremely sensitive microdroplet
TaqMan PCR reactions to identify and, if needed, sort cells of interest
for additional downstream molecular characterization. This unique
approach enables PACS to identify cells based on the presence of
transcripts, genomic DNA sequences, mRNA splice variants, SNPs,
non-coding RNAs, and other biomarkers not amenable to antibody-based
probe detection. PACS can be used to sort and enrich cells targeting
single-copy genomic DNA for the analysis of circulating tumor cells
(CTCs), intra-tumor heterogeneity, rare stem cells, viral or pathogen
infections and genomic characterization of cancer immune system response
and disorder. By analyzing individual cells within a population, it is
possible to identify rare CTC populations or transient cell states,
critical to human health and cancer progression, that are otherwise
unobservable by ensemble measurements. With PACS, we identified and
sorted prostate cancer cells from a heterogeneous population by
performing >132,000 simultaneous single-cell TaqMan RT-PCR reactions
targeting vimentin mRNA. Following vimentin-positive droplet sorting and
downstream analysis of recovered nucleic acids, we found that
cancer-specific genomes and transcripts were significantly enriched.

