Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-spheroid analysis reveals attenuating effect of HS27A stroma
cells on DLD1 colon carcinoma susceptibility to MEK kinase inhibitor
trametinib


In cancer treatment, stroma-derived microenvironmental cues are suspected
to exert an adversary impact on anti-cancer drug efficacy. In order to
take such influences into account in cellular drug screening campaigns,
we have set up a high-throughput-compatible co-spheroid model, enabling
the analysis of various combinations of cancer and stroma cell lines.
This assay system allows for cell analysis in a three-dimensional (3D)
close-to-physiological environment with simultaneous detection of cancer
and stroma cell viability based on differential luciferase
cell-labelling. Our data revealed that growth characteristics strongly
depend on the specific cell types combined. Stroma cells in contrast to
tumor cells usually ceased to proliferate or even showed dramatic loss of
viability possibly due to metabolic hijacking. We report on the
optimization of the cellular test systems to ensure significant viable
stroma cell counts during the drug testing phase. In such an optimized
co-spheroid model of Firefly-luciferase labelled DLD-1 colon cancer cells
with Renilla-luciferase labelled HS27A stroma cells, we identified the
MEK kinase inhibitor Trametinib as a compound showing a 10-30fold
attenuated potency as compared to the DLD-1 mono-spheroid model. Based on
these results we suggest integrating optimized co-spheroid studies into
early drug development to focus on compounds that remain active under
microenvironmental conditions.

