Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HMGA2 suppresses GBM stemness, invasion and
tumorigenicity


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of brain tumor-related
deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of GBM prevents
complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The lack of
curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific targeted
therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers in glioma
stem-like cells (GSCs) thought to be critical for tumor invasion and
recurrence could lead to development of better therapies. HMGA2, a
non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal and
cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential therapeutic
target in GBM has not been investigated. We found increased HMGA2
expression in a subset of primary human GBM tumors, in multiple
patient-derived GBM neurosphere and adherent cell lines, and in the
mesenchymal subgroup of GBM in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database.
Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-lowered HMGA2 protein levels and
significantly reduced invasion and clonogenicity of GBM cell lines in
transwell invasion and soft agar colony formation assays. Pharmacological
inhibition of HMGA proteins using the DNA minor-groove binding drug
Netropsin significantly inhibited growth of the U-87 MG GBM cell line
(PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of brain
tumor-related deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of GBM
prevents complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The lack
of curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific targeted
therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers in glioma
stem-like cells (GSCs) thought to be critical for tumor invasion and
recurrence could lead to development of better therapies. HMGA2, a
non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal and
cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential therapeutic
target in GBM has not been investigated. We found increased HMGA2
expression in a subset of primary human GBM tumors, in multiple
patient-derived GBM neurosphere and adherent cell lines, and in the
mesenchymal subgroup of GBM in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database.
Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-lowered HMGA2 protein levels and
significantly reduced invasion and clonogenicity of GBM cell lines in
transwell invasion and soft agar colony formation assays. Pharmacological
inhibition of HMGA proteins using the DNA minor-groove binding drug
Netropsin significantly inhibited growth of the U-87 MG GBM cell line
(P<0.01) in MTS assays. Mice bearing orthotopic GBM neurosphere xenograft
lines transduced with HMGA2 shRNA lived longer (median survival = 108
days) compared to control shRNA (median survival = 67.5 days)
(PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of brain
tumor-related deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of GBM
prevents complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The lack
of curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific targeted
therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers in glioma
stem-like cells (GSCs) thought to be critical for tumor invasion and
recurrence could lead to development of better therapies. HMGA2, a
non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal and
cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential therapeutic
target in GBM has not been investigated. We found increased HMGA2
expression in a subset of primary human GBM tumors, in multiple
patient-derived GBM neurosphere and adherent cell lines, and in the
mesenchymal subgroup of GBM in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database.
Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-lowered HMGA2 protein levels and
significantly reduced invasion and clonogenicity of GBM cell lines in
transwell invasion and soft agar colony formation assays. Pharmacological
inhibition of HMGA proteins using the DNA minor-groove binding drug
Netropsin significantly inhibited growth of the U-87 MG GBM cell line
(P<0.01) in MTS assays. Mice bearing orthotopic GBM neurosphere xenograft
lines transduced with HMGA2 shRNA lived longer (median survival = 108
days) compared to control shRNA (median survival = 67.5 days) (P<0.0001
by log-rank analysis). Conversely, lentiviral-mediated overexpression of
HMGA2 in GBM cell lines increased invasion, clonogenicity and resistance
to radiation in vitro (PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority
of brain tumor-related deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness
of GBM prevents complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence.
The lack of curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific
targeted therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers
in glioma stem-like cells (GSCs) thought to be critical for tumor
invasion and recurrence could lead to development of better therapies.
HMGA2, a non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal
and cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential
therapeutic target in GBM has not been investigated. We found increased
HMGA2 expression in a subset of primary human GBM tumors, in multiple
patient-derived GBM neurosphere and adherent cell lines, and in the
mesenchymal subgroup of GBM in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database.
Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-lowered HMGA2 protein levels and
significantly reduced invasion and clonogenicity of GBM cell lines in
transwell invasion and soft agar colony formation assays. Pharmacological
inhibition of HMGA proteins using the DNA minor-groove binding drug
Netropsin significantly inhibited growth of the U-87 MG GBM cell line
(P<0.01) in MTS assays. Mice bearing orthotopic GBM neurosphere xenograft
lines transduced with HMGA2 shRNA lived longer (median survival = 108
days) compared to control shRNA (median survival = 67.5 days) (P<0.0001
by log-rank analysis). Conversely, lentiviral-mediated overexpression of
HMGA2 in GBM cell lines increased invasion, clonogenicity and resistance
to radiation in vitro (P<0.01). Overexpression of HMGA2 also promoted GBM
tumor formation in vivo in orthotopic xenografts. To elucidate the
molecular mechanism by which HMGA2 promotes invasion and stemness in GBM,
we performed mRNA expression profiling on GBM neurosphere lines
lentivirally transduced to express HMGA2 or empty vector control. We
found increased CD44 expression in HMGA2-overexpressing GBM neurosphere
lines compared to control, and confirmed this result by western blotting.
Together, our results suggest an oncogenic role of HMGA2 in promoting GBM
tumorigenicity by increasing invasiveness and a stem cell-like state, and
show that HMGA2 is a potential therapeutic target in GBM.

