Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurate site prediction of gastrointestinal cancer by novel
methylated DNA markers: Discovery & validation


Purpose: Methylated DNA markers can discriminate upper from lower GI
neoplasms (Gastroenterology 2013;144(5):S84). It is unknown if
organ-specific molecular prediction of GI tumor site can be
achieved.Experimental design: An unbiased search for neoplasm markers at
each major GI organ site was conducted by reduced representation
bisulfite sequencing. Top marker candidates were then blindly validated
by methylation specific PCR on independent tissue DNA samples from normal
mucosa [17 esophagus (E), 13 stomach (S), 33 pancreas (P), 35 bile
duct/liver (BD), 21 colorectal (CR)] and neoplasia [42 E, 43 S, 36 P, 48
BD, 97 CR]. Recursive partitioning (rPart) trees modeled all stepwise
combinations of single markers to classify controls vs neoplasms and then
neoplasms by site (CR, gastroesophageal or pancreaticobiliary). A 2nd
model was designed from tissue data for blinded clinical piloting on 42
independent plasma DNA samples (14 normal and 28 cancers (14 P, 14
CR).Results: From the top 100 markers, 95 were validated and used for
rPart modeling. A 3- marker panel (chr12.133484978-5047, BMP3,
chr11.123301058-255) was selected for the universal detection of GI
neoplasms, as it classified neoplasms and control tissues with 95%
accuracy. Two markers (chr7.25896389-501, QKI) then assigned lower vs
upper GI neoplasms with 94% accuracy. Finally, 3 markers (PDGFD, ELOVL2,
PCBP3) called pancreaticobiliary vs gastroesophageal neoplasms with 94%
accuracy. All 8 markers applied in a single model (Table) accurately
predicted control vs tumor by site [88% (p Purpose: Methylated DNA
markers can discriminate upper from lower GI neoplasms (Gastroenterology
2013;144(5):S84). It is unknown if organ-specific molecular prediction of
GI tumor site can be achieved.Experimental design: An unbiased search for
neoplasm markers at each major GI organ site was conducted by reduced
representation bisulfite sequencing. Top marker candidates were then
blindly validated by methylation specific PCR on independent tissue DNA
samples from normal mucosa [17 esophagus (E), 13 stomach (S), 33 pancreas
(P), 35 bile duct/liver (BD), 21 colorectal (CR)] and neoplasia [42 E, 43
S, 36 P, 48 BD, 97 CR]. Recursive partitioning (rPart) trees modeled all
stepwise combinations of single markers to classify controls vs neoplasms
and then neoplasms by site (CR, gastroesophageal or pancreaticobiliary).
A 2nd model was designed from tissue data for blinded clinical piloting
on 42 independent plasma DNA samples (14 normal and 28 cancers (14 P, 14
CR).Results: From the top 100 markers, 95 were validated and used for
rPart modeling. A 3- marker panel (chr12.133484978-5047, BMP3,
chr11.123301058-255) was selected for the universal detection of GI
neoplasms, as it classified neoplasms and control tissues with 95%
accuracy. Two markers (chr7.25896389-501, QKI) then assigned lower vs
upper GI neoplasms with 94% accuracy. Finally, 3 markers (PDGFD, ELOVL2,
PCBP3) called pancreaticobiliary vs gastroesophageal neoplasms with 94%
accuracy. All 8 markers applied in a single model (Table) accurately
predicted control vs tumor by site [88% (p <0.0001)]. In plasma, a
2-marker panel (BMP3, QKI) was 78% accurate in assigning patients to
cancer or control groups (pPurpose: Methylated DNA markers can
discriminate upper from lower GI neoplasms (Gastroenterology
2013;144(5):S84). It is unknown if organ-specific molecular prediction of
GI tumor site can be achieved.Experimental design: An unbiased search for
neoplasm markers at each major GI organ site was conducted by reduced
representation bisulfite sequencing. Top marker candidates were then
blindly validated by methylation specific PCR on independent tissue DNA
samples from normal mucosa [17 esophagus (E), 13 stomach (S), 33 pancreas
(P), 35 bile duct/liver (BD), 21 colorectal (CR)] and neoplasia [42 E, 43
S, 36 P, 48 BD, 97 CR]. Recursive partitioning (rPart) trees modeled all
stepwise combinations of single markers to classify controls vs neoplasms
and then neoplasms by site (CR, gastroesophageal or pancreaticobiliary).
A 2nd model was designed from tissue data for blinded clinical piloting
on 42 independent plasma DNA samples (14 normal and 28 cancers (14 P, 14
CR).Results: From the top 100 markers, 95 were validated and used for
rPart modeling. A 3- marker panel (chr12.133484978-5047, BMP3,
chr11.123301058-255) was selected for the universal detection of GI
neoplasms, as it classified neoplasms and control tissues with 95%
accuracy. Two markers (chr7.25896389-501, QKI) then assigned lower vs
upper GI neoplasms with 94% accuracy. Finally, 3 markers (PDGFD, ELOVL2,
PCBP3) called pancreaticobiliary vs gastroesophageal neoplasms with 94%
accuracy. All 8 markers applied in a single model (Table) accurately
predicted control vs tumor by site [88% (p <0.0001)]. In plasma, a
2-marker panel (BMP3, QKI) was 78% accurate in assigning patients to
cancer or control groups (p<0.0009) and 83% accurate in assigning cancer
origin to CR or P sites (pPurpose: Methylated DNA markers can
discriminate upper from lower GI neoplasms (Gastroenterology
2013;144(5):S84). It is unknown if organ-specific molecular prediction of
GI tumor site can be achieved.Experimental design: An unbiased search for
neoplasm markers at each major GI organ site was conducted by reduced
representation bisulfite sequencing. Top marker candidates were then
blindly validated by methylation specific PCR on independent tissue DNA
samples from normal mucosa [17 esophagus (E), 13 stomach (S), 33 pancreas
(P), 35 bile duct/liver (BD), 21 colorectal (CR)] and neoplasia [42 E, 43
S, 36 P, 48 BD, 97 CR]. Recursive partitioning (rPart) trees modeled all
stepwise combinations of single markers to classify controls vs neoplasms
and then neoplasms by site (CR, gastroesophageal or pancreaticobiliary).
A 2nd model was designed from tissue data for blinded clinical piloting
on 42 independent plasma DNA samples (14 normal and 28 cancers (14 P, 14
CR).Results: From the top 100 markers, 95 were validated and used for
rPart modeling. A 3- marker panel (chr12.133484978-5047, BMP3,
chr11.123301058-255) was selected for the universal detection of GI
neoplasms, as it classified neoplasms and control tissues with 95%
accuracy. Two markers (chr7.25896389-501, QKI) then assigned lower vs
upper GI neoplasms with 94% accuracy. Finally, 3 markers (PDGFD, ELOVL2,
PCBP3) called pancreaticobiliary vs gastroesophageal neoplasms with 94%
accuracy. All 8 markers applied in a single model (Table) accurately
predicted control vs tumor by site [88% (p <0.0001)]. In plasma, a
2-marker panel (BMP3, QKI) was 78% accurate in assigning patients to
cancer or control groups (p<0.0009) and 83% accurate in assigning cancer
origin to CR or P sites (p<0.0001).Conclusion: Panels of methylated DNA
markers were identified for both universal detection of GI neoplasia and
accurate prediction of tumor site. Pilot testing of these markers in
plasma supports potential clinical feasibility.

