Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of the novel TTK kinase inhibitor
S81694 for the treatment of triple negative breast cancer


The tyrosine threonine kinase TTK, also known as Monopolar Spindle 1
kinase (MPS1), is a conserved kinase found to be highly expressed in a
number of human tumors of different origin. TTK kinase activity plays a
critical role in the control of mitosis, regulating the spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC), a mitotic mechanism required for proper chromosome
alignment and segregation during cellular division. The activity of this
checkpoint has been shown to be proficient and up-regulated in aneuploid
tumors, a common feature measured in approximately 90% of solid tumors
and 70% of hematological cancers.S81694 (NMS-P153) is a novel potent
inhibitor of TTK. It is a tight binder compound with long residence time
on the target and is highly selective for TTK against a wide range of
tested enzymes (kinases, channels, hormones, GPCRs).In vitro, brief
exposure is sufficient to commit cells to death with the compound showing
anti-proliferative activity with a demonstrated mechanism of action and
marked tumor growth inhibition in preclinical in vivo tumor models
associated with a good pharmacokinetic profile in both rodent and
non-rodent species.TTK inhibitors are anticipated to be more active in
SAC dependent tumors and data in the literature suggests that triple
negative breast cancer is among the tumor types potentially highly
dependent on TTK activity. Moreover, in accelerating mitosis, TTK
inhibitors have a novel mode of action as compared to currently known
mitotic inhibitors.To confirm the role of TTK in breast cancer and
identify a sensitive patient population to S81694 treatment,
translational studies have been conducted on a large panel of human tumor
cell lines, including 39 of mammary gland origin. Anti-proliferative
activity was measured after 72h continuous treatment or after a brief
treatment of 7h followed by 2D colony forming assay to verify the long
term effects of a treatment which mimics compound half-life in mice. In
addition, active caspase 3 induction was also analyzed to identify cell
lines more prone to activate apoptosis upon treatment.Triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines were confirmed to be particularly
sensitive to S81694 and correlation was observed between sensitivity
profile in vitro and tumor growth inhibition in vivo. In MDA-MB-231
xenograft and orthotopic models, tumor regression, cured animals and
metastasis reduction in several organs including brain and lungs was
observed.These results further confirm the role of TTK in triple negative
breast cancer and could support the clinical development of S81694 in
this indication.

