Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting by 13C tracers the utilization of glucose and glutamine
for the synthesis of fatty acids in triple negative breast cancer cells


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive cancer, which is
resistant to the majority of available chemotherapies. We have recently
identified significant differences in the levels of membrane lipids and
fatty acids between two distinct TNCB metabolic subtypes (MST2 and MST3)
(Beatty et al., 2014, manuscript submitted). Fatty acid synthesis has
recently been discussed as potential pharmaceutical target.In order to
evaluate whether glucose or glutamine is the preferred carbon source for
palmitic acid synthesis, TNBC cell lines (BT549 and HCC1806) were fed
with fully labelled glucose and fully labelled glutamine ([U-13C6]glucose
and [U-13C5]glutamine) in independent experiments. Fully labelled
glutamine allows conclusions on total usage of glutamine via the
reductive and the oxidative part of the TCA-cycle. In order to assess the
contribution of glutamine to palmitic acid synthesis via the reductive
pathway we fed the subtypes with single labelled glutamine
[5-13C1]glutamine. Enrichment of 13C in palmitic acid from all labelling
experiments was measured via GC-MS (gas chromatography coupled mass
spectrometry).Feeding the TNBC subtypes with [U-13C6]glucose and
[U-13C5]glutamine resulted in a higher enrichment of 13C in palmitic acid
derived from glucose as compared to glutamine in both subtypes,
indicating that glucose is the main carbon source at the tested
conditions. Feeding the cells with [5-13C1]glutamine also resulted in an
enrichment of 13C in palmitic acid in both subtypes, which indicates that
reductive glutamine metabolism contributes to palmitic acid synthesis in
both subtypes. Based on the 13C-palmitic acid data from both glutamine
isotopes we found that palmitic acid synthesis preferably occurs via the
reductive path in MST3 (61% of total glutamine use) while the oxidative
path seems the preferred route (34% of total glutamine use) in MST2.The
presented data indicate that glucose is the main carbon source for fatty
acid synthesis in both MSTs, suggesting a higher sensitivity towards
pharmacological targeting of glucose metabolism. Despite of the lower
dependency on glutamine, TNCBs of the MST3 subtype seem more sensitive
towards targeting the reductive glutamine metabolism.

