Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utility of circulating tumor cell (CTC) in advanced gastric cancer


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs), known as the leukemic phase of solid
tumor, have been associated with poor prognosis and clinical outcome in
various cancer including breast and colorectal. However, fewer studies
reported characteristic and usefulness of CTC as an indicator in gastric
cancer (GC). In this study, we evaluated utility of CTC in advanced GC
cancer. First, we confirmed detection rate of GC cancer cell lines as a
spiking test, and then defined CTC as DAPI+, EpCAM+ and CD45- cells
through immunofluorescence stating. To determine a cut-off for CTC of GC,
we assessed the number of CTCs in blood of 22 healthy volunteers, and
observed 1 (3/22) to 2 (1/22) of CTCs. Based on these results, we
determined CTC positivity of GC as more than 3 CTCs. When we evaluated
CTC positive rate in Stage IV GC patients, 28 patients wereCTC positive
(30.1%) with the median number of CTC 5 (range 3 to over 100).
Interestingly, 3 out of 28 patients were showed more than 100 CTCs.
While, in operable GC patients (Stage I to III), CTC positivity was 18.4%
(7/38) and median number of CTC was 4 (range 3 to 9) in CTC positive
patients. These results showed that Stage IV GC patients have high number
of CTCs than operable GC patients. Tumor histology and Lauren
classification did not affect to CTC positivity in Stage IV and operable
GC patients. We also observed the potential use of CTC in serial
follow-ups and one of the cases shows the decreasing CTCs followed by
clinical response. In conclusion, this study demonstrates that detection
of CTC may be useful prognostic indicator of GC cancer patients.

