Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A rational approach for the discovery of inhibitors of NSD2 for
the treatment of cancer


Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy which accounts for
approximately 10% of hematologic malignancies. Despite the introduction
of new therapeutic agents, MM remains incurable and nearly all patients
ultimately relapse. About 20% of MM are due to a chromosomal
translocation t(4;14) leading to overexpression of the NSD2 histone
methyltransferase. NSD2 catalyzes dimethylation of lysine 36 on histone
H3 (H3K36me2) and is associated with transcriptionally active regions.
Several studies have shown that in MM harboring the translocation
t(4;14), oncogenic programming is dependent on the methyltransferase
activity of NSD2. In addition, the NSD2 overactivity is also observed in
prostate and lung cancers. Thus, NSD2 is a potential target for cancers,
for which no selective drug is available to date.Using the AlphaLisa
technology, we screened 240,000 compounds coming from our proprietary
library. The assay is based on the detection of H3K36me2 on nucleosome by
a specific antibody. False positives hits were removed by a technological
counterscreen, and compounds with redox activity were excluded. This
strategy allowed us to identify about 200 compounds. To focus on the most
interesting ones, an orthogonal counterscreen based on 3H SAM
incorporation is being completed. In parallel to the biochemical
screening, we are developing secondary cellular assays based on the
H3K36me2 methylation and proliferation to further confirm hit activity.
To our knowledge, no NSD2 inhibitor have been identified to date despite
several screening effort performed by other groups. Our library has
already produced new chemical starting points for other KMTs, and we
believe that our hits could be promising starting points to generate
potent and selective NSD2 inhibitors.

