Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting immune checkpoints: using a big data approach for their
identification, prioritization and application


Tumor cells have long been known to successfully evade immune
surveillance mechanisms.In order to curtail the tumor progression as well
as to develop effective therapeutic anti-tumor strategies, key immune
regulators,or so-called immune checkpoints, havebeen recognizedas playing
an important role. To prevent excess tissue damage,immune checkpoints
that refer to a number of inhibitory players involved in immune
responses,are crucial for maintaining self-tolerance and modulating the
duration and amplitude of physiological immune responses.Therapies
targeting such immune checkpoints such as CTLA-4 and PD-1 have shown
great clinical successas they boost the already existing immune response
working against the tumorprogression. To identify novel immune
checkpoints it becomes crucial to comprehensively analyze the wealth of
existing knowledge regarding key signaling pathways, theircross-talk with
immune regulators, protein expression profiles in tumor tissues, and
patient outcomes data. These data silos require a big data analytics
approach to successfully hypothesize, query and derive meaningful
conclusions from this data. With a proprietary big data analytics
platform PharmGPS, we have identified a number of immune checkpoints that
have clear therapeutic potential for solid tumor regenesis. First, second
and third degree associations between tumorigenic pathways and immune
checkpoints were identified and preliminary findings will be presented.

