Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 downregulates CRKL proto-oncogene protein through miR-200
family


The downregulation of the miR-200 family has been involved in the
progression and metastasis of human cancers. The miR-200 family includes
two clusters: miR-200b, miR-200a and miR-429 (miR-200b-200a-429) located
on chromosome 1; and miR-200c and miR-141 (miR-200c-141) located on
chromosome 12. We identified response elements located around both
clusters that are responsive to p53 family. Based on the similarity of
their seed sequences, miR-200b, miR-200c and miR-429 have identical seed
sequences, whereas the seed sequence of miR-141 and miR-200a is similar,
but not identical, suggesting that miR-200b, miR-200c and miR-429 share
similar mRNAs target. Here, in silico miRNA target prediction identified
the v-crk sarcoma virus CT10 oncogene homolog-like (CRKL) as a potential
target for miR-200b, miR-200c and miR-429 (miR-200b/200c/429).
miR-200b/200c/429 inhibits the expression of CRKL mRNA and protein by
directly targeting its 3-UTR region. Importantly, endogenous CRKL
expression was decreased in cancer cells with introduction of wild-type
p53 and TAp63. Oncomine database shows that CRKL levels are significantly
overexpressed in multiple cancer types compared with the corresponding
normal tissues. We also found that CRKL was overexpressed in primary
breast cancer tissues harboring mutant p53 genes. Our results indicate
that miR-200b/200c/429, a p53-inducible miRNA, is a negative regulator of
the CRKL oncoprotein and suggest a new p53-miR-200-CRKL pathway in
carcinogenesis.

