Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-endocrine therapy in breast cancerresistance can be
circumvented by targeting ribonucleotide reductase M2 usingthe
pharmaceutical agent Didox


Breast Cancers (BC) that are sensitive to anti-endocrine therapies such
as tamoxifen develop resistance despite their initial favorable response.
To gain mechanistic insight on endocrine resistance, gene expression
profiling was performed to determine the transcripts that are
differentially expressed post-tamoxifen therapy under conditions of
prolonged drug treatment and development of resistance. This resistance
outcome is the result of the cancer cells invoking survival functions
that are up-regulated leading to enhanced cell proliferation and cell
motility networks. These networks were validated in a larger panel of
breast cancer cells. Here, we report the activation of Growth factor
signaling and IKK-signaling, NFB signaling, in BC cells upon acquired
resistance to ER blockade by anti-endocrine therapy. Moreover,
ribonucleotide reductase (RRM2) was revealed as a key contributor to
acquired tamoxifen resistance. An RNA interference screen demonstrated
that suppression of RRM2 by the RR inhibitor Didox results in
down-regulation of Her2 and EGFR, modulates ER- signaling, alters NFB
activity and expression, and decreases anti-apoptotic pathways. Indeed,
concomitant treatment of tamoxifen and Didox causes blockade of ER and
RRM2 induced prolonged ER inhibition and severely impairs the growth of
resistant tumor cells. Collectively, these results identify distinct
mechanisms that mediate secondary resistance to anti-endocrine therapies,
all of which reactivate RR signaling. These observations provide a
rational strategy to overcome the multifaceted clonal heterogeneity that
emerges when tumors are treated with targeted agents. We propose that
Didox and an anti-hormonal therapy should be tested in BC patients who
become refractory to anti-endocrine therapies.

