Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The extracellular domain of thrombomodulin induces erythroid
differentiation and hampers proliferation of human leukemia cells in
vitro and in vivo


Thrombomodulin (TM) is a glycosylated type I transmembrane molecule with
multiple domains that include an NH2-terminal lectin-like region, six
tandem epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like structures, an O-glycosylation
site-rich domain, a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic tail domain.
TM is ubiquitously expressed on endothelial cells and acts as an
anticoagulant via generation of activated protein C. Recombinant human
soluble thrombomodulin (rTM) comprises the active, extracellular domain
of TM, and inactivates coagulation. Use of rTM for the treatment of
disseminated intravascular coagulation was approved in Japan in 2008. We
previous showed that exposure of acute promyelocytic leukemia or acute
myelomonocytic leukemia cells to rTM induced myeloid differentiation and
growth arrest in vitro (Exp Hemat. 2012, Leuk Res. 2012). The present
study found that exposure of K562 and KU812 cell lines that were derived
from chronic myeloid leukemia cells to rTM increased expression of cell
surface glycophorin CD235a in association with upregulation of GATA1
mRNA, indicating a differentiation of leukemia cells toward erythroid
lineage. Interestingly, treatment of K562 bearing immunodeficient mice
with rTM significantly decreased number of K562 cells infiltrating in
liver and prolonged their survival compared to mice who received control
diluent. These observations shed light on a novel function of TM in
hematopoietic cells.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

