Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA interference kinome-wide screen reveals a role for PDK1 in
acquired resistance to CDK4/6 inhibition ER-positive breast cancer


Background: Small molecule inhibitors that target the CDK4/6/cyclinD1
pathway are in clinical development. Clinical trials combining the CDK4/6
inhibitor pallbociclib and the aromatase inhibitor letrozole have
demonstrated significantly improved clinical outcomes in patients with
ER-positive breast cancer. This combination is likely to be approved for
the treatment of patients with this breast cancer subtype. However, as
for other targeted therapies, development of resistance to CDK4/6
inhibitors in a significant fraction of patients is anticipated.
Therefore, there is a need to develop potent therapeutic strategies to
circumvent drug resistance.Methods: We performed a high-throughput RNAi
kinome screen targeting 720 kinases to identify potentially targetable
molecules whose inhibition in combination with the CDK4/6 inhibitor
LEE011 induced synthetic lethality in MCF7 ER+ breast cancer
cells.Results: The sensitivity index (SI) score, which measures the
influence of siRNA-induced gene knockdown on drug sensitivity, was
calculated for each siRNA in MCF7 cells treated with LEE011 (IC50, 144
nM). A cutoff of SI >0.15 (2 standard deviations above the mean) was used
for hit selection. Individual knockdown of 15 (2.1%) kinases sensitized
MCF7 cells to the CDK4/6 inhibitor (pBackground: Small molecule
inhibitors that target the CDK4/6/cyclinD1 pathway are in clinical
development. Clinical trials combining the CDK4/6 inhibitor pallbociclib
and the aromatase inhibitor letrozole have demonstrated significantly
improved clinical outcomes in patients with ER-positive breast cancer.
This combination is likely to be approved for the treatment of patients
with this breast cancer subtype. However, as for other targeted
therapies, development of resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors in a
significant fraction of patients is anticipated. Therefore, there is a
need to develop potent therapeutic strategies to circumvent drug
resistance.Methods: We performed a high-throughput RNAi kinome screen
targeting 720 kinases to identify potentially targetable molecules whose
inhibition in combination with the CDK4/6 inhibitor LEE011 induced
synthetic lethality in MCF7 ER+ breast cancer cells.Results: The
sensitivity index (SI) score, which measures the influence of
siRNA-induced gene knockdown on drug sensitivity, was calculated for each
siRNA in MCF7 cells treated with LEE011 (IC50, 144 nM). A cutoff of SI
>0.15 (2 standard deviations above the mean) was used for hit selection.
Individual knockdown of 15 (2.1%) kinases sensitized MCF7 cells to the
CDK4/6 inhibitor (p<0.05). 3-phosphoinositide dependent protein kinase 1
(PDK1) was identified as the top hit (SI = 0.32) whose downregulation
sensitized MCF7 cells to LEE011. This was confirmed with independent
siRNAs in ER+ MCF7, T47D, HCC1428 and HCC1500 breast cancer cell lines.
Pharmacological inhibition of PDK1 with the ATP-competitive, small
molecule inhibitor GSK2334470 synergistically inhibited proliferation of
MCF7 and T47D cells (combination index 0.19-0.89). LEE011-resistant MCF7
and T47D cells were generated by chronic treatment with doses of LEE011
up to 1 M. These cells displayed increased PDK1 protein expression
compared to parental cells. Inhibition of PDK1 with siRNA or GSK2334470
resensitized the LEE011-resistant cells to the CDK4/6 inhibitor.
LEE011-resistant MCF7 cells expressed high levels of phosphorylated S6
ribosomal protein (pS6), an effector of the PDK1 substrate p70S6K.
Genetic (with siRNA) and pharmacological inhibition of PDK1 (with
GSK2334470) abrogated pS6 levels whereas inhibition of AKT with the small
molecule inhibitor AZD5363 did not affect pS6 levels, suggesting that
PDK1 mediates resistance to CDK4/6 inhibition via p70S6K/pS6 signaling in
an AKT-independent manner.Conclusions: These studies suggest that PDK1
inhibition can overcome resistance to the CDK4/6 inhibitor LEE011 and
offer a rationale for further translational and clinical investigation of
combinations of CDK4/6 and PDK1 inhibitors in ER+ breast cancer.

