Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-tumoral autotaxin stored into platelet -granules promotes
breast cancer cell metastasis


Autotaxin (ATX) through its lysophospholipase D activity controls
physiological levels of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) in blood. ATX is
overexpressed in multiple types of cancers and we have shown previously
that together with LPA generated during platelet activation promotes
skeletal metastasis of breast cancer. However, the mechanisms that
regulate the pathophysiological significances of the interactions between
circulating LPA, ATX, and platelets remain undefined in cancer. Here we
show that ATX is stored in -granules of resting human platelets and
released upon tumor cell-induced platelet aggregation, leading to the
production of LPA. For this study, we used two human breast cancer cell
lines (MDA-MB-231, MDA-B02) that do not express ATX. Our in vitro and in
vivo experiments demonstrate that non-tumoral ATX controls the early
stage of bone colonization by tumor cells and to a less extent osteolytic
bone metastasis progression. Moreover, expression of a dominant negative
integrin v3-744 or treatment with the anti human v&;3 monoclonal antibody
LM609 completely abolished binding of ATX to tumor cells, demonstrating
the requirement of a fully active integrin v3 in this process. The
present results establish a new mechanism for platelet contribution to
LPA-dependent metastasis of breast cancer cells and demonstrate the
therapeutic potential of disrupting the binding of non-tumor-derived ATX
with the tumor cells for the prevention of metastasis.

