Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A modular software solution (under development) to expedite
sequencing workflow and mitigate legacy workflow issues in regulatory
environments


One of the challenges of working in regulatory environments is the need
to revalidate legacy workflows when incorporating new information or
tools. Even in unregulated environments, updating and integrating
workflows can require a considerable expenditure of time and labor. To
mitigate these issues, Illumina is developing an analysis framework
software as part of the Universal Oncology Test System for the MiSeqDx
System, the first next generation sequencer to achieve FDA clearance. By
incorporating plug-in workflow modules that seamlessly integrate with the
framework - yet remain self-contained and separately versioned from other
workflow modules - the software will expedite and ensure scalable
operations. Installing new modules to the framework will incur no need
for code changes to the legacy workflows, a key consideration for
development and validation in regulated environments. The updated MiSeqDx
analysis framework includes user authentication and sample sheet setup,
reducing the number of disparate application interactions and bringing
them together in a clean, clinical user interface accessible via any
computer web browser.The Universal Oncology Test System software workflow
module will allow an investigator to identify variants of interest via
three methods: an eligibility list of specific coordinate nucleotide
changes, configurable rules based on variant type and region, and an
amplification gene list with specified amplification type. This flexible
software solution can be used to produce, for example, clinical trial
reports that require masking of non-investigational variants while not
precluding the opportunity to informatically unfilter new information. A
report definition can be applied per sample, and updated post-sequencing
for a reanalyzed report. The in vitro diagnostic report, also in
development, aims to support the pathologist end user by separate
categorization of pathogenic variants based on companion diagnostics.The
MiSeqDx analysis software platform combined with the Universal Oncology
Test System workflow module can help expedite immediate clinical trial
uptake and detection of variants for interpretation and future patient
care.

