Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of chemoimmunotherapy dose intensity in diffuse large
b-cell lymphoma


IntroductionChemotherapy dose intensity (DI) impacts outcomes across
tumor subtypes. In diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), DI played a
large role prior to rituximab, but is still a subject of investigation.
Research into intensifying treatment for poorer prognostic lymphoma
subtypes has yielded dose-adjusted EPOCH-R where etoposide is added to
standard R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine,
and prednisone). Though, R-CHOP given every 14 vs. 21 days has not been
found to improve survival, this study examines if delays in treatment or
reductions in R-CHOP21 DI impact patient outcomes.MethodsIn this single
institution review, DLBCL patients (pts) treated with first-line R-CHOP
between 2004 and 2010 were included. After factoring in covariates such
as revised International Prognostic Index (R-IPI) and gender, pts were
compared by DI (ratio of actual total dose received vs. prescribed dose)
of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and treatment duration as a whole for
their impact on progression-free (PFS) and overall survival
(OS).ResultsOf 232 pts identified, 224 were included in final review.
Median age and ECOG performance status was 62 years and 1, respectively.
Majority had stage IV disease (46%). 124 patients were male with pts
evenly distributed between R-IPI 0-1 (low, 28%), 2 (low-intermediate,
21%), 3 (high-intermediate, 26%), and 4-5 (high, 25%). A median DI of
both cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin was 97%. 118 pts had >/ = 1 week
delay during treatment duration. Cutpoint analysis found that DI was more
important at 85% for both cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin. Median PFS
for patients who received / = 85% cyclophosphamide DI was 27.2 vs. 55.0
months (hazard ratio [HR] 2.48, p = 0.03). Similarly, median OS was 41.8
months vs. not reached (HR 2.79 p = 0.02), respectively. PFS and OS for
doxorubicin was similar at 27.6 vs. 53.7 months (HR 2.25, p = 0.04) and
40.9 months vs. not reached (HR 2.54, p = 0.02), respectively. Actual
treatment durations that differed IntroductionChemotherapy dose intensity
(DI) impacts outcomes across tumor subtypes. In diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL), DI played a large role prior to rituximab, but is still
a subject of investigation. Research into intensifying treatment for
poorer prognostic lymphoma subtypes has yielded dose-adjusted EPOCH-R
where etoposide is added to standard R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone). Though, R-CHOP given every 14
vs. 21 days has not been found to improve survival, this study examines
if delays in treatment or reductions in R-CHOP21 DI impact patient
outcomes.MethodsIn this single institution review, DLBCL patients (pts)
treated with first-line R-CHOP between 2004 and 2010 were included. After
factoring in covariates such as revised International Prognostic Index
(R-IPI) and gender, pts were compared by DI (ratio of actual total dose
received vs. prescribed dose) of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and
treatment duration as a whole for their impact on progression-free (PFS)
and overall survival (OS).ResultsOf 232 pts identified, 224 were included
in final review. Median age and ECOG performance status was 62 years and
1, respectively. Majority had stage IV disease (46%). 124 patients were
male with pts evenly distributed between R-IPI 0-1 (low, 28%), 2
(low-intermediate, 21%), 3 (high-intermediate, 26%), and 4-5 (high, 25%).
A median DI of both cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin was 97%. 118 pts had
>/ = 1 week delay during treatment duration. Cutpoint analysis found that
DI was more important at 85% for both cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin.
Median PFS for patients who received / = 85% cyclophosphamide DI was 27.2
vs. 55.0 months (hazard ratio [HR] 2.48, p = 0.03). Similarly, median OS
was 41.8 months vs. not reached (HR 2.79 p = 0.02), respectively. PFS and
OS for doxorubicin was similar at 27.6 vs. 53.7 months (HR 2.25, p =
0.04) and 40.9 months vs. not reached (HR 2.54, p = 0.02), respectively.
Actual treatment durations that differed <15% of the planned durations
were protective for PFS (HR 0.44, p = 0.008), but less so for OS (HR
0.63, p = 0.18). Taking R-IPI scores and gender in multivariate Cox
proportional hazards modeling found the impact of cyclophosphamide and
doxorubicin DI on PFS and OS maintained significance but not treatment
duration. Though multiple reasons for reduced DI exist, growth factor
support use trended towards higher DI pts (32 vs. 19%, p =
0.10).ConclusionsWhile intensifying R-CHOP by shortening cycles to every
14 days has not been beneficial, this study suggests that delays and dose
reductions in R-CHOP21 substantially impact outcomes. In doing so, it
highlights that maintaining pts on schedule is important and that more
accurate methods of determining appropriate chemotherapeutic doses may
affect both survival and toxicity. Although it is our standard to only
use growth factor support with delays it may be beneficial to starting
all patients up front on growth factor support.

