Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of PTEN PDZ-binding domain in mammary gland tumorigenesis


PTEN functions as a key negative regulator of PI3K-Akt pathway through
its lipid phosphatase activity. Mutations or loss of PTEN is frequently
observed in brain, breast, prostate and endometrial cancer. PTEN also
possesses a PDZ-binding domain (PDZ-BD) at its carboxyl terminus, which
can be recruited by PDZ-containing proteins like ZO-1 to cell tight
junction. Therefore, PTEN may have a potential role in regulating
epithelial tight junction integrity. To study the role of PTEN PDZ-BD in
breast epithelial tumorigenesis, a PTEN-PDZ mice lacking this domain was
generated and further crossed with MMTV-PyMT breast cancer model. As a
result, PTENPDZ/MMTV-PyMT mice show enhanced tumor growth and metastasis.
To elucidate tumor suppressive mechanisms of PTEN PDZ-BD,
three-dimensional cultures of PTENPDZ mouse mammary epithelial cells
(MMEs) was carried out. Though PTEN-PDZ MMEs spheres have normal
morphogenesis in 3D culture, they possess larger diameters than wild-type
(WT). Besides, both tight junction (ZO-1) and adherent junction
(E-Cadherin) of MMEs were examined in 3D culture, though no major
differences in cell junction and polarity was observed between PTEN-PDZ
and PTEN-WT. Future work will study signaling activities of
PTEN-PDZ/MMTV-PyMT breast cancer cells, morphogenesis, polarity and cell
junction of PTEN-PDZ/MMTV-PyMT MMEs in 3D cultures.This work was
supported by NIH RO1 (CA133669), Hong Kong Research Grant Council
(460713) and Hong Kong PhD Fellowship Scheme (PF12-13584)

