Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PRAME as a biomarker for a new molecular subclass of uveal melanoma


Introduction: Uveal melanoma is the most common primary intraocular tumor
of the eye and has a propensity for fatal hematogenous metastasis. Gene
expression profiling is routinely used in clinic to classify uveal
melanoma into prognostic subgroups: Class 1 (low metastatic risk) and
Class 2 (high metastatic risk). Approximately 40% of Class 2 patients
metastasize, which accounts for 85% of metastasis. The remaining 15% of
patients that metastasize are Class 1 based on gene expression profiling,
however this study demonstrates that the Class 1 patients that
metastasize (Class1met+) can be defined as a new molecular subclass,
distinct from Class 1 patients that do not metastasize (Class1met-) and
Class 2 patients.Methods: Tumor samples from Class1met+ and Class1met-
patients with at least 1 year of follow-up underwent histopathologic,
cytogenetic and transcriptomic analyses.Results: In a comparison of
Class1met+ and Class1met- tumors, the only significant difference was a
larger mean basal tumor diameter in Class1met+ tumors. Cytogenetic
analyses revealed more extensive copy number gains and losses in
Class1met+ tumors. The most significant differentiating features in
Class1met+ tumors included 1q gain, 6p gain, 6q loss, and 8q gain. Using
principal component analysis, the Class1met+ tumors clustered separately
from the Class1met- tumors, indicating the existence of significant
transcriptomic differences between the two subgroups. Strikingly, the
most highly differentially expressed gene in Class1met+ tumors was
preferentially expressed antigen in melanoma (PRAME); mean mRNA
expression of PRAME in Class1met+ tumors was 61-fold higher than in
Class1met- tumors.Discussion: We define a new subtype of uveal melanoma
and demonstrate that gene expression of PRAME can distinguish between
Class1met+ patients and Class1met- patients.

