Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Revealing the molecular portrait of triple negative breast tumors
from an understudied population through omics analysis of formalin-fixed
and paraffin-embedded tissues


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), defined by the lack of expression
of the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human
epidermal receptor 2 (HER2), is an aggressive form of breast cancer (BC)
that is more prevalent in certain populations, in particular in low and
middle-income regions. The detailed molecular features of TNBC in these
regions remain unexplored as samples are mostly accessible as
formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) archived tissues, a challenging
material for advanced genomic and transcriptomic studies. We performed an
integrative genomic analysis on FFPE samples from TNBC patients to
identify molecular programs associated with this disease in an
understudied population. We implemented whole exome sequencing of 12
tumor tissues and blood pairs, complemented with miRNA and mRNA profiling
of the tumor tissues, using FFPE archived pathological samples from
Mexican women. Sequencing analyses found TP53 and RB1 genes as the most
frequently mutated. Transcriptional programs were characterized by the
overexpression of growth-promoting signals (EGFR, PDGFR, VEGF, PIK3CA,
FOXM1), the repression of cell cycle control pathways (TP53, RB1), the
deregulation of DNA-repair pathways, and alterations in epigenetic
modifiers through miRNA:mRNA network de-regulation. The molecular
programs identified were typical of those described in basal-like tumors
in other populations. This work demonstrates the utility of archival
clinical samples for advanced integrated genomics analyses. It thus opens
up opportunities for investigating molecular features of tumors from
regions where only FFPE tissues are available, allowing the development
of treatment strategies and of retrospective studies on the exploration
of the geographic diversity of BC.

