Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling drug sensitivity and kinomic pathways utilizing a novel
human tumor derived MicroTumor assay


Introduction: At present, drug screening studies are commonly performed
using monolayer or spheroid culture and xenograft models of tumor cell
lines. However these do not fully replicate the primary tumor's
microenvironment and fail to accurately predict clinical endpoints. Vivo
Biosciences has developed a novel MicroTumor 3D matrix based assay system
that emulates primary tumor multicellular growth and biology ex vivo,
providing an advanced drug screening platform. We postulated that
MicroTumors established from patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors will
allow for accurate analysis of drug response and preserve molecular
signaling of parent tumors. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most
common primary brain malignancy, was used to test our hypothesis.
MicroTumors were evaluated by comparing kinome activation profiles of
GBM-MicroTumors with corresponding parental orthotopically implanted PDX;
and determining single and combination treatment effects of small
molecule kinase inhibitors (SMI) on GBM MicroTumors.Methods: We
investigated 6 GBM PDX tumor lines representing the 4 known molecular
subtypes: Classical (JX10, X1016, X1046); Proneural (XD456); Mesenchymal
(JX22P); and Neural (JX10). Four SMIs (primary kinase target indicated)
were studied: WP1066 (JAK2), selumetinib (MEK1/2), crizotinib (c-MET,
ALK), and cediranib (VEGFR, FLT-1, FLT-4, c-KIT, PDGFR). MTT assays and
Calcein AM imaging were used for cytotoxicity assessment and PamStation
12 Kinomic analyses were performed (UAB Kinome Core).Results: Kinomic
analyses of GBM orthotopic PDX and GBM-MicroTumors revealed similar
kinase signaling profiles based on comparison of commonly shared,
most-variant phosphopeptides. Upstream kinase analyses identified these
peptides as substrates of EGFR, AXL, ZAP70 and MERTK kinases. Initial
drug response studies demonstrated dose dependency and PDX-specific
responses for each drug used independently informing doses for ongoing
combination studies. Interestingly, the least cytotoxic drug across all 6
MicroTumors, selumetinib, did impact MicroTumor morphology observed with
Calcein AM imaging.Conclusions: We identified kinomic alterations that
may correlate MicroTumor and patient tumor biology and guide the use of
molecularly targeted SMIs. SMI activities towards these targets
highlighted that this novel 3D translational model for GBM can provide
relevant drug sensitivity information. Future studies with in vivo PDX
tumors will examine the most promising SMI combinations based on
MicroTumor data. We believe this two-stage approach (Microtumor screening
to predict PDX sensitivities) will improve preclinical drug screening in
GBM and other cancers.

