Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoparticle silencing of 1 and 3 integrins augments Dasatinib
sensitivity


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are an aggressive subcategory of
breast cancers that currently lack FDA-approved targeted therapies.
Previous studies have i) further subcategorized TNBCs into 5 distinct
subtypes, each with a preferential response to specific chemotherapies
and ii) identified beta1 and beta3 integrins to be key mediators of
breast cancer EMT and metastasis. We surveyed beta1 and beta3 integrin
expression in the 5 subtypes of TNBC with and without treatment of their
proposed chemotherapies by western blot analysis. Using nanoparticles, we
delivered beta1 and beta3 integrin-specific siRNAs to silence the
expression of both integrins either with or without treatment of the
proposed chemotherapies, and evaluated the effect of these treatment
regimens on EMT, invasion, and 3D outgrowth. We demonstrated that beta1
and beta3 integrins are robustly expressed in the Mesenchymal Stem-Like,
Mesenchymal, and Basal-Like2 subtypes of TNBCs. Furthermore, we observed
elevated expression of beta1 integrin upon Dasatinib treatment of the
Mesenchymal Stem-Like subtype. Lastly, we determined that delivery of
beta1 and beta3 integrin siRNAs sensitized breast cancer cells to
Dasatinib treatment. Collectively, our data suggests that delivery of
beta1 and beta3 integrin-specific siRNAs in combination with Dasatinib
treatment efficiently eliminates the aggressive characteristics of
Mesenchymal Stem-Like breast cancer cell lines.

