Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G1 phase melanoma cells escape proteasome inhibitor cytotoxicity


Utilising the fluorescent ubiquitination-based cell cycle indicator
(FUCCI), which facilitates real-time cell cycle tracking, we have
demonstrated in vitro and in vivo that melanomas are composed of
differentially cycling tumour cells in a subcompartment-specific
distribution. Further, we have shown that targeting the endoplasmic
reticulum with fenretinide (synthetic retinoid) or bortezomib (26S
proteasome inhibitor) induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of
metastatic melanoma cells in vitro and in vivo.This study aims to
investigate the effect of ER stress-inducing agents on the dynamics of
cell division and cell death of individual melanoma cells within the
complex tumor microenvironment, and to develop combination strategies
that increase the efficacy of ER stress-inducing agents for melanoma
therapy.FUCCI-melanoma cells were grown as 3D spheroids and implanted
into a collagen matrix to mimic tumor architecture and microenvironment.
Utilising the F-XBP1DBD-venus reporter construct, which labels the
cytoplasm in response to ER stress, we found that bortezomib induced ER
stress, delayed cell cycle progression, and combination with fenretinide
increased cell death in 2D and 3D culture. Flow cytometry and confocal
microscopy indicated that treatment of FUCCI-melanoma cells with
bortezomib induced G2 accumulation in 2D and 3D culture over the course
of 24 h. In contrast, by 72 h the majority of cells were in G1 phase.
Analysis of 2D and 3D real-time cell cycle imaging movies revealed that
bortezomib induced both G1- and G2 arrest, but preferentially killed
G2-phase cells. Consequently, pretreatment with temozolomide or
fenretinide, leading to G2-arrest, sensitised melanoma cells to
bortezomib cytotoxicity. In contrast, pretreatment with MEK inhibitors,
leading to G1 arrest, inhibited bortezomib cytotoxicity in all melanoma
cells, as did selective BRAF inhibitors in BRAF mutant melanoma cells.Our
data suggest that bortezomib combined with fenretinide or temozolamide is
a strategy worth exploring for the treatment of BRAF-inhibitor
insensitive or resistant melanoma. Importantly, melanoma cells arrested
in G1 are protected from bortezomib cytotoxicity, which excludes MAPK
pathway inhibitors as combination partners.

