Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting autophagy and apoptosis to enhance anticancer effect on
esophageal carcinoma in vitro


Esophageal cancer is one of the malignancies threatening human health
with high incidence and a very low 5-year survival rate with poor
outcomes in the developing countries. As one of the main treatment for
esophageal cancer, chemotherapy has been played indispensable roles along
with more and more chemoresistance and side effects arised though. Recent
studies showed that induction of autophagy has emerged as a drug
resistance mechanism that promotes cancer cell survival via
self-digestion. Therefore targeting autophagy in cancer might be another
promising approach of therapeutics. In this study, chloroquine (CQ) was
used as the autophagy inhibitor, which has been the anti-malarial drug
with 60 years history and safety performance, to study esophageal
carcinoma cells EC109 in vivo and explore the potential molecular
mechanisms. Chloroquine was employed to treat EC109 cells at different
dosages and time points, and MTT results showed that the viability of
EC109 was reduced dramatically in a dose dependent manner after 24 hours
treatment. Moreover, we found that CQ could inhibit the migration and
invasion abilities through scratch test and cell invasion Transwell
chamber test, also significantly suppressed the colony formation using
soft agar assay. Further investigation showed that mTOR pathway was
activated with CQ exposure, and autophagy marker LC3I/II conversion
decreased at early-stage, with obvious elevation eventually. More
interestingly, we observed that CQ promoted the EC109 cells apoptosis by
flow cytometry, also the mRNA expression of apoptosis associated
proteins, such as Fas and Bax were increased. According to our findings,
chloroquine showed its anticancer effect through modulating autophagy and
promoting cell apoptosis, which might have promising therapeutic benefits
for esophageal carcinoma.

