Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity using
Celigo imaging cytometry


Cytotoxicity assays play a central role in studying the function of
immune effector cells such as cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTL) and natural
killer (NK) cells. Traditionally, cytotoxicity assays have been performed
using 51Chromium (51Cr) and Calcein release assays. The assays involve
labeling tumor cells (target) with radioisotope or fluorescent dyes, when
the target cells are subjected to cytolysis by CTLs or NK cells
(effector), they releases the entrapped labels into the media upon lysis.
The amount of labels in the media is measured to determine the level of
cytotoxicity the effectors have induced. These traditional methods may
generate inconsistent results due to low sensitivity caused by poor
loading efficiency and high spontaneous release of the reagents. In this
work, we demonstrate a novel cytotoxicity assay using the Celigo imaging
cytometry method. Utilizing imaging cytometry, direct cell counting of
live fluorescent target cells can be performed, which is a direct method
for assessment of cytotoxicity. Human NK cells from one healthy donor
were used as effectors, and K562 (suspension) and IMR32 (adherent) were
used as the target cells. Both target cells were first stained with
Calcein AM, and seeded at 10,000 cells/well in a standard 96-well
microplate. The donor NK cells were then added to each well at
Effector-to-Target (E:T) ratios 10:1, 5:1, 2.5:1, 1.25:1, 0.625:1, and
0.3125:1. The 96 well plate was then scanned and analyzed using Celigo
imaging cytometer at t = 1, 2, 3, and 4 h to measure the% lysis of target
cells. The results showed increasing% lysis as incubation time and E:T
ratio increased. The propose Celigo imaging cytometry is an accurate and
simple method for direct quantification of cytotoxicity.

