Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel clinical tool that provides quantitative and accurate
measurement of Met protein


BACKGROUND:Overexpression of Met tyrosine kinase receptor is associated
with poor prognosis. Overexpression, and particularly MET amplification,
are predictive of response to Met-specific therapy in preclinical models.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissues is currently used to select for high Met expressing tumors for
Met inhibitor trials. IHC suffers from antibody non-specificity, lack of
quantitative resolution, and, when quantifying multiple proteins,
inefficient use of scarce tissue.METHODS:After describing the development
of the Liquid-Tissue-Selected Reaction Monitoring-mass spectrometry
(LT-SRM-MS) Met assay, we evaluated the expression level of Met in 130
FFPE gastroesophageal cancer (GEC) tissues. We assessed the correlation
of SRM Met expression to IHC and mean MET gene copy number (GCN)/nucleus
or MET/CEP7 ratio by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH).RESULTS:Proteomic mapping of recombinant Met identified
418TEFTTALQR426 as the optimal SRM peptide. Limits of detection (LOD) and
quantitation (LOQ) for this peptide were 150 and 200 amol/g tumor
protein, respectively. The assay demonstrated excellent precision and
temporal stability of measurements in serial sections analyzed one year
apart. Expression levels of 130 GEC tissues ranged (1500 amol/g was 100%
sensitive (95% CI 0.69-1) and 100% specific (95% CI 0.92-1) for MET
amplification.CONCLUSIONS:The Met SRM assay measured the absolute Met
levels in clinical tissues with high precision. Compared to IHC, SRM
provided a quantitative and linear measurement of Met expression,
reliably distinguishing between non-amplified and amplified MET tumors.
These results demonstrate a novel clinical tool for efficient tumor
expression profiling, potentially leading to better informed therapeutic
decisions for patients with GEC.

