Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor efficacy of synthetic formulations of active components
in Arum palaestinum extracts in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have a propensity for
aggressive growth and metastasis, with high morbidity and low 5-year
survival rates. Despite advances in treatment, the overall survival rate
has only modestly improved over the past several years. Herbal tea
extract from the root and leaves of Arum palaestinum has been used to
prevent and facilitate treatment of cancer in Palestine. Very few studies
have addressed the mechanisms and antitumor efficacy of this
neutraceutical. Here we tested the antitumor efficacy of synthetic
formulations of Arum palaestinum extract (GZ17-S, -05.00 and -06.02) in
preclinical models of HNSCC. Our preliminary data demonstrates that these
formulations have antitumor efficacy in several tumor types including
HNSCC, lung and ovarian cancer cells. We hypothesized that GZ17-06.02
inhibits phosphorylation of key molecules that mitigate HNSCC progression
and induce apoptotic cell death.Cytotoxicity of all the formulations was
investigated on two HNSCC cell lines, OSC19 and UMSCC1. The GZ17-06.02
and -05.00 were found to be highly efficacious with low ED50 values
(11.85 g/ml and 16.40 g/ml, respectively) for OSC19 and (10.86 g/ml and
11.60 g/ml, respectively) UMSCC1 cells at 72h. We determined the efficacy
of GZ17 formulations in mitigating HNSCC invasion and migration. Among
the formulations tested, GZ17-06.02 was most efficacious in significantly
reducing invasion (37.33%) and migration (12.66%) of OSC19 cells compared
to vehicle control (pHead and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have a
propensity for aggressive growth and metastasis, with high morbidity and
low 5-year survival rates. Despite advances in treatment, the overall
survival rate has only modestly improved over the past several years.
Herbal tea extract from the root and leaves of Arum palaestinum has been
used to prevent and facilitate treatment of cancer in Palestine. Very few
studies have addressed the mechanisms and antitumor efficacy of this
neutraceutical. Here we tested the antitumor efficacy of synthetic
formulations of Arum palaestinum extract (GZ17-S, -05.00 and -06.02) in
preclinical models of HNSCC. Our preliminary data demonstrates that these
formulations have antitumor efficacy in several tumor types including
HNSCC, lung and ovarian cancer cells. We hypothesized that GZ17-06.02
inhibits phosphorylation of key molecules that mitigate HNSCC progression
and induce apoptotic cell death.Cytotoxicity of all the formulations was
investigated on two HNSCC cell lines, OSC19 and UMSCC1. The GZ17-06.02
and -05.00 were found to be highly efficacious with low ED50 values
(11.85 g/ml and 16.40 g/ml, respectively) for OSC19 and (10.86 g/ml and
11.60 g/ml, respectively) UMSCC1 cells at 72h. We determined the efficacy
of GZ17 formulations in mitigating HNSCC invasion and migration. Among
the formulations tested, GZ17-06.02 was most efficacious in significantly
reducing invasion (37.33%) and migration (12.66%) of OSC19 cells compared
to vehicle control (p<0.001). Further, GZ17-06.02 induced cytotoxicity
through Caspase-3 and PARP cleavage in HNSCC cells. Flow cytometric
analyses of GZ17-06.02 treated HNSCC revealed a significant reduction in
cells in the G1 phase and increased apoptosis compared to vehicle control
treated cells. In order to determine the molecular mechanism regulating
these effects, we assessed the levels of phosphorylated proteins. It was
observed that phosphorylation of several signal transducing molecules
including MAPK, EGFR, Akt 1/2/3, checkpoint kinase (chk2), proto oncogene
tyrosine-kinase (Src) and signal transducer and activator of
transcription2 (STAT2) were reduced in OSC19 cells treated with
GZ17-06.02 compared to vehicle control. Further, we tested the in vivo
antitumor efficacy of all formulations on HNSCC xenografts. All
formulations demonstrated antitumor efficacy up on intratumoral
administration of 15 mg/kg/d. GZ17-06.02 was most efficacious in
significantly reducing the tumor volume compared to the vehicle control
treated tumors (pHead and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have a
propensity for aggressive growth and metastasis, with high morbidity and
low 5-year survival rates. Despite advances in treatment, the overall
survival rate has only modestly improved over the past several years.
Herbal tea extract from the root and leaves of Arum palaestinum has been
used to prevent and facilitate treatment of cancer in Palestine. Very few
studies have addressed the mechanisms and antitumor efficacy of this
neutraceutical. Here we tested the antitumor efficacy of synthetic
formulations of Arum palaestinum extract (GZ17-S, -05.00 and -06.02) in
preclinical models of HNSCC. Our preliminary data demonstrates that these
formulations have antitumor efficacy in several tumor types including
HNSCC, lung and ovarian cancer cells. We hypothesized that GZ17-06.02
inhibits phosphorylation of key molecules that mitigate HNSCC progression
and induce apoptotic cell death.Cytotoxicity of all the formulations was
investigated on two HNSCC cell lines, OSC19 and UMSCC1. The GZ17-06.02
and -05.00 were found to be highly efficacious with low ED50 values
(11.85 g/ml and 16.40 g/ml, respectively) for OSC19 and (10.86 g/ml and
11.60 g/ml, respectively) UMSCC1 cells at 72h. We determined the efficacy
of GZ17 formulations in mitigating HNSCC invasion and migration. Among
the formulations tested, GZ17-06.02 was most efficacious in significantly
reducing invasion (37.33%) and migration (12.66%) of OSC19 cells compared
to vehicle control (p<0.001). Further, GZ17-06.02 induced cytotoxicity
through Caspase-3 and PARP cleavage in HNSCC cells. Flow cytometric
analyses of GZ17-06.02 treated HNSCC revealed a significant reduction in
cells in the G1 phase and increased apoptosis compared to vehicle control
treated cells. In order to determine the molecular mechanism regulating
these effects, we assessed the levels of phosphorylated proteins. It was
observed that phosphorylation of several signal transducing molecules
including MAPK, EGFR, Akt 1/2/3, checkpoint kinase (chk2), proto oncogene
tyrosine-kinase (Src) and signal transducer and activator of
transcription2 (STAT2) were reduced in OSC19 cells treated with
GZ17-06.02 compared to vehicle control. Further, we tested the in vivo
antitumor efficacy of all formulations on HNSCC xenografts. All
formulations demonstrated antitumor efficacy up on intratumoral
administration of 15 mg/kg/d. GZ17-06.02 was most efficacious in
significantly reducing the tumor volume compared to the vehicle control
treated tumors (p<0.001). All formulations were well tolerated. We are
now testing the antitumor efficacy of GZ17-06.02 on systemic delivery
(oral gavage) in a patient-derived xenograft model of HNSCC. In
conclusion, the synthetic versions of Arum Palaestinum demonstrate potent
therapeutic potential in HNSCC through down-regulation of key signaling
molecules and the induction of apoptosis.

