Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of VEGF in breast cancer cells induced by
gp130 cytokines


Glycoprotein 130 (gp130) is a glycosylated type 1 membrane protein and
functions as a cytokine receptor modulating activity of the interleukin-6
(IL-6) family cytokines, which include IL-6, IL-11, IL-27, oncostatin M
(OSM), leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), ciliary neurotrophic factor
(CNTF), cardiotrophin 1 (CT-1), cardiotrophin-like cytokine (CLC), and
neuropoietin (NP). This study was designed to determine differential
expression of VEGF in breast cancer cells by IL-6 family cytokines, and
to elucidate the molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways involved in
cytokine-mediated VEGF induction. Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
MDA-MB-231 and estrogen receptor positive/progesterone receptor
positive/Her2 negative (ER+/PR+/Her2-) T47D cells were treated with three
cytokines (25 ng/mL), OSM, IL-6, and LIF, and analyzed. Our results
showed that all three cytokines increased levels of HIF1 by Western blot
analysis. OSM lead to a greater production of VEGF compared to IL-6 and
LIF, as measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and as seen
by luciferase reporter assay. Of the three cytokines, OSM alone induced
VEGF in TNBC MDA-MB-231 cells, and this effect was mediated by signal
transducer activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling. However, both
OSM and IL-6 increased VEGF secretion levels in ER+/PR+/Her2- T47D breast
cancer cells, and this signaling was mediated by both HIF1 and pSTAT3,
utilizing ELISA and Western blot analysis. These results implicate OSM as
the key gp130 cytokine inducing VEGF secretion, and also suggest that
this induction is not always HIF1 dependent and is cell-line specific.

