Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global profiling of SPARC-regulated metabolic pathways in ovarian
cancer


We have previously reported the tumor suppressor effect of SPARC in
ovarian cancer through inhibiting cancer cell growth and their
interactions within the peritoneal milieu. In the present study, we
sought to determine the effect of SPARC on metabolic perturbations
associated with ovarian cancer using a syngeneic murine ovarian cancer
model in SPARC knockout (KO) mice and their wildtype (WT) counterparts.
Murine ID8 ovarian cancer cell line were injected intraperitoneally in
SPARC KO and WT mice. Matched intraperitoneal tumor tissue, and ascitic
fluid were harvested 6 weeks post-injection of ID8 cells and were
subjected to global biochemical metabolomic profiling. In tandem, WT and
KO tumors were dissected by LCM-microdissected and were subjected to gene
expression profiling. Metabolomic profiling of SPARC KO tumors and
ascites revealed significantly altered metabolites associated with
glucose, energy, amino acid, and lipid metabolism, as well as redox
homeostasis. Integrated transcriptome and metabolome analysis of the top
significantly upregulated genes and metabolites in the KO compared to WT
tumors and ascitic fluid revealed that the major pathways upregulated in
absence of SPARC are those involved in: conversion of glucose to acetyl
CoA and entry into the citric acid (TCA) cycle, respiratory electron
transport and oxidative phosphorylation (SUCLG2; NDUFAB1; ATP5F1; UQCRH;
ATP5H; COX5B; NDUFV1; ATP5O; IDH3B/ succinate, fumarate and pyruvate),
protein metabolism (EIF5A; PREB; EIF4H; DAD1; STT3A; RPL4; SUMO1; CCT4;
CCT2; IGFBP5; HSPA5; EIF3A; EIF4B; RPS19; EIF3E/ mannose;
N-acetylneuraminate; N-glycolylneuraminate; glutamate; spermidine), fatty
acid beta oxidation (HADH; TPI1; LPL/glycerol), purine nucleotides de
novo biosynthesis and salvage (ATP5F1; ATP5H; PAICS; ATP6V1G1/ aspartate;
glycine; glutamate; fumarate). Together, these data provide novel insight
on the molecular mechanisms of the SPARC-induced metabolic perturbation
associated with ovarian cancer that can be translated into diagnostic and
prognostic biomarkers of the disease.

