Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The activity of plasma membrane V-ATPases is critical for the
invasion of breast cancer cells


The V-ATPases are a family of ATP-driven proton pumps that have been
implicated in breast cancer cell invasion. V-ATPases are found both
intracellularly and on the plasma membrane of specialized acid-secreted
cells and invasive cancer cells. As available inhibitors of the V-ATPase
are membrane-permeable, it has not yet been examined whether
intracellular or plasma membrane pumps are critical for invasiveness. It
has been proposed that V-ATPases promote invasiveness by localizing to
the plasma membrane. To test this hypothesis, we utilized two approaches
to specifically inhibit the V-ATPases at the plasma membrane. First, we
stably transfected invasive MB231 breast cancer cells with a V5-tagged
construct of the membrane-embedded subunit c. This allows for
extracellular expression of the V5 epitope. We then found that addition
of an anti-V5 antibody specifically inhibited plasma membrane V-ATPase
activity as well as in vitro invasion and migration of MB231 cells.
Second, we utilized a biotin-conjugated form of the specific V-ATPase
inhibitor bafilomycin to inhibit plasma membrane pumps. When bound to
streptavidin, this compound is membrane impermeable. Addition of
streptavidin-bound biotin-bafilomycin also inhibited in vitro invasion
and migration of MB231 cells. These studies suggest that V-ATPases at the
plasma membrane play a critical role in breast cancer cell invasion. We
hypothesize that plasma membrane V-ATPases participate in invasion by
creating an acidic microenvironment that promotes the activity of
pH-dependent proteases. Overall, these results have significant
implications for targeting the pump to prevent breast cancer metastasis.

