Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of the new sacral chordoma cell
line Chor-IN-1


Chordomas are rare, slowly growing but locally invasive bone tumors,
derived from notocord remnants and characterized by the expression of
Brachyury transcription factor.No standard medical therapy is available
for this indication that is resistant to chemotherapy. Surgery associated
to radiation, is the conventional treatment, but recurrence is extremely
common and disease progression is severely crippling for
patients.Expression of activated tyrosine kinase receptors and downstream
pathways has been observed, including PDGFR and EGFR. Although some
clinical responses have been obtained with Imatinib, also in combination
with Sirolimus, and with Erlotinib, these treatments cannot eradicate the
disease, and there is a strong need for new effective therapies.Only a
handful of chordoma cell lines are available today and the paucity of in
vitro models has so far limited the identification of new molecular
targets and the assessment of the efficacy of small molecules inhibitors
on chordoma cells proliferation.Here we present the establishment and the
characterization of the new Chor-IN-1 chordoma cell line from a recurrent
sacral tumor of a patient previously treated with Imatinib and
radiotherapy. The cell line has a very slow growth rate, as normally
observed for this type of tumors, and displays the typical chordoma
physaliferous morphology. The karyotype is indicative of a single
population and the Short Tandem Repeat (STR) profile is unique and 100%
identical to that of the original tumor sample. The cell line expresses
the most relevant chordoma biomarkers, like the product of the T gene
Brachyury, CD24 and Cytoketatin 19. The non synonymous rs2305089
polymorphism in the T gene, associated with chordoma predisposition, was
identified in the Chor-IN-1, as well as in the UCH-1 and UCH-2 chordoma
reference cell lines.To further characterize the new cell line, its
genetic background and transcriptional profile, with particular focus on
kinases, was analysed by a Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) approach, in
parallel with UCH-1 and UCH-2, to identify common and unique cancer
related features.Finally, the cell line was characterized for its
sensitivity to selected kinase inhibitor drugs already approved or in
clinical testing, in parallel with the control cell lines. Among the
several EGFR inhibitors tested, Afatinib resulted generally the most
active, suggesting that treatment with this drug may represent a valuable
therapeutic approach in chordoma.In conclusion, we report the
establishment and in depth characterization of a new chordoma cell line
that, retaining all the typical features of chordomas, represents a
useful tool for the identification of candidate new druggable targets, or
active drugs for chordoma therapy.

