Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of type X collagen as a pan-cancer serum biomarker


We previously reported elevated expression of Type X Collagen (COL10A1)
in solid tumors of diverse origin (Future Oncology 2012 Aug;8(8):
1031-40). This elevated expression in tumors was primarily localized to
vasculature, while COL10A1 expression in most adult tissues was
negligible. Given this pattern of expression, we hypothesized that
COL10A1 might demonstrate utility as a blood-born tumor biomarker. Serum
samples from healthy volunteers and from patients with active cancers of
the breast, lung, pancreas, colon, kidney, and bladder were obtained from
multiple existing bio-banks. COL10A1 serum levels were assessed in over
400 total patient samples using a polyclonal COL10A1 sandwich ELISA. The
overall utility of COL10A1 levels in determining presence of cancer was
judged by calculating ROC-AUC scores for each individual cancer type. In
general, COL10A1 levels were increased in cancer patients, although this
increase varied as a function of cancer type as well as by the bio-bank
the sera was obtained from. Given the sensitivity and specificity
limitations of polyclonal ELISA technology, even greater performance of
COL10A1 as a tumor biomarker could be attainable using high-specificity
monoclonal antibodies. We are currently characterizing such tests in
prospectively collected sera samples from breast cancer patients. These
data suggest that COL10A1 is a potential blood-born pan-cancer biomarker
that could prove useful in non-invasive cancer screening as well as in
monitoring tumor progression and treatment response.

