Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An anti-CD38 antibody drug conjugate for the treatment of diverse
hematologic malignancies


Purpose:The CD38 cell surface antigen is expressed in diverse hematologic
malignancies including multiple myeloma, acute promyelocytic leukemia
(PML), B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL), B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL),and T-cell
ALL. Here, we assessed the antitumor activity of novel extracellular drug
conjugates composed of anti-CD38 monoclonal antibodies conjugated to
various steroidal derivatives via flexible stable linkers.Experimental
Design:Activity of EDC8 was examined on lymphoma, leukemia and multiple
myeloma cell lines and a B-cell lymphoma xenograft model in
immunodeficient mice.Results:We identified that multiple anti-CD38
antibodies when conjugated to a novel small molecule steroids through
long stable linkers could provide picomolar apoptotic activity
independent of effector functions. These antibody drug conjugates, termed
EDC8s, inhibited cytotoxic activity through a mechanism that was
dependent on CD38 expression, as CD38 induction by ATRA could turn EDC8
resistant cells, sensitive, and naked anti-CD38 antibodies could compete
with the EDC8s rendering them inactive. The activity of the EDC8s was
also dependent on linker length and steroid chemistry. In vivo, EDC8 was
active on a B-cell lymphoma CD38+ tumor xenograft model. Results from one
of the EDC8s demonstrated in vivo tumor regression and cures when 5mgs/kg
of the conjugate was administered and this anti-CD38 antibody drug
conjugate had impressive single-agent activity greatly surpassing the
activity of CHOP.Conclusion:These results support efforts to further
evaluate these unique CD38-targeting antibody drug conjugates and may
lead to phase I clinical trials in patients with certain CD38+
malignancies.

