Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor induces neoplastic cell transformation
through a non-canonical signaling pathway


Induction of cell proliferation is closely related with the cellular
signaling pathway activation by stimulation of diverse growth factors
such as epidermal growth factor (EGF) and fibroblast growth factor. The
stimulation of growth factors induces activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (ERKs)/p90 ribosomal S6 kinases (p90RSK),
resulting in induction of cell proliferation and cell transformation.
Although fibroblast growth factor (FGF) is a well-known growth factor and
acts as a ligand of FGF receptor (FGFR), a receptor tyrosine kinase, in
cytoplasmic membrane, the tumor promoter potential has not been clearly
understood. Here, we provided the evidences that FGF acted as a tumor
promoter. We found that FGF-induced cell proliferation and
anchorage-independent cell transformation were correlated with the
induction of G1/S cell cycle transition. Importantly, we found that
kaempferol targeted and inhibited FGFR phosphorylation by in vitro and ex
vivo. Interestingly, FGF stimulation utilized a non-canonical signaling
pathway to activate RSK2 and ATF-1, which was not transduced by EGF
stimulation. We confirmed that kaempferol inhibited tyrosine
phosphorylation of FGFR, resulted in nuclear accumulation of
phospho-ATF-1 at Ser63. Importantly, kaempferol, PKC412, PD98059 and
U0126 inhibited EGF-induced anchorage-independent cell transformation in
JB6 Cl41 cells. In contrast, FGF-induced cell transformation in soft agar
was not inhibited by PD98059 and U0126. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that FGF acts as a tumor promoter and dual inhibition of
kaempferol on the kinase activities of FGFR and RSK2 suppresses the
FGF-induced neoplastic cell transformation through a non-canonical
signaling pathway which is not utilized by EGF stimulation.

