Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic index system based on 20 genes for predicting
recurrence of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer


BackgroundsThere is a crucial need for practical molecular markers of
bladder cancer recurrence, despite several molecular signatures for the
bladder cancer outcomes have been numerously investigated. Here, we aim
to identify a molecular signature consisting of small number of genes to
predict disease recurrence in non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC)
and to assess its usefulness as a practical
indicator.MethodsTrascriptomic profiling was performed using gene
expression data from 103 primary NMIBC specimens (Korean cohort) to
identify a signature associated with disease recurrence. The prognostic
value of the signature was validated in an independent cohort (European
cohort, n = 302). Time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves of recurrence using the nearest neighbour estimation method with a
cut-off value of 36 months were used to identify a small number of genes
that strongly retain prognostic value. A prognostic index (PI) based on
the expression data of 20 genes was developed in the Korean cohort and
validated in the European cohort. The association between the
20-gene-based PI method and prognosis of NMIBC patients was assessed
using Kaplan-Meier plot, the log-rank test, Cox proportional hazards
model, and leave-one-out cross validation methods.ResultsThe
determination of gene expression patterns by transcriptome data analysis
identified 822 genes associated with disease recurrence. Of the 822
genes, 20 genes which are highly associated with recurrence free survival
were detected by time-dependent ROC curves. The PI was developed by using
Cox coefficient values of 20 genes in the Korean cohort and its
robustness was validated in the European cohort (log-rank test, P
BackgroundsThere is a crucial need for practical molecular markers of
bladder cancer recurrence, despite several molecular signatures for the
bladder cancer outcomes have been numerously investigated. Here, we aim
to identify a molecular signature consisting of small number of genes to
predict disease recurrence in non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC)
and to assess its usefulness as a practical
indicator.MethodsTrascriptomic profiling was performed using gene
expression data from 103 primary NMIBC specimens (Korean cohort) to
identify a signature associated with disease recurrence. The prognostic
value of the signature was validated in an independent cohort (European
cohort, n = 302). Time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves of recurrence using the nearest neighbour estimation method with a
cut-off value of 36 months were used to identify a small number of genes
that strongly retain prognostic value. A prognostic index (PI) based on
the expression data of 20 genes was developed in the Korean cohort and
validated in the European cohort. The association between the
20-gene-based PI method and prognosis of NMIBC patients was assessed
using Kaplan-Meier plot, the log-rank test, Cox proportional hazards
model, and leave-one-out cross validation methods.ResultsThe
determination of gene expression patterns by transcriptome data analysis
identified 822 genes associated with disease recurrence. Of the 822
genes, 20 genes which are highly associated with recurrence free survival
were detected by time-dependent ROC curves. The PI was developed by using
Cox coefficient values of 20 genes in the Korean cohort and its
robustness was validated in the European cohort (log-rank test, P <
0.001). The PI was shown to be an independent risk factor by a
multivariate analysis and subset stratification according to stage and
(hazard ratio = 6.082, 95% confidence interval = 3.280 to 11.279, P
BackgroundsThere is a crucial need for practical molecular markers of
bladder cancer recurrence, despite several molecular signatures for the
bladder cancer outcomes have been numerously investigated. Here, we aim
to identify a molecular signature consisting of small number of genes to
predict disease recurrence in non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC)
and to assess its usefulness as a practical
indicator.MethodsTrascriptomic profiling was performed using gene
expression data from 103 primary NMIBC specimens (Korean cohort) to
identify a signature associated with disease recurrence. The prognostic
value of the signature was validated in an independent cohort (European
cohort, n = 302). Time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves of recurrence using the nearest neighbour estimation method with a
cut-off value of 36 months were used to identify a small number of genes
that strongly retain prognostic value. A prognostic index (PI) based on
the expression data of 20 genes was developed in the Korean cohort and
validated in the European cohort. The association between the
20-gene-based PI method and prognosis of NMIBC patients was assessed
using Kaplan-Meier plot, the log-rank test, Cox proportional hazards
model, and leave-one-out cross validation methods.ResultsThe
determination of gene expression patterns by transcriptome data analysis
identified 822 genes associated with disease recurrence. Of the 822
genes, 20 genes which are highly associated with recurrence free survival
were detected by time-dependent ROC curves. The PI was developed by using
Cox coefficient values of 20 genes in the Korean cohort and its
robustness was validated in the European cohort (log-rank test, P <
0.001). The PI was shown to be an independent risk factor by a
multivariate analysis and subset stratification according to stage and
(hazard ratio = 6.082, 95% confidence interval = 3.280 to 11.279, P <
0.001). The subset analysis also revealed that the PI could identify
patients who would benefit from intravesical therapy. Finally, gene
network analyses and experimental assays indicated that, among the 20
genes, CA9, ARTS-1 and FGF11 could be important mediators for NMIBC
recurrence.ConclusionsThe PI system based on 20 genes illustrates a novel
diagnostic tool to identify NMIBC patients that have a high risk of
recurrence.

