Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of new alternative lengthening of telomeres
(ALT)-positive cancer cell lines using the C-circle assay


Alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) is a telomere maintenance
mechanism used by approximately 10% of human cancers, including poor
prognosis childhood and adult cancers for which development of better
treatments is a priority. Currently there are only about ten published
ALT+ cancer cell lines available for research, only four of which are
available from international repositories. The development of the
C-Circle Assay has made it possible to accurately and conveniently test a
large number of cell lines for ALT activity. We have tested a panel of
297 cancer cell lines from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC)
with the C-Circle Assay for ALT and identified 34 new ALT+ cell lines.
Importantly, we have identified for the first time ALT+ cancer cell lines
derived from breast carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, melanoma and
leukemia. The overall proportion of ALT+ cancer cell lines was 11.4% (n =
297), which included 19.5% of leukemia (n = 46), 19.0% of melanoma (n =
21), 12.7% of non-small cell lung carcinoma (n = 53) and 3.3% of breast
carcinoma (n = 37) cell lines. These results identify additional cancer
cell line resources for research into the ALT mechanism, including cell
lines from cancer types where ALT has not previously been studied in
detail.

