Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternating electric fields (TTFields) in combination with
paclitaxel are therapeutically effective against ovarian cancer cells in
vitro and in vivo


Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields) are low intensity intermediate frequency
alternating electric fields that disrupt mitosis. Our previous in vitro
studies suggest that ovarian cancer cells are highly sensitive to
TTFields treatment.The goal of the present study was to evaluate the
efficacy of the combined treatment of TTFields and paclitaxel against
ovarian cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.For in vitro studies, TTFields
(1.75 V/cm) were applied for 72 hours using the inovitro system. The in
vivo efficacy of the combined treatment was tested in C57Bl/6 mice,
orthotopically injected with MOSE-L FFL luciferase positive cells. Finite
Element Mesh (FEM) simulations were performed using the Sim4life software
package (ZMT, Zurich, Switzerland) for the calculations of the electric
fields intensities around the ovaries.Our results demonstrate that in
vitro application of 200 kHz TTFields led to a significant reduction in
both the number of viable cells (44.6%) and the clonogenic potential
(23.8%) as compared to untreated cells (pTumor Treating Fields (TTFields)
are low intensity intermediate frequency alternating electric fields that
disrupt mitosis. Our previous in vitro studies suggest that ovarian
cancer cells are highly sensitive to TTFields treatment.The goal of the
present study was to evaluate the efficacy of the combined treatment of
TTFields and paclitaxel against ovarian cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo.For in vitro studies, TTFields (1.75 V/cm) were applied for 72 hours
using the inovitro system. The in vivo efficacy of the combined treatment
was tested in C57Bl/6 mice, orthotopically injected with MOSE-L FFL
luciferase positive cells. Finite Element Mesh (FEM) simulations were
performed using the Sim4life software package (ZMT, Zurich, Switzerland)
for the calculations of the electric fields intensities around the
ovaries.Our results demonstrate that in vitro application of 200 kHz
TTFields led to a significant reduction in both the number of viable
cells (44.6%) and the clonogenic potential (23.8%) as compared to
untreated cells (p<0.001). Further reduction in the number of viable
cells was achieved when TTFields were combined with paclitaxel. In vivo,
the combined treatment of TTFields and Paclitaxel led to a significant
reduction in tumor luminescence (40%, pTumor Treating Fields (TTFields)
are low intensity intermediate frequency alternating electric fields that
disrupt mitosis. Our previous in vitro studies suggest that ovarian
cancer cells are highly sensitive to TTFields treatment.The goal of the
present study was to evaluate the efficacy of the combined treatment of
TTFields and paclitaxel against ovarian cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo.For in vitro studies, TTFields (1.75 V/cm) were applied for 72 hours
using the inovitro system. The in vivo efficacy of the combined treatment
was tested in C57Bl/6 mice, orthotopically injected with MOSE-L FFL
luciferase positive cells. Finite Element Mesh (FEM) simulations were
performed using the Sim4life software package (ZMT, Zurich, Switzerland)
for the calculations of the electric fields intensities around the
ovaries.Our results demonstrate that in vitro application of 200 kHz
TTFields led to a significant reduction in both the number of viable
cells (44.6%) and the clonogenic potential (23.8%) as compared to
untreated cells (p<0.001). Further reduction in the number of viable
cells was achieved when TTFields were combined with paclitaxel. In vivo,
the combined treatment of TTFields and Paclitaxel led to a significant
reduction in tumor luminescence (40%, p<0.01) and in the tumor weight
(55%, pTumor Treating Fields (TTFields) are low intensity intermediate
frequency alternating electric fields that disrupt mitosis. Our previous
in vitro studies suggest that ovarian cancer cells are highly sensitive
to TTFields treatment.The goal of the present study was to evaluate the
efficacy of the combined treatment of TTFields and paclitaxel against
ovarian cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.For in vitro studies, TTFields
(1.75 V/cm) were applied for 72 hours using the inovitro system. The in
vivo efficacy of the combined treatment was tested in C57Bl/6 mice,
orthotopically injected with MOSE-L FFL luciferase positive cells. Finite
Element Mesh (FEM) simulations were performed using the Sim4life software
package (ZMT, Zurich, Switzerland) for the calculations of the electric
fields intensities around the ovaries.Our results demonstrate that in
vitro application of 200 kHz TTFields led to a significant reduction in
both the number of viable cells (44.6%) and the clonogenic potential
(23.8%) as compared to untreated cells (p<0.001). Further reduction in
the number of viable cells was achieved when TTFields were combined with
paclitaxel. In vivo, the combined treatment of TTFields and Paclitaxel
led to a significant reduction in tumor luminescence (40%, p<0.01) and in
the tumor weight (55%, p<0.05) as compared to untreated tumor bearing
mice. FEM simulations demonstrated that electric fields intensities
inside and in the vicinity of the ovaries of a real human anatomy model
are about 1 and 2 V/cm RMS which is above the minimal threshold required
for TTFields response.Taken together these results demonstrate that the
combined treatment of TTFields and paclitaxel could serve as an effective
treatment against ovarian cancer. A clinical trial testing the efficacy
of the combined modalities is now underway.

