Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Musashi enhances GS3K-beta and promotes stemness-related
chemoresistance in glioblastoma


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), one of the deadly malignant brain tumor,
and is easily to recur and develop resistance to clinical
chemotherapeutics. It has been demonstrated that cisplatin treatment
select for resistance but also for a more oncogenic phenotype
characterized by high self-renewal and oncogenic resistance. Musashi
(MSI), a neural stem cell marker, is found to be elevated in several
cancer tissues and positively regulates cancer progression. In this
report, we found that MSI promoted tumourigenicity and enhances drug
resistance of human GBM cells in response to cisplatin, a chemodrug. We
further showed that MSI could activate and interact with
phosphorylated-GS3K-, and lead to a protective effect against mitigating
cisplatin-induced cell death. Knockdown of MSI effectively suppressed the
phosphorylation of GS3K- and blocked -catenin translocating into nucleus
in cisplatin-resistant GBM cells, while overexpressing MSI reversed these
effects. Notably, MSI could further upregulate -catenin-driven stemness
signature, and expression of Oct-4, Nanog, and ABCG2, thereby enhanced
tumorigenicity and chemoresistance of GBM cells. Moreover, the result of
in vivo animal study demonstrated that knockdown MSI effectively
suppressed stem-like properties, synergistically enhanced the
chemotherapeutic effect, and significantly improved survival rate in
GBM-transplanted immunocompromised mice. Taken together, our findings
indicated that MSI-1 may provide a positive contribution to oncogenic
resistance, in partly, through interplaying with GS3K- and modulating
WNT/stemness mechanism.Note: This abstract was not presented at the
meeting.

