Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel translational pharmacology approaches on dose reduction and
alternative scheduling for the combination of JAK inhibitor, ruxolitinib,
PIM inhibitor, LGH447, and CDK4/6 inhibitor, LEE011 in a preclinical
model of myeloproliferative neoplasia


The JAK-STAT pathway is an important signaling pathway downstream of
multiple cytokine and growth factor receptors. It has been implicated in
the pathogenesis of multiple human diseases. The genetic aberration of
JAK2V617F and the associated activation of STAT in myeloproliferative
neoplasia (MPN) is one example of the involvement of this pathway in
human cancer. We have shown the combination benefits of combining
ruxolitinib (Jak1, 2 inhibitor), with LGH447 (PIM inhibitor) and LEE011
(CDK4/6 inhibitor) in a Ba/F3-JAK2V617F-driven MPN model. This triple
combination resulted in 99% reduction of total tumor burden and a 96%
reduction of spleen weight. Furthermore, the triple combination of
ruxolitinib, LGH447 and LEE011 reduced JAK2V617F allele burden by > 80%.
To translate this combination from preclinical setting to the clinic, it
is critical to evaluate dose to efficacy relationship for each agents and
scheduling to efficacy correlation for this combination. Here, the
preclinical doses for ruxolitinib, LGH447 and LEE011 were determined,
based on their clinically achieved exposure. We then examined
intermittent dosing of this combination in the same preclinical model.
Our data suggest that the combination efficacy of
ruxolitinib-LGH447-LEE011 is dependent on continuous administration of
the agents. Finally, we examined the effect of dose reduction for each of
the three agents on the combination efficacy in the
Ba/F3-JAK2V617F-driven MPN model. By modifying the doses for ruxolitinib,
LGH447 and LEE011 separately in the combination, our study reveals that
the triple combination efficacy is most sensitive to LEE011 dose
reduction, and it is least sensitive to LGH447 dose reduction. In
summary, our studies aim to design novel preclinical approaches to inform
and the design of clinical dose escalation in novel combination therapies.

