Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systems biology analysis to identify biomarkers for lenvatinib in
the preclinical cancer cell line panels


Objectives: Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib) is the selective inhibitor
of VEGFR1-3, and other proangiogenic and oncogenic pathway-related RTKs
including fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFR1-4), the
platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) , KIT, and RET.
Lenvatinib have been tested in several clinical trials, such as thyroid
cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma in Ph3, but biomarkers to predict
lenvatinib activity were not established. We performed a preclinical
systems biology approach to identify biomarkers predictive of lenvatinib
sensitivity in endometrial cell lines.Methods: We performed gene
expression profiling using Affimetrix Human exon 1.0 ST array and
targeted exon sequencing of 1,163 genes using Illumina sequencer in 19
endometrial cell lines. In vitro anti-proliferation activity (IC50) and
in vivo anti-tumor activity of lenvatinib were determined in the panel.
Besides, we did siRNA kinase library screening to classify the cell lines
into two groups by unsupervised hierarchical clustering. We identified
genes significantly over-expressed (p value Objectives: Lenvatinib
mesilate (lenvatinib) is the selective inhibitor of VEGFR1-3, and other
proangiogenic and oncogenic pathway-related RTKs including fibroblast
growth factor receptors (FGFR1-4), the platelet-derived growth factor
receptor (PDGFR) , KIT, and RET. Lenvatinib have been tested in several
clinical trials, such as thyroid cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma in
Ph3, but biomarkers to predict lenvatinib activity were not established.
We performed a preclinical systems biology approach to identify
biomarkers predictive of lenvatinib sensitivity in endometrial cell
lines.Methods: We performed gene expression profiling using Affimetrix
Human exon 1.0 ST array and targeted exon sequencing of 1,163 genes using
Illumina sequencer in 19 endometrial cell lines. In vitro
anti-proliferation activity (IC50) and in vivo anti-tumor activity of
lenvatinib were determined in the panel. Besides, we did siRNA kinase
library screening to classify the cell lines into two groups by
unsupervised hierarchical clustering. We identified genes significantly
over-expressed (p value <0.01, based on t-test) or enriched in mutations
(pObjectives: Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib) is the selective inhibitor
of VEGFR1-3, and other proangiogenic and oncogenic pathway-related RTKs
including fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFR1-4), the
platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) , KIT, and RET.
Lenvatinib have been tested in several clinical trials, such as thyroid
cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma in Ph3, but biomarkers to predict
lenvatinib activity were not established. We performed a preclinical
systems biology approach to identify biomarkers predictive of lenvatinib
sensitivity in endometrial cell lines.Methods: We performed gene
expression profiling using Affimetrix Human exon 1.0 ST array and
targeted exon sequencing of 1,163 genes using Illumina sequencer in 19
endometrial cell lines. In vitro anti-proliferation activity (IC50) and
in vivo anti-tumor activity of lenvatinib were determined in the panel.
Besides, we did siRNA kinase library screening to classify the cell lines
into two groups by unsupervised hierarchical clustering. We identified
genes significantly over-expressed (p value <0.01, based on t-test) or
enriched in mutations (p<0.1, based on Fishers test) between clusters.
Correlation analysis between expression and in vivo anti-tumor activity
was performed using t-test (pObjectives: Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib)
is the selective inhibitor of VEGFR1-3, and other proangiogenic and
oncogenic pathway-related RTKs including fibroblast growth factor
receptors (FGFR1-4), the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)
, KIT, and RET. Lenvatinib have been tested in several clinical trials,
such as thyroid cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma in Ph3, but
biomarkers to predict lenvatinib activity were not established. We
performed a preclinical systems biology approach to identify biomarkers
predictive of lenvatinib sensitivity in endometrial cell lines.Methods:
We performed gene expression profiling using Affimetrix Human exon 1.0 ST
array and targeted exon sequencing of 1,163 genes using Illumina
sequencer in 19 endometrial cell lines. In vitro anti-proliferation
activity (IC50) and in vivo anti-tumor activity of lenvatinib were
determined in the panel. Besides, we did siRNA kinase library screening
to classify the cell lines into two groups by unsupervised hierarchical
clustering. We identified genes significantly over-expressed (p value
<0.01, based on t-test) or enriched in mutations (p<0.1, based on Fishers
test) between clusters. Correlation analysis between expression and in
vivo anti-tumor activity was performed using t-test (p<0.05) and spearman
correlation (pObjectives: Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib) is the
selective inhibitor of VEGFR1-3, and other proangiogenic and oncogenic
pathway-related RTKs including fibroblast growth factor receptors
(FGFR1-4), the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) , KIT, and
RET. Lenvatinib have been tested in several clinical trials, such as
thyroid cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma in Ph3, but biomarkers to
predict lenvatinib activity were not established. We performed a
preclinical systems biology approach to identify biomarkers predictive of
lenvatinib sensitivity in endometrial cell lines.Methods: We performed
gene expression profiling using Affimetrix Human exon 1.0 ST array and
targeted exon sequencing of 1,163 genes using Illumina sequencer in 19
endometrial cell lines. In vitro anti-proliferation activity (IC50) and
in vivo anti-tumor activity of lenvatinib were determined in the panel.
Besides, we did siRNA kinase library screening to classify the cell lines
into two groups by unsupervised hierarchical clustering. We identified
genes significantly over-expressed (p value <0.01, based on t-test) or
enriched in mutations (p<0.1, based on Fishers test) between clusters.
Correlation analysis between expression and in vivo anti-tumor activity
was performed using t-test (p<0.05) and spearman correlation (p<0.01).
Correlation between gene mutation and lenvatinib sensitivity was
calculated by Wilcox-test (pObjectives: Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib)
is the selective inhibitor of VEGFR1-3, and other proangiogenic and
oncogenic pathway-related RTKs including fibroblast growth factor
receptors (FGFR1-4), the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)
, KIT, and RET. Lenvatinib have been tested in several clinical trials,
such as thyroid cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma in Ph3, but
biomarkers to predict lenvatinib activity were not established. We
performed a preclinical systems biology approach to identify biomarkers
predictive of lenvatinib sensitivity in endometrial cell lines.Methods:
We performed gene expression profiling using Affimetrix Human exon 1.0 ST
array and targeted exon sequencing of 1,163 genes using Illumina
sequencer in 19 endometrial cell lines. In vitro anti-proliferation
activity (IC50) and in vivo anti-tumor activity of lenvatinib were
determined in the panel. Besides, we did siRNA kinase library screening
to classify the cell lines into two groups by unsupervised hierarchical
clustering. We identified genes significantly over-expressed (p value
<0.01, based on t-test) or enriched in mutations (p<0.1, based on Fishers
test) between clusters. Correlation analysis between expression and in
vivo anti-tumor activity was performed using t-test (p<0.05) and spearman
correlation (p<0.01). Correlation between gene mutation and lenvatinib
sensitivity was calculated by Wilcox-test (p<0.1) Pathway enrichment was
performed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software.Results: Based on the
clustering of siRNA data cell lines were grouped into clusters. These
groups correlated with in vitro and in vivo lenvatinib sensitivity. Based
on the clusters we derived genes with significantly altered expression
between the groups (t-test pObjectives: Lenvatinib mesilate (lenvatinib)
is the selective inhibitor of VEGFR1-3, and other proangiogenic and
oncogenic pathway-related RTKs including fibroblast growth factor
receptors (FGFR1-4), the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)
, KIT, and RET. Lenvatinib have been tested in several clinical trials,
such as thyroid cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma in Ph3, but
biomarkers to predict lenvatinib activity were not established. We
performed a preclinical systems biology approach to identify biomarkers
predictive of lenvatinib sensitivity in endometrial cell lines.Methods:
We performed gene expression profiling using Affimetrix Human exon 1.0 ST
array and targeted exon sequencing of 1,163 genes using Illumina
sequencer in 19 endometrial cell lines. In vitro anti-proliferation
activity (IC50) and in vivo anti-tumor activity of lenvatinib were
determined in the panel. Besides, we did siRNA kinase library screening
to classify the cell lines into two groups by unsupervised hierarchical
clustering. We identified genes significantly over-expressed (p value
<0.01, based on t-test) or enriched in mutations (p<0.1, based on Fishers
test) between clusters. Correlation analysis between expression and in
vivo anti-tumor activity was performed using t-test (p<0.05) and spearman
correlation (p<0.01). Correlation between gene mutation and lenvatinib
sensitivity was calculated by Wilcox-test (p<0.1) Pathway enrichment was
performed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software.Results: Based on the
clustering of siRNA data cell lines were grouped into clusters. These
groups correlated with in vitro and in vivo lenvatinib sensitivity. Based
on the clusters we derived genes with significantly altered expression
between the groups (t-test p<0.01) or with significantly enriched
mutations in one of the clusters (Fisher's test pObjectives: Lenvatinib
mesilate (lenvatinib) is the selective inhibitor of VEGFR1-3, and other
proangiogenic and oncogenic pathway-related RTKs including fibroblast
growth factor receptors (FGFR1-4), the platelet-derived growth factor
receptor (PDGFR) , KIT, and RET. Lenvatinib have been tested in several
clinical trials, such as thyroid cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma in
Ph3, but biomarkers to predict lenvatinib activity were not established.
We performed a preclinical systems biology approach to identify
biomarkers predictive of lenvatinib sensitivity in endometrial cell
lines.Methods: We performed gene expression profiling using Affimetrix
Human exon 1.0 ST array and targeted exon sequencing of 1,163 genes using
Illumina sequencer in 19 endometrial cell lines. In vitro
anti-proliferation activity (IC50) and in vivo anti-tumor activity of
lenvatinib were determined in the panel. Besides, we did siRNA kinase
library screening to classify the cell lines into two groups by
unsupervised hierarchical clustering. We identified genes significantly
over-expressed (p value <0.01, based on t-test) or enriched in mutations
(p<0.1, based on Fishers test) between clusters. Correlation analysis
between expression and in vivo anti-tumor activity was performed using
t-test (p<0.05) and spearman correlation (p<0.01). Correlation between
gene mutation and lenvatinib sensitivity was calculated by Wilcox-test
(p<0.1) Pathway enrichment was performed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
software.Results: Based on the clustering of siRNA data cell lines were
grouped into clusters. These groups correlated with in vitro and in vivo
lenvatinib sensitivity. Based on the clusters we derived genes with
significantly altered expression between the groups (t-test p<0.01) or
with significantly enriched mutations in one of the clusters (Fisher's
test p<0.1). Additionally we performed correlation analysis between gene
expression and mutation and in vivo sensitivity to lenvatinib. Pathway
enrichment analysis of these signatures identified pathways associated
with in vitro and in vivo lenvatinib sensitivity. We defined a set of 306
genes as potential biomarkers based pre-clinical data. Around one third
of genes showed significant correlation with the clinical outcome of a
Ph2 trial of lenvatinib in patients with advanced endometrial cancer.
Additionally, several pathways identified based on the gene signature
associated with in vitro or in vivo data, such as ERK/MAPK and
Angiopoietin signaling, were commonly involved in sensitivity to
lenvatinib in clinical data.Conclusion: Pre-clinical systems biology
analysis identified candidate biomarkers correlating with in vitro or in
vivo lenvatinib activity in 19 endometrial cell lines. A large fraction
of genes from the pre-clinical analysis showed significant correlation
with clinical outcome of a Ph2 trial of lenvatinib in endometrial cancer.

