Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of non-protective autophagy by radiation in tumor cells:
Implications for autophagy inhibition as a therapeutic strategy


Our laboratory has previously described the four functional forms of
autophagy, specifically cytoprotective, cytotoxic, cytostatic and
nonprotective (Gewirtz DA, Cancer Research 2014). Evidence for the
nonprotective form was based on studies where murine 4T1 breast tumor
cells failed to be sensitized to ionizing radiation by pharmacological or
genetic inhibition of autophagy (Bristol ML, JPET, 2013). To determine
whether radiation induces the cytoprotective and nonprotective forms of
autophagy in human tumor cells lines of different tissue origin, the
influence of autophagy inhibition on radiation sensitivity was studied in
human breast, head and neck and non-small cell lung cancer cell lines. In
order to examine the potential involvement of p53 in the protective and
nonprotective forms of autophagy, the impact of autophagy inhibition on
radiation sensitivity was compared in cell lines that were either wild
type or mutant/null in p53. While ionizing radiation promoted autophagy
in all tumor cell lines studied, autophagy inhibition resulted in
radiation sensitivity only in the p53 wild type A549 and H460 NSCLC cells
and the HN30 head and neck tumor cells. In contrast, pharmacological
inhibition of autophagy and/or genetic silencing of autophagy genes
failed to influence sensitivity to radiation in the p53 mutant Hs578t
breast tumor cells, the HN6 head and neck tumor cells, and the H358
non-small cell lung cancer cells, indicative of nonprotective autophagy.
The apparent requirement for functional p53 in the promotion of
cytoprotective autophagy by radiation was confirmed by the observation
that radiation induced autophagy was nonprotective in p53 null H1299
cells but was converted to the cytoprotective form with induction of p53.
Conversely, whereas p53 wild-type HN30 cells did show sensitization to
radiation upon autophagy inhibition HN30 cells in which p53 was knocked
down were not sensitized. These observations have implications for
efforts to modulate the response of malignancies to radiation (and
possibly also to cancer chemotherapeutic drugs) through autophagy
inhibition.

