Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MSI, 18q LOH, and clinicopathological features in stage II
sporadic colon cancers: Biomarker study in a phase III study of
postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy for stage II colon cancer (SACURA
trial)


Background and Purpose: SACURA trial is a multicenter, randomized phase
III study which aims to evaluate the superiority of adjuvant treatment
with UFT to observation only after surgery for stage II colon cancer. In
an additional translational study, the mRNA expression of 5-FU-related
enzymes, MSI and 18q LOH, and histopathological factors including budding
are assessed to evaluate correlations with recurrences and survivals.
Survival data will be open in 2016. In the present study, we investigated
the correlations between clinicopathological features and the status of
MSI and 18q LOH to reveal the characteristics of colon cancer in
Japan.Material and Methods: From 1038 of 2024 patients enrolled from
October 2006 to July 2010, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples of
resected tumors were obtained under informed consent. MSI was evaluated
using 5 markers, BAT25, BAT26, D2S123, D5S346, and D17S250 selected from
the international guidelines suggested by the National Cancer Institute
collaborative meeting. MSI high (MSI-H) was defined as the presence of
instability in more than 20% of the markers. Microsatellite stability
(MSS) was defined as no unstable marker. 18qLOH was evaluated by 3
markers, D18S69, D18S74E, and D18S851. 18qLOH positivity was defined as
the presence of LOH in any of the 18q markers. 18q LOH negativity was
strictly defined as the presence of at least two informative markers and
the absence of LOH. Each marker were amplified by PCR using
fluorescence-labeled primers and analyzed on ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer
using GeneMapper Software Ver. 3.0.Results: Among 1038 tumors, MSI-H was
observed in 75 tumors (7.2%). MSI-L and MSS were observed in 24 (2.3%)
and 936 tumors (90.5%), respectively. MSI-H was more frequent in female
(p = 0.001), right-sided colon cancers (p 5cm tumors (pBackground and
Purpose: SACURA trial is a multicenter, randomized phase III study which
aims to evaluate the superiority of adjuvant treatment with UFT to
observation only after surgery for stage II colon cancer. In an
additional translational study, the mRNA expression of 5-FU-related
enzymes, MSI and 18q LOH, and histopathological factors including budding
are assessed to evaluate correlations with recurrences and survivals.
Survival data will be open in 2016. In the present study, we investigated
the correlations between clinicopathological features and the status of
MSI and 18q LOH to reveal the characteristics of colon cancer in
Japan.Material and Methods: From 1038 of 2024 patients enrolled from
October 2006 to July 2010, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples of
resected tumors were obtained under informed consent. MSI was evaluated
using 5 markers, BAT25, BAT26, D2S123, D5S346, and D17S250 selected from
the international guidelines suggested by the National Cancer Institute
collaborative meeting. MSI high (MSI-H) was defined as the presence of
instability in more than 20% of the markers. Microsatellite stability
(MSS) was defined as no unstable marker. 18qLOH was evaluated by 3
markers, D18S69, D18S74E, and D18S851. 18qLOH positivity was defined as
the presence of LOH in any of the 18q markers. 18q LOH negativity was
strictly defined as the presence of at least two informative markers and
the absence of LOH. Each marker were amplified by PCR using
fluorescence-labeled primers and analyzed on ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer
using GeneMapper Software Ver. 3.0.Results: Among 1038 tumors, MSI-H was
observed in 75 tumors (7.2%). MSI-L and MSS were observed in 24 (2.3%)
and 936 tumors (90.5%), respectively. MSI-H was more frequent in female
(p = 0.001), right-sided colon cancers (p 5cm tumors (p< 0.0001),
poorly-differentiated or mucinous cancers (pBackground and Purpose:
SACURA trial is a multicenter, randomized phase III study which aims to
evaluate the superiority of adjuvant treatment with UFT to observation
only after surgery for stage II colon cancer. In an additional
translational study, the mRNA expression of 5-FU-related enzymes, MSI and
18q LOH, and histopathological factors including budding are assessed to
evaluate correlations with recurrences and survivals. Survival data will
be open in 2016. In the present study, we investigated the correlations
between clinicopathological features and the status of MSI and 18q LOH to
reveal the characteristics of colon cancer in Japan.Material and Methods:
From 1038 of 2024 patients enrolled from October 2006 to July 2010,
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples of resected tumors were
obtained under informed consent. MSI was evaluated using 5 markers,
BAT25, BAT26, D2S123, D5S346, and D17S250 selected from the international
guidelines suggested by the National Cancer Institute collaborative
meeting. MSI high (MSI-H) was defined as the presence of instability in
more than 20% of the markers. Microsatellite stability (MSS) was defined
as no unstable marker. 18qLOH was evaluated by 3 markers, D18S69,
D18S74E, and D18S851. 18qLOH positivity was defined as the presence of
LOH in any of the 18q markers. 18q LOH negativity was strictly defined as
the presence of at least two informative markers and the absence of LOH.
Each marker were amplified by PCR using fluorescence-labeled primers and
analyzed on ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer using GeneMapper Software Ver.
3.0.Results: Among 1038 tumors, MSI-H was observed in 75 tumors (7.2%).
MSI-L and MSS were observed in 24 (2.3%) and 936 tumors (90.5%),
respectively. MSI-H was more frequent in female (p = 0.001), right-sided
colon cancers (p 5cm tumors (p< 0.0001), poorly-differentiated or
mucinous cancers (p< 0.0001), and abnormal CEA (p = 0.004). Age and Depth
of tumor invasion had no correlation with MSI status. The 18q LOH
phenotype was present in 531 tumors (51.2%) and LOH negativity was
observed in 360 (34.7%). Informative LOH data was not available in 147
tumors (14.2%).Tumors with 18q LOH was more frequent in left -sided colon
cancers(pBackground and Purpose: SACURA trial is a multicenter,
randomized phase III study which aims to evaluate the superiority of
adjuvant treatment with UFT to observation only after surgery for stage
II colon cancer. In an additional translational study, the mRNA
expression of 5-FU-related enzymes, MSI and 18q LOH, and
histopathological factors including budding are assessed to evaluate
correlations with recurrences and survivals. Survival data will be open
in 2016. In the present study, we investigated the correlations between
clinicopathological features and the status of MSI and 18q LOH to reveal
the characteristics of colon cancer in Japan.Material and Methods: From
1038 of 2024 patients enrolled from October 2006 to July 2010,
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples of resected tumors were
obtained under informed consent. MSI was evaluated using 5 markers,
BAT25, BAT26, D2S123, D5S346, and D17S250 selected from the international
guidelines suggested by the National Cancer Institute collaborative
meeting. MSI high (MSI-H) was defined as the presence of instability in
more than 20% of the markers. Microsatellite stability (MSS) was defined
as no unstable marker. 18qLOH was evaluated by 3 markers, D18S69,
D18S74E, and D18S851. 18qLOH positivity was defined as the presence of
LOH in any of the 18q markers. 18q LOH negativity was strictly defined as
the presence of at least two informative markers and the absence of LOH.
Each marker were amplified by PCR using fluorescence-labeled primers and
analyzed on ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer using GeneMapper Software Ver.
3.0.Results: Among 1038 tumors, MSI-H was observed in 75 tumors (7.2%).
MSI-L and MSS were observed in 24 (2.3%) and 936 tumors (90.5%),
respectively. MSI-H was more frequent in female (p = 0.001), right-sided
colon cancers (p 5cm tumors (p< 0.0001), poorly-differentiated or
mucinous cancers (p< 0.0001), and abnormal CEA (p = 0.004). Age and Depth
of tumor invasion had no correlation with MSI status. The 18q LOH
phenotype was present in 531 tumors (51.2%) and LOH negativity was
observed in 360 (34.7%). Informative LOH data was not available in 147
tumors (14.2%).Tumors with 18q LOH was more frequent in left -sided colon
cancers(p< 0.0001) and well to moderately-differentiated cancers (p =
0.008). Age, gender, the tumor size, depth of tumor invasion, and CEA had
no correlation with 18q LOH status.Conclusions: This is the first
analysis for the status of MSI and 18q LOH in a large population of
Japanese colon cancer patients from phase III study. Although the
frequency of the MSI phenotype in this study was lower than those in the
previous reports from western countries, clinicopathological
characteristics of the tumors with MSI and 18q LOH were similar. Our
future study in SACURA trial will contribute to establish the prognostic
and/or predictive biomarkers in stage II colon cancer.

