Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ribonucleotide reductase promotes uracil-mediated genome
instability in tumor progression


The elevation of RRM2A subunit of ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) has been
shown oncogenic and associated with human cancers. However, the molecular
mechanism of RRM2A in cancer promotion is unclear. In this study, we
investigated whether RNR-mediated dUTP formation is involved in promoting
genome instability. Since dUTP is degraded by dUTPase, we analyzed the
expression of RRM2A and dUTPase in clinical samples from colorectal and
breast cancer patients. The results revealed that high RRM2A and low
dUTPase in tumors are correlated with poorer survival. In cancer cell
lines that express high level of RRM2A and dUTPase, knockdown of dUTPase
increases genome instability. Conversely, overexpression of dUTPase
reduces genome stress in cancer cells expressing high RRM2A and low
dUTPase. In non-tumorigenic cells, overexpression of RRM2A increases
replication stress and genome instability accompanied by higher levels of
53BP1 foci and increased breaks at AT-rich fragile sites bound by 53BP1.
Thymidine supplement in growth medium or co-expression of dUTPase was
able to reduce RRM2A-mediated replication stress and 53BP1 foci. We
further provide evidence that RRM2A promotes replication stress and error
prone-translesion synthesis dependent on uracil DNA glycosylase. These
results suggest that up-regulation of RRM2A in tumor cells increases
uracil-mediated replication stress to promote genome instability.
Therefore, high RRM2A/low dUTPase context confers tumor genome evolution
advantage, correlating with poorer prognosis.

