Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel Mi-HTX in vivo platform by reconstituting
autologous immune components in patient tumor-derived xenografts


Developing a clinically relevant in vivo platform for testing novel anti
cancer therapeutics is hindered by lack of preservation of several
critical components of tumor microenvironments. While syngenic mice model
is being used traditionally for understanding action of immunomodulator
compounds one major drawback of this model is it does not represent human
specific targets therefore exhibit poor translational potential. Patient
tumor derived xenograft (PDX) is increasingly appreciated as a surrogate
of patient tumors for functional screening of anticancer drugs. However,
these models also display limitation of stably maintaining active
phenotypes of intra-tumor or tumor infiltrating immune cells in a
dynamical setting where mice immune system is also compromised. Recently
developed ex vivo CANScript platform (presenting in AACR-2015 Annual
meeting) shows promises in realization of a preserved patient immune
network in short term culture but have inherent constraints of
determining PK/PD correlations. To overcome this limitation and meet the
growing need of testing immunomodulator drugs in an immunologically
relevant in vivo model here we engineer a novel human tumor xenograft
platform called Mi-HTX where patient immune network was reconstituted by
implanting suitably primed peripheral blood mononuclear cells from same
donor. The data shows the preferential recruitment of several key immune
cells (CD8, macrophage and TRegs). The PK/PD/Efficacy correlation of
human anti-CTLA-4 in Mi-HTX platform shows the potential application of
this model for systematically evaluating immunomodulator drugs.

