Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Importance of Ras signaling in EphB2-mediated ependymoma
development


Ependymoma account for 6-12% of pediatric brain tumors and have a mean
age of diagnosis of 4 years, a 5-year survival rate ranging from 39%-64%,
and a progression free survival rate of 23-45%. General use of
chemotherapeutics remains highly ineffective for this disease therefore
standard of care consists of surgery followed by radiation with total
gross resection (TGR) having the best outcome (60-89% 5-year overall
survival for TGR vs. 21-46% 5-year overall survival for subtotal
resection (STR)) [6]. Patients having had STR have an extremely high
incidence of disease reoccurrence (43% to 72%) requiring additional
surgeries and radiation with a median 2-year overall survival after
relapse ranging from 20% to 49% [7]. These statistics highlight the need
for better adjuvant therapies. In an effort to identify new targets for
treating ependymoma we have developed a mouse model that relies on the
intracranial implantation of mouse supratentorial (forebrain) embryonic
neuronal stem cells (STeNSC) overexpressing the tyrosine kinase receptor
ephrin B2 (EphB2). Tumors develop within 4-8 months post-implantation,
require receptor activation and are consistently found to be
histologically, ultrastructurally and molecularly similar to the human
disease.Given the requirement for EphB2 activation in tumor development,
it became necessary to identify the EphB2 initiated signaling pathways
involved in this process. Among the many pathways initiated by EphB2
activation are those of the small GTPases of the Ras family (H-Ras,
K-Ras, N-Ras) that regulate cellular processes including cell
proliferation and transformation. Receptor activation is a multistep
process involving receptor autophosphorylation of two critical tyrosines
positions 604 and 610 within the juxtamembrane (Y604, Y610),
receptor/ligand complex dimerization, release of juxtamembrane mediated
kinase domain inhibition and finally kinase domain phosphorylation and
activation. While EphB2-mediated activation of Ras involves the kinase
domain of the receptor, Ras inhibition (RasGTP conversion to RasGDP) is
achieved by activating the Ras GTPase activating protein p120RasGAP via
its juxtamembrane. We took advantage of a previously identified EphB2
juxtamembrane mutation that inhibits p120RasGAP activation by converting
the tyrosines at positions 604 and 610 to glutamic acids (Y604/610E) thus
rendering Ras constitutively active. Ligand-mediated activation of this
mutant resulted in an absence of p120RasGAP activation and an increase in
Ras signaling (elevated levels of phosphorylated C-Raf, MEK1/2 and
Erk1/2) in vitro as predicted. More importantly, overexpression of the
EphB2(Y604/610E) protein in our model system showed no change in tumor
penetrance (100% penetrance); however, there was a dramatic shortening of
tumor latency from 207 days with EphB2 to 40 days with the Y604/610E
mutation, supporting the role for Ras signaling in EphB2 mediated
transformation.

