Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring leptomeningeal metastasis treatment response using
tumor cell free DNA from cerebral spinal fluid


Background:Cerebral Spinal Fluid (CSF) from brain tumor patients contains
tumor cell free DNA (cfDNA), which may provide a non-invasive and
routinely accessible method to obtain tumor genomic information. This
liquid biopsy method would prove considerably less morbid compared to an
open removal of tumor tissue from the brain. The opportunities of cfDNA
in CSF have not been systematically studied in CSF, particularly in
relation to how metastatic brain tumor cfDNA may respond to intrathecal
therapy.Methods:A patient who presented with elevated intracranial
pressure from metastatic melanoma to the leptomeninges underwent serial
therapuetic lumbar punctures, approximately every two weeks over a period
of three months. CSF was obtained through an informed consent, IRB
approved protocol. The primary melanoma tumor was known to have a BRAF
mutation 1799T>A (V600E). cfDNA was isolated from the CSF, and sequenced
to confirm the presence of this same tumor-specific BRAF mutation.
Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) quantified the mutant DNA amount and fraction
in CSF. These results were compared to the clinical cytology results from
the same sample.Results:Six time points were collected in 61 days. Tumor
cfDNA was detectable in the first five time points. Mutant DNA fraction
decreased from 53% to almost zero. The total amount of mutant DNA
decreased from 220 copies per ml of CSF to 4 copies per ml of CSF. This
result was concordant with the patient's clinical response to
therapy.Conclusion:Tumor cfDNA was found in CSF from a cancer patient
with leptomeningeal metastases. Both the mutant fraction and total copies
of mutant DNA corresponded with the patient's response to systemic
therapy. This non-invasive method may provide a powerful tool for
identifying and monitoring the genetic fingerprint of brain metastases.

