Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent loss of function mutations in TGFR1 and TGFR2 identify
hair follicle bulge stem cells as the cell of origin for cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma


Solid tumors are typically considered to arise from the accumulation of
mutations within either stem or differentiated cells and to evolve over
several years. However, melanoma patients treated with inhibitors of
oncogenic BRAF frequently present with keratoacanthomas and/or cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) within weeks of treatment, possibly driven
by paradoxical RAS/RAF MAPK pathway activation. Here, we identify
frequent HRAS, TGFR1 and TGFR2 mutations in skin lesions from vemurafenib
treated patients. Analysis of 98 human sporadic cSCC tumor samples and 21
cSCC cell lines revealed mutation of TGF receptors in 42% of samples and
activating RAS mutations in 9% of samples. Functional analysis indicates
that TGF receptor mutations frequently result in loss of canonical
signaling. Analysis of normal human skin revealed localised TGF signaling
in hair follicle bulge stem cells. In murine skin autocrine TGF signaling
was highly localised to Lgr5+ve stem cells. We modelled hyperactivation
of the MAPK pathway (through knockin of BRafV600E or KRASG12D) and the
consequences of TGF signalling ablation (through the deletion of Tgfr1)
in Lgr5+ve cells. Whist BRaf or KRAS activation alone did not lead to
cancer, homozygous deletion of Tgfr1 enabled rapid cSCC development.
Taken together, our results indicate that Lgr5+ve stem cells can act as
the cell of origin for cSCC and that hyperactivation of the RAS-RAF-MAPK
pathway, coupled with loss of TGF signalling, are driving events of skin
tumorigenesis.

