Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel pharmacological inhibitor CEP1430 for human pancreatic
cancer stem cells


Pancreatic cancer is one of the most devastating human malignancies with
an estimate yearly death of 280,000 and an overall median 5-year survival
rate of less than 5%. The development of relevant preclinical models of
the disease to evaluate novel therapeutic strategies can accelerate basic
research findings into the much needed clinical application. We used our
recently established three-dimensional (3D) in vitro culture assay system
that resembles in-vivo tumor growth to screen small molecule libraries.
We identified CEP1430, a sonic hedgehog (hh) pathway inhibitor as a
potential drug lead molecule. We selected this molecule for further
evaluation because the hh pathway is important for the maintenance of
cancer stem cells. The CEP1430 treatment markedly inhibited in-vitro
growth of human pancreatic CSC (IC50 value of 10 nM). In-vitro, CEP1430
induced apoptotic cell death of CSC and reduced pro-angiogenic but
increased anti-angiogenic marker expression at the doses tested. In-vivo
efficacy of CEP 1430 was evaluated in female SCID mice bearing human
pancreatic CSC. The once daily administration (ip) of CEP1430 (doses:10,
15, and 20 mg/kg) for 30 days resulted in 80%, 89% and 90% tumor growth
inhibition. The tumor growth inhibitory effect of CEP1430 in all
treatment groups was statistically significant in comparison to vehicle
treated control (PPancreatic cancer is one of the most devastating human
malignancies with an estimate yearly death of 280,000 and an overall
median 5-year survival rate of less than 5%. The development of relevant
preclinical models of the disease to evaluate novel therapeutic
strategies can accelerate basic research findings into the much needed
clinical application. We used our recently established three-dimensional
(3D) in vitro culture assay system that resembles in-vivo tumor growth to
screen small molecule libraries. We identified CEP1430, a sonic hedgehog
(hh) pathway inhibitor as a potential drug lead molecule. We selected
this molecule for further evaluation because the hh pathway is important
for the maintenance of cancer stem cells. The CEP1430 treatment markedly
inhibited in-vitro growth of human pancreatic CSC (IC50 value of 10 nM).
In-vitro, CEP1430 induced apoptotic cell death of CSC and reduced
pro-angiogenic but increased anti-angiogenic marker expression at the
doses tested. In-vivo efficacy of CEP 1430 was evaluated in female SCID
mice bearing human pancreatic CSC. The once daily administration (ip) of
CEP1430 (doses:10, 15, and 20 mg/kg) for 30 days resulted in 80%, 89% and
90% tumor growth inhibition. The tumor growth inhibitory effect of
CEP1430 in all treatment groups was statistically significant in
comparison to vehicle treated control (P<0.001). The administration of
CEP1430 for a period of 30 days was well tolerated without significant
changes in body weight or toxicity by histological examination of tissues
and organs. We are using proteomic and miRNA platforms to monitor
biomarkers of response, mode of action and selectivity of CEP1430.
Further pre-clinical in-vivo studies are ongoing to project human dose
and schedule as monotherapy and in combination with therapeutic
vaccination to advance CEP1430 for clinical investigation.

