Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognosis of baseline absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) and
neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR) in patients with pancreatic
adenocarcinoma


IntroductionThere are no established prognostic biomarkers in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). ALC and NLR have recently been of considerable
interest in a variety of cancers including pancreatic cancer as a
potential prognostic biomarker. In this single institution, retrospective
study, we evaluated ALC and NLR as prognostic indicators for pancreatic
cancer.Methods:We performed a retrospective chart review of patients
diagnosed at LSU Health Shreveport with PDAC from Jan 1, 2000 to December
31, 2010. Various clinical, laboratory, imaging and treatment data were
recorded. NLR was calculated by dividing the absolute neutrophil count by
the absolute lymphocyte count.ResultsA total of 152 patients had
analyzable data. Median overall survival across all patients examined was
5.34 months. Univariate COX analysis showed hazard ratio favorable for
patients with early stage pancreatic cancer, better performance status,
those who received chemo-radiation and surgery, ALC 1000 and NLR
IntroductionThere are no established prognostic biomarkers in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). ALC and NLR have recently been of considerable
interest in a variety of cancers including pancreatic cancer as a
potential prognostic biomarker. In this single institution, retrospective
study, we evaluated ALC and NLR as prognostic indicators for pancreatic
cancer.Methods:We performed a retrospective chart review of patients
diagnosed at LSU Health Shreveport with PDAC from Jan 1, 2000 to December
31, 2010. Various clinical, laboratory, imaging and treatment data were
recorded. NLR was calculated by dividing the absolute neutrophil count by
the absolute lymphocyte count.ResultsA total of 152 patients had
analyzable data. Median overall survival across all patients examined was
5.34 months. Univariate COX analysis showed hazard ratio favorable for
patients with early stage pancreatic cancer, better performance status,
those who received chemo-radiation and surgery, ALC 1000 and NLR < 10
(table 1). Hazard ratio for NLR 10 vs 10 (P = 0.001). Median OS for
subjects with ALC 999 = 2.47 months compared to those with ALC >1000 =
6.02 months (P 10 (P = 0.001). Median OS for subjects with ALC 999 = 2.47
months compared to those with ALC >1000 = 6.02 months (P <
0.001).Univariate & multivariate analysis of hazard ratios of survival
with respect to various clinical characteristics in patients with
pancreatic adenocarcinoma.Conclusion:ALC and NLR are routinely performed
laboratory tests which are inexpensive and have prognostic value in
pancreatic cancers. The biological mechanisms underlying changes in ALC
and NLR needs further exploration and could be a potential area for
translational research.

