Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic features of histological compartments in colorectal
carcinoma


Proteomic analysis of cancer tissues by mass spectrometry (MS) is
complicated by the fact that histological context is lost in the
analysis. Knowledge on the abundance of key proteins for the different
histological compartments may allow an assessment of the contribution of
each of these components to the proteomic profile obtained. We studied 18
colorectal carcinoma specimens and isolated carcinoma, necrosis, normal
epithelium, stroma, smooth muscle, and lymphoid infiltrate compartments
using laser capture microdissection (LCM). Proteins extracted from 60 LCM
caps were subjected to short-stack, gel electrophoresis, in-gel trypsin
digestion and analyzed on a Thermo-Fisher QExactive Orbitrap MS
instrument. Data were searched using myrimatch and MS-GF+ on a RefSeq
protein database and identified proteins were assembled using IDpicker 3.
The analysis identified about 2,000 non-redundant proteins at a protein
FDRProteomic analysis of cancer tissues by mass spectrometry (MS) is
complicated by the fact that histological context is lost in the
analysis. Knowledge on the abundance of key proteins for the different
histological compartments may allow an assessment of the contribution of
each of these components to the proteomic profile obtained. We studied 18
colorectal carcinoma specimens and isolated carcinoma, necrosis, normal
epithelium, stroma, smooth muscle, and lymphoid infiltrate compartments
using laser capture microdissection (LCM). Proteins extracted from 60 LCM
caps were subjected to short-stack, gel electrophoresis, in-gel trypsin
digestion and analyzed on a Thermo-Fisher QExactive Orbitrap MS
instrument. Data were searched using myrimatch and MS-GF+ on a RefSeq
protein database and identified proteins were assembled using IDpicker 3.
The analysis identified about 2,000 non-redundant proteins at a protein
FDR<5%. Unsupervised cluster analysis of the most abundant proteins
clustered each of the compartments together with few exceptions.
Surprisingly, the necrotic compartment was almost identical from the
carcinoma compartment, indicating the stability of the small peptides
used for MS sequence identifications. Comparisons of spectral count data
between each of the compartments and the remainder of the dataset by
protein enrichment analyses was performed using the online tool
www.webgestalt.org. The carcinoma compartment was enriched for proteins
involved in nucleic acid and general metabolism processes. Smooth muscle
was enriched for proteins involved in muscle contraction and cell
adhesion. The lymphoid infiltrates were enriched for chromatin and
nucleosome proteins, possibly indicating the relative contribution of
nuclear proteins from these small cells. The stromal component was
enriched for extracellular matrix proteins and proteins involved in
glycosylation processes. Using data from ProteinAtlas.org, we confirmed
histological associations of the most prominent protein markers with
their respective histological component. For instance, COL12A1 was highly
expressed in the stromal compartment, while SMTN was highly specific for
smooth muscle. Expression levels characterizing each of the histological
components can thus be described in protein signatures that can serve as
a measure of the relative contribution of each of the components in the
complex composition of a colorectal carcinoma sample.Supported by NIH/NCI
grant U24CA159988.

