Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-infiltrating B cells are predictive of human lung squamous
cell survival


Recent studies in human lung squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC) have shown
that upregulation of B cell-associated genes strongly correlate with
patient survival. More than any genetic factor (immunologic or otherwise)
CD79A, a pan-B cell marker, was found to have the strongest predictive
value. Expression of this marker was capable of identifying short ( 6
years) term lung SqCC survivors, with greater than 80% accuracy. These
data suggest that the presence of CD79A-expressing tumor-infiltrating B
(TIL-B) cells may be contributing to patient outcome. The aim of this
study was to characterize CD79A+ TIL-B cells in SqCC patient samples and
evaluate their role in lung SqCC survival. We evaluated human lung cancer
specimens from long and short term survivors for the presence of CD79A+
TIL-B cells by immunofluorescence and found that their presence directly
correlates with survival time. Further analysis showed that CD79A
expression found in tumors of long term survivors (>6 years) co-localizes
with CD20 staining but not CD138 staining, indicating that the cells
responsible for producing a survival signature are not plasma cells.
These data indicate that CD79A+ TIL-B cells are contributing to the
generation of an efficient immune response in lung SqCC and may be doing
so through non-humoral functions.

