Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Murine model of dual mTORC kinase inhibition identifies CDK6 as a
synergistic target in T-ALL


The PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway is frequently hyperactivated in T- cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). To model inhibition of this pathway in
lymphoma, mice with constitutively-active AKT specific to T-lymphocytes
(Lck-MyrAkt2) were crossed with mice that have genetically-reduced mTOR
expression (mTOR knock-down, KD). Lck-MyrAkt2 mice with mTOR KD had
altered thymic T-lymphocyte development; these mice also had delayed
thymic pre-T cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (pre-T LBL) progression
and increased survival relative to wild type (WT) mTOR/ Lck-MyrAkt2 mice
(average survival of 24 versus 14 weeks, respectively). Delayed pre-T LBL
formation was also observed when WT mTOR/Lck-MyrAkt2 mice were treated
for 8 weeks with the rapamycin analog, everolimus, an inhibitor of the
mTOR TORC1 complex. Transcriptional profiling of thymic lymphomas from
the WT vs KD mTOR/ Lck-MyrAkt2 mice revealed that mTOR KD was associated
with decreased expression of Cdk6, a critical proliferative control node
in T- cell development and oncogenic transformation. Pharmacologic
inhibition of mTOR in tumor cells also decreased CDK6. Tumor cells from
WT mTOR/Lck-MyrAkt2 mice were more sensitive to CDK4/6 inhibitors than
tumor cells from KD mTOR/Lck-MyrAkt2 mice. Combining an mTOR inhibitor
(rapamycin) with a CDK4/6 inhibitor (PD-0332991) synergistically
inhibited the viability and decreased downstream signaling in both mouse
lymphoma cells and human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) cell
lines. Combining a dual mTORC inhibitor (PP242) with a CDK4/6 inhibitor
decreased downstream signaling to an even greater extent in human T-ALL
cell lines. Our results suggest that an mTORi/CDKi combination may be
beneficial in the treatment of human T-ALL.

