Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Wnt3a targetome in triple-negative breast cancer cell lines


The canonical Wnt/beta-catenin pathway has been shown to be activated in
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). The activation of this pathway
leads to the expression of specific target genes depending on the
cell/tissue context. Here, we analyzed the transcriptome of two different
TNBC cell lines to define a comprehensive list of Wnt target genes. The
treatment of cells with Wnt3a for 6h up-regulated the expression (fold
change > 1.3) of 59 genes in MDA-MB-468 cells and 241 genes in HCC38
cells. Thirty genes were common to both cell lines. Beta-catenin may also
be a transcriptional repressor and we found that 18 and 166 genes were
down-regulated in response to Wnt3a treatment for 6h in MDA-MB-468 and
HCC38 cells, respectively, of which six were common to both cell lines.
Only half of the activated and the repressed transcripts have been
previously described as Wnt target genes. Therefore, our study reveals
137 novel genes that may be positively regulated by Wnt3a and 104 novel
genes that may be negatively regulated by Wnt3a. These genes are involved
in the Wnt pathway itself, and also in TGF-beta, p53 and Hedgehog
pathways. Thorough characterization of these novel potential Wnt target
genes may reveal new regulators of the canonical Wnt pathway. The
comparison of our list of Wnt target genes with those published in other
cellular contexts confirms the notion that Wnt target genes are tissue-,
cell line- and treatment-specific. Genes up-regulated in Wnt3a-stimulated
cell lines were more strongly expressed in TNBC than in luminal A breast
cancer samples. These genes were also overexpressed, but to a much lesser
extent, in HER2+ and luminal B tumors. We identified 72 Wnt target genes
higher expressed in TNBCs (17 with a fold change >1.3) which may reflect
the chronic activation of the canonical Wnt pathway that occurs in TNBC
tumors.

