Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDK1-dependent activation of RSK is an absolute requirement for
PI3K oncogenic activity in the thyroid gland


Aberrant activation of the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt
pathway plays a key role in thyroid tumorigenesis, particularly in
follicular thyroid cancer (FTC) and anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC).
Accordingly, conditional deletion of Pten in the mouse thyroid epithelium
induces constitutive activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway, and causes
thyroid hyperplasia at birth that progresses to invasive and metastatic
follicular carcinoma. This phenotype is dramatically accelerated by
simultaneous deletion of Trp53, leading to the development of ATC, or
activation of Kras, leading to poorly differentiated carcinomas.The PDK1
kinase plays a central role in the PI3K signaling cascade, acting as a
master regulator of PI3K downstream effectors belonging to the AGC
kinases family, such as AKT and S6K1. Additional AGC kinases are
controlled by PDK1 independent of PI3K activity.PDK1 possesses a
substrate docking site, the PIF pocket, required for the phosphorylation
of most AGC kinases (including S6K, PKC, SGK, and RSK) but not of AKT.
The L155E PDK1 mutant disrupts the PIF pocket and impairs AGC kinase
activation, without any effect on AKT activation.Thanks to this
differential mechanism of substrate activation, we are defining the
relative contribution of AKT and other PDK1 targets to the neoplastic
transformation process in Pten-/- thyrocytes.Surprisingly, in vivo
disruption of the PIF-pocket completely abrogates neoplastic
transformation of Pten-/- thyroids, even in the face of AKT constitutive
activation. This finding supports the hypothesis that the linear PI3K-AKT
pathway is not sufficient to drive thyroid transformation and that
concomitant activation of additional PDK1-dependent pathways is
absolutely required.We now show that RSK family members (RSK1-3) are
essential components of this PDK1-dependent accessory pathway.
Remarkably, RSK3 levels in the thyroid are increased in the absence of
Pten, and RSK activity in thyroid cells is abrogated when PDK1 PIF-pocket
is mutated.Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of RSK drastically
impairs [Pten,Trp53]-/- ATC cell proliferation both in vitro and in vivo,
in syngeneic allograft models.Taken together, our data identify a new
signaling cascade that is essential for neoplastic transformation of
thyroid epithelial cells, and thus a new critical candidate for drug
development.

