Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of surface-directed and classic androgen receptor
antagonists


Background: The androgen receptor (AR) surface-directed antagonist MJC13
inhibits AR function and proliferation of prostate cancer (PC) cells and
these effects are related to arrest of an AR/chaperone complex in the
cytoplasm. Here, we compared activities of MJC13 and the classic AR
antagonist flutamide.Method and Results: MJC13 and flutamide inhibit all
dihydrotestosterone (DHT)-dependent genes in LNCaP PC cells and both
compounds are equally effective. Control ChIP assays confirm that MJC13
inhibits AR binding to the prostate specific antigen (PSA) promoter more
strongly than flutamide, consistent with different mechanisms of action.
Examination of efficacy of MJC13 in conditions that reflect aspects of
castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) reveals that it inhibits a
flutamide-dependent AR mutant (ART877A), but displays greatly restricted
gene-specific activity in 22Rv1 cells that express a constitutively
active truncated AR and is inactive against glucocorticoid receptor (GR),
which can co-opt androgen-dependent signaling networks in CRPC. While
flutamide inhibits AR interactions with the coactivator SRC2, it does not
affect -catenin binding. In contrast, MJC13 inhibits AR interactions with
both coregulators and, unlike flutamide, strongly inhibits amplification
of AR activity obtained with SRC2 and -catenin. MJC13 also preferentially
inhibits -catenin-enhanced cell division in LNCaP cells relative to
flutamide.Conclusion: Our findings suggest that a surface-directed
antagonist can block AR activity in some conditions in which a classic
antagonist fails and may display utility in some forms of CRPC.

