Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNF126 promotes homologous recombination via regulating
E2F1-mediated BRCA1 expression


Abstract: Homologous recombination (HR)-mediated DNA double-strand break
repair is important for cell proliferation, cancer prevention and cancer
therapy resistance. HR protein BRCA1 is one of the most important
breast/ovarian cancer suppressor genes. Lower expression of BRCA1 has
been frequently observed in a broad spectrum of human cancers,
particularly sporadic breast/ovarian cancers. However, the mechanisms
governing BRCA1 expression is elusive. RNF126 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase
and is mapped to chromosome 19 p13.3 which is a commonly deleted region
in ovarian cancers. In addition, high-resolution 19p13.2-13.3
allelotyping of breast carcinomas demonstrates frequent loss of
heterozygosity. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data suggested that RNF126
depletion present in a broad spectrum of human tumors, particularly
ovarian cancers. Although a recent study suggested that RNF126 promote
cell growth, the function of RNF126 remains largely unknown. Here, we
demonstrate that RNF126 facilitates HR by promoting the expression of
BRCA1, in a manner independent of its E3 ligase activity but depending on
E2F1, a well-known transcription factor of BRCA1 promoter. In support of
this result, RNF126 promotes transactivation of BRCA1 promoter by
directly binding to E2F1. Most importantly, an RNF126 mutant lacking 10
amino acids that is responsible for the interaction with E2F1 has a
dominant-negative effect on BRCA1 expression by suppressing E2F1-mediated
transactivation of BRCA1 promoter and blocking the enrichment of E2F1 on
BRCA1 promoter. Last, RNF126 depletion leads to the increased sensitivity
to ionizing radiation (IR) and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
inhibitor. Collectively, our results suggest a novel role of RNF126 in
promoting HR-mediated repair through the positive regulation on BRCA1
expression by binding to E2F1. This study not only offers novel insights
into our current understanding of the biological functions of RNF126 but
also provides a potential therapeutic target for the cancer treatment.Key
words: Homologous recombination, RNF126, E2F1, BRCA1

