Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RP6530, a dual PI3K / inhibitor, potentiates ruxolitinib activity
in the JAK2-V617F mutant erythroleukemia cell lines


Background: Myelofibrosis (MF) represents a life-threatening neoplasm
that manifests particularly in the elderly population and is
characterized by bone marrow fibrosis and extramedullary hematopoeisis.
While ruxolitinib, a JAK1/2 inhibitor, has recently been approved by the
USFDA for its disease modifying potential in MF patients, it is still not
considered as a curative option. Targeting another kinase such as PI3K,
downstream of JAK, could therefore be a more efficient way of treating
myelofibrotic neoplasms. RP6530 is a novel, potent, and selective PI3K /
inhibitor that demonstrated high potency against PI3K (IC50 = 25 nM) and
(IC50 = 33 nM) enzymes with selectivity over (>300-fold) and (>100-fold)
isoforms. The objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of a
combination of ruxolitinib and RP6530 in the JAK2-V617F mutant Human
Erythroleukemia (HEL) cell line.Methods: Passive resistance was conferred
by incubating HEL cells with increasing concentrations of ruxolitinib
over an 8-10-week period. Endogenous JAK2, PI3K, PI3K, and pAKT were
estimated by Western Blotting. RP6530, ruxolitinib, and the combination
of RP6530 + Ruxolitinib were tested for their effect on viability and
apoptosis. Cell viability was assessed by a MTT assay. Induction of
apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V/PI staining.Results: Resistance to
ruxolitinib was confirmed by a right-ward shift in EC50 of ruxolitinib in
a HEL cell proliferation assay (0.82 M Vs. 12.2 M). Endogeous pAKT
expression was 3.7-fold higher in HEL-RR compared to HEL-RS cells
indicating activation of the AKT signaling pathway. While single-agent
activity of RP6530 was modest (33-46% inhibition @ 10 M) in both HEL-RS
and HEL-RR cells, addition of 10 M RP6530 to ruxolitinib was synergistic
resulting in a near-complete inhibition of proliferation (>90% for HEL-RS
and >70% for HEL-RR). While the order of addition did not affect the
potency of RP6530, addition of 5 M RP6530, 4 h prior to the addition of
ruxolitinib resulted in a significant reduction in EC50 of ruxolitinib
(5.8 M) in HEL-RR cells. On lines with cell proliferation data,
incubation of 10 M RP6530 with ruxolitinib for 72 h increased the percent
of apoptotic cells (55% in HEL-RS and 37% in HEL-RR) compared to either
agent alone (16-27% in HEL-RS and 17-21% in HEL-RR).Conclusions:
Ruxolitinib resistance in the V617F JAK-2 mutant HEL cells is accompanied
by an increase in pAKT expression. Inhibition of pAKT via the addition of
RP6530, a dual PI3K / inhibitor, resulted in a reversal of ruxolitinib
resistance. Complementary activity was also observed in HEL-RS cells
indicating that a combination of ruxolitinib and RP6530 could have a
positive bearing on the clinical outcome in MF patients.

