Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of meta-[211At]astatobenzylguanidine ([211At]MABG) as
an alpha particle emitting systemic targeted radiotherapeutic for
neuroblastoma


BACKGROUND Neuroblastoma (NB) is a radiosensitive malignancy and NB cells
express the norepinephrine transporter (NET) enabling uptake of NET
ligands. The majority of relapsed NBs remain sensitive to radiation
therapy even after extensive therapy. The currently employed targeted
radiotherapeutic [131I]MIBG is a highly active -particle emitting NET
ligand useful for cytoreduction of bulk tumor. However, [131I]MIBG does
not target isolated tumor cells, and thus targeted radiotherapy with
[211At]MABG (-particle emitter with higher biological effectiveness) can
address this critical problem due to the short path length that should
lead to the killing of isolated tumor cells.METHODS 211At was synthesized
using a bismuth target via the 209Bi(,2n)211At reaction and used for
solid-phase radiosynthesis of [211At]MABG. Cellular models were created
by first determining NET (SLC6A2) mRNA and protein expression in 35 human
NB cell lines, and then creating isogenic pairs by forced overexpression
of NET in 4 NB cell models. We then performed [211At]MABG uptake assays,
as well as biodistribution experiments, using these models. We are
defining the toxicity of [211At]MABG in mice via ongoing dose escalation
and monitoring laboratory parameters every 3 weeks after dosing. A linear
mixed effects model was used to determine the differences in the
parameters between the treated groups and controls. Finally, clonogenic
assays and therapeutic trials in mouse models comparing [131I]MIBG with
[211At]MABG are ongoing.RESULTS We synthesized [211At]MABG (radiochemical
yield of 25-50%, radiochemical purity > 99%) and showed NET-specific
uptake in NB1691 cells. Specificity was demonstrated by competition
assays with the blocking agent desipramine. NET-overexpressing cell lines
showed 4-10 fold higher uptake of NET ligands than parental isogenic
lines, and demonstrated tumor-specific [211At]MABG uptake in vivo with
tumor-muscle ratios of 7.37. Toxicity studies have shown that doses of 10
and 25 uCi of [211At]MABG were well tolerated, but there was weight loss
observed at higher doses (P = 0.01). There was also an expected trend
towards thrombocytopenia (P = 0.06), but no detectable impact on white
blood cell counts, (P = 0.74), hemoglobin (P = 0.41), bilirubin (P =
0.53) or creatinine (P = 0.10). Clonogenic assays show [211At]MABG to be
potently cytotoxic (1000 fold higher than [131I]MIBG), and murine
efficacy studies are ongoing.CONCLUSIONS We have synthesized 211At-MABG
in quantities sufficient for our preclinical experiments, and will scale
this up for clinical applications. The uptake and biodistribution of
[211At]MABG is similar to the currently used radiotherapeutic [131I]MIBG,
and to date there was no unanticipated toxicity. Preliminary results from
clonogenic assays suggest that [211At]MABG may be an effective agent for
salvage therapy for children with refractory/relapsed NB.

