Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of NMS-P648, a novel and potent
PARP-1/-3 inhibitor


PARP-1 and PARP-2 are nuclear enzymes activated by DNA strand breaks and
are involved in recruitment of DNA repair proteins to sites of damage.
PARP-1 and PARP-2 share partially overlapping functions, as shown by the
embryonic lethality of double knockout mice compared to animals with
single ablation either gene, which are viable. Despite this partial
functional redundancy, PARP-1, but not PARP-2, inhibition has been shown
to be synthetically lethal with defects in homologous recombination such
as BRCA gene mutations. All PARP inhibitors that are currently under
clinical investigation inhibit both PARP-1 and PARP-2, due to the high
sequence similarity between the catalytic domains of the two enzymes. A
third member of the family, PARP-3, has lower homology with PARP-1 and -2
and is much less well characterized, although it is known that its
activity is stimulated by double strand breaks and that it promotes DNA
repair through an error prone repair pathway, non-homologous end joining
(NHEJ). PARP-3 inhibition is thus presumed to be synthetically lethal
with other, alternative DNA repair pathway deficiencies.We report
preclinical characterization of NMS-P648, a selective PARP-1/-3
inhibitor, with a dissociation constants (KD), of 0.9 nM on PARP-1 and
with greater than four hundred-fold less affinity for PARP-2, as assessed
by direct binding assay. In cells, NMS-P648 inhibits hydrogen peroxide
induced poly ADP-ribose (PAR) synthesis with an IC50 of 1 nM, confirming
expected mechanism of action and indicating that inhibition of PARP-2 is
not required for this process.NMS-P648 has favourable ADME properties,
including stability in liver microsome incubation assays, low efflux
ratio in the CACO2 assay and an excellent pharmacokinetic profile, with
complete oral bioavailability and exposure levels that increase
proportionally with dose.Testing NMS-P648 on a panel of more than 100
human tumor cell lines using a 2D colony forming assay format revealed
that 7 cell lines were highly sensitive to the compound (IC50 PARP-1 and
PARP-2 are nuclear enzymes activated by DNA strand breaks and are
involved in recruitment of DNA repair proteins to sites of damage. PARP-1
and PARP-2 share partially overlapping functions, as shown by the
embryonic lethality of double knockout mice compared to animals with
single ablation either gene, which are viable. Despite this partial
functional redundancy, PARP-1, but not PARP-2, inhibition has been shown
to be synthetically lethal with defects in homologous recombination such
as BRCA gene mutations. All PARP inhibitors that are currently under
clinical investigation inhibit both PARP-1 and PARP-2, due to the high
sequence similarity between the catalytic domains of the two enzymes. A
third member of the family, PARP-3, has lower homology with PARP-1 and -2
and is much less well characterized, although it is known that its
activity is stimulated by double strand breaks and that it promotes DNA
repair through an error prone repair pathway, non-homologous end joining
(NHEJ). PARP-3 inhibition is thus presumed to be synthetically lethal
with other, alternative DNA repair pathway deficiencies.We report
preclinical characterization of NMS-P648, a selective PARP-1/-3
inhibitor, with a dissociation constants (KD), of 0.9 nM on PARP-1 and
with greater than four hundred-fold less affinity for PARP-2, as assessed
by direct binding assay. In cells, NMS-P648 inhibits hydrogen peroxide
induced poly ADP-ribose (PAR) synthesis with an IC50 of 1 nM, confirming
expected mechanism of action and indicating that inhibition of PARP-2 is
not required for this process.NMS-P648 has favourable ADME properties,
including stability in liver microsome incubation assays, low efflux
ratio in the CACO2 assay and an excellent pharmacokinetic profile, with
complete oral bioavailability and exposure levels that increase
proportionally with dose.Testing NMS-P648 on a panel of more than 100
human tumor cell lines using a 2D colony forming assay format revealed
that 7 cell lines were highly sensitive to the compound (IC50 <0.5 M). As
expected for an inhibitor of DNA repair, NMS-P648 induced S-phase cell
cycle arrest and the formation of nuclear H2AX foci in sensitive cell
lines, suggesting the induction of stalled or damaged replication forks,
followed by cell death. Responsive lines were of diverse tissue origin
and included BRCA mutated lines, as well as lines resistant to standard
chemotherapeutic agents and to known PARP 1/2 inhibitors, indicating a
unique activity profile. Translational and bioinformatic studies are
ongoing, aimed at identifying determinants of NMS-P648 sensitivity that
might drive patient population selection.The discovery that potent
PARP-1/-3 dual inhibitors such as NMS-P648 possess a unique sensitivity
profile provides an innovative opportunity in the field of therapeutic
intervention in DNA repair processes.

