Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IACS-10759: A novel OXPHOS inhibitor which selectively kill tumors
with metabolic vulnerabilities


Tumor cells normally depend on both glycolysis and oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) to provide the energy and macromolecule building
blocks needed to enable continued tumor cell growth. Genetic or
epigenetic inactivation of one of these two redundant pathways represents
a metabolic vulnerability that should be susceptible to an inhibitor of
the other pathway. Through an extensive medicinal chemistry campaign,
IACS-10759 was identified as a potent inhibitor of complex I of oxidative
phosphorylation. In isolated mitochondria or permeabilized cells, ATP
production or oxygen consumption was inhibited at single digit nM
concentrations in the presence of malate/glutamate, but not succinate.
More directly, IACS-10759 inhibited the conversion of NADH to NAD+ in an
immunoprecipitated complex I assay at low nM concentrations. Using
genetic and pharmacological approaches, the specific complex I subunit
inhibited by IACS-10759 has been identified and the mechanism of complex
I inhibition is being investigated. Importantly, IACS-10759 is orally
bioavailable with excellent physicochemical properties in preclinical
species and achieved significant in vivo efficacy with daily oral dosing
of 10-25 mg/kg. Specifically, there was a >50 day extension of median
survival in an orthotopic AML cell line xenograft and robust regression
in DLBCL and GBM xenograft models. In light of these results, as well as
its drug like profile IACS-10759 has entered IND enabling studies with
first-in-human studies targeted for third quarter of 2015.

