Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative drug sensitivity analysis of PI3K /mTOR pathway
inhibitors in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC)


Background: HNSCC is the sixth most common cancer worldwide. To date,
Cetuximab is the only approved targeted therapy for HNSCC treatment.
Thus,there is an immediate need to discover effective targets. Two
pharmacogenomic HTS studies, Cancer Genome Project (CGP) and Cancer Cell
Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) provide a large repository of drug sensitivity
data. The PI3K/mTOR pathway is one of the frequently activated signaling
cascades in HNSCC. However, it is unclear which class of PI3K/mTOR
inhibitors is most promising and which biomarkers may be used to predict
sensitivity. The rationale for this study is to identify novel biomarkers
to targets such as PI3K/mTOR pathway by data mining these public
databases. The potential biomarkers will be characterized in vitro in 68
HNSCC cell lines.Methods:The landscape of drug sensitivity profiles in 23
HNSCC cell lines (CGP) was analyzed by boxplot illustrations. Drugs that
induce growth inhibition at low doses (median10 M) were considered
effective. Chemotherapy drugs, drugs with missing values and unknown
targets were excluded from analyses. Hierarchical clustering of cell
lines was performed based on drug sensitivity using GOWER distance metric
and Ward's linkage after normalization. Clustering of 140 drugs based on
their sensitivity profiles was also done. In vitro, drug response to PI3K
pathway inhibitors in 28 HNSCC cell lines was assessed by ATP based cell
viability assay (CellTiter-Glo). Results: In the CGP datasets, we
identified a set of effective drugs with median IC75Background: HNSCC is
the sixth most common cancer worldwide. To date, Cetuximab is the only
approved targeted therapy for HNSCC treatment. Thus,there is an immediate
need to discover effective targets. Two pharmacogenomic HTS studies,
Cancer Genome Project (CGP) and Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE)
provide a large repository of drug sensitivity data. The PI3K/mTOR
pathway is one of the frequently activated signaling cascades in HNSCC.
However, it is unclear which class of PI3K/mTOR inhibitors is most
promising and which biomarkers may be used to predict sensitivity. The
rationale for this study is to identify novel biomarkers to targets such
as PI3K/mTOR pathway by data mining these public databases. The potential
biomarkers will be characterized in vitro in 68 HNSCC cell
lines.Methods:The landscape of drug sensitivity profiles in 23 HNSCC cell
lines (CGP) was analyzed by boxplot illustrations. Drugs that induce
growth inhibition at low doses (median10 M) were considered effective.
Chemotherapy drugs, drugs with missing values and unknown targets were
excluded from analyses. Hierarchical clustering of cell lines was
performed based on drug sensitivity using GOWER distance metric and
Ward's linkage after normalization. Clustering of 140 drugs based on
their sensitivity profiles was also done. In vitro, drug response to PI3K
pathway inhibitors in 28 HNSCC cell lines was assessed by ATP based cell
viability assay (CellTiter-Glo). Results: In the CGP datasets, we
identified a set of effective drugs with median IC75<10 M. These include
drugs targeting HDAC, HSP, BCL2 and CHK1/2, and PI3K/mTOR pathway. When
hierarchical clustering of drugs based on drug sensitivity was performed,
3 clusters were classified. Predictably, chemotherapy agents clustered
together. Selective drugs that were effective in a subset of cell lines
were also identified. To identify cell lines that were uniformly
sensitive to inhibitors targeting the PI3K/mTOR pathway, diverse classes
of inhibitors targeting PI3K pathway were selected and drug sensitivity
was analyzed across 28 HNSCC cell lines. Notably, all cell lines were
sensitive to the pan Class I PI3K inhibitor, BKM120 (IC75 Background:
HNSCC is the sixth most common cancer worldwide. To date, Cetuximab is
the only approved targeted therapy for HNSCC treatment. Thus,there is an
immediate need to discover effective targets. Two pharmacogenomic HTS
studies, Cancer Genome Project (CGP) and Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
(CCLE) provide a large repository of drug sensitivity data. The PI3K/mTOR
pathway is one of the frequently activated signaling cascades in HNSCC.
However, it is unclear which class of PI3K/mTOR inhibitors is most
promising and which biomarkers may be used to predict sensitivity. The
rationale for this study is to identify novel biomarkers to targets such
as PI3K/mTOR pathway by data mining these public databases. The potential
biomarkers will be characterized in vitro in 68 HNSCC cell
lines.Methods:The landscape of drug sensitivity profiles in 23 HNSCC cell
lines (CGP) was analyzed by boxplot illustrations. Drugs that induce
growth inhibition at low doses (median10 M) were considered effective.
Chemotherapy drugs, drugs with missing values and unknown targets were
excluded from analyses. Hierarchical clustering of cell lines was
performed based on drug sensitivity using GOWER distance metric and
Ward's linkage after normalization. Clustering of 140 drugs based on
their sensitivity profiles was also done. In vitro, drug response to PI3K
pathway inhibitors in 28 HNSCC cell lines was assessed by ATP based cell
viability assay (CellTiter-Glo). Results: In the CGP datasets, we
identified a set of effective drugs with median IC75<10 M. These include
drugs targeting HDAC, HSP, BCL2 and CHK1/2, and PI3K/mTOR pathway. When
hierarchical clustering of drugs based on drug sensitivity was performed,
3 clusters were classified. Predictably, chemotherapy agents clustered
together. Selective drugs that were effective in a subset of cell lines
were also identified. To identify cell lines that were uniformly
sensitive to inhibitors targeting the PI3K/mTOR pathway, diverse classes
of inhibitors targeting PI3K pathway were selected and drug sensitivity
was analyzed across 28 HNSCC cell lines. Notably, all cell lines were
sensitive to the pan Class I PI3K inhibitor, BKM120 (IC75 <Cmax: 1.68 M).
We identified seven lines that were resistant and twelve lines that were
sensitive to different PI3K/mTOR inhibitors. To identify novel biomarkers
of sensitivity, we will use Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA), exome
sequencing and gene expression data on cells that are uniformly sensitive
and resistant to PI3K pathway inhibition. Conclusion: HNSCC cell lines
were sensitive to a broad range of targeted therapies in in vitro screens
including several inhibitors of the PI3K/mTOR pathway. We independently
confirmed sensitivity to similar inhibitors and identified lines that
were universally sensitive and resistant to this class of drug for
biomarker development.

