Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic analysis of breast cancer in admixed populations of
central Colombia


Breast cancer (BC) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer among women
with an estimated 1,676,633 new cases resulting in 521,817 deaths each
year globally. Thus, it is no surprise BC research has become one of the
hottest cancer research areas in the past three decades. Past studies
examining and identifying BC risk loci have focused on three major
populations (European, African, and Asian). Past research has led to
greater understanding of the etiology (genetic and environmental) and
treatment of BC; resulting in a 30% decrease in mortality rate in wealthy
countries. However, when looking at BC incidence and mortality in low to
middle income nations similar gains are not seen; in fact, in these
countries mortality has increased in the past 20 years. This trend holds
true for the Hispanic community. While Hispanic women have a 27% lower
rate of BC than in non-Hispanic white women, Hispanic women are more
likely to be diagnosed with larger tumors and later stage cancer, leading
to 20% increase in mortality for Hispanic women compared to their
non-Hispanic white counterpart with similar diagnosis stage and age.
Differences in incidence and mortality have been attributed to
environmental and genetic factors. This case-control association study
aims to address a research disparity by examining the role of ethnicity
and genetics on development of BC risk in central Colombian Hispanic
populations. It provides one of the first assessments of known BC risk
factors in the South American Hispanic community. The study was conducted
in central Colombia using 600 breast cancer cases from COLUMBUS
initiative & 700 matched cancer-free controls from the CHIBCHA
consortium. Cases were genotyped using Affymetrix Axiom UK Biobank arrays
and controls were genotyped using both Affymetrix Axiom LAT and Axiom
Custom arrays followed by imputation using 1000 Genomes data. We analyzed
previously discovered BC loci and under independent analysis found 6
significant loci: rs11780156 (P = 0.005, OR: 1.34), rs2981582 (P = 0.007,
OR: 1.25), rs4784227 (P = 0.016, OR: 1.22), rs2981579 (P = 0.017, OR
1.21), rs1011970 (P = 0.0274, OR 1.20), rs1219648 (P = 0.042, OR 1.18)
and several loci showing borderline significant associations involving
the same risk allele. Interestingly, we identified additional novel BC
risk loci that were genome-wide significant and are undergoing
replication in populations from Central Mexico. In summary, we performed
an assessment of BC risk loci in central Colombian Hispanic population
and found significant overlap with BC risk loci previously identified in
European and East Asian populations as well as potentially novel loci
that are unique to Hispanic populations. These results are integral to
the establishment of personalized medicine programs and will form the
basis for future BC prevention and treatment program in Latin American
and US Hispanics.

