Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammatory and stem-like colorectal cell lines show differential
response to MEK-162 and neratinib in combination


Background: Improvement of colorectal cancer (CRC) treatment depends on
finding new effective agents and associated biomarkers that can predict
patient response to drugs. Recent cell culture experiments show that a
combination of MEK and pan ERBB inhibitors may be efficacious in treating
CRC (Sun et al 2014). The purpose of this study was to determine whether
a cell line's response to targeted agents would correlate with its
mutation profile and/or gene expression subtype.Methods: K-RAS mutation
status of 7 cell lines were identified and classified into stem-like or
inflammatory subtypes using gene expression data from the cancer cell
line encyclopedia and an algorithm described by Sadanandam et al. We
tested 5 stem-like cell lines (SW480, SW620, HCT116, C2BBE1, HS675T) and
2 inflammatory cell lines (NCI-H747, SW837) for response to inhibitors of
the RAS/RAF and PI3K pathways. MEK-162 and neratinib were tested as
single agents and in combination, using cell viability and clonogenic
assays.Results: Cell lines varied in response to the drugs when used as
single agents. All cell lines were resistant to the EGFR inhibitor
(Gefitinib) at concentrations 5 M. Two pan ERBB inhibitors (neratinib and
afatinib) showed IC50 values at or >4 M and 2 MEK inhibitors (Selumetinib
and MEK162) had IC50 values at or >1M. The inflammatory cell lines, SW837
and NCI-H747, had greater sensitivity to the MEK inhibitors (IC50 value
1M) while the KRAS mutant stem-like cell lines were relatively more
resistant (SW480, SW620) with IC50 values 4-5 M. Stem-like cell lines
with WT-KRAS (C2BBE1, HS675T) were even more resistant; IC50s were not
achieved at concentrations of 5 M. Similar results were obtained in
clonogenic growth assay.The MEK and pan ERBB inhibitor combinations were
more effective at decreasing cell viability and inducing apoptosis in
inflammatory cell lines than in stem-like cell lines. This combination
effectively inhibited 60-70% of cell viability in inflammatory cell lines
at a dose of 0.5 M and 0.062 M for neratinib and MEK-162 respectively.
The lethality of this combination was the same even if the doses were
reversed (0.5 M MEK-162 and 0.062 M neratinib). In contrast, we observed
that this combination was not nearly as effective against stem-like cell
lines irrespective of KRAS mutation status. Profiling of the
phosphorylation status of proteins in the RAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway
after exposure to the MEK-162 plus neratinib combination showed a
substantial inhibition of ERK phosphorylation in inflammatory cell lines
but not in 4 of the 5 stem-like cell lines.Conclusion: This study
demonstrates that colon cancer cell lines classified as the inflammatory
subtype are sensitive to the combination of MEK-162 plus neratinib at
concentrations at which cell lines of the stem-like subtype are
resistant.The PA DOH disclaims responsibility for analysis,
interpretations, or conclusions.

