Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of gene-expression biomarkers in urine pathology
specimens for the detection of bladder cancer


Bladder cancer recurrence screening is typically managed with a
combination of urine cytology and cystoscopy, each with its inherent
caveats. Cystoscopy is generally considered the gold standard for
diagnosing bladder cancer and can yield a valuable biopsy, but is too
invasive and expensive for routine screening and surveillance. Voided
urine cytology is inexpensive and readily available, but lacks the
desired level of sensitivity. Furthermore, up to 20% of urine cytology
specimens fall into one of two indeterminate categories that require
follow-up testing, typically in the form of an invasive cystoscopy
procedure. With the goal of developing a urine-based molecular test for
bladder cancer recurrence surveillance, we examined gene expression
biomarkers in urine cytopathology specimens. 90 patient urine samples
were analyzed: 45 high-grade urothelial carcinoma (HG-UC) and 45 benign
samples. All patient samples were submitted to the Johns Hopkins
Cytopathology Department for evaluation for bladder cancer via urine
cytology. The samples represent patients undergoing bladder cancer
recurrence screening and patients without a prior history of bladder
cancer presenting with hematuria. The urine sediments were stored in
liquid based cytology solution at 4C for a period of 7 - 10 days, during
which time the cytopathology diagnosis was determined from a portion of
the sample. Post-diagnosis, the pathology sample leftover was analyzed
for gene expression. RNA was extracted, amplified and microarray analysis
was performed and a panel of molecular biomarkers was identified.
Individual genes in this panel discriminate between HG-UC and benign in
this training set with an average ROC of 0.86 (p Bladder cancer
recurrence screening is typically managed with a combination of urine
cytology and cystoscopy, each with its inherent caveats. Cystoscopy is
generally considered the gold standard for diagnosing bladder cancer and
can yield a valuable biopsy, but is too invasive and expensive for
routine screening and surveillance. Voided urine cytology is inexpensive
and readily available, but lacks the desired level of sensitivity.
Furthermore, up to 20% of urine cytology specimens fall into one of two
indeterminate categories that require follow-up testing, typically in the
form of an invasive cystoscopy procedure. With the goal of developing a
urine-based molecular test for bladder cancer recurrence surveillance, we
examined gene expression biomarkers in urine cytopathology specimens. 90
patient urine samples were analyzed: 45 high-grade urothelial carcinoma
(HG-UC) and 45 benign samples. All patient samples were submitted to the
Johns Hopkins Cytopathology Department for evaluation for bladder cancer
via urine cytology. The samples represent patients undergoing bladder
cancer recurrence screening and patients without a prior history of
bladder cancer presenting with hematuria. The urine sediments were stored
in liquid based cytology solution at 4C for a period of 7 - 10 days,
during which time the cytopathology diagnosis was determined from a
portion of the sample. Post-diagnosis, the pathology sample leftover was
analyzed for gene expression. RNA was extracted, amplified and microarray
analysis was performed and a panel of molecular biomarkers was
identified. Individual genes in this panel discriminate between HG-UC and
benign in this training set with an average ROC of 0.86 (p <0.0001) while
a combined panel of 10 genes yields a ROC of 0.97 (p Bladder cancer
recurrence screening is typically managed with a combination of urine
cytology and cystoscopy, each with its inherent caveats. Cystoscopy is
generally considered the gold standard for diagnosing bladder cancer and
can yield a valuable biopsy, but is too invasive and expensive for
routine screening and surveillance. Voided urine cytology is inexpensive
and readily available, but lacks the desired level of sensitivity.
Furthermore, up to 20% of urine cytology specimens fall into one of two
indeterminate categories that require follow-up testing, typically in the
form of an invasive cystoscopy procedure. With the goal of developing a
urine-based molecular test for bladder cancer recurrence surveillance, we
examined gene expression biomarkers in urine cytopathology specimens. 90
patient urine samples were analyzed: 45 high-grade urothelial carcinoma
(HG-UC) and 45 benign samples. All patient samples were submitted to the
Johns Hopkins Cytopathology Department for evaluation for bladder cancer
via urine cytology. The samples represent patients undergoing bladder
cancer recurrence screening and patients without a prior history of
bladder cancer presenting with hematuria. The urine sediments were stored
in liquid based cytology solution at 4C for a period of 7 - 10 days,
during which time the cytopathology diagnosis was determined from a
portion of the sample. Post-diagnosis, the pathology sample leftover was
analyzed for gene expression. RNA was extracted, amplified and microarray
analysis was performed and a panel of molecular biomarkers was
identified. Individual genes in this panel discriminate between HG-UC and
benign in this training set with an average ROC of 0.86 (p <0.0001) while
a combined panel of 10 genes yields a ROC of 0.97 (p <0.0001).
Differential expression of some of the individual genes from the panel
was confirmed by qPCR. Additional evaluation of this gene panel in a
validation set is ongoing and results from this validation study will be
discussed.

