Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CB-839, a selective glutaminase inhibitor, synergizes with signal
transduction pathway inhibitors to enhance anti-tumor activity


Many tumor cells utilize the amino acid glutamine to meet the elevated
bioenergetic and biosynthetic demands of rapid cell growth. Glutamine is
utilized by the mitochondrial enzyme glutaminase, which converts
glutamine to glutamate. Glutamate is then used to fuel downstream
metabolic pathways such as the TCA cycle, redox balance and amino acid
synthesis. CB-839 is a novel and selective inhibitor of glutaminase that
impacts multiple metabolic pathways downstream of glutamate and has
anti-tumor activity in several preclinical models. In addition to its
effect on metabolism, CB-839 treatment decreased mTORC1 signaling in
triple negative breast cancer [Dennison et al. (2014) Keystone Tumor
Metabolism Conference Abstract #1027] and multiple myeloma cells
[MacKinnon et al. (2014) ASH Annual Meeting Abstract # 3429]. These
studies suggest that nutrient deprivation by CB-839 treatment can be
sensed by the mTORC1 pathway.This observation motivated an evaluation of
whether inhibitors of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling, the MAP kinase
pathway or the PI3 kinase/mTOR pathway could combine favorably with
CB-839 to inhibit proliferation. The pan receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor pazopanib, or the mTORC1 inhibitor everolimus synergized with
CB-839 to produce anti-proliferative effects in several renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) cell lines (CI range: 0.09-0.85 for pazopanib/CB-839 and
0.48-0.54 for everolimus/CB-839). The EGFR inhibitor erlotinib also
synergized with CB-839 to produce strong anti-proliferative effects in
several non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines (combination index
(CI) range: 0.39-0.75). CB-839 and the MEK inhibitor selumetinib showed
strong synergy in the KRAS mutant NSCLC cell line H2122 (CI = 0.46), but
weak synergy in the KRAS wild-type cell line H661 (CI = 0.9). These
antiproliferative effects were associated with diminished mTORC1
signaling measured in NSCLC cells treated with CB-839, erlotinib,
selumetinib or combinations of these agents. The in vitro synergistic
CB-839 combinations were also evalutated in an in vivo H2122 NSCLC
xenograft model where enhanced anti-tumor activity was observed when
CB-839 was dosed together with either erlotinib or selumetinib.CB-839 is
currently in Phase 1 clinical development for the treatment of solid and
hematological tumor types. This study is the first demonstration that
CB-839 can be used in combination with signaling pathway inhibitors to
increase the anti-tumor activity of these agents. These observations
provide a rationale for testing combinations of CB-839 with either
erlotinib or selumetinib in NSCLC patients and pazopanib or everolimus in
RCC patients.

