Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor and normal tissue localization of trastuzumab-modified with
a metal chelating polymer for auger electron radioimmunotherapy in
HER2-positive xenografts


PurposeWe have been investigating a potential radioimmunotherapeutic
(RIT) agent using the anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody trastuzumab to
address the issue of primary and acquired resistances in HER2-positive
Breast cancer (BC). Trastuzumab was conjugated to a metal chelating
polymer (MCP) with multiple DTPA units for labeling with the Auger
electron emitter Indium-111 (111In) [trastuzumab-MCP-111In]. We aim to
increase the amount of radioactivity delivered and enhance the
therapeutic effect towards trastuzumab sensitive and resistant tumors.
High specific activity (SA) (5.5 MBq/g) trastuzumab-Hy-MCP-111In was more
cytotoxic at killing HER2-positive BC cells sensitive and resistant than
low SA (0.37MBq/g) radioimmunoconjugates (RICs) in vitro. The current
study aimed to investigate the tumor localization properties of this new
RIT in mice with HER-2 positive BC xenografts.MethodsHydrazide MCP with
polyglutamide backbone, 20 or 30 DTPA units, and without or with PEG
chains [Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In] were site-specifically linked to
periodate-oxidized carbohydrates on the Fc domain of trastuzumab. Tumor
and normal tissue distribution were assessed in CD-1 athymic mice bearing
BT-474 (1106 HER2 receptors/cell) or trastuzumab resistant TrR1 (5105
HER2 receptors/cell) xenografts. Mice were injected intravenously with
trastuzumab-Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In (10g; 3-4 MBq/g), or
trastuzumab-Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In (1g; 3-5 MBq/g) without or with
non-labeled non specific anti-CD20 rituximab (9g). Controls consisted of
mice injected with MCPs only and
trastuzumab-NH-Bn-DTPA-111In.ResultsTrastuzumab-Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In
exhibited a HER2-mediated uptake in BT-474 tumors. Both RICs (10g) had a
higher tumor uptake (0.80.4 and 1.30.3%ID/g) than the non-targeted
Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In (0.20.04 and 0.30.1%ID/g) (p = 0.0104; pPurposeWe have
been investigating a potential radioimmunotherapeutic (RIT) agent using
the anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody trastuzumab to address the issue of
primary and acquired resistances in HER2-positive Breast cancer (BC).
Trastuzumab was conjugated to a metal chelating polymer (MCP) with
multiple DTPA units for labeling with the Auger electron emitter
Indium-111 (111In) [trastuzumab-MCP-111In]. We aim to increase the amount
of radioactivity delivered and enhance the therapeutic effect towards
trastuzumab sensitive and resistant tumors. High specific activity (SA)
(5.5 MBq/g) trastuzumab-Hy-MCP-111In was more cytotoxic at killing
HER2-positive BC cells sensitive and resistant than low SA (0.37MBq/g)
radioimmunoconjugates (RICs) in vitro. The current study aimed to
investigate the tumor localization properties of this new RIT in mice
with HER-2 positive BC xenografts.MethodsHydrazide MCP with polyglutamide
backbone, 20 or 30 DTPA units, and without or with PEG chains
[Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In] were site-specifically linked to periodate-oxidized
carbohydrates on the Fc domain of trastuzumab. Tumor and normal tissue
distribution were assessed in CD-1 athymic mice bearing BT-474 (1106 HER2
receptors/cell) or trastuzumab resistant TrR1 (5105 HER2 receptors/cell)
xenografts. Mice were injected intravenously with
trastuzumab-Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In (10g; 3-4 MBq/g), or
trastuzumab-Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In (1g; 3-5 MBq/g) without or with
non-labeled non specific anti-CD20 rituximab (9g). Controls consisted of
mice injected with MCPs only and
trastuzumab-NH-Bn-DTPA-111In.ResultsTrastuzumab-Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In
exhibited a HER2-mediated uptake in BT-474 tumors. Both RICs (10g) had a
higher tumor uptake (0.80.4 and 1.30.3%ID/g) than the non-targeted
Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In (0.20.04 and 0.30.1%ID/g) (p = 0.0104; p<0.0001).
Tumor uptake was also HER2-density dependent with about a 3-fold decrease
(0.40.1%ID/g) in TrR1-bearing mice for trastuzumab-Hy-PEG-MCP-111In.
Kidneys were found to be the major normal organ accumulation in both
formulations. Nevertheless, pegylation of the MCP caused a 4-fold
decrease in kidneys uptake (6.92.5 to 1.60.1% ID/g; p = 0.0018). At low
mass (1g) and high SA, addition of non-labeled rituximab improved the
tumor uptake of trastumab-Hy-MCP-111In by 2 fold (0.30.1 to 0.60.1%ID/g),
but no change in tumor uptake was seen for trastuzumab-Hy-PEG-MCP-111In.
Nonetheless, BT-474 tumor uptake of trastuzumab-Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In was
lower than the one obtained with trastuzumab-NH-Bn-DTPA-111In
(13.33.4%ID/g).ConclusionOur results suggest that
trastuzumab-Hy-(PEG)-MCP-111In could target HER2-positive xenografts
sensitive and resistant to trastuzumab. Further modifications on the MCP
are needed to improve the tumor uptake for Auger electron
radioimmunotherapy.

