Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RANK expression by osteosarcoma cells increases lung metastasis in
Nude mouse while has no effect in immune-competent mouse


AbstractBackground: Osteosarcoma, the most frequent malignant primary
bone tumor, is characterized by an osteoid tumor tissue formation
associated to a tumor-induced osteolysis. Lung metastasis occurs in some
osteosarcomas with dramatic consequence for patient lifespan. Expression
of RANK has been reported in some osteosarcoma cells and the question of
the potential repercussion on tumor growth, tumor-induced osteolysis and
lung metastasis was raised.Methods: Human HOS, human MG63 and mouse MOS-J
osteosarcoma cell-lines were transfected to stably over-express RANK and
injected in para-tibia muscle of Nude mice and syngeneic C57BL/6 mice for
MOS-J cells. Tumor growth was follow and associated osteolysis analyzed
by micro-CT and histology comparatively to injections of native cells.
Lung metastases were numbered in each group.Results: In Nude mouse RANK
over-expression, whatever the cell-line considered (human or mouse),
induces a significant increase of the number of lung metastasis while the
tumor growth and the induced osteolysis are not affected. Injections of a
RANKL blocking antibody reverse the impact of RANK over-expression on
lung metastasis. In the C57BL/6, RANK over-expression has no impact on
the lung metastasis and tumor-induced osteolysis. The tumor growth was
slightly reduced.Conclusions: Reported data evidence that RANK expression
by osteosarcoma cells has no significant effect on the tumor growth and
tumor-induced osteolysis but in immune-deficient Nude mouse induces an
important increase of the lung metastases dependently of RANKL
stimulation.

