Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In silico screening for novel Wnt/-catenin pathway target and
regulator genes in human hepatocellular carcinoma


IntroductionHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common type of
liver cancer and the third leading cause of all cancer deaths worldwide.
A fraction of HCC has increased activity of Wnt/-catenin (Wnt) pathway,
which reportedly enhances malignant phenotypes like
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in various kinds of cancer.
Identification of Wnt pathway target and regulator genes gives us better
understanding of molecular biological behavior of HCC. In this study, we
performed in silico screening for a novel Wnt pathway target and
regulator genes in human HCC using public databases.MethodFirst, we
obtained TCGA data sets of human HCC including mRNA expression (268
samples) and mutational status (198 samples) from the Broad GDAC Firehose
web site (gdac.broadinstitute.org/). Next, for -catenin transcriptional
target genes prepared by literature curation, we performed EEM analysis
(Niida et al. 2009) on the HCC expression data set to obtain Wnt pathway
target genes in HCC. Assuming the sum of mRNA expression of the Wnt
pathway target genes as Wnt pathway activity, we then measured
association between the pathway alteration and the activity by linear
multiple regression analysis ([Wnt pathway activity] = a0 + a1[CTNNB1
mutation] + a2[AXIN1 mutation] + a3[AXIN2 mutation]+a4[APC mutation]+
a5[CTNNB1 mRNA expression] : a0a5; partial regression coefficient). By
focusing on known epithelial markers (CDH1, KRT18, MUC1, OCLN, TJP1) and
mesenchymal markers (ACTA2, CDH2, FN1, VIM, VTN), we also examined
association between the Wnt pathway activity and EMT-manifesting
genotype. Finally, we performed multiple regression analysis to search
for novel Wnt pathway regulator genes ([Wnt pathway activity] = b0 +
b1[CTNNB1 mutation] + b2[APC mutation]+ b3[CTNNB1 mRNA expression] +
b4[mRNA of a regulator] : b0b4; partial regression
coefficient).Result(1)EEM identified AASS, ASPSCR1, BMP4, C6orf97, DUT,
GGH, GNPAT, GREB1, HGD, IKBKAP, ITPR2, LAMA3, LGR5, NEK3, RELN, RHBG,
RHOBTB1, SLC13A3, SMYD2, TBX3, TDGF1, TRIB2, VSNL1, ZBTB38 as the Wnt
pathway target genes in HCC.(2)Multiple regression analysis revealed the
Wnt pathway activity had strong correlations with CTNNB1 mutation
(p-value IntroductionHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common
type of liver cancer and the third leading cause of all cancer deaths
worldwide. A fraction of HCC has increased activity of Wnt/-catenin (Wnt)
pathway, which reportedly enhances malignant phenotypes like
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in various kinds of cancer.
Identification of Wnt pathway target and regulator genes gives us better
understanding of molecular biological behavior of HCC. In this study, we
performed in silico screening for a novel Wnt pathway target and
regulator genes in human HCC using public databases.MethodFirst, we
obtained TCGA data sets of human HCC including mRNA expression (268
samples) and mutational status (198 samples) from the Broad GDAC Firehose
web site (gdac.broadinstitute.org/). Next, for -catenin transcriptional
target genes prepared by literature curation, we performed EEM analysis
(Niida et al. 2009) on the HCC expression data set to obtain Wnt pathway
target genes in HCC. Assuming the sum of mRNA expression of the Wnt
pathway target genes as Wnt pathway activity, we then measured
association between the pathway alteration and the activity by linear
multiple regression analysis ([Wnt pathway activity] = a0 + a1[CTNNB1
mutation] + a2[AXIN1 mutation] + a3[AXIN2 mutation]+a4[APC mutation]+
a5[CTNNB1 mRNA expression] : a0a5; partial regression coefficient). By
focusing on known epithelial markers (CDH1, KRT18, MUC1, OCLN, TJP1) and
mesenchymal markers (ACTA2, CDH2, FN1, VIM, VTN), we also examined
association between the Wnt pathway activity and EMT-manifesting
genotype. Finally, we performed multiple regression analysis to search
for novel Wnt pathway regulator genes ([Wnt pathway activity] = b0 +
b1[CTNNB1 mutation] + b2[APC mutation]+ b3[CTNNB1 mRNA expression] +
b4[mRNA of a regulator] : b0b4; partial regression
coefficient).Result(1)EEM identified AASS, ASPSCR1, BMP4, C6orf97, DUT,
GGH, GNPAT, GREB1, HGD, IKBKAP, ITPR2, LAMA3, LGR5, NEK3, RELN, RHBG,
RHOBTB1, SLC13A3, SMYD2, TBX3, TDGF1, TRIB2, VSNL1, ZBTB38 as the Wnt
pathway target genes in HCC.(2)Multiple regression analysis revealed the
Wnt pathway activity had strong correlations with CTNNB1 mutation
(p-value < 2.0010-16), APC mutation (p-value = 2.7310-3), and CTNNB1
expression (p-value = 2.1910-07)(3)The Wnt pathway activity had a strong
correlation with the EMT genotype (p-value = 3.5810-4).(4)We identified
100 statistically significant Wnt pathway regulator candidates (q-values
IntroductionHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common type of
liver cancer and the third leading cause of all cancer deaths worldwide.
A fraction of HCC has increased activity of Wnt/-catenin (Wnt) pathway,
which reportedly enhances malignant phenotypes like
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in various kinds of cancer.
Identification of Wnt pathway target and regulator genes gives us better
understanding of molecular biological behavior of HCC. In this study, we
performed in silico screening for a novel Wnt pathway target and
regulator genes in human HCC using public databases.MethodFirst, we
obtained TCGA data sets of human HCC including mRNA expression (268
samples) and mutational status (198 samples) from the Broad GDAC Firehose
web site (gdac.broadinstitute.org/). Next, for -catenin transcriptional
target genes prepared by literature curation, we performed EEM analysis
(Niida et al. 2009) on the HCC expression data set to obtain Wnt pathway
target genes in HCC. Assuming the sum of mRNA expression of the Wnt
pathway target genes as Wnt pathway activity, we then measured
association between the pathway alteration and the activity by linear
multiple regression analysis ([Wnt pathway activity] = a0 + a1[CTNNB1
mutation] + a2[AXIN1 mutation] + a3[AXIN2 mutation]+a4[APC mutation]+
a5[CTNNB1 mRNA expression] : a0a5; partial regression coefficient). By
focusing on known epithelial markers (CDH1, KRT18, MUC1, OCLN, TJP1) and
mesenchymal markers (ACTA2, CDH2, FN1, VIM, VTN), we also examined
association between the Wnt pathway activity and EMT-manifesting
genotype. Finally, we performed multiple regression analysis to search
for novel Wnt pathway regulator genes ([Wnt pathway activity] = b0 +
b1[CTNNB1 mutation] + b2[APC mutation]+ b3[CTNNB1 mRNA expression] +
b4[mRNA of a regulator] : b0b4; partial regression
coefficient).Result(1)EEM identified AASS, ASPSCR1, BMP4, C6orf97, DUT,
GGH, GNPAT, GREB1, HGD, IKBKAP, ITPR2, LAMA3, LGR5, NEK3, RELN, RHBG,
RHOBTB1, SLC13A3, SMYD2, TBX3, TDGF1, TRIB2, VSNL1, ZBTB38 as the Wnt
pathway target genes in HCC.(2)Multiple regression analysis revealed the
Wnt pathway activity had strong correlations with CTNNB1 mutation
(p-value < 2.0010-16), APC mutation (p-value = 2.7310-3), and CTNNB1
expression (p-value = 2.1910-07)(3)The Wnt pathway activity had a strong
correlation with the EMT genotype (p-value = 3.5810-4).(4)We identified
100 statistically significant Wnt pathway regulator candidates (q-values
< 1.0010-10).ConclusionOur in silico screening identified novel Wnt
pathway target genes in HCC, whose expression profiles were correlated
with Wnt pathway alterations and the EMT-manifesting gene signature. We
also have predicted Wnt pathway regulator genes, and are now conducting
in vitro validation.

