Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor as potential therapeutic option for
vulvar cancer


Introduction: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important
process during cancer progression by which epithelial cells acquire
mesenchymal phenotype and show reduced intercellular adhesion as well as
increased motility. Interfering PI3K/AKT pathway has been considered an
anti-EMT target therapy, due to its effect in restoration of E-cadherin
function and inhibition of transcription factors that repress the
E-cadherin promoter, such as Snail, Slug, and Twist. Aim: Investigate the
antitumor effects of treatment with PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor, NVP-BEZ235,
in biological behavior of lymph node metastatic vulva cancer cell line
(SW962), as a potential anti-EMT agent in vulvar tumor. Methods: we
performed in vitro assays and evaluated the expression of proteins
related to PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway as well as Vimentin and E-cadherin,
relevant EMT biomarkers. All results were presented as mean standard
deviation and were compared using the unpaired t test or ANOVA followed
by the Bonferroni post test using Graph Pad InStat v3.02 software. P
values Introduction: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an
important process during cancer progression by which epithelial cells
acquire mesenchymal phenotype and show reduced intercellular adhesion as
well as increased motility. Interfering PI3K/AKT pathway has been
considered an anti-EMT target therapy, due to its effect in restoration
of E-cadherin function and inhibition of transcription factors that
repress the E-cadherin promoter, such as Snail, Slug, and Twist. Aim:
Investigate the antitumor effects of treatment with PI3K/mTOR dual
inhibitor, NVP-BEZ235, in biological behavior of lymph node metastatic
vulva cancer cell line (SW962), as a potential anti-EMT agent in vulvar
tumor. Methods: we performed in vitro assays and evaluated the expression
of proteins related to PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway as well as Vimentin and
E-cadherin, relevant EMT biomarkers. All results were presented as mean
standard deviation and were compared using the unpaired t test or ANOVA
followed by the Bonferroni post test using Graph Pad InStat v3.02
software. P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Results: Treatment with NVP-BEZ235 resulted in a significant decrease in
cell migration (pIntroduction: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
is an important process during cancer progression by which epithelial
cells acquire mesenchymal phenotype and show reduced intercellular
adhesion as well as increased motility. Interfering PI3K/AKT pathway has
been considered an anti-EMT target therapy, due to its effect in
restoration of E-cadherin function and inhibition of transcription
factors that repress the E-cadherin promoter, such as Snail, Slug, and
Twist. Aim: Investigate the antitumor effects of treatment with PI3K/mTOR
dual inhibitor, NVP-BEZ235, in biological behavior of lymph node
metastatic vulva cancer cell line (SW962), as a potential anti-EMT agent
in vulvar tumor. Methods: we performed in vitro assays and evaluated the
expression of proteins related to PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway as well as
Vimentin and E-cadherin, relevant EMT biomarkers. All results were
presented as mean standard deviation and were compared using the unpaired
t test or ANOVA followed by the Bonferroni post test using Graph Pad
InStat v3.02 software. P values < 0.05 were considered statistically
significant. Results: Treatment with NVP-BEZ235 resulted in a significant
decrease in cell migration (p< 0.001), proliferation (pIntroduction:
Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important process during
cancer progression by which epithelial cells acquire mesenchymal
phenotype and show reduced intercellular adhesion as well as increased
motility. Interfering PI3K/AKT pathway has been considered an anti-EMT
target therapy, due to its effect in restoration of E-cadherin function
and inhibition of transcription factors that repress the E-cadherin
promoter, such as Snail, Slug, and Twist. Aim: Investigate the antitumor
effects of treatment with PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor, NVP-BEZ235, in
biological behavior of lymph node metastatic vulva cancer cell line
(SW962), as a potential anti-EMT agent in vulvar tumor. Methods: we
performed in vitro assays and evaluated the expression of proteins
related to PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway as well as Vimentin and E-cadherin,
relevant EMT biomarkers. All results were presented as mean standard
deviation and were compared using the unpaired t test or ANOVA followed
by the Bonferroni post test using Graph Pad InStat v3.02 software. P
values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Results:
Treatment with NVP-BEZ235 resulted in a significant decrease in cell
migration (p< 0.001), proliferation (p< 0.01) and invasion
(pIntroduction: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an
important process during cancer progression by which epithelial cells
acquire mesenchymal phenotype and show reduced intercellular adhesion as
well as increased motility. Interfering PI3K/AKT pathway has been
considered an anti-EMT target therapy, due to its effect in restoration
of E-cadherin function and inhibition of transcription factors that
repress the E-cadherin promoter, such as Snail, Slug, and Twist. Aim:
Investigate the antitumor effects of treatment with PI3K/mTOR dual
inhibitor, NVP-BEZ235, in biological behavior of lymph node metastatic
vulva cancer cell line (SW962), as a potential anti-EMT agent in vulvar
tumor. Methods: we performed in vitro assays and evaluated the expression
of proteins related to PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway as well as Vimentin and
E-cadherin, relevant EMT biomarkers. All results were presented as mean
standard deviation and were compared using the unpaired t test or ANOVA
followed by the Bonferroni post test using Graph Pad InStat v3.02
software. P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Results: Treatment with NVP-BEZ235 resulted in a significant decrease in
cell migration (p< 0.001), proliferation (p< 0.01) and invasion (p<0.05).
The phosphorylation of AKT, S6K, 4E-BP1 and p70S6 was markedly reduced by
NVP-BEZ235 treatment. In contrast, the levels of p-GSK3 (Ser9) were
increased. Our qualitative results demonstrated that the localization
pattern of E-cadherin and Vimentin protein was similar between control
and treatment groups. We observed Vimentin protein only in isolated cells
and, E-cadherin protein was found exclusively in cell clusters,
demonstrating EMT-like events in SW962 cells. The expression of
E-cadherin in SW962 cells treated was slightly increased and the levels
of Vimentin was reduced in these cells. Conclusion: The present study
suggests that NVP-BEZ235 is an effective inhibitor of PI3K/mTOR pathway,
resulting in the decrease of Vimentin expression, an important EMT
marker, as well as of other essential tumor events, such as
proliferation, migration and invasion of vulva cancer. Taken together,
these findings not only provide a novel insight into the actions of
NVP-BEZ235 as inhibitor of EMT process in cancer progression, but also
highlight a novel potential therapeutic option for the treatment of
aggressive tumors such as vulvar carcinoma.

