Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening and identification of key surface markers of mesenchymal
stem cell osteogenic differentiation and osteosarcoma development


Introduction: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary malignant
tumor of bone in children and young adults. Knowledge about its cell of
origin is limited, making new treatments difficult to develop. Our aim is
to screen and identify the key surface markers of mesenchymal stem cell
(MSC) to osteogenic differentiation and OS malignant
transformation.Methods: A list of differentially expressed genes with a
statistically significant p-value Introduction: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the
most common primary malignant tumor of bone in children and young adults.
Knowledge about its cell of origin is limited, making new treatments
difficult to develop. Our aim is to screen and identify the key surface
markers of mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) to osteogenic differentiation and
OS malignant transformation.Methods: A list of differentially expressed
genes with a statistically significant p-value <0.05 was obtained by
microarray analysis from MSCs and osteoblasts (OB). MSCs were
differentiated into osteoblasts, adipocytes and chondrocytes and
confirmed by alizarin red staining, oil red O staining and collagen II
immunohistchemistry, respectively. Western blots were then performed to
identify the expression of selected surface markers during the MSC
differentiation and compared to those of OS cells.Results: Nine genes
were obtained with a p-value Introduction: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most
common primary malignant tumor of bone in children and young adults.
Knowledge about its cell of origin is limited, making new treatments
difficult to develop. Our aim is to screen and identify the key surface
markers of mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) to osteogenic differentiation and
OS malignant transformation.Methods: A list of differentially expressed
genes with a statistically significant p-value <0.05 was obtained by
microarray analysis from MSCs and osteoblasts (OB). MSCs were
differentiated into osteoblasts, adipocytes and chondrocytes and
confirmed by alizarin red staining, oil red O staining and collagen II
immunohistchemistry, respectively. Western blots were then performed to
identify the expression of selected surface markers during the MSC
differentiation and compared to those of OS cells.Results: Nine genes
were obtained with a p-value <0.02, which are differentially expressed
between MSC and OB. Four of them were correlated with cell adhesion and
metastasis. The expression profile of CD49b was distinct, where it was
down regulated only during MSC osteogenic differentiation and over
expressed in OS cell lines.Conclusions: Cell adhesion may have an
important role during MSC differentiation. CD49b is a unique marker
during MSC osteogenic differentiation and may play a significant role in
osteoasarcoma malignant transformation. In the future we plan to
determine the function and mechanism of CD49b during MSCs osteogenic
differentiation and osteosarcoma malignant transformation in vitro. We
will define the clinical significance of CD49b in osteosarcoma through
immunohistochemistry of patient samples and functional analyses.

