Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sulforaphane as a chemopreventive agent against oral carcinogenesis


Introduction: Epidemiologic studies report an association between reduced
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) risk and a diet rich in the
Brassica family of cruciferous vegetables. Broccoli extract induces
cytoprotective enzymes that mitigate the effects of environmental
carcinogens. The phytochemical sulforaphane (SF) mediates this inducer
activity via induction of the NRF2 transcription factor and its target
genes. Nrf2/ mice are more susceptible than WT mice to oral cancer
induced by the carcinogen 4NQO, while Keap1/ mice are less susceptible.
We performed pilot preclinical and clinical studies to evaluate the
chemopreventive potential of SF against oral carcinogenesis. Methods:
First, we evaluated a normal mucosal epithelial (Het-1A) and 2 HPV(-)
HNSCC cell lines (UMSCC-22A and UMSCC-1) by immunoblotting for dose and
time-dependent induction of NRF2 expression, after varying SF doses and
exposure times. Second, we performed qPCR for NRF2 target genes following
SF treatment (10 mol for 6 hrs) to determine if induced NRF2 signaling
was functional in these cell lines. Third, we evaluated chemoprevention
by SF in the 4NQO model of oral carcinogenesis: 34 WT C57BL/6 mice were
treated with 100 g/ml 4NQO in ad lib drinking water for 16 wks, then
randomized to vehicle vs. SF (6 mol thrice weekly) for 8 wks. Fourth, 10
healthy human volunteers consumed SF-rich broccoli sprout extract (BSE;
100 mol SF/day) for 3 days (NCT02023931). After a washout, participants
were treated for 3 days with topical exposure to the same regimen
(swish/spit). We analyzed urine SF metabolites by mass spectroscopy to
assess bioavailability, and serial oral mucosa scrapings by PCR to assess
NRF2 target gene induction. Results: Basal levels of NRF2 were nearly
undetectable, while SF led to dose and time-dependent upregulation of
NRF2 expression in all 3 cell lines. SF treatment significantly induced
NQO1 and GCLC mRNA in all 3 models. Compared to vehicle, SF reduced both
the average incidence of tongue tumors/mouse (1.76 vs. 0.76;
pIntroduction: Epidemiologic studies report an association between
reduced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) risk and a diet
rich in the Brassica family of cruciferous vegetables. Broccoli extract
induces cytoprotective enzymes that mitigate the effects of environmental
carcinogens. The phytochemical sulforaphane (SF) mediates this inducer
activity via induction of the NRF2 transcription factor and its target
genes. Nrf2/ mice are more susceptible than WT mice to oral cancer
induced by the carcinogen 4NQO, while Keap1/ mice are less susceptible.
We performed pilot preclinical and clinical studies to evaluate the
chemopreventive potential of SF against oral carcinogenesis. Methods:
First, we evaluated a normal mucosal epithelial (Het-1A) and 2 HPV(-)
HNSCC cell lines (UMSCC-22A and UMSCC-1) by immunoblotting for dose and
time-dependent induction of NRF2 expression, after varying SF doses and
exposure times. Second, we performed qPCR for NRF2 target genes following
SF treatment (10 mol for 6 hrs) to determine if induced NRF2 signaling
was functional in these cell lines. Third, we evaluated chemoprevention
by SF in the 4NQO model of oral carcinogenesis: 34 WT C57BL/6 mice were
treated with 100 g/ml 4NQO in ad lib drinking water for 16 wks, then
randomized to vehicle vs. SF (6 mol thrice weekly) for 8 wks. Fourth, 10
healthy human volunteers consumed SF-rich broccoli sprout extract (BSE;
100 mol SF/day) for 3 days (NCT02023931). After a washout, participants
were treated for 3 days with topical exposure to the same regimen
(swish/spit). We analyzed urine SF metabolites by mass spectroscopy to
assess bioavailability, and serial oral mucosa scrapings by PCR to assess
NRF2 target gene induction. Results: Basal levels of NRF2 were nearly
undetectable, while SF led to dose and time-dependent upregulation of
NRF2 expression in all 3 cell lines. SF treatment significantly induced
NQO1 and GCLC mRNA in all 3 models. Compared to vehicle, SF reduced both
the average incidence of tongue tumors/mouse (1.76 vs. 0.76; p<0.01) and
the average tumor volume/mouse (8.97 vs. 2.66 mm3; pIntroduction:
Epidemiologic studies report an association between reduced head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) risk and a diet rich in the Brassica
family of cruciferous vegetables. Broccoli extract induces cytoprotective
enzymes that mitigate the effects of environmental carcinogens. The
phytochemical sulforaphane (SF) mediates this inducer activity via
induction of the NRF2 transcription factor and its target genes. Nrf2/
mice are more susceptible than WT mice to oral cancer induced by the
carcinogen 4NQO, while Keap1/ mice are less susceptible. We performed
pilot preclinical and clinical studies to evaluate the chemopreventive
potential of SF against oral carcinogenesis. Methods: First, we evaluated
a normal mucosal epithelial (Het-1A) and 2 HPV(-) HNSCC cell lines
(UMSCC-22A and UMSCC-1) by immunoblotting for dose and time-dependent
induction of NRF2 expression, after varying SF doses and exposure times.
Second, we performed qPCR for NRF2 target genes following SF treatment
(10 mol for 6 hrs) to determine if induced NRF2 signaling was functional
in these cell lines. Third, we evaluated chemoprevention by SF in the
4NQO model of oral carcinogenesis: 34 WT C57BL/6 mice were treated with
100 g/ml 4NQO in ad lib drinking water for 16 wks, then randomized to
vehicle vs. SF (6 mol thrice weekly) for 8 wks. Fourth, 10 healthy human
volunteers consumed SF-rich broccoli sprout extract (BSE; 100 mol SF/day)
for 3 days (NCT02023931). After a washout, participants were treated for
3 days with topical exposure to the same regimen (swish/spit). We
analyzed urine SF metabolites by mass spectroscopy to assess
bioavailability, and serial oral mucosa scrapings by PCR to assess NRF2
target gene induction. Results: Basal levels of NRF2 were nearly
undetectable, while SF led to dose and time-dependent upregulation of
NRF2 expression in all 3 cell lines. SF treatment significantly induced
NQO1 and GCLC mRNA in all 3 models. Compared to vehicle, SF reduced both
the average incidence of tongue tumors/mouse (1.76 vs. 0.76; p<0.01) and
the average tumor volume/mouse (8.97 vs. 2.66 mm3; p<0.01). Seven of 10
subjects showed upregulation of NQO1 mRNA in oral mucosa during oral BSE
treatment, compared to baseline. Oral, but not topical, administration of
SF-rich BSE resulted in systemic exposure to SF as measured by urinary
metabolites. No treatment-related toxicities were observed. Conclusion:
SF induced functional NRF2 expression in normal mucosal and HNSCC cell
lines, and was protective against oral chemical carcinogenesis in the
4NQO model. Brief oral-systemic exposure to SF-rich BSE was
well-tolerated and bioactive in the oral mucosa of healthy human
volunteers. These studies provide preliminary evidence that SF may be
chemopreventive against HNSCC. Prospective clinical investigation in a
high risk population is warranted, including serial assessment of mucosal
NRF2 target gene induction as a candidate mechanistic biomarker.

