Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mechanical microenvironment and 1/FAK signaling control
fibroblast accumulation in lung cancer


There is growing interest in targeting the abnormal accumulation of
fibroblasts in solid tumors. The current paradigm assumes that the
abundance of tumor associated fibroblasts (TAFs) is largely driven by
soluble growth factors as in generic repair responses irrespective of the
tumor type or subtype. We recently challenged this assumption in cultured
TAFs from two major subtupes of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC):
adenocarcinoma (ADC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SQC). We reported that
the increased population of SQC-TAFs is largely driven by matrix
stiffening rather than by soluble growth factors. In contrast, ADC-TAFs
were poorly responsive to exogenous mechanical cues. We also reported
that the differential mechanoresponses in SQC- and ADC-TAFs were
associated with both larger mechanosensing through FAK and 1 integrin
expression in the former TAFs. To get more insights into the latter
mechanoregulatory circuit, we forced either 1 integrin activation or FAK
expression in fibroblasts cultured in soft (normal-like) gels. Both
conditions were sufficient to increase fibroblast population to values
comparable to those found in stiff (tumor-like) gels. These data reveal
that an abnormally high intrinsic mechanosensing through 1 integrins and
FAK can bypass the inhibitory (protective) role of an extrinsic soft
microenvironment. Moreover, these results suggest that inhibiting either
1 integrin or FAK signaling may be a suitable approach to target
tumor-supporting TAFs in SQC.

