Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regorafenib inhibits colorectal tumor growth through PUMA-mediated
apoptosis


Regorafenib, a multi-kinase inhibitor targeting the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK
pathway, has recently been approved for the treatment of metastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the mechanisms of action of regorafenib
in CRC cells have been unclear. We investigated how regorafenib
suppresses CRC cell growth and potentiates effects of other
chemotherapeutic drugs. We found that regorafenib treatment induces PUMA
in CRC cells irrespective of p53 status through the NF-B pathway
following ERK inhibition and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)
activation. Upregulation of PUMA is correlated with apoptosis induction
in different CRC cell lines. PUMA is necessary for regorafenib-induced
apoptosis in CRC cells. Chemosensitization by regorafenib is mediated by
enhanced PUMA induction through different pathways. Furthermore,
deficiency in PUMA abrogates the in vivo antitumor, antiangiogenic and
chemosensitization effects of regorafenib. Our results demonstrate a key
role of PUMA in mediating the anticancer effects of regorafenib in CRC
cells. They suggest that PUMA induction can be used as an indicator of
regorafenib sensitivity, and also provide a rationale for manipulating
the apoptotic machinery to improve the therapeutic efficacy of
regorafenib and other targeted drugs.

