Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target validation and structural optimization of selective small
molecule survivin inhibitors as potential anti-cancer agents


The anti-apoptotic protein survivin is highly expressed in most human
cancer cells, but has very low expression in normal differentiated cells.
Thus survivin is widely considered as an attractive cancer drug target.
Herein we report the in vitro and in vivo study on a series of novel
survivin inhibitors modified from our recently identified hit compound
UC-112. NCI 60-cell line screening assay showed that three new analogs
with oxyquinoline scaffold had GI50 values within the nanomolar range
(513 nM, 646 nM and 891 nM). These new compounds can overcome the P-gp
mediated multidrug-resistance in cancer cell lines. Western blot analyses
demonstrated the high selectivity for survivin inhibition among other
members in the inhibitor of apoptosis protein family. Mechanistic studies
such as isothermal calorimetry measurements, survivin protein pull-down
assay and fluorescence polarization assay confirm that these novel
compounds indeed target survivin and inhibit its function. The most
active compound showed excellent aqueous solubility of 148.7 M (PBS
pH7.4), reasonable metabolic stability (half-life) of 51 minutes as
tested in human liver microsomes, and no significant inhibitions to major
CYP enzymes except one of CYPs. Rat pharmacokinetic studies indicated
good pharmacokinetic profiles for this novel scaffold. When tested in an
A375 human melanoma xenograft model, this compound effectively suppressed
tumor growth and strongly induced cancer cell apoptosis in tumor tissues.
Overall, our study has demonstrated that these cell-permeable small
molecular survivin inhibitors possessing a novel scaffold could be
developed as potent anti-tumor therapeutic agents.

