Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Body mass, weight, and body size and uterine leiomyoma in the
Korea Nurses Health Study


Background: Body mass and body size may influence uterine leiomyoma
development in Asian populations.Methods: We examined the associations of
body mass index, weight change, and childhood, adolescent or current body
size with history of uterine leiomyoma in the Korea Nurses Health Study.
History of uterine leiomyoma and anthropometric factors were assessed
through self-administered questionnaires. We included only women who had
experienced pregnancies to avoid detection bias. As a result, a total of
5670 women were included and 560 women reported that they had uterine
leiomyoma. The median age of women was 38 years. We calculated odds
ratios(OR)s and 95% confidence interval (95% CI)s adjusted for potential
risk factors for uterine leiomyoma.Results: Current body mass index was
associated with higher odds of having uterine leiomyomas; multivariate OR
(95% CI) was 1.52(1.03-2.25; P for trend = 0.003) comparing 27.5 with
18.5-23 kg/m2. Body size in adulthood was associated with increased odds
of having uterine leiomyomas (P for trend = 0.002), whereas childhood or
adolescent body size was not. Also, women with greater change in body
weight since the first year of college tended to have higher odds of
having uterine leiomyomas, compared to those whose weight had been
stable.Conclusion: We found that body mass and weight gain in adulthood
were associated with increased odds of having uterine leiomyoma in Korean
women, but body mass in early life was not.

