Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-155-5p expression is associated with response to neoadjuvant
paclitaxel treatment of locally advanced breast cancer


IntroductionResistance to chemotherapy remains a prominent obstacle to
cure in cancer. We have previously shown that genetic defects in key
pathways involved in processes like apoptosis, cell-cycle arrest and
senescence may be involved in resistance to chemotherapy in
vivo.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are known to be crucial regulators of gene
expression, and to potentially affect the response to drugs, including
chemotherapy. Here, we aimed to explore the potential role of miRNAs in
mechanisms of breast cancer chemoresistance in-vivo, by analyzing miRNA
expression in breast cancer patients with recorded responses to
chemotherapy.Patient materials and MethodsBreast tumour biopsies were
collected before chemotherapy in a prospective clinical study, where
patients were randomized to receive epirubicin or paclitaxel monotherapy
(n = 223). Information about the response to therapy, as defined by the
UICC criteria, in addition to long-term outcome, was available for all
patients. The global miRNA expression levels were analyzed in 50 breast
tumour biopsies by deep sequencing. The patients were selected based on
their response to first-line chemotherapy. To verify the results obtained
by miRNA sequencing, selected miRNAs were quantified in all patients by
qPCR.ResultsNo global miRNA patterns were observed when performing
unsupervised clustering of miRNA sequencing data. Among samples from
paclitaxel-treated patients, we identified three differentially expressed
miRNAs between response groups; the expression of miR-155 was
significantly lower (p = 0.005) in patients with poor response to
paclitaxel, and the expression of both miR-181a and miR-181b were
significantly higher (p = 0.003 and 0.012, respectively) in patients with
poor response to paclitaxel.qPCR data validated the initial association
identified between high miR-155-5p expression levels and response to
paclitaxel treatment. Intriguingly though, high levels of miR-155 were
also associated with a poor prognosis in the study population as a whole
(p = 0.012), as well as with the presence of mutations in TP53 (p
IntroductionResistance to chemotherapy remains a prominent obstacle to
cure in cancer. We have previously shown that genetic defects in key
pathways involved in processes like apoptosis, cell-cycle arrest and
senescence may be involved in resistance to chemotherapy in
vivo.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are known to be crucial regulators of gene
expression, and to potentially affect the response to drugs, including
chemotherapy. Here, we aimed to explore the potential role of miRNAs in
mechanisms of breast cancer chemoresistance in-vivo, by analyzing miRNA
expression in breast cancer patients with recorded responses to
chemotherapy.Patient materials and MethodsBreast tumour biopsies were
collected before chemotherapy in a prospective clinical study, where
patients were randomized to receive epirubicin or paclitaxel monotherapy
(n = 223). Information about the response to therapy, as defined by the
UICC criteria, in addition to long-term outcome, was available for all
patients. The global miRNA expression levels were analyzed in 50 breast
tumour biopsies by deep sequencing. The patients were selected based on
their response to first-line chemotherapy. To verify the results obtained
by miRNA sequencing, selected miRNAs were quantified in all patients by
qPCR.ResultsNo global miRNA patterns were observed when performing
unsupervised clustering of miRNA sequencing data. Among samples from
paclitaxel-treated patients, we identified three differentially expressed
miRNAs between response groups; the expression of miR-155 was
significantly lower (p = 0.005) in patients with poor response to
paclitaxel, and the expression of both miR-181a and miR-181b were
significantly higher (p = 0.003 and 0.012, respectively) in patients with
poor response to paclitaxel.qPCR data validated the initial association
identified between high miR-155-5p expression levels and response to
paclitaxel treatment. Intriguingly though, high levels of miR-155 were
also associated with a poor prognosis in the study population as a whole
(p = 0.012), as well as with the presence of mutations in TP53 (p <
0.001).ConclusionHere, we show that breast cancer patients responding to
paclitaxel treatment have higher expression levels of miR-155-5p. Also,
patients with elevated levels of miR-155-5p expression have a poor
prognosis and a higher frequency of TP53 mutations.

