Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The influence of masculinity, racism, and social support on
colorectal cancer screening uptake among African American men: A
systematic review


BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is both preventable and highly
treatable, yet incidence and mortality rates are 25% and 50% higher among
African American men compared to their white counterparts. This
disproportionate burden places African American men last among all
racial/ethnic groups of both genders for age-adjusted CRC mortality rates
and five-year survival rates. These disparities are well documented, yet
preventive screening completion among African American men is relatively
low, understudied, and poorly explicated. A growing body of literature
indicates that separately, masculinity, racism, and social support are
strong influences on CRC screening uptake.METHODS: We conducted a
systematic review with the purpose of identifying and synthesizing the
connections between extant literature on the associations between
masculinity, racism, social support, and CRC screening completion.
Utilizing Garrard's Matrix Method, 19 studies met inclusion/exclusion
criteria; and the methodological quality of the reviewed evidence was
assessed.CONCLUSIONS: Thirteen studies employed non-experimental research
designs; a quasi-experimental design was present in four, and two
utilized experimental designs. Studies were published between 2000 and
2014; the majority within five years. Preliminary qualitative synthesis
suggests that social support was most frequently addressed (79%), while
masculinity and racism were equally examined (11%) for their influence on
CRC screening. After evaluating the conceptual and methodological
characteristics of included studies, 42% fell below average in quality
and rigor. The need for increased attention to the sociocultural
correlates of CRC screening for African American men are highlighted in
this systematic review, and important recommendations for research and
practice are provided.

