Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of multi-marker in tissue-derived cancer cells from
patients with epithelial ovarian carcinoma


Objective: The objective of this study is to refine a simple, rapid and
reproducible method for the isolation and characterization of epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC) cells from ovarian tumor tissues and to evaluate the
intracellular expression of CK-7, CA-125, HE4 and FOLR-1 in primary
ovarian cancer cells.Methods: Fourteen patients diagnosed with papillary
serous adenocarcinoma of ovary were selected in ASAN Medical Center.
Isolation of tumor EOC cells involves the mechanical disruption of the
tumor tissue and placed directly into culture with very little
manipulation. Primary ovarian cancer cells were monitored after initial
plating and every day for following 15 days. Confocal laser scanning
microscopy was used for the imaging of intracellular immunofluorescence
of CK-7, CA-125, HE4 and FOLR-1.Results: Two days after plating primary
ovarian cancer cells began to adhere to the plate by the presence of
small adherent clusters. The primary ovarian cancer cells became a
confluent monolayer and displayed the typical epithelial cobblestone
morphology. The mean duration of passage was 8.5 days, it was revealed
variously in the primary ovarian cancer cells. Immunofluorescent
detection of CK-7 expression in EOC cells demonstrates the epithelial
origin, however their expression was not constant. CA-125, HE-4 and
FOLR-1 were expressed by all tissue-derived EOC cells. The expression
pattern of CA-125, HE-4 and FOLR-1 was different in each patient and that
was not correlated with the serum level of CA-125.Conclusions: The
isolation and characterization of tissue-derived cancer cells from
patients with EOC using the expression of CK-7, CA-125, HE4 and FOLR-1
were reasonable method. This result could provide clinically relevant
models suitable for investigation of the ex vivo biological
characteristics of ovarian cancers.

