Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a potent covalent mutant-selective EGFR inhibitor -
the journey from high throughput screening to EGF816


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a validated therapeutic target
for lung cancer. First and second generation EGFR inhibitors (e.g.,
gefitinib, erlotinib and afatinib) have revolutionized treatment
paradigms of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with oncogenic
EGFR mutations. The use of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) provides
superior efficacy compared to chemotherapy in patients with EGFR L858R or
exon 19 deletion tumors. However, resistance inevitably develops after
8-12 months of treatment; most commonly via a secondary T790M point
mutation at the gatekeeper residue of EGFR. Furthermore, responses are
hindered due to treatment intolerance in the form of rash and diarrhea
that are mediated by simultaneous inhibition of wild-type (WT) EGFR at
doses required for mutant EGFR suppression. To overcome these
limitations, we initiated a project to identify mutant-selective EGFR
inhibitors that potently inhibit both activating and T790M resistance
EGFR mutations while sparing WT EGFR.In this presentation, we report our
medicinal chemistry approach and optimization that led to the discovery
of EGF816, a selective and potent covalent mutant-selective EGFR
inhibitor with single digit nanomolar cellular target modulation on both
activating and T790M resistance mutations. In addition, we will also
report validated clinical efficacy data from the first patient treated
with EGF816.

