Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histamine dihydrochloride as an immune modulator for solid tumors


Our recent adoptive T cell transfer trial for mesothelioma revealed a
striking anti-tumor response in a patient which was accompanied by
anaphylaxis, suggesting endogenous histamine release. In animal models,
histamine has direct and immune-based anti-tumor effects. In fact,
histamine dihydrochloride is approved in Europe in combination with
interleukin-2 (IL2) for leukemia treatment. We thus explored the
anti-tumor role of histamine in mesothelioma and lung cancer. An in vitro
MTT assay was used to measure cell proliferation. Daily doses of
histamine (1 mg/kg) - alone, or in combination with other immunotherapies
- was used to treat four subcutaneous flank tumor models in three
different mouse strains. Flow cytometric analyses were subsequently
performed on tumors. Histamine had in vitro anti-tumor activity against
all five cell lines tested with an IC50 of 0.1 mg/ml. Histamine also
significantly reduced tumor volume in all four in vivo models without
toxic side effects. Immunodepletion studies revealed that the effect was
partially due to T cells. When combined with two immunotherapy approaches
(adenovirally-delivered interferon- or a tumor antigen), anti-tumor
efficacy was augmented. Histamine resulted in more interferon- and IL2
production by tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, downregulation of CD206
expression on tumor-infiltrating macrophages, and reduced numbers of T
regulatory cells (Tregs). This pre-clinical data suggests that histamine
alone, or in combination with immunotherapy, should be explored in the
treatment of mesothelioma, lung cancer, and perhaps other cancers.

