Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of nuclear PKM2 in transcriptional regulation leading to EMT


Pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) maintains aerobic glycolysis in cancer cells
and stimulates cell proliferation by controlling Warburg effect(Nature,
2008). In addition, PKM2 translocates to nucleus in response to EGFR
signaling and up-regulates Cyclin D1 expression by controlling its
transcription (Nature, 2011). PKM2 confers malignant potential by
controlling both metabolism and transcriptional regulation. In this
study, we investigated the correlation between PKM2 and invasion and
metastasis of colorectal cancer in terms of nuclear function, which has
yet to be investigated. Tumor invasion is initiated with the change of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer cell, and we induced
EMT by adding TGF-1 and EGF to SW 480. After EGF induction, in parallel
with E-cadherin down-regulation and Vimentin up-regulation, the
expression of PKM2 was increased both in transcriptional and
translational level and PKM2 translocated into nucleus. PKM2 knock-down
by siRNA suppressed E-cadherin decrease and invasion capacity in invasion
assay. We created sh pyruvate kinase SW 480 with mouse PKM1 or PKM2 was
overexpressed both of which have DNA sequence resistant to sh pyruvate
kinase. PKM2 overexpression stimulated EMT induction by enhancing
E-cadherin decrease. TGIF2 was identified which interacted with PKM2 in
nucleus in response to EMT induction, which was considered to have a key
role in controlling EMT induction. We performed immunohistochemical
staining with specific antibody to PKM2 using clinical samples of
colorectal cancers. Clinicopathological analysis showed that PKM2
positivity significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis and
distant organ metastasis. In conclusion, our data suggested that PKM2
nuclear function had a crucial role in controlling invasion and
metastasis.

