Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MLN4924 synergistically enhances cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity
via JNK and Bcl-xL pathways in human urothelial carcinoma - In vitro and
in vivo study


IntroductionCisplatin-based chemotherapy is the main treatment for
metastatic bladder urothelial carcinoma; however, the response rate is
only approximately 40-65%. Many patients will encounter drug resistance
to chemotherapy eventually. Therefore, combination therapies to enhance
the efficacy of cisplatin and to overcome drug resistance are imperative
for the treatment of urothelial carcinoma. The aim of this study was to
investigate the antitumor effect and underlying mechanisms for the
combination of cisplatin and MLN4924, a NEDD8-activating enzyme
inhibitor, in human bladder urothelial carcinoma.Materials & MethodsWe
used MTT assays and CalcuSyn software to calculate the combination index
of cisplatin and MLN4924. The expression levels of DNA damage response
regulators, apoptotic-related molecules, MAPK and Bcl-xL were revealed by
western blot. c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitor (SP600125) and
overexpression of Bcl-xL were used to investigate the relationship
between JNK and Bcl-xL. The in vitro findings were further confirmed in
vivo via xenograft mouse model.ResultsThe combination of cisplatin and
MLN4924 exerted synergistic cytotoxicity on two high-grade bladder
urothelial carcinoma cell lines, NTUB1 and T24 (combination index
IntroductionCisplatin-based chemotherapy is the main treatment for
metastatic bladder urothelial carcinoma; however, the response rate is
only approximately 40-65%. Many patients will encounter drug resistance
to chemotherapy eventually. Therefore, combination therapies to enhance
the efficacy of cisplatin and to overcome drug resistance are imperative
for the treatment of urothelial carcinoma. The aim of this study was to
investigate the antitumor effect and underlying mechanisms for the
combination of cisplatin and MLN4924, a NEDD8-activating enzyme
inhibitor, in human bladder urothelial carcinoma.Materials & MethodsWe
used MTT assays and CalcuSyn software to calculate the combination index
of cisplatin and MLN4924. The expression levels of DNA damage response
regulators, apoptotic-related molecules, MAPK and Bcl-xL were revealed by
western blot. c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitor (SP600125) and
overexpression of Bcl-xL were used to investigate the relationship
between JNK and Bcl-xL. The in vitro findings were further confirmed in
vivo via xenograft mouse model.ResultsThe combination of cisplatin and
MLN4924 exerted synergistic cytotoxicity on two high-grade bladder
urothelial carcinoma cell lines, NTUB1 and T24 (combination index <1). In
addition, MLN4924 potentiated cisplatin-induced apoptosis and activation
of caspase-3, 7, phospho-histone H2A.X and PARP. We also observed c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation with down-regulation of Bcl-xL during
cisplatin and MLN4924 treatment. The inhibition of JNK activation
partially restored cell viability as well as the expression of B-cell
lymphoma-extra large (Bcl-xL); moreover, the overexpression of Bcl-xL
rescued cell viability. In the in vivo study, MLN4924 significantly
potentiated cisplatin-induced tumor suppression in urothelial carcinoma
xenograft mice.ConclusionIn summary, MLN4924 synergistically enhanced the
antitumor effect of cisplatin through increasing DNA damage, JNK
activation and down-regulating Bcl-xL in urothelial carcinoma cells.
These findings provide a new therapeutiuc strategy for bladder cancer.

