Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An evaluation of the role of Mucin in drug resistant ovarian cancer


MUC1 is a transmembrane glycoprotein that is overexpressed in epithelial
ovarian cancer. Due to extensive O-glycosylation, mucins form a physical
barrier that limits the intracellular accumulation and cytotoxic effect
of chemotherapeutic drugs. Our investigation represents a key step in
determining if drug resistance in ovarian cancer develops due to altered
MUC1 expression and glycosylation. Immunoblotting and ELISA techniques
were utilized to characterize the extent of membrane-bound and shed MUC1
expression in drug-resistant and drug-sensitive ovarian cancer cells. An
(anti-MUC1) antibody-based in vitro model was employed to determine if
the inhibition of O-glycosylation enhanced functional access of small
molecule drugs using FACS and fluorescence microscopic analyses.
Expression of MUC1 was detected in both the drug resistant ovarian cancer
cell line SK-OV-3 (MDR) and the parent cell line SK-OV-3 (WT), with the
highest levels observed in the drug resistant sub-clone. The greatest
improvement in functional anti-MUC1 antibody access following inhibition
of O-glycosylation was observed in the drug-resistant ovarian cancer
cells. Our results provide evidence to support drug resistance in ovarian
cancer due in part to a mucin barrier mesh. The inhibition of mucin
O-glycosylation may be a viable strategy to improve drug delivery and
efficacy of small molecule delivery to ovarian carcinomas.

