Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune checkpoint protein expression is up-regulated in
tumor-bearing elderly mice


Advancing age is a high risk factor of cancer occurrence. Also, cancer
incidence rate of elderly people have been increased. Accordingly,
treatment of elderly patients with cancer is one of the important
worldwide issues. Aging is associated with dysregulated immune response,
immunosenescence. In this study, we investigated that immunosenescence in
tumor-bearing xenograft model was related to change of T cell subsets.
MC38 colon carcinoma cells were injected s.c. in 2 months (young
adolescent), 6 months (adult) and 18 months (elderly) old C57/BL6 mice.
After 8 days, 10mg/kg oxaliplatin administered 1 time by intraperitoneal
(IP) injection and tumor volume measured. We divided 4 groups in each age
group (2, 6 and 18-months-old), vehicle (PBS)-treated normal mice,
oxaliplatin-treated normal mice, tumor-bearing mice, and
oxalpilatin-treated tumor-bearing mice, in 7 mice of each aged groups (2,
6 and 18-months-old). On day 30, mice were sacrificed. Splenocytes were
stained with anti- CD4+, CD8+, CD44+, CD62L+, CD27+, CD28+, PD-1+ and
TIM3+ to measure specific molecule expression of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in
the spleen. First, we analyzed the CD4+ and CD8+ T cell population
whether T cell character was changed based on Aging. In elderly mice,
total number of T cells was 5210% decline compared to 2-month-old mice
(pAdvancing age is a high risk factor of cancer occurrence. Also, cancer
incidence rate of elderly people have been increased. Accordingly,
treatment of elderly patients with cancer is one of the important
worldwide issues. Aging is associated with dysregulated immune response,
immunosenescence. In this study, we investigated that immunosenescence in
tumor-bearing xenograft model was related to change of T cell subsets.
MC38 colon carcinoma cells were injected s.c. in 2 months (young
adolescent), 6 months (adult) and 18 months (elderly) old C57/BL6 mice.
After 8 days, 10mg/kg oxaliplatin administered 1 time by intraperitoneal
(IP) injection and tumor volume measured. We divided 4 groups in each age
group (2, 6 and 18-months-old), vehicle (PBS)-treated normal mice,
oxaliplatin-treated normal mice, tumor-bearing mice, and
oxalpilatin-treated tumor-bearing mice, in 7 mice of each aged groups (2,
6 and 18-months-old). On day 30, mice were sacrificed. Splenocytes were
stained with anti- CD4+, CD8+, CD44+, CD62L+, CD27+, CD28+, PD-1+ and
TIM3+ to measure specific molecule expression of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in
the spleen. First, we analyzed the CD4+ and CD8+ T cell population
whether T cell character was changed based on Aging. In elderly mice,
total number of T cells was 5210% decline compared to 2-month-old mice
(p<0.0001). Both nave CD4+ and CD8+ T cells decreased in elderly mice
compared to young mice with reduction rate of 43.15%(PAdvancing age is a
high risk factor of cancer occurrence. Also, cancer incidence rate of
elderly people have been increased. Accordingly, treatment of elderly
patients with cancer is one of the important worldwide issues. Aging is
associated with dysregulated immune response, immunosenescence. In this
study, we investigated that immunosenescence in tumor-bearing xenograft
model was related to change of T cell subsets. MC38 colon carcinoma cells
were injected s.c. in 2 months (young adolescent), 6 months (adult) and
18 months (elderly) old C57/BL6 mice. After 8 days, 10mg/kg oxaliplatin
administered 1 time by intraperitoneal (IP) injection and tumor volume
measured. We divided 4 groups in each age group (2, 6 and 18-months-old),
vehicle (PBS)-treated normal mice, oxaliplatin-treated normal mice,
tumor-bearing mice, and oxalpilatin-treated tumor-bearing mice, in 7 mice
of each aged groups (2, 6 and 18-months-old). On day 30, mice were
sacrificed. Splenocytes were stained with anti- CD4+, CD8+, CD44+,
CD62L+, CD27+, CD28+, PD-1+ and TIM3+ to measure specific molecule
expression of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the spleen. First, we analyzed the
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell population whether T cell character was changed
based on Aging. In elderly mice, total number of T cells was 5210%
decline compared to 2-month-old mice (p<0.0001). Both nave CD4+ and CD8+
T cells decreased in elderly mice compared to young mice with reduction
rate of 43.15%(P<0.0001) and 34.37%(PAdvancing age is a high risk factor
of cancer occurrence. Also, cancer incidence rate of elderly people have
been increased. Accordingly, treatment of elderly patients with cancer is
one of the important worldwide issues. Aging is associated with
dysregulated immune response, immunosenescence. In this study, we
investigated that immunosenescence in tumor-bearing xenograft model was
related to change of T cell subsets. MC38 colon carcinoma cells were
injected s.c. in 2 months (young adolescent), 6 months (adult) and 18
months (elderly) old C57/BL6 mice. After 8 days, 10mg/kg oxaliplatin
administered 1 time by intraperitoneal (IP) injection and tumor volume
measured. We divided 4 groups in each age group (2, 6 and 18-months-old),
vehicle (PBS)-treated normal mice, oxaliplatin-treated normal mice,
tumor-bearing mice, and oxalpilatin-treated tumor-bearing mice, in 7 mice
of each aged groups (2, 6 and 18-months-old). On day 30, mice were
sacrificed. Splenocytes were stained with anti- CD4+, CD8+, CD44+,
CD62L+, CD27+, CD28+, PD-1+ and TIM3+ to measure specific molecule
expression of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the spleen. First, we analyzed the
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell population whether T cell character was changed
based on Aging. In elderly mice, total number of T cells was 5210%
decline compared to 2-month-old mice (p<0.0001). Both nave CD4+ and CD8+
T cells decreased in elderly mice compared to young mice with reduction
rate of 43.15%(P<0.0001) and 34.37%(P<0.0001), respectively. Then, we
checked the expression of immune regulatory molecules such as PD-1 and
TIM-3 on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. In elderly mice, PD-1 level was
up-regulated 1.8 times on CD4+ T cell and 0.9 times on CD8+ T cells.
Next, we evaluated the T cell characters between normal and tumor bearing
mice. In 2-month-old mice, tumor bearing affected to number of total T
cell decline 52.983.8% compared to tumor absence mice (pAdvancing age is
a high risk factor of cancer occurrence. Also, cancer incidence rate of
elderly people have been increased. Accordingly, treatment of elderly
patients with cancer is one of the important worldwide issues. Aging is
associated with dysregulated immune response, immunosenescence. In this
study, we investigated that immunosenescence in tumor-bearing xenograft
model was related to change of T cell subsets. MC38 colon carcinoma cells
were injected s.c. in 2 months (young adolescent), 6 months (adult) and
18 months (elderly) old C57/BL6 mice. After 8 days, 10mg/kg oxaliplatin
administered 1 time by intraperitoneal (IP) injection and tumor volume
measured. We divided 4 groups in each age group (2, 6 and 18-months-old),
vehicle (PBS)-treated normal mice, oxaliplatin-treated normal mice,
tumor-bearing mice, and oxalpilatin-treated tumor-bearing mice, in 7 mice
of each aged groups (2, 6 and 18-months-old). On day 30, mice were
sacrificed. Splenocytes were stained with anti- CD4+, CD8+, CD44+,
CD62L+, CD27+, CD28+, PD-1+ and TIM3+ to measure specific molecule
expression of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the spleen. First, we analyzed the
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell population whether T cell character was changed
based on Aging. In elderly mice, total number of T cells was 5210%
decline compared to 2-month-old mice (p<0.0001). Both nave CD4+ and CD8+
T cells decreased in elderly mice compared to young mice with reduction
rate of 43.15%(P<0.0001) and 34.37%(P<0.0001), respectively. Then, we
checked the expression of immune regulatory molecules such as PD-1 and
TIM-3 on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. In elderly mice, PD-1 level was
up-regulated 1.8 times on CD4+ T cell and 0.9 times on CD8+ T cells.
Next, we evaluated the T cell characters between normal and tumor bearing
mice. In 2-month-old mice, tumor bearing affected to number of total T
cell decline 52.983.8% compared to tumor absence mice (p<0.0001). As, the
number of T cells was already decreased in normal mice sufficiently in
18-month-old group. The number of T cells was not different between tumor
presence and absence in 18-month-old mice. Finally, we checked the change
of T cell characters according to chemotherapeutic agent oxaliplatin
treatment. Tumor volumes of 2-month-old mice were more decreased than
18-month-old when oxaliplatin was treated (41.815.2% reduction versus
16.621.9%). In oxaliplatin-treated, tumor-bearing 18-months-old mice,
total T cell number was decreased more than 18-months-old tumor-bearing
mice without treatment (4532%, P = 0.025). Our results suggest that
immunosenescnece have an effect to increase of immune checkpoint protein,
such as PD-1, TIM-3. Therefore, novel treatment with immune checkpoint
inhibitors is suggested as new therapeutic approaches in elderly patients.

