Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study of racial/ethnic disparities in pain
experience among breast cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy


Purpose: Pain is one of the multiple quality of life issues in breast
cancer survivors. We sought to determine whether race/ethnic disparity
exists in radiotherapy (RT)-induced pain and to assess associated risk
factors.Methods and Materials: Consecutive 375 female patients undergoing
adjuvant RT after breast-conserving surgery during 2009-2014 were
evaluated. Pain score was assessed as mean of the four pain severity
items (pain at its worst, least, average, and now) using 11-point numeric
rating scale (0-10) at pre-RT and post-RT. Pain scores of 4 to 10 were
regarded as clinically relevant pain. Pain presence and RT-induced change
were examined. In multivariable logistic regression analysis, we
evaluated risk factors for pre-RT, post-RT, and RT-induced pain.Results:
A total of 15.5% participants self-identified as non-Hispanic white
(NHW), 20.8% African American (AA), and 63.7% as Hispanic white (HW). AA
patients were more likely to be obese, to report comorbidities, and to
have advanced diseases. Pain prevalence was 15.9% at pre-RT and 31.3% at
post-RT while 19.7% of patients experienced RT-induced pain. Post-RT pain
severity and pain presence were associated with race/ethnicity, age, BMI,
number of comorbidity, tumor stage, HER2 status, axillary surgery,
fractionation, RT dose, breast volume, and hotspot volume (V105).
Multivariable analyses identified HW and obese as independently
associated with pre-RT pain while AA, HW, younger age (Purpose: Pain is
one of the multiple quality of life issues in breast cancer survivors. We
sought to determine whether race/ethnic disparity exists in radiotherapy
(RT)-induced pain and to assess associated risk factors.Methods and
Materials: Consecutive 375 female patients undergoing adjuvant RT after
breast-conserving surgery during 2009-2014 were evaluated. Pain score was
assessed as mean of the four pain severity items (pain at its worst,
least, average, and now) using 11-point numeric rating scale (0-10) at
pre-RT and post-RT. Pain scores of 4 to 10 were regarded as clinically
relevant pain. Pain presence and RT-induced change were examined. In
multivariable logistic regression analysis, we evaluated risk factors for
pre-RT, post-RT, and RT-induced pain.Results: A total of 15.5%
participants self-identified as non-Hispanic white (NHW), 20.8% African
American (AA), and 63.7% as Hispanic white (HW). AA patients were more
likely to be obese, to report comorbidities, and to have advanced
diseases. Pain prevalence was 15.9% at pre-RT and 31.3% at post-RT while
19.7% of patients experienced RT-induced pain. Post-RT pain severity and
pain presence were associated with race/ethnicity, age, BMI, number of
comorbidity, tumor stage, HER2 status, axillary surgery, fractionation,
RT dose, breast volume, and hotspot volume (V105). Multivariable analyses
identified HW and obese as independently associated with pre-RT pain
while AA, HW, younger age (<50), number of comorbidity (2), V105, and
pre-RT pain score with post-RT pain. Multivariable analysis also
identified AA (OR = 3.23; 95% CI = 1.05-9.93, p = 0.041), younger age (OR
= 2.45, 95% CI = 1.24-4.85, p = 0.010), and number of comorbidity (OR =
3.05, 95% CI = 1.29-7.21, p = 0.011 for 2; OR = 4.58, 95% CI =
1.46-14.37, p = 0.009 for at least 3) as risk factors for RT-induced
pain.Conclusions: This prospective study demonstrates AA and younger
women are more susceptible to RT-induced pain. In addition, the
management of comorbidity conditions, such as diabetes, hypertension, and
thyroid disease, deserves attention to prevent RT-induced pain in breast
cancer patients.

