Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive value of neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio for the efficacy
of preoperative chemotherapy in triple-negative breast cancer


Purpose: Abnormalities in the subpopulations in white blood cells, such
as neutrophilia and lymphopenia, have been reported in tumor-bearing
patients, and the neutrophil/ lymphocyte ratio (NLR) has been found to
associate with prognosis in patients following radical surgery. The NLR
was reported to associate with prognosis in cancer patients by
influencing both cancer progression and chemosensitivity. The correlation
between NLR and the outcome of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) in breast
cancer patients has not been elucidated yet. The aim of this study is to
evaluate NLR as one of the possible markers to predict the outcome of NAC
in patients with TNBC by a retrospective investigation of the consecutive
patient series treated with a standardized single protocol in our
institute.Experimental Design: NLR was evaluated in a total of 177
patients with early-stage breast cancer treated with NAC consisting FEC
(5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide) followed by weekly
paclitaxel followed by curative surgery. The correlation between NLR and
the prognosis including the efficacy of the NAC was evaluated
retrospectively. NLR was calculated from the preoperative blood sample by
dividing the absolute neutrophil count by the absolute lymphocyte count.
On the basis of previous studies, an NLR value of 3.0 was used as the
cut-off value to discriminate between high-NLR (3.0 and over) and low-NLR
(less than 3.0) groups.Results: NLR distributed from 0.5 to 10.6 with a
median of 2.0. Fifty-eight patients with low NLR (less than 3) had a
higher pCR rate (pPurpose: Abnormalities in the subpopulations in white
blood cells, such as neutrophilia and lymphopenia, have been reported in
tumor-bearing patients, and the neutrophil/ lymphocyte ratio (NLR) has
been found to associate with prognosis in patients following radical
surgery. The NLR was reported to associate with prognosis in cancer
patients by influencing both cancer progression and chemosensitivity. The
correlation between NLR and the outcome of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC)
in breast cancer patients has not been elucidated yet. The aim of this
study is to evaluate NLR as one of the possible markers to predict the
outcome of NAC in patients with TNBC by a retrospective investigation of
the consecutive patient series treated with a standardized single
protocol in our institute.Experimental Design: NLR was evaluated in a
total of 177 patients with early-stage breast cancer treated with NAC
consisting FEC (5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide)
followed by weekly paclitaxel followed by curative surgery. The
correlation between NLR and the prognosis including the efficacy of the
NAC was evaluated retrospectively. NLR was calculated from the
preoperative blood sample by dividing the absolute neutrophil count by
the absolute lymphocyte count. On the basis of previous studies, an NLR
value of 3.0 was used as the cut-off value to discriminate between
high-NLR (3.0 and over) and low-NLR (less than 3.0) groups.Results: NLR
distributed from 0.5 to 10.6 with a median of 2.0. Fifty-eight patients
with low NLR (less than 3) had a higher pCR rate (p<0.001), and more
frequently diagnosed to have TNBC (pPurpose: Abnormalities in the
subpopulations in white blood cells, such as neutrophilia and
lymphopenia, have been reported in tumor-bearing patients, and the
neutrophil/ lymphocyte ratio (NLR) has been found to associate with
prognosis in patients following radical surgery. The NLR was reported to
associate with prognosis in cancer patients by influencing both cancer
progression and chemosensitivity. The correlation between NLR and the
outcome of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) in breast cancer patients has
not been elucidated yet. The aim of this study is to evaluate NLR as one
of the possible markers to predict the outcome of NAC in patients with
TNBC by a retrospective investigation of the consecutive patient series
treated with a standardized single protocol in our institute.Experimental
Design: NLR was evaluated in a total of 177 patients with early-stage
breast cancer treated with NAC consisting FEC (5-fluorouracil,
epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide) followed by weekly paclitaxel followed
by curative surgery. The correlation between NLR and the prognosis
including the efficacy of the NAC was evaluated retrospectively. NLR was
calculated from the preoperative blood sample by dividing the absolute
neutrophil count by the absolute lymphocyte count. On the basis of
previous studies, an NLR value of 3.0 was used as the cut-off value to
discriminate between high-NLR (3.0 and over) and low-NLR (less than 3.0)
groups.Results: NLR distributed from 0.5 to 10.6 with a median of 2.0.
Fifty-eight patients with low NLR (less than 3) had a higher pCR rate
(p<0.001), and more frequently diagnosed to have TNBC (p<0.001) compared
with those with high NLR (3 and over). Among TNBC patients who achieved
pCR, DFS (p = 0.006) and OS (pPurpose: Abnormalities in the
subpopulations in white blood cells, such as neutrophilia and
lymphopenia, have been reported in tumor-bearing patients, and the
neutrophil/ lymphocyte ratio (NLR) has been found to associate with
prognosis in patients following radical surgery. The NLR was reported to
associate with prognosis in cancer patients by influencing both cancer
progression and chemosensitivity. The correlation between NLR and the
outcome of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) in breast cancer patients has
not been elucidated yet. The aim of this study is to evaluate NLR as one
of the possible markers to predict the outcome of NAC in patients with
TNBC by a retrospective investigation of the consecutive patient series
treated with a standardized single protocol in our institute.Experimental
Design: NLR was evaluated in a total of 177 patients with early-stage
breast cancer treated with NAC consisting FEC (5-fluorouracil,
epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide) followed by weekly paclitaxel followed
by curative surgery. The correlation between NLR and the prognosis
including the efficacy of the NAC was evaluated retrospectively. NLR was
calculated from the preoperative blood sample by dividing the absolute
neutrophil count by the absolute lymphocyte count. On the basis of
previous studies, an NLR value of 3.0 was used as the cut-off value to
discriminate between high-NLR (3.0 and over) and low-NLR (less than 3.0)
groups.Results: NLR distributed from 0.5 to 10.6 with a median of 2.0.
Fifty-eight patients with low NLR (less than 3) had a higher pCR rate
(p<0.001), and more frequently diagnosed to have TNBC (p<0.001) compared
with those with high NLR (3 and over). Among TNBC patients who achieved
pCR, DFS (p = 0.006) and OS (p<0.001) were significantly longer in
patients with low NLR than that with high NLR. Low NLR was associated
with a significantly favorable prognosis in TNBC patients who achieved
pCR, according to univariate analysis (p = 0.044, HR = 0.06).Conclusions:
Low NLR in patients with TNBC could be expected to show high efficacy,
and favorable outcome after NAC.

