Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide copy number analysis identified a copy number
polymorphism at chromosome 8p11 associated with sporadic colorectal
cancer risk in Singapore Chinese


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most frequent cancers and leading
cause of cancer mortality in the developed world. Twin study has
attributed about 35% of the etiology of sporadic CRC to genes. Hitherto,
more than 20 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci have been
associated with CRC risk. The role of structural variant in CRC, however,
remains unclear. We performed genome-wide association study (GWAS) on
2,000 ethnicity-, age-, and gender-matched Singapore Chinese CRC patients
(aged 50 or more and with no dominant family history of CRC) and healthy
controls. Genome-wide genotyping was performed using Affymetrix SNP 6
platform. Copy number polymorphism (CNP) was interrogated in 1830 samples
that passed quality assurance tests using a multivariate segmentation
algorithm. A 150 kb region at chromosome 8p11 was identified to be
significantly associated (-log10 p-value = 29) with sporadic CRC risk.
This CNP was preferentially amplified in the cases compared to the
controls. The amplification was not gender-specific suggesting that it is
not involved in gender-limiting pathway. It is now being replicated in an
independent panel using digital polymerase chain reaction (dPCR) and
multiplex endogenous reference technique. In silico analysis of a 1.5 Mb
region encompassing the CNP reveals a candidate gene 300kb 5 of the CNP
previously implicated in cancer progression. The expression of this gene
in cases with copy number and metastasis status is being interrogated.

