Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical anti-tumor efficacy and mode of action of a novel,
orally available, selective MKNK1 inhibitor [BAY 1143269]


MKNK1 (MAP kinase-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase, also known
as Mnk1) is activated by the mitogen-activated protein kinases ERK1/2 and
p38. Thus, MKNK1 signaling is involved in the cellular response to
environmental stress factors and cytokines. Of particular interest, MKNK1
kinase was shown to regulate mRNA translation by phosphorylating the
translation initiation factor eIF4E (eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 4E), known to be critical for malignant transformation but
dispensable for translation in normal cells. In addition, MKNK is
involved in resistance mechanisms to cancer therapeutics. Thus, the
inhibition of MKNK1 activity may provide an innovative approach for
anti-cancer therapy.BAY 1143269 was identified as a potent and selective
inhibitor of MKNK1 activity with an unprecedented mode of action.It
inhibits the phosphorylation of eIF4E in various cancer cell lines in
vitro and leads to reduced expression of MKNK-regulated translational
downstream targets, including survivin, Cdc25C and cyclin B1. In
addition, BAY 1143269 potently inhibits cytokine release in LPS
stimulated human blood.In vivo, BAY 1143269 shows a significant
monotherapy efficacy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), colorectal
cancer and melanoma xenograft models after an once daily, oral
application of 200 mg/kg in mice and 70 mg/kg in rats.Furthermore,
combination treatment with chemotherapy and BAY 1143269 gives additive
efficacy in several NSCLC cell lines and patient-derived xenograft models
leading to partial response (Lu7558, A549), stable disease (Lu7187,
Lu7166) or significant delay in tumor re-growth versus chemotherapy alone
after stop of treatment (Lu7558).In summary, BAY 1143269 is a selective,
orally available MKNK1 inhibitor that demonstrates preclinical in vivo
efficacy in mono- and combination therapy and may provide therapeutic
benefit for patients with solid tumors.

