Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A true orthotopic ovarian cancer patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
model


Introduction: Patient derived xenografts (PDXs) show promise as models to
study cancer as they recapitulate the principle characteristics of the
patients original tumor such as histology, mutational status, DNA copy
number, gene expression patterns, and clinical behavior while remaining
biologically stable through passaged in mice. We used an orthotopic model
transplanting tumor directly to the fallopian tube/ovary in order to
accurately study the native environment and the progression of the
ovarian cancer (OVCA).Experimental Design: Fresh OVCA tumor was
transplanted orthotopically to the fallopian tube/ovary of NSG 5-8 week
old mice. Tumor growth was followed over time. Tumors were evaluated by
IHC. Alu II probe staining was performed to evaluate human stroma
content. RPPA and targeted DNA sequencing are in-process. Drug studies
are in progress. Primary tumor lines are being generated.Results: To
date, we have transplanted tumor from 18 primary, 2 interval, and 5
recurrent ovarian debulking surgeries using an orthotopic ovarian tumor
transplant approach with an 85% success rate in generating tumors in
mouse passage 1 (MP1). The median time for tumors to reach 2 cm is 3
months when tumors are then passaged again (MP2/MP3). We have generated 8
BRCA 1/2 deleterious mutation positive carrier PDXs. Alu staining of PDXs
demonstrates human cells in the stroma. We have generated 8 primary tumor
cell lines from original tumors/PDXs.Conclusions: We conclude that
although technically more challenging, the orthotopic transplantation
technique is feasible in generating ovarian cancer PDXs that most closely
resemble the natural environment for ovarian cancer progression.

