Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Body size and composition, physical activity and breast cancer
risk in UK Biobank


Background: Body size and physical activity are two important modifiable
risk factors for breast cancer. Many previous studies are limited by the
use of body mass index (BMI), which is unable to distinguish between fat
and lean mass. Questions also remain over the role of vigorous compared
to lower intensity physical activity in relation to breast cancer risk.
We investigate the associations between BMI, body fat percentage,
waist-to-hip ratio (WHR), waist-to-height ratio (WHtR), total and
vigorous physical activity and both premenopausal and postmenopausal
breast cancer.Methods: We analyzed data from 48,713 premenopausal and
127,850 postmenopausal women followed from 2006 through 2012. We observed
443 premenopausal and 1,422 postmenopausal incident invasive breast
cancers during a mean 3.84 years of follow-up. Current users of hormone
replacement therapy (HRT) were excluded from the analyses.
Multivariable-adjusted Cox regression was used. All analyses were
stratified by age, geographical region, and socioeconomic status.
Analyses were adjusted for family history of breast cancer, previous HRT
use, height, parity, age at first birth, smoking, age at menarche,
alcohol intake frequency, and age at menopause (for postmenopausal women
only). This research has been conducted using the UK Biobank Resource, a
nationwide study of approximately 500,000 UK adults between ages 40-70 at
recruitment.Results: All measures of adiposity were positively associated
with increased breast cancer risk in postmenopausal but not in
premenopausal women. Compared with postmenopausal women in the lowest
quartile of body fat percentage (16.8-32.9%; median, 29.6%), women in the
highest quartile (41.9-54.3%; 44.8%) had an increased risk of breast
cancer (HR, 1.47; 95% confidence interval, 1.24-1.74; ptrend Background:
Body size and physical activity are two important modifiable risk factors
for breast cancer. Many previous studies are limited by the use of body
mass index (BMI), which is unable to distinguish between fat and lean
mass. Questions also remain over the role of vigorous compared to lower
intensity physical activity in relation to breast cancer risk. We
investigate the associations between BMI, body fat percentage,
waist-to-hip ratio (WHR), waist-to-height ratio (WHtR), total and
vigorous physical activity and both premenopausal and postmenopausal
breast cancer.Methods: We analyzed data from 48,713 premenopausal and
127,850 postmenopausal women followed from 2006 through 2012. We observed
443 premenopausal and 1,422 postmenopausal incident invasive breast
cancers during a mean 3.84 years of follow-up. Current users of hormone
replacement therapy (HRT) were excluded from the analyses.
Multivariable-adjusted Cox regression was used. All analyses were
stratified by age, geographical region, and socioeconomic status.
Analyses were adjusted for family history of breast cancer, previous HRT
use, height, parity, age at first birth, smoking, age at menarche,
alcohol intake frequency, and age at menopause (for postmenopausal women
only). This research has been conducted using the UK Biobank Resource, a
nationwide study of approximately 500,000 UK adults between ages 40-70 at
recruitment.Results: All measures of adiposity were positively associated
with increased breast cancer risk in postmenopausal but not in
premenopausal women. Compared with postmenopausal women in the lowest
quartile of body fat percentage (16.8-32.9%; median, 29.6%), women in the
highest quartile (41.9-54.3%; 44.8%) had an increased risk of breast
cancer (HR, 1.47; 95% confidence interval, 1.24-1.74; ptrend <0.001).
Vigorous physical activity was associated with decreased breast cancer
risk in postmenopausal but not in premenopausal women. Postmenopausal
women who participated in an average of 17.5 MET-h/week of vigorous
physical activity had a 15% decreased risk of breast cancer (HR 0.85;
0.74-0.98; ptrend = 0.025). This association was no longer significant
after adjusting for body fat percentage (HR 0.88, 0.77-1.02, ptrend =
0.084). Higher levels of total physical activity were associated with
non-statistically significant breast cancer risk reductions in both
premenopausal and postmenopausal women.Conclusion: In postmenopausal
women, breast cancer risk is strongly associated with greater adiposity
while it moderately decreased with greater vigorous physical activity.
Adjusting for body fat percentage attenuated the association between
vigorous physical activity and breast cancer risk. Longer follow-up is
needed to clarify associations, particularly in premenopausal women. We
also plan to extend these analyses by subdividing cancers by hormone
receptor status.

