Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic polymorphisms of DNA repair genes in the origin and
progression of chronic myeloid leukemia


Background: The origin of Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia (CML) involves the
formation of Double Strand Breaks (DSBs) which are initially sensed by
the Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM) signal kinase. Additionally,
Bcr-Abl transformed CML cells produce high levels of Reactive Oxygen
Species (ROS) that induce more DSBs. In such kind of cells, proper
functioning of ATM and NHEJ repair mechanisms are required for ensuring
the accurate repair of DSBs.Aim: The present study is planned to
understand the role of DNA repair, specifically NHEJ repair in the
occurrence of CML and its progression.Methodology: We have analysed seven
genetic polymorphisms in ATM, XRCC5, XRCC6 and XRCC7 genes in 476 Ph+ve
CML cases and 449 age and sex matched controls without family history of
cancers. Direct Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and Restriction Fragment
Length Polymorphism (RFLP) analyses were carried out using the DNA
isolated from blood samples through non-enzymatic/salting out method.
Statistical analyses were performed through SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics 20)
software.Results: The T allele of ATM C4138T polymorphism and A allele of
ATM -5144A>T polymorphism were found to be significantly associated with
enhanced risk of CML in our study. The CC genotype of XRCC6 -61C>G
polymorphism was found to have independent effect with CML risk as
confirmed by the LD and MDR analyses. Lower repeat (0R) of XRCC5 VNTR and
TT genotype of XRCC7 6721G>T polymorphisms had shown borderline
association with CML risk. Even though the XRCC5 2408G>A and XRCC6
-1310C>G polymorphisms did not show significant association with CML
independently, the AA and GG genotypes of these polymorphisms have been
found to confer enhanced risk for CML in combination with other SNPs of
the respective genes in haplotype analysis. Interestingly, combined
analysis demonstrated cumulative effect of risk genotypes in CML
development as well as progression where the fold change increased with
the number of adverse genotypes.Conclusion: The risk associated genotypes
were known to influence the expression and functioning of genes in NHEJ
pathway. Therefore, results of the present study suggested that defective
DNA damage sensing and deregulated repair due to variations in ATM and
NHEJ genes might influence CML development as well as progression.Key
words: CML, ATM, NHEJ, DNA repair, polymorphisms

