Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing response of Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) and lapatinib in
HER2+ inflammatory breast cancer cells


Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) is an aggressive and unique form of
breast cancer that develops rapidly. IBC, like non-IBC breast cancers, is
a heterogeneous disease and can occur as any of the six molecular breast
cancer subtypes. However, they are most commonly either triple negative;
that is presenting with an absence of estrogen receptor (ER-),
progesterone receptor (PR-) and the epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2-) or ER-, PR- and HER2+ overexpressed. There is no specific IBC
treatment; thus, it seems possible to find a therapeutic for this deadly
disease. Our published data demonstrates that Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi)
inhibits the viability of the triple negative IBC SUM149 cell line, but
not of MCF10A noncancerous mammary epithelial cells. Subsequently, in
this study, we aimed to investigate Reishi effects in the viability and
molecular signaling of the ER-, PR-, HER2+ IBC cell lines SUM190, KPL-4
and IBC-3. Furthermore, we studied the effects of Reishi on IBC cells
when treated in complement with the HER2 Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor,
lapatinib. The hypothesis for this study is that Reishi inhibits cancer
cell viability and sensitizes IBC cells to lapatinib therapy and
downregulates key proteins overexpressed in IBC. Herein, SUM190, KPL-4
and IBC-3 cells were treated with increasing concentrations of lapatinib
and/or Reishi for 24 or 72h. The combination of lapatinib plus Reishi
reduced cell viability of KPL-4 cells to 80% when treated with a
concentration of 0.25 mg/mL of Reishi for 72h. Additionally, our data
shows a reduction in cell viability of 70% in SUM190 cells treated with
lapatinib plus Reishi for 72h. Also, Reishi and lapatinib downregulate
the expression HER2 in KPL-4 cell after 72h of treatment. Our results
provide evidence that Reishi inhibits cancer cell viability, highlighting
the potential of Reishi as a natural anti-IBC-therapeutic. This project
was sponsored by NIH/NCI #1F31 CA174307 to ISA, Title V PPOHA US
Department of Education #P031M105050 to UCC/LAC, NIH/RCMI #G12 MD007583
to UCC/MMM, NIH/INBRE #5P20 GM103475 to UPR/UCC/MMM, NIH/NIMHD U54
MD008149 UH/MMM.

