Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BGB-283 effectively enhances MEK inhibitor induced tumor
suppression in RAS mutant cancers


Mutation in K-RAS, which drives constitutive activation of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway, is one of the
most frequent genetic alterations in human cancers. Pharmacological
targeting RAS mutants directly is extremely challenging and targeted
inhibition of K-RAS downstream effector MEK has shown limited clinical
activity in suppressing the progression of K-RAS mutant tumors. The
reduced sensitivity of K-RAS-mutated cancer cells to MEK inhibitors
(MEKi) is associated with feedback phosphorylation of MEK and rebound of
phosphorylated ERK levels after prolonged treatment. A synthetic lethal
screen provided the rational of targeting both RAF1 and MEK in K-RAS
mutated cancers. In this study, we investigated whether combining
BGB-283, a potent inhibitor to RAF dimers, and a series of MEKi could
achieve better therapeutic effect of the latter. We confirmed that
selumetinib (AZD6244) induced strong MEK phosphorylation in K-RAS mutated
cancer cells. Either knockdown of B-RAF/C-RAF or addition of BGB-283 in
the presence of selumetinib potently inhibited RAF-dependent MEK
phosphorylation and led to sustained inhibition of ERK activity.
Furthermore, BGB-283 and selumetinib showed synergistic effect in
inhibiting proliferation of several non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
and colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines harboring RAS mutations. In vivo,
combined dosing of BGB-283 and AZD6244 also exhibited enhanced antitumor
activity in K-RAS mutant NSCLC and CRC xenograft models compared to
monotherapies. Pharmacodynamic (PD) analysis revealed improved inhibition
of ERK phosphorylation in dually treated tumors. Together, these findings
suggested that combining RAF dimer inhibitor BGB-283 and MEKi could be a
promising strategy in treating RAS mutated cancers.

