Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo TK-NOG liver-humanized model to predict patient
pharmacological profile of anti-cancer agents


To overcome some limitations of existing models, CIEA developed a novel
experimental in vivo liver-humanized model. To do this, a herpes simplex
virus type 1 thymidine kinase (HSVtk) transgene was expressed within the
liver of highly immunodeficient NOG mice (TK-NOG). Mouse liver cells
expressing this transgene were ablated after a brief exposure to a
non-toxic dose of ganciclovir (GCV), and transplanted human liver cells
are stably maintained within the liver (humanized TK-NOG) without
exogenous drug. We have shown that the reconstituted liver is mature and
functional and could generate:1)A human-specific profile of anti-cancer
drug metabolism. The humanization of the liver of TK-NOG mice modified
the pharmacokinetic profile of the sorafenib anti-cancer agent. We were
also able to detect the N-oxide metabolite of the sorafenib in humanized
mice with a ratio of 8% of the non-metabolized sorafenib, in comparison
to a 10% ratio in patients and 0% (not detectable) in non-humanized
mice.2)An efficient environment for metastatic cell homing in
patient-derived-xenograft (PDX) model of UVeal melanoma. In two PDX UVeal
melanoma models orthotopically xenografted in liver-humanized TK-NOG
mice, we were able to detect liver metastasis, ranging from 10 to 50% of
animals, whereas metastases have never been detected in non-humanized
mice.This novel in vivo system provides an optimized platform for
increasing our predictivity of patient anti-cancer drug metabolism,
potential toxicology, and efficacy.

