Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian steroid hormones promote progression of DCIS by increasing
cancer stem cell self-renewal through IL-6 signaling


Introduction: The ability of the ovarian steroid hormones estradiol (E)
and progesterone (P) to influence cancer stem cell (CSC) self-renewal and
progression of human ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a critical but
understudied area or research. The objective of this study is to
characterize steroid hormone signaling involved in CSC self-renewal and
invasion in ER+PR+ DCIS. We have found that these hormones can increase
CSC self-renewal in a subset of DCIS patients, and that this may be
facilitated by activation of the IL-6 pathway.Methods: Mammosphere (MS)
assays (an in vitro assessment of CSC self-renewal) and the mouse
intraductal (MIND) xenograft model were used to characterize hormonal
regulation of the CSC population and invasion potential of primary human
ER+PR+ DCIS cells. Additionally, ovarectomized mice were used to create
MIND xenografts of ER+PR+ DCIS, treated with E+P or vehicle for 8 weeks,
and used for RNA sequencing and immunofluorescent staining.Results: Only
a subset of cases responded to E+P in vitro by increasing MS efficiency,
indicating increased CSC self-renewal. RNA sequencing of MSs identified
genes that differed between vehicle and E+P treatment only in DCIS cases
that respond to E+P by increasing MS efficiency. Many of these changes
were associated with epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), including
Twist1, Snai1, MMP9. In E+P-treated MIND xenografts, DCIS cases that
respond to E+P by increasing MS efficiency also had higher IL-8 and
vimentin (markers of EMT) compared to non-responders (PIntroduction: The
ability of the ovarian steroid hormones estradiol (E) and progesterone
(P) to influence cancer stem cell (CSC) self-renewal and progression of
human ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a critical but understudied area
or research. The objective of this study is to characterize steroid
hormone signaling involved in CSC self-renewal and invasion in ER+PR+
DCIS. We have found that these hormones can increase CSC self-renewal in
a subset of DCIS patients, and that this may be facilitated by activation
of the IL-6 pathway.Methods: Mammosphere (MS) assays (an in vitro
assessment of CSC self-renewal) and the mouse intraductal (MIND)
xenograft model were used to characterize hormonal regulation of the CSC
population and invasion potential of primary human ER+PR+ DCIS cells.
Additionally, ovarectomized mice were used to create MIND xenografts of
ER+PR+ DCIS, treated with E+P or vehicle for 8 weeks, and used for RNA
sequencing and immunofluorescent staining.Results: Only a subset of cases
responded to E+P in vitro by increasing MS efficiency, indicating
increased CSC self-renewal. RNA sequencing of MSs identified genes that
differed between vehicle and E+P treatment only in DCIS cases that
respond to E+P by increasing MS efficiency. Many of these changes were
associated with epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), including
Twist1, Snai1, MMP9. In E+P-treated MIND xenografts, DCIS cases that
respond to E+P by increasing MS efficiency also had higher IL-8 and
vimentin (markers of EMT) compared to non-responders (P<0.05). This
suggests that the cases which responded to E+P by increasing CSC
self-renewal may have undergone EMT. Additionally, IL-6 and IL-8 gene
expression and protein increased (PIntroduction: The ability of the
ovarian steroid hormones estradiol (E) and progesterone (P) to influence
cancer stem cell (CSC) self-renewal and progression of human ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a critical but understudied area or research.
The objective of this study is to characterize steroid hormone signaling
involved in CSC self-renewal and invasion in ER+PR+ DCIS. We have found
that these hormones can increase CSC self-renewal in a subset of DCIS
patients, and that this may be facilitated by activation of the IL-6
pathway.Methods: Mammosphere (MS) assays (an in vitro assessment of CSC
self-renewal) and the mouse intraductal (MIND) xenograft model were used
to characterize hormonal regulation of the CSC population and invasion
potential of primary human ER+PR+ DCIS cells. Additionally, ovarectomized
mice were used to create MIND xenografts of ER+PR+ DCIS, treated with E+P
or vehicle for 8 weeks, and used for RNA sequencing and immunofluorescent
staining.Results: Only a subset of cases responded to E+P in vitro by
increasing MS efficiency, indicating increased CSC self-renewal. RNA
sequencing of MSs identified genes that differed between vehicle and E+P
treatment only in DCIS cases that respond to E+P by increasing MS
efficiency. Many of these changes were associated with epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT), including Twist1, Snai1, MMP9. In
E+P-treated MIND xenografts, DCIS cases that respond to E+P by increasing
MS efficiency also had higher IL-8 and vimentin (markers of EMT) compared
to non-responders (P<0.05). This suggests that the cases which responded
to E+P by increasing CSC self-renewal may have undergone EMT.
Additionally, IL-6 and IL-8 gene expression and protein increased
(P<0.05) in a DCIS case which also responded to E+P treatment by
increasing MS efficiency. In an ER+PR+ DCIS case which did not increase
MS efficiency in response to E+P, IL-6 and IL-8 secretion remained
unchanged. Finally, RNA sequencing analysis of E+P vs. control-treated
mammary glands from ovarectomized MIND-transplanted mice indicated the
IL-6 signaling pathway was one of the top signaling pathways to be
activated. Expression of IL-8 and vimentin in E+P compared to
control-treated mice also increased (PIntroduction: The ability of the
ovarian steroid hormones estradiol (E) and progesterone (P) to influence
cancer stem cell (CSC) self-renewal and progression of human ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a critical but understudied area or research.
The objective of this study is to characterize steroid hormone signaling
involved in CSC self-renewal and invasion in ER+PR+ DCIS. We have found
that these hormones can increase CSC self-renewal in a subset of DCIS
patients, and that this may be facilitated by activation of the IL-6
pathway.Methods: Mammosphere (MS) assays (an in vitro assessment of CSC
self-renewal) and the mouse intraductal (MIND) xenograft model were used
to characterize hormonal regulation of the CSC population and invasion
potential of primary human ER+PR+ DCIS cells. Additionally, ovarectomized
mice were used to create MIND xenografts of ER+PR+ DCIS, treated with E+P
or vehicle for 8 weeks, and used for RNA sequencing and immunofluorescent
staining.Results: Only a subset of cases responded to E+P in vitro by
increasing MS efficiency, indicating increased CSC self-renewal. RNA
sequencing of MSs identified genes that differed between vehicle and E+P
treatment only in DCIS cases that respond to E+P by increasing MS
efficiency. Many of these changes were associated with epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT), including Twist1, Snai1, MMP9. In
E+P-treated MIND xenografts, DCIS cases that respond to E+P by increasing
MS efficiency also had higher IL-8 and vimentin (markers of EMT) compared
to non-responders (P<0.05). This suggests that the cases which responded
to E+P by increasing CSC self-renewal may have undergone EMT.
Additionally, IL-6 and IL-8 gene expression and protein increased
(P<0.05) in a DCIS case which also responded to E+P treatment by
increasing MS efficiency. In an ER+PR+ DCIS case which did not increase
MS efficiency in response to E+P, IL-6 and IL-8 secretion remained
unchanged. Finally, RNA sequencing analysis of E+P vs. control-treated
mammary glands from ovarectomized MIND-transplanted mice indicated the
IL-6 signaling pathway was one of the top signaling pathways to be
activated. Expression of IL-8 and vimentin in E+P compared to
control-treated mice also increased (P<0.05).Conclusions: Our results
indicate that steroid hormone treatment can enrich the CSC population by
increasing MS efficiency in some but not all DCIS cases, and that IL-6
may be involved in this selective ability. Therefore, DCIS cases with
higher MS efficiency in response to E+P treatment may also show higher
invasion potential in vivo. Our current model is that steroid hormones
induce increased secretion of IL-6, leading to increased self-renewal and
invasion potential. Further characterization of the signaling pathway(s)
associated with this selective effect may allow us to predict which DCIS
lesions have the ability to progress to invasive ductal carcinoma and
allow development of novel therapeutic targets.

