Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD133 knockdown sensitizes melanoma to kinase inhibitors


Melanoma is an aggressive and lethal form of cancer, responsible for
9,710 deaths in the US every year, as indicated by the Surveillance
Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program. Although early stages are
surgically treatable, the advanced or metastatic stages are the most
fatal, presumably due to resistance to chemotherapy, radiation or other
therapies. Refractoriness of metastatic melanoma is due to self-renewal
properties of a subpopulation of resistant cells, which may be the same
as what have been termed melanoma initiating cells (MIC), many of which
have been associated with the expression CD133. CD133 (PROM-1) is a
5-transmembrane-glycoprotein that is a cell surface marker for different
cancers including late-stage cutaneous melanoma. By magnetic activated
cell sorting, we isolated a CD133-positive population derived from a
patient harboring a difficult-to-treat NRASQ61R/BRAFWT profile. The MIC
were transfected with CD133-specific small-interfering RNA (siRNAs) to
deplete CD133 protein levels in cells. Our results show that knocking
down CD133 in NRASQ61R/BRAFWT mutant melanoma renders cells more
sensitive to clinically employed-MEK/BRAF inhibitors. Thus, specific gene
knockdown or small molecule targeting, along with the multikinase
inhibitors, may be a high potency therapeutic of late-stage and recurrent
melanoma. Analyses of patient-derived melanomas harboring different
mutation signatures are currently in progress to determine if CD133 and
MIC play broader roles in melanoma chemoresistance.

