Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule identification for the restoration of p53 pathway
through p73 and by degradation of mutant p53


One of the most explored cancer targets has been the tumor suppressor
p53. p53 is mutated in more than half of all human tumors and therefore
provides an attractive way to selectively target cancer cells that harbor
the mutant protein. Mutant p53 protein can acquire a gain-of-function
activity, losing its normal tumor suppressor properties and gaining
oncogenic characteristics. Various approaches have been taken to restore
the p53 pathway in mutant p53 expressing cells including the modulation
of mutant p53 conformation to wild-type, and through the upregulation of
p53 family members i.e. p73. Unlike p53, p73 is not commonly mutated in
cancer cells and thus confers restoration of the p53 pathway through
pharmacological stimulation. We characterized a small molecule that
restores the p53 pathway through p73. A high-throughput cell-based screen
identified small molecule CB002 as a potential candidate for the
restoration of the p53 pathway in mutant p53 containing human colorectal
cancer cells. Two colorectal cancer cell lines: SW480, DLD-1, and the
RXF393 renal cancer cell line, were treated with different concentrations
of CB002 for various time points. SW480 cells treated with CB002 for 8
hrs showed a decrease in p53 followed by an increase in DR5 expression at
16 hrs. DLD-1 cells treated with CB002 showed a decrease in p53
expression at 8 hrs. Although no change was observed in proteins involved
in cell cycle arrest or cell death that were tested, colony formation was
suppressed as compared to control. RXF393 cells treated with CB002 for 48
hrs showed decreased expression of p53 levels and increased levels of
p21. These data suggest that CB002 is able to decrease mutant p53 protein
expression, increase p53 target genes and promote expression of proteins
involved in apoptosis, such as p21 and DR5, respectively. It appears that
the CB002 mechanism is different depending on the cell line tested. We
hypothesize that CB002 is capable of degrading mutant p53 and restoring
the p53 pathway through p73 in colorectal cancer cells. Current
undergoing experiments are focused on unraveling the p73 dependence
through p73 knockdown and the mechanism of action involved in each cell
line. The following project will aid in the understanding of the role of
p73 in pharmacological restoration of the p53 pathway in cancer therapy.

