Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Englerin-A prevents invasive phenotypes of renal cell carcinoma by
reprogramming mesenchymal to epithelial transition: A key mechanism of
its anticancer properties


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is associated with a high frequency of
metastasis and only few therapies substantially prolong survival.
Recently, Englerin A (Eng A), a molecule of herb (Phyllanthus engleri)
extracts, shows selective toxic effect on RCCs through the National
CancerInstitute Drug Discovery panel using human cell lines as well as in
vitro angiogenesis. Eng A has been reported to possess certain anticancer
properties. However, whether Eng A could suppress RCC metastasis has not
been fully elucidated. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is
followed by invasion is a hallmark of metastasis malignancies including
renal cancer. The aim of the present study was to examine the effects of
Eng A in preventing the migration and invasion ofRCCs (Caki-1 and 786-0),
as well as to investigate whether Eng A may inhibit the molecular changes
associated with EMT induced by transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-1).
We also aimed to see whether Eng A suppresses the cancer stem cell
markers and spheroid formation. The investigation demonstrated that Eng A
suppressed the migration and invasion of these cells under non-cytotoxic
concentrations. Eng A inhibited molecular changes associated with
TGF-1-inducedEMT by upregulating the epithelial markers and
downregulating the mesenchymal markers. Eng A significantly reduced the
levels of Twist protein, a master regulator of EMT. Eng A also inhibits
the stem cell markers, i.e., CD44, ABCG2 and ALDH1 and spheroid
formation. We also found that Eng A inhibits TGF-1-induced angiogenesis.
This study indicated that Eng A may serve as a potential candidate for
the treatment of renal cancer metastasis.

