Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activating JAK1-S703I mutation may predict the sensitivity of
JAK-STAT inhibition in hepatocellular carcinoma patient-derived xenograft
tumor models


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common type of cancer
worldwide. However, current therapeutic approaches for this epidemic
disease are limited and its 5-year survival rate has not been improved in
the past decades. Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumor models have
become an excellent in vivo system for understanding of disease biology
and drug discovery. In order to identify new therapeutic targets for HCC,
whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed on more than 60 HCC PDX
models. Among them, four models exhibited point mutations in JAK1 (Janus
Kinase) gene, which were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. To explore the
transforming capability, these mutations were then introduced into 293T
and Ba/F3 cells by transient transfection and retroviral infection,
respectively. The results demonstrated that JAK1S703I mutation was able
to activate JAK-STAT (Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription)
signaling pathway and drive cell proliferation in the absence of cytokine
stimulation in vitro. Furthermore, a modest sensitivity to the treatment
of a JAK1/2 inhibitor, Ruxolitinib, was observed in JAK1S703I mutant PDX
model, but not in other mutant or wild type models. Pharmacodynamic
analysis showed that phosphorylation of STAT3 in the Ruxolitinib-treated
tumor tissues was significantly inhibited. Collectively, our results
suggested that JAK1S703I is an activating mutation for JAK-STAT signaling
pathway in vitro and in vivo. JAK-STAT pathway might represent a new
therapeutic opportunity for HCC. Monotherapy using a more potent
inhibitor and combinatory therapy may be further explored in JAK1S703I
mutant PDX model.

