Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutaome-based magnolin sensitivity in ovarian cancer cells


Signaling pathways mediated through Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and/or PI3K/AKT/mTOR
signaling pathways play a key role in cell transformation and cancer
development. During carcinogenesis, genomic alterations, accumulation of
mutations and amplification of growth signaling, induce cellular
phenotype changes including escaping aging, metabolic change of energy
source and resistance against therapeutic agents. Recently, our research
group has identified a natural compound, magnolin, that inhibits ERK1 and
ERK2 kinase activities with about 87 uM and 16.5 uM of IC50,
respectively. However, the effect of magnolin in cancer cells has been
poorly understood. To explore the effect of magnolin in cancer cells, we
examined anti-proliferation effect of magnolin in pancreatic, colon and
ovarian cancer cells. We found that striking differences of cancer cell
proliferation was observed in ovarian cancer cells, TOV112D and SKOV3, by
magnolin treatment. In TCGA mutaome data-base analysis, we found that
TOV112D and SKOV3 harbor the different mutations in different genes which
are known to involve in chemo-resistance. In cell cycle analysis, we
found that TOV112D reduced S-phase of cell cycle and increased
G1/G0-phase of cell cycle. Importantly, activation protein profiles in
TOV112D and SKOV3 cells by Western blotting showed that phosphorylation
of p90RSK including RSK2 was higher in SKOV3 cells compared with TOV112D
cells. These results strongly suggested that alteration of p90RSK
signaling may play an important role in expression of chemo-resistance in
ovarian cancer cells.

