Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Health disparity characteristics on growth patterns of breast
cancer mortality trends among the US Counties, 1989-2010


Background: Group-based trajectory models are increasingly being applied
to address questions related to the development of cancer mortalities
over time and, more recently, there is a need to move away from the
interpretation of trajectory groups as distinct entities. In this study,
we aim to identify trajectory-patterns which have distinct epidemiologic
disparity among US counties, and to assess whether health disparities in
the socioeconomic characteristics are associated with a greater women
health burden in breast cancer.Methods: Cases of breast cancer diagnosed
between 1989 and 2010 were selected from Center for Disease Control's
WONDER Online Databases using International Classification of Diseases
for Malignant neoplasm of breast (ICD 10 - C50). Age-adjusted mortality
rates of breast cancer between 1989 and 2010 were calculated by counties
as well as race (African American and White). Growth patterns were
identified using Growth Mixture Modeling (GMM) method and disparity
characteristics including socioeconomic attributes were investigated
through National Cancer Institute's Surveillance Epidemiology and End
Results (SEER) County Attributes Dataset.Results: We identified the
following three growth sub-patterns in the trajectories of breast cancer
mortality rates between 1989 and 2010 among US counties: (1) a majority
(61%) following a gradual decreasing trajectories, (2) a non-decreasing
trajectories (31%), and the remainder following a trajectory with
relatively rapid decreasing (7%). We compared disparity characteristics
of education level, median household income, poverty percentage,
percentages of older ages (65+) and younger ages (Background: Group-based
trajectory models are increasingly being applied to address questions
related to the development of cancer mortalities over time and, more
recently, there is a need to move away from the interpretation of
trajectory groups as distinct entities. In this study, we aim to identify
trajectory-patterns which have distinct epidemiologic disparity among US
counties, and to assess whether health disparities in the socioeconomic
characteristics are associated with a greater women health burden in
breast cancer.Methods: Cases of breast cancer diagnosed between 1989 and
2010 were selected from Center for Disease Control's WONDER Online
Databases using International Classification of Diseases for Malignant
neoplasm of breast (ICD 10 - C50). Age-adjusted mortality rates of breast
cancer between 1989 and 2010 were calculated by counties as well as race
(African American and White). Growth patterns were identified using
Growth Mixture Modeling (GMM) method and disparity characteristics
including socioeconomic attributes were investigated through National
Cancer Institute's Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)
County Attributes Dataset.Results: We identified the following three
growth sub-patterns in the trajectories of breast cancer mortality rates
between 1989 and 2010 among US counties: (1) a majority (61%) following a
gradual decreasing trajectories, (2) a non-decreasing trajectories (31%),
and the remainder following a trajectory with relatively rapid decreasing
(7%). We compared disparity characteristics of education level, median
household income, poverty percentage, percentages of older ages (65+) and
younger ages (<18), and rural-urban continuum among above three
sub-patterns.Conclusions: There is heterogeneity of the socioeconomic
characteristics that are highly associated with growth patterns in
trajectories of breast cancer mortality rates. Growth mixture models are
an effective tool to be able to capture health disparities in
heterogeneity among counties in the trajectory of breast cancer
mortality.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

