Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of the preoperative Controlling Nutritional Status (CONUT)
score on the clinical outcome after curative surgery for colorectal cancer


Background: Recently, the preoperative immune-nutritional status has been
reported to correlate with the long-term survival in colorectal cancer
(CRC) patients. Markers of the immune-nutritional status, such as the
serum albumin concentration and prognostic nutritional index (PNI) were
reported to have prognostic value. However, there have been no reports on
the relationship between the controlling nutritional status (CONUT) score
and the clinical outcome after curative surgery for CRC. We herein
evaluated the prognostic significance of the CONUT score in patients with
CRC, and compared the accuracy of the CONUT score and the PNI as a
predictor of survival.Materials and methods: We retrospectively reviewed
a database of 204 patients who underwent curative surgery for Stage
II/III CRC between 2004 and 2009. Patients were divided into two groups
according to the CONUT score and the PNI.Result: The low-CONUT group (N =
150) had two or fewer points, while the high-CONUT group (N = 54) had a
score of three points or more. The low-PNI group (N = 27) had a PNI
Background: Recently, the preoperative immune-nutritional status has been
reported to correlate with the long-term survival in colorectal cancer
(CRC) patients. Markers of the immune-nutritional status, such as the
serum albumin concentration and prognostic nutritional index (PNI) were
reported to have prognostic value. However, there have been no reports on
the relationship between the controlling nutritional status (CONUT) score
and the clinical outcome after curative surgery for CRC. We herein
evaluated the prognostic significance of the CONUT score in patients with
CRC, and compared the accuracy of the CONUT score and the PNI as a
predictor of survival.Materials and methods: We retrospectively reviewed
a database of 204 patients who underwent curative surgery for Stage
II/III CRC between 2004 and 2009. Patients were divided into two groups
according to the CONUT score and the PNI.Result: The low-CONUT group (N =
150) had two or fewer points, while the high-CONUT group (N = 54) had a
score of three points or more. The low-PNI group (N = 27) had a PNI < 40,
while the high-PNI group (N = 177) had a PNI of 40 or more.The five-year
relapse-free survival (RFS) rate was 73.0% in the low-CONUT group and
53.6% in the high-CONUT group, which was significantly different (p =
0.0018). The five-year RFS was 51.5% in the low-PNI group and 70.4% in
the high-PNI group, there was a significant difference between the low
PNI group and the high PNI group (p = 0.0162).In a univariate analysis of
the postoperative survival based on the clinicopathological factors, the
sex, age, lymphatic vessel invasion, venous invasion, lymph node
metastasis, preoperative CA19-9 level, the CONUT score and the PNI were
associated with the RFS. A multivariate analysis showed that sex (Odds
ratio (OR) = 2.012, 95%CI; 1.135-3.685, p = 0.0164) and the preoperative
CA19-9 (OR = 2.194,95%CI; 1.054-4.271, p = 0.0364) were independently
associated with the RFS.The five-year cancer-specific survival (CSS) rate
was significantly higher at 92.7% in the low-CONUT group than that of
81.0% in the high-CONUT group (p = 0.0016). The five-year CSS was 71.2%
in the low PNI group and 92.3% in the high PNI group, which was also
significantly different (p = 0.0155).In a univariate analysis for the
CSS, lymph node metastasis, the preoperative CA19-9 level, the CONUT
score and the PNI were significantly associated with the CSS. A
multivariate analysis showed that lymph node metastasis (OR = 4.080,
95%CI; 1.476-13.089, p = 0.0097) and the CONUT score (OR = 3.661,
95%CI;1.084-11.234, p = 0.0376) were independently associated with the
CSS.Conclusion: This study suggested that the CONUT score is a strong
independent predictor of the survival among CRC patients. The CONUT score
is a more sensitive prognostic factor than the PNI.

