Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paleolithic and Mediterranean diet pattern scores and their
associations with biomarkers of inflammation and oxidative balance


Chronic inflammation is associated with poor diet quality as well as risk
for cancer and other chronic diseases. A diet-inflammation association
may relate to evolutionary discordance. We investigated associations of
two diet pattern scores, the Paleolithic and the Mediterranean, with
circulating levels of two inflammation-related biomarkers, C-reactive
protein (CRP), an acute inflammatory protein, and F2-isoprostanes, a
reliable marker of lipid peroxidation in vivo, in a colonoscopy-based,
pooled case-control study of incident sporadic colorectal adenomas (N =
646). We created diet scores from responses on a modified Willett
food-frequency questionnaire, and measured plasma levels of CRP and
F2-isoprostanes by ELISA and GCMS, respectively. Both diet scores were
calculated and categorized into quintiles, and their associations with
the biomarker levels were estimated using unconditional logistic
regression. The multivariable-adjusted odds ratios (OR) comparing those
in the highest relative to those in the lowest quintiles of the
Paleolithic and Mediterranean diet scores, were, respectively, 0.73 (95%
confidence interval [CI] 0.39, 1.36; Ptrend = 0.35) and 0.71 (95% CI
0.36, 1.40; Ptrend = 0.12) for CRP levels, and 0.35 (95% CI 0.17, 0.74;
Ptrend Chronic inflammation is associated with poor diet quality as well
as risk for cancer and other chronic diseases. A diet-inflammation
association may relate to evolutionary discordance. We investigated
associations of two diet pattern scores, the Paleolithic and the
Mediterranean, with circulating levels of two inflammation-related
biomarkers, C-reactive protein (CRP), an acute inflammatory protein, and
F2-isoprostanes, a reliable marker of lipid peroxidation in vivo, in a
colonoscopy-based, pooled case-control study of incident sporadic
colorectal adenomas (N = 646). We created diet scores from responses on a
modified Willett food-frequency questionnaire, and measured plasma levels
of CRP and F2-isoprostanes by ELISA and GCMS, respectively. Both diet
scores were calculated and categorized into quintiles, and their
associations with the biomarker levels were estimated using unconditional
logistic regression. The multivariable-adjusted odds ratios (OR)
comparing those in the highest relative to those in the lowest quintiles
of the Paleolithic and Mediterranean diet scores, were, respectively,
0.73 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.39, 1.36; Ptrend = 0.35) and 0.71
(95% CI 0.36, 1.40; Ptrend = 0.12) for CRP levels, and 0.35 (95% CI 0.17,
0.74; Ptrend <0.01) and 0.64 (95% CI 0.29, 1.40; Ptrend = 0.03) for
F2-isoprostanes levels. These findings, which are particularly strong for
the inverse Paleolithic diet score-F2-isoprostanes association, suggest
that diets that are more Paleolithic- or Mediterranean-like may be
associated with lower levels of systemic inflammation and oxidative
stress.

