Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anticancer effects of triptolide with celastrol, two
main compounds from Thunder God Vine


Objective: Triptolide and celastrol are two most widely studied and
promising compounds isolated from Thunder God Vine (Trypterigium
wilfordii Hook F) with promising anticancer activity. However, their
clinical application was limited by toxicity. We aim to investigate the
synergistic anti-proliferative effects of triptolide with celastrol in
cancer and the molecular mechanism.Methods: The effects of triptolide and
celastrol in cancer cells and the molecular mechanism were assessed by
using MTT assay in vitro, xenografts mouse model in vivo, flow cytometry,
fluorescence microscope and Western blot analysis.Results: The
combination of triptolide with celastrol induced strong cell growth
inhibition, cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase and apoptosis with the
increasing intracellular ROS accumulation in cancer cells. Pretreatment
with ROS scavenger N-acetyl-L-cysteine totally blocked the apoptosis
induced by triptolide with celastrol. Treatment with celastrol alone
decreased many Hsp90 client proteins including Akt, Cdks, EGFR and Raf1,
but lead to stress-induced increase of Hsp70 and Hsp27. Adding triptolide
to celastrol treatment abrogated this phenomenon and induced more
apoptosis. In xenografts mouse model, the lower-dose combination of
triptolide with celastrol significant inhibited the growth of tumors
without obvious toxicity.Conclusions: Triptolide in combination with
celastrol showed outstanding synergistic anticancer effect, suggesting
that this beneficial combination may offer a promising treatment option
for cancer patients.

