Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating biomarkers of B vitamins in relation to lung cancer
risk in the Lung Cancer Cohort Consortium


Background - B vitamins and factors related to one-carbon metabolism help
to maintain DNA and regulate gene expression. Some epidemiological data
suggest that factors related to the one-carbon metabolism are important
in the pathogenesis of several cancers, including lung cancer.Methods -
Within the NCI Cohort Consortium, we designed a prospective case-control
study including a total of 5,546 case-control pairs nested within 20
prospective cohorts. Centralized biochemical analyses of all study
participants were performed to measure circulating concentrations of
vitamin B6, folate and methionine, which were subsequently evaluated in
relation to lung cancer risk using conditional logistic regression
models.Results - We observed an overall increased risk of lung cancer of
25% among study participants having a deficiency in circulating B6
concentrations compared to those with normal concentrations, the odds
ratio (OR) being 1.23 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.10 - 1.38. This
association was primarily evident seen among men (OR 1.38 95% CI 1.20 -
1.60), but not among women (OR 1.03 95% CI 0.85-1.24), as well as for
ever ever smokers (OR 1.32 95% CI 1.10 - 1.60). Subgroup analyses by
histological sub-site indicated particularly strong association for
squamous cell carcinoma type, with about 50% risk increase overall when
comparing subjects with vitamin B6 deficiency to normal levels. No
association was evident for methionine. Detailed results will be
presented at the conference.Conclusion - Our results are compatible with
the hypothesis that vitamin B6 deficiency is associated with increased
lung cancer risk, although the risk increase appears to be moderate.

