Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Luteolin inhibits cell proliferation and induces cell apoptosis
via down-regulation of mitochondrial membrane potential in esophageal
carcinoma cells EC1 and KYSE450


Esophageal squamous carcinoma (ESCC) may be developed through a
progressive sequence from mild to severe dysplasia, carcinoma in situ,
and finally, invasive carcinoma. Chemoprevention can block or weaken the
influence of development. Recent study has shown luteolin, a
bioflavonoid, possesses anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and
anti-proliferative effects, and it might have a preventive effect in this
progress. In this study, we focused on the effect of luteolin on cell
cycle regulation in human Esophageal Squamous Carcinoma Cell Line EC1 and
KYSE450 Cells in vitro and its potential mechanisms. Observations by flow
cytometer showed that luteolin inhibited cell cycle progression at G2/M
phase in a dose- and time-dependent manner. We also found that luteolin
could induce cell apoptosis via decreasing activation of caspase-3 and
down-regulation of mitochondrial membrane potential. Western blot results
showed the protein expression of cycle related protein CyclinD1 and
apoptosis related proteins caspase-3, caspase-9, and Bak were also
significantly decreased in luteolin treated cells compared with the
non-luteolin treated cells. Our results suggest that the proper use of
luteolin might be a practical approach to the prevention of esophageal
carcinoma via the inhibition of cell proliferation and other potential
high risk regions for this disease.

