Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of autophagy as potential molecular mechanism in
trastuzumab-induced cardiotoxicity


Autophagy is basic catabolic cellular process which is essential for
maintaining cellular homeostasis during nutrient starved and stress
conditions. Even though autophagy is altered in various cardiovascular
diseases including cardiomyopathy and heart failure, its precise role in
heart conditions remains ambiguous. Trastuzumab is a humanized monoclonal
antibody approved for treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer.
Trastuzumab treatment has been shown to induce considerable
cardiotoxicity. Molecular mechanism for trastuzumab-induced
cardiotoxicity remains largely unclear. In this study, we investigated
the role of autophagy as potential molecular mechanism in
trastuzumab-induced cardiotoxicity. We treated human primary
cardiomyocytes with trastuzumab at different time points, and then
examined the expression of prominent autophagic markers such as LC3A/B,
Beclin 1 and Bcl-2 by western blotting. Results divulged that expression
levels of LC3A/B were markedly decreased in cardiomyocytes after 24 and
48 h of trastuzumab treatment. Beclin 1 protein levels also significantly
decreased, although Bcl-2 expression was increased. These results
indicate that downregulation of Beclin 1 and upregulation of Bcl-2 after
trastuzumab treatment could potentially impede the formation of
autophagosomes resulting in inhibition of autophagy. Collectively, these
data indicate that autophagy plays a beneficial role in normal cardiac
tissues by preventing the accumulation of abnormal proteins or damaged
organelles. However, trastuzumab treatment may inhibit the autophagy,
resulting in cardiomyopathy.

