Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of an estrogen-regulated variant transcript of the
peroxisomal branched chain fatty acid oxidase, ACOX2, in breast cancer


Alternate transcripts from a single gene locus greatly enhance the
combinatorial flexibility of the human transcriptome. Different patterns
of exon usage have been observed when comparing normal tissue to cancers,
suggesting that variant transcripts may play a role in the tumor
phenotype. In this study we show that an intronic start variant of ACOX2,
peroxisomal Acyl-CoA oxidase 2 (ACOX2-i9), is expressed and translated
into a 25kDa protein in HepG2 cells as well as in several breast cancer
cell lines, where it is required for optimal cell proliferation. shRNA
knock down of the ACOX2-i9 variant results in decreased cell viability as
assessed by colony formation assay of T47D and MDA-MB 436 cells.
Moreover, expression of ACOX2-i9 is estrogen regulated, being induced by
estradiol and inhibited by tamoxifen in ER+ T47D and Mcf-7 cells, but not
in the ER- MDA-MB 436 cell line. This variant transcript is present
predominantly in breast tumors as assessed in our initial set of 53
breast cancers and further validated in 87 tumor/normal pairs from the
TCGA Breast Cancer dataset. It is specifically enriched in ER+ breast
cancers where it's expression is associated with improved outcome. These
data identify variant ACOX2 as a potential novel therapeutic biomarker in
ER+ breast cancer.

