Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a novel mitochondrial protein complex containing
pro-apoptotic Noxa in leukemia


Apoptosis evasion and altered nutrient metabolism are recognized as major
contributors to cancer development. However, the degree to which
apoptosis and metabolism are integrated in malignant cells remains poorly
understood. Previously our group observed alterations in mitochondrial
function mediated by expression of the pro-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2
family Noxa. Here, we report the presence of a large 650 kilodalton
multi-protein complex specific to the mitochondria of Jurkat leukemia
cells that contains Noxa. We also detect a similar mitochondrial protein
complex in cells expressing Noxa with a mutated BH3 domain, suggestive of
an apoptosis-independent metabolic function for this Bcl-2 family member.
Lastly, we present here the successful isolation of this complex aimed at
identifying other complex components via mass spectrometry. This unique
strategy included purifying the complex by gel-filtration chromatography,
and then resolving the complex into an acrylamide gel by either size or
charge, followed by separating the individual complex components by size.
Future studies are geared towards identifying the other components of the
complex, looking for presence of this complex in other cancers, and
understanding how this complex may function in maintaining mitochondrial
homeostasis in cancer. In summary, the data presented here strongly
suggests a non-canonical function for Noxa in regulating mitochondrial
function independent of apoptosis in leukemia, and possibly other
malignancies.Note: This abstract was not presented at the meeting.

