Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum ferritin as a predictive marker for increase in infection
and increased mortality in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome


Background: Myelodysplastic Syndrome (MDS) is a disorder of the bone
marrow wherein hematopoietic cells fail to develop and differentiate into
their mature forms. High iron stores in the body are known to have a
detrimental effect on the overall outcome for the patient, however its
exact role in the disease spectrum is currently unknown. We sought out to
elucidate the role of Serum Ferritin against two end points - infection
and death.Methods: The patient data was queried from METEOR (Methodist
Environment for Translational Enhancement and Outcomes Research), a
clinical data warehouse and analytics environment. We obtained baseline
demographics, laboratory data, diagnostic workup, treatment plan,
infection incidences, ferritin levels and dead/alive status.Results: We
reviewed the records of 2249 patients who were treated with a diagnosis
of MDS from January 2006 - June 2014. We matched patients with infection
during hospital stay due to any cause (sepsis, febrile neutropenia,
colitis, pneumonia, URTI, etc) against their maximum ferritin level. The
mean Ferritin in those without infection was 809.82 (95% CI: 575.17 -
1044.48) while the mean Ferritin in those with infection was 2360.09 (95%
CI: 1094.69 - 4167.12). We then performed the non-parametric,
Wilcoxon-Rank sum (Mann-Whitney U) test between the two variables and
concluded that there was a statistically significant relationship between
Serum Ferritin and Infection rates (p Background: Myelodysplastic
Syndrome (MDS) is a disorder of the bone marrow wherein hematopoietic
cells fail to develop and differentiate into their mature forms. High
iron stores in the body are known to have a detrimental effect on the
overall outcome for the patient, however its exact role in the disease
spectrum is currently unknown. We sought out to elucidate the role of
Serum Ferritin against two end points - infection and death.Methods: The
patient data was queried from METEOR (Methodist Environment for
Translational Enhancement and Outcomes Research), a clinical data
warehouse and analytics environment. We obtained baseline demographics,
laboratory data, diagnostic workup, treatment plan, infection incidences,
ferritin levels and dead/alive status.Results: We reviewed the records of
2249 patients who were treated with a diagnosis of MDS from January 2006
- June 2014. We matched patients with infection during hospital stay due
to any cause (sepsis, febrile neutropenia, colitis, pneumonia, URTI, etc)
against their maximum ferritin level. The mean Ferritin in those without
infection was 809.82 (95% CI: 575.17 - 1044.48) while the mean Ferritin
in those with infection was 2360.09 (95% CI: 1094.69 - 4167.12). We then
performed the non-parametric, Wilcoxon-Rank sum (Mann-Whitney U) test
between the two variables and concluded that there was a statistically
significant relationship between Serum Ferritin and Infection rates (p
<0.001). A student t-test with unequal variances was performed which,
confirmed the statistical significance (p 0.021).We matched patients who
passed away during hospital stay against their maximum ferritin level.
The mean Ferritin in those survived was 872.32 (95% CI: 592.96 - 1151.68)
while the mean Ferritin in those died was 2941.78 (95% CI: 1255.05 -
4628.50). We then performed the non-parametric, Wilcoxon-Rank sum
(Mann-Whitney U) test between the two variables and concluded that there
was a statistically significant relationship between Serum Ferritin and
death rates (p Background: Myelodysplastic Syndrome (MDS) is a disorder
of the bone marrow wherein hematopoietic cells fail to develop and
differentiate into their mature forms. High iron stores in the body are
known to have a detrimental effect on the overall outcome for the
patient, however its exact role in the disease spectrum is currently
unknown. We sought out to elucidate the role of Serum Ferritin against
two end points - infection and death.Methods: The patient data was
queried from METEOR (Methodist Environment for Translational Enhancement
and Outcomes Research), a clinical data warehouse and analytics
environment. We obtained baseline demographics, laboratory data,
diagnostic workup, treatment plan, infection incidences, ferritin levels
and dead/alive status.Results: We reviewed the records of 2249 patients
who were treated with a diagnosis of MDS from January 2006 - June 2014.
We matched patients with infection during hospital stay due to any cause
(sepsis, febrile neutropenia, colitis, pneumonia, URTI, etc) against
their maximum ferritin level. The mean Ferritin in those without
infection was 809.82 (95% CI: 575.17 - 1044.48) while the mean Ferritin
in those with infection was 2360.09 (95% CI: 1094.69 - 4167.12). We then
performed the non-parametric, Wilcoxon-Rank sum (Mann-Whitney U) test
between the two variables and concluded that there was a statistically
significant relationship between Serum Ferritin and Infection rates (p
<0.001). A student t-test with unequal variances was performed which,
confirmed the statistical significance (p 0.021).We matched patients who
passed away during hospital stay against their maximum ferritin level.
The mean Ferritin in those survived was 872.32 (95% CI: 592.96 - 1151.68)
while the mean Ferritin in those died was 2941.78 (95% CI: 1255.05 -
4628.50). We then performed the non-parametric, Wilcoxon-Rank sum
(Mann-Whitney U) test between the two variables and concluded that there
was a statistically significant relationship between Serum Ferritin and
death rates (p <0.001). A student t-test with unequal variances was
performed which, confirmed the statistical significance (p 0.018).Lastly,
we also performed the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test to assess for
the significance levels across all the three groups - Ferritin, infection
and death. This test confirmed the significance with a p value of 0.0001
for each of the outcomes.Conclusion: Our data review reveals that
increased ferritin is directly related to increased mortality and
morbidity. One explanation of this finding could lie in the potential
role of Iron as an oxidative agent, which increases free radical damage,
impair oxidative phosphorylation and promote mitochondrial dysfunction
resulting in cellular death. We conclude that increased ferritin
represents a serious threat to the health of the patient and recommend
that iron chelation therapy be instituted accordingly.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

