Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of rare and novel alleles in FFPE tumor samples
using laser capture microdissection (LCM) and Ampliseq sequencing
technologies


Tumors are becoming recognized as genetically heterogeneous masses of
cells with different clonal histories. Identifying the mutations present
in these heterogeneous masses can lead to important insights into the
future behavior of the tumor and possible intervention mechanisms.
However, the rarity of pathogenic mutations in small subsets of cells can
make identification of such alleles difficult. In this study, we
demonstrate a complete workflow that facilitates the identification of
rare and novel alleles from FFPE tumor sections. We collected small
regions with different cellular morphologies from lung tumor samples
using laser capture microdissection, extracted both DNA and RNA from
these regions, and characterized mutations present and transcript
abundances by using Ampliseq targeted sequencing. We show that LCM
facilitates the detection of alleles that are not detectable in
macrodissected tissue scrapes. We also show that different regions of a
tumor have very different patterns of alleles detectable and have a great
deal of genetic diversity. Finally, we show that RNA expression patterns
are also clearly different in the different regions. Interestingly,
dissected regions with similar gross tissue morphologies display
differences in alleles present and RNA expression patterns. These results
suggest the best way to analyze mutations present in a tumor is to
microdissect different subregions of the tumor, and using Ampliseq panels
to identify the alleles present in those subregions.

