Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Pim kinase inhibitor AZD1208 sensitizes acute myeloid leukemia
cells with fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 internal tandem duplication
(FLT3-ITD) to cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy drugs


Purpose: Internal tandem duplication (ITD) in the juxtamembrane domain of
the fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) receptor is present in leukemia
cells of approximately 30% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients.
These patients have a high remission rate, but short relapse-free and
overall survival. Pim-1 kinase, a pro-survival oncogene, is
transcriptionally upregulated downstream of FLT3-ITD and promotes
FLT3-ITD signaling via a positive feedback loop. We proposed that Pim
kinase inhibitors would enhance the cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy
drugs in AML cell lines and patient samples with FLT3-ITD.Methods:
AZD1208, a pan-Pim (Pim-1, Pim-2 and Pim-3) kinase inhibitor, was kindly
provided by AstraZeneca. FLT3-ITD cell lines included MV4-11, MOLM-14 and
Ba/F3-ITD. The topoisomerase 1 and 2 inhibitors daunorubicin,
mitoxantrone, etoposide and topotecan and the nucleoside analog
cytarabine were studied at their IC50 concentrations for each cell line.
Apoptosis was measured by flow cytometric analysis of Annexin V/propidium
iodide (PI) staining, percent cells in sub-G1 cell cycle phase using PI
staining and mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) using JC-1 dye, as
well as flow cytometric and western blot measurements of cleaved poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and caspase-3.Results: Co-treatment with
1M AZD1208 and daunorubicin induced significantly more apoptosis than
daunorubicin or AZD1208 alone (e.g., 65% vs. 25% and 7% in Ba/F3-ITD) in
FLT3-ITD cell lines. At least two-fold increase in apoptosis was also
seen when AZD1208 was combined with mitoxantrone, etoposide or topotecan,
compared with each drug alone, but AZD1208 did not increase apoptosis
induced by cytarabine. Chemosensitization of FLT3-ITD cells with the
combination treatment was confirmed by a higher percentage of sub-G1
cells (e.g., 33% for AZD1208 and daunorubicin combination vs. 17% for
daunorubicin alone in Ba/F3-ITD), more rapid loss of MMP and increased
time-dependent cleavage of PARP and caspase-3. Apoptosis was
significantly (PPurpose: Internal tandem duplication (ITD) in the
juxtamembrane domain of the fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) receptor is
present in leukemia cells of approximately 30% of acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) patients. These patients have a high remission rate, but short
relapse-free and overall survival. Pim-1 kinase, a pro-survival oncogene,
is transcriptionally upregulated downstream of FLT3-ITD and promotes
FLT3-ITD signaling via a positive feedback loop. We proposed that Pim
kinase inhibitors would enhance the cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy
drugs in AML cell lines and patient samples with FLT3-ITD.Methods:
AZD1208, a pan-Pim (Pim-1, Pim-2 and Pim-3) kinase inhibitor, was kindly
provided by AstraZeneca. FLT3-ITD cell lines included MV4-11, MOLM-14 and
Ba/F3-ITD. The topoisomerase 1 and 2 inhibitors daunorubicin,
mitoxantrone, etoposide and topotecan and the nucleoside analog
cytarabine were studied at their IC50 concentrations for each cell line.
Apoptosis was measured by flow cytometric analysis of Annexin V/propidium
iodide (PI) staining, percent cells in sub-G1 cell cycle phase using PI
staining and mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) using JC-1 dye, as
well as flow cytometric and western blot measurements of cleaved poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and caspase-3.Results: Co-treatment with
1M AZD1208 and daunorubicin induced significantly more apoptosis than
daunorubicin or AZD1208 alone (e.g., 65% vs. 25% and 7% in Ba/F3-ITD) in
FLT3-ITD cell lines. At least two-fold increase in apoptosis was also
seen when AZD1208 was combined with mitoxantrone, etoposide or topotecan,
compared with each drug alone, but AZD1208 did not increase apoptosis
induced by cytarabine. Chemosensitization of FLT3-ITD cells with the
combination treatment was confirmed by a higher percentage of sub-G1
cells (e.g., 33% for AZD1208 and daunorubicin combination vs. 17% for
daunorubicin alone in Ba/F3-ITD), more rapid loss of MMP and increased
time-dependent cleavage of PARP and caspase-3. Apoptosis was
significantly (P<0.0001) rescued by co-treatment with the pan-caspase
inhibitor z-VAD. Cell lines with wild-type FLT3 were less sensitive to
combined AZD1208 and chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Finally, increased
cytotoxicity of daunorubicin in the presence of AZD1208 was also seen in
FLT3-ITD AML patient marrow samples, but not remission marrow
samples.Conclusion: Our work supports clinical applicability of combining
a Pim kinase inhibitor with chemotherapy to treat AML with FLT3-ITD.
Ongoing work is directed toward determining the molecular mechanisms of
sensitization of FLT3-ITD cells to chemotherapy by Pim kinase inhibition.

