Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic profiling of prostate cancer in Korean population


Prostate cancer is one of the most common cancers for male population in
the world. The search for accurate biomarkers in prostate cancer is
critical for evolution of accurate management of prostate cancer.
Previous studies have identified that several genomic alterations in
prostate cancer including TMPRSS2-ERG fusion, PTEN deletion and SPOP
single nucleotide variants (SNVs), the majority of which are from western
population. To characterize the somatic mutations of prostate cancer in
Korean, we sequenced the whole exome of 49 prostate cancer patient
tissues and matched normal tissues. A total of 738 somatic non-silent
variants affecting 692 distinct genes were identified. In addition to
already known genes (SPOP, FOXA1 and PTEN), we also found previously
uncharacterized genes such as GRIN2A, LRP1, LRP1B and KRT1. Of the 40
mutated genes across multiple cases, missense SNVs of SPOP (5/49 cases,
10.2%) were the most frequent, followed by missense and splice-site SNVs
of GRIN2A (4/49 cases, 8.2%). Mutations in low density
lipoprotein-related protein encoded by LRP1 and LRP1B affected
considerable portion of all cases (7/49, 14.3%), describe the probable
relation between lipid metabolism and prostate cancer. As a results, we
suggested the distinct patterns of genetic variations involved in
prostate cancer of Korean population.Note: This abstract was not
presented at the meeting.

