Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A long tail of sub-clonal TP53 mutations emerged by ultra-deep
sequencing of newly diagnosed multiple myeloma (MM)


TP53 is rarely reported as being affected either by deletions or
mutations in MM, even if chr17p13 copy number (CN) loss defines a samples
subgroup with a particularly poor prognosis. Here we aim at
retrospectively analyzing by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) the TP53
gene inactivation in newly diagnosed MM, assessing the mutational events
frequency and their clinical impact.A cohort of 92 MM, receiving up-front
velcade (vel)-based regimens, followed by autologous stem cell
transplantation, was included in the study. TP53 gene mutational status
was analysed by amplicon-targeted deep NGS approach. An upcoming NGS data
analysis software was employed to detect vars (var) and to compare them
to IARC database. p53 activity was evaluated by immunoblot
assays.Ultra-deep TP53 coding sequence analysis (median depth: 1060)
highlighted the presence of a median of 1.8 vars per samples in 73/92
(79%) MM: a total of 131 nucleotide substitutions emerged, with vars
allele frequencies (VAF) ranging from 1 to 99% (median 1.3%). TP53 vars,
were defined either neutral or deleterious mutations, according to their
predicted effect at amino acid level. 36 cases carried 42 deleterious
vars (VAF = 1.2%), 67% of which were predicted as non-functional at
protein level. 9 samples carried 21 neutral vars (VAF = 1.1%), mainly
affecting the DNA binding domain. 28 samples carried 68 SIFT unclassified
vars, among which several polymorphisms were counted (VAF = 94.6%). SNPs
arrays were performed on 83/92 samples: 14/83 (17%) carried a TP53 CN
loss on chr17p13.1. The incidence of TP53 hemizygous deletion was higher
among cases carrying deleterious mutations, as compared to cases carrying
either neutral or unclassified mutations (25%, 12,5% and 12%,
respectively). 2/17 non-mutated samples carried TP53 hemizygous deletion,
as well. Interestingly, an Rb1 tumour suppressor gene CN loss on
chr13q14.2 significantly characterized samples carrying either mutated
(deleterious var) or deleted TP53 (p = 0.006). By immunoblot assay we
showed the absence of phosphorilation both in 3 TP53 deleted cases and in
3 MM carrying deleterious vars; on the contrary p-p53 was observed in 4
non-mutated cases.Clinical correlations were performed on 81 MM showing
that the presence of either TP53 hemizygous deletions or at least one
TP53 deleterious var was more likely associated to the response to
vel-based induction therapy (frequencies of partial response: 35% and 64%
among samples carrying or not impaired TP53, respectively; p = 0.05).
Conversely, the frequency of progression events was slightly higher among
MM carrying impaired TP53 (69% vs. 50%).In conclusion, the TP53 coding
sequence analysis by ultra-deep NGS of a cohort of newly diagnosed MM
highlighted an unexpected, still un-explored, high rate of TP53 vars. The
impact of TP53 damage on MM disease course has to be confirmed in
randomized clinical trial.Supported by Roche Diagnostics and FP7 NGS-PTL
project

