Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional inactivation of LKB1 increases the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and governs response to immune modulation


LKB1/STK11 is one of the most commonly mutated tumor suppressors in
non-small cell lung cancers. Inactivation of LKB1/STK11 is common in lung
cancers with mutated KRAS alleles (1) and results in a clinically more
aggressive and metastatic phenotype (2-5). Here, we show in genetically
engineered mouse models (GEMMs) and in primary human cancer specimens
that loss of LKB1/STK11 in the context of mutated KRAS has a marked
effect on the tumor immune microenvironment characterized by accumulation
of neutrophils and of tumor promoting cytokines including interleukin
(IL)-6. Importantly, Kras/Lkb1 tumors also carry reduced number of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes with the infiltrating lymphocytes
expressing higher levels of T cell exhaustion markers and greater
proportions of regulatory T cells as compared to KRAS-driven (Kras)
tumors. We also found that presence of LKB1 mutation was negatively
correlated with programmed death-1 ligand-1 (PD-L1) expression in mouse
and human lung tumors and that antibodies therapeutically targeting this
immune checkpoint were ineffective in Kras/Lkb1 mice. In contrast, an
IL-6 neutralizing antibody showed clinical benefit in the Kras/Lkb1 model
via the reduction of neutrophil accumulation and proinflammatory
cytokines. These findings suggest that LKB1 loss of function exacerbates
the tumor inflammatory microenvironment in lung cancers and that
targeting the aberrant cytokine signaling in LKB1-deficient tumors could
be a viable therapeutic option.

