Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity and avascular penetration of FTY720 (fingolimod) and its
non-immune suppressant analogue (OSU2S) within three dimensional tissue
culture model of colorectal cancer


Fingolimod (FTY-720) and its non-immunosuppressive analogue (OSU2S)
possess anticancer activity against hepatocellular carcinoma attributed
to interference with protein kinase C (PKC) signaling. Avascular
penetration represents a major limitation for the treatment of solid
tumors nonetheless colorectal cancer. Herein, we are assessing the
differential antiproliferative activity of OSU2S compared to FTY720
against multicellular spheroids of HCT-116 and HT-29 colorectal cancer
cell lines. In addition, we are comparing the avascular penetration
properties of OSU2S to FTY720 within the avascular multicellular layers
model.The IC50's of FTY720 and OSU2S were calculated in monolayer and
spheroid culture models of HCT-116 and HT-29 cells using Emax model.
Generally, OSU2S was found to be 1.5 to 3 folds more potent than FTY720
in both cell lines using monolayer and spheroid culture systems. The
ratios between the IC50's of FTY720 in spheroid compared to monolayer
cultures of HCT-116 and HT-29 cells were found to be to 5.7 and 3.4
folds, respectively. On the other hand, the ratios between the IC50's of
OSU2S in spheroid compared to monolayer cultures of HCT-116 and HT-29
cells were found to be 4.5 and 3.4 folds, respectively. This might be
attributed to avascular penetration problem for OSU2S and FTY720 in
colorectal cancer. The pre-calculated IC50's of FTY720 and OSU2S induced
significant increase in the cleaved fraction of PKC in both monolayer and
spheroid model in HCT-116 and HT-29 cells. The influence of FTY720 and
OSU2S on cell cycle analysis was studied using DNA flow cytometry
analysis. Both FTY720 and OSU2S changed the cell cycle distribution of
both HCT-116 and HT-29 cell lines in the monolayer culture and to a
lesser extent in the spheroid culture model. The avascular penetration of
OSU2S through multicellular layers of HCT-116 was 1.9 and 1.2 fold faster
than FTY720 after 12 and 24 h of penetration, respectively. Also, OSU2S
was faster than FTY720 in penetrating multicellular layers of HT-29 by
2.1 to 1.7 folds after 12 and 24 h of penetration, respectively. In
conclusion, OSU2S possess better antiproliferative and avascular
penetration profile within colorectal cancer cells compared to FTY720.

