Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment and targeting of the MDM2-p53 network in CLL


Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia (CLL) is the most common adult leukaemia in
the western world. It is a highly heterogenic disease with variable
disease progression. One of the clearest indicators of poor prognosis in
CLL is loss of p53 function via deletion of chromosome 17p13 (del17p) and
mutation of TP53. Since TP53 mutation rates rise dramatically in
treatment-refractory CLL, identifying TP53 mutations at diagnosis may aid
treatment decisions. We have compared next generation (NGS) to Sanger
sequencing to determine the optimal method and detection level for TP53
mutation in CLL and assess the clinical significance of small
TP53-mutated subclones. Since the incidence of TP53 mutation is
relatively low (approximately 10%) when first treatment of CLL is
required, targeting the p53 pathway may present a treatment option. To
investigate this possibility, primary CLL cells were exposed ex vivo to
the MDM2-p53 antagonists Nut-3a, RG-7112 and RG-7388 which prevent the
interaction between p53 and its inhibitor protein MDM2 to activate p53
leading to growth inhibition and cell death.We analysed genomic DNA from
the CLL cells of 140 patients, including 36 with multiple samples from
different stages of disease progression (median follow-up 10 years), by
NGS using a ROCHE 454 GS-FLX pyrosequencing platform. In addition, 90
samples were previously screened for TP53 mutations by Sanger DNA
sequencing. Full clinical diagnostic and outcome data was available. To
assess the functional status of the MDM2-p53 pathway, the sensitivity of
CLL cells to a range of non-genotoxic MDM2-p53 antagonists was
evaluated.Kaplan Meier analysis of NGS data showed that patients with
TP53 mutation+del17p had a median overall survival (OS) of 50 months
compared to 140 months for wild type TP53 patients (HR = 2.8, CI
1.7-14.6; p = 0.003). 5% of patients harboured a monoallelic TP53
mutation in the absence of del17p, 2.1% had del17p without mutation on
the remaining allele, and 9.3% had del17p+TP53 mutation. Interestingly,
patients with del17p+TP53 mutation showed poorer survival than patients
with TP53 mutation alone (HR 7.2, CI 1.2-14.6; p = 0.02). One patient
with TP53 mutation alone has stable disease (10 years, no treatment)
since detection of mutation. Four patients had TP53 mutant samples
detected by NGS which were not detected by Sanger sequencing. In addition
TP53 WT CLL cells showed a cytotoxic response to MDM2-p53 antagonists
(RG-7388 LC50 0.40.08 M, n = 11) whereas TP53 mutant CLL cells were 11
fold less sensitive (RG-7388 LC50 4.581.36 M, n = 3) as determined by XTT
assay following 48 hour treatment.NGS is a more sensitive method for
detection of TP53 mutations compared with Sanger sequencing. Patients
with TP53 mutation alone in the absence of del17p display longer OS
compared to patients with del17p+TP53 mutation. In addition, MDM2-p53
antagonists provide a potential future treatment option in TP53 WT CLL.

