Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual Wnt and EGFR-MAPK dependency of BRAFV600E-mutant colorectal
cancer


Aberrant Wnt pathway activation due to inactivating mutations in the gene
encoding RNF43 (an E3 ubiquitin ligase that promotes degradation of the
Wnt receptors Frizzled and LRP6) may contribute to the unresponsiveness
of BRAFV600E-mutant colorectal cancer (CRC) to BRAF inhibitors. Analysis
of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) CRC data set reveals a striking
co-occurrence of the BRAFV600E mutation and truncating mutations in
RNF43. RNF43 mutations are likely to be functionally significant, as
RNF43 mutations and mutations in the -catenin destruction complex
component APC are almost completely mutually exclusive. The vast majority
of BRAFV600E;RNF43-mutant CRCs are hypermutable [microsatellite
instability (MSI)-high phenotype]. The mismatch repair deficiency in
these tumors may directly contribute to RNF43 mutagenesis, as RNF43
mutations tend to be small insertions/deletions in homopolymeric tracts.
To determine if RNF43 mutations confer Wnt dependency in BRAFV600E-mutant
CRC, we treated three BRAFV600E;RNF43-mutant CRC patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) models with the porcupine inhibitor WNT974 (formerly
LGK974), which blocks the palmitoylation and secretion of Wnt ligands.
Single agent WNT974 anti-tumor activity was observed in 2/3 PDX models,
and correlated with decreased tumor cell proliferation and mucinous
differentiation. Single agent anti-tumor activity with the BRAF inhibitor
LGX818 was also observed in 2/3 PDX models. No single agent anti-tumor
activity was observed with the EGFR inhibitor cetuximab. The double
combinations of WNT974+LGX818 and LGX818+cetuximab, and the triple
combination of WNT974+LGX818+cetuximab were efficacious in all three
BRAFV600E;RNF43-mutant CRC PDX models. In summary, the Wnt pathway and
the EGFR-MAPK pathway may jointly promote tumorigenesis of
BRAFV600E-mutant CRC, providing a strong rationale to treat patients with
BRAFV600E-mutant CRCs harboring upstream Wnt pathway mutations with
combinations of WNT974, LGX818 and/or cetuximab.

