Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Topotecan synergizes with CHEK1 inhibitor to induce apoptosis in
ovarian cancer cells


BackgroundTopotecan is a therapeutic option for women with
platinum-resistant or -refractory ovarian cancer. However, the
dose-limiting toxicity of topotecan is myelosuppression. This led us to
seek a combination treatment to augment topotecan anti-cancer activity in
a cancer-targeted manner. Ovarian serous cancers, a major subtype, show
dysregulated DNA repair pathway and often display a high level of CHEK1,
a cell cycle regulator and DNA damage sensor. CHEK1 inhibitors are a
novel approach to treatment, and have been used as single agents or in
combination chemotherapy in many cancers.MethodsWe evaluated the cellular
effects of topotecan in a panel of high grade serous (HGS) and non-HGS
ovarian cancer cells. We then determined IC50s of topotecan in the
absence and presence of suboptimal concentrations of CHEK1 inhibitor,
PF477736. Synergism between topotecan and PF477736 was calculated based
on cellular viability assays. Cytotoxic effect of the combined treatment
was compared with apoptotic activities by Caspase3/7 activity assay and
Western blotting of cleaved-PARP1 and H2A.X.ResultsNon-HGS ovarian cancer
cells were generally more sensitive to topotecan treatment compared to
HGS ovarian cancer cells. When combined with suboptimal concentrations of
CHEK1 inhibitor, topotecan potently and synergistically inhibited the
proliferation of HGS ovarian cancer cells. This dramatic synergism in
cellular toxicity was consistent with increases in markers of
apoptosis.ConclusionsOur findings suggest that the addition of CHEK1
inhibitor increases the response of ovarian cancer cells to topotecan.
Furthermore, reduced dosages of both drugs achieved maximal cytotoxic
effects by combining topotecan with CHEK1 inhibitor. This strategy would
potentially minimize side effects of the drugs for extended clinical
benefit.

