Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p control cell proliferation and apoptosis
in HCC via regulation of PIN1 expression


Introduction: PIN1 is a peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase (PPlase) that
regulates multiple signaling pathways to control cell fate. It is found
to be up-regulated in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC), leading to
increased cell proliferation and inhibition of apoptosis. However, the
regulation of PIN1 remains poorly defined. MicroRNA (miRNA) plays a
pivotal role in carcinogenesis by regulating tumor suppressor genes and
oncogenes via targeting the 3UTR of their encoded mRNAs. Therefore, we
aimed at identifying miRNAs regulating PIN1 expression, and determining
the contributions of these miRNAs to tumorigenesis through PIN1.Methods:
Potential miRNAs regulating PIN1 were identified through sequence
prediction using the online database TargetScan Release 6.2. Western
immunoblotting and qRT-PCR were used to assess PIN1 expression in HCC
cells with over-expression of identified miRNAs. Dual-Luciferase reporter
assay was conducted to examine the direct interaction between the
identified miRNAs and PIN1 3UTR. The tumor suppressive role of the
identified miRNAs in HCC cells was investigated using MTT cell
proliferation assay, colony formation assay and Annexin V apoptosis
detection assay. To investigate the correlation between the levels of
PIN1 and the identified miRNAs, qRT-PCR was used to determine the mRNA
levels of PIN1 and the identified miRNAs in 20 pairs of normal liver
tissue and HCC.Results: We identified miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p as
important negative regulators of PIN1. Consequently, over-expression of
miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p enhanced cellular apoptosis, and inhibited cell
growth and colony formation in HCC cells. Furthermore, the cellular
functions of miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p were abrogated by over-expression
of PIN1. Importantly, the expression of PIN1 was negatively correlated
with that of miR-296-5p and miR-874-3p in HCC tissues, consistent with
the regulatory role of miR-295-5p and miR-874-3p on PIN1
expression.Conclusion: Taken together, our data showed that miR-296-5p
and miR-874-3p controlled cell proliferation and apoptosis in HCC by
regulating PIN1 expression.

