Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of tumor-specific antigens associated with RET/PTC3
expression


Relocated in transformation/papillary thyroid carcinoma, RET/PTC3 (RP3)
is a fusion oncogene that causes a form of papillary thyroid cancer
(PTC). In addition to driving transformation, the constitutively active
kinase precociously phosphorylates itself as well as other intracellular
proteins, thereby providing tumor-specific targets for the adaptive
immune system.PTCs are known to have the ability to escape the immune
system driving a dysregulation of the activity of several cell
populations involved in the immune response. Indeed we found that mice
immunized with RP3+/MHC class II+ cells produce dramatically fewer
IFNg-secreting CD4+ T cells compared to mice immunized with RP3-/MHC
class II+ counterparts as measured in the spleens.We demonstrated the
immunogenicity of RP3 with reactivity in both BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice to
RP3/IEd- and RP3/CIITA-expressing cells. Also, we observed immunogenicity
of RP3-derived phosphopeptides in ELISpot assays, supporting the
hypothesis that the aberrant autophosphorylation of RP3 is a source of
tumor-specific immunogenicity.Finally, utilizing a RP3-expressing
vaccinia vector for immunization of C57BL/6 mice, we identified peptide
sequences that appear to be immunogenic on the basis of unique
conformation of the fusion protein that impacts antigen processing.Taken
together these results could pave the way for better vaccine approaches
without accompanying autoimmunity.

