Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA-seq differential transcription analysis of TCGA colorectal
cancer (CRC) transcriptomes reveals subtype-specific isoform usage


Background: Differential transcription analysis may reveal transcriptome
aberrations associated with cancer progression and help identify
important drivers in molecularly distinct subtypes of a disease.Methods:
We developed a data-driven bioinformatics pipeline (DiffSplice) that
performs differential transcription analysis at the alternative splicing
(AS) level and allows accurate transcriptome reconstruction through joint
analysis of all RNA-seq samples. In this study, we applied DiffSplice to
RNA-seq data from TCGA CRC (n = 686) and evaluated the expression
patterns of the detected AS events across the four consensus molecular
subtypes (CMS) of the disease (n = 511): CMS1 - MSI Immune (hypermutated,
n = 76); CMS2 - Canonical (epithelial, WNT/MYC activation, n = 220); CMS3
- Metabolic (epithelial, enriched for KRAS mutations, n = 72); and CMS4 -
Mesenchymal (stromal invasion, TGFB activation, n = 143).Results: A total
of 15,613 AS events were detected, including 5,128 events that involved
novel splice junctions not cataloged in UCSC GAF2.0 transcriptome
annotation. Exon skipping was the most common pattern with 6,482
occurrences, followed by 4,962 alternative splice sites, 2,689
alternative 5/3 transcription sites and 1,262 retained introns. In the
subset of samples with CMS classification, a cross-subtype comparative
analysis revealed 1,835 differentially transcribed loci from 1,634 genes,
including 759 novel junctions (FDRBackground: Differential transcription
analysis may reveal transcriptome aberrations associated with cancer
progression and help identify important drivers in molecularly distinct
subtypes of a disease.Methods: We developed a data-driven bioinformatics
pipeline (DiffSplice) that performs differential transcription analysis
at the alternative splicing (AS) level and allows accurate transcriptome
reconstruction through joint analysis of all RNA-seq samples. In this
study, we applied DiffSplice to RNA-seq data from TCGA CRC (n = 686) and
evaluated the expression patterns of the detected AS events across the
four consensus molecular subtypes (CMS) of the disease (n = 511): CMS1 -
MSI Immune (hypermutated, n = 76); CMS2 - Canonical (epithelial, WNT/MYC
activation, n = 220); CMS3 - Metabolic (epithelial, enriched for KRAS
mutations, n = 72); and CMS4 - Mesenchymal (stromal invasion, TGFB
activation, n = 143).Results: A total of 15,613 AS events were detected,
including 5,128 events that involved novel splice junctions not cataloged
in UCSC GAF2.0 transcriptome annotation. Exon skipping was the most
common pattern with 6,482 occurrences, followed by 4,962 alternative
splice sites, 2,689 alternative 5/3 transcription sites and 1,262
retained introns. In the subset of samples with CMS classification, a
cross-subtype comparative analysis revealed 1,835 differentially
transcribed loci from 1,634 genes, including 759 novel junctions
(FDR<0.01). Of particular interest, we found that KRAS 4A expression
levels were higher in CMS3 samples (p = 0.0070), in line with the known
effect of this isoform as a negative regulator of mutant KRAS alleles. In
addition, expression of the CD44v isoform, a marker of epithelial cancer
stem cells, was higher in CMS2 and CMS3 samples (p = 0.015).
Alternatively, CD44s isoform expression levels were higher in CMS4
samples (pBackground: Differential transcription analysis may reveal
transcriptome aberrations associated with cancer progression and help
identify important drivers in molecularly distinct subtypes of a
disease.Methods: We developed a data-driven bioinformatics pipeline
(DiffSplice) that performs differential transcription analysis at the
alternative splicing (AS) level and allows accurate transcriptome
reconstruction through joint analysis of all RNA-seq samples. In this
study, we applied DiffSplice to RNA-seq data from TCGA CRC (n = 686) and
evaluated the expression patterns of the detected AS events across the
four consensus molecular subtypes (CMS) of the disease (n = 511): CMS1 -
MSI Immune (hypermutated, n = 76); CMS2 - Canonical (epithelial, WNT/MYC
activation, n = 220); CMS3 - Metabolic (epithelial, enriched for KRAS
mutations, n = 72); and CMS4 - Mesenchymal (stromal invasion, TGFB
activation, n = 143).Results: A total of 15,613 AS events were detected,
including 5,128 events that involved novel splice junctions not cataloged
in UCSC GAF2.0 transcriptome annotation. Exon skipping was the most
common pattern with 6,482 occurrences, followed by 4,962 alternative
splice sites, 2,689 alternative 5/3 transcription sites and 1,262
retained introns. In the subset of samples with CMS classification, a
cross-subtype comparative analysis revealed 1,835 differentially
transcribed loci from 1,634 genes, including 759 novel junctions
(FDR<0.01). Of particular interest, we found that KRAS 4A expression
levels were higher in CMS3 samples (p = 0.0070), in line with the known
effect of this isoform as a negative regulator of mutant KRAS alleles. In
addition, expression of the CD44v isoform, a marker of epithelial cancer
stem cells, was higher in CMS2 and CMS3 samples (p = 0.015).
Alternatively, CD44s isoform expression levels were higher in CMS4
samples (p<2.2e-16), consistent with previous literature showing that
cancer stem cells of tumors that have undergone mesenchymal transition
predominantly express the standard CD44 isoform that contains no variant
exons. Finally, variance of the transcription profiles suggested
potential intra-subtype heterogeneity and an opportunity to further
refine these global patterns.Discussion: Here we present an in-depth
transcriptome analysis of TCGA CRC data across the molecular subtypes of
the disease. We were able to identify differential transcription patterns
in an unbiased way by using a scalable and efficient computational
approach that models both annotated and novel splice variants
simultaneously. Our pipeline revealed a number of promising candidates
that may be acting as key modulators in specific disease subsets and
deserve further investigation.

