Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Body mass, smoking habit, and hypertension and renal cell cancer
survival


Background: A recent meta-analysis showed higher survival rate among
over-weight and obese renal cell cancer (RCC) patients. Given that
obesity, smoking and hypertension are well-established risk factors for
RCC development, it is therefore important to know whether these factors
are associated with RCC prognosis.Objectives: We evaluated the
associations of body mass index (BMI), smoking and hypertension with RCC
survival in a population-based cohort of incident RCC cases assembled
from a Swedish case-control study.Methods: We analyzed a total of 371 RCC
cases diagnosed in 1988-1992 with follow-up through Dec 31, 2011.
Information on weight, height, smoking habit and hypertension was
obtained through face-to-face interviews. Mortality information was
determined through linkage to the National Cancer Registry; 298 deaths
were identified, with 148 of those having RCC as the underlying cause of
death, during an average of 9.9 years of follow-up. We calculated hazard
ratios (HR)s and 95% confidence interval (CI)s using the Cox proportional
hazards models.Results: We confirmed that lifetime smoking and BMI at
highest adult weight were associated with a worse overall survival among
RCC patients. When we examined RCC-specific survival, the associations
were not statistically significant; multivariate HR (95% CI) was 0.89
(0.54-1.49) for 20 or greater pack-years of smoking compared to never
smokers. For BMI at highest adult weight, multivariate HR (95% CI) was
0.99 (0.53-1.87) comparing 35 or greater levels of BMI with less than 27
kg/m2 of BMI. History of hypertension was not associated with overall or
RCC-specific survival.Conclusions: We found a decreasing trend of overall
survival with increasing prediagnostic BMI and lifetime smoking, but no
significant associations of these factors and hypertension with
RCC-specific survival among RCC patients.

