Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived xenografts seem to have closer global expression
profile to that of the patient tumors of the corresponding cancer types,
than the equivalent cell lines do


Patient derived xenografts (PDXs) without in vitro manipulation are
believed to mirror original patients histopathologic and genetic
profiles, thus to be predictive surrogate models for patients, with
superiority over conventional cell lines. We have built the largest and
comprehensive PDX library of >1,100 models with genetic profiles of major
cancer types, including some major cancer types: 200 NSLCL1, 200 CRC2,
200 gastric3, 100 HCC4, 100 pancreatic, 30 ovarian, 10 brain tumors, and
many other cancer types.We set out to compare these 6 types of our PDXs
with the corresponding TCGA5 patient tumor samples and CCLE6 cancer cell
lines on their genomic expression by calculating pairwise Spearman rank
correlation coefficient , in order to further explore/confirm the
similarity and difference among the three collections. PDX were profiled
by both RNAseq and microarray (Affymetrix Human Genome U219 Array); CCLE
were from microarray (Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array); and
TCGA were from RNAseq. For convenience, these 4 gene expression datasets
are called PDX, PDXchip, CCLE and TCGA. Only genes common to all 4
datasets were used to compute . The preliminary data seems to lead to two
observations. First, for all 6 types, there is always at least one
different tumor CCLE-TCGA pair that has higher than the same tumor
CCLE-TCGA pair. For example, the TCGA colorectal, lung, and ovarian
cancers have higher with CCLE pancreatic cancer than the TCGA pancreatic
cancer does. In contrast, for both PDX and PDXchip, only lung and
pancreatic cancers show such behavior, and notable, both to TCGA
colorectal cancer. Seocnd, for same tumor type comparisons, is 0.73-0.83
(average 0.772) between PDX and TCGA, 0.67-0.76 (average 0.698) between
PDXchip and TCGA, 0.67-0.7 (average 0.682) between CCLE and TCGA. Third,
about 20% of CCLE lung cancers have much lower with TCGA, PDX, and
PDXchip lung cancers than the other CCLE lung cancers. In summary, these
observations show that our PDX models are close in genomic expression
profile to TCGA patient tumors per tumor types specifically, and more so
than CCLE cancer cell lines, which is also less specific.References1.
Yang, M., et al. Overcoming erlotinib resistance with tailored treatment
regimen in patient-derived xenografts from naive Asian NSCLC patients.
Int J Cancer 132, E74-84 (2013).2. Chen, D. Cetuximab response in CRC
patient-derived xenografts is predicted by RAS pathway activation rather
than KRAS mutation status. ASCO 2013 Annual Conference (2013).3. Zhang,
J. et al. A more efficient RNAi inducible system for tight regulation of
gene expression in mammalian cells and xenograft animals. Rna 13,
1375-1383 (2007).4. Guo, S. et al AACR-Annual Conference (2013).5.
http://cancergenome.nih.gov/.6. Barretina J, et al.
http://www.broadinstitute.org/ccle/home. Nature 28, 603-607 (2012).

