Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the mechanisms of anti-tumor protection mediated by an
antibody targeting the transferrin receptor 1


The transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1/CD71) is a type II transmembrane
homodimeric protein involved in iron uptake and regulation of cell
growth. The elevated levels of TfR1 expression on malignant cells,
together with its extracellular accessibility, make TfR1 an attractive
target for antibody therapy. We developed a mouse/human chimeric IgG3
specific for human TfR1 (ch128.1), which exhibits direct cytotoxic
activity against certain human malignant B cells in vitro. This
anti-tumor activity is due to the induction of TfR1 degradation and
lethal iron deprivation. Importantly, ch128.1 also shows extraordinary
anti-tumor activity in two xenograft models of the incurable B-cell
malignancy multiple myeloma in immunosuppressed mice (SCID-Beige)
resulting in up to 100% survival using a single dose. Interesting, this
anti-tumor activity occurs even against malignant cell lines that show
limited or no sensitivity to ch128.1 in vitro. The mechanism of in vivo
protection of ch128.1 is currently unknown. In order to explore the
possible role of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and
complement-mediated cytotoxicity (CDC) in the anti-tumor mechanism of
ch128.1 and to delineate the residues involved in these effector
functions, we developed three constructs with mutations in the ch128.1
heavy chain: 1) L234A/L235A, 2) P331S, and 3) L234A/L235A/P331S. We now
show that ch128.1 is capable of inducing ADCC and CDC against malignant B
cells in vitro suggesting the potential contribution of these antibody
effector functions to its effects in vivo. Additionally, we show that the
triple mutant consistently displayed significant ADCC reduction in vitro,
while the other mutants showed a weaker impairment, suggesting that all
three residues are relevant contributors to ADCC. Lack of CDC in the
P331S mutant confirmed the critical role of this residue, while the other
residues show a lesser role in CDC in vitro. These results provide, for
the first time, insights into the human IgG3 effector functions in the
context of TfR1 targeting of malignant cells. Intriguingly, we have
recently observed that the strong in vivo protection of ch128.1 against
disseminated malignant B cells is abolished when the triple ch128.1
mutant (L234A/L235A/P331S) is used as a therapeutic at the same dose as
that of ch128.1. These results point to a functional role for the
antibody Fc fragment in anti-tumor protection mediated by ch128.1.
Further studies aimed to provide a better understanding of the in vivo
activity exhibited by ch128.1 are in progress. This antibody may be
potentially used in the therapy of incurable human B-cell malignancies,
such as multiple myeloma and certain non-Hodgkin lymphomas.

