Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing radioimmunotherapy techniques for the alpha-emitter
225Actinium


Introduction: Radioimmunotherapy (RIT) is a potent therapeutic technique
that may be applicable to the treatment of numerous human cancers.
Currently available RIT therapies employ beta- and alpha-emitting
radionuclides. Alpha-emitters, such as 225Actinium (225Ac), have
promising advantages over beta-emitters RIT such high linear energy
transfer and independence of the tumor oxygenation status. RIT using
225Ac radionuclide directed by the monoclonal antibodies trastuzumab or
panitumumab may provide effective, targeted antineoplastic
effects.Methods: Antibodies trastuzumab to HER2/neu and panitumumab to
EGFR were conjugated to the bifunctional ligands NETA, DOTA, DECA, DEPA
and DETA. The conjugates were labeled with 225Ac at room temperature and
37C. At selected time points, the mixture was analyzed by instant thin
layer chromatography (ITLC). Radiolabeling reaction kinetics and yields
were calculated for 225Ac and for its daughter isotopes 221Francium
(221Fr) and 213Bismuth (213Bi) using the energy discrimination function
of the multichannel analyzer in the gamma counter. Summary of the new
data: Radiolabeling with Actinium was effective for several
ligand-antibody combinations and completed within 30 min. Radiolabeling
yields for 225Ac and it daughters 221Fr and 213Bi were most robust for
NETA and DECA conjugates to trastuzumab and panitumumab, labeled at
37C.Conclusion: Several novel ligands were evaluated for radiolabeling of
monocloncal antibodies trastuzumab or panitumumab with 225Ac radionuclide
and demonstrated fast kinetics of radiolabeling. Potential for targeted
therapeutic applications will be explored in future experiments.

