Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IRES-transactivating factors (ITAFs) as therapeutic targets in
breast and colorectal cancer


Background: The majority of cellular mRNAs are translated in a
cap-dependent manner, via ribosome assembly at 5 methylguanosine caps
followed by initiation at a nearby favorable AUG codon. Alternatively,
internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) facilitate translation in a
cap-independent manner, particularly during cell stress, and have been
identified in mRNAs encoding many canonical cellular oncogenes, including
c-MYC, c-SRC, XIAP, Aurora-A kinase, and IGF1R. IRES trans-activating
factors (ITAFs) are accessory proteins that augment or inhibit
translation of client IRES-containing mRNAs, and were found to be
upregulated in many cancer types including breast and colorectal
cancers.Methods and Results: Analysis of microarray datasets from cancer
and normal tissue specimens (The Cancer Genome Atlas, METABRIC, and
University of North Carolina datasets) revealed that expression of
several ITAFs is upregulated in malignant tissues compared to normal
controls. mRNAs encoding ITAFs were significantly upregulated (p
Background: The majority of cellular mRNAs are translated in a
cap-dependent manner, via ribosome assembly at 5 methylguanosine caps
followed by initiation at a nearby favorable AUG codon. Alternatively,
internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) facilitate translation in a
cap-independent manner, particularly during cell stress, and have been
identified in mRNAs encoding many canonical cellular oncogenes, including
c-MYC, c-SRC, XIAP, Aurora-A kinase, and IGF1R. IRES trans-activating
factors (ITAFs) are accessory proteins that augment or inhibit
translation of client IRES-containing mRNAs, and were found to be
upregulated in many cancer types including breast and colorectal
cancers.Methods and Results: Analysis of microarray datasets from cancer
and normal tissue specimens (The Cancer Genome Atlas, METABRIC, and
University of North Carolina datasets) revealed that expression of
several ITAFs is upregulated in malignant tissues compared to normal
controls. mRNAs encoding ITAFs were significantly upregulated (p < 0.05)
in cancer specimens, and ITAF protein levels were increased as measured
by immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays made up of malignant and
healthy tissue specimens.To investigate biological impact of ITAF
silencing, gene knockdown was accomplished using pGIPZ and pTRIPZ
lentiviral shRNA vectors. Silencing of ITAFs and concomitant reduction in
protein levels (measured by western blot) led to significant
proliferation impairment in MDA-MB-231, MCF7 and DLD1 cancer cells in 2-D
culture (as measured by counting assays, pBackground: The majority of
cellular mRNAs are translated in a cap-dependent manner, via ribosome
assembly at 5 methylguanosine caps followed by initiation at a nearby
favorable AUG codon. Alternatively, internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs)
facilitate translation in a cap-independent manner, particularly during
cell stress, and have been identified in mRNAs encoding many canonical
cellular oncogenes, including c-MYC, c-SRC, XIAP, Aurora-A kinase, and
IGF1R. IRES trans-activating factors (ITAFs) are accessory proteins that
augment or inhibit translation of client IRES-containing mRNAs, and were
found to be upregulated in many cancer types including breast and
colorectal cancers.Methods and Results: Analysis of microarray datasets
from cancer and normal tissue specimens (The Cancer Genome Atlas,
METABRIC, and University of North Carolina datasets) revealed that
expression of several ITAFs is upregulated in malignant tissues compared
to normal controls. mRNAs encoding ITAFs were significantly upregulated
(p < 0.05) in cancer specimens, and ITAF protein levels were increased as
measured by immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays made up of
malignant and healthy tissue specimens.To investigate biological impact
of ITAF silencing, gene knockdown was accomplished using pGIPZ and pTRIPZ
lentiviral shRNA vectors. Silencing of ITAFs and concomitant reduction in
protein levels (measured by western blot) led to significant
proliferation impairment in MDA-MB-231, MCF7 and DLD1 cancer cells in 2-D
culture (as measured by counting assays, p<0.05) as well as in soft agar
assays (pBackground: The majority of cellular mRNAs are translated in a
cap-dependent manner, via ribosome assembly at 5 methylguanosine caps
followed by initiation at a nearby favorable AUG codon. Alternatively,
internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs) facilitate translation in a
cap-independent manner, particularly during cell stress, and have been
identified in mRNAs encoding many canonical cellular oncogenes, including
c-MYC, c-SRC, XIAP, Aurora-A kinase, and IGF1R. IRES trans-activating
factors (ITAFs) are accessory proteins that augment or inhibit
translation of client IRES-containing mRNAs, and were found to be
upregulated in many cancer types including breast and colorectal
cancers.Methods and Results: Analysis of microarray datasets from cancer
and normal tissue specimens (The Cancer Genome Atlas, METABRIC, and
University of North Carolina datasets) revealed that expression of
several ITAFs is upregulated in malignant tissues compared to normal
controls. mRNAs encoding ITAFs were significantly upregulated (p < 0.05)
in cancer specimens, and ITAF protein levels were increased as measured
by immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays made up of malignant and
healthy tissue specimens.To investigate biological impact of ITAF
silencing, gene knockdown was accomplished using pGIPZ and pTRIPZ
lentiviral shRNA vectors. Silencing of ITAFs and concomitant reduction in
protein levels (measured by western blot) led to significant
proliferation impairment in MDA-MB-231, MCF7 and DLD1 cancer cells in 2-D
culture (as measured by counting assays, p<0.05) as well as in soft agar
assays (p< 0.05). In cancer cell lines, treatment with TNF-related
apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) led relocalization of ITAFs from cell
nuclei to the endoplasmic reticulum (assayed by immunofluorescence), with
increased translation of client IRES-harboring mRNAs encoding BAG-1 and
c-MYC oncoproteins, despite impaired global cap-dependent
translation.Conclusions and future directions: Future experiments will
include expanded investigation of protein-level ITAF expression in
archival human specimens using immunohistochemistry, as well as
investigation of the effects of ITAF silencing in cancer cell xenografts
in immunocompromised mice. Based on their increased expression in
malignant tissues and activity in translation of oncoproteins, cellular
ITAF genes may represent novel therapeutic targets for intervention.

