Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neo-antigen enriched TIL therapy mediates superior tumor
eradication in a patient-derived xenograft model of human melanoma


The mutational load in melanoma is high relative to that in most other
human malignancies, resulting in the possible expression of large numbers
of patient-specific mutated antigens. This may, in part, explain the
immunogenicity of this disease and the high rate of responsiveness to
immunotherapeutic strategies such as tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL)
therapy. Indeed, recent data have shown that cytotoxic T-cell reactivity
targeting neo antigens may be common in human melanoma TILs. Importantly
though, the clinical relevance of neo-antigen specific T cell populations
remains uncertain.To directly address the tumoricidal potential of
defined neo-antigen specific T cell populations, we first identified two
neo-antigen specific T-cell populations within a bulk melanoma TIL
culture by the combination of exome sequencing and MHC multimer-based T
cell screens. Subsequently, we generated TIL products that are highly
enriched for these neo-antigen reactivities and we compared the
anti-tumor activity of these neo-antigen enriched TIL with that of
standard bulk TIL in NSG mice bearing the autologous tumor. We observed
outgrowth of the tumors in mice treated with standard TIL. In contrast,
tumors in mice treated with enriched TILs were controlled long-term.
Additional experiments showed that this superior activity of neo-antigen
enriched TIL was caused by the increased numbers of T cells with a high
anti-tumor activity, rather than the depletion of cell populations with
inhibitory activity. Furthermore, once tumors eventually recurred these
were still recognized in vitro by cells from the initially infused TIL
culture.Together, these preclinical data demonstrate that neo-antigen
reactive T cells within bulk TIL cultures form a critical component of
anti-tumor reactivity and provide a further basis to target mutated
antigens with cancer immunotherapy.

