Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reproductive and hormonal factors and mortality risk among women
with colorectal cancer in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study


IntroductionWomen in the US have lower rates of colorectal cancer than
men, which has prompted research into the role of estrogen in
carcinogenesis. While use of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) and other
hormonally-related factors have been associated with lower risk of
colorectal cancer (CRC), associations between these factors and
colorectal cancer survival are not well defined.MethodsThe NIH-AARP
cohort includes 566,398 AARP members (aged 50-71 years) who resided in
one of six US states or two metropolitan areas and completed a mailed
baseline questionnaire in 1995-1996. Among 2,053 women with incident
colorectal cancer in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study, we examined
associations of age at menarche, age at menopause, age at first birth,
parity, oral contraceptive use, and menopausal hormone therapy use with
overall and disease-specific mortality. Using Cox proportional hazards
regression, we estimated hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals
(CIs) for overall and disease-specific mortality, adjusting for tumor
stage and grade, treatment, years since diagnosis, body mass index,
marital status, smoking status, diabetes, and physical
activity.ResultsThere were 759 deaths (332 due to CRC) over a median 7.7
years of follow-up. We observed a suggestive, but not statistically
significant, lower risk of all-cause mortality among women who were 13
years or older at menarche compared to those 12 or younger (HR = 0.89,
95% CI 0.77-1.03), but no associations for age at menopause, age at first
live birth, parity, or oral contraceptive use. Compared to never MHT use
former MHT use was not associated with mortality risk, but we found an
inverse association among current users at study entry for both all-cause
mortality (HR = 0.80, 95% CI 0.67-0.94) and colorectal cancer-specific
mortality (HR = 0.72, 95% CI 0.56-0.93). These associations were stronger
among those who reported fewer than five years of MHT use at baseline
than among those with a longer duration of use.ConclusionWe found
evidence of an inverse association between MHT use at study entry and
all-cause and colorectal cancer-specific mortality risk. Future studies
should focus on how varying usage patterns, including types of
preparation used, affect tumor progression and colorectal cancer survival.

