Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic landscape survey identifies SRSF1 as a key oncodriver in
small cell lung cancer


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive disease with poor
survival. Large-scale sequencing studies have revealed potential
disease-driving genes in various cancers, although in SCLC, much still
remains unknown, particularly in the Asian patient population. Here we
conducted whole exome sequencing (WES) and transcriptomic sequencing of
primary tumors from 99 Chinese SCLC patients. It revealed 34,099 somatic
nonsilent single nucleotide variants (SNVs) or insertion/deletions
(indels), an average of 308 per patient and nonsilent/silent ratio of
1.66. Genes harboring the most recurrent SNVs or indels were TP53 (81%),
CSMD3 (43%), RB1 (46%), LRP1B (38%) and OBSCN (41%). Somatic copy number
variants (CNVs) were also identified including MYC (8%), KIT (17%), and
SOX4 (19%), with SOX2 (67%) and multiple other genes located across a
segment on chromosome 3q27.1. Genes with CN losses include RB1 (34%),
RASSF1 (57%), FHIT (54%), KIF2A (16%), and CNTN3 (53%), as well as a long
segment along chromosome 3p22.1. Recurrence rates of these genes affected
by SNVs and CNVs were comparable to those reported previously. In
addition, we found recurrent gains of Serine/Arginine Splicing Factor 1
(SRSF1) in 51% (49/96) patients as well as concordant over-expression of
mRNA for those patients with gains (p = 0.005; two-tailed two-sided
Welch's t-test;). Among these 96 Chinese patients, 28% had both CN gain
and mRNA over-expression of SRSF1; SRSF1 CN status was evaluated by FISH
assay (N = 34), the positive and negative predictive values were 57% and
69% respectively. Patients with both RNASeq and survival data were
interrogated (N = 49), SRSF1 was the only gene correlating between both
CN gain and mRNA over-expression as well as between over-expression and
survival using a Cox proportion hazard (PH) regression model adjusting
for age, gender, tumor stage, and chemotherapy status (p = 0.034; HR =
3.0). Patients with SRSF1 mRNA over-expression or CN gain demonstrated
significantly worse survival. The discovery (log-rank test p = 0.062),
validation (log-rank test p = 0.03), and combined patient cohort (Cox PH
p = 0.021; HR = 2.1; log-rank test p = 0.005).On target in vivo studies
demonstrated that SRSF1 is essential for tumorigenecity of SCLC. siRNAs
(control/SRSF1)were transfected to cell lines with DNA amplification/mRNA
overexpression (DMS114 and SHP-77SRSF1). Equal numbers of viable
transfected cells were injected in immunocompromised mice and tumor
growth was monitored for up to three weeks. SRSF1 knockdown completely
suppressed the tumor growth These data strongly support SRSF1 as a
therapeutic target in SCLC and provide a rationale for personalized
therapy in SCLC.

