Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The spontaneous generation of GD2+ breast cancer stem-like cells
is directly proportional to tumor progression and mediated by epithelial
to mesenchymal transition and NFB activation


Breast cancer metastases are caused by extravasation of cancer cells from
the primary tumor; once released, the cells travel through the
circulation and initiate secondary tumors at distant sites. However, it
is not clear how these metastasizing mesenchymal-like breast cancer stem
cells (BCSCs) are generated in the primary tumor. We recently discovered
that ganglioside GD2 is expressed on BCSCs and that induction of
epithelial-to- mesenchymal transition (EMT) induced GD2 and GD3S
expression. GD2+ cells expressed higher levels of mesenchymal markers
(N-cadherin, vimentin, twist, snail) and lower levels of epithelial
markers (E-cadherin) than GD2- cells. Interestingly, FACS-sorted GD2-
cells spontaneously produced GD2+ cells within 4-6 days in culture. To
investigate the factors associated with the spontaneous generation of
GD2+ BCSCs, we cultured breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231and SUM159
cells in vitro and measured the percentages of GD2+ cells over time.
Interestingly, we noticed that the percentage and absolute numbers of
GD2+ cells increased in a time-dependent manner: from 4.5%2.5% on day 1
to 18%4.5% on day 6 suggesting spontaneous generation of GD2+ cells.
Considering that GD2+ cells grow slower compared to GD2- cells, these
data suggest that GD2- cells undergo cellular transformation into GD2+
cells. As induction of EMT generates stem cell-like cells, we determined
the expression of mesenchymal-related markers, including vimentin,
N-cadherin, and twist, in the breast cancer cells in a time-course
experiment. Results suggest 3 to 6 - fold induction of mesenchymal
markers in these breast cancer cells in a time-dependent manner. To
investigate the spontaneous generation of GD2+ cells in vivo, 1106 GFP+
MDA-MB-231 cells were transplanted into mammary fat pads of NOD/SCID mice
(n = 18). Each week, a group of mice (n = 3) was sacrificed, tumors were
extracted and the percentage of GFP+GD2+ cells was measured by flow
cytometry. In line with our in vitro results, we observed significant
increases in GD2+ BCSCs with increasing tumor volume. The frequency of
GD2+ cells increased from 15.1%4.6% to 37%8.7% in 6 weeks, indicating
that breast cancer cells spontaneously undergo EMT during tumor
progression and generate GD2+ BCSCs. To identify possible targets to
inhibit EMT in breast cancer cells, we performed Kinexus proteomic
analysis of GD2+ and GD2- cells and discovered activation of NFB
signaling in GD2+ cells. Inhibition of NFB signaling by the small
molecule inhibitor BMS345541 reduced the frequency of GD2+ cells by >95%
in breast cancer cell lines in vitro and increased survival in tumor
bearing mice. (Battula VL, et al., AACR, 2015). Inhibition of EMT using
BMS345541 might reduce EMT-driven generation of GD2+ BCSCs and thus
reduce their metastatic spread in breast cancer patients. Experiments
testing this hypothesis are under way.

