Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exogenous hormone use was inversely associated with gastric cancer
risk among women: The Singapore Chinese Health Study


Background: There is a 23-fold difference in gastric cancer incidence
worldwide between high- and low-risk populations. In all regions, gastric
cancer incidence is two-fold higher among men, compared with women.
Although higher prevalence of established risk factors in men may explain
some of the sex disparity, a protective role of high lifelong exposure to
estrogens may contribute to the lower gastric cancer incidence for women.
There have been few prospective data evaluating associations with gastric
cancer risk for markers of estrogen exposure in high-risk
populations.Methods: In the Singapore Chinese Health Study, 34,022 women
between 45 and 74 years of age were recruited as cohort participants
between 1993 and 1998. By December 2013, 315 incident gastric cancer
cases were identified. Information about menstrual and reproductive
histories, as well as oral contraceptive (OC) and hormone replacement
therapy (HRT) use was collected at the baseline interview. Cox
proportional hazard regression was performed to obtain the adjusted
hazard ratios (HRs) and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for
menstrual and reproductive factors and exogenous hormone use with gastric
cancer risk. In secondary analyses, a nested case-control study was
conducted in which Helicobacter (H.) pylori infection and atrophic
gastritis status were evaluated in conditional logistic regression models
as potential confounders on the association between hormone-related
factors and gastric cancer risk.Results: Compared with nonusers, ever use
of HRT (HR = 0.55; 95%CI: 0.26, 1.18), OCs (HR = 0.69; 95%CI: 0.51, 0.95)
and HRT and/or OCs (HR = 0.67; 95%CI: 0.49-0.92) was associated with a
lower risk of gastric cancer. A statistically significant trend with
increasing age at first OC use was observed for gastric cancer risk,
compared with nonusers (P for trend = 0.013). The HRs (95% CIs) for 25,
26-30 and >30 years of age, compared with nonusers were 0.85 (0.50,
1.46), 0.76 (0.48, 1.21), and 0.54 (0.31, 0.92), respectively. There were
no associations with other menstrual or reproductive factors including
number of births, years of menstrual cycling, or age at menopause. The
inverse associations with ever HRT and/or OC use for gastric cancer risk
remained after further adjusting for H. pylori infection and atrophic
gastritis status.Conclusion: In a high-risk study population, ever use of
exogenous hormones was associated with a statistically significant
decrease in gastric cancer risk, independent of established risk factors.
These results support the notion that high exposure to estrogens may
contribute to the lower incidence of gastric cancer in women compared
with men.

