Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parity, breastfeeding and ovarian cancer in the Million Women Study


There is epidemiological evidence that parity is associated with a
reduced risk of ovarian cancer, although few studies are large enough to
adequately explore variation by histological subtype. Evidence of
association with breastfeeding is varied, and often subject to
significant residual confounding by parity.We explored the association
between ovarian cancer and childbearing patterns (parity and
breastfeeding) in a large prospective cohort of UK women. Information on
exposures was obtained from the baseline questionnaire. Using a Cox
proportional hazards model, we estimated the relative risk (RR) of
ovarian cancer in women with different childbearing patterns, after
adjustment for potential confounding factors (including age, region,
history of breast cancer, hysterectomy, tubal ligation, use of
contraceptive or menopausal hormones, body mass index, smoking, and
socioeconomic status). We used a competing risks approach to look at
variation by histological subtype, and explored effects of the timing of
births. Analyses of breastfeeding were restricted to parous women and
stratified by parity.After excluding women with previous cancer,
bilateral oophorectomy, and unknown parity, the study population included
1,146,985 women, aged 56 years on average at recruitment. 7570 incident
cases of ovarian cancer accrued, after an average of 13.0 years of
follow-up. Overall, women with one child had an estimated 20% reduction
in the relative risk of ovarian cancer compared to nulliparous women (RR:
0.80, 95%CI: 0.74-0.87). However, this showed significant heterogeneity
by histological subtype (p-het = 0.005). There was strong evidence of a
reduced risk of clear cell (n = 156, RR: 0.57, 95%CI: 0.41-0.79) and
endometrioid tumours (n = 220, RR: 0.64, 95%CI: 0.49-0.84), but no
statistically significant reduction of mucinous (n = 234, RR: 0.82,
95%CI: 0.63-1.06) or serous tumours (n = 916, RR: 0.92, 95%CI:
0.81-1.05). Amongst parous women, each additional birth was associated
with an estimated 9% reduction in the relative risk of ovarian cancer
(RR: 0.91, 95%CI: 0.88-0.94), without significant subtype heterogeneity
(p-het = 0.1). We found no evidence of a significant association with the
age at first or last birth.After careful adjustment for parity, we found
limited evidence for a reduction in ovarian cancer risk with
breastfeeding. Overall, breastfeeding (ever vs never) was not associated
with ovarian cancer (RR: 0.94, 95%CI: 0.89-1.00, p = 0.07), and no
variation was seen by histological subtype (p-het = 0.7). However, there
was a significant trend with duration of breastfeeding (p-trend There is
epidemiological evidence that parity is associated with a reduced risk of
ovarian cancer, although few studies are large enough to adequately
explore variation by histological subtype. Evidence of association with
breastfeeding is varied, and often subject to significant residual
confounding by parity.We explored the association between ovarian cancer
and childbearing patterns (parity and breastfeeding) in a large
prospective cohort of UK women. Information on exposures was obtained
from the baseline questionnaire. Using a Cox proportional hazards model,
we estimated the relative risk (RR) of ovarian cancer in women with
different childbearing patterns, after adjustment for potential
confounding factors (including age, region, history of breast cancer,
hysterectomy, tubal ligation, use of contraceptive or menopausal
hormones, body mass index, smoking, and socioeconomic status). We used a
competing risks approach to look at variation by histological subtype,
and explored effects of the timing of births. Analyses of breastfeeding
were restricted to parous women and stratified by parity.After excluding
women with previous cancer, bilateral oophorectomy, and unknown parity,
the study population included 1,146,985 women, aged 56 years on average
at recruitment. 7570 incident cases of ovarian cancer accrued, after an
average of 13.0 years of follow-up. Overall, women with one child had an
estimated 20% reduction in the relative risk of ovarian cancer compared
to nulliparous women (RR: 0.80, 95%CI: 0.74-0.87). However, this showed
significant heterogeneity by histological subtype (p-het = 0.005). There
was strong evidence of a reduced risk of clear cell (n = 156, RR: 0.57,
95%CI: 0.41-0.79) and endometrioid tumours (n = 220, RR: 0.64, 95%CI:
0.49-0.84), but no statistically significant reduction of mucinous (n =
234, RR: 0.82, 95%CI: 0.63-1.06) or serous tumours (n = 916, RR: 0.92,
95%CI: 0.81-1.05). Amongst parous women, each additional birth was
associated with an estimated 9% reduction in the relative risk of ovarian
cancer (RR: 0.91, 95%CI: 0.88-0.94), without significant subtype
heterogeneity (p-het = 0.1). We found no evidence of a significant
association with the age at first or last birth.After careful adjustment
for parity, we found limited evidence for a reduction in ovarian cancer
risk with breastfeeding. Overall, breastfeeding (ever vs never) was not
associated with ovarian cancer (RR: 0.94, 95%CI: 0.89-1.00, p = 0.07),
and no variation was seen by histological subtype (p-het = 0.7). However,
there was a significant trend with duration of breastfeeding (p-trend
<0.001).In this largest prospective study of ovarian cancer to date, our
results provide new reliable evidence that childbearing has different
effects on different subtypes of ovarian cancer.

