Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic efficacy of the ZVex and GLAAS platforms in a
B16-F10/hCAIX melanoma mouse model


ZVex and GLAAS are two dendritic-cell (DC) targeting platform
technologies designed to enhance immune responses through the in vivo
induction of antigen specific CD8 and CD4 T-cells, respectively. ZVex is
a lentiviral vector pseudotyped with a modified Sindbis virus envelope
engineered to deliver tumor antigen-encoding nucleic acids to dendritic
cells in vivo. GLAAS(Glucopyranosyl Lipid A Adjuvant System) activates DC
by binding to the TLR-4 receptor and inducing strong Th1 type CD4
responses against co-delivered recombinant proteins. Currently both
platform technologies are being investigated in phase I clinical trials
in cancer patients.Human carbonic anhydrase 9 (hCAIX) is a
tumor-associated transmembrane antigen that is over-expressed on various
cancer cell types. We mapped hCAIX specific, multi-functional CD8 and CD4
T-cell epitopes within the extracellular and transmembrane regions of the
protein for the mouse haplotype H-2b by intracellular cytokine staining.
Mice lethally challenged s.c. on the flank with a B16-F10 tumor cell line
expressing the hCAIX protein (designated BC.12) fully controlled large
tumors (>100 mm2) when therapeutically immunized (subcutaneously at the
base of tail) with ZVex encoding hCAIX or the recombinant hCAIX protein
with GLAAS (either s.c. or i.m.). In both models, tumor control was
dose-dependent. Additionally, the presence of a strong transmembrane H-2b
restricted CD8 T-cell epitope was required for tumor control and
regression. hCAIX-specific CD8 T-cell responses were detectable as far
out as day 67 post challenge in mice displaying full regression of tumor.
These results demonstrate proof of concept for ZVex and GLAAS platform
technologies in an aggressive murine melanoma model.

