Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of the clinical candidate AZD9496: a potent and orally
bioavailable selective estrogen receptor downregulator and antagonist


With over 70% of breast cancers expressing the estrogen receptor alpha
(ER), treatment with either anti-hormonal therapies that directly block
ER function or therapies that block the production of estrogen itself
have proven to be effective treatments of the disease. Following the
pioneering discovery of the ER antagonist tamoxifen in the 1960s,
identification of the selective estrogen receptor downregulator (SERD)
fulvestrant represented a further step forward in the treatment of
advanced ER+ breast cancer especially in the endocrine resistance
setting. The pure estrogen downregulator-antagonist fulvestrant offers
the advantage of not only antagonising ER-driven tumor cell growth but
also degrading ER via ubiquitinylation and thus diminishing growth due to
reduced ER content. Given its low level of bioavailability and metabolic
profile, fulvestrant has been formulated as an intramuscular monthly
injection. We have sought to identify a novel, non-steroidal ER
antagonist and down-regulator that can be administered orally and could
yield improved exposure and clinical benefit. This presentation will
describe the discovery of AZD9496, a novel, orally bioavailable small
molecule that can induce ER degradation in breast cancer cell lines at
picomolar concentrations. Data will be shared for the first time on the
medicinal chemistry efforts that led to AZD9496, the good oral
pharmacokinetic properties of the compound which led to significant tumor
efficacy in both endocrine sensitive model (complete tumor growth
inhibition (TGI) in a MCF-7 model at a dose of 10 mpk) and resistant
models (tumor regressions in a HCC1428 long term estrogen deprived (LTED)
model, with significant down-regulation of ER protein (81%) at 1 mpk QD
and tumour growth inhibition in an ESR1 mutant PDX model). These findings
strongly supported selection of AZD9496 as a clinical candidate for the
treatment of ER+ breast cancer, and on October 2014 the first patient was
dosed with AZD9496.

