Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adeno-associated virus 2 (AAV2) induces recurrent insertional
mutagenesis in human hepatocellular carcinomas


Background: Hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) are related to various
etiologies including alcohol intake, obesity, hemochromatosis, hepatitis
B and hepatitis C virus infection. Additional risk factors remain to be
identified particularly in HCC developed without cirrhosis. We identified
a fragment of Adeno-Associated Virus type 2 (AAV2, a defective DNA virus
considered as non-pathogenic) inserted in an HCC genome and this result
prompted us to screen a large series of HCC samples.Methods: We screened
150 HCC and matched non-tumor liver samples for AAV2 sequences using PCR
and next generation sequencing. Expression of the genes targeted by viral
integration was quantified and the functional consequences of AAV2
integration within TERT promoter was analyzed in 3 HCC cell lines using
luciferase assay Results: Among the 150 tumors, we identified 7 cases
(5%) with a clonal AAV2 insertion whereas no clonal insertion was found
in the corresponding non-tumor liver tissues. In the first HCC tumor, we
identified a 208 base pairs insertion of an AAV2 fragment within the TERT
(coding for the telomerase reverse transcriptase) promoter. In HCC cell
lines, we demonstrated that this AAV2 insertion resulted in an increased
TERT promoter activity. We next identified 6 additional clonal somatic
integrations of AAV2, all occurred within known cancer driver genes,
CCNA2 (4 cases), CCNE1 or TNFSF10 leading to over-expression of the
targeted gene without generating chimeric viral-endogeneous functional
fusion transcripts. In CCNA2 (coding for cyclin A2), the four integration
sites were identified within intron 2 and AAV2 insertion ranged from 219
to 1,975bp occurring in both orientations. In CCNE1 (coding for cyclin
E1), we identified a 368bp AAV2 integration within intron 4. In the
remaining case, AAV2 integration occurred in the 3 UTR of TNSFS10 (coding
for the receptor TRAIL), 244 bp after the stop codon. In 6 out of the 7
tumors, the inserted AAV2 included the 3inverse tandem region.
Strikingly, almost all the tumors were developed on non-fibrotic liver (6
out of 7 cases, PBackground: Hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) are related
to various etiologies including alcohol intake, obesity, hemochromatosis,
hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus infection. Additional risk factors
remain to be identified particularly in HCC developed without cirrhosis.
We identified a fragment of Adeno-Associated Virus type 2 (AAV2, a
defective DNA virus considered as non-pathogenic) inserted in an HCC
genome and this result prompted us to screen a large series of HCC
samples.Methods: We screened 150 HCC and matched non-tumor liver samples
for AAV2 sequences using PCR and next generation sequencing. Expression
of the genes targeted by viral integration was quantified and the
functional consequences of AAV2 integration within TERT promoter was
analyzed in 3 HCC cell lines using luciferase assay Results: Among the
150 tumors, we identified 7 cases (5%) with a clonal AAV2 insertion
whereas no clonal insertion was found in the corresponding non-tumor
liver tissues. In the first HCC tumor, we identified a 208 base pairs
insertion of an AAV2 fragment within the TERT (coding for the telomerase
reverse transcriptase) promoter. In HCC cell lines, we demonstrated that
this AAV2 insertion resulted in an increased TERT promoter activity. We
next identified 6 additional clonal somatic integrations of AAV2, all
occurred within known cancer driver genes, CCNA2 (4 cases), CCNE1 or
TNFSF10 leading to over-expression of the targeted gene without
generating chimeric viral-endogeneous functional fusion transcripts. In
CCNA2 (coding for cyclin A2), the four integration sites were identified
within intron 2 and AAV2 insertion ranged from 219 to 1,975bp occurring
in both orientations. In CCNE1 (coding for cyclin E1), we identified a
368bp AAV2 integration within intron 4. In the remaining case, AAV2
integration occurred in the 3 UTR of TNSFS10 (coding for the receptor
TRAIL), 244 bp after the stop codon. In 6 out of the 7 tumors, the
inserted AAV2 included the 3inverse tandem region. Strikingly, almost all
the tumors were developed on non-fibrotic liver (6 out of 7 cases,
P<0.05) without known risk factor (5 out of 7, PBackground:
Hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) are related to various etiologies
including alcohol intake, obesity, hemochromatosis, hepatitis B and
hepatitis C virus infection. Additional risk factors remain to be
identified particularly in HCC developed without cirrhosis. We identified
a fragment of Adeno-Associated Virus type 2 (AAV2, a defective DNA virus
considered as non-pathogenic) inserted in an HCC genome and this result
prompted us to screen a large series of HCC samples.Methods: We screened
150 HCC and matched non-tumor liver samples for AAV2 sequences using PCR
and next generation sequencing. Expression of the genes targeted by viral
integration was quantified and the functional consequences of AAV2
integration within TERT promoter was analyzed in 3 HCC cell lines using
luciferase assay Results: Among the 150 tumors, we identified 7 cases
(5%) with a clonal AAV2 insertion whereas no clonal insertion was found
in the corresponding non-tumor liver tissues. In the first HCC tumor, we
identified a 208 base pairs insertion of an AAV2 fragment within the TERT
(coding for the telomerase reverse transcriptase) promoter. In HCC cell
lines, we demonstrated that this AAV2 insertion resulted in an increased
TERT promoter activity. We next identified 6 additional clonal somatic
integrations of AAV2, all occurred within known cancer driver genes,
CCNA2 (4 cases), CCNE1 or TNFSF10 leading to over-expression of the
targeted gene without generating chimeric viral-endogeneous functional
fusion transcripts. In CCNA2 (coding for cyclin A2), the four integration
sites were identified within intron 2 and AAV2 insertion ranged from 219
to 1,975bp occurring in both orientations. In CCNE1 (coding for cyclin
E1), we identified a 368bp AAV2 integration within intron 4. In the
remaining case, AAV2 integration occurred in the 3 UTR of TNSFS10 (coding
for the receptor TRAIL), 244 bp after the stop codon. In 6 out of the 7
tumors, the inserted AAV2 included the 3inverse tandem region.
Strikingly, almost all the tumors were developed on non-fibrotic liver (6
out of 7 cases, P<0.05) without known risk factor (5 out of 7, P<0.05),
thus suggesting a particular pathogenic role of AAV2 in this subset of
patients.Conclusion: Infection by AAV2, that is very frequent the general
population (around 30 to 60% of individuals), is involved in the
pathogenesis of rare human HCC by recurrent somatic integration in cancer
driver genes challenging its safety as a vector for gene therapy.

