Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation in protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type K (PTPRK)
enhances progression of colon cancer through WNT signaling


Recent comprehensive genome analyses revealed the accumulation of genetic
alterations in colorectal cancers (CRCs). However, it is still unknown
which genetic alterations are closely associated with certain phenotype
of CRCs, such as tumors with highly invasive character regardless of its
small size. Here we examined the small invasive CRCs using
high-throughput sequencing in order to clarify the common molecular
features in those CRCs.Seven small invasive CRCs (types 0-IIa+IIc or
0-Is+IIc, less than 20mm in diameter and with submucosal massive
invasion) were examined by exon sequencing. Seven thousands six variants
(SNVs and indels) were detected. Among them, PTPRK was frequently mutated
(3 cases, 43%; 1 nonsense and 2 missense mutations). We further examined
public database (TCGA and COSMIC) and found that 50 of 617 (8.17%) CRCs
contain PTPRK mutation. Those cases are frequent in proximal colon,
extensively methylated (CIMP-H), microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H)
and pathologically mucinous type. Consistent with clinical behavior,
invasion assay in CRC cell lines revealed that CRCs with PTPRK domain D1
mutation showed high invasiveness via WNT signaling activity. These data
indicate that PTPRK domain D1 mutation contributes to the invasiveness
and progression of proximal CRCs, especially CIMP-H and MSI-H cases.

