Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IMI CANCER-ID: Validation of novel blood-based biomarker
technologies in clinical settings


The Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI) was launched in 2008 as a
public-private partnership between the European Union and the European
Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (EFPIA). IMI
aims to facilitate the collaboration of healthcare stakeholders such as
academic and clinical researchers, pharmaceutical industry and small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in Europe, in order to address key issues
in drug development and patient access to innovative medicines.Tumor
heterogeneity and the dynamic changes at the molecular level during
disease progression make longitudinal monitoring of malignant disease
highly desirable in order to choose the best treatment options and to
monitor treatment efficacy. As access to tumor tissue is often the
limiting factor and historic samples are not predictive for the current
state of the disease, liquid biopsies are explored to support
personalized treatment of cancer patients. The CANCER-ID consortium was
established in 2014 and aims to validate technologies for blood-based
biomarkers such as Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs), circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA) and microRNAs (miRNAs) to determine the absence/presence of drug
targets and to assess the response to treatment. To prove broader
applicability and clinical utility of the consortium's technologies and
protocols, the validated assays will be deployed in controlled clinical
studies (TRACERx, NCT01888601; NVALT17, NTR4410; SPECTAlung, NCT02214134;
patients under SoC treatment) in 1) Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC)
and 2) anti-Her2-resistant metastatic breast cancer (Her2RMBC). CANCER-ID
is a unique network of experts in the fields of tumor biology, biomarker
development, clinical sciences and bioinformatics with a total indicative
budget of 14 Mio . The consortium joins forces of 16 academic groups (ten
large clinical trial sites), 6 EFPIA companies, 1 multi-national
diagnostics company, 5 SMEs with advanced technologies for CTC isolation
or for complex data analysis and big data handling, and two non-profit
organizations. In order to fully exploit the synergies created by
CANCER-ID, regulatory agencies and patient advocacy groups are involved
and invited to participate in the IMI project.

