Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Initial testing (stage 1) of the Curaxin, CBL0137, by the
Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program (PPTP)


The Curaxin, CBL0137, is a member of a new class of small molecules that
simultaneously activate p53 and inhibit cancer-associated stress response
pathways such as NFB and Heat Shock Factor 1. CBL0137 sequesters the FACT
(FAcilitates Chromatin Transcription) complex on chromatin, inhibiting
its function. CBL0137 has shown antitumor activity against a broad range
of tumor models. Because of its novel mechanism of action CBL0137 was
evaluated for its antitumor activity against the PPTP in vitro and in
vivo models.Methods: CBL0137 was tested against the PPTP's in vitro cell
line panel (n = 23) at concentrations ranging from 1.0 nM to 10.0 M using
the PPTP's standard 96 hour exposure period. CBL0137 was tested against
the PPTP solid tumor xenografts using a dose of 50 mg/kg administered by
the intravenous route weekly for 4 weeks. Standard PPTP time to event and
objective response metrics were used to assess CBL0137 in vivo
activity.Results: The median relative IC50 (rIC50) value for the PPTP
cell lines was 0.28 M, with a range from 0.13 M to 0.80 M. There were no
significant differences in rIC50 values by histotype. The median rIC50
for the neuroblastoma cell lines exceeded that of the non-neuroblastoma
cell lines (0.51 M vs 0.26 M, respectively, p = 0.16), while the median
rIC50 for the ALL cell lines was less than that of the non-ALL cell lines
(0.20 M vs 0.31 M, respectively, p = 0.06). All PPTP cell lines showed a
pronounced cytotoxic effect, with T/C Ymin% values approaching 0% and
with Relative I/O% values approaching -100% for all cell lines at the
higher concentrations tested.CBL0137 was generally well tolerated in vivo
with a 3.1% toxicity rate in the treated groups compared to a 0.8% rate
for control animals. CBL0137 induced significant differences in EFS
distribution compared to control in 9 of 30 (30%) of the solid tumor
xenografts evaluable for this measure and in 8 of 8 (100%) evaluable ALL
xenografts. Significance differences in EFS distributon were observed in
4 of 6 osteosarcoma lines, 2 of 2 rhabdoid tumor lines, and 2 of 6
rhabdomyosarcoma lines. No objective responses were observed among the 30
solid tumor xenografts. For the ALL panel, 1 xenograft achieved CR and 4
achieved PR.In summary, CBL0137 showed potent cytotoxic activity in vitro
without clear histotype selectivity. In vivo the most consistent activity
for CBL0137 was observed against the ALL xenografts, with most solid
tumor xenograft lines showing limited response to single agent CBL0137.
In considering clinical translation of these testing results, it will be
important to relate the drug levels in SCID (soid tumor models) or
NOD/SCID (ALL models) mice at 50 mg/kg to those tolerated in humans at
the CBL0137 recommended phase 2 dose.

