Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional validation of CEBPB as an oncogenic target of EWS-FLI1
in Ewing sarcoma


We previously identified increased copies of CEBPB in a subset of Ewing
sarcoma (ES) tumors, and this gain was associated with worse clinical
outcome. Due to CEBPB's role in cell growth and differentiation, as well
as the gene's ability to transform normal mammary epithelial cells, we
hypothesized that CEBPB acts as an oncogene in ES by increasing cell
proliferation and transformation. To address this hypothesis, we altered
gene expression using viral gene delivery systems in ES cell lines.
First, we tested if CEBPB is a target of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein
using a FLI1 shRNA to knockdown EWS-FLI1 in an ES cell line (A673),
followed by re-expression of the fusion gene. We then measured expression
of the three C/EBP (protein) isoforms by western blot. Knockdown of
EWS-FLI1 expression led to decreased protein expression of all three
C/EBP isoforms. Re-expression of EWS-FLI1 rescued C/EBP protein
expression, suggesting that C/EBP is a target of EWS-FLI1. To explore the
functional consequence of altered expression of CEBPB, we transduced ES
cell lines to knockdown, overexpress, and rescue C/EBP. Changes in
protein expression were confirmed by western blot. Following transduction
and antibiotic selection, cell proliferation and colony formation were
measured by quantification of cellular ATP (Cell Titer Glo, Promega).
Overexpression of C/EBP-1, the largest of the three C/EBP isoforms, led
to a significant (pWe previously identified increased copies of CEBPB in
a subset of Ewing sarcoma (ES) tumors, and this gain was associated with
worse clinical outcome. Due to CEBPB's role in cell growth and
differentiation, as well as the gene's ability to transform normal
mammary epithelial cells, we hypothesized that CEBPB acts as an oncogene
in ES by increasing cell proliferation and transformation. To address
this hypothesis, we altered gene expression using viral gene delivery
systems in ES cell lines. First, we tested if CEBPB is a target of the
EWS-FLI1 fusion protein using a FLI1 shRNA to knockdown EWS-FLI1 in an ES
cell line (A673), followed by re-expression of the fusion gene. We then
measured expression of the three C/EBP (protein) isoforms by western
blot. Knockdown of EWS-FLI1 expression led to decreased protein
expression of all three C/EBP isoforms. Re-expression of EWS-FLI1 rescued
C/EBP protein expression, suggesting that C/EBP is a target of EWS-FLI1.
To explore the functional consequence of altered expression of CEBPB, we
transduced ES cell lines to knockdown, overexpress, and rescue C/EBP.
Changes in protein expression were confirmed by western blot. Following
transduction and antibiotic selection, cell proliferation and colony
formation were measured by quantification of cellular ATP (Cell Titer
Glo, Promega). Overexpression of C/EBP-1, the largest of the three C/EBP
isoforms, led to a significant (p<0.005) increase in colony formation
when cells were grown in soft agar compared to empty vector transduced
cells. In addition, knockdown of C/EBP decreased colony formation (pWe
previously identified increased copies of CEBPB in a subset of Ewing
sarcoma (ES) tumors, and this gain was associated with worse clinical
outcome. Due to CEBPB's role in cell growth and differentiation, as well
as the gene's ability to transform normal mammary epithelial cells, we
hypothesized that CEBPB acts as an oncogene in ES by increasing cell
proliferation and transformation. To address this hypothesis, we altered
gene expression using viral gene delivery systems in ES cell lines.
First, we tested if CEBPB is a target of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein
using a FLI1 shRNA to knockdown EWS-FLI1 in an ES cell line (A673),
followed by re-expression of the fusion gene. We then measured expression
of the three C/EBP (protein) isoforms by western blot. Knockdown of
EWS-FLI1 expression led to decreased protein expression of all three
C/EBP isoforms. Re-expression of EWS-FLI1 rescued C/EBP protein
expression, suggesting that C/EBP is a target of EWS-FLI1. To explore the
functional consequence of altered expression of CEBPB, we transduced ES
cell lines to knockdown, overexpress, and rescue C/EBP. Changes in
protein expression were confirmed by western blot. Following transduction
and antibiotic selection, cell proliferation and colony formation were
measured by quantification of cellular ATP (Cell Titer Glo, Promega).
Overexpression of C/EBP-1, the largest of the three C/EBP isoforms, led
to a significant (p<0.005) increase in colony formation when cells were
grown in soft agar compared to empty vector transduced cells. In
addition, knockdown of C/EBP decreased colony formation (p<0.05), and
re-expression of either C/EBP-1 (pWe previously identified increased
copies of CEBPB in a subset of Ewing sarcoma (ES) tumors, and this gain
was associated with worse clinical outcome. Due to CEBPB's role in cell
growth and differentiation, as well as the gene's ability to transform
normal mammary epithelial cells, we hypothesized that CEBPB acts as an
oncogene in ES by increasing cell proliferation and transformation. To
address this hypothesis, we altered gene expression using viral gene
delivery systems in ES cell lines. First, we tested if CEBPB is a target
of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein using a FLI1 shRNA to knockdown EWS-FLI1
in an ES cell line (A673), followed by re-expression of the fusion gene.
We then measured expression of the three C/EBP (protein) isoforms by
western blot. Knockdown of EWS-FLI1 expression led to decreased protein
expression of all three C/EBP isoforms. Re-expression of EWS-FLI1 rescued
C/EBP protein expression, suggesting that C/EBP is a target of EWS-FLI1.
To explore the functional consequence of altered expression of CEBPB, we
transduced ES cell lines to knockdown, overexpress, and rescue C/EBP.
Changes in protein expression were confirmed by western blot. Following
transduction and antibiotic selection, cell proliferation and colony
formation were measured by quantification of cellular ATP (Cell Titer
Glo, Promega). Overexpression of C/EBP-1, the largest of the three C/EBP
isoforms, led to a significant (p<0.005) increase in colony formation
when cells were grown in soft agar compared to empty vector transduced
cells. In addition, knockdown of C/EBP decreased colony formation
(p<0.05), and re-expression of either C/EBP-1 (p<0.0001) or C/EBP-2 (pWe
previously identified increased copies of CEBPB in a subset of Ewing
sarcoma (ES) tumors, and this gain was associated with worse clinical
outcome. Due to CEBPB's role in cell growth and differentiation, as well
as the gene's ability to transform normal mammary epithelial cells, we
hypothesized that CEBPB acts as an oncogene in ES by increasing cell
proliferation and transformation. To address this hypothesis, we altered
gene expression using viral gene delivery systems in ES cell lines.
First, we tested if CEBPB is a target of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein
using a FLI1 shRNA to knockdown EWS-FLI1 in an ES cell line (A673),
followed by re-expression of the fusion gene. We then measured expression
of the three C/EBP (protein) isoforms by western blot. Knockdown of
EWS-FLI1 expression led to decreased protein expression of all three
C/EBP isoforms. Re-expression of EWS-FLI1 rescued C/EBP protein
expression, suggesting that C/EBP is a target of EWS-FLI1. To explore the
functional consequence of altered expression of CEBPB, we transduced ES
cell lines to knockdown, overexpress, and rescue C/EBP. Changes in
protein expression were confirmed by western blot. Following transduction
and antibiotic selection, cell proliferation and colony formation were
measured by quantification of cellular ATP (Cell Titer Glo, Promega).
Overexpression of C/EBP-1, the largest of the three C/EBP isoforms, led
to a significant (p<0.005) increase in colony formation when cells were
grown in soft agar compared to empty vector transduced cells. In
addition, knockdown of C/EBP decreased colony formation (p<0.05), and
re-expression of either C/EBP-1 (p<0.0001) or C/EBP-2 (p<0.005) rescued
the phenotype. To identify downstream targets of C/EBP we measured
changes in protein expression by western blot of potential CEBPB targets
in cells with overexpression of each C/EBP isoform. Overexpression of
C/EBP-1 and CEBP-2 led to increased protein expression of ALDH1A1. In
addition, overexpression of C/EBP-1 and C/EBP-2 led to resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents similar to previous reports of chemoresistance
for ES cells that overexpressed ALDH. In conclusion, the increased
transformation potential of ES cells that overexpress either C/EBP-1 or
C/EBP-2 indicates that CEBPB is an oncogenic target of EWS-FLI1. Poor
outcome for patients with CEBPB amplifications may result from
chemoresistance mediated by increased expression of ALDH1A1. In addition,
increased expression of ALDH may suggest that overexpression of C/EBP in
ES tumors induces a stem cell like state. Patients with CEBPB
amplifications may benefit from pretreatment with ALDH inhibitors prior
to chemotherapy.

