Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small but lethal, miR-137 acts as a tumor suppressive microRNA in
colorectal cancer


Colorectal cancer is the 3rd most common cause of cancer-related deaths
for men and women in the United States. Understanding the mechanisms
associated with the initiation and progression of colorectal cancer is
needed to develop precise therapies. Multiple regulatory processes are
responsible for maintaining cellular homeostasis, including microRNA
(miRNA) regulation. We previously demonstrated that miR-137 expression
was significantly decreased in 84% of tumors as compared to adjacent
mucosal tissue from patients with rectal cancer (n = 68). Restoration of
miR-137 reduced colon cancer growth, measured by colony formation and
tumorsphere assays. Induction of miR-137 expression significantly
decreased tumor growth in our xenograft tumor model by approximately 50%
(n = 10). To understand the mechanism associated with the tumor
suppressive function of miR-137, we transfected miR-137 mimic into
HCT-116 cells and performed microarray analysis to identify changes in
gene expression and identify key regulatory pathways effected by miR-137
restoration. Multiple miR-137 targets were down regulated, as compared to
cells treated with a negative control mimic. The data was validated using
quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). Finally, the expression of miR-137
target genes was analyzed in a panel of colon cancer cell lines using
qPCR. In summary, miR-137 acts as a tumor suppressive microRNA by
negatively regulating multiple targets that are overexpressed in
colorectal cancer.

