Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optides (optimized peptides), a new knottin-based cancer drug
discovery platform


Some of the highest value targets in cancer therapeutics involve
protein:protein interactions that are difficult to inhibit with small
molecule therapeutics. Peptide drug candidates offer an alternative, but
many peptide drugs have poor pharmacokinetic properties and some are
immunogenic. Knottin peptides have long been promoted as scaffolds for
human drug discovery efforts because the exquisitely tight knot formed by
disulfide bridges creates resistance to proteolytic and other forms of
degradation. Furthermore, some knottins cross the blood brain barrier,
the gut wall, or cell membranes which is ideal for certain targets.
Unfortunately, creating knottins synthetically or in bacteria results in
a large number of disulfide isomers, which has hampered research. We have
created a mammalian expression system that enables production of most
knottin scaffolds and variants of native knottins encoded in plant and
animal genomes. The platform routinely produces approximately 10 mg/liter
of near pure naked peptide, which is sufficient to conduct in vivo
studies without major scale-up. The system is endotoxin free. In addition
to building the platform, we identified over 200,000 new potential
knottin peptides in various genomes, creating a rich collection of
scaffolds from which to establish diversity libraries of native and
optimized variants. These candidates have potential for targeting
therapeutics to cancer cells as a solid tumor penetrating alternative to
antibody drug conjugates. Optides also have potential to be developed as
anti-cancer drugs themselves. The fact that knottin peptides are not
substrates for resistance mechanisms such as p-glycoprotein pumps
underscores the potential importance of this class of drugs for those
with previously treated cancer.

