Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reorganization of metastamiRs in the evolution of metastatic
aggressive high-risk neuroblastoma


MetastamiRs have momentous clinical relevance and have been correlated
with disease progression in many tumors. In this study, we identified
neuroblastoma metastamiRs exploiting unique mouse models of favorable and
high-risk metastatic human neuroblastoma. Further, we related their
deregulation to the modulation of target proteins and established their
association with clinical outcomes. Whole genome miRNA microarray
analysis identified 74 metastamiRs across the manifold of metastatic
tumors. RT-qPCR on select miRNAs validated profile expression. Results
from bio-informatics across the ingenuity pathway, miRCancer, and
literature data-mining endorsed the expression of these miRNAs in
multiple tumor systems and showed their role in metastasis, identifying
them as metastamiRs. Immunoblotting and TMA-IHC analyses revealed
alterations in the expression/phosphorylation of metastamiRs targets,
including ADAMTS-1, AKT1/2/3, ASK1, AURK, Birc1, Birc2, Bric5, -CATENIN,
CASP8, CD54, CDK4, CREB, CTGF, CXCR4, CYCLIN-D1, EGFR, ELK1, ESR1, CFOS,
FOSB, FRA, GRB10, GSK3, IL1, JUND, kRAS, KRTAP1, MCP1, MEGF10, MMP2,
MMP3, MMP9, MMP10, MTA2, MYB, cMYC, NF2, NOS3, P21, pP38, PTPN3, CLEAVED
PARP, PKC, SDF-1, SEMA3D, SELE, STAT3, TLR3, TNF, TNFR1, and VEGF in
aggressive cells ex vivo and in a manifold of metastatic tumors in vivo.
Clinical outcome association analysis with the validated metastamiRs
targets correlated strongly with poor overall and relapse-free survival.
For the first time, these results identified a comprehensive list of
neuroblastoma metastamiRs, related their deregulation to altered
expression of protein targets, and established their association with
poor clinical outcomes. The identified set of distinctive neuroblastoma
metastamiRs could serve as potential candidates for diagnostic markers
for the switch from favorable to high-risk metastatic disease.

