Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new medical tool to discriminate on a radiotherapy concomitant
treatment for non-small cell lung cancer patients


Introduction: The radioresistance of non-small cell lung cancer cells is
a less explored and poorly defined field compared with drug resistance.
Our group has previously reported that the loss of IGFBP-3 expression by
promoter hypermethylation results in reduced tumor cell sensitivity to
cisplatin in NSCLC, however the role of the IGF-I/IGBP-3 axe on
radiosensitivity in cancer is controversial because of the differing
results when various tumor types are evaluated. The purpose of the
present study is to investigate the role of radiotherapy on the biology
of IGFBP-3 promoter methylation and its clinical value as a potential
tool for deciding on a concomitant radiotherapy after NSCLC
surgery.Experimental procedure: In the present study we have worked with
5 human cancer cell lines, 40 NSCLC surgical sample patients with known
response to CDDP and radiotherapy treatments and 10 control samples with
non neoplastic pathology. We have study the relationship between a
dose-response radiotherapy treatment and the IGFBP-3 gene expression
regulated by promoter methylation measured by Radiation-clonogenic cell
survival assays, RT-PCR, bisulfite modification and quantitative
methylation specific PCR. We have also studied, the activation of the
IGFIR, ERK and PI3K/AKT pathways through the analysis of the AKT, pAKT,
pERK, ERK, pIGFIR and IGFIR protein levels by Western-Blot analysis.
Additionally, in order to provide a helpful tool that enables clinicians
to identify patients with a potential response to radiotherapy, we have
used The TCGA annotation to correlate the IGFBP-3 methylation score of
the NSCLC patients with their clinical-pathological parameters.Results:
Our results suggest in vitro evidence that linked the presence of an
IGFBP-3 unmethylated promoter with poor response to radiation. Radiation
might sensitize chemotherapy-resistant cells by reactivating
IGFBP-3-expression through promoter demethylation, inactivating the
PI3K/AKT pathway. Our translational results indicate that patients
harboring an unmethylated promoter could benefit more from a chemotherapy
schedule alone than from a multimodality therapy involving radiotherapy
and platinum-based treatments, increasing their OS by 2.5 years (p =
.03).Conclusion: Our findings indiucate that radiotherapy does not
improve survival for patients harboring an unmethylated IGFBP-3 promoter.

