Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of phosphatidylserine by monoclonal antibodies enhances
the activity of immune checkpoint inhibitors in breast tumors


Phosphatidylserine (PS) is a phospholipid normally residing in the inner
leaflet of the plasma membrane that becomes exposed on tumor vascular
endothelial cells (ECs) and tumor cells. PS exposure becomes enhanced in
response to chemotherapy, irradiation, and oxidative stresses in the
tumor microenvironment. PS exposure in tumors promotes an
immunosuppressive microenvironment which includes the recruitment of
myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), immature dendritic cells and
M2-like macrophages, as well as, the production of anti-inflammatory
cytokines. Binding of PS targeting antibodies on tumor endothelial cells,
tumor cells and their secreted microparticles triggers an Fc-FcR mediated
pro-inflammatory cellular and cytokine response that reverses the
immunosuppressive PS meditated checkpoint, thereby enhancing anti-tumor
immunity. A chimeric PS-targeting antibody, bavituximab, is being used in
combination with chemotherapy to treat patients with solid tumors in
multiple late-stage clinical trials. Using breast tumors in immune
competent mice, we demonstrate PS targeting antibodies enhance the
anti-tumor activity of combination therapies including anti-PD-1
antibodies. Tumor growth inhibition correlates with statistically
significant increases in the infiltration of CD8+ T cells and a reduction
of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). The combination of these
mechanisms promotes strong, localized, anti-tumor responses without the
side-effects of systemic immune activation.

