Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the immunogenicity of ALDHhigh human head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma cancer stem cells in vitro


Using mouse models we reported that dendritic cells (DC) pulsed with
cancer stem cells (CSC) enriched by virtue of their expression of the CSC
marker aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) significantly reduced development of
pulmonary metastases and prolonged survival. In this recent study, we
established the concept that the antigenicity/immunogenicity of ALDHhigh
human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cancer stem cells is
distinct from that of ALDHlow non-CSCs. To this end, we generated
CSC-loaded DCs to sensitize autologous peripheral blood lymphocytes to
react with CSCs using human HNSCC samples in vitro. From peripheral blood
and paired tumor tissues collected from 9 patients with HNSCC, we
obtained PBMCs and established 4 HNSCC tumor cell lines. DCs generated
from the PBMC and pulsed with the lysate of ALDHhigh cells isolated from
cultured HNSCC cells (CSC-DC) could sensitize autologous T, B lymphocytes
in vitro, which was evident by cytokine production, CTL activity, and
antibody secretion of these primed T, B cells in response to ALDHhigh
CSCs. In contrast, DCs pulsed with lysate of ALDHlow cells from the same
HNSCC patient (ALDHlow-DC) resulted in limited sensitization/priming of
autologous T, B lymphocytes to produce IFN, lyse CSCs, and secrete IgM
and IgG in response to ALDHhigh CSCs. These results demonstrated
significant differences in the antigenicity/immunogenicity between
ALDHhigh CSCs vs. ALDHlow cells isolated from the tumor specimen of
patients with HNSCC, which indicates the existence of unique CSC antigens
in the ALDHhigh population. In addition, this study demonstrates that it
is feasible to generate DCs from the PBMCs and isolate ALDHhigh CSCs from
cultured tumor cells of the patients with HNSCC to prepare CSC-DC
vaccines for clinical application.

