Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nitric oxide signaling pathway as a pathogenic driver in
pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is among the most malignant
cancers, with 5-year survival of 6%. Chronic inflammation is associated
with increased risk of PDAC. Nitric oxide (NO) is an important mediator
of inflammatory responses and plays a role in tumorigenesis. The
principal source of an increased and sustained level of NO is inducible
nitric oxide synthase (NOS2). In this study, weve tested the hypothesis
that NO enhances tumor progression in pancreatic cancer. We found that
higher NOS2 expression in tumors was associated with poor survival in
resected PDAC patients (p = 0.011). We then investigated the role of NO
by deleting NOS2 gene in a genetically engineered mouse model of
pancreatic cancer (KPC mice) with pancreas-specific activation of mutant
KRAS and P53, which faithfully recapitulates the development and
progression of human pancreatic cancer. NOS2-deficient KPC mice showed
longer survival compared to the KPC littermates with wildtype NOS2
(pPancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is among the most malignant
cancers, with 5-year survival of 6%. Chronic inflammation is associated
with increased risk of PDAC. Nitric oxide (NO) is an important mediator
of inflammatory responses and plays a role in tumorigenesis. The
principal source of an increased and sustained level of NO is inducible
nitric oxide synthase (NOS2). In this study, weve tested the hypothesis
that NO enhances tumor progression in pancreatic cancer. We found that
higher NOS2 expression in tumors was associated with poor survival in
resected PDAC patients (p = 0.011). We then investigated the role of NO
by deleting NOS2 gene in a genetically engineered mouse model of
pancreatic cancer (KPC mice) with pancreas-specific activation of mutant
KRAS and P53, which faithfully recapitulates the development and
progression of human pancreatic cancer. NOS2-deficient KPC mice showed
longer survival compared to the KPC littermates with wildtype NOS2
(p<0.01). Compared to tumors from KPC mice, KPC/NOS2/ tumors were less
vascularized (pPancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is among the most
malignant cancers, with 5-year survival of 6%. Chronic inflammation is
associated with increased risk of PDAC. Nitric oxide (NO) is an important
mediator of inflammatory responses and plays a role in tumorigenesis. The
principal source of an increased and sustained level of NO is inducible
nitric oxide synthase (NOS2). In this study, weve tested the hypothesis
that NO enhances tumor progression in pancreatic cancer. We found that
higher NOS2 expression in tumors was associated with poor survival in
resected PDAC patients (p = 0.011). We then investigated the role of NO
by deleting NOS2 gene in a genetically engineered mouse model of
pancreatic cancer (KPC mice) with pancreas-specific activation of mutant
KRAS and P53, which faithfully recapitulates the development and
progression of human pancreatic cancer. NOS2-deficient KPC mice showed
longer survival compared to the KPC littermates with wildtype NOS2
(p<0.01). Compared to tumors from KPC mice, KPC/NOS2/ tumors were less
vascularized (p<0.001) and with less macrophage recruitment (pPancreatic
Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is among the most malignant cancers, with
5-year survival of 6%. Chronic inflammation is associated with increased
risk of PDAC. Nitric oxide (NO) is an important mediator of inflammatory
responses and plays a role in tumorigenesis. The principal source of an
increased and sustained level of NO is inducible nitric oxide synthase
(NOS2). In this study, weve tested the hypothesis that NO enhances tumor
progression in pancreatic cancer. We found that higher NOS2 expression in
tumors was associated with poor survival in resected PDAC patients (p =
0.011). We then investigated the role of NO by deleting NOS2 gene in a
genetically engineered mouse model of pancreatic cancer (KPC mice) with
pancreas-specific activation of mutant KRAS and P53, which faithfully
recapitulates the development and progression of human pancreatic cancer.
NOS2-deficient KPC mice showed longer survival compared to the KPC
littermates with wildtype NOS2 (p<0.01). Compared to tumors from KPC
mice, KPC/NOS2/ tumors were less vascularized (p<0.001) and with less
macrophage recruitment (p<0.005), indicated by decreased expression of
CD31 and F4/80 respectively. NOS2 deficiency led to attenuated
proliferation and invasion, and enhanced apoptosis indicated by high
level of cleaved caspase-3 (p = 0.02). Consistent with the less malignant
phenotype, NOS2 deficiency reduced nuclear pERK accumulation (P = 0.034)
and the subsequent phosphorylation of FOXO3 (p = 0.026). Further
investigation showed a positive correlation between NOS2 expression and
pFOXO level in human PDAC specimen (p = 0.005). In addition, NOS2
deficiency reduced the expression of a well known oncogenic microRNA,
miR21 (p = 0.001). In summary, NOS2 gene expression in tumors is a
candidate prognostic marker in resected pancreatic cancer patients, and
NOS2/NO signaling may contribute to the pancreatic tumor progression by
inactivating FOXO3 in KPC mice. In this ongoing study, we are further
investigating the mechanistic role of NO in disease progression.

