Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactivation of p53R175 mutant by dietary phenethyl isothiocyanate
(PEITC) impairs tumor growth in vivo


Mutations in the p53 gene occur in a variety of human cancers with
remarkably high frequencies (as high as 80%), depending on the type and
stage of the tumors (www-p53.iarc.fr). The majority of mutations are
missense that are localized to six hotspot residues, which play a role
either in the structural integrity (structural mutants, e.g., R175H) or
in the DNA binding domain (contact mutants, e.g., R273H). Previously, we
showed that phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC), a naturally occurring
dietary constituent present abundantly in watercress, selectively
depletes p53 mutant protein, but not the WT p53, and induces apoptosis in
tumor cells expressing p53 mutants. In this study we demonstrated that
PEITC can reactivate p53R175 mutant protein and inhibit tumor growth in a
mutant p53R175H -dependent manner.PEITC displayed a 175 allele preference
of inhibition of cell proliferation as compared to other hotspot mutants
as detected by WST-1 assay and induced apoptosis in a p53R175 mutant
-dependent manner. Immunofluorescence and co-immunoprecipitation assay on
PEITC treated p53R175 cells using conformation-specific antibodies
(PAB1620 and PAB240) showed restoration of the WT-like conformation to
p53 mutant. Reactivation of the WT like functions to the p53R175 mutant
was established by its ability to bind DNA, transactivate p53 regulated
downstream target genes (p21, PUMA, MDM2, NOXA, BAX and BCL2), and
overexpression of p21 protein. PEITC treatment induced DNA damage
response as detected by pATM-S1981 and pCHK2-Thr68, G2/M and S-phase
cell-cycle arrest and oxidative stress as measured by decrease in the GSH
levels in the cells. In contrast, co-treatment of cells with PEITC and
reducing agents alleviated the inhibitory effects of PEITC on cell
proliferation. Elevated oxidative stress due to the combined effect of
PEITC and elevated ROS levels in p53 mutant cells might be responsible
for the activation of restored WT-like p53R175 mutant protein and
induction of apoptosis. PEITC induced proteasomal degradation and
autophagy of the p53R175 mutant. Animals fed with PEITC diet showed a
statistically significant reduction in xenograft tumor volumes,
proliferation marker Ki67, and mutant p53 stained cells. Elevated mRNA
levels of p53 regulated genes from animals fed PEITC diet provide in vivo
evidence for the p53R175H mutant reactivation and inhibition of xenograft
growth in a mutant p53-dependent manner. These are important findings
because they demonstrated that a dietary compound can inhibit the growth
of tumor cells in vivo by restoring the tumor suppressor functions to
mutant p53, and thus provide a target for the development of novel
chemopreventive strategies through dietary interventions.

