Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling of extracellular matrix proteins in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma progression and metastasis


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most common causes
of cancer-related death, and is characterized by accumulation of
excessive extracellular matrix (ECM). Although the ECM of tumors, such as
PDAC, has long been known to have major effects on behavior of both tumor
and stromal cells, including invasion, angiogenesis, metastasis, and
resistance to therapy, the detailed composition of the ECM in PDAC tumor
progression and metastasis are not understood. To study the involvement
of ECM proteins in PDAC primary tumor growth and the tissue-specific
metastasis program, we modified the comprehensive ECM proteomic approach
by Mass Spectrometry (MS) recently developed in our lab to profile the
ECM changes during PDAC progression in both the LSL-KrasG12D/+;
LSL-Trp53R127H/+; Pdx-1-Cre (KPC) mouse models of PDAC and human patient
samples. We will compare ECM profiles from normal pancreas, pancreatitis,
early and late pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) stages, and
PDAC. Initial MS identified between 100 and 140 ECM proteins in samples
representing each stage. The changes identified include changes
previously associated with PDAC (e.g., upregulation of Tnc, Lox) plus
novel, previously unreported changes. The combination of mouse models and
human samples will allow us to uncover critical ECM changes during PDAC
progression and metastasis and, furthermore, to investigate and
understand the functional consequences of such changes. The ongoing
studies will characterize the ECM of PDAC in detail and provide novel
insights into diagnosis, prognosis and treatments of this very difficult
disease.

