Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elimination of multi-drug-resistant breast cancer cells using
combination of high-intensity focused ultrasound and low-dose generic
chemotherapeutic


PURPOSEDespite medical advances, multidrug-resistant (MDR) breast cancers
continue to challenge the patients. In this study, we seek to evaluate a
new strategy in which the combination of High-Intensity Focused
Ultrasound (HIFU) and low-dose generic chemotherapeutic is utilized to
attack MDR breast cancer cells.METHODThis strategy, motivated by clinical
trials in which HIFU was used to treat breast fibroadenoma, led to the in
vitro study during which human triple-negative breast cancer stem cell
line BT-549 (ATCC), known for resistance to Docetaxel (DTX), was
paradoxically treated with low-dose DTX.Day 1: Each data sample consisted
of 10K cells grown inside a well of 8-well glass slides (Lab-Tek). Each
slide was then filled with growth media, sealed, submerged in 37C
degassed water bath and secured onto a fixture. The targets for HIFU
therapy are the center points of the 4 quadrants of each well's base. The
constant HIFU parameters for each slide were acoustic pressure 5MPa,
repetition rate 1Hz, focal-zone depth and 30 sec/sonication/center point
while duty cycle (DC) ranged 0-50% among slides. After HIFU treatment,
the slides were incubated for 24h.Day 2: Cell media for each slide was
replaced with fresh media containing [DTX] 0-4 nM prior to repeating HIFU
procedure from day 1.Day 4: After 48h of exposure to DTX, cell
survivability study was performed to determine the contribution of
HIFU-mediated necrosis as well as necrosis mediated by low [DTX] (versus
apoptosis by very high [DTX]).RESULTSCell survivability decreased by
increasing [DTX] or DC. In DTX-only group (DC 0%), average survivability
was 42.8% (n = 7) for [DTX] 1nM while in HIFU-only group ([DTX] 0 nM),
average survivability was 25.1% (n = 7) at DC 30%. In contrast, there was
virtually no survivability of breast cancer stem cells for the
combination of [DTX] 1nM and DC 30%.CONCLUSIONThe combination of HIFU and
low-dose Docetaxel was successful in virtually eliminating MDR breast
cancer cells in 4 days.Note: Our data suggests that, in principle, drug
resistance may be reversible and that a combination of HIFU and a
low-dose generic chemotherapeutic may be a promising alternative to
existing treatments (multidrug regimen, surgery or radiotherapy) against
other MDR cancers. In addition to high efficacy within a relatively short
time, the minimal/no side effects and low cost from using low-dose
generic chemotherapeutic may pave the way toward a paradigm shift in
near-future cancer treatments.

