Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A polyclonal origin for pancreatic cancer metastases


Cancer genome studies demonstrate that tumors are comprised of multiple
sub-clones with varied genetic and phenotypic properties. Metastases are
often depicted as arising from these subpopulations through seeding by
single cells, leading to clonally-derived lesions at distant sites.
Alternatively, it has been suggested that metastases can also arise from
the collective migration of tumor cells, resulting in formation of
polyclonal metastases. To better understand the dynamics of metastasis
formation in native tumors, we employed the multi-color Confetti lineage
tracing system, in an autochthonous mouse model of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Through the stochastic expression of distinct
fluorescent proteins in any given cell, we tracked the contribution of
different tumor subpopulations to malignant progression. We find that
early pre-malignant lesions exhibit significant clonal heterogeneity but
this clonal diversity decreases during progression to frank carcinoma.
Furthermore our data provide the first direct evidence for polyclonal
metastasis in the context of a naturally-evolving tumor and suggest that
seeding and colonization of metastatic sites involves interactions
between at least two distinct tumor populations. We also observe that
clonal evolution during metastatic growth varies significantly between
the sites of metastatic invasion, resulting in either monoclonal or
polyclonal outgrowth. These results provide and unprecedented window into
the dynamic changes in clonality that accompany tumor progression and
suggest that heterotypic interactions between tumor subpopulations and
microenvironmental factors unique to each tissue site contribute to the
clonal evolution of metastases.

