Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro comparison of conventional hyperthermia and
electro-hyperthemia


Purpose:Deep heating hypertermia methods are a promising cancer treatment
modalities used to enhance conventional treatment. This could be achieved
through radiofrequency field en-bloc heating by Thermotron RF-8 and
selective tumor heating by Oncotherm-Labehy, respectively. This is the
first study to evaluate the different cytotoxic effect and action
mechanism on cancer cells after mild hyperthermia (MHT) by Thermotron
RF-8 or Oncothermia-Labehy.Experimental Design:Hepatoma HepG2 cells were
used for MHT treatment (42C for 30minute). Either by Oncotherm-Labehy or
Thermotron RF-8 or water bath treatment were compared. Apoptosis
evaluated 24h after MTH as measured by Annexin-V assay and cell cycle
analysis. Mitochondria-targeted damage as measured by ROS production with
or without Mito-TEMPO treatment and membrane-targeted damage as measured
by caspase-8 expression, adhesion molecule expression, heat shock protein
(HSP) release and calcium channel disturbance were evaluated and
compared.Results:MHT resulted in similar cell cycle arrest on G2/M.
Oncothermia treatment resulted in higher apoptosis rate (38.876.58) than
RF-8 (25.132.26), water bath (18.770.35) and control (14.930.76). The
expression of Caspase-8 is higher by oncothermia treatment, while
caspase-3 and 9 levels were similar between 3 types of treatment. HSPs
were upregulated by MHT, however a marked HSP release outside cell and
E-cadherin overexpression on the membrane were only observed after
oncothermia treatment.Conclusion:In this report, we found that different
hyperthermia devices may induce different mechanisms on their cytotoxic
effects and cell responses to heat. Oncothermia may selectively target on
cell membrane before targeting on mitochondria, while RF-8 has no
membrane targeting effect. These results may provide rational basis for
future clinical application of hyperthermia treatment.

