Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of high mobility group box 1 in the combination therapy
of gemcitabine and radiation in muscle invasive bladder cancer


Purpose: Radical cystectomy is the gold standard treatment for muscle
invasive bladder cancer. However, it causes a serious impact in the
quality of life of the patients. Radiation therapy when combined with
radio-sensitizing chemotherapy is an attractive alternative as it offers
bladder preservation allowing for normal urinary and sexual functions.
However, lack of local control and dose dependent toxicity are the main
drawbacks of the combination therapy. As HMGB1 has been found to be
associated with DNA damage response and chronic inflammation pathways of
radiation resistance, we sought to investigate the role of HMGB1 in the
response to radiation in bladder cancer.Methods: The expression of HMGB1
among different bladder cancer cell lines was analyzed by mRNA and
Protein quantification. The mean growth inhibition to Gemcitabine was
assessed by colorimetric assays of cellular viability. Knock down of
HMGB1 was done using lentiviral shRNA system. To assess the effect of the
combination therapy, Clonogenic assay was done. Cells were exposed to the
mean growth inhibition dose of gemcitabine for 6 hours followed by
varying doses of radiation (2-8 Gy). Analysis of cell cycle was done by
Flow Cytometry. Western blot was utilized to assess pathways involved in
cellular survival. In vivo, athymic mice were subcutaneously injected
with two bladder cancer cell lines. Treatment consisted of either placebo
or combined gemcitabine (1 g/m2, 6 hours prior to radiation) and
fractionated IR (total 6Gy = 3Gy2) in cells with scramble vs knockdown of
HMGB1. Mice were followed over 3 weeks. Tumor weight was measured at
experimental endpoint.Results: HMGB1 expression was analyzed in eight
urothelial carcinoma cell lines. Amongst all, UM-UC3 and UM-UC5 had the
highest expression while 253J-BV had the lowest expression of HMGB1.
There was a significant correlation between the levels of HMGB1 and
resistance to radiation (P value Purpose: Radical cystectomy is the gold
standard treatment for muscle invasive bladder cancer. However, it causes
a serious impact in the quality of life of the patients. Radiation
therapy when combined with radio-sensitizing chemotherapy is an
attractive alternative as it offers bladder preservation allowing for
normal urinary and sexual functions. However, lack of local control and
dose dependent toxicity are the main drawbacks of the combination
therapy. As HMGB1 has been found to be associated with DNA damage
response and chronic inflammation pathways of radiation resistance, we
sought to investigate the role of HMGB1 in the response to radiation in
bladder cancer.Methods: The expression of HMGB1 among different bladder
cancer cell lines was analyzed by mRNA and Protein quantification. The
mean growth inhibition to Gemcitabine was assessed by colorimetric assays
of cellular viability. Knock down of HMGB1 was done using lentiviral
shRNA system. To assess the effect of the combination therapy, Clonogenic
assay was done. Cells were exposed to the mean growth inhibition dose of
gemcitabine for 6 hours followed by varying doses of radiation (2-8 Gy).
Analysis of cell cycle was done by Flow Cytometry. Western blot was
utilized to assess pathways involved in cellular survival. In vivo,
athymic mice were subcutaneously injected with two bladder cancer cell
lines. Treatment consisted of either placebo or combined gemcitabine (1
g/m2, 6 hours prior to radiation) and fractionated IR (total 6Gy = 3Gy2)
in cells with scramble vs knockdown of HMGB1. Mice were followed over 3
weeks. Tumor weight was measured at experimental endpoint.Results: HMGB1
expression was analyzed in eight urothelial carcinoma cell lines. Amongst
all, UM-UC3 and UM-UC5 had the highest expression while 253J-BV had the
lowest expression of HMGB1. There was a significant correlation between
the levels of HMGB1 and resistance to radiation (P value <0.0001). Our
results from clonogenic assays post combined treatment shows that
knockdown of HMGB1 resulted in a dose modifying factor (DMF) of 2.95 for
a survival fraction of 0.5. Moreover, western blot analysis revealed that
high expression of HMGB1 was associated with increased and sustained
activation of ERK pathway. Also, cell cycle analysis showed that upon
HMGB1 knockdown, cell cycle arrest was induced at S phase post
gemcitabine treatment and at G2 phase post radiation and combination
therapy. To validate these results, subcutaneous tumors were induced in
athymic mice and underwent two fractions of the combined treatment.
Significant sensitization effect upon HMGB1 knockdown was observed,
evident by tumor volume (P value Purpose: Radical cystectomy is the gold
standard treatment for muscle invasive bladder cancer. However, it causes
a serious impact in the quality of life of the patients. Radiation
therapy when combined with radio-sensitizing chemotherapy is an
attractive alternative as it offers bladder preservation allowing for
normal urinary and sexual functions. However, lack of local control and
dose dependent toxicity are the main drawbacks of the combination
therapy. As HMGB1 has been found to be associated with DNA damage
response and chronic inflammation pathways of radiation resistance, we
sought to investigate the role of HMGB1 in the response to radiation in
bladder cancer.Methods: The expression of HMGB1 among different bladder
cancer cell lines was analyzed by mRNA and Protein quantification. The
mean growth inhibition to Gemcitabine was assessed by colorimetric assays
of cellular viability. Knock down of HMGB1 was done using lentiviral
shRNA system. To assess the effect of the combination therapy, Clonogenic
assay was done. Cells were exposed to the mean growth inhibition dose of
gemcitabine for 6 hours followed by varying doses of radiation (2-8 Gy).
Analysis of cell cycle was done by Flow Cytometry. Western blot was
utilized to assess pathways involved in cellular survival. In vivo,
athymic mice were subcutaneously injected with two bladder cancer cell
lines. Treatment consisted of either placebo or combined gemcitabine (1
g/m2, 6 hours prior to radiation) and fractionated IR (total 6Gy = 3Gy2)
in cells with scramble vs knockdown of HMGB1. Mice were followed over 3
weeks. Tumor weight was measured at experimental endpoint.Results: HMGB1
expression was analyzed in eight urothelial carcinoma cell lines. Amongst
all, UM-UC3 and UM-UC5 had the highest expression while 253J-BV had the
lowest expression of HMGB1. There was a significant correlation between
the levels of HMGB1 and resistance to radiation (P value <0.0001). Our
results from clonogenic assays post combined treatment shows that
knockdown of HMGB1 resulted in a dose modifying factor (DMF) of 2.95 for
a survival fraction of 0.5. Moreover, western blot analysis revealed that
high expression of HMGB1 was associated with increased and sustained
activation of ERK pathway. Also, cell cycle analysis showed that upon
HMGB1 knockdown, cell cycle arrest was induced at S phase post
gemcitabine treatment and at G2 phase post radiation and combination
therapy. To validate these results, subcutaneous tumors were induced in
athymic mice and underwent two fractions of the combined treatment.
Significant sensitization effect upon HMGB1 knockdown was observed,
evident by tumor volume (P value <0.0001) and weight (P value Purpose:
Radical cystectomy is the gold standard treatment for muscle invasive
bladder cancer. However, it causes a serious impact in the quality of
life of the patients. Radiation therapy when combined with
radio-sensitizing chemotherapy is an attractive alternative as it offers
bladder preservation allowing for normal urinary and sexual functions.
However, lack of local control and dose dependent toxicity are the main
drawbacks of the combination therapy. As HMGB1 has been found to be
associated with DNA damage response and chronic inflammation pathways of
radiation resistance, we sought to investigate the role of HMGB1 in the
response to radiation in bladder cancer.Methods: The expression of HMGB1
among different bladder cancer cell lines was analyzed by mRNA and
Protein quantification. The mean growth inhibition to Gemcitabine was
assessed by colorimetric assays of cellular viability. Knock down of
HMGB1 was done using lentiviral shRNA system. To assess the effect of the
combination therapy, Clonogenic assay was done. Cells were exposed to the
mean growth inhibition dose of gemcitabine for 6 hours followed by
varying doses of radiation (2-8 Gy). Analysis of cell cycle was done by
Flow Cytometry. Western blot was utilized to assess pathways involved in
cellular survival. In vivo, athymic mice were subcutaneously injected
with two bladder cancer cell lines. Treatment consisted of either placebo
or combined gemcitabine (1 g/m2, 6 hours prior to radiation) and
fractionated IR (total 6Gy = 3Gy2) in cells with scramble vs knockdown of
HMGB1. Mice were followed over 3 weeks. Tumor weight was measured at
experimental endpoint.Results: HMGB1 expression was analyzed in eight
urothelial carcinoma cell lines. Amongst all, UM-UC3 and UM-UC5 had the
highest expression while 253J-BV had the lowest expression of HMGB1.
There was a significant correlation between the levels of HMGB1 and
resistance to radiation (P value <0.0001). Our results from clonogenic
assays post combined treatment shows that knockdown of HMGB1 resulted in
a dose modifying factor (DMF) of 2.95 for a survival fraction of 0.5.
Moreover, western blot analysis revealed that high expression of HMGB1
was associated with increased and sustained activation of ERK pathway.
Also, cell cycle analysis showed that upon HMGB1 knockdown, cell cycle
arrest was induced at S phase post gemcitabine treatment and at G2 phase
post radiation and combination therapy. To validate these results,
subcutaneous tumors were induced in athymic mice and underwent two
fractions of the combined treatment. Significant sensitization effect
upon HMGB1 knockdown was observed, evident by tumor volume (P value
<0.0001) and weight (P value <0.05).Conclusion: Our in vitro and in vivo
results strongly suggest that investigating HMGB1 increases efficacy of
combination therapy of gemcitabine and radiation. Baseline of HMGB1 could
be a good marker to predict response to such therapy.

