Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BrafV637E mutation as an early change in hepatocarcinogenesis
induced by neonatal treatment with diethylnitrosamine in B6C3F1 mice


Neonatal treatment of B6C3F1 mice with diethylnitrosamine (DEN) is often
employed as an experimental model for hepatic tumors. In this model,
microscopic preneoplastic foci emerge in the early stage and subsequently
progress into adenomas, from which hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is
finally developed. We detected the BrafV637E mutation, that is
correspondent to the human BrafV600E mutation, in 4/4 DEN-induced hepatic
tumors at 13 months after DEN treatment by whole exome analysis, and
further in 16/17 (94.1%) late tumors by the PCR-direct sequencing method.
By microdissection, the BrafV637E mutation was also detected in 16/18
(88.8%) and 22/28 (78.5%) microscopic lesions (preneoplastic foci and
microadenomas) respectively at 5 and 8-9 months after DEN treatment.
Meanwhile, although the BrafV637E mutation was detected in 5/7 (71.4%)
hepatic tumors induced by neonatal DEN treatment followed by repeated
CCl4 administration, it was not found in 24 hepatic tumors induced by
CCl4 alone and 6 spontaneous hepatic tumors in B6C3F1 mice, indicating
that the BrafV637E mutation is specific to the DEN-initiated hepatic
tumors, presumably being derived from the genotoxic action of DEN. The
DEN-induced tumors showed hyperphosphorylation of MEK and ERK1/2,
indicating that the BrafV637E mutation activated the downstream MAPK
pathway. Furthermore, the DEN-induced tumors overexpressed the
pro-survival/pro-proliferative cytokines/chemokines such as complement
C5/C5a, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule (sICAM-1), IL-1 receptor
antagonist (IL-1ra) and chemokine CXCL9 as well as the oncogene-induced
senescence (OIS) markers, p15Ink4b and p19Arf mRNAs, suggesting that the
BrafV637E mutation might influence the gene expression that is involved
either in cellular growth/survival or OIS. Transgenic mice expressing
BrafV637E specifically in the liver under the control of albumin promoter
showed enlarged hepatic mass as large as 4-5 times of normal liver, and
whole liver was consisted of small basophilic hepatocytes resembling the
cells in the early preneoplastic lesions induced by neonatal treatment
with DEN. These results indicate that the BrafV637E mutation plays a
pivotal role in the DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis.

