Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Duplex sequencing of AML reveals extensive sub clonal heterogeneity


Subclonal mutations, that are present in a small subset of tumor cells
prior to chemotherapy, could serve as a reservoir for the emergence of
drug resistance. These could selectively expand during chemotherapy and
result in relapse and death. We have used Duplex DNA Sequencing (DS) to
detect low frequency subclonal mutations in AML, both prior to treatment
and after relapse. DS focuses on a limited number of target genes at the
level of single DNA molecules. Mutations are scored only if they are
present at the same position in both strands of the same DNA molecule and
are complementary, resulting in sequencing accuracy that is more than
10,000-fold greater than that of conventional next-generation DNA
sequencing (NGS).To follow the course of mutation accumulation in AML, we
used capture hybridization to enrich for 15 genes previously reported to
be mutated in AML. We identified multiple subclonal mutations prior to
therapy that would not be detected by routine NGS. For example, in one
relapse sample, we identified a mutation in NRAS that was present in 32%
of the cells. The identical mutation was detected by DS prior to
treatment in 1% of cells. To further assess the frequency of subclonal
mutations in AML, we targeted a 30 kb panel of genes at 500,000 fold
depth, which facilitates detection of mutations present in fewer than
0.01% of cells. 5 subclonal mutations were identified within the 30 kb
target, corresponding to a frequency of 170 mutations per megabase,
Extrapolation of these results to the whole genome indicates that there
are approximately 500,000 subclonal mutations per AML genome, which is
1,000 fold higher than the frequency of clonal mutations. These subclonal
mutations would be unevenly distributed throughout the genome and be an
important source for the selection of drug resistance during therapy.

