Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DYRK1A kinase regulates mTOR signaling via modulating the TSC
complex


The Dual specificity Tyrosine-phosphorylation-Regulated Kinase 1A
(DYRK1A) kinase is encoded on chromosome 21 and is involved in the
pathogenesis of Down syndrome. Earlier studies have shown that DYRK1A is
essential for cells to undergo growth arrest following serum starvation,
at least in part by promoting the assembly of the DREAM repressor
complex. However, the function of this important kinase is not fully
understood. Using MudPIT MS/MS proteomic analysis of DYRK1A-interacting
proteins followed by immunoprecipitation-Western blotting, we
characterized the binding between DYRK1A and the subunits of the TSC
tumor suppressor protein complex, a major regulator of the mTORC1
pathway. This interaction was mapped to the kinase domain of DYRK1A,
suggesting that the TSC could serve as a substrate for DYRK1A
phosphorylation. Indeed, overexpression of DYRK1A increased
phosphorylation of both TSC1 and TSC2; this effect was fully reversed by
the DYRK1A inhibitor, harmine. Functional studies revealed that loss of
DYRK1A in two different cancer cell lines resulted in increased
phosphorylation of mTORC1 substrates S6K1 and 4E-BP1. This effect of
DYRK1A knockdown was inhibited by rapamycin, confirming the involvement
of mTORC1 signaling. Thus, our work revealed novel function of DYRK1A in
the regulation of mTOR signaling that controls cell growth,
proliferation, and survival.

