Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical study of telomerase-specific p53 tumor suppressor gene
overexpression in human scirrhous gastric cancer cells with different p53
status


Background: Despite multimodal therapy for scirrhous gastric cancer, many
patients show refractory to conventional therapy and rapid progression,
leading to poor prognosis. Therefore, the development of novel
therapeutic strategy is required to improve the clinical outcome in
patients with scirrhous gastric cancers. As novel therapeutic strategies,
Ad-p53, a replication-defective adenovirus expressing a tumor suppressor
p53 gene, is currently under clinical evaluation for various types of
cancers. We recently developed a novel p53-expressing telomerase-specific
replication-competent oncolytic adenovirus OBP-702, which induces the p53
gene expression in a telomerase-dependent manner. In this study, we
investigated the antitumor effects of Ad-p53 and OBP-702 in human
scirrhous gastric cancer cells with different p53 status.Methods: We used
3 human scirrhous gastric cancer cell lines with different p53 status,
NUGC4 (p53 wild-type), GCIY (p53 mutant-type), and KATOIII (p53 null).
The antitumor effects of Ad-p53 and OBP-702 were evaluated using XTT
assay. The 50% inhibiting dose (ID50) value of Ad-p53 and OBP-702 for
each cell was calculated using cell viability data obtained 3 days after
virus infection. We evaluated the virus-mediated cell death in the
sphere-forming cells by LIVE/DEAD assay. The apoptosis- and
autophagy-related cell death was assessed by western blot analysis for
cleaved poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and p62.Results: Ad-p53
suppressed the cell viability in p53-inactivated scirrhous gastric cancer
cells (KATO III, GCIY), whereas p53-intact NUGC4 cells were resistant to
Ad-p53. OBP-702 efficiently suppressed the cell viability in all
scirrhous gastric cancer cells with different p53 function. The ID50
value of OBP-702 was lower than that of Ad-p53 in all cell lines.
LIVE/DEAD assay showed that OBP-702 induced cell death more efficiently
than Ad-p53 in the sphere-forming cells. OBP-702 induced more profound
p53 expression and apoptotic cell death than Ad-p53. Moreover, only
OBP-702 induced not only apoptosis but also autophagy.Conclusions: These
results suggest that p53-expressing tumor-specific oncolytic adenovirus
OBP-702 is a promising antitumor agent to induce profound cell death in
scirrhous gastric cancers with different p53 status. Now, in vivo
experiments are under way to investigate the antitumor effect of OBP-702
in the peritoneal dissemination of scirrhous gastric cancer cells.

