Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDLIM2 : A cytoskeleton to nuclear courier protein for the IGF-1,
Wnt and TGF beta signalling pathways in Epithelial to Mesenchymal
Transition


PDLIM2 is a PDZ-LIM domain protein that regulates the stability and
activity of transcription factor families (including NFB, STATs and beta
catenin). PDLIM2 expression is repressed in certain cancers but it is
also highly expressed in Triple Negative Basal Breast cancers that are
characterized by poor survival. Suppression of PDLIM2 reverses the EMT
phenotype, inhibits polarized cell migration, and disrupts formation of
polarized epithelial acini in 3D cell cultures. PDLIM2 shuttles from the
cytoskeleton to the nucleus, but what mediates this nuclear translocation
or activity in transcription factor regulation is unknown.The aim of this
study was to identify the mechanisms governing PDLIM2 subcellular
localization and nuclear translocation. We found that IGF-1or TGF-
promotes PDLIM2 accumulation in the nucleus. Similarly, WNT3a stimulation
enhances PDLIM2 accumulation in the nucleus while inhibition of WNT
activity results in PDLIM2 stabilization in the cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic to
nuclear translocation is associated with reduced phosphorylation on
several serine residues in PDLIM2. The de-phosphorylation and subsequent
nuclear translocation of PDLIM2 can be prevented by inhibiting the
protein phosphatase PP1. In contrast, PDLIM2 phosphorylation can be
enhanced by activation of protein kinase C, which is dependent on the
presence of the focal adhesion scaffolding protein RACK1 in a complex
with PDLIM2.Overall, the data indicate that PDLIM2 cytoplasmic to nuclear
translocation in response to IGF-1, WNT or TGF beta signalling is
mediated by serine phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation by
cytoskeleton-associated kinases and phosphatases. Thus PDLIM2 acts as a
cytoskeleton to nucleus courier protein for these signalling pathways to
promote cancer cell migration and EMT.

