Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An oral procaspase activating drug, PAC-1, shows preclinical
promise for glioblastoma therapy


PAC-1 is an oral administered procaspase-3 activating drug developed to
overcome the malignant cell's barrier to apoptosis. The promising
preclinical safety and efficacy of PAC-1 has led to its consideration for
a first in human phase 1 clinical trial for recurrent and advanced
malignancies. We have found that because PAC-1 is able to reach
intracranial brain tumors in effective concentrations, that it is
particularly useful for glioblastoma (GBM), an aggressive and invasive
malignancy responsible for the most deaths due to brain cancer. In
glioblastoma patients a worse prognosis was correlated with high
expression of procaspase-3 mRNA, indicating that procaspase-3 activation
may be involved in the pathology of the tumor progression. In preclinical
testing of PAC-1, it showed significant survival benefit and low systemic
toxicity, in orthotopic animal models of glioblastoma. An aqueous
suspension of PAC-1 delivered orally to rats with intracranial 9L
glioblastoma improved survival compared to untreated controls.
Additionally, when PAC-1 was administered as an oral capsule to rats with
9L glioblastoma, median survival increased over three fold. Oral PAC-1
improved survival significantly also in a human xenograft model (p =
0.04) compared to controls. PAC-1 combined effectively with standard of
care, and in some animals, either alone or in combination resulted in
long term survival. PAC-1 has the ability to penetrate sufficiently
within intracranial tumors and its ability to overcome resistance to
apoptosis and activate widespread cell death specifically in the
malignant cells makes it a promising small molecule for further
preclinical and clinical development.

