Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DEC1 and DEC2 crosstalk between circadian rhythm and tumor
progression


Circadian rhythms are tightly regulated by clock genes. It has been
reported that clock genes plays important roles in biological function of
normal cells. However, it is not well understood the function of clock
genes in tumor cells. We showed that basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors, differentiated embryonic chondrocyte gene 1
(DEC1/BHLHE40/Sharp2/Stra13) and DEC2 (BHLHE41/Sharp1), are clock genes
and play important roles in circadian rhythm, cell proliferation,
apoptosis, hypoxia response, various stresses and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in tumor cells. Various
stresses, such as exposure to transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-),
hypoxia, cytokines, serum-free, and anti-tumor drugs affect DEC
expression. The increased or decreased DEC expression by such stresses is
involved in tumor progression. The evidence that DEC2 has circadian
expression in implanted mouse sarcoma cells and negatively regulates VEGF
expression under hypoxia. DEC1 has pro-apoptotic effects in human breast
cancer cells, whereas DEC2 has anti-apoptotic effects. DEC1 induced EMT
by TGF- in human pancreatic cancer cells, whereas DEC2 suppressed EMT.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed that DEC1 is highly expressed in
tumor cells and the expression is involved in malignancy. On the other
hand, DEC2 is little expressed in tumor cells compared with adjacent
non-tumor cells. These findings suggest that DEC1 and DEC2 have different
roles in tumor progression under circadian rhythm. DEC2 regulates the
circadian rhythm and VEGF expression by negative feed-back system, and
DEC1 and DEC2 regulates EMT by positive and negative feed-back system in
tumor cells. So, DEC acts as accelerator and brake in tumor progression.
In this study, we show current progress of the DEC genes in tumor
progression.

