Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of HPVE6 oncoprotein in the maintenance of cervical cancer
stem cells


Background & Objectives: Persistent infection of high-risk human
papillomaviruses (HR-HPV) is a key etiological factor responsible for the
development of cervical cancer. Deregulated expression of two viral
oncoproteins E6 and E7 drive oncogenic transformation and tumour
progression which may occur upon targeted infection of specific basal
cervical cells with stem cell properties. However, how oncoproteins
impact on putative CSCs, the stem cell signaling and their downstream
functions, is not known. In this study, we have identified and
characterized cervical cancer stem-like cells and unraveled the crosstalk
between HPV oncoproteins and stem cell signaling that allowed maintenance
of stemness in cancer cells.Experimental Procedure: Cervical cancer
stem-like cells (CaCxSLCs) were isolated and enriched by sequential
gating from HPV+ve and HPV-ve human cervical cancer cell lines (SiHa,
HeLa and C33a) using a set of functional and phenotypic markers (ABCG2,
CD49f, CD71, CD133) in defined conditioned media (DCM) with intermittent
culturing. CaCxSLCs were also assessed for their cervicosphere forming
ability, exclusion of DCV dye for generating SP cells, self renewability
and quiescenceness. Moreover, differential expression level and
DNA-binding activity of CSL-specific Notch1 and its downstream targets in
CaCxSLCs cells along with HPVE6 specific siRNA mediated gene silencing
was evaluated by gel retardation assay, immunobloting qRT-PCR followed by
in vivo tumor-initiating capacity in athymic nude mice.Results: CaCxSLCs
cells isolated from HPV+ve cells showed high expression of CD49f, Lrig1,
Nanog, Sox2, Oct4, ABCG2 and low Notch1 DNA binding activity as compared
to non- CaCxSLCs cells. Enriched CaCxSLCs were also found to be more
tumorigenic and showed high expression of HPVE6, HES1, CD133 transcripts
with high percentage of SP cells. CaCxSLCs differed from their
parental/non-CaCxSLCs as they overexpressed E6 oncogene. Knocking down of
HPVE6 by RNA interference resulted in abolition of spheroid formation
through downregulation of Hes1 and induction of re-differentiation while
interference of Hes-1 expression resulted in reduced cervicosphere
formation through down regulation of E6 and Nanog suggesting loss of
self-renewing ability.Conclusions: Our findings suggest a potential
regulatory role of HPVE6 in induction and maintenance of cervical cancer
stem-like cells through Hes1 expression which could be utilized as a
putative target for designing drugs that can promote differentiation of
cancer stem cells making the therapy most effective.Note: This abstract
was not presented at the meeting.

