Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-pim kinases inhibitor, AZD1208 suppresses tumor growth and
synergistically interacts with an AKT inhibitor in gastric cancer cells


Introduction: Pim kinases are highly conserved serine/threonine kinases
that control proliferation and survival pathways in cancer cells.
Different expression patterns of each isoforms (Pim-1, Pim-2, and Pim-3)
have been observed in various types of human cancer including gastric
cancer. AZD1208 is a potent and selective inhibitor that affects all
three isoforms of Pim. We investigated the effect of AZD1208 as a single
agent or in combination with an Akt inhibitor on the growth and cell
death in gastric cancer cells.Materials and Methods: The antitumor
activity of AZD1208 with/without an Akt inhibitor was evaluated in a
large panel of gastric cancer cell lines through growth inhibition assay.
The underlying mechanism was also examined by western blotting,
immunofluorescence assay (IFA), and cell cycle analysis.Results: Direct
substrates of Pim kinases were downregulated by the treatment with
AZD1208, but we could not find any reduction of cell viability in
short-term cell cultures. In contrast, cell viability decreased
significantly in long-term cultures. Light chain 3B (LC3B), a marker for
autophagy, increased in sensitive cells in dose dependent manner with
AZD1208 treatment, which suggest that the growth inhibition effect of
AZD1208 was achieved through autophagy, but not through apoptosis.
Moreover, we found that ATM and Chk2, two critical components of the DNA
repair pathway, were activated in an AZD1208-resistant cell line. We also
confirmed that the combination of an Akt inhibitor with AZD1208 produced
a highly synergistic effect in gastric cancer cell lines.Conclusion:
AZD1208 induced cell death through autophagy in gastric cancer cells.
Additionally, the combination of AZD1208 with an Akt inhibitor shows
synergistic antitumor effects.

