Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the mitochondria for the treatment of MLH1-deficient
disease


The DNA Mismatch repair (MMR) pathway is responsible for the repair of
base-base mismatches and insertion/deletion loops that arise during DNA
replication. MMR deficiency is currently estimated to be present in
15-17% of colorectal cancer cases and 30% of endometrial cancers. MLH1 is
one of the key proteins involved in the MMR pathway. MMR deficient
tumours are often resistant to standard chemotherapies, therefore there
is a critical need to identify new therapeutic strategies to treat MMR
deficient disease.We have performed synthetic lethal compound and RNAi
screens to identify potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of
MLH1 deficient tumours. Strikingly, upon analysis, a number of the hit
compounds have been shown to target mitochondrial function. Our previous
work has shown that MLH1 can localize to the mitochondria and silencing
of the mitochondrial genes, POLG and PINK1 are synthetically lethal with
MLH1 deficiency.We demonstrate that MLH1 deficient tumours are
synthetically lethal with mitochondrial targeted agents (Menadione,
Parthenolide) which are known to induce reactive oxygen species and cause
oxidative stress as one of their main mechanisms of action. Upon
functional analysis we show that loss of MLH1 is associated with a
reduction in Complex I activity, reduced basal oxygen consumption rate,
reduced spare respiratory capacity and reactive mitochondrial biogenesis
(upregulation of pgc1), suggesting that mitochondrial function is
deregulated upon loss of MLH1.Taken together, our results thus far
suggest that targeting the mitochondria may be a potential therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of MLH1 deficient disease.

