Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contribution of membrane-bound carboxypeptidase M to tumor growth
and metastasis by regulating epithelial mesenchymal transition in
esophageal squamous carcinoma


Carboxypeptidase M (CPM) is a membrane-bound exopeptidase that recognizes
the arginine (Arg) and lysine (Lys) residues in a C-terminal of
polypeptide chain or protein. The cleavage of some soluble factors such
as SDF-1 and EGF by CPM leads to the alteration of binding affinity to
their receptors. In this study, we examined the properties of CPM for
tumor growth and metastasis in human esophageal carcinoma cells. In order
to investigate the expression of CPM on human tumor cells, we established
the monoclonal antibody specific for human CPM and found the constitutive
expression of CPM on various human carcinomas by flow cytometry and
confocal laser microscopy. Treatment of cancer cells with EMT-mediated
cytokines, including TGF-beta, IL-6 and OSM, increased CPM expression on
their cell surface followed by enhancement of cell migration and change
of cell shapes from epithelial to mesenchymal type. Silencing CPM
expression by small interfering RNA (siRNA) specific for CPM in
esophageal and breast carcinoma cells were confirmed by flow cytometry.
We found that CPM-silenced carcinoma exhibited reduced cell proliferation
not only in 2D culture flask but also in 3D spheroid culture plate.
Importantly, the treatment of siRNA for CPM inhibited the expression of
EMT-related genes such as snail and slug which are important for cancer
motility. Consistently, we found that CPM-silenced carcinoma exhibited
reduced motility of cell in wound healing assay. Taken together, these
data indicate that CPM contributes to cell growth and EMT and might be a
therapeutic target in esophageal carcinoma.

