Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulation of miR-222-ABCG2 regulatory module in tongue squamous
cell carcinoma contributes to chemoresistance and enhanced metastatic
potential


Chemoresistance often associated with other clinical characteristics,
such as enhanced metastatic potential. However, the underlying molecular
mechanism remains unclear. Our previous studies had revealed that
microRNA-222 (miR-222) regulates the cell invasion [Cancer Genomics
Proteomics 2009 6:131-138], and plays a role in cell proliferation in
tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC) [FEBS Lett. 2010 584(18):4115-20].
The aim of this study is to elucidate the role of miR-222-ABCG2 pathway
in the association of cisplatin (cDDP) resistance with enhanced cell
migration and invasion ability in TSCC. First, we confirmed the
association between cDDP resistance (measured by IC50) and metastatic
potential (assessed by migration and invasion assays) using TSCC cell
lines and primary cultures from TSCC cases. The siRNA-mediated ABCG2
knockdown led to enhanced cDDP responsiveness, and reduced metastatic
potential in TSCC cells. On the contrary, ABCG2 overexpression induced
cDDP resistance, and enhanced cell migration and invasion in TSCC cells.
Bioinformatics analysis revealed that ABCG2 is a target gene of miR-222,
and the direct interaction of miR-222 with ABCG2 mRNA was confirmed by
luciferase reporter gene assay. Functional analyses indicated that
miR-222 downregulated the expression of ABCG2 gene and enhanced cDDP
responsiveness, as well as reduced cell migration and invasion in TSCC
cells. Thus, our results confirmed the association between cDDP
resistance and enhanced metastatic potential in TSCC. ABCG2 is a direct
target gene of miR-222, and deregulation of miR-222-ABCG2 regulatory
module in TSCC contributes to both cDDP resistance and enhanced
metastatic potential.

