Meeting: 2015 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Virus-guided fluorescence imaging of intraperitoneal free gastric
cancer cells: a preliminary clinical study as a potential clinical
biomarker


Objectives: In patients with gastric cancer, peritoneal dissemination is
the most common metastasis. To predict future peritoneal recurrences,
peritoneal lavage cytology is performed during operation. But even
cytology-negative patients sometimes develop peritoneal recurrences. Thus
an additional method to detect intraperitoneal free gastric cancer cells
is necessary. We have developed a genetically engineered adenovirus,
TelomeScan, which replicates and expresses GFP only in
telomerase-activated cancer cells. Here we detected intraperitoneal free
gastric cancer cells using TelomeScan, and investigated the correlation
between the number of GFP-positive cells and patient prognosis.Methods:
Peritoneal wash was obtained from 69 gastric cancer patients during
operation. The cells in the wash were infected with TelomeScan for 24
hours. Finally, GFP-positive cells were counted under a fluorescence
microscope. In some GFP-positive cases immunofluorescence assay was
added. Clinicopathological data were obtained from medical records. Then
we examined different cut-off values (the number of GFP-positive cells
which indicates TelomeScan-positive) and estimated survival curves using
the Kaplan-Meier method, and compared using the Wilcoxon test.Results:
For a cut-off value of 10, 25 of the 69 cases were TelomeScan-positive
(10 or more GFP-positive cells). And these 25 cases showed the most
significant worse prognosis when compared to the 44 TelomeScan-negative
cases (p = 0.0040). In addition, 17 of the 69 cases were conventional
cytology-positive. Of these 17 cases, 9 were TelomeScan-positive, and
these 9 cases showed significantly worse prognosis than the 8
TelomeScan-negative conventional cytology-positive cases (p = 0.0017, MST
195 days). Under fluorescence microscope we observed that GFP-positive
cells sometimes formed cell clusters with GFP-negative cells.
Immunofluorescence assay showed that these GFP-negative cells expressed
CD45, which means these cells were leukocytes.Conclusion: We have
successfully detected cancer cells in peritoneal wash using TelomeScan.
The presence of GFP-positive cells in peritoneal wash was associated with
worse prognosis. TelomeScan-positive patients, especially in conventional
cytology-positive cases, showed remarkably worse prognosis than
TelomeScan-negative conventional cytology-positive patients. Our data
suggest that TelomeScan-guided cytological detection may have clinical
implications as a prognostic biomarker in gastric cancer.

