Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro niche created by cancer stem-like cells derived from
mouse induced pluripotent stem cell.


Cancer stem cell (CSC) is a cell within tumor, which is considered to
possess the capacity of self-renewal and differentiation for providing
heterogeneous lineages of cancer cells in the tumor. Previously, we
converted mouse iPS (miPS) cells into CSCs by treatment with conditioned
medium prepared from Lewis Lung Carcinoma culture (miPS-LLCcm)1. RT-PCR
and FACS analysis revealed that miPS-LLCcm could give rise to endothelial
cells. When miPS-LLCcm were cultured on MatrigelTM, they exhibited the
tubular structure containing CD31 positive cells. In contrast,
undifferentiated cells enriched population, which were resistant to
puromycin (puro) as parental miPS cell2, failed to form tubes. After puro
was removed to allow the differentiate cells to survive, the tube
formation was observed again, indicating that the differentiated cells
were likely to contribute to tube formation. To confirm the stability of
this tube formation capacity, we repeated further two cycles of puro
selection and releasing differentiation. As the result, the tube
formation ability of the differentiated cells decreased. In parallel, we
added the conditioned medium of miPS-LLCcm culture into sphere-forming
assay, observed the increase of size and number of spheroids. This effect
was partly depended on Notch signaling pathway. These results raise the
possibility that the differentiated cells from miPS-LLCcm including
endothelial cells or their progenitor cells should be required for the
maintenance of miPS-LLCcm to differentiate towards vascular endothelial
linage. Collectively, we concluded that the differentiated cells from
miPS-LLCcm create a niche in vitro for the self-renewal of CSC in the
aspect of not only proliferation but also differentiation lineage.1.
Chen, L., et al. PLoS ONE 7, e33544 (2012).2. Okita, K., et al. Nature
448, 313-317 (2007).

