Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between helicobacter pylori infection and lung cancer:
a meta-analysis.


Lung cancer is still the leading death cause of cancers. Helicobacter
pylori (Hp) is one of the most common bacteria infecting human. In the
past decade, some investigators endeavored to clarify the possible
association of lung carcinoma risk with Hp infection, with conflicting
results. Whether Hp infection is a risk factor for lung cancer remains
largely uncertain. We performed a meta-analysis on the association
between Hp infection and lung cancer. Medline, OVID, EMBASE and Chinese
Biomedical Literature database (CBM) database were comprehensively
searched for the relevant literatures until September 2012. Meta-analysis
was performed using the program Review Manager 6.2. Heterogeneity was
also explored. Seven case-control studies with a total of 1011 cases and
1040 controls met the inclusion criteria and were included in the
meta-analysis. Hp infection was detected seropositivity for antibodies
against Hp using ELISA in all 7 studies. Our meta-analysis showed that
patients with lung cancer have a significantly higher rate of
seropositivity for antibodies against Hp than controls, with an odds
ratio of 3.15 (95% CI, 1.49-6.67). This meta-analysis suggests there may
be a potential effect of Hp infection on the risk of lung cancer. This
warrants further large and well-designed studies for thorough
investigation.

