Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained PI3-kinase signaling is mediated by ICOS, not CD28, for
anti-tumor T-cell responses elicited by anti-CTLA-4.


The generation of anti-tumor T-cell responses requires at least two
distinct signals consisting of T-cell receptor signaling and
CD28-costimulation to mediate PI3-kinase signaling. In previous studies,
we reported that cancer patients treated with anti-CTLA-4 had a
significant increase in T-cells expressing inducible costimulator (ICOS).
Here, we observed that PI3-kinase signaling was significantly increased
in ICOShi as compared to ICOSlow CD28+ T-cells from anti-CTLA-4 treated
patients. Our data also indicate that after T-cell activation,
ICOS-mediated PI3-kinase signaling plays an important role in downstream
T-cell responses such as expression of the T-bet transcription factor and
anti-tumor Th1 cytokine production. An ICOS-specific siRNA transfected
into activated human T-cells leads to diminished PI3K-signaling and T-bet
expression, which controls production of anti-tumor Th1 cytokines.
Furthermore, T-cells from ICOS-deficient mice have impaired PI3-kinase
signaling after in vitro activation. Our data also demonstrate that
T-cells from ICOS-deficient mice have impaired PI3-kinase signaling in
vivo, which correlates with impaired tumor rejection after treatment with
anti-CTLA-4. These data offer strong evidence to support that
CD28-mediated PI3-kinase signaling is limited and ICOS provides a
critical third signal to enable sustained PI3-kinase signaling for
optimal anti-tumor T-cell responses in the setting of anti-CTLA-4 therapy.

