Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of VEGFR expression modulation by antiangiogenic
therapy in mouse model of human breast cancer.


Antiangiogenic therapy targeting VEGF/VEGFR signaling is an important
strategy for cancer treatment, which is currently used in mono-therapy or
combination therapy settings. However, the emerging resistance to
antiangiogenic therapy as well as varied clinical response calls for the
development of early, preferably noninvasive, markers of treatment
response. In this study we used a recently developed molecular imaging
tracer, site-specifically 99mTc-labeled engineered single-chain VEGF
derivative, to monitor the VEGF receptor expression during the course of
sunitinib antiangiogenic therapy in orthotopic human breast cancer model
MDA-MB-231. The treatment protocol included two cycles of therapy
delivered daily for 5 days (80mg/kg, orally) with a 5-day vacation
between the cycles. Micro SPECT/CT imaging was performed longitudinally
up to day 16. Animals in the control group received vehicle solution
only. Tumors were excised and stained for the expression of CD31
endothelial cell marker. Experimental results suggest a highly
heterogeneous vascular regression response to the first round of
treatment, with significantly decreased tracer uptake and CD31 prevalence
in some but not all tumors. As judged by the increase in tracer uptake
and CD31 prevalence, a significant vascular rebound took place in all
tumors after the vacation period. Judging by the same criteria, the
second round of treatment was significantly less effective than the first
round. Taken together, these results suggests that noninvasive molecular
imaging of VEGF receptors reflects vascular regression and rebound in
individual tumors and can provide clinically relevant information for
monitoring and scheduling antiangiogenic therapy.

