Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BIM deletion polymorphism not associated with treatment
efficacy of sorafenib for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background: A germline BIM deletion polymorphism was recently proposed to
predict poor treatment efficacy of certain kinase inhibitors, including
imatinib and gefitinib. Sorafenib, a multi-kinase inhibitor, is the
current standard treatment for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
We aimed to explore whether BIM deletion predicted the treatment efficacy
of sorafenib for advanced HCC.Methods: All patients who were enrolled in
clinical trials to receive sorafenib-containing regimens as first-line
therapy for advanced HCC and consented to provide peripheral blood
samples were included in the study. Genomic DNA was extracted from the
mononuclear cells of peripheral blood. We performed PCR and agarose gel
electrophoresis to detect the genotypes with and without the BIM deletion
polymorphism, and then analyzed the associations between BIM genotypes
and treatment outcomes.Results: A total of 90 patients were enrolled.
Among them, 64 patients received sorafenib plus metronomic
tegafur/uracil, and 26 patients received sorafenib alone; 69 (77%)
patients had chronic hepatitis B infection, and 18 (20%) had chronic
hepatitis C infection. Most (90%) patients had BCLC stage C disease. The
heterozygous BIM deletion polymorphism was identified in 9 (10%)
patients. Patients with and without the BIM deletion polymorphism had
similar objective response rates (12.5 % vs. 6.2%, p = 0.479) and disease
control rates (55.6% vs. 60.5%, p = 0.774). Time to progression,
progression-free survival, and overall survival were also similar between
patients with and without BIM deletion (Table), regardless the treatment
regimens. Besides, the BIM polymorphism had no associations with gender,
age, hepatitis etiology, and disease stage.Conclusions: The BIM deletion
polymorphism was not associated with the treatment efficacy of sorafenib
for advanced HCC. (This work was supported by grants
NSC98-3112-B-002-038, NSC101-2314-B-002-141, 100CAP1020-2 &
NTUH.101-N1965.)
BIM deletion & treatment outcomes

