Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KPT-330, a selective small molecule inhibitor of nuclear export,
is active in bone and soft tissue sarcoma.


KPT-330 is a small molecule Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export (SINE)
that irreversibly block the major nuclear export protein CRM1 (exportin
1, XPO1). The Chromosome Region Maintenance 1 (CRM1) protein is
responsible for the nuclear export of snRNAs and of proteins bearing a
leucine-rich nuclear export signal (NES). This class of drugs is expected
to induce forced nuclear accumulation of tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs)
and is believed to initiate a genome survey leading to the death of
cancer cells with normal cells undergoing transient, reversible cell
cycle arrest. Our effort was to investigate the effects of KPT-330 in
sarcomas and the mechanism by which it exerts the effect of tumor
suppression. Our data clearly shows KPT-330 as active against a broad
panel of human bone and soft tissue sarcoma cell lines at low nanomolar
concentrations. The effect was mainly due to the induction of apoptosis.
Target specificity of the drug was confirmed by the decrease in CRM1
protein level. An induction of p53 and p21 protein levels was observed.
However, the effect of apoptosis or inhibition in proliferation seems to
be independent of p53 status of the cell line. The effect of KPT-330 was
further tested in xenograft models using malignant peripheral nerve
sheath (MPNST) and de-differentiated liposarcoma (LS141) cell lines.
Tumor suppression was observed in both the sarcoma models and its target
specificity was confirmed in the xenografts. KPT-330 may represent a new
drug for the treatment of bone and soft tissue sarcoma.

