Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic annotation of non-small cell lung cancer patient-derived
xenograft models for personalized cancer therapy.


Background: Recent studies have characterized non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) as one of the most genomically deranged of all cancers,
necessitating that both new drug development and patient therapy account
for intra- and inter-patient tumor heterogeneity. Clinically annotated
NSCLC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models represent a novel approach
to integrate this genomic complexity into a clinically relevant
pre-clinical platform. We here describe molecular characterization to
profile all currently druggable oncogenes for NSCLC in paired PDXs and
original patient NSCLC tumor (PT).Method: Genomic DNA from archival
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) PT and fresh first
human-to-mouse (P0) NSCLC PDX tumors were isolated and subjected to
oncogene mutational profiling using Sequenom's OncoCarta Panel v1. This
panel detects 238 mutations in 19 genes commonly altered in cancer.
RT-PCR-based molecular analyses of EGFR and KRAS mutations, EML4-ALK
fusion transcripts, and RNA expression levels of ERCC1, RRM1 and TS genes
were performed by Response Genetics, Inc. Genomic DNA from 3 serially
passaged NSCLC PDX tumors (2 KRAS and 1 EGFR mutation models) up to 5
passages were also analyzed.Results: In the first 7 of 9 patient-PDX
NSCLC models tested, oncogene mutational fidelity was preserved between
PDX and PT with a good correlation of molecular biomarker expression
(pBackground: Recent studies have characterized non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) as one of the most genomically deranged of all cancers,
necessitating that both new drug development and patient therapy account
for intra- and inter-patient tumor heterogeneity. Clinically annotated
NSCLC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models represent a novel approach
to integrate this genomic complexity into a clinically relevant
pre-clinical platform. We here describe molecular characterization to
profile all currently druggable oncogenes for NSCLC in paired PDXs and
original patient NSCLC tumor (PT).Method: Genomic DNA from archival
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) PT and fresh first
human-to-mouse (P0) NSCLC PDX tumors were isolated and subjected to
oncogene mutational profiling using Sequenom's OncoCarta Panel v1. This
panel detects 238 mutations in 19 genes commonly altered in cancer.
RT-PCR-based molecular analyses of EGFR and KRAS mutations, EML4-ALK
fusion transcripts, and RNA expression levels of ERCC1, RRM1 and TS genes
were performed by Response Genetics, Inc. Genomic DNA from 3 serially
passaged NSCLC PDX tumors (2 KRAS and 1 EGFR mutation models) up to 5
passages were also analyzed.Results: In the first 7 of 9 patient-PDX
NSCLC models tested, oncogene mutational fidelity was preserved between
PDX and PT with a good correlation of molecular biomarker expression
(p<0.01). Two paired models had discrepancies in genotyping: from
harboring 2 or 3 oncomutations at a frequency of 5-17% in PT to no
mutation detected in P0 tumors), likely due to intra-patient tumor
heterogeneity from clonal evolution. Of 3 models that have serial
passaged tumors, the frequencies of oncomutation in each model were
similar among the same passage (P0) or serial passage (P0 to P5) tumors.
In several models tested for in vivo drug efficacy based on the molecular
biomarker expression, results matched treatment outcome of the original
patients.,Conclusion: Our results validate the overall genomic fidelity
of PDX tumors compared to original PT. Molecular characterization of
individual tumor results in a clinically and genomically annotated PDX
model with potential utility for selecting and validating clinically
relevant drug target(s) for personalized cancer therapy.Acknowledgement:
Supported by UC Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center Developmental Award
(NIH/NCI P30CA093373), UL1 RR024146 from the National Center for Research
Resources, the Jackson Laboratory, Response Genetics Inc., and the
Addario Foundation.

