Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obinutuzumab (GA101) efficacy in chronic lymphocytic leukemia in
vitro is not diminished in high risk patients.


Introduction : we and others have already demonstrated the superiority of
obinutuzumab (GA101) over rituximab (RTX) in in vitro depletion assays
against chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells. It has been recently
suggested that complex karyotype (3 or more chromosomal abnormalities)
and recurrent somatic mutations of the TP53, NOTCH1 and SF3B1 genes,
influenced treatment-free and overall survivals in CLL patients. We
address the question whether these factors may also influence the
efficacy of anti-CD20 directed immunotherapy.Aim: To assess in vitro
pre-clinical activity of RTX and GA101 against CLL cells in freshly
isolated PBMCs, and correlate depletion efficacy with modern and
classical (FISH, IgVH mutational status, age, gender, Binet stage,
b2-microglobulin, bulky adenopathies>5cm) prognostic parameters in 95 CLL
patients. Moreover, CD20 antigen density was assessed in 24
patients.Methods: PBMCs were isolated from blood samples by Ficoll
gradient centrifugation. Antibody-mediated B cell depletions were
determined by enumerating trypan blue negative, flow cytometrically
CD19-positive B lymphocytes after treatment with 10 g/ml of anti-CD20
antibodies. The Quantibrite kit was used to determine CD20 density,
measured as quantity of antibodies bound per cell (CD20-ABC). The
Mann-Whitney test was used to compare median depletion according to
relevant clinical and biological data.Results: patients characteristics
were as follows: 69% males, median age 66y (36% >70y), advanced Binet
stage B/C in 39% (31.7% had NCI2008 criteria for treatment), 22.6% had
lymph nodes>5cm (56% had b2-microglobulin>3.5mg/l). Molecular and
cytogenetics studies were as follows: unmutated IgVH in 42.7%,
del13q/tri12/del11q/del17p=25.6%/22%/20%/5.8% respectively, complex
karyotype (CK) was found in 20.8% of cases, and somatic mutation of
TP53/NOTCH1/SF3B1 in 11.1%/12.6/4.8% of patients.The median B-CLL
depletion in freshly isolated PBMC fraction due to treatment with were
61% for GA101 vs 21.5% for RTX (n=95, p50% in 64% of cases. As shown in
Figure 1, in all categories of patients, GA101 was superior to RTX. This
was particularly noticed in the patients with TP53 deletion and/or
mutation (n=7). Median CD20-ABC was 8100 in 24 patients, who were
categorized as high or low CD20 expression based on that median. Low
CD20-ABC patients had significantly less antibody-induced B-cell
depletion, 12.8% (vs 25%, p=0.37) for RTX, and 42.5% (vs 67.5%, p=0.048)
for GA101. CD20-ABC was not found to be correlated with clinicobiological
parameters described above.Conclusions: according to modern prognostic
parameters, GA101 confirms its higher efficacy than RTX (three-fold), and
deserves further combination with chemotherapy or non-chemotherapy
entities in CLL management.

