Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Met signaling to overcome human cancer cell resistance
to radiation.


Purpose: Targeting signaling pathways that are implicated in cancer cell
resistance to therapy are being investigated to improve therapy outcome.
One of the receptor tyrosine kinases, c-Met (Met) is frequently
overexpressed in many cancer types including non small cell lung cancers
(NSCLCs) and head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) and is
associated with resistance to radiation. EMD1214063 is a small molecule
inhibitor that suppresses the kinase activity of Met. The current study
investigated the potential of EMD1214063 (provided by EMD Serono Merck
Inc) in enhancing cancer cell sensitivity to radiation.Materials and
Methods: Three NSCLC lines (A549, H460 and H1993) and three HNSCC lines
(FaDu, HN-5 and UMSCC-1) with different levels of Met protein were used
for the study. The effects of EMD1214063 on Met expression, cell
viability, migration and cell radiosensitivity were assessed. Various
scheduling effect on the magnitude of increased cell radiosensitivity was
evaluated. 53BP1 foci formation was assayed for DNA repair kinetics. In
vivo tumor growth delay assays on two NSCLCs and two HNSCCs generated in
mice were performed to test the efficacy of EMD1214063 on tumor growth
and tumor response to radiation.Results: NSCLC lines expressed higher
levels of Met than HNSCC lines. EMD1214063 reduced survival of NSCLC
lines markedly and had a minimal effect on HNSCC lines in vitro. Western
blots showed three major Met protein bands with molecular weights of
about 145 kDa, 60 kDa and 45 kDa. Radiation increased the expression
levels of the 145 kDa and 60 kDa fragments of Met in a dose dependent
manner. EMD1214063 suppressed the radiation-induced expression of Met and
prolonged the presence of 53BP1 foci. It potently enhanced the
radiosensitivity of A549, H1993, HN-5 and FaDu but not that of H460 and
UMSCC-1. The enhancement factors at the survival fraction of 0.5 ranged
from 1.11 to 2.24, with H1993 being the most responsive cell line. In
vivo data showed lack of single agent activity of EMD1214063 on the
growth of tumor xenografts tested (A549, H460 and FaDu). However, it
showed a schedule dependent effect in enhancing A549 tumor xenograft
response to radiation: a marked enhancement was observed only when
EMD1214063 was given concurrently with fractionated doses of radiation.
In vivo studies on other tumor types are ongoing.Conclusions: This study
demonstrated that EMD1214063 reduced viability and migration of NSCLC
cells and it selectively enhanced radiosensitivity of cells that express
higher levels of basal or induced Met and the underlying mechanism may be
inhibition of DNA repair. In vivo study data showed EMD1214063 induced a
schedule dependent enhancement of tumor response to radiation in a NSCLC
line. These data warrant further in vivo investigations aiming at taking
best regimens to the clinic testing.This study is being supported by EMD
Serono Merck via an independent medical grant.

