Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of FANCD2 by the mTOR pathway contributes to the
resistance of cancer cells to DNA double strand breaks.


Deregulation of the mTOR pathway is closely associated with
tumorigenesis. Accordingly mTOR inhibitors such as rapamycin and
mTOR-selective kinase inhibitors have been tested as cancer therapeutic
agents. Inhibition of mTOR results in sensitization to DNA damaging
agents, however the molecular mechanism is not well understood. We found
that a mTOR-selective kinase inhibitor, AZD8055, significantly enhanced
sensitivity of a pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma xenograft to radiotherapy and
sensitized rhabdomyosarcoma cells to interstrand crosslinker (ICL)
melphalan. Sensitization correlated with drug-induced downregulation of a
key component of the Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway, FANCD2 through mTOR
regulation of FANCD2 gene transcripts via mTORC1-S6K1. Importantly, we
show that FANCD2 is required for the proper activation of ATM-Chk2
checkpoint in response to ICL and that mTOR signaling promotes
ICL-induced ATM-Chk2 checkpoint activation by sustaining FANCD2. In
FANCD2 deficient lymphoblasts, FANCD2 is essential to suppress endogenous
and induced DNA damage, and FANCD2-deficient cells demonstrated impaired
ATM-Chk2 and ATR-Chk1 activation, which was rescued by re-introduction of
wild type FANCD2. Pharmacological inhibition of PI3K-mTOR-Akt pathway in
Rh30 rhabdomyosarcoma cells attenuated ICL-induced activation of ATM,
accompanied with the decrease of FANCD2. These data suggest that the mTOR
pathway may promote the repair of DNA double strand breaks by sustaining
FANCD2 and provide a novel mechanism of how the FA pathway modulates DNA
damage response and repair.

