Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copy number gain of PTK2 and PIK3CA mutations are common genetic
alterations in ovarian clear cell carcinoma.


Ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) is a subtype of epithelial ovarian
cancer and accounts for 5-25% of ovarian cancers. OCCC has shown higher
resistance to first-line platinum and taxane-based chemotherapy,
resulting in worse prognosis. Most common mutations occur in the genes
ARID1A (46%) and PIK3CA (33%). Using array comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH), we previously identified frequent chromosomal gain
at 8q24, which includes the encoding sequence for focal-adhesion kinase
(FAK)/Protein Tyrosine Kinase 2 (PTK2), a protein that provides signaling
and scaffolding functions at sites of integrin adhesion. To validate the
copy number gain of PTK2 and correlate the copy number variations with
PIK3CA mutations, we analyzed the copy number gain and protein expression
levels of PTK2, and examined the PIK3CA mutations in 67 OCCC samples. We
found that PTK2 copy number gain and loss were at a frequency of 23% and
25%, respectively. PTK2 gain significantly correlated with the strong
expression of PTK2. PIK3CA mutations were found in 20% of the samples.
About 40% of the tested samples showed PTK2 gain or PIK3CA mutation.
PIK3CA mutations are not strictly mutually exclusive to PTK2 gain, but
are more likely to occur in samples with PTK2 copy number normal or loss.
Genetic alterations in OCCC mainly activate the PTK2/PI3K/AKT signaling
pathway, which makes the pathway an attractive candidate for targeted
therapeutics. We, therefore, treated OVMANA, OVISE and OVTOKO OCCC cell
lines with PTK2 inhibitors (PF-562271 or PF-573228), or a combination of
PF-562271 with a PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor (BEZ235). Copy number
variations of PTK2 were not related to the drug sensitivity of the OCCC
cell lines. Drug sensitivity of most of the cells was enhanced toward
PF-562271 than PF-573228. OVMANA cells with PIK3CA mutations were more
sensitive to a combination of PI3K/mTOR and PTK2 inhibitor than the cells
without PIK3CA mutations. Our findings thus suggest that the
PTK2/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway is frequently activated in OCCC, and a
combination of inhibitor drugs would prove to be necessary to enhance the
overall drug efficacy in treating OCCC.

