Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PKC-iota inhibitor ICA-1 combined with TRAIL for glioblastoma
therapy.


Glioblastoma multiforme is a very aggressive brain tumor. Temozolimide is
the standard clinical therapy following surgery which offers a limited
survival advantage. The low survival rates of glioblastoma patients
require further investigation into pre-clinical combination therapy
options with apoptosis abilities. One such chemotherapeutic approach is
the use of the novel PKC-iota inhibitor, ICA-1, combined with rhTRAIL.
T98G or U87 glioblastoma cells were treated with ICA-1 for 48h or 72h,
respectively, with or without rhTRAIL in a 24-well format. Based on flow
cytometric analysis, the overall apoptosis rate for the T98G cells
exposed to ICA-1 plus TRAIL was the most significant with no distinction
between early and late apoptosis rates. In addition, the
immunofluorescence analysis showed higher T98G cell death for the
combination therapy. Further flow cytometric analysis showed that ICA-1
plus TRAIL generated significantly more late apoptosis for U87 cells than
any other treatment. The mechanism of action for this combinatorial
therapy is currently under investigation. However, our in vitro data
demonstrated that ICA-1 plus TRAIL induced 60-70% apoptosis in U87
glioblastoma cells and T98G glioblastoma cells which may offer a better
survival advantage in pre-clinical animal models.

