Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted inhibition of Chromosomal Maintenance Region Protein
(CRM1) potently suppresses growth of human neuroblastoma cell line models.


Background: Neuroblastoma is a childhood malignancy of the peripheral
nervous system, and most patients with high-risk disease are not cured.
New therapies are needed, but recurrent somatic mutations indicative of a
tractable therapeutic target are rare. Translocation of p53, FOXO, IB and
other critical tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs) from the nucleus to the
cytosol is mediated by exportin 1 (CRM1, XPO1), suggesting that
inhibition of CRM1 is a rational anti-cancer strategy. KPT-330 is a
Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export (SINE) that irreversibly binds CRM1
and is currently in Phase 1 clinical trials. SINE inhibits CRM1-mediated
nuclear export across multiple tumor types leading to activation of TSPs
and cancer cell death.Methods: A panel of 14 well-characterized
neuroblastoma cell lines was treated with KPT-330 across a 5-log range.
Growth inhibition was measured using CellTiter-Glo (Promega) viability
assays and a real time growth monitoring system (xCELLigence, Roche).
NOD/SCID mice with neuroblastoma xenografts were treated orally with
KPT-330 and tumor size was monitored.Results: KPT-330 showed cytotoxicity
against 14 neuroblastoma cell lines with a median IC50 of 28947.5 nM.
Sensitivity to KPT-330 was independent of MYCN amplification status.
Combination of KPT-330 with commonly used cytotoxic agents (irinotecan,
topotecan, cisplatin, doxorubicin) showed additive effects. In xenograft
models using the neuroblastoma cell lines IMR-32 and SH-SY5Y, oral
administration of KPT-330 (10 or 20 mg/kg, twice or thrice weekly) was
well tolerated and showed significant tumor growth inhibition
(pBackground: Neuroblastoma is a childhood malignancy of the peripheral
nervous system, and most patients with high-risk disease are not cured.
New therapies are needed, but recurrent somatic mutations indicative of a
tractable therapeutic target are rare. Translocation of p53, FOXO, IB and
other critical tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs) from the nucleus to the
cytosol is mediated by exportin 1 (CRM1, XPO1), suggesting that
inhibition of CRM1 is a rational anti-cancer strategy. KPT-330 is a
Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export (SINE) that irreversibly binds CRM1
and is currently in Phase 1 clinical trials. SINE inhibits CRM1-mediated
nuclear export across multiple tumor types leading to activation of TSPs
and cancer cell death.Methods: A panel of 14 well-characterized
neuroblastoma cell lines was treated with KPT-330 across a 5-log range.
Growth inhibition was measured using CellTiter-Glo (Promega) viability
assays and a real time growth monitoring system (xCELLigence, Roche).
NOD/SCID mice with neuroblastoma xenografts were treated orally with
KPT-330 and tumor size was monitored.Results: KPT-330 showed cytotoxicity
against 14 neuroblastoma cell lines with a median IC50 of 28947.5 nM.
Sensitivity to KPT-330 was independent of MYCN amplification status.
Combination of KPT-330 with commonly used cytotoxic agents (irinotecan,
topotecan, cisplatin, doxorubicin) showed additive effects. In xenograft
models using the neuroblastoma cell lines IMR-32 and SH-SY5Y, oral
administration of KPT-330 (10 or 20 mg/kg, twice or thrice weekly) was
well tolerated and showed significant tumor growth inhibition (p<0.001).
KPT-330 treatment resulted in decreased Myc family protein levels as well
as activation of apoptotic pathways.Conclusions: Neuroblastomas show
sensitivity to CRM1 inhibition both in vitro and in vivo. Ongoing work is
focused on discovering the cellular and genomic factors responsible for
increased sensitivity to nuclear export inhibition. With the expected
completion of the first in human phase I trials by mid 2013, treatment
with KPT-330 has the potential to be rapidly translated into a clinical
trial for children with neuroblastoma.

