Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of combination of an EGFR and AKT inhibitor in EGFR
mutant and EGFR wild type non-small cell lung cancer cells lines.


Background: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibition with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has proven successful in the management
of patients with non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, clinical
benefit is predominantly limited to the subgroup of patients with an
activating EGFR mutation (10%). Treating the remaining 90% of patients
with wild type (wt) EGFR is an unmet clinical need. Aim: To evaluate the
effect of an allosteric AKT inhibitor (AKTi 1/2) in combination with the
EGFR inhibitor gefitinib on cell proliferation, apoptosis and signalling
output in EGFR mutant/wt NSCLC cell lines. Methods: Four NSCLC cell lines
were selected: NCI-H522 and NCI-H1651 (EGFR wt and K-RAS wt), PC9 and
HCC827 (EGFR mutant). The 96hr sulphorhodamine assays was used to assess
the effect of gefitinib and AKTi 1/2 on growth inhibition, and median
effect analysis to calculate combination indices (CIs) to assess the
effect of both drugs in combination. The expression of p-EGFR, p-AKT,
p-S6, p-ERK and cleaved PARP were studied by Western blotting in the EGFR
wt NCI-H522 and the EGFR mutant PC9 cell lines. Results: EGFR wt cell
lines NCI-H522 and NCI-H1651 were relatively resistant to gefitinib (IC50
values of 7.0 2.5 uM and 8.8 0.9 uM, respectively) compared with the EGFR
mutant cell lines PC9 and HCC827 (IC50 values of 0.07 0.03 uM and 0.004
0.0005 uM, respectively). The combination of gefitinib and AKTi 1/2
produced synergistic inhibition of growth in both EGFR wild type and
mutant cell lines. Synergism was more marked in EGFR wt cell lines with
CI values (ED50) of 0.53 0.28 and 0.49 0.17 for NCI-H522 and NCI-H1651
respectively, compared with 0.74 0.11 and 0.76 0.14 for the EGFR mutant
cell lines PC9 and HCC827, respectively. Concomitant exposure of cells to
gefitinib and AKTi 1/2 for 24 hrs caused incremental inhibition of p-AKT,
p-S6 and p-ERK in both the EGFR wt (NCI-H522) and EGFR mutant (PC9) cell
lines. Gefitinib alone resulted in partial inhibition of AKT
phosphorylation in PC9 cells and up-regulation in NCI-H522 cells.
Incremental induction of cleaved PARP, a marker of apoptosis, was seen in
PC9 cells treated with the combination of gefitinib and AKTi 1/2.
Conclusions: These results demonstrate synergistic growth inhibition of
EGFR wt and mutant NSCLC cell lines by the combination of gefitinib with
AKTi 1/2. Additional pre-clinical studies are investigating this further.
Clinical studies of the combination doublet are warranted to expand the
utility of EGFR TKI in EGFR wt NSCLC.

