Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin inhibits prostate cancer metastasis in vivo by targeting
the inflammatory cytokines CXCL1 and -2.


In America and Western Europe prostate cancer is the second leading cause
of death in men. Emerging evidence suggests that chronic inflammation is
a major risk factor for the development and metastatic progression of
prostate cancer.We previously reported that the chemopreventive
polyphenol Curcumin inhibits the expression of the pro-inflammatory
cytokines CXCL1 and -2 leading to diminished formation of breast cancer
metastases. Here we analyse the effects of Curcumin on prostate carcinoma
growth, apoptosis and metastasis. We show that Curcumin inhibits
translocation of NFB to the nucleus through the inhibition of the
IB-kinase, IKK, leading to stabilization of the inhibitor of NFB, IB, in
PC3 prostate carcinoma cells. Inhibition of NFB activity reduces
expression of CXCL1 and -2 and abolishes the autocrine/paracrine loop
that links the two chemokines to NFB. The combination of Curcumin with
the synthetic IKK inhibitor, SC-541, shows no additive or synergistic
effects indicating that the two compounds share the target. Treatment of
the cells with Curcumin as wells as siRNA based knock-down of CXCL1 and
-2 induce apoptosis, inhibit proliferation, and down-regulate several
important metastasis-promoting factors like COX2, SPARC, and EFEMP. In an
orthotopic mouse model of haematogenous metastasis, treatment with
Curcumin inhibits statistically significantly formation of lung
metastases.In conclusion, chronic inflammation can induce a metastasis
prone phenotype in prostate cancer cells by maintaining a positive
pro-inflammatory and pro-metastatic feed-back loop between NFB and
CXCL1/-2. Curcumin disrupts this feed-back loop by the inhibition of NFB
signalling leading to reduced metastasis formation in vivo.

