Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TOB1 promotes cell survival in estrogen-independent estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer.


Antiestrogens are the most widely administered endocrine agents for the
treatment of estrogen receptor (ER)-expressing breast cancers, such as
tamoxifen, fulvestrant and aromatase inhibitor. However, most initially
responsive breast tumors acquire resistance and become
estrogen-independent. To find potential therapeutic target(s) against
drug resistance, we performed siRNA library screening studies to identify
cell survival determinants in estrogen independent cell lines from 631 ER
network related genes. LCC1 and LCC9 cells, derivatives of MCF-7, are
estrogen-independent. LCC1 cells are sensitive to fulvestrant and
tamoxifen. LCC9 cells are resistant to fulvestrant and cross-resistant to
tamoxifen. A number of genes selectively support the survival of
estrogen-independent tumor cells, including TOB1 (Transducer of ErbB2).
TOB1 gene knockdown significantly inhibited (>50%) estrogen-independent
cell growth in LCC1 and LCC9 cells, but had much less effect on the
survival of MCF-7 cells (10%). These cell lines have similar levels of
Tob1 protein. TOB1 knockdown did not cause apoptosis or autophagy. DNA
replication was reduced and G1 to S phase transition was blocked by TOB1
knockdown in the estrogen-independent cell lines. Next, we studied
cell-signaling pathways that regulate cell cycle transition. Cyclin D1
was upregulated and activated by TOB1 knockdown in estrogen-independent
cells, but not in MCF-7 cells. Therefore, cyclin D1 might be involved in
G1/S transition blockage induced by Tob1 inhibition. TOB1 knockdown also
activated cell cycle checkpoint kinase 2 (Chk2) and induced DNA damage.
Our data demonstrated that Tob1 promotes cell survival after ER+ breast
cancer cells acquire estrogen-independence, which might be mediated by
cyclin D1.

