Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4-CXCL12-CXCR7 axis predicts prognosis in locally
advanced-Chemo Radiotherapy (CRT) treated rectal cancer patients.


With optimized local treatment and the shift from a postoperative to a
preoperative treatment approach, distant metastases have become the
predominant mode of failure in locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC).
Therefore, the intensification of chemotherapy appears today as an
essential approach to improve distant control and survival in LARC.
However, extensive evidence have indicated that the LARC presents a
considerable heterogeneity in terms of prognostic and response to
preoperative treatment. Thus a critical issue is the selection of
patients for postoperative chemotherapy strongly favoring a risk-adapted
strategy rather than one size fits all approach. The chemokine receptor
CXCR4 is expressed in colorectal cancer (CRC) and correlates with reduced
survival and disease-free interval. A novel receptor for CXCL12, CXCR7,
was recently identified. Despite the signal transduction of CXCR7 is not
defined it certainly regulates the activity of CXCR4. The aim of the
present study is to evaluate the possible prognostic role of
CXCR4-CXCL12-CXCR7 axis in LARC patients subjected to CRT neoadjuvant
treatment and total mesorectal excision. Sixty-eight LARC patients
treated with different scheme of CRT and with persistence of pathological
tumor were evaluated for the expression of CXCR4, CXCR7, CXCL12 through
immunohistochemistry. CXCR4 and CXCR7 were rated as negative (0-50%)
CXCL12 was rated as low (50%). At a median follow up of 65 months, high
CXCR4 expression (>50%) impacted significantly on 5- years-relapse free
survival (RFS) and -cancer specific survival (CSS); high CXCR4 patients
had a 5-year RFS of 51,5% versus 93,7% negative-low CXCR4 (HR 0.10; 95%
CI, 0.07-0.44) (p = 0.0003), patients with high CXCR4 had a 5-year CSS of
69% versus the 100% of negative-low CXCR4 (HR 0.00; 95% CI, 0.03-0.43) (p
= 0.001). The expression of CXCR7 and CXCL12 alone did not correlate with
survival; concomitant expression of CXCR4/CXCR7 or CXCR4/CXCL12 improved
the prediction of survival. High CXCR4 expression/ neg-low CXCR7 (With
optimized local treatment and the shift from a postoperative to a
preoperative treatment approach, distant metastases have become the
predominant mode of failure in locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC).
Therefore, the intensification of chemotherapy appears today as an
essential approach to improve distant control and survival in LARC.
However, extensive evidence have indicated that the LARC presents a
considerable heterogeneity in terms of prognostic and response to
preoperative treatment. Thus a critical issue is the selection of
patients for postoperative chemotherapy strongly favoring a risk-adapted
strategy rather than one size fits all approach. The chemokine receptor
CXCR4 is expressed in colorectal cancer (CRC) and correlates with reduced
survival and disease-free interval. A novel receptor for CXCL12, CXCR7,
was recently identified. Despite the signal transduction of CXCR7 is not
defined it certainly regulates the activity of CXCR4. The aim of the
present study is to evaluate the possible prognostic role of
CXCR4-CXCL12-CXCR7 axis in LARC patients subjected to CRT neoadjuvant
treatment and total mesorectal excision. Sixty-eight LARC patients
treated with different scheme of CRT and with persistence of pathological
tumor were evaluated for the expression of CXCR4, CXCR7, CXCL12 through
immunohistochemistry. CXCR4 and CXCR7 were rated as negative (0-50%)
CXCL12 was rated as low (50%). At a median follow up of 65 months, high
CXCR4 expression (>50%) impacted significantly on 5- years-relapse free
survival (RFS) and -cancer specific survival (CSS); high CXCR4 patients
had a 5-year RFS of 51,5% versus 93,7% negative-low CXCR4 (HR 0.10; 95%
CI, 0.07-0.44) (p = 0.0003), patients with high CXCR4 had a 5-year CSS of
69% versus the 100% of negative-low CXCR4 (HR 0.00; 95% CI, 0.03-0.43) (p
= 0.001). The expression of CXCR7 and CXCL12 alone did not correlate with
survival; concomitant expression of CXCR4/CXCR7 or CXCR4/CXCL12 improved
the prediction of survival. High CXCR4 expression/ neg-low CXCR7 (< 50%)
impacted on 5 years- RFS (p = 0.0001) as well as CSS (p = 0.0278); high
CXCR4 expression plus neg-low CXCL12 (With optimized local treatment and
the shift from a postoperative to a preoperative treatment approach,
distant metastases have become the predominant mode of failure in locally
advanced rectal cancer (LARC). Therefore, the intensification of
chemotherapy appears today as an essential approach to improve distant
control and survival in LARC. However, extensive evidence have indicated
that the LARC presents a considerable heterogeneity in terms of
prognostic and response to preoperative treatment. Thus a critical issue
is the selection of patients for postoperative chemotherapy strongly
favoring a risk-adapted strategy rather than one size fits all approach.
The chemokine receptor CXCR4 is expressed in colorectal cancer (CRC) and
correlates with reduced survival and disease-free interval. A novel
receptor for CXCL12, CXCR7, was recently identified. Despite the signal
transduction of CXCR7 is not defined it certainly regulates the activity
of CXCR4. The aim of the present study is to evaluate the possible
prognostic role of CXCR4-CXCL12-CXCR7 axis in LARC patients subjected to
CRT neoadjuvant treatment and total mesorectal excision. Sixty-eight LARC
patients treated with different scheme of CRT and with persistence of
pathological tumor were evaluated for the expression of CXCR4, CXCR7,
CXCL12 through immunohistochemistry. CXCR4 and CXCR7 were rated as
negative (0-50%) CXCL12 was rated as low (50%). At a median follow up of
65 months, high CXCR4 expression (>50%) impacted significantly on 5-
years-relapse free survival (RFS) and -cancer specific survival (CSS);
high CXCR4 patients had a 5-year RFS of 51,5% versus 93,7% negative-low
CXCR4 (HR 0.10; 95% CI, 0.07-0.44) (p = 0.0003), patients with high CXCR4
had a 5-year CSS of 69% versus the 100% of negative-low CXCR4 (HR 0.00;
95% CI, 0.03-0.43) (p = 0.001). The expression of CXCR7 and CXCL12 alone
did not correlate with survival; concomitant expression of CXCR4/CXCR7 or
CXCR4/CXCL12 improved the prediction of survival. High CXCR4 expression/
neg-low CXCR7 (< 50%) impacted on 5 years- RFS (p = 0.0001) as well as
CSS (p = 0.0278); high CXCR4 expression plus neg-low CXCL12 (<50%)
affected 5 years-RFS (p = 0.0166) and CSS (p = 0.0145). Interestingly
evaluating CXCR4 categories (negative/low and high) versus the lymph
nodal status (negative and positive) significantly improved the
predictive power of CXCR4 and N status. High CXCR4 expression plus N+
identified patients with a worse 5 years RFS (p= 0.0001). The valuation
of the CXCR4-CXCL12-CXCR7 axis is a valuable prognostic tool in rectal
cancer patients treated with CRT neoadjuvant. Moreover CXCR4 inhibitors
might be considered in the adjuvant treatment of rectal cancer.

