Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the PI3K/mTOR pathway potentiates irradiation
effects in paediatric glioblastoma inducing metabolic alterations
detected by MRS.


Although radiotherapy is used to treat more than 50% of all cancer
patients, in glioblastomas the percentage of success is limited due to
the radioresistance of glioma cells. Reports have shown that part of this
phenomenon has to be attributed to the deregulation of the PI3K/mTOR
pathway (AC Begg, Nat Rev, 2011). Furthermore, p110 isoform specific PI3K
inhibitors produced additive cytotoxic effects in combination with
radiation therapy in in vitro and in vivo glioblastoma models (Chen JS et
al. MCT. 2008). Based on this, we have decided to study if the treatment
with the dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 potentiates the effects of
the irradiation and whether the combination would result in metabolic
changes that can be evaluated by MRS and hence may be utilized as
non-invasive biomarkers for the detection of response to combination
therapy during early stage clinical trials in children with glioma.For
this purpose we treated the paediatric high-grade glioma SF188 cell line
with a low dose of X-ray irradiation (5 Gy) and NVP-BEZ235 (2xGI50, 28nM)
both as single treatments and in combination. Our results showed a higher
decrease in the number of treated cells with the combination (PAlthough
radiotherapy is used to treat more than 50% of all cancer patients, in
glioblastomas the percentage of success is limited due to the
radioresistance of glioma cells. Reports have shown that part of this
phenomenon has to be attributed to the deregulation of the PI3K/mTOR
pathway (AC Begg, Nat Rev, 2011). Furthermore, p110 isoform specific PI3K
inhibitors produced additive cytotoxic effects in combination with
radiation therapy in in vitro and in vivo glioblastoma models (Chen JS et
al. MCT. 2008). Based on this, we have decided to study if the treatment
with the dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 potentiates the effects of
the irradiation and whether the combination would result in metabolic
changes that can be evaluated by MRS and hence may be utilized as
non-invasive biomarkers for the detection of response to combination
therapy during early stage clinical trials in children with glioma.For
this purpose we treated the paediatric high-grade glioma SF188 cell line
with a low dose of X-ray irradiation (5 Gy) and NVP-BEZ235 (2xGI50, 28nM)
both as single treatments and in combination. Our results showed a higher
decrease in the number of treated cells with the combination (P<0.002)
than with the single treatments alone (PAlthough radiotherapy is used to
treat more than 50% of all cancer patients, in glioblastomas the
percentage of success is limited due to the radioresistance of glioma
cells. Reports have shown that part of this phenomenon has to be
attributed to the deregulation of the PI3K/mTOR pathway (AC Begg, Nat
Rev, 2011). Furthermore, p110 isoform specific PI3K inhibitors produced
additive cytotoxic effects in combination with radiation therapy in in
vitro and in vivo glioblastoma models (Chen JS et al. MCT. 2008). Based
on this, we have decided to study if the treatment with the dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 potentiates the effects of the irradiation
and whether the combination would result in metabolic changes that can be
evaluated by MRS and hence may be utilized as non-invasive biomarkers for
the detection of response to combination therapy during early stage
clinical trials in children with glioma.For this purpose we treated the
paediatric high-grade glioma SF188 cell line with a low dose of X-ray
irradiation (5 Gy) and NVP-BEZ235 (2xGI50, 28nM) both as single
treatments and in combination. Our results showed a higher decrease in
the number of treated cells with the combination (P<0.002) than with the
single treatments alone (P<0.01) compared to the control.MRS spectra from
NVP-BEZ235 treated cells showed a significant (PAlthough radiotherapy is
used to treat more than 50% of all cancer patients, in glioblastomas the
percentage of success is limited due to the radioresistance of glioma
cells. Reports have shown that part of this phenomenon has to be
attributed to the deregulation of the PI3K/mTOR pathway (AC Begg, Nat
Rev, 2011). Furthermore, p110 isoform specific PI3K inhibitors produced
additive cytotoxic effects in combination with radiation therapy in in
vitro and in vivo glioblastoma models (Chen JS et al. MCT. 2008). Based
on this, we have decided to study if the treatment with the dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 potentiates the effects of the irradiation
and whether the combination would result in metabolic changes that can be
evaluated by MRS and hence may be utilized as non-invasive biomarkers for
the detection of response to combination therapy during early stage
clinical trials in children with glioma.For this purpose we treated the
paediatric high-grade glioma SF188 cell line with a low dose of X-ray
irradiation (5 Gy) and NVP-BEZ235 (2xGI50, 28nM) both as single
treatments and in combination. Our results showed a higher decrease in
the number of treated cells with the combination (P<0.002) than with the
single treatments alone (P<0.01) compared to the control.MRS spectra from
NVP-BEZ235 treated cells showed a significant (P<0.01) decrease in the
levels of Lactate (Lac), phosphocholine (PC) and total choline (tCho). In
contrast, irradiation resulted in an increase in PC,
glycerolphosphocholine and tCho (P=0.001). The combination showed similar
metabolic effects to NVP-BEZ235 single treatment, including a decrease in
the levels of Lac and PC.As expected, we observed inhibition of the
PI3K/mTOR pathway. Protein expression levels of pAKT (Ser473) and pS6RP
(Ser240/244) in NVP-BEZ235 and combination treated cells were decreased.
Irradiation induced-apoptosis was detected by increased levels of cleaved
PARP in cells treated with X-ray or combination but not with NVP-BEZ235
alone.We also explored the causes of metabolic changes detected by MRS.
Both in the NVP-BEZ235 and combination treatments, the decrease in PC
levels was associated with a decrease in the expression of ChoK, the
enzyme responsible for choline phosphorylation into PC. Furthermore, a
decrease in the levels of the glycolytic enzymes HKII and LDH-A was
detected following NVP-BEZ235 treatment and the combination. These
enzymes were not affected by X-ray alone.We have shown that inhibition of
the PI3K/mTOR pathway increases the cytotoxic activity of the irradiation
in paediatric glioblastoma. MRS allows monitoring of changes occurring
during the combination treatment, suggesting that PC and Lac may be used
as non-invasive biomarkers to detect response to PI3K/mTOR inhibition in
combination with radiotherapy.

