Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RasGRP3 contributes to Ras signaling, growth, and migration of
human lung cancer cell lines.


Elevated levels of Ras activity are a prominent feature in human lung
cancer. In approximately 20% of lung cancer cases, Ras activation is
achieved by mutation of the Ras proto-oncogene. Here, we explore the
possible contribution of RasGRP3 to Ras signaling in lung cancer. RasGRP3
is a Ras guanyl nucleotide exchange factor which has been shown to be
expressed in prostate tumor and melanoma cell lines, contributing to the
level of Ras activation, cell proliferation, and tumor xenograft growth.
Here, we report that RasGRP3 is expressed in multiple human lung cancer
cell lines but not in normal human bronchial epithelial cells. Likewise,
initial analysis reveals its expression in human lung tumors but not in
normal lung tissue. Suppression of endogenous RasGRP3 expression in lung
cancer cell lines showing reduced H-Ras-GTP and K-Ras-GTP formation as
well as Akt phosphorylation downstream from epidermal growth factor (EGF)
or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) stimulation. Additionally,
suppression of RasGRP3 inhibited translocation of the NF-kB p50 and p65
subunits from the cytoplasm to the nuclear fraction and modulated several
other transcriptional factors as well. Conversely, expression of
exogenous RasGRP3 elevated H-Ras-GTP and K-Ras-GTP and activated AKT
phosphorylation in the lung cancer H496 cell line, which itself only
expresses RasGRP3 at low levels. These changes in signaling were mirrored
at the cellular level. Downregulation of endogenous RasGRP3 inhibited
cell proliferation, impeded cell migration and reduced colony formations
in soft agar. Our results suggest that RasGRP3 may provide an addition
targetable signaling element in lung cancer.

