Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A validation study on photoacoustics imaging of fluorescent
pyroporphysome in vivo.


Photoacoustics (PA) is a hybrid in vivo imaging modality that combines
the temporal resolution of optics, and low acoustic scattering and high
spatial resolution of micro-ultrasound. This innovation can discern
optical absorption of endogenous and exogenous contrast agent(s) in the
tumor micro-environment. This advancement is made possible by precise
control of optical wavelength using a tunable pulsed laser, ranging from
680-970nm. In this study, we demonstrate fluorescent pyroporphysome, a
nanoparticle, to be a photoacoustic contrast agent by which we can
monitor its accumulation locally within the tumor.Approach: Co-registered
ultrasound (anatomical) and PA imaging of subcutaneous tumors was
accomplished with a LZ250 21 MHz transducer on the Vevo LAZR system
(FUJIFILM VisualSonics, Inc.). Mammary tumors were generated by
implanting from MDA-MB-231H2N cell line under the skin line.
Pyroporphysomes (120 nm in size) were administered by tail vein at a dose
of 300 nmoles. Multiwavelength photoacoustic scans were acquired and
quantified over 24 hours using Vevo Spectro (FUJIFILM VisualSonics,
Inc.), an ensuite absorbance spectrum quantification tool. Cri Maestro
(Quorum Technologies, Inc.) was used for concurrent whole body
fluorescence imaging.Results: Multi-wavelength analyses identified an in
vivo PA absorbance of 680 nm to pyroporphysome. Earliest detection was at
20 minutes post bolus in the tumor and PA signal for pyroporphysomes
persisted at 24 h. Signal accumulation is supported by a 22 fold change
in signal intensity per 3D volume (3.8% post bolus vs 87% at 24h).
Fluorescence analyses validate this accumulation in the tumor. Taken
together, photoacoustic imaging identifies pyroporphysome as a bimodal
contrast agent. Additional evidence includes a shift in signal
localization in the PA scans wherein pyroporphysomes were first detected
at the tumor periphery (Photoacoustics (PA) is a hybrid in vivo imaging
modality that combines the temporal resolution of optics, and low
acoustic scattering and high spatial resolution of micro-ultrasound. This
innovation can discern optical absorption of endogenous and exogenous
contrast agent(s) in the tumor micro-environment. This advancement is
made possible by precise control of optical wavelength using a tunable
pulsed laser, ranging from 680-970nm. In this study, we demonstrate
fluorescent pyroporphysome, a nanoparticle, to be a photoacoustic
contrast agent by which we can monitor its accumulation locally within
the tumor.Approach: Co-registered ultrasound (anatomical) and PA imaging
of subcutaneous tumors was accomplished with a LZ250 21 MHz transducer on
the Vevo LAZR system (FUJIFILM VisualSonics, Inc.). Mammary tumors were
generated by implanting from MDA-MB-231H2N cell line under the skin line.
Pyroporphysomes (120 nm in size) were administered by tail vein at a dose
of 300 nmoles. Multiwavelength photoacoustic scans were acquired and
quantified over 24 hours using Vevo Spectro (FUJIFILM VisualSonics,
Inc.), an ensuite absorbance spectrum quantification tool. Cri Maestro
(Quorum Technologies, Inc.) was used for concurrent whole body
fluorescence imaging.Results: Multi-wavelength analyses identified an in
vivo PA absorbance of 680 nm to pyroporphysome. Earliest detection was at
20 minutes post bolus in the tumor and PA signal for pyroporphysomes
persisted at 24 h. Signal accumulation is supported by a 22 fold change
in signal intensity per 3D volume (3.8% post bolus vs 87% at 24h).
Fluorescence analyses validate this accumulation in the tumor. Taken
together, photoacoustic imaging identifies pyroporphysome as a bimodal
contrast agent. Additional evidence includes a shift in signal
localization in the PA scans wherein pyroporphysomes were first detected
at the tumor periphery (<1mm below the skin line), and as deep as 2mm
towards the tumor core at 24 hours. In conclusion, data herein presents
photoacoustic imaging as the next generation imaging modality for
concurrent molecular and anatomical information to better understand
mechanistic changes in the tumor microenvironment.

