Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRM1-Selective Inhibitors of Nuclear Export (SINE) reduce the
incidence of tumor spreading and improve overall survival in preclinical
models of prostate cancer.


Background: CRM1 (XPO1) is the exclusive exportin mediating transport of
most tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs) including p53, pRb, FOXO, APC and
p21 out of the nucleus, abrogating their function.Methods: We tested the
effects of the potent, selective, clinical stage oral SINE compound
KPT-330 in prostate cancer (PrCa) models. Male SCID mice orthotopically
(intraprostatic) inoculated with the DU145 PrCa, known to produce highly
metastatic tumors with visceral metastases. In parallel, male CD1-nu/nu
mice were inoculated with intracardiac and intratibial injections of the
aggressive/bone-derived PrCa PC3, known to produce prominent osteolytic
bone lesions. The effects of SINEs KPT-330 and KPT-251 on metastatic
spreading were determined.Results: We previously demonstrated that SINE
CRM1 antagonists KPT330 and KPT251 have potent antitumor effects on PrCa
both in vitro and in vivo. Here, we demonstrate that KPT-330 reduces
intraprostatic DU145 tumor burden as well as the incidence of macroscopic
metastases to lymph nodes, liver and lung, in a dose-dependent manner.
The DU145 tumor burden was reduced by 41% with KPT-330 (4 mg/kg qd/5
days) and 61% (10 mg/kg q 3-4 d x 7) when compared to controls. The
incidence of PC3-derived bone metastases were significantly reduced with
KPT-330 at 10 mg/kg (q 2d x 3 weeks). At 50 days after cell injection,
80% (8/10) of controls and 0% (0/10) of the KPT-330-treated animals
developed X-Ray evidence of bone lesions (pBackground: CRM1 (XPO1) is the
exclusive exportin mediating transport of most tumor suppressor proteins
(TSPs) including p53, pRb, FOXO, APC and p21 out of the nucleus,
abrogating their function.Methods: We tested the effects of the potent,
selective, clinical stage oral SINE compound KPT-330 in prostate cancer
(PrCa) models. Male SCID mice orthotopically (intraprostatic) inoculated
with the DU145 PrCa, known to produce highly metastatic tumors with
visceral metastases. In parallel, male CD1-nu/nu mice were inoculated
with intracardiac and intratibial injections of the
aggressive/bone-derived PrCa PC3, known to produce prominent osteolytic
bone lesions. The effects of SINEs KPT-330 and KPT-251 on metastatic
spreading were determined.Results: We previously demonstrated that SINE
CRM1 antagonists KPT330 and KPT251 have potent antitumor effects on PrCa
both in vitro and in vivo. Here, we demonstrate that KPT-330 reduces
intraprostatic DU145 tumor burden as well as the incidence of macroscopic
metastases to lymph nodes, liver and lung, in a dose-dependent manner.
The DU145 tumor burden was reduced by 41% with KPT-330 (4 mg/kg qd/5
days) and 61% (10 mg/kg q 3-4 d x 7) when compared to controls. The
incidence of PC3-derived bone metastases were significantly reduced with
KPT-330 at 10 mg/kg (q 2d x 3 weeks). At 50 days after cell injection,
80% (8/10) of controls and 0% (0/10) of the KPT-330-treated animals
developed X-Ray evidence of bone lesions (p<0.05). The burden of bone
metastases, measured by lytic bone area, was significantly higher in
controls than in KPT-330-treated animals. Similarly, after intra-tibial
injection, the lytic areas were higher in controls than in the KPT-330
group (pBackground: CRM1 (XPO1) is the exclusive exportin mediating
transport of most tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs) including p53, pRb,
FOXO, APC and p21 out of the nucleus, abrogating their function.Methods:
We tested the effects of the potent, selective, clinical stage oral SINE
compound KPT-330 in prostate cancer (PrCa) models. Male SCID mice
orthotopically (intraprostatic) inoculated with the DU145 PrCa, known to
produce highly metastatic tumors with visceral metastases. In parallel,
male CD1-nu/nu mice were inoculated with intracardiac and intratibial
injections of the aggressive/bone-derived PrCa PC3, known to produce
prominent osteolytic bone lesions. The effects of SINEs KPT-330 and
KPT-251 on metastatic spreading were determined.Results: We previously
demonstrated that SINE CRM1 antagonists KPT330 and KPT251 have potent
antitumor effects on PrCa both in vitro and in vivo. Here, we demonstrate
that KPT-330 reduces intraprostatic DU145 tumor burden as well as the
incidence of macroscopic metastases to lymph nodes, liver and lung, in a
dose-dependent manner. The DU145 tumor burden was reduced by 41% with
KPT-330 (4 mg/kg qd/5 days) and 61% (10 mg/kg q 3-4 d x 7) when compared
to controls. The incidence of PC3-derived bone metastases were
significantly reduced with KPT-330 at 10 mg/kg (q 2d x 3 weeks). At 50
days after cell injection, 80% (8/10) of controls and 0% (0/10) of the
KPT-330-treated animals developed X-Ray evidence of bone lesions
(p<0.05). The burden of bone metastases, measured by lytic bone area, was
significantly higher in controls than in KPT-330-treated animals.
Similarly, after intra-tibial injection, the lytic areas were higher in
controls than in the KPT-330 group (p<0.05). The level of serum markers
of osteoclast activity (TRAP and type I collagen fragment, CTX), was
significantly higher in controls than in KPT-330-treated animals. The
related SINE KPT-251 (100 mg/Kg q 2d x 3 weeks) confirmed the reduction
of bone metastasis following CRM1 inhibition. The overall and disease
free survival, evaluated at 170 days after tumor injection, were
significantly higher in KPT-330- and KPT-251-treated animals versus
controls (PBackground: CRM1 (XPO1) is the exclusive exportin mediating
transport of most tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs) including p53, pRb,
FOXO, APC and p21 out of the nucleus, abrogating their function.Methods:
We tested the effects of the potent, selective, clinical stage oral SINE
compound KPT-330 in prostate cancer (PrCa) models. Male SCID mice
orthotopically (intraprostatic) inoculated with the DU145 PrCa, known to
produce highly metastatic tumors with visceral metastases. In parallel,
male CD1-nu/nu mice were inoculated with intracardiac and intratibial
injections of the aggressive/bone-derived PrCa PC3, known to produce
prominent osteolytic bone lesions. The effects of SINEs KPT-330 and
KPT-251 on metastatic spreading were determined.Results: We previously
demonstrated that SINE CRM1 antagonists KPT330 and KPT251 have potent
antitumor effects on PrCa both in vitro and in vivo. Here, we demonstrate
that KPT-330 reduces intraprostatic DU145 tumor burden as well as the
incidence of macroscopic metastases to lymph nodes, liver and lung, in a
dose-dependent manner. The DU145 tumor burden was reduced by 41% with
KPT-330 (4 mg/kg qd/5 days) and 61% (10 mg/kg q 3-4 d x 7) when compared
to controls. The incidence of PC3-derived bone metastases were
significantly reduced with KPT-330 at 10 mg/kg (q 2d x 3 weeks). At 50
days after cell injection, 80% (8/10) of controls and 0% (0/10) of the
KPT-330-treated animals developed X-Ray evidence of bone lesions
(p<0.05). The burden of bone metastases, measured by lytic bone area, was
significantly higher in controls than in KPT-330-treated animals.
Similarly, after intra-tibial injection, the lytic areas were higher in
controls than in the KPT-330 group (p<0.05). The level of serum markers
of osteoclast activity (TRAP and type I collagen fragment, CTX), was
significantly higher in controls than in KPT-330-treated animals. The
related SINE KPT-251 (100 mg/Kg q 2d x 3 weeks) confirmed the reduction
of bone metastasis following CRM1 inhibition. The overall and disease
free survival, evaluated at 170 days after tumor injection, were
significantly higher in KPT-330- and KPT-251-treated animals versus
controls (P< 0.0001). Treatment of PC3 and DU145 cells with KPT-330 lead
to significant reductions in the secretion of proteolytic enzymes (MMP-9,
MMP-2, uPA) as well as reduced ability of tumor cells to migrate and
invade Matrigel. Impaired secretion of pro-angiogenic (VEGF, IL6, IL8)
and pro-osteolytic (RANKL, IL6) cytokines was also observed.Conclusions:
These data show that selective blockade of CRM1-dependent nuclear export
has direct antitumor, anti-metastatic and anti-osteolytic activities in
PrCa and thus represents a novel approach for the treatment of advanced/
metastatic PrCa. KPT-330 is now in Phase 1 clinical trials in patients
with advanced solid tumors (clinicaltrailas.gov: NCT01607905).

