Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of prognostic markers in osteosarcoma using a
systems biology approach.


IntroductionOsteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant bone tumor in
pediatrics. The survival rate of patients with metastatic disease remains
very dismal. Nevertheless, metastasis is a complex process and a
single-level analysis will not likely identify its key biological
determinants. In this study, we used a systems biology approach to
identify common metastatic pathways that are jointly supported by both
mRNA and protein levels in two distinct human metastatic OS
models.MethodsThe metastatic OS models used consist of a pair of isogenic
OS cell lines (low metastatic parental cell line and highly metastatic
subline), namely HOS/143B and SaOS-2/LM7. We obtained mRNA expression
data by microarray analysis, and captured a specific subset of N-linked
glycoproteins by lectin affinity chromatography. Subsequently, we
identified the glycoproteins by mass spectrometry and quantified them by
spectral counting. The genomic and glycoproteomic data were integrated by
topological analysis, and validated by Western blotting and reverse phase
protein arrays (RPPR).ResultsPathway analysis of the up-regulated genes
and glycoproteins separately revealed pathways associated with metastasis
including RAS-related G-proteins signaling and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition. Nonetheless, no common significant
pathway was found between the two metastatic models. To address this
issue, we used a topological analysis based on a shortest path algorithm
to identify topological nodes that remained hidden from the
transcriptomic and glycoproteomic analyses. Analysis of the topological
nodes identified important common pathways, including Cytoskeleton
remodeling/TGF/WNT," Development/WNT signaling," and Cell
adhesion/Chemokines and adhesion. Up-regulation of proteins within these
pathways was validated using RPPR. To determine if we could utilize the
candidates identified as circulating prognostic biomarkers, we used
Luminex bead assays to quantify a set of cytokine/chemokine candidates in
the plasma samples from a cohort of OS patients. The analysis showed that
expression of candidate molecules such as: TGFA (HR 14.3, p-value
IntroductionOsteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant bone tumor in
pediatrics. The survival rate of patients with metastatic disease remains
very dismal. Nevertheless, metastasis is a complex process and a
single-level analysis will not likely identify its key biological
determinants. In this study, we used a systems biology approach to
identify common metastatic pathways that are jointly supported by both
mRNA and protein levels in two distinct human metastatic OS
models.MethodsThe metastatic OS models used consist of a pair of isogenic
OS cell lines (low metastatic parental cell line and highly metastatic
subline), namely HOS/143B and SaOS-2/LM7. We obtained mRNA expression
data by microarray analysis, and captured a specific subset of N-linked
glycoproteins by lectin affinity chromatography. Subsequently, we
identified the glycoproteins by mass spectrometry and quantified them by
spectral counting. The genomic and glycoproteomic data were integrated by
topological analysis, and validated by Western blotting and reverse phase
protein arrays (RPPR).ResultsPathway analysis of the up-regulated genes
and glycoproteins separately revealed pathways associated with metastasis
including RAS-related G-proteins signaling and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition. Nonetheless, no common significant
pathway was found between the two metastatic models. To address this
issue, we used a topological analysis based on a shortest path algorithm
to identify topological nodes that remained hidden from the
transcriptomic and glycoproteomic analyses. Analysis of the topological
nodes identified important common pathways, including Cytoskeleton
remodeling/TGF/WNT," Development/WNT signaling," and Cell
adhesion/Chemokines and adhesion. Up-regulation of proteins within these
pathways was validated using RPPR. To determine if we could utilize the
candidates identified as circulating prognostic biomarkers, we used
Luminex bead assays to quantify a set of cytokine/chemokine candidates in
the plasma samples from a cohort of OS patients. The analysis showed that
expression of candidate molecules such as: TGFA (HR 14.3, p-value <0.05),
EGF (HR 5.6, p-value IntroductionOsteosarcoma (OS) is the most common
malignant bone tumor in pediatrics. The survival rate of patients with
metastatic disease remains very dismal. Nevertheless, metastasis is a
complex process and a single-level analysis will not likely identify its
key biological determinants. In this study, we used a systems biology
approach to identify common metastatic pathways that are jointly
supported by both mRNA and protein levels in two distinct human
metastatic OS models.MethodsThe metastatic OS models used consist of a
pair of isogenic OS cell lines (low metastatic parental cell line and
highly metastatic subline), namely HOS/143B and SaOS-2/LM7. We obtained
mRNA expression data by microarray analysis, and captured a specific
subset of N-linked glycoproteins by lectin affinity chromatography.
Subsequently, we identified the glycoproteins by mass spectrometry and
quantified them by spectral counting. The genomic and glycoproteomic data
were integrated by topological analysis, and validated by Western
blotting and reverse phase protein arrays (RPPR).ResultsPathway analysis
of the up-regulated genes and glycoproteins separately revealed pathways
associated with metastasis including RAS-related G-proteins signaling and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition. Nonetheless, no common significant
pathway was found between the two metastatic models. To address this
issue, we used a topological analysis based on a shortest path algorithm
to identify topological nodes that remained hidden from the
transcriptomic and glycoproteomic analyses. Analysis of the topological
nodes identified important common pathways, including Cytoskeleton
remodeling/TGF/WNT," Development/WNT signaling," and Cell
adhesion/Chemokines and adhesion. Up-regulation of proteins within these
pathways was validated using RPPR. To determine if we could utilize the
candidates identified as circulating prognostic biomarkers, we used
Luminex bead assays to quantify a set of cytokine/chemokine candidates in
the plasma samples from a cohort of OS patients. The analysis showed that
expression of candidate molecules such as: TGFA (HR 14.3, p-value <0.05),
EGF (HR 5.6, p-value <0.05), and IL-10 (HR 5.0, p-value
IntroductionOsteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant bone tumor in
pediatrics. The survival rate of patients with metastatic disease remains
very dismal. Nevertheless, metastasis is a complex process and a
single-level analysis will not likely identify its key biological
determinants. In this study, we used a systems biology approach to
identify common metastatic pathways that are jointly supported by both
mRNA and protein levels in two distinct human metastatic OS
models.MethodsThe metastatic OS models used consist of a pair of isogenic
OS cell lines (low metastatic parental cell line and highly metastatic
subline), namely HOS/143B and SaOS-2/LM7. We obtained mRNA expression
data by microarray analysis, and captured a specific subset of N-linked
glycoproteins by lectin affinity chromatography. Subsequently, we
identified the glycoproteins by mass spectrometry and quantified them by
spectral counting. The genomic and glycoproteomic data were integrated by
topological analysis, and validated by Western blotting and reverse phase
protein arrays (RPPR).ResultsPathway analysis of the up-regulated genes
and glycoproteins separately revealed pathways associated with metastasis
including RAS-related G-proteins signaling and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition. Nonetheless, no common significant
pathway was found between the two metastatic models. To address this
issue, we used a topological analysis based on a shortest path algorithm
to identify topological nodes that remained hidden from the
transcriptomic and glycoproteomic analyses. Analysis of the topological
nodes identified important common pathways, including Cytoskeleton
remodeling/TGF/WNT," Development/WNT signaling," and Cell
adhesion/Chemokines and adhesion. Up-regulation of proteins within these
pathways was validated using RPPR. To determine if we could utilize the
candidates identified as circulating prognostic biomarkers, we used
Luminex bead assays to quantify a set of cytokine/chemokine candidates in
the plasma samples from a cohort of OS patients. The analysis showed that
expression of candidate molecules such as: TGFA (HR 14.3, p-value <0.05),
EGF (HR 5.6, p-value <0.05), and IL-10 (HR 5.0, p-value <0.05) at initial
diagnosis correlated with poor survival and were independent of
metastasis at diagnosis. We will also use Multiple Reaction Monitoring to
investigate the candidate biomarkers in other common pathways to
correlate with tumor progression, metastases, and survival.ConclusionsIn
this study, we used a systems biology approach by integrating genomic and
proteomic data to identify key and common metastatic mechanisms in OS.
Since WNT signaling and chemokines have been previously implicated in OS
and other tumors, further characterization and validation in human
samples of these common pathways may lead to novel prognostic biomarkers
and therapeutic strategies for curing metastatic OS.

