Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection and quantification of minoritary subclones of KRAS in
metastatic colorectal cancers by digital microfluidics: therapeutic
implications.


KRAS mutations are associated with an absence of response to
EGFR-targeting treatments in colorectal cancer. These therapies are
restricted to patients with a KRAS wild type tumor but only 50% of these
patients present an objective response. It has been recently demonstrated
that secondary resistance was associated with appearance of a KRAS
mutation. The presence of a low fraction of KRAS-mutated cells within
tumors, not detectable by commonly used procedures, could explain these
false negative and these secondary resistances.To understand the
importance of mutated subclones in the apparition of resistance to
therapy targeting EGFR, a retrospective study including 95 patients with
a metastatic colorectal cancer have been performed. All these patients,
refractory to irinotecan were treated either with a combination of
anti-EGFR and irinotecan or by anti-EGFR in monotherapy. These patients
consisted of 54 men and 41 women with an average age of 62 years 11.
Thirty-six patients were classified as responders according to RECIST
criteria and 59 as non responders. Within this historitical serie, 27
patients were previously characterized as bearing a KRAS mutation by bulk
Taqman analysis. DNA extracted from the tumors was analyzed by multiplex
droplet-based microfluidics. This method, by segregating individual DNA
molecules within million of aqueous microdroplets acting as independent
microreactors, allows to perform precise quantitative experiments, for
the 7 most frequent mutations of KRAS.All tumors reported as bearing a
mutated KRAS were detected as positives in droplets with proportions of
mutated DNA from 10 to 64% (mean of 34,7% 17,9%). Two of them (KRAS G12D)
were bearing additional subclones (KRAS G12V; KRAS G12S) detected only in
droplets. With the 68 negative tumors, 18 were found positive in droplets
with KRAS proportions from 0,013% to 86% (mean of 8.6% 20). Only 4
patients had a proportion of mutated DNA higher than 10% (86%, 24.5%,
12.7% and 10%), all presented low quantities of amplifiable DNA. We
observed an inverse correlation between the proportion of mutated DNA and
the frequency of anti-EGFR responses (PKRAS mutations are associated with
an absence of response to EGFR-targeting treatments in colorectal cancer.
These therapies are restricted to patients with a KRAS wild type tumor
but only 50% of these patients present an objective response. It has been
recently demonstrated that secondary resistance was associated with
appearance of a KRAS mutation. The presence of a low fraction of
KRAS-mutated cells within tumors, not detectable by commonly used
procedures, could explain these false negative and these secondary
resistances.To understand the importance of mutated subclones in the
apparition of resistance to therapy targeting EGFR, a retrospective study
including 95 patients with a metastatic colorectal cancer have been
performed. All these patients, refractory to irinotecan were treated
either with a combination of anti-EGFR and irinotecan or by anti-EGFR in
monotherapy. These patients consisted of 54 men and 41 women with an
average age of 62 years 11. Thirty-six patients were classified as
responders according to RECIST criteria and 59 as non responders. Within
this historitical serie, 27 patients were previously characterized as
bearing a KRAS mutation by bulk Taqman analysis. DNA extracted from the
tumors was analyzed by multiplex droplet-based microfluidics. This
method, by segregating individual DNA molecules within million of aqueous
microdroplets acting as independent microreactors, allows to perform
precise quantitative experiments, for the 7 most frequent mutations of
KRAS.All tumors reported as bearing a mutated KRAS were detected as
positives in droplets with proportions of mutated DNA from 10 to 64%
(mean of 34,7% 17,9%). Two of them (KRAS G12D) were bearing additional
subclones (KRAS G12V; KRAS G12S) detected only in droplets. With the 68
negative tumors, 18 were found positive in droplets with KRAS proportions
from 0,013% to 86% (mean of 8.6% 20). Only 4 patients had a proportion of
mutated DNA higher than 10% (86%, 24.5%, 12.7% and 10%), all presented
low quantities of amplifiable DNA. We observed an inverse correlation
between the proportion of mutated DNA and the frequency of anti-EGFR
responses (P< 0.03). The percentage of mutated DNA was 11.6% and 28,4%
for responders and non-responders respectively. Survival free progression
of patients was significantly different depending on the level of mutated
DNA within the tumor. The survival free progression of patients with
tumor presenting less than 5% of mutated KRAS was identical to the one of
non mutated patients with both technics. HRs were of 0.540.2 NS, 3.10.9,
(PKRAS mutations are associated with an absence of response to
EGFR-targeting treatments in colorectal cancer. These therapies are
restricted to patients with a KRAS wild type tumor but only 50% of these
patients present an objective response. It has been recently demonstrated
that secondary resistance was associated with appearance of a KRAS
mutation. The presence of a low fraction of KRAS-mutated cells within
tumors, not detectable by commonly used procedures, could explain these
false negative and these secondary resistances.To understand the
importance of mutated subclones in the apparition of resistance to
therapy targeting EGFR, a retrospective study including 95 patients with
a metastatic colorectal cancer have been performed. All these patients,
refractory to irinotecan were treated either with a combination of
anti-EGFR and irinotecan or by anti-EGFR in monotherapy. These patients
consisted of 54 men and 41 women with an average age of 62 years 11.
Thirty-six patients were classified as responders according to RECIST
criteria and 59 as non responders. Within this historitical serie, 27
patients were previously characterized as bearing a KRAS mutation by bulk
Taqman analysis. DNA extracted from the tumors was analyzed by multiplex
droplet-based microfluidics. This method, by segregating individual DNA
molecules within million of aqueous microdroplets acting as independent
microreactors, allows to perform precise quantitative experiments, for
the 7 most frequent mutations of KRAS.All tumors reported as bearing a
mutated KRAS were detected as positives in droplets with proportions of
mutated DNA from 10 to 64% (mean of 34,7% 17,9%). Two of them (KRAS G12D)
were bearing additional subclones (KRAS G12V; KRAS G12S) detected only in
droplets. With the 68 negative tumors, 18 were found positive in droplets
with KRAS proportions from 0,013% to 86% (mean of 8.6% 20). Only 4
patients had a proportion of mutated DNA higher than 10% (86%, 24.5%,
12.7% and 10%), all presented low quantities of amplifiable DNA. We
observed an inverse correlation between the proportion of mutated DNA and
the frequency of anti-EGFR responses (P< 0.03). The percentage of mutated
DNA was 11.6% and 28,4% for responders and non-responders respectively.
Survival free progression of patients was significantly different
depending on the level of mutated DNA within the tumor. The survival free
progression of patients with tumor presenting less than 5% of mutated
KRAS was identical to the one of non mutated patients with both technics.
HRs were of 0.540.2 NS, 3.10.9, (P<0.001) 4.91.7 (PKRAS mutations are
associated with an absence of response to EGFR-targeting treatments in
colorectal cancer. These therapies are restricted to patients with a KRAS
wild type tumor but only 50% of these patients present an objective
response. It has been recently demonstrated that secondary resistance was
associated with appearance of a KRAS mutation. The presence of a low
fraction of KRAS-mutated cells within tumors, not detectable by commonly
used procedures, could explain these false negative and these secondary
resistances.To understand the importance of mutated subclones in the
apparition of resistance to therapy targeting EGFR, a retrospective study
including 95 patients with a metastatic colorectal cancer have been
performed. All these patients, refractory to irinotecan were treated
either with a combination of anti-EGFR and irinotecan or by anti-EGFR in
monotherapy. These patients consisted of 54 men and 41 women with an
average age of 62 years 11. Thirty-six patients were classified as
responders according to RECIST criteria and 59 as non responders. Within
this historitical serie, 27 patients were previously characterized as
bearing a KRAS mutation by bulk Taqman analysis. DNA extracted from the
tumors was analyzed by multiplex droplet-based microfluidics. This
method, by segregating individual DNA molecules within million of aqueous
microdroplets acting as independent microreactors, allows to perform
precise quantitative experiments, for the 7 most frequent mutations of
KRAS.All tumors reported as bearing a mutated KRAS were detected as
positives in droplets with proportions of mutated DNA from 10 to 64%
(mean of 34,7% 17,9%). Two of them (KRAS G12D) were bearing additional
subclones (KRAS G12V; KRAS G12S) detected only in droplets. With the 68
negative tumors, 18 were found positive in droplets with KRAS proportions
from 0,013% to 86% (mean of 8.6% 20). Only 4 patients had a proportion of
mutated DNA higher than 10% (86%, 24.5%, 12.7% and 10%), all presented
low quantities of amplifiable DNA. We observed an inverse correlation
between the proportion of mutated DNA and the frequency of anti-EGFR
responses (P< 0.03). The percentage of mutated DNA was 11.6% and 28,4%
for responders and non-responders respectively. Survival free progression
of patients was significantly different depending on the level of mutated
DNA within the tumor. The survival free progression of patients with
tumor presenting less than 5% of mutated KRAS was identical to the one of
non mutated patients with both technics. HRs were of 0.540.2 NS, 3.10.9,
(P<0.001) 4.91.7 (P<0.001) for patients with tumor containing less than
5%, between 5 and 25% or more than 25% of mutated DNA respectively. This
work highlights the importance of a quantitative approach for detection
of mutation of the KRAS oncogene.

