Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MD-164 strongly inhibited various tumor cells and also metastasis
of pancreatic tumor cells via modulation of Arp2/3 complexes.


Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Genomics, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, University of Science and Technology in
Korea Daejon 305-806, Republic of KoreaThe most difficult problem in the
treatment of cancer patients is a metastatic recurrence. We focused to
find novel anti-metastatic chemicals without cytotoxicity. In preliminary
results, more than 800 commercially available pharmaceuticals and
pre-clinical drugs were screened to identify inhibitors of tumor cell
migration that are intimately tied to the steps of metastasis. The ARP2/3
complex which induces actin-polymerization and Y-branching is an
essential element for lamellipodia, invadopodia and filopodia at the
early stages of the metastasis in cells. Two classes of small molecule
inhibitors of Arp2/3 were reported. However, inhibitors of ARPC15 subunit
have not yet been reported. Regulating the ARPC15 subunits for inhibition
of actin polymerization by utilizing small molecules will benefit actin
based cell migration research. Furthermore, Inhibitors of specific ARPC15
subunit are highly advantageous for developing anti-metastasis drug
without toxicity and side effects. As a result of the screening, MD-164
was found to effectively reduce migration and invasion in various cancer
cell lines by targeting an ARP2/3 complex subunit2, a component of actin
related protein complex 2/3 (ARP 2/3). When AsPc-1 cells stably
expressing luciferase were injected into the tail vein of the mice and
the mice were treated with MD164, MD164 inhibited lung metastases about
70%.Citation Format: Byoung-Mog Kwon, Young Min Han. MD-164 strongly
inhibited various tumor cells and also metastasis of pancreatic tumor
cells via modulation of Arp2/3 complexes. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of
the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5517. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5517

