Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN deficient lung cancer cells are sensitive to the combination
of olaparib with cisplatin through suppressing DNA damage signaling.


PARP inhibition in combination with DNA-damaging agents is one of the
most promising new therapeutic approaches to cancer. PTEN is a
tumor-suppressor gene deactivating PI3K downstream of EGFR signaling. In
H1650 cells harboring EGFR deletion mutation in exon 19 with PTEN loss,
we reported that synergistic effects of a PARP inhibitor (olaparib) and a
DNA-damaging agent (cisplatin) were observed in vitro and in vivo (#4686,
AACR 2012).We further clarified how PTEN loss affected DNA damage
signaling. H1299 and A549 are lung cancer cells harboring wild type PTEN.
Antagonistic effects of olaparib with cisplatin were shown in H1299 and
A549 cells according to combination index (CI). Sensitivity to a PARP
inhibitor was reported to be associated with a defect in Mre11
expression. H1650 cells exhibited lower levels of Mre11 compared with
PTEN-transfected H1650 cells (designated H1650PTEN+ cells). To address
how lower expression levels of Mre11 affects the synergism between
cisplatin and olaparib, Mre11 expression vector was transfected into
H1650 cells (designated H1650Mre11+ cells). CIs were 0.23, 0.20, 0.57 and
0.29 when concentration ratios of cisplatin and olaparib were designed to
be molar ratios of 1:1, 1:2, 1:3 and 1:5, respectively, in H1650 cells,
while CIs were 0.76, 0.91, 0.97 and 0.77 in H1650Mre11+ cells. Although
these CIs in H1650Mre11+ were somewhat elevated compared with those
observed in original H1650 cells, these results indicated that lower
levels of Mre11 alone could not be the sole reason for the synergism. On
the other hand, PTEN has other nuclear functions, including
transcriptional regulation of the RAD51 gene, whose product is essential
for homologous recombination (HR) repair of DNA breaks. RPA is displaced
from single stranded DNA by RAD51 to initiate HR. There were no
significant differences of RAD51 and RPA levels by Western blotting.
Meanwhile, PTEN deficiency resulted in significant reduction in RAD51 and
RPA focus formation after drug-exposure or irradiation compared to
H1650PTEN+ cells although H2AX was similarly increased in both cells. As
RPA binds to single stranded DNA, the RPA focus could be a marker for end
resection at the double stranded DNA ends. Thus, inactivation of PTEN
might lead to suppression of DNA damage signaling, leading to the lower
levels of end resection and, hence, less RPA focus formation. As shown
above, reduced levels of Mre11 alone could not provide a sufficient
explanation for this, though Mre11 is involved in the molecular
mechanisms of the end resection.The combination of cisplatin with
olaparib in PTEN deficient lung tumors might be pursued in clinical
trials although further investigations should be required to clarify
whether and to what extent the molecular events including Mre11, RAD51
and RPA are responsible for the synergic effect.

