Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-time imaging of pancreatic cancer stem cells for
identification of the selectively targeting therapy.


Identification and purification of cancer stem cells (CSCs) should offer
a clue of the therapeutic targets, but their heterogeneous expansion
remains the significant obstacle of studies. One of the solutions might
be establishment of real-time monitoring of CSC, based on fluorescence
imaging with the intrinsically low proteasome activity. The monitoring
system in human pancreatic cancer cells proved directly the asymmetric
division of CSC to generate non-CSC. Real-time chemoresistance of the
CSCs and remarkable tumorigenicity (as few as 10 cells) indicated their
preclinical significance. The synthetic lethal screening was applied to
identify a novel compound targeting specifically the pancreatic CSCs. It
inhibited nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin in the pancreatic CSCs.
Anti-CSC effects of the compound were confirmed by in vitro dynamic
images and in vivo tumor analyses. The real-time monitoring system of
CSCs is an innovative strategy providing a visible target that should
lead to the discovery of successful therapies directed toward CSCs of
aggressive cancers.Citation Format: Shinji Tanaka, Rama Adikrisna,
Satoshi Matsumura, Daisuke Ban, Takanori Ochiai, Takumi Irie, Atsushi
Kudo, Noriaki Nakamura, Shoji Yamaoka, Shigeki Arii. Real-time imaging of
pancreatic cancer stem cells for identification of the selectively
targeting therapy. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4896. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4896

