Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of EphA2 in the maintenance of cell viability of KRAS
mutant non-small cell lung cancer.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United
States. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common
histological subtype of lung cancer, which can be further subdivided
based on its unique profile of oncogenic mutations. Identifying molecular
subtypes of NSCLC and matching patients with appropriate targeted
therapies is critically important for the treatment of this disease.
Although significant progress has been made to develop novel,
molecularly-targeted therapeutics, challenges still remain in targeting
commonly occurring mutations in NSCLC, such as those in KRAS. Overcoming
these challenges will require astute strategies to identify and inhibit
novel kinase targets required for cell viability in these subtypes of
lung cancer. To this end, we have shown that the EphA2 receptor tyrosine
kinase plays a unique role in the maintenance of cell viability in NSCLC,
especially those with KRAS mutations. EphA2 is generally overexpressed in
NSCLC and even further overexpressed in KRAS mutant NSCLC. Preliminary
data from our lab has shown that knockdown of EphA2 expression in a large
number of human NSCLC cell lines dramatically inhibits cell viability in
cell lines bearing KRAS mutations. To further understand this phenotype,
we are working to define the molecular mechanisms downstream of EphA2
that are critical for cell viability in this genotype and to model the
effects EphA2 deficiency in vivo using transgenic mouse models. Based on
our preliminary data, we propose that EphA2 provides a novel target for
modulating cell viability in lung cancers with KRAS mutations associated
with limited therapeutic options.

