Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapy model for advanced intracerebral B16 mouse melanoma using
radiosurgery combined with immunotherapy.


A reproducible therapy model for advanced intracerebral B16 melanoma is
reported. Implanted tumors (D0), suppressed by a single 15 Gy
radiosurgical dose of 100 kVp X-rays (D8) were further suppressed by a
single ip injection of a Treg depleting Mab given two days prior to the
initiation (D9) of four weekly then eight bi-monthly sc injections of
GMCSF-transfected, mitotically disabled B16 cells. The results of seven
independent experiments were similar to the combined result: the Median
(Days) [SD/Total N] of survival went from 15[1.09/62] (No Treatment
Control) to 35.8[8.8/58] (Radiosurgery-Only) to 52.5[13.5/57]
(Radiosurgery Plus Immunotherapy); Radiosurgery-Only and Radiosurgery
Plus Immunotherapy groups were highly distinct from Controls as well as
from one another (pA reproducible therapy model for advanced
intracerebral B16 melanoma is reported. Implanted tumors (D0), suppressed
by a single 15 Gy radiosurgical dose of 100 kVp X-rays (D8) were further
suppressed by a single ip injection of a Treg depleting Mab given two
days prior to the initiation (D9) of four weekly then eight bi-monthly sc
injections of GMCSF-transfected, mitotically disabled B16 cells. The
results of seven independent experiments were similar to the combined
result: the Median (Days) [SD/Total N] of survival went from 15[1.09/62]
(No Treatment Control) to 35.8[8.8/58] (Radiosurgery-Only) to
52.5[13.5/57] (Radiosurgery Plus Immunotherapy); Radiosurgery-Only and
Radiosurgery Plus Immunotherapy groups were highly distinct from Controls
as well as from one another (p<0.0001). Within two weeks after
immunization, tumors in mice receiving Radiosurgery Plus Immunotherapy
were significantly smaller than tumors in mice treated only with
Radiosurgery. Splenocytes and lymph node cells from immunized mice showed
increased interferon Y production when cultured with syngenic tumor
cells. We hypothesize that our model will be useful for the development
and testing of novel combination therapies for brain tumors.

