Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GPR56 regulates the turnover of tissue transglutaminase and tumor
growth in melanoma.


Biochemical and biophysical properties of extracellular matrix (ECM)
regulate multiple aspects of cancer cell behavior during tumor
progression. The mechanisms of these regulations are not well defined. We
previously reported that an atypical G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR),
GPR56, inhibited melanoma growth and metastasis and its N-terminus binds
to tissue transglutaminase, TG2, a major cross-linking enzyme in ECM. We
thus postulated that GPR56 might suppress melanoma progression by
influencing ECM properties through its interaction with TG2. To test
this, we examined the effects of GPR56 on melanoma growth in the presence
or absence of TG2, using the immunodeficient Tg2+/+ or Tg2/ mice. Our
results showed that the crosslinking enzyme, TG2, promoted melanoma
growth, but this tumor-promoting effect was antagonized by GPR56. The
mechanisms of this antagonism were revealed through a series of
immunohistochemical and biochemical analyses. In GPR56-expressing cells,
the extracellular TG2 was internalized by GPR56 and subsequently degraded
in a lysome-dependent manner, resulting in a down-regulation of TG2 in
ECM. This down-regulation of TG2 by GPR56 led to changes in the
deposition of TG2 and other matrix proteins in melanomas and a reduction
in melanoma growth. Taken together, we present evidence that a surface
receptor on melanoma cells, GPR56, regulates the turnover of the
crosslinking enzyme, TG2, in the tumor microenvironment, leading to
changes in ECM deposition and melanoma progression.Citation Format:
Liquan Yang, Sonali Mohanty, Nancy Corson, Lei Xu. GPR56 regulates the
turnover of tissue transglutaminase and tumor growth in melanoma.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 210.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-210

