Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-wide association study of breast cancer survival
according to molecular subtype in Korean women.


Background: Breast cancer is heterogeneous disease according to ethnicity
and molecular subtype. In this study, we conducted a genome-wide
association study (GWAS) to evaluate the association between
susceptibility loci and breast cancer survival by the molecular subtypes
which were classified into four subtypes based on estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) in Korean women.Methods: Analyses included 2,023 invasive breast
cancer patients, comprised of ER/PR+ and HER2- (N=1,006), ER/PR+ and
HER2+ (N=245), ER/PR- and HER2+ (N=226), ER/PR- and HER2- (N=279), and
unknown subtype (N=267), from Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SeBCS). For
analyses, 555,117 SNPs were genotyped using Affymetrix SNP Array 6.0 and
2,416,663 SNPs were imputated based on HapMap Phase II (release 22). Cox
proportional hazard models adjusted for age, recruited centers, and TNM
stage were used to test the association of these SNPs with disease-free
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) by molecular subtype.Results:
With median follow-up periods of 3.8 years in DFS and 4.0 years in OS,
there was significant difference in survival between molecular subtypes
tested by log-rank (PBackground: Breast cancer is heterogeneous disease
according to ethnicity and molecular subtype. In this study, we conducted
a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to evaluate the association
between susceptibility loci and breast cancer survival by the molecular
subtypes which were classified into four subtypes based on estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 (HER2) in Korean women.Methods: Analyses included 2,023
invasive breast cancer patients, comprised of ER/PR+ and HER2- (N=1,006),
ER/PR+ and HER2+ (N=245), ER/PR- and HER2+ (N=226), ER/PR- and HER2-
(N=279), and unknown subtype (N=267), from Seoul Breast Cancer Study
(SeBCS). For analyses, 555,117 SNPs were genotyped using Affymetrix SNP
Array 6.0 and 2,416,663 SNPs were imputated based on HapMap Phase II
(release 22). Cox proportional hazard models adjusted for age, recruited
centers, and TNM stage were used to test the association of these SNPs
with disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) by molecular
subtype.Results: With median follow-up periods of 3.8 years in DFS and
4.0 years in OS, there was significant difference in survival between
molecular subtypes tested by log-rank (P<0.0001, Log-rank test). Compared
to ER/PR+ and HER2-, ER/PR- and HER2+ and ER/PR- and HER2- were
associated with a poorer prognosis (HRER/PR- and HER2+ (95% CI)=2.00
(1.35-2.97), HRER/PR- and HER2-=2.37 (1.70-3.29) in DFS and HRER/PR- and
HER2+=2.54 (1.50-4.30), HRER/PR- and HER2-=2.59 (1.65-4.08) in OS). By
molecular subtypes, we identified 5 SNPs associated with DFS
(HRrs161041(PPP2R2B)=2.35 (1.68-3.30) in ER/PR+ and HER2-,
HRrs1896346(TBX3)=8.19 (3.52-19.08) in ER/PR+ and HER2+,
HRrs1278329(ADAM12)=3.96 (2.23-7.02) in ER/PR- and HER2+,
HRrs10894375(NTM)=3.10 (2.02-4.74), HRrs10825036(PCDH15)=2.87 (1.90-4.34)
in ER/PR- and HER2-) and 3 SNPs associated with OS
(HRrs7659008(LYPLA1P2)=0.20 (0.09-0.39) in ER/PR+ and HER2-,
HRrs4750561(CDNF)=0.12 (0.05-0.29), and HRrs4807216(SF3A2)=11.51
(4.30-30.81) in ER/PR- and HER2+) in breast cancer with the level of
P-valueBackground: Breast cancer is heterogeneous disease according to
ethnicity and molecular subtype. In this study, we conducted a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) to evaluate the association between
susceptibility loci and breast cancer survival by the molecular subtypes
which were classified into four subtypes based on estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) in Korean women.Methods: Analyses included 2,023 invasive breast
cancer patients, comprised of ER/PR+ and HER2- (N=1,006), ER/PR+ and
HER2+ (N=245), ER/PR- and HER2+ (N=226), ER/PR- and HER2- (N=279), and
unknown subtype (N=267), from Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SeBCS). For
analyses, 555,117 SNPs were genotyped using Affymetrix SNP Array 6.0 and
2,416,663 SNPs were imputated based on HapMap Phase II (release 22). Cox
proportional hazard models adjusted for age, recruited centers, and TNM
stage were used to test the association of these SNPs with disease-free
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) by molecular subtype.Results:
With median follow-up periods of 3.8 years in DFS and 4.0 years in OS,
there was significant difference in survival between molecular subtypes
tested by log-rank (P<0.0001, Log-rank test). Compared to ER/PR+ and
HER2-, ER/PR- and HER2+ and ER/PR- and HER2- were associated with a
poorer prognosis (HRER/PR- and HER2+ (95% CI)=2.00 (1.35-2.97), HRER/PR-
and HER2-=2.37 (1.70-3.29) in DFS and HRER/PR- and HER2+=2.54
(1.50-4.30), HRER/PR- and HER2-=2.59 (1.65-4.08) in OS). By molecular
subtypes, we identified 5 SNPs associated with DFS
(HRrs161041(PPP2R2B)=2.35 (1.68-3.30) in ER/PR+ and HER2-,
HRrs1896346(TBX3)=8.19 (3.52-19.08) in ER/PR+ and HER2+,
HRrs1278329(ADAM12)=3.96 (2.23-7.02) in ER/PR- and HER2+,
HRrs10894375(NTM)=3.10 (2.02-4.74), HRrs10825036(PCDH15)=2.87 (1.90-4.34)
in ER/PR- and HER2-) and 3 SNPs associated with OS
(HRrs7659008(LYPLA1P2)=0.20 (0.09-0.39) in ER/PR+ and HER2-,
HRrs4750561(CDNF)=0.12 (0.05-0.29), and HRrs4807216(SF3A2)=11.51
(4.30-30.81) in ER/PR- and HER2+) in breast cancer with the level of
P-value<1105.Conclusion: This study suggests that associations between
SNPs and survival were heterogeneous according to the molecular subtype
of breast cancer. Furthermore, Additional larger studies are needed to
replicate these findings.

