Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) family member BRD4
for treatment of pediatric sarcomas.


Background. Potent inhibitors of histone binding modules have the
potential to suppress, selectively, transcription of specific genes,
including MYC family of transcription factors. JQ1 binds competitively to
acetyl-lysine recognition motifs, or bromodomains. JQ1 inhibits BET
bromodomain, and down-regulates MYC transcription. Ewing sarcoma (EWS)
and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS) are associated with high expression
of c-MYC and MYCN, respectively (Delmore JE, Cell 2011; Filippakopoulos
P, Nature 2010). Consequently, we have evaluated sensitivity of EWS and
ARMS cell lines and xenograft models to JQ1.Methods. EWS and ARMS cells
were incubated with JQ1, or JQ1R (non-active enantiomer) for 96 hrs. Cell
viability was determined by Alamar Blue staining. C-MYC and MYCN were
determined by immunoblotting. Xenograft tumor lines were grown in CB17
female SCID mice. JQ1 was administered P.O. at 30 mg/kg (BID) or 50 mg/kg
(SID) for up to 3 weeks. Assessment of JQ1 activity was as described
(Houghton P, Ped Blood & Cancer, 2007). The effect of JQ1 on
proliferation and tube formation of human umbilical vascular endothelial
cells (HUVECs) was as described (Bid H, Mol Cancer Ther, 2012).Results.
For all cell lines, the IC50 concentration for JQ1R (inactive enantiomer)
was > 10 microM. EWS cell lines (n=9) segregated into two distinct groups
with IC50 7 microM ES-6, EW8, CHLA-258). Seven of 9 ARMS cell lines
demonstrated sensitivity to JQ1 (IC50 10 microM Rh18, Rh30). JQ1 (500 nM,
24 hr) markedly down-regulated c-MYC in Rh41, and to a lesser extent in
Rh36. MYCN expression in Rh5 ARMS cell line was also suppressed by JQ1.
Of interest, JQ1 did not suppress c-MYC in any EWS cell line. In vivo,
BID and SID dosing was well tolerated (mortality 1.2%) and gave similar
antitumor activity. JQ1 significantly retarded growth of all 4 sarcoma
models (Rh10, Rh28 ARMS and EW5, EW8 EWS lines. T/C at day 21 range 0.30
0.43). Of note, while EW8 cells in vitro were resistant to JQ1 (IC50 > 10
microM), the xenografts were equally sensitive as other lines to JQ1
treatment, suggesting JQ1 exerted effects on stroma/angiogenesis. In
vitro, JQ1 (500 nM) suppressed tube formation of HUVECs without
decreasing viability.Conclusions. JQ1 potently inhibited proliferation of
EWS and ARMS cells in vitro, with distinct groups demonstrating either
sensitivity or resistance. Sensitivity was associated with decreased
levels of MYCN or c-MYC in some cell lines. In vivo, JQ1 demonstrated
significant antitumor activity in 4 xenograft lines, including EW8
derived from cells resistant to JQ1 in vitro. The potential for JQ1 to
exert anti-angiogenic effects is suggested by its potent inhibition of
HUVECs differentiation. Supported through a grant from SWOG

