Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dinuclear platinum agent, BBR3610-DACH, exhibits a significant
anti-proliferative effect: Regulation of G1/S and G2/M cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis induction.


BBR3610-DACH, a long-chain, bifunctional dinuclear PTII complex with a
similar DNA binding mode to the Phase II clinical drug, BBR3464 and its
potent analogue, BBR3610, was shown previously to be resistant to
metabolic decomposition by sulfur-containing nucleophiles. Initial
observations utilizing the alkaline comet assay indicate that
BBR3610-DACH forms interstrand crosslinks. Cell cycle analysis using flow
cytometry showed that BBR3610-DACH inhibited cell proliferation and
caused G1/S and G2/M cell cycle arrest in HCT116 colorectal cells in a
time dependent manner accompanied with significant s phase depletion.
Similar experiments with synchronized cells showed a distinct G1 phase
arrest elicited by the drug following release from arrest. Immunoblotting
revealed a stabilization of p53 between 6-24hr after treatment with 20M
(IC90) BBR3610-DACH, with a concomitant increased levels of the cyclin
dependent kinase inhibitors, p21 and p27. Cell proliferation assay using
MTT and subsequent cell cycle studies with HCT116 p53-/- and HCT116
p21-/- indicated that the cytotoxicity profile of BBR3610-DACH was p21
dependent and partially dependent on the p53 status. However, no change
was observed in the protein levels of cyclin E, CDK2, and CDC25A which
are G1 phase regulators. Decrease in the levels of cyclin A and cyclin B1
at 24hrs suggested a G2/M block indicative of a possible mitotic
catastrophe. Next, we examined whether the DNA damage sensor protein
kinases, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ataxia telangiectasia
and RAD3 related (ATR) had a role in the cell cycle regulation after drug
treatment. Studies using the ATM inhibitor, KU-60019 and caffeine
(inhibits both ATM and ATR) revealed no apparent role of ATM but a
possible dependence on ATR. Following the cell cycle effects,
BBR3610-DACH induced cell death as seen from cleaved poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 (PARP-1) levels as early as 6hrs after drug treatment.
Interestingly, no cleaved caspase 3 was seen suggesting a
caspase-independent PARP cleavage. Together these findings suggest that
BBR3610-DACH is a major cell cycle inhibitory DNA binding platinum agent
that could be further developed as a major chemotherapeutic.

