Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long non-coding RNA SS-001 regulates proliferation, cell cycle,
and migration in esophageal adenocarcinoma cells.


Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is one of the most rapidly increasing
cancers in Western countries, but its underlying molecular mechanisms
have not yet been completely elucidated. Recently, the discovery of long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) has added a new layer of complexity to the
molecular architecture, identifying these molecules as emerging key
regulators of diverse biological pathways. Increasing evidence shows that
lncRNA dysregulation can lead to diseases such as cancer, but their
potential involvement in EAC is not yet well-understood.In this study, we
identified a set of lncRNAs that were differentially expressed in
esophageal cancers vs. normal tissues by massively parallel RNA
sequencing. Expression levels were validated using quantitative real-time
PCR. One lncRNA, designated SS-001, was significantly overexpressed and
hypomethylated in EAC cell lines and tissues vs. normal esophageal
epithelial cells and adjacent non-tumor tissues, respectively. SS-001 is
an intergenic lncRNA located on chromosome 21.In vitro assays in EAC cell
lines demonstrated that knockdown of SS-001 resulted in inhibition of
cell proliferation, the cell cycle, and migration. Moreover, patients
with high SS-001 expression levels had a relatively poor prognosis. Our
findings suggest that SS-001 may play a significant role in the
development or progression of EAC and has the potential to serve as a
prognostic biomarker.

