Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-diagnostic levels of serum one-carbon metabolism biomarkers
and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.


Pre-diagnostic levels of serum one-carbon metabolism biomarkers and risk
of hepatocellular carcinomaBACKGROUND. It is well established that rats
fed diets deficient in choline and methionine spontaneously develop
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Tumor DNA from these animals show a
characteristic hypomethylation pattern, suggesting that disruption of the
one-carbon metabolism (1CM) pathway may be an underlying mechanism for
hepatocarcinogenesis. Prospective epidemiological data on circulating
levels of 1CM biomarkers in relation to HCC risk have been
lacking.METHODS. We prospectively examined the association between
prediagnostic serum concentrations of betain, choline, cystathionine,
homocysteine (Hcy), methionine, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF),
pyridoxal-5-phosphate (PLP, the bioactive form of vitamin B6),
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), and risk of
developing HCC among 297 incident HCC cases and 631 matched controls from
a cohort of 18,244 men in Shanghai, China. Conditional logistic
regression method was used to calculate odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) adjusted for smoking, alcohol use, hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg) seropositivity and chronic liver disease.RESULTS.
Higher serum levels of PLP were associated with statistically
significantly reduced risk of HCC. The ORs (95% CIs) for the 2nd, 3rd,
and 4th quartiles of serum PLP were 0.52 (0.32, 0.85), 0.57 (0.35, 0.93)
and 0.35 (0.20, 0.60), respectively, compared with the 1st quartile
(PtrendPre-diagnostic levels of serum one-carbon metabolism biomarkers
and risk of hepatocellular carcinomaBACKGROUND. It is well established
that rats fed diets deficient in choline and methionine spontaneously
develop hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Tumor DNA from these animals show
a characteristic hypomethylation pattern, suggesting that disruption of
the one-carbon metabolism (1CM) pathway may be an underlying mechanism
for hepatocarcinogenesis. Prospective epidemiological data on circulating
levels of 1CM biomarkers in relation to HCC risk have been
lacking.METHODS. We prospectively examined the association between
prediagnostic serum concentrations of betain, choline, cystathionine,
homocysteine (Hcy), methionine, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF),
pyridoxal-5-phosphate (PLP, the bioactive form of vitamin B6),
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), and risk of
developing HCC among 297 incident HCC cases and 631 matched controls from
a cohort of 18,244 men in Shanghai, China. Conditional logistic
regression method was used to calculate odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) adjusted for smoking, alcohol use, hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg) seropositivity and chronic liver disease.RESULTS.
Higher serum levels of PLP were associated with statistically
significantly reduced risk of HCC. The ORs (95% CIs) for the 2nd, 3rd,
and 4th quartiles of serum PLP were 0.52 (0.32, 0.85), 0.57 (0.35, 0.93)
and 0.35 (0.20, 0.60), respectively, compared with the 1st quartile
(Ptrend<0.01). Among men with positive HBsAg, doubling serum choline
concentration was associated with a statistically significant 58%
decrease in HCC risk (OR=0.42; 95% CI: 0.19, 0.92) and doubling serum
methionine concentration was positively associated with HCC risk
(OR=2.94; 95% CI: 1.27, 6.82). Serum levels of cystathionine were
associated with increased risk of HCC among all subjects (OR=1.92; 95%
CI: 1.14, 3.21; Ptrend=0.01, comparing the 4th to 1st quartile). There
was no association for HCC risk with circulating levels of 5-MTHF, Hcy,
SAM, or SAH.CONCLUSION. Choline and PLP may be protective against the
development of HCC whereas circulating methionine may be a risk factor
for developing HCC, especially among high-risk individuals. Future
investigation is warranted to test whether diets high in vitamin B6 are
effective in preventing HCC development in high-risk populations.

