Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting beta1 integrin potentiates antiangiogenic therapy and
inhibits growth of bevacizumab-resistant glioblastoma multiforme.


INTRODUCTION: Antiangiogenic therapies like bevacizumab hold promise for
cancer treatment. However, the development of acquired resistance,
including an aggressive mesenchymal phenotype, limit utility of these
agents. We previously published a report in which microarray and PCR
analysis revealed beta1 integrin to be upregulated in
bevacizumab-resistant glioblastomas (BRGs). Because the beta1 integrin
subunit mediates tumor-microenvironment interactions, we further
investigated its role in mesenchymal-type resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapy.METHODS: Immunostaining of BRG specimens and genetic or
pharmacologic beta1 targeting in BRG cells and BRG-derived xenografts
were used to study the role of beta1 integrin in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance in vitro and in vivo. Cells were transduced to express
beta1-GFP fusion protein to measure beta1 integrin turnover in focal
adhesions using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP).RESULTS: Beta1 integrin and downstream beta1-effector focal
adhesion kinase immunostaining were upregulated in 75% and 86% of BRGs,
resepectively, compared to pre-treatment paired specimens. Flow cytometry
revealed 8-fold upregulation of beta1 integrin in BRG-derived primary GBM
cells compared to cells from bevacizumab-nave GBMs (PINTRODUCTION:
Antiangiogenic therapies like bevacizumab hold promise for cancer
treatment. However, the development of acquired resistance, including an
aggressive mesenchymal phenotype, limit utility of these agents. We
previously published a report in which microarray and PCR analysis
revealed beta1 integrin to be upregulated in bevacizumab-resistant
glioblastomas (BRGs). Because the beta1 integrin subunit mediates
tumor-microenvironment interactions, we further investigated its role in
mesenchymal-type resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy.METHODS:
Immunostaining of BRG specimens and genetic or pharmacologic beta1
targeting in BRG cells and BRG-derived xenografts were used to study the
role of beta1 integrin in anti-angiogenic therapy resistance in vitro and
in vivo. Cells were transduced to express beta1-GFP fusion protein to
measure beta1 integrin turnover in focal adhesions using fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP).RESULTS: Beta1 integrin and
downstream beta1-effector focal adhesion kinase immunostaining were
upregulated in 75% and 86% of BRGs, resepectively, compared to
pre-treatment paired specimens. Flow cytometry revealed 8-fold
upregulation of beta1 integrin in BRG-derived primary GBM cells compared
to cells from bevacizumab-nave GBMs (P<0.05). FRAP revealed more rapid
beta1 integrin turnover in focal adhesion kinases in BRG-derived cells
than in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells, with 4-fold more time to achieve 37%
recovery in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells than in BRG-derived cells
expressing a beta1-GFP fusion protein (95 versus 398 seconds;
PINTRODUCTION: Antiangiogenic therapies like bevacizumab hold promise for
cancer treatment. However, the development of acquired resistance,
including an aggressive mesenchymal phenotype, limit utility of these
agents. We previously published a report in which microarray and PCR
analysis revealed beta1 integrin to be upregulated in
bevacizumab-resistant glioblastomas (BRGs). Because the beta1 integrin
subunit mediates tumor-microenvironment interactions, we further
investigated its role in mesenchymal-type resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapy.METHODS: Immunostaining of BRG specimens and genetic or
pharmacologic beta1 targeting in BRG cells and BRG-derived xenografts
were used to study the role of beta1 integrin in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance in vitro and in vivo. Cells were transduced to express
beta1-GFP fusion protein to measure beta1 integrin turnover in focal
adhesions using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP).RESULTS: Beta1 integrin and downstream beta1-effector focal
adhesion kinase immunostaining were upregulated in 75% and 86% of BRGs,
resepectively, compared to pre-treatment paired specimens. Flow cytometry
revealed 8-fold upregulation of beta1 integrin in BRG-derived primary GBM
cells compared to cells from bevacizumab-nave GBMs (P<0.05). FRAP
revealed more rapid beta1 integrin turnover in focal adhesion kinases in
BRG-derived cells than in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells, with 4-fold more
time to achieve 37% recovery in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells than in
BRG-derived cells expressing a beta1-GFP fusion protein (95 versus 398
seconds; P<0.05).Hypoxia, which was increased 80% (as evidenced by CA9
immunostaining) (PINTRODUCTION: Antiangiogenic therapies like bevacizumab
hold promise for cancer treatment. However, the development of acquired
resistance, including an aggressive mesenchymal phenotype, limit utility
of these agents. We previously published a report in which microarray and
PCR analysis revealed beta1 integrin to be upregulated in
bevacizumab-resistant glioblastomas (BRGs). Because the beta1 integrin
subunit mediates tumor-microenvironment interactions, we further
investigated its role in mesenchymal-type resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapy.METHODS: Immunostaining of BRG specimens and genetic or
pharmacologic beta1 targeting in BRG cells and BRG-derived xenografts
were used to study the role of beta1 integrin in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance in vitro and in vivo. Cells were transduced to express
beta1-GFP fusion protein to measure beta1 integrin turnover in focal
adhesions using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP).RESULTS: Beta1 integrin and downstream beta1-effector focal
adhesion kinase immunostaining were upregulated in 75% and 86% of BRGs,
resepectively, compared to pre-treatment paired specimens. Flow cytometry
revealed 8-fold upregulation of beta1 integrin in BRG-derived primary GBM
cells compared to cells from bevacizumab-nave GBMs (P<0.05). FRAP
revealed more rapid beta1 integrin turnover in focal adhesion kinases in
BRG-derived cells than in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells, with 4-fold more
time to achieve 37% recovery in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells than in
BRG-derived cells expressing a beta1-GFP fusion protein (95 versus 398
seconds; P<0.05).Hypoxia, which was increased 80% (as evidenced by CA9
immunostaining) (P<0.05) after bevacizumab resistance, increased beta1
integrin expression 30% in cultured bevacizumab-nave GBM cells
(PINTRODUCTION: Antiangiogenic therapies like bevacizumab hold promise
for cancer treatment. However, the development of acquired resistance,
including an aggressive mesenchymal phenotype, limit utility of these
agents. We previously published a report in which microarray and PCR
analysis revealed beta1 integrin to be upregulated in
bevacizumab-resistant glioblastomas (BRGs). Because the beta1 integrin
subunit mediates tumor-microenvironment interactions, we further
investigated its role in mesenchymal-type resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapy.METHODS: Immunostaining of BRG specimens and genetic or
pharmacologic beta1 targeting in BRG cells and BRG-derived xenografts
were used to study the role of beta1 integrin in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance in vitro and in vivo. Cells were transduced to express
beta1-GFP fusion protein to measure beta1 integrin turnover in focal
adhesions using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP).RESULTS: Beta1 integrin and downstream beta1-effector focal
adhesion kinase immunostaining were upregulated in 75% and 86% of BRGs,
resepectively, compared to pre-treatment paired specimens. Flow cytometry
revealed 8-fold upregulation of beta1 integrin in BRG-derived primary GBM
cells compared to cells from bevacizumab-nave GBMs (P<0.05). FRAP
revealed more rapid beta1 integrin turnover in focal adhesion kinases in
BRG-derived cells than in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells, with 4-fold more
time to achieve 37% recovery in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells than in
BRG-derived cells expressing a beta1-GFP fusion protein (95 versus 398
seconds; P<0.05).Hypoxia, which was increased 80% (as evidenced by CA9
immunostaining) (P<0.05) after bevacizumab resistance, increased beta1
integrin expression 30% in cultured bevacizumab-nave GBM cells (P<0.01).
Two hours of incubation with 10 and 100 ng/mL VEGF reduced adhesion of
GBM cells to beta1 ligands fibronectin, collagen IV, and laminin by
10-50% in a dose-dependent fashion (PINTRODUCTION: Antiangiogenic
therapies like bevacizumab hold promise for cancer treatment. However,
the development of acquired resistance, including an aggressive
mesenchymal phenotype, limit utility of these agents. We previously
published a report in which microarray and PCR analysis revealed beta1
integrin to be upregulated in bevacizumab-resistant glioblastomas (BRGs).
Because the beta1 integrin subunit mediates tumor-microenvironment
interactions, we further investigated its role in mesenchymal-type
resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy.METHODS: Immunostaining of BRG
specimens and genetic or pharmacologic beta1 targeting in BRG cells and
BRG-derived xenografts were used to study the role of beta1 integrin in
anti-angiogenic therapy resistance in vitro and in vivo. Cells were
transduced to express beta1-GFP fusion protein to measure beta1 integrin
turnover in focal adhesions using fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching (FRAP).RESULTS: Beta1 integrin and downstream
beta1-effector focal adhesion kinase immunostaining were upregulated in
75% and 86% of BRGs, resepectively, compared to pre-treatment paired
specimens. Flow cytometry revealed 8-fold upregulation of beta1 integrin
in BRG-derived primary GBM cells compared to cells from bevacizumab-nave
GBMs (P<0.05). FRAP revealed more rapid beta1 integrin turnover in focal
adhesion kinases in BRG-derived cells than in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells,
with 4-fold more time to achieve 37% recovery in bevacizumab-nave GBM
cells than in BRG-derived cells expressing a beta1-GFP fusion protein (95
versus 398 seconds; P<0.05).Hypoxia, which was increased 80% (as
evidenced by CA9 immunostaining) (P<0.05) after bevacizumab resistance,
increased beta1 integrin expression 30% in cultured bevacizumab-nave GBM
cells (P<0.01). Two hours of incubation with 10 and 100 ng/mL VEGF
reduced adhesion of GBM cells to beta1 ligands fibronectin, collagen IV,
and laminin by 10-50% in a dose-dependent fashion (P<0.05).BRGs
demonstrated aggressive mesenchymal-like phenotype in vitro and growth of
subcutaneous BRG xenografts was attenuated by beta1 antibody OS2966
(PINTRODUCTION: Antiangiogenic therapies like bevacizumab hold promise
for cancer treatment. However, the development of acquired resistance,
including an aggressive mesenchymal phenotype, limit utility of these
agents. We previously published a report in which microarray and PCR
analysis revealed beta1 integrin to be upregulated in
bevacizumab-resistant glioblastomas (BRGs). Because the beta1 integrin
subunit mediates tumor-microenvironment interactions, we further
investigated its role in mesenchymal-type resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapy.METHODS: Immunostaining of BRG specimens and genetic or
pharmacologic beta1 targeting in BRG cells and BRG-derived xenografts
were used to study the role of beta1 integrin in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance in vitro and in vivo. Cells were transduced to express
beta1-GFP fusion protein to measure beta1 integrin turnover in focal
adhesions using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP).RESULTS: Beta1 integrin and downstream beta1-effector focal
adhesion kinase immunostaining were upregulated in 75% and 86% of BRGs,
resepectively, compared to pre-treatment paired specimens. Flow cytometry
revealed 8-fold upregulation of beta1 integrin in BRG-derived primary GBM
cells compared to cells from bevacizumab-nave GBMs (P<0.05). FRAP
revealed more rapid beta1 integrin turnover in focal adhesion kinases in
BRG-derived cells than in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells, with 4-fold more
time to achieve 37% recovery in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells than in
BRG-derived cells expressing a beta1-GFP fusion protein (95 versus 398
seconds; P<0.05).Hypoxia, which was increased 80% (as evidenced by CA9
immunostaining) (P<0.05) after bevacizumab resistance, increased beta1
integrin expression 30% in cultured bevacizumab-nave GBM cells (P<0.01).
Two hours of incubation with 10 and 100 ng/mL VEGF reduced adhesion of
GBM cells to beta1 ligands fibronectin, collagen IV, and laminin by
10-50% in a dose-dependent fashion (P<0.05).BRGs demonstrated aggressive
mesenchymal-like phenotype in vitro and growth of subcutaneous BRG
xenografts was attenuated by beta1 antibody OS2966 (P<0.05). Addition of
OS2966 allowed 20-fold dose reduction of bevacizumab per cycle in
subcutaneous GBM-derived xenografts (PINTRODUCTION: Antiangiogenic
therapies like bevacizumab hold promise for cancer treatment. However,
the development of acquired resistance, including an aggressive
mesenchymal phenotype, limit utility of these agents. We previously
published a report in which microarray and PCR analysis revealed beta1
integrin to be upregulated in bevacizumab-resistant glioblastomas (BRGs).
Because the beta1 integrin subunit mediates tumor-microenvironment
interactions, we further investigated its role in mesenchymal-type
resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy.METHODS: Immunostaining of BRG
specimens and genetic or pharmacologic beta1 targeting in BRG cells and
BRG-derived xenografts were used to study the role of beta1 integrin in
anti-angiogenic therapy resistance in vitro and in vivo. Cells were
transduced to express beta1-GFP fusion protein to measure beta1 integrin
turnover in focal adhesions using fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching (FRAP).RESULTS: Beta1 integrin and downstream
beta1-effector focal adhesion kinase immunostaining were upregulated in
75% and 86% of BRGs, resepectively, compared to pre-treatment paired
specimens. Flow cytometry revealed 8-fold upregulation of beta1 integrin
in BRG-derived primary GBM cells compared to cells from bevacizumab-nave
GBMs (P<0.05). FRAP revealed more rapid beta1 integrin turnover in focal
adhesion kinases in BRG-derived cells than in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells,
with 4-fold more time to achieve 37% recovery in bevacizumab-nave GBM
cells than in BRG-derived cells expressing a beta1-GFP fusion protein (95
versus 398 seconds; P<0.05).Hypoxia, which was increased 80% (as
evidenced by CA9 immunostaining) (P<0.05) after bevacizumab resistance,
increased beta1 integrin expression 30% in cultured bevacizumab-nave GBM
cells (P<0.01). Two hours of incubation with 10 and 100 ng/mL VEGF
reduced adhesion of GBM cells to beta1 ligands fibronectin, collagen IV,
and laminin by 10-50% in a dose-dependent fashion (P<0.05).BRGs
demonstrated aggressive mesenchymal-like phenotype in vitro and growth of
subcutaneous BRG xenografts was attenuated by beta1 antibody OS2966
(P<0.05). Addition of OS2966 allowed 20-fold dose reduction of
bevacizumab per cycle in subcutaneous GBM-derived xenografts (P<0.05).
Intracranial delivery of OS2966 through osmotic pumps in mice carrying
intracranial BRG-derived xenografts over 28 days increased tumor cell
apoptosis, decreased tumor cell invasiveness, and altered tumor cell
morphology (PINTRODUCTION: Antiangiogenic therapies like bevacizumab hold
promise for cancer treatment. However, the development of acquired
resistance, including an aggressive mesenchymal phenotype, limit utility
of these agents. We previously published a report in which microarray and
PCR analysis revealed beta1 integrin to be upregulated in
bevacizumab-resistant glioblastomas (BRGs). Because the beta1 integrin
subunit mediates tumor-microenvironment interactions, we further
investigated its role in mesenchymal-type resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapy.METHODS: Immunostaining of BRG specimens and genetic or
pharmacologic beta1 targeting in BRG cells and BRG-derived xenografts
were used to study the role of beta1 integrin in anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance in vitro and in vivo. Cells were transduced to express
beta1-GFP fusion protein to measure beta1 integrin turnover in focal
adhesions using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP).RESULTS: Beta1 integrin and downstream beta1-effector focal
adhesion kinase immunostaining were upregulated in 75% and 86% of BRGs,
resepectively, compared to pre-treatment paired specimens. Flow cytometry
revealed 8-fold upregulation of beta1 integrin in BRG-derived primary GBM
cells compared to cells from bevacizumab-nave GBMs (P<0.05). FRAP
revealed more rapid beta1 integrin turnover in focal adhesion kinases in
BRG-derived cells than in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells, with 4-fold more
time to achieve 37% recovery in bevacizumab-nave GBM cells than in
BRG-derived cells expressing a beta1-GFP fusion protein (95 versus 398
seconds; P<0.05).Hypoxia, which was increased 80% (as evidenced by CA9
immunostaining) (P<0.05) after bevacizumab resistance, increased beta1
integrin expression 30% in cultured bevacizumab-nave GBM cells (P<0.01).
Two hours of incubation with 10 and 100 ng/mL VEGF reduced adhesion of
GBM cells to beta1 ligands fibronectin, collagen IV, and laminin by
10-50% in a dose-dependent fashion (P<0.05).BRGs demonstrated aggressive
mesenchymal-like phenotype in vitro and growth of subcutaneous BRG
xenografts was attenuated by beta1 antibody OS2966 (P<0.05). Addition of
OS2966 allowed 20-fold dose reduction of bevacizumab per cycle in
subcutaneous GBM-derived xenografts (P<0.05). Intracranial delivery of
OS2966 through osmotic pumps in mice carrying intracranial BRG-derived
xenografts over 28 days increased tumor cell apoptosis, decreased tumor
cell invasiveness, and altered tumor cell morphology
(P<0.05).CONCLUSIONS: Beta1 integrin expression and turnover in focal
adhesion kinases is upregulated in BRGs due to 2 possible mechanisms -
hypoxic upregulation and bevacizumab-induced VEGF depletion eliminating
VEGF-mediated inhibition of beta1 activity. Beta1 inhibition is well
tolerated in vivo and holds promise for disrupting anti-angiogenic
therapy resistance.

