Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pilot study of long non-coding RNA expression profile in
esophageal cancer.


Background LncRNAs, range from 200 nt to >100 kilobases (kb), demonstrate
a wide range of structural and functional roles through the regulation of
a metastable epigenome and transcriptional network. Recently,
accumulating evidence indicates aberrant expression of LncRNAs may play
an important role in cancer biology.Objective To study the profile of
differentially expressed LncRNAs in esophageal cancer tissues and the
adjacent normal tissues, and to find out the possible function of LncRNAs
involved in the process of tumor development preliminarily.Methods The
total RNA were extracted from esophageal cancer tissues and the adjacent
normal tissues and were quantified by the NanoDrop ND-1000 and standard
denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis. Each sample was amplified and
transcribed into fluorescent cRNA along the entire length of the
transcripts without 3 bias utilizing a random priming method. The labeled
cRNAs were hybridized onto the Human LncRNA Array v2.0 (8 x 60K,
Arraystar) including the global profiling of 33,045 human LncRNAs and
30,215 coding transcripts and then were scanned by the Agilent Scanner
G2505B. Quantile normalization and subsequent data processing were
performed using the GeneSpring GX v11.5.1 software package (Agilent
Technologies). Differentially expressed LncRNAs and mRNAs with
statistical significance were identified through Volcano Plot filtering
or Fold Change filtering. Pathway analysis and GO analysis were applied
to determine the roles of those differentially expressed mRNAs played in
biological pathways or GO terms. Finally, Hierarchical Clustering was
performed to show the distinguishable LncRNAs and mRNAs expression
pattern among samples.Results With a criterion of Fold Change >= 2.0 and
P-value Background LncRNAs, range from 200 nt to >100 kilobases (kb),
demonstrate a wide range of structural and functional roles through the
regulation of a metastable epigenome and transcriptional network.
Recently, accumulating evidence indicates aberrant expression of LncRNAs
may play an important role in cancer biology.Objective To study the
profile of differentially expressed LncRNAs in esophageal cancer tissues
and the adjacent normal tissues, and to find out the possible function of
LncRNAs involved in the process of tumor development
preliminarily.Methods The total RNA were extracted from esophageal cancer
tissues and the adjacent normal tissues and were quantified by the
NanoDrop ND-1000 and standard denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis.
Each sample was amplified and transcribed into fluorescent cRNA along the
entire length of the transcripts without 3 bias utilizing a random
priming method. The labeled cRNAs were hybridized onto the Human LncRNA
Array v2.0 (8 x 60K, Arraystar) including the global profiling of 33,045
human LncRNAs and 30,215 coding transcripts and then were scanned by the
Agilent Scanner G2505B. Quantile normalization and subsequent data
processing were performed using the GeneSpring GX v11.5.1 software
package (Agilent Technologies). Differentially expressed LncRNAs and
mRNAs with statistical significance were identified through Volcano Plot
filtering or Fold Change filtering. Pathway analysis and GO analysis were
applied to determine the roles of those differentially expressed mRNAs
played in biological pathways or GO terms. Finally, Hierarchical
Clustering was performed to show the distinguishable LncRNAs and mRNAs
expression pattern among samples.Results With a criterion of Fold Change
>= 2.0 and P-value <= 0.05, 1019 of differentially expressed LncRNAs were
identified in esophageal cancer tissues, including 399 of overexpressed
LncRNAs and 620 of downexpressed LncRNAs. The top 10 of aberrant LncRNAs
were AK022914, chr10:127700955-127703336, LOC284233, RP11-38M15.6, RNU12,
FAM25E, C21orf81, AK095500, AC009336.24, and RP11-397A15.4. Using GENCODE
annotation of human genes, 11 of differentially expressed enhancer-like
LncRNAs and their nearby coding genes were identified. In addition, there
were 25 of differentially expressed lincRNAs and nearby coding gene pairs
associated with esophageal cancer according to John Rinn reported
lincRNAs profiling. The differentially expressed transcripts were further
identified and the matched coding genes adjacent to differentially
expressed LncRNAs (distance Background LncRNAs, range from 200 nt to >100
kilobases (kb), demonstrate a wide range of structural and functional
roles through the regulation of a metastable epigenome and
transcriptional network. Recently, accumulating evidence indicates
aberrant expression of LncRNAs may play an important role in cancer
biology.Objective To study the profile of differentially expressed
LncRNAs in esophageal cancer tissues and the adjacent normal tissues, and
to find out the possible function of LncRNAs involved in the process of
tumor development preliminarily.Methods The total RNA were extracted from
esophageal cancer tissues and the adjacent normal tissues and were
quantified by the NanoDrop ND-1000 and standard denaturing agarose gel
electrophoresis. Each sample was amplified and transcribed into
fluorescent cRNA along the entire length of the transcripts without 3
bias utilizing a random priming method. The labeled cRNAs were hybridized
onto the Human LncRNA Array v2.0 (8 x 60K, Arraystar) including the
global profiling of 33,045 human LncRNAs and 30,215 coding transcripts
and then were scanned by the Agilent Scanner G2505B. Quantile
normalization and subsequent data processing were performed using the
GeneSpring GX v11.5.1 software package (Agilent Technologies).
Differentially expressed LncRNAs and mRNAs with statistical significance
were identified through Volcano Plot filtering or Fold Change filtering.
Pathway analysis and GO analysis were applied to determine the roles of
those differentially expressed mRNAs played in biological pathways or GO
terms. Finally, Hierarchical Clustering was performed to show the
distinguishable LncRNAs and mRNAs expression pattern among
samples.Results With a criterion of Fold Change >= 2.0 and P-value <=
0.05, 1019 of differentially expressed LncRNAs were identified in
esophageal cancer tissues, including 399 of overexpressed LncRNAs and 620
of downexpressed LncRNAs. The top 10 of aberrant LncRNAs were AK022914,
chr10:127700955-127703336, LOC284233, RP11-38M15.6, RNU12, FAM25E,
C21orf81, AK095500, AC009336.24, and RP11-397A15.4. Using GENCODE
annotation of human genes, 11 of differentially expressed enhancer-like
LncRNAs and their nearby coding genes were identified. In addition, there
were 25 of differentially expressed lincRNAs and nearby coding gene pairs
associated with esophageal cancer according to John Rinn reported
lincRNAs profiling. The differentially expressed transcripts were further
identified and the matched coding genes adjacent to differentially
expressed LncRNAs (distance < 300kb) showed participating in the
processes of cell cycle, cell differentiation, protease activities, and
et al according to GO analysis and Pathway analysis.Conclusions The
results suggests a specific profile of differentially expressed LncRNAs
in esophageal cancer, which function prediction implies the broad
participation in the processes of oncogenesis.Citation Format: Ran Liu,
Miao Yang, Juan Liao, Yi Wang, Enchun Pan, Wei Guo, Lihong Yin, Yuepu Pu.
A pilot study of long non-coding RNA expression profile in esophageal
cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1835.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1835

