Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the IL-13 receptor alpha 2 with novel antibody-drug
conjugates for the treatment of cancer.


The IL-13 receptor alpha 2 (IL-13R2) is a transmembrane protein that is
highly expressed on several cancers including glioblastoma, ovarian,
pancreatic cancers. It can internalize after binding to its ligand IL-13
or in response to ligation with an antibody. In addition, we have
discovered that IL-13R2 is up-regulated in tumor cell lines that are
resistant to chemotherapeutic drugs. These properties make IL-13R2 an
attractive target for antibody-drug conjugate (ADC), an emerging modality
of molecularly targeted cancer therapies. A humanized monoclonal
antibody, hAB08 with an affinity of 0.17 nM to the soluble recombined
hIL-13R2, was conjugated with two novel microtubule inhibitors (MTIs),
MTI1 and MTI2, developed by Pfizer. In vitro cytotoxicity of the
conjugates was tested against IL-13R2 positive and negative cell lines.
These conjugates were effective against the IL-13R2 positive cell lines
(PC3MM2 and A375), having an IC50 ranging from 1.1 to 3.8 ng Ab/mL.
However, both of the ADCs were not active against the IL-13R2 negative
H460 cell line. When treating mice with established human PC3MM2 and A375
tumors, these conjugates were efficacious at 3 mg/kg in reducing tumor
growth. In the PC3MM2 model, treatment with hAB08-MTI1 and hAB08-MTI2
resulted in 5 out of 8 or 3 out of 8 animals without measurable tumors at
Day 76, respectively. In contrast, the vehicle control group and control
ADC (hIgG8.8-MTI1 and hIgG8.8-MTI2) groups were terminated at Day 15, 15,
19 due to the large size of tumors, respectively. These in vitro and in
vivo results demonstrate potent antitumor activities of hAB08-MTI1 and
hAB08-MTI2 against IL-13R2 positive tumors. The findings support the
development of novel hAB08-MTI1 or hAB08-MTI2 ADCs as a molecularly
targeted therapy for cancer patients that are resistant to standard
chemotherapy.

