Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salmonella typhimurium A1-R inhibits aggressive pancreatic tumor
growth and prolongs survival.


Salmonella typhimurium (A1-R) has been previously shown to target
multiple tumor types. A1-R has been shown to prevent metastasis of the
XPA-1 human pancreatic cancer cell line in nude mice. The aim of this
study is the anti-tumor efficacy of A1-R against a more aggressive
pancreatic cell line. Human MiaPaCa2 pancreatic cancer cells, expressing
RFP, were cultured in vitro and subsequently infected with A1-R. Efficacy
of infection was noted by intracellular bacteria with subsequent cell
lysis and apoptosis. MiaPaCa2-RFP was implanted subcutaneously in nude
mice. After tumor engraftment, the mice were subjected to intravenous
therapy with A1-R (5107 CFU) once a week for 3 weeks. The tumors were
harvested and weighed after the treatment period. MiaPaCA2-RFP were
subsequently surgically implanted orthotopically. Treatment was initiated
2 weeks later. Mice were treated with intravenous A1-R (5107 CFU) once a
week for 6 weeks, after which survival and tumor growth were recorded. In
the subcutaneous tumor model, significant decreases in the rate of tumor
growth (p = 0.049) and tumor size (p =0.004) were observed upon
termination. In the orthotopic model, a significant decrease in the rate
of tumor growth (p = 0.01) and increased survival was observed (p =
0.014). The mean survival of the treatment group and the control group
was 49 days and 35 days, respectively. None of the mice showed any
adverse events or weight loss from bacterial therapy. Further
investigation will be expanded to other pancreatic cancer cell lines and
human patient tumorgrafts in combination with chemotherapy with the goal
of cure of pancreatic cancer.

