Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salinomycin reduced breast cancer stem cell properties by reducing
SOX2 and OCT4.


Salinomycin isolated from Streptomyces albus and a potassium ionophore.
It has been used to eliminate bacteria, fungi and parasites. Also, Cancer
stem cells (CSCs) are a subpopulation of cells within the tumor that has
ability to self-renew and undergo differentiation to phenotypically
diverse cell populations. So, CSCs are involved in metastasis,
chemoresistance and even cancer relapse. Recently, there are many
evidences to CSCs subpopulations enhance capability of DNA repair and
reduce the apoptosis. Furthermore, salinomycin has been reported to act
as selective breast cancer stem cell inhibitor based on its property of
reducing the cancer stem cell and to induce the apoptosis in cancer cell.
Therefore, we investigated the effect of salinomycin on breast cancer
stem cells.First, Mammosphere formation assay was performed to observe
stem cell-like property after salinomycin treat in anchorage-independent
state. We confirmed salinomycin reduces number and size of mammosphere at
3, 6, 9 day. Also, we compared mRNA expressing level of stem cell marker
such as SOX2 and OCT4 by RT-PCR. Consequently, salinomycin was the
down-regulated stem cell marker mRNA level as well as protein level.To
confirm the reduction of the side population level, we performed FACS
analysis using CD44+ and CD24- markers. Results by FACS analysis revealed
that salinomycin treated with breast cancer stem cell reduced stemness by
downregulating CD44+/CD24- population. Consistently, when mammosphere
implanted into the mammary fat pads of BALB/c female nude mice cleared of
endogenous epithelium, the tumor size was decreased. In conclusion, we
concluded that effect of salinomycin to reduce stemness is mediated by
downregulation of SOX2 and OCT4 in human breast cancer cell.

