Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) as diagnostic biomarker in
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) patients .


Clinicians face important pitfalls in the treatment of Renal cell
carcinoma (RCC), such as absence of symptoms in early stages of the
disease, its high metastatic potential and its resistance to conventional
therapy. These facts emphasize the requirement of early diagnosis to
optimize the chance of cure. ccRCC, the most common histological type of
RCC, is considered a cell metabolic disease which develops from the
activation of pseudohypoxic pathways. The transmembrane enzyme CAIX,
involved in pH homeostasis and expressed in ccRCC tumors, is considered
to be one of the best cellular biomarkers of hypoxia. Our aim was to
study the role of serum CAIX as diagnostic biomarker of ccRCC, taking
into account that serum contains a rich untapped source of
disease-specific information.Employing a quantitative ELISA test (R&D
System), the expression of serum CAIX of 30 ccRCC patients and 16 healthy
controls was evaluated. Samples from cancer patients were taken before
surgery, without any previous treatment (S1), and after tumor removal
(S2). ccRCC patients showed significantly elevated values of serum CAIX
(Median 75.89 pg/ml, range 30,8-1482,9) respect to the levels observed in
healthy controls (23.29, 0.0-79.9). On the basis of the optimal cut-off
point of 34,821 pg/ml serum CAIX, 22/30 cancer patients showed high
values of CAIX versus only 1/15 healthy controls (pClinicians face
important pitfalls in the treatment of Renal cell carcinoma (RCC), such
as absence of symptoms in early stages of the disease, its high
metastatic potential and its resistance to conventional therapy. These
facts emphasize the requirement of early diagnosis to optimize the chance
of cure. ccRCC, the most common histological type of RCC, is considered a
cell metabolic disease which develops from the activation of
pseudohypoxic pathways. The transmembrane enzyme CAIX, involved in pH
homeostasis and expressed in ccRCC tumors, is considered to be one of the
best cellular biomarkers of hypoxia. Our aim was to study the role of
serum CAIX as diagnostic biomarker of ccRCC, taking into account that
serum contains a rich untapped source of disease-specific
information.Employing a quantitative ELISA test (R&D System), the
expression of serum CAIX of 30 ccRCC patients and 16 healthy controls was
evaluated. Samples from cancer patients were taken before surgery,
without any previous treatment (S1), and after tumor removal (S2). ccRCC
patients showed significantly elevated values of serum CAIX (Median 75.89
pg/ml, range 30,8-1482,9) respect to the levels observed in healthy
controls (23.29, 0.0-79.9). On the basis of the optimal cut-off point of
34,821 pg/ml serum CAIX, 22/30 cancer patients showed high values of CAIX
versus only 1/15 healthy controls (p< 0.01, Chi square test). The assay
of serum CAIX expression in our population exhibited a sensitivity of
93.8% and a specificity of 73.3%. Besides, we demonstrated that Stage I
ccRCC patients showed significantly lower levels of the circulating
enzyme (Md, range expressed in pg/ml CAIX: Stage I= 45.3, 30.8-107.9 vs
Stage IV=102.9, 36.2-1482.9; MW test pClinicians face important pitfalls
in the treatment of Renal cell carcinoma (RCC), such as absence of
symptoms in early stages of the disease, its high metastatic potential
and its resistance to conventional therapy. These facts emphasize the
requirement of early diagnosis to optimize the chance of cure. ccRCC, the
most common histological type of RCC, is considered a cell metabolic
disease which develops from the activation of pseudohypoxic pathways. The
transmembrane enzyme CAIX, involved in pH homeostasis and expressed in
ccRCC tumors, is considered to be one of the best cellular biomarkers of
hypoxia. Our aim was to study the role of serum CAIX as diagnostic
biomarker of ccRCC, taking into account that serum contains a rich
untapped source of disease-specific information.Employing a quantitative
ELISA test (R&D System), the expression of serum CAIX of 30 ccRCC
patients and 16 healthy controls was evaluated. Samples from cancer
patients were taken before surgery, without any previous treatment (S1),
and after tumor removal (S2). ccRCC patients showed significantly
elevated values of serum CAIX (Median 75.89 pg/ml, range 30,8-1482,9)
respect to the levels observed in healthy controls (23.29, 0.0-79.9). On
the basis of the optimal cut-off point of 34,821 pg/ml serum CAIX, 22/30
cancer patients showed high values of CAIX versus only 1/15 healthy
controls (p< 0.01, Chi square test). The assay of serum CAIX expression
in our population exhibited a sensitivity of 93.8% and a specificity of
73.3%. Besides, we demonstrated that Stage I ccRCC patients showed
significantly lower levels of the circulating enzyme (Md, range expressed
in pg/ml CAIX: Stage I= 45.3, 30.8-107.9 vs Stage IV=102.9, 36.2-1482.9;
MW test p<0.001). Then, we analyzed whether already established
clinicopathological variables in RCC were associated with serum CAIX
levels, finding a remarkable correlation with tumor size (Spearman test
pClinicians face important pitfalls in the treatment of Renal cell
carcinoma (RCC), such as absence of symptoms in early stages of the
disease, its high metastatic potential and its resistance to conventional
therapy. These facts emphasize the requirement of early diagnosis to
optimize the chance of cure. ccRCC, the most common histological type of
RCC, is considered a cell metabolic disease which develops from the
activation of pseudohypoxic pathways. The transmembrane enzyme CAIX,
involved in pH homeostasis and expressed in ccRCC tumors, is considered
to be one of the best cellular biomarkers of hypoxia. Our aim was to
study the role of serum CAIX as diagnostic biomarker of ccRCC, taking
into account that serum contains a rich untapped source of
disease-specific information.Employing a quantitative ELISA test (R&D
System), the expression of serum CAIX of 30 ccRCC patients and 16 healthy
controls was evaluated. Samples from cancer patients were taken before
surgery, without any previous treatment (S1), and after tumor removal
(S2). ccRCC patients showed significantly elevated values of serum CAIX
(Median 75.89 pg/ml, range 30,8-1482,9) respect to the levels observed in
healthy controls (23.29, 0.0-79.9). On the basis of the optimal cut-off
point of 34,821 pg/ml serum CAIX, 22/30 cancer patients showed high
values of CAIX versus only 1/15 healthy controls (p< 0.01, Chi square
test). The assay of serum CAIX expression in our population exhibited a
sensitivity of 93.8% and a specificity of 73.3%. Besides, we demonstrated
that Stage I ccRCC patients showed significantly lower levels of the
circulating enzyme (Md, range expressed in pg/ml CAIX: Stage I= 45.3,
30.8-107.9 vs Stage IV=102.9, 36.2-1482.9; MW test p<0.001). Then, we
analyzed whether already established clinicopathological variables in RCC
were associated with serum CAIX levels, finding a remarkable correlation
with tumor size (Spearman test p<0.01). Then, we investigated the
usefulness of serum CAIX in the follow-up of these patients.
Interestingly in 20/30 (66.7%) ccRCC patients values of CAIX decreased
after tumor removal (S2 vs S1).We conclude that serum CAIX could be a
useful diagnostic biomarker in ccRCC patients. This would be of relevant
importance as there is a lack of molecular biomarkers for this pathology.

