Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioenergetic changes in glycolysis, Kreb's cycle, and
glutaminolysis in pancreatic cells treated with mitochondria-targeted
cationic drugs.


Human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an incurable and highly
aggressive human cancer. Current chemotherapy provides a slight increase
in survival. New therapeutic strategies to treat PDAC are desperately
needed. In this study we used a relatively non-toxic
mitochondria-targeted cationic nitroxide (Mito-CP) in combination with
antiglycolytic agents (2-deoxyglucose, 2-DG) to selectively inhibit
pancreatic cancer cell proliferation. We used high-throughput XF24
extracellular flux analyzer and mass spectrometry-based metabolomics
approach to investigate cellular bioenergetics changes in pancreatic
cancer cells (MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells). Results indicate that at
nanomolar concentrations, Mito-CP alone potently inhibited proliferation
of MiaPaCa-2 cells and synergized with 2-DG in inhibiting intracellular
ATP levels. In the presence of glycolytic inhibitors, i.e. 2-DG or
3-bromopyruvate, Mito-CP exhibited enhanced toxicity in both pancreatic
cell lines. LC-MS-based metabolomics studies indicate that Mito-CP
inhibits Kreb's cycle metabolites (citric acid, cis-aconitic and
isocitric acids) but significantly enhances intracellular glutamine,
alpha-ketoglutarate, succinate, fumarate, and malate. This enhancement is
abolished in glutamine-free media. We conclude that strategies to
modulate bioenergetic metabolism with relatively non-toxic
mitochondria-targeted nitroxides in combination with glycolysis or
glutaminolysis inhibitors may provide a novel route for treating patients
with PDAC with minimal toxic side effects.

