Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduction in lobular but not ductal hyperplasia by the PGR
inhibitor ORG33628 in a CYP19A1 overexpressing mouse model of breast
cancer risk.


Background: The Women's Health Initiative demonstrated increased breast
cancer risk in women exposed to estrogen with progesterone. Genetically
engineered mice with conditional mammary epithelial cell targeted
Cytochrome P45019A1 (CYP19A1/aromatase) over-expression
(tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice) tested the impact of a selective
progesterone receptor (PGR) inhibitor, ORG33628, on mammary hyperplasia
and cancer development. This model demonstrates increased percentages of
PGR+ mammary epithelial cells (MECs) cells at the hyperplastic stage and
triple negative (Estrogen Receptor (ER)-, PGR-, Receptor tyrosine-protein
kinase erbB-2 (HER2/neu)-) adenocarcinomas.Purpose: Test if ORG33628
reduces mammary hyperplasia and blocks cancer formation in
tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice.Methods: Female tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA
mice were implanted subcutaneously with a pellet containing either
ORG33628 7.5mg (60-day release) or placebo at age 10m. A smaller study
tested ORG33628 in CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA/trp53+/- mice. Mice were necropsied
at age 12m and mammary tissue examined to determine if ORG33628 altered
lobular/ductal hyperplasia prevalence or blocked progression to
hyperplastic alveolar nodules (HANs) or cancer. Immunohistochemistry
(IHC) was employed to compare MEC proliferative index (PI) (Ki-67) and
percentage of MECs expressing nuclear-localized ER/PGR. An uterotropic
assay tested if ORG33628 blocked estrogen-induced changes in the
uterus/cervix. Ovariectomized 6w old mice were implanted subcutaneously
with pellets of 0.72g 17-estradiol and either ORG33628 or placebo,
necropsied 3 days later, and uterine weight, PI and ER/PGR expression
compared in uterine and cervical epithelium and stroma.Results: ORG33628
treatment reduced lobular hyperplasia prevalence (Fisher's exact,
pBackground: The Women's Health Initiative demonstrated increased breast
cancer risk in women exposed to estrogen with progesterone. Genetically
engineered mice with conditional mammary epithelial cell targeted
Cytochrome P45019A1 (CYP19A1/aromatase) over-expression
(tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice) tested the impact of a selective
progesterone receptor (PGR) inhibitor, ORG33628, on mammary hyperplasia
and cancer development. This model demonstrates increased percentages of
PGR+ mammary epithelial cells (MECs) cells at the hyperplastic stage and
triple negative (Estrogen Receptor (ER)-, PGR-, Receptor tyrosine-protein
kinase erbB-2 (HER2/neu)-) adenocarcinomas.Purpose: Test if ORG33628
reduces mammary hyperplasia and blocks cancer formation in
tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice.Methods: Female tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA
mice were implanted subcutaneously with a pellet containing either
ORG33628 7.5mg (60-day release) or placebo at age 10m. A smaller study
tested ORG33628 in CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA/trp53+/- mice. Mice were necropsied
at age 12m and mammary tissue examined to determine if ORG33628 altered
lobular/ductal hyperplasia prevalence or blocked progression to
hyperplastic alveolar nodules (HANs) or cancer. Immunohistochemistry
(IHC) was employed to compare MEC proliferative index (PI) (Ki-67) and
percentage of MECs expressing nuclear-localized ER/PGR. An uterotropic
assay tested if ORG33628 blocked estrogen-induced changes in the
uterus/cervix. Ovariectomized 6w old mice were implanted subcutaneously
with pellets of 0.72g 17-estradiol and either ORG33628 or placebo,
necropsied 3 days later, and uterine weight, PI and ER/PGR expression
compared in uterine and cervical epithelium and stroma.Results: ORG33628
treatment reduced lobular hyperplasia prevalence (Fisher's exact, p<0.05)
and percentages of PGR+ MEC (9.3% to 5.2%, t-test, pBackground: The
Women's Health Initiative demonstrated increased breast cancer risk in
women exposed to estrogen with progesterone. Genetically engineered mice
with conditional mammary epithelial cell targeted Cytochrome P45019A1
(CYP19A1/aromatase) over-expression (tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice)
tested the impact of a selective progesterone receptor (PGR) inhibitor,
ORG33628, on mammary hyperplasia and cancer development. This model
demonstrates increased percentages of PGR+ mammary epithelial cells
(MECs) cells at the hyperplastic stage and triple negative (Estrogen
Receptor (ER)-, PGR-, Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2
(HER2/neu)-) adenocarcinomas.Purpose: Test if ORG33628 reduces mammary
hyperplasia and blocks cancer formation in tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA
mice.Methods: Female tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice were implanted
subcutaneously with a pellet containing either ORG33628 7.5mg (60-day
release) or placebo at age 10m. A smaller study tested ORG33628 in
CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA/trp53+/- mice. Mice were necropsied at age 12m and
mammary tissue examined to determine if ORG33628 altered lobular/ductal
hyperplasia prevalence or blocked progression to hyperplastic alveolar
nodules (HANs) or cancer. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was employed to
compare MEC proliferative index (PI) (Ki-67) and percentage of MECs
expressing nuclear-localized ER/PGR. An uterotropic assay tested if
ORG33628 blocked estrogen-induced changes in the uterus/cervix.
Ovariectomized 6w old mice were implanted subcutaneously with pellets of
0.72g 17-estradiol and either ORG33628 or placebo, necropsied 3 days
later, and uterine weight, PI and ER/PGR expression compared in uterine
and cervical epithelium and stroma.Results: ORG33628 treatment reduced
lobular hyperplasia prevalence (Fisher's exact, p<0.05) and percentages
of PGR+ MEC (9.3% to 5.2%, t-test, p<0.05), but did not alter ductal
hyperplasia or HAN prevalence or block cancer formation. ORG33628 reduced
estrogen-induced uterine weight gain (t-test, pBackground: The Women's
Health Initiative demonstrated increased breast cancer risk in women
exposed to estrogen with progesterone. Genetically engineered mice with
conditional mammary epithelial cell targeted Cytochrome P45019A1
(CYP19A1/aromatase) over-expression (tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice)
tested the impact of a selective progesterone receptor (PGR) inhibitor,
ORG33628, on mammary hyperplasia and cancer development. This model
demonstrates increased percentages of PGR+ mammary epithelial cells
(MECs) cells at the hyperplastic stage and triple negative (Estrogen
Receptor (ER)-, PGR-, Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2
(HER2/neu)-) adenocarcinomas.Purpose: Test if ORG33628 reduces mammary
hyperplasia and blocks cancer formation in tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA
mice.Methods: Female tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice were implanted
subcutaneously with a pellet containing either ORG33628 7.5mg (60-day
release) or placebo at age 10m. A smaller study tested ORG33628 in
CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA/trp53+/- mice. Mice were necropsied at age 12m and
mammary tissue examined to determine if ORG33628 altered lobular/ductal
hyperplasia prevalence or blocked progression to hyperplastic alveolar
nodules (HANs) or cancer. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was employed to
compare MEC proliferative index (PI) (Ki-67) and percentage of MECs
expressing nuclear-localized ER/PGR. An uterotropic assay tested if
ORG33628 blocked estrogen-induced changes in the uterus/cervix.
Ovariectomized 6w old mice were implanted subcutaneously with pellets of
0.72g 17-estradiol and either ORG33628 or placebo, necropsied 3 days
later, and uterine weight, PI and ER/PGR expression compared in uterine
and cervical epithelium and stroma.Results: ORG33628 treatment reduced
lobular hyperplasia prevalence (Fisher's exact, p<0.05) and percentages
of PGR+ MEC (9.3% to 5.2%, t-test, p<0.05), but did not alter ductal
hyperplasia or HAN prevalence or block cancer formation. ORG33628 reduced
estrogen-induced uterine weight gain (t-test, p<0.05) and PI in cervical
epithelium (38.6% to 15%, t-test, pBackground: The Women's Health
Initiative demonstrated increased breast cancer risk in women exposed to
estrogen with progesterone. Genetically engineered mice with conditional
mammary epithelial cell targeted Cytochrome P45019A1 (CYP19A1/aromatase)
over-expression (tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice) tested the impact of a
selective progesterone receptor (PGR) inhibitor, ORG33628, on mammary
hyperplasia and cancer development. This model demonstrates increased
percentages of PGR+ mammary epithelial cells (MECs) cells at the
hyperplastic stage and triple negative (Estrogen Receptor (ER)-, PGR-,
Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2 (HER2/neu)-)
adenocarcinomas.Purpose: Test if ORG33628 reduces mammary hyperplasia and
blocks cancer formation in tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice.Methods: Female
tet-op-CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA mice were implanted subcutaneously with a pellet
containing either ORG33628 7.5mg (60-day release) or placebo at age 10m.
A smaller study tested ORG33628 in CYP19A1/MMTV-rtTA/trp53+/- mice. Mice
were necropsied at age 12m and mammary tissue examined to determine if
ORG33628 altered lobular/ductal hyperplasia prevalence or blocked
progression to hyperplastic alveolar nodules (HANs) or cancer.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was employed to compare MEC proliferative
index (PI) (Ki-67) and percentage of MECs expressing nuclear-localized
ER/PGR. An uterotropic assay tested if ORG33628 blocked estrogen-induced
changes in the uterus/cervix. Ovariectomized 6w old mice were implanted
subcutaneously with pellets of 0.72g 17-estradiol and either ORG33628 or
placebo, necropsied 3 days later, and uterine weight, PI and ER/PGR
expression compared in uterine and cervical epithelium and
stroma.Results: ORG33628 treatment reduced lobular hyperplasia prevalence
(Fisher's exact, p<0.05) and percentages of PGR+ MEC (9.3% to 5.2%,
t-test, p<0.05), but did not alter ductal hyperplasia or HAN prevalence
or block cancer formation. ORG33628 reduced estrogen-induced uterine
weight gain (t-test, p<0.05) and PI in cervical epithelium (38.6% to 15%,
t-test, p<0.05) in the uterotropic assay.Conclusions: ORG33628 reduced
lobular but not ductal hyperplasia and did not prevent progression to
HANs or cancer. In normal development, estrogen plays the more important
role in ductal development and progesterone in lobular development
paralleling the isolated impact of ORG33628 on lobular disease here.
These results suggest that reducing ductal hyperplasia may be a
prerequisite for cancer prevention or that reducing lobular hyperplasia
at 10m in this model is too late due to the presence of triple negative
cancer progenitor cells.Support: P30CA051008, RO1CA112176,
T32CA009686-15, KG080359. Content solely responsibility of authors and
does not necessarily represent official NCI/NIH views.

