Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of AURKA- and PTPRJ-interacting human colorectal
cancer susceptibility alleles.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) causes nearly 50,000 deaths in the United States
each year and therefore represents the third leading cause of
cancer-related deaths. The identification of susceptibility variants that
interact to modulate risk for sporadic CRC would have immense value as a
tool to identify individuals with increased genetic predisposition to
disease. Polymorphisms in Aurora Kinase A (AURKA) and Protein Tyrosine
Phosphatase Receptor Type J (PTPRJ) have been shown to increase CRC risk
in human case-control studies. Crosses between mice resistant and
susceptible to chemically induced skin cancer have led to the
identification of two loci, Skts1 and Skts5, each of which statistically
interacts with the Aurka locus to promote skin cancer in a murine model.
Using a similar approach, the mouse Ptprj locus has been shown to
interact synergistically with the loci Scc5 and Scc13 to increase colon
cancer susceptibility. Array comparative genomic hybridization studies in
human colorectal tumor DNAs have shown high frequencies of genomic copy
number gains or losses at the human orthologs of Skts1, Skts5, Scc5, and
Scc13. Our goal is to identify sporadic CRC risk variants and to
characterize genetic interactions at the AURKA- and PTPRJ-interacting
loci. We hypothesize that the human orthologs of these mouse CRC
susceptibility loci will interact genetically with AURKA and PTPRJ to
influence CRC risk. By generating normal colon transcriptome data from
CRC-susceptible and CRCresistant mouse strains using RNA-Seq, we
prioritized candidate genes on the basis of differential expression,
differential splicing or potentially functional polymorphisms. Tagging
single nucleotide polymorphisms (tagSNPs) for the human orthologs of
these genes were tested for allele-specific imbalance by Sequenom
MassARRAY quantitative genotyping of 194 paired human colorectal
tumor/non-tumor DNA samples. TagSNPs exhibiting point-wise p-values
Colorectal cancer (CRC) causes nearly 50,000 deaths in the United States
each year and therefore represents the third leading cause of
cancer-related deaths. The identification of susceptibility variants that
interact to modulate risk for sporadic CRC would have immense value as a
tool to identify individuals with increased genetic predisposition to
disease. Polymorphisms in Aurora Kinase A (AURKA) and Protein Tyrosine
Phosphatase Receptor Type J (PTPRJ) have been shown to increase CRC risk
in human case-control studies. Crosses between mice resistant and
susceptible to chemically induced skin cancer have led to the
identification of two loci, Skts1 and Skts5, each of which statistically
interacts with the Aurka locus to promote skin cancer in a murine model.
Using a similar approach, the mouse Ptprj locus has been shown to
interact synergistically with the loci Scc5 and Scc13 to increase colon
cancer susceptibility. Array comparative genomic hybridization studies in
human colorectal tumor DNAs have shown high frequencies of genomic copy
number gains or losses at the human orthologs of Skts1, Skts5, Scc5, and
Scc13. Our goal is to identify sporadic CRC risk variants and to
characterize genetic interactions at the AURKA- and PTPRJ-interacting
loci. We hypothesize that the human orthologs of these mouse CRC
susceptibility loci will interact genetically with AURKA and PTPRJ to
influence CRC risk. By generating normal colon transcriptome data from
CRC-susceptible and CRCresistant mouse strains using RNA-Seq, we
prioritized candidate genes on the basis of differential expression,
differential splicing or potentially functional polymorphisms. Tagging
single nucleotide polymorphisms (tagSNPs) for the human orthologs of
these genes were tested for allele-specific imbalance by Sequenom
MassARRAY quantitative genotyping of 194 paired human colorectal
tumor/non-tumor DNA samples. TagSNPs exhibiting point-wise p-values < 0.1
were further tested in a replication sample set of 296 paired colorectal
tumor/non-tumor DNA samples. Among 900 tagSNPs tested, 75 polymorphisms
reproducibly showed evidence of allele-specific imbalance (point-wise
p-values Colorectal cancer (CRC) causes nearly 50,000 deaths in the
United States each year and therefore represents the third leading cause
of cancer-related deaths. The identification of susceptibility variants
that interact to modulate risk for sporadic CRC would have immense value
as a tool to identify individuals with increased genetic predisposition
to disease. Polymorphisms in Aurora Kinase A (AURKA) and Protein Tyrosine
Phosphatase Receptor Type J (PTPRJ) have been shown to increase CRC risk
in human case-control studies. Crosses between mice resistant and
susceptible to chemically induced skin cancer have led to the
identification of two loci, Skts1 and Skts5, each of which statistically
interacts with the Aurka locus to promote skin cancer in a murine model.
Using a similar approach, the mouse Ptprj locus has been shown to
interact synergistically with the loci Scc5 and Scc13 to increase colon
cancer susceptibility. Array comparative genomic hybridization studies in
human colorectal tumor DNAs have shown high frequencies of genomic copy
number gains or losses at the human orthologs of Skts1, Skts5, Scc5, and
Scc13. Our goal is to identify sporadic CRC risk variants and to
characterize genetic interactions at the AURKA- and PTPRJ-interacting
loci. We hypothesize that the human orthologs of these mouse CRC
susceptibility loci will interact genetically with AURKA and PTPRJ to
influence CRC risk. By generating normal colon transcriptome data from
CRC-susceptible and CRCresistant mouse strains using RNA-Seq, we
prioritized candidate genes on the basis of differential expression,
differential splicing or potentially functional polymorphisms. Tagging
single nucleotide polymorphisms (tagSNPs) for the human orthologs of
these genes were tested for allele-specific imbalance by Sequenom
MassARRAY quantitative genotyping of 194 paired human colorectal
tumor/non-tumor DNA samples. TagSNPs exhibiting point-wise p-values < 0.1
were further tested in a replication sample set of 296 paired colorectal
tumor/non-tumor DNA samples. Among 900 tagSNPs tested, 75 polymorphisms
reproducibly showed evidence of allele-specific imbalance (point-wise
p-values < 0.05). Our data indicate that allele-specific imbalance occurs
in candidate genes (e.g. KLF13, HDAC9, FBN2, SNX10 and PRDM5) whose
murine orthologs map to cancer susceptibility loci. Our next step is to
explore expression patterns of these candidate genes in human colorectal
tumor and non-tumor tissues and to investigate the effects of gene
silencing or overexpression on critical cancer phenotypes such as
proliferation, apoptosis, and migration in mouse and human colon cancer
cell lines. Additionally, an ongoing human case-control association study
of 6000 colorectal cancer cases and 6000 controls is expected to yield
results shortly, which will be presented at the 2013 AACR meeting.

