Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generating preclinical models to assess bone marrow toxicity
induced by the PARP inhibitor olaparib in combination with chemotherapy.


Inhibitors of the DNA damage response (DDR) provide an exciting
opportunity as new anti-cancer therapies. A prominent example is
olaparib, an inhibitor of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1), that
has shown potential as a monotherapy for tumours bearing BRCA1/2 defects
in clinical trials. Apart from monotherapy based on the concept of
synthetic lethality, PARP inhibitors also have the potential to provide
additional benefit when used in combination with DNA damage-inducing
chemotherapies. In the clinic, however, this approach has been
challenging due to enhanced bone marrow toxicity.Our aim is to generate
preclinical models to provide a better understanding of the mechanisms
for this limiting bone marrow toxicity. We characterized in vitro
responses to DNA damage induced by IR and chemotherapy in human
hematopoietic multipotent progenitors and mesenchymal stem cells, both
components of bone marrow. In parallel, we modelled the effects of a
platinum chemotherapy (carboplatin) in combination with olaparib in wild
type rats with the aim of reproducing the clinical combination-induced
bone marrow toxicity.We will present data that provide initial insights
into the suitability of the rat pre-clinical model to guide combination
dose and schedules with olaparib and an assessment of the ability of
different bone marrow and peripheral blood cell populations to act as
useful biomarkers to guide better tolerated combination schedules.

