Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomerase activity in bronchial aspiration is a potential marker
for inflammation and cancer detection: A prospective study.


Background: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the
United States for both men and women. Bronchoscopy is one of the major
tools, along with bronchial aspirates, brushings, biopsies and
bronchoalveolar lavage, used to obtain specimens revealing the diagnosis
in more than 85% of cases. The diagnosis remains difficult especially in
distal tumors, given the absence of a relevant marker and/or sensitive
imaging technique. Telomerase is a ribonucleotide enzyme that elongates
telomeres and is responsible for the immortalization of cancerous cells.
This enzyme, that is expressed in more than 90% of cancers, seems to
increase in bronchial aspirates of patients with lung cancer. Purpose:
The objective of our study is to further investigate the value of
telomerase measurement in the bronchial aspirates as a diagnostic tool
for lung cancer. Methods: Random 82 bronchial aspirates were obtained
from patients undergoing bronchoscopy to diagnose any lung illness type
including inflammation and cancer.Patient consent form was filled. The
bronchial aspirates were divided for cytology examination and telomerase
activity measurement. The latter were washed twice with ice-child
phosphate buffer, observed by microscope, treated with lysis buffer,
incubated 30 minutes on ice and then centrifuged at 14 000 rpm at 4oC for
25 minutes. The supernatant was used to quantitate proteins using
Bradford reagent and to measure telomerase activity by quantitative
Real-time PCR technique. Out of 82 specimens, 11 were excluded because of
high hemolysis that interfered with the technique and/or because of the
complete absence of cells or elements. Results: A significant difference
in telomerase activity average was noted between normal patients and
those with inflammation and cancer (0.27, 3.83 and 19.96 atmol/mg
protein/20min, p0.46]. Telomerase activity was also predictive of cancer
vs. normal condition, AUC=0.87 [(95% CI:0.72-0.96); se=78%, sp=92%, NPV =
71%, at cut-off >0.46]. Its predictive power of cancer vs. inflammation
was AUC=0.69 [(95% CI: 0.55-0.80); se=74%, sp=70%,NPV = 79%, at cut-off
>1.03], and of inflammation vs. normal condition wasAUC=0.76 [(95% CI:
0.62-0.88); se=79%, sp=77%, NPV = 59%, at cut-off >0].Conclusion: The
detection of telomerase activity in bronchial aspirates is a promising
diagnostic marker for lung cancer and inflammation detection.

