Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome instability as a common characteristic of solid
cancers.


Analogous to the genomic types of instability describing cancer genomes,
we recently proposed transcriptome instability as a genome-wide, pre-mRNA
splicing related characteristic of colorectal cancer (Sveen et al.,
Genome Medicine, 2011). Here, we explore transcriptome instability in
several major solid cancer types.We have analyzed exon microarray data
from ten cancer datasets (555 samples; seven cancer types) and four
normal tissue types (93 samples; paired samples from colonic mucosa,
lung, prostate and the stomach) for variation in relative amounts of
aberrant exon usage, based on alternative splicing scores calculated by
the FIRMA algorithm. Most major solid cancer types (breast, cervical,
colorectal (two datasets), lung, and prostate (two datasets) cancer)
showed large variations in aberrant exon usage amounts among the samples,
and these amounts were strongly associated with splicing factor
expression levels. Thus, we consider these cancer types to exhibit
transcriptome instability. Non-random associations with splicing factor
(n = 280) expression levels were shown by separation of samples according
to aberrant exon usage amounts upon unsupervised hierarchical clustering
analyses, and by stronger correlations between aberrant exon usage
amounts and splicing factor expression levels than expected by chance
(compared with random gene sets and permutations of the aberrant exon
usage amounts; P Analogous to the genomic types of instability describing
cancer genomes, we recently proposed transcriptome instability as a
genome-wide, pre-mRNA splicing related characteristic of colorectal
cancer (Sveen et al., Genome Medicine, 2011). Here, we explore
transcriptome instability in several major solid cancer types.We have
analyzed exon microarray data from ten cancer datasets (555 samples;
seven cancer types) and four normal tissue types (93 samples; paired
samples from colonic mucosa, lung, prostate and the stomach) for
variation in relative amounts of aberrant exon usage, based on
alternative splicing scores calculated by the FIRMA algorithm. Most major
solid cancer types (breast, cervical, colorectal (two datasets), lung,
and prostate (two datasets) cancer) showed large variations in aberrant
exon usage amounts among the samples, and these amounts were strongly
associated with splicing factor expression levels. Thus, we consider
these cancer types to exhibit transcriptome instability. Non-random
associations with splicing factor (n = 280) expression levels were shown
by separation of samples according to aberrant exon usage amounts upon
unsupervised hierarchical clustering analyses, and by stronger
correlations between aberrant exon usage amounts and splicing factor
expression levels than expected by chance (compared with random gene sets
and permutations of the aberrant exon usage amounts; P < 0.001).In
comparisons across healthy tissue types and paired cancer and normal
datasets, we observed tissue- and cancer-specific patterns in splicing
factor correlations. Interestingly, in comparisons across cancer types
with transcriptome instability (but not across cancer datasets that did
not show transcriptome instability; gastric cancer, a second lung cancer
dataset, and neuroblastoma), the non-random associations between aberrant
exon usage amounts and splicing factor expression remained intact,
indicating a failure to adhere to tissue specificity. Thus, we consider
transcriptome instability to be a common feature of most major solid
cancer types, and this deviant splicing pattern is associated with
splicing factor expression levels.

