Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paclitaxel potentiates212Pb-radioimmunotherapy-induced cell
killing efficacy by perturbing mitotic spindle checkpoint.


We have recently reported on the potentiation of high-LET radiation
212Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab targeting HER2 in combination with paclitaxel. To
elucidate mechanisms associated with this therapy, mice bearing human
colon cancer LS-174T i.p. xenografts were pre-treated with paclitaxel,
followed by treatment with 212Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab and compared to groups
treated with paclitaxel alone, 212Pb-TCMC-HuIgG, 212Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab
and 212Pb-TCMC-HuIgG with paclitaxel pre-treatment.
212Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab with paclitaxel given 24-30 h earlier, induced
mitotic catastrophe and increased apoptosis. The combined modality of
paclitaxel and 212Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab markedly reduced DNA content in the
S-phase of the cell cycle with a concomitant increase observed in the
G2/M-phase. This treatment regimen also resulted in reduced
phosphorylation of histone H3, accompanied by an increase in
multimicronuclei, or mitotic catastrophe in nuclear profiles and positive
stained H2AX foci. This data suggests possible effects on the mitotic
spindle checkpoint by the paclitaxel and 212Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab
treatment. Consistent with this hypothesis, 212Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab
treatment in response to paclitaxel reduced expression and
phosphorylation of BubR1, which is likely attributable to disruption in a
functional survivin/Aurora B complex, leading to impairment of the
mitotic spindle checkpoint. In addition, the reduction of BubR1
expression may be mediated by the association of a repressive
transcription factor, E2F4, on the promoter region of BubR1 gene. Taken
together, these findings suggest that paclitaxel pre-treatment sensitizes
212Pb-TCMC-trastuzumab induced cell killing, leading to cell death by
mitotic catastrophe followed by apoptosis.

