Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD22-targeting epratuzumab mediates trogocytosis of multiple
cell-surface markers on normal, malignant, and lupus B cells.


Background. Epratuzumab, a humanized anti-CD22 antibody, is currently in
clinical trials of B-cell lymphoma and autoimmune diseases, demonstrating
therapeutic activities in non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). Thus, epratuzumab offers a promising option for
CD22-targeted immunotherapy. Although epratuzumab is capable of depleting
on average 35% of circulating B cells in patients, its in vivo mechanism
of action (MOA) remains incompletely understood. We hypothesized that
ligation of epratuzumab to CD22 could modulate other surface molecules
involved in regulating B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) signaling, leading
to altered B-cell functions that ultimately mitigate symptoms of the
underlying diseases. Methods. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
from either healthy donors or lupus patients with flares, were incubated
with epratuzumab, and the relative surface levels of CD22 and selected
BCR regulators, including CD19, CD21, and CD79b, were analyzed by flow
cytometry. Results. Epratuzumab promptly induced a marked decrease of
CD22 (>80%), CD19 (>50%), CD21 (>50%), and CD79b (>30%) on the surface of
B cells in PBMCs obtained from normal donors or treatment-nave lupus
patients, and of NHL cells (Daudi and Raji) spiked into normal PBMCs.
Although some Fc-independent loss of CD22 is expected from its
internalization by epratuzumab, the concurrent and prominent reduction of
CD19, CD21, and CD79b is Fc-dependent and results from trogocytosis of
epratuzumab-bound B cells to FcR-expressing effector cells, including
monocytes, NK cells, and granulocytes. Following incubation with
epratuzumab, but not with an isotype control mAb, reduced staining of
surface antigens on B cells coincided with positive CD19 and CD22
staining of the effector cells. In the absence of PBMCs, treatment of NHL
cell lines (Daudi and Raji) with epratuzumab resulted in more than 80%
reduction of CD22, with little, if any, reduction in CD19, CD21, CD79b or
surface IgM observed. Inclusion of a crosslinking second antibody with
epratuzumab induced only a minimal (Background. Epratuzumab, a humanized
anti-CD22 antibody, is currently in clinical trials of B-cell lymphoma
and autoimmune diseases, demonstrating therapeutic activities in
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Thus,
epratuzumab offers a promising option for CD22-targeted immunotherapy.
Although epratuzumab is capable of depleting on average 35% of
circulating B cells in patients, its in vivo mechanism of action (MOA)
remains incompletely understood. We hypothesized that ligation of
epratuzumab to CD22 could modulate other surface molecules involved in
regulating B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) signaling, leading to altered
B-cell functions that ultimately mitigate symptoms of the underlying
diseases. Methods. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from either
healthy donors or lupus patients with flares, were incubated with
epratuzumab, and the relative surface levels of CD22 and selected BCR
regulators, including CD19, CD21, and CD79b, were analyzed by flow
cytometry. Results. Epratuzumab promptly induced a marked decrease of
CD22 (>80%), CD19 (>50%), CD21 (>50%), and CD79b (>30%) on the surface of
B cells in PBMCs obtained from normal donors or treatment-nave lupus
patients, and of NHL cells (Daudi and Raji) spiked into normal PBMCs.
Although some Fc-independent loss of CD22 is expected from its
internalization by epratuzumab, the concurrent and prominent reduction of
CD19, CD21, and CD79b is Fc-dependent and results from trogocytosis of
epratuzumab-bound B cells to FcR-expressing effector cells, including
monocytes, NK cells, and granulocytes. Following incubation with
epratuzumab, but not with an isotype control mAb, reduced staining of
surface antigens on B cells coincided with positive CD19 and CD22
staining of the effector cells. In the absence of PBMCs, treatment of NHL
cell lines (Daudi and Raji) with epratuzumab resulted in more than 80%
reduction of CD22, with little, if any, reduction in CD19, CD21, CD79b or
surface IgM observed. Inclusion of a crosslinking second antibody with
epratuzumab induced only a minimal (<15%) reduction of CD19 and CD21.
When these NHL cells (1 x 105 cells) were mixed with PBMCs (1 x 106
cells), epratuzumab induced a 40 to 70% reduction of CD19 and CD21, with
significant down-regulation of surface IgM and CD79b also. Under the
conditions examined, rituximab at 10 g/mL reduced the B-cell count by
50%, whereas epratuzumab did not cause significant B-cell depletion,
either at 10 g/mL or 1 mg/mL. Conclusions. This study revealed a
previously unknown, and potentially important, MOA of epratuzumab.
Whether the observed trogocytosis could be correlated with the depletion
of malignant B cells in lymphoid tissues is currently under investigation.

