Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study identifies novel loci associated
with osteosarcoma.


Osteosarcoma (OS), the most common primary malignant bone tumor, has a
peak incidence during the pubertal growth spurt. OS occurs at increased
frequency in several inherited cancer syndromes (e.g., Li-Fraumeni and
Rothmund Thomson syndromes). A limited number of common SNPs associated
with OS have been identified in biologically plausible pathways (e.g.,
growth or DNA repair).We developed an international, multi-institutional
study in order to conduct the first genome-wide association study (GWAS)
of OS. Participating subjects provided informed consent through local
IRBs. Control subjects were cancer free adults derived from large studies
in prior GWAS at the NCI. Genotyping of all cases was conducted using the
Illumina OmniExpress SNP microarray chip platform in 2 phases. The first
phase analyzed 910 osteosarcoma cases. After quality control filtering
and assessment of population substructure, 596 cases of European (EUR)
ancestry were advanced to the primary GWAS analysis (Phase 1A). We
combined data from 2,703 previously genotyped controls drawn from 3 EUR
cohorts. There was no evidence for significant population substructure
differences between OS cases and controls. The association analysis
(1-degree of freedom trend test) was adjusted for study, sex and 4
eigenvectors. The top 30 SNPs (P Osteosarcoma (OS), the most common
primary malignant bone tumor, has a peak incidence during the pubertal
growth spurt. OS occurs at increased frequency in several inherited
cancer syndromes (e.g., Li-Fraumeni and Rothmund Thomson syndromes). A
limited number of common SNPs associated with OS have been identified in
biologically plausible pathways (e.g., growth or DNA repair).We developed
an international, multi-institutional study in order to conduct the first
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of OS. Participating subjects
provided informed consent through local IRBs. Control subjects were
cancer free adults derived from large studies in prior GWAS at the NCI.
Genotyping of all cases was conducted using the Illumina OmniExpress SNP
microarray chip platform in 2 phases. The first phase analyzed 910
osteosarcoma cases. After quality control filtering and assessment of
population substructure, 596 cases of European (EUR) ancestry were
advanced to the primary GWAS analysis (Phase 1A). We combined data from
2,703 previously genotyped controls drawn from 3 EUR cohorts. There was
no evidence for significant population substructure differences between
OS cases and controls. The association analysis (1-degree of freedom
trend test) was adjusted for study, sex and 4 eigenvectors. The top 30
SNPs (P <10-5) were genotyped by TaqMan in an additional 247 OS cases and
588 EUR controls. DNA from an additional 218 OS cases were subsequently
scanned and, after the same quality filtering and population substructure
analyses were applied, the data from 98 EUR cases were merged with the
initial scan for the final analysis (Phase1B).The fixed-effects
meta-analysis of all 941 OS cases and 3,291 controls identified 2 regions
that achieved genome-wide significance. The first, rs1906953 on 6p21.3,
is associated with susceptibility to OS (P = 8.1x10-9, odds ratio [OR]
1.57, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.35-1.83). rs1906953 is in intron 7
of GRM4. GRM4 is expressed in osteoblasts and osteoclasts and involved in
glutamate signaling, which is suggested to be involved in cell
differentiation and regulation of bone formation.The second signal
resides in an intergenic region on chromosome 2p25.2; rs7591996 (P = 1.0
x 10-8, OR 0.72, 95% CI 0.65-0.81). Another SNP in this region,
rs10208273, is moderately correlated with the first signal (r2= 0.32) and
approached genome-wide significance (P = 2.9 x 10-7, OR 1.35, 95% CI
1.21-1.52).A third locus in the ADAMTS6 gene on 5q12.3 is promising but
does not yet achieve genome-wide significance: rs17206779 (P = 5.1x10-7,
OR 0.75, 95% CI 0.68-0.84). Notably, variants in genes encoding members
of the ADAMTS protein family have been associated with height, a known OS
risk factor.We have conducted the first GWAS of OS and identified several
novel loci associated with OS risk. Further investigation of these loci
will advance understanding of OS etiology and biology.

