Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The long non-coding RNA MALAT1 is an essential gene regulator for
lung cancer metastasis in a novel human knockout model .


The long non-coding RNA MALAT1 was one of the first lncRNAs associated
with cancer: it is a highly conserved nuclear ncRNA and a predictive
marker for metastasis development in lung cancer. However, its high
abundance and nuclear localization have greatly hampered its functional
analysis since it is only inefficiently knocked down by RNA interference
(RNAi).To uncover its functional importance, we developed a MALAT1
knockout model in human lung tumor cells by genomically integrating RNA
destabilizing elements site-specifically into the MALAT1 locus using Zinc
Finger Nucleases (ZFN).This approach yielded a more than 1000-fold
silencing of MALAT1 providing a unique loss-of-function model.Proposed
mechanisms of action of MALAT1 include regulation of splicing or gene
expression. In lung cancer, MALAT1 does not alter alternative splicing
but actively regulates gene expression inducing a signature of
metastasis-associated genes. Consequently, MALAT1-deficient cells are
impaired in migration and form fewer tumor nodules in a mouse xenograft
model.Encouraged by this discovery of the essential function of MALAT1 in
lung cancer metastasis, we wanted to analyze whether MALAT1 could also be
therapeutically targeted: We developed Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs)
effectively blocking MALAT1 expression in the cell culture and in the
animal. Notably, MALAT1-ASO treatment prevents metastasis formation after
tumor implantation. Thus, targeting MALAT1 with antisense
oligonucleotides provides a potential therapeutic approach to prevent
lung cancer metastasis with MALAT1 serving as both, predictive marker and
therapeutic target.Lastly, regulating gene expression, but not
alternative splicing is the critical function of MALAT1 in lung cancer
metastasis.In summary, ten years after the discovery of the lncRNA MALAT1
as a biomarker for lung cancer metastasis, our loss-of-function model
unravels the active function of MALAT1 as a regulator of gene expression
governing hallmarks of lung cancer metastasis.

