Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of Next Generation Sequencing technologies in
comparison to current diagnostic gold standards for BRAF, EGFR and KRAS
mutational analysis.


BACKGROUND: Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) has the potential of
becoming an important tool in clinical diagnosis and therapeutic
decision-making in oncology owing to its enhanced sensitivity in DNA
mutation detection, fast-turnaround of samples in comparison to current
gold standard methods and the potential to sequence a large number of
cancer-driving genes at the one time. We aim to test the diagnostic
accuracy of current NGS technology in the analysis of mutations that
represent current standard-of-care, and its reliability to generate
concomitant information on other key genes in human oncogenesis.METHODS:
Thirteen FFPE clinical samples (8 lung adenocarcinomas, 3 colon
carcinomas and 2 malignant melanomas) already genotyped for EGFR, KRAS
and BRAF mutations by current standard-of-care methods (Sanger Sequencing
and q-PCR), were analyzed for detection of mutations in the same three
genes using two NGS platforms and an additional 43 genes with one of
these platforms. The results were analyzed using closed platform-specific
proprietary bioinformatics software as well as open third party
applications (including, among others, the Open CLC Genomics
Workbench).RESULTS: Our results indicate that the existing format of the
NGS technology performed well in detecting the clinically relevant
mutations stated above, with apparent improved sensitivity, but may not
be reliable for a broader unsupervised analysis of the wider genome in
its current design. They also illustrate the relevance of different
bioinformatics curation approaches, allowing different degrees of
stringency, for the avoidance of potential false positives in the broader
choice of genes selected, when compared with the expected mutation
frequencies from sources such as the COSMIC database, for the tumor types
analyzed. The systems are also able to detect other mutations outside the
expected ones representing the current main "standard-of-care," the
significance of which are uncertain at this point.CONCLUSIONS: Our study
represents a diagnostically lead validation of the major strengths and
weaknesses of this technology in its current state of development before
consideration for diagnostic use.

