Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional assays to define agonists and antagonists of sigma-2
receptors.


The sigma receptor was originally defined pharmacologically as the
specific binding site for a group of compounds named as sigma ligands.
The sigma-2 receptor has been identified as a biomarker in proliferating
tumors. It regulates cell growth and is an emerging target for cancer
diagnosis and therapeutics. Up to date numerous sigma-2 selective ligands
have been developed. However, there is no well-established functional
assay for defining agonist/antagonist for sigma-2 receptors. Many sigma-2
ligands with diverse structures have been shown to induce cytotoxicity in
a variety of cancer cells by triggering caspase-independent and
caspase-dependent apoptosis. Therefore, in the current study, we propose
to use cell viability and caspase 3 activity, a hallmark of apoptosis, as
functional assays to define agonist/antagonist for sigma-2 receptors.
Three classes of sigma-2 ligands developed in our laboratory were tested
in these two assays in two tumor cell lines: mouse breast cancer cell
line EMT6 and human melanoma cell line MDA-MB435. Based on the ratios of
the EC50 values of our sigma-2 ligands to the EC50 of siramesine, we
categorized the azabicyclononane analogs as agonists (e.g. SV 119) or
partial agonists (e.g. WC 26 and SV 95), and benzamide analogs as
non-canonical antagonists (e.g. RHM-1) since they do not trigger cell
death, and they do not block sigma-2 agonist-induced cell death. SV 95
partially blocked SV 119-induced cytotoxicity. The establishment of
functional assays for defining agonist/antagonist will facilitate
functional characterization of sigma-2 ligands and sigma-2 receptors.

