Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROS-mediated activation of AKT induces apoptosis via pVHL in
prostate cancer cells .


Reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a central role in oxidative stress,
which leads to the onset of diseases, such as cancer. Furthermore, ROS
contributes to the delicate balance between tumor cell survival and
death. However, the mechanisms by which tumor cells decide to elicit
survival or death signals during oxidative stress are not completely
understood. We have previously reported that ROS enhanced tumorigenic
functions in prostate cancer cells, such as cell migration and invasion,
which depended on CXCR4 and AKT signaling. Here, we report a novel
mechanism by which ROS facilitated cell death through activation of AKT.
We initially observed that ROS increased expression of phosphorylated AKT
(p-AKT) in 22Rv1 human prostate cancer cells. The tumor suppressor PTEN,
a negative regulator of AKT signaling, was rendered catalytically
inactive through oxidation by ROS, although the expression levels
remained consistent. Despite these events, cells still underwent
apoptosis. Further investigation into apoptosis revealed that expression
of the tumor suppressor pVHL increased, with concomitant decreased
expression of HIF1. Further investigation into pVHL during apoptosis
revealed that the tumor suppressor becomes phosphorylated at S111 prior
to activity; S111 is within a target motif (RXXS) forphosphorylation by
AKT kinase. We then determined that pVHL and p-AKT associated in vitro
via co-immunoprecipitation assay. Moreover, knockdown of pVHL by siRNA
rescued HIF1 protein expression and rescued cells from apoptosis, which
was determined by Annexin-V and cleaved-PARP. Collectively, our study
suggests that in the context of oxidative stress, activatedAKT
facilitated apoptosis by inducing pVHL function. Moreover, our studies
suggest a novel paradigm for AKT-that it may participate in tumor
suppressor rather than oncogenesis.

