Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of selective MELK kinase inhibitors for cancer
treatments.


Maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK) is an atypical member of
the AMPK family of serine-threonine kinases that has been implicated in
stem cell renewal, cell cycle progression, cytokinesis, mRNA splicing and
apoptosis. MELK activity is correlated with its phosphorylation level, is
cell cycle dependent and maximal during mitosis although direct upstream
regulators of MELK kinase activity are unknown. This kinase is highly
expressed in several types of solid cancers: colon, breast, ovary, lung,
and brain and shows relatively low expression levels in normal tissues.
MELK overexpression in patient-derived tumors strongly correlates with
poor prognosis in glioblastoma and breast cancer. Moreover, siRNA
mediated knockdown of MELK kinase significantly inhibits growth of tumor
cell lines both in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, MELK kinase is an
emerging and interesting target of significant potential for therapeutic
intervention in cancer. In this study, we are reporting results for a
series of new MELK kinase inhibitors that were developed at Selvita.
Newly synthesized derivatives exert good selectivity and potency in MELK
inhibitions with the low sub-micromolar range. Anticancer effects of
these compounds were investigated in several cancer cell lines of solid
tumor origin where the compounds were shown to induce cell death with low
micromolar ED50 values. Compounds were also analyzed for their effects on
cell death, proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle parameters and ADME
properties. Taken altogether, the presented data supports our rationale
of using inhibitors of MELK kinases as a novel approach for the cancer
therapy, especially for the treatment of glioblastoma and breast cancer.

