Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Conformation-specific monoclonal antibodies against Notch1 target
aberrant Notch1 signaling in cancer stem cells.


Notch signaling pathway plays a key role in regulating various cell fates
including those of stem cells, throughout the mammalian development and
adult homeostasis. Here we report characterization of anti-Notch1
monoclonal antibodies (mAb's) with potential therapeutic applications.
Antibodies against various domains of human-Notch1 receptor were
generated and characterized, mAb's generated against primary
ligand-binding domain (EGF like repeats 11-12) and activation domain NRR
(Negative Regulatory region) showed most prominent therapeutic potential.
The Notch1 specific mAb 602.101 against ligand-binding domain (EGF like
repeats 11-12) prevents binding of Jagged and Delta-like ligands and
subsequent Notch1 receptor activation in breast cancer stem cells.
Further, antibody treatment leads to apoptosis, inhibition of epithelial
to mesenchymal transitions as well as irreversible depletion of cancer
stem cells. The conformation specific mAb's against Notch1 NRR can
specifically distinguish between the mutant and the wild type human
Notch1 receptor present on cancer cells. Anti-NRR mAb's 604.107 (mutant
specific) and 604.132 (wild type specific) specifically inhibited Notch1
signaling in leukemic and breast cancer stem cells. These mAbs can serve
as a potential tool to irreversibly combat therapy resistant cancer stem
cell subpopulations and to inhibit the epithelial to mesenchymal
transitions in various types of cancers.

