Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase 0 microdosing trial quantitating DNA adduct formation to
identify platinum chemosensitivity: from bench to bedside.


Purpose: DNA adduct formation is a critical step in platinum(Pt)induced
cell death. The goal of this project is to measure carboplatin-DNA
adducts after a single non-toxic microdose of [14C]carboplatin, use this
information to predict efficacy before cancer patients receive toxic
chemotherapy and assess the underlying chemoresistance mechanisms, thus
enhancing personalized therapy.Methods: Six non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) and six bladder cancer cell lines were treated with 1 M
(microdose) or 100 M (therapeutic dose) carboplatin, but with equal
amounts of [14C]carboplatin. Carboplatin-DNA monoadduct levels were
determined by measuring 14C content in genomic DNA with accelerator mass
spectrometry (AMS). Cellular sensitivity to carboplatin (IC50 values) was
correlated with drug-DNA adduct levels. To validate the in vitro
findings, a pilot Phase 0 trial with microdosing [14C]carboplatin was
initiated to determine the recommended Phase II dose (RP2D) of
[14C]carboplatin for optimal measurement of DNA monoadducts and
pharmacokinetics (PK) in lung and bladder cancer. PK and DNA monoadduct
levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumor tissues were
determined by liquid scintillation counting and AMS, respectively,
validated with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), and
correlated with tumor response to chemotherapy.Results: DNA monoadduct
levels in cell lines induced by microdose and therapeutic concentrations
of carboplatin were highly linearly proportional (r2 = 0.95, p Purpose:
DNA adduct formation is a critical step in platinum(Pt)induced cell
death. The goal of this project is to measure carboplatin-DNA adducts
after a single non-toxic microdose of [14C]carboplatin, use this
information to predict efficacy before cancer patients receive toxic
chemotherapy and assess the underlying chemoresistance mechanisms, thus
enhancing personalized therapy.Methods: Six non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) and six bladder cancer cell lines were treated with 1 M
(microdose) or 100 M (therapeutic dose) carboplatin, but with equal
amounts of [14C]carboplatin. Carboplatin-DNA monoadduct levels were
determined by measuring 14C content in genomic DNA with accelerator mass
spectrometry (AMS). Cellular sensitivity to carboplatin (IC50 values) was
correlated with drug-DNA adduct levels. To validate the in vitro
findings, a pilot Phase 0 trial with microdosing [14C]carboplatin was
initiated to determine the recommended Phase II dose (RP2D) of
[14C]carboplatin for optimal measurement of DNA monoadducts and
pharmacokinetics (PK) in lung and bladder cancer. PK and DNA monoadduct
levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumor tissues were
determined by liquid scintillation counting and AMS, respectively,
validated with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), and
correlated with tumor response to chemotherapy.Results: DNA monoadduct
levels in cell lines induced by microdose and therapeutic concentrations
of carboplatin were highly linearly proportional (r2 = 0.95, p < 0.001)
as measured by AMS, and correlated to the total Pt-DNA adduct levels
induced by therapeutic carboplatin (r2 = 0.80, p Purpose: DNA adduct
formation is a critical step in platinum(Pt)induced cell death. The goal
of this project is to measure carboplatin-DNA adducts after a single
non-toxic microdose of [14C]carboplatin, use this information to predict
efficacy before cancer patients receive toxic chemotherapy and assess the
underlying chemoresistance mechanisms, thus enhancing personalized
therapy.Methods: Six non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and six bladder
cancer cell lines were treated with 1 M (microdose) or 100 M (therapeutic
dose) carboplatin, but with equal amounts of [14C]carboplatin.
Carboplatin-DNA monoadduct levels were determined by measuring 14C
content in genomic DNA with accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS). Cellular
sensitivity to carboplatin (IC50 values) was correlated with drug-DNA
adduct levels. To validate the in vitro findings, a pilot Phase 0 trial
with microdosing [14C]carboplatin was initiated to determine the
recommended Phase II dose (RP2D) of [14C]carboplatin for optimal
measurement of DNA monoadducts and pharmacokinetics (PK) in lung and
bladder cancer. PK and DNA monoadduct levels in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells and tumor tissues were determined by liquid
scintillation counting and AMS, respectively, validated with inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), and correlated with tumor
response to chemotherapy.Results: DNA monoadduct levels in cell lines
induced by microdose and therapeutic concentrations of carboplatin were
highly linearly proportional (r2 = 0.95, p < 0.001) as measured by AMS,
and correlated to the total Pt-DNA adduct levels induced by therapeutic
carboplatin (r2 = 0.80, p < 0.001) as measured by ICP-MS. DNA adduct
levels were superior in predicting resistance to carboplatin when
compared to the mRNA expression of ERCC1, a DNA repair gene commonly used
as a resistant biomarker of Pt-based chemotherapy. Nine patients were
recruited at the pilot Phase 0 trial. The Level I dose of
[14C]carboplatin at 107 dpm/Kg with total carboplatin at 1% of
therapeutic dose (area under curve of 6) was determined as the RP2D. No
clinical toxicity was observed as a result of microdosing. The radiation
exposure from 14C was less than a chest X-ray per patient. DNA monoadduct
levels and PK parameters of carboplatin at the microdose and therapeutic
doses were highly correlated (pPurpose: DNA adduct formation is a
critical step in platinum(Pt)induced cell death. The goal of this project
is to measure carboplatin-DNA adducts after a single non-toxic microdose
of [14C]carboplatin, use this information to predict efficacy before
cancer patients receive toxic chemotherapy and assess the underlying
chemoresistance mechanisms, thus enhancing personalized therapy.Methods:
Six non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and six bladder cancer cell lines
were treated with 1 M (microdose) or 100 M (therapeutic dose)
carboplatin, but with equal amounts of [14C]carboplatin. Carboplatin-DNA
monoadduct levels were determined by measuring 14C content in genomic DNA
with accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS). Cellular sensitivity to
carboplatin (IC50 values) was correlated with drug-DNA adduct levels. To
validate the in vitro findings, a pilot Phase 0 trial with microdosing
[14C]carboplatin was initiated to determine the recommended Phase II dose
(RP2D) of [14C]carboplatin for optimal measurement of DNA monoadducts and
pharmacokinetics (PK) in lung and bladder cancer. PK and DNA monoadduct
levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumor tissues were
determined by liquid scintillation counting and AMS, respectively,
validated with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), and
correlated with tumor response to chemotherapy.Results: DNA monoadduct
levels in cell lines induced by microdose and therapeutic concentrations
of carboplatin were highly linearly proportional (r2 = 0.95, p < 0.001)
as measured by AMS, and correlated to the total Pt-DNA adduct levels
induced by therapeutic carboplatin (r2 = 0.80, p < 0.001) as measured by
ICP-MS. DNA adduct levels were superior in predicting resistance to
carboplatin when compared to the mRNA expression of ERCC1, a DNA repair
gene commonly used as a resistant biomarker of Pt-based chemotherapy.
Nine patients were recruited at the pilot Phase 0 trial. The Level I dose
of [14C]carboplatin at 107 dpm/Kg with total carboplatin at 1% of
therapeutic dose (area under curve of 6) was determined as the RP2D. No
clinical toxicity was observed as a result of microdosing. The radiation
exposure from 14C was less than a chest X-ray per patient. DNA monoadduct
levels and PK parameters of carboplatin at the microdose and therapeutic
doses were highly correlated (p<0.001), suggesting that this non-toxic
microdosing approach can be used to predict DNA adduct levels and PK of
therapeutic doses. Patients with the highest DNA monoadduct levels
responded best to carboplatin-based chemotherapy, although more data is
needed to achieve statistical significance in the clinical
data.Conclusions: This novel microdosing approach predicts DNA monoadduct
levels and PK of therapeutic carboplatin dosing; preliminary data suggest
the feasibility of predicting chemosensitivity and the possibility of
guiding personalized dosing.

