Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-5 induced migration of HT1376 cells via ERK1/2-mediated MMP-9
expression by inducing activation of NF-B .


Interleukin-5 (IL-5) plays an important role in the growth and
differentiation of human B cells and eosinophils. However, little is
known about the effect of IL-5 on cancer cells. In this study, we
investigated the molecular mechanism involved in the IL-5-induced
migration of bladder cancer HT1376 cells. Our results indicated that IL-5
significantly enhanced migration and MMP-9 expression in HT1376 cells. We
also found that IL-5 induces transcriptional activation of the binding of
NF-kB and AP-1, which are two important nuclear transcription factors
that are linked to MMP-9 expression in HT1376 cells. In subsequent
experiments, we found activation of ERK1/2 in IL-5-treated HT1376 cells.
To examine the involvement of the ERK1/2 signaling pathway on
IL-5-induced cell responses, we pretreated HT1376 cells with the ERK1/2
inhibitor U0126 followed by IL-5 treatment. The results showed that U0126
treatment inhibited migration of IL-5-treated HT1376 cells. Moreover,
IL-5-stimulated MMP-9 expression was suppressed by the addition of U0126.
Inhibition of ERK1/2 function consistently rescued transcriptional
activity of NF-kB, without altering AP-1 activation, in IL-5-treated
cells. Finally, inhibition of IL-5 specific receptor IL-5R alpha by small
interfering RNA (siRNA) suppressed migration, ERK1/2 activation, MMP-9
expression and binding activation of NF-kB in IL-5-treated HT1376 cells.
The results of the present study indicate that the IL-5/IL-5R alpha dyad
induced cell migration through ERK1/2-mediated expression of MMP-9 by
binding activation of NF-kB in bladder cancer cells. In conclusion, these
novel findings indicate that binding of IL-5 to IL-5R alpha plays a
critical role in MMP-9 expression, which might be involved in the
migration of bladder cancer.

