Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variations in apoptosis pathway are associated with
survival in late stage non-small cell lung cancer.


Dysregulation of apoptosis pathway plays an essential role in
carcinogenesis, tumor progression, and resistance to chemotherapy. We
hypothesized that genetic variations in genes involved in the apoptosis
pathway may affect the survival in late stage non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients. To test this hypothesis, we genotyped 583 tagging SNPs
in 598 late stage NSCLC patients and analyzed their associations with
survival individually and jointly. Seven SNPs were statistically
significantly associated with overall survival after correction for
multiple comparisons (qDysregulation of apoptosis pathway plays an
essential role in carcinogenesis, tumor progression, and resistance to
chemotherapy. We hypothesized that genetic variations in genes involved
in the apoptosis pathway may affect the survival in late stage non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. To test this hypothesis, we genotyped
583 tagging SNPs in 598 late stage NSCLC patients and analyzed their
associations with survival individually and jointly. Seven SNPs were
statistically significantly associated with overall survival after
correction for multiple comparisons (q<0.1). The most significant SNP was
rs17592236 on FOXO1 gene under the dominant model (OR: 2.54, 95%CI:
1.71-3.78, p=4.15x106). We also observed a significant cumulative effect.
Compared to the reference group (patients with no more than two risk
alleles), those having five or more risk alleles were much more likely to
die within seven months (HR: 3.58, 95% CI: 2.55-5.04, pDysregulation of
apoptosis pathway plays an essential role in carcinogenesis, tumor
progression, and resistance to chemotherapy. We hypothesized that genetic
variations in genes involved in the apoptosis pathway may affect the
survival in late stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. To
test this hypothesis, we genotyped 583 tagging SNPs in 598 late stage
NSCLC patients and analyzed their associations with survival individually
and jointly. Seven SNPs were statistically significantly associated with
overall survival after correction for multiple comparisons (q<0.1). The
most significant SNP was rs17592236 on FOXO1 gene under the dominant
model (OR: 2.54, 95%CI: 1.71-3.78, p=4.15x106). We also observed a
significant cumulative effect. Compared to the reference group (patients
with no more than two risk alleles), those having five or more risk
alleles were much more likely to die within seven months (HR: 3.58, 95%
CI: 2.55-5.04, p<0.001). Notably, the median survival time (MST) was
significantly reduced by up to 15 months in high risk patients when
compared to the reference group (MST: 22.2 months, pDysregulation of
apoptosis pathway plays an essential role in carcinogenesis, tumor
progression, and resistance to chemotherapy. We hypothesized that genetic
variations in genes involved in the apoptosis pathway may affect the
survival in late stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. To
test this hypothesis, we genotyped 583 tagging SNPs in 598 late stage
NSCLC patients and analyzed their associations with survival individually
and jointly. Seven SNPs were statistically significantly associated with
overall survival after correction for multiple comparisons (q<0.1). The
most significant SNP was rs17592236 on FOXO1 gene under the dominant
model (OR: 2.54, 95%CI: 1.71-3.78, p=4.15x106). We also observed a
significant cumulative effect. Compared to the reference group (patients
with no more than two risk alleles), those having five or more risk
alleles were much more likely to die within seven months (HR: 3.58, 95%
CI: 2.55-5.04, p<0.001). Notably, the median survival time (MST) was
significantly reduced by up to 15 months in high risk patients when
compared to the reference group (MST: 22.2 months, p<0.001). Survival
tree analysis revealed potential higher order gene-gene interactions
among these SNPs. Our results provided evidence that genetic variations
in the apoptosis pathway modulate NSCLC survival and may serve as
biomarkers to differentiate NSCLC patients with different prognosis.

