Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thromboxane synthase and thromboxane receptor targeting have
anti-angiogenic efficacy in-vivo and reduce angiogenic secretions from
human colorectal tumor explants ex-vivo.


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer
worldwide. The VEGF inhibitor avastin is commonly used to treat
metastatic CRC. However, a poor overall response rate of approximately
40% suggests further anti-angiogenic strategies are warranted. While
COX-2 inhibitors are promising, chronic use is associated with increased
cardiovascular risk. Downstream of COX-2, the thromboxane (TX) signalling
pathway promotes tumour development, and is thought to promote cancer
growth via increased tumour-associated angiogenesis. This study aimed to
examine the TX signalling pathway as a novel anti-angiogenic target for
the treatment of CRC.Methods: We examined the effect of TX-pathway
inhibition (using thromboxane synthase (TXS) inhibitors, thromboxane
receptor (TP) antagonists and dual inhibitors; n=15) on blood vessel
formation in-vivo using a transgenic zebrafish model (TgEGFP fli-1).
Zebrafish larvae were treated with increasing concentrations of these
inhibitors 4-6 h post-fertilization (hpf). Fish were fixed at 48hpf and
vascular formation assessed under the flouresence microscope by counting
of intersegmental vessels (ISV). The most promising TX-pathway inhibitors
(ozagrel, seratrodast, AH-23848) were brought forward for further
analysis using ex-vivo 3D-explant culturing. Angiogenic protein
secretions from CRC tumour explants were assessed following 72 h
treatment with these inhibitors using Meso-Scale Discovery multi-spot
arrays (7-spot immunoassay system against human VEGF, Ang-1, Ang-2, bFGF,
PAI-1, VCAM-1, ICAM-1) and compared with the known anti-angiogenic agent,
avastin.Results: In-vivo vascular screening revealed significant effects
on ISV formation for a number of TX-pathway inhibitors. The 3 inhibitors
with the greatest effect on vessel formation were ozagrel (TXS
inhibitor), seratrodast (TP antagonist) and AH-23848 (TXS/EP4 inhibitor).
Treatment with 100uM of these inhibitors reduced vessel formation to 70%
(pIntroduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer
worldwide. The VEGF inhibitor avastin is commonly used to treat
metastatic CRC. However, a poor overall response rate of approximately
40% suggests further anti-angiogenic strategies are warranted. While
COX-2 inhibitors are promising, chronic use is associated with increased
cardiovascular risk. Downstream of COX-2, the thromboxane (TX) signalling
pathway promotes tumour development, and is thought to promote cancer
growth via increased tumour-associated angiogenesis. This study aimed to
examine the TX signalling pathway as a novel anti-angiogenic target for
the treatment of CRC.Methods: We examined the effect of TX-pathway
inhibition (using thromboxane synthase (TXS) inhibitors, thromboxane
receptor (TP) antagonists and dual inhibitors; n=15) on blood vessel
formation in-vivo using a transgenic zebrafish model (TgEGFP fli-1).
Zebrafish larvae were treated with increasing concentrations of these
inhibitors 4-6 h post-fertilization (hpf). Fish were fixed at 48hpf and
vascular formation assessed under the flouresence microscope by counting
of intersegmental vessels (ISV). The most promising TX-pathway inhibitors
(ozagrel, seratrodast, AH-23848) were brought forward for further
analysis using ex-vivo 3D-explant culturing. Angiogenic protein
secretions from CRC tumour explants were assessed following 72 h
treatment with these inhibitors using Meso-Scale Discovery multi-spot
arrays (7-spot immunoassay system against human VEGF, Ang-1, Ang-2, bFGF,
PAI-1, VCAM-1, ICAM-1) and compared with the known anti-angiogenic agent,
avastin.Results: In-vivo vascular screening revealed significant effects
on ISV formation for a number of TX-pathway inhibitors. The 3 inhibitors
with the greatest effect on vessel formation were ozagrel (TXS
inhibitor), seratrodast (TP antagonist) and AH-23848 (TXS/EP4 inhibitor).
Treatment with 100uM of these inhibitors reduced vessel formation to 70%
(p<0.0001), 40% (pIntroduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most
common cancer worldwide. The VEGF inhibitor avastin is commonly used to
treat metastatic CRC. However, a poor overall response rate of
approximately 40% suggests further anti-angiogenic strategies are
warranted. While COX-2 inhibitors are promising, chronic use is
associated with increased cardiovascular risk. Downstream of COX-2, the
thromboxane (TX) signalling pathway promotes tumour development, and is
thought to promote cancer growth via increased tumour-associated
angiogenesis. This study aimed to examine the TX signalling pathway as a
novel anti-angiogenic target for the treatment of CRC.Methods: We
examined the effect of TX-pathway inhibition (using thromboxane synthase
(TXS) inhibitors, thromboxane receptor (TP) antagonists and dual
inhibitors; n=15) on blood vessel formation in-vivo using a transgenic
zebrafish model (TgEGFP fli-1). Zebrafish larvae were treated with
increasing concentrations of these inhibitors 4-6 h post-fertilization
(hpf). Fish were fixed at 48hpf and vascular formation assessed under the
flouresence microscope by counting of intersegmental vessels (ISV). The
most promising TX-pathway inhibitors (ozagrel, seratrodast, AH-23848)
were brought forward for further analysis using ex-vivo 3D-explant
culturing. Angiogenic protein secretions from CRC tumour explants were
assessed following 72 h treatment with these inhibitors using Meso-Scale
Discovery multi-spot arrays (7-spot immunoassay system against human
VEGF, Ang-1, Ang-2, bFGF, PAI-1, VCAM-1, ICAM-1) and compared with the
known anti-angiogenic agent, avastin.Results: In-vivo vascular screening
revealed significant effects on ISV formation for a number of TX-pathway
inhibitors. The 3 inhibitors with the greatest effect on vessel formation
were ozagrel (TXS inhibitor), seratrodast (TP antagonist) and AH-23848
(TXS/EP4 inhibitor). Treatment with 100uM of these inhibitors reduced
vessel formation to 70% (p<0.0001), 40% (p<0.0001) and 35%
(pIntroduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer
worldwide. The VEGF inhibitor avastin is commonly used to treat
metastatic CRC. However, a poor overall response rate of approximately
40% suggests further anti-angiogenic strategies are warranted. While
COX-2 inhibitors are promising, chronic use is associated with increased
cardiovascular risk. Downstream of COX-2, the thromboxane (TX) signalling
pathway promotes tumour development, and is thought to promote cancer
growth via increased tumour-associated angiogenesis. This study aimed to
examine the TX signalling pathway as a novel anti-angiogenic target for
the treatment of CRC.Methods: We examined the effect of TX-pathway
inhibition (using thromboxane synthase (TXS) inhibitors, thromboxane
receptor (TP) antagonists and dual inhibitors; n=15) on blood vessel
formation in-vivo using a transgenic zebrafish model (TgEGFP fli-1).
Zebrafish larvae were treated with increasing concentrations of these
inhibitors 4-6 h post-fertilization (hpf). Fish were fixed at 48hpf and
vascular formation assessed under the flouresence microscope by counting
of intersegmental vessels (ISV). The most promising TX-pathway inhibitors
(ozagrel, seratrodast, AH-23848) were brought forward for further
analysis using ex-vivo 3D-explant culturing. Angiogenic protein
secretions from CRC tumour explants were assessed following 72 h
treatment with these inhibitors using Meso-Scale Discovery multi-spot
arrays (7-spot immunoassay system against human VEGF, Ang-1, Ang-2, bFGF,
PAI-1, VCAM-1, ICAM-1) and compared with the known anti-angiogenic agent,
avastin.Results: In-vivo vascular screening revealed significant effects
on ISV formation for a number of TX-pathway inhibitors. The 3 inhibitors
with the greatest effect on vessel formation were ozagrel (TXS
inhibitor), seratrodast (TP antagonist) and AH-23848 (TXS/EP4 inhibitor).
Treatment with 100uM of these inhibitors reduced vessel formation to 70%
(p<0.0001), 40% (p<0.0001) and 35% (p<0.0001) of untreated control for
ozagrel, seratrodast and AH-23848 respectively. Human explant culturing
revealed that the secretion of a number of angiogenic metabolites from
CRC tumour explants was significantly reduced following thromboxane
pathway targeting, including VEGF, bFGF, Ang-1, PAI-1 and
ICAM.Conclusion: Thromboxane pathway targeting demonstrates
anti-angiogenic effects in-vivo. In CRC patients, these effects may be
mediated in part through a reduction in angiogenic protein secretions.
Targeting this pathway may be a novel anti-angiogenic approach for the
treatment of metastatic CRC alone, or in combination with traditional
agents.

