Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association between severe treatment-related lymphopenia and
progression free survival in patients with newly diagnosed squamous cell
head and neck cancer.


Background:Severe treatment-related lymphopenia (TRL) occurs in 50% of
glioblastoma and pancreatic cancer patients and is associated with early
death from tumor progression. We sought to determine if similar findings
were seen in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).Patients and
Methods:Eligible patients for this retrospective study had: 1) HNSCC
cancer diagnosed in 2007-2009, 2) good performance status, 3)
platinum-based chemoradiation, and 4) follow-up at Johns Hopkins. Serial
total lymphocyte counts (TLC), overall survival (OS) and progression-free
survival (PFS) were analyzed accounting for known prognostic
factors.Results:Fifty-six adults met eligibility criteria: median age: 57
years, female: 21%, HPV+: 61%, surgery prior to chemoradiation: 16%,
stage IVA-IVB: 77%, T stage 3-4: 40% and N stage 2b-3: 56%. Changes in
TLC are shown below:
14/56 patients (25%) had tumor recurrence and 9 (16%) died of their
tumor. HPV+ patients had longer PFS (p=0.01) and OS (p=0.006) than HPV-
patients. 10/22 HPV- patients had disease progression and 7 died. HPV-
patients who developed grade III-IV TRL two months after beginning
chemoradiation had a strikingly higher hazard rate for disease
progression than those whose TLC remained higher (multivariate analysis
HR 6.2, 95%CI: 1.1-35.2; p=0.039). Too few events occurred in the HPV+
cohort for analysis.Conclusion:TLCs were normal before chemoradiation.
However, two months after chemoradiation 60% of patients had severe TLC
regardless of HPV status. HPV- patients with severe TRL were much more
likely to have disease progression than those without TRL. Prospective
studies are needed to confirm these findings which are similar to those
reported in other cancers. Preservation of the immune system during
chemoradiation may be important to improving PFS and OS.Citation Format:
Jian L. Campian, Guneet Sarai, Xiaobu Ye, Shanthi Marur, Stuart A.
Grossman. The association between severe treatment-related lymphopenia
and progression free survival in patients with newly diagnosed squamous
cell head and neck cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2420. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2420

