Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Levels of IL-12 family cytokines in ascitic fluid are associated
with extent and resectability of ovarian cancer and correlate with
overall survival.


Background: Ovarian cancer (OC) is commonly associated with ascites and
predominantly remains in the peritoneal cavity. Soluble factors present
in ascites such as growth factors and cytokines likely play a key role in
local tumor behavior including stage, invasiveness and resectability and
survival. Members of IL-12 family (IL-12p70, IL-23, IL-27 and IL-35) play
a critical role in the regulation of inflammatory response. However,
their role as local factors in ovarian cancer growth has not been well
studied. We hypothesized that that the level of these important
immunomodulatory and pro-inflammatory cytokines are associated with the
clinical behavior of OC.Methods: Ascites fluid was collected and analyzed
from women undergoing maximal debulking surgery for presumed OC, and
relevant clinical endpoints were abstracted. Concentrations of IL-12
related cytokines (IL-23, IL-27, IL-35, and IL-12p70) were assessed by
ELISA. Cytokines were also assessed on matching pre-surgery plasma
samples. Cytokine concentrations between matched ascites and plasma
samples were examined using scatter plots and Spearman correlations.
Associations between ascites concentrations and clinical characteristics
were assessed using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests. Associations between ascites
levels with overall survival in newly diagnosed invasive OC patients were
assessed by Cox proportional hazards models using a log2
transformation.Results: Ascites fluid was analyzed from 20 patients with
primary epithelial OC including 18 serous histology, 19 patients with
stage III or IV disease: 16 (80%) were optimally debulked. We observed
that higher levels of IL-12p70 were associated with locally invasive
disease including higher rates of sub-optimal debulking (p=0.0074) and
stage IV disease (p=0.012). For other IL-12 family members we observed
similar associations between higher cytokine levels and suboptimal
disease and stage IV disease including IL-23 (p=0.73, p=0.17), IL-27
(p=0.041, p=0.018), and IL35 (p=0.12, p=0.11), respectively. In addition,
increase in IL-23 was associated with worse overall survival (log2 HR =
1.85, p=0.031).Conclusions: Higher levels of IL-12 family of cytokines in
ascitic fluid are associated with several surrogates of biological
aggressiveness in OC including stage, resectability and survival. Given
the importance of local tumor environment on clinical behavior, a
detailed understanding of IL-12 pathway may help in developing novel
therapeutic strategies to treat OC.

