Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIK3CA mutations in primary HER2-positive and triple negative
breast cancer.


Background: Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway aberrations
are common in breast cancer. PIK3CA mutations are the most frequent ones
in breast cancer. Mutations were most frequently found in exons 9 and 20.
Reported data is discrepant with regard to prognostic or predictive value
of PIK3CA mutations especially in HER2+ve breast cancer. We therefore
investigate PIK3CA mutations in HER2+ve and triple negative (TN) primary
breast cancer (BC) and correlate the mutations with pathological complete
response (pCR) after neoadjuvant therapy. Methods: We prospectively
evaluated PIK3CA mutations in the 600 participants of the neoadjuvant
Geparsixto study (NCT01426880). The study investigates the effect of
adding carboplatin to a liposomal doxorubicin/taxane combination for the
treatment of patients with HER2+ve and TN primary BC. HER2+ve patients
received concomitantly trastuzumab and lapatinib, the TN patients
bevacizumab. HER2, hormone receptors (HR), and Ki67 were centrally
confirmed. PIK3CA genotyped in tumor material from formalin fixed,
paraffin embedded core biopsies before therapy using classical Sanger
sequencing of exon 9 and 20. Results: From September 2011 to November
2012, 600 patients with centrally confirmed HER2+ve or TN primary BC have
been included in the Geparsixto study. Median age was 46 years (range
21-78); most tumors were cT2 (66%); cN0 (60%); ductal invasive (92%),
grade 3 (65%); within the HER2+ve group 62% were HR positive. So far, in
344 randomized patients PIK3CA mutations have been evaluated, 155 with
HER2+ve and 189 with TN disease. Overall at least one mutation could be
detected in 17.9%; in 19.4% of the HER2+ve and 6.3% of the TN BC. An exon
9 mutation could be detected in 7.8% of the HER2+ve and 3.2 of the TNBC
cases and an exon 20 mutation in 12.6% of the HER2+ve and 4.2 of the TN
cases. A mutation in both exons was detectable in one case only. PIK3CA
mutations were more frequent in the HER2+ve/HR+ve group 22.9% vs 13.6% in
the HER2+ve/HR-ve group. Conclusion: PIK3CA mutations are more frequent
in HER2+ve than in TN BC which is in line with previous reports. Results
on all 600 patients and correlation with pCR in the two subgroups will be
presented at the meeting.The project has been funded within the EU-FP7
project RESPONSIFY No 278659.

