Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of telmisartan on triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and
lung cancer tumor progression and intratumoral distribution of
nanoparticles.


Introduction: The intratumoral distribution of tumor targeted
nanoparticles (NP) is hindered by dense collagen network and highly
fibrous interstitium. Use of antifibrotic agents can decrease tumor
interstitial fibrosis and promote NP intratumoral distribution. The
objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of Telmisartan (TEL,
AT1 blocker/PPAR- agonist) and Losartan (LOS, AT1 blocker) on NPs
intratumoral distribution and anticancer effects in TNBC and lung
cancer.Methods: Anticancer effect of TEL (5 mg/kg) and LOS (20 mg/kg) by
inhalation and oral route were evaluated using Non-small cell lung cancer
(A549 orthotopic and metastatic model) and triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC, MDA-MB-231 orthotopic model) in Nu/nu mice. Also, to study
intratumoral distribution, fluorescent polystyrene NP (FPNP) were
administered intravenously followed by fluorescent microscopy. Tumor
fibrous nature was characterized by estimating collagen-1, transforming
growth factor beta1 (TGF-;1) expression by IHC and ELISA. Collagen
deposition in the tumor interstitium was studied by Masson's Trichome
staining. To correlate the AT1 receptor blockage to anticancer effects,
expression of VEGF, cleaved caspase-3, MMP-9 and microvessel densities
(CD31) were quantified by IHC and western blotting. Epithelial
Mesenchymal transition (EMT) mediated tumor metastasis was characterized
by expressions of E-Cadherin and Vimentin.Results: TEL showed significant
antitumor effects in both lung and TNBC tumor models. TEL at 1/4th dose
produced superior anticancer effects than LOS. Survival rate was extended
with TEL compare to LOS & untreated control. Further, Paclitaxel-NP
produced better tumor regression in inhalation with TEL compared to
single agent treatment and control. The fibrous nature of lung tumors and
TNBC was decreased significantly (pIntroduction: The intratumoral
distribution of tumor targeted nanoparticles (NP) is hindered by dense
collagen network and highly fibrous interstitium. Use of antifibrotic
agents can decrease tumor interstitial fibrosis and promote NP
intratumoral distribution. The objective of this study was to evaluate
the effect of Telmisartan (TEL, AT1 blocker/PPAR- agonist) and Losartan
(LOS, AT1 blocker) on NPs intratumoral distribution and anticancer
effects in TNBC and lung cancer.Methods: Anticancer effect of TEL (5
mg/kg) and LOS (20 mg/kg) by inhalation and oral route were evaluated
using Non-small cell lung cancer (A549 orthotopic and metastatic model)
and triple negative breast cancer (TNBC, MDA-MB-231 orthotopic model) in
Nu/nu mice. Also, to study intratumoral distribution, fluorescent
polystyrene NP (FPNP) were administered intravenously followed by
fluorescent microscopy. Tumor fibrous nature was characterized by
estimating collagen-1, transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-;1)
expression by IHC and ELISA. Collagen deposition in the tumor
interstitium was studied by Masson's Trichome staining. To correlate the
AT1 receptor blockage to anticancer effects, expression of VEGF, cleaved
caspase-3, MMP-9 and microvessel densities (CD31) were quantified by IHC
and western blotting. Epithelial Mesenchymal transition (EMT) mediated
tumor metastasis was characterized by expressions of E-Cadherin and
Vimentin.Results: TEL showed significant antitumor effects in both lung
and TNBC tumor models. TEL at 1/4th dose produced superior anticancer
effects than LOS. Survival rate was extended with TEL compare to LOS &
untreated control. Further, Paclitaxel-NP produced better tumor
regression in inhalation with TEL compared to single agent treatment and
control. The fibrous nature of lung tumors and TNBC was decreased
significantly (p<0.05) with TEL and LOS treatment based on expression of
collagen-1 and TGF-;1. This allowed better FPNP distribution into the
tumors compared to control. Further, compared to control tumors, LOS and
TEL treated group resulted in 5.33 and 14.33 fold increase in NP
distribution. Similarly, Paclitaxel-NP distribution was superior in
combination with TEL & LOS treatment, which in turn exhibited synergistic
anticancer effects. TEL treatment resulted in the decreased metastatic
tumor nodules and tumor volumes. The metastatic markers MMP-9 & vimentin
levels were significantly decreased (pIntroduction: The intratumoral
distribution of tumor targeted nanoparticles (NP) is hindered by dense
collagen network and highly fibrous interstitium. Use of antifibrotic
agents can decrease tumor interstitial fibrosis and promote NP
intratumoral distribution. The objective of this study was to evaluate
the effect of Telmisartan (TEL, AT1 blocker/PPAR- agonist) and Losartan
(LOS, AT1 blocker) on NPs intratumoral distribution and anticancer
effects in TNBC and lung cancer.Methods: Anticancer effect of TEL (5
mg/kg) and LOS (20 mg/kg) by inhalation and oral route were evaluated
using Non-small cell lung cancer (A549 orthotopic and metastatic model)
and triple negative breast cancer (TNBC, MDA-MB-231 orthotopic model) in
Nu/nu mice. Also, to study intratumoral distribution, fluorescent
polystyrene NP (FPNP) were administered intravenously followed by
fluorescent microscopy. Tumor fibrous nature was characterized by
estimating collagen-1, transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-;1)
expression by IHC and ELISA. Collagen deposition in the tumor
interstitium was studied by Masson's Trichome staining. To correlate the
AT1 receptor blockage to anticancer effects, expression of VEGF, cleaved
caspase-3, MMP-9 and microvessel densities (CD31) were quantified by IHC
and western blotting. Epithelial Mesenchymal transition (EMT) mediated
tumor metastasis was characterized by expressions of E-Cadherin and
Vimentin.Results: TEL showed significant antitumor effects in both lung
and TNBC tumor models. TEL at 1/4th dose produced superior anticancer
effects than LOS. Survival rate was extended with TEL compare to LOS &
untreated control. Further, Paclitaxel-NP produced better tumor
regression in inhalation with TEL compared to single agent treatment and
control. The fibrous nature of lung tumors and TNBC was decreased
significantly (p<0.05) with TEL and LOS treatment based on expression of
collagen-1 and TGF-;1. This allowed better FPNP distribution into the
tumors compared to control. Further, compared to control tumors, LOS and
TEL treated group resulted in 5.33 and 14.33 fold increase in NP
distribution. Similarly, Paclitaxel-NP distribution was superior in
combination with TEL & LOS treatment, which in turn exhibited synergistic
anticancer effects. TEL treatment resulted in the decreased metastatic
tumor nodules and tumor volumes. The metastatic markers MMP-9 & vimentin
levels were significantly decreased (p<0.001) in TEL group compared to
LOS & control, suggesting the promising effects of TEL in tumor
anti-metastasis. Further, our study also demonstrated the safety of TEL
upon inhalation route.Conclusion: Telmisartan showed significant
anticancer effects in Lung cancer and TNBC. Telmisartan could be an ideal
candidate for combination therapy to improve the NPs intratumoral
distribution and anticancer effects in various cancer types.

