Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Th17 cells in the microenvironment of oral squamous
cell carcinoma.


Objective: To find out if there is any abnormal in the Th17 level of OSCC
patients in vivo, to affirm their inhibitory effects on OSCC and find
relative mechanism.To find new way to control OSCC though Th-17 relatived
pathway.Methods: Flow cytometry was used to evaluate the level of Th17
and Treg in the peripheral blood samples of OSCC patients and control
group. Th17 and Treg in The tumor microenvironment were detected too and
the relation between them was evaluated. Stable transfection was
performed to transfect human tongue carcinoma cell line TCA8113 with
human-IL-17a gene. TCA8113/IL-17 cell and hu-PBL -SCID-beige mice were
used to investigate the change of the tumor microenvironment and the
possible mechanism of how Th17 inhibite the OSCC tumor grow.Results: The
level of Th17 cells in the peripheral blood of OSCC patients is higher
than the normal control group; The level of CD4 + CD25high CD127lowT cell
in peripheral blood of OSCC patients was higher than the normal control.
The level of CD31+Treg in peripheral blood of OSCC patients was higher
than the normal control. Th17 cells and Treg infiltration were found in
the local tumor microenvironment of OSCC and a inverse relationship
between them was found. The second part: TCA8113/IL-17 cell which stable
express IL-17A was successfully established, and the shape was good. The
proliferation of cells in vitro was samiliar to TCA8113 and
TCA8113/PCDNA3.1 cells.The Hu-PBL-SCID-beige mice immune reconstitution
model was successfully established, and human-IgG can be detected in
peripheral blood of all mice with an average concentration of 2.105g/L.
The success rate of reconstruction was 100%.Experimental mouse model of
OSCC were constructed with TCA8113, TCA8113/IL-17, and TCA8113/pcDNA3.1
cell. Success rate was 95%.Tumor growth rate in T +17 group was lower
than T and T+P group. The final tumor volume of T+17 group (1.219
0.626cm3) was lower than T group (2.858 1.188cm3) and T+P group
(2.591.199 cm3).The mRNA and protein expression levels of IL-17a, IL-6,
granzyme B and RORt in T+17 group were higher than the T group and T + P
group.Conclusion:Th17 and Treg levels of peripheral blood were increased
in OSCC patients, but there was no relation between them. The immune
environment in OSCC patients was in a suppressive state. CD4 +
CD25highCD127low was a better way than o CD4+CD25highFoxP3+ to marked
Treg in OSCC. Infiltration of Th17 and Treg in tumor microenviroment
could be evaluated, and negative correlation between them could be
investigated. Treg in the OSCC microenvironment may inhibited the Th17
differentiation and function.

