Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trastuzumab effect on cell death and proliferation of HER2+
mammary adenocarcinoma cells using a tridimensional culture


HER2 is overexpressed in 20-25% invasive breast tumors, and associated
with low free disease survival. Trastuzumab (Tz), monoclonal antibody
anti HER2, is used as immunotherapy to treat HER2+ tumors; however more
than half of them are resistant or acquire resistance during treatment.
Cellular spheroids are a model of cell growth in 3D that mimic the
structure of in vivo avascular tumors. We have previously demonstrated
that tumor spheroids (TS) present different subpopulations, with a
gradient of proliferative, quiescente and apoptotic cells from the outer
rim towards the hypoxic core.The aim of this study was to analyze the
biological characteristics of the different cell populations that
constitute the TS and their response to Tz.TS of HER2+ human mammary
tumor cells (cell line BT474) were cultured as cell suspensions on agar
(hanging drop method) in 48-well plates (1 spheroid / well). Cell cycle
at days 7, 14 and 21 of TS growth was analyzed by flow cytometry. A
significant increase only in the G2/M phase (6.6%, 10.3% and 13.3%
respectively) was detected. TS were incubated with Tz at a concentration
of 50ug/ml; a commercial IgG (50ug/mL) was used as negative control. The
effect on cell growth kinetics was evaluated with photographs taken at
different times, observing a reduction of the spheroids volume until they
reached a decrease by 71% at day 20 (pHER2 is overexpressed in 20-25%
invasive breast tumors, and associated with low free disease survival.
Trastuzumab (Tz), monoclonal antibody anti HER2, is used as immunotherapy
to treat HER2+ tumors; however more than half of them are resistant or
acquire resistance during treatment. Cellular spheroids are a model of
cell growth in 3D that mimic the structure of in vivo avascular tumors.
We have previously demonstrated that tumor spheroids (TS) present
different subpopulations, with a gradient of proliferative, quiescente
and apoptotic cells from the outer rim towards the hypoxic core.The aim
of this study was to analyze the biological characteristics of the
different cell populations that constitute the TS and their response to
Tz.TS of HER2+ human mammary tumor cells (cell line BT474) were cultured
as cell suspensions on agar (hanging drop method) in 48-well plates (1
spheroid / well). Cell cycle at days 7, 14 and 21 of TS growth was
analyzed by flow cytometry. A significant increase only in the G2/M phase
(6.6%, 10.3% and 13.3% respectively) was detected. TS were incubated with
Tz at a concentration of 50ug/ml; a commercial IgG (50ug/mL) was used as
negative control. The effect on cell growth kinetics was evaluated with
photographs taken at different times, observing a reduction of the
spheroids volume until they reached a decrease by 71% at day 20 (p<0.01
vs controls). Tz induced an increase in the% of cells arrested in G1
(80.8% vs 64.7% control IgG, pHER2 is overexpressed in 20-25% invasive
breast tumors, and associated with low free disease survival. Trastuzumab
(Tz), monoclonal antibody anti HER2, is used as immunotherapy to treat
HER2+ tumors; however more than half of them are resistant or acquire
resistance during treatment. Cellular spheroids are a model of cell
growth in 3D that mimic the structure of in vivo avascular tumors. We
have previously demonstrated that tumor spheroids (TS) present different
subpopulations, with a gradient of proliferative, quiescente and
apoptotic cells from the outer rim towards the hypoxic core.The aim of
this study was to analyze the biological characteristics of the different
cell populations that constitute the TS and their response to Tz.TS of
HER2+ human mammary tumor cells (cell line BT474) were cultured as cell
suspensions on agar (hanging drop method) in 48-well plates (1 spheroid /
well). Cell cycle at days 7, 14 and 21 of TS growth was analyzed by flow
cytometry. A significant increase only in the G2/M phase (6.6%, 10.3% and
13.3% respectively) was detected. TS were incubated with Tz at a
concentration of 50ug/ml; a commercial IgG (50ug/mL) was used as negative
control. The effect on cell growth kinetics was evaluated with
photographs taken at different times, observing a reduction of the
spheroids volume until they reached a decrease by 71% at day 20 (p<0.01
vs controls). Tz induced an increase in the% of cells arrested in G1
(80.8% vs 64.7% control IgG, p<0.001) and a decrease in the proliferative
subpopulation (7.4% vs 11.4%, pHER2 is overexpressed in 20-25% invasive
breast tumors, and associated with low free disease survival. Trastuzumab
(Tz), monoclonal antibody anti HER2, is used as immunotherapy to treat
HER2+ tumors; however more than half of them are resistant or acquire
resistance during treatment. Cellular spheroids are a model of cell
growth in 3D that mimic the structure of in vivo avascular tumors. We
have previously demonstrated that tumor spheroids (TS) present different
subpopulations, with a gradient of proliferative, quiescente and
apoptotic cells from the outer rim towards the hypoxic core.The aim of
this study was to analyze the biological characteristics of the different
cell populations that constitute the TS and their response to Tz.TS of
HER2+ human mammary tumor cells (cell line BT474) were cultured as cell
suspensions on agar (hanging drop method) in 48-well plates (1 spheroid /
well). Cell cycle at days 7, 14 and 21 of TS growth was analyzed by flow
cytometry. A significant increase only in the G2/M phase (6.6%, 10.3% and
13.3% respectively) was detected. TS were incubated with Tz at a
concentration of 50ug/ml; a commercial IgG (50ug/mL) was used as negative
control. The effect on cell growth kinetics was evaluated with
photographs taken at different times, observing a reduction of the
spheroids volume until they reached a decrease by 71% at day 20 (p<0.01
vs controls). Tz induced an increase in the% of cells arrested in G1
(80.8% vs 64.7% control IgG, p<0.001) and a decrease in the proliferative
subpopulation (7.4% vs 11.4%, p<0.05). A decrease in the% of apoptotic
cells was also detected (Annexin V/IP). When we analyzed cell viability
at different time points, we observed that Tz elicited changes in live to
dead cells ratio. A reversion of the inhibitory effect of Tz on TS growth
was observed after antibody withdrawal.Spheroids were fixed and included
in paraffin to analyze the expression of HER2, pHER2, clived caspase 3,
HIF-1a, p27, p21 and cyclinD1 by confocal microscopy. HER2 expression was
not modulated by Tz; however, we observed lower expression of its
activated receptor (pHER2). HIF-1a was expressed only in cells around the
central core while clived caspase 3 was expressed in the central core.
After Tz incubation, both markers were no longer detected.We can conclude
that Tz exerted a potent antiproliferative and direct cytotoxic effect on
BT474 tumor cells growing in 3D; these activities might be due to the
partial inhibition of HER2 activation. Tz inhibited the formation of the
hypoxic core and therefore the apoptotic subpopulation, generating
thereby a smaller TS composed only of remaining Tz-resistant living
cells. We propose that this model could be useful to study the mechanisms
involved in the effect and on the resistance to Tz.

