Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IMGN289, an EGFR-targeting antibody-maytansinoid conjugate with
potent activity against non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) regardless of
dependency on EGFR pathway.


NSCLC accounts for approximately 85% of all lung cancers. Based on tumor
histology, NSCLC can be subdivided into adenocarcinoma (AC), squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC), and large cell carcinoma (LCC), which account for
40%, 25-30% and 10-15% of NSCLC cases, respectively. In a fraction of AC
cases, driver oncogenes have been identified that enable effective
treatment with targeted therapies. For most NSCLC cases, however,
etiology is still unknown and effective targeted therapies have yet to be
achieved. Additionally, even cancers that initially respond to targeted
therapies eventually develop resistance, creating the need for other
therapeutic approaches.EGFR is one of the best characterized driver
oncogenes in NSCLC and also is frequently expressed at high levels in
this indication. In house immunohistochemical analysis found EGFR to be
highly expressed in 23.8% of AC (n = 21), 60% of SCC (n = 10) and 50% of
LCC (n = 8), confirming published data that EGFR represents an attractive
therapeutic target for NSCLC. As a novel approach to targeting
EGFR-expressing tumors, we have developed IMGN289, an antibody-drug
conjugate (ADC) consisting of the J2898A antibody (Ab), which selectively
binds to EGFR and inhibits EGFR-driven tumor cell growth, conjugated to
the maytansinoid DM1, a potent anti-microtubule agent, via the SMCC
thioether linker. IMGN289 showed significantly enhanced cytotoxic
activity, relative to cetuximab or unconjugated J2898A, against a panel
of NSCLC cell lines dependent on EGFR signaling. In vitro, anti-EGFR Abs
typically inhibit less than 70% of tumor cell growth at 30 nM
concentration, whereas IMGN289 exposure approached 100% inhibition at a
significantly lower concentration. Enhanced potency of IMGN289 against
EGFR-dependent tumors was demonstrated in vivo in the H292 xenograft
tumor model, where the minimally effective doses of IMGN289 and its
J2898A Ab were 1 and 3 mg/kg, respectively. In addition, IMGN289 was
effective against EGFR-expressing NSCLC cells that are not dependent on
EGFR signaling and therefore resistant to anti-EGFR Abs. For example,
IMGN289 was active against H226 and H1703 mesenchymal cell lines in vitro
and H1703 xenograft tumor in vivo, while neither cetuximab nor J2898A
alone was active. IMGN289 was also active against EGFR mutant HCC827 cell
lines that have acquired resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
through T790M EGFR mutation or MET gene amplification. Thus,
EGFR-targeting IMGN289 achieves a distinct anti-tumor mechanism that is
independent of EGFR pathway inhibition.In summary, IMGN289 is highly
active against EGFR-positive NSCLC cells regardless of dependency on the
EGFR pathway and represents a promising therapeutic candidate for NSCLC.

