Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BART9, an EBV encoded miRNA, regulates E-cadherin and metastasis.


EBV is a casual agent of NPC and products of EBV genome are believed to
be involved in the pathogenesis of NPC. EBV is the first human virus
found to express microRNAs (miRNAs). EBV has been found encoded more than
forty miRNAs, the functions of which remain largely unknown. In this
study, We discovered that BART9 was expressed at high levels in NPC
tissues examined. In addition, the level of BART9 was higher than the
best documented human oncogenic miR-21. Next, we investigated the role
and mechanism of BART9 in NPC cells, and found that exogenous expression
of BART9 enhanced the migration and invasion but not proliferation of EBV
negative-NPC cells in vitro. Further, depletion of endogenous BART9
suppressed migration and invasion of EBV-positive NPC cells. We further
demonstrated that BART9 directly targeted CDH1-3-UTR and repressed the
expression of CDH1, a metastasis suppressor. In addition, restoring of
BART9-resistant CDH1 expression in BART9 over-expression cells recovered
the migratory and invasive ability of BART9. More importantly, ectopic
expression of BART9 triggered spontaneous metastasis of NPC cells in
vivo. Finally, in situ hybridization for BART9 showed strong positive
staining in paraffin-embedded nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissues and the
CDH1 protein levels have an inverse correlation with BART9 expression.
Collectively, our findings indicate that BART9 promoted migration,
invasion and metastasis in NPC. It is the first case reported that EBV
encodes an BART miRNA has effect on motility of infected cells,
suggesting a novel mechanism by which Epstein-Barr virus induces the
metastasis and recurrence of NPC.

