Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved imaging of orthotopic BxPC3 pancreatic adenocarcinoma
xenograft using animal PET/CT.


Treatment of pancreatic adenocarcinoma is difficult because the location
of the lesion is often unknown.
6-[18F]fluoro-L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine ([18F]FDOPA) is used for
imaging of neuroendocrine tumours, which take up and decarboxylate amine
precursors. [18F]FDOPA use in diagnostic pancreatic imaging has
increased, since the exocrine pancreas synthesises dopamine. We studied
the uptake of [18F]FDOPA in healthy and diseased pancreas. Mice bearing
orthotopic BxPC3 pancreatic adenocarcinoma and sham-operated controls
were pre-treated with enzyme inhibitors of aromatic amino acid
decarboxylase (AADC), catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT), monoamine
oxidase A (MAO-A) or combinations of these inhibitors. Mice were injected
with 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-glucose ([18F]FDG) or [18F]FDOPA and scanned
via positron emission tomography/computed tomography. The absolute
[18F]FDOPA uptake was determined from selected tissues using a well
counter. The intratumoural biodistribution pattern of [18F]FDOPA was
recorded autoradiographically. The main FDOPA metabolites present in
pancreatic samples were determined with high-performance liquid
chromatography. [18F]FDG uptake was high in pancreatic tumours, while
[18F]FDOPA uptake was highest in healthy pancreas and significantly lower
in tumour-bearing pancreas, independent of pre-treatment. [18F]FDOPA
uptake in pancreas was lowest with vehicle pre-treatment and highest with
pre-treatment with the inhibitor of AADC. When mice received COMT+MAO-A
inhibitors, uptake was high in healthy pancreas but low in tumour-bearing
pancreas. Unequal uptake may be due to blockade of metabolism and
increased availability of [18F]fluorodopamine due to the employed enzyme
inhibitors. Combined use of [18F]FDG and [18F]FDOPA is suitable for
imaging pancreatic tumours. Pre-treatment with COMT+MAO-A inhibitors
improved the differentiation of pancreas from surrounding tissue and
healthy pancreas from tumour.

