Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of NF-B as a prediction marker of 5-FU based adjuvant
chemotherapy for adenocarcinoma of the stomach.


Introduction: The relapse rate of gastrointestinal cancer patients who
underwent R0 resection followed by postoperative 5-FU based adjuvant
chemotherapy is approximately 40%. Therefore, it is important to identify
prediction markers of the chemotherapeutic efficacy. Recently, we
identified NF-B as a candidate relapse prediction biomarker from a
cell-based screening followed by an immunohistochemical retrospective
study (Ishida, et al PLoSONE, 2012). To evaluate the biological
significance of NF-B in the context of 5-FU-based chemotherapy, we
analyzed the biological response of NF-B stimulated by 5-FU.Materials and
Methods: Human gastric cancer cell lines (MKN45, MKN74, KE39, GSS,
KatoIII) were used. Induction and localization of NF-B in response to
5-FU by western blot and immunohistochemistry were observed.
Transcriptional products induced by 5-FU were investigated using a DNA
microarray. Knockdown of p65 and p53 genes was performed to examine their
transcriptional machinery. Both DNA binding domain mutation and codon72
polymorphism in p53 gene were also investigated. Pro/Pro variant from
codon72 affects the binding efficacy for NF-B subunit p65.Results: By
applying 5-FU, both total p65 and phosphorylated-p65 levels were
increased in the nucleus. By DNA microarray analysis, 10 transcript
products induced by 5-FU were identified. Interestingly, 5 of 10
transcripts have been known as that of p53 downstream. Theoretical
prediction of promoter binding sites of p53 and NF-B revealed that p53
binding sequences were located closer to the transcription start site
than those of NF-B. However, the density of the consensus sequences of
NF-B was higher than that of p53. Interestingly, there were many binding
sequences of NF-B in TP53 promoter, but only a few of those of p53 in p65
promoter. Knockdown of p65 gene also decreased p53 protein as well as its
downstream gene expression, such as p21. In contrast, NF-B was not
affected by TP53 knockdown. MKN45 and GSS, whose codon72 variant is
Pro/Pro are relatively resistant to 5-FU, but Arg/Arg variant of KE39 and
MKN74 is >10times sensitive to 5-FU. KatoIII with a large deletion of
TP53 is resistant to 5-FU. These facts may suggest that NF-B and p53
binding is relevant to 5-FU sensitivity.Conclusion: Present results
suggest that: (i) NF-B plays a more important role than p53 in response
to 5-FU; and (ii) NF-B may play a compensatory function in p53 mutant
cells. From a viewpoint of predicting 5-FU based chemotherapeutic
efficacy, NF-B is considered to be a 5-FU-chemosensitivity prediction
marker.

