Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- Effects on prostate cancer cell migration are mediated by
PGE2 through activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.


Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-) plays an important role in the
progression of prostate cancer. It exhibits both tumor suppressor and
tumor promoting activities. Correlations between COX-2 overexpression and
enhanced production of PGE2 have been implicated in cancer progression;
however, there are no studies indicating that TGF- effects in prostate
cancer cells involve PGE2 synthesis. In this study, we investigated TGF-
regulation of COX-1 and COX-2 expression in prostate cancer cells and
whether the effects of TGF- on cell proliferation and migration are
mediated by PGE2. COX-1 protein was ubiquitously expressed in prostate
cells; however, COX-2 protein levels were only detected in prostate
cancer cells. TGF- treatment increased COX-2 protein levels and PGE2
secretion in PC3 cells. Exogenous PGE2 and PGF2 had no effects on cell
proliferation in LNCaP, DU145, and PC3 cells while PGE2 and TGF- induced
migratory behavior only in PC3 cells. Only EP2 and EP4 receptors were
detected at mRNA levels in prostate cells. The EP4-targeting siRNA
inhibited PGE2 and TGF--induced migration of PC3 cells. PGE2 and TGF-
induced phosphorylation of AKT which was blocked by antagonists of PGE2
(EP4) receptors (L161982, AH23848) and PI3-kinase inhibitor (LY294002) in
PC3 cells. Pretreatment with L161982 or AH23848 blocked the stimulatory
effects of PGE2 and TGF- on cell migration, while LY294002 or rapamycin
completely eliminated PGE2, TGF-, and EGF-induced migration PC3 cells. We
conclude that TGF- increases COX-2 levels and PGE2 secretion in prostate
cancer cells which, in turn, mediates TGF- effects on cell migration
through the activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.Acknowledgements: These
studies were supported by the NIH/NIMHD/RCMI grant #G12MD007590,
NIH/NIMHD #5P20MD002285, and DOD grant # W8I-08-1-0077.

