Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SGI-110, a novel 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine- containing dinucleotide,
induces Cancer Germline (CG) antigen expression in Acute Myeloid Leukemia
(AML) cells.


Introduction: CG antigens are genes whose normal expression is limited to
the adult testis and embryonic ovary. Aberrant expression of these genes
is reported in solid cancers where they are known to be immunogenic. CG
targeted cancer vaccines are in clinical development for cancers with
endogenous gene expression. The CG genes NY-ESO1 and MAGEA are silent in
adult tissues due to CpG island hypermethylation. Treatment of
non-expressing cancer cell lines in vitro with hypmomethylating drugs
(HMAs) like Decitabine (DAC) and Azacytidine (AZA), both FDA approved for
patients with myeloid cancers, can induce CG gene expression. We
hypothesized that SGI-110 (Astex Pharmaceuticals, Inc.), a second
generation hypomethylating agent with superior pharmacokinetics, would
induce CG antigen genes in AML cells in vitro.Methods: HL60 and U937
cells were cultured in vitro using standard techniques and treated with
phosphate buffered saline, 0.1, 1 or 5 M SGI-110, 0.5M DAC or 2M AZA.
Results are pooled from a minimum of three replicates. Viability by
trypan blue exclusion and DNA, RNA and protein were obtained on day 5;
DNA was bisulfite converted. Methylation (LINE-1, NY-ESO1, by
pyrosequencing and MAGEA by methylation specific PCR), mRNA expression
(by RT-PCR), and protein expression (by Western blot) were
assessed.Results: Treatment with SGI-110 produced dose-dependent
cytotoxicity. Viability at 0.1, 1 and 5M SGI-110 doses was 47, 11, 8% in
HL60 cells and 91, 41, 22% in U937 cells. Viability at the 1M SGI-110
dose was comparable to 0.5M DAC (11 and 38%, respectively) and less than
2M AZA (51 and 30% respectively) in both cell lines. Baseline LINE-1
elements were 80% methylated in HL60 cells and 68% methylated in U937
cells. In both lines 1M SGI-110 produced optimal LINE-1 demethylation,
comparable to DAC. At baseline both NY-ESO1 and MAGEA3/6 promoters were
densely hypermethylated in both HL60 and U937 and neither expressed mRNA;
treatment with AZA, DAC and 1M SGI-110 hypomethylated both genes and
induced mRNA expression. No mRNA expression of CG genes was detected at
the 0.1M SGI-110 dose. NY-ESO1 and MAGEA protein expression were induced
following 1 and 5M doses of SGI-110 and DAC in both cell lines; in U937
cells AZA induced MAGEA but not NY-ESO1.Summary: SGI-110 induces global
and gene specific hypomethylation as well as mRNA and protein expression
of the CG genes NY-ESO1 and MAGEA3/6 in AML cells. This protein induction
in vitro is at least as potent as that observed following AZA and DAC
treatment. Induction of anti-MAGE specific T-cells has been reported in
myeloid cancer patients receiving AZA + Vorinostat, suggesting that
induced CG specific immunity may contribute to response to HMAs (Goodyear
et al. Blood. 2010;116:1908). These data suggest that the combination of
HMAs such as SGI-110 with CG vaccination may be of value in myeloid
malignancy.

