Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the IL-6-JAK1-STAT3-Oct-4 pathway in the dynamic
equilibrium between cancer stem cells and non-stem cancer cells.


Previous studies have demonstrated that a small subset of cancer cells is
capable of tumor initiation. The existence of tumor initiating cancer
stem cells (CSCs) has several implications in terms of future cancer
treatment and therapies. However, recently, several researchers proposed
that differentiated cancer cells (non-CSCs) can convert to stem-like
cells to maintain equilibrium. These results imply that removing CSCs may
prompt non-CSCs in the tumor to convert into stem cells to maintain the
equilibrium. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) has been found to play an important
role in the inducible formation of CSCs and their dynamic equilibrium
with non-stem cells. In this study, we used CSC-like MDA-MB231 human
breast adenocarcinoma cells and their alternate subset non-CSCs to
investigate how IL-6 regulates the conversion of non-CSCs to CSCs.
CSC-like cells formed mammospheres well, whereas most of non-stem cells
died by anoikis and only part of the remaining non-stem cells produced
viable mammospheres. Similar results were observed in xenograft tumor
formation. Data from cytokine array assay show that IL-6 was secreted
from non-CSCs when cells were cultured in ultra-low attachment plates.
IL-6 regulates CSC-associated OCT-4 gene expression through the
IL-6-JAK1-STAT3 signal transduction pathway in non-CSCs. Inhibiting this
pathway by treatment with anti-IL-6 antibody (1 g/ml) or niclosamide
(0.5-2 M)/LLL12 (5-10 M) effectively prevented OCT-4 gene expression and
suppressed mammosphere formation of non-stem cells. These results suggest
that the IL-6-JAK1-STAT3 signal transduction pathway plays an important
role in the conversion of non-CSCs into CSCs through regulation of OCT-4
gene expression.

