Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA mismatch repair deficiency in sebaceous skin tumors: a large
case series from a single pathology practice.


Muir Torre syndrome is characterized by the presence of sebaceous skin
tumours and/or multiple keratoacanthomas, as well as a personal or family
history of internal malignancies. It is now recognized that many of these
families are a phenotypic variant of Lynch syndrome in which there is an
inherited genetic defect in one of the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes
(MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 or PMS2), and that mutation carriers may be identified
through testing sebaceous skin tumours for loss of protein expression. In
many cases, however, loss of MMR expression in skin tumours may be
sporadic in nature, and further study is required to determine whether
clinicopathological features or other tumor molecular changes can refine
the process of triaging patients for expensive genetic testing for Lynch
syndrome. The aim of this retrospective study was to assess the results
of reflex immunohistochemical screening of sebaceous skin tumours in
order to identify associations between clinicopathological features of
these tumours including subtypes, tumor location, and specific protein(s)
showing loss of expression.An audit of sebaceous tumours tested by
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for MMR expression identified 428 individuals
(149 females, 279 males) with one or more lesions tested between January
2009 and April 2012, at Sullivan Nicolaides Pathology. Patients ages
ranged from 17 to 100 years. A total of 450 skin lesions were examined:
232 sebaceous adenomas, 66 sebaceous carcinomas, 82 sebaceomas, 27
sebaceous hyperplasias, 12 sebaceous tumours NOS, as well as 14 squamous
cell and 13 basal cell carcinomas with sebaceous differentiation, and 4
keratoacanthomas. Excluding unclassified sebaceous tumours, MMR
deficiency was detected in a total of 129/438 (29%) lesions. Of the MMR
deficient tumours 97 showed loss of MSH2 and MSH6 (75%), with MLH1/PMS2
loss observed in 21 (16%) cases, solitary MSH6 loss in 10 (8%), and PMS2
loss alone in one (1%). No statistical association was found between MMR
deficiency and gender (81/279 (29%) males; 37/149 (25%) females), or
patient age (68 yr MMR deficient vs. 65 yr MMR normal). The majority of
tumours were located on the head and neck (366/447: 82%), while 52 (12%)
were on the trunk and 19 (4%) on the limbs. While most MMR deficient
tumours were located on the head and neck (84/366; 23%), MMR loss of
expression was more commonly observed in lesions on the trunk (36/62;
58%) and limbs (9/19; 47%), and MLH1/PMS2 and MSH6 only losses were
proportionally more common in non-head and neck sites. MMR loss was most
commonly observed in sebaceous adenomas (84/232: 36%) and sebaceomas
(22/82: 27%), and less frequently in other sebaceous lesions. We have
identified MMR deficiency in a significant number of sebaceous skin
lesions, yet it remains unclear from the current data what proportion of
these patients have a germline mutation in an MMR gene and thus have Muir
Torre (Lynch) syndrome.

