Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression levels of TOX3 and the risk allele of the associated
SNP rs3803662 predict adverse outcome for breast cancer patients.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women. Genome-wide association
studies have identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that
increase the risk of breast cancer. The minor allele of SNP rs3803662 has
been shown to correlate with increased breast cancer risk in women of
European descent as well as with lower expression of TOX3. The SNP is
located on chromosome 16q12.1 approximately 4 kb upstream of the gene.
The aim of the study was to examine the association of the risk allele
with the expression of TOX3 as well as the correlation of the mRNA levels
and genotype with clinical and pathological characteristics. The SNP was
genotyped in normal DNA from 160 breast cancer patients. The mRNA levels
were measured in breast tumors by gene expression microarrays and
confirmed by quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR. The clinical and tumor
characteristics were retrieved from hospital records and their
association with the level of mRNA and the SNP was analyzed. Statistical
and survival analyses were performed in R. The association of the risk
allele of rs3803662 with lower TOX3 expression was confirmed in estrogen
receptor (ER) positive tumors. It was more often observed in lobular than
ductal tumors (p = 0.04), and carriers of the risk allele who had been
diagnosed with luminal A tumors had shorter overall survival than
carriers of the non-risk allele (p = 0.009). Correlation analysis with
tumor histopathology showed that low TOX3 mRNA levels correlated with
high Ki67 levels (p = 0.026) and tumors of the basal subtype (p Breast
cancer is the most common cancer in women. Genome-wide association
studies have identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that
increase the risk of breast cancer. The minor allele of SNP rs3803662 has
been shown to correlate with increased breast cancer risk in women of
European descent as well as with lower expression of TOX3. The SNP is
located on chromosome 16q12.1 approximately 4 kb upstream of the gene.
The aim of the study was to examine the association of the risk allele
with the expression of TOX3 as well as the correlation of the mRNA levels
and genotype with clinical and pathological characteristics. The SNP was
genotyped in normal DNA from 160 breast cancer patients. The mRNA levels
were measured in breast tumors by gene expression microarrays and
confirmed by quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR. The clinical and tumor
characteristics were retrieved from hospital records and their
association with the level of mRNA and the SNP was analyzed. Statistical
and survival analyses were performed in R. The association of the risk
allele of rs3803662 with lower TOX3 expression was confirmed in estrogen
receptor (ER) positive tumors. It was more often observed in lobular than
ductal tumors (p = 0.04), and carriers of the risk allele who had been
diagnosed with luminal A tumors had shorter overall survival than
carriers of the non-risk allele (p = 0.009). Correlation analysis with
tumor histopathology showed that low TOX3 mRNA levels correlated with
high Ki67 levels (p = 0.026) and tumors of the basal subtype (p < 0.001),
whereas high expression correlated with ER (p = 0.004) and progesterone
receptor (p = 0.005) positivity. In addition, high TOX3 mRNA levels
correlated with positive lymph nodes at time of diagnosis (p Breast
cancer is the most common cancer in women. Genome-wide association
studies have identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that
increase the risk of breast cancer. The minor allele of SNP rs3803662 has
been shown to correlate with increased breast cancer risk in women of
European descent as well as with lower expression of TOX3. The SNP is
located on chromosome 16q12.1 approximately 4 kb upstream of the gene.
The aim of the study was to examine the association of the risk allele
with the expression of TOX3 as well as the correlation of the mRNA levels
and genotype with clinical and pathological characteristics. The SNP was
genotyped in normal DNA from 160 breast cancer patients. The mRNA levels
were measured in breast tumors by gene expression microarrays and
confirmed by quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR. The clinical and tumor
characteristics were retrieved from hospital records and their
association with the level of mRNA and the SNP was analyzed. Statistical
and survival analyses were performed in R. The association of the risk
allele of rs3803662 with lower TOX3 expression was confirmed in estrogen
receptor (ER) positive tumors. It was more often observed in lobular than
ductal tumors (p = 0.04), and carriers of the risk allele who had been
diagnosed with luminal A tumors had shorter overall survival than
carriers of the non-risk allele (p = 0.009). Correlation analysis with
tumor histopathology showed that low TOX3 mRNA levels correlated with
high Ki67 levels (p = 0.026) and tumors of the basal subtype (p < 0.001),
whereas high expression correlated with ER (p = 0.004) and progesterone
receptor (p = 0.005) positivity. In addition, high TOX3 mRNA levels
correlated with positive lymph nodes at time of diagnosis (p < 0.001).
Patients with ER positive tumors and high levels of TOX3 mRNA had shorter
overall- and distant metastasis free-survival (p = 0.017 and p = 0.021,
respectively), an effect that was mostly attributable to patients with
tumors of the luminal B subtype. In conclusion, the results suggest that
the risk allele of rs3803662 has the strongest effect in patients with
tumors of the luminal A subtype. They also imply that the expression
levels of TOX3 affect the progression of breast cancer but the effect may
depend on the subtype.

