Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-educated macrophages promote proliferation of human
pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.


Macrophages promote tumor growth by stimulating tumor-associated
angiogenesis, cancer-cell invasion, migration, and intravasation, as well
as suppression of antitumor immune responses. We previously defined the
macrophages which were harvested from the peritoneal cavity of nude mice
with subcutaneous human pancreatic tumors as tumor-educated macrophages
(EM) and demonstrated EM promoted tumor growth and metastasis in
orthotopic mouse models. The aim of this study is to elucidate the
mechanism of tumor promotion by EM. Transgenic nude mice
ubiquitously-expressing GFP were injected subcutaneously with the human
pancreatic cancer cell line XPA1 stably expressing RFP in the cytoplasm
and GFP in the nucleus. GFP-expressing macrophages from the GFP mice with
the dual-color pancreatic tumor were harvested and defined as EM.
Macrophages were also harvested from transgenicGFP mice without tumors
and identified as nave macrophages (NM). EM and NM were compared for
their ability to enhance cancer-cell proliferation. Using a
skin-flap-window imaging model, the mitotic index of the cancer cells
significantly increased after injection of EM compared to NM (p = 0.001).
Next, we cultured cancer cells in 3-D on Gelfoam and found that the
cancer cells cultured with EM proliferated to a greater extent compared
to those cultured with NM (p = 0.014). We also found that the cancer
cells cultured in the conditioned medium harvested from EM had enhanced
proliferated compared to cancer cells cultured in the conditioned medium
from NM (p = 0.016). These results suggest that EM secrete factors which
increase cancer cell growth and can serve as a novel therapeutic target
for pancreatic cancer.

