Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitory effect of soluble EP2 receptor on ovarian tumor growth
in nude mice and usefulness of TMPRSS4 as a molecular target for
synergistic efficacy.


Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) plays an important role in cancer cell growth,
progression, and metastasis and exerts its effects by binding to
E-prostanoid receptor (EP). In the previous study, we showed that soluble
fragment of EP2 receptor containing the second extracellular region
(FuEP2/Ex2) has neutralizing activity to PGE2 and inhibits the growth of
prostate and endometrial cancer cells. Here, we established a stable
transfectant expressing FuEP2/Ex2 from human ovarian cancer SKOV/ip cells
(SKOV/ip-FuEP2/Ex2) and SKOV/ip-FuEP2/Ex2 and vector-control cells were
injected into nude mice intraperitoneally. Tumor weight and ascites
volume in SKOV/ip-FuEP2/Ex2-injected mice decreased significantly
compared to control cell-injected mice. Furthermore, microvessel density
and numbers of M2-poralized macrophage in tumor lesion were significantly
decreased in SKOV/ip-FuEP2/Ex2-injected mice. By using RNAs from tumor
lesion in each group, the cDNA microarray analysis was also conducted.
Six of upregulated genes and eight of downregulated genes in
SKOV/ip-FuEP2/Ex2-derived tumor were identified. In upregulated genes,
MMP-7, TMPRSS4, and CYP1B1, which is involved in cancer progression and
metastasis, were included. Treatment with AEBSF, an inhibitor of TMPRSS4,
or siRNA for TMPRSS4 further reduced cell growth of SKOV/ip-FuEP2/Ex2
cells in vitro and in vivo. Our results suggest that FuEP2/Ex2 has a
suppressive effect in peritoneal metastasis model of ovarian cancer and
that MMP-7, TMPRSS4, and CYP1B1 may act as a survival factor under the
condition in which EP-mediated signaling are inhibited. Moreover,
targeting of TMPRSS4 may enhance the inhibitory effect of FuEP2/Ex2 on
ovarian cancer metastasis.

