Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in immune cell populations in relapsed/refractory CLL
patients treated with a Bruton's Tyrosine Kinase (BTK) Inhibitor,
Ibrutinib (PCI-32765), in combination with Bendamustine and Rituximab
(BR).


Although chemoimmunotherapy has led to higher response rates in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), most patients relapse due to emergence of
resistant subclones. Here, we analyzed changes in immune cell (IC)
populations of 29 subjects with relapsed/refractory CLL enrolled in
PCYC-1108, a Phase 1b, open-label, parallel-group, nonrandomized,
multicenter study of ibrutinib (PCI-32765) in combination with BR
(O'Brien et al; ASCO 2012). Mononuclear cells were collected and
cryopreserved at 4 time points: 1: just prior to therapy, 2: cycle 1 day
15 (d15), 3: at start of cycle 3 (d 60) and; 4: at the end of study (d
180).Based on a decrease in absolute lymphocyte count (ALC), 27/29
patients responded to this combination therapy. We analyzed residual B, T
and monocyte populations and prognostic markers, CD38 and CD49d in each
patient and grouped the cases based on percent reduction of CD19+CD5+
(CLL B cells) at all time points while on therapy. 10/29 cases (34%)
showed > 50% reduction (Grp1) whereas 41% (12/29) showed greater
retention of CLL cells (Grp2), and 7/29 cases (24%) showed variable
changes (Grp 3). Median reduction in ALC in Grp1 was 97.8% (range:
68.3-99.75) vs 87.7% (range: 77.3- 99.6) for Grp2. Grp 1 cases showed a
decrease in CD23+ and CD38+ CLL B cells at d15; although CD23+ cells
decreased further CD38+ cells increased in 8/10 Grp1 cases. CD49d+ CLL
cells remained stable in 6/10 Grp 1 and 11/12 Grp 2 cases but increased
in 4/10 Grp1 cases. A marked increase in CD3+ and CD14+ cells accompanied
the decrease in CLL B cells in cases in Grp1. Grp2 followed a different
trend: CD3+ cells decreased until d60 and eventually increased, albeit
mildly whereas their percentages of CD14+ cells did not change throughout
therapy. Such dynamic changes in IC populations prompted us to assess the
presence of dividing CLL cells, in the face of reduced ALC. Surprisingly,
although Grp1 showed decreased percentages of CLL cells, 3/10 cases
developed increased numbers of Ki-67+ CLL cells, achieving 19-43% at
d180. In Grp2, only 0.1-4.0% Ki-67+ CLL B cells were found. BCR-induced
phosphorylation of BTK was analyzed by phosphoflow. Both Grp1 and Grp2
exhibited increased BTK phosphorylation at d15 which decreased
precipitously at subsequent time points.Together, these studies indicate
that combining ibrutinib with BR effectively reduced numbers of
circulating CLL cells in >93% of cases, but relative proportions of CLL
cells only in 1/3 relapse/refractory CLL cases. Of note, the proportion
of circulating CD3+, CD14+, and Ki-67+ CLL B cells, increased
considerably in Grp 1 cases, possibly representing compensatory
proliferative changes due to increased availability of immune niches
and/or release of cells from niches. A post-protocol correlation of
clinical parameters with changes in circulating immune cell populations
is pending.

