Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiles of triple negative breast cancer
epithelial and stromal cells are predictive of treatment response.


Lacking human epithelial growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) amplification as
well as estrogen and progesterone receptors, TNBC is a heterogeneous
collection of biologically diverse cancers that likely contributes to
variable clinical outcomes for patients suffering from this disease.
Since TNBC lacks well-defined molecular targets, we recently performed
gene expression (GE) analyses and identified six distinct molecular TNBC
subtypes with unique biologies. To further decipher the contribution of
tumor epithelium and its adjacent stroma to the biology of TNBC and
clinical response to treatments, we performed GE analysis on biopsy
material from 20 TNBC patients enrolled in a phase II clinical trial
[VICC-BRE0904; a neoadjuvant study of cisplatin and paclitaxelRAD001
(mTOR inhibitor)]. We isolated RNA from both tumor epithelial and stromal
cells using laser capture microdissection. Our goal is to determine if GE
from tumor epithelial and/or stromal cells is predictive of response to
treatment. Our preliminary results indicate that there is differential GE
in both tumor epithelial as well as stromal cells in pretreatment
biopsies of responders versus non-responders. Patients with higher
expression of proliferation genes such as MKI67, KIFCI, AURKB, E2F3, and
DNA damage response genes TP53BP2, CHEK1, RPA1, BLM were more responsive
to treatment compared to non-responders. Upon completion of the phase II
clinical trial and correlative molecular analyses, we anticipate
identifying biomarkers of drug sensitivity that will provide insight to
novel combination therapies for the different subtypes of TNBC.

