Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of the DNA repair regulator PARI in pancreatic
cancers promotes genomic instability and tumorigenesis.


Inappropriate homologous recombination (HR) causes genomic instability
and cancer. We recently showed that the protein PARI, containing a
UvrD-like helicase domain, is a novel PCNA interacting partner, required
for preservation of genome stability in human and DT40 chicken cells
(Moldovan et al, Molecular Cell 2012). Using cell-based and biochemical
assays, we showed that PARI restricts unscheduled recombination by
interfering with the formation of RAD51-DNA HR structures. Thus, we
proposed that PARI is a long sought-after factor that suppresses
inappropriate recombination events at mammalian replication forks.We
recently found that PARI is specifically overexpressed in pancreatic
cancer cells (O'Connor et al, Cancer Research, in revision). PARI
up-regulation results in DNA repair deficiency and genomic instability.
Importantly, PARI knockdown compromises the proliferation of pancreatic
cancer cells in vitro. PARI depletion results in an altered cell cycle,
defined by S-phase accumulation, perturbed DNA replication, and
activation of the DNA damage response pathway in the absence of exogenous
DNA damage. Moreover, we found that in pancreatic cancer cells, PARI
overexpression results in DNA damage tolerance by promoting replication
of damaged DNA. Finally, using a xenograft tumor model in nude mice we
show that PARI knockdown reduces pancreatic tumor growth in vivo. Thus,
our work suggests that PARI is a potential target for pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma therapy.

