Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer/testis antigens: Comprehensive expression analysis and
correlation with survival in glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is a highly invasive and aggressive tumor which
confers a dismal prognosis despite advances of current therapy. Cancer
vaccines have been utilized as treatment of other tumors and might be an
option for brain tumors. Cancer/testis (CTA) genes represent promising
targets for immunotherapeutic approaches. They are expressed in tumors
and expression in normal tissues is exclusively or preferentially
restricted to testis. The expression of 31 CTA genes was investigated in
48 glioblastomas and 5 normal brain samples using RT-PCR. A tissue
microarray was made and expression of a CTA was detected by
immunohistochemical staining. Among the genes with no expression in
normal brain CTA1 (57%), CTA2 (54%), CTA3 (44%) and CTA4 (15%) were the
most expressed in glioblastomas. At least one of these four selected CTA
genes was found expressed in 86% of the GBM cases. Coexpression of two,
three and four CTA genes occurred in 25%, 17% and 5% of the examined GBM
cases, respectively. CTA4 protein expression was identified in 13%
(12/92) of GBM and was negative in all anaplastic astrocytomas (0/15),
diffuse astrocytomas (0/48), pilocytic astrocytomas (0/38) and normal
brain samples (0/40) evaluated. We found that CTA2-positive GBMs and
tumors expressing 3-4 CTA genes presented a significantly better outcome
(P = 0.032; hazards ratio = 0.53; 95% CI; 0.28 to 1.0 and P = 0.017,
hazards ratio = 0.36; 95% CI, 0.17 to 0.74; respectively). Furthermore,
multivariate survival analysis revealed that coexpression of 3-4 CTA
genes (P = 0.044, hazards ratio = 0.3, 95%CI = 0.093-0.963), radiotherapy
(P = 0.010, hazards ratio = 0.16, 95%CI = 0.04-0.65) and chemotherapy (P
= 0.001, hazards ratio = 0.10, 95% CI = 0.03-0.41) remained as
independent predictors of overall survival. In conclusion, CTAs are
potential targets for immunotherapy in patients with GBM, 86% of the
cases examined expressed at least one of four selected CTA genes. The
presence of 3-4 CTA genes was associated with better survival, suggesting
that these genes might elicit an immune response against GBM. Supported
by FAPESP(Grant 2010/20218-2 and 2011/15118-1).

