Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS mutational subtypes and copy number variations are predictive
of response of human pancreatic cancer cell lines to MEK162 in vitro.


Background: Activating mutations in KRAS have been observed in over 90%
of pancreatic tumors and are thought to be a major mechanism of
oncogenesis in pancreatic cancer. The EGFR signaling pathway serves as a
potential target for cancer therapies. Although targeting KRAS itself has
been difficult, targeting the downstream effector MEK1/2, a dual specific
kinase required for activation of ERK1/2 has proven to be worthy in both
preclinical cell lines and animal studies. MEK162 (ARRY-438192) is a
potent, selective, ATP-uncompetitive inhibitor of MEK1/2 and was found to
be effective at inhibiting growth in a cohort of solid tumors. The
objective of this preclinical study was to assess the antitumor activity
of MEK162 in pancreatic cancer comprehensively using a panel of 29
pancreatic cancer cell lines. Methods: MEK162 sensitivity in 29
pancreatic cancer cell lines was examined using a five day proliferation
assay to assess growth inhibition in vitro. Array-comparative genomic
hybridization (array-CGH) was performed on each cell line to determine
genomic copy number variation (CNV). KRAS mutational status at codon 12
and 13 was determined by PCR. Results: Sensitivity of pancreatic cancer
cell lines to MEK162 varied. There were 15 cell lines with IC50 values
less than 500nm and 14 cell lines with IC50s greater than 500nM and 1
cell line (PATU8988T) in which the IC50 was not achieved at the maximum
dose of 10uM. Although significant CNV was observed in many genes, only
KRAS CNV was found to be significantly associated with sensitivity to
MEK162 (p =0.007). In 15 cell lines with IC50 500nM (resistant lines), 10
had detectable KRAS copy number variations (gains and losses), and 4 had
normal levels of KRAS. KRAS mutational subtypes were also associated with
sensitivity. Although, the average IC50 of cells with wildtype KRAS (n=4)
was not statistically different from those with mutant KRAS (n=25), those
cell lines with a KRAS(V12) mutation (n=12) were significantly more
resistant to MEK 162 than those with wildtype (n=4) or KRAS(D12)
mutations (n=10). Activating mutations resulting in a polar amino acid
[KRAS(D12), KRAS(R12) or KRAS(C12)] were more sensitive to MEK162 than
nonpolar amino acids [KRAS(V12) (p-value=0.01466)]. Finally, we showed
that cells with a KRAS CNV and KRAS(V12) mutation (n=7) were less
sensitive than cells having neither KRAS CNV or KRAS(V12) mutation (n=14)
(p-value=0.0007). The remaining 8 cell lines had moderate sensitivity to
MEK inhibition. Conclusions: Our study has established that MEK162
sensitivity in pancreatic cancer cells lines is associated with KRAS CNV
and mutational subtype. Clinical validation of these markers is required.

