Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation profile of markers for epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and stem cell in tamoxifen-resistant MCF-7 breast cancer cell
line.


DNA methylation plays a key role in the epigenetic-based regulation of
gene expression. Several genes that showed increased hypomethylations of
gene promotors in antiestrogen-resistant breast cancer cells were found
to be increased in tumor cells and possess oncogenic activity. The
purpose of this study is to investigate the differences of methylation
profiles, especially EMT markers, between tamoxifen-sensitive breast
cancer cell lines and tamoxifen-resistant cell lines using MCF7 and
tamoxifen-resistant MCF7 (MCF7-R) cell lines, and then to indentify the
presence of the identified markers in the breast tissues of recurred
patients with antiestrogen treatments. Bisulphite-converted genomic DNA
was assayed on Infinium Human Methylation 450K Beadchips using the
Illumina Infinium HD methylation assay kit using four groups of the cells
including MCF7, MCF7-R, MCF+E2 and MCF7-R+E2. . In MCF7-R cells, 31023
CpG sites showed altered methylations, with 13617 hypomethylated and
17406 hypermethylated, compared with MCF7. The numbers of hypomethylated
and hypermethylated CpG sites in the promoter regions were 4719 and 3347,
respectively. Among the well-known EMT markers, the genes meeting the
results of methylation status selected were CTNNB1, SNAIL2, TWIST1, LEF1,
GSC and ETS1. Although the results of the current study suggest that
aberrant DNA methylations of EMT markers are not the main force driving
the molecular biology of resistance against antiestrogen therapy, these
will contribute and result in to some extent.

