Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A functional interaction between alpha-fetoprotein and miRNA-29
modulates the HCC epigenome.


Globally, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for 70-85% of primary
liver cancers and ranks second in the leading cause of male cancer death.
Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), normally expressed during fetal
development, is reactivated in 60% of HCC tumors and associated with poor
patient outcome. We hypothesize that AFP+ and AFP- tumors may differ
biologically and have different prognosis in HCC patients. Using
microarray-based global microRNA and mRNA profiling, we found that
members of the miR-29 family are the most significantly (pGlobally,
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for 70-85% of primary liver
cancers and ranks second in the leading cause of male cancer death. Serum
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), normally expressed during fetal development, is
reactivated in 60% of HCC tumors and associated with poor patient
outcome. We hypothesize that AFP+ and AFP- tumors may differ biologically
and have different prognosis in HCC patients. Using microarray-based
global microRNA and mRNA profiling, we found that members of the miR-29
family are the most significantly (p<1E-5) down-regulated miRs in AFP+
tumors (n=242). Physiologically, during mouse embryonic development,
miR-29 family expression is low but gradually increases after birth,
contrary to AFP expression which dramatically decreases after birth. In
addition, a member of the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) family, DNMT3A, is
one of the most significantly (p=8E-6) up-regulated genes in AFP+ HCC.
Interestingly, there is a significant inverse correlation (pGlobally,
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for 70-85% of primary liver
cancers and ranks second in the leading cause of male cancer death. Serum
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), normally expressed during fetal development, is
reactivated in 60% of HCC tumors and associated with poor patient
outcome. We hypothesize that AFP+ and AFP- tumors may differ biologically
and have different prognosis in HCC patients. Using microarray-based
global microRNA and mRNA profiling, we found that members of the miR-29
family are the most significantly (p<1E-5) down-regulated miRs in AFP+
tumors (n=242). Physiologically, during mouse embryonic development,
miR-29 family expression is low but gradually increases after birth,
contrary to AFP expression which dramatically decreases after birth. In
addition, a member of the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) family, DNMT3A, is
one of the most significantly (p=8E-6) up-regulated genes in AFP+ HCC.
Interestingly, there is a significant inverse correlation (p<1E-4)
between miR-29 and DNMT gene expression, suggesting that they may be
functionally antagonistic, which is consistent with the finding showing
that DNMT3A and DNMT3B are direct targets of miR-29. Experimentally, we
found that increased AFP expression or the addition of AFP+ media to AFP-
cells inhibits miR-29a expression in HCC cell lines. We also found that
AFP transcriptionally regulates the promoter of miR-29a. Moreover, global
DNA methylation array profiling reveals increased methylation in HCC
patients with high levels of serum AFP. These results support our
hypothesis that AFP inhibits miR-29, which modulates epigenetic changes
that contribute to poor outcome. Taken together, this study elucidates
the mechanisms that link AFP and miR-29 expression to epigenetic
alterations and may aid in the development of novel therapeutic agents to
improve survival of HCC patients.

