Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thermochemotherapy with controlled drug delivery using a novel
magnetic anti-cancer drug .


Background:Radical surgery for patients with oral cancer may cause
dysfunction, such as dysphagia, dysarthria, or mastication disorders,
leading to decreased quality of life in cancer patients. Here, we report
the development of a novel magnetic anti-cancer drug, EI236, which may
enable us to reduce such problems. EI236 possesses three features;
anti-cancer effect alike cisplatin, controlled drug delivery using a
magnet, and hyperthermic effect upon exposure to an alternating current
magnetic field (ACMF). We thus examined the efficacy of EI236 in treating
oral cancer in a rabbit cancer model.Methods:Cell proliferation was
measured by MTT assays. We established the rabbit tongue cancer model
using VX2 cells, which are readily transplantable in vivo. Electromagnet
was used to attract EI236 to the site of tongue cancer by controlled drug
delivery (CDR), and ACMF to generate heat from EI236 (HT). Rabbits were
divided into 4 groups: control group, intravenous EI236 injection group
(5mg/kg7days) (i.v.), intravenous EI236 injection + electromagnet group
(i.v. + CDR), intravenous EI236 injection + electromagnet + ACMF group
(i.v. + CDR + HT). The size of tumors was measured daily for 7 days,
followed by histopathological evaluation. Of note, EI236 was injected at
the same dose in the three groups.Results:EI236 showed anti-cancer
effects in a dose-dependent manner in VX2 cells. The IC50 value of EI236
was 7.5M in cultured cells. The resultant tumor volume after EI236 i.v.
injection treatment in rabbits was as follows; 319.340.0% for control,
228.594.3% for i.v., 91.527.4X% for i.v. + CDR, 248.2% for i.v. + CDR +
HT, indicating that the i.v. + CDR + HT group showed the greatest
decrease. It also showed the largest necrotic area in H-E staining
analysis. The tumor cell nucleus, as determined by Ki67 staining, were
mostly disappeared.Conclusion:Anti-cancer effect of EI236 was
synergistically increased in the presence of CDR and/or HT. EI236 may
serve as a novel anti-cancer therapy that enables CDR and HT at the same
time.

