Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of CD146/Latexin as a novel pathway suppressing breast
tumor invasion.


CD146, also known as melanoma cell adhesion molecule or MUC18, was
initially identified as a promoter of melanoma as well as prostate cancer
progression and metastasis. Interestingly, however, CD146 appears to be a
breast cancer (BC) tumor suppressor. The molecular mechanism of CD146 in
cancer are still nascent and controversial. To address this discrepancy,
we applied microarray gene expression profiling analysis, using a
tetracycline (tet On)-inducible system of CD146 in the MDA-MB-231 BC cell
line, and identified latexin (LXN) as a potential CD146-downstream
signaling transcriptional target. LXN showed a 7 fold increase, which was
confirmed in vitro by both time-course western blotting and RT-PCR
analyses. In addition, NF-kappaB was identified as the molecular link
between CD146 induction and LXN transactivation.More interestingly, we
established the CD146-tet On inducible system in mouse BC xenograft
model, and demonstrated that in vivo induction of CD146-inhibited breast
tumor growth. Furthermore, breast tumor tissues from both Omani patients
and patients from New Orleans area in Louisiana, were examined by
immunohistochemistry for the expression of CD146 and LXN. Strikingly, the
results revealed that the expression levels of both CD146 and its
downstream target LXN showed parallel inhibition patterns in BC
progression, with high expression in both normal and benign but low or no
expression in malignant and metastatic breast tumor tissues.This study is
the first to uncover a molecular link and provide evidence for a role of
CD146/LXN-signaling in suppressing BC progression. Thus, reactivation of
LXN through pharmacological manipulation holds particular promise for
guiding the development of novel targeted-therapeutic strategies for BC.

