Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coordination of overexpressed NIMA-related kinase 2 and TRF1
results in mitotic abnormalities in breast cancer cells.


NIMA-related kinase 2 (NEK2), a serine-threonine protein kinase, plays a
role in features of mitotic progression including timing of mitotic
entry, chromatin condensation, spindle organization and cytokinesis.
Kinase death NEK2 mutant expression or NEK2 depleted cells lead to
failure of centrosome separation while NEK2 overexpression results in
premature centrosome separation. In addition, it has been revealed that
telomeric repeat binding factor 1 (TRF1) interacts directly with NEK2.
TRF1 not only regulates telomere length, but is also associated with cell
cycle regulation. However, the interactions and correlations between NEK2
and TRF1 are far from clear. Here, we show that mitotic aberrations
through NEK2 overexpression are likely to require TRF1. Our results
demonstrate that NEK2 directly binds and phosphorylates TRF1 in vitro and
in vivo through multiple sites on TRF1. NEK2 overexpression in breast
cancer cells, MCF 7 and MDA-MB-231, results in increased numbers of
centrosomes and multinucleated cells, which leads to cytokinetic failure
and aneuploidization. Additionally, TRF1 depletion by siRNA prevents the
occurrence of unaligned chromosomes by NEK2 overexpression during
metaphase. Concurrent Nek2 overexpression and TRF1 depleted cells
demonstrated 2 centrosomes per cell, similar to mock plasmid and negative
control siRNA transfected cells. Therefore, we propose that TRF1 is
required for overexpressed NEK2 to trigger abnormal mitosis and
chromosomal instability.

