Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulated sphingosine 1-phosphate signaling contributes to a
more aggressive phenotype in oral squamous cell carcinoma cells.


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the sixth most common cancer
worldwide, accounting for more than 250,000 new cases each year. Early
death usually occurs as a result of local invasion and regional lymph
node metastases and overall five year mortality rates are approximately
50%. Novel therapeutic targets are urgently required. Sphingosine
1-phosphate (S1P) regulates many biological processes associated with
tumour development and progression, with the specific effects of S1P
being determined, in part, by the profile of receptor expression in tumor
cells. Sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1), an enzyme responsible for the
production of S1P, has been reported to be overexpressed in OSCC tissues,
but the effect of S1P on the behavior of OSCC cells and the expression of
S1P receptors in OSCC has not been examined. The effect of S1P on OSCC
cells was examined by treating OSCC cell lines in vitro. S1P inhibited
the proliferation of OSCC cells but stimulated cell scattering in colony
dispersal assays, causing colonies to disperse into single, highly
migratory cells. S1P-induced cell migration was dependent on the MEK,
ROCK and Rac-1 signaling pathways. Additionally, S1P enhanced tumor cell
invasion in 3-dimensional organotypic invasion assays. S1P also protected
OSCC cells from Cisplatin-induced apoptosis, as determined in clonogenic
survival assays. Using QPCR, we show that OSCC cell lines express S1P
receptors 1-3 and that the expression of S1P1 and S1P2 was significantly
lower in 8/8 OSCC cell lines compared to normal oral keratinocytes (pOral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the sixth most common cancer worldwide,
accounting for more than 250,000 new cases each year. Early death usually
occurs as a result of local invasion and regional lymph node metastases
and overall five year mortality rates are approximately 50%. Novel
therapeutic targets are urgently required. Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P)
regulates many biological processes associated with tumour development
and progression, with the specific effects of S1P being determined, in
part, by the profile of receptor expression in tumor cells. Sphingosine
kinase 1 (SphK1), an enzyme responsible for the production of S1P, has
been reported to be overexpressed in OSCC tissues, but the effect of S1P
on the behavior of OSCC cells and the expression of S1P receptors in OSCC
has not been examined. The effect of S1P on OSCC cells was examined by
treating OSCC cell lines in vitro. S1P inhibited the proliferation of
OSCC cells but stimulated cell scattering in colony dispersal assays,
causing colonies to disperse into single, highly migratory cells.
S1P-induced cell migration was dependent on the MEK, ROCK and Rac-1
signaling pathways. Additionally, S1P enhanced tumor cell invasion in
3-dimensional organotypic invasion assays. S1P also protected OSCC cells
from Cisplatin-induced apoptosis, as determined in clonogenic survival
assays. Using QPCR, we show that OSCC cell lines express S1P receptors
1-3 and that the expression of S1P1 and S1P2 was significantly lower in
8/8 OSCC cell lines compared to normal oral keratinocytes (p<0.001),
whilst S1P3 mRNA levels were significantly higher in 6/8 cell lines
(pOral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the sixth most common cancer
worldwide, accounting for more than 250,000 new cases each year. Early
death usually occurs as a result of local invasion and regional lymph
node metastases and overall five year mortality rates are approximately
50%. Novel therapeutic targets are urgently required. Sphingosine
1-phosphate (S1P) regulates many biological processes associated with
tumour development and progression, with the specific effects of S1P
being determined, in part, by the profile of receptor expression in tumor
cells. Sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1), an enzyme responsible for the
production of S1P, has been reported to be overexpressed in OSCC tissues,
but the effect of S1P on the behavior of OSCC cells and the expression of
S1P receptors in OSCC has not been examined. The effect of S1P on OSCC
cells was examined by treating OSCC cell lines in vitro. S1P inhibited
the proliferation of OSCC cells but stimulated cell scattering in colony
dispersal assays, causing colonies to disperse into single, highly
migratory cells. S1P-induced cell migration was dependent on the MEK,
ROCK and Rac-1 signaling pathways. Additionally, S1P enhanced tumor cell
invasion in 3-dimensional organotypic invasion assays. S1P also protected
OSCC cells from Cisplatin-induced apoptosis, as determined in clonogenic
survival assays. Using QPCR, we show that OSCC cell lines express S1P
receptors 1-3 and that the expression of S1P1 and S1P2 was significantly
lower in 8/8 OSCC cell lines compared to normal oral keratinocytes
(p<0.001), whilst S1P3 mRNA levels were significantly higher in 6/8 cell
lines (p<0.001). S1P receptor expression was similarly deregulated in two
dysplasia cell lines, suggesting that alterations in S1P signalling occur
early in tumor progression. The results of the present study demonstrate
that de-regulated S1P signaling contributes to a more motile, invasive
and chemo-resistant phenotype in OSCC and indicate that the S1P-receptor
axis may represent a promising target for therapy. Work is ongoing to
examine the protein expression of S1P receptors in OSCC tissues and to
determine the precise role of the S1P3 receptor in mediating the tumor
promoting effects of S1P in OSCC cells.

