Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MAD1 1673 GA polymorphism alters the function of the mitotic
splindle assembly checkpoint and is asociated with a worse response to
induction chemotherapy and sensitivity to treatment in patients with
advanced epithelial ovarian cancer.


Introduction: MAD1, a protein of the mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint
(SAC), recognizes MAD2 through two leucine zippers, transporting and
activating MAD2, which promotes a metaphase arrest signal. A SNP of Mad1
was found to affect the SAC function that could be involved in a bad
response to therapeutic agents that alter the dynamics of microtubules.
Objective: To investigate the relationship of the polymorphism Mad1 1673
GA (rs1801368) with the efficiency of the SAC and the generation of
aneuploidies, and with the therapeutic response of patients with ovarian
cancer. Methods: The polymorphism was evaluated in 144 healthy
individuals and 91 patients. The mitotic arrest and the presence of
errors in segregation were analyzed in cultured human lymphocytes treated
with nocodazol and paclitaxel. Errors in segregation were also evaluated
in 27 biopsies of patients. Results: Allele frequencies in healthy
individuals were G: 50, A: 50, while in the patients, they were G: 38%,
A: 62% (pIntroduction: MAD1, a protein of the mitotic spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC), recognizes MAD2 through two leucine zippers,
transporting and activating MAD2, which promotes a metaphase arrest
signal. A SNP of Mad1 was found to affect the SAC function that could be
involved in a bad response to therapeutic agents that alter the dynamics
of microtubules. Objective: To investigate the relationship of the
polymorphism Mad1 1673 GA (rs1801368) with the efficiency of the SAC and
the generation of aneuploidies, and with the therapeutic response of
patients with ovarian cancer. Methods: The polymorphism was evaluated in
144 healthy individuals and 91 patients. The mitotic arrest and the
presence of errors in segregation were analyzed in cultured human
lymphocytes treated with nocodazol and paclitaxel. Errors in segregation
were also evaluated in 27 biopsies of patients. Results: Allele
frequencies in healthy individuals were G: 50, A: 50, while in the
patients, they were G: 38%, A: 62% (p<0.05). The percentage of cells with
mitotic arrest was higher in GG cells (pIntroduction: MAD1, a protein of
the mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), recognizes MAD2 through
two leucine zippers, transporting and activating MAD2, which promotes a
metaphase arrest signal. A SNP of Mad1 was found to affect the SAC
function that could be involved in a bad response to therapeutic agents
that alter the dynamics of microtubules. Objective: To investigate the
relationship of the polymorphism Mad1 1673 GA (rs1801368) with the
efficiency of the SAC and the generation of aneuploidies, and with the
therapeutic response of patients with ovarian cancer. Methods: The
polymorphism was evaluated in 144 healthy individuals and 91 patients.
The mitotic arrest and the presence of errors in segregation were
analyzed in cultured human lymphocytes treated with nocodazol and
paclitaxel. Errors in segregation were also evaluated in 27 biopsies of
patients. Results: Allele frequencies in healthy individuals were G: 50,
A: 50, while in the patients, they were G: 38%, A: 62% (p<0.05). The
percentage of cells with mitotic arrest was higher in GG cells (p<0.05).
The frequency of micronuclei and nondisjunction events increased in AA
cells (pIntroduction: MAD1, a protein of the mitotic spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC), recognizes MAD2 through two leucine zippers,
transporting and activating MAD2, which promotes a metaphase arrest
signal. A SNP of Mad1 was found to affect the SAC function that could be
involved in a bad response to therapeutic agents that alter the dynamics
of microtubules. Objective: To investigate the relationship of the
polymorphism Mad1 1673 GA (rs1801368) with the efficiency of the SAC and
the generation of aneuploidies, and with the therapeutic response of
patients with ovarian cancer. Methods: The polymorphism was evaluated in
144 healthy individuals and 91 patients. The mitotic arrest and the
presence of errors in segregation were analyzed in cultured human
lymphocytes treated with nocodazol and paclitaxel. Errors in segregation
were also evaluated in 27 biopsies of patients. Results: Allele
frequencies in healthy individuals were G: 50, A: 50, while in the
patients, they were G: 38%, A: 62% (p<0.05). The percentage of cells with
mitotic arrest was higher in GG cells (p<0.05). The frequency of
micronuclei and nondisjunction events increased in AA cells (p<0.05).
Tumors from polymorphic patients had a higher percentage of aneuploid
cells (pIntroduction: MAD1, a protein of the mitotic spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC), recognizes MAD2 through two leucine zippers,
transporting and activating MAD2, which promotes a metaphase arrest
signal. A SNP of Mad1 was found to affect the SAC function that could be
involved in a bad response to therapeutic agents that alter the dynamics
of microtubules. Objective: To investigate the relationship of the
polymorphism Mad1 1673 GA (rs1801368) with the efficiency of the SAC and
the generation of aneuploidies, and with the therapeutic response of
patients with ovarian cancer. Methods: The polymorphism was evaluated in
144 healthy individuals and 91 patients. The mitotic arrest and the
presence of errors in segregation were analyzed in cultured human
lymphocytes treated with nocodazol and paclitaxel. Errors in segregation
were also evaluated in 27 biopsies of patients. Results: Allele
frequencies in healthy individuals were G: 50, A: 50, while in the
patients, they were G: 38%, A: 62% (p<0.05). The percentage of cells with
mitotic arrest was higher in GG cells (p<0.05). The frequency of
micronuclei and nondisjunction events increased in AA cells (p<0.05).
Tumors from polymorphic patients had a higher percentage of aneuploid
cells (p<0.05). The GG patients showed a higher biochemical response,
optimal cytoreduction and sensitivity to the treatment. There were no
differences in progression-free or overall survival between both groups.
Conclusions: the polymorphism Mad1 1673 GA affects the SAC functionality,
increasing the frequency of aneuploid cells. This polymorphism modifies
the response to agents that alter the dynamics of microtubules in
patients with ovarian cancer.

