Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in sensitivity to
CNX-2006, a novel mutant-selective EGFR inhibitor which overcomes in
vitro T790M-mediated resistance in NSCLC.


Background: EGFR is an established target in advanced NSCLC, and the EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib have been
approved for the treatment of patients harbouring activating-EGFR
mutations. Unfortunately, their efficacy is limited by acquired
resistance, caused in 50% of the cases by the T790M secondary
point-mutation. Several EGFR inhibitors have been developed with the aim
to overcome such resistance. However, emergence of in vitro resistance
due to T790M amplification has been reported for second-generation
EGFR-TKIs. Therefore we evaluated the efficacy of CNX-2006, a prototype
of the novel mutant-selective EGFR-TKI CO-1686, which is currently in a
phase I clinical trial in previously treated mutant EGFR NSCLCs.Methods:
CNX-2006 was provided by Celgene Avilomics Research. Its
antiproliferative activity was tested by sulforhodamine B assay in 12
NSCLC cell lines, previously characterized for EGFR and K-Ras mutational
status and gefitinib sensitivity, including PC9GR4 and PC9DR1 (kindly
provided by Dr. Jnne, Harvard University, Boston, USA). Novel CNX-2006
resistant clones have been established starting from the EGFR T790M cells
H1975 and PC9GR4, and several markers have been characterized by RT-PCR,
kinase array and Western blot.Results: CNX-2006 inhibited cell
proliferation independently from K-Ras mutations while it was as
effective as gefitinib in activating-EGFR mutation positive cells. In the
cell lines expressing wild-type EGFR CNX-2006 and gefitinib had limited
anti-proliferative activity. CNX-2006 inhibited EGFR-T790M cells growth
up to 1000-fold more compared to wild-type EGFR cells. EGFR inhibition
was observed in cells harbouring the T790M mutation at IC50 values below
20 nM after 1 hour exposure to the drug. In contrast to gefitinib,
CNX-2006 also significantly reduced the volume of tumor spheres derived
from H1975 cells. Multiple CNX-2006 resistant clones were generated by
exposing H1975 or PC9GR4 cells to increasing drug concentrations, leading
to 30-fold resistant clones, which grow in CNX-2006 concentrations 16-20
times the initial IC50s. This resistance was retained for at least 3
months after drug removal. CNX-2006 resistant clones showed differences
in expression of several biomarkers associated with EMT, such as a 3-fold
reduction of E-cadherin mRNA and a 60-fold increase in MMP9 compared to
the parental cells.Conclusions: CNX-2006 is a potent, mutant-selective
EGFR inhibitor with excellent in vitro activity in cells with activating
EGFR mutations, as well as in cells harbouring the T790M mutation. Future
studies in mechanisms underlying EMT are warranted and might be used to
prevent CNX-2006 resistance.

