Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APE1/Ref1, a mammalian DNA repair/redox factor, increases
mitochondrial activity.


The mammalian apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 (APE1) is an essential
DNA repair protein which also functions as a redox sensor (Ref1) to
activate many transcription factors. A fraction of APE1/Ref1 protein is
localized in the mitochondria for repairing oxidative DNA damage.
However, its influence on mitochondrial activity has not been studied. We
established genetically modified mouse embryonic fibroblast cells with
extremely low APE1, at only 0.2% of the control MEFs. The APE1-knockdown
(APE1kd) MEFs grew normally although they were highly sensitive to
alkylating reagents. We analyzed the APE1kd MEFs to investigate the
effect of APE1 on mitochondrial activity. Compared to the wild-type MEFs,
the APE1kd MEFs exhibit a markedly decreased mitochondrial respiration
activity and in turn showed glycolysis at a rate higher than the
wild-type cells, which presumably compensated low ATP generation from
mitochondria. A glycolysis inhibitor, 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG) affected
ATP generation effectively, suggesting that the cells with low APE1
expression depended on glycolysis much more than the wild-type MEFs. The
change in the mitochondrial activity appeared reversible. We propose that
the presence of APE1 in the mitochondria/cytoplasm enhances mitochondrial
respiration by a mechanism unrelated to its DNA repair activity.

