Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of FGFR3 by genomic fusion in urothelial carcinoma of
the bladder.


FGFR3 is frequently activated by mutation in urothelial carcinoma of the
bladder. We demonstrate here a further method of activation, by gene
fusion following chromosomal re-arrangement. Four fusions with
transforming acid coiled-coil 3 (TACC3) resulting from 4p16.3
re-arrangement were identified. A fifth fusion following t(4;7) was with
BAI1-associated protein 2-like 1 (BAIAP2L1), also known as IRTKS (Insulin
Receptor Kinase Substrate) on chromosome 7. The FGFR3-TACC3 fusions
involve four different genomic re-arrangements resulting in three
different transcripts. The fusion proteins show constitutive
phosphorylation, activation of the MAPK pathway and transform NIH-3T3
cells. All have lost the final exon of FGFR3, which includes the PLC1
binding site. Thus PLC1 pathway activation and known PLC1-induced effects
in normal urothelial cells were not induced. The FGFR3-BAIAP2L1 fusion
retains most of BAIAP2L1 including the IRSp53/MIM domain (IMD) that
mediates actin binding and Rac interaction, while the FGFR3-TACC3 fusions
all retain the TACC domain that mediates microtubule binding. As cells
containing these fusion genes are highly sensitive to FGFR-selective
agents, detection of fusion genes may be useful in selecting patients for
targeted therapy.

