Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and biological characterization of ON108600, a small
molecule inhibitor of protein kinase CK2.


Protein kinase CK2 (Casein kinase 2) is a highly conserved,
constitutively active Ser/Thr protein kinase implicated in cellular
transformation and tumorigenesis. CK2 regulates multiple oncogenic
pathways involved in cell cycle progression, suppression of apoptosis,
hypoxia, angiogenesis, inflammation and DNA repair. Unlike other
signaling molecules such as PI3K, RAF, RAS, where genetic alterations
lead to deregulated signaling pathways, in the case of CK2, only its high
expression levels have been associated with a disease state and no
mutations have been found to date. Here we describe the mechanism of
action of ON108600 a potent small molecule inhibitor of both catalytic
subunits of protein kinase CK2.ON108600 showed broad-spectrum
anti-proliferative and cytotoxic activity in multiple cancer cell lines
while having little or no effect on normal cells. CK2 regulates Akt
signaling through phosphorylation and inactivation of PTEN and via direct
and specific phosphorylation of Akt at S129. Treatment with ON108600
resulted in dramatic reductions of phosphorylation of PTEN and Akt S129
and downstream targets of Akt in multiple cancer cell lines. Further,
phosphorylation of p21Cip1/Waf1 at Thr145 and its cytoplasmic
localization has been shown to be a poor prognostic marker in breast
cancer. ON108600 showed a dose and time dependant dephosphorylation of
p21 at Thr145 and induced a potent mitotic cell cycle arrest in most
cancer cell lines. CK2 has also been implicated in regulating Caspase
signaling via phosphorylation of caspase cleavage sites and thus exerting
its pro-survival effects. ON108600 treatment induced potent apoptosis by
activating the Caspase 3/7 signaling cascade.To understand the structural
basis of CK2 inhibition by ON108600 we performed x-ray crystallographic
studies of ON108600-CK2. The co-crystal structure of ON108600-CK2
revealed that ON108600 binds in the active site pocket of CK2 wherein it
mimics the binding of GTP in the CK2 active site. Structural studies also
revealed that ON108600 induces a conformational change in the 4-5 loop of
the catalytic subunit which is known to interact with the -regulatory
subunit of CK2 and critical for substrate recognition and activation. CK2
has been reported to be a structural microtubule associated protein and
the CK2 holoenzyme has been shown to regulate microtubule dynamics.
Interestingly, ON108600 was found to inhibit CK2 holoenzyme mediated
polymerization of -tubulins in in-vitro assays.CK2 has emerged as novel
druggable target and selective inhibitors of CK2 such as ON108600 may
prove as a potential anti-cancer therapy. Our ongoing studies are focused
towards identifying novel combinations of ON108600 with existing
chemotherapeutic agents in multiple myeloma, prostate and breast
cancer.Citation Format: Amol Padgaonkar, Olga Rechkoblit, Stephen
Cosenza, Venkat R. Pallela, Venkata Subbaiah DRC, MV Ramana Reddy, Aneel
Aggarwal, E Premkumar Reddy. Discovery and biological characterization of
ON108600, a small molecule inhibitor of protein kinase CK2. [abstract].
In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association
for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA):
AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3239.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3239

