Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of intratumoral HER2 heterogeneity in
gastric cancer.


Aim: To evaluate the clinical significance of intratumoral HER2
heterogeneity in gastric cancer (GC).Methods: A total of 322 GC tissues
were evaluated by HER2 immunohistochemistry (IHC), of which 73 with IHC
2+ or 3+ were subjected to fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
Also, 3-5 distinct spots in each case showing different HER2 staining
intensity were evaluated individually for comparing IHC staining
intensity with gene copy number (GCN). Minimum, average, and maximum FISH
scores were generated for each case.Results: Intratumoral heterogeneity
of HER2 overexpression and gene amplification were 54 and 30 of 73 cases
with IHC 2+ or 3+, respectively. These cases were characterised by
diffuse or mixed Lauren type, HER2 IHC 2+, and low-level amplification.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed that the heterogeneous
overexpression was significantly associated with longer disease-free
survival times than the homogeneous, and the high average GCN was most
associated with poor outcome. Also, there was a strong correlation
between the IHC and FISH results for each spot. Quantitative PCR analysis
of the cancer tissues and the cell-free plasma showed that HER2 gene copy
by quantitative PCR on tissue correlated well with those by FISH, but
plasma HER2 level was not.Conclusions: Considering the high incidence of
intratumoral HER2 heterogeneity in GC, accurate HER2 assessment would
require larger tissues and more detailed guidelines. The guidelines
should include the recommendation that FISH-scoring areas be selected
with reference to a corresponding IHC slide. Also, the definition of
HER2-positive tumours should be reassessed considering the intratumoral
heterogeneity.

