Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer properties of novel rhenium compounds against human
cancer cell lines.


Cisplatin, carboplatin, oxaliplatin, and related metallodrugs are
extensively being used in the treatment of a variety of cancers.
Unfortunately these drugs are highly toxic and tumor becomes
drug-resistance. These circumstances have led researchers to look for new
cytotoxic agents that may exhibit less toxicity and devoid of drug
resistance. It is believed that cisplatin and related drugs directly bind
to genomic DNA through purine bases. Synthesis of new metallodrugs which
does not follow the above mechanism of action might yield better drugs
with less toxicity and devoid of drug resistance. Recently we have
demonstrated that several anticancer rhenium compounds do not directly
bind to DNA. We have synthesized numerous rhenium pentylcarbonato and
acetylsalicylato complexes which include
(CO)3(2,2-Bipyridyl)ReOC(O)OC5H11 (PC-1),
(CO)3(1,10-Phenanthroline)ReOC(O)OC5H11 (PC-2),
(CO)3(5-Methyl-1,10-Phenanthroline)Re ReOC(O)OC5H11 (PC-3),
(CO)3(2,9-Dimethyl-1,10-Phenanthroline)ReOC(O)OC5H11 (PC-4),
(CO)3(5,6-Dimethyl-1,10-Phenanthroline)ReOC(O)OC5H11 (PC-5),
(CO)3(4,7-Diphenyl-1,10-Phenanthroline)ReOC(O)OC5H11 (PC-6),
(CO)3(2,9-Dimethyl-4,7-Diphenyl-1,10-Phenanthroline)Re ReOC(O)OC5H11
(PC-7), (CO)3(2,2-Bipyridyl)ReOC(O)C6H4C(O)OCH3 (ASP-1),
(CO)3(1,10-Phenanthroline)ReOC(O)C6H4C(O)OCH3, (ASP-2),
(CO)3(5-Methyl-1,10-Phenanthroline)ReOC(O)C6H4C(O)OCH3 (ASP-3),
(CO)3(2,9-Dimethyl-1,10-Phenanthroline)ReOC(O)C6H4C(O)OCH3 (ASP-4),
(CO)3(5,6-Dimethyl-1,10-Phenanthroline)ReOC(O)C6H4C(O)OCH3 (ASP-5),
(CO)3(4,7-Diphenyl-1,10-Phenanthroline)ReOC(O)C6H4C(O)OCH3 (ASP-6),
(CO)3(2,9-Dimethyl-4,7-Diphenyl-1,10-Phenanthroline)ReOC(O)C6H4C(O)OCH3
(ASP-7). The anticancer properties of the compounds were evaluated using
human prostate, alveolar lung, brain, colon, and leukemia cancer cell
lines and normal bone marrow cell lines. The results of this study
demonstrate that these complexes have significant anticancer properties.
Therefore, these complexes can potentially find applications in the
treatment of these cancers.Acknowledgment. The work at MSU was partially
supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (Grant No.
G11HD038439) and Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Grant No.
NRC-HQ-12-G-27-0086). The work at ECSU-UNC was partially supported by
grant from the Department of Energy (TMCF/DOE grant).

