Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-1 modulates glioblastoma cell migration via interaction
with FAK.


Malignant glioblastomas (GBM) are the most common brain tumors and
exhibit excessive growth, cell cycle regulation, neovascularization,
angiogenesis, migration, immune escape and resistance to apoptosis.
Galectin-1 (Gal-1) is a 14.5-kDa -galactoside-binding protein, which
displays intracellular (i.e., protein-protein interactions) and
extracellular (i.e., protein-oligosaccharide interactions) functions with
marked pro-angiogenic and pro-migratory effects in gliomas. Although
glioma is considered one of the deadliest cancers with median survival
ranging from nine to twelve months, therapeutic treatments that target
Gal-1 may prove effective since Gal-1 is one of the genes that cause
aggressive behaviors of human GBM such as migration and invasion. Gal-1
controls glioma cell migration and invasion by modifying the actin
cytoskeleton and expression of small GTPases. In the present study,
immunohistochemical, Real Time PCR and Western blot experiments performed
with clinical samples demonstrated that Gal-1 is highly expressed in
human GBM tissue as compared to healthy brain tissue. Matrigel invasion
assays confirmed that treatment of glioma cell lines U251 and 5310 with
human umbilical cord blood stem cells (hUCBSC) almost completely blocked
invasion of GBM cells. We also observed that treatment of GBM cells with
hUCBSC decreased the expression of both Gal-1 and FAK. Additionally,
silencing either the Gal-1 or FAK gene using shRNA decreased migration
and invasion of glioblastoma cells. Furthermore, using
immunocytochemistry and Western blot analyses, we observed that Gal-1 and
FAK interact with each other in glioblastoma. Taken together, our results
suggest that Gal-1 and FAK might have a direct protein-protein
interaction for their function in the tumorigenesis of glioblastoma.

