Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGFR activation defines a subset of astrocytes in the
neuroinflammatory microenvironment of breast cancer brain metastasis,
inhibitable by pazopanib.


Brain metastases occur in approximately 35% of metastatic breast cancer
patients whose tumors overexpress HER2. Brain colonization of cancer
cells occurs in a unique environment, containing microglia,
oligodendrocytes, astrocytes and neurons. While a neuroinflammatory
response has been documented in brain metastasis, its contribution to
cancer progression and therapy remains poorly understood. Using a model
system to study experimental brain metastasis of breast cancer, we
intensively characterized the brain metastatic microenvironment of a
brain tropic, HER2-transfected MDA-MB-231 human breast carcinoma subline
(231-BR-HER2). The 231-BR-HER2 cell line was injected into the left
cardiac ventricle of immunocompromised mice; mice were treated with
vehicle, 30mg/kg or 100mg/kg pazopanib twice a day beginning on day 3
post-injection, for 4 weeks. Pazopanib, a multispecific tyrosine kinase
inhibitor targeting VEGFR-1, -2, and -3, PDGFR- and , and c-kit, directly
targeted tumor cells through the disruption of B-Raf pathway, prevents
the outgrowth of 231-BR-HER2 large brain metastases by 73% (pBrain
metastases occur in approximately 35% of metastatic breast cancer
patients whose tumors overexpress HER2. Brain colonization of cancer
cells occurs in a unique environment, containing microglia,
oligodendrocytes, astrocytes and neurons. While a neuroinflammatory
response has been documented in brain metastasis, its contribution to
cancer progression and therapy remains poorly understood. Using a model
system to study experimental brain metastasis of breast cancer, we
intensively characterized the brain metastatic microenvironment of a
brain tropic, HER2-transfected MDA-MB-231 human breast carcinoma subline
(231-BR-HER2). The 231-BR-HER2 cell line was injected into the left
cardiac ventricle of immunocompromised mice; mice were treated with
vehicle, 30mg/kg or 100mg/kg pazopanib twice a day beginning on day 3
post-injection, for 4 weeks. Pazopanib, a multispecific tyrosine kinase
inhibitor targeting VEGFR-1, -2, and -3, PDGFR- and , and c-kit, directly
targeted tumor cells through the disruption of B-Raf pathway, prevents
the outgrowth of 231-BR-HER2 large brain metastases by 73% (p<0.0001).
Here we evaluated the effect of pazopanib on the brain micro-environment
microenvironment. A novel subpopulation of metastasis-associated
astrocytes expressing phosphorylated (Y751) PDGFR was identified
surrounding brain metastases. This subpopulation of p751-PDGFR +
astrocytes was also identified in human brain metastases from five
different craniotomy specimens. Expression of p751-PDGFR was studied in
primary cultures of astrocyte-enriched glial cells. p751-PDGFR expression
was increased in response to soluble factors from cultured breast cancer
cells, and was inhibited by pazopanib treatment. In the mouse mode,
pazopanib treatment resulted in a 70% (p=0.023) decrease of the
p751-PDGFR+ astrocyte population, at the lowest dose of 30mg/kg, twice
daily. In contrast, pazopanib did not have any effect on microglia
expression. Collectively, the data identify a new subpopulation of
activated astrocytes in the perivascular stage of subclinical brain
metastases and demonstrate that they are inhibitable by pazopanib,
suggesting its potential to prevent the development of brain metastases
from breast cancer patients.

