Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subcellular translocation of -catenin and its relationship with
EGFR activation in HPV16 positive OPSCC.


Background: The incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) has increased in recent
years. HPV-associated OPSCC follows a distinct carcinogenic pathway from
HPV-negative OPSCC. The molecular basis of the disease progression due to
HPV remains to be elucidated. Clinical observations have revealed
frequent and early lymph node metastasis and unusual distant metastasis
in HPV-associated as compared with HPV-negative OPSCC. To understand the
underlying molecular mechanism, we have studied whether -catenin, one of
the major proteins in the Wnt pathway, is involved in HPV-associated
OPSCC metastasis. Methods: The study samples (n = 210) were collected
from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded OPSCC tissues obtained from the
Surgical Pathology files in the Department of Pathology at Emory
University following the regulations of the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Expression levels of p16 as a surrogate
marker for HPV-associated cancer, -catenin, and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) were determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses.
Membrane expression of -catenin and total EGFR level were scored as a
weight index [WI = intensity (0, 1+, 2+, and 3+) x % of positive
staining]. Nuclear -catenin and p16 were recorded as positive and
negative. Expression and subcellular localization of -catenin as well as
EGFR expression and activation were also studied in both HPV-positive and
-negative head and neck SCC (HNSCC) cell lines (n =7) by Western blot
analysis. SiRNA against HPV E6 was used to elucidate the effect of HPV on
-catenin translocation. Results: Our results showed that membrane WI of
-catenin was inversely correlated with p16 positivity (p Background: The
incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (OPSCC) has increased in recent years. HPV-associated
OPSCC follows a distinct carcinogenic pathway from HPV-negative OPSCC.
The molecular basis of the disease progression due to HPV remains to be
elucidated. Clinical observations have revealed frequent and early lymph
node metastasis and unusual distant metastasis in HPV-associated as
compared with HPV-negative OPSCC. To understand the underlying molecular
mechanism, we have studied whether -catenin, one of the major proteins in
the Wnt pathway, is involved in HPV-associated OPSCC metastasis. Methods:
The study samples (n = 210) were collected from formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded OPSCC tissues obtained from the Surgical Pathology
files in the Department of Pathology at Emory University following the
regulations of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA). Expression levels of p16 as a surrogate marker for
HPV-associated cancer, -catenin, and epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) were determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses. Membrane
expression of -catenin and total EGFR level were scored as a weight index
[WI = intensity (0, 1+, 2+, and 3+) x % of positive staining]. Nuclear
-catenin and p16 were recorded as positive and negative. Expression and
subcellular localization of -catenin as well as EGFR expression and
activation were also studied in both HPV-positive and -negative head and
neck SCC (HNSCC) cell lines (n =7) by Western blot analysis. SiRNA
against HPV E6 was used to elucidate the effect of HPV on -catenin
translocation. Results: Our results showed that membrane WI of -catenin
was inversely correlated with p16 positivity (p < 0.0001), while nuclear
staining of -catenin was associated with p16 positive OPSCC (p = 0.007)
and positive lymph nodes (p = 0.0304). A low level of membrane -catenin
(cut-off by the median value) was significantly associated with disease
free survival and overall survival (p Background: The incidence of human
papillomavirus (HPV)-associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(OPSCC) has increased in recent years. HPV-associated OPSCC follows a
distinct carcinogenic pathway from HPV-negative OPSCC. The molecular
basis of the disease progression due to HPV remains to be elucidated.
Clinical observations have revealed frequent and early lymph node
metastasis and unusual distant metastasis in HPV-associated as compared
with HPV-negative OPSCC. To understand the underlying molecular
mechanism, we have studied whether -catenin, one of the major proteins in
the Wnt pathway, is involved in HPV-associated OPSCC metastasis. Methods:
The study samples (n = 210) were collected from formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded OPSCC tissues obtained from the Surgical Pathology
files in the Department of Pathology at Emory University following the
regulations of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA). Expression levels of p16 as a surrogate marker for
HPV-associated cancer, -catenin, and epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) were determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses. Membrane
expression of -catenin and total EGFR level were scored as a weight index
[WI = intensity (0, 1+, 2+, and 3+) x % of positive staining]. Nuclear
-catenin and p16 were recorded as positive and negative. Expression and
subcellular localization of -catenin as well as EGFR expression and
activation were also studied in both HPV-positive and -negative head and
neck SCC (HNSCC) cell lines (n =7) by Western blot analysis. SiRNA
against HPV E6 was used to elucidate the effect of HPV on -catenin
translocation. Results: Our results showed that membrane WI of -catenin
was inversely correlated with p16 positivity (p < 0.0001), while nuclear
staining of -catenin was associated with p16 positive OPSCC (p = 0.007)
and positive lymph nodes (p = 0.0304). A low level of membrane -catenin
(cut-off by the median value) was significantly associated with disease
free survival and overall survival (p < 0.05 in both cases). Furthermore,
WI EGFR was positively correlated with nuclear -catenin (p = 0.0001). Our
in vitro study showed that nuclear -catenin level was higher in
HPV16-positive HNSCC cell lines than in HPV16-negative cell lines.
Furthermore, HPV16-positive cells showed higher EGFR activation than
HPV16-negative cells. Reduction of HPV16 E6 led to the de-activation of
EGFR and decreased level of -catenin in the nucleus. Conclusion: Our
findings suggest that HPV16 E6 mediates the translocation of -catenin to
the nucleus, which may be regulated by activated EGFR. The underlying
mechanism deserves further investigation. (This study was supported by US
National Institutes of Health (NIH/NCI) grant HHSN2610201000125C, R33
CA134392-01, and Georgia Cancer Coalition Distinguished Cancer Scholar
Award to ZGC).

