Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of IGF1R as a responsible factor and a therapeutic
target for overcoming acquired and intrinsic resistance to PI3K
inhibitors.


The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is frequently activated
in human cancers. Therefore PI3K is thought to be a promising target for
cancer therapy, and many compounds targeting PI3K have been developed and
tested in clinical trials. Acquired resistance is a major obstacle for
conventional cancer chemotherapy, and also for some of the targeted
therapies approved to date. Long-term administration of protein tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as gefitinib and imatinib, gives rise to
resistant cancer cells carrying a drug-resistant gatekeeper mutation in
the kinase domain of the respective target genes, EGFR and BCR-ABL. As
for the PI3K inhibitors (PI3Kis), little is known about their acquired
resistance. To address this issue, we established four human cancer cell
lines that exhibited resistance to ZSTK474, a PI3Ki we developed
previously, after drug exposure for a period of more than 1-year in
vitro. None of the PI3Ki-reistant cells, however, contained any mutation
in the kinase domain of the PIK3CA gene. Instead, we found that
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) was overexpressed in all
four resistant cells. Furthermore, PI3Ki-nave cancer cells expressing
high levels of IGF1R also exhibited resistance to PI3Kis. Interestingly,
IGF1R-TKIs strongly enhanced the efficacy of PI3Ki in these cells. Thus,
we propose that IGF1R could serve as a biomarker to predict the
inefficacy of PI3K inhibitors, and also could be a target for overcoming
acquired and intrinsic resistance in IGF1R-overexpressing cancers.

