Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sulfiredoxin is required for AOM/DSS induced mouse colon
carcinogenesis and invasiveness of human colon cancer cells.


Sulfiredoxin (Srx) is the enzyme that reduces the overoxidized inactive
form of peroxiredoxins (Prxs). To study the function of Srx in
carcinogenesis in vivo, we tested whether loss of Srx protects mice from
cancer development. Srx null mice were generated and colon carcinogenesis
was induced by an azoxymethane (AOM) and dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)
protocol. Compared to either wildtype or heterozygotes, Srx-/- mice had
significantly reduced rates in both tumor multiplicity and volume.
Mechanistic studies reveal that loss of Srx did not alter tumor cell
proliferation; however, increased apoptosis and decreased inflammatory
cell infiltration were obvious in tumors from Srx null mice compared to
those from wildtype control. In addition to the AOM/DSS model,
examination of Srx expression in human reveals a tissue-specific
expression pattern. Srx expression was also demonstrated in tumors from
colorectal cancer patients and the levels of expression were associated
with patients clinic stage. These data provide the first in vivo evidence
that loss of Srx renders mice resistance to AOM/DSS-induced colon
carcinogenesis, suggesting that Srx has a critical oncogenic role in
cancer development, and Srx may be used as a marker for human colon
cancer pathogenicity.Citation Format: Qiou Wei, Hong Jiang, Alyson Baker,
Lisa K. Dodge, Matthieu Gerard, Matthew R. Young, Michel B. Toledano,
Nancy H. Colburn. Sulfiredoxin is required for AOM/DSS induced mouse
colon carcinogenesis and invasiveness of human colon cancer cells.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2727.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2727

