Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Chi3l1/YKL-40 in the tumor progression and metastasis in
the lung.


The 18 glycosyl hydrolase gene family (GH18) contains chitinases and
chitinase-like proteins (CLP) that lack enzyme activity. Chitinase
3-like-1 (Chi3l1; also called BRP-39 in mouse and YKL-40 in man), the
prototypic CLP, is expressed in an exaggerated fashion in the serum and
or tissues from patients with a variety of malignancies including breast,
colon/rectum, ovary, melanoma, prostate, kidney, brain, bone, and lung.
In many of these malignancies, there is a strong correlation between the
levels of Chi3l1/YKL-40 and disease progression, prognosis and
disease-free survival. However, the roles of YKL-40 in the development
and progression of lung cancer has not been determined. To begin to
address this issue, we generated Chi3l1/BRP-39 null mutant (Chi3l1-/-)
and lung-specific overexpressing YKL-40 transgenic (YKL-40 Tg) mice and
evaluated them in a number of settings. The studies demonstrated that
Chi3l1/BRP-39/YKL-40 is an important regulator of cellular apoptosis,
inflammation, angiogenesis and M2 macrophage differentiation. We also
found that melanoma metastasis to the lung was significantly decreased in
Chi3l1-/- mice and increased in YKL-40 Tg mice and that activation of the
RIG-like helicase (RLH) innate immune pathway significantly decreased
BRP-39 production and melanoma or breast cancer lung metastasis. Lastly,
immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis demonstrated that, in mice with
specific mutation of KRAS and/or p53, Chi3l1/BRP-39 is expressed in an
exaggerated manner in normal peritumor tissues and lung cancer cells in
early and late stages of lung cancer development, respectively. In
combination, our preliminary studies demonstrate that
Chi3l1/BRP-39/YKL-40 plays a critical role in the generation of a
metastasis-permissive microenvironment and is dysregulated in the course
of the development of primary lung cancers.

