Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variation in SIRT1 affects susceptibility of lung squamous
cell carcinomas in former uranium miners from the Colorado plateau.


Epidemiological studies of underground miners suggest that occupational
exposure to radon causes lung cancer with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
as the predominant histological type. However, the genetic determinants
for susceptibility of radon-induced SCC in miners are unclear.
Double-strand breaks (DSBs) induced by radioactive radon daughters are
repaired primarily by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) that is
accompanied by the dynamic changes in surrounding chromatin, including
nucleosome repositioning and histone modifications. Thus, a molecular
epidemiological study was conducted to assess whether genetic variation
in 16 genes involved in NHEJ and related histone modification affected
susceptibility for SCC in radon-exposed former miners (267 SCC cases and
383 controls) from the Colorado plateau. A global association between
genetic variation in the haplotype block where SIRT1 resides and the risk
for SCC in miners (P=0.003) was identified. Haplotype alleles tagged by
the A allele of SIRT1 rs7097008 were associated with increased risk for
SCC (Odds Ratio = 1.69, P = 8.2105) and greater survival in SCC cases
(Hazard Ratio = 0.79, P = 0.03) in miners. Functional validation of
rs7097008 demonstrated that the A allele was associated with reduced gene
expression in bronchial epithelial cells and compromised DNA repair
capacity in peripheral lymphocytes. Together, these findings substantiate
genetic variation in SIRT1 as a risk modifier for developing SCC in
miners and suggested that SIRT1 may also play a tumor suppressor role in
radon-induced cancer in miners.

