Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel ERK inhibitor is active in models of acquired resistance
to BRAF and MEK inhibitors.


The high frequency of activating BRAFV600E mutations in melanoma
(40-70%), thyroid (50%) and colorectal cancer (10%), or KRAS/NRAS
mutations in melanoma (20%), pancreatic (90%), colorectal (50%) and
non-small cell lung cancer (30%), provides strong rationale for targeting
the MAPK pathway as a therapeutic strategy 1-6. Vemurafenib (PLX4032) and
dabrafenib (GSK2118436), selective BRAF inhibitors, and trametinib
(GSK1120212), an allosteric MEK inhibitor, have shown robust clinical
efficacy in melanoma patients 7-10. However, the majority of responses
are transient and cellular resistance is often associated with pathway
reactivation involving the downstream extracellular-signal-regulated
kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) (reviewed in 11). We hypothesized that pathway
blockade at ERK, the last signaling node prior to MAPK transcriptional
programming, would not only be efficacious in MAPK-activated tumors but
would also have utility in BRAF or MEK inhibitor resistant settings. We
therefore sought to identify small molecule inhibitors of ERK. This
report describes the identification and characterization of SCH772984, a
potent and selective ATP competitive inhibitor of ERK1/2 which displays
behaviors of both type I and type II kinase inhibitors. SCH772984 has
nanomolar cellular potency on tumor cells with mutations in BRAF, NRAS,
or KRAS and induces tumor regressions in xenograft models at tolerated
doses. Importantly, SCH772984 effectively inhibited MAPK signaling and
cell proliferation in BRAF or MEK inhibitor resistant models as well as
in the context of BRAF/MEK combination resistance. Together these data
support the clinical development of ERK inhibitors, not only in patients
with MAPK activated tumors, but also in patients who have developed
acquired resistance to BRAF or MEK inhibitors or resistance to the
recently described combination of these agents.

