Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Picropodophyllin downregulates p53 and increases the Warburg
effect in pediatric glioblastoma cells.


Picropodophyllin (PPP) is reported to be a potent and selective inhibitor
of tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor
(IGF-1R) [Girnita et al., Clin Cancer Res 12:1383-91, 2006]. We
previously showed increases in glucose uptake and lactate production in
paediatric glioblastoma KNS42 cells after 24h of PPP-treatment [Wong Te
Fong et al., Proc Mol Tar Ther B61, 2012]. These findings are unexpected
for IGF-1R inhibition. Upregulation of c-Myc or downregulation of p53 are
known to upregulate glycolysis in cancer [DeBerardinis et al., Cell Metab
7:11-20, 2008a; Kawauchi et al., Nat Cell Bio 30(9): 1792-5, 2007]. In
order to identify the molecular mechanism that drives our previously
observed upregulation of glycolysis following PPP treatment, we examine
the changes in glucose metabolism in PPP-treated cells over a 96h
time-course and relate these metabolic changes to c-Myc and p53
expression. KNS42 cells were treated for 6, 24, 48 and 96h with 2.4M
(5xIC50) of PPP. Culture media from the PPP-treated and control cells
were analyzed by 1H Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) to examine the
effect of PPP on glucose uptake and lactate excretion. pErk, pAkt, c-Myc,
p53 and -actin (loading control) protein expressions were examined by
Western blot (WB). No change in cell number was found after 6h of PPP
treatment but 50% of PPP-treated cells remained by 24h when compared to
controls (pPicropodophyllin (PPP) is reported to be a potent and
selective inhibitor of tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin-like growth
factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) [Girnita et al., Clin Cancer Res 12:1383-91,
2006]. We previously showed increases in glucose uptake and lactate
production in paediatric glioblastoma KNS42 cells after 24h of
PPP-treatment [Wong Te Fong et al., Proc Mol Tar Ther B61, 2012]. These
findings are unexpected for IGF-1R inhibition. Upregulation of c-Myc or
downregulation of p53 are known to upregulate glycolysis in cancer
[DeBerardinis et al., Cell Metab 7:11-20, 2008a; Kawauchi et al., Nat
Cell Bio 30(9): 1792-5, 2007]. In order to identify the molecular
mechanism that drives our previously observed upregulation of glycolysis
following PPP treatment, we examine the changes in glucose metabolism in
PPP-treated cells over a 96h time-course and relate these metabolic
changes to c-Myc and p53 expression. KNS42 cells were treated for 6, 24,
48 and 96h with 2.4M (5xIC50) of PPP. Culture media from the PPP-treated
and control cells were analyzed by 1H Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
(MRS) to examine the effect of PPP on glucose uptake and lactate
excretion. pErk, pAkt, c-Myc, p53 and -actin (loading control) protein
expressions were examined by Western blot (WB). No change in cell number
was found after 6h of PPP treatment but 50% of PPP-treated cells remained
by 24h when compared to controls (p<0.001) and similar numbers of treated
cells were also observed at 48 and 96h, indicating that a cohort of cells
was initially killed by PPP (the doubling time of KNS42 is 30h) and that
the remaining cell population survived the treatment. WB showed decreases
in pErk (from 6h) and pAkt (from 24h) expression in PPP-treated cells,
consistent with the mechanism of drug action. 1H MRS analysis of culture
media showed significant increases in glucose uptake (pPicropodophyllin
(PPP) is reported to be a potent and selective inhibitor of tyrosine
phosphorylation of insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R)
[Girnita et al., Clin Cancer Res 12:1383-91, 2006]. We previously showed
increases in glucose uptake and lactate production in paediatric
glioblastoma KNS42 cells after 24h of PPP-treatment [Wong Te Fong et al.,
Proc Mol Tar Ther B61, 2012]. These findings are unexpected for IGF-1R
inhibition. Upregulation of c-Myc or downregulation of p53 are known to
upregulate glycolysis in cancer [DeBerardinis et al., Cell Metab 7:11-20,
2008a; Kawauchi et al., Nat Cell Bio 30(9): 1792-5, 2007]. In order to
identify the molecular mechanism that drives our previously observed
upregulation of glycolysis following PPP treatment, we examine the
changes in glucose metabolism in PPP-treated cells over a 96h time-course
and relate these metabolic changes to c-Myc and p53 expression. KNS42
cells were treated for 6, 24, 48 and 96h with 2.4M (5xIC50) of PPP.
Culture media from the PPP-treated and control cells were analyzed by 1H
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) to examine the effect of PPP on
glucose uptake and lactate excretion. pErk, pAkt, c-Myc, p53 and -actin
(loading control) protein expressions were examined by Western blot (WB).
No change in cell number was found after 6h of PPP treatment but 50% of
PPP-treated cells remained by 24h when compared to controls (p<0.001) and
similar numbers of treated cells were also observed at 48 and 96h,
indicating that a cohort of cells was initially killed by PPP (the
doubling time of KNS42 is 30h) and that the remaining cell population
survived the treatment. WB showed decreases in pErk (from 6h) and pAkt
(from 24h) expression in PPP-treated cells, consistent with the mechanism
of drug action. 1H MRS analysis of culture media showed significant
increases in glucose uptake (p<0.01) and lactate excretion
(PPicropodophyllin (PPP) is reported to be a potent and selective
inhibitor of tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin-like growth factor-1
receptor (IGF-1R) [Girnita et al., Clin Cancer Res 12:1383-91, 2006]. We
previously showed increases in glucose uptake and lactate production in
paediatric glioblastoma KNS42 cells after 24h of PPP-treatment [Wong Te
Fong et al., Proc Mol Tar Ther B61, 2012]. These findings are unexpected
for IGF-1R inhibition. Upregulation of c-Myc or downregulation of p53 are
known to upregulate glycolysis in cancer [DeBerardinis et al., Cell Metab
7:11-20, 2008a; Kawauchi et al., Nat Cell Bio 30(9): 1792-5, 2007]. In
order to identify the molecular mechanism that drives our previously
observed upregulation of glycolysis following PPP treatment, we examine
the changes in glucose metabolism in PPP-treated cells over a 96h
time-course and relate these metabolic changes to c-Myc and p53
expression. KNS42 cells were treated for 6, 24, 48 and 96h with 2.4M
(5xIC50) of PPP. Culture media from the PPP-treated and control cells
were analyzed by 1H Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) to examine the
effect of PPP on glucose uptake and lactate excretion. pErk, pAkt, c-Myc,
p53 and -actin (loading control) protein expressions were examined by
Western blot (WB). No change in cell number was found after 6h of PPP
treatment but 50% of PPP-treated cells remained by 24h when compared to
controls (p<0.001) and similar numbers of treated cells were also
observed at 48 and 96h, indicating that a cohort of cells was initially
killed by PPP (the doubling time of KNS42 is 30h) and that the remaining
cell population survived the treatment. WB showed decreases in pErk (from
6h) and pAkt (from 24h) expression in PPP-treated cells, consistent with
the mechanism of drug action. 1H MRS analysis of culture media showed
significant increases in glucose uptake (p<0.01) and lactate excretion
(P<0.0001) in PPP-treated cells at 24, 48 and 96h, and these metabolic
changes are associated with decreased expression of p53 at these
time-points. No significant metabolic changes were found in PPP-treated
cells at 6h and p53 was unchanged compared to controls at this
time-point. Reduced expression of c-Myc was found in PPP-treated cells
from 24h. Our data indicate that it is p53 downregulation and not changes
in c-Myc expression that drives the upregulation of glycolysis in KNS42
cells from 24h of PPP-treatment, and that these cellular and metabolic
adaptations help cellular survival during treatment, suggesting a
possible mechanism of resistance to PPP. Downregulation of p53 may drive
the upregulation of glycolysis, representing a possible mechanism of
resistance to PPP treatment in KNS42 cells.We acknowledge the support
received from the CRUK and EPSRC Cancer Imaging Centre in association
with the MRC and Department of Health (England) grant C1060/A10334, NHS
funding to the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre.

