Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contribution of FKBP5 genetic variation to gemcitabine treatment
and survival in pancreatic cancer.


The FKBP5 gene encodes the FKBP51 immunophilin, a negative regulator of
AKT. Variability in level of FKBP5 expression is a major factor
contributing to variation in response to several classes of
chemotherapeutic agents including gemcitabine, first line treatment for
pancreatic cancer. Genetic variation of FKBP5 could influence its
expression, function, and, ultimately, treatment response of pancreatic
cancer. We set out to comprehensively study the role of genetic variation
in FKBP5 identified by Next Generation DNA resequencing in response to
gemcitabine treatment of pancreatic cancer by utilizing both tumor and
germline DNA samples from 43 pancreatic cancer patients, including 19
paired tumor-normal samples. Genotype-phenotype association studies with
overall survival (in tumor only) as well as with FKBP5 gene expression
were performed using the same samples in which Next Generation DNA
resequencing had been performed, followed by functional genomic studies
of top selected single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). In-depth
resequencing identified 404 FKBP5 SNPs in both normal and tumor DNA
patient samples. SNPs with the smallest p-values for association with
FKBP5 survival or expression were subjected to functional genomic
studies. Electromobility shift assay (EMSA) showed that the rs73748206 T
allele altered DNA-protein binding patterns, consistent with a
significantly increased reporter gene activity. The effect of rs73748206
was also confirmed by mRNA expression studies using lymphoblastoid cell
lines (LCL) derived from the same patients from whom DNA used for
resequencing had been obtained. This comprehensive FKBP5 resequencing
study provides insight into the role of inheritance in variation in
response to gemcitabine therapy of pancreatic cancer.

