Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The alterations and significance of hMLH1 and TGFII receptor
expression during esophageal carcinogenesis.


Esophageal cancer is one of the most common cancers in the world,
prognosis is very poor and five-year survival time is less than 20%.
Epidemiology studies have revealed a strong association between cancer
risks and genetic-environmental factors, the underlying mechanisms are
largely unknown. Previous studies have also demonstrated that activation
of oncogene and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes contribute to
disruption of esophageal epithelial cell maturation, leading to tumor
formation. Most recently, a group of DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes,
such as hMSH2,hMSH6,hMLH1, attracts attention, because their aberrant
expression significantly affects tumor formation, as well demented in
colorectal, gastric and endometrial cancers. But the alteration in
esophageal carcinogenesis has not been reported. The present study was to
determine the alteration of hMLH1 and its potential target TGFII receptor
(TGFIIR) and the significance in esophageal carcinogenesis. Materials and
methods: 108 esophageal tissues including 20 normal esophageal mucosa
(NE), 21 dysplasia (DYS), 25 cancer in situ (CIU) and 42 squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), were collected. All patients did not accept chemotherapy
or radiotherapy before surgical operation. Immunohistochemical staining
was used to determine the expression of hMLH1 and TGFIIR in NE, DYS, CIU
and SCC, using anti-human hMLH1 and TGFIIR antibodies. The expression was
scored using semi-quantification system. The correlation between protein
expression and clinical characteristics was analyzed. Results: 95%
(19/20) of NE showed hMLH1 nuclear expression, but the express of hMLH1
was reduced in DYS (71%, 15/21) and CIU (68%, 17/25), and it was
dramatically reduced to 15% (6/42) in SCC (pEsophageal cancer is one of
the most common cancers in the world, prognosis is very poor and
five-year survival time is less than 20%. Epidemiology studies have
revealed a strong association between cancer risks and
genetic-environmental factors, the underlying mechanisms are largely
unknown. Previous studies have also demonstrated that activation of
oncogene and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes contribute to
disruption of esophageal epithelial cell maturation, leading to tumor
formation. Most recently, a group of DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes,
such as hMSH2,hMSH6,hMLH1, attracts attention, because their aberrant
expression significantly affects tumor formation, as well demented in
colorectal, gastric and endometrial cancers. But the alteration in
esophageal carcinogenesis has not been reported. The present study was to
determine the alteration of hMLH1 and its potential target TGFII receptor
(TGFIIR) and the significance in esophageal carcinogenesis. Materials and
methods: 108 esophageal tissues including 20 normal esophageal mucosa
(NE), 21 dysplasia (DYS), 25 cancer in situ (CIU) and 42 squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), were collected. All patients did not accept chemotherapy
or radiotherapy before surgical operation. Immunohistochemical staining
was used to determine the expression of hMLH1 and TGFIIR in NE, DYS, CIU
and SCC, using anti-human hMLH1 and TGFIIR antibodies. The expression was
scored using semi-quantification system. The correlation between protein
expression and clinical characteristics was analyzed. Results: 95%
(19/20) of NE showed hMLH1 nuclear expression, but the express of hMLH1
was reduced in DYS (71%, 15/21) and CIU (68%, 17/25), and it was
dramatically reduced to 15% (6/42) in SCC (p<0.05). Altered expression of
hMLH1 was also negatively associated with SCC differentiation (40% in
well differentiated SCC, 10% in moderate differentiated SCC and no
expression at poorly differentiated SCC, pEsophageal cancer is one of the
most common cancers in the world, prognosis is very poor and five-year
survival time is less than 20%. Epidemiology studies have revealed a
strong association between cancer risks and genetic-environmental
factors, the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. Previous studies
have also demonstrated that activation of oncogene and inactivation of
tumor suppressor genes contribute to disruption of esophageal epithelial
cell maturation, leading to tumor formation. Most recently, a group of
DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes, such as hMSH2,hMSH6,hMLH1, attracts
attention, because their aberrant expression significantly affects tumor
formation, as well demented in colorectal, gastric and endometrial
cancers. But the alteration in esophageal carcinogenesis has not been
reported. The present study was to determine the alteration of hMLH1 and
its potential target TGFII receptor (TGFIIR) and the significance in
esophageal carcinogenesis. Materials and methods: 108 esophageal tissues
including 20 normal esophageal mucosa (NE), 21 dysplasia (DYS), 25 cancer
in situ (CIU) and 42 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), were collected. All
patients did not accept chemotherapy or radiotherapy before surgical
operation. Immunohistochemical staining was used to determine the
expression of hMLH1 and TGFIIR in NE, DYS, CIU and SCC, using anti-human
hMLH1 and TGFIIR antibodies. The expression was scored using
semi-quantification system. The correlation between protein expression
and clinical characteristics was analyzed. Results: 95% (19/20) of NE
showed hMLH1 nuclear expression, but the express of hMLH1 was reduced in
DYS (71%, 15/21) and CIU (68%, 17/25), and it was dramatically reduced to
15% (6/42) in SCC (p<0.05). Altered expression of hMLH1 was also
negatively associated with SCC differentiation (40% in well
differentiated SCC, 10% in moderate differentiated SCC and no expression
at poorly differentiated SCC, p<0.05), but was not associated with the
status of metastasis, depth of invasion, gender and ages. Similar pattern
of TGFRII was seen in esophageal tissues: about 10% SCC expressed
cytoplastic TGFRII, but 62%DYS, 64% CIU and 85% NE expressed TGFRII. The
difference was significant (pEsophageal cancer is one of the most common
cancers in the world, prognosis is very poor and five-year survival time
is less than 20%. Epidemiology studies have revealed a strong association
between cancer risks and genetic-environmental factors, the underlying
mechanisms are largely unknown. Previous studies have also demonstrated
that activation of oncogene and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes
contribute to disruption of esophageal epithelial cell maturation,
leading to tumor formation. Most recently, a group of DNA mismatch repair
(MMR) genes, such as hMSH2,hMSH6,hMLH1, attracts attention, because their
aberrant expression significantly affects tumor formation, as well
demented in colorectal, gastric and endometrial cancers. But the
alteration in esophageal carcinogenesis has not been reported. The
present study was to determine the alteration of hMLH1 and its potential
target TGFII receptor (TGFIIR) and the significance in esophageal
carcinogenesis. Materials and methods: 108 esophageal tissues including
20 normal esophageal mucosa (NE), 21 dysplasia (DYS), 25 cancer in situ
(CIU) and 42 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), were collected. All patients
did not accept chemotherapy or radiotherapy before surgical operation.
Immunohistochemical staining was used to determine the expression of
hMLH1 and TGFIIR in NE, DYS, CIU and SCC, using anti-human hMLH1 and
TGFIIR antibodies. The expression was scored using semi-quantification
system. The correlation between protein expression and clinical
characteristics was analyzed. Results: 95% (19/20) of NE showed hMLH1
nuclear expression, but the express of hMLH1 was reduced in DYS (71%,
15/21) and CIU (68%, 17/25), and it was dramatically reduced to 15%
(6/42) in SCC (p<0.05). Altered expression of hMLH1 was also negatively
associated with SCC differentiation (40% in well differentiated SCC, 10%
in moderate differentiated SCC and no expression at poorly differentiated
SCC, p<0.05), but was not associated with the status of metastasis, depth
of invasion, gender and ages. Similar pattern of TGFRII was seen in
esophageal tissues: about 10% SCC expressed cytoplastic TGFRII, but
62%DYS, 64% CIU and 85% NE expressed TGFRII. The difference was
significant (p<0.05). Like hMLH1, TGFRII expression was not associated
with metastasis, invasion, gender and ages. Unlike hMLH1, TGFRII
expression was not associated with SCC differentiation. More
interestingly, the altered expression of hMLH1 was well correlated with
alteration of TGFRII (r=0.563, pEsophageal cancer is one of the most
common cancers in the world, prognosis is very poor and five-year
survival time is less than 20%. Epidemiology studies have revealed a
strong association between cancer risks and genetic-environmental
factors, the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. Previous studies
have also demonstrated that activation of oncogene and inactivation of
tumor suppressor genes contribute to disruption of esophageal epithelial
cell maturation, leading to tumor formation. Most recently, a group of
DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes, such as hMSH2,hMSH6,hMLH1, attracts
attention, because their aberrant expression significantly affects tumor
formation, as well demented in colorectal, gastric and endometrial
cancers. But the alteration in esophageal carcinogenesis has not been
reported. The present study was to determine the alteration of hMLH1 and
its potential target TGFII receptor (TGFIIR) and the significance in
esophageal carcinogenesis. Materials and methods: 108 esophageal tissues
including 20 normal esophageal mucosa (NE), 21 dysplasia (DYS), 25 cancer
in situ (CIU) and 42 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), were collected. All
patients did not accept chemotherapy or radiotherapy before surgical
operation. Immunohistochemical staining was used to determine the
expression of hMLH1 and TGFIIR in NE, DYS, CIU and SCC, using anti-human
hMLH1 and TGFIIR antibodies. The expression was scored using
semi-quantification system. The correlation between protein expression
and clinical characteristics was analyzed. Results: 95% (19/20) of NE
showed hMLH1 nuclear expression, but the express of hMLH1 was reduced in
DYS (71%, 15/21) and CIU (68%, 17/25), and it was dramatically reduced to
15% (6/42) in SCC (p<0.05). Altered expression of hMLH1 was also
negatively associated with SCC differentiation (40% in well
differentiated SCC, 10% in moderate differentiated SCC and no expression
at poorly differentiated SCC, p<0.05), but was not associated with the
status of metastasis, depth of invasion, gender and ages. Similar pattern
of TGFRII was seen in esophageal tissues: about 10% SCC expressed
cytoplastic TGFRII, but 62%DYS, 64% CIU and 85% NE expressed TGFRII. The
difference was significant (p<0.05). Like hMLH1, TGFRII expression was
not associated with metastasis, invasion, gender and ages. Unlike hMLH1,
TGFRII expression was not associated with SCC differentiation. More
interestingly, the altered expression of hMLH1 was well correlated with
alteration of TGFRII (r=0.563, p<0.05). Conclusion: Both hMLH1 and TGFRII
expression were significantly reduced during esophageal carcinogenesis.
But whether the reduced expression of hMLH1 and TGFRII could be a
biomarker for cancer detection or risk prediction, and whether there is a
regulatory interaction between these two proteins during carcinogenesis,
is not clear and needs further investigation.Citation Format: Yunjuan
Jiao, Weixing Zhao, Xin Dong, Xiaoyu Yang, Zheying Zhang, Yongxia Wang,
Jing Cui, Zhiqiang Qin, Wancai Yang, Wancai Yang. The alterations and
significance of hMLH1 and TGFII receptor expression during esophageal
carcinogenesis. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting
of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4689. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4689

