Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular and pharmacokinetic studies of dicycloplatin, a new
platinum analogue, suggest it is a promising chemotherapeutic agent.


Dicycloplatin (DCP), a new platinum compound recently approved by the
Chinese FDA, is a platinum-based supramolecule. The host-part
(carboplatin) and a guest-part (cyclobutane-1,1-dicarboxylic acid or
CBDC) are linked by hydrogen bonds. DCP has a stable chemical structure
and good water solubility. Pharmacokinetic studies show that the
prototype DCP concentration 2-h after administration is still high (17.1
g/ml), after 26.9 g/ml at 0.5 hour. In comparison, 5.01 g/ml of
carboplatin prototype is obtained 2-h after administration. Preclinical
in vitro and in vivo studies and a phase I clinical trial demonstrated
that DCP possesses significant antitumor activity, with fewer adverse
effects than carboplatin. Molecular investigation of DCP-treated ovarian
cancer A2780 cells showed activation of several kinases, including Chk2,
p53, BRCA1 and other downstream factors. The increase in activated
p-Chk2, p-p53 and p-BRCA1 after 1-h DCP exposure at IC50 dose occurred in
a time-dependent manner. Quantitative analysis of phosphorylated Chk2 and
BRCA1 expression revealed that the amount of dicycloplatin-induced
phosphorylation of the two factors doubled at 48-h and tripled for p53 at
24-h, compared to controls. We observed that the DCP-induced activation
profile and cisplatin-activated mechanisms are similar. We conclude that
dicycloplatin is a promising platinum chemotherapeutic compound.

