Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in regulatory T cell related genes and ovarian
cancer survival.


Tumor infiltrating regulatory T cells (Tregs) appear to play a role in
survival in a number of solid tumors, including ovarian cancer. We
assessed genetic variation via tag SNPs (N=749) in 25 Treg associated
genes (CD28, CTLA4, FOXP3, IDO1, IL10, IL10RA, IL15, 1L17RA, IL23A,
IL23R, IL2RA, IL6, IL6R, IL8, LGALS1, LGALS9, MAP3K8, STAT5A, STAT5B,
TGFB1, TGFB2, TGFB3, TGFBR1, TGRBR2, and TGFBR3) in relation to ovarian
cancer survival. SNPs were selected based on r2 0.8, MAF 0.05, 5 kb
upstream and downstream from the gene. We had SNP and outcome data for
ovarian cancer from 10,084 combined ovarian cancer cases, including 5,248
high grade serous, 1,452 endometrioid, 661 mucinous, and 795 clear cell
cases of European descent across multiple studies from the Ovarian Cancer
Association Consortium (OCAC). Cox proportional hazards regression
modeling was used to estimate per-allele hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) for associations with overall survival,
adjusting for age at diagnosis, population substructure PCs, study site,
histology (for the all case analysis), tumor stage, tumor grade and oral
contraceptive use. The strongest associations were found for endometrioid
histologic subtype and IL2RA SNPs (maximum r2=0.67) rs11256497 [HR=1.42,
95% CI: 1.22-1.64; p=5.7 x 106], rs791587 [HR=1.36, 95% CI: 1.17-1.57;
p=6.2 x 105], rs2476491 [HR=1.40, 95% CI: 1.19-1.64; p=5.6 x 105], and
rs10795763 [HR=1.35, 95% CI: 1.17-1.57; p=7.9 x 105], as well as clear
cell ovarian cancer and CTLA4 SNP rs231775 [HR=0.67, 95% CI: 0.54-0.82;
p=9.3 x 105]. No other associations were observed at pTumor infiltrating
regulatory T cells (Tregs) appear to play a role in survival in a number
of solid tumors, including ovarian cancer. We assessed genetic variation
via tag SNPs (N=749) in 25 Treg associated genes (CD28, CTLA4, FOXP3,
IDO1, IL10, IL10RA, IL15, 1L17RA, IL23A, IL23R, IL2RA, IL6, IL6R, IL8,
LGALS1, LGALS9, MAP3K8, STAT5A, STAT5B, TGFB1, TGFB2, TGFB3, TGFBR1,
TGRBR2, and TGFBR3) in relation to ovarian cancer survival. SNPs were
selected based on r2 0.8, MAF 0.05, 5 kb upstream and downstream from the
gene. We had SNP and outcome data for ovarian cancer from 10,084 combined
ovarian cancer cases, including 5,248 high grade serous, 1,452
endometrioid, 661 mucinous, and 795 clear cell cases of European descent
across multiple studies from the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium
(OCAC). Cox proportional hazards regression modeling was used to estimate
per-allele hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for
associations with overall survival, adjusting for age at diagnosis,
population substructure PCs, study site, histology (for the all case
analysis), tumor stage, tumor grade and oral contraceptive use. The
strongest associations were found for endometrioid histologic subtype and
IL2RA SNPs (maximum r2=0.67) rs11256497 [HR=1.42, 95% CI: 1.22-1.64;
p=5.7 x 106], rs791587 [HR=1.36, 95% CI: 1.17-1.57; p=6.2 x 105],
rs2476491 [HR=1.40, 95% CI: 1.19-1.64; p=5.6 x 105], and rs10795763
[HR=1.35, 95% CI: 1.17-1.57; p=7.9 x 105], as well as clear cell ovarian
cancer and CTLA4 SNP rs231775 [HR=0.67, 95% CI: 0.54-0.82; p=9.3 x 105].
No other associations were observed at p<1 x 104. Overall, this study
provided evidence that variation in genes related to Tregs, particularly
IL2RA and CTLA4, influence ovarian cancer survival.

