Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting thymidine metabolic pathways in cancer cells with a
novel thymidine conjugate.


Cellular thymidine metabolism involves two pathways: the catabolic and
salvage pathways. The catabolic pathway breaks down thymidine to carbon
dioxide for energy while the salvage pathway converts thymidine to its
5-triphosphate as one of building blocks for DNA synthesis. Cytosolic
level of thymidine is regulated by both thymidine phosphorylase (TYMP) of
the catabolic pathway and thymidine kinase (TK) of the salvage pathway.
In tumor tissues and cancer cells, abnormally high levels of these two
proteins have been consistently reported. Therefore, thymidine metabolic
pathways in cancer cells are a potential therapeutic target for novel
drug design and development. We recently developed a novel thymidine
analog, 3-deoxythymidine phenylquinoxaline conjugate (dT-QX) that
selectively killed a series of cancer cell lines including human liver
carcinoma HepG2 and Hep3B, breast adenocarcinoma MCF-7, rat brain glioma
C6 and mouse liver cancer H22 cells and showed low cytotoxicity on the
normal liver hepatocyte HL-7702 cells. dT-QX is a conjugate of
3-deoxythymidine and a DNA intercalating moiety with a triazole linkage
achieved by click chemistry. The selective killing of cancer cells was
attributed to the selective inhibition of DNA synthesis in the cancer
cells but not in normal liver HL-7702 cells, resulting in extensive
production of mitochondrial superoxide stress. The conjugation of
3-deoxythymidine was found to be critical for dT-QX to achieve the
selective killing of cancer cells. The killing by dT-QX was revealed to
be directly due to the expression levels of TYMP and TKs in cancer cells,
confirming that dT-QX successfully targeted the thymidine metabolic
pathways as designed. Finally, a preliminary mouse study with
subcutaneous liver tumors confirmed that dT-QX effectively inhibited the
growth of tumors in vivo.

