Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of THBS1 is a critical step in glioblastoma
angiogenesis.


One of the hallmarks of Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is its abundant
vasculature. These blood vessels support the tumor in a number of ways,
including providing a niche for glioblastoma cancer stem cells. GBM
tumors drive the formation of their vasculature and associated germinal
niches through reciprocal inductive interactions between GBM cells and
endothelial cells. Targeting the primary drivers of angiogenesis, VEGF
and bFGF, in anti-angiogenic cancer treatments has value but is not
curative. We hypothesize that identification of additional angiogenic
molecules and pathways will provide new avenues for treatment. We used
microarrays to perform global gene expression profiling to identify genes
that are increased or decreased in expression as a consequence of
functional interactions between GBM and brain microvascular endothelial
cells. We identified several regulators of angiogenesis whose expression
is modulated by this cell-cell interaction, but were particularly
interested in the downregulation of Thrombospondin-1 (THBS1) and its
associated receptors. THBS1 is a powerful anti-angiogenic protein and has
previously been implicated in cancer, but its precise mechanism in
glioblastoma angiogenesis is not yet known. A number of in-vitro
experiments validated the importance of THBS1 in the interaction between
GBM and endothelial cells. In-vivo mouse xenograft experiments showed
that overexpression of THBS1 strongly inhibited tumor formation. We
believe these results reveal the importance of factors other than VEGF in
glioblastoma angiogenesis and provide a rationale to evaluate
combinatorial targeted anti-angiogenic therapy for GBM.

