Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of anti-human APRIL monoclonal antibodies capable
of inhibiting APRIL-dependent B cell function and hyperproliferation.


A Proliferation Inducing Ligand (APRIL) is a TNF ligand that, via its
receptors TACI and BCMA, is involved in both B cell physiology as well as
in proliferation and survival of malignant B cells. To target
APRIL-dependent stimulation of B cell cancers, we recently produced and
characterized two monoclonal antagonistic anti-human APRIL antibodies
called humanAPRIL.01A (hA.01A) and humanAPRIL.03A (hA.03A). In a first
biochemical assay to validate their blocking activity, hA.01A was shown
to fully prevent APRIL from binding to its receptors, whereas a
substantial difference was detected for hA.03A, which inhibited APRIL
binding to BCMA less efficiently than hA.01A. Epitope mapping
subsequently revealed that hA.01A and hA.03A bind distinct sites on
APRIL, which provided a structural rationale of their different blocking
activities. Importantly, this differential inhibition profile can be used
to functionally dissect BCMA and TACI-dependent signals and indicated
that B cell survival and IgA production are regulated differently by
these receptors. Primary CLL cultures were shown to be sensitive to APRIL
neutralization using hA.01A. hA.01A also inhibited hyperplasia in a
transgenic mouse model reminiscent of B-CLL. Altogether, these data
indicate that hA.01A is a novel tool potentially useful for the targeted
treatment of B cell-derived cancers such as B-CLL and Multiple Myeloma.

