Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer associated stellate cells promote
differentiation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in a STAT3-dependent
manner.


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of cancer-related death
in the United States with many patients that are diagnosed dying within
one year. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is an inflammatory disease and
includes several stromal elements such as lymphocytes and other immune
cells, fibroblasts, and stellate cells. Pancreatic stellate cells (PSC),
also known as cancer associated fibroblasts, can provide pro-survival
signals to tumor cells, however their interactions with immune cells
within the tumor microenvironment have not been explored in detail. We
hypothesized that factors produced by human PSC could enhance
myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC) differentiation and function,
which promotes immunosuppression in the tumor microenvironment. Primary
PSC were harvested from human specimens and morphology was confirmed via
immunofluorescent microscopy and staining for vimentin, alpha-smooth
muscle actin ( SMA), and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). We
analyzed soluble factors from PSC and human fetal primary pancreatic
fibroblast cell line (HPPFC; negative controls) using a Luminex assay.
Normal donor peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC, n=3 donors) were
cultured with 5 and 10% PSC supernatants, 10% HPPFC supernatants
(negative control), or IL-6/GM-CSF (positive control) for 7 days, and
assessed for MDSC phenotype by flow cytometry. The FLLL32 STAT3 inhibitor
was used to determine whether PSC-mediated MDSC differentiation or PSC
viability was STAT3-dependent. Stellate cell lines (n=7) were generated
from patients and validated. Luminex analysis indicated that PSC produced
cytokines involved in MDSC differentiation (IL-6, VEGF, MCSF) and
chemotaxis (SDF-1, MCP-1). Culture with PSC supernatants for 7 days
promoted PBMC differentiation into an MDSC (CD11b+CD33+) phenotype
(pPancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of cancer-related
death in the United States with many patients that are diagnosed dying
within one year. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is an inflammatory
disease and includes several stromal elements such as lymphocytes and
other immune cells, fibroblasts, and stellate cells. Pancreatic stellate
cells (PSC), also known as cancer associated fibroblasts, can provide
pro-survival signals to tumor cells, however their interactions with
immune cells within the tumor microenvironment have not been explored in
detail. We hypothesized that factors produced by human PSC could enhance
myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC) differentiation and function,
which promotes immunosuppression in the tumor microenvironment. Primary
PSC were harvested from human specimens and morphology was confirmed via
immunofluorescent microscopy and staining for vimentin, alpha-smooth
muscle actin ( SMA), and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). We
analyzed soluble factors from PSC and human fetal primary pancreatic
fibroblast cell line (HPPFC; negative controls) using a Luminex assay.
Normal donor peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC, n=3 donors) were
cultured with 5 and 10% PSC supernatants, 10% HPPFC supernatants
(negative control), or IL-6/GM-CSF (positive control) for 7 days, and
assessed for MDSC phenotype by flow cytometry. The FLLL32 STAT3 inhibitor
was used to determine whether PSC-mediated MDSC differentiation or PSC
viability was STAT3-dependent. Stellate cell lines (n=7) were generated
from patients and validated. Luminex analysis indicated that PSC produced
cytokines involved in MDSC differentiation (IL-6, VEGF, MCSF) and
chemotaxis (SDF-1, MCP-1). Culture with PSC supernatants for 7 days
promoted PBMC differentiation into an MDSC (CD11b+CD33+) phenotype
(p<0.01) and a sub-population of polymorphonuclear CD11b+CD33+CD15+ cells
(pPancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of cancer-related
death in the United States with many patients that are diagnosed dying
within one year. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is an inflammatory
disease and includes several stromal elements such as lymphocytes and
other immune cells, fibroblasts, and stellate cells. Pancreatic stellate
cells (PSC), also known as cancer associated fibroblasts, can provide
pro-survival signals to tumor cells, however their interactions with
immune cells within the tumor microenvironment have not been explored in
detail. We hypothesized that factors produced by human PSC could enhance
myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC) differentiation and function,
which promotes immunosuppression in the tumor microenvironment. Primary
PSC were harvested from human specimens and morphology was confirmed via
immunofluorescent microscopy and staining for vimentin, alpha-smooth
muscle actin ( SMA), and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). We
analyzed soluble factors from PSC and human fetal primary pancreatic
fibroblast cell line (HPPFC; negative controls) using a Luminex assay.
Normal donor peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC, n=3 donors) were
cultured with 5 and 10% PSC supernatants, 10% HPPFC supernatants
(negative control), or IL-6/GM-CSF (positive control) for 7 days, and
assessed for MDSC phenotype by flow cytometry. The FLLL32 STAT3 inhibitor
was used to determine whether PSC-mediated MDSC differentiation or PSC
viability was STAT3-dependent. Stellate cell lines (n=7) were generated
from patients and validated. Luminex analysis indicated that PSC produced
cytokines involved in MDSC differentiation (IL-6, VEGF, MCSF) and
chemotaxis (SDF-1, MCP-1). Culture with PSC supernatants for 7 days
promoted PBMC differentiation into an MDSC (CD11b+CD33+) phenotype
(p<0.01) and a sub-population of polymorphonuclear CD11b+CD33+CD15+ cells
(p<0.05). Supernatants from a HPPFC were used as a negative control,
which when cultured with PBMC did not induce an MDSC phenotype. The
resulting CD11b+CD33+ cells were functional as they suppressed autologous
T cell proliferation (pPancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause
of cancer-related death in the United States with many patients that are
diagnosed dying within one year. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is an
inflammatory disease and includes several stromal elements such as
lymphocytes and other immune cells, fibroblasts, and stellate cells.
Pancreatic stellate cells (PSC), also known as cancer associated
fibroblasts, can provide pro-survival signals to tumor cells, however
their interactions with immune cells within the tumor microenvironment
have not been explored in detail. We hypothesized that factors produced
by human PSC could enhance myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC)
differentiation and function, which promotes immunosuppression in the
tumor microenvironment. Primary PSC were harvested from human specimens
and morphology was confirmed via immunofluorescent microscopy and
staining for vimentin, alpha-smooth muscle actin ( SMA), and glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). We analyzed soluble factors from PSC
and human fetal primary pancreatic fibroblast cell line (HPPFC; negative
controls) using a Luminex assay. Normal donor peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC, n=3 donors) were cultured with 5 and 10% PSC
supernatants, 10% HPPFC supernatants (negative control), or IL-6/GM-CSF
(positive control) for 7 days, and assessed for MDSC phenotype by flow
cytometry. The FLLL32 STAT3 inhibitor was used to determine whether
PSC-mediated MDSC differentiation or PSC viability was STAT3-dependent.
Stellate cell lines (n=7) were generated from patients and validated.
Luminex analysis indicated that PSC produced cytokines involved in MDSC
differentiation (IL-6, VEGF, MCSF) and chemotaxis (SDF-1, MCP-1). Culture
with PSC supernatants for 7 days promoted PBMC differentiation into an
MDSC (CD11b+CD33+) phenotype (p<0.01) and a sub-population of
polymorphonuclear CD11b+CD33+CD15+ cells (p<0.05). Supernatants from a
HPPFC were used as a negative control, which when cultured with PBMC did
not induce an MDSC phenotype. The resulting CD11b+CD33+ cells were
functional as they suppressed autologous T cell proliferation (p<0.05).
Culture of normal PBMCs with PSC supernatants led to STAT3 but not STAT1
or STAT5 phosphorylation. Finally, the FLLL32 STAT3 inhibitor abrogated
PSC-mediated MDSC differentiation, PSC viability, and reduced autocrine
IL-6 production indicating these processes are STAT3 dependent
(pPancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of cancer-related
death in the United States with many patients that are diagnosed dying
within one year. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is an inflammatory
disease and includes several stromal elements such as lymphocytes and
other immune cells, fibroblasts, and stellate cells. Pancreatic stellate
cells (PSC), also known as cancer associated fibroblasts, can provide
pro-survival signals to tumor cells, however their interactions with
immune cells within the tumor microenvironment have not been explored in
detail. We hypothesized that factors produced by human PSC could enhance
myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC) differentiation and function,
which promotes immunosuppression in the tumor microenvironment. Primary
PSC were harvested from human specimens and morphology was confirmed via
immunofluorescent microscopy and staining for vimentin, alpha-smooth
muscle actin ( SMA), and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). We
analyzed soluble factors from PSC and human fetal primary pancreatic
fibroblast cell line (HPPFC; negative controls) using a Luminex assay.
Normal donor peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC, n=3 donors) were
cultured with 5 and 10% PSC supernatants, 10% HPPFC supernatants
(negative control), or IL-6/GM-CSF (positive control) for 7 days, and
assessed for MDSC phenotype by flow cytometry. The FLLL32 STAT3 inhibitor
was used to determine whether PSC-mediated MDSC differentiation or PSC
viability was STAT3-dependent. Stellate cell lines (n=7) were generated
from patients and validated. Luminex analysis indicated that PSC produced
cytokines involved in MDSC differentiation (IL-6, VEGF, MCSF) and
chemotaxis (SDF-1, MCP-1). Culture with PSC supernatants for 7 days
promoted PBMC differentiation into an MDSC (CD11b+CD33+) phenotype
(p<0.01) and a sub-population of polymorphonuclear CD11b+CD33+CD15+ cells
(p<0.05). Supernatants from a HPPFC were used as a negative control,
which when cultured with PBMC did not induce an MDSC phenotype. The
resulting CD11b+CD33+ cells were functional as they suppressed autologous
T cell proliferation (p<0.05). Culture of normal PBMCs with PSC
supernatants led to STAT3 but not STAT1 or STAT5 phosphorylation.
Finally, the FLLL32 STAT3 inhibitor abrogated PSC-mediated MDSC
differentiation, PSC viability, and reduced autocrine IL-6 production
indicating these processes are STAT3 dependent (p<0.01). These data
demonstrate a novel role for PSC in supporting immunosuppression
associated with cancer and suggest that STAT3 within both stromal and
immunosuppressive cells represents a therapeutic target.

