Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-30c inhibits human breast tumor chemo-resistance by
regulating twinfinlin-1 (TWF1) and IL-11.


Chemotherapy resistance remains a challenging problem in the clinic and
the underlying molecular mechanisms are poorly characterized. We
hypothesize that epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is involved
in therapy resistance and cancer progression, but the functional link and
signalling pathways need to be elucidated. Our work discovered that
miR-30c, a human breast tumour prognostic marker, plays a pivotal role in
chemo-resistance and apoptosis by a direct targeting of TWF1, which
encodes an actin-binding protein and promotes EMT. We also identified
IL-11 as a secondary target of TWF1 in the miR-30c signalling pathway.
Expression of miR-30c inversely correlated with TWF1 and IL-11 levels in
primary breast tumours and low IL-11 associated with relapse-free
survival in breast cancer patients. Furthermore, our study demonstrates
that miR-30c is transcriptionally regulated by GATA3 in breast tumours.
Identification of a novel miRNA-mediated pathway that regulates
chemo-resistance and apoptosis in breast cancer will facilitate the
development of novel therapeutic strategies.This study was supported in
part by The University of Chicago Women's Board (J.B.) and Chicago
Fellows Program (H.L.), DOD W81XWH-09-1-0331, NIH K12 CA139160-02, NCI
K99 CA160638-01A1, CTSA UL1 RR024999 (H.L.), Segal Fund and Ludwig Fund
(G.L.G.).

