Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor associated macrophages are associated with poor survival in
epithelial ovarian cancer.


BackgroundTumor associated macrophages have been associated with poor
outcomes in several solid tumors, but their impact on the outcome of
patients with epithelial ovarian cancer has not been well
established.MethodsWe constructed a tissue microarray of 142 epithelial
ovarian cancer specimens. Immunohistochemistry was performed for the
presence of CD68+ macrophages. The distribution of macrophages was
evaluated separately in tumor and stromal tissue. Clinical
characteristics were recorded and presence or absence of intratumoral
macrophages was correlated with clinical characteristics including
survival.ResultsMedian follow-up for the entire cohort was 32.0 months
(range, 1.7-170 months), and median progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS) were 14.1 months and 47.8 months, respectively.
Intratumoral macrophages (ITMs) were present in 132/142 patients (91.5%)
and absent in 12/142 (8.5%). Patients whose tumor tissue did not contain
ITMs had a significantly longer median PFS (not reached, p = 0.009) and
median OS (150.1 months, p=0.03), compared with the median PFS and OS of
11.7 and 47.7 months, respectively, among patients with ITMs.
Interestingly, we could not demonstrate differences in PFS and OS when
stromal macrophages were evaluated separately. The presence of ITMs was
an independent prognostic factor for OS in a multivariate analysis
(p=0.009). The Cox proportional hazard ratios for presence of ITMs were
3.55 for PFS (95% CI, 1.38-12.13) and 3.62 for OS (95% CI,
1.33-13.08).ConclusionsOur study shows that the presence of intratumoral
but not stromal macrophages correlates with poor prognosis in epithelial
ovarian carcinoma.

