Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic correlates of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and
response to vitamin D supplementation.


Epidemiological studies indicate that vitamin D has antineoplastic
effects in the colorectum and suggest that vitamin D supplementation may
be a promising chemopreventative approach to reduce risk of colorectal
cancer. Thus, it is important to consider how genetic factors may modify
vitamin D status and response to vitamin D supplementation. We
investigated this question among 2,259 participants randomized in the
Vitamin D/Calcium Polyp Prevention Study, an on-going, double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial of supplementation with vitamin D3
(1000 IU/day) and/or calcium carbonate (1200 mg elemental calcium/day)
for the prevention of colorectal adenomas. Candidate single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in or near seven genes involved in
vitamin D or calcium metabolism, transport or signaling. Excluding SNPs
with MAF0.8, 23 SNPs were analyzed in vitamin D binding protein (GC),
25-hydroxylase (CYP2R1), 24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1), 1-hydroxylase
(CYP27B1), 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7), vitamin D receptor
(VDR), and calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR). These included 5 SNPs
previously associated with circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels in
genome-wide association studies (GWAS): rs2282679, rs12785878, rs3829251,
rs10741657 and rs6013897. Linear regression was used to estimate
associations with baseline serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and with
levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D achieved after approximately one year of
vitamin D supplementation in the trial after adjusting for baseline
levels. Analyses were restricted to non-Hispanic white participants (82%)
to avoid population stratification and additive genetic models were used.
Baseline 25-hydroxyvitamin D was statistically significantly associated
with genotype at 3 GWAS hits in GC, DHCR7 and CYP2R1 and at 5 other SNPs
in GC, CYP2R1 and CYP24A1. When response to supplementation was
investigated, compliance with pill taking was taken into account by
restricting analyses to optimally compliant subjects. Genotype at 3 SNPs
in VDR, CYP2R1, and CYP24A1 statistically significantly modified the
25-hydroxyvitamin D level achieved with vitamin D supplementation. In
conclusion, we have identified variation in or near key vitamin D and
calcium pathway genes that modify serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D status and
the response to supplementation with vitamin D. This research may
identify individuals at risk for poor response to vitamin D
supplementation. The public health significance of this work is
substantial due to the prevalence of vitamin D insufficiency and the high
incidence of colorectal cancer, osteoporosis, and other common diseases
associated with poor vitamin D status.

