Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of NANOG in modulating cancer cell metabolism.


Tumors and cancer cell lines are both heterogeneous populations and
contain a sub-population of undifferentiated cells known as cancer stem
cells (CSCs) that are able to renew, proliferate and differentiate into
tumor cells. Recent studies have shown that transcription factors (TFs)
that are implicated in the pluripotency maintenance of embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) are over-expressed in many tumors. Origin and progression of
cancer is the result of a complex network of communication between tumor
initiating cells also known as cancer stem cells (CSCs) and epithelial
cells. Despite the knowledge about involvement of NANOG in modulation of
cancer progression, oncogenic signaling, and tumorigenesis, it is not
known about how NANOG regulates metabolic fluxes and alter cancer cell's
metabolism. Here, we show that NANOG can shift cancer cells metabolism
from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis, to meet cancer cell's
energy needs, redox balance, proliferation, and invasion. Our findings
are based on the quantification of metabolites, related to glycolysis,
the pentose phosphate pathway, the TCA and urea cycles, and amino acids
and nucleotide metabolism, and comparison of these pathways fluxes under
induced and uninduced NANOG expression. Our results demonstrate the
metabolic targets of NANOG on cancer progression. These insights will
present a unique opportunity for diagnosing and treating cancer through
CSCs.

