Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-administration of lapatinib increases exposure to docetaxel but
not doxorubicin in the small intestine of mice.


Combination therapy is increasingly utilized for the treatment of
metastatic breast cancer. However, co-administration of drugs,
particularly agents that are substrates for or inhibitors of
p-glycoprotein, can result in increased tissue toxicity. Unfortunately,
determining levels of chemotherapeutics in human tissues is challenging
and plasma drug concentrations are not always indicative of tissue
toxicokinetics or toxicodynamics, especially when tissue penetration is
altered.The aim of the work presented herein was to determine if
concomitant administration of compounds currently being combined in
clinical trials for metastatic breast cancer treatment alters plasma and
tissue pharmacokinetics in mice if both agents are p-glycoprotein
substrates and/or inhibitors. Accordingly, we investigated the
pharmacokinetic interactions of the classic cytotoxics and p-glycoprotein
substrates docetaxel and doxorubicin when given concurrently with the
targeted agent and p-glycoprotein inhibitor lapatinib.Our time course
plasma and tissue distribution studies showed that co-administration of
lapatinib with doxorubicin did not appreciably alter the pharmacokinetics
of this anthracycline in the plasma or six tissues evaluated in mice,
presumably because, at doses relevant to human exposure, lapatinib
inhibition of p-glycoprotein did not significantly alter doxorubicin
transport out of these tissue compartments. However, combining lapatinib
with docetaxel dramatically increased intestinal exposure to this
chemotherapeutic, which has clinical implications for enhancing
gastrointestinal toxicity. The significant lapatinib-docetaxel
interaction is likely CYP3A4-mediated and thus, our study suggests that
caution should be taken when this combination is administered,
particularly to patients with compromised CYP3A activity, and recipients
should be closely monitored for enhanced toxicity, particularly for
adverse effects on the intestine.

