Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HER family signaling in gastric cancer: The selective
and equipotent EGFR, HER2 and HER3 signaling inhibitor, AZD8931, is
efficacious in primary models of HER family driven disease.


Despite an overall decline, gastric cancer incidence remains high in
Asian countries including China, Japan and South Korea. Five-year
survival rates continue to improve in early stage disease through an
aggressive combination of surgery and chemo/radiotherapy, primarily using
fluoropyrimidine and platinum agent combinations. In advanced disease,
the TOGA trial provided clinical validation of a role for HER2 in driving
tumor progression in a subset of gastric cancer (GC) patients. However,
recent clinical studies with EGFR targeting antibodies in GC have failed
to show promise (EXPAND and REAL3 trials). Nonetheless, the dismal
prognosis associated with late stage disease and the frequent implication
of dysregulated HER family signaling in GC necessitate further
investigation.AZD8931 is an orally bioavailable, highly selective and
potent small molecule inhibitor of EGFR, HER2 and HER3 signaling(1).To
evaluate the potential utility of this agent in clinical GC, we examined
HER family gene amplification and expression in GC tissue samples and
sought to correlate these profiles with response to AZD8931 in GC tumor
xenograft models. High Her2 expression (IHC3+ or IHC2+/FISH+ve) was
confirmed in 17.4% of tumours (20/115). Importantly, high level EGFR
(44.4%, 48/108) and HER3 (89.3%, 92/103) protein expression was also
detected in our cohort of Chinese GC samples. Gastric cancer cell panel
screening (n=25 lines) identified a number of AZD8931-sensitive cell
lines with a range of HER family expression profiles (GI50 range 0.02 to
0.35M). In the NUGC3 xenograft model (high EGFR expression), twice-daily
oral dosing of AZD8931 elicited potent, dose-responsive anti-tumour
activity at well-tolerated doses (98% TGI at 6mg/kg/bid, 108% TGI at
12.5mg/kg/bid, all PDespite an overall decline, gastric cancer incidence
remains high in Asian countries including China, Japan and South Korea.
Five-year survival rates continue to improve in early stage disease
through an aggressive combination of surgery and chemo/radiotherapy,
primarily using fluoropyrimidine and platinum agent combinations. In
advanced disease, the TOGA trial provided clinical validation of a role
for HER2 in driving tumor progression in a subset of gastric cancer (GC)
patients. However, recent clinical studies with EGFR targeting antibodies
in GC have failed to show promise (EXPAND and REAL3 trials). Nonetheless,
the dismal prognosis associated with late stage disease and the frequent
implication of dysregulated HER family signaling in GC necessitate
further investigation.AZD8931 is an orally bioavailable, highly selective
and potent small molecule inhibitor of EGFR, HER2 and HER3
signaling(1).To evaluate the potential utility of this agent in clinical
GC, we examined HER family gene amplification and expression in GC tissue
samples and sought to correlate these profiles with response to AZD8931
in GC tumor xenograft models. High Her2 expression (IHC3+ or
IHC2+/FISH+ve) was confirmed in 17.4% of tumours (20/115). Importantly,
high level EGFR (44.4%, 48/108) and HER3 (89.3%, 92/103) protein
expression was also detected in our cohort of Chinese GC samples. Gastric
cancer cell panel screening (n=25 lines) identified a number of
AZD8931-sensitive cell lines with a range of HER family expression
profiles (GI50 range 0.02 to 0.35M). In the NUGC3 xenograft model (high
EGFR expression), twice-daily oral dosing of AZD8931 elicited potent,
dose-responsive anti-tumour activity at well-tolerated doses (98% TGI at
6mg/kg/bid, 108% TGI at 12.5mg/kg/bid, all P<0.0001) and anti-tumour
efficacy correlated well with pharmacodynamic modulation of phospho-HER
signaling. To investigate the translational relevance of these data,
primary GC models with varying HER family protein expression profiles
were identified and established. Within these models, AZD8931 anti-tumor
efficacy correlated broadly with strong HER pathway activation (0 to 83%
TGI at 12.5mg/kg/bid). We further evaluated the activity of AZD8931 in
combination with cisplatin/5-FU, 1st line standard of care chemotherapies
commonly used in the treatment of gastric cancer. Using a primary GC
xenograft model, AZD8931 demonstrated additive benefit when used at well
tolerated doses (minimal body weight loss). These data support the
potential clinical utility of AZD8931 for the therapeutic treatment of
gastric cancers exhibiting strong HER pathway signaling.1 Hickinson et
al. Clin.Cancer Res 2010; Feb 15.

