Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human MutS homologue 4 (hMSH4) interacts with eIF3f and inhibits
NHEJ-mediated DNA repair.


DNA mismatch repair (MMR) proteins participate in diverse cellular
functions including DNA damage response and repair. As a member of the
MMR family, hMSH4 plays an important role in meiotic recombination,
likely through the formation of hMSH4-hMSH5 heterocomplex that interacts
with homologous recombination DNA intermediate structures. It is known
that hMSH4 is expressed in an array of somatic cells; however, its
involvement in mitotic processes is poorly defined. We have identified a
new hMSH4 interacting partner eIF3f, a protein that functions not only in
translation but also in the regulation of apoptosis and tumorigenesis.
Our studies have demonstrated that hMSH4-eIF3f interaction is mediated
through the N-terminal regions of both proteins. The interaction with
eIF3f stabilizes hMSH4 protein, which in turn sustains DNA double strand
break (DSB)-induced -H2AX foci and compromises cell survival in response
to ionizing radiation (IR). These effects could be attributed to the
inhibition of NHEJ activity by hMSH4. Furthermore, hMSH4 reduces
IR-induced AKT activation, thereby facilitating eIF3f-mediated bypass of
S phase arrest, and ultimately promoting G2/M arrest in response to IR
treatment. In short, this study revealed a potential role of hMSH4 in the
maintenance of genomic stability through suppressing error-prone DSB
repair.

