Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and validation of novel autoantibodies for the
detection of malignant mesothelioma.


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) survival rate has been hampered by the lack
of efficient and accurate early detection methods. The immune system may
detect the early changes of tumor progression by responding with
tumor-associated autoantibody production. Hence, in this study, we
translated the humoral immune response to cancer proteins into a valuable
blood test for MM. A T7 phage MM cDNA library was constructed using MM
tumor tissues and biopanned for tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) using
pooled MM patients and normal serum samples. About 1000 individual phage
TAAs clones from the biopanned library were subjected for protein
microarray construction and tested with 53 MM and 52 controls serum
samples as a training group. The classifiers developed from the training
group were further validated with 50 patient and 50 normal serum samples
as an independent blind validation. Nine candidate autoantibody markers
were selected by logistic regression and Treeview statistical analysis as
a detecting panel. In the training set, sensitivity of 92.5% and
specificity of 90.4% were reached with an AUC was 0.898 in Receiver
Operating Characteristic analysis. For validation test, 86.5% sensitivity
and 86.8% specificity were achieved with an AUC of 0.825. Among these 9
candidate markers, five were found to be strongly cancer associated
proteins (PDIA6, MEG3, SDCCAG3, IGHG3, IGHG1). Our results achieved much
greater accuracies than any other current biomarkers for MM detection and
hence could be a useful tool to assess cancer risk in high-risk
populations.Citation Format: Xufei Zhang, Lei Zhao, Weike Shen, Kemp
Kernstine, Li Zhong. Identification and validation of novel
autoantibodies for the detection of malignant mesothelioma. [abstract].
In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association
for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA):
AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5300.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5300

