Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-induced fibrocytes mediate immune suppression via
Indoleamine Oxidase.


Fibrocytes are hematopoietic stem cell-derived, fibroblast precursors
implicated in chronic inflammation, fibrosis and wound healing, whereas
human myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) have been described as
CD14-CD11b+CD33+HLADR- cells that exert T cell suppression via ROS, ARG1
and iNOS2. Here we report that patients with metastatic pediatric
sarcomas have abnormal expansions of myeloid cells within elutriated
mononuclear apheresis samples of pediatric cancer patients. Like myeloid
derived suppressor cells, these cells are CD14-CD11b+, but they also
cells bear markers of classical fibrocytes, including surface smooth
muscle actin, fibroblast activation protein, collagen I/V, and HLA-DR,
but are PM2K negative. They also mediate angiogenesis and are
CD33lo/-CD34+CD15+CD16+CD66b+CD68+PDL1+ and IL4R+. While classical
fibrocytes serve as antigen presenting cells and augment immune
reactivity, fibrocytes from cancer patients suppressed anti-CD3 mediated
T cell proliferation, primarily via indoleamine oxidase (IDO).
Interestingly the degree of fibrocyte expansion observed in individual
patients directly correlated with the frequency of circulating GATA3+CD4+
cells (R=0.80) and monocytes from healthy donors cultured with IL-4
differentiated into fibrocytes with the same phenotypic profile and
immunosuppressive properties as those observed in patients with cancer.
We conclude that fibrocytes are a subset of myeloid derived suppressor
cells expanded in cancer patients likely in response to Th2 immune
deviation. These cells may contribute to tumor progression via both
immune evasion and angiogenesis.

