Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidation of crizotinib resistance in NCI-H3122 and strategies
to circumvent bypass resistance.


The Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) fusion proteins such as EML4-ALK act
as oncogenic drivers in approximately 5-7% of non-small cell lung
carcinomas (NSCLC). The rationale for targeting this kinase as a means of
treatment has been validated by the clinical efficacy and subsequent
approval of the ALK inhibitor, crizotinib (Xalkori ). The overall
response rate of 61% suggests potential intrinsic resistance to
crizotinib. In addition, like many tyrosine kinase inhibitors, acquired
resistance inevitably leads to treatment refractory cancers. To better
understand resistance mechanisms (both intrinsic and acquired), and
circumvent resistance to crizotinib, we developed in vitro resistance
models through prolonged crizotinib exposure. We isolated resistance
clones and characterization identified different resistance mechanisms,
including pathway bypass as well as an ALK kinase mutation (G1269A),
similar to those that have been reported from refractory patient samples.
The majority of the resistance clones escaped crizotinib suppression via
pathway bypass. In several resistance clones, simultaneous activation of
EGFR and IGF1R receptors limited the efficacy of double combination
strategies and required triple combinations. In addition,
phospho-proteomic analysis revealed simultaneous activation of different
receptor tyrosine kinases, suggesting that combination treatment with
inhibitors of downstream mediators such as PI3K and MEK may be effective
strategies.Our resistance models demonstrate the heterogeneity of cancers
and reveal the multiplicity of escape mechanisms. Our results provide
support for the evaluation of combination therapy with downstream
mediator inhibitors as a way to restore as well as enhance sensitivity to
crizotinib.

