Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mouse embryonic fibroblasts null for krppel-like factor 4 show
reduced autophagy and elevated mTOR activity.


Krppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is a zinc-finger transcription factor named
for its homology to the Drosophila protein Krppel. KLF4 negatively
regulates cell-cycle progression and, cell proliferation, and is a known
tumor suppressor in certain cancers. Autophagy, or self-eating, is a
process through which intracellular aggregates can be degraded and their
components recycled. The role of autophagy in cancer appears to be
context dependent. In pre-cancerous tissue, autophagy may serve a
protective purpose, removing cytotoxic aggregates and promoting a healthy
intracellular environment. In cancerous tissue, however, autophagy may
allow cancer cell survival. Previous studies examining gene expression in
WT (KLF4+/+) and KLF4 null (KLF4-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
revealed autophagy related gene expression to be downregulated in KLF4-/-
MEFs. In order to evaluate whether KLF4 is important in autophagy, we
examined microtubule associated protein-1 light chain 3 protein (LC3, a
marker of autophagy) and a downstream target of mTOR (p70S6K, a marker of
autophagy inhibition) in KLF4+/+ and KLF4-/- MEFs. Our results show that
levels of LC3 are reduced and levels of p70S6K are elevated in both
KLF4-/- MEFs and MEFs in which KLF4 has been transiently silenced.
Rapamycin treatment, which inhibits mTOR activity, fails to restore
autophagy in KLF4 null MEFs. Collectively, these findings suggest that
KLF4 may negatively regulate mTOR activity and that KLF4 may also be
necessary for induction of autophagy either downstream or entirely
independent of mTOR.Citation Format: Hagos Engda, Elise DeRoo. Mouse
embryonic fibroblasts null for krppel-like factor 4 show reduced
autophagy and elevated mTOR activity. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1656. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1656

