Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tubulin binding agent BPR0L075 induces iitotic catastrophe in
paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells that is independent of
caspase-3 activation.


Paclitaxel resistance is a significant clinical problem. In the current
study, we evaluated antiproliferative effects of a tubulin binding agent
BPR0L075 in paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells. BPR0L075 displays
potent and broad-spectrum cytotoxicity at low nanomolar concentrations
(IC50 = 2-7 nM) against both parental ovarian cancer cells (OVCAR-3,
SKOV-3, and A2780-1A9) and paclitaxel-resistant sublines (OVCAR-3-TR,
SKOV-3-TR, 1A9-PTX10), regardless of the expression levels of the
multidrug resistance transporter P-gp and class III -tubulin or mutation
of -tubulin. BPR0L075 blocks cell cycle at the G2/M phase in
paclitaxel-resistant cells while equal concentration of paclitaxel
treatment was ineffective. BPR0L075 induced cell death in
paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells (OVCAR-3-TR and SKOV-3-TR) is
primarily due to mitotic catastrophe, evidenced by formation of giant,
multinucleated cells and absence of PARP cleavage and DNA fragmentation.
Immunoblot analysis shows that survivin protein expression was depleted
in resistant cells. BPR0L075 induced cell death in the
paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells proceed through caspase-3
independent mechanisms, supported by the absence of caspase-3 cleavage
and ineffectiveness of caspase-3 inhibitor in protecting the resistant
cells from BPR0L075 induced cell death. In conclusion, BPR0L075 displays
potent cytotoxic effects in ovarian cancer cells with a potential to
overcome paclitaxel resistance by bypassing efflux transporters and
inducing mitotic catastrophe. BPR0L075 represents a promising antimitotic
agent in controlling taxane-resistant ovarian cancer cells.

