Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simvastatin targets breast cancer stem-like cells by inhibiting
intracellular signaling pathways leading to radiosensitization of
inflammatory breast cancer cells.


Background: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is responsible for 10% of
breast cancer deaths although contributing to a small percentage (1%) of
total breast cancer cases each year. The hallmarks of IBC are skin
involvement and a high propensity to metastasize. It is thought that a
small population of stem-like cancer cells is responsible for the
metastatic potential and treatment resistance to therapies such as
radiation therapy in IBC. In this study we explored the
radiosensitization of several breast cancer cell lines in vitro with
simvastatin and the mechanism for this.Methods: In order to determine
cell proliferation, breast cancer cell lines SUM149, SUM159 and MCF-7
were grown in 96 well plates with different concentrations of simvastatin
for one week. In order to determine the effect of simvastatin in
stem-like cancer cells, cells were seeded in serum free, growth factor
enriched, anchorage independent, treated with simvastatin for 24 hours
and mammosphere formation was quantified a week later. In addition,
SUM149, SUM159 and MCF-7 cells were cultured in standard monolayer
cultures and in stem cell enriching anchorage independent cultures with
simvastatin and treated with increasing concentrations of radiation.
Survival curves were generated using Sigmaplot 8.0 and t-test was used to
compare surviving fraction (SF) of groups. Finally, cell lysates were
obtained from cultures untreated and treated with simvastatin and
radiation and analyzed through western blot.Results: Simvastatin
significantly decreased cancer cell proliferation in vitro in all cell
lines (pBackground: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is responsible for
10% of breast cancer deaths although contributing to a small percentage
(1%) of total breast cancer cases each year. The hallmarks of IBC are
skin involvement and a high propensity to metastasize. It is thought that
a small population of stem-like cancer cells is responsible for the
metastatic potential and treatment resistance to therapies such as
radiation therapy in IBC. In this study we explored the
radiosensitization of several breast cancer cell lines in vitro with
simvastatin and the mechanism for this.Methods: In order to determine
cell proliferation, breast cancer cell lines SUM149, SUM159 and MCF-7
were grown in 96 well plates with different concentrations of simvastatin
for one week. In order to determine the effect of simvastatin in
stem-like cancer cells, cells were seeded in serum free, growth factor
enriched, anchorage independent, treated with simvastatin for 24 hours
and mammosphere formation was quantified a week later. In addition,
SUM149, SUM159 and MCF-7 cells were cultured in standard monolayer
cultures and in stem cell enriching anchorage independent cultures with
simvastatin and treated with increasing concentrations of radiation.
Survival curves were generated using Sigmaplot 8.0 and t-test was used to
compare surviving fraction (SF) of groups. Finally, cell lysates were
obtained from cultures untreated and treated with simvastatin and
radiation and analyzed through western blot.Results: Simvastatin
significantly decreased cancer cell proliferation in vitro in all cell
lines (p<0.002). Cell lines SUM 159 and MCF 7 grown in mammosphere
enriched media showed significant decreased mammosphere formation when
grown in the presence of simvastatin (pBackground: Inflammatory breast
cancer (IBC) is responsible for 10% of breast cancer deaths although
contributing to a small percentage (1%) of total breast cancer cases each
year. The hallmarks of IBC are skin involvement and a high propensity to
metastasize. It is thought that a small population of stem-like cancer
cells is responsible for the metastatic potential and treatment
resistance to therapies such as radiation therapy in IBC. In this study
we explored the radiosensitization of several breast cancer cell lines in
vitro with simvastatin and the mechanism for this.Methods: In order to
determine cell proliferation, breast cancer cell lines SUM149, SUM159 and
MCF-7 were grown in 96 well plates with different concentrations of
simvastatin for one week. In order to determine the effect of simvastatin
in stem-like cancer cells, cells were seeded in serum free, growth factor
enriched, anchorage independent, treated with simvastatin for 24 hours
and mammosphere formation was quantified a week later. In addition,
SUM149, SUM159 and MCF-7 cells were cultured in standard monolayer
cultures and in stem cell enriching anchorage independent cultures with
simvastatin and treated with increasing concentrations of radiation.
Survival curves were generated using Sigmaplot 8.0 and t-test was used to
compare surviving fraction (SF) of groups. Finally, cell lysates were
obtained from cultures untreated and treated with simvastatin and
radiation and analyzed through western blot.Results: Simvastatin
significantly decreased cancer cell proliferation in vitro in all cell
lines (p<0.002). Cell lines SUM 159 and MCF 7 grown in mammosphere
enriched media showed significant decreased mammosphere formation when
grown in the presence of simvastatin (p<0.05). Moreover, simvastatin
radiosensitized all cell lines in both monolayer and anchorage
independent clonogenic assays. The triple-negative IBC cell line SUM149
had the greatest response to combined treatment regardless of the
radiation dose used in monolayer cultures (SF2: 0.417 vs 0.319, SF4:
0.136 vs 0.075, SF6: 0.026 vs 0.018, in control vs treated respectively,
all pBackground: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is responsible for 10%
of breast cancer deaths although contributing to a small percentage (1%)
of total breast cancer cases each year. The hallmarks of IBC are skin
involvement and a high propensity to metastasize. It is thought that a
small population of stem-like cancer cells is responsible for the
metastatic potential and treatment resistance to therapies such as
radiation therapy in IBC. In this study we explored the
radiosensitization of several breast cancer cell lines in vitro with
simvastatin and the mechanism for this.Methods: In order to determine
cell proliferation, breast cancer cell lines SUM149, SUM159 and MCF-7
were grown in 96 well plates with different concentrations of simvastatin
for one week. In order to determine the effect of simvastatin in
stem-like cancer cells, cells were seeded in serum free, growth factor
enriched, anchorage independent, treated with simvastatin for 24 hours
and mammosphere formation was quantified a week later. In addition,
SUM149, SUM159 and MCF-7 cells were cultured in standard monolayer
cultures and in stem cell enriching anchorage independent cultures with
simvastatin and treated with increasing concentrations of radiation.
Survival curves were generated using Sigmaplot 8.0 and t-test was used to
compare surviving fraction (SF) of groups. Finally, cell lysates were
obtained from cultures untreated and treated with simvastatin and
radiation and analyzed through western blot.Results: Simvastatin
significantly decreased cancer cell proliferation in vitro in all cell
lines (p<0.002). Cell lines SUM 159 and MCF 7 grown in mammosphere
enriched media showed significant decreased mammosphere formation when
grown in the presence of simvastatin (p<0.05). Moreover, simvastatin
radiosensitized all cell lines in both monolayer and anchorage
independent clonogenic assays. The triple-negative IBC cell line SUM149
had the greatest response to combined treatment regardless of the
radiation dose used in monolayer cultures (SF2: 0.417 vs 0.319, SF4:
0.136 vs 0.075, SF6: 0.026 vs 0.018, in control vs treated respectively,
all p<0.0001) and in stem cell enriching cultures (SF2: 0.880 vs 0.762,
SF4: 0.863 vs 0.492, SF6: 0.920 vs 0.492, in control vs treated
respectively, all pBackground: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is
responsible for 10% of breast cancer deaths although contributing to a
small percentage (1%) of total breast cancer cases each year. The
hallmarks of IBC are skin involvement and a high propensity to
metastasize. It is thought that a small population of stem-like cancer
cells is responsible for the metastatic potential and treatment
resistance to therapies such as radiation therapy in IBC. In this study
we explored the radiosensitization of several breast cancer cell lines in
vitro with simvastatin and the mechanism for this.Methods: In order to
determine cell proliferation, breast cancer cell lines SUM149, SUM159 and
MCF-7 were grown in 96 well plates with different concentrations of
simvastatin for one week. In order to determine the effect of simvastatin
in stem-like cancer cells, cells were seeded in serum free, growth factor
enriched, anchorage independent, treated with simvastatin for 24 hours
and mammosphere formation was quantified a week later. In addition,
SUM149, SUM159 and MCF-7 cells were cultured in standard monolayer
cultures and in stem cell enriching anchorage independent cultures with
simvastatin and treated with increasing concentrations of radiation.
Survival curves were generated using Sigmaplot 8.0 and t-test was used to
compare surviving fraction (SF) of groups. Finally, cell lysates were
obtained from cultures untreated and treated with simvastatin and
radiation and analyzed through western blot.Results: Simvastatin
significantly decreased cancer cell proliferation in vitro in all cell
lines (p<0.002). Cell lines SUM 159 and MCF 7 grown in mammosphere
enriched media showed significant decreased mammosphere formation when
grown in the presence of simvastatin (p<0.05). Moreover, simvastatin
radiosensitized all cell lines in both monolayer and anchorage
independent clonogenic assays. The triple-negative IBC cell line SUM149
had the greatest response to combined treatment regardless of the
radiation dose used in monolayer cultures (SF2: 0.417 vs 0.319, SF4:
0.136 vs 0.075, SF6: 0.026 vs 0.018, in control vs treated respectively,
all p<0.0001) and in stem cell enriching cultures (SF2: 0.880 vs 0.762,
SF4: 0.863 vs 0.492, SF6: 0.920 vs 0.492, in control vs treated
respectively, all p<0.0001). The triple-negative non-IBC cell line SUM159
was more sensitive to combined treatment in monolayer cultures
(pBackground: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is responsible for 10% of
breast cancer deaths although contributing to a small percentage (1%) of
total breast cancer cases each year. The hallmarks of IBC are skin
involvement and a high propensity to metastasize. It is thought that a
small population of stem-like cancer cells is responsible for the
metastatic potential and treatment resistance to therapies such as
radiation therapy in IBC. In this study we explored the
radiosensitization of several breast cancer cell lines in vitro with
simvastatin and the mechanism for this.Methods: In order to determine
cell proliferation, breast cancer cell lines SUM149, SUM159 and MCF-7
were grown in 96 well plates with different concentrations of simvastatin
for one week. In order to determine the effect of simvastatin in
stem-like cancer cells, cells were seeded in serum free, growth factor
enriched, anchorage independent, treated with simvastatin for 24 hours
and mammosphere formation was quantified a week later. In addition,
SUM149, SUM159 and MCF-7 cells were cultured in standard monolayer
cultures and in stem cell enriching anchorage independent cultures with
simvastatin and treated with increasing concentrations of radiation.
Survival curves were generated using Sigmaplot 8.0 and t-test was used to
compare surviving fraction (SF) of groups. Finally, cell lysates were
obtained from cultures untreated and treated with simvastatin and
radiation and analyzed through western blot.Results: Simvastatin
significantly decreased cancer cell proliferation in vitro in all cell
lines (p<0.002). Cell lines SUM 159 and MCF 7 grown in mammosphere
enriched media showed significant decreased mammosphere formation when
grown in the presence of simvastatin (p<0.05). Moreover, simvastatin
radiosensitized all cell lines in both monolayer and anchorage
independent clonogenic assays. The triple-negative IBC cell line SUM149
had the greatest response to combined treatment regardless of the
radiation dose used in monolayer cultures (SF2: 0.417 vs 0.319, SF4:
0.136 vs 0.075, SF6: 0.026 vs 0.018, in control vs treated respectively,
all p<0.0001) and in stem cell enriching cultures (SF2: 0.880 vs 0.762,
SF4: 0.863 vs 0.492, SF6: 0.920 vs 0.492, in control vs treated
respectively, all p<0.0001). The triple-negative non-IBC cell line SUM159
was more sensitive to combined treatment in monolayer cultures (p<0.001)
than in stem cell enriching cultures. Combination of simvastatin and
radiation therapy decreased protein expression of phospho-rho A, VEGF-A,
and phospho-ras.Conclusions: IBC remains a difficult disease to treat
with a high rate of local recurrence after radiation therapy. Statins
have been shown to increase tumor free survival in breast cancer. Herein
we show simvastatin targets breast cancer stem-like cells resulting in
radiosensitizing of IBC in vitro.

