Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of a chimera of p16 and ARF: All is not lost.


Adults in the US are now 28 times more likely to develop melanoma than 75
years ago. Among other genetic abnormalities, mutations in the INK4a
locus on chromosome 9p21 are prominent in melanoma and can be found in
nearly 50% of familial cases. Two independent tumor suppressors which are
transcribed from the INK4a locus, p16 (CDKN2A) and ARF (p14ARF), share
common exons 2 and 3 but are translated in unique reading frames. p16
causes cell cycle and growth arrest in the G1 phase by binding
cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6), thereby displacing Cyclin D1
and inhibiting the enzymes. ARF, meanwhile, causes cell cycle and growth
arrest in the G1 and G2/M phases by binding MDM2, in turn stabilizing
p53. Mutations in melanoma often affect one or both genes, suggesting p16
and ARF may play equally important roles in tumor suppression. We report
a 2 bp deletion, 1 bp insertion (CC to T) in exon 2 of p16/ARF found in a
melanoma cell line that alters the reading frames of both genes and
creates unique proteins. One transcript initiates from the ARF promoter
and codes for the first 94 amino acids of ARF before switching to the
reading frame of p16 to code for another 75 residues. We named the
resulting protein chimera ARF (chARF). The other transcript initiates
from the p16 promoter, codes for the first 80 amino acids of p16, then
switches to a non-p16/non-ARF reading frame to code for an additional 63
residues. We called this protein p16-Alternate Carboxyl Terminus
(p16-ACT). Based on sequence, we hypothesized that chARF could function
both as ARF and p16 since it contains the MDM2 binding domain of ARF as
well as most of the CDK4/6 binding domain of p16. Meanwhile, we
hypothesized that p16-ACT would have no function since it is missing most
of the CDK4/6 binding region of p16. To assess the function of these
proteins, we overexpressed both mutant and wild-type proteins in the
p16/ARF-inactivated tumor cell line U2OS. In CDK4 immunoprecipitation
assays, chARF bound CDK4, but unlike wild-type p16, did not displace
Cyclin D1. p16-ACT neither bound CDK4 nor displaced Cyclin D1. chARF
expression strongly activated the p53/p21 pathway and arrested U2OS cells
in the G1 and G2/M phases of the cell cycle in a manner identical to
wild-type ARF. p16-ACT, however, had no noticeable effect on cell cycle
distribution. Finally, we looked at cell proliferation and found that
chARF expression suppressed monolayer cell growth and colony formation in
U2OS cells by 75-85%, similar to wild-type ARF. p16-ACT expression had a
small suppressive effect on colony formation, but no effect on monolayer
growth. We conclude that chARF functions as wild-type ARF but neither
chARF nor p16-ACT function as wild-type p16.

