Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variation in circadian rhythm genes influence epithelial ovarian
cancer risk and invasiveness.


Background: Circadian rhythms of biological processes are regulated by
endogenous clock genes and clock-controlled genes. Aberrant expression of
circadian clock genes may have important consequences on the
transactivation of downstream targets that control the cell cycle and
cellular proliferation potentially promoting carcinogenesis. Animal
models indicate that several circadian rhythm genes are expressed in the
ovaries, where they influence and are influenced by estrous cycles. The
goal of the current study was to examine the association of circadian
gene variants and epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk.Methods:
Thirty-one SNPs from five circadian genes (i.e., ARNTL, CRY2, KLF10,
NPAS2, PER3, TIMELESS) were genotyped in 14,736 cases and 23,448 control
women of European ancestry from 43 studies in the Ovarian Cancer
Association Consortium (OCAC), on a custom Illumina iSelect designed for
the Collaborative Oncological Gene-Environment Study (COGS). Both
invasive cancers combined and the four main histological subtypes (serous
[n=8,372], endometroid [n=2,068], clear cell [n=1,025] and mucinous
[n=943] were analyzed, SNP analyses were conducted using unconditional
logistic regression under a log-additive model. All analyses were
adjusted for study site and population substructure.Results: Eleven SNPs
were found to be associated with ovarian cancer risk. The SNPs most
associated with serous cancer risk were KLF10 rs2513928 (OR=.95
p=6.1x103), rs2513927 (OR=1.05 p=6.1x103), rs2511703 (OR=1.05 p=9.8x103),
rs3191333 (OR=1.05, p=1.5x102) and NPAS2 rs13012930 (OR=.95, p=3.5x102).
Endometroid cancer risk was significantly associated with ARNTL SNPs
rs10732458 (OR=1.3, p=1.0x102) and rs7117836 (OR=1.2, p=4.6x102), while
clear cell cancer risk was associated with ARNTL rs1562438 (OR=.88,
p=1.5x102), rs1026071 (OR=.89, p=1.8x102), and rs3816360 (OR=.91,
p=4.8x102) and KLF10 rs2388232 (OR=1.1, p=3.3x102). No variants were
significantly associated with mucinous cancer risk. Four SNPs in KLF10
were associated with cancer invasiveness; they were rs2513928 (OR=.95,
p=1.8x103), rs3191333 (OR=1.04, p=1.4x102), rs2513927 (OR=1.04,
p=1.9x102), and rs2511703 (OR=1.03, p=2.8x102).Conclusions: Data from the
current study suggest that polymorphisms in circadian genes ARNTL, KLF10,
and NPAS2 are significantly associated with ovarian cancer
histopathologic subtypes and invasiveness. These findings merit further
investigation and replication.Funding: R01 CA149429Citation Format:
Heather Jim, Jonathan Tyrer, Hui-Yi Lin, Gang Han, Xiaotao Qu, Ellen L.
Goode, Zhihua Chen, Ya-Yu Tsai, Julie M. Cunningham, Edward Iversen,
Susan Ramus, Andrew Berchuck, Joellen Schildkraut, Alvaro Monteiro, Simon
Gayther, Steven A. Narod, Thomas A. Sellers, Paul Pharoah, Catherine M.
Phelan. Variation in circadian rhythm genes influence epithelial ovarian
cancer risk and invasiveness. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4850. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4850

