Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating effects of resveratrol on systemic markers associated
with breast cancer risk: a pilot clinical study in postmenopausal women
with high adiposity.


Resveratrol, a phytochemical produced by a restricted number of plant
species in response to stress, has exerted compelling breast cancer
preventive activities in preclinical studies. Resveratrol not only acted
as an estrogen receptor agonist/antagonist and inhibited aromatase but
also affected multiple carcinogenesis pathways and multiple targets
within a pathway. Resveratrol also demonstrated beneficial effects on
metabolic disturbances in rodent models for obesity. We conducted an open
label, single arm pilot study of resveratrol in postmenopausal women with
high body mass index (BMI 25 kg/m2), a risk factor for breast cancer. The
primary objective was to determine the effect of resveratrol on serum
estradiol levels with secondary endpoints being measurement of modulation
of multiple systemic markers associated with breast cancer risk. Forty
eligible subjects were recruited to initiate the resveratrol intervention
(1 gm resveratrol daily for 12 weeks) with six withdrawn early due to
adverse events. Thirty-four subjects completed 12 weeks of resveratrol
intervention. We found that resveratrol intervention did not result in
significant changes in serum concentrations of estradiol, estrone, and
testosterone in the study cohort but significantly increased serum levels
of sex steroid hormone binding globulin (10% increase from baseline, p
Resveratrol, a phytochemical produced by a restricted number of plant
species in response to stress, has exerted compelling breast cancer
preventive activities in preclinical studies. Resveratrol not only acted
as an estrogen receptor agonist/antagonist and inhibited aromatase but
also affected multiple carcinogenesis pathways and multiple targets
within a pathway. Resveratrol also demonstrated beneficial effects on
metabolic disturbances in rodent models for obesity. We conducted an open
label, single arm pilot study of resveratrol in postmenopausal women with
high body mass index (BMI 25 kg/m2), a risk factor for breast cancer. The
primary objective was to determine the effect of resveratrol on serum
estradiol levels with secondary endpoints being measurement of modulation
of multiple systemic markers associated with breast cancer risk. Forty
eligible subjects were recruited to initiate the resveratrol intervention
(1 gm resveratrol daily for 12 weeks) with six withdrawn early due to
adverse events. Thirty-four subjects completed 12 weeks of resveratrol
intervention. We found that resveratrol intervention did not result in
significant changes in serum concentrations of estradiol, estrone, and
testosterone in the study cohort but significantly increased serum levels
of sex steroid hormone binding globulin (10% increase from baseline, p <
0.01). Resveratrol intervention resulted in a significant increase in
urinary 2-hydroxyestrone (2-OHE1) levels (73% increase from baseline, p
Resveratrol, a phytochemical produced by a restricted number of plant
species in response to stress, has exerted compelling breast cancer
preventive activities in preclinical studies. Resveratrol not only acted
as an estrogen receptor agonist/antagonist and inhibited aromatase but
also affected multiple carcinogenesis pathways and multiple targets
within a pathway. Resveratrol also demonstrated beneficial effects on
metabolic disturbances in rodent models for obesity. We conducted an open
label, single arm pilot study of resveratrol in postmenopausal women with
high body mass index (BMI 25 kg/m2), a risk factor for breast cancer. The
primary objective was to determine the effect of resveratrol on serum
estradiol levels with secondary endpoints being measurement of modulation
of multiple systemic markers associated with breast cancer risk. Forty
eligible subjects were recruited to initiate the resveratrol intervention
(1 gm resveratrol daily for 12 weeks) with six withdrawn early due to
adverse events. Thirty-four subjects completed 12 weeks of resveratrol
intervention. We found that resveratrol intervention did not result in
significant changes in serum concentrations of estradiol, estrone, and
testosterone in the study cohort but significantly increased serum levels
of sex steroid hormone binding globulin (10% increase from baseline, p <
0.01). Resveratrol intervention resulted in a significant increase in
urinary 2-hydroxyestrone (2-OHE1) levels (73% increase from baseline, p <
0.01) leading to a favorable change in urinary 2-OHE1/16-OHE1 ratio (85%
increase from baseline, p Resveratrol, a phytochemical produced by a
restricted number of plant species in response to stress, has exerted
compelling breast cancer preventive activities in preclinical studies.
Resveratrol not only acted as an estrogen receptor agonist/antagonist and
inhibited aromatase but also affected multiple carcinogenesis pathways
and multiple targets within a pathway. Resveratrol also demonstrated
beneficial effects on metabolic disturbances in rodent models for
obesity. We conducted an open label, single arm pilot study of
resveratrol in postmenopausal women with high body mass index (BMI 25
kg/m2), a risk factor for breast cancer. The primary objective was to
determine the effect of resveratrol on serum estradiol levels with
secondary endpoints being measurement of modulation of multiple systemic
markers associated with breast cancer risk. Forty eligible subjects were
recruited to initiate the resveratrol intervention (1 gm resveratrol
daily for 12 weeks) with six withdrawn early due to adverse events.
Thirty-four subjects completed 12 weeks of resveratrol intervention. We
found that resveratrol intervention did not result in significant changes
in serum concentrations of estradiol, estrone, and testosterone in the
study cohort but significantly increased serum levels of sex steroid
hormone binding globulin (10% increase from baseline, p < 0.01).
Resveratrol intervention resulted in a significant increase in urinary
2-hydroxyestrone (2-OHE1) levels (73% increase from baseline, p < 0.01)
leading to a favorable change in urinary 2-OHE1/16-OHE1 ratio (85%
increase from baseline, p < 0.01). Serum leptin levels were suppressed
significantly (10% decrease from baseline, p Resveratrol, a phytochemical
produced by a restricted number of plant species in response to stress,
has exerted compelling breast cancer preventive activities in preclinical
studies. Resveratrol not only acted as an estrogen receptor
agonist/antagonist and inhibited aromatase but also affected multiple
carcinogenesis pathways and multiple targets within a pathway.
Resveratrol also demonstrated beneficial effects on metabolic
disturbances in rodent models for obesity. We conducted an open label,
single arm pilot study of resveratrol in postmenopausal women with high
body mass index (BMI 25 kg/m2), a risk factor for breast cancer. The
primary objective was to determine the effect of resveratrol on serum
estradiol levels with secondary endpoints being measurement of modulation
of multiple systemic markers associated with breast cancer risk. Forty
eligible subjects were recruited to initiate the resveratrol intervention
(1 gm resveratrol daily for 12 weeks) with six withdrawn early due to
adverse events. Thirty-four subjects completed 12 weeks of resveratrol
intervention. We found that resveratrol intervention did not result in
significant changes in serum concentrations of estradiol, estrone, and
testosterone in the study cohort but significantly increased serum levels
of sex steroid hormone binding globulin (10% increase from baseline, p <
0.01). Resveratrol intervention resulted in a significant increase in
urinary 2-hydroxyestrone (2-OHE1) levels (73% increase from baseline, p <
0.01) leading to a favorable change in urinary 2-OHE1/16-OHE1 ratio (85%
increase from baseline, p < 0.01). Serum leptin levels were suppressed
significantly (10% decrease from baseline, p < 0.01) following
resveratrol intervention whereas serum adiponectin levels were not
changed. The most common possibly or probably related adverse events were
diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal discomfort. One participant had a
possibly related serious grade 4 elevation in hepatic ALT and AST enzymes
at the post-intervention visit which resolved after less than 3 months of
follow-up. Aside from this event, resveratrol intervention did not result
in clinically significant changes in hematology and blood chemistry. We
conclude that daily 1 gm dose of resveratrol did not affect the levels of
circulating sex steroid hormones in postmenopausal women with high BMI
but resulted in favorable changes in serum sex steroid binding globulin
and leptin levels and urinary 2-OHE1/16-OHE1 ratio that may be associated
with reduced breast cancer risk. However, the observed adverse effects
advocate for the consideration of lower doses for further clinical
development of resveratrol for cancer prevention. (supported by a
contract, N01-CN-35158, from the National Cancer Institute, Division of
Cancer Prevention)

