Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAK1 inhibition sensitizes neuroblastoma cells to chemotherapy.


Treatment failure in high risk neuroblastoma is largely due to
development of chemoresistance. NF-B activation is one of the resistance
mechanisms for cancer cells to escape from chemotherapy-induced
cell-death. TAK1 is an essential component in genotoxic stresses-induced
NF-B activation; however, the role of TAK1 in the development of
chemoresistance in neuroblastoma remains unknown. Using a panel of
neuroblastoma cell lines, we found that TAK1 inhibitor 5Z-7-oxozeaenol
significantly augmented the cytotoxic effects of doxorubicin (Dox) and
etoposide (VP-16) on neuroblastoma cell lines. TAK1 inhibition also
enhanced the inhibitory effect of Dox and VP-16 on anchorage-independent
growth. Treatment of neuroblastoma cells with 5Z-7-oxozeaenol blocked
Dox-induced NF-B activation and enhanced Dox-induced apoptosis. Moreover,
5Z-7-oxozeaenol could overcome the established chemoresistance in LA-N-6
neuroblastoma cells. Using an orthotopic neuroblastoma mouse model, we
found that 5Z-7-oxozeaenol significantly enhanced chemotherapeutic
efficacy in vivo. Together, we provide a proof-of-concept that TAK1
inhibition significantly enhances the sensitivity of neuroblastoma cells
to chemotherapy-induced cell-death and can serve as an effective adjunct
to current chemotherapeutic regimens for high risk disease. Since the
requirement of TAK1 kinase activity in genotoxic stresses-induced NF-B
activation is not limited by cell type, this suggests that TAK1
inhibition may greatly enhance the chemotherapeutic efficacy in other
cancers.Keywords: Neuroblastoma; TAK1 inhibitor; 5Z-7-oxozeaenol;
chemotherapyCitation Format: Yihui Fan. TAK1 inhibition sensitizes
neuroblastoma cells to chemotherapy. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3273. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3273

