Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromosome 2p gain and N-Myc amplification predict poor outcome of
patients with LIN28 negative supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal
tumors of the central nervous system (CNS-PNET)..


Primitive neuroectodermal tumors of central nervous system (CNS-PNET)
which represents 3-7% of all pediatric brain tumors, are a rare group of
neoplasms occurring in the CNS and include supratentorial PNETs (s-PNET),
medulloepitheliomas and ependymoblastomas. Whereas ependymoblastomas
harbour chromosome 19q13.41 amplification, express the neural stem cell
marker LIN28 and show aggressive clinical behaviour, the biological
mechanisms and molecular alterations contributing to the pathogenesis of
s-PNETs remain so far poorly understood. Expression analyses and limited
CGH studies indicated that s-PNETs may represent genetically a
heterogeneous group with frequent but multiple copy number aberrations.
In order to find possible specific molecular and cytogenetic alterations
suitable for molecular risk stratification and predictive for the overall
survival, we performed a multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
(MLPA) and molecular inversion probe (MIP) analysis on DNA samples of 25
s-PNET cases of patients (median age 5.35 years; range, 2.41 - 17.28
years). The majority of patients were enrolled in the clinical GPOH
HIT2000 trial. MLPA and MIP analysis revealed large losses of genomic
material of chromosomes 3, 4, 5, 13, while frequent gains were observed
at chromosomes 1, 17, 19, 20 and 22. Recurrent regions of gains were
found at chromosome 7q11.2, 7q22.1, 12q13 and losses at 16q23.1, 6p21.1,
and 11q11. High-copy number gains (amplifications) were found in
particular at chromosome 2p24.3 (N-Myc) (in 6 cases) and 4q21 (in 2
cases). None of the chromosomal alterations identified was found
significantly associated with the age of the patients at diagnosis,
presence of tumor metastases or presence of postoperative residual tumor.
In contrast, patients with tumors harbouring 2p gain or N-Myc
amplification showed shorter overall survival (OS) (p=0.0029 and
p=0.0012, respectively).These parameters were independent from the
presence of metastases, which was indeed the most important clinical
factor for unfavourable OS (p=0.0112) in our series. In the era of the
personalized neuro-oncology, the identification of molecular marker
associated to patients outcome may represent the further significant step
towards the patients's risk stratification and the improvement of
therapeutic strategies also for patients suffering from s-PNETs.

