Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UCHL1 as a potential therapeutic target in uterine papillary
serous carcinoma.


Uterine papillary serous carcinoma (UPSC) comprises less than 10% of all
endometrial cancers but accounts for a disproportionately high number of
deaths. Due to its rarity, few prospective studies have been conducted
which focus on this aggressive subtype, and it has been difficult to
establish optimal treatment strategies. With poor survival rates and high
recurrence rates, the identification of novel therapeutic targets would
aid in the management of UPSCs. RNAseq data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) was analyzed using Significant Analysis of Microarrays to identify
genes that were differentially expressed between 81 cases of grade 2
endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEC) and 41 cases of UPSC. A gene of
interest was then selected based on its subcellular location, correlation
with survival and normal tissue specificity. The findings were validated
by immunohistochemical staining of UPSC paraffin sections. All patient
samples were obtained and stored in accordance with human subject
research protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board. All
paraffin sections were reviewed by a pathologist. By comparing the RNAseq
profiles of UPSCs and EECs, we identified 242 genes that were
differentially expressed (qUterine papillary serous carcinoma (UPSC)
comprises less than 10% of all endometrial cancers but accounts for a
disproportionately high number of deaths. Due to its rarity, few
prospective studies have been conducted which focus on this aggressive
subtype, and it has been difficult to establish optimal treatment
strategies. With poor survival rates and high recurrence rates, the
identification of novel therapeutic targets would aid in the management
of UPSCs. RNAseq data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was analyzed
using Significant Analysis of Microarrays to identify genes that were
differentially expressed between 81 cases of grade 2 endometrioid
endometrial carcinoma (EEC) and 41 cases of UPSC. A gene of interest was
then selected based on its subcellular location, correlation with
survival and normal tissue specificity. The findings were validated by
immunohistochemical staining of UPSC paraffin sections. All patient
samples were obtained and stored in accordance with human subject
research protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board. All
paraffin sections were reviewed by a pathologist. By comparing the RNAseq
profiles of UPSCs and EECs, we identified 242 genes that were
differentially expressed (q<0.005). Among these, ubiquitin C-terminal
hydrolase 1 (UCHL1) showed higher expression in UPSCs compared to EECs,
with an increase of over 6-fold. UCHL1 was chosen for further studies as
Kaplan-Meier analysis of all endometrial cases in the TCGA database
revealed that UCHL1 expression also correlated significantly with poorer
disease-free survival (pUterine papillary serous carcinoma (UPSC)
comprises less than 10% of all endometrial cancers but accounts for a
disproportionately high number of deaths. Due to its rarity, few
prospective studies have been conducted which focus on this aggressive
subtype, and it has been difficult to establish optimal treatment
strategies. With poor survival rates and high recurrence rates, the
identification of novel therapeutic targets would aid in the management
of UPSCs. RNAseq data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was analyzed
using Significant Analysis of Microarrays to identify genes that were
differentially expressed between 81 cases of grade 2 endometrioid
endometrial carcinoma (EEC) and 41 cases of UPSC. A gene of interest was
then selected based on its subcellular location, correlation with
survival and normal tissue specificity. The findings were validated by
immunohistochemical staining of UPSC paraffin sections. All patient
samples were obtained and stored in accordance with human subject
research protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board. All
paraffin sections were reviewed by a pathologist. By comparing the RNAseq
profiles of UPSCs and EECs, we identified 242 genes that were
differentially expressed (q<0.005). Among these, ubiquitin C-terminal
hydrolase 1 (UCHL1) showed higher expression in UPSCs compared to EECs,
with an increase of over 6-fold. UCHL1 was chosen for further studies as
Kaplan-Meier analysis of all endometrial cases in the TCGA database
revealed that UCHL1 expression also correlated significantly with poorer
disease-free survival (p<0.05). Preliminary immunohistochemical studies
also show higher expression of UCHL1 in UPSCs than in ECCs.
Interestingly, contrast analysis of TCGA data for breast cancer indicates
that basal-like breast tumors also show significantly higher UCHL1
expression compared to the other breast cancer subtypes (pUterine
papillary serous carcinoma (UPSC) comprises less than 10% of all
endometrial cancers but accounts for a disproportionately high number of
deaths. Due to its rarity, few prospective studies have been conducted
which focus on this aggressive subtype, and it has been difficult to
establish optimal treatment strategies. With poor survival rates and high
recurrence rates, the identification of novel therapeutic targets would
aid in the management of UPSCs. RNAseq data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) was analyzed using Significant Analysis of Microarrays to identify
genes that were differentially expressed between 81 cases of grade 2
endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEC) and 41 cases of UPSC. A gene of
interest was then selected based on its subcellular location, correlation
with survival and normal tissue specificity. The findings were validated
by immunohistochemical staining of UPSC paraffin sections. All patient
samples were obtained and stored in accordance with human subject
research protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board. All
paraffin sections were reviewed by a pathologist. By comparing the RNAseq
profiles of UPSCs and EECs, we identified 242 genes that were
differentially expressed (q<0.005). Among these, ubiquitin C-terminal
hydrolase 1 (UCHL1) showed higher expression in UPSCs compared to EECs,
with an increase of over 6-fold. UCHL1 was chosen for further studies as
Kaplan-Meier analysis of all endometrial cases in the TCGA database
revealed that UCHL1 expression also correlated significantly with poorer
disease-free survival (p<0.05). Preliminary immunohistochemical studies
also show higher expression of UCHL1 in UPSCs than in ECCs.
Interestingly, contrast analysis of TCGA data for breast cancer indicates
that basal-like breast tumors also show significantly higher UCHL1
expression compared to the other breast cancer subtypes (p<0.005). Both
basal-like breast cancer and UPSC have a high rate of p53 mutation (80%
and 90%); this shared upregulation of UCHL1 suggests that a possible
mechanism by which UCHL1 contributes to pathogenesis is through
stabilization of mutant p53. In conclusion, our data identifies UCHL1 as
a gene that is upregulated in UPSCs and is associated with poor
disease-free survival. UCHL1 is a possible novel therapeutic target for
the management of UPSCs. Further studies are needed to elucidate the
underlying mechanisms in which it contributes to tumorigenesis.

