Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of miR-18b in MDM2-p53 pathway signaling and melanoma
progression.


MicroRNAs regulate gene expression and are differentially expressed in
various tumors. While p53 is inactivated by point mutations in many
tumors, melanomas rarely harbor mutations in the p53 gene. Here we report
the biological role of miR-18b in melanoma via targeting the MDM2-p53
pathway. Expression of miR-18b was significantly suppressed in melanoma
specimens and cell lines by virtue of hypermethylation, and was
re-induced in melanoma cell lines following 5-AZA-deoxycytidine
treatment. Lower levels of miR-18b expression in primary melanoma were
associated with significantly reduced overall survival. MDM2 was
identified as a target of miR-18b action, as miR-18b significantly
suppressed the luciferase activity of a reporter plasmid containing the
3UTR sequence of MDM2 complementary to the miR-18b seed sequence.
Induction of miR-18b expression in melanoma cells resulted in reduced
MDM2 expression, upregulation of p53 as well as PUMA and p21, and
suppression of the anti-apoptotic BCL2 and BCL-XL genes, resulting in
significant suppression of melanoma cell proliferation. The effects of
miR-18b overexpression on the p53 pathway and on melanoma cell growth
were reversed by MDM2 overexpression. Stable overexpression of miR-18b
produced potent tumor suppressor activity, as evidenced by suppressed
melanoma cell proliferation, induction of apoptosis, and reduced tumor
cell growth in vivo. In addition, miR-18b overexpression suppressed
melanoma cell migration and invasiveness, and reversed
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in melanoma cell lines. Our results
demonstrate a novel role for miR-18b as a tumor suppressor in melanoma,
identify the MDM2-p53 pathway as a target of miR-18b action, and suggest
miR-18b overexpression as a novel strategy to reactivate the p53 pathway
in human tumors.

