Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pim2 is required for maintaining Multiple Myeloma cell
proliferation through modulating mTORC1 pathway.


Multiple Myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematological malignancy.
Despite the advances of therapeutic regimens over the last decade, nearly
all patients eventually relapse, highlighting the need for additional
therapeutic agents. Pim kinases, a family of serine/threonine kinase, are
reported to be oncogenic and required for the maintenance of
hematological malignancies. Here, consistent with previous reports, we
show that Pim2 kinase expression is most highly elevated in MM.
Importantly, shRNA knockdown of Pim2 leads to a significant inhibition of
MM cell growth, suggesting that Pim2 is critical in maintaining MM
malignancy. We developed a potent and specific small molecule inhibitor
for the Pim kinases. Inhibition of Pim2 by this molecule suppressesMM
cell growth. We find that Pim inhibitor treatment results in the
suppression of cell proliferation, but not induction of apoptosis, in all
MM cell lines tested. Further, we identified mTORC1 signaling, which is
critical for cell proliferation, as significantly repressed by Pim2
inhibition. The two major mTORC1 downstream effectors: P70S6K and 4EBP1
are rapidly dephosphorylated upon Pim inhibitor treatment of MM cells. We
are currently investigating the potential signaling modules that may
mediate Pim2s regulation on mTORC1 pathway. Taken together, our findings
strongly supportPim2 as a promising therapeutic target in MM, given its
distinct expression inMM and essential role in maintaining proliferation.

