Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Erlotinib inhibits growth of a patient derived chordoma tumor
xenograft.


Chordomas are rare primary bone tumors that occur along the neuraxis.
Current treatment includes surgical resection and often postoperative
radiotherapy. Despite treatment, local recurrence occurs in the majority
of patients and metastasis is frequent. Treatment options for patients
with recurrence is limited and, notably, there are no FDA approved
chemotherapeutic agents. Median survival is approximately 7 years. The
lack of treatment options is in part due to the paucity of preclinical
model systems for this tumor. We have previously established a serially
transplantable animal model directly from human chordoma tissue. Further
analysis of this patient derived xenograft demonstrates that subsequent
passages continue to resemble the original patient tumor histologically
and immunohistochemically and maintain nuclear expression of brachyury, a
marker for chordoma. Genome wide variation between the patient's tumor
and xenografts continues to be more than 99% concordant. To further
characterize this model, a receptor tyrosine kinase screen of more than
70 kinases was evaluated and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) was
found to be the most activated kinase. In vitro studies demonstrate that
EGFR inhibitors, such as erlotinib and gefitinib, inhibit growth of a
validated human chordoma cell line, U-CH1. In vivo studies demonstrate
that erlotinib significantly inhibits growth of this patient derived
chordoma xenograft. Evaluation of tumors post-treatment reveals that
erlotinib reduces tumor proliferation and phosphorylation of EGFR. Taken
together, these findings demonstrate targeting EGFR can inhibit chordoma
growth in vivo and support further clinical evaluation of EGFR inhibitors
in the treatment of this disease.

