Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-449a enhances radiosensitivity in lung adenocarcinoma
cells.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide.
Radiotherapy is often applied for treating lung cancer, but it often
fails because of the relative non-susceptibility of lung cancer cells to
radiation. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been reported to modulate the
radiosensitivity of lung cancer cells and have the potential to improve
the efficacy of radiotherapy. The purpose of this study was to identify a
miRNA that can adjust radiosensitivity in lung adenocarcinoma cells. Two
lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (CL1-0 and CL1-5) with different
metastatic ability and radiosensitivity were used. In order to understand
the regulatory mechanisms of differential radiosensitivity in these
isogenic tumor cells, both CL1-0 and CL1-5 were treated with 10 Gy
radiation, and were harvested respectively at 0, 1, 4, and 24 h after
radiation exposure. The changes in expression of miRNA upon irradiation
were examined using Illumina Human microRNA BeadChips. Twenty-five miRNAs
were identified as having differential expression post-irradiation in
CL1-0 or CL1-5 cells. Among these miRNAs, miR-449a, which was
down-regulated in CL1-0 cells at 24 h after irradiation, was chosen for
further investigation. Overexpression of miR-449a in CL1-0 cells
effectively increased irradiation-induced DNA damage and apoptosis,
altered the cell cycle distribution and eventually led to sensitization
of CL1-0 to irradiation.

