Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: shRNA mediated suppression of either of the small subunits of
ribonucleotide reductase, R2 and p53R2, elicits a robust increase in
sensitivity to ionizing radiation.


Gemcitabine (2,2-difluroro-2-deoxycytidine;dFdCyd) is a potent
radiosensitizer in tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. dFdCyd elicits
cytotoxicity primarily via incorporation of its triphosphate, dFdCTP,
into DNA, whereas inhibition of ribonucleotide reductase (RR) by dFdCDP
produces a profound depletion of dATP which correlates to
radiosensitization. We have demonstrated that dNTP imbalances generated
by dFdCyd produce mismatches in DNA, which, if not repaired, augment
sensitivity to subsequent ionizing radiation (IR). DNA mismatches were
not required to elicit cytotoxicity but were necessary for
radiosensitization to occur. We therefore hypothesized that RNAi mediated
suppression of RR activity would also radiosensitize cells. RR is a
heterodimeric tetramer composed of the regulatory and active site subunit
R1 paired with either R2 or its p53-inducible homolog, p53R2, as the
catalytic and rate-limiting subunit. To determine whether the suppression
of either R2 or p53R2 produced a similar extent of radiosensitization
compared to dFdCyd, two different shRNAs were used to suppress each
subunit in wild-type p53 MCF7 breast carcinoma and A549 non-small cell
lung carcinoma cells, producing a profound ( 90%) suppression of the
target protein, R2 or p53R2, with little effect (20%) on expression of
its homolog. shRNAs for both R2 and p53R2 produced effects similar to
those observed with dFdCyd on dATP depletion (% control value) (MCF7: 66
6% (shRNA) vs. 85 10 % (dFdCyd); A549: 75 20% (shRNA) vs. 80 5% (dFdCyd),
and cytotoxicity (MCF7: 35-60% (shRNA) vs. 40-50% (FdCyd); A549: 40-65%
(shRNA) vs. 40-60% (dFdCyd)). When shRNA suppression was followed by IR,
radiosensitivity was similar with the shRNAs (R2 and p53R2) vs. dFdCyd
(MCF7: radiation enhancement ratio (RER)) = 1.45 0.08 (shRNA) vs. 1.7
0.14 (dFdCyd); A549: RER= 1.51 0.09 (shRNA) vs. 1.55 0.14(dFdCyd)), and a
similar increase in DNA mismatches compared to untreated wild type cells
(MCF7: 7-fold (dFdCyd) vs. 5-7 fold (shRNA); A549: 3 fold (dFdCyd) vs.
3-5 fold (shRNA)) was observed. Although p53R2 is thought to be induced
primarily in response to DNA damage, its effects on dATP depletion and
DNA mismatches prior to IR suggest that it may play a previously
unidentified role in normal maintenance of DNA replication. These results
reinforce our prior finding that the mechanism of radiosensitization with
dFdCyd is the decrease in dATP and not its incorporation into DNA or its
cytotoxicity. Excellent radiosensitization with suppression of either R2
or p53R2, compared to dFdCyd, suggests that this targeted approach merits
in vivo evaluation. Elevated expression of R2 is known to enhance the
invasiveness of cancer cells, and increase resistance to dFdCyd, thus its
suppression would further enhance anticancer activity in addition to its
effect on radiosensitization.

