Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel chemopreventive mechanism for a traditional medicine: East
Indian sandalwood oil induces autophagy and cell death in proliferating
keratinocytes.


-Santalol, one of the primary components of the East Indian sandalwood
oil (EISO), has been investigated for its potential use as a
chemopreventive agent in skin cancer. Although there is some evidence
that -santalol could be an effective chemopreventive agent, to date,
purified EISO has not been investigated. EISO is widely used for its
health benefits in cultures around the world. In the current study, we
show for the first time that EISO-treatment of cultured keratinocytes
inhibits cell cycle progression and UV-induced AP-1 activity, two major
cellular effects known to drive skin carcinogenesis. Unlike many
chemopreventive agents, inhibition of signaling upstream of AP-1 was not
a primary means of EISO-mediated AP-1 inhibition, as no effect of EISO
was observed on UV-induced Akt, ERK, and p38 MAPK activity. EISO induced
cell death at low concentrations, although caspase and PARP cleavage were
not observed indicating that death was not due to apoptosis.
Interestingly, plasma membrane integrity was severely compromised in
EISO-treated cells and LC3 cleavage suggests the induction of autophagy.
These effects were more pronounced in EISO-treated cells that were
stimulated to proliferate than in quiescent cells. Together, these
effects suggest that EISO has chemopreventive properties and may be
useful as in preventing skin carcinogenesis.

