Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnostic potential of microRNAs (miRs) in malignant pleural
mesothelioma (MPM).


Introduction: MPM is histologically difficult to distinguish from
reactive mesothelial proliferations (RMPs), partly because proposed
MPM-markers are not specific, reproducible or validated enough (Zimling
ZG, Jrgensen A & Santoni-Rugiu E, Histopathology 2012; 60(6B):E96-105).
MiRs are small non-coding RNA-strands (22 nt) that post-transcriptionally
regulate gene-expression, vital cellular processes and oncogenesis.
However it is uncertain whether currently published miR-data may provide
candidate diagnostic biomarkers for differentiating MPM from RMP. To
pursue this goal, we performed a screening of miR-expression in FFPE
diagnostic biopsies, surgically resected MPM-specimens and corresponding
surrounding non-neoplastic pleura (NP).Materials and Methods: We
performed a RT-qPCR-based (Exiqon) screening of 742 human miRs expression
in preoperative biopsies, epithelioid MPM-, and NP-specimens from 5
patients treated with extra-pleural pneumonectomy as part of trimodal
protocol. The relevant identified differentially expressed miRs were
validated on tissue samples from 41 independent MPM-patients by RT-qPCR
TaqMan MicroRNA Assays (Applied Biosystems). Quantification-cycles (Cq)
were determined by the related 7500 RT-PCR system software, comparatively
analyzing PCR-data with an internal reference-gene (RNU49). Significant
(p 80%) by generating ROC-curves using the RT-qPCR-data. The
IMIG-criteria were not met for miR-17-5p, -221 and -143, while miR-126,
-145, -193a-3p and -652 showed high sensitivity and specificity.
Preliminary IHC-data of the validated miR-126 target L-type amino acid
transporter 1 (LAT1) showed good correlation between miR-126
down-regulation and LAT1 up-regulation in MPM.Conclusion: The
cancer-relevant miR-126, -145, -193a-3p and -652 have great potential as
biomarkers for distinguishing MPM from RMPs, while miR-17-5p, -143 and
-221, previously reported to be specific for MPM's histological subtypes
and to play a pathogenic role in MPM, are not entirely suitable for this
differential diagnostic purpose. Further studies by in situ-hybridization
techniques will additionally corroborate the possible use of these miRs
in MPM diagnostics.

