Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-coding satellite RNAs are highly expressed in cancer adjacent
lesions of human pancreatic carcinoma and may promote oncogenesis .


It was believed that most satellite repeats in pericentric
heterochromatin region were silenced and rarely transcribed into RNAs.
However, a few reports suggest that non-coding satellite RNAs may play a
significant role in cell division, heterochromatin remodeling or DNA
damage such as other well-researched non-coding RNAs. In fact, a next
generation digital gene expression method recently revealed that human
satellite II (HSATII) transcripts are highly and specifically upregulated
in human pancreatic tumors. To further explore these findings, we
examined the precise localization of HSATII transcripts in human clinical
pancreatic tissues by in situ hybridization using highly sensitive locked
nucleic acid-modified oligonucleotide probes. Unexpectedly, HSATII RNAs
were not detected in pancreatic ductal cancerous lesions, in almost all
cases examined.Instead, HSATII RNAs were clearly expressed in
non-cancerous adjacent acinar cells, surrounding carcinoma tissues. On
the other hand, none of normal or inflammatory pancreatic tissues derived
from the ones without cancer expressed HSATII RNAs. While,HSATII
transcript expression in normal pancreatic ductal cells could not be
induced in vitro even under stress conditions which mimic the
tumor-adjacent environments, the cells with ectopic expression of HSATII
transcripts showed the increase foci of gH2AX, which may reflect the
increased genomic instability. These results suggest that the expression
of HSATII may not be phenotypic changes in cancers but may directly
contribute to the oncogenesis in the cells in precancerous lesions.

