Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Does beam radiation treatment of prostate cancer increase rectal
cancer risk.


Background: Prostate cancer (PC) is the most common invasive cancer among
US men. The majority of PCs are organ-confined at diagnosis and are
candidates for treatment using external beam radiation alone (RAD),
prostatectomy alone (SURG), or other protocols. This research was
conducted at Loma Linda University using California Cancer Registry (CCR)
population-data for 1988-2010. The CCR is part of the Surveillance
Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program. Since 1988, there has been
mandatory state-wide reporting of information for all invasive cancers to
the CCR including cancer diagnosis and stage, treatment, and demographic
characteristics, with greater than 99% case reporting. From 1988-2010,
nearly half a million California men were diagnosed with prostate cancer
(PC). The majority were organ-confined at diagnosis.Problem: We sought to
assess whether RAD treatment of prostate cancer, that exposes peri-rectal
tissue to ionizing radiation, was followed by increased risk of rectal
cancer, relative to SURG.Methods: We conducted record linkage for all new
prostate and rectal (rectum and rectosigmoid junction) cancers in
California 1988-2010, identifying men diagnosed with rectal cancer 5+
years following RAD or SURG treatment of organ-confined prostate. Among
the men treated with RAD vs SURG, the Cox proportional hazards ratio (HR)
for rectal cancer was assessed. Demographic covariates included: age
(Background: Prostate cancer (PC) is the most common invasive cancer
among US men. The majority of PCs are organ-confined at diagnosis and are
candidates for treatment using external beam radiation alone (RAD),
prostatectomy alone (SURG), or other protocols. This research was
conducted at Loma Linda University using California Cancer Registry (CCR)
population-data for 1988-2010. The CCR is part of the Surveillance
Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program. Since 1988, there has been
mandatory state-wide reporting of information for all invasive cancers to
the CCR including cancer diagnosis and stage, treatment, and demographic
characteristics, with greater than 99% case reporting. From 1988-2010,
nearly half a million California men were diagnosed with prostate cancer
(PC). The majority were organ-confined at diagnosis.Problem: We sought to
assess whether RAD treatment of prostate cancer, that exposes peri-rectal
tissue to ionizing radiation, was followed by increased risk of rectal
cancer, relative to SURG.Methods: We conducted record linkage for all new
prostate and rectal (rectum and rectosigmoid junction) cancers in
California 1988-2010, identifying men diagnosed with rectal cancer 5+
years following RAD or SURG treatment of organ-confined prostate. Among
the men treated with RAD vs SURG, the Cox proportional hazards ratio (HR)
for rectal cancer was assessed. Demographic covariates included: age
(<50, 50-74, & 75+ years), race/ethnicity as Asian/Other (A-O),
non-Hispanic black (NHB), Hispanic (Hisp), and non-Hispanic white (NHW),
and socioeconomic status quintiles (1-5 Highest) .Results: There were 194
new rectal cancers among 54,130 PC cases that had been treated with RAD
and 254 cases among 69,105 SURG patients. Adjusting for demographic
covariates and year of PC diagnosis, the rectal cancer HR with 95% CI for
RAD vs. SURG was: HRRAD/SURG=1.58, 95% CI=1.28-1.94. Following are HRs
for age (continuous variable) (HRAge=1.02, 95% CI=1.00-1.34) and
categories of race/ethnicity (HRA-O/NHW=0.99, 95% CI=0.66-1.49;
HRNHB/NHW=1.09, 95% CI=0.75-1.57; HRHisp/NHW=1.07, 95% CI=0.78-1.47); SES
(HRSES1/SES5=0.92, 95% CI=0.64-1.34; HRSES2/SES5=1.17, 95% CI=0.87-1.57;
HRSES3/SES5=1.20, 95% CI=0.92-1.57; HRSES4/SES5=1.19, 95% CI=0.93-1.54);
and PC diagnostic year (continuous variable) (HRYear=0.94,
95%CI=0.92-0.97).Discussion/Conclusions: Findings reveal increased rectal
cancer hazards among organ-confined prostate cancer patients treated with
RAD, relative to SURG, that is substantially independent of demographic
covariates. Treatment of rectal cancer among PC patients treated with RAD
is further complicated because they may have already received maximum
pelvic RAD dose. Further analyses that seek to distinguish roles of
different dose and delivery methods for RAD are ongoing.

