Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective study of urinary prostaglandin E2 and prostacyclin
metabolites and lung cancer risk .


Cumulative evidence from both in vitro and animal studies suggests that
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) may be involved in the development and
progression of lung cancer. Overproduction of prostaglandin E synthase
and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), one of the end products of the COX-2
pathway, has been implicated in the pathogenesis of non-small cell lung
cancer. On the other hand, evidence suggests that prostacyclin (PGI2),
another end products of the COX-2 pathway, may differ from other
bioactive prostaglandins and may exert cancer-inhibitory effects on the
development of lung cancer. PGE2 is quickly converted to
11-hydroxy-9,15-dioxo-2,3,4,5-tetranor-prostane-1,20-dioic acid (PGE-M),
a major PGE2 metabolite and excreted in urine. PGI2 is rapidly converted
into 6-keto-PGF1a, a chemically stable but biologically inactive
hydration product. Circulatory 6-keto-PGF1a undergoes -oxidation and
appears in the urine as 2,3-dinor-6-keto-PGF1a (PGI-M), the primary
breakdown product of PGI2. Urinary PGE-M and PGI-M are stable compounds
and can be measured accurately and reliably with newly developed and
validated LC-MS and GC-MS assays. In this study, we evaluated the
association of pre-diagnostic urinary PGE-M and PGI-M levels with
subsequent risk of developing lung cancer. We conducted a nested
case-control study using resources of the Shanghai Men's Health Study, a
prospective cohort study, in which 61,491 Chinese men aged 40-74 years
were recruited from 2002 to 2006 and followed for up to 7 years. Urinary
PGE-M and PGI-M in 349 incident lung cancer patients were compared to 349
matched controls. Overall, the geometric mean of baseline level of
urinary PGE-M did not differ significantly between cases and controls.
Compared with the lowest quartile, the risks (odds ratios, ORs) of
developing lung cancer were non-significantly elevated (1.48, 95%
CI=0.91-2.40 for the highest quartile). No dose-response relationship was
evident. The baseline level of urinary PGI-M was more than 20% higher in
cases than in controls. The ORs for developing lung cancer increased from
1.0 to 1.14 (95% CI=0.66-1.95), 1.45 (95% CI=0.86-2.45), and 1.70 (95%
CI=0.99-2.92) across the quartiles of urinary PGI-M levels (P for
trend=0.0056). Excluding 63 case-control pairs who were diagnosed with
lung cancer within one year of follow-up did not change the associations
for PGE-M and PGI-M. No interaction was found between PGE-M and PGI-M in
relation to lung cancer risk. In summary, using data from a large
prospective cohort study, we found that high levels of urinary PGI-M, and
possibly PGE-M, were associated with subsequent risk of developing lung
cancer. Our data suggest that high activity of the COX-2 pathway, rather
than the prostaglandin E2 alone, may play a major role in lung cancer
development. Further studies are needed to evaluate these two urinary
markers as possible biomarkers for lung cancer risk assessment.

