Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antioxidant inhibition of GSK-3 stabilizes anti-apoptotic factor
Mcl-1 leading to decreased apoptosis and increased cell survival.


Antioxidant-mediated stabilization of Nrf2 is known to up-regulate
anti-apoptotic factors Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL that leads to reduced apoptosis
and increased cell survival. In this report we investigated and found
that anti-apoptotic factor Mcl-1 is coordinately induced with Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL factors in response to antioxidants. However, unlike Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL, Nrf2 did not control antioxidant-mediated up-regulation of Mcl-1.
Further studies revealed that ERK1/2 phosphorylation of Mcl-1T163 primes
Mcl-1 for phosphorylation by GSK3 at position S159. This modification
degrades Mcl-1 and contributes to the maintenance of physiological level
of Mcl-1 and cellular apoptosis. Exposure of Hep-G2 cells to antioxidant
tert-butyl hydroquinone (t-BHQ) for 4-16h led to time dependent
Akt-mediated inactivation of GSK3, decreased Mcl-1S159 phosphorylation
resulting in stabilization of Mcl-1 protein. Antioxidant-mediated
increased Mcl-1 heterodimerized with Bim and Bax and down regulated
cellular apoptosis. The contribution of antioxidant increased Mcl-1 in
reduced apoptosis was further confirmed by siRNA-mediated inhibition of
Mcl-1 that increased susceptibility to etoposide-mediated cell death and
reduced cell survival through the activation of caspases 3/7. These
results provided evidence that antioxidant control of GSK-3 led to
increase in Mcl-1 that contributed to decreased apoptosis and increased
cell survival. The results collectively suggest that antioxidant
stabilized Nrf2 and GSK3 both through distinct mechanisms lead to
increased anti-apoptotic factors Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 that reduces
apoptosis and promotes cell survival.

