Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination erlotinib and cisplatin causes decrease angiogenesis
in lung adenocarcinoma.


Introduction: Platinum based agents such as cisplatin have been
traditionally used to for the treatment of lung cancer, and tyrosine
kinase inhibitors such as erlotinib are being used more readily.
Combinations of anti-cancer agents are becoming more popular due to the
anticipation that combination treatment is more effective than individual
drug treatments. In this study, we evaluate the anti-cancer effects of
combination erlotinib and cisplatin in in vitro cell lines and in in vivo
mice models. In addition, as studies of cisplatin and erlotinib in other
cancer types show potential to inhibit angiogenesis, we examine whether
these agents are able to target angiogenesis in lung
adenocarcinoma.Method: Three individual lung adenocarcinoma cell lines
(PC9, A549, and H292) were utilized. Each cell line had four treatment
groups: control, erlotinib only, cisplatin only, and combination
erlotinib and cisplatin. Alamar Blue Assay was utilized to evaluate for
in vitro cell death following two day treatments. PC9 cells were injected
into the left flank of nude mice for in vivo experiments. Erlotinib
and/or cisplatin treatments were injected directly into the tumor and
tumor measurements were made every 2 days for a total of 14 days. Western
blot analysis of VEGFR, p-VEGFR, and CD31was performed for both in vitro
and in vivo samples. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and
3,3-Diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining for CD31 were done on tumor
samples.Results: Combination treatment in EGFR mutated PC9 cells led to
significantly higher cell death compared to other treatment groups
(PIntroduction: Platinum based agents such as cisplatin have been
traditionally used to for the treatment of lung cancer, and tyrosine
kinase inhibitors such as erlotinib are being used more readily.
Combinations of anti-cancer agents are becoming more popular due to the
anticipation that combination treatment is more effective than individual
drug treatments. In this study, we evaluate the anti-cancer effects of
combination erlotinib and cisplatin in in vitro cell lines and in in vivo
mice models. In addition, as studies of cisplatin and erlotinib in other
cancer types show potential to inhibit angiogenesis, we examine whether
these agents are able to target angiogenesis in lung
adenocarcinoma.Method: Three individual lung adenocarcinoma cell lines
(PC9, A549, and H292) were utilized. Each cell line had four treatment
groups: control, erlotinib only, cisplatin only, and combination
erlotinib and cisplatin. Alamar Blue Assay was utilized to evaluate for
in vitro cell death following two day treatments. PC9 cells were injected
into the left flank of nude mice for in vivo experiments. Erlotinib
and/or cisplatin treatments were injected directly into the tumor and
tumor measurements were made every 2 days for a total of 14 days. Western
blot analysis of VEGFR, p-VEGFR, and CD31was performed for both in vitro
and in vivo samples. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and
3,3-Diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining for CD31 were done on tumor
samples.Results: Combination treatment in EGFR mutated PC9 cells led to
significantly higher cell death compared to other treatment groups
(P<0.0001); the effect was synergistic. In EGFR wild type A549 and H292
cell lines there were no significant differences. Similar to results from
cell cultures, in vivo studies of combination treatment showed
significant inhibition of tumor growth compared to other treatment groups
(p=0.001). On western blot analysis, there were significantly lower
levels of p-VEGFR (pIntroduction: Platinum based agents such as cisplatin
have been traditionally used to for the treatment of lung cancer, and
tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as erlotinib are being used more readily.
Combinations of anti-cancer agents are becoming more popular due to the
anticipation that combination treatment is more effective than individual
drug treatments. In this study, we evaluate the anti-cancer effects of
combination erlotinib and cisplatin in in vitro cell lines and in in vivo
mice models. In addition, as studies of cisplatin and erlotinib in other
cancer types show potential to inhibit angiogenesis, we examine whether
these agents are able to target angiogenesis in lung
adenocarcinoma.Method: Three individual lung adenocarcinoma cell lines
(PC9, A549, and H292) were utilized. Each cell line had four treatment
groups: control, erlotinib only, cisplatin only, and combination
erlotinib and cisplatin. Alamar Blue Assay was utilized to evaluate for
in vitro cell death following two day treatments. PC9 cells were injected
into the left flank of nude mice for in vivo experiments. Erlotinib
and/or cisplatin treatments were injected directly into the tumor and
tumor measurements were made every 2 days for a total of 14 days. Western
blot analysis of VEGFR, p-VEGFR, and CD31was performed for both in vitro
and in vivo samples. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and
3,3-Diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining for CD31 were done on tumor
samples.Results: Combination treatment in EGFR mutated PC9 cells led to
significantly higher cell death compared to other treatment groups
(P<0.0001); the effect was synergistic. In EGFR wild type A549 and H292
cell lines there were no significant differences. Similar to results from
cell cultures, in vivo studies of combination treatment showed
significant inhibition of tumor growth compared to other treatment groups
(p=0.001). On western blot analysis, there were significantly lower
levels of p-VEGFR (p<0.0001) and CD31 (p=0.0291) in the combination group
compared to all other groups. H&E staining shows significantly lower
density of blood vessel and DAB staining of CD31in the combination group
compared to other groups.Conclusions: Combination low dose erlotinib and
cisplatin is able to induce synergistic cell death. This effect, however,
may be specific to EGFR mutated lung adenocarcinoma. Combination
treatment also demonstrated the ability to inhibit tumor growth in mice.
The inhibition of tumor growth may be secondary to inhibition of
angiogenesis.

