Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiles of microRNA in endometrial carcinoma using
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulatemRNA stability
and protein expression at post-transcriptional level.Certain miRNAs have
been demonstrated to act either as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. The
specific expression profiles of miRNAs have been found in many human
cancers, but the role of miRNAs in endometrioid endometrial cancer (EEC)
remains poorly understood. Most miRNA profiling studies have used fresh
tissue samples. This study was to provide the candidate miRNAs for
further confirming the role of miRNAs in carcinogenesis of EEC and to
explore whether FFPE material would be suitable for miRNA profiling. We
found the differences in miRNA expression profile using human miRNA
microarray in EECs and normal endometrium. Of those, the miR-200a*,
miR-200b*, miR-141, miR-182, and miR-205 were greatly enriched. The
expressions of these 5 miRNAs were validated using quantitative real time
reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR). Then, we performed qRT-PCR profiling
of miR expression in 30 microdissected formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) specimens (20 EECs, 10 non-tumor specimens) and reconfirmed the
results of differential expression between cancer and normal tissue. We
next tested whether specific inhibition of overexpressed microRNAs would
alter the chemosensitivity. In in vitro cell viability assay,
anti-miR200b* slightly enhanced cisplatin cytotoxicity compared with
negative control although it showed marginal statistical significance
(p=0.07). This information provided the candidate miRNAs for further
confirming the role of miRNAs in carcinogenesis of EEC and potentially
serving as a diagnostic or therapeutic tool. FFPE specimens of
endometrial tissues are suitable as a source for miRNA microarray
profiling.

