Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparative study of affibody, antibody and EGF for
near-infrared fluorescence imaging of EGFR- and EGFRvIII-expressing
tumors.


Aberrant overexpression and/or activation of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) is associated with many types of cancers. EGFR variant
III (EGFRvIII) is a common in-frame deletion mutant, which lacks a large
part of the extracellular portion (exons 2-7), including components of
the ligand-binding domain. Although EGFR has been extensively studied asa
molecular imaging target, information about EGFRvIII-targeted molecular
imaging is lacking. In this study, an EGFR-specific affibody, a
therapeutic antibody (panitumumab) and the ligand EGF were labeled with
IRDye 800CW (Ex/Em: 774/789 nm), and named as Aff800, Pan800 and EGF800
respectively. The binding affinities of the labeled agents were compared
in cell-based assays using a rat glioma cell line F98 parental (F98-p)
lacking EGFR, and two F98-derived transgenic cell lines expressing EGFR
or EGFRvIII (designated as F98-EGFR and F98-vIII respectively). Results
showed that all agents could bind to F98-EGFR, with Pan800 having the
highest binding affinity, followed by Aff800 and EGF800. Pan800 and
Aff800, but not EGF800, bound to F98-vIII with similar affinities. In
vivo animal imaging studies demonstrated that compared to F98-p tumor
signals, F98-EGFR tumor generated higher signals for all three agents.
However, in the case of F98-vIII, only Pan800 and Aff800 signals were
higher. Analysis of tissue lysates showed that a large portion of Pan800
was degraded into small fragments in F98-EGFR and F98-vIII tumors,
possibly due to proteolytic digestion after its specific binding and
internalization. In conclusion, Pan800 and Aff800 could be used as
imaging agents for both wild type EGFR and EGFRvIII, whereas EGF800 only
targets wild type EGFR.

