Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging of methioninase-induced S/G2-phase-trapping for subsequent
effective chemotherapy.


Methionine-dependence of cancer cells may be due to excessive methylation
reactions in cancer cells. Deprivation of methionine , lyase
(methioninase or METase) selectively arrests cancer cells during late
S-phase, where they are highly sensitive to DNA-damaging chemotherapy.
Fluorescent ubiquitination-based cell cycle indicator (FUCCI)), was used
to monitor the onset of the S/G2-phase block due to methionine
deprivation effected by METase. The S-phase-blocked cancer cells
fluoresced yellow or green, in contrast to cancer cells in G1 which
fluoresced red. Cancer cells, synchronously blocked in S-phase by METase
and identified by their yellow-green fluorescence, were administered
DNA-damaging chemotherapy drugs such as doxorubicin, cisplatin, or
5-fluorouracil. Treatment of cancer cells with drugs only without
methioninase-effected S-phase synchrony, led to the majority of the
cancer cell population being blocked in G0/G1 phase (red fluorescent)
where they were resistant to the drugs. In contrast, METase treatment,
followed by chemotherapy when FUCCI indicated the S/G2 block was highly
effective for killing cancer cells. Color-coded chemotherapy, whereby the
cell cycle of cancer cells is selectively and synchronously blocked in
S-phase as identified by fluorescent reporters, may be a general approach
to effective cancer treatment.

