Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased co-amplification of HER2 and STARD3 in a cell line model
of acquired lapatinib resistance.


Resistance to lapatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor of HER2, is a
significant clinical problem and to date the mechanisms of acquired
lapatinib resistance remain largely unknown. In order to study acquired
lapatinib resistance we established an in vitro cell line model through
continuous culture of HCC1954 cells with 1 M lapatinib. After 6 months
the resulting HCC1954-L cells where significantly less sensitive to
lapatinib with an IC50 of 2.6 0.3 M compared to aged-matched parental
cells (IC50 0.42 0.02 M; p = 0.004). In addition, lapatinib treatment had
no significant effect on the growth of HCC1954-L xenograft tumors in
mice, indicating the utility of HCC1954-L cells as an in vivo model of
acquired lapatinib resistance.Array CGH analysis was performed on the
sensitive and resistant cell lines. Chromosomal aberrations were detected
in 15 regions in the HCC1954-L cells, including increased amplification
of the region of chr17q12 known to contain HER2 and STARD3.
Immunoblotting was performed to assess whether the increased
amplification corresponded with increased expression of the proteins.
HCC1954-L cells exhibited a small but significant increase (1.2 fold) in
HER2 protein expression (p=0.02) compared to parental cells. Increased
gene amplification of HER2 was also confirmed by FISH analysis. While
STARD3 protein expression was undetectable in in parental HCC1954 cells,
HCC1954-L cells expressed high levels of STARD3 protein. Knockdown of
STARD3 using siRNA resulted in a 20% decrease in cell growth compared to
scrambled control treated cells, suggesting that STARD3 amplification and
expression plays a role in the proliferation of HCC1954-L cells.In
summary, we have developed a robust model of acquired lapatinib
resistance which exhibits increased amplification and expression of HER2
and STARD3.

