Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A hypermethylated phenotype as predictive marker for response to
PCV in anaplastic oligodendrogliomas. A report from EORTC study 26951.


Introduction: In 1995 a large European phase III clinical trial (EORTC
26951) was initiated to examine the effects of adjuvant procarbazine,
CCNU and vincristine (PCV) chemotherapy in anaplastic oligodendrogliomas
(AOD and AOA). This trial showed that the addition of 6 cycles PCV after
59.4 Gy RT increases overall survival (OS) and progression free survival
(PFS) in these tumors. However, some patients appeared to benefit more
from the addition of PCV treatment than others. In current study, we
aimed to identify the patients in this trial that benefit from adjuvant
PCV treatment using genome wide methylation profiling.Methods:
Methylation profiles of a total of 115 samples were generated, 49 of
which were reported previously.Results: Most (59/66) samples were
formalin-fixed and embedded in paraffin (FFPE). Our first experiment was
therefore aimed at determining the performance of methylation arrays
using such tissue. Paired snap frozen (FF)-FFPE sample analysis on six
glioma samples demonstrated that the correlation between FF and FFPE
samples was high: 0.9610.023. Between FFPE technical replicates it was
0.9870.009. These results demonstrate that methylation profiling can be
performed on DNA isolated from FFPE samples. We then performed
methylation profiling on an additional 66 samples of the EORTC26951 trial
(59 FFPE, 7 FF) and combined the data with those of the 49 FF samples
previously analyzed. The cohort analyzed for methylation profiling had
similar characteristics as the entire EORTC26951 cohort. However, OS
within the RT-only treatment arm of included patients was worse compared
to OS in patients not included. Univariate analysis indicated that CIMP
(CpG island methylator phenotype) status was a favorable prognostic
marker for OS with CIMP+ tumors having a more favorable prognosis than
CIMP- tumors (median OS 1.05 v. 6.46 years HR 0.225 95% CI [0.138,
0.369], PIntroduction: In 1995 a large European phase III clinical trial
(EORTC 26951) was initiated to examine the effects of adjuvant
procarbazine, CCNU and vincristine (PCV) chemotherapy in anaplastic
oligodendrogliomas (AOD and AOA). This trial showed that the addition of
6 cycles PCV after 59.4 Gy RT increases overall survival (OS) and
progression free survival (PFS) in these tumors. However, some patients
appeared to benefit more from the addition of PCV treatment than others.
In current study, we aimed to identify the patients in this trial that
benefit from adjuvant PCV treatment using genome wide methylation
profiling.Methods: Methylation profiles of a total of 115 samples were
generated, 49 of which were reported previously.Results: Most (59/66)
samples were formalin-fixed and embedded in paraffin (FFPE). Our first
experiment was therefore aimed at determining the performance of
methylation arrays using such tissue. Paired snap frozen (FF)-FFPE sample
analysis on six glioma samples demonstrated that the correlation between
FF and FFPE samples was high: 0.9610.023. Between FFPE technical
replicates it was 0.9870.009. These results demonstrate that methylation
profiling can be performed on DNA isolated from FFPE samples. We then
performed methylation profiling on an additional 66 samples of the
EORTC26951 trial (59 FFPE, 7 FF) and combined the data with those of the
49 FF samples previously analyzed. The cohort analyzed for methylation
profiling had similar characteristics as the entire EORTC26951 cohort.
However, OS within the RT-only treatment arm of included patients was
worse compared to OS in patients not included. Univariate analysis
indicated that CIMP (CpG island methylator phenotype) status was a
favorable prognostic marker for OS with CIMP+ tumors having a more
favorable prognosis than CIMP- tumors (median OS 1.05 v. 6.46 years HR
0.225 95% CI [0.138, 0.369], P<0.0001. Multivariate analysis indicates
that CIMP status is a prognostic factor for overall survival that is
independent of clinical and histological parameters (age, sex,
performance score and review diagnosis). IDH1 mutations (39/51), 1p19q
LOH (29/63) and MGMT promoter methylation (45/52) were predominantly
identified in CIMP+ tumors whereas EGFR amplification was predominantly
identified in the CIMP- subtype (20/42, 48%). When stratified for
treatment, CIMP+ tumors showed a clear benefit from adjuvant PCV
chemotherapy, both for OS and PFS. Median OS of CIMP+ samples in the RT
and RT-PCV arms was 3.27 and 9.36 years respectively (HR: 0.409; 95% CI
[0.224,0.746], P=0.0036). There was no such benefit for CIMP-
tumors.Conclusion: Our results suggest that CIMP status is predictive for
benefit from adjuvant PCV in AODs and AOAs in samples of the EORTC 26951
clinical trial. Further validation of these results is urgently required.

