Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation the role of prostate cancer derived exosomes on
their tumor microenvironment.


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the leading type of cancer
diagnosed in men. In 2012, approximately 241,740 new cases of PCa will be
diagnosed in the United States. Prompt diagnosis of the disease can
substantially improve its clinical outcome. Improving capability for
early detection, as well as developing new therapeutic targets in
advanced disease are research priorities that will ultimately lead to
better patient survival.Eukaryotic cells secrete proteins via distinct
regulated mechanisms which are either ER/Golgi dependent or microvesicle
mediated. The release of microvesicles has been shown to provide a novel
mechanism for intercellular communication. Exosomes are nanometer sized
cup-shaped membrane vesicles which are secreted from normal and cancerous
cells. They are present in various biological fluids such as serum, milk,
urine, malignant ascites and amniotic fluid.Recent studies have
demonstrated that cancerous cells secret exosomes which may be
differentiated from those derived from normal cells upon their
composition. Therefore, exosomes could be used in facilitating early
diagnosis via less invasive procedures or be candidates for novel
therapeutic approaches for different pathological disorders.Studies on
tumour-related microvesicles suggest that exosomes play a significant
role in paracrine signaling pathway thus potentially influencing cancer
progression via different mechanisms.Methods and Results: Exosomes were
purified from the conditioned media (CM) from different PCa cell lines
after 72 hours in serum free media treatment. Using differential
centrifugation cell debris and protein aggregates were removed from CM.
Finally exosomes were isolated in a 30% sucrose cushion using
ultracentrifugation. Further analysis using transmission electron
microscopy validated the integrity of purified exosomes. Western blot
analysis was also used to probe for different exosome markers. Proteomic
mass spectrometry of exosomes reveals that exosomes derived from specific
PCa cells present potential markers of PCa progression. Transfer of
exosomes to non-identical cells in culture was visualised using confocal
microscopy of fluorescence labeled exosomes as well as exosomal GFP
tagged protein. Phenotypic change in recipient cells was studied upon
exposure to exosomes derived from non-identical prostate cell lines and
an impact on cell survival pathways associated with tumor
microenvironment were observed.Conclusion: This study revealed that PCa
derived exosomes represent a conduit for protein/genetic information
transfer into their tumor microenvironment conferring pro-cell survival
and metastasis.

