Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PPAR acetylation governs differentiation function.


The peroxisome proliferator-activator receptor gamma (PPAR) is a member
of nuclear receptors (NRs) that plays an important role in the
pathogenesis of human diseases, including obesity, type II diabetes and
cancer. PPAR regulates lipid homeostasis by activating the transcription
of key genes that are responsible for lipid biosynthesis. NRs undergo
post-translational modification including phosphorylation and
acetylation. Direct nuclear receptor acetylation by histone
acetyltransferases regulates ligand sensitivity and growth properties.
Using mass spectrometry and in vivo labeling assays we showed that PPAR
is acetylated in cultured cells. Inhibition of endogenous TSA-sensitive
and NAD-dependent deacetylase activity enhanced Ppar acetylation. SIRT1
bound and deacetylated Ppar at K154/155. These lysine residues of Ppar
were required for adipocyte differentiation function and determined
distinct gene expression signaling pathways. The lysine residues
governing sumoylation (K77) and acetylation (K154/155) were shown to have
dissociable functions in regulating cell-cycle, gene expression, gene
promoter activity, and protein stability. Breast tumor growth, de novo
lipid synthesis, induction of autophagy and evasion of apoptosis was
promoted by K154/155 and inhibited by K77 in vivo. Ppar acetylation
induced a gene signature that was increased in breast cancer, associated
with a reduction in SIRT1 abundance and poor outcome. These studies
suggest that the Ppar lysine motif regulates both ligand-dependent
receptor stability and receptor-dependent gene expression and cell
functions. Ppar and SIRT1 signaling converge in vivo to regulate breast
tumor lipid metabolism and growth.

