Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulation of miR-10b in osteosarcoma.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary bone malignancy found in
children and adolescents, but the underlying molecular pathogenesis is
not yet well understood. Utilizing a genetically engineered mouse model
of OS that faithfully recapitulates salient features of the human
disease, we are able to examine potential molecular contributions, such
as that of a class of small, regulatory RNAs called microRNAs (miRNAs),
in the processes of tumor proliferation and tumor progression and/or
metastasis.MiRNA expression profile of tumors isolated from primary and
secondary (metastatic) tumor sites of the mouse model revealed
significant differential expression of miRNAs between the two groups.
MiR-10b was significantly down-regulated in metastatic tumors in
comparison with their primary counterparts, and thus was hypothesized to
play important roles in the process of metastatic progression and/or
tumorigenesis. To determine its impact on invasiveness and/or
proliferation of the tumor cells, miR-10b was re-expressed in metastatic
cell lines and introduced through tail-vein or intramuscular injections
into scid/nude mice. Quantitative analysis using a bioluminescence
imaging system showed delayed metastatic progression, lessened pulmonary
tumor burden, as well as decreased primary tumor size in animals injected
with tumor cells over-expressing miR-10b as compared to the controls.
These data suggest that miR-10b down-regulation contributes to the
processes of metastasis and tumorigenesis in OS through altered
interaction with its target genes. Currently, putative miR-10b gene
targets generated by microarray and RNA-seq analysis are being validated
to provide a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying
miR-10b regulation in OS, and to facilitate the discovery of pathways
amenable to manipulation with novel therapeutics.

