Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of multidimensional colorectal cancer
molecular profiles reveals an aggressive subpopulation characterized by
specific gene methylation/expression patterns.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is clinically and molecularly heterogenous. With
the advent of approaches based on multidimensional genomic profiling,
such as the one carried out by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) consortium,
new analytical tools have to be developed and employed to fully integrate
and analyze multiple layers of molecular and clinical annotation, and so
highlight previously unknown features of the disease.To tackle this
issue, we reasoned that highly efficient and integrative visualization of
molecular and clinical data may enable intuitive identification of
recurrent correlation patterns within complex datasets. We therefore
developed a 3D-graphical, real-time interactive software, the
GenomeCruzer," that greatly accelerates global data visualization and
analysis, facilitating the rapid screening of a high number of working
hypotheses and allowing swift prioritization of the most promising
ones.We initially focused on a publicly available dataset of expression
and methylation profiles provided by the TCGA consortium on a panel of
145 colon cancer specimens, and selected a subset of 3600 genes expressed
with high variability across the dataset. Unsupervised clustering of
genes based on their methylation profiles across samples identified three
main subsets, displaying, respectively, high, low and intermediate
overall methylation status. Data visualization and analysis with
GenomeCruzer revealed that the three gene methylation clusters were
clearly associated with three patient subgroups: patients with a CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP) were mostly captured, as expected, by
the high methylation gene subgroup, while the 1471-gene cluster with an
alternative methylation pattern defined a subgroup of 75 patients, that
we named alternative methylator phenotype (AMP), most notably enriched
for Stage IV cases (o/e = 1.7, p.val Colorectal cancer (CRC) is
clinically and molecularly heterogenous. With the advent of approaches
based on multidimensional genomic profiling, such as the one carried out
by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) consortium, new analytical tools have
to be developed and employed to fully integrate and analyze multiple
layers of molecular and clinical annotation, and so highlight previously
unknown features of the disease.To tackle this issue, we reasoned that
highly efficient and integrative visualization of molecular and clinical
data may enable intuitive identification of recurrent correlation
patterns within complex datasets. We therefore developed a 3D-graphical,
real-time interactive software, the GenomeCruzer," that greatly
accelerates global data visualization and analysis, facilitating the
rapid screening of a high number of working hypotheses and allowing swift
prioritization of the most promising ones.We initially focused on a
publicly available dataset of expression and methylation profiles
provided by the TCGA consortium on a panel of 145 colon cancer specimens,
and selected a subset of 3600 genes expressed with high variability
across the dataset. Unsupervised clustering of genes based on their
methylation profiles across samples identified three main subsets,
displaying, respectively, high, low and intermediate overall methylation
status. Data visualization and analysis with GenomeCruzer revealed that
the three gene methylation clusters were clearly associated with three
patient subgroups: patients with a CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)
were mostly captured, as expected, by the high methylation gene subgroup,
while the 1471-gene cluster with an alternative methylation pattern
defined a subgroup of 75 patients, that we named alternative methylator
phenotype (AMP), most notably enriched for Stage IV cases (o/e = 1.7,
p.val < 1.10-4) and depleted of MSI-H patients (o/e =0.21, 1*10-5).
Integrative analysis of gene expression and methylation for the AMP
patient group revealed transcriptional modules associated with
interferon-alfa signalling (p Colorectal cancer (CRC) is clinically and
molecularly heterogenous. With the advent of approaches based on
multidimensional genomic profiling, such as the one carried out by The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) consortium, new analytical tools have to be
developed and employed to fully integrate and analyze multiple layers of
molecular and clinical annotation, and so highlight previously unknown
features of the disease.To tackle this issue, we reasoned that highly
efficient and integrative visualization of molecular and clinical data
may enable intuitive identification of recurrent correlation patterns
within complex datasets. We therefore developed a 3D-graphical, real-time
interactive software, the GenomeCruzer," that greatly accelerates global
data visualization and analysis, facilitating the rapid screening of a
high number of working hypotheses and allowing swift prioritization of
the most promising ones.We initially focused on a publicly available
dataset of expression and methylation profiles provided by the TCGA
consortium on a panel of 145 colon cancer specimens, and selected a
subset of 3600 genes expressed with high variability across the dataset.
Unsupervised clustering of genes based on their methylation profiles
across samples identified three main subsets, displaying, respectively,
high, low and intermediate overall methylation status. Data visualization
and analysis with GenomeCruzer revealed that the three gene methylation
clusters were clearly associated with three patient subgroups: patients
with a CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) were mostly captured, as
expected, by the high methylation gene subgroup, while the 1471-gene
cluster with an alternative methylation pattern defined a subgroup of 75
patients, that we named alternative methylator phenotype (AMP), most
notably enriched for Stage IV cases (o/e = 1.7, p.val < 1.10-4) and
depleted of MSI-H patients (o/e =0.21, 1*10-5). Integrative analysis of
gene expression and methylation for the AMP patient group revealed
transcriptional modules associated with interferon-alfa signalling (p <
10-7, downregulated in AMPs) and with protein translation (pColorectal
cancer (CRC) is clinically and molecularly heterogenous. With the advent
of approaches based on multidimensional genomic profiling, such as the
one carried out by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) consortium, new
analytical tools have to be developed and employed to fully integrate and
analyze multiple layers of molecular and clinical annotation, and so
highlight previously unknown features of the disease.To tackle this
issue, we reasoned that highly efficient and integrative visualization of
molecular and clinical data may enable intuitive identification of
recurrent correlation patterns within complex datasets. We therefore
developed a 3D-graphical, real-time interactive software, the
GenomeCruzer," that greatly accelerates global data visualization and
analysis, facilitating the rapid screening of a high number of working
hypotheses and allowing swift prioritization of the most promising
ones.We initially focused on a publicly available dataset of expression
and methylation profiles provided by the TCGA consortium on a panel of
145 colon cancer specimens, and selected a subset of 3600 genes expressed
with high variability across the dataset. Unsupervised clustering of
genes based on their methylation profiles across samples identified three
main subsets, displaying, respectively, high, low and intermediate
overall methylation status. Data visualization and analysis with
GenomeCruzer revealed that the three gene methylation clusters were
clearly associated with three patient subgroups: patients with a CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP) were mostly captured, as expected, by
the high methylation gene subgroup, while the 1471-gene cluster with an
alternative methylation pattern defined a subgroup of 75 patients, that
we named alternative methylator phenotype (AMP), most notably enriched
for Stage IV cases (o/e = 1.7, p.val < 1.10-4) and depleted of MSI-H
patients (o/e =0.21, 1*10-5). Integrative analysis of gene expression and
methylation for the AMP patient group revealed transcriptional modules
associated with interferon-alfa signalling (p < 10-7, downregulated in
AMPs) and with protein translation (p< 10-6, upregulated in AMPs).
Expression profiles obtained from the Cancer Cell Encyclopaedia were
subsequently analysed to verify that expression of such modules occurs in
cancer cells and is not derived from infiltrating cells.These data show
that integrative analysis of multidimensional clinical and molecular
datasets such as those provided by the TCGA can be greatly facilitated by
ad-hoc developed software like the GenomeCruzer, providing unprecedented
insight into the biology of cancer and defining new cancer subtypes of
potential clinical relevance.

