Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples.


The availability of large numbers of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) tumor DNA samples, together with accurate and specific clinical
annotations, can be a great resource for in-depth analysis of
correlations of somatic and germline DNA alterations with clinical
outcome. However, the effects of this tissue preservation technique on
next-generation DNA sequencing technologies and downstream analyses are
still being investigated. Furthermore, usually the archives of such FFPE
samples do not include matched normal tissue, which complicates the
process of identifying somatic alterations. We are in the process of
analyzing lung adenocarcinoma, colorectal and prostate patient datasets,
which contain both an FFPE and a fresh-frozen tumor together with a
matched blood normal sample. The availability of both a frozen and an
FFPE tumor sample enables us to compare the detected somatic point
mutations and indels, taking into account the fact that these pairs are
produced from different aliquots of DNA. This analysis includes
calculating the power to detect variants in the FFPE sample given that
they have been observed in the fresh frozen tumor, as well as the
validation rate of clonal SNVs between the two samples. We are also
developing a method for classification of SNVs as germline or somatic
without a paired normal sample by taking advantage of the fact that most
tumor samples contain a substantial fraction of normal cells. Because
stromal contamination has a different effect on the allelic fraction of
somatic vs. germline SNVs, we can apply algorithms to estimate tumor
purity and absolute somatic copy numbers in order to distinguish the two
types of events. We present preliminary results from these analyses.

