Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploration of genome-wide two-locus SNP-SNP interactions relate
to nasopharyngeal carcinoma susceptibility.


Most of the genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are concentrated on
the detection main effects and can only explain only a small fraction of
the genetic risk. One possible explanation might be the existence of
interactions between loci. This effect might be missed in traditional
GWAS analysis. Testing for SNP-SNP interaction within a single GWAS study
can identify the stronger results that are revealed when genes interact.
Here, we have completed the genome-wide two-locus SNP-SNP interaction
analysis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). We started with the NPC GWAS
dataset as our Discovery dataset, then we performed an exhaustive
genome-wide two-locus search by pairing each SNP sets according to
chromosome positions for PLINK epistasis analysis. The analysises were
also performed within each SNP sets to ensure every SNP has performed
epistasis analysis with all the other SNPs in the dataset. In total,
there were 4,244,943 unique interactions after the genome-wide two-locus
epistasis analysis. The top 10,000 interaction pairs from the Discovery
dataset were selected for validation test in a subset of independent
samples. Finally, 67 SNP pairs remain significant in Validation and
Combined analysis and can successfully passed permutation tests for
10,000 times. The 67 significant interaction pairs can be clustered into
39 interaction groups which 12 (32%) of the 39 clusters were with at
least two nearby SNPs from one of the interaction chromosome. This study
represents one of the first attempts to explore the high-dimensional
genetic architecture of NPC on a genome-wide scale.

