Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted RNA sequencing for expression analysis of breast cancer
patient samples using a biomarker gene panel.


Background: Gene expression profiling has been shown to be effective in
the analysis of postoperative tumor samples in various cancers. However,
for studies requiring the analysis of small specimens, such as core
biopsies, the limited amount of available material makes multi-gene
analyses exceedingly difficult. Moreover, microarray-based analyses
provide somewhat limited dynamic range and multi-gene qRT-PCR analyses
often require in excess of 100 ng of input RNA per sample. To this end,
we describe the development of targeted RNA-sequencing methodology which
combines the power of a universal RNA amplification with NGS for
ultra-deep expression analysis of multiple target genes, enabling
Background: Gene expression profiling has been shown to be effective in
the analysis of postoperative tumor samples in various cancers. However,
for studies requiring the analysis of small specimens, such as core
biopsies, the limited amount of available material makes multi-gene
analyses exceedingly difficult. Moreover, microarray-based analyses
provide somewhat limited dynamic range and multi-gene qRT-PCR analyses
often require in excess of 100 ng of input RNA per sample. To this end,
we describe the development of targeted RNA-sequencing methodology which
combines the power of a universal RNA amplification with NGS for
ultra-deep expression analysis of multiple target genes, enabling <100 ng
of sample input for multi-gene analysis in a single tube format. Methods:
The gene expression patterns of triple-negative breast cancer FFPE
samples were analyzed using a 96-gene breast cancer biomarker panel
across three different platforms. Affymetrix Human Gene ST 1.0
microarrays and a pre-developed qRT-PCR panel were employed for analysis.
For Targeted RNA-seq analysis, the 96-gene panel was amplified using a
universal, single-tube XP-PCR amplification strategy followed by sequence
analysis using the Ion-Torrent Personal Genome Machine. NGS-based
expression analysis was performed by counting the frequency of expression
tag sequences and the performance of the three expression analysis
platforms were compared. Results: The performance of the three gene
expression platforms was analyzed according to two different parameters.
Gene pairs from four well-characterized expression modules were compared,
demonstrating a positive correlation and association with expected
clinical biomarker characteristics in all three platforms. Targeted
RNA-seq provided the most sensitivity in terms of detection rates with
Background: Gene expression profiling has been shown to be effective in
the analysis of postoperative tumor samples in various cancers. However,
for studies requiring the analysis of small specimens, such as core
biopsies, the limited amount of available material makes multi-gene
analyses exceedingly difficult. Moreover, microarray-based analyses
provide somewhat limited dynamic range and multi-gene qRT-PCR analyses
often require in excess of 100 ng of input RNA per sample. To this end,
we describe the development of targeted RNA-sequencing methodology which
combines the power of a universal RNA amplification with NGS for
ultra-deep expression analysis of multiple target genes, enabling <100 ng
of sample input for multi-gene analysis in a single tube format. Methods:
The gene expression patterns of triple-negative breast cancer FFPE
samples were analyzed using a 96-gene breast cancer biomarker panel
across three different platforms. Affymetrix Human Gene ST 1.0
microarrays and a pre-developed qRT-PCR panel were employed for analysis.
For Targeted RNA-seq analysis, the 96-gene panel was amplified using a
universal, single-tube XP-PCR amplification strategy followed by sequence
analysis using the Ion-Torrent Personal Genome Machine. NGS-based
expression analysis was performed by counting the frequency of expression
tag sequences and the performance of the three expression analysis
platforms were compared. Results: The performance of the three gene
expression platforms was analyzed according to two different parameters.
Gene pairs from four well-characterized expression modules were compared,
demonstrating a positive correlation and association with expected
clinical biomarker characteristics in all three platforms. Targeted
RNA-seq provided the most sensitivity in terms of detection rates with
<100 ng FFPE RNA input and provides unlimited dynamic range with
increased sequencing depth. In particular, low expressing genes,
undetectable by qRT-PCR analysis from 1,000 ng input FFPE RNA, were
detected and eligible for expression analysis with a significant number
of sequencing reads. In addition to expression analysis, alternative
transcription/splicing analysis is possible from sequence analysis of the
target transcripts using targeted RNA-seq. Conclusion: By combining
universally-primed pre-amplification and NGS in multi-gene expression
analysis, targeted RNA-seq provides a robust, sensitive gene expression
analysis methodology for a variety of clinical sample specimens.
Compression issues typically associated with high pre-amplification
cycles were not observed here, resulting in higher gene detection rates,
at lower sample input amounts leading to high-sensitivity expression
analysis.

