Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inverse relationship between p53 and phospho-Chk1 (Ser317) protein
expression in UVB-induced skin tumors in SKH-1 mice.


Previous data demonstrated that the topical application of caffeine
inhibited UVB-induced skin tumor formation. Studies showed that caffeine
significantly diminished phospho (p)-Chk1 (Ser317) staining and increased
the number of mitotic cells that expressed both cyclin B1 and caspase 3
in tumors, suggesting that caffeine induces apoptosis selectively in
tumors by inhibiting the ATR/Chk1 pathway and promoting lethal mitosis.
We also found that caffeine attenuated the UVB-induced decrease in
mitotic cells with cyclin B1 to a greater extent in p53 knockout (KO)
mice compared with p53 wild-type (WT) littermates. Therefore, we sought
to investigate the mechanism by which caffeine could selectively
sensitize p53-deficient cells to apoptosis following UVB exposure by
inhibiting ATR/Chk1 pathway.Performing immunohistochemistry on stored
tumor paraffin samples, we found an almost exclusive inverse relationship
(>95%) between p53 expression and p-Chk1 (Ser317), but not p-Chk1
(Ser345), in all 42 keratoacanthomas and 11 squamous cell carcinomas
examined. Tumors that expressed high levels and large areas of p53
protein had no detectable p-Chk1 (Ser317) expression, whereas tumors that
expressed high levels and large areas of p-Chk1 (Ser317) protein had no
detectable p53 expression. Squamous cell carcinomas that demonstrated
heterogeneous p53 and p-Chk1 (Ser317) expression within the same tumor
showed that the areas that expressed p53 were negative for p-Chk1
(Ser317) and the areas that expressed p-Chk1 (Ser317) were negative for
p53. Similar patterns were observed for keratoacanthomas. Not only was
the inverse relationship demonstrated in heterogeneous tumors that showed
clusters of positive and negative cells, it was also demonstrated in
heterogeneous tumors that showed mixtures of single cells either positive
or negative for p53. These findings were consistent for the epidermis
away from tumors that demonstrated no p-Chk1 (Ser317), but appreciable
p53 protein in the basal layer. As expected, the inverse relationship
could not be observed by western blotting tumors that expressed both
proteins. However, tumors from p53 KO mice had elevated levels of p-Chk1
(Ser317) compared with tumors from p53 wild-type SKH-1 controls. A
similar pattern was observed in normal epidermis from p53 KO mice after a
single exposure to UVB, whereas p53 WT littermates induced p-Chk1
(Ser317), but to a much lesser extent. Moreover, we demonstrated that
UVB-induced p-Chk1 (Ser317) was inhibited by caffeine in p53 KO epidermal
cells in vitro. To our knowledge, this striking phenotypic negative
association between two proteins has never been observed in skin
tumors.These data illustrate the dynamic regulation of checkpoint
function, suggesting that phosphorylation of Chk1 on Serine 317 is
regulated by p53 status and that p53 may act as a molecular on and off
switch for the phosphorylation of Chk1 on Serine 317.

