Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of the alternatively spliced ACTN4 variant
in high-grade neuroendocrine pulmonary tumors.


Background: High-grade neuroendocrine tumours (HGNTs) of the lung
manifest a wide spectrum of clinical behaviour, but no method of
predicting their outcome has been established.Materials and methods: We
newly established a monoclonal antibody specifically recognizing the
product of the alternatively spliced ACTN4 transcript (namely, variant
actinin-4), and used it to examine the expression of variant actinin-4
immunohistochemically in a total of 609 surgical specimens of various
histological subtypes of lung cancer.Results: Variant actinin-4 was
expressed in 55% (96/176) of HGNTs, but in only 0.8% (3/378) of
non-neuroendocrine lung cancers. Expression of variant actinin-4 was
significantly associated with unfavorable overall survival in HGNT
patients (P = 0.00021, log-rank test). Multivariate analysis using the
Cox proportional hazards model showed that expression of variant
actinin-4 was the most significant independent negative predictor of
survival in HGNT patients (hazard ratio, 2.18; P = 0.000714) after the
presence of lymph node metastasis (hazard ratio, 2.30; P =
0.00012).Conclusions: Expression of variant actinin-4 is an independent
prognostic factor for patients with HGNTs. This protein has high affinity
for filamentous actin polymers and likely promotes aggressive behaviour
of cancer cells. The present clinical findings clearly support this
notion.Citation Format: Akihiko Miyanaga, Kazufumi Honda, Koji Tsuta,
Mari Masuda, Akitomo Miyamoto, Shingo Shinagawa, Hitoshi Tsuda, Hisao
Asamura, Akihiko Gemma, Tesshi Yamada. Prognostic significance of the
alternatively spliced ACTN4 variant in high-grade neuroendocrine
pulmonary tumors. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting
of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2375. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2375

