Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nucleolin-induced cap-independent translational pathway involved
in Sp1 accumulation in tumorigenesis.


Sp1 is a transcriptional factor to regulate numbers genes related to cell
proliferation, apoptosis and tumor progression. Previous studies indicate
that Sp1 is induced significantly through modulating its transcriptional
activity and protein stability. To detail study the level of Sp1 protein
and mRNA in tumorigenesis found that Sp1 mRNA was just increased a
little, but Sp1 protein was increased dramatically, implying that
enhancement of translational activity by nucleion might be important in
the Sp1 accumulation in tumor progression. Here we found a Y-shift motif
within the 5-UTR of the Sp1 mRNA, and to study the contribution in Sp1
level found that the 5-URT could enhance the translational efficiency of
Sp1. Using this Y-shift motif as a probe fished the interacted proteins.
Several RNA binding proteins were identified by LC/MS/MS, and nucleolin
is one of them. To further address the effect of nucleolin in Sp1
induction found that nucleolin overexpression did not alter the level of
Sp1 mRNA, but increased the translational activity obviously. In
addition, the signal transduction pathway was also studied, and found
that EGFR and Kras pathways might be involved in the induction in the
cap-independent pathway in Sp1 induction in tumorigenesis. Taken the
previous studies and this study together, during tumor formation, several
strategies including increasing the transcriptional activity, protein
stability and translational efficiency were used to induce the Sp1 level
to regulate many oncogenes to enhance the cancer progression.Keywords:
Nucleolin, Sp1, Cap-independent pathway,

