Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fluorophore-conjugated antibodies improve surgical resection of
pancreatic cancer leading to prolonged disease-free survival and overall
survival in orthotopic mouse models.


We established orthotopic mouse models of human pancreatic cancer with
fragments of BxPC-3-RFP tumor. Two weeks after implantation, mice were
randomized to FGS or bright-field surgery (BS). FGS was performed 24 hrs
after tail vein injection of anti-CEA-Alexa 488. Completeness of
resection was assessed from pre- and postoperative images obtained with
the OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System. Whole body images of mice were
obtained postoperatively to assess for recurrence and mice were followed
until premorbid to measure survival. We achieved a complete resection of
pancreatic cancers in 92% of mice in the FGS group as compared to 58% in
the BS group (p=0.002). Preoperative tumor burden was not significantly
different between groups (p=0.424). However, FGS afforded a significantly
smaller mean postoperative tumor burden compared to BS: 0.0004 SE 0.0003
mm2 vs. 0.0841 SE 0.027 mm2, p=0.004. On average, mice in the FGS
experienced a greater reduction in tumor burden: 99.99% vs 97.72%,
p=0.01. FGS reduced recurrence rates from 95% to 50% (p=0.002) and
lengthened mean disease-free survival from 7 weeks to 30.5 weeks (pWe
established orthotopic mouse models of human pancreatic cancer with
fragments of BxPC-3-RFP tumor. Two weeks after implantation, mice were
randomized to FGS or bright-field surgery (BS). FGS was performed 24 hrs
after tail vein injection of anti-CEA-Alexa 488. Completeness of
resection was assessed from pre- and postoperative images obtained with
the OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System. Whole body images of mice were
obtained postoperatively to assess for recurrence and mice were followed
until premorbid to measure survival. We achieved a complete resection of
pancreatic cancers in 92% of mice in the FGS group as compared to 58% in
the BS group (p=0.002). Preoperative tumor burden was not significantly
different between groups (p=0.424). However, FGS afforded a significantly
smaller mean postoperative tumor burden compared to BS: 0.0004 SE 0.0003
mm2 vs. 0.0841 SE 0.027 mm2, p=0.004. On average, mice in the FGS
experienced a greater reduction in tumor burden: 99.99% vs 97.72%,
p=0.01. FGS reduced recurrence rates from 95% to 50% (p=0.002) and
lengthened mean disease-free survival from 7 weeks to 30.5 weeks
(p<0.001). The FGS group experienced longer overall survival compared to
the BS group: 16.5 weeks vs. 37 weeks (p=0.001). Cure rate was improved
with FGS from 5% to 50% (p=0.003). Furthermore, FGS more than doubled the
one-year postoperative survival rate from 3 mice in the BLS group to 8
mice in the FGS group (p=0.005). This novel approach has potential to
improve outcomes in the surgical treatment of pancreatic cancer.
Survival and recurrence according to surgical mode.

