Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression and mutation analysis of the EGFR signaling pathway in
invasive cervical carcinoma.


BackgroundInvasive cervical carcinoma (ICC) remains a major cause of
female mortality worldwide claiming the lives of around 275,000 women
each year. Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is the known cause of
ICC. Whilst advances have been made in the prevention of ICC by
incorporating HPV testing into cervical screening programs and by the
development of HPV vaccines, relatively little progress has been made in
understanding ICC cellular pathway abrogation and the significance for
ICC treatment. In this study, upstream elements in the PI3K and RAS
signaling cascades in the EGFR pathway have been
investigated.MethodsHPV-16 positive squamous cell carcinomas from Madhya
Pradesh, India were screened by immunohistochemistry (IHC) for EGFR,
PIK3CA and PTEN expression. IHC data were scored in terms of the
percentage of tumor cells staining (0, 1-25, 25-75, >75) and in terms of
staining intensity (weak, moderate, strong). Real-time PNA-clamp PCR
assays were performed to screen for KRAS mutations (7 types) and PI3K
mutations (9 types).ResultsKRAS mutations were undetected in any of 91
(0%) samples tested whereas PI3K mutations were detected in 19/96 (19.8%)
ICCs [P1% cells) EGFR staining was found in 44/94 (46.8%) ICCs and showed
a significant relationship to PI3K mutation detection: 13/44 (29.6%) EGFR
positive vs. 6/50 (12.0%) EGFR negative [P=0.044]; PI3K mutations were
notably common in ICCs with >75% of tumor cells staining (n=8/20
[40.0%]). EGFR staining was not age related [P=0.526]. Any (>1%) PTEN
staining was detected in 27/93 (29.0%) ICCs; most of these (n=21) showed
staining of >75% cells. There was no significant association of PI3K
mutation detection with PTEN expression (8/27 [29.6%] PTEN positive vs.
11/66 [16.7%] PTEN negative, P=0.169). PIK3CA was abundantly expressed in
all but 3 (1.1%) ICCs, one of which showed a PI3K mutation. No
significant relationships were detected for any of the markers with
respect to tumor grade, stage, size or lymph node status.ConclusionsThese
data show that EGFR expression is relatively common in ICCs whereas KRAS
mutations are absent or rare supporting the use of anti-EGFR therapies in
the treatment of ICC patients. PI3K mutations were detected in nearly a
fifth of cases suggesting a potential role in the progression of a
significant subset of ICCs. Interestingly, PI3K mutations were associated
with older age and EGFR expression. Whether PI3K mutations negatively
impact anti-EGFR therapies is currently uncertain. PTEN expression was
undetected in 71.0% of specimens suggesting loss of its function in
suppressing AKT signaling immediately downstream of PI3K.

