Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cooperative function between miR-142-3p and miR-142-5p in
hepatocellular carcinoma.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs regulate gene expression at
post-transcriptional level and involved in a wide range of biological
processes. Aberrant expressions of miRNA have subsequently been
identified in different types of cancers, including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Due to their abilities in targeting multiple tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes, miRNAs are speculated to involve in
carcinogenesis.From a miRNA profiling study and subsequent qRT-PCR
validation, miR-142-3p and miR-142-5p were found to be significantly
down-regulated in HCC tumors versus adjacent non-tumor and their
expressions were further decreased in corresponding venous metastases.
Functionally, HCC cells stably overexpressing miR-142 showed significant
reduction in cell migration and invasion, but not in cell proliferation
and colony formation of HCC cells. Overexpression of miR-142 also
significantly reduced stress fibre formation and led to cell shrinkage in
HCC cells as revealed by immunofluorescent staining (IF) and scanning
electron microscope (SEM).Interestingly, transient overexpression of
either miR-142-3p or miR-142-5p alone using miRNA-precursors reduced the
migration of HCC cells. Whereas, overexpression of both the miR-142-3p
and miR-142-5p precursors further inhibited cell migration
synergistically, suggesting that miR-142-3p and miR-142-5p may function
cooperatively to regulate cell movement.MiR-142-3p and mir-142-5p are
mature miRNAs derived from the 3 and 5 strand of precursor-miR-142
respectively, in which they possess totally different seed sequences and
hence distinct pools of target genes. Based on the bioinformatic
prediction from Targetscan 5.0 algorithm, a total of 696 genes were
predicted as putative targets of miR-142-3p and miR-142-5p. The
biological relevancies of their targets were further revealed by using
the DIANA mirPath enrichment analysis. Intriguingly, downstream gene
targets of miR-142-3p and miR-142-5p have been highly enriched in
pathways regulating cell movement, such as the regulation of actin
cytoskeleton (p=6.30e-08), adherens junction (p=2.71e-06) and focal
adhesion (p=1.80e-03).Until recently, little was known about the
functional relationships between the -3p and -5p mature miRNA species
derived from the same precursor-miRNA and their biological relevance in
cancer biology. In this study, we have illustrated the coordination
between the mature miR-142-3p and miR-142-5p. It is postulated that the
down-regulation of miR-142 in HCC may lead to the de-repression of
components regulating cell movements and eventually promote cell
migration, invasion or even metastasis of HCC.

