Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic conversion on p53 pathway in human cancer: The clinical
potential of p53 mutation status as a predictive biomarker for drug
sensitivity by epigenetic treatment.


Background: DNA methylation plays a central role in epigenetic
contribution to human cancer progression. We have mentioned actual
epigenetic conversion on critical molecular pathways in human cancer
(Mini-symposium on AACR 2012). Such genes included PGP9.5, NMDAR2B, DAPK,
and Cyclin A1, which have been all demonstrated to be involved in
apoptotic process on upstream or downstream of p53 pathway.Materials and
Methods: Epigenetic profiles of PGP9.5, NMDAR2B, and Cyclin A1 were
examined in 163 primary gastric cancer by Q-MSP in combination with p53
mutation status (exon 4 to 8) by SSCP. Effects of epigenetic reversion by
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine and trichostatin A, in combination with
chemotherapeutic drug, CDDP, were assessed for apoptosis by flow
cytometry and p53 trans-activation ability by luciferase analysis in
gastric cancer cell lines with or without p53 mutation.Results: (1) SSCP
identified 44 mutations (27%) of p53 gene in primary gastric cancer.
Mutation status of p53 gene was not of prognostic relevance. (2) We
performed epigenetic profiles for PGP9.5, NMDAR2B, DAPK, and Cyclin A1.
Methylation level is higher in primary tumors with p53 wild type than in
those with p53 mutant in gastric cancer (PGP9.5>NMDAR2B>Cyclin
A1>DAPK).(3) Importantly, super-high methylation level of PGP9.5,
NMDAR2B, and cyclin A1 was exclusively found in primary tumors with no
p53 mutation, and such cut-off TaqMeth values were 50, 163, and 133,
respectively. (4) Super-high methylation was found in 14 for PGP9.5, 19
for NMDAR2B, and 8 in Cyclin A1, which are not always redundant.
Super-high methylation may represent functional shut-down of expression
in the individual genes. (5) In NUGC4 gastric cancer cell line, harboring
wild type p53, epigenetic treatment remarkably augmented apoptosis by
CDDP chemotherapy, concordant with p53 transcription activity. This
finding suggested that epigenetic treatment could be additional options
to classical chemotherapy more efficiently to kill cancer cells with wild
type p53. (6) On the other hand, in KATO III cancer cell line, harboring
null p53 (mutant), epigenetic treatment alone induced robust apoptosis,
with no trans-activation of p53.Conclusion: In GI cancers, several genes
involved on the p53 pathway are functionally suppressed in expression by
super-dense methylation of the promoter regions, and epigenetic reversion
of p53 activity may be beneficial for killing cancer cells more
efficiently, if p53 is not mutated. On the other hand, cancer cell with
no p53 mutation is very sensitive by epigenetic treatments, and p53
status may predict sensitivity of cancer cells by chemotherapy in
combination with epigenetic treatments.Citation Format: Keishi Yamashita,
Mina Waraya, Hiroshi Katoh, Akira Ooki, Hiroshi Kawamata, Kazunori
Nakamura, Hiroshi Nishimiya, Akira Ema, David Sidransky, Masahiko
Watanabe. Epigenetic conversion on p53 pathway in human cancer: The
clinical potential of p53 mutation status as a predictive biomarker for
drug sensitivity by epigenetic treatment. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of
the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4662. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4662

