Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salan titanium(IV) complexes: A new class of anti-cancer agents.


Early attempts at using titanium compounds (derivatives of titanocene
dichloride and budotitane) as anti-cancer treatment were essentially
unsuccessful. The main reason was their rapid hydrolysis in biological
media, leading to a variety of unidentified products that hampered the
elucidation of mechanistic aspects. Lately, we have introduced a new
class of Ti(IV) complexes of salan type diamino bis(phenolato) ligands.
These compounds demonstrate substantially enhanced hydrolytic stability,
as well as cytotoxic activity towards a variety of cancer cell lines in
vitro. The IC50 of different derivatives of these compounds towards
murine mammary carcinoma, lymphoma, multi-drug resistant lymphoma, as
well as human leukemia, melanoma and pancreatic cancer cell lines, is in
the range of 0.6 - 5.7M, as compared to 70-100M of the older titanium
compounds and to 50-60M of cisplatin (Manna C.M. et al. ChemMedChem, 7,
703 (2012)). Exposure of murine T-69 and human OVCAR-1 and HT-29 cell
lines to one of the salan Ti(IV) compounds resulted in increased levels
of p53 and growth arrest in G-1 of the cell cycle implying activation of
the apoptotic pathway in response to Ti(IV) complexes.The well-identified
and highly stable hydrolysis products of the titanium compounds, which
had previously been formulated into nanoparticles to enhance solubility
and assist cellular penetration (Meker, S. et al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
51,10515 (2012)), were active both in vitro (IC50 -0.45M) in murine
lymphoma and in vivo (50% tumor growth inhibition) of the same lymphoma
cells following their introduction into syngeneic mice. These findings
suggest the potential use of solubilized active titanium compound
derivatives as a new class of anti-cancer agents.

