Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systems analysis of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cell
invasion identifies functional gene signatures predictive of survival in
lung cancer.


We have implemented a systems approach to identify molecular features
associated with mesenchymal or epithelial phenotypes and cell behavior in
38 lung adenocarcinoma cell lines that encompassed common known genomic
alterations that drive the development of lung adenocarcinoma. Cell line
characterization based on morphology, invasiveness, motility and
cell-cell adhesion was integrated with proteomic, gene expression,
microRNA and methylation profiles. Signatures were established from
differential expression of transcripts and proteins in subsets of cell
lines with mesenchymal and epithelial characteristics as well as high or
low invasion and motility. The mesenchymal, invasion and migration
signatures had common upregulation of genes or proteins related to
cytoskeletal and actin-binding proteins. Sets of 148 and 74 transcripts
corresponding to proteins that were overexpressed in mesenchymal cell
lines and high invasive cell lines, respectively, were highly predictive
of survival in three independent lung adenocarcinoma datasets. Subsets of
39 and 21 transcripts corresponding to cytoskeletal and acting binding
proteins in the mesenchymal and invasive signatures were found to also
predict survival in the three independent lung adenocarcinoma datasets,
pointing to an association between cytoskeletal and actin binding
proteins, a mesenchymal phenotype and tumor progression in lung
adenocarcinoma.

