Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: M2 macrophages co-cultured with prostate cancer cells promote
osteoblast differentiation mediated by BMP-2 and BMP-7.


Prostate cancers frequently metastasize to bone and cause predominantly
osteoblastic lesions. When tumor cells metastasize to bone, they interact
with the bone microenvironment. Bidirectional interactions between
prostate cancer cells and bone microenvironment increase expression of
cytokines, chemokines and adhesion molecules. These factors can be
produced by tumor cells as well as bone marrow cells including
osteoclasts, osteoblasts/stromal cells and macrophages. It has been
demonstrated that M2 macropahge enhanced tumor growth, survival and
metastasis. However, whether M2 macropahges play roles in prostate
cancer-induced osteoblastic lesions, specifically in osteoblast
differentiation is unknown. We initially isolated M2 macrophages from
primary murine bone marrow cells culturing with IL-4 and IL-13. Then M2
macrophages were co-cultured with or without prostate cancer C4-2B or
LNCaP cells at ratio 5:1. Then the conditioned media (CM) from M2
co-cultures were collected. We incubated murine bone marrow cells or
MC3T3 E1 cells with different concentrations of the CM and performed Von
Kossa Staining. We found that the co-cultured CM, but not the CM
collected from either macrophages or prostate cancer cells, significantly
induced bone marrow cells or MC3T3 E1 mineralization in vitro. This
induction was partially blocked by anti-BMP-2 and anti-BMP-7 neutralizing
antibodies. We further observed that the co-cultured CM significantly
induced alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and osteocalcin (OCN) production.
Finally, we determined the cytokine productions from the co-cultured CM
by using ELISA. The production of BMP-2 and BMP-7 were detected. The
conditioned media collected from M1 macrophage were used as corresponding
and negative controls throughout the whole study. We concluded that M2
macrophages co-cultured with prostate cancer cells promote osteoblast
differentiation mediated by BMP-2 and BMP-7. Supported by NSF projects
81171993 and 81272415; NSF key project 81130046; 973 Grant
(2009CB918902); Guangxi projects 201201ZD004 and 2012GXNSFCB53004.

