Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53-dependent expression of the fluorouracil (5-FU) catabolic
enzyme dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) in mouse liver.


Fluorouracil (5-FU) a commonly used drug in the treatment of cancer is
hampered by a short unpredictable plasma half-life, which complicates
dose modulation to minimize toxicity and improve efficacy of 5-FU
treatment. Strategies to improve on the unfavorable pharmacokinetic
properties of 5-FU, currently under clinical trial, involve targeting of
the catabolic enzyme dihydropyrmidine dehydrogenase (DPD).This requires
understanding the mechanisms regulating the expression of DPD and the
inducibility of 5-FU catabolism, which is inadequately investigated. By
performing in silico analysis we were able to identify putative p53
binding sites in the proximity of the dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
gene (DPYD) and confirm by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) that p53
increasingly locates to a binding site (about 1.8 0.05 fold over
untreated control) downstream of DPYD (P53DBS) following a single IV
bolus of 5-FU (150 mg/kg bw) in mouse liver. Indeed, DPYD mRNA increased
by 1.8 fold and protein by 1.8 fold (PFluorouracil (5-FU) a commonly used
drug in the treatment of cancer is hampered by a short unpredictable
plasma half-life, which complicates dose modulation to minimize toxicity
and improve efficacy of 5-FU treatment. Strategies to improve on the
unfavorable pharmacokinetic properties of 5-FU, currently under clinical
trial, involve targeting of the catabolic enzyme dihydropyrmidine
dehydrogenase (DPD).This requires understanding the mechanisms regulating
the expression of DPD and the inducibility of 5-FU catabolism, which is
inadequately investigated. By performing in silico analysis we were able
to identify putative p53 binding sites in the proximity of the
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase gene (DPYD) and confirm by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) that p53 increasingly locates to a binding
site (about 1.8 0.05 fold over untreated control) downstream of DPYD
(P53DBS) following a single IV bolus of 5-FU (150 mg/kg bw) in mouse
liver. Indeed, DPYD mRNA increased by 1.8 fold and protein by 1.8 fold
(P< 0.0005) respectively in a time- and p53-dependent manner in the liver
of treated with 5-FU. Our ongoing studies are focused on assessing
p53-dependent regulation of DPD-activity and the resulting change in 5-FU
bioavailability We suggest that p53 can regulate an important step of
pyrimidine-catabolism and targeting p53 in the context of 5-FU therapy of
malignancies carrying p53 mutations may be another strategy to improve
treatment efficacy.

