Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Further observation of increasing strength of the smoking-bladder
cancer association: The Los Angeles Bladder Cancer Study.


Objective: Cigarette smoking is an established risk factor for bladder
cancer. Recent research suggests smoking-related risk has increased in
the United States, in spite of decreased prevalence of smoking (JNCI
101:1553-61, 2009; JAMA 306:737-45, 2011). Hypothesized reasons for this
temporal pattern include changes in how deeply smokers inhale and changes
in cigarette composition, which may be related. We examined associations
between smoking status and bladder cancer risk during three successive
intervals between 1987 and 1996 to investigate whether level of risk had
changed in our study population. To gain insight into possible effects of
changing smoking habits we also evaluated impact on estimated
associations of intensity and duration of smoking.Methods: We examined
the association between smoking and bladder cancer risk in a
population-based case-control study conducted in Los Angeles within three
separate intervals defined by year of diagnosis: 1987-1989, 1990- 1992,
and 1993-1996. We calculated odds ratios (OR) and corresponding 95%
confidence intervals (CI) using conditional logistic regression. Cases
and controls were matched on age, gender, race, and neighborhood. Further
analyses were adjusted for pack years of smoking, education, and use of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).Results: There were 569
cases and 553 controls in the 1987-1989 interval, 461 cases and 426
controls in 1990-1992, and 641 cases and 607 controls in 1992-1996. In
each interval smoking was associated with bladder cancer risk. Compared
with never smokers, OR estimates for former smokers were 1.79
[95%CI=1.30-2.48], 1.38 [95%CI=0.95-1.99], and 1.93 [95%CI=1.42-2.62] for
the successive intervals. For current smokers, corresponding estimates
were 3.18 [95%CI=2.29-4.4], 3.90 [95%CI=2.64-5.77], and 4.75
[95%CI=3.37-6.7]. When males and females were considered separately,
these estimates were also greater in later intervals. In 1992-1996,
current male smokers were 4.45 (95%CI=3.03-6.56) times as likely and
current female smokers were 5.95 (95%CI=2.78-12.71) times as likely to
have bladder cancer; these associations were weaker in 1987-1989: 2.95
(95%CI=2.01-4.35) and 3.75 (95%CI=2.03-6.92). After adjusting for pack
years, all odds ratio estimates for current smokers were attenuated, 0.83
[95%CI=1.22-2.75], 1.86[95%CI=1.13-3.06], 2.4 [95%CI=1.54-3.75] for
successive intervals, while for former smokers none of the associations
were statistically significant.Conclusions: Bladder cancer risk appears
to have increased among both ever smokers and current smokers, although
distinctions are less pronounced after accounting for pack years of
smoking. Further research is needed to learn whether this pattern
reflects changes in smoking behavior, formulation of cigarettes, or other
factors - and to determine whether these increases have continued.

