Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: L14R8, a Pac derivative, induces casapase-3 mediated apoptosis in
mantle cell lymphoma.


The resistance of cancer cells to natural apoptotic signals is pivotal
for their survival and is typically ruled by either up- or
down-regulation or mutations of key proteins in the apoptotic cascade.
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an incurable B-cell non-Hodgkin's
malignancy and expresses high levels of anti-apoptotic proteins resulting
in survival advantage. Given the potential role(s) of pro-apoptotic
compounds for treating cancer, unremitting efforts are in use to develop
therapeutics that target specific proteins in the apoptotic cascade.
Activation of zymogen procaspase-3 to caspase-3 is the hallmark feature
of both extrinsic and intrinsic cell death pathways. MCL cell lines,
Granta-519, JeKo and Mino possess high levels of procaspase-3 thereby
providing a rational approach for using agents that can activate
procaspase-3. L14R8 is a novel and potent Procaspase Activating Compound
(Pac) analogue that forms a stable complex with Zn2+ ion. It directly
activates caspase-3 via chelating Zn2+ thereby removes Zn2+-mediated
inhibition of caspase-3 activation. In this study, three MCL cells lines,
Granta-519, JeKo and Mino were treated for 24 hr with different
concentrations of L14R8 and their respective IC50 values were determined
(8, 9 and 11 M) by Annexin V-PI assay. To determine mechanism of cell
death, these cell lines were treated with L14R8 (10 M), Pac1a (10 M; an
inactive analogue) or staurosporin (100 nM; used as a positive control)
for 24 hr either alone or in presence of Zn2+ (100 M; ZnSO4) and cell
death was evaluated by FACS analysis. L14R8 treatment resulted in
significant cell death (pThe resistance of cancer cells to natural
apoptotic signals is pivotal for their survival and is typically ruled by
either up- or down-regulation or mutations of key proteins in the
apoptotic cascade. Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an incurable B-cell
non-Hodgkin's malignancy and expresses high levels of anti-apoptotic
proteins resulting in survival advantage. Given the potential role(s) of
pro-apoptotic compounds for treating cancer, unremitting efforts are in
use to develop therapeutics that target specific proteins in the
apoptotic cascade. Activation of zymogen procaspase-3 to caspase-3 is the
hallmark feature of both extrinsic and intrinsic cell death pathways. MCL
cell lines, Granta-519, JeKo and Mino possess high levels of procaspase-3
thereby providing a rational approach for using agents that can activate
procaspase-3. L14R8 is a novel and potent Procaspase Activating Compound
(Pac) analogue that forms a stable complex with Zn2+ ion. It directly
activates caspase-3 via chelating Zn2+ thereby removes Zn2+-mediated
inhibition of caspase-3 activation. In this study, three MCL cells lines,
Granta-519, JeKo and Mino were treated for 24 hr with different
concentrations of L14R8 and their respective IC50 values were determined
(8, 9 and 11 M) by Annexin V-PI assay. To determine mechanism of cell
death, these cell lines were treated with L14R8 (10 M), Pac1a (10 M; an
inactive analogue) or staurosporin (100 nM; used as a positive control)
for 24 hr either alone or in presence of Zn2+ (100 M; ZnSO4) and cell
death was evaluated by FACS analysis. L14R8 treatment resulted in
significant cell death (p<0.05) in all three MCL cell lines tested
compared with either DMSO or only ZnSO4 treated cells. Addition of Zn2+
completely inhibited L14R8-mediated cell death but did not change
staurosporin-induced apoptosis. Western blot analysis from JeKo and Mino
cells revealed a strong procaspase-3 to caspase-3 (p17 and p12 fragments)
cleavage accompanied by loss of both Mcl-1 and XIAP proteins. This was
consistent with PARP cleavage data. Confocal analysis using cleaved
caspase-3 antibody reaffirmed L14R8 role on caspase-3 cleavage. To extend
cell line data to primary human tumor cells, malignant B-lymphoma cells
were obtained from five patients. A 24 hr treatment with 10 M L14R8
reaffirmed an evocative role on cell death (26% vehicle control versus
61% L14R8 treated; pThe resistance of cancer cells to natural apoptotic
signals is pivotal for their survival and is typically ruled by either
up- or down-regulation or mutations of key proteins in the apoptotic
cascade. Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an incurable B-cell non-Hodgkin's
malignancy and expresses high levels of anti-apoptotic proteins resulting
in survival advantage. Given the potential role(s) of pro-apoptotic
compounds for treating cancer, unremitting efforts are in use to develop
therapeutics that target specific proteins in the apoptotic cascade.
Activation of zymogen procaspase-3 to caspase-3 is the hallmark feature
of both extrinsic and intrinsic cell death pathways. MCL cell lines,
Granta-519, JeKo and Mino possess high levels of procaspase-3 thereby
providing a rational approach for using agents that can activate
procaspase-3. L14R8 is a novel and potent Procaspase Activating Compound
(Pac) analogue that forms a stable complex with Zn2+ ion. It directly
activates caspase-3 via chelating Zn2+ thereby removes Zn2+-mediated
inhibition of caspase-3 activation. In this study, three MCL cells lines,
Granta-519, JeKo and Mino were treated for 24 hr with different
concentrations of L14R8 and their respective IC50 values were determined
(8, 9 and 11 M) by Annexin V-PI assay. To determine mechanism of cell
death, these cell lines were treated with L14R8 (10 M), Pac1a (10 M; an
inactive analogue) or staurosporin (100 nM; used as a positive control)
for 24 hr either alone or in presence of Zn2+ (100 M; ZnSO4) and cell
death was evaluated by FACS analysis. L14R8 treatment resulted in
significant cell death (p<0.05) in all three MCL cell lines tested
compared with either DMSO or only ZnSO4 treated cells. Addition of Zn2+
completely inhibited L14R8-mediated cell death but did not change
staurosporin-induced apoptosis. Western blot analysis from JeKo and Mino
cells revealed a strong procaspase-3 to caspase-3 (p17 and p12 fragments)
cleavage accompanied by loss of both Mcl-1 and XIAP proteins. This was
consistent with PARP cleavage data. Confocal analysis using cleaved
caspase-3 antibody reaffirmed L14R8 role on caspase-3 cleavage. To extend
cell line data to primary human tumor cells, malignant B-lymphoma cells
were obtained from five patients. A 24 hr treatment with 10 M L14R8
reaffirmed an evocative role on cell death (26% vehicle control versus
61% L14R8 treated; p<0.02). Consistent with the cell line data, a few
patient samples also showed a decrease in Mcl-1 and XIAP proteins
suggesting a clinical significance of exploiting L14R8 in MCL. Based on
these results, we conclude that L14R8 induces cell death via activating
procaspase-3 cleavage accompanied by loss of anti-apoptotic proteins such
as Mcl-1 and XIAP. Further evidence will be provided on MEF cells
deficient in Caspse-3, -7 or both to explicate the mechanism of L14R8
mediated cell death.

