Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial DNA copy number is prospectively associated with
breast cancer risk.


A previous case-control study reported a positive association between
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number in peripheral blood and breast
cancer risk. However, data on mtDNA copy number and breast cancer risk in
prospective cohorts is lacking. We evaluated the prospective association
between mtDNA copy number and breast cancer risk in the Singapore Chinese
Health Study. We conducted a nested case-control study of 183 incident
breast cancer cases with pre-diagnostic blood samples and 529
individually matched control women who were free of breast cancer. The
mtDNA copy number was measured using real time PCR. Conditional logistic
regression methods were employed to examine the association between mtDNA
copy number and breast cancer risk. Overall, there was no association
between mtDNA copy number and breast cancer after adjustment for
potential confounders (p=0.37). Among participants who donated a blood
sample within 3 years of breast cancer diagnosis women in the second and
third tertile of mtDNA copy number had a significantly increased breast
cancer risk as compared to those in the lowest mtDNA copy number tertile
(odds ratio (95% confidence interval): 1.84 (0.93-3.64) and 2.13
(1.09-4.17) respectively; p for trend = 0.03). There was no association
between mtDNA copy number and breast cancer risk among women who donated
a blood sample 3 years before breast cancer diagnosis (p for trend =
0.73). This study supports a prospective association between increased
mtDNA copy number and breast cancer risk that is dependent on the time
interval between blood collection and breast cancer diagnosis.

