Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel SurrobodyTM that simultaneously activates
both death receptors DR4 and DR5 and induces cancer cell death with high
potency.


Death receptors of the Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) family are found on
surface of most cancer cells and their activation typically kills cancer
cells through the stimulation of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway. The
endogenous ligand for death receptors-4 and -5 (DR4 and DR5) is tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand, TRAIL (Apo2L). TRAIL
is expressed by many cell types, including Natural Killer (NK) cells that
are involved in the immune surveillance and elimination of cells in vivo.
Given that most normal untransformed cells are not susceptible to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis, activators of death receptors have emerged as
promising cancer therapeutic agents.One strategy to stimulate death
receptors in cancer patients has been to use soluble human recombinant
TRAIL protein, but this agent has limitations of a short half-life and
decoy receptor sequestration. An alternative strategy to evade decoy
receptor sequestration and to have improved pharmacokinetic properties is
to generate DR4 or DR5 agonist antibodies. To this end, several agonistic
monoclonal antibodies have been reported that overcome the limitations of
short half-life, but exhibited the limitation of activating only one of
the two death receptors. The SurrobodyTM binding protein is a novel
therapeutic protein structure based upon the pre-B cell antigen receptor
common chain that is capable of being engineered to bind a diversity of
targets with high affinity and specificity. We exploited a previously
discovered SurrobodyTM that potently activates both DR4 and DR5 in vitro
and in vivo. Here we show experimental results for a dual agonist
SurrobodyTM that offers a powerful and likely more reliable strategy for
cancer therapeutics based on simultaneous stimulation of both TRAIL
receptors, DR4 and DR5.

