Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo evidence for prior manipulation therapy-induced metastasis
of primary osteosarcoma.


Our previous clinical study demonstrated that manipulation therapy (MT)
on osteosarcoma (OS) patients prior to diagnosis resulted in poor
prognosis after surgical treatment. This study was aimed to provide in
vivo evidence of MT-induced metastasis in primary osterosarcoma.
Eight-week-old male GFP-labeled human OS cells-transferred nude mice were
randomly allocated into 2 groups, namely, MT (+) and MT (-) groups. MT
was conducted with repeated massage on tumor site twice a week for 7 or
15 weeks. The parameters evaluated were x-ray diagnosis, micro-PET/CT
scan, histopathology and serum metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) level. The
results showed that MT (+) mice showed a decreased body weight
(30.50.65g) and an increased tumor volume (8.31.18 mm3) compared to MT
(-) group with body weight (35.80.40g, pOur previous clinical study
demonstrated that manipulation therapy (MT) on osteosarcoma (OS) patients
prior to diagnosis resulted in poor prognosis after surgical treatment.
This study was aimed to provide in vivo evidence of MT-induced metastasis
in primary osterosarcoma. Eight-week-old male GFP-labeled human OS
cells-transferred nude mice were randomly allocated into 2 groups,
namely, MT (+) and MT (-) groups. MT was conducted with repeated massage
on tumor site twice a week for 7 or 15 weeks. The parameters evaluated
were x-ray diagnosis, micro-PET/CT scan, histopathology and serum
metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) level. The results showed that MT (+) mice
showed a decreased body weight (30.50.65g) and an increased tumor volume
(8.31.18 mm3) compared to MT (-) group with body weight (35.80.40g,
p<0.0001) and tumor volume (3.91.34mm3, p=0.038), respectively. There was
an increased signal intensity over lymph node region of hind limb by
micro-PET/CT and the GFP-labeled human OS cells were detected in the lung
and bilateral lymph nodes in MT (+) group, while there were no such
findings in MT (-) group. The serum MMP9 level was higher in MT (+) group
(27.11.29 ng/ml) than in MT (-) group (17.81.97 ng/ml, p=0.048). Taken
previous clinical observation and the present in vivo evidence together,
we conclude that physicians should pay more attention on those patients
who seek MT before diagnosis or during treatment for osteosarcoma.

