Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of chebulagic acid and chebulinic acid and their
pharmacokinetics in mouse .


Purpose: Triphala (THL), an ayurveda powder mixture of three myrobalan
fruits, has shown promising anti-tumor growth activity in stomach and
pancreatic tumor mouse models. Chebulagic acid (CA) and chebulinic acid
(CI) are two bioactive THL tannins showing preventive effect on diabetes
and carcinogenesis. Notably, our study demonstrated that THL and CI can
inhibit vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) induced angiogenesis, a
critical step for the initiation, growth, progression of malignant tumor.
However, the pharmacokinetics (PK) of CA and CI remains unknown.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to establish an LC-MS/MS method
to measure CA and CI in mouse plasma and to characterize their PK in mice
after an oral administration of THL.Methods: The following ion
transitions at m/zs: 953.1/303.0, 955.3/337.2, and 301.5/163.9 were used
for monitoring CA, CI and hesperetin (internal standard), respectively,
on an API-3000 mass spectrometer. THL (100 mg/kg) in water containing
22.2 mg/kg CA and 6.8 mg/kg CI was orally gavaged to mice. Plasma samples
were collected at the following time points, 10, 20, 30, 60, 120, 240 and
480 min after dose. The plasma level of CA and CI was determined using a
LC-MS/MS method. The PK parameters of CA and CI were retrieved using a
Computer Software WinNonlin (Pharasight version 5.3).Results: An LC-MS/MS
method for determination of CA and CI was developed and validated in the
concentration range of 1-1000 ng/mL with the low limit quantification of
5 ng/mL in mouse plasma. This method was capable to characterize the
pharmacokinetics of CA and CI in mouse after an oral administration of
100 mg/kg THL. The plasma concentration and time profile of CA and CI
demonstrated that both CA and CI was absorbed rapidly with an absorption
half-life (K01-HL) of 1.19 min and 6.71 min, respectively. The peak
plasma concentration (Cmax) of CA and CI reached 4061 (4.0 M) and 1953
ng/mL (2.0 M) in plasma. After absorption, CA and CI eliminate rapidly
with a half-life (K10-HL) of 67 min and 40.5 min, respectively. Both are
detectable up to 8 h in mouse plasma. The area under the plasma
concentration-time curve (AUC) to the last time point (480 min) of CA and
CI are 4.24E+05 min*ng/ml and 1.23E+05 ng/ml.min and their volume
distribution (V_F) are 5083 mL/kg and 3235 mL/kg and their clearance
(Cl-F) is 55.5 mL/min/kg and 52.6 mL/min/kg, respectively.Conclusions:
The pharmacological effective concentration of CI targeting VEGF (2.0 M)
can be achieved in plasma in mice after an oral administration of
non-toxic THL dose. The favorable pharmacokinetic characteristics of CI
along with the LC-MS/MS method warrants further exploration of the
potential correlation of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of CI or
THL as a chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic agent targeting VEGF.
Supported by biomedical mass spectrometric laboratory

