Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of novel PI3K/mTOR inhibitors BKM120 and BEZ235 in
comparison to everolimus in Head & Neck Squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC).


Background: Current management of advanced HNSCC is limited to surgery,
radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. The frequent activation of the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway in HNSCC has suggested that inhibition of
PI3K/mTOR may have potential therapeutic activity. Preliminary results of
the phase I/II CAPRA clinical trial combining the mTOR inhibitor
everolimus with paclitaxel and carboplatin have shown promising antitumor
activity. Experimental evidences have suggested that mTOR inhibition
using rapalogues may be hampered by a negative feedback resulting in PI3K
activation. The aim of our study was to evaluate the antiproliferative
effects of novel PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in comparison to everolimus in a
panel of three HNSCC cell lines.Materials and Methods: HNSCC cell lines
(SQ20B, HEP2, and SCC61) were treated with mTORC1 specific inhibitor
everolimus, the dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor BEZ235, and the specific PI3K
inhibitor BKM120. Antiproliferative effects were assessed using MTT
assay. Protein expression and phoshorylation were assessed by western
blot.Results: HNSCC cancer cells were characterized for predictive
factors of mTOR inhibitors. SQ20B and SCC61 cells displayed an epithelial
phenotype whereas HEP2 cells displayed mesenchymal characteristics. SQ20B
and SCC61 cells also had a constitutively activated AKT pathway in
contrast to HEP2 cells. Others potentials predictive factors of mTOR
inhibitors (Bcl2, Cyclin D1, p27, c-Myc) were differentially expressed in
HEP2, SCC61, and SQ20B cells. In all cell lines, everolimus displayed
IC50 over 6 M. Novel mTOR inhibitors were 2-30 times more potent with
IC50 ranging from 0.2 to 0.8 M for BEZ235 and from 2.1 to 2.4 M for
BKM120. Everolimus and BEZ235 were less potent in HEP2 compared to SQ20B
and SCC61 cells. In SQ20B and SCC61 cell lines everolimus displayed low
IC25 (0.02M) close to BEZ235 (0.1M) and lower than BKM120 (1.4M). All
inhibitors displayed potent inhibition of S6 phosphorylation in all
cells. Everolimus and the novel mTOR inhibitors inhibited the
constitutive AKT activation observed in SQ20B and SCC61. In contrast,
everolimus but not the novel mTOR inhibitors, significantly increased AKT
activation in HEP2 cells. In combinations with carboplatin or paclitaxel,
everolimus and BEZ235 displayed synergistic antiproliferative effects in
HEP2 and additive effects in SQ20B, whereas BKM120 displayed mostly
additive effects in both cell lines.Conclusion: Novel generation of
PI3K/mTOR inhibitors displayed more potent antiproliferative effects than
everolimus in HNSCC cell lines. Everolimus and BEZ235 were more active in
epithelial cells with constitutionally activated AKT pathway whereas
BKM120 potently inhibited cell proliferation in all HNSCC models. Several
combinations with chemotherapies were shown to be synergistic and may be
regarded as an attractive strategy in HNSCC patients.

