Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Automatic synthesis of efficient transcription inhibitors as
anti-cancer agents designing sequence-specific DNA-binding molecules.


PURPOSE: Regulation of endogenous gene expression using synthetic
chemicals, so called Transcription therapy is a unique and promising
approach. Although we have reported in vitro and in vivo anti-tumor,
anti-metastatic and various anti-disease efficacies of hairpin
Pyrrole-Imidazole polyamide (hPIP),PIP still needs to improve on
selectivity of target DNA sequences and sensitivity to bind specific
sequences. Hence, we synthesized PIPs targeting
transcription-factor-binding-sites with several different structures and
tested their efficacy, selectivity and sensitivity in vitro as well as in
vivo model.METHODS: We have developed an automatic system forPIP
synthesis by using peptide synthesizer of PSSM8 (Shimazu) and synthesized
hPIPs or cyclic PIPs targeting either the MMP9 AP1 site or NFkB site to
evaluate sensitivity and specificity. Each PIP, which has a different
beta-alanine position, was tested for target DNA binding by surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) usingBiaCore system. We also test cell invasion
and migration in vitro and metastatic capability in an in vivo xenograft
model.RESULTS: Each hPIPs targeting AP1 or NFkB site showed significant
reduction of MMP9 expression in MDA-MB-231 cells and HeLa cells and
metastatic capacity in vivo. hPIP with crossed beta-alanine position
showed the almost same dissociation constant as those with parallel
beta-alanine position. Cyclic PIPs also showed similar dissociation
constant as hPIPs and showed better sequence specificity with reasonable
efficacy at least in vitro analysis.CONCLUSION: The result suggested that
variousPIPs with different target sites or architectures give distinct
efficacy, selectivity and sensitivity in at least in vitro cancer cell
culture system. Depending on pharmacokinetic properties of PIP the most
suitable PIP can be selected for the future trial as seen in
combinatorial chemistry technique.

