Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial bioenergetics of metastatic breast cancer cells in
response to decreasing oxygen tension.


Solid tumors are characterized by regions of low oxygen tension, which
play a central role in tumor progression and resistance to therapy. The
major organelle affected by reduced oxygen tension is the mitochondrion,
which has to functionally adapt to maintain cellular bioenergetics for
the cell survival. In the present study, a novel experimental approach
was developed to examine the real-time bioenergetic changes during
adaptation to various oxygen tensions ranging from 20% to Solid tumors
are characterized by regions of low oxygen tension, which play a central
role in tumor progression and resistance to therapy. The major organelle
affected by reduced oxygen tension is the mitochondrion, which has to
functionally adapt to maintain cellular bioenergetics for the cell
survival. In the present study, a novel experimental approach was
developed to examine the real-time bioenergetic changes during adaptation
to various oxygen tensions ranging from 20% to < 1% oxygen using highly
sensitive extracellular flux technology. Oxygen was gradually removed
from the culture medium, and bioenergetic changes were measured in normal
breast epithelial (MCF10A) and metastatic cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231
and MCF10CA clones). We found that breast cancer cells, but not MCF10A
cells, rapidly responded to low oxygen tension by stabilizing HIF-1,
increasing hypoxia responsive gene expression, and stimulating cellular
uptake of glucose, confirming previous observations. In addition, breast
cancer cells increased extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) or
glycolysis during adaptation to low oxygen tension, and this effect was
markedly lower in MCF10A cells. Interestingly, breast cancer cells
exhibited a biphasic response in oxygen consumption rate (OCR) as the
oxygen tension was reduced gradually from 20% to Solid tumors are
characterized by regions of low oxygen tension, which play a central role
in tumor progression and resistance to therapy. The major organelle
affected by reduced oxygen tension is the mitochondrion, which has to
functionally adapt to maintain cellular bioenergetics for the cell
survival. In the present study, a novel experimental approach was
developed to examine the real-time bioenergetic changes during adaptation
to various oxygen tensions ranging from 20% to < 1% oxygen using highly
sensitive extracellular flux technology. Oxygen was gradually removed
from the culture medium, and bioenergetic changes were measured in normal
breast epithelial (MCF10A) and metastatic cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231
and MCF10CA clones). We found that breast cancer cells, but not MCF10A
cells, rapidly responded to low oxygen tension by stabilizing HIF-1,
increasing hypoxia responsive gene expression, and stimulating cellular
uptake of glucose, confirming previous observations. In addition, breast
cancer cells increased extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) or
glycolysis during adaptation to low oxygen tension, and this effect was
markedly lower in MCF10A cells. Interestingly, breast cancer cells
exhibited a biphasic response in oxygen consumption rate (OCR) as the
oxygen tension was reduced gradually from 20% to <1.0%, a response not
previously described. This effect is HIF-1-dependent, as silencing HIF-1
function in cancer cells completely abolished the biphasic response in
OCR and increase in ECAR. Moreover, cancer cells demonstrated the ability
to restore and maintain its OCR steadily at specific oxygen tension
either during deoxygenation or reoxygenation, an effect not observed in
HIF-1 silenced cells. Additional studies confirmed that the initial
stimulation of OCR is due to increased mitochondrial respiration. In
conclusion, our results suggest that HIF-1 provides high degree of
bioenergetic flexibility under different oxygen tensions which may confer
an adaptive advantage in the ever-changing tumor microenvironment as well
as during invasion and metastasis. Moreover, these differences may be
useful in screening novel therapeutic agents that target the
bioenergetics of cancer cells in response to low oxygen tension.

