Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The characterization of anti-breast cancer compounds isolated from
the Juniperus communis.


Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer in the female population
worldwide where approximately 30% of these women will succumb to their
disease. The identification of novel, efficacious and safe anticancer
drugs is thus essential to mitigate the morbidity and mortality
associated with this disease. More recently, the study of anticancer
properties from natural products has regained popularity as natural
entities provide more biodiversity of chemical structures with biological
and medicinal activity. Based on a documented library of the most common
medicinal plants used by the indigenous people of North America, we have
examined the anti-breast cancer properties of extracts from Juniperus
communis (common juniper).Using methanolic extracts from juniper needles
and branches, we conducted bioassay-guided fractionation to assess growth
inhibition of the highly malignant MB231 breast cancer cell line. The
isolation and identification of active juniper constituents were
performed through high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and
standard spectroscopic analysis (1D- and 2D-nuclear magnetic resonance
[NMR] and low-resolution and high-resolution mass spectrometry).We
characterized the diterpene isocupressic acid and the aryltetralin lignan
deoxypodophyllotoxin as very potent inhibitors of cancer cell growth
using dose-response and kinetic cell viability assays. Using a series of
cellular and molecular tests, we also found that isocupressic acid and
deoxypodophyllotoxin block MB231 cell cycling through the suppression of
the ERK/MAPK and the NFB signaling pathways. In addition to the blockade
of the cell's survival cascade, both compounds concomitantly induced
CASPASE-3-dependant apoptosis of MB231 cells within hours of
treatment.Our findings emphasize the potential and importance of natural
products screening for new chemical entities with novel anticancer
activities. Natural products research complemented with the wealth of
information available through the ethnobotanical and ethnopharmacological
knowledge of the indigenous natives will provide new candidate entities
with desirable bioactivities to develop new cancer therapies.

