Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo 3D assay: rapid and reliable replication of the in vivo
anti-tumor efficacy of c-Met inhibitors.


For compounds directed against molecular targets expressed in tumor
cells, the ex vivo 3D tumor clonogenic assay (TCA) is a rapid and
reliable ex vivo assay with a high predictive value for in vivo tumor
sensitivity. Single cell suspensions prepared from patient-derived tumor
xenografts (PDX) growing subcutaneously in nude mice or from cultured
human tumor cell lines are seeded in semisolid medium and tumor colony
formation is monitored in the presence or absence of test compounds over
a period of one to three weeks.Based on experiments with up to 70 PDX, we
have demonstrated that the TCA accurately replicates the in vivo
sensitivity of PDX towards cMet inhibitors across all major tumor
histologies. More specifically, all three NSCLC PDX that regressed in
response to cMet inhibition in in vivo efficacy tests were sensitive to
several cMet inhibitors in the ex vivo TCA. By contrast, data obtained
with a 2D cell proliferation and survival assay did not correlate with
the 3D and in vivo situations, suggesting that cMet function does not
affect cell survival and proliferation on plastic but confers the
capacity for anchorage-independent growth. The correlation of 3D but not
2D data with in vivo sensitivity was confirmed using anti-cMet siRNAs in
selected PDX-derived non-small cell lung cancer cell lines. Preliminary
immunohistochemical analysis revealed that PDX sensitive to cMet
inhibitors expressed high cMet levels while not all PDX expressing high
cMet levels were sensitive to cMet inhibitors.In conclusion, for cMet
inhibitors the TCA replicates in vivo sensitivities of PDX to a high
degree. Due to its short duration the TCA is an excellent tool for the
screening of large numbers of cMet inhibitors and PDX. As all of the PDX
qualified for use in the TCA (>200) have been extensively molecularly
characterised (gene expression, gene copy number variation and mutation
analysis) this assay is also an excellent tool for generating high
quality biomarker hypotheses during the preclinical profiling of
molecules intended for oncology indications.

