Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Further studies on cadmium-adapted lung epithelial cells: evidence
for the attenuation of general stress response, enhancement of
metallothionein-induction response, and loss of p53 expression.


Adaptation is a cellular process in which cells are progressed from the
starting sensitive state to the later adapted state to the exposing
agent. Acute exposure of cells to cadmium (Cd) can cause cell death;
however, chronic exposure of Cd can develop acquired tolerance where cell
death is suppressed. We previously reported that during Cd adaptation in
lung epithelial cells, cells develop tolerance to cell death, generally
due to perturbation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling
pathway and the nonresponsiveness of JNK phosphorylation is critical for
the Cd-tolerance in these cells (1, 2). In this study, we further studied
the properties of these Cd-adapted cells. Our results indicate that
Cd-adapted cells, when compared with Cd-treated parental Cd-sensitive
cells, show negligible general stress response to the same dosage of
cadmium exposure. Moreover, although metallothionein (MT) is induced in
both Cd-sensitive and Cd-adapted cells, Cd-adapted cells show enhanced
MT-induction response and this was not due to MT gene amplification.
Lastly, we showed that the tumor suppressor p53 protein level is severely
abrogated in these Cd-adapted cells, suggesting that the normal p53
function is lost and may account for the death tolerance, genome
instability, as well as the progression of carcinogenesis.

