Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PSPHL and breast cancer in African American women: Causativegene
or population stratification.


Background: The phophoserine phosphatase-like (PSPHL) gene, first
identified as overexpressed in fibroblasts from patients withFanconi
anemia, is expressed at significantly higher levels in breast tumors as
well as stromal tissues from African American women (AAW) compared to
Caucasian women (CW). The function of PSPHL has not been determined, thus
how overexpression of PSPHL impacts tumor etiology or contributes to
outcome disparities in African American women is unclear. Here, we
evaluated the molecular mechanisms driving expression differences between
populations to determine whether expression differences are causative or
represent population stratification.Methods: A PCR-based approach was
used to detect the retention or deletion of a 30-kb segment of 7p11 that
includes the first three exons of PSPHL. Genotypes were determined using
genomic DNA from AAW with invasive breast cancer (n=220), AAW without
breast cancer (n = 352) and CW with invasive breast cancer (n=508). Gene
expression levels were evaluated byqRT-PCR using RNA isolated from breast
tumors from 52 CW and 43 AAW. Genotype frequencies were analyzed using
chi-square analysis and gene expression levels by a Mann-Whitney
U-test;PBackground: The phophoserine phosphatase-like (PSPHL) gene, first
identified as overexpressed in fibroblasts from patients withFanconi
anemia, is expressed at significantly higher levels in breast tumors as
well as stromal tissues from African American women (AAW) compared to
Caucasian women (CW). The function of PSPHL has not been determined, thus
how overexpression of PSPHL impacts tumor etiology or contributes to
outcome disparities in African American women is unclear. Here, we
evaluated the molecular mechanisms driving expression differences between
populations to determine whether expression differences are causative or
represent population stratification.Methods: A PCR-based approach was
used to detect the retention or deletion of a 30-kb segment of 7p11 that
includes the first three exons of PSPHL. Genotypes were determined using
genomic DNA from AAW with invasive breast cancer (n=220), AAW without
breast cancer (n = 352) and CW with invasive breast cancer (n=508). Gene
expression levels were evaluated byqRT-PCR using RNA isolated from breast
tumors from 52 CW and 43 AAW. Genotype frequencies were analyzed using
chi-square analysis and gene expression levels by a Mann-Whitney
U-test;P<0.05 was used to define significance.Results: Gene expression
levels were correlated with the presence or absence of the 30-kb deletion
of 7p11: patients homozygous for the deletion had no detectable
expression of PSPHL, while patients heterozygous for the deletion had
expression levels 2.5-fold lower than those homozygous for retention of
PSPHL. When the frequency of the deletion was evaluated by ethnicity, 62%
of CW were homozygous for the deletion of PSPHL compared to 5% of AAW
with invasive breast cancer (PBackground: The phophoserine
phosphatase-like (PSPHL) gene, first identified as overexpressed in
fibroblasts from patients withFanconi anemia, is expressed at
significantly higher levels in breast tumors as well as stromal tissues
from African American women (AAW) compared to Caucasian women (CW). The
function of PSPHL has not been determined, thus how overexpression of
PSPHL impacts tumor etiology or contributes to outcome disparities in
African American women is unclear. Here, we evaluated the molecular
mechanisms driving expression differences between populations to
determine whether expression differences are causative or represent
population stratification.Methods: A PCR-based approach was used to
detect the retention or deletion of a 30-kb segment of 7p11 that includes
the first three exons of PSPHL. Genotypes were determined using genomic
DNA from AAW with invasive breast cancer (n=220), AAW without breast
cancer (n = 352) and CW with invasive breast cancer (n=508). Gene
expression levels were evaluated byqRT-PCR using RNA isolated from breast
tumors from 52 CW and 43 AAW. Genotype frequencies were analyzed using
chi-square analysis and gene expression levels by a Mann-Whitney
U-test;P<0.05 was used to define significance.Results: Gene expression
levels were correlated with the presence or absence of the 30-kb deletion
of 7p11: patients homozygous for the deletion had no detectable
expression of PSPHL, while patients heterozygous for the deletion had
expression levels 2.5-fold lower than those homozygous for retention of
PSPHL. When the frequency of the deletion was evaluated by ethnicity, 62%
of CW were homozygous for the deletion of PSPHL compared to 5% of AAW
with invasive breast cancer (P<0.00005). In contrast, genotype
frequencies did not differ significantly between AAW with invasive breast
cancer compared to AAW controls (P=0.116).Conclusions: The deletion of
30-kb of chromosome 7p11 prevents expression of PSPHL. The prevalence of
the deletion allele is 77% in CW compared to 23% in AAW, suggesting that
this 30-kb deletion and subsequent disruption of PSPHL may be a derived
trait in Caucasians. Although the deletion frequency and associated
expression differ significantly betweenAAW and CW with invasive breast
cancer, the similar frequency of the deletion allele in AAW with and
without invasive breast cancer suggests that these genetic differences
represent population stratification, and do not contribute to outcome
differences between AAW and CW with breast cancer.

