Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin prolongs survival in a K-rasLA2 lung cancer mouse model
by inhibiting cancer stem cells and tumor growth.


Mutations in K-Ras are characteristic of human lung cancers and occur
almost exclusively in smokers. Metformin, which is widely prescribed for
the treatment of type II diabetes mellitus, may reduce lung cancer
incidence in diabetics. We previously showed that metformin prevents
K-Ras-mediated lung tumorigenesis in mice exposed to tobacco-carcinogen
in an AMPK-independent manner. To elucidate further mechanisms of tumor
prevention and estimate the survival impact of metformin on mutant
K-Ras-mediated-lung tumorigenesis, we treated mutant K-Ras transgenic
mice (K-RasLA2), with oral metformin. Metformin reduced tumor
multiplicity by 48.9% and increased overall survival by 34% (median
survival 191 days (control) vs 257 days (metformin); HR=0.27; 95% CI
0.11-0.68; p=0.009). Metformin decreased the number of bronchioloalveolar
cells (BASCs), which are recognized as the cells of origin for lung
adenocarcinomas initiated by oncogenic K-ras, as well as expression of
cancer stem cell markers such as OCT4 and SOX2. Markers of cellular
proliferation such as cyclin D1 and Ki67 were also decreased in lung
tumors from metformin-treated mice. Metformin inhibited activation of
multiple receptor tyrosine kinases as well as Ras-Raf signaling.
Collectively, these data confirm that metformin inhibits K-Ras-induced
lung tumorigenesis and identifies tumor-initiating cells as targets of
metformin whose inhibition may underlie the ability of metformin to
prolong survival. Clinical chemoprevention trials using metformin are
warranted for high-risk populations likely to develop K-Ras mutations
such as current or former smokers.

