Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HSF1 facilitates cell transformation by enhancing the expression
of extracellular proteins.


The expression level or the activity of heat shock factor-1 (HSF1), a
master transcriptional regulator of the heat shock response, is elevated
in cancer cell lines and tumor tissues. Loss of HSF1 function has been
demonstrated to prevent oncogenesis. We thus examined whether and how
HSF1 induces cell transformation using anchorage-independent growth as a
surrogate for transformation phenotype. CGL2 cells overexpressing HSF1
(CGL2-wtHSF1) were more proficient to form colonies in soft agar than the
parental control cells (CGL2-Neo). Cells stably depleted of HSF1
(CGL2-shHSF1), on the other hand, were unable to form colonies in soft
agar. The diminished ability of CGL2-shHSF1 cells to grow in soft agar
was rescued by ectopic expression of wild-type HSF1 but not an S326A
substitution mutant or a C-terminal (transactivation domain) deletion
mutant, indicating that phosphorylation at S326 and/or the
transactivation activity of HSF1 was required for its ability to enhance
anchorage-independent growth. In addition, conditioned medium collected
from HSF1-overexpressing cells could induce anchorage-independent growth
of HSF1-depleted cells. These results indicated that HSF1 might enhance
cell transformation by transactivating the expression of particular
extracellular proteins.

