Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of specific apoptotic mediators predicts sensitivity to
combined MEK and PI3K inhibition in KRAS mutant non-small cell lung
cancer according to TP53 mutational status.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death
world-wide. Though targeted therapies have been developed for NSCLC with
activating EGFR mutations or the EML4-ALK translocation, no highly
effective targeted therapies exist for cancers harboring activating KRAS
mutations. We previously observed that concomitant use of MEK and PI3K
inhibitors (MEKi/PI3Ki) led to tumor regressions in a mouse model of KRAS
mutant NSCLC, and clinical trials investigating this strategy are
underway. However, KRAS mutant NSCLCs are a heterogeneous group of
cancers, and the molecular determinants of sensitivity to MEKi/PI3Ki are
unknown. Here we report that human KRAS mutant NSCLC cell lines exhibit
variability in responsiveness to MEKi/PI3Ki resulting from differential
apoptotic responses. We identified key pro- and anti-apoptotic regulators
regulators of the apoptotic response induced by MEKi/PI3Ki. Loss of the
apoptotic response due to down-regulation of pro-apoptotic mediators was
associated with acquired resistance to MEKi/PI3Ki. The responsiveness of
KRAS mutant NSCLCs to combined MEKi/PI3Ki could be predicted by the
relative expression levels of specific apoptotic regulators, depending on
TP53 mutational status. These results reveal genotype-specific mechanisms
of apoptosis necessary for responsiveness to targeted therapies and
suggest biomarkers for predicting responsiveness of KRAS mutant NSCLC to
MEKi/PI3Ki.

