Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selection of non-phophorylated peptide inhibitors of BRCA1.


A growing body of literature suggests Breast Cancer-Associated Protein 1
(BRCA1) is important not only as a cause, but also as a target in the
quest for cancer treatment. BRCA1 deficient cells treated with radiation
as well as PARP inhibitors and other chemotherapeutics demonstrate a
greater sensitivity than cells with wild type BRCA1. Inhibitors of BRCA1
would take advantage of this synthetic lethality and represent a
significant advance in cancer treatment as well as an understanding of
the biology of DNA repair. Despite significant study of BRCA1 protein and
function, it is a large protein (208 KDa) that is still largely
uncharacterized, but its N- and C-terminal domains have been described by
significant structural data. The BRCT (BRCA1 C-Terminal) Domain is a
phosphoprotein binding domain that is commonly mutated or lost in cancers
and has a binding cleft seemingly very suitable for drug design. Small
molecule screens have been conducted against this domain, but the
resulting hits with moderate affinity have not been shown to induce BRCA1
deficient phenotypes. Phosphopeptides have also been studied as potential
BRCA1 inhibitors, yet despite some having affinities in the mid-nanomolar
range the presence of a phosphate is not without its pharmacologic
challenges. We generated an mRNA display library with 1.3 x 1013 cyclized
peptides covalently attached to the mRNA that encoded them. Eight rounds
of selection exposing the library to a GST-BRCT fusion resulted in
non-phosphorylated peptides that bind to a BRCT domain of BRCA1. The
sequences resulting from the selection have common homologies and initial
characterization has shown that these peptides may be the first viable
non-phosphoserine containing inhibitors of BRCA1.

