Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The involvement of MSK1 in non-canonical activation of NF-KB in
the late phase of UVB irradiation.


Nuclear Factor Kappa-B (NF-KB) is a transcription factor that plays a
crucial role in controlling expression of genes involved in the immune
and inflammatory responses as well a being a key component in the onset
of a larger number of cancers. One activator of NF-KB that has been
studied, but still remains controversial, is that of ultraviolet B light
(UVB). In this study we demonstrate that mitogen- and-stress activated
protein kinase (MSK1) is responsible for a non-canonical late-phase
activation of NF-KB. Following UVB irradiation (50 mJ/cm2) MSK1 is
activated via phosphorylation at both 6 and 24 h time points.
Investigations into the signaling pathways upstream of MSK1 through the
use of specific inhibitors for mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase
(MEK)(PD 98059) and p38 (SB 203580) revealed that both kinases are
required for full phosphorylation during the late-phase (24 h) while p38
is predominately responsible for phosphorylation during the early-phase
(6 h). Electromobilty shift assays (EMSA) for NF-KB binding affinity
showed that inhibition of MSK1 via inhibitor H89 resulted in a marked
reduction in binding affinity. Inhibition of p38 also coincided with a
reduction in NF-KB binding affinity. Interestingly, supershift assays
implicate that the p65 isoform of NF-KB is predominantly involved in
late-phase activation in response to UVB irradiation. Analysis of cell
viability showed that decreased viability was correlated with MSK1
inhibition and decreased NF-KB binding affinity. Together, the results of
these studies shed light onto a novel pathway of MSK1 mediated late-phase
activation of NF-KB in response to UVB irradiation.

