Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of osteopontin in the sensitivity of malignant
pleural mesothelioma cells to pemetrexed.


Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is one of the fatal
cancers associated with asbestos exposure.Pemetrexed (PEM) is currently
recommended as one of the antitumor drugs consisted of standard therapies
for MPM.However, the mechanism of the sensitivity of MPM to PEM remains
unclear. Methods: We analyzed the antitumor effects of PEM in six MPM
cell lines by MTS assay. To identify genes associated with drug
sensitivity,we conducted gene expression profiling on the same set of
cell lines using Affymetrix HG-U133A GeneChips. Pathway analysis was
performed to provide a viewpoint of the biological function of the genes.
Results: Three cell lines were sensitive to PEM. Eighteen transcripts and
fourteen genes identified by Gene-chips were significantly correlated
with sensitivity to PEM. Pathway analysis revealed that SPP1/OPN was an
important target in PEM sensitivity. Overexpression of SPP1 was observed
in the sensitive cells by Western blotting. Introduction of SPP1 by
lentiviral vector significantly enhanced the invasion activities of MPM
cells. Expression of SPP1/OPN and AKT phosphorylation were significantly
decreased after PEM treatment of the PEM-sensitive cells. PEM treatment
with SPP1/OPN knockdown inhibited the PEM-induced cell growth inhibitory
effect in PEM-sensitive cells. Conclusions: Our results suggest that SPP1
may be used as a single predictive biomarker of the effectiveness of PEM
treatment in MPM. Patient selection based on SPP1/OPN expression may be
useful for future clinical development of PEM therapy for MPM.

