Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathway profiling for personalized medicine: Comparison of two
immunoassays.


Cancer therapy is evolving to a detailed molecular analysis of the
patient's tumor followed by treatment with selective drug(s) targeting
the individual properties of the tumor based upon identification of
prognostic and predictive biomarkers. This requires comprehensive, highly
sensitive test systems. We therefore sought to develop a sensitive
diagnostic test for functionally profiling a spectrum of signaling
pathway proteins in tumor samples. Here, we evaluated and compared two
assay platforms: CEER (Collaborative Enzyme Enhanced
Reactive-Immunoassay; Prometheus Labaratories) and MSD (Meso Scale
Discovery).Breast, lung, and prostate cancers as well as glioblastoma and
melanoma model cell lines (in all 10 cell lines) with various oncogenic
pathway signatures were treated with different concentrations of PI3K
inhibitor (BAY 806946) or an inhibitor targeting HER1 and HER2
(Lapatinib). Cells were lysed and the activation status as well as
abundance of ten pathway proteins (HER1, HER2, cMET, PI3K, AKT, ERK, MEK,
PRAS40, RPS6, and P70S6K) was measured by MSD at Bayer in Berlin and by
CEER in a blinded fashion at Prometheus Laboratories. Target-specific
inhibition (IC50) and downstream signal modulations were determined and
compared. Overall we found a high concordance between the two assays.
While target specific inhibitions were observed in relevant cell lines,
varying mechanisms of treatment resistance due to redundant pathway
activation, feedback loop or pathway cross talks were observed between
the PI3K/AKT and RAS/ERK pathways.This study shows that sensitive
immunoassays are a suitable tool for the detection and monitoring of
biomarkers and provides new insights into the mode of action of targeted
agents. Comprehensive profiling of signaling pathways holds promise as an
approach to personalize selection of anticancer therapy.

