Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostaglandin and associated eicosanoid dose response to omega-3
fatty acid (FA) diet in rat colon.


Introduction: Prostaglandin (PG) E2 has been linked to higher risk of
colorectal carcinogenesis. Our previous in vitro data (Wada et al. J Biol
Chem 2007;282;22254) demonstrated reduction of cellular eicosanoids by
substituting the n-3 fatty acid EPA for the more common n-6 FA
arachidonic acid (AA) as substrate for the cyclooxygenases (Cox). We
tested the hypothesis that EPA substitution for n-6 FA in vivo will
reduce procarcinogenic eicosanoids in rats.Methods: F344 male rats were
fed EPA: n-6 FA ratio diets of 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 for 5 weeks.
Eicosanoids (PGs and lipoxins) in proximal, transverse and distal colonic
tissue and urinary PG metabolites were assayed on LC-MS-MS. Fatty acids
in serum and tissue were measured by GC-MS.Results: Serum EPA:AA ratio
(means(SD)) increased linearly from 0.02(0.004) at baseline (no EPA) to
0.98(0.32) EPA:n-6 ratio of 0.6. Colonic EPA:AA ratios increased from
0.03(0.01) to 0.41(0.15) in distal colon. Representative eicosanoid
concentrations (g/mg protein) in distal colon tissue with associated
EPA:n-6 diets in the Table suggest rapid eicosanoid reduction at lower
dietary EPA:n-6 ratios and then flattening of the dose response at higher
ratios. The distal colon contained the lowest eicosanoid concentrations
compared to transverse and proximal colon. Urinary PGE metabolite was
reduced from 13.42(1.95) ng/mg creatinine (dietary EPA:n-6 FA=0) to
7.67(0.62) ng/mg creatinine (dietary EPA:n-6 FA=0.6).Conclusion: Diet
induced substitution of omega-3 for omega-6 substrates of Cox and
lipoxygenases in F-344 rats causes a rapid, non-linear decline in colonic
PGE2 and lipoxin products. PGE3 increases linearly with omega-3 FA dose.
These data support the hypothesis that reduction in carcinogenesis stress
induced by eicosanoids can be modulated by a dietary intervention in vivo.
Eicosanoids in rat colon

