Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnosing small round cell tumors using whole transcriptome
expression profiling.


INTRODUCTION: Differential diagnosis of malignant small round cell tumors
(SRCTs) can be challenging due to their undifferentiated character. Their
primitive histopathological features often render the identification of
morphological features difficult and therefore, no definitive diagnosis
may be possible. This is crucial in pediatric SRCTs as disparate
approaches to therapy are used for distinct tumor types based on a
patient's risk. This study sought to discover and implement diagnostic
signatures for a variety of SRCTs using whole transcriptome profiling.
METHODS: RNAs from 115 prospectively-obtained pediatric SRCTs were
profiled on Affymetrix Human Exon microarrays. These comprised of Ewing
sarcoma (n=10), neuroblastoma (n=10), PAX-FKHR fusion-negative
rhabdomyosarcoma (F-RMS, n=20), PAX-FKHR fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma
(F+RMS, n=19), lymphoma (n=10), Wilms tumor (n=10), clear cell sarcoma
(n=7), rhabdoid tumor (n=9), medulloblastoma (n=10), and osteosarcoma
(n=10). Expressions of 1,393,765 probe selection regions (PSRs) were
analyzed. Binary screens were performed for each tumor type to identify
diagnostic PSRs. Selected PSRs were combined as a signature, and its
diagnostic potential was assessed by k-nearest neighbor algorithms.
Primers designed to interrogate loci corresponding to the diagnostic PSRs
were tested on cell lines and cases representing the various tumor types
using the WaferGen SmartChip MyDesign platform. RESULTS: Binary screens
identified hundreds of diagnostic PSRs corresponding to annotated and
unannotated transcripts for each tumor type. To limit signature size, the
top 6 PSRs were chosen for each tumor type. 17%-83% of features in each
signature represented non-exonic content. Hierarchical clustering
demonstrated the ability of each signature to diagnose the corresponding
tumor by binary and multiplex analyses. Discrimination analysis showed
that signatures for Ewing sarcoma, neuroblastoma, F+RMS, lymphoma and
osteosarcoma were the best performing and most exclusive. Overall, each
tumor signature had robust diagnostic potential (binary discrimination,
all pINTRODUCTION: Differential diagnosis of malignant small round cell
tumors (SRCTs) can be challenging due to their undifferentiated
character. Their primitive histopathological features often render the
identification of morphological features difficult and therefore, no
definitive diagnosis may be possible. This is crucial in pediatric SRCTs
as disparate approaches to therapy are used for distinct tumor types
based on a patient's risk. This study sought to discover and implement
diagnostic signatures for a variety of SRCTs using whole transcriptome
profiling. METHODS: RNAs from 115 prospectively-obtained pediatric SRCTs
were profiled on Affymetrix Human Exon microarrays. These comprised of
Ewing sarcoma (n=10), neuroblastoma (n=10), PAX-FKHR fusion-negative
rhabdomyosarcoma (F-RMS, n=20), PAX-FKHR fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma
(F+RMS, n=19), lymphoma (n=10), Wilms tumor (n=10), clear cell sarcoma
(n=7), rhabdoid tumor (n=9), medulloblastoma (n=10), and osteosarcoma
(n=10). Expressions of 1,393,765 probe selection regions (PSRs) were
analyzed. Binary screens were performed for each tumor type to identify
diagnostic PSRs. Selected PSRs were combined as a signature, and its
diagnostic potential was assessed by k-nearest neighbor algorithms.
Primers designed to interrogate loci corresponding to the diagnostic PSRs
were tested on cell lines and cases representing the various tumor types
using the WaferGen SmartChip MyDesign platform. RESULTS: Binary screens
identified hundreds of diagnostic PSRs corresponding to annotated and
unannotated transcripts for each tumor type. To limit signature size, the
top 6 PSRs were chosen for each tumor type. 17%-83% of features in each
signature represented non-exonic content. Hierarchical clustering
demonstrated the ability of each signature to diagnose the corresponding
tumor by binary and multiplex analyses. Discrimination analysis showed
that signatures for Ewing sarcoma, neuroblastoma, F+RMS, lymphoma and
osteosarcoma were the best performing and most exclusive. Overall, each
tumor signature had robust diagnostic potential (binary discrimination,
all p<0.0001). To explore the possibility of translating the signatures
to a quantitative PCR platform, RNA from 8 cell lines corresponding to 5
tumor types were used: TC32, CHLA10, TC252 (Ewing sarcoma); RD (F-RMS);
Rh30, JR (F+RMS); REH (surrogate for lymphoma); and Saos-2
(osteosarcoma). Diagnostic primers sets showed substantial efficacy in
distinguishing cell lines and cases corresponding to the tumor type of
interest when compared with other samples. CONCLUSIONS: Using pediatric
SRCTs as an example, this study illustrates that whole transcriptome
analysis can reveal potential transcripts that can robustly diagnose
malignancies that pose a histological challenge. Such concise genomic
signatures can be translated to quantitative PCR-based assays for routine
clinical implementation.

