Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying tumor driving signaling pathways for companion
diagnostics using computational pathway models.


IntroductionTargeted drug treatment requires reliable companion
diagnostics for therapy selection. Genomic and transcriptomic data can
provide input for this, provided tools exist to convert this complex data
into meaningful clinical information. We develop computational models of
oncogenic pathways, to assess which one drives tumor growth in an
individual patient and what is the causing (epi)genetic
defect.Computational pathway modelsBased on a selection of experimentally
validated direct target genes, we built initial models of the Wnt, ER, AR
and Hedgehog pathways, covering their transcriptional program. We have
modeled each pathway by a Bayesian network, which interprets the target
genes mRNA levels (Affymetrix U133Plus2.0), and infers a probability that
the respective pathway is active in a certain sample. Model parameters
are based on literature insights and experimental data.ResultsA first Wnt
model, calibrated on cell line data, validated perfectly on 32 normal
colon samples and 32 colon adenomas from patients (GSE8671). A second Wnt
model, calibrated on these 64 patient samples, correctly predicted no Wnt
activity in all 44 normal colon samples, and Wnt activity in 97 of 101
colon cancer samples from GSE20916.Next, we tested the second Wnt model
on other cancer types. On 25 breast cancer cell lines from GSE12777 with
known Wnt status, the model correctly identified the two samples with an
active pathway. On two patient data sets (GSE12276, n=204; GSE21653,
n=266) Wnt activity was predicted in a higher number of basal samples
compared to other subtypes (p=0.021 and p=2.7e-5, respectively), in line
with increasing evidence for Wnt activity in this subtype. Finally, tests
on liver (GSE9843, GSE6764) and medulloblastoma sets (GSE10327) confirm
the power of these models to predict Wnt pathway activity.A first ER
model was calibrated on estrogen-deprived and -stimulated MCF7 cell lines
(GSE8697). Applied on breast cancer cell line data from GSE21618,
increased incidence of ER pathway activity was found in
tamoxifen-sensitive cell lines compared to resistant ones. On breast
cancer patient data (GSE12276, GSE9195, GSE6532) the model showed no
pathway activity in ER- samples, and an active ER pathway in 26-38% of
the ER+ samples. Within the latter group, model-predicted ER activity
correlated with improved survival. Clinical utility studies to correlate
ER activity to hormone therapy response are in progress.Finally, the AR
model showed promising results on prostate cancer cell lines (GSE34211,
GSE36133), as did the Hedgehog model on medulloblastoma samples
(GSE10327).ConclusionOur computational pathway models predict functional
activity of oncogenic pathways for an individual patient based on mRNA
data, complementary to existing molecular and histopathology staining
tests. Clinical utility for therapy response prediction is currently
being validated with clinical partners.

