Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA-10b promotes medulloblastoma proliferation and survival via
Bcl-2.


Introduction: The role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in the pathology of
medulloblastoma (MB), the most common malignant brain tumor in children,
is being elucidated at present. miRNA expression profiling studies have
revealed a number of miRNAs implicated in medulloblastoma initiation and
progression by controlling the expression of various genes responsible
for cell proliferation or cell death. The effect of miRNA-10b on MB
growth and proliferation through transcriptional induction of Bcl-2, an
anti-apoptotic cellular proto-oncogene and tumor promoter, was explored
in this study.Methods: Assays were carried out using six established MB
cell lines and 13 primary MB samples. A screening cancer-specific miRNA
array identified miRNA-10b as highly expressed in MB compared to normal
cerebellum. Real-time PCR showed that miRNA-10b is significantly
up-regulated (42-100 fold) compared to the normal cerebellum in all MB
cell lines. Two MB cell lines (DAOY and UW228) were transiently
transfected with control miRNA, miRNA-10b inhibitor, and miRNA-10b mimic
for 48 to 72 hrs. The transfected cells were subjected to RT-PCR, MTT,
apoptosis, clonogenic assay, and western blot analysis.Results:
Transfection of miRNA-10b inhibitor induced a significant down-regulation
of miRNA-10b expression in the MB cell lines, while miRNA-10b mimic
induced miRNA-10b expression as measured by RT-PCR. Down-regulation of
miRNA-10b expression resulted in a significant down-regulation of mRNA
and protein levels of Bcl-2 and Mcl-1, decreased proliferation (p 0.001)
and induced apoptosis (p 0.001) as compared to control. Inhibition of
miRNA-10B further blocked the colony-forming capability of MB cells (p
0.001). miRNA-10b mimic transfection exerted an opposite effect.
Down-regulation of miRNA-10b resulted in abrogation of phosphorylation of
Bcl-2 at Ser70, a site previously reported to be critical in inhibiting
apoptosis. Analyses of miRNA-10b levels in 13 primary MB samples revealed
that the 2 patients with high levels of miRNA-10b (more than 200-fold
increase versus control) had multiple recurrences (4.5) and died within 5
years of diagnosis, compared with the 11 patients with low levels of
miRNA-10b who had a mean of 1.2 recurrences and 40% long-term
survival.Conclusions: In conclusion, our data indicate that miRNA-10b may
act as an oncomir in MB tumorigenesis, and reveal a previously unreported
mechanism with Bcl-2 as an important mediator of miRNA-10b activity in MB
cell survival. Targeting of miRNA-10b may provide a novel therapeutic
approach in the treatment of MB.

