Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The relationship between the 14-3-3zeta expression pattern and the
clinicopathological variables of the 192 gastric cancer patients.


Gastric cancer remains one of the most common malignant diseases, despite
its steady declining trend worldwide. Overall, gastric cancer mortality
is estimated to be 700000 cases annually (10.4% of all cancer related
death), ranking second only after lung cancer. 14-3-3zeta, a member of
14-3-3 proteins, have important roles in a wide range of biological
processes through the interactions with >100 key proteins, such as
FOXO3a, Bad and CCND1. Recent studies have revealed that up-regulation of
14-3-3zeta contribute to the transformation phenotype of breast and lung
cancer. However, the relevance of 14-3-3zeta expression in gastric
carcinogenesis remained poorly understood.In this study, we aimed to
clarify the clinicopathological significance of 14-3-3zeta expression in
patients with gastric cancer. A total of 192 gastric cancer specimens
were obtained from patients undergoing curative surgery at Oita
University Hospital. The expression levels of 14-3-3zeta were
investigated by immunohistochemistry. The relationship between the
14-3-3zeta expression pattern and the clinicopathological variables of
the gastric cancer patients were analyzed.14-3-3zeta was strongly
expressed in 102of the 192 cases. Strong expression of 14-3-3zeta was
correlated with Lymph node metastasis, Histological subtype and Tumor
stage (Fisher's exact test, pGastric cancer remains one of the most
common malignant diseases, despite its steady declining trend worldwide.
Overall, gastric cancer mortality is estimated to be 700000 cases
annually (10.4% of all cancer related death), ranking second only after
lung cancer. 14-3-3zeta, a member of 14-3-3 proteins, have important
roles in a wide range of biological processes through the interactions
with >100 key proteins, such as FOXO3a, Bad and CCND1. Recent studies
have revealed that up-regulation of 14-3-3zeta contribute to the
transformation phenotype of breast and lung cancer. However, the
relevance of 14-3-3zeta expression in gastric carcinogenesis remained
poorly understood.In this study, we aimed to clarify the
clinicopathological significance of 14-3-3zeta expression in patients
with gastric cancer. A total of 192 gastric cancer specimens were
obtained from patients undergoing curative surgery at Oita University
Hospital. The expression levels of 14-3-3zeta were investigated by
immunohistochemistry. The relationship between the 14-3-3zeta expression
pattern and the clinicopathological variables of the gastric cancer
patients were analyzed.14-3-3zeta was strongly expressed in 102of the 192
cases. Strong expression of 14-3-3zeta was correlated with Lymph node
metastasis, Histological subtype and Tumor stage (Fisher's exact test,
p<0.05). These results suggest that up-regulation of 14-3-3zeta is
associated with the clinically malignant features of gastric cancer.

