Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition predicts prognosis In
clinical gastric cancer.


Background;Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is thought to play
an important role in cancer invasion and metastasis and could be a
critical target to improve survival. Recently, EMT has been actively
studied in various cancers. In this study, we explored the impact of EMT
on clinical prognosis of gastric cancer.Methods;Eleven gastric cancer
cell lines (N87, NUGC2, MKN45, NUGC4, KATOIII, MKN74, SC-6-JCK, GCIY,
MKN28, AZ521 and MKN1) and one hundred sixteen patients who underwent
surgery for gastric cancer in our hospital were investigated in this
study. The mRNA expression level of an epithelial marker (E-cadherin), a
mesenchymal marker (vimentin) and several transcription factors known to
induce EMT were measured by quantitative real-time PCR. EMT status of
each gastric cancer patient was determined by calculating the V/E ratio
(vimentin mRNA expression divided by E-cadherin expression in cancerous
tissues) and the correlation between EMT status and clinicopathological
factors and prognosis were analyzed. Results;86 patients were classified
as having epithelial tumors and 30 patients as having mesenchymal tumors.
Mesenchymal tumor type was significantly associated with pathological
diffuse type cancer (P = 0.0002) and stage IV (P = 0.046). On
multivariate analysis, tumor size ( 65mm) (P = 0.013), T classification
(T3/4) (P = 0.020), positive peritoneal washing cytology or peritoneal
metastasis (P = 0.0002) and EMT status (mesenchymal phenotype) (P =
0.043) were independent prognostic factors for gastric cancer patients.
Seven of the gastric cancer cell lines were classified as epithelial and
four were classified as mesenchymal. Among the five transcription factors
(Twist, Slug, Snail, Zeb-1 and Zeb-2) analyzed, Zeb-1 mRNA expression was
significantly correlated with mesenchymal phenotype and the V/E ratio (r
= 0.708, P = 0.015). These results indicated that Zeb-1 could play a key
role in EMT for gastric cancer cell lines. Zeb-1 mRNA expression was
therefore measured by real-time PCR in cancerous tissues from patients,
and the patients were divided into low (n =84) and high (n = 32)
expression groups. Not surprisingly, we found a significant correlation
between V/E ratio and Zeb-1 mRNA expression (r = 0.727, P
Background;Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is thought to play
an important role in cancer invasion and metastasis and could be a
critical target to improve survival. Recently, EMT has been actively
studied in various cancers. In this study, we explored the impact of EMT
on clinical prognosis of gastric cancer.Methods;Eleven gastric cancer
cell lines (N87, NUGC2, MKN45, NUGC4, KATOIII, MKN74, SC-6-JCK, GCIY,
MKN28, AZ521 and MKN1) and one hundred sixteen patients who underwent
surgery for gastric cancer in our hospital were investigated in this
study. The mRNA expression level of an epithelial marker (E-cadherin), a
mesenchymal marker (vimentin) and several transcription factors known to
induce EMT were measured by quantitative real-time PCR. EMT status of
each gastric cancer patient was determined by calculating the V/E ratio
(vimentin mRNA expression divided by E-cadherin expression in cancerous
tissues) and the correlation between EMT status and clinicopathological
factors and prognosis were analyzed. Results;86 patients were classified
as having epithelial tumors and 30 patients as having mesenchymal tumors.
Mesenchymal tumor type was significantly associated with pathological
diffuse type cancer (P = 0.0002) and stage IV (P = 0.046). On
multivariate analysis, tumor size ( 65mm) (P = 0.013), T classification
(T3/4) (P = 0.020), positive peritoneal washing cytology or peritoneal
metastasis (P = 0.0002) and EMT status (mesenchymal phenotype) (P =
0.043) were independent prognostic factors for gastric cancer patients.
Seven of the gastric cancer cell lines were classified as epithelial and
four were classified as mesenchymal. Among the five transcription factors
(Twist, Slug, Snail, Zeb-1 and Zeb-2) analyzed, Zeb-1 mRNA expression was
significantly correlated with mesenchymal phenotype and the V/E ratio (r
= 0.708, P = 0.015). These results indicated that Zeb-1 could play a key
role in EMT for gastric cancer cell lines. Zeb-1 mRNA expression was
therefore measured by real-time PCR in cancerous tissues from patients,
and the patients were divided into low (n =84) and high (n = 32)
expression groups. Not surprisingly, we found a significant correlation
between V/E ratio and Zeb-1 mRNA expression (r = 0.727, P < 0.0001). High
Zeb-1 expression was also significantly associated with age ( 63),
pathological diffuse type and number of lymph node metastasis (n 16), (P
= 0.036, P = 0.035, P = 0.018, respectively). Finally, patients in the
high-expression group had significantly poorer survival than those in the
low-expression group (P = 0.0071).Conclusion;EMT is a critical prognostic
factor for gastric cancer. Zeb-1 is an important EMT-inducing
transcription factor and might be a therapeutic target for patients with
gastric cancer.

