Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential BMP4 and GREM1 protein expression in uterine
leiomyosarcoma and leiomyoma.


Background:Uterine leiomyosarcoma (ULMS) and leiomyoma (ULM) are smooth
muscle tumors with distinct clinical behavior. Little is known about the
factors that influence these tumors biology. Differential diagnosis among
low grade ULMS and the several clinical forms of ULM is a challenge both
in laboratory and pathological routine. Thus, the identification of new
molecular markers can help in the differential diagnosis between ULM from
ULMS and clinical management. Our aim was to evaluate expression of bone
morphogenetic protein - 4 (BMP-4) and Gremlin-1 (GREM1) in uterine
leiomyosarcoma and leiomyoma (including leiomyoma with atypia) using
immunohistochemistry. Method: 57 patients with ULMS and 30 with ULM,
among them10 ULM with atypia (ULMA) were select. The tissues were used in
tissue microarray construction. Immunohistochemistry reaction was
performed with monoclonal antibody against BMP-4 and GREM-1 and evaluated
using semi-quantitative method.Results: BMP-4 was positive in 43% of the
ULMS, 5% ULM and 80% ULMA, respectively. GREM-1 was positive in 67% of
the ULMS, 20% ULM and 10% ULMA. BMP-4 is a potent growth factor that is
involved in many important biological processes. Gremlin-1 can
specifically bind to BMP-4 precursor protein inside cells, which prevents
the production and secretion of mature BMP-4. This regulation determines
BMP-4 biological effects on cells in the local microenvironment.However,
the molecular mechanism of GREM-1/BMP-4 interaction remains
unexplored.Conclusion: Ours preliminary results showed that expression of
BMP-4 and GREM-1 play an important role in uterine smooth tumors, in
while atypical leiomyomas presented higher levels of BMP-4 protein
expression and lower levels of GREM-1. However, the role of these
proteins interactions must be clarified.

