Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Temporal trends, predictors, and outcome of chemotherapy in
elderly women with advanced stage endometrial cancer.


Objective. Randomized clinical trials have suggested that adjuvant
chemotherapy improves survival for women with advanced stage (III-IV)
endometrial cancer. Despite the fact the endometrial cancer is common in
the elderly, a minority of women >65 years of age were represented in
these trials. We performed a population-based analysis to determine the
use and impact on survival of adjuvant chemotherapy in elderly women with
advanced stage endometrial cancer. Methods. The Surveillance
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)-Medicare database was utilized to
identify women diagnosed with stage III-IV endometrial cancer diagnosed
from 1998-2007. Only those patients who had undergone a hysterectomy were
included. The use of chemotherapy within 6 months of diagnosis and its
impact on survival was examined using multivariable logistic regression
and Cox proportional hazards models. Results. A total of 1819 women
including 1193 with stage III and 626 with stage IV tumors were
identified. Adjuvant chemotherapy was given to 46% of women. Use of
chemotherapy increased with time from 42% in 1998 to 63% in 2007
(PObjective. Randomized clinical trials have suggested that adjuvant
chemotherapy improves survival for women with advanced stage (III-IV)
endometrial cancer. Despite the fact the endometrial cancer is common in
the elderly, a minority of women >65 years of age were represented in
these trials. We performed a population-based analysis to determine the
use and impact on survival of adjuvant chemotherapy in elderly women with
advanced stage endometrial cancer. Methods. The Surveillance
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)-Medicare database was utilized to
identify women diagnosed with stage III-IV endometrial cancer diagnosed
from 1998-2007. Only those patients who had undergone a hysterectomy were
included. The use of chemotherapy within 6 months of diagnosis and its
impact on survival was examined using multivariable logistic regression
and Cox proportional hazards models. Results. A total of 1819 women
including 1193 with stage III and 626 with stage IV tumors were
identified. Adjuvant chemotherapy was given to 46% of women. Use of
chemotherapy increased with time from 42% in 1998 to 63% in 2007
(P<0.0001). By 2007, 54% of women with endometrioid tumors, 82% with
serous tumors and 80% with carcinosarcomas received adjuvant
chemotherapy. Use of whole pelvic radiotherapy decreased slightly from
40% in 1998 to 37% in 2007 while use of brachytherapy was stable at 22%.
In a multivariable regression model, later year of diagnosis,
non-endometrioid histology, residence in the eastern U.S., and stage IV
disease were associated with receipt of chemotherapy while older women
were less likely to receive chemotherapy (P65 years of age receive
chemotherapy. In addition to year of diagnosis, stage and histology are
the strongest predictors of receipt of chemotherapy. Among elderly women
with endometrial cancer, chemotherapy is associated with a reduction in
mortality.

