Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pediatric preclinical testing program (PPTP) stage 1 evaluation of
MLN0128, a potent TOR kinase inhibitor.


Introduction: The PI3K-TORC1 pathway links extracellular (growth factors)
and intracellular (nutrient sensing) to cell cycle progression and
proliferation. This pathway is dysregulated in many adult cancers, but
less is known regarding childhood malignancies. MLN0128 is a novel
orally-available small molecule inhibitor of both the TORC1 and TORC2
complexes, key components of the PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway.Methods:
MLN0128 was evaluated against the 23 cell lines of the PPTP in vitro
panel using 96 hour exposure at concentrations from 0.1 nM to 1.0 M.
MLN0128 was tested against the PPTP solid tumor xenografts (SCID mice)
and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL; NOD-SCID mice) panels using a dose
of 1 mg/kg administered by the P.O. route daily for 21 days.Results: In
vitro the median relative IC50 value for the PPTP cell lines was 19 nM,
with a range from 2 nM to 102 nM. There was a trend for lower median
rIC50 values for the rhabdomyosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma cell line panels
(8 nM and 5 nM, respectively). The median rIC50 value for the ALL cell
lines (68 nM) was significantly greater than that for the non-ALL cell
lines.In vivo MLN0128 was well tolerated, with only a 1.4% toxicity rate
in the treated groups, compared to a 0.3% toxicity rate in control
animals. All 38 tested xenograft models were considered evaluable for
efficacy. MLN0128 induced significant differences in EFS distribution
compared to control in 24 of 31 (77%) of the evaluable solid tumor
xenografts, but did not induce significant differences in EFS
distribution in any of the 7 evaluable ALL xenografts. MLN0128 induced
tumor growth inhibition meeting criteria for intermediate EFS T/C
activity (EFS T/C > 2) in 6 of 30 (20%) evaluable solid tumor xenografts.
Intermediate activity for the EFS T/C metric occurred in the rhabdoid
tumor panel (2 of 3) and in single xenografts in four other panels.
Objective responses were not observed for the solid tumor or for the ALL
xenograft panels. Pharmacodynamic studies to determine TOR inhibition are
planned.Conclusions: The activity observed for MLN0128 against the PPTP
preclinical models is similar to that previously reported by the PPTP for
another TOR kinase inhibitor (Houghton PJ, et al. Pediatr Blood Cancer.
58:191-9, 2012). When combined with PPTP results reported for PI3K and
AKT inhibitors (Reynolds CP, et al. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012. Epub
2012/09/25 and Gorlick R, et al. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 59:518-24, 2012),
the available data suggest that kinase inhibitors targeting the PI3K
pathway produce limited single agent activity for the tumor types
represented by the PPTP models. (Supported by award NO1-CM-42216 from the
NCI).

