Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSTM1 and GSTT1 polymorphisms in population-based study of
colorectal cancer risk.


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) remains a significant cause of
mortality accounting for 10% of all deaths of malignancies in European
Caucasians. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) participate in the
detoxification of chemotherapeutic agents used in therapy of CRC. Genetic
polymorphisms in GST genes (copy-number variants of GSTM1 and GSTT1) that
lead to diminished enzyme activity have been associated with CRC risk and
survival increased chemotherapeutic treatment benefit in patients in most
of the studies.Aims: In this study we examined associations of GSTM1 and
GSTT1 genotypes and clinical factors (age, gender, stage, localization of
the tumor) with risk and we assessed the effect of genetic polymorphisms
in GST genes on survival in CRC patients treated with adjuvant/palliative
chemotherapy.Materials & methods: We followed 1106 CRC patients treated
with chemotherapy based on fluoropyrimidines and 1343 unrelated controls.
Polymorphisms were genotyped by a relative quantification method
(copy-number variants of GSTM1 and GSTT1), and PCR followed by gel
electrophoresis (null/non-null genotypes for GSTM1 and GSTT1).
Statistical evaluations of risk were evaluated using the Pearson
Chi-Square Test. Associations between genotypes and overall survival were
assessed using Kaplan-Meier curves and Cox proportional hazards
regression.Results: GSTT1 null was associated with a small but
significant increase in risk (p = 0.013, OR = 1.393, 95% CI =
1.007-1.818). Copy-number variants of GSTM1 was associated with a
reduction of risk (pDominant model Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC)
remains a significant cause of mortality accounting for 10% of all deaths
of malignancies in European Caucasians. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs)
participate in the detoxification of chemotherapeutic agents used in
therapy of CRC. Genetic polymorphisms in GST genes (copy-number variants
of GSTM1 and GSTT1) that lead to diminished enzyme activity have been
associated with CRC risk and survival increased chemotherapeutic
treatment benefit in patients in most of the studies.Aims: In this study
we examined associations of GSTM1 and GSTT1 genotypes and clinical
factors (age, gender, stage, localization of the tumor) with risk and we
assessed the effect of genetic polymorphisms in GST genes on survival in
CRC patients treated with adjuvant/palliative chemotherapy.Materials &
methods: We followed 1106 CRC patients treated with chemotherapy based on
fluoropyrimidines and 1343 unrelated controls. Polymorphisms were
genotyped by a relative quantification method (copy-number variants of
GSTM1 and GSTT1), and PCR followed by gel electrophoresis (null/non-null
genotypes for GSTM1 and GSTT1). Statistical evaluations of risk were
evaluated using the Pearson Chi-Square Test. Associations between
genotypes and overall survival were assessed using Kaplan-Meier curves
and Cox proportional hazards regression.Results: GSTT1 null was
associated with a small but significant increase in risk (p = 0.013, OR =
1.393, 95% CI = 1.007-1.818). Copy-number variants of GSTM1 was
associated with a reduction of risk (pDominant model < 0.001, OR = 0.673,
95% CI = 0.552-0.820). The same associations were founded in male cases
after gender stratification.There were no significant associations
between GSTT1 and GSTM1 genotypes with other clinical factors
(localization, stage and tumor node metastasis classification) in the
total case group. However, following stratification by age (Introduction:
Colorectal cancer (CRC) remains a significant cause of mortality
accounting for 10% of all deaths of malignancies in European Caucasians.
Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) participate in the detoxification of
chemotherapeutic agents used in therapy of CRC. Genetic polymorphisms in
GST genes (copy-number variants of GSTM1 and GSTT1) that lead to
diminished enzyme activity have been associated with CRC risk and
survival increased chemotherapeutic treatment benefit in patients in most
of the studies.Aims: In this study we examined associations of GSTM1 and
GSTT1 genotypes and clinical factors (age, gender, stage, localization of
the tumor) with risk and we assessed the effect of genetic polymorphisms
in GST genes on survival in CRC patients treated with adjuvant/palliative
chemotherapy.Materials & methods: We followed 1106 CRC patients treated
with chemotherapy based on fluoropyrimidines and 1343 unrelated controls.
Polymorphisms were genotyped by a relative quantification method
(copy-number variants of GSTM1 and GSTT1), and PCR followed by gel
electrophoresis (null/non-null genotypes for GSTM1 and GSTT1).
Statistical evaluations of risk were evaluated using the Pearson
Chi-Square Test. Associations between genotypes and overall survival were
assessed using Kaplan-Meier curves and Cox proportional hazards
regression.Results: GSTT1 null was associated with a small but
significant increase in risk (p = 0.013, OR = 1.393, 95% CI =
1.007-1.818). Copy-number variants of GSTM1 was associated with a
reduction of risk (pDominant model < 0.001, OR = 0.673, 95% CI =
0.552-0.820). The same associations were founded in male cases after
gender stratification.There were no significant associations between
GSTT1 and GSTM1 genotypes with other clinical factors (localization,
stage and tumor node metastasis classification) in the total case group.
However, following stratification by age (<70 vs 70 years at diagnosis),
in young patients, GSTT1 null was associated with an increased risk (p
Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) remains a significant cause of
mortality accounting for 10% of all deaths of malignancies in European
Caucasians. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) participate in the
detoxification of chemotherapeutic agents used in therapy of CRC. Genetic
polymorphisms in GST genes (copy-number variants of GSTM1 and GSTT1) that
lead to diminished enzyme activity have been associated with CRC risk and
survival increased chemotherapeutic treatment benefit in patients in most
of the studies.Aims: In this study we examined associations of GSTM1 and
GSTT1 genotypes and clinical factors (age, gender, stage, localization of
the tumor) with risk and we assessed the effect of genetic polymorphisms
in GST genes on survival in CRC patients treated with adjuvant/palliative
chemotherapy.Materials & methods: We followed 1106 CRC patients treated
with chemotherapy based on fluoropyrimidines and 1343 unrelated controls.
Polymorphisms were genotyped by a relative quantification method
(copy-number variants of GSTM1 and GSTT1), and PCR followed by gel
electrophoresis (null/non-null genotypes for GSTM1 and GSTT1).
Statistical evaluations of risk were evaluated using the Pearson
Chi-Square Test. Associations between genotypes and overall survival were
assessed using Kaplan-Meier curves and Cox proportional hazards
regression.Results: GSTT1 null was associated with a small but
significant increase in risk (p = 0.013, OR = 1.393, 95% CI =
1.007-1.818). Copy-number variants of GSTM1 was associated with a
reduction of risk (pDominant model < 0.001, OR = 0.673, 95% CI =
0.552-0.820). The same associations were founded in male cases after
gender stratification.There were no significant associations between
GSTT1 and GSTM1 genotypes with other clinical factors (localization,
stage and tumor node metastasis classification) in the total case group.
However, following stratification by age (<70 vs 70 years at diagnosis),
in young patients, GSTT1 null was associated with an increased risk (p <
0.001, OR = 1.942, 95% CI = 1.523-3.440).Furthermore, GSTM1 null and
GSTT1 copy number variation were associated with low survival rates in
younger patients (p = 0.047, HR = 3.937; p = 0.039, HR = 4.246). However,
survival increase is observed in young patients with GSTM1 copy number
variant (pDominant model Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) remains a
significant cause of mortality accounting for 10% of all deaths of
malignancies in European Caucasians. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs)
participate in the detoxification of chemotherapeutic agents used in
therapy of CRC. Genetic polymorphisms in GST genes (copy-number variants
of GSTM1 and GSTT1) that lead to diminished enzyme activity have been
associated with CRC risk and survival increased chemotherapeutic
treatment benefit in patients in most of the studies.Aims: In this study
we examined associations of GSTM1 and GSTT1 genotypes and clinical
factors (age, gender, stage, localization of the tumor) with risk and we
assessed the effect of genetic polymorphisms in GST genes on survival in
CRC patients treated with adjuvant/palliative chemotherapy.Materials &
methods: We followed 1106 CRC patients treated with chemotherapy based on
fluoropyrimidines and 1343 unrelated controls. Polymorphisms were
genotyped by a relative quantification method (copy-number variants of
GSTM1 and GSTT1), and PCR followed by gel electrophoresis (null/non-null
genotypes for GSTM1 and GSTT1). Statistical evaluations of risk were
evaluated using the Pearson Chi-Square Test. Associations between
genotypes and overall survival were assessed using Kaplan-Meier curves
and Cox proportional hazards regression.Results: GSTT1 null was
associated with a small but significant increase in risk (p = 0.013, OR =
1.393, 95% CI = 1.007-1.818). Copy-number variants of GSTM1 was
associated with a reduction of risk (pDominant model < 0.001, OR = 0.673,
95% CI = 0.552-0.820). The same associations were founded in male cases
after gender stratification.There were no significant associations
between GSTT1 and GSTM1 genotypes with other clinical factors
(localization, stage and tumor node metastasis classification) in the
total case group. However, following stratification by age (<70 vs 70
years at diagnosis), in young patients, GSTT1 null was associated with an
increased risk (p < 0.001, OR = 1.942, 95% CI = 1.523-3.440).Furthermore,
GSTM1 null and GSTT1 copy number variation were associated with low
survival rates in younger patients (p = 0.047, HR = 3.937; p = 0.039, HR
= 4.246). However, survival increase is observed in young patients with
GSTM1 copy number variant (pDominant model < 0.001, HR =
13.246).Conclusions: This study confirms the association with the risk
and the effect of GSTT1 and GSTM1 polymorphisms on survival in CRC
patients who received chemotherapy.We also suggest a specific risk
association with GST null genotype in younger patients, particularly in
those with presentation of tumor under the age of 70 years. The null GST
genotype could be related to an improved immune response in younger
patients, but less detoxification and increased rates of DNA damage in
older patients.

