Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Item response theory analysis of the patient satisfaction with
cancer-related care: psychometric validation in a multicultural sample of
1,296 participants.


BACKGROUND: Patient satisfaction (PS) is an important outcome measure of
quality of cancer-related care. PS was one of the four core study
outcomes of the National Cancer Institute and American Cancer Society
funded $25 million multicenter Patient Navigation Research Program (PNRP)
to reduce disparities in cancer care. A Patient Satisfaction with Cancer
Care (PSCC) measure was developed and validated for the PNRP using
classical test theory and principal components analysis (PCA).OBJECTIVE:
To calibrate items of the PSCC to facilitate the development of a
computerized adaptive testing (CAT) system, which can be used to tailor
the PSCC to patients satisfaction level based on properties of the
items.METHODS: The PCA revealed a unidimensional PSCC measure. Thus, we
applied unidimensional item response theory (IRT) models to the 18-item
PSCC data from 1,296 participants (73% female; age 18 to 86 years). We
fitted two IRT models to the data: An unconstrained graded response model
(GRM) and a constrained GRM (i.e., Rasch Model) where all discrimination
parameters across items were fixed to be equal. We obtained model fit
indices (log-likelihood, AIC & BIC) and performed model comparison
through likelihood ratio (LR) test between the unconstrained GRM and the
Rasch model. We obtained item and latent trait (i.e., patient
satisfaction) parameter estimates, category characteristic curves,
operating characteristic curves, and test information curves for the
better fitting model.RESULTS: The unconstrained GRM fitted the data
significantly better (LR = 828, df = 17, p BACKGROUND: Patient
satisfaction (PS) is an important outcome measure of quality of
cancer-related care. PS was one of the four core study outcomes of the
National Cancer Institute and American Cancer Society funded $25 million
multicenter Patient Navigation Research Program (PNRP) to reduce
disparities in cancer care. A Patient Satisfaction with Cancer Care
(PSCC) measure was developed and validated for the PNRP using classical
test theory and principal components analysis (PCA).OBJECTIVE: To
calibrate items of the PSCC to facilitate the development of a
computerized adaptive testing (CAT) system, which can be used to tailor
the PSCC to patients satisfaction level based on properties of the
items.METHODS: The PCA revealed a unidimensional PSCC measure. Thus, we
applied unidimensional item response theory (IRT) models to the 18-item
PSCC data from 1,296 participants (73% female; age 18 to 86 years). We
fitted two IRT models to the data: An unconstrained graded response model
(GRM) and a constrained GRM (i.e., Rasch Model) where all discrimination
parameters across items were fixed to be equal. We obtained model fit
indices (log-likelihood, AIC & BIC) and performed model comparison
through likelihood ratio (LR) test between the unconstrained GRM and the
Rasch model. We obtained item and latent trait (i.e., patient
satisfaction) parameter estimates, category characteristic curves,
operating characteristic curves, and test information curves for the
better fitting model.RESULTS: The unconstrained GRM fitted the data
significantly better (LR = 828, df = 17, p < 0.001). Item parameter
estimates showed strong items discriminating power ( = 0.94 to 2.18).
Standard errors (SE) of the item parameter estimates were also small
(i.e., mostly around 0.1 for the threshold parameters, and between 0.1 to
0.2 for the discrimination parameters), confirming the precision of the
item parameter estimates obtained.CONCLUSIONS: The PSCC is suitable to be
delivered through a CAT system where patients will receive tailored
optimally selected items to measure their satisfaction levels, and scores
will be equated across different subsets of items (i.e., test forms). An
IRT-based PSCC CAT system will provide key patient reported outcome data
to help improve patient-centered cancer care and satisfaction for
medically underserved populations.

