Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LY2875358, a bivalent MET antibody with anti-tumor activity
through blocking HGF as well as inducing degradation of MET,
differentiates from a one-armed 5D5 MET antibody.


MET is involved in many mechanisms of cancer proliferation and
metastasis. Inappropriate activation of MET can be induced by
HGF-independent mechanisms such as gene amplification, specific genetic
mutations, and transcriptional up-regulation, or by HGF-dependent
autocrine or paracrine mechanisms. LY2875358 is a novel humanized
bivalent MET antibody currently in phase I clinical testing (trial
NCT01287546). LY2875358 has high neutralization and internalization
activities against MET for inhibiting HGF-dependent and HGF-independent
MET pathway activation and tumor growth. In HGF-dependent MET activation,
LY2875358 blocks HGF binding to MET, HGF-induced MET phosphorylation and
tumor growth both in cell culture and in mouse xenograft models,
resembling activities of a humanized one-armed 5D5 MET antibody
(monovalent antibody similar to Onartuzumab). In tumors with
HGF-independent MET activation through MET gene amplification, LY2875358
induces internalization and degradation of MET, which results in
decreased pMET and total MET, inhibition of cell proliferation and tumor
growth in MKN45 and SNU5 gastric tumor lines and EBC-1 and H1993 NSCLC
tumor lines. Moreover, LY2875358 enhances antitumor activity in
combination with cisplatin or 5-FU in vitro and in vivo in MET amplified
tumor cells. However, under the same ligand-independent conditions, the
one-armed 5D5 antibody did not have anti-tumor activities. When HGF is
added to tumor cells with high MET gene amplification, LY2875358
decreases cell proliferation, while the one-armed 5D5 antibody does not.
In contrast to other bivalent MET antibodies, LY2875358 has no or
otherwise negligible agonist activity and does not stimulate biological
activities such as cell proliferation, scattering, invasion,
tubulogenesis, apoptosis protection or angiogenesis in various HGF
responsive cells. These findings indicate that LY2875358 has a different
mechanism of action from the humanized one-armed 5D5 MET antibody.
LY2875358 may be a promising therapy for treatment of patients whose
tumors are driven by HGF-dependent and HGF-independent MET activation.

