Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the role of up-regulated genes in highly metastatic oral
cancer subline using spontaneous metastatic mouse model.


Metastasis is one of the critical factors contributing to poorer
prognosis and QOL in cancer patients. Although this mechanism has been
gradually revealed, there are few genes found as useful diagnostic
markers or molecular targets for clinical application so far. In this
study, we attempted to establish in vitro/in vivo metastatic models using
a human oral squamous cell carcinoma cell lines (HOC313). We first
carried out in vivo selection of high-metastatic tumor cells by means of
sequential subcutaneous (s.c.) implantation (1107 cells) of this cell
line into SCID mice, resulting in the establishment of a highly
metastatic subline which metastasized to axillary lymph nodes and lung.
Moreover, we developed the imaging system using parent cells and highly
metastatic cells. Then, to explore metastasis-related genes and signaling
pathways, we performed integrative analyses using array CGH, cDNA
microarray and the systems biological approach based on their data sets.
Then we identified copy number aberrations (CNAs) of chromosome 19 and
differentially expressed genes between parent cells and high-metastatic
cells. Up regulated genes in high-metastatic cells are related with cell
growth, migration, invasion and metastatic ability. Among these, one gene
was closely associated with migration, invasion and metastasis. Moreover,
when knocking down of this gene, we observed morphological change from
mesenchymal phenotype to epithelial phenotype. Further analyses of these
genes may ultimately lead to the development of novel modalities of
diagnosis and therapy for cancer metastasis.

