Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition by claudin-3
and claudin-4.


The mechanisms that control intracellular adhesion are central to the
process of invasion and metastasis. Claudin-3 (CLDN3) and claudin-4
(CLDN4) are major structural molecules of the tight junctions that link
epithelial cells. Our prior work has demonstrated that knockdown of the
expression of either CLDN3 or CLDN4 produces marked changes in the
phenotype of ovarian carcinoma cells including increases in growth rate
in vivo, migration, invasion, metastasis and drug resistance, similar to
those produced by the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We
postulated that these changes may result from the ability of CLDN3 or
CLDN4 to suppress EMT. In this study we found that knockdown of either
CLDN3 or CLDN4 increased cell size and resulted in elongated,
fibroblastic morphology. While knockdown of CLDN3 or CLDN4 did not alter
the expression of vimentin, it significantly down-regulated the level of
E-cadherin and up-regulated N-cadherin expression. Conversely,
over-expression of CLDN3 or CLDN4 in a cell line that does not express
endogenous CLDN3 or CLDN4 decreased N-cadherin expression. Re-expression
of E-cadherin in the CLDN3 or CLDN4 knockdown cells reduced migration,
invasion and tumor growth in vivo. Loss of either CLDN3 or CLDN4 resulted
in activation of the PI3K pathway as evidenced by increased Akt
phosphorylation, and up-regulation of the mRNA and protein levels of the
transcription factor Twist. Taken together, these findings suggest that
CLDN3 and CLDN4 function in the ovarian cancer cells to sustain an
epithelial phenotype and that their loss promotes EMT.Citation Format:
Xiying Shang, Xinjian Lin, Gerald Manorek, Stephen Howell. Regulation of
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition by claudin-3 and claudin-4.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1495.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1495

