Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of DNA copy number and gene expression in
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas .


Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are the sixth prevalent
cancer by incidence worldwide. The major risk factors associated with
HNSCC are tobacco usage, alcohol consumption and human papillomavirus
(HPV) infection. Only 40%-50% of patients survive more than three years,
even with the advances in surgical techniques and the recognized benefits
of chemotherapy. Integrative studies using genomic alterations and
large-scale expression analysis have been used to find functionally
relevant molecular drivers and targets for therapy. The aim of this study
was to investigate biological markers as potential predictors of response
to chemo and radiotherapy according to HPV infection in oropharyngeal
carcinomas (OC). Thirty-three fresh OC biopsies were genotyped for HPV,
evaluated by array CGH (4x180k, Agilent) and by gene expression
large-scale analysis (4x44k, Agilent). Approximately 54% of cases were
HPV positive with HPV16 (16/33) being the most frequently detected,
followed by HPV 18 (1/33) and HPV 16/18 (1/33). The most frequent copy
number alterations were losses on 8p11.23-p11.22, 14q11.1-q11.2, 15q11.2
and gains on 11q13.2 and 11q13.2-q13.3 (pHead and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCC) are the sixth prevalent cancer by incidence worldwide.
The major risk factors associated with HNSCC are tobacco usage, alcohol
consumption and human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. Only 40%-50% of
patients survive more than three years, even with the advances in
surgical techniques and the recognized benefits of chemotherapy.
Integrative studies using genomic alterations and large-scale expression
analysis have been used to find functionally relevant molecular drivers
and targets for therapy. The aim of this study was to investigate
biological markers as potential predictors of response to chemo and
radiotherapy according to HPV infection in oropharyngeal carcinomas (OC).
Thirty-three fresh OC biopsies were genotyped for HPV, evaluated by array
CGH (4x180k, Agilent) and by gene expression large-scale analysis (4x44k,
Agilent). Approximately 54% of cases were HPV positive with HPV16 (16/33)
being the most frequently detected, followed by HPV 18 (1/33) and HPV
16/18 (1/33). The most frequent copy number alterations were losses on
8p11.23-p11.22, 14q11.1-q11.2, 15q11.2 and gains on 11q13.2 and
11q13.2-q13.3 (p<0.05). Comparative analysis of genomic alterations
according to HPV status revealed gains of 3q26.31 and 11q13.2 and losses
of 9p21.3 exclusively in HPV negative cases (p0.5 and negative: R0.5 and
negative: R<0.5). It was identified 61 genes correlated by both
procedures, 52 showed positive correlation (10/52 gain/up-regulated and
42/52 deletion/down-regulated) and 9 negative correlation (4/9
gain/down-regulated and 5/9 loss/up-regulated). Both genes mapped on
11q13, CCND1 and PPFIA1, were confirmed as associated with unfavorable
response to treatment in OC, showing copy number gains and transcripts
overexpression. This analysis demonstrated biological markers as
potential predictors of response to chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy
according to HPV infection in oropharyngeal carcinomas.

