Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cytotoxic activity of the anti-mesothelin immunotoxin SS1P is
enhanced by the PKC inhibitor enzastaurin.


The activation of protein kinase C (PKC) contributes to tumor survival
and proliferation provoking the development of inhibitory agents that may
function as cancer therapeutics. Pseudomonas exotoxin-based immunotoxins
are antibody-based recombinant proteins that employ an ADP-ribosylation
domain for the enzymatic inhibition of protein synthesis of target cancer
cells. Combining PKC inhibitors with immunotoxins was undertaken to
explore possible synergy. Enzastaurin but not two other PKC inhibitors
(Sortastaurin and G06976) combined with immunotoxins directed to surface
mesothelin or the transferrin receptor to produce synergistic or additive
cell death via apoptosis. Enhancement of killing was noted with
enzastaurin concentrations of 5 uM or greater. Mechanistic insights of
the combined immunotoxin-enzastaurin killing centered on the rapid
complete loss of the prosurvival Bcl2 protein, Mcl-1, and the activation
of caspase 3/7. Moreover, efficient cell killing was associated with loss
of Akt and the BH3-only protein Bad. Enzastaurin-mediated enhanced cell
killing was specific to Pseudomonas exotoxin-based immunotoxins as there
was no enhancement with other agents that inhibit protein synthesis such
as cycloheximide and diphtheria toxin. Immunotoxin-enzastaurin
combinations could be useful for the treatment of human cancers that
express mesothelin and are not efficiently killed by SS1P alone.

