Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New thiol-(-lactam amide) SAHA analogues as potent histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors..


Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are one of the last frontiers in
pharmaceutical research. Two HDACi are already part of armamentarium of
the anticancer drugs of the oncologists: Vorinostat, Zolinza (SAHA) and
Romidepsin, Istodax (depsipeptide; FK-228), both licensed by the FDA for
the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). Beyond them, more than
twenty new drugs are currently under pre-clinical and clinical
investigation as single agent and in combination therapies against
different cancers and in other several novel therapeutic indications.
Mainly they are hydroxamic acids and benzamide derivatives; however none
has emerged superior to SAHA in terms of potency.In our search, we have
selected a new generation of HDACi: thiol-based SAHA bearing a lactam
amide in -position. This new generation was highly competitive compared
to competing drugs, displaying sub-micromolar to low nanomolar inhibitor
activity on HDACs, being especially powerful on HDAC6 isoform. They
exhibited higher anti-proliferative activity than SAHA on different human
cell lines. In vivo they were orally administered and showed a higher
potency than SAHA, with a negligible toxicity.The overall profile of this
new class of HDAC inhibitors, including synthesis and a comprehensive
pharmacological characterization, will be presented.These encouraging
results prompted us to select a drug candidate which is currently in a
phase of pre-clinical evaluation.

