Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of invasive and metastatic potential of Tpl2
knockout keratinocytes.


Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer in the United States, with
an estimated two million cases diagnosed annually. Tpl2 (MAP3K8) is a
serine threonine protein kinase in the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signal transduction cascade. Tpl2 was identified by our laboratory
as having a tumor suppressive function in skin carcinogenesis. Tpl-2
knockout mice develop significantly more tumors than matched wildtype
controls and have a larger degree of inflammation when challenged with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). However, it is unknown
whether the tumors that develop in Tpl2 knockout mice are more aggressive
and invasive than skin tumors in wildtype mice. Therefore, we compared
the invasive and metastatic potential of keratinocytes from wildtype and
Tpl2 knockout mice. Using various techniques including gene microarray,
real-time polymerase chain reaction, and zymography we found MMP-2 and
MMP-9 matrix metalloproteinases to be significantly up-regulated in
Tpl-2/- keratinocytes. Additionally, Tpl-2/- keratinocytes have altered
migration rates, significantly higher malignant conversion rates and
increased angiogenesis when compared to wildtype keratinocytes. Moreover,
protein arrays identified several angiogenic factors, in addition to the
MMP's, induced in Tpl-2/- keratinocytes. In summary, our studies
demonstrate skin tumors from Tpl-2/- mice have the potential to be more
aggressive, invasive, and metastatic than tumors in control animals.

