Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNFRs shed by tumor cells inhibit the migration of macrophages.


Breast tumor cells transform their microenvironment through the
expression of pro-tumor molecules critical to their progression and
metastasis. Among the targets of tumor cell secretions are macrophages,
which play an essential role in tumor progression. Although macrophages
possess tumor cell killing abilities, the tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs) display primarily pro-tumor functions including increasing tumor
angiogenesis and promoting tumor cell invasion. Breast tumor cells shed
multiple membrane-bound proteins including their tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) receptors through TACE/ADAM17 activities. The release of sTNFR1/2
serves a decoy sequestering TNF and preventing TNF-driven apoptosis of
tumor cells. Additionally, tumor derived sTNFR1/2 also modulate TNF
effects on macrophages including their migration. Here, we investigated
whether sTNFRs were shed by cells present within the breast tumor
microenvironment and determined their effects on macrophage migration in
response to TNF. TNF and sTNFRs concentrations were measured in murine
mammary tumor and normal cells including monocytes/macrophages. In
addition, the migration of murine monocytes toward TNF in the presence
tumor derived soluble factors (TDSFs) was determined by transwell assays.
The effects of TDSFs obtained with and without the sheddase inhibitor
TAPI-0 treatment on monocyte/macrophage migration were also assessed. No
TNF was detected in the TDSFs of tumor cells or secretions from normal
epithelial cells. In contrast, stroma cells especially macrophages
expressed high levels of TNF (pBreast tumor cells transform their
microenvironment through the expression of pro-tumor molecules critical
to their progression and metastasis. Among the targets of tumor cell
secretions are macrophages, which play an essential role in tumor
progression. Although macrophages possess tumor cell killing abilities,
the tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) display primarily pro-tumor
functions including increasing tumor angiogenesis and promoting tumor
cell invasion. Breast tumor cells shed multiple membrane-bound proteins
including their tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors through TACE/ADAM17
activities. The release of sTNFR1/2 serves a decoy sequestering TNF and
preventing TNF-driven apoptosis of tumor cells. Additionally, tumor
derived sTNFR1/2 also modulate TNF effects on macrophages including their
migration. Here, we investigated whether sTNFRs were shed by cells
present within the breast tumor microenvironment and determined their
effects on macrophage migration in response to TNF. TNF and sTNFRs
concentrations were measured in murine mammary tumor and normal cells
including monocytes/macrophages. In addition, the migration of murine
monocytes toward TNF in the presence tumor derived soluble factors
(TDSFs) was determined by transwell assays. The effects of TDSFs obtained
with and without the sheddase inhibitor TAPI-0 treatment on
monocyte/macrophage migration were also assessed. No TNF was detected in
the TDSFs of tumor cells or secretions from normal epithelial cells. In
contrast, stroma cells especially macrophages expressed high levels of
TNF (p<0.001). sTNFR2 concentrations were variable in TDSFs and
significantly decreased in TDSFs obtained following TAPI-0 treatment
(pBreast tumor cells transform their microenvironment through the
expression of pro-tumor molecules critical to their progression and
metastasis. Among the targets of tumor cell secretions are macrophages,
which play an essential role in tumor progression. Although macrophages
possess tumor cell killing abilities, the tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs) display primarily pro-tumor functions including increasing tumor
angiogenesis and promoting tumor cell invasion. Breast tumor cells shed
multiple membrane-bound proteins including their tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) receptors through TACE/ADAM17 activities. The release of sTNFR1/2
serves a decoy sequestering TNF and preventing TNF-driven apoptosis of
tumor cells. Additionally, tumor derived sTNFR1/2 also modulate TNF
effects on macrophages including their migration. Here, we investigated
whether sTNFRs were shed by cells present within the breast tumor
microenvironment and determined their effects on macrophage migration in
response to TNF. TNF and sTNFRs concentrations were measured in murine
mammary tumor and normal cells including monocytes/macrophages. In
addition, the migration of murine monocytes toward TNF in the presence
tumor derived soluble factors (TDSFs) was determined by transwell assays.
The effects of TDSFs obtained with and without the sheddase inhibitor
TAPI-0 treatment on monocyte/macrophage migration were also assessed. No
TNF was detected in the TDSFs of tumor cells or secretions from normal
epithelial cells. In contrast, stroma cells especially macrophages
expressed high levels of TNF (p<0.001). sTNFR2 concentrations were
variable in TDSFs and significantly decreased in TDSFs obtained following
TAPI-0 treatment (p<0.05). Macrophages migrated toward TNF in a
dose-dependent manner (pBreast tumor cells transform their
microenvironment through the expression of pro-tumor molecules critical
to their progression and metastasis. Among the targets of tumor cell
secretions are macrophages, which play an essential role in tumor
progression. Although macrophages possess tumor cell killing abilities,
the tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) display primarily pro-tumor
functions including increasing tumor angiogenesis and promoting tumor
cell invasion. Breast tumor cells shed multiple membrane-bound proteins
including their tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors through TACE/ADAM17
activities. The release of sTNFR1/2 serves a decoy sequestering TNF and
preventing TNF-driven apoptosis of tumor cells. Additionally, tumor
derived sTNFR1/2 also modulate TNF effects on macrophages including their
migration. Here, we investigated whether sTNFRs were shed by cells
present within the breast tumor microenvironment and determined their
effects on macrophage migration in response to TNF. TNF and sTNFRs
concentrations were measured in murine mammary tumor and normal cells
including monocytes/macrophages. In addition, the migration of murine
monocytes toward TNF in the presence tumor derived soluble factors
(TDSFs) was determined by transwell assays. The effects of TDSFs obtained
with and without the sheddase inhibitor TAPI-0 treatment on
monocyte/macrophage migration were also assessed. No TNF was detected in
the TDSFs of tumor cells or secretions from normal epithelial cells. In
contrast, stroma cells especially macrophages expressed high levels of
TNF (p<0.001). sTNFR2 concentrations were variable in TDSFs and
significantly decreased in TDSFs obtained following TAPI-0 treatment
(p<0.05). Macrophages migrated toward TNF in a dose-dependent manner
(p<0.05). While the addition of TDSFs prevented the macrophage migration
toward TNF, the use of TDSFs collected following TAPI-0 treatment had no
effects of the macrophage migration toward TNF (pBreast tumor cells
transform their microenvironment through the expression of pro-tumor
molecules critical to their progression and metastasis. Among the targets
of tumor cell secretions are macrophages, which play an essential role in
tumor progression. Although macrophages possess tumor cell killing
abilities, the tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) display primarily
pro-tumor functions including increasing tumor angiogenesis and promoting
tumor cell invasion. Breast tumor cells shed multiple membrane-bound
proteins including their tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors through
TACE/ADAM17 activities. The release of sTNFR1/2 serves a decoy
sequestering TNF and preventing TNF-driven apoptosis of tumor cells.
Additionally, tumor derived sTNFR1/2 also modulate TNF effects on
macrophages including their migration. Here, we investigated whether
sTNFRs were shed by cells present within the breast tumor
microenvironment and determined their effects on macrophage migration in
response to TNF. TNF and sTNFRs concentrations were measured in murine
mammary tumor and normal cells including monocytes/macrophages. In
addition, the migration of murine monocytes toward TNF in the presence
tumor derived soluble factors (TDSFs) was determined by transwell assays.
The effects of TDSFs obtained with and without the sheddase inhibitor
TAPI-0 treatment on monocyte/macrophage migration were also assessed. No
TNF was detected in the TDSFs of tumor cells or secretions from normal
epithelial cells. In contrast, stroma cells especially macrophages
expressed high levels of TNF (p<0.001). sTNFR2 concentrations were
variable in TDSFs and significantly decreased in TDSFs obtained following
TAPI-0 treatment (p<0.05). Macrophages migrated toward TNF in a
dose-dependent manner (p<0.05). While the addition of TDSFs prevented the
macrophage migration toward TNF, the use of TDSFs collected following
TAPI-0 treatment had no effects of the macrophage migration toward TNF
(p<0.05). These results support the modulatory role of sTNFRs secreted by
tumor cells in macrophage responses to TNF.[This works is supported by
grants from the Department of Defense Era of Hope research program
(BC044778) and the National Science Foundation EFRI program (CBE0736007)].

