Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association of coffee intake with liver cancer incidence and
chronic liver disease mortality in male smokers.


Background: A number of previous studies have suggested that coffee
intake is associated with reduced risk of liver cancer and chronic liver
disease. However, most prospective studies were conducted in Asian
populations where Hepatitis B virus (HBV) and Hepatitis C viruses (HCV)
are the dominant risk factors. Prospective studies in Western populations
with lower HBV and HCV prevalence are sparse. Also, individuals prepare
coffee in different ways, yet despite known effects of preparation on the
constituents found in coffee, it is unknown whether preparation affects
disease associations.Methods: The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer
Prevention (ATBC) Study was a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of
-tocopherol and -carotene supplementation, set in a population of Finnish
male smokers aged 50-69. Among the 29,133 men enrolled at baseline,
27,037 men recorded their coffee consumption and were followed for up to
24 years for incident liver cancer or mortality from chronic liver
disease among other outcomes. Information on the method of coffee
preparation was available for 20,737 men. Relative risks (RRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated by Cox proportional hazard
models. We used an 8 ounce cup as our unit of analysis.Results: Coffee
intake was inversely associated with incident liver cancer (RR per
cup/day=0.82, 95% CI=0.73-0.93; RR for intake of 4 cups/day vs. intake of
>0-0-0-<1 cup/day=0.08, 95%CI=0.03-0.18, p-trend0-<1 cup/day=0.08,
95%CI=0.03-0.18, p-trend<0.0001). Inverse associations persisted in those
without diabetes, HBV and HCV negative cases and in analyses stratified
by alcohol, smoking dose, and serum cholesterol. Among those with
information on coffee preparation, we observed similar associations for
those drinking boiled or filtered coffee.Conclusions: Intake of both
boiled and filtered coffee was associated with reduced risk of incident
liver cancer and mortality from chronic liver disease in the ATBC cohort,
suggesting that drinking coffee may have benefits for the liver,
irrespective of how it is prepared.Citation Format: Gabriel Y. Lai,
Stephanie J. Weinstein, Demetrius Albanes, Philip R. Taylor, Katherine A.
McGlynn, Jarmo Virtamo, Rashmi Sinha, Neal D. Freedman. The association
of coffee intake with liver cancer incidence and chronic liver disease
mortality in male smokers. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4828. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4828

