Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Binding characteristics of the immunocytokine hu14.18-IL2 and
induction of human effector functions as anticipated mode of action.


Immunotherapy of neuroblastoma with anti-GD2 antibodies in combination
with interleukin-2 (IL2) emerges as an important treatment option as
shown in several clinical trials. In consequence, an antibody-IL2 fusion
protein (hu14.18-IL2; immunocytokine) was designed that combines the
targeting and effector functions of an anti-GD2 antibody and the immune
modulation activity of IL2. In addition to mediation of typical effector
functions such as CDC and ADCC this immunocytokine targets IL2 to GD2+
tumor cells and thereby links tumor cells to IL2-receptor bearing
effector cells via an Fc-gamma independent mechanism. This concept has
already shown encouraging results in Phase I/II trials in
relapsed/refractory neuroblastoma patients. Here, we report the antigen
binding characteristics and in vitro anti-neuroblastoma activity of a new
GMP preparation of hu14.18-IL2 (APN301). Binding of APN301 to its nominal
antigen GD2 was analyzed by solid phase ELISA and compared to other
antibodies of the 14G2a family. Affinities of APN301 to GD2 and to
anti-14.18 anti-idiotype antibodies were also determined by Biacore
analysis. GD2 specific ADCC, CDC and whole blood cytotoxicity were
analyzed in cytotoxicity assays in vitro (calcein-release, 51Cr release)
using GD2+ neuroblastoma target cell lines.We demonstrate similar binding
characteristics of APN301 to GD2 compared to parent 14.18 antibodies
(murine and chimeric). The anti-14.18 anti-id antibody ganglidiomab fully
inhibits binding of APN301 to the nominal antigen GD2, thereby proving
internal image properties. The dissociation constants of APN301 to GD2
and ganglidiomab as determined in Biacore analyses are in the 10-9M and
10-7M range, respectively, similar to those determined for the naked
chimeric 14.18 antibody. Relevant for the prediction of clinical activity
we demonstrate potent specific lysis of GD2+ human neuroblastoma cells
mediated by APN301 in a whole blood cytotoxicity assay in vitro,
utilizing whole blood of healthy donors as well as whole blood of
high-risk neuroblastoma patients in advanced disease stage. Further
clinical trials with APN301 in neuroblastoma patients are being planned,
taking into account the found potent whole blood cytolytic activity and
the pharmakokinetic properties of this immunocytokine.Citation Format:
Hans Loibner, Manfred Schuster, Evelyne Janzek, Stefan Stranner, Bernhard
Peball, Susanne Wiederkum, Oliver Mutschlechner, Nikolai Siebert, Holger
Lode. Binding characteristics of the immunocytokine hu14.18-IL2 and
induction of human effector functions as anticipated mode of action.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2858.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2858

