Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin use and risk of lung cancer in patients with diabetes.


Observational studies suggest that cancer incidence is lower in patients
with type 2 diabetes treated with metformin, relative to patients treated
with other diabetes medications. The few studies to examine metformin use
in relation to lung cancer risk, however, have produced inconsistent
results. To clarify this relationship, we conducted a retrospective
cohort study of 50,722 adults aged 40 years or older included in the
Kaiser Permanente Northern California Diabetes Registry, who completed a
mailed survey administered in 1994 to 1996 on health-related traits and
behaviors. All prescribed diabetes medications were identified for each
patient from pharmacy records. Patients were followed for lung cancer
from 1997 to 2009, with a median follow-up of 8.1 years. Using Cox
regression, with age as the time scale, rate ratios (RR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) were calculated to estimate risk of lung cancer
associated with new use of metformin, adjusted for sex, race/ethnicity,
smoking status, income, education level, diabetes duration, baseline
measures of hemoglobin A1c and creatinine, and ever use of other types of
diabetes medications. Measures of metformin use, along with ever use for
each type of diabetes medication, were modeled as time-dependent
variables. During 389,887 person-years of follow-up, 685 patients were
diagnosed with lung cancer. The adjusted RR for ever use of metformin was
0.95 (95% CI, 0.79-1.14). For duration of metformin use, the adjusted RRs
for Observational studies suggest that cancer incidence is lower in
patients with type 2 diabetes treated with metformin, relative to
patients treated with other diabetes medications. The few studies to
examine metformin use in relation to lung cancer risk, however, have
produced inconsistent results. To clarify this relationship, we conducted
a retrospective cohort study of 50,722 adults aged 40 years or older
included in the Kaiser Permanente Northern California Diabetes Registry,
who completed a mailed survey administered in 1994 to 1996 on
health-related traits and behaviors. All prescribed diabetes medications
were identified for each patient from pharmacy records. Patients were
followed for lung cancer from 1997 to 2009, with a median follow-up of
8.1 years. Using Cox regression, with age as the time scale, rate ratios
(RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated to estimate risk
of lung cancer associated with new use of metformin, adjusted for sex,
race/ethnicity, smoking status, income, education level, diabetes
duration, baseline measures of hemoglobin A1c and creatinine, and ever
use of other types of diabetes medications. Measures of metformin use,
along with ever use for each type of diabetes medication, were modeled as
time-dependent variables. During 389,887 person-years of follow-up, 685
patients were diagnosed with lung cancer. The adjusted RR for ever use of
metformin was 0.95 (95% CI, 0.79-1.14). For duration of metformin use,
the adjusted RRs for <2.0, 2.0-4.9, and 5.0+ years were 1.01 (95% CI,
0.80-1.28), 0.94 (95% CI, 0.73-1.22), and 0.86 (95% CI, 0.63-1.18),
respectively. In analyses stratified by smoking status, the adjusted RRs
for ever use of metformin were 0.98 (95% CI, 0.79-1.21) in ever smokers
and 0.59 (95% CI, 0.34-1.01) in never smokers. However, in never smokers,
the number of users diagnosed with lung cancer was relatively small, and
no dose-response decrease in risk with increasing duration of metformin
use was found; the corresponding adjusted RRs for Observational studies
suggest that cancer incidence is lower in patients with type 2 diabetes
treated with metformin, relative to patients treated with other diabetes
medications. The few studies to examine metformin use in relation to lung
cancer risk, however, have produced inconsistent results. To clarify this
relationship, we conducted a retrospective cohort study of 50,722 adults
aged 40 years or older included in the Kaiser Permanente Northern
California Diabetes Registry, who completed a mailed survey administered
in 1994 to 1996 on health-related traits and behaviors. All prescribed
diabetes medications were identified for each patient from pharmacy
records. Patients were followed for lung cancer from 1997 to 2009, with a
median follow-up of 8.1 years. Using Cox regression, with age as the time
scale, rate ratios (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated
to estimate risk of lung cancer associated with new use of metformin,
adjusted for sex, race/ethnicity, smoking status, income, education
level, diabetes duration, baseline measures of hemoglobin A1c and
creatinine, and ever use of other types of diabetes medications. Measures
of metformin use, along with ever use for each type of diabetes
medication, were modeled as time-dependent variables. During 389,887
person-years of follow-up, 685 patients were diagnosed with lung cancer.
The adjusted RR for ever use of metformin was 0.95 (95% CI, 0.79-1.14).
For duration of metformin use, the adjusted RRs for <2.0, 2.0-4.9, and
5.0+ years were 1.01 (95% CI, 0.80-1.28), 0.94 (95% CI, 0.73-1.22), and
0.86 (95% CI, 0.63-1.18), respectively. In analyses stratified by smoking
status, the adjusted RRs for ever use of metformin were 0.98 (95% CI,
0.79-1.21) in ever smokers and 0.59 (95% CI, 0.34-1.01) in never smokers.
However, in never smokers, the number of users diagnosed with lung cancer
was relatively small, and no dose-response decrease in risk with
increasing duration of metformin use was found; the corresponding
adjusted RRs for <2.0, 2.0-4.9, and 5.0+ years of metformin use were 0.52
(95% CI, 0.23-1.16), 0.58 (95% CI, 0.26-1.26), and 0.70 (95% CI,
0.31-1.58), respectively. Our results suggest that metformin use is not
associated with lung cancer risk in former or current smokers with
diabetes. Additional research is needed to determine whether metformin
use might alter lung cancer risk in never smokers with diabetes.

