Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The circadian factor period 2 modulates p53 stability and function
in downstream signaling.


The human Period 2 (hPer2) factor is a transcriptional regulator placed
at the core of the circadian clock mechanism responsible for generating
the negative feedback loop that sustains the clock. Its relevance to
human diseases is underlined by alterations in its function that impacts
many biochemical and physiological processes and, when absent, results in
the development of various cancers. The tumor suppressor role of Per2 is
speculated to involve transcriptional activation of p53, altered
expression of cell cycle components, and regulation of the DNA-damage
response pathway. However, it is entirely unclear how Per2 operates
mechanistically. First, we identified hPer2 binds the C-terminus half of
human p53 (hp53) and forms a stable trimeric complex with hp53s negative
regulator, the oncogenic protein Mdm2. Second, we determined that hPer2
binding to hp53 prevents Mdm2 from ubiquitinating and targeting hp53 by
the proteasome. Accordingly, downregulation of hPer2 expression directly
impacts hp53 levels whereas its overexpression influences both hp53
protein stability and transcription. Furthermore, we spatially define the
distribution of the trimeric complex and determine the site for
processing to be located in the nucleus. Third, we establish that
hp53-mediated gene transcription is influenced by the presence of hPer2.
Target genes such as 14-3-3, hp21WAF1/CIP1, and gadd45 show a synergistic
increase in expression when hPer2 and hp53 are co-expressed in a
hp53-deficient background. This result is the direct consequence of hPer2
dissociation of hp53 as result of checkpoint activation as shown by
studies performed using a constitutively bound form of the hPer2/hp53
complex. Overall, our findings directly place hPer2 at the heart of the
hp53-mediated response by modulating its stability and controlling its
function.Citation Format: Carla V. Finkielstein, Tetsuya Gotoh, Marian
Vila-Caballer, carlo santos, jingjing liu, jianhua yang. The circadian
factor period 2 modulates p53 stability and function in downstream
signaling. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5173.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5173

