Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of colon macrophages prevents colitis and colon cancer
triggered by commensal bacteria.


We have previously shown that selected commensal bacteria contribute to
colorectal carcinogenesis through bystander effects. Specifically,
Enterococcus faecalis, a human intestinal commensal, induces colitis and
colon cancer in Il10/- mice. In this study, we hypothesized that tissue
macrophages triggered by E. faecalis were exclusively responsible for
epithelial cell transformation. We evaluated the role of macrophages by
depleting them from the colon in these mice and observing their loss on
colorectal carcinogenesis.To deplete colon macrophages in Il10/ and
control mice, we administered encapsulated clodronate liposomes (ECL) via
weekly rectal enemas. Mice were colonized with E. faecalis strain
OG1RFSS. Controls consisted of: 1) Il10/- mice given ECL enemas but not
colonized with enterococci; 2) Il10/ mice colonized with E. faecalis but
given sham liposome enemas containing no clodronate (SL); and 3) Il10+/+
mice colonized with E. faecalis and given ECL enemas. Mice were treated
for 9 months and colon biopsies evaluated by immunohistochemical staining
for numbers of macrophages; inflammation; cancer; presence of
4-hydroxy-2-nonenal protein adducts; and expression of cyclooxygenase
(COX)-2, TNF-, netrin-1, and WNT/-catenin signaling.Staining of colon
biopsies using F4/80 (a murine macrophage marker) showed significant
decreases in numbers of macrophages for mice administered ECL enemas
compared to mice given SL enemas (P We have previously shown that
selected commensal bacteria contribute to colorectal carcinogenesis
through bystander effects. Specifically, Enterococcus faecalis, a human
intestinal commensal, induces colitis and colon cancer in Il10/- mice. In
this study, we hypothesized that tissue macrophages triggered by E.
faecalis were exclusively responsible for epithelial cell transformation.
We evaluated the role of macrophages by depleting them from the colon in
these mice and observing their loss on colorectal carcinogenesis.To
deplete colon macrophages in Il10/ and control mice, we administered
encapsulated clodronate liposomes (ECL) via weekly rectal enemas. Mice
were colonized with E. faecalis strain OG1RFSS. Controls consisted of: 1)
Il10/- mice given ECL enemas but not colonized with enterococci; 2) Il10/
mice colonized with E. faecalis but given sham liposome enemas containing
no clodronate (SL); and 3) Il10+/+ mice colonized with E. faecalis and
given ECL enemas. Mice were treated for 9 months and colon biopsies
evaluated by immunohistochemical staining for numbers of macrophages;
inflammation; cancer; presence of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal protein adducts;
and expression of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, TNF-, netrin-1, and
WNT/-catenin signaling.Staining of colon biopsies using F4/80 (a murine
macrophage marker) showed significant decreases in numbers of macrophages
for mice administered ECL enemas compared to mice given SL enemas (P
<0.001). As expected, no colitis or cancer occurred in E.
faecalis-colonized Il10+/+ mice. For E. faecalis-colonized Il10/ mice
administered SL enemas, severe colitis and colon cancer (5 of 12 mice)
developed. In contrast, for E. faecalis-colonized Il10/ mice administered
ECL enemas, no colitis (P We have previously shown that selected
commensal bacteria contribute to colorectal carcinogenesis through
bystander effects. Specifically, Enterococcus faecalis, a human
intestinal commensal, induces colitis and colon cancer in Il10/- mice. In
this study, we hypothesized that tissue macrophages triggered by E.
faecalis were exclusively responsible for epithelial cell transformation.
We evaluated the role of macrophages by depleting them from the colon in
these mice and observing their loss on colorectal carcinogenesis.To
deplete colon macrophages in Il10/ and control mice, we administered
encapsulated clodronate liposomes (ECL) via weekly rectal enemas. Mice
were colonized with E. faecalis strain OG1RFSS. Controls consisted of: 1)
Il10/- mice given ECL enemas but not colonized with enterococci; 2) Il10/
mice colonized with E. faecalis but given sham liposome enemas containing
no clodronate (SL); and 3) Il10+/+ mice colonized with E. faecalis and
given ECL enemas. Mice were treated for 9 months and colon biopsies
evaluated by immunohistochemical staining for numbers of macrophages;
inflammation; cancer; presence of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal protein adducts;
and expression of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, TNF-, netrin-1, and
WNT/-catenin signaling.Staining of colon biopsies using F4/80 (a murine
macrophage marker) showed significant decreases in numbers of macrophages
for mice administered ECL enemas compared to mice given SL enemas (P
<0.001). As expected, no colitis or cancer occurred in E.
faecalis-colonized Il10+/+ mice. For E. faecalis-colonized Il10/ mice
administered SL enemas, severe colitis and colon cancer (5 of 12 mice)
developed. In contrast, for E. faecalis-colonized Il10/ mice administered
ECL enemas, no colitis (P <0.0001) or cancers (P = 0.037) developed. ECL
enemas significantly decreased the expression of COX-2, TNF-, and
netrin-1, and presence of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal protein adducts, suggesting
that macrophage depletion by clodronate eliminated bystander effects.
Finally, macrophage depletion also significantly decreased -catenin
signaling in colon biopsies.These findings strongly suggest that the
activation of colon macrophages by E. faecalis is necessary for
inflammation and cancer development in the IL-10 knockout model. The
reduction or elimination of expression of COX-2, TNF-, netrin-1, and
4-hydroxy-2-nonenal protein adducts further supports a key role for these
innate immune cells in generating bystander effects. Our results provide
potential new strategies for preventing colorectal cancer.

