Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel caspase-3 activator, L14R8, induces apoptosis in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia cells.


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a B-cell malignancy and leukemia
cells accumulate in bone marrow, lymph node, and peripheral blood due to
decreased apoptosis. High levels of Bcl-2 family anti-apoptotic and
inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) in leukemic lymphocytes are
primarily responsible for defective apoptosis in CLL. Both intrinsic
caspase-9-mediated and extrinsic caspase-8-dependent apoptosis pathways
activate downstream procaspase-3 to active casapce-3. In normal (n=4) as
well as CLL lymphocytes (n=9), there is consistent expression of
procaspase-3. However, active caspase-3 was present in normal lymphocytes
but not in CLL cells suggesting that CLL cells have defective endogenous
apoptosis. Hence, we hypothesized that compounds that can directly
activate the functional ability of procaspase-3, should overcome the
checkpoints of cell death and trigger apoptosis in CLL lymphocytes.
Procaspase activating compounds (PAC; Vanquish Oncology) convert
executioner procaspases to their active forms by chelating labile zinc on
these enzymes. We have tested L14R8, a potent analogue of PAC, in primary
CLL cells. The IC50 of L14R8-induced apoptosis in CLL was 7.7M (n=12,
24hrs). L14R8 (10 M) induced apoptosis as early as 6 hrs along with
mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP). The drug
significantly induced apoptosis in CLL patient samples (n=4) cultured in
suspension cultures (60%, p=0.023,) as well as CLL lymphocytes under
microenvironmental protection of marrow stromal cells (40%, p=0.011)
albeit at a lower rate. Mechanistically, L14R8-treatment reduced
uncleaved procaspases-3 and -9 expression and increased cleaved active
caspases-3 and -9 expression (n=3). Consistent with the mechanism of
action of L14R18 on terminal caspases, WT as well as cells lacking BAX
and BAK (mouse embryo fibroblasts) were equally sensitive to this agent.
Consistent with L14R8 mechanism, addition of exogenous Zinc ion
completely reversed L14R8-mediated apoptosis of CLL lymphocytes
(p=0.0063, n=4), but did not affect staurosporin-induced apoptosis in
these lymphocytes. Moreover, L14R8-induced 86% (range 58-90%, n=4) cell
death in CLL lymphocytes, which was reduced by pan caspase-inhibitors,
Z-VAD to 58% (range 32-79%) and Q-VD-OPh to 35% (range 20-55%) cell
death, which indicated the mechanistic recovery of L14R8-mediated
apoptosis. Smac (the inhibitor of IAPs) protein expression was increased
in CLL cells after treatment with L14R8. With respect to the therapeutic
index, at 24 hrs, L14R8 induced 79% apoptosis in CLL cells (range
46%-97%, n=14) and only 18% (16-28%, n=3) in lymphocytes from healthy
donors. We conclude that L14R8 induced apoptosis through activation of
procaspase-3 to active caspase-3 in CLL cells. L14R8 and other PAC
provide therapeutic index and may be developed into targeted therapeutics
for patients with CLL.*Funded by Vanquish Oncology

