Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Are alcohol drinking and cigarette smoking related to risk of
glioma? A large prospective U.S. cohort study.


Background: Glioma is a relatively uncommon and highly fatal malignancy
with few known risk factors. Alcohol consumption and cigarette smoking
are associated with an increased risk of several types of cancer, but
whether these exposures are related to the risk of glioma remains
unclear.Methods: We prospectively examined the relationship between
cigarette smoking, alcohol intake, and risk of glioma in the National
Institutes of Health-AARP Diet and Health Study, a large prospective
cohort of 477,095 U.S. men and women between the ages of 50-71 years.
Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for glioma risk
according to alcohol intake (total alcohol, beer, wine, and liquor) and
smoking status, intensity, and, among former smokers, time since quitting
were calculated using models adjusted for sex, education, marital status,
and race/ethnicity.Results: During a median 10.5 person-years of
follow-up, 492 men and 212 women were diagnosed with glioma. Among men,
current, heavier (>20 cigarettes per day) smoking was associated with a
reduced risk of glioma compared to never smoking (HR=0.40, 95% CI:
0.21-0.79). Men who quit smoking 2 drinks per day versus 2 drinks per day
versus 2 drinks per day versus <1 drink per week: HR=0.56, 95% CI:
0.33-0.93; P-trend=0.03) and women (1 drink per week versus 2 drinks per
day versus <1 drink per week: HR=0.56, 95% CI: 0.33-0.93; P-trend=0.03)
and women (1 drink per week versus <1 drink per week: HR=0.66, 95% CI:
0.33-1.34; P-trend=0.27). Results were similar by education level, after
mutual adjustment for smoking and alcohol, and after restricting to
glioblastoma, the most common and lethal histological subtype of
glioma.Conclusions: Among men, current, heavy cigarette smoking and
greater alcohol, particularly beer, consumption were inversely associated
with the risk of glioma. Pooled analyses of prospective studies are
needed to investigate more precisely the potential influence of these
exposures on glioma risk.

