Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Taxane-induced hedgehog activation promotes stemness of breast
cancer cells.


Recurrence of breast cancer after chemotherapy is thought to arise from
resistant breast cancer stem cells which are eventually able to
repopulate the tumor. The hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway has been shown
to regulate the proliferation and survival of breast cancer stem cells,
and has been shown to promote resistance to chemotherapy through the
activation of multi-drug resistance and prosurvival pathways. Here we
report that exposure of heterogenous breast cancer cell lines (T47D and
SKBr3) to low doses (1-10nM) of docetaxel resulted in activation of HH
signaling. Increased levels of sonic HH were detected in supernatants of
breast cancer cells at 6- hours post-treatment. This release was
accompanied by increased expression and nuclear translocation of Gli-1,
peaking at 24 hours after exposure. Additionally, increased expression of
the PTCH receptor was observed by western blotting in these cells 24
hours after treatment, indicating activation of a Gli-1 induced negative
feeback loop. Increased mammosphere formation was observed in cells after
preincubation with low dose docetaxel. Secondary sphere forming
efficiency (SFE) was also increased in pretreated cells. The increase in
SFE was similar to that of cell lines cultured in the presence of
recombinant SHH. Additionally, the increase in SFE observed after
docetaxel treatment could be blocked by the addition of sublethal doses
of the hedgehog inhibitor cyclopamine. These results suggest that
hedgehog pathway activation induced by docetaxel treatment could result
in increased stemness of breast cancer cell lines. We propose that
chemotherapy may activate stem cell signaling pathways, resulting in
expansion of cancer stem cells and increased drug resistance.

