Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor CASZ1 inhibits normal myoblast and
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) migration.


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma of
childhood, and is thought to arise from primitive mesenchymal cells
committed to skeletal muscle differentiation. Less than 30% of patients
with metastatic disease survive even with the most intensive treatment
regimens. Approximately 50% of patients with RMS have intermediate risk
and the event-free survival of the intermediate risk patients is
approximately 70%. However, even within this group, the survival of
patients with metastatic embryonal tumors is much poorer (50%). Thus
understanding the molecular mechanism of RMS metastasis and the
development of therapeutic strategies to inhibit RMS metastasis is
critical for these patients. We have reported that zinc finger
transcription factor CASZ1 functions as a tumor suppressor gene in
neuroblastoma. In these studies we found that CASZ1 regulates genes
involved in cell movement and many pertaining to skeletal/muscle system
development. To understand whether the induction of muscle developmental
genes by CASZ1 was an anomaly associated with pathology, we evaluated the
expression and regulation of CASZ1 in normal myoblasts. CASZ1 expression
significantly increased when the C2C12 murine myoblast cell line
differentiated upon serum withdrawal. Knockdown of CASZ1 in myoblasts
causes a 30% increase in cell migration (pRhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the
most common soft-tissue sarcoma of childhood, and is thought to arise
from primitive mesenchymal cells committed to skeletal muscle
differentiation. Less than 30% of patients with metastatic disease
survive even with the most intensive treatment regimens. Approximately
50% of patients with RMS have intermediate risk and the event-free
survival of the intermediate risk patients is approximately 70%. However,
even within this group, the survival of patients with metastatic
embryonal tumors is much poorer (50%). Thus understanding the molecular
mechanism of RMS metastasis and the development of therapeutic strategies
to inhibit RMS metastasis is critical for these patients. We have
reported that zinc finger transcription factor CASZ1 functions as a tumor
suppressor gene in neuroblastoma. In these studies we found that CASZ1
regulates genes involved in cell movement and many pertaining to
skeletal/muscle system development. To understand whether the induction
of muscle developmental genes by CASZ1 was an anomaly associated with
pathology, we evaluated the expression and regulation of CASZ1 in normal
myoblasts. CASZ1 expression significantly increased when the C2C12 murine
myoblast cell line differentiated upon serum withdrawal. Knockdown of
CASZ1 in myoblasts causes a 30% increase in cell migration (p<0.02) as
determined using an Essen IncuCyte scratch-wound healing assay.
Furthermore knock-down of CASZ1 in C2C12 cells leads to a 50% decrease in
expression of the skeletal muscle development gene myogenin while
over-expression of CASZ1 leads to 2-fold increase in myogenin mRNA. Since
CASZ1 regulates aspects of normal muscle development, we hypothesized
that its dysregulation in RMS may impact tumor progression. To test this
hypothesis, we first evaluated the expression of CASZ1 in primary RMS
tumors. We found that CASZ1 mRNA level in embryonal RMS patients samples
is 1.5 lower than in normal muscle or alveolar RMS (pRhabdomyosarcoma
(RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma of childhood, and is thought
to arise from primitive mesenchymal cells committed to skeletal muscle
differentiation. Less than 30% of patients with metastatic disease
survive even with the most intensive treatment regimens. Approximately
50% of patients with RMS have intermediate risk and the event-free
survival of the intermediate risk patients is approximately 70%. However,
even within this group, the survival of patients with metastatic
embryonal tumors is much poorer (50%). Thus understanding the molecular
mechanism of RMS metastasis and the development of therapeutic strategies
to inhibit RMS metastasis is critical for these patients. We have
reported that zinc finger transcription factor CASZ1 functions as a tumor
suppressor gene in neuroblastoma. In these studies we found that CASZ1
regulates genes involved in cell movement and many pertaining to
skeletal/muscle system development. To understand whether the induction
of muscle developmental genes by CASZ1 was an anomaly associated with
pathology, we evaluated the expression and regulation of CASZ1 in normal
myoblasts. CASZ1 expression significantly increased when the C2C12 murine
myoblast cell line differentiated upon serum withdrawal. Knockdown of
CASZ1 in myoblasts causes a 30% increase in cell migration (p<0.02) as
determined using an Essen IncuCyte scratch-wound healing assay.
Furthermore knock-down of CASZ1 in C2C12 cells leads to a 50% decrease in
expression of the skeletal muscle development gene myogenin while
over-expression of CASZ1 leads to 2-fold increase in myogenin mRNA. Since
CASZ1 regulates aspects of normal muscle development, we hypothesized
that its dysregulation in RMS may impact tumor progression. To test this
hypothesis, we first evaluated the expression of CASZ1 in primary RMS
tumors. We found that CASZ1 mRNA level in embryonal RMS patients samples
is 1.5 lower than in normal muscle or alveolar RMS (p<0.001). To
investigate the role of CASZ1 in embryonal RMS cell growth and migration,
we developed a Tet-On CASZ1 expression system using the RD RMS cell line.
Overexpression of CASZ1 does not affect RD cell proliferation based on
MTS and IncuCyte cell confluence assays. Over-expression of CASZ reduces
cell motility by 20% (pRhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common
soft-tissue sarcoma of childhood, and is thought to arise from primitive
mesenchymal cells committed to skeletal muscle differentiation. Less than
30% of patients with metastatic disease survive even with the most
intensive treatment regimens. Approximately 50% of patients with RMS have
intermediate risk and the event-free survival of the intermediate risk
patients is approximately 70%. However, even within this group, the
survival of patients with metastatic embryonal tumors is much poorer
(50%). Thus understanding the molecular mechanism of RMS metastasis and
the development of therapeutic strategies to inhibit RMS metastasis is
critical for these patients. We have reported that zinc finger
transcription factor CASZ1 functions as a tumor suppressor gene in
neuroblastoma. In these studies we found that CASZ1 regulates genes
involved in cell movement and many pertaining to skeletal/muscle system
development. To understand whether the induction of muscle developmental
genes by CASZ1 was an anomaly associated with pathology, we evaluated the
expression and regulation of CASZ1 in normal myoblasts. CASZ1 expression
significantly increased when the C2C12 murine myoblast cell line
differentiated upon serum withdrawal. Knockdown of CASZ1 in myoblasts
causes a 30% increase in cell migration (p<0.02) as determined using an
Essen IncuCyte scratch-wound healing assay. Furthermore knock-down of
CASZ1 in C2C12 cells leads to a 50% decrease in expression of the
skeletal muscle development gene myogenin while over-expression of CASZ1
leads to 2-fold increase in myogenin mRNA. Since CASZ1 regulates aspects
of normal muscle development, we hypothesized that its dysregulation in
RMS may impact tumor progression. To test this hypothesis, we first
evaluated the expression of CASZ1 in primary RMS tumors. We found that
CASZ1 mRNA level in embryonal RMS patients samples is 1.5 lower than in
normal muscle or alveolar RMS (p<0.001). To investigate the role of CASZ1
in embryonal RMS cell growth and migration, we developed a Tet-On CASZ1
expression system using the RD RMS cell line. Overexpression of CASZ1
does not affect RD cell proliferation based on MTS and IncuCyte cell
confluence assays. Over-expression of CASZ reduces cell motility by 20%
(p<0.01) using an Essen IncuCyte scratch-wound healing assay. Knockdown
of CASZ1 in RD cells increases cell migration by 40% (pRhabdomyosarcoma
(RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma of childhood, and is thought
to arise from primitive mesenchymal cells committed to skeletal muscle
differentiation. Less than 30% of patients with metastatic disease
survive even with the most intensive treatment regimens. Approximately
50% of patients with RMS have intermediate risk and the event-free
survival of the intermediate risk patients is approximately 70%. However,
even within this group, the survival of patients with metastatic
embryonal tumors is much poorer (50%). Thus understanding the molecular
mechanism of RMS metastasis and the development of therapeutic strategies
to inhibit RMS metastasis is critical for these patients. We have
reported that zinc finger transcription factor CASZ1 functions as a tumor
suppressor gene in neuroblastoma. In these studies we found that CASZ1
regulates genes involved in cell movement and many pertaining to
skeletal/muscle system development. To understand whether the induction
of muscle developmental genes by CASZ1 was an anomaly associated with
pathology, we evaluated the expression and regulation of CASZ1 in normal
myoblasts. CASZ1 expression significantly increased when the C2C12 murine
myoblast cell line differentiated upon serum withdrawal. Knockdown of
CASZ1 in myoblasts causes a 30% increase in cell migration (p<0.02) as
determined using an Essen IncuCyte scratch-wound healing assay.
Furthermore knock-down of CASZ1 in C2C12 cells leads to a 50% decrease in
expression of the skeletal muscle development gene myogenin while
over-expression of CASZ1 leads to 2-fold increase in myogenin mRNA. Since
CASZ1 regulates aspects of normal muscle development, we hypothesized
that its dysregulation in RMS may impact tumor progression. To test this
hypothesis, we first evaluated the expression of CASZ1 in primary RMS
tumors. We found that CASZ1 mRNA level in embryonal RMS patients samples
is 1.5 lower than in normal muscle or alveolar RMS (p<0.001). To
investigate the role of CASZ1 in embryonal RMS cell growth and migration,
we developed a Tet-On CASZ1 expression system using the RD RMS cell line.
Overexpression of CASZ1 does not affect RD cell proliferation based on
MTS and IncuCyte cell confluence assays. Over-expression of CASZ reduces
cell motility by 20% (p<0.01) using an Essen IncuCyte scratch-wound
healing assay. Knockdown of CASZ1 in RD cells increases cell migration by
40% (p<0.01) but does not affect cell proliferation. However when CASZ1
is expressed in the presence of a muscle inducing differentiation cue,
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, TPA, the proliferation of RD cells
is suppressed an additional 40% (pRhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most
common soft-tissue sarcoma of childhood, and is thought to arise from
primitive mesenchymal cells committed to skeletal muscle differentiation.
Less than 30% of patients with metastatic disease survive even with the
most intensive treatment regimens. Approximately 50% of patients with RMS
have intermediate risk and the event-free survival of the intermediate
risk patients is approximately 70%. However, even within this group, the
survival of patients with metastatic embryonal tumors is much poorer
(50%). Thus understanding the molecular mechanism of RMS metastasis and
the development of therapeutic strategies to inhibit RMS metastasis is
critical for these patients. We have reported that zinc finger
transcription factor CASZ1 functions as a tumor suppressor gene in
neuroblastoma. In these studies we found that CASZ1 regulates genes
involved in cell movement and many pertaining to skeletal/muscle system
development. To understand whether the induction of muscle developmental
genes by CASZ1 was an anomaly associated with pathology, we evaluated the
expression and regulation of CASZ1 in normal myoblasts. CASZ1 expression
significantly increased when the C2C12 murine myoblast cell line
differentiated upon serum withdrawal. Knockdown of CASZ1 in myoblasts
causes a 30% increase in cell migration (p<0.02) as determined using an
Essen IncuCyte scratch-wound healing assay. Furthermore knock-down of
CASZ1 in C2C12 cells leads to a 50% decrease in expression of the
skeletal muscle development gene myogenin while over-expression of CASZ1
leads to 2-fold increase in myogenin mRNA. Since CASZ1 regulates aspects
of normal muscle development, we hypothesized that its dysregulation in
RMS may impact tumor progression. To test this hypothesis, we first
evaluated the expression of CASZ1 in primary RMS tumors. We found that
CASZ1 mRNA level in embryonal RMS patients samples is 1.5 lower than in
normal muscle or alveolar RMS (p<0.001). To investigate the role of CASZ1
in embryonal RMS cell growth and migration, we developed a Tet-On CASZ1
expression system using the RD RMS cell line. Overexpression of CASZ1
does not affect RD cell proliferation based on MTS and IncuCyte cell
confluence assays. Over-expression of CASZ reduces cell motility by 20%
(p<0.01) using an Essen IncuCyte scratch-wound healing assay. Knockdown
of CASZ1 in RD cells increases cell migration by 40% (p<0.01) but does
not affect cell proliferation. However when CASZ1 is expressed in the
presence of a muscle inducing differentiation cue,
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, TPA, the proliferation of RD cells
is suppressed an additional 40% (p<0.01). Taken together, our results
suggest that regulation of myogenin expression and cell migration by
CASZ1 in C2C12 maybe integral to proper myogenic differentiation, and
dysregulation of CASZ1 during early myogenesis may contribute to
embryonal RMS tumorigenesis and metastasis.Citation Format: Zhihui Liu,
Wilson Chan, Carol J. Thiele. Tumor suppressor CASZ1 inhibits normal
myoblast and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) migration. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2630.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2630

