Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination external beam and internal radiation via 131I-CLR1404
in the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma xenografts.


Radiotherapy (RT) is a central treatment modality for head and neck
cancer (HNC). However, optimal outcome is commonly limited by the
radiation tolerance of adjacent normal tissue structures. Radiation is
sometimes valuable in the setting of locoregional tumor recurrence,
however the risk of significant normal tissue toxicity is substantial
with repeat irradiation and can have a profound adverse impact on patient
quality of life. Although technical advances including intensity
modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) can reduce normal tissue effects, the
problem of repeat exposure of normal tissues to radiation is frequently
limiting. The radiolabeled drug 124/131I-CLR1404 is a phospholipid ether
analogue (PLE) that accumulates preferentially within malignant tumors
and enables internal delivery of radiation. This allows a combination of
external and internal radiotherapy delivery with a goal of improving
treatment outcome without enhanced normal tissue toxicities.In this
study, we characterized the ability of 131I-CLR1404 to augment RT
response using xenografted mice harboring human squamous cell carcinomas
(SCC). We determined tumor growth delay as well as tumor and normal
tissue dose distribution of 131I-CLR-1404 via Monte Carlo simulation
using PET data generated with 124I-CLR1404 imaging. Tumor growth delay
was extended by 15.5 days using combined 3.7MBq 131I-CLR1404 and RT
compared to RT or 131I-CLR1404 alone. In combination therapy, single dose
administration of 7.4 MBq 131I-CLR1404 as well as split dosing with 2 x
3.7 MBq separated by one week showed the same additional growth delay of
27 days compared to single dose of 3.7 MBq. Monitoring drug distribution
via PET/CT showed high tumor selectivity with a tumor-to-liver ratio of
6.20.65 and a tumor-to-muscle ratio of 6.70.21.These data illustrate the
tumor selectivity of the CLR1404 PLE delivery platform as well as
augmentation of tumor response with combined RT and 131I-CLR1404
treatment. De-intensification of external beam radiation dose, with
attendant reduction in normal tissue toxicities so common in HNC patients
represents a central objective to be tested in controlled clinical trials
with the ultimate goal of improving treatment outcome and quality of life
for HNC patients.

