Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic relevance of the most common chromosomal deletions in
prostate cancer.


A variety of chromosomal deletions are known to occur frequently in
prostate cancer. Target genes and clinical significance of most of these
deletions are unknown. To learn more about epidemiology, association with
tumor phenotype, relevance for PSA recurrence and associations with other
molecular features, several relevant deletions were analyzed on a
large-scale tissue microarray platform in this project.For the purpose of
this study, a tissue microarray containing 11,156 prostate cancers was
analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). All cancers were
analyzed with dual-labeling probes including PTEN (10q23), TP53
(17p13.1), FOXP1 (3p14.1), CHD1 (5q21) and MAP3K7 (6q15) together with
their respective centromere probes. In addition, ERG fusion status and
tumor cell proliferation (Ki67 labeling index) of all cancers were
determined by immunohistochemistry. Deletions were seen for PTEN in 17.9%
of 6,122, TP53 in 14.7% of 7,604, FOXP1 in 9.2% of 6,059, CHD1 in 9.9% of
7,026, and for MAP3K7 in 18.7% of 3,528 interpretable cases. All
deletions were strongly linked to the ERG status (pA variety of
chromosomal deletions are known to occur frequently in prostate cancer.
Target genes and clinical significance of most of these deletions are
unknown. To learn more about epidemiology, association with tumor
phenotype, relevance for PSA recurrence and associations with other
molecular features, several relevant deletions were analyzed on a
large-scale tissue microarray platform in this project.For the purpose of
this study, a tissue microarray containing 11,156 prostate cancers was
analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). All cancers were
analyzed with dual-labeling probes including PTEN (10q23), TP53
(17p13.1), FOXP1 (3p14.1), CHD1 (5q21) and MAP3K7 (6q15) together with
their respective centromere probes. In addition, ERG fusion status and
tumor cell proliferation (Ki67 labeling index) of all cancers were
determined by immunohistochemistry. Deletions were seen for PTEN in 17.9%
of 6,122, TP53 in 14.7% of 7,604, FOXP1 in 9.2% of 6,059, CHD1 in 9.9% of
7,026, and for MAP3K7 in 18.7% of 3,528 interpretable cases. All
deletions were strongly linked to the ERG status (p<0.0001 each). In ERG
positive/negative cancers, the deletion frequency was 27%/11% for PTEN,
22%/9% for TP53, 22%/7% for FOXP1, 6%/18% for CHD1, and 11%/28% for
MAP3K7. The frequency of all these deletions increased significantly with
tumor stage and grade. This was most prominently true for TP53, PTEN and
MAP3K7 (pA variety of chromosomal deletions are known to occur frequently
in prostate cancer. Target genes and clinical significance of most of
these deletions are unknown. To learn more about epidemiology,
association with tumor phenotype, relevance for PSA recurrence and
associations with other molecular features, several relevant deletions
were analyzed on a large-scale tissue microarray platform in this
project.For the purpose of this study, a tissue microarray containing
11,156 prostate cancers was analyzed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). All cancers were analyzed with dual-labeling probes
including PTEN (10q23), TP53 (17p13.1), FOXP1 (3p14.1), CHD1 (5q21) and
MAP3K7 (6q15) together with their respective centromere probes. In
addition, ERG fusion status and tumor cell proliferation (Ki67 labeling
index) of all cancers were determined by immunohistochemistry. Deletions
were seen for PTEN in 17.9% of 6,122, TP53 in 14.7% of 7,604, FOXP1 in
9.2% of 6,059, CHD1 in 9.9% of 7,026, and for MAP3K7 in 18.7% of 3,528
interpretable cases. All deletions were strongly linked to the ERG status
(p<0.0001 each). In ERG positive/negative cancers, the deletion frequency
was 27%/11% for PTEN, 22%/9% for TP53, 22%/7% for FOXP1, 6%/18% for CHD1,
and 11%/28% for MAP3K7. The frequency of all these deletions increased
significantly with tumor stage and grade. This was most prominently true
for TP53, PTEN and MAP3K7 (p<0.0001 each). In addition, there was a
significant association of most deletions with the likelihood of PSA
recurrence (PTEN, TP53, MAP3K7, CHD1: pA variety of chromosomal deletions
are known to occur frequently in prostate cancer. Target genes and
clinical significance of most of these deletions are unknown. To learn
more about epidemiology, association with tumor phenotype, relevance for
PSA recurrence and associations with other molecular features, several
relevant deletions were analyzed on a large-scale tissue microarray
platform in this project.For the purpose of this study, a tissue
microarray containing 11,156 prostate cancers was analyzed by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). All cancers were analyzed with
dual-labeling probes including PTEN (10q23), TP53 (17p13.1), FOXP1
(3p14.1), CHD1 (5q21) and MAP3K7 (6q15) together with their respective
centromere probes. In addition, ERG fusion status and tumor cell
proliferation (Ki67 labeling index) of all cancers were determined by
immunohistochemistry. Deletions were seen for PTEN in 17.9% of 6,122,
TP53 in 14.7% of 7,604, FOXP1 in 9.2% of 6,059, CHD1 in 9.9% of 7,026,
and for MAP3K7 in 18.7% of 3,528 interpretable cases. All deletions were
strongly linked to the ERG status (p<0.0001 each). In ERG
positive/negative cancers, the deletion frequency was 27%/11% for PTEN,
22%/9% for TP53, 22%/7% for FOXP1, 6%/18% for CHD1, and 11%/28% for
MAP3K7. The frequency of all these deletions increased significantly with
tumor stage and grade. This was most prominently true for TP53, PTEN and
MAP3K7 (p<0.0001 each). In addition, there was a significant association
of most deletions with the likelihood of PSA recurrence (PTEN, TP53,
MAP3K7, CHD1: p<0.0001; FOXP1: p=0.1486).The combination of deletion
information provided even better prognostic information. There was a dose
dependent relationship between the number of deletions and PSA
recurrence. Tumors with no deletion had the best clinical outcome
followed by cancers, with one, two, and three or more deletions (pA
variety of chromosomal deletions are known to occur frequently in
prostate cancer. Target genes and clinical significance of most of these
deletions are unknown. To learn more about epidemiology, association with
tumor phenotype, relevance for PSA recurrence and associations with other
molecular features, several relevant deletions were analyzed on a
large-scale tissue microarray platform in this project.For the purpose of
this study, a tissue microarray containing 11,156 prostate cancers was
analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). All cancers were
analyzed with dual-labeling probes including PTEN (10q23), TP53
(17p13.1), FOXP1 (3p14.1), CHD1 (5q21) and MAP3K7 (6q15) together with
their respective centromere probes. In addition, ERG fusion status and
tumor cell proliferation (Ki67 labeling index) of all cancers were
determined by immunohistochemistry. Deletions were seen for PTEN in 17.9%
of 6,122, TP53 in 14.7% of 7,604, FOXP1 in 9.2% of 6,059, CHD1 in 9.9% of
7,026, and for MAP3K7 in 18.7% of 3,528 interpretable cases. All
deletions were strongly linked to the ERG status (p<0.0001 each). In ERG
positive/negative cancers, the deletion frequency was 27%/11% for PTEN,
22%/9% for TP53, 22%/7% for FOXP1, 6%/18% for CHD1, and 11%/28% for
MAP3K7. The frequency of all these deletions increased significantly with
tumor stage and grade. This was most prominently true for TP53, PTEN and
MAP3K7 (p<0.0001 each). In addition, there was a significant association
of most deletions with the likelihood of PSA recurrence (PTEN, TP53,
MAP3K7, CHD1: p<0.0001; FOXP1: p=0.1486).The combination of deletion
information provided even better prognostic information. There was a dose
dependent relationship between the number of deletions and PSA
recurrence. Tumors with no deletion had the best clinical outcome
followed by cancers, with one, two, and three or more deletions
(p<0.0001). Particular strong prognostic information was obtained by
combining PTEN and p53 deletions. Patients with none of these alterations
had 17% PSA recurrence while the respective figure was 40% on patients
with both deletions.In summary, these data show, that chromosomal
deletions are tightly linked with ERG status in prostate cancer and that
most of these deletions have clinical relevance. Combinatorial analysis
of genomic alterations in prostate cancer might provide clinically
relevant information.

