Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivated hippo-pathway as a prognostic biomarker in
hepatocellular carcinoma.


The contact inhibition of proliferation and cell movement is crucially
important in embryonic development, tissue regeneration, and wound
healing for the well-controlled organogenesis. The disruption of contact
inhibition results in sustained cell proliferation and uncontrolled cell
movement, which is a hallmark of solid tumors. Loss of contact inhibition
allows cancer cells to facilitate the invasion of neighboring tissues and
metastasis to remote organs. The recently identified Hippo signaling
pathway has been implicated in contact inhibition of proliferation as
well as organ size control. Indeed, the conditional inactivation of
hippo-pathway in liver leads to enlarged liver (massive hepatomegaly) and
tumorigenesis (Cell, 2007). Clinically, HCC often shows the huge tumor
more than size in 10cm, strongly speculating that inactivation of
hippo-pathway plays an important role in HCC progression. However,
clinical significance of hippo-pathway in HCC is largely unknown. Here,
we investigated the clinical significance of inactivated hippo-pathway,
which induce overexpressed oncogenes (YAP/TAZ), using resected 80 HCC
samples, and suggested the tumoral-high TAZmRNA expression was a worse
prognostic biomarker for HCC patients represented by high proliferative
activity. The tumor size in High TAZmRNA expression group (n =24) was
significantly larger than that in low expression group (n = 56) (P The
contact inhibition of proliferation and cell movement is crucially
important in embryonic development, tissue regeneration, and wound
healing for the well-controlled organogenesis. The disruption of contact
inhibition results in sustained cell proliferation and uncontrolled cell
movement, which is a hallmark of solid tumors. Loss of contact inhibition
allows cancer cells to facilitate the invasion of neighboring tissues and
metastasis to remote organs. The recently identified Hippo signaling
pathway has been implicated in contact inhibition of proliferation as
well as organ size control. Indeed, the conditional inactivation of
hippo-pathway in liver leads to enlarged liver (massive hepatomegaly) and
tumorigenesis (Cell, 2007). Clinically, HCC often shows the huge tumor
more than size in 10cm, strongly speculating that inactivation of
hippo-pathway plays an important role in HCC progression. However,
clinical significance of hippo-pathway in HCC is largely unknown. Here,
we investigated the clinical significance of inactivated hippo-pathway,
which induce overexpressed oncogenes (YAP/TAZ), using resected 80 HCC
samples, and suggested the tumoral-high TAZmRNA expression was a worse
prognostic biomarker for HCC patients represented by high proliferative
activity. The tumor size in High TAZmRNA expression group (n =24) was
significantly larger than that in low expression group (n = 56) (P <
0.05). YAP/TAZ protein over-expression in HCC was associated with high
proliferative activity by Ki-67 positive cells. The high TAZmRNA
expression group showed significantly worsen disease free survival and
overall survival compared with that in low expression group (P = 0.01 and
0.02, respectively). Thus, inactivation of Hippo-pathway plays a crucial
role in tumor progression by accelerating proliferative activity, and
tumoral TAZmRNA expression level may be a useful prognostic biomarker in
HCC.

