Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral enclomiphene citrate lowers IGF-1 in men with secondary
hypogonadism while raising testosterone: Implications for cancer
prevention.


Introduction: Lowered hGH and IGF-1 have been linked with protection from
various cancers.Methods and Subjects: We determined levels of IGF-1 and
pituitary hormones in men with secondary hypogonadism under treatment
with enclomiphene (a.k.a. Androxal) in comparison to topical testosterone
(T) or placebo. Three, randomized, blinded, phase II studies evaluating
daily oral Androxal were performed: ZA-201 investigated 12 men taking
25mg of Androxal in comparison to a gel for 6 months, ZA-202 enrolled 119
diabetic men taking 12.5 or 25 mg Androxal versus placebo for 3 months,
and ZA-204 investigated 47 men taking 6.25mg, 12.5mg and 25mg Androxal
versus another gel for 6 weeks. All subjects had initial total T
Introduction: Lowered hGH and IGF-1 have been linked with protection from
various cancers.Methods and Subjects: We determined levels of IGF-1 and
pituitary hormones in men with secondary hypogonadism under treatment
with enclomiphene (a.k.a. Androxal) in comparison to topical testosterone
(T) or placebo. Three, randomized, blinded, phase II studies evaluating
daily oral Androxal were performed: ZA-201 investigated 12 men taking
25mg of Androxal in comparison to a gel for 6 months, ZA-202 enrolled 119
diabetic men taking 12.5 or 25 mg Androxal versus placebo for 3 months,
and ZA-204 investigated 47 men taking 6.25mg, 12.5mg and 25mg Androxal
versus another gel for 6 weeks. All subjects had initial total T <350
ng/dL and low-to-normal LH (Introduction: Lowered hGH and IGF-1 have been
linked with protection from various cancers.Methods and Subjects: We
determined levels of IGF-1 and pituitary hormones in men with secondary
hypogonadism under treatment with enclomiphene (a.k.a. Androxal) in
comparison to topical testosterone (T) or placebo. Three, randomized,
blinded, phase II studies evaluating daily oral Androxal were performed:
ZA-201 investigated 12 men taking 25mg of Androxal in comparison to a gel
for 6 months, ZA-202 enrolled 119 diabetic men taking 12.5 or 25 mg
Androxal versus placebo for 3 months, and ZA-204 investigated 47 men
taking 6.25mg, 12.5mg and 25mg Androxal versus another gel for 6 weeks.
All subjects had initial total T <350 ng/dL and low-to-normal LH (<12
IU/L). Serum samples were taken for T, LH and FSH before and after
dosing. We could not measure hGH directly but measured its marker,
liver-produced IGF-1.Results: All treatments raised T into the normal
range (300-1000 ng/dL), but placebo did not in ZA-202. Androxal elevated
LH and FSH. Gels decreased LH and FSH strongly. Unexpected was the strong
action of Androxal to lower serum IGF-1 in all three trials. Both
Androxal and topicals lowered serum IGF-1 but Androxal was more
effective. An example is given from ZA-204 below. Dose groups showed no
differences in IGF-1 before (p = 0.94) but significance after treatment
(p = 0.03),Conclusions: Endocrine profile indicate that enclomiphene
citrate stimulates the pituitary, resulting in increased LH and FSH and
eventually T. The results on IGF-1 cannot be attributed to T since
topicals, when used, raised T but not IGF-1 whereas only enclomiphene
citrate raised T but lowered IGF-1. Enclomiphene citrate is different
from topicals and may be a new way to relieve low T in men with an intact
hypothalamus-pituitary-testicular axis. If Androxal can lower hGH or
IGF-1 in aging men at risk for prostate cancer, its use in men with
secondary hypogonadism is an important new treatment.
Effect of Treatment on IGF-1

