Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression and prognostic significance of neutrophil
gelatinase-asssociated lipocalin (NGAL) in primary breast cancer.


Introduction:Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL; also known
as lipocalin 2), a member of the lipocalin family that transports small
lipophilic ligands, has gained recent attention as both a potential
biomarker and a modulator of human cancers including breast cancer. In
this study, we examined the expression ofNAGL in breast carcinoma and
evaluated the prognostic value of its expression.Methods:Tissue
microarray (TMA) blocks were made with formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissues from 207 breast cancer patients and the immunohistochemical
staining was done using an anti-NGAL antibody. The correlation between
NGAL expression and the clinicopathologic parameters such as age, tumor
size, lymph node status, Ki-67 labeling index, histologic grade, hormone
receptors and HER2/neu expression as well as clinical outcome was
evaluated.Results:NGAL was expressed in 60 breast carcinomas (21.9%). A
higher NGAL expression was noted in the younger (p=0.018) and
premenopausal women (p=0.036). NGAL expression correlated with a high
Ki-67 labeling index (p=0.001) and poor histologic grade (p=0.002). No
significant association between NGAL expression and hormone receptor
status and HER2/neu overexpression. With a median follow-up of63 months,
NGAL expression was associated with decreased disease-free survival,
especially for patients with estrogen receptor negative group (p=0.013)
and lymph node positive group (p=0.005), but not associated with overall
survival.Conclusion:NGAL is expressed in approximately one-fifth of the
breast carcinomas and its expression is correlated with several poor
prognostic markers and decreased disease-free survival. This results show
that NGAL expression may be a predictor of poor prognosis in primary
human breast cancer, especially with more aggressive clinical features

