Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacogenomic investigation of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK)
inhibitor ibrutinib (PCI-32765): drug sensitivity in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) within a tumor microenvironment-aligned high-throughput
screen.


Ibrutinib (PCI-32765) is an orally administered small molecule that
covalently binds to Cys-481 of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK). Ibrutinib
has demonstrated promise across several types of B-cell malignancies and
is currently in Phase 2/3 clinical testing. Preclinical studies have
established three key mechanisms following blunting of proximal B cell
receptor (BCR) signaling through BTK inhibition: (1) suppression of
pro-survival pathways, (2) diminished integrin activation and (3)
attenuation of chemotactic response. Single agent ibrutinib Phase 1/2
clinical trials have revealed high clinical response rates in both nave
and relapsed or refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), as well
as, relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) patients (Byrd, et
al. 2012 ASH; Wang, et al. 2012 ASH; Advani, et al. 2010 JCO). Response
rates in a phase 2 diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) clinical trial
appeared to be more prevalent in activated B-cell (ABC) over germinal
center B-cell like (GCB) DLBCL patients (Staudt et al., ASH 2012). To
gain a further understanding of ibrutinib response and inform optimal
therapeutic combinations in DLBCL, we established a combination high
throughput pharmacology screen (cHTS) with ibrutinib. Ibrutinib was
evaluated alone and in combination with 99 targeted compounds, across 17
(12 GCB; 5 ABC) DLBCL cell lines. To better align with human biology,
DLBCL cell lines were screened in the presence of human marrow stromal
cell conditioned media (hMSC-CM) and B-cell receptor stimulation via
anti-IgG/anti-IgM antibodies. Interestingly, 8/17 (47%) DLBCL cell lines
were intolerant to any external BCR stimulation, so those lines were
screened in hMSC-CM without exogenous BCR stimulation. Under our
experimental conditions, 11/17 (65%) cell lines displayed some
sensitivity (IC50 Ibrutinib (PCI-32765) is an orally administered small
molecule that covalently binds to Cys-481 of Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(BTK). Ibrutinib has demonstrated promise across several types of B-cell
malignancies and is currently in Phase 2/3 clinical testing. Preclinical
studies have established three key mechanisms following blunting of
proximal B cell receptor (BCR) signaling through BTK inhibition: (1)
suppression of pro-survival pathways, (2) diminished integrin activation
and (3) attenuation of chemotactic response. Single agent ibrutinib Phase
1/2 clinical trials have revealed high clinical response rates in both
nave and relapsed or refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), as
well as, relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) patients
(Byrd, et al. 2012 ASH; Wang, et al. 2012 ASH; Advani, et al. 2010 JCO).
Response rates in a phase 2 diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
clinical trial appeared to be more prevalent in activated B-cell (ABC)
over germinal center B-cell like (GCB) DLBCL patients (Staudt et al., ASH
2012). To gain a further understanding of ibrutinib response and inform
optimal therapeutic combinations in DLBCL, we established a combination
high throughput pharmacology screen (cHTS) with ibrutinib. Ibrutinib was
evaluated alone and in combination with 99 targeted compounds, across 17
(12 GCB; 5 ABC) DLBCL cell lines. To better align with human biology,
DLBCL cell lines were screened in the presence of human marrow stromal
cell conditioned media (hMSC-CM) and B-cell receptor stimulation via
anti-IgG/anti-IgM antibodies. Interestingly, 8/17 (47%) DLBCL cell lines
were intolerant to any external BCR stimulation, so those lines were
screened in hMSC-CM without exogenous BCR stimulation. Under our
experimental conditions, 11/17 (65%) cell lines displayed some
sensitivity (IC50 < 10 M) to ibrutinib at 72 hours based on ATPliteTM
measurements [breakdown: 4/17 (24%) highly sensitive (IC50 Ibrutinib
(PCI-32765) is an orally administered small molecule that covalently
binds to Cys-481 of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK). Ibrutinib has
demonstrated promise across several types of B-cell malignancies and is
currently in Phase 2/3 clinical testing. Preclinical studies have
established three key mechanisms following blunting of proximal B cell
receptor (BCR) signaling through BTK inhibition: (1) suppression of
pro-survival pathways, (2) diminished integrin activation and (3)
attenuation of chemotactic response. Single agent ibrutinib Phase 1/2
clinical trials have revealed high clinical response rates in both nave
and relapsed or refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), as well
as, relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) patients (Byrd, et
al. 2012 ASH; Wang, et al. 2012 ASH; Advani, et al. 2010 JCO). Response
rates in a phase 2 diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) clinical trial
appeared to be more prevalent in activated B-cell (ABC) over germinal
center B-cell like (GCB) DLBCL patients (Staudt et al., ASH 2012). To
gain a further understanding of ibrutinib response and inform optimal
therapeutic combinations in DLBCL, we established a combination high
throughput pharmacology screen (cHTS) with ibrutinib. Ibrutinib was
evaluated alone and in combination with 99 targeted compounds, across 17
(12 GCB; 5 ABC) DLBCL cell lines. To better align with human biology,
DLBCL cell lines were screened in the presence of human marrow stromal
cell conditioned media (hMSC-CM) and B-cell receptor stimulation via
anti-IgG/anti-IgM antibodies. Interestingly, 8/17 (47%) DLBCL cell lines
were intolerant to any external BCR stimulation, so those lines were
screened in hMSC-CM without exogenous BCR stimulation. Under our
experimental conditions, 11/17 (65%) cell lines displayed some
sensitivity (IC50 < 10 M) to ibrutinib at 72 hours based on ATPliteTM
measurements [breakdown: 4/17 (24%) highly sensitive (IC50 < 200 nM),
2/17 (12%) sensitive (IC50 200 nM Ibrutinib (PCI-32765) is an orally
administered small molecule that covalently binds to Cys-481 of Bruton's
tyrosine kinase (BTK). Ibrutinib has demonstrated promise across several
types of B-cell malignancies and is currently in Phase 2/3 clinical
testing. Preclinical studies have established three key mechanisms
following blunting of proximal B cell receptor (BCR) signaling through
BTK inhibition: (1) suppression of pro-survival pathways, (2) diminished
integrin activation and (3) attenuation of chemotactic response. Single
agent ibrutinib Phase 1/2 clinical trials have revealed high clinical
response rates in both nave and relapsed or refractory chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), as well as, relapsed or refractory mantle
cell lymphoma (MCL) patients (Byrd, et al. 2012 ASH; Wang, et al. 2012
ASH; Advani, et al. 2010 JCO). Response rates in a phase 2 diffuse large
B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) clinical trial appeared to be more prevalent in
activated B-cell (ABC) over germinal center B-cell like (GCB) DLBCL
patients (Staudt et al., ASH 2012). To gain a further understanding of
ibrutinib response and inform optimal therapeutic combinations in DLBCL,
we established a combination high throughput pharmacology screen (cHTS)
with ibrutinib. Ibrutinib was evaluated alone and in combination with 99
targeted compounds, across 17 (12 GCB; 5 ABC) DLBCL cell lines. To better
align with human biology, DLBCL cell lines were screened in the presence
of human marrow stromal cell conditioned media (hMSC-CM) and B-cell
receptor stimulation via anti-IgG/anti-IgM antibodies. Interestingly,
8/17 (47%) DLBCL cell lines were intolerant to any external BCR
stimulation, so those lines were screened in hMSC-CM without exogenous
BCR stimulation. Under our experimental conditions, 11/17 (65%) cell
lines displayed some sensitivity (IC50 < 10 M) to ibrutinib at 72 hours
based on ATPliteTM measurements [breakdown: 4/17 (24%) highly sensitive
(IC50 < 200 nM), 2/17 (12%) sensitive (IC50 200 nM < x Ibrutinib
(PCI-32765) is an orally administered small molecule that covalently
binds to Cys-481 of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK). Ibrutinib has
demonstrated promise across several types of B-cell malignancies and is
currently in Phase 2/3 clinical testing. Preclinical studies have
established three key mechanisms following blunting of proximal B cell
receptor (BCR) signaling through BTK inhibition: (1) suppression of
pro-survival pathways, (2) diminished integrin activation and (3)
attenuation of chemotactic response. Single agent ibrutinib Phase 1/2
clinical trials have revealed high clinical response rates in both nave
and relapsed or refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), as well
as, relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) patients (Byrd, et
al. 2012 ASH; Wang, et al. 2012 ASH; Advani, et al. 2010 JCO). Response
rates in a phase 2 diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) clinical trial
appeared to be more prevalent in activated B-cell (ABC) over germinal
center B-cell like (GCB) DLBCL patients (Staudt et al., ASH 2012). To
gain a further understanding of ibrutinib response and inform optimal
therapeutic combinations in DLBCL, we established a combination high
throughput pharmacology screen (cHTS) with ibrutinib. Ibrutinib was
evaluated alone and in combination with 99 targeted compounds, across 17
(12 GCB; 5 ABC) DLBCL cell lines. To better align with human biology,
DLBCL cell lines were screened in the presence of human marrow stromal
cell conditioned media (hMSC-CM) and B-cell receptor stimulation via
anti-IgG/anti-IgM antibodies. Interestingly, 8/17 (47%) DLBCL cell lines
were intolerant to any external BCR stimulation, so those lines were
screened in hMSC-CM without exogenous BCR stimulation. Under our
experimental conditions, 11/17 (65%) cell lines displayed some
sensitivity (IC50 < 10 M) to ibrutinib at 72 hours based on ATPliteTM
measurements [breakdown: 4/17 (24%) highly sensitive (IC50 < 200 nM),
2/17 (12%) sensitive (IC50 200 nM < x < 1 M), 5/17 (29%) modestly
sensitive (IC50 1 M Ibrutinib (PCI-32765) is an orally administered small
molecule that covalently binds to Cys-481 of Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(BTK). Ibrutinib has demonstrated promise across several types of B-cell
malignancies and is currently in Phase 2/3 clinical testing. Preclinical
studies have established three key mechanisms following blunting of
proximal B cell receptor (BCR) signaling through BTK inhibition: (1)
suppression of pro-survival pathways, (2) diminished integrin activation
and (3) attenuation of chemotactic response. Single agent ibrutinib Phase
1/2 clinical trials have revealed high clinical response rates in both
nave and relapsed or refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), as
well as, relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) patients
(Byrd, et al. 2012 ASH; Wang, et al. 2012 ASH; Advani, et al. 2010 JCO).
Response rates in a phase 2 diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
clinical trial appeared to be more prevalent in activated B-cell (ABC)
over germinal center B-cell like (GCB) DLBCL patients (Staudt et al., ASH
2012). To gain a further understanding of ibrutinib response and inform
optimal therapeutic combinations in DLBCL, we established a combination
high throughput pharmacology screen (cHTS) with ibrutinib. Ibrutinib was
evaluated alone and in combination with 99 targeted compounds, across 17
(12 GCB; 5 ABC) DLBCL cell lines. To better align with human biology,
DLBCL cell lines were screened in the presence of human marrow stromal
cell conditioned media (hMSC-CM) and B-cell receptor stimulation via
anti-IgG/anti-IgM antibodies. Interestingly, 8/17 (47%) DLBCL cell lines
were intolerant to any external BCR stimulation, so those lines were
screened in hMSC-CM without exogenous BCR stimulation. Under our
experimental conditions, 11/17 (65%) cell lines displayed some
sensitivity (IC50 < 10 M) to ibrutinib at 72 hours based on ATPliteTM
measurements [breakdown: 4/17 (24%) highly sensitive (IC50 < 200 nM),
2/17 (12%) sensitive (IC50 200 nM < x < 1 M), 5/17 (29%) modestly
sensitive (IC50 1 M < x 10 M)]. Consistent with DLBCL clinical responses,
the highly sensitive (IC50 10 M)]. Consistent with DLBCL clinical
responses, the highly sensitive (IC50 < 200 nM) DLBCL models, which
better reflect clinically attainable drug concentrations, demonstrated
approximately a two-fold enrichment in ABC (40%; 2/5) versus GCB (17%;
2/12) response with single agent ibrutinib. However, selective drug
combinations were found to drive greater sensitivity across both ABC and
GCB subtypes. Ongoing work is focused on mapping pathways that contribute
to combination drug sensitivity by comparing pharmacologic synergy of
targeted agents against mutational (Exome-Seq) and whole genome gene
expression profiling (GEP). Together, these data will help to inform
optimal ibrutinib combination strategies in DLBCL.

