Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100A8/A9 promotes invasion and migration through p38
MAPK-dependent NF-B activation in gastric cancer cells.


S100A8 and S100A9 (S100A8/A9) are low-molecular weight members of the
S100 family of calcium-binding proteins. Recent studies have reported
S100A8/A9 promote tumorigenesis. We have previously reported that
S100A8/A9 is mostly expressed in stromal cells and inflammatory cells
between gastric tumor cells. However, the role of environmental S100A8/A9
in gastric cancer has not been defined. We observed in the present study
the effect of S100A8/A9 on migration and invasion of gastric cancer
cells. S100A8/A9 treatment increased migration and invasion at lower
concentrations that did not affect cell proliferation and cell viability.
S100A8/A9 caused activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) and nuclear factor-B (NF-B). The phosphorylation of p38 MAPK was
not affected by the NF-B inhibitor Bay whereas activation of NF-B was
blocked by p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580, indicating that S100A8/A9-induced
NF-B activation is mediated by phosphorylation of p38 MAPK.
S100A8/A9-induced cell migration and invasion was inhibited by SB203580
and Bay, suggesting that activation of p38 MAPK and NF-B is involved in
the S100A8/A9 induced cell migration and invasion. S100A8/A9 caused an
increase in matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) and MMP12 expression, which
were inhibited by SB203580 and Bay. S100A8/A9-induced cell migration and
invasion was inhibited by MMP2 siRNA and MMP12 siRNA, indicating that
MMP2 and MMP12 is related to the S100A8/A9 induced cell migration and
invasion. Taken together, these results suggest that S100A8/A9 promotes
cell migration and invasion through p38 MAPK-dependent NF-B activation
leading to an increase of MMP2 and MMP12 in gastric cancer.

