Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chorio-allantoicmembrane (CAM) model for testing HOX gene
antagonism in pancreatic cancer.


BackgroundPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most
aggressive solid cancers with a 5-year survival rate approaching a dismal
5%. New therapeutic targets need to be identified in order to increase
survival rates.HOX genes are a family of 39 transcription factors
involved in embryonic development and which have been found to be
dys-regulated in PDAC. HOX gene function can be antagonised by HXR9, a
peptide that competitively inhibits binding of HOX proteins to their
co-factor PBX. We established that the CAM model recapitulates human
PDAC, including desmoplasia, and is highly suitable for the evaluation of
HXR9 in vivo.Experimental procedureFour PDAC-derived cell lines (AsPc-1,
BxPc-3, PaCa-3 and PancTu1) were treated in vitro with HXR9. Ic50s were
determined using both MTS and LDH assays. FACS analysis was used to
determine mechanisms of cell death. Cell lines were subsequently
implanted in the CAM using Marigel on embryonic day (EDD) 10. Tumour
growth curves were established and tumours were resected and subsequently
stained withPDAC-specific cell surface markers. CAM-tumours were treated
with intra-tumoral injection of HXR9 on EDD 16.ResultsPDAC-derived cell
lines were sensitive to HXR9 in vitro with IC50s ranging from 13-45M.
Annexin V-PE analysis showed apoptosis was induced in HXR9 treated cells.
PDAC was established in the CAM from cell lines and showed remarkable
similarity to human disease including desmoplasia and phonotypic markers.
Intra-tumoral treatment of CAM-PDAC showed evidence of tumour regression
and apoptosis.ConclusionsThe CAM model is a simple and robust assay for
modelling human PDAC and recapitulates architecture including
desmoplasia. The CAM assay is suitable for testing the efficacy of HXR9.
Targeting HOX gene dys-regulation is a novel approach for the treatment
of PDAC.

