Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase II study of a weekly liposomal paclitaxel formulation
(Genexol-PM) and gemcitabine combination chemotherapy in patients with
advanced biliary cancer.


OBJECTIVE: Advanced biliary cancer is associated with a poor prognosis
due to wide resistance to chemotherapeutic agents. This phase II clinical
trial was conducted to determine the efficacy and safety of weekly
gemcitabine and liposomal paclitaxel in patients with unresectable of
metastatic biliary cancer.METHODS: The eligibility criteria were patients
1) with pathologically proven biliary cancer, 2) with an ECOG performance
status 0 to 2, 3) aged more than 18, 4) with measurable lesions, 5) with
adequate hematologic, renal and liver functions, and 6) who provided
written informed consent. Each treatment cycle was consisted of
gemcitabine 1000 mg/m and liposomal paclitaxel (Genexol-PM)100 mg/m on
days 1, 8 followed by rest perioid of 14 days. It was repeated until the
appearance of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity up to maximal
10 cycles. The primary end point of this study was reponse rate, and
secondary end points included toxicity, progression free survival and
overall survival.RESULTS: Forty five patients were enrolled; median age
was 63 years; male (n=33) and female (n=12). The median number of cycles
administered was 4.0 (range,1-10). Thirty nine patients were assessable
for efficacy. Ten partial responses and 18 stable diseases were
confirmed. Giving an overall response rate was 25.6% and disease control
rate was 71.8% in per-protocol population. The median time to progression
and median overall survival was 4.0 (95% CI; 3.174.83) months and 8.13
(95% CI; 4.7611.51) months, respectively. MUC4 expression was not
significantly correlated with overall survival and progression free
survival (p=0.391).CONCLUSION: Weekly gemcitabine combined with
Genexol-PM appears to be effective against advanced biliary cancers.
Further randomized trials are needed to confirm this finding.

