Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel curcumin loaded magnetic nanoparticles for pancreatic cancer
treatment.


Curcumin (CUR), a naturally occurring polyphenol derived from the root of
Curcuma longa, has demonstrated potent anti-cancer and cancer prevention
activity in a variety of cancers. However, the clinical translation of
curcumin has been significantly hampered due its extensive degradation,
suboptimal pharmacokinetics and poor bioavailability. To address these
clinically relevant issues, we have developed a novel curcumin loaded
magnetic nanoparticle (MNP-CUR) formulation. Herein, we have evaluated
the in vitro and in vivo therapeutic efficacy of this novel MNP-CUR
formulation in pancreatic cancer. Human pancreatic cancer cells (HPAFII
and Panc-1) exhibited efficient internalization of the MNP-CUR
formulation in a dose dependent manner. As a result, MNP-CUR formulation
effectively inhibited growth of HPAFII and Panc-1 cells in cell
proliferation and colony formation assays. Similarly, the MNP-CUR
formulation suppressed pancreatic tumor growth in an HPAFII xenograft
mice model and improved mice survival by delaying tumor growth. The
growth inhibitory effect of MNP-CUR formulation was correlated with the
suppression of PCNA, Bcl-xL, Mcl-1, MUC1, collagen I and enhanced
membrane -catenin expression. Interestingly, our MNP-CUR formulation did
not show any sign of hemotoxicity and stable after incubation with human
serum proteins. Additionally, our MNP-CUR formulation improved serum
bioavailability of curcumin in mice up to 2.5 fold as compared to
curcumin in Tween-20. Furthermore, biodistribution studies of our MNP-CUR
formulation demonstrate a significant amount of formulation was able to
reach the pancreatic xenograft tumor(s) which suggests its clinical
translational potential. In conclusion, our study suggests that our novel
MNP-CUR formulation can be valuable for the treatment of pancreatic
cancer.

