Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of exosomal microRNAs in malignant ascites, peritoneal
lavage fluid and cell culture supernatant of gastric cancer.


Background. A microRNA (miRNA) is non-coding RNA molecules of 21-25nt.
miRNAs are post-transcriptional regulators that bind to messenger RNA
transcripts, resulting in translational repression of target degradation
and gene silencing. miRNAs are wrapped in exosome and secreted stably in
body fluid, which can prevent RNase from degrading the miRNAs. Therefore
several methods for miRNA-based early cancer detection using serum,
plasma, and urine are reported. However there is no report to detect
peritoneal dissemination of gastric cancer using malignant ascitis.Aim.
To detect predictive factors for peritoneal dissemination of gastric
cancer, global analysis of exosomal miRNAs in gastric malignant ascites,
intraoperative peritoneal lavage fluid and cell culture supernatant were
performed.Materials and Methods. A total of 6 gastric malignant ascites,
20 peritoneal lavage fluids and 2 human gastric carcinoma cell culture
supernatants (OCUM-2M and its sub line with high potential for metastasis
to the peritoneal cavity named OCUM-2MD3) were included in this study.
The amount of 10 ml samples underwent a final ultracentrifugation at
120,000g twice to pellet the exosomes. miRNA was extracted and analyzed
using Bioanalyzer. Exosomal miRNA expression profiling was performed
using the Agilent Human miRNA Microarrays. To quantitatively detect
mature miRNAs, TaqMan MicroRNA Assays was used. Statistical tests by
spearman's rank-correlation coefficient were performed to investigate
correlation of exosomal miRNAs that were expressed between malignant
ascites and cell culture supernatant.Results. miRNAs were detected in
each gastric malignant ascites at concentrations ranging from 61.7 ng to
220 ng, however no or very low amounts of ribosomal RNA (18S and 28S).
Microarray analysis detected 327 miRNAs in malignant ascites, 389 in
OCUM-2M and 414 in OCUM-2MD3. miRNA expression of Malignant ascites
correlated that of cell culture supernatants; OCUM-2M(r=0.774,
pBackground. A microRNA (miRNA) is non-coding RNA molecules of 21-25nt.
miRNAs are post-transcriptional regulators that bind to messenger RNA
transcripts, resulting in translational repression of target degradation
and gene silencing. miRNAs are wrapped in exosome and secreted stably in
body fluid, which can prevent RNase from degrading the miRNAs. Therefore
several methods for miRNA-based early cancer detection using serum,
plasma, and urine are reported. However there is no report to detect
peritoneal dissemination of gastric cancer using malignant ascitis.Aim.
To detect predictive factors for peritoneal dissemination of gastric
cancer, global analysis of exosomal miRNAs in gastric malignant ascites,
intraoperative peritoneal lavage fluid and cell culture supernatant were
performed.Materials and Methods. A total of 6 gastric malignant ascites,
20 peritoneal lavage fluids and 2 human gastric carcinoma cell culture
supernatants (OCUM-2M and its sub line with high potential for metastasis
to the peritoneal cavity named OCUM-2MD3) were included in this study.
The amount of 10 ml samples underwent a final ultracentrifugation at
120,000g twice to pellet the exosomes. miRNA was extracted and analyzed
using Bioanalyzer. Exosomal miRNA expression profiling was performed
using the Agilent Human miRNA Microarrays. To quantitatively detect
mature miRNAs, TaqMan MicroRNA Assays was used. Statistical tests by
spearman's rank-correlation coefficient were performed to investigate
correlation of exosomal miRNAs that were expressed between malignant
ascites and cell culture supernatant.Results. miRNAs were detected in
each gastric malignant ascites at concentrations ranging from 61.7 ng to
220 ng, however no or very low amounts of ribosomal RNA (18S and 28S).
Microarray analysis detected 327 miRNAs in malignant ascites, 389 in
OCUM-2M and 414 in OCUM-2MD3. miRNA expression of Malignant ascites
correlated that of cell culture supernatants; OCUM-2M(r=0.774, p<0.01)
and OCUM-2MD3(r=0.776, r2-fold change) than in OCUM-2M. Among these 140
miRNAs, 7 miRNAs detected at high expression in malignant ascites were
selected for confirmation by qRT-PCR. All 7 miRNA was detectable both
malignant ascites and intraoperative peritoneal lavage fluids by
qRT-PCR.Conclusions. Exosomal miRNAs were highly detectable in malignant
ascites and peritoneal lavage fluids. In this study 7 miRNAs related to
peritoneal dissemination were identified. This result may provide a new
diagnostic approach of peritoneal dissemination.Citation Format: Motohiko
Tokuhisa, Yasushi Ichikawa, Takashi Kosaka, Satoshi Hasegawa, Hirotoshi
Akiyama, Takashi Ishikawa, Nobuyoshi Kosaka, Takahiro Ochiya, Masakazu
Yashiro, Kousei Hirakawa, Chikara Kunisaki, Ayumu Goto, Noritoshi
Kobayashi, Itaru Endo. Expression of exosomal microRNAs in malignant
ascites, peritoneal lavage fluid and cell culture supernatant of gastric
cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5279.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5279

