Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biochemical and structural characteristics of crizotinib-resistant
ALK mutants.


Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), when aberrantly regulated through gene
translocations or mutations, has been implicated as an oncogenic driver
in a variety of cancers. XALKORI (crizotinib) is an FDA-approved therapy
for locally advanced or metastatic (ALK)-positive non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Mutations of certain residues within the ALK kinase
domain have been associated with crizotinib resistance. To understand the
molecular basis of mutational resistance, we have kinetically and
structurally characterized several clinical mutations of ALK kinase
domain. In the basal-state (nonphosphorylated) proteins, mutations
C1156Y, F1174L, L1152R and L1196M resulted in 14 to 52-fold increase in
catalytic efficiency of phosphorylation of an activation loop peptide.
Accordingly, these mutants were more rapidly autophosphorylated, compared
to wild-type enzyme. In addition, F1174L, C1156Y and L1156Y had 2 to
6-fold higher catalytic efficiencies when fully activated by
autophosphorylation. Conversely, catalytic efficiencies of
nonphosphorylated and phosphorylated G1269A variant decreased by 1.2 and
1.6-fold, respectively. Inhibition of L1152R, L1196M and G1269A by
crizotinib was reduced by 3-28-fold, compared to wild-type enzyme, from
Ki determinations. From direct binding studies of the L1196M gatekeeper
mutation, the loss of crizotinib binding occurred 6 and 13-fold for
phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated proteins, respectively. By
crystallographic studies apoenzyme and crizotinib complexes of ALK kinase
domain displayed an inactive kinase conformation that is stabilized by an
extended hydrophobic network of residues. F1174 and L1196 are part of
this hydrophobic core, and mutations of these residues are predicted to
destabilize the inactive ALK conformation. Taken together, these results
suggest that most of the resistant mutations (e.g. L1196M, F1174L,
C1156Y, L1152R) result in a more dynamic protein that increases substrate
turnover. In addition, the reduction of crizotinib binding for the
mutations in the vicinity of the inhibitor binding site (L1196M, G1269A)
is likely a contributing factor for the resistance. This structural and
kinetic analysis of mutational resistance may be useful for design of new
inhibitors targeting multiple clinical mutations of ALK.

