Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An online tool for the validation of survival-predicting
biomarkers in non small-cell lung cancer using microarray data of 1,329
patients.


To decipher the molecular basis of lung cancer and to improve treatment
strategies we have to identify genes correlated to therapy response and
to survival. Here, we present the development of a new, freely available
online tool suitable for the real-time meta-analysis of published lung
cancer microarray datasets to validate expression based survival related
biomarker candidates.First we have searched the caBIG, GEO and TCGA
repositories to identify datasets with published gene expression data and
survival information. In this, three GEO platforms (GPL96, GPL570 and
GPL3921) were considered as these possess 22,277 common probes, which
were used for constructing the database. All together 1,329 NSCLC samples
in 9 independent datasets were identified, 85% have overall survival and
45% progression free survival info, one-third adenocarcinomas and
one-third squamous cell carcinomas, 57% male and the average overall
survival is 45 months. Kaplan-Meier survival plot, and the hazard ratio
with 95% confidence intervals and logrank P value are calculated and
plotted in R using Bioconductor packages. To assess the prognostic value
of a gene, each percentile (of expression) between the lower and upper
quartiles are computed and the best performing threshold is used as the
final cutoff in a Cox regression analysis. The complete meta-analysis
tool can be accessed online at: www.kmplot.com/lung.We demonstrate the
application of this integrative analysis pipeline by validating 22
previously published survival associated biomarkers including VEGF,
ADAM28, ANXA3, CADM1, CD24, CD82, CDK1, CEA, cyclin E, ERCC1, EZH2, HER2,
IFNAR2, MMP9, OPN, P16, p53R2, RAD51, S100A4, survivin, XAF1 and XIAP. Of
these, high significances (pTo decipher the molecular basis of lung
cancer and to improve treatment strategies we have to identify genes
correlated to therapy response and to survival. Here, we present the
development of a new, freely available online tool suitable for the
real-time meta-analysis of published lung cancer microarray datasets to
validate expression based survival related biomarker candidates.First we
have searched the caBIG, GEO and TCGA repositories to identify datasets
with published gene expression data and survival information. In this,
three GEO platforms (GPL96, GPL570 and GPL3921) were considered as these
possess 22,277 common probes, which were used for constructing the
database. All together 1,329 NSCLC samples in 9 independent datasets were
identified, 85% have overall survival and 45% progression free survival
info, one-third adenocarcinomas and one-third squamous cell carcinomas,
57% male and the average overall survival is 45 months. Kaplan-Meier
survival plot, and the hazard ratio with 95% confidence intervals and
logrank P value are calculated and plotted in R using Bioconductor
packages. To assess the prognostic value of a gene, each percentile (of
expression) between the lower and upper quartiles are computed and the
best performing threshold is used as the final cutoff in a Cox regression
analysis. The complete meta-analysis tool can be accessed online at:
www.kmplot.com/lung.We demonstrate the application of this integrative
analysis pipeline by validating 22 previously published survival
associated biomarkers including VEGF, ADAM28, ANXA3, CADM1, CD24, CD82,
CDK1, CEA, cyclin E, ERCC1, EZH2, HER2, IFNAR2, MMP9, OPN, P16, p53R2,
RAD51, S100A4, survivin, XAF1 and XIAP. Of these, high significances
(p<1E-16) were achieved by ANXA3 (HR=0.63), CADM1 (HR=1.7), IFNAR2
(HR=0.54), RAD51 (HR=1.9) and XAF1 (HR=0.58). Five additional genes were
significant: S100A4 (HR=1.46, p=3.6E-4), CD82 (HR=1.34, p=0.018), OPN
(HR=1.33, p=0.02), HER2 (HR=1.3, p=0.02) and CD24 (HR=0.75, p=0.3). The
remaining genes did not achieved statistical significance.In summary, we
developed an online available meta-analysis tool for the validation of
genes associated with survival in NSCLC.

