Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of neuropilin-1 in human monocyte is induced by RANKL
and may be associated with trastuzumab mediated antibody dependent
cellular cytotoxicity in breast cancer cells.


PurposeWe found that neuropilin (NRP)-1high monocyte exhibited higher and
NRP-1low monocyte exhibited lower trastuzumab mediated antibody dependent
cellular cyototoxicity (ADCC) in HER2 positive breast cancer cells.
Recently, it was reported that NRP-1 expression in bone marrow-derived
monocyte/macrophage precursor cells (BMMs) was rapidly and markedly
suppressed after receptor activator of nuclear factor-B ligand (RANKL)
stimulation in mice model (Nature 2012). Aim of this study is to explore
effect of RANKL on NRP-1 expression in human monocyte and effect of RANKL
on trastuzumab mediated ADCC.MethodsPeripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) were prepared from blood of healthy volunteers by using
Lymphoprep (AXIS SHIELD, Dundee, UK). The cells were cultured with
various concentration of RANKL (0, 5, 50, and 250 ng/ml) for 2, 4, and 24
hours. The cells were collected and stained with FITC conjugated
anti-CD14 antibody, FITC conjugated anti-CD3 antibody, and APC conjugated
anti-NRP-1 antibody and analyzed by flow cytometry. In ADCC assay,
various concentration of RANKL treated PBMCs were co-cultured with HER2
positive human breast cancer cell line, SKBR3 and 10g/ml of trastuzumab
for 2 hours (E:T=10:1). The cell mixture was stained with FITC conjugated
anti-CD14 antibody, FITC conjugated anti-CD56 antibody, PE conjugated
anti-NRP-1 antibody, and PE-Cy 5 conjugated anti-CD107a antibody. CD56+
NK cell and CD14+ monocyte degranulation assay was used to evaluate
effect of RANKL on target cancer cell killing activity of those effector
cells.ResultsOn the contrary to the recent reports, analysis of flow
cytometry indicated that expression of NRP-1 in monocyte 24 hours after
RANKL treatment was upregulated while there was no effect of RANKL on
expression of NRP-1 in CD56+ NK cell. MFI of NRP-1 was 373 in RANKL
0ng/ml, 427 in RANKL 5ng/ml, 469 in RANKL 50ng/ml, and 477 in RANKL
250ng/ml. Furthermore, in ADCC assay, higher concentration of RANKL
treated PBMCs showed higher CD107a expression level in monocyte
population, 10.8% (0ng/ml of RANKL), 14.7% (5ng/ml of RANKL), 16.2%
(50ng/ml of RANKL), and 18.9% (250ng/ml of RANKL),
respectively.ConclusionsThese data suggested that RANKL upregulated NRP-1
expression in human monocyte and this might be associated with higher
trastuzumab mediated ADCC activity in this experimental settings.

