Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of MR imaging biomarkers of the vascular and
infiltrative phenotype in intracranial MDA-MB-231 tumors.


Tumors growing in the brain often invade into the parenchyma and co-opt
the existing vasculature leaving the blood brain barrier (BBB) intact;
extravasation of the Gd-DTPA contrast agent used in MRI is therefore
precluded. Anti-angiogenic agents can restore the compromised BBB of
neovascular regions resulting in pseudoresponse in human glioblastoma
(GBM), and preclinical brain metastasis models. Non-invasive imaging
strategies are required to accurately interrogate brain specific growth
patterns. Preclinical models that faithfully emulate infiltrative gliomas
are limited. Intracranial implantation of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
results in tumors exhibiting substantial local invasion, principally
occurring along existing blood vessels. Multiparametric MRI was used to
identifying sensitive biomarkers of infiltrative tumor growth in this
model. Alteration in the vascular phenotype was assessed in response to
pan-VEGFR inhibitor cediranib or cross reactive human/mouse anti-VEGF-A
antibody B20-4.1.1.Intracranial MDA-MB-231 tumors were heterogeneous;
areas of high apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC, mm2s1), a biomarker of
cellularity, correlated with the most hyperintense regions on T2-weighted
images and areas of histologically confirmed edema. Regions of high
Gd-DTPA extravasation were distinct from the areas of high ADC, but
correlated with regions of high fractional blood volume (fBV) detected
using intravascular USPIO particles. Infiltrative regions identified on
H&E images corresponded to areas of limited Gd-DTPA leakage and low
fBV.Cediranib (3 x 6mg/kg) caused significant tumor growth delay after
48h compared to controls (cediranib 160 9% pre-treatment volume, vehicle
210 14%, pTumors growing in the brain often invade into the parenchyma
and co-opt the existing vasculature leaving the blood brain barrier (BBB)
intact; extravasation of the Gd-DTPA contrast agent used in MRI is
therefore precluded. Anti-angiogenic agents can restore the compromised
BBB of neovascular regions resulting in pseudoresponse in human
glioblastoma (GBM), and preclinical brain metastasis models. Non-invasive
imaging strategies are required to accurately interrogate brain specific
growth patterns. Preclinical models that faithfully emulate infiltrative
gliomas are limited. Intracranial implantation of MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells results in tumors exhibiting substantial local invasion,
principally occurring along existing blood vessels. Multiparametric MRI
was used to identifying sensitive biomarkers of infiltrative tumor growth
in this model. Alteration in the vascular phenotype was assessed in
response to pan-VEGFR inhibitor cediranib or cross reactive human/mouse
anti-VEGF-A antibody B20-4.1.1.Intracranial MDA-MB-231 tumors were
heterogeneous; areas of high apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC, mm2s1),
a biomarker of cellularity, correlated with the most hyperintense regions
on T2-weighted images and areas of histologically confirmed edema.
Regions of high Gd-DTPA extravasation were distinct from the areas of
high ADC, but correlated with regions of high fractional blood volume
(fBV) detected using intravascular USPIO particles. Infiltrative regions
identified on H&E images corresponded to areas of limited Gd-DTPA leakage
and low fBV.Cediranib (3 x 6mg/kg) caused significant tumor growth delay
after 48h compared to controls (cediranib 160 9% pre-treatment volume,
vehicle 210 14%, p<0.05, unpaired t-test). A 50% reduction in Ktrans
(min1), a compound biomarker of permeability/perfusion, was observed
following cediranib treatment (pTumors growing in the brain often invade
into the parenchyma and co-opt the existing vasculature leaving the blood
brain barrier (BBB) intact; extravasation of the Gd-DTPA contrast agent
used in MRI is therefore precluded. Anti-angiogenic agents can restore
the compromised BBB of neovascular regions resulting in pseudoresponse in
human glioblastoma (GBM), and preclinical brain metastasis models.
Non-invasive imaging strategies are required to accurately interrogate
brain specific growth patterns. Preclinical models that faithfully
emulate infiltrative gliomas are limited. Intracranial implantation of
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells results in tumors exhibiting substantial
local invasion, principally occurring along existing blood vessels.
Multiparametric MRI was used to identifying sensitive biomarkers of
infiltrative tumor growth in this model. Alteration in the vascular
phenotype was assessed in response to pan-VEGFR inhibitor cediranib or
cross reactive human/mouse anti-VEGF-A antibody B20-4.1.1.Intracranial
MDA-MB-231 tumors were heterogeneous; areas of high apparent diffusion
coefficient (ADC, mm2s1), a biomarker of cellularity, correlated with the
most hyperintense regions on T2-weighted images and areas of
histologically confirmed edema. Regions of high Gd-DTPA extravasation
were distinct from the areas of high ADC, but correlated with regions of
high fractional blood volume (fBV) detected using intravascular USPIO
particles. Infiltrative regions identified on H&E images corresponded to
areas of limited Gd-DTPA leakage and low fBV.Cediranib (3 x 6mg/kg)
caused significant tumor growth delay after 48h compared to controls
(cediranib 160 9% pre-treatment volume, vehicle 210 14%, p<0.05, unpaired
t-test). A 50% reduction in Ktrans (min1), a compound biomarker of
permeability/perfusion, was observed following cediranib treatment
(p<0.05, paired t-test). Perfused tumor area, assessed using Hoechst
33342, was lower in treated tumors (cediranib 5.4 0.6%, vehicle 9.1 1.5%,
pTumors growing in the brain often invade into the parenchyma and co-opt
the existing vasculature leaving the blood brain barrier (BBB) intact;
extravasation of the Gd-DTPA contrast agent used in MRI is therefore
precluded. Anti-angiogenic agents can restore the compromised BBB of
neovascular regions resulting in pseudoresponse in human glioblastoma
(GBM), and preclinical brain metastasis models. Non-invasive imaging
strategies are required to accurately interrogate brain specific growth
patterns. Preclinical models that faithfully emulate infiltrative gliomas
are limited. Intracranial implantation of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
results in tumors exhibiting substantial local invasion, principally
occurring along existing blood vessels. Multiparametric MRI was used to
identifying sensitive biomarkers of infiltrative tumor growth in this
model. Alteration in the vascular phenotype was assessed in response to
pan-VEGFR inhibitor cediranib or cross reactive human/mouse anti-VEGF-A
antibody B20-4.1.1.Intracranial MDA-MB-231 tumors were heterogeneous;
areas of high apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC, mm2s1), a biomarker of
cellularity, correlated with the most hyperintense regions on T2-weighted
images and areas of histologically confirmed edema. Regions of high
Gd-DTPA extravasation were distinct from the areas of high ADC, but
correlated with regions of high fractional blood volume (fBV) detected
using intravascular USPIO particles. Infiltrative regions identified on
H&E images corresponded to areas of limited Gd-DTPA leakage and low
fBV.Cediranib (3 x 6mg/kg) caused significant tumor growth delay after
48h compared to controls (cediranib 160 9% pre-treatment volume, vehicle
210 14%, p<0.05, unpaired t-test). A 50% reduction in Ktrans (min1), a
compound biomarker of permeability/perfusion, was observed following
cediranib treatment (p<0.05, paired t-test). Perfused tumor area,
assessed using Hoechst 33342, was lower in treated tumors (cediranib 5.4
0.6%, vehicle 9.1 1.5%, p<0.05), confirming reduced vascular function.
Cediranib also led to a 9% reduction in tumor ADC (pTumors growing in the
brain often invade into the parenchyma and co-opt the existing
vasculature leaving the blood brain barrier (BBB) intact; extravasation
of the Gd-DTPA contrast agent used in MRI is therefore precluded.
Anti-angiogenic agents can restore the compromised BBB of neovascular
regions resulting in pseudoresponse in human glioblastoma (GBM), and
preclinical brain metastasis models. Non-invasive imaging strategies are
required to accurately interrogate brain specific growth patterns.
Preclinical models that faithfully emulate infiltrative gliomas are
limited. Intracranial implantation of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
results in tumors exhibiting substantial local invasion, principally
occurring along existing blood vessels. Multiparametric MRI was used to
identifying sensitive biomarkers of infiltrative tumor growth in this
model. Alteration in the vascular phenotype was assessed in response to
pan-VEGFR inhibitor cediranib or cross reactive human/mouse anti-VEGF-A
antibody B20-4.1.1.Intracranial MDA-MB-231 tumors were heterogeneous;
areas of high apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC, mm2s1), a biomarker of
cellularity, correlated with the most hyperintense regions on T2-weighted
images and areas of histologically confirmed edema. Regions of high
Gd-DTPA extravasation were distinct from the areas of high ADC, but
correlated with regions of high fractional blood volume (fBV) detected
using intravascular USPIO particles. Infiltrative regions identified on
H&E images corresponded to areas of limited Gd-DTPA leakage and low
fBV.Cediranib (3 x 6mg/kg) caused significant tumor growth delay after
48h compared to controls (cediranib 160 9% pre-treatment volume, vehicle
210 14%, p<0.05, unpaired t-test). A 50% reduction in Ktrans (min1), a
compound biomarker of permeability/perfusion, was observed following
cediranib treatment (p<0.05, paired t-test). Perfused tumor area,
assessed using Hoechst 33342, was lower in treated tumors (cediranib 5.4
0.6%, vehicle 9.1 1.5%, p<0.05), confirming reduced vascular function.
Cediranib also led to a 9% reduction in tumor ADC (p<0.05), possibly due
to resolution of edema, as observed in GBM patients.A single 10mg/kg dose
of B20-4.1.1 resulted in significant tumor growth delay over 48h
(B20-4.1.1 120 18%, control antibody 230 8%) and a 58% reduction in
Ktrans (pTumors growing in the brain often invade into the parenchyma and
co-opt the existing vasculature leaving the blood brain barrier (BBB)
intact; extravasation of the Gd-DTPA contrast agent used in MRI is
therefore precluded. Anti-angiogenic agents can restore the compromised
BBB of neovascular regions resulting in pseudoresponse in human
glioblastoma (GBM), and preclinical brain metastasis models. Non-invasive
imaging strategies are required to accurately interrogate brain specific
growth patterns. Preclinical models that faithfully emulate infiltrative
gliomas are limited. Intracranial implantation of MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells results in tumors exhibiting substantial local invasion,
principally occurring along existing blood vessels. Multiparametric MRI
was used to identifying sensitive biomarkers of infiltrative tumor growth
in this model. Alteration in the vascular phenotype was assessed in
response to pan-VEGFR inhibitor cediranib or cross reactive human/mouse
anti-VEGF-A antibody B20-4.1.1.Intracranial MDA-MB-231 tumors were
heterogeneous; areas of high apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC, mm2s1),
a biomarker of cellularity, correlated with the most hyperintense regions
on T2-weighted images and areas of histologically confirmed edema.
Regions of high Gd-DTPA extravasation were distinct from the areas of
high ADC, but correlated with regions of high fractional blood volume
(fBV) detected using intravascular USPIO particles. Infiltrative regions
identified on H&E images corresponded to areas of limited Gd-DTPA leakage
and low fBV.Cediranib (3 x 6mg/kg) caused significant tumor growth delay
after 48h compared to controls (cediranib 160 9% pre-treatment volume,
vehicle 210 14%, p<0.05, unpaired t-test). A 50% reduction in Ktrans
(min1), a compound biomarker of permeability/perfusion, was observed
following cediranib treatment (p<0.05, paired t-test). Perfused tumor
area, assessed using Hoechst 33342, was lower in treated tumors
(cediranib 5.4 0.6%, vehicle 9.1 1.5%, p<0.05), confirming reduced
vascular function. Cediranib also led to a 9% reduction in tumor ADC
(p<0.05), possibly due to resolution of edema, as observed in GBM
patients.A single 10mg/kg dose of B20-4.1.1 resulted in significant tumor
growth delay over 48h (B20-4.1.1 120 18%, control antibody 230 8%) and a
58% reduction in Ktrans (p<0.05), but no change in ADC was observed.BBB
integrity following treatment is being evaluated to inform on the
contributions of its restoration, and altered vascular function, to the
observed changes in vascular imaging biomarkers.Intracranial MDA-MB-231
tumors provide a useful model for the development of imaging biomarkers
of the infiltrative and vascular phenotype of tumors in the brain, which
are essential for the assessment of the novel invasive orthotopic glioma
models currently being developed, and their response to therapeutics.

