Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative expression analysis of somatostatin receptor subtypes
in human neuroendocrine tumors using two sets of new monoclonal
antibodies.


The expression and reliable detection of somatostatin receptor subtypes
(SSTR1-5) is a prerequisite for the successful use of somatostatin
analogues in neuroendocrine tumors (NET). Two sets of monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) against human SSTR1, 2A, 3 and 5 have recently been
developed by two independent laboratories using rabbit and mouse
hybridomas. Our aim was to evaluate the usefulness of both sets of mAbs
for detection of SSTRs in NET samples as they are routinely collected in
clinical practice. Mouse and rabbit mAbs were characterized in SSTR1, 2,
3 and 5-transfected HEK293 cells and human archival pancreatic tissue and
NET samples. Comparative analysis of mAbs was also conducted by
immunostaining of a tissue microarray composed of 75 cores of NET.
Immunohistochemical analysis of HEK293 cells showed that both rabbit and
mouse mAbs specifically detect their cognate receptor subtype, with mild
cytoplasmic cross-reactivity observed for rabbit mAbs. Both sets of mAbs
labeled normal pancreatic islets and showed similar patterns of
immunoreactivity in NET controls. Direct comparison of mAb sets using a
NET tissue microarray revealed a strong correlation between rabbit and
mouse mAbs against SSTR1 and 5, and moderate correlation for SSTR3. The
rabbit mAb against SSTR2A showed higher affinity for its cognate receptor
than the corresponding mouse mAb, resulting in more reliable detection of
this SSTR. In conclusion, mAbs from both sets are reliable tools for the
detection of SSTR1, 3 and 5, whereas the rabbit mAb against SSTR2A is
recommended for use in routine clinical testing due to its superior
binding affinity.

