Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survivin Suppression by YM155 involves downregulation of Cyclin Ds
and Activation of Rb.


The pro-metastatic and survival protein Survivin is robustly
overexpressed in carcinomas compared to normal or benign tissue. The
imadazolium based small molecule YM155, which was discovered in a
chemical library screen of compounds that effectively suppressed the
Survivin promoter, induces apoptosis of castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) cells. Despite the current use of YM155 in phase II
clinical trials, the mechanisms by which YM155 inhibits the expression of
Survivin and kills cancer cells remain unclear. Our laboratory previously
reported that the pocket proteins (Rb, p107, p130) suppress Survivin
expression by recruiting E2F4 to CDE/CHR promoter elements of the
Survivin promoter. Here we studied early signaling responses in a panel
of prostate and kidney cancer cell lines and showed that YM155 rapidly
decreases the levels of cyclin Ds and activates Rb, preceding the
suppression of Survivin expression. We hypothesize that YM155
down-regulates Survivin expression by activating the pocket proteins and
promoting their recruitment along with E2F4 to the proximal region of the
Survivin promoter. In addition, we provide evidence that the induction of
apoptosis by YM155 may be mediated not only by the downregulation of
Survivin but also through induced expression of the proapoptotic protein
Bim, repression of the anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1, followed by
activation of caspases.

