Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RECK silencing enhances hyperplastic phenotypes in epithelial
cells through c-Myc and HIF-2.


Downregulation of the tumor suppressor, RECK is induced by hypoxia (Lee
et al., 2010). However, the role of RECK silencing in tumorigenic
hyperplastic phenotype is largely unknown. Exposure of various normal
epithelial cells to hypoxia resulted in significantly increased cell
proliferation. Hypoxia increased diploid S phase cells, cell cycle kinase
proteins such as cyclin D1 and c-Myc involved in G1/S transition. Hypoxia
promoted phosphorylation of Rb protein (p-pRb), but decreased p21cip1,
p27kip1 and p16ink4A. The knockdown of RECK by small interfering (si) RNA
(RECKsi) promoted cell proliferation under normoxic conditions.
Furthermore, siRECK produced the same expression patterns of cell cycle
kinase proteins, c-Myc, and p-pRb observed under hypoxic conditions.
MMP-2, MMP-9, and MT1-MMP were activated by hypoxia, and an MMP inhibitor
significantly suppressed hypoxia-induced proliferation. In addition, the
siRECK-transfected cells formed larger and more numerous colonies than
the control cells in vitro tumorigenic assays. Nude mice injected with
stably shRECK-transfected cells developed larger tumors more rapidly than
those injected with control shRNA-transfected cells. Expression of HIF-2
as well as NFB and STAT1 was significantly increased both under hypoxic
conditions and in RECK-knockdown cells. Knockdown of HIF-2 diminished
hypoxia-induced proliferation of epithelial cells. Taken together, these
results suggest that hypoxia-induced RECK silencing increases epithelial
transformation and tumorigenicity via HIF-2 activation, in which
increased metalloproteinase activity may play a role. In conclusion, the
suppression of RECK may be a crucial event for achieving a hyperplastic
characteristics to favor early tumorigenesis by hypoxic stress.

