Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination statin and chemotherapy treatment inhibits
proliferation and cytotoxicity of an aggressive natural killer cell
leukemia.


Aggressive natural killer cell leukemia is an acute neoplastic
proliferation of natural killer cells, resulting in progressive disease
and a poor prognosis. Establishing an effective treatment plan for
aggressive natural killer cell leukemia has not been successful. Current
clinical treatment plans rely on chemotherapeutic drug combinations;
however, many patients do not respond well and often relapse or develop
drug resistance leading to death within several months. Uncontrolled cell
growth coupled to pathology caused by the natural killer cytotoxicity of
the leukemia cells produces the mortality. New therapeutic approaches to
this aggressive leukemia are needed. In recent years statin drugs, known
for their cholesterol lowering ability, have been shown to have certain
anti-tumor effects. In this study, the effect of combination chemotherapy
and statin treatment on proliferation, cell cycle time and cytotoxicity
was investigated using the aggressive natural killer cell line known at
YT-INDY. In terms of anti-proliferative effect, combination treatment of
YT-INDY with doxorubicin (1 nM and 0.1 nM) with 10 uM atorvastatin,
fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted in significant (pAggressive natural
killer cell leukemia is an acute neoplastic proliferation of natural
killer cells, resulting in progressive disease and a poor prognosis.
Establishing an effective treatment plan for aggressive natural killer
cell leukemia has not been successful. Current clinical treatment plans
rely on chemotherapeutic drug combinations; however, many patients do not
respond well and often relapse or develop drug resistance leading to
death within several months. Uncontrolled cell growth coupled to
pathology caused by the natural killer cytotoxicity of the leukemia cells
produces the mortality. New therapeutic approaches to this aggressive
leukemia are needed. In recent years statin drugs, known for their
cholesterol lowering ability, have been shown to have certain anti-tumor
effects. In this study, the effect of combination chemotherapy and statin
treatment on proliferation, cell cycle time and cytotoxicity was
investigated using the aggressive natural killer cell line known at
YT-INDY. In terms of anti-proliferative effect, combination treatment of
YT-INDY with doxorubicin (1 nM and 0.1 nM) with 10 uM atorvastatin,
fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted in significant (p<0.05) inhibition of
tumor cell proliferation compared to either agent alone. Paclitaxel, at a
concentration of 1 nM, in combination with 10 uM atorvastatin,
fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted in significant (pAggressive natural
killer cell leukemia is an acute neoplastic proliferation of natural
killer cells, resulting in progressive disease and a poor prognosis.
Establishing an effective treatment plan for aggressive natural killer
cell leukemia has not been successful. Current clinical treatment plans
rely on chemotherapeutic drug combinations; however, many patients do not
respond well and often relapse or develop drug resistance leading to
death within several months. Uncontrolled cell growth coupled to
pathology caused by the natural killer cytotoxicity of the leukemia cells
produces the mortality. New therapeutic approaches to this aggressive
leukemia are needed. In recent years statin drugs, known for their
cholesterol lowering ability, have been shown to have certain anti-tumor
effects. In this study, the effect of combination chemotherapy and statin
treatment on proliferation, cell cycle time and cytotoxicity was
investigated using the aggressive natural killer cell line known at
YT-INDY. In terms of anti-proliferative effect, combination treatment of
YT-INDY with doxorubicin (1 nM and 0.1 nM) with 10 uM atorvastatin,
fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted in significant (p<0.05) inhibition of
tumor cell proliferation compared to either agent alone. Paclitaxel, at a
concentration of 1 nM, in combination with 10 uM atorvastatin,
fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted in significant (p<0.05) inhibition of
proliferation. Lovastatin, when used with doxorubicin or paclitaxel
provided no significant inhibition compared to controls. Atorvastatin (10
uM), in combination with teniposide (100 pM or 10 pM) or topotecan (1 nM
or 100 pM), inhibited YT-INDY proliferation at a statistically
significant level (pAggressive natural killer cell leukemia is an acute
neoplastic proliferation of natural killer cells, resulting in
progressive disease and a poor prognosis. Establishing an effective
treatment plan for aggressive natural killer cell leukemia has not been
successful. Current clinical treatment plans rely on chemotherapeutic
drug combinations; however, many patients do not respond well and often
relapse or develop drug resistance leading to death within several
months. Uncontrolled cell growth coupled to pathology caused by the
natural killer cytotoxicity of the leukemia cells produces the mortality.
New therapeutic approaches to this aggressive leukemia are needed. In
recent years statin drugs, known for their cholesterol lowering ability,
have been shown to have certain anti-tumor effects. In this study, the
effect of combination chemotherapy and statin treatment on proliferation,
cell cycle time and cytotoxicity was investigated using the aggressive
natural killer cell line known at YT-INDY. In terms of anti-proliferative
effect, combination treatment of YT-INDY with doxorubicin (1 nM and 0.1
nM) with 10 uM atorvastatin, fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted in
significant (p<0.05) inhibition of tumor cell proliferation compared to
either agent alone. Paclitaxel, at a concentration of 1 nM, in
combination with 10 uM atorvastatin, fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted
in significant (p<0.05) inhibition of proliferation. Lovastatin, when
used with doxorubicin or paclitaxel provided no significant inhibition
compared to controls. Atorvastatin (10 uM), in combination with
teniposide (100 pM or 10 pM) or topotecan (1 nM or 100 pM), inhibited
YT-INDY proliferation at a statistically significant level (p<0.05).
Teniposide (1 nM) or topotecan (1 nM), in combination with fluvastatin
(10 uM), provided significant (pAggressive natural killer cell leukemia
is an acute neoplastic proliferation of natural killer cells, resulting
in progressive disease and a poor prognosis. Establishing an effective
treatment plan for aggressive natural killer cell leukemia has not been
successful. Current clinical treatment plans rely on chemotherapeutic
drug combinations; however, many patients do not respond well and often
relapse or develop drug resistance leading to death within several
months. Uncontrolled cell growth coupled to pathology caused by the
natural killer cytotoxicity of the leukemia cells produces the mortality.
New therapeutic approaches to this aggressive leukemia are needed. In
recent years statin drugs, known for their cholesterol lowering ability,
have been shown to have certain anti-tumor effects. In this study, the
effect of combination chemotherapy and statin treatment on proliferation,
cell cycle time and cytotoxicity was investigated using the aggressive
natural killer cell line known at YT-INDY. In terms of anti-proliferative
effect, combination treatment of YT-INDY with doxorubicin (1 nM and 0.1
nM) with 10 uM atorvastatin, fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted in
significant (p<0.05) inhibition of tumor cell proliferation compared to
either agent alone. Paclitaxel, at a concentration of 1 nM, in
combination with 10 uM atorvastatin, fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted
in significant (p<0.05) inhibition of proliferation. Lovastatin, when
used with doxorubicin or paclitaxel provided no significant inhibition
compared to controls. Atorvastatin (10 uM), in combination with
teniposide (100 pM or 10 pM) or topotecan (1 nM or 100 pM), inhibited
YT-INDY proliferation at a statistically significant level (p<0.05).
Teniposide (1 nM) or topotecan (1 nM), in combination with fluvastatin
(10 uM), provided significant (p<0.05) reduction of proliferation
compared to any single agent. Consistent with the effects on
proliferation, compared to untreated cells, statin alone or chemo alone
controls, combination therapy with atorvastatin (10 uM) and doxorubicin,
paclitaxel, teniposide or topotecan increased the cell cycle time of
YT-INDY at nearly every chemo concentration tested. Finally, in addition
to the anti-proliferative effect of chemotherapy and statin together,
combination treatment with paclitaxel (10 nM) and fluvastatin (0.5 uM) or
lovastatin (0.5 uM) resulted in significant (pAggressive natural killer
cell leukemia is an acute neoplastic proliferation of natural killer
cells, resulting in progressive disease and a poor prognosis.
Establishing an effective treatment plan for aggressive natural killer
cell leukemia has not been successful. Current clinical treatment plans
rely on chemotherapeutic drug combinations; however, many patients do not
respond well and often relapse or develop drug resistance leading to
death within several months. Uncontrolled cell growth coupled to
pathology caused by the natural killer cytotoxicity of the leukemia cells
produces the mortality. New therapeutic approaches to this aggressive
leukemia are needed. In recent years statin drugs, known for their
cholesterol lowering ability, have been shown to have certain anti-tumor
effects. In this study, the effect of combination chemotherapy and statin
treatment on proliferation, cell cycle time and cytotoxicity was
investigated using the aggressive natural killer cell line known at
YT-INDY. In terms of anti-proliferative effect, combination treatment of
YT-INDY with doxorubicin (1 nM and 0.1 nM) with 10 uM atorvastatin,
fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted in significant (p<0.05) inhibition of
tumor cell proliferation compared to either agent alone. Paclitaxel, at a
concentration of 1 nM, in combination with 10 uM atorvastatin,
fluvastatin or simvastatin resulted in significant (p<0.05) inhibition of
proliferation. Lovastatin, when used with doxorubicin or paclitaxel
provided no significant inhibition compared to controls. Atorvastatin (10
uM), in combination with teniposide (100 pM or 10 pM) or topotecan (1 nM
or 100 pM), inhibited YT-INDY proliferation at a statistically
significant level (p<0.05). Teniposide (1 nM) or topotecan (1 nM), in
combination with fluvastatin (10 uM), provided significant (p<0.05)
reduction of proliferation compared to any single agent. Consistent with
the effects on proliferation, compared to untreated cells, statin alone
or chemo alone controls, combination therapy with atorvastatin (10 uM)
and doxorubicin, paclitaxel, teniposide or topotecan increased the cell
cycle time of YT-INDY at nearly every chemo concentration tested.
Finally, in addition to the anti-proliferative effect of chemotherapy and
statin together, combination treatment with paclitaxel (10 nM) and
fluvastatin (0.5 uM) or lovastatin (0.5 uM) resulted in significant
(p<0.05) inhibition of natural killer cell cytotoxicity compared to any
single agent. These results suggest that statins in combination with
certain chemotherapeutic agents could provide a better anti-tumor
response and improved patient outcomes, compared to chemotherapy alone,
in those individuals with aggressive natural killer cell leukemias.

