Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive role of FDG PET-CT in monitoring locally advanced
rectal cancer (LARC) during preoperative radiochemotherapy with an
experimental bevacizumab schedule.


Objectives : We have shown that pathological regression of LARC and
relapse free survival can be predicted by early changes in FDG uptake
during preoperative radiochemotherapy. We have attempted to improve
efficacy of our neo-adjuvant treatment by adding an experimental
bevacizumab (BEV) schedule. FDG PETCT was utilized to monitor response
and correlate with pathological outcome.Methods : Forty six patients with
poor prognosis LARC received 3 biweekly courses of oxaliplatin/
raltitrexed (day 1) and FU/ folinic acid (day 2) during pelvic RT (45
Gy). BEV (5 mg/kg) was administered on day -4 for the first 2 courses.
PET-CT was performed at baseline, on day 12 and prior to surgery and
lesion TLG (mean SUV x volume) values determined. Pathologic response was
defined using a modified Mandard tumor regression grade (TRG) scale.
Responders were defined as TRG1-2, non-responders as TRG3-4.Results :
Thirty-seven patients (80%) showed pathologic response (65% with previous
scheme). Eight patients (17%, previously 35%) were non-responders.
Responders showed significantly higher TLG reduction on day 12 PET-CT
(median -72% range -90%+31%) compared to non-responders (TRG3-4, median
-38%, range -45% +25%, p Objectives : We have shown that pathological
regression of LARC and relapse free survival can be predicted by early
changes in FDG uptake during preoperative radiochemotherapy. We have
attempted to improve efficacy of our neo-adjuvant treatment by adding an
experimental bevacizumab (BEV) schedule. FDG PETCT was utilized to
monitor response and correlate with pathological outcome.Methods : Forty
six patients with poor prognosis LARC received 3 biweekly courses of
oxaliplatin/ raltitrexed (day 1) and FU/ folinic acid (day 2) during
pelvic RT (45 Gy). BEV (5 mg/kg) was administered on day -4 for the first
2 courses. PET-CT was performed at baseline, on day 12 and prior to
surgery and lesion TLG (mean SUV x volume) values determined. Pathologic
response was defined using a modified Mandard tumor regression grade
(TRG) scale. Responders were defined as TRG1-2, non-responders as
TRG3-4.Results : Thirty-seven patients (80%) showed pathologic response
(65% with previous scheme). Eight patients (17%, previously 35%) were
non-responders. Responders showed significantly higher TLG reduction on
day 12 PET-CT (median -72% range -90%+31%) compared to non-responders
(TRG3-4, median -38%, range -45% +25%, p < 0.05), confirming previous
findings. Preoperative PET-CT studies, on the other hand, were not
predictive of pathologic response (responders TLG change median -92%,
range -100% +4%, non-responders median 86%, range -94%-76%, p = ns).
Ongoing studies to define a correlation between FDG uptake and biomarkers
of angiogenesis such as Circulating endothelial cells (CEC) will be
presented.Conclusions : Our findings indicate that the current scheme
significantly increases pathologic response. PET-CT confirms to be a
powerful early surrogate marker of treatment efficacy. PET-CT may be used
to tailor more aggressive treatment for non-responsive patient

