Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a functional assay for the determination of BRCA1
carrier status.


Germline mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1 confer
an overall lifetime risk of developing breast cancer of up to 80%. Given
the high risk of cancer development associated with BRCA1 mutation
carriers, it is important that they be identified early and accurately.
However, identification is impeded by the number of Variants of Unknown
Significance (VUS), therefore there is compelling rationale for a
functional assay that will identify pathogenic mutations. Previous work
in our lab developed a novel functional assay to predict BRCA1 status
based on gene expression profiles. That study analyzed EBV-transformed
lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) of BRCA1 mutation carriers (BRCA1+/) and
controls (BRCA1+/+) and found that lymphocytes from BRCA1 carriers could
be distinguished with high fidelity (90% accuracy) from individuals with
two wild type copies of the gene. Interestingly, carriers were recognized
through their basal gene expression profiles. Global gene expression
level changes following ionizing radiation (IR) to induce the DNA damage
response (DDR) did not support the development of an accurate class
predictor.The final predictor included a set of 43 genes. Many of these
genes were also markers of differentiation in blood cells. A subset of
these genes have now been validated in LCLs using qRT-PCR and
protein-based methods including single reaction monitoring mass spec
(SRM-MS) and flow cytometry. These assays were able to distinguish BRCA1
mutation carriers from controls based on the expression levels of
specific markers, including genes with known roles in lymphocyte
differentiation. Using these techniques, ongoing work is being done to
test the ability of these markers to discriminate BRCA1 mutation carriers
from controls using lymphocytes isolated from fresh blood samples.

