Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triptolide inhibit malignant growth and telomerase activity in
malignant neurofibromatosis cells.


Neurofibromatosis patients have an 8-13% risk of developing a malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) which has a poor prognosis.
Increasing telomerase activity and telomerase reverse transcriptase
(TERT) mRNA were observed in 82% and 100% of the MPNST patients.
Currently, there is no effective drug for MPNST. In this study, we
explore the effect of Triptolide (TPL) on MPNST and its molecule
mechanism.In vitro, human MPNST cell lines STS26T, T256 and ST88-14 were
treated with TPL. Cell proliferation was measured with MTT assay; cell
apoptosis was assayed with Annexin-V staining and Sub-G1 phase analysis.
STS26T cells treated with TPL were harvested and then assessed for their
caspase 9, 8 and 3 activity with fluorescence substrates. Protein and RNA
were harvested for the assay of telomerase activity and TERT mRNA
level.In vivo, STS26T, T265 and ST88-14 (5106/site) cells were
transplanted into nude mice. Mice bared tumor (100 mm3, STS26T) was
treated with TPL (0.25 mg/kg, three times a week) for 4 weeks. Tumor
weight was compared between TPL treated and the control group.The results
showed that: 1) TPL inhibited the proliferation of STS26T and T256 cells
in a dose and time dependent manner: The inhibition concentration (IC50)
was 18.05 ng/ml, 15.0 ng/ml and 9.0 ng/ml for STS26T, T256 and ST-88,
respectively, indicating that STS26T is more resistant to chemotherapy
drug. As compared with IC50 of Taxol at 128 ng/ml, TPL was more potent in
suppression of MPNST growth; 2) TPL induced apoptosis of MPNST cells as
evidenced by the increased portion of cells in Annexin V positive
staining and sub-G1 population. TPL at doses of 12.5-25 ng/ml showed an
activation of apoptotic molecular; 3) TPL inhibited the relative
telomerase activity (RTA) of STS26T and T256 cells. To reach similar
inhibition of RAT, STS26T cells required a higher dose (36 ng/ml v.s. 9
ng/ml); 4) TPL inhibited TERT mRNA of STS26T cells. To define if the
reduced telomerase activity was due to the reduction of the TERT
synthesis, the effect of TPL on TERT mRNA was examined. TERT mRNA in
STS26T cells was greatly reduced with TPL in time and dose dependent. 5)
In vivo, TPL in low dose range (0.25 mg/kg) effectively inhibited
aggressive xenograft of STS26T. TPL significantly reduced the tumor
weight of STS26T as compared to the vehicle alone treated group (0.75 +
0.15g vs 3.1 + 0.45g, PNeurofibromatosis patients have an 8-13% risk of
developing a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) which has a
poor prognosis. Increasing telomerase activity and telomerase reverse
transcriptase (TERT) mRNA were observed in 82% and 100% of the MPNST
patients. Currently, there is no effective drug for MPNST. In this study,
we explore the effect of Triptolide (TPL) on MPNST and its molecule
mechanism.In vitro, human MPNST cell lines STS26T, T256 and ST88-14 were
treated with TPL. Cell proliferation was measured with MTT assay; cell
apoptosis was assayed with Annexin-V staining and Sub-G1 phase analysis.
STS26T cells treated with TPL were harvested and then assessed for their
caspase 9, 8 and 3 activity with fluorescence substrates. Protein and RNA
were harvested for the assay of telomerase activity and TERT mRNA
level.In vivo, STS26T, T265 and ST88-14 (5106/site) cells were
transplanted into nude mice. Mice bared tumor (100 mm3, STS26T) was
treated with TPL (0.25 mg/kg, three times a week) for 4 weeks. Tumor
weight was compared between TPL treated and the control group.The results
showed that: 1) TPL inhibited the proliferation of STS26T and T256 cells
in a dose and time dependent manner: The inhibition concentration (IC50)
was 18.05 ng/ml, 15.0 ng/ml and 9.0 ng/ml for STS26T, T256 and ST-88,
respectively, indicating that STS26T is more resistant to chemotherapy
drug. As compared with IC50 of Taxol at 128 ng/ml, TPL was more potent in
suppression of MPNST growth; 2) TPL induced apoptosis of MPNST cells as
evidenced by the increased portion of cells in Annexin V positive
staining and sub-G1 population. TPL at doses of 12.5-25 ng/ml showed an
activation of apoptotic molecular; 3) TPL inhibited the relative
telomerase activity (RTA) of STS26T and T256 cells. To reach similar
inhibition of RAT, STS26T cells required a higher dose (36 ng/ml v.s. 9
ng/ml); 4) TPL inhibited TERT mRNA of STS26T cells. To define if the
reduced telomerase activity was due to the reduction of the TERT
synthesis, the effect of TPL on TERT mRNA was examined. TERT mRNA in
STS26T cells was greatly reduced with TPL in time and dose dependent. 5)
In vivo, TPL in low dose range (0.25 mg/kg) effectively inhibited
aggressive xenograft of STS26T. TPL significantly reduced the tumor
weight of STS26T as compared to the vehicle alone treated group (0.75 +
0.15g vs 3.1 + 0.45g, P<0.001).The data demonstrate that TPL possesses
potent inhibitory effect on the growth of MPNST tumor cells both in vitro
and in vivo, which is related with its reduction of telomerase activity.
TPL has a good potential to be developed as a new anti-MPNST
drug.Citation Format: Shanmin Yang, Wei Wang, Luqiang Huang, Mei Zhang,
Paul Okunieff, Lurong Zhang. Triptolide inhibit malignant growth and
telomerase activity in malignant neurofibromatosis cells. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2256.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2256

