Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SGN-LIV1A: a development stage antibody drug-conjugate targeting
LIV-1 for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer.


LIV-1, also known as SLC39A6 or ZIP6, is a member of the zinc transporter
family and was first identified as an estrogen-inducible gene in breast
cancer derived cell lines. LIV-1, as a downstream target of STAT3,
promotes the epithelial to mesenchymal transition that is important in
the malignant progression to metastasis. Consistent with its role in
cancer, we determined by immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis that LIV-1 is
expressed in subtypes of metastatic breast cancers (ER+/HER2-, HER2+ and
triple negative). In healthy human tissues, LIV-1 expression is limited
to four hormonally-regulated organs. The broad expression of LIV-1 in
metastatic breast cancer in combination with the limited expression in
vital organs makes LIV-1 an excellent target for an antibody-drug
conjugate (ADC). SGN-LIV1A is an ADC consisting of a humanized anti-LIV-1
mAb conjugated to the microtubule-disrupting agent, monomethyl auristatin
E, via a protease-cleavable linker. In vitro, SGN-LIV1A shows target
specific internalization and cytotoxic activity against a breast cancer
cell line. In vivo studies also demonstrate antitumor activity of
SGN-LIV1A in preclinical xenograft models with significant delay of tumor
growth compared to control groups. These findings support further
evaluation and development of SGN-LIVA as a therapeutic for the treatment
of metastatic breast cancer.

