Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2-integrin-derived signals induce cell survival and proliferation
of AML blasts by activating a Syk/STAT signaling axis.


Constitutive activation of certain kinase-dependent signal transduction
pathways is critical for the pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Apart from FLT3-ITD the spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) induces cell
survival and proliferation in a high proportion of AML blasts, but the
underlying molecular events of Syk signaling have not been investigated
so far. Using a phosphoproteomic approach we elucidated the AML-specific
phosphorylation state of Syk and found that the kinase is constitutively
phosphorylated at all known activation inducing tyrosine residues.
Moreover, we have identified the multi-protein complex that is nucleated
by constitutively active Syk in AML cells by quantitative proteomic
techniques. This complex differs from the B lymphoid Syk interactome
regarding several proteins, in particular the2-integrin receptor Mac-1
and also the oncogenic transcription factors STAT3 and STAT5. Our
functional studies in primary AML cell cultures revealed that tonic
signals derived from the integrin-associated Fc- chain lead to
Syk-dependent activation of STAT3 and STAT5 that in turn induces AML cell
proliferation. Moreover, stimulation of Mac-1 intensifies the
constitutive Syk-mediated STAT3/5 activation in AML cells, a scenario
likely to take place in the bone marrow niche. In accordance with these
findings, we observed that 2-integrins including Mac-1 induce
proliferation of AML cells in an AML cell/stroma co-culture model. Taken
together, we identified an oncogenic integrin/Syk/STAT signaling axis
that might serve as a therapeutic target of AML in the future.

