Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benzopyrene diol epoxide attenuates p34cdc2 and inhibits cell
growth: role of p53.


Our previous findings demonstrated that DNA damage by polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) triggers cellular protective response of
cell growth inhibition (G1-S cell cycle arrest and inhibition of DNA
synthesis) in human fibroblast associated with accumulation of p53
protein, a known cell growth inhibitory transcription factor. Here we
report that in different cell lines BPDE treatment (ultimate carcinogenic
metabolite of the PAH benzo[a]pyrene) triggers variable extent of cell
growth inhibition which do not correspond to the extent of increased p53
accumulation as we observed. We also observed that BPDE treatment of
cells significantly down-regulates expression of p34cdc2, a known cell
cycle activating protein. Although the role of cdc2 down-regulation in
inhibition of cell cycle progression is well known, to the best of our
knowledge cdc2 down-regulation in response to cellular insult by PAHs has
not been reported. Unlike p53 accumulation there is correspondence
between extent of cell growth inhibition and the extent of cdc2
down-regulation by BPDE in different cell lines. Interestingly,
BPDE-induced cdc2 down-regulation is observed to be p53 dependent
although there is lack of correspondence between the extent of p53
accumulation and cdc2 down-regulation. However, extent of BPDE induced
cdc2 down-regulation was observed to have correspondence with the extent
of accumulation of cell cycle inhibitor protein p21 (transactivation
product of p53) in different cell lines. These findings may have an
implication that cell growth inhibition in response to DNA damaging PAHs
may involve down-regulation of cdc2 protein mediated by p53 activation
(transactivation ability), and the extent of p53 accumulation is not the
determining factor in this regard.

