Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotine contributes to oral cancer by promotion of cell invasion
through ASAP1 signaling pathway.


Oral cancer is characterized as prolonged exposure to potential risk
factors, including tobacco use or cigarette smoking. However, the
underlined mechanism of tobacco leads to cancer is still largely unknown.
To shed light on the molecular basis of tobacco induced oral
carcinogenesis, we established three sublines of oral cancer cells
chronically treated with nicotine (IC30 dose for 3 months). Phenotypic
characterization showed that the sublines were tolerant to nicotine,
increased cell invasion and migration abilities, along with the altered
expressions of epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers. The
transcriptomic profiling analysis was performed between parental and the
subline cells to global survey and identify nicotine induced genes.
Heretical clustering analysis reveals that 1004 genes were differentially
expressed, in which 28% of the genes associated with cell mobility. Total
of 13 genes were confirmed by RT-PCR assay that over-expressed in the
nicotine sublines. ASAP1 was significantly increased in all 3 cell lines,
and it was selected for further studied. Knockdown ASAP1 expressions by
shRNA reduced nicotine induced cell migration (to 60% 80%) and invasion
(to 55% 60%) abilities. This ASAP1 silencing further inhibited nicotine-
induced MMP2 enzyme activity. Clinical study also supported this finding
that ASAP1 was significantly elevated in the oral cancer tissues from
patients with smoking habits (P=0.042) but not in the cancer patients
without smoking (P=0.714). We therefore concluded that tobacco
contributes to oral cancer by the promotion of cell migration and
invasion, which was at least in part, through ASAP1 associated signaling
pathway.

