Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KAP1 promotes malignant properties of breast cancer cells and
regulates the expression of multiple KRAB-ZNFs.


Background and Objective: Chromatin remodeling is fundamental for normal
development and is universally affected in cancer cells. The largest
family of human transcription factors, KRAB-ZNF repressors, and their
essential cofactor KAP1 play important roles in chromatin organization
and regulate multiple cellular processes such as cell differentiation,
pluripotency, apoptosis, DNA repair and imprinting. Here, we explored the
role of KAP1 and KRAB-ZNFs in breast cancer.Methods: Using cancer patient
samples, in vitro and animal xenograft model we analyzed KAP1 role in
cancer cell proliferation and primary tumor formation.Results: Patient
sample analysis showed KAP1 and KRAB-ZNFs overexpression in significant
proportion of breast tumors. KAP1 depletion in a panel of breast cancer
cell lines inhibited cancer cell proliferation, while KAP1 overexpression
stimulated cell growth. Concordantly, KAP1 knockdown in MDA-MB-231LN
human breast cancer cells inhibited primary tumor growth in orthotopic
xenograft mouse model, while KAP1 overexpression had an opposite, growth
stimulatory effect. KAP1 depletion resulted in decreased expression of a
number of cancer-associated genes. Functional in vitro studies provided
evidence that KAP1 positively regulates expression of multiple
KRAB-ZNFs.Discussion and Conclusions: These results thus establish KAP1
as an oncogenic factor in breast cancer. Grant support: NIH NCRR grant
P20 RR16440 and Susan G. Komen for the Cure grant KG110350.

