Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of circulating fibrocytes in the progression of
adenocarcinomas by modulating EMT and tumor microenvironment.


Background: Circulating fibrocytes (CFs) are bone marrow derived,
mesenchymal progenitor cells that have emerging role in many diseases.
CFs was shown to participate in tissue remodeling in pulmonary
hypertension and fibrosis, via secretion of different cytokines and
growth factors. Nevertheless, their role in the lung cancer still has to
be delineated. Thus, our aim is to identify the role of CFs in lung
cancer progression and metastatic potential.Results/methods: We generated
CFs by isolating human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and
culturing them for 10 days until they differentiated into CFs. Purity
(95%) of the CFs population was analyzed by flow cytometry and
immunofluorescence. Co-culturing of A549 (human alveolar adenocarcinoma
cells) and CFs for 12 and 24 hrs, followed by collection of conditioned
medium (CM) and RNA from both cells yielded interesting results.
Co-cultured CM promoted proliferation (1.310.07 versus 1.50.13) and
migrating capacity (64.626.5 versus 472.8103.4) of A549 tumor cells. In
addition, co-cultured CM caused epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) of A549 cells; epithelial markers (E-cadherin, cytokeratin) were
downregulated, and mesenchymal markers (-smooth muscle actin,
fibronectin) were upregulated.In vivo to study the CFs involvement in
lung cancer, we co-injected CFs with A549 cells or A549 cells alone and
measured the tumor growth after 28 days. The tumor size was significantly
increased (1354.8333.6 versus 3042.4373.4) in co-injected group (CF+A549)
compared to A549 alone. Screening for genes regulated in co-injected
group tumors showed regulation of tumor microenvironment, an increase in
macrophage markers (CSF1R, CD68, CD200, MMD), angiogenesis markers
(EDNRB, THBS1) and ECM remodeling markers (MMP14, CTSB, CTSH) compared to
A549 tumor alone.Conclusions: We believe that circulating fibrocytes may
play positive role in the tumor growth and progression. The increase in
EMT and migration, may suggest their involvement in invasion and
metastasis. Targeting CFs and their secretory molecules can be of
therapeutic importance in lung cancer.

