Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis in subsets of precursor
B-cells isolated from umbilical cord blood.


Tissue specific DNA methylation is accountable for regulating gene
expression and cellular differentiation during normal human development.
Aberrant tissue specific gene regulation may lead to the development of
many disease states including cancer. Genome-wide analysis of DNA
methylation (methylome) in both healthy and diseased tissue is essential
to understand the functional consequence of altered DNA methylation.
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a malignancy associated with
precursor B-cells. In order to gain a better understanding of the role of
altered DNA methylation in the pathogenesis of ALL, it is essential that
we characterize the DNA methylation present in healthy precursor B-cells.
Umbilical cord blood is enriched for precursor B-cells and is used as a
source of hematopoietic stem cells in the treatment of blood related
disorders and malignancies. To study the methylome in healthy precursor
B-cells, we have optimized a protocol to isolate 4 subsets of precursor
B-cells from umbilical cord blood, and to then generate MBD-seq libraries
from the small amount of genomic DNA (Tissue specific DNA methylation is
accountable for regulating gene expression and cellular differentiation
during normal human development. Aberrant tissue specific gene regulation
may lead to the development of many disease states including cancer.
Genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation (methylome) in both healthy and
diseased tissue is essential to understand the functional consequence of
altered DNA methylation. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a
malignancy associated with precursor B-cells. In order to gain a better
understanding of the role of altered DNA methylation in the pathogenesis
of ALL, it is essential that we characterize the DNA methylation present
in healthy precursor B-cells. Umbilical cord blood is enriched for
precursor B-cells and is used as a source of hematopoietic stem cells in
the treatment of blood related disorders and malignancies. To study the
methylome in healthy precursor B-cells, we have optimized a protocol to
isolate 4 subsets of precursor B-cells from umbilical cord blood, and to
then generate MBD-seq libraries from the small amount of genomic DNA (<
100ng) isolated from those subsets of precursor B-cells.Subsets of
precursor B-cells were isolated from cord blood based on the level of
expression of cell surface antigen. Initially mononuclear cells were
isolated by Ficoll-plaque followed by magnetic labeling and depletion of
non B-cells. B-cells were labeled with antibodies against CD19, CD34 and
CD45 surface antigens and sorted by flow cytometry. Based on expression
level of surface antigen, four different subsets of precursor B-cells
were sorted (CD19+/CD34+; CD19+/CD34-/CD45low; CD19+/CD34-/CD45med; and
CD19+/CD34-/CD45high). Immediately after cell sorting, DNA was isolated
by using a commercially available kit. The entire amount of DNA from
CD19+/CD34+ and CD19+/CD34-/CD45low (Tissue specific DNA methylation is
accountable for regulating gene expression and cellular differentiation
during normal human development. Aberrant tissue specific gene regulation
may lead to the development of many disease states including cancer.
Genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation (methylome) in both healthy and
diseased tissue is essential to understand the functional consequence of
altered DNA methylation. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a
malignancy associated with precursor B-cells. In order to gain a better
understanding of the role of altered DNA methylation in the pathogenesis
of ALL, it is essential that we characterize the DNA methylation present
in healthy precursor B-cells. Umbilical cord blood is enriched for
precursor B-cells and is used as a source of hematopoietic stem cells in
the treatment of blood related disorders and malignancies. To study the
methylome in healthy precursor B-cells, we have optimized a protocol to
isolate 4 subsets of precursor B-cells from umbilical cord blood, and to
then generate MBD-seq libraries from the small amount of genomic DNA (<
100ng) isolated from those subsets of precursor B-cells.Subsets of
precursor B-cells were isolated from cord blood based on the level of
expression of cell surface antigen. Initially mononuclear cells were
isolated by Ficoll-plaque followed by magnetic labeling and depletion of
non B-cells. B-cells were labeled with antibodies against CD19, CD34 and
CD45 surface antigens and sorted by flow cytometry. Based on expression
level of surface antigen, four different subsets of precursor B-cells
were sorted (CD19+/CD34+; CD19+/CD34-/CD45low; CD19+/CD34-/CD45med; and
CD19+/CD34-/CD45high). Immediately after cell sorting, DNA was isolated
by using a commercially available kit. The entire amount of DNA from
CD19+/CD34+ and CD19+/CD34-/CD45low (<100ng) subsets, and 100ng of DNA
from CD19+/CD34-/CD45med and CD19+/CD34-/CD45high subsets were fragmented
by sonication using Diagenode Bioruptor. Sequencing libraries were
generated using the Illumina Chip-seq protocol with modifications.
Enrichment of methylated DNA was validated by PCR amplification of
methylated (SLC25A37) and unmethylated (APC) regions. MBD-seq libraries
were sequenced using Illumina next-generation sequencing technology and
then sequenced data were analyzed by NextGENe software. We found 45
million uniquely matched reads covering 700 million bases in the human
genome for each precursor B-cell subset. Methylated peaks were identified
using the Peak Identification tool in NextGENe. The results demonstrated
a differential pattern of DNA methylation in the subsets of healthy
precursor B-cells.

