Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A metabolic enzyme as a pro-angiogenic activator in premalignant
mammary cells.


A crucial step in cancer progression is the development of a high-density
vascular network, the angiogenic switch. During carcinogenesis breast
angiogenesis occurs at hyperplasia before atypia, reaching maximum
vascularization between ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive carcinoma.
Altered energy metabolism is an early hallmark of several human
malignancies. Fatty Acid Synthase (FASN) is a metabolic enzyme that
catalyzes the synthesis of Palmitate from Malonyl CoA. With the exception
of liver and adipose tissue, normal cells have low levels of FASN and
activity. Here we show that FASN expression is progressively up-regulated
in the early steps of human breast carcinogenesis. While under hypoxia
FASN expression is downregulated in non-transformed breast epithelial
cells that form normal ducts. In pre-malignant breast cancer lesions
under similar conditions, FASN expression is upregulated. These data
suggest a link between FASN-hypoxia-progression. In addition, we observed
that in early stages of breast carcinogenesis, FASN regulates the
expression of hypoxia genes, which in turn results in increase
vascularization and angiogenic markers. Forced expression of FASN in
non-transformed breast epithelial cells resulted in increased activity of
HIF-1 and upregulation of VEGF expression. Furthermore, FASN-expressing
non-transformed breast epithelial cells under hypoxia conditions produced
the necessary factors to stimulate angiogenesis, as measured by tube
formation and migration in HUVEC cells. These data provide evidence that
FASN promotes pro-angiogenesis under hypoxia at the early onset of breast
carcinoma; thus, it could be considered as a target for breast cancer
chemoprevention.

