Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARSHA, a novel analog of resveratrol inhibits proliferation of
breast cancer cells by modulating expressions of ER and ER.


Epidemiologic evidence suggests that diets rich in phytoestrogens are
associated with a reduced risk of breast cancer. Resveratrol, a
bioflavonoid found naturally in grapes, has been very effective as an
antiproliferative agent in vitro. However, its poor bioavailability and
rapid metabolism limits its use as a preferred anticancer agent.The
problem of poor bioavailability of resveratrol can be solved by the
synthesis of its analogs with appropriate chemical modifications that
would enhance the stability and anticancer potency of resveratrol. To
achieve this objective, we have synthesized a library of resveratrol
analogs that resemble the basic skeleton of resveratrol but have
structural modifications. These novel analogs were screened for their
potential to inhibit growth of breast cancer cells. One analog, namely,
ARSHA showed better potential and selectivity in inhibiting the
proliferation of breast cancer cells.Our next goal was to identify the
mechanism by which ARSHA specifically inhibits the growth of breast
cancer cells. Estrogen receptor (ER) expressing cell lines MCF-7 and
T47D, and ER negative cell line MDA-MB-231 as well as ER-transfected cell
line MDA-MB-231 were treated with 50M doses of ARSHA for upto 72 hours.
mRNA and protein was isolated from respective cell lines. Real-time PCR
and western blot analyses were performed. ARSHA significantly induced the
expression of ER (3-fold) and inhibited the expression of ER (0.2-fold)
compared to vehicle treated controls. Taken together, our findings
indicate that novel resveratrol analog ARSHA may inhibit the
proliferation of breast cancer cell lines by inhibiting the expression of
ER and inducing the expression of ER. Estrogen receptor acts as a
mediator of proliferation while ER acts as an inhibitor of estrogen
signaling.

