Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-activity relationship study anti-microtubule agents
targeting the colchicine site on tubulin that circumvent drug resistance.


The vinca alkaloids and taxanes are successful antitumor agents. However,
drug resistance limits their clinical utility in cancer chemotherapy.
Overexpression of P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and expression of the -tubulin
subtype, -III tubulin, are two clinically established drug resistance
mechanisms that reduce the effectiveness of these agents. In 2010, we
reported that the 6-CH3 cyclopenta[d]pyrimidine scaffold affords water
soluble antimitotic agents targeting the colchicine site on tubulin.
Molecular modeling and docking studies of the parent compound in the
X-ray crystal structure of tubulin (PDB: 1SA0) suggested that the N4-CH3
moiety involved in hydrophobic interactions with the side chain C of
Lys254, Ala250 and Leu248. However, this binding pocket in tubulin is
relatively large. We designed a variety of N4-alkyl substitutions to
determine optimal size of the substituent at the N4-position for these
hydrophobic interactions. Among the different substitutions at the N4
were n-propyl, i-propyl and cyclopropyl. These compounds inhibited the
growth of human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-435 in culture, with IC50s
130, 410, and 300nM, respectively. The previously reported methyl
substituent at the N4-position is the most potent analog against these
cancer cells, with IC50 of 10.6 nM. Thus, increasing the size of the
N4-alkyl substituent caused a decrease in the potency of the analogs
indicating that groups larger than methyl may be progressively
detrimental to potency. This could be due to conformational restriction
of various rotatable bonds in the molecule, lack of appropriate
hydrophobic interactions with the colchicine site, and/or due to other
factors such as transport into the tumor cells. The experiments to
distinguish among these possibilities are undergoing.

