Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) regulates MAPK activation
and cellular protection against chemical stress.


NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1) is a cytosolic redox-regulating
enzyme modulated by Nrf2-mediated stress signaling pathways, with an
established role in regulation of stress-related transcription factors.
In these studies we investigate the role of NQO1 in regulation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways. Quantitative
PCR and western blot studies showed that constitutive levels of several
MAPK members are upregulated in NQO1-null mouse skin as well as in
skin-derived keratinocytes, relative to WT. However, though total protein
levels are increased, inducibility of these kinases by known MAPK
inducers such as EGF and benzo[a]pyrene (BP) is significantly decreased
in NQO1-null cells. NQO1 regulation of MAPK signaling was confirmed by
studies showing that NQO1 knockdown by siRNA led to decreased MAPK
activation, and overexpression of NQO1 protein led to increased MAPK
activation by EGF. Similarly, downregulation of activity via dicoumarol
caused loss of ERK phosphorylation, while NQO1 activation via t-BHQ
caused increased ERK phosphorylation, which was blocked by MAPK
pathway-specific inhibitors. To investigate the functional role of MAPK
deactivation in skin-derived keratinocytes, studies with BP and menadione
showed that lack of NQO1 expression led to increased susceptibility to
ROS generation, and that this ROS generation causes increased toxicity.
Taken together, these results show a significant role for NQO1 in
regulation of MAPK signaling pathways, which ultimately lead to
protection against ROS-mediated apoptosis.

