Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxic trans-activation of sodium dependent bicarbonate
co-transporters regulates pH in 3D spheroids and promotes growth.


Background: Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is strongly induced by hypoxia.
CAIX extracellularly hydrates CO2 to HCO3 and H+, and we previously
showed CAIX regulates pH in 3D spheroids. CAIX expression correlates with
poor prognosis in most tumour types. We recently showed CAIX regulates
tumour growth, necrosis and that knockdown enhances Bevacizumab
treatment, highlighting the role of pH regulation in the hypoxic tumour
milieu. We hypothesised that transport of HCO3, which had been produced
by CAIX extracellularly could facilitate quenching of intracellular H+.
We identified increased expression of SLC4A4 (which encodes a bicarbonate
transporter), in response to Bevacizumab, a treatment which increases the
hypoxic fraction of cells, in vivo.Method: We investigated a panel of
cells lines (4 colon cancers, 2 glioblastomas, 1 breast cancer and 1 head
and neck cancer) for changes in RNA expression of bicarbonate
transporters in response to hypoxia (0.1% O2, 72 hours), and the role of
HIF1 and HIF2 in key identified changes. We used a specific Na+ dependent
bicarbonate transport inhibitor (SO859) to examine the effect of
inhibition on pH regulation and growth in spheroids. Further to this we
used shRNA knockdown of SLC4A4 and SLC4A9 in cell lines with increased
hypoxic expression to further investigate their role.Results: Hypoxia
increased the RNA expression of one or more bicarbonate transporter in
6/8 cancer cell lines. The largest increases in expression change were
for SLC4A4 in Ls174T and SCC25 (79.4 fold, pBackground: Carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX) is strongly induced by hypoxia. CAIX extracellularly
hydrates CO2 to HCO3 and H+, and we previously showed CAIX regulates pH
in 3D spheroids. CAIX expression correlates with poor prognosis in most
tumour types. We recently showed CAIX regulates tumour growth, necrosis
and that knockdown enhances Bevacizumab treatment, highlighting the role
of pH regulation in the hypoxic tumour milieu. We hypothesised that
transport of HCO3, which had been produced by CAIX extracellularly could
facilitate quenching of intracellular H+. We identified increased
expression of SLC4A4 (which encodes a bicarbonate transporter), in
response to Bevacizumab, a treatment which increases the hypoxic fraction
of cells, in vivo.Method: We investigated a panel of cells lines (4 colon
cancers, 2 glioblastomas, 1 breast cancer and 1 head and neck cancer) for
changes in RNA expression of bicarbonate transporters in response to
hypoxia (0.1% O2, 72 hours), and the role of HIF1 and HIF2 in key
identified changes. We used a specific Na+ dependent bicarbonate
transport inhibitor (SO859) to examine the effect of inhibition on pH
regulation and growth in spheroids. Further to this we used shRNA
knockdown of SLC4A4 and SLC4A9 in cell lines with increased hypoxic
expression to further investigate their role.Results: Hypoxia increased
the RNA expression of one or more bicarbonate transporter in 6/8 cancer
cell lines. The largest increases in expression change were for SLC4A4 in
Ls174T and SCC25 (79.4 fold, p<0.01 n=3: 2.4 fold, pBackground: Carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX) is strongly induced by hypoxia. CAIX extracellularly
hydrates CO2 to HCO3 and H+, and we previously showed CAIX regulates pH
in 3D spheroids. CAIX expression correlates with poor prognosis in most
tumour types. We recently showed CAIX regulates tumour growth, necrosis
and that knockdown enhances Bevacizumab treatment, highlighting the role
of pH regulation in the hypoxic tumour milieu. We hypothesised that
transport of HCO3, which had been produced by CAIX extracellularly could
facilitate quenching of intracellular H+. We identified increased
expression of SLC4A4 (which encodes a bicarbonate transporter), in
response to Bevacizumab, a treatment which increases the hypoxic fraction
of cells, in vivo.Method: We investigated a panel of cells lines (4 colon
cancers, 2 glioblastomas, 1 breast cancer and 1 head and neck cancer) for
changes in RNA expression of bicarbonate transporters in response to
hypoxia (0.1% O2, 72 hours), and the role of HIF1 and HIF2 in key
identified changes. We used a specific Na+ dependent bicarbonate
transport inhibitor (SO859) to examine the effect of inhibition on pH
regulation and growth in spheroids. Further to this we used shRNA
knockdown of SLC4A4 and SLC4A9 in cell lines with increased hypoxic
expression to further investigate their role.Results: Hypoxia increased
the RNA expression of one or more bicarbonate transporter in 6/8 cancer
cell lines. The largest increases in expression change were for SLC4A4 in
Ls174T and SCC25 (79.4 fold, p<0.01 n=3: 2.4 fold, p<0.05, n=3) and
SLC4A9 in U87 and Ls174T (10.5 fold, pBackground: Carbonic anhydrase IX
(CAIX) is strongly induced by hypoxia. CAIX extracellularly hydrates CO2
to HCO3 and H+, and we previously showed CAIX regulates pH in 3D
spheroids. CAIX expression correlates with poor prognosis in most tumour
types. We recently showed CAIX regulates tumour growth, necrosis and that
knockdown enhances Bevacizumab treatment, highlighting the role of pH
regulation in the hypoxic tumour milieu. We hypothesised that transport
of HCO3, which had been produced by CAIX extracellularly could facilitate
quenching of intracellular H+. We identified increased expression of
SLC4A4 (which encodes a bicarbonate transporter), in response to
Bevacizumab, a treatment which increases the hypoxic fraction of cells,
in vivo.Method: We investigated a panel of cells lines (4 colon cancers,
2 glioblastomas, 1 breast cancer and 1 head and neck cancer) for changes
in RNA expression of bicarbonate transporters in response to hypoxia
(0.1% O2, 72 hours), and the role of HIF1 and HIF2 in key identified
changes. We used a specific Na+ dependent bicarbonate transport inhibitor
(SO859) to examine the effect of inhibition on pH regulation and growth
in spheroids. Further to this we used shRNA knockdown of SLC4A4 and
SLC4A9 in cell lines with increased hypoxic expression to further
investigate their role.Results: Hypoxia increased the RNA expression of
one or more bicarbonate transporter in 6/8 cancer cell lines. The largest
increases in expression change were for SLC4A4 in Ls174T and SCC25 (79.4
fold, p<0.01 n=3: 2.4 fold, p<0.05, n=3) and SLC4A9 in U87 and Ls174T
(10.5 fold, p<0.01 n=3; 19 fold, pBackground: Carbonic anhydrase IX
(CAIX) is strongly induced by hypoxia. CAIX extracellularly hydrates CO2
to HCO3 and H+, and we previously showed CAIX regulates pH in 3D
spheroids. CAIX expression correlates with poor prognosis in most tumour
types. We recently showed CAIX regulates tumour growth, necrosis and that
knockdown enhances Bevacizumab treatment, highlighting the role of pH
regulation in the hypoxic tumour milieu. We hypothesised that transport
of HCO3, which had been produced by CAIX extracellularly could facilitate
quenching of intracellular H+. We identified increased expression of
SLC4A4 (which encodes a bicarbonate transporter), in response to
Bevacizumab, a treatment which increases the hypoxic fraction of cells,
in vivo.Method: We investigated a panel of cells lines (4 colon cancers,
2 glioblastomas, 1 breast cancer and 1 head and neck cancer) for changes
in RNA expression of bicarbonate transporters in response to hypoxia
(0.1% O2, 72 hours), and the role of HIF1 and HIF2 in key identified
changes. We used a specific Na+ dependent bicarbonate transport inhibitor
(SO859) to examine the effect of inhibition on pH regulation and growth
in spheroids. Further to this we used shRNA knockdown of SLC4A4 and
SLC4A9 in cell lines with increased hypoxic expression to further
investigate their role.Results: Hypoxia increased the RNA expression of
one or more bicarbonate transporter in 6/8 cancer cell lines. The largest
increases in expression change were for SLC4A4 in Ls174T and SCC25 (79.4
fold, p<0.01 n=3: 2.4 fold, p<0.05, n=3) and SLC4A9 in U87 and Ls174T
(10.5 fold, p<0.01 n=3; 19 fold, p<0.01 n=3). SLC4A4 expression was
regulated by HIF1 in Ls174T and SCC25 (pBackground: Carbonic anhydrase IX
(CAIX) is strongly induced by hypoxia. CAIX extracellularly hydrates CO2
to HCO3 and H+, and we previously showed CAIX regulates pH in 3D
spheroids. CAIX expression correlates with poor prognosis in most tumour
types. We recently showed CAIX regulates tumour growth, necrosis and that
knockdown enhances Bevacizumab treatment, highlighting the role of pH
regulation in the hypoxic tumour milieu. We hypothesised that transport
of HCO3, which had been produced by CAIX extracellularly could facilitate
quenching of intracellular H+. We identified increased expression of
SLC4A4 (which encodes a bicarbonate transporter), in response to
Bevacizumab, a treatment which increases the hypoxic fraction of cells,
in vivo.Method: We investigated a panel of cells lines (4 colon cancers,
2 glioblastomas, 1 breast cancer and 1 head and neck cancer) for changes
in RNA expression of bicarbonate transporters in response to hypoxia
(0.1% O2, 72 hours), and the role of HIF1 and HIF2 in key identified
changes. We used a specific Na+ dependent bicarbonate transport inhibitor
(SO859) to examine the effect of inhibition on pH regulation and growth
in spheroids. Further to this we used shRNA knockdown of SLC4A4 and
SLC4A9 in cell lines with increased hypoxic expression to further
investigate their role.Results: Hypoxia increased the RNA expression of
one or more bicarbonate transporter in 6/8 cancer cell lines. The largest
increases in expression change were for SLC4A4 in Ls174T and SCC25 (79.4
fold, p<0.01 n=3: 2.4 fold, p<0.05, n=3) and SLC4A9 in U87 and Ls174T
(10.5 fold, p<0.01 n=3; 19 fold, p<0.01 n=3). SLC4A4 expression was
regulated by HIF1 in Ls174T and SCC25 (p<0.05, n=3). HIF1 bound directly
to the HRE in the promoter of SLC4A4 in SCC25. SLC4A9 expression increase
was regulated by HIF2 (80%) and HIF1 (29%) in Ls174T. SO859 treatment
acidified the intracellular pH of cells in U87 spheroids. The most
significant differences in pH were seen at the spheroid core
(pBackground: Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is strongly induced by
hypoxia. CAIX extracellularly hydrates CO2 to HCO3 and H+, and we
previously showed CAIX regulates pH in 3D spheroids. CAIX expression
correlates with poor prognosis in most tumour types. We recently showed
CAIX regulates tumour growth, necrosis and that knockdown enhances
Bevacizumab treatment, highlighting the role of pH regulation in the
hypoxic tumour milieu. We hypothesised that transport of HCO3, which had
been produced by CAIX extracellularly could facilitate quenching of
intracellular H+. We identified increased expression of SLC4A4 (which
encodes a bicarbonate transporter), in response to Bevacizumab, a
treatment which increases the hypoxic fraction of cells, in vivo.Method:
We investigated a panel of cells lines (4 colon cancers, 2 glioblastomas,
1 breast cancer and 1 head and neck cancer) for changes in RNA expression
of bicarbonate transporters in response to hypoxia (0.1% O2, 72 hours),
and the role of HIF1 and HIF2 in key identified changes. We used a
specific Na+ dependent bicarbonate transport inhibitor (SO859) to examine
the effect of inhibition on pH regulation and growth in spheroids.
Further to this we used shRNA knockdown of SLC4A4 and SLC4A9 in cell
lines with increased hypoxic expression to further investigate their
role.Results: Hypoxia increased the RNA expression of one or more
bicarbonate transporter in 6/8 cancer cell lines. The largest increases
in expression change were for SLC4A4 in Ls174T and SCC25 (79.4 fold,
p<0.01 n=3: 2.4 fold, p<0.05, n=3) and SLC4A9 in U87 and Ls174T (10.5
fold, p<0.01 n=3; 19 fold, p<0.01 n=3). SLC4A4 expression was regulated
by HIF1 in Ls174T and SCC25 (p<0.05, n=3). HIF1 bound directly to the HRE
in the promoter of SLC4A4 in SCC25. SLC4A9 expression increase was
regulated by HIF2 (80%) and HIF1 (29%) in Ls174T. SO859 treatment
acidified the intracellular pH of cells in U87 spheroids. The most
significant differences in pH were seen at the spheroid core (p<0.001,
n=20) and periphery (pBackground: Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is
strongly induced by hypoxia. CAIX extracellularly hydrates CO2 to HCO3
and H+, and we previously showed CAIX regulates pH in 3D spheroids. CAIX
expression correlates with poor prognosis in most tumour types. We
recently showed CAIX regulates tumour growth, necrosis and that knockdown
enhances Bevacizumab treatment, highlighting the role of pH regulation in
the hypoxic tumour milieu. We hypothesised that transport of HCO3, which
had been produced by CAIX extracellularly could facilitate quenching of
intracellular H+. We identified increased expression of SLC4A4 (which
encodes a bicarbonate transporter), in response to Bevacizumab, a
treatment which increases the hypoxic fraction of cells, in vivo.Method:
We investigated a panel of cells lines (4 colon cancers, 2 glioblastomas,
1 breast cancer and 1 head and neck cancer) for changes in RNA expression
of bicarbonate transporters in response to hypoxia (0.1% O2, 72 hours),
and the role of HIF1 and HIF2 in key identified changes. We used a
specific Na+ dependent bicarbonate transport inhibitor (SO859) to examine
the effect of inhibition on pH regulation and growth in spheroids.
Further to this we used shRNA knockdown of SLC4A4 and SLC4A9 in cell
lines with increased hypoxic expression to further investigate their
role.Results: Hypoxia increased the RNA expression of one or more
bicarbonate transporter in 6/8 cancer cell lines. The largest increases
in expression change were for SLC4A4 in Ls174T and SCC25 (79.4 fold,
p<0.01 n=3: 2.4 fold, p<0.05, n=3) and SLC4A9 in U87 and Ls174T (10.5
fold, p<0.01 n=3; 19 fold, p<0.01 n=3). SLC4A4 expression was regulated
by HIF1 in Ls174T and SCC25 (p<0.05, n=3). HIF1 bound directly to the HRE
in the promoter of SLC4A4 in SCC25. SLC4A9 expression increase was
regulated by HIF2 (80%) and HIF1 (29%) in Ls174T. SO859 treatment
acidified the intracellular pH of cells in U87 spheroids. The most
significant differences in pH were seen at the spheroid core (p<0.001,
n=20) and periphery (p<0.001, n=20). U87 spheroids have HIF1
stabilisation and CAIX expression throughout, as detected by
immunohistochemistry. Longer SO859 treatment of 24 hours resulted in a
reduced effect on pH, suggesting a compensation mechanism. SO859
treatment reduced the spheroid growth rate of 4/4 cell lines tested,
including MDA-MB-468 a cell line that showed no hypoxic increase in
bicarbonate transport expression. In U87 spheroids, CAIX knockdown
further reduced the reduction in growth rate seen with SO859. SLC4A4 and
SLC4A9 knockdown reduced growth rate in Ls174T spheroids and SLC4A9
knockdown reduced spheroid growth rate in U87.Conclusion: This work
highlights the value of developing small molecules or antibodies, which
inhibit bicarbonate transport to clinically deregulate pH regulation in
the hypoxic microenvironment of tumours.

