Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of small molecule Bcl-XL inhibitors for treatment of
lung cancer.


Bcl-XL is a major anti-apoptotic protein in the Bcl-2 family whose
overexpression is more widely observed in human lung cancer cells than
that of Bcl-2, suggesting that Bcl-XL is more biologically relevant and
therefore a better therapeutic target for lung cancer. Here, we screened
small molecules that selectively target the BH3 domain (aa 90-98) binding
pocket ofBcl-XL using the UCSF DOCK 6.1 program suite and the NCI
chemical library database.We identified two new Bcl-XL inhibitors (BXI-61
and BXI-72) that exhibit selective toxicity against lung cancer cells
compared with normal human bronchial epithelial cells. Fluorescence
polarization assay reveals that BXI-61 and BXI-72 preferentially bind to
Bcl-XL protein but notBcl2 in vitro with high binding affinities.
Treatment of cells with BXI-72 results in disruption of Bcl-XL/Bak
interaction, oligomerization of Bak and cytochrome c release from
mitochondria.These two BXI compounds potently repress lung cancer
xenografts in vivo without significant normal tissue toxicity within
effective doses. Importantly, BXI-72 can also overcome acquired
radioresistance of lung cancer. Based on our findings, the development of
BXI(s) as a new class of anticancer agents is warranted and represents a
novel strategy for improving lung cancer outcome.

