Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LINE-1 %5-Methylcytosine levels in pre-diagnostic leukocyte DNA
and subsequent renal cell cancer risk .


Background: Alteration of DNA methylation is thought to promote
carcinogenesis by weakening chromosomal stability and changing normal
gene expression patterns. These epigenetic alterations that occur
throughout the genome are considered early events in the carcinogenic
process. Lately, long interspersed nucleotide element (LINE-1)
methylation levels in blood DNA have been examined in relation to risk of
several cancers. One previous renal cell cancer (RCC) case-control study
reported higher LINE-1 methylation levels in blood DNA for cases than
controls. Since DNA samples from that study were collected
post-diagnostically, it remains unclear if the observed difference
occurred prior to, or as a result of carcinogenesis. Thus, we examined
the association between global methylation and RCC risk using
prospectively collected blood samples.Methods: A nested RCC case-control
study was conducted amid subjects in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene
Cancer Prevention (ATBC) cohort, a study of Finnish male Caucasian
smokers, 50 to 69 years old. LINE-1 percent 5-methylcytosine (LINE-1
%5-MeC) levels from 191 cases and 575 controls, matched on age at
randomization (+/-5 years), were quantified using bisulfite treated blood
DNA and pyrosequencing. Cancer risk was assessed in quartiles (Q1:79.5)
of methylation based on control levels. Unconditional logistic regression
was used to compute odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
adjusting for pack-years of smoking, age at randomization, hypertension,
family history of cancer, body mass index (BMI) and intervention
group.Results: RCC risk was significantly increased with increasing
LINE-1 %5-MeC levels (Q1REF. vs. Q2OR= 1.12 (0.63-1.92), Q3OR= 1.78
(1.06-3.00), Q4OR= 1.78 (1.00-3.03); p-trend= 0.01). Associations
appeared more pronounced for males with a higher BMI: (BMI 79.5) of
methylation based on control levels. Unconditional logistic regression
was used to compute odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
adjusting for pack-years of smoking, age at randomization, hypertension,
family history of cancer, body mass index (BMI) and intervention
group.Results: RCC risk was significantly increased with increasing
LINE-1 %5-MeC levels (Q1REF. vs. Q2OR= 1.12 (0.63-1.92), Q3OR= 1.78
(1.06-3.00), Q4OR= 1.78 (1.00-3.03); p-trend= 0.01). Associations
appeared more pronounced for males with a higher BMI: (BMI <25kg/m2: Q1
vs. Q2-Q4OR= 0.89 (0.35-2.23); BMI 25-79.5) of methylation based on
control levels. Unconditional logistic regression was used to compute
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) adjusting for
pack-years of smoking, age at randomization, hypertension, family history
of cancer, body mass index (BMI) and intervention group.Results: RCC risk
was significantly increased with increasing LINE-1 %5-MeC levels (Q1REF.
vs. Q2OR= 1.12 (0.63-1.92), Q3OR= 1.78 (1.06-3.00), Q4OR= 1.78
(1.00-3.03); p-trend= 0.01). Associations appeared more pronounced for
males with a higher BMI: (BMI <25kg/m2: Q1 vs. Q2-Q4OR= 0.89 (0.35-2.23);
BMI 25-<30kg/m2: Q1 vs. Q2-Q4OR= 1.21 (0.67-2.17); BMI 30kg/m2: Q1 vs.
Q2-Q4OR= 8.86 (2.20-35.68); p-interaction= 0.01). Decreasing LINE-1
%5-MeC levels were observed with increasing BMI for controls (p-trend=
0.004) but not cases (p-trend=0.19). Analyses for pack-years of smoking
showed no association with LINE-1 %5-MeC levels in cases or controls;
pack-years of smoking was not shown to modify associations.Conclusion:
Our study findings that increasing LINE-1 %5-MeC levels were associated
with higher RCC risk using pre-diagnostically collected blood DNA are
consistent with results reported in a previous case-control study. Yet,
stratified results for BMI and smoking observed post-diagnostically in
that case-control study are not supported in pre-diagnostic samples used
here. Our results suggest that higher methylation levels are reflective
of elevated RCC risk prior to diagnosis. Additional studies are being
conducted in a second cohort to replicate these findings.

