Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the prevalence and prognostic significance of 92
endpoints using high throughput multiplexed qPCR In archival tissue from
multiple NSCLC trials.


Over one third of all cancer related deaths worldwide are caused by
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Until recently, tumor histology was
rarely a factor in treatment decisions. However, this paradigm is
shifting with the recent emergence of molecularly targeted therapies and
next-generation chemotherapies. To better define the molecular sub-types
of NSCLC that associate with active therapies and to evaluate their
prognostic significance in historical clinical trials, we developed a
microfluidics-based multiplexed PCR platform that enables analyses of 96
gene transcripts in 96 samples using material from as little as a single
biopsy slide. The multiplexed assay panel consists of Taqman assays for
markers of histology, chemo-resistance, prognosis, oncogenic pathway
activity, epithelial vs. mesenchymal biology, as well as NSCLC drug
targets.We report here on the development and validation of this 96-gene
transcript-profiling panel. Using titrations of several lung biopsy
formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues, we show that as little
as 10 ng of FFPE RNA is feasible and yields robust gene expression data
across all assays of the profiling panel.Using this technology, we tested
archival lung biopsy samples from multiple Phase II and III studies to
assess the prevalence and potential prognostic significance of 92
endpoints in parallel. We identified several markers that were strongly
associated with histology as defined by TTF1 or p63 expression. In
addition, several of the these markers were also associated with longer
survival regardless of therapy, and will be discussed. These data suggest
that retrospective analyses of clinical trial samples using
Fluidigm-based expression analysis can be used to better inform future
trial design in NSCLC.

