Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of Human Papillomavirus E6 and E7 genes in colorectal
cancer.


Purpose: The role of human papillomavirus (HPV) has been well established
in the pathogenesis on cervical cancers and anogenital. However, HPV-DNA
has also been detected in tumor tissues of other malignancies such as
head and neck cancer, esophageal cancer, and some skin cancers. Viral
genes expression and multiplication occur exclusively in the nuclei of
the infected cells and are tightly linked to the state of differentiation
of the cells. Integration of viral DNA into host genome is essential for
carcinogenesis since it promotes disruption of HPV E2 gene, leading to
abnormal expression of E6 and E7 oncoproteins. Both E6 and E7 can form
specific complexes with tumor suppressor gene p53 and pRB respectively.
However, the role of HPV in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer is
still undetermined. Our objectives were (1) to evaluate the presence of
HPV infection in patients with CRC; (2) to type HPV positive cases using
primer specific for HPV-16, and (3) to determine the mRNA expression
levels of the viral oncogenes HPV-16 E6 and HPV-16 E7.Experimental
Designs: To determine the association of HPV and CRC, we conducted an
age-and-gender matched case-control study using tumor and tumor-adjacent
colorectal tissues from patients with CRC (cases) and without CRC
(controls). Presence of L1, E2, and E6 genes was analyzed to determine
whether a full-length HPV genome existed in tumor and normal tissue
samples. Human HPV-16 DNA detection was performed by a nested PCR
strategy using the PGMY09/PGMY11 as outer primer, and GP5+/GP6+ as inner
primers. We detected the expression of E6 and E7 mRNA in the HPV-16 (+)
cases. Hypothesis testing was performed using Pearson Chi-square analysis
of proportions and conditional logistic regression using SPSS 17.Results:
A total of 54 (-actin+) CRC patients (mean age 61 11 years, 27 males) and
36 controls (mean age was 60 9 years, 18 males) were evaluated. HPV DNA
was identified in 25 of 54 (46.3%) patients with CRC and in 1 of 36
(2.8%) controls (OR = 25.58; 95% CI 3.22 to 203.49, p Purpose: The role
of human papillomavirus (HPV) has been well established in the
pathogenesis on cervical cancers and anogenital. However, HPV-DNA has
also been detected in tumor tissues of other malignancies such as head
and neck cancer, esophageal cancer, and some skin cancers. Viral genes
expression and multiplication occur exclusively in the nuclei of the
infected cells and are tightly linked to the state of differentiation of
the cells. Integration of viral DNA into host genome is essential for
carcinogenesis since it promotes disruption of HPV E2 gene, leading to
abnormal expression of E6 and E7 oncoproteins. Both E6 and E7 can form
specific complexes with tumor suppressor gene p53 and pRB respectively.
However, the role of HPV in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer is
still undetermined. Our objectives were (1) to evaluate the presence of
HPV infection in patients with CRC; (2) to type HPV positive cases using
primer specific for HPV-16, and (3) to determine the mRNA expression
levels of the viral oncogenes HPV-16 E6 and HPV-16 E7.Experimental
Designs: To determine the association of HPV and CRC, we conducted an
age-and-gender matched case-control study using tumor and tumor-adjacent
colorectal tissues from patients with CRC (cases) and without CRC
(controls). Presence of L1, E2, and E6 genes was analyzed to determine
whether a full-length HPV genome existed in tumor and normal tissue
samples. Human HPV-16 DNA detection was performed by a nested PCR
strategy using the PGMY09/PGMY11 as outer primer, and GP5+/GP6+ as inner
primers. We detected the expression of E6 and E7 mRNA in the HPV-16 (+)
cases. Hypothesis testing was performed using Pearson Chi-square analysis
of proportions and conditional logistic regression using SPSS 17.Results:
A total of 54 (-actin+) CRC patients (mean age 61 11 years, 27 males) and
36 controls (mean age was 60 9 years, 18 males) were evaluated. HPV DNA
was identified in 25 of 54 (46.3%) patients with CRC and in 1 of 36
(2.8%) controls (OR = 25.58; 95% CI 3.22 to 203.49, p < 0.001). HPV-16
was identified in 18 of 25 (72.0%) HPV-positive CRC cases, and in one
(2.8%) control was HPV (+). All 18 HPV-16 CRC cases showed expressed E6
mRNA. Six of 18 (33.3%) HPV-16 positive cases expressed E7 mRNA. Among
the 12 CRC cases where both tumor and adjacent tissue was available, 2 of
9 (16.7%) exhibited HPV-16 DNA in both tumor and tumor-adjacent
tissues.Conclusion: These results support that colorectal HPV infection
is common among patients with CRC. The high presence of HPV in tumors
located proximal to the rectum suggests that this infection might not
result from direct spread from anogenital sites. Moreover, our finding of
highly frequent active expression of E6 and E7 viral oncogenes in the
host strongly suggests that HPV oncoproteins may play a role in the
pathogenesis of colorectal carcinogenesis.

