Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel method of sonic hedgehog signaling activation in the
chemoresistance of glioblastoma: A ligand-independent mechanism.


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GMB) is the most common and lethal adult primary
tumor of the central nervous system. Despite current chemotherapy with
concomitant surgical resection and radiotherapy, GBM 5-year survival is
3%. A better understanding of the cellular pathways in tumor
proliferation and survival is required for the development of new
treatments. Previously, the Sonic Hedgehog pathway has been shown to be
dysregulated in chemoresistant GBM. Pharmacological inhibition of SHH
signaling with Cyclopamine enhanced GBM chemosensitivity to temozolomide
(TMZ). SHH receptor, PTCH1, is tonically repressed by the ligandbut is
activated by by receptor-mediated endocytosis of SHH. Here we show SHH
signaling in GBM is ligand-independent and is initiated by
post-transcriptional regulation of PTCH1. MicroRNA are small non-coding
RNA molecules known to regulate a number of cell processes such as
development and oncogenesis. As far as we are aware there is no report on
microRNA in the regulation of PTCH1. Knockdown of Dicer, a Type III
RNAase, which is required for microRNA synthesis, increased the cellular
toxicity to TMZ, thus revealing the importance of microRNA in GBM
chemoresistance. We have indentified and characterized PTCH as a
functional target of microRNA-9 (miR-9) in both non-neural cell lines as
well as GBM cell lines. Overexpression of miR-9 in GBM cells results in
downstream pathway activation and resistance to TMZ treatment. We also
explored a number of mir-9/PTCH1-dependent mechanisms of chemoresistance
and uncovered downstream upregulation of ATP-binding cassette drug efflux
transporters, MDR1 and ABCG2. Taken together, our data indicate a role
for miRNA9 in the acquisition of chemoresistance in GBMs and may serve as
novel therapeutic targets.

