Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Receptor tyrosine kinase AXL is upregulated in metformin resistant
prostate cancer cells.


Metformin is a biguanine derivative, widely used as an antidiabetic drug.
Epidemiological studies on several types of cancers including breast,
prostate, ovarian and pancreatic cancer show that patients treated with
metformin have a lower incidence of cancer. Mechanistic studies have
shown that metformin inhibits cancer cell viability by activating the AMP
activated protein kinase (AMPK) pathway and inhibiting mTOR. In this
study we developed a metformin resistance LnCap prostate cancer cells by
exposing the cells continuously increasing concentrations of metformin.
Micro-array data analysis comparing the resistant cells (4-fold) to
parental cells showed that genes associated with receptor binding and
with cell proliferation are primarily affected. EDIL3 (EGF-like repeats
and discoidin I-like domains 3), EREG (eEpiregulin) and AXL (Axl receptor
tyrosine kinase) are top three up regulated genes ( 35 fold). CALB2
(cCalbindin 2) and TPTE (transmembrane phosphatase with tensin homology)
were the top down regulated genes (10 fold down regulated). AXL
overexpression has earlier been demonstrated in Imatinib resistant CML
cell lines and in CML cells from patients. We are currently investigating
the role of Axl receptor tyrosine kinase in metformin resistant prostate
cancer cells.

