Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program (PPTP) stage 1 evaluation of
NSC750854, a sulfamated purine analog with a distinctive anticancer
activity profile.


Introduction: NSC750854 [3,4-dihydroxy-5-purin-9-yloxolan-2-yl)methyl
sulfamate] is a purine analog with an activity profile substantially
different from that of other anticancer purines. Unlike purine analogs
used as anticancer agents, it does not have any substituents on the
purine base. Because of the 5-sulfamate on its sugar component, it cannot
be phosphorylated. Initial mechanistic studies have shown that it does
not interact with the RNA/DNA pathways typically affected by purine
analogs, and further work on target identification is underway.Methods:
NSC750854 was tested against the PPTP's in vitro cell line panel at
concentrations ranging from 1.0 nM to 10.0 M using the PPTP's standard 96
hour exposure period. It was tested against PPTP solid tumor xenografts
using a dose of 5 mg/kg administered by the intraperitoneal (IP) route
daily for 5 days repeated at day 15.Results: The median relative IC50
(rIC50) value for the PPTP cell lines was 32 nM, with a range from 11 nM
(MOLT-4) to 124 M (CHLA-258). NSC750854 demonstrated consistent
cytotoxicity across all of the PPTP cell lines, with Relative In/Out%
values near -100% for each of the cell lines. The acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) cell lines were more sensitive to NSC750854 than non-ALL
cell lines. NSC750854 showed no dependence on TP53 for its cytotoxic
effect, and TP53 mutated cell lines had nominally lower rIC50 values
compared to wildtype cell lines.NSC750854 was well tolerated in vivo,
with only a 1.7% toxicity rate in treated animals, similar to that
observed for control animals (0.7%). NSC750854 induced significant
differences in EFS distribution compared to control in 26 of 30 (87%) of
the evaluable solid tumor xenografts. NSC750854 induced tumor growth
inhibition meeting criteria for intermediate or high EFS T/C activity
(requiring EFS T/C > 2) in 14 of 29 (48%) evaluable solid tumor
xenografts. Objective responses were observed in 11 of 30 xenografts.
Responses were observed for multiple histotypes, including rhabdoid
tumors, Wilms tumor, Ewing sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, glioblastoma, and
neuroblastoma. While some of the xenografts that were responsive to
NSC750854 have also shown responsiveness to other cytotoxic agents (e.g.,
KT-10, KT-16, and Rh10 and to a lesser extent D456 and D645), other
responsive models have shown limited sensitivity to most agents against
which they've been tested (e.g., BT-29 and CHLA-79).Conclusions: NSC75084
shows high activity at a well-tolerated dose against multiple pediatric
solid tumor xenografts, including activity against highly resistant
models. Data mining activities are ongoing to generate hypotheses
regarding molecular characteristics associated with responsiveness to
NSC750854. (Supported by award NO1-CM-42216 from the NCI).

