Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel 1,3-bis(3,5-dichlorophenyl) urea compound COH-SR4 for
targeting melanoma.


The current clinical modalities in the management of malignant melanomas
are met with limited response. The molecular events that regulate
oncogenic transformation, invasive progression and resistance to therapy
in melanomas are determined by an interplay between various complex
signaling networks. In the context of evident demographic risk, limited
response to current clinical interventions and molecular complexity of
melanomas, novel candidate molecules capable of effectively inducing
tumor inhibition along with targeting critical nodes of melanoma
signaling assume translational significance. In this regard, we
investigated the anti-cancer effects of a novel dichlorophenyl urea
compound called SR4 in melanoma. The SR4 treatment decreased the survival
and inhibited the clonogenic potential along with inducing apoptosis in
vitro cultures of melanoma. SR4 treatments lead to inhibition of GST
activity along with inducing G2/M phase cell cycle arrest. Oral
administration of 4 mg/kg b.w. SR4 leads to effective inhibition of tumor
burdens in both syngeneic and nude mouse models of melanoma. The SR4
treatment was well tolerated and no overt toxicity was observed. The
histopathological examination of resected tumor sections reflected
decreased blood vessels, decrease in the levels of angiogenesis marker,
CD31, and proliferation marker, Ki67, along with an increase in pAMPK
levels. Western blot analyses of resected tumor lysates revealed
increased PARP cleavage, Bim, pAMPK along with decreased pAkt, vimentin,
fibronectin, CDK4 and cyclin B1. Thus, SR4 represents a highly effective
candidate for the further development of single agent and combinatorial
therapies to effectively target aggressive and clinically resistant
melanomas (Supported by NIH grant CA 77495).

