Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fish oil increases immune cell infiltration of tumors and reduces
the incidence of mammary carcinogenesis in Her2neu mice.


The role of omega-3 fatty acids (n-3 FA) in breast cancer prevention is
widely studied, however much controversy exists in the field. In numerous
preclinical models including the Her2neu transgenic model, consumption of
n-3 FA provides a protective effect in mammary carcinogenesis. However,
to date few studies have explored the effect of n-3 FA supplementation on
immune modulation and if such changes contribute to the cancer prevention
effects of n-3 FA. The goal of the current study was to explore the role
of fish oil, as the source of n-3 FA, on immune markers and tumor yield
in a Her2/neu transgenic model. Her2neu mice were randomized to two
dietary interventions: AIN-93G-based diet with 1) 11% of diet (per gram
weight) as corn oil (CO) or 2) 10% of diet as menhaden fish oil plus 1%
of diet as corn oil (FO) (n=30/gr). FO significantly reduced the
incidence and multiplicity of tumors in Her2neu mice (PThe role of
omega-3 fatty acids (n-3 FA) in breast cancer prevention is widely
studied, however much controversy exists in the field. In numerous
preclinical models including the Her2neu transgenic model, consumption of
n-3 FA provides a protective effect in mammary carcinogenesis. However,
to date few studies have explored the effect of n-3 FA supplementation on
immune modulation and if such changes contribute to the cancer prevention
effects of n-3 FA. The goal of the current study was to explore the role
of fish oil, as the source of n-3 FA, on immune markers and tumor yield
in a Her2/neu transgenic model. Her2neu mice were randomized to two
dietary interventions: AIN-93G-based diet with 1) 11% of diet (per gram
weight) as corn oil (CO) or 2) 10% of diet as menhaden fish oil plus 1%
of diet as corn oil (FO) (n=30/gr). FO significantly reduced the
incidence and multiplicity of tumors in Her2neu mice (P<0.05). A cohort
of mice (n=10/gr) were sacrificed at 4 months just prior to developing
focal malignant mammary lesions. No differences in the size or
cellularity of the spleen were observed; however flow cytometric analysis
revealed that FO mice had a significantly greater number of several cell
types (CD3+ T cells, NK1.1+ NK cells, CD11c+ DCs) and a greater number of
splenic Gr1+/CD11b+ cells than CO mice (14.3 2.6 X 106 vs. 3.6 1.8 X106,
respectively; PThe role of omega-3 fatty acids (n-3 FA) in breast cancer
prevention is widely studied, however much controversy exists in the
field. In numerous preclinical models including the Her2neu transgenic
model, consumption of n-3 FA provides a protective effect in mammary
carcinogenesis. However, to date few studies have explored the effect of
n-3 FA supplementation on immune modulation and if such changes
contribute to the cancer prevention effects of n-3 FA. The goal of the
current study was to explore the role of fish oil, as the source of n-3
FA, on immune markers and tumor yield in a Her2/neu transgenic model.
Her2neu mice were randomized to two dietary interventions: AIN-93G-based
diet with 1) 11% of diet (per gram weight) as corn oil (CO) or 2) 10% of
diet as menhaden fish oil plus 1% of diet as corn oil (FO) (n=30/gr). FO
significantly reduced the incidence and multiplicity of tumors in Her2neu
mice (P<0.05). A cohort of mice (n=10/gr) were sacrificed at 4 months
just prior to developing focal malignant mammary lesions. No differences
in the size or cellularity of the spleen were observed; however flow
cytometric analysis revealed that FO mice had a significantly greater
number of several cell types (CD3+ T cells, NK1.1+ NK cells, CD11c+ DCs)
and a greater number of splenic Gr1+/CD11b+ cells than CO mice (14.3 2.6
X 106 vs. 3.6 1.8 X106, respectively; P<0.05). Gr1+/CD11b+ cells are
markers that define myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) which
increase with tumor growth and have immunosuppressive function. However,
recent reports have documented a role for MDSCs in immune modulation and
the emergence of MDSCs subtypes that have different functional roles. A
second cohort of mice (n=10/gr) were sacrificed at 12-15 months when 80%
of control mice have been shown to develop mammary tumors. FO mice had
significantly larger spleens with greater splenocyte counts than CO mice
(270.3 69.3 X106 and 198.9 38.7 X 106, respectively; PThe role of omega-3
fatty acids (n-3 FA) in breast cancer prevention is widely studied,
however much controversy exists in the field. In numerous preclinical
models including the Her2neu transgenic model, consumption of n-3 FA
provides a protective effect in mammary carcinogenesis. However, to date
few studies have explored the effect of n-3 FA supplementation on immune
modulation and if such changes contribute to the cancer prevention
effects of n-3 FA. The goal of the current study was to explore the role
of fish oil, as the source of n-3 FA, on immune markers and tumor yield
in a Her2/neu transgenic model. Her2neu mice were randomized to two
dietary interventions: AIN-93G-based diet with 1) 11% of diet (per gram
weight) as corn oil (CO) or 2) 10% of diet as menhaden fish oil plus 1%
of diet as corn oil (FO) (n=30/gr). FO significantly reduced the
incidence and multiplicity of tumors in Her2neu mice (P<0.05). A cohort
of mice (n=10/gr) were sacrificed at 4 months just prior to developing
focal malignant mammary lesions. No differences in the size or
cellularity of the spleen were observed; however flow cytometric analysis
revealed that FO mice had a significantly greater number of several cell
types (CD3+ T cells, NK1.1+ NK cells, CD11c+ DCs) and a greater number of
splenic Gr1+/CD11b+ cells than CO mice (14.3 2.6 X 106 vs. 3.6 1.8 X106,
respectively; P<0.05). Gr1+/CD11b+ cells are markers that define myeloid
derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) which increase with tumor growth and
have immunosuppressive function. However, recent reports have documented
a role for MDSCs in immune modulation and the emergence of MDSCs subtypes
that have different functional roles. A second cohort of mice (n=10/gr)
were sacrificed at 12-15 months when 80% of control mice have been shown
to develop mammary tumors. FO mice had significantly larger spleens with
greater splenocyte counts than CO mice (270.3 69.3 X106 and 198.9 38.7 X
106, respectively; P<0.05), which was comprised of a greater number of
most cells types (CD3+, F480+, CD11c+, and NK1.1+ cells) including
splenic Gr-1+/CD11b+ MDSCs (13.1 4.6 X 106 and 3.4 1.8 X106, respectively
PThe role of omega-3 fatty acids (n-3 FA) in breast cancer prevention is
widely studied, however much controversy exists in the field. In numerous
preclinical models including the Her2neu transgenic model, consumption of
n-3 FA provides a protective effect in mammary carcinogenesis. However,
to date few studies have explored the effect of n-3 FA supplementation on
immune modulation and if such changes contribute to the cancer prevention
effects of n-3 FA. The goal of the current study was to explore the role
of fish oil, as the source of n-3 FA, on immune markers and tumor yield
in a Her2/neu transgenic model. Her2neu mice were randomized to two
dietary interventions: AIN-93G-based diet with 1) 11% of diet (per gram
weight) as corn oil (CO) or 2) 10% of diet as menhaden fish oil plus 1%
of diet as corn oil (FO) (n=30/gr). FO significantly reduced the
incidence and multiplicity of tumors in Her2neu mice (P<0.05). A cohort
of mice (n=10/gr) were sacrificed at 4 months just prior to developing
focal malignant mammary lesions. No differences in the size or
cellularity of the spleen were observed; however flow cytometric analysis
revealed that FO mice had a significantly greater number of several cell
types (CD3+ T cells, NK1.1+ NK cells, CD11c+ DCs) and a greater number of
splenic Gr1+/CD11b+ cells than CO mice (14.3 2.6 X 106 vs. 3.6 1.8 X106,
respectively; P<0.05). Gr1+/CD11b+ cells are markers that define myeloid
derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) which increase with tumor growth and
have immunosuppressive function. However, recent reports have documented
a role for MDSCs in immune modulation and the emergence of MDSCs subtypes
that have different functional roles. A second cohort of mice (n=10/gr)
were sacrificed at 12-15 months when 80% of control mice have been shown
to develop mammary tumors. FO mice had significantly larger spleens with
greater splenocyte counts than CO mice (270.3 69.3 X106 and 198.9 38.7 X
106, respectively; P<0.05), which was comprised of a greater number of
most cells types (CD3+, F480+, CD11c+, and NK1.1+ cells) including
splenic Gr-1+/CD11b+ MDSCs (13.1 4.6 X 106 and 3.4 1.8 X106, respectively
P<0.05). Despite the presence of more Gr1+/CD11b+ cells in the spleens of
FO mice, T cells from these mice had significantly greater IL-2 and IFN-
release in response to in vitro stimulation with anti-CD3 (0.5 g/ml),
suggesting that Gr1+/CD11b+ cells may not be inhibiting T cell function
in FO mice. Lastly, FO mice had a greater number of tumor infiltrating
immune cells than CO mice, including CD3+, NK1.1+, F480+ and Gr1+/CD11b+
cells (PThe role of omega-3 fatty acids (n-3 FA) in breast cancer
prevention is widely studied, however much controversy exists in the
field. In numerous preclinical models including the Her2neu transgenic
model, consumption of n-3 FA provides a protective effect in mammary
carcinogenesis. However, to date few studies have explored the effect of
n-3 FA supplementation on immune modulation and if such changes
contribute to the cancer prevention effects of n-3 FA. The goal of the
current study was to explore the role of fish oil, as the source of n-3
FA, on immune markers and tumor yield in a Her2/neu transgenic model.
Her2neu mice were randomized to two dietary interventions: AIN-93G-based
diet with 1) 11% of diet (per gram weight) as corn oil (CO) or 2) 10% of
diet as menhaden fish oil plus 1% of diet as corn oil (FO) (n=30/gr). FO
significantly reduced the incidence and multiplicity of tumors in Her2neu
mice (P<0.05). A cohort of mice (n=10/gr) were sacrificed at 4 months
just prior to developing focal malignant mammary lesions. No differences
in the size or cellularity of the spleen were observed; however flow
cytometric analysis revealed that FO mice had a significantly greater
number of several cell types (CD3+ T cells, NK1.1+ NK cells, CD11c+ DCs)
and a greater number of splenic Gr1+/CD11b+ cells than CO mice (14.3 2.6
X 106 vs. 3.6 1.8 X106, respectively; P<0.05). Gr1+/CD11b+ cells are
markers that define myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) which
increase with tumor growth and have immunosuppressive function. However,
recent reports have documented a role for MDSCs in immune modulation and
the emergence of MDSCs subtypes that have different functional roles. A
second cohort of mice (n=10/gr) were sacrificed at 12-15 months when 80%
of control mice have been shown to develop mammary tumors. FO mice had
significantly larger spleens with greater splenocyte counts than CO mice
(270.3 69.3 X106 and 198.9 38.7 X 106, respectively; P<0.05), which was
comprised of a greater number of most cells types (CD3+, F480+, CD11c+,
and NK1.1+ cells) including splenic Gr-1+/CD11b+ MDSCs (13.1 4.6 X 106
and 3.4 1.8 X106, respectively P<0.05). Despite the presence of more
Gr1+/CD11b+ cells in the spleens of FO mice, T cells from these mice had
significantly greater IL-2 and IFN- release in response to in vitro
stimulation with anti-CD3 (0.5 g/ml), suggesting that Gr1+/CD11b+ cells
may not be inhibiting T cell function in FO mice. Lastly, FO mice had a
greater number of tumor infiltrating immune cells than CO mice, including
CD3+, NK1.1+, F480+ and Gr1+/CD11b+ cells (P<0.05). The presence of a
greater number of tumor infiltrating immune cells correlates with reduced
tumor burden in the FO mice. These data suggest unique immune modulatory
effects of FO in tumor-bearing animals. This work is supported by the
Susan G. Komen Foundation, Komen Grant KG0681632.

