Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated approach to identify clinically relevant long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in cancer.


Despite growing appreciation of the number and importance of long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in normal physiology and diseases, the
knowledge on cancer-related lncRNAs is still limited. We utilized probes
from array-based expression profiles that are uniquely mapped to
annotated lncRNAs to investigate the expression of 10,207 lncRNAs in
about 1,300 tumor samples over four different cancer types. By
integrating the expression profiles of these lncRNAs with clinical
outcome and somatic copy number alterations (SCNA), we identified lncRNAs
that are associated with specific cancer subtypes and clinical prognosis,
and predicted those that are potential drivers of cancer progression. We
further validated our computational predictions by experimentally
confirming the oncogenic functions of two novel lncRNAs in prostate
cancer. Our results demonstrate that public genomic data contain a wealth
of information on disease-relevant non-coding RNAs, and integrating
orthogonal datasets and clinical information could facilitate the
discovery of clinically relevant lncRNAs and help prioritize their
functional studies.Citation Format: X. Shirley Liu. An integrated
approach to identify clinically relevant long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs)
in cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1822.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1822

