Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo selection of S. typhimurium A1-R enhanced tumor-targeting
variants.


The S. typhimurium A1-R mutant (A1-R), which is auxotrophic for leu-arg,
and selected for high antitumor virulence, has been previously shown to
be effective as monotherapy against human breast, prostate, pancreatic,
and fibrosarcoma tumors that have been orthotopically implanted in nude
mice. In the present study, we generated an enhanced tumor-targeting S.
typhimurium variant using in vivo selection. Dual-color murine mammary
tumor (MMT) cells expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) in the
nucleus and red fluorescent protein (RFP) in the cytoplasm were injected
(1 106 cells) in both flanks of 4-week-old female nude mice. Seven days
after tumor implantation, A1-R bacteria were injected (1 107 cfu iv).
Five days after injection, the tumors were harvested and minced. The
bacteria which invaded the tumor were isolated and seeded on LB agar.
After overnight incubation, colonies were picked and purified and termed
A1-R1. The procedure was repeated with A1-R1 to obtain A1-R2. To
determine the efficacy of the new bacterial variants, MMT-dual cells were
seeded onto the 6-well plates. After 48 hours incubation, A1-R, A1-R1,
and A1-R2 (1 108 cfu/well) were added to each plate. After 0, 24, 48, 72,
96 hours incubation, each plate was observed by confocal microscopy.
Compared with A1-R, the infection rate of cancer cells by A1-R1 and A1-R2
was increased. The A1-R1 and A1-R2 variant bacteria generated in vivo
selection show promise for improved bacterial targeting in vivo.

