Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pterostilbene suppresses the generation of breast cancer stem
cells within tumor microenvironment and metastasis via modulating
NF-B/microRNA448 circuit.


Tumor microenvironment plays a key role in promoting
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a cellular step for cancer
cells to gain metastatic ability and is also associated to the generation
of cancer stem cells (CSCs). Agents capable of modulating the tumor
microenvironment could be more efficient in managing tumor progression.
Pterostilbene, a natural stilbene isolated from blueberries have been
suggested for its anti-cancer effects. Here, we explored the potential
microenvironment modulating effects of pterostilbene in a M2-polarized
macrophages (M2 TAMs) and breast cancer cell co-culture system. We first
demonstrated that co-culturing with M2 TAMs increased the percentage of
CD44+/CD24- CSC population and migratory/invasive abilities. We then
showed that pterostilbene treatment dose-dependently overcame M2
TAM-induced enrichment of CSCs and metastatic potential of breast cancer
cells. Mechanistically, pterostilbene suppressed NFB, Twist1, Vimentin
and increased E-cadherin expression. Importantly, pterostilbene-mediated
NFB downregulation was correlated to an increased amount of microRNA448.
Finally, using non-invasive bioluminescence technique we demonstrated
that pterostilbene treatment significantly suppressed M2 TAM co-cultured
MDA-MB-231 tumorigenesis and metastasis. Thus, pterostilbene could be a
potential anti-CSC agent for clinical development.

