Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NVP-BKM120 decreases cell survival and antagonizes resistance
signals derived from protective tissue microenvironment by interfering
with the Akt/FoxO3a/Bim axis in CLL cells.


Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is a key component of many
cancers survival. Particularly, PI3K is constitutively activated in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) due to microenvironment signals,
including stromal cell interaction, CXCR4 activation and B-cell receptor
(BCR) triggering. Because of the importance of PI3K for
CLL-microenvironment cross-talk and chemotherapy resistance, we
investigated the activity of the NVP-BKM120, an orally available pan
class I PI3K inhibitor.Here, we show that NVP-BKM120 promoted
mitochondrial apoptosis in primary CLL cells independently of common
prognostic markers. At the molecular level, NVP-BKM120 blocked PI3K
signalling, resulting in decreased phosphorylation of Akt and FoxO3a
while downregulating Mcl-1 and inducing Bim. Importantly, selective
knockdown of BIM rescued cells from NVP-BKM120-induced apoptosis.
Moreover, NVP-BKM120 enhanced the activity of the BH3-mimetic ABT263 in
CLL cells, leading to synergistic apoptosis induction. We also found that
NVP-BKM120 inhibited BCR- and stromal-induced Akt activation as well as
induced Bim in presence of BCR-derived and stromal survival signals. In
stromal cocultures, NVP-BKM120 sensitized CLL cells towards bendamustine
and fludarabine. Furthermore, NVP-BKM120 downregulated secretion of
chemokines after BCR triggering and inhibited CLL cell chemotaxis and
actin polymerization toward CXCL12.Altogether, our data suggest that
NVP-BKM120 displays a dual mechanism of action, directly decreasing cell
survival and antagonizing survival and drug-resistance signals derived
from protective tissue microenvironment.

