Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of stem cell differentiation by p53.


Differentiation is one of the barriers for tumorigenesis and
reprogramming. In addition, embryonic stem (ES) and induced pluripotent
stem (iPS) cells utilize differentiation to maintain their genomic
stability by removing cells with mutation burden from the population in
response to DNA damage. The tumor suppressor p53 is critical for
regulating the differentiation of ES and iPS cells. However, the
mechanism of how p53 regulates the differentiation of ES and iPS cells is
unclear. To systematically study the underlying mechanisms, we employ an
integrated genome-wide study in mouse ES cells. Systems analyses reveal
that p53-activated genes and p53-repressed genes have distinct regulatory
mechanisms and functions in mouse ES cells. Binding of p53 at promoter
region significantly correlates with gene activation but not with
repression. In addition, we unexpectedly identify a novel regulatory mode
for p53-mediated repression through interfering with distal enhancer
activity. This regulatory mode explains some but not all of the
p53-mediated repressive events. Importantly, many ES cell-enriched core
transcription factors are p53-repressed genes. Further analyses
demonstrate that p53-repressed genes are functionally associated with ES
and iPS cell status while p53-activated genes are linked to
differentiation. Genome-wide analyses also show that p53-activated genes
and -repressed genes have distinguishable features of expression levels
and epigenetic markers, such as H3K4me3, H3K27me3 and H3K79me2. Upon DNA
damage, p53 regulates the self-renewal and pluripotency of ES cells.
Together, these results support a model that, in response to DNA damage,
p53 affects the status of ES cells through activating
differentiation-associated genes and repressing ES cell-enriched genes.
Because many poorly differentiated tumors express ES-cell gene signature,
our results may also have far-reaching implications in how p53 restricts
the origin of cancer stem cells in adult tissues.Citation Format:
Mangmang Li, Yunlong He, Wendy Dubois, Jing Huang. Regulation of stem
cell differentiation by p53. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2643. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2643

