Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity of pimasertib in combination with SAR245409 or
SAR245408 in human primary colorectal cancer xenograft models bearing
PI3K/KRas and KRas mutations.


The PI3K/AKT/mTOR and Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK are interlinked growth and survival
signaling pathways that are often constitutively activated in human
tumors as a result of amplifications and/or mutations in PIK3CA, RAS and
BRAF genes. In the present work, we have investigated the anti-tumor
activity and documented the steady state pharmacodynamic impact of
combinations between 2 selective pan PI3K Class I inhibitors, SAR245408
(XL147) and SAR245409 (XL765) with the selective allosteric inhibitor of
MEK1/2, pimasertib (AS703026; MSC1936369B) against several different
patient derived colorectal cancer (CRC) xenograft models harboring either
KRAS mutations, dual KRAS and BRAF mutations or dual KRAS and PIK3CA
mutations.In the BRAF driven CRC model, effects of the combinations were
not significantly different from that of single agent treatment of
pimasertib alone. In the G12V KRAS or G12D KRAS mutant CRC models, both
combinations led to significantly greater anti-tumor activity than that
of single agent treatment. In the dual PIK3CA/KRAS mutant tumors,
combination therapies lead to a potent inhibition of both TORC1 and TORC2
pathways, in addition to inhibition of the MAPK pathway in contrast to
single agent treatments. Overall, pimasertib combined with either
SAR245409 or SAR245408 showed a significantly greater anti-tumor activity
as compared to single agent treatment alone in primary models bearing
KRAS mutations or dual PIK3CA/KRAS mutations. The combination of
pimasertib and SAR245409 is currently being investigated in patients with
PIK3CA/KRAS mutant colorectal cancer as part of an ongoing Phase Ib dose
escalation trial of oral combination therapy with pimasertib
(MSC1936369B) and SAR245409 in subjects with locally advanced or
metastatic solid tumors.

