Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Humoral autoimmune response to a RNA-binding protein HCC1/CAPER in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).


HCC1 was originally cloned as a cell nuclear autoantigen in a patient
with liver cirrhosis that progressed to HCC. The full-length sequence of
HCC1encodes a protein of 530 amino acids and migrating at 64 kDa in
SDS-PAGE. HCC1 has two isoforms of HCC1.4 and HCC1.3. The difference is
that HCC1.3 has 6-amino acid deletion located in the RNP-1-like region of
the putative third RNP-CS domain. The nucleotides and protein sequences
of HCC1 were not found at that time in searching available databases and,
therefore, it was considered as a novel gene with unknown function.
Several years later, a group showed that HCC1 was a co-activator of
activating protein-1 and estrogen receptors and proposed naming it CAPER.
Further study by other group has demonstrated that HCC1/CAPER is a novel
transcriptional co-activator for v-Rel that strongly suppresses its
transforming activity, uncovering a tumor suppressor role for HCC1/CAPER
in regulating Rel's oncogenic activity. Our previous studies have
demonstrated that autoantibodies against tumor-associated antigens (TAAs)
can be regarded as serological biomarkers in cancer immunodiagnosis.
Whether autoantibodies to HCC1/CAPER can be also used as one of the
markers in HCC remains to be investigated. In the present study,
autoantibody responses to HCC1.3 and HCC1.4 were firstly evaluated by
ELISA, western blotting and indirect immunofluorescence assay in sera
from patients with HCC, liver cirrhosis and chronic hepatitis, as well as
from normal human individuals. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) with HCC tissue
array slides was also performed to analyze protein expression profiles of
HCC1. The prevalence of anti-HCC1.4 antibodies was 13.5% (23/171) in HCC,
which was significantly higher than that in normal human sera (1.1%).
Whereas the significant difference regarding frequency of anti-HCC1.3
antibodies between HCC patients and normal individuals was not found. The
frequency of HCC1 expression in HCC tissues was also significantly higher
than that in normal liver tissues (57.5% vs. 0%; PHCC1 was originally
cloned as a cell nuclear autoantigen in a patient with liver cirrhosis
that progressed to HCC. The full-length sequence of HCC1encodes a protein
of 530 amino acids and migrating at 64 kDa in SDS-PAGE. HCC1 has two
isoforms of HCC1.4 and HCC1.3. The difference is that HCC1.3 has 6-amino
acid deletion located in the RNP-1-like region of the putative third
RNP-CS domain. The nucleotides and protein sequences of HCC1 were not
found at that time in searching available databases and, therefore, it
was considered as a novel gene with unknown function. Several years
later, a group showed that HCC1 was a co-activator of activating
protein-1 and estrogen receptors and proposed naming it CAPER. Further
study by other group has demonstrated that HCC1/CAPER is a novel
transcriptional co-activator for v-Rel that strongly suppresses its
transforming activity, uncovering a tumor suppressor role for HCC1/CAPER
in regulating Rel's oncogenic activity. Our previous studies have
demonstrated that autoantibodies against tumor-associated antigens (TAAs)
can be regarded as serological biomarkers in cancer immunodiagnosis.
Whether autoantibodies to HCC1/CAPER can be also used as one of the
markers in HCC remains to be investigated. In the present study,
autoantibody responses to HCC1.3 and HCC1.4 were firstly evaluated by
ELISA, western blotting and indirect immunofluorescence assay in sera
from patients with HCC, liver cirrhosis and chronic hepatitis, as well as
from normal human individuals. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) with HCC tissue
array slides was also performed to analyze protein expression profiles of
HCC1. The prevalence of anti-HCC1.4 antibodies was 13.5% (23/171) in HCC,
which was significantly higher than that in normal human sera (1.1%).
Whereas the significant difference regarding frequency of anti-HCC1.3
antibodies between HCC patients and normal individuals was not found. The
frequency of HCC1 expression in HCC tissues was also significantly higher
than that in normal liver tissues (57.5% vs. 0%; P<0.001). The data
suggests that anti-HCC1.4 autoantibody may be a potential biomarker for
HCC, but not HCC1.3. Further functional study of HCC1 may provide more
evidence to address the question why these two isoforms of HCC1 can
induce different humoral immune response in HCC patients.

