Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy induced by cathepsin S inhibition causes early ROS
production for oxidative DNA damage and subsequent cell death.


Cathepsin S plays multiple roles in MHC class II antigen presentation,
extracellular matrix degradation, angiogenesis, and tumorogenesis.
Pharmacological inhibition of cathepsin S activity not only inhibits
tumor invasion and angiogenesis but also reduces cell viability. Herein,
we investigate the molecular executioner which responsible for targeting
cathepsin S-induced cell death and its association with autophagy.
Surprisingly, distinct from the classical regulation of autophagy by ROS,
autophagy, rather than mitochondrial process, is the genuine regulator of
early ROS production which responsible for consequent oxidative DNA
damage and cell death. Molecular silencing of autophagy-dependent ATG
genes and pharmacologic inhibition of autophagy with 3-MA and wortmannin
significantly reduced ROS production, oxidative DNA damage, and cell
death. Collectively, this study reveals a non-canonical molecular pathway
where after the inhibition of cathepsin S, autophagy up-regulates ROS
production for oxidative DNA damage and subsequently contributes to
autophagy-dependent cell death. (This work was supported by the following
grants: Department of Health, Taiwan DOH99-TD-C-111-004, National Health
Research Institutes CA-101-PP-22, and National Research Program for
Biopharmaceuticals 100CAP015-5)

