Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase 1 regulates pro-inflammatory
mediators associated with prostate tumorigenesis.


Oxidative stress and inflammation are both important in the neoplastic
transformation of the prostate. NAD(P)H Quinone Oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1)
is a key antioxidant enzyme that protects against quinone-derived
reactive intermediates and maintains a cellular pool of antioxidants.
Various studies conducted using NQO1 knockout mice suggested its
potential role in carcinogenesis. However the role of NQO1 has not been
fully explored in prostate cancer. Here we show that NQO1 silencing by a
specific shRNA (shNQO1) increased cell survival, proliferation, colony
formation, migration and hormone-independent survival in
hormone-responsive human prostate cancer cells LNCaP. Genome wide array
revealed that NQO1 blockade significantly upregulated pro-inflammatory
mediators (e.g., IL-32, CCL2, IL-8, IL-17C, IL-10RA, CXCR2, CXCR7, NOS3)
associated with prostate tumorigenesis. Cytokine profiling further
confirmed the increased IL-8 production in conditioned-media from NQO1
knockdown cells compared to the parental cells. However, enforced
expression of NQO1 in these cells did not alter IL-8 and other
inflammatory mediators. Our data indicate that inflammatory mediators
produced by NQO1 knockdown LNCaP cells may be responsible for the
hormone-independent survival. Since these inflammatory mediators
influence prostate cancer development and castration resistance,
strategies modulating cellular antioxidants to regulate NQO1 and other
important players in NQO1-signaling may provide multifaceted
opportunities for prostate cancer prevention. Supported by a postdoctoral
fellowship from CPRIT (DT) and RO1 CA 149516 (RG).

