Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming platinum-resistance in ovarian cancer via targeting
basonuclin1 (BNC1).


Purpose This study aims to interrogate if basonuclin1 (BNC1), a key gene
identified through integrative TCGA-based functional genomic analysis, is
a relevant target for overcoming chemo-resistance in high-grade serous
ovarian cancer (HGS-OvCa). BNC1 is a transcription factor which can
regulate ribosomal biogenesis and cell proliferation. Methods TCGA mRNA
expression and clinical response data were used to systematically
identify genes associated with chemo-resistance in patients with
HGS-OvCa. Gene-specific effects were subsequently studied for selected
targets in vitro. BNC1 targeted siRNA was used to study the functional
role of BNC1 in chemo-resistance. Apoptosis and cell cycle analyses were
carried out following BNC1 silencing in ovarian cancer cell lines with or
without the presence of cisplatin. The in vivo effects of silencing BNC1
on the chemosensitivity were tested using an orthotopic mouse model
(A2780CP20) of ovarian cancer. Results The expression of BNC1 was found
to be increased by more than two-fold (Agilent platform; pPurpose This
study aims to interrogate if basonuclin1 (BNC1), a key gene identified
through integrative TCGA-based functional genomic analysis, is a relevant
target for overcoming chemo-resistance in high-grade serous ovarian
cancer (HGS-OvCa). BNC1 is a transcription factor which can regulate
ribosomal biogenesis and cell proliferation. Methods TCGA mRNA expression
and clinical response data were used to systematically identify genes
associated with chemo-resistance in patients with HGS-OvCa. Gene-specific
effects were subsequently studied for selected targets in vitro. BNC1
targeted siRNA was used to study the functional role of BNC1 in
chemo-resistance. Apoptosis and cell cycle analyses were carried out
following BNC1 silencing in ovarian cancer cell lines with or without the
presence of cisplatin. The in vivo effects of silencing BNC1 on the
chemosensitivity were tested using an orthotopic mouse model (A2780CP20)
of ovarian cancer. Results The expression of BNC1 was found to be
increased by more than two-fold (Agilent platform; p<0.001) in
chemo-resistant tumors in the TCGA dataset. A 5-fold increase in its
expression level was also observed in cisplatin-resistant A2780-CP20 and
IGROV-CP20 cells compared to parental cell lines. BNC1 silencing
increased the sensitivity of A2780CP20 cells to cisplatin treatment
(IC50) with a 30% increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells present
at 72 hours following cisplatin treatment, when compared to cells treated
with control siRNA. Profound G2-cell cycle arrest was also noted
following combined siBNC1 and cisplatin (IC30) treatment (68% vs. 28%;
siBNC1 plus cisplatin vs. siControl plus cisplatin; pPurpose This study
aims to interrogate if basonuclin1 (BNC1), a key gene identified through
integrative TCGA-based functional genomic analysis, is a relevant target
for overcoming chemo-resistance in high-grade serous ovarian cancer
(HGS-OvCa). BNC1 is a transcription factor which can regulate ribosomal
biogenesis and cell proliferation. Methods TCGA mRNA expression and
clinical response data were used to systematically identify genes
associated with chemo-resistance in patients with HGS-OvCa. Gene-specific
effects were subsequently studied for selected targets in vitro. BNC1
targeted siRNA was used to study the functional role of BNC1 in
chemo-resistance. Apoptosis and cell cycle analyses were carried out
following BNC1 silencing in ovarian cancer cell lines with or without the
presence of cisplatin. The in vivo effects of silencing BNC1 on the
chemosensitivity were tested using an orthotopic mouse model (A2780CP20)
of ovarian cancer. Results The expression of BNC1 was found to be
increased by more than two-fold (Agilent platform; p<0.001) in
chemo-resistant tumors in the TCGA dataset. A 5-fold increase in its
expression level was also observed in cisplatin-resistant A2780-CP20 and
IGROV-CP20 cells compared to parental cell lines. BNC1 silencing
increased the sensitivity of A2780CP20 cells to cisplatin treatment
(IC50) with a 30% increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells present
at 72 hours following cisplatin treatment, when compared to cells treated
with control siRNA. Profound G2-cell cycle arrest was also noted
following combined siBNC1 and cisplatin (IC30) treatment (68% vs. 28%;
siBNC1 plus cisplatin vs. siControl plus cisplatin; p<0.0001).
Importantly, combinational treatment of siBNC1 and cisplatin resulted in
a 90% reduction in tumor burden in chemo-resistant A2780CP20 orthotopic
mouse model when compared to control siRNA plus cisplatin treatment group
(pPurpose This study aims to interrogate if basonuclin1 (BNC1), a key
gene identified through integrative TCGA-based functional genomic
analysis, is a relevant target for overcoming chemo-resistance in
high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGS-OvCa). BNC1 is a transcription
factor which can regulate ribosomal biogenesis and cell proliferation.
Methods TCGA mRNA expression and clinical response data were used to
systematically identify genes associated with chemo-resistance in
patients with HGS-OvCa. Gene-specific effects were subsequently studied
for selected targets in vitro. BNC1 targeted siRNA was used to study the
functional role of BNC1 in chemo-resistance. Apoptosis and cell cycle
analyses were carried out following BNC1 silencing in ovarian cancer cell
lines with or without the presence of cisplatin. The in vivo effects of
silencing BNC1 on the chemosensitivity were tested using an orthotopic
mouse model (A2780CP20) of ovarian cancer. Results The expression of BNC1
was found to be increased by more than two-fold (Agilent platform;
p<0.001) in chemo-resistant tumors in the TCGA dataset. A 5-fold increase
in its expression level was also observed in cisplatin-resistant
A2780-CP20 and IGROV-CP20 cells compared to parental cell lines. BNC1
silencing increased the sensitivity of A2780CP20 cells to cisplatin
treatment (IC50) with a 30% increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells
present at 72 hours following cisplatin treatment, when compared to cells
treated with control siRNA. Profound G2-cell cycle arrest was also noted
following combined siBNC1 and cisplatin (IC30) treatment (68% vs. 28%;
siBNC1 plus cisplatin vs. siControl plus cisplatin; p<0.0001).
Importantly, combinational treatment of siBNC1 and cisplatin resulted in
a 90% reduction in tumor burden in chemo-resistant A2780CP20 orthotopic
mouse model when compared to control siRNA plus cisplatin treatment group
(p<0.01). Conclusion Collectively, BNC1 represents an important target
for enhancing chemosensitivity in ovarian tumors and its down-regulation
could lead to better clinical outcome.

