Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TLR8 stimulation enhances cetuximab-mediated natural killer cell
lysis of head and neck cancer cells and dendritic cell cross priming of
EGFR-specific CD8+ T cells.


Background: Cetuximab is an anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
monoclonal antibody (mAb) that prolongs survival in the treatment of head
and neck cancer (HNC), but only in 10-20%. An immunological mechanism of
action including natural killer (NK) cell-mediated antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) has been suggested. We investigated the
effects of activating toll-like receptor (TLR)-8 to enhance activity of
cetuximab-stimulated, FcR bearing cells.Objective: To determine the
capability of TLR8-stimulation to enhance the activation and function of
NK cells and dendritic cells (DC) in the presence of cetuximab-coated HNC
cells.Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), NK, DC and CD8+
T cells were isolated and analyzed using 51Cr release ADCC, flow
cytometry analysis, cytokine ELISA, and EGFR853-861 tetramer
staining.Results: TLR8 stimulation of unfractionated PBMC led to enhanced
cetuximab-mediated ADCC in healthy donors (p=0.01) and HNC patients
(pBackground: Cetuximab is an anti-epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) monoclonal antibody (mAb) that prolongs survival in the treatment
of head and neck cancer (HNC), but only in 10-20%. An immunological
mechanism of action including natural killer (NK) cell-mediated
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) has been suggested. We
investigated the effects of activating toll-like receptor (TLR)-8 to
enhance activity of cetuximab-stimulated, FcR bearing cells.Objective: To
determine the capability of TLR8-stimulation to enhance the activation
and function of NK cells and dendritic cells (DC) in the presence of
cetuximab-coated HNC cells.Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC), NK, DC and CD8+ T cells were isolated and analyzed using 51Cr
release ADCC, flow cytometry analysis, cytokine ELISA, and EGFR853-861
tetramer staining.Results: TLR8 stimulation of unfractionated PBMC led to
enhanced cetuximab-mediated ADCC in healthy donors (p=0.01) and HNC
patients (p<0.05), which was dependent on NK cells. Secretion of Th1
cytokines TNF(pBackground: Cetuximab is an anti-epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibody (mAb) that prolongs survival in the
treatment of head and neck cancer (HNC), but only in 10-20%. An
immunological mechanism of action including natural killer (NK)
cell-mediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) has been
suggested. We investigated the effects of activating toll-like receptor
(TLR)-8 to enhance activity of cetuximab-stimulated, FcR bearing
cells.Objective: To determine the capability of TLR8-stimulation to
enhance the activation and function of NK cells and dendritic cells (DC)
in the presence of cetuximab-coated HNC cells.Methods: Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC), NK, DC and CD8+ T cells were isolated and
analyzed using 51Cr release ADCC, flow cytometry analysis, cytokine
ELISA, and EGFR853-861 tetramer staining.Results: TLR8 stimulation of
unfractionated PBMC led to enhanced cetuximab-mediated ADCC in healthy
donors (p=0.01) and HNC patients (p<0.05), which was dependent on NK
cells. Secretion of Th1 cytokines TNF(p<0.0001), IFN(pBackground:
Cetuximab is an anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal
antibody (mAb) that prolongs survival in the treatment of head and neck
cancer (HNC), but only in 10-20%. An immunological mechanism of action
including natural killer (NK) cell-mediated antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) has been suggested. We investigated the effects of
activating toll-like receptor (TLR)-8 to enhance activity of
cetuximab-stimulated, FcR bearing cells.Objective: To determine the
capability of TLR8-stimulation to enhance the activation and function of
NK cells and dendritic cells (DC) in the presence of cetuximab-coated HNC
cells.Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), NK, DC and CD8+
T cells were isolated and analyzed using 51Cr release ADCC, flow
cytometry analysis, cytokine ELISA, and EGFR853-861 tetramer
staining.Results: TLR8 stimulation of unfractionated PBMC led to enhanced
cetuximab-mediated ADCC in healthy donors (p=0.01) and HNC patients
(p<0.05), which was dependent on NK cells. Secretion of Th1 cytokines
TNF(p<0.0001), IFN(p<0.0001), and IL-12p40(pBackground: Cetuximab is an
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibody (mAb)
that prolongs survival in the treatment of head and neck cancer (HNC),
but only in 10-20%. An immunological mechanism of action including
natural killer (NK) cell-mediated antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) has been suggested. We investigated the effects of
activating toll-like receptor (TLR)-8 to enhance activity of
cetuximab-stimulated, FcR bearing cells.Objective: To determine the
capability of TLR8-stimulation to enhance the activation and function of
NK cells and dendritic cells (DC) in the presence of cetuximab-coated HNC
cells.Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), NK, DC and CD8+
T cells were isolated and analyzed using 51Cr release ADCC, flow
cytometry analysis, cytokine ELISA, and EGFR853-861 tetramer
staining.Results: TLR8 stimulation of unfractionated PBMC led to enhanced
cetuximab-mediated ADCC in healthy donors (p=0.01) and HNC patients
(p<0.05), which was dependent on NK cells. Secretion of Th1 cytokines
TNF(p<0.0001), IFN(p<0.0001), and IL-12p40(p<0.005) was increased. NK
cells in TLR8 stimulated PBMC showed higher degranulation marker CD107a
expression after incubation with cetuximab-treated HNC cells
(pBackground: Cetuximab is an anti-epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) monoclonal antibody (mAb) that prolongs survival in the treatment
of head and neck cancer (HNC), but only in 10-20%. An immunological
mechanism of action including natural killer (NK) cell-mediated
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) has been suggested. We
investigated the effects of activating toll-like receptor (TLR)-8 to
enhance activity of cetuximab-stimulated, FcR bearing cells.Objective: To
determine the capability of TLR8-stimulation to enhance the activation
and function of NK cells and dendritic cells (DC) in the presence of
cetuximab-coated HNC cells.Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC), NK, DC and CD8+ T cells were isolated and analyzed using 51Cr
release ADCC, flow cytometry analysis, cytokine ELISA, and EGFR853-861
tetramer staining.Results: TLR8 stimulation of unfractionated PBMC led to
enhanced cetuximab-mediated ADCC in healthy donors (p=0.01) and HNC
patients (p<0.05), which was dependent on NK cells. Secretion of Th1
cytokines TNF(p<0.0001), IFN(p<0.0001), and IL-12p40(p<0.005) was
increased. NK cells in TLR8 stimulated PBMC showed higher degranulation
marker CD107a expression after incubation with cetuximab-treated HNC
cells (p<0.001). TLR8 stimulation enhanced DC maturation markers CD80,
CD83, and CD86 in co-culture with NK cells and cetuximab-treated HNC
cells. Stimulation of DC using TLR8 agonist plus cetuximab-activated NK
cells significantly increased EGFR-specific CD8+ T cell induction,
compared to either condition alone (pBackground: Cetuximab is an
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibody (mAb)
that prolongs survival in the treatment of head and neck cancer (HNC),
but only in 10-20%. An immunological mechanism of action including
natural killer (NK) cell-mediated antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) has been suggested. We investigated the effects of
activating toll-like receptor (TLR)-8 to enhance activity of
cetuximab-stimulated, FcR bearing cells.Objective: To determine the
capability of TLR8-stimulation to enhance the activation and function of
NK cells and dendritic cells (DC) in the presence of cetuximab-coated HNC
cells.Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), NK, DC and CD8+
T cells were isolated and analyzed using 51Cr release ADCC, flow
cytometry analysis, cytokine ELISA, and EGFR853-861 tetramer
staining.Results: TLR8 stimulation of unfractionated PBMC led to enhanced
cetuximab-mediated ADCC in healthy donors (p=0.01) and HNC patients
(p<0.05), which was dependent on NK cells. Secretion of Th1 cytokines
TNF(p<0.0001), IFN(p<0.0001), and IL-12p40(p<0.005) was increased. NK
cells in TLR8 stimulated PBMC showed higher degranulation marker CD107a
expression after incubation with cetuximab-treated HNC cells (p<0.001).
TLR8 stimulation enhanced DC maturation markers CD80, CD83, and CD86 in
co-culture with NK cells and cetuximab-treated HNC cells. Stimulation of
DC using TLR8 agonist plus cetuximab-activated NK cells significantly
increased EGFR-specific CD8+ T cell induction, compared to either
condition alone (p<0.01).Discussion: VTX-2337 and cetuximab combination
therapy can activate innate and adaptive anti-cancer immune responses.
Further investigation in human trials will be important for determining
the clinical benefit from this combination, and for determining
biomarkers of response.

