Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of endothelin 3 in melanoma progression and metastasis.


G-protein coupled receptors have been identified as important factors in
melanoma progression including growth and proliferation of tumorigenic
cells, as well as facilitating metastasis. Upregulation of the G-protein
coupled receptor Endothelin receptor b (Ednrb) and its ligand Endothelin
3 (Edn3) has been implicated in melanoma progression in several in vitro
experiments. In this study we investigated the putative role of Edn3
over-expression in melanoma progression in vivo. Tg(Grm1) Epv mice
over-expressing metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 (Grm1) under the
Dopachrome tautomerase promoter that spontaneously produce melanocytic
lesions in the ears and tails with limited metastatic capability, were
crossed with transgenic mice that over-express Edn3 under the keratin 5
promoter (K5-Edn3). The Tg(Grm1)Epv/K5-Edn3 mice tumors appeared 3 months
earlier and grew at a rate 3-4 times faster than the Tg(Grm1)/Epv control
mice. Ninety-five percent of Dct-Grm1/ K5-Edn3 mice also displayed
pigmented lesions in distant organs such as the lungs. Real Time PCR
analysis showed higher expression levels of angiogenic related genes such
as Hif-1 in the Dct-Grm1/K5-Edn3mice, when compared to controls. Our
studies demonstrate that Edn3 over-expression enhances melanoma
progression to a fully malignant state. Our preliminary data also
suggests that Edn3 may be involved in tumor angiogenesis leading to
faster melanoma tumor development.Citation Format: Nikeisha L. Chin, Juan
Carlos Gallegos, Rosy Cruz, Ruslan Garcia, Andrea Gonzalez, Manuel
Borobia, Lidia Kos. Role of endothelin 3 in melanoma progression and
metastasis. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington,
DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr
2819. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2819

