Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the relationship between e-cadherin expression and
proliferative activity at the invasive front of esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.


IntroductionEsophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has a poor
prognosis mainly because it is usually in an advanced stage at the time
of diagnosis. The epithelium-mesenchyme transition (EMT), when epithelial
cells loss their original characteristics and acquire mesenchymal
phenotype, is indicated first by the loss of E-cadherin expression. The
EMT is considered the main event in tumor progression and metastasis. In
vitro studies have demonstrated that e-cadherin downregulation can lead
to cell proliferation. This finding has not been evaluated in human
tumors. This study aimed to elucidate whether tumor cells that have
undergone EMT at the invasive front of the ESCC are in proliferative
state.Material and MethodsSamples of 58 ESCC cases were double stained by
immunohistochemistry (IHQ) for E-cadherin (BD Bioscience) and Ki67
(ROCHE) antibodies using the Automated System Ventana BenchMark XT
(ROCHE). IHC analysis was performed using Aperio ScanScope XT (APERIO)
with the Algorithm ColorDeconvolution.In each case E-cadherin and Ki67
expression were evaluated in the tumor core and at the invasive front,
separately. Positivity was divided into strong, moderate and weak
positive according to intensity staining. For each case a score was given
based on the formula with the percentages of each positivity group [Score
= 1x (% Weak) + 2x (% Moderate) + 3x (% Strong)].Results and
DiscussionAnalysis of the IHQ double-stain for E-cadherin showed that 51
(87.9%) cases had a high expression at the tumor core when compared with
invasive front and in 7 (12.1%) cases were found high expression at the
invasion front (pIntroductionEsophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC)
has a poor prognosis mainly because it is usually in an advanced stage at
the time of diagnosis. The epithelium-mesenchyme transition (EMT), when
epithelial cells loss their original characteristics and acquire
mesenchymal phenotype, is indicated first by the loss of E-cadherin
expression. The EMT is considered the main event in tumor progression and
metastasis. In vitro studies have demonstrated that e-cadherin
downregulation can lead to cell proliferation. This finding has not been
evaluated in human tumors. This study aimed to elucidate whether tumor
cells that have undergone EMT at the invasive front of the ESCC are in
proliferative state.Material and MethodsSamples of 58 ESCC cases were
double stained by immunohistochemistry (IHQ) for E-cadherin (BD
Bioscience) and Ki67 (ROCHE) antibodies using the Automated System
Ventana BenchMark XT (ROCHE). IHC analysis was performed using Aperio
ScanScope XT (APERIO) with the Algorithm ColorDeconvolution.In each case
E-cadherin and Ki67 expression were evaluated in the tumor core and at
the invasive front, separately. Positivity was divided into strong,
moderate and weak positive according to intensity staining. For each case
a score was given based on the formula with the percentages of each
positivity group [Score = 1x (% Weak) + 2x (% Moderate) + 3x (%
Strong)].Results and DiscussionAnalysis of the IHQ double-stain for
E-cadherin showed that 51 (87.9%) cases had a high expression at the
tumor core when compared with invasive front and in 7 (12.1%) cases were
found high expression at the invasion front (p<0,001). The median values
for E-cadherin double-stain scores were 184.2 and 163.0 at invasive front
and tumor core, respectively (pIntroductionEsophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) has a poor prognosis mainly because it is usually in an
advanced stage at the time of diagnosis. The epithelium-mesenchyme
transition (EMT), when epithelial cells loss their original
characteristics and acquire mesenchymal phenotype, is indicated first by
the loss of E-cadherin expression. The EMT is considered the main event
in tumor progression and metastasis. In vitro studies have demonstrated
that e-cadherin downregulation can lead to cell proliferation. This
finding has not been evaluated in human tumors. This study aimed to
elucidate whether tumor cells that have undergone EMT at the invasive
front of the ESCC are in proliferative state.Material and MethodsSamples
of 58 ESCC cases were double stained by immunohistochemistry (IHQ) for
E-cadherin (BD Bioscience) and Ki67 (ROCHE) antibodies using the
Automated System Ventana BenchMark XT (ROCHE). IHC analysis was performed
using Aperio ScanScope XT (APERIO) with the Algorithm
ColorDeconvolution.In each case E-cadherin and Ki67 expression were
evaluated in the tumor core and at the invasive front, separately.
Positivity was divided into strong, moderate and weak positive according
to intensity staining. For each case a score was given based on the
formula with the percentages of each positivity group [Score = 1x (%
Weak) + 2x (% Moderate) + 3x (% Strong)].Results and DiscussionAnalysis
of the IHQ double-stain for E-cadherin showed that 51 (87.9%) cases had a
high expression at the tumor core when compared with invasive front and
in 7 (12.1%) cases were found high expression at the invasion front
(p<0,001). The median values for E-cadherin double-stain scores were
184.2 and 163.0 at invasive front and tumor core, respectively (p<0.001).
Analyses of the Ki67 double-stain showed that 19 (32.7%) cases showed a
high expression at tumor core and 39 (67.3%) cases showed a high
expression at the invasive front (pIntroductionEsophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) has a poor prognosis mainly because it is usually in an
advanced stage at the time of diagnosis. The epithelium-mesenchyme
transition (EMT), when epithelial cells loss their original
characteristics and acquire mesenchymal phenotype, is indicated first by
the loss of E-cadherin expression. The EMT is considered the main event
in tumor progression and metastasis. In vitro studies have demonstrated
that e-cadherin downregulation can lead to cell proliferation. This
finding has not been evaluated in human tumors. This study aimed to
elucidate whether tumor cells that have undergone EMT at the invasive
front of the ESCC are in proliferative state.Material and MethodsSamples
of 58 ESCC cases were double stained by immunohistochemistry (IHQ) for
E-cadherin (BD Bioscience) and Ki67 (ROCHE) antibodies using the
Automated System Ventana BenchMark XT (ROCHE). IHC analysis was performed
using Aperio ScanScope XT (APERIO) with the Algorithm
ColorDeconvolution.In each case E-cadherin and Ki67 expression were
evaluated in the tumor core and at the invasive front, separately.
Positivity was divided into strong, moderate and weak positive according
to intensity staining. For each case a score was given based on the
formula with the percentages of each positivity group [Score = 1x (%
Weak) + 2x (% Moderate) + 3x (% Strong)].Results and DiscussionAnalysis
of the IHQ double-stain for E-cadherin showed that 51 (87.9%) cases had a
high expression at the tumor core when compared with invasive front and
in 7 (12.1%) cases were found high expression at the invasion front
(p<0,001). The median values for E-cadherin double-stain scores were
184.2 and 163.0 at invasive front and tumor core, respectively (p<0.001).
Analyses of the Ki67 double-stain showed that 19 (32.7%) cases showed a
high expression at tumor core and 39 (67.3%) cases showed a high
expression at the invasive front (p<0,001). Proliferation rates,
represented by Ki67 expression, showed median values of 8.1 and 6.8 at
the invasive front and tumor core, respectively (p=0.052). Spearman
correlation between the IHQ double and single-stain was moderately
positive (p IntroductionEsophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has a
poor prognosis mainly because it is usually in an advanced stage at the
time of diagnosis. The epithelium-mesenchyme transition (EMT), when
epithelial cells loss their original characteristics and acquire
mesenchymal phenotype, is indicated first by the loss of E-cadherin
expression. The EMT is considered the main event in tumor progression and
metastasis. In vitro studies have demonstrated that e-cadherin
downregulation can lead to cell proliferation. This finding has not been
evaluated in human tumors. This study aimed to elucidate whether tumor
cells that have undergone EMT at the invasive front of the ESCC are in
proliferative state.Material and MethodsSamples of 58 ESCC cases were
double stained by immunohistochemistry (IHQ) for E-cadherin (BD
Bioscience) and Ki67 (ROCHE) antibodies using the Automated System
Ventana BenchMark XT (ROCHE). IHC analysis was performed using Aperio
ScanScope XT (APERIO) with the Algorithm ColorDeconvolution.In each case
E-cadherin and Ki67 expression were evaluated in the tumor core and at
the invasive front, separately. Positivity was divided into strong,
moderate and weak positive according to intensity staining. For each case
a score was given based on the formula with the percentages of each
positivity group [Score = 1x (% Weak) + 2x (% Moderate) + 3x (%
Strong)].Results and DiscussionAnalysis of the IHQ double-stain for
E-cadherin showed that 51 (87.9%) cases had a high expression at the
tumor core when compared with invasive front and in 7 (12.1%) cases were
found high expression at the invasion front (p<0,001). The median values
for E-cadherin double-stain scores were 184.2 and 163.0 at invasive front
and tumor core, respectively (p<0.001). Analyses of the Ki67 double-stain
showed that 19 (32.7%) cases showed a high expression at tumor core and
39 (67.3%) cases showed a high expression at the invasive front
(p<0,001). Proliferation rates, represented by Ki67 expression, showed
median values of 8.1 and 6.8 at the invasive front and tumor core,
respectively (p=0.052). Spearman correlation between the IHQ double and
single-stain was moderately positive (p <0.001).ConclusionTumor cells at
the invasive front showed an increased proliferation rate as they lose
the E-cadherin expression and at the tumor core showed an higher
expression of E-cadherin and a lower expression of Ki67. However, some
cases showed a different behavior with a higher expression of E-cadherin
at the invasive front and a elevated rate proliferation at tumor core. A
more complex mechanism in the dynamics of E-cadherin and Ki67 expressions
could be acting during EMT. Further studies are necessary to the better
understanding of the complexity of this mechanism.

