Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-198 silencing is a mechanism of gemcitabine resistance in
human pancreatic adenocarcinoma.


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC) is a very aggressive disease with
extremely high mortality rate. Chemotherapy with gemcitabine (G) is a
standard of care for advanced disease, but chemotherapy resistance is
commonly noted. Human PAC is characterized by overexpression of the
proto-oncogene c-met. Increased activation of c-met has been reported in
G-resistant PAC cells. Also, aberrant expression of microRNAs (miRNAs)
has been linked to cancer progression. Furthermore, a recent study showed
that miR-198 regulates c-met expression by binding to the 3-untranslated
region of c-met mRNA. However, the role of miR-198 in chemotherapy
resistance in PAC has not previously been studied. Consequently, in this
study we used the G-sensitive and G-resistant subclones of the L3.6pl
human PAC cell line to examine the role of miR-198 in G-resistant PAC. We
observed that the G-resistant subclone had increased expression of c-met
(using qPCR and western blotting) and phosphorylated c-met (using western
blotting), but not hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). Furthermore, using
qPCR we observed significant silencing of miR-198 expression in the
G-resistant subclone in comparison to the G-sensitive subclone (P
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC) is a very aggressive disease with
extremely high mortality rate. Chemotherapy with gemcitabine (G) is a
standard of care for advanced disease, but chemotherapy resistance is
commonly noted. Human PAC is characterized by overexpression of the
proto-oncogene c-met. Increased activation of c-met has been reported in
G-resistant PAC cells. Also, aberrant expression of microRNAs (miRNAs)
has been linked to cancer progression. Furthermore, a recent study showed
that miR-198 regulates c-met expression by binding to the 3-untranslated
region of c-met mRNA. However, the role of miR-198 in chemotherapy
resistance in PAC has not previously been studied. Consequently, in this
study we used the G-sensitive and G-resistant subclones of the L3.6pl
human PAC cell line to examine the role of miR-198 in G-resistant PAC. We
observed that the G-resistant subclone had increased expression of c-met
(using qPCR and western blotting) and phosphorylated c-met (using western
blotting), but not hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). Furthermore, using
qPCR we observed significant silencing of miR-198 expression in the
G-resistant subclone in comparison to the G-sensitive subclone (P <
0.01). To determine the functional significance of miR-198 silencing in G
resistance, we silenced miR-198 expression in the G-sensitive subclone by
transfection of a specific oligonucleotide inhibitor of miR-198. We
observed that miR-198 silencing resulted in increased expression of c-met
and phosphorylated c-met. Further, miR-198 silencing on its own increased
total RNA concentration significantly by 146% (P Pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (PAC) is a very aggressive disease with extremely high
mortality rate. Chemotherapy with gemcitabine (G) is a standard of care
for advanced disease, but chemotherapy resistance is commonly noted.
Human PAC is characterized by overexpression of the proto-oncogene c-met.
Increased activation of c-met has been reported in G-resistant PAC cells.
Also, aberrant expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) has been linked to cancer
progression. Furthermore, a recent study showed that miR-198 regulates
c-met expression by binding to the 3-untranslated region of c-met mRNA.
However, the role of miR-198 in chemotherapy resistance in PAC has not
previously been studied. Consequently, in this study we used the
G-sensitive and G-resistant subclones of the L3.6pl human PAC cell line
to examine the role of miR-198 in G-resistant PAC. We observed that the
G-resistant subclone had increased expression of c-met (using qPCR and
western blotting) and phosphorylated c-met (using western blotting), but
not hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). Furthermore, using qPCR we observed
significant silencing of miR-198 expression in the G-resistant subclone
in comparison to the G-sensitive subclone (P < 0.01). To determine the
functional significance of miR-198 silencing in G resistance, we silenced
miR-198 expression in the G-sensitive subclone by transfection of a
specific oligonucleotide inhibitor of miR-198. We observed that miR-198
silencing resulted in increased expression of c-met and phosphorylated
c-met. Further, miR-198 silencing on its own increased total RNA
concentration significantly by 146% (P < 0.05) and cell viability by
14.3% (P Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC) is a very aggressive disease
with extremely high mortality rate. Chemotherapy with gemcitabine (G) is
a standard of care for advanced disease, but chemotherapy resistance is
commonly noted. Human PAC is characterized by overexpression of the
proto-oncogene c-met. Increased activation of c-met has been reported in
G-resistant PAC cells. Also, aberrant expression of microRNAs (miRNAs)
has been linked to cancer progression. Furthermore, a recent study showed
that miR-198 regulates c-met expression by binding to the 3-untranslated
region of c-met mRNA. However, the role of miR-198 in chemotherapy
resistance in PAC has not previously been studied. Consequently, in this
study we used the G-sensitive and G-resistant subclones of the L3.6pl
human PAC cell line to examine the role of miR-198 in G-resistant PAC. We
observed that the G-resistant subclone had increased expression of c-met
(using qPCR and western blotting) and phosphorylated c-met (using western
blotting), but not hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). Furthermore, using
qPCR we observed significant silencing of miR-198 expression in the
G-resistant subclone in comparison to the G-sensitive subclone (P <
0.01). To determine the functional significance of miR-198 silencing in G
resistance, we silenced miR-198 expression in the G-sensitive subclone by
transfection of a specific oligonucleotide inhibitor of miR-198. We
observed that miR-198 silencing resulted in increased expression of c-met
and phosphorylated c-met. Further, miR-198 silencing on its own increased
total RNA concentration significantly by 146% (P < 0.05) and cell
viability by 14.3% (P < 0.05; using MTT assay), both suggestive of a
proliferative effect. However, significant effects on apoptosis were
undetectable (using Hoechst nuclear staining). Furthermore, miR-198
silencing significantly abrogated G-induced apoptosis (P Pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (PAC) is a very aggressive disease with extremely high
mortality rate. Chemotherapy with gemcitabine (G) is a standard of care
for advanced disease, but chemotherapy resistance is commonly noted.
Human PAC is characterized by overexpression of the proto-oncogene c-met.
Increased activation of c-met has been reported in G-resistant PAC cells.
Also, aberrant expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) has been linked to cancer
progression. Furthermore, a recent study showed that miR-198 regulates
c-met expression by binding to the 3-untranslated region of c-met mRNA.
However, the role of miR-198 in chemotherapy resistance in PAC has not
previously been studied. Consequently, in this study we used the
G-sensitive and G-resistant subclones of the L3.6pl human PAC cell line
to examine the role of miR-198 in G-resistant PAC. We observed that the
G-resistant subclone had increased expression of c-met (using qPCR and
western blotting) and phosphorylated c-met (using western blotting), but
not hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). Furthermore, using qPCR we observed
significant silencing of miR-198 expression in the G-resistant subclone
in comparison to the G-sensitive subclone (P < 0.01). To determine the
functional significance of miR-198 silencing in G resistance, we silenced
miR-198 expression in the G-sensitive subclone by transfection of a
specific oligonucleotide inhibitor of miR-198. We observed that miR-198
silencing resulted in increased expression of c-met and phosphorylated
c-met. Further, miR-198 silencing on its own increased total RNA
concentration significantly by 146% (P < 0.05) and cell viability by
14.3% (P < 0.05; using MTT assay), both suggestive of a proliferative
effect. However, significant effects on apoptosis were undetectable
(using Hoechst nuclear staining). Furthermore, miR-198 silencing
significantly abrogated G-induced apoptosis (P < 0.05) and G-induced
reduction of cell viability (P Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC) is a very
aggressive disease with extremely high mortality rate. Chemotherapy with
gemcitabine (G) is a standard of care for advanced disease, but
chemotherapy resistance is commonly noted. Human PAC is characterized by
overexpression of the proto-oncogene c-met. Increased activation of c-met
has been reported in G-resistant PAC cells. Also, aberrant expression of
microRNAs (miRNAs) has been linked to cancer progression. Furthermore, a
recent study showed that miR-198 regulates c-met expression by binding to
the 3-untranslated region of c-met mRNA. However, the role of miR-198 in
chemotherapy resistance in PAC has not previously been studied.
Consequently, in this study we used the G-sensitive and G-resistant
subclones of the L3.6pl human PAC cell line to examine the role of
miR-198 in G-resistant PAC. We observed that the G-resistant subclone had
increased expression of c-met (using qPCR and western blotting) and
phosphorylated c-met (using western blotting), but not hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF). Furthermore, using qPCR we observed significant silencing
of miR-198 expression in the G-resistant subclone in comparison to the
G-sensitive subclone (P < 0.01). To determine the functional significance
of miR-198 silencing in G resistance, we silenced miR-198 expression in
the G-sensitive subclone by transfection of a specific oligonucleotide
inhibitor of miR-198. We observed that miR-198 silencing resulted in
increased expression of c-met and phosphorylated c-met. Further, miR-198
silencing on its own increased total RNA concentration significantly by
146% (P < 0.05) and cell viability by 14.3% (P < 0.05; using MTT assay),
both suggestive of a proliferative effect. However, significant effects
on apoptosis were undetectable (using Hoechst nuclear staining).
Furthermore, miR-198 silencing significantly abrogated G-induced
apoptosis (P < 0.05) and G-induced reduction of cell viability (P <
0.05). We conclude that G-resistant human PAC cells have silencing of
miR-198. Moreover, miR-198 silencing in PAC cells induces increased
expression and phosphorylation of c-met, increased cell proliferation and
abrogation of G-induced apoptosis and induction of proliferation.
Therefore, miR-198 silencing is a mechanism of G-resistance in PAC.
Furthermore, therapeutic strategies to enhance miR-198 expression may be
beneficial in PAC.

