Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mammography interval and breast cancer mortality in the Women's
Health Initiative.


Background: The 2009 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
statement on screening for breast cancer suggests the lack of evidence
for mammography for women 75 years or older based on the premise that
disease would be indolent at advanced age. Analysis of the Women's Health
Initiative (WHI) data refute this hypothesis, in that over 60% of breast
cancers diagnosed between ages 70 to 79 were moderately or poorly
differentiated. In order to better understand the role of screening
mammography in older women, we evaluated the relationship between the
time interval from breast cancer diagnosis to the last prior mammogram,
and mortality due to breast cancer in the WHI. Methods: The study sample
included 8,663 women enrolled in the WHI observational study (OS) or
clinical trial (CT) who were diagnosed with breast cancer over an average
of 12.2 (2.6 SD) years of follow-up (1,670 with insitu disease).
Information on mammography was obtained annually or semi-annually from
medical record update forms. Mammography interval was defined as the time
between the date of diagnosis, and the last self- reported mammogram
completed > 6 months prior to diagnosis. Self- and
interviewer-administered questionnaires were used to collect information
on other risk factors. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to
analyze the association between mammography interval and breast cancer
mortality stratified by age at diagnosis (50-74 vs 75+). Statistical
tests were two-sided. Results: Prior mammograms were reported by 30% of
women within > 6 months to Background: The 2009 U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force (USPSTF) statement on screening for breast cancer suggests the
lack of evidence for mammography for women 75 years or older based on the
premise that disease would be indolent at advanced age. Analysis of the
Women's Health Initiative (WHI) data refute this hypothesis, in that over
60% of breast cancers diagnosed between ages 70 to 79 were moderately or
poorly differentiated. In order to better understand the role of
screening mammography in older women, we evaluated the relationship
between the time interval from breast cancer diagnosis to the last prior
mammogram, and mortality due to breast cancer in the WHI. Methods: The
study sample included 8,663 women enrolled in the WHI observational study
(OS) or clinical trial (CT) who were diagnosed with breast cancer over an
average of 12.2 (2.6 SD) years of follow-up (1,670 with insitu disease).
Information on mammography was obtained annually or semi-annually from
medical record update forms. Mammography interval was defined as the time
between the date of diagnosis, and the last self- reported mammogram
completed > 6 months prior to diagnosis. Self- and
interviewer-administered questionnaires were used to collect information
on other risk factors. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to
analyze the association between mammography interval and breast cancer
mortality stratified by age at diagnosis (50-74 vs 75+). Statistical
tests were two-sided. Results: Prior mammograms were reported by 30% of
women within > 6 months to < 1 year of diagnosis, 47% between 1 to 5
years, or none at all. Longer interval was associated with advanced stage
with 23% of women who had an interval of > 5 years diagnosed with
regional or distant disease, compared to 20% of women with an interval of
> 6 months to 6 months to age 75 at diagnosis. A significant association
was not seen for women age 50 to 74. For women > age 75, an interval of >
2 to 5 years or no mammogram, resulted in a HR of 3.17 (95% CI,
1.68-5.96), p-trend 0.0001. For women age 50-74, the respective HR's and
95% CI were 1.05 (0.75-1.46) and 1.28 (0.8-2.06), p-trend 0.43.
Conclusions: Extended time between breast cancer diagnosis and the last
mammogram had a significant impact on breast cancer mortality for women
diagnosed after age 75, suggesting a role for continued screening to
reduce breast cancer mortality in older women.

