Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progressive biallelic loss of TP53 is associated with progression
of pleuropulmonary blastoma initiated by germline loss and somatic
mutation of DICER1.


Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) is a rare, aggressive childhood cancer
arising from lung mesenchymal cells. In early stages, these cells reside
in the walls of epithelial-lined cysts and may remain dormant or progress
to thickened cysts and then highly malignant masses over several years.
Familial germline loss-of-function DICER1 variants have been described,
although carriers may not be affected. Therefore, we sought to uncover
additional genetic events underlying tumor development through whole
exome sequencing of 15 tumor/normal pairs. In addition to known
loss-of-function germline variants found throughout DICER1, this analysis
identified somatic missense mutations clustered in the DICER1 RNase IIIb
domain in nearly every case. While the somatic mutations impact novel
amino acid residues, expression analysis demonstrated depletion of
5p-derived miRNAs similar to that described in other DICER1-mutant
tumors. While mutation rates were relatively high compared to other
pediatric solid tumors, most mutations, except those in DICER1 and TP53,
appeared to be subclonal. Early stage tumors (PPB Type II) had
predominantly single-copy deletion of TP53 whereas late stage tumors (PPB
Type III) had secondary TP53 mutations. Several late stage tumors also
had activating mutations in RAS pathway members, including NRAS and BRAF.
Therefore, compound DICER1 loss appears to be initiating and synergistic
with incremental loss of TP53 and acquisition of additional driver
mutations. We subsequently characterized this molecular pattern using
deep sequencing and immunohistochemistry in an extension cohort of 45
additional tumors. This step-wise series of germline and somatic
alterations illustrates a genetic mechanism consistent with the
progressive nature of pleuropulmonary blastoma.

