Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The pivotal role of IKKalpha in the development of spontaneous
lung squamous cell carcinomas.


During the last decades lung cancer has become the leading cause of
cancer deaths in the world, and the need to develop better diagnostic
techniques and therapies is urgent. To advance the understanding of this
disease, various genetically engineered and chemical induced mouse models
have been established. However, there are no robust animal models of lung
squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs), one of the major types of lung cancer.
Here, we generated Ikk-KA/KA knock-in mice (KA/KA) in which an ATP
binding site of IKK, Lys 44 was replaced by alanine. All the knock-in
mice at 4 to 6 months of age developed spontaneous lethal lung SCCs
associated with markedly increased leukocyte infiltration and expression
of cytokines, and chemokines in the lungs. Furthermore, we identified
deregulated c-myc, Nanog, Oct3/4, p53, Rb, EGFR, MAPK, Jun-B, p63,
Trim29, Rhov, CDK1, and IGF1 in mouse lung SCCs, and identified reduced
IKK and IB and increased ROS1 in mutant lungs and SCCs, some of which
were found in human lung SCCs. Lung cancers were prevented by
reintroducing epithelial-cell IKK, depleting macrophages or depleting
lymphocytes. This study not only provides a novel model for studying the
pathogenesis, treatment, early detection, and prevention of human lung
SCCs, but also demonstrates how a single mutation in IKK elicits
malignancy through the combined epithelial-cell-autonomous and immune
mechanisms.

