Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of the serum metabolomic profiles of breast cancer
patients after receiving limonene intervention.


Background. Limonene is a bioactive food component found in citrus peel
oil that has demonstrated chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic activities
in preclinical studies. To better characterize its mechanism of action in
the clinical setting, we measured the serum metabolomic profiles of
breast cancer patients before and after receiving a short-term limonene
intervention.Methods. Forty women with stage 0 - II breast cancer
received 2 g QD limonene daily for 2 - 6 weeks (21.5 8.8 days) before
surgical resection of their tumor. Pre/post intervention blood draws were
taken to assess serum metabolomic profiles. Metabolomic analysis was
performed on the gas chromatography mass spectrometry and liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry platforms established at Metabolon,
Inc.Results. Of the 397 identified biochemicals, 71 changed significantly
(pBackground. Limonene is a bioactive food component found in citrus peel
oil that has demonstrated chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic activities
in preclinical studies. To better characterize its mechanism of action in
the clinical setting, we measured the serum metabolomic profiles of
breast cancer patients before and after receiving a short-term limonene
intervention.Methods. Forty women with stage 0 - II breast cancer
received 2 g QD limonene daily for 2 - 6 weeks (21.5 8.8 days) before
surgical resection of their tumor. Pre/post intervention blood draws were
taken to assess serum metabolomic profiles. Metabolomic analysis was
performed on the gas chromatography mass spectrometry and liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry platforms established at Metabolon,
Inc.Results. Of the 397 identified biochemicals, 71 changed significantly
(p<0.05) from baseline to post limonene intervention. Pathway analysis
revealed several key metabolic changes. Significant increases were noted
in eight bile acid conjugates following limonene intervention, including
a 3-fold elevation in taurocholate, taurodeoxycholate, and
glycoursodeoxycholate. There were also significant decreases in a number
of steroid hormones including dehydroisoandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S),
4-androsten-3beta, 17beta-diol disulfate, epiandrosterone sulfate,
androsterone sulfate, and pregnen-diol disulfate. In addition, markers of
collagen remodeling or degradation were elevated following limonene
intervention. Increased circulating vitamin C, improved insulin
sensitivity and glycemic control, and reduced inflammatory potential were
also noted following limonene treatment. An increase in plasma levels of
ten different glycerophosphocholines and four carnitines were all
significantly correlated to a decrease in cyclinD1 (all p's0.4) in an
exploratory analysis.Conclusions. This global metabolomic profiling study
revealed several novel mechanistic insights into the potential clinical
activities of limonene. Efforts are ongoing to correlate these metabolic
changes to carcinogenesis, clinical characteristics, and risk markers
measured in breast tissue and serum.

