Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated analysis of the eph/ephrin family: implications in
endometrial cancer.


Objective: Members of the Eph/Ephrin family are known to play seminal
roles in cancer growth and metastasis in many solid tumors; however, a
comprehensive analysis has not been carried out. We analyzed the clinical
relevance of all Eph/Ephrin family members in endometrial cancer.Methods:
Level 3 data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was utilized to assess
the clinical significance of all 14 Eph receptors available in the
database (EphA1-8, EphA10, EphB1-4, and EphB6), as well as EphrinA1-A5
and EphrinB1-B3. We examined gene methylation status and copy number
changes in these tumors. Clinical information extracted included age,
tumor histology, tumor grade, stage, estrogen(ER)/progesterone(PR)
receptor status, and overall survival.Results: A total of 320 samples
were available for analysis. Increased EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2
expression was significantly correlated with poorer overall survival
(p=0.03, p=0.04, p=0.01, and p=0.008, respectively) and lack of ER and PR
expression (r=-0.34, p=2.25e6; r-0.24, p=0.0007; r=-0.22, p=0.002;
r=-0.46, p=2.38e11, respectively). Compared to endometrioid histology,
serous histology was associated with increased expression of EphA2
(pObjective: Members of the Eph/Ephrin family are known to play seminal
roles in cancer growth and metastasis in many solid tumors; however, a
comprehensive analysis has not been carried out. We analyzed the clinical
relevance of all Eph/Ephrin family members in endometrial cancer.Methods:
Level 3 data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was utilized to assess
the clinical significance of all 14 Eph receptors available in the
database (EphA1-8, EphA10, EphB1-4, and EphB6), as well as EphrinA1-A5
and EphrinB1-B3. We examined gene methylation status and copy number
changes in these tumors. Clinical information extracted included age,
tumor histology, tumor grade, stage, estrogen(ER)/progesterone(PR)
receptor status, and overall survival.Results: A total of 320 samples
were available for analysis. Increased EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2
expression was significantly correlated with poorer overall survival
(p=0.03, p=0.04, p=0.01, and p=0.008, respectively) and lack of ER and PR
expression (r=-0.34, p=2.25e6; r-0.24, p=0.0007; r=-0.22, p=0.002;
r=-0.46, p=2.38e11, respectively). Compared to endometrioid histology,
serous histology was associated with increased expression of EphA2
(p<0.0001), EphA4 (pObjective: Members of the Eph/Ephrin family are known
to play seminal roles in cancer growth and metastasis in many solid
tumors; however, a comprehensive analysis has not been carried out. We
analyzed the clinical relevance of all Eph/Ephrin family members in
endometrial cancer.Methods: Level 3 data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) was utilized to assess the clinical significance of all 14 Eph
receptors available in the database (EphA1-8, EphA10, EphB1-4, and
EphB6), as well as EphrinA1-A5 and EphrinB1-B3. We examined gene
methylation status and copy number changes in these tumors. Clinical
information extracted included age, tumor histology, tumor grade, stage,
estrogen(ER)/progesterone(PR) receptor status, and overall
survival.Results: A total of 320 samples were available for analysis.
Increased EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2 expression was significantly
correlated with poorer overall survival (p=0.03, p=0.04, p=0.01, and
p=0.008, respectively) and lack of ER and PR expression (r=-0.34,
p=2.25e6; r-0.24, p=0.0007; r=-0.22, p=0.002; r=-0.46, p=2.38e11,
respectively). Compared to endometrioid histology, serous histology was
associated with increased expression of EphA2 (p<0.0001), EphA4
(p<0.0002), EphB1 (pObjective: Members of the Eph/Ephrin family are known
to play seminal roles in cancer growth and metastasis in many solid
tumors; however, a comprehensive analysis has not been carried out. We
analyzed the clinical relevance of all Eph/Ephrin family members in
endometrial cancer.Methods: Level 3 data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) was utilized to assess the clinical significance of all 14 Eph
receptors available in the database (EphA1-8, EphA10, EphB1-4, and
EphB6), as well as EphrinA1-A5 and EphrinB1-B3. We examined gene
methylation status and copy number changes in these tumors. Clinical
information extracted included age, tumor histology, tumor grade, stage,
estrogen(ER)/progesterone(PR) receptor status, and overall
survival.Results: A total of 320 samples were available for analysis.
Increased EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2 expression was significantly
correlated with poorer overall survival (p=0.03, p=0.04, p=0.01, and
p=0.008, respectively) and lack of ER and PR expression (r=-0.34,
p=2.25e6; r-0.24, p=0.0007; r=-0.22, p=0.002; r=-0.46, p=2.38e11,
respectively). Compared to endometrioid histology, serous histology was
associated with increased expression of EphA2 (p<0.0001), EphA4
(p<0.0002), EphB1 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (pObjective: Members of the
Eph/Ephrin family are known to play seminal roles in cancer growth and
metastasis in many solid tumors; however, a comprehensive analysis has
not been carried out. We analyzed the clinical relevance of all
Eph/Ephrin family members in endometrial cancer.Methods: Level 3 data
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was utilized to assess the clinical
significance of all 14 Eph receptors available in the database (EphA1-8,
EphA10, EphB1-4, and EphB6), as well as EphrinA1-A5 and EphrinB1-B3. We
examined gene methylation status and copy number changes in these tumors.
Clinical information extracted included age, tumor histology, tumor
grade, stage, estrogen(ER)/progesterone(PR) receptor status, and overall
survival.Results: A total of 320 samples were available for analysis.
Increased EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2 expression was significantly
correlated with poorer overall survival (p=0.03, p=0.04, p=0.01, and
p=0.008, respectively) and lack of ER and PR expression (r=-0.34,
p=2.25e6; r-0.24, p=0.0007; r=-0.22, p=0.002; r=-0.46, p=2.38e11,
respectively). Compared to endometrioid histology, serous histology was
associated with increased expression of EphA2 (p<0.0001), EphA4
(p<0.0002), EphB1 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p<0.0001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.04).
Grade 3 tumor samples had increased expression of EphA2 (pObjective:
Members of the Eph/Ephrin family are known to play seminal roles in
cancer growth and metastasis in many solid tumors; however, a
comprehensive analysis has not been carried out. We analyzed the clinical
relevance of all Eph/Ephrin family members in endometrial cancer.Methods:
Level 3 data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was utilized to assess
the clinical significance of all 14 Eph receptors available in the
database (EphA1-8, EphA10, EphB1-4, and EphB6), as well as EphrinA1-A5
and EphrinB1-B3. We examined gene methylation status and copy number
changes in these tumors. Clinical information extracted included age,
tumor histology, tumor grade, stage, estrogen(ER)/progesterone(PR)
receptor status, and overall survival.Results: A total of 320 samples
were available for analysis. Increased EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2
expression was significantly correlated with poorer overall survival
(p=0.03, p=0.04, p=0.01, and p=0.008, respectively) and lack of ER and PR
expression (r=-0.34, p=2.25e6; r-0.24, p=0.0007; r=-0.22, p=0.002;
r=-0.46, p=2.38e11, respectively). Compared to endometrioid histology,
serous histology was associated with increased expression of EphA2
(p<0.0001), EphA4 (p<0.0002), EphB1 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p<0.0001), and
EphrinA3 (p=0.04). Grade 3 tumor samples had increased expression of
EphA2 (p<0.03), EphA4 (pObjective: Members of the Eph/Ephrin family are
known to play seminal roles in cancer growth and metastasis in many solid
tumors; however, a comprehensive analysis has not been carried out. We
analyzed the clinical relevance of all Eph/Ephrin family members in
endometrial cancer.Methods: Level 3 data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) was utilized to assess the clinical significance of all 14 Eph
receptors available in the database (EphA1-8, EphA10, EphB1-4, and
EphB6), as well as EphrinA1-A5 and EphrinB1-B3. We examined gene
methylation status and copy number changes in these tumors. Clinical
information extracted included age, tumor histology, tumor grade, stage,
estrogen(ER)/progesterone(PR) receptor status, and overall
survival.Results: A total of 320 samples were available for analysis.
Increased EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2 expression was significantly
correlated with poorer overall survival (p=0.03, p=0.04, p=0.01, and
p=0.008, respectively) and lack of ER and PR expression (r=-0.34,
p=2.25e6; r-0.24, p=0.0007; r=-0.22, p=0.002; r=-0.46, p=2.38e11,
respectively). Compared to endometrioid histology, serous histology was
associated with increased expression of EphA2 (p<0.0001), EphA4
(p<0.0002), EphB1 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p<0.0001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.04).
Grade 3 tumor samples had increased expression of EphA2 (p<0.03), EphA4
(p<0.006), EphB1 (pObjective: Members of the Eph/Ephrin family are known
to play seminal roles in cancer growth and metastasis in many solid
tumors; however, a comprehensive analysis has not been carried out. We
analyzed the clinical relevance of all Eph/Ephrin family members in
endometrial cancer.Methods: Level 3 data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) was utilized to assess the clinical significance of all 14 Eph
receptors available in the database (EphA1-8, EphA10, EphB1-4, and
EphB6), as well as EphrinA1-A5 and EphrinB1-B3. We examined gene
methylation status and copy number changes in these tumors. Clinical
information extracted included age, tumor histology, tumor grade, stage,
estrogen(ER)/progesterone(PR) receptor status, and overall
survival.Results: A total of 320 samples were available for analysis.
Increased EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2 expression was significantly
correlated with poorer overall survival (p=0.03, p=0.04, p=0.01, and
p=0.008, respectively) and lack of ER and PR expression (r=-0.34,
p=2.25e6; r-0.24, p=0.0007; r=-0.22, p=0.002; r=-0.46, p=2.38e11,
respectively). Compared to endometrioid histology, serous histology was
associated with increased expression of EphA2 (p<0.0001), EphA4
(p<0.0002), EphB1 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p<0.0001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.04).
Grade 3 tumor samples had increased expression of EphA2 (p<0.03), EphA4
(p<0.006), EphB1 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (pObjective: Members of the Eph/Ephrin
family are known to play seminal roles in cancer growth and metastasis in
many solid tumors; however, a comprehensive analysis has not been carried
out. We analyzed the clinical relevance of all Eph/Ephrin family members
in endometrial cancer.Methods: Level 3 data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) was utilized to assess the clinical significance of all 14 Eph
receptors available in the database (EphA1-8, EphA10, EphB1-4, and
EphB6), as well as EphrinA1-A5 and EphrinB1-B3. We examined gene
methylation status and copy number changes in these tumors. Clinical
information extracted included age, tumor histology, tumor grade, stage,
estrogen(ER)/progesterone(PR) receptor status, and overall
survival.Results: A total of 320 samples were available for analysis.
Increased EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2 expression was significantly
correlated with poorer overall survival (p=0.03, p=0.04, p=0.01, and
p=0.008, respectively) and lack of ER and PR expression (r=-0.34,
p=2.25e6; r-0.24, p=0.0007; r=-0.22, p=0.002; r=-0.46, p=2.38e11,
respectively). Compared to endometrioid histology, serous histology was
associated with increased expression of EphA2 (p<0.0001), EphA4
(p<0.0002), EphB1 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p<0.0001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.04).
Grade 3 tumor samples had increased expression of EphA2 (p<0.03), EphA4
(p<0.006), EphB1 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p<0.0001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.04)
compared to lower grade samples. EphA2, EphB1, and EphB2 expression was
higher in samples from patients with advanced stage (FIGO Stage IIIA-IVB)
compared to those with early stage disease (p=0.008, p=0.0183, and p 63
years had greater tumoral expression of EphA4 (p 63 years had greater
tumoral expression of EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p=0.001), and EphrinA3
(p=0.03). Increased copy number correlated with EphB2 (r=0.41, p=0.001)
and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02) expression, but was not correlated with
other Eph or Ephrin gene expression. Gene methylation inversely
correlated with EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and EphrinA5
receptor expression (r 63 years had greater tumoral expression of EphA4
(p<0.0001), EphB2 (p=0.001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.03). Increased copy number
correlated with EphB2 (r=0.41, p=0.001) and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02)
expression, but was not correlated with other Eph or Ephrin gene
expression. Gene methylation inversely correlated with EphA2, EphA4,
EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and EphrinA5 receptor expression (r<-0.22, p 63
years had greater tumoral expression of EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2
(p=0.001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.03). Increased copy number correlated with
EphB2 (r=0.41, p=0.001) and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02) expression, but was
not correlated with other Eph or Ephrin gene expression. Gene methylation
inversely correlated with EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and
EphrinA5 receptor expression (r<-0.22, p<0.0001; r 63 years had greater
tumoral expression of EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p=0.001), and EphrinA3
(p=0.03). Increased copy number correlated with EphB2 (r=0.41, p=0.001)
and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02) expression, but was not correlated with
other Eph or Ephrin gene expression. Gene methylation inversely
correlated with EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and EphrinA5
receptor expression (r<-0.22, p<0.0001; r<-0.26, p 63 years had greater
tumoral expression of EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p=0.001), and EphrinA3
(p=0.03). Increased copy number correlated with EphB2 (r=0.41, p=0.001)
and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02) expression, but was not correlated with
other Eph or Ephrin gene expression. Gene methylation inversely
correlated with EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and EphrinA5
receptor expression (r<-0.22, p<0.0001; r<-0.26, p<0.0002; r 63 years had
greater tumoral expression of EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p=0.001), and
EphrinA3 (p=0.03). Increased copy number correlated with EphB2 (r=0.41,
p=0.001) and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02) expression, but was not correlated
with other Eph or Ephrin gene expression. Gene methylation inversely
correlated with EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and EphrinA5
receptor expression (r<-0.22, p<0.0001; r<-0.26, p<0.0002; r<-0.23, p 63
years had greater tumoral expression of EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2
(p=0.001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.03). Increased copy number correlated with
EphB2 (r=0.41, p=0.001) and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02) expression, but was
not correlated with other Eph or Ephrin gene expression. Gene methylation
inversely correlated with EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and
EphrinA5 receptor expression (r<-0.22, p<0.0001; r<-0.26, p<0.0002;
r<-0.23, p<0.0006; r 63 years had greater tumoral expression of EphA4
(p<0.0001), EphB2 (p=0.001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.03). Increased copy number
correlated with EphB2 (r=0.41, p=0.001) and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02)
expression, but was not correlated with other Eph or Ephrin gene
expression. Gene methylation inversely correlated with EphA2, EphA4,
EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and EphrinA5 receptor expression (r<-0.22,
p<0.0001; r<-0.26, p<0.0002; r<-0.23, p<0.0006; r<-0.21, p 63 years had
greater tumoral expression of EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p=0.001), and
EphrinA3 (p=0.03). Increased copy number correlated with EphB2 (r=0.41,
p=0.001) and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02) expression, but was not correlated
with other Eph or Ephrin gene expression. Gene methylation inversely
correlated with EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and EphrinA5
receptor expression (r<-0.22, p<0.0001; r<-0.26, p<0.0002; r<-0.23,
p<0.0006; r<-0.21, p<0.003; r 63 years had greater tumoral expression of
EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p=0.001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.03). Increased copy
number correlated with EphB2 (r=0.41, p=0.001) and EphrinA3 (r=0.23,
p=0.02) expression, but was not correlated with other Eph or Ephrin gene
expression. Gene methylation inversely correlated with EphA2, EphA4,
EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and EphrinA5 receptor expression (r<-0.22,
p<0.0001; r<-0.26, p<0.0002; r<-0.23, p<0.0006; r<-0.21, p<0.003; r<-0.2,
p 63 years had greater tumoral expression of EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2
(p=0.001), and EphrinA3 (p=0.03). Increased copy number correlated with
EphB2 (r=0.41, p=0.001) and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02) expression, but was
not correlated with other Eph or Ephrin gene expression. Gene methylation
inversely correlated with EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and
EphrinA5 receptor expression (r<-0.22, p<0.0001; r<-0.26, p<0.0002;
r<-0.23, p<0.0006; r<-0.21, p<0.003; r<-0.2, p<0.01; r 63 years had
greater tumoral expression of EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p=0.001), and
EphrinA3 (p=0.03). Increased copy number correlated with EphB2 (r=0.41,
p=0.001) and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02) expression, but was not correlated
with other Eph or Ephrin gene expression. Gene methylation inversely
correlated with EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and EphrinA5
receptor expression (r<-0.22, p<0.0001; r<-0.26, p<0.0002; r<-0.23,
p<0.0006; r<-0.21, p<0.003; r<-0.2, p<0.01; r<-0.2, p 63 years had
greater tumoral expression of EphA4 (p<0.0001), EphB2 (p=0.001), and
EphrinA3 (p=0.03). Increased copy number correlated with EphB2 (r=0.41,
p=0.001) and EphrinA3 (r=0.23, p=0.02) expression, but was not correlated
with other Eph or Ephrin gene expression. Gene methylation inversely
correlated with EphA2, EphA4, EphB1, EphB2, EphrinA3, and EphrinA5
receptor expression (r<-0.22, p<0.0001; r<-0.26, p<0.0002; r<-0.23,
p<0.0006; r<-0.21, p<0.003; r<-0.2, p<0.01; r<-0.2, p<0.01,
respectively). In patients with advanced stage expression of EphrinA3 and
EphrinA5 was associated with poorer OS (p=0.002 and p=0.012). In a
multivariate analysis, stage and Eph expression were the strongest
independent predictors of poor survival, of which, EphA4 was the most
significant (p=0.0024). In further support of the significance of EphA4,
increased expression of its ligands EphrinA3 and EprhinA5 correlated with
poorer OS.Conclusions: Concordant with emerging roles for the Eph
receptor and Eprhins in driving malignant biology, increased EphA2,
EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2 expression, as well as EphrinA3 and EphrinA5
expression, is predictive of poor patient outcome and constitutes
attractive targets for biological therapies.

