Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knock-down of base excision repair genes increases susceptibility
to organophospate pesticide toxicity.


Organophosphates are chemicals that inhibit cholinesterases and are
employed widely as pesticides. Concerns are increasing regarding the
relative safety of these chemicals to the environment. Recent studies
suggest organophosphate exposure is associated with increased expression
of fragile sites and DNA damage at concentrations that are not associated
with cholinesterase inhibition. Chronic exposure to the organophosphate
has been associated with high incidences of prostate cancer in farm
workers as well as leukemia and non-Hodgkin lymphoma in adults and
children. Moreover, a higher degree of DNA damage has been reported in
pesticide applicators that have polymorphisms in the base excision repair
genes XRCC1 and OGG1. Our laboratory reports that cells deficient in BER
enzymes APE1 and OGG1 exhibit a higher cytotoxicity when exposed, in a
dose-dependent manner, to organophosphates Chlorpyrifos,
Chlorpyrifos-oxon and Isofenphos. However, it should be noted that other
organophosphates such as Diazinon and Dichlorvos had very little effects
on cellular viability within the APE1 and OGG1 deficient cells. It should
be noted that Chlorpyrifos, Chlorpyrifos-oxon and Isofenphos also produce
significant oxidative stress in cells. Our data is consistent with
previous studies which report a higher degree of DNA damage has been
reported in pesticide applicators that have polymorphisms in the base
excision repair genes XRCC1 and OGG1. Moreover, our data further suggests
that only certain organophosphates, particularly those that induce
oxidative stress, may be responsible for toxicity in APE1 and OGG1
deficient cells.

