Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Innate immunity driving tumor angiogenesis: the role of natural
killer cells in non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) .


Immune cells infiltrating tumors often show a skewed phenotype that
reflects attenuation of anti-tumor activity and enhancement of pro-tumor
activities, including angiogenesis.Natural Killer (NK) cells are
effectors lymphocytes of innate immunity that can potentially control
tumors by their cytotoxic activity. Nevetherless the role of NK cells in
angiogenesis remains to be defined.Here we investigate the subset
distribution of tumor infiltrating NKs and the correlation with
pro-angiogenic factor production, like VEGF, PlGF and IL-8, on clinical
samples belonging from patient with non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC).Samples (tumor, adjacent normal tissue and peripheral blood),
solid tissues are mechanically dispersed, while blood is processed using
a Ficoll gradient. Flow cytometry (FC) analyses were performed to
evaluate specific markers (CD56, CD16, CD335, CD3) for NK cells.The
CD56brightCD16NK phenotype predominated in all NSCLC samples while the
CD56dimCD16+ cytotoxic NK phenotype prevailed in adjacent normal tissues
and in non-oncologic lung tissues, independent of smoking status. The
CD56+CD16 NK subset was associated with angiogenic cytokines production
like VEGF, PlGF and IL-8 (CXCL8)Further, patients with the SQK histotype
showed significantly higher angiogenic factor production by CD56+CD16NK
cells infiltrating tumors, adjacent tissues and peripheral blood,
compared to those from adenocarcinoma (ADK) and control
tissues.Supernatants derived from NSCLC infiltrating CD56+CD16NK cells
induced endothelial cell chemotaxis and formation of capillary-like
structures in vitro, particularly evident in SQK derived NK cell
supernatants and absent in controlsAs TGF1 expression has been associated
with poorer survival in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) squamous cell
carcinoma (SQK) and polarization of peripheral NK cells towards a
decidual NK phenotype, a subset associated with angiogenesis, we
evaluated whether TGFb culd be implicated in these polarization
phenomena. We demonstrated as exposure to TGF1 up-regulated VEGF and PlGF
production by peripheral blood CD56+CD16NK cells from healthy
subjects.Our data suggest that, like other immune cells, NK cells in
NSCLC can be switched to an angiogenic phenotype, particularly evident
for SQK and likely mediated by TGF1, which could contribute to
angiogenesis in SQK NSCLC development and progression.

