Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post chemotherapy aggressiveness of breast cancer cells is related
to TLR-3 / NOD-1 -2 activation.


Post chemotherapy relapsing breast cancer is often characterized by an
increased aggressiveness and potential to metastasize. The mechanisms by
which cancer cells escape chemotherapy are yet not completely understood.
Toll-like receptor (TLR)-3, activated by RNAs, as well as NOD-1 and
NOD-2, two newly described regulators of the innate immune system, play a
role in tumor growth by regulating apoptosis or macrophage invasion into
tumors. We hypothesize that chemotherapy leads to release of nucleotides
from apoptotic cells which then in turn are capable of activating the
pro-inflammatory TLR-3 pathway. The parallel activation of NOD-1/-2 via
TRAF6 then leads to an amplification of the metastasizing potential of
post chemotherapy breast cancer cells by increasing the recruitment of
macrophages. Balb/c mice bearing 4T1 syngeneic breast cancer tumors were
treated with a combination chemotherapy (CMF; cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg,
methotrexate 25 mg/kg, 5-fluoro-uracil 50 mg/kg; n=8) cycled twice i.p.,
solvent (NaCl; n=8) cycled twice i.p. or without therapy (n=8). After 21
days animals were sacrificed, tumor weight was measured, metastases were
detected histologically, cell proliferation rate was analyzed by Ki-67
expression, macrophage count was evaluated immunohistologically and
tissue mRNA expression was examined by RT-PCR. CMF treatment (376.0 61.14
mg) significantly retarded tumor growth vs. untreated (620.6 58.95 mg) or
NaCl (665.8 45.46 mg) treated controls (PPost chemotherapy relapsing
breast cancer is often characterized by an increased aggressiveness and
potential to metastasize. The mechanisms by which cancer cells escape
chemotherapy are yet not completely understood. Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-3, activated by RNAs, as well as NOD-1 and NOD-2, two newly
described regulators of the innate immune system, play a role in tumor
growth by regulating apoptosis or macrophage invasion into tumors. We
hypothesize that chemotherapy leads to release of nucleotides from
apoptotic cells which then in turn are capable of activating the
pro-inflammatory TLR-3 pathway. The parallel activation of NOD-1/-2 via
TRAF6 then leads to an amplification of the metastasizing potential of
post chemotherapy breast cancer cells by increasing the recruitment of
macrophages. Balb/c mice bearing 4T1 syngeneic breast cancer tumors were
treated with a combination chemotherapy (CMF; cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg,
methotrexate 25 mg/kg, 5-fluoro-uracil 50 mg/kg; n=8) cycled twice i.p.,
solvent (NaCl; n=8) cycled twice i.p. or without therapy (n=8). After 21
days animals were sacrificed, tumor weight was measured, metastases were
detected histologically, cell proliferation rate was analyzed by Ki-67
expression, macrophage count was evaluated immunohistologically and
tissue mRNA expression was examined by RT-PCR. CMF treatment (376.0 61.14
mg) significantly retarded tumor growth vs. untreated (620.6 58.95 mg) or
NaCl (665.8 45.46 mg) treated controls (P<0.05 respectively PPost
chemotherapy relapsing breast cancer is often characterized by an
increased aggressiveness and potential to metastasize. The mechanisms by
which cancer cells escape chemotherapy are yet not completely understood.
Toll-like receptor (TLR)-3, activated by RNAs, as well as NOD-1 and
NOD-2, two newly described regulators of the innate immune system, play a
role in tumor growth by regulating apoptosis or macrophage invasion into
tumors. We hypothesize that chemotherapy leads to release of nucleotides
from apoptotic cells which then in turn are capable of activating the
pro-inflammatory TLR-3 pathway. The parallel activation of NOD-1/-2 via
TRAF6 then leads to an amplification of the metastasizing potential of
post chemotherapy breast cancer cells by increasing the recruitment of
macrophages. Balb/c mice bearing 4T1 syngeneic breast cancer tumors were
treated with a combination chemotherapy (CMF; cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg,
methotrexate 25 mg/kg, 5-fluoro-uracil 50 mg/kg; n=8) cycled twice i.p.,
solvent (NaCl; n=8) cycled twice i.p. or without therapy (n=8). After 21
days animals were sacrificed, tumor weight was measured, metastases were
detected histologically, cell proliferation rate was analyzed by Ki-67
expression, macrophage count was evaluated immunohistologically and
tissue mRNA expression was examined by RT-PCR. CMF treatment (376.0 61.14
mg) significantly retarded tumor growth vs. untreated (620.6 58.95 mg) or
NaCl (665.8 45.46 mg) treated controls (P<0.05 respectively P<0.01).
Interestingly, pulmonary metastases occurred only in the CMF group.
Proliferation as measured by Ki-67 expression however was not decreased
in CMF treated animals and was even significantly higher as compared to
untreated animals (34.76 3.475 vs. 18.58 2.666; PPost chemotherapy
relapsing breast cancer is often characterized by an increased
aggressiveness and potential to metastasize. The mechanisms by which
cancer cells escape chemotherapy are yet not completely understood.
Toll-like receptor (TLR)-3, activated by RNAs, as well as NOD-1 and
NOD-2, two newly described regulators of the innate immune system, play a
role in tumor growth by regulating apoptosis or macrophage invasion into
tumors. We hypothesize that chemotherapy leads to release of nucleotides
from apoptotic cells which then in turn are capable of activating the
pro-inflammatory TLR-3 pathway. The parallel activation of NOD-1/-2 via
TRAF6 then leads to an amplification of the metastasizing potential of
post chemotherapy breast cancer cells by increasing the recruitment of
macrophages. Balb/c mice bearing 4T1 syngeneic breast cancer tumors were
treated with a combination chemotherapy (CMF; cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg,
methotrexate 25 mg/kg, 5-fluoro-uracil 50 mg/kg; n=8) cycled twice i.p.,
solvent (NaCl; n=8) cycled twice i.p. or without therapy (n=8). After 21
days animals were sacrificed, tumor weight was measured, metastases were
detected histologically, cell proliferation rate was analyzed by Ki-67
expression, macrophage count was evaluated immunohistologically and
tissue mRNA expression was examined by RT-PCR. CMF treatment (376.0 61.14
mg) significantly retarded tumor growth vs. untreated (620.6 58.95 mg) or
NaCl (665.8 45.46 mg) treated controls (P<0.05 respectively P<0.01).
Interestingly, pulmonary metastases occurred only in the CMF group.
Proliferation as measured by Ki-67 expression however was not decreased
in CMF treated animals and was even significantly higher as compared to
untreated animals (34.76 3.475 vs. 18.58 2.666; P<0.05). Moreover
macrophage invasion into CMF treated tumors was significantly increased
vs. untreated animals (35.25 4.131 vs. 22.86 2.511 cells/field; PPost
chemotherapy relapsing breast cancer is often characterized by an
increased aggressiveness and potential to metastasize. The mechanisms by
which cancer cells escape chemotherapy are yet not completely understood.
Toll-like receptor (TLR)-3, activated by RNAs, as well as NOD-1 and
NOD-2, two newly described regulators of the innate immune system, play a
role in tumor growth by regulating apoptosis or macrophage invasion into
tumors. We hypothesize that chemotherapy leads to release of nucleotides
from apoptotic cells which then in turn are capable of activating the
pro-inflammatory TLR-3 pathway. The parallel activation of NOD-1/-2 via
TRAF6 then leads to an amplification of the metastasizing potential of
post chemotherapy breast cancer cells by increasing the recruitment of
macrophages. Balb/c mice bearing 4T1 syngeneic breast cancer tumors were
treated with a combination chemotherapy (CMF; cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg,
methotrexate 25 mg/kg, 5-fluoro-uracil 50 mg/kg; n=8) cycled twice i.p.,
solvent (NaCl; n=8) cycled twice i.p. or without therapy (n=8). After 21
days animals were sacrificed, tumor weight was measured, metastases were
detected histologically, cell proliferation rate was analyzed by Ki-67
expression, macrophage count was evaluated immunohistologically and
tissue mRNA expression was examined by RT-PCR. CMF treatment (376.0 61.14
mg) significantly retarded tumor growth vs. untreated (620.6 58.95 mg) or
NaCl (665.8 45.46 mg) treated controls (P<0.05 respectively P<0.01).
Interestingly, pulmonary metastases occurred only in the CMF group.
Proliferation as measured by Ki-67 expression however was not decreased
in CMF treated animals and was even significantly higher as compared to
untreated animals (34.76 3.475 vs. 18.58 2.666; P<0.05). Moreover
macrophage invasion into CMF treated tumors was significantly increased
vs. untreated animals (35.25 4.131 vs. 22.86 2.511 cells/field; P<0.05).
TLR-3 (1471 278.3 vs. 291.3 33.4 or 512.7 88.4; PPost chemotherapy
relapsing breast cancer is often characterized by an increased
aggressiveness and potential to metastasize. The mechanisms by which
cancer cells escape chemotherapy are yet not completely understood.
Toll-like receptor (TLR)-3, activated by RNAs, as well as NOD-1 and
NOD-2, two newly described regulators of the innate immune system, play a
role in tumor growth by regulating apoptosis or macrophage invasion into
tumors. We hypothesize that chemotherapy leads to release of nucleotides
from apoptotic cells which then in turn are capable of activating the
pro-inflammatory TLR-3 pathway. The parallel activation of NOD-1/-2 via
TRAF6 then leads to an amplification of the metastasizing potential of
post chemotherapy breast cancer cells by increasing the recruitment of
macrophages. Balb/c mice bearing 4T1 syngeneic breast cancer tumors were
treated with a combination chemotherapy (CMF; cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg,
methotrexate 25 mg/kg, 5-fluoro-uracil 50 mg/kg; n=8) cycled twice i.p.,
solvent (NaCl; n=8) cycled twice i.p. or without therapy (n=8). After 21
days animals were sacrificed, tumor weight was measured, metastases were
detected histologically, cell proliferation rate was analyzed by Ki-67
expression, macrophage count was evaluated immunohistologically and
tissue mRNA expression was examined by RT-PCR. CMF treatment (376.0 61.14
mg) significantly retarded tumor growth vs. untreated (620.6 58.95 mg) or
NaCl (665.8 45.46 mg) treated controls (P<0.05 respectively P<0.01).
Interestingly, pulmonary metastases occurred only in the CMF group.
Proliferation as measured by Ki-67 expression however was not decreased
in CMF treated animals and was even significantly higher as compared to
untreated animals (34.76 3.475 vs. 18.58 2.666; P<0.05). Moreover
macrophage invasion into CMF treated tumors was significantly increased
vs. untreated animals (35.25 4.131 vs. 22.86 2.511 cells/field; P<0.05).
TLR-3 (1471 278.3 vs. 291.3 33.4 or 512.7 88.4; P<0.001) mRNA expression
as well as TLR-3 signaling members TRAF6 (1207 145.0 vs. 418.1 78.3 or
239.0 32.8; PPost chemotherapy relapsing breast cancer is often
characterized by an increased aggressiveness and potential to
metastasize. The mechanisms by which cancer cells escape chemotherapy are
yet not completely understood. Toll-like receptor (TLR)-3, activated by
RNAs, as well as NOD-1 and NOD-2, two newly described regulators of the
innate immune system, play a role in tumor growth by regulating apoptosis
or macrophage invasion into tumors. We hypothesize that chemotherapy
leads to release of nucleotides from apoptotic cells which then in turn
are capable of activating the pro-inflammatory TLR-3 pathway. The
parallel activation of NOD-1/-2 via TRAF6 then leads to an amplification
of the metastasizing potential of post chemotherapy breast cancer cells
by increasing the recruitment of macrophages. Balb/c mice bearing 4T1
syngeneic breast cancer tumors were treated with a combination
chemotherapy (CMF; cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg, methotrexate 25 mg/kg,
5-fluoro-uracil 50 mg/kg; n=8) cycled twice i.p., solvent (NaCl; n=8)
cycled twice i.p. or without therapy (n=8). After 21 days animals were
sacrificed, tumor weight was measured, metastases were detected
histologically, cell proliferation rate was analyzed by Ki-67 expression,
macrophage count was evaluated immunohistologically and tissue mRNA
expression was examined by RT-PCR. CMF treatment (376.0 61.14 mg)
significantly retarded tumor growth vs. untreated (620.6 58.95 mg) or
NaCl (665.8 45.46 mg) treated controls (P<0.05 respectively P<0.01).
Interestingly, pulmonary metastases occurred only in the CMF group.
Proliferation as measured by Ki-67 expression however was not decreased
in CMF treated animals and was even significantly higher as compared to
untreated animals (34.76 3.475 vs. 18.58 2.666; P<0.05). Moreover
macrophage invasion into CMF treated tumors was significantly increased
vs. untreated animals (35.25 4.131 vs. 22.86 2.511 cells/field; P<0.05).
TLR-3 (1471 278.3 vs. 291.3 33.4 or 512.7 88.4; P<0.001) mRNA expression
as well as TLR-3 signaling members TRAF6 (1207 145.0 vs. 418.1 78.3 or
239.0 32.8; P<0.001) and Interferon beta1 (190.2 25.5 vs. 54.50 15.7 or
63.43 33.4; PPost chemotherapy relapsing breast cancer is often
characterized by an increased aggressiveness and potential to
metastasize. The mechanisms by which cancer cells escape chemotherapy are
yet not completely understood. Toll-like receptor (TLR)-3, activated by
RNAs, as well as NOD-1 and NOD-2, two newly described regulators of the
innate immune system, play a role in tumor growth by regulating apoptosis
or macrophage invasion into tumors. We hypothesize that chemotherapy
leads to release of nucleotides from apoptotic cells which then in turn
are capable of activating the pro-inflammatory TLR-3 pathway. The
parallel activation of NOD-1/-2 via TRAF6 then leads to an amplification
of the metastasizing potential of post chemotherapy breast cancer cells
by increasing the recruitment of macrophages. Balb/c mice bearing 4T1
syngeneic breast cancer tumors were treated with a combination
chemotherapy (CMF; cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg, methotrexate 25 mg/kg,
5-fluoro-uracil 50 mg/kg; n=8) cycled twice i.p., solvent (NaCl; n=8)
cycled twice i.p. or without therapy (n=8). After 21 days animals were
sacrificed, tumor weight was measured, metastases were detected
histologically, cell proliferation rate was analyzed by Ki-67 expression,
macrophage count was evaluated immunohistologically and tissue mRNA
expression was examined by RT-PCR. CMF treatment (376.0 61.14 mg)
significantly retarded tumor growth vs. untreated (620.6 58.95 mg) or
NaCl (665.8 45.46 mg) treated controls (P<0.05 respectively P<0.01).
Interestingly, pulmonary metastases occurred only in the CMF group.
Proliferation as measured by Ki-67 expression however was not decreased
in CMF treated animals and was even significantly higher as compared to
untreated animals (34.76 3.475 vs. 18.58 2.666; P<0.05). Moreover
macrophage invasion into CMF treated tumors was significantly increased
vs. untreated animals (35.25 4.131 vs. 22.86 2.511 cells/field; P<0.05).
TLR-3 (1471 278.3 vs. 291.3 33.4 or 512.7 88.4; P<0.001) mRNA expression
as well as TLR-3 signaling members TRAF6 (1207 145.0 vs. 418.1 78.3 or
239.0 32.8; P<0.001) and Interferon beta1 (190.2 25.5 vs. 54.50 15.7 or
63.43 33.4; P<0.05) mRNA expression was significantly upregulated in CMF
vs. untreated or NaCl treated mice. Increased cellular turnover upon
chemotherapy leads to NOD-1 (74.54 14.59 vs. 34.43 6.46 or 26.11 7.39;
PPost chemotherapy relapsing breast cancer is often characterized by an
increased aggressiveness and potential to metastasize. The mechanisms by
which cancer cells escape chemotherapy are yet not completely understood.
Toll-like receptor (TLR)-3, activated by RNAs, as well as NOD-1 and
NOD-2, two newly described regulators of the innate immune system, play a
role in tumor growth by regulating apoptosis or macrophage invasion into
tumors. We hypothesize that chemotherapy leads to release of nucleotides
from apoptotic cells which then in turn are capable of activating the
pro-inflammatory TLR-3 pathway. The parallel activation of NOD-1/-2 via
TRAF6 then leads to an amplification of the metastasizing potential of
post chemotherapy breast cancer cells by increasing the recruitment of
macrophages. Balb/c mice bearing 4T1 syngeneic breast cancer tumors were
treated with a combination chemotherapy (CMF; cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg,
methotrexate 25 mg/kg, 5-fluoro-uracil 50 mg/kg; n=8) cycled twice i.p.,
solvent (NaCl; n=8) cycled twice i.p. or without therapy (n=8). After 21
days animals were sacrificed, tumor weight was measured, metastases were
detected histologically, cell proliferation rate was analyzed by Ki-67
expression, macrophage count was evaluated immunohistologically and
tissue mRNA expression was examined by RT-PCR. CMF treatment (376.0 61.14
mg) significantly retarded tumor growth vs. untreated (620.6 58.95 mg) or
NaCl (665.8 45.46 mg) treated controls (P<0.05 respectively P<0.01).
Interestingly, pulmonary metastases occurred only in the CMF group.
Proliferation as measured by Ki-67 expression however was not decreased
in CMF treated animals and was even significantly higher as compared to
untreated animals (34.76 3.475 vs. 18.58 2.666; P<0.05). Moreover
macrophage invasion into CMF treated tumors was significantly increased
vs. untreated animals (35.25 4.131 vs. 22.86 2.511 cells/field; P<0.05).
TLR-3 (1471 278.3 vs. 291.3 33.4 or 512.7 88.4; P<0.001) mRNA expression
as well as TLR-3 signaling members TRAF6 (1207 145.0 vs. 418.1 78.3 or
239.0 32.8; P<0.001) and Interferon beta1 (190.2 25.5 vs. 54.50 15.7 or
63.43 33.4; P<0.05) mRNA expression was significantly upregulated in CMF
vs. untreated or NaCl treated mice. Increased cellular turnover upon
chemotherapy leads to NOD-1 (74.54 14.59 vs. 34.43 6.46 or 26.11 7.39;
P<0.05) activation vs. controls. Together with macrophage invasion, NOD-2
(82.61 14.30 vs. 33.35 5.33 or 42.17 5.87; PPost chemotherapy relapsing
breast cancer is often characterized by an increased aggressiveness and
potential to metastasize. The mechanisms by which cancer cells escape
chemotherapy are yet not completely understood. Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-3, activated by RNAs, as well as NOD-1 and NOD-2, two newly
described regulators of the innate immune system, play a role in tumor
growth by regulating apoptosis or macrophage invasion into tumors. We
hypothesize that chemotherapy leads to release of nucleotides from
apoptotic cells which then in turn are capable of activating the
pro-inflammatory TLR-3 pathway. The parallel activation of NOD-1/-2 via
TRAF6 then leads to an amplification of the metastasizing potential of
post chemotherapy breast cancer cells by increasing the recruitment of
macrophages. Balb/c mice bearing 4T1 syngeneic breast cancer tumors were
treated with a combination chemotherapy (CMF; cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg,
methotrexate 25 mg/kg, 5-fluoro-uracil 50 mg/kg; n=8) cycled twice i.p.,
solvent (NaCl; n=8) cycled twice i.p. or without therapy (n=8). After 21
days animals were sacrificed, tumor weight was measured, metastases were
detected histologically, cell proliferation rate was analyzed by Ki-67
expression, macrophage count was evaluated immunohistologically and
tissue mRNA expression was examined by RT-PCR. CMF treatment (376.0 61.14
mg) significantly retarded tumor growth vs. untreated (620.6 58.95 mg) or
NaCl (665.8 45.46 mg) treated controls (P<0.05 respectively P<0.01).
Interestingly, pulmonary metastases occurred only in the CMF group.
Proliferation as measured by Ki-67 expression however was not decreased
in CMF treated animals and was even significantly higher as compared to
untreated animals (34.76 3.475 vs. 18.58 2.666; P<0.05). Moreover
macrophage invasion into CMF treated tumors was significantly increased
vs. untreated animals (35.25 4.131 vs. 22.86 2.511 cells/field; P<0.05).
TLR-3 (1471 278.3 vs. 291.3 33.4 or 512.7 88.4; P<0.001) mRNA expression
as well as TLR-3 signaling members TRAF6 (1207 145.0 vs. 418.1 78.3 or
239.0 32.8; P<0.001) and Interferon beta1 (190.2 25.5 vs. 54.50 15.7 or
63.43 33.4; P<0.05) mRNA expression was significantly upregulated in CMF
vs. untreated or NaCl treated mice. Increased cellular turnover upon
chemotherapy leads to NOD-1 (74.54 14.59 vs. 34.43 6.46 or 26.11 7.39;
P<0.05) activation vs. controls. Together with macrophage invasion, NOD-2
(82.61 14.30 vs. 33.35 5.33 or 42.17 5.87; P<0.01) expression is
significantly upregulated vs. controls.TLR-3 activation in 4T1 breast
cancer tumors might lead to increased NOD-1/ -2 activation and
simultaneously to increased macrophage invasion representing an
independent indicator for the aggressiveness of breast tumors.Supported
by a grant from the Grants4Targets initiative from Bayer Pharma AG to P.P.

