Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated in vitro/in silico platform to study the
evolutionary dynamics of resistance to cancer therapy .


Emerging clinical evidence suggests that tumor response to treatment
occurs along stochastic, evolutionary trajectories, with the
amplification of pre-existing clones of resistant cells being shown to be
responsible for treatment failure in a number of cases. In this
evolutionary view of cancer, pre-existing tumor heterogeneity forms a
pool of candidate mutations for selection to act on. Thus, a clearer
picture of the heterogeneity in cancer cell lines will facilitate a
mechanistic understanding of the dynamics of resistance evolution.In this
report, we describe the development of an in vitro system based on the
soft agar clonogenic assay, to characterize the degree of heterogeneity
in net growth rate (fitness) and the effects of this variation in fitness
on the population-level response to drug treatment.The in vitro system
was developed as a 24-well soft agar clonogenic assay, with sequential
images of the growing colonies taken every day, over a period of two
weeks. An automated system for plate preparation, imaging, and plate
transfer from incubator to imager was developed to increase assay
throughput. A modified greedy algorithm was developed in MATLAB to
reliably track colonies as they grow and shift in the image frame from
day to day. The individual growth rates of colonies in the pre-treatment
colonies followed an exponential model, indicative of a clonal origin for
the individual colonies, which was confirmed by microscopy.Next, we
developed an in silico platform (based on a Monte Carlo stochastic
simulation) to study this heterogeneity in growth rates, and derive
insights that are relevant to the planning of therapeutic interventions.
This simulation was also used to optimize the design of the experimental
system and can provide guidance on the optimal seeding density to avoid
merging colonies. We are now using this simulation platform to explore
the impact of heterogeneity on population fitness and on drug resistance.
This platform can also be extended to examine the individual colonies
derived from drug treatment, and provides a rapid and simple means of
isolation of resistant subclones for further study.Taken together, the
combined in vitro/in silico platform presented here forms the basis of a
Systems Biology approach for assessing the role of cancer cell
heterogeneity in the evolution of resistance in response to treatment

