Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of ABCC10 in taxane mediated resistance in non-small cell
lung carcinoma.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide with
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounting for 85% of diagnosed cases.
The 5 year survival rate for NSCLC is 15% with less than 7% of the
patients alive 10 years after initial diagnosis. The taxanes, docetaxel
and paclitaxel are potent chemotherapeutic drugs which result in cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis through inhibition of microtubule
depolymerization and are fundamental in cancer treatment regimens and are
used as first line agents in NSCLC. Chemoresistance is a major obstacle
in the treatment of NSCLC, an observation attributed in part to the drug
efflux activity of the ATP Binding Cassette (ABC) transporter family
proteins. ABCC10, a member of the ABC transporter family has been shown
to confer resistance to various anti-neoplastic agents including
docetaxel and paclitaxel in vitro. More importantly, Abcc10 null mice
have been shown to exhibit increased tissue sensitivity to paclitaxel in
vivo. Thus, ABCC10 may be an ideal target for investigation as a factor
involved in reducing taxane efficacy. Here, we investigate whether ABCC10
has a role in taxane resistance in non-small cell lung carcinoma.Human
NSCLC cell lines were examined for ABCC10 expression by western
immunoblots ABCC10 expression was then targeted for suppression using
short-hairpin RNAs in the NSCLC cell lines A549 and H1299. Our results
show that ABCC10 is expressed at varying levels in human NSCLC cell
lines. Furthermore, suppression of ABCC10 in NSCLC cell lines resulted in
increased cellular accumulation of docetaxel as well as a reduction in
the efflux of the drug out of the cells. Further studies are needed to
assess effects of ABCC10 in vivo on docetaxel sensitivity as well as the
mechanisms involved in regulating ABCC10 activity.

