Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel method to identify HER2-derived HLA-A2 epitopes for use in
combination immunotherapy with Trastuzumab.


Introduction: Several MHC class I HER2-derived peptides have been
identified that elicit a peptide-specific, cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)
response. We have postulated that Trastuzumab (Tz) binding may protect or
modulate enzymatic cleavage sites on HER2 normally accessible by
proteasomes thereby altering the cleavage pattern and resulting peptide
profile. We have previously reported that Tz-treated breast cancer cells
are recognized and killed more efficiently than untreated cells by T
cells stimulated with the HER2-derived peptide E75 (aa:369-377). In the
current study, we show that unique peptides may be located within the Tz
binding sequence and that treatment with Tz may generate novel
immunogenic peptides that could be used as vaccines in combination
immunotherapy.Methods: The binding site of Tz on the HER2 protein was
analyzed for HLA-A2 binding peptides. Five nonameric peptides were
identified, synthesized and tested. HLA-stabilization assays using T2
cells were performed to confirm HLA-A2 binding. HER577 (aa:577-585;
FGPEADQCV) demonstrated the highest affinity and was further studied.
PBMC from healthy donors were stimulated with HER577 and tested in
standard cytotoxicity assays (CTX) against HER2-expressing tumor cell
lines that were untreated or pre-treated with Tz. NK cell depletion was
performed to ensure that the effects were not due to ADCC. The effect of
Tz treatment on cell surface MHC class I protein expression was also
determined.Results: HER577 (aa:577-585; FGPEADQCV) showed binding
affinity to HLA-A2 stronger than that of E75 (MFI = 532 for HER577 and
332 for E75). HER577 and E75 both had a n off-rate of t1/2 > 8 hr. CTX
assays using MCF7 (HLA-A2+, low HER2) showed specific cytotoxicity by
HER577-CTL (453%) that was similar to E75-CTL (514%). CTX assays
evaluating Her577-CTL versus MCF7 cells pretreated with Tz resulted in a
16% increase in specific cytotoxicity. In MCF7 cells transfected to
overexpress HER2 (HER18) the specific lysis was 305% which increased to
515% (p=0.05) with Tz treatment. Similarly, with SKBr3-A2 cells (SKBr3
cells transfected to express HLA-A2), the specific lysis was 445% which
increased to 623% (p=0.02) with Tz treatment. Tz treatment of a panel of
breast cancer cell lines with varying HER2 expression demonstrated no
changes in HLA-A2 or HLA-ABC expression, confirming the increased killing
after Tz treatment was caused by specific expression of the
peptide/HLA-A2 complex.Conclusion: HER577 is a class I HER2-derived
epitope identified using a novel method for the discovery of immunogenic
peptides for vaccine development. Further investigation of combination
immunotherapy with therapeutic antibodies and unique peptide vaccines is
warranted.

