Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering apoferritin nanocages for tumor imaging and therapy.


Ferritin is a major iron storage protein found in human and most living
organisms. Each ferritin is comprised of 24 subunits, which self-assemble
to form a cage-like nanostructure. Apoferritins (FRTs) refer to those
that are without iron encapsulated. FRT is an interesting nanoplatform
and holds great potential in cancer imaging and drug delivery for several
reasons. 1) Biosafety. Compared to many other biomaterials, FRTs have
fewer concerns in toxicity and immunogenicity. 2) Unique nanostructure.
Despite the rigidness under physiological conditions, the FRT
nanoarchitecture can be broken down into FRT subunits in an acidic
environment (pH = 2). Interestingly, such a process is reversible. When
the pH is tuned back to neutral, the FRT subunits will be reconstituted
into a nanocage structure, and almost in an intact fashion. This feature
can be harnessed to form hybrid nanostructures and to allow for efficient
drug loading. 3) Easy surface modification. As a protein, FRT nanocages
can be genetically modified to present a peptide sequence on the surface.
In addition, FRTs have multiple lysine and cysteine groups on the surface
that can be easily linked with functional molecules, such as a
fluorescence dye or a targeting peptide. 4) High loading capacity. In
addition to iron and transition metals, many small molecules are able to
be encapsulated into FRT interiors efficiently. Making use of these
unique characteristics, we recently developed several multifunctional
FRT-based probes for tumor imaging. Very recently, we found that
doxorubicin can be internalized into RGD modified FRTs (RFRTs) with high
efficiency (up to 70 wt%). The Dox-loaded RFRTs kept integrin
selectivity, which was confirmed by both in vitro and in vivo imaging.
Therapeutic studies on U87MG subcutaneous models observed a good tumor
growth inhibition rate (89.6%) and reduced cardiotoxicity.

