Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genetic variants of growth factor-related genes associate with
the prognosis of patients with advanced esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma .


PURPOSE: To investigate the association between the genetic polymorphisms
of growth factor-related genes and the prognosis of patients with
advanced esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).PATIENTS AND METHODS:
A total of 336 ESCC patients with advanced tumor stages (stage 2b+3+4)
were enrolled in the study. These subjects were randomly assigned to a
training set (n=95) and a replication set (n=241).The genotypes of
candidate single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) were analyzed using iPLEX
Gold technology from the genomic DNA of peripheral leukocytes, and were
correlated with the clinical outcome of patients in training,
replication, and combined groups. Serum levels of growth factors were
examined by enzyme-link immunosorbent assay (ELISA).RESULTS: In training
group, the genotyping of 16 candidate SNPs was successfully performed.
Seven SNPs, rs4444903, rs2010963, rs2272037, rs713646, rs3025039,
rs3025040, rs2016347, significant or borderline significant correlated
with mortality or disease progression and were further evaluated in an
independent replication group. In replication group, GG of rs4444903 at
EGF gene and CC of rs2010903 at VEGF showed unfavorable trend for the
mortality (P=0.286 for rs4444903; P=0.215 for rs2010963). These 2 SNPs
showed significant effects on overall survival of the patients in combing
group (GG vs. AA, adjusted [HR] = 1.29, 95% CI=1.01-1.66, P=0.045 for
rs4444903; CC vs. GG, adjusted [HR] = 1.53, 95% CI=1.07-2.18, P=0.020 for
rs2010963). Meanwhile, GA genotype of rs2272037at IGF1R gene also show
unfavorable trend among all subjects (GA vs. GG, [HR] = 1.24, 95%
CI=0.96-1.60, P=0.108). Combing these 3 SNPs, patients with 3 unfavorable
genotypes showed 2-fold risk for mortality compared to patients without
any of the unfavorable genotypes (accumulated unfavorable genotypes 3 vs.
0, [HR] = 2.00, 95% CI=1.10-3.64, P=0.023). Additionally, GG genotype of
EGF_rs4444903 correlated with increase serum levels of EGF in patients
with advanced ESCC. Finally, both EGF and VEGF expression levels
significant associated with the mortality of patients.CONCLUSION: The
genetic variants in growth factor-related can serve as prognostic
predictors of the patients with advanced ESCC, and thus provide more
information for the personalized therapies for the patients with ESCC.

