Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary folate intake and pancreatic cancer risk: Results from the
European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition.


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PC) has an exceptionally high mortality
rate due to late discovery and poor prognosis. The etiology of the cancer
is largely unknown and primary prevention strategies are limited for this
lethal cancer. Over the past years, evidence has been accumulated for
folate which may play a role in carcinogenesis. Previous epidemiological
studies, however, have shown inconsistent results in relation to PC risk
with a weak inverse association with folate intake from foods, but not
from supplements. The recent large study from the Pooling Project found
no association between folate intake and PC risk. However, in the pooled
analysis, folate data may be heterogeneous across studies and countries,
thus not readily comparable. In the EPIC study, we obtained dietary
folate intake data that was standardized across 10 participating
countries using the EPIC Nutrient DataBase. Folic acid fortification or
supplementation use was not common in Europe at the baseline data
collection. We then set out to evaluate the association between total
dietary folate intake and PC risk.Methods: A total of 477,245
participants without any history of cancer and with complete dietary
folate information ascertained by food frequency questionnaire were
followed up for 11 years, during which 904 first incident primary PC
cases were recorded. Folate intake was energy-adjusted by using the
residual method. Hazard Ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
were estimated using Cox proportional hazards models.Results: In
multivariable analyses stratified by age, sex, study center and adjusted
for smoking status, energy intake, BMI, educational level, diabetes
status, supplement use and dietary fiber intake, we observed
non-significantly decreased PC risk with higher folate intake: the HR of
PC risk for those in the highest quartile of folate intake (353 g/d)
compared with the lowest quartile (Background: Pancreatic cancer (PC) has
an exceptionally high mortality rate due to late discovery and poor
prognosis. The etiology of the cancer is largely unknown and primary
prevention strategies are limited for this lethal cancer. Over the past
years, evidence has been accumulated for folate which may play a role in
carcinogenesis. Previous epidemiological studies, however, have shown
inconsistent results in relation to PC risk with a weak inverse
association with folate intake from foods, but not from supplements. The
recent large study from the Pooling Project found no association between
folate intake and PC risk. However, in the pooled analysis, folate data
may be heterogeneous across studies and countries, thus not readily
comparable. In the EPIC study, we obtained dietary folate intake data
that was standardized across 10 participating countries using the EPIC
Nutrient DataBase. Folic acid fortification or supplementation use was
not common in Europe at the baseline data collection. We then set out to
evaluate the association between total dietary folate intake and PC
risk.Methods: A total of 477,245 participants without any history of
cancer and with complete dietary folate information ascertained by food
frequency questionnaire were followed up for 11 years, during which 904
first incident primary PC cases were recorded. Folate intake was
energy-adjusted by using the residual method. Hazard Ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using Cox proportional hazards
models.Results: In multivariable analyses stratified by age, sex, study
center and adjusted for smoking status, energy intake, BMI, educational
level, diabetes status, supplement use and dietary fiber intake, we
observed non-significantly decreased PC risk with higher folate intake:
the HR of PC risk for those in the highest quartile of folate intake (353
g/d) compared with the lowest quartile (<240 g/d) was 0.65 (95% CI: 0.37,
1.13; Ptrend = 0.13). There was a borderline significant and positive
trend in PC risk across folate quartiles among current smokers (HR=1.53
(0.59-3.97) for 240-291 g/d, 3.51 (1.04-11.90) for 291-353 g/d, and 3.31
(0.71-15.40) for 353 g/d of folate intake, respectively (Ptrend = 0.07)).
A similar pattern was shown when a single reference category was chosen
and joint effects were determined for tertiles of folate in combination
with smoking categories in relation to PC risk. When very low
(Background: Pancreatic cancer (PC) has an exceptionally high mortality
rate due to late discovery and poor prognosis. The etiology of the cancer
is largely unknown and primary prevention strategies are limited for this
lethal cancer. Over the past years, evidence has been accumulated for
folate which may play a role in carcinogenesis. Previous epidemiological
studies, however, have shown inconsistent results in relation to PC risk
with a weak inverse association with folate intake from foods, but not
from supplements. The recent large study from the Pooling Project found
no association between folate intake and PC risk. However, in the pooled
analysis, folate data may be heterogeneous across studies and countries,
thus not readily comparable. In the EPIC study, we obtained dietary
folate intake data that was standardized across 10 participating
countries using the EPIC Nutrient DataBase. Folic acid fortification or
supplementation use was not common in Europe at the baseline data
collection. We then set out to evaluate the association between total
dietary folate intake and PC risk.Methods: A total of 477,245
participants without any history of cancer and with complete dietary
folate information ascertained by food frequency questionnaire were
followed up for 11 years, during which 904 first incident primary PC
cases were recorded. Folate intake was energy-adjusted by using the
residual method. Hazard Ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
were estimated using Cox proportional hazards models.Results: In
multivariable analyses stratified by age, sex, study center and adjusted
for smoking status, energy intake, BMI, educational level, diabetes
status, supplement use and dietary fiber intake, we observed
non-significantly decreased PC risk with higher folate intake: the HR of
PC risk for those in the highest quartile of folate intake (353 g/d)
compared with the lowest quartile (<240 g/d) was 0.65 (95% CI: 0.37,
1.13; Ptrend = 0.13). There was a borderline significant and positive
trend in PC risk across folate quartiles among current smokers (HR=1.53
(0.59-3.97) for 240-291 g/d, 3.51 (1.04-11.90) for 291-353 g/d, and 3.31
(0.71-15.40) for 353 g/d of folate intake, respectively (Ptrend = 0.07)).
A similar pattern was shown when a single reference category was chosen
and joint effects were determined for tertiles of folate in combination
with smoking categories in relation to PC risk. When very low (<150 g/d)
or high intake (500 g/d) were investigated using 200-300 g/d as a
reference, we found a slightly increased, but statistically
non-significant risk estimate with a very low intake (HR=1.28, 95% CI:
0.40-4.06).Conclusions: We found non-significant inverse associations
between dietary folate intake and PC risk in the large European study.
There was some evidence that the findings were heterogeneous by smoking
status. Our results warrant further investigation.

