Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel small-molecule inhibitors of androgen
receptor variants lacking the ligand-binding domain.


Over 30,000 men die from prostate cancer in Canada and USA each year.
Current therapeutic strategy for advanced prostate cancer is to suppress
androgen receptor (AR) signaling by reducing level of androgens (via
castration) and by antiandrogens to compete with endogenous androgens for
binding in the AR ligand-binding domain (LBD). Despite of initial
response, lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) arises as a
result of oncogenic reactivation of the AR. Current treatments for CRPC
provide only a modest improvement in overall survival (a few months). It
is now firmly established that reactivation of the AR signaling in CRPC
is due to multiple mechanisms, including point mutations in the AR LBD
and expression of AR variants lacking the LBD. Recently, a series of AR
splice variants lacking the LBD, such as AR-v7, were identified from
tissue specimen of CRPC patients. Significantly, AR-v7 is constitutively
active even in the absence of androgens and it is thus no longer possible
to be inhibited by conventional LBD-targeting antiandrogens (such as
bicalutamide) or by androgen-depleting agents (such as Abirateron). This
potentially provides a novel mechanism for the development of CRPC. Our
recent work has identified a novel chemical compound that inhibits AR-v7
in reporter assays. We found this compound is also active against
full-length ARs, including the wild type and multiple clinically-relevant
mutant ARs, such as the T877A, H874Y and W741C mutants. Our study
indicated this compound targets the N-terminal domain of the AR. We have
obtained structure-activity relationship (SAR) of this compound.

