Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zoledronic acid inhibits cancer growth and cancer stem cell
phenotypes in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


Zoledronic acid (ZA), a third generation of bisphosphonates, is known to
have both anti-osteolytic and anti-tumor activities. It exerts
anti-osteolytic function by interfering with mevalonate pathway and
preventing protein prenylation required for growth and survival in
osteoclast cells. Also, similar function has been found to induce cancer
apoptosis and inhibit cancer growth in bone-related cancer, but its
effect on other cancer types, including head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) is still unclear. In this study, we first monitored the
effect of ZA on cancer growth in HNSCC cell lines in vitro. ZA
significantly suppressed cancer growth, shown by decreased anchorage
independent growth in soft agar assay and diminished cell growth in
organotypic raft culture. Because cancer stem cell (CSC; also called
tumor-initiating cell) plays a significant role in cancer growth, we
further investigated the effect of ZA on CSC in HNSCC. ZA-treated HNSCC
cells significantly decreased CSC phenotypes such as sphere forming
ability and migratory ability. In SCC4, a tongue squamous cell carcinoma
cell line, side population and expression of pluripotency marker genes
were significantly decreased by ZA. Also, ZA inhibited the CSC-related
Sonic Hedgehog pathway in SCC4 as demonstrated by decreased mRNA
expression of transcriptional factor, Gli-1. Taken together, our data
suggest that ZA targets CSC and hence inhibits cancer growth in HNSCC.

