Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Twist for maintenance of EMT in colon cancer cell .


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition or transformation (EMT) is a process
characterized by loss of cell adhesion, repression of E-cadherin
expression, and increased cell motility. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) confers tumor cells with metastatic dissemination,
cancer stem cell-like characters and drug resistance. However, the
molecular mechanism for metastatic dissemination remains unclear.
Initiation of metastasis involves invasion, which has many phenotypic
similarities to EMT, including a loss of cell-cell adhesion mediated by
E-cadherin repression and an increase in cell mobility. In this study, we
induced EMT in colon cancer cell line LoVo with expression of Twist, a
key transcriptional factor of EMT. The metastasis associated with EMT was
determined E-cadherin, vimentin and -catenin protein expression by
western blot and morphological changes associated with EMT in these
cells. We found that expression of Twist induced a morphological change
associated with EMT in these cells. We also found that the E-cadherin was
significantly decreased in Twist-overexpressing cells LoVo.
Interestingly, we showed that -catenin was activated in these
Twist-overexpressing cells. Our results indicate that activation of
-catenin is required for the sustention of EMT-associated metastasis
dissemination.

