Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKC alpha is implicated in epithelial to mesenchymal transition
and erlotinib resistance in non-small cell lung carcinoma cells.


Overexpression and mutational activation of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) play important roles in the pathogenesis of
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). For patients with EGFR activating
mutations, EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are given as a primary
therapy. However, the majority of these patients eventually develop
resistance to TKIs. To address a potential role of PKC isozymes in the
resistance to TKIs, we used an isogenic model: the NSCLC H1650 cell line
and its erlotinib-resistance derivative H1650-M3. H1650-M3 cells display
a mesenchymal-like morphology driven by TGF- signaling (PNAS
107:15535-15540, 2010). Comparison of the expression of PKC isozymes by
Western blot between parental and erlotinib-resistant H1650 cells
revealed that the M3 derivative displays remarkably high levels of PKC
and reduced levels of PKC. qPCR analysis established that PKC mRNA levels
in H1650-M3 cells are 40-fold higher than in parental cells. In order to
investigate a potential involvement of PKC in TKI resistance we used
RNAi. Upon PKC depletion H1650-M3 cells display a morphology that is
consistent with the epithelial phenotype. Moreover, depletion of PKC from
H1650-M3 cells led to significant changes in the expression of EMT
markers. Indeed, mRNA levels of vimentin, Zeb2, SNAIL and TWIST were
reduced by more than 50 % in erlotinib-resistant cells when PKC
expression was silenced. Analysis of cell viability in response to
erlotinib treatment showed that pretreatment with either the pan-PKC
inhibitor GF 109203X or the cPKC inhibitor G6976 sensitized H1650-M3 to
erlotinib. Furthermore, PKC RNAi depletion markedly sensitized H1650
cells to the TKI. Therefore, PKC up-regulation in erlotinib-resistant
cells may play an important role in driving the resistance to the drug.
Our results also highlight a potential role for PKC in EMT in lung cancer
cells.

