Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A platform to study metastatic cancer.


Metastasis is responsible for over 90% of cancer related deaths. While
significant advances in visualizing metastasis have been made in vivo,
the details of the biological and physical processes that govern invasion
and intravasation remain poorly understood. The difficulty in studying
metastasis stems from the complexity of the interface where invasion and
intravasation take place, between the tumor's local tissue
microenvironment and the vascular system. To elucidate the mechanistic
events taking place during invasion and intravasation, we have developed
a platform that positions tumor cells adjacent to an artificial vessel
embedded in an extracellular matrix (ECM). Using live-cell, fluorescence
microscopy, we study the complex interplay between highly metastatic
cancer cells and a functional artificial microvessel lined with
endothelial cells during tumor migration and intravasation. We
hypothesize that an engineered platform that recapitulates the
interactions between a tumor and a physiologically relevant artificial
vessel within an extracellular matrix will allow the systematic study of
the physical and biological properties that regulate invasion and
intravasastion. Since there remain many gaps in our understanding of the
biology and physics of invasion and intravasation, further insight into
these poorly understood processes may provide new strategies to prevent
the spread of cancer and reduce the high mortality rates associated with
metastasis.

