Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural and biochemical analysis of ERBB4 mutations in cancer.


Genes encoding the ErbB receptor tyrosine kinases (EGFR/ERBB1, ERBB2,
ERBB3, and ERBB4) are key regulators of cellular proliferation, survival,
and differentiation, and thus represent potent proto-oncogenes. In
particular, mutations or copy number variations of EGFR or ERBB2 are
present in human malignancies and serve as biomarkers for targeted
therapies. Recently, somatic mutations of the ERBB4 gene have been
identified in various cancer types, such as non-small cell lung cancer
and melanoma, indicating a role for mutated ERBB4 as a potential drug
target. However, the structural and functional consequences of the ERBB4
mutations remain to be fully elucidated.We used both a structural as well
as a biochemical approach to address the functional effects the ERBB4
mutations for ErbB4 signaling. The structural effects of the mutations
were assessed in both active and inactive ErbB4 conformation in silico.
The biochemical effects of the mutations on ErbB4 signaling were analyzed
in vitro using assays measuring the kinase activity of ErbB4 as well as
activation of downstream signaling pathways.Although all structural
subdomains of ERBB4 have been reported to be affected by somatic
mutations, our analyses indicated that the mutations cluster to regions
important for activation of the receptor, such as the dimerization
interface and the kinase domain active site. Some of the mutations were
structurally non-hazardous and probably represent passenger mutations.
Consistently, the biochemical analyses indicated for the presence of both
activating and functionally non-significant mutations.These observations
suggest for the presence of both driver as well as passenger mutations of
ERBB4 in human cancer.

