Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The factual evidence of gastric mucosal IL-8 mRNA expression, cagA
gene H.pylori infection, and pepsinogen I/II ratio in Thai gastric cancer
.


Background: Interleukine-8 (IL-8) gene expression was reported in vitro
that it may relate to cagA gene in Japanese. There is no in vivo study
demonstrated how its level related to cagA genotype and serum pepsinogen
I/II ratio in other Asian Ethnic beside of East Asian such as in
Japanese. We aimed to study the relative risk of the cytokine gene
expression level in Thai gastric cancer and how its correlation to other
co-factors Methods: There were 86 Thai gastric cancer patients and 134
Thai non-cancer volunteers who underwent endoscopic mucosal biopsies. The
serum pepsinogen I, II, and Helicobacter pylori Immunoglobulin G antibody
were tested. The extracted H.pylori DNA was genotyped for cagA mutation.
The IL-8 mRNA expression was measured by Real Time relative quantitation
polymerase chain reaction in all Thai tissue samples from the specific
site of biopsy, 17 Japanese gastric cancer, and 12 non-cancer gastric
mucosal samples. The multivariate analysis was used for the risk study.
The student t-test and Mann-Whitney were used for quantitative analysis.
The correlation study was done in the subgroup analysis. The STATA 11.0,
USA, and SPSS version 16, USA were used for statistical analysis. The
p-value Background: Interleukine-8 (IL-8) gene expression was reported in
vitro that it may relate to cagA gene in Japanese. There is no in vivo
study demonstrated how its level related to cagA genotype and serum
pepsinogen I/II ratio in other Asian Ethnic beside of East Asian such as
in Japanese. We aimed to study the relative risk of the cytokine gene
expression level in Thai gastric cancer and how its correlation to other
co-factors Methods: There were 86 Thai gastric cancer patients and 134
Thai non-cancer volunteers who underwent endoscopic mucosal biopsies. The
serum pepsinogen I, II, and Helicobacter pylori Immunoglobulin G antibody
were tested. The extracted H.pylori DNA was genotyped for cagA mutation.
The IL-8 mRNA expression was measured by Real Time relative quantitation
polymerase chain reaction in all Thai tissue samples from the specific
site of biopsy, 17 Japanese gastric cancer, and 12 non-cancer gastric
mucosal samples. The multivariate analysis was used for the risk study.
The student t-test and Mann-Whitney were used for quantitative analysis.
The correlation study was done in the subgroup analysis. The STATA 11.0,
USA, and SPSS version 16, USA were used for statistical analysis. The
p-value <0.05 was considered as a statistically significant. Results:
There is high level of IL-8 mRNA expression in positive H.pylori in Thai
gastric cancer cases. However,negative cagA gene is found in 86.8 per
cent of Thai gastric cancer though high yields of East Asian type in
positive cagA cases. The PGI/II ratio in gastric cancer is significant
lower than in non-cancer group, p =0.045. The mean level of IL-8 mRNA
expression in Thai and Japanese advance gastric cancer were 9,615.65 (log
10= 2.62) and 1509.11 (log 10=2.17), respectively, p= 0.014. The total
mean IL-8 mRNA expression in non-cancer Thais is 2,262 (log 10=1.49)
while that in Japanese non-cancer is 10.79(log10= 0.69), p2 in both Thais
and Japanese, Odds ratio= 7.97 (95%CI=3.75-16.97, p2 in both Thais and
Japanese, Odds ratio= 7.97 (95%CI=3.75-16.97, p<0.001) and Odd ratios= 4
(95%CI=1.29-12.40), respectively. Serum PGI/II ratio at less than 3.0 and
IL-8 mRNA expression 100 or log10 2 are significantly cut off risk
difference between Thai cancer and non-cancer, p= 0.03 and p 2 in both
Thais and Japanese, Odds ratio= 7.97 (95%CI=3.75-16.97, p<0.001) and Odd
ratios= 4 (95%CI=1.29-12.40), respectively. Serum PGI/II ratio at less
than 3.0 and IL-8 mRNA expression 100 or log10 2 are significantly cut
off risk difference between Thai cancer and non-cancer, p= 0.03 and p <
0.001, respectively.Conclusion: The IL-8 mRNA expression level and
pepsinogen I/II ratio reflect individualized ethnic host stomach mucosal
defense difference and cancer inflammation in Thai gastric cancer.
H.pylori is at risk for gastric cancer but there is negative cagA gene in
this population. Gastric mucosal IL-8 mRNA expression may be a useful
marker for poorly differentiated type gastric cancer treatment in near by
future.

