Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone H3.3 mutations drive paediatric glioblastoma through
upregulation of MYCN.


Glioblastomas of children and young adults (pGBM) have a median survival
of only 12-15 months and are clinically and biologically distinct from
histologically similar cancers in older adults. They are defined by
highly specific mutations in the gene encoding the histone H3.3 variant
H3F3A, occurring either at or close to key residues marked by methylation
for regulation of transcription - K27 and G34. The G34 mutation is
specific to tumours of the cerebral hemispheres and is associated with a
distinct age of incidence (16 yrs) and gene expression signature compared
to K27 and wild-type tumours. ChIP-Seq for the activating K36
trimethylation mark (H3K36me3) mark of G34V mutant KNS42 pGBM cells
identified 156 genes differentially bound and expressed compared to
wild-type pGBM control. The transcriptional program induced recapitulates
that of the developing forebrain, and involves numerous markers of stem
cell maintenance, cell fate decisions and self-renewal. Critically, H3F3A
G34 mutations cause profound upregulation of MYCN, a potent oncogene
which is causative of glioblastomas when expressed in the correct
developmental context. A synthetic lethality siRNA screen revealed this
driving aberration to be selectively targetable in this patient
population by inhibiting kinases responsible for stabilisation of the
protein such as AURKA and CHK1. We thus provide the mechanistic
explanation for how the first histone gene mutation in human disease
biology acts to deliver MYCN, a potent tumorigenic initiator, into a stem
cell compartment of the developing forebrain, selectively giving rise to
incurable cerebral hemispheric glioblastoma. Employing synthetic lethal
approaches to these mutant tumour cells provides a rational way to
develop novel and highly selective treatment strategies.Citation Format:
Lynn Bjerke, Alan Mackay, Meera Nandhabalan, Anna Burford, Alexa Jury,
Sergey Popov, Dorine Bax, Diana Carvalho, Katy Taylor, Mara Vinci,
Illirjana Bajrami, Imelda McGonnell, Chris Lord, Rui Reis, Darren
Hargrave, Alan Ashworth, Paul Workman, Chris Jones. Histone H3.3
mutations drive paediatric glioblastoma through upregulation of MYCN.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2962.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2962

