Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX2 contributes towards invasive phenotype of serous ovarian
cancer by up-regulating MMP2.


SOX2 encodes a member of the SRY-related HMG-box (SOX) family of
transcription factors involved in the regulation of embryonic development
and in the determination of cell fate. SOX2 maps to 3q26.33, a region
frequently amplified in HGSOvCa as reported in the TCGA and other large
array-based CGH studies. However, the role of SOX2 in HGSOvCa oncogenesis
and progression has not been studied yet. Given the importance of SOX2 in
maintenance of stem cell phenotype and its overexpression in solid
tumors, we sought to define the role of SOX2 in HGSOvCa.In order to
establish a direct role for SOX2 in vivo, we conducted DNA copy number
analysis and qRT-PCR analysis in two independent panels of primary
HGSOvCa and 25 serous OVCA lines. We overexpressed SOX2 in T29, OVCA433,
A2780, SKOV3 and OVCAR5 cells and/or knockdown SOX2 in UCI101 and OV90
cells. Ectopic expression of SOX2 resulted in decreased cell
proliferation, soft agar colony formation, in vivo tumorigenicity but
higher degree of invasion relative to cells with empty vectors. SOX2
overexpression increased MMP2 activity as determined by gelatin
zymography. We also performed mRNA profiling to identify SOX2 target
genes. SOX2 knockdown cells decreased migration,andinvasion but increased
tumorigenicity. Differentially expressed genes in cells overexpressing
SOX2 will be presented. Increased SOX2 expression in HGSOvCa appears to
produce a more invasive yet quiestant cell. Overexpression of SOX2 may
induce a stem-like transcriptional program in HGSOvCa. Thus, identifying
SOX2 target genes may offer new insight into the understanding of ovarian
cancer biology.

