Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic characterization of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in
triple negative breast cancer patients.


Triple negative (ER-negative, PR-negative, HER2-negative) considered as
poor prognosis breast cancer patients without many therapeutic options.
Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) have been proposed as a real time liquid
biopsy in breast cancer patients. CTCs are associated with disease
relapse and could serve as a target for molecular cancer therapies. The
aim of the present study was the phenotypic characterization of CTCs in
triple negative patients to explore new therapeutic strategies for these
patients. We evaluated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
cytospins from 29 triple negative patients, before the initiation of
adjuvant (19 early) and front-line (10 metastatic) treatment. The
expression of Cytokeratins (CK) (marker for CTCs), Estrogen Receptor
(ER), Progesterone Receptor (PR), EGFR and HER2 in CTCs was assessed
using double immunofluorescent experiments. Our results revealed that
median expression per patient for ER, PR, EGFR and HER2 was 16.7%, 0%,
42.9% and 91.4%. The respective numbers for early versus (vs) metastatic
patients were 29.7% vs 0% for ER, 27.1% vs 0% for PR, 70.8% vs 52.3% for
EGFR and 50% vs 48.7% for HER2. In addition ER, PR, EGFR and HER2 were
expressed in 33.1%, 28%, 67.7% and 45.1%, respectively, of the total
examined CTCs. Triple staining experiments with the Ariol system could
not revealed any no co-expression of CK/EGFR/ER in CTCs; however, there
was only one patient with CTCs co-expressing CK/HER2/ER.Consequently in
order to identify whether chemotherapy could induce phenotypic changes of
CTCs, 18 patients were analyzed after the completion of adjuvant
treatment. ER, PR, EGFR and HER2 median expression per patients was
identified in 0.2%, 15.2%, 66.7%, and 50% suggesting that adjuvant
chemotherapy does not significantly influence the phenotype of CTCs in
triple negative patients.The majority of CTCs in triple negative patients
revealed expression of HER2 and EGFR implying that these receptors could
be a potential target for the limitation of metastasis in these patients.

