Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of transcript levels of members of the urokinase-type
plasminogen activator system with clinico-pathological parameters in
prostate cancer .


Background: Members of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA)
system play an important role in tumor progression and angiogenesis in
different human malignancies including breast, kidney, colon, stomach and
prostate cancer (PCa). Aim of the study was to characterize mRNA
expression levels of members of the uPA system in tissue specimens from
primary PCa and their potential association with clinico-pathological
parameters.Methods: Transcript levels of members of the uPA system, i.e.,
uPA, uPA receptor (uPAR) and plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1
(PAI1) were analyzed in a cohort of 132 corresponding pairs of malignant
and adjacent non-malignant prostate tissue samples. Relative gene
expression levels were determined by quantitative PCR (qPCR) and
normalized to the reference gene TATA-box-binding protein (TBP).
Potential correlations between the three markers themselves and the
clinico-pathological parameters were assessed by Spearman's Rho test and
by Fisher's exact test.Results: There were no significant differences in
expression levels of uPA system genes between the corresponding malignant
and non-malignant tissue specimens. Transcript levels of all members of
the uPA system displayed a significant correlation with each other in the
tumor tissues. At stratifying uPA, uPAR and PAI-1 expression levels by
the median a significant correlation between an elevated expression of
uPA and PAI-1 was correlated with higher Gleason score (P = 0.001 and P =
0.007). In addition, a significant positive correlation between uPAR
transcript levels and tumor stage was detected (P = 0.025).Conclusion:
Our results demonstrate that mRNA expression levels of members of the uPA
system correlated with each other and with clinico-pathological
parameters. We suggest that transcript levels of uPA system members can
be helpful markers for the study of tumor behavior of prostate cancer.

