Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COX-2 inhibition with celecoxib delays the progression of invasive
mammary carcinoma in a murine model of collagen dense stroma.


Breast cancer is the most common invasive cancer in women causing over
40,000 deaths yearly in the United States. Increased mammographic density
correlates with over four-fold greater risk for breast cancer, making it
one of the most important risk factors known for this disease. High
breast density is correlated to increased collagen in the breast tissue,
and we have found that increased collagen in the Col1a1tm1jae mouse model
promotes mammary tumor formation and progression. Elevated collagen
density in vitro increases expression of PTGS2
(prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2), the gene for COX-2, by over four
fold. COX-2 over-expression is observed in 40% of invasive breast
carcinoma cases and correlates with poor prognosis. Based on these
findings, we hypothesized that inhibition of COX-2 may be an effective
therapy in the context of mammary tumors arising in dense tissue.
Celecoxib is a selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
that specifically inhibits COX-2. To understand the mechanism by which
COX-2 affects cell signaling and response to collagen matrix density, we
utilized our previously characterized model of MMTV-PyVT tumors on a wild
type (wt) or Col1a1tm1jae background. Col1a1tm1jae heterozygote and wt
littermates were randomly assigned at 11 weeks of age to treatment with
placebo or celecoxib at 400mg per kilogram body weight. Oral treatment
was given daily for 21 days. We found that MMTV-PyVT tumors responded to
celecoxib in a manner that is regulated by matrix density (p-value Breast
cancer is the most common invasive cancer in women causing over 40,000
deaths yearly in the United States. Increased mammographic density
correlates with over four-fold greater risk for breast cancer, making it
one of the most important risk factors known for this disease. High
breast density is correlated to increased collagen in the breast tissue,
and we have found that increased collagen in the Col1a1tm1jae mouse model
promotes mammary tumor formation and progression. Elevated collagen
density in vitro increases expression of PTGS2
(prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2), the gene for COX-2, by over four
fold. COX-2 over-expression is observed in 40% of invasive breast
carcinoma cases and correlates with poor prognosis. Based on these
findings, we hypothesized that inhibition of COX-2 may be an effective
therapy in the context of mammary tumors arising in dense tissue.
Celecoxib is a selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
that specifically inhibits COX-2. To understand the mechanism by which
COX-2 affects cell signaling and response to collagen matrix density, we
utilized our previously characterized model of MMTV-PyVT tumors on a wild
type (wt) or Col1a1tm1jae background. Col1a1tm1jae heterozygote and wt
littermates were randomly assigned at 11 weeks of age to treatment with
placebo or celecoxib at 400mg per kilogram body weight. Oral treatment
was given daily for 21 days. We found that MMTV-PyVT tumors responded to
celecoxib in a manner that is regulated by matrix density (p-value
<.0001). Tumors that arose on the dense Col1a1tm1jae background were
larger and more invasive (p-value Breast cancer is the most common
invasive cancer in women causing over 40,000 deaths yearly in the United
States. Increased mammographic density correlates with over four-fold
greater risk for breast cancer, making it one of the most important risk
factors known for this disease. High breast density is correlated to
increased collagen in the breast tissue, and we have found that increased
collagen in the Col1a1tm1jae mouse model promotes mammary tumor formation
and progression. Elevated collagen density in vitro increases expression
of PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2), the gene for COX-2, by
over four fold. COX-2 over-expression is observed in 40% of invasive
breast carcinoma cases and correlates with poor prognosis. Based on these
findings, we hypothesized that inhibition of COX-2 may be an effective
therapy in the context of mammary tumors arising in dense tissue.
Celecoxib is a selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
that specifically inhibits COX-2. To understand the mechanism by which
COX-2 affects cell signaling and response to collagen matrix density, we
utilized our previously characterized model of MMTV-PyVT tumors on a wild
type (wt) or Col1a1tm1jae background. Col1a1tm1jae heterozygote and wt
littermates were randomly assigned at 11 weeks of age to treatment with
placebo or celecoxib at 400mg per kilogram body weight. Oral treatment
was given daily for 21 days. We found that MMTV-PyVT tumors responded to
celecoxib in a manner that is regulated by matrix density (p-value
<.0001). Tumors that arose on the dense Col1a1tm1jae background were
larger and more invasive (p-value <.0001). Endpoint tumor size was
diminished in mice treated with a daily dose of celecoxib, which delayed
the development of tumors and changed the structure of the dense matrix.
The effect of celecoxib was not as prominent for masses which developed
on the low density wt background. Immunohistochemistry of relevant
markers in these tissues is ongoing and will further our understanding of
the effects of COX-2 inhibition in dense matrices. These findings suggest
that COX-2 has a direct role in modulating the configuration of dense
matrices which promote a more invasive cancer effect. Moreover, these
findings suggest that COX-2 may be an effective therapeutic target for
women with dense breast tissue.

