Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Emerging role of Smad7 in DNA damage response pathway as a
positive regulator.


The cellular response to DNA damage is essential in maintaining genomic
stability. As DNA damage accumulates, the occurrence rate of cancer is
significantly enhanced. Smad7 is known as an inhibitory Smad which
negatively regulates TGF--induced signaling pathway. Smad7 is
predominantly localized in the nucleus even without TGF- stimulation.
However, TGF--independent Smad7 function in the nucleus is still not
clear. Here, we report Smad7 regulates DNA damage signaling in response
to double-strand break induced by radiomimetic drug, neocarzinostatin
(NCS). Smad7 overexpression accelerates DNA repair by enhancing
phosphorylation of ATM and H2AX, major DNA damage response signaling,
after DNA damage. In Smad7/ MEF cell, loss of Smad7 leads to failure of
ATM phosphorylation and nuclear foci formation at the site of DNA damage
upon NCS treatment. We show that Smad7 interacts with activated ATM/MRN
complex and this interaction is significantly increased after DNA damage.
Additionally, Smad7 co-localizes with pATM, MRN complex and H2AX at the
sites of DNA damage. Taken together, our data suggests that Smad7 plays a
critical role in DNA damage response pathway through interaction with
activated ATM. In this study, we reveal the de novo function of Smad7 in
the nucleus.

