Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The T-box transcription factor Brachyury blocks cell cycle
progression and mediates tumor resistance to chemotherapy and radiation.


The T-box transcription factor Brachyury, a molecule frequently detected
in human cancers but seldom found in normal adult tissue, has recently
been proposed as a significant determinant of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in human carcinomas. In the current investigation, we
present data demonstrating that in three different human lung carcinoma
models, expression of Brachyury is associated with a mesenchymal
phenotype. Additionally, elevated Brachyury expression is shown to
strongly correlate with increased in vitro resistance to cytotoxic
therapies, such as chemotherapy and radiation. Further investigation
showed that chemotherapy treatment in vitro selected tumor cells that
were high in Brachyury, and that the degree of resistance to therapy was
comparable to the level of Brachyury expression. We also demonstrate that
in vitro and in vivo, human lung carcinoma cells with greater levels of
Brachyury divide at slower rates than those with lower levels of
Brachyury, a phenomenon associated with marked downregulation of cyclin
D1, phosphorylated Rb (pRb), and CDKN1A (p21). ChIP and luciferase
resporter assays revealed that Brachyury represses p21 expression in
carcinoma cells by directly binding to a half T-box consensus site
located within the promoter region of the p21 gene, indicating a
potential mechanism for the observed therapy resistance associated with
Brachyury expression. Finally, we observed that in vivo treatment of
tumor xenografts with chemotherapy resulted in the selective growth of
resistant tumors that were high in Brachyury. Altogether, these results
suggest that in addition to being a driver of EMT, Brachyury expression
may attenuate cell cycle progression, and enable tumor cells to become
less susceptible to chemotherapy and radiation in human carcinomas.

