Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the prognostic value of miRNA-181b and its target
identification and validation in colorectal cancers.


Background: microRNAs (miRNAs) are 19 to 24 nucleotide sequences that
regulate cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. miRNA-181b
is involved in tumor initiation and progression of several human
malignancies including colorectal cancers (CRCs). Thus, we sought to
determine the prognostic value of miRNA-181b in CRCs.Methods: Expression
of miRNA-181b was quantified, by quantitative PCR (q-RT-PCR), in normal
(benign colonic epithelia) tissues and in their corresponding CRC
archival tissue samples collected from 345 patients. The expression
levels were correlated with patient overall survival. Putative molecular
targets of miRNA-181b were identified by in silico analysis. miRNA-181b
mediated, post-transcriptional regulation of these targets was assessed
in CRC cell lines (SW480, HCT116 p53-/- and HCT116 +/+) by transfection
studies. The targets were validated by measuring their mRNA expression
levels, by use of qRT-PCR, in CRC tissues that exhibited elevated levels
of miRNA-181b as well as by cloning techniques to assess a direct
interaction between miRNA-181b and 3UTRs of its target genes using
luciferase assays.Results: Survival analysis indicated that increased
expression of miRNA-181b was associated with poor prognosis for CRCs (log
rank, p=0.004). Fourteen putative molecular targets of miRNA-181b were
identified by in silico analysis, and miRNA-181b mediated
post-transcriptional regulation of these targets was validated in CRC
cell lines by q-RT-PCR. Integrin alpha-3 was up-regulated, and BCL2LII
and TNF were down-regulated upon overexpression of miRNA-181b in vitro.
Also, these targets were validated in CRC tissues that exhibited elevated
miRNA-181b levels. The direct interaction of miRNA-181b with the target
gene 3UTRs was validated with luciferase assays.Conclusions: These
findings demonstrate that miRNA-181b regulates expression of Integrin
alpha-3, BCL2LII, and TNF; and is a prognostic marker for colorectal
cancers.

