Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NAD+ Kinase inhibition synergizes with ROS-inducing chemotherapies.


Background: NAD+ kinase (NADK) is at present the only known enzyme that
converts NAD+ to NADP+, which is subsequently reduced to NADPH. The
demand for NADPH in cancer cells is elevated as reducing equivalents are
required for the high levels of nucleotide, protein and fatty acid
synthesis found in proliferating cells, as well as for neutralizing high
levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) present in these cells. The aim
of this study was to determine whether inhibitors of NADK synergize with
chemotherapeutic drugs known to induce ROS.Methods: Using a NADK
inhibitor our group previously identified, thionicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPS), (Mol Pharmacol., in press), we explored
combinations of NADPS with various classes of drugs known to induce ROS:
tubulin inhibitors (docetaxel, paclitaxel, vinblastine), a nucleoside
analog (gemcitabine), topoisomerase I and II inhibitors (irinotecan and
doxorubicin, respectively), and a DNA crosslinking agent (cisplatin).
Fixed ratios of NADPS and the combination drug based on their EC50 values
were tested in a colon cancer cell line (C85) using a MTS assay. The
combination index (CI) was determined by the Chou-Talalay method for drug
combination based on the median effect analysis.Results: All drugs were
found to synergize with NADPS. Knockdown of NADK with siRNA or inhibition
of NADK by NADPS in combination with MTX revealed equivalent efficacy.
Quantification of intracellular NADPH and ROS levels are currently
underway.Conclusions: NADK inhibitors along with drugs that increase ROS-
mediated stress may represent an efficacious antitumor combination and
should be explored further against in vivo tumor models.

