Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pleiotropic tumor suppressor role of microRNA-34b in prostate
cancer.


CpG island hypermethylation is one of the most common causes of the loss
of tumor-suppressor microRNAs (miRNA) in cancers. Here we show that
miR-34b is silenced in human prostate cancer (PCa) and the mechanism is
through CpG hypermethylation. We provide evidence that miR-34b directly
targets methyltransferases (DNMT) and deacetylases (HDACs). We show that
miR-34b expression could predict overall survival and recurrence free
survival such that patients with high miR-34b levels had longer survival.
Further we elucidate the tumor suppressor role of miR-34b using both in
vitro and in vivo models. Functionally miR-34b inhibits cell
proliferation, colony formation, migration/invasion and triggers G0/G1
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in cancer cells. The mechanism is partly
through the down regulation of AKT pathway as miR-34b directly targets
AKT and causes depletion of its downstream genes. Our results show that
over-expression of miR-34b caused a decline in the mesenchymal markers
Vimentin, ZO1, N-cadherin and Snail whereas there was an increase in
E-cadherin expression. Finally we demonstrated the antitumor effect of
miR-34b in vivo. MiR-34b caused a dramatic decrease in tumor growth in
nude mice compared to cont-miR. These findings offer new insight into the
role of miR-34b in the inhibition of prostate cancer through
demethylation, active chromatin modification and AKT pathways and may
provide a rationale for the development of new strategies targeting
epigenetic regulation of miRNAs for the treatment of prostate cancer.

