Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 12-Lipoxygenase regulation of prostate cancer progression.


The underlying mechanism by which elevated omega-6 fatty acids, like
arachidonic acid, lead to increased prostate cancer (PCa) risk is
unclear. However, it is known that the 12-Lipoxygenase (12-LOX) enzyme
that metabolizes arachidonic acid, as well as the 12(S)-HETE metabolic
end product together with its cognate receptor, 12-HETER1, are strongly
associated with PCa. 12(S)-HETE affects many cancer phenotypes including
cell migration and metastasis. It causes the disassembly of complex
cellular anchors to the substrata called hemidesmosomes that are
comprised of numerous proteins, including ITGB4, which we identified as
an interacting partner of 12-LOX. ITGB4 also physically interacts with
c-Met at the cell membrane in multiple cell lines, in a cell line and
stimulus-specific manner. PCa metastases have increased levels of both
12-LOX and c-Met. Therefore we sought to determine if ITGB4, c-MET and
12-LOX comprise a signaling axis. Our findings revealed that
HGF-c-Met-induced invasion could be attenuated by enzymatic inhibitors of
12LOX, but that addition of exogenous 12(S)-HETE could not overcome the
block. Furthermore, the physical interaction between 4 and c-Met remained
unaffected by enzymatic inhibitors in PCa cells. Likewise, LC-MS
analyses, showed that HGF stimulation did not lead to increased
12(S)-HETE production, and knockdown of 12-HETER1, by shRNA had no effect
on HGF-induced invasion. Therefore, we hypothesize that 12LOX has dual
functions whereby its enzymatic activity leads to hemidesmosome
dissociation and cell release from the substrata, and its capacity to
modulate c-MET/ITGB4 signaling may be attributed to a scaffolding
function.

