Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of qNPA vs qPCR on FFPE tissue.


Accurate, sensitive and robust multiplexed measurements of gene
expression from formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue or
paraformaldehyde fixed samples are ideally required for clinical
diagnostic tests and retrospective analysis of archived samples. We
evaluated the measurement of gene expression from FFPE tissues using HTG
Molecular's qNPA assay and made comparisons to qPCR. The results show
that qNPA provides a highly sensitive, accurate, quantitative, and
robustly reliable automated multiplexed assay of gene expression from
FFPE, permitting the rapid development and launch of new diagnostic and
research assays. qNPA uses a lysis-only, extraction-free protocol which
measures up to 47 genes/sample. In contrast, qPCR requires RNA
extraction/reverse transcription. Accuracy was determined by correlating
measurements from matched frozen and fixed samples, determining the R2
correlation coefficient. Comparing frozen/FFPE cell pellets qNPA R2 =
0.97. Comparing frozen/FFPE pancreas tissue qNPA R2= 0.97 with a present
call rate of 91%, compared to qPCR R2= 0.86 and a present call rate of
just 17%, even using 26 times more FFPE sample amount than qNPA.
Comparing fresh/paraformaldehyde fixed Islet cells, qNPA R2= 0.98, qPCR
R2= 0.02, after staining for sorting by cytometry qNPA R2= 0.96, qPCR R2=
0.12. Thus, qNPA fixed tissue measurements were much more accurate than
qPCR. In an additional comparison using matched breast cancer frozen
compared with FFPE samples, qNPA measurements averaged R2=0.81, with 6%
CV for triplicate measurements of separately processed samples. For >95%
of genes the expression levels measured by qNPA were independent of cold
ischemic times of 0 to 16 hr. Measured levels are also independent of
fixation from 4 to 72 hr. The robust performance of qNPA measurements
from FFPE translated into quantitative consistency that has previously
not been achievable using qPCR. Data from clinical FFPE samples submitted
by a large number of HTG's clients was reviewed and for each set the
number of samples tested, the average area tested/sample (cm2 area of a 5
micron thick section), the failure rate (FR), and the avg reproducibility
(%CV for samples independently processed in triplicate) was determined
for breast FFPE (300 samples, 0.3 cm2/sample, 1% FR, 10.5%CV), lung FFPE
(700 samples, 0.3 cm2/sample, 0.5% FR, 9.5%CV), prostate FFPE (15
samples, 0.3 cm2/sample, 0% FR, 11%CV), colon FFPE (15 samples, 0.3
cm2/sample, 0% FR, 9%CV), ovary FFPE (15 samples, 0.3 cm2/sample, 0% FR,
10%CV) and lymphoma FFPE (300 samples, 0.3 cm2/sample, 0.5% FR, 8%CV).
Thus, qNPA provides a highly accurate, reproducible, robust multiplexed
measurement of gene expression from FFPE tissue that is not affected by
wide variations in ischemic or fixation time. Fully automated qNPA on the
EDGE platform is expected in Jan 2013. This system, with a turn-around
time of less than 24 hours, will improve even further the robustness of
extraction-free gene expression.

