Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined analysis of Aldh1, Survivin and EpCAM expression,
representing important hallmarks of cancer, predicts clinical prognosis
in colorectal cancer.


Background: Current treatment of colorectal cancer patients is solely
based on TNM stage. Biomarkers to further refine this staging system are
warranted. Tumor aggressiveness might be related to the number of cancer
hallmarks possessed by a tumor. Expression level of a specific biomarker
may represent gain of those cancer hallmarks represented by this marker.
Combining such biomarkers might add to needed discriminative value and
biological- and clinical significance. We therefore investigated combined
expression of Aldh1, Survivin and EpCAM, which together reflect the main
cancer hallmarks, in relation to clinical outcome of colorectal cancer
patients.Methods: Immunohistochemistry was performed using a tumor tissue
micro array of colorectal cancer patients (N=410). Percentage of cells
positive for individual markers was scored. Patients were divided into
groups based on median expression. Individual markers and their
combination were assessed for associations with overall survival, disease
specific survival and recurrence free survival. Complete covariate- and
marker expression data were available for 249 patients (study cohort) for
uni- and multivariate survival analysis, performed with automated
stepwise backward Cox regression.Results: In single marker analyses,
increased expression of Aldh1 and Survivin, and decreased expression of
EpCAM was associated with poor clinical outcome in colorectal cancer, and
designated clinically unfavorable marker expression. Based on these
results, the three biomarkers were combined into four groups (groups 0,
I, II and III). Group number represented the number of markers that
showed unfavorable expression in the tumor. Reference group 0 contained
patients with favorable marker expression for all markers. Group I, group
II and group III contained patients with unfavorable marker expression of
respectively one, two or three of the markers. No correlation with
clinicopathological parameters was found. Combined expression of all
three markers (Group I / Group II / Group III, compared to Group 0) was
shown to be a strong independent prognostic factor of tumor recurrence
rates and patient survival in the multivariate analyses: overall survival
(HR= 1.33 / 2.05 / 5.39, PBackground: Current treatment of colorectal
cancer patients is solely based on TNM stage. Biomarkers to further
refine this staging system are warranted. Tumor aggressiveness might be
related to the number of cancer hallmarks possessed by a tumor.
Expression level of a specific biomarker may represent gain of those
cancer hallmarks represented by this marker. Combining such biomarkers
might add to needed discriminative value and biological- and clinical
significance. We therefore investigated combined expression of Aldh1,
Survivin and EpCAM, which together reflect the main cancer hallmarks, in
relation to clinical outcome of colorectal cancer patients.Methods:
Immunohistochemistry was performed using a tumor tissue micro array of
colorectal cancer patients (N=410). Percentage of cells positive for
individual markers was scored. Patients were divided into groups based on
median expression. Individual markers and their combination were assessed
for associations with overall survival, disease specific survival and
recurrence free survival. Complete covariate- and marker expression data
were available for 249 patients (study cohort) for uni- and multivariate
survival analysis, performed with automated stepwise backward Cox
regression.Results: In single marker analyses, increased expression of
Aldh1 and Survivin, and decreased expression of EpCAM was associated with
poor clinical outcome in colorectal cancer, and designated clinically
unfavorable marker expression. Based on these results, the three
biomarkers were combined into four groups (groups 0, I, II and III).
Group number represented the number of markers that showed unfavorable
expression in the tumor. Reference group 0 contained patients with
favorable marker expression for all markers. Group I, group II and group
III contained patients with unfavorable marker expression of respectively
one, two or three of the markers. No correlation with clinicopathological
parameters was found. Combined expression of all three markers (Group I /
Group II / Group III, compared to Group 0) was shown to be a strong
independent prognostic factor of tumor recurrence rates and patient
survival in the multivariate analyses: overall survival (HR= 1.33 / 2.05
/ 5.39, P< 0.001), disease specific survival (HR= 2.39 / 4.54 / 12.18,
PBackground: Current treatment of colorectal cancer patients is solely
based on TNM stage. Biomarkers to further refine this staging system are
warranted. Tumor aggressiveness might be related to the number of cancer
hallmarks possessed by a tumor. Expression level of a specific biomarker
may represent gain of those cancer hallmarks represented by this marker.
Combining such biomarkers might add to needed discriminative value and
biological- and clinical significance. We therefore investigated combined
expression of Aldh1, Survivin and EpCAM, which together reflect the main
cancer hallmarks, in relation to clinical outcome of colorectal cancer
patients.Methods: Immunohistochemistry was performed using a tumor tissue
micro array of colorectal cancer patients (N=410). Percentage of cells
positive for individual markers was scored. Patients were divided into
groups based on median expression. Individual markers and their
combination were assessed for associations with overall survival, disease
specific survival and recurrence free survival. Complete covariate- and
marker expression data were available for 249 patients (study cohort) for
uni- and multivariate survival analysis, performed with automated
stepwise backward Cox regression.Results: In single marker analyses,
increased expression of Aldh1 and Survivin, and decreased expression of
EpCAM was associated with poor clinical outcome in colorectal cancer, and
designated clinically unfavorable marker expression. Based on these
results, the three biomarkers were combined into four groups (groups 0,
I, II and III). Group number represented the number of markers that
showed unfavorable expression in the tumor. Reference group 0 contained
patients with favorable marker expression for all markers. Group I, group
II and group III contained patients with unfavorable marker expression of
respectively one, two or three of the markers. No correlation with
clinicopathological parameters was found. Combined expression of all
three markers (Group I / Group II / Group III, compared to Group 0) was
shown to be a strong independent prognostic factor of tumor recurrence
rates and patient survival in the multivariate analyses: overall survival
(HR= 1.33 / 2.05 / 5.39, P< 0.001), disease specific survival (HR= 2.39 /
4.54 / 12.18, P< 0.001) and recurrence free survival (HR= 2.35 / 5.18 /
12.90, PBackground: Current treatment of colorectal cancer patients is
solely based on TNM stage. Biomarkers to further refine this staging
system are warranted. Tumor aggressiveness might be related to the number
of cancer hallmarks possessed by a tumor. Expression level of a specific
biomarker may represent gain of those cancer hallmarks represented by
this marker. Combining such biomarkers might add to needed discriminative
value and biological- and clinical significance. We therefore
investigated combined expression of Aldh1, Survivin and EpCAM, which
together reflect the main cancer hallmarks, in relation to clinical
outcome of colorectal cancer patients.Methods: Immunohistochemistry was
performed using a tumor tissue micro array of colorectal cancer patients
(N=410). Percentage of cells positive for individual markers was scored.
Patients were divided into groups based on median expression. Individual
markers and their combination were assessed for associations with overall
survival, disease specific survival and recurrence free survival.
Complete covariate- and marker expression data were available for 249
patients (study cohort) for uni- and multivariate survival analysis,
performed with automated stepwise backward Cox regression.Results: In
single marker analyses, increased expression of Aldh1 and Survivin, and
decreased expression of EpCAM was associated with poor clinical outcome
in colorectal cancer, and designated clinically unfavorable marker
expression. Based on these results, the three biomarkers were combined
into four groups (groups 0, I, II and III). Group number represented the
number of markers that showed unfavorable expression in the tumor.
Reference group 0 contained patients with favorable marker expression for
all markers. Group I, group II and group III contained patients with
unfavorable marker expression of respectively one, two or three of the
markers. No correlation with clinicopathological parameters was found.
Combined expression of all three markers (Group I / Group II / Group III,
compared to Group 0) was shown to be a strong independent prognostic
factor of tumor recurrence rates and patient survival in the multivariate
analyses: overall survival (HR= 1.33 / 2.05 / 5.39, P< 0.001), disease
specific survival (HR= 2.39 / 4.54 / 12.18, P< 0.001) and recurrence free
survival (HR= 2.35 / 5.18 / 12.90, P< 0.001). Increase in group number
was associated with higher hazard ratios, indicating that gain of cancer
hallmarks was associated with more aggressive tumors.Discussion: Our data
demonstrated that combined expression level of Aldh1, Survivin and EpCAM,
together representing the main cancer hallmarks, reflected tumor
aggressiveness and hence predicted survival and recurrence in colorectal
cancer patients. Including the analysis of these biomarkers may therefore
complement the current TNM staging system.

