Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deletion of Np63 and Np73 in p53 deficient mice results in TAp63
and TAp73 compensation of p53 tumor suppression in vivo.


p53 tumor suppressor undergoes mutational loss in majority of cancers
contributing to tumor formation. Therapeutic strategies are aimed towards
p53 overexpression in tumors or to identify targets that compensate for
p53-functional loss. p63 & p73, share structural similarities to p53,
making them excellent candidates for therapeutic compensation of p53.
Unlike p53, p63 and p73 do not undergo mutational loss and their role in
tumorigenesis is being delineated. p63 and p73 have two major isoforms,
the transactivation (TA), with activities similar to p53 and the delta
()N- isoform with oncogenic functions. Inhibition of TAp63 and TAp73 is
observed in cancers as a consequence of overexpression of N isoforms of
p63 and p73. In disparity, recent studies report, tumor suppressive
properties of Np63 and Np73 in activating genes involved in DNA repair
and apoptosis.To define the functional roles of Np63 and Np73 in cancer,
mouse models targeting the N isoforms were generated. We observed that,
Np63+/- and Np73/ mice on a p53/ background had lower thymic lymphoma
incidence compared to the p53/ mice. I found TAp63 and TAp73 up regulated
in the double mutant mice that correspond with an increase in
p53-downstream apoptotic (PUMA, Noxa, BAX) and cell cycle targets (p21,
p16, PML). This suggests that ablation of N isoforms mediate TAp63 and
TAp73 up regulation inducing apoptosis or cell cycle arrest by activation
of p53-downstream targets. To further demonstrate this, I ablated Np63
and Np73 in vivo in p53/- mice thymic lymphoma by administering
adenoviral-CRE specifically to the thymus. The CRE-treated mice had a
significant thymic lymphoma regression within 3 weeks as imaged by MRI in
comparison to the mock-treated mouse cohorts. Additionally, RNA-Seq
analysis from CRE-treated versus untreated mice, has identified novel
metabolic genes with apoptotic or cell-cycle functions. We further
report, Np63 and Np73 to bind to promoter site of TAp63 and TAp73 by
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). This supports the notion that
ablation of N isoforms of p63 and p73 restores the function of TAp63 and
TAp73 thus compensating for p53-tumor suppressive function in vivo. To
test, if ablation of N isoforms reduces tumorigenesis in human cancers,
Np63 and Np73 were knocked down in human cancer cell lines were p53
expression was ablated or mutated. TAp63 and TAp73 were upregulated in
Np63/Np73 knock down human cancer cell lines. However, induction of
apoptosis or cell-cycle arrest was observed in p53-deleted cancer cell
lines in comparison to the p53-mutated cell lines. This highlights the
co-repressive effect of mutant p53, preventing activation of TAp63/TAp73
downstream targets. Current work is aimed towards overcoming mutant p53
effect in these cancer cell lines. Thus, targeting the Np63/Np73
compensates for p53-functional loss mediating tumor suppression.

