Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of choline phospholipid metabolism in pancreatic
cancer cells.


Pancreatic cancer has a current 5-year survival rate of less than 3%,
accounting for the fourth largest number of cancer deaths in the US. Poor
prognosis is, in part, due to its diagnosis at late stages and to limited
response to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Currently, there are no
noninvasive markers available for early diagnosis. The development of
novel therapeutic strategies is also critically important. 1H magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is being evaluated in the diagnosis of other
solid malignancies such as brain, prostate and breast cancer, and for
monitoring therapy in brain cancer. 1H MR spectra of these tumors show
elevated total choline (tCho) due to increased phosphocholine (PC). This
increase in PC has been attributed to high expression of the choline
kinase (Chk)- gene. Here, for the first time, we have used 1H MRS to
characterize choline phospholipid metabolism in a panel of pancreatic
adenocarcinomas cell lines. Eight pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines
and one immortalized pancreatic cell line were used to obtain water
soluble cell extracts for high resolution 1H MRS and cell lysates were
used for immunoblotting. Human Pancreatic Nestin Expressing (HPNE) cells,
stably expressing human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT),
hTERT-HPNE cells were used as pancreatic immortalized cells. hTERT-HPNE,
Panc-1 and BxPC-3 cells were obtained from ATCC. All other cell lines
were obtained from the Johns Hopkins pancreatic xenobank and were derived
from pancreatic cancer patients. Panc-1, BxPC-3, Pa09C, Pa28C, Pa20C cell
lines were derived from primary adenocarcinomas. While Pa02C and Pa03C
were derived from liver metastasis of adenocarcinoma, Pa04C was obtained
from lung metastasis of adenocarcinoma. For immunoblots studies, 60 g
whole-cell extracts protein was resolved on SDS-PAGE to detect Chk- using
a custom-made Chk antibody. Water-soluble cell extracts from
approximately 1.5x107 cells made using dual-phase extraction were used to
acquire proton spectra at a 500 MHz Bruker spectrometer for metabolite
quantitation.Immunoblots from various pancreatic cell lines showed
different level of Chk- overexpression with very low expression in Pa04C,
Pa28C and undetectable level in hTERT-HPNE cells. Quantitative data for
choline containing metabolites obtained from water soluble cell extracts
showed elevated PC and tCho in all adenocarcinomas relative to the
immortalized pancreatic cells (pPancreatic cancer has a current 5-year
survival rate of less than 3%, accounting for the fourth largest number
of cancer deaths in the US. Poor prognosis is, in part, due to its
diagnosis at late stages and to limited response to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. Currently, there are no noninvasive markers available for
early diagnosis. The development of novel therapeutic strategies is also
critically important. 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is being
evaluated in the diagnosis of other solid malignancies such as brain,
prostate and breast cancer, and for monitoring therapy in brain cancer.
1H MR spectra of these tumors show elevated total choline (tCho) due to
increased phosphocholine (PC). This increase in PC has been attributed to
high expression of the choline kinase (Chk)- gene. Here, for the first
time, we have used 1H MRS to characterize choline phospholipid metabolism
in a panel of pancreatic adenocarcinomas cell lines. Eight pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell lines and one immortalized pancreatic cell line were
used to obtain water soluble cell extracts for high resolution 1H MRS and
cell lysates were used for immunoblotting. Human Pancreatic Nestin
Expressing (HPNE) cells, stably expressing human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT), hTERT-HPNE cells were used as pancreatic
immortalized cells. hTERT-HPNE, Panc-1 and BxPC-3 cells were obtained
from ATCC. All other cell lines were obtained from the Johns Hopkins
pancreatic xenobank and were derived from pancreatic cancer patients.
Panc-1, BxPC-3, Pa09C, Pa28C, Pa20C cell lines were derived from primary
adenocarcinomas. While Pa02C and Pa03C were derived from liver metastasis
of adenocarcinoma, Pa04C was obtained from lung metastasis of
adenocarcinoma. For immunoblots studies, 60 g whole-cell extracts protein
was resolved on SDS-PAGE to detect Chk- using a custom-made Chk antibody.
Water-soluble cell extracts from approximately 1.5x107 cells made using
dual-phase extraction were used to acquire proton spectra at a 500 MHz
Bruker spectrometer for metabolite quantitation.Immunoblots from various
pancreatic cell lines showed different level of Chk- overexpression with
very low expression in Pa04C, Pa28C and undetectable level in hTERT-HPNE
cells. Quantitative data for choline containing metabolites obtained from
water soluble cell extracts showed elevated PC and tCho in all
adenocarcinomas relative to the immortalized pancreatic cells (p<0.05).
Differences were also observed within the adenocarcinoma cell lines.
While Panc-1, Pa09c and Pa20c showed the highest amounts of PC, Pa20c and
Pa03c pancreatic cancer cells showed significantly high free choline
compared to all other cell lines (pPancreatic cancer has a current 5-year
survival rate of less than 3%, accounting for the fourth largest number
of cancer deaths in the US. Poor prognosis is, in part, due to its
diagnosis at late stages and to limited response to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. Currently, there are no noninvasive markers available for
early diagnosis. The development of novel therapeutic strategies is also
critically important. 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is being
evaluated in the diagnosis of other solid malignancies such as brain,
prostate and breast cancer, and for monitoring therapy in brain cancer.
1H MR spectra of these tumors show elevated total choline (tCho) due to
increased phosphocholine (PC). This increase in PC has been attributed to
high expression of the choline kinase (Chk)- gene. Here, for the first
time, we have used 1H MRS to characterize choline phospholipid metabolism
in a panel of pancreatic adenocarcinomas cell lines. Eight pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell lines and one immortalized pancreatic cell line were
used to obtain water soluble cell extracts for high resolution 1H MRS and
cell lysates were used for immunoblotting. Human Pancreatic Nestin
Expressing (HPNE) cells, stably expressing human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT), hTERT-HPNE cells were used as pancreatic
immortalized cells. hTERT-HPNE, Panc-1 and BxPC-3 cells were obtained
from ATCC. All other cell lines were obtained from the Johns Hopkins
pancreatic xenobank and were derived from pancreatic cancer patients.
Panc-1, BxPC-3, Pa09C, Pa28C, Pa20C cell lines were derived from primary
adenocarcinomas. While Pa02C and Pa03C were derived from liver metastasis
of adenocarcinoma, Pa04C was obtained from lung metastasis of
adenocarcinoma. For immunoblots studies, 60 g whole-cell extracts protein
was resolved on SDS-PAGE to detect Chk- using a custom-made Chk antibody.
Water-soluble cell extracts from approximately 1.5x107 cells made using
dual-phase extraction were used to acquire proton spectra at a 500 MHz
Bruker spectrometer for metabolite quantitation.Immunoblots from various
pancreatic cell lines showed different level of Chk- overexpression with
very low expression in Pa04C, Pa28C and undetectable level in hTERT-HPNE
cells. Quantitative data for choline containing metabolites obtained from
water soluble cell extracts showed elevated PC and tCho in all
adenocarcinomas relative to the immortalized pancreatic cells (p<0.05).
Differences were also observed within the adenocarcinoma cell lines.
While Panc-1, Pa09c and Pa20c showed the highest amounts of PC, Pa20c and
Pa03c pancreatic cancer cells showed significantly high free choline
compared to all other cell lines (p<0.05). These data support the
development of 1H MRS to detect pancreatic cancer and monitor response to
treatment. The aberrant choline metabolism observed here in pancreatic
cancer cells may also provide novel targets in the treatment of
pancreatic cancer.

