Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired resistance to gefitinib is associated with cancer
stem-like phenotype and EMT in EGFR mutant lung adenocarcinoma.


Background: Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene
are associated with increased sensitivity of lung adenocarcinoma to
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) such as gefitinib. During gefitinib
treatment, however, the tumor becomes resistant by acquiring specific
types of resistance via the somatic changes. Although the underlying
mechanisms for acquired resistance include the amplification of c-Met
gene and the secondary mutation in EGFR genes, there are still unknown
mechanisms that cannot be explained by the two types of genetic changes.
Here, we sought to find a novel mechanism to explain TKI-resistance of
EGFR-dependent lung adenocarcinoma.Methods: We developed resistant cells
(HCC827-GR) from gefitinib-sensitive HCC827 cells harboring EGFR deletion
mutation by chronic exposure to increasing concentrations of gefitinib.
Acquired resistance mechanisms of HCC827-GR cells were analyzed.Results:
HCC827-GR showed much less phosphorylation of most receptor kinases
including EGFR but higher phosphorylation of downstream signaling
molecules, Erk and Akt, than its parental cell. By comparing the gene
expression profiles between HCC827 and HCC827-GR, we found that cancer
stem cell (CSC) markers, CD44 and ALDH1A1 genes, were highly induced in
HCC827-GR compared with those in HCC827. Knockdown of CD44 and ALDH1A1
expression by RNA interference induced inactivation of both Akt and Erk
phosphorylation in HCC827-GR. Furthermore, HCC827-GR displayed CSC-like
functionality such as colony formation and the phenotype of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Higher level of vimentin, ZEB1
and ZFHX4 and lower level of E-cadherin were observed in HCC827-GR
together with morphological change. Interestingly, miR200c, a tumor
suppressive microRNA, was dramatically decreased in HCC827-GR. Forced
expression of miR200c in HCC827-GR abrogated the increased expression of
ZEB1 and ALDH1A1, resulting in the restoration of E-cadherin.Conclusions:
These findings imply that cancer stemness induced via CD44 and ALDH1A1
expression and EMT contribute to the acquisition of gefitinib resistance
in EGFR-TKI sensitive lung adenocarcinoma. Therefore, CSC markers
including CD44 and ALDH1A1 and EMT regulators such as miR200c can be used
as therapeutic targets for TKI-resistant EGFR-dependent lung
adenocarcinoma.Citation Format: Sun Min Lim, Hyun Jung Kim, Young Ho Ban,
Sang Jun Ha, Byoung Chul Cho. Acquired resistance to gefitinib is
associated with cancer stem-like phenotype and EMT in EGFR mutant lung
adenocarcinoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting
of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4663. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4663

