Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prostate stroma-derived profile is predictive of early relapse
and reflects potential mechanisms of aggressive disease.


The microenvironment of prostate cancer plays a major role in tumor
initiation, growth, and metastatic spread. Using RNA expression data from
fresh frozen human prostatectomies for which the clinical outcome was
followed for over 5 years, we have developed a general approach to
identify gene expression changes of the tumor-adjacent stroma that
distinguishes aggressive prostate cancer cases from indolent cases.
Highly significant gene associations were defined by correlating
expression with Disease-free Survival (DFS) and also, separately, by
comparing RNA expression between cases that remained disease free for at
least 4 years following surgery with those cases that exhibited relapse
within 1 year of surgery. A total of 193 highly significant genes were
identified, of which 15 were common to the two approaches. These 15 genes
were used to develop a PAM (Prediction Analysis for Microarrays)-based
algorithm to classify new cases as indolent or aggressive and to provide
a probability for each classification. The algorithm was tested on
stroma-enriched samples from 47 new cases with known outcome with an
accuracy of 87% [1]. A potential functional basis for some the genes
associated with aggressive disease was suggested by the observation that
p53 expression is decreased in aggressive disease whereas p53-target
genes and cell cycle inhibitors including p21, GADD45A, and GADD45B are
increased, which is a pattern others have noted as suggestive of
senescence [2]. Increased IGFBP6, Tubulin alpha 1a, and Lamin A/C further
suggest a senescence-associated secretory phenotype [3]. A potential
secretory factor of known significance in the growth of prostate cancer
(IGF-1/Somatomedin-C) has elevated RNA levels in the stroma of the same
cases. These features argue that an accurate and general prediction of
aggressiveness may be derived from the tumor microenvironment and may be
composed of genes that have functional roles in bringing about aggressive
disease.[1] Jia et al. 2012 PLoS ONE, 7(8):e41371[2] Liebermann and
Hoffman 2008 Journal of Molecular Signaling, 3:15[3] Coppe et al. 2008
PLoS Biology, 6(12):e301Citation Format: Zhenyu Jia, Farahnaz
Rahmatpanah, Xin Chen, Michael McClelland, Dan Mercola. A prostate
stroma-derived profile is predictive of early relapse and reflects
potential mechanisms of aggressive disease. [abstract]. In: Proceedings
of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer
Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer
Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2811. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2811

