Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCL9 mediates TGF- regulation of tumor cell survival and lung
metastasis.


Cancer metastasis is an ominous feature of tumor progression and accounts
for over 90% of cancer-associated deaths. Tumor cell survival in the
distant organ is the rate-limiting step in the metastatic process.
Primary tumors modulate the pre-metastatic organs and build up a tumor
favorable soil for the seeds (tumor cells). However, the precise cellular
and molecular mechanisms remain to be elucidated.We found that
Gr-1+CD11b+ cells or myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) infiltrate
and landscape the pre-metastatic lung into an inflammatory,
proliferative, and immune suppressive environment. Tumor cells
co-cultured or co-injected with MDSCs showed increased survival and
metastasis. Using a cytokine protein array screening, we found that CCL9
(MIP1-, macrophage inflammatory protein-1 gamma) is highly secreted in
the supernatant of co-culture as well as the metastatic lung. We
identified that MDSCs, particularly Ly6C+CD11b+ and F4/80+CD11b+ subsets,
are the main source for CCL9 expression. Interestingly, deletion of
transforming growth factor - receptor II (TRII) in myeloid cells, results
in significantly decreased lung metastasis and CCL9 expression. The
mechanisms underlying CCL9 regulation of metastasis is currently under
investigation.

