Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide blood leukocyte DNA methylation in relation to
visceral, subcutaneous, and hepatic adiposity in postmenopausal women.


Obesity has a broad spectrum of health consequences and is responsible
for 15-20% of cancer deaths. Yet, little is known about systemic
epigenetic alterations that may mediate the detrimental metabolic effects
of excess adiposity. We investigated differences in genome-wide blood
leukocyte methylation associated with amounts of visceral, liver and
abdominal subcutaneous fat in healthy women. Participants were drawn from
a feasibility study conducted in Honolulu, Hawaii, where 60 women, aged
60-65 years and of Japanese or European descent, underwent dual energy
X-ray absorptiometry assessing total and regional fat (kg) and abdominal
magnetic resonance imaging at L4-L5 assessing visceral and subcutaneous
fat areas (cm2) and percent liver fat. Forty six women with MRI data were
analyzed for the study. Over 480K loci were determined by the Illumina
HumanMethylation450K BeadChip. Data were normalized using GenomeStudio
and transferred to Partek Genomics Suite for analysis. We performed
analysis of covariance adjusted for age and ethnicity to determine loci
that were differentially methylated (DM) by levels of visceral fat (VF),
liver fat (LF) and abdominal subcutaneous fat (SF) (dichotomization at
the median). DM genes were examined for their biological pathway. We
found that 70 loci were DM for high vs. low levels of VF at pObesity has
a broad spectrum of health consequences and is responsible for 15-20% of
cancer deaths. Yet, little is known about systemic epigenetic alterations
that may mediate the detrimental metabolic effects of excess adiposity.
We investigated differences in genome-wide blood leukocyte methylation
associated with amounts of visceral, liver and abdominal subcutaneous fat
in healthy women. Participants were drawn from a feasibility study
conducted in Honolulu, Hawaii, where 60 women, aged 60-65 years and of
Japanese or European descent, underwent dual energy X-ray absorptiometry
assessing total and regional fat (kg) and abdominal magnetic resonance
imaging at L4-L5 assessing visceral and subcutaneous fat areas (cm2) and
percent liver fat. Forty six women with MRI data were analyzed for the
study. Over 480K loci were determined by the Illumina
HumanMethylation450K BeadChip. Data were normalized using GenomeStudio
and transferred to Partek Genomics Suite for analysis. We performed
analysis of covariance adjusted for age and ethnicity to determine loci
that were differentially methylated (DM) by levels of visceral fat (VF),
liver fat (LF) and abdominal subcutaneous fat (SF) (dichotomization at
the median). DM genes were examined for their biological pathway. We
found that 70 loci were DM for high vs. low levels of VF at p<5.0xE-03.
56 and 109 loci were DM for SF and LF, respectively. The top DM loci
included hypo-CPLX1, FAM163A, ACLY and hyper-UCP3 for VF (pObesity has a
broad spectrum of health consequences and is responsible for 15-20% of
cancer deaths. Yet, little is known about systemic epigenetic alterations
that may mediate the detrimental metabolic effects of excess adiposity.
We investigated differences in genome-wide blood leukocyte methylation
associated with amounts of visceral, liver and abdominal subcutaneous fat
in healthy women. Participants were drawn from a feasibility study
conducted in Honolulu, Hawaii, where 60 women, aged 60-65 years and of
Japanese or European descent, underwent dual energy X-ray absorptiometry
assessing total and regional fat (kg) and abdominal magnetic resonance
imaging at L4-L5 assessing visceral and subcutaneous fat areas (cm2) and
percent liver fat. Forty six women with MRI data were analyzed for the
study. Over 480K loci were determined by the Illumina
HumanMethylation450K BeadChip. Data were normalized using GenomeStudio
and transferred to Partek Genomics Suite for analysis. We performed
analysis of covariance adjusted for age and ethnicity to determine loci
that were differentially methylated (DM) by levels of visceral fat (VF),
liver fat (LF) and abdominal subcutaneous fat (SF) (dichotomization at
the median). DM genes were examined for their biological pathway. We
found that 70 loci were DM for high vs. low levels of VF at p<5.0xE-03.
56 and 109 loci were DM for SF and LF, respectively. The top DM loci
included hypo-CPLX1, FAM163A, ACLY and hyper-UCP3 for VF (p<6.0xE-05);
hypo-BAI1, TNNT1, DAPK3, PRAME and hyper-CD81 for SF (pObesity has a
broad spectrum of health consequences and is responsible for 15-20% of
cancer deaths. Yet, little is known about systemic epigenetic alterations
that may mediate the detrimental metabolic effects of excess adiposity.
We investigated differences in genome-wide blood leukocyte methylation
associated with amounts of visceral, liver and abdominal subcutaneous fat
in healthy women. Participants were drawn from a feasibility study
conducted in Honolulu, Hawaii, where 60 women, aged 60-65 years and of
Japanese or European descent, underwent dual energy X-ray absorptiometry
assessing total and regional fat (kg) and abdominal magnetic resonance
imaging at L4-L5 assessing visceral and subcutaneous fat areas (cm2) and
percent liver fat. Forty six women with MRI data were analyzed for the
study. Over 480K loci were determined by the Illumina
HumanMethylation450K BeadChip. Data were normalized using GenomeStudio
and transferred to Partek Genomics Suite for analysis. We performed
analysis of covariance adjusted for age and ethnicity to determine loci
that were differentially methylated (DM) by levels of visceral fat (VF),
liver fat (LF) and abdominal subcutaneous fat (SF) (dichotomization at
the median). DM genes were examined for their biological pathway. We
found that 70 loci were DM for high vs. low levels of VF at p<5.0xE-03.
56 and 109 loci were DM for SF and LF, respectively. The top DM loci
included hypo-CPLX1, FAM163A, ACLY and hyper-UCP3 for VF (p<6.0xE-05);
hypo-BAI1, TNNT1, DAPK3, PRAME and hyper-CD81 for SF (p<5.0xE-05); and
hyper-DIAPH2, RPA4, WT1, TBC1D3C and NRG1 for LF (pObesity has a broad
spectrum of health consequences and is responsible for 15-20% of cancer
deaths. Yet, little is known about systemic epigenetic alterations that
may mediate the detrimental metabolic effects of excess adiposity. We
investigated differences in genome-wide blood leukocyte methylation
associated with amounts of visceral, liver and abdominal subcutaneous fat
in healthy women. Participants were drawn from a feasibility study
conducted in Honolulu, Hawaii, where 60 women, aged 60-65 years and of
Japanese or European descent, underwent dual energy X-ray absorptiometry
assessing total and regional fat (kg) and abdominal magnetic resonance
imaging at L4-L5 assessing visceral and subcutaneous fat areas (cm2) and
percent liver fat. Forty six women with MRI data were analyzed for the
study. Over 480K loci were determined by the Illumina
HumanMethylation450K BeadChip. Data were normalized using GenomeStudio
and transferred to Partek Genomics Suite for analysis. We performed
analysis of covariance adjusted for age and ethnicity to determine loci
that were differentially methylated (DM) by levels of visceral fat (VF),
liver fat (LF) and abdominal subcutaneous fat (SF) (dichotomization at
the median). DM genes were examined for their biological pathway. We
found that 70 loci were DM for high vs. low levels of VF at p<5.0xE-03.
56 and 109 loci were DM for SF and LF, respectively. The top DM loci
included hypo-CPLX1, FAM163A, ACLY and hyper-UCP3 for VF (p<6.0xE-05);
hypo-BAI1, TNNT1, DAPK3, PRAME and hyper-CD81 for SF (p<5.0xE-05); and
hyper-DIAPH2, RPA4, WT1, TBC1D3C and NRG1 for LF (p<3.0xE-05). Although
none of these loci reached statistical significance after multiple test
correction (Bonferroni pObesity has a broad spectrum of health
consequences and is responsible for 15-20% of cancer deaths. Yet, little
is known about systemic epigenetic alterations that may mediate the
detrimental metabolic effects of excess adiposity. We investigated
differences in genome-wide blood leukocyte methylation associated with
amounts of visceral, liver and abdominal subcutaneous fat in healthy
women. Participants were drawn from a feasibility study conducted in
Honolulu, Hawaii, where 60 women, aged 60-65 years and of Japanese or
European descent, underwent dual energy X-ray absorptiometry assessing
total and regional fat (kg) and abdominal magnetic resonance imaging at
L4-L5 assessing visceral and subcutaneous fat areas (cm2) and percent
liver fat. Forty six women with MRI data were analyzed for the study.
Over 480K loci were determined by the Illumina HumanMethylation450K
BeadChip. Data were normalized using GenomeStudio and transferred to
Partek Genomics Suite for analysis. We performed analysis of covariance
adjusted for age and ethnicity to determine loci that were differentially
methylated (DM) by levels of visceral fat (VF), liver fat (LF) and
abdominal subcutaneous fat (SF) (dichotomization at the median). DM genes
were examined for their biological pathway. We found that 70 loci were DM
for high vs. low levels of VF at p<5.0xE-03. 56 and 109 loci were DM for
SF and LF, respectively. The top DM loci included hypo-CPLX1, FAM163A,
ACLY and hyper-UCP3 for VF (p<6.0xE-05); hypo-BAI1, TNNT1, DAPK3, PRAME
and hyper-CD81 for SF (p<5.0xE-05); and hyper-DIAPH2, RPA4, WT1, TBC1D3C
and NRG1 for LF (p<3.0xE-05). Although none of these loci reached
statistical significance after multiple test correction (Bonferroni
p<1.0xE-07), their hyper- and hypo-methylation clearly segregated by high
vs. low levels of VF, SF or LF in principal component analyses and
heatmaps. We limited the pathway analysis to the CpGs in promoters
because they are most likely to regulate gene expression. VF was
associated with hypermethylation of cellular development and
proliferation related genes (CDK6, FAM204A, GUSB, HLA-DMB, MAGED1, MATK,
miR-10B, PPP1R13L, PPP1R14C, PPP2R2B, UCP3 and VAV3). SF was associated
with hypomethylation of cellular growth and proliferation, tissue
morphology and cell cycle related genes (DAPK3, EHMT2, MAFB, NHLRC1,
PRAME, SMPD3 and TGOLN2). LF was associated with hypermethylation of
genes related to neurological disease, organismal abnormalities, and
cell-to-cell signaling (ADRB3, COMT, DNTTIP1, PLEC, RPA4 and SEPT6).
There was little overlap among DM genes by different levels of the fat
depots. Our findings provide further evidence that the various body fat
depots are distinct metabolic entities and suggest that they are
associated with specific DNA methylation profiles in blood leukocytes.

