Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ablation of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 10 (ADAM 10)
induces significant pancreatic tumor heterogeneity and blocks cancer
metastasis.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the 4th leading cause of cancer
related death in the U.S. This disease has a poor prognosis due to late
detection and rapid progression to metastasis. ADAM10 is a membrane bound
metalloproteinase responsible for shedding bioactive molecules and
inducing regulated intra-membrane proteolysis of cell surface proteins
such as Notch. Both ADAM10 and Notch are highly expressed in patients
with PDA, with the latter being implicated in PDA progression. We have
found that genetic ablation of ADAM10 in the KrasG12D/+;Ptf1aCre/+ mouse
PDA model altered tumor character to favor a cystic phenotype, mixed with
low grade pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) and PDA. Though
ADAM10 knockout mice retain the ability to form locally invasive cancer,
they live 50% longer than control mice, essentially to a full 2-year life
span. The phenotypes we observe closely mimic Notch-2 knockout mice,
consistent with ADAM10s role as the primary Notch activating proteinase.
Further examination revealed that ADAM10 knockout mice did not show
significant liver metastasis compared to control, despite their local
invasiveness. The mechanism through which ADAM 10 controls a cancer
cell's ability to establish distant metastases will be explored.

