Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-adenoma Adnab-9 antibody recognizes a serum GI cancer
candidate biomarker.


Population-based serum banks may allow for the early detection of shed
markers of common gastrointestinal cancers. Few GI pan-biomarkers are
available for serum testing and those that are lack specificity and
universal sensitivity for colorectal, gastric and pancreatic cancers. The
p87 antigen recognized by the Adnab-9 antibody may be an ideal candidate
for such a biomarker. It has both diagnostic and prognostic biomarker
ability for these GI cancers but its ability to detect the antigen in
serum is unknown. Methods: In order to gauge feasibility of serum testing
we conducted a literature search to determine the existence of model
established serum banks internationally. An indirect Adnab-9 ELISA was
performed on a validation set of sera from 20 CRC patients and 10
controls. A known positive stool extract was used as the positive
control. Results: Six countries were found to possess serum banks with
the numbers of specimens ranging from 1,982 to 2,132,215. Of these 6
countries, age-adjusted mortality from CRC was highest in the Netherlands
at 21/100,000, from gastric cancer highest in Japan 35/100,000 and from
pancreatic cancer highest in the USA 11/100,000. The validation sera set
Australian patient demographics were similar for gender and ethnicity.
The controls were significantly younger than the cancer patients (6410.3
versus 52.23.4 years [pPopulation-based serum banks may allow for the
early detection of shed markers of common gastrointestinal cancers. Few
GI pan-biomarkers are available for serum testing and those that are lack
specificity and universal sensitivity for colorectal, gastric and
pancreatic cancers. The p87 antigen recognized by the Adnab-9 antibody
may be an ideal candidate for such a biomarker. It has both diagnostic
and prognostic biomarker ability for these GI cancers but its ability to
detect the antigen in serum is unknown. Methods: In order to gauge
feasibility of serum testing we conducted a literature search to
determine the existence of model established serum banks internationally.
An indirect Adnab-9 ELISA was performed on a validation set of sera from
20 CRC patients and 10 controls. A known positive stool extract was used
as the positive control. Results: Six countries were found to possess
serum banks with the numbers of specimens ranging from 1,982 to
2,132,215. Of these 6 countries, age-adjusted mortality from CRC was
highest in the Netherlands at 21/100,000, from gastric cancer highest in
Japan 35/100,000 and from pancreatic cancer highest in the USA
11/100,000. The validation sera set Australian patient demographics were
similar for gender and ethnicity. The controls were significantly younger
than the cancer patients (6410.3 versus 52.23.4 years [p<0.002]) but
there was no direct linear correlation between OD450 and age
(r2=0.104;p=0.102). Dilution of serum at both 1:1 and 1:3 ratios showed
significantly different mean OD450 values between cancer and control
patients of 0.0760.007 (xSTDEV) versus 0.0690.006 (pPopulation-based
serum banks may allow for the early detection of shed markers of common
gastrointestinal cancers. Few GI pan-biomarkers are available for serum
testing and those that are lack specificity and universal sensitivity for
colorectal, gastric and pancreatic cancers. The p87 antigen recognized by
the Adnab-9 antibody may be an ideal candidate for such a biomarker. It
has both diagnostic and prognostic biomarker ability for these GI cancers
but its ability to detect the antigen in serum is unknown. Methods: In
order to gauge feasibility of serum testing we conducted a literature
search to determine the existence of model established serum banks
internationally. An indirect Adnab-9 ELISA was performed on a validation
set of sera from 20 CRC patients and 10 controls. A known positive stool
extract was used as the positive control. Results: Six countries were
found to possess serum banks with the numbers of specimens ranging from
1,982 to 2,132,215. Of these 6 countries, age-adjusted mortality from CRC
was highest in the Netherlands at 21/100,000, from gastric cancer highest
in Japan 35/100,000 and from pancreatic cancer highest in the USA
11/100,000. The validation sera set Australian patient demographics were
similar for gender and ethnicity. The controls were significantly younger
than the cancer patients (6410.3 versus 52.23.4 years [p<0.002]) but
there was no direct linear correlation between OD450 and age
(r2=0.104;p=0.102). Dilution of serum at both 1:1 and 1:3 ratios showed
significantly different mean OD450 values between cancer and control
patients of 0.0760.007 (xSTDEV) versus 0.0690.006 (p<0.025) and
0.0830.008 versus 0.0740.004 (pPopulation-based serum banks may allow for
the early detection of shed markers of common gastrointestinal cancers.
Few GI pan-biomarkers are available for serum testing and those that are
lack specificity and universal sensitivity for colorectal, gastric and
pancreatic cancers. The p87 antigen recognized by the Adnab-9 antibody
may be an ideal candidate for such a biomarker. It has both diagnostic
and prognostic biomarker ability for these GI cancers but its ability to
detect the antigen in serum is unknown. Methods: In order to gauge
feasibility of serum testing we conducted a literature search to
determine the existence of model established serum banks internationally.
An indirect Adnab-9 ELISA was performed on a validation set of sera from
20 CRC patients and 10 controls. A known positive stool extract was used
as the positive control. Results: Six countries were found to possess
serum banks with the numbers of specimens ranging from 1,982 to
2,132,215. Of these 6 countries, age-adjusted mortality from CRC was
highest in the Netherlands at 21/100,000, from gastric cancer highest in
Japan 35/100,000 and from pancreatic cancer highest in the USA
11/100,000. The validation sera set Australian patient demographics were
similar for gender and ethnicity. The controls were significantly younger
than the cancer patients (6410.3 versus 52.23.4 years [p<0.002]) but
there was no direct linear correlation between OD450 and age
(r2=0.104;p=0.102). Dilution of serum at both 1:1 and 1:3 ratios showed
significantly different mean OD450 values between cancer and control
patients of 0.0760.007 (xSTDEV) versus 0.0690.006 (p<0.025) and
0.0830.008 versus 0.0740.004 (p<0.02) respectively. Eighty percent of
cancer patients serum were positive versus 30% of controls (OR 9.3; CI
1.6-53.2;pPopulation-based serum banks may allow for the early detection
of shed markers of common gastrointestinal cancers. Few GI pan-biomarkers
are available for serum testing and those that are lack specificity and
universal sensitivity for colorectal, gastric and pancreatic cancers. The
p87 antigen recognized by the Adnab-9 antibody may be an ideal candidate
for such a biomarker. It has both diagnostic and prognostic biomarker
ability for these GI cancers but its ability to detect the antigen in
serum is unknown. Methods: In order to gauge feasibility of serum testing
we conducted a literature search to determine the existence of model
established serum banks internationally. An indirect Adnab-9 ELISA was
performed on a validation set of sera from 20 CRC patients and 10
controls. A known positive stool extract was used as the positive
control. Results: Six countries were found to possess serum banks with
the numbers of specimens ranging from 1,982 to 2,132,215. Of these 6
countries, age-adjusted mortality from CRC was highest in the Netherlands
at 21/100,000, from gastric cancer highest in Japan 35/100,000 and from
pancreatic cancer highest in the USA 11/100,000. The validation sera set
Australian patient demographics were similar for gender and ethnicity.
The controls were significantly younger than the cancer patients (6410.3
versus 52.23.4 years [p<0.002]) but there was no direct linear
correlation between OD450 and age (r2=0.104;p=0.102). Dilution of serum
at both 1:1 and 1:3 ratios showed significantly different mean OD450
values between cancer and control patients of 0.0760.007 (xSTDEV) versus
0.0690.006 (p<0.025) and 0.0830.008 versus 0.0740.004 (p<0.02)
respectively. Eighty percent of cancer patients serum were positive
versus 30% of controls (OR 9.3; CI 1.6-53.2;p<0.015). Signal to noise
ratios of the positive control was satisfactory with the lowest OD450
reading at 0.085 obtained at a 1:6,400 dilution with a linear
dilution-reaction curve. Conclusions: National serum banks already exist
that could allow for graduated targeted screening of a specific disease
based on relative mortality rates. The Adnab-9 antibody is a promising
candidate for a pan-biomarker based on the outcome of the indirect ELISA.
Since sensitivity of Adnab-9 stool binding is lowest for CRC compared to
gastric and pancreatic, it is likely that serum testing for the other 2
cancers would yield comparable results. In order to elucidate this
further, testing in prospective studies should be undertaken.

