Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposing roles of p53 and autophagy in a model of PALB2-associated
hereditary breast cancer.


Hereditary breast cancers stem from germline mutations in susceptibility
genes such as BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2. These and the majority of other
known susceptibility genes all encode products that function in the
repair and response to DNA damage, particularly double strand breaks. The
p53 tumor suppressor is frequently mutated in hereditary breast cancer,
and results from mouse models also suggest that its inactivation is
critical for tumorigenesis induced by loss of BRCA1 and BRCA2. Autophagy
is an intracellular waste disposal/recycling and stress mitigation
mechanism that that can impact both cancer initiation and progression,
but its role in breast cancer is unclear. Here we show that, similar to
Brca1 and Brca2, ablation of Palb2 in mouse mammary gland resulted in
tumor development with long latency, the majority of the tumors harbored
mutations in Trp53, and combined deletion of Palb2 and Trp53 led to
efficient tumor formation. Interestingly, partial loss of autophagy, due
to mono-allelic loss of the essential autophagy gene Becn1, delayed and
reduced Palb2-associated mammary tumorigenesis in mice with Palb2 single
deletion but not Palb2;Trp53 double deletion in the mammary gland. These
results indicate that, in the face of DNA damage and genome alterations
elicited by PALB2 loss, p53 is a barrier to cancer development whereas
autophagy facilitates cell survival and tumorigenesis. Our findings also
underscore the similarity between PALB2- and BRCA-associated cancers and
further suggest that inhibition of autophagy may represent a new avenue
to the prevention and/or treatment of hereditary breast cancers.

