Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation, SNP and expression analysis of the Vitamin D receptor
(VDR) gene in different tumor tissues.


The vitamin D receptor gene encodes the nuclear hormone receptor for
vitamin D3 and belongs to the family of trans-acting transcriptional
regulatory factors and shows sequence similarity to the steroid and
thyroid hormone receptors. Downstream targets of this nuclear hormone
receptor are principally involved in mineral metabolism though the
receptor regulates a variety of other metabolic pathways, such as those
involved in the immune response and cancer. In light of evidence for
promoter methylation of the vitamin D receptor in the control of the
expression of this gene, we have designed methylation assays that cover
many regions of this gene in order to determine its methylation profile
in normal individuals, ovarian tumors and ovarian cell lines. We have
isolated the DNA from ten tumor tissues and their adjacent normal tissue
from four different tumor types; ovarian, breast, colon and cervical. By
utilizing a combination of bisulfite sequencing, SNP genotyping, and
expression analysis, we show that there are distinct patterns of
methylation levels between different regions of the VDR gene in each of
the cancers observed. We have also analyzed a number of SNPs within these
genes and show a possible correlation with the methylation and /or
expression of the genes and the SNP genotypes. These data may provide
information that could lead to the development of biomarkers for
different cancers.

