Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of prostate carcinogenesis in TRAMP mice by
-santalol by causing cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis.


-santalol, a major component of sandalwood oil inhibits growth of
cultured prostate cancer cells in vitro by causing apoptosis. The present
study was undertaken to determine the in vivo efficacy of -santalol using
TRAMP (Transgenic Adenocarcinoma of Mouse Prostate) mice as a model. The
i.p administration of -santalol (50 mg/kg) did not cause any side effects
or weight loss throughout the study. Administration of -santalol (50
mg/kg) showed a trend in decrease in average wet weights of urogenital
weights compared to control mice (34% decrease in -santalol group
compared to control). Furthermore, the dorsolateral sections of prostate
from -santalol-treated mice exhibited decreased cell proliferation in
association with induction of apoptosis. Western blotting analysis of
prostate tumor samples from -santalol-treated group revealed an increase
in the expression levels of cleaved PARP, phospho p53 (ser 15), cleaved
caspase-3, cyclin B, p21 and a modest reduction in antiapoptotic protein
Bcl-xL compared to control samples. In agreement with these results,
-santalol treatment resulted in G2/M cell cycle arrest in cultured
prostate cancer cells. In conclusion, the present study indicates that
-santalol administration inhibits the development of prostate cancer in
TRAMP mice by decreasing cell proliferation, causing cell cycle arrest,
and inducing apoptosis. This study was supported by Wilkes University
Type I grant, American Association of Colleges of Pharmacy and by
Translational Cancer Research Center funded by South Dakota Governor's
Office of Economic Development.

