Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KIR copy-number variation and cutaneous melanoma risk.


Prevention of cutaneous malignant melanoma requires the identification
and clearance of abnormal, pre-cancerous cells by the immune system.
Central to this immune surveillance is the interplay between KIR
receptors present on natural killer cells and their HLA ligands expressed
on target cells. Like HLA, the KIR genes are highly polymorphic. They
encode both activating receptors (that trigger NK-cell mediated killing),
and inhibitory receptors (important in NK cell education and
self-tolerance). Many of the KIR genes occur as copy number variants, and
we hypothesize that inter- individual variability in KIR copy number is
associated with melanoma risk. A random sample of cases and controls
within the large, population-based Minnesota Skin Health Study were
selected for examination (84 cases and 87 controls). Using Luminex
technology and genomic DNA isolated from subject buccal cells we tested
for the presence or absence of specific KIR genes (KIR3DL1, KIR2DS1,
KIR2DL2, KIR2DL3, KIR2DL5, KIR2DS1, KIR2DS2, KIR2DS3, KIR2DS4 {truncating
allele}, KIR2DS5, KIR2DS1). In addition to investigating each gene as a
melanoma risk factor, we created an integrated locus score for 2DL2/DL3
and 3DL1/DS1, reflecting the typical mutual exclusivity of these genes at
their respective loci. Results: Homozygous deletion of the activating KIR
gene 2DS1 was associated with both an increasing number of nevi
(pPrevention of cutaneous malignant melanoma requires the identification
and clearance of abnormal, pre-cancerous cells by the immune system.
Central to this immune surveillance is the interplay between KIR
receptors present on natural killer cells and their HLA ligands expressed
on target cells. Like HLA, the KIR genes are highly polymorphic. They
encode both activating receptors (that trigger NK-cell mediated killing),
and inhibitory receptors (important in NK cell education and
self-tolerance). Many of the KIR genes occur as copy number variants, and
we hypothesize that inter- individual variability in KIR copy number is
associated with melanoma risk. A random sample of cases and controls
within the large, population-based Minnesota Skin Health Study were
selected for examination (84 cases and 87 controls). Using Luminex
technology and genomic DNA isolated from subject buccal cells we tested
for the presence or absence of specific KIR genes (KIR3DL1, KIR2DS1,
KIR2DL2, KIR2DL3, KIR2DL5, KIR2DS1, KIR2DS2, KIR2DS3, KIR2DS4 {truncating
allele}, KIR2DS5, KIR2DS1). In addition to investigating each gene as a
melanoma risk factor, we created an integrated locus score for 2DL2/DL3
and 3DL1/DS1, reflecting the typical mutual exclusivity of these genes at
their respective loci. Results: Homozygous deletion of the activating KIR
gene 2DS1 was associated with both an increasing number of nevi (p<0.04),
and increased melanoma risk (OR 2.2, 95% CI 1.2 - 4.3). Similarly, at the
shared 3DL1/3DS1 locus, absence of the activating KIR3DS1 gene was
significantly associated with increased melanoma risk (OR 2.0, 95% CI 1.0
- 3.3), and a borderline significant increase in the number of nevi
(pPrevention of cutaneous malignant melanoma requires the identification
and clearance of abnormal, pre-cancerous cells by the immune system.
Central to this immune surveillance is the interplay between KIR
receptors present on natural killer cells and their HLA ligands expressed
on target cells. Like HLA, the KIR genes are highly polymorphic. They
encode both activating receptors (that trigger NK-cell mediated killing),
and inhibitory receptors (important in NK cell education and
self-tolerance). Many of the KIR genes occur as copy number variants, and
we hypothesize that inter- individual variability in KIR copy number is
associated with melanoma risk. A random sample of cases and controls
within the large, population-based Minnesota Skin Health Study were
selected for examination (84 cases and 87 controls). Using Luminex
technology and genomic DNA isolated from subject buccal cells we tested
for the presence or absence of specific KIR genes (KIR3DL1, KIR2DS1,
KIR2DL2, KIR2DL3, KIR2DL5, KIR2DS1, KIR2DS2, KIR2DS3, KIR2DS4 {truncating
allele}, KIR2DS5, KIR2DS1). In addition to investigating each gene as a
melanoma risk factor, we created an integrated locus score for 2DL2/DL3
and 3DL1/DS1, reflecting the typical mutual exclusivity of these genes at
their respective loci. Results: Homozygous deletion of the activating KIR
gene 2DS1 was associated with both an increasing number of nevi (p<0.04),
and increased melanoma risk (OR 2.2, 95% CI 1.2 - 4.3). Similarly, at the
shared 3DL1/3DS1 locus, absence of the activating KIR3DS1 gene was
significantly associated with increased melanoma risk (OR 2.0, 95% CI 1.0
- 3.3), and a borderline significant increase in the number of nevi
(p<0.07). In contrast, at the KIR2DL2/2DL3 locus, which encodes two
inhibitory KIR alleles, our data suggest that a lack of diversity at this
locus may be more important than the presence or absence of either gene;
individuals homozygous for either 2DL2 or 2DL3 were at increased risk for
both nevi (pPrevention of cutaneous malignant melanoma requires the
identification and clearance of abnormal, pre-cancerous cells by the
immune system. Central to this immune surveillance is the interplay
between KIR receptors present on natural killer cells and their HLA
ligands expressed on target cells. Like HLA, the KIR genes are highly
polymorphic. They encode both activating receptors (that trigger NK-cell
mediated killing), and inhibitory receptors (important in NK cell
education and self-tolerance). Many of the KIR genes occur as copy number
variants, and we hypothesize that inter- individual variability in KIR
copy number is associated with melanoma risk. A random sample of cases
and controls within the large, population-based Minnesota Skin Health
Study were selected for examination (84 cases and 87 controls). Using
Luminex technology and genomic DNA isolated from subject buccal cells we
tested for the presence or absence of specific KIR genes (KIR3DL1,
KIR2DS1, KIR2DL2, KIR2DL3, KIR2DL5, KIR2DS1, KIR2DS2, KIR2DS3, KIR2DS4
{truncating allele}, KIR2DS5, KIR2DS1). In addition to investigating each
gene as a melanoma risk factor, we created an integrated locus score for
2DL2/DL3 and 3DL1/DS1, reflecting the typical mutual exclusivity of these
genes at their respective loci. Results: Homozygous deletion of the
activating KIR gene 2DS1 was associated with both an increasing number of
nevi (p<0.04), and increased melanoma risk (OR 2.2, 95% CI 1.2 - 4.3).
Similarly, at the shared 3DL1/3DS1 locus, absence of the activating
KIR3DS1 gene was significantly associated with increased melanoma risk
(OR 2.0, 95% CI 1.0 - 3.3), and a borderline significant increase in the
number of nevi (p<0.07). In contrast, at the KIR2DL2/2DL3 locus, which
encodes two inhibitory KIR alleles, our data suggest that a lack of
diversity at this locus may be more important than the presence or
absence of either gene; individuals homozygous for either 2DL2 or 2DL3
were at increased risk for both nevi (p<0.03), and melanoma (OR 1.8, 95%
CI 1.0 - 3.4) relative to those who had both 2DL2 and 2DL3. These novel
analyses at the complex KIR locus indicate that absence of certain
activating KIR receptors, and balance in diversity of KIR inhibitory
receptors are important determinants of cutaneous melanoma risk.

