Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic potential is determined early in synovial sarcoma
development and reflected by tumor molecular features.


Introduction. Synovial sarcoma (SynSa) is an aggressive type of tumor,
comprising approximately 10% of soft tissue sarcomas. Over half of SynSa
patients develop metastases or local recurrence, but the molecular
mechanism of aggressive SynSa outcome remains poorly
characterized.Methods.Sixty five frozen tumor specimens from 54 SynSa
patients [34 males; median age 37 years (range 5-86 years)] were
subjected to aCGH and gene expression profiling. Examined set of tumor
specimens included 16 primary tumors from untreated patients who did not
develop metastasis/local recurrence (SynSa1 group;" median follow-up 76
months), 26 primary tumors from untreated patients who developed
metastases or local recurrence during follow-up (SynSa2 group;" median
follow-up 29 months), and 23 metastatic/recurrent SynSa tumors (SynSa3
group;" median follow-up 46 months). For 8 patients primary tumor
specimen was paired with metastatic/recurrent tumor specimens. Median
follow-up for all patients was 40 months (range 3-218 months).Results.
AURKA and KIF18A, which play important roles in various mitotic events,
were the two most up-regulated genes in SynSa2 and SynSa3 groups compared
to the SynSa1 group (corr p = 4.48e-6 and corr p = 8.65e-6,
respectively). Moreover, we identified 125 genes differentially expressed
between SynSa1 and SynSa2 groups (t test unpaired, corr p value cut-off =
0.05, fold change 2), 38 of which were common with recently published
CINSARC (Complexity Index in Sarcomas) prognostic signature (Ref. 1, 2).
Comparison of expression profiles between SynSa2 and SynSa3 groups did
not show any significant differences. Analysis of genomic index (GI)
based on aCGH profiles demonstrated that the SynSa1 group consisted of
tumors with significantly less complex genomes compared to SynSa2 and
SynSa3 groups (p = 0.021 and p = 0.020, respectively). The median GI in
SynSa1, SynSa2 and SynSa3 groups was 9 (range 0-49), 16 (range 0-123) and
28 (range 0-130), respectively. Of note, there was no statistically
significant difference in genome complexity between SynSa2 and SynSa3
groups, which suggests that progressive disease is not associated with
accumulation of secondary genomic rearrangements/copy number
changes.Conclusions. Primary SynSa tumors from patients who develop
metastases or local recurrence share common molecular features with
metastatic/recurrent SynSa. Presented data confirm that aggressive SynSa
behavior is determined early in SynSa development and may be related to
impaired mitotic regulatory mechanism.

