Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Surfactant-free PLGA encapsulation facilitates delivery of
LY294002 to endoplasmic reticulum and enhances its cytotoxicity.


LY294002 (LY) is a potent inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases
(PI3Ks); however, bio-applications of LY are limited by its poor
solubility and pharmacokinetic profile. Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA) is a biodegradable nanomaterial that can be used as a carrier for
drug delivery. Although LY-loaded polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)-containing PLGA
nanoparticles (PVA-LY NPs) have been developed to improve LY solubility,
the ratio of NP internalization is unsatisfactory and the cytotoxicity of
PVA-LY NPs is inferior to that of free LY. LY-loaded surfactant-free PLGA
nanoparticles (SF-LY NPs) were developed to improve the therapeutic
efficacy of LY. The size of SF-LY NPs was in the range of 80-100 nm, the
shape was spherical and the NPs were monodispersed. The loading capacity
of LY in SF NPs was 7.4g/mg with a sustained-released pattern. In four
lung cancer cell lines, SF-LY NPs showed a stronger growth inhibitory
effect, sustained suppression of the serine/threonine kinase AKT
activation, and increased intracellular uptake of LY compared with PVA-LY
NPs or free LY. In addition, it was observed that SF NPs tend to
accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and subsequently induce
pronounced ER stress. After injection into tumors, SF-LY NPs exhibited a
stronger antitumor effect than free LY. These findings indicated that the
surfactant-free formulation of PLGA is an ideal vector to carry LY and
that SF-LY NPs possess promising anticancer activity.

