Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ubiquitin specific protease 3 is a regulator of histone
ubiquitination required for maintenance of genomic stability.


The ubiquitination of histones is crucial for the maintenance of genomic
stability. Little is understood about the deubiquitinating enzymes that
catalyze the removal of ubiquitin from histones in response to UV damage.
In this study, we identify the ubiquitin-specific protease 3 (USP3) as a
deubiquitinating enzyme which catalyzes the cleavage of ubiquitin from
H2AX and uH2A in response to UV damage. Using GFP-tagged USP3 we
demonstrate that USP3 is a nuclear protein. To determine the function of
USP3 in chromatin regulation we ectopically expressed USP3 in Hela cells
and analyzed the ubiquitination status of histones. Our analysis
demonstrated that the overexpression of the wild type USP3 (USP3wt), but
not the catalytically inactive mutant (USP3C1685) resulted in a decrease
in the ubiquitination of H2AX and uH2A. This result was further supported
by the functional ablation of USP3 by RNAi. The efficient reduction of
the USP3 protein was accompanied by a significant increase in the levels
of uH2A and the ubiquitination of H2AX. In addition, we were also able to
demonstrate that the depletion of USP3 increases the persistence of uH2A
and Fk2 foci formation in response to UV damage. Together, our results
implicate that USP3 is involved in the removal of ubiquitin marks from
chromatin-bound proteins as a means to attenuate the damage signal. Thus,
in the presence of UV damage, the functional ablation of USP3 may lead to
a delay in cell cycle progression and the activation of checkpoint
signals, which in turn could induce genotoxic stress. This work was
supported by the PHS grant ES2388, ES12991 and CA93413.

