Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liposomal C6 ceramide appears to potentiate enhanced chemotoxicity
of pancreatic cancer.


Introduction: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma a highly lethal malignancy (5 yr
survival 5%) is poorly responsive to all chemotherapy, in part related to
presence of chemo resistant pathways: prosurvival (AKT/PI3K/mTOR and
mutant KRAS. We previously demonstrated reversal of these resistant
pathways by C6 Ceramide and now pursue optimum intracellular delivery
using selected liposomal preparations of C6 Ceramide.Methods: C6
Ceramide(C6Cer) in 4 different liposomal vesicle formulations were tested
by MTT assay against pancreatic cell lines L3.6, PANC1 and MIA, combined
with chemotherapy: Gemcitabine, Paclitaxel and Cetuximab.Liposomal
preparations included : (#1)18:1 PC
(1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine; (#3),18:0 PC
(1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine;(#5) DPGG
(1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-galloyl); and (#7) 18:0 PEG2 PE
(1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N[methoxy(polyethylene
glycol)-2000. (#1)18:1 PC- has low transition temp.(T*) and is fluid at
body T*(# 3). 18:0 PC-is rigid with high transition (T*) . #5 DPGG-
avoids RE System (is fluid at body T*, induces long circulations)#7. 18:0
PEG 2 PE - industry standard (also avoids RE system).Biologic effects of
the 4 lipid formulations with/without C6 Ceramide were initially assessed
invitro.Results: Dose response MTT assay demonstrated no distinctive
response of C6 combined liposomes vesicles # 1 & 3, but confirmed high
activity in preparations #5 & 7.MTT Response Conclude: Liposomal C6
preparations show high activity in potentiating chemo toxicity by
Gemcitabine, Paclitaxel and Cetuximab against Pancreatic Cancer.
Confirmatory in vivo studies are in process.

