Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cavin-1 alters oncogenic effects of caveolin-1 microdomains in
prostate cancer.


Caveolin-1 is associated with prostate cancer progression and has been
suggested to be a biomarker and therapeutic target. Mature caveolin-1
resides in lipid raft domains at the plasma membrane, where it forms
caveolae upon co-expression of cavin-1 (also known as PTRF; polymerase I
and transcript release factor). In the absence of cavin-1, caveolin-1
does not form caveolae but are found on flat membrane. To determine if
oncogenic caveolin-1 in prostate cancer is present in caveolae, we
examined the relative expression of caveolin-1 and cavin-1 in normal,
non-malignant and malignant prostate tissues. We found that caveolin-1 is
induced in prostate cancer without cavin-1, an expression pattern mirror
in the PC3 cell line. Previously we showed that expression of cavin-1 in
PC3 cells recruits flat membrane caveolin-1 to caveolae and reduced
transmigration. Here we report that cavin-1 expression reduces tumour
size and metastasis of PC3 cells in vivo, using an orthotopic prostate
cancer xenograft mouse model. To determine if cavin-1 acts by
neutralizing oncogenic caveolin-1, we expressed cavin-1 in caveolin-1
negative LNCaP and 22Rv1 cells. While caveolin-1 over-expression
increased anchorage-independent growth of LNCaP and 22Rv1 cells, cavin-1
over-expression had no effect. Furthermore, co-expression of cavin-1 in
LNCaP+caveolin-1 cells reversed caveolin-1 effect. Taken together, these
results suggest that caveolin-1 in prostate cancer is present outside of
caveolae, and caveola formation by cavin-1 co-expression alters the
oncogenic effect of non-caveolar caveolin-1 microdomains.

