Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rate of moist desquamation in patients receiving radiation for
breast cancer after mastectomy versus breast conserving surgery.


OBJECTIVE: Although skin toxicity is expected to be more severe in the
setting of post-mastectomy radiation (PMRT) compared to breast conserving
surgery + intact breast radiation (BCT), the actual incidence of moist
desquamation (MD) in patients treated with PMRT has not been well
quantified. We prospectively determined rates of MD in patients treated
with PMRT compared to BCT and identified risk factors for the development
of MD.MATERIALS/ METHODS: 284 breast cancer patients enrolled on two
parallel prospectively managed observational studies to assess skin
reaction to RT (one in the setting of BCT and the other PMRT) were
included in this analysis. All received tangential photons to the intact
breast or chest wall (CW) following definitive surgery, with a dose of
45-50 Gy to the breast/CW +/- supraclavicular nodes (SCV). BCT patients
had a 10 Gy lumpectomy cavity boost. PMRT patients received daily 0.5 cm
bolus with a 10 Gy scar boost. Skin toxicities and rates of MD were rated
by the treating physician on a weekly basis during RT, using the CTCAE
v3.0 scale. Logistic regression analysis was used to assess risk factors
associated with MD.RESULTS: Overall, 19% were black, 64% Hispanic white,
and 17 % non-Hispanic white/other. Patients receiving PMRT were younger
(median age 51.5 vs 57, pOBJECTIVE: Although skin toxicity is expected to
be more severe in the setting of post-mastectomy radiation (PMRT)
compared to breast conserving surgery + intact breast radiation (BCT),
the actual incidence of moist desquamation (MD) in patients treated with
PMRT has not been well quantified. We prospectively determined rates of
MD in patients treated with PMRT compared to BCT and identified risk
factors for the development of MD.MATERIALS/ METHODS: 284 breast cancer
patients enrolled on two parallel prospectively managed observational
studies to assess skin reaction to RT (one in the setting of BCT and the
other PMRT) were included in this analysis. All received tangential
photons to the intact breast or chest wall (CW) following definitive
surgery, with a dose of 45-50 Gy to the breast/CW +/- supraclavicular
nodes (SCV). BCT patients had a 10 Gy lumpectomy cavity boost. PMRT
patients received daily 0.5 cm bolus with a 10 Gy scar boost. Skin
toxicities and rates of MD were rated by the treating physician on a
weekly basis during RT, using the CTCAE v3.0 scale. Logistic regression
analysis was used to assess risk factors associated with MD.RESULTS:
Overall, 19% were black, 64% Hispanic white, and 17 % non-Hispanic
white/other. Patients receiving PMRT were younger (median age 51.5 vs 57,
p<.001), and had more advanced stage (0% vs 20.4% stage 0, 7% vs 46.9%
stage I, 32.8% vs 26.1% stage II, and 60.3% v. 6.6% stage III,
pOBJECTIVE: Although skin toxicity is expected to be more severe in the
setting of post-mastectomy radiation (PMRT) compared to breast conserving
surgery + intact breast radiation (BCT), the actual incidence of moist
desquamation (MD) in patients treated with PMRT has not been well
quantified. We prospectively determined rates of MD in patients treated
with PMRT compared to BCT and identified risk factors for the development
of MD.MATERIALS/ METHODS: 284 breast cancer patients enrolled on two
parallel prospectively managed observational studies to assess skin
reaction to RT (one in the setting of BCT and the other PMRT) were
included in this analysis. All received tangential photons to the intact
breast or chest wall (CW) following definitive surgery, with a dose of
45-50 Gy to the breast/CW +/- supraclavicular nodes (SCV). BCT patients
had a 10 Gy lumpectomy cavity boost. PMRT patients received daily 0.5 cm
bolus with a 10 Gy scar boost. Skin toxicities and rates of MD were rated
by the treating physician on a weekly basis during RT, using the CTCAE
v3.0 scale. Logistic regression analysis was used to assess risk factors
associated with MD.RESULTS: Overall, 19% were black, 64% Hispanic white,
and 17 % non-Hispanic white/other. Patients receiving PMRT were younger
(median age 51.5 vs 57, p<.001), and had more advanced stage (0% vs 20.4%
stage 0, 7% vs 46.9% stage I, 32.8% vs 26.1% stage II, and 60.3% v. 6.6%
stage III, p<.0001), but there was no difference between the groups with
respect to race, ethnicity, body mass index (BMI), or smoking status. In
the BCT group, 23% of patients developed MD vs 55.2% in the PMRT group
(pOBJECTIVE: Although skin toxicity is expected to be more severe in the
setting of post-mastectomy radiation (PMRT) compared to breast conserving
surgery + intact breast radiation (BCT), the actual incidence of moist
desquamation (MD) in patients treated with PMRT has not been well
quantified. We prospectively determined rates of MD in patients treated
with PMRT compared to BCT and identified risk factors for the development
of MD.MATERIALS/ METHODS: 284 breast cancer patients enrolled on two
parallel prospectively managed observational studies to assess skin
reaction to RT (one in the setting of BCT and the other PMRT) were
included in this analysis. All received tangential photons to the intact
breast or chest wall (CW) following definitive surgery, with a dose of
45-50 Gy to the breast/CW +/- supraclavicular nodes (SCV). BCT patients
had a 10 Gy lumpectomy cavity boost. PMRT patients received daily 0.5 cm
bolus with a 10 Gy scar boost. Skin toxicities and rates of MD were rated
by the treating physician on a weekly basis during RT, using the CTCAE
v3.0 scale. Logistic regression analysis was used to assess risk factors
associated with MD.RESULTS: Overall, 19% were black, 64% Hispanic white,
and 17 % non-Hispanic white/other. Patients receiving PMRT were younger
(median age 51.5 vs 57, p<.001), and had more advanced stage (0% vs 20.4%
stage 0, 7% vs 46.9% stage I, 32.8% vs 26.1% stage II, and 60.3% v. 6.6%
stage III, p<.0001), but there was no difference between the groups with
respect to race, ethnicity, body mass index (BMI), or smoking status. In
the BCT group, 23% of patients developed MD vs 55.2% in the PMRT group
(p<0.0001). Other factors predictive of MD were increasing BMI (17.3% in
BMI 30, p=0.011), and increasing breast cancer stage (21.7% stage 0,
24.5% stage I, 29.5% stage II, 49% stage III, p=0.018). On multivariate
analysis, the use of PMRT (OR 3.84, 95% CI 1.76-8.87, p=0.001) and
increasing BMI (OR 2.42, 95% CI 1.10-5.30 (p=0.028) for BMI 25-29.9 vs
30, p=0.011), and increasing breast cancer stage (21.7% stage 0, 24.5%
stage I, 29.5% stage II, 49% stage III, p=0.018). On multivariate
analysis, the use of PMRT (OR 3.84, 95% CI 1.76-8.87, p=0.001) and
increasing BMI (OR 2.42, 95% CI 1.10-5.30 (p=0.028) for BMI 25-29.9 vs
<25; OR 3.10, 95% CI 1.46-6.59 (p=0.003) for BMI 30 vs 30, p=0.011), and
increasing breast cancer stage (21.7% stage 0, 24.5% stage I, 29.5% stage
II, 49% stage III, p=0.018). On multivariate analysis, the use of PMRT
(OR 3.84, 95% CI 1.76-8.87, p=0.001) and increasing BMI (OR 2.42, 95% CI
1.10-5.30 (p=0.028) for BMI 25-29.9 vs <25; OR 3.10, 95% CI 1.46-6.59
(p=0.003) for BMI 30 vs <25) retained statistical significance as risk
factors for MD, but stage was no longer significant. There was no
difference in rate of MD by race or ethnicity.CONCLUSIONS: The rate of MD
is more than double in patients receiving PMRT vs BCT, 55.2% vs 23%, even
when accounting for increasing stage and BMI. This information is
important in counseling our patients regarding the potential toxicities
of adjuvant radiation treatment for breast cancer.

