Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in the expression profile of microRNAs and their predicted
targets in fibroblasts associated with breast carcinoma compared to
fibroblasts from normal breast tissue.


Background: Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) contribute to tumor
growth and progression in breast cancer. CAFs are functional and
phenotypically distinct from normal breast tissue (NAFs). Epigenetic
modifications and post-transcriptional gene regulation by microRNAs may
contribute to the phenotype of CAFs.Objective: To identify the changes in
microRNAs expression profile in fibroblasts associated with breast cancer
as compared to those observed in fibroblasts obtained from samples of
mammoplasty.Methodology: Fibroblast primary culture from breast carcinoma
(n= 04) and normal breast (n= 06) tissues were established and
characterized by Immunohistochemistry. Total RNA extraction and
purification were realized using Mirvana kit and miRNAs differentially
expressed were identified by qPCR TaqMan Low Density Array. Potential
targets of these miRNAs were identified by in slico analysis using DIANAm
T, Miranda, miRWalk, PICTAR5 and TargetScan databases and compared to
microarray profile determined using the U133 plus v.2 Affymetrix
chip.Results: All primary cultures from fibroblast were characterized by
presence of vimentin, total absence of CD31 and pan-cytokeratin
expression but CAFs exhibited a higher proportion of cells positive for
alpha-actin and S100A4. The five microRNAs differentially expressed
identified by statistical analysis and grouped hierarchically
(hs_miR_655, hs_miR_383, hs_miR_129_3p, hs_miR_15b, hs_miR_489) (FDR10%
and pBackground: Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) contribute to tumor
growth and progression in breast cancer. CAFs are functional and
phenotypically distinct from normal breast tissue (NAFs). Epigenetic
modifications and post-transcriptional gene regulation by microRNAs may
contribute to the phenotype of CAFs.Objective: To identify the changes in
microRNAs expression profile in fibroblasts associated with breast cancer
as compared to those observed in fibroblasts obtained from samples of
mammoplasty.Methodology: Fibroblast primary culture from breast carcinoma
(n= 04) and normal breast (n= 06) tissues were established and
characterized by Immunohistochemistry. Total RNA extraction and
purification were realized using Mirvana kit and miRNAs differentially
expressed were identified by qPCR TaqMan Low Density Array. Potential
targets of these miRNAs were identified by in slico analysis using DIANAm
T, Miranda, miRWalk, PICTAR5 and TargetScan databases and compared to
microarray profile determined using the U133 plus v.2 Affymetrix
chip.Results: All primary cultures from fibroblast were characterized by
presence of vimentin, total absence of CD31 and pan-cytokeratin
expression but CAFs exhibited a higher proportion of cells positive for
alpha-actin and S100A4. The five microRNAs differentially expressed
identified by statistical analysis and grouped hierarchically
(hs_miR_655, hs_miR_383, hs_miR_129_3p, hs_miR_15b, hs_miR_489) (FDR10%
and p<0.05) allowed the separation of the samples into two distinct
groups: NAFs and CAFs. The Gene Ontology analysis of predicted target
genes to each one of the microRNAs listed above and also identified by
microarray, revealed their involvement in important biological processes
including cellular morphogenesis and protein localization.Further
detailed studies of these miRNAs and their targets in CAFs may help to
better understand the contribution of the mammary tumor microenvironment
to breast carcinogenesis and progression.Financial Support: FAPESP
09/100088-7, FAPESP 2011/08194-3

