Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclophosphamide induces dose dependent apoptosis of CD4+FoxP3+
regulatory T cells relative to CD4+FoxP3- effector T cells in breast
cancer patients.


CD4+FoxP3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) accumulate at tumor sites and
within the peripheral blood of patients with a variety of cancers. Tregs
suppress antigen-specific immune responses, and represent a major barrier
to the efficacy of cancer immunotherapy. We previously conducted a
dose-ranging study of low dose Cyclophosphamide (0, 200, 250, and 350
mg/m2) given one day prior to a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF)-secreting HER-2+ breast cancer vaccine in 28 patients
with metastatic breast cancer. We found that vaccine-induced
HER-2-specific immunity was best optimized by 200 mg/m2 CY, and that
doses of CY higher than 200 mg/m2 suppressed antigen-specific immunity.
To further explore the pharmacodynamic impact of CY on immune priming, we
analyzed Tregs and effector CD4+ T cells present in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) collected pre- and post-vaccination with or
without CY by flow cytometry. We found that the percentage of CD4+FoxP3+
Tregs in PBMC did not change with vaccination alone. Conversely, CY at
doses of either 200 or 250 mg/m2 selectively induced the apoptosis of
CD4+FoxP3+ Tregs relative to CD4+FoxP3 effector T cells, and CY at 350
mg/m2 induced apoptosis of both CD4+FoxP3+ Tregs and CD4+FoxP3 effector T
cells. Finally, CY at all doses selectively decreased CCR7CD45RA effector
memory Tregs and increased CCR7+CD45RA+ nave Tregs relative to vaccine
alone. Collectively, these data suggest that low dose CY selectively
induces apoptosis of CD4+FoxP3+ Tregs relative to CD4+FoxP3 effector T
cells, providing a window for more efficient induction of vaccine-induced
HER-2-specific immunity.

