Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long non-coding RNAs as functional targets of germline genetic
variation at ovarian cancer susceptibility loci.


An emerging theme in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) is that the
majority of common low-risk variants fall within non-protein coding DNA,
with no immediately obvious functional role in disease initiation and
development. As part of an international consortium (the ovarian cancer
association consortium) we have identified eleven regions of the genome
that harbor common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are
associated with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk. We hypothesize that
a proportion of risk SNPs identified by GWAS coincide with regulatory
non-coding RNA species, such as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). We used
RNA sequencing (RNAseq) of five EOC cell lines and ten normal EOC
precursor cell lines to identify lncRNAs that overlap EOC risk SNPs. Fine
mapping of EOC susceptibility regions using 1000 Genome project data in
18,000 invasive EOC cases and 20,000 controls identified suspected
functional variants at each known risk locus. We then integrated RNAseq
and genotyping data to identify SNPs mapping to ncRNAs.At the 2q31 risk
locus a lncRNA gene (LOC401022) overlapped with 7 of 19 EOC risk
variants, three of which were predicted to alter the sequence of the
mature lncRNA transcript. RNAseq profiling showed that LOC401022 was
overexpressed in EOC cell line compared to normal ovarian cancer
precursor tissues; this was validated in a larger panel of 51 cancer and
67 normal cell lines (P=9.8x10-12). Analysis of copy number variation in
500 high-grade serous tumors profiled by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
project showed copy number gain in this region in over 40% of EOCs
supporting the hypothesis that LOC401022 has oncogenic role during EOC
development. Lentiviral delivery of a targeted shRNA was used to
knockdown LOC401022 expression in OV90 EOC cells. LOC401022 knockdown was
associated with reduced proliferation and a marked
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition compared to control cells transduced
with a non-targeting shRNA. Cytokeratin expression was lost and vimentin
expression upregulated following LOC401022 knockdown.LOC401022 contains
145bp of sequence that has antisense similarity to the HOXD1 gene.
However, in our EOC cell lines and in the cancer cell line encyclopedia,
HOXD1 and LOC401022 expression are positively correlated (R2=0.48 and
0.62 respectively), and LOC401022 knockdown did not influence HOXD1
expression. This suggests that factors upstream of these two genes may
regulate co-expression of both LOC401022 and HOXD1. We went on to perform
genome wide expression profiling in OV90 cells after LOC401022 knockdown
using RNAseq, to identify functional targets of this lncRNA and have
identified several putative susceptibility genes which TCGA data suggest
are involved EOC development. To our knowledge, this is the first
instance in which a lncRNA has been implicated as a functional target of
genetic variation at an ovarian cancer susceptibility locus.Citation
Format: Kate Lawrenson, Honglin Song, Janet Lee, Jonathan Tyrer, Susan
Ramus, Paul Pharoah, Simon Gayther. Long non-coding RNAs as functional
targets of germline genetic variation at ovarian cancer susceptibility
loci. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2559.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2559

