Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic CNV testing on chromosome 17q genes reveals clinically
relevant subtypes in breast cancer.


Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) and genomic Copy Number
Variation (CNV) testing may not yield identical CN status for the same
gene, due to methodological differences in calling gene copies. The aim
of the present study was to evaluate the clinical relevance of genomic
CNV profiles on 17q (17q11.2-q12 to 17q21-q22) in the context of
high-risk operable breast cancer.Methods: The CN status of NOS2, HER2,
THRA, RARA and TOP2A was tested with 5- and 3-end-specific, exon-intron
spanning qPCR CNV assays (two assays per gene). Software obtained CN
values against normal DNA were evaluated from 439 informative paraffin
breast cancer tissue samples with >50% tumor cells and were assessed (a)
upon logarithmic transformation as continuous variables, and (b) as
nominal variables with following CN categories: loss (>0-0.5 copies);
no-gain or marginal accounting for DNA replication (1-4); low-gain (5-6)
and high-gain (>6). For each gene, 5- and 3-ends were evaluated
separately for gene stability and in combination for obtaining the entire
gene CN status. All patients had received adjuvant anthracyclines in the
frame of two phase III trials.Results: Concordance between 5- and 3-end
CN status was observed in 94.53% of tumors for TOP2A; 91.12% for THRA;
86.79% for HER2; 69.70% for RARA; and, 53.76% for NOS2. Strong
associations were observed for classic HER2 FISH status with NOS2
(p=.0007), HER2 and THRA (both pFluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH)
and genomic Copy Number Variation (CNV) testing may not yield identical
CN status for the same gene, due to methodological differences in calling
gene copies. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the clinical
relevance of genomic CNV profiles on 17q (17q11.2-q12 to 17q21-q22) in
the context of high-risk operable breast cancer.Methods: The CN status of
NOS2, HER2, THRA, RARA and TOP2A was tested with 5- and 3-end-specific,
exon-intron spanning qPCR CNV assays (two assays per gene). Software
obtained CN values against normal DNA were evaluated from 439 informative
paraffin breast cancer tissue samples with >50% tumor cells and were
assessed (a) upon logarithmic transformation as continuous variables, and
(b) as nominal variables with following CN categories: loss (>0-0.5
copies); no-gain or marginal accounting for DNA replication (1-4);
low-gain (5-6) and high-gain (>6). For each gene, 5- and 3-ends were
evaluated separately for gene stability and in combination for obtaining
the entire gene CN status. All patients had received adjuvant
anthracyclines in the frame of two phase III trials.Results: Concordance
between 5- and 3-end CN status was observed in 94.53% of tumors for
TOP2A; 91.12% for THRA; 86.79% for HER2; 69.70% for RARA; and, 53.76% for
NOS2. Strong associations were observed for classic HER2 FISH status with
NOS2 (p=.0007), HER2 and THRA (both p<.0001), and for classic TOP2A FISH
status with HER2 (p=.0004) and THRA (pFluorescent In Situ Hybridization
(FISH) and genomic Copy Number Variation (CNV) testing may not yield
identical CN status for the same gene, due to methodological differences
in calling gene copies. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the
clinical relevance of genomic CNV profiles on 17q (17q11.2-q12 to
17q21-q22) in the context of high-risk operable breast cancer.Methods:
The CN status of NOS2, HER2, THRA, RARA and TOP2A was tested with 5- and
3-end-specific, exon-intron spanning qPCR CNV assays (two assays per
gene). Software obtained CN values against normal DNA were evaluated from
439 informative paraffin breast cancer tissue samples with >50% tumor
cells and were assessed (a) upon logarithmic transformation as continuous
variables, and (b) as nominal variables with following CN categories:
loss (>0-0.5 copies); no-gain or marginal accounting for DNA replication
(1-4); low-gain (5-6) and high-gain (>6). For each gene, 5- and 3-ends
were evaluated separately for gene stability and in combination for
obtaining the entire gene CN status. All patients had received adjuvant
anthracyclines in the frame of two phase III trials.Results: Concordance
between 5- and 3-end CN status was observed in 94.53% of tumors for
TOP2A; 91.12% for THRA; 86.79% for HER2; 69.70% for RARA; and, 53.76% for
NOS2. Strong associations were observed for classic HER2 FISH status with
NOS2 (p=.0007), HER2 and THRA (both p<.0001), and for classic TOP2A FISH
status with HER2 (p=.0004) and THRA (p<.0001) gene CN status.
Hierarchical cluster analysis based on the log-transformed CN values by
using Euclidean distance and Ward's minimum variance yielded an
unsupervised 7-cluster classification, whereby tumors with one or
multiple low CN genes were associated with worse outcome (log-rank
p=.0195 for disease free survival [DFS]). Based on this observation we
used the above described CN categories and applied a deterministic
profiling distinguishing tumors with no aberrations (A, n=218 [49.7%]);
CN losses or complex losses/gains (B, n=29 [6.6%]); any gain in 1 gene
(C, n=92 [20.9%]); and, multiple gains (D, n=100 [22.8%]). Again,
patients with B-tumors had the worst outcome (p=.0123 for DFS). Upon
adjustment for clinical parameters, FISH and IHC HER2 and TOP2A status,
ER/PgR IHC, and breast carcinoma subtypes, B-tumors independently
predicted for increased risk of relapse and death in comparison to A- and
C-tumors (e.g., for DFS, B vs. A, HR: 2.3, 95%CI: 1.3-4.2, Wald-p=.0036;
B vs. C, HR: 2.6, 95% CI: 1.4-5.0, Wald-p=.0031).Conclusions: Breast
tumors with CN losses or complex losses/gains for the genes examined on
17q seem to carry the worst prognosis among those treated in the adjuvant
setting with anthracyclines and may be worthy indentifying for different
treatment selection. TOP2A FISH and CNV status are not concordant, while
NOS2 and RARA seem to suffer internal CNV, which needs further validation
for its biologic implications.

