Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lomustine nanoparticles are effective brain cancer treatments.


AbstractThe therapy of brain cancers such as Glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) is often hampered by the blood-brain-barrier, which limits the
access of drugs to the brain. High blood concentrations of a drug can
increase transport into the brain but in the case of cytotoxic drugs
often lead to dose-limiting peripheral toxicity, typically
myelosuppression. In the current study we explore the potential of
Nanomerics Molecular Envelope Technology (MET) nanoparticles to enhance
transport of the cytotoxic drug lomustine to the brain while avoiding
dose-limiting peripheral bone marrow toxicity. We have previously shown
that these particles increase the brain activity of drugs such as the
intravenous anaesthetic propofol by a factor of ten.MET nanoparticles
were prepared from a self-assembling amphiphilic chitosan based polymer -
quaternary ammonium palmitoyl glycol chitosan.Lomustine, a poorly water
soluble alkylating nitrosourea (CCNU), was encapsulated within these
particles at a concentration of 2mg mL1, 20x higher than what is
achievable with conventional ethanolic- polysorbate 80 formulations.In
order to determine the therapeutic efficacy of the formulations,
orthotopic intracranial human glioblastomas (U87- MG cells) were studied
in female CD-1 nude mice. Established tumours were treated at the maximal
achievable lomustine concentrations using MET lomustine (13 mg kg1/day)
and the conventional formulation (1.2 mg kg1/day) for 10 days.The mean
survival time for animals that received the MET formulation was
significantly (p AbstractThe therapy of brain cancers such as
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is often hampered by the
blood-brain-barrier, which limits the access of drugs to the brain. High
blood concentrations of a drug can increase transport into the brain but
in the case of cytotoxic drugs often lead to dose-limiting peripheral
toxicity, typically myelosuppression. In the current study we explore the
potential of Nanomerics Molecular Envelope Technology (MET) nanoparticles
to enhance transport of the cytotoxic drug lomustine to the brain while
avoiding dose-limiting peripheral bone marrow toxicity. We have
previously shown that these particles increase the brain activity of
drugs such as the intravenous anaesthetic propofol by a factor of ten.MET
nanoparticles were prepared from a self-assembling amphiphilic chitosan
based polymer - quaternary ammonium palmitoyl glycol chitosan.Lomustine,
a poorly water soluble alkylating nitrosourea (CCNU), was encapsulated
within these particles at a concentration of 2mg mL1, 20x higher than
what is achievable with conventional ethanolic- polysorbate 80
formulations.In order to determine the therapeutic efficacy of the
formulations, orthotopic intracranial human glioblastomas (U87- MG cells)
were studied in female CD-1 nude mice. Established tumours were treated
at the maximal achievable lomustine concentrations using MET lomustine
(13 mg kg1/day) and the conventional formulation (1.2 mg kg1/day) for 10
days.The mean survival time for animals that received the MET formulation
was significantly (p <0.05) prolonged (33.17 days) compared to the
ethanolic lomustine formulation (22.5 days) and that of the control group
(21.33 days). The lack of gross symptoms or any difference in body weight
between groups suggested the 10x higher MET nanoparticle lomustine dose
did not lead to additional toxicity. This was confirmed measuring full
blood and femoral bone marrow cell counts on day 1, 7, and 22 after
treatment (regime as before).Animal white blood cell and femoral cell
counts were not affected by any of the lomustine formulations, however
both treated groups of animals showed a transient drop in the platelet
count on Day 7 with recovery by day 22.The MET lomustine particulate
formulation thus enabled the administration of a more than ten times
higher dose of lomustine which dramatically improved therapeutic outcome
with little evidence of any additional toxicity or dose limiting toxic
effects.The results of this study suggest that MET nanoparticles may
provide a safe means to improve therapeutic outcomes in brain cancer
using current cytotoxic drugs.

