Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential sensitivities to heat shock protein 90(HSP90)
inhibitors in anaplastic lymphoma kinase(ALK)-positive non-small cell
ling cancer(NSCLC) cells.


Objectives: HSP90 is an abundant cellular chaperone protein and its
inhibition results in the instability and degradation of client proteins
such as HER2, mutant KIT, mutant EGFR, and ALK. Recently, HSP90
inhibitors showed clinical activity against echinoderm
microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4)-ALK NSCLC. However, it is
unknown whether HSP90 inhibitors remain sensitive against ALK-positive
NSCLC cells that show acquired resistance to ALK inhibitors, such as
crizotinib. Here, we evaluated the activity of two clinical stage HSP90
inhibitors in ALK-positive NSCLC cells that were sensitive and resistant
to crizotinib.Methods: ALK-positive NSCLC cells that were
crizotinib-sensitive (SNU-2292 and NCI-H3122) and crizotinib-resistant
(SNU-2535 and H3122CR1) were used. In vitro cytotoxicities of HSP90
inhibitors alone (ganetespib and NVP-AUY922), or in combination with
crizotinib, were evaluated against ALK-positive NSCLC cells using a
modified MTT assay. Cell cycle and Annexin-V binding assays were
evaluated by flow cytometry. Expression of ALK and its downstream
effectors were detected by Western blot assay after exposure to HSP90
inhibitors crizotinib.Results: HSP90 inhibitors were highly potent
against crizotinib sensitive SNU-2292 and NCI-H3122 cell lines and
displayed enhanced activity when combined with 0.1 M crizotinib.
Consistent with previous reports, crizotinib resistant H3122 cells were
5x fold less sensitive to HSP90 inhibitors compared to parental H3122
cells, with IC50 still in the low nanomolar range. In a concentration
dependent manner, the HSP90 inhibitors did not suppress ALK downstream
signals in H3122CR1 and SNU-2535 cell lines compared to effects on
NCI-H3122 and SNU-2292 cell lines. In addition, phospho-ALK signals were
significantly diminished in Ba/F3 cells expressing EML4-ALK compared to
cell lines expressing L1196M or G1269A after exposure to HSP90
inhibitors. Cell cycle analysis demonstrated HSP90 inhibitors and/or
crizotinib significantly increased the sub-G1 populations of NCI-H3122
and SNU-2292 cells compared with those of H3122CR1 and SNU-2535.
Similarly, apoptotic cells significantly increased in
crizotinib-sensitive cells than in crizotinib-resistant cells treated
with HSP90 inhibitors and/or crizotinib.Conclusions: HSP90 inhibitors
showed differential sensitivities in ALK-positive NSCLC cells. Our
results suggest that HSP90 inhibitors alone or in combination treatment
with crizotinib are effective against crizotinib-sensitive, ALK-positive
NSCLC cells.

