Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of stem cell and EMT phenotype in
Circulating Tumor Cells.


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are associated with prognosis
and can be used as a liquid biopsy for repeated follow up examinations.
The subpopulation of CTCs that successfully establish distant metastases
share EMT and stemness features. These cells have been found to be
associated with resistance to anti-cancer therapies and treatment
failure.Patients and methods: Peripheral blood (20 mL in EDTA) was
obtained and after density gradient centrifugation, immunomagnetic
Ber-EP4 coated capture beads were used to enrich for epithelial cells
from 102 patients with early breast cancer and 23 patients with verified
metastasis. Messenger RNA was isolated from enriched epithelial cells
using oligo (dT)25 coated magnetic beads. After cDNA synthesis the
expression of CK-19, MAGE-A3, HER-2, PBGD and CD24, CD44, ALDH1, HPRT was
tested, using two different quadruplex RT-qPCR assays. Moreover we
performed RT-qPCR for the expression of TWIST1, hMammaglobin and hTERT
++.Results: The presence of circulating tumor cells was evaluated using
CK-19, MAGE-A3, HER-2, hTERT ++, and mammaglobin gene transcripts. In 102
operable breast cancer patients 31 patients (30.4%) were found positive
for the presence of CTCs. CTC biomarkers were significantly correlated
with lymph nodes (P=0.032). In the CTC+ group, 10 patients (32.3%) were
positive for TWIST1 and 16 (51.6%) were positive for CD44+/CD24-/low and
ALDH1+ cell phenotype. We found a significant correlation between HER2
negative tumors with TWIST1 expression (P=0.027) and Stem Cell phenotype
(P=0.012). The detection of both EMT and Stem Cell characteristics was
associated with shorter disease-free survival (P=0.024). In the CTC
positive group of patients with verified metastasis (39.1%) 1 patient
(11.1%) was positive for TWIST1 and 4 (44.4%) were positive for
CD44+/CD24-/low and ALDH1+ cell phenotype. The detection of CK19+, Stem
Cell and Stem Cell and/or EMT phenotype was associated with shorter
overall-free survival (P=0.036, P=0.001 and P=0.002).Discussion: CTCs in
breast cancer patients share both stem cell and/or EMT phenotype. The
detection and molecular characterization of CTCs with an EMT or stem
cell-like characteristics could be a powerful diagnostic tool for the
determination of prognosis and designing new therapeutic drugs for the
elimination of minimal residual disease.

