Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling for actionable aberrations in advanced
osteosarcoma.


Background: The survival of patients with advanced metastatic
osteosarcoma is poor with limited therapeutic options. Conventional
therapies have reached a plateau. There is an urgent need for new
rational targeted therapies based on identified biomarkers. Recently,
theranostic molecular profiling services for advanced cancer patients by
CLIA-certified commercial companies as well as in-house profiling in
major academic medical centers has expanded exponentially. Using this
technology, we evaluated molecular profiles of patients with advanced
osteosarcoma.Patients and Methods: We conducted an observational chart
review of patients with advanced metastatic osteosarcoma referred to
Clinical Center for Targeted Therapy and/or Department of Pediatrics at
MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC) whose tumor tissue had been analyzed by
one of the following methods: 1. 182 gene next-generation exome
sequencing (Foundation Medicine, Boston, MA), 2. Immunohistochemistry
(IHC)/ PCR-based panel (CARIS Target Now, CARIS Life Sciences, Phoenix,
AZ), 3. Single-gene PCR assays, PTEN IHC (MD Anderson Cancer Center CLIA
pathology laboratory), 4. UT Houston Medical School IHC based
morphoproteomics (Dr. Brown, Houston, TX).Results: 10/18 pts had
profiling data (Foundation One, N=3, Caris N=2, UT MDACC CLIA, N=7,
Morphoproteomics, N=2). Median age at presentation was 17.5(9-65). Most
of the patients were heavily pretreated and had more than one profiling
done (median no of prior therapies was > 5). M: F= 12:6. One patient had
a history of retinoblastoma. Identified aberrations included PTEN loss
(N=4), MYC amplification (N=1), P53 truncation or mutation (N=2), BCL2L2
amplification (N=1), NKX2-1 amplification (N=1), RB1 loss or mutation
(N=2), PIK3CA mutation (N=1), EGFR amplification (n=1) and JUN
amplification (N=1). IHC-based morphoproteomics showed increased
expression of p-ERK1/2(Thr 202/Tyr204), p-mTOR (Ser 2448), and TRAIL(DR4)
in 2 patients and p-IGF-1R(Tyr 1161) in 1 patient. Single-gene PCR-based
assay for specific aberrations found no aberrations in 5/5
patients.Conclusions: Theranostic molecular profiling services are
rapidly evolving. Advanced osteosarcoma molecular profiling revealed many
aberrations in the PIK3CA/PTEN/mTOR pathway. Actionable aberrations exist
and may be detected in subsets of advanced osteosarcomas. Further
large-scale investigations are needed to evaluate the clinical benefit of
matching patients with actionable aberrations identified using
commercially available profiles.

