Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and application of a syngeneic breast tumor
preclinical model to study anticancer efficacy and cardiac safety of
doxorubicin and dexrazoxane.


Doxorubicin is a chemotherapeutic drug that causes oxidative
stress-mediated cardiotoxicity. To prevent oxidative stress and help to
mitigate the cardiotoxic effects of doxorubicin, the iron chelator
dexrazoxane is clinically used. However, iron chelators and other
antioxidants have not completely succeeded in mitigating this effect and
do not protect against iron-independent oxidative damage. One limitation
to the development of new cardioprotectants is the lack of
physiologically-relevant animal models to simultaneously study antitumor
activity and cardioprotection. Therefore, we optimized a syngeneic rat
model and examined the mechanisms by which oxidative stress affects the
safety and efficacy outcome. Immune-competent spontaneously hypertensive
rats (SHRs) were implanted with the SHR-derived, breast tumor cell line,
SST-2. Tumor growth and cytokine responses (IL-1A, MCP-1, TNF-) were
observed two weeks post-implantation. In order to demonstrate the utility
of SHR/SST-2 model for monitoring both anticancer efficacy and acute
cardiotoxicity, we studied cardiotoxic doxorubicin alone and in
combination with dexrazoxane. As predicted, significant tumor reduction,
DNA damage, and cardiomyopathy were demonstrated by doxorubicin.
Treatment with the cardioprotectant dexrazoxane increased the
pro-survival autophagy marker LC3-II and decreased caspase-3 in the
heart, as a single agent and in combination with doxorubicin.
Histopathology and transmission electron microscopy demonstrated
apoptosis, autophagy, and necrosis in tumor and heart. Our results
demonstrate the advantage of the immune-proficient SHR/SST-2 model to
study anticancer agents and simultaneously address anticancer efficacy
and cardiac safety.

