Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MM-121/SAR256212, an anti-ErbB3 antibody, restores sensitivity to
letrozole and delays the onset of resistance in an ER+ breast cancer
model.


Endocrine therapies directed against estrogen action are initially
effective in estrogen-receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer, though most
patients will eventually develop resistance to these treatments. It has
recently been shown that growth factor signaling can activate ER through
the AKT and MAPK signaling pathways. Moreover, both heregulin and ErbB3
signaling have been implicated as potential escape routes in the
development of resistance to anti-estrogen therapies. Here we have used
an in vivo model of ER+ breast cancer to investigate the activity of
MM-121/SAR256212, alone and in combination with the aromatase inhibitor
letrozole.Tumor xenografts of human breast cancer cells (MCF-7)
engineered to express aromatase (MCF7-Ca) were generated in
ovariectomized athymic nude mice. Mice were injected daily with
androstenedione and randomized to treatment groups once the average tumor
volume per group reached 300 mm3. Mice received vehicle, letrozole,
MM-121, or both MM-121 and letrozole. Following development of resistance
to letrozole, mice receiving letrozole alone were re-distributed into
three treatment groups - letrozole, MM-121, or letrozole plus MM-121.
Tumors were harvested at 24 h post-treatment initiation, at development
of letrozole resistance, and at the end of study. Total and
phosphorylated levels of certain signaling proteins in the ErbB network
were measured by quantitative Western blotting.MM-121 in combination with
letrozole significantly inhibited tumor growth (pEndocrine therapies
directed against estrogen action are initially effective in
estrogen-receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer, though most patients will
eventually develop resistance to these treatments. It has recently been
shown that growth factor signaling can activate ER through the AKT and
MAPK signaling pathways. Moreover, both heregulin and ErbB3 signaling
have been implicated as potential escape routes in the development of
resistance to anti-estrogen therapies. Here we have used an in vivo model
of ER+ breast cancer to investigate the activity of MM-121/SAR256212,
alone and in combination with the aromatase inhibitor letrozole.Tumor
xenografts of human breast cancer cells (MCF-7) engineered to express
aromatase (MCF7-Ca) were generated in ovariectomized athymic nude mice.
Mice were injected daily with androstenedione and randomized to treatment
groups once the average tumor volume per group reached 300 mm3. Mice
received vehicle, letrozole, MM-121, or both MM-121 and letrozole.
Following development of resistance to letrozole, mice receiving
letrozole alone were re-distributed into three treatment groups -
letrozole, MM-121, or letrozole plus MM-121. Tumors were harvested at 24
h post-treatment initiation, at development of letrozole resistance, and
at the end of study. Total and phosphorylated levels of certain signaling
proteins in the ErbB network were measured by quantitative Western
blotting.MM-121 in combination with letrozole significantly inhibited
tumor growth (p<0.05) in our in vivo model. Further, when MM-121 was
dosed with letrozole from the start of the study, a statistically
significant delay was observed in the onset of resistance to letrozole
(p=0.01; Letrozole vs. Let+MM-121/SAR256212). Following development of
letrozole resistance, the addition of MM-121 restored sensitivity to
letrozole and slowed the rate of tumor growth (pEndocrine therapies
directed against estrogen action are initially effective in
estrogen-receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer, though most patients will
eventually develop resistance to these treatments. It has recently been
shown that growth factor signaling can activate ER through the AKT and
MAPK signaling pathways. Moreover, both heregulin and ErbB3 signaling
have been implicated as potential escape routes in the development of
resistance to anti-estrogen therapies. Here we have used an in vivo model
of ER+ breast cancer to investigate the activity of MM-121/SAR256212,
alone and in combination with the aromatase inhibitor letrozole.Tumor
xenografts of human breast cancer cells (MCF-7) engineered to express
aromatase (MCF7-Ca) were generated in ovariectomized athymic nude mice.
Mice were injected daily with androstenedione and randomized to treatment
groups once the average tumor volume per group reached 300 mm3. Mice
received vehicle, letrozole, MM-121, or both MM-121 and letrozole.
Following development of resistance to letrozole, mice receiving
letrozole alone were re-distributed into three treatment groups -
letrozole, MM-121, or letrozole plus MM-121. Tumors were harvested at 24
h post-treatment initiation, at development of letrozole resistance, and
at the end of study. Total and phosphorylated levels of certain signaling
proteins in the ErbB network were measured by quantitative Western
blotting.MM-121 in combination with letrozole significantly inhibited
tumor growth (p<0.05) in our in vivo model. Further, when MM-121 was
dosed with letrozole from the start of the study, a statistically
significant delay was observed in the onset of resistance to letrozole
(p=0.01; Letrozole vs. Let+MM-121/SAR256212). Following development of
letrozole resistance, the addition of MM-121 restored sensitivity to
letrozole and slowed the rate of tumor growth (p<0.0001; Letrozole vs.
Let to Let+MM-121/SAR256212). Molecular analyses indicated decreased
tErbB3 and pErbB3 levels in MM-121/SAR256212 treated tumors. As
previously shown, tHER2 levels were elevated following development of
letrozole resistance. Moreover, pS6 levels were decreased following
continuous MM-121/SAR256212 and letrozole treatment, indicating decreased
mRNA translation.In conclusion, MM-121 delayed the onset of resistance to
letrozole in this in vivo model, and re-sensitized tumors to letrozole
upon development of resistance. These data indicate a potential role for
combining MM-121 with letrozole in first and second line treatment of ER+
breast cancer.

