Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RASSF1C, unlike RASSF1A, reduces TNF- induced phosphorylation of
MST1/2.


Introduction: Recently, RASSF1A has been shown to mediate the apoptotic
effects of TNF- by interacting with the mammalian sterile 20-like kinase
1 and 2 (MST1/2) through the Salvador/Rassf/Hippo (SARAH) domain leading
to MST1/2 phosphorylation activation of apoptosis through the Hippo
pathway. In contrast, we have previously shown that RASSF1C promotes cell
proliferation and attenuates apoptosis in cancer cells. Since both
RASSF1A and RASSF1C contain the SARAH domain located in their identical
C-termini, RASSF1C should be capable of interacting with SARAH
domain-containing proteins, and could potentially attenuate
MST1/2-mediated apoptosis through the Hippo pathway. Thus, in this study
we have investigated the impact of RASSF1C on MST1/2
activation/phosphorylation in presence of TNF-, including whether RASSF1C
modulates MST1/2 pro-apoptotic effects through the Hippo pathway
differently from RASSF1A.Method: Breast and lung cancer cells
over-expressing RASSF1A and RASSF1C were used in this study. Cells were
cultured in the proper media and treated with TNF- for 12-18 hr. Cells
were collected and used for Western blot analysis utilizing antibodies
that detect MST and p-MST antibodies.Results: Our preliminary data
suggest that RASSF1C over-expression decreases the phosphorylation levels
of MST1/2 in TNF--treated breast and lung cancer cells compared to those
cells over-expressing RASSF1AConclusion: Our findings suggest that
over-expression of RASSF1C in breast and lung cancer cells may attenuate
the MST1/2 apoptotic effects by sequestering of MST1/2 proteins and
inhibiting their activation by phosphorylation. The findings also further
support our hypothesis that RASSF1C attenuates apoptosis; and RASSF1C,
unlike RASSF1A, may inhibit MST1/2 activation and hence may negatively
modulate the Hippo pathway.

