Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Irradiation enhances tumor-homing ability of monocytes as cellular
carrier.


Tumor-homing ability of monocytes renders them as potential cellular
delivery system for alternative cancer therapy, but the migration ability
is reduced after reagents are up-taken. Approaches that can enhance
monocyte tumor homing and migration abilities will facilitate the
clinical value of using monocytes as cellular carrier. Previous studies
have shown that irradiation (IR) could promote macrophage aggregation
into the hypoxic regions. To investigate whether IR could enhance the
infiltration of bone marrow-derived monocytes (BMDMs) into tumors, the
infiltration of BMDMs prepared from GFP-transgenic mice were examined by
fluorescence microscopy in murine prostate adenocarinoma TRAMP-C1 model.
The results showed that IR did not increase the initial infiltration
number of BMDMs, but enhanced the retention of monocytes within
IR-treated tumors up to 2 weeks. This study also showed that BMDMs were
able to uptake various imaging or therapeutic agents, but their mobility
was decreased as the load was increased. However, when BMDMs were
differentiated in IR-treated tumor condition medium (IR-CM), the
nanoparticles-loaded migration loss was recovered in both in vitro and in
vivo models. The prolong retention of monocytes within irradiated tumor
tissues and the ability of IR-CM to enhance the migration ability of
cargo-loaded BMDMs suggest that pre-conditioned monocytes could be a
potential cellular carrier for target therapy following conventional RT.
(This study is supported by NHRI-EX101-10132BI and NSC101-2627-M-007-001
grants)

