Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving survival of extraocular, metastatic and trilateral
retinoblastoma patients with combined intensive therapy.


PURPOSE: Most extraocular, metastatic and trilateral retinoblastoma (RB)
patients manifest multidrug resistance due to P-glycoprotein and few
survive beyond a year when treated with conventional chemotherapy and
radiation. We report results of cyclosporine circumvention of multidrug
resistance to carboplatin, etoposide and vincristine (CEV), combined with
consolidation with a myeloablative conditioning regimen (high-dose
carboplatin, etoposide and cyclophosphamide), with autologous stem cell
transplantation (ASCT) for stem cell rescue.METHOD: Since 1998, we
treated 9 such young children: three (ages 6.3, 1.3 and 2.3 years) with
non-germline RB with massive optic nerve/optic chiasm involvement
(resection and orbital radiation), one (age 4.8 years) with germline RB
and mandibular metastasis (totally resection after CEV-response avoiding
radiation), one (age 5 months) with germline RB and leptomeningeal
disease (intraventricular cytarabine/topotecan-response avoiding
craniospinal radiation), one (age 2.6 years) with non-germline RB with
orbital/intracranial/leptomeningeal recurrence (intraventricular
cytarabine/topotecan and orbital radiation), and three (ages 3, 5 and 27
months) with germline trilateral RB with leptomeningeal disease
(intraventricular cytarabine/topotecan-response avoiding craniospinal
radiation).RESULTS: Eight children have completed therapy, and one child
with trilateral suprasellar RB and leptomeningeal disease is still on
treatment prior to ASCT. Two patients died: one child with
orbital/intracranial/leptomeningeal recurrence died of disease 1.8 years
post-metastasis (1.4 years post ASCT); one child with trilateral
suprasellar RB with leptomeningeal disease died of disease 2.7 years
post-diagnosis (2 years post ASCT), resulting from a local recurrence
along the needle track site of the original suprasellar biopsy. Six
children of the 8 children who completed therapy are alive at a median of
12.5 years from diagnosis (range 5.3-13.3 years): 3 children with massive
optic nerve involvement are relapse-free 12.7, 13.3 and 12.6 years
post-diagnosis (12.3, 12.8, 12.3 years post ASCT); one child with
mandibular recurrence is relapse-free 12.4 years post-metastasis (11.7
years post ASCT); one child with leptomeningeal RB is relapse-free 12.1
years post-diagnosis (11.6 years post ASCT); and one child with
trilateral suprasellar RB with leptomeningeal disease is relapse-free 5.3
years post-diagnosis (4.8 years post ASCT).CONCLUSION: Six of eight
children who have completed therapy for extraocular, metastatic and
trilateral retinoblastoma, who in the past would have died, may be cured
by intensive multimodality therapy.

