Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel promoter hypermethylation marker for prognostic in
cervicouterine cancinogenesis.


New biomarkers are needed to improve cervical cancer screening
technologies, which are mostly based on cytological examination and HPV
detection. However, PAP-smear has a low-sensitivity to detect low grade
squamous intraepithelial lesions and not all HPV infected women will
develop preneoplastic or neoplastic lesions. Previous results of our
group showed that genes Gen Z (patent pending), CDH1 and MEGF9 could be
hypermethylated in cervical cancer and not in normal epithelia. The aim
of this study was to determinate if promoter methylation status of genes
(Gen Z, CDH1 and MEGF9) are related with progression or diagnosis of
cervical carcinogenesis.For this study, 107 citobrush, urine and blood
samples were collected from women who attended to gynecological care in a
public health center in Temuco, Chile. Citobrush DNA from 50 normal, 40
low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL), 40 high grade squamous
intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) and 17 squamous cervical cancer were
bisulfite converted for methylation specific PCR (MSP). Bisulfite
conversion was confirmed by amplification of a 133-bp fragment of the
-actin. MSP primers were specifically design for CpG island of promotor
region of each gene.Gen Z was found 100% methylated in SCC samples, 65%
in HSIL, 43% in LSIL and in normal samples only a 26%. MEGF9 and CDH1
genes were found methylated in 36% and 48% of normal samples, 45% and 55%
of LSIL, 70% and 77% of HSIL and 47% and 71% of SCC, respectively.All
promoter regions studied showed a higher methylation frequency in LSIL,
HSIL and SCC than normal samples. Significant statistical differences in
Gen Z and CDH1 Methylation frequencies between normal and SCC samples
were found (PNew biomarkers are needed to improve cervical cancer
screening technologies, which are mostly based on cytological examination
and HPV detection. However, PAP-smear has a low-sensitivity to detect low
grade squamous intraepithelial lesions and not all HPV infected women
will develop preneoplastic or neoplastic lesions. Previous results of our
group showed that genes Gen Z (patent pending), CDH1 and MEGF9 could be
hypermethylated in cervical cancer and not in normal epithelia. The aim
of this study was to determinate if promoter methylation status of genes
(Gen Z, CDH1 and MEGF9) are related with progression or diagnosis of
cervical carcinogenesis.For this study, 107 citobrush, urine and blood
samples were collected from women who attended to gynecological care in a
public health center in Temuco, Chile. Citobrush DNA from 50 normal, 40
low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL), 40 high grade squamous
intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) and 17 squamous cervical cancer were
bisulfite converted for methylation specific PCR (MSP). Bisulfite
conversion was confirmed by amplification of a 133-bp fragment of the
-actin. MSP primers were specifically design for CpG island of promotor
region of each gene.Gen Z was found 100% methylated in SCC samples, 65%
in HSIL, 43% in LSIL and in normal samples only a 26%. MEGF9 and CDH1
genes were found methylated in 36% and 48% of normal samples, 45% and 55%
of LSIL, 70% and 77% of HSIL and 47% and 71% of SCC, respectively.All
promoter regions studied showed a higher methylation frequency in LSIL,
HSIL and SCC than normal samples. Significant statistical differences in
Gen Z and CDH1 Methylation frequencies between normal and SCC samples
were found (P<0.05). Methylation of Gen Z increased in a sequential and
cumulative way as the lesion progress.Our results suggest that the Gen Z
could be useful tool for identifying women with a higher risk of
progression to cervical cancer. Examination of these biomarkers in a
larger, independent cohort is warranted. Grant Support: This
investigation was financed by Proyect CORFO-INNOVA N07CN13PBT-222 and
Proyect CORFO N 09CN14-5960 (CEGIN). CI is recipient of grants from
FONDECYT Postdoctoral Proyect N 3130630. PB is recipient of grants from
FONDECYT Postdoctoral Proyect N 3120141

