Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen-independent regulation of cellular signaling,
transcriptional activity, and mRNA stability in a cell model of prostate
cancer.


Prostate cancer progression relies on the interplay between androgen
dependent and independent processes. Depending on the cell type and
stimulus, the independent pathway may result in proliferation,
progression, or inhibition. It recently has become evident that the
molecular mechanisms that drive the differentiation of normal prostate
cells towards abnormal proliferation involve multiple signal transduction
cascades that often overlap and interact. Through a combination of
multiple techniques, including chromatin immunoprecipitation (chIP) and
RNA pull-down, we are able to correlate cellular signaling events to
androgen receptor transcriptional activity, and how it relates to cancer
progression by using growth factors and hormones. In growth factor
stimulated LNcap prostate cancer cells, we observed activation of Stat3
and PI3K pathways and reduced transcriptional activity of typical
androgen receptor DNA targets, such as prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKN1A or p21). However, in
estradiol stimulated cells we detected an increase transcriptional
activity of the above targets as well as activation of proliferation
pathways. Because the androgen receptor and its targets are also
regulated by mRNA stability through the UTR, we assessed RNA stability
using RNA pull-down assays and RT-PCR. Our results, and those already
published, indicate that multiple overlapping signal transduction
pathways are involved in the abnormal differentiation of prostate cells;
therefore, our use of a combination of tools is advantageous in further
defining the model of cancer progression and potential therapies.

