Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C646, a selective small molecule inhibitor of p300,
radiosensitizes cancer cells through enhancement of mitotic catastrophe.


Background: The histone acetyltransferases (HATs) including p300, CBP and
TIP60 are transcriptional co-activators implicated in many gene
regulatory pathways and protein acetylation events. We have previously
shown that siRNA-mediated ablation of p300 and CBP sensitized cancer
cells to ionizing radiation (IR) (Ogiwara, Oncogene 2011), and that
garcinol, curcumin and anacardic acid, natural compounds with multi-HATs
inhibitory activity, had radiosensitizing effect in cancer cells (Oike,
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2012). However, radiosensitization by
selective small molecule inhibitors targeting activity of a specific HAT,
that can have much potential for clinical use, have not been well
investigated. C646 is a selective small molecule inhibitor of p300
identified by structure-based and active site-directed in silico
screening (Bowers, Chem Biol 2010). In this study, we investigated the in
vitro effect of C646 on radiosensitization and cell death in human cancer
cells.Materials and Methods: The radiosensitizing effect in A549 (lung
adenocarcinoma), H460 (lung squamous cell carcinoma) and H157 (lung large
cell carcinoma) cells were assessed by colony formation assay, while that
in MRC-5 (fibroblast) cells lacking in colony-forming ability was
examined by ATP assay. Cell cycle distribution in A549 cells was analyzed
using flow cytometry. The effect on mitotic catastrophe, apoptosis and
senescence in A549 cells was evaluated by DAPI, annexin V and
senescence-associated -galactosidase staining, respectively. C646 was
used at concentrations less than IC50.Results: C646 radiosensitized A549,
H460 and H157 cancer cells with dose enhancement ratio at 10% surviving
fraction of 1.4, 1.2 and 1.2, respectively. Meanwhile, C646 unaffected
the radiosensitivity of MRC-5 cells. Cell cycle analysis showed that the
hyperploid cell population (> 4N DNA cells) increased in C646-treated
A549 cells after IR. Analyses of mode of cell death revealed that C646
enhanced mitotic catastrophe, but not apoptosis nor senescence, induced
by IR in A549 cells.Conclusion: These data indicate that C646 is a
radiosensitizer which enhances mitotic catastrophe induced by IR.

