Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unexpected complexity in Mcl-1 phosphorylation in response to
microtubule inhibitors.


Microtubule inhibitors promote phosphorylation and degradation of Mcl-1,
and the loss of expression of this key anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member
appears to be critical for apoptosis induction. While several sites and
kinases have been implicated, a phosphorylation/degradation-resistant
mutant has not been definitively described. Contrary to previous reports
suggesting that Thr92 phosphorylation by Cdk1 regulates Mcl-1
degradation, a Thr92Ala Mcl-1 mutant expressed in HeLa cells was
phosphorylated and degraded with the same kinetics as wild-type following
vinblastine-treatment. Similarly, when Mcl-1 with alanine replacements of
five putative major sites (S64, T70A, T92, S121, T163) was expressed, it
was phosphorylated and degraded like the wild-type. These results
suggested redundancy or the existence of additional regulatory sites. To
analyze Mcl-1 phosphorylation in more detail, cell extracts, made using a
novel extraction solution to improve resolution, were subjected to
2D-PAGE/immunoblotting. Extracts from asynchronous control cells showed
one major and two minor, more acidic, spots, the latter sensitive to acid
phosphatase treatment. Extracts from vinblastine-treated cells showed up
to 9 distinct spots all but two of which were eliminated after acid
phosphatase treatment. These results reveal an unexpected complexity in
Mcl-1 phosphorylation in response to microtubule inhibitors and the
existence of many more sites than previously suspected. Identification of
the additional sites of phosphorylation, the kinase(s) responsible, and
their role in regulation of Mcl-1 degradation are ongoing.Supported by
NIH CA109821.

