Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of cell surface polysialic acid biosynthesis modulates
tumor cell migration.


Polysialic acid (polySia) is a linear alpha-2,8-linked carbohydrate
homopolymer of up to 100 sialic acid residues. It is characteristically
re-expressed on the surface of NCAM (neuronal cell adhesion molecule) in
many cancer cells where it modulates tumour dissemination. PolySia-NCAM
expression is strongly associated with poor clinical prognosis and
correlates with aggressive/invasive disease in small cell lung cancer,
pancreatic cancer, neuroblastoma and many other tumours principally of
neural crest origin [1]. SiRNA knockdown of polysialyltransferases
(polySTs) ST8SiaII and ST8SiaIV, the enzymes responsible for
polysialylation of neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), has been shown
to abolish cell migration in tumour cells [2]. Besides brain regions with
persistent neuronal plasticity, polySia is essentially absent from the
adult body. Its exclusive synthesis by two polySTs, ST8SiaIV and
particularly ST8SiaII, present a novel, selective, highly attractive but
largely unexplored therapeutic opportunity [1].We have embarked on a
programme of design and synthesis of novel polyST inhibitors, and have
established a screening cascade to determine enzyme inhibition and
effects on polySia-expressing cells in vitro. Using endoneuraminidase, an
enzyme that specifically cleaves polySia chains from NCAM, we can assess
the rate and extent to which polySia growth is inhibited in the presence
of agent in cellular systems. In addition, an in vitro scratch assay was
established to evaluate modulation of cell migration using a transfected
isogenic cell line system (C6-STX: polySia +, ST8SiaII + / C6-WT: polySia
-, ST8SiaII - [3]) and neuroblastoma cell lines known to express
polySia-NCAM, ST8SiaIV and ST8SiaII (SHSY-5Y and IMR-32).We have
identified compounds, including ICT-3067, ICT-3128 and ICT-3147, which
lead to a significant reduction in cell surface polySia-NCAM and that
modulate tumour cell migration in in vitro. We have also identified a
number of key modifications to CMP-sialic acid precursor molecules which
dramatically decrease cell migration in ST8SiaII-expressing cells,
through modulation of polySia assembly. It is also noteworthy that the
potency of these compounds has been increased with simple chemical
modifications, resulting in greater lipophilicity.In summary, a number of
efficient modulators of polySia assembly and their efficacy in reducing
cell migration is described. This points to the potential of the polySia
biosynthesis pathway, and in particular the polySTs, as attractive
therapeutic targets in metastatic tumours.[1] Falconer, R.A. et al.,
Curr. Cancer Drug Targets, 2012, 12, 925-939; [2] Schreiber et al.,
Gastroenterology, 2008, 134, 1555-1566; [3] Suzuki, M. et al.,
Glycobiology, 2005, 15, 887-894.

