Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I study of intravenous PI3K inhibitor BAY 80-6946 in
Japanese subjects.


Background: BAY 80-6946 is an intravenous, potent and highly selective
pan-Class I PI3K inhibitor with anti-tumor activity in a panel of
preclinical models. A phase I study to evaluate safety, tolerability and
pharmacokinetics at the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) in Western patients
was performed in Japanese patients with advanced or refractory solid
tumors.Methods: Ten patients received 1-hr intravenous infusions of BAY
80-6946 at doses of 0.4 mg/kg (3 patients) and 0.8 mg/kg (7 patients);
0.8 mg/kg had been determined as the MTD in a previous phase I study
conducted in the US (Patnaik et al., J Clin Oncol 29: 2011; suppl, abstr
3035). A cycle consisted of 3 weekly doses, every 4 weeks, with treatment
continuing until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. Tumor
types included 4 colorectal, 2 non-small cell lung, 1 renal, pancreatic,
GIST and bladder cancer, respectively. Pharmacokinetics (PK) were
evaluated following the first and third doses. Safety evaluations
included monitoring of glucose and blood pressure, EKGs and
echocardiogram.Results: Safety and tolerability were evaluated in cycle 1
and no DLTs were observed in the either cohort. Anticipated adverse
events (AEs), hyperglycemia and hypertension related to BAY 80-6946, were
observed but easily managed by appropriate medication. Transient
hyperglycemia Gr 1 was seen in 4 (40%), Gr 2 in 2 (20%) and Gr 3 in 1
patient (10%), respectively. Transient hypertension Gr 1 was seen in 2
(20%) and Gr 2 in 4 (40%) patients, respectively. Other drug-related AEs
more than 2 patients in the cycle 1 included Gr 1/2 anemia (20%), oral
mucositis (20%), nausea (20%), neutropenia (40%), leukocytopenia (40%),
pruritus (20%) and skin acneiform (20%) and Gr 2/3 lymphocytopenia. One
patient with a serious adverse event related to the study drug was
observed showing Gr 3 diarrhea with Gr 2 pre-syncope in the 2nd cycle
whom recovered but needed prolonged hospitalization. Seven patients
discontinued the study due to progressive disease and 3 due to AEs; 2 in
1st, 5 in 2nd, 2 in 3rd and 1 in 5th cycle, respectively. The GIST
patient previously progressed on both imatinib and sunitinib had stable
disease (SD) through the end of 5th cycle but discontinued due to the
drug-related thrombocytopenia. PK analyses yielded results similar to
that reported in Western patients. The AUC for BAY 80-6946 was
approximately dose proportional. There was no accumulation between Day 1
and Day 15 in AUC for BAY 80-6946. The half-life of BAY 80-6946 averaged
approximately 32 to 36 hours after C1D1 of dosing.Conclusions: BAY
80-6946 was generally well tolerated at the MTD of 0.8 mg/kg. Study drug
related hyperglycemia and hypertension were well managed. There are no
relevant ethnic differences in PK between Japanese and Western patients.

