Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABT-869 enhances radiosensitivity of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma cells.


Purpose: Novel targeted therapeutic strategies to overcome
radio-resistance of cancer cells traditionally treated with radiation may
improve patient survival with the added benefit of reduced systemic
toxicity. Herein, we tested the feasibility of ABT-869 (Linifanib), a
multi-receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor of members of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and platelet derived growth factor
(PDGF) receptor families, on radio-sensitization of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).Materials and Methods: UMSCC-22A and
UMSCC-22B cells were treated with ABT-869 and -radiation response was
determined. Cell viability, cytotoxicity, apoptosis induction and cell
cycle distribution were examined by MTT assay, colony formation assay and
flow cytometry. In addition, expression of STAT3 and downstream signaling
proteins were assessed using western immunoblotting.Results: Treatment
with ABT-869 resulted in cell growth inhibition, induction of apoptosis,
G2/M cell cycle arrest, reduced phosphorylation of STAT3, which has been
linked to radio-resistance, lower expression of cyclin D1, survivin and
increase PARP cleavage. In addition, ABT-869 overcame the
radio-resistance of the cell lines and significantly enhanced
radiation-induced cytotoxicity (p Purpose: Novel targeted therapeutic
strategies to overcome radio-resistance of cancer cells traditionally
treated with radiation may improve patient survival with the added
benefit of reduced systemic toxicity. Herein, we tested the feasibility
of ABT-869 (Linifanib), a multi-receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor of
members of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and platelet derived
growth factor (PDGF) receptor families, on radio-sensitization of head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).Materials and Methods: UMSCC-22A
and UMSCC-22B cells were treated with ABT-869 and -radiation response was
determined. Cell viability, cytotoxicity, apoptosis induction and cell
cycle distribution were examined by MTT assay, colony formation assay and
flow cytometry. In addition, expression of STAT3 and downstream signaling
proteins were assessed using western immunoblotting.Results: Treatment
with ABT-869 resulted in cell growth inhibition, induction of apoptosis,
G2/M cell cycle arrest, reduced phosphorylation of STAT3, which has been
linked to radio-resistance, lower expression of cyclin D1, survivin and
increase PARP cleavage. In addition, ABT-869 overcame the
radio-resistance of the cell lines and significantly enhanced
radiation-induced cytotoxicity (p < 0.05).Conclusions: These data suggest
the possibility of combining targeted therapeutic such as ABT-869 with
radiation to enhance inhibition of cell growth and apoptosis in HNSCC
cells. Thus, it may provide a novel therapeutic strategy and improve
efficacy of radiation against HNSCC in the future.

