Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LSD1 regulation of SKP2 expression in prostate cancer.


Prostate carcinogenesis is a complicated process involving both genetic
and epigenetic changes. Aberrant expression of LSD1 (Lysine-specific
demethylase 1) has been reported in human prostate cancers. Although high
expression of LSD1 is implicated in prostate tumorigenesis, the
underlying molecular mechanisms are not fully understood. Here we
reported that LSD1 promotes proliferation and migration of prostate
cancer cells via up-regulation of SKP2 expression. Knockdown of LSD1
using small interfering RNA (siRNA) decreases SKP2 expression and
inhibits prostate cancer cell proliferation and migration. Promoter
luciferase reporter and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments
show that LSD1 regulates SKP2 expression by controlling the levels of
H3K4 methylation in SKP2 promoter and this function of LSD1 is mediated
through its demethylase activity. As demonstrated by
immunohistochemistry, LSD1 and SKP2 proteins positively correlate with
each other and their expression is associated with cell proliferation in
human prostate cancer tissues. Our data not only identify SKP2 as a
direct regulated target gene of LSD1 but also reveal that SKP2 plays an
important role in contributing LSD1 mediated prostate cancer cell
proliferation and migration, suggesting that the LSD1-SKP2 axis can serve
as therapeutic targets for treatment of prostate cancers.

