Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABT-348 in combination with inhibition of CDK4/6 highlights a
strategy to target RB mutant cells while sparing RB wild-type cells.


ABT-348 is a novel, potent and orally bioavailable inhibitor of the
Aurora kinases as well as the VEGF and PDGF families of receptor tyrosine
kinases. ABT-348 is broadly efficacious preclinically as a single agent
against a wide range of tumor types and is currently in Phase I/II
clinical trials. Several published studies have supported the potential
utility of combining targeted anti-proliferative agents with cytotoxic
chemotherapies. Herein, the efficacy of combining the neocytotoxic agent,
ABT-348, with CDK4/6 inhibition in the treatment of solid tumor cells has
been evaluated. Inhibition of CDK4/6 via siRNA elicits a potent
cytostatic response in cells that harbor a wild-type, functional RB. We
demonstrate that features of cellular senescence are induced in human
tumor cells with siRNAs targeting both CDK4 and CDK6. Dual inhibition of
CDK4 and CDK6 is required for antiproliferative activity in most cancer
cell lines and this is not accompanied by induction of apoptosis. In RB
wild-type cells, CDK4/6 inhibition antagonizes the activity of ABT-348 by
inducing G0/G1 arrest. Conversely, CDK4/6 inhibition does not alter the
therapeutic response of RB-deficient cells to ABT-348, indicating that
the effects of ABT-348 are dependent on cells progressing into mitosis. A
preponderance of evidence from previous publications and our studies
indicate that CDK4/6 inhibition attenuates the cellular response to
cytotoxic chemotherapies in RB wild-type cells providing a potential to
expand the therapeutic window for ABT-348. Thus combination with ABT-348
and a CDK4/6 inhibitor may provide an opportunity to selectively target
RB mutant cells.

