Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low frequencies of SF3B1 mutations indicate SF3B1 inhibitor as a
novel moleculartargeted drug for colorectal cancer.


Purpose: FR901464 (FR) is an antitumor agent that specifically binds to
and inhibits the function of splicing factor 3B subunit 1 (SF3B1). Higher
frequencies of SF3B1 gene mutations and their relevance to cancer
progression have been shown in studies of hematological malignancies.We
assessed the frequencies of SF3B1 gene mutations in colorectal cancer
(CRC) and the correlation of SF3B1 mutations and FR sensitivity in
CRC.Experimental Design: We measured FR sensitivity in CRC cell lines to
establish FR-resistant clones and performed DNA sequencing of all25 SF3B1
exons in nine CRC cell lines, FR-resistant clones, and 16 CRC patients.On
the basis our results, we performed further DNA sequencing in 80 CRC
patients.Results: The FR IC50 values in all CRC cell lines were 500-fold
greater than that of their parental cells, although the IC50 of
oxaliplatin or 5-fuluorouracil were the same. We found nonsense mutations
in exon 10 of DLD1 cells and no significant mutations in the other
samples. All the FR-resistant clones had the missense mutations in codon
1073 of exon 22. We found no mutation in exons 10, 22, and 12-15, which
were previously reported in hematological malignancies in 80 CRC
patients.Conclusion: Our data indicated the usefulness of the SF3B1
inhibitor as a novel molecular targeted drug for CRC and the other
malignancies without codon 1073 mutations.

