Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOCS2 (suppressor of cytokine signaling protein 2) is a prognostic
indicator of progression-free survival in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) patients.


HNSCC is a common, deadly, and disfiguring disease. While combinations of
radiotherapy, surgery, and chemotherapy are highly effective in HNSCC,
there is significant morbidity associated with the disease and recurrence
is common. There is great interest in identifying molecular events and
pathways which drive HNSCC progression in order that targeted therapies
may be developed. The loss of the tumor suppressor function such as p53
and NOTCH1, as well as activation of the STAT3 and STAT5 pathways, has
been implicated in HNSCC progression. We have identified interactions
between STAT3, STAT5, and the novel tumor suppressor SOCS2 to be
important in HNSCC. To extend these findings to humans, we performed
experiments to identify prognostic markers in HNSCC and to investigate
the expression of STAT3, STAT5, and SOCS2 in HNSCC
tissue.Immunohistochemistry was performed on tissue microarrays from
resected tumor specimens of 123 stage I-IVB oral cavity SCC patients
(treated with surgery +/- adjuvant radiation therapy) with annotated
clinical outcome information from a median follow up of 76 months
collected at the UT/MD Anderson Cancer Center. The array was screened
with antibodies against STAT5, STAT3, and SOCS2, and scored in a blinded
fashion by a pathologist. SOCS2 expression (present vs. absent)
correlated significantly with recurrence-free survival in both the
univariate (hazard ratio 0.24, p=0.0003; Cox proportional hazards model)
and multivariate (hazard ratio 0.24, p=0.0004) analyses. Notably all
patients who lacked SOCS2 tumor expression recurred within 45 months.
There was a trend towards a correlation of SOCS2 expression with overall
survival (HR 0.50, p=0.11) and disease-specific survival (HR 0.52,
p=0.28). SOCS2 expression did not significantly correlate with tumor
stage and extracapsular extension emphasizing that its absence is an
independent marker of poor prognosis. Our prior published work
demonstrates that STAT5 drives SOCS2 expression. The expression of SOCS2
in these patient samples positively correlated with total and
phosphoSTAT5 (r=0.29 and 0.21 respectively; pHNSCC is a common, deadly,
and disfiguring disease. While combinations of radiotherapy, surgery, and
chemotherapy are highly effective in HNSCC, there is significant
morbidity associated with the disease and recurrence is common. There is
great interest in identifying molecular events and pathways which drive
HNSCC progression in order that targeted therapies may be developed. The
loss of the tumor suppressor function such as p53 and NOTCH1, as well as
activation of the STAT3 and STAT5 pathways, has been implicated in HNSCC
progression. We have identified interactions between STAT3, STAT5, and
the novel tumor suppressor SOCS2 to be important in HNSCC. To extend
these findings to humans, we performed experiments to identify prognostic
markers in HNSCC and to investigate the expression of STAT3, STAT5, and
SOCS2 in HNSCC tissue.Immunohistochemistry was performed on tissue
microarrays from resected tumor specimens of 123 stage I-IVB oral cavity
SCC patients (treated with surgery +/- adjuvant radiation therapy) with
annotated clinical outcome information from a median follow up of 76
months collected at the UT/MD Anderson Cancer Center. The array was
screened with antibodies against STAT5, STAT3, and SOCS2, and scored in a
blinded fashion by a pathologist. SOCS2 expression (present vs. absent)
correlated significantly with recurrence-free survival in both the
univariate (hazard ratio 0.24, p=0.0003; Cox proportional hazards model)
and multivariate (hazard ratio 0.24, p=0.0004) analyses. Notably all
patients who lacked SOCS2 tumor expression recurred within 45 months.
There was a trend towards a correlation of SOCS2 expression with overall
survival (HR 0.50, p=0.11) and disease-specific survival (HR 0.52,
p=0.28). SOCS2 expression did not significantly correlate with tumor
stage and extracapsular extension emphasizing that its absence is an
independent marker of poor prognosis. Our prior published work
demonstrates that STAT5 drives SOCS2 expression. The expression of SOCS2
in these patient samples positively correlated with total and
phosphoSTAT5 (r=0.29 and 0.21 respectively; p<0.05) as well as total and
phospho-STAT3 (r=0.27 and 0.26, respectively; pHNSCC is a common, deadly,
and disfiguring disease. While combinations of radiotherapy, surgery, and
chemotherapy are highly effective in HNSCC, there is significant
morbidity associated with the disease and recurrence is common. There is
great interest in identifying molecular events and pathways which drive
HNSCC progression in order that targeted therapies may be developed. The
loss of the tumor suppressor function such as p53 and NOTCH1, as well as
activation of the STAT3 and STAT5 pathways, has been implicated in HNSCC
progression. We have identified interactions between STAT3, STAT5, and
the novel tumor suppressor SOCS2 to be important in HNSCC. To extend
these findings to humans, we performed experiments to identify prognostic
markers in HNSCC and to investigate the expression of STAT3, STAT5, and
SOCS2 in HNSCC tissue.Immunohistochemistry was performed on tissue
microarrays from resected tumor specimens of 123 stage I-IVB oral cavity
SCC patients (treated with surgery +/- adjuvant radiation therapy) with
annotated clinical outcome information from a median follow up of 76
months collected at the UT/MD Anderson Cancer Center. The array was
screened with antibodies against STAT5, STAT3, and SOCS2, and scored in a
blinded fashion by a pathologist. SOCS2 expression (present vs. absent)
correlated significantly with recurrence-free survival in both the
univariate (hazard ratio 0.24, p=0.0003; Cox proportional hazards model)
and multivariate (hazard ratio 0.24, p=0.0004) analyses. Notably all
patients who lacked SOCS2 tumor expression recurred within 45 months.
There was a trend towards a correlation of SOCS2 expression with overall
survival (HR 0.50, p=0.11) and disease-specific survival (HR 0.52,
p=0.28). SOCS2 expression did not significantly correlate with tumor
stage and extracapsular extension emphasizing that its absence is an
independent marker of poor prognosis. Our prior published work
demonstrates that STAT5 drives SOCS2 expression. The expression of SOCS2
in these patient samples positively correlated with total and
phosphoSTAT5 (r=0.29 and 0.21 respectively; p<0.05) as well as total and
phospho-STAT3 (r=0.27 and 0.26, respectively; p<0.05). Likewise, we
measured total and phosphoSTAT3, total and phosphoSTAT5, and SOCS2 in a
panel of HNSCC cell lines. SOCS2 protein levels and phosphorylation of
STAT3 and STAT5 varied among cell lines, however cells with elevated
phosphoSTAT3 and STAT5 also showed elevated SOCS2 protein. This is the
first study which identifies SOCS2 as an independent marker of prognosis
in HNSCC. In support of its role as a tumor suppressor, the lack of SOSC2
expression was associated with universal recurrence.This work was
supported The University of Texas SPORE in Head and Neck Cancer (P50
CA097007), The Cancer Center Support Grant, and the ASCO Cancer
Foundation Young Investigator Award (WW).

