Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global genomic analysis identified PRKCI as a potential
therapeutic target gene for human clear cell ovarian cancer.


Clear cell ovarian cancer (CCOC), a rare epithelial ovarian cancer
histotype, is more resistant to standard chemotherapy and has a worse
prognosis than serous and endometrioid histotypes. We attempted to
identify genes that are responsible for the aggressive behavior of CCOC
and could be potential therapeutic targets using genomic and expression
profilings. To identify gene amplification, genome-wide DNA copy number
alterations were measured in 13 CCOC cell lines using high-resolution
oligonucleotide array CGH (Agilent 105k Human Genome CGH Microarray).
GISTIC analysis identified 16 amplified regions containing 391 genes.
After comparison to our database of differentially expressed genes
between human CCOC specimens and normal ovarian surface epithelium
specimen (Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays), 45 of the amplified
genes showed mRNA overexpression in CCOC specimens. Among the 45 genes,
protein kinase C iota (PRKCI) was amplified in 9/13 CCOC cell lines and
was overexpressed (6.7 fold) in CCOC specimens. Analysis using
PathwayStudio software identified PRKCI mediated pathways for cell
migration and invasion. Knock-down of PRKCI by transfection with PRKCI
specific siRNAs suppressed cell migration and invasion in KOC-7c and
OVISE cells. On the other hand, ectopic expression of PRKCI by
transfection with PRKCI expressing vector enhanced cell migration and
invasion in ES2 and TOV21G cells. The results from the present study
therefore suggested that PRKCI may promote metastasis and serve as a
potential target gene for treatment of human clear cell ovarian cancer.

