Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic identification of combinatorial markers of drug
sensitivity in cancer cell lines.


Purpose: Translating the cancer genome into highly efficacious targets to
guide rational therapeutic combinations is a major emerging
challenge.Methods: We established an in silico bioinformatic platform in
parallel with a high throughput screening platform evaluating the
pharmacological activity of 37 novel targeted agents across 669 highly
characterized cell lines representing the genetic and tumor-type
heterogeneity of human cancers. Analysis of large scale pharmacological
data coupled to massive sequencing data on cell lines was performed to
systematically identify combinatorial biomarkers of sensitivity and
resistance to cancer therapeutics. Genomic predictors discovered in a 141
cell line training set were validated in an independent non-overlapping
test set of 359 cell lines screened on 14 of the compounds.Results: We
demonstrate combinations of genomic events that are co-occurring or
mutually exclusive and act as co-drivers in various tumors, representing
potential targets for combinatorial intervention in cancer. We find that
multiple cooperating genomic events predict response to drug intervention
independent of tumor lineage.Conclusions: The coupling of scalable in
silico and functional high throughput cancer cell line platforms for the
identification of co-events in cancer delivers rational combinatorial
targets for synthetic lethal approaches with a high potential to prevent
the emergence of resistance.

