Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of T3-regulated microRNAs in human hepatoma cells.


Thyroid hormone (T3)/thyroid hormone receptor (TR) signaling regulates
cellular growth, development and differentiation, which play important
roles in vivo. T3/TR signaling promotes invasion while suppressing
proliferation of hepatoma cells. MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small, short,
endogenously expressed non-coding RNAs that negatively regulate gene
expression. Aberrant miRNA expression has been observed in various tumor
types, including hepatocellular carcinoma. At present, it is unclear
whether T3/TR signaling regulates miRNAs in hepatoma cells. In our
laboratory, miRNA profiling analysis using the high-throughput stem-loop
RT-qPCR method revealed upregulation of miR-21 by T3/TR. A native thyroid
hormone response element was identified in the primary miR-21 promoter
region using promoter and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
Overexpression of miR-21 promoted hepatoma cell migration and invasion,
similar to that observed with T3 stimulation in hepatoma cells. In
addition, anti-miR-21-induced suppression of cell migration was rescued
by T3. T-cell lymphoma invasion and metastasis 1 (Tiam1), involved in
cell migration and invasion, was identified as a miR-21 target, and
downregulated by T3. Tiam1 was upregulated upon knockdown of miR-21, and
conversely, downregulated upon miR-21 overexpression. Further, knockdown
of Tiam1 enhanced migration and invasion may through increase of vimentin
and MMP2 expression in hepatoma cells. The correlation among T3/TR,
miR-21 and Tiam1 was observed in vivo is similar with in vitro. These
findings indicate that miR-21 is directly upregulated by T3. Moreover,
T3-mediated enhancement of hepatoma cell migration and invasion may
through miR-21-targeted downregulation of Tiam1.

