Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells can target
brain tumor initiating cells.


AbstractThe discovery of neural stem cells offers paradigm shift in brain
tumor research. In neuro-oncology, the biology of neural stem cells has
been pursued in two ways: as cancer stem cells to understand the origin
and maintenance of brain tumors and as a potential cell-based vehicle for
gene therapy. In addition to neural stem cells, mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) have been reported to possess tumor-tropic migratory capacities.
However, there is scanty data on migratory capacity of MSC toward brain
tumor initiating cells (BTICs). This study focuses on investigating the
ability of human adipose tissue derived MSCs (hAT-MSCs) to target BTICs
and their cross-talk in the microenvironment.BTICs were isolated from
three different kinds of brain tumors (medulloblastoma, atypical
teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (ATRT), glioblastoma). The migration capacities
of hAT-MSCs toward BTICs were examined both in vitro transwell assay and
in vivo bioluminescence imaging analysis. To investigate the crosstalk
between hAT-MSCs and BTICs, various cytokines were analyzed. Using
co-culture system of hAT-MSCs and BTICs, we analyzed the mRNA expression
patterns of cytokine receptors (CCR2, CCR4, CCR5, CCR7, CCR9, CCR10,
XCR1, CXCR1, IL-8R, CXCR4, CX3CR1, IL1R1, IL6R, MET, PDGFRB, KDR, CD44,
IFNAR1 and TEK) by qRT-PCR and protein level of their ligand in
co-cultured media by Bio-Plex human cytokine ELISA.We confirmed the
migratory capacity of t hAT-MSCs toward BTICs in vitro and BTICs-derived
xenograft brain tumors in vivo live imaging. mRNA expression of receptors
(CCR4, CCR5, CCR10, XCR1, CXCR1, IL-8R, CXCR4, PDGFRB, KDR, CD44, IFNAR1
and TEK) increased two- to eighteen-fold higher levels. The cytokine
analysis revealed that the ligand levels of hAT-MSCs (medulloblastoma:
VEGF, IL6, IL8, CCL3, CCL2 and TEK; ATRT: VEGF, CCL3 and TEK;
glioblastoma: CCL2, PDGF, TEK and IGF1) and the ligand levels BTICs
(medulloblastoma: CCL5 and CXCL4; ATRT: IL-8 and CXCL4; glioblastoma:
CXCL4 and IGF1) were elevated in the co-cultured media.Our findings
demonstrated that hAT-MSCs can target BTICs. Cross-talk between hAT-MSCs
cytokine receptor and BTICs ligand (medulloblastoma: CCR5/CCL5 and
CXCR4/CXCL4; ATRT: IL-8R/IL-8 and CXCR4/CXCL4; glioblastoma: CXCR4/CXCL4
and IGF1R/IGF1) play cardinal role in this process.

