Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRCA-positivity: Multicultural scenes from the rear view mirror .


Background: To date, BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations have been associated with
specific breast cancer subtypes and patient demographics. BRCA testing
has predominantly been performed in the Caucasian population. Certain
breast cancer subtypes such as Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC), have
previously been associated with African American (AA) women and BRCA1
positivity. Novel targeted agents such as PARP inhibitors may be
beneficial for TNBC and BRCA-positive cancers. Appropriate genetic
referral and testing could influence patient treatment options. We sought
to determine the patterns of patient referral and outcome for BRCA
testing at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital (TJUH).Methods: After
obtaining IRB approval, a retrospective case review was performed to
identify women who proceeded with genetic counseling from January 2008
through May 2012. Patients with positive genetic tests were assessed.
Pathology reports of mutation-positive women were reviewed. Patient
characteristics such as ethnicity were confirmed from genetic counseling
records.Findings: 461 new patients were seen for genetic counseling from
January 2008 through May 2012. 309 (67%) proceeded with BRCA genetic
testing and 26 (9%) were found to carry a deleterious BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutation. Hormone receptor profiles, age at diagnosis, and ethnic
background varied among mutation carriers. The predominant ethnic
background represented in TJUH mutation carriers is now AA. In 2008-2009
(24 months), only one AA woman was diagnosed with a BRCA mutation;
however, from 2010-May 2012 (29 months), 9 AA women and 2 Hispanic women
were diagnosed as BRCA-mutation carriers.Conclusions: BRCA-positive
patients have diverse demographic and hormone receptor profiles. Although
we found that TNBC remains associated with BRCA1 carriers and estrogen
positivity with BRCA2 carriers, it is not absolute. A recent shift has
noted substantially more AA women being diagnosed with BRCA mutations.
While this may indicate that more diverse populations are being referred
for genetic counseling, more importantly, it suggests that diverse
populations are becoming more receptive to participating in genetic
counseling and when appropriate, receiving genetic testing.Citation
Format: Susan Miller-Samuel, Nicole Simone, Anne L. Rosenberg.
BRCA-positivity: Multicultural scenes from the rear view mirror .
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 126.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-126

