Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide siRNA screens identify potent p53 inhibitors in NSCLC
cells.


Background: Non Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) remains the number one
cause of cancer death worldwide. For a number of cancers, restoration of
tumor suppressor p53 activity is being studied as a possible treatment
strategy. Approximately 50% of NSCLCs harbor wild type p53. The p53
inhibitor RCHY1 was previously shown to be highly expressed in lung
cancer and suggested to play a critical role in lung tumor progression by
degrading p53 (Duan et al., J Natl Cancer Inst 96: 1718-1721). We
hypothesized that more molecules could be inhibiting p53 in NSCLC. Here
we set out to identify these inhibitors as potential therapeutic targets
in NSCLC.Methods: Three siRNA screens were done with the Dharmacon
siGENOME whole human genome siRNA library on a derivative of the A549
NSCLC cell line harboring the p53 dependent firefly luciferase reporter
PG13Luc. Luciferase activity was measured three days after siRNA
transfection using an in-house developed assay (Siebring-van Olst et al,
J Biomol Screen, PMID: 23112084).Results: The screens showed excellent
assay metrics (Z factors >0.5 and Spearman Rank Correlations >0.89). Hit
selection threshold for stratification was set at a robust Z-score 3,
which selected 54 genes. Silencing these candidates increased luciferase
activity more than 5-fold in the primary screen, which exceeded commonly
known p53 inhibitors such as MDM2 and MDM4 (2.5 and 3.2-fold,
respectively). For 37 hits, the phenotype was confirmed with two or more
individual siRNAs targeting that gene, as well as in a different
A549-PG13Luc cell clone. In A549 cells carrying a shRNA construct
suppressing p53, a reduction in p53 activity was seen for all 37
candidates, thus showing that the effects of gene silencing on luciferase
activity were indeed p53 dependent. A second reporter system with a
different p53 response element, the Cignal assay, confirmed p53
dependency for 14 hits. Silencing these 14 inhibitors in a second NSCLC
cell line (NCI-H292), also resulted in p53 activation. Western blot
analysis on siRNA-transfected A549 cells confirmed p53 activation by
showing increased levels of p53 and/or increased levels of p21 (12 and 8
candidate genes, respectively). Interestingly, silencing 9 putative p53
inhibitors was accompanied with a subsequent loss of cell viability.
Protein interaction analysis using STRING showed that six of these genes,
i.e., CWC22, SF3A3, SF3B1, SF3B14, HNRPL and SNRPD3, cluster together in
a network involved in RNA processing, while the other candidates appeared
unrelated.Conclusion: We identified a number of potent inhibitors of p53
in NSCLC cells that have not previously been associated with p53
function. Some of these proteins could be potential therapeutic targets
in cancers harboring wild type p53.

