Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calorie restriction decreases spontaneous mammary tumorigenesis
and upregulates ER- in MMTV-neu transgenic mice.


Obesity increases postmenopausal breast cancer risk and increases
mortality in pre- and postmenopausal women. While the majority of breast
cancers in obese women are estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, ER-negative
tumors confer a much worse prognosis. The mechanism by which obesity
affects ER-negative breast cancer risk and prognosis is not clear, and
strategies for offsetting the negative effects of obesity are urgently
needed. In this study, we utilized the MMTV-neu mouse model of
luminal-type breast cancer to test the hypothesis that energy balance
modulation, through diet-induced obesity (DIO) or calorie restriction
(CR) regimens, alters mammary tumor development and progression through
regulation of ER in the mammary epithelium. MMTV-neu mice form
spontaneous mammary tumors that progress from an ER-positive hyperplasia
to aggressive ER-negative ductal adenocarcinomas. Female MMTV-neu
transgenic mice and non-transgenic host strain (FVB) mice (6-8 weeks old;
n=90/genotype) were randomized (30/group) to receive: control diet
(modified AIN-76A); a 30% CR regimen (isonutrient); or a DIO regimen. A
subset of mice (n=4 per group) was killed at 1, 3, and 5 months following
diet initiation, and tissues were collected for analysis; remaining
animals were followed for a 60-week survival study. We found that,
relative to control diet, the DIO regimen significantly increased body
weight, percent body fat (pObesity increases postmenopausal breast cancer
risk and increases mortality in pre- and postmenopausal women. While the
majority of breast cancers in obese women are estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive, ER-negative tumors confer a much worse prognosis. The
mechanism by which obesity affects ER-negative breast cancer risk and
prognosis is not clear, and strategies for offsetting the negative
effects of obesity are urgently needed. In this study, we utilized the
MMTV-neu mouse model of luminal-type breast cancer to test the hypothesis
that energy balance modulation, through diet-induced obesity (DIO) or
calorie restriction (CR) regimens, alters mammary tumor development and
progression through regulation of ER in the mammary epithelium. MMTV-neu
mice form spontaneous mammary tumors that progress from an ER-positive
hyperplasia to aggressive ER-negative ductal adenocarcinomas. Female
MMTV-neu transgenic mice and non-transgenic host strain (FVB) mice (6-8
weeks old; n=90/genotype) were randomized (30/group) to receive: control
diet (modified AIN-76A); a 30% CR regimen (isonutrient); or a DIO
regimen. A subset of mice (n=4 per group) was killed at 1, 3, and 5
months following diet initiation, and tissues were collected for
analysis; remaining animals were followed for a 60-week survival study.
We found that, relative to control diet, the DIO regimen significantly
increased body weight, percent body fat (p<0.0001), and
obesity-associated serum hormones and growth factors (IGF-I, insulin,
leptin, and estradiol; pObesity increases postmenopausal breast cancer
risk and increases mortality in pre- and postmenopausal women. While the
majority of breast cancers in obese women are estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive, ER-negative tumors confer a much worse prognosis. The
mechanism by which obesity affects ER-negative breast cancer risk and
prognosis is not clear, and strategies for offsetting the negative
effects of obesity are urgently needed. In this study, we utilized the
MMTV-neu mouse model of luminal-type breast cancer to test the hypothesis
that energy balance modulation, through diet-induced obesity (DIO) or
calorie restriction (CR) regimens, alters mammary tumor development and
progression through regulation of ER in the mammary epithelium. MMTV-neu
mice form spontaneous mammary tumors that progress from an ER-positive
hyperplasia to aggressive ER-negative ductal adenocarcinomas. Female
MMTV-neu transgenic mice and non-transgenic host strain (FVB) mice (6-8
weeks old; n=90/genotype) were randomized (30/group) to receive: control
diet (modified AIN-76A); a 30% CR regimen (isonutrient); or a DIO
regimen. A subset of mice (n=4 per group) was killed at 1, 3, and 5
months following diet initiation, and tissues were collected for
analysis; remaining animals were followed for a 60-week survival study.
We found that, relative to control diet, the DIO regimen significantly
increased body weight, percent body fat (p<0.0001), and
obesity-associated serum hormones and growth factors (IGF-I, insulin,
leptin, and estradiol; p<0.01 for all) in both MMTV-neu and FVB controls.
Conversely, CR significantly decreased body weight, percent body fat
(pObesity increases postmenopausal breast cancer risk and increases
mortality in pre- and postmenopausal women. While the majority of breast
cancers in obese women are estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, ER-negative
tumors confer a much worse prognosis. The mechanism by which obesity
affects ER-negative breast cancer risk and prognosis is not clear, and
strategies for offsetting the negative effects of obesity are urgently
needed. In this study, we utilized the MMTV-neu mouse model of
luminal-type breast cancer to test the hypothesis that energy balance
modulation, through diet-induced obesity (DIO) or calorie restriction
(CR) regimens, alters mammary tumor development and progression through
regulation of ER in the mammary epithelium. MMTV-neu mice form
spontaneous mammary tumors that progress from an ER-positive hyperplasia
to aggressive ER-negative ductal adenocarcinomas. Female MMTV-neu
transgenic mice and non-transgenic host strain (FVB) mice (6-8 weeks old;
n=90/genotype) were randomized (30/group) to receive: control diet
(modified AIN-76A); a 30% CR regimen (isonutrient); or a DIO regimen. A
subset of mice (n=4 per group) was killed at 1, 3, and 5 months following
diet initiation, and tissues were collected for analysis; remaining
animals were followed for a 60-week survival study. We found that,
relative to control diet, the DIO regimen significantly increased body
weight, percent body fat (p<0.0001), and obesity-associated serum
hormones and growth factors (IGF-I, insulin, leptin, and estradiol;
p<0.01 for all) in both MMTV-neu and FVB controls. Conversely, CR
significantly decreased body weight, percent body fat (p<0.0001) and
decreased serum hormones/ growth factors, while increasing adiponectin
(each at pObesity increases postmenopausal breast cancer risk and
increases mortality in pre- and postmenopausal women. While the majority
of breast cancers in obese women are estrogen receptor (ER)-positive,
ER-negative tumors confer a much worse prognosis. The mechanism by which
obesity affects ER-negative breast cancer risk and prognosis is not
clear, and strategies for offsetting the negative effects of obesity are
urgently needed. In this study, we utilized the MMTV-neu mouse model of
luminal-type breast cancer to test the hypothesis that energy balance
modulation, through diet-induced obesity (DIO) or calorie restriction
(CR) regimens, alters mammary tumor development and progression through
regulation of ER in the mammary epithelium. MMTV-neu mice form
spontaneous mammary tumors that progress from an ER-positive hyperplasia
to aggressive ER-negative ductal adenocarcinomas. Female MMTV-neu
transgenic mice and non-transgenic host strain (FVB) mice (6-8 weeks old;
n=90/genotype) were randomized (30/group) to receive: control diet
(modified AIN-76A); a 30% CR regimen (isonutrient); or a DIO regimen. A
subset of mice (n=4 per group) was killed at 1, 3, and 5 months following
diet initiation, and tissues were collected for analysis; remaining
animals were followed for a 60-week survival study. We found that,
relative to control diet, the DIO regimen significantly increased body
weight, percent body fat (p<0.0001), and obesity-associated serum
hormones and growth factors (IGF-I, insulin, leptin, and estradiol;
p<0.01 for all) in both MMTV-neu and FVB controls. Conversely, CR
significantly decreased body weight, percent body fat (p<0.0001) and
decreased serum hormones/ growth factors, while increasing adiponectin
(each at p<0.01). Gene expression (qRT-PCR) and protein expression
(immunohistochemistry) analysis revealed that loss of mammary ER
expression, known to occur by 8 weeks of age in control MMTV-neu mice,
was accelerated by DIO and delayed by CR. Additionally, we found that CR
(relative to control diet) significantly increased mammary ER expression
(pObesity increases postmenopausal breast cancer risk and increases
mortality in pre- and postmenopausal women. While the majority of breast
cancers in obese women are estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, ER-negative
tumors confer a much worse prognosis. The mechanism by which obesity
affects ER-negative breast cancer risk and prognosis is not clear, and
strategies for offsetting the negative effects of obesity are urgently
needed. In this study, we utilized the MMTV-neu mouse model of
luminal-type breast cancer to test the hypothesis that energy balance
modulation, through diet-induced obesity (DIO) or calorie restriction
(CR) regimens, alters mammary tumor development and progression through
regulation of ER in the mammary epithelium. MMTV-neu mice form
spontaneous mammary tumors that progress from an ER-positive hyperplasia
to aggressive ER-negative ductal adenocarcinomas. Female MMTV-neu
transgenic mice and non-transgenic host strain (FVB) mice (6-8 weeks old;
n=90/genotype) were randomized (30/group) to receive: control diet
(modified AIN-76A); a 30% CR regimen (isonutrient); or a DIO regimen. A
subset of mice (n=4 per group) was killed at 1, 3, and 5 months following
diet initiation, and tissues were collected for analysis; remaining
animals were followed for a 60-week survival study. We found that,
relative to control diet, the DIO regimen significantly increased body
weight, percent body fat (p<0.0001), and obesity-associated serum
hormones and growth factors (IGF-I, insulin, leptin, and estradiol;
p<0.01 for all) in both MMTV-neu and FVB controls. Conversely, CR
significantly decreased body weight, percent body fat (p<0.0001) and
decreased serum hormones/ growth factors, while increasing adiponectin
(each at p<0.01). Gene expression (qRT-PCR) and protein expression
(immunohistochemistry) analysis revealed that loss of mammary ER
expression, known to occur by 8 weeks of age in control MMTV-neu mice,
was accelerated by DIO and delayed by CR. Additionally, we found that CR
(relative to control diet) significantly increased mammary ER expression
(p<0.0001) and delayed the onset of hyperplasia (pObesity increases
postmenopausal breast cancer risk and increases mortality in pre- and
postmenopausal women. While the majority of breast cancers in obese women
are estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, ER-negative tumors confer a much
worse prognosis. The mechanism by which obesity affects ER-negative
breast cancer risk and prognosis is not clear, and strategies for
offsetting the negative effects of obesity are urgently needed. In this
study, we utilized the MMTV-neu mouse model of luminal-type breast cancer
to test the hypothesis that energy balance modulation, through
diet-induced obesity (DIO) or calorie restriction (CR) regimens, alters
mammary tumor development and progression through regulation of ER in the
mammary epithelium. MMTV-neu mice form spontaneous mammary tumors that
progress from an ER-positive hyperplasia to aggressive ER-negative ductal
adenocarcinomas. Female MMTV-neu transgenic mice and non-transgenic host
strain (FVB) mice (6-8 weeks old; n=90/genotype) were randomized
(30/group) to receive: control diet (modified AIN-76A); a 30% CR regimen
(isonutrient); or a DIO regimen. A subset of mice (n=4 per group) was
killed at 1, 3, and 5 months following diet initiation, and tissues were
collected for analysis; remaining animals were followed for a 60-week
survival study. We found that, relative to control diet, the DIO regimen
significantly increased body weight, percent body fat (p<0.0001), and
obesity-associated serum hormones and growth factors (IGF-I, insulin,
leptin, and estradiol; p<0.01 for all) in both MMTV-neu and FVB controls.
Conversely, CR significantly decreased body weight, percent body fat
(p<0.0001) and decreased serum hormones/ growth factors, while increasing
adiponectin (each at p<0.01). Gene expression (qRT-PCR) and protein
expression (immunohistochemistry) analysis revealed that loss of mammary
ER expression, known to occur by 8 weeks of age in control MMTV-neu mice,
was accelerated by DIO and delayed by CR. Additionally, we found that CR
(relative to control diet) significantly increased mammary ER expression
(p<0.0001) and delayed the onset of hyperplasia (p<0.001) in both
MMTV-neu and FVB mice. Importantly, we found that after 60 weeks of
feeding, CR significantly increased tumor-free survival of MMTV-neu mice
(p=0.01). CR tumor samples showed a decrease in vascularity and presence
of mitotic figures. In conclusion, dietary energy balance modulation
impacts spontaneous MMTV-neu mammary tumor development and ER and ER
levels in normal and tumor tissue. In addition, increased mammary ER
expression may represent a novel mechanism underlying the anticancer
effects of CR.

