Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing acquired resistance mechanisms to targeted therapy
in FGFR1-amplified lung squamous cell carcinoma.


Inhibitors targeting specific genomic alterations have revolutionized
cancer therapy and dramatically improved patient outcomes; nonetheless,
after a period response, patient tumors almost universally develop
resistance to these inhibitors and recur. In the case of squamous cell
carcinoma of the lung, it has been demonstrated that focal amplifications
of the FGFR1 gene occur in at least 10% of patients and that a subset of
these events are sensitive to FGFR targeted therapies. Here, we describe
the generation of resistant clones of the cell line NCI-H2077 to several
FGFR inhibitors with clinical potential. This cell line is a squamous
lung line with a focal amplification of FGFR1 that demonstrates
dependency in the presence of both small molecule inhibitors and
knockdown of the FGFR1 protein. After generation of resistant clones, we
performed RTK phosphorylation arrays in the presence and absence of
inhibitor to determine whether there were changes in the activity of
other kinases, and the lines were sequenced to determine whether
secondary mutations in FGFR1 had arisen. Follow-up experiments were
performed to determine alternative sensitivities of the resistant clones.
These experiments contribute to our growing understanding of the
resistance mechanisms that arise in response to kinase inhibitors, and it
is our hope that they will benefit patients undergoing treatment for
FGFR1-amplified lung squamous cell carcinoma.

