Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BCG in combination with anti-IL-10R1 monoclonal antibody induces
specific antitumor immunity in an orthotopic bladder cancer model.


Introduction and Objective: We previously demonstrated that combination
therapy with BCG and anti-IL-10 receptor 1 monoclonal antibody
(anti-IL-10R1 mAb) effectively prevented bladder cancer metastasis in a
murine MB49 orthotopic tumor model. MB49 cells express the male minor
histocompatibility (HY) antigen that, although is immunogenic, induces no
tumor rejection in female mice. Here we investigated whether the
combination therapy could enhance HY-specific immune responses and
whether this HY-specific immunity contributed to the prevention of
bladder cancer metastasis in this model.Methods: Four groups of female
mice (n = 5) were inoculated intravesically (i.b.) with 1 X 106
luciferaseexpressing MB49 (MB49-Luc) cells and treated intraperitoneally
(i.p.) with PBS, control IgG (200g), or anti-IL-10R1 mAb (200g) at day 0.
Starting at day 1, mice were treated twice weekly with i.b. PBS plus i.p.
PBS (Group 1), i.b. PBS plus i.p. anti-IL-10R1 mAb (Group 2), i.b. BCG
plus i.p. control IgG (Group 3), or i.b. BCG plus i.p. anti-IL-10R1 mAb
(Group 4) for a total of 6 treatments. Tumor growth was monitored using
the IVIS luminescence system. Mice were sacrificed for analysis at day
21. Splenocytes were prepared, pooled and cultured in the presence of a
HY antigen peptide or a control ovalbumin (OVA) peptide. After 3 days
culture supernatants were collected and analyzed for IFN- production by
ELISA. After 5 days splenocytes were used as effector cells in a
cytotoxicity assay.Results: Tumor implantation was confirmed for all
groups. Splenocytes produced no IFN in response to OVA peptide
stimulation. Splenocytes from Groups 1 and 3 (treated with no
anti-IL-10R1 mAb) produced no IFN- in response to HY peptide stimulation.
In contrast, splenocytes from Groups 2 and 4 (treated with anti-IL-10R1
mAb) produced significantly increased IFN- in a dose-dependent manner in
response to HY peptide stimulation, with Group 4 (combination therapy)
splenocytes being more potent. Accordingly, Group 4 splenocytes exhibited
profound cytotoxicity against MB49-Luc cells with 69.8%, 51.2% and 25.6%
killing at an E:T ratio of 50:1, 25:1 and 12.5:1, respectively. However,
splenocytes from Group 2 (anti-IL-10R1 mAb monotherapy) showed marginal
killing of MB49-Luc cells.Conclusions: BCG in combination with
anti-IL-10R1 mAb induced HY-specific effector cells cytotoxic to MB49-Luc
bladder cancer cells. Anti-IL-10R1 mAb may prove useful in clinical
practice for the prevention of metastatic bladder cancer in high-risk
patients.

