Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer malignancy and drug sensitivity are regulated by
mammaglobin 1.


Breast cancer metastasis, a complex process enabling tumour cells
dissemination, accounts for more than 90% of breast cancer mortality. The
identification of genes involved in breast cancer metastasis is thus
essential mitigate disease progressionOne of these factors, mammaglobin 1
(MGB1), is specifically expressed in mammary epithelial tissues and
overexpressed in mammary cancers. Normally, MGB1 plays an essential role
in cellular homeostasis. More recently, studies show that MGB1 is a
useful biomarker for prognostic application and the detection of
metastastatic breast cancer. However, no studies reveal the cellular and
molecular function of MGB1 in this disease. We therefore set out to
elucidate the role of MGB1 in breast cancer processes.We developed a
breast cancer model with conditioned MGB1 expression to assess the
molecular and cellular processes regulated by that protein which lead to
breast cancer cell malignancy. After investigation, we observed that loss
of MGB1 expression led to the reduction of cancer cell growth which was
supported by the suppression of p38, JNK, ERK and NFB activities. We also
found that MGB1 promotes cell migration which is supported through
increased activities of FAK and matrix metalloproteinases. MGB1 also
seems to foster epithelial to mesenchymal transitioning of cancer cells
via the activation of Snail, Twist and Zeb1 pathways. Interestingly, we
also found that MGB1 confers breast cancer cell sensitivity to apoptosis
and to various anti-cancer drug treatments.Our study provides the first
in dept molecular elucidation of MGB1 function in breast cancer
processes. In summary, it extends our knowledge on the biology of breast
cancer malignancy and gives us new tools to achieve new therapeutic and
diagnostic strategies against this disease.

