Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZD8186: a potent selective inhibitor of PI3K targeting
PTEN-deficient tumours dependent on dysregulated PI3K signalling.


AZD8186 is a novel potent small molecule that targets the lipid kinase
PI3K with selectivity vs PI3K. AZD8186 reduces pAKT-S473 in the PTEN
deficient MDA-MB-468 cell line with an IC50 AZD8186 is a novel potent
small molecule that targets the lipid kinase PI3K with selectivity vs
PI3K. AZD8186 reduces pAKT-S473 in the PTEN deficient MDA-MB-468 cell
line with an IC50 <5nM, while in the PI3K-dependent PIK3CA mutant line
BT474 it is 200 fold less potent. AZD8186 also demonstrates cellular
activity versus PI3K, inhibiting IgM-dependent pAKT-S473 with an IC50 of
15nM. In cell line panels, sensitivity to AZD8186 is associated in part
with loss of PTEN function suggesting that targeting tumours that have
lost normal levels of PTEN function through deletion, mutation or down
regulation might enrich for sensitivity to AZD8186. Deficiencies in PTEN
are described in a number of tumour types such as prostate, squamous
lung, breast, renal and glioblastoma. AZD8186 has single anti-tumour
activity in pre-clinical models representing each of these settings,
which is associated with dynamic regulation of a number of key pathway
biomarkers. Clinically, agents such as AZD8186 are likely to be used in
combination. The use of AZD8186 in conjunction with either androgen
therapy or docetaxol has been explored in cell lines and pre-clinical
disease models. Combining AZD8186 with MDV-3100 resulted in synergistic
inhibition of LNCAP prostate tumour cell growth, demonstrating the
potential to combine with androgen therapy. Moreover in HCC70 (breast)
and PC3 (prostate) tumour xenografts AZD8186 shows increased benefit in
combination with docetaxel, demonstrating the ability to combine with
cytotoxic chemotherapy. Exploration of dose and schedule revealed that
efficacy can be maintained in combination with docetaxol at a lower dose
of AZD8186 than required for monotherapy activity. Moreover efficacy was
maintained when the frequency of AZD8186 dosing was reduced using a
shorter intermittent schedule. Understanding how AZD8186 combines with
standards of care for PTEN null disease segments provides important
insight into how agents targeting PI3K-dependent tumours may be used most
effectively in the clinic.[Current affiliation for S. Cosulich is
Novartis, Basel, Switzerland.]

