Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRCA 1/2 mutation status is correlated with increased
hypersensitivity reactions to carboplatin.


Background: Carboplatin (Cp) has become the standard first-line
chemotherapeutic agent for treatment of ovarian cancer (OvCa), and
Cp-related hypersensitivity reaction (HSR) has been observed in 5-20% of
patients (pts). The several known potential risk factors for HSR include
age, # of prior platinum treatments/cycles, and longer duration of
platinum-free interval (PFI). The role of BRCA mutation status has not
been studied in the context of Cp HSR, although OvCa pts with BRCAmut+
are treated repeatedly with platinum-based chemotherapies.Methods: The
medical records of 74 women who enrolled and initiated at least one cycle
of Cp on two phase I clinical trials (NCT01237067 and NCT01445418) with
Cp and olaparib (AZD2281) were reviewed. Cp was given with olaparib for a
maximum of 8 cycles. Clinical characteristics including BRCA mutation
status, history of HSR prior to or on study, and outcomes were
analyzed.Results: Primary diagnoses of the 74 pts were ovarian (71),
fallopian tube (1), and primary peritoneal (2) carcinomas. Pts had a
median age of 56 years (27-80) and ECOG 0-1. 50/74 (68%) pts were BRCA
mutation carriers (BRCA 1 [38], BRCA 2 [10], BRCA1/2 [1], BRCApro 68%
[1]). All pts had received platinum-based therapy prior to enrollment,
and the median # of prior platinum regimens and cycles were 2 (1-6) and
12 (2-42), respectively. The median PFI from the last prior platinum
treatment to the first Cp infusion on study was 15.3 months (6-82). 15/74
(20%) pts had a documented history of HSR to Cp prior to enrollment and
were pre-medicated with methylprednisolone, H1, and H2 blockers before a
slow, incremental Cp infusion. 15/74 (20%) pts developed HSR on study
(grade 1 [6], grade 2 [5], and grade 3 [4]), 4 of whom had prior history
of Cp HSR. Taken together, the incidence of Cp HSR at any point in the
pts oncologic history, either prior to or on study, was 35.1% (26/74);
prior history of Cp HSR was not predictive of HSR on study. Age, median #
of prior platinum cycles, and PFI for the 15 pts with HSR on study vs.
those with no HSR history were 52 (27-73) vs. 56 (34-73), 12 (6-20) vs.
10 (2-42), and 21.2 (8-53) vs. 15.3 (6-82), respectively, all of which
were not statistically significant. 4/15 (27%) pts with HSR on study
(including 2/4 pts with prior history) stopped Cp treatment due to
repeated HSR despite pre-medications, while 7/15 (47%) pts stopped
therapy for other reasons. The remaining 4/15 (27%) pts successfully
completed 8 cycles or are continuing therapy per protocol. BRCA mutation
was significantly associated with increased risk of HSR (prior to or on
study), 46% (23/50), vs. 11% (2/19) for pts with no BRCA mutation (p =
0.010).Conclusions: Cp re-treatment can be successful for OvCa pts
despite prior history of HSR. Prior HSR history did not increase the risk
of HSR on study. Being a BRCAmut+ carrier was associated with a
statistically significantly greater risk of HSR and may serve as a
clinical predictive biomarker of Cp hypersensitivity.

