Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A single-tube, multiplexed, transcript-based assay to detect ALK,
ROS1 and RET fusions in lung cancer.


Oncogenic fusions involving ALK, ROS1 and RET define a small
subpopulation (7%) of non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC). Tumors
harboring ALK and ROS1 rearrangements are highly sensitive to crizotinib
whereas RET inhibitors may be of potential benefit for the treatment for
RET-fusion positive tumors1. Current methods for detection of ALK, ROS1,
and RET rearrangements involve fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH),
immunohistochemistry (IHC) or RT-PCR, each test offering its own
advantages and disadvantages, and making it difficult for screening large
numbers of patient samples for all three targetable fusions.To explore
screening modalities for the simultaneous detection of ALK, ROS1 and RET
fusions from a single analyte, we designed a multiplexed,
transcript-based assay to detect for presence or absence of fusions.
Utilizing a combined 3 over-expression and fusion-specific detection
strategy, we developed a single-tube multiplex assay with a quantitative
scoring modality that is highly sensitive, reproducible and capable of
detecting low abundant ALK, ROS1 and RET fusion transcripts. We
successfully validated the assay in 273 NSCLC specimens. For ALK, our
results were highly concordant (97.4%) to prior results obtained by IHC
(n=189). We confirmed ROS1 (n=7) and RET (n=11) fusion-positive tumors by
RT-PCR plus sequencing. There is a significant enrichment for ROS1 and
RET fusions in triple negative NSCLC (i.e. KRAS/EGFR/ALK wildtype) (Table
1). ALK, ROS1, RET, KRAS and EGFR mutations are mutually exclusive in
this study. Our assay offers an easy to perform, high-throughput, and
FFPE-compatible screening method for detection of ALK, ROS1 and RET
fusions.
Incidence of ALK, ROS1 and RET fusions

