Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-200b blocks breast cancer lung metastasis in an
orthotopic mouse mammary xenograft tumor model.


Triple negative, or basal-like, breast cancer is a highly invasive and
metastatic form of breast cancer, and is difficult to treat due to the
lack of target therapies. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
refers to a developmental program that converts epithelial cells to
mesenchymal cells, therefore enabling cells to migrate and invade. EMT is
tightly controlled during development, and recent studies showed that EMT
is often reactivated in cancer and plays an important role in cancer
invasion and metastasis, and that EMT can also be regulated by microRNAs.
MicroRNAs (miRs) are a large family of small non-coding RNAs that
negatively regulate protein-coding gene expression posttranscriptionally.
Although the miR-200 family members have been shown to be able to inhibit
EMT, their effects on cancer metastasis continue to be controversial. We
aim to investigate the effect of miR-200b on triple negative breast
cancer lung metastasis and the underlying mechanism. It was found that
stably expressing miR-200b in MDA-MB-231 cells blocked lung metastasis in
an orthotopic mouse mammary xenograft tumor model. In vitro studies
showed that stably expressing miR-200b significantly reduced triple
negative breast cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.
Furthermore, stably expressing miR-200b also decreased tumor growth and
angiogenesis in the orthotopic mouse mammary xenograft tumors. These
findings suggest that miR-200b blocks breast cancer lung metastasis
through its strong inhibitory effect on multiple-steps including
proliferation, migration, invasion and angiogenesis.

