Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptomic changes in the oral mucosal epithelium reflect the
physiologic response to indoor burning of solid fuels.


RATIONALE: Human exposure to indoor smoke emissions from the domestic
burning of solid fuels (e.g. coal, wood, plant materials) is a major
cause of morbidity and mortality that affects nearly half of the world's
population. While epidemiologic studies on the health impact of indoor
air pollution (IAP) have yielded valuable insights from the use of
various exposure assessments (e.g. personal and area air sampling,
urinary metabolites), there is a need to connect these exposure measures
to biomarkers of the host's physiologic response to exposure. We have
previously shown that gene-expression (GE) profiles in the upper airway
epithelium are affected by tobacco smoke. Thus, we sought to determine
whether transcriptomic changes in the oral mucosal epithelium might also
capture physiologic responses to IAP from the burning of solid fuels.
METHODS: Buccal mucosa epithelial cell scrapings were collected from
healthy, non-smoking female subjects in rural Xuanwei, China, where
female lung cancer rates are among the highest in the world.
Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) exposure levels from indoor burning of solid fuels
(primarily coal) for cooking and heating were measured by personal
in-home air monitoring. RNA from 18 samples was extracted and processed
onto Affymetrix Gene 1.0 ST arrays. Student's t-test and DAVID were used
to identify and characterize genes that vary between relatively high
levels of BaP exposure (n=8; BaP 99.0 +/- 45.9) and low (n=10; BaP 16.2
+/- 6.1) exposure. Using GSEA, results were compared to independent
airway epithelial GE profiles that distinguish current smokers from never
smokers and bronchial GE profiles in subjects with and without lung
cancer. RESULTS: We identified 227 genes that were differentially
expressed between subjects with high and low BaP exposure (pRATIONALE:
Human exposure to indoor smoke emissions from the domestic burning of
solid fuels (e.g. coal, wood, plant materials) is a major cause of
morbidity and mortality that affects nearly half of the world's
population. While epidemiologic studies on the health impact of indoor
air pollution (IAP) have yielded valuable insights from the use of
various exposure assessments (e.g. personal and area air sampling,
urinary metabolites), there is a need to connect these exposure measures
to biomarkers of the host's physiologic response to exposure. We have
previously shown that gene-expression (GE) profiles in the upper airway
epithelium are affected by tobacco smoke. Thus, we sought to determine
whether transcriptomic changes in the oral mucosal epithelium might also
capture physiologic responses to IAP from the burning of solid fuels.
METHODS: Buccal mucosa epithelial cell scrapings were collected from
healthy, non-smoking female subjects in rural Xuanwei, China, where
female lung cancer rates are among the highest in the world.
Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) exposure levels from indoor burning of solid fuels
(primarily coal) for cooking and heating were measured by personal
in-home air monitoring. RNA from 18 samples was extracted and processed
onto Affymetrix Gene 1.0 ST arrays. Student's t-test and DAVID were used
to identify and characterize genes that vary between relatively high
levels of BaP exposure (n=8; BaP 99.0 +/- 45.9) and low (n=10; BaP 16.2
+/- 6.1) exposure. Using GSEA, results were compared to independent
airway epithelial GE profiles that distinguish current smokers from never
smokers and bronchial GE profiles in subjects with and without lung
cancer. RESULTS: We identified 227 genes that were differentially
expressed between subjects with high and low BaP exposure (p<0.01). Genes
elevated with high BaP exposure were enriched for genes involved in the
activation of apoptosis and the Toll-Like Receptor Signaling pathway.
Genes that we have previously shown to have altered expression in the
bronchial, buccal, and nasal epithelium of current smokers relative to
never smokers were enriched among the genes associated with BaP exposure
(GSEA; qRATIONALE: Human exposure to indoor smoke emissions from the
domestic burning of solid fuels (e.g. coal, wood, plant materials) is a
major cause of morbidity and mortality that affects nearly half of the
world's population. While epidemiologic studies on the health impact of
indoor air pollution (IAP) have yielded valuable insights from the use of
various exposure assessments (e.g. personal and area air sampling,
urinary metabolites), there is a need to connect these exposure measures
to biomarkers of the host's physiologic response to exposure. We have
previously shown that gene-expression (GE) profiles in the upper airway
epithelium are affected by tobacco smoke. Thus, we sought to determine
whether transcriptomic changes in the oral mucosal epithelium might also
capture physiologic responses to IAP from the burning of solid fuels.
METHODS: Buccal mucosa epithelial cell scrapings were collected from
healthy, non-smoking female subjects in rural Xuanwei, China, where
female lung cancer rates are among the highest in the world.
Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) exposure levels from indoor burning of solid fuels
(primarily coal) for cooking and heating were measured by personal
in-home air monitoring. RNA from 18 samples was extracted and processed
onto Affymetrix Gene 1.0 ST arrays. Student's t-test and DAVID were used
to identify and characterize genes that vary between relatively high
levels of BaP exposure (n=8; BaP 99.0 +/- 45.9) and low (n=10; BaP 16.2
+/- 6.1) exposure. Using GSEA, results were compared to independent
airway epithelial GE profiles that distinguish current smokers from never
smokers and bronchial GE profiles in subjects with and without lung
cancer. RESULTS: We identified 227 genes that were differentially
expressed between subjects with high and low BaP exposure (p<0.01). Genes
elevated with high BaP exposure were enriched for genes involved in the
activation of apoptosis and the Toll-Like Receptor Signaling pathway.
Genes that we have previously shown to have altered expression in the
bronchial, buccal, and nasal epithelium of current smokers relative to
never smokers were enriched among the genes associated with BaP exposure
(GSEA; q<0.01). There was also a significant enrichment for bronchial
epithelial airway genes that were altered in subjects with and without
lung cancer in a previous report (GSEA; qRATIONALE: Human exposure to
indoor smoke emissions from the domestic burning of solid fuels (e.g.
coal, wood, plant materials) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality
that affects nearly half of the world's population. While epidemiologic
studies on the health impact of indoor air pollution (IAP) have yielded
valuable insights from the use of various exposure assessments (e.g.
personal and area air sampling, urinary metabolites), there is a need to
connect these exposure measures to biomarkers of the host's physiologic
response to exposure. We have previously shown that gene-expression (GE)
profiles in the upper airway epithelium are affected by tobacco smoke.
Thus, we sought to determine whether transcriptomic changes in the oral
mucosal epithelium might also capture physiologic responses to IAP from
the burning of solid fuels. METHODS: Buccal mucosa epithelial cell
scrapings were collected from healthy, non-smoking female subjects in
rural Xuanwei, China, where female lung cancer rates are among the
highest in the world. Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) exposure levels from indoor
burning of solid fuels (primarily coal) for cooking and heating were
measured by personal in-home air monitoring. RNA from 18 samples was
extracted and processed onto Affymetrix Gene 1.0 ST arrays. Student's
t-test and DAVID were used to identify and characterize genes that vary
between relatively high levels of BaP exposure (n=8; BaP 99.0 +/- 45.9)
and low (n=10; BaP 16.2 +/- 6.1) exposure. Using GSEA, results were
compared to independent airway epithelial GE profiles that distinguish
current smokers from never smokers and bronchial GE profiles in subjects
with and without lung cancer. RESULTS: We identified 227 genes that were
differentially expressed between subjects with high and low BaP exposure
(p<0.01). Genes elevated with high BaP exposure were enriched for genes
involved in the activation of apoptosis and the Toll-Like Receptor
Signaling pathway. Genes that we have previously shown to have altered
expression in the bronchial, buccal, and nasal epithelium of current
smokers relative to never smokers were enriched among the genes
associated with BaP exposure (GSEA; q<0.01). There was also a significant
enrichment for bronchial epithelial airway genes that were altered in
subjects with and without lung cancer in a previous report (GSEA;
q<0.01). CONCLUSION: Buccal epithelial GE is affected by BaP exposure in
a population that uses coal and other solid fuels for indoor cooking and
heating among healthy women in Xuanwei, China. Solid fuel emissions may
elicit some of the same transcriptomic responses as cigarette smoke and
lung cancer. This demonstrates the feasibility of using non-invasively
collected buccal GE profiling to assess physiologic responses to other
inhaled toxins such as coal smoke in population-based studies.

