Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The molecular architecture of p85 as determined by SAXS and
chemical cross-linking.


The p85 protein, encoded by PIK3R1, is the regulatory subunit of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase alpha (PI3K). The role of p85 extends to
regulation of PTEN-phosphatase activity, the unfolded protein response,
and additional cellular pathways. PIK3R1 was recently identified as
frequently mutated in glioblastomas and endometrial cancers. Small-angle
X-ray scattering (SAXS) and chemical cross-linking were used to complete
the first investigation of the shape and molecular organization of full
length p85. p85 is elongated in shape and exists in a conformation
conducive to p110 binding. The p85 structural data was utilized to
generate the first model of the full length PI3K complex. Cancer
associated PIK3R1 mutations are localized to interfaces between p85
domains, and in the context of the PI3K complex, are clustered at regions
comprising the interface of the catalytic and regulatory subunits. A
potential interface was discovered between the RhoGAP domain of p85 and
the p110 kinase domain. GTPases may enhance PI3K activity by binding to
the RhoGAP domain, thereby attenuating the interaction between the RhoGAP
and the kinase domain. These data provide the structural groundwork
required for a better understanding of the regulatory mechanisms mediated
by p85, and may facilitate the development of future drugs targeting the
PI3K pathway.

