Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a microRNA expression signature for
radiochemosensitivity of colorectal cancer cells, involving miRNAs-320a,
-224, -132 and let7g.


Background: Preoperative 5-fluorouracil-based chemoradiotherapy is the
standard treatment for locally advanced rectal carcinomas. However, the
individual tumor response is very heterogeneous, ranging from complete
resistance to regression. Therefore, ascertaining the role of microRNAs
(miRNAs) in therapy response as well as identification certain miRNA as
predictive markers for response remains very crucial.Materials/Methods:
Using an in-vitro model of 12 colorectal cancer cell lines, we compare
the pretherapeutic miRNA expression profiles of these cell lines with the
previously assessed radiochemoresistance of each cell lines,
respectively. Differences in treatment sensitivity of the cell lines and
miRNAs expression were then correlated. Colony formation assays in two
independent cell lines were used for the functional validation in-vitro.
To asses the clinical applicability miRNA expressions of 64
pretherapeutic biopsies from patients with locally advanced cancer
treated with 5-FU based RCT were analyzed.Results: We identified 36
miRNAs whose expression levels correlated significantly with the
heterogeneous sensitivity of the cell lines to chemoradiotherapy (p
Background: Preoperative 5-fluorouracil-based chemoradiotherapy is the
standard treatment for locally advanced rectal carcinomas. However, the
individual tumor response is very heterogeneous, ranging from complete
resistance to regression. Therefore, ascertaining the role of microRNAs
(miRNAs) in therapy response as well as identification certain miRNA as
predictive markers for response remains very crucial.Materials/Methods:
Using an in-vitro model of 12 colorectal cancer cell lines, we compare
the pretherapeutic miRNA expression profiles of these cell lines with the
previously assessed radiochemoresistance of each cell lines,
respectively. Differences in treatment sensitivity of the cell lines and
miRNAs expression were then correlated. Colony formation assays in two
independent cell lines were used for the functional validation in-vitro.
To asses the clinical applicability miRNA expressions of 64
pretherapeutic biopsies from patients with locally advanced cancer
treated with 5-FU based RCT were analyzed.Results: We identified 36
miRNAs whose expression levels correlated significantly with the
heterogeneous sensitivity of the cell lines to chemoradiotherapy (p <
0.05). Microarray measurements were independently validated using
semi-quantitative real-time PCR. miR-320, miR-132, miR-429, miR-224 and
let-7g were then functionally validated in-vitro by transfection of
corresponding miRNA mimics. Analysis of miRNA expression in rectal cancer
patients biopsies showed high correlation of miR-224 expression with poor
prognosis (p=0.043).Conclusion: We identified 36 miRNAs that associated
with response to chemoradiotherapy. Functional validations of miR-320,
miR-132, miR-429, miR-224 and let-7g have been undertaken in-vitro
underlining the regulatory effects of the specific miRNAs. Further
miR-224 found out to be significantly correlated to Disease Free Survival
(DFS). An independent prospective validation in a clinical trial will be
performed.

