Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of an attenuated version of a strongly immunogenic,
peptide-based vaccine to enhance an anti-cancer immune response against
folate receptor-alpha.


Background: FR is over-expressed in ovarian and breast cancers. E39 (FBP
191-199) is an immunogenic, cytotoxic t lymphocyte (CTL) eliciting
peptide derived from FR used in a cancer vaccine strategy. Due to the in
vitro observation of antigen-induced cell death with repeated T cell
stimulation by E39, we developed an attenuated form of the E39, J65. We
report the use of J65 alone or in combination with E39 to better induce
E39-specific CTL and anti- FR immunity. Methods: T2 stabilization assays
were performed using flow cytometry to determine peptide HLA-A2 binding
affinity. Interferon- (IFN) release was measured from peripheral blood
mononuclear cell (PMBC) cultures after weekly stimulation with J65X3
followed by re-stimulation with either J65 or E39. Nave PBMCS from
healthy donors (HD) were primed with weekly J65X3 or E39X3, re-stimulated
with E39 at concentrations of 5 and 25G/M, and then tested for the
ability to lyse FR-expressing cancer cells. PBMCs from responding donors
(RD) were stimulated with E39 or J65, then proliferation was measured by
cell counts after 14d. IL-2 secretion was also measured. Results: The
affinity of J65 for HLA-A2 was half that of the native E39 (65V130 MCF).
After priming with J65X3, IFN levels were lower in the re-stimulated J65
culture compared to E39 re-stimulation (43V181 PG/ML). HD cultures
demonstrated a higher tumor cell lysis (24.5 & 17.4% V 14.6 & 11.1%)
after priming with J65X3 compared to E39X3. In RD cultures, PMBC cell
counts were higher in the J65 culture compared with the same donor PMBCS
stimulated with E39 (8.2X106V2.4X106 cells) and IL-2 concentrations were
lower in the J65 cultures (820V580 PG/ML). Conclusions: In vitro analysis
reveals the potential of J65 to induce CTL with the ability to
proliferate while avoiding overstimulation. Importantly, these CTL
demonstrate enhanced recognition and lysis of FR-expressing cancer cells.
The potential of this weaker, survival inducing version of E39 to induce
a more robust anti-FR immune response is currently being assessed in a
first in human, Phase 1b clinical trial in ovarian and breast cancer
patients.

