Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclin D2- mediated cardiomyocyte cell cycle activity reverses
doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity.


Introduction: Doxorubicin (DOX) is an effective anticancer agent which
also induces acute and chronic cardiotoxicities. We have generated a
juvenile mouse model to study DOX-induced cardiotoxicity in children.
Cardiomyocyte apoptosis with an ensuing loss of myocardial function is
observed in this model. Here, we hypothesize that activation of
cardiomyocyte cell cycle protects against DOX-induced cardiotoxicity.
Methods: Two week old MHC-cylin D2 (D2) mice and their non-transgenic
(NON-TXG) littermates were given weekly DOX injections for 5 weeks (25
mg/kg total dose). Animals were studied 1 week (acute stage) or 13 weeks
(late stage) after the last DOX injection. Cardiac function was measured
with echocardiography and cardiomyocyte (CM) cell cycle was quantified
using a tritiated thymidine incorporation assay. Results: Our results
showed that CM cell cycle was increased in D2 mice as compared to NON-TXG
mice (thymidine positive CM nuclei, 0.030.01% vs. 0.0020.002 in acute
stage, pIntroduction: Doxorubicin (DOX) is an effective anticancer agent
which also induces acute and chronic cardiotoxicities. We have generated
a juvenile mouse model to study DOX-induced cardiotoxicity in children.
Cardiomyocyte apoptosis with an ensuing loss of myocardial function is
observed in this model. Here, we hypothesize that activation of
cardiomyocyte cell cycle protects against DOX-induced cardiotoxicity.
Methods: Two week old MHC-cylin D2 (D2) mice and their non-transgenic
(NON-TXG) littermates were given weekly DOX injections for 5 weeks (25
mg/kg total dose). Animals were studied 1 week (acute stage) or 13 weeks
(late stage) after the last DOX injection. Cardiac function was measured
with echocardiography and cardiomyocyte (CM) cell cycle was quantified
using a tritiated thymidine incorporation assay. Results: Our results
showed that CM cell cycle was increased in D2 mice as compared to NON-TXG
mice (thymidine positive CM nuclei, 0.030.01% vs. 0.0020.002 in acute
stage, p<0.01; and 0.030.01% vs. 0.0010.001 in late stage, p0.05),
whereas in the presence of CM cell cycle activity, cardiac function
improved in late stage vs. acute stage (FS = 60.11.3% vs. 47.13.3%,
p0.05), whereas in the presence of CM cell cycle activity, cardiac
function improved in late stage vs. acute stage (FS = 60.11.3% vs.
47.13.3%, p<0.01). CM apoptosis (0.020.01/mm2 vs. 0.050.01/mm2, p0.05),
whereas in the presence of CM cell cycle activity, cardiac function
improved in late stage vs. acute stage (FS = 60.11.3% vs. 47.13.3%,
p<0.01). CM apoptosis (0.020.01/mm2 vs. 0.050.01/mm2, p<0.01) and
fibrosis (6.20.9% vs. 12.01.7%, p0.05), whereas in the presence of CM
cell cycle activity, cardiac function improved in late stage vs. acute
stage (FS = 60.11.3% vs. 47.13.3%, p<0.01). CM apoptosis (0.020.01/mm2
vs. 0.050.01/mm2, p<0.01) and fibrosis (6.20.9% vs. 12.01.7%, p<0.01) was
reduced in D2 mice as compared to NON-TXG mice in late stage. Conclusion:
For the first time, our data suggest activation of CM cell cycle in adult
mice reverses DOX-induced cardiotoxicity.

