Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Hippo pathway regulates liver development and tumorigenesis in
zebrafish.


The Hippo pathway is a novel signaling cascade that regulates cell
proliferation, organ size and tumorigenesis in mammals. In mice,
deregulation of the Hippo pathway in the liver has been shown to potently
induce tumor formation. However, the molecular mechanism by which the
Hippo pathway regulates hepatic growth is not well understood. In this
study, we have examined liver development in NF2-/- mutant zebrafish,
which exhibit systemic activation of Yap, and found that liver size was
increased by 5 days post fertilization (dpf). Histological evaluation of
the NF2-/- mutant zebrafish embryos revealed that the enlarged liver was
composed of an extended biliary network. In order to examine the
cell-autonomous effects of Yap activation in hepatocytes, we generated
Tg(fabp10a:YapS87A) fish and found that liver size increased dramatically
by 5 dpf. In contrast to the NF2-/- mutant, histological and FACS
analysis revealed that the enlarged liver in the Tg(fabp10a:YapS87A)
embryos was composed of a greater number of hepatocytes. Chemical
exposure to the -secretase inhibitor DAPT or erlotinib rescued the
hepatomegaly phenotype in 5 dpf Tg(fabp10a:YapS87A) embryos, indicating
dependence on Notch and EGFR signaling pathways. To gain greater insight
into how these developmental studies relate to tumorigenesis, we compared
NF2+/- mutants and Tg(fabp10a:YapS87A) adults and found that both lines
were predisposed to liver tumor formation, developing predominantly
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. Together, these studies reveal an
evolutionarily conserved role of the Hippo pathway at the interface
between liver development and tumorigenesis in zebrafish.

