Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a fully-human chimeric antigen receptor against
PSCA for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer represents the fourth leading cause of cancer-related
death in developed countries. Despite remarkable advances in the
understanding of its molecular pathophysiology, treatment options remain
scarce, highlighting the need for novel therapies. Adoptive cell transfer
(ACT) of lymphocytes engineered ex vivo to express chimeric antigen
receptors (CAR) has come of age as a safe and clinically efficacious
treatment for advanced cancers.We sought to develop a CAR specific for
prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA), a glycoprotein with restricted
expression in normal tissues that is over-expressed in pancreatic cancer
cells starting at early stages of malignant transformation.In order to
establish the optimal CAR design, we generated constructs containing
antigen-recognition domains derived from mouse or human antibodies, and
intracellular domains containing one or two co-stimulatory domains, in
addition to CD3zeta. We compared multiple constructs and found that a CAR
based on human monoclonal antibody Ha1-4.117 had greater reactivity in
vitro. Using a murine model of ACT we observed that CAR-engineered human
lymphocytes induced an antitumor effect on HPAC xenografts.
Interestingly, unlike what has been described for other CARs, a second
generation PSCA CAR (containing CD28 signaling domain) induced a more
potent antitumor effect than its third generation counterpart (containing
CD28 and 41BB domains).Our results provide evidence to support PSCA as a
target antigen for immunotherapy of pancreatic cancer, using adoptively
transferred autologous lymphocytes engineered to express an
Ha1-4.117-based CAR.

