Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of aberrant breast acinar morphogenesis by deregulation
of an estrogen receptor alpha circadian circuit.


Altered estrogen receptor alpha (ERA) signaling and altered circadian
rhythms are both features of breast cancer. ERA mRNA oscillates in a
circadian fashion in ERA-positive breast epithelial cells, but not in
ERA-positive breast cancer cells (Rossetti et al., 2012a). Interestingly,
we identified a circuit consisting of ERA and an estrogen-regulated loop
consisting of PER2 and BMAL1, two circadian clock genes, in entrained
ERA-positive breast epithelial cells. This estrogen-regulated circuit is
apparently necessary for breast epithelial acinar morphogenesis, and its
disruption by ERA knock down negatively affects both the
estrogen-sustained circadian PER2-BMAL1mechanism and the formation of
acini in three-dimensional (3D) culture on basement membrane. Conversely,
knock down of either PER2 or BMAL1, by hampering the PER2-BMAL1 loop of
the circadian clock, negatively affects both ERA circadian oscillations
and 3D breast acinar morphogenesis (Rossetti et al., 2012b). This is the
first evidence that a circuit comprising ERA and key circadian clock
components is implicated in the acinar developmental processes of breast
epithelial cells.Acknowledgments: this work was supported by the
Department of Defense (DOD) Concept Award W81XWH0610657 (NS), the Breast
Cancer Coalition of Rochester (NS), and the Friends for an Earlier Test
for Breast Cancer Foundation (NS).Rossetti, S, Esposito, J, Corlazzoli,
F, Gregorski, A, and Sacchi, N. (2012a). Entrainment of breast (cancer)
epithelial cells detects distinct circadian oscillation patterns for
clock and hormone receptor genes. Cell Cycle 11, 350-360.Rossetti, S,
Corlazzoli, F, Gregorski, A, Azmi, NH, and Sacchi, N. (2012b).
Identification of an estrogen-regulated circadian mechanism necessary for
breast acinar morphogenesis. Cell Cycle 11, 3691-3700.

