Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LIN28B drives neuroblastoma oncogenesis through let7-MYCN
signaling.


LIN28B regulates developmental processes by modulating miRNAs of the
let-7 family. A role for LIN28B in cancer has been proposed, but has not
been established in vivo. We report LIN28B amplification or
overexpression in high risk neuroblastoma. LIN28B repressed let-7 family
miRNAs and induced MYCN expression in neuroblastoma cells in vitro.
LIN28B-let-7-MYCN signaling induced proliferation and blocked
differentiation of normal neuroblasts and neuroblastoma cells. The effect
of LIN28B knock-down was rescued by overexpression of let-7-resistant
MYCN. To analyse the tumor-initiating capacity and oncogenicity of Lin28b
in vivo, mice were generated by knock-in of the
CAG-LSL-Lin28b-IRES-Luciferse vector (LSL-Lin28b) into the ROSA26 locus.
Crossbreeding these mice with DBH-iCre mice targeted Lin28b expression to
the neural crest. Abdominal tumors developed in 7 of 18
DBHiCre;LSL-Lin28b mice at 36-62 days of age. Autopsy revealed uni- or
bilateral adrenal tumors in all mice, reflecting the most frequent
localization of human NB. Tumors consisted of small round blue cells and
expressed the NB markers, DBH, TH and Phox2b. The macroscopic tumor
appearance, primary tumor sites, tumor histology and marker gene
expression confirmed these tumors as NB. Successful serial
transplantation supported that the primary tumors from this model system
were fully transformed malignant tumors. Both the Lin28b and MYCN
proteins were strongly expressed in all tumors and members of the let-7
miRNA family were significantly downregulated. We demonstrate that
overexpressing Lin28b in the neural crest can drive NB tumor formation in
mice, supporting LIN28B as an important oncogene for NB and potentially
for other malignancies. Therapeutic approaches aimed at inhibiting Lin28b
or let-7 family re-expression may be useful therapeutic approaches to
circumvent MYCN addiction in NB.

