Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 blocks growth of pancreatic cancer
cells in 3D collagen.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is associated with a pronounced
collagen-rich stromal reaction that has been shown to contribute to
chemo-resistance. We have found that the collagen microenvironment
promotes expression of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and thereby
promotes chemo-resistance; however, HATs have proven to be difficult
druggable targets. Bromodomain proteins are chromatin readers that can
bind to acetylated histones and thereby regulate gene expression. JQ1, an
inhibitor of BET class of human bromodomains, was shown to have efficacy
against leukemia and lymphoma cell lines. Thus, we examined the effect of
JQ1 on a panel of PDAC cells grown in 3D collagen. AsPC1, CD18 and
Panc02.03 cells were particularly sensitive to the effects of JQ1, while
Panc1 cells were relatively resistant to JQ1 treatment. JQ1 decreased myc
mRNA and increased p21 mRNA in CD18 cells, but not in Panc1 cells. JQ1
also decreased growth of chemo-resistant CD18 cells grown in 3D collagen,
and blocked EGF and TGF-1-induced growth and scattering of Panc1 and CD18
cells in 3D collagen. The MEK1/2 inhibitor U0126 and JQ1 synergistically
attenuated growth of CD18 and Panc1 cells in 3D collagen. In addition,
EGFR inhibitors (AG1478 and PD153035) and JQ1 also synergistically
attenuated the growth of CD18 and Panc1 cells in 3D collagen. In
contrast, the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB202190 did not attenuate the effect of
JQ1 on growth of CD18 and Panc1 cells in 3D collagen. Finally, JQ1
potentiated the effect of gemcitabine on the growth of CD18 and Panc1
cells in 3D collagen. Overall, these results suggest that JQ1 and other
bromodomain inhibitors are potential therapeutic agents for the treatment
of pancreatic cancer.

