Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FK506 binding protein 51 (FKBP51) binds to p300 and acts as
transcriptional co-regulator of ABCG2 gene expression in melanoma.


Several lines of evidence support a role for FKBPs in chromatin
modifications and cancer. Particularly for some of them, DNA association
and regulation of gene expression has been demonstrated, mediated by
histone- or transcription factor- chaperone activity. FKBP51 is an
immunophilin that functions also as co chaperone of several proteins and
receptors. We previously found this molecule has an essential role in
melanoma resistance to the therapy and aggressiveness. Melanoma cells
expressing stem cell markers (MCSC) produced high levels of FKBP51. In
addition, the number of MCSC (identified by ABCG2 expression) was
increased in FKBP51 over expressing melanoma cell lines. By converse,
reduced expression of cancer stemness genes was measured in FKBP51
silenced melanoma. Since ABCG2+ cells also contained high levels of the
general transcriptional co-activator, namely E1A binding protein p300, we
hypotesized that FKBP51 might act as a p300 co chaperone with a role in
transcriptional regulation of stemness markers. By co-IP assays, we show
that FKBP51 interacts with p300 and partecipates in transcriptional
complexes with Smad 2 and p300. By chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
(ChIP) we demonstrate that FKBP51 binds to chromatin. We used different
couples of primers to amplify different regions of the ABCG2 promoter, in
FKBP51-immunoprecipitated chromatin and found enrichment of DNA fragments
corresponding to a first sequence localized at 3450 bp (-3450) from the
transcription start site (TSS), a second at -3219, and a third at -939.
Differently, no enrichment in closest regions was found, suggesting the
specificity of FKBP51 binding to ABCG2 promoter. In addition, we found
p300 bound to the same regions of ABCG2 promoter, and such binding was
impaired by FKBP51 downmodulation, suggesting the immunophilin
regulatated the binding of p300 to DNA. In conclusion, our study supports
the conclusion that FKBP51 partecipates in the transcriptional apparatus
that controls expression of melanoma stemness genes, acting as co
chaperone of p300.

