Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of tumorigenesis by a novel Gemini vitamin D analog
BXL0124 and a synthetic triterpenoid CDDO-Im in MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic
mice.


HER2 amplification is one of major genetic alterations in breast cancer,
representing about 20% breast cancer cases. Gemini vitamin D analogs and
synthetic triterpenoids have been shown to repress the growth of
HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells and inhibit mammary tumorigenesis
of MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mice. In previous leukemia studies, CDDO and
its derivatives have been shown to synergize with vitamin D or vitamin D
analogs to induce monocytic differentiation, demonstrating the potential
combinatory effects for cancer prevention. In the present study, we
investigated the anti-cancer activity of a novel Gemini vitamin D analog
BXL0124, a potent synthetic triterpenoid CDDO-Im alone and in combination
utilizing the MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mouse model. BXL0124 (0.3 g/kg
body weight), CDDO-Im (3 mole/kg body weight) or their combination was
orally administered to MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mice three times a week,
beginning at 12 weeks of age. The body weight and tumor size of each
mouse were measured weekly, and the mice were sacrificed when they were
56 weeks old. BXL0124, CDDO-Im and their combination delayed the
development of MMTV-HER2/neu mammary tumors. The tumor multiplicity was
decreased by BXL0124 (0.84), CDDO-Im (0.65, pHER2 amplification is one of
major genetic alterations in breast cancer, representing about 20% breast
cancer cases. Gemini vitamin D analogs and synthetic triterpenoids have
been shown to repress the growth of HER2-overexpressing breast cancer
cells and inhibit mammary tumorigenesis of MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mice.
In previous leukemia studies, CDDO and its derivatives have been shown to
synergize with vitamin D or vitamin D analogs to induce monocytic
differentiation, demonstrating the potential combinatory effects for
cancer prevention. In the present study, we investigated the anti-cancer
activity of a novel Gemini vitamin D analog BXL0124, a potent synthetic
triterpenoid CDDO-Im alone and in combination utilizing the MMTV-HER2/neu
transgenic mouse model. BXL0124 (0.3 g/kg body weight), CDDO-Im (3
mole/kg body weight) or their combination was orally administered to
MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mice three times a week, beginning at 12 weeks
of age. The body weight and tumor size of each mouse were measured
weekly, and the mice were sacrificed when they were 56 weeks old.
BXL0124, CDDO-Im and their combination delayed the development of
MMTV-HER2/neu mammary tumors. The tumor multiplicity was decreased by
BXL0124 (0.84), CDDO-Im (0.65, p<0.05) and their combination (0.53, pHER2
amplification is one of major genetic alterations in breast cancer,
representing about 20% breast cancer cases. Gemini vitamin D analogs and
synthetic triterpenoids have been shown to repress the growth of
HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells and inhibit mammary tumorigenesis
of MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mice. In previous leukemia studies, CDDO and
its derivatives have been shown to synergize with vitamin D or vitamin D
analogs to induce monocytic differentiation, demonstrating the potential
combinatory effects for cancer prevention. In the present study, we
investigated the anti-cancer activity of a novel Gemini vitamin D analog
BXL0124, a potent synthetic triterpenoid CDDO-Im alone and in combination
utilizing the MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mouse model. BXL0124 (0.3 g/kg
body weight), CDDO-Im (3 mole/kg body weight) or their combination was
orally administered to MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mice three times a week,
beginning at 12 weeks of age. The body weight and tumor size of each
mouse were measured weekly, and the mice were sacrificed when they were
56 weeks old. BXL0124, CDDO-Im and their combination delayed the
development of MMTV-HER2/neu mammary tumors. The tumor multiplicity was
decreased by BXL0124 (0.84), CDDO-Im (0.65, p<0.05) and their combination
(0.53, p<0.05) compared to control (1.11). The averaged tumor weight was
also reduced by BXL0124 (0.63 g), CDDO-Im (0.44g, pHER2 amplification is
one of major genetic alterations in breast cancer, representing about 20%
breast cancer cases. Gemini vitamin D analogs and synthetic triterpenoids
have been shown to repress the growth of HER2-overexpressing breast
cancer cells and inhibit mammary tumorigenesis of MMTV-HER2/neu
transgenic mice. In previous leukemia studies, CDDO and its derivatives
have been shown to synergize with vitamin D or vitamin D analogs to
induce monocytic differentiation, demonstrating the potential combinatory
effects for cancer prevention. In the present study, we investigated the
anti-cancer activity of a novel Gemini vitamin D analog BXL0124, a potent
synthetic triterpenoid CDDO-Im alone and in combination utilizing the
MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mouse model. BXL0124 (0.3 g/kg body weight),
CDDO-Im (3 mole/kg body weight) or their combination was orally
administered to MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mice three times a week,
beginning at 12 weeks of age. The body weight and tumor size of each
mouse were measured weekly, and the mice were sacrificed when they were
56 weeks old. BXL0124, CDDO-Im and their combination delayed the
development of MMTV-HER2/neu mammary tumors. The tumor multiplicity was
decreased by BXL0124 (0.84), CDDO-Im (0.65, p<0.05) and their combination
(0.53, p<0.05) compared to control (1.11). The averaged tumor weight was
also reduced by BXL0124 (0.63 g), CDDO-Im (0.44g, p<0.05) and their
combination (0.43 g, pHER2 amplification is one of major genetic
alterations in breast cancer, representing about 20% breast cancer cases.
Gemini vitamin D analogs and synthetic triterpenoids have been shown to
repress the growth of HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells and inhibit
mammary tumorigenesis of MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mice. In previous
leukemia studies, CDDO and its derivatives have been shown to synergize
with vitamin D or vitamin D analogs to induce monocytic differentiation,
demonstrating the potential combinatory effects for cancer prevention. In
the present study, we investigated the anti-cancer activity of a novel
Gemini vitamin D analog BXL0124, a potent synthetic triterpenoid CDDO-Im
alone and in combination utilizing the MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic mouse
model. BXL0124 (0.3 g/kg body weight), CDDO-Im (3 mole/kg body weight) or
their combination was orally administered to MMTV-HER2/neu transgenic
mice three times a week, beginning at 12 weeks of age. The body weight
and tumor size of each mouse were measured weekly, and the mice were
sacrificed when they were 56 weeks old. BXL0124, CDDO-Im and their
combination delayed the development of MMTV-HER2/neu mammary tumors. The
tumor multiplicity was decreased by BXL0124 (0.84), CDDO-Im (0.65,
p<0.05) and their combination (0.53, p<0.05) compared to control (1.11).
The averaged tumor weight was also reduced by BXL0124 (0.63 g), CDDO-Im
(0.44g, p<0.05) and their combination (0.43 g, p<0.05) compared to
control (0.89 g). In MMTV-HER2/neu mammary tumors, the activation of HER2
and EGFR as well as downstream signaling molecules, including JAK2, Src,
Mek1/2 and Erk1/2, were markedly repressed by BXL0124, CDDO-Im and their
combination. The protein levels of cyclin D1, c-Myc, PCNA and Bcl2 were
decreased, whereas the protein level of p21 was increased by BXL0124,
CDDO-Im and their combination. While HER2 was expressed in all tumor
area, the activation of HER2 was found predominantly in the front
invading edge area of MMTV-HER2/neu mammary tumors. All three treatments
markedly decreased the activation of HER2 signaling at the front invading
edge area. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that BXL0124, CDDO-Im
and their combination may be promising chemopreventive agents targeting
the HER2 signaling pathway in HER2-positive breast cancer. (This work was
supported in part by the National Institutes of Health National Cancer
Institute R01-CA-127645 and the National Institutes of Health National
Institute of Environmental Health Science Grant ES005022.)

