Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of insulin receptor isoforms in human lung
cancer.


Substantial population and preclinical data have indicated that the
insulin growth factor (IGF) pathway plays an important role in lung
cancer. Although results from early clinical trials targeting the IGF1R
showed some evidence of response in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
larger randomized phase III trials have not shown clear clinical benefit
in combination with conventional strategies. These disappointing results
have focused attention on the insulin receptor isoform A (IR-A) as one
intrinsic resistance factor to anti-IGF1R therapy due to its ability to
mediate growth-promoting signaling through binding to IGF-II. However,
the expression status of insulin-receptor isoforms in lung cancer and its
subtypes is largely unknown. In order to address this issue, the mRNA
expression levels of insulin-receptor isoforms were studied in 50 normal
lung samples and 183 lung cancer samples from complementary DNA (cDNA)
arrays. Additionally, 31 primary small cell lung cancer (SCLC) tumor
samples with paired adjacent normal tissues were also evaluated.The mRNA
expression levels of insulin receptor isoform B (IR-B) were significantly
lower in NSCLC than normal lung samples (n=176, p Substantial population
and preclinical data have indicated that the insulin growth factor (IGF)
pathway plays an important role in lung cancer. Although results from
early clinical trials targeting the IGF1R showed some evidence of
response in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), larger randomized phase
III trials have not shown clear clinical benefit in combination with
conventional strategies. These disappointing results have focused
attention on the insulin receptor isoform A (IR-A) as one intrinsic
resistance factor to anti-IGF1R therapy due to its ability to mediate
growth-promoting signaling through binding to IGF-II. However, the
expression status of insulin-receptor isoforms in lung cancer and its
subtypes is largely unknown. In order to address this issue, the mRNA
expression levels of insulin-receptor isoforms were studied in 50 normal
lung samples and 183 lung cancer samples from complementary DNA (cDNA)
arrays. Additionally, 31 primary small cell lung cancer (SCLC) tumor
samples with paired adjacent normal tissues were also evaluated.The mRNA
expression levels of insulin receptor isoform B (IR-B) were significantly
lower in NSCLC than normal lung samples (n=176, p < 0.001), including
adenocarcinoma (n=85, p Substantial population and preclinical data have
indicated that the insulin growth factor (IGF) pathway plays an important
role in lung cancer. Although results from early clinical trials
targeting the IGF1R showed some evidence of response in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), larger randomized phase III trials have not shown
clear clinical benefit in combination with conventional strategies. These
disappointing results have focused attention on the insulin receptor
isoform A (IR-A) as one intrinsic resistance factor to anti-IGF1R therapy
due to its ability to mediate growth-promoting signaling through binding
to IGF-II. However, the expression status of insulin-receptor isoforms in
lung cancer and its subtypes is largely unknown. In order to address this
issue, the mRNA expression levels of insulin-receptor isoforms were
studied in 50 normal lung samples and 183 lung cancer samples from
complementary DNA (cDNA) arrays. Additionally, 31 primary small cell lung
cancer (SCLC) tumor samples with paired adjacent normal tissues were also
evaluated.The mRNA expression levels of insulin receptor isoform B (IR-B)
were significantly lower in NSCLC than normal lung samples (n=176, p <
0.001), including adenocarcinoma (n=85, p < 0.0001), squamous cell
carcinoma (n=60, p Substantial population and preclinical data have
indicated that the insulin growth factor (IGF) pathway plays an important
role in lung cancer. Although results from early clinical trials
targeting the IGF1R showed some evidence of response in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), larger randomized phase III trials have not shown
clear clinical benefit in combination with conventional strategies. These
disappointing results have focused attention on the insulin receptor
isoform A (IR-A) as one intrinsic resistance factor to anti-IGF1R therapy
due to its ability to mediate growth-promoting signaling through binding
to IGF-II. However, the expression status of insulin-receptor isoforms in
lung cancer and its subtypes is largely unknown. In order to address this
issue, the mRNA expression levels of insulin-receptor isoforms were
studied in 50 normal lung samples and 183 lung cancer samples from
complementary DNA (cDNA) arrays. Additionally, 31 primary small cell lung
cancer (SCLC) tumor samples with paired adjacent normal tissues were also
evaluated.The mRNA expression levels of insulin receptor isoform B (IR-B)
were significantly lower in NSCLC than normal lung samples (n=176, p <
0.001), including adenocarcinoma (n=85, p < 0.0001), squamous cell
carcinoma (n=60, p < 0.0001) and large cell lung cancer samples (n=16, p
Substantial population and preclinical data have indicated that the
insulin growth factor (IGF) pathway plays an important role in lung
cancer. Although results from early clinical trials targeting the IGF1R
showed some evidence of response in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
larger randomized phase III trials have not shown clear clinical benefit
in combination with conventional strategies. These disappointing results
have focused attention on the insulin receptor isoform A (IR-A) as one
intrinsic resistance factor to anti-IGF1R therapy due to its ability to
mediate growth-promoting signaling through binding to IGF-II. However,
the expression status of insulin-receptor isoforms in lung cancer and its
subtypes is largely unknown. In order to address this issue, the mRNA
expression levels of insulin-receptor isoforms were studied in 50 normal
lung samples and 183 lung cancer samples from complementary DNA (cDNA)
arrays. Additionally, 31 primary small cell lung cancer (SCLC) tumor
samples with paired adjacent normal tissues were also evaluated.The mRNA
expression levels of insulin receptor isoform B (IR-B) were significantly
lower in NSCLC than normal lung samples (n=176, p < 0.001), including
adenocarcinoma (n=85, p < 0.0001), squamous cell carcinoma (n=60, p <
0.0001) and large cell lung cancer samples (n=16, p < 0.0001). The mRNA
expression levels of IR-B were also significantly lower in SCLC primary
tumor samples (P=0.002).The mRNA levels for IR-A were significantly
higher in primary SCLC samples (p 0.05).When comparing tumor to normal
lung samples, the IR-A:IR-B mRNA expression ratios were significantly
higher in primary SCLC samples (p 0.05).When comparing tumor to normal
lung samples, the IR-A:IR-B mRNA expression ratios were significantly
higher in primary SCLC samples (p <0.0001). The IR-A:IR-B mRNA expression
ratios were also significantly higher in all NSCLC samples compared to
normal lung, (p 0.05).When comparing tumor to normal lung samples, the
IR-A:IR-B mRNA expression ratios were significantly higher in primary
SCLC samples (p <0.0001). The IR-A:IR-B mRNA expression ratios were also
significantly higher in all NSCLC samples compared to normal lung, (p <
0.001) including adenocarcinoma (p 0.05).When comparing tumor to normal
lung samples, the IR-A:IR-B mRNA expression ratios were significantly
higher in primary SCLC samples (p <0.0001). The IR-A:IR-B mRNA expression
ratios were also significantly higher in all NSCLC samples compared to
normal lung, (p < 0.001) including adenocarcinoma (p < 0.0001), squamous
cell carcinoma (p 0.05).When comparing tumor to normal lung samples, the
IR-A:IR-B mRNA expression ratios were significantly higher in primary
SCLC samples (p <0.0001). The IR-A:IR-B mRNA expression ratios were also
significantly higher in all NSCLC samples compared to normal lung, (p <
0.001) including adenocarcinoma (p < 0.0001), squamous cell carcinoma (p
< 0.0001) and large-cell lung cancer (p 0.05).When comparing tumor to
normal lung samples, the IR-A:IR-B mRNA expression ratios were
significantly higher in primary SCLC samples (p <0.0001). The IR-A:IR-B
mRNA expression ratios were also significantly higher in all NSCLC
samples compared to normal lung, (p < 0.001) including adenocarcinoma (p
< 0.0001), squamous cell carcinoma (p < 0.0001) and large-cell lung
cancer (p < 0.0001).Our results indicated that the reduction of the level
of IR-B expression and an increase in the IR-A:IR-B expression ratio may
highlight patients with active IR-A signaling, and may be more
informative than identifying those with increased IR-A expression only.
Additionally, these results suggested that an increased IR-A:IR-B
expression ratio might be a useful biomarker in selecting patients that
may have an intrinsic resistance to anti-IGF1R therapy in lung cancer.

