Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation analysis and prognostic relevance of CIC and FUBP1 in
oligodendroglial tumors.


Oligodendroglial tumors (OTs) are a major subtype of glioma. They are
characterized by IDH mutation and a combined deletion of chromosomes 1p
and 19q. OT is an interesting entity in neuro-oncology due to the strong
association of 1p/19q codeletion with favorable prognosis and
chemosensitivity. Although the mechanism underlying the predictive power
of 1p/19q codeletion in prognosis and treatment response is not known,
chromosomes 1p and 19q likely contain OT-related genes. Recent exomic
sequencing study in OTs revealed two novel mutated genes, CIC and FUBP1,
that map to 19q13 and 1p31, respectively. The aims of this study were to
(1) determine the incidences of 1p/19q codeletion and mutations of IDH,
CIC and FUBP1, and (2) evaluate the clinical relevance of these molecular
aberrations in 55 OTs diagnosed at our hospital. Our results showed that
somatic mutations of CIC and FUBP1 occurred in 47% and 15% of OTs
examined. CIC mutations included 57% indels, 39% missense mutations and
4% nonsense mutation. Missense mutations in CIC were localized to the
high-mobility group domain and the C1 motif with repressor activity. More
than 75% of missense mutations were predicted to confer damaging effects
on cic function. FUBP1 mutations included 3 indels, 3 splicing
alterations and 1 nonsense mutation. Six of 7 FUBP1-mutated tumors were
concurrently mutated in CIC. 1p/19q codeletion and IDH mutation were
observed respectively in 44% and 91% of OTs examined. About 60% of
CIC-mutated OTs also showed 1p/19q codeletion, suggesting that, at least
in this tumor subset, CIC might act as a candidate tumor suppressor.
Follow-up data were available for 44 patients. Survival analysis revealed
correlation of tumor grade and patient age of Oligodendroglial tumors
(OTs) are a major subtype of glioma. They are characterized by IDH
mutation and a combined deletion of chromosomes 1p and 19q. OT is an
interesting entity in neuro-oncology due to the strong association of
1p/19q codeletion with favorable prognosis and chemosensitivity. Although
the mechanism underlying the predictive power of 1p/19q codeletion in
prognosis and treatment response is not known, chromosomes 1p and 19q
likely contain OT-related genes. Recent exomic sequencing study in OTs
revealed two novel mutated genes, CIC and FUBP1, that map to 19q13 and
1p31, respectively. The aims of this study were to (1) determine the
incidences of 1p/19q codeletion and mutations of IDH, CIC and FUBP1, and
(2) evaluate the clinical relevance of these molecular aberrations in 55
OTs diagnosed at our hospital. Our results showed that somatic mutations
of CIC and FUBP1 occurred in 47% and 15% of OTs examined. CIC mutations
included 57% indels, 39% missense mutations and 4% nonsense mutation.
Missense mutations in CIC were localized to the high-mobility group
domain and the C1 motif with repressor activity. More than 75% of
missense mutations were predicted to confer damaging effects on cic
function. FUBP1 mutations included 3 indels, 3 splicing alterations and 1
nonsense mutation. Six of 7 FUBP1-mutated tumors were concurrently
mutated in CIC. 1p/19q codeletion and IDH mutation were observed
respectively in 44% and 91% of OTs examined. About 60% of CIC-mutated OTs
also showed 1p/19q codeletion, suggesting that, at least in this tumor
subset, CIC might act as a candidate tumor suppressor. Follow-up data
were available for 44 patients. Survival analysis revealed correlation of
tumor grade and patient age of <45 years with better overall survival
(OS) (P=0.005 and P=0.002, respectively) and a strong trend of 1p/19q
codeletion toward longer survival (P=0.053), but lack of prognostic
significance with IDH mutation. Controlling for 1p/19q codeletion,
patients whose tumors carrying CIC wild-type showed a longer survival
(median OS was not yet reached) than those with CIC mutant (median OS=117
months; P=0.029). In fact, patients whose tumors harboring 1p/19q
codeletion and CIC mutation showed survival distribution comparable with
those without 1p/19q codeletion. CIC mutation seemed to have increased
the aggressiveness of 1p/19q-codeleted tumors. In our cohort, tumors with
1p/19q codeletion and CIC wild-type exhibited the longest survival among
all OTs examined. Multivariate analysis, however, showed that only tumor
grade, patient age of Oligodendroglial tumors (OTs) are a major subtype
of glioma. They are characterized by IDH mutation and a combined deletion
of chromosomes 1p and 19q. OT is an interesting entity in neuro-oncology
due to the strong association of 1p/19q codeletion with favorable
prognosis and chemosensitivity. Although the mechanism underlying the
predictive power of 1p/19q codeletion in prognosis and treatment response
is not known, chromosomes 1p and 19q likely contain OT-related genes.
Recent exomic sequencing study in OTs revealed two novel mutated genes,
CIC and FUBP1, that map to 19q13 and 1p31, respectively. The aims of this
study were to (1) determine the incidences of 1p/19q codeletion and
mutations of IDH, CIC and FUBP1, and (2) evaluate the clinical relevance
of these molecular aberrations in 55 OTs diagnosed at our hospital. Our
results showed that somatic mutations of CIC and FUBP1 occurred in 47%
and 15% of OTs examined. CIC mutations included 57% indels, 39% missense
mutations and 4% nonsense mutation. Missense mutations in CIC were
localized to the high-mobility group domain and the C1 motif with
repressor activity. More than 75% of missense mutations were predicted to
confer damaging effects on cic function. FUBP1 mutations included 3
indels, 3 splicing alterations and 1 nonsense mutation. Six of 7
FUBP1-mutated tumors were concurrently mutated in CIC. 1p/19q codeletion
and IDH mutation were observed respectively in 44% and 91% of OTs
examined. About 60% of CIC-mutated OTs also showed 1p/19q codeletion,
suggesting that, at least in this tumor subset, CIC might act as a
candidate tumor suppressor. Follow-up data were available for 44
patients. Survival analysis revealed correlation of tumor grade and
patient age of <45 years with better overall survival (OS) (P=0.005 and
P=0.002, respectively) and a strong trend of 1p/19q codeletion toward
longer survival (P=0.053), but lack of prognostic significance with IDH
mutation. Controlling for 1p/19q codeletion, patients whose tumors
carrying CIC wild-type showed a longer survival (median OS was not yet
reached) than those with CIC mutant (median OS=117 months; P=0.029). In
fact, patients whose tumors harboring 1p/19q codeletion and CIC mutation
showed survival distribution comparable with those without 1p/19q
codeletion. CIC mutation seemed to have increased the aggressiveness of
1p/19q-codeleted tumors. In our cohort, tumors with 1p/19q codeletion and
CIC wild-type exhibited the longest survival among all OTs examined.
Multivariate analysis, however, showed that only tumor grade, patient age
of <45 years and 1p/19q codeletion were independent prognostic factors.
In conclusion, our study suggests that CIC and FUBP1 are potential tumor
suppressor genes in OTs and that CIC mutation may sub-stratify
1p/19q-codeleted tumors into prognostic groups. Further study with larger
sample size is needed to validate our findings.

