Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation and copy number changes in
breast cancers.


Epigenetic modifications are known to be critical in regulating normal
developmental processes and cellular differentiation. DNA methylation of
CpG dinucleotides is a well-characterized epigenetic marker frequently
associated with transcriptional silencing. CpG dinucleotides are
non-randomly distributed throughout the genome with regions enriched for
CpGs being known as CpG islands. It is now well established that
epigenetic inactivation of tumor suppressor genes can occur by CpG island
promoter methylation. For example, BRCA1 promoter methylation occurs in
approximately 10 - 15% of all breast cancers and is associated with gene
silencing. Recent technological advances have enabled DNA methylation to
be profiled genome-wide. Using the Infinium 450 thousand probe arrays, we
have studied DNA methylation and copy number changes to discover new
markers of potential clinical relevance in breast cancer. Expression
analyses by immunohistochemisty on tissue arrays for subtype-specific
markers (ER, PR, HER2, Ki-67, EGFR, CK5/6, CK8, CK18, MUC1 and Claudin-3)
carried out previously were used to establish DNA methylation markers of
breast cancer subtypes. This integrated approach is presented in clinical
context with available data on histological grade, disease stage and
breast cancer-specific survival outcomes.

