Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Furin is required for processing KISS1 to kisspeptins.


KISS1 is a broadly functional metastatic suppressor that is secreted and
processed in the extracellular milieu into small peptides (called
kisspeptins (KP)). The enzyme(s) responsible for generation of KP from
nascent KISS1 is unknown, although sequence analysis (cleavage at KR or
RR dibasic sites) suggests that members of the proprotein convertase
family may be involved. We, therefore, hypothesized that enzyme(s)
belonging to the proprotein convertase family process KISS1 to generate
kisspeptins. To this end, we treated multiple melanomas and breast
carcinoma cells overexpressing KISS1 with the proprotein convertase
inhibitor Dec-RVKR-CMK and found that KISS1 processing was completely
inhibited, strongly consistent with a role for proprotein convertases. To
identify specific proprotein convertases responsible for KISS1
processing, we systematically analyzed the mRNA expression of the nine
members of this family across numerous cell lines. We found a consistent
expression of the three proteases - furin, PC5 and PC7 -suggesting one or
combination of these three enzymes to be involved in KISS1 processing.
shRNA-mediated knockdown of furin, PC5 and PC7 (individually and in
combination) resulted in complete loss of KISS1 processing only in furin
knockdown cells; whereas, no effect on processing was observed in PC5 or
PC7 knockdown cells. Thus, when combined with previous studies showing
post-secretion processing, extracellular furin was identified as the
essential enzyme responsible for KISS1 proteolytic cleavage into
kisspeptins. [Support: CA134981, Komen SAC110037, National Foundation for
Cancer Research, Steiner Family Fellowship in Metastasis Research]

