Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phylogenetic classification, structural evolution, and functional
divergence of the Ras superfamily of GTPases as tracked by the Conserved
Domain Database (CDD)..


The Conserved Domain Database (CDD,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/cdd.shtml) is part of NCBI's
Entrez query and retrieval system and is a collection of annotated
multiple sequence alignment (MSA) models representing ancient conserved
protein domains, basic units of protein function and protein
evolution.These MSA models are available as position specific score
matrices (PSSMs) for fast identification of conserved domains in protein
sequences via Reverse Position Specific -BLAST (RPS-BLAST), a variation
of the commonly used PSI-BLAST. The domain models can be viewed and
examined interactively using NCBI's CDTree/Cn3D software applications.
Conserved functional annotations such as key catalytic and ligand-binding
sites are displayed on protein structures sharing significant homology to
the query, thereby inferring the underlying mechanism(s) of the protein
domain family. Here, we present the current, functionally annotated,
evolutionary classification of the Ras GTPase superfamily, including the
circularly permuted Ras-like domain, and its downstream effectors such as
RasGAP and RasGEF. Using CDTree/Cn3D tools, subfamilies in diverse
organisms were inferred from the MSAs, phylogenetic trees, and domain
architectures of the Ras superfamily. Furthermore, several subfamilies
comprising of only uncharacterized protein sequences have their functions
annotated by inference from the molecular and cellular functions of known
related proteins having 3D structure, and based on the available
literature. We demonstrate the utility of CDTree/Cn3D in studying
molecular evolution of protein domain families, and in accelerating the
pace of biological discovery by enabling researchers to obtain valuable
clues regarding as-yet-unidentified molecular properties and mechanisms.
CDTree/Cn3D software is freely available for download via the CDD website.

