Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of BET bromodomain targets genetically diverse
glioblastoma.


Epigenetic regulations have been increasingly recognized as an integral
part of tumor biology and attractive therapeutic targets. The bromodomain
and extra-terminal domain (BET) proteins specifically recognize
acetylated lysine residues on histone tails. BET bromodomain inhibition
with a first-in-class inhibitor JQ1 reduces expression of a broad
spectrum of growth promoting and antiapoptotic genes, including c-Myc,
resulting in suppression of several hematopoietic cancers and NUT midline
carcinoma. We and other groups have previously reported the critical role
of c-Myc in glioblastoma stem cells. Here, we demonstrated broad
antineoplastic effects of JQ1 both in ex vivo cultures and orthotopic
models using a panel of glioblastoma tumors carrying different genetic
lesions. JQ1 induced marked cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
association with p21WIP1/CIP1 induction and hTERT, Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL
reduction. Consistent with previous studies, JQ1 decreased c-Myc
expression in glioblastoma. However, exogenous c-Myc did not
significantly protect glioblastoma from JQ1, unlike the observations in
hematopoietic cancers. Cells genetically engineered for Akt
hyperactivation or p53/Rb inactivation did not compromise JQ1 efficacy,
suggesting that these signaling pathways commonly altered in glioblastoma
may not confer resistance to JQ1. Taken together, our results suggest
potentially broad therapeutic utility of BET bromodomain inhibition for
treating genetically diverse glioblastoma tumors.

