Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of omega-3 fatty acid and dietary energy restriction on
mammary carcinogenesis, circulating biomarkers and molecular regulators
in rats.


Available evidence indicates that diets enriched in the ratio of n-3
fatty acids or dietary energy restriction (DER) have a broad range of
health-related benefit including prevention of breast cancer. However,
the number of studies in the combined effects of these intervention
strategies have been investigated is limited. The objective of this
investigation was to determine the effect of the combination of dietary
n-3 and DER on mammary carcinogenesis, on plasma levels of cancer
associated growth factors and cytokines and on molecular regulators in
mammary carcinomas using a pre-clinical rat model for breast cancer.
Female Sprague Dawley rats were injected with 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (50
mg/kg) and 7 days thereafter randomized to four groups (n=30/group), 1)
control (dietary n-6/n-3=1:1); 2) high n-3 (dietary n-6/n-3=1:10); 3)
20%DER (dietary n-6/n-3=1:1); 4) high n-3 + 20%DER (dietary
n-6/n-3=1:10). Rats were fed a modification of the AIN-93G diet
formulation that contained 30% of dietary calories from fat (currently
recommended in the US Dietary guidelines). It was observed that mammary
cancer incidence, cancer multiplicity and tumor burden were reduced and
cancer latency was elongated for the rats in groups 2-4 compared to the
rats in group 1, and the significant differences were observed between
group 1 (n-6/n-3=1:1) and 4 (n-6/n-3=1:10 + 20%DER). The protective
dietary combination of high n-3 and DER was associated with significant
reductions in plasma IGF-1, insulin, and leptin and increased adiponectin
compared to rats fed the control diet (n-6/n-3=1:1, pAvailable evidence
indicates that diets enriched in the ratio of n-3 fatty acids or dietary
energy restriction (DER) have a broad range of health-related benefit
including prevention of breast cancer. However, the number of studies in
the combined effects of these intervention strategies have been
investigated is limited. The objective of this investigation was to
determine the effect of the combination of dietary n-3 and DER on mammary
carcinogenesis, on plasma levels of cancer associated growth factors and
cytokines and on molecular regulators in mammary carcinomas using a
pre-clinical rat model for breast cancer. Female Sprague Dawley rats were
injected with 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (50 mg/kg) and 7 days thereafter
randomized to four groups (n=30/group), 1) control (dietary n-6/n-3=1:1);
2) high n-3 (dietary n-6/n-3=1:10); 3) 20%DER (dietary n-6/n-3=1:1); 4)
high n-3 + 20%DER (dietary n-6/n-3=1:10). Rats were fed a modification of
the AIN-93G diet formulation that contained 30% of dietary calories from
fat (currently recommended in the US Dietary guidelines). It was observed
that mammary cancer incidence, cancer multiplicity and tumor burden were
reduced and cancer latency was elongated for the rats in groups 2-4
compared to the rats in group 1, and the significant differences were
observed between group 1 (n-6/n-3=1:1) and 4 (n-6/n-3=1:10 + 20%DER). The
protective dietary combination of high n-3 and DER was associated with
significant reductions in plasma IGF-1, insulin, and leptin and increased
adiponectin compared to rats fed the control diet (n-6/n-3=1:1, p<0.01).
Carcinomas induced in the protected animals were smaller in mass with
altered levels of proteins in the PPAR and mTOR pathways on which plasma
insulin had the most impact. This work was supported by grant KG081632
from the Susan G. Komen Foundation.

