Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myristoylated alanine-rich C kinase substrate (MARCKS)
phosphorylation potentiates human lung cancer cell malignancy .


Myristoylated alanine-rich C kinase substrate (MARCKS), a substrate of
protein kinase C (PKC), is a key regulatory molecule controlling mucin
secretion by airway epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo. Phosphorylated
MARCKS (p-MARCKS) has been reportedly to promote inflammatory cell
migration in several lung diseases. However, the functionality of MARCKS
and its related phosphorylation in lung cancer malignancy has not been
characterized. This study demonstrated MARCKS expression and elevated
p-MARCKS in various lung cancer cell lines with high malignancy, such as
CL1-0-F3, CL1-5, PC9, A549 and several tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
resistant cell lines (H1650 and H1975), as compared with normal human
bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells and low metastasis cancer cell line.
siRNA knockdown MARCKS expression resulted in an inhibition of cell
migration, accompanying with a decrease of Slug expression in these
malignant lung cancer cell lines. Treatment with myristoylated
24-amino-acid MARCKS N-terminus sequence (MANS) peptide, but not the
control myristoylated random N-terminal sequence (RNS) peptide,
suppressed MARCKS phosphorylation and impaired cell migration and wound
healing ability in these lung cancer cell lines. Importantly, MANS
peptide treatment resulted in a suppression of lamellipodia/filopodia
formation and an enhancement of cell-cell contacts with increased
E-cadherin expression. These results confirmed a crucial role for MARCKS,
specifically its phosphorylation, in potentiating lung cancer cell
migration and malignancy. This study has also suggested a potential usage
of MANS or the MARCKS-related peptides in the treatment of lung cancer
metastasis.

