Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP53 mutation status defines two distinct classes of diffuse
anaplastic Wilms tumor.


Wilms tumor (WT) is a paediatric renal tumor with a relapse rate of 10 to
15%. Tumor stage and the histological presence of diffuse anaplasia (DA)
are the most important adverse prognostic factors in WT. Previous studies
have described TP53 mutations at a frequency of up to 75% in DA WT cases,
however only small cohorts were analysed. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the frequency of TP53 mutations in a large group of DA WT and
correlate these data with tumor and patient characteristics.DA WTs from
61 patients were analysed for TP53 mutations using Sanger sequencing. A
paediatric pathologist confirmed the presence of anaplastic cells in the
specimen used for DNA extraction. Sequence alterations were classified as
damaging or neutral mutations with reference to databases of known
mutations and functional prediction algorithms (SIFT, PolyPhen2). Loss of
17p, where TP53 is located, was evaluated using CGH or SNP arrays and
gene expression profiling was carried out using cDNA microarrays.
Kaplan-Meier Survival analysis and Breslow's test were used to compare
TP53 alterations with clinico-pathological characteristics.Of the 61
cases, 29 (47.5%) had at least one damaging TP53 mutation and 26 of these
also had TP53 loss. Most of the cases (20 out of 29, 68.9%) presented
TP53 mutations located within exons 5 to 8. These exons comprise the
DNA-binding domain where the hotspots are located. The other 32 DA WT
cases did not harbour mutations but six had 17p loss. Patients with DA WT
that carry TP53 mutations and/or 17p loss had a worse response to
treatment than those patients that had wild type TP53 (pWilms tumor (WT)
is a paediatric renal tumor with a relapse rate of 10 to 15%. Tumor stage
and the histological presence of diffuse anaplasia (DA) are the most
important adverse prognostic factors in WT. Previous studies have
described TP53 mutations at a frequency of up to 75% in DA WT cases,
however only small cohorts were analysed. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the frequency of TP53 mutations in a large group of DA WT and
correlate these data with tumor and patient characteristics.DA WTs from
61 patients were analysed for TP53 mutations using Sanger sequencing. A
paediatric pathologist confirmed the presence of anaplastic cells in the
specimen used for DNA extraction. Sequence alterations were classified as
damaging or neutral mutations with reference to databases of known
mutations and functional prediction algorithms (SIFT, PolyPhen2). Loss of
17p, where TP53 is located, was evaluated using CGH or SNP arrays and
gene expression profiling was carried out using cDNA microarrays.
Kaplan-Meier Survival analysis and Breslow's test were used to compare
TP53 alterations with clinico-pathological characteristics.Of the 61
cases, 29 (47.5%) had at least one damaging TP53 mutation and 26 of these
also had TP53 loss. Most of the cases (20 out of 29, 68.9%) presented
TP53 mutations located within exons 5 to 8. These exons comprise the
DNA-binding domain where the hotspots are located. The other 32 DA WT
cases did not harbour mutations but six had 17p loss. Patients with DA WT
that carry TP53 mutations and/or 17p loss had a worse response to
treatment than those patients that had wild type TP53 (p<0.01).The CGH
profiles showed an increase in the number of gains and losses seen in DA
WT with TP53 mutations, compared to those without, suggesting a more
unstable genome.Gene expression profiling revealed 71 differentially
expressed genes between DA WT with and without mutations. These genes may
be associated with the anaplastic phenotype, but their role in the
pathogenesis of WT remains to be confirmed.Evaluating a large series of
anaplastic WT, we found that the frequency of TP53 mutations in DA WT was
lower than previously reported. However, samples with apparent wild type
TP53 will be further evaluated by deep-sequencing to determine if
mutations are present in a minority cell population. The relatively high
frequency of wild type TP53 in DA WT suggests that TP53 mutations are
neither necessary nor sufficient to generate anaplasia.Grants: Cancer
Research UK; EU FP7 P-medicine, Sophie Barringer Trust and GOSHCC.

