Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of Nodal expression by estrogen in hormone responsive
human breast cancer cell lines.


Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers among Canadian women.
Estrogen plays a key role in the in the normal growth and development of
the breast and is also a major contributor to breast cancer growth.
Recent studies have demonstrated that embryonic morphogen, Nodal is
expressed in metastatic breast cancers and that its expression is
correlated with breast cancer progression. In silico analysis of the
Nodal promoter has revealed putative estrogen receptor binding sites
(ERE) in proximity to the transcription start site. Our goal in this
study is to investigate the role of estrogen on Nodal expression in human
breast cancer cell-lines. Stimulation of MCF-7 and T47D breast cancer
cell-lines that are estrogen receptor positive and express low levels of
Nodal with 10nM of estradiol (E2) for varying amounts of time revealed
that Nodal protein expression increases at about 48 hours after E2
exposure and persists up to 120 hours. Treatment with the E2 antagonist,
ICI-182,780 (ICI) abrogates the E2-enhanced Nodal protein expression.
Conversely, treating the MCF- 7 and T47D cells with recombinant Nodal
resulted in a decreased expression of estrogen receptor in these cells
both at the transcript and protein levels. These preliminary results
suggest that there is a bidirectional interaction between estrogen
receptor and Nodal in these cell-lines. Future experiments are aimed at
understanding in depth this bidirectional phenomenon to provide better
insight into hormonal regulation in metastatic breast cancer.

