Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging parameters and molecular correlates as predictive markers
of treatment response to mTOR inhibition in adults with recurrent
low-grade gliomas.


Purpose. Activation of the PI3K/mTOR pathway in low-grade gliomas (LGG)
provides a rationale for treatment with mTOR inhibitors as in preclinical
studies activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR renders cells more susceptible to
mTOR inhibition. In a phase II prospective clinical trial of the mTOR
inhibitor everolimus for recurrent LGGs, we performed preliminary
analyses to identify early imaging and molecular biomarkers of treatment
response.Methods. Thirty-six patients (of a planned 60 patients)
underwent biopsy at the time of recurrence and were then treated with
everolimus. Serial multimodal magnetic resonance imagining was done every
2 months; the imaging included anatomic, dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE),
perfusion-weighted, diffusion-weighted, and MR spectroscopic imaging.
Tumor molecular analyses included IDH1R132H mutations, 1p19q
co-deletions, and phosphoprotein analyses of activation of the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR and MAPK pathways by immunohistochemistry, including p-S6,
p-PRAS40, p-4EBP1, and p-MAPK.Results. Histologies at original diagnosis
were oligodendroglioma (14), astrocyomta (9), oligoastrocytoma (13). At
time of recurrence 9/36 patients had transformed to higher-grade disease.
Therapy prior to study participation included radiation in 11 and
temozolomide in 23. Twelve patients continue on active therapy, 15 have
progressed, and the remaining discontinued drug due to toxicity (n=2),
poor follow-up (n=1), refusal of further therapy (n=4), or unrelated
intercurrent disease (n=2). Fifteen patients had stable disease for over
a year, and 4 had stable disease for over 2 years while on treatment, all
despite multiple prior recurrences. Six patients have died, 3 of which
had high-grade gliomas at recurrence. Analyses of the first 17 accrued
patients showed significant changes in parameters estimated from the DCE
data in the T2 lesion in subjects who did not progress in the first 6
months; these changes included reductions in the fractional blood volume
(median fBV) and vascular permeability (90th percentile Kps) at 4 months
(pPurpose. Activation of the PI3K/mTOR pathway in low-grade gliomas (LGG)
provides a rationale for treatment with mTOR inhibitors as in preclinical
studies activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR renders cells more susceptible to
mTOR inhibition. In a phase II prospective clinical trial of the mTOR
inhibitor everolimus for recurrent LGGs, we performed preliminary
analyses to identify early imaging and molecular biomarkers of treatment
response.Methods. Thirty-six patients (of a planned 60 patients)
underwent biopsy at the time of recurrence and were then treated with
everolimus. Serial multimodal magnetic resonance imagining was done every
2 months; the imaging included anatomic, dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE),
perfusion-weighted, diffusion-weighted, and MR spectroscopic imaging.
Tumor molecular analyses included IDH1R132H mutations, 1p19q
co-deletions, and phosphoprotein analyses of activation of the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR and MAPK pathways by immunohistochemistry, including p-S6,
p-PRAS40, p-4EBP1, and p-MAPK.Results. Histologies at original diagnosis
were oligodendroglioma (14), astrocyomta (9), oligoastrocytoma (13). At
time of recurrence 9/36 patients had transformed to higher-grade disease.
Therapy prior to study participation included radiation in 11 and
temozolomide in 23. Twelve patients continue on active therapy, 15 have
progressed, and the remaining discontinued drug due to toxicity (n=2),
poor follow-up (n=1), refusal of further therapy (n=4), or unrelated
intercurrent disease (n=2). Fifteen patients had stable disease for over
a year, and 4 had stable disease for over 2 years while on treatment, all
despite multiple prior recurrences. Six patients have died, 3 of which
had high-grade gliomas at recurrence. Analyses of the first 17 accrued
patients showed significant changes in parameters estimated from the DCE
data in the T2 lesion in subjects who did not progress in the first 6
months; these changes included reductions in the fractional blood volume
(median fBV) and vascular permeability (90th percentile Kps) at 4 months
(p<0.001 and p=0.04) and 6 months (p=0.001 and p=0.02). Molecular
analyses on tissues obtained from the first 23 accrued patients
demonstrated that p-PRAS40 staining was associated with improved PFS
(log-rank, p=0.03), which is in contradistinction to a cohort of newly
diagnosed adult LGGs that was not treated with signaling inhibitors in
which p-PRAS40 staining was associated with worse PFS (log-rank,
p=0.07).Conclusions. In patients with recurrent LGGs treated with
everolimus, perfusion parameters may represent early markers of treatment
response. Apparent reversal of association of p-PRAS40 staining with PFS
when everolimus is administered suggests that PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
activation may serve as a predictive marker of response to mTOR
inhibition. Accrual continues and overall efficacy results are pending.

