Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Web-based access using CellMiner for gene expression, DNA copy
number, microRNA transcript levels, variant status, drug activity, and
their pattern comparisons for the NCI-60.


High-throughput data is increasingly being integrated into the fields of
biology, molecular biology, and pharmacology. However, a difficult
problem has been the rapid and fluid access to and integration of the
data, which tends to reside in huge unwieldy databases. One set of cell
lines with substantial potential for benefit from this type of access and
integration is the NCI-60 cancerous cell lines. We present here a set of
tools within our CellMiner web-application designed to address this need
for the areas of transcript expression, microRNA expression, gene DNA
copy number, variant status, and drug activity. CellMiner allows the user
to rapidly access data for relative levels of transcript expression for
26,065 genes, 360 microRNAs, and 20,602 compounds including 102 Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs. These levels in turn create
patterns across the NCI-60 that can be compared to one another using our
pattern match tool. Together, these tools allow one to query the data for
potential relationships between these parameters, in a manner specific to
a users area of expertise and interest, in a rapid and flexible manner
without the need for expertise in computer science or bioinformatics.
Comparisons of transcript/drug will be demonstrated with
SLFN11/topotecan; variant/drug with BRAF V600E/vemurafinib; colon
tissue-of origin specific genes with TRIM15, RNF43, and VIL1; and DNA
copy number change with CDKN2A (p16). The data are publicly available at
http://discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer.

