Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Control of tumor lymphangiogenesis by epoxyeicosanoids.


Background: Epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) are lipid autacoids
biosynthesized by cytochrome P450 epoxygenases and metabolized by soluble
epoxide hydrolase (sEH) to less active dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids
(DHETs). EETs are autocrine and paracrine mediators of arachidonic
acid-induced vasorelaxation in the cardiovascular and renal systems.
Thus, inhibitors of sEH, which raise endogenous EET levels, are being
considered for long-term use in hypertension, diabetes, stroke and other
medical conditions. 20-hydroxeicosatetraenoic acid (20-HETE) is a small
molecule biosynthesized by cytochrome P450 -hydroxylases. We recently
demonstrated that EETs stimulate multiorgan and lymph node metastasis, a
major cause of disease dissemination and death. However, the mechanism of
EETs in tumor lymphangiogenesis is unknown. Thus, we hypothesize that
EETs stimulate lymph node metastasis via tumor lymphangiogenesis. Methods
and Results: Using two murine tumor lines transfected with VEGFC,
B16F10-VEGFC melanoma and T241-VEGFC fibrosarcoma tumors, we demonstrate
that EETs stimulate primary tumor growth via tumor lymphangiogenesis.
Systemic administration of 14,15-EET and/or 20-HETE by osmotic minipump
accelerated primary B16F10-VEGFC melanoma and T241-VEGFC fibrosarcoma
tumor growth. Inhibitors of soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH), the enzyme
that metabolizes EETs, elevated endogenous EET levels and also promoted
tumor growth: sEH inhibitors (TUPS and AUCB) stimulated primary
B16F10-VEGFC tumor growth. Conversely, systemic administration of a
20-HETE antagonist (HET0016) and/or EET antagonist (14,15-EEZE) regressed
established primary B16F10-VEGFC tumors. 14,15-EET and 11,12-EET
stimulated lymphatic endothelial cell proliferation, viability and
migration. To determine whether tumor lymphangiogenesis contributes to
the increase in B16F10-VEGFC tumor growth in 14,15-EET treated mice, we
analyzed tumors for the specific lymphangiogenesis markers podoplanin and
LYVE-1. Immunohistochemistry studies revealed an increase in
podoplanin-positive and LYVE-1-positive vessels in B16F10-VEGFC tumors
treated with 14,15-EET compared to vehicle treatment. 14,15-EET,
11,12-EET, and 20-HETE increased the production of VEGFC by B16F10-VEGFC
and T241 fibrosarcoma tumor cells. Using a well-established model in
which resection of a primary tumor (Lewis lung carcinoma) reproducibly
stimulates the development of distant metastases 14-17 days after
resection, we investigated whether EET antagonists inhibit spontaneous
metastatic growth. The EET antagonist 14,15-EEZE and/or siRNA to VEGFR3
inhibited lung metastasis and the combination showed additive inhibition.
Conclusion: EETs and 20-HETE stimulate tumor lymphangogenesis, offering a
mechanistic rationale for using EET and 20-HETE antagonists as novel
anti-cancer therapeutics to inhibit lymph node metastasis and tumor
lymphangiogenesis.

