Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CanDrA: Cancer-specific driver missense mutation annotation with
optimized features.


Driver mutations are somatic mutations that provide growth advantage to
tumor cells, while passenger mutations are those that are not
functionally associated with oncogenesis. Distinguishing drivers from
passengers is challenging because drivers occur much less frequently than
passengers, they turn to have low prevalence, and their functions are
multifactorial. Missense mutations are excellent candidates for driver
identification, as they occur more frequently and are potentially easier
to target than other types of mutations. Although several methods have
been developed for predicting the functional impact of missense
mutations, only a few are specifically designed for identifying driver
mutations. As more mutations are being discovered, more accurate
predictive models can be developed using machine learning approaches that
systematically characterize the commonality and peculiarity of somatic
mutations under specific cancer background. Here, we present such a
Cancer Driver Annotation (CanDrA) tool that assesses the driver potential
of missense somatic mutations based on a set of 95 structural and
evolutionary features computed by over 10 functional prediction
algorithms from SNVBOX, VEP, ANNOVAR and Mutation Assessor. Through
feature optimization and supervised training, CanDrA outperforms existing
tools in analysing the glioblastoma multiforme and the ovarian carcinoma
data in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia project.

