Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DUSP1 is a novel target for enhancing pancreatic cancer cell
sensitivity to gemcitabine.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a deadly cancer with a poor
prognosis that is characterized by marked chemoresistance to a broad
spectrum of chemotherapeutic drugs, as a consequence of intrinsic
cell-autonomous factors, and extrinsic stroma-associated factors. Dual
specificity protein phosphatase 1 (DUSP1) has been reported to be
overexpressed in pancreatic cancer cells in PDAC. Moreover, DUSP1 was
shown to be essential for efficient in vitro colony formation and in vivo
tumorigenicity, indicating that DUSP1 may contribute to the biological
aggressiveness of PDAC. However, it is not known whether DUSP1
overexpression contributes to PDAC chemoresistance. Using BxPC3 and
COLO-357 human pancreatic cancer cells, we show that gemcitabine
activated c-JUN N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 mitogen activated protein
kinase (p38 MAPK), key kinases in two major stress-activated signaling
pathways. Activation of JNK and p38 MAPK was associated with increased
apoptosis, as evidenced by increased cleavage of PARP and Caspase 3.
However, gemcitabine also enhanced DUSP1 transcription, as demonstrated
by increased DUSP1 mRNA levels, and increased RNA polymerase II loading
at both DUSP1 promoter and gene body. Moreover, shRNA-mediated inhibition
of DUSP1 enhanced JNK and p38 MAPK activation and sensitized both cell
lines to gemcitabine. Taken together, these results suggest that
gemcitabine-mediated upregulation of DUSP1 contributes to a negative
feedback loop that attenuates its beneficial actions on stress pathways
and apoptosis, raising the possibility that targeting DUSP1 in PDAC may
have the dual advantage of suppressing proliferation while enhancing
gemcitabine chemosensitivity.

