Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PBI-05204, a supercritical CO2 extract of Nerium oleander,
inhibits the growth of human pancreatic cancer in a Panc-1 orthotopic
model by down-regulation of PI3k/mTOR pathways.


Recent studies have suggested that cardiac glycosides (CGs), such as
oleandrin, have an ability to inhibit the proliferation of various cancer
cells, including those from pancreatic, non-small cell lung cancer,
prostate, colon and breast cancers. However, the inhibitory effect of
oleandrin or extracts containing this CG on the growth of human
pancreatic cancer xenografts has not been assessed. In this study, the
anticancer activity and related pharmacology of the botanical drug
PBI-05204, a supercritical CO2 extract of Nerium oleander, was examined
in a human pancreatic Panc-1 orthotopic mouse model. Five out of 7 (70%)
of control mice exhibited tumor growth measurable by imaging. In
contrast, only one out of seven mice treated for 6 weeks with PBI-05204
(40 mg/kg) exhibited a measureable orthotropic tumor. At 20 mg/kg, the
average tumor weight (51 58 mg) in mice treated with PBI-05204 was
markedly reduced from that in control (134 99 mg). In contrast,
gemcitabine (80 mg/kg) did not appear to inhibit the proliferation of
this particular tumor. Histopathological examination of serial sections
from each pancreas showed that the pancreas of 3/6 mice treated with
PBI-05204 (40 mg/kg) were normal while the other 3/6 had tumor sizes less
than 4 mm3 (control range: 55 to 500 mm3). Ki-67 staining was
substantially reduced in pancreatic tumors treated with PBI-05204 (20
mg/kg) compared to that of control, suggesting that PBI-05204 indeed
inhibited the proliferation of Panc-1 tumor cells. Mechanistically,
tissue proteomic array analyses suggest that PBI-05204 suppresses the
expression of phosphorylation of Src, Akt, S6, 4EPB1, and VEGF in a
conc.-dependent manner. The effects of PBI-05204 on suppression of these
proteins were further confirmed by immunohistochemical staining of
pancreatic tumor tissues and Western blotting of tissue lysates. To
delineate whether PBI-05204 also regulated these important oncogenic
pathways in Panc-1 cells in vitro, Panc-1 cells were treated with
PBI-05204 (0.3 to 1.2 g/ml) for 24 hrs and subjected to examination of
signaling protein expression. The cellular expression of these important
signaling proteins was also markedly reduced by PBI-05204 in a
conc.-dependent manner while proliferation of Panc-1 cells was notably
reduced. Taken together, these results suggest that PBI-05204 exerts
potent anticancer activity in this human pancreatic cancer Panc-1
orthotropic mouse model that may, in turn, be mediated by down-regulation
of PI3k/Akt and mTOR pathways. Given the observed PBI-05204 mediated
reduction in tumor growth of human Panc-1 tumor cells, we are currently
determining whether pancreatic tumor cells are able to continue growing
when drug treatment is discontinued. The results will be presented at the
annual meeting. This study was supported in part by Phoenix
Biotechnology, Inc.

