Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of prostate cancer and benign prostate hyperplasia
with polymorphisms in VDR gene, CYP17 gene and SRD5A2 gene among Lebanese
men.


Specific aim: To investigate the relationship between genetic
polymorphisms in vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene, cytochrome P-450 steroid
17-hydroxylase/17, 20 lyase gene (CYP17 gene) and steroid 5 reductase
type II gene (SRD5A2 gene) and prostate cancer (PC) and benign prostate
hyperplasia (BPH) among Lebanese men.Methods: DNA extracted from blood of
47 subjects with clinical PC, 76 subjects with BPH and 81 subjects with
no prostrate-related pathologies (all subjects 50-70 years in age) was
tested for single nucleotide polymorphisms in VDR and CYP17 genes and
variable numbers of TA repeats in the SRD5A2 gene (0 or 9 repeats) using
polymerase chain reaction followed by restriction fragment-length
polymorphism analysis and/or electrophoretic separation. Association
between PC and/or BPH and the genotypes was assessed by calculating the
odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). The relative risk (RR)
of PC and/or and BPH associated with the recessive alleles was estimated
using the equation RR= (a/(a+b))/(c/(c+d)), where a is the number of
subjects with PC or BPH who are homozygous recessive, b is the number of
subjects with PC or BPH who are homozygous dominant or heterozygous, c is
the number of control subjects who are homozygous recessive and d is the
number of control subjects who are homozygous dominant or heterozygous in
a particular gene.Results: The genotype ff (for Fok I C to T), bb (for
Bsm I A to G), aa (for Apa I G to T) and tt (for Taq I T to C) of VRD
gene are not associated with elevated risk for PC or BPH (for ff; OR:
0.5231- 0.5818, 95% CI: 0.0390-1.1098, RR: 0.7116-0.7579, 95% CI: 0.4586-
1.0807; for bb; OR: 0.1476-0.3850, 95% CI: 0.0603-0.9081, RR:
0.3068-0.5137, 95% CI: 0.1462-0.9719; for aa; OR: 0.3193-0.5478, 95% CI:
0.2203-1.1580, RR: 0.6256-0.7371, 95% CI: 0.6256-0.7371, 95% CI:
0.4375-1.0999; for tt: OR: 0.7197-1.1142; 95% CI: 0.3066-2.6989, RR:
0.7849-1.2434, 95% CI: 0.4146-1.9431). The genotype A2/A2 for CYP17 gene
was only marginally associated with elevated risk for PC or BPA (OR:
0.7761-1.0860, 95% CI: 0.2751-2.4471, RR: 0.8073-1.0658, 95% CI:
0.3342-2.0858). Although not statistically significant at 0.05 level of
significance, genotype (TA)9/(TA)9 showed an association with PC and BPH
(OR:1.7325-1.9268, 95% CI: 0.2618-14.1801; RR: 1.7017-1.8837, 95% CI:
0.2748-12.91).Conclusions: The data indicates that among Lebanese men,
the Fok I, Bsm I, Apa I and Taq I polymorphisms in VDR gene are not
associated with elevated risks of developing PC or BPH, alyhough A2/A2
allele of CYP17 gene can be marginally associated and (TA)9/(TA)9 allele
of SRD5A2 gene may be substantially associated with PC and BPH but the
finding needs to be confirmed in further studies.

