Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of Tregs from PBMCs by treatment with defucosylated
anti-CCR4 mAb.


Objectives: Tregs down-regulate immune responses against various antigens
including tumor cells. Impairment of Tregs cause autoimmune responses. CC
chemokine receptor 4 (CCR4) is expressed selectively on Foxp3+CD4
T-cells, so that the treatment of PBMCs with KM2760, anti-human CCR4 mAb
with a defucosylated Fc region, could deplete CCR4+Tregs by ADCC. In this
study, we analyzed depletion of Tregs phenotypically and functionally
after treatment of PBMCs with KM2760.Methods and main results: CCR4
expression was analyzed on CD4 T-cells purified from healthy donor PBMCs
by FACS. CCR4 positivecells were 21% in CD4 T-cells, and 71% in
Foxp3+cells. Depletion of CCR4 positive cells by treatment with KM2760
was examined. PBMCs were incubated with KM2760 (0, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10 g/ml)
for 4 or 20 hours, and analyzed by FACS. Efficient depletion was observed
with higher antibody concentration and longer incubation time. Then we
examined inhibition of CFSE dilution of labeled CD4 or CD8 T cells
stimulated with anti-CD3 mAb after culture with an equal number of
CD4+25+127low Tregs and CD4-8- cells pretreated with or without KM2760.
Proliferating responder cells were 68% in culture with CD4+25+127low
Tregs pretreated with KM2760, whereas those cells with CD4+25+127low
Tregs without pretreatment was 38% in CD4 T-cells, 77%and 40% in CD8
T-cells,respectively.Conclusions: Efficient Treg depletion was observed
in vitro by treatment of PBMCs with KM2760. In vivo treatment with the
same mAb may induce tumor immune responses by Treg depletion.

