Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of Salmonella typhimurium A1-R treatment on human patient
pancreatic tumorgrafts.


We have previously developed the genetically-modified Salmonella
typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) strain that selectively targets tumors and
demonstrated its efficacy for various types of cancer cell lines in nude
mouse models. The aim of this study is to determine the efficacy A1-R
treatment for human-patient pancreatic tumorgrafts.
Pancreatic-cancer-patient tumor specimens were initially established
subcutaneously in NOD/SCID mice immediately after surgery. The patient
tumors were then harvested from NOD/SCID mice and passed orthotopically
in transgenic nude mice, expressing fluorescent protein in order for the
tumors to acquire fluorescent stroma for imaging. After confirmation of
tumor growth by fluorescence imaging, the nude mice were treated in the
following groups: (1) 5-fluorouracil (5FU) (10 mg/kg, ip); (2) cisplatin
(CDDP) (10 mg/kg, ip); (3) gemcitabine (GEM) (150 mg/kg, ip); (4) A1-R
(A1-R) (1.5x108 cfu/body, ip); and (5) PBS (vehicle/control) (ip).
Control, 5FU, CDDP, GEM and A1-R injections were performed on a weekly
basis from day-21 after tumor implantation for 4 weeks. Animals were
sacrificed at 7 weeks, and tumors were harvested for analysis. Each
treatment arm involved 5 tumor-bearing mice. No significant effects on
body weight, morbidity, or severe toxicities were observed in any
treatment arm. The tumor weight of each group was as follows: (1) 5FU,
0.044 0.027g; (2) CDDP, 0.04 0.032g; (3) GEM, 0.058 0.051g; (4) A1-R,
0.106 0.038g; and (5) PBS, 0.258 0.209g. S. typhimurium A1-R treatment
significantly reduced the tumor weight compared to control treatment (p =
0.011), as did the other treatments including 5FU (p = 0.005), CDDP (p =
0.004), and GEM (p = 0.001). S. typhimurium A1-R treatment was effective
for human pancreatic tumorgrafts and could be a promising therapy for
human pancreatic cancer.

