Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular signal regulated kinase 5 inpathogenesis of
malignant mesothelioma.


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a neoplastic disease of the pleural,
peritoneal or pericardial cavity. Currently, there is no therapy for MM
as it is resistant to most of the common chemotherapies and therefore,
there is a need for new treatment strategies. In the present study we
demonstrated that ERK5 is important in MM tumor growth and can
potentially be targeted in combination with the chemotherapeutic drugs
for more effective treatment. Human MM cell lines exhibit constitutive
activation of ERK5.Addition of doxorubicin to these MM cell lines
resulted in further activation of ERK5. ERK5 silencing by small hairpin
RNA (shERK5) increased DOX-induced cell death and DOX retention in human
MM cells. In addition, shERK5 MM lines exhibited both attenuated colony
formation on soft agar and invasion of MM cells in vitro. Most
importantly, injection of shERK5 MM cell lines into SCID mice showed
significant reduction in tumor growth using both subcutaneous and
intraperitoneal models. Finally, use of doxorubicin and cisplatin in
combination with ERK5 inhibition showed further reduction in tumor weight
and volume in the IP model of tumor growth, proving our hypothesis that
ERK5 inhibition in combination with chemotherapeutic drugs is a
beneficial strategy for combination therapy in MM patients. This work is
supported by MesotheliomaApplied Research Foundation (AS),
NIEHS-RO1ES021110 (AS) and T32 ES07122 (BM) grants.

