Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of nuclear factor kappa B in survival of human
papillomavirus-positive head and neck cancer cell lines.


Nuclear factor kappa B (NFB) has been implicated in the development of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) from premalignant changes
to tumor progression, and in treatment resistance and recurrence.
However, the roles of NFB in the sensitivity to chemoradiation of human
papillomavirus (HPV)-associated HNSCC have not been well defined.
Previously we reported that high expression of NFB detected by
immunohistochemistry in pretreated HPV+ oropharyngeal cancer patients was
significantly associated with poor progression free survival (AACR 2012
Abstract #4489). Therefore, we hypothesized that NFB could play a role in
pro-survival in HPV+ head and neck cancer cells. We first examined the
sensitivity of five HPV+ head and neck cancer cell lines (HPV16: UDSCC2,
93-VU-147T, UM-SCC47, UPCI:SCC90, HPV18: SCC1483) to radiation and
cisplatin, Consistent with current models, when we knocked down
expression of the HPV16E6 oncogene, SCC47 and SCC1483 cells with restored
expression of p53 displayed a significant reduction in S phase entry as
revealed by cell cycle analysis (SCC47: scrambled control 14.08% 0.55%
versus siRNA-E6 6.39% 2.40, p=0.004; SCC1483: scrambled control 13.39%
1.28% versus 7.49% 0.83, p=0.002). In addition, all five cell lines
displayed reduced sensitivity to cisplatin compared with cells treated
with scrambled control siRNA. The basal level of activated NFB in HPV+
cell lines was correlated with the sensitivity to radiation and cisplatin
as assessed by colony formation and cell growth assays. Suppression of
NFBp65 by siRNA resulted in marked increases in apoptosis associated with
reduction of Bcl-2 in both SCC47 and SCC1483 cells. This pattern was more
pronounced with increasing doses of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib
(32.5 to 130 nM for 48 to 72 hr). Furthermore, SCC47 and SCC1483 cells
treated with siRNA NFBp65 displayed a significantly greater level of
apoptosis induced by radiation or cisplatin compared to cells treated
with non-targeted control siRNA, indicating a pro-survival effect for
NFB. Further studies are warranted to delineate the effects of HPV
oncogene interactions with NFB signaling pathways on chemoradiation
sensitivity. (This study was supported by the V Foundation).

