Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Natural occurring leelamine inhibits melanoma development by
targeting multiple signaling pathways.


Melanoma remains a highly drug resistant tumor type. Melanoma cells
rapidly progress resistance to drugs targeting single proteins by
circumventing the point of inhibition. To overcome this problem, one
approach has been to develop drugs targeting multiple proteins or
pathways deregulated in the growth of the disease, such as the PI3
kinase, MAP kinase, and STAT3 signaling cascades. Agents simultaneously
inhibiting several key pathways aiding melanoma development would be a
first in class type of new drug for treating melanoma. To identify a drug
that might target the PI3K, MAPK and STAT3 cascades, a natural product
library was screened identifying leelamine as a potential inhibitor.
Leelamine had the greatest inhibitory efficacy selectively killed
melanoma cells by decreasing levels of cellular proliferation and
increasing apoptosis rates. Leelamine inhibited the growth of preexisting
xenografted tumors by 60%, by targeting PI3K, MAPK and STAT3 pathways
without affecting animal body weight or blood markers of major organ
function. The most prominent tumor inhibitory mechanisms of actions of
leelamine occurred through by decreasing of Akt, Erk and Stat3 activity,
which reduced cellular proliferation and consequently decreased tumor
vascularization as well as increasing apoptosis. Collectively, these
discoveries demonstrate the development of a naturally occurring
pharmacological agent that targets multiple pathways and thereby more
effectively treat melanoma.

