Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of NEDD9 destabilizes Aurora A kinase and augments
efficacy of inhibitors.


Aurora A Kinase (AURKA) is overexpressed in 96% of human cancers and is
considered an independent marker of poor prognosis. While the majority of
tumors have elevated levels ofAURKA protein, only few have AURKA gene
amplification; therefore, posttranscriptional mechanism regulating AURKA
protein levels are significant. In this study, we show that the known
activator and binding partner of AURKA, NEDD9, is directly involved in
AURKA stability. Analysis of comprehensive breast cancer tissue
microarray revealed a tight correlation between expression of both
proteins and significantly increased prognostic value. A decrease in
AURKA proteins, concomitant with increased ubiquitination and
proteasome-dependent degradation, occurs due to depletion or knockout of
NEDD9 proteins. Re-expression of wild type (WT) NEDD9 was sufficient to
rescue the observed phenomenon. Binding of NEDD9 to AURKA is critical for
AURKA stabilization. Mutation of S296E was sufficient to disrupt the
binding and reduce the level of AURKA protein. Mechanistically, NEDD9
stabilizes AURKA by limiting the binding of cdh1-substrate recognition
subunit of APC/C Ubiquitin Ligase to AURKA. Moreover, depletion of NEDD9
in tumor cells increased their sensitivity to AURKA inhibitors.
Combinational therapy using NEDD9 shRNAs and AURKA inhibitors had a
profound inhibitory effect on tumor initiation and later, metastasis in
lungs of human tumor xenografts. Our findings provide evidence for
successful application of AURKA inhibitors for treatment of solid tumors,
which often overexpress NEDD9.

