Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATM, TS and RRM1 protein expression in nasopharyngeal carcinomas
(NPC) treated with curative intent.


Background: Although NPC is a radiation and chemotherapy sensitive
tumour, some patients still relapse with distant metastatic disease.
Biomarkers are needed to help identify which patients are at higher risk
of relapse and/or who will respond to therapy. Ataxia telangiectasia
mutated (ATM) is a putative marker for radiation sensitivity while,
thymidylate synthetase (TS), and ribonucleotide reductase subunit M1
(RRM1) levels have been associated with response to 5FU and gemcitabine,
two chemotherapy agents often used in NPC. We characterized the protein
expression of ATM, TS, and RRM1 in tumours from 146 patients with
non-metastatic NPC treated at two Canadian institutions between Jan
2000-Dec 2007 and explored the relationship of each marker with clinical
outcomes. Methods: Pre-treatment, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded NPC
tumour specimens were assembled in a tissue microarray. ATM, TS and RRM1
protein expression were evaluated by quantitative fluorescence
immunohistochemistry and with automated quantitative digital image
analysis (AQUA) using the Y170, TS106 and 60073-2-Ig monoclonal
antibodies respectively. Protein expression levels were assessed in
tumour, tumour cytoplasm, tumour nuclear, and non-malignant tumour stroma
compartments. The effect of protein expression levels on overall survival
(OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) was examined using Cox regression.
For all biomarkers, AQUA scores were analyzed in quartiles. Results:
Patient characteristics were: mean age=52 years (SD=12.2; range 18 to
85), 67% male, 73% KPS 90%, WHO type 1/2/3=11%/28%/61%, stage III/IV=65%.
Fifty-eight (40%) patients received platinum-based CRT; the remainder was
treated with RT alone. With a median follow-up of 50 months (range 3 to
120), the 5 year survival rates were 71% (95% CI=62%-78%) for OS and 48%
(95% CI=39%-57%) for DFS. After adjusting for KPS, stage, and WHO type,
OS was worse for the group with tumour:stromal (T/S) ATM ratios in the
top quartile versus those in the lowest quartile (p=0.049). OS was also
worse for tumours with TS levels in the lowest quartile versus the top
quartile (p=0.033). RRM1 was not associated with outcomes (p=0.748).
There was no significant effect of any of the biomarkers on disease-free
survival (ATM T/S p=0.708; TS p=0.978; RRM1 p=0.918). Conclusions: In our
cohort of non-metastatic NPC patients, relative overexpression of ATM and
low TS protein levels were associated with worse outcomes suggesting
further investigation of these potential biomarkers is warranted.

