Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bringing next generation sequencing (NGS) to the clinic:
Analytical validation of a comprehensive NGS-based cancer gene test.


Background: As the number of clinically relevant cancer genes grows and
the amount of tissue available for analysis decreases, next-generation
sequencing (NGS) becomes increasingly attractive as a diagnostic tool, as
it can detect all classes of genomic alterations in all cancer genes in a
single test. However, for NGS to demonstrate its full utility in the
clinic, robust analytical validation approaches and performance
benchmarks against gold standard methodologies are required.Methods: We
have developed a comprehensive NGS-based diagnostic test to enable
accurate detection of clinically-relevant genomic alterations across 4604
exons of 289 cancer genes (1.5 Mb) in routine FFPE specimens, including
needle biopsies. To validate the test, we created synthetic reference
standards spanning key determinants of detection accuracy for somatic
alterations, such as a range of stromal admixture, indel length, and
amplitude of copy change: For base substitutions, we mixed 2 pools of 10
normal cell-lines, thereby testing 1035 different variants in a broad
10%-100% allele frequency range. For indels, 28 tumor cell lines with 44
alterations (1-40bp) were mixed into 41 variably sized pools, creating a
validation set of 163 events. For copy alterations, 7 matched
tumor/normal cell-lines bearing a total of 12 amplifications (copy number
8-15) and 7 homozygous deletions were mixed in 5 tumor content ratios
20%-75%. The test was applied blinded to all pools and alteration calls
compared to expectation based on constituents in each mix. We then
verified that observed performance translated to FFPE by examining test
concordance on 185 tumors characterized clinically for mutations in 8
genes including KRAS, BRAF, and EGFR (Sanger, Sequenom, and PCR) and 131
specimens characterized for CNAs in ERBB2, PTEN, AR and CCND1 (IHC and
FISH).Results: On synthetic standards, performance reached >99%
sensitivity for substitutions (1,035/1,035) and >98% for indels (161/163)
at 10% allele-frequency with PPV>99%. Sensitivity for CNAs was >95% for
focal amplifications (46/48) and >99% for homozygous deletions (28/28) at
30% tumor fraction, with PPV>99%. Robust performance translated to FFPE:
concordance was 98% for both substitutions and indels (164/168) and CNAs
(41/42) relative to prior calls.Conclusions: We present a rigorous
validation approach and performance benchmarks for a comprehensive
NGS-based test for use in clinical oncology. Given the ability of NGS to
detect a much broader range of genomic alterations than currently
available technologies, particularly on limited tissue, we suggest that
this type of testing can be a direct component of patient care and
potentially expand targeted treatment options.

