Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Akt signaling: a strategy to overcome platinum
resistance in ovarian cancer.


Targeted therapies in combination with cytotoxic agents are promising
future treatment regimens for women with resistant ovarian cancer.
Current standard treatment of serous ovarian cancer is a platinum-
(carboplatin) based chemotherapy, usually combined with taxanes. A 90%
cure rate is observed in early stage ovarian cancers, however, in
advanced stages, about 20-30% of patients never have a remission or will
suffer from recurrent disease within 5 years. One major reason is the
development of a resistance against the platinum-based chemotherapy.In
order to identify possible novel therapeutic targets for
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer, we compared gene expression and
oncogenic kinase phosphorylation patterns in the human ovarian cancer
cell line A2780 and its platinum-resistant variant A2780cis in vitro and
in vivo.In vivo, the untreated A2780cis-derived tumor model showed
reduced proliferation activity and enhanced apoptosis, while carboplatin
treatment failed to induce tumor reduction, as compared to the sensitive
A2780-derived tumor model. Analysis of 47 kinase phosphorylation sites in
carboplatin-treated A2780 and A2780cis derived tumors revealed that Akt
was hyperphosphorylated at Ser273 but not altered during treatment in
resistant tumors, whereas Akt phosphorylation was weak and further
reduced during treatment in sensitive tumors. This was associated with an
unchanged p53 phosphorylation status in resistant tumors during
treatment. In line with this, the novel allosteric Akt inhibitor BAY
10001931 resensitized A2780 and A2780cis cells to carboplatin in vitro.
To investigate if the Akt phosphorylation status correlated with an
activation of downstream targets, RNA of A2780 and A2780cis vehicle- or
carboplatin treated tumors was hybridized onto an Illumina Bead Chip
array. Here, linear model analysis identified GDF15 as one of four
p53-induced target genes possibly involved in the development of
chemoresistance. GDF15 protein expression was highly induced during
carboplatin treatment in both cell lines, whereas basal GDF15 expression
was higher in resistant cells than in sensitive A2780 cells in vitro and
in vivo. This was correlated with a higher secretion of GDF15 into the
serum of A2780cis-tumor-bearing mice. Similar tendencies were observed in
vitro. Interestingly, simultaneous Akt inhibition with BAY 10001931
markedly reduced the carboplatin-induced upregulation of GDF15 in A2780
and A2780cis cells. Additionally, shRNA-mediated knockdown of GDF15 in
resistant A2780cis cells also abrogated the phosphorylation of Akt in
vitro. These results indicate that a causal relationship exists between
Akt activation and GDF15 expression in resistant ovarian cancer cells.
Together, a combination treatment with an Akt inhibitor and carboplatin
of GDF15-expressing ovarian cancer cells might represent a novel approach
to treat resistant ovarian cancer.

