Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term resistance to PI3K/mTOR inhibition requires increased
expression of c-myc and YAP.


We have shown that extracellular matrix (ECM) contact contributes to
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor resistance, where drug treatment leads to cytostasis
but not cell death in ECM-attached cells. These cells do undergo
proliferation arrest and this may reflect the situation in vivo, where
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor treatment initially leads to growth arrest of the
tumor cells. However this is often followed by re-initiation of
proliferation, leading to relapse. In this study we have investigated the
underlying molecular mechanisms that mediate long-term resistance to
PI3K/mTOR inhibitors by selecting for cancer cells that proliferate after
chronic inhibitor exposure in 3D cell cultures. To assess the mechanism
of resistance, we performed reverse phase protein and RNA-seq arrays to
identify signaling pathways that were altered in proliferating drug
resistant cells. The protein arrays revealed up-regulated levels of c-myc
and the Hippo pathway effector, YAP, in the resistant cells, and
introduction of exogenous c-myc and YAP into drug sensitive cells
rendered them resistant. While expression of c-myc alone induced partial
resistance, YAP was also required, as knock-down of endogenous YAP
resulted in loss of resistance. These data suggest that c-myc alone is
not sufficient for generating resistance to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors, but an
additional driver is required. Since the Hippo pathway is another major
growth-promoting pathway (in addition to mTOR), it is conceivable that
YAP compensates for the loss of mTOR signaling, contributing to
resistance. Our current efforts are aimed at elucidating the mechanism by
which YAP and c-myc mediate drug resistance to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors.
Preliminary data suggests that c-myc-dependent glutamine metabolism
contributes to drug resistance, as inhibition of glutaminase prevents
resistance.

