Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Pin1 reduces RAD51 expression and enhances
radiosensitivity in U87MG glioblastoma cells.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary brain tumor, and
has poor prognosis and high recurrences. Pin1, a peptidyl-prolyl
isomerase, can recognize phospho-Ser/Thr-Pro motifs and isomerize the
cis/trans forms of its substrates. It has been known that Pin1 is
involved in cell cycle regulation and cell proliferation, and has
affected various protein stability and function, such as cyclin D1 and
p53. Recent study has showed that cyclin D1 can directly bind to RAD51
upon radiation in addition to its role in cell cycle. This complex is
recruited to DNA damage sites and helps DNA repair. Here, we investigated
the role of Pin1 in regulating cyclin D1/RAD51 interaction and affecting
the radiosensitivity in U87MG glioblastoma cells. We showed that no
interaction was detected between cyclin D1 and RAD51 after ionic
radiation in U87MG cells; interestingly, knockdown of Pin1 decreased both
cyclin D1 and RAD51 expression and enhanced their sensitivities to
radiation. Furthermore, knockdown of Pin1 with IR induced G1 and G2/M
arrest which resulted in cell growth inhibition and apoptosis.
Importantly, knockdown of Pin1 and combination with radiation yielded
increased number of -H2AX foci than radiation control cells, suggesting
that delayed repair occurred in pin1 knockdown cells. In summary, our
results suggest that inhibition of Pin1 decreases RAD51 expression and
enhances radiosenstivity in U87MG glioblastoma Cells.

