Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging human pancreatic tumor xenografts with 89Zr-labeled
anti-mesothelin antibody.


Background: Mesothelin (MSLN) is a tumor differentiation antigen that is
highly expressed by cells of many epithelial tumors, with limited
expression in normal human tissues. Our understanding of therapeutic
antibodies targeting MSLN might benefit from immunoPET imaging of
antibody uptake. We developed and preclinically validated an 89Zr labeled
anti-MSLN antibody (89Zr-AMA) for this noninvasive imaging of tumor and
normal organ uptake.Methods: 89Zr was attached to an anti-MSLN humanized
IgG1 monoclonal antibody derivatized with the bifunctional chelator
reagent N-succinyldesferrioxamine-B-tetrafluorphenol. The 89Zr-AMA was
characterized in terms of conjugation ratio, aggregation, radiochemical
purity, stability, and immunoreactivity. Two human MSLN-expressing
pancreatic tumor cell lines, HPAC and CAPAN-2, were used for xenograft
studies in mice. Tumor uptake and organ distribution of 89Zr-AMA were
studied in the HPAC line at three protein doses (10, 25 and 100 g)
labeled with 1 MBq 89Zr and results were compared with nonspecific
111In-IgG. After dose-finding, CAPAN-2 and HPAC tumor xenograft-bearing
mice were scanned with PET at 1, 3, and 6 days after tracer injection of
the optimal AMA dose labeled with 5 MBq 89Zr, followed by ex vivo
biodistribution at day 6. Tracer uptake was quantified and expressed as
mean standardized uptake values (SUVmean).Results: 89Zr-AMA formed with
high specific activity (> 500 MBq/mg), high yield (> 90% without further
purification), and high purity (> 95% determined by SE-HPLC analysis). In
vitro validation of 89Zr-AMA showed a fully preserved immunoreactivity
with a long (> 1 week) stability in 0.9% NaCl. Biodistribution analyses
of the dose-finding groups revealed a dose-dependent 89Zr-AMA tumor
uptake, with the highest fractional tumor uptake in the 10 g dose group,
14.2 %ID/g on day 6. Tumor uptake of the non-specific control antibody,
111In-IgG, was lower than that of the 89Zr-AMA (P Background: Mesothelin
(MSLN) is a tumor differentiation antigen that is highly expressed by
cells of many epithelial tumors, with limited expression in normal human
tissues. Our understanding of therapeutic antibodies targeting MSLN might
benefit from immunoPET imaging of antibody uptake. We developed and
preclinically validated an 89Zr labeled anti-MSLN antibody (89Zr-AMA) for
this noninvasive imaging of tumor and normal organ uptake.Methods: 89Zr
was attached to an anti-MSLN humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody
derivatized with the bifunctional chelator reagent
N-succinyldesferrioxamine-B-tetrafluorphenol. The 89Zr-AMA was
characterized in terms of conjugation ratio, aggregation, radiochemical
purity, stability, and immunoreactivity. Two human MSLN-expressing
pancreatic tumor cell lines, HPAC and CAPAN-2, were used for xenograft
studies in mice. Tumor uptake and organ distribution of 89Zr-AMA were
studied in the HPAC line at three protein doses (10, 25 and 100 g)
labeled with 1 MBq 89Zr and results were compared with nonspecific
111In-IgG. After dose-finding, CAPAN-2 and HPAC tumor xenograft-bearing
mice were scanned with PET at 1, 3, and 6 days after tracer injection of
the optimal AMA dose labeled with 5 MBq 89Zr, followed by ex vivo
biodistribution at day 6. Tracer uptake was quantified and expressed as
mean standardized uptake values (SUVmean).Results: 89Zr-AMA formed with
high specific activity (> 500 MBq/mg), high yield (> 90% without further
purification), and high purity (> 95% determined by SE-HPLC analysis). In
vitro validation of 89Zr-AMA showed a fully preserved immunoreactivity
with a long (> 1 week) stability in 0.9% NaCl. Biodistribution analyses
of the dose-finding groups revealed a dose-dependent 89Zr-AMA tumor
uptake, with the highest fractional tumor uptake in the 10 g dose group,
14.2 %ID/g on day 6. Tumor uptake of the non-specific control antibody,
111In-IgG, was lower than that of the 89Zr-AMA (P < 0.05, paired t test).
Day 6 89Zr-AMA biodistribution data from the animals that underwent PET
showed ex vivo tumor uptake of 12.0 %ID/g in HPAC and 11.8 %ID/g in
CAPAN-2 tumors and 4.6 and 4.4 %ID/g in blood. Uptake of the nonspecific
control 111In-IgG was 5.7 %ID/g for HPAC and 3.6 %ID/g for CAPAN-2
tumors, and 10.0 and 7.5 %ID/g for their respective blood pools. MicroPET
imaging was consistent with the biodistribution data. 89Zr-AMA showed a
progressive increase in tumor uptake over time, whereas the activity in
the blood pool decreased; in liver, spleen and kidney it remained
stable.Conclusion: 89Zr-AMA tumor uptake is antigen-specific in
MSLN-expressing tumors. This tracer can be translated to the clinic for
serial non-invasive PET imaging.

