Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A screen to identify novel p53 family member activity-restoring
compounds with a focus on p73.


Tumor suppressor p53 family regulates gene transcription, and thereby
cell cycle, apoptosis, metabolism and other processes. The p53 gene is
found mutated in over 50% of all human cancers, and it has been of great
interest to identify drugs that can restore p53 function. While p53 can
display a wide variety of mutations, which potentially could complicate
function restoration therapy, family member p73 gene mutation is rare.
Therefore, we sought to identify novel compounds that are able to restore
the activity of the p53 family, with a focus on p73 dependency in the
presence of mutant p53. To this end, a functional cell-based screening
assay was set up for cancer cell death-inducing small molecules that
activate p53 pathway-dependent gene transcription. SW480 colon carcinoma
cells, which carry R273H/R309S mutations in p53, and stably express a p53
family-responsive luciferase construct, were utilized, with parental
cells and cells displaying stable knockdown of p73 being subjected to
compounds from NCI Diversity Set 3. This set contains about 1600
compounds that are relatively well characterized and structurally rigid.
After various treatment periods, p53 activity was assessed, as well as
cell viability. Subsequently, a total of 26 compounds were selected for
further investigation and validation. Follow up studies will include dose
and time courses for p53 family activation and viability in a variety of
cell lines that are wild-type, mutant or null for p53. Also mechanistic
studies and cellular assays will be performed, with the hopes to identify
novel drugs that are able to restore activity of the p53 family, and
subsequent cancer cell death, and thus providing novel candidates for the
treatment of human cancer.

