Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incidence of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and monoclonal B-cell
lymphocytosis in Olmsted county, 2000-2010: impact of the 2008
International Workshop on CLL Guidelines.


Background:Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL)
is the most common adult leukemia in the United States. Prior studies in
Olmsted County, Minnesota, showed a CLL age and sex adjusted incidence
rate of 6.6 per 100,000 during 1985-89. Subsequently, the definition of
CLL is now based on the 2008 International Workshop on CLL (IWCLL)
Guidelines. Individuals having a CLL immunophenotype by flow cytometry
are classified as CLL if the absolute B-cell count (ABC) is >5 x 109/L or
classified as monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL) if ABC is 5 x 109/L
and the IWCLL 2008 guidelines defined as ABC > 5 x 109/L. Incidence rates
were age and sex adjusted using the 2010 US white population. Time to
treatment (TTT) survival analyses was from time of diagnosis to date of
first treatment or last follow-up and Cox regression analysis was
used.ResultsUsing the NCI-WG 96 classification, there were 8 MBL cases
and 115 CLLs in whom 61% were Rai stage 0, 34% were Rai stage 1-2, and 5%
were Rai stage 3-4. Using the IWCLL 2008 classification, there were 44
MBL cases and 79 CLLs in whom 43% Rai stage 0, 49% were Rai stage 1-2 and
8% Rai stage 3-4. Median ALC at diagnosis was 8.1 x 109/L for CLL and 5.9
x 109/L for MBL. Median ABC count at diagnosis was 7.1 x 109/L for CLL
and 2.8 x 109/L for MBL. The age and sex adjusted incidence rate (per
100,000) for CLL for 2000-2010 was 10.0 using NCI-WG 96 and 6.8 using
IWCLL 2008. Rates for MBL were 0.66 using NCI-WG 96 and 3.5 using IWCLL
2008. The median TTT for CLL was 9.2 years using NCI-WG 96 and 6.5 years
by IWCLL 2008.DiscussionThis study demonstrates that reclassification of
CLL using the IWCLL 2008 guidelines decreases CLL incidence relative to
the NCI-WG 96 criteria. For the first time, this population based study
also establishes an incidence rate for clinically identified MBL.
Approximately 50% of previously labeled Rai 0 CLL are now reclassified as
MBL. Re-classification increases the percent of Rai stage 1-2 and
decreases the percent of Rai 0 cases at diagnosis. Reclassification also
substantially shortens the median TTT for newly diagnosed CLL cases
classified by the 2008 criteria relative to the NCI-WG 96 criteria. In
summary, the IWCLL 2008 reclassification has significant implications for
incidence studies, staging, and prognosis of CLL and MBL.

