Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evidence supporting cotargeting insulin-like growth
factor receptor (IGF-1R) and Src in non-small cell lung cancer.


The antitumor efficacy of IGF-1R targeting agents (TKIs or antibodies)
has been evaluated in recent clinical trials, but the effect has been
found to be marginal and limited. Since it has been suggested that IGF-1R
and Src signaling pathways cooperate with each other in the proliferation
and survival of cancer cells, we investigated the role of Src in the
resistance to the IGF-1R TKI and further suggested the rationale of
co-targeting of IGF-1R and Src in the treatment of NSCLC. We examined
Src-mediated regulation of IGF-1R activation and assessed the effect of
the combined treatment with an IGF-1R TKI and a Src inhibitor on the
proliferation, survival, and signaling changes in human NSCLC cells and
NSCLC xenografts in nude mice. In addition, expressions of the IGF-1R
signaling axis were evaluated in tissue microarrays of NSCLC from two
independent databases (N=352, and 353, respectively) and correlated with
clinicopathologic characteristics and patient survival. We found
co-activation of IGF-1R and Src in various NSCLC cells and modulation of
IGF-1R signaling by overexpression or knockdown of Src. Combined blockade
of IGF-1R and Src resulted in the suppression of cell proliferation,
induction of apoptosis, inhibition of signaling responsible for cell
survival and proliferation, and tumor growth in vivo. In human tissue
samples, p-IGF-1R/IR, IGF-1R, and pSrc expressions were significantly
associated with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in both TMAs. pIGF-1R/IR
and pSrc had strong positive correlation with each other (PThe antitumor
efficacy of IGF-1R targeting agents (TKIs or antibodies) has been
evaluated in recent clinical trials, but the effect has been found to be
marginal and limited. Since it has been suggested that IGF-1R and Src
signaling pathways cooperate with each other in the proliferation and
survival of cancer cells, we investigated the role of Src in the
resistance to the IGF-1R TKI and further suggested the rationale of
co-targeting of IGF-1R and Src in the treatment of NSCLC. We examined
Src-mediated regulation of IGF-1R activation and assessed the effect of
the combined treatment with an IGF-1R TKI and a Src inhibitor on the
proliferation, survival, and signaling changes in human NSCLC cells and
NSCLC xenografts in nude mice. In addition, expressions of the IGF-1R
signaling axis were evaluated in tissue microarrays of NSCLC from two
independent databases (N=352, and 353, respectively) and correlated with
clinicopathologic characteristics and patient survival. We found
co-activation of IGF-1R and Src in various NSCLC cells and modulation of
IGF-1R signaling by overexpression or knockdown of Src. Combined blockade
of IGF-1R and Src resulted in the suppression of cell proliferation,
induction of apoptosis, inhibition of signaling responsible for cell
survival and proliferation, and tumor growth in vivo. In human tissue
samples, p-IGF-1R/IR, IGF-1R, and pSrc expressions were significantly
associated with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in both TMAs. pIGF-1R/IR
and pSrc had strong positive correlation with each other (P<.0001 and
PThe antitumor efficacy of IGF-1R targeting agents (TKIs or antibodies)
has been evaluated in recent clinical trials, but the effect has been
found to be marginal and limited. Since it has been suggested that IGF-1R
and Src signaling pathways cooperate with each other in the proliferation
and survival of cancer cells, we investigated the role of Src in the
resistance to the IGF-1R TKI and further suggested the rationale of
co-targeting of IGF-1R and Src in the treatment of NSCLC. We examined
Src-mediated regulation of IGF-1R activation and assessed the effect of
the combined treatment with an IGF-1R TKI and a Src inhibitor on the
proliferation, survival, and signaling changes in human NSCLC cells and
NSCLC xenografts in nude mice. In addition, expressions of the IGF-1R
signaling axis were evaluated in tissue microarrays of NSCLC from two
independent databases (N=352, and 353, respectively) and correlated with
clinicopathologic characteristics and patient survival. We found
co-activation of IGF-1R and Src in various NSCLC cells and modulation of
IGF-1R signaling by overexpression or knockdown of Src. Combined blockade
of IGF-1R and Src resulted in the suppression of cell proliferation,
induction of apoptosis, inhibition of signaling responsible for cell
survival and proliferation, and tumor growth in vivo. In human tissue
samples, p-IGF-1R/IR, IGF-1R, and pSrc expressions were significantly
associated with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in both TMAs. pIGF-1R/IR
and pSrc had strong positive correlation with each other (P<.0001 and
P<.0001, respectively). The expression of pSrc serves as a predictor of
poor survival in these patients by multivariate analysis in patients with
adenocarcinoma. Our data suggest that Src may play an important role in
the resistance of a small molecule inhibitor targeting IGF-1R, and IGF-1R
and Src are activated in NSCLC patients and thus should be investigated
as therapeutic targets in NSCLC patients. Further studies would be
necessary to examine the efficacy of combined treatment targeting IGF-1R
and Src in NSCLC patients.

