Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vimentin serves as a signaling scaffold at focal adhesion sites to
regulate lung cancer cell adhesion.


Vimentin is a dynamic type III intermediate filament that is
overexpressed in various cancers including non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). It is a classic biomarker for highly invasive tumors and is
associated with increased likelihood of metastasis and poor survival.
Vimentin filaments are dynamic and localize to focal adhesions, where
they assemble and disassemble to promote cell migration. Our data show
that vimentin depletion reduces cell adhesion and phosphorylated focal
adhesion kinase (pFAK); therefore, we hypothesize that vimentin acts
through FAK to regulate cell adhesion and metastasis. We show that
vimentin filaments enter pFAK- and pSrc-positive focal adhesion sites,
and upon vimentin depletion, pFAK, pSrc and total FAK levels decrease. To
explore the mechanism behind this observation, we performed a
phospho-proteomic screen for proteins whose phosphorylation is altered
upon vimentin loss. One of the identified proteins was a guanine
nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) that regulates rac1. We show that
vimentin loss leads to GEF mis-localization and downstream rac1
inactivation. Furthermore, inactivation of the GEF itself resulted in
aberrant cellular adhesion and loss of pFAK. Based upon this data, we
propose that vimentin serves as a signaling scaffold to regulate FAK via
a rac1-GEF interaction. This work provides insight into the mechanism by
which vimentin affects cell adhesion and potentially NSCLC metastasis.

