Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fasting protects against the adverse side effects of chemotherapy
but has no effect on antitumor activity.


The multi-modality approach to colorectal liver metastases has led to an
increase in the number of patients eligible for hepatic resection. The
tumor response to chemotherapeutic drugs plays a pivotal role in the
success of this approach. The limitations to their use are often severe
adverse side-effects, resulting in an early discontinuation of the
chemotherapy. In previous work we have shown that fasting leads to
increased expression of cytoprotective and antioxidant genes. In this
study we have examined the effects of fasting prior to administration of
a high dose of the chemotherapeutic agent irinotecan on the occurrence of
chemotherapy-associated adverse events and anti-tumor effect in C26
coloncarcinoma bearing mice.Male BALB/c mice were subcutaneously
implanted with a 15 mm3 cube of C26 coloncarcinoma cells and divided into
4 groups (n=6/group). Ten days after implantation, 2 groups were fasted
for 72 hours and 2 groups were fed ad libitum. After 72 hours all groups
were fed ad libitum again. One ad libitum group and one fasting group
were treated with a cumulative dose of 400 mg/kg irinotecan ip,
administered on days 0, 2 and 4 relative to fasting. Tumor growth was
measured daily using Vernier calipers. Ocurrence of adverse side effects
was recorded daily. Leucocytes were counted on day 8 after the first
irinotecan dose. All mice were sacrificed 10 days after the first
irinotecan injection or earlier when tumor volume exceeded allowable
range. Tumors were resected, measured and weighted.In the ad libitum fed
group mice showed weight loss from the first irinotecan injection, while
the fasted mice gained weight during the observation period. In the ad
libitum fed mice other adverse side effects were observed from day 4
after the first irinotecan gift. They displayed different behaviour,
reduced mobility, had ruffled hair, a hunched posture and diarrhea. The
fasted mice showed no visible adverse side effects. The number of
leukocytes in the fasted group treated with irinotecan was significantly
higher, than in the ad libitum fed treated animals (6.5*106/mL vs.
3.2*106/mL, pThe multi-modality approach to colorectal liver metastases
has led to an increase in the number of patients eligible for hepatic
resection. The tumor response to chemotherapeutic drugs plays a pivotal
role in the success of this approach. The limitations to their use are
often severe adverse side-effects, resulting in an early discontinuation
of the chemotherapy. In previous work we have shown that fasting leads to
increased expression of cytoprotective and antioxidant genes. In this
study we have examined the effects of fasting prior to administration of
a high dose of the chemotherapeutic agent irinotecan on the occurrence of
chemotherapy-associated adverse events and anti-tumor effect in C26
coloncarcinoma bearing mice.Male BALB/c mice were subcutaneously
implanted with a 15 mm3 cube of C26 coloncarcinoma cells and divided into
4 groups (n=6/group). Ten days after implantation, 2 groups were fasted
for 72 hours and 2 groups were fed ad libitum. After 72 hours all groups
were fed ad libitum again. One ad libitum group and one fasting group
were treated with a cumulative dose of 400 mg/kg irinotecan ip,
administered on days 0, 2 and 4 relative to fasting. Tumor growth was
measured daily using Vernier calipers. Ocurrence of adverse side effects
was recorded daily. Leucocytes were counted on day 8 after the first
irinotecan dose. All mice were sacrificed 10 days after the first
irinotecan injection or earlier when tumor volume exceeded allowable
range. Tumors were resected, measured and weighted.In the ad libitum fed
group mice showed weight loss from the first irinotecan injection, while
the fasted mice gained weight during the observation period. In the ad
libitum fed mice other adverse side effects were observed from day 4
after the first irinotecan gift. They displayed different behaviour,
reduced mobility, had ruffled hair, a hunched posture and diarrhea. The
fasted mice showed no visible adverse side effects. The number of
leukocytes in the fasted group treated with irinotecan was significantly
higher, than in the ad libitum fed treated animals (6.5*106/mL vs.
3.2*106/mL, p<0.001). The experiment had to be terminated before the end
of the observation period in 67% of the non-treated mice due to
progressive tumor growth. In both irinotecan treated groups tumor growth
was similarly suppressed compared with the fasted and ad libitum fed
groups without irinotecan (1271 mg vs. 2106 mg, pThe multi-modality
approach to colorectal liver metastases has led to an increase in the
number of patients eligible for hepatic resection. The tumor response to
chemotherapeutic drugs plays a pivotal role in the success of this
approach. The limitations to their use are often severe adverse
side-effects, resulting in an early discontinuation of the chemotherapy.
In previous work we have shown that fasting leads to increased expression
of cytoprotective and antioxidant genes. In this study we have examined
the effects of fasting prior to administration of a high dose of the
chemotherapeutic agent irinotecan on the occurrence of
chemotherapy-associated adverse events and anti-tumor effect in C26
coloncarcinoma bearing mice.Male BALB/c mice were subcutaneously
implanted with a 15 mm3 cube of C26 coloncarcinoma cells and divided into
4 groups (n=6/group). Ten days after implantation, 2 groups were fasted
for 72 hours and 2 groups were fed ad libitum. After 72 hours all groups
were fed ad libitum again. One ad libitum group and one fasting group
were treated with a cumulative dose of 400 mg/kg irinotecan ip,
administered on days 0, 2 and 4 relative to fasting. Tumor growth was
measured daily using Vernier calipers. Ocurrence of adverse side effects
was recorded daily. Leucocytes were counted on day 8 after the first
irinotecan dose. All mice were sacrificed 10 days after the first
irinotecan injection or earlier when tumor volume exceeded allowable
range. Tumors were resected, measured and weighted.In the ad libitum fed
group mice showed weight loss from the first irinotecan injection, while
the fasted mice gained weight during the observation period. In the ad
libitum fed mice other adverse side effects were observed from day 4
after the first irinotecan gift. They displayed different behaviour,
reduced mobility, had ruffled hair, a hunched posture and diarrhea. The
fasted mice showed no visible adverse side effects. The number of
leukocytes in the fasted group treated with irinotecan was significantly
higher, than in the ad libitum fed treated animals (6.5*106/mL vs.
3.2*106/mL, p<0.001). The experiment had to be terminated before the end
of the observation period in 67% of the non-treated mice due to
progressive tumor growth. In both irinotecan treated groups tumor growth
was similarly suppressed compared with the fasted and ad libitum fed
groups without irinotecan (1271 mg vs. 2106 mg, p<0.001).Our data
demonstrate that 72 hours of fasting prior to treatment with a high dose
of irinotecan prevents the occurrence of adverse side effects, while the
antitumor activity is not affected. These data suggest that a
preoperative fasting regimen may improve the therapeutic index of
chemotherapeutic agents and increases the efficacy of chemotherapeutic
treatment.

