Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Refametinib (BAY 86-9766): An allosteric inhibitor of MEK1/2,
potently inhibits tumor growth in patient-derived xenograft models of
gastric cancer.


Background: Gastric cancer (GC) is a prevalent and deadly disease.
Because the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK signaling cascade plays a critical role in
signal transduction pathways that regulate growth factor response,
angiogenesis, tumor cell proliferation, and apoptosis, blocking this
signaling pathway could thus have therapeutic efficacy. This study aims
to target this pathway in preclinical models of GC with refametinib (BAY
86-9766, RDEA119), an orally available, allosteric inhibitor of
MEK1/2.Methods: Eight patient-derived GC xenograft models with different
histotypes were treated orally with refametinib or vehicle and tumor
growth was monitored using caliper measurements. Tissue sections of
vehicle- or refametinib-treated xenografts were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry for cell proliferation, apoptosis and microvessel
area, using antibodies against p-Histone H3Ser10, cleaved PARP and CD31,
respectively. Tumor lysates were analyzed by Western Blotting with
antibodies for effects on marker proteins for proliferation, apoptosis
and angiogenesis.Results: Refametinib demonstrated significant tumor
growth inhibition ranging from 66-87% in eight GC models at a dose of 15
mg/kg/d. Refametinib inhibited cell proliferation by 2-4 fold as observed
by reduced staining for p-Histone H3Ser10. Increased staining for
caspase-cleaved p85 PARP by 1.5 to 9 fold was detected, indicating that
refametinib induced apoptosis. Furthermore the compound significantly
inhibited angiogenesis in 2 of 8 models by 3-fold compared to the
vehicle-treated group as indicated by reduced CD31 staining. Reduced cell
proliferation and induction of apoptosis were associated with decreased
levels of p-ERK1/2, p-cdk2Thr14/Tyr15, p-p90RSKSer359/363,
p-p70S6KThr421/Ser424, p-4EBP1Thr70, p-S6RSer235/236 and p-eIF4ESer209
and elevation of p-AktSer473, Bim and cleaved PARP. Conclusion: We show
that single-agent refametinib has significant anti-tumor activity in
patient-derived gastric cancer preclinical models. Our findings support
further investigation of refametinib either in monotherapy or in
combination with inhibitors of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway in the treatment
of GC.

