Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic studies of the potentiation of hypoxia-targeted drug
TH-302 by co-administration of checkpoint kinase1 (Chk1) inhibitors.


The hypoxia-activated prodrug TH-302 is reduced at its nitroimidazole
group and under hypoxic conditions, releases Br-IPM, a bis-alkylating DNA
crosslinker. We previously reported that Chk1 inhibitors are TH-302
sensitizers both in vitro and in vivo in the context of p53 checkpoint
deficiency. To assess the impact of the Chk1 inhibitor AZD7762 on DNA
damage in TH-302 treated cells directly, we used the single-cell
electrophoresis-based Comet assay. Cells treated with vehicle, TH-302, or
AZD7762 exhibited no visible tail moment. In contrast, cells treated with
both AZD7762 and TH-302 exhibited a tail moment, indicating the induction
of double-strand breaks (DSBs). To determine the effect of AZD7762 on
TH-302-induced DNA damage response, H2AX was evaluated. We demonstrated
in p53/ HT29 cells that either TH-302 or AZD7762 induced H2AX. However,
treatment with both AZD7762 and TH-302 greatly increased H2AX staining,
demonstrating a greater DNA damage response with the combiniaton therapy.
Induction of apoptosis was also assessed. TH-302 did not induce apoptosis
in HT29, while AZD7762 caused a slight increase in apoptosis. However,
treatment with both TH-302 and AZD7762 induced a dramatic increase in
apoptosis, indicating that the Chk1 inhibitor AZD7762 sensitizes HT29
cells to apoptosis in response to the DNA damage induced by TH-302. To
explore involved signaling pathways, we conducted immunoblot analysis and
observed an increase in phospho-histone H3 at serine 10 in the
combination treatment group, consistent with DNA damaged cells undergoing
mitotic catastrophe. To investigate which DNA repair system is affected
by Chk-1 inhibitor-mediated enhancement of TH-302 cytotoxicity, we
utilized CHO cell-based DNA repair mutant cell line pairs. Potentiation
of TH-302 cytotoxicity by AZD7762 was only observed in cell lines
proficient in, and not deficient in, the specific type of DNA repair
involved in the repair of TH-302 DNA damage (homology-dependent repair;
HDR). To explore the role of HDR in AZD7762-mediated potentiation of
TH-302 cytotoxicity further, we investigated the effects of AZD7762 on
Rad51 levels. In response to TH-302, Rad51 expression levels were
increased. However, combination treatment of cells with AZD7762 and
TH-302 led to Rad51 expression levels lower than those observed in
control cells. The results suggest that the down-regulation of
Rad51-dependent HDR by AZD7762 results in the persistence of unrepaired
DNA damage in response to TH-302 and underlies the mechanism of
potentiation of TH-302 cytotoxicity by AZD7762. The preclinical data
presented in this study support a new approach for the treatment of
cancer by combining Chk1 inhibitors with the tumor-hypoxia targeted
TH-302.

