Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate on EGFR or ALK driven
lung cancer models.


There has been considerable evidence that (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate
(EGCG) inhibited enzyme activities and signal transduction pathways,
resulting in the suppression of cell proliferation and enhancement of
apoptosis, as well as the inhibition of cell invasion, angiogenesis and
metastasis. EGCG has been shown to bind directly to several receptors
including epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and to inhibit the
functions. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as getinib and ALK
inhibitors such as crizotinib are effective for non-small cell lung
cancer harboring activating EGFR mutations and ALK fusion genes,
respectively. However, even in the patients with an initial response to
the drug, acquired resistance develops after 6-12 months. In this study,
we investigated effects of EGCG on EGFR or ALK driven lung cancer
models.We used four lung cancer cell lines: PC-9, RPC-9, H1975 and H2228.
RPC-9 cells that acquired EGFR T790M mutation were established from
parental PC-9 cells harboring EGFR exon 19 deletion mutation in our
laboratory. RPC-9 cells that showed a 400-fold resistance to gefitinib
compared with parental PC-9 cells. H1975 cells have L858R point mutation
in exon 21 with T790M. H2228 cells harbor EML4-ALK fusion genes. Growth
inhibition was measured using MTT assay. The drug concentration required
to inhibit the growth of tumor cells by 50% (IC50) for 96 h exposure was
used to evaluate the effectiveness of EGCG. Protein expression was
determined by Western blotting. The IC50s (mean + standard deviation)
were 46 + 7.0 M for PC-9 cells, 37 + 3.6 M for RPC-9 cells, 32 + 0.6 M
for H1975 cells and 57 + 7.6 M for H2228 cells: the four cell lines have
similar sensitivity to EGCG. Phosphorylated (p)EGFR, pAKT and pERK in
RPC-9 and H1975 cells were suppressed by EGCG (50 or 100 M). pALK, pAKT
and pERK in H2228 cells were also inhibited by EGCG (50 or 100M).The
antitumor effect of EGCG was examined using mouse xenograft model. PC-9,
RPC-9, H1975, and H2228 cells (2 106) were injected s.c. into the backs
of the athymic mice at 7 wk of age. At about 1 week after injection, mice
harboring about 5 - 10 mm tumor size were randomly assigned into one of
two groups that received either EGCG or vehicle. The tumor sizes (mm3;
mean + standard deviation) of PC-9 on day 42 were 1114 + 478 (n = 10) in
EGCG group and 2803 + 973 (n = 9) in control group (p There has been
considerable evidence that (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)
inhibited enzyme activities and signal transduction pathways, resulting
in the suppression of cell proliferation and enhancement of apoptosis, as
well as the inhibition of cell invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis.
EGCG has been shown to bind directly to several receptors including
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and to inhibit the functions.
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as getinib and ALK inhibitors such
as crizotinib are effective for non-small cell lung cancer harboring
activating EGFR mutations and ALK fusion genes, respectively. However,
even in the patients with an initial response to the drug, acquired
resistance develops after 6-12 months. In this study, we investigated
effects of EGCG on EGFR or ALK driven lung cancer models.We used four
lung cancer cell lines: PC-9, RPC-9, H1975 and H2228. RPC-9 cells that
acquired EGFR T790M mutation were established from parental PC-9 cells
harboring EGFR exon 19 deletion mutation in our laboratory. RPC-9 cells
that showed a 400-fold resistance to gefitinib compared with parental
PC-9 cells. H1975 cells have L858R point mutation in exon 21 with T790M.
H2228 cells harbor EML4-ALK fusion genes. Growth inhibition was measured
using MTT assay. The drug concentration required to inhibit the growth of
tumor cells by 50% (IC50) for 96 h exposure was used to evaluate the
effectiveness of EGCG. Protein expression was determined by Western
blotting. The IC50s (mean + standard deviation) were 46 + 7.0 M for PC-9
cells, 37 + 3.6 M for RPC-9 cells, 32 + 0.6 M for H1975 cells and 57 +
7.6 M for H2228 cells: the four cell lines have similar sensitivity to
EGCG. Phosphorylated (p)EGFR, pAKT and pERK in RPC-9 and H1975 cells were
suppressed by EGCG (50 or 100 M). pALK, pAKT and pERK in H2228 cells were
also inhibited by EGCG (50 or 100M).The antitumor effect of EGCG was
examined using mouse xenograft model. PC-9, RPC-9, H1975, and H2228 cells
(2 106) were injected s.c. into the backs of the athymic mice at 7 wk of
age. At about 1 week after injection, mice harboring about 5 - 10 mm
tumor size were randomly assigned into one of two groups that received
either EGCG or vehicle. The tumor sizes (mm3; mean + standard deviation)
of PC-9 on day 42 were 1114 + 478 (n = 10) in EGCG group and 2803 + 973
(n = 9) in control group (p < 0.05). Similarly, the xenograft tumors of
RPC-9, H1975 and H2228 cells in EGCG-treated groups were significantly
smaller than those in vehicle-treated groups, respectively. The numbers
of tumor blood vessels of xenograft tissues, which were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry using CD31 antibody, in EGCG-treated mice were
significantly reduced than those in vehicle-treated mice.In conclusion,
these preclinical data suggest that EGCG may be effective for both
EGFR-driven in spite of T790M presence and ALK-driven lung tumors.

