Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preparation and anti-tumor growth of polyethylene glycol-poly
lactic acid block copolymers sorafenib nanoparticles.


BACKGROUND&AIMS: In vitro and in vivo studies have showed that sorafenib
can inhibit the growth of liver cancer cells and solid tumor. However,
poor water solubility, short half-life, high side-effect limit its
clinical application in malignant tumor treatment. In this study, we
report on the preparation of sorafenib nanoparticles by nanotechnology,
and to observe the anti-hepatocarcinoma effect and in vivo metabolism of
sorafenib nanoparticles. Methods:Polyethylene glycol-poly lactic acid
block copolymers were synthesized with ring-opening polymerization
technique as drug carrier material. Polyethylene glycol-poly lactic acid
block copolymers sorafenib nanoparticles were prepared with nanometer
precipitation method. The particle diameter and surface potential of
sorafenib nanoparticles were determined by nanometer particle size and
zeta otentiometer(Nano-ZS ZEN3600, Malvern). Drug-loading rate and
entrapment rate were determined by ultraviolet spectrophotometer. In
vitro slow release of sorafenib nanoparticles was determined by
extracorporeal dialysis. The effect of sorafenib nanoparticles on H22
liver cancer cells proliferation was determined with CCK8 reagent in
vitro culture .In vivo pharmacokinetics of sorafenib nanoparticles was
analysed with DAS2.1.1 software. Results:Sorafenib nanoparticles were
round, particle diameter was 127.32.0 nm, Zeta potential was -3.350.42
mV, drug-loading rate was 6.78%, entrapment rate was 98.21%. In vitro
accumulative release rate of sorafenib nanoparticles at 24h, 48h, 72h,
96h were respectively 50.9073%, 56.2395%, 60.2561%, 63.2843%. The
inhibitive effect of sorafenib nanoparticles on H22 liver cancer cells
proliferation was more enhanced than that of sorafenib at the same drug
concentration(F=74.988,PBACKGROUND&AIMS: In vitro and in vivo studies
have showed that sorafenib can inhibit the growth of liver cancer cells
and solid tumor. However, poor water solubility, short half-life, high
side-effect limit its clinical application in malignant tumor treatment.
In this study, we report on the preparation of sorafenib nanoparticles by
nanotechnology, and to observe the anti-hepatocarcinoma effect and in
vivo metabolism of sorafenib nanoparticles. Methods:Polyethylene
glycol-poly lactic acid block copolymers were synthesized with
ring-opening polymerization technique as drug carrier material.
Polyethylene glycol-poly lactic acid block copolymers sorafenib
nanoparticles were prepared with nanometer precipitation method. The
particle diameter and surface potential of sorafenib nanoparticles were
determined by nanometer particle size and zeta otentiometer(Nano-ZS
ZEN3600, Malvern). Drug-loading rate and entrapment rate were determined
by ultraviolet spectrophotometer. In vitro slow release of sorafenib
nanoparticles was determined by extracorporeal dialysis. The effect of
sorafenib nanoparticles on H22 liver cancer cells proliferation was
determined with CCK8 reagent in vitro culture .In vivo pharmacokinetics
of sorafenib nanoparticles was analysed with DAS2.1.1 software.
Results:Sorafenib nanoparticles were round, particle diameter was
127.32.0 nm, Zeta potential was -3.350.42 mV, drug-loading rate was
6.78%, entrapment rate was 98.21%. In vitro accumulative release rate of
sorafenib nanoparticles at 24h, 48h, 72h, 96h were respectively 50.9073%,
56.2395%, 60.2561%, 63.2843%. The inhibitive effect of sorafenib
nanoparticles on H22 liver cancer cells proliferation was more enhanced
than that of sorafenib at the same drug concentration(F=74.988,P<0.05),
The inhibitive effect of sorafenib nanoparticles on H22 liver cancer
cells proliferation enhanced at the increase of sorafenib concentration.
The in vivo metabolism time of sorafenib in sorafenib nanoparticles group
was longer than that of sorafenib group (SNP t1/2, 13.95h vs S t1/2,
9.67h; t=2.618, PBACKGROUND&AIMS: In vitro and in vivo studies have
showed that sorafenib can inhibit the growth of liver cancer cells and
solid tumor. However, poor water solubility, short half-life, high
side-effect limit its clinical application in malignant tumor treatment.
In this study, we report on the preparation of sorafenib nanoparticles by
nanotechnology, and to observe the anti-hepatocarcinoma effect and in
vivo metabolism of sorafenib nanoparticles. Methods:Polyethylene
glycol-poly lactic acid block copolymers were synthesized with
ring-opening polymerization technique as drug carrier material.
Polyethylene glycol-poly lactic acid block copolymers sorafenib
nanoparticles were prepared with nanometer precipitation method. The
particle diameter and surface potential of sorafenib nanoparticles were
determined by nanometer particle size and zeta otentiometer(Nano-ZS
ZEN3600, Malvern). Drug-loading rate and entrapment rate were determined
by ultraviolet spectrophotometer. In vitro slow release of sorafenib
nanoparticles was determined by extracorporeal dialysis. The effect of
sorafenib nanoparticles on H22 liver cancer cells proliferation was
determined with CCK8 reagent in vitro culture .In vivo pharmacokinetics
of sorafenib nanoparticles was analysed with DAS2.1.1 software.
Results:Sorafenib nanoparticles were round, particle diameter was
127.32.0 nm, Zeta potential was -3.350.42 mV, drug-loading rate was
6.78%, entrapment rate was 98.21%. In vitro accumulative release rate of
sorafenib nanoparticles at 24h, 48h, 72h, 96h were respectively 50.9073%,
56.2395%, 60.2561%, 63.2843%. The inhibitive effect of sorafenib
nanoparticles on H22 liver cancer cells proliferation was more enhanced
than that of sorafenib at the same drug concentration(F=74.988,P<0.05),
The inhibitive effect of sorafenib nanoparticles on H22 liver cancer
cells proliferation enhanced at the increase of sorafenib concentration.
The in vivo metabolism time of sorafenib in sorafenib nanoparticles group
was longer than that of sorafenib group (SNP t1/2, 13.95h vs S t1/2,
9.67h; t=2.618, P<0.05). Conclusion:Sorafenib nanoparticles can
significantly inhibit the cells proliferation of liver cancer, and
prolong in vivo metabolism of srafenib. The preparation of sorafenib
nanoparticles has established good theoretical basis to further study in
vivo anti-tumor effect and mechanism of sorafenib nanoparticles .

