Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intra-tumoral heterogeneity of PDGFRA / MET gain in WHO grade II
diffuse astrocytomas.


Glioblastomas with a proneural expression signature are characterized by
frequent IDH1 mutations (i.e. genetic hallmarks of secondary
glioblastomas) and PDGFRA amplification. Most glioblastomas with IDH1
mutations (11/12, 92%) show a proneural signature, the majority with
wild-type PDGFRA, while approximately 30% of glioblastomas with a
proneural signature had IDH1 mutations. IDH1/2 mutations are frequent and
early genetic events in diffuse astrocytomas WHO grade II, precursor to
secondary glioblastomas, but little is known about the role and timing of
PDGFRA amplification in these tumors.In the present study, we assessed
PDGFRA gain in 342 low-grade diffuse gliomas (166 low-grade diffuse
astrocytomas, as well as 61 oligoastrocytomas and 115 oligodendrogliomas)
by quantitative PCR. PDGFRA gain was detected in 27/166 (16.3%) diffuse
astrocytomas, significantly more frequent than in oligoastrocytomas
(6.6%; P=0.04) or in oligodendrogliomas (3/115; 2.6%; PGlioblastomas with
a proneural expression signature are characterized by frequent IDH1
mutations (i.e. genetic hallmarks of secondary glioblastomas) and PDGFRA
amplification. Most glioblastomas with IDH1 mutations (11/12, 92%) show a
proneural signature, the majority with wild-type PDGFRA, while
approximately 30% of glioblastomas with a proneural signature had IDH1
mutations. IDH1/2 mutations are frequent and early genetic events in
diffuse astrocytomas WHO grade II, precursor to secondary glioblastomas,
but little is known about the role and timing of PDGFRA amplification in
these tumors.In the present study, we assessed PDGFRA gain in 342
low-grade diffuse gliomas (166 low-grade diffuse astrocytomas, as well as
61 oligoastrocytomas and 115 oligodendrogliomas) by quantitative PCR.
PDGFRA gain was detected in 27/166 (16.3%) diffuse astrocytomas,
significantly more frequent than in oligoastrocytomas (6.6%; P=0.04) or
in oligodendrogliomas (3/115; 2.6%; P<0.0001).We correlated PDGFRA gain
with other genetic alterations in low-grade diffuse gliomas previously
reported from our laboratory. PDGFRA gain was significantly more frequent
in diffuse astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas and low-grade diffuse gliomas
without IDH1/2 mutations than those with IDH1/2 mutations (36.8% vs
13.6%; P=0.018, 16.7% vs 1.0%; P=0.028, 24.3% vs 8.3%; P=0.006,
respectively). PDGFRA gain was most frequent (28.6%) in gliomas lacking
any of common genetic alterations (IDH1/2 mutations, TP53 mutations and
1p/19q loss). PDGFRA gain was found in low-grade diffuse gliomas with
TP53 mutation IDH1/2 mutations (16.3%) and those with IDH1/2 mutation
only (10.5%), but rare in tumors with 1p/19q loss IDH1/2 mutations
(1.4%).In diffuse astrocytomas, PDGFRA gain positively correlated with
MET gain (P=0.016) and inversely correlated with 1p/19q loss (P=0.005)
and IDH1/2 mutations (P=0.018). The vast majority of diffuse astrocytomas
showed IDH1/2 mutations and/or PDGFRA gain (154/166; 93%).Mean survival
of diffuse astrocytoma patients with PDGFRA gain was 8.8 1.6 years,
similar to that with IDH1/2 mutations (7.8 0.5 years) or TP53 mutations
(7.6 0.6 years), but significantly longer than those with MET gain (4.4
0.7 years). The mean survival of diffuse astrocytoma patients with
co-gain of MET and PDGFRA was 7.7 2.0 years, which was similar to those
with PDGFRA gain only.Dual-color FISH in 6 diffuse astrocytomas with
PDGFRA / MET co-gain identified by quantitative PCR revealed PDGFRA and
MET were typically amplified in different tumor cell populations within
the tumor, but tumor cells with co-amplification were also focally
observed, suggesting intra-tumoral heterogeneity even in diffuse
astrocytomas.

