Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin-mediated regulation of the miR132/212 cluster and miR
122/181a expression through PI3K, Akt, mTOR signaling in primary cultured
rat hepatocytes.


Background and Objective: Several microRNAs were selected for
characterization of their response to insulin signaling based on previous
reports implicating their role in the regulation of hepatic metabolism,
diabetes, hepatocellular carcinoma, and predictions of targeting CYP2E1.
CYP2E1 catalyzes the metabolic activation of carcinogens, increases
cellular oxidative stress, and is elevated in diabetes and at low insulin
levels (0.1nM) in primary cultured hepatocytes. In addition, aberrant
miR-122 expression was reported to be associated with hepatocellular
carcinoma in rats, as well as in human tissue, and may be involved with
hepatocarcinogenesis. In view of the critical role of the PI3K, Akt and
mTOR signaling pathway in pathogenesis, mechanistic studies were
conducted to examine the role of this pathway in regulation miR 132/212,
122 and 181a expression. Methods: Insulin effects on miRNA (miRs) levels
were monitored using qPCR, and mechanistic studies employing inhibitors
of PI3K, Akt, and mTOR were used to examine the role of this insulin
signaling pathway on miR expression. The results were compared to miR
let-7a, which is not implicated in the regulation of hepatic metabolism
or diabetes and does not target CYP2E1 mRNA. Results: Insulin at
concentrations of 0.1, 1.0, and 10 nM increased the expression of
miRNA-132 and 212 2- and 1.8-fold respectively, whereas expression of
miRNAs 181a and 122 increased 1.6- and 1.4-fold, respectively. In
contrast, insulin failed to significantly alter the expression of miRNA
let-7a. Inhibition of PI3K with LY294002, Akt with A-443654 and mTOR with
rapamycin resulted in significant suppression of the insulin-mediated
elevation of miR-132, miR-212, and miR-122 levels monitored over the
insulin concentrations examined. Inhibition of PI3K with LY294002, or Akt
with A-443654 decreased the insulin-mediated increase in miR-181a levels
by 20 to 50% relative to the respective insulin-concentration. Rapamycin
inhibition of mTOR produced a marginal (Background and Objective: Several
microRNAs were selected for characterization of their response to insulin
signaling based on previous reports implicating their role in the
regulation of hepatic metabolism, diabetes, hepatocellular carcinoma, and
predictions of targeting CYP2E1. CYP2E1 catalyzes the metabolic
activation of carcinogens, increases cellular oxidative stress, and is
elevated in diabetes and at low insulin levels (0.1nM) in primary
cultured hepatocytes. In addition, aberrant miR-122 expression was
reported to be associated with hepatocellular carcinoma in rats, as well
as in human tissue, and may be involved with hepatocarcinogenesis. In
view of the critical role of the PI3K, Akt and mTOR signaling pathway in
pathogenesis, mechanistic studies were conducted to examine the role of
this pathway in regulation miR 132/212, 122 and 181a expression. Methods:
Insulin effects on miRNA (miRs) levels were monitored using qPCR, and
mechanistic studies employing inhibitors of PI3K, Akt, and mTOR were used
to examine the role of this insulin signaling pathway on miR expression.
The results were compared to miR let-7a, which is not implicated in the
regulation of hepatic metabolism or diabetes and does not target CYP2E1
mRNA. Results: Insulin at concentrations of 0.1, 1.0, and 10 nM increased
the expression of miRNA-132 and 212 2- and 1.8-fold respectively, whereas
expression of miRNAs 181a and 122 increased 1.6- and 1.4-fold,
respectively. In contrast, insulin failed to significantly alter the
expression of miRNA let-7a. Inhibition of PI3K with LY294002, Akt with
A-443654 and mTOR with rapamycin resulted in significant suppression of
the insulin-mediated elevation of miR-132, miR-212, and miR-122 levels
monitored over the insulin concentrations examined. Inhibition of PI3K
with LY294002, or Akt with A-443654 decreased the insulin-mediated
increase in miR-181a levels by 20 to 50% relative to the respective
insulin-concentration. Rapamycin inhibition of mTOR produced a marginal
(<10%) decrease in miR-181a levels. Inhibition of PI3K or Akt did not
show any significant effect on miR let-7a. In summary, seminal evidence
is provided for insulin regulation of microRNA expression in primary
cultured hepatocytes through PI3K, Akt and mTOR (TORC1).

