Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevalence of MET expression, activating mutations of KRAS and
IDH1/2, and ROS1 fusions in cholangiocarcinoma patient tumor samples.


Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) originates from biliary tract epithelium and can
be classified anatomically into intrahepatic or extrahepatic CCA.
Although a relatively rare disease in the United States and Europe, the
incidence of intrahepatic CCA is on the rise with unknown causes. CCA
incidence is higher in Asia and the etiology is associated with
infections such as liver fluke and hepatitis B/C. Prognosis at diagnosis
is poor with median survival time of C and c.183A>T for Q61H), 5 IDH1
mutations (R132G, R132S, R132H, R132C, R132L), and 5 IDH2 mutations
(R172G, R172M, R172K, R172W, R172S) were analyzed. Overall, 25% of
analyzed samples were positive for KRAS mutation, and G12D was the
predominant mutation (60%). One-third of Asian samples were positive for
KRAS mutation, whereas less than one-fifth of non-Asian samples contained
KRAS mutations. For IDH1, the frequency of mutation was less than 10%
overall, and the majority of patients with IDH1 mutations were non-Asian.
The R132C mutation was the predominant IDH1 mutation, and all tissues
that were positive for IDH1 mutations were of intrahepatic origin.
Interestingly, 2 out of the 7 samples positive for IDH1 mutations (R132C)
were also positive for G12D KRAS mutation. There is no trend of MET
expression correlating with either KRAS or IDH1 mutations. IDH2 analyses
by castPCR and FISH studies examining ROS1 gene fusion are ongoing. Based
on these data, inhibitors of receptor tyrosine kinases and their
signaling pathways such as MET and ROS1 may merit clinical evaluation in
CCA patients. LY2801653, a MET inhibitor which also has inhibitory
activity against ROS1 and MKNK1/2 is currently in phase 1 clinical
testing in patients with advanced cancer (trial I3O-MC-JSBA, NCT01285037).

