Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrantly up-regulated synaptotagmin-like 2 (SYTL2) promotes
tumorigenesis of ovarian cancer cells .


Epithelial ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer-related
death among woman and has the highest case-fatality rate among
gynecologic cancers. Recently, microarray based high-throughput studies
have characterized the genomics of epithelial ovarian cancer. These
studies have revealed extensive DNA copy number alterations with large
areas of gene amplification. There are however little data identifying
the genes critical for the clinicopathologic characteristics of this
tumor. Here, we describe an analysis of 11q14 amplicon which has been
found in 25% of serous ovarian cancers. Among the genes in the 11q14
amplicon we validate an increased DNA copy number of SYTL2 in patient
samples and show that this gene has the strongest negative prognostic
power. Ectopic overexpression of SYTL2 in ovarian cancer cell lines A2780
and A224 showed increases in cell proliferation, colony formation,
migration and invasion in vitro. In nude mice xenograft models, SYTL2
expression in A2780 cells resulted in increased tumor formation. SYTL2
may act through a novel mechanism by enhancing the secretion of Wnt-3a
while having minimal effects on its expression. In summary, our data
suggest SYTL2 has oncogenic effcst in ovarian cancer and may contribute
to the progression of the disease.

