Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel therapy NKP-1339 is active in osteosarcoma.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary malignant bone tumor in
children and young adults. Despite significant advancements in the
diagnosis and treatment of OS, overall survival trends have remained
stagnant with conventional chemotherapy. New chemotherapeutic agents and
combination regimens are being studied to target pathways that are
believed to be active in OS. NKP-1339 is a novel small molecule
anti-cancer compound that targets the GRP78 pathway. A NKP-1339 single
agents Phase I has been completed [1]. GRP78 is a master regulator of
endoplasmic reticulum stress. High GRP78 levels are found in a wide
variety of cancer types and have been correlated with tumor
proliferation, metastasis, angiogenesis and tumor cell survival.
Treatment with anti-cancer agents, both cytotoxic and targeted agents,
has been shown to give rise to further induction of GRP78, and such
elevation been correlated to resistance. NKP-1339 down-regulates GRP78
levels selectively in tumor cells leading to tumor cell death. In this
study, we explore NKP-1339 activity against OS cell lines. In vitro
cytotoxicity assays were performed with NKP-1339, as a single agent, on
both standard and patient derived OS cell lines. Three out of four
standard cell lines (75%) and two out of four patient derived cell lines
(50%) showed IC50 of 80-100 uM. These results, in terms of uM range and
activity against tumor lines that are resistant to other agents, are
consistent with previous in vitro studies of NKP-1339 with other tumor
types. The IC50 uM levels of NKP-1339 are achievable in patient plasma.
In vitro combination studies are underway to determine the synergistic
anti-tumor effects of NKP-1339 with standard chemotherapeutic agents used
in OS. Future studies will include treatment of OS xenograft models with
NKP-1339 as a single agent and in combination, and if promising, an OS
clinical trial will be initiated.[1] Thompson et al. ASCO 2012 abstract
#3033

