Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiopoietin-2 antagonist enhances the anti-angiogenic effect of
sunitinib in a preclinical renal cell carcinoma model.


Angiogenesis, the formation of blood vessels from pre-existing ones, is
an essential process in tumor growth and development. During
angiogenesis, normal vessels consisting of endothelial and
peri-endothelial cells are first destabilized via the Angiopoietin-2
(Ang-2)-Tie2 axis, and then endothelial cells are activated to
proliferate and form new vessels mainly through the Vascular Endothelial
Growth Factor (VEGF)-VEGFR2 axis. Currently there are several
anti-angiogenic therapies targeting the VEGF-VEGFR pathway used in the
clinic in various cancer settings. New therapies such as Ang-2
antagonists are also being pursued and have recently been shown to be
valuable especially in combination with anti-VEGF therapies. Renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) is a highly vascularized disease where anti-angiogenic
therapies are used as both first and second line treatments. The present
study focused on evaluating the effects of an Ang-2 antagonist in
combination with the FDA approved Sunitinib, a first line treatment in
RCC. An in vivo intradermal assay with VHL mutant, human renal cell
carcinoma, Caki-2, cells was used to assess angiogenesis of either the
Ang-2 antagonist, Sunitinib or the combination of the Ang-2 antagonist
and Sunitinib. Results show a greater decrease in the number of tumor
cell induced vessels in the Ang-2 and Sunitinib combination group
compared to either Ang-2 antagonist or Sunitinib alone. Tumor growth was
also impaired by these agents when used alone or in combination; however
there was greater decrease in tumor volume in the Ang-2 and Sunitinib
combination group compared to either Ang-2 antagonist or Sunitinib alone.
These data show greater tumor vessel and tumor inhibition when an Ang-2
antagonist and Sunitinib are administered in combination.

