Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ErbB4 is critical for tumor suppressive HPP1/STAT signaling in
colon cancer.


Background: HPP1 (also known as TMEFF2) encodes a cleavable transmembrane
protein that is thought to be a tumor suppressive EGF-like ligand that
activates STAT1 and 2-associated pathways. From phylogenetic analyses, it
is postulated that HPP1 exerts its effects via erbB4. We sought to
characterize the role of erbB4 in the context of the HPP1/STAT tumor
suppressive signaling axis.Methods: Transient knockdown of erbB4 was
achieved using siRNA in stable HPP1-overexpressing HCT116 transfectants.
The impact of erbB4 manipulation on STAT signaling was assessed by
expression and activation analyses using RT-PCR and Western blotting.
Subsequent alterations in cell proliferation and anchorage-independent
growth were evaluated by MTT and soft agar assays, respectively.Results:
We have previously demonstrated that HPP1s tumor suppressive effects are
associated with activation of suppressive STAT1 and 2 and downregulation
of oncogenic STAT3 and 5. Abrogation of erbB4 expression resulted in a
reversal of this profile with a reduction in activated STAT1 and 2 and
increased phosphorylation of STAT3 and 5. Moreover, inhibition of ErbB4
receptor in HPP1 over-expressing transfectants resulted in an attenuation
of tumor suppressive behavior with increased cell proliferation (Optical
Density: 0.120.11 vs. 0.35 0.040; p0.001) and colony formation in soft
agar (38525 vs. 6630 colonies; p0.001) as compared to scrambled siRNA
control transfectants.Conclusion: The EGF-like domain of HPP1 via erbB4
receptor signaling is essential for its tumor suppressive effects.
Knockdown of erbB4 elicits a reversal of HPP1-mediated effects on cell
behavior and STAT-family activation status. Therapeutic targeting of the
erbB family of receptors is of great interest and our findings may lead
to a greater understanding of the complex nature of their associated
signaling pathways.

