Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of RSK2 in human skin cancer.


Our previous study demonstrated that the total p90 ribosomal S6 kinase 2
(RSK2) protein level was significantly higher in human skin cancer
tissues and cancer cells compared with normal skin tissues and
premalignant cell lines. However, the role of RSK2 activation and
signaling in human skin cancer has not yet been fully elucidated. In this
study, we provided evidences that RSK2 plays a key role in human skin
cancer. We examined the effect of knocking down RSK2 expression on
EGF-induced anchorage-independent transformation in the premalignant
HaCaT human skin keratinocyte cell line and on soft agar colony growth of
SK-MEL-28 malignant melanoma (MM) cells. We found that UVB stimulation
induced increased in not only the total and phosphorylated protein levels
of ERKs and RSK2, but also the nuclear localization and gene expression
of RSK2. Moreover, RSK2/ mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) showed
enhanced sub-G1 accumulation induced by UVB stimulation compared with
RSK2+/+ MEFs, indicating that RSK2 might play an important role in
tolerance against stress associated with UV. RSK2 knockdown inhibited
proliferation and anchorage-independent transformation of HaCaT cells and
soft agar colony growth of MM cells. We found that the phosphorylated
protein levels of RSK2 were enhanced in cancer tissues compared with
normal tissues in a human skin cancer tissue array. Importantly,
activated RSK2 protein levels were highly abundant in human skin cancer
tissues compared with matched skin normal tissues. Taken together, our
results demonstrated that RSK2 plays a key role in neoplastic
transformation of human skin cells and in skin cancer growth.

