Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinopathologic correlation with the LCM based instability
profiles for the mitochondrial microsatellite regions in the benign to
metastatic transitions of surface epithelium ovarian tumor subtypes.


Background: Up to date, genomic and microgenomic changes have been
identified in nuclear genome whereas, there is no available data about
the mitochondrial genome alterations in paired ovarian tumors.
Additionally, genomic factors that involve in the progression to advanced
stages of ovarian malignancy is still largely unknown. Current work
suggest that the mitochondrial alterations have importance in the
progress of carcinogenesis in spesific cell populations at clinical,
pathological and molecular pathological levels.Methods and Findings: We
analyzed subtypes of 41 ovarian carcinoma samples including normal and
tumor (benign, borderline and malignant) using laser captured
microdissection technology. Out of 41 ovarian cases, 19 serous papillary
carcinoma, 6 mucinous adenomcarcinoma, 9 endometrioid adenocarcinoma, 5
mixed type ovarian carcinoma, 1 undifferentiated carcinoma and 1 clear
cell adenocarcinoma were included in the study. All samples were screened
for 5.5kb (MT-D-Loop, MT-CytB, MT-ATPaz6-8, MT-12SrRNA, MT-16SrRNA) of
mitochondrial genome by PCR-based sequencing analysis. A total of 91
variations were found. Sixty six percent (60/91) of these variations is
shown in MITOMAP and 34% (31/91) is observed as novel variations.
Overall, we did not find any correlation in D-Loop variations between
pathological prognostic and molecular pathological prognostic factors
(CD34,ER,PR,c-erbB-2,p53,MDR1,MDR3). However, the expression of a key
component of drug resistance, protein GST (gluthatione S transferase),
was detected as 270 in samples with instability; and 165 (median 25-75
percentile) in samples with stability in D-Loop position at 309 for C7TC6
repeats, (pBackground: Up to date, genomic and microgenomic changes have
been identified in nuclear genome whereas, there is no available data
about the mitochondrial genome alterations in paired ovarian tumors.
Additionally, genomic factors that involve in the progression to advanced
stages of ovarian malignancy is still largely unknown. Current work
suggest that the mitochondrial alterations have importance in the
progress of carcinogenesis in spesific cell populations at clinical,
pathological and molecular pathological levels.Methods and Findings: We
analyzed subtypes of 41 ovarian carcinoma samples including normal and
tumor (benign, borderline and malignant) using laser captured
microdissection technology. Out of 41 ovarian cases, 19 serous papillary
carcinoma, 6 mucinous adenomcarcinoma, 9 endometrioid adenocarcinoma, 5
mixed type ovarian carcinoma, 1 undifferentiated carcinoma and 1 clear
cell adenocarcinoma were included in the study. All samples were screened
for 5.5kb (MT-D-Loop, MT-CytB, MT-ATPaz6-8, MT-12SrRNA, MT-16SrRNA) of
mitochondrial genome by PCR-based sequencing analysis. A total of 91
variations were found. Sixty six percent (60/91) of these variations is
shown in MITOMAP and 34% (31/91) is observed as novel variations.
Overall, we did not find any correlation in D-Loop variations between
pathological prognostic and molecular pathological prognostic factors
(CD34,ER,PR,c-erbB-2,p53,MDR1,MDR3). However, the expression of a key
component of drug resistance, protein GST (gluthatione S transferase),
was detected as 270 in samples with instability; and 165 (median 25-75
percentile) in samples with stability in D-Loop position at 309 for C7TC6
repeats, (p<0.05). Additionally, there was a significant difference in
the mitotic index of Ki-67 expression in the samples whom had no changes
in CA5 repeats as 37.2+20.00 and 54.3+17.0 in samples with CA5 repeat
variations at position 514 (pBackground: Up to date, genomic and
microgenomic changes have been identified in nuclear genome whereas,
there is no available data about the mitochondrial genome alterations in
paired ovarian tumors. Additionally, genomic factors that involve in the
progression to advanced stages of ovarian malignancy is still largely
unknown. Current work suggest that the mitochondrial alterations have
importance in the progress of carcinogenesis in spesific cell populations
at clinical, pathological and molecular pathological levels.Methods and
Findings: We analyzed subtypes of 41 ovarian carcinoma samples including
normal and tumor (benign, borderline and malignant) using laser captured
microdissection technology. Out of 41 ovarian cases, 19 serous papillary
carcinoma, 6 mucinous adenomcarcinoma, 9 endometrioid adenocarcinoma, 5
mixed type ovarian carcinoma, 1 undifferentiated carcinoma and 1 clear
cell adenocarcinoma were included in the study. All samples were screened
for 5.5kb (MT-D-Loop, MT-CytB, MT-ATPaz6-8, MT-12SrRNA, MT-16SrRNA) of
mitochondrial genome by PCR-based sequencing analysis. A total of 91
variations were found. Sixty six percent (60/91) of these variations is
shown in MITOMAP and 34% (31/91) is observed as novel variations.
Overall, we did not find any correlation in D-Loop variations between
pathological prognostic and molecular pathological prognostic factors
(CD34,ER,PR,c-erbB-2,p53,MDR1,MDR3). However, the expression of a key
component of drug resistance, protein GST (gluthatione S transferase),
was detected as 270 in samples with instability; and 165 (median 25-75
percentile) in samples with stability in D-Loop position at 309 for C7TC6
repeats, (p<0.05). Additionally, there was a significant difference in
the mitotic index of Ki-67 expression in the samples whom had no changes
in CA5 repeats as 37.2+20.00 and 54.3+17.0 in samples with CA5 repeat
variations at position 514 (p<0.05).Conclusion: Our results suggest that
our findings will add clinical value for the spesific/novel genetic
variations detected in 34% of ovarian tumors. The results of
microsatellite analysis in ovarian tumors showed changes of 26% for D310
(C)7-9, 37% for position 16184 (C)8-14. Our data supports the idea that,
the variations spesifically in MT-D Loop and MT-CytB gene regions would
reflect the preliminary transitional changes in progression of
tumorigenesis. The functional use of LCM system and the microgenomic
profiles will be definetely helpful for prognostic and therapeutic
approaches in the field of mitochondrial oncology .

