Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC-driven models of primitive neuroectodermal tumor are sensitive
to inhibitors of glutamine metabolism.


Brain tumors are a diverse group of cancers in which alterations in
growth regulation pathways drive tumorigenicity. Histologically similar
tumors may have significant differences in underlying molecular pathways
and this in turn may have significant implications for the development of
targeted treatment. The MYC family of proteins promotes proliferation and
an aggressive phenotype in diverse cancers. Primitive Neuroectodermal
Tumors (PNETs) are high grade tumors that can arise throughout the
neuro-axis. One subset of PNETs is MYC amplified, and some PNETs are
known to express LIN28A, a key regulator of MYC. MYC expression in tumors
leads to increased reliance on glutamine metabolism (i.e. the Warburg
effect). We hypothesized that MYC-driven PNET tumors would up regulate
glutamine metabolism and that glutaminase inhibitors would selectively
target MYC-driven tumors. We tested this hypothesis using the
MYC-positive PNET cell line PFSK as well as MYC-transformed human neural
stem cells. The glutamine methabolic inhibitors DON
(6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine) and acivicin were used to disrupt glutamine
metabolism in these cells. Using Tetrazolium dye reduction (MTT assay)
and Bromodeoxyuridine assays (BrdU) as indicators for cell growth and
replication, we found that PFSK growth is inhibited by acivicin at 10
micromolar concentration (MTT activity reduced by 88%, pBrain tumors are
a diverse group of cancers in which alterations in growth regulation
pathways drive tumorigenicity. Histologically similar tumors may have
significant differences in underlying molecular pathways and this in turn
may have significant implications for the development of targeted
treatment. The MYC family of proteins promotes proliferation and an
aggressive phenotype in diverse cancers. Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumors
(PNETs) are high grade tumors that can arise throughout the neuro-axis.
One subset of PNETs is MYC amplified, and some PNETs are known to express
LIN28A, a key regulator of MYC. MYC expression in tumors leads to
increased reliance on glutamine metabolism (i.e. the Warburg effect). We
hypothesized that MYC-driven PNET tumors would up regulate glutamine
metabolism and that glutaminase inhibitors would selectively target
MYC-driven tumors. We tested this hypothesis using the MYC-positive PNET
cell line PFSK as well as MYC-transformed human neural stem cells. The
glutamine methabolic inhibitors DON (6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine) and
acivicin were used to disrupt glutamine metabolism in these cells. Using
Tetrazolium dye reduction (MTT assay) and Bromodeoxyuridine assays (BrdU)
as indicators for cell growth and replication, we found that PFSK growth
is inhibited by acivicin at 10 micromolar concentration (MTT activity
reduced by 88%, p<0.05, t-test acivicin treated compared to untreated)
MYC-negative UW228 cells were resistant to DON and acivicin treatment.
Similarly, DON or acivicin inhibited the proliferation of MYC-transformed
human neural stem cells. We observed a 75% reduction in BrdU
incorporation in MYC transformed cortex neural stem cells using acivicin,
(pBrain tumors are a diverse group of cancers in which alterations in
growth regulation pathways drive tumorigenicity. Histologically similar
tumors may have significant differences in underlying molecular pathways
and this in turn may have significant implications for the development of
targeted treatment. The MYC family of proteins promotes proliferation and
an aggressive phenotype in diverse cancers. Primitive Neuroectodermal
Tumors (PNETs) are high grade tumors that can arise throughout the
neuro-axis. One subset of PNETs is MYC amplified, and some PNETs are
known to express LIN28A, a key regulator of MYC. MYC expression in tumors
leads to increased reliance on glutamine metabolism (i.e. the Warburg
effect). We hypothesized that MYC-driven PNET tumors would up regulate
glutamine metabolism and that glutaminase inhibitors would selectively
target MYC-driven tumors. We tested this hypothesis using the
MYC-positive PNET cell line PFSK as well as MYC-transformed human neural
stem cells. The glutamine methabolic inhibitors DON
(6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine) and acivicin were used to disrupt glutamine
metabolism in these cells. Using Tetrazolium dye reduction (MTT assay)
and Bromodeoxyuridine assays (BrdU) as indicators for cell growth and
replication, we found that PFSK growth is inhibited by acivicin at 10
micromolar concentration (MTT activity reduced by 88%, p<0.05, t-test
acivicin treated compared to untreated) MYC-negative UW228 cells were
resistant to DON and acivicin treatment. Similarly, DON or acivicin
inhibited the proliferation of MYC-transformed human neural stem cells.
We observed a 75% reduction in BrdU incorporation in MYC transformed
cortex neural stem cells using acivicin, (p<0.001, t-test acivicin
treated compared to vehicle treated), 60% reduction in cortex MYC cells
using DON (pBrain tumors are a diverse group of cancers in which
alterations in growth regulation pathways drive tumorigenicity.
Histologically similar tumors may have significant differences in
underlying molecular pathways and this in turn may have significant
implications for the development of targeted treatment. The MYC family of
proteins promotes proliferation and an aggressive phenotype in diverse
cancers. Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumors (PNETs) are high grade tumors
that can arise throughout the neuro-axis. One subset of PNETs is MYC
amplified, and some PNETs are known to express LIN28A, a key regulator of
MYC. MYC expression in tumors leads to increased reliance on glutamine
metabolism (i.e. the Warburg effect). We hypothesized that MYC-driven
PNET tumors would up regulate glutamine metabolism and that glutaminase
inhibitors would selectively target MYC-driven tumors. We tested this
hypothesis using the MYC-positive PNET cell line PFSK as well as
MYC-transformed human neural stem cells. The glutamine methabolic
inhibitors DON (6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine) and acivicin were used to
disrupt glutamine metabolism in these cells. Using Tetrazolium dye
reduction (MTT assay) and Bromodeoxyuridine assays (BrdU) as indicators
for cell growth and replication, we found that PFSK growth is inhibited
by acivicin at 10 micromolar concentration (MTT activity reduced by 88%,
p<0.05, t-test acivicin treated compared to untreated) MYC-negative UW228
cells were resistant to DON and acivicin treatment. Similarly, DON or
acivicin inhibited the proliferation of MYC-transformed human neural stem
cells. We observed a 75% reduction in BrdU incorporation in MYC
transformed cortex neural stem cells using acivicin, (p<0.001, t-test
acivicin treated compared to vehicle treated), 60% reduction in cortex
MYC cells using DON (p<0.05), and a 48% reduction in hindbrain MYC cells
using DON (pBrain tumors are a diverse group of cancers in which
alterations in growth regulation pathways drive tumorigenicity.
Histologically similar tumors may have significant differences in
underlying molecular pathways and this in turn may have significant
implications for the development of targeted treatment. The MYC family of
proteins promotes proliferation and an aggressive phenotype in diverse
cancers. Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumors (PNETs) are high grade tumors
that can arise throughout the neuro-axis. One subset of PNETs is MYC
amplified, and some PNETs are known to express LIN28A, a key regulator of
MYC. MYC expression in tumors leads to increased reliance on glutamine
metabolism (i.e. the Warburg effect). We hypothesized that MYC-driven
PNET tumors would up regulate glutamine metabolism and that glutaminase
inhibitors would selectively target MYC-driven tumors. We tested this
hypothesis using the MYC-positive PNET cell line PFSK as well as
MYC-transformed human neural stem cells. The glutamine methabolic
inhibitors DON (6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine) and acivicin were used to
disrupt glutamine metabolism in these cells. Using Tetrazolium dye
reduction (MTT assay) and Bromodeoxyuridine assays (BrdU) as indicators
for cell growth and replication, we found that PFSK growth is inhibited
by acivicin at 10 micromolar concentration (MTT activity reduced by 88%,
p<0.05, t-test acivicin treated compared to untreated) MYC-negative UW228
cells were resistant to DON and acivicin treatment. Similarly, DON or
acivicin inhibited the proliferation of MYC-transformed human neural stem
cells. We observed a 75% reduction in BrdU incorporation in MYC
transformed cortex neural stem cells using acivicin, (p<0.001, t-test
acivicin treated compared to vehicle treated), 60% reduction in cortex
MYC cells using DON (p<0.05), and a 48% reduction in hindbrain MYC cells
using DON (p<0.01). The growth of control MYC-negative cells was not
significantly inhibited by either drug. This data shows that glutaminase
inhibition limits cell replication in tissue culture models of MYC-driven
PNET. We are currently investigating the mechanism of growth inhibition
(e.g. apoptosis versus cell cycle arrest) caused by glutaminase
inhibitors. Murine orthotopic xenograft experiments investigating the
efficacy of DON and acivicin treatment in MYC-driven PNET are currently
underway in our laboratory.

