Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mifepristone suppresses triple-negative breast cancer cell growth
via miR-153 mediated down-regulation of KLF5 expression.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is one of the most malignant breast
cancers without effective therapeutic approaches currently. It is
reported that KLF5 is over-expressed in TNBC; and KLF5 depletion
suppresses TNBC cell proliferation, cell survival and tumor growth in
vivo significantly, which implies that KLF5 may be a therapeutic target
for TNBC treatment. As a progesterone receptor antagonist, mifepristone
(MIF) has been found to have anti-tumor activity in multiple
hormone-dependent cancers, including luminal type breast cancers.
Interestingly, we found that MIF is also able to suppress KLF5 protein
expression in TNBC cell and inhibit TNBC cell growth in vitro and in
vivo. We further demonstrated that MIF does not suppress KLF5 mRNA
expression at all, but down-regulates KLF5 protein level via
up-regulating miR-153 expression in TNBC cells. We found miR-153 mimics
can down-regulates KLF5 protein level in TNBC cells similar to MIF does;
and consistently, miR-153 inhibitor rescues MIF-induced down-regulation
of KLF5 protein expression. Taken together, our findings suggest that MIF
is able to inhibit TNBC growth possibly via suppressing KLF5 expression;
and our research may provide a new possible chemotherapeutic for the
treatment of TNBC.

