Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deficiency of Notch-1 signaling in liver increases neuroblastoma
hepatic metastases.


Purpose: The Notch signaling pathway has been extensively studied for its
role in tumor angiogenesis but its function in tumor metastasis is
largely elusive. In the present study we investigated the role of a notch
receptor, Notch-1, in the regulation of neuroblastoma liver metastatic
process.Methods: To investigate the function of Notch-1 in neuroblastoma
liver metastasis we first generated immunodeficient (rag2gammaC deletion)
Notch-1 heterozygous (+/-) mice. We crossed a Notch1 heterozygous (+/-)
mouse with a rag2/gamma-c double knockout (-/-) mouse. The mouse with
Notch1(+/-)rag2(+/-)gammaC(+/-) genotype was then backcrossed with a
rag2gammaC double knockout (-/-) mouse to generate
rag2(-/-)gammaC(-/-)Notch1(+/-) mouse or
rag2(-/-)gammaC(-/-)Notch1(+/+)control mouse . These mice (n=5) were
intracardically injected with 105 neuroblastoma NGP (MYCN amplified)
cells expressing Firefly luciferase. The mice were subjected to IVIS-
bioluminescence imaging, once in a week, to monitor the metastatic
spread. All mice were sacrificed at week 8. At the time of sacrifice,
mice were injected with Luciferin, sacrificed and liver was then
dissected out, imaged and bioluminescence flux was measured (ex vivo
imaging). The liver tissues were also sectioned (5um, paraffin) and H&E
stained at multiple levels to further confirm the presence of
metastases.Result: Intracardically injected NGP cells formed increased
liver metastases in rag2(-/-)gammaC(-/-)Notch1(+/-) mice compared to
littermate control rag2(-/-)gammaC(-/-)Notch1(+/+) mice. 4 out of 5 (80%)
mice in Notch-het group and only 1 out of 5 (20%) mice in control group
developed hepatic metastases. Notch-het livers showed multiple metastatic
lesions with diameter ranged from 1-5 mm. Ex vivo bioluminescence imaging
showed total flux (photon/sec) of Notch1 (+/-) livers were significantly
higher (pPurpose: The Notch signaling pathway has been extensively
studied for its role in tumor angiogenesis but its function in tumor
metastasis is largely elusive. In the present study we investigated the
role of a notch receptor, Notch-1, in the regulation of neuroblastoma
liver metastatic process.Methods: To investigate the function of Notch-1
in neuroblastoma liver metastasis we first generated immunodeficient
(rag2gammaC deletion) Notch-1 heterozygous (+/-) mice. We crossed a
Notch1 heterozygous (+/-) mouse with a rag2/gamma-c double knockout (-/-)
mouse. The mouse with Notch1(+/-)rag2(+/-)gammaC(+/-) genotype was then
backcrossed with a rag2gammaC double knockout (-/-) mouse to generate
rag2(-/-)gammaC(-/-)Notch1(+/-) mouse or
rag2(-/-)gammaC(-/-)Notch1(+/+)control mouse . These mice (n=5) were
intracardically injected with 105 neuroblastoma NGP (MYCN amplified)
cells expressing Firefly luciferase. The mice were subjected to IVIS-
bioluminescence imaging, once in a week, to monitor the metastatic
spread. All mice were sacrificed at week 8. At the time of sacrifice,
mice were injected with Luciferin, sacrificed and liver was then
dissected out, imaged and bioluminescence flux was measured (ex vivo
imaging). The liver tissues were also sectioned (5um, paraffin) and H&E
stained at multiple levels to further confirm the presence of
metastases.Result: Intracardically injected NGP cells formed increased
liver metastases in rag2(-/-)gammaC(-/-)Notch1(+/-) mice compared to
littermate control rag2(-/-)gammaC(-/-)Notch1(+/+) mice. 4 out of 5 (80%)
mice in Notch-het group and only 1 out of 5 (20%) mice in control group
developed hepatic metastases. Notch-het livers showed multiple metastatic
lesions with diameter ranged from 1-5 mm. Ex vivo bioluminescence imaging
showed total flux (photon/sec) of Notch1 (+/-) livers were significantly
higher (p<0.01) compared to Notch1 (+/+) control livers.
Immunohistochemical staining against blood vessel markers such as
Collagen IV, endomucin (endothelial cells) and aSMA (pericyte) showed
extensive network of angiogenesis in Notch1 (+/-) liver
metastases.Conclusion: Deficiency of Notch1 signaling in liver
microenvironment presented an increase in metastases in Notch-het mice in
NGP intracardiac injection metastatic model. Therefore our study
indicates that Notch1 acts as tumor suppressor in neuroblastoma liver
metastasis.

