Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia as a tool for identifying prostate cancer-associated
antigens.


So far, therapeutic vaccination with allogeneic cancer cells has been
only marginally effective. A reason for failure could stem from the fact
that vaccine cells are usually cultured in air (pO2=20 kPa), while tumors
in situ are often highly hypoxic. Hence, it is possible that vaccine
cells expressed antigens differently than tumor cells in situ. We
postulate that cells grown at low pO2 provide a better antigen match to
tumors in situ and could be more effective vaccines. We tested the former
hypothesis by comparing prostate cancer (CaP) cells propagated at pO2 = 2
kPa and 20 kPa. To identify potential tumor-associated antigens, we
prepared CaP cell lysates, resolved them by 2D electrophoresis and
immunoblotting using spontaneous antibodies from plasma derived from CaP
patients and control subjects. Antibody-labeled spots were analyzed by
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Among identified molecules, we selected
hypoxia-regulated HSP70 and hnRNP L and hypoxia-independent HSP60 and
determined by ELISA the frequency of plasma samples reacting with these
molecules two standard deviations above their reaction with normal sera.
Frequency of HSP60-reactive plasma was 1/76 in healthy controls (HC;
1.3%), while it was 7/54 in CaP patients (13.0%; pSo far, therapeutic
vaccination with allogeneic cancer cells has been only marginally
effective. A reason for failure could stem from the fact that vaccine
cells are usually cultured in air (pO2=20 kPa), while tumors in situ are
often highly hypoxic. Hence, it is possible that vaccine cells expressed
antigens differently than tumor cells in situ. We postulate that cells
grown at low pO2 provide a better antigen match to tumors in situ and
could be more effective vaccines. We tested the former hypothesis by
comparing prostate cancer (CaP) cells propagated at pO2 = 2 kPa and 20
kPa. To identify potential tumor-associated antigens, we prepared CaP
cell lysates, resolved them by 2D electrophoresis and immunoblotting
using spontaneous antibodies from plasma derived from CaP patients and
control subjects. Antibody-labeled spots were analyzed by MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometry. Among identified molecules, we selected hypoxia-regulated
HSP70 and hnRNP L and hypoxia-independent HSP60 and determined by ELISA
the frequency of plasma samples reacting with these molecules two
standard deviations above their reaction with normal sera. Frequency of
HSP60-reactive plasma was 1/76 in healthy controls (HC; 1.3%), while it
was 7/54 in CaP patients (13.0%; p<0.05). The corresponding values were
1/14 in colorectal cancer (7.1%), 1/10 in lung cancer (LC; 10.0%), 1/20
in renal cell carcinoma (5.0%) and 0/17 in rheumatoid arthritis (RA; 0%),
not different from healthy controls. These data suggest that CaP patients
develop humoral immunity to HSP60. Levels of autoantibodies to HSP70 in
CaP patients (2/38, 5.3%) did not differ from HC (2/54, 3.7%) while they
did differ from HC in LC (2/10, 20.0%) and RA (3/17, 17.7%). Similarly,
frequency of autoantibodies to hnRNP L did no differ between HC (3/49,
6.1%) and CaP patients (2/38, 5.3%). Further, we evaluated the expression
of hnRNP L protein in native CaP tissue by Western blot. In contrast to
the levels of autoantibodies in plasma, hnRNP L antigen was present at
twice the levels in CaP tissue (N=8) than in control benign prostate
tissue (N=4; pSo far, therapeutic vaccination with allogeneic cancer
cells has been only marginally effective. A reason for failure could stem
from the fact that vaccine cells are usually cultured in air (pO2=20
kPa), while tumors in situ are often highly hypoxic. Hence, it is
possible that vaccine cells expressed antigens differently than tumor
cells in situ. We postulate that cells grown at low pO2 provide a better
antigen match to tumors in situ and could be more effective vaccines. We
tested the former hypothesis by comparing prostate cancer (CaP) cells
propagated at pO2 = 2 kPa and 20 kPa. To identify potential
tumor-associated antigens, we prepared CaP cell lysates, resolved them by
2D electrophoresis and immunoblotting using spontaneous antibodies from
plasma derived from CaP patients and control subjects. Antibody-labeled
spots were analyzed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Among identified
molecules, we selected hypoxia-regulated HSP70 and hnRNP L and
hypoxia-independent HSP60 and determined by ELISA the frequency of plasma
samples reacting with these molecules two standard deviations above their
reaction with normal sera. Frequency of HSP60-reactive plasma was 1/76 in
healthy controls (HC; 1.3%), while it was 7/54 in CaP patients (13.0%;
p<0.05). The corresponding values were 1/14 in colorectal cancer (7.1%),
1/10 in lung cancer (LC; 10.0%), 1/20 in renal cell carcinoma (5.0%) and
0/17 in rheumatoid arthritis (RA; 0%), not different from healthy
controls. These data suggest that CaP patients develop humoral immunity
to HSP60. Levels of autoantibodies to HSP70 in CaP patients (2/38, 5.3%)
did not differ from HC (2/54, 3.7%) while they did differ from HC in LC
(2/10, 20.0%) and RA (3/17, 17.7%). Similarly, frequency of
autoantibodies to hnRNP L did no differ between HC (3/49, 6.1%) and CaP
patients (2/38, 5.3%). Further, we evaluated the expression of hnRNP L
protein in native CaP tissue by Western blot. In contrast to the levels
of autoantibodies in plasma, hnRNP L antigen was present at twice the
levels in CaP tissue (N=8) than in control benign prostate tissue (N=4;
p<0.05). Overall, our results suggest that it is worthwhile to pursue
evaluating of HSP60-specific autoantibodies as a CaP-associated marker.
Currently, we are analyzing HSP60 and hnRNP L (hypoxia-regulated) protein
and transcript expression by immunohistochemistry and PCR, respectively,
in a large patient cohort. This approach could validate the use of
hypoxia-sensitive molecules as effective prognostic biomarkers and help
develop better therapy for CaP and, possibly, other tumors. Support: DOD
PC094680 and PCF Creativity Award (both to CRG).

