Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of HER4 isoforms in transgenic mice reveal
isoform-specific role in mammary gland development and carcinogenesis.


Human epidermal growth factor receptor 4 (HER4/ERBB4) belongs to the
family of four receptor tyrosine kinases (HER1-4). While HER1, HER2 and
HER3 are often overexpressed in breast cancer and predict poor prognosis,
the role of HER4 in cancer is still unclear. Some studies suggest a tumor
suppressor role of HER4, while contradictory reports suggest its
oncogenic potential. HER4 gene produces multiple isoforms as a result of
alternative splicing, in contrast to other members of this receptor
family. We have used a gain-of-function MMTV-HER4 model isoforms, to
evaluate potential developmental and carcinogenic roles of HER4-CYT1 and
CYT2. Mammary gland ductal morphogenesis was significantly suppressed by
expressing one of the transgene isoforms, strongly suggesting a role of
HER4 in normal mammary ductal morphogenesis in addition to its role in
lactation described previously. Interestingly, sustained expression of
one HER4 transgene isoform resulted in formation of mammary tumor
lesions, whereas no significant findings were observed in the control
group. Formation of tumor lesions in these transgenic mice strongly
suggests an oncogenic function of a HER4 isoform. These novel findings
may help improve the rational design of targeted breast cancer therapy.
Supported by NIH grant RO1 CA80065.

