Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyamidoamine dendrimers induce epigenetic changes in cultured
normal and malignant human lung epithelial cells.


Dendrimers constitute structurally well-defined nanomaterials that are
potentially useful for a vast range of biomedical applications, including
targeted cancer therapy. Polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers are a
relatively unexplored material subclass from consideration of low-dose
studies of toxicological and biological effects, including epigenetic
changes that may link to altered cell differentiation and risk of
transformation. The present study assessed cell viability, histone
modifications, genome-wide DNA methylation and gene expression changes in
primary human bronchial epithelial cells (PBEC) and the human alveolar
epithelial cell line A549 following exposure to 4th generation PAMAM
dendrimers with hydroxyl (-OH) or amino (-NH2) terminating groups. The
preliminary results show that these PAMAMs can regulate DNA methylation
and histone modification at micromolar levels without significant effect
on cell viability (lactate dehydrogenase assay). Specific changes in DNA
methylation patterns implicated inflammation-related genes, although with
different results in the two model systems. The results imply epigenetic
regulation of gene expression by PAMAMs, and follow up work now
investigates this hypothesis. Close attention to safety issues is of
paramount importance for the sustainable development of the
nanotechnologies, especially for biomedical applications, and the present
data may shed light on potential long-term/low-dose effects of engineered
nanomaterials.

