Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urinary biomarkers of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon and volatile
organic carcinogens in relation to lung cancer development in lifelong
never smokers - The Shanghai Cohort Study.


Background: In the United States, 10-15% of lung cancer victims are
lifelong never smokers. Non-smoking related lung cancer alone ranks as
the 6th most frequently diagnosed cancer. The etiological factors for
non-smoking lung cancer are unclear. Although strong evidence supports a
major role for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) as causes of lung
cancer in smokers, epidemiological studies prospectively investigating
biomarkers of PAH and volatile organic carcinogens in relation to lung
cancer risk among never smokers are lacking.Methods: A nested
case-control study of lung cancer among never smokers was conducted
within the Shanghai Cohort Study, a prospective cohort of 18,244 Chinese
men aged 45-64 years at enrollment during 1986-1989. After more than 20
years of follow-up, we identified 96 incident lung cancer cases among
never smokers. For each case, we randomly chose one control among cohort
participants who were never smokers. The control was matched to the index
case by age (2 years), date of urine collection (1 month) and
neighborhood of residence. We quantified urinary free cotinine,
3-hydroxyphenanthrene (3-OH-Phe), total hydroxyphenanthrenes (the sum of
1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-OH-Phe) (total OH-Phe),
r-1,t-2,3,c-4-tetrahdroxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydrophenanthrene (PheT),
mercapturic acid metabolites of acrolein [3-hydroxypropyl mercapturic
acid (HPMA)], benzene [S-phenyl mercapturic acid (SPMA)], crotonaldehyde
[4-hydroxybut-2-yl mercapturic acid (HBMA)], and ethylene oxide
[2-hydroxyethyl mercapturic acid (HEMA)]. Self-reported never smokers
whose urinary free cotinine was greater than 20 ng/ml were excluded from
the present analysis for their potential use of tobacco. The odds ratio
(OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for lung cancer for each urinary
biomarker was estimated using an unconditional logistic regression
method.Results: Among never smokers, urinary levels of all 3 measured PAH
biomarkers were statistically significantly higher in cases than
controls. The geometric means (pmol/mg creatinine) of total OH-Phe,
3-OH-Phe and PheT were 19.10 (in cases) vs 16.08 (in controls) (P =
0.017); 6.64 vs 5.44 (P = 0.011); and 19.84 vs 16.10 (P = 0.035),
respectively. Compared with the lowest quartile, ORs (95% CIs) for lung
cancer for the highest quartile were 2.59 (1.01-6.65) for total OH-Phe,
3.10 (1.12-7.75) for 3-OH-Phe, and 2.98 (1.13-7.87) for PheT (all Ptrend
Background: In the United States, 10-15% of lung cancer victims are
lifelong never smokers. Non-smoking related lung cancer alone ranks as
the 6th most frequently diagnosed cancer. The etiological factors for
non-smoking lung cancer are unclear. Although strong evidence supports a
major role for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) as causes of lung
cancer in smokers, epidemiological studies prospectively investigating
biomarkers of PAH and volatile organic carcinogens in relation to lung
cancer risk among never smokers are lacking.Methods: A nested
case-control study of lung cancer among never smokers was conducted
within the Shanghai Cohort Study, a prospective cohort of 18,244 Chinese
men aged 45-64 years at enrollment during 1986-1989. After more than 20
years of follow-up, we identified 96 incident lung cancer cases among
never smokers. For each case, we randomly chose one control among cohort
participants who were never smokers. The control was matched to the index
case by age (2 years), date of urine collection (1 month) and
neighborhood of residence. We quantified urinary free cotinine,
3-hydroxyphenanthrene (3-OH-Phe), total hydroxyphenanthrenes (the sum of
1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-OH-Phe) (total OH-Phe),
r-1,t-2,3,c-4-tetrahdroxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydrophenanthrene (PheT),
mercapturic acid metabolites of acrolein [3-hydroxypropyl mercapturic
acid (HPMA)], benzene [S-phenyl mercapturic acid (SPMA)], crotonaldehyde
[4-hydroxybut-2-yl mercapturic acid (HBMA)], and ethylene oxide
[2-hydroxyethyl mercapturic acid (HEMA)]. Self-reported never smokers
whose urinary free cotinine was greater than 20 ng/ml were excluded from
the present analysis for their potential use of tobacco. The odds ratio
(OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for lung cancer for each urinary
biomarker was estimated using an unconditional logistic regression
method.Results: Among never smokers, urinary levels of all 3 measured PAH
biomarkers were statistically significantly higher in cases than
controls. The geometric means (pmol/mg creatinine) of total OH-Phe,
3-OH-Phe and PheT were 19.10 (in cases) vs 16.08 (in controls) (P =
0.017); 6.64 vs 5.44 (P = 0.011); and 19.84 vs 16.10 (P = 0.035),
respectively. Compared with the lowest quartile, ORs (95% CIs) for lung
cancer for the highest quartile were 2.59 (1.01-6.65) for total OH-Phe,
3.10 (1.12-7.75) for 3-OH-Phe, and 2.98 (1.13-7.87) for PheT (all Ptrend
<0.05). There was no statistically significant difference in urinary
levels of HPMA, SPMA, HBMA and HEMA between cases and
controls.Conclusion: This is the first prospective study that
demonstrates a positive association between urinary biomarkers of PAH and
lung cancer risk among never smokers. Given its ubiquitous presence in
the environment, PAH could account for large proportion of non-smoking
related lung cancer.1

