Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of melanoma metastasis by malignant melanoma-initiating
cell marker ABCB5.


Cancer stem cells drive tumor growth, including metastatic disease
progression. ATP-binding cassette member B5 (ABCB5) expression identifies
malignant melanoma initiating cells (MMICs), which are distinguishable
from cancer bulk populations by their self-renewal and differentiation
capacities, and pro-oncogenic interactions with the microenvironment.
ABCB5 confers drug resistance in multiple human malignancies through its
actions as a drug efflux transporter. Here, we demonstrate that ABCB5
also regulates melanoma metastasis. ABCB5 monoclonal antibody (mAb)
treatment significantly inhibited metastasis development in highly
immune-compromised NOD-scid IL2Rnull mice carrying fully established
human melanoma xenografts, independent of previously reported
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) effects. ABCB5 mAb
treatment was well tolerated, as indicated by equal body weights of
treated mice and untreated controls. Moreover, ABCB5 mAb also inhibited
melanoma cell invasive capacity, suggesting that ABCB5 regulates
intravasation and/or extravasation of metastatic tumor cells.
Furthermore, the average size of metastatic nodules in ABCB5 mAb-treated
mice was significantly smaller than those in isotype control mAb-treated
or untreated mice, indicating that ABCB5 also regulates proliferation of
disseminated tumor cells. Expression profile analysis revealed that
multiple known metastasis-associated genes are regulated by ABCB5. Rescue
of their expression could reverse the anti-metastatic effects induced by
ABCB5 inhibition. Thus, ABCB5 is not only a marker for MMICs, but
functionally drives metastatic melanoma progression.Citation Format: Jie
Ma, Allireza Alloo, Brian J. Wilson, Markus H. Frank. Regulation of
melanoma metastasis by malignant melanoma-initiating cell marker ABCB5.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2685.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2685

