Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting cross talk between ROS/autophagy and
apoptosis for pancreatic cancer by a herbal extract.


5-year survival for pancreatic cancer (PanCA) continuous to be lower than
any other solid tumor due to late stage diagnosis combined with lack of
effective therapeutic options. Therefore developing novel strategies
possibly based on molecular targets is critical for successful management
of PanCA. Recent studies from our laboratory show potential
anti-pancreatic cancer activity for NexrutineR (Nx), a bark extract
isolated from traditional Chinese medicine Phellodendron amurense. These
studies also show that Nx reduces pancreatic fibrosis in preclinical
animal model through targeting two critical oncogenic transcription
factors including NF-B and Stat3. Nonetheless, the precise molecular
mechanism associated with the observed biological activity is unclear. We
investigated whether Nx inhibits pancreatic cell proliferation and
pancreatic fibrosis via reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated activation
of autophagy. Our data show that Nx can induce autophagy at earlier time
points (4h) but inhibit autophagy at later time points (24h) in human
pancreatic cancer cell lines Capan-2 and BxPC-3 as evidenced by
autophagosome formation, alteration in the expression and levels of
various autophagy related genes. Interestingly Nx also induced apoptosis
at 24h time point but not at 4h suggesting that autophagy precedes
apoptosis. Further under these experimental conditions, treatment of
pancreatic cancer cells with Nx enhanced intracellular production of ROS
implicating a cross talk between Nx-induced ROS, autophagy and apoptosis.
Overall, our findings divulge an important role for
ROS/autophagy/apoptosis in Nx-mediated anti-pancreatic cancer effects.
Supported by NCCAM (APK).

