Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 stabilizing agent CP-31398 prevents urinary bladder tumor
growth and invasion in transgenic UPII-SV40T mice.


The United States will have approximately 73,510 new cases of bladder
cancer in 2012 with 14,880 deaths. More than 50% of the invasive (lamina
and muscularis) bladder tumors have mutations in p53 and/or pRB. p53
appears to play a major role in the etiology of human bladder cancer,
particularly in the high grade invasive type. Structural and functional
defects in p53 are found in majority of human transitional cell
carcinomas (TCC). The high prevalence of bladder cancer and the frequency
of tumor recurrence make it an important target for chemoprevention. In
UPII-SV40T transgenic mice, induced bladder TCC bears strong resemblance
to that of human TCC in phenotype and in the mode of progression. In the
present study, we determined the chemopreventive efficacy of a p53
stabilizing agent, CP-31398, using transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model.
After genotyping, six-week old UPII-SV40T mice (n=32/group) were fed
control (AIN-76A) or experimental diets containing 150 or 300 ppm
CP-31398 for 34 weeks. Progression of bladder cancer was monitored by MRI
imaging. At 40 weeks of age, all mice were euthanized; urinary bladders
were collected to determine weights, tumor incidence and multiplicity;
and histopathology. There was a significant increase in bladder weights
of transgenic vs. wild type mice (male 140.2 mg vs. 27.3 mg, pThe United
States will have approximately 73,510 new cases of bladder cancer in 2012
with 14,880 deaths. More than 50% of the invasive (lamina and muscularis)
bladder tumors have mutations in p53 and/or pRB. p53 appears to play a
major role in the etiology of human bladder cancer, particularly in the
high grade invasive type. Structural and functional defects in p53 are
found in majority of human transitional cell carcinomas (TCC). The high
prevalence of bladder cancer and the frequency of tumor recurrence make
it an important target for chemoprevention. In UPII-SV40T transgenic
mice, induced bladder TCC bears strong resemblance to that of human TCC
in phenotype and in the mode of progression. In the present study, we
determined the chemopreventive efficacy of a p53 stabilizing agent,
CP-31398, using transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model. After genotyping,
six-week old UPII-SV40T mice (n=32/group) were fed control (AIN-76A) or
experimental diets containing 150 or 300 ppm CP-31398 for 34 weeks.
Progression of bladder cancer was monitored by MRI imaging. At 40 weeks
of age, all mice were euthanized; urinary bladders were collected to
determine weights, tumor incidence and multiplicity; and histopathology.
There was a significant increase in bladder weights of transgenic vs.
wild type mice (male 140.2 mg vs. 27.3 mg, p<0.0001; female 34.2 mg vs,
14.8 mg pThe United States will have approximately 73,510 new cases of
bladder cancer in 2012 with 14,880 deaths. More than 50% of the invasive
(lamina and muscularis) bladder tumors have mutations in p53 and/or pRB.
p53 appears to play a major role in the etiology of human bladder cancer,
particularly in the high grade invasive type. Structural and functional
defects in p53 are found in majority of human transitional cell
carcinomas (TCC). The high prevalence of bladder cancer and the frequency
of tumor recurrence make it an important target for chemoprevention. In
UPII-SV40T transgenic mice, induced bladder TCC bears strong resemblance
to that of human TCC in phenotype and in the mode of progression. In the
present study, we determined the chemopreventive efficacy of a p53
stabilizing agent, CP-31398, using transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model.
After genotyping, six-week old UPII-SV40T mice (n=32/group) were fed
control (AIN-76A) or experimental diets containing 150 or 300 ppm
CP-31398 for 34 weeks. Progression of bladder cancer was monitored by MRI
imaging. At 40 weeks of age, all mice were euthanized; urinary bladders
were collected to determine weights, tumor incidence and multiplicity;
and histopathology. There was a significant increase in bladder weights
of transgenic vs. wild type mice (male 140.2 mg vs. 27.3 mg, p<0.0001;
female 34.2 mg vs, 14.8 mg p<0.0001, respectively). A significant
decrease in the tumor growth as evidenced by decreased bladder weights
(by 52-65%, pThe United States will have approximately 73,510 new cases
of bladder cancer in 2012 with 14,880 deaths. More than 50% of the
invasive (lamina and muscularis) bladder tumors have mutations in p53
and/or pRB. p53 appears to play a major role in the etiology of human
bladder cancer, particularly in the high grade invasive type. Structural
and functional defects in p53 are found in majority of human transitional
cell carcinomas (TCC). The high prevalence of bladder cancer and the
frequency of tumor recurrence make it an important target for
chemoprevention. In UPII-SV40T transgenic mice, induced bladder TCC bears
strong resemblance to that of human TCC in phenotype and in the mode of
progression. In the present study, we determined the chemopreventive
efficacy of a p53 stabilizing agent, CP-31398, using transgenic
UPII-SV40T mouse model. After genotyping, six-week old UPII-SV40T mice
(n=32/group) were fed control (AIN-76A) or experimental diets containing
150 or 300 ppm CP-31398 for 34 weeks. Progression of bladder cancer was
monitored by MRI imaging. At 40 weeks of age, all mice were euthanized;
urinary bladders were collected to determine weights, tumor incidence and
multiplicity; and histopathology. There was a significant increase in
bladder weights of transgenic vs. wild type mice (male 140.2 mg vs. 27.3
mg, p<0.0001; female 34.2 mg vs, 14.8 mg p<0.0001, respectively). A
significant decrease in the tumor growth as evidenced by decreased
bladder weights (by 52-65%, p<0.000 in males; by 32 %, pThe United States
will have approximately 73,510 new cases of bladder cancer in 2012 with
14,880 deaths. More than 50% of the invasive (lamina and muscularis)
bladder tumors have mutations in p53 and/or pRB. p53 appears to play a
major role in the etiology of human bladder cancer, particularly in the
high grade invasive type. Structural and functional defects in p53 are
found in majority of human transitional cell carcinomas (TCC). The high
prevalence of bladder cancer and the frequency of tumor recurrence make
it an important target for chemoprevention. In UPII-SV40T transgenic
mice, induced bladder TCC bears strong resemblance to that of human TCC
in phenotype and in the mode of progression. In the present study, we
determined the chemopreventive efficacy of a p53 stabilizing agent,
CP-31398, using transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model. After genotyping,
six-week old UPII-SV40T mice (n=32/group) were fed control (AIN-76A) or
experimental diets containing 150 or 300 ppm CP-31398 for 34 weeks.
Progression of bladder cancer was monitored by MRI imaging. At 40 weeks
of age, all mice were euthanized; urinary bladders were collected to
determine weights, tumor incidence and multiplicity; and histopathology.
There was a significant increase in bladder weights of transgenic vs.
wild type mice (male 140.2 mg vs. 27.3 mg, p<0.0001; female 34.2 mg vs,
14.8 mg p<0.0001, respectively). A significant decrease in the tumor
growth as evidenced by decreased bladder weights (by 52-65%, p<0.000 in
males; by 32 %, p<0.001 in females) was observed in CP-31398 treated
mice. Invasive papillary TCC incidence was 100 % in transgenic mice fed
with control diet. The mice exposed to 150 and 300 ppm CP-31398 showed
dose dependent inhibition (29%, pThe United States will have
approximately 73,510 new cases of bladder cancer in 2012 with 14,880
deaths. More than 50% of the invasive (lamina and muscularis) bladder
tumors have mutations in p53 and/or pRB. p53 appears to play a major role
in the etiology of human bladder cancer, particularly in the high grade
invasive type. Structural and functional defects in p53 are found in
majority of human transitional cell carcinomas (TCC). The high prevalence
of bladder cancer and the frequency of tumor recurrence make it an
important target for chemoprevention. In UPII-SV40T transgenic mice,
induced bladder TCC bears strong resemblance to that of human TCC in
phenotype and in the mode of progression. In the present study, we
determined the chemopreventive efficacy of a p53 stabilizing agent,
CP-31398, using transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model. After genotyping,
six-week old UPII-SV40T mice (n=32/group) were fed control (AIN-76A) or
experimental diets containing 150 or 300 ppm CP-31398 for 34 weeks.
Progression of bladder cancer was monitored by MRI imaging. At 40 weeks
of age, all mice were euthanized; urinary bladders were collected to
determine weights, tumor incidence and multiplicity; and histopathology.
There was a significant increase in bladder weights of transgenic vs.
wild type mice (male 140.2 mg vs. 27.3 mg, p<0.0001; female 34.2 mg vs,
14.8 mg p<0.0001, respectively). A significant decrease in the tumor
growth as evidenced by decreased bladder weights (by 52-65%, p<0.000 in
males; by 32 %, p<0.001 in females) was observed in CP-31398 treated
mice. Invasive papillary TCC incidence was 100 % in transgenic mice fed
with control diet. The mice exposed to 150 and 300 ppm CP-31398 showed
dose dependent inhibition (29%, p<0.01; 57%, pThe United States will have
approximately 73,510 new cases of bladder cancer in 2012 with 14,880
deaths. More than 50% of the invasive (lamina and muscularis) bladder
tumors have mutations in p53 and/or pRB. p53 appears to play a major role
in the etiology of human bladder cancer, particularly in the high grade
invasive type. Structural and functional defects in p53 are found in
majority of human transitional cell carcinomas (TCC). The high prevalence
of bladder cancer and the frequency of tumor recurrence make it an
important target for chemoprevention. In UPII-SV40T transgenic mice,
induced bladder TCC bears strong resemblance to that of human TCC in
phenotype and in the mode of progression. In the present study, we
determined the chemopreventive efficacy of a p53 stabilizing agent,
CP-31398, using transgenic UPII-SV40T mouse model. After genotyping,
six-week old UPII-SV40T mice (n=32/group) were fed control (AIN-76A) or
experimental diets containing 150 or 300 ppm CP-31398 for 34 weeks.
Progression of bladder cancer was monitored by MRI imaging. At 40 weeks
of age, all mice were euthanized; urinary bladders were collected to
determine weights, tumor incidence and multiplicity; and histopathology.
There was a significant increase in bladder weights of transgenic vs.
wild type mice (male 140.2 mg vs. 27.3 mg, p<0.0001; female 34.2 mg vs,
14.8 mg p<0.0001, respectively). A significant decrease in the tumor
growth as evidenced by decreased bladder weights (by 52-65%, p<0.000 in
males; by 32 %, p<0.001 in females) was observed in CP-31398 treated
mice. Invasive papillary TCC incidence was 100 % in transgenic mice fed
with control diet. The mice exposed to 150 and 300 ppm CP-31398 showed
dose dependent inhibition (29%, p<0.01; 57%, p<0.005) of invasive TCC
with 28% and 53% carcinoma In situ, respectively, suggesting suppression
of invasive tumor growth. Kidney abnormalities like ureter obstruction
and nephrohydrosis were observed in almost all control mice but
significantly less frequent in CP-31398-fed mice. Molecular analysis of
the bladder tumors showed an increase in apoptosis markers (p53, p21,
Bax) with a decrease in angiogenic markers (CD31 and VEGF) in transgenic
mice fed with CP-31398. These results suggest that p53 modulating agents
can serve as potential chemopreventive for bladder TCC. (Supported in
part by NCI-CN53300)

