Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The antioxidation microsphere flow cytometer assay.


Increased production of reactive oxygen species is a feature of most, if
not all, human disease, including cardiovascular disease and cancer.
Dietary antioxidants may be especially important in protecting against
human diseases associated with free radical damage to cellular DNA,
lipids, and proteins. Yet, present data are not sufficient to quantify
micronutrient requirements needed to protect against oxidative damage.
The antioxidant roles of many food constituents, including herbs and
spices, have not been clarified. The AMFC assay measures the oxidation of
R-Phycoerythrin attached to microspheres via a protein coupling linker. A
25mM stock solution of ABTS.+
[2,2-Azino-bis-(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) free radical],
prepared during a 12 hour, 4 C incubation with potassium persulfate to
cause removal of one electron generating a metastable ABTS. This stock
solution was diluted to 100M in 150l, which resulted in 80% quenching of
15l of 104 PE microspheres. The antioxidant effects were measured by
first incubating 50l the 80 % quenching ABTS.+ with 100l portions of
serial diluted antioxidants for 30 min. at 22 C to determine the
antioxidants neutralize the ABTS.+. Subsequently, 15l of PE-tagged
microspheres were added to each sample and incubated one hour at 22 C.
The peak fluorescent channel number was determined for 5,000
microspheres. The typical percentage protection by the antioxidant
standard at 500 ng/ml for Trolox (water soluble Vitamin E derivative) was
8, while 500 ng/ml of Vitamin C restored 78% The range of 500-5,000 ng/ml
showed the protective effects of Trolox and Vitamin C remained constant.
On the average, equivalent percentage protection for both the hydrophilic
and lipid soluble fractions of 14 spices (courtesy of McCormick Science
Institute) was not achieved until the 20-50 g/ml concentration of the
spices with Turmeric, Cinnamon, Oregano and Cloves, showing the highest
antioxidant protection. Interestingly, Rosemary, Sage, Thyme and Turmeric
revealed a significant reduction in antioxidant activity at 200 g/ml.
These are still significant antioxidant levels that show a secondary
reason besides flavoring to use spices for achieving clinically important
antioxidant activity. The AMFC assay is very sensitive to the effects of
oxidants, functions under physiological conditions, requires little
sample and allows application to the study of serum samples. Thus, one
may monitor antioxidant activity in healthy volunteers taking compounds
to boost the antioxidant activity to offset the long-term effects of
oxidative radiation and chemotherapy.Citation Format: Jerry T.
Thornthwaite, Hare R. Shah. The antioxidation microsphere flow cytometer
assay. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4797.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4797

