Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mass spectrometric immunoassay for insulin-like growth factor 1.


Mass Spectrometric Immunoassays (MSIA) are protein quantification methods
that utilize mass spectrometric detection for quantification of targeted
protein analytes affinity retrieved by surface-immobilized antibodies.
This rather straightforward concept is realized through affinity pipette
devices (MSIA-Tips) that enable high-throughput assaying of hundreds of
samples per day. Described here is the development and validation of mass
spectrometric immunoassay for insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF1).MSIA-Tips derivatized with anti-IGF-1 antibody were used for
affinity isolation of IGF1 from human samples. Long R3 (LR3) IGF1, spiked
into samples prior to the affinity isolation, served as internal
reference standard for signal normalization and IGF1 quantification.
Following capture and elution, both the intact proteins and their
surrogate tryptic peptides were analyzed via LC/MS. Linear standard
curves were built that spanned the range of 1 to 1,500 ng/mL. The assay
exhibited intra- and inter-assay precisions of Mass Spectrometric
Immunoassays (MSIA) are protein quantification methods that utilize mass
spectrometric detection for quantification of targeted protein analytes
affinity retrieved by surface-immobilized antibodies. This rather
straightforward concept is realized through affinity pipette devices
(MSIA-Tips) that enable high-throughput assaying of hundreds of samples
per day. Described here is the development and validation of mass
spectrometric immunoassay for insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF1).MSIA-Tips derivatized with anti-IGF-1 antibody were used for
affinity isolation of IGF1 from human samples. Long R3 (LR3) IGF1, spiked
into samples prior to the affinity isolation, served as internal
reference standard for signal normalization and IGF1 quantification.
Following capture and elution, both the intact proteins and their
surrogate tryptic peptides were analyzed via LC/MS. Linear standard
curves were built that spanned the range of 1 to 1,500 ng/mL. The assay
exhibited intra- and inter-assay precisions of <10%, and linearity and
spiking-recovery in the 90 - 110% range. Data was compared to that
obtained with a commercially available ELISA, yielding good correlation.
The data correlation between intact IGF1 and peptide-based IGF1 MS
analyses was good, demonstrating the applicability of the IGF1 MSIA
across MS platforms.

