Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smurf2 mediates ubiquitination and degradation of YY1 to suppress
B-cell proliferation and lymphomagenesis.


Current treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), the most
common type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, has improved patient survival
significantly. However, 40-50% of DLBCL patients still die from this
disease. There is a critical need to better understand the specific
molecular pathways that are perturbed in DLBCL for the development of new
and effective therapeutic approaches. We show that mice deficient in the
E3 ubiquitin ligase Smurf2 spontaneously develop B-cell lymphomas that
resemble human DLBCL with molecular features of germinal center B cells.
We discover that Smurf2 mediates ubiquitination and degradation of YY1, a
key germinal center transcription factor. Importantly, Smurf2 deficiency
enhances YY1-mediated transactivation of c-Myc and B-cell proliferation.
Furthermore, the expression of Smurf2 is significantly decreased in
primary human DLBCL samples compared to normal B cells, and low levels of
Smurf2 expression correlate with poor survival prognosis in DLBCL
patients. The Smurf2-YY1-c-Myc regulatory axis represents a novel pathway
perturbed in DLBCL that suppresses B-cell proliferation and
lymphomagenesis, suggesting Smurf2 as a new therapeutic paradigm for
DLBCL.Citation Format: Charusheila Ramkumar, Hang Cui, Yahui Kong,
Stephen Jones, Rachel Gerstein, Hong Zhang. Smurf2 mediates
ubiquitination and degradation of YY1 to suppress B-cell proliferation
and lymphomagenesis. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 1994. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1994

