Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An analysis of human papilloma virus (HPV) E6 antibodies and risk
of head and neck cancer: two large European studies.


Background. Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, in particular HPV16, is
causing an increasing number of oropharyngeal cancers in Europe and the
United States. HPV16 E6 antibodies are a marker of tumour integration and
would be expected to be present among cases with a HPV related tumour but
absent or very low in individuals without a HPV related cancer. We
investigated the presence of HPV16 E6 antibodies in two large European
studies - (i) a retrospective case-control study of 1219 cases (366 oral
cavity, 324 oropharynx and 529 hypopharynx/larynx) and 1425 controls with
blood samples collected at the time of diagnosis among the cases (the
ARCAGE study), and (ii) a nested case-cnotrol study of 638 incident head
and neck cancers (including 180 oral, 135 oropharynx, and 247
hypopharynx/larynx), and 1599 comparable controls from the EPIC cohort
study, with blood samples collected between 1 and 14 years before
diagnosis among the cases.Methods. Plasma from all cases and controls was
analyzed for antibodies against multiple proteins of HPV16, with a
particular focus on HPV16 E6. Odds ratios (OR) of cancer and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) were calculated adjusting for potential
confounders. All-cause mortality was evaluated among cases using Cox
proportional hazards regression.Findings. Within ARCAGE, HPV16 E6
seropositivity was present in 0.8% (11/1425) of controls and 30.2%
(97/324) of oropharynx cases (OR=132.0, 95% CI 65-266). A much weaker
association was also seen for larynx cancer (8/529 cases positive; OR=4.2
95%CI 1.5-11.3). No association was seen for oral cancer (4/366 cases
positive; OR=1.9 95% CI 0.6-6.2). Within the EPIC nested case-control
study 34.8% of oropharyngeal cancer cases and 0.6% of controls were HPV16
E6 positive (OR= 274, 95% CI 110 to 681), although no association was
seen with other cancer sites. The increased risk of oropharyngeal cancer
among HPV16 E6 seropositive participants was independent of time between
blood collection and diagnosis and was observed more than 10 years before
diagnosis.Interpretation. Our results indicate that (i) HPV16 E6
antibodies are rare in controls, and less than 1%, (ii) about 30% of
oropharynx cancer cases are positive for HPV16, with blood samples taken
at the time of diagnosis, and (iii) HPV16 E6 seropositivity is present
more than 10 years prior to diagnosis of oropharyngeal cancers. Further,
because of its near absence in controls, it may potentially be useful as
a biomarker for early detection of oropharyngeal cancer that is
presumably HPV-positive.

