Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selectively kill cisplatin resistant lung cancer cells by
exploiting ROS and metabolic differences.


Cisplatin resistance remains a clinical challenge for the treatment of
lung cancer. We have previously shown that all cisplatin resistant (CR)
cells tested have high ROS and low thioredoxin-1 (TRX1) protein. These
biochemical changes lead to metabolic re-programming and hence these CR
cells depend on fatty acid (FA) metabolism. To further confirm these
finding, here we show a correlation between the levels of cisplatin
resistance and ROS production, intracellular TRX1 levels and metabolic
changes in tumor cells. We have established multiple CR clones with
different levels of CR from small cell and non small cell lung cancer H69
and H460 (purchased from ATCC) and from cell lines derived from our lung
cancer patients (SCLC1 and NSCLCS). These clones have different levels of
cisplatin resistance ranging from 2, 5, to 10 fold. The stepwise
increases in cisplatin resistance are correlated with a progressive
increase in ROS production while intracellular TRX1 levels are gradually
decreasing. Furthermore, CR cells which are highly resistant to cisplatin
(2-3fold or more) with high ROS levels are hypersensitive to ROS inducing
agent, elesclomol. Importantly, when ROS production increased by 5% or
more, lung cancer cells become more sensitive to an agent that interferes
with the FA synthesis pathway such as TOFA (an acetyl-coA carboxylase
inhibitor) but resistant to glycolytic inhibitors. Thus, our data suggest
that CR cells were no longer dependant on glycolysis, but instead are
reliant on oxidative metabolism (OXMET). Since CR cells are sensitive to
elesclomol, we have investigated whether combination of TOFA and
elesclomol can increase cell death in CR cells. Our data showed that
elesclomol alone at 5nM results in 35-40% cell death in 72hr.
Interestingly, combination treatment with a non-toxic dose of TOFA
(0.1g/ml) resulted in significant increase in cell death to 70%;
(pCisplatin resistance remains a clinical challenge for the treatment of
lung cancer. We have previously shown that all cisplatin resistant (CR)
cells tested have high ROS and low thioredoxin-1 (TRX1) protein. These
biochemical changes lead to metabolic re-programming and hence these CR
cells depend on fatty acid (FA) metabolism. To further confirm these
finding, here we show a correlation between the levels of cisplatin
resistance and ROS production, intracellular TRX1 levels and metabolic
changes in tumor cells. We have established multiple CR clones with
different levels of CR from small cell and non small cell lung cancer H69
and H460 (purchased from ATCC) and from cell lines derived from our lung
cancer patients (SCLC1 and NSCLCS). These clones have different levels of
cisplatin resistance ranging from 2, 5, to 10 fold. The stepwise
increases in cisplatin resistance are correlated with a progressive
increase in ROS production while intracellular TRX1 levels are gradually
decreasing. Furthermore, CR cells which are highly resistant to cisplatin
(2-3fold or more) with high ROS levels are hypersensitive to ROS inducing
agent, elesclomol. Importantly, when ROS production increased by 5% or
more, lung cancer cells become more sensitive to an agent that interferes
with the FA synthesis pathway such as TOFA (an acetyl-coA carboxylase
inhibitor) but resistant to glycolytic inhibitors. Thus, our data suggest
that CR cells were no longer dependant on glycolysis, but instead are
reliant on oxidative metabolism (OXMET). Since CR cells are sensitive to
elesclomol, we have investigated whether combination of TOFA and
elesclomol can increase cell death in CR cells. Our data showed that
elesclomol alone at 5nM results in 35-40% cell death in 72hr.
Interestingly, combination treatment with a non-toxic dose of TOFA
(0.1g/ml) resulted in significant increase in cell death to 70%;
(p<0.05). At a higher dose of elesclomol (10nM) which yield 50% cell
death, combination with TOFA (0.1ug/ml) results in 95% cell death
(pCisplatin resistance remains a clinical challenge for the treatment of
lung cancer. We have previously shown that all cisplatin resistant (CR)
cells tested have high ROS and low thioredoxin-1 (TRX1) protein. These
biochemical changes lead to metabolic re-programming and hence these CR
cells depend on fatty acid (FA) metabolism. To further confirm these
finding, here we show a correlation between the levels of cisplatin
resistance and ROS production, intracellular TRX1 levels and metabolic
changes in tumor cells. We have established multiple CR clones with
different levels of CR from small cell and non small cell lung cancer H69
and H460 (purchased from ATCC) and from cell lines derived from our lung
cancer patients (SCLC1 and NSCLCS). These clones have different levels of
cisplatin resistance ranging from 2, 5, to 10 fold. The stepwise
increases in cisplatin resistance are correlated with a progressive
increase in ROS production while intracellular TRX1 levels are gradually
decreasing. Furthermore, CR cells which are highly resistant to cisplatin
(2-3fold or more) with high ROS levels are hypersensitive to ROS inducing
agent, elesclomol. Importantly, when ROS production increased by 5% or
more, lung cancer cells become more sensitive to an agent that interferes
with the FA synthesis pathway such as TOFA (an acetyl-coA carboxylase
inhibitor) but resistant to glycolytic inhibitors. Thus, our data suggest
that CR cells were no longer dependant on glycolysis, but instead are
reliant on oxidative metabolism (OXMET). Since CR cells are sensitive to
elesclomol, we have investigated whether combination of TOFA and
elesclomol can increase cell death in CR cells. Our data showed that
elesclomol alone at 5nM results in 35-40% cell death in 72hr.
Interestingly, combination treatment with a non-toxic dose of TOFA
(0.1g/ml) resulted in significant increase in cell death to 70%;
(p<0.05). At a higher dose of elesclomol (10nM) which yield 50% cell
death, combination with TOFA (0.1ug/ml) results in 95% cell death
(p<0.05). Our findings strongly suggest that the levels of cisplatin
resistance correlate with the levels of ROS production but inversely
correlate with intracellular TRX1. When ROS production increases, these
CR cells also become less addicted to glucose, but use FA as their energy
source. Thus, by targeting ROS (elesclomol) and OXMET (TOFA), one can
successfully kill CR cells without significant effect to normal cells
(LL24, a lung fibroblast as control). Overall, these findings could have
future implications for drug development to selectively target and
eliminate CR tumors with a high ROS and low TRX1profile. Supported by
James and Esther King Florida Biomedical Research.

