Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor 3 untranslated region (UTR): a conundrum and a
significant therapeutic opportunity.


Master transcriptional regulator Androgen Receptor (AR) remained a
fascinating and an enigmatic molecule, particularly in Prostate cancer
biology. Major impetus in PCa research is currently focused on the
development of new generation of therapeutics to target AR expression,
especially in castration-resistant stage of the disease. 920 amino acid
coding AR gene encompasses over 180 kilobase (kb) of X-chromosome
containing eight exons that produces a nearly 10.7 kb AR mRNA. The fully
processed mature AR mRNA account for only 26% of total coding capacity
and most of the transcript codes for noncoding regions that includes 5
and 3 UTRs. However, functional roles of UTRs in AR gene expression,
principally its regulatory involvement in development of CRPC remained
indefinable. Our research is focusing on understanding the functional
roles of 6.8 kb long AR 3 UTR in AR gene expression and especially the
molecular mechanism that revitalizes AR expression in CRPC. We have shown
that a number of regulatory noncoding miRNAs play a critical 3 UTR
targeting role in AR gene expression and has potential therapeutic
implications. Here we show a synergistic approach of targeting AR
expression mediated via its 3 UTR, using a miRNA cocktail combinatorial
approach. In addition, we are investigating the potential functional
association of 3 UTR in AR gene expression and implication in
PCa.Citation Format: Girish C. Shukla, Kavleen Sikand, Jey S. Ebron.
Androgen receptor 3 untranslated region (UTR): a conundrum and a
significant therapeutic opportunity. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3196. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3196

