Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-331-5p targets receptor EphA2 and attenuates tumor growth and
migration in NSCLC.


Introduction: Receptor EphA2 is over expressed in NSCLC and is associated
with tumor progression and poor survival. MicroRNAs (miRs) are short,
non-coding RNAs that post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression.
Dysregulated expression of miRs has been observed in variety of
malignancies. However, the role of miR-331-5p in NSCLC growth and
migration is not known. We hypothesized that EphrinA1 treatment promotes
miR-331-5p expression in NSCLC and miR-331 may inhibit tumor growth and
invasion by targeting receptor EphA2.Methods: The A-549 and H-23 NSCLC
cells were treated with Ephrin-A1 for 24 hr and the miR-331-5p expression
was measured by real-time PCR analysis. EphA2 protein expression was
studied through Western blotting analysis. The cell proliferation was
studied by WST-1 assay. The tumor formation and invasion was determined
by 3-D matrigel and Wound healing assays respectively. Luciferase assay
was performed to confirm miR-331-5p as one of the direct and specific
target for EphA2.Results: The miR-331-5p expression was inversely
correlated with EphA2 expression. Transfection of NSCLC with precursor
miR-331-5p inhibited proliferation, and migration of NSCLC cells. In
addition the ability of tumor colony formation was significantly
inhibited when the cells were transfected with miR-331-5p precursors. We
have identified predicted target binding site of EphA2 in its 3 UTR
region by miR-331-5p. This was confirmed by Luciferase assay.
Over-expression of miR-331-5p in NSCLC cells repressed the endogenous
levels of EphA2 protein.Conclusion: This study for the first time
reports, that miR-331-5p directly regulates EphA2 mRNA and protein
expression in NSCLC. MiR-331 directly binds to 3 -UTR region of EphA2 and
inhibits tumor growth and migration. Our findings also provide an insight
into the regulation of EphA2 expression and suggest that miR-331-5p has
the capacity to regulate signalling pathways critical for the development
and progression of NSCLC.Funding: RC1 from Florida Department Health, and
VA Merit

