Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of functional assays for p97/VCP inhibition.


p97 (also called VCP in metazoans and CDC48 in yeast) is a highly
conserved, ubiquitously expressed, and essential AAA ATPase. p97 plays a
key role in endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation of misfolded
secretory and membrane proteins as well as ubiquitin-dependent turnover
of a subset of cytoplasmic substrates of the ubiquitin-proteasome system.
p97 also plays a critical role in specific cellular processes including
Golgi membrane reassembly, membrane fusion, autophagy and DNA repair
mechanisms. p97 expression is elevated in a number of cancer types
including prostate cancer, non-small-cell lung carcinoma and leukemia.
Given its cellular functions in protein homeostasis and the successful
clinical development of proteasome inhibitors, p97 has emerged as an
exciting new target for cancer therapy. We used p97 siRNA and a recently
identified small molecule p97 inhibitor, N2,N4-dibenzylquinazoline-
2,4-diamine (DBeQ) as tools to develop functional assays suitable for
further evaluating the activity of potential p97 inhibitors. A panel of
unfolded protein response marker genes that are consistently modulated by
p97 siRNA or DBeQ treatment has been identified. In addition, methods to
monitor autophagic activity have been developed, including high content
analysis of LC3B-GFP puncta formation. Cell viability assays were used to
determine the susceptibility of various cancer cell lines to p97
inhibition. These assays will be used to evaluate the effects of
potential p97 inhibitors on p97-dependent pathways and anti-proliferative
activity.Acknowledgement: Funded by NExT Chemical Biology Consortium, NCI
Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

