Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel gene expression profiles of poorly differentiated lung
cancer are enriched in stem cell factors and predictive of worse clinical
outcome.


Poorly differentiated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) at the
histopathological level has been associated with shorter patient
survival. Analogously, at the cellular level, poorly differentiated tumor
cells exhibit more aggressive phenotypes than their well-differentiated
counterparts, including higher tumorigenic potential and higher
metastatic capacity. Effective therapeutic targeting of the malignant
undifferentiated cells will require a deeper understanding of their
molecular drivers. To investigate the hierarchical basis of heterogeneous
NSCLC tumors, we developed an improved method to study the
undifferentiated and differentiated states of primary tumor cultures. The
cultures were established in defined serum-free media from freshly
resected tumors and were induced to differentiate either by culture in
serum-containing media or by exposure to the air-liquid interface (ALI)
in serum-free media with two variations. Gene expression profiles
revealed similar patterns of change in all three conditions, which
confirmed the undifferentiated state of the initial culture; however,
differentiation in serum caused many extraneous changes in gene
expression, which suggested that the ALI method represents a more
physiologically relevant condition. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
demonstrated that the profile of the undifferentiated state was enriched
in signatures of embryonic stem cell factors, metastasis and drug
resistance. In addition, novel gene expression signatures of the
undifferentiated state were predictive of shorter patient survival in a
clinical dataset of NSCLC. These results establish a robust method for
studying the cellular hierarchy in NSCLC that is independent of cell
surface markers, and the data reveal several potential avenues for future
therapeutic intervention.

