Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactivation of codogenic endogenous retroviral (ERV) envelope
genes in human endometrial carcinoma and prestages: emergence of new
molecular targets.


Endometrial carcinoma (EnCa) is the most common invasive gynaecologic
carcinoma. Over 85% of EnCa are classified as endometrioid, expressing
steroid hormone receptors and mostly involve pathological prestages.
Evolutionarily occurring exogenous retroviral infections into germ lines
generated human endogenous retroviruses (ERV) and represent today 8% of
the human genome. Our research parallels similarities between
placentogenesis, where ERV envelope (env) genes have essential functions,
and tumorigenesis. Previously, we demonstrated that Syncytin-1 (ERVW-1
env gene) up regulation was involved in EnCa cell fusion and steroid
hormone proliferation regulated by TGF-. Additionally, Syncytin-1 was up
regulated in EnCa tissues from tamoxifen treated breast carcinoma
patients. The majority of ERV env coding genes are either not present or
not consistently represented on gene expression microarrays.For the first
time all 21 ERV env genes, including 19 codogenic and two env genes with
premature stop codons were cloned and analysed for their absolute gene
expression in 38 EnCa, 31 endometrium, 9 endometrial hyperplasia and 20
polyps. ERV env genes showed a stepwise increase of expression from the
benign to malignant states. We classified env expression into three
different categories. For example, EnCa demonstrated seven genes with
high >200 mol/ng cDNA expression where Syncytin-1 was the highest single
gene; two middle >50 mol/ng cDNA expressed (e.g. erv-3) and 12 low
Endometrial carcinoma (EnCa) is the most common invasive gynaecologic
carcinoma. Over 85% of EnCa are classified as endometrioid, expressing
steroid hormone receptors and mostly involve pathological prestages.
Evolutionarily occurring exogenous retroviral infections into germ lines
generated human endogenous retroviruses (ERV) and represent today 8% of
the human genome. Our research parallels similarities between
placentogenesis, where ERV envelope (env) genes have essential functions,
and tumorigenesis. Previously, we demonstrated that Syncytin-1 (ERVW-1
env gene) up regulation was involved in EnCa cell fusion and steroid
hormone proliferation regulated by TGF-. Additionally, Syncytin-1 was up
regulated in EnCa tissues from tamoxifen treated breast carcinoma
patients. The majority of ERV env coding genes are either not present or
not consistently represented on gene expression microarrays.For the first
time all 21 ERV env genes, including 19 codogenic and two env genes with
premature stop codons were cloned and analysed for their absolute gene
expression in 38 EnCa, 31 endometrium, 9 endometrial hyperplasia and 20
polyps. ERV env genes showed a stepwise increase of expression from the
benign to malignant states. We classified env expression into three
different categories. For example, EnCa demonstrated seven genes with
high >200 mol/ng cDNA expression where Syncytin-1 was the highest single
gene; two middle >50 mol/ng cDNA expressed (e.g. erv-3) and 12 low <50
mol/ng cDNA expressed (e.g. Syncytin-2). Overall, ERV env genes were in
part similar in their expression hierarchy when compared to 34 term
placentas, supporting parallel functions. Regarding tumor parameters,
Syncytin-1 and Syncytin-2 were significantly up regulated in advanced
stage pT2 compared to pT1b. In less differentiated EnCa Syncytin-1,
erv-3, envT and envFc2 were up regulated. Using immunohistochemistry
Syncytin-1, Syncytin-2 and erv-3 specifically localized to glandular
epithelial cells of polyps, hyperplasia and EnCa. As noted in
patient-matched EnCa compared to endometrium, increased Syncytin-1
expression correlated with ERVW-1 5long terminal repeat (LTR)
hypomethylation, including the ERE and CRE overlapping MeCP2 sites. This
hypomethylation state was similar to human placental
cytotrophoblasts.Functional analyses showed 10 additional env genes also
regulated by methylation in EnCa cell lines. Co-transfection of an
estrogen receptor (ER) negative EnCa cell line with an ER and ERVW-1
5LTR-luciferase reporter constructs, resulted in increased activity
following treatment with estradiol and tamoxifen, which was suppressed by
methylation.Reactivated and overexpressed ERV env genes could serve to
promote tumorigenesis of pathological pre-stages and EnCa. A comparative
model involving ERV in placentogenesis versus EnCa is presented.

