Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural insights into the dynamic functionality of Bax through
molecular dynamics simulations.


The Bcl-2 protein family modulates the balance between cellular life and
death. Bax, a pro-apoptotic member of this family, participates in
mitochondria-mediated apoptosis but also supports mitochondrial
bioenergetics. In previous work, we showed that a peptide derived from
the alpha 9-helix of Bax is cytotoxic, specifically when used to treat
breast cancer cells. Such structural and biochemical studies are useful
for identifying functional domains within Bax that can be developed into
therapeutic peptides, but are limiting when ascribing function to domains
at a molecular level. Computational modeling and molecular dynamics
simulations of Bax provides a high-power analysis of the subtle changes
that modulate the regulatory and effector activities of the protein. This
study seeks to elucidate the consequence of alterations in micro-domains
that confer activity, apoptotic or otherwise, to the protein. Molecular
dynamics simulation was used to determine how the trans-membrane region
of Bax conferred stability to the protein, identifying regions of high
flexibility and differential exposure. Computationally rotating the angle
at Pro168 altered the position of the 9-helix of Bax, mimicking the
active and inactive forms of Bax. We found that active Bax, but not
inactive Bax, presented a more relaxed structure which altered the
conformation and exposure of the BH3 domain, potentially enhancing
interactions among the family of Bcl-2 proteins. Since dysregulation of
Bcl-2 proteins is implicated in a number of cancers, examining the basic
structural dynamics at a molecular level yielded information that can aid
in the design novel Bcl-2 family-targeting chemotherapeutics.

