Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiprogestin responsiveness of a human breast cancer xenograft
model overexpressing progesterone receptors isoforms A (PRA) or B (PRB).


Endocrine therapies in breast cancer are designed to target directly or
indirectly the estrogen receptors alpha (ER). There is increasing
evidence indicating that progesterone receptors (PR) are involved as ER
modulating breast cancer growth. Antiprogestins had been used in clinical
trials in patients who have failed to other therapies; however, the
results were not very clear. Our laboratory has developed an experimental
murine model of breast cancer in which mammary carcinomas, expressing ER
and PR, transit through different stages of hormone dependency. We
demonstrated using this model, that only tumors with higher levels of PRA
than PRB were those responsive to antiprogestin treatment. Moreover, the
antiprogestin mifepristone (MFP) was able to stimulate the growth of
tumors overexpressing PRB. The aim of this study was to move into a human
in mouse scenario in order to test our hypothesis postulating that only
breast cancer patients with higher levels of PRA than PRB are susceptible
to MFP treatment. T47D-YA and T47D-YB kindly provided by Dr. K. Horwitz
(University of Colorado, Denver), were inoculated sc with matrigel into
the right and left flanks respectively of female NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid
Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice (5/group; 3 experiments) that have been implanted
one week before with a sc 17--estradiol pellet (0.5mg). After 10 days,
when tumors reached a size greater than 20 mm2, the mice were treated
with silastic or MFP (6 mg) pellets sc. In other experiments MFP was
administered as daily injections of 10 mg/kg/body weight. Animals were
followed for 2 weeks. A significant decrease in tumor size was only
registered in T47D-YA tumors treated with MFP (pEndocrine therapies in
breast cancer are designed to target directly or indirectly the estrogen
receptors alpha (ER). There is increasing evidence indicating that
progesterone receptors (PR) are involved as ER modulating breast cancer
growth. Antiprogestins had been used in clinical trials in patients who
have failed to other therapies; however, the results were not very clear.
Our laboratory has developed an experimental murine model of breast
cancer in which mammary carcinomas, expressing ER and PR, transit through
different stages of hormone dependency. We demonstrated using this model,
that only tumors with higher levels of PRA than PRB were those responsive
to antiprogestin treatment. Moreover, the antiprogestin mifepristone
(MFP) was able to stimulate the growth of tumors overexpressing PRB. The
aim of this study was to move into a human in mouse scenario in order to
test our hypothesis postulating that only breast cancer patients with
higher levels of PRA than PRB are susceptible to MFP treatment. T47D-YA
and T47D-YB kindly provided by Dr. K. Horwitz (University of Colorado,
Denver), were inoculated sc with matrigel into the right and left flanks
respectively of female NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice (5/group; 3
experiments) that have been implanted one week before with a sc
17--estradiol pellet (0.5mg). After 10 days, when tumors reached a size
greater than 20 mm2, the mice were treated with silastic or MFP (6 mg)
pellets sc. In other experiments MFP was administered as daily injections
of 10 mg/kg/body weight. Animals were followed for 2 weeks. A significant
decrease in tumor size was only registered in T47D-YA tumors treated with
MFP (p<0.05). Interestingly the T47D-YB tumors growing in the
contralateral flank of the same mice increased their size with MFP
treatment. They reached a size even larger than control -YB tumors
(pEndocrine therapies in breast cancer are designed to target directly or
indirectly the estrogen receptors alpha (ER). There is increasing
evidence indicating that progesterone receptors (PR) are involved as ER
modulating breast cancer growth. Antiprogestins had been used in clinical
trials in patients who have failed to other therapies; however, the
results were not very clear. Our laboratory has developed an experimental
murine model of breast cancer in which mammary carcinomas, expressing ER
and PR, transit through different stages of hormone dependency. We
demonstrated using this model, that only tumors with higher levels of PRA
than PRB were those responsive to antiprogestin treatment. Moreover, the
antiprogestin mifepristone (MFP) was able to stimulate the growth of
tumors overexpressing PRB. The aim of this study was to move into a human
in mouse scenario in order to test our hypothesis postulating that only
breast cancer patients with higher levels of PRA than PRB are susceptible
to MFP treatment. T47D-YA and T47D-YB kindly provided by Dr. K. Horwitz
(University of Colorado, Denver), were inoculated sc with matrigel into
the right and left flanks respectively of female NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid
Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice (5/group; 3 experiments) that have been implanted
one week before with a sc 17--estradiol pellet (0.5mg). After 10 days,
when tumors reached a size greater than 20 mm2, the mice were treated
with silastic or MFP (6 mg) pellets sc. In other experiments MFP was
administered as daily injections of 10 mg/kg/body weight. Animals were
followed for 2 weeks. A significant decrease in tumor size was only
registered in T47D-YA tumors treated with MFP (p<0.05). Interestingly the
T47D-YB tumors growing in the contralateral flank of the same mice
increased their size with MFP treatment. They reached a size even larger
than control -YB tumors (p<0.05). T47D-YA tumors showed nuclear MYC and
Cyclin D1 staining whereas a cytoplasmic staining was observed in
MFP-treated tumors 72 hours after treatment (immunohistochemistry).
Conversely, an intense nuclear staining of both proteins was observed in
T47D-YB tumors growing with MFP treatment. It can be concluded that in
this human in mouse model, a specific inhibitory effect of MFP is only
obtained in xenografts expressing PRA, while a stimulatory effect may be
achieved in tumors expressing only PRB. These results are in agreement
with our data in murine tumors and as a whole suggest that antiprogestins
may be excellent therapeutic tools for breast cancer patients with higher
levels of PRA than PRB.

