Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutagenic effects of inorganic particulate matter on Raji and
HepG2 cell lines exposed to ultraviolet radiation.


Epidemiological studies have correlated exposure to
ultraviolet-irradiated particulate matter with cardiovascular,
respiratory, and malignant lung diseases. This study investigated the DNA
damage induced by two major inorganic particulate matter compounds found
in diesel exhaust, ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate on Burkitt's
lymphoma (Raji) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cell lines. We found
a dose-dependent positive correlation of accumulated DNA damage in
concentrations of ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate (25 g/ml, 50
g/ml, 100 g/ml, 200 g/ml, 400 g/ml) with ultraviolet exposure (250 J/m2,
400 J/m2, 600 J/m2, 850 J/m2), as measured by the Comet Assay in both
cell lines. There was a significant difference between the treated
ammonium nitrate samples and negative control samples in Raji and HepG2
(p Epidemiological studies have correlated exposure to
ultraviolet-irradiated particulate matter with cardiovascular,
respiratory, and malignant lung diseases. This study investigated the DNA
damage induced by two major inorganic particulate matter compounds found
in diesel exhaust, ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate on Burkitt's
lymphoma (Raji) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cell lines. We found
a dose-dependent positive correlation of accumulated DNA damage in
concentrations of ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate (25 g/ml, 50
g/ml, 100 g/ml, 200 g/ml, 400 g/ml) with ultraviolet exposure (250 J/m2,
400 J/m2, 600 J/m2, 850 J/m2), as measured by the Comet Assay in both
cell lines. There was a significant difference between the treated
ammonium nitrate samples and negative control samples in Raji and HepG2
(p < 0.001). Apoptosis was shown in Raji and HepG2 cells when exposed to
high concentrations of ammonium nitrate (200 g/ml, 400 g/ml) for 1 hour
in samples without ultraviolet exposure, as assessed by the Comet Assay.
However, the quantity of apoptotic cells greatly diminished after
ultraviolet exposure at these concentrations. To further investigate and
clarify the underlying mechanisms, we used Annexin V to quantify
apoptosis. Flow Cytometry confirmed the results shown by the Comet Assay;
ultraviolet exposure diminished apoptosis in ammonium nitrate-induced DNA
damage in both Raji and HepG2. Ammonium sulfate induced DNA damage with
or without ultraviolet influence was minimal as assessed by the Comet
Assay in both cell lines, with a significant difference (p
Epidemiological studies have correlated exposure to
ultraviolet-irradiated particulate matter with cardiovascular,
respiratory, and malignant lung diseases. This study investigated the DNA
damage induced by two major inorganic particulate matter compounds found
in diesel exhaust, ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate on Burkitt's
lymphoma (Raji) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cell lines. We found
a dose-dependent positive correlation of accumulated DNA damage in
concentrations of ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate (25 g/ml, 50
g/ml, 100 g/ml, 200 g/ml, 400 g/ml) with ultraviolet exposure (250 J/m2,
400 J/m2, 600 J/m2, 850 J/m2), as measured by the Comet Assay in both
cell lines. There was a significant difference between the treated
ammonium nitrate samples and negative control samples in Raji and HepG2
(p < 0.001). Apoptosis was shown in Raji and HepG2 cells when exposed to
high concentrations of ammonium nitrate (200 g/ml, 400 g/ml) for 1 hour
in samples without ultraviolet exposure, as assessed by the Comet Assay.
However, the quantity of apoptotic cells greatly diminished after
ultraviolet exposure at these concentrations. To further investigate and
clarify the underlying mechanisms, we used Annexin V to quantify
apoptosis. Flow Cytometry confirmed the results shown by the Comet Assay;
ultraviolet exposure diminished apoptosis in ammonium nitrate-induced DNA
damage in both Raji and HepG2. Ammonium sulfate induced DNA damage with
or without ultraviolet influence was minimal as assessed by the Comet
Assay in both cell lines, with a significant difference (p < 0.05)
between the treated and negative control samples. These results indicate
that the inorganic particulate compound, ammonium nitrate, induced DNA
strand breaks at all concentrations and apoptosis at high concentrations
in Raji and HepG2 cells, with ultraviolet radiation preventing apoptosis
at high concentrations. We hypothesize that ultraviolet radiation
inhibits an essential cellular mechanism, possibly involving p53, thereby
explaining this phenomenon. Further studies are necessary to characterize
the roles of apoptosis inhibition in DNA damage caused by inorganic
particulate matter.

