Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming the resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy: Itraconazole
blocks blood vessel maturation and synergizes with anti-VEGF therapy.


Background: Anti-angiogenic drugs, such as sunitinib, have been used as a
first line therapy for renal cell carcinoma and some other cancers.
However, the development of resistance to angiogenesis inhibitors
targeting the VEGF pathway is common and impedes the efficacy of cancer
treatments. Previously, we found it that blood vessel maturation is a
common feature of tumors resistant to sunitinib. Thus, we hypothesized
that novel approaches of inhibiting pericyte coverage of the tumor
vasculature could be a successful approach to sensitize resistant tumors
to sunitinib. Approach: An in vitro angiogenesis model was developed for
screening the pericyte recruitment inhibitors. Itraconazole, an
anti-fungal drug, was found to block the association of pericyte with
newly-formed blood vessel endothelial cells. A sunitinib resistance
animal model of Myc-Cap prostate cancer xenograft was used for studying
the in vivo effect of treatment. Animals were dosed with itraconazole,
sunitinib or the combination when tumors were well established. Result:
through the in vitro angiogenesis model, the association of pericyte with
endothelial cells was significantly reduced by itraconazole treatment.
Its mechanism of action involved inhibition of focal adhesion kinase
activity, a protein that plays a central role in cell spreading,
differentiation, migration and cell death. Moreover, itraconazole
treatment showed reduced pericyte coverage of tumor vasculature in vivo,
and synergized with sunitinib treatments. Conclusion: These findings
indicated that itraconazole is effective in inhibiting the pericyte
coverage of the tumor vasculature and broaden the efficacy of sunitinib.
Our results support further preclinical and clinical evaluation of
itraconazole combination therapies in cancer treatment.

