Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation of EZH2 at Thr487 is a marker for good prognosis
in pancreatic cancer patients.


EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)
and is involved in repressing gene expression through methylation of
histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27). EZH2 is overexpressed in multiple tumor
types and correlates with poor prognosis. We have previous shown that
phosphorylation of EZH2 at Thr 487 by CDK1 inhibits its methyltransferase
activity. However, the status of phosphorylation of EZH2 at Thr 487
(P-EZH2-T487) and its clinical implication in cancer patients have not
been reported. We thus examined P-EZH2-T487 by immunohistochemistry and
its association with prognosis in pancreatic cancer patients. We found
that P-EZH2-T487 can be seen in 61% (47/77) of pancreatic cancer. In
univariate survival analysis, patients with high P-EZH2-T487 had
significantly longer overall survival time when compared with those with
low P-EZH2-T487 (P=0.032). In multivariate analysis, P-EZH2-T487 was an
independent prognostic marker for overall survival in pancreatic cancer
(HR=0.358, P=0.001). These results suggest that P-EZH2-T487 is a
prognostic indicator for clinical outcome in pancreatic cancer
patients.Citation Format: Yongkun Wei, Shih-Shin Chang, Huamin Wang,
Weiya Xia, Mien-Chie Hung. Phosphorylation of EZH2 at Thr487 is a marker
for good prognosis in pancreatic cancer patients. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5351.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5351

