Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A synergistic effect between aldehydes and doxorubicin in S.
cerevisiae provides a model for enhancing anthracycline-based therapy.


We have previously reported that interruption of the synthesis of the
amino acid threonine confers sensitivity to doxorubicin in S. cerevisiae.
Threonine synthesis requires the genes HOM6, THR1, and THR4, which encode
the enzymes homoserine dehydrogenase, homoserine kinase, and threonine
synthase, respectively. The inactivation of these genes in threonine
biosynthesis results in increased toxicity of doxorubicin. Interestingly,
the most sensitive strain, hom6, results in the accumulation of
L-aspartate semialdehyde. We hypothesize that the accumulation of this
metabolite results in toxic synergy with doxorubicin.We have further
investigated the role of aldehydes in the sensitization of yeast cells to
anthracyclines. Inactivation of HOM3, which encodes for the aspartate
kinase required for the first step in threonine biosynthesis, prevents
the accumulation of the L-aspartate semialdehyde in the hom6 strain and
rescues its sensitivity to doxorubicin, suggesting a role for the
aldehyde in the sensitization to doxorubicin. Furthermore, wild type
strains treated with different aldehydes significantly reduced the
survival of the cells to anthracyclines, and distinctly in other
therapeutic agents. These results indicate that aldehydes have a
synergistic effect with anthracyclines. In humans, threonine is an
essential amino acid and its biosynthesis does not occur. However, our
results are directly applicable to relevant human pathways in
nonessential amino acids and ornithine synthesis. Potential application
of the accumulation of glutamic semialdehyde and succinic semialdehyde
intermediates for a synergistic effect with doxorubicin is
discussed.Research supported by NIH/NCRR RCMI grant #RR03020 at Florida
A&M University.

