Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physical activity prior to diagnosis and risk of fatal breast
cancer.


Data suggest an inverse association between physical activity and risk of
breast cancer, as well as lower risk of death among breast cancer
survivors with higher levels of physical activity. Breast cancer survival
rates are relatively high. However, lifestyle factors prior to diagnosis
may be related to whether subsequent breast cancer is aggressive, and
ultimately fatal. We examined this association in the Nurses Health Study
(NHS), among 105,387 women with 18 years of follow-up (1986-2010).
Physical activity was assessed every 2-4 years on the NHS biennial
questionnaire; new cases of breast cancer were reported on the biennial
questionnaire and followed-up via medical record review. Cause of death
was determined through review of medical records and death certificates.
Overall, 762 fatal cases were identified during follow-up among 8356
total cases of breast cancer. We used Cox proportional hazards models to
estimate the association between the cumulative average of physical
activity over follow-up and fatal breast cancer. In multivariable models,
higher physical activity was significantly inversely associated with
fatal breast cancer risk. Relative to Data suggest an inverse association
between physical activity and risk of breast cancer, as well as lower
risk of death among breast cancer survivors with higher levels of
physical activity. Breast cancer survival rates are relatively high.
However, lifestyle factors prior to diagnosis may be related to whether
subsequent breast cancer is aggressive, and ultimately fatal. We examined
this association in the Nurses Health Study (NHS), among 105,387 women
with 18 years of follow-up (1986-2010). Physical activity was assessed
every 2-4 years on the NHS biennial questionnaire; new cases of breast
cancer were reported on the biennial questionnaire and followed-up via
medical record review. Cause of death was determined through review of
medical records and death certificates. Overall, 762 fatal cases were
identified during follow-up among 8356 total cases of breast cancer. We
used Cox proportional hazards models to estimate the association between
the cumulative average of physical activity over follow-up and fatal
breast cancer. In multivariable models, higher physical activity was
significantly inversely associated with fatal breast cancer risk.
Relative to <3 MET-hrs of activity per week, participation in activities
totaling 3 to Data suggest an inverse association between physical
activity and risk of breast cancer, as well as lower risk of death among
breast cancer survivors with higher levels of physical activity. Breast
cancer survival rates are relatively high. However, lifestyle factors
prior to diagnosis may be related to whether subsequent breast cancer is
aggressive, and ultimately fatal. We examined this association in the
Nurses Health Study (NHS), among 105,387 women with 18 years of follow-up
(1986-2010). Physical activity was assessed every 2-4 years on the NHS
biennial questionnaire; new cases of breast cancer were reported on the
biennial questionnaire and followed-up via medical record review. Cause
of death was determined through review of medical records and death
certificates. Overall, 762 fatal cases were identified during follow-up
among 8356 total cases of breast cancer. We used Cox proportional hazards
models to estimate the association between the cumulative average of
physical activity over follow-up and fatal breast cancer. In
multivariable models, higher physical activity was significantly
inversely associated with fatal breast cancer risk. Relative to <3
MET-hrs of activity per week, participation in activities totaling 3 to <
9, 9 to Data suggest an inverse association between physical activity and
risk of breast cancer, as well as lower risk of death among breast cancer
survivors with higher levels of physical activity. Breast cancer survival
rates are relatively high. However, lifestyle factors prior to diagnosis
may be related to whether subsequent breast cancer is aggressive, and
ultimately fatal. We examined this association in the Nurses Health Study
(NHS), among 105,387 women with 18 years of follow-up (1986-2010).
Physical activity was assessed every 2-4 years on the NHS biennial
questionnaire; new cases of breast cancer were reported on the biennial
questionnaire and followed-up via medical record review. Cause of death
was determined through review of medical records and death certificates.
Overall, 762 fatal cases were identified during follow-up among 8356
total cases of breast cancer. We used Cox proportional hazards models to
estimate the association between the cumulative average of physical
activity over follow-up and fatal breast cancer. In multivariable models,
higher physical activity was significantly inversely associated with
fatal breast cancer risk. Relative to <3 MET-hrs of activity per week,
participation in activities totaling 3 to < 9, 9 to < 18, 18 to Data
suggest an inverse association between physical activity and risk of
breast cancer, as well as lower risk of death among breast cancer
survivors with higher levels of physical activity. Breast cancer survival
rates are relatively high. However, lifestyle factors prior to diagnosis
may be related to whether subsequent breast cancer is aggressive, and
ultimately fatal. We examined this association in the Nurses Health Study
(NHS), among 105,387 women with 18 years of follow-up (1986-2010).
Physical activity was assessed every 2-4 years on the NHS biennial
questionnaire; new cases of breast cancer were reported on the biennial
questionnaire and followed-up via medical record review. Cause of death
was determined through review of medical records and death certificates.
Overall, 762 fatal cases were identified during follow-up among 8356
total cases of breast cancer. We used Cox proportional hazards models to
estimate the association between the cumulative average of physical
activity over follow-up and fatal breast cancer. In multivariable models,
higher physical activity was significantly inversely associated with
fatal breast cancer risk. Relative to <3 MET-hrs of activity per week,
participation in activities totaling 3 to < 9, 9 to < 18, 18 to <27, and
27 MET-hrs/week were associated with reductions in risk of 21% (95% CI:
0.63-1.00), 35% (95% CI: 0.51-0.82), 41% (95% CI: 0.45-0.78), and 43%
(95% CI: 0.43-0.74), respectively (ptrendData suggest an inverse
association between physical activity and risk of breast cancer, as well
as lower risk of death among breast cancer survivors with higher levels
of physical activity. Breast cancer survival rates are relatively high.
However, lifestyle factors prior to diagnosis may be related to whether
subsequent breast cancer is aggressive, and ultimately fatal. We examined
this association in the Nurses Health Study (NHS), among 105,387 women
with 18 years of follow-up (1986-2010). Physical activity was assessed
every 2-4 years on the NHS biennial questionnaire; new cases of breast
cancer were reported on the biennial questionnaire and followed-up via
medical record review. Cause of death was determined through review of
medical records and death certificates. Overall, 762 fatal cases were
identified during follow-up among 8356 total cases of breast cancer. We
used Cox proportional hazards models to estimate the association between
the cumulative average of physical activity over follow-up and fatal
breast cancer. In multivariable models, higher physical activity was
significantly inversely associated with fatal breast cancer risk.
Relative to <3 MET-hrs of activity per week, participation in activities
totaling 3 to < 9, 9 to < 18, 18 to <27, and 27 MET-hrs/week were
associated with reductions in risk of 21% (95% CI: 0.63-1.00), 35% (95%
CI: 0.51-0.82), 41% (95% CI: 0.45-0.78), and 43% (95% CI: 0.43-0.74),
respectively (ptrend<0.001). Results were virtually unchanged after
additionally adjusting for BMI (e.g. 27 vs. Data suggest an inverse
association between physical activity and risk of breast cancer, as well
as lower risk of death among breast cancer survivors with higher levels
of physical activity. Breast cancer survival rates are relatively high.
However, lifestyle factors prior to diagnosis may be related to whether
subsequent breast cancer is aggressive, and ultimately fatal. We examined
this association in the Nurses Health Study (NHS), among 105,387 women
with 18 years of follow-up (1986-2010). Physical activity was assessed
every 2-4 years on the NHS biennial questionnaire; new cases of breast
cancer were reported on the biennial questionnaire and followed-up via
medical record review. Cause of death was determined through review of
medical records and death certificates. Overall, 762 fatal cases were
identified during follow-up among 8356 total cases of breast cancer. We
used Cox proportional hazards models to estimate the association between
the cumulative average of physical activity over follow-up and fatal
breast cancer. In multivariable models, higher physical activity was
significantly inversely associated with fatal breast cancer risk.
Relative to <3 MET-hrs of activity per week, participation in activities
totaling 3 to < 9, 9 to < 18, 18 to <27, and 27 MET-hrs/week were
associated with reductions in risk of 21% (95% CI: 0.63-1.00), 35% (95%
CI: 0.51-0.82), 41% (95% CI: 0.45-0.78), and 43% (95% CI: 0.43-0.74),
respectively (ptrend<0.001). Results were virtually unchanged after
additionally adjusting for BMI (e.g. 27 vs. <3 MET-hrs/week total
activity RR=0.56 (95% CI: 0.43-0.73, ptrendData suggest an inverse
association between physical activity and risk of breast cancer, as well
as lower risk of death among breast cancer survivors with higher levels
of physical activity. Breast cancer survival rates are relatively high.
However, lifestyle factors prior to diagnosis may be related to whether
subsequent breast cancer is aggressive, and ultimately fatal. We examined
this association in the Nurses Health Study (NHS), among 105,387 women
with 18 years of follow-up (1986-2010). Physical activity was assessed
every 2-4 years on the NHS biennial questionnaire; new cases of breast
cancer were reported on the biennial questionnaire and followed-up via
medical record review. Cause of death was determined through review of
medical records and death certificates. Overall, 762 fatal cases were
identified during follow-up among 8356 total cases of breast cancer. We
used Cox proportional hazards models to estimate the association between
the cumulative average of physical activity over follow-up and fatal
breast cancer. In multivariable models, higher physical activity was
significantly inversely associated with fatal breast cancer risk.
Relative to <3 MET-hrs of activity per week, participation in activities
totaling 3 to < 9, 9 to < 18, 18 to <27, and 27 MET-hrs/week were
associated with reductions in risk of 21% (95% CI: 0.63-1.00), 35% (95%
CI: 0.51-0.82), 41% (95% CI: 0.45-0.78), and 43% (95% CI: 0.43-0.74),
respectively (ptrend<0.001). Results were virtually unchanged after
additionally adjusting for BMI (e.g. 27 vs. <3 MET-hrs/week total
activity RR=0.56 (95% CI: 0.43-0.73, ptrend<0.001)). Results for fatal
breast cancer were stronger than those for overall breast cancer. Our
findings suggest higher physical activity before breast cancer diagnosis
is associated with reduced risk of fatal breast cancer. Our results
extend existing evidence supporting an inverse association between
physical activity and breast cancer risk to the outcome of fatal breast
cancer.
Physical Activity and risk of overall and fatal breast cancer: Nurses
Health Study, 19862010

