Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -arrestin-2 mediated regulation of plasminogen activator inhibitor
Type 1.


Several studies described the elevated levels of plasminogen activated
Inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) protein in malignant tissues and indicated the
potential use as a therapeutic target. In bladder cancer, higher levels
of PAI-1 were found in tumor tissues compared to normal tissues. Urinary
levels of PAI-1 protein in combination with other markers resulted in
higher sensitivity and specificity in detecting bladder cancer. In human
kidney mesangial cells, the thromboxane A2 (TP) receptor agonist
stimulation increased PAI-1 mRNA and protein. Our lab indicated that TP
receptor is highly expressed in bladder cancer tissues and inversely
correlated with patients` survival. We also indicated the TP isoform can
induce malignant transformation in immortalized non-transformed
urothelial cells. Our published data indicated that U46619 dependent
stimulation of cell migration is -arrestin-2 dependent. The purpose of
the current study is to investigate the mechanism whereby TP stimulation
regulates PAI-1 expression. The protein levels of PAI-1 were found to be
increased in bladder cancer cells following stimulation with TP agonist
(U46619). Tetracycline inducible shRNA knock-down of -arrestin-2 resulted
in a significant reduction of PAI-1 protein, but not mRNA in bladder
cancer cells and also resulted in a significant reduction of trans-well
cell migration and invasion. Our data suggest that the agonist mediated
increase in PAI-1 is regulated at the post-transcriptional level. The
role of -arrestin-2 KD on agonist dependent stimulation remains to be
determined.

