Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitization of cancer cells to cisplatin by curcumin: mlecular
mechanism and drug delivery.


Curcumin, the major active component of the spice Turmeric, is known to
sensitize cancer cells to treatment with cisplatin. However, the exact
mechanism by which this occurs is unresolved. We hypothesize that
sensitization is dependent on curcumin-mediated inhibition of thioredoxin
reductase 1, a major antioxidant enzyme. We have shown that a knock down
of TxnRd1 expression ameliorates sensitization by curcumin and that
over-expression of TxnRd1 in cells with low endogenous levels enhances
cisplatin sensitivity. The use of curcumin clinically has been limited by
is its low bioavailability outside the GI tract. Therefore, we have also
encapsulated curcumin into polymersome nanoparticles composed of
poly(ethylene oxide)-block-polycaprolactone co-polymer to improve drug
delivery. These vesicles have the unique advantage of being completely
biodegradable and can be dual loaded with individual drugs in the
membrane and aqueous core allowing for simultaneous delivery of curcumin
and cisplatin. Preliminary studies have demonstrated that these
polymersomes encapsulate both curcumin in the hydrophobic membrane and
cisplatin in the aqueous core and can deliver them to tumor cells. Future
studies will determine whether these bifunctional polymersomes
demonstrate enhanced cytotoxicity to animal models of solid tumors.

