Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 4-methylumbelliferone: Dietary supplement turned chemo-preventive
and anti-metastatic agent for prostate cancer.


INTRODUCTION: Hyaluronic acid (HA), a glycosaminoglycan, is associated
with prostate cancer (PCa) progression and metastasis.
4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) is a HA-synthesis inhibitor and we have
shown antitumor and anti-invasive effects of 4-MU on PCa cells in vitro
and in xenografts. In this study we evaluated the efficacy of 4-MU to
prevent PCa growth and metastasis in the TRAMP model. We also evaluated
the effects of 4-MU on epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).METHODS:
TRAMP mice (n = 8-11/group) were treated with vehicle or 4-MU (450 mg/kg)
by starting stage-specific treatment at 8 (PIN stage), 12
(adenocarcinoma) and 22 (invasive carcinoma) wks of age. At 28 wks, 50%
of animals in 4-MU treated groups were sacrificed and the other 50% were
left untreated up to 52 wks. At necropsy prostate (P) and seminal
vesicles (SV) were weighed, tissues were analyzed by histology,
immunohistochemistry and quantitative PCR for EMT markers and serum
chemistry was evaluated. PC3-ML cells treated with 4-MU were analyzed for
EMT markers.RESULTS: At 28 wks, 100% of vehicle treated mice developed
prostate tumors, but tumor growth and progression was inhibited in all
4-MU treated groups; P+SV weight (g): vehicle: 3.22.9; 8 wk: 0.430.14; 12
wk: 0.350.04; 22 wk: 1.00.35 g. The P+SV weight in TRAMP mice at 22 wks
of age was 0.90.04, showing that late stage administration of 4-MU halted
further tumor progression. Animals in 8 and 12 wk groups remained tumor
free until 52 wk and 44 wk respectively. While 55% of vehicle treated
animals developed metastasis, none of the treated groups had metastasis.
No serum/organ toxicity or weight loss was observed in the treatment
groups. HA, HA receptors (CD44, RHAMM) and EMT markers (-catenin, Zeb2)
were downregulated (>2-fold), but E-cadherin was upregulated (4-fold) in
the treatment groups. 4-MU treatment (0-60 g/ml) similarly modulated the
expression of EMT markers and HA receptors in PC3-ML cells.CONCLUSION:
4-MU is a promising non-toxic, oral chemopreventive agent, which inhibits
PCa growth and metastasis by plausibly abrogating HA-signaling and
reversing EMT.Support: R01 CA 123063-04 (VBL); R01 CA 72821-11 (VBL)

