Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of clonogenicity and xenograft tumor growth by
activation and/or over-expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-/ (PPAR/).


The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-/ (PPAR/) regulates a
variety of biological processes but the function of PPAR/ in
carcinogenesis remains controversial. Stable human cancer cell lines
(A431, MDA-MB-231 and MCF7) that constitutively over-express PPAR/ were
produced to effectively examine the role of this receptor in human cancer
models. Ligand activation of PPAR/ both in MDA-MB-231 (ER-negative) and
MCF7 (ER-positive) cells over-expressing PPAR/ cells caused significantly
decreased clonogenicity compared to controls. Over-expression of PPAR/
reduced tumor volumes and tumor weights of ectopic xenografts from both
MDA-MB-231 and MCF7cells compared to controls. Ligand activation of PPAR/
caused an even greater reduction of tumor volumes and tumor weights
compared to controls. Interestingly, similar results were observed in the
human epidermoid carcinoma cell line A431 and other human cancer cell
lines. Ligand activation of PPAR/ strongly inhibited clonogenicity in
A431 cells over-expressing PPAR/. Xenografts from A431 control cells
rapidly developed tumors while tumors were barely detectable in A431
cells over-expressing PPAR/. These observations demonstrate the
inhibitory effect of activating or over-expressing PPAR/ on tumorigenesis
in human cancer cell lines. This suggests that PPAR/ suppression of
tumorigenicity may be mediated through common mechanisms.

