Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of EpCAM negative circulating tumor cells in CellSearch
waste.


Introduction: Circulating tumor cells (CTC) measured with the CellSearch
system in patients with metastatic carcinomas are associated with poor
survival. The CellSearch system uses immunomagnetic enrichment targeting
the EpCAM antigen. A frequently raised question is what the frequency and
significance is of CTC that do not express EpCAM within the CTC of the
individual patient and between different patients. To investigate this, a
device was constructed that collects the blood discarded by the
CellSearch system and passes the blood through micro sieves with 5um
pores to enrich for the larger CTC.Methods: A sample collection device
was attached to the waste line of the CellTracks Autoprep (AP). The blood
discarded after immunomagnetic separation was detected in the waste line
and collected into a separate 50ml conical tube for each patient sample.
After collection, the blood was filtered through microfabricated silicon
nitride filters with pore diameters of 5 micrometer (Aquamarijn, Zutphen,
The Netherlands) with a pressure below 40mbar. To evaluate recovery on
the filter the COLO320(median size 11m), SKBR3(16m) and T24(16m) cell
lines where used. To evaluate recovery from the AP waste the SKBR3(445000
EpCAM antigens) and T24(2167 EpCAM antigens) cell lines where used. 300
cells where spiked in 7.5ml of blood collected in CellSave tubes from
healthy volunteers. All samples were processed the day after
collection.Results: The average recovery on filter from whole blood is
29% for COLO320 and 80% for SKBR3 and T24. The average recovery of the
SKBR3 cell line with the CellSearch system is 91% and 5% are recovered
from the AP waste using filtration. In contrast, the average recovery of
T24 cell line with the CellSearch system is only 30% but 51% are
recovered from the AP waste after filtration. The carryover between
spiked and unspiked samples collected from the AP waste was Introduction:
Circulating tumor cells (CTC) measured with the CellSearch system in
patients with metastatic carcinomas are associated with poor survival.
The CellSearch system uses immunomagnetic enrichment targeting the EpCAM
antigen. A frequently raised question is what the frequency and
significance is of CTC that do not express EpCAM within the CTC of the
individual patient and between different patients. To investigate this, a
device was constructed that collects the blood discarded by the
CellSearch system and passes the blood through micro sieves with 5um
pores to enrich for the larger CTC.Methods: A sample collection device
was attached to the waste line of the CellTracks Autoprep (AP). The blood
discarded after immunomagnetic separation was detected in the waste line
and collected into a separate 50ml conical tube for each patient sample.
After collection, the blood was filtered through microfabricated silicon
nitride filters with pore diameters of 5 micrometer (Aquamarijn, Zutphen,
The Netherlands) with a pressure below 40mbar. To evaluate recovery on
the filter the COLO320(median size 11m), SKBR3(16m) and T24(16m) cell
lines where used. To evaluate recovery from the AP waste the SKBR3(445000
EpCAM antigens) and T24(2167 EpCAM antigens) cell lines where used. 300
cells where spiked in 7.5ml of blood collected in CellSave tubes from
healthy volunteers. All samples were processed the day after
collection.Results: The average recovery on filter from whole blood is
29% for COLO320 and 80% for SKBR3 and T24. The average recovery of the
SKBR3 cell line with the CellSearch system is 91% and 5% are recovered
from the AP waste using filtration. In contrast, the average recovery of
T24 cell line with the CellSearch system is only 30% but 51% are
recovered from the AP waste after filtration. The carryover between
spiked and unspiked samples collected from the AP waste was <1.3% of the
spiked cells for unspiked samples with a mean of 0.9%.Conclusions: We
present a method and device that enables the identification and
characterization of CTC not detected by the CellSearch system which
allows a systematic evaluation of the clinical relevance of these CTC.

