Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential contribution of chromatin remodeling complex
components to the protection from cytotoxic stress.


Anthracyclines are among the most common chemotherapeutic agents used
to-date. Although effective, resistance to this agent usually develops in
the course of treatment and serious dose-related toxicity, namely chronic
cardio-toxicity, limits its use. In patients suffering from triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cytotoxic agents such as anthracyclines are
some of the only therapeutic alternatives. To increase our knowledge of
the pathways that protect cells from anthracyclines we carried out a
genome-wide genetic screening in the eukaryotic model organism S.
cerevisiae to identify gene defects that generate cells hypersensitive to
doxorubicin. A total of 71 deletion strains displayed varying levels of
sensitivity to anthracylcines. Of these, 11 genes are involved in
chromatin remodeling. The most sensitive mutations corresponded to swi3,
snf2 and arp8, which are components of the SWI/SNF complex. Deletion of
SNF2 resulted in sensitivity to doxorubicin of 100,000-fold higher than
wild type cells. Further analysis of the SNF2 defective strain revealed
that it is also sensitive to daunorubicin and cisplatin, as well as to
other DNA damaging agents such as alkylating agents, the topoI inhibitor
campthotecin or replication blocks from hydroxyurea. Our results indicate
that the SWI/SNF complex plays a critical role in protecting cells from
exposure to anthracyclines and other DNA damaging agents. Targeting these
genes may provide a useful alternative to hypersensitize cancer cells to
chemotherapy and provide a therapeutic alternative to TNBC. Research
supported by NIH/NCRR RCMI grant #RR03020 at Florida A&M University.

