Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rb dephosphorylation and cleavage in Apoptosis.


The Retinoblastoma protein (Rb) is important in the control of cell
proliferation and apoptosis. Its activity is controlled by reversible
phosphorylation on several serine and threonine residues. The role of Rb
phosphorylation in the control of apoptosis is largely unknown, although
several apoptotic stimuli result in dephosphorylation of Rb. We have
recently shown that dephosphorylation of Threonine-821 of Rb is required
for apoptosis triggered by UV radiation and by the cdk inhibitor,
Roscovitine. Here we show that Roscovitine induced dephosphorylation of
Threonine-821 occurred concomitant with C-terminal cleavage of Rb, which
is a known marker of apoptosis. In attempt to characterize the role of Rb
dephosphorylation in the process of Rb cleavage, we have utilized mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) that express a mutant Rb in which the
carboxy-terminal caspase cleavage site (884DEADG888) of Rb is altered to
DEAAE which is resistant to cleavage (RB-MI). Roscovitine treatment (8
hours, 25M) causes a reduction in cell number in WT MEFs, but has no
effect on RB-MI MEFs. In addition, Roscovitine causes apoptosis in 60-70%
of WT MEFs, however Roscovitine is unable to induce apoptosis in RB-MI
MEFs demonstrating that the cdk inhibitor requires the carboxy-terminal
cleavage of Rb in order to stimulate apoptosis. Apoptosis was measured
using a DNA fragmentation ELISA, TUNEL assay, and by immunoblotting of
active caspase-3. Experiments are currently underway to determine whether
dephosphorylation of Threonine-821, specifically, is required for Rb
cleavage.

