Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNAs profile as a novel biomarker for
osteosarcoma.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the primary bone tumor in children, with
approximately 400 cases each year diagnosed in patients under the age of
twenty. Current therapies can achieve long-term relapse free survival
rates near 75% for those with localized disease, while survival rates for
patients with overt metastatic disease at diagnosis are often less than
20%. Without adjuvant chemotherapy, over 80% of children will develop
metastatic or recurrent disease and all patients require long term
monitoring. However, there are no reliable, non-invasive biological
markers to detect the presence or progression of disease, assess therapy
response, or provide upfront risk stratification. The present method for
detecting and monitoring disease status in OS is radiographic imaging
which is often difficult to interpret. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
evolutionarily conserved, stable, small non-coding RNA molecules that are
key post-transcriptional regulators and are ideal candidates for
circulating biomarker development due to their stability in plasma, ease
of isolation with high sensitivity, and the unique expressions associated
with specific disease states. As such, we have developed a signature
profile of circulating miRNAs utilizing a novel genetically engineered
mouse model of OS that can discriminate between mice with and without OS.
Specifically, we have determined that circulating miR-205 is decreased
3.2-fold in mice with disease compared to disease-free mice, whereas
miR-574-3p, miR-214, and miR-335-5p are increased 1.4, 1.9, and 2.9 fold
respectively in the diseased mice. Finally, based upon prior studies
utilizing other cancer models, we believe that we will be able to
directly translate these findings from the mouse model to patients
afflicted with osteosarcoma.

