Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the stem cell factor HMGA2 to improve outcomes in
glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of brain tumor-related
deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of GBM prevents
complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The lack of
curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific targeted
therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers in glioma
stem-like cells (GSCs), one of the major causes of tumor invasion and
recurrence, could lead to development of better therapies. HMGA2, a
non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal and
cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential therapeutic
target in GBM has not been investigated. To elucidate the role of HMGA2
in GBM, we have used a combination of in vitro and in vivo techniques in
the present study. We found high expression of HMGA2 mRNA and protein in
a subset of primary brain tumor samples from GBM patients, GBM cell lines
and GBM stem-cell lines using quantitative real-time PCR and
immunoblotting. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
significantly inhibited invasion of GBM cell lines (U-87 MG and LN-229,
32 and 70% inhibition, respectively, with HMGA2 shRNA vs. control shRNA,
PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of brain tumor-related
deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of GBM prevents
complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The lack of
curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific targeted
therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers in glioma
stem-like cells (GSCs), one of the major causes of tumor invasion and
recurrence, could lead to development of better therapies. HMGA2, a
non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal and
cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential therapeutic
target in GBM has not been investigated. To elucidate the role of HMGA2
in GBM, we have used a combination of in vitro and in vivo techniques in
the present study. We found high expression of HMGA2 mRNA and protein in
a subset of primary brain tumor samples from GBM patients, GBM cell lines
and GBM stem-cell lines using quantitative real-time PCR and
immunoblotting. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
significantly inhibited invasion of GBM cell lines (U-87 MG and LN-229,
32 and 70% inhibition, respectively, with HMGA2 shRNA vs. control shRNA,
P<0.001) and GBM stem cell lines (040821, 62% inhibition with HMGA2 shRNA
vs. control shRNA, PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of
brain tumor-related deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of
GBM prevents complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The
lack of curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific
targeted therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers
in glioma stem-like cells (GSCs), one of the major causes of tumor
invasion and recurrence, could lead to development of better therapies.
HMGA2, a non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal
and cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential
therapeutic target in GBM has not been investigated. To elucidate the
role of HMGA2 in GBM, we have used a combination of in vitro and in vivo
techniques in the present study. We found high expression of HMGA2 mRNA
and protein in a subset of primary brain tumor samples from GBM patients,
GBM cell lines and GBM stem-cell lines using quantitative real-time PCR
and immunoblotting. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
significantly inhibited invasion of GBM cell lines (U-87 MG and LN-229,
32 and 70% inhibition, respectively, with HMGA2 shRNA vs. control shRNA,
P<0.001) and GBM stem cell lines (040821, 62% inhibition with HMGA2 shRNA
vs. control shRNA, P<0.001) through Matrigel in vitro by transwell
invasion assays. Conversely, overexpression of HMGA2 in GBM stem cell
lines increased invasion (130% increase with HMGA2 overexpression vs.
control vector, PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of
brain tumor-related deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of
GBM prevents complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The
lack of curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific
targeted therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers
in glioma stem-like cells (GSCs), one of the major causes of tumor
invasion and recurrence, could lead to development of better therapies.
HMGA2, a non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal
and cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential
therapeutic target in GBM has not been investigated. To elucidate the
role of HMGA2 in GBM, we have used a combination of in vitro and in vivo
techniques in the present study. We found high expression of HMGA2 mRNA
and protein in a subset of primary brain tumor samples from GBM patients,
GBM cell lines and GBM stem-cell lines using quantitative real-time PCR
and immunoblotting. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
significantly inhibited invasion of GBM cell lines (U-87 MG and LN-229,
32 and 70% inhibition, respectively, with HMGA2 shRNA vs. control shRNA,
P<0.001) and GBM stem cell lines (040821, 62% inhibition with HMGA2 shRNA
vs. control shRNA, P<0.001) through Matrigel in vitro by transwell
invasion assays. Conversely, overexpression of HMGA2 in GBM stem cell
lines increased invasion (130% increase with HMGA2 overexpression vs.
control vector, P<0.0001) through Matrigel in vitro as demonstrated by
transwell invasion assays. In addition, overexpression of HMGA2 increased
clonogenicity of GBM stem cell lines in vitro in soft agar and
methylcellulose clonogenic assays (40% increase with HMGA2 overexpression
vs. control vector, PGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) causes the majority of
brain tumor-related deaths in the United States. The high invasiveness of
GBM prevents complete surgical resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The
lack of curative treatment highlights a dire need to develop specific
targeted therapeutics. Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers
in glioma stem-like cells (GSCs), one of the major causes of tumor
invasion and recurrence, could lead to development of better therapies.
HMGA2, a non-histone transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal
and cancer stem cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential
therapeutic target in GBM has not been investigated. To elucidate the
role of HMGA2 in GBM, we have used a combination of in vitro and in vivo
techniques in the present study. We found high expression of HMGA2 mRNA
and protein in a subset of primary brain tumor samples from GBM patients,
GBM cell lines and GBM stem-cell lines using quantitative real-time PCR
and immunoblotting. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2
significantly inhibited invasion of GBM cell lines (U-87 MG and LN-229,
32 and 70% inhibition, respectively, with HMGA2 shRNA vs. control shRNA,
P<0.001) and GBM stem cell lines (040821, 62% inhibition with HMGA2 shRNA
vs. control shRNA, P<0.001) through Matrigel in vitro by transwell
invasion assays. Conversely, overexpression of HMGA2 in GBM stem cell
lines increased invasion (130% increase with HMGA2 overexpression vs.
control vector, P<0.0001) through Matrigel in vitro as demonstrated by
transwell invasion assays. In addition, overexpression of HMGA2 increased
clonogenicity of GBM stem cell lines in vitro in soft agar and
methylcellulose clonogenic assays (40% increase with HMGA2 overexpression
vs. control vector, P<0.0001). Importantly, Kaplan-Meier analysis showed
increased survival of mice injected with GBM stem cell lines transduced
with HMGA2 shRNA compared to control shRNA (PGlioblastoma Multiforme
(GBM) causes the majority of brain tumor-related deaths in the United
States. The high invasiveness of GBM prevents complete surgical
resection, allowing tumor recurrence. The lack of curative treatment
highlights a dire need to develop specific targeted therapeutics.
Identifying and targeting novel molecular markers in glioma stem-like
cells (GSCs), one of the major causes of tumor invasion and recurrence,
could lead to development of better therapies. HMGA2, a non-histone
transcriptional modulator, is a regulator of normal and cancer stem
cells. The significance of HMGA2 as a potential therapeutic target in GBM
has not been investigated. To elucidate the role of HMGA2 in GBM, we have
used a combination of in vitro and in vivo techniques in the present
study. We found high expression of HMGA2 mRNA and protein in a subset of
primary brain tumor samples from GBM patients, GBM cell lines and GBM
stem-cell lines using quantitative real-time PCR and immunoblotting.
Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated reduction of HMGA2 significantly
inhibited invasion of GBM cell lines (U-87 MG and LN-229, 32 and 70%
inhibition, respectively, with HMGA2 shRNA vs. control shRNA, P<0.001)
and GBM stem cell lines (040821, 62% inhibition with HMGA2 shRNA vs.
control shRNA, P<0.001) through Matrigel in vitro by transwell invasion
assays. Conversely, overexpression of HMGA2 in GBM stem cell lines
increased invasion (130% increase with HMGA2 overexpression vs. control
vector, P<0.0001) through Matrigel in vitro as demonstrated by transwell
invasion assays. In addition, overexpression of HMGA2 increased
clonogenicity of GBM stem cell lines in vitro in soft agar and
methylcellulose clonogenic assays (40% increase with HMGA2 overexpression
vs. control vector, P<0.0001). Importantly, Kaplan-Meier analysis showed
increased survival of mice injected with GBM stem cell lines transduced
with HMGA2 shRNA compared to control shRNA (P<0.05) in an in vivo,
orthotopic, intracranial mouse xenograft model. Together, our results
suggest the importance of HMGA2 in promoting tumorigenicity of GBM by
increasing invasiveness and a stem-like state, thereby suggesting that
HMGA2 is a potential therapeutic target in GBM. Future studies are aimed
at elucidating the molecular mechanism by which HMGA2 regulates invasion
and stemness in GBM.

