Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in microRNA (miRNA) pathways and survival in
esophageal cancer (EC) patients.


Introduction: Polymorphisms within miRNA and in genes regulating miRNA
biogenesis can regulate a variety of cancer pathways in EC patients.
Comprehensive pathway analyses of miRNA-related genes were performed on
EC outcomes.Methods: 324 EC patients from Princess Margaret Hospital
(Toronto, Canada) were screened for 62 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 21 miRNA or miRNA biogenesis pathway genes. Multivariate
Cox-proportional hazard models, adjusted for key prognostic factors
evaluated the association of each SNP with overall survival (OS) and
progression free survival (PFS). Significant SNPs were further analysed
for joint effects, and also in subgroup and pathway analyses. All results
were internally validated through bootstrapping.Results: Five
polymorphisms belonging to the miRNA biogenesis pathway and one in a
miRNA were nominally associated with OS or PFS, where adjusted hazard
ratios (aHR) were between 1.23-1.41 for each comparison; p=0.003-0.04:
AGO1 (rs595961; chromosome (chr) 1), GEMIN3 (rs197412; chr1) CD86
(rs17281995; chr 3) hs-miRNA-26a1 (rs7372209; chr 3), GEMIN4 (rs7813 and
rs910924; chr 17). Joint effect analysis of SNPs in the same chromosome
found additive effects of these risk alleles (RA) on outcome: chr 1 (2-4
vs 0-1: aHROS=1.82 [1.21-2.75], p=0.004), chr 3 (3-4 vs 0: aHROS=4.07
[1.91-8.67], p=0.003), chr 17 (4 vs 0: aHRPFS=2.21 [1.13-4.31], p=0.02).
Pathway based analysis found each additional RA conferring a strong
additive effect on OS (per 2 RA: aHR=1.50 [1.25-1.81], p=1.9x10E-5).
Results on PFS were similar, with aHRPFS per 2RA of 1.51 [1.26-1.82],
p=1.3x10E-5. Internal validation found consistent results for all
analyses. Exploratory subgroup analysis identified two SNPs that had
differential effects on OS based on histology: for adenocarcinomas, the
aHR for KIAA0423 (rs1053667) was 0.51 [0.28-0.96], p=0.03, while for
squamous cell carcinomas, the aHR was 7.36 [2.07-26.1], p=0.002.
Similarly, for DICER (rs13078), aHRadenocarcinoma=0.96 [0.72-1.28],
p=0.78 vs aHRsquamous=2.51[1.21-5.21], p=0.01). In subset analyses,
hsa-mir-30a (rs1358379), hsa-mir-492 (rs2289030), hsa-mir-499
(rs3746444), and DGCR8 (rs1640299) were significantly associated with
different outcomes by nodal status.Conclusion: We identified the miRNA
biogenesis pathway as having an important role in the prognosis of EC
patients, with a 50% increase in death or disease progression when
carrying two additional miRNA risk alleles. Although some of the
identified polymorphisms have been previously associated with risk or
prognosis in other cancer disease sites, we report for the first time,
their associations with esophageal cancer prognosis.Citation Format:
Lawson Eng, Olusola O. Faluyi, Xin Qiu, Dangxiao Cheng, Daniel J. Renouf,
Lorin Dodbiba, Sevtap Savas, Sharon Marsh, Jennifer J. Knox, Gail E.
Darling, Rebecca KS Wong, Wei Xu, Geoffrey Liu, Abul K. Azad.
Polymorphisms in microRNA (miRNA) pathways and survival in esophageal
cancer (EC) patients. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2562. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2562

