Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro tyrosine kinase activity profiling to identify molecular
targets and predictive biomarkers in gastric cancer cell lines.


Background: Gastric cancer is among the leading causes of cancer-related
deaths worldwide, notably in Asia. Though targeted therapies have been
under clinical evaluation, the biological complexity of this cancer type
may confer resistance to single-targeted therapies. Especially, scirrhous
phenotype is known to be affected by multiple growth factors. To overcome
this biological complexity, multi-targeted kinase inhibitors (MTKIs) have
been clinically tested and were reported to be effective in a subset of
patients. We wanted to elucidate the kinase activity signature of gastric
cancer and to explore predictive biomarkers of MTKIs using gastric cancer
cell lines by tyrosine kinase activity profiling.Material and methods:
The growth-inhibitory effect of the MTKIs sunitinib, sorafenib, pazopanib
and the Akt inhibitor MK-2206 was evaluated by the MTT assay. 11
scirrhous and 14 non-scirrhous gastric cancer cell lines were grown until
semi-confluent, lysed, aliquoted and stored at -80C until use. The basal
tyrosine kinase activity of the lysates was measured on PamChip peptide
micro-arrays, containing 144 peptides derived from known human
phosphorylation sites. Quantification of peptide phosphorylation and data
analysis were performed using BioNavigator and SIMCA P+ software.Results:
HSC-39, HSC-40A, KATO-III and HSC-43 scirrhous cells and SNU-16
non-scirrhous cells were sensitive to all three MTKIs with IC50 values
Background: Gastric cancer is among the leading causes of cancer-related
deaths worldwide, notably in Asia. Though targeted therapies have been
under clinical evaluation, the biological complexity of this cancer type
may confer resistance to single-targeted therapies. Especially, scirrhous
phenotype is known to be affected by multiple growth factors. To overcome
this biological complexity, multi-targeted kinase inhibitors (MTKIs) have
been clinically tested and were reported to be effective in a subset of
patients. We wanted to elucidate the kinase activity signature of gastric
cancer and to explore predictive biomarkers of MTKIs using gastric cancer
cell lines by tyrosine kinase activity profiling.Material and methods:
The growth-inhibitory effect of the MTKIs sunitinib, sorafenib, pazopanib
and the Akt inhibitor MK-2206 was evaluated by the MTT assay. 11
scirrhous and 14 non-scirrhous gastric cancer cell lines were grown until
semi-confluent, lysed, aliquoted and stored at -80C until use. The basal
tyrosine kinase activity of the lysates was measured on PamChip peptide
micro-arrays, containing 144 peptides derived from known human
phosphorylation sites. Quantification of peptide phosphorylation and data
analysis were performed using BioNavigator and SIMCA P+ software.Results:
HSC-39, HSC-40A, KATO-III and HSC-43 scirrhous cells and SNU-16
non-scirrhous cells were sensitive to all three MTKIs with IC50 values <
1 mol/L. Orthogonal partial least square-discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA)
of basal tyrosine kinase activity profiles showed a clear segregation
between sensitive cell lines and insensitive cell lines. Levels of
putative target proteins such as PDGFR, VEGFR, Raf and Kit did not
correlate with the sensitivity. All sensitive cell lines turned out to
harbor an FGFR2 amplification suggesting that FGFR2 amplification may be
a predictive biomarker of response to MTKI treatment. Kinases such as
EGFR, EPHA, FGFR, IGF1R, INSR and Src contributed to this segregation
suggesting that these are relevant to the sensitivity to MTKIs. MET
overexpressing cell lines were resistant to treatment with the four
inhibitors. Scirrhous cells were segregated from non-scirrhous cells by
OPLS-DA among cell lines with signet-ring cell carcinoma cytology with
R2, 0.994; Q2, 0.615. EGFR, ERBB2, 3, 4, EPHAs, FAK, IGF1R, INSR, MAP2Ks,
RET and SRC seemed to be responsible for the segregation suggesting that
they play an important role in scirrhous gastric cancer
biology.Conclusions: Kinase activity profiles reflect the biological
complexity of gastric cancer. FGFR2 status correlates with sensitivity to
sunitinib, pazopanib and sorafenib, whereas MET status does not. These
data imply that tyrosine kinase activity profiling with PamChip peptide
arrays can be utilized to identify molecular targets and predictive
biomarkers in gastric cancer and this should be further explored.

