Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of lung adenocarcinoma progression by NKX2-1 is
dependent on p53 Status.


This article investigates the mechanistic aspects of NKX2-1 as a tumour
suppressor and its oncogenic properties in lung adenocarcinoma. We show
that NKX2-1 is a transcriptional factor that directly regulates p53
transcription. In p53 wild-type cells, NKX2-1 interacts with SP1 to
down-regulate IKK transcription. In p53 mutated cells, NKX2-1 elevates
the mutant p53/NF-Y complex to up-regulate IKK transcription.
NKX2-1-mediated IKK expression is responsible for the efficacy of soft
agar growth, invasion, and xenograft lung tumour nodule formation.
Moreover, tumour aggressiveness attenuated by NKX2-1-mediated IKK is
predominately through the shuffling of Foxo3a between the cytosol and
nucleus of lung cancer cells to modulate E-cadherin expression. A
consistent association of NKX2-1 with IKK and E-cadherin expression was
observed in tumours from lung adenocarcinoma patients. P53 mutated
tumours with high NKX2-1 expression have poorer overall survival (OS) and
relapse-free survival (RFS) rates than those with low-NKX2-1 expression.
Conversely, p53 wild-type tumours with high-NKX2-1 tumours have more
favourable OS and RFS rates than those with low-NKX2-1 expression. As
such, we demonstrate that aberrant transcription of IKK underlines the
ability of NKX2-1 to act as a tumour suppressor or to display oncogenic
properties in lung adenocarcinoma.

