Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Over-expression of PIM1 kinase contributes to CYP24A1 gene
up-regulation in prostate cancer.


The traditional role of vitamin D is in the control of calcium
homeostasis and bone mineralization. Over the past 2 decades, studies
have demonstrated that vitamin D is useful for the prevention and
treatment of various cancers. 24-hydroxylase, encoded by CYP24A1 gene, is
the key enzyme which inactivates vitamin D. Increased expression of
CYP24A1 has been found in several human tumors. CYP24A1 is regulated
directly by 1,25(OH)2D3 (1,25D3) through genomic signaling. Studies have
revealed that protein kinase signaling pathways may also be involved in
the regulation of CYP24A1 expression. By screening a chemical compound
library, we discovered that small chemical compounds with inhibitory
activity toward protein kinases including PIM1 and HIPK2 inhibited
CYP24A1 expression. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated PIM1 knockdown reduced
1,25D3-induced CYP24A1 mRNA and protein expression in human prostate
cancer PC3 cells. In contrast, HIPK2 knockdown had no effect. The
serine/threonine kinase PIM1 has been implicated as an oncogene in
various human cancers including lymphomas, gastric, colorectal and
prostate carcinomas. We analyzed mRNA expression of CYP24A1 and PIM1 in
26 case-matched pairs of human benign and malignant prostate by qRT-PCR.
CYP24A1 expression was increased in 6 out of 26 malignant prostate
samples compared to benign lesions (> 1.5 fold). PIM1 expression was
increased in 10 out of 26 malignant prostate samples compared to benign
lesions (> 1.5 fold). Five of the 6 samples with increased CYP24A1 in
malignant lesions also had increased PIM1 expression. Fisher's exact test
shows that increased CYP24A1 expression is significantly associated with
increased PIM1 expression in malignant prostate (P = 0.0184). These data
indicate that PIM1 may be involved in increased CYP24A1 expression in
prostate cancer.This study was supported by NIH/NCI grants 5R01CA067267
and 5R01CA095045.

