Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune response to XAGE-1b (GAGED2a) in NSCLC patients and its
clinical relevance.


BACKGROUND:XAGE-1bis a cancer/testis (CT) antigen expressed highly in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with restricted expressiononly in
testis in normal tissues. In this study, we investigated correlation of
intensity of humoral and cellular immune responses against XAGE-1b and
itsclinical relevance in NSCLC patients.MATERIALS AND METHODS:Peripheral
bloodwas obtained from NSCLC patients who visited Kawasaki Medical School
Hospital between 2005 and 2012 under written informed consent. Antibody
response to XAGE-1bwas analyzed by ELISA using synthesized XAGE-1b
protein. CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses were examined by IFN- ELISA and/or
IFN-capture assay by FACS using 12-mer or 16-merXAGE-1b-overlapping
peptides (OLPs) spanning the entire XAGE-1b (GAGED2a) protein.RESULTS:
Antibody positive frequencies of total 362 NSCLC, 220 lung adenocarcinoma
and 85 lung squamous cell carcinoma patients were 8.8% (32/362), 12.7%
(28/220) and 1.2% (1/85), respectively. With antibody positive NSCLC
patients, the patients showing high, intermediate and low antibody
response was 7, 20 and 5, respectively. The frequency of XAGE-1b-reactive
CD4 T-cells in patients showing high, intermediate and low antibody
response was 5.5 2.1 x 105, 1.5 0.7 x 105 and BACKGROUND:XAGE-1bis a
cancer/testis (CT) antigen expressed highly in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) with restricted expressiononly in testis in normal tissues. In
this study, we investigated correlation of intensity of humoral and
cellular immune responses against XAGE-1b and itsclinical relevance in
NSCLC patients.MATERIALS AND METHODS:Peripheral bloodwas obtained from
NSCLC patients who visited Kawasaki Medical School Hospital between 2005
and 2012 under written informed consent. Antibody response to XAGE-1bwas
analyzed by ELISA using synthesized XAGE-1b protein. CD4 and CD8 T-cell
responses were examined by IFN- ELISA and/or IFN-capture assay by FACS
using 12-mer or 16-merXAGE-1b-overlapping peptides (OLPs) spanning the
entire XAGE-1b (GAGED2a) protein.RESULTS: Antibody positive frequencies
of total 362 NSCLC, 220 lung adenocarcinoma and 85 lung squamous cell
carcinoma patients were 8.8% (32/362), 12.7% (28/220) and 1.2% (1/85),
respectively. With antibody positive NSCLC patients, the patients showing
high, intermediate and low antibody response was 7, 20 and 5,
respectively. The frequency of XAGE-1b-reactive CD4 T-cells in patients
showing high, intermediate and low antibody response was 5.5 2.1 x 105,
1.5 0.7 x 105 and < 1.1 x 105, respectively. The frequency of
XAGE-1b-reactive CD8 T-cells was 6.9 1.6 x 106, 4.6 1.6 x 106 and
BACKGROUND:XAGE-1bis a cancer/testis (CT) antigen expressed highly in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with restricted expressiononly in
testis in normal tissues. In this study, we investigated correlation of
intensity of humoral and cellular immune responses against XAGE-1b and
itsclinical relevance in NSCLC patients.MATERIALS AND METHODS:Peripheral
bloodwas obtained from NSCLC patients who visited Kawasaki Medical School
Hospital between 2005 and 2012 under written informed consent. Antibody
response to XAGE-1bwas analyzed by ELISA using synthesized XAGE-1b
protein. CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses were examined by IFN- ELISA and/or
IFN-capture assay by FACS using 12-mer or 16-merXAGE-1b-overlapping
peptides (OLPs) spanning the entire XAGE-1b (GAGED2a) protein.RESULTS:
Antibody positive frequencies of total 362 NSCLC, 220 lung adenocarcinoma
and 85 lung squamous cell carcinoma patients were 8.8% (32/362), 12.7%
(28/220) and 1.2% (1/85), respectively. With antibody positive NSCLC
patients, the patients showing high, intermediate and low antibody
response was 7, 20 and 5, respectively. The frequency of XAGE-1b-reactive
CD4 T-cells in patients showing high, intermediate and low antibody
response was 5.5 2.1 x 105, 1.5 0.7 x 105 and < 1.1 x 105, respectively.
The frequency of XAGE-1b-reactive CD8 T-cells was 6.9 1.6 x 106, 4.6 1.6
x 106 and < 1.1 x 106, respectively. The frequency of cytotoxic CD8
T-cells in IFN- secreting CD8 T-cells in response to
XAGE-1b-peptide-pulsed autologous EBV-B cells in patients showing high
and intermediate antibody responses was 59.0% and 4.8%, respectively.We
evaluated overall survival (OS) time with 120 stage IIIB/IV lung
adenocarcinoma patients. Median OS were 32.3 and 14.4 months in
antibody-positive and negative patients(P-.039). There was no significant
differencewith 1-year survival rate in antibody-positive (68.7%) and
negative (55.6%)patients, but was significant with 3-year survival rate
in 34.8% and 14.1% respectively. Furthermore, univariate and
multivariable analyses showed XAGE-1b antibody response was independent
prognostic factor.CONCLUSION:Our findings indicate that CT antigen
XAGE-1b is highly immunogenic in NSCLC patients inducing antibody, and
CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses and the immune response against XAGE-1b is
beneficial for prognosis.

