Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is interrupting IGF1R signaling enough to overcome resistance to
trastuzumab in HER2+ breast cancer models?.


Background: Trastuzumab resistance hampers its well-known efficacy in
controlling HER2+ breast cancer progression. IGF1R is associated with
worse outcomes in the HER2+ subtype of breast cancer (Br Cancer Res Treat
2012 132:131). Indeed, there is in vitro evidence showing that increased
signaling through IGF1R confers resistance to HER2-targeting agents.
However, the involvement of IGF1R and its downstream signaling pathways
in this mechanism have yet to be confirmed. Purpose: Since, IGF1R is
involved in the progression of breast cancers and resistance to
trastuzumab therapy, co-suppression of this pathway with IGF1R mAB plus
trastuzumab (T) or T-DM1 may, therefore, be efficacious in T-resistant
breast cancer models. Methods: Here, we investigated the preclinical
efficacy of IGF1R mAB (R7072) alone or in combination with T or T-DM1 in
BT474/HerR (T-resistant) and MCF7/HER2-18 (HER2 stably overexpressed)
cell lines. The inhibition of IGF1R pathway effectors was evaluated by
Western blotting. Tumor growth inhibition after treatment of R7072,
T/T-DM1 or the combination was examined in cell-based xenograft models.
Results: 1) Doses as low as 10 g/ml, R7072 abrogated p- AKT (S473 and
T308) within 1hr of treatment in both MC7/HER2-18 and MCF7 cells
(parental), 2) R7072 transiently blocked phosphorylation of downstream
effector of mTOR, P70S6K (in 1hr treatment) in MCF7/HER2-18 cells but
completely blocked of phosphorylation of P70S6K in MCF7 cells in both
time points, 3) IGF1-induced AKT activation was inhibited in both HER2
overexpressed MCF7 and parental cells, however, both T and T-DM1 failed
to block AKT activation following IGF1 stimulation in both cell lines, 4)
in both cell lines, treatment of R7072 resulted in upregulation of p-ERK
at higher time points, 5) R7072 was unable to block PI3K and its
downstream effectors in HER2+/T-resistant cells, 6) in vivo xenograft
data show that the combination of R7072 and T/T-DM1 has strongly enhanced
antitumor effects in both MCF7/HER2-18 and BT474/HerR cells, but as a
single agent, R7072 failed to block tumor growth in HER2+/T-resistant
cells, and 5) similarly this combination significantly blocked the
expression Ki67 and CD31 in tumor tissues. Conclusion: Our data suggest
that the combination of R7072 and anti-HER2 antibody (T or T-DM1) is
highly effective in the HER2+/T-resistant model and that similar level of
inhibition cannot be achieved by either monotherapy.Citation Format:
Yuliang Sun, Nandini Dey, Max Hasmann, Pradip De, Brian Leyland-Jones. Is
interrupting IGF1R signaling enough to overcome resistance to trastuzumab
in HER2+ breast cancer models?. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 537. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-537

