Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic repression of miR-217 contributes to tobacco-induced
esophageal carcinogenesis.


Although alterations in microRNA (miRNA; miR) expression have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of a variety of human malignancies,
limited information is available regarding mechanisms by which these
noncoding RNAs contribute to initiation and progression of
tobacco-induced esophageal cancers. In order to examine this issue, array
and RT-PCR techniques were used to examine miRNA expression profiles in
immortalized esophageal epithelial cells (Het-1A), as well as NCI-SB-EsC1
(EsC1), NCI-SB-EsC2 (EsC-2), OE19, and OE33 esophageal cancer cells
cultured in normal media (NM) with or without cigarette smoke condensate
(CSC). Under relevant exposure conditions, CSC significantly decreased
miR-217 expression (1.5-9.2 fold) in esophageal cancer cells and Het-1A
cells. Endogenous miR-217 expression levels in cultured esophageal cancer
cells were significantly lower than those observed in Het-1A cells.
Consistent with these findings, miR-217 was significantly down-regulated
(3.5-23.5 fold) in resected esophageal cancers relative to adjacent
normal esophageal tissues. Software-guided analysis revealed that miR-217
potentially targeted KLK7, encoding a kallikrein family member implicated
in invasion and metastasis of several cancers. Constitutive
over-expression of miR-217 inhibited expression, whereas depletion of
endogenous miR-217 enhanced expression of KLK7 in Het-1A, EsC1 and EsC2
cells. RNA cross-link immunoprecipitation (CLIP) experiments confirmed
direct interaction of miR-217 with KLK7 transcripts. Methylated DNA
Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
experiments demonstrated that CSC increased DNA methylation and decreased
H3K4me3 levels within the miR-217 genomic locus in Het-1A, EsC1 and EsC2
cells. Deoxyazacytidine (DAC) induced miR-217 expression in EsC1 and EsC2
cells but not Het-1A cells, and markedly attenuated CSC-mediated miR-217
repression in these cells. Over-expression of miR-217 significantly
decreased proliferation of esophageal cancer and Het-1A cells, as well as
invasion of esophageal cancer cells. Depletion of miR-217 increased
growth of Het-1A cells, but not EsC1 and EsC2 cells presumably due to
lower endogenous miR-217 expression in these cancer cells. Experiments
are currently in progress to examine the effects of miR-217 and KLK7
expression on tumorigenicity of esophageal cancer cells. Collectively,
these data demonstrate that epigenetic repression of miR-217 contributes
to the pathogenesis of esophageal carcinomas, and suggest that
restoration of miR-217 expression may be a novel strategy for therapy of
these malignancies.Citation Format: Sichuan Xi, Suzanne Inchauste,
Zuoxiang Xiao, Jigui Shan, Mary Zhang, Julie A. Hong, Manish T Raiji,
David G. Beer, David S. Schrump. Epigenetic repression of miR-217
contributes to tobacco-induced esophageal carcinogenesis. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3071.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3071

