Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Formulation of oral microparticulate drug delivery system for
cancer.


The development of oral controlled-release cancer drug formulations with
enhanced bioavailability and efficacy is highly desired. Our research aim
to develop controlled-release capsule formulations containing
sulforaphane-encapsulated in a biodegradable polymeric microparticulate
system. Sulforaphane, a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDAC), was
investigated as this therapeutic agent reverses aberrant epigenetic
changes in cancer cells and the effects of this drug are reversible.
Biodegradable polymeric microspheres were prepared by a
microencapsulation method, and prepared microspheres were characterized
for various properties, including encapsulation efficiency, percent
yield, particle size, size distribution, surface morphology, and Zeta
potential. Dissolution studies were carried out to analyze the release
profiles of the microspheres and capsule-containing microsphere
formulations. Data indicated that microspheres were less than 2-m in
diameter size. It has been shown that particles within this size range
are effectively taken in by the cells. The prepared microsphere
formulations had Zeta potential values of about -30 mV, which suggest
that they are stable. Furthermore, microsphere formulations were shown to
provide controlled-release of the drug over 36 hours. Capsule
formulations containing microspheres exhibited similar drug release
characteristics; however, the lag time for drug release was longer. Thus,
oral gelatin capsules containing sulforaphane-encapsulated biodegradable
microspheres show potential for effective delivery of epigenetic agents.

