Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-9D5 is a prognostic marker in early stage non-small cell
lung cancer.


Background: Galectins are proteins with a conserved carbohydrate
recognition domain and a high affinity for beta-galactosides on
glycoconjugates. They are differentially expressed in many pathologies,
including cancer. Recent findings suggest a prognostic potential of
galectin-1 and -3 in lung cancer as increased expression is frequently
associated with enhanced malignancy and poor patient survival. However,
prognostic values of the other 13 members of the galectin family in lung
cancer remain elusive. We performed extensive galectin expression
profiling and determined the prognostic value of all known human
galectins in early stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients.Methods: A retrospective study was performed on primary tumors
from 93 early stage NSCLC patients with a follow-up of at least 5 years.
The mRNA expression levels of all human galectins in NSCLC tumor tissue
were determined by qPCR and correlated with overall survival.
Additionally, tissue microarrays (TMAs) comprising of both normal and
tumor lung tissue were stained for galectin-9 and staining frequency was
scored in epithelial cells and endothelial cells (EC).Results: Galectin
mRNA expression in NSCLC was shown to be confined to galectin-1, -3, -4,
-7, -8, and -9. Patients with galectin-1 expression levels above median
showed significant shorter overall survival (43.5 (95% CI 32.4-54.6) vs.
72.2 (59.3-89.0) months; p=0.039, HR=1.5). The expression of galectin-3
was not prognostic in our patient group. Only one other galectin was
found to be of prognostic value, i.e. a splice variant of galectin-9
lacking exon 5 (galectin-9D5). Patients with galectin-9D5 expression
levels below median have shorter overall survival (49.2 (34.1-64.2) vs.
67.3 (55.0-79.6) months; p=0.007, HR=2.2). Overall patient survival was
even worse when patients with high galectin-1 and low galectin-9D5 levels
were compared to all other patients (30.0 (16.2-43.9) vs. 70.8
(58.6-83.0) months; p=0.002, HR=4.6). Immunohistochemical staining of
TMAs for total galectin-9 revealed no differences between epithelial
cells of normal and tumor tissue. However, galectin-9 protein levels were
significantly increased in tumor EC compared to normal EC.Conclusion:
Comprehensive galectin expression profiling identified a spice variant of
galectin-9, i.e. galectin-9D5, as a novel prognostic marker in early
stage NSCLC. Interestingly, whereas low galectin-9D5 mRNA expression
levels predict poor patient survival, we observed an increased galectin-9
protein expression in tumor EC compared to normal EC. Further research is
warranted to unravel role of galectin-9 in angiogenesis and immune
regulation in NSCLC. Since it has been shown that adjuvant chemotherapy
can improve the survival of patients with resected stage II-IIIa NSCLC,
determining the galectin expression profile might serve as a tool in
predicting prognosis and treatment selection for individual patients.

