Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative metabolism by human peritoneal cancer cells stimulated
with death ligands.


Anatomic environments harboring cancer are known to influence tumor
sensitivity to most forms of therapy. In general, the effects are
negative with respect to clinical response. Thus, manipulation of tumor
environments to favor treatment outcome is justified. The human
peritoneal cavity harbors multiple types of primary and metastatic cancer
whose presence elicits a substantial inflammatory response with
consequent diverse and conflicting effects on tumor growth and treatment
response. The present study used peritoneal tumors (PT) from patients to
investigate expression of oxidative metabolism (OM) genes relevant to
inflammation within the peritoneal cavity. Briefly, PT were used to
establish cell lines which were stimulated with pathophysiologic
concentrations of the inflammatory death ligands, rTNF and rTRAIL
followed by gene expression analysis with real time pcr. Lines from a
metastatic lesion on the stomach of a colorectal cancer patient (CR) as
well as tissue from a patient with extensive peritoneal carcinomatosis
(PC) were used. Stimulation (expressed as fold increase above media
controls) of the PC line with rTNF elicited significantly increased
expression of multiple OM gene families and multiple isoforms within each
family including the gluathione peroxidase (isoforms 1-4, range = 2.1-4.8
fold); peroxiredoxin (isoforms 1-6, range = 2.6-5.1 fold); superoxide
dismutase (isoforms 1-3, range = 2.4-2.6 fold); and, arachidonate
metabolism (Cox1, Cox2 and 12-Lipox, range =2.1-16 fold) families.
Significant increases were also seen for ApoE (3.8 fold); gluathione
synthetase, transferase, and reductase (3.1, 2.6, and 7.1 fold
respectively); and scavenger receptor A (4.1 fold). The results with
rTRAIL also showed significant increases in expression of selected
isoforms of the same OM families, but were of lesser magnitude and
involved only 1 or 2 of the isoforms from each family. OM gene expression
in the CR line was not significantly increased in most gene families by
inflammatory death ligands, with statistically significant increases of
Anatomic environments harboring cancer are known to influence tumor
sensitivity to most forms of therapy. In general, the effects are
negative with respect to clinical response. Thus, manipulation of tumor
environments to favor treatment outcome is justified. The human
peritoneal cavity harbors multiple types of primary and metastatic cancer
whose presence elicits a substantial inflammatory response with
consequent diverse and conflicting effects on tumor growth and treatment
response. The present study used peritoneal tumors (PT) from patients to
investigate expression of oxidative metabolism (OM) genes relevant to
inflammation within the peritoneal cavity. Briefly, PT were used to
establish cell lines which were stimulated with pathophysiologic
concentrations of the inflammatory death ligands, rTNF and rTRAIL
followed by gene expression analysis with real time pcr. Lines from a
metastatic lesion on the stomach of a colorectal cancer patient (CR) as
well as tissue from a patient with extensive peritoneal carcinomatosis
(PC) were used. Stimulation (expressed as fold increase above media
controls) of the PC line with rTNF elicited significantly increased
expression of multiple OM gene families and multiple isoforms within each
family including the gluathione peroxidase (isoforms 1-4, range = 2.1-4.8
fold); peroxiredoxin (isoforms 1-6, range = 2.6-5.1 fold); superoxide
dismutase (isoforms 1-3, range = 2.4-2.6 fold); and, arachidonate
metabolism (Cox1, Cox2 and 12-Lipox, range =2.1-16 fold) families.
Significant increases were also seen for ApoE (3.8 fold); gluathione
synthetase, transferase, and reductase (3.1, 2.6, and 7.1 fold
respectively); and scavenger receptor A (4.1 fold). The results with
rTRAIL also showed significant increases in expression of selected
isoforms of the same OM families, but were of lesser magnitude and
involved only 1 or 2 of the isoforms from each family. OM gene expression
in the CR line was not significantly increased in most gene families by
inflammatory death ligands, with statistically significant increases of
<3 fold observed for glutathione peroxidases 5, 6 and 7; lactoperoxidase;
myeloperoxidase; and Cox1. Incubation of the CR and PC line with rTNF and
rTRAIL produced only modest inhibition of proliferation in an MTS assay.
These results demonstrate that innflammatory death ligands shown to be
increased in the peritoneal cavity of cancer patients can elicit
increased expression of OM genes in primary PT cell lines. The types of
genes stimulated suggest that PT cells can create a highly anti-oxidant
local microenvironment within an inflammed peritoneal cavity. This effect
may substantially inhibit the tumoricidal effects of chemotherapy,
radiation, and antitumor immunity while promoting tumor angiogenesis and
progression. Tumor-targeted inhibition of OM may improve clinical
treatment outcomes in peritoneal cancers.

