Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomere length of tumor tissues and survival in patients with
early stage non-small cell lung cancer .


Telomere shortening leads to genomic instability that drives oncogenesis
through the activation of telomerase and the generation of other
mutations necessary for tumor progression. This study was conducted to
determine the impact of telomere shortening on the survival of patients
with early stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Relative telomere
length in tumor tissues was measured by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction in 164 patients with surgically-resected NSCLC. The association
between telomere length and overall survival (OS) and disease-free
survival (DFS) was analyzed.When the patients were categorized into
quartiles based on telomere length, those patients with the 1st quartile
(shortest) of telomere length had a significantly worse OS and DFS
compared to patients with the 2nd to the 4th quartiles of telomere length
(adjusted hazard ratio for OS =2.67, 95% confidence interval = 1.50-4.75,
P = 0.001; and adjusted hazard ratio forDFS = 1.92, 95% confidence
interval = 1.17-3.14, P = 0.01). An association between telomere length
and survival outcome was more pronounced in squamous cell carcinomas than
adenocarcinomas (P-value of test for homogeneity for OS and DFS = 0.05
and 0.02, respectively).Telomere length of tumor tissues is an
independent prognostic factor in patients with surgically resected early
stage NSCLC.

