Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased ceramide synthase 5 expression is associated with
lymphovascular invasion, metastasis and poor survival in colorectal
cancer.


Background: Ceramide synthase 5 (CerS5) is multi-pass transmembrane
protein of the endoplasmic reticulum. Functioning as a bona fide
(dihydro)ceramide synthase, CerS5 regulates the levels of short ceramide
species. Ceramides are bioactive lipids implicated in proliferation,
senescence, angiogenesis and death of normal and cancerous cells. We
aimed to investigate CerS5 expression in colorectal cancer tissue and to
evaluate the prognostic significance of CerS5 in colorectal cancer
patients.Methods: CerS5 expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry
on tissue microarrays constructed from 125 colorectal cancer patients.
The associations between CerS5 staining and the clinicopathological
factors were examined using the Spearman rank correlation test. Patient
survival was examined using the Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox
proportional hazard modeling, categorized according to high or low CerS5
staining intensity.Results: Immunohistological staining revealed an
overexpression of membranous CerS5 in 63 out of 125 (50.4%) colorectal
carcinomas. CerS5 overexpression significantly correlated with
lymphovascular invasion and metastatic disease in matched tumor cases (P
= 0.036 & P = 0.037, respectively). Patients with CerS5 overexpressing
tumors had a significantly lower overall 5-year survival (OS, P = 0.029)
and 5-year recurrence-free survival (RFS, P = 0.047). Cox multivariate
analysis showed that the increased CerS5 expression was an independent
predictor of OS (hazard ratio (HR) = 1.604; 95% confidence interval (CI)
1.010-2.548, P = 0.045) and RFS (HR = 1.592; CI 1.036-2.447, P =
0.034).Conclusions: We found an increased expression of ceramide synthase
5 (CerS5) in 50% of investigated colorectal carcinomas, which was
associated with lymphovascular invasion, metastasis and poor survival in
colorectal cancer patients. Our study identifies CerS5 as a novel
independent prognostic biomarker for patients with colorectal cancer.

