Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying novel therapeutic targets for cancer stem cell
differentiation.


A growing body of evidence supports a role for cancer stem cells in the
initiation and maintenance of a wide range of tumors. Cancer stem cells
appear to be less sensitive to current treatments, necessitating the
discovery of novel strategies for targeting this cell type. We
hypothesize that driving cancer stem cells to differentiate will be an
effective approach for inhibiting tumor growth and recurrence. Indeed,
this strategy is used for the treatment of Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia,
which presents with an accumulation of promyelocytes. Treatment with
all-trans retinoic acid drives these cells to differentiate into
neutrophils and leads to complete remission in over 90% of patients.The
goal of our work is to identify druggable nodes to drive epithelial
cancer stem cells to differentiate, leading to inhibition of tumor
growth. We are currently focused on colorectal cancer, for which there is
a high unmet medical need. Each year, more than 1.2 million new cases of
colorectal adenocarcinoma are reported. It is estimated that 80% of colon
tumors have mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, which
results in constitutive activation of the Wnt pathway and nuclear
accumulation of -catenin. Wnt signaling activates the transcription of
genes that drive cell proliferation. Recent studies have shown that
-catenin is necessary for the maintenance of colorectal adenocarcinomas
with APC mutations. Indeed, -catenin knockdown in colon cancer cells
drives them to differentiate and decreases their proliferative capacity,
reducing tumor size in vivo. We have developed a number of methods to
monitor this process in vitro, and will present our efforts to screen for
novel targets that can drive colon tumor stem cells to differentiate.

