Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Poly (ADP) ribose polymerase (PARP) enzyme inhibitor, CEP8983,
potentiates bendamustine activity in small cell lung cancer (SCLC).


Background: Effective therapy for small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is
currently limited; therefore new approaches are warranted. High level of
expression of PARP enzyme in SCLC suggests a role for this enzyme in the
development of resistance to DNA-damaging agents used for treatment of
SCLC. We investigated activity of a PARP inhibitor, CEP8983, in
combination with bendamustine in SCLC.Methods: In vitro cytotoxicity of
bendamustine alone and in combination with CEP8983 was assessed in SCLC
cell lines (DMS114, DMS153, DMS53, H526, H146, H69, H187, H209, and
H128). Exponentially growing cells were treated by continuous exposure
for 72 h to vehicle, CEP8983, Bendamustine or the combination. Surviving
cell fraction and growth inhibition was determined using MTS assay.
Western blot assay was performed to assess for PARP inhibition; changes
in markers of apoptosis (cleaved PARP and caspase), DNA damage
(gamma-H2AX) under different treatment conditions. Degree of cisplatin
sensitivity previously determined for these cell lines were correlated
with bendamustine activity and modulation by CEP8983.Results: CEP8983
showed negligible cytotoxicity as a single agent at relevant
concentrations. Bendamustine was cytotoxic to SCLC cell lines with
clinically achievable micromolar IC50 concentrations (DMS114 - 73.1M,
DMS153 - 66.4M, DMS53 - 53.7M, H526 - 16.0M, H146 - 34.4M, H69 - 30.9M,
H187 - 16.1M, H209 - 51.6M, and H128 - 6.2M). The combination of
bendamustine and CEP8983 produced a 20 to 80% reduction in IC50
concentrations of bendamustine in 8 of 9 cell lines tested. There was no
significant correlation between platinum and bendamustine sensitivity in
these cell lines (r=0.199, 95%CI: -0.5364, 0.7623; p=0.6085). There was a
strong positive correlation between higher platinum sensitivity of cell
lines (indicated by low IC50 concentration of cisplatin) and enhanced
cytotoxicity of bendamustine by CEP8983 (r= -0.856, 95%CI:
-0.9691,-0.4436; p=0.0033). The combination induced increased gamma-H2AX
expression in some of the cell lines suggesting increased apoptosis in
the presence of CEP8983. In vivo confirmation of this interaction is
pending in xenograft model to be presented at the meeting.Conclusions:
Bendamustine cytotoxicity against SCLC cell lines was potentiated by
CEP8983, especially in cell lines that were more sensitive to cisplatin.
The data support clinical evaluation of this novel combination in
patients with SCLC.

