Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The histone methyltransferase EZH2 catalytic activity is required
for cell growth in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.


Lysine methyltransferases and demethylases were identified as
transcriptional co-regulators functioning by either preserving particular
chromatin methylation states or by controlling placement and removal of
histone lysine methylation marks to promote dynamic changes in gene
expression. The development of small molecule methyltransferase and
demethylase inhibitors provides a novel approach to affect the regulation
of transcription, and thus potentially allowing interference with
aberrant transcriptional programs as observed, for instance, in
cancer.Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2), the major histone H3 lysine 27
(K27) methyltransferase, is widely implicated in tumor progression. The
presence of a recurrent mutation of a single tyrosine residue in the EZH2
catalytic domain in germinal center B-cell like diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (GCB-DLBCL) and follicular lymphoma suggests that these cancers
might be dependent on altered EZH2 molecular function, the mutation
facilitating the conversion of an H3K27 di-methylated to a tri-methylated
state. Inhibition of the EZH2 catalytic activity will provide a new
therapeutic approach to treat human cancers, especially lymphomas
carrying activating mutations.Constellation has identified, characterized
and optimized potent, selective and reversible EZH2 small molecule
inhibitors as well as studied the biological impact of such inhibition.
We find that pharmacological inhibition of EZH2 causes selective cell
viability defects with cell lines harboring EZH2 mutations being the most
sensitive. Our EZH2 inhibitors potently engage the target in vivo and
exhibit efficacy in lymphoma xenograft models. Genome-wide mapping of
EZH2 and H3K27me3 sites in the absence and presence of the compound
revealed that the EZH2 inhibitor caused significant changes to the local
chromatin modification landscape, however only a subset of these
alterations translated into gene expression changes. The discovery of
additional contexts that define sensitivity to EZH2 inhibitors will be
discussed.

