Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequence variations in TP53 3UTR affect p53 protein expression and
function and patient survival in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.


Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma and represents 80% of all aggressive lymphomas.
DLBCL can be classified into two major subtypes by gene expression
profiling. The germinal center B-cell (GCB) subtype possesses gene
expression patterns that resemble non-malignant B-cells that have entered
the germinal center. The activated B-cell (ABC) subtype expresses many
genes that are regulated by NF-B activation. This agrees with the concept
of cell of origin (COO) that subtypes of DLBCL originate from various
stages of B-cell differentiation. The TP53 tumor suppressor gene encodes
a transcription factor that acts as a sensor of cellular stressors and
responds by upregulating various target genes to promote cell cycle
arrest, initiate apoptosis, inhibit angiogenesis, and initiate DNA
repair. Because approximately 50% of all cancers possess wild-type TP53
coding sequence (CDS), we reasoned that mutations outside the CDS may
also promote tumorigenesis and help explain how cancers with wild-type
p53 escape p53-regulated pathways. In this study, we determined the
nucleotide sequence of the TP53 gene, including the 5UTR and 3UTR, in 244
de novo DLBCL tumors with a hypothesis that the TP53 3UTR is altered in
cancer. We sought to evaluate the prognostic importance and functional
significance of sequence variation in the TP53 3UTR in combination with
CDS mutation and COO. We found a large number of single nucleotide
variants (SNV) in the TP53 3UTR with the majority of them previously
unreported. There was no difference in overall survival and
progression-free survival between patients with SNVs and those without.
Similarly, no significant difference was found in COO subgroups between
patients with and without SNVs. However, when patients are divided into
two sets according to their TP53 CDS status, we found that patients
carrying a wild-type TP53 CDS and a 3UTR variant have a better 5-year
overall survival than patients carrying a wild-type CDS and a native
3UTR. In contrast, for patients with mutant TP53 CDS, 3UTR variation
predicts poor survival. Most of the unreported 3UTR SNVs are located in
the sites that are complementary to seed sequences of microRNA that are
predicted or experimentally validated to target TP53. We found that three
SNVs disrupting the seed match between miR-125b and the TP53 3UTR affect
p53 regulation by this microRNA. Additionally, an annotated SNP
(rs78378222) in the TP53 polyadenylation signal (PAS) was uncovered in 3
of 244 patient samples (1.29%). Results from Northern and Western blots
indicated that the presence of this SNP significantly affects p53 mRNA
production and consequently results in downregulation of p53 protein.
Using TUNEL assays, we demonstrate that cells harboring the TP53 PAS
mutation exhibit reduced apoptosis upon UV treatment when compared to
wild-type control cells.Citation Format: Michael Gordon, Ken H. Young,
Yong Li. Sequence variations in TP53 3UTR affect p53 protein expression
and function and patient survival in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 781.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-781

