Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Surgical and chemotherapy influence on circulating developmental
microRNA miR17-92 and long term survival in breast and ovarian cancer
patients.


BackgroundBreast cancer (BrCa) is treated with surgery (SUR), radiation
(RAD) and or chemotherapy (CTx) based on stage at diagnosis. Over 75% of
women are diagnosed with ovarian cancer (OvCa) are diagnosed at stage III
and treated with debulking SUR and CTx. Only 1/5 of OvCa are cured of
their disease with SUR followed by CTx. In stage III BrCa 40% are long
term survivors after SUR, CTx & RAD. There are no markers to quantify the
contribution of each therapeutic intervention to the overall success in
cancer patients. Patterns of circulating miRs may explain the role of SUR
and CTx in ovarian/breast cancer cure. MiRs-17-92 have essential roles in
embryonal and immune system development. MiR-17-92 cluster is deleted in
20% of ovarian cancers.AimsWe set out to identify changes microRNA
patterns in plasma obtained before and after surgery for breast/ovarian
cancer and during chemotherapy that correlated with the patients
long-term outcomes.MethodsBetween 2004 and 2011 we investigated patterns
of plasma miRNAs collected before, after surgery, during and after
chemotherapy in 50 patients presenting for surgery for ovarian cancer 18
breast cancer patients and 11 age and race-matched normal controls. We
also collected blood at ovarian cancer relapse and tumor and benign ovary
for miRNA analysis. 2-sample t-test was used for all 2-sample comparison
and ANOVA followed by Benjamin-Hochberg method for multiple testing to
limit the false discovery rate (FDR) at the 5% level. All tests were
2-tailed and results with a pBackgroundBreast cancer (BrCa) is treated
with surgery (SUR), radiation (RAD) and or chemotherapy (CTx) based on
stage at diagnosis. Over 75% of women are diagnosed with ovarian cancer
(OvCa) are diagnosed at stage III and treated with debulking SUR and CTx.
Only 1/5 of OvCa are cured of their disease with SUR followed by CTx. In
stage III BrCa 40% are long term survivors after SUR, CTx & RAD. There
are no markers to quantify the contribution of each therapeutic
intervention to the overall success in cancer patients. Patterns of
circulating miRs may explain the role of SUR and CTx in ovarian/breast
cancer cure. MiRs-17-92 have essential roles in embryonal and immune
system development. MiR-17-92 cluster is deleted in 20% of ovarian
cancers.AimsWe set out to identify changes microRNA patterns in plasma
obtained before and after surgery for breast/ovarian cancer and during
chemotherapy that correlated with the patients long-term
outcomes.MethodsBetween 2004 and 2011 we investigated patterns of plasma
miRNAs collected before, after surgery, during and after chemotherapy in
50 patients presenting for surgery for ovarian cancer 18 breast cancer
patients and 11 age and race-matched normal controls. We also collected
blood at ovarian cancer relapse and tumor and benign ovary for miRNA
analysis. 2-sample t-test was used for all 2-sample comparison and ANOVA
followed by Benjamin-Hochberg method for multiple testing to limit the
false discovery rate (FDR) at the 5% level. All tests were 2-tailed and
results with a p<0.05 were considered statistically
significant.ResultsFifty patients were operated for EOC mean age at
surgery 65 (range 51-78), 11 race matched women controls - mean age of 58
(range 25-67). Four patients were cured, 21 patients died within 36 month
of their diagnosis and 21 patients who survived long term not cured but
continue to receive chemotherapy. 18 brCa patients were ER/PR/Her2- W(5),
B(5) and ER/PR+ W(5) B(3). MiR-19a was pre-op in patients with short over
all survival (pBackgroundBreast cancer (BrCa) is treated with surgery
(SUR), radiation (RAD) and or chemotherapy (CTx) based on stage at
diagnosis. Over 75% of women are diagnosed with ovarian cancer (OvCa) are
diagnosed at stage III and treated with debulking SUR and CTx. Only 1/5
of OvCa are cured of their disease with SUR followed by CTx. In stage III
BrCa 40% are long term survivors after SUR, CTx & RAD. There are no
markers to quantify the contribution of each therapeutic intervention to
the overall success in cancer patients. Patterns of circulating miRs may
explain the role of SUR and CTx in ovarian/breast cancer cure. MiRs-17-92
have essential roles in embryonal and immune system development.
MiR-17-92 cluster is deleted in 20% of ovarian cancers.AimsWe set out to
identify changes microRNA patterns in plasma obtained before and after
surgery for breast/ovarian cancer and during chemotherapy that correlated
with the patients long-term outcomes.MethodsBetween 2004 and 2011 we
investigated patterns of plasma miRNAs collected before, after surgery,
during and after chemotherapy in 50 patients presenting for surgery for
ovarian cancer 18 breast cancer patients and 11 age and race-matched
normal controls. We also collected blood at ovarian cancer relapse and
tumor and benign ovary for miRNA analysis. 2-sample t-test was used for
all 2-sample comparison and ANOVA followed by Benjamin-Hochberg method
for multiple testing to limit the false discovery rate (FDR) at the 5%
level. All tests were 2-tailed and results with a p<0.05 were considered
statistically significant.ResultsFifty patients were operated for EOC
mean age at surgery 65 (range 51-78), 11 race matched women controls -
mean age of 58 (range 25-67). Four patients were cured, 21 patients died
within 36 month of their diagnosis and 21 patients who survived long term
not cured but continue to receive chemotherapy. 18 brCa patients were
ER/PR/Her2- W(5), B(5) and ER/PR+ W(5) B(3). MiR-19a was pre-op in
patients with short over all survival (p< 0.003). CTx increased miR-19a
38-fold compared to the pre-SUR levels (pBackgroundBreast cancer (BrCa)
is treated with surgery (SUR), radiation (RAD) and or chemotherapy (CTx)
based on stage at diagnosis. Over 75% of women are diagnosed with ovarian
cancer (OvCa) are diagnosed at stage III and treated with debulking SUR
and CTx. Only 1/5 of OvCa are cured of their disease with SUR followed by
CTx. In stage III BrCa 40% are long term survivors after SUR, CTx & RAD.
There are no markers to quantify the contribution of each therapeutic
intervention to the overall success in cancer patients. Patterns of
circulating miRs may explain the role of SUR and CTx in ovarian/breast
cancer cure. MiRs-17-92 have essential roles in embryonal and immune
system development. MiR-17-92 cluster is deleted in 20% of ovarian
cancers.AimsWe set out to identify changes microRNA patterns in plasma
obtained before and after surgery for breast/ovarian cancer and during
chemotherapy that correlated with the patients long-term
outcomes.MethodsBetween 2004 and 2011 we investigated patterns of plasma
miRNAs collected before, after surgery, during and after chemotherapy in
50 patients presenting for surgery for ovarian cancer 18 breast cancer
patients and 11 age and race-matched normal controls. We also collected
blood at ovarian cancer relapse and tumor and benign ovary for miRNA
analysis. 2-sample t-test was used for all 2-sample comparison and ANOVA
followed by Benjamin-Hochberg method for multiple testing to limit the
false discovery rate (FDR) at the 5% level. All tests were 2-tailed and
results with a p<0.05 were considered statistically
significant.ResultsFifty patients were operated for EOC mean age at
surgery 65 (range 51-78), 11 race matched women controls - mean age of 58
(range 25-67). Four patients were cured, 21 patients died within 36 month
of their diagnosis and 21 patients who survived long term not cured but
continue to receive chemotherapy. 18 brCa patients were ER/PR/Her2- W(5),
B(5) and ER/PR+ W(5) B(3). MiR-19a was pre-op in patients with short over
all survival (p< 0.003). CTx increased miR-19a 38-fold compared to the
pre-SUR levels (p<0.0002). CTx up-ed MiR-19b 38 fold (pBackgroundBreast
cancer (BrCa) is treated with surgery (SUR), radiation (RAD) and or
chemotherapy (CTx) based on stage at diagnosis. Over 75% of women are
diagnosed with ovarian cancer (OvCa) are diagnosed at stage III and
treated with debulking SUR and CTx. Only 1/5 of OvCa are cured of their
disease with SUR followed by CTx. In stage III BrCa 40% are long term
survivors after SUR, CTx & RAD. There are no markers to quantify the
contribution of each therapeutic intervention to the overall success in
cancer patients. Patterns of circulating miRs may explain the role of SUR
and CTx in ovarian/breast cancer cure. MiRs-17-92 have essential roles in
embryonal and immune system development. MiR-17-92 cluster is deleted in
20% of ovarian cancers.AimsWe set out to identify changes microRNA
patterns in plasma obtained before and after surgery for breast/ovarian
cancer and during chemotherapy that correlated with the patients
long-term outcomes.MethodsBetween 2004 and 2011 we investigated patterns
of plasma miRNAs collected before, after surgery, during and after
chemotherapy in 50 patients presenting for surgery for ovarian cancer 18
breast cancer patients and 11 age and race-matched normal controls. We
also collected blood at ovarian cancer relapse and tumor and benign ovary
for miRNA analysis. 2-sample t-test was used for all 2-sample comparison
and ANOVA followed by Benjamin-Hochberg method for multiple testing to
limit the false discovery rate (FDR) at the 5% level. All tests were
2-tailed and results with a p<0.05 were considered statistically
significant.ResultsFifty patients were operated for EOC mean age at
surgery 65 (range 51-78), 11 race matched women controls - mean age of 58
(range 25-67). Four patients were cured, 21 patients died within 36 month
of their diagnosis and 21 patients who survived long term not cured but
continue to receive chemotherapy. 18 brCa patients were ER/PR/Her2- W(5),
B(5) and ER/PR+ W(5) B(3). MiR-19a was pre-op in patients with short over
all survival (p< 0.003). CTx increased miR-19a 38-fold compared to the
pre-SUR levels (p<0.0002). CTx up-ed MiR-19b 38 fold (p<0.003). MiR-92
low in pre-SUR plasma increased 17-fold during CTx (pBackgroundBreast
cancer (BrCa) is treated with surgery (SUR), radiation (RAD) and or
chemotherapy (CTx) based on stage at diagnosis. Over 75% of women are
diagnosed with ovarian cancer (OvCa) are diagnosed at stage III and
treated with debulking SUR and CTx. Only 1/5 of OvCa are cured of their
disease with SUR followed by CTx. In stage III BrCa 40% are long term
survivors after SUR, CTx & RAD. There are no markers to quantify the
contribution of each therapeutic intervention to the overall success in
cancer patients. Patterns of circulating miRs may explain the role of SUR
and CTx in ovarian/breast cancer cure. MiRs-17-92 have essential roles in
embryonal and immune system development. MiR-17-92 cluster is deleted in
20% of ovarian cancers.AimsWe set out to identify changes microRNA
patterns in plasma obtained before and after surgery for breast/ovarian
cancer and during chemotherapy that correlated with the patients
long-term outcomes.MethodsBetween 2004 and 2011 we investigated patterns
of plasma miRNAs collected before, after surgery, during and after
chemotherapy in 50 patients presenting for surgery for ovarian cancer 18
breast cancer patients and 11 age and race-matched normal controls. We
also collected blood at ovarian cancer relapse and tumor and benign ovary
for miRNA analysis. 2-sample t-test was used for all 2-sample comparison
and ANOVA followed by Benjamin-Hochberg method for multiple testing to
limit the false discovery rate (FDR) at the 5% level. All tests were
2-tailed and results with a p<0.05 were considered statistically
significant.ResultsFifty patients were operated for EOC mean age at
surgery 65 (range 51-78), 11 race matched women controls - mean age of 58
(range 25-67). Four patients were cured, 21 patients died within 36 month
of their diagnosis and 21 patients who survived long term not cured but
continue to receive chemotherapy. 18 brCa patients were ER/PR/Her2- W(5),
B(5) and ER/PR+ W(5) B(3). MiR-19a was pre-op in patients with short over
all survival (p< 0.003). CTx increased miR-19a 38-fold compared to the
pre-SUR levels (p<0.0002). CTx up-ed MiR-19b 38 fold (p<0.003). MiR-92
low in pre-SUR plasma increased 17-fold during CTx (p<0.003). MiR-25 low
in pre-SUR plasma and increased 47-fold during CTx (pBackgroundBreast
cancer (BrCa) is treated with surgery (SUR), radiation (RAD) and or
chemotherapy (CTx) based on stage at diagnosis. Over 75% of women are
diagnosed with ovarian cancer (OvCa) are diagnosed at stage III and
treated with debulking SUR and CTx. Only 1/5 of OvCa are cured of their
disease with SUR followed by CTx. In stage III BrCa 40% are long term
survivors after SUR, CTx & RAD. There are no markers to quantify the
contribution of each therapeutic intervention to the overall success in
cancer patients. Patterns of circulating miRs may explain the role of SUR
and CTx in ovarian/breast cancer cure. MiRs-17-92 have essential roles in
embryonal and immune system development. MiR-17-92 cluster is deleted in
20% of ovarian cancers.AimsWe set out to identify changes microRNA
patterns in plasma obtained before and after surgery for breast/ovarian
cancer and during chemotherapy that correlated with the patients
long-term outcomes.MethodsBetween 2004 and 2011 we investigated patterns
of plasma miRNAs collected before, after surgery, during and after
chemotherapy in 50 patients presenting for surgery for ovarian cancer 18
breast cancer patients and 11 age and race-matched normal controls. We
also collected blood at ovarian cancer relapse and tumor and benign ovary
for miRNA analysis. 2-sample t-test was used for all 2-sample comparison
and ANOVA followed by Benjamin-Hochberg method for multiple testing to
limit the false discovery rate (FDR) at the 5% level. All tests were
2-tailed and results with a p<0.05 were considered statistically
significant.ResultsFifty patients were operated for EOC mean age at
surgery 65 (range 51-78), 11 race matched women controls - mean age of 58
(range 25-67). Four patients were cured, 21 patients died within 36 month
of their diagnosis and 21 patients who survived long term not cured but
continue to receive chemotherapy. 18 brCa patients were ER/PR/Her2- W(5),
B(5) and ER/PR+ W(5) B(3). MiR-19a was pre-op in patients with short over
all survival (p< 0.003). CTx increased miR-19a 38-fold compared to the
pre-SUR levels (p<0.0002). CTx up-ed MiR-19b 38 fold (p<0.003). MiR-92
low in pre-SUR plasma increased 17-fold during CTx (p<0.003). MiR-25 low
in pre-SUR plasma and increased 47-fold during CTx (p<0.002). Changes in
miR-17-92 cluster were the most dramatic in patients with OvCa treated
with SUR and CTx. Post-SUR miRs from 17-92 cluster increased post-SUR in
BrCa. High pre-SUR miR17-92 pre-SUR & during CTx forecast good
outcome.ConclusionsDuring CTx, levels of miR-17-92 change dramatically
compared to the pre-surgical levels. Shifts in microRNAs from the cluster
17-92 observed in the nadir phase of adjuvant chemotherapy for ovarian
cancer patients correlate with long term outcomes. Breast and ovarian
cancer patients with higher circulating miR-17-92 levels in pre-surgical
plasma levels had better long-term survival.

