Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis reveals Src/Stat and EGFR/MAPK pathways as
potential mechanism of resistance to PI3K inhibitors in lung cancer.


The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is the most
commonly dysregulated pathway in many human cancers, including non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Therefore, targeting PI3K signaling has become
a promising approach in cancer therapy. Although studies have indicated
development of resistance to PI3K inhibitors, the molecular mechanism of
drug resistance is largely unknown in NSCLC. Here, we sought to identify
new potential biomarkers and pathways that confer resistance to PI3K
inhibitors in NSCLC. To this end, we used reverse-phase protein array
(RPPA) to assess the expression levels and activation status of 137
proteins involved in signaling pathways implicated in lung cancer.
Seventy-four NSCLC cell lines were treated with the PI3K inhibitor BAY
80-6946 and lysates were collected for proteomic analysis. First, we
evaluted the association between drug sensitivity (IC50) and RPPA
expression levels at baseline in sixty NSCLC cell lines. Correlation test
was applied to each marker vs drug and Wilcox Rank test was performed to
compare the smallest and largest one third of all the cell lines. We
found increased phosphorylation and inactivation of pro-apoptotic protein
Bad and phospho-LKB1 in the resistant cell lines. An inverse correlation
was found for phosphorylation and inactivation of c-Src. Interestingly,
activation of EGFR and increased levels of PTCH and PKC were found in the
resistant cell lines. Next, paired t-test was applied to each marker
comparing the difference between drug and control treated cells. As
expected, treatment with BAY 80-6946, significantly downregulates
components of PI3K/mTOR pathway, as illustrated by decreased levels of
phospho-Akt (-4.28-fold relative expression) and phospho-S6 ribosomal
protein (-9.64-fold), phospho-p70S6K (-3.47-fold) and phospho-mTOR
(-1.42-fold). We observed elevated expression of negative regulators of
mTOR pathway, LKB1 (1.11-fold), AMPK (1.12-fold) and phospho-AMPK
(12-fold). On the other hand, our analysis identified new potential
pathways of resistance that are activated upon PI3K inhibition. We found
increased levels of phospho-EGFR (PThe phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
signaling pathway is the most commonly dysregulated pathway in many human
cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Therefore,
targeting PI3K signaling has become a promising approach in cancer
therapy. Although studies have indicated development of resistance to
PI3K inhibitors, the molecular mechanism of drug resistance is largely
unknown in NSCLC. Here, we sought to identify new potential biomarkers
and pathways that confer resistance to PI3K inhibitors in NSCLC. To this
end, we used reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) to assess the expression
levels and activation status of 137 proteins involved in signaling
pathways implicated in lung cancer. Seventy-four NSCLC cell lines were
treated with the PI3K inhibitor BAY 80-6946 and lysates were collected
for proteomic analysis. First, we evaluted the association between drug
sensitivity (IC50) and RPPA expression levels at baseline in sixty NSCLC
cell lines. Correlation test was applied to each marker vs drug and
Wilcox Rank test was performed to compare the smallest and largest one
third of all the cell lines. We found increased phosphorylation and
inactivation of pro-apoptotic protein Bad and phospho-LKB1 in the
resistant cell lines. An inverse correlation was found for
phosphorylation and inactivation of c-Src. Interestingly, activation of
EGFR and increased levels of PTCH and PKC were found in the resistant
cell lines. Next, paired t-test was applied to each marker comparing the
difference between drug and control treated cells. As expected, treatment
with BAY 80-6946, significantly downregulates components of PI3K/mTOR
pathway, as illustrated by decreased levels of phospho-Akt (-4.28-fold
relative expression) and phospho-S6 ribosomal protein (-9.64-fold),
phospho-p70S6K (-3.47-fold) and phospho-mTOR (-1.42-fold). We observed
elevated expression of negative regulators of mTOR pathway, LKB1
(1.11-fold), AMPK (1.12-fold) and phospho-AMPK (12-fold). On the other
hand, our analysis identified new potential pathways of resistance that
are activated upon PI3K inhibition. We found increased levels of
phospho-EGFR (P<0.0001), PTCH (PThe phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
signaling pathway is the most commonly dysregulated pathway in many human
cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Therefore,
targeting PI3K signaling has become a promising approach in cancer
therapy. Although studies have indicated development of resistance to
PI3K inhibitors, the molecular mechanism of drug resistance is largely
unknown in NSCLC. Here, we sought to identify new potential biomarkers
and pathways that confer resistance to PI3K inhibitors in NSCLC. To this
end, we used reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) to assess the expression
levels and activation status of 137 proteins involved in signaling
pathways implicated in lung cancer. Seventy-four NSCLC cell lines were
treated with the PI3K inhibitor BAY 80-6946 and lysates were collected
for proteomic analysis. First, we evaluted the association between drug
sensitivity (IC50) and RPPA expression levels at baseline in sixty NSCLC
cell lines. Correlation test was applied to each marker vs drug and
Wilcox Rank test was performed to compare the smallest and largest one
third of all the cell lines. We found increased phosphorylation and
inactivation of pro-apoptotic protein Bad and phospho-LKB1 in the
resistant cell lines. An inverse correlation was found for
phosphorylation and inactivation of c-Src. Interestingly, activation of
EGFR and increased levels of PTCH and PKC were found in the resistant
cell lines. Next, paired t-test was applied to each marker comparing the
difference between drug and control treated cells. As expected, treatment
with BAY 80-6946, significantly downregulates components of PI3K/mTOR
pathway, as illustrated by decreased levels of phospho-Akt (-4.28-fold
relative expression) and phospho-S6 ribosomal protein (-9.64-fold),
phospho-p70S6K (-3.47-fold) and phospho-mTOR (-1.42-fold). We observed
elevated expression of negative regulators of mTOR pathway, LKB1
(1.11-fold), AMPK (1.12-fold) and phospho-AMPK (12-fold). On the other
hand, our analysis identified new potential pathways of resistance that
are activated upon PI3K inhibition. We found increased levels of
phospho-EGFR (P<0.0001), PTCH (P<0.0001) and PKC (PThe phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is the most commonly dysregulated
pathway in many human cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Therefore, targeting PI3K signaling has become a promising
approach in cancer therapy. Although studies have indicated development
of resistance to PI3K inhibitors, the molecular mechanism of drug
resistance is largely unknown in NSCLC. Here, we sought to identify new
potential biomarkers and pathways that confer resistance to PI3K
inhibitors in NSCLC. To this end, we used reverse-phase protein array
(RPPA) to assess the expression levels and activation status of 137
proteins involved in signaling pathways implicated in lung cancer.
Seventy-four NSCLC cell lines were treated with the PI3K inhibitor BAY
80-6946 and lysates were collected for proteomic analysis. First, we
evaluted the association between drug sensitivity (IC50) and RPPA
expression levels at baseline in sixty NSCLC cell lines. Correlation test
was applied to each marker vs drug and Wilcox Rank test was performed to
compare the smallest and largest one third of all the cell lines. We
found increased phosphorylation and inactivation of pro-apoptotic protein
Bad and phospho-LKB1 in the resistant cell lines. An inverse correlation
was found for phosphorylation and inactivation of c-Src. Interestingly,
activation of EGFR and increased levels of PTCH and PKC were found in the
resistant cell lines. Next, paired t-test was applied to each marker
comparing the difference between drug and control treated cells. As
expected, treatment with BAY 80-6946, significantly downregulates
components of PI3K/mTOR pathway, as illustrated by decreased levels of
phospho-Akt (-4.28-fold relative expression) and phospho-S6 ribosomal
protein (-9.64-fold), phospho-p70S6K (-3.47-fold) and phospho-mTOR
(-1.42-fold). We observed elevated expression of negative regulators of
mTOR pathway, LKB1 (1.11-fold), AMPK (1.12-fold) and phospho-AMPK
(12-fold). On the other hand, our analysis identified new potential
pathways of resistance that are activated upon PI3K inhibition. We found
increased levels of phospho-EGFR (P<0.0001), PTCH (P<0.0001) and PKC
(P<0.0001). We observed activation of c-Src pathway upon treatment with
BAY 80-6946, total and phospho-Src (PThe phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
signaling pathway is the most commonly dysregulated pathway in many human
cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Therefore,
targeting PI3K signaling has become a promising approach in cancer
therapy. Although studies have indicated development of resistance to
PI3K inhibitors, the molecular mechanism of drug resistance is largely
unknown in NSCLC. Here, we sought to identify new potential biomarkers
and pathways that confer resistance to PI3K inhibitors in NSCLC. To this
end, we used reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) to assess the expression
levels and activation status of 137 proteins involved in signaling
pathways implicated in lung cancer. Seventy-four NSCLC cell lines were
treated with the PI3K inhibitor BAY 80-6946 and lysates were collected
for proteomic analysis. First, we evaluted the association between drug
sensitivity (IC50) and RPPA expression levels at baseline in sixty NSCLC
cell lines. Correlation test was applied to each marker vs drug and
Wilcox Rank test was performed to compare the smallest and largest one
third of all the cell lines. We found increased phosphorylation and
inactivation of pro-apoptotic protein Bad and phospho-LKB1 in the
resistant cell lines. An inverse correlation was found for
phosphorylation and inactivation of c-Src. Interestingly, activation of
EGFR and increased levels of PTCH and PKC were found in the resistant
cell lines. Next, paired t-test was applied to each marker comparing the
difference between drug and control treated cells. As expected, treatment
with BAY 80-6946, significantly downregulates components of PI3K/mTOR
pathway, as illustrated by decreased levels of phospho-Akt (-4.28-fold
relative expression) and phospho-S6 ribosomal protein (-9.64-fold),
phospho-p70S6K (-3.47-fold) and phospho-mTOR (-1.42-fold). We observed
elevated expression of negative regulators of mTOR pathway, LKB1
(1.11-fold), AMPK (1.12-fold) and phospho-AMPK (12-fold). On the other
hand, our analysis identified new potential pathways of resistance that
are activated upon PI3K inhibition. We found increased levels of
phospho-EGFR (P<0.0001), PTCH (P<0.0001) and PKC (P<0.0001). We observed
activation of c-Src pathway upon treatment with BAY 80-6946, total and
phospho-Src (P<0.0001 and PThe phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling
pathway is the most commonly dysregulated pathway in many human cancers,
including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Therefore, targeting PI3K
signaling has become a promising approach in cancer therapy. Although
studies have indicated development of resistance to PI3K inhibitors, the
molecular mechanism of drug resistance is largely unknown in NSCLC. Here,
we sought to identify new potential biomarkers and pathways that confer
resistance to PI3K inhibitors in NSCLC. To this end, we used
reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) to assess the expression levels and
activation status of 137 proteins involved in signaling pathways
implicated in lung cancer. Seventy-four NSCLC cell lines were treated
with the PI3K inhibitor BAY 80-6946 and lysates were collected for
proteomic analysis. First, we evaluted the association between drug
sensitivity (IC50) and RPPA expression levels at baseline in sixty NSCLC
cell lines. Correlation test was applied to each marker vs drug and
Wilcox Rank test was performed to compare the smallest and largest one
third of all the cell lines. We found increased phosphorylation and
inactivation of pro-apoptotic protein Bad and phospho-LKB1 in the
resistant cell lines. An inverse correlation was found for
phosphorylation and inactivation of c-Src. Interestingly, activation of
EGFR and increased levels of PTCH and PKC were found in the resistant
cell lines. Next, paired t-test was applied to each marker comparing the
difference between drug and control treated cells. As expected, treatment
with BAY 80-6946, significantly downregulates components of PI3K/mTOR
pathway, as illustrated by decreased levels of phospho-Akt (-4.28-fold
relative expression) and phospho-S6 ribosomal protein (-9.64-fold),
phospho-p70S6K (-3.47-fold) and phospho-mTOR (-1.42-fold). We observed
elevated expression of negative regulators of mTOR pathway, LKB1
(1.11-fold), AMPK (1.12-fold) and phospho-AMPK (12-fold). On the other
hand, our analysis identified new potential pathways of resistance that
are activated upon PI3K inhibition. We found increased levels of
phospho-EGFR (P<0.0001), PTCH (P<0.0001) and PKC (P<0.0001). We observed
activation of c-Src pathway upon treatment with BAY 80-6946, total and
phospho-Src (P<0.0001 and P<0.0001). Accordingly, key downstream survival
cascades regulated by c-Src, FAK (PThe phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
signaling pathway is the most commonly dysregulated pathway in many human
cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Therefore,
targeting PI3K signaling has become a promising approach in cancer
therapy. Although studies have indicated development of resistance to
PI3K inhibitors, the molecular mechanism of drug resistance is largely
unknown in NSCLC. Here, we sought to identify new potential biomarkers
and pathways that confer resistance to PI3K inhibitors in NSCLC. To this
end, we used reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) to assess the expression
levels and activation status of 137 proteins involved in signaling
pathways implicated in lung cancer. Seventy-four NSCLC cell lines were
treated with the PI3K inhibitor BAY 80-6946 and lysates were collected
for proteomic analysis. First, we evaluted the association between drug
sensitivity (IC50) and RPPA expression levels at baseline in sixty NSCLC
cell lines. Correlation test was applied to each marker vs drug and
Wilcox Rank test was performed to compare the smallest and largest one
third of all the cell lines. We found increased phosphorylation and
inactivation of pro-apoptotic protein Bad and phospho-LKB1 in the
resistant cell lines. An inverse correlation was found for
phosphorylation and inactivation of c-Src. Interestingly, activation of
EGFR and increased levels of PTCH and PKC were found in the resistant
cell lines. Next, paired t-test was applied to each marker comparing the
difference between drug and control treated cells. As expected, treatment
with BAY 80-6946, significantly downregulates components of PI3K/mTOR
pathway, as illustrated by decreased levels of phospho-Akt (-4.28-fold
relative expression) and phospho-S6 ribosomal protein (-9.64-fold),
phospho-p70S6K (-3.47-fold) and phospho-mTOR (-1.42-fold). We observed
elevated expression of negative regulators of mTOR pathway, LKB1
(1.11-fold), AMPK (1.12-fold) and phospho-AMPK (12-fold). On the other
hand, our analysis identified new potential pathways of resistance that
are activated upon PI3K inhibition. We found increased levels of
phospho-EGFR (P<0.0001), PTCH (P<0.0001) and PKC (P<0.0001). We observed
activation of c-Src pathway upon treatment with BAY 80-6946, total and
phospho-Src (P<0.0001 and P<0.0001). Accordingly, key downstream survival
cascades regulated by c-Src, FAK (P<0.0001), Stat5 (PThe phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is the most commonly dysregulated
pathway in many human cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Therefore, targeting PI3K signaling has become a promising
approach in cancer therapy. Although studies have indicated development
of resistance to PI3K inhibitors, the molecular mechanism of drug
resistance is largely unknown in NSCLC. Here, we sought to identify new
potential biomarkers and pathways that confer resistance to PI3K
inhibitors in NSCLC. To this end, we used reverse-phase protein array
(RPPA) to assess the expression levels and activation status of 137
proteins involved in signaling pathways implicated in lung cancer.
Seventy-four NSCLC cell lines were treated with the PI3K inhibitor BAY
80-6946 and lysates were collected for proteomic analysis. First, we
evaluted the association between drug sensitivity (IC50) and RPPA
expression levels at baseline in sixty NSCLC cell lines. Correlation test
was applied to each marker vs drug and Wilcox Rank test was performed to
compare the smallest and largest one third of all the cell lines. We
found increased phosphorylation and inactivation of pro-apoptotic protein
Bad and phospho-LKB1 in the resistant cell lines. An inverse correlation
was found for phosphorylation and inactivation of c-Src. Interestingly,
activation of EGFR and increased levels of PTCH and PKC were found in the
resistant cell lines. Next, paired t-test was applied to each marker
comparing the difference between drug and control treated cells. As
expected, treatment with BAY 80-6946, significantly downregulates
components of PI3K/mTOR pathway, as illustrated by decreased levels of
phospho-Akt (-4.28-fold relative expression) and phospho-S6 ribosomal
protein (-9.64-fold), phospho-p70S6K (-3.47-fold) and phospho-mTOR
(-1.42-fold). We observed elevated expression of negative regulators of
mTOR pathway, LKB1 (1.11-fold), AMPK (1.12-fold) and phospho-AMPK
(12-fold). On the other hand, our analysis identified new potential
pathways of resistance that are activated upon PI3K inhibition. We found
increased levels of phospho-EGFR (P<0.0001), PTCH (P<0.0001) and PKC
(P<0.0001). We observed activation of c-Src pathway upon treatment with
BAY 80-6946, total and phospho-Src (P<0.0001 and P<0.0001). Accordingly,
key downstream survival cascades regulated by c-Src, FAK (P<0.0001),
Stat5 (P<0.0001), phospho-Stat5 (PThe phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
signaling pathway is the most commonly dysregulated pathway in many human
cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Therefore,
targeting PI3K signaling has become a promising approach in cancer
therapy. Although studies have indicated development of resistance to
PI3K inhibitors, the molecular mechanism of drug resistance is largely
unknown in NSCLC. Here, we sought to identify new potential biomarkers
and pathways that confer resistance to PI3K inhibitors in NSCLC. To this
end, we used reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) to assess the expression
levels and activation status of 137 proteins involved in signaling
pathways implicated in lung cancer. Seventy-four NSCLC cell lines were
treated with the PI3K inhibitor BAY 80-6946 and lysates were collected
for proteomic analysis. First, we evaluted the association between drug
sensitivity (IC50) and RPPA expression levels at baseline in sixty NSCLC
cell lines. Correlation test was applied to each marker vs drug and
Wilcox Rank test was performed to compare the smallest and largest one
third of all the cell lines. We found increased phosphorylation and
inactivation of pro-apoptotic protein Bad and phospho-LKB1 in the
resistant cell lines. An inverse correlation was found for
phosphorylation and inactivation of c-Src. Interestingly, activation of
EGFR and increased levels of PTCH and PKC were found in the resistant
cell lines. Next, paired t-test was applied to each marker comparing the
difference between drug and control treated cells. As expected, treatment
with BAY 80-6946, significantly downregulates components of PI3K/mTOR
pathway, as illustrated by decreased levels of phospho-Akt (-4.28-fold
relative expression) and phospho-S6 ribosomal protein (-9.64-fold),
phospho-p70S6K (-3.47-fold) and phospho-mTOR (-1.42-fold). We observed
elevated expression of negative regulators of mTOR pathway, LKB1
(1.11-fold), AMPK (1.12-fold) and phospho-AMPK (12-fold). On the other
hand, our analysis identified new potential pathways of resistance that
are activated upon PI3K inhibition. We found increased levels of
phospho-EGFR (P<0.0001), PTCH (P<0.0001) and PKC (P<0.0001). We observed
activation of c-Src pathway upon treatment with BAY 80-6946, total and
phospho-Src (P<0.0001 and P<0.0001). Accordingly, key downstream survival
cascades regulated by c-Src, FAK (P<0.0001), Stat5 (P<0.0001),
phospho-Stat5 (P<0.0001) and phospho-Stat3 (PThe phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is the most commonly dysregulated
pathway in many human cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Therefore, targeting PI3K signaling has become a promising
approach in cancer therapy. Although studies have indicated development
of resistance to PI3K inhibitors, the molecular mechanism of drug
resistance is largely unknown in NSCLC. Here, we sought to identify new
potential biomarkers and pathways that confer resistance to PI3K
inhibitors in NSCLC. To this end, we used reverse-phase protein array
(RPPA) to assess the expression levels and activation status of 137
proteins involved in signaling pathways implicated in lung cancer.
Seventy-four NSCLC cell lines were treated with the PI3K inhibitor BAY
80-6946 and lysates were collected for proteomic analysis. First, we
evaluted the association between drug sensitivity (IC50) and RPPA
expression levels at baseline in sixty NSCLC cell lines. Correlation test
was applied to each marker vs drug and Wilcox Rank test was performed to
compare the smallest and largest one third of all the cell lines. We
found increased phosphorylation and inactivation of pro-apoptotic protein
Bad and phospho-LKB1 in the resistant cell lines. An inverse correlation
was found for phosphorylation and inactivation of c-Src. Interestingly,
activation of EGFR and increased levels of PTCH and PKC were found in the
resistant cell lines. Next, paired t-test was applied to each marker
comparing the difference between drug and control treated cells. As
expected, treatment with BAY 80-6946, significantly downregulates
components of PI3K/mTOR pathway, as illustrated by decreased levels of
phospho-Akt (-4.28-fold relative expression) and phospho-S6 ribosomal
protein (-9.64-fold), phospho-p70S6K (-3.47-fold) and phospho-mTOR
(-1.42-fold). We observed elevated expression of negative regulators of
mTOR pathway, LKB1 (1.11-fold), AMPK (1.12-fold) and phospho-AMPK
(12-fold). On the other hand, our analysis identified new potential
pathways of resistance that are activated upon PI3K inhibition. We found
increased levels of phospho-EGFR (P<0.0001), PTCH (P<0.0001) and PKC
(P<0.0001). We observed activation of c-Src pathway upon treatment with
BAY 80-6946, total and phospho-Src (P<0.0001 and P<0.0001). Accordingly,
key downstream survival cascades regulated by c-Src, FAK (P<0.0001),
Stat5 (P<0.0001), phospho-Stat5 (P<0.0001) and phospho-Stat3 (P<0.0001)
were upregulated in treated cells. Our results suggest that PI3K
inhibition leads to EGFR/MAPK and c-SRC/Stat signaling activation in
vitro, suggesting a compensatory pathway that may allow NSCLC survival.
Taken together, these results suggest that activation of Src/Stat pathway
as an important mechanism of resistance to PI3K inhibitors in NSCLC and
may be clinically relevant targets for combination therapy.

