Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting both PI3K/mTOR and EGFR pathways leads to synergistic
anti-tumor activity in erlotinib resistant non-small-cell lung cancers.


NSCLCs with EGFR mutations, such as a deletion in exon 19 (del E746-A750)
or point mutation in exon 21 (L858R), are sensitive to TKI (gefitinib and
erlotinib) treatments. However, acquired resistance to TKI therapy occurs
in patients after 12-14 months. Approximately 50% of these resistant
patients have developed secondary (gatekeeper) T790M mutation in EGFR;
many other resistance mechanisms also have been described including a
PIK3CA mutation and PTEN deletion. In this study, we characterize a dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, PF-4979064, in combination with a pan-ErbB
inhibitor, PF-299804 (dacomitinib) in erlotinib resistant NSCLC lines
NCI-H1975 (harboring EGFR and PIK3CA mutation) and NCI-H1650 (harboring
EGFR and PTEN deletion). As a clinically relevant concentration of
PF-299804 only induces moderate anti-tumor activity in both H1975 and
H1650 cells, PF-4979064 was added in a variety of cellular and animal
studies to determine whether the combination was able to achieve a
synergistic induction of anti-tumor activity. Results demonstrate that
the combination of PF-4979064 and PF-299804 lead to a synergistic
inhibition in cell proliferation and xenograft tumor growth in both the
NCI-H1975 and NCI-H1650 models. Our results further suggest that there is
a rationale to examine a potential clinical development plan combining
the dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor (PF-4979064) and dacomitinib (PF-299804) in
NSCLC patients who have developed resistance to erlotinib and have a
concomitant PIK3CA mutation or PTEN deletion.

