Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression analysis of perfusable nodules grown on ex vivo 3D
model shows effects on extracellular matrix, cell signaling and immune
response.


Tumor microenvironment plays a very important role in regulating the cell
behavior within a tissue, largely by interacting with the extracellular
matrix (ECM). Recently, our lab has developed a novel ex vivo lung model
that forms perfusable tumor nodules, which mimic human lung cancer
histopathology and protease secretion patterns better than tumor cells
grown on a petri dish. In this study, we have compared the genome-wide
gene expression profiles (Affymetrix 430_2) and protein arrays (Reverse
phase protein array or RPPA) of 2D (monolayer) culture versus our ex vivo
3D cell culture using 393p cells, derived from mice lung cancer.
Expression array data showed a set 1314 gene probes differentially
expressed between monolayer 2D culture and 3D ex vivo cell culture. Gene
Ontology (GO) analysis of differentially expressed genes showed the
upregulation of several genes associated with extracellular matrix (ECM1,
BMP15, FMOD, cathepsin, MMP9, MMP10), cell signaling (VEGFA, TGFB2,
FGF20), and immune response (C1, C3, MHC class II, IL1, IL1RA, IL13, TNF
receptor superfamily, CXCL2). Selected genes were also validated using
real time PCR. We found 46 proteins with significant (pTumor
microenvironment plays a very important role in regulating the cell
behavior within a tissue, largely by interacting with the extracellular
matrix (ECM). Recently, our lab has developed a novel ex vivo lung model
that forms perfusable tumor nodules, which mimic human lung cancer
histopathology and protease secretion patterns better than tumor cells
grown on a petri dish. In this study, we have compared the genome-wide
gene expression profiles (Affymetrix 430_2) and protein arrays (Reverse
phase protein array or RPPA) of 2D (monolayer) culture versus our ex vivo
3D cell culture using 393p cells, derived from mice lung cancer.
Expression array data showed a set 1314 gene probes differentially
expressed between monolayer 2D culture and 3D ex vivo cell culture. Gene
Ontology (GO) analysis of differentially expressed genes showed the
upregulation of several genes associated with extracellular matrix (ECM1,
BMP15, FMOD, cathepsin, MMP9, MMP10), cell signaling (VEGFA, TGFB2,
FGF20), and immune response (C1, C3, MHC class II, IL1, IL1RA, IL13, TNF
receptor superfamily, CXCL2). Selected genes were also validated using
real time PCR. We found 46 proteins with significant (p<0.01)
differential levels in 2D vs 3D cell cultures of 393p. The proteins
associated with extracellular matrix (Collagen VI, Caveolin1,
Fibronectin) and cell signaling (mTOR, p38 (phosphorylated), Caspase 7
(Cleaved), BAD (phosphorylated), PI3K) were upregulated in 3D ex vivo
cell culture compared to conventional 2D culture. Thus, our results
showed the insightful influence of the 3D ex vivo model and its
three-dimensional perfusable environment over cell growth and its
behavior in terms of significant differences in gene expression and
protein patterns as compared to the same cells grown on conventional 2D
cell cultures.

