Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin reverses drug resistance in human small-call lung
carcinoma cells.


Small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) has a dismal prognosis in part because
of multidrug resistance (MDR). Silibinin is a flavonolignan extracted
from milk thistle (Silybum marianum), extracts of which are used in
traditional medicine. Recently, silibinin has shown anti-cancer activity
in cell and animal models, in particular prostate cancer where a clinical
trial is underway. Here, we report the effects of silibinin on SCLC,
particularly cells showing MDR. SCLC cells studied were NCI-H69 and a
derived cell line VPA17 showing resistance to etoposide (9-fold),
doxorubicin (15-fold) and vincristine (10-fold). VPA17 cells did not show
resistance to silibinin (IC50 = 60M for H69 and VPA17). Flow cytometry
analysis after incubation in 30 M silibinin showed no changes in cell
cycle phases in VPA17 or H69 cells (G1 = 49%, S = 29%, G2/M = 18%)
compared with untreated cells (p>0.05). Silibinin (30 M) incubation was
pro-apoptotic in VPA17 cells after >3 days, as measured by ELISA of BUdR
labeled DNA fragments. Apoptosis was also indicated by an increase in
caspase-3 specific activity (to 16 enzyme units/104 cells vs. 5 units/104
cells for untreated controls (p Small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) has a
dismal prognosis in part because of multidrug resistance (MDR). Silibinin
is a flavonolignan extracted from milk thistle (Silybum marianum),
extracts of which are used in traditional medicine. Recently, silibinin
has shown anti-cancer activity in cell and animal models, in particular
prostate cancer where a clinical trial is underway. Here, we report the
effects of silibinin on SCLC, particularly cells showing MDR. SCLC cells
studied were NCI-H69 and a derived cell line VPA17 showing resistance to
etoposide (9-fold), doxorubicin (15-fold) and vincristine (10-fold).
VPA17 cells did not show resistance to silibinin (IC50 = 60M for H69 and
VPA17). Flow cytometry analysis after incubation in 30 M silibinin showed
no changes in cell cycle phases in VPA17 or H69 cells (G1 = 49%, S = 29%,
G2/M = 18%) compared with untreated cells (p>0.05). Silibinin (30 M)
incubation was pro-apoptotic in VPA17 cells after >3 days, as measured by
ELISA of BUdR labeled DNA fragments. Apoptosis was also indicated by an
increase in caspase-3 specific activity (to 16 enzyme units/104 cells vs.
5 units/104 cells for untreated controls (p < 0.05). The anti-apoptotic
protein survivin was elevated as measured by ELISA in VPA17 compared to
H69 cells (11.8 vs.1.8 pg/g protein, p Small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC)
has a dismal prognosis in part because of multidrug resistance (MDR).
Silibinin is a flavonolignan extracted from milk thistle (Silybum
marianum), extracts of which are used in traditional medicine. Recently,
silibinin has shown anti-cancer activity in cell and animal models, in
particular prostate cancer where a clinical trial is underway. Here, we
report the effects of silibinin on SCLC, particularly cells showing MDR.
SCLC cells studied were NCI-H69 and a derived cell line VPA17 showing
resistance to etoposide (9-fold), doxorubicin (15-fold) and vincristine
(10-fold). VPA17 cells did not show resistance to silibinin (IC50 = 60M
for H69 and VPA17). Flow cytometry analysis after incubation in 30 M
silibinin showed no changes in cell cycle phases in VPA17 or H69 cells
(G1 = 49%, S = 29%, G2/M = 18%) compared with untreated cells (p>0.05).
Silibinin (30 M) incubation was pro-apoptotic in VPA17 cells after >3
days, as measured by ELISA of BUdR labeled DNA fragments. Apoptosis was
also indicated by an increase in caspase-3 specific activity (to 16
enzyme units/104 cells vs. 5 units/104 cells for untreated controls (p <
0.05). The anti-apoptotic protein survivin was elevated as measured by
ELISA in VPA17 compared to H69 cells (11.8 vs.1.8 pg/g protein, p <
0.01). Incubation for 96 h in 30M silibinin significantly reduced
survivin in VPA17 cells (3.4 pg/g protein, p Small-cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC) has a dismal prognosis in part because of multidrug resistance
(MDR). Silibinin is a flavonolignan extracted from milk thistle (Silybum
marianum), extracts of which are used in traditional medicine. Recently,
silibinin has shown anti-cancer activity in cell and animal models, in
particular prostate cancer where a clinical trial is underway. Here, we
report the effects of silibinin on SCLC, particularly cells showing MDR.
SCLC cells studied were NCI-H69 and a derived cell line VPA17 showing
resistance to etoposide (9-fold), doxorubicin (15-fold) and vincristine
(10-fold). VPA17 cells did not show resistance to silibinin (IC50 = 60M
for H69 and VPA17). Flow cytometry analysis after incubation in 30 M
silibinin showed no changes in cell cycle phases in VPA17 or H69 cells
(G1 = 49%, S = 29%, G2/M = 18%) compared with untreated cells (p>0.05).
Silibinin (30 M) incubation was pro-apoptotic in VPA17 cells after >3
days, as measured by ELISA of BUdR labeled DNA fragments. Apoptosis was
also indicated by an increase in caspase-3 specific activity (to 16
enzyme units/104 cells vs. 5 units/104 cells for untreated controls (p <
0.05). The anti-apoptotic protein survivin was elevated as measured by
ELISA in VPA17 compared to H69 cells (11.8 vs.1.8 pg/g protein, p <
0.01). Incubation for 96 h in 30M silibinin significantly reduced
survivin in VPA17 cells (3.4 pg/g protein, p < 0.01 compared with
untreated cells) but not in H69 cells. VPA17 cells incubated in 30 M
silibinin for 5 days showed an inhibition of pgp-mediated efflux of
calcein acetoxymethyl ester (calcein AM): Compared with drug-sensitive
H69 cells, VPA17 drug-resistant cells had significantly reduced calcein
AM retention (21 vs. 59 fluorescence units, pSmall-cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC) has a dismal prognosis in part because of multidrug resistance
(MDR). Silibinin is a flavonolignan extracted from milk thistle (Silybum
marianum), extracts of which are used in traditional medicine. Recently,
silibinin has shown anti-cancer activity in cell and animal models, in
particular prostate cancer where a clinical trial is underway. Here, we
report the effects of silibinin on SCLC, particularly cells showing MDR.
SCLC cells studied were NCI-H69 and a derived cell line VPA17 showing
resistance to etoposide (9-fold), doxorubicin (15-fold) and vincristine
(10-fold). VPA17 cells did not show resistance to silibinin (IC50 = 60M
for H69 and VPA17). Flow cytometry analysis after incubation in 30 M
silibinin showed no changes in cell cycle phases in VPA17 or H69 cells
(G1 = 49%, S = 29%, G2/M = 18%) compared with untreated cells (p>0.05).
Silibinin (30 M) incubation was pro-apoptotic in VPA17 cells after >3
days, as measured by ELISA of BUdR labeled DNA fragments. Apoptosis was
also indicated by an increase in caspase-3 specific activity (to 16
enzyme units/104 cells vs. 5 units/104 cells for untreated controls (p <
0.05). The anti-apoptotic protein survivin was elevated as measured by
ELISA in VPA17 compared to H69 cells (11.8 vs.1.8 pg/g protein, p <
0.01). Incubation for 96 h in 30M silibinin significantly reduced
survivin in VPA17 cells (3.4 pg/g protein, p < 0.01 compared with
untreated cells) but not in H69 cells. VPA17 cells incubated in 30 M
silibinin for 5 days showed an inhibition of pgp-mediated efflux of
calcein acetoxymethyl ester (calcein AM): Compared with drug-sensitive
H69 cells, VPA17 drug-resistant cells had significantly reduced calcein
AM retention (21 vs. 59 fluorescence units, p<0.01). However, silibinin
incubation reversed this drug efflux, with increased retention of calcein
AM only in VPA17 cells (88 fluorescence units, pSmall-cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC) has a dismal prognosis in part because of multidrug resistance
(MDR). Silibinin is a flavonolignan extracted from milk thistle (Silybum
marianum), extracts of which are used in traditional medicine. Recently,
silibinin has shown anti-cancer activity in cell and animal models, in
particular prostate cancer where a clinical trial is underway. Here, we
report the effects of silibinin on SCLC, particularly cells showing MDR.
SCLC cells studied were NCI-H69 and a derived cell line VPA17 showing
resistance to etoposide (9-fold), doxorubicin (15-fold) and vincristine
(10-fold). VPA17 cells did not show resistance to silibinin (IC50 = 60M
for H69 and VPA17). Flow cytometry analysis after incubation in 30 M
silibinin showed no changes in cell cycle phases in VPA17 or H69 cells
(G1 = 49%, S = 29%, G2/M = 18%) compared with untreated cells (p>0.05).
Silibinin (30 M) incubation was pro-apoptotic in VPA17 cells after >3
days, as measured by ELISA of BUdR labeled DNA fragments. Apoptosis was
also indicated by an increase in caspase-3 specific activity (to 16
enzyme units/104 cells vs. 5 units/104 cells for untreated controls (p <
0.05). The anti-apoptotic protein survivin was elevated as measured by
ELISA in VPA17 compared to H69 cells (11.8 vs.1.8 pg/g protein, p <
0.01). Incubation for 96 h in 30M silibinin significantly reduced
survivin in VPA17 cells (3.4 pg/g protein, p < 0.01 compared with
untreated cells) but not in H69 cells. VPA17 cells incubated in 30 M
silibinin for 5 days showed an inhibition of pgp-mediated efflux of
calcein acetoxymethyl ester (calcein AM): Compared with drug-sensitive
H69 cells, VPA17 drug-resistant cells had significantly reduced calcein
AM retention (21 vs. 59 fluorescence units, p<0.01). However, silibinin
incubation reversed this drug efflux, with increased retention of calcein
AM only in VPA17 cells (88 fluorescence units, p<0.001 compared with
untreated cells). Silibinin did not inhibit pgp-mediated efflux directly,
since there was no effect on calcein AM efflux after 45 min. incubation
of untreated VPA17 cells. Pre-incubation of VPA17 cells in 30 M silibinin
for 5 days reduced the IC50 for etoposide (5.50 uM to 0.65 M, p
Small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) has a dismal prognosis in part because
of multidrug resistance (MDR). Silibinin is a flavonolignan extracted
from milk thistle (Silybum marianum), extracts of which are used in
traditional medicine. Recently, silibinin has shown anti-cancer activity
in cell and animal models, in particular prostate cancer where a clinical
trial is underway. Here, we report the effects of silibinin on SCLC,
particularly cells showing MDR. SCLC cells studied were NCI-H69 and a
derived cell line VPA17 showing resistance to etoposide (9-fold),
doxorubicin (15-fold) and vincristine (10-fold). VPA17 cells did not show
resistance to silibinin (IC50 = 60M for H69 and VPA17). Flow cytometry
analysis after incubation in 30 M silibinin showed no changes in cell
cycle phases in VPA17 or H69 cells (G1 = 49%, S = 29%, G2/M = 18%)
compared with untreated cells (p>0.05). Silibinin (30 M) incubation was
pro-apoptotic in VPA17 cells after >3 days, as measured by ELISA of BUdR
labeled DNA fragments. Apoptosis was also indicated by an increase in
caspase-3 specific activity (to 16 enzyme units/104 cells vs. 5 units/104
cells for untreated controls (p < 0.05). The anti-apoptotic protein
survivin was elevated as measured by ELISA in VPA17 compared to H69 cells
(11.8 vs.1.8 pg/g protein, p < 0.01). Incubation for 96 h in 30M
silibinin significantly reduced survivin in VPA17 cells (3.4 pg/g
protein, p < 0.01 compared with untreated cells) but not in H69 cells.
VPA17 cells incubated in 30 M silibinin for 5 days showed an inhibition
of pgp-mediated efflux of calcein acetoxymethyl ester (calcein AM):
Compared with drug-sensitive H69 cells, VPA17 drug-resistant cells had
significantly reduced calcein AM retention (21 vs. 59 fluorescence units,
p<0.01). However, silibinin incubation reversed this drug efflux, with
increased retention of calcein AM only in VPA17 cells (88 fluorescence
units, p<0.001 compared with untreated cells). Silibinin did not inhibit
pgp-mediated efflux directly, since there was no effect on calcein AM
efflux after 45 min. incubation of untreated VPA17 cells. Pre-incubation
of VPA17 cells in 30 M silibinin for 5 days reduced the IC50 for
etoposide (5.50 uM to 0.65 M, p < 0.05) and doxorubicin (0.620 M to 0.035
M, p Small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) has a dismal prognosis in part
because of multidrug resistance (MDR). Silibinin is a flavonolignan
extracted from milk thistle (Silybum marianum), extracts of which are
used in traditional medicine. Recently, silibinin has shown anti-cancer
activity in cell and animal models, in particular prostate cancer where a
clinical trial is underway. Here, we report the effects of silibinin on
SCLC, particularly cells showing MDR. SCLC cells studied were NCI-H69 and
a derived cell line VPA17 showing resistance to etoposide (9-fold),
doxorubicin (15-fold) and vincristine (10-fold). VPA17 cells did not show
resistance to silibinin (IC50 = 60M for H69 and VPA17). Flow cytometry
analysis after incubation in 30 M silibinin showed no changes in cell
cycle phases in VPA17 or H69 cells (G1 = 49%, S = 29%, G2/M = 18%)
compared with untreated cells (p>0.05). Silibinin (30 M) incubation was
pro-apoptotic in VPA17 cells after >3 days, as measured by ELISA of BUdR
labeled DNA fragments. Apoptosis was also indicated by an increase in
caspase-3 specific activity (to 16 enzyme units/104 cells vs. 5 units/104
cells for untreated controls (p < 0.05). The anti-apoptotic protein
survivin was elevated as measured by ELISA in VPA17 compared to H69 cells
(11.8 vs.1.8 pg/g protein, p < 0.01). Incubation for 96 h in 30M
silibinin significantly reduced survivin in VPA17 cells (3.4 pg/g
protein, p < 0.01 compared with untreated cells) but not in H69 cells.
VPA17 cells incubated in 30 M silibinin for 5 days showed an inhibition
of pgp-mediated efflux of calcein acetoxymethyl ester (calcein AM):
Compared with drug-sensitive H69 cells, VPA17 drug-resistant cells had
significantly reduced calcein AM retention (21 vs. 59 fluorescence units,
p<0.01). However, silibinin incubation reversed this drug efflux, with
increased retention of calcein AM only in VPA17 cells (88 fluorescence
units, p<0.001 compared with untreated cells). Silibinin did not inhibit
pgp-mediated efflux directly, since there was no effect on calcein AM
efflux after 45 min. incubation of untreated VPA17 cells. Pre-incubation
of VPA17 cells in 30 M silibinin for 5 days reduced the IC50 for
etoposide (5.50 uM to 0.65 M, p < 0.05) and doxorubicin (0.620 M to 0.035
M, p < 0.05). Synergism between silibinin and chemotherapy drugs was
determined by exposure of VPA17 cells to 1:1 ratios at the appropriate
IC50 values of silibinin: etoposide or silibinin: doxorubicin at 0.25 x
IC50, 0.5 x IC50, 2 x IC50 and 4 x IC50. After 4 days, the combination
index (CI) was determined using CalcuSyn software. Silibinin and
etoposide showed synergism (CI = 0.46 at ED50 and CI = 0.95 at ED95);
silibinin and doxorubicin also showed synergism (CI = 0.24 at ED50 and CI
= 0.96 at ED95). These data indicate that in SCLC, silibinin is
pro-apoptotic, reverses MDR and acts synergistically with chemotherapy
drugs. Silibinin, a non-toxic natural product may be useful in treatment
of drug-resistant SCLC.

