Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Presentation and treatment of prostate cancer in HIV-infected men:
Do racial disparities exist.


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is increasing among HIV-infected
(HIV+) men who are living longer on effective anti-retroviral therapy
(ART). African-American (AA) men are overrepresented in the HIV+
population and are at high risk for PCa and PCa-related health
disparities. Little is known about PCa presentation and treatment
utilization in HIV+ and HIV+AA men.Methods: We conducted a retrospective
analysis of HIV+ men with PCa seen at Northwestern Medicine in Chicago,
IL, from 2001 to 2012. Cases identified through electronic medical record
billing, encounter, and procedure codes were verified by chart review. We
collected data on age, race/ethnicity, ART, CD4+ cell counts, and
covariates for HIV and PCa. Descriptive and comparative statistical
analyses were used.Results: We studied 44 HIV+ men with a median age of
59.5 years at PCa diagnosis. There were 15 (34%) AAs, 25 (57%) Caucasians
(CAs), two (5%) Hispanics, and two (5%) of unknown/other ethnicity. The
majority (42/44 [95%]) were on ART with a median CD4+ cell count at PCa
diagnosis of 372/l (88-1215, 306). Median prostate specific antigen (PSA)
at PCa diagnosis was 5.2 ng/ml (0.1-547, 102), and PSA did not differ
between AAs and CAs (p=.83). Of the 34 men with clinical staging, 20
(59%) were cT1c, 11 (32%) cT2a, one (3%) cT2c, and two (6%) cT3 or
higher. Stage at presentation was similar among AAs and CAs. Of all men
with clinically localized (CL) disease in whom initial treatment was
known, the majority (14/27 [52%]) underwent radical prostatectomy (RP)
with most (9/14 [64%]) utilizing the robotic approach. Rates of RP in AAs
and CAs were comparable (4/10 [40%] vs 9/15 [60%], p = 0.47). Radiation
(including external beam (5, [19%]) and brachytherapy (2, [7%])) was used
as primary therapy in seven (26%) men. Six (22%) elected watchful
waiting/active surveillance. Overall, received treatments adhered to
National Comprehensive Cancer Network recommendations for
risk-appropriate therapy in 91% of men, with no disparities found between
AAs and CAs (13/13 [100%] vs 15/17 [88%], p=.20).Conclusions: HIV+ men
are younger at PCa diagnosis compared to the general population (median
age at diagnosis=67) and are likely to present with CL-PCa, regardless of
race. Utilization of RP for CL-PCa and rates of overall appropriateness
of therapy in HIV+ and HIV+ AAs are high and comparable to national data,
suggesting no major treatment disparities based on HIV and racial status
exist. Further studies on etiologies of early PCa presentation and RP-
and cancer-related outcomes in HIV+ men are needed.

