Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival after cutaneous melanoma in kidney transplant recipients:
a population-based matched cohort study.


BACKGROUNDEarly detection and tailored treatment algorithms have resulted
in improved outcomes for patients with cutaneous melanoma. Solid organ
transplant recipients are at elevated risk of melanoma, and may have
poorer outcomes than non-transplant recipients, although the evidence is
unreliable.METHODSWe conducted a national, population-based, matched
cohort study of de novo invasive cutaneous melanoma in Australian kidney
transplant recipients and in randomly selected members of the general
population matched for age, sex, state of residence, and year of
diagnosis (1982-2003). Melanoma histopathological characteristics were
extracted from cancer registry notifications and date of death was
obtained by linkage with the National Death Index (1982-2011). Kaplan
Meier curves and Cox proportional hazard models were used to analyse the
overall survival of transplant and non-transplant recipients, adjusted
for matching and histopathological characteristics.RESULTSCompared to
non-transplant recipients (n=202), melanomas in transplant recipients
(n=75) were more likely to have a higher AJCC pathologic stage (P=0.003)
at diagnosis. Survival was significantly lower for recipients compared to
non-recipients, overall and for stage I melanomas (PBACKGROUNDEarly
detection and tailored treatment algorithms have resulted in improved
outcomes for patients with cutaneous melanoma. Solid organ transplant
recipients are at elevated risk of melanoma, and may have poorer outcomes
than non-transplant recipients, although the evidence is
unreliable.METHODSWe conducted a national, population-based, matched
cohort study of de novo invasive cutaneous melanoma in Australian kidney
transplant recipients and in randomly selected members of the general
population matched for age, sex, state of residence, and year of
diagnosis (1982-2003). Melanoma histopathological characteristics were
extracted from cancer registry notifications and date of death was
obtained by linkage with the National Death Index (1982-2011). Kaplan
Meier curves and Cox proportional hazard models were used to analyse the
overall survival of transplant and non-transplant recipients, adjusted
for matching and histopathological characteristics.RESULTSCompared to
non-transplant recipients (n=202), melanomas in transplant recipients
(n=75) were more likely to have a higher AJCC pathologic stage (P=0.003)
at diagnosis. Survival was significantly lower for recipients compared to
non-recipients, overall and for stage I melanomas (P<0.001).
Transplantation was associated with a significantly increased risk of
death (adjusted hazards ratio 8.06; 95% confidence interval, 3.92 to
16.6, PBACKGROUNDEarly detection and tailored treatment algorithms have
resulted in improved outcomes for patients with cutaneous melanoma. Solid
organ transplant recipients are at elevated risk of melanoma, and may
have poorer outcomes than non-transplant recipients, although the
evidence is unreliable.METHODSWe conducted a national, population-based,
matched cohort study of de novo invasive cutaneous melanoma in Australian
kidney transplant recipients and in randomly selected members of the
general population matched for age, sex, state of residence, and year of
diagnosis (1982-2003). Melanoma histopathological characteristics were
extracted from cancer registry notifications and date of death was
obtained by linkage with the National Death Index (1982-2011). Kaplan
Meier curves and Cox proportional hazard models were used to analyse the
overall survival of transplant and non-transplant recipients, adjusted
for matching and histopathological characteristics.RESULTSCompared to
non-transplant recipients (n=202), melanomas in transplant recipients
(n=75) were more likely to have a higher AJCC pathologic stage (P=0.003)
at diagnosis. Survival was significantly lower for recipients compared to
non-recipients, overall and for stage I melanomas (P<0.001).
Transplantation was associated with a significantly increased risk of
death (adjusted hazards ratio 8.06; 95% confidence interval, 3.92 to
16.6, P<0.0001). Pathologic stage (P=0.0004) and histology (P=0.009) also
independently predicted risk of death.CONCLUSIONSTransplant recipients
have a markedly poorer outcome than non-recipients after melanoma
diagnosis. A review of patient education and skin cancer screening
guidelines is warranted. Treatment algorithms developed for the general
population with melanoma do not appear to apply to transplant recipients.

