Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual ALK and EGFR inhibition targets a mechanism of acquired
resistance to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor crizotinib in ALK
translocated lung cancer.


ABSTRACTIntroduction: The multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
crizotinib is active against ALK translocated non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC); however acquired resistance invariably develops over time. ALK
mutations have previously been implicated in only a third of resistant
tumors. We sought to evaluate alternative mechanisms of resistance and
preclinical strategies to overcome these in a cell line driven by
EML4-ALK.Methods: We selected the NSCLC cell line NCI-H3122 (H3122:
EML4-ALK E13;A20) and derived resistant variants that were able to grow
in the presence of 1M crizotinib. These were analyzed for ALK mutations,
sensitivity to crizotinib in combination to other TKIs (imatinib,
sorafenib, erlotinib and afatinib), and for activation of alternative
tyrosine kinases.Results: All H3122 crizotinib resistant (CR) clones
lacked mutations in the kinase domain of ALK. To evaluate if possible
alternative kinases functioned as bypass tracks for downstream signaling
activation in these resistance cells, we used a functional approach of
dual ALK TKI (with crizotinib) with combinatory TKI inhibition to screen
for possible targets. Crizotinib + sorafenib (BRAF, RET, PDGFR, VEGFR
TKI) and crizotinib + imatinib (ABL, PDGFR, KIT TKI) were ineffective. In
contrast, crizotinib + erlotinib (reversible EGFR TKI) and crizotinib +
afatinib (irreversible EGFR/ERBB2 TKI) were able to inhibit the growth of
H3122 CR clones, indicating potential EGFR activation as a mechanism of
resistance. Analyses of phosho-receptor tyrosine kinase arrays
demonstrated that CR clones had 5-25 times higher phospho-EGFR signal
than H3122 parental cells did after the exposure to 1M crizotinib,
indicating phospho-EGFR was the most predominant phosphorylated signal in
crizotinib-resistant cells.Conclusions: Using a functional approach of
combining ALK and EGFR TKIs, we identified activation of EGFR as a
mechanism of resistance to crizotinib in preclinical models of ALK
translocated NSCLC. If EGFR activation is confirmed as a predominant
mechanism of crizotinib resistance in patient-derived tumors, the use of
crizotinib + EGFR TKIs should be tested in future clinical trials for
this important cohort of NSCL

