Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary fat intake and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer by tumor
histology.


Differences in ovarian cancer incidence rates worldwide suggest an
important role for lifestyle factors, including diet, that may influence
disease risk. In the WHI dietary modification RCT, a low-fat diet reduced
ovarian cancer risk. However, a pooled analysis of 12 cohort studies
observed no association between total fat intake and ovarian cancer risk.
We hypothesized that the association between dietary fat intake and
ovarian cancer risk may vary between the histological subtypes, or that
associations may differ depending on the type of fat consumed, such as
saturated fat, which has deleterious health effects, and long-chain
omega-3 fatty acids, which have anti-inflammatory properties.The study
objective was to evaluate fat intake in a New England case-control study
that included 1872 cases and 1978 population-based controls enrolled
between 1992-2008. At the time of enrolment, participants were
interviewed in-person about known and suspected ovarian cancer risk
factors and diet was assessed using a validated self-administered,
semi-quantitative FFQ. Unconditional logistic regression was used to
estimate the association between fat intake and ovarian cancer risk
overall and polytomous logistic regression was used to test whether risk
associations varied across the histological subtypes of invasive ovarian
cancer. Multivariate models were adjusted for study center and phase,
age, number of pregnancies, oral contraceptive use, history of tubal
ligation and family history of ovarian cancer.We observed a significantly
decreased risk of ovarian cancer overall with higher intakes of omega-3
and omega-6 (long chain n-3, Q4 vs. Q1, OR = 0.79, 95% CI = 0.66 - 0.96;
total n-6, Q4 vs. Q1, OR = 0.77, 95% CI = 0.64 - 0.94), and an increased
risk with increased consumption of total trans fats (Q4 vs. Q1, OR =
1.30, 95% CI = 1.08 - 1.57). The protective effects for high intake of
omega-3 were strongest for endometrioid invasive tumors (Q4 vs. Q1, OR =
0.58, 95% CI = 0.41 - 0.82, Ptrend = 0.003, Phet (differences in
associations between all invasive histological subtypes) = 0.20). There
was a suggestive increased risk for serous, endometrioid, and mucinous
invasive tumors with high intake of trans fats although this association
was significant only for serous tumors (Q4 vs. Q1, OR = 1.28, 95% CI =
1.02 - 1.62, Ptrend = 0.02, Phet = 0.83). The protective effects of
omega-6 were no longer apparent in analyses of different histological
subtypes of invasive ovarian cancer although we observed an inverse
association with risk of serous borderline tumors (Q4 vs. Q1, OR = 0.56,
95% CI = 0.36 - 0.90, Ptrend = 0.05).These findings suggest that higher
intakes of omega-3 may be protective for ovarian cancer, while high
consumption of trans fats appeared to increase risk. To further evaluate
the possible role for omega-3 in the prevention of ovarian cancer,
additional studies are needed to confirm these findings and to
investigate the mechanistic basis for these associations.

