Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of Sox4 as a key oncogene in leukemias with mutated
or silenced C/EBP.


Transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBP)
controls cell proliferation and myeloid differentiation. In 10% of
patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) C/EBPA is either mutated or
epigenetically silenced. C/EBPA mutated leukemias differ from C/EBPA
silenced leukemias in prognosis and phenotype, yet both leukemias cluster
together based on genome wide gene expression signatures, indicating a
unifying mechanism of disease. So far, the key downstream events required
for C/EBPA loss to trigger leukemogenesis are still unclear.Based on
microarray gene expression analysis, we used a shRNA screening platform
to search for mediators of leukemic outgrow of C/EBP-deficient
stem/progenitor cells (C/EBP-/- HSC/HPCs, lineage-c-kit+ScaI+). In our
screen, oncogene Sox4 was identified as a gene that was up-regulated in
C/EBP-/- HSC/HPCs and whose down-regulation abrogated aberrant
self-renewal ability and restored myeloid differentiation of C/EBP-/-
HSC/HPCs, as demonstrated by in vitro serial-replating and
differentiation assays.Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed the
endogenous binding of C/EBP at the proximal promoter of Sox4 in the
HSC/HPCs enriched population (lineage-c-kit+) and the mature myeloid
population (Mac1+Gr1+). In vitro promoter reporter assay demonstrated
that wild-type human C/EBPA, but none of the C/EBPA mutants identified
from AML patients, repressed Sox4 transcription through its binding to a
highly conserved C/EBP binding site.C/EBP and Sox4 showed reciprocal
expression patterns in both HSCs and various hematopoietic compartments
during myeloid maturation of wild type mice. Furthermore, expression of
Sox4 was up-regulated in HSCs of C/EBP-deficient mice as well as in
leukemia-initiating cells (LICs) of a murine C/EBP mutant AML model. To
further genetically dissect the role of Sox4 in driving leukemia in the
absence of functional CEBP, we generated Sox4, C/EBP double deficient
mice and observed that loss of Sox4 alleviated the abnormal HSC/HPCs
expansion and defective myeloid programming caused by C/EBP deficiency.
In addition, comparisons of the murine C/EBP mutant AML model with a
Sox4-induced AML model revealed that LICs of both leukemia models were
enriched in immunophenotypically similar populations and exhibited
comparable gene expression signatures. Importantly, down-regulation of
Sox4 by shRNA in LICs from murine C/EBP mutant AML was sufficient to
abolish their augmented serial-replating ability. Intriguingly, enhanced
expression of SOX4 in AML patients with either mutated or epigenetically
silenced C/EBPA compared to other AML subtypes confirmed the findings in
our mouse model systems.Our data demonstrate that failure to suppress
Sox4 expression is the underlying mechanism of leukemias with mutated or
silenced C/EBP. These data also uncover a promising rationale for a
therapeutic target in these leukemias.

