Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of genetic polymorphisms in VEGFR1 with
progression-free and overall survival in patients with neuroendocrine
tumors treated with the VEGFA inhibitor bevacizumab.


Background:Neuroendocrine tumors (NET) have been shown to be responsive
to treatment with VEGF pathway inhibitors. We hypothesized that genetic
variation in VEGFA, VEGFR1 or VEGFR2 is associated with progression free
survival (PFS) and/or overall survival (OS) in patients with metastatic
NET treated with bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting
VEGFA.Methods:We selected 61 functional and tagging SNPs with a minor
allele frequency of 5% or greater, with full gene coverage of VEGFA,
VEGFR1 and VEGFR2. We pooled data from two genotyped datasets, selecting
82 patients with metastatic NET who received bevacizumab administered
either as a single agent or as part of a combination regimen. Using a Cox
proportional hazards regression analysis, and an additive genetic model,
we tested the SNPs associations with PFS and OS adjusting for age and
stage at diagnosis, gender, tumor origin, grade of differentiation, and
genotyping dataset.Results:We found that 4 intronic tagging SNPs in
VEGFR1, rs7987649, rs9508021, rs9513095 and rs2104330 were associated
with PFS at pBackground:Neuroendocrine tumors (NET) have been shown to be
responsive to treatment with VEGF pathway inhibitors. We hypothesized
that genetic variation in VEGFA, VEGFR1 or VEGFR2 is associated with
progression free survival (PFS) and/or overall survival (OS) in patients
with metastatic NET treated with bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody
targeting VEGFA.Methods:We selected 61 functional and tagging SNPs with a
minor allele frequency of 5% or greater, with full gene coverage of
VEGFA, VEGFR1 and VEGFR2. We pooled data from two genotyped datasets,
selecting 82 patients with metastatic NET who received bevacizumab
administered either as a single agent or as part of a combination
regimen. Using a Cox proportional hazards regression analysis, and an
additive genetic model, we tested the SNPs associations with PFS and OS
adjusting for age and stage at diagnosis, gender, tumor origin, grade of
differentiation, and genotyping dataset.Results:We found that 4 intronic
tagging SNPs in VEGFR1, rs7987649, rs9508021, rs9513095 and rs2104330
were associated with PFS at p<0.05. The association between rs7987649 and
PFS (multivariate Hazard Ratio 0.55 (0.38, 0.81) p=0.002) remained
significant after adjusting for multiple testing. One of the four SNPs
associated with PFS, rs7987649, as well as another SNP in VEGFR1,
rs3794339, were associated with OS at pBackground:Neuroendocrine tumors
(NET) have been shown to be responsive to treatment with VEGF pathway
inhibitors. We hypothesized that genetic variation in VEGFA, VEGFR1 or
VEGFR2 is associated with progression free survival (PFS) and/or overall
survival (OS) in patients with metastatic NET treated with bevacizumab, a
monoclonal antibody targeting VEGFA.Methods:We selected 61 functional and
tagging SNPs with a minor allele frequency of 5% or greater, with full
gene coverage of VEGFA, VEGFR1 and VEGFR2. We pooled data from two
genotyped datasets, selecting 82 patients with metastatic NET who
received bevacizumab administered either as a single agent or as part of
a combination regimen. Using a Cox proportional hazards regression
analysis, and an additive genetic model, we tested the SNPs associations
with PFS and OS adjusting for age and stage at diagnosis, gender, tumor
origin, grade of differentiation, and genotyping dataset.Results:We found
that 4 intronic tagging SNPs in VEGFR1, rs7987649, rs9508021, rs9513095
and rs2104330 were associated with PFS at p<0.05. The association between
rs7987649 and PFS (multivariate Hazard Ratio 0.55 (0.38, 0.81) p=0.002)
remained significant after adjusting for multiple testing. One of the
four SNPs associated with PFS, rs7987649, as well as another SNP in
VEGFR1, rs3794339, were associated with OS at p<0.05 although these
associations did not remain significant after multiple testing
adjustment. No SNPs in either VEGFR2 or VEGFA were associated with PFS or
OS.Conclusions:In patients with neuroendocrine tumors treated with
bevacizumab, the VEGFR1 SNP rs7987649 appears to be associated with
progression-free survival. We note that three SNPs identified in our
analysis, rs9508021, rs9513095 and rs2104330, are in strong linkage
disequilibrium with SNPs rs7993418 and rs9582036, which have been
associated with increased VEGFR1 expression and with PFS and OS in
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (Lambrechts, 2012). Further study of loci
within this region of VEGFR1 is warranted to discover potential causal
variants affecting NET survival.

