Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-491-3p regulation of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A
gene family.


Background: The UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are phase II
metabolic enzymes that prime endogenous and exogenous compounds for
excretion from the body. The UGTs are often found to have high
inter-individual differences in expression, and this impacts patients
response to drug therapy. Studies examining the epigenetic regulation of
the UGT enzymes have not previously been performed. Recently, it has been
shown that the phase I metabolic cytochrome P-450s (CYPs) are negatively
regulated by microRNA (miRNA). miRNA are short, endogenous strands of RNA
roughly 22-24 nucleotides in length that regulate gene expression. MiRNA
specifically bind to the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of mature messenger
RNA (mRNA) and post-transcriptionally repress protein expression.
Purpose: The goal of this study is to identify and evaluate miRNA
regulation of UGT1A expression and whether this regulation contributes to
differences in UGT1A enzymatic activity. Results: miR-491-3p was
identified using the miRanda prediction program. Luciferase assays showed
a significant reduction in luciferase activity with an attached UGT1A
3UTR in the presence of miR-491-3p mimic (PBackground: The
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are phase II metabolic enzymes that
prime endogenous and exogenous compounds for excretion from the body. The
UGTs are often found to have high inter-individual differences in
expression, and this impacts patients response to drug therapy. Studies
examining the epigenetic regulation of the UGT enzymes have not
previously been performed. Recently, it has been shown that the phase I
metabolic cytochrome P-450s (CYPs) are negatively regulated by microRNA
(miRNA). miRNA are short, endogenous strands of RNA roughly 22-24
nucleotides in length that regulate gene expression. MiRNA specifically
bind to the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of mature messenger RNA (mRNA)
and post-transcriptionally repress protein expression. Purpose: The goal
of this study is to identify and evaluate miRNA regulation of UGT1A
expression and whether this regulation contributes to differences in
UGT1A enzymatic activity. Results: miR-491-3p was identified using the
miRanda prediction program. Luciferase assays showed a significant
reduction in luciferase activity with an attached UGT1A 3UTR in the
presence of miR-491-3p mimic (P<0.03). This reduction was lost when the
miR-491-3p binding site in the UGT1A 3 UTR was mutated. Mature miR-491-3p
expression levels were identified and quantified in numerous cancer cell
lines and normal human tissues. There was a significant increase in
expression of miR-491-3p in four human liver cancer cell lines (HepG2,
Hep3B, HuH-7, and SK-HEP-1) compared to normal liver (PBackground: The
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are phase II metabolic enzymes that
prime endogenous and exogenous compounds for excretion from the body. The
UGTs are often found to have high inter-individual differences in
expression, and this impacts patients response to drug therapy. Studies
examining the epigenetic regulation of the UGT enzymes have not
previously been performed. Recently, it has been shown that the phase I
metabolic cytochrome P-450s (CYPs) are negatively regulated by microRNA
(miRNA). miRNA are short, endogenous strands of RNA roughly 22-24
nucleotides in length that regulate gene expression. MiRNA specifically
bind to the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of mature messenger RNA (mRNA)
and post-transcriptionally repress protein expression. Purpose: The goal
of this study is to identify and evaluate miRNA regulation of UGT1A
expression and whether this regulation contributes to differences in
UGT1A enzymatic activity. Results: miR-491-3p was identified using the
miRanda prediction program. Luciferase assays showed a significant
reduction in luciferase activity with an attached UGT1A 3UTR in the
presence of miR-491-3p mimic (P<0.03). This reduction was lost when the
miR-491-3p binding site in the UGT1A 3 UTR was mutated. Mature miR-491-3p
expression levels were identified and quantified in numerous cancer cell
lines and normal human tissues. There was a significant increase in
expression of miR-491-3p in four human liver cancer cell lines (HepG2,
Hep3B, HuH-7, and SK-HEP-1) compared to normal liver (P<0.001) and a
significant decrease in expression between normal human colon compared to
Caco-2 colorectal cancer cells (P=0.0041), and between normal lung
compared to A-549 lung cancer cells (P=0.0002). In HuH-7 liver cancer
cells, we determined that transient transfection of miR-491-3p
significantly reduced mRNA levels of UGT1A1 (PBackground: The
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are phase II metabolic enzymes that
prime endogenous and exogenous compounds for excretion from the body. The
UGTs are often found to have high inter-individual differences in
expression, and this impacts patients response to drug therapy. Studies
examining the epigenetic regulation of the UGT enzymes have not
previously been performed. Recently, it has been shown that the phase I
metabolic cytochrome P-450s (CYPs) are negatively regulated by microRNA
(miRNA). miRNA are short, endogenous strands of RNA roughly 22-24
nucleotides in length that regulate gene expression. MiRNA specifically
bind to the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of mature messenger RNA (mRNA)
and post-transcriptionally repress protein expression. Purpose: The goal
of this study is to identify and evaluate miRNA regulation of UGT1A
expression and whether this regulation contributes to differences in
UGT1A enzymatic activity. Results: miR-491-3p was identified using the
miRanda prediction program. Luciferase assays showed a significant
reduction in luciferase activity with an attached UGT1A 3UTR in the
presence of miR-491-3p mimic (P<0.03). This reduction was lost when the
miR-491-3p binding site in the UGT1A 3 UTR was mutated. Mature miR-491-3p
expression levels were identified and quantified in numerous cancer cell
lines and normal human tissues. There was a significant increase in
expression of miR-491-3p in four human liver cancer cell lines (HepG2,
Hep3B, HuH-7, and SK-HEP-1) compared to normal liver (P<0.001) and a
significant decrease in expression between normal human colon compared to
Caco-2 colorectal cancer cells (P=0.0041), and between normal lung
compared to A-549 lung cancer cells (P=0.0002). In HuH-7 liver cancer
cells, we determined that transient transfection of miR-491-3p
significantly reduced mRNA levels of UGT1A1 (P<0.0001), UGT1A3
(PBackground: The UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are phase II
metabolic enzymes that prime endogenous and exogenous compounds for
excretion from the body. The UGTs are often found to have high
inter-individual differences in expression, and this impacts patients
response to drug therapy. Studies examining the epigenetic regulation of
the UGT enzymes have not previously been performed. Recently, it has been
shown that the phase I metabolic cytochrome P-450s (CYPs) are negatively
regulated by microRNA (miRNA). miRNA are short, endogenous strands of RNA
roughly 22-24 nucleotides in length that regulate gene expression. MiRNA
specifically bind to the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of mature messenger
RNA (mRNA) and post-transcriptionally repress protein expression.
Purpose: The goal of this study is to identify and evaluate miRNA
regulation of UGT1A expression and whether this regulation contributes to
differences in UGT1A enzymatic activity. Results: miR-491-3p was
identified using the miRanda prediction program. Luciferase assays showed
a significant reduction in luciferase activity with an attached UGT1A
3UTR in the presence of miR-491-3p mimic (P<0.03). This reduction was
lost when the miR-491-3p binding site in the UGT1A 3 UTR was mutated.
Mature miR-491-3p expression levels were identified and quantified in
numerous cancer cell lines and normal human tissues. There was a
significant increase in expression of miR-491-3p in four human liver
cancer cell lines (HepG2, Hep3B, HuH-7, and SK-HEP-1) compared to normal
liver (P<0.001) and a significant decrease in expression between normal
human colon compared to Caco-2 colorectal cancer cells (P=0.0041), and
between normal lung compared to A-549 lung cancer cells (P=0.0002). In
HuH-7 liver cancer cells, we determined that transient transfection of
miR-491-3p significantly reduced mRNA levels of UGT1A1 (P<0.0001), UGT1A3
(P<0.05), and UGT1A6 (PBackground: The UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases
(UGTs) are phase II metabolic enzymes that prime endogenous and exogenous
compounds for excretion from the body. The UGTs are often found to have
high inter-individual differences in expression, and this impacts
patients response to drug therapy. Studies examining the epigenetic
regulation of the UGT enzymes have not previously been performed.
Recently, it has been shown that the phase I metabolic cytochrome P-450s
(CYPs) are negatively regulated by microRNA (miRNA). miRNA are short,
endogenous strands of RNA roughly 22-24 nucleotides in length that
regulate gene expression. MiRNA specifically bind to the 3 untranslated
region (UTR) of mature messenger RNA (mRNA) and post-transcriptionally
repress protein expression. Purpose: The goal of this study is to
identify and evaluate miRNA regulation of UGT1A expression and whether
this regulation contributes to differences in UGT1A enzymatic activity.
Results: miR-491-3p was identified using the miRanda prediction program.
Luciferase assays showed a significant reduction in luciferase activity
with an attached UGT1A 3UTR in the presence of miR-491-3p mimic (P<0.03).
This reduction was lost when the miR-491-3p binding site in the UGT1A 3
UTR was mutated. Mature miR-491-3p expression levels were identified and
quantified in numerous cancer cell lines and normal human tissues. There
was a significant increase in expression of miR-491-3p in four human
liver cancer cell lines (HepG2, Hep3B, HuH-7, and SK-HEP-1) compared to
normal liver (P<0.001) and a significant decrease in expression between
normal human colon compared to Caco-2 colorectal cancer cells (P=0.0041),
and between normal lung compared to A-549 lung cancer cells (P=0.0002).
In HuH-7 liver cancer cells, we determined that transient transfection of
miR-491-3p significantly reduced mRNA levels of UGT1A1 (P<0.0001), UGT1A3
(P<0.05), and UGT1A6 (P<0.001). Inversely, inhibitor knockdown of
endogenous miR-491-3p levels in HuH-7 cells showed a significant increase
in the expression of UGT1A1 (PBackground: The
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are phase II metabolic enzymes that
prime endogenous and exogenous compounds for excretion from the body. The
UGTs are often found to have high inter-individual differences in
expression, and this impacts patients response to drug therapy. Studies
examining the epigenetic regulation of the UGT enzymes have not
previously been performed. Recently, it has been shown that the phase I
metabolic cytochrome P-450s (CYPs) are negatively regulated by microRNA
(miRNA). miRNA are short, endogenous strands of RNA roughly 22-24
nucleotides in length that regulate gene expression. MiRNA specifically
bind to the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of mature messenger RNA (mRNA)
and post-transcriptionally repress protein expression. Purpose: The goal
of this study is to identify and evaluate miRNA regulation of UGT1A
expression and whether this regulation contributes to differences in
UGT1A enzymatic activity. Results: miR-491-3p was identified using the
miRanda prediction program. Luciferase assays showed a significant
reduction in luciferase activity with an attached UGT1A 3UTR in the
presence of miR-491-3p mimic (P<0.03). This reduction was lost when the
miR-491-3p binding site in the UGT1A 3 UTR was mutated. Mature miR-491-3p
expression levels were identified and quantified in numerous cancer cell
lines and normal human tissues. There was a significant increase in
expression of miR-491-3p in four human liver cancer cell lines (HepG2,
Hep3B, HuH-7, and SK-HEP-1) compared to normal liver (P<0.001) and a
significant decrease in expression between normal human colon compared to
Caco-2 colorectal cancer cells (P=0.0041), and between normal lung
compared to A-549 lung cancer cells (P=0.0002). In HuH-7 liver cancer
cells, we determined that transient transfection of miR-491-3p
significantly reduced mRNA levels of UGT1A1 (P<0.0001), UGT1A3 (P<0.05),
and UGT1A6 (P<0.001). Inversely, inhibitor knockdown of endogenous
miR-491-3p levels in HuH-7 cells showed a significant increase in the
expression of UGT1A1 (P<0.003) and UGT1A10 (PBackground: The
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are phase II metabolic enzymes that
prime endogenous and exogenous compounds for excretion from the body. The
UGTs are often found to have high inter-individual differences in
expression, and this impacts patients response to drug therapy. Studies
examining the epigenetic regulation of the UGT enzymes have not
previously been performed. Recently, it has been shown that the phase I
metabolic cytochrome P-450s (CYPs) are negatively regulated by microRNA
(miRNA). miRNA are short, endogenous strands of RNA roughly 22-24
nucleotides in length that regulate gene expression. MiRNA specifically
bind to the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of mature messenger RNA (mRNA)
and post-transcriptionally repress protein expression. Purpose: The goal
of this study is to identify and evaluate miRNA regulation of UGT1A
expression and whether this regulation contributes to differences in
UGT1A enzymatic activity. Results: miR-491-3p was identified using the
miRanda prediction program. Luciferase assays showed a significant
reduction in luciferase activity with an attached UGT1A 3UTR in the
presence of miR-491-3p mimic (P<0.03). This reduction was lost when the
miR-491-3p binding site in the UGT1A 3 UTR was mutated. Mature miR-491-3p
expression levels were identified and quantified in numerous cancer cell
lines and normal human tissues. There was a significant increase in
expression of miR-491-3p in four human liver cancer cell lines (HepG2,
Hep3B, HuH-7, and SK-HEP-1) compared to normal liver (P<0.001) and a
significant decrease in expression between normal human colon compared to
Caco-2 colorectal cancer cells (P=0.0041), and between normal lung
compared to A-549 lung cancer cells (P=0.0002). In HuH-7 liver cancer
cells, we determined that transient transfection of miR-491-3p
significantly reduced mRNA levels of UGT1A1 (P<0.0001), UGT1A3 (P<0.05),
and UGT1A6 (P<0.001). Inversely, inhibitor knockdown of endogenous
miR-491-3p levels in HuH-7 cells showed a significant increase in the
expression of UGT1A1 (P<0.003) and UGT1A10 (P<0.05) mRNA. No alteration
in expression was observed for UGT2B7. miR-491-3p over-expression
affected the enzymatic activity of the UGT1As against the
chemotherapeutic compound raloxifene (PBackground: The
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are phase II metabolic enzymes that
prime endogenous and exogenous compounds for excretion from the body. The
UGTs are often found to have high inter-individual differences in
expression, and this impacts patients response to drug therapy. Studies
examining the epigenetic regulation of the UGT enzymes have not
previously been performed. Recently, it has been shown that the phase I
metabolic cytochrome P-450s (CYPs) are negatively regulated by microRNA
(miRNA). miRNA are short, endogenous strands of RNA roughly 22-24
nucleotides in length that regulate gene expression. MiRNA specifically
bind to the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of mature messenger RNA (mRNA)
and post-transcriptionally repress protein expression. Purpose: The goal
of this study is to identify and evaluate miRNA regulation of UGT1A
expression and whether this regulation contributes to differences in
UGT1A enzymatic activity. Results: miR-491-3p was identified using the
miRanda prediction program. Luciferase assays showed a significant
reduction in luciferase activity with an attached UGT1A 3UTR in the
presence of miR-491-3p mimic (P<0.03). This reduction was lost when the
miR-491-3p binding site in the UGT1A 3 UTR was mutated. Mature miR-491-3p
expression levels were identified and quantified in numerous cancer cell
lines and normal human tissues. There was a significant increase in
expression of miR-491-3p in four human liver cancer cell lines (HepG2,
Hep3B, HuH-7, and SK-HEP-1) compared to normal liver (P<0.001) and a
significant decrease in expression between normal human colon compared to
Caco-2 colorectal cancer cells (P=0.0041), and between normal lung
compared to A-549 lung cancer cells (P=0.0002). In HuH-7 liver cancer
cells, we determined that transient transfection of miR-491-3p
significantly reduced mRNA levels of UGT1A1 (P<0.0001), UGT1A3 (P<0.05),
and UGT1A6 (P<0.001). Inversely, inhibitor knockdown of endogenous
miR-491-3p levels in HuH-7 cells showed a significant increase in the
expression of UGT1A1 (P<0.003) and UGT1A10 (P<0.05) mRNA. No alteration
in expression was observed for UGT2B7. miR-491-3p over-expression
affected the enzymatic activity of the UGT1As against the
chemotherapeutic compound raloxifene (P<0.01), a drug metabolized by
several members of the UGT1A family. Conclusion: miR-491-3p regulates the
expression of several members of the UGT1A gene family. This regulation
affects UGT1A enzymatic activity against the drug raloxifene in vitro.
This is the first evidence implicating the epigenetic regulation of the
UGT enzymes by miRNA.

