Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitivity of endometrial cancer cells to inhibitors targeting
different nodes of the PI3K pathway and their combination with a MEK
inhibitor.


Activation of the PI3K pathway has been reported in endometrial cancers,
and there are a number of inhibitors targeting different nodes of the
PI3K pathway currently in clinical trials, including the PI3K/mTOR dual
inhibitor GDC-0980 that is in a phase II trial for endometrial cancer
(NCT01455493). In this study, we set to examine the prevalence of
overlapping mutational activation of the PI3K pathway with other
pathways, such as MAPK. We also tested whether targeting different nodes
of PI3K pathway, such as PI3K, AKT, or PI3K/mTOR could exert differential
effects on endometrial cancer cells, and whether combination with a MEK
inhibitor could provide an additional benefit in inhibiting endometrial
cancer cell growth.Alteration of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
were profiled in 80 endometrial cancer samples by qRT-PCR, targeted deep
sequencing, and IHC staining. Multiple PI3K inhibitors, including
GDC-0941 (PI3K), GDC-0068 (AKT), GDC-0980 (PI3K/mTOR), and the MEK
inhibitor GDC-0973 were tested in a panel of 27 endometrial cancer cell
lines for their effects on cell growth. Cell signaling status at baseline
and on-treatment was profiled by reverse phase protein array. Mutations
and copy number variations of relevant oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes were examined in these cells by targeted deep sequencing.In the 80
endometrial tumor tissues we profiled, there were multiple instances of
PI3K pathway alteration including 31% PIK3CA mutations, 9% AKT1
mutations, 16% MET mutations, and 38% PTEN null. In addition, KRAS
mutations significantly overlapped with PTEN null or PIK3CA mutation in
the same specimen. Endometrial cancer cell lines had distinct patterns of
sensitivity to inhibitors targeting different nodes of the PI3K pathway.
Preliminary results showed that GDC-0068 was more effective in cell lines
with PTEN mutations, while GDC-0941 had a greater effect on those with
PIK3CA mutations, and the cell lines were broadly sensitive to GDC-0980.
In spite of the widespread activation of the PI3K pathway in endometrial
cancer cells, synergistic inhibition of cell growth was observed when
GDC-0973 was combined with either GDC-0068 or GDC-0941 in most of the
cell lines tested. We will seek to identify genomic and/or proteomic
features that will allow better selection as to which node of the PI3K
pathway to target, and when to combine with a MEK inhibitor.

