Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100A4 interacts with p53 in the nucleus promoting its degradation.


Background.S100A4 is a calcium binding protein which has no known
enzymatic activity, but it exerts its function by binding and regulating
other molecules, among which have been described Myosin and p53. S100A4
has been shown to be upregulated in several types of cancers, correlating
with poor prognosis and metastasis.In a previous study (Orre et al.,
2007), S100A4 has been shown to be involved the cellular response to
ionizing irradiation in a p53 dependent manner; our aim here was
therefore to investigate the cellular interaction partners of S100A4 in
response to p53 and then, based on this data, to further elucidate the
cellular function of S100A4.Observations.Nutlin-3A is a compound that
specifically stabilizes p53 through inhibiting the interaction between
p53 and mdm2. We could show an interaction between S100A4 and p53 via
immunoprecipitation in the NSCLC cell line A549 (which has a high
expression of S100A4 and a wild-type p53), and that this interaction is
increased after Nutlin-3A treatment. The interaction has been
independently confirmed via Proximity Ligation Assay, showing as well
that the protein complexes are localized in the nucleus.Since this
interaction increased after inhibition of the mdm2-p53 interaction, we
hypothesized that S100A4 could be involved in regulation of p53
degradation; therefore we generated two cell lines from A549, infected
with S100A4 shRNA (shS100A4) or an Empty Vector shRNA (shEV) as a
control. Knockdown of S100A4 resulted in stabilization of p53 and
transactivation of p53 transcriptional targets; it also resulted in
higher sensitivity to cisplatin-mediated apoptotic cell death, measured
as a drop in mitochondrial membrane potential, caspase-3 activation and
AV/PI assay.We confirmed this finding by an independent method using
transient S100A4 down regulation via siRNA; this resulted in an increase
in p53 level and of p21 and MDM2 level in A549 adenocarcinoma cells.
S100A4 siRNA resulted also in p53-dependent growth arrest, that was
reversed after co-transfecting p53 siRNA.Conclusions.Our data show that
S100A4 interacts with p53 increasing its degradation, resulting in higher
cell viability and lower apoptosis after cisplatin treatment. A possible
correlation in patients between S100A4 overexpression and cisplatin
resistance could be used to drive treatment selection.

