Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SR48692 inhibits EGF receptor transactivation and proliferation of
lung cancer cells.


Neurotensin (NTS) is an autocrine growth factor for some lung cancer
cells (Moody et al., 1985;Life Sci 36:1727). NTS binds with high affinity
to the GPCR NTSR1 causing phosphatidyl inositol turnover and
proliferation of lung cancer cells; SR48692 is a NTSR1 antagonist (Moody
et al., 2001; Peptides 22:109). NTSR1 expression is associated with poor
survival of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (Alfano et al.,
2010; Clin Cancer Res 16:4401). NSCLC cells express the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) whose tyrosine kinase activity is inhibited by
gefitinib. Here the abillity of SR48692 to block EGFR transactivation
caused by NTS was investigated. NTS and NTS8-13 but not NTS1-8 addition
to NSCLC cell lines NCI-H1299 or A549 cells increased phosphorylation of
Tyr1068 of the EGFR after 2 min which was blocked by 10 uM SR48692 or 10
ug/ml gefitinib. The ability of NTS to regulate EGF receptor
transactivation was blocked by GM6001 (matrix metalloprotease inhibitor),
PP2 (Src inhibitor), N-acetylcysteine (anti-oxidant) and transforming
growth factor TGF) antibody. By ELISA, NTS significantly increased
secretion of TGF from lung cancer cells. NTS but not levocabastine (NTSR2
agonist) increased cytosolic Ca2+ within seconds after addition to
NCI-H1299 cells which was antagonized by SR48692. NTS addition to
NCI-H1299 cells increased tyrosine phosphorylation of beta-catenin, ERK,
FAK, PYK-2 and Src which was antagonized by SR48692. SR48692 inhibited
the proliferation of NCI-H1299 and A549 cells which have wild type EGFR.
Also, SR48692 potentiated the ability of gefitinib to inhibit growth of
NCI-H1299 and A549 cells. These results indicate that SR48692 is a NTSR1
antagonist which increases the potency of gefitinib in lung cancer cells.

