Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of (R,R)-4-methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol in a rat
C6 glioma xenograft model in the mouse.


(R,R)-4-methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol (MNF) inhibits in vitro proliferation
of several types of cancer cell lines. In this study, the in vivo
antitumor effects of MNF were evaluated using rat C6 glioma cells
implanted subcutaneously into the lower flank of 5 week-old NMRI/Nude
female Swiss mice (0.5 x 10(6) cells, 100l). Three days after the
inoculation, the mice were subjected to intraperitoneal injections of
saline or MNF (10l/g, 2mg/kg of body weight) for 5 days per week for 2
weeks. Tumor volumes were measured everyday using slide calipers.
Significant reductions in mean tumor volumes were observed in mice
receiving MNF when compared with the saline-treated group (p
(R,R)-4-methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol (MNF) inhibits in vitro proliferation
of several types of cancer cell lines. In this study, the in vivo
antitumor effects of MNF were evaluated using rat C6 glioma cells
implanted subcutaneously into the lower flank of 5 week-old NMRI/Nude
female Swiss mice (0.5 x 10(6) cells, 100l). Three days after the
inoculation, the mice were subjected to intraperitoneal injections of
saline or MNF (10l/g, 2mg/kg of body weight) for 5 days per week for 2
weeks. Tumor volumes were measured everyday using slide calipers.
Significant reductions in mean tumor volumes were observed in mice
receiving MNF when compared with the saline-treated group (p < 0.001,
n=17-19). At the end of the study, animals were sacrificed and tumors
were collected for cDNA microarray, quantitative PCR and immunoblot
analyses. Comparison of cDNA microarray analysis of tumors from mice
treated with MNF vs. saline demonstrated a significant decrease in
expression of genes involved in cellular proliferation, including mitotic
checkpoint kinase MAD3L (BUB1B), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 3
(CDKN3) and cyclin A2 (CCNA2), as well as molecular markers for
glioblastoma, such as oligodendrocyte transcription factor 1 (OLIG1) and
SRY-box 4 (SOX4). Target gene validation is currently in progress. Our
results show that MNF reduces growth of flank xenografted C6 glioma
tumors and expression of genes related to tumor proliferation and suggest
that this compound may be useful in cancer treatment. This work was
supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the NIA/ NIH.

