Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mass cytometry analysis identifies rare primitive subpopulations
with High STAT5 and p38 MAPK activity in a elderly male treated for
chronic myelogenous leukemia.


Introduction: Despite promising advances in enzyme-targeted therapeutics
for treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), there is a high rate
of relapse. Constitutive signaling by STAT5 transcription factor is
essential for ABL-kinase driven leukemogenesis. We performed mass
cytometry (MC) analysis of cell type-specific activity of this critical
survival mechanism in a patient with relapsed CML.Design: Peripheral
blood from a previously treated 74y CML patient who had held therapy for
approx. 2 months and had a rising WBC (7.9 K/l) was obtained from UCSF,
fixed 4 hours post-collection, and stained with a panel of 30 metal
isotope-tagged antibodies including those towards lineage-associated
antigens; CD127/IL-7R; p-STAT5A; p-p38 MAP kinase; and IkappaB kinase. MC
performed on the CyTOF instrument at HIMC of Stanford University was
analyzed on FlowJo and spanning-tree progression analysis of
density-normalized events algorithms.Results: Markedly high basal STAT5
and p38 activity was detected in minute subpopulations of
CD19br/IgD-/CD45dim cells (0.36%) and CD4+/CD45br T-cells (0.24%)
expressing IL-7R, and not in the IL-7R (-) lymphocytes. A less frequent
p-STAT5hi/CD34+/CD117+ blast population (0.06%) had lower IL-7R, p-p38,
IkappaB, and higher IL-3R compared to the other two p-STAT5hi cell-types;
while neutrophils and precursors had significantly lower (80-100X)
p-STAT5 (Table).Conclusion: Activated STAT5 and p38 MAPK in rare
post-therapy CML cells with upregulated IL-7R supports the notion that
these are resistance mechanisms and possible drug targets for residual
CML. Whether these are ABL kinase-driven pathways, and prognostic
relevance of rare circulating CD19+/IL-7R+ cells in the context of
previously treated CML remains to be elucidated. Furthermore, such
activated networks in a rare subset of CD4+ T-cells suggest these are
also oncogene-addicted immune evasion mechanisms.
Raw median values of selected antigens

