Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A gemini vVitamin D analog, BXL0124, inhibits mammary
tumorigenesis by delaying the transition of ductal carcinoma in situ to
iInvasive breast carcinoma.


The transition of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) to invasive carcinoma
is a crucial event in the progression of breast tumors. DCIS is a
noninvasive breast cancer that harbors various grades of lesions ranging
from non life threatening to invasive type lesions. The disappearance and
breakdown of the myoepithelial cell layer and basement membrane in DCIS
has been identified as a major event in the progression from DCIS to
invasive carcinoma. We have previously reported that a novel Gemini
vitamin D analog,
1,25-dihydroxy-20R-21(3-hydroxy-3-deuteromethyl-4,4,4-trideuterobutyl)-23-y
ne-26,27-hexafluoro-cholecalciferol (BXL0124), inhibits the growth of
MCF10DCIS.com xenografted tumors in immunodeficient mice without
hypercalcemic toxicity. Based on this knowledge, we have investigated
whether BXL0124 blocks or delays the progression of DCIS. In the present
study, MCF10DCIS.com cells (1x106 cells/mouse) were injected into the
mammary fat pad of nu/nu mice. The mice were then treated with BXL0124
(0.1g/kg) over weeks 1, 2, and 3. Mammary glands and tumors were analyzed
over the course of three weeks to determine the effects of BXL0124. The
myoepithelial marker, smooth muscle actin (SMA), and the luminal marker,
cytokeratin 18 (CK18), were used to analyze tumor histology. The
inhibitory effect of BXL0124 treatment on cell proliferation was
determined by the cell proliferation marker, proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA). BXL0124 showed a 53% and 60% reduction in the tumor
volume by week 2 and 3, respectively. The myoepithelial structure of DCIS
was maintained in the treatment group, whereas loss of the myoepithelial
layer was evident in the control group. The treatment with BXL0124 also
decreased cell proliferation of DCIS luminal cells compared to the
control group, suggesting that growth potential of luminal cells was
reduced by BXL0124. In conclusion, the Gemini vitamin D analog BXL0124
inhibits the progression of MCF10DCIS.com xenografted mammary tumors in
part by maintaining the vital myoepithelial layer within the tumors and
by reducing proliferation rate of the luminal cells. Our results suggest
a novel mechanism in the cancer preventive action of BXL0124 during the
progression of DCIS like lesions to invasive carcinoma. (This work was
supported in part by the National Institutes of Health National Cancer
Institute R01-CA127645 and the National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences Grant ES005022).

