Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival of lymphoma and beverages consumptions; alcohol, tea and
coffee: results from National Cancer Centre, Singapore lymphoma cohort.


Background: In 2008, Singapore Cancer Registry reported lymphoma
age-standardized rate (ASR) among males and females was 11.2 per 100,000
and 7.5 per 100,000, respectively with highest incidence observed in
Malays, followed Chinese and Indians. Lymphoma incidence rates have been
increasing since 1968 (female; ASR: 1.8 per 100,000) and is now the
seventh and ninth most common cause of cancer for both men and women,
respectively. Lymphoma is widely studied but the cause is yet to be
ascertained. Epidemiological studies have shown modifiable behaviour such
as heavy alcohol use results in poorer survival across various cancer
types in Western population while reviews of tea and coffee consumptions
in association with survival are limited. Here, we examined the impact of
beverages consumption; alcohol, tea and coffee on lymphoma survival in
South East Asia.Methods: A cohort of 384 lymphoma patients with confirmed
histology was recruited from January 2004 to December 2009 and was
prospectively followed through till July 2012. At diagnosis, lifestyle
characteristics were assessed using a structured questionnaire. Cox
proportional hazards regression was used to estimate the prognostic value
of three beverages; alcohol, tea and coffee, on lymphoma survival
adjusted for other clinical prognostic factors; LDH, ECOG, Ann Arbor
stage and extra-nodal sites.Results: The overall median follow-up was 4.2
years (range: 0.02 to 8.3). Among all lymphoma subtypes, the most
prevalent was DLBCL, 183 (47.7%) with highest incidence among Chinese,
305 (79.4%) followed by Malay 53 (13.8%) and Indian 24 (6.3%). Alcohol
consumptions were associated with poorer survival for all lymphoma
(ptrend=0.004) with increasing alcohol use whereas female black tea
(plog-rank=0.0063) and coffee (plog-rank=0.018) consumptions had lower
risk of death compared to non-drinkers. Full model including alcohol (one
or more drinks per day; HR=2.35, 95% CI: 1.38-4.00, p=0.002) and clinical
prognostic factors results in c index, 0.75 and 0.72, for overall
survival and progression free survival, respectively.Conclusion: Alcohol
consumption in our cohort is predictive of survival while tea and coffee
had a weak survival association among lymphoma. This model warrant
external validation.

