Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAi screen identifies a synthetic lethal interaction between Pim1
overexpression and Plk1 inhibition.


PIM1 kinase is overexpressed in many tumor types including lymphomas and
prostate cancer, where it is known to cooperate with the MYC oncogene in
promoting tumorigenicity. PIM1 enhances MYC stability and transcriptional
activity. Knowledge of the vulnerabilities of Pim1-expressing tumor cells
will be of great value in efforts to develop novel anti-cancer
therapeutics. Here we have used RNAi screening to identify genes whose
depletion is detrimental to Pim1-overexpressing cells. We screened a
collection of 570 siRNAs targeting cell cycle, apoptosis,
serine-threonine kinase and tyrosine kinase genes for their effects on
the viability of Pim1-expressing RWPE1 prostate epithelial cells. We
identified the mitotic regulator polo-like kinase (PLK1) as a gene whose
depletion is particularly detrimental to the viability of Pim1-expressing
prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of PLK1 by shRNA
or by the chemical inhibitor BI2536 in prostate cancer xenograft model
resulted in a dramatic inhibition of tumor progression in
Pim1-overexpressing cells. Interestingly Pim1-overexpressing cells are
more prone to mitotic arrest followed by apoptosis. Furthermore,
inhibition of Plk1 activity led to the reduction of MYC protein levels
both in vitro and in vivo. These results suggest that PLK1 inhibition may
be particularly effective against PIM1-expressing tumors due, at least in
part, to the fact that PLK1 inhibition reduces MYC protein
levels.Citation Format: Sarki Abdulkadir, Riet Vander Meer, Meejeon Roh.
RNAi screen identifies a synthetic lethal interaction between Pim1
overexpression and Plk1 inhibition. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5185. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5185

