Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DRAGO (KIAA0247), a new p53-regulated antioncogene.


INTRODUCTION: The present work aims at functionally characterize DRAGO
(DRug Activated Gene Overexpressed)/KIAA0247, an unknown, highly
evolutionary-conserved gene. Data obtained in the lab showed that DRAGO
is up-regulated by p53 in response to chemotherapeutic compound treatment
in vitro and that its ectopic overexpression in cells growing in culture
leads to cell death. DRAGO knockout mice are normal, fertile and do not
develop tumors. At clinical level, lower DRAGO mRNA levels correlate to
worse prognosis in colorectal and ovarian cancer patients. Preliminary
evidences suggest a potential involvement of DRAGO in the control of
immune response.EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES: to verify if DRAGO may cooperate
with p53 in counteracting tumor onset we crossed DRAGO and p53 knockout
mice and evaluated the distribution of spontaneous tumors and the
survival of double transgenic mice. DRAGO KO mice were generated by Cre
recombinase-mediated-cassette-exchange approach. p53 KO mice were
purchased from Jackson Lab. Mice were bred and PCR genotyped. Survival
analysis were performed with GraphPad Prism 5 . Formalin fixed and
paraffin embedded histological samples were hematoxylin/eosin stained and
assessed by pathologists for diagnosis.As regards macrophages isolation,
PECs (Peritoneal Exudate Cells) were collected from DRAGO +/+ or -/- mice
and M1 and M2 response were induced in vitro by LPS and IL4 treatment
respectively. Gene expression was assessed with The TaqMan Mouse Immune
Array. Results were validated by FACS analysis.RESULTS: DRAGO knockout
negatively influenced survival: on a p53-/- background, deletion of
either one or both DRAGO alleles progressively reduced survival (median
survival: 166 and 139 days respectively) compared with DRAGO+/+ mice
(190days). On a p53+/- background, DRAGO-/- and DRAGO+/- mice showed
similar survival decrease (446 and 431 days respectively) compared with
DRAGO+/+ mice (570 days). DRAGO genotype did not influence tumor
incidence both in the p53-/- subpopulations (lymphomas 70%, sarcomas
30%), and in the p53+/- subpopulations (sarcomas 60%, lymphomas and
carcinomas 20%).PEC gene expression assessment displayed significant
overexpression of CCR4 receptor on DRAGO-/- PECs, both in physiological
conditions and upon M1 and M2 phenotype induction. FACS analysis
confirmed that CCR4 expression is higher on DRAGO-/- PECs compared to
DRAGO+/+ counterpart (43% vs 25% of positive cells).CONCLUSIONS: crossing
p53 and DRAGO knockout mice allowed us to demonstrate the oncosuppressive
role of DRAGO in vivo and its cooperation with p53. Deletion of one or
both DRAGO alleles determined a detrimental effect over survival both in
p53-/- and in p53+/- mice. Also, DRAGO genotype did not affect tumor
incidence on both p53 backgrounds. Preliminary data suggest that DRAGO
might have a role in the macrophage functionality.

