Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hormonal and reproductive risk factors for fatal breast cancer.


Introduction: Although survival from breast cancer is high (5-year
survival: 88%), a subset of breast cancers are ultimately fatal.
Pre-diagnosis lifestyle factors may influence which patients will die due
to their disease. Examining the incidence of fatal breast cancer
specifically is important for elucidating these factors, because most
women with breast cancer do not die of the disease, and a specific effect
on aggressiveness could be missed. Thus, in the Nurses Health Study
cohorts (NHS and NHSII), we evaluated risk factors for fatal breast
cancer.Methods: Any woman who died due to breast cancer at any time
post-diagnosis was considered a fatal case. Hazards ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) for the association of reproductive and
hormonal factors with incidence of fatal breast cancer were calculated
using Cox proportional hazards regression. NHS and NHSII were combined
using meta-analysis. Fatal and non-fatal cases were also compared for
heterogeneity using competing risks analysis. For this analysis, we
restricted to women who had had 15 years of post-diagnosis follow-up and
defined a fatal case as any case for whom death due to breast cancer
occurred within 15 years of diagnosis.Results: We documented 1,736 fatal
cases of breast cancer over 30 years of follow-up in NHS and 275 cases
over 20 years of follow-up in NHSII. Similar to incidence of total breast
cancer, increasing parity, younger age at first birth, and older age at
menarche, and younger age at menopause tended to be associated with
decreased risk of fatal breast cancer (Table). Compared to non-fatal
cases, increasing age, age at first birth, age at natural menopause and
time since quitting smoking were more strongly associated with fatal
breast cancer than with non-fatal breast
cancer(p-heterogeneityIntroduction: Although survival from breast cancer
is high (5-year survival: 88%), a subset of breast cancers are ultimately
fatal. Pre-diagnosis lifestyle factors may influence which patients will
die due to their disease. Examining the incidence of fatal breast cancer
specifically is important for elucidating these factors, because most
women with breast cancer do not die of the disease, and a specific effect
on aggressiveness could be missed. Thus, in the Nurses Health Study
cohorts (NHS and NHSII), we evaluated risk factors for fatal breast
cancer.Methods: Any woman who died due to breast cancer at any time
post-diagnosis was considered a fatal case. Hazards ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) for the association of reproductive and
hormonal factors with incidence of fatal breast cancer were calculated
using Cox proportional hazards regression. NHS and NHSII were combined
using meta-analysis. Fatal and non-fatal cases were also compared for
heterogeneity using competing risks analysis. For this analysis, we
restricted to women who had had 15 years of post-diagnosis follow-up and
defined a fatal case as any case for whom death due to breast cancer
occurred within 15 years of diagnosis.Results: We documented 1,736 fatal
cases of breast cancer over 30 years of follow-up in NHS and 275 cases
over 20 years of follow-up in NHSII. Similar to incidence of total breast
cancer, increasing parity, younger age at first birth, and older age at
menarche, and younger age at menopause tended to be associated with
decreased risk of fatal breast cancer (Table). Compared to non-fatal
cases, increasing age, age at first birth, age at natural menopause and
time since quitting smoking were more strongly associated with fatal
breast cancer than with non-fatal breast cancer(p-heterogeneity<0.05).
Associations between reproductive and hormonal factors and risk of fatal
breast cancer in theConclusion: Increasing age, age at first birth, and
time since quitting smoking are more strongly associated with fatal
breast cancer, suggesting that these factors may help predict which women
are at risk of more aggressive breast cancers.

