Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting aneuploidy with NMS-P153, a tight binder inhibitor of
the spindle assembly checkpoint MPS1 (TTK) kinase.


Aneuploidy is one of the major hallmarks of cancer and is a unique
property of tumoral cells. Targeting of the molecular mechanisms required
for growth of aneuploid cells is a potential strategy for developing new
therapies with preferential activity against cancer.The Spindle Assembly
Checkpoint (SAC) is a mitotic mechanism required for proper chromosomal
segregation, ensuring that cells do not divide until all sister
chromatids correctly align to the metaphase plate. The SAC is a complex
machinery regulated by a number of members which are rarely mutated in
tumors. Rather, checkpoint components have been found to be upregulated
in aneuploid tumor cells, suggesting a potential tumor addiction to SAC
functions.MPS1 kinase, (also known as TTK) is an essential enzyme of the
SAC complex which is aberrantly overexpressed in a wide range of tumors
and necessary for tumor cell proliferation. We previously reported the
identification of NMS-P715, a selective and orally bioavailable MPS1
inhibitor, capable of promoting mitotic acceleration, thereby causing
massive aneuploidy and cancer cell death both in vitro and in vivo and
which promotes tumor growth inhibition in preclinical cancer models.
Supported by these results, a lead optimization program was then
undertaken which led to the identification of NMS-P153, an optimized
product candidate for clinical development.NMS-P153 is selective, shows
high in vitro enzymatic potency on MPS1 (IC50 of 3 nM) and a prolonged
residence binding time.More than 100 cell lines have been analyzed
against NMS-P153 in proliferation studies and several distinct xenograft
models have been tested in vivo, allowing the identification of potential
genetic contexts of sensitivity. Potent anti-proliferative activity, good
tumor growth inhibition associated with tumor regression and biomarker
modulation was observed in sensitive xenograft models.A favorable ADME
profile, associated with permissive therapeutic safety margins observed
in different species at efficacious exposures, indicate that NMS-P153 is
suitable for further development, with the potential for being a
first-in-class drug targeting MPS1 kinase.

