Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Untargeted metabolomic profiling identifies diagnostic and
prognostic biomarkers of lung cancer.


Lung cancer remains the most common cause of cancer deaths world-wide.
Despite the intensive research over many years, the prognosis of this
deadly disease is still very poor, with fewer than 15% of the patients
surviving 5 years after primary diagnosis. While there are several
methodologies described and proposed for early detection of lung cancer
(spiral CT, circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines IL6, IL8 and CRP), the
specificity and robustness remains to be achieved. What we readily know
is that cancer cells have a distinguishable metabolic fingerprint
compared to normal cells. Metabolomics holds promise to be able to detect
and capture subtle shifts in multiple metabolic paths and cellular
modifiers that will enable identification of critical components of
cancer risk and tumor behavior. We conducted a first of its kind effort
using mass spectrometry-based untargeted metabolic profiling of urine
samples obtained from 469 lung cancer patients and 536 healthy population
controls. We identified four robust biomarkers, high levels of which are
associated with lung cancer diagnosis and poorer survival. After the
adjustment for potential confounding factors, all four biomarkers were
significantly associated with lung cancer diagnosis (FDR-adjusted
p-values Lung cancer remains the most common cause of cancer deaths
world-wide. Despite the intensive research over many years, the prognosis
of this deadly disease is still very poor, with fewer than 15% of the
patients surviving 5 years after primary diagnosis. While there are
several methodologies described and proposed for early detection of lung
cancer (spiral CT, circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines IL6, IL8 and
CRP), the specificity and robustness remains to be achieved. What we
readily know is that cancer cells have a distinguishable metabolic
fingerprint compared to normal cells. Metabolomics holds promise to be
able to detect and capture subtle shifts in multiple metabolic paths and
cellular modifiers that will enable identification of critical components
of cancer risk and tumor behavior. We conducted a first of its kind
effort using mass spectrometry-based untargeted metabolic profiling of
urine samples obtained from 469 lung cancer patients and 536 healthy
population controls. We identified four robust biomarkers, high levels of
which are associated with lung cancer diagnosis and poorer survival.
After the adjustment for potential confounding factors, all four
biomarkers were significantly associated with lung cancer diagnosis
(FDR-adjusted p-values <0.05, ORs ranging from 1.9 to 5.1), whereas one
of four was associated with diagnosis in early I and II stages (OR =3.3,
p-value =0.002). Furthermore, all four biomarkers are associated with
prognosis (HRs ranging from 1.49 to 1.97, after adjustment for potential
confounders, p-values Lung cancer remains the most common cause of cancer
deaths world-wide. Despite the intensive research over many years, the
prognosis of this deadly disease is still very poor, with fewer than 15%
of the patients surviving 5 years after primary diagnosis. While there
are several methodologies described and proposed for early detection of
lung cancer (spiral CT, circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines IL6, IL8
and CRP), the specificity and robustness remains to be achieved. What we
readily know is that cancer cells have a distinguishable metabolic
fingerprint compared to normal cells. Metabolomics holds promise to be
able to detect and capture subtle shifts in multiple metabolic paths and
cellular modifiers that will enable identification of critical components
of cancer risk and tumor behavior. We conducted a first of its kind
effort using mass spectrometry-based untargeted metabolic profiling of
urine samples obtained from 469 lung cancer patients and 536 healthy
population controls. We identified four robust biomarkers, high levels of
which are associated with lung cancer diagnosis and poorer survival.
After the adjustment for potential confounding factors, all four
biomarkers were significantly associated with lung cancer diagnosis
(FDR-adjusted p-values <0.05, ORs ranging from 1.9 to 5.1), whereas one
of four was associated with diagnosis in early I and II stages (OR =3.3,
p-value =0.002). Furthermore, all four biomarkers are associated with
prognosis (HRs ranging from 1.49 to 1.97, after adjustment for potential
confounders, p-values <0.02), whereas two were associated with survival
in stages I and II (HRs of 1.83 and 9.33, p-values 0.03 and 0.0006
respectively). A combination of the four biomarkers resulted in stronger
associations, suggesting that they may be independent of one another.
Significantly higher levels of these biomarkers were confirmed in an
independent sample set from the same cohort, confirming our findings and
eliminating storage time as a potential confounder. A targeted
quantitation was carried out in a representative subset of 198 samples,
further validating previous findings from the untargeted screen.
Furthermore, intraclass correlation analysis revealed high repeatability
of two independent measurements over a year apart (ICCs between 0.82 and
0.99). Lastly, the metabolome of 62 tumor and 62 adjacent normal tissues
was profiled (stage I adeno- and squamous cell- carcinomas), linking two
urinary biomarkers directly to the tumor metabolism (FCs of 1.7 and 19.0;
p-values 0.03 and Lung cancer remains the most common cause of cancer
deaths world-wide. Despite the intensive research over many years, the
prognosis of this deadly disease is still very poor, with fewer than 15%
of the patients surviving 5 years after primary diagnosis. While there
are several methodologies described and proposed for early detection of
lung cancer (spiral CT, circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines IL6, IL8
and CRP), the specificity and robustness remains to be achieved. What we
readily know is that cancer cells have a distinguishable metabolic
fingerprint compared to normal cells. Metabolomics holds promise to be
able to detect and capture subtle shifts in multiple metabolic paths and
cellular modifiers that will enable identification of critical components
of cancer risk and tumor behavior. We conducted a first of its kind
effort using mass spectrometry-based untargeted metabolic profiling of
urine samples obtained from 469 lung cancer patients and 536 healthy
population controls. We identified four robust biomarkers, high levels of
which are associated with lung cancer diagnosis and poorer survival.
After the adjustment for potential confounding factors, all four
biomarkers were significantly associated with lung cancer diagnosis
(FDR-adjusted p-values <0.05, ORs ranging from 1.9 to 5.1), whereas one
of four was associated with diagnosis in early I and II stages (OR =3.3,
p-value =0.002). Furthermore, all four biomarkers are associated with
prognosis (HRs ranging from 1.49 to 1.97, after adjustment for potential
confounders, p-values <0.02), whereas two were associated with survival
in stages I and II (HRs of 1.83 and 9.33, p-values 0.03 and 0.0006
respectively). A combination of the four biomarkers resulted in stronger
associations, suggesting that they may be independent of one another.
Significantly higher levels of these biomarkers were confirmed in an
independent sample set from the same cohort, confirming our findings and
eliminating storage time as a potential confounder. A targeted
quantitation was carried out in a representative subset of 198 samples,
further validating previous findings from the untargeted screen.
Furthermore, intraclass correlation analysis revealed high repeatability
of two independent measurements over a year apart (ICCs between 0.82 and
0.99). Lastly, the metabolome of 62 tumor and 62 adjacent normal tissues
was profiled (stage I adeno- and squamous cell- carcinomas), linking two
urinary biomarkers directly to the tumor metabolism (FCs of 1.7 and 19.0;
p-values 0.03 and <0.00001, respectively). In addition to their potential
to further identify those high risk groups who would most benefit from an
invasive screen, thereby minimizing the false positive rate, these
markers may also illuminate novel lung carcinogenesis pathways, as well
as potential therapeutic targets. Mechanistic studies elucidating
effected pathways are ongoing.

