Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of TGF-beta signaling inhibition with LY2157299 in
hepatocarcinoma models and in ex vivo whole tumor tissue samples from
patient specimen.


Background: Therapeutic options for patients with advanced
hepatocarcinomas (HCC) are still limited. TGF-1 and -fetoprotein (AFP)
have been shown to be independent prognostic factors for disease
progression and recurrence. LY2157299, a selective ATP-mimetic inhibitor
of TGF- receptor (TR)-I activation, is currently under clinical
investigation in HCC patients. Our study aimed at exploring the effects
of LY2157299 in HCC cell lines and patient samples with various AFP
expression levels.Materials and Methods: Antiproliferative effects of
LY2157299 were evaluated in a panel of human HCC cells by MTT assay.
Baseline and phosphorylated protein levels were detected by Western blot
analysis and mRNA expressions by qRT-PCR. Invasion assays were done on
matrigel and in OptiCell devices. Tumor samples from HCC patients were
surgically resected, cut in 300 m thick slices using a Tissue Slicer.
Each slice was randomly selected and exposed to LY2157299 (1M and 10M)
and sorafenib (5M) for 48h. Tumor samples were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) or immunofluorescence (IF).Results: LY2157299
was evaluated in HEPG2, HEP3B and SK-HEP1 cells as well as
SK-HEP1-derived cells tolerant to sorafenib (SK-Sora) and sunitinib
(SK-Suni). Exogenous stimulation of all HCC cell lines with TGF- yielded
downstream activation of p-Smad2 and p-Smad3 that was potently inhibited
with LY2157299 treatment at micromolar concentrations. Low concentrations
of LY2157299 displayed antiproliferative effects in HEPG2 cells when
stimulated by TGF- but not in SK-HEP1, SK-Sora, SK-Suni and HEP3B cells.
Interestingly, HEPG2 cells were the only cell line displaying high levels
of AFP as along with an epithelial phenotype. LY2157299 yielded potent
anti-migratory and anti-invasive properties in invasive SK-HEP1, SK-Suni
and SK-Sora cells. Tumor slices from surgically resected tumor samples
from 3 patients with advanced HCC, were exposed ex vivo to 1 M and 10 M
LY2157299 or 5 M sorafenib for 48h. This method allows evaluating the
effects of novel anticancer agents in whole tumors containing cancer
cells and stroma cells. LY2157299 but not sorafenib decreased p-Smad2/3
downstream TGF- signaling as well as AFP levels. IHC analysis of
LY2157299 and sorafenib-exposed samples showed a significant decrease of
the proliferative marker Ki67 and increase of the apoptotic marker
caspase-3. Interestingly these effects were independent of AFP
expression.Conclusion: TGF-/TR-I inactivation using LY2157299 inhibits
TGF--dependent cell signaling in HCC cell lines with either
anti-proliferative or anti-invasive effects depending on the model. In
tumor samples from patients, inhibition of TGF- signaling was associated
with decreased AFP levels, inhibition of proliferation and apoptosis
induction. Our data suggest that LY2157299 may be useful for patients
with HCC.

