Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the role of distinct glutaminase isoforms in cancer.


Glutaminase is a key enzyme for the conversion of glutamine to glutamate
with subsequent use as a fuel in the TCA cycle, glutathione production
and protein synthesis. A subset of tumor cells shows preferential
dependency on glutamine and glutaminase for cell proliferation and
survival, consistent with metabolic addiction to this pathway. Between
two glutaminase loci in the genome, the gene for kidney-type glutaminase
(Gls1) has 2 alternatively spliced products (KGA and GAC), with distinct
regulation and expression from liver-type glutaminase (Gls2).
Furthermore, based on distinct C-termini and enzymatic properties, it has
been proposed that the Gls1 alternatively spliced isoforms (KGA and GAC)
may themselves have distinct functions. Our data further elucidates the
role of glutaminase in cancer by addressing the following key questions:
a) what is the major role of glutaminase in cells most sensitive to its
inhibition? b) is GAC interchangeable with KGA in its expression pattern
and role in tumor cells? c) how do tumors adapt to glutaminase
inhibition? By generating and using a panel of GAC and KGA
isoform-selective reagents we show that the two isoforms have distinct
patterns of expression and distinct roles in cell proliferation,
migration and tumor growth in vivo. In addition, based on metabolomics,
functional and complementation assays, we propose a mechanistic basis for
tumor cell dependency on glutaminase and the tumor adaptive response to
glutaminase inhibition. Our data reveal the basis for the addiction of
tumor subsets to glutaminase and elucidate the role of distinct isoforms
of kidney-type glutaminase isoforms in cancer.

