Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of critical microRNA regulated pathways in
histiocytic diseases.


Histiocytic diseases encompass a spectrum of proliferative diseases in
humans and dogs. While relatively rare in the human, histiocytic diseases
are quite prevalent in certain breeds of dog. In the dog, these diseases
range from benign histiocytoma to the malignancy, histiocytic sarcoma
(HS). Disseminated HS has a poor prognosis and lacks effective treatment
options. The goal of this study is to unravel the mechanisms of
tumorigenesis in histiocytic diseases by analyzing the differential
expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) along the spectrum of canine histiocytic
diseases. As regulators of gene expression, miRNAs will provide insight
into the pathways for tumorigenesis in histiocytic malignancies as
compared to benign histiocytic diseases. MiRNA profiling of canine
histiocytic diseases was conducted on cases of reactive histiocytosis,
histiocytic sarcoma, and hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma. These
samples were compared to normal canine histiocytes derived from
peripheral blood. Based upon analysis of the profiling data, several
miRNAs were selected for verification and quantification by quantitative
reverse transcription PCR. The expression of the known canine miRNAs was
evaluated by miRNA array. Data analysis with unsupervised clustering
resulted in miRNA expression pattern clusters that were similar to the
disease groups. The miRNA profiling data revealed three miRNA targets
that were significantly upregulated in all cases as compared to normal
canine histiocytes. Functional studies of these miRNAs are underway.
These findings support the hypothesis that each histiocytic disease
entity has a unique miRNA profile. These miRNAs and/or genes in the
pathways they regulate may be targeted for novel and effective therapies.
Comparative studies have the potential to elucidate HS tumorigenesis, and
improve clinical outcome in dogs and humans.

