Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A selection strategy for the design of small proteins that can
distinguish DNA repair intermediates.


Recognition of DNA damage by repair proteins is crucial for genomic
stability. Several repair enzymes recognize aberrant DNA structural
features, including nicks, gaps, and abasic sites, in a
sequence-independent DNA manner. Reported here is a strategy to model
these protein-DNA interactions using small proteins. A phage-displayed
library of approximately one hundred million distinct zinc fingers was
engineered at the DNA level based on the DNA binding domain of the repair
protein poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Eight codons, representing amino
acid residues in loop regions of the zinc finger structure, were
randomized using an NNK codon scheme. The DNA cassette was cloned into a
commercially obtained T7 phagemid vector. The resultant phage library was
exposed to nicked DNA molecules, which were attached to magnetic beads
via a biotin-streptavidin linkage. In four rounds of selection that
featured negative selection against non-nicked DNA and streptavidin
coated beads, viral retention on the affinity resin increased from a
negligible quantity to 62%. DNA sequencing following the final round
revealed near convergence to a single, 39-mer peptide. This selected
peptide will be generated by bacterial expression and assayed for binding
activity using multiple strategies. While phage display of sequence
specific DNA binding proteins is well-precedented, selection of peptides
that bind specific DNA structures has not been reported. Molecules
discovered by this strategy will help illuminate the structure-function
relationships of proteins that recognize distinct DNA structures and may
lead to new anticancer approaches.

