Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PNA mediated real-time PCR clamping assay to detect IDH1 mutations
.


The hotspot mutations in codon 132 of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1)
is a frequent DNA alteration in gliomas and astrocytomas. IDH mutations
are prognostic and diagnostic for tumors with mutation, associated with a
proneural subclass, and have longer survival compared with those without
the mutation.We have developed a highly sensitive and simple method to
detect hotspot mutations in codon 132 of IDH1 using PNA-mediated
real-time PCR clamping, PNAClampTM.PNAClampTM is based on unique
properties of PNA probes that PNA oligomers are not recognized by DNA
that can serve as sequence-selective clamps during PCR amplification.
This method can also detect 5 mutations through only one tube reactions
simultaneously, which requires only 10 ng of the target DNA each.Data
analysis was much faster and easier to perform than analysis of the
sequencing data, and results could be obtained in 3hr from DNA extraction
to analysis.Furthermore, we could readily identify a mixture of 1% mutant
allele vs. 99% wild type allele with our PNAClamp assay, in comparison to
direct sequencing assay which have detection limit of approximately 20%
mutant allele.We performed the assay on 191 paraffin-embedded glioma
specimens in Korea for diagnosing IDH mutation.The results showed that
the PNAClampTM IDH1 detected higher number of mutation (27.2%, 52/191)
than of direct sequencing (20.9%, 40/191) in 191 giloma samples in Korea.
The result was not in agreement with the sequencing in12 (6.3%) samples.
This result was likely due to the high sensitivity of
PNAClampTM.PNAClampTM is a fast, sensitive and easy to perform method
which can reliably detect common mutations of IDH genes in gliomas or
other tumors.

