Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiles of DNA methylation in peripheral blood are associated
with bladder cancer survival.


Bladder cancer is a common solid tumor, with greater than 71,000 cases
diagnosed in the United States last year, and greater than 14,000 deaths
attributable to this disease. In addition to this mortality, the
morbidity of this disease can be great, as the non-invasive form of this
disease, making up >75% of the incidence, recurs frequently, and
therefore requires frequent invasive monitoring through cystoscopy at a
great cost to the health care system. There are critical gaps in our
understanding of the predictors of its recurrence and survival, and
identifying molecular alterations associated with these outcomes is
essential for improving patient morbidity and the care of patients with
this disease. We have shown that profiles of DNA methylation in
peripheral blood are associated with human bladder cancer and have
recently demonstrated that much, but not all, of the variation in DNA
methylation is attributable to disease-associated changes in the
underlying proportion of immune cells in the peripheral blood sample. We
also have devised a novel statistical strategy that utilizes DNA
methylation profiles to quantify the proportion of blood cell subtypes in
archival DNA. This is able to disentangle the variability in DNA
methylation profiles attributable to blood cell population differences
from epigenetic variation arising within a cell population. We sought to
determine if variation in DNA methylation identified in peripheral blood,
reflective, in part, of altered white blood cell proportions, is
associated with bladder cancer recurrence and survival in a
population-based study of incident bladder cancers in New Hampshire, USA.
Illumina Infinium 27K DNA methylation arrays were performed on whole
peripheral blood derived DNA samples from 223 cases of bladder cancer,
having a median follow-up time of approximately 13 years. Array data was
subjected to quality control procedures and normalization using the
ComBAT methodology to account for plate/BeadChip effects. Fitting a
series of Cox proportional hazards models, stratified by histology
(carcinoma in-situ, low-grade non-invasive, high-grade non-invasive, and
invasive) and controlled for patient age and gender revealed 6,873
high-confidence (q Bladder cancer is a common solid tumor, with greater
than 71,000 cases diagnosed in the United States last year, and greater
than 14,000 deaths attributable to this disease. In addition to this
mortality, the morbidity of this disease can be great, as the
non-invasive form of this disease, making up >75% of the incidence,
recurs frequently, and therefore requires frequent invasive monitoring
through cystoscopy at a great cost to the health care system. There are
critical gaps in our understanding of the predictors of its recurrence
and survival, and identifying molecular alterations associated with these
outcomes is essential for improving patient morbidity and the care of
patients with this disease. We have shown that profiles of DNA
methylation in peripheral blood are associated with human bladder cancer
and have recently demonstrated that much, but not all, of the variation
in DNA methylation is attributable to disease-associated changes in the
underlying proportion of immune cells in the peripheral blood sample. We
also have devised a novel statistical strategy that utilizes DNA
methylation profiles to quantify the proportion of blood cell subtypes in
archival DNA. This is able to disentangle the variability in DNA
methylation profiles attributable to blood cell population differences
from epigenetic variation arising within a cell population. We sought to
determine if variation in DNA methylation identified in peripheral blood,
reflective, in part, of altered white blood cell proportions, is
associated with bladder cancer recurrence and survival in a
population-based study of incident bladder cancers in New Hampshire, USA.
Illumina Infinium 27K DNA methylation arrays were performed on whole
peripheral blood derived DNA samples from 223 cases of bladder cancer,
having a median follow-up time of approximately 13 years. Array data was
subjected to quality control procedures and normalization using the
ComBAT methodology to account for plate/BeadChip effects. Fitting a
series of Cox proportional hazards models, stratified by histology
(carcinoma in-situ, low-grade non-invasive, high-grade non-invasive, and
invasive) and controlled for patient age and gender revealed 6,873
high-confidence (q < 0.05) associations with bladder cancer specific
death as the endpoint. In a principle components analysis, the first
principal component, accounting for a striking 46% of the variability in
methylation, was significantly associated with bladder cancer specific
death. Ongoing analyses are examining how changes to underlying cell
proportions mediate the relationship between DNA methylation and patient
survival. These data suggest that peripheral blood DNA methylation
profiles proximal to the time of diagnosis are strongly prospectively
predictive of bladder cancer specific survival and suggest that these
biomarkers may have important use as non-invasive prognostic tools worthy
of continued study.

