Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysregulated stromal microRNAs promote metastatic progression in
colorectal cancer.


BackgroundMicroRNAs, which are key drivers of colorectal cancer (CRC)
tumorogenesis, are also increasingly implicated in metastatic
progression. Equally relevant in CRC metastasis is the critical part
played by the tumour microenvironment and interactions between epithelial
cells and cancer-associated stromal cells such as myofibroblasts.The
present study aims to address whether miRNAs in cancer-associated stroma
influence the metastatic cascade by identifying miRNAs dysregulated in
CRC specimens of progressive pathological stage and exploring their
functional significance.Methods and ResultsRT-PCR-based QuantimiR
microarray profiling revealed 18 miRNAs significantly differentially
expressed in the laser-microdissected stroma of 20 CRC specimens compared
with paired normal tissue. The highest scoring miRNA candidates were
validated using high-sensitivity Taqman qRT-PCR assays. Stromal miR21,
miR19a and miR215 expression were capable of distinguishing tumor from
normal tissue (pBackgroundMicroRNAs, which are key drivers of colorectal
cancer (CRC) tumorogenesis, are also increasingly implicated in
metastatic progression. Equally relevant in CRC metastasis is the
critical part played by the tumour microenvironment and interactions
between epithelial cells and cancer-associated stromal cells such as
myofibroblasts.The present study aims to address whether miRNAs in
cancer-associated stroma influence the metastatic cascade by identifying
miRNAs dysregulated in CRC specimens of progressive pathological stage
and exploring their functional significance.Methods and
ResultsRT-PCR-based QuantimiR microarray profiling revealed 18 miRNAs
significantly differentially expressed in the laser-microdissected stroma
of 20 CRC specimens compared with paired normal tissue. The highest
scoring miRNA candidates were validated using high-sensitivity Taqman
qRT-PCR assays. Stromal miR21, miR19a and miR215 expression were capable
of distinguishing tumor from normal tissue (p<0.03) and miR192,
distinguishing between tumors of different pathological stage (Duke's A
vs C pBackgroundMicroRNAs, which are key drivers of colorectal cancer
(CRC) tumorogenesis, are also increasingly implicated in metastatic
progression. Equally relevant in CRC metastasis is the critical part
played by the tumour microenvironment and interactions between epithelial
cells and cancer-associated stromal cells such as myofibroblasts.The
present study aims to address whether miRNAs in cancer-associated stroma
influence the metastatic cascade by identifying miRNAs dysregulated in
CRC specimens of progressive pathological stage and exploring their
functional significance.Methods and ResultsRT-PCR-based QuantimiR
microarray profiling revealed 18 miRNAs significantly differentially
expressed in the laser-microdissected stroma of 20 CRC specimens compared
with paired normal tissue. The highest scoring miRNA candidates were
validated using high-sensitivity Taqman qRT-PCR assays. Stromal miR21,
miR19a and miR215 expression were capable of distinguishing tumor from
normal tissue (p<0.03) and miR192, distinguishing between tumors of
different pathological stage (Duke's A vs C p<0.008).MiR21, an important
oncomiR with pleiotropic actions in numerous cancer relevant biological
pathways was one of our highest scoring candidates, with a 3.4 mean fold
increase in CRC compared with normal tissue (pBackgroundMicroRNAs, which
are key drivers of colorectal cancer (CRC) tumorogenesis, are also
increasingly implicated in metastatic progression. Equally relevant in
CRC metastasis is the critical part played by the tumour microenvironment
and interactions between epithelial cells and cancer-associated stromal
cells such as myofibroblasts.The present study aims to address whether
miRNAs in cancer-associated stroma influence the metastatic cascade by
identifying miRNAs dysregulated in CRC specimens of progressive
pathological stage and exploring their functional significance.Methods
and ResultsRT-PCR-based QuantimiR microarray profiling revealed 18 miRNAs
significantly differentially expressed in the laser-microdissected stroma
of 20 CRC specimens compared with paired normal tissue. The highest
scoring miRNA candidates were validated using high-sensitivity Taqman
qRT-PCR assays. Stromal miR21, miR19a and miR215 expression were capable
of distinguishing tumor from normal tissue (p<0.03) and miR192,
distinguishing between tumors of different pathological stage (Duke's A
vs C p<0.008).MiR21, an important oncomiR with pleiotropic actions in
numerous cancer relevant biological pathways was one of our highest
scoring candidates, with a 3.4 mean fold increase in CRC compared with
normal tissue (p<0.01). In-situ hybridisation localized miR21 expression
to fibroblast type cells in the stroma. Staining was absent in normal
tissue and CRC epithelium.To assess the biological significance of
stromal miR21, stable over-expression was induced in cultured
fibroblasts. This resulted in up-regulated SMA expression, implying miR21
supports myofibroblast transdifferentiation. Medium supernatant from
miR21 over-expressing fibroblasts protected CRC cells from oxaliplatin
induced apoptosis and increased their proliferative and invasive
capacity. 3D organotypic co-cultures, developed to model in-vivo
circumstances, revealed that ectopic stromal miR21 expression was
associated with 3.6 fold increased invasion of CRC epithelium into stroma
(pBackgroundMicroRNAs, which are key drivers of colorectal cancer (CRC)
tumorogenesis, are also increasingly implicated in metastatic
progression. Equally relevant in CRC metastasis is the critical part
played by the tumour microenvironment and interactions between epithelial
cells and cancer-associated stromal cells such as myofibroblasts.The
present study aims to address whether miRNAs in cancer-associated stroma
influence the metastatic cascade by identifying miRNAs dysregulated in
CRC specimens of progressive pathological stage and exploring their
functional significance.Methods and ResultsRT-PCR-based QuantimiR
microarray profiling revealed 18 miRNAs significantly differentially
expressed in the laser-microdissected stroma of 20 CRC specimens compared
with paired normal tissue. The highest scoring miRNA candidates were
validated using high-sensitivity Taqman qRT-PCR assays. Stromal miR21,
miR19a and miR215 expression were capable of distinguishing tumor from
normal tissue (p<0.03) and miR192, distinguishing between tumors of
different pathological stage (Duke's A vs C p<0.008).MiR21, an important
oncomiR with pleiotropic actions in numerous cancer relevant biological
pathways was one of our highest scoring candidates, with a 3.4 mean fold
increase in CRC compared with normal tissue (p<0.01). In-situ
hybridisation localized miR21 expression to fibroblast type cells in the
stroma. Staining was absent in normal tissue and CRC epithelium.To assess
the biological significance of stromal miR21, stable over-expression was
induced in cultured fibroblasts. This resulted in up-regulated SMA
expression, implying miR21 supports myofibroblast transdifferentiation.
Medium supernatant from miR21 over-expressing fibroblasts protected CRC
cells from oxaliplatin induced apoptosis and increased their
proliferative and invasive capacity. 3D organotypic co-cultures,
developed to model in-vivo circumstances, revealed that ectopic stromal
miR21 expression was associated with 3.6 fold increased invasion of CRC
epithelium into stroma (p<0.001). Western blotting and immunofluorescence
confirm RECK and TIMP3, inhibitors of the matrix remodelling enzymes
MMPs, and known miR21 targets, are significantly downregulated in ex-vivo
and cultured fibroblasts, with a corresponding increase in MMP2 activity
by zymography.ConclusionsStromal miRNA expression profiles can
distinguish CRC specimens of different pathological stage and could form
the basis of a molecular staging approach in CRC. Dysregulation of key
oncomiR, miR21 is a stromal phenomenon and supports
fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transdifferentiation. Malignant invasion is
enhanced by miR21 induced RECK/TIMP3 downregulation and rise in MMP2
activity. This novel mechanism highlights the importance of tumour stroma
in CRC progression, and presents an interesting perspective for the
development of novel drugs.

