Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breastin a natural product from Nerium Oleander exhibits high
activity in a panel of human tumor cell lines.


Background: More than half of all registered anticancer agents were
originally derived from natural sources. We isolated and screened >2.000
pure compounds, and purified extracts from microorganisms and plants in a
panel of human tumor cell lines (Kelter et al. ENA 2008). Here we report
on the activity of Breastin, a defined extract isolated from the plant
Nerium Oleander in 63 human cell lines. The mode of action was elucidated
by comparing the activity profile with that of known anticancer agents
with defined mechanism.Methods: Breastin was isolated as cold extract
from the leaves of the plant Nerium Oleander. It contains defined amounts
of glycosides, flavonoides and polysaccharides. In-vitro activity was
determined in 63 human tumor cell lines in a monolayer assay. 4 to 10,000
cells were seeded in 96 well plates; one day later Breastin was added at
5 concentrations and incubated with the cells for 4 days. The read-out
was propidium iodide-based fluorescence. Based on IC50 and IC70 values
tumor selectivity was analyzed. In the Compare Analysis the IC50 and IC70
pattern of Breastin was compared with the corresponding patterns of 180
known substances using Spearman Correlations.Results: Breastin showed a
dose-dependent antitumor activity, the mean IC50 and IC70 were 1.1 and
2.7 g/ml, respectively. It was the most potent and selective preparation
out of a series of 36 extracts that were obtained with different
extraction procedures. 31 / 63 cell lines investigated showed IC50
Background: More than half of all registered anticancer agents were
originally derived from natural sources. We isolated and screened >2.000
pure compounds, and purified extracts from microorganisms and plants in a
panel of human tumor cell lines (Kelter et al. ENA 2008). Here we report
on the activity of Breastin, a defined extract isolated from the plant
Nerium Oleander in 63 human cell lines. The mode of action was elucidated
by comparing the activity profile with that of known anticancer agents
with defined mechanism.Methods: Breastin was isolated as cold extract
from the leaves of the plant Nerium Oleander. It contains defined amounts
of glycosides, flavonoides and polysaccharides. In-vitro activity was
determined in 63 human tumor cell lines in a monolayer assay. 4 to 10,000
cells were seeded in 96 well plates; one day later Breastin was added at
5 concentrations and incubated with the cells for 4 days. The read-out
was propidium iodide-based fluorescence. Based on IC50 and IC70 values
tumor selectivity was analyzed. In the Compare Analysis the IC50 and IC70
pattern of Breastin was compared with the corresponding patterns of 180
known substances using Spearman Correlations.Results: Breastin showed a
dose-dependent antitumor activity, the mean IC50 and IC70 were 1.1 and
2.7 g/ml, respectively. It was the most potent and selective preparation
out of a series of 36 extracts that were obtained with different
extraction procedures. 31 / 63 cell lines investigated showed IC50 < 1.14
g/ml. Breastin had a higher potency than several anticancer agents used
in the clinic, e.g. Cisplatin, 5-Fluoruracil and Cyclophosphamide. The
highest activity was seen in bladder, CNS, colon and NSC lung cancer cell
lines as well as in pancreas and prostate models. In systematic
combination studies Breastin increased the effect of the tubuline binders
Paclitaxel, and Docetaxel in 4/6 cell lines, the alkylating agents
Cyclophamide and Mitomycin, adriamycin and alimta.The Compare Analyses
showed no similarity with 180 known anticancer agents, the coefficients
of correlation were Background: More than half of all registered
anticancer agents were originally derived from natural sources. We
isolated and screened >2.000 pure compounds, and purified extracts from
microorganisms and plants in a panel of human tumor cell lines (Kelter et
al. ENA 2008). Here we report on the activity of Breastin, a defined
extract isolated from the plant Nerium Oleander in 63 human cell lines.
The mode of action was elucidated by comparing the activity profile with
that of known anticancer agents with defined mechanism.Methods: Breastin
was isolated as cold extract from the leaves of the plant Nerium
Oleander. It contains defined amounts of glycosides, flavonoides and
polysaccharides. In-vitro activity was determined in 63 human tumor cell
lines in a monolayer assay. 4 to 10,000 cells were seeded in 96 well
plates; one day later Breastin was added at 5 concentrations and
incubated with the cells for 4 days. The read-out was propidium
iodide-based fluorescence. Based on IC50 and IC70 values tumor
selectivity was analyzed. In the Compare Analysis the IC50 and IC70
pattern of Breastin was compared with the corresponding patterns of 180
known substances using Spearman Correlations.Results: Breastin showed a
dose-dependent antitumor activity, the mean IC50 and IC70 were 1.1 and
2.7 g/ml, respectively. It was the most potent and selective preparation
out of a series of 36 extracts that were obtained with different
extraction procedures. 31 / 63 cell lines investigated showed IC50 < 1.14
g/ml. Breastin had a higher potency than several anticancer agents used
in the clinic, e.g. Cisplatin, 5-Fluoruracil and Cyclophosphamide. The
highest activity was seen in bladder, CNS, colon and NSC lung cancer cell
lines as well as in pancreas and prostate models. In systematic
combination studies Breastin increased the effect of the tubuline binders
Paclitaxel, and Docetaxel in 4/6 cell lines, the alkylating agents
Cyclophamide and Mitomycin, adriamycin and alimta.The Compare Analyses
showed no similarity with 180 known anticancer agents, the coefficients
of correlation were < 0.6 in all cases. Therefore Breastin has probably a
different mechanism of action. In previous studies components of Breastin
acted as specific inhibitors of the membrane Na+/K+ ATPase. This type of
compounds is not included in the reference data base. Analyses of
predictive biomarkers and gene patterns are ongoing.In former studies
in-vivo activity was determined in murine models: B16 melanoma and
Lewis-Lung-carcinoma were sensitive, leukemias L1210 and P388 were
resistant.Conclusion: The evaluation of 36 extracts from Nerium Oleander
identified the cold extract called Breastin as most promising anticancer
agent with selective in-vitro activity found in bladder, CNS, colon and
NSC lung cancer cell lines as well as in pancreas and prostate models.
Moreover, in combination studies Breastin showed synergism with severall
cytotoxic drugs.

