Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-free endo180 reveals additional level of endocytic receptor
functioning in meningioma.


Endo180, also known as uPAR associated protein (uPARAP), is a member of
the tri-molecular complex formed by uPA along with uPAR in the endocytic
processing of collagen degradation. In the present study, we found that
this membrane-bound protein was released into culture supernates of
meningioma and other cancer cell types. In addition, we report a
tremendous increase of Endo180 transcript and protein levels in
irradiated meningioma cells and their culture filtrates. While
non-denaturing immunoprecipitation studies suggested that Endo180
interacts with uPA in cell-free conditions, uPA binding was significantly
quenched by deglycosylation of solubilized Endo180. Myc-tagged cDNA
expression suggested shedding of Endo180 against secretion from
meningioma cells. Function blocking and knockdown of Endo180 adversely
affected the proliferation of meningioma cells with concomitant decrease
in uPA activity and uPAR expression. We also observed a significant rise
of Endo180 expression in meningioma clinical samples and tumors in animal
models. A further increase of expression was observed among the brain
sections of mice infused with irradiated meningioma cells. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that solubilization of Endo180
characterizes a different hierarchy of endocytic receptor functioning in
meningioma.

