Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognosis-related miRNA expression profiles of neuroblastoma.


PURPOSE: Neuroblastoma (NB) is known to exhibit clinical heterogeneity
and its accurate risk classification is one of the major challenges to
improve the personalized therapy. We have been constructing the
genomic/genetic profile-based risk classification system for NB. Recent
studies indicated that miRNA expression levels are strongly correlated
with patient prognosis of NB. To further improve our tumor stratification
system by adding the miRNA classifier, we conducted miRNA expression
profiling of favorable (F) and unfavorable (UF) NBs and searched for the
prognosis-related miRNAs in our sample set.METHODS: 48 primary samples
(19 stage 1 or 2; 16 stage 3 or 4 without MYCN amplification; 13 stage 3
or 4 with MYCN amplification) were analyzed by miRNA microarray (Agilent
G4470A). Statistical analysis was conducted by using the information of
patient outcome at 3 years after diagnosis. Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
was also conducted to validate the results in 101 primary tumors by using
Taqman microRNA assays.RESULTS: Among the 470 miRNAs analyzed, 79 miRNAs
showed strong correlation to the prognosis (pPURPOSE: Neuroblastoma (NB)
is known to exhibit clinical heterogeneity and its accurate risk
classification is one of the major challenges to improve the personalized
therapy. We have been constructing the genomic/genetic profile-based risk
classification system for NB. Recent studies indicated that miRNA
expression levels are strongly correlated with patient prognosis of NB.
To further improve our tumor stratification system by adding the miRNA
classifier, we conducted miRNA expression profiling of favorable (F) and
unfavorable (UF) NBs and searched for the prognosis-related miRNAs in our
sample set.METHODS: 48 primary samples (19 stage 1 or 2; 16 stage 3 or 4
without MYCN amplification; 13 stage 3 or 4 with MYCN amplification) were
analyzed by miRNA microarray (Agilent G4470A). Statistical analysis was
conducted by using the information of patient outcome at 3 years after
diagnosis. Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was also conducted to validate
the results in 101 primary tumors by using Taqman microRNA
assays.RESULTS: Among the 470 miRNAs analyzed, 79 miRNAs showed strong
correlation to the prognosis (p<0.05): 17 and 62 miRNAs showed higher
expressions in UF and F phenotypes, respectively. In the former miRNA
group, 5 were located in 1q whose genomic copy number is frequently
increased in UF type tumors. On the other hand, the latter includes 5, 6
and 9 miRNAs in 1p, 19q13 and 14q32, respectively, which are frequently
decreased in copy numbers in UF type. In addition, miR-542-5p, whose
expression has been reported as a prognostic marker by other groups, was
also in the latter group in our dataset (pPURPOSE: Neuroblastoma (NB) is
known to exhibit clinical heterogeneity and its accurate risk
classification is one of the major challenges to improve the personalized
therapy. We have been constructing the genomic/genetic profile-based risk
classification system for NB. Recent studies indicated that miRNA
expression levels are strongly correlated with patient prognosis of NB.
To further improve our tumor stratification system by adding the miRNA
classifier, we conducted miRNA expression profiling of favorable (F) and
unfavorable (UF) NBs and searched for the prognosis-related miRNAs in our
sample set.METHODS: 48 primary samples (19 stage 1 or 2; 16 stage 3 or 4
without MYCN amplification; 13 stage 3 or 4 with MYCN amplification) were
analyzed by miRNA microarray (Agilent G4470A). Statistical analysis was
conducted by using the information of patient outcome at 3 years after
diagnosis. Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was also conducted to validate
the results in 101 primary tumors by using Taqman microRNA
assays.RESULTS: Among the 470 miRNAs analyzed, 79 miRNAs showed strong
correlation to the prognosis (p<0.05): 17 and 62 miRNAs showed higher
expressions in UF and F phenotypes, respectively. In the former miRNA
group, 5 were located in 1q whose genomic copy number is frequently
increased in UF type tumors. On the other hand, the latter includes 5, 6
and 9 miRNAs in 1p, 19q13 and 14q32, respectively, which are frequently
decreased in copy numbers in UF type. In addition, miR-542-5p, whose
expression has been reported as a prognostic marker by other groups, was
also in the latter group in our dataset (p<0.001, 3.3-fold lower in UF).
We further conducted qRT-PCR of these picked-up miRNAs with 101
independent NB samples for validation and found that higher expression of
miR-181b and miR-149 showed significant correlation with poor and good
prognosis of patients (both logrank pPURPOSE: Neuroblastoma (NB) is known
to exhibit clinical heterogeneity and its accurate risk classification is
one of the major challenges to improve the personalized therapy. We have
been constructing the genomic/genetic profile-based risk classification
system for NB. Recent studies indicated that miRNA expression levels are
strongly correlated with patient prognosis of NB. To further improve our
tumor stratification system by adding the miRNA classifier, we conducted
miRNA expression profiling of favorable (F) and unfavorable (UF) NBs and
searched for the prognosis-related miRNAs in our sample set.METHODS: 48
primary samples (19 stage 1 or 2; 16 stage 3 or 4 without MYCN
amplification; 13 stage 3 or 4 with MYCN amplification) were analyzed by
miRNA microarray (Agilent G4470A). Statistical analysis was conducted by
using the information of patient outcome at 3 years after diagnosis.
Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was also conducted to validate the results
in 101 primary tumors by using Taqman microRNA assays.RESULTS: Among the
470 miRNAs analyzed, 79 miRNAs showed strong correlation to the prognosis
(p<0.05): 17 and 62 miRNAs showed higher expressions in UF and F
phenotypes, respectively. In the former miRNA group, 5 were located in 1q
whose genomic copy number is frequently increased in UF type tumors. On
the other hand, the latter includes 5, 6 and 9 miRNAs in 1p, 19q13 and
14q32, respectively, which are frequently decreased in copy numbers in UF
type. In addition, miR-542-5p, whose expression has been reported as a
prognostic marker by other groups, was also in the latter group in our
dataset (p<0.001, 3.3-fold lower in UF). We further conducted qRT-PCR of
these picked-up miRNAs with 101 independent NB samples for validation and
found that higher expression of miR-181b and miR-149 showed significant
correlation with poor and good prognosis of patients (both logrank
p<0.001), respectively. In addition, intermediate-risk type of tumors
(stage 3 or 4, no MYCN amplification, n=40) were also significantly
classified into favorable or unfavorable by these two miRNA classifiers
(p=0.021 and p=0.005, respectively). Interestingly, miR-149 has been
reported that it has pro-apoptotic function by repressing Akt1 and E2F1
expressions in a neuroblastoma cell line.CONCLUSION: The result suggested
that miRNA expression profile exhibited strong correlation with NB
prognosis, and integration of miRNA classifier with other markers could
improve the prediction system for NB prognosis.

