Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C11 Acetate and 18F FDG PET/CT imaging of MDR2-/- mouse model of
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Our previous research reveals a link between the enzyme autotaxin (ATX)
and its product lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). We have shown a shift in ATX levels and LPA variant biosynthesis
associated with HCC in patients that was corrected by liver
transplantation. Moreover we have demonstrated a reduction in hepatic
tumor burden in the MDR2-/- mouse model of HCC by treatment with
commercial ATX inhibitors. The purpose of this study was to establish the
relevance of FDG PET versus 11C acetate imaging to monitor response to
ATX inhibition in the in-vivo MDR2 /- mouse model of HCC whereby we would
be able to test the impact of novel inhibitors on both the initiation and
progression of HCC. Methods: Dynamic high-resolution Positron Emission
Tomography (PET) images of 12 month MDR-/- mice and FVB controls were
acquired using 18F-FDG or 11C-Acetate (N=3 per group). At the end of the
PET imaging session whole body CT images were acquired. Image
segmentation for discrete volumes of interests (VOI) was manually
constructed from parametric images for the liver for 18F-FDG images while
for 11C-Acetate VOIs were submitted to kinetic modeling, using a
3-compartment, 4-parameter model. Results. MDR2-/- mice had significant
hepatic tumors at 12 month (7.91.8mm) whereas no tumors were observed in
FVB controls. MDR2-/- mice had significantly higher hepatic 11C-Acetate
uptake and metabolic rates when compared to FVB controls (0.60.04 vs
0.490.02ml/g/min P=0.038). In contrast there was no significant
difference in 18F-FDG metabolism or uptake in the livers of MDR2-/- mice
when compared to wild type FVB controls (1.10.23 v 1.320.2 and 3.610.97
vs. 4.30.6SUV respectively p=ns). Conclusion: The biology of HCC
formation in MDR2-/- is better suited to 11C acetate PET/CT imaging than
18F FDG. 11C acetate is the most effective imaging method available to
test response to treatment in an in-vivo model of HCC.Citation Format:
Nicholas J. Skill, Paul R. Territo, Amanda A. Riley, Brian P. McCarthy,
Mary A. Maluccio. C11 Acetate and 18F FDG PET/CT imaging of MDR2-/- mouse
model of hepatocellular carcinoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2661. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2661

