Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of transcription factors critical for the growth of
basal-like breast cancer.


Background: Intrinsic differences in gene expression between basal-like
breast cancer (BLBC) and other breast cancer subtypes imply that
transcriptional regulators are differentially activated in breast cancer
subtypes and may be promising therapeutic targets. We hypothesized that
genomic comparisons between BLBC and non-BLBC will identify transcription
factors (TFs) critical for BLBC growth. We identified TFs using an
integrative analysis comparing mRNA expression, frequency of TF response
elements in differentially expressed genes, and DNA-binding activity of
nuclear proteins in BLBC and non-BLBC. We then tested whether inhibition
of these specific TFs suppresses the growth of BLBC.Methods: We compared
mRNA expression of 702 TFs in TNBC tumors compared to non-TNBC samples
across 15 breast tumor datasets in Oncomine and identified TFs with a
combined p-value Background: Intrinsic differences in gene expression
between basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) and other breast cancer subtypes
imply that transcriptional regulators are differentially activated in
breast cancer subtypes and may be promising therapeutic targets. We
hypothesized that genomic comparisons between BLBC and non-BLBC will
identify transcription factors (TFs) critical for BLBC growth. We
identified TFs using an integrative analysis comparing mRNA expression,
frequency of TF response elements in differentially expressed genes, and
DNA-binding activity of nuclear proteins in BLBC and non-BLBC. We then
tested whether inhibition of these specific TFs suppresses the growth of
BLBC.Methods: We compared mRNA expression of 702 TFs in TNBC tumors
compared to non-TNBC samples across 15 breast tumor datasets in Oncomine
and identified TFs with a combined p-value <0.05 and higher expression in
TNBC.We used the online tool, CORE_TF, to identify TF response elements
occurring more frequently within promoters (-1kb through first exon) of
117 genes significantly more highly expressed in BLBC tumors compared to
non-BLBC samples (pBackground: Intrinsic differences in gene expression
between basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) and other breast cancer subtypes
imply that transcriptional regulators are differentially activated in
breast cancer subtypes and may be promising therapeutic targets. We
hypothesized that genomic comparisons between BLBC and non-BLBC will
identify transcription factors (TFs) critical for BLBC growth. We
identified TFs using an integrative analysis comparing mRNA expression,
frequency of TF response elements in differentially expressed genes, and
DNA-binding activity of nuclear proteins in BLBC and non-BLBC. We then
tested whether inhibition of these specific TFs suppresses the growth of
BLBC.Methods: We compared mRNA expression of 702 TFs in TNBC tumors
compared to non-TNBC samples across 15 breast tumor datasets in Oncomine
and identified TFs with a combined p-value <0.05 and higher expression in
TNBC.We used the online tool, CORE_TF, to identify TF response elements
occurring more frequently within promoters (-1kb through first exon) of
117 genes significantly more highly expressed in BLBC tumors compared to
non-BLBC samples (p<0.01 in 3 independent datasets) as compared to 1500
non-BLBC genes, with a p-value 1.2 and p 1.2 and p <0.05 in BLBC compared
to non-BLBC nuclear lysates were identified.BLBC and non-BLBC cells
transfected with control or specific siRNAs to each TF identified in at
least 2/3 of the assays were grown in quadruplicate and cell counts at
day 6 were compared.Results: mRNA analysis identified 132 TFs
significantly more highly expressed in TNBC compared to non-TNBC.
Analysis of TF response elements identified 94 motifs seen more
frequently in genes more highly expressed in BLBC. Analysis of
protein-bound DNA motifs identified 11 motifs significantly more highly
bound using BLBC protein than non-BLBC protein. Integrative analysis of
these results identified two TFs that were detected in all three
analyses: STAT1 and PPAR, an additional 26 TFs identified in both mRNA
expression and DNA element analyses, and 5 identified in the RNA
expression and DNA-binding protein analyses. siRNA knockdown of the
identified TFs showed that several of the TFs are critical for BLBC
growth.Conclusions: This study identified TFs with differential
expression and activity in BLBC and non-BLBC using an integrative
analysis of RNA, DNA and proteins. Inhibition of specific TFs
demonstrates that several of these TFs are critical for the growth of
BLBC. Further investigation of the TFs identified in this study will
improve our understanding BLBC and will identify novel targets for the
treatment and prevention of BLBC.

