Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic cross talk between omental derived adipose stromal cells
from lean and obese patients with ovarian cancer cells.


Advanced-stage ovarian cancers have been shown to be metastatic in
peritoneal cavity. Ovarian cancer metastasis is diagnosed primarily in
omentum which is a soft fatty pad that extends from stomach and covers
the bowel. The location of excess adipose tissue appears to be an
important factor which influences the effect of obesity on cancer
incidence. For example, increased total body obesity is associated with
relative risk of 1.14 of developing ovarian cancer. However, a waist to
hip circumference ratio of >0.85 is associated with a much higher 8-fold
increased risk of developing ovarian cancer. Individuals with greater
waist to hip ratio generally have more visceral adipose including omental
adipose. The tumor promoting effects of regional adipose may be
attributed, at least in part, to the presence of a population of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) in adipose tissue. Adipose stem cells or
adipose derived stromal cells (ASCs) are a multi-potent population of
mesenchymal stem cells, which support cancer progression in many models.
These cells are uniquely tumor tropic, migrating into tumor stroma from
regional sources where they support formation of tumor stroma elements
and promote tumor progression. Here, we use metabolic foot-printing
approach to dissect the metabolic networks regulated by ASCs and ACs, as
well as their role in imparting drug resistance to tumors by deregulating
metabolic pathways in ovarian cancer cells. Importantly, we found that
O-ASCs from obese patients differentially induce metabolic reprogramming
in cancer cells and that cancer cells induce reciprocal metabolic
alterations and phenotypic changes in O-ASCs from lean patients.

