Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diabetes mellitus and risk of prostate cancer in the European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition.


The current epidemiologic evidence suggests that men with type 2 diabetes
mellitus may be at lower risk of developing prostate cancer. More
research is needed to clarify whether and how time since diabetes
diagnosis, diabetes treatment, stage and grade of prostate cancer, age at
recruitment, adiposity, and physical activity modify the risk profile. We
assessed the association of self-reported history of diabetes mellitus
diagnosis at baseline with risk of prostate cancer among 139,131 men
recruited into the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and
Nutrition (EPIC), after excluding men with prevalent cancer at
recruitment and men who did not return the baseline questionnaires or had
missing information about their history of diabetes. After an average of
12 years follow-up, 4,531 prostate cancers were diagnosed, of which 894
men had advanced (T3-4, N+, M+) disease and 1,688 had localized disease
(T0-2, N0, M0); 375 men had high-grade disease (Gleason score 8) disease
and 1,811 had low-grade disease (Gleason score The current epidemiologic
evidence suggests that men with type 2 diabetes mellitus may be at lower
risk of developing prostate cancer. More research is needed to clarify
whether and how time since diabetes diagnosis, diabetes treatment, stage
and grade of prostate cancer, age at recruitment, adiposity, and physical
activity modify the risk profile. We assessed the association of
self-reported history of diabetes mellitus diagnosis at baseline with
risk of prostate cancer among 139,131 men recruited into the European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC), after
excluding men with prevalent cancer at recruitment and men who did not
return the baseline questionnaires or had missing information about their
history of diabetes. After an average of 12 years follow-up, 4,531
prostate cancers were diagnosed, of which 894 men had advanced (T3-4, N+,
M+) disease and 1,688 had localized disease (T0-2, N0, M0); 375 men had
high-grade disease (Gleason score 8) disease and 1,811 had low-grade
disease (Gleason score < 8). Hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence
intervals (95% CI) were estimated using Cox proportional hazards models
stratified by EPIC recruitment center and age at enrolment, and adjusted
for body mass index, waist circumference, cigarette smoking status,
university education, physical activity, and daily dietary intake of
energy, alcohol, fruits and vegetables, fish, calcium and protein from
dairy sources. A total of 5,100 men (3.7%) stated at baseline that they
had a history of diabetes mellitus. Men with diabetes had a 26% reduced
risk of developing prostate cancer compared to men without diabetes (HR,
0.74; 95% CI, 0.63-0.86). There was no significant reduction in risk in
the first two years after diabetes diagnosis (No. of cases, 39; HR, 0.83;
95% CI, 0.60-1.14), but was evident for men diagnosed between 3 to 6
years after diagnosis (No. of cases, 32; HR, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.51-1.02) and
7-12 years (No. of cases, 32; HR, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.53-1.07), and was even
lower for men who had been diagnosed for more than 12 years (No. of
cases, 31; HR, 0.64; 95% CI, 0.45-0.92). Compared to non-diabetics,
diabetic men not receiving insulin treatment at baseline had a risk of
prostate cancer (HR, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.60-0.94) similar to what of diabetic
men who were receiving insulin (HR, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.59-1.03). These
results did not differ by stage and grade of prostate cancer, or by age
at recruitment, adiposity, or physical activity. Our results are
compatible with the hypothesis that diabetes is associated with reduced
prostate cancer risk. A potential biological explanation underlying this
association is that men with severe type 2 diabetes may manifest lower
testosterone concentrations, which provide an environment that is not
conducive to proliferation of prostate cancer cells.

