Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial Membrane Protein-2 (EMP2) promotes glioblastoma growth
via upregulating invasion and angiogenesis.


Recent data suggests that EMP2 is a novel oncogene in a number of tumors
including breast, ovarian, endometrial and primary central nervous system
malignancies. Its expression correlates with poor survival and can serve
as a prognostic indicator in many tumors. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
is an aggressive brain tumor with a medium survival of 18 months, and we
have found that EMP2 is expressed in the majority of GBM tumors but not
in healthy brains. In order to therapeutically exploit the expression of
EMP2 on these tumors, we have developed recombinant antibodies to this
oncogene. In experimental models, use of the anti-EMP2 antibodies showed
profound efficacy in reducing GBM tumor load. We further dissected the
underlying molecular mechanisms and found that EMP2 accelerated GBM tumor
growth through increasing v3 integrin surface expression in GBM cells,
activating downstream FAK and Src kinases and promoting cell migration
and invasion. Furthermore, EMP2 upregulated vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) in several GBM cell lines. This increase appeared to be
functionally relevant as conditioned medium from GBM cells with forced
overexpression of EMP2 increased human umbilical vein endothelial cell
(HUVEC) migration and capillary tube formation, suggesting a role for
EMP2 in the regulation of tumor angiogenesis. Our results suggest the
importance of this oncogene in the control of the tumor microenvironment
and that targeting EMP2 expression may be a novel therapy for GBM.

