Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational and expressional analyses of DICER1 gene in ovarian
stromal tumors and other common tumors.


Recurrent missense somatic mutations in DICER1 gene affecting exons 25
and 26 have recently been reported in non-epithelial tumors of ovary,
especially in Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors (SLCT). Such a recurrent nature
of the mutations strongly suggests that DICER1 mutation may play an
important role in the development of ovarian non-epithelial tumors. The
aim of this study was to further characterize the DICER1 mutations in
human tumor tissues. We analyzed the DICER1 mutations in 2,819 tumor
tissues from ovary and other organs by single-strand conformation
polymorphism analysis. We found the DICER1 exon 25 and 26 hot-spot
mutations in 2 of 14 SLCT (14.3%) and one of 132 non-Hodgkin lymphomas
(0.8%), but none in other tumors. In SLCT, DICER1 expression was observed
in Sertoli cells, but neither in Leydig nor spindle-shaped cells. We also
analyzed DICER1 expression in lung, stomach, colon and prostate cancer
tissues. DICER1 expression was lost in 37% of prostate cancers, but not
in lung, stomach and colon cancers. Our data indicate that DICER1
recurrent mutations commonly occur in SLCT, but the incidence was
significantly lowerthan that in the earlier study. Our data suggest that
both DICER1 mutation and its expression loss may be important in tumor
pathogenesis and that they are tumor type-specific.

