Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering the genomic heterogeneity in malignant melanoma by
genomic profiling of clonal tumor populations.


1) BackgroundMelanoma is a heterogeneous disease and even though
consistent genetic patterns among different subtypes have been revealed,
clinical trials have failed to significantly improve survival. However,
most of the genomic studies do not take into consideration the underlying
genomic heterogeneity. In this study, we used genomic profiling of sorted
clonal tumor populations in order to investigate the genomic
heterogeneity and the clonal evolution in malignant melanoma.2)
MethodsMultiple biopsies from melanoma patients were subjected to
flow-sorting based on DNA content. The tumor specific marker SOX10 was
used as an additional parameter to exclude contribution of normal tissue.
Resulting clonal tumor populations were genomically characterized by
usage of high resolution aCGH. A TMA was constructed for validation of
the findings.3) ResultsDNA content based flow sorting of small human
melanoma biopsies was successfully implemented and revealed the
co-existence of distinct clonal populations (diploid as well as
aneuploid) within these samples. The use of the additional marker SOX10
allowed us to uncover and sort pure diploid tumor populations from
diploid fractions admixed with normal cells. These findings were
confirmed by aCGH.4) ConclusionsHuman malignant melanoma is composed of
different clonal populations with population-specific genomic
aberrations. The use of SOX10 allowed unraveling of pure tumor
populations within the diploid peaks, which would have been obscured by
the use of DNA content alone. Further genomic analyses of these sorted
clonal tumor populations are fundamental for the understanding of the
genomic heterogeneity and its potential impact on metastasis and therapy
response in malignant melanoma.

