Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tristetraprolin downregulates AHRR expression through mRNA
destabilization.


Background. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AHRR) inhibits the
transcription activity of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) by
competing for dimerization with the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) and
subsequently binding to XRE. Interestingly, the AHRR has two AU-rich
elements (AREs) in its 3UTR which relates to the post-transcriptional
regulation by ARE-binding proteins including Tristetraprolin (TTP), BRF1,
HuR and so on. In previous study, we determined that TTP plays a critical
role in the decaying of VEGF, LATS2, cIAP2, COX2 and Pim-1 through
binding these AREs in 3 UTR.Methodology/principal Findings. We
investigated the post-transcriptional regulation of the AHRR expression
by TTP. Our results show that the expression level of AHRR is inversely
correlated with TTP expression in human breast cancer cell lines using
the real-time PCR and western blot. The overexpression of TTP decreased
the expression level of AHRR and inhibited the proliferation of MDA-MB435
human breast cancer cells. On the contrary, the treatment with a small
interfering RNA against TTP increased the expression of AHRR mRNA and
protein. AHRR mRNA contains two AREs within the 3UTR and TTP destabilized
a luciferase mRNA containing AHRR ARE. Moreover, RNA electrophoretic
mobility shift assay revealed that TTP binds directly to the ARE of AHRR
mRNA.Conclusions/Significance. These studies demonstrated that the TTP
expression is inversely correlated with AHRR expression in several human
breast cancer cell lines using the real-time PCR and western blot. We
suggest that TTP acts as a negative regulator of the AHRR gene expression
and it may have an effect on tumor development through inducing AHR
activation and the expression of tumor suppressors containing XRE in
human breast cancer cells.

