Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altering the function of cancer-associated fibroblasts via
activation of Notch signaling to inhibit tumor growth.


Objectives. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) play critical roles in
determining tumor growth, invasion, metastasis, drug response and tumor
angiogenesis. We have previously demonstrated that activation of the
Notch1 pathway confers normal human dermal fibroblasts a suppressive
phenotype to melanoma growth. Here, we further investigated whether
manipulation of Notch signaling in melanoma-associated fibroblasts (MAF)
alter their regulatory phenotype by which affects melanoma
growth.Methods. MAF were isolated from human metastatic melanoma and
characterized. Notch pathway activity in MAF versus normal human dermal
fibroblasts was examined using Notch pathway RT2-PCRArray and
immunoblotting. Enforced activation of Notch pathway was achieved by
transducing MAF with lentiviral vector encoding active form of Notch1
(NIC). The effect of active Notch1-engineered MAF on melanoma growth was
tested by in vitro co-culture and in vivo co-xenografting animal
model.Results. Isolated MAF are -smooth muscle actin (-SMA) and
fibroblast activation protein (FAP) positive. MAF exhibited a relatively
lower Notch activity compared to normal human dermal fibroblasts.
Enforced activation of Notch1 pathway suppressed cellular activities of
MAF. Active Notch1-engineered MAF significantly inhibited melanoma cell
growth in vitro and retarded xenografted human melanoma cell growth on
mouse skin.Conclusions. Notch pathway activity is lower in MAF.
Constitutive activation of Notch pathway confers MAF to a suppressive
phenotype in regulating melanoma growth. Our study demonstrated that
Notch signaling functions as a critical molecular switch in determining
the regulatory role of tumor stromal fibroblasts and provided a novel
approach to target tumor microenvironment through modulating stromal
fibroblasts by manipulation of Notch signaling.

