Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HEF1 is an important regulator of mesenchymal and amoeboid
invasion in breast cancer.


In previous studies, the focal adhesion-associated scaffolding protein
HEF1, also known as NEDD9, has been implicated as a possible dynamic
switch between the mesenchymal and amoeboid migration methods of melanoma
cancer cells. Management of this switch provides a possible mechanism of
control that could potentially open up new strategies for treatments of
metastatic cancers. We have sought to investigate whether HEF1s
involvement in cell migration could also be applied to breast cancer. To
monitor the switch between the two methods of migration, we decided to
monitor activation of the Rac1 and RhoA proteins of the Rho subfamily of
GTPases, which are renowned for their roles in actin cytoskeletal
dynamics and have been linked to cancer cell invasion. High levels of
active Rac1 result in an elongated cell morphology accompanied by
mesenchymal cell movement, whereas high active RhoA levels result in a
rounded cell morphology accompanied by amoeboid cell movement. Using a
series of GST-tag pulldown experiments, we pulled and quantified amounts
of active Rac1 and RhoA from an MDA-MB-231LN human breast cancer cell
line grown in both 2D and 3D conditions under a HEF1 shRNA knockdown. Our
HEF1-reduced cell line shows a decrease in active Rac1 and an increase in
active RhoA compared to a control cell line with normal HEF1 levels. With
this data, we aim to further substantiate HEF1 as a relevant key player
in the balance between mesenchymal and amoeboid dominance in cancer cells.

