Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous methylation and mutational analysis of breast cancer
genomes using droplet-based targeted sequencing.


Targeted sequencing using droplet-based PCR provides an established
method to selectively and uniformly amplify thousands of genomic regions
of interest for deep, cost-effective next generation sequencing.
Recently, this approach has been adapted for the analysis of
bisulfite-treated DNA, enabling both quantitative epigenomic analysis
(strand-specific determination of cytosine methylation status with
single-base pair resolution) and genomic mutation detection. Simultaneous
collection of both methylation and genomic aberration information with a
single method makes efficient use of precious clinical material and
allows both researchers and clinicians to use this information to
sub-type cancers.Here we report on our sequencing results using a single
breast cancer targeted panel for sequence specific analysis of both
epigenomic methylation and genomic mutation in breast tumor samples. The
Breast Cancer MethylSeq Panel includes PCR primer pairs designed to
amplify 1000 targets, leaving room for an additional 3000 target loci of
interest to be added by individual researchers in the future. This single
panel provides information about both loci-specific CpG methylation and
genomic mutations, enabling analysis of multiple content types including:
A) cell subtype (CELL); B) genomic mutation (MUT); C) surrogate gene
expression subtypes using promoter CpG islands or other methylation marks
(EXP); D) copy-number variation (CNV); E) Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH);
and F) methylation-mediated gene silencing and loss of imprinting (IMP).
In addition, miRNA associated with breast cancer will be targeted for
analysis (MIR).The Breast Cancer MethylSeq Panel was tested and validated
with a set of 64 bisulfite-converted DNA samples that included breast
cancer cell lines, a range of ER positive and negative tumors and TCGA
samples, and a set of 8 metastatic tumors from a single individual.
Overall Illumina HiSeq sequencing success metrics, concordance with
metadata on the various target classes (A-F above) using validated
controls, and results from the patient samples will be presented.The
Breast Cancer MethylSeq Panel allows simultaneous analysis of epigenomic
and genomic sequence alterations associated with breast tumor samples,
enabling tumor sub-typing and correlation with clinical outcomes. This
core panel provides a unique (expandable) screening tool for the breast
cancer research community, and a paradigm for efficient analysis of
multiple endpoints from a single assay for other diseases.

