Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-15 improves the effect of adoptive T cell therapy through
cellular senescence delay.


Adoptive T-cell therapy is one of the most effective forms of
immunotherapy in the clinical setting. However, the mechanism that
regulates the in vivo effect of T-cell therapy still remains unclear.
Using T cells generated from normal donors against previously identified
T-cell epitopes in U266 idiotype light chain model, we expanded the
antigen-specific T cells with IL-2 or IL-15 cytokines, we found that
antigen specific T cells expanded with IL-2 have temperate inhibitory
effect in vivo, whereas IL-15-expanded antigen-specific T cells provide a
much stronger in vivo effect. Approximately 30% experimental mice
remained tumor free after adoptive transfer with IL-15 expanded-
antigen-specific T cells. Detailed analysis revealed that IL-15-expanded
T cells have down-regulated expression of cellular senescence signature
genes, decreased SA--Gal activity, and decreased P53, P21WAF1 and
P16INK4a expression. The expression level of CD27 and CD28 is
significantly greater in IL-15-expanded T cells, indicating that
IL-15-expanded T cells have delayed cellular senescence. This result is
also confirmed by the memory CD8+ T cells purified from general normal
donors. Memory CD8+ T cells cultured with IL-15 have significantly
greater levels of CD27 and CD28 expression, lower SA--Gal activity and
lower P53, P21WAF1 and P16INK4a protein level after 5 days culture in
vitro. To identify the molecular mechanism of the effect of IL-15 on the
cellular senescence, we cultured the memory CD8+ T cells with IL-15 in
the presence of different signaling pathway inhibitors and we found that
IL-15 regulated cellular senescence through JAK3-STAT3 and JAK3-STAT5
signaling pathways. DNA damage molecules ATM, MDC1, and TP53bp1 are also
down-regulated by IL-15, and there are three STATs potential binding
sites in the promoter of TP53bp1. Using a CHIP assay, we found that IL-15
directly regulates p-STAT3 and p-STAT5 binding to the -123 site of
TP53bp1 promoter. This site is also bound by tri-methy-H3(Lys27) and P300
after IL-15 stimulation, indicating that IL-15 induces both epigenetic
and transcriptional mechanism to repress TP53bp1 expression. Cellular
senescence was initially reported in human fibroblast cells of
irreversible growth arrest, active metabolism, and specific gene
signatures, and recent studies showed that senescence can be reversed and
delayed by certain treatments. Our study provides the first evidence of
IL-15 in memory CD8+ T cell senescence delay, which has provided a
detailed molecular mechanism. Our study provides important information
for the future improvement of adoptive T cell therapy in the clinic.

