Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutated CD80 may facilitate T-cell activation by inhibiting
PDL1-PD1 suppression and by costimulating.


CD80 functions as a costimulatory signal to activate T cells when it
binds to CD28 or as an apoptotic signal when it binds to CTLA4. We
recently identified another function for CD80 and showed that
co-expression of CD80 by Program Death Ligand-1+ (PDL1+) human tumor
cells prevents PDL1 binding to its receptor PD1 on activated T cells, and
enhances activation of tumor-reactive T cells. To distinguish if CD80 is
facilitating T cell activation by preventing PDL1-PD1 interactions and/or
by functioning as a costimulatory molecule, we have generated a
recombinant CD80 molecule that does not bind to CD28. Since we
hypothesize that CD80 may be a therapeutic for inhibiting tumor-mediated
immune suppression via PDL1-PD1 interactions, the recombinant CD80 is
also designed to not interact with CTLA4. Using site directed mutagenesis
we generated CD80 with the following mutations: H96A, L97A, and E99A
(CD8096,97,99). CD28 and CTLA4 bind to 35.3% and 37.4%, respectively, of
tumor cells expressing wild type CD80. In contrast, only 1.2% and 1.4% of
tumor cells expressing CD8096,97,99 bind CD28 and CTLA4, respectively,
demonstrating that the mutant CD80 does not bind to CD28 or CTLA4.
Previous studies demonstrated that CD80 prevents PDL1-PD1 interactions by
binding to PDL1 and obscuring its detection. Only 7.05% of CD8096,97,99
mutants have detectable PDL1 (vs. 98% of untransfected parental human
tumor cells), demonstrating that the CD8096,97,99 mutant does not bind
CD28 or CTLA4, but retains the ability to inhibit PDL1-PD1 interactions.
We are also generating a soluble form of CD8096,97,99 (sCD8096,97,99)
that could be administered to cancer patients to prevent tumor
cell-mediated PDL1 immune suppression. The construct for the soluble form
was generated by ligating the two extracellular domains of CD80
containing the 96,97,99 mutations to the Fc region of human IgG1,
followed by incorporation into the Pet21a+ plasmid containing the T7
promoter. Recombinant protein will be isolated from transformed E. coli
using a protein G affinity column, and tested in functional experiments
with PDL1+ tumor cells to determine if CD80 increases T-cell activation
by inhibiting PDL1-PD-1 immune suppression and/or by facilitating
costimulation.This work was funded, in part, by grants from the HHMI
Precollege and Undergraduate Science Education Program (52006949), CBI
(T32 GM066706), and NIH (R01CA84232 and RO1CA115880).

