Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Small Ribosomal Protein Subunit S7 Functions as a Tumor
Suppressor to regulate ovarian tumorigenesis through PI3K/AKT and MAPK
pathways.


AbstractBackground and Purpose-Ovarian cancer is the most lethal
gynecological malignancy in women, but the essential mechanism remains
unclear. Studies have shown that many ribosomal proteins are
dysfunctional in various tumors. The small ribosomal protein subunit S7
(RPS7) has been reported to interact with MDM2 and may function as a
tumor suppressor, but its role in cancer development is largely unknown.
Here, we examined the molecular function of RPS7 in human ovarian
cancer.Experimental Design-Retrovirus-mediated small hairpin RNA (shRNA)
was used to silence the expression of RPS7 in ovarian cancer cell lines
SKOV3 and OVCA433, named SKOV3-RPS7i, OVCA433-RPS7i plus their GFP shRNA
(GFPi) controls. Cell proliferation, cell cycle, apoptosis, cell
migration and invasion, and tumor growth were tested to determine the
function of RPS7 in ovarian cancer.Results-Immunostaining of RPS7 showed
that RPS7 was higher in ovarian cancer tissues than in nomal tissues.
Silencing of RPS7 in SKOV3 and OVCA433 cells promoted cell growth and
markedly enhanced anchorage-independent colony formation. Depletion of
RPS7 accelerated cell cycle progression through G1-S transition, which
was evidenced by alterations of cell cycle regulatory proteins including
p21waf1/cip1, CDK2/4, Cyclin B1, and Cyclin D1. Knockdown of RPS7
weakened cell apoptosis by increasing the expression of anti-apoptotic
proteins including BCL2 and BCL-XL, and decreasing the expression of
apoptotic molecules including p27cip/kip, BAK, and BAD. However,
knockdown of RPS7 reduced cell migration and invasion. Further analysis
showed that the expression of -catenin, MMP2, and MMP13 was decreased,
but E-cadherin was increased in RPS7-silenced cells compared with in
controls, indicating that RPS7 is associated with metastasis. Moreover,
P85, P110 and AKT1/2 were decreased in SKOV3-RPS7i and OVCA433-RPS7i,
suggesting that RPS7 functions through PI3K/AKT signal pathway. Although
the basal levels of ERK 1/2, MEK1/2, and p38 were inconsistently altered,
but the phosphorylation of MEK1/2 (Ser217/221), ERK1/2 (Thr202/Tyr204),
and p38 (Thr180/Tyr182) was reduced in SKOV3-RPS7i and OVCA433-RPS7i
cells, compared with in controls. Thus, our results suggested that RPS7
appears to regulate cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis
through PI3K/AKT and MAPK signal pathways.Conclusion-RPS7 may function as
an anti-tumor factor in ovarian tumorigenesis through PI3K/AKT and MAPK
signal pathways.

