Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A morphologically distinct cancer initiating cell in human and
murine PanIN and pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is highly lethal with a survival
rate of less than 6 months for the majority of patients. In order to
better understand its development we hypothesized that there is cellular
heterogeneity in murine and human PDAC precursor lesions (PanINs). We
utilized two independent models of murine PanIN (mPanIN) formation to
drive oncogenic KrasG12D expression in the murine pancreas during
development (KCPdx1) or specifically in adult acinar cells (KCiMist1).
The mice were crossed to the mTmG reporter mouse to map the fate of cells
expressing Kras (KCiMist1G) that are marked by expression of GFP. We used
transmission electron microscopy on mPanIN-containing tissue to identify
a morphologically distinct rare cell type present in both models of
mPanIN. These cells morphologically resemble tuft cells, which are
characterized by their brush-like morphology, including apically
projecting microvillae and the expression of DCLK1 and AcTub. Using
Flourescence Activated Cell Sorting Techniques (FACS), we were able to
isolate DCLK1HI/GFP+ murine PanIN tuft cells expressed in the KCiMist1G
model. We discovered that these cells have an increased ability to form
PanIN spheres in vitro relative to GFP+ cells alone, indicative of a
progenitor PanIN stem cell function.Using immunofluorescent labeling on a
human PanIN (n=23) and metastatic PDAC (n=10) tissue arrays, we
determined that in 15% of PanIN lesions, 13-30% of the cells have
detectable levels of AcTub, with a primarily apical pattern of labeling.
In contrast, over 80% of metastatic PDAC cells are AcTub+, but they no
longer exhibit an apical pattern of labeling. Applying our cell surface
FACS strategy to four different human pancreatic cancer cell lines and
three early passage human xenografts, we determined that 2-5% of human
pancreatic cancer cells have detectable levels of cell-surface AcTub and
DCLK1. We have functionally analyzed the tumor-initiating capacity of
cell surface AcTubHI cells using in vitro tumor sphere experiments. In
this assay, cell surface AcTubHI cells show a statistically significant
100-fold increase in tumor sphere-forming capacity relative to cell
surface AcTubLOW cells. We further evaluated the functional significance
of cell surface AcTub by analyzing the in vivo tumor initiating
capacities of cell surface AcTubHI and AcTubLOW cells from a human PDAC
xenograft. Cell surface AcTubHI cells exhibited significantly increased
tumor initiating frequency relative to the AcTubLOW population
(**pPancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is highly lethal with a
survival rate of less than 6 months for the majority of patients. In
order to better understand its development we hypothesized that there is
cellular heterogeneity in murine and human PDAC precursor lesions
(PanINs). We utilized two independent models of murine PanIN (mPanIN)
formation to drive oncogenic KrasG12D expression in the murine pancreas
during development (KCPdx1) or specifically in adult acinar cells
(KCiMist1). The mice were crossed to the mTmG reporter mouse to map the
fate of cells expressing Kras (KCiMist1G) that are marked by expression
of GFP. We used transmission electron microscopy on mPanIN-containing
tissue to identify a morphologically distinct rare cell type present in
both models of mPanIN. These cells morphologically resemble tuft cells,
which are characterized by their brush-like morphology, including
apically projecting microvillae and the expression of DCLK1 and AcTub.
Using Flourescence Activated Cell Sorting Techniques (FACS), we were able
to isolate DCLK1HI/GFP+ murine PanIN tuft cells expressed in the
KCiMist1G model. We discovered that these cells have an increased ability
to form PanIN spheres in vitro relative to GFP+ cells alone, indicative
of a progenitor PanIN stem cell function.Using immunofluorescent labeling
on a human PanIN (n=23) and metastatic PDAC (n=10) tissue arrays, we
determined that in 15% of PanIN lesions, 13-30% of the cells have
detectable levels of AcTub, with a primarily apical pattern of labeling.
In contrast, over 80% of metastatic PDAC cells are AcTub+, but they no
longer exhibit an apical pattern of labeling. Applying our cell surface
FACS strategy to four different human pancreatic cancer cell lines and
three early passage human xenografts, we determined that 2-5% of human
pancreatic cancer cells have detectable levels of cell-surface AcTub and
DCLK1. We have functionally analyzed the tumor-initiating capacity of
cell surface AcTubHI cells using in vitro tumor sphere experiments. In
this assay, cell surface AcTubHI cells show a statistically significant
100-fold increase in tumor sphere-forming capacity relative to cell
surface AcTubLOW cells. We further evaluated the functional significance
of cell surface AcTub by analyzing the in vivo tumor initiating
capacities of cell surface AcTubHI and AcTubLOW cells from a human PDAC
xenograft. Cell surface AcTubHI cells exhibited significantly increased
tumor initiating frequency relative to the AcTubLOW population
(**p<0.0000539). These data provide important new information regarding
cellular heterogeneity in murine PanIN and human pancreatic cancer, and
suggest that novel strategies targeting DCLK1 and AcTub may have
potential therapeutic utility.

