Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phagocytic regulation through exogenous caffeine exposure in
whole-blood macrophages.


Caffeine is the most widely used neurostimulant in the world, and it has
been shown that 79% of the United States population drinks coffee at
least occasionally. Previous research has suggested that caffeine may be
involved in the regulation of phagocytosis in immune cells through
anti-inflammatory and pro-inflammatory signals. To investigate this
effect, we used a macrophage engulfment assay, which was optimized in our
lab to measure phagocytosis after exogenous caffeine exposure. Human
leukocytes were isolated and incubated to allow for monocyte
differentiation. After being allowed to differentiate for 1hr, 24hrs,
3-days, or 7-days, macrophages were incubated with varying concentrations
of caffeine (35 M-20 mM) for 1-24 hours. Cells were treated with
lipopolysaccharide, and then incubated for 2 hours with
fluorescently-labeled microspheres conditioned by incubation with fetal
bovine serum. Engulfment was measured using flow cytometry, indicating
the phagocytosis of microspheres in integral ratios. It was observed that
engulfment was dependent on cell differentiation time, as well as
caffeine concentration and exposure time. After Caffeine is the most
widely used neurostimulant in the world, and it has been shown that 79%
of the United States population drinks coffee at least occasionally.
Previous research has suggested that caffeine may be involved in the
regulation of phagocytosis in immune cells through anti-inflammatory and
pro-inflammatory signals. To investigate this effect, we used a
macrophage engulfment assay, which was optimized in our lab to measure
phagocytosis after exogenous caffeine exposure. Human leukocytes were
isolated and incubated to allow for monocyte differentiation. After being
allowed to differentiate for 1hr, 24hrs, 3-days, or 7-days, macrophages
were incubated with varying concentrations of caffeine (35 M-20 mM) for
1-24 hours. Cells were treated with lipopolysaccharide, and then
incubated for 2 hours with fluorescently-labeled microspheres conditioned
by incubation with fetal bovine serum. Engulfment was measured using flow
cytometry, indicating the phagocytosis of microspheres in integral
ratios. It was observed that engulfment was dependent on cell
differentiation time, as well as caffeine concentration and exposure
time. After <12 hour differentiation, cells exposed to caffeine showed a
concentration-dependent reduction in engulfment when compared to those
that were not treated. During incubation for 12 - 72 hours, however,
results showed a 20% down-regulation of engulfment at Caffeine is the
most widely used neurostimulant in the world, and it has been shown that
79% of the United States population drinks coffee at least occasionally.
Previous research has suggested that caffeine may be involved in the
regulation of phagocytosis in immune cells through anti-inflammatory and
pro-inflammatory signals. To investigate this effect, we used a
macrophage engulfment assay, which was optimized in our lab to measure
phagocytosis after exogenous caffeine exposure. Human leukocytes were
isolated and incubated to allow for monocyte differentiation. After being
allowed to differentiate for 1hr, 24hrs, 3-days, or 7-days, macrophages
were incubated with varying concentrations of caffeine (35 M-20 mM) for
1-24 hours. Cells were treated with lipopolysaccharide, and then
incubated for 2 hours with fluorescently-labeled microspheres conditioned
by incubation with fetal bovine serum. Engulfment was measured using flow
cytometry, indicating the phagocytosis of microspheres in integral
ratios. It was observed that engulfment was dependent on cell
differentiation time, as well as caffeine concentration and exposure
time. After <12 hour differentiation, cells exposed to caffeine showed a
concentration-dependent reduction in engulfment when compared to those
that were not treated. During incubation for 12 - 72 hours, however,
results showed a 20% down-regulation of engulfment at <5 mM caffeine,
whereas those cells exposed to 5-10 mM caffeine exhibited a 20%
higher-engulfing phenotype, compared to the controls. At caffeine
concentrations above 10 mM cell viability and engulfment was decreased up
to 50%. It was concluded that the effect of caffeine on macrophages is
dependent on incubation time and concentration, as well as the state of
macrophage differentiation. Because of the implications of macrophage
phenotype in many diseases involving inflammation, including cancer,
these findings suggest further research should be continued to explore
the therapeutic potential of caffeine and/or its analogs.

