Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Site-specific DICER and DROSHA RNA products control the DNA-damage
response.


The DNA damage response (DDR) is a signaling pathway that arrests the
proliferation of cells undergoing genotoxic events to preserve genome
stability and as such plays important tumor suppressing functions. DICER
and DROSHA are crucial ribonucleases involved in RNA interference (RNAi).
Components of RNAi are thought to have evolved to preserve genome
stability from the attacks of viruses and mobile genetic elements. RNA
products generated by DICER and DROSHA are involved in chromatin
assembly, gene silencing and cancer. So far, RNAi and DDR pathways have
not been demonstrated to directly interact.We have recently shown in
human, mouse and zebrafish that DICER and DROSHA, but not downstream
elements of the RNAi pathway, are necessary to activate the DDR upon
exogenous DNA damage and oncogene-induced genotoxic stress, as studied by
DDR foci formation and by checkpoint assays. Indeed, oncogene-induced
senescent cells, upon DICER or DROSHA inactivation, escape DDR-imposed
arrest and proliferate again.DDR foci are sensitive to RNase A treatment
and DICER- and DROSHA-dependent RNA products are required to restore DDR
foci in RNase-A-treated cells. Through RNA deep sequencing and the study
of DDR activation at a single inducible DNA double-strand break, we
demonstrate that DDR foci formation requires site-specific DICER- and
DROSHA-dependent small RNAs, named DDRNAs, which act in a
MRE11-RAD50-NBS1- complex-dependent manner to fuel DDR. DDRNAs, either
chemically synthesized or in vitro generated by DICER cleavage, are
sufficient to restore the DDR in RNase-A-treated cells, also in the
absence of other cellular RNAs.We propose an unanticipated direct role of
a novel class of ncRNAs in the control of DDR activation at sites of DNA
damage. The relevance of these findings in the context of tumor
suppression will be discussed.

