Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor budding is a predictive feature for lymph node metastasis in
invasive ductal breast cancer.


Background: Tumor budding is a phenomenon associated with epithelial
mesenchymal transition and correlates with tumor invasiveness and
metastasis in colon cancer. In breast cancer this histomorphological
feature has not yet been determined. In this study we investigated the
prognostic value of peritumoral budding (PTB) and intratumoral budding
(ITB) in invasive ductal breast cancer and its correlation with lymph
node status. Method: Two pathologists counted tumor buds within the tumor
(ITB) and at the periphery (PTB) of 90 primary invasive ductal breast
cancers. ITB and PTB were scored on whole tissue sections stained with a
PanCK antibody. Budding was defined as isolated single cancer cells or
microscopic cell clusters composed of 1 or up to 5 cells. A tumor was
designated to have high-grade budding if it had an average of >10 buds.
PTB and ITB were then correlated with pathological features of breast
cancer. Results: Forty-eight percent (n=43) and 50% (n=45) were
considered high-grade for either ITB or PTB, respectively. High-grade PTB
was significantly (p=0.0044) associated with lymph node metastasis and
ITB was significantly (p=0.0018) associated with hormone receptor
positive tumors. ITB and PTB were frequent in Her2 negative (50% and 53%)
tumors and breast cancer with higher T-category >T3 (57%). Neither PTB
nor ITB showed an association with tumor grade or proliferation index as
measured by Mib-1 staining. Conclusion: For the first time, we report
that PTB is a strong (p=0.0044) predictive tumor feature of lymph node
metastasis in invasive ductal breast cancer. The association of PTB with
metastatic disease may be due to an increased occurrence of lymph vessels
found at the tumor periphery. Additional studies are ongoing to determine
if tumor budding can select for more aggressive subtypes of invasive
breast cancer.

