Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CLEFMA synergizes with celecoxib in suppression of lung cancer
cell growth.


Background: Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is frequently over-expressed in
various malignancies, often associated with poor clinical outcome.
Celecoxib, a selective COX-2 inhibitor induces apoptosis in cancer cells.
However, at higher concentrations needed for chemoprevention or
treatment, celecoxib targets COX-2 independent drug targets resulting in
undesired toxicity. CLEFMA or 4-[3, 5-bis
(2-chlorobenzylidene-4-oxo-piperidine-1-yl)-4-oxo-2-butenoic acid], a
novel molecule synthesized in our laboratory potently inhibits the
proliferation of various cancer cells while sparing normal cells. In this
study we have tested a hypothesis that CLEFMA would reduce the celecoxib
dose required for effective suppression of cancer cell
proliferation.Methods: We determined IC50 values of CLEFMA and celecoxib
in lung adenocarcinoma (H441 and A549) and small cell lung cancer (H1650)
cells. Further, we tested their toxicity in normal lung fibroblast CCL151
cells at 1x IC50 and 2x IC50 dose levels required for H441 cells. Drug
concentrations at ratio 1:3 (Mixture 1), 1:1 (Mixture 2) and 3:1 (Mixture
3) of respective IC50 values of CLEFMA and celecoxib were examined for
synergism. The data was analyzed with the Calcusyn software. Following
synergy experiments, we determined the effect of CLEFMA treatment on
total COX and COX-2 enzymatic activity in cultured A549 cells and in
tumor tissue lysates obtained from H441 xenografts in mice. Expression of
anti-apoptotic (BCL-2, Bcl-XL and surviving) and apoptotic proteins
(PARP, caspase-3 and caspase-7) were investigated by
immunobloting.Results: We observed that CLEFMA was more effective in
suppressing the proliferation of all three cancer cell lines than
celecoxib. Celecoxib showed significant toxicity in normal lung
fibroblasts at 2x IC50 dose, whereas CLEFMA was non-toxic to the normal
cells. From the fractional effect-combination index (Fa-CI) plots, we
found that Mixture 1 (1:3:: CLEFMA:celecoxib) was synergistic (CI
Background: Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is frequently over-expressed in
various malignancies, often associated with poor clinical outcome.
Celecoxib, a selective COX-2 inhibitor induces apoptosis in cancer cells.
However, at higher concentrations needed for chemoprevention or
treatment, celecoxib targets COX-2 independent drug targets resulting in
undesired toxicity. CLEFMA or 4-[3, 5-bis
(2-chlorobenzylidene-4-oxo-piperidine-1-yl)-4-oxo-2-butenoic acid], a
novel molecule synthesized in our laboratory potently inhibits the
proliferation of various cancer cells while sparing normal cells. In this
study we have tested a hypothesis that CLEFMA would reduce the celecoxib
dose required for effective suppression of cancer cell
proliferation.Methods: We determined IC50 values of CLEFMA and celecoxib
in lung adenocarcinoma (H441 and A549) and small cell lung cancer (H1650)
cells. Further, we tested their toxicity in normal lung fibroblast CCL151
cells at 1x IC50 and 2x IC50 dose levels required for H441 cells. Drug
concentrations at ratio 1:3 (Mixture 1), 1:1 (Mixture 2) and 3:1 (Mixture
3) of respective IC50 values of CLEFMA and celecoxib were examined for
synergism. The data was analyzed with the Calcusyn software. Following
synergy experiments, we determined the effect of CLEFMA treatment on
total COX and COX-2 enzymatic activity in cultured A549 cells and in
tumor tissue lysates obtained from H441 xenografts in mice. Expression of
anti-apoptotic (BCL-2, Bcl-XL and surviving) and apoptotic proteins
(PARP, caspase-3 and caspase-7) were investigated by
immunobloting.Results: We observed that CLEFMA was more effective in
suppressing the proliferation of all three cancer cell lines than
celecoxib. Celecoxib showed significant toxicity in normal lung
fibroblasts at 2x IC50 dose, whereas CLEFMA was non-toxic to the normal
cells. From the fractional effect-combination index (Fa-CI) plots, we
found that Mixture 1 (1:3:: CLEFMA:celecoxib) was synergistic (CI < 1.0)
in all three cell lines; in H441 cells mixture 2 (1:1) was synergistic at
lower concentration of the drugs, Mixture 3 (3:1) was synergistic only in
A549 cells. CLEFMA does not reduce COX-2 activity/unit enzyme, but
reduced the expression levels of COX-2 protein; the combination of CLEFMA
with celecoxib synergistically suppressed COX-2 expression. CLEFMA also
potentiated the activity of celecoxib in down-regulating Bcl-2, Bcl-XL
and survivin (anti-apoptotic proteins) and up-regulating PARP, caspase-3
and caspase-7 (pro-apoptotic proteins).Conclusions: From the results we
conclude that CLEFMA synergistically augments the growth inhibitory
effect of celecoxib in human lung cancer cell lines without being toxic
to normal cells. It appears that the synergy depends on the different
mode of actions of the two drugs- CLEFMA suppressing COX-2 protein
expression, whereas celecoxib reducing COX-2 activity.

