Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transmembrane domain required for MCL1 function.


MCL1 is an anti-apoptotic family member of the BCL2 family of proteins
that exerts its anti-apoptotic function at least in large measure by
sequestering BH3 domain containing pro-apoptotic proteins within the
outer mitochondrial membrane. Several lines of evidence point to MCL1 as
an important oncology target. MCL1 is among the top 10 most frequently
amplified genes in human cancer. Consistent with its frequent
amplification, MCL1 is highly expressed in many tumor types, and high
expression levels of MCL1 contribute to tumor development and resistance
to chemotherapy. MCL1 is required for survival of a sub-group of tumor
cells that are characterized by low levels of expression of another
anti-apoptotic BCL2 family protein, BCL-xL. Despite the important role of
MCL1 in cancer, no inhibitors of MCL1 have reached the clinic. We
employed mutagenesis to further explore the anti-apoptotic mechanism of
MCL1. Deletion of the N-terminus portion of MCL1, including the PEST
domain, did not significantly affect its anti-apoptotic function.
However, deletion of the transmembrane (TM) domain of MCL1 abolished the
anti-apoptotic function of MCL1. Furthermore, an MCL1 point mutation
within the TM domain impaired its anti-apoptotic function, however, it
could still bind to the pro-apoptotic proteins BIM and BAK. Therefore,
the TM domain may represent an alternative site for pharmaceutical
targeting of MCL1.

