Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence for intracellular calcium-regulated secretion in
gastrointestinal stromal tumor.


Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are considered to originate from
the electrically active pacemaker cells of the gut. Despite the presence
of synaptic like vesicles and proteins involved in exocytosis and
secretory response in other cell types, it still remains unclear if GIST
cells have a regulated secretion. A GIST tumor cell line (GIST882) was
used as a model cell system, and stimulus-secretion coupling was
investigated performing measurements of intracellular Ca2+, confocal
microscopy, flow cytometry and an ATP-based assay to measure secretory
response. We demonstrate that GIST cells have an intracellular signaling
pathway downstream regulating cell secretion observed as an ATP release.
Cell membrane integrity was preserved showing that ATP is released and
not related to cell membrane rupture or cell death. The
stimulus-secretion signal transduction is, at least partly, dependent on
Ca2+ influx, since exclusion of extracellular Ca2+ diminishes the
secretory response. We conclude that measurements of the secretory
response in GIST by using ATP as a marker may be a useful tool in
dissecting the signal transduction pathway, identification of secretory
substances and in the development of drugs.Citation Format: Erik
Berglund, David Berglund, Pinar Akcakaya, Mehran Ghaderi, Elisabetta
Dare, Per-Olof Berggren, Craig A. Aspinwall, Weng-Onn Lui, Jan Zedenius,
Catharina Larsson, Robert Brnstrm. Evidence for intracellular
calcium-regulated secretion in gastrointestinal stromal tumor.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5317.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5317

