Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyploidy across breast cancer subtypes.


Introduction: Breast cancer remains the most common cancer in women.
Although treatment advances have improved the prognosis for many women,
many existing therapies have significant associated toxicities. A major
goal of current research is to develop targeted therapies based on
characteristics of each individual's cancer.Polyploidy can provide a
potential difference between cancer and normal cells that can be
harnessed to selectively destroy cancer cells. We hypothesize that
polyploidy is common in aggressive triple negative breast cancer. If this
is the case, polyploidy could provide a target for therapy in triple
negative cancers.Methods:We conducted a retrospective review of data
collected by the University of Wisconsin Tumor Registry and HER2 testing
by the state lab of hygiene between 2003 and 2011. Patients from the two
data sets were matched by name and/or medical record number. Tumors were
considered polyploid if 3 CEP17 signals were detected. Chi square testing
and student T-tests were used to identify statistical
correlations.Results: A total of 1211 were identified meeting eligibility
criteria and 170 women had polyploid tumors. Of these, 72 had unknown or
equivocal results for ER/PR or HER2 and were excluded from analyses.
Polyploid tumors correlated with TNBC (p=0.028) and hormone receptor
negative cancer (p=0.02). Subgroup analysis showed a positive correlation
between HER2 positive tumors and polyploid tumors (p=0.0005). Polyploidy
tumors were more likely to be either stage I or stage IV (p=0.0019).
Vital status at last contact and age at diagnosis were not significantly
different between the two groups (p=0.2875 and 0.7826,
respectively).Discussion:We conclude that polyploid tumors cross all
known subtypes of breast cancer, but are enriched among triple negative
cancers. This may represent a viable group of cancers that can be
targeted with specialized therapy.


