Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of Trichostatin A and 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine
achieves superior anticancer efficacy on ovarian cancer via regulation of
migration, invasion, apoptosis, and cell cycle.


Objective: To investigate the anticancer efficacy and mechanism of
Trichostatin A (TSA) and 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) on ovarian
cancer cells.Material and methods: The effect of TSA and 5-aza-CdR was
evaluated on the human ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3 in vitro and in
vivo. Optimal dose combinations of TSA and 5-aza-CdR was assessed by MTS
assay, migration and invasion by transwell assay and BD invasion chamber,
expression of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers (Twist,
E-cadherin, and N-cadherin), MMP-2/9, apoptosis markers (Bcl-2 and
Bcl-x/L), cell cycle markers (p21 and p27), epigenetic markers
(DNMT3A/3B, HDAC1/2, LSD1, Ac-H3/H4 and H3K4me2, H3K9me2) by Western
blot. Spheroid formation was evaluated in serum free medium when exposed
to the combination of drugs. Tumorigenicity of cancer cells treated both
before and after implantation subcutaneously and intraperitoneally was
assessed in SCID mice.Results: The effect of fixed ratio combinations of
TSA and 5-aza-CdR on cell viability was assessed and 0.1 M TSA and 5 M
5-aza-CdR achieved the maximal synergistic effect (Combination Index
=0.421). Tumorigenicity of SKOV3 cells pretreated with both drugs was
significantly suppressed when compared with either drug alone or
untreated control (pObjective: To investigate the anticancer efficacy and
mechanism of Trichostatin A (TSA) and 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR)
on ovarian cancer cells.Material and methods: The effect of TSA and
5-aza-CdR was evaluated on the human ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3 in
vitro and in vivo. Optimal dose combinations of TSA and 5-aza-CdR was
assessed by MTS assay, migration and invasion by transwell assay and BD
invasion chamber, expression of epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) markers (Twist, E-cadherin, and N-cadherin), MMP-2/9, apoptosis
markers (Bcl-2 and Bcl-x/L), cell cycle markers (p21 and p27), epigenetic
markers (DNMT3A/3B, HDAC1/2, LSD1, Ac-H3/H4 and H3K4me2, H3K9me2) by
Western blot. Spheroid formation was evaluated in serum free medium when
exposed to the combination of drugs. Tumorigenicity of cancer cells
treated both before and after implantation subcutaneously and
intraperitoneally was assessed in SCID mice.Results: The effect of fixed
ratio combinations of TSA and 5-aza-CdR on cell viability was assessed
and 0.1 M TSA and 5 M 5-aza-CdR achieved the maximal synergistic effect
(Combination Index =0.421). Tumorigenicity of SKOV3 cells pretreated with
both drugs was significantly suppressed when compared with either drug
alone or untreated control (p<0.001) in SCID mice models. Migration
capacity was markedly suppressed through the induction of E-cadherin and
suppression of N-cadherin (MET), and invasion was suppressed at least
partially via inhibition of MMP-2 and MMP-9 with the combined treatment.
The combination drugs markedly inhibited both spheroid size (pObjective:
To investigate the anticancer efficacy and mechanism of Trichostatin A
(TSA) and 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) on ovarian cancer
cells.Material and methods: The effect of TSA and 5-aza-CdR was evaluated
on the human ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3 in vitro and in vivo. Optimal
dose combinations of TSA and 5-aza-CdR was assessed by MTS assay,
migration and invasion by transwell assay and BD invasion chamber,
expression of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers (Twist,
E-cadherin, and N-cadherin), MMP-2/9, apoptosis markers (Bcl-2 and
Bcl-x/L), cell cycle markers (p21 and p27), epigenetic markers
(DNMT3A/3B, HDAC1/2, LSD1, Ac-H3/H4 and H3K4me2, H3K9me2) by Western
blot. Spheroid formation was evaluated in serum free medium when exposed
to the combination of drugs. Tumorigenicity of cancer cells treated both
before and after implantation subcutaneously and intraperitoneally was
assessed in SCID mice.Results: The effect of fixed ratio combinations of
TSA and 5-aza-CdR on cell viability was assessed and 0.1 M TSA and 5 M
5-aza-CdR achieved the maximal synergistic effect (Combination Index
=0.421). Tumorigenicity of SKOV3 cells pretreated with both drugs was
significantly suppressed when compared with either drug alone or
untreated control (p<0.001) in SCID mice models. Migration capacity was
markedly suppressed through the induction of E-cadherin and suppression
of N-cadherin (MET), and invasion was suppressed at least partially via
inhibition of MMP-2 and MMP-9 with the combined treatment. The
combination drugs markedly inhibited both spheroid size (p<0.001) and
spheroid number (p=0.002), through inhibition of Twist, N-cadherin,
MMP-2, MMP-9 and induction of E-cadherin. The combination of TSA (0.1
mg/kg) and 5-aza-CdR (5 mg/kg) significantly suppressed tumor
implantation (pObjective: To investigate the anticancer efficacy and
mechanism of Trichostatin A (TSA) and 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR)
on ovarian cancer cells.Material and methods: The effect of TSA and
5-aza-CdR was evaluated on the human ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3 in
vitro and in vivo. Optimal dose combinations of TSA and 5-aza-CdR was
assessed by MTS assay, migration and invasion by transwell assay and BD
invasion chamber, expression of epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) markers (Twist, E-cadherin, and N-cadherin), MMP-2/9, apoptosis
markers (Bcl-2 and Bcl-x/L), cell cycle markers (p21 and p27), epigenetic
markers (DNMT3A/3B, HDAC1/2, LSD1, Ac-H3/H4 and H3K4me2, H3K9me2) by
Western blot. Spheroid formation was evaluated in serum free medium when
exposed to the combination of drugs. Tumorigenicity of cancer cells
treated both before and after implantation subcutaneously and
intraperitoneally was assessed in SCID mice.Results: The effect of fixed
ratio combinations of TSA and 5-aza-CdR on cell viability was assessed
and 0.1 M TSA and 5 M 5-aza-CdR achieved the maximal synergistic effect
(Combination Index =0.421). Tumorigenicity of SKOV3 cells pretreated with
both drugs was significantly suppressed when compared with either drug
alone or untreated control (p<0.001) in SCID mice models. Migration
capacity was markedly suppressed through the induction of E-cadherin and
suppression of N-cadherin (MET), and invasion was suppressed at least
partially via inhibition of MMP-2 and MMP-9 with the combined treatment.
The combination drugs markedly inhibited both spheroid size (p<0.001) and
spheroid number (p=0.002), through inhibition of Twist, N-cadherin,
MMP-2, MMP-9 and induction of E-cadherin. The combination of TSA (0.1
mg/kg) and 5-aza-CdR (5 mg/kg) significantly suppressed tumor
implantation (p<0.001), and no apparent toxicity was found (control vs.
combined, mice weight, p=0.0537) and expression of Bcl-2 and Bcl-x/L was
suppressed while p21 and p27 were induced in tumor nodules. Epigenetic
markers DNMT3A/3B and HDAC1/2, enzymes important to tumor suppressor
genes, were markedly inhibited with the combination. Acetylation of
histone H3 and H4 were more markedly stimulated with the combination than
with either agent alone. H3K4me2 expression was induced and H3K9me3 and
LSD1 were suppressed by exposure to the combined drugs.Conclusion: These
results suggest that the combination of TSA and 5-aza-CdR significantly
suppresse tumorigenicity of ovarian cancer cells by inhibiting migration
and invasion via suppression of N-cadherin and MMP-2/9, induction of
E-cadherin, regulation of apoptosis and cell cycle via suppression of
Bcl-2 and Bcl-x/L and induction of p21 and p27, which may be
epigenetically regulated by DNA methylation and histone modification.

