Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor and circulating transcriptomes in breast cancer.


Circulating biomarkers can provide a less invasive way to monitor
patients and their response to therapies. Recent advances in next
generation RNA sequencing have allowed for a comprehensive
characterization of the transcribed genome, which extends past
protein-coding genes to include non-coding RNAs, important regulators of
protein-coding gene expression. While several studies have shown that
circulating small non-coding RNAs, specifically microRNAs, have the
potential to serve as biomarkers of cancer, little work has been done to
study the role of long RNAs as circulating biomarkers. Our goal was to
identify the role of mRNAs and long non-coding RNAs as biomarkers of
detection and response to therapy for breast cancer.To start, we utilized
samples from 13 breast cancer patients whose tumors were biopsied for
research prior to and after trastuzumab treatment as part of a clinical
trial. RNA was extracted from both the pre- and post-treatment biopsies
for each patient. Next generation RNA-sequencing was completed and reads
aligned to known mRNAs and lncRNAs. Mean expression levels were inferred
and the statistical significance of differences in expression between
pre- and post-treatment samples was assessed among the 11 women in the
trial that achieved a pathological complete response. We then compared
this to the circulating transcriptome from 10 breast cancer patients and
10 age and race matched mammography-screened controls, which provided
blood samples for biomarker studies as part of a larger case-control
study. RNA was extracted from the plasma on all 20 samples. Next
generation RNA-sequencing was done and was aligned to known mRNAs and
lncRNAs as in the tumor samples from the clinical trial. Differences in
circulating RNA expression between the breast cancer patients and
controls was done using a t-test.After exclusion of RNAs that were
expressed in Circulating biomarkers can provide a less invasive way to
monitor patients and their response to therapies. Recent advances in next
generation RNA sequencing have allowed for a comprehensive
characterization of the transcribed genome, which extends past
protein-coding genes to include non-coding RNAs, important regulators of
protein-coding gene expression. While several studies have shown that
circulating small non-coding RNAs, specifically microRNAs, have the
potential to serve as biomarkers of cancer, little work has been done to
study the role of long RNAs as circulating biomarkers. Our goal was to
identify the role of mRNAs and long non-coding RNAs as biomarkers of
detection and response to therapy for breast cancer.To start, we utilized
samples from 13 breast cancer patients whose tumors were biopsied for
research prior to and after trastuzumab treatment as part of a clinical
trial. RNA was extracted from both the pre- and post-treatment biopsies
for each patient. Next generation RNA-sequencing was completed and reads
aligned to known mRNAs and lncRNAs. Mean expression levels were inferred
and the statistical significance of differences in expression between
pre- and post-treatment samples was assessed among the 11 women in the
trial that achieved a pathological complete response. We then compared
this to the circulating transcriptome from 10 breast cancer patients and
10 age and race matched mammography-screened controls, which provided
blood samples for biomarker studies as part of a larger case-control
study. RNA was extracted from the plasma on all 20 samples. Next
generation RNA-sequencing was done and was aligned to known mRNAs and
lncRNAs as in the tumor samples from the clinical trial. Differences in
circulating RNA expression between the breast cancer patients and
controls was done using a t-test.After exclusion of RNAs that were
expressed in <25% of the samples, the expression level of 163 lncRNAs and
1702 mRNAs were associated with treatment (pCirculating biomarkers can
provide a less invasive way to monitor patients and their response to
therapies. Recent advances in next generation RNA sequencing have allowed
for a comprehensive characterization of the transcribed genome, which
extends past protein-coding genes to include non-coding RNAs, important
regulators of protein-coding gene expression. While several studies have
shown that circulating small non-coding RNAs, specifically microRNAs,
have the potential to serve as biomarkers of cancer, little work has been
done to study the role of long RNAs as circulating biomarkers. Our goal
was to identify the role of mRNAs and long non-coding RNAs as biomarkers
of detection and response to therapy for breast cancer.To start, we
utilized samples from 13 breast cancer patients whose tumors were
biopsied for research prior to and after trastuzumab treatment as part of
a clinical trial. RNA was extracted from both the pre- and post-treatment
biopsies for each patient. Next generation RNA-sequencing was completed
and reads aligned to known mRNAs and lncRNAs. Mean expression levels were
inferred and the statistical significance of differences in expression
between pre- and post-treatment samples was assessed among the 11 women
in the trial that achieved a pathological complete response. We then
compared this to the circulating transcriptome from 10 breast cancer
patients and 10 age and race matched mammography-screened controls, which
provided blood samples for biomarker studies as part of a larger
case-control study. RNA was extracted from the plasma on all 20 samples.
Next generation RNA-sequencing was done and was aligned to known mRNAs
and lncRNAs as in the tumor samples from the clinical trial. Differences
in circulating RNA expression between the breast cancer patients and
controls was done using a t-test.After exclusion of RNAs that were
expressed in <25% of the samples, the expression level of 163 lncRNAs and
1702 mRNAs were associated with treatment (p<0.05). Of the mRNAs
associated with treatment response, 9 that were expressed at higher
levels before treatment were also increased in the circulation in breast
cancer patients, compared to controls (pCirculating biomarkers can
provide a less invasive way to monitor patients and their response to
therapies. Recent advances in next generation RNA sequencing have allowed
for a comprehensive characterization of the transcribed genome, which
extends past protein-coding genes to include non-coding RNAs, important
regulators of protein-coding gene expression. While several studies have
shown that circulating small non-coding RNAs, specifically microRNAs,
have the potential to serve as biomarkers of cancer, little work has been
done to study the role of long RNAs as circulating biomarkers. Our goal
was to identify the role of mRNAs and long non-coding RNAs as biomarkers
of detection and response to therapy for breast cancer.To start, we
utilized samples from 13 breast cancer patients whose tumors were
biopsied for research prior to and after trastuzumab treatment as part of
a clinical trial. RNA was extracted from both the pre- and post-treatment
biopsies for each patient. Next generation RNA-sequencing was completed
and reads aligned to known mRNAs and lncRNAs. Mean expression levels were
inferred and the statistical significance of differences in expression
between pre- and post-treatment samples was assessed among the 11 women
in the trial that achieved a pathological complete response. We then
compared this to the circulating transcriptome from 10 breast cancer
patients and 10 age and race matched mammography-screened controls, which
provided blood samples for biomarker studies as part of a larger
case-control study. RNA was extracted from the plasma on all 20 samples.
Next generation RNA-sequencing was done and was aligned to known mRNAs
and lncRNAs as in the tumor samples from the clinical trial. Differences
in circulating RNA expression between the breast cancer patients and
controls was done using a t-test.After exclusion of RNAs that were
expressed in <25% of the samples, the expression level of 163 lncRNAs and
1702 mRNAs were associated with treatment (p<0.05). Of the mRNAs
associated with treatment response, 9 that were expressed at higher
levels before treatment were also increased in the circulation in breast
cancer patients, compared to controls (p<0.05). None of the lncRNAs that
were altered in response to treatment were statistically significantly
differentially expressed in the circulation, although we are limited in
our ability to rule this out due to sample size. Validation of these
mRNAs in plasma in a larger sample of cases and controls, as well as in
patients before and after treatment, is currently ongoing.Our data shows
that, as expected, the expression profile of both mRNAs and lncRNAs in
breast cancer tissue changes with treatment, and transcriptome profiling
of RNA from the plasma suggests that many of these same RNAs are
deregulated in the circulation of breast cancer patients. More work will
need to be done to see if the circulating transcriptome can be used as a
marker for early breast cancer diagnosis or response to treatment.

