Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HER family signaling in low HER2-expressing breast
cancer: activity of the selective and equipotent EGFR, HER2 and HER3
signaling inhibitor, AZD8931, in models of low HER2-expressing disease.


Effective therapies for women with low-HER2 expressing breast cancer
remain a significant unmet clinical need. We have detected significant
phosphorylated-HER and HER2:HER3 dimer expression in clinical breast
cancer samples without HER2 amplification suggesting that HER signaling
may play a role in these tumors. It is our hypothesis that ligand-driven
signaling is the major route of HER family activation in the absence of
HER2 amplification.AZD8931 is an orally bioavailable and highly selective
small molecule inhibitor of EGFR, HER2 and HER3 signaling, which shows
greatest potency when HER signaling is ligand-driven(1). In a range of
low HER2 breast cancer cell lines, AZD8931 inhibited heregulin-driven
proliferation (GI50 range 0.05 to 0.38M) HER2:HER3 signaling, HER3:PI3K
interaction and downstream signaling. In vivo, twice-daily oral dosing of
AZD8931 showed significant monotherapy anti-tumor efficacy in a xenograft
model of low HER2 breast cancer (MDA-MB-175VII) at well-tolerated doses
(90% TGI at 12.5 mg/kg/bid).We further evaluated the activity of AZD8931
in combination with paclitaxel, a commonly used standard of care
chemotherapy for patients with advanced breast cancer expressing low
levels of HER2. Pre-clinically, the combination of AZD8931 with
paclitaxel showed at least additive activity in vitro in a range of
breast cell lines and additive efficacy in vivo in a BT474 (high HER2)
xenograft model at well tolerated doses (AZD8931 12.5 mg/kg/bid TGI 63%;
paclitaxel 7.5mg/kg/qw TGI 41%; combination TGI 95%). Combination work in
the low HER2 xenograft model is ongoing.These data demonstrate that
AZD8931 inhibits ligand-driven HER family receptor activation, receptor
dimerization, PI3K interaction and downstream signaling leading to
anti-tumor activity in vivo. These data also support the potential
clinical utility of AZD8931 for the therapeutic treatment of low HER2
expressing breast cancers in combination with paclitaxel.1 Hickinson et
al. Clin.Cancer Res (2010) 16:1159-69.

