Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel small-molecule inhibitor of Stat3 induces antitumor cell
effects in human glioma and breast cancer cells.


Constitutive activation of Stat3, a member of signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat) family of proteins, occurs with a high
frequency in human tumors and contributes to carcinogenesis and tumor
progression. Compelling evidence shows aberrant activation of Stat3
constitutes a point of convergence in oncogenic tyrosine kinase
signaling, functioning as a master regulator of events crucial for
tumorigenesis and malignant progression. We present a series of novel
small-molecules that abrogate constitutive activation of Stat3 in human
tumors, including glioma and breast cancer. The small-molecule, SH5-07,
inhibits in vitro Stat3 DNA-binding activity, with IC50 value of 3.9 M.
Further, treatment with SH5-07 induces dose-dependent inhibition of
constitutively-active Stat3 in human glioma U251MG and U373MG and breast
cancer MDA-MB-231 cells. Moreover, treatment with low micromolar SH5-07
of U251MG, U373MG, and MDA-MB-231 cells blocks constitutive Stat3
phosphorylation, DNA-binding, and transcriptional activities by as early
as 30 minutes. Furthermore, the inhibition of aberrantly-active Stat3 by
SH5-07 blocks the anchorage-dependent and independent growth, survival,
migration, and invasion in vitro of human glioma and breast cancer cells.
Data together indicates SH5-07 is a promising small-molecule Stat3
inhibitor and a suitable drug candidate for clinical development.

