Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of T-type calcium channels sensitizes ovarian cancer
cell growth and metastasis to platinum-based chemotherapy.


The inability to successfully treat women with ovarian cancer is due in
large part to the advanced stage of disease at diagnosis and the
development of platinum resistance. T-type calcium channels have recently
garnered interest as potential targets for the treatment of many cancers.
We investigated the hypothesis that inhibiting T-type calcium channels
would sensitize ovarian cancer cells to platinum based chemotherapy using
cell culture and mouse models. Sequential treatment of cultured ovarian
cancer cell lines or primary cells obtained from patients with mibefradil
followed by carboplatin showed a dose-dependent decrease in cell number
that was greater than observed with either drug alone. Importantly,
treatment of platinum-resistant tumor cells with mibefradil followed by
carboplatin also decreased cell number. Moreover, either simultaneous
administration of both drugs or treatment with carboplatin followed by
mibefradil did not alter cellular response to carboplatin. Based on these
findings, we tested the effect of mibefradil and carboplatin in a mouse
model of peritoneal ovarian cancer metastasis with platinum-resistant
ovarian cancer cells. Tumor-bearing mice were subjected to 3 cycles of
Interlaced TherapyTM, which consists of 5 days of mibefradil treatment
followed by one dose of carboplatin and 2 days off. We found that while
neither drug alone significantly affected tumor growth compared to
control, the mice that received the dual treatment had a dramatic
reduction in tumor burden. Together, the data provide pre-clinical
evidence supporting the use of T-type calcium channel blockers with
platinum-based chemotherapy to treat ovarian cancer.

