Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-derived macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor and
interleukin-6 cooperated in hypoxic accumulation of CD11b+Gr-1+ myeloid
cells.


Recently, myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) have gained much
attention due to their role in tumor immunity suppression as well as
promotion of angiogenesis, tumor cell invasion, and metastases. However,
the mechanisms that regulate MDSCs recruitment have not been well
clarified. Here, we demonstrated that hypoxic tumor microenvironment
stimulate the recruitment of MDSCs through increased production of
macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) by
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells. Knock-down (KD) of
HIF-1/2 in HNSCC cells decreased MIF level but did not inhibit the MDSCs
migration, because HIF-1/2 KD increased NF-B activity which further
enhanced IL-6 secretion. In vivo administration of neutralizing IL-6
antibody and inhibitors against MIF and NF-B decreased MDSCs
accumulation, accompanied by reduced micro-vessel density (MVD),
lymphatic vessel density (LVD), and xenograft tumor growth. The
supplementation of MDSCs increased MVD, LVD, and xenograft tumor growth.
In conclusion, hypoxic HNSCC cells may stimulate the accumulation of
MDSCs through secreting MIF and IL-6. This process is mediated by
interactions between NF-B and HIF-1/2. Strategies targeting hypoxic tumor
microenvironment may represent attractive approaches to HNSCC therapy.[G
Zhu and Y Tang contributed equally to this paper.]

