Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of Basonuclin 1 (BNC1): a novel tumor
suppressor gene commonly downregulated in human prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) harbors a myriad of aberrant genomic and epigenetic
alterations. Epigenetic inactivation of genes in PCa is largely based on
transcriptional silencing by aberrant CpG methylation of CpG rich
promoter regions. To better understand the role of aberrant methylation
changes and to identify biological pathways likely to be affected in PCa,
we used a genome-wide methylation array from Illumina (Infunium) to
identify novel methylated genes associated to PCa. We identified several
candidate genes including BNC1 as novel genes which are frequently
methylated and whose methylation closely related to inactivation of gene
expression in prostate cancer cell lines. Basonuclin1 is a zinc finger
transcription factor that interacts with a subset of promoters of genes
transcribed by both RNA polymerase-I and -II and has roles in maintaining
ribosomal biogenesis and the proliferative potential of immature
epithelial cells. We found that the expression of BNC1 negatively
correlated with the degree of methylation at the CpG island in prostate
tumor samples compared to benign prostate tissues. The forced-expression
of BNC1 significantly decreased prostate cancer cell proliferation
whereas the siRNA mediated BNC1 knock-down increased prostate cancer cell
proliferation. Overall, our data suggest a potential tumor suppressor
role for BNC1 that includes regulation of cell proliferation and
cell-cell interaction in prostate carcinogenesis.

