Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical trial simulation for the individualization of docetaxel
dosing.


Background and objective: To evaluate if docetaxel severe neutropenia can
be reduced by pharmacokinetic (PK) and absolute neutrophils counts (ANC)
guided dose individualization.Methods: The incidence of Grade 4
neutropenia following docetaxel 75 mg/m2 every 3 weeks (Arm A) or
docetaxel individualized dose (Arm B) was predicted on the basis of the
model proposed by Bruno [1] and Quartino [2]. Optimal sampling times for
PK and ANC assessments after an initial test dose were determined. The
individual model parameters estimated using the maximum a posteriori
estimation in NONMEM 7 were used to determine the individualized
docetaxel dose, defined as the maximum dose that yields a probability of
neutropenia Grade 4 lower than 30%.Results: An initial dose of 50 mg/m2
at least 2 weeks earlier, plasma concentrations collected at 1, 3 and 7 h
after the start of the infusion, and ANC measurements determine at 0, 7,
14, and 21 days were adequate to determine the individualized dose,
without any carry-over effect. The neutropenia Grade 4 incidence was 55%
and 45% in arms A and B, respectively. A sample size of 154 patients per
arm was need to have a 82% power of detecting the effect of dose
individualization. The average docetaxel individualized dose was 55
mg/m2.Conclusions: Docetaxel PKPD guided dose individualization is
potentially useful in controlling the PKPD variability and decreasing the
incidence of neutropenia Grade 4.1.Bruno R, Vivier N, Vergniol JC, De
Phillips SL, Montay G, Sheiner LB.A population pharmacokinetic model for
docetaxel (Taxotere): model building and validation. J Pharmacokinet
Biopharm. 1996; 24: 153-172.2.Quartino AL, Friberg LE, Karlsson MO. A
simultaneous analysis of the time-course of leukocytes and neutrophils
following docetaxel administration using a semi-mechanistic
myelosuppression model. Invest New Drugs. 2012; 30: 833-845.

