Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monoclonal antibodies to transmembrane proteins.


Transmembrane proteins, including multipass transmembrane proteins like
GPCRs and ion channels, are important targets for therapeutic monoclonal
antibody (mab) discovery. Therapeutic antibodies to this class of
proteins are generally targeted to extracellular domains displayed on the
surfaces of living cells. Challenges associated with developing
antibodies to this class of targets are small numbers of extracellular
amino acids, membrane-dependent protein conformation, difficulty in
expression at high levels, high amino acid sequence homology of human and
mouse proteins, and post-translational modifications. DNA immunization
strategies with full-length constructs and high throughput flow cytometry
screening of mab binding to transfected and control cells was used to
generate and identify large numbers of mabs to CXCR4 and ADORA2A (GPCRs)
and CD20 (a tetraspan membrane protein). Panels of mabs were generated
for all 3 targets with low numbers of hybridoma fusions. For each target
the mab gene sequences were shown to be unique and contain levels of
somatic hypermutation comparable to existing benchmark therapeutic
antibodies. Epitope mapping with mutant proteins identified diverse
patterns of reactivity including known and novel specificities.
Functional assays including apoptosis and receptor modulation (calcium
flux and cAMP modulation) further demonstrated that the technical
approach generated diverse panels of antibodies that exhibit functional
activity as good or better than existing benchmark therapeutic antibodies

