Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitory effects of new 1H-pyrrolo[3,2-c]pyridine derivative,
KIST101029, on AP-1 activity and neoplastic cell transformation induced
by insulin-like growth factor 1.


Diarylureas and diarylamides derivatives are reported to have antitumor
activity. Encouraged by the interesting antiproliferative activity of
diarylurea and diarylamide derivatives, we synthesized a new series of
diarylureas and diarylamides containing pyrrolo[3,2-c]pyridine scaffold.
In this study, we demonstrate that a new 1H-pyrrolo[3,2-c]pyridine
derivative, KIST101029, inhibits neoplastic cell transformation induced
by insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) in mouse epidermal JB6 Cl41
cells. The KIST101029 compound inhibited mitogen-activated protein
kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinases (MEK), c-jun
N-terminal kinases (JNK), and mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR)
signaling pathways induced by IGF-1 in JB6 Cl41 cells, resulting in the
inhibition of c-fos and c-jun transcriptional activity. In addition, the
KIST101029 inhibited the associated activator protein-1 (AP-1)
transactivation activity and cell transformation induced by IGF-1 in JB6
Cl41 cells. Consistent with these observations, in vivo chorioallantoic
membrane assay also showed that the KIST101029 inhibited IGF-1-induced
tumorigenicity of JB6 Cl41 cells. Taken together, these results indicate
that a new 1H-pyrrolo[3,2-c]pyridine derivative, KIST101029, might exert
chemopreventive effects through the inhibition of phosphorylation of MAPK
and mTOR signaling pathway.Citation Format: Hyo Jeong Yun, Hong Seok
Choi. Inhibitory effects of new 1H-pyrrolo[3,2-c]pyridine derivative,
KIST101029, on AP-1 activity and neoplastic cell transformation induced
by insulin-like growth factor 1. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2599. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2599

