Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new model improves lung cancer prediction in the preoperative
evaluation of patients with suspicious lung lesions.


Lung cancer predictive models, such as the Mayo model (Swensen, 1997),
that are used for screening and referral to surgery are based on only
traditional variables and are outdated. Clinical information such as
FEV1, FDG-PET and lesion growth increasingly are used in treatment
decisions. This information needs to be incorporated into our clinical
prediction models. We developed a lung cancer risk model utilizing the
more extensive clinical information available at the point of a decision
for surgery that predicts cancer better than existing models.We evaluated
a lung cancer prediction model using multivariable logistic regression in
a population being evaluated for lung surgery at a single academic
institution in an IRB approved study. The model included non-linear
relationships between continuous variables and lung cancer and used
multiple imputation to handle missing data. Internal validation was
conducted using the bootstrap method with 500 iterations. Area under the
curve (AUC) and Brier score were calculated for the training model and
internal bootstrap validation model. The characteristics of the new model
were compared to the Mayo model.492 individuals were recruited at who had
been evaluated for surgery with known or suspected lung cancer. Lung
cancer prevalence was 72%. Diagnosis was determined pathologically (92%)
or by greater than 18 months of followup among those who didn't undergo
surgery. Missing data occurred with FDG-PET scan (22%), growth on serial
CT scans (13%), predicted FEV1 (10%) and pre-operative disease symptoms
(7%). The remaining variables of interest had less than 5% missing data.
Age (OR 1.05; 95%CI: 1.03-1.08), pack years (OR 1.03; 95%CI: 1.00-1.05),
pre-operative lesion maximum diameter (OR 1.06; 95%CI: 1.04-1.08), lesion
growth (OR 2.92 95%CI: 1.10-5.65), previous cancer (OR 1.86 95%CI:
1.05-3.32) and FDG-PET avidity (OR 4.56 95%CI: 2.17-9.57) predicted lung
cancer (pLung cancer predictive models, such as the Mayo model (Swensen,
1997), that are used for screening and referral to surgery are based on
only traditional variables and are outdated. Clinical information such as
FEV1, FDG-PET and lesion growth increasingly are used in treatment
decisions. This information needs to be incorporated into our clinical
prediction models. We developed a lung cancer risk model utilizing the
more extensive clinical information available at the point of a decision
for surgery that predicts cancer better than existing models.We evaluated
a lung cancer prediction model using multivariable logistic regression in
a population being evaluated for lung surgery at a single academic
institution in an IRB approved study. The model included non-linear
relationships between continuous variables and lung cancer and used
multiple imputation to handle missing data. Internal validation was
conducted using the bootstrap method with 500 iterations. Area under the
curve (AUC) and Brier score were calculated for the training model and
internal bootstrap validation model. The characteristics of the new model
were compared to the Mayo model.492 individuals were recruited at who had
been evaluated for surgery with known or suspected lung cancer. Lung
cancer prevalence was 72%. Diagnosis was determined pathologically (92%)
or by greater than 18 months of followup among those who didn't undergo
surgery. Missing data occurred with FDG-PET scan (22%), growth on serial
CT scans (13%), predicted FEV1 (10%) and pre-operative disease symptoms
(7%). The remaining variables of interest had less than 5% missing data.
Age (OR 1.05; 95%CI: 1.03-1.08), pack years (OR 1.03; 95%CI: 1.00-1.05),
pre-operative lesion maximum diameter (OR 1.06; 95%CI: 1.04-1.08), lesion
growth (OR 2.92 95%CI: 1.10-5.65), previous cancer (OR 1.86 95%CI:
1.05-3.32) and FDG-PET avidity (OR 4.56 95%CI: 2.17-9.57) predicted lung
cancer (p<0.05). AUC for the initial model was 0.87 (95%CI: 0.84 - 0.91)
and Brier score was 0.12. Bootstrap sampling estimated AUC of 0.85 and
Brier score of 0.13 demonstrating internal validity of the model. The
Mayo model was evaluated for those with complete data (93%) and had an
AUC of 0.80 (95%CI: 0.75 - 0.85) which was significantly less (PLung
cancer predictive models, such as the Mayo model (Swensen, 1997), that
are used for screening and referral to surgery are based on only
traditional variables and are outdated. Clinical information such as
FEV1, FDG-PET and lesion growth increasingly are used in treatment
decisions. This information needs to be incorporated into our clinical
prediction models. We developed a lung cancer risk model utilizing the
more extensive clinical information available at the point of a decision
for surgery that predicts cancer better than existing models.We evaluated
a lung cancer prediction model using multivariable logistic regression in
a population being evaluated for lung surgery at a single academic
institution in an IRB approved study. The model included non-linear
relationships between continuous variables and lung cancer and used
multiple imputation to handle missing data. Internal validation was
conducted using the bootstrap method with 500 iterations. Area under the
curve (AUC) and Brier score were calculated for the training model and
internal bootstrap validation model. The characteristics of the new model
were compared to the Mayo model.492 individuals were recruited at who had
been evaluated for surgery with known or suspected lung cancer. Lung
cancer prevalence was 72%. Diagnosis was determined pathologically (92%)
or by greater than 18 months of followup among those who didn't undergo
surgery. Missing data occurred with FDG-PET scan (22%), growth on serial
CT scans (13%), predicted FEV1 (10%) and pre-operative disease symptoms
(7%). The remaining variables of interest had less than 5% missing data.
Age (OR 1.05; 95%CI: 1.03-1.08), pack years (OR 1.03; 95%CI: 1.00-1.05),
pre-operative lesion maximum diameter (OR 1.06; 95%CI: 1.04-1.08), lesion
growth (OR 2.92 95%CI: 1.10-5.65), previous cancer (OR 1.86 95%CI:
1.05-3.32) and FDG-PET avidity (OR 4.56 95%CI: 2.17-9.57) predicted lung
cancer (p<0.05). AUC for the initial model was 0.87 (95%CI: 0.84 - 0.91)
and Brier score was 0.12. Bootstrap sampling estimated AUC of 0.85 and
Brier score of 0.13 demonstrating internal validity of the model. The
Mayo model was evaluated for those with complete data (93%) and had an
AUC of 0.80 (95%CI: 0.75 - 0.85) which was significantly less (P<0.001)
than that observed for the new model. The Mayo model generally
underestimated risk and its Brier score was 0.17, showing poorer
calibration than the new model.Our internally validated model performed
better in distinguishing low risk from high risk patients than the Mayo
model in a surgical population being evaluated for lung cancer. The Mayo
model, with its more limited clinical information, underestimated risk.
Future work will validate this model in an external dataset and
prospectively evaluate the impact of the model on patient safety and
resource utilization.

