Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic MYD88 mutants require Toll-like receptors.


Oncogenic mutations affecting the signaling adapter MyD88 are present in
39% of activated B-cell-like (ABC) diffuse large B cell lymphomas
(DLBCLs), with the most recurrent MyD88 mutant, L265P, present in 29% of
cases. MYD88 mutations constitutively activate multiple signaling
cascades that promote the survival and proliferation of ABC DLBCLs,
including the NF-B, type-1 interferon, p38 and JAK/STAT pathways. It is
unknown whether MyD88 mutants act autonomously or require a receptor to
engage these downstream pathways. Here we show that the MyD88 L265P
oncoprotein binds constitutively to two members of the Toll-like receptor
family, TLR7 and TLR9, thereby amplifying signals that emanate from these
receptors. Knockdown of TLR7 or TLR9 potently suppressed NF-B activity in
ABC DLBCL cell lines and promoted apoptosis. Depletion of known proteins
essential for TLR7 and TLR9 trafficking and signaling, including UNC93B1,
PRAT4A or CD14, was lethal for ABC DLBCL lines. Similarly, pharmacologic
inhibition of TLR7 and TLR9 function in lysosomal compartments using the
cathepsin inhibitor zFA-fmk or hydroxychloroquine diminished MyD88
signaling and reduced survival of ABC DLBCL lines. TLR7 or TLR9 mutants
that are defective in ligand binding failed to promote the survival of
ABC DLBCL lines following knockdown of endogenous TLR7 or TLR9 expression
in ABC DLBCL lines. Moreover, an inhibitory oligonucleotide capable of
suppressing TLR9 responses in normal B cells blocked NF-B signaling and
survival of ABC DLBCL lines. These new insights into the oncogenic
mechanisms of MyD88 mutants provide a rationale for targeting of TLR7 and
TLR9 signaling for the therapy of ABC DLBCL.

