Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity is independently associated with mTORC1 pathway activation
in the progression of endometrial cancer.


Background: Obesity is a major risk factor for endometrial cancer (EC)
yet, with the exception of estrogen, the mechanisms underlying this
association remain unclear. The mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1
(mTORC1) cascade links energy balance to cell proliferation via the
PI3K/Akt pathway. Phosphorylation of Akt by hormone and growth factor
signaling activates mTORC1 and results in the downstream phosphorylation
of 4EBP1. Activated 4EBP1 positively regulates cap-dependent translation
and cell growth, and correlates with EC progression. Thus, we explored
the associations between obesity and pAkt and p4EBP1 expression, and cell
proliferation rates (Ki67) in benign and malignant endometrial
tissues.Methods: Medical records were reviewed to identify women who
underwent endometrial biopsy at UAB Hospital from 2008-2010. Women who
had recurrent EC or diagnoses of any other cancer were excluded. Data on
diagnosis, height, weight, race, age, menopausal status, number of
children, medications, and comorbid conditions were extracted from
medical records. Height and weight were used to calculate body mass index
(BMI: kg/m2). A gynecologic pathologist reviewed H&E slides for
concordance with the pathology report, and additional sections were
obtained from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks.
Immunohistochemistry was used to assess p4EBP1, pAkt, and Ki67. The
pathologist employed a semiquantitative scoring system based on percent
positive and staining intensity for p4EBP1 and pAkt, and scored on
percent positive for Ki67. Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used to compare
marker activity between women with and without EC in the overall and
BMI-stratified sample.Results: Immunohistochemical data were available
for 18 benign and 25 type 1 endometrioid EC cases, of which 29 were obese
(BMI > 29.9) and 14 were non-obese (BMI 29.9); the overall mean BMI was
35.5 (SD=11.6). Mean age was 56.7 (12.2). Women with vs. without EC had
significantly elevated median [interquartile range] expression of
cytoplasmic p4EBP1 (95 [30-180] vs. 0 [0-20], p=0.001), nuclear p4EBP1
(170 [95-195] vs. 70 [20-100], p=0.003), and Ki67 (50 [40-80] vs. 10
[5-20], pBackground: Obesity is a major risk factor for endometrial
cancer (EC) yet, with the exception of estrogen, the mechanisms
underlying this association remain unclear. The mammalian target of
rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) cascade links energy balance to cell
proliferation via the PI3K/Akt pathway. Phosphorylation of Akt by hormone
and growth factor signaling activates mTORC1 and results in the
downstream phosphorylation of 4EBP1. Activated 4EBP1 positively regulates
cap-dependent translation and cell growth, and correlates with EC
progression. Thus, we explored the associations between obesity and pAkt
and p4EBP1 expression, and cell proliferation rates (Ki67) in benign and
malignant endometrial tissues.Methods: Medical records were reviewed to
identify women who underwent endometrial biopsy at UAB Hospital from
2008-2010. Women who had recurrent EC or diagnoses of any other cancer
were excluded. Data on diagnosis, height, weight, race, age, menopausal
status, number of children, medications, and comorbid conditions were
extracted from medical records. Height and weight were used to calculate
body mass index (BMI: kg/m2). A gynecologic pathologist reviewed H&E
slides for concordance with the pathology report, and additional sections
were obtained from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks.
Immunohistochemistry was used to assess p4EBP1, pAkt, and Ki67. The
pathologist employed a semiquantitative scoring system based on percent
positive and staining intensity for p4EBP1 and pAkt, and scored on
percent positive for Ki67. Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used to compare
marker activity between women with and without EC in the overall and
BMI-stratified sample.Results: Immunohistochemical data were available
for 18 benign and 25 type 1 endometrioid EC cases, of which 29 were obese
(BMI > 29.9) and 14 were non-obese (BMI 29.9); the overall mean BMI was
35.5 (SD=11.6). Mean age was 56.7 (12.2). Women with vs. without EC had
significantly elevated median [interquartile range] expression of
cytoplasmic p4EBP1 (95 [30-180] vs. 0 [0-20], p=0.001), nuclear p4EBP1
(170 [95-195] vs. 70 [20-100], p=0.003), and Ki67 (50 [40-80] vs. 10
[5-20], p<0.0001). EC was not associated with pAKT activity. While obese
women with vs. without EC had significantly higher expression of
cytoplasmic p4EBP1 (100 [80-180] vs. 0 [0-10], p=0.002) and nuclear
p4EBP1 (180 [100-200] vs. 65 [20-100], p=0.002), neither cytoplasmic nor
nuclear p4EBP1 activity differed by EC status among non-obese women. No
associations between obesity and Ki67 or pAKT were detected.Conclusions:
Results from this exploratory study suggest that p4EBP1 expression is
elevated in obese women with EC. These preliminary findings suggest that
obesity may play a role in EC-related activation of the mTORC1 pathway
and 4EBP1, a biomarker for EC outcomes.

