Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting lipogenic signaling to repress cancer cell growth.


The significantly enhanced lipogenesis is a metabolic hallmark of rapidly
proliferating tumor cells. Although most normal cells acquire the bulk of
their fatty acids from circulation, tumor cells synthesize more than 90%
of required lipids de novo. The sterol regulatory element-binding protein
1 (SREBP1), encoded by SREBF1 gene, is a master regulator of lipogenic
gene expression. Although it is known that SREBP1 and its target genes
are overexpressed in a variety of cancers, the role of SREBP1 in
endometrial cancer is largely unknown. Herein, we screened a panel of
endometrial cancer specimen for their lipogenic gene expression by
quantitative PCR and showed a significant increase in mRNA abundance of
SREBF1, SREBF2, and FASN genes in cancer compared to normal endometrium.
Immunohistochemical staining confirmed SREBP1 protein overexpression and
further demonstrated increased nuclear distribution of SREBP1 in EC.
SREBP1 promotes cellular proliferation in cell culture and enhances tumor
growth in a xenograft model. Knockdown of endogenous SREPF1 gene impaired
the viability of cells cultured in medium supplemented with
lipid-depleted serum. BF175, a small molecule inhibitor designed to
target SREBP1, repressed SREBP1-dependent gene expression and cell growth
and induced EC cell death. We extended our observation to over 100 cancer
cell lines from 12 different cancer types and showed promising results of
BF175 in repressing tumor growth and inducing cell death. Together, this
study established a role of SREBP1 in tumor growth and validated BF175
for its therapeutic effectiveness in targeting SREBP1 and lipogenesis to
block cancer cell growth.

