Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gender-associated expression of tumor markers and a small gene set
in breast carcinoma.


In 2011, carcinoma of the breast in men accounted for 1% of all breast
cancers in the US, and approximately 450 male patients died from this
disease. Although breast carcinomas in both genders share certain
pathological features, notable differences have been observed regarding
incidence, prognosis and survival. Results from microarray analyses in
our studies and those of other reports were used to select 33 candidate
genes to investigate in male breast carcinomas. Tumor marker results for
99 male breast cancers and 18,000 female breast carcinomas were extracted
from our IRB-approved comprehensive database. Estrogen receptor (ER) and
progestin receptor (PR) levels were determined by either radio-ligand
binding (NEN/DuPont) or enzyme immunoassay (Abbott Labs). HER-2/neu
levels were determined by either ELISA (Oncogene Science) or EIA (Triton
Biosciences), and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) levels were
determined by an in-house radio-ligand competition assay. RNA was
isolated from tissue sections of de-identified frozen biopsies from 12
male patients and 233 female patients using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen)
and analyzed for quality and quantity (Agilent Bioanalyzer). cDNA for
qPCR measurements was prepared in Tris-HCl buffer with KCl, MgCl2, DTT
(Invitrogen), dNTPs (Invitrogen), RNasin (Promega) and Superscript RT III
(Invitrogen). qPCR reactions were performed using Power Sybr Green PCR
Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), forward/reverse primers and cDNA
obtained from the reverse transcription reaction. Relative gene
expression was calculated by the ddCt method using -actin as a reference
and Universal Human Reference RNA (Stratagene) as a calibrator. Among 99
male breast cancers, 82 were ER positive and 78 exhibited PR. Levels of
ER (P = 0.013) and PR (P In 2011, carcinoma of the breast in men
accounted for 1% of all breast cancers in the US, and approximately 450
male patients died from this disease. Although breast carcinomas in both
genders share certain pathological features, notable differences have
been observed regarding incidence, prognosis and survival. Results from
microarray analyses in our studies and those of other reports were used
to select 33 candidate genes to investigate in male breast carcinomas.
Tumor marker results for 99 male breast cancers and 18,000 female breast
carcinomas were extracted from our IRB-approved comprehensive database.
Estrogen receptor (ER) and progestin receptor (PR) levels were determined
by either radio-ligand binding (NEN/DuPont) or enzyme immunoassay (Abbott
Labs). HER-2/neu levels were determined by either ELISA (Oncogene
Science) or EIA (Triton Biosciences), and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) levels were determined by an in-house radio-ligand
competition assay. RNA was isolated from tissue sections of de-identified
frozen biopsies from 12 male patients and 233 female patients using the
RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen) and analyzed for quality and quantity (Agilent
Bioanalyzer). cDNA for qPCR measurements was prepared in Tris-HCl buffer
with KCl, MgCl2, DTT (Invitrogen), dNTPs (Invitrogen), RNasin (Promega)
and Superscript RT III (Invitrogen). qPCR reactions were performed using
Power Sybr Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), forward/reverse
primers and cDNA obtained from the reverse transcription reaction.
Relative gene expression was calculated by the ddCt method using -actin
as a reference and Universal Human Reference RNA (Stratagene) as a
calibrator. Among 99 male breast cancers, 82 were ER positive and 78
exhibited PR. Levels of ER (P = 0.013) and PR (P < 0.001) protein were
greater in male breast cancers compared to biopsies from female patients,
although no difference was observed in the expression of ESR1 and PGR
genes that encode these receptors. In contrast, no differences were
observed in either of the other conventional breast cancer biomarkers,
HER-2/neu or EGFR protein, nor in patient age at diagnosis. However,
there was a difference in the binding affinities (Kd value) of PR (P =
0.004) between the genders, which was not observed in ER between male and
female breast cancer tissues. Furthermore, expression levels of six genes
(NAT1, TBC1D9, IL6ST, RABEP1, PLK1 and LRBA) that we and others have
suggested serve as indicators of risk of recurrence, were elevated in
male breast cancer biopsies compared to those from female patients (P In
2011, carcinoma of the breast in men accounted for 1% of all breast
cancers in the US, and approximately 450 male patients died from this
disease. Although breast carcinomas in both genders share certain
pathological features, notable differences have been observed regarding
incidence, prognosis and survival. Results from microarray analyses in
our studies and those of other reports were used to select 33 candidate
genes to investigate in male breast carcinomas. Tumor marker results for
99 male breast cancers and 18,000 female breast carcinomas were extracted
from our IRB-approved comprehensive database. Estrogen receptor (ER) and
progestin receptor (PR) levels were determined by either radio-ligand
binding (NEN/DuPont) or enzyme immunoassay (Abbott Labs). HER-2/neu
levels were determined by either ELISA (Oncogene Science) or EIA (Triton
Biosciences), and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) levels were
determined by an in-house radio-ligand competition assay. RNA was
isolated from tissue sections of de-identified frozen biopsies from 12
male patients and 233 female patients using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen)
and analyzed for quality and quantity (Agilent Bioanalyzer). cDNA for
qPCR measurements was prepared in Tris-HCl buffer with KCl, MgCl2, DTT
(Invitrogen), dNTPs (Invitrogen), RNasin (Promega) and Superscript RT III
(Invitrogen). qPCR reactions were performed using Power Sybr Green PCR
Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), forward/reverse primers and cDNA
obtained from the reverse transcription reaction. Relative gene
expression was calculated by the ddCt method using -actin as a reference
and Universal Human Reference RNA (Stratagene) as a calibrator. Among 99
male breast cancers, 82 were ER positive and 78 exhibited PR. Levels of
ER (P = 0.013) and PR (P < 0.001) protein were greater in male breast
cancers compared to biopsies from female patients, although no difference
was observed in the expression of ESR1 and PGR genes that encode these
receptors. In contrast, no differences were observed in either of the
other conventional breast cancer biomarkers, HER-2/neu or EGFR protein,
nor in patient age at diagnosis. However, there was a difference in the
binding affinities (Kd value) of PR (P = 0.004) between the genders,
which was not observed in ER between male and female breast cancer
tissues. Furthermore, expression levels of six genes (NAT1, TBC1D9,
IL6ST, RABEP1, PLK1 and LRBA) that we and others have suggested serve as
indicators of risk of recurrence, were elevated in male breast cancer
biopsies compared to those from female patients (P < 0.05). Preliminary
results suggest that over-expression of the protein product of one or
more of the genes identified represents a molecular target that warrants
further exploration for development of a gender specific therapeutic and
companion diagnostic. Supported in part by a grant from Phi Beta Psi
Charity Trust and a CTSP Award from the Commonwealth of Kentucky.

