Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering TIMP-1 for selective MMP inhibition and future use as
a protein therapeutic.


Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a family of extracellular matrix
degrading proteins, have been found to be upregulated in many human
cancers and have been shown to contribute to cancer progression. There
have been many aborted attempts to target MMPs therapeutically using
small molecule inhibitors; the limited selectivity of most MMP inhibitors
may be a major factor contributing to their poor effectiveness. As an
alternative to small molecule MMP inhibitors, we are developing new
methodology to create selective protein inhibitors of MMPs, based on the
scaffold of the natural inhibitor TIMP-1, that may be used as protein
therapeutics. Because TIMP-1 has a very short plasma half-life, we have
developed methods for PEGylation that extend the plasma half-life to
about 24h while preserving MMP inhibitory activity, rendering it more
suitable for in vivo applications. We have also generated mutations in
TIMP-1 that confer selective binding toward particular MMPs. The targets
thus far pursued include MMP-9, MMP-3, and MMP-10, which represent
therapeutic targets of interest in breast cancer and lung cancer. In the
future, the methods developed here can be used to identify TIMP-1
variants selective toward additional MMPs, which may be of utility in the
research and treatment of many human cancers.

