Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MYCN in Neuroblastoma by BET Bromodomain Inhibition.


Bromodomain inhibition comprises a promising therapeutic strategy in
cancer, particularly for hematologic malignancies. To date, however,
genomic biomarkers to direct clinical translation have been lacking. We
conducted a cell-based screen of genetically-defined cancer cell lines
using a prototypical inhibitor of BET (bromodomain and extra-terminal
domain) bromodomains. Integration of genetic features with
chemosensitivity data revealed a robust correlation between MYCN
amplification and sensitivity to bromodomain inhibition. We characterized
the mechanistic and translational significance of this finding in
neuroblastoma, a childhood cancer with frequent amplification of MYCN.
Genome-wide expression analysis demonstrated downregulation of the MYCN
transcriptional program accompanied by suppression of MYCN transcription,
and a BET Bromodomain inhibitor was found to displace BRD4 from the MYCN
promoter region in neuroblastoma cell lines. Functionally,
bromodomain-mediated inhibition of MYCN impaired growth and induced
apoptosis in neuroblastoma. BRD4 knock-down phenocopied these effects,
establishing BET bromodomains as transcriptional regulators of MYCN. BET
inhibition conferred a significant survival advantage in three in vivo
neuroblastoma models, providing a compelling rationale for developing BET
bromodomain inhibitors in patients with neuroblastoma.

