Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of neurofibromin in stem cell differentiation.


Neurofibromin is a product of the tumor suppressor gene Nf1 which is
responsible for neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). When NF1 is mutated, Ras
is constitutively active, enabling affected cells to proliferate
extensively. This proliferation can result in tumor formation,
particularly in neural crest-derived cells in the peripheral nervous
system. NF1 patients can also exhibit cognitive deficits and develop
other symptoms unrelated to cancer. While it is common knowledge that
neurofibromin is involved in tumor formation, little is known about its
function in neural stem cell proliferation and differentiation in normal
and pathological settings. In addition to Ras-GAP function, recent
studies have demonstrated that neurofibromin has a novel role on neuronal
differentiation via its GAP-related domain. Thus we have speculated that
abnormal regulation of NF1-GAP in neuronal cells may be implicated in
NF1-related learning and memory disorders. The aim of the present work is
to evaluate the role of neurofibromin in neuronal cell differentiation
using stem cells (SCs) expressing different levels of neurofibromin. We
have developed a new system to differentiate mouse SCs via formation of
an embryoid body, a floating cell cluster which, by markers and function,
mimicks adult neural stem cells. We have shown that the mouse embryonic
ESs of all NF1 genotypes in our possession retain their pluripotency and
can be differentiated into neuronal cells. This systematic study of
complex molecular events in signaling pathways that occur in mouse
embryonic SCs that have one (Nf1+/-), both (Nf1+/+) or neither (Nf1-/-)
functional allele during in vitro differentiation is critical for a
better understanding of the biology of neurofibromatosis and
identification of potential targets.

