Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in
resveratrol-induced lung cancer cell death.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related deaths worldwide. In
2008, 158,592 deaths were attributed to this disease and 208,493 new
cases were diagnosed in the United States. Resveratrol (trans-3, 5,
4-trihydroxystilbene), a compound found largely in the skins of red
grapes, has been reported to be a promising anticancer agent in various
types of cancer. The primary goal of this study is to delineate the key
signaling pathways induced in response to resveratrol leading to lung
cancer cell death. In this study, we use non-tumorigenic human bronchial
epithelial (BEAS-2B) and human lung epithelial cancer (H460) cells to
model the response of lung tissue to resveratrol.We observed an increase
in superoxide, hydrogen peroxide and nitric oxide production in response
to resveratrol treatment in lung cancer cells (H460) as compared to
non-tumorigenic cells (BEAS-2B). Additionally, our data shows an increase
in BEAS-2B cell viability as compared to H460 cell viability in response
to resveratrol treatment. Overall, we observe an increase in cellular
oxidative and nitrosative stress in cancer cells in response to
resveratrol treatment which may be responsible for increased apoptosis
and decreased viability in these cells. Subsequently, we plan to identify
the specific reactive species as well as the major apoptotic pathway
induced in response to resveratrol treatment in both normal and cancer
cells. We expect resveratrol to have significant effect on lung cancer
cells via oxidative/nitrosative stress-mediated modulation of key
apoptotic biomarkers. This study will establish the protective role of
resveratrol in the pathogenesis of lung cancer and the information can be
potentially exploited to improve future lung cancer therapies.

