Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro radiosensitization of human cervical cancer HeLa cells
with iron oxide- titanium dioxide core-shell nanoparticles conjugated
with 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC).


Cervical cancer is resistant to current surgical, chemo- and radiotherapy
interventions and represents a virtually incurable tumor. In this study,
we explored titanium dioxide core-shell nanocomposites conjugated with
DOPAC (DOPAC-NCs) as radiosensitizers. Radioresistant human carcinoma
cervical HeLa cell cultures were treated with or without of increasing
concentrations of DOPAC-NCs (5-20 nM) prior to irradiation. One hour
later, cells were irradiated with a single dose of gamma radiation (5 Gy,
10 Gy, or 15 Gy). Seventy-two hours following radiation treatment, cell
proliferation/viability was assessed by MTS assay. Sham-irradiated cells
were served as a control. We have found that treatment of HeLa cells with
DOPAC-NCs affected the survival of irradiated cells in a dose-dependent
manner. Our data demonstrate that cell survival of cells irradiated with
15 Gy and pre-treated with the highest concentration of DOPAC-NCs was as
low as 23.7% compared to survival of cells that were not treated with
DOPAC-NCs prior to irradiation. In opposite, without radiation, treatment
with DOPAC-NCs had no effect on cell viability/proliferation.These
findings provide in vitro evidence that DOPAC-NCs may be developed and
employed as radiosensitizers in cervical cancer radiation therapy.

