Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tri-snRNP spliceosome complex is required for MYC-dependent
cancer growth.


Spliceosome coordinated RNA splicing is an essential cellular process
that can generate an immensely diverse repertoire of RNA. While cancer
cells have been known to hijack this process to generate splice forms
with oncogenic function, the specific role of spliceosome components in
this process is not well understood. In this study, we use an integrative
genomic approach to identify PRPF6, a member of the tri-snRNP spliceosome
complex as essential for colon cancer growth. We show that, in addition
to PRPF6, other tri-snRNP components are coordinately overexpressed or
amplified in cancer cells. Inhibition of the tri-snRNP complex, but not
other spliceosome components, abrogated cancer cell growth only in
dependent cancer cell lines in vitro and in vivo. High resolution
transcriptome analysis reveals that the tri-snRNP complex binds and
regulates the splicing of a relatively small number of genes, many of
which are transcriptional targets of the c-MYC oncogene. Intriguingly,
many components of the tri-snRNP complex are mutated in a genetic form of
Retinitis Pigmentosa. This genetic corollary suggests that the tri-snRNP
complex is necessary in specific cellular contexts that may depend on the
proper transcription and splicing of a tri-snRNP regulated set of
genes.Citation Format: Adam Adler, Zhaoshi Jiang, Mark McCleland,
Elizabeth Blackwood, Sharon Yee, Benjamin Haley, Jean-Philippe Stephan,
Sofia Hussain, Vivek Chopra, Ron Firestein. The tri-snRNP spliceosome
complex is required for MYC-dependent cancer growth. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3203.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3203

