Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of clinical ChIPSeq data and public databases
identified candidate long non-coding RNAs critically involved in
gastrointestinal cancer.


Recent work has suggested various important functions and molecular
mechanisms for long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and they are also thought
to play critical roles in cancer. However the importance of lncRNAs in
cancer biology is still unclear. In this study, we sought to
comprehensively identify novel lncRNAs that are critically involved in
tumorigenesis and progression in gastrointestinal cancer. To identify
candidate lncRNAs, we have applied the ChIP-Seq technology to clinical
endoscopic biopsy specimens and characterized global histone modification
patterns in more than 30 normal tissues and cancers. We developed an
original lncRNA database based on several public databases. We then
examined histone methylation status around putative lncRNAs and generated
a list of candidate lncRNAs that may be important for cancer. In order to
narrow the list down, we also utilized publicly available ChIPSeq data as
well as bisulfite sequencing and RNASeq data to perform integrated
analysis. Finally we identified 10 lncRNAs that are abnormally silenced
by DNA methylation in gastrointestinal cancer and also identified other
10 lncRNAs that are abnormally overexpressed and potentially acting as
oncogenic genes in cancer. We are examining gene expression level and
epigenetic status of these lncRNAs in cancer cell lines and specimens by
qRT-PCR, MSP, bisulfite pyro-sequencing and ChIP assay. Here we would
like to show the advantage of making the best use of publicly available
multi-omics data to promote long non-coding RNA research.

