Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pro-fluorescent membrane integrity dye for the real-time
assessment of cytotoxicity.


Cell-based assay models are now universally employed as a routine means
of establishing and ranking on- and off-target toxicities. It is well
appreciated, however, that individual cytotoxic phenotypes are shaped not
only by compound dosage, but by the length of compound-cell exposure. In
addition to compound-specific attributes, inherent cellular factors such
as biotransformation capacity, cell cycle susceptibility, and receptor
expression often dictate the kinetics of cytotoxicity. Unfortunately, the
majority of conventional cytotoxicity assays are performed at a terminal
endpoint (48-72h) which at worst can underestimate cytotoxicity due to
biomarker degradation, or at best, fail to reveal important features of
the cytotoxic event which may be important for establishing
mechanism-of-action. We have developed a pro-fluorescent, cell-impermeant
probe which can be applied to cells at the time of dosing to report
changes in membrane integrity as they occur in real-time. The dye enters
cells with impaired membrane integrity, greatly enhancing fluorescence
which is proportional to non-viable cell number. The dye can be used in
traditional plate based formats using standard fluorometry or with image
based readers (Essen Bioscience Incucyte) to establish the dose-dependent
kinetics of cytotoxicity. Here we describe the dye's utility using
mechanistically distinct cytotoxins with both cancer cell lines
(on-target) and terminally differentiated cells (off-target) and
correlate this dead cell fluorescence activity to other cytotoxicity
biomarkers by same-well multiplexed methods.

