Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Double mutation of KRAS and PIK3CA affects the efficacy of
NVP-BEZ235, a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, in regulating the PI3K/mTOR
pathway in colorectal cancer.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) with mutational activation of KRAS is observed
frequently. In addition, PIK3CA mutations commonly coexist with KRAS
mutations and lead to additive activation of the PI3K/mTOR signaling
pathway. Here, we investigated how CRC cells that harbor KRAS and PIK3CA
mutations affect sensitivity to inhibition of PI3K/mTOR with NVP-BEZ235
(BEZ235). We selected CRC patient samples and assessed their mutational
status.CRC patients with KRAS or PIK3CA mutations show activation of Akt
and mTOR, particularly when KRAS and PIK3CA mutations coexist.
Suppression of PI3K/mTOR by BEZ235 results in a growth inhibitory effect
and enhanced apoptosis via Bim activation in KRAS mutant cells.
Mutational activation of KRAS when accompanied by a PIK3CA mutation
converges at PI3K/mTOR pathway activation, resulting in resistance to
BEZ235. Bim knockdown blocked the apoptotic response to BEZ235 in KRAS
mutant cells, suggesting that PI3K inhibition leads to Bim accumulation.
Moreover, BEZ235 treatment resulted in induction of FOXO3a activity and
its induced transcription of Bim activation, which sensitized cells to
cytotoxic agents leading to apoptosis in double mutant cells in vitro and
in vivo. Taken together, our data suggest that targeting PI3K/mTOR
sensitizes cells to apoptosis, implying that activation of PI3K/mTOR
signaling via KRAS or PIK3CA mutation is an important pathway in CRC cell
growth. Based on these results, coexistent KRAS and PIK3CA mutations
confer resistance to BEZ235 via suppression of Bim-induced apoptosis,
suggesting that combined treatment with conventional chemoagents is a
potential strategy in the clinic.

