Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multimodality interrogation of systemic RNA
interference-defective-1 transmembrane family member 1 (SIDT1) identifies
axon guidance protein interactions.


IntroductionSIDT1 is an 11-transmembrane domain channel protein that
conveys small double stranded RNA (dsRNA) molecules between cells. SIDT1
is highly expressed in human pancreatic stellate cells and disruption of
SIDT1 function attenuates synthesis of components of the desmoplastic
response that is typical of pancreatic cancer. We sought to identify the
intra- and extracellular protein interaction partners of SIDT1 using an
unbiased multimodality screening approach.MethodsSIDT1 was used as bait
in a membrane-directed split ubiquitin yeast 2-hybrid (Y2H) screen.
Candidate interacting partners identified in multiple biological
replicates using a stringent selection approach were validated using
immunoprecipiation and the functional effects of disrupting candidate
interacting partner protein expression were determined using lentiviral
short hairpin RNA-based RNA interference. Gene ontology (GO) term
analysis was performed. A high-throughput flow cytometry-based assay was
used to quantify the effects of depleting SIDT1 interacting partners on
fluorescent dsRNA transfer mediated by SIDT1.Potential SIDT1 ectodomain
interactors were probed using cell surface phage display. SIDT1-tGFP
transfected HEK293 cells were probed, with tGFP transfectants serving as
a counter-selection control population. Phage display hits were
deconvoluted using BLASTP. Fluorescently labeled peptides were
synthesized and interactions assessed by epifluorescence microscopy using
human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells. Enzymatic quantification of
biotinylated synthetic peptide colocalisation was performed.
Immunohistochemical and clincopathological correlation using resected
pancreatic adenocarcinoma specimens was undertaken.ResultsThe Y2H screen
identified a shortlist of consistent SIDT1 interacting partners in which
axon guidance proteins were significantly overrepresented, based on
GO-term analysis. Disruption of Reticulon 4 expression resulted in
impairment of SIDT1 intercellular small dsRNA transfer function.Phage
display identified a SIDT1-binding 12-mer with sequence homology to human
Growth arrest-specific 6 (GAS6). 12-mer colocalisation with full length
SIDT1 and the SIDT1 ectodomain was confirmed using controlled
epifluorescence microscopy. Levels of SIDT1 protein expression correlate
with the presence of perineural invasion in human resection specimens
(PIntroductionSIDT1 is an 11-transmembrane domain channel protein that
conveys small double stranded RNA (dsRNA) molecules between cells. SIDT1
is highly expressed in human pancreatic stellate cells and disruption of
SIDT1 function attenuates synthesis of components of the desmoplastic
response that is typical of pancreatic cancer. We sought to identify the
intra- and extracellular protein interaction partners of SIDT1 using an
unbiased multimodality screening approach.MethodsSIDT1 was used as bait
in a membrane-directed split ubiquitin yeast 2-hybrid (Y2H) screen.
Candidate interacting partners identified in multiple biological
replicates using a stringent selection approach were validated using
immunoprecipiation and the functional effects of disrupting candidate
interacting partner protein expression were determined using lentiviral
short hairpin RNA-based RNA interference. Gene ontology (GO) term
analysis was performed. A high-throughput flow cytometry-based assay was
used to quantify the effects of depleting SIDT1 interacting partners on
fluorescent dsRNA transfer mediated by SIDT1.Potential SIDT1 ectodomain
interactors were probed using cell surface phage display. SIDT1-tGFP
transfected HEK293 cells were probed, with tGFP transfectants serving as
a counter-selection control population. Phage display hits were
deconvoluted using BLASTP. Fluorescently labeled peptides were
synthesized and interactions assessed by epifluorescence microscopy using
human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells. Enzymatic quantification of
biotinylated synthetic peptide colocalisation was performed.
Immunohistochemical and clincopathological correlation using resected
pancreatic adenocarcinoma specimens was undertaken.ResultsThe Y2H screen
identified a shortlist of consistent SIDT1 interacting partners in which
axon guidance proteins were significantly overrepresented, based on
GO-term analysis. Disruption of Reticulon 4 expression resulted in
impairment of SIDT1 intercellular small dsRNA transfer function.Phage
display identified a SIDT1-binding 12-mer with sequence homology to human
Growth arrest-specific 6 (GAS6). 12-mer colocalisation with full length
SIDT1 and the SIDT1 ectodomain was confirmed using controlled
epifluorescence microscopy. Levels of SIDT1 protein expression correlate
with the presence of perineural invasion in human resection specimens
(P<0.001).DiscussionUsing a multimodality screening approach we have
identified novel SIDT1 binding partners. The role of SIDT1 and its
interacting partners in heterotypic cellular interactions, e.g. with
peritumoral neurons, warrants further investigation.

