Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic alterations in premalignant nasopharyngeal epithelium
support stable EBV infection.


EBV infection is closely associated with nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Early
events involved in the establishment of EBV infection in premalignant
nasopharyngeal epithelium are largely undefined. We have established
multiple immortalized nasopharygeal epithelial cells as premalignant cell
models for EBV infection. We observed that nasopharyngeal epithelial
cells immortalized by combined actions of telomerase and cyclin D1 or
knocking down p16 could support stable EBV infection. Furthermore, we
observed that EBV infection commonly induces growth inhibition and
senescence in infected nasopharyngeal epithelial cells. Overexpression of
cyclin D1 suppresses the growth inhibition and support EBV infection.
Furthermore cyclin D1 expression confers resistance to differentiation
induction in immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial cells. EBV infection
is closely associated with undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma. We
observed that cyclin D1 overexpression is common in premalignant
nasopharyngeal epithelium and co-exist with EBV infection shown by EBER
staining. All these showed that cyclin D1 overexpression or suppression
of the p16 activation support EBV infection establishment in premalignant
nasopharyngeal epithelium which has been postulated to be an important
and early event in NPC development.Citation Format: George Sai-Wah Tsao,
Anna CM Tsang, Elaine YL Yip, W Deng, Annie LM Cheung, KW Lo. Genetic
alterations in premalignant nasopharyngeal epithelium support stable EBV
infection. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4784.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4784

