Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interactions between smoking and DNA repair in breast cancer risk.


Breast cancer risk has been associated with tobacco smoking or deficient
DNA repair. However, limited previous studies have focused on genetic
susceptibility-exposure interactions. Using T-lymphocytes collected in a
breast cancer case-control study (357 controls and 360 cases), this study
tested whether the association between smoking and breast cancer risk is
modified by individual's nucleotide excision repair capacity (NERC) using
a newly developed plasmid-based electroporation assay. There was a
significant age-dependent decline of NERC in controls (p=0.01) but not in
breast cancer cases (p=0.59). Controls with current smoking status had a
significantly higher NERC (mean+SD, 5.72+3.30, n=38) than never smokers
(4.61+2.76, n=206). There was a significant association between lower
NERC and elevated breast cancer risk only among current smokers (odds
ratio [OR]=4.44; 95% confidence interval [CI]=1.03-19.13) after
adjustment for age, race, and family history. In contrast, there was a
significant association between lower NERC and reduced breast cancer risk
in never smokers (OR=0.39; 95%CI=0.20-0.76). In controls, smoking-related
elevation of NERC may be related to adaptive response. In breast cancer
cases, elevated cancer risk may be associated with: (1) deficient NER
response to smoking-related DNA damages in smokers and (2) environmental
exposures (e.g. ionizing radiation) in non-smokers, which induced NER but
repaired by other repair pathways (e.g. base excision and double-strand
repair). Our findings highlight the complex interplay between
individual's NER capacity and smoking in breast cancer risk.

