Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment related breast cancer disease specific survival
improvement over time limited to estrogenreceptor negative patients:
1990-2004.


Background. It is unclear if improvement in breast cancer (BC) disease
specific survival (DSS) over the past two decades is related to increased
mammography detection or more effective treatments.Methods. From our
institutional breast cancer registry database we identified BC stage II
and III patients age 50-59 given adjuvant chemotherapy for diagnosis
years 1990-2004. Information in the database is chart abstracted and
variables include method of detection, diagnosis and treatment with
patients followed over time for subsequent recurrence and vital status.
We compared disease specific survival (DSS) by 5 year intervals and
stratified by detection method and estrogen receptor status (ER). Method
of detection was categorized as patient (PtD) or mammography (MamD)
detected as recorded in the chart by the physician at time of diagnosis
(n=483). Physician detected (n=50) and cases untreated with chemotherapy
(n=52) were excluded. Cox regression was used to test for significant
predictive variables and the Kaplan Meier method for DSS stratified
analysis.Results. Of the 483 cases 42% were MamD and 58% were PtD with
82% stage II and 18% stage III cancer. Average length of follow up was
10.46 years, range 8.11-17.21 years. Cox regression analysis results for
comparative change in DSS by 5 year intervals (1990-94, 1995-99, 2000-04)
were significant for ER status (p90% 5 year DSS rates over all three time
intervals with no significant changes by diagnosis year.Conclusions. In
our cohort, better disease specific survival over time was related to
both detection method and estrogen receptor status. Specific improvement
over time was confined to patient detected estrogen receptor negative
disease cases with no change in mammography detected cases DSS by either
positive or negative estrogen receptor status. Survival improvement is
coincident with the introduction of taxol for adjuvant chemotherapy
treatment in 1994.

