Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASPP2 enhances DRAM induced autophagy to promote apoptosis in
HepG2 cells.


Background and Aims: ASPP2 (Apoptosis Stimulating Protein 2 of p53) binds
to p53 and enhances p53 pro-apoptotic function. Autophagy may play a role
in this process although the mechanisms remain to be clarified. Our aims
were to explore the mechanisms by which the ASPP2-p53 pathway could
promote apoptosis and autophagy in hepatocellular carcinoma cells in
order to identify novel therapeutic targets in this disease.Methods:
HepG2 cells were transfected with GFP-LC3 plasmid and then damaged with
methyl methanesulfonate (MMS). Apoptosis was detected by cleavage of CK18
and PARP by immunocytochemical staining and Western blot. Real-time PCR
and immunoblot were used to analyze changes in DRAM and LC3I/II
expression. DRAM siRNA was used to inhibit DRAM function.Results: After
MMS exposure for 24 hours, we identified more M30 positive cells and p85
formation in HepG2 cells compared to control cells. When HepG2 cells were
transfected with a GFP-LC3 expression plasmid and then treated by MMS, we
found that MMS treatment induced LC3 staining punctate structures, a
marker for autophagy. Moreover, enforced expression of ASPP2 using
adenovirus infection led to more autophagy and apoptosis in HepG2 after
MMS treatment, under conditions where ASPP2 expressing adenovirus
infection alone could not induce apoptosis and autophagy. Using real time
PCR, we identified that MMS treatment could induce DRAM expression and
that ASPP2 overexpression prior to MMS could further enhance DRAM
expression compared to MMS alone. Immunoblot assay demonstrated that
ASPP2 expression increased MMS-induced DRAM expression, LC3 II and p85
formation. Importantly, a DRAM specific siRNA blocked autophagy and
apoptosis in HepG2 cells under these conditions when compared to a
control siRNA.Conclusions: Our results suggest that ASPP2 can enhance MMS
induced apoptosis via p53-dependent DRAM-mediated autophagy. Since DRAM
is an important component of p53-mediated autophagy, our results
demonstrate a new role for ASPP2 in this pathway. These findings open new
avenues for investigation into the mechanisms of autophagy-based therapy
in hepatocellular cancer (Supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (30870853,30770742 and 30910103915), Beijing
Municipal Natural Science Foundation (7092045 and 7101005) and
Basic-Clinical Collaborative Research Fund, CCMU (12JL-L05)).

