Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: cIAP2 as a therapeutic target in malignancies.


[Introduction] Inhibition of the apoptotic pathway is one of the factors
that may be responsible for carcinogenesis and drug resistance, and the
inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) family is thought to prevent
apoptosis through inhibition of caspases and pro-caspases and may affect
anti-cancer drug sensitivity. [Purposes] The purpose of this study is to
clarify the roles of cellular inhibitor of apoptosis 2 (cIAP2) gene,
which is a member of IAP family, on apoptosis and 5-FU sensitivity in
cancer cells. [Methods and Results] The expression profiles of human
colon cancer cell line DLD-1, its 5-FU-resistant subclone DLD-1/FU and
further 21 types of colon cancer cell lines were compared. 50% inhibitory
concentration (IC50) of 5-FU in DLD-1/FU was over 100 times higher than
that in DLD-1. With the analysis of expression profiles among 23 genes,
we found that cIAP2 gene was up-regulated in DLD-1/FU compared with DLD-1
and other cell lines with low IC50. Next, the role of the cIAP2 gene was
investigated for 5-FU resistance using RNA interference. The
down-regulation of cIAP2 efficiently enhanced 5-FU sensitivity, the
activation of caspase 3/7 and apoptosis under exposure to 5-FU. The
immunohistochemistry of cIAP2 in cancer and corresponding normal tissues
from colorectal cancer patients in stage III revealed that cIAP2 was more
frequently expressed in cancer tissues than in normal tissues, and
cIAP2-positive patients had a trend toward early recurrence after
5-FU-based chemotherapy. [Conclusion] IAPs are reported to be abnormally
regulated and expressed in the majority of human malignancies at elevated
levels. Among them, cIAP2 should be a possible therapeutic target in
malignancies, especially in colorectal cancer.

