Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of miR-301-3P in the regulation of Rho GTPases mediated
EMT signaling in castration resistant prostate cancer.


Development of cutting edge molecular techniques greatly enhanced the
knowledge of the biology of the prostate cancer (CaP). These results
helped us for early detection of the disease and also developing targeted
therapies of CaP. It is a fact that other than Androgen Receptor (AR),
there is no specific gene candidate that could be either linked for
initiation, progression or treatment of CaP. Emerging evidences suggest
that a small set of microRNAs (miRNA) linked to pathogenesis of CaP
especially leading to castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). The
current conventional therapies have not proven to be successful for CRPC
that compelled us to identify new targets or potent small molecules to
efficiently suppress the growth of advance stages of CaP. In genome wide
miRNA profiling, we have found that hsa-miR-301a-3p is expressed at stage
specific manner in prostate tumor as compared to controls. These results
encouraged us to dissect the role of miRNA-301a in preclinical models of
CaP. miR-301-3P was highly expressed (10-14 folds) in CaP cell lines
(LNCaP, C4-2B, DU-145 and PC-3) when compared to normal prostate
epithelial cell lines (PZHPV-7 and PrEC). Silencing specifically
miR-301a-3p resulted in inhibition of proliferation, colony forming
abilities, invasion, migration and cell adhesion of CaP cells. At
molecular levels we found, inhibition of miR-301a-3p upregulated its
direct target of tumor suppressor TXNIP/VDUP1 expression. In addition,
silencing miR-301a-3p negatively activated Rho GTPases family proteins;
specifically Rho1 and Rac-1 ubiquitous signaling, resulted in
transcriptional down-regulation of Epithelial-Mesenchymal-Transition
(EMT) markers like slug and -catenin. Our immunofluorescence studies
suggest E-cadherin is highly expressed in the membranes and at the
cellular junctions when miR-301a-3p were inhibited in CRPC cells. On the
contrary, over expression of miR-301-3P, increased proliferation of CaP
cells and activated Rho GTPase signaling (Rho A/B/C, Rac1 and CDC42) and
mesenchymal markers like slug, b-catenin resulted in invasion and
migration of CaP cells. Currently, we are interrupting Rho signaling
pathways, especially upstream events of RhoA effectors Rho-associated
kinases (ROCK) in miR301 over expressed CaP cells and dissecting the
downstream events and correlate with phenotypic changes of CaP cells. Our
in vivo assays may reveal whether silencing miR-301-3p could be a
potential target for the treatment of CRPC cells.Citation Format: Vittal
Kurisetty, Trinath P. Das, Rama S. Reddy, Jessica Stiles, Brad Bryan,
Chendil Damodaran. The role of miR-301-3P in the regulation of Rho
GTPases mediated EMT signaling in castration resistant prostate cancer.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5329.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5329

