Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tristetraprolin controls the stability of uPA/uPAR mRNA through
binding to the 3UTR of uPA/uPAR mRNA in U87MG glioma cells.


Malignant gliomas are one of the most common primary intrinsic brain
tumors. In particular, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), WHO grade IV, is
highly invasive. Because of its high invasiveness, patients with
unresectable GBM have a poor prognosis and have median survival of only a
few months. The invasiveness of glioma depends on proteolysis of the
extracellular matrix, a complex event occurring through the surrounding
tissue during tumor cell invasion. Urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA)
and its specific receptor (uPAR) play a major role in the infiltrative
growth of glioblastoma. Tristetraprolin (TTP or ZFP36) is a tandem CCCH
zinc-finger RNA-binding protein that regulates the stability of certain
AU-rich element (ARE) mRNAs. Recent work reports that TTP is deficient in
many cancer cells when compared with normal cell types. Moreover, the
lack of TTP is associated with a variety of cancer-related processes. In
the present study, we investigated the post-transcriptional regulation of
uPA/uPAR expression by the tristetraprolin (TTP) in U87MG human glioma
cells. Here, we showed that the overexpression of TTP decreased the
stability of uPA/uPAR mRNA and the expression level of uPA/uPAR protein.
uPA/uPAR mRNA include AU-rich elements (AREs) within the 3-untranslated
region, and TTP destabilized a luciferase mRNA containing uPA/uPAR AREs.
In addition, TTP inhibits cell invasion in U87MG glioma cells. Present
study demonstrates that TTP suppress the progression of glioma through
the regulation of uPA/uPAR mRNA stability.

