Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obatoclax (GX15-070) potently induces apoptosis in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines and enhances the activity of
EGFR inhibitors.


HNSCC represents 90% of head and neck tumors. More than half of HNSCC
patients are initially treated with curative intent, but will relapse
over the course of their disease and have poor prognosis with a median
survival of 6-9 months. Novel therapeutic approaches are in desperate
need for this patient population. The antiapoptotic BCL-2 family proteins
like BCL-2, BCL-XL, and MCL-1 are involved in oncogenesis and
chemoresistance and are overexpressed in HNSCC. Obatoclax is a
small-molecule antagonist of the BH3-binding groove of the prosurvival
(or anti-apoptotic) members of the BCL-2 family of proteins. It is the
only compound among the current BCL-2 inhibitors in clinical trials that
is capable of inhibiting MCL-1, in addition to BCL-2 and BCL-XL. We
determined the activity of obatoclax in 4 HNSCC cell lines (UMSCC-1,
Cal-33, 1483, UMSCC-22A). Cell viability was determined by MTT assay, and
apoptosis by Annexin-V binding, FACS analysis and immunoblotting. All
four HNSCC cell lines were highly sensitive to single agent obatoclax
with IC50s ranging from 50-300 nM. Obatoclax induced apoptosis in all
four HNSCC cell lines as evidenced by increased Annexin-V binding at 48
hours from 10% in vehicle treated cells to 30-60% and through cleavage of
caspase 3 and PARP. Interestingly, obatoclax enhanced the activity of the
two small tyrosine kinase inhibitors of EGFR (erlotinib and gefitinib).
We are the first to show the activity of obatoclax in HNSCC alone and in
combination with EGFR inhibitors. In vivo study of obatoclax using human
HNSCC xenograft tumors is currently underway. This preclinical study
suggests that obatoclax might have a therapeutic role in HNSCC either
alone or in combination with EGFR inhibitors.

