Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of tetraspanins CD151 and CD9 by micro-RNA in breast
and prostate cancers.


Rationale: Tetraspanins are involved in modulating various cellular
functions related to cancer progression, such as cell-cell adhesion,
migration and signalling. The tetraspanin CD151 (pro-metastatic) is
typically over-expressed in cancers, whereas CD9 (metastasis suppressor)
is generally under-expressed in cancers. Increased CD151 protein
expression in breast and prostate cancers significantly correlates with
poor patient outcomes, whereas high CD9 protein expression in these
cancers is associated with good patient prognosis. However, progress in
developing CD151 and CD9 as prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets
is hampered by a lack of understanding of the mechanisms controlling
altered CD151 and CD9 protein expression in cancers.Objective: miRNAs,
which are small non-coding RNAs involved in post-transcriptional control,
are known to be dysregulated in breast and prostate cancers.
Bioinformatics analysis has identified around 250 miRNA, which are
predicted to bind CD151 or CD9, thus we aim to investigate if miRNAs are
able to regulate the expression of CD151 and CD9 in vitro using a range
of breast and prostate cancer cell lines.Methods and Results: Using a
dual luciferase reporter assay the level of protein expression regulation
via CD151 or CD9 3UTR, where miRNA generally bind their targets, was
determined in 13 breast and prostate cell lines. This analysis showed
that the amount of targeting of CD151 and CD9 varied across these cell
lines indicating a role for miRNA. Analysis of miRNA expression in normal
and cancerous cell lines using miRNA expression arrays and qPCR has
confirmed that some miRNAs which are predicted to target CD9 such as
miR-25 are up-regulated in many prostate and breast cancer cell lines
compared to non-tumourigenic cells. Conversely, miRNA were identified
with different expression levels that are predicted to target CD151. To
determine whether these miRNAs directly regulate CD151 or CD9, a dual
luciferase 3UTR reporter assay encompassing specific miRNA mimics is
being used.Conclusion: Altered miRNA expression is one way in which
prostate and breast cancer cells might alter tetraspanin protein
expression to allow cancer progression and metastasis.Citation Format:
Danielle R. Bond, Murray Cairns, Leonie K. Ashman, Judith Weidenhofer.
Regulation of tetraspanins CD151 and CD9 by micro-RNA in breast and
prostate cancers. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting
of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5283. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5283

