Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of G-quadruplex structures in the human RET promoter region
in the regulation of this gene.


The medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a tumor type characterized by
germline point mutations of the RET (REarranged during Transfection)
proto-oncogene. Since these mutations are known to induce oncogenic
activation of RET tyrosine kinase, various therapeutic strategies
interfering with the oncogenic function of RET protein have been
developed and tested for treating RET-associated cancers in several
preclinical and clinical studies. Our previous study has demonstrated
that the G-rich strand in the polypurine/polypyrimidine (pPu/pPy) region
of the RET proximal promoter is capable of forming intramolecular
G-quadruplex structures in vitro in the presence of K+, which can be
further stabilized by a G-quadruplex interactive agents. Thus, the
detailed mechanism by which G-quadruplex structures regulate RET
transcription has been studied using mutation analysis and promoter
reporter assays together with a detailed analysis of transcription factor
binding to the RET promoter in vivo. To this end, we have explored the
Flp-In cell system using homologous recombination, which allows
integration of a single copy of a wild type or G-quadruplex-mutant RET
promoterluciferase construct into a specific genomic recombination locus
(FRT site) in a host Flp-In the human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cell
line. Thus, differences in reporter expression levels from isolated
isogenic cell clones can be ascribed more confidently to
promoter-specific effects, rather than enhancer/silencer artifacts due to
variations in integration sites. Using these isogenic cell lines, we are
able to provide strong evidence for G-quadruplex-dependent
transcriptional repression of the RET gene in vivo.

