Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: From sequencing data to mutation spectra: a high throughput
analysis pipeline.


Advances in massively parallel sequencing technology have revolutionized
the way we characterise cancer genomes and provided significant new
insights to our understanding of the mechanisms that underpin
oncogenesis. A diverse range of mutations types including single
base-pair changes, insertions, deletions, copy number alterations and
larger structural variations are common in cancer genomes.To rapidly and
accurately screen next generation sequencing data for these somatic
mutations in cancer, the Cancer Genome Project (CGP) has developed a high
throughput analysis pipeline utilising a suite of analysis software
developed by the group. Built around a compute farm of 2,000 nodes and
using a Lustre filesystem, raw data files (BAM etc.), analysis results
files and version information are efficiently stored and tracked in our
archive/storage system, FileTrk. Lane data is aligned using
Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) and web interfaces have been developed to
allow scientific staff to rapidly QC aligned lanes. Once QC'd and desired
coverage is reached, lanes are merged into a single sample BAM file and
the sample is then ready for analysis.In house algorithms are used to
detect point mutations (CaVEMan), structural variation breakpoints
(Brass) and copy number changes (ASCAT and PICNIC), whilst Pindel is used
to detect small insertions/deletions. Post-processing filters then remove
false positives and the results are uploaded into a database. Mutations
are annotated to the protein and RNA levels using standard nomenclature
(Vagrent, in-house software). Downstream analysis software has been
developed (CANDI, in-house software) which produces a range of plots to
aid visualisation of mutation context and mutation spectra patterns in
related cancer samples.Current IT development is focussed on converting
the pipeline to produce and store VCF output, incorporate further
downstream analysis software and automate data export to COSMIC and the
ICGC data portal.

