Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epstein-Barr Virus-induced gene 3 as a novel serum and tissue
biomarker and a therapeutic target for lung cancer.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the world. The
number of patients responding well to current standard therapies is still
small, and no tumor marker has been entirely useful for screening
curative stage cancers. To identify molecules which could be useful for
the development of diagnostic biomarkers and novel drugs, we have
established an effective screening strategy as follows; i) To identify
up-regulated genes in 120 lung cancers by genome-wide screening using the
cDNA microarray representing 27,648 genes and pure populations of tumor
cells taken from cancer tissues by laser microdissection, ii) To verify
the candidate genes for their very low level of expression in normal
tissues by northern-blot analyses, iii) To validate the
clinicopathological significance of its over-expression with tissue
microarray containing hundreds of archived lung-cancers, iv) To verify
whether the target gene is essential for the growth of cancer cells by
RNAi and cell growth assays, v) To evaluate it for usefulness as a serum
diagnostic biomarker by ELISA, if they are tumor-specific transmembrane
or secretory proteins. As a result of this process, we identified 35
druggable oncoproteins. We further identified the Epstein-Barr
virus-induced gene 3 (EBI3), which encodes a secretory glycoprotein.
Immunohistochemical staining of EBI3 using tissue microarrays revealed
that strong EBI3 expression was associated with a poor prognosis (P =
0.0014), and multivariate analysis confirmed it to be an independent
prognostic factor (P = 0.0439; N=414). In addition, we established an
ELISA to measure serum EBI3 and found that the proportion of serum
EBI3-positive cases was 47.1% (73 of 155) for lung adenocarcinoma, 54.5%
(24 of 44) for lung squamous cell carcinoma, and 41.3% (31 of 75) for
small cell lung cancer, while 3 (2.4%) of 126 healthy volunteers were
falsely diagnosed. The sensitivity of serum EBI3 for cancer detection was
44.4% for stage I-II lung adenocarcinoma, 50.0% for stage I-II lung
squamous cell carcinoma, and 35.2% for small cell lung cancer with
limited disease (LD) stage, thereby proving it was superior to
conventional tumor markers of CEA and CYFRA21-1 in terms of both
sensitivity and specificity. Validation analysis using another
independent set of serum samples (132 lung cancers and 41 healthy
volunteers) confirmed significant elevation of EBI3 in the sera of lung
cancer patients. Furthermore, reduction in EBI3 expression by siRNA
suppressed cancer cell proliferation, while induction of EBI3 conferred
growth-promoting activity. EBI3 should be a biomarker for early cancer
detection and for the prediction of prognosis, as well as being a
suitable therapeutic target.Citation Format: Yataro Daigo, Atsushi
Takano, Yusuke Nakamura. Epstein-Barr Virus-induced gene 3 as a novel
serum and tissue biomarker and a therapeutic target for lung cancer.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2370.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2370

