Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitors of Skp2 E3ligase stabilize nuclear p27kip1 for regain
of growth regulation in cancer.


In many human cancers, the tumor suppressor, p27kip1 (p27), a
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor critical to cell cycle arrest,
undergoes perpetual ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation by the E3
ligase complex SCF-Skp2/Cks1 and/or cytoplasmic mislocalization; lack of
nuclear p27 causes aberrant cell cycle progression and cytoplasmic p27
can mediate cell migration/metastasis. We previously showed that estrogen
(E2) induces Skp2-dependent degradation of p27 and cell proliferation in
primary endometrial epithelial cells (EECs) and endometrial carcinoma
(ECA) cell lines (e.g., ECC-1) suggesting a pathogenic mechanism for type
I endometrial carcinoma (ECA), an estrogen (E2)-linked cancer. The
current studies show that treatment of ECC-1 cells with small molecule
inhibitors of Skp2/Cks1 E3 ligase activity (Skp2E3LIs) increase protein
levels of p27, increase p27 half-life by 6 hours and inhibit cell
proliferation (IC50 10M). Two of five SKP2E3LIs, designated as C2 and C20
specifically increase p27 in the nucleus while decreasing p27 in the
cytoplasm in both ECC-1 cells and primary ECA cells. In addition, C2 and
C20 prevent both E2-induced proliferation and degradation of nuclear p27.
These data suggest that Skp2E3LIs can function in the nucleus to prevent
E2-induced degradation of p27 in primary ECA cells to regain growth
control by directly blocking p27 ubiquitylation and subsequent
degradation. Skp2E3LIs enable a chemical biology approach to
understanding the functional significance of the ubiquitin pathway in
p27-mediated cell cycle regulation and importantly, are the first
specific proteasome inhibitors that pharmacologically target the binding
interaction between the E3ligase, SCF-Skp2/Cks1 and p27 to prevent its
ubiquitylation and subsequent degradation. These targeted inhibitors
represent a major therapeutic advancement over general proteasome
inhibitors for cancers characterized by SCF-Skp2/Cks1-mediated
destruction of p27.

