Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autologous TARP peptide vaccination is associated with slowing in
PSA velocity and a decrease in tumor growth rate in patients with Stage
D0 prostate cancer.


Background: T-cell receptor alternate reading frame protein (TARP) is a
novel, immunogenic 58 amino acid protein that is over-expressed in 95% of
prostate cancer and 50% of breast cancer specimens and hence is a good
candidate for therapeutic vaccination. In mice the immunogenicity of
HLA-A*0201 binding TARP peptides can be improved through
epitope-enhancement achieved by amino acid substitutions that result in
increased HLA binding affinity. We conducted a first-in-human study to
determine the safety and immunogenicity of TARP peptide vaccination and
its impact on the velocity of PSA rise (expressed as slope log (PSA) or
PSA doubling time (PSADT)) and tumor growth rate in men with Stage D0
prostate cancer.Methods: HLA-A*0201 positive men were randomized to
receive epitope-enhanced (29-37-9V) or wild type (27-35) TARP peptides
administered as a peptide emulsion with Montanide ISA 51VG plus GM-CSF
(Arm A) or as an autologous peptide-pulsed dendritic cell vaccine (Arm
B). Vaccines were administered q 3 weeks for a total of 5 vaccines with
an optional 6th dose of vaccine at 36 weeks based on immune response or
PSADT criteria and a booster dose of vaccine for all patients at 48 and
96 weeks.Results: A total of 41 patients (n = 21 Arm A, n = 20 Arm B)
enrolled, with a median on study duration of 75 weeks as of 07/31/12.
Baseline cohort characteristics (median): age 62 yrs, PSA 3.44, Gleason
Score 7, ALC 1270, CD4%/absolute 42.5%/547 cells/mm3, 25-OH vitamin D
level 28, with 30 of 41 (73%) s/p radical prostatectomy and 26 of 41
(63%) s/p EBRT for PSA biochemical recurrence. TARP vaccination was safe
and well tolerated with adverse events limited to local injection site
reactions Background: T-cell receptor alternate reading frame protein
(TARP) is a novel, immunogenic 58 amino acid protein that is
over-expressed in 95% of prostate cancer and 50% of breast cancer
specimens and hence is a good candidate for therapeutic vaccination. In
mice the immunogenicity of HLA-A*0201 binding TARP peptides can be
improved through epitope-enhancement achieved by amino acid substitutions
that result in increased HLA binding affinity. We conducted a
first-in-human study to determine the safety and immunogenicity of TARP
peptide vaccination and its impact on the velocity of PSA rise (expressed
as slope log (PSA) or PSA doubling time (PSADT)) and tumor growth rate in
men with Stage D0 prostate cancer.Methods: HLA-A*0201 positive men were
randomized to receive epitope-enhanced (29-37-9V) or wild type (27-35)
TARP peptides administered as a peptide emulsion with Montanide ISA 51VG
plus GM-CSF (Arm A) or as an autologous peptide-pulsed dendritic cell
vaccine (Arm B). Vaccines were administered q 3 weeks for a total of 5
vaccines with an optional 6th dose of vaccine at 36 weeks based on immune
response or PSADT criteria and a booster dose of vaccine for all patients
at 48 and 96 weeks.Results: A total of 41 patients (n = 21 Arm A, n = 20
Arm B) enrolled, with a median on study duration of 75 weeks as of
07/31/12. Baseline cohort characteristics (median): age 62 yrs, PSA 3.44,
Gleason Score 7, ALC 1270, CD4%/absolute 42.5%/547 cells/mm3, 25-OH
vitamin D level 28, with 30 of 41 (73%) s/p radical prostatectomy and 26
of 41 (63%) s/p EBRT for PSA biochemical recurrence. TARP vaccination was
safe and well tolerated with adverse events limited to local injection
site reactions < Grade 2. Twenty-eight of 39 patients (72%) reaching 24
weeks and 23 of 31 (74%) reaching 48 weeks were documented to have a
decreased slope log PSA compared to their pre-vaccination baseline
(p=0.0012 and p=0.0004 for overall changes in slope log PSA,
respectively); there was no statistically significant difference between
the two arms, although only the DC arm was significant at 48 wks on its
own. TARP vaccination also resulted in a 50% decrease in calculated tumor
growth rate constant: pre-vaccine g = 0.0042/day, post-vaccine g =
0.0021/day (p=0.003). TARP-specific IFN- ELISPOT responses were detected
in the majority of subjects but did not correlate with observed decreases
in slope log (PSA).

