Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: xCT inhibition suppresses CD44v-positive stem-like tumor cells,
which are resistant to EGFR-targeted therapy in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma.


Given that cancer cells are exposed to environmental stressors such as
oxygen or nutrient deficiency, low pH, inflammatory mediators, and ROS
during tumor progression,the ability to avoid the consequences of such
exposure is required for cancer cell survival. CD44 is a major marker for
stem-like cancer cells in many epithelial tumors and has been implicated
in tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis. CD44 exists in numerous
variant isoforms (CD44v) that are generated through alternative mRNA
splicing. We recently showed that interaction of CD44v with the cystine
transporter subunit xCT stabilizes the latter protein and thereby
potentiates the ability of cancer cells to defend themselves against
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Stem-like cancer cells in which defense
against ROS is enhanced by CD44v are thus thought to drive tumor growth,
chemoresistance and metastasis.In the present study, we show that head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells that express CD44v rely on
the activity of the cystine transporter subunit xCT for control of their
redox status. Ablation of CD44v attenuated the xCT dependency as well as
tumor-forming ability in HNSCC cells, and xCT inhibition selectively
induced apoptosis in CD44v-expressing tumor cells. In contrast,
CD44v-negative differentiated cells manifest epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) activation and rely largely on EGFR activity for their
survival. Combined treatment with inhibitors of xCT-dependent cystine
transport and of EGFR may induce apoptosis in distinct subpopulations of
HNSCC tumor cells.

