Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A molecular pre-operative prognostic nomogram for resectable
pancreatic cancer.


Purpose: Defining clinically and biologically relevant phenotypes to
inform treatment decisions in other cancers have led to substantial
improvements in overall outcomes. About 80% of patients with pancreatic
cancer (PC) succumb to the disease despite curative resection, many of
whom recur within 6 months of surgery. These early recurrences
demonstrate that current staging is inadequate and that there is a clear
need to better define prognostic phenotypes prior to significant
intervention. This study aimed to evaluate the potential clinical utility
of biologically relevant molecules as prognostic factors in resected PC
to define strategies that may improve current preoperative staging
accuracy and inform treatment decisions.Method: We assessed the
relationship of aberrant expression of two pro-metastatic calcium-binding
proteins, S100A2 and S100A4 with disease-specific survival in four
independent cohorts of patients (total n = 547) who underwent operative
resection for PC. A preoperative nomogram using pre-operatively
assessable variables including biomarkers was derived and was compared to
traditional prognostic variables and the postoperative nomogram.Results:
High S100A2 and S100A4 expressions were an independent poor prognostic
factor in both the training (n = 76; HR = 2.00, 95% CI = 1.15 - 3.49, P =
0.0216 and HR = 3.34, 95% CI = 1.69 - 6.62, P = 0.0005 respectively) and
validation (n = 316; HR = 1.73, 95% CI = 1.20 - 2.48, P = 0.0030 and HR =
1.65, 95% CI = 1.23 - 2.22, P = 0.0009 respectively) cohorts. These
results were further validated in a prospective cohort (ICGC-APGI, n =
100) and another retrospective population based cohort (NCI SEER, n =
55). Aberrant expression of S100A2/A4 protein again stratified the
cohorts into 3 distinct prognostic groups. A preoperative nomogram using
only variables that could be measured preoperatively (age, tumour size,
tumour location and molecular biomarkers), predicted survival better than
nomograms derived using clinico-pathological variables, which are only
determinable after surgery. A proof-of-principle study demonstrated that
biomarker expression can be reliably assessed in preoperative EUS-FNA
cell block samples.Conclusion: S100A4 and S100A2 are one of the very few
biomarkers that have been independently validated in multiple patient
cohorts. Their aberrant expression stratifies PC into distinct prognostic
groups and potentially enables more accurate preoperative prognostication
through a nomogram. Biomarker assessment potentially enables accurate
preoperative prognostication, which is more accurate than current staging
methods. The development and application of such nomograms has the
potential to improve patient selection for surgery and assist clinicians
in making tie-breaker decisions that would ultimately improve the overall
survival and quality of life for patients with PC.

