Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Murine matrigel plug assay for quick evaluation of
anti-angiogenesis drugs.


Angiogenesis plays important roles in disease processes such as tumor
development and progression, as well as many physiological conditions. A
few cancer drugs were successfully approved based on anti-angiogenesis
mechanisms. More candidates are in different evaluation stages, including
clinical phase II stages. Among many assays used for angiogenesis
evaluation, Murine Matrigel Plug Assay (MMPA) is a relatively simple,
highly effective in vivo assay to evaluate anti-angiogenesis responses of
the test articles. Because of its simplicity and short assay duration,
the assay is scalable for efficient screening of large number of test
articles. However, the analysis of the plugs, usually with H&E staining
and microvessel counting, is time consuming and error prone, hampers the
usage of this method as a general screening assay for test articles.
Here, we set out to test a number of combinations of assay conditions,
including mouse strains, angiogenesis inducers, varying days of
treatment, and different routes of SOC drug treatments. More importantly,
we tested plug analysis methods including H&E staining, CD31 IHC
staining, as well as hemoglobin concentration analysis. We demonstrated
that hemoglobin concentration analysis results are corroborated by IHC
staining as well as H&E staining, in most of the conditions tested.
Hemoglobin assay is less time consuming and easier to scale up. Thus MMPA
followed by hemoglobin analysis may be suitable for large scale screening
studies for angiogenesis modulators. Interestingly, CTX, one of the
popular anti-cancer therapeutics, was shown in MMPA as a good
anti-angiogenesis agent. In conclusion, the MMPA described may greatly
facilitate the preclinical development of cancer therapeutics that target
the angiogenesis.

