Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Kampo (Japanese herbal) medicine Juzentaihoto may suppress the
expression of indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase on macrophages and prolong the
survival of transgenic mice bearing lens-epithelial cell carcinoma.


Kampo medicine (the traditional Chinese medicine) is a pharmaceutical
grade multi-herbal medicine widely used for immunocompromized patient in
Japan. Juzentaihoto is a well known Kampo medicine that comprises 10
different herbs. The effect of a Kampo medicine Juzentaihoto on survival
of tumor-bearing mice was measured in this study.We previously reported
T3 transgenic mice carrying A-SV40Tag transgene (A denotes murine
A-crystallin promoter). The T3 mice carry a single copy of transgene,
which have been generated from A-loxP-SV40Tag/Ella-cre double
transgenics. The T3 lens tumors show multi-step carcinogenesis(J Cancer
Res Clin Oncol 135:1521-1532 2009). At birth the T3 lens tumors
demonstrate moderatesevere dysplasia, and in 2-3 month-old they become
carcinoma in situ and start to invade lens capsule, and in 4-6 month-old
they proliferate in the eyeball and finally they enlarge and destroy
eyeballs. The T3 lens tumor is growing very slow and finally invading and
destroying surrounding brain tissue, and some of the T3 lens tumor,
metastasizing to cervical lymph node and lung. Finally T3 mice died due
to cancer cachexia. Carcinogenesis of the T3 lens tumor induced by SV40 T
antigens is pathologically very similar to uterine cervical cancer, which
is induced by high-risk human papillomavirus E6 and E7 oncoprotein(Cancer
Lett 179:165-173 2002, Oncol Rep 12:253-258 2004, Oncogene 25:3670-3679
2006). We also reported that expression of indoleamine 2,
3-dioxygenase(IDO)increases as tumors progress from carcinoma in situ to
microinvasive and invasive cancer, and that tumor associated
macrophages(TAMs) localized at the invasive front express IDO in patients
with cervical cancer(Cancer Sci 98:874-881 2007).In this study, the T3
mice were fed bait containing 1.5% Juzentaihoto for more than one year
and the survival rate was compared with the untreated control. We also
analyzed various biological activities, such as phagocytosis, IL-10 and
IL-12 induction, especially IDO-expression on macrophages.Oral
administration of Juzentaihoto activated peritoneal exudate macrophages
and recruited the IDO-negative macrophages. The number of TAMs also
increased as compared with the untreated control. These results suggest
that oral administration of Juzentaihoto affect macrophage expression of
IDO, possibly through a mechanism mediated by the activation of M1
macrophages and modulate local innate immunity.

