Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The hereditary genetic polymorphism of mir-608 predicts the
clinical outcome and expression of IL-6 in patients with esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma .


PURPOSE: To investigate the effect of the single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in microRNA-related genes on the prognosis of patients with
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total
of 504 patients with a diagnosis of ESCC were enrolled in the study. The
genotypes of miRNA-related SNPs were analyzed from the genomic DNA of
peripheral leukocytes and were correlated with the clinical outcome of
patients, which was first evaluated in a randomly assigned training set
(n=129) and subsequently verified by a replication set (n= 375).RESULTS:
In training group, the heterozygous CG genotype of mir-608 rs4919510 was
associated with reduced risk for adverse clinical outcomes (HR [95% CI]
=0.47 [0.27-0.82] for death; HR [95% CI] =0.47 [0.29-0.77] for
recurrence). In contrast, both homozygous CC and GG genotypes showed
unfavorable for prognosis. The associations were confirmed in an
independent replication group (GG+CC vs. CG, HR [95% CI] =1.36
[1.07-1.73], P=0.013 for death; HR [95% CI] = 1.26 [1.00-1.59], P=0.048
for recurrence). The prognostic effect was more pronounced among patients
with advanced tumor stages and in those treated with concurrent
neoadjuvant chemo- radiotherapy (CCRT). Functional relevance of rs4919510
was correlated with the serum IL-6 levels. GG variant was significantly
associated with IL-6 over-expression in advanced ESCC
patients.CONCLUSION: The hereditary genetic variants in mir-608 can serve
as an independent predictor for the clinical outcome of ESCC patients.
The prognostic effect of rs4919510 may be partially mediated by impairing
the ability in regulating IL-6 expression.

