Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optical coherence tomography imaging in cancer research.


Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is an established imaging technology
with a greater than 10 year history in the clinic. Over the past 5 years,
an increasing number of cancer investigators have employed OCT in
preclinical studies and have found that its unique capabilities address
some of the gaps left by existing intravital imaging approaches. However,
because OCT is relatively new to the cancer research community, these
capabilities and limitations are not broadly known. Therefore, to
facilitate translation, we will summarize OCT to the cancer research
community. This will include a description of how it works, what its
capabilities are, and what its role in preclinical cancer research is now
and what it is likely to become over the next decade.The basic principles
of OCT will be summarized to allow investigators to compare it with
alternative imaging technologies and identify investigations where OCT is
best suited. The imaging modes of OCT will be described and examples of
use in cancer investigations will be given. The use of OCT for
angiography at spatial and temporal scales not accessible to other
technologies will be described. We will also present anatomical imaging
of tumors using OCT and highlight its ability to assess tumor volume and
to map tumor viability. Finally, the advantages of OCT-based label-free
lymphangiography will be described and compared with existing approaches
for lymphatic vessel imaging.We will end our discussion by communicating
briefly some of the innovations in OCT that are happening now in research
and engineering laboratories and the new capabilities that such
innovations are likely to enable. Through this presentation, we hope to
establish dialogues to drive technology development toward answering
critical problems in cancer research.

