Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A first-in-humans phase I cancer clinical trial for
4-Demthyl-4-cholesteryloxycarbonylpenclomedine (DM-CHOC-PEN).


Purpose: 4-Demethyl-4-cholesteryloxycarbonylpenclomedine (DM-CHOC-PEN) is
a poly-chlorinated pyridine cholesteryl carbonate whose MOA is via
alkylation of DNA @ N7 - guanine and induces oxidative stress. The main
aims of this first-in human trial were to determine maximum-tolerated
dose (MTD), safety, dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) and pharmacokinetics
(PK) of DM-CHOC-PEN - IND 68,876.Patients & Methods: DM-CHOC-PEN was
administered as a 3-hr IV infusion once every 21-days in 21 patients with
melanoma (n=3), colorectal CA (CRC, n=3), and glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) (n= 6); the most frequent diagnoses. The trial allowed enrollment
of patients with advanced cancer +/- CNS involvement. The starting dose
was 39 mg/m2 with escalations to date up to 98.7 mg/m2.Results:
Twenty-one (21) patients have been treated to date. MTD was 2-tiered and
defined as 85.8 mg/m2 for patients with liver involvement and, for
patients without liver abnormality it is not yet defined but is at least
98.7 mg/m2, for the latter population. The drug was well tolerated with
the most common adverse effects being fatigue (n=2), liver dysfunction -
elevated bilirubin (Gr-3, n=2; Gr-2, n=1), ALT/AST (Gr-2, n=3), alk phos
(Gr-2, n=3) and an allergic reaction (Gr-2, n=1). No neuro/psychological,
hematological or renal toxicity observed.Two (2) patients with liver
metastasis demonstrated hyperbilirubinemia (Gr-3 SLT) at the 98.7 mg/m2
dose level. Five (5) additional patients with liver disease have been
treated at 85.8 mg/m2 level without toxicity - the MTD for that stage of
cancer. Dose cohorts @ 98.7 mg/m2 are in progress for non-liver staged
patients. PK studies in humans revealed the following profile for
DM-CHOC-PEN 70 mg/kg: AUC o-t = 980 mg.h/L, CL - 0.141L/h, T1/2 - 0.63 h
& T - 24.1 h. DM-CHOC PEN and DM-PEN showed a rebound phenomenon @ 50
hours post-infusion with a T release of 26.7h. Same phenomenon is
observed in RBCs (estimation using Monolix 3.2). DM-CHOC-PEN and DM-PEN
were detected 3 and 15 days bound to RBCs (after 70 mg/m2); DM-CHOC-PEN
was also detected in the urine (Cmax=17.5 g/mL) until day 15. The AUC was
linear for all doses. Similar to the rats, the total lipid profiles in
the patients were erratic (2o to the lipid emulsion vehicle) during the
3-h infusion period, and then returned to pre-treatment values after 24
h. The triglycerides were the most significantly affected. DM-CHOC-PEN
could be identified in spinal sarcoma tissue (in 190 ng/g quantities)
obtained surgically from a patient 21- days post single injection of 39
mg/m2. Conclusion: DM-CHOC-PEN is safe at the presented dose levels and
shows a favorable PK profile. Seven (7) patients have observed responses
or significant PFS, including 5 with CNS involvement. DM-CHOC-PEN is well
tolerated with manageable toxicities. Complete patient
responses/toxicities will be presented. Supported by NCI/SBIR grant
-1R43CA132257.

