Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selection of DNA aptamers for an ovarian cancer cell line using
high-throughput sequencing.


The mucin, MUC16, facilitates metastasis and immuneprotection of ovarian
tumors. Therefore, agents that effectively target MUC16 expressing
ovarian cancer cells will be useful for diagnostic and therapeutic
applications. Here, we have utilized the Cell-based Systematic Evolution
of Ligands by Exponential Enrichment (cell-SELEX) approach to generate
high affinity single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) aptamers as agents for
detection and treatment of MUC16-positive ovarian tumors. An ssDNA
aptamer library composed of 100 trillion sequences was subjected to ten
iterative rounds of negative and positive selection using the
MUC16-knockdown and MUC16-positive ovarian cancer cell line, OVCAR-3.
Aptamers from each round were amplified by asymmetric PCR and subjected
to high throughput NextGen sequencing. Eight ssDNA aptamers enriched
through the selection process were identified by bioinformatics analysis
and their selectivity and affinity for MUC16-positive cells was
determined by flow cytometry. Two of these aptamers (Apt-1 and Apt-8)
showed significant binding to the MUC16-positive OVCAR-3 with a Kd of 24
and 28 nM, respectively. In contrast, Apt-1 and Apt-8 only weakly
recognized the MUC16-knockdown OVCAR-3 cells. M-Fold analysis indicated
that Apt-1 and Apt-8 had defined secondary structures resulting from
ordered base pairing of the ssDNA. The inclusion of NextGen sequencing
techniques has therefore allowed rapid identification of theranostic
aptamers from an exhaustive library of ssDNA sequences. This study
provides a streamlined method for development of theranostic aptamers
that can be used to recognize and target MUC16 expressing ovarian cancer
cells.

