Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of genomic and transcriptomic data in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the 8th most common cancer
worldwide and the 6th tumor in frequency in Brazil. Most of cases are
diagnosed at an advanced stage and despite the improvement of various
treatment modalities the overall survival rates still remain low. In
order to identify new possible molecular markers, genomic and
transcriptomic data were evaluated using integrative analysis in ESCC
samples. Thirty frozen samples of ESCC were carried out in genome-wide
expression (GWE) profiling using the Agilent Whole Human Genome
Microarray 44K and in Array-CGH (aCGH) using the Agilent Human Genome CGH
Microarray 44K following the manufacturer's protocol. Data were extracted
and flagged with Feature Extraction and processed using NEXUS 6.0 and
TMEV 4.8 Software. A subset of genes identified by the integrated
analysis was analyzed for signaling networks using Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA) software. The aCGH analysis revealed 14 significant
genomic alterations including 7 gains and 7 losses. Gains were detected
at 3q27.3-q28, 3q28-q29, 3q29, 7q21.3-q22.1, 8p11.23-p11.2, 11q13.2-q13.4
and 12p13.31; losses were found at 1p21.1-p13.3, 3p11.1-q11.1,
3p12.1-p11.2, 6q16.3, 9q21.13, 9p21.3 and 13q21.31. A total of 375 genes
were mapped to these regions of which 343 genes were involved in genomic
gains and 32 in losses. GWE profile identified 1770 differentially
expressed genes in comparison with normal tissue including 573 up
regulated and 1197 down-regulated. The integrated analysis showed that
genomic and transcriptomic results were concordant in 39 genes, in which
36 were up regulated and involved in gain of DNA copy number and 3 genes
were down-regulated and associated to genomic losses. According to IPA
analysis three significant networks could be defined comprising these
genes. The first network comprised 14 of the concordant genes and was
associated to functions as cellular assembly and organization,
cardiovascular system development and function and cell morphology. The
second network (11 genes) was related to cancer, immunological disease
and cell cycle. The third network (9 genes) was associated to cancer, RNA
post-transcriptional modification and organismal development. A total of
11 genes were involved in genomic gains by aCGH but were considered
down-regulated by GWE profiling, while two genes were involved in losses
but their transcripts were up-regulated. The IPA analysis showed that
these genes are associated to function as drug metabolism, small molecule
biochemistry and nucleic acid metabolism. In this study, it was detected
significant genomic alterations and genes differentially expressed
involved in important signaling networks that could have an impact on
tumor development or progression in ESCC. These genes might be useful as
a first step to identify molecular markers for improved diagnostic and
therapeutic modalities in this tumor.

