Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The potential chemomodulatory effects of didox and resveratrol on
doxorubicin in colon cancer cells.


Resveratrol and didox are polyhydroxy phenols that possess potential
anticancer and chemosensitizing effects. The efficacy of doxorubicin in
the treatment of colorectal cancer is limited by multi-drug resistance.
Herein, we have assessed the chemomodulatory effect of resveratrol and
didox on doxorubicin in colorectal cancer cell lines (HCT116 and HT29).
Furthermore, we have investigated the molecular aspects of this
interaction. Resveratrol was found to possess anti-cancer properties;
however with a relatively low potency in HCT116 (IC50 = 17.5 M) and HT29
(IC50 = 187 M). IC50 values of Didox in HCT 116 and HT29 was 105 M and
501 M, respectively. In terms of Doxorubicin, the IC50-values were 0.96 M
and 0.88 M in HCT116 and HT29, respectively. Resveratrol combination with
doxorubicin significantly reduced its IC50-values to 0.59 M in HCT116,
and to 0.49 M in HT29. Moreover, Didox combination significantly
increased the potency of doxorubicin showing IC50 shift to 0.4 M in
HCT116, and to 0.29 M in HT29. The combination between doxorubicin and
resveratrol/didox in HCT116 and HT29 was found to be additive
(combination index ranged from 0.8-1.2). The pro-apoptotic genes, p53 and
bax, were markedly elevated after combination of doxorubicin with
resveratrol or didox in both HCT116. On the other hand, the anti
apoptotic genes, bcl2 and bclx, were downregulated. Caspase-3
concentration revealed marked increase due to combination of didox with
doxorubicin in both cell lines. On the other hand, resveratrol
combination with doxorubicin showed marginal elevation of caspase-3
concentration in HT-29 cells while marked elevation in HCT116 cells. In
conclusion, didox and resveratrol potentiated the efficacy of doxorubicin
in colorectal cancer cell lines.

