Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of topoisomerase II expression and cancer-specific
death in patients with surgically-resected clear cell renal cell
carcinoma.


PURPOSE: Despite the development of prognostic algorithms based on
clinico-pathologic features, the ability to identify aggressive forms of
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) remains suboptimal. Topoisomerase
IIA (TOP2a) is a biomarker of DNA replication and a target for
antineoplastic agents. Herein, we evaluate the association of TOP2a
expression in ccRCC tumors with pathologic features of aggressiveness and
risk of cancer-specific death.METHODS: We identified 947 patients who
underwent nephrectomy to treat clinically localized ccRCC between
1/16/1990 and 9/27/2006. TOP2a expression was assessed using IHC and
scored as number of positive cells per mm2. We evaluated TOP2a expression
using a continuous variable and tertile categories. For associations with
pathologic features we employed Kruskal-Wallis tests and for associations
with cancer-specific survival we generated Cox proportional hazard
regression models.RESULTS: Higher TOP2a expression is associated with
later stage, higher grade and higher Mayo SSIGN score (all p PURPOSE:
Despite the development of prognostic algorithms based on
clinico-pathologic features, the ability to identify aggressive forms of
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) remains suboptimal. Topoisomerase
IIA (TOP2a) is a biomarker of DNA replication and a target for
antineoplastic agents. Herein, we evaluate the association of TOP2a
expression in ccRCC tumors with pathologic features of aggressiveness and
risk of cancer-specific death.METHODS: We identified 947 patients who
underwent nephrectomy to treat clinically localized ccRCC between
1/16/1990 and 9/27/2006. TOP2a expression was assessed using IHC and
scored as number of positive cells per mm2. We evaluated TOP2a expression
using a continuous variable and tertile categories. For associations with
pathologic features we employed Kruskal-Wallis tests and for associations
with cancer-specific survival we generated Cox proportional hazard
regression models.RESULTS: Higher TOP2a expression is associated with
later stage, higher grade and higher Mayo SSIGN score (all p < 0.001).
The risk of death from RCC increases with increasing TOP2a expression (p
trend PURPOSE: Despite the development of prognostic algorithms based on
clinico-pathologic features, the ability to identify aggressive forms of
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) remains suboptimal. Topoisomerase
IIA (TOP2a) is a biomarker of DNA replication and a target for
antineoplastic agents. Herein, we evaluate the association of TOP2a
expression in ccRCC tumors with pathologic features of aggressiveness and
risk of cancer-specific death.METHODS: We identified 947 patients who
underwent nephrectomy to treat clinically localized ccRCC between
1/16/1990 and 9/27/2006. TOP2a expression was assessed using IHC and
scored as number of positive cells per mm2. We evaluated TOP2a expression
using a continuous variable and tertile categories. For associations with
pathologic features we employed Kruskal-Wallis tests and for associations
with cancer-specific survival we generated Cox proportional hazard
regression models.RESULTS: Higher TOP2a expression is associated with
later stage, higher grade and higher Mayo SSIGN score (all p < 0.001).
The risk of death from RCC increases with increasing TOP2a expression (p
trend < 0.0001). Compared to patients in the lowest tertile, those
patients with tumors in the highest tertile of TOP2a expression were at
increased risk of RCC death (HR=2.31 95% CI 1.64-3.25; pPURPOSE: Despite
the development of prognostic algorithms based on clinico-pathologic
features, the ability to identify aggressive forms of clear cell renal
cell carcinoma (ccRCC) remains suboptimal. Topoisomerase IIA (TOP2a) is a
biomarker of DNA replication and a target for antineoplastic agents.
Herein, we evaluate the association of TOP2a expression in ccRCC tumors
with pathologic features of aggressiveness and risk of cancer-specific
death.METHODS: We identified 947 patients who underwent nephrectomy to
treat clinically localized ccRCC between 1/16/1990 and 9/27/2006. TOP2a
expression was assessed using IHC and scored as number of positive cells
per mm2. We evaluated TOP2a expression using a continuous variable and
tertile categories. For associations with pathologic features we employed
Kruskal-Wallis tests and for associations with cancer-specific survival
we generated Cox proportional hazard regression models.RESULTS: Higher
TOP2a expression is associated with later stage, higher grade and higher
Mayo SSIGN score (all p < 0.001). The risk of death from RCC increases
with increasing TOP2a expression (p trend < 0.0001). Compared to patients
in the lowest tertile, those patients with tumors in the highest tertile
of TOP2a expression were at increased risk of RCC death (HR=2.31 95% CI
1.64-3.25; p<0.0001). Interestingly, among those patients with low risk
disease (SSIGN score 0-3; 95% 10 year survival), those with high TOP2a
were at increased risk of RCC death (HR=3.09 95% CI 1.29-7.40; p
=0.01).CONCLUSION: Higher TOP2a expression is associated with more
aggressive pathologic features and increased risk of cancer-specific
death among patients undergoing surgery for localized ccRCC. If
confirmed, these data support further inquiry for TOP2a as a prognostic
and predictive biomarker for ccRCC patients.

