Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell gene-expression programs and basal-like breast cancer.


Basal-like carcinoma is a subtype of breast cancer that is characterized
by poor prognosis and high intratumor heterogeneity. In basal-like breast
epithelia, we have identified two anticorrelated gene-expression programs
that arise among single extracellular matrix (ECM)-attached cells during
organotypic 3D culture. The first program contains multiple TGF-related
genes including TGFBR3, and its heterogeneous induction is critical to
suppress ductal branching. The second program contains JUND together with
the basal-like marker, KRT5. Homogenizing JUND expression in single cells
leads to 3D acini with bridged lumina that are similar to cribiform
ductal carcinoma in situ. TGFBR3 and JUND together comprise a circuit
that is interconnected via four negative-feedback loops. Computational
modeling of the circuit predicts damped, antiphase oscillations upon
stimulation with endogenous impulses of TGF-like ligand, and we directly
observe these spontaneous responses in 3D culture by live-cell imaging.
The TGFBR3-JUND circuit is remarkably conserved in early basal-like
tumors that heterogeneously express KRT5, suggesting that asynchronous
circuit dynamics are active in this patient subset. We further show that
the circuit is strongly dependent on ECM engagement, as detachment leads
to a rewiring that is triggered by RPS6 dephosphorylation and maintained
by juxtacrine signaling from tenascin C. Breast tumor heterogeneity need
not stem from partial basal-like differentiation and could instead
reflect dynamic toggling of individual cells between expression states.

