Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluate the efficacy of new therapeutics using advanced
metastatic mouse models.


Metastasis, the spread and growth of tumor cells to distant organs, is
usually a final and fatal step in the progression of solid malignancies.
Preclinical test of the new anti-cancer therapies that could mimic the
disease present in most clinical trials asks for robust metastatic models
than just the subcutaneous models. We sought to establish and validate a
panel of experimental (i.v. inoculation) and spontaneous (orthotopic
inoculation) mouse models with high metastatic potential and varied
tissue tropism in different types of cancer models, covering colorectal,
liver, prostate, breast, pancreatic cancer and melanoma. The
responsiveness of metastasis to several therapies that are proved to be
clinically effective or ineffective was investigated. A higher predictive
power of the metastatic models was demonstrated compared with the
corresponding subcutaneous models. By means of the transcriptomic
analysis of the paired primary tumor population and the distant lung
metastasis population in 5 orthotopic tumor models, we identified the
gene signatures that differentiate the two populations in different tumor
types. Our signature was also compared with the clinical relevant gene
signatures correlated with lung metastasis risk. Several genes are
concordantly expressed in both signatures and are biologically
meaningful. Overall, given the higher predictive power and the clinical
relevance, the use of the metastatic mouse models constitutes an
effective and important strategy to preclinically evaluate the efficacy
of new therapeutic regimens.

