Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF2 role in trastuzumab-resistance in JIMT-1 cells.


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death in women.
Overexpression of Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2) is
detected in 20-30% of breast cancers. Overexpression of HER2 is linked to
poor prognosis, more aggressive phenotype, and resistance to chemotherapy
and hormonal treatment. HER2 is part of a four member family of cell
surface receptors that are implicated in transmission of signals
controlling cell growth and differentiation. HER2 has an intracellular
domain with tyrosine kinase catalytic activity. Dimerization of HER2
activates the MAP kinase and AKT pathways. HER2 receptor also
heterodimerizes with the IGF1 receptor in trastuzumab-resistant cell
lines. The insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) has an important role in
fetal and cancer development signaling through the insulin-like growth
factor 1 receptor (IGF1R), the insulin receptor (InsR), and cross-talk
with the estrogen receptor alpha and beta (ER, ER). We hypothesize that
IGF2 mediates trastuzumab-resistance in JIMT-1 cell line. IGF2 mRNA and
protein levels were determined in trastuzumab-sensitive cell lines
(BT474, SKBR3, and ZR 75-30) and trastuzumab-resistant cell line (JIMT-1)
by qPCR and Western blot. We also analyzed the effect of IGF2 inhibition
treatment on the phosphorylation levels of HER2. Our study showed that
IGF2 increases in trastuzumab-resistant cell line, JIMT-1. Furthermore,
inhibition of IGF2 decreases JIMT-1 cell viability compared to control
and renders cells sensitive to trastuzumab. These findings provide a
potential therapy target for trastuzumab-resistant breast cancers.

