Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 19-Nor-2-(3-hydroxypropyl)-1,25-dihydroxy vitaminD3 (MART-10) is a
potent cell growth regulator and tumor metastasis inhibitor in MCF-7
cells: a new emerging strategy against ER+ breast cancer.


Aims: For estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer patients,
hormone antagonist therapy is currently a standard regimen with a
successful rate of 50 % to prevent cancer recurrence post radical surgery
and radiation therapy. Recently, the active form of vitamin D3,
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D3], has received much attention due
to its potent antitumor effects in pre-clinical studies, yet its clinical
application has been hampered by its hypercalcemia side effect. In this
study, we investigated the in vitro effects of a new class of
less-calcemic vitamin D analog,
19-nor-2-(3-hydroxypropyl)-1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (MART-10), on
ER+MCF-7 cells.Materials and Methods: Cell number counting was used to
evaluate the antiproliferative effect of 1,25(OH)2D3 and MART-10 on MCF-7
and MDA-MB-231 cells. Flow cytometry, western blot, q-RT/PCR, and
cellular invasion and migration assays were conducted to compare the
effects of 1,25(OH)2D3 and MART-10 on cell cycle progression, apoptosis
induction, protein and mRNA expression, and cancer cell metastasis of
MCF-7 cells, respectively.Results: We demonstrate that in MCF-7 cells:
(1) MART-10 is 500- to 1000-fold more potent than 1,25(OH)2D3 in
inhibiting cell growth and arresting them at G0/G1 phase, mediated by a
greater induction of p21 and p27 expression. (2) MART-10 is more active
than 1,25(OH)2D3 in causing cell apoptosis through higher BAX/Bcl
expression ratio and the subsequent cytochrome C release from
mitochondria to cytosol without involving caspases. (3) MART-10 is more
active than 1,25(OH)2D3 in preventing cell invasion and migration with a
greater upregulation of E-cadherin expression. No effects on MMP-2 and -9
were observed. (4) MART-10 upregulated CYP24A1 expression to a greater
extent and for a longer period of time than 1,25(OH)2D3, suggesting it
can exert a greater vitamin D receptor (VDR) transactivation and is more
resistant to CYP24A1-mediated degradation. (5) VDR is highly expressed in
MCF-7 cells, but not in MDA-MB-231 cells, that may explain the greater
1,25(OH)2D3 and MART-10 effects observed in MCF-7 cells. (6) MART-10 is
more potent than 1,25(OH)2D3 in suppressing ER expression.Conclusion:
Based on our results, MART-10 is a promising vitamin D analog for the
potential treatment of ER+ breast cancer. Further in vivo animal study is
warranted.

