Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value and functional impact of aberrant
GABREmiR-452miR-224 promoter methylation in prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (PC) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality among
men in Western countries. Currently available tools for PC diagnosis and
prognosis are suboptimal and novel biomarkers are urgently needed. This
study investigated the regulation, function, and PC biomarker potential
of a genomic locus encompassing miR-224, miR-452, and their host gene
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptor family epsilon subunit (GABRE).
First, mRNA and miRNA expression profiling data for three independent
patient sets, including a total of 80 nonmalignant and 281 PC tissue
samples, showed significant downregulation of all three genes in PC.
Next, we asked if this locus was silenced in PC by aberrant
hypermethylation of its promoter-associated CpG island. Indeed, bisulfite
sequencing of 11 nonmalignant and 21 PC tissue samples showed frequent
cancer-specific hypermethylation, which was successfully validated in an
independent set of 35 nonmalignant and 245 PC tissue samples by
methylation-specific qPCR. Notably, GABRE promoter methylation
distinguished PC from nonmalignant prostate with 96% sensitivity and 94%
specificity (AUC=0.98). Consistent with an epigenetic silencing
mechanism, methylation levels correlated inversely with GABRE, miR-224,
and miR-452 expression in both clinical samples and prostatic cell
lines.By univariate cox regression analysis, high GABRE methylation was
significantly (p=0.011, p=0.015, p=0.002) associated with PSA recurrence
after radical prostatectomy in three independent PC patient cohorts
(n=186, n=129, n=148). Moreover, in multivariate models, GABRE
methylation added significant independent prognostic value to established
clinicopathological predictors in two cohorts (p=0.031 and p=0.020) and
was borderline significant in the smaller third cohort (p=0.073). In line
with the significant adverse prognostic value of GABRE promoter
methylation, functional studies in vitro suggested that silencing of this
locus may lead to increased malignancy of PC cells. Thus, ectopic
expression of miR-224 and miR-452 mimics, respectively, inhibited
proliferation, migration, and invasion of two PC cell lines (PC3 and
DU145) with undetectable endogenous levels of both miRNAs. We are
currently analyzing post-transfection microarray gene expression
profiling data to identify target genes mediating the tumor suppressive
functions of miR-224 and miR-452; results will be presented at the
conference.In conclusion, our results showed that the GABREmiR-452miR-224
locus is frequently silenced in PC by aberrant promoter hypermethylation
and, furthermore, is a new promising epigenetic candidate biomarker for
PC diagnosis and prognosis. Also, the tumor suppressive functions of
miR-224 and miR-452 demonstrated in two PC cell lines may suggest this
locus as a potential target for epigenetic therapy of PC.

