Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of an orally active small-molecule irreversible
inhibitor of protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) for ovarian cancer
treatment.


Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
chaperone protein, catalyzes disulfide bond breakage, formation and
rearrangement. The effect of PDI inhibition on ovarian cancer progression
is not yet clear, and there is a need for potent, selective and safe
small-molecule inhibitors of PDI. Here, we report a new class of novel
propynoic acid carbamoyl methyl amides (PACMAs) that are active against a
panel of human ovarian cancer cell lines. Using fluorescent derivatives,
2D gel electrophoresis, and mass spectrometry, we established that PACMA
31, one of the most active analogues, acts as an irreversible
small-molecule inhibitor of PDI, forming a covalent bond with PDI's
active site cysteines. We also demonstrated that PDI activity is
essential for the survival and proliferation of human ovarian cancer
cells. In vivo, PACMA 31 showed tumor targeting ability and significantly
suppressed ovarian tumor growth without causing toxicity to normal
tissues. These irreversible small-molecule PDI inhibitors represent a new
approach for the development of targeted anticancer agents for ovarian
cancer therapy, and can also serve as useful probes for investigating the
biology of PDI-implicated pathways.

