Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF1 is a master regulator with the facilitate of demethylation
for the hexokinase 2 expression during cancer progression.


Hexokinase 2 (HK2) is a key enzyme of aerobic glycolysis, known as the
Warburg effect. A recent report showed that the HK2 expression in
glioblastoma multiforme correlates with the progression of cancer and the
survival of patients. The regulation of HK2 expression in cancer cells
has been explored for many decades, however the precise mechanism is not
yet identified. HK2 gene has a 4-kb promoter, which contains the
potential responsive elements for glucose, insulin, glucagon, TPA, cAMP
and HIF1 . However, methylation of the promoter region makes normal cells
nearly silent in HK2 expression. A study showed the potential
contribution of demethylation of promoter for the HK2 expression during
cancer progression.In this study, we tried to identify the master
regulator of HK2 expression. We performed methylation beadchip array for
the comparison of methylation status of HK2 gene between normal tissues
and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The 5-UTR and 3-UTR are densely
methylated in normal tissues, but significantly demethylated in HCC.
Moreover, we identified new hypoxia responsive element (HRE) through the
deletion and site-directed mutagenesis study with 2-kb promoter of human
HK2. The mutation of new HRE diminished the luciferase activity. Specific
interaction between HIF1 and HRE were identified by ChIP and EMSA. Then,
we showed that demethylation by 5-Aza-deoxycytidine could contribute to
the HK2 expression in hypoxic condition.In conclusion, we revealed the
mechanism of HK2 expression and hypoxia is one of the major regulator
among pre-known regulators. The sequential events, demethylation and
exposure to hypoxic environments are the main requisite for the HK2
expression during the cancer progression.

