Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists abrogate tumor
invasion and promote TRAIL-induced apoptosis in malignant glioma.


Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common brain tumors and have a worse
prognosis, so it is needed to develop effective treatments. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-) agonists, including
15-deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) and synthetic ligands,
troglitazone and rosiglitazone, are known to sensitize tumor cells to
apoptosis via various molecular mechanisms. In this study, we
investigated the therapeutic potentials of combined treatment with PPAR-
agonists and TRAIL in TRAIL-resistant astrocytoma cells. TRAIL alone and
each PPAR- agonist exhibited no cytotoxic effects; while the
pre-incubation with PPAR- agonists enhanced dramatically TRAIL-induced
cell death, which was abrogated by a broad spectrum caspase inhibitor,
z-VAD-fmk. And also, the combined treatment with PPAR- agonists and TRAIL
increased the enzymatic activity of caspase-3. These results indicate
that PPAR- agonists might promote TRAIL-mediated apoptosis by modulating
the caspase activity. In addition, the expression of anti-apoptotic
proteins including FLIP, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and XIAP was suppressed by the
combined treatment. Besides the cytotoxic effect, treatment with PPAR-
agonists significantly inhibited glioma invasion in vitro and in vivo.
These results collectively suggest that PPAR- agonists may provide a
promising strategy to treat malignant glioma.

