Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel RNA In situ hybridization method for the detection of ETV1,
ETV4 and ETV5 rearrangements in prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) remains the most commonly diagnosed cancer in
American men with an estimated incidence of 214,740 new cases and
accounting for 28,170 deaths in 2012. The genetic basis of 50-60% of PCa
is attributable to rearrangements in ETS genes (ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5),
BRAF, RAF1 and overexpression of SPINK1. The discovery and validation of
reliable diagnostic methods are warranted to detect these molecular
rearrangements. ETS gene rearrangements are typically detected by FISH
and PCR methods. Recently, monoclonal antibodies against ERG have been
developed which detect the truncated ERG protein and are strongly
correlated with ERG rearrangement as detected by FISH. However, due to
the lack of specific antibodies for ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 genes, in situ
detection of these markers is not feasible. We have developed a novel RNA
in situ hybridization (RNA-ISH) based assay for in situ detection of
ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 in formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues
from prostate needle biopsies, prostatectomy, and metastatic PCa
specimens using commercially available RNA-ISH probes. In order to assess
the feasibility of RNA-ISH method for the reliable detection of ETS
rearrangement, we compared RNA-ISH with ERG immunohistochemistry (IHC)
using previously validated ERG positive cases. Of the 12 ERG IHC-positive
cases, RNA-ISH was positive in all samples and no false positives were
detected in the 70 ERG-negative cases, indicating a 100% concordance
between IHC and RNA-ISH. Thus, we established that the RNA-ISH method is
comparable to IHC for evaluation of ETS gene rearrangement in PCa We then
tested ETV1 (NM_004956), ETV4 (NM_001079675), and ETV5 (NM_004454) probes
on 10 known positive (ETV1-5; ETV4-4; ETV5-1) and 319 unknown cases
(localized PCa N=265; Metastatic PCa N=54). All 10 known positive cases
were confirmed positive by RNA-ISH. Of the 319 cases, 11 (3.4%) ETV1and 3
(1%) ETV4 positive cases were identified. No non-specific staining was
observed. Positive cases with tissue available for evaluation were
validated with break-apart FISH probes and found to be confirmatory in
all cases. No non-specific staining was observed in rearrangement
negative cases. In majority (20/24) of the positive cases the RNA-ISH
staining pattern was homogeneous; however, 3 ETV1-positive cases and 1
ETV4-positive case showed heterogeneous staining pattern. ERG IHC was
performed and we found that the regions negative for either ETV1 or ETV4
were positive for ERG. Thus we identified a subset of prostate cancer
showing dual ETS rearrangement in two independent tumor foci. This is the
first time dual ETS rearrangement in prostate cancer has been
demonstrated in situ. We showed that RNA-ISH is a viable alternative
method for in situ detection of ETS gene rearrangements in prostate
cancer.

