Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoparticle formulation of KU55933 as a potent radiosensitizer.


KU55933 is a potent and specific inhibitor of the Ataxia Telangiectasia
Mutated (ATM) protein. Given ATM's critical role in DNA damage repair,
specifically double-strand break repair, KU55933 holds high potential as
a radiosensitizer. Indeed, previous preclinical studies have demonstrated
the radiosentization effect of KU55933. However, clinical translation of
KU55933 as a radiosensitizer has been prevented due to concerns of its
potential toxicity. Systemic administration of KU55933 would sensitize
normal cells as well as cancer cells to the effects of radiotherapy. Such
sensitization would not improve the therapeutic index of radiotherapy.
Therefore, the key challenge in the translation of KU55933 is to identify
methods that can selectively deliver KU55933 to tumors while minimizing
normal tissue dose. While traditional drug delivery methods cannot
overcome this challenge, the development of nanoparticle (NP) drug
delivery vehicles offers a unique opportunity. NPs are known to
preferentially accumulate in tumors while provide low drug dose to nearby
normal tissues. We hypothesize that NP delivery of KU55933 can not only
improve the therapeutic efficacy of KU55933, but also lower its toxicity.
In this study, we engineered a NP formulation of KU55933 using a
biodegradable lipid-polymer NP. We then compared the radiosensitization
effect of NP KU55933 to that of KU55933 in vitro using the non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines H23, A549 and H460. Clonogenic survival
assays showed that NP KU55933 is a more potent radiosensitizer than
KU55933. The differential radiosensitization effect of both KU55933
formulations was also evaluated in a xenograft mouse model of NSCLC. We
validated our in vitro results by demonstrating that NP KU55933 is more
effective than KU55933 as radiosensitizer in flank xenograft models of
NSCLC. To compare the toxicity of NP KU55933 and KU55933, we determined
the skin toxicity after radiotherapy with the two drug formulations. We
found lower skin toxicity in mice treated with the NP KU55933 than that
for KU55933. In conclusion, our studies demonstrate that NP formulation
of KU55933 can enhance the radiosensitization effect and decreases the
toxicity in vitro and in vivo. Our results suggest that NP KU55933 holds
potential for clinical translation.

