Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TW01001, a novel piperazinedione compound, induces mitotic arrest
and autophagy in non-small cell lung cancer A549 cells.


Targeting cellular mitosis in tumor cells is an attractive treatment
strategy. Here, we report TW01001, a novel compound from the sodium
3-((6-((Z)-((Z)-5-benzylidene-3,6-dioxopiperazin-2-ylidene)methyl)pyridin-3
-yloxy)methyl)benzoate, as a new mitotic inhibitor which inhibit tubulin
polymerization for non-small cell lung cancer treatment. We focus the
detailed mechanism of action of TW01001 in a non-small cell lung
carcinoma cell line A549 cells. Treatment of A549 cells with TW01001
caused the cells to accumulate at the G2/M phase of the cell cycle, with
a concomitant induction of mitotic phase marker such as MPM2, cyclin B,
and phospho-Histone H3. An increase levels of cyclin-dependent kinase 1
(CDK1) Thr161 phosphorylation and bcl-2 Ser70 phosphorylation was found
in TW01001-treated cells, suggesting the drug induced CDK1 activity. We
showed that the p53 accumulation was detected and was required for the
TW01001-induced mitotic arrest. Moreover, TW01001 induced autophagy
concentration- and time-dependently by the conversion of microtubule
associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3-I) to LC3-II and p62/SQSTM1
degradation. After 48 h of TW01001 exposure, apoptotic cell death
occurred by revealing caspase-3 activation and PARP cleavage. Notably,
blockade of autophagy by either pharmacological inhibitor or siRNAs
targeting Atg5 resulted in reduced cytotoxicity in response to TW01001,
suggesting that TW01001-induced autophagy led to cell death. Taken
together, these results indicated that the combination of autophagy
inducers might be attractive for the management of cancer therapy and
provides the framework for further development of TW01001 as a new
therapeutic agent for lung cancer treatment.

