Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leukemic FLT3 signals via Grb10 and elevated Grb10 expression
correlates with poor prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia.


The adaptor protein Grb10 plays important roles in mitogenic signaling.
However, its roles in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) are predominantly
unknown. Here we describe the role of Grb10 in FLT3-ITD-mediated AML. The
type III receptor tyrosine kinase, FLT3 is widely expressed in AML and
approximately 30% of AML patients carry an oncogenic FLT3-internal tandem
duplication (ITD) mutation. We observed that Grb10 physically associates
with normal and oncogenic FLT3 through FLT3 phospho-tyrosine 572 and 793
residues. Although Grb10 expression did not affect FLT3 activation or
stability, its expression enhanced FLT3-mediated Akt and STAT5
phosphorylation without affecting Erk or p38 phosphorylation. Selective
Grb10 depletion reduced Akt and STAT5 phosphorylation in Ba/F3 and
OCI-AML-5 cells. Grb10 regulates cell cycle by accelerating G2-M
transition followed by an increased cell population in S-phase.
Expression of Grb10 furthermore resulted in an increased proliferation,
survival and colony formation of Ba/F3-FLT3-ITD cells. Grb10 expression
was significantly increased in AML patients compared to healthy controls
and was also elevated in patients carrying FLT3-ITD mutants. The elevated
Grb10 expression correlated to relapse as well as to poor prognosis. In
addition, Grb10 expression led to resistance to chemotherapy. These
results suggest that Grb10 binds to FLT3 and induces PI3K-Akt and STAT5
signaling pathways resulting in an enhanced proliferation, survival and
colony formation of hematopoietic cells that furthermore initiates
drug-resistance and poor prognosis in AML.

