Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orally active nontoxic dual MMP2 and CAIX inhibitors as anticancer
therapy.


Carbonic anhydrases IX and XII, (CAIX and CAXII) are critical to maintain
a low pH in the tumor cell's microenvironment, and MMP-2 is critical for
breaching the basement membrane that opens the way to the dissemination
of metastases. The expression of carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX), a marker
for hypoxic tumors, is correlated with poor prognosis. In this
presentation, we wish to report that carbamoylphosphonates (CPOs) have
been identified as orally bioavailable dual inhibitors of matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) on the one hand, and carbonic anhydrases
(CAs) on the other hand, especially the IX and XII isoforms, well known
as cancer promoting factors. We have also demonstrated that the ionized
CPO acids are unable to cross the cell membrane and thus are limited to
interact with enzymes present in the extracellular domains of as are both
CA isozymes CAIX and CAXII and MMP-2. Finally, exposing cancer cells to
CPOs in hypoxic conditions resulted in the dose dependent release of
lactate dehydrogenase, confirming the direct interaction of the CPOs with
the cancer related isozymes CAIX and XII and thereby promoting cellular
damage. Thus, CPOs can be regarded as novel orally active nontoxic drug
candidates for CAIX expressing tumor targeted chemotherapy acting by two
synergistic mechanisms, namely, inhibiting CAs and MMPs simultaneously.

