Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ShRNA-based cellular proliferation signaling analysis revealed
DRD2 as a novel therapeutic target for glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma remains one of the deadliest of human cancers, with most
patients succumbing to the disease within one year of diagnosis. Our best
current understanding of its etiology is that glioblastoma involves
genetic and epigenetic changes that subvert the inherent molecular
circuitry of glial cells to drive uncontrolled cellular proliferation.
Unfortunately, this molecular circuitry in glioblastoma appears
sufficiently complex and redundant that disruption at any particular
point tends to redirects signaling through the remaining circuit. In this
context, meaningful therapeutic gains will require the identification of
therapeutic agents that target critical nodes within this circuit. To
identify novel therapeutic agents that target critical nodes which
regulate cellular proliferation, a genome-wide retroviral shRNA library
screen was conducted in two glioblastoma cell lines (U87MG and A172) and
two lung carcinoma lines (A549 and NCI-H460). Pathway analysis of the
pro-proliferative genes using both PANTHER and Ingenuity software
revealed an over-representation of G-protein coupled neurotransmitter
receptors (GPCR), including dopamine receptor subtype 2 (DRD2), which was
also highly expressed in glioblastoma specimens relative to the matched
normal parentchymal. Further investigation demonstrated that DRD2 signal
regulates cell growth by GNAI2-induced ERK activation. Moreover,
Haloperidol, one of DRD2 antagonists, enhances significantly anti-tumor
efficacy of EGFR inhibitor AG1478 using U87 and mesenchymal neuroshpere
xenografy mouse models. Given that both AG1478 and DRD2 antagonists have
been approved for the treatment of glioblastoma and psychotics,
separtately, Haloperidol combined with chemotherapy represents a novel
and likely conducted strategy for the treatment of glioblastoma.

