Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical and economic burden of incidental findings suspicious for
cancer on non-contrast chest computed tomography performed during
myocardial perfusion imaging.


Background: Radionuclide myocardial imaging is often performed to rule
out cardiac ischemia. One drawback is that tissue like breast or stomach
can result in attenuation artifact. A common practice involves obtaining
a non-contrast low resolution attenuation corrected chest CT (ACCT). No
studies have evaluated the clinical & economic burden of findings
suggestive for lung cancer on these ACCT images. Methods: Consecutive
patients undergoing ACCT from Jan 2005 - Dec 2008 were enrolled.
Clinically significant findings were defined as those requiring further
follow-up or clearly having features suspicious for lung cancer. For non-
calcified lung nodules, our size cutoff was >4 mm in smokers & >6 mm in
non-smokers. Follow-up & economic data were obtained from review of
hospital & claims records respectively. Mortality data were obtained by
social security death index. Direct costs were calculated from procedure
related costs & health care utilization costs. Results: Of 1139 patients
that underwent ACCT (mean age 59.6 11.3 years, women 47%), 1088 had a
median follow up of 4 years. We found 62 patients with lung nodules, 1
with consolidation, 11 with pleural effusion, 5 with pleural plaques, 1
with esophageal mass, 2 with breast masses, & 5 with lymphadenopathy. Of
these, a total of 15 patients were confirmed to have lung cancer, 1 with
esophageal cancer, 1 breast cancer, & 1 lymphoma, 6 of whom suffered
cancer related death. Of the 1001 patients without any clinically
significant findings in whom follow up was available, 22 were later
discovered to have a new cancer diagnosis localized to the chest within
the field of vision of ACCT. Of the 22 patients with cancer, 6 died from
their cancer related process, an overall proportion of 0.6%, markedly
less than in those with clinically relevant findings (7%) on ACCT (chi2 =
28.3, p Background: Radionuclide myocardial imaging is often performed to
rule out cardiac ischemia. One drawback is that tissue like breast or
stomach can result in attenuation artifact. A common practice involves
obtaining a non-contrast low resolution attenuation corrected chest CT
(ACCT). No studies have evaluated the clinical & economic burden of
findings suggestive for lung cancer on these ACCT images. Methods:
Consecutive patients undergoing ACCT from Jan 2005 - Dec 2008 were
enrolled. Clinically significant findings were defined as those requiring
further follow-up or clearly having features suspicious for lung cancer.
For non- calcified lung nodules, our size cutoff was >4 mm in smokers &
>6 mm in non-smokers. Follow-up & economic data were obtained from review
of hospital & claims records respectively. Mortality data were obtained
by social security death index. Direct costs were calculated from
procedure related costs & health care utilization costs. Results: Of 1139
patients that underwent ACCT (mean age 59.6 11.3 years, women 47%), 1088
had a median follow up of 4 years. We found 62 patients with lung
nodules, 1 with consolidation, 11 with pleural effusion, 5 with pleural
plaques, 1 with esophageal mass, 2 with breast masses, & 5 with
lymphadenopathy. Of these, a total of 15 patients were confirmed to have
lung cancer, 1 with esophageal cancer, 1 breast cancer, & 1 lymphoma, 6
of whom suffered cancer related death. Of the 1001 patients without any
clinically significant findings in whom follow up was available, 22 were
later discovered to have a new cancer diagnosis localized to the chest
within the field of vision of ACCT. Of the 22 patients with cancer, 6
died from their cancer related process, an overall proportion of 0.6%,
markedly less than in those with clinically relevant findings (7%) on
ACCT (chi2 = 28.3, p <0.0001). In the 85 patients with clinically
significant findings, a total of 166 diagnostic procedures (including
bronchoscopy, CT guided biopsy, transbronchial biopsy) & additional
imaging tests were performed to identify the suspicious lesions. Also,
these patients logged a total of 49 ED/inpatient visits & 64 outpatient
visits prior to confirmatory pathological diagnosis. The mean direct cost
of investigating a suspicious lesion that was found to be malignant was
$78,630 (rate current to June 2012). The mean direct cost incurred until
death due to cancer in patients with clinically significant findings was
$341,200 vs. $181,000 (p Background: Radionuclide myocardial imaging is
often performed to rule out cardiac ischemia. One drawback is that tissue
like breast or stomach can result in attenuation artifact. A common
practice involves obtaining a non-contrast low resolution attenuation
corrected chest CT (ACCT). No studies have evaluated the clinical &
economic burden of findings suggestive for lung cancer on these ACCT
images. Methods: Consecutive patients undergoing ACCT from Jan 2005 - Dec
2008 were enrolled. Clinically significant findings were defined as those
requiring further follow-up or clearly having features suspicious for
lung cancer. For non- calcified lung nodules, our size cutoff was >4 mm
in smokers & >6 mm in non-smokers. Follow-up & economic data were
obtained from review of hospital & claims records respectively. Mortality
data were obtained by social security death index. Direct costs were
calculated from procedure related costs & health care utilization costs.
Results: Of 1139 patients that underwent ACCT (mean age 59.6 11.3 years,
women 47%), 1088 had a median follow up of 4 years. We found 62 patients
with lung nodules, 1 with consolidation, 11 with pleural effusion, 5 with
pleural plaques, 1 with esophageal mass, 2 with breast masses, & 5 with
lymphadenopathy. Of these, a total of 15 patients were confirmed to have
lung cancer, 1 with esophageal cancer, 1 breast cancer, & 1 lymphoma, 6
of whom suffered cancer related death. Of the 1001 patients without any
clinically significant findings in whom follow up was available, 22 were
later discovered to have a new cancer diagnosis localized to the chest
within the field of vision of ACCT. Of the 22 patients with cancer, 6
died from their cancer related process, an overall proportion of 0.6%,
markedly less than in those with clinically relevant findings (7%) on
ACCT (chi2 = 28.3, p <0.0001). In the 85 patients with clinically
significant findings, a total of 166 diagnostic procedures (including
bronchoscopy, CT guided biopsy, transbronchial biopsy) & additional
imaging tests were performed to identify the suspicious lesions. Also,
these patients logged a total of 49 ED/inpatient visits & 64 outpatient
visits prior to confirmatory pathological diagnosis. The mean direct cost
of investigating a suspicious lesion that was found to be malignant was
$78,630 (rate current to June 2012). The mean direct cost incurred until
death due to cancer in patients with clinically significant findings was
$341,200 vs. $181,000 (p <0.0001) in patients that died from cancer
located in the chest area that did not initially have a clinically
significant finding. Conclusion: This study is the first of its kind to
characterize the clinical & economic burden of suspicious incidental
findings on ACCT. Despite additional economic burden, patients with
clinically significant incidental findings had a higher mortality rate.

