Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Agtuzumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody, blocks AGR2 function
through conformational epitopes around its catalytic center.


AGR2 is a member of protein disulfide-isomerase (PDI) family and plays an
important role in cancer development including tumorigenesis and
metastasis. Unlike the classical PDI protein with a CxxC catalytic
center, AGR2 contains a CxxS center that function in Mucin2 formation on
the endoplasmic reticulum. However, AGR2 has also been shown to present
in blood plasma and is secreted by several cell lines. As a secreted
small protein, AGR2 is particularly suitable target for antibody medicine
and its functional antibody is under investigation for therapeutic
potentials by several major pharmaceutical firms and academic
institutions but few showed AGR2 any anti-cancer efficacy. Here we report
a humanized monoclonal antibody against AGR2, Agtuzumab, with promising
therapeutic potentials. This antibody blocks AGR2 function in cell
migration and proliferation assays and reduced tumorigenic and angiogenic
potential of xenograft tumors in nude mice. Treatment of AGR2-blocking
antibody reduced the expression of VEGF and VEGFR level in xenograft
tumor tissues for both human tumor and its mouse stroma cells. Scanning
mutagenesis assays revealed discontinuous regions around the CxxS PDI
center. on AGR2 protein that are essential for efficient binding of
Agtuzumab. Our results for the first time confirmed with a potential
therapeutic antibody that AGR2 can be a therapeutic target and its
blocking requires the blockage of a conformational epitope. This result
also explains why many monoclonal antibodies developed against peptides
may not be functional against AGR2 related tumors.

