Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prolyl isomerase Pin1 negatively regulates CDK10 stability to
induce tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer.


Endocrine therapies that inhibit estrogen receptor (ER)- signaling are
the most common and effective treatment for ER--positive breast cancer.
However, the use of these agents is limited by the frequent development
of resistance. The aim of this study was to elucidate the mechanisms by
which downregulation of CDK10 expression confers resistance to tamoxifen
in breast cancer. Here, we show that peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1
downregulates CDK10 protein as a result of its interaction with and
ubiquitination of CDK10, thereby affecting CDK10-dependent Raf-1
phosphorylation (S338). Pin1-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) show
higher CDK10 expression than Pin1+/+ MEFs, whereas CDK10 protein was
downregulated in the rescued Pin1-/- MEFs after reexpression of Pin1.
Pin1 silencing in SKBR-3 and MCF7 cells increased the CDK10 expression.
In human tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer and tamoxifen-resistant MCF7
cells, immunohistochemical staining and immunoblotting analysis shows an
inverse correlation between the expression of CDK10 and the degree of
tamoxifen resistance. There was also a positive correlation between the
high level of P-Raf-1 (Ser338) and Pin1 in human tamoxifen-resistant
breast cancer and tamoxifen-resistant MCF7 (TAMR-MCF7) cells.
Importantly, 4-OH tamoxifen (4-OHT), when used in combination with
overexpressed CDK10 or Raf-1 inhibitor, increased cleaved PARP and DNA
fragmentation to inhibit cologenic growth of MCF7 cells and
tamoxifen-resistant MCF7 cells, respectively. On the basis of these
findings, we suggest that the Pin1-mediated CDK10 ubiquitination is a
major regulator of tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cell growth and
survival.Citation Format: Prem Kharam, Hong Seok Choi. Prolyl isomerase
Pin1 negatively regulates CDK10 stability to induce tamoxifen resistance
in breast cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting
of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5629. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5629

