Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral injection of CpG oligonucleotides induces the
differentiation and reduces the immunosuppressive activity of
myeloid-derived suppressor cells.


Immunostimulatory CpG oligonucleotides (ODN) activate cells that express
TLR9 and have been shown to improve the host's response to tumor Ags.
Unfortunately, the immunosuppressive microenvironment that surrounds many
cancers inhibits Agspecific cellular responses and thus interferes with
CpG-mediated immunotherapy. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC)
represent an important constituent of this immunosuppressive milieu.
Large numbers of MDSC are present in and near tumor sites where they
inhibit the activity of Ag-specific T and NK cells. Current studies
indicate that the delivery of CpG ODN directly into the tumor bed reduces
the immunosuppressive activity of monocytic (CD11b+, Ly6G-, Ly6Chigh)
MDSC. Monocytic MDSC express TLR9 and respond to CpG stimulation by 1)
losing their ability to suppress T cell function, 2) producing Th1
cytokines, and 3) differentiating into macrophages with tumoricidal
capability. These findings provide insight into a novel mechanism by
which CpG ODN contribute to tumor regression, and they support
intratumoral injection as the optimal route for their delivery.Citation
Format: Hidekazu Shirota, Yuko Shirota, Dennis M. Klinman. Intratumoral
injection of CpG oligonucleotides induces the differentiation and reduces
the immunosuppressive activity of myeloid-derived suppressor cells.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 484.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-484

