Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemical disruption of Wnt protein fatty acylation as an
anti-cancer therapeutic strategy.


The secreted Wnt signaling molecules are associated with a broad range of
cancers and represent high priority therapeutic targets. Recently
identified small molecules that disrupt Wnt biosynthesis by disabling the
extracellular acyltransferase Porcupine (Porcn) form the basis of a novel
targeted anti-cancer therapeutic strategy. Porcn is a founding member of
a sixteen gene family known as Membrane-Bound O-Acyltransferases (MBOATs)
that likely control the production of a broad range of disease-relevant
signaling molecules. A deeper understanding of the chemical-protein
interaction that confers Porcn inhibitors with selectivity would
facilitate the engineering of improved Porcn inhibitors and molecules
with activity against other MBOAT family members. Using synthetic fatty
acyl analogues that allow direct labeling of Wnt proteins and chemical
inhibitors of fatty acid metabolic enzymes, we have uncovered that Porcn
utilizes a monounsaturated 16-carbon fatty acid as a substrate. Chemical
disruption of stearoyl-CoA desturase (SCD) that converts palmitate to
palmitoleate blocks Wnt protein production and activity thus revealing
another potential chemical strategy for inhibiting Wnt-dependent
cancerous growth. The inability of several other Porcn family members
with known protein substrates to utilize palmitoleate may account for the
selectivity of Porcn classes of inhibitors. Our study expands the number
of drug targets to include those enzymes that control the production of
secreted signaling molecules and reveals a direct influence of cellular
metabolic status on coordinated and cancerous cell growth regulation.

