Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Agreement of immunohistochemistry, fluorescence in situ
hybridization, real-time quantitative polymerase-chain reaction, and
quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR for Her-2/Neu status assessment in
breast cancer patients: a single center, retrospective m


Background: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescence-in-situ
hybridization (FISH) are the standard methods to assess human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) status in breast cancer (BC) patients.
Real-time quantitative polymerase-chain-reaction (Q-PCR) and quantitative
reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) allow quantitative determination of
gene copy number and gene expression on, respectively, DNA and RNA. These
molecular methods are available to assess HER-2
amplification/overexpression but their use remains controversial. Here we
performed a parallel comparison of these four methods to define their
concordance rates and evaluate their relative role in HER-2 status
determination. Patients and Methods: HER-2 status was determined by IHC,
FISH, Q-PCR and qRT-PCR in a retrospectively assessed cohort of 130 BC
patients. The studied set was enriched in cases scoring as 3+ by standard
IHC analysis. Tests were performed blindly in parallel. Western blotting
was performed on a subset of equivocal cases. Kappa statistics and ROC
curves were used as appropriate, and concordance analyses were
interpreted according to the ASCO/CAP guidelines. Results: Of the 130
enrolled patients, 47 (36%) were classified as positive and 27 (21%) as
equivocal by IHC. With FISH, 50 patients (38%) were HER-2 amplified,
while 80 (62%) were not. The overall agreement between FISH and Q-PCR was
98.5% (95% CI, 94.6% to 99.6%) with a k value of 0.97 (95% CI, 0.92 to
1). Assuming FISH as the standard reference, Q-PCR showed a sensitivity
of 98% (95% CI, 89.5% to 99.6%) and a specificity of 98.8% (95% CI, 93.3%
to 99.8%), with a global accuracy of 98%. The overall agreement between
FISH and qRT-PCR was 96.9% (95% CI, 92.3% to 98.8%) with a k value of
0.94 (95% CI, 0.87 to 1). For both comparisons, the observed concordance
values were greater than the 95% threshold required by the ASCO/CAP
guidelines to validate novel approaches for HER-2 testing. 3% of samples
showed HER-2 overexpression only by qRT-PCR analysis, in all cases
belonging to the equivocal range as defined by either IHC or FISH. In
these patients, WB confirmed higher HER-2 protein levels compared to
healthy diploid controls. Conclusions: The high concordance between FISH
and both Q-PCR and qRT-PCR supports the use of molecular tests as an
alternative to current standard methods. Present results also suggest
that qRT-PCR may be able to unequivocally classify patients belonging to
the IHC/FISH equivocal range. Non-amplified HER-2 overexpressing BCs may
account for the rare trastuzumab-responders observed in phase III trials,
where trastuzumab response was assessed in HER-2-amplified vs.
non-amplified cases.

