Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of cell proliferation by GPR55/cannabinoid receptors
using (R,R)-4-methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol in rat C6 glioma cell line.


(R,R)-4-Methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol (MNF) is a potent inhibitor of the
proliferation of rat C6 glioma cells with an IC(50) of 0.45 nM and
initial in vivo data indicate that the compound may be potentially useful
in the treatment of malignant gliomas. MNF is an agonist of the
(2)-adrenergic receptor and an antagonist of the GPR55 receptor. Previous
studies have demonstrated that MNF inhibits proliferation in 1321N1
astrocytoma cells via the (2)-adrenergic receptor and in HepG2
hetapocallular carcinoma cells via GPR55. In this study, the mechanism of
the observed MNF effect in C6 cells was investigated using
[(3)H]-thymidine incorporation, cell motility assay, and internalization
of the fluorescent GPR55 ligand, Tocrifluor 1117 (T1117). The
anti-mitogenic response of MNF was not affected by the (2)-AR antagonist
3-(isopropylamino)-1-[(7-methyl-4-indanyl)oxy]butan-2-ol (ICI 118,551).
Cell treatment with synthetic agonists of cannabinoid receptors 1 and 2
(WIN-55212,2 and CP55940) led to growth inhibition, whereas pretreatment
with AM251 (0.1-5 M) dose-dependently blocked the anti-mitogenic
responses of MNF. Both AM251 and the atypical cannabinoid O-1602
increased cell motility, which was blocked by MNF. Finally, there was
marked inhibition in the cellular accumulation of T1117 in MNF-treated C6
glioma cells. These results indicate that MNF inhibits proliferation of
C6 cells via GPR55/cannabinoid receptors and not via the (2)-adrenergic
receptor. This work was supported entirely by the Intramural Research
Program of the NIA, NIH.

