Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular response of the axillary lymph node microenvironment to
metastatic colonization.


Breast stroma plays an active role in tumorigenesis, undergoing both
phenotypic and molecular changes to facilitate and promote tumor
development and growth. The metastatic microenvironment also plays a role
in successful colonization; however, the genetic changes in these
secondary microenvironments are not well described.To improve
understanding of the molecular changes associated with metastatic
colonization of a foreign tissue, gene expression data was generated from
lymph node tissues from women with at least one lymph node with
macrometastases and one lymph node with no detectable metastases. Lymph
node tissue was microdissected and hybridized to U133A 2.0 gene
expression arrays. Differential expression was detected using Partek
Genomics Suite6.5 with P2-fold change defining significance. Thirty-four
genes were differentially expressed, 23 genes, including EPCAM, KRT19 and
MUC1, were expressed at significantly higher levels in colonized lymph
nodes and 11 genes, such as CXCL2 and HPGDS, were expressed at
significantly higher levels in non-metastatic lymph nodes. Thus, lymph
node tissue differs in gene expression between those harboring metastatic
tumors and those without metastasis. Genes expressed at higher levels in
colonized lymph nodes are involved in tumorigenesis, suggesting that like
the breast stromal microenvironment, the metastatic microenvironment
undergoes cross-talk with the tumor cells, while genes involved in immune
function are down-regulated in colonized lymph nodes, suggesting that
suppression of proper immune response may be required for successful
metastatic colonization.

