Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Divergent estrogen receptor positive and negative breast cancer
trends and etiologic heterogeneity in Denmark .


Background: Long-term breast cancer trends in incidence in the United
States (US) show rising ER positive rates and falling ER negative rates.
We hypothesized that these divergent trends reflect etiologic
heterogeneity and that comparable trends should be observed in other
countries with similar risk factor profiles.Methods: We analyzed invasive
female breast cancers in Denmark from 1993-2010. We summarized the
overall trend in age-standardized rates with the estimated annual
percentage change (EAPC) statistic, and used age-period-cohort models to
estimate age-specific EAPCs, cohort rate ratios (CRRs), and projections
for future time periods (2011-2018).Results: In Denmark, the overall rate
of ER positive cancers rose between 1993 and 2010 by 30%/year (95% CI: 28
to 33%/yr) while the overall rate of ER negative cancers fell by 21%/year
(95% CI: -25 to -16%/yr). The ER positive rate increased fastest among
postmenopausal women and the ER negative rate decreased fastest among
premenopausal women, reflecting that cohorts born after 1944 were at
relatively higher risk of ER positive tumors and lower risk of ER
negative tumors. If current trends continue, ER positive cancers will
increase at least 13% and ER negative cancers will fall as much as 15% by
2018.Conclusion: Divergent ER-specific trends are consistent with
distinct etiologic pathways. If trends in known risk factors are
responsible, the Danish and US experience may foreshadow a common pattern
worldwide.

