Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transformation by the D816V mutant of c-Kit is dependent on the
PI3-kinase isoform p110 but independent of its lipid kinase activi.


Gain-of-function mutations of the receptor tyrosine kinase c-Kit are
frequently seen in several malignanices with the D816V mutation being the
most common. In this study we demonstrate that a mutant of c-Kit/D816V
that is deficient in binding of the p85 subunit of PI3-kinase (M724A) has
lost its ability to induce ligand-independent cell survival and
proliferation while c-Kit/D816V induced PI3-kinases activity was only
marginally reduced. Furthermore, inhibitors of PI3-kinase were unable to
block c-Kit/D816V-induced cell survival. These data suggest that
PI3-kinase plays a role in c-Kit/D816V induced cell transformation which
is independent of its lipid kinase activity. By mass spectrometry, we
identified a heavily tyrosine-phosphorylated 110 kDa protein associated
with p85 to be the p110 subunit of PI3-kinase and the site of
phosphorylation as Tyr 523, and the phosphorylation is not dependent on
the lipid kinase activity of PI3-kinase. Knockdown of p110 in c-Kit/D816V
expressing Ba/F3 cells led to reduced cell survival and proliferation
while the PI3-kinase activity remained almost intact. The c-Kit/D816V
expressing Ba/F3 cells lost their ability to form colonies in semi-solid
culture if p110 was knocked down. Additionally, knockdown of p110 o o , o
blood vessel formation c-Kit/D816V expressing Ba/F3 cells were
subcutaneously injected into nude mice. Taken together, these results
suggest a kinase independent role of p110 in the D816Vmutant of c-Kit
mediated cell transformation and suggest that p110 could potentially be a
selective therapeutic target for c-Kit/D816V expressing tumors.

