Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The evidence of glioblastoma heterogenity.


Gliomas are composed of heterogeneous combinations of cells, with
different phenotypic characteristics and different proliferative
potentials; however, there is no convincing evidence that only the single
glioma stem cells (GSC) could be representative of patient tumor and
which cell type were the root for tumor growth. Because most tumors have
a clonal origin, GSCs must give rise to phenotypically diverse progenies,
including matured GSCs with indefinite self-renewing potential, as well
as differentiated cancer cells with limited proliferative potential. To
investigate the cellular origin of population diversity, we established 4
subclones from a glioblastoma patient. These subclones were subsequently
propagated and analyzed. All clones expressed stem cell makers (nestin,
sox2, musashi) heterogeneously. The morphology, self-renewal and
proliferative capacities of the subclones were varying. FACS and cDNA
microarray analysis showed that each subclones were composed of distinct
population of cells. The sensitivities of some drug were different. In
animal models, xenografts from subclones, tumor-progression/invasion and
animal survivals were also different. Some clones invaded contra-lateral
hemisphere via tract fiber. Our observations suggest that single cell
derived subclones from a patient is capable of producing phenotypically
heterogeneous self-renewing progenies in an in vitro and in vivo setting.
The functional analysis of the heterogeneous GSC clones may provide a
better understanding of GSC biology and novel means for testing of new
treatment strategies that focus on the eradication of the true GSCs.

