Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SCL8A1 negatively regulated by miR-223 is one candidate for
sodium/calcium transportation and low level of apoptosis in penile
carcinomas.


Background: Penile cancer (PeCa) is a rare disease in developed
countries, but with high incidence in South America and Africa. Surgery
is frequently used for local control of the disease and can lead to
partial or complete amputation of the organ. Integrative analysis of
large-scale gene expression and genomic alterations in PeCa showed
down-expression of the solute carrier family 8 (SLC8A1, sodium/calcium
exchanger) with no genomic changes suggesting that other mechanisms, such
as micro-RNAs, could be involved in gene regulation. Intracellular Ca2+
can contribute to cancer cell proliferation and tumor progression, but
can also induce tumor apoptosis by calcium-regulated cell death pathways.
Therefore, we speculated if the down-expression of SLC8A1 mediated, at
least in part, by miR-223 in penile carcinomas could lead to a reduction
of cellular calcium levels and apoptosis suppression and to contribute
for increased cell proliferation.Aim: This study aimed to confirm the
gene expression patterns of SLC8A1 and miR-223 in PeCa and normal tissues
and to evaluate calcium levels and apoptosis in in a subset of the
samples showing these alterations.Methods: RNA was obtained from 39 fresh
PeCa and 4 normal penile tissues. SLC8A1 gene and miRNA-223 transcript
levels were evaluated by RT-qPCR. Fresh PeCa (n=2) matched with adjacent
(n=1) and normal tissue from autopsy (n=1) showing alterations of SLC8A1
and miRNA-233 were selected and evaluated for calcium distribution by
Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS).
Caspase-3 and Ki-67 were evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 9 selected
PeCa.Results: Significant down-expression of SLC8A1 (P=0.010) and
overexpression of miR-223 (P=0.0072) was detected in tumors in the
comparison with normal controls. A significant negative correlation was
detected between SLC8A1 transcript levels and miR-223 (P=0.015, r =
-0.482), suggesting that this gene is regulated by this miRNA. LA-ICP-MS
mapping revealed decreased calcium levels in tumor cells compared with
adjacent normal cells and also compared with a normal tissue. Penile
carcinoma tissue showed lower calcium counts (Ca44/C13 ratio=5,14 +/-
0,81) compared with normal tissues (Ca44/C13 ratio=6,34 +/- 4,63). In
addition, PeCa presented considerably higher sodium counts (counts per
second = 6.5 x 105) compared with normal tissues (counts per second = 4 x
105). Decreased caspase-3 and increased Ki-67 levels were detected in
tumor tissues, indicating that low-level apoptosis and high cell
proliferation index occurred in these samples.Conclusions: The results
suggested that down-regulation of SLC8A1 gene probably mediated by
miR-223 can contribute to calcium levels reduction in PeCa and
consequently in apoptosis suppression of these cells. Further functional
studies are needed to prove this hypothesis.

