Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigational study of acquired resistance to the EGFR
irreversible inhibitor afatinib (BIBW2992) in wild-type and EGFR-mutant
NSCLC cell lines.


Introduction: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) represents about 85% of
all lung cancers. Almost 20% of NSCLC tumors harbor somatic activating
mutations of the tyrosine kinase (TK) encoding domain in EGFR gene (exons
18-21). Patients with EGFR mutations treated with specific inhibitors of
EGFR-TKI such as gefitinib and erlotinib demonstrated a significantly
longer survival. Nevertheless, the majority of patients acquire
resistance to these drugs within one year due to a second-site mutation
in EGFR (T790M). The irreversible EGFR-TKI, afatinib, has been found to
be effective in inhibiting the growth of NSCLC cells with the T790M
mutation of EGFR. In this study, we generated different NSCLC cell lines
resistant to afatinib to investigate the biological and molecular
mechanisms of acquired resistance.Methods: A dose-escalation study to
establish afatinib-resistant cell lines was performed in 3 NSCLC cell
lines with a different EGFR mutational status: A549 (EGFR-wild type);
H-1650 (exon19 delE746-A750); H-1975 (exon21 L858R/exon20 T790M). EGFR
exons (18-21) from parental and resistant cells were sequenced by Sanger
method while the EGF pathway was studied by qPCR using TaqMan Array EGF
Pathway and relative expression values of 92 genes, compared to parental
cells, were obtained by 2ddCT. Concomitantly, protein expression of some
relevant genes such as EGFR and AKT, both phosphorylated and
unphosphorylated, were investigated by western blot (WB).Results: All 3
cell lines exhibited different degree of drug resistance and actively
proliferated under persistent afatinib pressure (A549: 8.5M; H-1650:
1.0M; H-1975: 5.0M) as compared to parental cultures. WB reported active
phosphorylation of EGFR and AKT in resistant cells regardless of EGFR
mutational status. This behavior also persisted in absence of EGF
stimulation and in cultures maintained in afatinib-free medium for over 2
months. However none of the resistant cell lines harbored new EGFR
mutation in the 4 exons (18-21). Gene expression analysis showed an
increase of some members of RAS (MRAS, KRAS) and Rho families and also
PI3K regulatory subunit 1 (PIK3R1) in A549 and H1975 cells. Notably, SHC3
(Src homology 2 domain containing; transforming protein 3) was
up-regulated about 60-fold in H1975 whereas proto-oncogene JUN showed a
6-fold increase in H1650. In addition EGF was down-modulated in both
H1650 and H1975.Conclusion: Silencing of EGF in resistant cells together
with the EGFR and AKT phosphorylation, suggest that these cultures
acquired a different way to activate the EGF pathway. Furthermore in
H-1975 the markedly increase of SHC3, an adaptor immediately downstream
of EGFR, leads to hypothesize that it could be implicated in the
activation of EGFR. Further investigations of SHC3 involvement in EGF
pathway activation as well as sequencing analysis of the whole EGFR gene
are ongoing.

