Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylcytosine topology: potential of a DNA landmark in
pre-clinical epigenetic drug toxicology.


Cellular reprogramming through drug-based epigenetic intervention has
become a novel approach in the treatment of complex diseases and in
regenerative medicine towards reconstitution of normal cell, tissue and
organ function. Within this context, non-specific and off-target global
DNA demethylation either directly induced by DNA demethylating drugs or
indirectly caused by histone modifiers or any other agent with epigenetic
consequences could impact the cells DNA methylation pattern and lead to
unwanted cryptic DNA methylation toxicity and carcinogenesis: by
influencing chromatin conformation, genome organization, and cellular
gene expression programs. The Translational Cytomics Group at the
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center (Los Angeles) has developed 3D quantitative
DNA Methylation Imaging (3D-qDMI), a non-disruptive image-cytometrical
method that measures the differential load and spatial distribution of
methylated cytosine (MeC) within individual nuclei of thousands of cells
in a cell-by-cell fashion. Thus the technology has the additional
capability of capturing cellular heterogeneity regarding global DNA
methylation properties in response to drug exposure. Utilizing 3D-qDMI we
are currently evaluating these topological parameters, which translate to
differential DNA methylation phenotypes (MeC phenotypes), as potential
chromatin signatures (textures) to be utilized in the characterization of
cells during reprogramming, and for genotoxicity assessment of drugs.

