Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel targets mediating resistance to EGFR/c-Met tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in NSCLC.


Combination therapy of c-Met/EGFR TKIs against c-Met/EGFR, while
initially effective, has been shown to be susceptible to acquired
resistance. To establish a mechanism of TKI resistance, the NSCLC model
cell lines H2170 and H358 were made resistant to the c-Met/EGFR TKIs
SU11274, erlotinib, or a combination by exposing the cells to
progressively increasing concentrations of inhibitors. Phospho-Met
(Tyr1003) was found to be downregulated 4- and 1.5- fold in H2170 and
H358 cells, respectively. Phospho-EGFR was found to be upregulated in
H2170 cells and downregulated in H358 cells. Interestingly, no
significant differences were observed in c-Met/EGFR downstream signaling
proteins, indicating that alternative signaling pathways such as the
canonical Wnt pathway may confer TKI resistance. To determine differences
in Wnt signaling between parental and resistant cell lines,
immunoblotting was performed. In the H2170 erlotinib resistant (H2170-ER)
cell line, a 5- and 6-fold increase in phospho-LRP5/6 as well as a 2- and
3-fold increase in total-LRP5/6 was observed in the presence or absence
of erlotinib, respectively. Furthermore, H2170-ER cells exhibited a 3-
and 16-fold increase in NKD2 as well as a 2.5- and 6-fold increase in
Wnt3A in the presence or absence of EGF, respectively. A 2- to 2.5-fold
increase was also observed in DVL2/3 in the absence of EGF. However, the
Wnt pathway did not seem to have a significant role in H358 cells. Since
EGFR and Wnt signaling are known to exhibit crosstalk, activation of the
Wnt pathway may stimulate activation of EGFR causing resistance. This is
suggested as upregulation of proteins involved in the Wnt pathway was
seen only in the H2170 cell line. These results were confirmed by
treating H2170 cells with the Wnt inhibitor XAV939. MTT analysis
indicated that parental cells showed no significant response to XAV939,
however, resistant cell lines showed a 2-fold decrease in viability when
compared to a c-Met/EGFR TKI combination treatment. We propose a new
treatment modality with Wnt inhibitors which have not yet entered
clinical testing.To identify new targets for NSCLC, stable isotope
labeling by heavy/light amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) coupled with
mass spectroscopy was used. Analysis revealed more than 200 proteins
modulated greater than 1.5-fold, six of which have significant potential
to influence cell growth and survival based on their biological roles in
NSCLC. These proteins include total--catenin, TPR, syntenin, HMGB2, TOM34
and AIF. We are currently using tandem mass tagging (TMT) to further
investigate additional modulated proteins. Proteins of interest
identified by this method include TPD52, erbB2, MESDC2, PIN1, PEA15 and
NRAS. Proteins confirmed to be upregulated/activated in resistant cell
lines will be further investigated as targets which induce drug
resistance in NSCLC.Citation Format: Ryan Jacobs, Jason Fong, David
Moravec, Greg Botting, Ryan Bomgarden, John Rogers, Rosa Viner, Michael
Blank, Neelu Puri. Novel targets mediating resistance to EGFR/c-Met
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in NSCLC. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5653. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5653

