Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of survival prognostic models for non-small-cell lung
cancer instage- and age-specific groups.


Aims: Performance status (PS) is commonly used for patient stratification
in lung cancer clinical trials. Many prognostic models have been proposed
to predict survival for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). It is of
interest to evaluate whether the existing prognostic models perform
better than PS alone in stage- and age-specific trials for patient
stratification. For stage- and age-specific groups, we aim to assess the
performance of several popular prognostic models for overall survival
with NSCLC trial data from Cancer Leukemia Group B (CALGB).Patients and
Methods: Data from Alliance/CALGB were used to validate the following
prognostic models. Using 2979 NSCLC patients, B model (Blanchon et al
2006) was developed on a Cox regression with age, histology, PS, sex and
stage (I-IV) as prognostic variables. Using 9137 surgically resected
NSCLC patients, C model (Chansky et al 2009) was developed via Cox
regression and recursive partitioning and amalgamation analyses with
prognostic variables age, sex and stage (I-IIIA). Using 392 early stage
NSCLC patients, G model (Gail et al 1984) was based on Weibull survival
model with histology, PS and TN stage as prognostic variables. Using 782
advanced NSCLC patients, M model (Mandrekar at al 2006) was developed via
Cox regression with prognostic variables age, BMI, hemoglobin level, PS,
sex, stage (IIIB-IV), white blood cell count. In validation analysis,
1921 stage I (IA-IB) and 1108 stage IV NSCLC patients who participated in
completed CALGB treatment trials and lung cancer tissue bank were
included. For stage I, B, C and G models were evaluated along with the PS
only model. For stage IV, B and M models were evaluated. The concordance
of predicted survival times and risk scores was estimated by c-index
(Harrell et al 1996). Separation of survival curves between risk groups
was examined using Kaplan-Meier method and log rank test. The assessments
were conducted for young (=70) age groups as well as all patients
combined.Results: For stage 1 and young, B and PS have better survival
separation than C and G with c-index for B, PS, C and G equal to 0.587,
0.567, 0.546 and 0.469. Slightly less concordant but similar findings
hold for stage I and old patients with B, PS, C and G equal to 0.607,
0.586, 0.543 and 0.485. For stage IV and young, B and PS perform better
than M with c-index for B, PS and M equal to 0.616, 0.594 and 0.556.
Again, slightly less concordant but similar findings hold for stage IV
and old patients with B, PS and M equal to 0.571, 0.552 and
0.492.Conclusion: Overall, B model performs better than other models for
both stage I and stage IV and each age group. However, none of these
prognostic models yield sufficiently better survival separation and rank
concordance than the PS only model. Further research is needed to develop
prognostic models significantly better than performance status alone for
patient stratification in stage- and age-specific clinical trials.

