Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumoral efficacy of therapeutic human anti-KIR antibody
(BMS-986015/IPH2102) in a preclinical xenograft tumor model.


Natural Killer cells (NK cells) are lymphocytes able to recognize and
kill tumors for which the expression of Major Histocompatibility Complex
(MHC) class I molecules is altered. This missing self recognition is
mediated in humans by the lack of engagement of MHC class I i.e. Human
Leucocyte Antigens (HLA) molecules with NK cell inhibitory receptors that
include Killer Immunoglobulin-like Receptors (KIR). Some tumors escape NK
cell immune surveillance by increasing the expression of HLA molecules on
their surface. Consequently, blocking interactions between KIR and HLA
molecules constitutes an interesting therapeutic strategy. The
anti-KIR2DL1/2/3-specific monoclonal antibody, BMS-986015/IPH2102, is a
human IgG4 that is being developed for treating both hematologic
malignancies and solid tumors.In rodents, the MHC class I inhibitory
system regulating NK cell activation is based on lectin-like family Ly49
but the KIR molecules are not expressed. The objective of this study was
to develop a preclinical model to assess the efficacy of the drug
candidate used in clinical trials, BMS-986015/IPH2102. Mice expressing
the human NK inhibitory KIR2DL3, on the surface of NK cells were
generated on a RAG-1deficient background (KIRtgRAG mice). The human B
cell lymphoma cell line, 721.221, transduced with HLA-Cw3 molecule, a
ligand of KIR2DL3, was intra-venously engrafted in these mice. The
expression of HLA-C by tumor cells was sufficient to allow them to escape
control of NK cells, leading to mice death in around 30 days. IPH2102
treatment increased mice survival in a dose dependent manner when
injected at the same time as the tumor challenge. This protective effect
was NK cell mediated and directly correlated with the duration of KIR
saturation. Interestingly, BMS-986015/IPH2102 treatment also improved
survival in therapeutic conditions i.e. when the antibody was injected 5
days after the tumor, also in a NK cell dependent manner.In conclusion,
this study showed efficacy of BMS-986015/IPH2102 as single agent in a
HLA-Cw3-expressing tumor model and this xenogenic pre-clinical model will
be an excellent tool to investigate the therapeutic benefits of
combination treatments.

