Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiopoietin 2 is elevated in patients with RCC, and Ang2
inhibition improves antiantiogenic activity of sunitinib in a mouse model
of RCC.


Background: Several small molecules targeting angiogenic receptor
tyrosine kinases (TKIs) are approved for treatment of advanced RCC. While
many patients (pts) respond to TKIs, resistance develops in all. Ang2 is
a secreted glycoprotein that is upregulated at sites of angiogenesis and
has been implicated in cancer neovascularization. Ang2 is elevated in
many cancer states, and higher levels are associated with poor prognosis.
Recent studies have also suggested efficacy of combined Ang and VEGFR
inhibition as therapy in RCC.Mehtods: A panel of angiogenic genes was
analyzed by RT-PCR in several tumor vs normal tissues. Plasma Ang2 levels
in pts with RCC were measured in duplicate at baseline, on treatment with
sunitinib (median 34.5 days after starting sunitinib), and at resistance
to sunitinib. Finally, dual Ang1/2 (AMG 386) or Ang2 (L1-7) inhibition
was also tested in a murine RCC xenograft model of resistance to VEGFR
inhibition. Tumors were assessed for blood flow by arterial spin labeled
(ASL) MRI.Results: Among the genes studied, Ang2 levels were 6.7 fold
higher in human tumors vs normal (nl) tissues, and 12.6 fold higher in
RCC vs nl. RCC ranked highest for Ang2 expression across all the tumor
types tested, with Ang2 levels in RCC being 2.8 fold higher than in all
other tumor types. VEGF and KDR showed similar results, with both
exhibiting higher levels in tumors vs nl tissues (7.5 fold for VEGF and 2
fold for KDR). VEGF was 25.5 fold higher in RCC vs nl, and KDR was 6 fold
higher in RCC vs nl. VEGF and KDR were also higher in RCC than all other
tumor types (7.0 fold for VEGF and 6.5 fold for KDR).Plasma Ang2 was
significantly higher in pts with metastatic RCC (n=50) compared to
controls (n=26) and pts with stage I disease (n=39) (PBackground: Several
small molecules targeting angiogenic receptor tyrosine kinases (TKIs) are
approved for treatment of advanced RCC. While many patients (pts) respond
to TKIs, resistance develops in all. Ang2 is a secreted glycoprotein that
is upregulated at sites of angiogenesis and has been implicated in cancer
neovascularization. Ang2 is elevated in many cancer states, and higher
levels are associated with poor prognosis. Recent studies have also
suggested efficacy of combined Ang and VEGFR inhibition as therapy in
RCC.Mehtods: A panel of angiogenic genes was analyzed by RT-PCR in
several tumor vs normal tissues. Plasma Ang2 levels in pts with RCC were
measured in duplicate at baseline, on treatment with sunitinib (median
34.5 days after starting sunitinib), and at resistance to sunitinib.
Finally, dual Ang1/2 (AMG 386) or Ang2 (L1-7) inhibition was also tested
in a murine RCC xenograft model of resistance to VEGFR inhibition. Tumors
were assessed for blood flow by arterial spin labeled (ASL) MRI.Results:
Among the genes studied, Ang2 levels were 6.7 fold higher in human tumors
vs normal (nl) tissues, and 12.6 fold higher in RCC vs nl. RCC ranked
highest for Ang2 expression across all the tumor types tested, with Ang2
levels in RCC being 2.8 fold higher than in all other tumor types. VEGF
and KDR showed similar results, with both exhibiting higher levels in
tumors vs nl tissues (7.5 fold for VEGF and 2 fold for KDR). VEGF was
25.5 fold higher in RCC vs nl, and KDR was 6 fold higher in RCC vs nl.
VEGF and KDR were also higher in RCC than all other tumor types (7.0 fold
for VEGF and 6.5 fold for KDR).Plasma Ang2 was significantly higher in
pts with metastatic RCC (n=50) compared to controls (n=26) and pts with
stage I disease (n=39) (P<0.001). Ang2 was also measured in pts at
baseline, day 28 and at time of progression on sunitinib. Plasma Ang2
decreased at day 28 (n=39 pairs) and increased at the time of disease
progression (n=28 pairs) (PBackground: Several small molecules targeting
angiogenic receptor tyrosine kinases (TKIs) are approved for treatment of
advanced RCC. While many patients (pts) respond to TKIs, resistance
develops in all. Ang2 is a secreted glycoprotein that is upregulated at
sites of angiogenesis and has been implicated in cancer
neovascularization. Ang2 is elevated in many cancer states, and higher
levels are associated with poor prognosis. Recent studies have also
suggested efficacy of combined Ang and VEGFR inhibition as therapy in
RCC.Mehtods: A panel of angiogenic genes was analyzed by RT-PCR in
several tumor vs normal tissues. Plasma Ang2 levels in pts with RCC were
measured in duplicate at baseline, on treatment with sunitinib (median
34.5 days after starting sunitinib), and at resistance to sunitinib.
Finally, dual Ang1/2 (AMG 386) or Ang2 (L1-7) inhibition was also tested
in a murine RCC xenograft model of resistance to VEGFR inhibition. Tumors
were assessed for blood flow by arterial spin labeled (ASL) MRI.Results:
Among the genes studied, Ang2 levels were 6.7 fold higher in human tumors
vs normal (nl) tissues, and 12.6 fold higher in RCC vs nl. RCC ranked
highest for Ang2 expression across all the tumor types tested, with Ang2
levels in RCC being 2.8 fold higher than in all other tumor types. VEGF
and KDR showed similar results, with both exhibiting higher levels in
tumors vs nl tissues (7.5 fold for VEGF and 2 fold for KDR). VEGF was
25.5 fold higher in RCC vs nl, and KDR was 6 fold higher in RCC vs nl.
VEGF and KDR were also higher in RCC than all other tumor types (7.0 fold
for VEGF and 6.5 fold for KDR).Plasma Ang2 was significantly higher in
pts with metastatic RCC (n=50) compared to controls (n=26) and pts with
stage I disease (n=39) (P<0.001). Ang2 was also measured in pts at
baseline, day 28 and at time of progression on sunitinib. Plasma Ang2
decreased at day 28 (n=39 pairs) and increased at the time of disease
progression (n=28 pairs) (P<0.001). In our mouse model of RCC, dual
Ang1/2 (AMG 386) or Ang2 (L1-7) inhibition improved the activity of
sunitinib (su) (time to progression on su, su+AMG 386, su+L1-7 =
25.612.4, 48.213.5, or 51.917.2 days, respectively (PBackground: Several
small molecules targeting angiogenic receptor tyrosine kinases (TKIs) are
approved for treatment of advanced RCC. While many patients (pts) respond
to TKIs, resistance develops in all. Ang2 is a secreted glycoprotein that
is upregulated at sites of angiogenesis and has been implicated in cancer
neovascularization. Ang2 is elevated in many cancer states, and higher
levels are associated with poor prognosis. Recent studies have also
suggested efficacy of combined Ang and VEGFR inhibition as therapy in
RCC.Mehtods: A panel of angiogenic genes was analyzed by RT-PCR in
several tumor vs normal tissues. Plasma Ang2 levels in pts with RCC were
measured in duplicate at baseline, on treatment with sunitinib (median
34.5 days after starting sunitinib), and at resistance to sunitinib.
Finally, dual Ang1/2 (AMG 386) or Ang2 (L1-7) inhibition was also tested
in a murine RCC xenograft model of resistance to VEGFR inhibition. Tumors
were assessed for blood flow by arterial spin labeled (ASL) MRI.Results:
Among the genes studied, Ang2 levels were 6.7 fold higher in human tumors
vs normal (nl) tissues, and 12.6 fold higher in RCC vs nl. RCC ranked
highest for Ang2 expression across all the tumor types tested, with Ang2
levels in RCC being 2.8 fold higher than in all other tumor types. VEGF
and KDR showed similar results, with both exhibiting higher levels in
tumors vs nl tissues (7.5 fold for VEGF and 2 fold for KDR). VEGF was
25.5 fold higher in RCC vs nl, and KDR was 6 fold higher in RCC vs nl.
VEGF and KDR were also higher in RCC than all other tumor types (7.0 fold
for VEGF and 6.5 fold for KDR).Plasma Ang2 was significantly higher in
pts with metastatic RCC (n=50) compared to controls (n=26) and pts with
stage I disease (n=39) (P<0.001). Ang2 was also measured in pts at
baseline, day 28 and at time of progression on sunitinib. Plasma Ang2
decreased at day 28 (n=39 pairs) and increased at the time of disease
progression (n=28 pairs) (P<0.001). In our mouse model of RCC, dual
Ang1/2 (AMG 386) or Ang2 (L1-7) inhibition improved the activity of
sunitinib (su) (time to progression on su, su+AMG 386, su+L1-7 =
25.612.4, 48.213.5, or 51.917.2 days, respectively (P<0.05). Treatment
with these agents exhibited a trend towards reduction in residual viable
tissue after combination treatment and prevented the resumption of blood
flow as measured with ASL MRI with sunitinib alone (tumor perfusion on
day 50 post-treatment with su, su+AMG 386, su+L1-7 = 36.715.0, 18.411.1,
or 16.07.3 ml/100g/min, respectively, PBackground: Several small
molecules targeting angiogenic receptor tyrosine kinases (TKIs) are
approved for treatment of advanced RCC. While many patients (pts) respond
to TKIs, resistance develops in all. Ang2 is a secreted glycoprotein that
is upregulated at sites of angiogenesis and has been implicated in cancer
neovascularization. Ang2 is elevated in many cancer states, and higher
levels are associated with poor prognosis. Recent studies have also
suggested efficacy of combined Ang and VEGFR inhibition as therapy in
RCC.Mehtods: A panel of angiogenic genes was analyzed by RT-PCR in
several tumor vs normal tissues. Plasma Ang2 levels in pts with RCC were
measured in duplicate at baseline, on treatment with sunitinib (median
34.5 days after starting sunitinib), and at resistance to sunitinib.
Finally, dual Ang1/2 (AMG 386) or Ang2 (L1-7) inhibition was also tested
in a murine RCC xenograft model of resistance to VEGFR inhibition. Tumors
were assessed for blood flow by arterial spin labeled (ASL) MRI.Results:
Among the genes studied, Ang2 levels were 6.7 fold higher in human tumors
vs normal (nl) tissues, and 12.6 fold higher in RCC vs nl. RCC ranked
highest for Ang2 expression across all the tumor types tested, with Ang2
levels in RCC being 2.8 fold higher than in all other tumor types. VEGF
and KDR showed similar results, with both exhibiting higher levels in
tumors vs nl tissues (7.5 fold for VEGF and 2 fold for KDR). VEGF was
25.5 fold higher in RCC vs nl, and KDR was 6 fold higher in RCC vs nl.
VEGF and KDR were also higher in RCC than all other tumor types (7.0 fold
for VEGF and 6.5 fold for KDR).Plasma Ang2 was significantly higher in
pts with metastatic RCC (n=50) compared to controls (n=26) and pts with
stage I disease (n=39) (P<0.001). Ang2 was also measured in pts at
baseline, day 28 and at time of progression on sunitinib. Plasma Ang2
decreased at day 28 (n=39 pairs) and increased at the time of disease
progression (n=28 pairs) (P<0.001). In our mouse model of RCC, dual
Ang1/2 (AMG 386) or Ang2 (L1-7) inhibition improved the activity of
sunitinib (su) (time to progression on su, su+AMG 386, su+L1-7 =
25.612.4, 48.213.5, or 51.917.2 days, respectively (P<0.05). Treatment
with these agents exhibited a trend towards reduction in residual viable
tissue after combination treatment and prevented the resumption of blood
flow as measured with ASL MRI with sunitinib alone (tumor perfusion on
day 50 post-treatment with su, su+AMG 386, su+L1-7 = 36.715.0, 18.411.1,
or 16.07.3 ml/100g/min, respectively, P<0.01).Conclusion: Ang2 inhibition
is elevated in pts with RCC, and Ang2 inhibition improves the activity of
sunitinib in our mouse model of resistance. Plasma Ang2 levels increase
in pts treated with sunitinib and may contribute to resistance to
therapy. It is possible that the subset of pts with the highest Ang2 at
resistance may be the optimal candidates for combination of these
antiangiogenic agents.

