Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between a COX2 polymorphism and ER status in relation
to risk for early events in breast cancer patients.


Background. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) polymorphisms are associated with
cancer in the lung, colorectum, and breast. In several studies, the COX2
rs5277 variant has been implicated in cancers associated with
inflammation. COX-2 is the rate-limiting enzyme in the production of the
pro-inflammatory prostaglandin, which activates CYP19 transcription and
increases CYP19 (aromatase) levels, the key enzyme in androgen to
estrogen conversion. The aim of this study was to investigate whether
associations between the COX2 rs5277 polymorphism and early breast cancer
events vary according to ER-status. Methods. COX2 rs5277 (306G>C, V102V)
was genotyped with PCR based methods in 634 breast cancer patients in a
population-based ongoing cohort from southern Sweden. Clinical data were
obtained from patient charts and pathology reports. Rs5277 was examined
in relation to patient, tumor characteristics and early events. Results.
Minor allele frequency was 16.1%. Rs5277 was not associated with patient
or tumor characteristics. Median follow-up was 4.92 years in patients
with invasive tumors. Overall, increasing number of C-alleles was not
associated with early events (Log Rank 1df; p=0.35). However, after
stratification according to ER status, increasing number of C-alleles was
associated with a fewer early events in the 73 patients with ER-negative
tumors (Log Rank 1df; p=0.029) and borderline associated with more early
events among the among the 497 patients with ER-positive tumors (Log Rank
1df; p=0.081). The interaction between ER-status and COX2 rs5277 on early
events was significant (pinteraction=0.010). In a multivariate model
among patients with ER-positive tumors, a CC genotype predicted an
increased risk for early events (HR 4.25; 95 %CI 1.18-15.29; p=0.027),
adjusted for tumor size (pT), nodal involvement, age, and histological
grade. None of the patients with a CC genotype and an ER-negative tumor
had a breast cancer event during the follow-up. Conclusion. The results
indicate that the association between the COX2 rs5277 polymorphism and
early breast cancer events varies according to ER-status. Information on
rs5277 genotype may provide additional prognostic information for
individual breast cancer patients.

