Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of an RGD containing soluble pro-inflammatory form of
the XL313 cryptic collagen epitope during tumor growth and inflammation.


Evidence indicates that malignant tumor progression depends not only on
tumor cells themselves, but also on stromal cells of the malignant lesion
including tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). TAMs have been suggested
to contribute to changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) through
remodeling of architectural proteins like type-I collagen. Our previous
studies have shown that remodeling of the ECM results in localized
triggering of what we have termed biomechanical ECM switches resulting in
exposure of cryptic ECM epitopes. In this regard, collagen has a number
of Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) containing cryptic sites and soluble RGD containing
reagents are currently being developed for the treatment of malignant
tumors. However, it is not known if the distinct cryptic RGD elements in
type-I collagen are functionally redundant or if specific flanking
sequences convey differential control of cellular behavior. In this
regard, we previously generated a series of monoclonal antibodies (Mabs)
that target distinct RGD containing cryptic sites of type-I collagen. One
of these Mabs designated XL313 exhibits selective recognition of the
conserved RGDKGE cryptic element and significantly (PEvidence indicates
that malignant tumor progression depends not only on tumor cells
themselves, but also on stromal cells of the malignant lesion including
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). TAMs have been suggested to
contribute to changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) through
remodeling of architectural proteins like type-I collagen. Our previous
studies have shown that remodeling of the ECM results in localized
triggering of what we have termed biomechanical ECM switches resulting in
exposure of cryptic ECM epitopes. In this regard, collagen has a number
of Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) containing cryptic sites and soluble RGD containing
reagents are currently being developed for the treatment of malignant
tumors. However, it is not known if the distinct cryptic RGD elements in
type-I collagen are functionally redundant or if specific flanking
sequences convey differential control of cellular behavior. In this
regard, we previously generated a series of monoclonal antibodies (Mabs)
that target distinct RGD containing cryptic sites of type-I collagen. One
of these Mabs designated XL313 exhibits selective recognition of the
conserved RGDKGE cryptic element and significantly (P<0.05) inhibits
B16F10 melanoma tumor growth as well as growth factor induced
angiogenesis and inflammation in vivo. Interestingly, Mab XL166,
selective for the RGDAPG collagen cryptic eptitope, showed no effect on
tumor growth, angiogenesis or inflammation. To evaluate the role of the
XL313 epitope in angiogenesis and inflammation in more detail, we
examined its exposure in inflammed tissues. While the XL313 epitope was
detected in close proximity to angiogenic blood vessels, the majority of
the epitope localized to what appeared to be inflammatory infiltrates,
suggesting a role for inflammatory cells in generating the XL313 collagen
element. Here we provide evidence that a soluble form of the RGD
containing XL313 epitope is generated by macrophages through a mechanism
dependent in part on cathepsin activity, as a cathepsin inhibitor reduced
generation of the XL313 epitope. Importantly, elevated levels of a
circulating form of the XL313 epitope were detected, while lower levels
of the related XL166 RGD epitope were observed in these samples following
FGF-induced inflammation of the Chick CAM. Given these findings, we
sought to determine whether the soluble XL313 epitope might induce
inflammation in vivo. Our findings indicate that the RGD containing XL313
epitope, but not the XL166, epitope significantly (PEvidence indicates
that malignant tumor progression depends not only on tumor cells
themselves, but also on stromal cells of the malignant lesion including
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). TAMs have been suggested to
contribute to changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) through
remodeling of architectural proteins like type-I collagen. Our previous
studies have shown that remodeling of the ECM results in localized
triggering of what we have termed biomechanical ECM switches resulting in
exposure of cryptic ECM epitopes. In this regard, collagen has a number
of Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) containing cryptic sites and soluble RGD containing
reagents are currently being developed for the treatment of malignant
tumors. However, it is not known if the distinct cryptic RGD elements in
type-I collagen are functionally redundant or if specific flanking
sequences convey differential control of cellular behavior. In this
regard, we previously generated a series of monoclonal antibodies (Mabs)
that target distinct RGD containing cryptic sites of type-I collagen. One
of these Mabs designated XL313 exhibits selective recognition of the
conserved RGDKGE cryptic element and significantly (P<0.05) inhibits
B16F10 melanoma tumor growth as well as growth factor induced
angiogenesis and inflammation in vivo. Interestingly, Mab XL166,
selective for the RGDAPG collagen cryptic eptitope, showed no effect on
tumor growth, angiogenesis or inflammation. To evaluate the role of the
XL313 epitope in angiogenesis and inflammation in more detail, we
examined its exposure in inflammed tissues. While the XL313 epitope was
detected in close proximity to angiogenic blood vessels, the majority of
the epitope localized to what appeared to be inflammatory infiltrates,
suggesting a role for inflammatory cells in generating the XL313 collagen
element. Here we provide evidence that a soluble form of the RGD
containing XL313 epitope is generated by macrophages through a mechanism
dependent in part on cathepsin activity, as a cathepsin inhibitor reduced
generation of the XL313 epitope. Importantly, elevated levels of a
circulating form of the XL313 epitope were detected, while lower levels
of the related XL166 RGD epitope were observed in these samples following
FGF-induced inflammation of the Chick CAM. Given these findings, we
sought to determine whether the soluble XL313 epitope might induce
inflammation in vivo. Our findings indicate that the RGD containing XL313
epitope, but not the XL166, epitope significantly (P<0.05) induced
inflammation in vivo, suggesting that generation of distinct RGD
containing collagen peptides might have distinct roles in inflammation.
Our findings are consistent with a novel mechanism by which generation of
a specific highly conserved cryptic RGD collagen peptide might enhance
rather than inhibit inflammation in vivo, and thus contribute to tumor
progression.

