Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular ferritin is a tumorigenic factor and is secreted by
tumor-associated macrophages: A functional link between inflammation and
tumorigenesis.


Tumor-associated macrophages play a critical role in breast tumor
development and progression; however, it is still unclear what effector
molecular mechanisms they employ to impact tumorigenesis. Ferritin is the
primary intracellular iron storage protein and is also abundant in
circulation. In breast cancer patients, ferritin is detected at higher
levels in both serum and tumor lysates, and its increase correlates with
poor clinical outcome. In this study, we have performed a comprehensive
examination of the distribution of ferritin in normal and malignant
breast tissue at different stages in tumor development. We demonstrated
decreased ferritin expression in cancer cells but increased infiltration
of ferritin-rich CD68-positive macrophages with increased histological
grade. Interestingly, ferritin stained within the stroma surrounding
tumor tissue suggesting local release within the breast. In cell culture,
primary macrophages, but not breast cancer cells, were capable of
ferritin secretion and this secretion was further increased in response
to the inflammatory cytokines TNF and IL-1. We next examined the possible
functional significance of extracellular ferritin in a breast cancer cell
culture model. Ferritin stimulated the proliferation of the human breast
cancer cell lines MCF7 and T47D in an iron-independent manner suggesting
a direct and novel function for this protein in tumorigenesis. To provide
further support to this concept, we measured the inflammatory biomarker
serum ferritin in advanced breast cancer patients receiving combinational
therapeutics (n=66). Serum ferritin was elevated in approximately 50% of
the patients and this elevation was predictive of progression-free
survival (P=0.004, median 8.30 vs. 23.90 months) and overall survival
(PTumor-associated macrophages play a critical role in breast tumor
development and progression; however, it is still unclear what effector
molecular mechanisms they employ to impact tumorigenesis. Ferritin is the
primary intracellular iron storage protein and is also abundant in
circulation. In breast cancer patients, ferritin is detected at higher
levels in both serum and tumor lysates, and its increase correlates with
poor clinical outcome. In this study, we have performed a comprehensive
examination of the distribution of ferritin in normal and malignant
breast tissue at different stages in tumor development. We demonstrated
decreased ferritin expression in cancer cells but increased infiltration
of ferritin-rich CD68-positive macrophages with increased histological
grade. Interestingly, ferritin stained within the stroma surrounding
tumor tissue suggesting local release within the breast. In cell culture,
primary macrophages, but not breast cancer cells, were capable of
ferritin secretion and this secretion was further increased in response
to the inflammatory cytokines TNF and IL-1. We next examined the possible
functional significance of extracellular ferritin in a breast cancer cell
culture model. Ferritin stimulated the proliferation of the human breast
cancer cell lines MCF7 and T47D in an iron-independent manner suggesting
a direct and novel function for this protein in tumorigenesis. To provide
further support to this concept, we measured the inflammatory biomarker
serum ferritin in advanced breast cancer patients receiving combinational
therapeutics (n=66). Serum ferritin was elevated in approximately 50% of
the patients and this elevation was predictive of progression-free
survival (P=0.004, median 8.30 vs. 23.90 months) and overall survival
(P<0.0001, median 12.73 vs. 69.57 months). When patients were stratified
based on their levels for serum ferritin and the hepatic inflammatory
biomarker C-reactive protein (CRP), elevation in serum ferritin alone was
predictive of shorter survival while elevation in CRP alone was not.
Moreover, serum ferritin and CRP showed independent prognostic value in a
multivariate model. Overall, the independent prognostic value of serum
ferritin indicates that its increase is not caused exclusively by
inflammation-induced secretion by the liver and that it may have direct
functional significance on breast tumors. In conclusion, the
identification of tumor-associated macrophages as the major site of
ferritin expression and release within breast tumors as well as the
tumorigenic effects of extracellular ferritin introduces novel
therapeutic targets and molecular diagnostic tools for breast cancer. The
targeting of ferritin's functionality or secretion within the tumor
microenvironment may have clinical efficacy regardless of tumor site or
molecular subtype.

