Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of elacytarabine and daunorubicin is significantly
more effective than combination of cytarabine and daunorubicin in primary
patient xenografts of AML.


Background: The overall survival rate in patients with acute myeloid
leukaemia has changed little in the last 20 years with overall survival
rates for young patients (60 years, survival statistics are less than 10%
being cured (2). Although AML has become one of the most molecularly
characterised malignancies, the core therapeutic option remains unchanged
in the last 15 years i.e. We continue to be solely reliant upon a
combination of anthracycline and Cytarabine (Ara-C) as the cornerstone of
induction therapy. Recently many potentially drugable targets have been
revealed (3-7) and while responses have been observed, these are
generally amongst sub-sets of patients with good to intermediate
prognostic factors and most often in combination with conventional
therapy.Aims and methods: Elacytarabine (ELA; CP-4055) is a fatty acid
derivative of Ara-C, currently in undergoing phase II and phase III
clinical trial as second-course remission-induction therapy and in late
stage AML, respectively. In this study we determined the MTD for the
combination of ELA in combination with Daunorubicin (DAN) in NSG mice.
Subsequently, we compared the preclinical efficacy of the combination of
ELA (30 mg/kg; q.d.x5) or Ara-C (500 mg/kg; q.d.x2) with DAN (2.5 mg/kg;
q.d.x3) in primary xenografts in NSG mice (n = 24) from relapsed
(Ara-C+DAN) AML patients. Employing a novel time-domain imaging strategy
(8) we non-invasively monitored disease progression following therapy.
Similarly marrow aspirates were assayed for AML content by flow cytometry
and IHC analysis.Results: The combination of ELA and DAN was well
tolerated in NSG mice xenografted with primary patient AML cells. While
longitudinal near infrared optical imaging of AML disease burden
illustrated lower disease burden in Ara-C + DAN treated mice than
controls (pBackground: The overall survival rate in patients with acute
myeloid leukaemia has changed little in the last 20 years with overall
survival rates for young patients (60 years, survival statistics are less
than 10% being cured (2). Although AML has become one of the most
molecularly characterised malignancies, the core therapeutic option
remains unchanged in the last 15 years i.e. We continue to be solely
reliant upon a combination of anthracycline and Cytarabine (Ara-C) as the
cornerstone of induction therapy. Recently many potentially drugable
targets have been revealed (3-7) and while responses have been observed,
these are generally amongst sub-sets of patients with good to
intermediate prognostic factors and most often in combination with
conventional therapy.Aims and methods: Elacytarabine (ELA; CP-4055) is a
fatty acid derivative of Ara-C, currently in undergoing phase II and
phase III clinical trial as second-course remission-induction therapy and
in late stage AML, respectively. In this study we determined the MTD for
the combination of ELA in combination with Daunorubicin (DAN) in NSG
mice. Subsequently, we compared the preclinical efficacy of the
combination of ELA (30 mg/kg; q.d.x5) or Ara-C (500 mg/kg; q.d.x2) with
DAN (2.5 mg/kg; q.d.x3) in primary xenografts in NSG mice (n = 24) from
relapsed (Ara-C+DAN) AML patients. Employing a novel time-domain imaging
strategy (8) we non-invasively monitored disease progression following
therapy. Similarly marrow aspirates were assayed for AML content by flow
cytometry and IHC analysis.Results: The combination of ELA and DAN was
well tolerated in NSG mice xenografted with primary patient AML cells.
While longitudinal near infrared optical imaging of AML disease burden
illustrated lower disease burden in Ara-C + DAN treated mice than
controls (p<0.05), those treated with ELA+DAN demonstrated significantly
reduced disease burden, both in comparison to controls (pBackground: The
overall survival rate in patients with acute myeloid leukaemia has
changed little in the last 20 years with overall survival rates for young
patients (60 years, survival statistics are less than 10% being cured
(2). Although AML has become one of the most molecularly characterised
malignancies, the core therapeutic option remains unchanged in the last
15 years i.e. We continue to be solely reliant upon a combination of
anthracycline and Cytarabine (Ara-C) as the cornerstone of induction
therapy. Recently many potentially drugable targets have been revealed
(3-7) and while responses have been observed, these are generally amongst
sub-sets of patients with good to intermediate prognostic factors and
most often in combination with conventional therapy.Aims and methods:
Elacytarabine (ELA; CP-4055) is a fatty acid derivative of Ara-C,
currently in undergoing phase II and phase III clinical trial as
second-course remission-induction therapy and in late stage AML,
respectively. In this study we determined the MTD for the combination of
ELA in combination with Daunorubicin (DAN) in NSG mice. Subsequently, we
compared the preclinical efficacy of the combination of ELA (30 mg/kg;
q.d.x5) or Ara-C (500 mg/kg; q.d.x2) with DAN (2.5 mg/kg; q.d.x3) in
primary xenografts in NSG mice (n = 24) from relapsed (Ara-C+DAN) AML
patients. Employing a novel time-domain imaging strategy (8) we
non-invasively monitored disease progression following therapy. Similarly
marrow aspirates were assayed for AML content by flow cytometry and IHC
analysis.Results: The combination of ELA and DAN was well tolerated in
NSG mice xenografted with primary patient AML cells. While longitudinal
near infrared optical imaging of AML disease burden illustrated lower
disease burden in Ara-C + DAN treated mice than controls (p<0.05), those
treated with ELA+DAN demonstrated significantly reduced disease burden,
both in comparison to controls (p<0.001) and Ara-C+DAN (pBackground: The
overall survival rate in patients with acute myeloid leukaemia has
changed little in the last 20 years with overall survival rates for young
patients (60 years, survival statistics are less than 10% being cured
(2). Although AML has become one of the most molecularly characterised
malignancies, the core therapeutic option remains unchanged in the last
15 years i.e. We continue to be solely reliant upon a combination of
anthracycline and Cytarabine (Ara-C) as the cornerstone of induction
therapy. Recently many potentially drugable targets have been revealed
(3-7) and while responses have been observed, these are generally amongst
sub-sets of patients with good to intermediate prognostic factors and
most often in combination with conventional therapy.Aims and methods:
Elacytarabine (ELA; CP-4055) is a fatty acid derivative of Ara-C,
currently in undergoing phase II and phase III clinical trial as
second-course remission-induction therapy and in late stage AML,
respectively. In this study we determined the MTD for the combination of
ELA in combination with Daunorubicin (DAN) in NSG mice. Subsequently, we
compared the preclinical efficacy of the combination of ELA (30 mg/kg;
q.d.x5) or Ara-C (500 mg/kg; q.d.x2) with DAN (2.5 mg/kg; q.d.x3) in
primary xenografts in NSG mice (n = 24) from relapsed (Ara-C+DAN) AML
patients. Employing a novel time-domain imaging strategy (8) we
non-invasively monitored disease progression following therapy. Similarly
marrow aspirates were assayed for AML content by flow cytometry and IHC
analysis.Results: The combination of ELA and DAN was well tolerated in
NSG mice xenografted with primary patient AML cells. While longitudinal
near infrared optical imaging of AML disease burden illustrated lower
disease burden in Ara-C + DAN treated mice than controls (p<0.05), those
treated with ELA+DAN demonstrated significantly reduced disease burden,
both in comparison to controls (p<0.001) and Ara-C+DAN (p<0.01) treated
mice. Flow cytometry analysis of bone marrow aspirates revealed similar
reductions in ELA treated mice. Ultimately, combination of ELA+DAN
exhibited significant increases in mean survival time (45 4.6 days) over
control (31.6 1.7 days; pBackground: The overall survival rate in
patients with acute myeloid leukaemia has changed little in the last 20
years with overall survival rates for young patients (60 years, survival
statistics are less than 10% being cured (2). Although AML has become one
of the most molecularly characterised malignancies, the core therapeutic
option remains unchanged in the last 15 years i.e. We continue to be
solely reliant upon a combination of anthracycline and Cytarabine (Ara-C)
as the cornerstone of induction therapy. Recently many potentially
drugable targets have been revealed (3-7) and while responses have been
observed, these are generally amongst sub-sets of patients with good to
intermediate prognostic factors and most often in combination with
conventional therapy.Aims and methods: Elacytarabine (ELA; CP-4055) is a
fatty acid derivative of Ara-C, currently in undergoing phase II and
phase III clinical trial as second-course remission-induction therapy and
in late stage AML, respectively. In this study we determined the MTD for
the combination of ELA in combination with Daunorubicin (DAN) in NSG
mice. Subsequently, we compared the preclinical efficacy of the
combination of ELA (30 mg/kg; q.d.x5) or Ara-C (500 mg/kg; q.d.x2) with
DAN (2.5 mg/kg; q.d.x3) in primary xenografts in NSG mice (n = 24) from
relapsed (Ara-C+DAN) AML patients. Employing a novel time-domain imaging
strategy (8) we non-invasively monitored disease progression following
therapy. Similarly marrow aspirates were assayed for AML content by flow
cytometry and IHC analysis.Results: The combination of ELA and DAN was
well tolerated in NSG mice xenografted with primary patient AML cells.
While longitudinal near infrared optical imaging of AML disease burden
illustrated lower disease burden in Ara-C + DAN treated mice than
controls (p<0.05), those treated with ELA+DAN demonstrated significantly
reduced disease burden, both in comparison to controls (p<0.001) and
Ara-C+DAN (p<0.01) treated mice. Flow cytometry analysis of bone marrow
aspirates revealed similar reductions in ELA treated mice. Ultimately,
combination of ELA+DAN exhibited significant increases in mean survival
time (45 4.6 days) over control (31.6 1.7 days; p<0.0001) and Ara-C+DAN
treated mice (39 3.2 days; pBackground: The overall survival rate in
patients with acute myeloid leukaemia has changed little in the last 20
years with overall survival rates for young patients (60 years, survival
statistics are less than 10% being cured (2). Although AML has become one
of the most molecularly characterised malignancies, the core therapeutic
option remains unchanged in the last 15 years i.e. We continue to be
solely reliant upon a combination of anthracycline and Cytarabine (Ara-C)
as the cornerstone of induction therapy. Recently many potentially
drugable targets have been revealed (3-7) and while responses have been
observed, these are generally amongst sub-sets of patients with good to
intermediate prognostic factors and most often in combination with
conventional therapy.Aims and methods: Elacytarabine (ELA; CP-4055) is a
fatty acid derivative of Ara-C, currently in undergoing phase II and
phase III clinical trial as second-course remission-induction therapy and
in late stage AML, respectively. In this study we determined the MTD for
the combination of ELA in combination with Daunorubicin (DAN) in NSG
mice. Subsequently, we compared the preclinical efficacy of the
combination of ELA (30 mg/kg; q.d.x5) or Ara-C (500 mg/kg; q.d.x2) with
DAN (2.5 mg/kg; q.d.x3) in primary xenografts in NSG mice (n = 24) from
relapsed (Ara-C+DAN) AML patients. Employing a novel time-domain imaging
strategy (8) we non-invasively monitored disease progression following
therapy. Similarly marrow aspirates were assayed for AML content by flow
cytometry and IHC analysis.Results: The combination of ELA and DAN was
well tolerated in NSG mice xenografted with primary patient AML cells.
While longitudinal near infrared optical imaging of AML disease burden
illustrated lower disease burden in Ara-C + DAN treated mice than
controls (p<0.05), those treated with ELA+DAN demonstrated significantly
reduced disease burden, both in comparison to controls (p<0.001) and
Ara-C+DAN (p<0.01) treated mice. Flow cytometry analysis of bone marrow
aspirates revealed similar reductions in ELA treated mice. Ultimately,
combination of ELA+DAN exhibited significant increases in mean survival
time (45 4.6 days) over control (31.6 1.7 days; p<0.0001) and Ara-C+DAN
treated mice (39 3.2 days; p<0.039).Conclusions: The combination of
ELA+DAN is well tolerated and significantly increase survival in
comparison to Ara-C+DAN in primary patient xenografts of refractory
AML.1. Rowe JM, et al. Blood 2010; 116: 3147-56.2. Burnett AK. Rev Clin
Exp Hematol 2002; 6: 26-45; discussion 86-7.3. Nencioni A et al. Leukemia
2007; 21: 30-6.4. Bruserud O et al. Expert Opin Ther Targets 2006; 10:
51-68.5. Burnett AK et al. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2007:
429-34.6. Doepfner KT et al. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2007; 63: 215-30.7.
Tang R et al. BMC Cancer 2009; 9: 199.8. McCormack E et al. Blood 2012;
In Press.

