Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant Wilms' tumor gene 1 devoid of zinc-fingers promotes
proliferation of human hematopoietic progenitor cells in vitro.


The transcription factor Wilms tumour gene 1 (WT1) is present in some
primitive hematopoietic cells and is highly expressed in the majority of
lymphoid and myeloid leukemias, suggesting a role for WT1 in
leukemogenesis. Mutations within the WT1 gene are present in 10-15 % of
patients with cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemias and may be
an independent predictor of poor clinical outcome. The mutations are most
often heterozygous frameshift mutations leading to premature termination
of the reading frame and therefore deletion of the entire DNA-binding
zinc-finger domain. We have investigated the cellular effects of mutant
WT1 protein lacking all four zinc-fingers, WT1(delZ). We report that
expression of WT1(delZ) prolongs the proliferation of human hematopoietic
CD34+ progenitor cells in vitro. Moreover, WT1(delZ) transduced cells
express erythroid markers, including hemoglobin and elevated STAT5
protein levels, in part independently of addition of erythropoietin.
STAT5 was increased by a posttranscriptional mechanism. The erythroid
phenotype was also observed at global gene expression level, where
WT1(delZ) caused coordinated up-regulation of genes associated with
erythroid maturation, as well as genes related to cell division, while
monocytic and neutrophil genes were down modulated. Our results indicate
that WT1(delZ) promotes cell proliferation and erythroid differentiation
at the expense of monocytes and granulocytes.

