Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of tobacco-free policy at University of Guam.


BackgroundSmoking is one of the biggest avoidable causes of mortality on
Guam. Lung cancer accounted for an estimated 17.2% of new cancer cases,
and 28.6% of cancer deaths (2003-2007). Smoking prevalence both for
adults and youth remains high on Guam, about 25.8% (BRFSS, 2010), and
12.6% (YRBR, 2011), respectively. Recognizing the destructive role of
tobacco on health, University of Guam (UOG) introduced tobacco-free
policy on August 1, 2006. This paper will evaluate students tobacco use
and attitudes towards the policy and its implementation.MethodsSeventeen
courses were randomly sampled from the list of all courses offered, and
all students in the courses selected were asked to participate in
23-question survey. The sample size was 279 students which are about 8%
of all UOG students. The survey data was collected from October, 16 to
October, 30, 2012.ResultsThe demographics of the respondents closely
matched the distribution of the demographics of the whole student
population. About 12% of the respondents were current smokers, 4%
reported using other tobacco products, and 5% reported chewing betel
nuts.Most students (81%) said they were aware of the tobacco-free policy
on the campus, however 71% of students reported reading the policy for
the first time during the survey. Seventeen percent of students never
read the policy before and were not aware of it.Big proportion of
students (about 13%) admitted to using tobacco products on campus in the
past 6 months, majority of them (88%) used cigarettes. As a result, 58%
of students reported being close enough to someone who was smoking on
campus to smell the smoke during the past 30 days.The survey results
showed significant difference between smokers and nonsmokers in attitudes
toward tobacco-free policy and its implementation. Only 31.25% students
who smoke everyday support 100% tobacco-free environment whereas 84.12%
of nonsmokers support it. Ninety four percent of smokers and 68% of
nonsmokers either agreed or strongly agreed that UOG should provide the
designated smoking areas. Significantly smaller proportion of current
smokers than nonsmokers (55.9% and 78.1% respectively, p-value = 0.000)
feels that UOG should provide resources for smoking prevention and
cessation. Similarly, significantly smaller proportion of current smokers
than nonsmokers (41.2% and 84.1% respectively, p-value = 0.000) feels
that UOG should place increased emphasis on enforcement and disciplinary
action for non-compliance. Overwhelming majority of students (81%) was
not aware of Guam Tobacco Free Quit Line.Conclusions, Future ResearchThe
visibility and communication of the policy could be improved at UOG. The
data collected can be used as a baseline data for future research. By
conducting a similar survey in the following years, we will be able track
any changes in students smoking rates and changes in attitudes.

