Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-dervied gammadelta regulatory T cells suppress innate and
adaptive immunity through the induction of immunosenescence.


Fundamentally understanding the suppressive mechanisms utilized by
different subsets of tumor-infiltrating regulatory T (Treg) cells is
critical for the development of effective strategies for anti-tumor
immunotherapy. Gammadelta Treg cells have recently been identified in
human diseases including in cancer patients. However, the suppressive
mechanisms and functional regulations of this new subset of
unconventional Treg cells are largely unknown. In the current studies, we
explored the suppressive mechanism(s) utilized by human breast
tumor-derived gammadelta Treg cells on innate and adaptive immunity. We
found that gammadelta Treg cells induced immunosenescence in targeted
nave and effector T cells, as well as dendritic cells (DCs). Furthermore,
senescent T cells and DCs induced by gammadelta Treg cells had altered
phenotypes and developed potent suppressive activities, further
amplifying the immunosuppression mediated by gammadelta Treg cells. In
addition, we demonstrated that manipulation of TLR8 signaling in
gammadelta Treg cells can block gammadelta Treg-induced conversion of T
cells and DCs into senescent cells in vitro and in vivo. Our studies
identify the novel suppressive mechanism mediated by human tumor-derived
gammadelta Treg cells on innate and adaptive immunity, which should be
critical for development of strong and innovative approaches to reverse
the tumor suppressive microenvironment and improve effects of
immunotherapy. This work was supported by the grant from the American
Cancer Society (RSG-10-160-01-LIB).Key words: gammadelta T cells;
Regulatory T cells; Dendritic cells; Senescence; Immune suppression

