Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging biomarker development for treatment efficacy for prostate
cancer to the bone.


Approximately 70% of patients with late stage cancers metastasize to the
bone. RECIST identifies these tumors as unmeasureable for therapeutic
response assessment. Cabozantinib (CABO), a tyrosine kinase inhibitor of
MET and VEGFR2, has shown promise as an effective therapy for metastatic
prostate cancer to the bone. Patients treated with CABO showed a
reduction in [Tc99m]-bone scan signal suggesting tumor response to
treatment. Nevertheless, a return in signal to pre-treatment levels was
observed in these patients following therapy completion. It has yet to be
determined if the response observed in bone scans results from tumor
death, changes in bone metabolism or vascular alterations in the
tumor-stromal microenvironment resulting in reduced transport of the
imaging tracer. The study objective was to assess tumor and bone response
to CABO in an animal model of bone metastasis using a quantitative
multi-modal imaging approach.Twenty-seven male SCID mice were implanted
with PC3 cell line in the right tibia. PC3 cells were transfected with a
plasmid expressing a bioluminescence imaging (BLI) reporter for measuring
apoptosis. When tumor volumes reached 10mm3 by MRI, mice were distributed
into 2 groups: CABO at 30 mg/kg (N=13) and vehicle (N=14). Treatments
were delivered by oral gavage once a day for three weeks. Starting
pre-treatment, MRI and BLI were acquired every third day and CT every
week. Tumor and bone volumes were monitored by manually contouring
volumes of interest (VOI) on anatomical MRI and CT images, respectively.
The apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), an indirect measure of tumor
cellularity, was calculated from diffusion MRI.Mice treated with CABO
were found to have significantly higher ADC values and slower growth
profile than controls (pApproximately 70% of patients with late stage
cancers metastasize to the bone. RECIST identifies these tumors as
unmeasureable for therapeutic response assessment. Cabozantinib (CABO), a
tyrosine kinase inhibitor of MET and VEGFR2, has shown promise as an
effective therapy for metastatic prostate cancer to the bone. Patients
treated with CABO showed a reduction in [Tc99m]-bone scan signal
suggesting tumor response to treatment. Nevertheless, a return in signal
to pre-treatment levels was observed in these patients following therapy
completion. It has yet to be determined if the response observed in bone
scans results from tumor death, changes in bone metabolism or vascular
alterations in the tumor-stromal microenvironment resulting in reduced
transport of the imaging tracer. The study objective was to assess tumor
and bone response to CABO in an animal model of bone metastasis using a
quantitative multi-modal imaging approach.Twenty-seven male SCID mice
were implanted with PC3 cell line in the right tibia. PC3 cells were
transfected with a plasmid expressing a bioluminescence imaging (BLI)
reporter for measuring apoptosis. When tumor volumes reached 10mm3 by
MRI, mice were distributed into 2 groups: CABO at 30 mg/kg (N=13) and
vehicle (N=14). Treatments were delivered by oral gavage once a day for
three weeks. Starting pre-treatment, MRI and BLI were acquired every
third day and CT every week. Tumor and bone volumes were monitored by
manually contouring volumes of interest (VOI) on anatomical MRI and CT
images, respectively. The apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), an
indirect measure of tumor cellularity, was calculated from diffusion
MRI.Mice treated with CABO were found to have significantly higher ADC
values and slower growth profile than controls (p<0.05) suggesting a drop
in tumor cellularity. Following one week of treatment, BLI signal
increased 7 fold over baseline values indicating a delay in tumor
apoptosis. In contrast, ADC values and apoptosis activation were
unchanged in the controls resulting in significant differences between
groups (pApproximately 70% of patients with late stage cancers
metastasize to the bone. RECIST identifies these tumors as unmeasureable
for therapeutic response assessment. Cabozantinib (CABO), a tyrosine
kinase inhibitor of MET and VEGFR2, has shown promise as an effective
therapy for metastatic prostate cancer to the bone. Patients treated with
CABO showed a reduction in [Tc99m]-bone scan signal suggesting tumor
response to treatment. Nevertheless, a return in signal to pre-treatment
levels was observed in these patients following therapy completion. It
has yet to be determined if the response observed in bone scans results
from tumor death, changes in bone metabolism or vascular alterations in
the tumor-stromal microenvironment resulting in reduced transport of the
imaging tracer. The study objective was to assess tumor and bone response
to CABO in an animal model of bone metastasis using a quantitative
multi-modal imaging approach.Twenty-seven male SCID mice were implanted
with PC3 cell line in the right tibia. PC3 cells were transfected with a
plasmid expressing a bioluminescence imaging (BLI) reporter for measuring
apoptosis. When tumor volumes reached 10mm3 by MRI, mice were distributed
into 2 groups: CABO at 30 mg/kg (N=13) and vehicle (N=14). Treatments
were delivered by oral gavage once a day for three weeks. Starting
pre-treatment, MRI and BLI were acquired every third day and CT every
week. Tumor and bone volumes were monitored by manually contouring
volumes of interest (VOI) on anatomical MRI and CT images, respectively.
The apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), an indirect measure of tumor
cellularity, was calculated from diffusion MRI.Mice treated with CABO
were found to have significantly higher ADC values and slower growth
profile than controls (p<0.05) suggesting a drop in tumor cellularity.
Following one week of treatment, BLI signal increased 7 fold over
baseline values indicating a delay in tumor apoptosis. In contrast, ADC
values and apoptosis activation were unchanged in the controls resulting
in significant differences between groups (p<0.05). As determined by CT,
control mice had significantly more loss in bone volume than what was
observed in the CABO treated mice, with differences first observed at day
14 post-treatment initiation (pApproximately 70% of patients with late
stage cancers metastasize to the bone. RECIST identifies these tumors as
unmeasureable for therapeutic response assessment. Cabozantinib (CABO), a
tyrosine kinase inhibitor of MET and VEGFR2, has shown promise as an
effective therapy for metastatic prostate cancer to the bone. Patients
treated with CABO showed a reduction in [Tc99m]-bone scan signal
suggesting tumor response to treatment. Nevertheless, a return in signal
to pre-treatment levels was observed in these patients following therapy
completion. It has yet to be determined if the response observed in bone
scans results from tumor death, changes in bone metabolism or vascular
alterations in the tumor-stromal microenvironment resulting in reduced
transport of the imaging tracer. The study objective was to assess tumor
and bone response to CABO in an animal model of bone metastasis using a
quantitative multi-modal imaging approach.Twenty-seven male SCID mice
were implanted with PC3 cell line in the right tibia. PC3 cells were
transfected with a plasmid expressing a bioluminescence imaging (BLI)
reporter for measuring apoptosis. When tumor volumes reached 10mm3 by
MRI, mice were distributed into 2 groups: CABO at 30 mg/kg (N=13) and
vehicle (N=14). Treatments were delivered by oral gavage once a day for
three weeks. Starting pre-treatment, MRI and BLI were acquired every
third day and CT every week. Tumor and bone volumes were monitored by
manually contouring volumes of interest (VOI) on anatomical MRI and CT
images, respectively. The apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), an
indirect measure of tumor cellularity, was calculated from diffusion
MRI.Mice treated with CABO were found to have significantly higher ADC
values and slower growth profile than controls (p<0.05) suggesting a drop
in tumor cellularity. Following one week of treatment, BLI signal
increased 7 fold over baseline values indicating a delay in tumor
apoptosis. In contrast, ADC values and apoptosis activation were
unchanged in the controls resulting in significant differences between
groups (p<0.05). As determined by CT, control mice had significantly more
loss in bone volume than what was observed in the CABO treated mice, with
differences first observed at day 14 post-treatment initiation (p<0.05).
CABO was found to activate cell death through apoptosis (BLI) resulting
in reduced tumor cellularity (ADC) and inhibited tumor growth (anatomical
MRI). Increased tumor burden may have reduced osteolytic processes
causing less bone loss over controls. Quantitative diffusion MRI and CT,
backed by preclinical optical techniques, provide highly sensitive
temporal information on the tumor-stromal microenvironment and their
interaction to a targeted therapeutic intervention. Translatable
quantitative imaging techniques, i.e. MRI and CT, may provide
individualized medicine to patients suffering from metastatic prostate
cancer to the bone.

