Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-124 suppresses colorectal tumor progression in a mouse
xenograft model via targeting KITENIN.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are increasingly implicated in modulating the
progression of various cancers. Although there is emerging evidences that
some miRNAs can function as oncogenes or tumour suppressors, the
regulation of colorectal cancer (CRC) progression by miRNA is not fully
understood. KITENIN (KAI1 C-terminal interacting tetraspanin, Vangl1) is
not only a major component of PCP pathway but also a functional protein
promoting CRC cell motility and invasiveness. Previously, we observed
that KITENIN acts as a metastasis-enhancing protein in a mouse model of
colon cancer and that KITENIN is highly expressed in sporadic human CRC
tissues. But the underlying regulation mechanisms of aberrant expression
of KITENIN in CRC are not clearly understood. Here we tried to identify
the miRNAs, which modulate the expression of KITENIN, using luciferase
assay and with computational prediction of miRNA targeting KITENIN. We
identified several miRNAs and one of them is miR-124. miR-124 negatively
regulated KITENIN expression through binding to the 3-untranslated region
of KITENIN. We further examined whether increased expression of miR-124
affects colorectal tumor progression via targeting KITENIN. Ectopic
expression of miR-124 was found to suppress the migration and
invasiveness of various CRC cells. miR-124 also inhibited tumor growth in
a mouse xenograft model. These findings provide the experimental evidence
to a possible therapeutic effect of miR-124 on suppressing colorectal
tumor progression and identification of miR-124-mediated regulation of
KITENIN might provide a promising therapeutic target in treating CRC.

