Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patterns of recurrent mutations in SETBP1 mutated and wild-type
atypical Chronic Myeloid Leukemia patients.


Atypical Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (aCML) is a heterogeneous disorder
belonging to the group of myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative (MDS/MPN)
syndromes. The molecular pathogenesis of this disease is still unclear
and the outcome is poor with no improvement over the last 20 years.We
applied whole exome sequencing approach in 9 aCML patient samples in
order to identify possible recurrent alterations. The analysis revealed
the presence of unique mutations in 70 genes with 3 cases of SETBP1
alterations.Some of the genes identified as mutated in the initial set of
9 patients (IDH2, MTA2, EPHB3, ETNK1, GATA2, IRAK4) and having a score
higher than 1 in the oncogenic GeneRanker database were resequenced in a
cohort of 40 aCML patients (15 with and 25 without SETBP1 mutations).
With the exception of IDH2, no other gene was found mutated in any case
apart from the index patient.Evaluation on a larger cohort of 70 aCML
samples revealed recurrent SETBP1 mutations in 24.3% of cases (see
designated abstract).To test the relationship between SETBP1 variants and
mutations in oncogenes known to be involved in myeloid malignancies,
mutations in ASXL1, CBL, CEBPA, DNMT3A, EED, EZH2, FLT3, IDH1/2, JAK2,
JARID2, NPM1, N/KRAS, RBBP4, RUNX1, SF3B1, SUZ12, TET2 and WT1 were
evaluated in a population of 61 aCML patients (14 with and 47 without
SETBP1 mutations) by Sanger sequencing.Overall we identified 60 mutations
in 14 genes: 28 were missense point mutations, 13 nonsense point
mutations, 15 missense ins/del and 4 ins/del leading to a premature stop
codon. No mutations were found in IDH1, RBBP4, NPM1, JAK2, FLT3,
DNMT3A.Mutations in ASXL1 were present in 14 patients and appeared more
frequent in patients with mutated SETBP1 (36% vs 19%) while the 15 TET2
mutations were more prevalent in patients with SETBP1 WT than in mutated
samples(28% vs. 14%). Further associations will be presented at the
meeting, although further analysis on larger cohorts of patients will be
necessary to determine the significance of this differences. Additional
data on epigenetic signature of aCML will clarify the role of epigenetic
dysregulation in aCML and related diseases.

