Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of the carboxyl-terminus of MUC16 can accelerate
the occurrence of phenotypes in p53 heterozygous mouse model.


Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death in women.
Cancer antigen 125 (CA125), also known as MUC16, is a high molecular
weight glycoprotein overexpressed in sera of women with epithelial
ovarian cancer, but not in normal epithelial ovarian tissue. As a
biomarker, CA125 is widely used to screen, diagnose and monitor the
epithelial ovarian cancer. To further understand the roles of MUC16 in
tumorigenesis, recently, some mouse models related Muc16 and MUC16 were
created. There is no phenotype for the Muc16 knockout mice (Cheon et al.,
PLoS ONE, 2009). We built a MUC16 carboxyl-terminus transgenic mouse
(MUC16C354) and found out that the transgenic mice appear to be viable,
fertile, and develop normally through the more than two years of life. In
order to investigate the relationship of p53 mutation and MUC16
overexpression in tumorigensis, we generated mice in which MUC16C354 can
be overxepressed with p53 heterozygote. Like the MUC16C354 transgenic
mice, the MUC16C354; p53+/- mice develop normally. Both mouse strains are
susceptible to spontaneous tumors, including sarcoma and lymphoma.
However, comparing p53+/- mice, overexpression of MUC16C354 significantly
accelerates the occurrence of phenotypes in MUC16C354; p53+/- mice. Out
of a study population of 94 MUC16C354; p53+/- mice, 22 (23.4%) developed
obvious neoplasms by 18 months of age, 13 (11.9%) out of 109 for p53+/-
mice ( Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death in
women. Cancer antigen 125 (CA125), also known as MUC16, is a high
molecular weight glycoprotein overexpressed in sera of women with
epithelial ovarian cancer, but not in normal epithelial ovarian tissue.
As a biomarker, CA125 is widely used to screen, diagnose and monitor the
epithelial ovarian cancer. To further understand the roles of MUC16 in
tumorigenesis, recently, some mouse models related Muc16 and MUC16 were
created. There is no phenotype for the Muc16 knockout mice (Cheon et al.,
PLoS ONE, 2009). We built a MUC16 carboxyl-terminus transgenic mouse
(MUC16C354) and found out that the transgenic mice appear to be viable,
fertile, and develop normally through the more than two years of life. In
order to investigate the relationship of p53 mutation and MUC16
overexpression in tumorigensis, we generated mice in which MUC16C354 can
be overxepressed with p53 heterozygote. Like the MUC16C354 transgenic
mice, the MUC16C354; p53+/- mice develop normally. Both mouse strains are
susceptible to spontaneous tumors, including sarcoma and lymphoma.
However, comparing p53+/- mice, overexpression of MUC16C354 significantly
accelerates the occurrence of phenotypes in MUC16C354; p53+/- mice. Out
of a study population of 94 MUC16C354; p53+/- mice, 22 (23.4%) developed
obvious neoplasms by 18 months of age, 13 (11.9%) out of 109 for p53+/-
mice ( <0.014). Tumor tissues and tumor cells carrying MUC16C354 and
p53+/- are transplantable. MAPK/ERK signaling pathway is upregulated in
these tumors. Our findings demonstrate our hypothesis that MUC16 may play
a role in tumorigensis.

