Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The significance of squamous vs. adenocarcinoma subtypes in
early-stage cervical carcinoma.


Objective: Historically, cervical adenocarcinomas have been viewed as
more aggressive than squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in multiple small
cohorts. We analyzed the largest Latino cohort of early stage cancer to
determine the impact of histologic type.Methods: Retrospective analysis
of patients with SCC and adenocarcinoma stages IA1-IB2 at the Mexican
Oncology Hospital from 2000-2010 was performed for: age, stage, tumor
size, lymphovascular invasion (LVI), invasion depth, lymph node status,
recurrence and survival. Pathologic review proceeded inclusion. 64
patients with SCC were recruited between 2000-2003. 101 patients with
adenocarcinoma were recruited between 2000-2010. Categorical variables
were analyzed by chi square and continuous variables using one-way ANOVA
analysis.Results: Results are summarized in Table 1. Adenocarcinomas
tended to be higher grade (p= 0.01), while SCC's were larger with deeper
invasion (pObjective: Historically, cervical adenocarcinomas have been
viewed as more aggressive than squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in multiple
small cohorts. We analyzed the largest Latino cohort of early stage
cancer to determine the impact of histologic type.Methods: Retrospective
analysis of patients with SCC and adenocarcinoma stages IA1-IB2 at the
Mexican Oncology Hospital from 2000-2010 was performed for: age, stage,
tumor size, lymphovascular invasion (LVI), invasion depth, lymph node
status, recurrence and survival. Pathologic review proceeded inclusion.
64 patients with SCC were recruited between 2000-2003. 101 patients with
adenocarcinoma were recruited between 2000-2010. Categorical variables
were analyzed by chi square and continuous variables using one-way ANOVA
analysis.Results: Results are summarized in Table 1. Adenocarcinomas
tended to be higher grade (p= 0.01), while SCC's were larger with deeper
invasion (p<0.001). Stage, LVI and lymph node status were not
significantly different. Recurrence rate (RR) was 5% (5/101) in
adenocarcinomas and 8% (5/64) in SCC's. 5 year survival (OS) was
equivalent (98.2% and 95.2% for adenocarcinoma and SCC respectively,
p=0.369). In adenocarcinomas, in the absence of LVI, no patients (0/75)
had positive lymph nodes. Adenocarcinomas received more adjuvant
radiation therapy (RT) when compared to SCC's (71.3% vs. 37.5%); given
high survival and low recurrence we were unable to evaluate RT's effect
on OS and RR.Conclusion: Patients with early stage adenocarcinomas have
smaller, higher grade tumors than patients with SCC with no difference in
LVI, lymph node involvement, recurrence rate or survival. . A potential
confounding factor was higher rate of adjuvant RT in adenocarcinoma vs.
SCC patients. Overall, these findings suggest the need for more
aggressive therapy in the treatment of early stage cervical
adenocarcinoma should be investigated further, potentially reducing
morbidity in this cohort of patients.


