Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between DNA methylation profile and neo-adjuvant
treatment response in breast cancer patients.


Epigenetic alterations are common in breast cancer, yet how these
modifications contribute to chemotherapy response is poorly understood.
This study aimed to define a DNA methylation profile associated with
response to neo-adjuvant treatment in breast cancer and to identify
possible candidate genes associated with resistance as predictors.Eleven
pre-treatment and 12 post-treatment serum samples with 6 pairs of FFPE
tissues were collected in neo-adjuvant chemotherapy with operable and
locally advanced breast cancer. Illumina HumanMethylation450K BeadChip
technology for serum DNA and Roche Nimblegen Human DNA Methylation 3x720K
CpG Island Plus RefSeq Promoter Arrays, MeDIP-chip technology for FFPE
DNA were used for simultaneous analysis of 450,000 CpG sites for serum
DNA and 27,728 for FFPE DNA, respectively.Genes generated from
pre-treatment samples were compared with those genes obtained from
post-treatment samples, which showed differential modulation following
neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. Association on 11 pre-treatment serum DNA
highlighted 102 genes significantly related to Ki67 level change as the
treatment response (p =0.2) after excluding genes changed by neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy. Among them, 16 genes showed consistent methylation levels
between serum and tissue (hypermethylation including ITIH3,
p-value=0.0015, 8.9 fold-change; hypomethylation including ARID3A,
p-value=0.0037, 1.4 fold-change). Hypomethylation of DBH, PRDM16, SLC12A7
and VSX2 in pre-treatment serum and tissue DNA were also predicted to
another response surrogate measured by the changes of tumor size (p
=0.2).Our study suggests that testing for methylation levels of genes
identified in this study may be beneficial in predicting individual
patient response to neo-adjuvant therapies.

