Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HADC-2: Chemopreventive effect of OSU-HDAC42 on rat
colon carcinogenesis and APCmin/+ Mice intestinal tumorigenesis.


Epigenetic modulators particularly histone deacetylases (HDACs) are valid
targets cancer for prevention and Therapy. Recent studies from our
laboratory and others suggest that HDAC-2 over-expression is associated
with colon tumor progression and potential target for colon cancer
prevention. The present study explored the chemopreventive effects of
novel HDAC-2 inhibitor, OSU-HDAC42, in a mouse model of familial
adenomatous polyposis (FAP). We used a rat colon carcinogenesis model
assay, inhibition of aberrant crypt foci (ACF) development, as measure of
the dose-response and chemopreventive effects. Colonic ACF were induced
by azoxymethane (AOM) (15 mg/kg BW once weekly for 2 weeks by s.c.
injection at the age of 8 and 9 weeks). One week after AOM-treatment
groups of rats were fed AIN-76A diet containing 0, 75, 150 and 300 ppm
OSU-HDAC42 for eight-weeks, and then colonic ACF were evaluated. Six
week-old male C57Bl/6J-APCmin/+ and wild type mice were fed AIN-76A diet
containing 150 ppm OSU-HADC42 or 300 ppm SAHA for 80 days. At 120 days of
age, all mice were killed, and the intestines were evaluated for polyps.
Dietary administration of OSU-HDAC42 produced a dose-dependent inhibition
of AOM-induced colonic ACF formation (by 13-50%, pEpigenetic modulators
particularly histone deacetylases (HDACs) are valid targets cancer for
prevention and Therapy. Recent studies from our laboratory and others
suggest that HDAC-2 over-expression is associated with colon tumor
progression and potential target for colon cancer prevention. The present
study explored the chemopreventive effects of novel HDAC-2 inhibitor,
OSU-HDAC42, in a mouse model of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). We
used a rat colon carcinogenesis model assay, inhibition of aberrant crypt
foci (ACF) development, as measure of the dose-response and
chemopreventive effects. Colonic ACF were induced by azoxymethane (AOM)
(15 mg/kg BW once weekly for 2 weeks by s.c. injection at the age of 8
and 9 weeks). One week after AOM-treatment groups of rats were fed
AIN-76A diet containing 0, 75, 150 and 300 ppm OSU-HDAC42 for
eight-weeks, and then colonic ACF were evaluated. Six week-old male
C57Bl/6J-APCmin/+ and wild type mice were fed AIN-76A diet containing 150
ppm OSU-HADC42 or 300 ppm SAHA for 80 days. At 120 days of age, all mice
were killed, and the intestines were evaluated for polyps. Dietary
administration of OSU-HDAC42 produced a dose-dependent inhibition of
AOM-induced colonic ACF formation (by 13-50%, p<0.05 -0.001) and reduced
the number of foci with 4 crypts/focus (by 25-57%, P46%, p26%, P0.05) in
APCmin/+ mice. Whereas 300 ppm SAHA showed limited non-significant
inhibition of intestinal polyp formation in APCmin/+ mice. Further,
OSU-HDAC42 showed inhibition in small intestinal polyps size measuring
1-2-mm (P26%, P0.05) in APCmin/+ mice. Whereas 300 ppm SAHA showed
limited non-significant inhibition of intestinal polyp formation in
APCmin/+ mice. Further, OSU-HDAC42 showed inhibition in small intestinal
polyps size measuring 1-2-mm (P<0.001). Importantly, mice fed with 150ppm
OSU-HDAC42 showed significant reduction in HDAC-2, PCNA, CyclinA, CDK2,
CDC25C expression pattern and increased p53 expression levels. These
observations demonstrate that novel HDAC inhibitor, OSU-HDAC42 potential
chemopreventive against the chemically-induced and polyposis models of
colon tumorigenesis. {This work is supported by NCI-N01-CN53300}

