Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a lung cancer growth factor, LASEP3, as a
serological and prognostic biomarker and a therapeutic target.


To identify novel biomarkers or therapeutic targets for lung cancers, we
have been screening genes encoding transmembrane/secretory proteins that
are up-regulated in lung cancers, using cDNA microarrays. During this
process, we identified a secreted protein, LASEP3 (lung cancer-associated
serum protein 3) as a candidate.Immunohistochemical analysis showed that
strong positive staining of LASEP3 was observed in 198 (54.8%) of 361
NSCLCs (non-small cell lung cancer).High level of LASEP3 expression was
associated with poor prognosis of NSCLC patients. (P=0.0183 by log-rank
test). Serum LASEP3 levels were higher in NSCLC patients than in healthy
volunteers. The proportion of serum LASEP3-positive cases was 160 (61.8%)
of 259 NSCLCs, while 6 (5.5%) of 109 healthy volunteers were falsely
diagnosed. Moreover serum LASEP3 levels were significantly higher in
breast and colon cancer patients than in healthy volunteers.A combined
assay using both LASEP3 and CEA increased sensitivity because 79.5% of
the NSCLC patients were then diagnosed as positive, whereas only 7.3% of
109 healthy volunteers were falsely diagnosed as positive. In addition,
the use of both LASEP3 and proGRP increased sensitivity because 78.3% of
the lung SCLC patients were diagnosed as positive, whereas only 6.6% of
121 healthy volunteers were falsely diagnosed. LASEP3 protein was
overexpressed in breast, cervical and colon cancer tissues. Furthermore,
treatment of lung cancer cells withLASEP3-siRNAs suppressed its
expression and suppressed cell growth and invasion.To clarify the
mechanism of tumor suppression by siRNAs against LASEP3, we performed
flow cytometric analysis of the tumor cells transfected with these
siRNAs. We found a significant increase of the cells at the G0/G1 phase.
These data suggest that LASEP3 is a diagnostic and prognostic biomarker
and therapeutic target for lung and various type of human cancer.Citation
Format: Atsushi Takano, Yusuke Nakamura, Yataro Daigo. Characterization
of a lung cancer growth factor, LASEP3, as a serological and prognostic
biomarker and a therapeutic target. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2359. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2359

