Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC amplification and overexpression Is associated With metastasis
and drug resistance in a mouse model of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.


Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is the most aggressive form of thyroid
cancer. Despite a relatively low prevalence, it accounts for a
disproportionate number of thyroid cancer-related deaths, due to its
resistance to every therapeutic approach. We have generated a mouse model
in which simultaneous selective activation of the PI3K pathway and
inactivation of p53 in thyroid epithelial cells leads to the development
of ATC. These tumors display all the typical features of their human
counterpart and metastasize to the lungs in over 25% of cases (20 out of
76).Recent data have indicated that mammary tumors driven by PI3K
activation quickly become resistant to PI3K inhibitors through mechanisms
that include Myc amplification. We have used our model to test the
hypothesis that Myc overexpression and/or amplification might contribute
the aggressive features of PI3K-driven ATC.Analysis of 46 primary tumors
developed by [Pten,p53]thyr-/ mice using a high-sensitivity real-time PCR
approach demonstrates that the Myc locus is amplified (copy number 4) in
about 25% of cases. Conversely, none of 20 metastatic follicular thyroid
carcinomas developed by Ptenthyr-/ mice displayed Myc amplification. More
strikingly, Myc is amplified in almost 50% (7/15) of ATCs with distant
metastases, suggesting that Myc amplification confers more aggressive
features to PI3K-driven anaplastic tumors, even in the absence of drug
mediated selective pressure.Furthermore, when injected in syngeneic mice,
cell lines established from Myc-amplified tumors grow faster than cell
lines derived from tumors without Myc amplification. Myc-amplified cell
lines are more resistant than Myc-diploid cells to the PI3K inhibitor
BKM120, as well as to paclitaxel and doxorubicin treatment, and this
increased resistance can be abrogated by shRNA-mediated Myc
downregulation.These data support a model in which Myc cooperates with
PI3K activation to induce more aggressive features, including drug
resistance and enhanced metastatic behavior, in advanced thyroid
carcinomas.Furthermore, these data lay the basis for new studies aimed at
increasing therapeutic efficacy by interfering with Myc and Myc-dependent
pathways.

