Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serine phosphorylation of vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein
regulates the tumorigenic potential of colon cancer cells.


Colorectal cancer is one of the most common and deadly cancers in
developed nations. Molecular mechanisms precisely defining colorectal
tumorigenesis and cancer progression remain unclear, an obstacle for
innovative research applications. The vasodilator-stimulated
phosphoprotein (VASP) is an actin-binding protein which critically
regulates the cytoskeleton and its dependent functions, including cell
shape, adhesion and migration. Of relevance, VASP Ser phosphorylation
becomes deregulated in colorectal transformation and promotes invasive
protrusion dynamics. Here, VASP Ser phosphorylation was selectively
inhibited in colon carcinoma cells employing dominant negative mutants.
Effects on cell tumorigenic potential were examined with two mouse models
of colorectal cancer. Compared to control conditions, suppression of VASP
Ser239 phosphorylation resulted in an enhanced cancer cell capability to
establish tumor colonies in both the subcutaneous and peritoneal
xenograft model. Increased tumorigenicity reflected, in part, hyper
proliferative kinetics of cancer cells bearing VASP Ser239 mutants, which
exhibited accelerated growth and DNA synthesis rates. In contrast,
selective inhibition of VASP Ser157 slowed cell proliferation and reduced
the in vivo tumorigenic potential of colon carcinoma cells, compared to
respective controls. These observations support the suggestion that VASP
Ser phosphorylation represents a fine signaling mechanism to control
intestinal tumorigenesis and invasion, a novel paradigm for targeted
anticancer strategies in patients with colorectal cancer.

