Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAi screening of human kinome identified fibroblast growth factor
receptor 4 (FGFR4) as potential molecular target in basal-like breast
cancers (BLBC).


Global gene expression profiling has uncovered previously unrecognized
subsets of human breast cancer, including the so-called "triple-negative"
or "basal-like" tumours (BLBC) characterized by estrogen/progesterone
receptor negativity, lack of Her-2/Neu amplification and high frequency
of p53 mutation. These refractory tumours therefore are insensitive to
hormonal therapy or trastuzumab-based therapy, and thus confer a markedly
poor prognosis relative to other subtypes. To date, little progress has
been made to identify specific molecular pathways associated with these
refractory cancers that may be effectively targeted for therapeutic
purposes. Using a human kinome RNAi library screen, we show that
knock-down of endogenous human FGFR4 (but not FGFR1-3) induces
significant tumor-specific cell death in basal-like breast cancer cells.
Further analysis reveals that FGFR4 mediates the BLBC cells survival
through activation of AKT as knock-down of endogenous FGFR4 in MDA-MB-468
and HCC1937 cells significantly reduced AKT phosphorylation.
Consistently, ectopic expression of a constitutively active myristoylated
AKT completely abrogates the apoptosis induced by FGFR4 knock-down.
Interestingly, both MDA-MB-468 and HCC1937 also secrete fibroblast growth
factor 19 (FGF19), a canonical ligand specific for FGFR4. RNAi-mediated
silencing of FGF19 evidently suppresses the growth of these BLBC cells
via AKT signalling as marked by diminished AKT phosphorylation following
depletion of FGF19. Knockdown of FGF19 in addition triggers ERK1/2
activation to compensate for AKT signalling down-regulation in
MDA-MB-468. Together, our results demonstrated the existence of a
FGFR4-FGF19 autocrine loop which could potentially be developed as
therapeutic target for future treatment of BLBC.

