Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The molecular kinetics of p21 and Cdk4 dictates irreversible G0/G1
phase cell cycle arrest in CRPC cells.


Deregulation of cell cycle progression is the hallmark of cancer; to this
effect, several small molecules (AG-024322, AT7519, E7070, P1446A-05 and
Flavopiridol) against cell cycle kinases are being developed to regulate
cell cycle machinery that resulted in inhibition of tumor growth. The
present study examined the effect of 3, 9-dihydroxy-2-prenylcoumestan-a
furanocoumarin (Pso) on castration resistant prostate cancer cells (CRPC)
cells. Treatment of CRPC (PC-3 and C4-2B) cells with Pso significantly
caused irreversible G0-G1 cell cycle arrest that resulted in inhibition
of cell proliferation. Protein analysis suggested that the expression of
cdk inhibitors (CDKI) p21cip1 and p27kip1 were upregulated in both CRPC
cell lines by Pso treatment. Studies using real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis suggest that Pso
transcriptionally regulates p21cip1 and p27kip1 in CRPC cells. Our
immunofluorescence analysis pointed out that both p21cip1 and p27kip1
accumulated in the nucleus upon the treatment as compared to untreated
CRPC cells. In addition, the cell cycle arrest was associated with
decreased levels of both cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases. However,
cdk-4 appears to be more significantly downregulated when compared with
either cyclins (D1, D2, D3 and Cyclin E) or other Cdk's (cdk2/6). Also,
we noted an increased hypophosphorylated level of retinoblastoma (Rb)
with a decreased in Rb phosphorylation resulted in inhibition of E2F1
function. Further, transient over expression of Cdk4 overcomes the
Pso-induced G0-G1 arrest in CRPC cells. Also, knockdown of p21cip1 and
p27kip1 expression with small interfering RNA significantly abrogated the
Pso-induced G0-G1 cell cycle arrest suggested that induction of p21cip1
and p27kip1 is required for G0-G1 cell cycle arrest by Pso. Altogether
our results strongly suggest that Pso could be a potential candidate for
prevention and therapy against CRPC. Our ongoing studies using xenograft
models of CRPC in nude mice may reveal the in vivo efficacy of Pso.

