Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overactive Cdk2 permits polyploidy by overwhelming the tetraploidy
checkpoint.


The p53-dependent tetraploidy checkpoint serves to block the
proliferation of cells that double their genome without dividing.
Oftentimes, cancers will contain a tetraploid sub-population, indicating
either an ability to bypass this checkpoint or that the checkpoint is no
longer functional. In studying the chromosomal instability of tumor cell
lines from mice with mammary expression of a constitutively active Cyclin
D1-Cdk2 fusion protein (D1K2), we noticed an increased rate of
polyploidization in the presence of the spindle-poison paclitaxel. This
was recapitulated in an MCF10A cell line model, and it was discovered
that this is due to the inability of the tetraploidy checkpoint to
completely stop DNA replication in tetraploid cells with constitutively
active Cdk2. Biochemical analysis shows that tetraploid cells expressing
D1K2 maintain Rb phosphorylation longer than tetraploid control cells,
matching the phenotype seen in cells that have p53 stably knocked down.
Further DNA replication, yielding octaploid cells, appears to further
intensify the tetraploidy checkpoint, arresting the cells. Due to the
fact that approximately 50% of all breast cancers overexpress Cyclin D,
these observations raise intriguing questions about the treatment of
tumors with overactive Cdk2. While it appears these tetraploid MCF10A
cells are unviable, we can not account for other mutations that may exist
in vivo and allow the proliferation of a chromosomally unstable
tetraploid tumor population.

