Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of endometrial cancer with urolithin A, a
metabolite of berry ellagitannins.


Berries have been reported to elicit chemopreventive effects in cell
culture, in animal model systems and in humans. Bio-fractionation studies
indicate that the chemopreventive effects of berries can be ascribed to
their component anthocyanins, ellagitannins and compounds in the
non-alcohol soluble (fiber) fraction. In the present study, 17
berry-related compounds were evaluated at concentrations ranging from 1-
50 M for their anti-proliferative effects on cultured human endometrial
cancer cell lines (ECC-1, Ishikawa and HEC1A). These compounds include
the anthocyanins; cyandin-3-glucoside and cyanidin-3-rutinoside and their
metabolite, protocatechuic acid; ellagic acid and its metabolites,
urolithins A and B; and three oligosaccharides, four short-chain
carboxylic acids and four lignans present in the fiber fraction. Cell
proliferation assays indicated that urolithin A was the most effective
inhibitor of the growth of all three endometrial cancer cell lines. Cell
cycle analysis by flow cytometry revealed that urolithin A induced cell
cycle arrest at the G2/M phase. This was associated with up-regulation of
the protein expression of cyclins B1 and E2, p21, phospho-cdc2 and myt1
as determined by western blot analysis. Endometrial cells depend on
progesterone to limit cellular growth because it is antagonistic to
estrogen-mediated cell proliferation. It is of importance therefore, that
urolithin A was found to reduce estrogen receptor alpha and induce
progesterone receptor expression in all three cell lines. In summary, our
findings suggest that urolithin A may be chemopreventive for endometrial
cancer through modulating genes that control the G2/M phase of the cell
cycle and that regulate steroid receptor expression. This research was
supported, in part, by MCW Startup Funds to Y-W Huang.

