Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of dysregulated miRs and its target genes in head
and neck cancer.


Oral cancer is a subtype of head and neck cancer, the eighth common
cancer type in the world. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs
that mediate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level by
degrading target messenger RNA or repressing their translation. The
deregulation of certain microRNAs has been associated with the
progression and metastasis of various cancer types. A total of 133 miRs
were dysregulated in oral cancer cells when compared with normal oral
keratinocytes by using microRNA microarray hybridization. Among them,
miR-22, often silenced in breast cancer, colon cancer, and multiple
myeloma, is downregulated and least known in oral carcinogenesis. In this
study, we confirmed the down-regulation of miR-22 in the majority of oral
cell lines and 70 % of the tested clinical specimens, as measured by
real-time PCR. Both gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments
showed that increased miR-22 expression significantly reduced oral cancer
cell migration and invasion, whereas decreased miR-22 expression
dramatically enhanced cell migration and invasion. Snail, a transcription
factor that promotes cell invasion and tumor metastasis, was predicted to
be a target of miR-22. The prediction was validated by the inverse
correlation of miR-22 and snail protein, and the luciferase reporter
assay bearing 3- translated region derived from snail. Silencing snail
expression by using shRNA recapitulated the anti-metastatic function of
miR-22, whereas restored snail expression attenuated the function of
miR-22 in oral cancer cells. Together, these results suggest that miR-22
may act as a tumor suppressor through decreasing snail expression in oral
cancer and thus be used as a therapeutic target to block oral cancer
metastasis.

