Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased Rho GTPase and reduced glycolysis activity in metastatic
cancer cells.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
cancer in the world. Metastases are resistant to conventional therapies
and are responsible for 90% of tumour-related death. Better understanding
on the molecular mechanism of metastasis may shed light on prevention and
treatment of disease. We have established a systemic cellular model for
metastases investigation. The parental SAS cells, a low tumorigenic HNSCC
cell line; SASVO3 (VO3) cells, a highly tumorigenic cells derived from
SAS; and SASVO3M-1 (M1) and SASVO3M-5 (M5) cells, two lines of pulmonary
metastatic cells derived from SASVO3 cells using mice model.
Transcriptome analysis revealed that M1 and M5 shared the most similar
transcription signature and their common genes were designated common M.
The profiles of VO3 and common M were distinct from that of parental SAS.
Biological pathway analyses showed the signaling of cell movement such as
integrin, RhoA, Cdc42, Rac, and actin polymerization were identified in
metastatic cells. Of oncogenic properties, metastatic cells possess
increased activities of foci formation, filopodia formation, wound
healing, and in vivo pulmonary metastases. Interestingly, metabolism
assay revealed that the glycolysis activity was increased in highly
tumorigenic VO3 cells compare to parental SAS. Yet it was decreased in
metastatic M5 cells compared to VO3 cells. Reverse Warburg effect," which
indicating a lowered glycolysis in tumor cells, has been demonstrated by
others in metastatic breast cancer by in situ immunohistochemistry stain.
The correlation of metabolism and metastasis of HNSCC cells will be
discussed.

