Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STK4 downregulation promotes tumor invasion/migration and is
associated with poor prognosis in human colon cancer.


Colon cancer has high incidence rate in the world and the early stage of
colon cancer can be cured by surgical therapy. However, it remains
difficult to predict the prognostic outcome of colon cancer patients.
STK4 is considered as a potential tumor suppressor, which plays an
important role in Hippo pathway to control the organ size and the
inhibition ability of cell-cell contact. The major aim of this study is
focused on the investigation of prognostic value of STK4 in colon cancer.
By immunohistochemistry assay, we examined the expression of STK4 in 140
pairs normal and tumor colon cancer specimens. The relationship between
STK4 expression and clinicopathological factors as well as patient
survival were analyzed and the results showed that STK4 was significantly
downregulated in tumor tissues compared to their corresponding non-tumor
part (PColon cancer has high incidence rate in the world and the early
stage of colon cancer can be cured by surgical therapy. However, it
remains difficult to predict the prognostic outcome of colon cancer
patients. STK4 is considered as a potential tumor suppressor, which plays
an important role in Hippo pathway to control the organ size and the
inhibition ability of cell-cell contact. The major aim of this study is
focused on the investigation of prognostic value of STK4 in colon cancer.
By immunohistochemistry assay, we examined the expression of STK4 in 140
pairs normal and tumor colon cancer specimens. The relationship between
STK4 expression and clinicopathological factors as well as patient
survival were analyzed and the results showed that STK4 was significantly
downregulated in tumor tissues compared to their corresponding non-tumor
part (P<0.01) and that was significantly associated with tumor size
(P=0.003), distal metastasis (P=0.03), disease recurrence and poor
survival (PColon cancer has high incidence rate in the world and the
early stage of colon cancer can be cured by surgical therapy. However, it
remains difficult to predict the prognostic outcome of colon cancer
patients. STK4 is considered as a potential tumor suppressor, which plays
an important role in Hippo pathway to control the organ size and the
inhibition ability of cell-cell contact. The major aim of this study is
focused on the investigation of prognostic value of STK4 in colon cancer.
By immunohistochemistry assay, we examined the expression of STK4 in 140
pairs normal and tumor colon cancer specimens. The relationship between
STK4 expression and clinicopathological factors as well as patient
survival were analyzed and the results showed that STK4 was significantly
downregulated in tumor tissues compared to their corresponding non-tumor
part (P<0.01) and that was significantly associated with tumor size
(P=0.003), distal metastasis (P=0.03), disease recurrence and poor
survival (P<0.005). Moreover, loss of STK4 expression showed a
significant poor outcome in colon cancer patients by univariate and
multivariate analysis. These results indicated that there is a positive
correlation in STK4 expression and prognosis and survival of colon cancer
patients. Loss of STK4 expression displayed poor outcome. The conclusion
is that STK4 can be used as a prognostic maker to predict patient
survival and play a role in metastasis suppression of colorectal cancer.

