Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of genes involved in NFB driven resistance to
endocrine treatment in breast cancer.


Introduction: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease exemplified by
patients with Estrogen Receptor (ER) positive and negative breast cancer.
Treatment of patients with breast cancer is increasingly governed by this
notion of heterogeneity. For example, patients with ER+ breast cancer are
treated with endocrine therapy. Although endocrine treatment is the
mainstay of therapy for patients with ER+ breast cancer, resistance to
endocrine therapy is a major clinical problem. Recently we identified a
6-gene signature predictive of Tamoxifen sensitivity. In addition, our
earlier work has shown the importance of the NFkB transcription factor
family in determining ER function. In this study, we aim to elucidate the
role of NFkB in endocrine therapy response.Materials and methods: Public
gene expression data sets of breast cancer patients and cell lines have
been analyzed. ER- (PAM50-model) and NFkB-activation signatures
(Annunziata et al, Cancer Cell, 2007) were calculated for all samples. In
addition, samples were classified using our Tamoxifen response gene
signature. We selected 11 cell lines with presumed strong or weak
activation of NFkB based on the analysis of NFkB target gene expression.
These cell lines were analyzed for NFkB DNA-binding using the TransAM
ELISA kits (Active Motif). ER and NFkB target gene expression was
determined using qRT-PCR. In addition, the expression of the 6 endocrine
therapy responsive genes (ABAT, ADAMDEC1, CLEC7A, ETS1, ITK and STC2) was
evaluated.Results: When analyzing the NFkB activation signature in 700
samples from patients with breast cancer, we clearly observed an inverse
correlation with the ER activation signature (R=-0.65, PIntroduction:
Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease exemplified by patients with
Estrogen Receptor (ER) positive and negative breast cancer. Treatment of
patients with breast cancer is increasingly governed by this notion of
heterogeneity. For example, patients with ER+ breast cancer are treated
with endocrine therapy. Although endocrine treatment is the mainstay of
therapy for patients with ER+ breast cancer, resistance to endocrine
therapy is a major clinical problem. Recently we identified a 6-gene
signature predictive of Tamoxifen sensitivity. In addition, our earlier
work has shown the importance of the NFkB transcription factor family in
determining ER function. In this study, we aim to elucidate the role of
NFkB in endocrine therapy response.Materials and methods: Public gene
expression data sets of breast cancer patients and cell lines have been
analyzed. ER- (PAM50-model) and NFkB-activation signatures (Annunziata et
al, Cancer Cell, 2007) were calculated for all samples. In addition,
samples were classified using our Tamoxifen response gene signature. We
selected 11 cell lines with presumed strong or weak activation of NFkB
based on the analysis of NFkB target gene expression. These cell lines
were analyzed for NFkB DNA-binding using the TransAM ELISA kits (Active
Motif). ER and NFkB target gene expression was determined using qRT-PCR.
In addition, the expression of the 6 endocrine therapy responsive genes
(ABAT, ADAMDEC1, CLEC7A, ETS1, ITK and STC2) was evaluated.Results: When
analyzing the NFkB activation signature in 700 samples from patients with
breast cancer, we clearly observed an inverse correlation with the ER
activation signature (R=-0.65, P<0.01). Also, we observed NFkB
hyperactivation in ER- breast cancers (PIntroduction: Breast cancer is a
heterogeneous disease exemplified by patients with Estrogen Receptor (ER)
positive and negative breast cancer. Treatment of patients with breast
cancer is increasingly governed by this notion of heterogeneity. For
example, patients with ER+ breast cancer are treated with endocrine
therapy. Although endocrine treatment is the mainstay of therapy for
patients with ER+ breast cancer, resistance to endocrine therapy is a
major clinical problem. Recently we identified a 6-gene signature
predictive of Tamoxifen sensitivity. In addition, our earlier work has
shown the importance of the NFkB transcription factor family in
determining ER function. In this study, we aim to elucidate the role of
NFkB in endocrine therapy response.Materials and methods: Public gene
expression data sets of breast cancer patients and cell lines have been
analyzed. ER- (PAM50-model) and NFkB-activation signatures (Annunziata et
al, Cancer Cell, 2007) were calculated for all samples. In addition,
samples were classified using our Tamoxifen response gene signature. We
selected 11 cell lines with presumed strong or weak activation of NFkB
based on the analysis of NFkB target gene expression. These cell lines
were analyzed for NFkB DNA-binding using the TransAM ELISA kits (Active
Motif). ER and NFkB target gene expression was determined using qRT-PCR.
In addition, the expression of the 6 endocrine therapy responsive genes
(ABAT, ADAMDEC1, CLEC7A, ETS1, ITK and STC2) was evaluated.Results: When
analyzing the NFkB activation signature in 700 samples from patients with
breast cancer, we clearly observed an inverse correlation with the ER
activation signature (R=-0.65, P<0.01). Also, we observed NFkB
hyperactivation in ER- breast cancers (P<0.01). When restricting our
analysis to ER+ samples, we demonstrated NFkB hyperactivation in samples
from patients predicted by our 6-gene signature to be resistant to
endocrine therapy. NFkB DNA-binding experiments confirmed the gene
expression based NFkB activation status of eleven selected cell lines. In
addition, NFkB DNA-binding was associated with elevated expression of
ADAMDEC1 and ETS1 and reduced expression of ABAT (All PsIntroduction:
Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease exemplified by patients with
Estrogen Receptor (ER) positive and negative breast cancer. Treatment of
patients with breast cancer is increasingly governed by this notion of
heterogeneity. For example, patients with ER+ breast cancer are treated
with endocrine therapy. Although endocrine treatment is the mainstay of
therapy for patients with ER+ breast cancer, resistance to endocrine
therapy is a major clinical problem. Recently we identified a 6-gene
signature predictive of Tamoxifen sensitivity. In addition, our earlier
work has shown the importance of the NFkB transcription factor family in
determining ER function. In this study, we aim to elucidate the role of
NFkB in endocrine therapy response.Materials and methods: Public gene
expression data sets of breast cancer patients and cell lines have been
analyzed. ER- (PAM50-model) and NFkB-activation signatures (Annunziata et
al, Cancer Cell, 2007) were calculated for all samples. In addition,
samples were classified using our Tamoxifen response gene signature. We
selected 11 cell lines with presumed strong or weak activation of NFkB
based on the analysis of NFkB target gene expression. These cell lines
were analyzed for NFkB DNA-binding using the TransAM ELISA kits (Active
Motif). ER and NFkB target gene expression was determined using qRT-PCR.
In addition, the expression of the 6 endocrine therapy responsive genes
(ABAT, ADAMDEC1, CLEC7A, ETS1, ITK and STC2) was evaluated.Results: When
analyzing the NFkB activation signature in 700 samples from patients with
breast cancer, we clearly observed an inverse correlation with the ER
activation signature (R=-0.65, P<0.01). Also, we observed NFkB
hyperactivation in ER- breast cancers (P<0.01). When restricting our
analysis to ER+ samples, we demonstrated NFkB hyperactivation in samples
from patients predicted by our 6-gene signature to be resistant to
endocrine therapy. NFkB DNA-binding experiments confirmed the gene
expression based NFkB activation status of eleven selected cell lines. In
addition, NFkB DNA-binding was associated with elevated expression of
ADAMDEC1 and ETS1 and reduced expression of ABAT (All Ps<0.05). Finally,
the 6-gene signature predictive of Tamoxifen response showed an increased
expression in cell lines with increased NFkB DNA-binding (PIntroduction:
Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease exemplified by patients with
Estrogen Receptor (ER) positive and negative breast cancer. Treatment of
patients with breast cancer is increasingly governed by this notion of
heterogeneity. For example, patients with ER+ breast cancer are treated
with endocrine therapy. Although endocrine treatment is the mainstay of
therapy for patients with ER+ breast cancer, resistance to endocrine
therapy is a major clinical problem. Recently we identified a 6-gene
signature predictive of Tamoxifen sensitivity. In addition, our earlier
work has shown the importance of the NFkB transcription factor family in
determining ER function. In this study, we aim to elucidate the role of
NFkB in endocrine therapy response.Materials and methods: Public gene
expression data sets of breast cancer patients and cell lines have been
analyzed. ER- (PAM50-model) and NFkB-activation signatures (Annunziata et
al, Cancer Cell, 2007) were calculated for all samples. In addition,
samples were classified using our Tamoxifen response gene signature. We
selected 11 cell lines with presumed strong or weak activation of NFkB
based on the analysis of NFkB target gene expression. These cell lines
were analyzed for NFkB DNA-binding using the TransAM ELISA kits (Active
Motif). ER and NFkB target gene expression was determined using qRT-PCR.
In addition, the expression of the 6 endocrine therapy responsive genes
(ABAT, ADAMDEC1, CLEC7A, ETS1, ITK and STC2) was evaluated.Results: When
analyzing the NFkB activation signature in 700 samples from patients with
breast cancer, we clearly observed an inverse correlation with the ER
activation signature (R=-0.65, P<0.01). Also, we observed NFkB
hyperactivation in ER- breast cancers (P<0.01). When restricting our
analysis to ER+ samples, we demonstrated NFkB hyperactivation in samples
from patients predicted by our 6-gene signature to be resistant to
endocrine therapy. NFkB DNA-binding experiments confirmed the gene
expression based NFkB activation status of eleven selected cell lines. In
addition, NFkB DNA-binding was associated with elevated expression of
ADAMDEC1 and ETS1 and reduced expression of ABAT (All Ps<0.05). Finally,
the 6-gene signature predictive of Tamoxifen response showed an increased
expression in cell lines with increased NFkB DNA-binding
(P<0.01).Conclusion: In the present study we demonstrate that NFkB
activation is associated with attenuated response to endocrine treatment
in patients with breast cancer. Our data suggest that this association is
due to a repressive effect of NFkB on ER but mechanistic data in support
of this view are currently lacking. We propose that the panel of cell
lines evaluated in part of the present study will prove to be helpful
instrument in elucidating the role of the interaction between ER and NFkB
in endocrine treatment resistance.

