Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tgfbr1 haploinsufficiency is a potent modifier of breast cancer
risk.


Background: We previously identified a hypomorphic TGF- type 1 receptor
variant (TGFBR1*6A) that is associated with cancer risk and has impaired
TGF- signaling capability. Two recent large meta-analyses of case control
studies have found a significant association between TGFBR1*6A and risk
of several types of cancer, including breast cancer (ORs 1.16,1.01-1.34;
1.15,1.01-1.31). To investigate the effects of constitutively decreased
TGFBR1 signaling on cancer development, we developed a novel mouse model
of Tgfbr1 haploinsufficiency to mimic the decreased TGFBR1 signaling
observed in individuals with higher risk of cancer. Using this model, we
demonstrated that Apcmin;Tgfbr1+/- mice develop more than twice as many
intestinal tumors as Apcmin controls. The aim of the current study was to
assess the effects of Tgfbr1 haploinsufficiency on breast carcinogenesis
by crossing Tgfbr1+/- mice with the MMTV-c-Neu mouse model.Methods: Fully
congenic (100%) FVB/N-Tgfbr1+/- mice were crossed with FVB/N-Neu mice,
and female virgin progeny were kept for analysis. Mammary glands were
collected from 10, 12, and 40 week-old Neu and Neu;Tgfbr1+/- mice. Mice
assessed for tumor development were sacrificed 80 days after the initial
tumor palpation or at the earliest sign of morbidity. Whole lungs, tumor
tissue, and primary tumor cells were collected for additional analysis.
Long-term evaluation of 2-year-old Tgfbr1+/+ and Tgfbr1+/- mice was also
conducted to directly assess the impact of Tgfbr1 haploinsufficiency on
mammary gland and lung development.Results: Mammary gland whole mounts
revealed that Neu;Tgfbr1+/- mice have more ductal branching at all time
points compared to Neu mice. In the assessment of breast tumor
development, Neu;Tgfbr1+/- mice were observed to have a significantly
shorter tumor latency period (171 days) compared to Neu mice (220 days)
(p=0.004). Seventy percent of Neu;Tgfbr1+/- mice (14/20) developed
surface lung metastases, while 36.4% were observed in Neu mice (8/22), a
borderline significant difference (p=0.061). The TGF--mediated growth
inhibition of Neu;Tgfbr1+/- primary tumor cells was 32.2% lower than that
of Neu tumor cells (p=0.007). Neu;Tgfbr1+/- tumor cells and tissue had
significantly reduced Smad2/3 phosphorylation and total Cdkn1b (p27Kip1)
expression compared to Neu mice. Long-term evaluation of Tgfbr1+/- and
wild-type mice revealed no signs of mammary gland hyperplasia or
differences in lung fibrosis in either group.Conclusion: This study is
the first in vivo evidence that Tgfbr1 haploinsufficiency promotes breast
carcinogenesis by increasing breast cancer proliferation. The relevance
of this data to human breast cancer warrants additional investigations
into the effects of decreased TGFBR1 signaling on tumor development and
progression and identifies potential targets for prevention and
treatment.Citation Format: Michael J. Pennison, Diana S. Rosman-Balzer,
Lakisha Moore-Smith, Jacquelyn W. Zimmerman, Trenton R. Schoeb, Andra R.
Frost, Ming Zhang, Peter M. Siegel, Boris C. Pasche. Tgfbr1
haploinsufficiency is a potent modifier of breast cancer risk.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1406.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1406

