Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-generation RNA sequencing identifies UHRF1 as a key
regulatory protein in triple-negative breast cancer survival.


Introduction: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a particularly
aggressive form of breast cancer that presently lacks specific treatment.
Using next-generation RNA sequencing of 94 TNBC tumors and 20 normal
breast tissues, we have identified UHRF1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, as
significantly overexpressed. UHRF1 is involved in DNA methylation, is
upregulated via mutated p53, and plays a role in the repression of RB1 &
BRCA1. Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), a polyphenol found in green tea,
has been previously investigated in its role of downregulating
UHRF1.Methods: cDNA libraries from 20 normal breast tissues from the
Susan G. Komen Tissue Bank at the IU Simon Cancer Center and 10 TNBC
tumors were sequenced on an Applied Biosystems SOLiD3 sequencer. Mapping
of reads to the human genome (hg19) was performed using the LifeScope
software. RNA-seq data from an additional 84 TNBCs was downloaded from
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data portal. Differential gene expression
was analyzed using Partek Genomics Suite; and network, pathway, and
transcription factor analysis was performed using Ingenuity Systems IPA
9.0. To investigate the effects of EGCG a known downregulator of UHRF1 in
vitro, nine TNBC cell lines were utilized representing the known TNBC
molecular subtypes. TNBC cell lines were chosen based on differing
subtypes which include different genetic and morphological
characteristics. Cells were seeded in 96 well plates at 10,000 cells per
well and dosed with increasing concentrations of EGCG from 0-400M, in
increments of 50M. CellTiter-Glo was used to assess the viability of all
cells lines after 72 hours. The IC50 was ascertained using percent
changes from control luminosity of untreated cells.Results: Transcription
factor analysis of RNA-seq data identified RB1 activity as significantly
inhibited in TNBC. A search for upstream inhibitors identified UHRF1 as
highly overexpressed in TNBC (Fold-change =7.96, p-value=8.34x106).
Further network analysis revealed that upregulation of UHRF1 is mediated
by mutated p53 (which is mutated >80% of TNBCs) and is an inhibitor of
BRCA1 which is known to be suppressed in TNBC. Using a publically
available gene expression database, high expression of UHRF1 is
correlated with poor survival in breast cancer (pIntroduction:
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a particularly aggressive form of
breast cancer that presently lacks specific treatment. Using
next-generation RNA sequencing of 94 TNBC tumors and 20 normal breast
tissues, we have identified UHRF1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, as
significantly overexpressed. UHRF1 is involved in DNA methylation, is
upregulated via mutated p53, and plays a role in the repression of RB1 &
BRCA1. Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), a polyphenol found in green tea,
has been previously investigated in its role of downregulating
UHRF1.Methods: cDNA libraries from 20 normal breast tissues from the
Susan G. Komen Tissue Bank at the IU Simon Cancer Center and 10 TNBC
tumors were sequenced on an Applied Biosystems SOLiD3 sequencer. Mapping
of reads to the human genome (hg19) was performed using the LifeScope
software. RNA-seq data from an additional 84 TNBCs was downloaded from
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data portal. Differential gene expression
was analyzed using Partek Genomics Suite; and network, pathway, and
transcription factor analysis was performed using Ingenuity Systems IPA
9.0. To investigate the effects of EGCG a known downregulator of UHRF1 in
vitro, nine TNBC cell lines were utilized representing the known TNBC
molecular subtypes. TNBC cell lines were chosen based on differing
subtypes which include different genetic and morphological
characteristics. Cells were seeded in 96 well plates at 10,000 cells per
well and dosed with increasing concentrations of EGCG from 0-400M, in
increments of 50M. CellTiter-Glo was used to assess the viability of all
cells lines after 72 hours. The IC50 was ascertained using percent
changes from control luminosity of untreated cells.Results: Transcription
factor analysis of RNA-seq data identified RB1 activity as significantly
inhibited in TNBC. A search for upstream inhibitors identified UHRF1 as
highly overexpressed in TNBC (Fold-change =7.96, p-value=8.34x106).
Further network analysis revealed that upregulation of UHRF1 is mediated
by mutated p53 (which is mutated >80% of TNBCs) and is an inhibitor of
BRCA1 which is known to be suppressed in TNBC. Using a publically
available gene expression database, high expression of UHRF1 is
correlated with poor survival in breast cancer (p<0.001). As EGCG is a
known downregulator of UHRF1, we tested EGCG on nine TNBC cell lines and
assessed for cell viability. EGCG resulted in significant cell death with
a median LD50 of 109M. Furthermore, in two of the cell lines, HCC70 and
HCC1143, 100% cell death was observed at 250M.Conclusions: UHRF1 is a key
member of the p53/RB1/BRCA1 network and is important in TNBC survival.
EGCG, a natural compound that downregulates UHRF1, significantly
decreases the viability of TNBC cell lines in-vitro. Investigation into
more potent small molecule inhibitors of UHRF1 is currently underway.

