Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained delivery of CZ48, a lactone-stabilized camptothecin, by
nanosuspensions.


Background: CZ48, a prodrug of camptothecin (CPT), shows promising
antitumor activity as a topoisomerase I (Topo-I) inhibitor after its
biotransformation to CPT in vivo. Studies establish that a prolonged
exposure of Topo-I inhibitors with low concentrations is more efficacious
in cancer treatment than a short term exposure with high concentrations,
due to the S-phase cell cycle specific mechanism. However, poor
solubility and the effective delivery challenges have been the obstacles
for clinical applications of CZ48 to patients.Objectives: The research
was to achieve the following objectives: (1) to prepare by wet media
milling method and characterize CZ48 nanosuspensions (NSs); (2) to
determine the pharmacokinetics (PK) of CZ48 and CPT from CZ48 NSs in
Swiss nude mouse model; (3) to demonstrate the proof-of-concept efficacy
of CZ48 NS in tumor-bearing athymic mouse model.Methods: CZ48 NSs of
different sizes were formulated by media milling method. The in vitro
release kinetics in plasma and phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution
(pH 7.4) were characterized, respectively, using the dialysis bag
diffusion technique. The PK of CZ48 and CPT were evaluated in male Swiss
nu-nu mice by intravenous (i.v.) doses of 5 and 25 mg/kg for cosolvent
reference and NSs, respectively. The PK parameters of CZ48 and CPT were
derived by WinNonlin 3.0. The proof-of-concept efficacy was performed in
the subcutaneous tumor model of Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) H460
cell line in the nude mouse model. ANOVA with Tukey's post-hoc and
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis were used for comparisons of PK
modifications and efficacy of the CZ48 from NSs using the cosolvent as
reference.Results: CZ48 NSs of particle sizes of 200 nm (NS-S) and 600 nm
(NS-L) were successfully formulated and extensively characterized. The in
vitro sustained release of CZ48 from NSs in plasma was achieved with 0.60
0.12 %/h release rate and less than 40 % total release at 48 h, compared
with 6.48 0.29 %/h release rate and complete release by 28 h from
cosolvent. NS-S and NS-L prolonged the blood circulation of CZ48 by 8.00,
and 5.58 h, respectively, compare to 0.70 h from cosolvent. More
importantly, NS-S yielded CPT with the longest half-life (12.51, 5.81 vs.
0.40 h) and largest AUC (19.78, 10.95 vs. 8.29 nM*h/(mg/kg)) than NS-L
and cosolvent. CZ48-loaded NS-S exhibited significant tumor growth rate
suppression compared to cosolvent (0.08 0.03 vs. 0.18 0.06/day) with a
higher tolerable dose (25 vs. 5 mg/kg), and an improved survival rate
(80% vs. 10%).Conclusion: This study is the first report to demonstrate
the NS as a viable pharmaceutical carrier to deliver CZ48 in a sustained
manner, achieving significant tumor growth suppression at a higher
tolerable dose. The study provides a formulation strategy of great
potentials to overcome the delivery barriers for other anticancer drugs.
We anticipate that the CZ48 NS will be a lead candidate for the future
clinical trials of CZ48.

