Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Embelin induces reactive oxygen species-mediated apoptosis in PTC
cells.


The X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) is a promising new molecular
target for the design of novel anticancer drugs aiming at overcoming
apoptosis-resistance of cancer cells to. Recent studies demonstrated that
the BIR3 domain of XIAP where caspase-9 and Smac proteins bind is an
attractive site for designing small-molecule inhibitors of XIAP. Embelin,
identified primarily from the Embelia ribes plant, is one such compound
shown to exhibit chemopreventive, anti-inflammatory, and apoptotic
activities via inhibiting XIAP activity. In this study we found tthat
embelin generated a dose dependent Reactive oxygen species (ROS) in PTC
cell lines. Pretreatment of PTC cell with N-acetyl-Lcysteine, an
scavenger of ROS prevented embelin mediated inhibition of cell
proliferation and apoptosis. Further more, NAC pretreatment also
abrogated embeling mediated mitochondrial apoptosis. In addition
treatment of PTC cell lines with embelin causes activation of p38, a
stress related map kinases leading to up-regulation of death receptor 5
(DR5). Interestingly NAC pretreatment prevented its activation as well as
up-regulation of DR5. Altogether, these data suggest a novel function for
embelin causes inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of
apoptosis via generation of ROS a suppressor of XIAP pathway via
generation of ROS in PTC cells, and raise the possibility that this agent
may have a future therapeutic role in PTC and possibly other malignancies
with up-regulated XIAP pathway.

