Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maintenance immunotherapy following carboplatin (CBDCA) -
pemetrexed (PEM) chemotherapy in advanced adenocarcinoma (ADK) of the
lung: A phase II study.


Background: Continuation maintenance therapy with PEM vs. placebo has
been shown to improve progression-free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS), in patients with advanced non squamous non small cell lung
cancer, at the price of a substantial toxicity. Nevertheless, in these
patients the observed lymphocytopenia induced by chemotherapy, is a
negative independent prognostic factor. Bacterial extracts (OM-85) have
been shown to enhance the activation of both IgM memory B lymphocytes
(CD24+/CD27+ cells) and inteleukin-2 receptor-expressing lymphocytes
(CD25+ cells) (Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2006;19:551). In addition,
we have demonstrated that 13-cis retinoic acid (RA) restored the
chemotherapy-depressed immune function (Clin Cancer Res 2001;7:1251).
With this rationale, we designed a phase II study of maintenance
immunotherapy after first line CBDCA-PEM chemotherapy in order to
maintain an achieved response, or at least stable disease, for as long as
possible, with acceptable side effects.Methods:
Histologically/cytologically confirmed patients with stage IIIB or IV non
operable ADK of the lung with measurable disease, ECOG PS 0-2, age 18-75
years and adequate bone marrow, renal and liver function were eligible
for the study. Treatment consisted of 6 courses of PEM 500 mg/m2 and
CBDCA, AUC=5, on day 1 every 3 weeks. Patients with a clinical benefit
were treated with OM-85, 7 mg/day, 10 days/month and RA 0.5 mg/kg, 5
days/week, 3 weeks/month, both given until progression.Results: From
September 2007 to March 2012, 54 patients, with a median age of 65 years
(range 33-75), 50% stage IIIB and 50% stage IV, were entered into the
study. At a median follow up of 22 months, clinical benefit was observed
in 41 patients (75%); Complete response 8 (14%), partial response 21
(39%), stable disease 12 (22%), progressive disease 13 (25%). One-year OS
rate was 69%. After immunotherapy, a statistically significant
(PBackground: Continuation maintenance therapy with PEM vs. placebo has
been shown to improve progression-free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS), in patients with advanced non squamous non small cell lung
cancer, at the price of a substantial toxicity. Nevertheless, in these
patients the observed lymphocytopenia induced by chemotherapy, is a
negative independent prognostic factor. Bacterial extracts (OM-85) have
been shown to enhance the activation of both IgM memory B lymphocytes
(CD24+/CD27+ cells) and inteleukin-2 receptor-expressing lymphocytes
(CD25+ cells) (Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2006;19:551). In addition,
we have demonstrated that 13-cis retinoic acid (RA) restored the
chemotherapy-depressed immune function (Clin Cancer Res 2001;7:1251).
With this rationale, we designed a phase II study of maintenance
immunotherapy after first line CBDCA-PEM chemotherapy in order to
maintain an achieved response, or at least stable disease, for as long as
possible, with acceptable side effects.Methods:
Histologically/cytologically confirmed patients with stage IIIB or IV non
operable ADK of the lung with measurable disease, ECOG PS 0-2, age 18-75
years and adequate bone marrow, renal and liver function were eligible
for the study. Treatment consisted of 6 courses of PEM 500 mg/m2 and
CBDCA, AUC=5, on day 1 every 3 weeks. Patients with a clinical benefit
were treated with OM-85, 7 mg/day, 10 days/month and RA 0.5 mg/kg, 5
days/week, 3 weeks/month, both given until progression.Results: From
September 2007 to March 2012, 54 patients, with a median age of 65 years
(range 33-75), 50% stage IIIB and 50% stage IV, were entered into the
study. At a median follow up of 22 months, clinical benefit was observed
in 41 patients (75%); Complete response 8 (14%), partial response 21
(39%), stable disease 12 (22%), progressive disease 13 (25%). One-year OS
rate was 69%. After immunotherapy, a statistically significant (P<0.001)
increase in lymphocyte number was observed in responders. Median PFS was
10.2 months, while median OS was 27.6 months. Four patients, rendered
operable with treatment, underwent a radical surgical procedure. Grade 4
renal toxicity was observed in 1 patient, while grade 3-4 hematologic
toxicity occurred in 9 patients (17%).Conclusion: This study shows that
maintenance immunotherapy with the combination of OM-85 and RA,
administered after chemotherapy in advanced ADK of the lung, is feasible
and induces a statistically significant raise in lymphocyte number. In
addition a favorable impact on PFS and OS was observed. Future randomized
studies to investigate the role of maintenance immunotherapy strategies,
are in program

