Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis of nuclei dissected from FFPE tissue using
expression microdissection.


Currently, proteomic analysis of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissue (the most common method of storing tissue specimens) are limited
by the overwhelming complexity of the cellular proteome, which makes
disease related changes in protein expression difficult to detect.
Expression Microdissection (xMD) allows for automated,
operator-independent dissection of specific cells or subcellular
organelles in FFPE tissue, resulting in the enrichment of specific,
selectable protein populations. In xMD, tissue slices that have been
stained for specific cellular markers using immunohistochemical (HC)
methods are placed under a layer of ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) polymer
film. When the stack is uniformly illuminated (using a rastering laser or
a light pulse), the EVA melts and makes contact only over the stained
tissue, enabling specific capture and transfer of these areas for further
biochemical analysis, while leaving unstained tissue behind.As a proof of
principle, we are using the xMD technique to enrich for nuclei in FFPE
rat brain tissue sections followed by proteomic analysis. Shotgun
proteomic analysis of these samples show a significant enrichment in
nuclear localized proteins, with an average 18% of recovered proteins
localized to the nucleus-versus 11% of recovered proteins in whole tissue
scrapes. Targeted mass spectrometry, using Multiple Reaction Monitoring
(MRM), also shows an enrichment of nuclear markers such as histones and
DNA-binding proteins, and a de-enrichment of non-nuclear proteins. The
enrichment for nuclei allows for the identification of methylated lysines
on histones that are not detected in whole tissue scrapes, most likely
due to their low abundance.The evolving methodology may allow researchers
to profile the sub-cellular proteome of patient samples to identify
potential new disease biomarkers and drug targets. This novel technology
could also be used to advance our understanding of the biomolecular
changes responsible for a specific disease state.

