Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer testis antigens-specific CD4+ T-cell immunity augmented by
CTL-epitopes vaccination in cancer patients.


We identified novel cancer testis antigens (CTAs) including CDCA1, LY6K
(URLC10) and KIF20A that are overexpressed in lung cancer, head and neck
cancer (HNC), and other various malignancies, but not expressed in many
adult normal tissues except for testis and fetal organs by using
genome-wide cDNA microarray analyses. We identified CTAs-derived peptides
that can activate tumor-reactive and HLA-A2 or -A24-restricted CTLs in
both in vitro preclinical and in vivo clinical studies of peptide
vaccine. It is well known that IL-2 and IFN- produced by Th1 cells have
pivotal roles in efficient induction of memory CTLs and efficient
infiltration of CTLs into the tumor. We identified these CTAs-derived
promiscuous 2026-mer long peptides (LPs) that can induce both Th1 cells
restricted by several frequent HLA class II and tumor-reactive CTLs
restricted by HLA-A2 or -A24. The LPs were naturally processed from CTAs
and presented by dendritic cells. In addition, these LPs induced
propagation of CTA-specific CTLs by cross presentation in both human in
vitro and HLA-class I transgenic mice in vivo. Furthermore, these LPs and
Th1-cell clone enhanced induction of CTA-specific CTLs in vitro.
Significant frequencies of CTA-specific Th1 cells were detected after
short-term in vitro stimulation with LPs in HNC patients vaccinated with
CTA-derived CTL-epitope peptides and cancer patients before vaccination
but not in healthy donors; responses were augmented by repeated
vaccinations. These results show for the first time the presence of novel
CTAs-specific Th1 cell responses in cancer patients and suggest the
potential utility of these LPs for propagation of CTAs-specific Th1 cells
and CTLs.

