Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of anti-SLC34A2 antibody drug conjugate as
a therapeutic for non-small cell lung and ovarian cancers.


SLC34A2, also known as type II Na/Pi co-transporters NaPi2b or NaPi3b, is
a member of solute carrier protein family SLC34. SLC34A2 is highly
expressed on cancers of the lung, ovary and thyroid as well as on normal
lung pneumocytes, and is a promising target for antigen-directed therapy.
Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) specify the delivery of a cytotoxic drug
to cells expressing an accessible antigenic target. Here we have appended
monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) to an antibody recognizing SLC34A2.
Anti-SLC34A2-vc-MMAE inhibits tumor growth in multiple ovarian and
non-small cell lung cancer xenograft models that express SLC34A2.
Anti-SLC34A2 antibody and its conjugate cross-react with both human and
monkey, and toxicity studies in monkeys are conducted to identify both
target- and MMAE-related effects. Anti-SLC34A2-vc-MMAE was well tolerated
in monkeys at efficacious doses and produced dose-related bone marrow
suppression and increased apoptosis and mitotic figures consistent with
MMAE-related pharmacology. Despite high levels of expression in normal
lung of non-human primate, the cross-reactive ADC exhibited an acceptable
safety profile with a dose-limiting toxicity unrelated to normal tissue
expression. Overall, our preclinical results suggest that the antibody
drug conjugate targeting the SLC34A2 may provide an effective new therapy
for the treatment of NSCLC and ovarian cancer.

