Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of the glycolytic enzyme PFKFB2 induces growth
inhibition and enhances paclitaxel sensitivity in ovarian cancer cells.


Knockdown of certain glycolytic enzymes can affect ovarian cancer cell
growth and enhance sensitivity to paclitaxel.
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase-2 (PFKFB-2) is the
cardiac isoform of the most important glycolytic regulator,
phosphofructokinase-2, From the TCGA database of >300 ovarian cancers,
the PFKFB2 gene ranked in the top 33% of overexpressed genes and in the
top 19% of genes with copy number gain. We found that PFKFB2 mRNA was
upregulated in 10 of 12 ovarian cancer cell lines when expression of the
gene was compared to that in normal ovarian epithelial cells in culture.
Knockdown of PFKFB2 with siRNA markedly inhibited cell proliferation and
increased paclitaxel sensitivity in p53 wild type ovarian cancer cell
lines as demonstrated in short-term cytotoxicity and long-term clonogenic
assays. Liposome encapsulated PFKFB2 siRNA significantly inhibited growth
(PKnockdown of certain glycolytic enzymes can affect ovarian cancer cell
growth and enhance sensitivity to paclitaxel.
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase-2 (PFKFB-2) is the
cardiac isoform of the most important glycolytic regulator,
phosphofructokinase-2, From the TCGA database of >300 ovarian cancers,
the PFKFB2 gene ranked in the top 33% of overexpressed genes and in the
top 19% of genes with copy number gain. We found that PFKFB2 mRNA was
upregulated in 10 of 12 ovarian cancer cell lines when expression of the
gene was compared to that in normal ovarian epithelial cells in culture.
Knockdown of PFKFB2 with siRNA markedly inhibited cell proliferation and
increased paclitaxel sensitivity in p53 wild type ovarian cancer cell
lines as demonstrated in short-term cytotoxicity and long-term clonogenic
assays. Liposome encapsulated PFKFB2 siRNA significantly inhibited growth
(P<0.05) of human ovarian cancer xenografts in two ovarian cancer models
(Hey A8 and A2780); even greater growth inhibition was observed when
PFKFB2 siRNA treatment was combined with paclitaxel. Cell growth
inhibition in cell culture was linked to G1 arrest and to a modest
increase in apoptosis. Induction of p21Cip1 and p27Kip1 protein by PFKFB2
knockdown contributed to the G1 arrest, since silencing p21Cip1 and
p27Kip1 dramatically reduced PFKFB2 knockdown-induced G1 arrest. PFKFB2
knockdown also modulated the expression of CDK2 and the phosphorylation
of p27Kip1. Induction of p53 protein contributed to both PFKFB2
knockdown-induced G1 arrest and to apoptosis, since silencing p53
markedly alleviated PFKFB2 knockdown-induced G1 arrest and apoptosis.
PFKFB2 knockdown inhibited expression of the ABC transporter family
members ABCC4 and ABCG2 at the level of transcription, possibly
contributing to enhanced paclitaxel retention and increased cytotoxicity
after PFKFB2 knockdown. Taken together, these results suggest that PFKFB2
protein may regulate cell growth and sensitivity to paclitaxel by
multiple mechanisms, particularly in p53 wild type ovarian cancers. As
methods to deliver siRNA evolve in the clinic, PFKFB2 may provide a novel
target for enhancing sensitivity to paclitaxel-based chemotherapy in
patients with low grade serous ovarian cancer where p53 function remains
intact.

