Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic association of POU5F1B at 8q24 with prostate cancer.


Numerous genetic variants at 8q24 have been associated with risk for
multiple common cancers, most prominently for prostate cancer. POU5F1B is
a retrotransposed copy of the master stem cell factor OCT4, and one of
few known genes within the 8q24 interval. While OCT4 is expressed
selectively in embryonic stem cells, POU5F1B retains its open reading
frame and has been shown to be expressed in cancers. Ectopic expression
of OCT4 blocks progenitor cell differentiation and causes dysplasia,
raising the possibility that aberrant expression of POU5F1B might have
analogous effects. Because POU5F1B sequence is non-unique, a potential
contribution of POU5F1B genetic variation to cancer risk has not been
investigated in prior GWAS. We evaluated genetic variants of POU5F1B for
association with prostate cancer within a case-control study of familial
prostate cancer at Vanderbilt University that included 830 familial
prostate cancer probands, and 830 age-matched control probands without a
personal or family history of prostate cancer. Our study identified four
missense variants within POU5F1B, and eight haplotypes of > 1% frequency.
G176E was associated with prostate cancer (P = 3.1 x 104) and was in LD
with GWAS SNP rs6983267 (r2 = 0.69). The minor allele (encoding
glutamate) uniquely marked a single haplotype (the most common) with an
inverse association with prostate cancer (P = 5.7 x 104, OR = 0.78 (95%CI
0.7-0.9)). As expected, the haplotype association was correlated with
that of GWAS SNP rs6983267. A second haplotype differing from the first
only at G176E (encoding glycine) was independently associated with risk
of prostate cancer (P = 5.5 x 107, OR = 1.91 (95%CI 1.5-2.5)). However,
glycine would also be encoded at this position by all other haplotypes,
none carrying a risk effect. The risk haplotype was tagged by the pair of
missense variants, G176E (glycine) and E238Q (glutamine). In a single
allele analysis, the latter variant had no apparent association with
prostate cancer. The risk effect of the former adjusted for the latter
was OR = 2.12 (95%CI 1.6-2.7), P = 1.7 x 108; the risk effect of the
latter adjusted for the former was OR = 1.79 (95%CI 1.4-2.3), P = 9.4 x
106. The two missense variants would alter each of the DNA-binding
domains: one altering a highly conserved site with a non-conservative
substitution, and the other abrogating a kinase site known to
physiologically regulate other POU transcription factors. Our data
suggest that combinations of these variants may be associated with risk
of prostate cancer and warrant further investigation of the potential
role of POU5F1B in the 8q24 cancer associations.

