Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of Fbw7 in human melanoma and its role in
cell migration.


The E3 ubiquitin ligase Fbw7 (F-box and WD repeat domain-containing 7) is
broadly considered as a tumor suppressor because of its role in turnover
of several well-known onco-proteins. However, the role of Fbw7 in
melanomagenesis is not clear. To investigate the expression profile and
biological functions of Fbw7 in melanoma, we examined Fbw7 expression
level using melanoma tissue microarray and immunohistochemistry. Our data
showed that Fbw7 expression is significantly reduced in primary melanoma
compared with dysplastic nevi (P = 0.020) and further reduced in
metastatic melanoma compared with primary melanoma (P = 0.011).
Furthermore, we observed a strong correlation between negative Fbw7
expression and a worse 5-year survival of melanoma patients (P = 0.015).
We also found that both Fbw7 protein and mRNA expression was
significantly reduced in 9 melanoma cell lines compared with normal
melanocytes. Moreover, our in vitro studies showed a remarkable increase
of cell migration and stress fibre formation in Fbw7 knockdown cells, and
treatment of selective MEK inhibitor abrogated Fbw7 knockdown induced
melanoma cell migration. Taken together, our findings indicate that Fbw7
plays an important role in melanoma progression, and Fbw7 inhibits
melanoma cell migration through MAPK-ERK signalling pathway and may serve
as a prognostic marker.

