Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Novel pathway for regulation of ANXA2 expression in lung cancer
cell metastasis by SETDB1/SMAD3 repressor complex.


Aberrant histone methylation contributes to tumor development and
progression by histone methyltransferase. SETDB1 is an H3K9
methyltransferase that contributes to the epigenetic silencing of target
genes in cancer cells, but the role of SETDB1 in the progression of
tumorigenesis remains largely unknown. We show here that H3K9Me2 and
SETDB1 are down-regulated in metastatic lung cancer cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry examination of the lung carcinoma tissue microarray
revealed that expression of SETDB1 is significant decreased in metastasis
status. Ectopic expression of SETDB1 in highly invasive lung cancer cells
suppressed cancer cell migration, invasion and filopodia formation. In
contrast, knockdown of endogenous SETDB1 in non-invasive lung cancer
cells by RNA interference increases cell migration and invasion in vitro.
Mechanistic investigations suggested that SETDB1 is specifically
down-regulated by miR-29b in metastatic lung cancer cells. Ectopic
miR-29b expression in non-invasive lung cancer cells increases cell
invasion ability. Furthermore, we also establish a causal role for the
SETDB1/SMAD3 complex in driving metastasis and identify ANXA2 as a
critical target in this process among numerous target genes. These
findings suggest a novel pathway regulated by SETDB1/SMAD3 complex in
lung cancer metastasis.

