Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiproliferative effects of PI3K-mTOR pathway inhibitors alone or
in combination with MEK inhibitor GSK1120212 in pancreatic cancer cell
lines are not correlated with molecular effects on ERK and S6
phosphorylation.


Background: Activating K-RAS mutations are frequent (>70%) in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (PAC) and drive downstream deregulation of both
Raf-MEK-ERK and PI3K-mTOR pathways. Moreover, many cross-talks exist
between these two pathways, so that inhibition of one leads to activation
of the other. MEK inhibitors (MEKi) are currently under clinical
evaluation in PAC, in combination with chemotherapy or targeted agents
including PI3K-mTOR pathway inhibitors. To date, no predictive marker has
been validated for such combinations in PAC. This study aimed to explore
the effects of various PI3K-mTOR pathway inhibitors alone or in
combination with MEKi GSK1120212, in MIAPACA-2 and PANC-1 PAC cell
lines.Materials and Methods: Everolimus is a mTORC1 inhibitor, AZD8055 a
dual mTORC1/mTORC2 inhibitor, BEZ235 a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, and
BKM120 a pan-class PI3K inhibitor. GSK1120212 is an allosteric non-ATP
competitive MEKi. Effects on proliferation were evaluated by MTT assay.
Protein expression was assessed by Western blot. Combinations were
analyzed using the Chou-Talalay method.Results: We had previously shown
that MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 were two mesenchymal K-RAS mutated PAC cell
lines with different response to GSK1120212, MIAPaCa-2 being the most
sensitive (72h-IC50=0.009M) and PANC-1 the most resistant (72h-IC50=33M).
We additionally screened these cell lines for predictive markers of
response to mTOR pathway inhibitors: no mutation was found in B-RAF, EGFR
and PI3KCA genes; MIAPaCa-2 exhibited lower p27, PTEN and higher Bcl-2
levels than PANC-1. PANC-1 exhibited high basal level of Akt associated
with high level of pAkt and downstream pP70S6K and pS6, suggesting basal
activation of the pathway. PI3K-mTOR pathway inhibitors exerted
antiproliferative effects on both cell lines. Unexpectedly, MIAPaCa-2 was
more sensitive than PANC-1 to everolimus (IC50=23.3M vs 47.0M) and other
PI3K-mTOR inhibitors (IC50 range=0.385-4.19M vs 6.31-31.6M). Combination
of GSK1120212 and the PI3K-mTOR inhibitors for 72h resulted in
synergistic effects in MIAPaCa-2 sensitive cell line but not in PANC-1.
We further studied cell signaling in PANC-1. MEK inhibition abolished
pERK expression (-70%) and increased pAkt expression (+60%). mTOR pathway
inhibition by everolimus or BKM120 (0.1M, 1M) decreased pS6 expression
(-90% and -80%, respectively) and induced a slight increase in pERK
(+10%). Combination therapy resulted in extinction of both pERK and pS6
expression.Conclusion: Response to combined MEK/mTOR pathway inhibition
was not correlated with usually reported biomarkers of response to MEKi
or mTOR pathway inhibitors. PANC-1 cell line was resistant despite
effective inhibition of both pERK and pS6, suggesting that resistance may
be due to activation of other alternative pathway(s).

