Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 isoform specificity in controlling breast tumor initiating
cell properties.


Tumor initiating cells (TICs) constitute a small fraction of tumor cells
that display stem cell characteristics, including the ability to
self-renew and generate heterogeneous tumors. A CD44+/CD24- profile has
been widely used to identify TICs in a variety of tumors. However, it has
remained unknown whether CD44 is functionally required for TICs and
whether a specific CD44 isoform is enriched in TICs. Here, we report that
the CD44s isoform is the major splice isoform expressed in a CD44+/CD24-
breast stem cell population. Functionally, CD44s is required for
expression of a breast stem cell (BSC) gene signature and is essential
for mammosphere formation. Modulation of CD44 alternative splicing by the
splicing regulator ESRP1 prevents CD44s production and, in turn, inhibits
mammosphere formation and expression of the BSC signature. Furthermore,
CD44s is required for limiting numbers of TICs to form tumors in an
animal model of breast cancer progression. Together, these data
illustrate that the CD44s splice isoform is enriched in CD44+/CD24-
breast stem cells and serves as an important regulator of stem cell
properties. Our results also suggest that CD44s-dependent TIC properties
can be controlled at the level of alternative splicing by splicing
factors that regulate production of specific CD44 isoforms.Citation
Format: Rhonda L. Brown, Sali Liu, Lauren M. Reinke, Chonghui Cheng. CD44
isoform specificity in controlling breast tumor initiating cell
properties. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington,
DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 260.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-260

