Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation-induced matrix metalloprotease-9 promotes mesenchymal
transition of Daoy cells and initiates activation of pro-matrix
metalloprotease-2.


Ionizing radiation is an efficient therapeutic modality against cancer
and a potent carcinogenic agent with the ability to alter cellular
genotype. Earlier, we reported that medulloblastoma cells exposed to
ionizing radiation showed enhanced invasive and adhesive characteristics.
Invasion is the cumulative effort of cells to degrade the extracellular
matrix (ECM) and to modulate cellular phenotype to invade the ECM.
Therefore, we examined the modulation gained by irradiated
medulloblastoma cells leading to enhanced invasiveness. Radiation-induced
invasion increased with the increase in the recovery time after radiation
treatment and was identified to be associated with MMP-9/MMP-2 activity.
Radiation enhanced the expression of MMP-9 and induced the cleavage of
pro-MMP-2 into active form, and the latter was associated with MT-MMP-1
expression. A significant time lag observed between the radiation
exposure time and MMP-2 activation was identified as a period required
for the irradiated cells to acquire cellular alteration, such as
mesenchymal characteristics. Recombinant protein(s) and inhibitor(s)
studies demonstrated that radiation-induced MT-MMP-1 expression and MMP-2
activation are in harmony with JNK activation. MMP-9 gene silencing and
protein supplementation studies confirmed that MMP-9 activates JNK
signaling and potent inducers of mesenchymal markers such as Snai1 and
N-Cadherin. Further, gene-specific silencing of either MMP-9 or
N-Cadherin showed significant reduction of MMP-2 activation in irradiated
Daoy cells. Collectively, our results provide an insight on the role of
MMP-9 in radiation-induced invasion and in initiating signaling cascades
that modulate Daoy cells to acquire mesenchymal characteristics and
activate MMP-2.

