Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation-induced angiogenic signaling pathway in endothelial
cells isolated from normal and cancer tissue of human breast.


Despite the strong possibility that the endothelial cells (ECs) of tumors
and normal tissues may differ in various aspects, most previous studies
on ECs have used normal cells. Here, we purified ECs from tumorous and
normal human breast tissues, and studied the effect of radiation on
angiogenesis and the relevant molecular mechanisms in these cells. We
found that in normal tissue-derived endothelial cells (NECs), 4 Gy
irradiation increased tube formation, MMP-2 expression and ERK pathway
activation. In cancer-derived endothelial cells (CECs), however, 4 Gy
irradiation significantly reduced tube formation, increased the
production of angiostatin and interleukin-6 (IL-6), and up-regulated AKT
and JNK pathway activation. Knockdown experiments showed that siMMP-2
efficiently inhibited tube formation by irradiated NECs, while
siPlasminogen effectively attenuated the irradiation-induced suppression
of tube formation and the up-regulation of angiostatin in CECs. Moreover,
siIL-6 clearly inhibited the irradiation-induced generation of
angiostatin in CECs. Inhibition of ERK with a pharmacological inhibitor
or siRNAs markedly suppressed irradiation-induced tube formation and
MMP-2 up-regulation in NECs, while the inhibition of either AKT or JNK
with pharmacological inhibitor or siRNA treatment of CECs clearly
attenuated the irradiation-induced inhibition of tube formation and the
up-regulation of angiostatin and IL-6. These observations collectively
demonstrate that there are distinct differences in the radiation
responses of NECs and CECs, and might provide important clues for
improving the efficacy of radiation therapy.

