Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysregulation of the repressive H3K27 trimethylation mark in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma contributes to dysregulated squamous
differentiation.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is one of the most
prevalent cancers diagnosed worldwide and is associated with a 5-year
survival rate of 55%. EZH2, a component of the polycomb repressor complex
2, trimethylates H3K27 (H3K27me3); which has been shown to drive squamous
differentiation in normal keratinocytes. This study determined whether
inhibition of EZH2-mediated epigenetic silencing could induce
differentiation or provide therapeutic benefit in HNSCC. We determined
the effects of inhibiting EZH2, by either RNA interference or
pharmacologically, on HNSCC growth, viability and differentiation in
vitro. Xenografts of HNSCC cell lines were used to assess efficacy of
3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), an inhibitor of H3K27 trimethylation, in
vivo.EZH2 was highly expressed in HNSCC cell lines in vitro and tissue
microarray analysis revealed high expression in (n= 59) in situ relative
to normal oral epithelium (n=12). Inhibition of EZH2 with siRNA could
induce expression of differentiation genes in differentiation-refractory
squamous cell carcinoma cell lines. Differentiation-refractory HNSCC cell
lines displayed persistent H3K27me3 on the promoters of differentiation
genes. DZNep caused cancer-cell specific apoptosis in addition to a
profound reduction in colony forming efficiency and induction of some
squamous differentiation genes. Furthermore, in vivo, DZNep attenuated
tumour growth in two different xenograft models, caused intra-tumour
inhibition of EZH2 and induction of differentiation genes in
situ.Collectively, these data suggest that aberrant differentiation in
HNSCC may be attributed to epigenetic dysregulation and suggests that
inhibition of PRC2-mediated gene repression may represent a potential
therapeutic target.

