Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronological changes of hormone receptor status in breast cancer
by reproductive factors: results from Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SeBCS).


Lifestyle factors have been chronologically changed into western-style in
Korea, which may result in the rapid increase of breast cancer incidence.
It is plausible reproductive factors through hormonal mechanisms are
differentially related to risk of breast cancer subtypes defined estrogen
receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) status. We investigated the
differential association of reproductive risk factors on such subtypes
and also evaluated the temporal trends between those factors and the
subtypes.Using data of Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SeBCS), a multicenter
based case-control study, 3,689 breast cancer patients and 3,870 control
subjects were analyzed in this study. The distribution of subtypes among
cases was 62.7% of ER+, 37.3% ER-, 53.2% of PR+ and 46.8% PR-,
respectively. Reproductive factors including age at menarche, pregnancy
history, age at first full term pregnancy, number of children, duration
of estrogen exposure before first full term pregnancy (EEBF), duration of
lifetime estrogen exposure (LEED), breast feeding history and duration of
breast feeding were evaluated on breast cancer risk by hormone receptor
status. Multinomial logistic regression and Wald tests for heterogeneity
across the subtypes were conducted.The frequency of PR-positive breast
cancer significantly was higher among the women born in 1960s (56.4%)
compared to women born in 1940s (41.9%) (p for trend Lifestyle factors
have been chronologically changed into western-style in Korea, which may
result in the rapid increase of breast cancer incidence. It is plausible
reproductive factors through hormonal mechanisms are differentially
related to risk of breast cancer subtypes defined estrogen receptor (ER)
and progesterone receptor (PR) status. We investigated the differential
association of reproductive risk factors on such subtypes and also
evaluated the temporal trends between those factors and the
subtypes.Using data of Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SeBCS), a multicenter
based case-control study, 3,689 breast cancer patients and 3,870 control
subjects were analyzed in this study. The distribution of subtypes among
cases was 62.7% of ER+, 37.3% ER-, 53.2% of PR+ and 46.8% PR-,
respectively. Reproductive factors including age at menarche, pregnancy
history, age at first full term pregnancy, number of children, duration
of estrogen exposure before first full term pregnancy (EEBF), duration of
lifetime estrogen exposure (LEED), breast feeding history and duration of
breast feeding were evaluated on breast cancer risk by hormone receptor
status. Multinomial logistic regression and Wald tests for heterogeneity
across the subtypes were conducted.The frequency of PR-positive breast
cancer significantly was higher among the women born in 1960s (56.4%)
compared to women born in 1940s (41.9%) (p for trend <0.0001). However,
there was no significant trend of the distribution in ER-defined breast
cancer subtype. Breast cancer risks associated with number of children,
EEBF, LEED, duration of breast feeding were different between ER or PR
status (all p for heterogeneity Lifestyle factors have been
chronologically changed into western-style in Korea, which may result in
the rapid increase of breast cancer incidence. It is plausible
reproductive factors through hormonal mechanisms are differentially
related to risk of breast cancer subtypes defined estrogen receptor (ER)
and progesterone receptor (PR) status. We investigated the differential
association of reproductive risk factors on such subtypes and also
evaluated the temporal trends between those factors and the
subtypes.Using data of Seoul Breast Cancer Study (SeBCS), a multicenter
based case-control study, 3,689 breast cancer patients and 3,870 control
subjects were analyzed in this study. The distribution of subtypes among
cases was 62.7% of ER+, 37.3% ER-, 53.2% of PR+ and 46.8% PR-,
respectively. Reproductive factors including age at menarche, pregnancy
history, age at first full term pregnancy, number of children, duration
of estrogen exposure before first full term pregnancy (EEBF), duration of
lifetime estrogen exposure (LEED), breast feeding history and duration of
breast feeding were evaluated on breast cancer risk by hormone receptor
status. Multinomial logistic regression and Wald tests for heterogeneity
across the subtypes were conducted.The frequency of PR-positive breast
cancer significantly was higher among the women born in 1960s (56.4%)
compared to women born in 1940s (41.9%) (p for trend <0.0001). However,
there was no significant trend of the distribution in ER-defined breast
cancer subtype. Breast cancer risks associated with number of children,
EEBF, LEED, duration of breast feeding were different between ER or PR
status (all p for heterogeneity <0.05). Those reproductive factors showed
a chronological trend according to the birth year groups. EEBF was longer
among the women born in 1960s group than women born in 1940s. As the EEBF
increased, the risk of breast cancer increased significantly; this
association was stronger among PR-positive (OR= 1.96, 95% CI= 1.65 - 2.33
for Q4 vs Q1) than among PR-negative cancer (OR= 1.48, 95% CI= 1.24 -
1.77 for Q4 vs Q1) (p for heterogeneity= 0.0100). LEED was shorter among
the women born in 1960s group than women born in 1940s. As the LEED
increased, the risk of breast cancer decreased significantly, which is
stronger among PR-negative (OR= 0.67, 95% CI= 0.57 - 0.79 for Q4 vs Q1)
than among PR-positive cancer (OR= 0.89, 95% CI= 0.76 - 1.05 for Q4 vs
Q1) (p for heterogeneity= 0.0014).Our results suggest that association
between the reproductive risk factors and breast cancer risk differs
appreciably for breast cancer defined by hormone receptor status.
Increasing distribution of PR-positive breast cancer might be attributed
to changes of EEBF and LEED.

