Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent inactivation of the Mieap-regulated mitochondrial quality
control in colorectal cancer.


Recently, we discovered a novel mechanism for mitochondrial quality
control (MQC), in which Mieap, a p53-inducible protein, controls MQC by
repairing or eliminating unhealthy mitochondria in a process known as
MALM (Mieap-induced Accumulation of Lysosome-like organelles within
Mitochondria) or MIV (Mieap-Induced Vacuole), respectively (1, 2). We
also reported that two mitochondrial outer membrane proteins, BNIP3 and
NIX, are essential mediators of the MALM (2, 3). To examine the role of
Mieap-regulated MQC pathway in tumorigenesis, we analyzed the status of
p53, Mieap, BNIP3, and NIX in 57 cases of primary colorectal cancer. Of
the 57 patients, Mieap and BNIP3 promoter methylation was observed in 5
(8.8%) and 26 (45.6%) patients, respectively. A p53 mutation was detected
in 4 (18%) of the 22 patients with either Mieap or BNIP3 promoter
methylation whereas it was found in 9 (52%) of the 17 patients with
neither Mieap nor BNIP3 promoter methylation, implying that the
p53/Mieap/BNIP3 pathway in the Mieap-regulated MQC is inactivated in at
least 80% of colorectal cancer cases. Hypoxia induced MALM in the
colorectal cancer cell line LS174T (wild-type p53, Mieap-positive,
BNIP3-positive). In vitro knockdown of p53, Mieap, or BNIP3 in the LS174T
cells severely inhibited hypoxia-induced MALM, leading to the
accumulation of unhealthy mitochondria and increased mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species (mtROS) generation. Furthermore, the mtROS
dramatically enhanced cancer migration and invasion under hypoxic
conditions. These results suggest that the Mieap-regulated MQC function
plays a critical role in tumor suppression in colorectal cancer.1.
Miyamoto Y et al. PLoS ONE 6: e16054, 20112. Kitamura N et al. PLoS ONE
6: e16060, 20113. Nakamura Y et al. PLoS ONE 7: e30767, 2012

