Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FTY720 prevent tumorigenesis and suppress the progression of
colitis-associated cancer.


Inflammatory bowel disease is an important risk factor for colorectal
cancer. Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a pleiotropic bioactive
sphingolipid metabolite formed by two sphingosine kinases, SphK1 and
SphK2, is involved in inflammation and cancer. Enhanced tumor number and
size, with a concomitant increase in tumor load was observed in mice
overexpressing SphK1 treated with the colonotropic mutagen azoxymethane
(AOM) followed by three rounds of oral administration of the luminal
toxin dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) to induce colitis-associated cancer
(CAC). There was also a large increase in adenomas with a high grade of
dysplasia associated with increased SphK1 expression and formation of
S1P. We demonstrated that the SphK1/S1P axis is important for production
of IL-6 and is involved in persistent activation of STAT3 and consequent
upregulation of one of its target genes, the S1P receptor S1PR1. Because
the pro-drug FTY720 modulates the immune system by acting as a functional
antagonist of S1PR1, inducing its internalization and degradation, we
examined its effect on CAC progression. FTY720 drastically reduced
colitis-associated tumorigenesis, when it was administered during CAC
induction. Remarkably, FTY720 blocked CAC progression even when it was
administered later after the last DSS treatment when tumors were already
established. Moreover, it reduced SphK1 expression, production of IL-6,
and persistent activation of STAT3. These findings suggest that FTY720
may be beneficial for preventing tumor formation in individuals with
inflammatory bowel disease.This work was supported by grants from the
National Institute of Health (R37GM043880, R01CA61774, U19AI077435 to
S.S. and R01CA160688 to K.T.). M.N. is a Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science Postdoctoral Fellow.

