Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining and targeting a Glioblastoma cancer stem cell population
with EGF Receptor Variant III.


The relationship between mutated proteins and the relatively rare cancer
stem cell population is unclear since driver mutations are present
throughout a tumor. Glioblastoma (GBM) tumors frequently express
EGFRvIII, an EGFR variant that arises via gene rearrangement and
amplification. The expression of EGFRvIII is restricted despite the
prevalence of the alteration. Here we show that EGFRvIII is expressed in
a population of human GBM cancer stem cells. EGFRvIII positive cancer
stem cells demonstrate greater self-renewal and tumor initiation than the
more abundant EGFRvIII negative cells. EGFRvIII positive cells are
associated with stem/progenitor markers while markers of differentiation
are found in EGFRvIII negative cells. EGFRvIII is highly co-expressed
with CD133, and the EGFRvIII positive/CD133 positive sub-population
defines the highest self-renewal and tumor initiating population.
Surprisingly, wildtype EGFR was infrequently co-expressed with EGFRvIII
but present in the majority of cells, both in primary GBM and cultured
GBM neurospheres. Elimination of the EGFRvIII positive or the
EGFRvIII/CD133 dual positive population with an engineered
anti-EGFRvIII/CD133 bi-specific antibody reduced tumorigenicity of
implanted tumor cells. This work demonstrates that a mutated oncogene can
have CSC specific expression and be used to specifically target this
population.

