Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pilot study of intrahepatic artery chemotherapy in combination
with sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma patients.


Background: Sorafenib and chemoembolization of the liver (TACE) have both
produced increased survival in patients (pts) with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). However, not all HCC pts can tolerate or accept TACE due
to portal vein thrombosis or risk of liver failure.Chemotherapy infused
via intrahepatic artery infusion (IA) may potentially increase drug
delivery to the tumor while reducing systemic toxicity. In this pilot
trial, we combined IA cisplatin or IA carboplatin with oral sorafenib for
pts with unresectable HCC and report our results herein.Methods: Major
inclusion criteria into this study include:unresectable HCC, Child's A or
early Child's B (maximum 7 points on Child-Pugh scale), serum bilirubin
Background: Sorafenib and chemoembolization of the liver (TACE) have both
produced increased survival in patients (pts) with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). However, not all HCC pts can tolerate or accept TACE due
to portal vein thrombosis or risk of liver failure.Chemotherapy infused
via intrahepatic artery infusion (IA) may potentially increase drug
delivery to the tumor while reducing systemic toxicity. In this pilot
trial, we combined IA cisplatin or IA carboplatin with oral sorafenib for
pts with unresectable HCC and report our results herein.Methods: Major
inclusion criteria into this study include:unresectable HCC, Child's A or
early Child's B (maximum 7 points on Child-Pugh scale), serum bilirubin
<3 mg/dl, ECOG performance status 0-1.Treatment plan:IA cisplatin 60
mg/m2 or carboplatin AUC =6 was infused percutaneously IA on day 1 and
then every 6 weeks. Sorafenib 400 mg po bid was given on day 1 and
continuously. MRI or CT abdomen was done every 6 weeks. Recist criteria
was used to measure response.Results: 11 pts were accrued onto the
study.Median age was 65 (range 48-84), median number of cycles 2 (range
1-7). Of 10 evaluable pts, 6 had clinical benefit (4 partial responses
for 2+, 3+, 8+ and 18 months, 2 minor responses). Two of the responding
pts withdrew to have ablation therapy or liver transplant after their HCC
was able to be downstaged and remain free of disease for 32+ and 36+
months. Toxicity was generally tolerable and no pt withdrew due to drug
toxicity.Conclusion: Preliminary results with IA cisplatin or IA
carboplatin with sorafenib are encouraging and this combination may
downstage some pts with unresectable HCC. Further studies with this
regimen are indicated.Supported by Bayer HealthCare and Onyx
Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

