Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro culturing of CTCs/DTCs in personalized cancer management.


Subsequent detection, quantification and molecular characterization of
CTCs has an enormous potential in numerous of oncology areas. But
detection and isolation of CTCs is technically quite challenging. The
whole dissemination process encompasses also individual tumor cells which
are found in relatively big quantities in peritoneal washings (PW) and
pleural effusions (PE), so called disseminated tumor cells (DTCs).Thanks
in vitro cultures of separated CTCs/DTCs we were able to introduce
additional chemosensitivity testing for the purpose of individualized
cancer treatment. We present an isolation and cultivation of CTC/DTC of
non-small cell lung cancer and gastrointestinal cancers (esophageal
cancer, colorectal cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer) describing
cultivation methodology on patients case studies.The cancer cells were
separated from body fluids (PW, PE, blood) using the differences in size
of cancer cells if compared to other nucleated cells detected in body
cavities. After reaching the confluence the chemosensitivity of cell
cultures has been tested by xCELLigence system (RTCA, Roche) for
different concentrations of single cis-platinum, gemcitabine and
fluorouracyl (incubation time 24-72 hours) or their combinations. The
dynamic real-time cell growth monitoring enables parallel or sequential
combinations of administered drugs with a direct outcome for patients
care.Conclusions: We assume that developing cultivation strategies for
CTCs/DTCs could bring us closer to the definition of the CTC/DTC-function
within the dissemination process with a perspective to use this knowledge
in personalized cancer treatment.

