Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell assay on a chip to study tumor initiating cells heterogeneity
and treatment resistance.


Recent investigations from both animal models and clinical samples have
continuously supported that Tumor Initiating Cell (TIC) does exist and
plays an important role in tumor metastasis and recurrence. However, TICs
have a few intrinsic properties leading to their complexity in molecular
targeting and inhibition. TICs are 1) heterogeneous, 2) dynamically
changing states, 3) often rare and 4) lack robust biomarker combinations,
thereby challenging conventional bulk in vitro experimental tools and
complicating the prediction and explanation of animal study results. High
throughput, in situ, and cell-by-cell measurement on TICs is a way to
fully decipher TIC's molecular signature and signaling pathways. We
believe such measurement can lead to 1) revolutionary implementation of
TIC models; 2) identification of new therapeutic targets; and 3)
reduction of breast cancer recurrence and metastasis. Microfluidics
technology (1) is a candidate to serve as such type of high throughput
single-cell characterization.We started pursuing such measurements a few
years ago and demonstrated high throughput single-cell protein profiling
on both cell lines and clinical samples. The technology, called
single-cell barcode chip (SCBC), is facilitated by state-of-the-art
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) microfluidics protocols. The SCBC consists of
down to nanoliter chambers that concentrate proteins from individual
cells to a level even higher than cell culture media in conventional dish
technology and contains extremely miniaturized antibody arrays to capture
proteins produced by cells in these chambers. Further utilization of our
SCBC platform to TICs is expected to characterize protein expression from
individual breast TIC and lead to new discoveries in TIC filed.

