Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pterostilbene exerts full protection against UVB-induced skin
carcinogenesis.


Epidemiological, clinical and laboratory studies have demonstrated that
solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation is the main cause of nonmelanoma skin
cancer (i.e., basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma) and it is also a
prime factor in the etiology of cutaneous melanoma. The cancer-causing
effects of solar exposure on the skin are mainly produced by UV-B
radiation in the 290- to 320-nm range, the same range that produces
burning in human skin (erythema), inflammation, oxidative stress, DNA
damage, etc. Thus, and considering the alarming numbers of skin cancers
being diagnosed around the world, it is increasingly evident the need of
an effective protection against UV radiation. Polyphenols (PFs) are
abundant in many fruits and vegetables, wine, tea, and various dietary
supplements. The role of these natural molecules as potential
anticarcinogens and photoprotectors has been postulated (e.g. Clifford JL
& DiGiovanni J. Cancer Prev Res 3: 132-5, 2010). Resveratrol
(trans-3,5,4-trihydroxystilbene; RES) is a phytoalexin present in a wide
variety of plant species, where its synthesis is induced by stress
conditions. The cancer chemopreventive activity of RES was first reported
by Jang et al [Science 275, 218 - 220 (1997)] in a model of skin
carcinogenesis where topic administration of this polyphenol inhibited
multistage mouse skin carcinogenesis. Equally promising action is exerted
by resveratrol analogues, mainly pterostilbene
(3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxy-transstilbene: PTER), which shows a higher
half-life and more potent anticancer effects in vivo than RES. The
long-term UV-B administration (180 mJ/cm2; 3 doses/week; for a total of
30 weeks) reproduces, in an animal model, which are the consequences in
humans of receiving chronic UV-B radiations. We observed that
pretreatment of the skin with PTER prevented UV-B-induced skin
tumorigenesis (90 % of tumor free-mice at the end of treatment, n=20;
PEpidemiological, clinical and laboratory studies have demonstrated that
solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation is the main cause of nonmelanoma skin
cancer (i.e., basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma) and it is also a
prime factor in the etiology of cutaneous melanoma. The cancer-causing
effects of solar exposure on the skin are mainly produced by UV-B
radiation in the 290- to 320-nm range, the same range that produces
burning in human skin (erythema), inflammation, oxidative stress, DNA
damage, etc. Thus, and considering the alarming numbers of skin cancers
being diagnosed around the world, it is increasingly evident the need of
an effective protection against UV radiation. Polyphenols (PFs) are
abundant in many fruits and vegetables, wine, tea, and various dietary
supplements. The role of these natural molecules as potential
anticarcinogens and photoprotectors has been postulated (e.g. Clifford JL
& DiGiovanni J. Cancer Prev Res 3: 132-5, 2010). Resveratrol
(trans-3,5,4-trihydroxystilbene; RES) is a phytoalexin present in a wide
variety of plant species, where its synthesis is induced by stress
conditions. The cancer chemopreventive activity of RES was first reported
by Jang et al [Science 275, 218 - 220 (1997)] in a model of skin
carcinogenesis where topic administration of this polyphenol inhibited
multistage mouse skin carcinogenesis. Equally promising action is exerted
by resveratrol analogues, mainly pterostilbene
(3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxy-transstilbene: PTER), which shows a higher
half-life and more potent anticancer effects in vivo than RES. The
long-term UV-B administration (180 mJ/cm2; 3 doses/week; for a total of
30 weeks) reproduces, in an animal model, which are the consequences in
humans of receiving chronic UV-B radiations. We observed that
pretreatment of the skin with PTER prevented UV-B-induced skin
tumorigenesis (90 % of tumor free-mice at the end of treatment, n=20;
P<0.01). Our aim was to study the key molecular mechanisms involved in
this strong anticancer effect elicited by PTER. Our results indicate that
PTER efficiently avoid skin carcinogenesis induced by solar radiation by
decreasing DNA mutagenesis, and protein and lipid oxidation.

