Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Uracil DNA glycosylase expression determines human lung cancer
cell sensitivity to pemetrexed.


Uracil misincorporation into DNA is a consequence of pemetrexed
inhibition of thymidylate synthetase (TS). The DNA base excision repair
(BER) enzyme, uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG) is the major glycosylase
responsible for removal of misincorporated uracil. We previously
illustrated hypersensitivity to pemetrexed in UNG-/- human colon cancer
cells (DLD1) and proposed that cytotoxic uracil accumulation leads to
collapsed replication forks, double strand breaks and cell death. Here,
we examined the relationship between cellular capability to remove
uracil-DNA and pemetrexed sensitivity in human lung cancer cells. Viral
siRNA and shRNA knockdown of UNG enhanced pemetrexed sensitivity in A549
and H1975 cells, respectively. We further evaluated induction of UNG as a
mechanism of pemetrexed resistance. Exposure of H1299 cells to step-wise
increasing concentrations of pemetrexed established drug resistant
sublines: H1299PR-1 and H1299PR-2. Significant induction of UNG protein
was observed in both sublines. Importantly, co-treatment with the BER
inhibitor, methoxyamine (MX), overcame pemetrexed resistance in
H1299PR-1/2 underscoring the utility of BER directed therapeutics to
offset acquired pemetrexed resistance. Lastly, differential expression of
UNG in cell lines and primary lung cancer tissues was associated with
pemetrexed sensitivity. Cell lines derived from squamous and small cell
carcinoma, known to be clinically resistant to pemetrexed, had the
highest levels of UNG expression in a panel of eight lung cancer cell
lines. Analysis of cDNA microarrays derived from primary human lung
cancer tissues also indicated high UNG expression in pemetrexed-resistant
histological subtypes. Thus, we propose that UNG is a major determinant
of pemetrexed sensitivity in human lung cancer.

