Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGFBR1 and TP53 SNPs interactions associated with colorectal
cancer risk: Analysis of metabolic pathways using a Random Forest
approach.


Background:We recently found the association of african ancestry with
colorrectal cancer risk in Colombian population. Currently due to sample
size limitations we can not perform further analysis (ej.GWAS) to explore
this finding. Pathway analysis has been proposed as a complementary
approach to single SNP analyses in GWAS, specially in hypothesis driven
analysis.AIM: To evaluate the association of SNP included in the SNP500
cancer with colorectal cancer risk in colombian population.Methods: We
recruited 264 controls and 203 colorectal cancer cases from 5 Colombian
cities.Participants gave written informed consent, donated blood samples
and answered guided-questionnaires. SNP analysis was done using and high
reliable comertial plataform the Illumina Cancer Panel This panel
includes 1492 SNP related to different cancer metabolic pathways and were
drawn from the SNP500 cancer database. After QC procedures we grouped
these SNP according to the pathway maps reported in the KEGG database.
Using a Random Forest Analysis we evaluate the discriminative capacity
between cancer case and control of each SNP in each pathway separately.
Age sex and african ancestry where considered covariates for this
analysis. Those SNPs showing a better o similar performance to african
ancestry were further analyzed in a conditional logistic regression
model, where all known risk factors for colorectal cancer were
included.Results: 1192 SNPs and 418 individuals pass through the QC
protocol. SNP were grouped in 16 different pathways. Random Forest
analysis showed that only 1 pathway, the hsa05210 (i.e colorrectal
cancer) contained 2 SNPs, rs868 and rs2909430, that outperformed the
discriminatory capacity of african ancestry between cases and controls.
Conditional logistic regression analysis showed an interaction between
both polymorphisms (pBackground:We recently found the association of
african ancestry with colorrectal cancer risk in Colombian population.
Currently due to sample size limitations we can not perform further
analysis (ej.GWAS) to explore this finding. Pathway analysis has been
proposed as a complementary approach to single SNP analyses in GWAS,
specially in hypothesis driven analysis.AIM: To evaluate the association
of SNP included in the SNP500 cancer with colorectal cancer risk in
colombian population.Methods: We recruited 264 controls and 203
colorectal cancer cases from 5 Colombian cities.Participants gave written
informed consent, donated blood samples and answered
guided-questionnaires. SNP analysis was done using and high reliable
comertial plataform the Illumina Cancer Panel This panel includes 1492
SNP related to different cancer metabolic pathways and were drawn from
the SNP500 cancer database. After QC procedures we grouped these SNP
according to the pathway maps reported in the KEGG database. Using a
Random Forest Analysis we evaluate the discriminative capacity between
cancer case and control of each SNP in each pathway separately. Age sex
and african ancestry where considered covariates for this analysis. Those
SNPs showing a better o similar performance to african ancestry were
further analyzed in a conditional logistic regression model, where all
known risk factors for colorectal cancer were included.Results: 1192 SNPs
and 418 individuals pass through the QC protocol. SNP were grouped in 16
different pathways. Random Forest analysis showed that only 1 pathway,
the hsa05210 (i.e colorrectal cancer) contained 2 SNPs, rs868 and
rs2909430, that outperformed the discriminatory capacity of african
ancestry between cases and controls. Conditional logistic regression
analysis showed an interaction between both polymorphisms (p<0.001).
Compared against carriers of the mayor alleles of these two SNPs, we
found a protective effect against colorectal cancer risk among carriers
of only one of the variants (OR 0.04 CI95% 0.01-0.25 and OR 0.26 CI95%
0.12-.053 for rs868 and rs2909430 respectively). In contrast we found a
positive association with cancer risk among carriers of both variants (OR
12.5 CI95% 3.15-49-98). African ancestry possitive association remained
significant in the multiple regression analysis (pBackground:We recently
found the association of african ancestry with colorrectal cancer risk in
Colombian population. Currently due to sample size limitations we can not
perform further analysis (ej.GWAS) to explore this finding. Pathway
analysis has been proposed as a complementary approach to single SNP
analyses in GWAS, specially in hypothesis driven analysis.AIM: To
evaluate the association of SNP included in the SNP500 cancer with
colorectal cancer risk in colombian population.Methods: We recruited 264
controls and 203 colorectal cancer cases from 5 Colombian
cities.Participants gave written informed consent, donated blood samples
and answered guided-questionnaires. SNP analysis was done using and high
reliable comertial plataform the Illumina Cancer Panel This panel
includes 1492 SNP related to different cancer metabolic pathways and were
drawn from the SNP500 cancer database. After QC procedures we grouped
these SNP according to the pathway maps reported in the KEGG database.
Using a Random Forest Analysis we evaluate the discriminative capacity
between cancer case and control of each SNP in each pathway separately.
Age sex and african ancestry where considered covariates for this
analysis. Those SNPs showing a better o similar performance to african
ancestry were further analyzed in a conditional logistic regression
model, where all known risk factors for colorectal cancer were
included.Results: 1192 SNPs and 418 individuals pass through the QC
protocol. SNP were grouped in 16 different pathways. Random Forest
analysis showed that only 1 pathway, the hsa05210 (i.e colorrectal
cancer) contained 2 SNPs, rs868 and rs2909430, that outperformed the
discriminatory capacity of african ancestry between cases and controls.
Conditional logistic regression analysis showed an interaction between
both polymorphisms (p<0.001). Compared against carriers of the mayor
alleles of these two SNPs, we found a protective effect against
colorectal cancer risk among carriers of only one of the variants (OR
0.04 CI95% 0.01-0.25 and OR 0.26 CI95% 0.12-.053 for rs868 and rs2909430
respectively). In contrast we found a positive association with cancer
risk among carriers of both variants (OR 12.5 CI95% 3.15-49-98). African
ancestry possitive association remained significant in the multiple
regression analysis (p<0.01). Rs868 and rs2909430 are located in TP53 and
TGFBR1 genes. Other Polymorphisms in this genes has shown conflicting
results in previous analysis on colorectal cancer risk.Conclusion: We
report for the first time an epistatic effect between two polymorphism
located in genes involved in the colorectal cancer metabolic pathway in
an admixed population after controlling for population structure and
known risk factors. These results may help to explain the diverging
results observed in studies of the association of these genes with
colorectal cancer riskCitation Format: Gustavo Hernandez-Suarez,
MariaCarolina Sanabria, Martha Serrano, Jovanny Zabaleta, Albert Tenesa.
TGFBR1 and TP53 SNPs interactions associated with colorectal cancer risk:
Analysis of metabolic pathways using a Random Forest approach.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4840.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4840

