Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of SPP1 in NPC microenvironment.


Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma (NPC) is highly associated with EBV infection
and lymphocytes infiltration, which contribute to form the NPC
microenvironment. To better understand the NPC microenvironment, we
conducted PCR array using pooled cDNA mixtures from 5 NPC tissues and
their counterpart non-tumor tissues to profile inflammation-associated
gene expression. We found that the Th1/Th2 related cytokines were down
regulated in NPC tissues. This result was verified by Real-time
quantitative PCR using 13 pairs of NPC samples and non-tumor tissues. The
result of IHC staining of NPC tissues with T helper cell marker CD4 also
showed decreased infiltration of T helper cells. Lower level of Th1/Th2
related cytokines were also detected in NPC serum compared to paired
non-tumor serum. Osteopontin (SPP1), a glycophosphoprotein, playing roles
in inflammation, bone formation, and tumor progression and metastasis,
was over expressed in 67% (8/12) of NPC samples compared with non-tumor
tissues. IHC staining of SPP1 in NPC tissues also showed up-regulation of
SPP1 in either NPC cells or lymphocytes. To study the effect of SPP1 on T
helper cells population, we cultured PBMC by adding SPP1 protein at the
concentration from 0 to 100 ng/ml into the culture medium, followed by
Flow Cytometry analysis. We found that Low-dose SPP1 protein stimulated T
helper cell proliferation, which could be inhibited by SPP1 at high dose.
Our data indicated that the over-expression of SPP1 by NPC cells might
contribute to tumor immunosuppression in NPC microenvironment, thus
promote cancer progression.

