Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide analysis of stepwise hepatocarcinogenesis using next
generation sequencer.


Early hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) originates from the hepatocytes of
chronic liver disease and develops into classical HCC. To identify
sequential genomic changes in multistep hepatocarcinogenesis, we analyzed
fusion genes and mutations using next generation sequencer about 40 early
and 80 advanced HCCs. First, exome sequence showed that base sequence
aberrations were more frequent in advanced HCC than early HCC, and
mutations including TP53 (24%), CTNNB1 (24%), and ARID1A (16%) were
recurrently observed in both early and advanced HCCs. Consistent with our
previous report homozygous deletions near CSMD1 and CDKN2A were also
found in 8 and 5 cases, respectively, only in advanced HCC. Next, we
detected 4 types of fusion gene, including interchromosomal
(translocation), intrachromosomal (deletion), intrachromosomal
(translocation), and inversion by RNA sequencing. We also found that
every HCC harbored 2 to 5 fusion genes, which were more frequent in
advanced than early HCC, although there were no recurrent rearrangements
in neither advanced nor early HCCs. Especially chromathripsis, in which
10 to 100 rearrangements were localized in the specific genomic regions
and genomic features imply chromosome breaks occur in one-off crisis, was
the event observed only in advanced HCC. Taken together, genomic changes
were more frequent in advanced HCC, suggesting early HCC originates in
the chronic liver disease and progresses into advanced HCC with genomic
aberrations.

