Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated oligo aCGH and SKY analysis of genomic alterations in
malignant mesothelioma cell lines.


Malignant mesothelioma (MMt) is a rare and very aggressive tumor of the
mesothelium. It's most prevalent subtype is malignant pleural
mesothelioma, eighty percent of which are associated with asbestos
exposure. MMt incidence is 0.9 new cases per 100,000 persons per year.
The five year relative survival is 7% overall, which positions MMt
immediately above pancreatic cancer (6%), at the bottom of the survival
list by cancer site.We applied a comprehensive molecular cytogenetic
analysis using spectral karyotyping (SKY) and oligo aCGH to a panel of
MMt cell lines. We found the largest set of recurrent and non-recurrent
homozygous deletions (HD) for MMt (88 HDs in 17 cell lines; 52 recurrent
HDs that fall into ten genomic areas). Detailed analysis of the most
frequently homozygously deleted area located at 9p21.3 revealed that the
main targets are CDKN2A/p14ARF (in 100% of the MM cell lines),
CDKN2A/p16INK4A and CDKN2B /p15 (94% of cell lines). p14ARF seems to be
the main target of HDs in the 9p21.3 area (deleted in all 17 MMt cell
lines studied), followed by p16INK4A (deleted in 16 cell lines)
indicating the inactivation of two major tumor suppressing pathways, p53
and Rb. Accordingly, mutations or HDs of p53 and Rb are infrequent events
in MMt tumors. Other recurrent HDs were located at 9p21.2 (targeting
LINGO2) and at16p13.3 (RBFOX1) in 41% of cell lines, 22q11.23 (GSTT1) in
29%, 22q12.2 (NF2) and 3q26 (no known genes) in 23% each, 8p11.22 -23
(ADAM5P/ADAM3A) in 18%, 3p21.3-p21.2 (RPL29), 3p21 (DUSP7), 4q22.1
(FAM190A) and 13q11-q12 (LATS2) in 12% each of the 17 MM cell lines While
p16INK4A, p14ARF, p15, LATS2 and NF2 have been shown to behave as tumor
suppressors in MMts, other genes in the HD areas presented here could be
new tumor suppressor candidates.Structural chromosomal rearrangements
were mainly non-reciprocal translocations (74% of aberrations detected by
SKY) and deletions (23%). No recurrent balanced or unbalanced
translocations have been found. Structural chromosomal rearrangements
resulted in recurrent losses of fragments or whole chromosomal arms of
1p, 3p, 8p, 9p, 13q, 14q, 15q, 18q, 22q and gains of 1q, 5p, 7p, 8q, 17q,
20q. Small HDs were frequently embedded in the areas of focal losses.
Integration of SKY and aCGH data allowed reconstruction of chromosomal
rearrangements leading to the formation of HDs. Our data imply that only
with acquisition of structural or numerical karyotypic abnormalities can
MMt cells attain a complete loss of the 9p21.3 genomic area and loss of
tumor suppressor genes located there. Tetraploidization seems to be a
late event in the karyotypic progression of MMt cells, after HD in the
9p21.3 area has already been acquired.

