Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid quantitation of circulating microRNAs using a novel
detection technology.


The rapid implementation of quantifying microRNAs (miRNAs) in body fluids
for diagnosis and prognosis could be improved by designing more rapid
approaches. The current mainstream approach is quantitative reverse
transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR). Barriers for the applicability are lengthy
time requirement for isolation and amplification of miRNAs, and
polymerase inhibitors that copurify with miRNA, and compromise the
accuracy of the approach. Here we provide an approach using a
nano-particle technology that overcomes these limitations. This
technology is based on the principle that a fluorophore-containing
oligonucletide sequence is fluorescently silent unless displaced from a
quencher by a specific substrate RNA. Once displacement occurs, the
resulting fluorescence provides a measure of RNA concentration in the
reaction. Our approach allows for the direct and rapid quantification of
circulating miRNAs with minimal processing of blood plasma/serum and is
done without the use of enzymes. Using circulating miRNAs with
established roles in cancer and quality control, miR-16, miR-21 and
miR-22 and miR-451, we identified optimal temperature, detergent and
solvent-extraction parameters, to quantify accurately these miRNAs in
plasma using a microplate fluorometer within an hour after plasma
preparation. The stringency of our conditions can discriminate wild type
from a single-basepair mismatch RNA, and is specific for mature miRNAs.
Furthermore, this approach facilitates measurement of samples collected
in heparin, an anticoagulant that severely inhibits polymerases used for
qRT-PCR. This approach creates the possibility for rapid blood tests to
quantify miRNA-associated events in real-time, and provides greater
public access to miRNA studies by reducing the cost and time requirement
of current accurate approaches of miRNA quantitation.

