Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of mTOR mediated signaling pathways in papillary thyroid
cancer cell.


The mammalian target rapamycin (mTOR) signaling cascade is a key
regulatory pathway controlling initiation of mRNA in mammalian cells.
Torin2 is a potent, selective and orally available mTOR inhibitor for
treatment of cancer. Dysregulation of mTOR signaling has been found in
many cancers, however its role Papillary Thyroid Cancer (PTC) has not
been explained. Therefore in this study, we investigated the role of mTOR
and its associated molecules in PTC cell lines using MTT, flow cytometry
and DNA fragmentation assays and western blotting. Our data showed that
Torin2 caused a dose dependent growth inhibition in all cell lines
studied. Cell cycle assay showed that the sub-G1 population in TPC-1 cell
increased from 12.44% in untreated control sample to 31.50% after 200nM
of Torin2 treatment and 44.08% after 400nM of Torin2 treatment for 48
hours. Similarly BCPAP cells increased from 8.47% in untreated control
sample to 33.54% after 200nM of Torin2 treatment and 41.16% after 400nM
of Torin2 treatment for 48 hours. Further confirmation using
FITC-conjugated Annexin V and PI assay showed that apoptotic cell
increased from 8.89% in untreated cells to 58.54% and 73.54% after 200nM
and 400nM treatment in TPC-1 cells, and from 13.24% in control to 46.74%
and 70.64% in BCPAP cells, indicating a dose dependent apoptosis induced
in both cell lines. Treatment of PTC cell lines with Torin2 inactivated
downstream targets of mTOR; p70S6 and 4E-BP1. Torin2 treatment of PTC
cell lines also induced mitochondrial dependent apoptosis via activation
and cleavage of caspase-9, and 3, and cleavage of PARP. Furthermore
Torin2 positively regulated autophagy by disrupting the Beclin-1 complex,
releasing Beclin-1 to induce autophagy. Our results suggest mTOR and its
associated signaling pathway play a critical role in PTC tumorigenesis,
therefore targeting of mTOR expression may be a viable therapeutic
intervention for treatment of these cancers.

