Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methionine adenosyltransferase II regulates histone
methyltransferase G9a expression in colorectal cancer stem cells.


Histone modification is critical for regulation of chromatin structure
and gene transcription in cells and recent evidences have characterized
that histone methylation may contribute to tumorigenesis and cancer
malignancies. In general, the methyl donor for methylation is synthesized
from S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), in a reaction catalyzed from methionine
by methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT). Our previous studies have
demonstrated the expression of histone methyltransferase G9a, which is
responsible for histone H3 lysine 9 methylation, not only correlates to
tumor aggressiveness but also plays a crucial role in regulation of
colorectal cancer stem cells (CSCs), which endow high tumorigenecity,
drive metastasis and therapy-resistance. We discover that G9a is enriched
in CSCs and knockdown of its expression will promote differentiation,
inhibit drug-resistance and metastatic ability of CSCs. Here, we further
report that MATII expression is specifically elevated in the nucleus and
interacts with G9a in CSCs. Overexpression of MATII in non-CSCs will
increase G9a expression, self-renewal ability and stemness marker
expression. In contrast, knockdown of MATII decreases G9a expression, it
reveals that the self-renewal ability will be blocked in CSCs.
Furthermore, inhibition of MATII expression by its inhibitor, SAM, can
also decrease G9a expression and stem-cell like characteristics. Taken
together, we first demonstrate that the expression and the function of
G9a are both maintained by MATII in colorectal CSCs. These findings
provide a new insight into understanding of the link between the
metabolic enzyme and epigenetic regulator in CSCs, which may be a
therapeutic target in the future.

