Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the aggresome targeted Q141K ABCG2/BCRP
variant.


ABCG2 is a member of the G subfamily of human ABC transporters. It is an
ATP-dependent protein and is a half-transporter that must dimerize for
function. In various tumor cell lines, ABCG2 was involved in resistance
to chemotherapy, by transporting numerous anticancer agents including
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Studies show the transporter has an important
role in normal tissue protection, including the blood-brain and
maternal-fetal barriers. It has also been observed that ABCG2 may play a
protective role with respect to exposure to smoke or dietary carcinogens.
A common variant in human ABCG2, the polymorphism Q141K, impairs
expression and function, thereby reducing drug clearance and increasing
the toxicity of chemotherapy and other substrate drugs. Although the
activity of the Q141K variant is regularly described, biochemical data
remain rare. Q141K has an impaired trafficking to cell surface compared
to the WT protein and is sequestered in the aggresome. Here we
characterized the Q141K and WT protein in human cells, studying
post-translational modification, biochemistry, dimerization status,
half-life, and endocytosis. Glycosylation and phosphorylation are
equivalent, as is ATP binding and hydrolysis, and substrate binding using
IAAP competition assays. Cell treatment with romidepsin, an HDAC
inhibitor approved by FDA as an anticancer agent, restored the impaired
variant trafficking, leading to an increase in drug efflux. The
restoration of ABCG2 Q141K function has potential applications in
oncology and in medicine, in improving normal tissue protection and drug
elimination, as well as in cancer prevention since several carcinogens
are substrates for ABCG2.

