Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intra-person and inter-person biomarker variation for modeling
longitudinal values of ovarian cancer early detection biomarkers.


In 2012, an estimated 22,280 women will be diagnosed with ovarian cancer
in the United States and 15,500 women will die from this disease. Though
localized ovarian cancers have a survival rate of 92%, only 15-20% of
ovarian cancers are detected at this stage. Developing an effective
strategy for early detection could reduce mortality. While individual
values of CA125 are neither sufficiently sensitive nor specific for early
detection, monitoring CA125 over time shows greater specificity. The risk
of ovarian cancer algorithm, ROCA, analyzes the trend of annual values
for CA125, utilizing each woman's own baseline to refer a small fraction
(In 2012, an estimated 22,280 women will be diagnosed with ovarian cancer
in the United States and 15,500 women will die from this disease. Though
localized ovarian cancers have a survival rate of 92%, only 15-20% of
ovarian cancers are detected at this stage. Developing an effective
strategy for early detection could reduce mortality. While individual
values of CA125 are neither sufficiently sensitive nor specific for early
detection, monitoring CA125 over time shows greater specificity. The risk
of ovarian cancer algorithm, ROCA, analyzes the trend of annual values
for CA125, utilizing each woman's own baseline to refer a small fraction
(<1-2%) of women to transvaginal sonography. Using this strategy, no more
than three operations are required for each case of ovarian cancer
detected. Use of multiple biomarkers might increase sensitivity for
preclinical disease. Based on a multiplex assay of 96 biomarkers, a four
biomarker panel was identified of CA125, HE4, MMP-7 and CA 72-4 with
greater sensitivity than CA125 alone. To estimate the utility of these
biomarkers for longitudinal screening, we assessed five annual
longitudinal control serum samples from 200 women who did not develop
ovarian cancer from the MDACC SPORE normal risk ovarian cancer screening
study (NROSS). Utilizing WinBUGS, the inter-person and intra-person CVs
were evaluated. Upon log transformation for CA125, HE4 and MMP-7 and
log(log()+1) transformation for CA72-4, both the inter-person and
intra-person CVs follow a log-normal distribution. The median
inter-person CVs for CA125, HE4, MMP-7 and CA 72-4 were 49%, 20%, 35% and
84% respectively and the median intra-person CVs were 15%, 25%, 21% and
21% respectively. The ratios of intra-person CVs to inter-person CVs
derived for CA125, HE4, MMP-7 and log(CA 72-4) were 0.31, 1.25, 0.6 and
0.31. We anticipate that the lower the ratio, the higher the contribution
of each individual marker to early detection during longitudinal
measurements. The intra-person CV's should permit development of a
multi-marker algorithm. Assessment of longitudinal samples derived from
50 cases of preclinical ovarian cancer and 10 controls per case (UKCTOCS
trial) are underway in order to establish such a longitudinal
multi-marker algorithm for assessment of ovarian cancer risk.

