Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Towards the identification of PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum
kinase (PERK) inhibitors.


During tumorgenesis cancer cells must tolerate cellular stresses such as
DNA damage, hypoxia, and oxidative stress. In order to adapt to and
overcome such stresses, tumor cells remodel transcriptional and
translational programs by activating pro-survival signaling pathways.
PERK (PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase) is one of the key components
of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Many studies report that the UPR
is activated in a variety of tumor types. Previous studies demonstrated
that cells with a compromised PERK-eIF2-ATF4 signaling pathway are
sensitive to hypoxic stress in vitro and form tumors that grow more
slowly in vivo. Together, these data suggest a substantial role for PERK
and the UPR in tumor cell survival and adaptation to stress. Thus,
selective inhibitors of PERK activity may be useful therapeutic
candidates for the treatment of cancer. Using a high-throughput screening
(HTS) approach a number of lead compounds were identified with
demonstrated ability to inhibit PERK kinase autophosphorylation and
activity in cells. Using a publically available structure of Apo PERK a
PERK-ATP complex structure was generated by means of molecular dynamics
(MD) simulation. Evidence is presented to support the notion that the
simulation-generated structure represents a useful model for
computer-aided lead optimization.

