Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of a functional polymorphism in the epidermal growth
factor gene for pathogenesis and prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma in
Japanese patients.


[Introduction] A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the epidermal
growth factor (EGF) gene (rs4444903) has been investigated as a predictor
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Previous reports identified an A to G
transition at position 61 in the 5 untranslated region of the EGF gene
and demonstrated that the G/G genotype was associated with an increased
risk of developing HCC as compared to the A/G and A/A genotype. Racial
differences with respect to the distribution of this SNP have been
reported; however, no investigation has examined a Japanese
population.[Objectives] To examine the relationship between EGF SNP
genotype and the development and prognosis of HCC in a Japanese
population.[Methods] Restriction fragment-length polymorphism was used to
determine EGF SNP genotype in two hundred and eight patients with HCC,
who underwent resection in our department between 1994 and 2010. The
level of EGF mRNA expression in cancerous tissues was measured by
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. EGF SNP was also analyzed in
three hundred and four patients with either hepatitis, liver cirrhosis,
or healthy controls. The correlation between EGF SNP genotype and
prognosis was statistically analyzed in patients with HCC.[Results] A/A,
A/G, and G/G genotype were 5.3%, 42.8%, and 51.9% in the Japanese
patients with HCC. Tumoral EGF mRNA expression in G/G patients was
significantly higher than that in A/A patients (P=0.04). A/A, A/G, and
G/G genotype were 8.2%, 35.9%, and 55.9% in patients without HCC.
Analysis of the distribution of allelic frequencies revealed that the
odds ratios of developing HCC were 1.86 (95% CI 0.88-4.12, P=0.23) in A/G
patients and 1.44 (95% CI 0.70-3.17, P=0.33) in G/G patients compared
with A/A patients. However, when the analysis was limited to patients
with hepatitis C, the odds ratio were 3.37 (95% CI 1.20-12.06, P=0.02) in
A/G patients, and 2.77 (95% CI 1.10-9.78, P=0.04) in G/G patients,
compared with A/A patients. 3) No statistically significant differences
were observed between EGF SNP genotype and disease-free and overall
survival.[Conclusions] The frequency of the EGF SNP genotype in a
Japanese population was characterized by a very low distribution of A/A
patients. The EGF 61*G allele was associated with greater EGF mRNA
expression in HCC tissue. The EGF SNP genotype was also associated with
risk for development of HCC in hepatitis C patients but not with
prognosis.

