Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implication of delta-catenin-promoted E-cadherin processing on
human prostate cancer progression.


Although -catenin overexpression is frequently observed in some human
cancers, the mechanistic implications of -catenin expression in
epithelial cells and carcinomas remain elusive. In this study, we found
that prostate cancer cells overexpressing -catenin show an increase in
multi-layer growth in culture. In these cells, -catenin colocalizes with
E-cadherin at the plasma membrane, and the E-cadherin processing is
noticeably elevated. A deletion mutant of -catenin totally abolishes the
-catenin-induced E-cadherin processing and the multi-layer growth of the
cells. In addition, prostate cancer cells overexpressing -catenin display
an elevated total -catenin level and increase nuclear distribution,
resulting in the activation of -catenin/LEF-1-mediated transcription.
Indeed, human prostate tumor xenograft in nude mice, which is derived
from cells overexpressing -catenin, shows increased -catenin nuclear
localization and more rapid growth rates. Moreover, the metastatic
xenograft tumor weights positively correlate with the level of 29 kD
E-cadherin fragment, and primary human prostate tumor tissues also show
elevated levels of -catenin expression and the E-cadherin processing.
Taken together, these results suggest that -catenin plays an important
role in prostate cancer progression through inducing E-cadherin
processing and thereby activating -catenin-mediated oncogenic
signals.Citation Format: Hangun Kim, Somy Yoon, So-Yeon Park, Jun Eul
Hwang, Kwonseop Kim, Kyung Keun Kim. Implication of
delta-catenin-promoted E-cadherin processing on human prostate cancer
progression. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington,
DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr
3016. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3016

