Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small-molecule inhibitor BMS-777607 induces breast cancer cell
polyploidy with increased resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy agents.


The RON receptor tyrosine kinase is a therapeutic target for cancer
treatment. Here we report therapeutic effect and phenotypic change of
breast cancer cells in response to BMS-777607, a RON tyrosine kinase
inhibitor. Treatment of breast cancer cells with BMS-777607 at
therapeutic doses inhibited cancerous clonogenic growth but had only
minimal effect on cell apoptosis. Significantly, BMS-777607 induced
extensive polyploidy with multiple sets of chromosomes in cancer cells.
This effect is independent of RON expression. Knockdown of RON in T-47D
and ZR-75-1 cells by specific siRNA did not prevent polyploid formation.
Immunofluorescent analysis of -tubulin and -tubulin expression in
polyploid cells revealed that BMS-777607 disrupts bi-polar spindle
formation and causes multi-polar-like microtubule assembly. Also, both
metaphase equatorial alignment and chromosomal segregation were absent in
polyploid cells. These results suggest that cellular mitosis arrests at
prophase/pro-metaphase and fails to undergo cytokinesis. By analyzing
kinase-inhibitory profiles, aurora kinase B was identified as the target
molecule inhibited by BMS-777607. In BMS-777607 treated cells, aurora
kinase B was inhibited followed by protein degradation. Moreover,
BMS-777607 inhibited Ser10 phosphorylation of histone H3, a substrate of
aurora kinase B. Chemosensitivity analysis indicated the resistance of
polyploid cells towards chemotherapeutics. Treatment with doxorubicin,
bleomycin,cisplatin, methotrexate, and paclitaxel significantly increased
cellular IC50 values. These findings highlight the theory that BMS-777607
acts as a multi-kinase inhibitor at therapeutic doses and is capable of
inducing polyploidy by inhibiting aurora kinase B. Increased resistance
of polyploid cells to cytotoxic chemotherapeutics could have a negative
impact on targeted cancer therapy using BMS-777607.

