Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinically relevant low dose combination of rosuvastatin and
difluoromethylornithine provides effective chemopreventive efficacy
against AOM-induced colon cancers in F344 rats .


Preclinical and clinical studies suggest that statins and polyamine
inhibitors suppress growth, invasion and progression of malignant colon
tumors. Experiments were designed to evaluate the human clinical relevant
doses of Rosuvastatin and Difluromethylornithine (DFMO), individually and
in combination, on azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon adenocarcinomas
(AdCa) in male F344 rats. Eight weeks of age, rats (30-36/group) treated
with AOM to induce the colonic tumors and nine weeks after the AOM
treatment, groups of rats were fed AIN-76A diets containing Rosuvastatin
(50 or 100 ppm), DFMO (500 or 1000 ppm), or their low dose combination
for an additional 40 weeks. AOM-treated rats fed control diet showed AdCa
multiplicity of 3.59 0.48 (Mean SEM) and AdCa incidence of 96.6 %. 50 or
100 ppm Rosuvastatin significantly suppressed AdCa multiplicities (29%,
pPreclinical and clinical studies suggest that statins and polyamine
inhibitors suppress growth, invasion and progression of malignant colon
tumors. Experiments were designed to evaluate the human clinical relevant
doses of Rosuvastatin and Difluromethylornithine (DFMO), individually and
in combination, on azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon adenocarcinomas
(AdCa) in male F344 rats. Eight weeks of age, rats (30-36/group) treated
with AOM to induce the colonic tumors and nine weeks after the AOM
treatment, groups of rats were fed AIN-76A diets containing Rosuvastatin
(50 or 100 ppm), DFMO (500 or 1000 ppm), or their low dose combination
for an additional 40 weeks. AOM-treated rats fed control diet showed AdCa
multiplicity of 3.59 0.48 (Mean SEM) and AdCa incidence of 96.6 %. 50 or
100 ppm Rosuvastatin significantly suppressed AdCa multiplicities (29%,
p<0.046 and 42%, pPreclinical and clinical studies suggest that statins
and polyamine inhibitors suppress growth, invasion and progression of
malignant colon tumors. Experiments were designed to evaluate the human
clinical relevant doses of Rosuvastatin and Difluromethylornithine
(DFMO), individually and in combination, on azoxymethane (AOM)-induced
colon adenocarcinomas (AdCa) in male F344 rats. Eight weeks of age, rats
(30-36/group) treated with AOM to induce the colonic tumors and nine
weeks after the AOM treatment, groups of rats were fed AIN-76A diets
containing Rosuvastatin (50 or 100 ppm), DFMO (500 or 1000 ppm), or their
low dose combination for an additional 40 weeks. AOM-treated rats fed
control diet showed AdCa multiplicity of 3.59 0.48 (Mean SEM) and AdCa
incidence of 96.6 %. 50 or 100 ppm Rosuvastatin significantly suppressed
AdCa multiplicities (29%, p<0.046 and 42%, p<0.007, respectively). 100
ppm Rosuvastatin, but not the lower dose, significantly inhibited colon
AdCa incidence (p52% (p52% (p<0.003) more inhibition of invasive AdCa
multiplicity. As anticipated, DFMO at both doses significantly inhibited
AdCa multiplicity (p52% (p<0.003) more inhibition of invasive AdCa
multiplicity. As anticipated, DFMO at both doses significantly inhibited
AdCa multiplicity (p<0.003 - p52% (p<0.003) more inhibition of invasive
AdCa multiplicity. As anticipated, DFMO at both doses significantly
inhibited AdCa multiplicity (p<0.003 - p<0.0001) and incidence (p52%
(p<0.003) more inhibition of invasive AdCa multiplicity. As anticipated,
DFMO at both doses significantly inhibited AdCa multiplicity (p<0.003 -
p<0.0001) and incidence (p<0.05-0.001) as compared to control diet. The
combination of low-dose Rosuvastatin plus low dose DFMO suppressed colon
AdCa multiplicity by 76% (p52% (p<0.003) more inhibition of invasive AdCa
multiplicity. As anticipated, DFMO at both doses significantly inhibited
AdCa multiplicity (p<0.003 - p<0.0001) and incidence (p<0.05-0.001) as
compared to control diet. The combination of low-dose Rosuvastatin plus
low dose DFMO suppressed colon AdCa multiplicity by 76% (p<0.0001) as
compared to low-dose Rosuvastatin (29%) and low-dose DFMO (46%),
suggesting an additive effect. This low dose combination also resulted in
delay of colonic AdCa progression, as revealed by the presence of a
higher number of adenomas in the treated group as compared to the low
adenoma/high AdCa occurrence in the control diet group. DFMO,
Rosuvastatin and/or combinations caused significantly decreased
expression of cyclin E, cdk2, cav-1, laminin 1, and mutant p53 proteins,
and increased expression of wild type p53, cdc25c and p21 compared to
control tumors by Western immunoblotting and Immunohistochemistry. The
inflammatory markers IL-6, stat3, and COX-2 and the proliferation markers
-catenin and cyclin D1 also were down-regulated significantly in tumors
of rats fed low-dose combinations as compared to low doses of
Rosuvastatin or DFMO alone. This first report on combination treatment
using clinically relevant doses of statin plus DFMO shows significant
suppression of colon AdCa. Further studies are warranted using low-dose
combinations of Rosuvastatin and DFMO in individuals at high risk for
colon cancer. (Supported by R01-CA-94962 & NCI-CN-N01-53300)

