Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sunitinib suppresses the proliferation, migration, apoptosis
resistance, tumor angiogenesis and growth in MDA-MB-468 cell cultures and
xenografts .


We previously reported the anti-tumor efficacy of sunitinib (VEGF
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor) in murine ER-positive breast cancer
xenograft model, in which sunitinib suppressed both autocrine and
paracrine effects in breast cancer progression. The investigations of
sunitinib on triple-negative breast cancer are very limited. The clinical
utility of sunitinib is less understood in the setting of breast cancer.
The present study determines: 1) whether VEGF is highly expressed in
MDA-MB-468 cells, compared to MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells; 2) whether
sunitinib inhibits the proliferation, migration, apoptosis resistance of
cultured MDA-MB-468 cells; 3) whether oral sunitinib treatment suppresses
tumor angiogenesis and growth in MDA-MB-468 xenografts; and 4) whether
sunitinib changes % of breast cancer stem cells in the xenografts.
MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MCF-7 cells were cultured using RPMI 1640 media
with 10% FBS. VEGF protein levels were detected using ELISA (R&D
Systams). MDA-MB-468 cells were exposed to sunitinib for 18 hours for
measuring proliferation (3H-thymidine incorporation), migration (BD
BioCoat Matrigel Invasion Chamber), and apoptosis (Millipore ApopTag).
106 MDA-MB-468 cells inoculated into the left fourth mammary gland fat
pad in athymic nude-foxn1 mice. When the tumor volume reached 100 mm3,
sunitinib was given by gavage at 80 mg/kg/2 days for 4 weeks. Tumor
angiogenesis was determined by CD31 immunohistochemistry. Breast cancer
stem cells were determined by flow cytometry analysis using CD44+/CD24-
or low. VEGF protein levels in MDA-MB-468 cells were 10257292 pg/ml that
are 3-folds higher than those (342874 pg/ml) in MDA-MB-231 cells and
31-folds higher than those (3354 pg/ml) in MCF-7 cells (PWe previously
reported the anti-tumor efficacy of sunitinib (VEGF receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor) in murine ER-positive breast cancer xenograft model, in
which sunitinib suppressed both autocrine and paracrine effects in breast
cancer progression. The investigations of sunitinib on triple-negative
breast cancer are very limited. The clinical utility of sunitinib is less
understood in the setting of breast cancer. The present study determines:
1) whether VEGF is highly expressed in MDA-MB-468 cells, compared to
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells; 2) whether sunitinib inhibits the
proliferation, migration, apoptosis resistance of cultured MDA-MB-468
cells; 3) whether oral sunitinib treatment suppresses tumor angiogenesis
and growth in MDA-MB-468 xenografts; and 4) whether sunitinib changes %
of breast cancer stem cells in the xenografts. MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468,
MCF-7 cells were cultured using RPMI 1640 media with 10% FBS. VEGF
protein levels were detected using ELISA (R&D Systams). MDA-MB-468 cells
were exposed to sunitinib for 18 hours for measuring proliferation
(3H-thymidine incorporation), migration (BD BioCoat Matrigel Invasion
Chamber), and apoptosis (Millipore ApopTag). 106 MDA-MB-468 cells
inoculated into the left fourth mammary gland fat pad in athymic
nude-foxn1 mice. When the tumor volume reached 100 mm3, sunitinib was
given by gavage at 80 mg/kg/2 days for 4 weeks. Tumor angiogenesis was
determined by CD31 immunohistochemistry. Breast cancer stem cells were
determined by flow cytometry analysis using CD44+/CD24- or low. VEGF
protein levels in MDA-MB-468 cells were 10257292 pg/ml that are 3-folds
higher than those (342874 pg/ml) in MDA-MB-231 cells and 31-folds higher
than those (3354 pg/ml) in MCF-7 cells (P<0.01, n=6). 1, 5 and 10 mol/L
of sunitinib caused 24, 41 and 59% reduction in the proliferation of
MDA-MB-468 cells, respectively, compared to the control (PWe previously
reported the anti-tumor efficacy of sunitinib (VEGF receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor) in murine ER-positive breast cancer xenograft model, in
which sunitinib suppressed both autocrine and paracrine effects in breast
cancer progression. The investigations of sunitinib on triple-negative
breast cancer are very limited. The clinical utility of sunitinib is less
understood in the setting of breast cancer. The present study determines:
1) whether VEGF is highly expressed in MDA-MB-468 cells, compared to
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells; 2) whether sunitinib inhibits the
proliferation, migration, apoptosis resistance of cultured MDA-MB-468
cells; 3) whether oral sunitinib treatment suppresses tumor angiogenesis
and growth in MDA-MB-468 xenografts; and 4) whether sunitinib changes %
of breast cancer stem cells in the xenografts. MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468,
MCF-7 cells were cultured using RPMI 1640 media with 10% FBS. VEGF
protein levels were detected using ELISA (R&D Systams). MDA-MB-468 cells
were exposed to sunitinib for 18 hours for measuring proliferation
(3H-thymidine incorporation), migration (BD BioCoat Matrigel Invasion
Chamber), and apoptosis (Millipore ApopTag). 106 MDA-MB-468 cells
inoculated into the left fourth mammary gland fat pad in athymic
nude-foxn1 mice. When the tumor volume reached 100 mm3, sunitinib was
given by gavage at 80 mg/kg/2 days for 4 weeks. Tumor angiogenesis was
determined by CD31 immunohistochemistry. Breast cancer stem cells were
determined by flow cytometry analysis using CD44+/CD24- or low. VEGF
protein levels in MDA-MB-468 cells were 10257292 pg/ml that are 3-folds
higher than those (342874 pg/ml) in MDA-MB-231 cells and 31-folds higher
than those (3354 pg/ml) in MCF-7 cells (P<0.01, n=6). 1, 5 and 10 mol/L
of sunitinib caused 24, 41 and 59% reduction in the proliferation of
MDA-MB-468 cells, respectively, compared to the control (P<0.01, n=6).
Sunitinib at 1 mol/L significantly inhibited the migration of MDA-MB-468
cells by 45% compared to the control (PWe previously reported the
anti-tumor efficacy of sunitinib (VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor) in murine ER-positive breast cancer xenograft model, in which
sunitinib suppressed both autocrine and paracrine effects in breast
cancer progression. The investigations of sunitinib on triple-negative
breast cancer are very limited. The clinical utility of sunitinib is less
understood in the setting of breast cancer. The present study determines:
1) whether VEGF is highly expressed in MDA-MB-468 cells, compared to
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells; 2) whether sunitinib inhibits the
proliferation, migration, apoptosis resistance of cultured MDA-MB-468
cells; 3) whether oral sunitinib treatment suppresses tumor angiogenesis
and growth in MDA-MB-468 xenografts; and 4) whether sunitinib changes %
of breast cancer stem cells in the xenografts. MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468,
MCF-7 cells were cultured using RPMI 1640 media with 10% FBS. VEGF
protein levels were detected using ELISA (R&D Systams). MDA-MB-468 cells
were exposed to sunitinib for 18 hours for measuring proliferation
(3H-thymidine incorporation), migration (BD BioCoat Matrigel Invasion
Chamber), and apoptosis (Millipore ApopTag). 106 MDA-MB-468 cells
inoculated into the left fourth mammary gland fat pad in athymic
nude-foxn1 mice. When the tumor volume reached 100 mm3, sunitinib was
given by gavage at 80 mg/kg/2 days for 4 weeks. Tumor angiogenesis was
determined by CD31 immunohistochemistry. Breast cancer stem cells were
determined by flow cytometry analysis using CD44+/CD24- or low. VEGF
protein levels in MDA-MB-468 cells were 10257292 pg/ml that are 3-folds
higher than those (342874 pg/ml) in MDA-MB-231 cells and 31-folds higher
than those (3354 pg/ml) in MCF-7 cells (P<0.01, n=6). 1, 5 and 10 mol/L
of sunitinib caused 24, 41 and 59% reduction in the proliferation of
MDA-MB-468 cells, respectively, compared to the control (P<0.01, n=6).
Sunitinib at 1 mol/L significantly inhibited the migration of MDA-MB-468
cells by 45% compared to the control (P<0.01, n=6). Sunitinib (5 mol/L)
increased 31% apoptosis of MDA-MB-468 cells (PWe previously reported the
anti-tumor efficacy of sunitinib (VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor) in murine ER-positive breast cancer xenograft model, in which
sunitinib suppressed both autocrine and paracrine effects in breast
cancer progression. The investigations of sunitinib on triple-negative
breast cancer are very limited. The clinical utility of sunitinib is less
understood in the setting of breast cancer. The present study determines:
1) whether VEGF is highly expressed in MDA-MB-468 cells, compared to
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells; 2) whether sunitinib inhibits the
proliferation, migration, apoptosis resistance of cultured MDA-MB-468
cells; 3) whether oral sunitinib treatment suppresses tumor angiogenesis
and growth in MDA-MB-468 xenografts; and 4) whether sunitinib changes %
of breast cancer stem cells in the xenografts. MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468,
MCF-7 cells were cultured using RPMI 1640 media with 10% FBS. VEGF
protein levels were detected using ELISA (R&D Systams). MDA-MB-468 cells
were exposed to sunitinib for 18 hours for measuring proliferation
(3H-thymidine incorporation), migration (BD BioCoat Matrigel Invasion
Chamber), and apoptosis (Millipore ApopTag). 106 MDA-MB-468 cells
inoculated into the left fourth mammary gland fat pad in athymic
nude-foxn1 mice. When the tumor volume reached 100 mm3, sunitinib was
given by gavage at 80 mg/kg/2 days for 4 weeks. Tumor angiogenesis was
determined by CD31 immunohistochemistry. Breast cancer stem cells were
determined by flow cytometry analysis using CD44+/CD24- or low. VEGF
protein levels in MDA-MB-468 cells were 10257292 pg/ml that are 3-folds
higher than those (342874 pg/ml) in MDA-MB-231 cells and 31-folds higher
than those (3354 pg/ml) in MCF-7 cells (P<0.01, n=6). 1, 5 and 10 mol/L
of sunitinib caused 24, 41 and 59% reduction in the proliferation of
MDA-MB-468 cells, respectively, compared to the control (P<0.01, n=6).
Sunitinib at 1 mol/L significantly inhibited the migration of MDA-MB-468
cells by 45% compared to the control (P<0.01, n=6). Sunitinib (5 mol/L)
increased 31% apoptosis of MDA-MB-468 cells (P<0.01). Oral sunitinib
treatment significantly inhibited tumor angiogenesis and tumor growth,
and slightly increased % of breast cancer stem cells in the xenografts.
These findings suggest that VEGF is highly expressed in triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) cells especially in MDA-MB-468 cells. VEGF receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (sunitinib) can inhibit autocrine effects
(proliferation, migration, and apoptosis resistance) and paracrine
effects (tumor angiogenesis) in triple negative breast cancer
progression. However, the possibility should be considered of sunitinib
increasing breast cancer stem cells. Sunitinib or other anti-VEGF agents
in TNBC therapy may have to be combined with cancer stem cell-targeting
drugs.

