Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted sequencing to detect somatic mutations, translocations
and copy-number variation in human tumors simultaneously.


The ability to harness the power of next generation sequencing for
characterizing the cancer genome would be extremely valuable to the
cancer research community and ultimately improve diagnosis and
individualized therapy.We present a targeted approach using massively
parallel sequencing to simultaneously detect mutations, translocations
and copy-number variations in archived clinical tumor specimen.Targeted
sequencing was achieved by designing RNA baits to capture the exons of
504 genes with relevance to cancer. The bait set was augmented with
specific intronic sequences to detect translocations often involved in
cancer. The overall performance of the hybrid capture was improved by
optimizing the tiling strategy of the baits. These improvements
significantly shifted fragments with low or no-coverage closer to the
overall mean, resulting in a more uniform coverage distribution.To
validate the targeted gene panel we sequenced tumor samples harboring
mutations, translocations and copy-number alterations that were
previously identified by clinically approved assays. All the known
alterations were confirmed with additional potentially actionable
mutations.The ultimate goal of the targeted panel is to screen cancer
patients quickly and economically allowing simultaneous detection of all
common genomic alterations in the cancer genome.

