Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating bone marrow-derived VEGFR-2+ progenitor cells in
benign and malignant soft tissue tumors.


Background : Circulating endothelial progenitor cells (cEPCs) as
recruited to the angiogenic vascular system of malignant tumors have been
evaluated as a biomarker of tumor remission or progression through
therapy in lung and breast cancer. We were interested to analyze the
presence of bone marrow derived (BMD) cEPCs in soft tissue malignancies
and correlate the changes to treatment efficacy.Methods: 75
treatment-nave patients have (41 sarcoma, 21 gastro-intestinal stromal
tumors GIST, 12 desmoid) and 11 healthy controls have been enrolled to
the study. 25 ml of blood samples were drawn prior to therapy and 4-6
weeks after treatment by 20G iv cannula, collected in tubes containing
sodium citrate (0.105 M) and processed within 1 h. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated by Ficoll density gradient
centrifugation and cEPCs were characterized by quadruple staining using
antibodies against CD133+, CD34, CD45dim and vascular endothelial growth
factor-receptor (VEGF-R)-2+. The expression of cell-surface antigens was
determined by four-color immunofluorescence. The frequency of cEPCs in
peripheral blood was determined by a 2-dimensional
side-scatter/fluorescence dot-plot analysis after exclusion of annexin
V-positive cells and appropriate to exclude apoptotic cells. EPC counts
are expressed as a percentage of total PBMCs. Serum-concentrations of
VEGF and Angiopoetin-2 were determined by ELISA in triplicate samples
from 5 ml serum.Results:The percentage of hematopoietic stem cells
(CD34+, CD133+) was significantly increased in sarcoma and desmoid
patients (0.44 0.1 %) compared to GIST and healthy controls (0.13 0.04 %;
p=0.001). The percentage of VEGFR-2+ cells correspond to cEPC in sarcoma
of 0.179 0.190 % vs. healthy controls of 0.025 0.018 %. Values for
desmoid patients were similar to sarcoma whereas GIST patients showed
values comparable to healthy patients. We found significantly increased
mean VEGF levels in both sarcoma and desmoids (359 157 pg/ml) in
comparison to healthy controls (27 13 pg/ml; p = 0.001). Ang-2 levels
before therapy were significantly lower in healthy controls and desmoids
(1665 445 pg/ml) compared to sarcoma and GIST (2929 960 pg/ml, p = 0.033)
patients. Patients without signs of tumor recurrence showed normal cEPC
values at post-treatment controls, whereas patients with progressive
disease had increasing cEPC levels.Conclusion: This study demonstrates an
increased mobilization of cEPCs in sarcoma and (non-metatasizing)
desmoids tumors compared to healthy individuals and patients with GIST.
cEPCs recruited for vasculogenesis and paracrine effects play a different
role in the various subtypes of human soft tissue tumors.

