Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant KRAS2 mRNA PET imaging in spontaneous transgenic lung
cancers.


Treatment of lung cancer with anti-EGFR antibodies or tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) fails when KRAS2 cancer gene is activated by mutation.
Mutation of the KRAS2 12th codon from the wild type GGU that encodes
glycine (G) to a mutant GAU that encodes aspartate (D) occurs in some
lung cancers. For this reason, we hypothesize that determining KRAS2
mutation status in vivo by external mRNA PET imaging will enable
physicians to decide on alternatives to EGFR-directed therapy. To test
the hypothesis, we designed wild type and mutant KRAS2 hybridization
agents based on peptide nucleic acid (PNA), due to its strong, specific
basepairing, and resistance to nucleases and proteases. At the
C-terminus, we included a cyclized tetrapeptide based on insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF1) to enable IGF1R-mediated cellular uptake. We
included an N-terminal N2S2 chelator in order to bind 64Cu. We then
administered the 64Cu-labeled agents by tail vein into mutant KRAS2
transgenic mice that develop spontaneous lung tumors. We demonstrated
sequence-specific positron emission tomography (PET) imaging and
quantitation of mutant KRAS2 G12D mRNA in the mice. The wild type control
agent, differing by one base in the middle of the 12th codon, showed
neglible images in the same mice. Wobble base agents with a hypoxanthine
to detect either G12D or G12V KRAS2 mutants are under investigation.
Supported by NIH CA148565; IP owned by EW/MLT, licensed to MTTI.

