Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR inhibitors attenuate caspase-independent cell death and
confer negative effects on cisplatin .


EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have demonstrated exciting results
and led to advanced therapy trials in combination with chemotherapy.
However, clinical studies have raised an important question why the
antagonism between TKI and chemotherapy occurs in lung cancer patients
only with wildtype but not mutant EGFR. In this study, we further
explored the mechanism through which gefitinib gives rise to the negative
effects when combined with cisplatin in wildtype EGFR lung cancer cells.
We found that gefitinib inhibited cisplatin-induced caspase-independent
cell death (CID) but not caspase-dependent cell death (apoptosis). In
wildtype EGFR cells, gefitinib not only inhibited CID but also failed to
induce apoptosis and therefore compromising the efficacy of cisplatin.
Moreover, inhibition of the EGFR/ERK/AKT pathway by gefinitib activated
FOXO3a and subsequently reduced reactive oxygen species (ROS) induced by
cisplatin treatment and ROS-mediated CID. To overcome this, we showed
that SAHA and erastin, which are known to induce ROS-mediated CID,
strongly enhanced the effect of cisplatin in wildtype EGFR cells. Taken
together, our findings provide a possible explanation for the previously
failed clinical trials as well as a novel insight into future cancer
therapy.

