Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of kinases that regulate microtubule stability and
centrosome function enhance paclitaxel sensitivity in multiple ovarian
cancer cell lines.


Virtually all patients with newly diagnosed ovarian cancer are treated
with a combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin. While 70% of ovarian
cancers respond to carboplatin, more than half do not respond to the
paclitaxel. Inhibition of kinases that modulate primary resistance to
paclitaxel, could enhance response to therapy. To identify kinases that
regulate sensitivity to paclitaxel, high throughput screening with a
kinome wide siRNA library was performed in SKOv3 ovarian cancer cells.
Among 45 hits, 14 target proteins (AATK, ACRBP, BMP2K, CHUK, EDN2, IKBKB,
ILK, RAPGEF3, RAPGEF4, RFP, SIK2, STK24, STK39 and TBK1) regulated
sensitivity to paclitaxel and were expressed or overexpressed in a
fraction of ovarian cancers. siRNAs against each of these kinases were
tested for the ability to enhance sensitivity to paclitaxel in each of 12
ovarian cancer cell lines that reflected the heterogeneity observed in
ovarian cancers including mutations of TP53, BRCA1/2, KRAS, BRAF, PI3K
and PTEN. Knockdown of 7 individual genes reduced the IC50 of paclitaxel
in more than half of the cell lines by 25 to 80 percent. Knockdown of
STK39 and NFKB pathway kinases IKBKB and TBK1 enhanced microtubule
stability judged by microtubule fractionation assay. Other kinases are
known to affect centrosome function (SIK2, ACRBP). Our studies have
identified several proteins that regulate primary sensitivity to
paclitaxel in ovarian cancer cells and that could serve as targets to
enhance response to primary therapy.

