Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stoichiometric depletion of glutathione by anticancer agent JS-K.


JS-K is a nitric oxide (NO)-releasing drug of the O2-arylated
diazeniumdiolate family that has demonstrated pronounced cytotoxicity and
antitumor properties in a variety of cancer models. It is activated for
NO release by reaction with glutathione (GSH), a step that consumes an
equivalent of GSH, effectively irreversibly. The two equivalents of NO
thus released can be oxidized intracellularly, leading to S-nitrosylation
and S-glutathionylation of GSH in a cascade of further reactions that
consume additional equivalents of GSH and generate GSH disulfide (GSSG).
The GSH/GSSG redox couple is the major redox buffer of the cell, helping
maintain a reducing environment under basal conditions. Here we show that
depletion of GSH on treating U937 leukemia cells with JS-K markedly
raises the reduction potential of the cell, initiating MAPK stress
signaling pathways, and inducing apoptosis. Microarray analysis confirmed
signaling gene changes at the transcriptional level and revealed
alteration in the expression of several genes crucial for maintenance of
cellular redox homeostasis, as well as cell proliferation and survival,
including MYC. The data indicate that multiplicative depletion of reduced
GSH and deregulation of intracellular redox balance are important steps
in the mechanism of JS-K's cytotoxic action.An additional GSH-consuming
pathway was found to occur with Double JS-K, an aryl
bis(diazeniumdiolate) created with the purpose of doubling the payload of
NO. Double JS-K caused pronounced protein glutathionylation, in contrast
to its monovalent counterpart. Serving as a bivalent electrophile, Double
JS-K irreversibly crosslinked GSH to protein thiols through its aromatic
linker. The results provide a previously unrecognized component of the
multifaceted mechanism of action of bivalent electrophiles of the
arylated diazeniumdiolate class.

