Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of COX-2 in p53 induction and Jnk activation following
DNA damage.


Cyclooxygenase (COX) is a rate-limiting enzyme in arachidonic acid
cascade and exists as two related but unique isoforms, COX-1 and COX-2.
While COX-1 is constitutively expressed in many tissues and is believed
to play a role in tissue homeostasis, COX-2 is highly inducible by
various stimuli including inflammatory cytokines, growth factors, and DNA
damage. In addition, aberrant COX-2 expression is frequently observed in
many types of cancer, suggesting the role of COX-2 in tumor development
and progression. p53 is a well-known tumor suppressor and plays a key
role in the control of normal cell's response to environmental or
cellular stresses. Although p53 has been shown to regulate COX-2
expression, the modulation of p53 levels by COX-2 has not been
determined. In the present study, we have examined the role of COX-2 as
an upstream regulator of p53 levels using COX-2 knockout (KO) mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). DNA damage-induced increase in p53 protein
levels were greatly reduced in COX-2 KO MEFs compared to wild type (WT)
or COX-1 KO MEFs. Furthermore, a COX-2 specific inhibitor suppressed
doxorubicin-induced p53 accumulation and cell death. However, initial
induction of p53 accumulation in response to doxorubicin was not altered
by deficiency or inhibition of COX-2, suggesting that COX-2 may be
involved in maintenance of p53 stability. Doxorubicin-induced
accumulation of p53 appeared to be mediated through the activation of
Jun-N-terminal Kinase (Jnk). Activation of Jnk by doxorubicin was
decreased in COX-2 KO MEFs or by COX-2 inhibition, suggesting that DNA
damage induces activation of Jnk by a mechanism that involves COX-2. Our
results suggest the existence of novel cross-talk between COX-2 and p53
and identify COX-2 as a potential target for reducing the side effects
from chemotherapy.

