Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting non-canonical Wnt signaling in acute myeloid leukemia.


Childhood acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease, with
distinct cytogenetic sub-groups and responses to chemotherapy. Greater
understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the different forms
of this disease offers the possibility of developing novel therapies
targeting disease-specific signaling pathways. We have recently analysed
the role of non-canonical Wnt signaling induced Rac activation in the
most frequent sub-type of childhood AML, associated with chromosomal
translocations affecting the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene. Our data
indicate that MLL-fusions utilize non-canonical Wnt signaling, by
inducing transcriptional activation of Frat gene expression and
stimulating Rac activation through a signaling pathway involving GSK3 and
DVL1 components. This pathway can be disrupted by shRNA-mediated
silencing of Frat or Dvl expression, or by pharmacological inhibition of
GSK3. Interestingly, the DVL-GSK3 signaling pathway can be disrupted by
expression of a dominant negative FRATN mutant, that lacks the
GSK3-binding domain, even in the absence of endogenous FRAT expression.
FRATN inhibits growth, survival and disease progression of MLL-fusion
expressing leukemic cells. These experiments have now been extended to
the analysis of the anti-leukemia effects of FRATN expression in
non-MLL-rearranged leukemia cell lines. This study highlights the
potential of this novel signaling pathway as a target for future novel
therapies of AML.

