Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of 2SP (ELF) enhances the stem-like traits and invasiveness
of HCC cells.


2SP(ELF) is one of adapter proteins for Smad3/Smad4 complex formation
during TGF- signal transduction. 40% of 2SP+/- mice spontaneously develop
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and most cases of human HCC, gastric
cancer, and lung cancer demonstrate significant reductions in 2SP
expression. In our study, we investigated the possible mechanism for loss
of 2SP induced HCC tumorigenesis. Recent studies have highlighted the
involvement of cancer stem cells during the formation and progression of
various types of cancers, epithelial cells that have undergone EMT
(epithelial mesenchymal transition) acquire stem-cell properties during
cancer development. Giving the role of TGF-beta signaling in stem cell
differentiation and EMT during embryonic development, we hypothesize loss
of 2SP results in alteration of liver stem cell that may contribute to
the development of HCC in 2SP+/ mice. It has been shown that
EpCAM-positive adult liver cells has stem cell property and can
differentiate into functional hepatocytes in xenograft model. We found
that EpCAM-positive hepatocyte number doubled in 2SP+/ mouse compared to
wild type by fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS). Furthermore EpCAM
level in 2SP+/ mouse liver was three times higher than that in the liver
of wild type mouse. To study the mechanism by which Epcam is regulated by
2SP, HCC cells were transfected by 2SP siRNA. Inhibition of 2SP increased
the expression of Epcam, and EMT markers vimentin was increased and
E-cadherin expression was decreased in PLC/PRF/5 and SNU449 cells, while
TGF-1 and Smad3 rescued the expression of Epcam and E-cadherin, but not
vimentin. We also found that suppression of 2SP expression promotes
adhesion, migration and cloning formation of PLC/PRF/5 and SNU449 cells.
Our data suggests loss of 2SP enhances the stem-like traits and
invasiveness of HCC cells.

