Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC-driven glutamine metabolism promotes antiestrogen resistance
in breast cancer.


About 70% of newly diagnosed cases of invasive breast cancer in the U.S.
will be estrogen receptor alpha positive (ER+). Endocrine therapy is the
least toxic and most effective means to manage the hormone-dependent
breast cancer, administered as an antiestrogen, e.g., Tamoxifen (TAM) or
Faslodex (FAS; Fulvestrant; ICI 182,780) or an aromatase inhibitor (AI),
e.g., Letrozole (LET). However, advanced ER+ breast cancer that has
become resistant to endocrine therapy remains a significant clinical
problem. Here we show that in breast cancer cells and rat tumors with
acquired antiestrogen resistance, MYC, a oncogenic transcription factor,
is overexpressed. Inhibition of MYC with small molecule inhibitor or
siRNA resensitizes resistant cells to antiestorgens by inducing
apoptosis. MYC inhibition in resistant cells also inhibited glutamine
uptake and decreased levels of ASCT2/SLC1A5, a glutamine transporter.
Resistant cells showed significant increase in cell proliferation in
response to glutamine than sensitive cells. Moreover, resistant cells
showed increased sensitivity to an inhibitor of glutaminase, GLS, an
enzyme that hydrolysis of glutamine to glutamate. Thus, MYC promotes
increased dependence on glutamine in antiestrogen resistant cells, and
targeting glutamine metabolism could help circumvent antiestrogen
resistance. Overreaching goal of this study is to and to identify
effective therapies to treat endocrine resistant breast cancer.

