Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two distinctive single nucleotide polymorphisms determine liver
metastases responses to docetaxel plus thiotepa for metastatic breast
cancer patients.


The successful predictively treatment of metastatic breast cancer (MBC)
remains a major challenge. Until now there is no definite marker to
distinguish responder from non-responder and more and more important,
metastasis occurred within different organs lead to serious variations of
overall survival. In this study, paclitaxel and anthracyclines
pretreated153 patients with MBC received 606 cycles of docetaxel plus
thiotepa. 65 of 153 patients were concurrently diagnosed as MBC involved
liver metastasis (LM). Among 153 patients, the response were 1 complete
response (CR) (0.7%), 25 partial responses (PR) (16.3%), 73 stable
diseases (SD) (47.7%), 46 progressive diseases (PD) (30.1%) and 8
unevaluable(5.2%). For LM patients, the localized liver response were 2
CR (3.1%), 20 PR (30.8%), 16 SD (24.6%), 22 PD (33.8%),5 unevaluable
(7.7%). Median PFS and OS for both entire and LM subgroup were 6.5 (95%
CI, 5.6 to 7.4) versus 4.2 (95%CI, 2.3-6.1), and 20.0 (95% CI, 15.6 to
24.4) versus 14.2 (95%CI, 9.5-18.9) months respectively. 79 SNPs in
CYP450, whose minor allele frequency were 10% were genotyped. There was
no significant difference of SNPs in therapeutic responses, PFS or OS. Of
importance, there were two distinctive SNPs, rs2277119 and rs4646487
*2/*3 alleles, which tended to have the better liver metastases response
than *1 when choosing a false discovery rate as 12%. It seemed that
docetaxel plus thiotepa might be regarded as an active specific regimen
for MBC with liver metastasis. The generation of conceptually specific
chemotherapy targeting the organ with cancer metastasis should be
considered in the future.Citation Format: Jing Yu, Ningning Dong, Ying
Yan, Bin Shao, Lijun Di, Guohong Song, Li Che, Jun Jia, Hanfang Jiang, Xu
Liang, Yulin Zhu, Chaoying Wang, Jie Zahng, Budong Zhu, Xinna Zhou,
Xiaoli Wang, Huabing Yang, Jun Ren, Herbert Kim Lyerly. Two distinctive
single nucleotide polymorphisms determine liver metastases responses to
docetaxel plus thiotepa for metastatic breast cancer patients.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5298.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5298

