Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR overexpression is associated with radio-resistance and worse
prognosis of cervical cancer.


mTOR is an important factor for cell proliferation. It is reported that
overexpression of mTOR is associated with poor prognosis in many cancers.
We examined mTOR expression in cervical cancer and association with
clinico-pathological findings. 34 patients were examined about mTOR
expression by immuno-histochemistry. The result was classified into 3
categories, i.e negative, weak positive and strong positive. 25 patients
were treated with concurrent chemoradiotherapy, 8 ptients were treated
with hysterectomy and one patient was treated with chemotherapy as main
treatment. Overexpression of mTOR was recognized in 24(71%) patients. The
frequency of parametrial invasion and lymphnode metastasis in mTOR
positive and negative were 17/24 (71%) versus 3/10 (30%) (p=0.027) and
14/24 (58%) versus 2/10 (20%) (p=0.041). In 25 cases treated with
radiotherapy, mTOR overexpression was seen in 19 cases (76%). Averages of
tumor diameter in mTOR positive and negative cases were 4.8 cm and 5.0cm
respectively (n.s). In 5 local recurrent cases treated with
chemo-radiotherpy, tumor diameters of pre-treatment were 0, 3.5, 5.5, 7
and 7cm. Small tumor was included in local recurrence in mTOR positive
cases. It is suggested that mTOR overexpression promotes lymphnode and
parametrial metastasis and is associated with radio-resistance. In case
of mTOR overexpression, we need to consider treatment by hysterectomy if
the tumor is resectable or usage of mTOR inhibitor at chemo-radiation,
and control of mTOR expression is important in treatment of cervical
cancer.

