Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of Salmonella typhimurium A1-R on chemoresistant
stem-like human pancreatic cancer cells.


We have previously developed the genetically-modified Salmonella
typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) strain that selectively targets tumors. We have
also previously reported that XPA1 human pancreatic cancer cells are
dimorphic (spindle and round shape), with the spindle-shaped cancer cells
having the greater capability for distant metastasis, suggesting they are
stem-like cells. The aim of this study is to examine whether
spindle-shaped XPA1 cells are chemo-resistant and if they are sensitive
to A1-R. Serial dilution was performed to obtain clones of both cellular
morphologies. To determine chemosensitivity, in vitro IC50 values were
obtained for both types of XPA1 cells for (1) Cisplatin (CDDP); (2)
5-fluorouracil (5FU); (3) Gemcitabine (GEM); and (4) A1-R. The efficacy
of these drugs was also determined for both types of XPA1 cells in vivo.
IC50 values of spindle-shaped and round XPA1 cells, respectively, were
2.65 0.22 g/ml and 1.43 0.36 g/ml for CDDP (p = 0.012); 2.44 0.25 g/ml
and 1.48 0.19 g/ml for 5FU (p = 0.007); 3.17 0.15 ng/ml and 2.70 0.29
ng/ml for GEM (p = 0.133); and (19.7 1.46) x 108 cfu/ml and (17.8 9.78)
108 cfu /ml for A1-R (p = 0.771). In vivo, 5FU and A1-R significantly
reduced the tumor weight of round cells (5FU; p = 0.028; A1-R; p =
0.011). However, only A1-R significantly reduced the tumor weight of
spindle-shaped cells (p = 0.012). The spindle-shaped XPA1 cells were thus
chemo-resistant and sensitive to A1-R, suggesting A1-R could be a
promising therapy for chemo-resistant human pancreatic cancer stem-like
cells.

