Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical efficacyof the PARP inhibitor rucaparib
(AG014699/PF-01367338) as a monotherapy and incombination with PI3K
inhibition.


Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors are an emerging class of
potential anti-cancer therapeutics currently being explored in patients
with tumors harboring BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Inhibition ofPARP
increases DNA damage that cannot be repaired in BRCA1/2 mutant tumor
cells and will therefore result in cell death.Proof-of-concept trials
have demonstrated the clinical benefit of PARP inhibition in BRCA1/2
-associated tumors (Audeh et al. 2010; Fong et al. 2010). Rucaparib
(CO-338, AG014699, PF-01367338) is a potent, orally available PARP1 and
PARP2 inhibitor (Ki = 1.4 and0.17 nM, respectively) currently being
investigated in phase 1/2 trials both asa monotherapy and in combination
with chemotherapy. Here, we investigated the preclinical efficacy of
rucaparib as single agent and in combination with other targeted agents
in cell lines and xenograft models and correlated anti-tumor response to
HR status. Sensitivity to rucaparib was determined in vitro in a panel of
cancer cell lines using i) a six day CellTiter-Glo viability assay and
ii) a 14-18 day clonogenic assay. DNA damage and repair was assessed by
H2AX and RAD51 foci formation as determined by immunofluorescence. Cell
lines were deemed HR-proficient if RAD51 foci were 2-fold24 hours post
DNA damage. In vivo anti-tumor activity of rucaparib as a single agent
was assessed in theMDA-MB-436 breast cancer xenograft model. We tested a
wide range of cancer cell lines including breast, ovarian, prostate and
small cell lung cancer lines for RAD51 foci formation and sensitivity to
rucaparib in vitro. Cell lines sensitive to rucaparib were generally
deficient in RAD51 foci formation. For example, the BRCA1 mutated ovarian
cell line UWB1.289 had a rucaparib IC50 of 0.375M and was HR deficient.
Re-introduction of a wild-type BRCA1 allele into theUWB1.289 cell line
restored HR proficiency and increased the IC5014-fold to 5.4M. Results in
vitro, correlated with xenograft response to rucaparib in vivo. Treatment
of mice bearing BRCA1 mutated MDA-MB-436 breast tumor xenografts resulted
in tumor regression corresponding to the low IC50 of 0.091M to rucaparib
in vitro and a HR deficient phenotype as assessed by RAD51. Assessing
rucaparib in combination with several PI3K pathway inhibitors including
Pan-PI3K, TORC1/2 and PI3K/mTOR inhibitors showed additive or synergistic
anti-tumor efficacy depending on the specific compound examined. Our
findings demonstrate that cell lines deficient in their HR DNA repair
pathway are sensitive to rucaparib treatment. Investigation of rucaparib
sensitivity in tumors harboring mutations in additional HR pathway genes
is merited and could expand the utility of rucaparib beyond BRCA 1/2.
Combination therapy approaches employing PI3K inhibitors with rucaparib
may be of particular promise.

