Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming cisplatin resistance by celastrol in cancer cells.


Cisplatin is one of the most widely used cytotoxic anticancer drugs for
the treatment of solid malignancies, including lung, testicular, ovarian,
head and neck, colorectal, bladder cancers, etc. However, its clinical
efficacy is often limited by the development of chemoresistance. Several
mechanisms have been implicated in cisplatin resistance, such as reduced
drug uptake, increased cellular thiol/folate levels and increased DNA
repair. Celastrol, a quinone methide triterpene, is an active compenent
of the traditional Chinese medicinal plant Tripterygium Wilfordii, which
exhibits significant antitumor activity in different cancer models in
vitro and in vivo. In this study, we sought to determine the effect of
celastrol on cisplatin resistance cancer cells and the possible involved
molecular mechanism. Our data show that celastrol had similar cytotoxic
effects on both A549 parental and A549/DDP cisplatin resistant cells. The
IC50 values of celastrol to both cell lines are at the concentration of M
range. Celastrol also induced cell apoptosis with ROS accumulation, loss
of mitochondrial membrane potentials, cleavage of PARP and caspases in a
dose- and time-dependent manner in both cell lines. These findings might
provide significant strategy for overcoming cisplatin resistance in
clinic, and define the novel mechanism of celastrol-induced anticancer
activity.Citation Format: Zhi Shi. Overcoming cisplatin resistance by
celastrol in cancer cells. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2245. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2245

