Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allele-specific loss of OSGIN1 associates with the progression of
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most frequent human
malignances worldwide, which causes more than half a million death every
year. Most human cancers are characterized by genomic instability.
Chromosomal region gains or losses occur during cancer progression and
high incidence of allelic imbalance is often observed in cancer patients.
The risk alleles were usually overrepresented in cancer cells due to
selective retention or amplification. In this report, we found a novel
nucleotide variation at the coding region of the gene OSGIN1. Allele
imbalance of OSGIN1 was frequently observed in a cohort of HCC patients,
and the wild type allele was preferentially lost in the tumor tissue.
Functional assays revealed that OSGIN1 has strong tumor suppressive
function and associated with chemoresistance of HCC cell lines. The
variant allele was less effective in inducing apoptosis than the wild
type allele. This functional variation may be due to their different
ability to localize to mitochondria. Further more, we found HCC patients
carrying the variant allele have poorer prognosis than the wild type
carriers. These findings suggested that OSGIN1 might be an important
tumor suppressor gene in the progression of HCC and the retention of the
variant allele might be a risk factor for HCC.

