Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR inhibition augments anti-tumor immune responses by HER
family-specific human CD4 helper T cells in vitro.


Despite immunotherapy is a promising approach for cancer treatment, there
are many obstacles remain to be overcome. The characteristics of tumor
evasion of immune surveillance are produced by decreased expression of
immune molecules and secretion of immunoregulatory cytokines. To break
these tumor microenvironment which act as suppressor of antitumor
immunology, we evaluated the value of EGFR inhibitors as
immune-modulators. Following two days EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor
treatment, expression of HLA-DR molecule of head and neck squamous cancer
(HNSCC) cell lines were increased, meanwhile EGFR blocking antibody
treatment augmented HLA-DR expression. Furthermore, EGFR inhibitors
decreased spontaneous secretion of IL-8 and TGF- from HNSCC cell lines.
To confirm the immune supporting activity of EGFR inhibitors, tumor
antigen specific CD4 helper T lymphocyte (HTL) responses to
EGFR-expressing tumor were investigated. We identified novel EGFR HTL
epitope using MHC class II binding algorithms. The candidate EGFR peptide
elicited HTL responses against EGFR-expressing HNSCC in vitro. The EGFR
peptide shares high homology to HER2, HER-3 and c-Met, so that these were
able to stimulate EGFR peptide reactive HTLs responses in a HLA-DR
restricted manner indicating that the EGFR peptide serves a universal
tumor-associated peptide in HER family and c-Met. Finally, we evaluated
EGFR reactive HTL responses against HNSCC cell lines treated with EGFR
inhibitors. As a result, EGFR inhibitors drastically increased HTL IFN-
production and cytotoxic response. Since HER family and c-MET have been
considered as targets of alternative pathway of EGFR inhibition,
therapeutic strategy combining EGFR inhibitors with novel HTL epitope
identified in this study might be attractive option for antitumor
immunotherapy.

