Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MCL1 dependent cells are sensitive to the CDK inhibitor Dinaciclib.


Dinaciclib is a potent inhibitor of cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs) 1, 2,
5, and 9 and is currently in Phase 3 for the treatment of refractory
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). To further understand the mechanism
of action, identify predictive biomarkers, and find additional cancer
types which may benefit from dinaciclib, we evaluated cell viability
following 24 hours treatment across a panel of 500 cells lines.
Hematopoietic cell lines were on average 3-times more sensitive than
solid tumor lines. In agreement with previous findings, mRNA expression
of the anti-apoptotic family member BCL-xL or the ratio of MCL1-to-BCL-xL
continue to be the best predictor of dinaciclib sensitivity in both
hematopoietic and solid tumor cell lines. MCL1 appears to be an important
target of dinaciclib particularly in MCL1 amplified cell lines.
Dependence on MCL1 was established in a panel of 19 breast, NSCLC and
SCLC cell lines by depletion of the protein by either dinaciclib
treatment or MCL1 RNAi. The NSCLC line H23 was highly dependent on MCL1,
as RNAi knockdown decreased viability to 80% tumor regression. Cell lines
which lacked pro-apoptotic proteins BAX / BAK or harbored a BAX mutation
were insensitive to the inhibitor. Using apoptosis defective lines we
demonstrate that 24 hours of dinaciclib treatment still impacted cell
count by blocking cell cycle progression as measured by FACS. These data
demonstrate that both cell cycle block and induction of apoptosis
contribute to dinaciclib's mechanism of action. However, the observation
that MCL1 and BCL-xL were top genes associated with sensitivity suggests
that induction of apoptosis is the predominant mechanism of dinaciclib's
anti-tumor effect and warrants further investigation of MCL1
amplification as a predictive biomarker in future clinical studies.

