Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of Tivantinib (ARQ 197) is due to inhibition of
tubulin polymerization in addition to c-Met inhibition.


The receptor tyrosine kinase c-Met is the high-affinity receptor for the
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). The HGF/c-Met axis is often dysregulated
in tumors. Such c-Met activation is caused by MET gene amplification,
activating mutations, and auto- or paracrine mechanisms. Thus, c-Met
inhibitors are under development as anti-cancer drugs. Tivantinib (ARQ
197) was reported as a small molecule Met inhibitor and early clinical
studies suggest anti-tumor activity. To assess if the anti-tumor activity
of tivantinib was due to inhibition of c-Met, we investigated the
activity of tivantinib in both c-Met addicted and non-addicted cancer
cells for cell viability. As expected, we observed that other Met
inhibitors, crizotinib and PHA-665752, suppressed the growth of c-Met
addicted cancers, but not the growth of c-Met non-addicted cells. In
contrast, tivantinib inhibited cell viability similarly in both c-Met
addicted and non-addicted cells. These results suggest that tivantinib
exhibits its antitumor activity in a c-Met status independent manner.
Tivantinib treatment increased the number of G2/M phase arrested EBC1
cells similarly as vincristine treatment, whereas PHA-665752 or
crizotinib treatment markedly induced cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1
phase. To identify the additional molecular target of tivantinib, we
performed COMPARE analysis, in silico screening using extensive drug
sensitivity database of 39 cancer cell lines (JFCR39), and identified
microtubule as a target of tivantinib. Tivantinib treated cells
demonstrated typical microtubule disruption similar to vincristine. In
vitro microtubule polymerization assay clearly demonstrated that
tivantinib inhibited microtubule assembly. From these results, tivantinib
inhibits microtubule polymerization in addition to inhibiting c-MET.

