Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EcSOD overexpression inhibits the growth and invasion by affecting
extracellular matrix in PC3 human prostate cancer cells.


It has been shown that EcSOD (extracellular superoxide dismutase, SOD3)
can attenuate tissue damage and cancer cell invasion but so far its
function in prostate cancer cells has not been completely clarified.
Thus, we investigated the effect of EcSOD for cell growth and invasion in
PC3 human prostate cancer cells. We stably transfected PC3 cells with
pCMV-EcSOD cDNA and observed its overexpression in mRNA and protein
levels through RT-PCR and Western Blot, respectively. To check out the
influence for the growth rate of EcSOD, we analyzed Cell Viability and
Cytotoxicity Assay as a colorimetric and fluorometric format via MTT
(3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) reagent
and cell-permeable polyanionic calcein acetoxymethyl (Calcein AM) and
ethidium homodimer (EthD-1) dye. And we performed EcSOD Activity Assay
and ELISA. Moreover, we time-dependently carried out Wound-healing Assay
by monitoring the down-regulated growth rate of EcSOD overexpression PC3
cells. Furthermore, we verified low EcSOD expression compared to other
types of SODs by IHC and Patients Tissue Microarray. Meanwhile, we
accomplished Invasion Assay and MMP-2 and-9 Activity Assay with
Zymography. Herein, it elucidated that EcSOD abrogates cell growth,
proliferation, and invasion by associating with extracellular matrix in
PC3 human prostate cancer cells. Taken together, these findings suggest
that EcSOD can potentially have beneficial future strategy for the
treatment of prostate cancer.

