Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systems biology approach links genetic, epigenetic, and
transcriptomic features to tamoxifen sensitivity.


Utilizing existing genome-wide genotype, transcriptome and microRNA
(miRNA) datasets, we developed an integrative approach to evaluate the
role of genetic-epigenetic regulatory networks in human complex traits.
In this study, we focused on cellular sensitivity to tamoxifen, a
commonly prescribed breast cancer medication as a phenotype of interest.
A sequential multi-dimensional model was constructed to first identify
genes/miRNAs whose expression levels are correlated with tamoxifen
sensitivity. This in turn facilitated the identification of SNPs
associated with potential functionally relevant genomic features.
Finally, associations between these selected SNPs and cellular
sensitivity to tamoxifen were evaluated. A permutation-based false
discovery rate (FDR) procedure showed that association findings from our
approach have much lower FDRs when compared to those obtained through a
traditional single-step genome-wide association study (GWAS) between SNP
and drug sensitivity. Our model identified 50 unique SNPs associated with
30 miRNAs and 34 gene expression levels, all of which associated with
cellular sensitivity to tamoxifen phenotypes in HapMap YRI samples. Among
them, several miRNAs and genes have been previously implicated to play a
role in tamoxifen sensitivity; most are novel. Functional studies on
select miRNAs/genes are currently underway in both the HapMap samples and
breast cancer cell lines.

