Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRIM16 is a prognostic marker for patients with lymph node
metastatic melanoma.


The family of tripartite-motif (TRIM) proteins is involved in diverse
cellular processes, ranging from innate immunity, oncoprotein, and tumor
suppressor roles. TRIM16 overexpression confers retinoid sensitivity in
retinoid-resistant cancer cells. Previously, we found a strong
correlation between loss of TRIM16 expression and disease progression in
two human cancers: neuroblastoma and squamous cell carcinoma of skin.
Moreover, TRIM16 acted as a tumor suppressor in both cancers through
effects on cell cycle and migration. Here we examined the potential role
of TRIM16 as a tumor suppressor in melanoma.We found that the endogenous
TRIM16 expression level in seven melanoma cell lines was significantly
lower than in normal human melanocytes. Overexpression of TRIM16 reduced
cell viability and proliferation in multiple melanoma tumor cell lines
assessed by the Alamar Blue assay, compared to empty vector controls (P
The family of tripartite-motif (TRIM) proteins is involved in diverse
cellular processes, ranging from innate immunity, oncoprotein, and tumor
suppressor roles. TRIM16 overexpression confers retinoid sensitivity in
retinoid-resistant cancer cells. Previously, we found a strong
correlation between loss of TRIM16 expression and disease progression in
two human cancers: neuroblastoma and squamous cell carcinoma of skin.
Moreover, TRIM16 acted as a tumor suppressor in both cancers through
effects on cell cycle and migration. Here we examined the potential role
of TRIM16 as a tumor suppressor in melanoma.We found that the endogenous
TRIM16 expression level in seven melanoma cell lines was significantly
lower than in normal human melanocytes. Overexpression of TRIM16 reduced
cell viability and proliferation in multiple melanoma tumor cell lines
assessed by the Alamar Blue assay, compared to empty vector controls (P <
0.01). Overexpression of TRIM16 also decreases cell migration and induces
apoptosis in melanoma cells. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated
that TRIM16 expression is decreased in human metastatic melanoma tissue
samples (Stage 3 and 4) compared to dysplastic compound nevi and primary
melanomas (n=91). Most importantly, we have demonstrated that high TRIM16
expression is a favourable prognostic marker of survival (P=0.025) in a
cohort of 170 melanoma patients with lymph node metastases. Median
survival was 59 months in the high TRIM16 expression group (n=64),
compared to 16 months in the low TRIM16 expression group (n=106). We also
show overexpression of TRIM16 in melanoma cells lines induced
interferon-beta 1 (IFNB1) mRNA expression, and IFNB1 expression is
required for inhibition of cell proliferation by TRIM16. IFNB1 expression
was also reduced in human metastatic melanoma tissue samples (n=91), and
positively correlated with TRIM16 expression in patient samples. Our in
vitro and in vivo data suggest that TRIM16 is a prognostic marker for
patients with lymph node metastatic melanoma and may play an important
role in melanoma tumor metastasis.

