Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC16 upregulates TSPYL5 gene and mediates Lung cancer cell
proliferation by suppressing p53 activity.


Background: Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer related death
in the world. The 5-year survival of lung cancer patients is a dismal
15%. MUC16 is a very high molecular weight glycoprotein with 22,152 amino
acid residues in its protein sequence. According to Oncomine data, MUC16
is highly overexpressed in lung cancer particularly Non Small Cell Lung
Cancer cell [NSCLC]. MUC16 is a well-established tumor marker in ovarian
cancer but its functional and mechanistic role is not well understood.
The Testis Specific Y-Like Protein (TSPYL5), which is also overexpressed
in lung carcinoma (68%) and it has been suggested that overexpression of
TSPYL5 induces cancer cell growth by suppressing p53 activity in terms.
We evaluated the interplay between MUC16 and TSPYL5 in lung
carcinogenesis.Materials and Methods: Endogenously expressed MUC16 was
stably knocked down using a MUC16 shRNA construct (pSUPER-Retro-MUC16-sh)
in H292 and H827 lung cancer cells by stable transfection method. The
cells were treated with cisplatin to investigate the role of MUC16 and
TSPYL5 on chemoresistance in lung cancer cells and its role in p53
degradation.Results: MUC16 is overexpressed in lung cancer while it is
absent in normal lung tissues by immunohistochemistry analysis.
Specifically MUC16 is highly observed in Stage III of lung carcinoma than
other stages and metastatic sites as well. Significant expression of
MUC16 was observed in NSCLC derived cell lines (H292 and H827) that
express p53 (wild type). On knocking down MUC16 in H292 cells, a decrease
in proliferation and an increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells
were observed in comparison to vector control cells (by FACs). MUC16
knockdown in H292 cell lines decreased the motility and invasion compared
to the MUC16 expressing control cells. Our microarray data suggest that
multiple cancer-related genes including TSPYL5, CXCL1, CXCL2, CCL20, and
IL8 are down-regulated in MUC16 knockdown cells. TSPYL5 suppresses p53
activity and thereby mediates cancer cell proliferation. Cisplatin
treatment in H292 and H827 cells resulted in decreased expression of
MUC16 and TSPYL5, and increased expression of p53. This indicates that
MUC16 overexpression upregulates TSPYL5, which may suppresses the p53
activity thereby inducing lung cancer cell proliferation and making the
cells insensitive to various cytotoxic agents.Conclusion: MUC16 may play
a significant role in lung cancer cell proliferation through the
upregulation of TSPYL5 which in turn control p53 activity.

