Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-Nicastrin antibodies for the treatment of endocrine resistant
breast cancer .


Background: Resistance to endocrine therapy occurs in at least 30% of
patients with breast cancer (BC) and remains a major clinical problem.
Among the mechanisms underpinning endocrine resistance is the enrichment
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) features and signalling
pathways such as EGFR and Notch. Notch receptors are activated by the
gamma-secretase (GS) enzyme composed of nicastrin, presenilin, PEN2 and
Aph-1. Gamma secretase inhibitors are being tested as novel therapeutics
for cancer treatment, predominantly in combination with anti-hormonal
agents as well as chemotherapy, however treatment related toxicities are
apparent. Nicastrin is upregulated in BC and we have developed
anti-nicastrin monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) to target its functions and
block GS. Here, we show that nicastrin may be a relevant therapeutic
target in endocrine resistance and demonstrate the effects of
anti-nicastrin MAbs.Materials and Methods: We used two cell line models
of MCF7 cells which developed endocrine resistance: TamR cells (Hiscox et
al) and MLET2/MLET5 developed in our laboratory. We raised anti-nicastrin
MAbs (MAb1 and MAb2) against nicastrin extracellular domain. Western
blotting, RT-qPCR, transwell invasion and 3D matrigel growth assays were
used to demonstrate their molecular and functional effects. Gamma
secreatse inhibitor RO4929097 was used for comparison.Results: We
demonstrate that nicastrin is overexpressed at both mRNA and protein
level in endocrine resistant cell lines (> 4-fold). These cells
concomitantly exhibit elevated molecular markers of EMT: Vimentin
(3-fold), CD44 (> 2-fold), EGFR (> 4-fold), RhoGTPase Cdc42 target genes
IQGAP1 (2-fold) and IQGAP2 (>100-fold); as well as Notch4 (>2-fold),
Notch-targets Hey1 and Hes1 (4-fold), while Notch1 is suppressed (>
2-fold). Anti-nicastrin MAb1, MAb2 and RO4929097 were equally potent in
inhibiting Notch target genes Hey1 and Hes1, as well as growth of TAMR
and MLET acini in 3D Matrigel. Interestingly, effective inhibition of
vimentin, CD44 and IQGAPs was observed only upon treatment with
anti-nicastrin MAbs, while RO4929097 had no effect. Interestinly, a clear
distinction was noted between anti-nicastrin MAbs and RO4929097 in terms
of their effect on Notch4. MAb1 and MAb2 attenuated Notch4 transcription
and reduced activated Notch4 and nicastrin levels, while RO4929097
achieved an opposite effect. Furthermore, only anti-nicastrin MAbs were
also potent inhibitors of TAMR cell invasion (by >50%, pBackground:
Resistance to endocrine therapy occurs in at least 30% of patients with
breast cancer (BC) and remains a major clinical problem. Among the
mechanisms underpinning endocrine resistance is the enrichment of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) features and signalling
pathways such as EGFR and Notch. Notch receptors are activated by the
gamma-secretase (GS) enzyme composed of nicastrin, presenilin, PEN2 and
Aph-1. Gamma secretase inhibitors are being tested as novel therapeutics
for cancer treatment, predominantly in combination with anti-hormonal
agents as well as chemotherapy, however treatment related toxicities are
apparent. Nicastrin is upregulated in BC and we have developed
anti-nicastrin monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) to target its functions and
block GS. Here, we show that nicastrin may be a relevant therapeutic
target in endocrine resistance and demonstrate the effects of
anti-nicastrin MAbs.Materials and Methods: We used two cell line models
of MCF7 cells which developed endocrine resistance: TamR cells (Hiscox et
al) and MLET2/MLET5 developed in our laboratory. We raised anti-nicastrin
MAbs (MAb1 and MAb2) against nicastrin extracellular domain. Western
blotting, RT-qPCR, transwell invasion and 3D matrigel growth assays were
used to demonstrate their molecular and functional effects. Gamma
secreatse inhibitor RO4929097 was used for comparison.Results: We
demonstrate that nicastrin is overexpressed at both mRNA and protein
level in endocrine resistant cell lines (> 4-fold). These cells
concomitantly exhibit elevated molecular markers of EMT: Vimentin
(3-fold), CD44 (> 2-fold), EGFR (> 4-fold), RhoGTPase Cdc42 target genes
IQGAP1 (2-fold) and IQGAP2 (>100-fold); as well as Notch4 (>2-fold),
Notch-targets Hey1 and Hes1 (4-fold), while Notch1 is suppressed (>
2-fold). Anti-nicastrin MAb1, MAb2 and RO4929097 were equally potent in
inhibiting Notch target genes Hey1 and Hes1, as well as growth of TAMR
and MLET acini in 3D Matrigel. Interestingly, effective inhibition of
vimentin, CD44 and IQGAPs was observed only upon treatment with
anti-nicastrin MAbs, while RO4929097 had no effect. Interestinly, a clear
distinction was noted between anti-nicastrin MAbs and RO4929097 in terms
of their effect on Notch4. MAb1 and MAb2 attenuated Notch4 transcription
and reduced activated Notch4 and nicastrin levels, while RO4929097
achieved an opposite effect. Furthermore, only anti-nicastrin MAbs were
also potent inhibitors of TAMR cell invasion (by >50%,
p<0.01).Conclusion: Nicastrin is overexpressed in endocrine resistant
breast cancer cells. Anti-nicastrin monoclonal antibodies inhibit Notch4
signalling, attenuate expression of pro-invasive molecules such as
vimentin, IQGAPs and CD44 and reduce cellular invasiveness and growth in
3D Matrigel. Therefore, targeting nicastrin may be a valid therapeutic
strategy in breast cancer patients that relapse of endocrine therapy.

