Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel single-nucleotide polymorphism markers predictive of
pathologic response to preoperative chemoradiotherapy in rectal cancer
patients.


Purpose: Studies aimed at predicting individual responsiveness to
preoperative chemoradiotherapy (CRT) are urgently needed, especially
considering the risks associated with poorly responsive patients, i.e.,
delay of curative surgery, immune suppression, and adverse
effects.Methods and Materials: A three-step strategy for the
determination of CRT sensitivity is proposed that includes: 1) screening
of a human genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array
correlated with histopathological tumor regression grade (TRG), 2)
clinical association analysis in 113 patients treated with preoperative
CRT, and 3) a cell-based functional assay for biological validation.
Genome-wide screening identified nine SNPs associated with preoperative
CRT responses.Results: Genome-wide screening identified nine SNPs
associated with preoperative CRT responses. The patients carrying the
reference allele (C) of the SNP CORO2A rs1985859 exhibited greater
positive responses (TRG 1-3) than those with the substitution allele (T)
(P=0.01). Down-regulation of CORO2A was associated with significantly
reduced early apoptosis in RKO and COLO320DM colorectal cancer cells by
27% (P=0.048) and 39% (P=0.023), respectively, as determined by flow
cytometry. Although a specific genotype associated with radiosensitivity
was not detected in the clinical association analysis, down-regulation of
FAM101A significantly increased the viability of RKO and COLO320DM cells
by 25% (P=0.01) and 23% (P=0.023), respectively in the MTT assay.
Conclusion: CRT-sensitive SNP markers were identified using a novel
three-step process. The candidate marker CORO2A rs1985859 and the
putative marker FAM101A rs7955740 may improve the prediction of
radiosensitivity to preoperative CRT, although further validation is
needed in large cohorts.

