Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, GDC-0980 sensitizes BRCA-competent
triple negative breast cancer cells to ABT888 in the presence of
carboplatin by impairing DNA-damage repair: A proof of concept
combination of PI3K/mTOR inhibitor with PARP inhibitor .


Background: PARP is a promising target in the Triple Negative subset of
Breast Cancer, the most aggressive subset characterized by poor prognosis
and limited option for targeted therapy. The PI3K pathway, in addition to
its pro-proliferative effects on tumor cells, also contributes to the
repair of DSB in both a kinase-dependent and independent manner (Kumar,
2010) directly by controlling relevant enzymes (Friedman, 2009) or
indirectly by regulating the expression of repair-related proteins. PI3K
inhibition impairs BRCA1/2 expression in BRCA-proficient cells leading to
the DNA damage, and HR impairment (Juvekar, 2012; Ibrahim, 2012).
Purpose: We hypothesize that an additional inhibition of HR and NHEJ by
GDC-0980 in conjunction with the inhibition of classical PI3K-mTOR
survival signals, will induce more effective anti-proliferative and
pro-apoptotic signals in BRCA-competent TNBC cells when combined with
PARP inhibitor (impaired DNA-SSB-repair), and carboplatin (increased
DNA-DSB). Methods: We tested effects of ABT888, and GDC-0980 (alone, and
combination), on cell survival/ proliferation in a panel of 5-7 BRCA-wt
and mutant TNBC cell lines using MTT assay, CelltiterGLO, and cell cycle
analyses (PI & EDU). Clonogenic growth was tested by 3D ON-TOP assay and
soft-agar assay. Apoptosis (Annexin V, Apoptosis Array), and cell
signaling marker(s) (WB) were investigated. Results: The results show
that, (1) the range of EC50s for GDC-0980 in cells (HCC70, HCC1143,
HCC1937, MDA-MB231, MDA468, BT20) varied from 0.2 M to 5 M; PIK3CA
mutated (H1047R) BT20 cells exhibited the lowest EC50, while RAS/RAF
mutated MDA-MB231 cells exhibited the highest EC50, (2) PTEN-null and ATM
kinase mutated MDA-MB468 cells were the most sensitive to ABT888 in the
dose-response study by clonogenic assay (ABT888 failed to show a response
by MTT assay), (3) out of three doses of GDC-0980 (200 nM, 100 nM, and 50
nM) tested in combination with ABT888 (10M) plus carboplatin (10 M),
BRCA-competent MDA-MB468 cells were found to be more sensitive to the
combination at 50 nM GDC-0980 than BRCA-competent MDA-MB231 cells, (4)
GDC-0980 treatment (50nM) decreased pAKT-S473 and pP70S6K, and (5)
GDC-0980 treatment time-dependently increased cleaved-caspase 3, 9, and
cleaved-PARP in cells. Conclusion: Data indicate that GDC-0980 enhances
the activity of ABT888, in the presence of carboplatin. We are currently
pursuing the studies to delineate the mechanistic relationship between
the anti-proliferative, pro-apoptotic, and anti-DNA-damage-repair effects
of GDC-0980 in BRCA-competent TNBC cell lines in combination with ABT888
plus carboplatin, the results of which will be presented in the meeting.

