Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABCB5 expression in colorectal cancer circulating tumor cells
correlates with metastatic disease progression.


Targeted personalized treatment approaches are critical for the
development of successful therapies for advanced colorectal cancer (CRC).
In this regard, circulating tumor cells (CTC) are of foremost interest as
potential predictors of metastatic disease progression and patient
therapeutic response. We have previously demonstrated that ATP-binding
cassette member B5 (ABCB5) is expressed by cancer stem cells (CSC) in
several human malignancies, including CRC, and that ABCB5 identifies
therapy-refractory tumor subpopulations in CRC patients that correlate
with disease progression. In order to evaluate the potential role of
ABCB5 as a clinically relevant CTC marker, we utilized a human-to-mouse
xenograft model system to examine the relationship of ABCB5-positive
CRC-CTC to CRC metastasis. Human CRC tumor cells were grafted
subcutaneously into immunocompromized NSG mice. 7 weeks after
xenotransplantation, peripheral blood mononuclear cells and lungs were
evaluated by qPCR for expression of human ABCB5 and GAPDH mRNAs.
Expression analysis of these specimens revealed a significant positive
correlation between peripheral blood human ABCB5 mRNA expression and
aggregate metastatic disease load as determined by human GAPDH mRNA
expression levels in lungs (r=0.8994, P=0.0147). Remarkably, no
significant correlation existed between peripheral blood human GAPDH mRNA
expression and metastatic disease load, indicating a unique and essential
role of ABCB5-positive CSC-CTC in colorectal cancer metastatic disease
progression. Significantly increased peripheral blood ABCB5 expression
was also observed in a clinical series of UICC stages I-III colorectal
cancer patients (n=105) compared to healthy controls (PTargeted
personalized treatment approaches are critical for the development of
successful therapies for advanced colorectal cancer (CRC). In this
regard, circulating tumor cells (CTC) are of foremost interest as
potential predictors of metastatic disease progression and patient
therapeutic response. We have previously demonstrated that ATP-binding
cassette member B5 (ABCB5) is expressed by cancer stem cells (CSC) in
several human malignancies, including CRC, and that ABCB5 identifies
therapy-refractory tumor subpopulations in CRC patients that correlate
with disease progression. In order to evaluate the potential role of
ABCB5 as a clinically relevant CTC marker, we utilized a human-to-mouse
xenograft model system to examine the relationship of ABCB5-positive
CRC-CTC to CRC metastasis. Human CRC tumor cells were grafted
subcutaneously into immunocompromized NSG mice. 7 weeks after
xenotransplantation, peripheral blood mononuclear cells and lungs were
evaluated by qPCR for expression of human ABCB5 and GAPDH mRNAs.
Expression analysis of these specimens revealed a significant positive
correlation between peripheral blood human ABCB5 mRNA expression and
aggregate metastatic disease load as determined by human GAPDH mRNA
expression levels in lungs (r=0.8994, P=0.0147). Remarkably, no
significant correlation existed between peripheral blood human GAPDH mRNA
expression and metastatic disease load, indicating a unique and essential
role of ABCB5-positive CSC-CTC in colorectal cancer metastatic disease
progression. Significantly increased peripheral blood ABCB5 expression
was also observed in a clinical series of UICC stages I-III colorectal
cancer patients (n=105) compared to healthy controls (P<0.001). Thus, our
results identify the CSC antigen ABCB5 as a novel molecular marker of
metastasis-associated CRC-CTC and point to potential utility of ABCB5 as
a prognostic indicator and predictor of therapeutic response in patients
with advanced colorectal cancer.

