Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Factors associated to concurrent anal and cervical HPV infection:
Results from a population-based study among Hispanics.


Objective: Persistent infection with certain types of HPV is associated
with cervical and anal cancer, accounting for 96% and 93% of these tumors
in the US. Population-based data on anal and cervical HPV co-infection
among Hispanics is limited. We aimed to estimate the concordance between
cervical and anal HPV infection among a population-based sample of 600
women aged 16 to 64 years living in the San Juan Metropolitan area of
Puerto Rico (PR).Methods: The study population for this cross-sectional
study (2010-2012) was identified through a cluster probability sampling
design of households in the San Juan Metropolitan Area, and included
non-institutionalized women aged 16-64 years old residing in this area.
Women completed a face-to-face interview conducted by female trained data
collectors and a computer-assisted self-interview, using the Audio CASI
system for the collection of demographic and lifestyle variables. Anal
and cervical specimens were collected through previously tested
self-collection methods and HPV DNA testing was performed using a
modified pool of MY09/MY11 consensus HPV L1 primers as well as primers
for amplification of the human beta-globin gene. PCR products from
positive samples were typed by dot-blot hybridization using 39 individual
type-specific probes. Logistic regression models were used to assess
factors associated to concurrent cervical and anal HPV infection.Results:
Mean age of participants is 42.0 years (13.4 SD), 19.3% have Objective:
Persistent infection with certain types of HPV is associated with
cervical and anal cancer, accounting for 96% and 93% of these tumors in
the US. Population-based data on anal and cervical HPV co-infection among
Hispanics is limited. We aimed to estimate the concordance between
cervical and anal HPV infection among a population-based sample of 600
women aged 16 to 64 years living in the San Juan Metropolitan area of
Puerto Rico (PR).Methods: The study population for this cross-sectional
study (2010-2012) was identified through a cluster probability sampling
design of households in the San Juan Metropolitan Area, and included
non-institutionalized women aged 16-64 years old residing in this area.
Women completed a face-to-face interview conducted by female trained data
collectors and a computer-assisted self-interview, using the Audio CASI
system for the collection of demographic and lifestyle variables. Anal
and cervical specimens were collected through previously tested
self-collection methods and HPV DNA testing was performed using a
modified pool of MY09/MY11 consensus HPV L1 primers as well as primers
for amplification of the human beta-globin gene. PCR products from
positive samples were typed by dot-blot hybridization using 39 individual
type-specific probes. Logistic regression models were used to assess
factors associated to concurrent cervical and anal HPV infection.Results:
Mean age of participants is 42.0 years (13.4 SD), 19.3% have < 12 years
of education and 9.7% had no health-care coverage. Laboratory results for
the first 403 participants with complete cervical and anal results show
that 21.3% were co-infected with HPV in the cervix and anus. In
multivariate logistic regression models, women aged 35-49 (OR=0.45, 95%
CI=0.23-0.86) and 50-64 years (0.44, 95% CI=0.21-0.93) were less like to
be co-infected as compared to those aged 16-34. A trend was observed were
women with 2-9 lifetime sexual partners (OR=2.47, 95% CI=0.91-6.73) and
those with 10 sexual partners (OR=3.33, 95% CI=1.07-10.41) were more
likely to be co-infected than women with one sexual partner. Also, those
married/living together (OR=0.55, 95% CI=0.30-1.01) were less likely to
be co-infected as compared to single women, this result was marginally
significant (pObjective: Persistent infection with certain types of HPV
is associated with cervical and anal cancer, accounting for 96% and 93%
of these tumors in the US. Population-based data on anal and cervical HPV
co-infection among Hispanics is limited. We aimed to estimate the
concordance between cervical and anal HPV infection among a
population-based sample of 600 women aged 16 to 64 years living in the
San Juan Metropolitan area of Puerto Rico (PR).Methods: The study
population for this cross-sectional study (2010-2012) was identified
through a cluster probability sampling design of households in the San
Juan Metropolitan Area, and included non-institutionalized women aged
16-64 years old residing in this area. Women completed a face-to-face
interview conducted by female trained data collectors and a
computer-assisted self-interview, using the Audio CASI system for the
collection of demographic and lifestyle variables. Anal and cervical
specimens were collected through previously tested self-collection
methods and HPV DNA testing was performed using a modified pool of
MY09/MY11 consensus HPV L1 primers as well as primers for amplification
of the human beta-globin gene. PCR products from positive samples were
typed by dot-blot hybridization using 39 individual type-specific probes.
Logistic regression models were used to assess factors associated to
concurrent cervical and anal HPV infection.Results: Mean age of
participants is 42.0 years (13.4 SD), 19.3% have < 12 years of education
and 9.7% had no health-care coverage. Laboratory results for the first
403 participants with complete cervical and anal results show that 21.3%
were co-infected with HPV in the cervix and anus. In multivariate
logistic regression models, women aged 35-49 (OR=0.45, 95% CI=0.23-0.86)
and 50-64 years (0.44, 95% CI=0.21-0.93) were less like to be co-infected
as compared to those aged 16-34. A trend was observed were women with 2-9
lifetime sexual partners (OR=2.47, 95% CI=0.91-6.73) and those with 10
sexual partners (OR=3.33, 95% CI=1.07-10.41) were more likely to be
co-infected than women with one sexual partner. Also, those
married/living together (OR=0.55, 95% CI=0.30-1.01) were less likely to
be co-infected as compared to single women, this result was marginally
significant (p<0.10). No differences were observed by education,
health-care coverage, smoking status, age of sexual initiation or anal
sexual practices.Conclusions: Co-infection with HPV infection in the
cervix and anus is common among Hispanic women in PR, and is associated
with younger age and increased number of sexual partners. Given the
current low uptake of the HPV vaccine in PR, public health interventions
that increase vaccine accessibility and uptake in this population are
warranted, as a method for cervical and anal cancer prevention.

