Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of LIN28B and RAN in promoting neuroblastoma
tumorigenesis.


Background: : Neuroblastoma is a childhood cancer of the sympathetic
nervous system that accounts for approximately 10% of pediatric oncology
deaths. The genetic basis of neuroblastoma has begun to be elucidated,
with genome-wide association studies uncovering BARD1 and LMO1 as both
predisposition genes and oncogenic drivers in a large subset of
established neuroblastomas. Recently, our laboratory has shown that
germline variation in LIN28B, a master regulator of the let-7 family of
tumor suppressor microRNAs, promotes susceptibility to neuroblastoma.
Neuroblastomas harboring the risk genotype show high LIN28B expression
and this is highly associated with increased cellular proliferation,
advanced stage disease and worse patient outcome (Nat. Gen.,
2012).Methods and Results: : To investigate the mechanism by which LIN28B
influences the malignant phenotype, we first performed in silico analyses
of several newly created and publicly available mRNA expression data sets
along with SNP-array based DNA copy number data from 648 primary
neuroblastomas. We observed a strong positive correlation between LIN28B
and RAN expression in multiple data sets (P = 2.9 x 108 to 2.7 x 103).
RAN is a member of the Ras family of GTPases that participates in mitosis
and nuclear trafficking and is implicated as an oncogene in multiple
malignancies. Recurrent somatic copy number gain of 12q24, where RAN is
located, was observed in 15% (97/648) of neuroblastomas (p Background: :
Neuroblastoma is a childhood cancer of the sympathetic nervous system
that accounts for approximately 10% of pediatric oncology deaths. The
genetic basis of neuroblastoma has begun to be elucidated, with
genome-wide association studies uncovering BARD1 and LMO1 as both
predisposition genes and oncogenic drivers in a large subset of
established neuroblastomas. Recently, our laboratory has shown that
germline variation in LIN28B, a master regulator of the let-7 family of
tumor suppressor microRNAs, promotes susceptibility to neuroblastoma.
Neuroblastomas harboring the risk genotype show high LIN28B expression
and this is highly associated with increased cellular proliferation,
advanced stage disease and worse patient outcome (Nat. Gen.,
2012).Methods and Results: : To investigate the mechanism by which LIN28B
influences the malignant phenotype, we first performed in silico analyses
of several newly created and publicly available mRNA expression data sets
along with SNP-array based DNA copy number data from 648 primary
neuroblastomas. We observed a strong positive correlation between LIN28B
and RAN expression in multiple data sets (P = 2.9 x 108 to 2.7 x 103).
RAN is a member of the Ras family of GTPases that participates in mitosis
and nuclear trafficking and is implicated as an oncogene in multiple
malignancies. Recurrent somatic copy number gain of 12q24, where RAN is
located, was observed in 15% (97/648) of neuroblastomas (p < 0.0001), and
this gain was associated with increased RAN expression (P = 0.0041),
stage 4 (P = 0.0047), high-risk (P = 0.0005), and the MYCN non-amplified
subset of high-risk in particular (P = 0.0021). Pathway analysis of the
MYCN amplified subset of high-risk neuroblastoma showed that high LIN28B
expression was strongly associated with increased RAN signaling (P = 7.1
x 108), suggesting LIN28B may regulate RAN activity. Western blotting in
a panel of six neuroblastoma cell lines confirmed a tight correlation at
the protein level. RNA interference targeting LIN28B resulted in
depletion of RAN protein and a potent antiproliferative effect that was
phenococpied by siRNA-mediated depletion of RAN.Conclusions and Future
Directions: Our data show that LIN28B expression and 12q24 gain promote
the expression of RAN, suggesting two mechanisms that help to drive the
malignant phenotype of neuroblastoma. We are currently determining
whether LIN28B drives expression of the activated GTP-bound form of RAN.
In addition, we are studying whether LIN28B regulates RAN in a let-7
dependent manner. Finally, we plan to determine whether targeting
exportin1/XPO1/CRM1, which complexes with RAN in the nuclear membrane to
export proteins and mRNA to the cytoplasm, will demonstrate therapeutic
effect in neuroblastoma in a LIN28B- and/or RAN-dependent manner.

