Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of endogenous peroxidase activity on cell culture-based
drug activity screening.


Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are known to play an intrinsic role in
mediating the cancer cell killing of many commonly employed anticancer
agents. In many cases this is due to direct production of ROS via
interaction with cellular components. This evidence is based partly on
observations that ROS-scavenging agents such as N-acetylcysteine or
catalase reverse killing in cancer cells. Catalase enzymatically degrades
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) into dioxygen and water. We examined the effect
of catalase (5,000 U/mL) supplemented in growth media on the efficacy of
800 cytotoxic small molecules. Strong reversal of toxicity was found for
34 compounds with diverse mechanisms, including tubilin-interacting
drugs. This implies that cytotoxins may have diminished efficacy in vivo
due to the high activity of catalase in blood (100,000 U/mL).
Surprisingly, we found that assays conducted with supplementation of
catalase in media at levels greater than >20,000 U/mL, intended to
replicate the endogenous environment, were highly toxic to cells. This
phenomenon has been replicated in a number of cell lines from various
tissue origins. One implication of this funding is that cancer cell lines
require baseline ROS levels for cell survival proliferation, consistent
with the cancer ROS addiction theory. Given that cell culture medium
lacks peroxidase activity we conclude that the precise cell culture
environment is a critical determinant of the results obtained when
screening drugs for toxicity to cancer cells.

