Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K inhibitor, GS-1101, impacts transcription and translation in
mantle cell lymphoma.


PI3K, , and are the most ubiquitous and important PI3K family class I
member isoforms that contribute to cell growth and survival processes in
cancer. Among these isoforms, PI3K and are broadly expressed, where PI3K
and are uniquely expressed in T- and B-cells, respectively, making them
ideal candidates for targeted therapies in hematological malignancies.
GS-1101, also known as CAL-101, is a potent and selective PI3K inhibitor
(IC50=2.5 nM) that is currently in Phase II/III clinical trials in B-cell
diseases. Previous studies have elucidated disruption of survival factors
and cytokine signaling mediated by PI3K/Akt pathways as major mechanism
of activity in B-cell malignancies.It has been established that
oncoprotein PI3K isoform deregulates transcription and translation
processes in solid tumors, and based on the knowledge of PI3K and
GS-1101, we hypothesized that 1) GS-1101 treatment will inhibit gene
transcription and protein translation, 2) will impact transcription and
translation regulators that are downstream of PI3K/Akt pathways and 3)
will reduce short-lived mRNA and proteins such as Mcl-1, c-Myc and cyclin
D1, which are important in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), a B-cell lymphoma.
In JeKo-1 and Mino MCL cell lines, PI3K is the most prominent isoform. In
these cell lines and in primary MCL cells, the level of apoptosis was
modest (less than 15%) when cells were treated with 5 M GS-1101 for 24
hr. Consistent with Annexin/PI data, slight levels of PARP cleavage was
detected. Of the two Akt phosphorylation sites, Thr308 and Ser473,
phosphorylation of Akt (Thr308) showed dose-dependent decrease in both
cell lines when treated by GS-1101 for 1 hr following serum starvation;
however, there was no change in Akt (Ser347) levels following 24 hr of
GS-1101 treatment in full serum conditions. Global RNA synthesis was
substantially reduced in MCL primary samples, reaching 80% of control at
1 M and 50% or less at 5 M for 24 hr treatment, while only minor changes
(80-90% of control) were observed in JeKo-1 and Mino. Global translation
inhibition measured by leucine incorporation was observed in JeKo-1, Mino
and primary MCL cells. Phosphorylation levels of translation regulators
p70S6K (Ser9) and S6 (Ser235/236) showed dose-dependent decrease when
treated with GS-1101 for 24 hr in JeKo-1. Meanwhile, minor decrease of
4E-BP1 (Ser65) phosphorylation level was observed in JeKo-1 under the
same conditions. In Jeko-1 cells, early response genes such as
short-lived MCL1 mRNA level was reduced following 24 hr of GS-1101
treatment, however, other (PIM2, MYC, CCND1) mRNA levels decreased to a
lesser extent. At the protein level, both Mcl-1 and cyclin D1 expression
decreased in JeKo-1 cells. In conclusion, similar to inhibition of other
PI3K isoforms, PI3K inhibition impacted transcription and translation,
and reduced cyclin D1 and Mcl-1 levels which are important for MCL cell
survival and proliferation.

