Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of p53 oligomerization and sensitivity to checkpoint
abrogation of neuroblastoma.


Cell cycle checkpoints prevent cells from dividing with damaged DNA by
causing cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. DNA damage-induced cell cycle
arrest resulting from treatment with the topoisomerase I inhibitor SN38
can be abrogated specifically in p53-defective cells by treatment with
the Chk1 inhibitor 7-hydroxystaurosporine (UCN-01). However, some p53
wild-type tumor cell lines have also been shown to be sensitive to
checkpoint abrogation, suggesting that these cells have other defects in
the p53 pathway that can be exploited for therapeutic purposes. Our
recent studies revealed that cells that are sensitive to checkpoint
abrogation lack p53 dimers and tetramers. Thus, one possible explanation
for the sensitivity of p53 wildtype tumors to checkpoint abrogation is a
defect in oligomerization. In the current study, we investigate the DNA
damage response and UCN-01 sensitivity of three p53 wildtype
neuroblastoma cell lines: SK-N-SH, SH-SY5Y, and IMR32. In order to
determine the responses of these cells to DNA damage, the cells were
treated with concentrations of SN38 ranging from 0-30 ng/ml. All three
cell lines arrested in G2, S, or G1 depending upon SN38 concentration and
displayed an increase in p53 levels with increasing SN38. Additionally,
p53 was phosphorylated on serine 15 following SN38 treatment in all three
cell lines, suggesting that p53 is active. In order to determine whether
these cells are susceptible to UCN-01-mediated abrogation of cell cycle
arrest, cell were treated with 3 ng/ml SN38 for 24 hours, followed by
25-100 nM UCN-01 for 6 and 24 hours. The SK-N-SH and IMR32 showed only
slight sensitivity to the highest concentration of UCN-01 treatment as
evidenced by partial abrogation of S and G2 arrest. The SH-SY5Y, however,
abrogated S arrest after 6 hours at the lowest concentration of UCN-01
and abrogated G2 arrest after 24 hours. We also analyzed the
oligomerization status of p53 using glutaraldehyde crosslinking. The
SK-N-SH cells possess levels of p53 dimers and tetramers similar to what
has previously been reported in p53 wildtype MCF10A cells. The IMR32 and
SH-SY5Y, however, had extremely low levels of dimers and tetramers.
Consistent with this, only SK-N-SH showed activation of p21waf1 in
response to SN38 treatment. Previous studies have reported cytoplasmic
sequestration as a mechanism of p53 inactivation p53 wildtype
neuroblastomas, although more recent studies refute these reports. In
order to determine the sub-cellular distribution of p53, we prepared
nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts. Both the SK-N-SH and SH-SY5Y had
primarily nuclear p53, while in IMR32, p53 was evenly distributed between
the nucleus and cytoplasm. The results of this study suggest that
oligomerization status alone is insufficient as an indicator of
sensitivity of p53 wildtype tumors to the therapeutic combination of DNA
damage agent and checkpoint inhibitor.

