Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Formulation and characterization of a nanoparticulate drug
delivery system for cancer therapy.


Most anticancer agents are not targeted to neoplastic cells. As a result,
the development of dosage forms and drug delivery systems containing
anticancer drugs capable of targeting cancer cells is highly desired. Our
research investigated an albumin-based nanoparticulate delivery system as
a platform technology for the delivery of anticancer agents. Doxorubicin
hydrochloride was used as the model drug. Drug-encapsulated nanoparticles
were prepared by microencapsulation through spray-drying and were
characterized for their physicochemical properties. Raman spectroscopy
was used to investigate the stability of the encapsulated drug.
Additionally, Zeta potential measurements were used to assess the
colloidal stability and surface properties of the nanoparticles.
Dissolution studies were carried out to examine the release profile of
the drug from the nanoparticles. The in vitro efficacy of the drug-loaded
nanoparticulate drug delivery system was analyzed in MCF-7 breast cancer
cell line. Raman spectroscopy data suggested that the drug is stable in
the nanoparticulate drug carrier. Nanoparticles have Zeta potential
measurements of approximately -30 mV, suggesting that the system is
stable in an aqueous environment. Dissolution studies showed that the
drug was released from the nanoparticles at a sustained rate over a
period of over 24 hours. In vitro data in MCF-7 cell line indicated that
there was more than 10% more inhibition of cell viability when
doxorubicin was used with the biodegradable polymeric carrier. Similar
results were observed from clonogenic studies. Additionally, our in vitro
data suggested that cell death induced by the drug-loaded nanoparticles
was caused by apoptosis. Hence, the data suggest that biodegradable
albumin nanoparticles are capable of targeting cancer cells.

