Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chlorinated bisphenol A diglycidyl ether (EPI-001) mediates
degradation of the androgen receptor in prostate cancer cells.


The androgen receptor is a critical target for the treatment of locally
advanced and metastatic prostate cancer (PCa). Blocking AR signaling via
castration or antiandrogens such as bicalutamide and enzalutamide results
in tumor regression. However, resistance to AR-targeted therapy
inevitably develops, marked by the outgrowth of castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC) cells. Mechanisms of CRPC include amplification of
the AR gene, leading to overexpression of AR mRNA and protein, as well as
expression of truncated AR splice variants. AR overexpression can convert
bicalutamide to a weak agonist, thereby driving AR reactivation and
ongoing cellular proliferation and survival. AR splice variants lack the
COOH-terminal AR ligand binding domain (LBD) and function as
constitutively-active, ligand-independent transcription factors.
Recently, the chlorinated bisphenol A diglycidyl ether, EPI-001, was
shown to bind to the AR NH2-terminal domain and inhibit AR signaling by
interfering with coactivator recruitment. Here, we show that EPI-001 has
a novel activity of mediating degradation of AR protein in various PCa
cell lines, including cells driven by AR gene amplification and cells
driven by AR splice variants. Cells displaying resistance to the
next-generation antiandrogen enzalutamide were growth inhibited at
EPI-001 concentrations corresponding to maximal AR degradation. Moreover,
using VCaP cells as a model of AR overexpression, we show that
EPI-001-mediated AR degradation prevents inappropriate agonist response
to bicalutamide. This work provides proof-of-principle that targeting
full-length and splice variant forms of the AR for degradation with
EPI-001 may enhance the efficacy of conventional and next-generation
antiandrogens for treatment of CRPC.

