Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of YAP expression with colorectal cancer progression.


YAP, a crucial transcriptional coactivator in the Hippo signaling
pathway, is upregulated in several human tumors and suggested to promote
tumor progression. However, its expression level and role in colorectal
cancer (CRC) remain unknown. In this study, YAP expression and the
correlation between YAP expression and CRC clinical features were
investigated. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and
Western blotting were performed on 30 matched pairs of fresh CRC tissues
and adjacent normal mucosae from 30 CRC patients. Immunohistochemical
analysis was performed on 116 matched pairs of paraffin-embedded CRC
tissues and adjacent normal mucosae, as well as in 73 cases of metastatic
lymph nodes. Our results showed YAP expression level in CRC or lymphatic
metastatic tissues was clearly higher than that in normal mucosae (PYAP,
a crucial transcriptional coactivator in the Hippo signaling pathway, is
upregulated in several human tumors and suggested to promote tumor
progression. However, its expression level and role in colorectal cancer
(CRC) remain unknown. In this study, YAP expression and the correlation
between YAP expression and CRC clinical features were investigated.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting
were performed on 30 matched pairs of fresh CRC tissues and adjacent
normal mucosae from 30 CRC patients. Immunohistochemical analysis was
performed on 116 matched pairs of paraffin-embedded CRC tissues and
adjacent normal mucosae, as well as in 73 cases of metastatic lymph
nodes. Our results showed YAP expression level in CRC or lymphatic
metastatic tissues was clearly higher than that in normal mucosae
(P<0.01), whereas that in CRC tissues with lymphatic metastasis was
higher than that in tissues without lymphatic metastasis (PYAP, a crucial
transcriptional coactivator in the Hippo signaling pathway, is
upregulated in several human tumors and suggested to promote tumor
progression. However, its expression level and role in colorectal cancer
(CRC) remain unknown. In this study, YAP expression and the correlation
between YAP expression and CRC clinical features were investigated.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting
were performed on 30 matched pairs of fresh CRC tissues and adjacent
normal mucosae from 30 CRC patients. Immunohistochemical analysis was
performed on 116 matched pairs of paraffin-embedded CRC tissues and
adjacent normal mucosae, as well as in 73 cases of metastatic lymph
nodes. Our results showed YAP expression level in CRC or lymphatic
metastatic tissues was clearly higher than that in normal mucosae
(P<0.01), whereas that in CRC tissues with lymphatic metastasis was
higher than that in tissues without lymphatic metastasis (P<0.05). YAP
expression is associated with serosal invasion, lymphatic metastasis,
lymph node ratio, remote metastasis, Dukes stage, and the
carcinoembryonic antigen level (PYAP, a crucial transcriptional
coactivator in the Hippo signaling pathway, is upregulated in several
human tumors and suggested to promote tumor progression. However, its
expression level and role in colorectal cancer (CRC) remain unknown. In
this study, YAP expression and the correlation between YAP expression and
CRC clinical features were investigated. Quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting were performed on 30
matched pairs of fresh CRC tissues and adjacent normal mucosae from 30
CRC patients. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on 116 matched
pairs of paraffin-embedded CRC tissues and adjacent normal mucosae, as
well as in 73 cases of metastatic lymph nodes. Our results showed YAP
expression level in CRC or lymphatic metastatic tissues was clearly
higher than that in normal mucosae (P<0.01), whereas that in CRC tissues
with lymphatic metastasis was higher than that in tissues without
lymphatic metastasis (P<0.05). YAP expression is associated with serosal
invasion, lymphatic metastasis, lymph node ratio, remote metastasis,
Dukes stage, and the carcinoembryonic antigen level (P<0.05). It is also
an independent predictor of the survival of CRC patients (PYAP, a crucial
transcriptional coactivator in the Hippo signaling pathway, is
upregulated in several human tumors and suggested to promote tumor
progression. However, its expression level and role in colorectal cancer
(CRC) remain unknown. In this study, YAP expression and the correlation
between YAP expression and CRC clinical features were investigated.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting
were performed on 30 matched pairs of fresh CRC tissues and adjacent
normal mucosae from 30 CRC patients. Immunohistochemical analysis was
performed on 116 matched pairs of paraffin-embedded CRC tissues and
adjacent normal mucosae, as well as in 73 cases of metastatic lymph
nodes. Our results showed YAP expression level in CRC or lymphatic
metastatic tissues was clearly higher than that in normal mucosae
(P<0.01), whereas that in CRC tissues with lymphatic metastasis was
higher than that in tissues without lymphatic metastasis (P<0.05). YAP
expression is associated with serosal invasion, lymphatic metastasis,
lymph node ratio, remote metastasis, Dukes stage, and the
carcinoembryonic antigen level (P<0.05). It is also an independent
predictor of the survival of CRC patients (P<0.05). Patients with high
YAP expression level exhibited lower overall survival rates than those
with low expression (P=0.001). Further analysis showed that YAP predicted
CRC prognosis primarily for patients with late-clinical-stage CRC
(P=0.002). These findings suggest that YAP is a potential marker for
predicting CRC progression and prognosis. YAP upregulation is associated
with poor overall survival time in CRC patients, particularly in those
with late stage of the disease. Therefore, YAP may be an effective
therapeutic target for late-stage tumors.Citation Format: Daxing Xie,
Xiangyang Wang, Jiang Min, Xiaolan Li, Jubo Hu, Jianping Gong.
Association of YAP expression with colorectal cancer progression.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 770.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-770

