Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A direct regulation of Twist1 by FOXQ1 promotes colorectal cancer
metastasis.


AbstractMalignant cell transformation, invasion and metastasis are
dependent on the coordinated rewiring of gene expression. A major
component in the scaffold of these reprogramming events is one in which
epithelial cells lose intercellular connections and polarity and adopt a
motile mesenchymal phenotype, one that is largely supported by a robust
transcriptional machinery consisting mostly of developmental
transcription factors.We investigated the winged helix transcription
factor, FOXQ1, identified from an oligonucleotide microarray expression
analysis, as being concomitantly deregulated in both epithelial and
stromal compartments. We found that FOXQ1 contributes to epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT), in part by directly affecting the
transcription of Twist1, itself a key mediator of metastasis that
transcriptionally regulates the expression of important molecules
involved in EMT. Reporter gene assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that FOXQ1 regulated and directly interacted with the
Twist1 promoter, leading to a suppression of E-cadherin and increased
expression of mesenchymal markers. Forced expression and RNAi mediated
silencing of FOXQ1 led to increased and decreased levels of Twist1 mRNA
and protein levels, respectively, with concomitant effects on migration,
invasion and in vivo metastasis of colorectal cancer cells. Moreover,
FOXQ1 mRNA and protein expression correlated in a series of resected
patient samples. Conclusively our results show that FOXQ1 is a novel
mediator of colorectal cancer metastasis and joins the network of
transcription factors that orchestrate EMT.

