Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44-mediated glucose metabolism affects ROS level and drug
sensitivity in glycolytic cancer cells.


Low reactive oxygen species (ROS) level of cancer cells is implicated in
chemo-resistance. One of the reasons why cancer cells keep their ROS
level low is an increased glycolytic flux accompanied by activation of
pentose phosphate pathway (PPP).We found that CD44, a cell surface marker
for cancer stem cells, interact with pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) which is
one of the most important regulators of aerobic glycolysis (Warburg
effect), and thereby promotes the glycolysis of cancer cells. CD44
ablation by RNA interference increased PKM2 enzymatic activity and then
induced metabolic shift from glycolysis to mitochondrial respiration and
concomitantly reduced glucose uptake and PPP flux via suppression of
glucose transporter1 (Glut1) expression. Such metabolic changes by CD44
ablation depleted cellular reduced glutathione(GSH) contents and
increased intracellular ROS level. Our group previously reported that
CD44 variant expression promotes xCT-mediated cysteine uptake and
consequent GSH synthesis. Taken together, we suggested that CD44
maintains GSH synthesis and low ROS level in glycolytic cancer cells not
only through xCT-mediated cysteine uptake but also by maintenance of the
PPP flux and consequent NADPH production.Additionally, CD44 depleted
cancer cells more sensitized them anticancer drugs even in more
glycolytic environments, such as p53-deficient or hypoxia, in which
cancer cells show more chemo-resistance. This increased sensitivity to
anticancer drugs conferred by CD44 ablation was inhibited by pretreatment
with a precursor of GSH that functions as an antioxidant. Therefore,
these results indicated that enhanced ROS level by CD44 ablation
sensitizes highly glycolytic cancer cells to conventional
chemotherapy.The possibility that CD44-targeted therapy may perturb the
metabolism of cancer cells and thereby impair their capacity to defend
against ROS warrants further investigation.

