Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CtBP1 as a transcriptional corepressor in prostate cancer.


Background: C-terminal Binding Protein 1 (CtBP1), a transcriptional
co-repressor that regulates the expression of tumor suppressors and genes
involved in cell death, is known to play a critical role in multiple
cancers. Earlier, we showed that CtBP1 is overexpressed in metastatic
prostate cancer. Furthermore, our studies indicated a role for CtBP1 in
conferring radiation resistance to prostate cancer cell lines. We also
demonstrated the functional role of CtBP1 in regulating prostate cancer
cell growth in vitro and tumor growth and metastasis in vivo.Methods and
Results: Our gene expression profiling and bioinformatics analysis found
that multiple potential tumor suppressors are reactivated upon CtBP1
knockdown in multiple prostate cancer cell lines. We next validated these
targets of CtBP1-mediated repression by qRTPCR and western blotting using
CtBP1 stable knockdown prostate cancer cell lines, and in normal prostate
epithelial PrEC cells overexpressing CtBP1. Our studies confirmed that
CtBP1 targets multiple genes including SP8 transcription factor and
kallikrein-related peptidase 10 (KLK10) among others. Knockdown of the
reactivated gene led to a reversion of these cells to a more aggressive
phenotype. Furthermore, our studies confirmed that the CtBP1 target genes
are down-regulated in metastatic prostate cancer.Conclusion: Taken
together, our studies demonstrated that dysregulated expression of CtBP1
plays an important role in prostate cancer progression by down-regulating
the expression of multiple potential tumor suppressor genes. Thus,
targeting CtBP1 in aggressive prostate cancer may have clinical
significance.

