Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global gene expression regulated by phenethyl isothiocyanate in
human colon cancer SW480 cells.


Phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC), a promising chemopreventive compound
originated from cruciferous vegetables, is known to inhibit proliferation
of colon cancer cells through inducing apoptosis and cell cycle arrest.
Although exact mechanisms are unclear, it seems that PEITC may have
multiple molecular targets and play multiple roles in a variety of
events. Some of our recent studies indicate that a key mechanism of
apoptosis induction by PEITC may be through covalent modification of its
target proteins, such as tubulin. Numerous studies also reported that
PEITC may induce apoptotic signals through gene transcriptional
regulation. However, systematic studies on PEITC-induced gene expression
profile, particularly in colon cancer cells, are rare. In this study, we
examined overall gene expression profile of SW480 cells at different time
points after PEITC treatment using cDNA microarray. Results showed that
PEITC induced significant changes in expression of several
apoptosis-related genes, such as BIM, DEDD2, GADD45B, HSPB8, SYK,
PIK3C2A, CTNNB1, LGALS8, and NOXA. Furthermore, these changes were
confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction at transcript level and
immunoblot at protein level. Considering significant roles of these genes
in signaling transduction leading to downstream events, such as
apoptosis, the findings of this study may shed lights on the molecular
mechanisms by which PEITC exert its anti-carcinogenic effects. (Supported
by NCI grant CA100853)

