Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The intriguing interplay between EGFR inhibitors and the hypoxic
microenvironment: preclinical study in cetuximab-sensitive head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma cell lines.


Introduction: Since the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is
overexpressed in more than 90% of all head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCC) and activation of EGFR initiates important signal
transduction pathways in carcinogenesis, it has emerged as a promising
therapeutic target. Nevertheless, one main challenge alongside the
treatment with EGFR inhibitors remains, being drug resistance. An
important potential mechanism involves the hypoxic tumor
microenvironment. As our knowledge about the exact impact of tumor
hypoxia on the activity of EGFR inhibitors and vice versa remains
limited, the present study investigated the cytotoxic effect of the
EGFR-targeting monoclonal antibody cetuximab and the EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor erlotinib under normoxic versus hypoxic conditions.Materials &
Methods: Three cetuximab-sensitive HNSCC cell lines (SC263, LICR-HN2 and
LICR-HN5) were treated either with 0 - 10 nM cetuximab for 168 hours or
with 0 - 20 M erlotinib for 72 hours. Cells were incubated under normal
or reduced oxygen conditions for 24 or 72 hours immediately after
addition of the drug, with hypoxia (Introduction: Since the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in more than 90% of all
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and activation of EGFR
initiates important signal transduction pathways in carcinogenesis, it
has emerged as a promising therapeutic target. Nevertheless, one main
challenge alongside the treatment with EGFR inhibitors remains, being
drug resistance. An important potential mechanism involves the hypoxic
tumor microenvironment. As our knowledge about the exact impact of tumor
hypoxia on the activity of EGFR inhibitors and vice versa remains
limited, the present study investigated the cytotoxic effect of the
EGFR-targeting monoclonal antibody cetuximab and the EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor erlotinib under normoxic versus hypoxic conditions.Materials &
Methods: Three cetuximab-sensitive HNSCC cell lines (SC263, LICR-HN2 and
LICR-HN5) were treated either with 0 - 10 nM cetuximab for 168 hours or
with 0 - 20 M erlotinib for 72 hours. Cells were incubated under normal
or reduced oxygen conditions for 24 or 72 hours immediately after
addition of the drug, with hypoxia (<0.1% O2) being achieved in a Bactron
IV anaerobic chamber. Cell survival was assessed with the sulforhodamine
B assay and IC50 values (representing the drug concentration reducing
cell growth to 50%) were calculated.Results: Cetuximab and erlotinib
establish a dose-dependent growth inhibition under both normal and
reduced oxygen conditions in all three HNSCC cell lines. Considering the
effect of cetuximab on cell survival, no significant differences were
observed in IC50 values when cells were incubated under normoxia versus
hypoxia for 24 or 72 hours (p=0.790, p=0.807 and p=0.288 for SC263,
LICR-HN2 and LICR-HN5 respectively). For example, in LICR-HN2 HNSCC
cells, cetuximab treatment resulted in IC50 values of 0.140.09 nM,
0.190.12 nM, and 0.150.07 nM for incubation under normoxia versus hypoxia
for 24 or 72 hours, respectively. Similarly, the efficacy of erlotinib
was not influenced by the oxygen tension in LICR-HN2 and LICR-HN5 cells
(p=0.171 and p=0.387, respectively). In SC263 cells, however, a
significantly increased sensitivity to erlotinib (p=0.006) was shown when
cells were incubated under hypoxic conditions, with IC50 values of
1.531.07 M, 0.810.28 M, and 0.400.00 M for incubation under normoxic
conditions versus hypoxic conditions for 24 hours or 72 hours,
respectively.Conclusion: Our results suggest that, in the HNSCC cell
lines included in our study, both EGFR-inhibitors cetuximab and erlotinib
maintain their growth inhibitory effect under hypoxia. As poor
oxygenation is a pathophysiological property of the majority of human
solid tumors, including HNSCC, further studies are warranted to define
the precise mechanistic and therapeutic implications of these
observations.

