Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lurbinectedin (PM01183) in vivo synergizes the antitumor activity
of taxanes.


Background: Lurbinectedin (PM01183), a new synthetic
tetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloid, is a minor groove specific DNA binder
that interacts directly with specific factors involved in DNA repair and
transcription pathways. In living cells, PM01183-DNA adducts stall
replication and transcription giving rise to double strand breaks,
inducing accumulation of cells in the S-phase of the cell cycle and
triggering apoptosis. In both the ongoing phase II trials (pancreas and
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer) the first stage was concluded with
positive results in clinical activity, ensuring the continuity of the
trials. Also, phase I trials in combination with doxorubicin and
gemcitabine as well as in advanced acute leukemia are ongoing. In vivo
studies aimed at defining the synergism of PM01183 combined with taxanes
(taxol and docetaxel) are presented here.Material and Methods: Athymic
mice were implanted with HGC-27 (gastric), A2780 (ovarian), H460 (NSCLC),
22RV1 (prostate) or MDA-MB-231 (breast) cancer cells. Mice bearing tumors
(ca. 150 mm3) were allocated (N=6-8/group) to experimental groups,
namely: placebo; PM01183 at MTD (0.180 mg/kg [0.54 mg/m2]), 0.75MTD,
0.5MTD and 0.25MTD; taxol (H460, A2780 or HGC-27) or docetaxel (22RV1 or
MDA-MB-231) at their MTD, 0.75MTD, 0.5MTD and 0.25MTD; and, PM01183
combined either with taxol or docetaxel at (1+1), (0.75+0.75),
(0.50+0.50) and (0.25+0.25) MTDs. All treatments were given intravenously
once per week during the placebo-treated survival time. The combination
index (CI) was determined by the CI-isobol method. When needed,
statistical differences for the antitumor effect recorded between groups
were determined using two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test.Results: In all the
experiments, the combination of PM01183 and taxol or docetaxel resulted
in more antitumor effect (PBackground: Lurbinectedin (PM01183), a new
synthetic tetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloid, is a minor groove specific DNA
binder that interacts directly with specific factors involved in DNA
repair and transcription pathways. In living cells, PM01183-DNA adducts
stall replication and transcription giving rise to double strand breaks,
inducing accumulation of cells in the S-phase of the cell cycle and
triggering apoptosis. In both the ongoing phase II trials (pancreas and
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer) the first stage was concluded with
positive results in clinical activity, ensuring the continuity of the
trials. Also, phase I trials in combination with doxorubicin and
gemcitabine as well as in advanced acute leukemia are ongoing. In vivo
studies aimed at defining the synergism of PM01183 combined with taxanes
(taxol and docetaxel) are presented here.Material and Methods: Athymic
mice were implanted with HGC-27 (gastric), A2780 (ovarian), H460 (NSCLC),
22RV1 (prostate) or MDA-MB-231 (breast) cancer cells. Mice bearing tumors
(ca. 150 mm3) were allocated (N=6-8/group) to experimental groups,
namely: placebo; PM01183 at MTD (0.180 mg/kg [0.54 mg/m2]), 0.75MTD,
0.5MTD and 0.25MTD; taxol (H460, A2780 or HGC-27) or docetaxel (22RV1 or
MDA-MB-231) at their MTD, 0.75MTD, 0.5MTD and 0.25MTD; and, PM01183
combined either with taxol or docetaxel at (1+1), (0.75+0.75),
(0.50+0.50) and (0.25+0.25) MTDs. All treatments were given intravenously
once per week during the placebo-treated survival time. The combination
index (CI) was determined by the CI-isobol method. When needed,
statistical differences for the antitumor effect recorded between groups
were determined using two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test.Results: In all the
experiments, the combination of PM01183 and taxol or docetaxel resulted
in more antitumor effect (P<0.05) than that obtained with the more active
single agent at the highest dose (MTD level). Analysis of the results by
the CI-isobol method indicated synergism (CIBackground: Lurbinectedin
(PM01183), a new synthetic tetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloid, is a minor
groove specific DNA binder that interacts directly with specific factors
involved in DNA repair and transcription pathways. In living cells,
PM01183-DNA adducts stall replication and transcription giving rise to
double strand breaks, inducing accumulation of cells in the S-phase of
the cell cycle and triggering apoptosis. In both the ongoing phase II
trials (pancreas and platinum-resistant ovarian cancer) the first stage
was concluded with positive results in clinical activity, ensuring the
continuity of the trials. Also, phase I trials in combination with
doxorubicin and gemcitabine as well as in advanced acute leukemia are
ongoing. In vivo studies aimed at defining the synergism of PM01183
combined with taxanes (taxol and docetaxel) are presented here.Material
and Methods: Athymic mice were implanted with HGC-27 (gastric), A2780
(ovarian), H460 (NSCLC), 22RV1 (prostate) or MDA-MB-231 (breast) cancer
cells. Mice bearing tumors (ca. 150 mm3) were allocated (N=6-8/group) to
experimental groups, namely: placebo; PM01183 at MTD (0.180 mg/kg [0.54
mg/m2]), 0.75MTD, 0.5MTD and 0.25MTD; taxol (H460, A2780 or HGC-27) or
docetaxel (22RV1 or MDA-MB-231) at their MTD, 0.75MTD, 0.5MTD and
0.25MTD; and, PM01183 combined either with taxol or docetaxel at (1+1),
(0.75+0.75), (0.50+0.50) and (0.25+0.25) MTDs. All treatments were given
intravenously once per week during the placebo-treated survival time. The
combination index (CI) was determined by the CI-isobol method. When
needed, statistical differences for the antitumor effect recorded between
groups were determined using two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test.Results: In
all the experiments, the combination of PM01183 and taxol or docetaxel
resulted in more antitumor effect (P<0.05) than that obtained with the
more active single agent at the highest dose (MTD level). Analysis of the
results by the CI-isobol method indicated synergism (CI<1.0) after the
treatment with PM01183 plus taxol of mice bearing HGC-27, A2780, H460
xenografted tumors. Also, in 22RV1 or MDA-MB-231 tumor bearing animals,
the treatment of PM01183 plus docetaxel resulted in an additive or
synergistic effect.Conclusion: An improved (additive or synergism) in
vivo antitumor activity was recorded after the treatment with PM01183
plus taxanes (taxol or docetaxel) of mice bearing gastric, ovarian,
NSCLC, breast or prostate xenografted tumors.

