Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA damage responses in different cell types of nonproliferating
human prostate tissue.


DNA damage response (DDR) pathways have been extensively studied in
cancer cell lines and mouse models, but little is known about how DNA
damage is recognized by different cell types in nonmalignant, slowly
replicating human tissues. Here, we assess, using ex vivo cultures of
human prostate tissue, DDR caused by cytotoxic drugs (camptothecin,
doxorubicin, etoposide, and cisplatin) and ionizing radiation (IR) in the
context of normal tissue architecture. Using specific markers for basal
and luminal epithelial cells, we determine and quantify cell
compartment-specific damage recognition. IR, doxorubicin, and etoposide
induced the phosphorylation of H2A.X on Ser(139) (gH2AX) and DNA damage
foci formation. Surprisingly, luminal epithelial cells lack the prominent
gH2AX response after IR when compared with basal cells, although ATM
phosphorylation on Ser(1981) and 53BP1 foci were clearly detectable in
both cell types. The attenuated gH2AX response seems to result from low
levels of total H2A.X in the luminal cells. Marked increase in p53, a
downstream target of the activated ATM pathway, was detected only in
response to camptothecin and doxorubicin. These findings emphasize the
diversity of pathways activated by DNA damage in slowly replicating
tissues and reveal an unexpected deviation in the prostate luminal
compartment that may be relevant in prostate tumorigenesis. Detailed
mapping of tissue and cell type differences in DDR will provide an
outlook of relevant responses to therapeutic strategies. TSC model
presented can also be used for functional genomic studies, cellular and
tumor biology as well as for drug response testing.

