Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Response biomarkers for the hypoxia-targeted drug TH-302: imaging,
plasma, and tissue.


Biomarkers that assess the therapeutic response to anticancer treatments
may aid in tailoring therapeutic regimens to individuals. Ideally, the
relative contributory effect of each agent in a muti-agent regimen can be
discerned. Hypoxia is a prevalent feature of solid tumors, associated
with treatment failure, poor prognosis, and increased metastasis. TH-302,
a hypoxia-activated prodrug of the DNA cross-linker bromo
isophosphoramide mustard, has demonstrated broad efficacy in preclinical
models and is exhibiting promising activity in multiple ongoing clinical
trials, both as a monotherapy and in combination therapy regimens. Three
fundamental biomarker platforms were assessed in this preclinical study:
positron emission tomography (PET) imaging employing the tracer
[18F]-HX4; immunohistochemistry of isolated tumor tissue employing
antibodies directed against the exogenous hypoxia biomarker pimonidazole
(PIMO) and the endogenous hypoxia biomarker carbonic anhydrase IX
(CA-IX); and ELISA-based quantification of circulating plasma CA-IX. Both
HX4 and PIMO utilize the same 2-nitroimidazole hypoxia-sensitive trigger
for their activity and specificity as TH-302 utilizes. CA-IX is
up-regulated by two distinct hypoxia sensing pathways: hypoxia-inducible
factor 1; and the unfolded protein response. The human H460 non-small
cell lung cancer human tumor ectopic xenograft model was employed for
these studies. When the tumor size was 300-600 mm3, a single dose of
TH-302 (150 mg/kg, ip) or vehicle was administered. This TH-302 treatment
regimen yields a tumor growth inhibition of 58%, TGD1000 of 10 d, and
maximum body weight loss of 2%. [18F]-HX4 uptake was assessed by PET/CT
imaging and the tumor to muscle ratio (T/M) was determined. Animals were
scanned pre- and post-treatment and the T/M ratio was significantly
reduced 72 hours after TH-302 treatment (from 3.3 0.3 to 2.1 0.2, p0.05).
Blood was collected from the animals pre- and post- treatment via
retro-orbital vein. Plasma CA-IX changed from baseline 165 13 to 104 9.3
pg/ml 72 hours after TH-302 dosing, a 37% reduction (p0.05). Blood was
collected from the animals pre- and post- treatment via retro-orbital
vein. Plasma CA-IX changed from baseline 165 13 to 104 9.3 pg/ml 72 hours
after TH-302 dosing, a 37% reduction (p<0.05; n=10 per group). No change
was observed in the vehicle-treated group. For tissue biomarker analysis,
tumors were harvested 72 hours after TH-302 treatment, and tumor hypoxia
was assessed by semi-quantitative morphometric analysis of the PIMO
immunostaining at that time. The hypoxic fraction (HF) was 13 1.7% in the
vehicle group (n=5) and 5.8 0.5% in the TH-302 treatment group (n=6,
p0.05). Blood was collected from the animals pre- and post- treatment via
retro-orbital vein. Plasma CA-IX changed from baseline 165 13 to 104 9.3
pg/ml 72 hours after TH-302 dosing, a 37% reduction (p<0.05; n=10 per
group). No change was observed in the vehicle-treated group. For tissue
biomarker analysis, tumors were harvested 72 hours after TH-302
treatment, and tumor hypoxia was assessed by semi-quantitative
morphometric analysis of the PIMO immunostaining at that time. The
hypoxic fraction (HF) was 13 1.7% in the vehicle group (n=5) and 5.8 0.5%
in the TH-302 treatment group (n=6, p<0.05). Strong co-localization of
CA-IX and PIMO expression was observed in consecutive sections. These
preclinical results highlight the promise of using TH-302 response
biomarkers tested in the clinical setting for their ability to help guide
TH-302 treatment decisions after the initiation of therapy.

