Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ocimum gratissimum aqueous extract induces apoptotic signalling in
human osteosarcoma cells.


Osteosarcoma (Osteosarcoma) is a kind of bone cancer. Eighty percent of
this tumor will be metastatic to the lungs or liver. Therefore, these
patients generally need to use chemotherapy to improve disease and
increase survival possibility. Recently, it has been reported that Ocimum
gratissimum (OG) aqueous extract has anti-tumor activity. In this study,
we detected the effect of OG extract on human bone cancer cell growth and
metastasis.The results showed that the OG extract can inhibit cell growth
and induce cell apoptosis in human bone cancer cells, but no effect in
normal nerve cell. Therefore, we suggest that OG extract s may have
anti-cancer ability, and can provide the use in the development of new
anti-cancer drugsFigure . OGE effect on the cell growth in two
osteosarcoma cells. Cell growth was determined 03 or 05 days after
subculture using the MTT assay as described in Materials and Methods.
Absorbance values obtained from the cells on day 0 after subculture were
taken as 100%.Citation Format: Chien Chung Lin. Ocimum gratissimum
aqueous extract induces apoptotic signalling in human osteosarcoma cells.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1182.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1182

