Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation of miRNA genes is a useful biomarker for detection of
bladder cancer.


Background and aim: Dysregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) has been
implicated in bladder cancer (BCa), though the mechanism is not fully
understood. We aimed to explore the involvement of epigenetic alteration
of miRNA expression in bladder cancer. Materials and methods: Two BCa
cell lines (T24 and UM-UC-3) were treated with 5-aza-2deoxycytidine
(5-aza-dC) and 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA), after which their miRNA
expression profiles were analyzed using a TaqMan Array. Bisulfite
pyrosequencing was used to assess miRNA gene methylation in 5 cancer cell
lines, 83 primary tumors, and 120 preoperative and 47 postoperative urine
samples. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis was used to
assess the diagnostic performance of the miRNA gene panel. Results: Of
664 miRNAs examined, 146 were upregulated by 5-aza-dC plus PBA. CpG
islands were identified in the proximal upstream of 23 miRNA genes, and
12 of those were hypermethylated in cell lines. Among them, miR-137,
-124-2, -124-3 and -9-3 were frequently and tumor-specifically methylated
in primary cancers (miR-137, 68.7%; miR-124-2, 50.6%; miR-124-3, 65.1%;
miR-9-3, 45.8%). Methylation of the same four miRNAs in urine specimens
enabled BCa detection with 81% sensitivity and 89% specificity; the area
under the ROC curve was 0.916. Ectopic expression of silenced miRNAs in
BCa cells suppressed growth and cell invasion. Conclusions: Our results
indicate that epigenetic silencing of miRNA genes may be involved in the
development of BCa and that methylation of miRNA genes could be a useful
biomarker for cancer detection.

