Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAY 1125976, a highly selective and potent allosteric AKT1/2
inhibitor, for the treatment of cancers with aberrations in the
PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway.


The PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway is frequently activated in human cancer. AKT, a
central element in the pathway, is essential for tumor growth,
proliferation, survival, invasion and metastasis. Activation of AKT is a
key mechanism in resistance to chemo-, radio- and targeted therapies.
Thus, AKT is considered an attractive drug target. Herein, we report on
the preclinical profile and combinability of BAY 1125976, a potent,
highly selective, allosteric AKT1/2 inhibitor, which is particularly
effective in models with PI3K-AKT pathway aberrations. In biochemical
assays, BAY 1125976 demonstrates equal potency against AKT1 and AKT2 in
the low nanomolar range (IC50 10 nM) while it displays weaker activity
against AKT3 (IC50 500 nM) and is inactive against 230 other protein/
lipid kinases (IC50 > 1 M). Mechanistically, BAY 1125976 blocks AKT
signalling by inhibiting the phosphorylation of AKT at both Thr308 and
Ser473 (IC50 The PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway is frequently activated in human
cancer. AKT, a central element in the pathway, is essential for tumor
growth, proliferation, survival, invasion and metastasis. Activation of
AKT is a key mechanism in resistance to chemo-, radio- and targeted
therapies. Thus, AKT is considered an attractive drug target. Herein, we
report on the preclinical profile and combinability of BAY 1125976, a
potent, highly selective, allosteric AKT1/2 inhibitor, which is
particularly effective in models with PI3K-AKT pathway aberrations. In
biochemical assays, BAY 1125976 demonstrates equal potency against AKT1
and AKT2 in the low nanomolar range (IC50 10 nM) while it displays weaker
activity against AKT3 (IC50 500 nM) and is inactive against 230 other
protein/ lipid kinases (IC50 > 1 M). Mechanistically, BAY 1125976 blocks
AKT signalling by inhibiting the phosphorylation of AKT at both Thr308
and Ser473 (IC50 < 1 nM), as well as downstream phosphorylation of 4E-BP1
(IC50 The PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway is frequently activated in human cancer.
AKT, a central element in the pathway, is essential for tumor growth,
proliferation, survival, invasion and metastasis. Activation of AKT is a
key mechanism in resistance to chemo-, radio- and targeted therapies.
Thus, AKT is considered an attractive drug target. Herein, we report on
the preclinical profile and combinability of BAY 1125976, a potent,
highly selective, allosteric AKT1/2 inhibitor, which is particularly
effective in models with PI3K-AKT pathway aberrations. In biochemical
assays, BAY 1125976 demonstrates equal potency against AKT1 and AKT2 in
the low nanomolar range (IC50 10 nM) while it displays weaker activity
against AKT3 (IC50 500 nM) and is inactive against 230 other protein/
lipid kinases (IC50 > 1 M). Mechanistically, BAY 1125976 blocks AKT
signalling by inhibiting the phosphorylation of AKT at both Thr308 and
Ser473 (IC50 < 1 nM), as well as downstream phosphorylation of 4E-BP1
(IC50 < 50 nM). The strong inhibition of cellular p-AKT and downstream
signalling translates to a broad inhibition of tumor cell proliferation
in vitro. In particular, tumor cell lines carrying defects in the tumor
suppressor PTEN, or oncogenic mutations in PIK3CA are most sensitive to
BAY 1125976 treatment. Daily oral dosing of BAY 1125976 in human
xenograft tumor models induces strong pharmacodynamic inhibition of AKT
phosphorylation that correlates with drug exposure. In vivo, BAY 1125976
demonstrates dose-dependent anti-tumor efficacy in multiple xenograft
tumor models of different histological types with PIK3CA mutations or
PTEN deletions while being well tolerated. BAY 1125976 can be effectively
combined with various anti-cancer therapies. In vitro combination
profiling shows synergistic anti-proliferative effects with anti-hormonal
therapeutics in breast and prostate cancer cell lines, which translates
to enhanced anti-tumor efficacy with durable tumor regressions in vivo.
Furthermore, in vivo combination of BAY 1125976 with external beam
radiation results in strong additive to synergistic efficacy and
significant tumor growth delay. Moreover, the combination of BAY 1125976
with the bone-targeting agent Radium 223 in a breast cancer bone
metastasis model results in reduced tumor and metastases burden and
increased necrotic and fibrotic bone area. In conclusion, BAY 1125976 is
a highly selective, potent allosteric AKT1/2 inhibitor with strong in
vitro and in vivo activity in tumor models with activated AKT signalling
and strong synergistic activity in combination. Targeting AKT might also
provide a promising strategy for overcoming chemo/radio-resistance and
increasing radio-sensitization and radio-potentiation.

