Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PGI2 analog enhances endothelial-pericyte interactions and
suppresses lung metastasis.


Background: Endothelial cells (ECs) express IP (prostaglandin I2 (PGI2)
specific receptor) and are playing important role in tumor angiogenesis.
We have reported that the PGI2-IP system is necessary for vascular
remodeling and angiogenesis. Additionally, we have reported that the
knockdown of IP increases tumor metastasis in mouse models.Objectives: In
this study, we examined whether the activated PGI2-IP signaling could
enhance EC-PC interactions and suppress tumor metastasis.Materials &
Methods: Mouse-derived Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cells were used for a
mouse lung metastatic model, and were injected from the tail vein of mice
(c57BL/6J). Beraprost sodium (BPS; PGI2 analog) was continuously
administered for 3 weeks. Tumor metastasis to lung was assessed by using
hematoxylin-eosin staining. The a-SMA and the NG2 as a pericyte marker
and the endomucin as an endothelial cell marker were analyzed by
immunofluorescence to evaluate angiogenesis in metastatic lung tumors.
The structure of the tumor blood vessels was analyzed by scanning
electron microscopy (SEM).Results: The size and number of lung metastatic
nodules were significantly decreased in BPS group compared with in
control group assessed by the mice lung metastatic model.
Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that the number of vessel-associated
a-SMA+ cells was significantly increased by BPS administration. Scanning
electron microscopy revealed that pericytes covering the tumor blood
vessels increased in BPS group.Conclusions: The present study
demonstrated that BPS suppresses lung metastasis in our model. These
results also suggested that the maturation of tumor blood vessels by
pericytes may decrease tumor metastasis. Finally, we propose that BPS
would be a novel therapeutic target in lung metastasis.

