Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sorafenib overcomes irinotecan resistance in colorectal cancer by
inhibiting the ABCG2 drug-efflux pump..


Background: Despite recent advances in the treatment of colorectal
cancer, tumor resistance is a frequent cause of chemotherapy failure.
Thus, new treatment options are needed to improve survival of patients
with irinotecan-refractory colorectal cancers, particularly those bearing
KRAS mutations that preclude the use of anti-EGFR therapies. In this
study, we investigated whether sorafenib could reverse irinotecan
resistance, thereby enhancing the therapeutic efficacy of routinely used
irinotecan-based chemotherapy.Materials and methods: We used both in
vitro (the HCT116, SW48, SW620 and HT29 colon adenocarcinoma cell lines
and four SN-38 resistant HCT-116 and SW48 clones) and in vivo models
(nude mice xenografted with SN-38 resistant HCT116 cells) to test the
efficacy of sorafenib alone or in combination with irinotecan, or its
active metabolite SN-38.Results: Sorafenib improved the anti-tumoral
activity of irinotecan in vitro, in both parental and SN-38 resistant
colon adenocarcinoma cell lines independently of their KRAS status, as
well as in vivo, in xenografted mice. By inhibiting the drug-efflux pump
ABCG2, sorafenib favors irinotecan intracellular accumulation and
enhances its toxicity.Conclusion: Our results show that sorafenib can
suppress resistance to irinotecan and suggest that sorafenib could be
used to overcome resistance to irinotecan-based chemotherapies in
colorectal cancer, particularly in KRAS mutated tumors.

