Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of nucleolar protein 4 as a novel methylated tumor
suppressor gene in head and neck cancer.


Purpose: Methylation of CpG islands in the promoter region of genes acts
as a significant mechanism of epigenetic gene silencing in head and neck
cancer. In this study, we assessed the utility of epigenetic alterations
of a panel of twelve genes (NOL4, IRX1, SLC5A8, LRRC3B, FUSSEL18, EBF3,
GBX2, HMX2, SEPT9, ALX3, SOCS3, LHX6) previously reported.Experimental
Design: In this study we investigated methylation of the 12 gene
promoters via a candidate gene approach. After the initial screening of
methylated CpG islands on the promoter regions by bisulfite sequencing
using salivary rinse samples, only two genes had methylated CpG
dinucleotides on their promoter regions in tumor samples and absence of
methylated CpGs were found in normal salivary rinse samples after
bisulfite modification and bisulfite sequencing. We then performed
quantitative methylation specific PCR (Q-MSP) on 16 salivary rinse and 14
normal mucosal samples from healthy people and 33 HNSCC tumor samples for
two genes selected.Results: After validation with QMSP, one gene,
nucleolar protein 4 (NOL4), was highly methylated (91%) in tumor samples
and unmethylated in normal salivary rinse samples and minimally
methylated in normal mucosal samples demonstrating cancer specific
methylation in HNSCC tissues. Although iroquois homeobox 1 (IRX1) gene
was observed as methylated in normal mucosal and salivary rinse samples,
indeed, the methylation values of these normal samples were very low
(less than 10%).Conclusions: We identified NOL4, as a highly specific
promoter methylated gene was associated with HNSCC. IRX1 which may have a
potential as a biomarker for HNSCC and should also be assessed in a
larger cohort.

