Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TCEB3C (Elongin A3) on chromosome 18 presents a putative tumor
suppressor gene of small intestine neuroendocrine tumors.


Small intestine neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs) arise from the
enterochromaffin cells and produce hormones which can cause the carcinoid
syndrome. The incidence is increasing and the five-year survival rate is
60-80 %. Loss of one copy of chromosome 18 is a very frequent event in
these tumors, supporting the presence of a crucial tumor suppressor gene.
This study investigated whether TCEB3C, encoding Elongin A3, presents a
putative tumor suppressor gene in SI-NETs. This gene is currently the
only known imprinted gene on chromosome 18, requiring only one gene copy
inactivation event to fulfill the Knudson hypothesis.Elongin A3
expression in SI-NETs (n=47) was heterogeneous and negative in most
cells. 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine induced expression of Elongin A3 in a
carcinoid tumor cell line and in tumor derived primary cell cultures, but
not in a control cell line. Also the general histone methyltransferase
inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A induced TCEB3C expression in the carcinoid
tumor cell line, but not in control cells suggesting further that the
TCEB3C gene was epigenetically suppressed in neuroendocrine tumor cells.
The TCEB3C gene encompasses an CpG island and quantitative cytosine CpG
methylation analysis will be presented. Furthermore, overexpression of
Elongin A3 led to a decrease in clonogenic survival of carcinoid tumor
cells, but not of control cells strongly supporting a growth-regulatory
role. These results support a putative tumor suppressor role of TCEB3C in
neuroendocrine cells of the small intestine.

