Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and circulating tumor microemboli
(CTM) from patients with small cell lung cancer (SCLC) show heterogeneity
in epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype and evidence of
vasculogenic mimicry (VM).


Background: Circulating tumour cells (CTCs) and circulating tumour
microemboli (CTM) are prevalent in patients with aggressive small cell
lung cancer (SCLC). Heterogeneity in epithelial and mesenchymal
phenotypes in CTCs and within CTM was investigated given evidence in
preclinical models of epithelial and mesenchymal cell co-operativity
advantageous for hematogenous spread and the role of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) in invasion and metastasis.Methods: Four
colour immunofluorescence assays were developed and applied to tumour
cells enriched by filtration from peripheral blood of extensive stage
SCLC patients prior to treatment. CTCs/CTM were assessed for expression
of cytokeratins (CKs, epithelial marker) and vimentin (mesenchymal
marker) with DAPI stained nuclei and negative selection of leukocytes and
circulating endothelial cells (CECs) by CD45 and/or vascular
endothelial-cadherin (VE-cadherin, CD144) expression respectively.Results
and Conclusions: CTCs were identified in all patients that expressed
epithelial and/or mesenchymal markers. Individual CTM were detected
comprised of tumour cells of heterogeneous EMT status and CTM were also
observed containing leukocytes and/or CECs. There was substantial
heterogeneity in CK and vimentin expression in CTCs and within CTM
consistent with EMT plasticity and with co-operativity between epithelial
and mesenchymal tumour cells. A subpopulation of CTCs co-expressed CKs
and VE-cadherin that intriguingly, raises the possibility that vascular
mimicry accompanies and may facilitate hematogenous spread in this
aggressive tumor type. Further studies are required to explore this new
hypothesis.

