Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The germline rs55705857 risk allele is not preferentially gained
in gliomas with 8q24 duplication.


Background:Gliomas are primary malignant brain tumors with significant
morbidity and mortality. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) mapped to
8q24 have been shown to be associated with glioma development. Recently,
we identified seven SNPs (through tag SNP genotyping/imputation, pooled
next-generation sequencing using long-range PCR, and validation SNP
genotyping) that are highly associated with the risk of developing
glioma. After stratifying by histologic and tumor subtype, one SNP,
rs55705857, in the 8q24.21 region near CCDC26 was significantly
associated with oligodendroglial tumors and IDH mutated astrocytic
gliomas with high odds ratios (ORs 6.0) (Jenkins et al. Nature Genet.
44:1122;2012). By array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), a
significant proportion of oligodendroglial tumors and IDH mutated
astrocytomas have been shown to duplicate 8q24 (Kitange et al., Genes Chr
Cancer 42:68;2005; Nousmehr et al. Cancer Cell 17:510;2010). We were
interested in learning if the germline risk allele of rs55705857 is
associated with gliomas that duplicate 8q24. We were also interested in
learning if the risk allele is preferentially gained in gliomas that
duplicate 8q24. Methods: We performed aCGH on 217 tumor samples.
rs55705857 germline genotype was available on 120 of the patients; of
which 30 carried the risk (G) allele. In addition, we sequenced the
rs55805857 region in 48 gliomas, 15 of which exhibited gain or
duplication of chromosome 8, 8q, or 8q24. The ratio of the
Sanger-sequencing peak heights at and around rs55705857 was used to
determine which allele (risk or wild-type) was gained. Results: All 15
duplications included rs55705857 and the immediately adjacent regions. Of
the 30 patients who carried the germline risk (G) allele for rs55707857,
8 (26.7%) exhibited duplication of 8q24 upon aCGH analysis of their
glioma. Of the 90 patients who only carried the wild-type (A) allele, 7
(7.5%) exhibited duplications of 8q24 upon aCGH analysis of their glioma.
This difference in proportion is statistically significant (p=0.024,
Fischer exact test). Of the 15 tumors with duplication of 8q24, 8 came
from patients who were germline rs55705857 heterozygotes (AG). Of these 8
germline heterozygotes with duplication of 8q24, 4 gained the risk (G)
allele, 2 gained the wild-type (A) allele and 2 exhibited gain of both
alleles in their tumor specimens. Conclusions: While the results require
replication, our data suggest that carrying the risk allele for
rs55705857 predisposes to the development of gliomas that subsequently
duplicate 8q24. However, gliomas with duplication of 8q24 do not
preferentially gain the risk rs55705857 allele. This result implies that,
while the duplication always includes the rs55705857 region, the risk
allele or region is not the direct target of the duplication.

