Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth of HCT-116 colon cancer xenografts is inhibited by CysLT1R
antagonists.


BackgroundCysteinyl leukotrienes (LTC4, LTD4 and LTE4) are potent
pro-inflammatory molecules derived from arachidonic acid and mediate
their effect through CysLT1R and CysLT2R. There is a strong correlation
between long-standing inflammatory bowel disease where these
pro-inflammatory mediators are abundant and colorectal cancer. We have
shown that LTD4 via its receptor CysLT1 induces up-regulation of colon
cancer associated proteins (COX-2, -catenin and Bcl-2) and induces cell
migration and cell survival. In addition, our previous work has shown
that CysLT1R is upregulated in colon cancer patients and associated with
poor prognosis.Aim and MethodsThe present study investigated the
correlation between CysLT1R and colon cancer development in vivo using
CysLT1R antagonists (ZM198,615 or Montelukast) and the nude mouse
xenograft model. Two drug administration regimens were established. The
first regimen was established to investigate the importance of CysLT1R in
tumor initiation. Nude mice were inoculated with 50 M CysLT1R
antagonist-pretreated HCT-116 colon cancer cells and received continued
daily treatment (5 mg/kg, i.p.). The second regimen aimed to address the
role of CysLT1R in tumor progression. Nude mice were inoculated with
non-pretreated HCT-116 cells and did not receive CysLT1R antagonist
treatment until recordable tumor initiation. Furthermore, we performed a
series of in vitro studies using the human colon cancer cell line HCT-116
and CysLT1R antagonists.ResultsIn the HCT-116 colon cancer xenograft
model both drug administration regimens resulted in significantly reduced
tumor size, attributed to increased levels of p21WAF/Cip1 (P
BackgroundCysteinyl leukotrienes (LTC4, LTD4 and LTE4) are potent
pro-inflammatory molecules derived from arachidonic acid and mediate
their effect through CysLT1R and CysLT2R. There is a strong correlation
between long-standing inflammatory bowel disease where these
pro-inflammatory mediators are abundant and colorectal cancer. We have
shown that LTD4 via its receptor CysLT1 induces up-regulation of colon
cancer associated proteins (COX-2, -catenin and Bcl-2) and induces cell
migration and cell survival. In addition, our previous work has shown
that CysLT1R is upregulated in colon cancer patients and associated with
poor prognosis.Aim and MethodsThe present study investigated the
correlation between CysLT1R and colon cancer development in vivo using
CysLT1R antagonists (ZM198,615 or Montelukast) and the nude mouse
xenograft model. Two drug administration regimens were established. The
first regimen was established to investigate the importance of CysLT1R in
tumor initiation. Nude mice were inoculated with 50 M CysLT1R
antagonist-pretreated HCT-116 colon cancer cells and received continued
daily treatment (5 mg/kg, i.p.). The second regimen aimed to address the
role of CysLT1R in tumor progression. Nude mice were inoculated with
non-pretreated HCT-116 cells and did not receive CysLT1R antagonist
treatment until recordable tumor initiation. Furthermore, we performed a
series of in vitro studies using the human colon cancer cell line HCT-116
and CysLT1R antagonists.ResultsIn the HCT-116 colon cancer xenograft
model both drug administration regimens resulted in significantly reduced
tumor size, attributed to increased levels of p21WAF/Cip1 (P < 0.01),
cleaved caspase 3, and the caspase-cleaved product of cytokeratin 18.
Decreased levels of VEGF (P BackgroundCysteinyl leukotrienes (LTC4, LTD4
and LTE4) are potent pro-inflammatory molecules derived from arachidonic
acid and mediate their effect through CysLT1R and CysLT2R. There is a
strong correlation between long-standing inflammatory bowel disease where
these pro-inflammatory mediators are abundant and colorectal cancer. We
have shown that LTD4 via its receptor CysLT1 induces up-regulation of
colon cancer associated proteins (COX-2, -catenin and Bcl-2) and induces
cell migration and cell survival. In addition, our previous work has
shown that CysLT1R is upregulated in colon cancer patients and associated
with poor prognosis.Aim and MethodsThe present study investigated the
correlation between CysLT1R and colon cancer development in vivo using
CysLT1R antagonists (ZM198,615 or Montelukast) and the nude mouse
xenograft model. Two drug administration regimens were established. The
first regimen was established to investigate the importance of CysLT1R in
tumor initiation. Nude mice were inoculated with 50 M CysLT1R
antagonist-pretreated HCT-116 colon cancer cells and received continued
daily treatment (5 mg/kg, i.p.). The second regimen aimed to address the
role of CysLT1R in tumor progression. Nude mice were inoculated with
non-pretreated HCT-116 cells and did not receive CysLT1R antagonist
treatment until recordable tumor initiation. Furthermore, we performed a
series of in vitro studies using the human colon cancer cell line HCT-116
and CysLT1R antagonists.ResultsIn the HCT-116 colon cancer xenograft
model both drug administration regimens resulted in significantly reduced
tumor size, attributed to increased levels of p21WAF/Cip1 (P < 0.01),
cleaved caspase 3, and the caspase-cleaved product of cytokeratin 18.
Decreased levels of VEGF (P < 0.01) and reduced vessel size (P
BackgroundCysteinyl leukotrienes (LTC4, LTD4 and LTE4) are potent
pro-inflammatory molecules derived from arachidonic acid and mediate
their effect through CysLT1R and CysLT2R. There is a strong correlation
between long-standing inflammatory bowel disease where these
pro-inflammatory mediators are abundant and colorectal cancer. We have
shown that LTD4 via its receptor CysLT1 induces up-regulation of colon
cancer associated proteins (COX-2, -catenin and Bcl-2) and induces cell
migration and cell survival. In addition, our previous work has shown
that CysLT1R is upregulated in colon cancer patients and associated with
poor prognosis.Aim and MethodsThe present study investigated the
correlation between CysLT1R and colon cancer development in vivo using
CysLT1R antagonists (ZM198,615 or Montelukast) and the nude mouse
xenograft model. Two drug administration regimens were established. The
first regimen was established to investigate the importance of CysLT1R in
tumor initiation. Nude mice were inoculated with 50 M CysLT1R
antagonist-pretreated HCT-116 colon cancer cells and received continued
daily treatment (5 mg/kg, i.p.). The second regimen aimed to address the
role of CysLT1R in tumor progression. Nude mice were inoculated with
non-pretreated HCT-116 cells and did not receive CysLT1R antagonist
treatment until recordable tumor initiation. Furthermore, we performed a
series of in vitro studies using the human colon cancer cell line HCT-116
and CysLT1R antagonists.ResultsIn the HCT-116 colon cancer xenograft
model both drug administration regimens resulted in significantly reduced
tumor size, attributed to increased levels of p21WAF/Cip1 (P < 0.01),
cleaved caspase 3, and the caspase-cleaved product of cytokeratin 18.
Decreased levels of VEGF (P < 0.01) and reduced vessel size (P < 0.05)
were also observed, the latter only in the ZM198,615-pretreatment
group.When administrating CysLT1R antagonists in vitro, a significant
reduction in cell proliferation, adhesion and colony formation were
observed for the HCT-116 cell line. In addition, we observed induction of
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner.ConclusionOur
results demonstrate that CysLT1R antagonists inhibit tumor growth in a
xenograft model of colon cancer by impairing angiogenesis and inducing
apoptosis. The present in vivo data also highlight the prospect of this
receptor in targeted colon cancer therapy.Grant acknowledgementsThis work
was supported by grants awarded to the authors A. Sjlander from the
Swedish Cancer Foundation, the Swedish Medical Research Council.

