Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LY2801653: An orally bioavailable MET kinase inhibitor with
inhibitory activity against the oncoproteins ROS1 and MKNK1/2.


Under normal conditions MET receptor activation, internalization, and
degradation is a highly controlled process regulated by the binding of
its ligand, HGF. In many cancers however, MET becomes highly
dysregulated, and MET overexpression, with or without gene amplification,
is associated with a poorer prognosis. Aberrant activation of MET can
also occur through mutation, or increased autocrine or paracrine HGF
production. MET activation leads to increased oncogenic activities
including cell migration, proliferation, invasion, survival, tumor
neovascularization and decreased apoptosis. Several inhibitors of MET,
including type I and type II kinase inhibitors, are currently being
investigated in clinical trials. LY2801653 is a type II MET kinase
inhibitor being investigated in patients with advanced cancer (trial
I3O-MC-JSBA, NCT01285037). In addition to MET, LY2801653 also inhibits
ROS1 kinase, and the serine/threonine kinases MKNK1/2, with cell-based
IC50 of 23nM and 7nM respectively. ROS1 is an orphan receptor that can be
constitutively activated as a fusion protein either by genomic
microdeletion or translocation. ROS1 fusion proteins are found in
glioblastoma, NSCLC and cholangiocarcinoma. MKNK1/2 are kinases
downstream of ERK and p38 and are capable of regulating translation
through the direct phosphorylation of eIF4E. Increased MKNK1/2-dependent
phosphorylation of the translation factor eIF4E is observed in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma and is correlated with a poor prognosis.
This study evaluated the relative inhibitory effects of LY2801653,
Crizotinib, XL184, XL880, and PF4217903 in a variety of cell lines
against MET, ROS1, MKNK1/2, ERK, and other downstream molecules. In
HCC78, a ROS1-fusion protein bearing cell line, and in NIH3T3 cells
stably transfected with the FIG-ROS(s) fusion, LY2801653, XL184 and XL880
were more potent inhibitors of ROS1 compared with Crizotinib. Moreover,
LY2801653 and Crizotinib were both efficacious in NIH3T3 FIG-ROS(s)
xenografts, although LY2801653 was more potent in reducing p-ROS1 in
these tumors than Crizotinib. In NCI-H2122 and Hs746T cells (mutated
MET), A2780 cells (MET-negative), KP-4 cells (MET autocrine), H441 cells
(HGF-independent; MET positive), HCT116 (mutated KRAS), and the
cholangiocarcinoma cell lines EGI-1 and TFK-1, LY2801653 demonstrated
more potent inhibitory activity against MKNK1/2 versus treatment with
XL184 and XL880, while Crizotinib had no observed inhibitory activity
against MKNK1/2. LY2801653 also showed inhibitory activity against
MKNK1/2 in MET-amplified MKN45 cells. These findings suggests there may
be clinical merits to testing LY2801653 in tumor types associated with
increased MKNK1/2 activity or ROS1 fusion proteins alone, or in
conjunction with aberrant MET activity, such as colorectal carcinoma,
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, and cholangiocarcinoma.

