Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dihydroartemisinin inhibits mTORC1 signaling in tumor cells.


Dihydroartemisinin (DHA) is a derivative of artemisinin, a natural
product isolated from the plant, Artemisia annua. DHA is also the active
metabolite of first-generation artemisinin derivatives (artemisinin,
artesunate, artemether, etc.). Artemisinins have been clinically used to
treat malaria for decades. Recent studies have demonstrated that
artemisinin and its derivatives possess anticancer activity. This study
was set to investigate the anticancer mechanism of DHA. We found that DHA
inhibited proliferation in a spectrum of tumor cells, by arresting cells
in G1/G0 and G2/M phases, which was linked to downregulation of cyclin
D1, CDK4 and CDC25A, as well as CDK1 and CDC25C expression, respectively.
We also observed that DHA induced caspase-dependent apoptosis, which was
related to downregulation of survivin, Mcl-1 and Bcl2. As the mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a master kinase that regulates cell
proliferation and survival, we further tested whether DHA inhibits mTOR
signaling. Interestingly, we observed that DHA inhibited phosphoryaltion
of mTOR and its downstream effector molecules, p70 S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) and
eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) binding protein 1 (4E-BP1), in a
concentration- and time-dependent manner, but did not obviously affect
mTORC2-mediated phosphorylation of Akt, which is in contrast to the
conventional mTORC1 inhibitor, rapamycin. The results suggest that DHA
may represent a novel class of mTORC1 inhibitor, and may execute its
anticancer activity primarily by blocking mTOR-mediated signaling
pathways in the tumor cells.

