Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: uPAR-regulated nuclear translocation of hand-1 mediates vascular
radiosensitivity in medulloblastoma tumors.


Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPAR) is overexpressed in the
tumor-stromal invasive microenvironment in many human cancers including
medulloblastoma. The role of uPAR in tumor progression and angiogenesis
has been well characterized. Most recently, in medulloblastoma cells, we
showed that ionizing radiation (IR)-induced uPAR is a potent activator of
cancer stem cell (CSC)-like properties and is associated with various
transcription factors that are involved during embryonic development and
cancer. In this study, we show that the uPAR protein is a cytoplasmic
sequestration factor for a novel basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor, Hand-1. The Hand-1 protein plays an essential role
in differentiation of trophoblast giant cells and cardiac morphogenesis,
and yet its precise cellular function and its contributions to cancer
remain mostly unknown. In the present study, we observed that Hand-1
protein is upregulated in uPAR shRNA-treated medulloblastoma cells and
accompanies sustained cell growth and angiogenesis. Furthermore,
IR-induced uPAR overexpression negatively regulates Hand-1 activity and
results in the stabilization of angiogenesis promoting molecules, such as
HIF-1 alpha. Finally, uPAR overexpression and its association with Hand-1
after IR treatment indicate that uPAR is capable of regulating Hand-1 and
that uPAR has a role in the process of IR-induced tumor angiogenesis.

