Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic function of miR-196s promote cell invasion through
suppression of NME4 to regulate JNK-TIMP1-MMP signaling pathway in head
and neck cancer.


Dysregulation of microRNA (miRNA) is associated with malignant
transformation, while elucidating the roles remains an ongoing process.
In this study, we characterize miR-196 functions in head and neck cancer
(HNC). We found that neither miR-196a or miR-196b has an effect on cell
growth, only miR-196a plays a role in protection cells from radiation
damage, while both miR-196a and miR-196b actively promotes cell migration
(1.7- to 2.7-fold) and invasion (2.1- to 2.3-fold), which were supported
by the altered expressions of fibronectin and N-cadherin.
Mechanistically, miR-196 achieves these functions by targeting and
inhibiting the anti-metastatic family member NME4, which is further
elucidated as a tumor suppressor to repress JNK protein phosphorylation,
leading to TIMP1 inhibition and MMP1/9 activation. Furthermore, both
miR-196a and miR-196b was significantly over-expressed in the cancer
tissues compared to the normal counterparts, with approximately 60 and 10
fold elevations respectively in average. Over-expression of miR-196 was
correlated to lymph node metastasis and poor survival. In summary, our
findings define miR-196 as a crucial oncomir in HNC which acts at least
in part, through NME4-pJNK-TIMP-MMP signaling pathway to promote cell
invasion and cellular transformation.

