Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The double bromodomain protein Brd2 controls B cell expansion and
mitogenesis.


Background: Bromodomain-containing coregulators of transcription have
been identified recently as new epigenetic targets to treat a variety of
hematologic malignancies, including acute myeloid leukemias. However, the
bromodomain mechanisms that couple histone acetylation to transcription
in lymphopoiesis, and that govern mature lymphocyte responsiveness to
growth signals, are only partly understood. Brd2 is a transcriptional
co-regulator that contains dual Bromodomains and an ExtraTerminal domain
(defining the BET family) that couples chromatin modification to cell
cycle progression. We previously reported the first functional
characterization of a BET protein as an effector of mammalian mitogenic
signal transduction: E-Brd2 transgenic mice develop an activated B cell
type of diffuse large B cell lymphoma. There have been no other animal
models reported for genetic or lentiviral expression of BET proteins,
which hampers testing of novel anticancer drugs such as JQ1 and its
derivatives.Methods: Here we use Brd2 lentivirus transduction of
hematopoietic stem cells and reconstitution of lethally irradiated
recipient mice to examine the function of Brd2 in hematopoiesis in the
bone marrow and mitogenesis in the periphery.Results: Three-fold
over-expression of Brd2 in hematopoietic stem cells selectively leads to
a doubling of the B cell compartment and increases mature B cell
mitogenic responsiveness ex vivo. Knockdown of Brd2 by shRNA totally
ablates hematopoietic lineages, likely by inhibiting the
lineage-committed progenitor expansion through down-regulation of cyclin
A, which reinforces results from E-Brd2 transgenic mice. The novel small
molecule BET inhibitor JQ1 reduces B cell mitogenesis by about 60% in
parallel experiments, but this effect likely extends to other related BET
family members and lacks Brd2 specificity.Conclusion/Significance: The
Brd2 pathway integrates lymphopoiesis, leukemogenesis and normal
mitogenesis. Targeting this pathway with therapeutic drugs may therefore
confer multiple, diverse benefits in the treatment of hematologic
malignancy, B cell mediated disease and likely inflammation.

