Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase inhibitor screening uncovers differential kinase
dependencies in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC).


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) constitutes approximately 20% of all
breast cancer and disproportionately affects younger women and
African-American women. These tumors, negative for estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor, and Her2 amplification, are resistant to standard
targeted treatments, and the need for new therapeutic targets for this
tumor type is urgent. Within the TNBC patient population, there is
variability in response to treatment, and it is unclear what molecular
features of the disease lead to this heterogeneity. Protein kinases are
often amplified and/or mutated in human cancers, and they are attractive
therapeutic targets due to their enzymatic activity and widespread
expression. We have screened a library of small-molecule kinase
inhibitors against a panel of 12 TNBC cell lines and 3 control cell lines
in duplicate in cell viability assays. We generated dose-response curves
and half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values for each
compound-cell line pair. The results support a heterogeneous dependence
of different TNBC cell lines on specific kinases. Statistical analysis
identifies significantly over-represented kinase targets and pathways in
subsets of TNBC cell lines following inhibitor treatment. A number of
compounds show selective toxicity for TNBC cell lines and suggest
targetable kinase dependencies. Kinase inhibitor sensitivity in TNBC does
not appear to correlate with gene expression patterns, suggesting
alternative mechanisms for TNBC heterogeneity. Sequencing data and other
biomarkers databases will be mined for correlations with sensitivity to
kinase inhibition in TNBC. Thus this study will identify new potential
therapeutic targets and biomarkers for TNBC.

