Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship of MMP11 to Gli1 and prognosis in breast cancer.


Background: Gli1 is a transcription factor and oncogene that was first
described in the context of Hedgehog signaling. We have previously shown
that nuclear localization of Gli1 is predictive of a poor prognosis in
estrogen receptor (ER)-negative (ER-), but not ER-positive (ER+) breast
carcinomas (BrCa) [Xu et al. Breast Cancer ResTreat 2010:59]. In
addition, we demonstrated that overexpression of Gli1 in ER- BrCa cell
lines increases cell migration and invasion and, conversely, silencing of
Gli1 decreases migration, invasion and metastasis [Kwon et al. Clinical
Exp Metastasis 2011:437]. We also found that MMP11 is a down-stream
target of Gli1 that is, at least in part, responsible for the
pro-invasive/metastatic activity of Gli1. Methods: To extend these
findings, we immunostained a microarray of 140 clinically-annotated BrCa
for MMP11 and analyzed the results with regard to expression of Gli1 and
prognosis. MMP11 was assessed in cancer epithelial cells and associated
stromal cells. To study the function of Gli1 and MMP11 in metastasis, we
derived a highly invasive variant of the ER- cell line SUM1315 by serial
invasion-selection and compared expression of Gli1 and MMP11 in the
parental cells and invasive variant. Results: There was no significant
correlation between epithelial expression of MMP11 and nuclear
localization of Gli1 (p=0.193, r=0.112) in cancer epithelium. However,
stromal expression of MMP11 was positively correlated with nuclear
localization of Gli1 in cancer epithelium (p=0.001, r=0.284), possibly
due to increased secretion of MMP11 by Gli1-positive (i.e., those with
nuclear Gli1) BrCa. In addition, stromal expression of MMP11 was higher
in Gli1-positive than Gli1-negative BrCa (p=0.05). By Kaplan-Meier
analysis, neither stromal nor epithelial expression of MMP11 alone was
predictive of a poorer overall survival when considering all BrCa, ER+
and ER- BrCa. However, in ER- BrCa, high (> mean) epithelial expression
of MMP11 and Gli1 nuclear localization identified a group with a
particularly poor overall survival (p=0.035, Log-rank test), although
Gli1 nuclear localization alone in ER- BrCa was also predictive of a poor
overall survival (p=0.014, Log-rank test). By transwell invasion assay,
the invasive variant of SUM1315 was approximately 3 times more invasive
than parental cells. Expression of Gli1 by quantitative RT-PCR was
similar in invasive variant and parental SUM1315, while expression of
MMP-11 was 2-fold higher in the invasive variant. Conclusions: Stromal
expression of MMP11 was higher in Gli1-positive than Gli-negative BrCa.
Yet, expression of MMP11 alone was not a prognostic indicator nor did
MMP11 expression improve the prognostic value of Gli1. Expression of
MMP11 was modestly elevated in invasive variants of SUM1315. These
findings suggest that MMP11 alone is not responsible for the increased
invasion and poor prognosis resulting from Gli1 activity in BrCa.Funding
provided by Susan G. Komen for the Cure

