Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myeloid cells promote fibroblast invasion and lead mammary
adenocarcinoma cell invasion.


Myeloid cells localize to invasive edges of solid tumors where they
promote invasive tumor growth, intravasation into vasculature and
metastasis of malignant cells1,2. Fibroblasts, on the other hand, lead
collective cell migration3 of carcinoma cells via fostering extracellular
matrix (ECM) remodeling and generating tracks of collagen fibers that act
as highways for cell migration4,5. To identify soluble molecules
mediating these juxtacrine communication mechanisms between myeloid cells
and fibroblasts in potentiating metastasis, we conducted pilot studies
with subsets of spleen- or tumor-derived myeloid cells, tumor-derived
fibroblasts, and mammary adenocarcinoma cells. Whereas spleen-derived
CD11b+Ly6ChiLy6G monocytes promote fibroblast migration ex vivo, two
populations of tumor-derived myeloid cells, e.g., CD11b+Gr1+ and
CD11b+Gr1 cells possessed this capability. In ex vivo migration assays,
fibroblast migration was dependent on myeloid cell-derived factors, e.g.,
CXCL11, CXCL15, FGF2, IGF-1 and Shh, as well as fibroblast Akt and ERK1/2
phosphorylation. Inhibition of fibroblast MEK reduced myeloid
cell-induced fibroblast migration, whereas FGF-RI inhibition completely
abolished this capability. These studies indicate a role for myeloid
cell-fibroblast communication in fostering migration (and potentially
activation) of fibroblasts that lead collective cell migration properties
of mammary carcinoma cells. Ongoing studies are identifying specific
subpopulations of tumor-associated myeloid cells possessing these
activities, as well as the role of FGF receptor signaling pathways in
facilitating metastasis.1.Wyckoff, J.B., et al. Direct visualization of
macrophage-assisted tumor cell intravasation in mammary tumors. Cancer
Res 67, 2649-2656 (2007).2.Qian, B.Z. & Pollard, J.W. Macrophage
diversity enhances tumor progression and metastasis. Cell 141, 39-51
(2010).3.Friedl, P., Locker, J., Sahai, E. & Segall, J.E. Classifying
collective cancer cell invasion. Nat Cell Biol 14, 777-783
(2012).4.Khalil, A.A. & Friedl, P. Determinants of leader cells in
collective cell migration. Integr Biol (Camb) 2, 568-574
(2010).5.Gritsenko, P.G., Ilina, O. & Friedl, P. Interstitial guidance of
cancer invasion. J Pathol 226, 185-199 (2012).The authors acknowledge
generous support from the NIH/NCI, a Dept of Defense (DoD) Breast Cancer
Research Program Postdoctoral Fellowship, a DoD Era of Hope Scholar
Expansion Award, Susan G. Komen Fndt, and the Breast Cancer Research Fndt.

