Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolism and tissue distribution of curcumin in mouse GI tract.


Purpose: Curcuminoids have shown pronounced preventive activities on
gastrointestinal (GI) cancers in preclinical settings and have now
advanced to clinical evaluation. However, their tissue distribution and
metabolism in the GI tissues remain largely unknown. The objective of
this study is to establish an LC-MS/MS method to profile curcumin (CUR),
demethoxycurcumin (DMC), bisdemethoxycurcumin (BDMC) and CUR Metabolites:
CUR O-glucuronide (COG), CUR O-sulfate (COS), and tetrahydrocurcumin
(THC) in plasma, and to study their disposition and kinetics in the GI
tissues and lumens.Methods: The following ion transitions at m/z:
367.4/149.1, 337.3/216.9, 307.5/186.8, 543.7/216.9, 447.4/216.9, and
371.2/235.1, and 301.5/163.9 were used for monitoring CUR, DMC, BDMC,
COG, COS, THC and hesperetin (internal standard), respectively, on an API
mass spectrometer. Nano-emulsion CUR (50 mg/kg) was orally administered
to CD2F1 mice. Plasma, stomach tissues (ST) and lumens (SL), intestine
tissue (IT) and lumens (IL), and colon tissue (CT) and feces (F) were
collected up to 6 h after the dose and analyzed using an LC-MS/MS
method.Results: CUR and its metabolites were simultaneously quantified in
mouse plasma, GI tissue homogenates, and GI lumens using the LC-MS/MS
method with a linear range of 2 to 1000 ng/mL. COG was found to be the
most abundant circulating CUR metabolite with a peak concentration of
3.99 M in plasma at 30 min, which is approximately 8 and 36 fold higher
than that of CUR and COS, respectively. In contrast, CUR was the most
abundant transient species in ST, IT and CT, and reached pharmacological
effective peak concentrations (M) of 118, 55, and 142 in ST, IT and CT at
20, 60 and 30 min, respectively. The concentrations of CUR were 8261, 923
and 9.74 M in SL, IL and F at 30, 60 and 30 min, respectively. COG and
COS were two main metabolites of CUR with relative lower peak
concentrations of 6.46 and 8.79 M in IT and 30.4 and 80.1 M in IL at 60
min, respectively, while COG and COS concentrations were much lower in
ST, CT and F, and they were not detectable in SL. Notably, THC was the
main metabolite of CUR with peak concentrations of 24 and 1.89 M in ST
and CT at 10 and 360 min, respectively, while no THC was detected in SL,
IT, IL and F. In addition, DMC, BDMC, and THC, and their glucuronide and
sulfate adducts were also profiled using these ion transition
channels.Conclusions: The LC-MS/MS method provides a critical analytic
method to study the metabolism, tissue distribution, and pharmacokinetics
(PK) of CUR in mice. These results demonstrated that orally ingested CUR
could deliver pharmacological effective level of CUR to GI tissues and
lumens, which is completely different from that in plasma. Therefore,
further investigation of curcuminoids as a preventive or therapeutic
agent for GI cancers is warranted. Supported by R21CA135478 (Liu),
CA159077-01 (Liu & Xu) and Biomedical Mass Spectrometric Laboratory (Chan
& Liu).

