Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of aldehyde dehydrogenase is essential for growth of
mesenchymal glioma stem cells.


Emerging evidence has indicated glioma stem cells(GSCs) could be
subclassified into two major entities termed as as proneural(PN) GSCs and
mesenchymal(MES) GSCs according to their mutually-exclusive gene
expression pattern. In this study, we characterize 20 patient-derived
GSCs into PN GSCs and MES GSCs based on the unbiased analysis with
transcriptome microarray and microRNA profiles. Signaling pathway
analysis identified the upregulation of various tumor metabolic pathways
in MES GSCs. In particular, the glycolytic pathway containing several
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) genes was significantly enriched in MES
GSCs. ALDH activity was elevated in MES GSCs, but not in MES non-GSCs or
PN GSCs, and its inhibition attenuated MES GSC growth. Intriguingly,
irradiation could induce PN GSC's loss of PN phenotype and a gain of MES
phenotype, indicating the irradiation-induced PN-to-MES transformation.
Furthermore, selective ALDH inhibitor, DEAB, can partially block
irradiation-induced transformation of PN to MES GSCs. Clinically, ALDH
immunoreactivity was markedly elevated in malignant gliomas in comparison
to low grade gliomas or normal brain tissues. Collectively, our data
suggest that two GSC subtypes harboring distinct signaling pathways
represent intertumoral glioma heterogeneity, and highlight previously
unidentified roles of ALDH-associated metabolic signaling in MES MGs and
their GSCs. Blocking the pathways that regulate ALDH activity might
providepromising therapeutic approaches for a subset of malignant gliomas
with the MES signature.

