Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduction in aflatoxin exposure drives decrease in primary liver
cancer in Qidong, China.


Primary liver cancer (PLC) causes nearly 700,000 annual deaths worldwide
predominately in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa; >370,000 deaths occur in
the People's Republic of China, alone. Two factors synergistically
associated with PLC are chronic infection with hepatitis B (HBV) and
repetitive ingestion of aflatoxin (AFB)-contaminated foods. Utilizing
information collected over several decades by the Qidong Cancer Registry,
mortality rates from PLC were compared to timelines for regional
implementation of HBV vaccination and levels of AFB exposure. The
concentration of the AFB-lysine adduct was quantified by isotope dilution
mass spectrometry in randomized, age-matched subsets of archived serum
samples collected from 1989-2012. Economic, social and public health
changes occurring during this time period were examined including
implementation of a universal vaccination program and the adaptation of
an open policy of food provisionment which led to rice replacing maize as
the major dietary staple in the Qidong region. Although the crude rates
of PLC increased from 1972-1990s (50/100,000 to a steady-state rate of
75/100,000), much of the increase can be attributed to a proportionate
aging population. Upon stratifying by birth cohort, no significant change
in mortality rate from PLC was found for individuals over 40 years of
age. However, 60-75% mortality declines in 20-24, 25-29, 30-34 year olds
born 1973-177 compared to similar birth cohorts of 1958-1962 were
observed. The prevalence of HBV surface antigen positivity was unchanged;
moreover, all these birth cohorts were born before the universal HBV
vaccination of newborns. Median levels of the aflatoxin biomarker dropped
from 19.3 pg/mg albumin in 1989 to non-detectable by 2009. The estimated
population attributable risk of AFB-related PLC decreased from 45% in
1989 to 11% in 2012. Significant reductions in PLC mortality occurred
prior to the introduction of universal hepatitis vaccination in Qidongese
newborns. Agricultural and economic reforms instituted in the 1980s
leading to the establishment of rice as a dietary staple was associated
with a 40-fold reduction in AFB exposure. Thus, by extrapolation, changes
in food-based policies altering exposure to carcinogens in the diet can
have a dramatic impact on PLC mortality worldwide. Supported by NIEHS P01
ES 006052, NST China No. 2008ZX10002-015, No. 2012ZX10002-008.

