Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced CD44 and OTP gene expression are strong indicators of poor
prognosis in pulmonary carcinoids.


Purpose: Pulmonary carcinoids are well-differentiated neuroendocrine
tumors showing usually a favorable prognosis. However, there is a risk
for late recurrence and/or distant metastasis. Because histological
classification in typical and atypical (AC) carcinoids is difficult and
its reliability to predict disease outcome varies, we evaluated three
genes as potential prognostic markers, i.e., OTP, CD44 and RET.Methods:
These genes were analyzed in 56 frozen carcinoids by quantitative RT-PCR.
RET was further studied by methylation and mutation analysis.
Immunohistochemistry for CD44 and OTP protein expression was performed on
292 carcinoids.Results: Low mRNA expression levels of CD44 (p=1.3e-5) and
OTP (p=0.012), and high levels of RET (p=0.0025), were strongly
associated with a low 20-year survival of carcinoid patients. High RET
expression was not related to promoter hypomethylation or gene mutations.
A direct link between gene expression and protein levels was confirmed
for CD44 and OTP, but not for RET. Within all carcinoids as well as ACs,
absence of CD44 protein was significantly associated with low 20-year
survival (p=8.6e-5 and p=0.00015, respectively). The absence of nuclear
OTP followed by complete loss of expression was also significantly
associated with unfavorable disease outcome in all carcinoids (p=2.9e-5).
Multivariate analysis revealed that CD44 and OTP immunostaining combined
with histopathology is the optimal indicator for patient
outcome.Conclusions: Our study indicates that CD44 and OTP are strong
indicators of poor outcome. We therefore argue for implementation of
these markers in routine diagnostics in addition to histopathology to
improve subclassification of pulmonary carcinoids into prognostically
relevant categories.

