Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-193b is growth-inhibitory in Ewing sarcoma, and represses
ErbB4.


Ewing sarcoma, the second most common cancer of bone and soft tissue in
adolescents and young adults, is an aggressive malignancy with poor
long-term outcome. Ewing sarcoma is driven primarily by the EWS/Fli-1
fusion oncoprotein, which arises from the recurrent t(11,22)
translocation. Our laboratory has been interested in identifying
microRNAs (miRs) with growth-modulating properties in Ewing sarcoma,
manipulation of which could potentially be used for novel therapies, as
shown in preclinical studies for other cancers. We have previously shown
that replacement of select miRs, normally repressed by EWS/Fli1, can
inhibit the growth of Ewing sarcoma cells. To identify additional, and
more potent, miRs with growth-suppressive properties in EWS, we have
performed a phenotype-based, secondary miniscreen in Ewing sarcoma cell
lines. This screen, using transfection of miR mimics into the EWS cell
lines A673 and SK-ES-1, followed by growth assays as read-out, identified
miR-193b as a strong candidate growth suppressive miR in Ewing sarcoma.
Subsequent cloning and stable overexpression of endogenous miR-193b
verified the growth suppressive phenotype. Examination of candidate
targets further identified ErbB4 as potently repressed upon miR-193b
overexpression. ErbB4 has recently been shown to play a key role in Ewing
sarcoma, specifically as a driver of metastasis and as a mediator of
resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy, key biological parameters that
define high-risk disease. With the need for therapy expansion in
pediatric EWS, miR-193b replacement, through ErbB4 inhibition, may be a
way to help control high-risk disease.

