Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fetal exposure to diethylstilbestrol and DNA methylation in adult
women.


In utero diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure has long term consequences
including increased risk of vaginal and breast cancer. Epigenetic factors
are suspected to contribute to some of these increased risks and animal
studies show DES-mediated effects on DNA methylation in both uterine
tissue and blood. However, there are currently no studies examining the
effect of fetal DES exposure on DNA methylation in humans. Therefore, we
investigated differences in DNA methylation between women exposed to DES
in utero compared to unexposed women. All our study subjects were
participants in the Sister Study -a prospective cohort focused on
environmental and familial risk factors for breast cancer and other
diseases. Within this study 1,156 women (2.3%) said that they were
definitely or probably exposed to DES in utero. In a special sub study
(including both women who reported positive exposure and women who
reported no exposure), we confirmed exposure history with the woman's
mother and from those with matching mother daughter reports we randomly
selected 100 exposed and 100 unexposed women. We analyzed DNA methylation
patterns in blood using the Illumina 450k array to assess methylation at
473,844 CpG sites. Primary analysis did not reveal any differentially
methylated CpGs (dmCpGs) below the false discovery rate (FDR, qIn utero
diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure has long term consequences including
increased risk of vaginal and breast cancer. Epigenetic factors are
suspected to contribute to some of these increased risks and animal
studies show DES-mediated effects on DNA methylation in both uterine
tissue and blood. However, there are currently no studies examining the
effect of fetal DES exposure on DNA methylation in humans. Therefore, we
investigated differences in DNA methylation between women exposed to DES
in utero compared to unexposed women. All our study subjects were
participants in the Sister Study -a prospective cohort focused on
environmental and familial risk factors for breast cancer and other
diseases. Within this study 1,156 women (2.3%) said that they were
definitely or probably exposed to DES in utero. In a special sub study
(including both women who reported positive exposure and women who
reported no exposure), we confirmed exposure history with the woman's
mother and from those with matching mother daughter reports we randomly
selected 100 exposed and 100 unexposed women. We analyzed DNA methylation
patterns in blood using the Illumina 450k array to assess methylation at
473,844 CpG sites. Primary analysis did not reveal any differentially
methylated CpGs (dmCpGs) below the false discovery rate (FDR, q<0.05),
nonetheless there were about 8000 dmCpGs with p-values In utero
diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure has long term consequences including
increased risk of vaginal and breast cancer. Epigenetic factors are
suspected to contribute to some of these increased risks and animal
studies show DES-mediated effects on DNA methylation in both uterine
tissue and blood. However, there are currently no studies examining the
effect of fetal DES exposure on DNA methylation in humans. Therefore, we
investigated differences in DNA methylation between women exposed to DES
in utero compared to unexposed women. All our study subjects were
participants in the Sister Study -a prospective cohort focused on
environmental and familial risk factors for breast cancer and other
diseases. Within this study 1,156 women (2.3%) said that they were
definitely or probably exposed to DES in utero. In a special sub study
(including both women who reported positive exposure and women who
reported no exposure), we confirmed exposure history with the woman's
mother and from those with matching mother daughter reports we randomly
selected 100 exposed and 100 unexposed women. We analyzed DNA methylation
patterns in blood using the Illumina 450k array to assess methylation at
473,844 CpG sites. Primary analysis did not reveal any differentially
methylated CpGs (dmCpGs) below the false discovery rate (FDR, q<0.05),
nonetheless there were about 8000 dmCpGs with p-values <0.05.
Stratification of women into subgroups -based on menopausal status,
fertility related diagnoses or hormone intake- did not alter the results.
Previous work using mouse models shows gene specific changes in gene
expression and DNA methylation following perinatal exposure to DES. When
we compared these expression changes in ten genes to changes in promoter
methylation in our data we found an inverse correlation between gene
expression in mouse and the direction of methylation in our samples. This
was especially evident in the ERBB2 promoter region. We also examined the
subset of genes known to directly interact with DES: in four of the seven
direct DES targets (AR, TTR, AFP, and GLI3) we found a majority of the 5
CpGs had lower methylation levels in exposed women, although these
differences were not statistically significant. This is the first study
investigating genome wide methylation changes in women subjected to an
unusual and very potent prenatal exposure that is known to have severe
consequences into adulthood. Study weaknesses include lack of information
regarding dose and exact timing of exposure as well as use of whole blood
instead of uterine target tissue, but we still observe changes at pIn
utero diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure has long term consequences
including increased risk of vaginal and breast cancer. Epigenetic factors
are suspected to contribute to some of these increased risks and animal
studies show DES-mediated effects on DNA methylation in both uterine
tissue and blood. However, there are currently no studies examining the
effect of fetal DES exposure on DNA methylation in humans. Therefore, we
investigated differences in DNA methylation between women exposed to DES
in utero compared to unexposed women. All our study subjects were
participants in the Sister Study -a prospective cohort focused on
environmental and familial risk factors for breast cancer and other
diseases. Within this study 1,156 women (2.3%) said that they were
definitely or probably exposed to DES in utero. In a special sub study
(including both women who reported positive exposure and women who
reported no exposure), we confirmed exposure history with the woman's
mother and from those with matching mother daughter reports we randomly
selected 100 exposed and 100 unexposed women. We analyzed DNA methylation
patterns in blood using the Illumina 450k array to assess methylation at
473,844 CpG sites. Primary analysis did not reveal any differentially
methylated CpGs (dmCpGs) below the false discovery rate (FDR, q<0.05),
nonetheless there were about 8000 dmCpGs with p-values <0.05.
Stratification of women into subgroups -based on menopausal status,
fertility related diagnoses or hormone intake- did not alter the results.
Previous work using mouse models shows gene specific changes in gene
expression and DNA methylation following perinatal exposure to DES. When
we compared these expression changes in ten genes to changes in promoter
methylation in our data we found an inverse correlation between gene
expression in mouse and the direction of methylation in our samples. This
was especially evident in the ERBB2 promoter region. We also examined the
subset of genes known to directly interact with DES: in four of the seven
direct DES targets (AR, TTR, AFP, and GLI3) we found a majority of the 5
CpGs had lower methylation levels in exposed women, although these
differences were not statistically significant. This is the first study
investigating genome wide methylation changes in women subjected to an
unusual and very potent prenatal exposure that is known to have severe
consequences into adulthood. Study weaknesses include lack of information
regarding dose and exact timing of exposure as well as use of whole blood
instead of uterine target tissue, but we still observe changes at p<0.05.
If DNA methylation changes are detectable in blood decades after exposure
this strengthens the idea that DES exposure leads to epigenetic changes
and should be possible to verify even further using samples from uterine
or vaginal tissue.

