Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TH17 cells promote early pancreatic tumorigenesis.


Chronic pancreatitis increases by 16 fold the risk of developing
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), one of the deadliest human
cancers. Activating Kras mutations have been detected in 30% of early
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias (PanINs), increasing to 100% in
advanced pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).We hypothesize that
inflammatory cells recruited to the pancreas in response to chronic
injury can interact with epithelial cells harboring activated KrasG12D
and affect the progression of PanIN lesions. To test this hypothesis, we
have used the inducible transgenic Mist1:CreERT2; LSL-KrasG12D (KCiMist1)
adult mice in which the LSL KrasG12D allele is activated specifically in
the acinar compartment. This model leads to rapid formation of PanINs
with a classic "ductal" phenotype and the progression of lesions is
further accelerated with the induction of chronic pancreatitis (CP)
generated by recurrent injections of cerulein.We have found that TH17
cells, a subtype of CD4+ T-helper cells known to play an active role in
other models of inflammation- induced tumorigenesis, are recruited to the
pancreas during chronic pancreatitis and further increased upon KrasG12D
activation. The differentiation of CD4+T cells into TH17 requires IL-6
and TGF-B, factors that are increased in the pancreatic tumor
microenvironment. Finally, Stat3, a key transcription factor that
determines the differentiation of TH17 lineage, is activated in the
pancreatic dysplastic epithelium as well as in the stromal infiltrating
cells.We have discovered that PanINs from KCiMist1 mice overexpress the
IL-17RA by immunofluorescence and furthermore we confirmed this finding
on human PanIN tissue arrays.Intrapancreatic injections of adenovirus
encoding IL-17A, the main cytokine produced by TH17 cells, into
transgenic mice after KrasG12D activation led to an increase in the
progression of PanIN lesions by 6 weeks when compared with mice injected
with luciferase-adenovirus. We showed a decrease in initiation and
progression of PanINs in KCiMist1/CP mice that have received
neutralizating antibodies against IL-17RA, IL-17A and IL-17F for 6 weeks
after Kras activation. Finally, we transplanted IL-17A KO bone marrow
into KCiMist1 mice and showed a significant decrease in metaplasia and
PanINs formation when compared with mice transplanted with WT bone
marrow.In conclusion, we have shown through three functional murine
experiments that TH17 cells, recruited to the pancreas in the presence of
chronic pancreatitis, can accelerate the progression of early pancreatic
tumorigenesis, setting the basis for future translational studies
targeting TH17 cells.This work has been supported by the training grant:
NIGMS T32GMO66691.

