Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of EphB4-EphrinB2 as novel target in Her2 positive breast
cancer.


Background: Her2 amplification drives tumor growth in 20% of breast
cancers. Her2 targeted therapies have improved survival, but eventual
failure occurs and additional targeted therapies to overcome resistance
are needed. EphB4 and EphrinB2 receptor kinase -ligand pair is induced in
Her2 positive tumors and is a novel target.Methods: Her2 positive tumor
cell lines and Her2 transgenic mouse lines were studied for expression of
EphB4-EphrinB2. The role of EphB4-EphrinB2 was examined by knock down
with shRNA. In vivo tumor xenograft studies with Her2 positive cell lines
resistant or sensitive to Her2 targeted therapy, and Her2 transgenic
mouse were treated with soluble decoy receptor (soluble EphB4-Albumin
fusion protein). Tumor response and activation status of Her2 were
examined.Results: EphB4 and EphrinB2 are induced in Her2 positive tumor
cell lines with further induction in trastuzumab (Herceptin) resistant
tumor lines. Knock down of EphB4 with shRNA reduced the cell viability by
nearly 80% compared to control shRNA. In vivo studies with sEphB4-Albumin
also reduced the tumor growth by 70-80% accompanied by the reduction in
pHer2 and pEGFR. No effect was seen on pHer3. Combination with lapatinib
and sEphB4-Albumin was additive. sEphB4-Albumin inhibited tumor growth in
Her2 resistant tumor cell lines by 56%.Conclusion: EphB4 and EphrinB2 are
induced by Herceptin sensitive and resistant Her2 positive tumors. EphB4
provides survival advantage to Her2 positive trastuzumab sensitive and
resistant tumors. sEphB4-Albumin inhibits tumor growth as single agent in
both trastuzumab sensitive and resistant tumors. sEphB4-Albumin is
currently in the clinical development and thus worthy of investigation in
Her2 positive cancers.

