Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HERV-K env plays important roles in cell proliferation, migration
and tumor progression in melanoma.


Human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) are remnants from ancient
retroviral infections, and most of them are inactive in normal tissues.
However, one family of HERV, HERV-K, is reportedly active in several
cancers, including melanoma. Increased expression of HERV-K in melanoma
cells correlates with malignant transformation, while a serological
response to HERV-K in melanoma patients correlates with survival
probability. The mechanism behind these observations remains obscure. Our
group reported that anti-HEEV-K envelope (env) protein antibodies shows
antitumor potential in targeting breast tumors, indicating that HERV-K
env may play an important role in tumorigenesis. In this study, we
produced a cell line derived from melanoma cell line A375, in which the
expression of HERV-K env was stably knocked down by a lentivector based
shRNA. Compared to the control cells, these cells exhibit lower
proliferation/migration/invasion rates and lower tumorigenicity in vitro.
In vivo, their tumorigenic potential was found to be reduced after
inoculation into NOD/SCID gamma mice. Moreover, results of antibody
array, RNAseq and Western blotting indicate that altered HERV-K env
expression led to changes in expression of several proteins important in
oncogenesis and metastasis. These results suggest that HERV-K env plays
specific and important roles in melanoma carcinogenesis.

