Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transglutaminase-2 mediates the pro-malignant effects of
oncostatin-M receptor overexpression in cervical squamous cell carcinoma.


An important feature of cervical squamous carcinogenesis is genomic
instability caused by deregulated expression of HPV oncogenes in
proliferating epithelial cells. A genomic imbalance that is commonly
selected in advanced cervical squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is copy
number gain of chromosome 5p. One gene that is likely to drive selection
of this abnormality is the oncostatin-M receptor (OSMR; located at
5p13.1), which is commonly up-regulated in cervical SCC and produces a
significantly worse clinical outcome when over-expressed. Cervical SCC
cells that over-expressed OSMR showed enhanced responsiveness to the
major ligand OSM, which induced multiple pro-malignant effects, including
increased cell migration and invasiveness. We now show that
transglutaminase-2 (TGM2) is an important mediator of the
ligand-dependent phenotypic effects of OSMR over-expression in cervical
carcinoma cells. TGM2 expression correlated with disease progression and
with OSMR levels in clinical samples of SCC of the cervix and head and
neck. TGM2 depletion in cervical SCC cells abrogated the increased
migration and invasiveness induced by OSM. TGM2 was shown to interact
with integrin-51 and fibronectin in cervical SCC cells, with OSM
treatment strengthening the interaction. Importantly, integrin-51 and
fibronectin were over-expressed in cervical SCC samples, where levels
correlated with those of OSMR. We conclude that an OSMR-TGM2-integrin-51
pathway is of biological significance in cervical SCC and a candidate for
therapeutic targeting.

