Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-B pathways are associated with increased recurrence in
different subtypes of ER positive breast cancer.


Although therapies exist for breast cancer and mortality rates have
fallen, resistance to current therapies remains a major problem. The NF-B
pathways regulate the transcription of a wide range of genes involved in
the immune response, inflammation, proliferation and apoptosis. Many of
these processes are hallmarks of cancer and NF-B has been hypothesised to
be a link between inflammation and tumourigenesis. The aim of the current
study was to investigate the role of both NF-B pathways in the
pathogenesis and recurrence of breast cancer.Immunohistochemistry was
employed to assess key components of the canonical (p65 and IKK) and
non-canonical (NIK, RelB, IKK) pathways on a TMA of 544 patients with
full clinical follow up and clinical information including ER status,
subtype (luminal A/B, triple negative, HER2 enriched), necrosis,
apoptosis and angiogenesis.Nuclear expression of p-p65 S536 was observed
in 81% (336/414) of patients and was associated with angiogenesis
(p=0.028) and disease free survival (p=0.003). Those patients with
tumours that expressed high levels of p-p65 S536 in the nuclear
compartment had significantly shorter disease free survival compared to
those with low expression (6.95 years vrs 7.91 years). The cohort was
then subdivided by ER status and this observation was attenuated in ER
positive tumours (p=0.002, 7.10 years vrs 8.34 years). When split further
into subtype this was negated in luminal A tumours (p=0.120) but
significance increased in luminal B tumours (p=2.54x10-4, 5.52 years vrs
8.16 years). A differing role was observed for the non-canonical pathway.
Cytoplasmic expression of IKK was observed in 97% (367/378) of patients
and was associated with apoptosis (p=0.024) and necrosis (p=0.020) and a
shorter disease free survival in those with high expression (p=0.014,
7.16 years vrs 7.64 years). This observation was attenuated in ER
positive tumours when the cohort was subdivided by ER status (p=0.008,
7.56 years vrs 8.00 years). When split into subtype, the relationship
between cytoplasmic IKK and disease free survival was negated in all
subtypes except luminal A (p=0.015, 7.92 years vrs 8.32 years). Other
members of the NF-B pathways (p65 NLS, IKK, NIK and RelB) were not
associated with disease free survival.Our results suggest that the NF-B
pathways are involved in promoting recurrence in patients with ER
positive tumours and may be involved with development of endocrine
resistance. However, each pathway seems to be involved in different
subtypes with the canonical pathway associating with recurrence in the
luminal B subtype and the non-canonical with the luminal A subtype.
Further studies in an independent cohort combined with mechanistic
studies are required. These results highlight that patients with ER
positive tumours may have different signalling pathways driving
recurrence and therefore benefit from different therapeutic strategies.

