Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p16INK4A down-regulation activates breast stromal adipocytes.


Obesity, a disease linked to increased number of adipocytes in various
tissues, is now recognized as a risk factor for the development of breast
cancer. Importantly, obesity has been reported to be associated with the
occurrence of larger, more advanced tumors and aggressive cancer
pathological features, including lymph node metastasis, advanced tumor
stage, and high grade. Cancer-associated adipocytes (CAAs), the most
abundant cellular component of breast cancer-associated stroma, promote
carcinogenesis through paracrine effects. However, the molecular basis of
adipocytes implication in breast carcinogenesis remains elusive. To shed
light on this important phenomenon, we established and characterized
normal adipocytes from post-plastic surgery of breast tissues. We have
shown that these cells express various adipocyte biomarkers, including
Leptin, TNF- and FABP4. Furthermore, we investigated the role of the
tumor suppressor p16 INK4A protein in adipocytes activation. We have
found that specific down-regulation of p16INK4A by shRNA increased the
expression/secretion levels of various adipokines including leptin,
activated breast adipocyte and enhanced their migration/invasion
abilities. Consequently, media conditioned with these cells stimulated
the proliferation and the migration/invasion of breast cancer cells and
enhanced endothelial cell differentiation into capillary-like structures.
In addition, we have also shown that media conditioned with breast cancer
cells decrease the expression of p16INK4A and increase the expression of
leptin in adipocytes.These results provide the first indication that
p16INK4A down-regulation in breast stromal adipocytes is an important
step toward their activation.

