Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implication of miR-34a in radioresistance of bladder cancer .


Purpose : Investigate resistance of radiation via miR-34a expression in
human urothelial carcinomaMethods : Human urothelial carcinoma cell lines
derived from well-differentiated superficial bladder tumors as well as
from high-grade invasive tumors were screened for their sensitivity to
radiation. Growth inhibition was monitored by clonogenic assays. qRT-PCR
analysis was used to evaluate expression of miR-34a among the human
urothelial carcinoma cell lines. Methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction (MSP) was performed to determine CpG methylation status of
miR-34a gene promoter among the cell lines. Association between miR-34a
and sensitivity to radiation was also investigated by ectopic expression
of miR-34a. Western blot was performed to evaluate protein
expression.Results: Remarkable differences in sensitivity to radiation
have been shown among those cell lines in vitro. Of interest, miR-34a
expression correlates with human bladder cancer cell response to
radiation, with resistant cell lines showing lower expression of miR-34a
and that is due to CpG methylation of its promoter. Additionally, an
inverse correlation was observed between miR-34a and expression of
sirtuin1 (SIRT1). Ectopic expression of miR-34a in cell lines resistant
to radiation showed a positive effect of miR-34a to the response therapy.
Growth inhibition observed after treatment could be explained, in part,
by the increased expression of the cell cycle inhibitor p21.Conclusion:
Preliminary results suggest that detection of miR-34a expression may
potentially be used as a predictor of therapeutic efficacy, and its
regulation represent an attractive mechanism for the management of
bladder cancer therapy.

