Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Realgar exerts cytotoxic killing of gastric cancer cells through
Bax apoptotic pathway.


Background:Arsenic compound has shown excellent activity in APL. Its
anticancer activity in solid tumors is still being explored. We have
tested realgar, arsenic sulfide (As4A4), in gastric cancer cells to
understand its anticancer activity and mechanism.Methods: The effects of
the realgar on cell proliferation and apoptosis of AGS and MGC803 cell
lines were determined using methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) assay and
Annexin V assay. Western blot analysis was used to detect the related
pathways by measuring the expression levels of apoptotic proteins such as
Bax, Bcl-2, c-myc, p53 and mdm2. Real-time PCR analysis was used to
measure the mRNA levels of the related genes.Results: Realgar
significantly inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis in gastric
cancer cell lines AGS and MGC803 in a dose- and time-dependent manner,
particularly in AGS cells. Realgar up-regulated the expression of p53 and
p53 target genes MDM2 and Bax, down-regulated the expression of Bcl-2 and
c-Myc in AGS cell lines, indicating that realgar could induce apoptosis
via p53-bax pathway in AGS cell lines. However, similar dose of realgar
up-regulated the expression of Bax, down-regulated the expression of
Bcl-2 and c-Myc in MGC803 cell lines, with much less effect on the
expression of p53.Conclusion: Realgar has significant anti-cancer effect
on gastric cancer cell lines through inhibiting cell proliferation and
inducing apoptosis. Our findings suggest a potential therapeutic effect
of realgar in gastric cancer and further study in this area is needed.

