Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The developmental patterning gene HOXA9 promotes ovarian cancer
growth via paracrine effects on mesenchymal stem cells and peritoneal
fibroblasts.


As is the case in normal organogenesis, it is increasingly recognized
that tumor growth is regulated by cross-talk between epithelial and
stromal cells. Whereas the ability of cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) to stimulate tumor cell growth has been extensively studied, it is
not clear whether CAFs are reciprocally controlled by developmental
programs that are activated in tumor cells. Epithelial ovarian cancers
(EOCs) frequently colonize peritoneal surfaces that overlie connective
and adipose tissues. We found that expression of HOXA9, a homeobox gene
that is normally expressed in the developing female reproductive tract,
is strongly associated with poor outcomes in EOC patients and in mouse
xenograft models of EOC. Whereas HOXA9 promoted EOC growth in vivo, HOXA9
did not stimulate autonomous tumor cell growth in vitro. Expression of
HOXA9 in EOC cells induced normal peritoneal fibroblasts and adipose
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to express CAF markers and to stimulate
growth of EOC and endothelial cells. These effects of HOXA9 were due in
substantial part to its transcriptional activation of the gene encoding
TGF-2 that acted in a paracrine manner on peritoneal fibroblasts and
adipose MSCs to induce CXCL12, IL-6 and VEGF-A expression. These results
indicate that HOXA9 expression in EOC cells promotes a microenvironment
that is permissive for tumor growth.

