Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploratory biomarker program in Phase I clinical development of
RG7155, a novel humanized anti-CSF-1R Mab, targeting Tumor Associated
Macrophages (TAMs).


Early Phase I clinical development of RG7155, a humanized anti-CSF-1R
monoclonal antibody binding to dimerization interface of CSF-1 receptor
and inducing apoptosis in CSF-1R expressing macrophages is accompanied by
an extensive biomarker program. Phase I biosampling aims to enable
monitoring of mode of action, drug efficacy and potential tumor escape
mechanisms by identifying response prediction and mechanistic efficacy
markers and therefore to support optimal biological dose (OBD) definition
and patient stratification for subsequent clinical testing.One biomarker
hypothesis to support potential patient stratification assumes that
response to treatment with RG7155 is enhanced in tumors with high CSF-1R
positive macrophage infiltration and with high CSF-1 levels in the
peripheral blood as the basis for tumor promoting macrophage recruitment
and differentiation. The Phase I biomarker program comprises extensive
biosampling including mandatory fresh baseline and on treatment tumor,
skin biopsies as well as peripheral blood sampling to identify and
monitor pharmacodynamic as well as mechanistic efficacy markers.Pre- and
on-treatment tumor tissue analysis involves tumor infiltrating macrophage
subtype characterization via CD68/CD163/CSF-1R/MHC II, CD4 and CD8 T cell
assessment by multiplex IHC assays. In order to detect early tissue
response prediction markers in surrogate tissue, wound associated
macrophages (WAMs) are assessed in wounded skin tissue samples. Further,
systematic collection of peripheral blood samples before and during
RG7155 administration aims at identifying CSF-1R expressing target
populations, other potential RG7155 susceptible immune cell populations
by flow cytometry using CD8/CD4/CD3/CD45/MHC II/CD14/CD16/CD56/CD19
markers and an extended cytokine profiling by Luminex 17-plex panel.
These markers will be correlated to direct anti-tumor effects assessed
using KI67 IHC, FDG-PET, DC-Ultrasound and clinical response.Here we
describe the development of the clinical biomarker strategy based on
preclinical data and the specific assay developments, to enable the
selection of the OBD, the correlation of TAM elimination with anti-tumor
effects and the optimization of the biomarker sampling to minimize the
burden of diagnostic procedures for patients in future clinical trials.

