Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), telomerase, melanoma
associated antigen (MAGE1 and MAGE 3), cancer stem cell markers
cytokeratin (CK) and (CD133,) as potential biomarkers for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC).


Background. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) had been recently classified
as a complex disease with a wide range of risk factors. Analysis of AFP
level as a tumor marker is applied in patients with a high risk of
developing HCC. However, the lack of AFP sensitivity and specificity has
elucidated the need for novel tumor markers. Therefore, the aim of the
current study is to assess AFP, MAGE1 and MAGE 3, CK, and HCC cancer stem
cell (CSC) markers (CD133, CD90, CD44) as potential biomarkers for HCC
patients.Patients and Methods. This study was conducted on the peripheral
blood lymphocytes (PBL) of one 130 participants involving 70 patients
with HCC, thirteen patients with chronic hepatitis (CH) and 30 normal
controls. For those patients, serum AFP was tested by ELISA. Telomerase,
MAGE 1, and MAGE 3, CD90 and CD44 RNA expression was detected by
qualitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). CD133
and CK expression was measured by flowcytometry (FCM) and qPCR analysis
in 10 ml of PBL of each patient.Results. All CH and HCC patients were
positive for HCV antibodies. The number of cells expressing CD 133 in the
patients PBL was significantly lower in HCC patients than other groups
while that of CD90 and CD44 was significantly higher in HCC than in the
other groups (pBackground. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) had been
recently classified as a complex disease with a wide range of risk
factors. Analysis of AFP level as a tumor marker is applied in patients
with a high risk of developing HCC. However, the lack of AFP sensitivity
and specificity has elucidated the need for novel tumor markers.
Therefore, the aim of the current study is to assess AFP, MAGE1 and MAGE
3, CK, and HCC cancer stem cell (CSC) markers (CD133, CD90, CD44) as
potential biomarkers for HCC patients.Patients and Methods. This study
was conducted on the peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) of one 130
participants involving 70 patients with HCC, thirteen patients with
chronic hepatitis (CH) and 30 normal controls. For those patients, serum
AFP was tested by ELISA. Telomerase, MAGE 1, and MAGE 3, CD90 and CD44
RNA expression was detected by qualitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). CD133 and CK expression
was measured by flowcytometry (FCM) and qPCR analysis in 10 ml of PBL of
each patient.Results. All CH and HCC patients were positive for HCV
antibodies. The number of cells expressing CD 133 in the patients PBL was
significantly lower in HCC patients than other groups while that of CD90
and CD44 was significantly higher in HCC than in the other groups
(p<0.01). Also, MAGE-1,MAGE-3, AFP, CD90 and CD44 expressions by qPCR
were significantly higher (pBackground. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
had been recently classified as a complex disease with a wide range of
risk factors. Analysis of AFP level as a tumor marker is applied in
patients with a high risk of developing HCC. However, the lack of AFP
sensitivity and specificity has elucidated the need for novel tumor
markers. Therefore, the aim of the current study is to assess AFP, MAGE1
and MAGE 3, CK, and HCC cancer stem cell (CSC) markers (CD133, CD90,
CD44) as potential biomarkers for HCC patients.Patients and Methods. This
study was conducted on the peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) of one 130
participants involving 70 patients with HCC, thirteen patients with
chronic hepatitis (CH) and 30 normal controls. For those patients, serum
AFP was tested by ELISA. Telomerase, MAGE 1, and MAGE 3, CD90 and CD44
RNA expression was detected by qualitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). CD133 and CK expression
was measured by flowcytometry (FCM) and qPCR analysis in 10 ml of PBL of
each patient.Results. All CH and HCC patients were positive for HCV
antibodies. The number of cells expressing CD 133 in the patients PBL was
significantly lower in HCC patients than other groups while that of CD90
and CD44 was significantly higher in HCC than in the other groups
(p<0.01). Also, MAGE-1,MAGE-3, AFP, CD90 and CD44 expressions by qPCR
were significantly higher (p<0.001) in HCC group than in chronic
hepatitis and normal control groups. There was a highly significant
difference (pBackground. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) had been recently
classified as a complex disease with a wide range of risk factors.
Analysis of AFP level as a tumor marker is applied in patients with a
high risk of developing HCC. However, the lack of AFP sensitivity and
specificity has elucidated the need for novel tumor markers. Therefore,
the aim of the current study is to assess AFP, MAGE1 and MAGE 3, CK, and
HCC cancer stem cell (CSC) markers (CD133, CD90, CD44) as potential
biomarkers for HCC patients.Patients and Methods. This study was
conducted on the peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) of one 130
participants involving 70 patients with HCC, thirteen patients with
chronic hepatitis (CH) and 30 normal controls. For those patients, serum
AFP was tested by ELISA. Telomerase, MAGE 1, and MAGE 3, CD90 and CD44
RNA expression was detected by qualitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). CD133 and CK expression
was measured by flowcytometry (FCM) and qPCR analysis in 10 ml of PBL of
each patient.Results. All CH and HCC patients were positive for HCV
antibodies. The number of cells expressing CD 133 in the patients PBL was
significantly lower in HCC patients than other groups while that of CD90
and CD44 was significantly higher in HCC than in the other groups
(p<0.01). Also, MAGE-1,MAGE-3, AFP, CD90 and CD44 expressions by qPCR
were significantly higher (p<0.001) in HCC group than in chronic
hepatitis and normal control groups. There was a highly significant
difference (p<0.001) between groups for telomerase gene expression, which
was detected in 10% and 42.3% of CHC and HCC patients respectively. The
expression levels of AFP, CD44 and CD90 correlated significantly with HCC
stage (r=.461, p=0.001), grade and multicentricity (r=.244, p=0.02) while
CD133 showed a significant correlation with tumor size (r=.455, P=0.006)
but not significantly correlated with multicentricity and HCC stage.
Cellular expression of CK was significantly higher in HCC than in other
groups, and showed a significant correlation with tumor size (r=.347,
P=0.041) and multicentricity (r=0.513, P=0.02).Conclusion. 1) AFP, MAGE1,
MAGE 3 and the number of cells expressing CK in the PBL of HCC could be
used as markers for early detection of HCC. 2) The CSC markers (CD90,
CD44) and AFP are highly expressed in HCC and contribute to aggressive
phenotype thus they could be used as prognostic and predictive markers.

