Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyisoprenylated methylated protein methyl esterase as a
potential therapeutic target and biomarker in lung cancer.


PURPOSE: Excessive epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling
and/or hyperactivities of polyisoprenylated monomeric G-proteins of the
Ras superfamily are frequently associated with various human cancers
including lung cancer. While mutations or overexpression of these
proteins are responsible for their tumorigenic effects, secondary
modifications of the monomeric G-proteins involving polyisoprenylation
and eventual methylation are required for their normal as well as the
pathological activities. Despite the use of anti-EGFR targeted therapies,
prognosis is still poor for patients whose tumors harbor the defective
receptor. The need to find novel biomarkers for early/companion diagnosis
and targets for the development of novel therapies remains strong. Since
polyisoprenylated methylated protein methyl esterase (PMPMEase) is a
critical enzyme of the polyisoprenylation pathway whose inhibition causes
cancer cell death, the objective was to determine whether it is
overexpressed and/or hyperactive in lung cancers in which case, it might
serve as a possible diagnostic biomarker or drug target.METHODS: Tissue
microarrays (TMAs) consisting of 416 cores from 416 separate normal lung
and lung cancer cases were analyzed for PMPMEase expression. Also,
PMPMEase activities in fresh frozen lung cancer tissues were determined.
PMPMEase expression and activities in normal lung fibroblasts (WI-38) as
well as lung cancer A549 and H460 cells were also determined. The effect
of specific PMPMEase inhibition with L-28 on cell viability was also
tested.RESULTS: Significantly more intense PMPMEase immunoreactivity was
observed in 88.3% of the 416 cases in the lung cancer compared to the
normal controls (p PURPOSE: Excessive epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) signaling and/or hyperactivities of polyisoprenylated monomeric
G-proteins of the Ras superfamily are frequently associated with various
human cancers including lung cancer. While mutations or overexpression of
these proteins are responsible for their tumorigenic effects, secondary
modifications of the monomeric G-proteins involving polyisoprenylation
and eventual methylation are required for their normal as well as the
pathological activities. Despite the use of anti-EGFR targeted therapies,
prognosis is still poor for patients whose tumors harbor the defective
receptor. The need to find novel biomarkers for early/companion diagnosis
and targets for the development of novel therapies remains strong. Since
polyisoprenylated methylated protein methyl esterase (PMPMEase) is a
critical enzyme of the polyisoprenylation pathway whose inhibition causes
cancer cell death, the objective was to determine whether it is
overexpressed and/or hyperactive in lung cancers in which case, it might
serve as a possible diagnostic biomarker or drug target.METHODS: Tissue
microarrays (TMAs) consisting of 416 cores from 416 separate normal lung
and lung cancer cases were analyzed for PMPMEase expression. Also,
PMPMEase activities in fresh frozen lung cancer tissues were determined.
PMPMEase expression and activities in normal lung fibroblasts (WI-38) as
well as lung cancer A549 and H460 cells were also determined. The effect
of specific PMPMEase inhibition with L-28 on cell viability was also
tested.RESULTS: Significantly more intense PMPMEase immunoreactivity was
observed in 88.3% of the 416 cases in the lung cancer compared to the
normal controls (p < 0.0001). The mean scores SEM were 118.87.7 (normal),
232.125.1 (small-cell lung carcinomas), 352.19.4 (squamous cell
carcinomas), 311.79.8 (adenocarcinomas), 350.024.2 (papillary
adenocarcinomas), 334.730.1 (adenosquamous carcinomas), 321.939.7
(bronchioloalveolar carcinomas), and 331.385.0 (large-cell carcinomas).
PMPMEase was significantly more active in five of the ten lung cancer
cases compared to normal adjacent tissues (p PURPOSE: Excessive epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling and/or hyperactivities of
polyisoprenylated monomeric G-proteins of the Ras superfamily are
frequently associated with various human cancers including lung cancer.
While mutations or overexpression of these proteins are responsible for
their tumorigenic effects, secondary modifications of the monomeric
G-proteins involving polyisoprenylation and eventual methylation are
required for their normal as well as the pathological activities. Despite
the use of anti-EGFR targeted therapies, prognosis is still poor for
patients whose tumors harbor the defective receptor. The need to find
novel biomarkers for early/companion diagnosis and targets for the
development of novel therapies remains strong. Since polyisoprenylated
methylated protein methyl esterase (PMPMEase) is a critical enzyme of the
polyisoprenylation pathway whose inhibition causes cancer cell death, the
objective was to determine whether it is overexpressed and/or hyperactive
in lung cancers in which case, it might serve as a possible diagnostic
biomarker or drug target.METHODS: Tissue microarrays (TMAs) consisting of
416 cores from 416 separate normal lung and lung cancer cases were
analyzed for PMPMEase expression. Also, PMPMEase activities in fresh
frozen lung cancer tissues were determined. PMPMEase expression and
activities in normal lung fibroblasts (WI-38) as well as lung cancer A549
and H460 cells were also determined. The effect of specific PMPMEase
inhibition with L-28 on cell viability was also tested.RESULTS:
Significantly more intense PMPMEase immunoreactivity was observed in
88.3% of the 416 cases in the lung cancer compared to the normal controls
(p < 0.0001). The mean scores SEM were 118.87.7 (normal), 232.125.1
(small-cell lung carcinomas), 352.19.4 (squamous cell carcinomas),
311.79.8 (adenocarcinomas), 350.024.2 (papillary adenocarcinomas),
334.730.1 (adenosquamous carcinomas), 321.939.7 (bronchioloalveolar
carcinomas), and 331.385.0 (large-cell carcinomas). PMPMEase was
significantly more active in five of the ten lung cancer cases compared
to normal adjacent tissues (p < 0.001). The specific PMPMEase activity in
A549 (5.2 0.10 mmol/h/mg of protein) and H460 (4.8 0.05 mmol/h/mg of
protein) cells was 1.6- and 1.5-fold higher than in WI-38 cells (3.2 0.04
mmol/h/mg of protein), respectively. Exposure of the cells to L-28, led
to lung cancer cell death, with EC50 of 8.5 x 10-6 M for A549 and 2.8 x
10-5 M for H460 cells.CONCLUSION: These results implicate PMPMEase
overexpression and hyperactivity in lung cancer progression, implying
that PMPMEase could serve as a marker for diagnosis and target for lung
cancer therapy.

