Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARID1A promotes endocrine resistance in ER+ breast cancer cells.


We recently identified the ARID1A gene as a new candidate tumor
suppressor gene (TSG), mutated in the T47D cells, an ER+ breast cancer
cell line. We have shown previously that re-expression of ARID1A in T47D
cells inhibits both proliferation and anchorage-independent growth and
also that nuclear expression of ARID1A is progressively decreased during
the later stages of breast tumor progression. ARID1A encodes a member of
the SWI/SNF family of proteins, which function to remodel chromatin and
thereby regulate gene expression programs. Most breast cancers express
the estrogen receptor (ER), and are thus responsive to the mitogenic
effects of the estrogen hormone as well as to the anti-proliferative
effects of anti-estrogen therapies. To uncover the potential role of
ARID1A in the regulation of estrogen signaling in ER+ breast cancer
cells, we tested if re-expression of ARID1A may also affect
estrogen-dependent growth. Surprisingly, we found that re-expression of
ARID1A in T47D cells results in a decrease in the proliferative response
of these cells to estrogen but also to a decrease in the viability of the
cells in hormone-depleted conditions. Then, to further investigate if the
loss of ARID1A may promote estrogen-independent growth, we silenced
ARID1A expression by shRNA in MCF-7 cells that express moderate levels of
ARID1A protein. We found that ARID1A-silencing increases the survival of
MCF-7 cells in the absence of hormones. In addition, we also observed
that phosphorylation of FAK and Src, whose activities have been suggested
to be important in endocrine resistance, is highly increased in the
absence of ARID1A. All together, these results suggest that loss of
ARID1A can promote endocrine-resistance in ER-positive breast cancer
cells.

