Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Importance of protein interactions in mediating AF9/MLLT3 function.


AF9/MLLT3, located on chromosome band 9p22, was first identified as a
fusion partner of the Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene in acute myeloid
leukemia. The AF9 protein has been shown to play an important role in
erythrocyte/ megakaryocyte development by regulating the expression of
genes encoding hematopoietic transcription factors. Moreover, in
hematopoietic precursor cells, expression of a chimeric protein comprised
of the C-terminus of AF9 fused to the N-terminus of MLL leads to leukemic
transformation. Thus AF9 contributes both to normal as well as neoplastic
blood cell development. Our lab and others have shown the direct or
indirect association of the C-terminus of AF9 with several distinct
proteins including activators and repressors of transcription (AF4,
pTEFb, DOT1L, CBX8, RING1b, and BCoR), thus suggesting that the function
of AF9 can be substantially changed depending upon the nature of
molecules that specifically associate with it. We hypothesize that AF9 is
an important component of several distinct macromolecular complexes, each
of which has a unique function. Specifically, DOT1L is a chromatin
modifying enzyme that methylates histone H3 at lysine 79. CBX8 is
component of the repressive Polycomb PRC1 complexes. Here, we report that
the association of AF9 with CBX8 competes with DOT1L for AF9 binding and
alters expression of genes regulated by DOT1L. In this context, CBX8
enhances rather than represses gene expression.Citation Format: Bhavna
Malik, Charles S. Hemenway. Importance of protein interactions in
mediating AF9/MLLT3 function. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 761. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-761

