Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copper is required for oncogenic BRAF signaling and tumorigenesis.


The BRAF serine/threonine kinase is mutated, typically at V600, to remain
in the active oncogenic state in a large fraction of melanoma, thyroid
cancers, and hairy cell leukemia, and to a lesser extent in a wide
spectrum of other cancers, thereby activating the kinases MEK1 and MEK2
to stimulate the MAPK pathway and promote cancer. Excitingly, ATP
inhibitors of oncogenic BRAF and MEK provide a survival advantage in
metastatic melanoma and early clinical studies suggest that coupling BRAF
and MEK kinase inhibitors may be even more effective. Thus, the
combination of multiple approaches to inhibit MAPK signaling holds great
promise for the treatment of BRAF mutation-positive cancers, especially
in terms of overcoming resistance. In this regard, we previously found
that copper (Cu) influx enhanced MEK1 phosphorylation of its substrates
ERK1/2 through a Cu-MEK1 interaction. We show here that genetic loss of
the high affinity Cu transporter Ctr1 or mutations in MEK1 that disrupt
Cu binding reduced MAPK signaling and oncogenic BRAFV600E-mediated
tumorigenesis, which could be rescued by expressing activated ERK2.
Importantly, a Cu chelator used in the treatment of Wilson's disease
reduced tumor growth of not only BRAFV600E-transformed cells, but also
cells resistant to a BRAF inhibitor. Taken together, these results
suggest that Cu-chelation therapy could be repurposed for the treatment
of BRAFV600E mutation-positive cancers.

