Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic risk stratification for breast cancer based on a polygenic
risk score and family history.


Background: Breast cancer is the most common cancer among Western women.
Risk stratification of women can aid surveillance for and prevention of
breast cancer. However, the value of genetic profiling in risk
stratification has been widely debated. Early studies were based on risk
profiles generated from only a few genetic variants, while recent
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have led to the identification of
many more loci. We investigated the value of using 77 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in breast cancer susceptibility loci identified to
date for risk stratification of women both with and without a family
history of breast cancer.Methods: We tested for all possible pair-wise
multiplicative SNP interactions between 77 SNPs using 46,450 cases and
42,599 controls of European origin in the Breast Cancer Association
Consortium (BCAC) using logistic regression analyses. A subset of 33,673
cases and 33,381 controls from studies not selected for family history
was used to construct a polygenic risk score (PRS) based on the 77 SNPs.
Estimates of the relative risk for breast cancer by levels of the PRS and
population-based breast cancer incidence and mortality rates were used to
derive absolute risks of developing breast cancer for percentiles of the
PRS.Results: There was no strong evidence for multiplicative interaction
between any particular SNP pair, but there was a suggestion of a larger
number of observed significant interactions over those expected by
chance. Women in the highest 1% of the PRS score had a three-fold
increased risk of developing breast cancer compared with women in the
middle quintile (40-60thpctile)(OR=3.36 95%CI:2.95-3.83). The
corresponding relative risks for PRSs derived separately for ER-positive
and ER-negative disease were 3.73 95%CI:3.24-4.30 and 2.80 95%CI:
2.26-3.46, respectively. The OR for family history (1 or more first
degree relatives with breast cancer) was slightly attenuated, from 1.85
to 1.74, after adjusting for the PRS, consistent with the estimated
fraction (14%) of the familial relative risk explained by the 77 SNPs
under a multiplicative polygenetic model of inheritance. The combined
effects of PRS and family history of breast cancer were consistent with a
multiplicative model (P-interaction=0.34). The 10-year absolute risk of
breast cancer for a 50 year old woman without family history of breast
cancer ranged from 0.70 % for women in the lowest 1% of the PRS, 2.4% for
the middle quintile, to 7.1 % for the highest 1% of the PRS. For a 50
year old woman with a family history, the corresponding risk ranged from
1.2%, 4.0% and 11.2%, respectively.Conclusion: The PRS provides good
discrimination of breast cancer risk across women without a family
history of breast cancer, and can also be used to further refine the
genetic risk among women with a family history. The observed level of
risk discrimination could be useful to inform targeted screening or
prevention strategies.Citation Format: Nasim Mavaddat, Paul Pharoah, Per
Hall, Douglas Easton, Montserrat Garcia-Closas, for the Breast Cancer
Association Consortium. Genetic risk stratification for breast cancer
based on a polygenic risk score and family history. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2567.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2567

