Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxicity of a novel bi-functional temozolomide analog, DP68,
is independent of MGMT status in glioblastoma models.


Resistance to temozolomide (TMZ) in the majority of glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) is mediated by O6-methylguanine methyltransferase
(MGMT). In this study, the efficacy of TMZ, a mono-functional methylating
agent, was compared to a bi-functional TMZ analog (DP68) and a
corresponding mono-functional TMZ analog (DP86) in established glioma
lines (T98, U251), primary GBM xenograft lines (GBM12, GBM22, GBM6) and a
TMZ-resistant model with high level MGMT expression (GBM12TMZ). Using a
combination of CyQuant and neurosphere assays, the IC50 with TMZ
treatment for MGMT expressing lines (U251, GBM12, GBM22) was much lower
than non-expressing lines (T98, G6, G12TMZ), while all lines were
sensitive to DP68 regardless of MGMT status (see Table). In the same
assays, cells were less sensitive to DP86, but cytotoxicity was also
independent of MGMT status. In both U251 and T98, DP68 resulted in a
time-and dose-dependent induction of markers for DNA damage and
checkpoint activation (P-H2AX, ATM, KAP1, Chk1 and Chk2) and a pronounced
S-phase arrest within 24 hours of treatment. Based on these results and
the hypothesis that DP68 induces DNA cross-links, siRNA knockdown was
used to further dissect the importance of the ATM and ATR signaling
pathways and the Fanconi Anemia (FA) cross-link repair pathway for DP68
cytotoxicity. Compared to no treatment, 1 microM DP68 resulted in 100%
relative absorbance in siCONtrol transfected U251 cells, 41% for siATR,
35% for siFANCD2 and 90% for siATM. In contrast, only siATR and not
siFAND2 nor siATM sensitized U251 cells to DP86. Similarly, inhibition of
ATR (VE-821), but not ATM (KU-60019) potently sensitized cells to DP68
(see Table). Taken together, the inhibitory effects of DP68 are superior
to TMZ in the GBM cell lines tested, regardless of MGMT expression.
Furthermore, the siRNA and western blotting suggest that recovery from
DP68 is dependent on ATR and the FA repair pathway.


