Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential response to retinoid treatment of normal and
transformed murine mammary cells overexpressing protein kinase C (PKC)
isoforms.


Some of the most promising signaling pathways for breast cancer treatment
include the PKC family, involved in proliferation and apoptosis, and the
retinoid system mainly involved in differentiation.In this work we have
overexpressed or PKC isoforms in two murine mammary models, a
tumor-derived cell line (LM3) and a normal mammary gland-derived line
(NMuMG), in order to analyze whether elevated expression of these kinases
alter the sensitivity to retinoid treatment.The overexpression of or PKC
isozymes did not induce detectable morphological alterations either in
LM3 or in NMuMG cell lines. In the transformed cell context, the
overexpression of PKC increased cell proliferation (population doubling
time: 14.82.3 h vs 21.23.1 h in control cells pSome of the most promising
signaling pathways for breast cancer treatment include the PKC family,
involved in proliferation and apoptosis, and the retinoid system mainly
involved in differentiation.In this work we have overexpressed or PKC
isoforms in two murine mammary models, a tumor-derived cell line (LM3)
and a normal mammary gland-derived line (NMuMG), in order to analyze
whether elevated expression of these kinases alter the sensitivity to
retinoid treatment.The overexpression of or PKC isozymes did not induce
detectable morphological alterations either in LM3 or in NMuMG cell
lines. In the transformed cell context, the overexpression of PKC
increased cell proliferation (population doubling time: 14.82.3 h vs
21.23.1 h in control cells p<0.05) and motility (wound coverage: 69.38.3%
vs 41.25.1% in control cells pSome of the most promising signaling
pathways for breast cancer treatment include the PKC family, involved in
proliferation and apoptosis, and the retinoid system mainly involved in
differentiation.In this work we have overexpressed or PKC isoforms in two
murine mammary models, a tumor-derived cell line (LM3) and a normal
mammary gland-derived line (NMuMG), in order to analyze whether elevated
expression of these kinases alter the sensitivity to retinoid
treatment.The overexpression of or PKC isozymes did not induce detectable
morphological alterations either in LM3 or in NMuMG cell lines. In the
transformed cell context, the overexpression of PKC increased cell
proliferation (population doubling time: 14.82.3 h vs 21.23.1 h in
control cells p<0.05) and motility (wound coverage: 69.38.3% vs 41.25.1%
in control cells p<0.05), alterations that could be associated with an
aggressive in vivo tumor behavior. Interestingly, at the same time, PKC
sensitized LM3 cells to the effects of the All-Trans-Retinoic Acid (ATRA)
as evidenced by a significant reduction in both parameters.On the
contrary, PKC overexpression did not affect either LM3 cells in vitro
behavior or their response to ATRA. However, through a RARE-luciferase
gene reporter assay, we could determine that the overexpression of PKC
increased the activity of the retinoic acid receptors.In the normal cell
context (NMuMG cells), the overexpression of both PKCs did not induce
alterations in the proliferative potential (population doubling time:
14.80.8 h) or cell motility (wound coverage: 37.81.6%). Moreover, the
subsequent treatment with ATRA neither affected the above mentioned
parameters.Upon othotopic inoculation into syngeneic mice, LM3-PKC cells
formed tumors with higher growth rate and metastatic potential than
LM3-vector ones. In vivo treatment with a subcutaneous ATRA pellet
reduced both the local tumor growth and the number of spontaneous lung
metastases (Md [Range]: 9 [0-27] vs 55 [20-75] for LM3-PKC treated or not
respectively pSome of the most promising signaling pathways for breast
cancer treatment include the PKC family, involved in proliferation and
apoptosis, and the retinoid system mainly involved in differentiation.In
this work we have overexpressed or PKC isoforms in two murine mammary
models, a tumor-derived cell line (LM3) and a normal mammary
gland-derived line (NMuMG), in order to analyze whether elevated
expression of these kinases alter the sensitivity to retinoid
treatment.The overexpression of or PKC isozymes did not induce detectable
morphological alterations either in LM3 or in NMuMG cell lines. In the
transformed cell context, the overexpression of PKC increased cell
proliferation (population doubling time: 14.82.3 h vs 21.23.1 h in
control cells p<0.05) and motility (wound coverage: 69.38.3% vs 41.25.1%
in control cells p<0.05), alterations that could be associated with an
aggressive in vivo tumor behavior. Interestingly, at the same time, PKC
sensitized LM3 cells to the effects of the All-Trans-Retinoic Acid (ATRA)
as evidenced by a significant reduction in both parameters.On the
contrary, PKC overexpression did not affect either LM3 cells in vitro
behavior or their response to ATRA. However, through a RARE-luciferase
gene reporter assay, we could determine that the overexpression of PKC
increased the activity of the retinoic acid receptors.In the normal cell
context (NMuMG cells), the overexpression of both PKCs did not induce
alterations in the proliferative potential (population doubling time:
14.80.8 h) or cell motility (wound coverage: 37.81.6%). Moreover, the
subsequent treatment with ATRA neither affected the above mentioned
parameters.Upon othotopic inoculation into syngeneic mice, LM3-PKC cells
formed tumors with higher growth rate and metastatic potential than
LM3-vector ones. In vivo treatment with a subcutaneous ATRA pellet
reduced both the local tumor growth and the number of spontaneous lung
metastases (Md [Range]: 9 [0-27] vs 55 [20-75] for LM3-PKC treated or not
respectively p<0.05). PKC overexpression did not affect in vivo LM3
behavior.Our results show that in an already transformed context, PKC
overexpression induced a more aggressive phenotype but also conferred
sensitivity to the retinoid treatment. On the other side high PKC levels
increased the activity of retinoid receptors but did not modulate
biological cell responses to this compound. In a normal cell context,
both PKC isoforms as well as the retinoid treatment are innocuous thus
ensuring the safeness use of retinoids in patients with aggressive breast
tumors associated with high PKC expression.

