Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypically diverse cancer cell subpopulations in a
luminal-like breast cancer xenograft model are associated with different
signaling pathways.


High degree of intratumor cellular diversity represent a major challenge
when attempting to cure cancer. The presence of tumor cell subpopulations
with enhanced in vivo tumorigenic capacity (tumor initiating cells,
TICs), and high resistance to conventional cancer therapy, compared with
the bulk tumor cell populations, has for the last decade been the focus
of many breast cancer research groups. The cellular heterogeneity of an
orthotopic luminal-like breast cancer xenograft model was investigated
using IHC, flow cytometry, whole genome expression profiling and mass
spectrometry-based proteomics combined with in vivo tumorigenicity and
targeted therapy assays. Epithelial cell adhesion molecule, EpCAM, highly
specific for the human tumor epithelial cells, was used to separate human
tumor cells from the mouse stromal compartment.Further flow analysis of
the EpCAM positive tumor cell population revealed diverse expression of
several cell surface markers, including CD24 and SSEA-4 (stage specific
embryonic antigen 4).SSEA-4-/CD24-, SSEA-4+/CD24- and SSEA-4-/CD24+
populations were capable of initiating tumors in NOD SCID mice while
SSEA-4+/CD24+ cells were non-tumorigenic. Tumors resulting from the
SSEA-4+/CD24- subpopulation did not express CD24, while tumors arising
from the SSEA-4-/CD24- and SSEA-4-/CD24+ populations, contained all four
subpopulations.As measured by whole genome expression analysis and mass
spectrometry-based proteomics, the molecular differences were most
pronounced between tumorigenic subpopulations and the non-tumorigenic
subpopulation. While the mRNA expression data revealed a high degree of
similarity among the four subpopulations, the proteomics data suggested
that several signaling pathways might have distinct and different
activity across the populations. The effects of targeted therapy against
ER and WNT signaling on heterogeneity and tumorigenicity have been
evaluated by in vivo experiments.

