Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The biological significance of T3-regulated endoglin in human
hepatoma cells.


Hypothyroidism has been associated with significantly elevated risk for
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), although the precise underlying
mechanisms remain unknown at present. Thyroid hormone (T3) and its
receptor (TR) are involved in metabolism and growth. Endoglin is a T3/TR
candidate target gene identified from our previous studies. Here, we
demonstrated that T3 positively regulates endoglin mRNA and protein
levels, both in vitro and in vivo. The thyroid hormone response elements
(TRE) of endoglin were identified at positions -2114/-2004 and
-2032/-1973 of the promoter region using the electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay.
Endoglin was downregulated in subgroups of HCC patients, and
significantly associated with histology grade (negative association, p =
0.001), and this expression level was significantly associated with TR1
in these HCC patients. Knockdown of endoglin expression in HCC cells
promoted cell proliferation in the presence of T3. Moreover, endoglin
stabilized p21 expression at the translational level. Based on the
collective findings, we propose that endoglin is stimulated by T3 to
stabilize p21, leading to the inhibition of cell proliferation. Endoglin
and TR1 levels are reduced in HCC, resulting in increased proliferative
activity.

