Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Landscape of human and viral genomic alterations in cervical
carcinomas.


Background: Cervical cancer is a major public health problem worldwide.
The etiological role of human papilloma virus (HPV) infections in
cervical cancer is well established. However, HPV infection is
insufficient to account for the development of cervical cancers because
only 2 % of women infected with HPV eventually develop invasive
carcinomas. We have therefore initiated a large scale sequencing effort
to provide comprehensive data on the global landscape of genomic
aberrations and HPV variants that contribute to cervical cancer. Methods:
We have carried out comprehensive whole exome sequencing analyses on 120
tumor-normal paired samples from Mexico and Norway. We also carried out
transcriptome and whole genome sequencing analyses on a subset of the
patients (81 and 14 individuals respectively). Results: The aggregate
mutation rate across the dataset was 3.8 per megabase (Mb), with the most
common mutations being C to T/G in the Tp*C dinucleotide context, at a
rate of 15 mutations per Mb. In all, 18,037 mutations were found across
the entire dataset, including 11,536 missense, 984 nonsense, 4691 silent,
231 splice site, 32 translation start site mutations, as well 443
deletions and 142 insertions. MutSig analyses to identify genes that were
mutated at statistically significant frequencies across our dataset
revealed 11 genes to be recurrently mutated with a false discovery rate
of qBackground: Cervical cancer is a major public health problem
worldwide. The etiological role of human papilloma virus (HPV) infections
in cervical cancer is well established. However, HPV infection is
insufficient to account for the development of cervical cancers because
only 2 % of women infected with HPV eventually develop invasive
carcinomas. We have therefore initiated a large scale sequencing effort
to provide comprehensive data on the global landscape of genomic
aberrations and HPV variants that contribute to cervical cancer. Methods:
We have carried out comprehensive whole exome sequencing analyses on 120
tumor-normal paired samples from Mexico and Norway. We also carried out
transcriptome and whole genome sequencing analyses on a subset of the
patients (81 and 14 individuals respectively). Results: The aggregate
mutation rate across the dataset was 3.8 per megabase (Mb), with the most
common mutations being C to T/G in the Tp*C dinucleotide context, at a
rate of 15 mutations per Mb. In all, 18,037 mutations were found across
the entire dataset, including 11,536 missense, 984 nonsense, 4691 silent,
231 splice site, 32 translation start site mutations, as well 443
deletions and 142 insertions. MutSig analyses to identify genes that were
mutated at statistically significant frequencies across our dataset
revealed 11 genes to be recurrently mutated with a false discovery rate
of q<0.1 after correction for multiple hypothesis testing (and
RNASeq-based evidence of robust gene expression). The most significantly
mutated genes encode for members of the PIK3CA/PTEN and RAS/RAF/MAPK
signaling pathways, as well as the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC). We have also uncovered novel patterns of HPV transcript abundance
and sites of recurrent HPV integration in cell cycle related genes. In
addition, our whole genome sequencing data suggests that HPV-negative
p53-mutant tumors harbor high frequencies of genomic rearrangements.
Conclusion: The comprehensive catalogue of genomic alterations provided
by this project reveals potential novel therapeutic targets in cervical
carcinomas. Our data also sets the stage for improving diagnostic and
preventive strategies, especially in resource-limited settings with the
highest incidence of cervical cancer.

