Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small-molecule-induced reactivation of mutant p53 in cancer cells.


The tumour suppressor p53 inhibits tumour growth by induction of cell
cycle arrest, apoptosis or senescence. However, p53 mutations occur
frequently in human tumours. About one-third of the mutations lower the
melting temperature of the protein and cause rapidly unfolds at body
temperature. The p53 cancer mutant Y220C is an excellent paradigm for
rescuing the function of conformationally unstable p53 mutants because it
has a unique surface crevice that can be targeted by small-molecule
stabilizers. Through biophysical and cell-based screening, we identified
a compound, PK7088, which binds to the Y220C mutant with a dissociation
constant of 140 M. The binding mode of this compound class was determined
by X-ray crystallography. In cancer cells carrying the Y220C mutant,
PK7088 increased the amount of folded mutant protein with wild-type like
conformation, as monitored by immunofluorescence, and restored its
transcriptional functions. It induced p53-Y220C-dependent growth
inhibition, cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. This was confirmed by p53
silencing. Most notably, PK7088 increased the expression levels of p21
and the proapoptotic NOXA protein. PK7088 worked synergistically with
Nutlin-3 on up-regulating p21 and NOXA expression, whereas Nutlin-3 on
its own had no effect, consistent with its mechanism of action. PK7088
also restored non-transcriptional apoptotic functions of p53 by
triggering nuclear export of BAX to the mitochondria. These findings
provide novel insights into p53 mutant reactivation and may facilitate
the development of more potent and selective small-molecule drugs for
specific mutant p53 rescue.

