Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of epidermal growth factor receptor mutation tests in
patients with recurred non-small cell lung cancer after surgery.


Background: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are
predictive marker of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We compared the agreements between
three EGFR mutation tests with surgical specimens of recurred
NSCLC.Methods: We retrospectively analyzed paraffin-embedded tissues,
which were obtained from 111 (76 adenocarcinoma, 17 squamous cell
carcinoma, 18 others) cases of 108 patients treated by EGFR-TKIs after
surgery between 2003 and 2011 in Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital. EGFR mutations in exons 18-21 were analyzed by three different
methods- Cobas EGFR mutation test (Roche), PNA Clamp EGFR mutation test
(Panagene) and direct sequencing- and compared with radiologic response
to EGFR-TKIs. The degree of agreement was evaluated by Cohen's kappa
value.Results: The mean treatment duration of total 111 (64 gefitinib, 47
erlotinib) cases was 188.5198.7 days. The response rate was 18.9%, and
disease control rate was 63.1%. EGFR mutation rates were 38.7% in PNA
clamping, 34.2% in Cobas test, and 31.5% in direct sequencing. The
agreement of Cobas test and PNA clamping was 93.7% (k=0.864, pBackground:
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are predictive marker
of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). We compared the agreements between three EGFR mutation
tests with surgical specimens of recurred NSCLC.Methods: We
retrospectively analyzed paraffin-embedded tissues, which were obtained
from 111 (76 adenocarcinoma, 17 squamous cell carcinoma, 18 others) cases
of 108 patients treated by EGFR-TKIs after surgery between 2003 and 2011
in Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital. EGFR mutations in exons
18-21 were analyzed by three different methods- Cobas EGFR mutation test
(Roche), PNA Clamp EGFR mutation test (Panagene) and direct sequencing-
and compared with radiologic response to EGFR-TKIs. The degree of
agreement was evaluated by Cohen's kappa value.Results: The mean
treatment duration of total 111 (64 gefitinib, 47 erlotinib) cases was
188.5198.7 days. The response rate was 18.9%, and disease control rate
was 63.1%. EGFR mutation rates were 38.7% in PNA clamping, 34.2% in Cobas
test, and 31.5% in direct sequencing. The agreement of Cobas test and PNA
clamping was 93.7% (k=0.864, p<0.001), that of Cobas test and sequencing
was 84.7% (k=0.653, pBackground: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations are predictive marker of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
therapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We compared the agreements
between three EGFR mutation tests with surgical specimens of recurred
NSCLC.Methods: We retrospectively analyzed paraffin-embedded tissues,
which were obtained from 111 (76 adenocarcinoma, 17 squamous cell
carcinoma, 18 others) cases of 108 patients treated by EGFR-TKIs after
surgery between 2003 and 2011 in Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital. EGFR mutations in exons 18-21 were analyzed by three different
methods- Cobas EGFR mutation test (Roche), PNA Clamp EGFR mutation test
(Panagene) and direct sequencing- and compared with radiologic response
to EGFR-TKIs. The degree of agreement was evaluated by Cohen's kappa
value.Results: The mean treatment duration of total 111 (64 gefitinib, 47
erlotinib) cases was 188.5198.7 days. The response rate was 18.9%, and
disease control rate was 63.1%. EGFR mutation rates were 38.7% in PNA
clamping, 34.2% in Cobas test, and 31.5% in direct sequencing. The
agreement of Cobas test and PNA clamping was 93.7% (k=0.864, p<0.001),
that of Cobas test and sequencing was 84.7% (k=0.653, p<0.001), and that
of PNA and sequencing was 78.4% (k=0.528, pBackground: Epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are predictive marker of EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We
compared the agreements between three EGFR mutation tests with surgical
specimens of recurred NSCLC.Methods: We retrospectively analyzed
paraffin-embedded tissues, which were obtained from 111 (76
adenocarcinoma, 17 squamous cell carcinoma, 18 others) cases of 108
patients treated by EGFR-TKIs after surgery between 2003 and 2011 in
Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital. EGFR mutations in exons
18-21 were analyzed by three different methods- Cobas EGFR mutation test
(Roche), PNA Clamp EGFR mutation test (Panagene) and direct sequencing-
and compared with radiologic response to EGFR-TKIs. The degree of
agreement was evaluated by Cohen's kappa value.Results: The mean
treatment duration of total 111 (64 gefitinib, 47 erlotinib) cases was
188.5198.7 days. The response rate was 18.9%, and disease control rate
was 63.1%. EGFR mutation rates were 38.7% in PNA clamping, 34.2% in Cobas
test, and 31.5% in direct sequencing. The agreement of Cobas test and PNA
clamping was 93.7% (k=0.864, p<0.001), that of Cobas test and sequencing
was 84.7% (k=0.653, p<0.001), and that of PNA and sequencing was 78.4%
(k=0.528, p<0.001). The prediction rates of EGFR-TKIs response were 39.5%
of Cobas test, 37.2% of PNA clamping, and 34.3% of sequencing. The degree
of agreement between mutation and clinical response was better in Cobas
test (k=0.350, pBackground: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations are predictive marker of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
therapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We compared the agreements
between three EGFR mutation tests with surgical specimens of recurred
NSCLC.Methods: We retrospectively analyzed paraffin-embedded tissues,
which were obtained from 111 (76 adenocarcinoma, 17 squamous cell
carcinoma, 18 others) cases of 108 patients treated by EGFR-TKIs after
surgery between 2003 and 2011 in Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital. EGFR mutations in exons 18-21 were analyzed by three different
methods- Cobas EGFR mutation test (Roche), PNA Clamp EGFR mutation test
(Panagene) and direct sequencing- and compared with radiologic response
to EGFR-TKIs. The degree of agreement was evaluated by Cohen's kappa
value.Results: The mean treatment duration of total 111 (64 gefitinib, 47
erlotinib) cases was 188.5198.7 days. The response rate was 18.9%, and
disease control rate was 63.1%. EGFR mutation rates were 38.7% in PNA
clamping, 34.2% in Cobas test, and 31.5% in direct sequencing. The
agreement of Cobas test and PNA clamping was 93.7% (k=0.864, p<0.001),
that of Cobas test and sequencing was 84.7% (k=0.653, p<0.001), and that
of PNA and sequencing was 78.4% (k=0.528, p<0.001). The prediction rates
of EGFR-TKIs response were 39.5% of Cobas test, 37.2% of PNA clamping,
and 34.3% of sequencing. The degree of agreement between mutation and
clinical response was better in Cobas test (k=0.350, p<0.001) and PNA
clamping (k=0.330, pBackground: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations are predictive marker of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
therapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We compared the agreements
between three EGFR mutation tests with surgical specimens of recurred
NSCLC.Methods: We retrospectively analyzed paraffin-embedded tissues,
which were obtained from 111 (76 adenocarcinoma, 17 squamous cell
carcinoma, 18 others) cases of 108 patients treated by EGFR-TKIs after
surgery between 2003 and 2011 in Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital. EGFR mutations in exons 18-21 were analyzed by three different
methods- Cobas EGFR mutation test (Roche), PNA Clamp EGFR mutation test
(Panagene) and direct sequencing- and compared with radiologic response
to EGFR-TKIs. The degree of agreement was evaluated by Cohen's kappa
value.Results: The mean treatment duration of total 111 (64 gefitinib, 47
erlotinib) cases was 188.5198.7 days. The response rate was 18.9%, and
disease control rate was 63.1%. EGFR mutation rates were 38.7% in PNA
clamping, 34.2% in Cobas test, and 31.5% in direct sequencing. The
agreement of Cobas test and PNA clamping was 93.7% (k=0.864, p<0.001),
that of Cobas test and sequencing was 84.7% (k=0.653, p<0.001), and that
of PNA and sequencing was 78.4% (k=0.528, p<0.001). The prediction rates
of EGFR-TKIs response were 39.5% of Cobas test, 37.2% of PNA clamping,
and 34.3% of sequencing. The degree of agreement between mutation and
clinical response was better in Cobas test (k=0.350, p<0.001) and PNA
clamping (k=0.330, p<0.001) than sequencing (k=0.252,
p=0.008).Conclusion: The strength of agreement of Cobas test was very
good with PNA clamping and good with direct sequencing. So Cobas test can
be useful test for EGFR-TKI therapy in recurred NSCLC after surgery.

