Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel T-cell redirecting trivalent bispecific antibodies.


Background: Various formats of bispecific antibodies (bsAbs) to redirect
effector T cells for killing of targeted tumor cells have shown
considerable promise both pre-clinically and clinically. Notable examples
are BiTE and DART, which comprise scFv-based anti-CD3 and anti-tumor
antibodies. Herein, we describe, for the first time, the generation of a
panel of novel T-cell redirecting trivalent bsAbs, each comprising an
anti-CD3 scFv covalently conjugated to a stabilized dimer of
tumor-targeting Fab by the DOCK-AND-LOCKTM (DNLTM) method, as potential
therapeutics for hematological or solid malignancies. We provide a
detailed characterization of a CD19-specific prototype designated
(19)-3s. DNL is a modular platform that combines recombinant engineering
with site-specific chemical conjugation to generate bsAbs whose
conceivable advantages include bivalent binding to tumor cells, a larger
size (130 kDa) to preclude rapid renal clearance, and potent T-cell
mediated cytotoxicity. Methods: Seven DNL complexes, designated (19)-3s,
(14)-3s, (15)-3s, (E1)-3s, (1R)-3s, (C2)-3s, and (M1)-3s, were prepared
by linking anti-CD3 scFv to a stabilized dimer of humanized Fab with
specificity for CD19, CEACAM5, CEACAM6, Trop-2, IGF-1R, HLA-DR, and
PAM4-antigen, respectively. Each complex was affinity purified and showed
more than 85% of the desired product in a single peak by size-exclusion
HPLC. Extensive in vitro characterizations were performed on (19)-3s
using a variety of cell-based assays and CD19-expressing human
non-Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines (Daudi, Raji and Ramos). The in vivo
antitumor activity of (19)-3s was evaluated in NOD/SCID mice injected SC
with a mixture of Raji cells and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(hPBMCs). Results: (19)-3s at 1 g/mL induced synapse formation between
freshly isolated human T cells and Daudi cells, resulting in 45.5%
CD20/CD7 dual-positive events with >90% of Daudi cells associated with T
cells, compared with 2% for untreated cells. At an E:T ratio of 12.5:1,
(19)-3s-mediated T-cell killing of Daudi cells at 50-fold) upregulation
of CD69 expression and T cell proliferation. The (19)-3s was highly
effective in vivo. In the Raji/hPBMC model of NOD/SCID mice, three of the
5 animals treated every other day with 43 g of (19)-3s for three doses
remained alive after 84 days and had significantly (P = 0.0018) improved
median survival time (> 84 days) compared to the untreated control group
(28 days). Conclusions: (19)-3s effectively induce T-cell-mediated
killing of CD19-expressing cells in vitro and in vivo. We are currently
evaluating the in vitro and in vivo properties of other DNL complexes in
cognate solid tumors.

