Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early stage inhibition of murine mammary carcinogenesis by
ultraviolet radiation.


Epidemiological studies of geographical variations in breast cancer
mortality rates have found increased death rates at higher latitudes in
USA and other countries 1. This breast cancer latitudinal gradient is
hypothesized to be mediated by ultraviolet radiation (UVR) - produced
vitamin D3. We first have tested this latitudinal hypotheses using the
well-described C3(1)/Tag transgenic murine mammary carcinogenesis model2.
We have found that UVR significantly prolongs palpable tumor - free
survival (13523 vs.11818 days) and reduces the tumor burden and
multiplicity (2.91.6 vs. 7.22.3 tumors), but does not alter the time
between the appearance of the first palpable tumor and death in Tag
female mice. Therefore we have focused on the effects of UVR on earlier
stage carcinogenesis. Tag transgenic female mice have a time-dependent
increase in the incidence of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) - like
incidence. Thus, Tag mice develop ductal epithelial atypia in 50% of mice
at age 8 wks, with progression to intraepithelial neoplasia (resembling
human DCIS) in 70-90% of mice (in at least one gland) at 10-13 wks, and
DCIS-like changes and early invasion in 100% of mice at age 14-15 wks. We
compared weekly the similarity of histological changes between the pairs
of mammary glands and found no significant gland site-to-gland site
variations. UVR treatment, 350mJ/cm2 thrice weekly from age 6 wks to 15
wks, reduced both the percentage of DCIS-bearing mice (65, 60, 51, 32 and
20% reduction at week 8, 9, 11, 13 and 14) and the percentage of
DCIS-bearing glands in each animal (82, 55, 66, 20 and 19% reduction at
week 9, 11, 13, 14 and 15). The mechanism of the UVR-mediated prevention
of the murine mammary carcinogenesis is unclear but there is evidence
favoring a Hedgehog (HH) signaling-dependent mechanism, since D3 is a
potent inhibitor of the HH signaling pathway, which is upregulated in
many cancers including breast cancer3-5. Consistent with this idea we
found that UVR reduces DCIS-like changes in Ptch+/- mice. Taken together
our results support our hypothesis that inhibition of early stage mammary
carcinogenesis by UVR-produced vitamin D3 underlies the latitudinal
gradient. 1. Garland, F. C. et all. Prev Med 1990, 19, 614-22. 2. Green,
J. E. et all. Oncogene 2000, 19, 1020-7. 3. Bijlsma, M. F. et all. PLoS
Biol 2006, 4, e232. 4. Moraes, R. C. et all. Development 2009, 136,
1423-32. 5. Lewis, M. T. et all. Development 1999, 126, 5181-93.

