Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GB virus C viremia and subsequent risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in
the PLCO screening trial.


Background: Immune disturbance and chronic infections contribute to the
development of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). GB virus C (GBV-C), a
flavivirus, causes chronic asymptomatic infection in 1-2% of blood
donors. Retrospective case-control studies have demonstrated associations
between GBV-C viremia and NHL, but the prevalence of GBV-C could be
artifactually high in NHL cases due to prior blood transfusions or
disease-related immunosuppression and viral reactivation.Methods: We
conducted a case-control study nested in the U.S. Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer (PLCO) Screening Trial. Using incidence
density sampling, NHL cases were each matched to 2 controls on sex, race,
and age and calendar year at cohort entry. Pre-diagnostic sera were
assessed for GBV-C RNA in matched sets, with the laboratory blinded to
case-control status. GBV RNA positivity was determined by a consensus
algorithm incorporating results of 5 reverse transcriptase PCR assays.
Odds ratios (ORs) for NHL overall and NHL subtypes were calculated using
conditional and unconditional logistic regression, respectively.Results:
658 NHL cases and 1316 controls were included. GBV-C RNA was detected in
37 subjects (1.9%). Notably, in contrast to the low prevalence in study
subjects, blinded testing concurrently found GBV-C RNA in 24 of 25 (96%)
positive quality control (QC) samples but also 14 of 25 (56%) of negative
QC samples, likely reflecting contamination when the QC samples had been
prepared. Nonetheless, among subjects GBV-C RNA tended to be more
commonly detected in cases than controls (2.6% vs. 1.5%, OR 1.73, 95%CI
0.90-3.34, p=0.10). The association with NHL was strongest over longer
latency intervals, with ORs (95%CI) of 1.56 (0.58-4.18), 0.88
(0.26-2.99), and 6.00 (1.21-29.7) for GBV-C RNA detected 0-1.0, 1.1-4.0,
and 4.1+ years, respectively, before diagnosis/selection. Among NHL
subtypes, we observed non-significant associations with GBV-C RNA for
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (OR 1.84, 95%CI 0.62-5.45), follicular
lymphoma (2.29, 0.67-7.85), and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (2.15,
0.94-4.94).Conclusions: GBV-C viremia was associated with a
non-significant increased risk of NHL in a U.S. general population
cohort. The presence of an association more than 4 years after detection
of GBV-C RNA argues against bias related to NHL treatment or
immunosuppression in cases, and lends support to a possible etiologic
relationship. Detection of low-level GBV-C viremia was challenging, and
contamination during sample preparation likely led to a high prevalence
of RNA positivity in negative QC samples. Contamination should not have
led to preferentially higher positivity in cases vs. controls, but we are
undertaking additional confirmatory testing. Samples will also be assayed
for infection with HIV and hepatitis C virus, which are proven viral
causes of NHL and are more common in GBV-C infected individuals.

