Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of the EGFR mutational status on FFPE material from
patients with lung cancer using Multiplex PCR followed by sequencing on a
compatible 454 sequencing platform.


Background: The epidermal growth factor receptor belongs to the ErbB
family of cell-surface receptors. Hotspot mutations within this gene
occur in 27% of lung cancers and patients carrying mutation(s) likely
receive more benefit from EGFR targeted therapy. We have evaluated the
feasibility of multiplex PCR targeting known mutational hotspots in EGFR
exon 18 till 21, followed by 454 pyrosequencing to determine the EGFR
mutational status in patients with lung cancer.Methods: FFPE samples from
10 lung cancer patients were collected. Four samples were mutant and six
carried the wild-type (WT) genotype. A multiplex PCR was performed in
which primers had a gene specific sequence, a patient specific bar code
(MID) and Roche sequencing tags. The unique multiplex identifiers (MIDs)
allow appropriate mixing of patient samples and differentiation in the
sequence data. Amplicon generation was verified by fragment analysis
(GeneScan). Amplicons were purified using AMPure XP beads, quantified by
Quant-iT PicoGreen, pooled in equimolar ratios and diluted before
emulsion PCR. Sequencing was carried out in 2 runs using Titanium
Amplicon chemistry (Lib-A) on a 454 GS Junior. Two samples were analyzed
in duplicate to assess reproducibility. Data were analyzed using the
amplicon variant analyzer software.Results: A throughput of 52.159 and
28.769 high quality reads was achieved for the library in the performed
runs. Considering the EGFR amplicons, a mean coverage of 837 reads (range
589 - 1350) was obtained. Four variants were detected by sequencing and
were 100% concordant with results obtained using a StripAssay in an
ISO-certified setting. The variants and frequencies detected were G719X
(21,7%), p.L747-S752del (21,46%), p.H773_V774insNPH (11,14%) and p.L861Q
(24,11%). In the WT samples no EGFR mutations were detected, suggesting a
100% specificity on the obtained 454 data. Additionally, variant analysis
showed 2 different SNPs in exon 20 and 21 (rs1050171 and rs17290559,
respectively). These are classified as the synonymous mutations Q787Q and
R836R and do not have any clinical significance. The SNPs in exon 20 and
21 were detected in 67% and 17% of the WT samples, respectively.
Inter-run reproducibility was established from comparison of 2 WT samples
in different sequence runs. Intra-assay reproducibility was demonstrated
via analysis of EGFR mutant samples in duplicate.Conclusions: Our study
provides a basis for the implementation of next generation sequencing for
the detection of somatic mutations in EGFR in a routine clinical setting.
The used multiplex PCR and subsequent 454 sequencing allowed the
detection of significant activating or resistance associated EGFR
mutations in FFPE material from patients with lung cancer. We obtained
100% concordance with previously obtained results from an accredited
laboratory.

