Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Podocalyxin-like 1 promotes stemness and metastasis of cancer
cells through activating cortactin.


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are involved in tumor-initiation, self-renewal,
and metastasis. CSCs share many similar biological properties with
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Currently, there still lacks a biomarker
that can specifically identify CSCs. Therefore, the signaling mechanism
underlying the metastatic process due to CSCs is still unclear. In the
present study, we used hybridoma to identify cell surface biomarker that
was coexpressed on both ESCs and cancer cells. We found that
podocalyxin-like 1 (PODXL) was expressed abundantly on both ESCs and
cancer cells. The expression of PODXL, which was upregulated in
tumorsphere, was found to be associated with CSCs markers. Additionally,
overexpression of PODXL was correlated with lymph node metastasis and
cancer malignancy. Knockdown of PODXL suppressed tumor self-renewal,
invasiveness, and metastasis. Further study of its molecular mechanism
revealed that PODXL induces focal adhesion kinase activation, F-actin
polymerization, and invadopodia formation by interacting with and
activating cortactin. Collectively, we found that PODXL promotes tumor
self-renewal and initiation and that the elevation of PODXL enhances
local tumor cells invasiveness and distant organ metastasis. Therefore,
PODXL might be a biomarker for CSC and a potential target for the
development of CSC therapeutics.

