Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characteristics of pancreatic cancer spheroids as a model for
anticancer efficacy test.


Compared to the conventional monolayers or suspension cultures, 3D
culture models have drawn attention as a vivo-mimic model which can
produce clinically relevant data. Among the several types of 3D culture
models, multicellular spheroid (MCS) is a appropriate model for study of
penetration and efficacy of anticancer agents. Purpose of this study was
to establish MCS of human pancreatic cancer cell (Panc-1) and evaluate
its usefulness as anticancer efficacy test. Panc-1 MCS was produced
successfully by using poly-dimethylsiloxane(PDMS) microwell instead of
agarose-coated 96-well system. MCS with average diameter of 375 m was
prepared in 700 m microwells after 4 days of culture. Spherical
morphology with rather rough surface and junctional structures in outer
cell layers were observed with no notable necrotic area. Extracellular
matrix proteins such as collagen I, fibronectin, and laminin were
detected in the interstitial space of MCS. Stem cell population with
CD44+/CD24+/ESA+ expression increased from 0.1% to 2.1% when cultured as
MCS. miRNA expression profiling showed a difference between monolayers
and MCS, i.e., 36 and 85 genes were up- and down-regulated in MCS,
respectively. Imaging of drug penetration and viability indicators
including MitoSOX, Edu incorporation, and Ki-67 expression were optimized
for microwell format. Colorimetric assays of MTS and APH were performed
after transferring MCS to 96-well plates. Overall, we demonstrated that
PDMS microwell is an appropriate platform for preparation of MCS of
Panc-1 cells and MCS showed different biological features from
monolayers, suggesting that Panc-1 MCS prepared using PDMS microwell may
be a useful 3D model for anticancer efficacy test.Citation Format:
Sang-Eun Yeon, Sang-Hoon Lee, Hyo-Jeong Kuh. Characteristics of
pancreatic cancer spheroids as a model for anticancer efficacy test.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2722.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2722

