Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bcl-XL overexpression prevents B Cell receptor driven autophagy in
IgM+ lymphoma.


Our previous studies showed that B cell receptor (BCR) induced apoptosis
in lymphoma was preceded by suppression of PI-3K [Carey GB, Scott DW
(2001) J. Immunol, 166: 1618-1626]. PI-3K stimulates mTOR, a suppressor
of autophagy and mitophagy. In addition, Bcl-XL is known to inhibit
BCR-driven apoptosis in lymphoma, although the underlying mechanism is
not clear. Therefore the present study examined autophagy in BCR induced
apoptosis in lymphoma cells expressing high or low levels of Bcl-XL.
WEHI-231 and WEHI-231 cells expressing Bcl-XL (WEHI-231/Bcl-XL) were
treated with anti-IgM to cross-link the BCR and to determine the cellular
processes leading to apoptosis. The results confirmed dramatic
mitochondrial dysfunction followed by apoptosis in parental WEHI-231
compared to WEHI-231/BclXL. BCR-crosslinking resulted in a massive and
rapid induction of the autophagic response in parental WEHI-231 compared
to those expressing Bcl-XL. Furthermore, treatment with STF-62247, a
small molecule inducer of autophagy, resulted in apoptosis in WEHI-231
but not WEHI-231/BclXL cells. These data suggest that BclXL prevents
BCR-driven apoptosis in lymphoma via blocking autophagic and mitophagic
responses. Hence, combinations of small molecule autophagy inducers and
Bcl-XL antagonists may prove to be effective in addressing lymphoma.
Supported by NCI Grant UH2CA158689 to G.B.C.

