Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detecting low abundance therapeutic targets for ovarian cancer
using engineered gold nanoparticles.


Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have been widely studied for use in disease
therapeutics as targeting and imaging agents, drug delivery vehicles and
as self-therapeutics. When AuNPs interact with the biological milieu they
form a corona layer, which is predominantly composed of proteins. The
outer soft layer is dynamic and here proteins are free to exchange over
time. The inner hard layer on the other hand consists of proteins firmly
bound to the NP surface. The Vromans effect predicts that given a limited
surface area, low affinity, high abundance proteins, that first attach to
the surface, are over time replaced by high affinity, low abundance
proteins. Our aim was to enrich low abundance proteins on the AuNP
surface to probe for differentially expressed proteins that are not
detected by traditional methods of protein identification. We studied the
binding of ovarian cell lysates (cancerous and non cancerous) to 10 nm
sized positively and negatively charged AuNPs. The formation of corona
around the AuNPs was characterized by dynamic light scattering and zeta
potential measurements. The composition of the protein corona was
identified using mass spectrometry. Proteins were also identified from
the cell lysate pool to serve as a control to assess protein enrichment
on NP surface. Using this approach, Hepatoma Derived Growth Factor (HDGF)
was identified as a low abundance protein that was detected by mass
spectrometry in cancer cells only after enrichment on the surface of
positively charged AuNPs. HDGF is overexpressed in multiple ovarian
cancer cells lines and knock down using siRNA shows decrease in cell
proliferation, G2/M arrest and apoptosis. This suggests an important role
of HDGF in the tumorigenicity of ovarian cancer, which could serve as an
important therapeutic target for the disease.

