Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic efficacy of different double arms
polyethyleneglycol-modified liposome containing doxorubicin on pulmonary
metastasis.


[Purpose] Metastasis is responsible for most mortality in cancer therapy.
Important things of metastatic treatment are not only prevention but also
therapy of metastatic tumor. It was indicated that usability of liposomal
doxorubicin (DOX) as drug delivery system formulation which were modified
with 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
dipolyethyleneglycol(different double arms PEG; DDA-PEG) (DDA-LDOX).
DDA-PEG had two different PEG lengths, 2000 and 500, in one molecule. In
this study, the effect of DDA-LDOX was examined on pulmonary metastasis
compared with 1-monomethoxy-PEG(2000)-2,3-distearoylglycerol
(PEG2000-DSG) modified liposomal DOX (2000-LDOX).[Methods] The liposomal
DOX was prepared by L--distearoylphosphatidylcholine, cholesterol,
L--distearoylphosphatidyl-DL-glycerol and DOX (100:100:60:18 mol).
Liposomal DOX was added 7.5 mol DDA-PEG or 15 mol PEG2000-DSG. In
anti-metastasis experiment, BDF1 mice were transplanted B16F10 melanoma
cells by intravenous inoculation and each liposome (2.5 mg/kg, DOX) was
injected at 20, 23 and 26 day after tumor transplantation. After 48 hr
from last administration, the mice were dissected and score of pulmonary
metastasis was recorded (010, 0: normal). Removed tissues were determined
DOX concentration by fluorescence method. In vitro, it was examined DOX
uptake into B16F10 melanoma cells from each liposome. [Results and
Discussion] Pulmonary metastasis scores of control and 2000-LDOX were 6.5
and 2.6, respectively. In contrast, that of DDA-LDOX was 1.0. Relative
pulmonary weight (%) was correlation with metastatic score (R2=0.954) and
supported pulmonary metastasis score. DOX concentration of DDA-LDOX was
twice higher than that of 2000-LDOX in the lung, namely, it was proved
that DDA-LDOX was easy to accumulate in the lung. Especially, it was
suggested that DDA-LDOX accumulated into pulmonary metastatic site
because DOX concentrations of heart, spleen and kidney were equal level
in other group. In the examination of DOX uptake into tumor cells, DOX
level in DDA-LDOX group was significantly higher than that in 2000-LDOX
group. The data had supported high accumulation into pulmonary metastasis
in vivo. In conclusion, it was suggested that DDA-LDOX was useful drug
carrier for suppressed pulmonary metastasis since it could have target
ability to pulmonary metastasis.

