Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Are there cell cycle-dependent variations in cadherin-mediated
cell adhesion.


Cell adhesion makes possible the development of tissues and organs. It
has thus been an important topic in biomedical research, cancer research
in particular. One method used to quantify cell adhesion, the dual
pipette assay, has shown persistent variability in the force required to
separate adherent cells despite efforts to minimize variability through
strict protocols and assay automation. We are using FUCCI (fluorescence
ubiquitination cell cycle indicator) to determine if cell-cycle dependent
changes might account for the observed variability in separation force.
The FUCCI technique involves antiphase oscillating proteins that mark the
cell-cycle transitions with corresponding fluorescent probes. Initial
comparison of fluorescence distributions in aggregated and unaggregated
FUCCI E cad cells showed no preferential accumulation in aggregates of
cells in a particular stage of the cell cycle. Work continues to improve
the resolution and reproducibility of the tests.Citation Format: Maria
Cimpean, Yangjinqi Yu, Brenna Laperle, Edie Corey, William A. Thomas. Are
there cell cycle-dependent variations in cadherin-mediated cell adhesion.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 212.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-212

