Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wide surgical margins are of prognostic importance in GIST.


Background: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common
mesenchymal tumor of the gastrointestinal tract and even in the era with
molecularly targeted agents is surgery the mainstay of treatment and the
only treatment that could lead to cure. Microscopically negative margins
are today accepted as sufficient margins for cure while tumor rupture is
known to result in poor prognosis and therefore taken into account in
prognostic models. In other types of soft tissue sarcoma has wide margins
been known to be of importance for recurrence while this has not been
shown in GIST.Methods: 116 patient were included in the study, 55 male
and 61 female, mean age 61 years (10-86) and mean follow-up 73 month
(4,6-365) that has been evaluated for surgical margins at the time for
surgery or at referral to our institution. The criteria used has been
those used for sarcoma in other locations were Wide margins are defined
as 3 cm marginal in the organ of origin combined with an completely
intact peritoneal surface covering the tumor. In cases where the tumor is
stucked to surrounding tissue or organ, that part has been resected un
bloc with the tumor. Marginal margins are defined as R0 resection with
less then 3 cm and Intralesional margin is when the tumor is shelled out
or damage to surrounding peritoneal surface or judged as R1 resection.
Local recurrence has been defined as recurrence at site of origin or
intraabdominal recurrence of tumor in the peritoneum and metastatic
disease when recurrence is distant metastasis.Results: We found 48 cases
with wide margins(3 recurrence), 39 with marginal margins (15 recurrence)
and 29 with intralesional margins (17 recurrence). There was significant
difference calculated as Kaplan-Meier for both local recurrence
(p=0,00016), distant metastasis (p= 0,004) and survival (p= 0,0047) and
in cox regression analysis hazard ratio were 7,4 for marginal margins and
8,08 for intralesional margins compared to wide margins and this was not
correlated with size or site (p= 0,007).Conclusion: Surgical margins is
of great importance in GIST both for local recurrence, distant metastasis
and survival and patient with GIST should be operated with wide margins,
in accordance with principals of other sarcoma.

