Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isoenzyme-selective HDAC activity assays.


Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are the family of enzymes which catalyze
removal of acetyl groups from lysine residues on both histone and
non-histone proteins. The lysine acetylation state of histones is an
important post-translational modification which affects both chromatin
structure and gene transcription. Thus, by deacetylating the
amino-terminal tails of histones, HDACs have a profound effect on
numerous and diverse cellular functions including cell proliferation.
Given this important regulatory role, as well as evidence for significant
HDAC involvement in the modulation of cancer, rapid advancement has been
made in the development of broad-spectrum HDAC inhibitors. Recently,
there has been an increased focus on the development of
isoenzyme-specific HDAC inhibitors which may lead to improved therapy,
including better efficacy and reduced off target effects. To enable
selective HDAC studies, we developed assays that selectively measure
specific isoenzyme activities in cells, extracts, or recombinant
proteins. The assays use a homogeneous luminescent approach with a single
reagent addition that is amenable to HTS. Isoenzyme-selective,
luminogenic acetylated peptide substrates provide the basis for HDAC
isoenzyme selectivity. Peptide deacetylation is measured by exposure to
developer and a luciferin detection reagent. In addition to isoenzyme
specificity, the assays show approximately 100-fold or better enhanced
sensitivity over fluorescence methods and the versatility necessary for
both biochemical and cell-based formats.

