Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence for genetic mediation of lung cancer through hay fever.


Introduction: In the past decade, advances in genetics have led to the
discovery of numerous lung cancer susceptibility variants. The majority
of these variants have been found to influence lung cancer susceptibility
via tobacco exposure or nicotine addiction; however, recently,
researchers have observed lung cancer susceptibility variants that
mediate through Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). Studies
involving potential genetic factors related to other lung-related
conditions, such as pneumonia and/or hay fever have been limited. The
genetic variants related to underlying mechanism of hay fever on the
development of lung cancer are interesting to pursue as hay fever has
been showed to be protective against lung cancer.Methods: Cases included
1154 histological-confirmed Caucasian lung cases from MD Anderson Cancer
Center in Houston, Texas, and controls included 1137 individuals
recruited through the Kelsey-Seybold Clinics in Houston, Texas. These
cases and controls were a subset of participants from a lung cancer
case-control study conducted that has available Genome-wide association
study (GWAS) data (317,498 SNPs). We first conducted an association
analysis in PLINK to determine the association of each SNP with both lung
cancer and hay fever and find SNPs that showed a joint significance for
both hay fever and lung cancer in opposite directions (p-value
Introduction: In the past decade, advances in genetics have led to the
discovery of numerous lung cancer susceptibility variants. The majority
of these variants have been found to influence lung cancer susceptibility
via tobacco exposure or nicotine addiction; however, recently,
researchers have observed lung cancer susceptibility variants that
mediate through Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). Studies
involving potential genetic factors related to other lung-related
conditions, such as pneumonia and/or hay fever have been limited. The
genetic variants related to underlying mechanism of hay fever on the
development of lung cancer are interesting to pursue as hay fever has
been showed to be protective against lung cancer.Methods: Cases included
1154 histological-confirmed Caucasian lung cases from MD Anderson Cancer
Center in Houston, Texas, and controls included 1137 individuals
recruited through the Kelsey-Seybold Clinics in Houston, Texas. These
cases and controls were a subset of participants from a lung cancer
case-control study conducted that has available Genome-wide association
study (GWAS) data (317,498 SNPs). We first conducted an association
analysis in PLINK to determine the association of each SNP with both lung
cancer and hay fever and find SNPs that showed a joint significance for
both hay fever and lung cancer in opposite directions (p-value < 0.05 for
both). We then performed mediation analyses with the SNPs that showed
significance for both hay fever and lung cancer. Finally, we inferred
SNPs in regions that contained a collection of tag SNPs that mediate lung
cancer risk through hay fever.Results: Two hundred and forty six SNPs
were found to be statistically significant (p-value Introduction: In the
past decade, advances in genetics have led to the discovery of numerous
lung cancer susceptibility variants. The majority of these variants have
been found to influence lung cancer susceptibility via tobacco exposure
or nicotine addiction; however, recently, researchers have observed lung
cancer susceptibility variants that mediate through Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease (COPD). Studies involving potential genetic factors
related to other lung-related conditions, such as pneumonia and/or hay
fever have been limited. The genetic variants related to underlying
mechanism of hay fever on the development of lung cancer are interesting
to pursue as hay fever has been showed to be protective against lung
cancer.Methods: Cases included 1154 histological-confirmed Caucasian lung
cases from MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, and controls
included 1137 individuals recruited through the Kelsey-Seybold Clinics in
Houston, Texas. These cases and controls were a subset of participants
from a lung cancer case-control study conducted that has available
Genome-wide association study (GWAS) data (317,498 SNPs). We first
conducted an association analysis in PLINK to determine the association
of each SNP with both lung cancer and hay fever and find SNPs that showed
a joint significance for both hay fever and lung cancer in opposite
directions (p-value < 0.05 for both). We then performed mediation
analyses with the SNPs that showed significance for both hay fever and
lung cancer. Finally, we inferred SNPs in regions that contained a
collection of tag SNPs that mediate lung cancer risk through hay
fever.Results: Two hundred and forty six SNPs were found to be
statistically significant (p-value < 0.05) for both hay fever
(protection) and lung cancer (risk), and 76 of these SNPs maintained
their significance level after mediation analysis. SNP rs7159751 on
chromosome 14 had the highest mediation effect of 19.83%. A collection of
SNPs on the Neuregulin 3 gene (NRG3) that mediate lung cancer risk
through hay fever was found on Chromosome 10 which has been shown to
activate the JAK-STAT signal transduction pathway and stimulate lung
epithelial cell proliferation.Conclusion: This is the first study to have
investigated the mediation effects of hay fever on lung cancer risk. Our
data supports the mediation role of certain SNPs in lung cancer through
hay fever and points to specific transduction pathway. Future studies are
needed to validate these results in external populations.

