Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of epithelial to mesenchymal transition and advancement
of therapeutic effect in oral cancer by the flavonoid compound,
Quercetin: pivotal roles of Snail repression and RKIP induction.


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is prevalent worldwide, and survival
in OSCC has not improved significantly in the last few decades. Cancer
prevention using natural products has become an integral part of cancer
control. Quercetin is a plant-derived flavonoid known to possess
anti-inflammatory property, but its use as a chemopreventive substance
has been reviewed quite recently. Several reports have assessed the
pro-apoptotic action of Quercetin in cancer cells similar to many other
flavonoids, although the mechanisms involved are not clear. We here
reported that Quercetion-mediated sensitization may result from
modulation of the EMT inducer Snail and the EMT suppressor/
immunosurveillance cancer gene product Raf-1 kinase inhibitory protein
(RKIP). Quercetin regulated EMT, invasion, cell survival and apoptosis
via inhibition of NF-B inactivation as well as leaded to the induction of
RKIP through downregulation of its transcriptional repressor Snail.
Quercetin-induced RKIP upregulation potentiates further modulated
mitochondria-mediated apoptosis, thus leading to enhance therapeutic
effect. These findings demonstrate the role of Quercetin in the
regulation of EMT via inhibition of NF-B and Snail and induction of RKIP
and also identified Quercetin as targets for resistance via
NF-B/Snail/RKIP circuitry.

