Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A study of relationships between signalling output and growth
inhibition to personalize combinations of MEK and AKT inhibitors.


PurposeWe hypothesized that understanding the relationships between
combinatorial inhibition of signalling output and growth in cell line
models will help design clinical trials of combinations of MEK and AKT
inhibitors which are currently challenged by overlapping
toxicity.MethodsWe exposed two BRAF mutant cell lines (WM266.4 and
SKMEL-28), two PIK3CA mutant cell lines (MCF-7 and SKOV-3) and a cell
line with no BRAF or PIK3CA mutations (Caco2) to increasing
concentrations of a MEK inhibitor (MEKi) and an AKT inhibitor (AKTi),
PD0325901 and AKT11/2 kinase inhibitor respectively, for 24hrs. ELISAs
were used to quantify signalling output downstream of MEK and AKT i.e.
p-ERK and p-S6 respectively. Concentrations of MEKi and AKTi that
inhibited phosphorylation of 0, 25, 50, 75 and 100% of ERK and S6
respectively were calculated in these models. The cell line panel was
then exposed to different functionally inhibitory concentrations of both
MEKi and AKTi in combination and effects on growth inhibition was
quantified by 96hr sulforhoamine B assays.ResultsIn BRAF mutant lines
WM266.4 and SKMEL-28, the growth inhibition (GI) by maximally inhibiting
p-ERK by MEKi was 83.2 % and 64 % respectively. There was no statistical
difference on GI by additionally maximally inhibiting p-S6 in addition to
maximal p-ERK inhibition in these cell lines (86.9 vs 83.2 % p=0.34 and
74% vs 64%, p= 0.27 respectively). In PIK3CA mutant cell lines MCF-7 and
SKOV3 the GI by maximally inhibiting p-S6 by AKTi was 93 % and 69.4 %
respectively. There was no statistical difference on growth inhibition by
additionally maximally inhibiting p-ERK in addition to maximal p-S6
inhibition in these cell lines (94.6 vs 93 % p=0.34 and 79.6% vs 69.4%,
p= 0.05 respectively). In Caco2 which does not harbour either a BRAF or
PIK3CA mutation, the GI by maximally inhibiting p-ERK was 48.9 % and
additionally maximally inhibiting p-S6 caused a significantly improved
growth inhibition (78.1 vs 48.9%, p= 0.0007). GI by maximally inhibiting
p-S6 was 64.1% and additionally maximally inhibiting p-ERK caused a
statistically significant improved growth inhibition (78.1 vs 64.1%,
p=0.0203) in this cell line model. In Caco2 cells the incremental
significant GI caused by the addition of AKTi and MEKi started at
concentrations that inhibited 50% of p-S6 and 75% of p-ERK
respectively.ConclusionsIn the cell line panel studied, significant
additional growth inhibition by maximally inhibiting p-ERK and p-S6 in
combination occurred in BRAF and PIK3CA wt cells and not in those that
harboured activating mutations in these genes. Titration of the degree of
p-ERK and p-S6 inhibition needed to maximally inhibit growth in
combination may obviate the necessity to completely inhibit both p-ERK
and p-S6. These findings have important implications in the way we design
phase I/II trials of combinations of MEK and AKT inhibitors.

