Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sorafenib in combination with rottlerin show an additive effects
in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cells.


Introduction: RCC is a tumor entity with poor outcome. Targeted therapies
with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) are promising agents for combating
progression in RCC. We investigated the effect of the TKI sorafenib and
sunitinib on cancer progression in vitro. We additionally analysed a
coadministration of rottlerin, inhibiting PKCdelta, with sorafenib or
sunitinib.Methods: Four clear cell RCC cell lines were treated with
sorafenib or sunitinib alone (5 M) or in combination with rottlerin (10
M). Proliferation (BrdU incorporation), apoptosis (caspase 3) and
expression of PKCdelta in nuclei (pro-apoptitic), cytoplasm (inactive)
and membranous (active) was quantified. The activity of PKCdelta was
analysed by detection of phosphorylated PKCdelta (Western blot).Results:
Cell proliferation was reduced by sorafenib and rottlerin, but not by
sunitinib. Combination of sorafenib and rottlerin showed an additive
effect in proliferation inhibition. Rottlerin and sunitinib induced
apoptosis. Althougth sorafenib alone did not induce apoptosis, in
combination with rottlerin, apoptosis was more intensely induced than
with rottlerin alone. All agents induced an enhanced expression of
PKCdelta in the nuclei. Sunitinib in combination with rottlerin reduced
membrane -bound PKCdelta. Analogue, expression of activated PKCdelta was
reduced after cell treatment with sunitinib in combination with
rottlerin.Conclusion: Coadministration of sorafenib and rottlerin showed
an additive effect on proliferation and apoptosis of RCC cells. The
expression and activity of PKCdelta was reduced most by sorafenib in
comibation with rottlerin. This indicates an improvement in RCC therapy
with sorafenib by coadministration of rottlerin.

