Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGF/SVEGFR-2 and VEGF/TSP-1 ratios as probable predictors of
response to metronomic chemotherapy with Cyclophosphamide and Celecoxib
in advanced breast cancer patients.


The efficacy and low toxicity of antiangiogenic metronomic chemotherapy
(MCT) with cyclophosphamide (Cy) and celecoxib (Cel) in advanced breast
cancer patients (ABCP) was demonstrated in our studies but no reliable
biomarkers or predictors of response have been found yet. The aim of this
study was to analyze several pro- and anti-angiogenic parameters and
evaluate their potential role as predictor of response duration in ABCP
treated with MCT with daily Cy and Cel. Treatment plan: Patients received
Cy 50 mg p.o./day + Cel 200 mg p.o. bid. This clinical trial was
authorized by the School of Medicine Bioethics Committee and by
A.N.M.A.T. (Argentine Regulatory Authority). .Angiogenesis parameters:
Serum levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), VEGF-C,
soluble VEGF Receptors 2 and 3 (sVEGFR-2, sVEGFR-3) and Thrombospondin 1
(TSP-1) were determined by ELISA. Blood samples were collected before and
during treatment and parametric tests were used to analyze data. Fifteen
patients were enrolled, A partial response (PR) was observed in 1 patient
(6.7%), which lasted 6 weeks. Prolonged Stable disease (pSD 24 weeks) was
observed in 6/15 patients (40%). Median TTP among patients with pSD was
37.5 weeks (range: 26.43-81.57). The OCB obtained was 46.7% (PR=1/15 +
SD=6/15). The median TTP (PR+pSD) was 33 weeks (range: 10.43-81.57).
Treatment toxicity was very low and no grade 3 or 4 adverse events were
registered. Biomarkers were determinated in 13 patients. Serum VEGF
concentration decreased as a function of time (P=0.004); sVEGFR-2
increased during response (P= 0.0268) while non-significant variations
were detected in VEGF-C, sVEGFR-3 and TSP-1. The baseline values of VEGF,
and VEGF/sVEGFR-2 and VEGF/TSP-1 ratios were significantly correlated
with response duration (P=0.029, P=0.015, P=0.014, respectively). To
assess which of the three variables measured at the beginning of the
treatment could be used to predict response duration, linear regression
analyses were done. VEGF/sVEGFR-2 and VEGF/TSP-1 ratios were good
predictors (P=0.028, P=0.029, respectively), meanwhile VEGF was not
(P=0.059). When considering VEGF, VEGF/VEGFR-2 and VEGF/TSP-1 in a
multiple regression analysis, the goodness of prediction was not improved
with respect to that obtained with each putative predictor. We conclude
that the antiangiogenic nature of MCT with Cy plus Cel is confirmed
through the decrease of VEGF and the increase of sVEGFR-2; the absence of
variation in VEGF-C and sVEGFR-3 would indicate the lack of effect on
lymphangiogenesis; if confirmed in a higher number of patients,
VEGF/sVEGFR-2 and VEGF/TSP-1 ratios could be useful as early predictors
of treatment response.

