Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of therapeutic responses of disseminated Ewing sarcoma
xenografts to adoptive therapy with chimeric receptor gene-modified T
cells in mice by whole body magnetic resonance imaging.


Novel treatment strategies in Ewing sarcoma include molecularly targeted
drugs and antibodies as well as cellular therapies. Preclinical in vivo
models are needed that recapitulate the biology of multifocal disease and
reflect the activity of novel therapies against systemic
(micro)metastatic disease. Here, we used whole body magnetic resonance
imaging techniques to monitor the engraftment and metastatic spread of
human Ewing sarcoma xenografts in mice and to address the therapeutic
efficacy of adoptive T cell transfer. Of 18 mice receiving intravenous
injections of 2x106 VH-64 cells, all developed disseminated tumor growth
detectable by whole-body MRI within 31 days. All mice had lung tumors,
with a median of 19 tumors (range 1 to 60) per mouse. Sixteen mice had
additional tumor manifestations, including bone and/or bone marrow
(n=10), soft tissues (n=5), and kidney (n=13). Interobserver agreement
was high, with an intraclass correlation of 0.929 for tumor numbers.
Dissection and histological analysis confirmed the presence of CD99+
small blue round cell tumors in bones, lungs and kidneys in all examined
specimens. Sequential whole body T2 MRI scans at weekly intervals
following an initial scan 3 weeks after tumor inoculation revealed in
vivo growth of tumors at all sites. To add further tissue information, we
performed parallel diffusion weighted whole body imaging with background
signal suppression (DWIBS). DWIBS effectively visualized metastatic Ewing
sarcoma growth in bones, retroperitoneal organs, and soft tissues,
whereas, as expected, susceptibility artifacts in air-filled spaces
prevented effective detection of lung tumors. To assess the therapeutic
efficacy of adoptive T cell transfer against disseminated Ewing sarcomas
in this model, further cohorts of 9 mice each received transfusions of
1x107 14.G2a-28 gene-modified human GD2-specific T cells following tumor
inoculation. Control mice received non-transduced T cells. The numbers of
mice developing tumors and the numbers of tumors at extrapulmonary
localizations sites were not noticeably different between treated and
control mice. However, animals receiving GD2-targeted gene-modified T
cell therapy had lower numbers of pulmonary tumors than controls (pNovel
treatment strategies in Ewing sarcoma include molecularly targeted drugs
and antibodies as well as cellular therapies. Preclinical in vivo models
are needed that recapitulate the biology of multifocal disease and
reflect the activity of novel therapies against systemic
(micro)metastatic disease. Here, we used whole body magnetic resonance
imaging techniques to monitor the engraftment and metastatic spread of
human Ewing sarcoma xenografts in mice and to address the therapeutic
efficacy of adoptive T cell transfer. Of 18 mice receiving intravenous
injections of 2x106 VH-64 cells, all developed disseminated tumor growth
detectable by whole-body MRI within 31 days. All mice had lung tumors,
with a median of 19 tumors (range 1 to 60) per mouse. Sixteen mice had
additional tumor manifestations, including bone and/or bone marrow
(n=10), soft tissues (n=5), and kidney (n=13). Interobserver agreement
was high, with an intraclass correlation of 0.929 for tumor numbers.
Dissection and histological analysis confirmed the presence of CD99+
small blue round cell tumors in bones, lungs and kidneys in all examined
specimens. Sequential whole body T2 MRI scans at weekly intervals
following an initial scan 3 weeks after tumor inoculation revealed in
vivo growth of tumors at all sites. To add further tissue information, we
performed parallel diffusion weighted whole body imaging with background
signal suppression (DWIBS). DWIBS effectively visualized metastatic Ewing
sarcoma growth in bones, retroperitoneal organs, and soft tissues,
whereas, as expected, susceptibility artifacts in air-filled spaces
prevented effective detection of lung tumors. To assess the therapeutic
efficacy of adoptive T cell transfer against disseminated Ewing sarcomas
in this model, further cohorts of 9 mice each received transfusions of
1x107 14.G2a-28 gene-modified human GD2-specific T cells following tumor
inoculation. Control mice received non-transduced T cells. The numbers of
mice developing tumors and the numbers of tumors at extrapulmonary
localizations sites were not noticeably different between treated and
control mice. However, animals receiving GD2-targeted gene-modified T
cell therapy had lower numbers of pulmonary tumors than controls
(p<0.0001). Moreover, the median volumes of soft tissue tumors at first
detection were lower in the treatment cohort (p=0.019). Mice treated with
GD2-redirected T cells had a growth delay of their lung tumors, with both
smaller volumes (p=0.023) and lower numbers of tumors (p=0.024) at 4
weeks after tumor inoculation. Thus, GD2-retargeted T cells cannot
prevent disseminated tumor growth in this aggressive systemic disease
model, but are active to reduce pulmonary Ewing sarcoma manifestations.
Optimized strategies now aim to enhance the efficacy of chimeric T cell
receptor therapies.

