Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The importance of cell cycle biomarkers in prognostic signatures
in tobacco-related cancers.


Smokers have an increased risk of developing dozens of cancers including
lung (90% caused from smoking), bladder (50%), and head and neck (33%
from smoking alone; 68% from smoking and alcohol combined). We posited
that disease outcome in patients with tobacco-related cancers correlates
with the activity of a common biological pathway. The identification of
such a pathway would aid in the selection of robust prognostic biomarkers
for these patients.We collected 19 gene expression datasets (N = 1996)
for patients with lung adenocarcinoma (LA, 8 cohorts, N = 770), squamous
cell lung carcinoma (SCLC, 3 cohorts, N = 164), bladder transitional cell
carcinoma (BL, 5 cohorts, N = 778), and head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC, 3 cohorts, N = 188). We performed a functional analysis
and identified overrepresented modules (GO terms and KEGG pathways) in
lists of genes predictive of outcome (P Smokers have an increased risk of
developing dozens of cancers including lung (90% caused from smoking),
bladder (50%), and head and neck (33% from smoking alone; 68% from
smoking and alcohol combined). We posited that disease outcome in
patients with tobacco-related cancers correlates with the activity of a
common biological pathway. The identification of such a pathway would aid
in the selection of robust prognostic biomarkers for these patients.We
collected 19 gene expression datasets (N = 1996) for patients with lung
adenocarcinoma (LA, 8 cohorts, N = 770), squamous cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC, 3 cohorts, N = 164), bladder transitional cell carcinoma (BL, 5
cohorts, N = 778), and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC, 3
cohorts, N = 188). We performed a functional analysis and identified
overrepresented modules (GO terms and KEGG pathways) in lists of genes
predictive of outcome (P < 0.01) for each cohort. Strikingly, the only
consistently overrepresented modules were cell-cycle related, and these
were histology dependent. Cell cycle related modules were overrepresented
in the 3 (out of 3) BL progression cohorts and in 5 (out of 8) LA
survival cohorts (FDR Smokers have an increased risk of developing dozens
of cancers including lung (90% caused from smoking), bladder (50%), and
head and neck (33% from smoking alone; 68% from smoking and alcohol
combined). We posited that disease outcome in patients with
tobacco-related cancers correlates with the activity of a common
biological pathway. The identification of such a pathway would aid in the
selection of robust prognostic biomarkers for these patients.We collected
19 gene expression datasets (N = 1996) for patients with lung
adenocarcinoma (LA, 8 cohorts, N = 770), squamous cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC, 3 cohorts, N = 164), bladder transitional cell carcinoma (BL, 5
cohorts, N = 778), and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC, 3
cohorts, N = 188). We performed a functional analysis and identified
overrepresented modules (GO terms and KEGG pathways) in lists of genes
predictive of outcome (P < 0.01) for each cohort. Strikingly, the only
consistently overrepresented modules were cell-cycle related, and these
were histology dependent. Cell cycle related modules were overrepresented
in the 3 (out of 3) BL progression cohorts and in 5 (out of 8) LA
survival cohorts (FDR < 5%). No modules were consistently overrepresented
in SCLC or HNSCC cohorts at FDR Smokers have an increased risk of
developing dozens of cancers including lung (90% caused from smoking),
bladder (50%), and head and neck (33% from smoking alone; 68% from
smoking and alcohol combined). We posited that disease outcome in
patients with tobacco-related cancers correlates with the activity of a
common biological pathway. The identification of such a pathway would aid
in the selection of robust prognostic biomarkers for these patients.We
collected 19 gene expression datasets (N = 1996) for patients with lung
adenocarcinoma (LA, 8 cohorts, N = 770), squamous cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC, 3 cohorts, N = 164), bladder transitional cell carcinoma (BL, 5
cohorts, N = 778), and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC, 3
cohorts, N = 188). We performed a functional analysis and identified
overrepresented modules (GO terms and KEGG pathways) in lists of genes
predictive of outcome (P < 0.01) for each cohort. Strikingly, the only
consistently overrepresented modules were cell-cycle related, and these
were histology dependent. Cell cycle related modules were overrepresented
in the 3 (out of 3) BL progression cohorts and in 5 (out of 8) LA
survival cohorts (FDR < 5%). No modules were consistently overrepresented
in SCLC or HNSCC cohorts at FDR < 10%.The consistent association of cell
cycle modules with outcome implied that a cell cycle biomarker signature
would robustly predict outcome in these cohorts. We evaluated the
prognostic value of a previously published cell cycle proliferation (CCP)
score that was validated in prostate cancer patients. The CCP score is
the average expression of 31 cell cycle-related genes, and was not
optimized in any way for the current analysis. CCP score was predictive
of outcome in the 5 LA cohorts enriched in cell cycle modules and of
progression and survival in all BL cohorts with this information. CCP
score was also significant (P Smokers have an increased risk of
developing dozens of cancers including lung (90% caused from smoking),
bladder (50%), and head and neck (33% from smoking alone; 68% from
smoking and alcohol combined). We posited that disease outcome in
patients with tobacco-related cancers correlates with the activity of a
common biological pathway. The identification of such a pathway would aid
in the selection of robust prognostic biomarkers for these patients.We
collected 19 gene expression datasets (N = 1996) for patients with lung
adenocarcinoma (LA, 8 cohorts, N = 770), squamous cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC, 3 cohorts, N = 164), bladder transitional cell carcinoma (BL, 5
cohorts, N = 778), and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC, 3
cohorts, N = 188). We performed a functional analysis and identified
overrepresented modules (GO terms and KEGG pathways) in lists of genes
predictive of outcome (P < 0.01) for each cohort. Strikingly, the only
consistently overrepresented modules were cell-cycle related, and these
were histology dependent. Cell cycle related modules were overrepresented
in the 3 (out of 3) BL progression cohorts and in 5 (out of 8) LA
survival cohorts (FDR < 5%). No modules were consistently overrepresented
in SCLC or HNSCC cohorts at FDR < 10%.The consistent association of cell
cycle modules with outcome implied that a cell cycle biomarker signature
would robustly predict outcome in these cohorts. We evaluated the
prognostic value of a previously published cell cycle proliferation (CCP)
score that was validated in prostate cancer patients. The CCP score is
the average expression of 31 cell cycle-related genes, and was not
optimized in any way for the current analysis. CCP score was predictive
of outcome in the 5 LA cohorts enriched in cell cycle modules and of
progression and survival in all BL cohorts with this information. CCP
score was also significant (P < 0.05) in a multivariate analysis for
overall survival in 3 (out of 4) LA cohorts and was the second most
consistently predictive variable for survival in BL (behind stage). Final
multivariate models were developed through forward stepwise selection of
significant variables (P Smokers have an increased risk of developing
dozens of cancers including lung (90% caused from smoking), bladder
(50%), and head and neck (33% from smoking alone; 68% from smoking and
alcohol combined). We posited that disease outcome in patients with
tobacco-related cancers correlates with the activity of a common
biological pathway. The identification of such a pathway would aid in the
selection of robust prognostic biomarkers for these patients.We collected
19 gene expression datasets (N = 1996) for patients with lung
adenocarcinoma (LA, 8 cohorts, N = 770), squamous cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC, 3 cohorts, N = 164), bladder transitional cell carcinoma (BL, 5
cohorts, N = 778), and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC, 3
cohorts, N = 188). We performed a functional analysis and identified
overrepresented modules (GO terms and KEGG pathways) in lists of genes
predictive of outcome (P < 0.01) for each cohort. Strikingly, the only
consistently overrepresented modules were cell-cycle related, and these
were histology dependent. Cell cycle related modules were overrepresented
in the 3 (out of 3) BL progression cohorts and in 5 (out of 8) LA
survival cohorts (FDR < 5%). No modules were consistently overrepresented
in SCLC or HNSCC cohorts at FDR < 10%.The consistent association of cell
cycle modules with outcome implied that a cell cycle biomarker signature
would robustly predict outcome in these cohorts. We evaluated the
prognostic value of a previously published cell cycle proliferation (CCP)
score that was validated in prostate cancer patients. The CCP score is
the average expression of 31 cell cycle-related genes, and was not
optimized in any way for the current analysis. CCP score was predictive
of outcome in the 5 LA cohorts enriched in cell cycle modules and of
progression and survival in all BL cohorts with this information. CCP
score was also significant (P < 0.05) in a multivariate analysis for
overall survival in 3 (out of 4) LA cohorts and was the second most
consistently predictive variable for survival in BL (behind stage). Final
multivariate models were developed through forward stepwise selection of
significant variables (P < 0.05). CCP score was selected for the final
model in 3 (out of 4) LA cohorts and for all 3 BL cohorts when
progression was the endpoint.Finally, we assessed whether the prognostic
value of previously published BL and LA signatures depended on cell
cycle-correlated genes. Gene expression values were adjusted for CCP
score or by a constant (positive control) and 3 BL progression and 10 LA
survival signatures were analyzed. Compared to the control signatures,
the adjusted signatures lost their predictive ability (at P Smokers have
an increased risk of developing dozens of cancers including lung (90%
caused from smoking), bladder (50%), and head and neck (33% from smoking
alone; 68% from smoking and alcohol combined). We posited that disease
outcome in patients with tobacco-related cancers correlates with the
activity of a common biological pathway. The identification of such a
pathway would aid in the selection of robust prognostic biomarkers for
these patients.We collected 19 gene expression datasets (N = 1996) for
patients with lung adenocarcinoma (LA, 8 cohorts, N = 770), squamous cell
lung carcinoma (SCLC, 3 cohorts, N = 164), bladder transitional cell
carcinoma (BL, 5 cohorts, N = 778), and head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC, 3 cohorts, N = 188). We performed a functional analysis
and identified overrepresented modules (GO terms and KEGG pathways) in
lists of genes predictive of outcome (P < 0.01) for each cohort.
Strikingly, the only consistently overrepresented modules were cell-cycle
related, and these were histology dependent. Cell cycle related modules
were overrepresented in the 3 (out of 3) BL progression cohorts and in 5
(out of 8) LA survival cohorts (FDR < 5%). No modules were consistently
overrepresented in SCLC or HNSCC cohorts at FDR < 10%.The consistent
association of cell cycle modules with outcome implied that a cell cycle
biomarker signature would robustly predict outcome in these cohorts. We
evaluated the prognostic value of a previously published cell cycle
proliferation (CCP) score that was validated in prostate cancer patients.
The CCP score is the average expression of 31 cell cycle-related genes,
and was not optimized in any way for the current analysis. CCP score was
predictive of outcome in the 5 LA cohorts enriched in cell cycle modules
and of progression and survival in all BL cohorts with this information.
CCP score was also significant (P < 0.05) in a multivariate analysis for
overall survival in 3 (out of 4) LA cohorts and was the second most
consistently predictive variable for survival in BL (behind stage). Final
multivariate models were developed through forward stepwise selection of
significant variables (P < 0.05). CCP score was selected for the final
model in 3 (out of 4) LA cohorts and for all 3 BL cohorts when
progression was the endpoint.Finally, we assessed whether the prognostic
value of previously published BL and LA signatures depended on cell
cycle-correlated genes. Gene expression values were adjusted for CCP
score or by a constant (positive control) and 3 BL progression and 10 LA
survival signatures were analyzed. Compared to the control signatures,
the adjusted signatures lost their predictive ability (at P < 0.05) in
88% and 75% of BL and LA cohorts, respectively. Our results indicate that
cell cycle-related genes are prognostic biomarkers in some
tobacco-related cancers and may be required for robust biomarker-based
outcome prediction in BL and LA patients.Citation Format: Garrett Dancik,
Dan Theodorescu. The importance of cell cycle biomarkers in prognostic
signatures in tobacco-related cancers. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2379. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2379

