Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZD1208 PIM kinase inhibitor - Preliminary evidence of target
pathway inhibition in Phase I clinical trials of AML.


PIM kinases have been shown to play a key role as downstream effectors of
growth factor signalling pathways including Flt3 and the Jak-STAT
signalling pathways in AML, NHL and other solid tumors. AZD1208 is a
novel, orally bioavailable, highly selective PIM kinase inhibitor with
single nanomolar potency against all three PIM kinases and is currently
undergoing Phase I testing and dose escalation studies in AML. Here we
describe a multiplexed biomarker strategy measuring pBAD, p4EBP1 and
p-p70S6K as downstream pharmacodynamic biomarkers for PIM kinase
inhibition in clinical trials. Patient bone marrow aspirates and
peripheral blood samples were collected pre- and post-AZD1208 treatment
in AML patients during the Phase I dose escalation and expansions.
Primary patient samples were analyzed for quantitative changes in pBAD,
p4EBP1 by NanoPro and MesoScale assay platforms as well as a qualitative
evaluation of p-p70S6K and other exploratory endpoints. Preclinical PK-PD
modeling data with AZD1208 had suggested that greater than a 50% decrease
in the levels of one of these phosphorlyated substrates would be
indicative of efficacy and PIM pathway inhibition. Following a single
dose of AZD1208 at 120mg, the first dose level, approximately 60-70%
inhibition of pBAD, S112 was seen in the bone marrow and peripheral
blasts. Taken together, the data presented here provide evidence for
single agent AZD1208 activity in AML patients based on quantitative
reduction in these biomarkers. Correlations of these biomarker endpoints
with Phase I pharmacokinetic data underscore the therapeutic potential of
Pim kinase inhibition by AZD1208 for the treatment of AML, and strongly
support further investigation of this agent in other indications where
PIM signaling may play a role in tumorigenesis and survival.

