Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel epigenetic biomarkers for platinum-based
chemotherapy resistance in high grade serous ovarian cancer.


Platinum-based chemotherapy has been standard of care for advanced stage
ovarian cancer (OC) patients since the last 3 decades. However, majority
of patients relapse within 6 months with drug-resistant disease, which
entitle OC among the most lethal gynecological malignancy. Besides
classic clinicopathological features of the primary tumor, no biological
parameters have shown clinically predictive and prognostic value for
chemoresponse in OC. In the present study, we are focusing on the
identification of novel DNA methylation markers in response to
platinum-based chemotherapy in high grade serous OC. To accomplish this
aim, we performed next generation sequencing on methylation-enriched
genomic DNA, isolated from frozen OC patient material from responders
(more than 18 months progression free survival) and non-responders (less
than 6 months progression free survival) to platinum chemoresponse (n=10
in each group).Subsequent robust biostatistics and comparative expression
data analysis revealed a list of significantly differentially methylated
genes of which a number were checked by methylation specific PCR (MSP) on
a large platinum sensitive and resistance OC cell line panel. Gene
ontology analysis showed that these genes are frequently associated with
cell-fate determination, lineage commitment, transcriptional factor
binding and ions-transporter system.Selected candidate methylation
markers are currently being validated by pyrosequencing. Moreover, these
selected markers are in-silico validated with publically available
methylation and expression databases. Next, selected candidate
methylation markers will be validated by quantitative-MSP on an
independent OC patient cohort. Ultimately, this study will provide a DNA
methylation profile for identifying those patients that may benefit from
platinum-based chemotherapy in combination with epigenetic treatment
modalities.

