Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of lipid inflammatory mediators on colon cancer
initiating cells.


Past studies links the lipid inflammatory mediators at the tumor
microenvironment to the colorectal cancer, however their impact on the
colon cancer initiating cells (CICs) is largely unknown. Accordingly, the
present study aimed to identify the possible link between lipid
inflammatory mediators and CICs. In lack of robust marker for identifying
colon CICs, we initially screen five different colon cancer cell lines
(HCT-116, Caco-2, SW-480 SW-620 and HT-29) for their percentage
occurrence using well-established stem cell markers i.e. CD133, CD44 and
ALDH. The Flow cytometeric sorting of CD133, CD44 and ALDH subpopulations
showed large variation in their population size in these cell lines.
Further we noted that ALDH is relatively better marker of these to
identify CICs. This statement was based on our observation of markedly
increased capacity of ALDH+ cells to produce colonies rather than ALDH
cells. We sorted ALDH+/CICs and investigated the effect of lipid
inflammatory mediators such as leukotriene D4 (LTD4) or prostaglandin E2
(PGE2) on these cells. It was noted that LTD4 and PGE2 stimulations not
only enriched the relative population of ALDH+ cells; it also greatly
improved the colony forming capacity of these cells. Moreover, we
observed that ALDH+ cells were more resistant to 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU)
treatment compared to ALDH cells. Furthermore the qPCR data revealed that
Bcl-2, COX-2, Bcl-3, ALDH1B1, GLI1 and KLF4 genes were largely amplified
in ALDH+ cells in presence of LTD4 or PGE2, indicating their probable
impact on the stemness pool of these cells. In conclusion our study shows
that lipid inflammatory mediators can affect the survival and stemness of
CICs.

