Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-181a suppresses salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma
metastasis by targeting the ERK/Slug pathway.


MicroRNA deregulation plays a major role in the initiation and
progression of many cancers. The objective of this study is to evaluate
the role of miR-181a in the metastasis of salivary adenoid cystic
carcinoma (SACC). We identified a panel of differentially expressed
microRNAs in two pairs SACC cell lines with different metastatic
potential using microarrays. Among these differentially expressed
microRNAs, the down-regulation of miR-181a was further validated by
quantitative RT-PCR. Functional analysis indicated that miR-181a inhibits
SACC cell migration, invasion and proliferation in vitro and in vivo.
Ectopic transfection of miR-181a inhibited the expression of NGF, VEGF,
TGF2, ERK1/2, pERK1/2 and Slug in SACC-LM cells which had higher
expression of these genes compared to SACC-83 cells; while inverse
results were found in miR-181a LNA transfected SACC-83 cells. The direct
targeting of miR-181a to the Slug and ERK2 mRNAs were confirmed by
luciferase reporter gene assays. SiRNA-mediated knockdown of Slug, ERK2
led to reduced cell migration and invasion of SACC, and knockdown of ERK2
suppresses the expression of Slug. Taken together, these results suggest
that microRNA deregulation (i.e., down-regulation of miR-181a)
contributes to the metastasis of SACC. MiR-181a-mediated suppression of
SACC metastasis may be achieved in part by directly targeting Slug and
ERK2 and regulating ERK/Slug pathway.

