Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2 promote a malignant phenotype in lung adenocarcinoma and
VEGF/VEGFR2 pathways mediates regulation of EZH2 through E2F3/HIF-1 and
downregulation of miR-101.


Background. EZH2 overexpression has been described in a wide variety of
tumors, including lung cancer. EZH2 has been implicated in neoplastic
transformation, tumor progression and activation of angiogenesis. The
mechanisms associated with the regulation of EZH2 expression in lung
cancer cells are mostly unknown. In this study, we investigated the role
of EZH2 in cell proliferation/migration and response to chemotherapy in
lung adenocarcinoma (LADCa) cell lines. Moreover, we studied the
mechanisms of EZH2 regulation associated to the VEGF/VEGFR2 pathway
expression.Methods. LADCa cell lines were inhibited pharmacologically
with different doses of DZNep (0, 2.5 and 5M) and by knockdown of EZH2 by
siRNA. EZH2, H3K27me3 and PARP-C expressions were determined by
Western-blots (WB). Cisplatin and carboplatin sensitivity (IC50) and
proliferation were determined by MTS assay. Cell migration was measured
using Boyden chamber assay. After stimulation of cell lines with VEGF-A,
EZH2, VEGFR-2, E2F3 and HIF-1 expression were determined using WBs, and
EZH2 and miR-101 expressions were determined by quantitative PCR. To
study the role of VEGFR-2 and HIF-1 in the regulation of EZH2, we
examined the effect of knockdown VEGFR-2 and HIF-1 by siRNA.Results. We
found that inhibition with DZNep and knockdown by siRNA decreased the
expression of EZH2, reduced H3K27me3 level, and increased PARP-C levels
in LADCa cell lines. Treatment with DZNep and knockdown of EZH2
significantly increased sensitivity to cisplatin and carboplatin
(pBackground. EZH2 overexpression has been described in a wide variety of
tumors, including lung cancer. EZH2 has been implicated in neoplastic
transformation, tumor progression and activation of angiogenesis. The
mechanisms associated with the regulation of EZH2 expression in lung
cancer cells are mostly unknown. In this study, we investigated the role
of EZH2 in cell proliferation/migration and response to chemotherapy in
lung adenocarcinoma (LADCa) cell lines. Moreover, we studied the
mechanisms of EZH2 regulation associated to the VEGF/VEGFR2 pathway
expression.Methods. LADCa cell lines were inhibited pharmacologically
with different doses of DZNep (0, 2.5 and 5M) and by knockdown of EZH2 by
siRNA. EZH2, H3K27me3 and PARP-C expressions were determined by
Western-blots (WB). Cisplatin and carboplatin sensitivity (IC50) and
proliferation were determined by MTS assay. Cell migration was measured
using Boyden chamber assay. After stimulation of cell lines with VEGF-A,
EZH2, VEGFR-2, E2F3 and HIF-1 expression were determined using WBs, and
EZH2 and miR-101 expressions were determined by quantitative PCR. To
study the role of VEGFR-2 and HIF-1 in the regulation of EZH2, we
examined the effect of knockdown VEGFR-2 and HIF-1 by siRNA.Results. We
found that inhibition with DZNep and knockdown by siRNA decreased the
expression of EZH2, reduced H3K27me3 level, and increased PARP-C levels
in LADCa cell lines. Treatment with DZNep and knockdown of EZH2
significantly increased sensitivity to cisplatin and carboplatin (p<0.05)
by MTS assay of LADCa cell lines. Knockdown of EZH2 reduced significantly
cell proliferation and migration of LADCa cell lines (pBackground. EZH2
overexpression has been described in a wide variety of tumors, including
lung cancer. EZH2 has been implicated in neoplastic transformation, tumor
progression and activation of angiogenesis. The mechanisms associated
with the regulation of EZH2 expression in lung cancer cells are mostly
unknown. In this study, we investigated the role of EZH2 in cell
proliferation/migration and response to chemotherapy in lung
adenocarcinoma (LADCa) cell lines. Moreover, we studied the mechanisms of
EZH2 regulation associated to the VEGF/VEGFR2 pathway expression.Methods.
LADCa cell lines were inhibited pharmacologically with different doses of
DZNep (0, 2.5 and 5M) and by knockdown of EZH2 by siRNA. EZH2, H3K27me3
and PARP-C expressions were determined by Western-blots (WB). Cisplatin
and carboplatin sensitivity (IC50) and proliferation were determined by
MTS assay. Cell migration was measured using Boyden chamber assay. After
stimulation of cell lines with VEGF-A, EZH2, VEGFR-2, E2F3 and HIF-1
expression were determined using WBs, and EZH2 and miR-101 expressions
were determined by quantitative PCR. To study the role of VEGFR-2 and
HIF-1 in the regulation of EZH2, we examined the effect of knockdown
VEGFR-2 and HIF-1 by siRNA.Results. We found that inhibition with DZNep
and knockdown by siRNA decreased the expression of EZH2, reduced H3K27me3
level, and increased PARP-C levels in LADCa cell lines. Treatment with
DZNep and knockdown of EZH2 significantly increased sensitivity to
cisplatin and carboplatin (p<0.05) by MTS assay of LADCa cell lines.
Knockdown of EZH2 reduced significantly cell proliferation and migration
of LADCa cell lines (p<0.05). VEGF stimulation induced expression of EZH2
and H3K27me3 levels. Concomitantly, we found that stimulation with VEGF
induced expression of E2F3 and HIF-1, and downregulation of miR-101. This
phenomenon was observed only in LADCa cell lines expressing VEGFR-2, and
not in cell lines with low or lack of expression of VEGFR-2. The
increased expression of EZH2, E2F3 and HIF-1, and the down-regulation of
miR-101 in response to VEGF, were reduced by knocking down VEGFR-2 and to
a lesser degree by knocking down HIF-1 in LADCa.Conclusion. Our in vitro
findings suggest that EZH2 overexpression may promote a more malignant
phenotype of lung adenocarcinoma. The pharmacologic inhibition with DZNep
and knockdown of EZH2 by siRNA increased sensitivity of LADCa cell lines
to cisplatin and carboplatin, and reduced cell migration capabilities.
Our results suggest that VEGF/VEGFR-2 axis plays a role in the regulation
of EZH2 through E2F3/HIF-1 and miR-101 regulations. EZH2 is a potential
therapeutic target in lung cancer that regulates the epigenome to
overcome drug resistance. (Supported in part by grants DoD PROSPECT
W81XWH-07-1-0306, NCI/UT Lung SPORE 5P50CA70907-11, and Becas Chile)

