Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AID/APOBEC cytidine deaminases can mimic the phenomenon of
localized hypermutation in cancer or kataegis.


Recently, using whole-genome sequencing data of breast cancer genomes we
revealed localized regions of dense somatic hypermutation, called
kataegis, in which substitutions at C:G base pairs occurring within a
distinctive sequence context were found associated with clusters of
genomic rearrangements. The mechanism of kataegis is unknown. On the
basis of similarities in mutation class and sequence context in
experimental systems, members of the AID/APOBEC family of cytidine
deaminases were implicated.Here we expressed members of this gene family
in yeast and demonstrate that mutation clusters mimicking many of the
features of kataegis in cancer, can be generated. Because the genomic
location of each stretch of kataegis is different between individual
human cancer genomes, it was reasoned that kataegis is triggered by a
local stochastic event, such as a DNA double strand break. Here, we have
introduced double strand breaks into the yeast genome and shown that
kataegis is elicited in its vicinity. Furthermore, kataegis is
substantially diminished in the absence of uracil-DNA glycosylase,
indicating that base excision DNA repair is implicated in its genesis.
Additionally, the mutation sequence context preferences revealed by these
yeast experiments suggest that APOBEC3B and APOBEC3A are the deaminases
most likely responsible for the kataegis observed in human cancer. The
results therefore provide insights into the mechanism of kataegis and
indicate a contribution of APOBEC3B/A-catalyzed DNA deamination to genome
mutation in cancer. Finally, we show using an algorithm developed to
allow efficient detection of kataegis in other publicly available
whole-genome sequenced datasests that this phenomenon is not restricted
to breast cancer.

