Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased miR-126 and miR-375 expression in primary ER-positive
breast cancer predict longer relapse-free time following treatment with
tamoxifen.


Adjuvant tamoxifen treatment provides benefit for millions of women with
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer; however, up to 50% of patients
experience distant or local recurrence or even die. Tamoxifen resistance
is contributed to by host and tumor associated factors and the latter has
been particularly attributed to adaptive changes of the tumor involving
the regulation of cellular pathways associated with growth, proliferation
and apoptosis. Recently, microRNA expression signatures have been
appreciated as useful tools to improve the classification of tumors into
subtypes and the assessment of tumor heterogeneity. However it is not
clear to what extend microRNA signatures derived from the primary tumor
can predict treatment outcome. Here we test the hypothesis that distinct
microRNAs expressed in the primary tumor can predict the onset of local
and distant recurrence following adjuvant tamoxifen. We investigated 115
patients diagnosed with ER positive breast cancer at the Robert Bosch
Hospital, Stuttgart, Germany, who had received adjuvant tamoxifen, and
had a median follow up of 9.23 years (range: 0.21 - 19.96 years). We
compared tumor microRNA expression profiles of 6 patients who developed
recurrence under tamoxifen with expression profiles of 6 patients who
stayed recurrence-free. Matching of patients was based on age at
diagnosis, year of surgery and major histopathological parameters.
Candidate microRNAs were identified by global microRNA expression
profiling using GeneChip miRNA 2.0 arrays (Affymetrix). Different
expression of microRNAs was validated using real-time PCR in 103 tumor
samples. We identified miR-126 and miR-375 to be expressed at higher
levels in tumors of patients with a lower risk of recurrence (p = 0.0003
and p = 0.0081, respectively). Receiver operator characteristics (ROC)
were calculated to further validate their values for predicting breast
cancer relapse. The area under the curve (AUC) for miR-126 was 0.6838 (p
= 0.0006) and 0.6450 (p = 0.0071) for miR-375, respectively. Kaplan-Meier
survival analyses showed that a higher expression of miR-126 and/or
miRNA-375 in the patients primary tumor was associated with longer
relapse-free time (p = 0.0024 and p = 0.0351, respectively). Our data
suggest that miR-126 and miR-375 are promising candidates for further
evaluation as tamoxifen outcome predictors in ER-positive breast cancer.
R.H. and J.A.K. contributed equally to this work

