Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of longitudinal relaxation time mapping for monitoring
vascular permeability in brain tumors.


Introduction: Vessel permeability measurement in tumors, as assessed by
Ktrans exchange coefficient, may have diagnostic value for determining
treatment effectiveness and are an emerging parameter for drug transport
modeling. Transvascular exchange models have been the standard for
deriving Ktrans in an imaging voxel based on the pharmacokinetic analysis
of the longitudinal relaxation time (T1) measurements following systemic
delivery of T1-shortening contrast reagent (CR) in tissue using dynamic
contrast-enhanced (DCE)-MRI. Analysis requires a pre-contrast
longitudinal relaxation time (T10) as a model input. This study
investigates the effect of using T10 maps versus an average value for
analyzing changes in Ktrans measurements in intracerebral lung carcinoma,
glioma, and melanoma xenograft models before and after treatment with
agents targeting tumor edema.Materials and Methods: Rats were inoculated
in the right basal ganglia with LX-1 human lung carcinoma (n = 10), UW28
human glioma (n = 11), or A2058 human melanoma cells (n = 15). After
baseline MRI scans, animals received glyburide (24 g/kg oral),
dexamethasone (1.8 mg/kg IV) or vehicle control. MRI study was performed
using a horizontal bore 11.75 T magnet system. T10 in tumor tissue was
measured using a spin-echo inversion recovery sequence. DCE-MRI was done
with a fast-gradient-echo sequence. Ktrans was calculated by non-linear
squared fitting to the T1 measurements; animal-specific arterial input
functions were used. A Student's two-tailed, paired t-test was used to
test statistical significance of change in Ktrans between using T10 maps
versus ROI-based T10 value.Results and Discussion: On pre-treatment MRI,
50% of lung and melanoma metastases showed standard deviation 10% the
average T10 value. For UW28 tumors, standard deviation was Introduction:
Vessel permeability measurement in tumors, as assessed by Ktrans exchange
coefficient, may have diagnostic value for determining treatment
effectiveness and are an emerging parameter for drug transport modeling.
Transvascular exchange models have been the standard for deriving Ktrans
in an imaging voxel based on the pharmacokinetic analysis of the
longitudinal relaxation time (T1) measurements following systemic
delivery of T1-shortening contrast reagent (CR) in tissue using dynamic
contrast-enhanced (DCE)-MRI. Analysis requires a pre-contrast
longitudinal relaxation time (T10) as a model input. This study
investigates the effect of using T10 maps versus an average value for
analyzing changes in Ktrans measurements in intracerebral lung carcinoma,
glioma, and melanoma xenograft models before and after treatment with
agents targeting tumor edema.Materials and Methods: Rats were inoculated
in the right basal ganglia with LX-1 human lung carcinoma (n = 10), UW28
human glioma (n = 11), or A2058 human melanoma cells (n = 15). After
baseline MRI scans, animals received glyburide (24 g/kg oral),
dexamethasone (1.8 mg/kg IV) or vehicle control. MRI study was performed
using a horizontal bore 11.75 T magnet system. T10 in tumor tissue was
measured using a spin-echo inversion recovery sequence. DCE-MRI was done
with a fast-gradient-echo sequence. Ktrans was calculated by non-linear
squared fitting to the T1 measurements; animal-specific arterial input
functions were used. A Student's two-tailed, paired t-test was used to
test statistical significance of change in Ktrans between using T10 maps
versus ROI-based T10 value.Results and Discussion: On pre-treatment MRI,
50% of lung and melanoma metastases showed standard deviation 10% the
average T10 value. For UW28 tumors, standard deviation was <10% of the
average T10 for all animals. LX-1 metastases became more heterogeneous
based on increase. Ktrans was assessed using an ROI-based average T10
value and T10 maps before and after treatment. T10 mapping reduced
average Ktrans in over 88% of cases (including pre- and post- treatment).
Change in Ktrans from T10 mapping did not change with treatment (p 0.07)
and change in Ktrans resulting from treatment was not significantly
affected by T10 mapping (p 0.09) the treatment groups. There was a trend
towards significance observed with larger animal numbers.Conclusions:
LX-1 and A2058 metastases were more heterogeneous than the UW28 model
based on standard deviation of T10 values within tumor. Using an
ROI-based average T10 value was likely to overpredict average Ktrans
values, but not likely to significantly affect treatment outcomes of
study for these tumors and therapies despite tumor heterogeneity.
Overpredicted Ktrans hot spots could have more consequences on hot spot
analysis to monitor treatment outcome rather than average Ktrans.

