Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene resilencing following decitabine therapy is initiated by
nucleosome reoccupancy and is related to CpG island shore methylation.


Decitabine is a front line therapy for myelogenous leukaemias and is in
clinical trials for various solid tumour types. This DNA demethylating
agent reactivates genes silenced by promoter hypermethylation in cancer.
However upon drug withdrawal reexpressed genes undergo remethylation
(resilencing) which may underlie drug resistance and presents a barrier
to effective therapy. We aimed to define the ordered sequence of
epigenetic events associated with resilencing. Using biallelically
methylated MLH1 as a model gene, we profiled epigenetic changes at the
MLH1 promoter associated with reexpression and resilencing in a
colorectal cancer cell line before, during and after Decitabine
treatment. In contrast to the closed chromatin structure observed before
treatment, Decitabine induced increased MLH1 expression and 54% decreased
promoter methylation. We show that gene resilencing, which occurs 6-8
days following removal of therapy, is not due to promoter remethylation
but is initiated by reoccupancy of nucleosomes to demethylated promoter
alleles. Furthermore, long-term monitoring of cells following treatment
showed MLH1 expression never reverts to pretreatment levels with
low-level expression and demethylated promoter alleles persisting up to
118 days after withdrawal of Decitabine. Genome-wide methylation
profiling was used to categorise promoter CpG Islands (CGI) based on
their degree of demethylation after treatment. This revealed that CGIs
with persistence of demethylated promoter alleles after long-term
recovery (n=108) showed significantly lower levels of CGI shore
methylation (p=0.0231). Our findings suggest a role for shore methylation
in susceptibility to CGI remethylation and that therapeutic targeting of
nucleosome assembly may provide a novel strategy to prevent gene
resilencing.

