Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the miR29b/Sp1/Dnmt pathway for curative therapy in
Mll-PTD/Flt3-ITD acute myeloid leukemia.


The partial tandem duplication (PTD) of the MLL gene is a molecular
defect in human myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
and associates with poor patient outcomes, especially when other
molecular prognostic markers are co-present such as the internal tandem
duplication (ITD) of FLT3, i.e., FLT3-ITD. In human AML, MLL-PTD alters
the epigenome via aberrant H3K4 methylation activity but is also
associated with increased DNA methylation through an unknown mechanism
(Whitman, et al, Blood 2008). Using a double knock-in mouse model of AML
with Mll-PTD and Flt3-ITD, we analyzed the DNA methylome using a methyl
binding protein (MBD2) pull down followed by next generation sequencing.
Leukemic mouse bone marrow (BM, n=8) exhibited a 1.7 fold increase in
global DNA methylation compared to non-leukemic controls (n=9, P=0.017).
Consistent with this finding, DNA methyltransferases (Dmnt) 1, 3a, and 3b
were overexpressed (1.5 fold P=0.03, 2.3 fold P=0.01, and 5.3 fold
P=0.03, respectively). We previously showed that the non-coding microRNA
29b (miR-29b) expression directly downmodulates DNMT3a and 3b, but
indirectly inhibits DNMT1 via miR-29b-driven SP1 suppression. In the
murine Mll-PTD/Flt3-ITD AML, the precursor to the mature miR-29b
(pri-miR-29b-2) was downregulated in leukemic BM (0.7-fold, PThe partial
tandem duplication (PTD) of the MLL gene is a molecular defect in human
myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and associates
with poor patient outcomes, especially when other molecular prognostic
markers are co-present such as the internal tandem duplication (ITD) of
FLT3, i.e., FLT3-ITD. In human AML, MLL-PTD alters the epigenome via
aberrant H3K4 methylation activity but is also associated with increased
DNA methylation through an unknown mechanism (Whitman, et al, Blood
2008). Using a double knock-in mouse model of AML with Mll-PTD and
Flt3-ITD, we analyzed the DNA methylome using a methyl binding protein
(MBD2) pull down followed by next generation sequencing. Leukemic mouse
bone marrow (BM, n=8) exhibited a 1.7 fold increase in global DNA
methylation compared to non-leukemic controls (n=9, P=0.017). Consistent
with this finding, DNA methyltransferases (Dmnt) 1, 3a, and 3b were
overexpressed (1.5 fold P=0.03, 2.3 fold P=0.01, and 5.3 fold P=0.03,
respectively). We previously showed that the non-coding microRNA 29b
(miR-29b) expression directly downmodulates DNMT3a and 3b, but indirectly
inhibits DNMT1 via miR-29b-driven SP1 suppression. In the murine
Mll-PTD/Flt3-ITD AML, the precursor to the mature miR-29b (pri-miR-29b-2)
was downregulated in leukemic BM (0.7-fold, P<0.001), whereas Sp1 mRNA
was upregulated compared to wildtype (1.6-fold P=0.01). Bortezomib is a
proteasome inhibitor that also downregulates Dnmt's (Liu, et al, Blood,
2008) by increasing the expression of miR-29b (Liu, et al, Cancer Cell,
2010). In vitro, bortezomib induced a dose-dependent reduction in
proliferation of Mll-PTD/Flt3-ITD leukemic blasts (MTS assay, EC50
23.83nM) and apoptosis. Prior to cell death in bortezomib-treated cells,
expression of pri-miR-29b-2 increased by 1.7 fold over vehicle treated
cells (P=0.01) while Dnmt3b mRNA (P=0.001) and protein levels decreased
to half of the vehicle treated level. Targeting of this pathway in vivo
using liposomal-bortezomib (1mg/kg IV twice per week for 2 weeks followed
by 2mg/kg IV twice per week for 2 weeks) significantly increased survival
of AML transplanted mice, compared with vehicle or free-bortezomib with
80% alive 90 days post-transplant (PThe partial tandem duplication (PTD)
of the MLL gene is a molecular defect in human myelodysplastic syndrome
and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and associates with poor patient
outcomes, especially when other molecular prognostic markers are
co-present such as the internal tandem duplication (ITD) of FLT3, i.e.,
FLT3-ITD. In human AML, MLL-PTD alters the epigenome via aberrant H3K4
methylation activity but is also associated with increased DNA
methylation through an unknown mechanism (Whitman, et al, Blood 2008).
Using a double knock-in mouse model of AML with Mll-PTD and Flt3-ITD, we
analyzed the DNA methylome using a methyl binding protein (MBD2) pull
down followed by next generation sequencing. Leukemic mouse bone marrow
(BM, n=8) exhibited a 1.7 fold increase in global DNA methylation
compared to non-leukemic controls (n=9, P=0.017). Consistent with this
finding, DNA methyltransferases (Dmnt) 1, 3a, and 3b were overexpressed
(1.5 fold P=0.03, 2.3 fold P=0.01, and 5.3 fold P=0.03, respectively). We
previously showed that the non-coding microRNA 29b (miR-29b) expression
directly downmodulates DNMT3a and 3b, but indirectly inhibits DNMT1 via
miR-29b-driven SP1 suppression. In the murine Mll-PTD/Flt3-ITD AML, the
precursor to the mature miR-29b (pri-miR-29b-2) was downregulated in
leukemic BM (0.7-fold, P<0.001), whereas Sp1 mRNA was upregulated
compared to wildtype (1.6-fold P=0.01). Bortezomib is a proteasome
inhibitor that also downregulates Dnmt's (Liu, et al, Blood, 2008) by
increasing the expression of miR-29b (Liu, et al, Cancer Cell, 2010). In
vitro, bortezomib induced a dose-dependent reduction in proliferation of
Mll-PTD/Flt3-ITD leukemic blasts (MTS assay, EC50 23.83nM) and apoptosis.
Prior to cell death in bortezomib-treated cells, expression of
pri-miR-29b-2 increased by 1.7 fold over vehicle treated cells (P=0.01)
while Dnmt3b mRNA (P=0.001) and protein levels decreased to half of the
vehicle treated level. Targeting of this pathway in vivo using
liposomal-bortezomib (1mg/kg IV twice per week for 2 weeks followed by
2mg/kg IV twice per week for 2 weeks) significantly increased survival of
AML transplanted mice, compared with vehicle or free-bortezomib with 80%
alive 90 days post-transplant (P<0.001). At day 90, treated mice had
normal spleen weights (mean 86mg) and absence of leukemic blasts in BM,
liver, or spleen compared to vehicle-treated mice that showed significant
blast infiltration (mean spleen weight 396mg, PThe partial tandem
duplication (PTD) of the MLL gene is a molecular defect in human
myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and associates
with poor patient outcomes, especially when other molecular prognostic
markers are co-present such as the internal tandem duplication (ITD) of
FLT3, i.e., FLT3-ITD. In human AML, MLL-PTD alters the epigenome via
aberrant H3K4 methylation activity but is also associated with increased
DNA methylation through an unknown mechanism (Whitman, et al, Blood
2008). Using a double knock-in mouse model of AML with Mll-PTD and
Flt3-ITD, we analyzed the DNA methylome using a methyl binding protein
(MBD2) pull down followed by next generation sequencing. Leukemic mouse
bone marrow (BM, n=8) exhibited a 1.7 fold increase in global DNA
methylation compared to non-leukemic controls (n=9, P=0.017). Consistent
with this finding, DNA methyltransferases (Dmnt) 1, 3a, and 3b were
overexpressed (1.5 fold P=0.03, 2.3 fold P=0.01, and 5.3 fold P=0.03,
respectively). We previously showed that the non-coding microRNA 29b
(miR-29b) expression directly downmodulates DNMT3a and 3b, but indirectly
inhibits DNMT1 via miR-29b-driven SP1 suppression. In the murine
Mll-PTD/Flt3-ITD AML, the precursor to the mature miR-29b (pri-miR-29b-2)
was downregulated in leukemic BM (0.7-fold, P<0.001), whereas Sp1 mRNA
was upregulated compared to wildtype (1.6-fold P=0.01). Bortezomib is a
proteasome inhibitor that also downregulates Dnmt's (Liu, et al, Blood,
2008) by increasing the expression of miR-29b (Liu, et al, Cancer Cell,
2010). In vitro, bortezomib induced a dose-dependent reduction in
proliferation of Mll-PTD/Flt3-ITD leukemic blasts (MTS assay, EC50
23.83nM) and apoptosis. Prior to cell death in bortezomib-treated cells,
expression of pri-miR-29b-2 increased by 1.7 fold over vehicle treated
cells (P=0.01) while Dnmt3b mRNA (P=0.001) and protein levels decreased
to half of the vehicle treated level. Targeting of this pathway in vivo
using liposomal-bortezomib (1mg/kg IV twice per week for 2 weeks followed
by 2mg/kg IV twice per week for 2 weeks) significantly increased survival
of AML transplanted mice, compared with vehicle or free-bortezomib with
80% alive 90 days post-transplant (P<0.001). At day 90, treated mice had
normal spleen weights (mean 86mg) and absence of leukemic blasts in BM,
liver, or spleen compared to vehicle-treated mice that showed significant
blast infiltration (mean spleen weight 396mg, P<0.001). Taken together,
these data support the miR-29b/SP1/DNMT pathway of epigenetic modulation
as active in Mll-PTD/Flt3-ITD AML, and indicate bortezomib as a valuable
treatment option to be explored in patients with
MLL-PTD/FLT3-ITD-associated AML.

