Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: hsa-miR-200a regulates VEGF-C to induce epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in sorafenib resistance hepatocellular carcinoma cells.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common potentially
lethal human malignancies worldwide. Although treatment and perioperative
management have evolved in recent years with dramatic advances in
diagnostic techniques, operative methods, and combined chemoradiotherapy,
the prognosis of patients with liver cancer remains dissolve. Sorafenib,
a multikinase inhibitor targeting angiogenesis of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), demonstrated survival benefits in recent clinical
trials. However, disease stabilization with sorafenib lasts a few months,
possibly due to the development of resistance. It has been reported that
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C signaling through VEGFR-3
(VEGFR-3) mediates leukemic cell proliferation, survival, and resistance
to chemotherapy. In this study, we will elucidated the molecular
mechanisms of VEGF-C with sorafenib-resistance in hepatocellular
carcinoma. Our results showed that recombinant VEGF-C protein protected
Huh-7/WT cell from sorafenib treatment. Knockdown of VEGF-C in Huh7/SR
(sorafenib-resistance) cells decreased the cell survival in sorafenib
treatment. The sorafenib-resistant cells changed their appearance from
epithelial type to mesenchymal type compared to control. In Affymetrix
microarray and microRNA microarray assays, we also found significant
differences between Huh7/WT and Huh7/SR cell lines. hsa-miR-200a was
found down-regulated in Huh7/SR cells which was found to be associated
with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Overexpression of
hsa-miR-200a was found to regulate VEGF-C to alter EMT status in
Sorafenib-resistance HCC. In conclusion, EMT may induce VEGF-C and
downstream signaling pathways which resulted in sorafenib-resistance in
HCC and hsa-miR-200a was found to be playing an important role in this
process.

