Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A retrospective evaluation of metformin usage in patients with
small cell lung cancer (SCLC).


Rationale. In observational and preclinical studies, metformin is found
to have anticancer properties and to prolong survival in various cancer
types. It is unknown whether metformin use confers a survival benefit in
Small Call Lung Cancer (SCLC) patients. We studied the influence of
metformin usage on the overall survival (OS) in SCLC patients. Methods.
SCLC patients in the period 1998 to 2009 were selected from the
population-based Eindhoven Cancer Registry. Those included were linked to
the PHARMO Record Linkage System. The following data were recorded: date
of diagnosis, age, gender, stage of disease, comorbidity (Charlson
comorbidity index), drug usage, administration of chemotherapy and date
of death. Kaplan Meier curves were used to estimate OS. Cox regression
analyses were used to estimate the hazard ratio (HR), this was corrected
for age, gender and stage of disease in multivariate analyses. Due to the
small group of patients using metformin, a multivariate analysis to
correct the HR estimation was not performed. Results. In this study, a
total of 1,136 SCLC patients were included. Median age was 67 years
(range 37-95), 63%/37% male/female, 63%/37% extended/limited disease.
Patients were treated with chemotherapy (75%), radiotherapy (28%) or
surgery (2%). A total of 256 patients (23%) did not receive active
anticancer treatment. Most common comorbidities were cardiovascular
diseases (35%), COPD (24%), and hypertension (19%). A total of 151
patients (12%) were diagnosed with diabetes mellitus (DM), of which 92
(68%) received antidiabetics at time of diagnosis of SCLC. Fifty patients
received metformin. DM was not significantly associated with a worse
prognosis, with a median OS of 6.0 vs. 7.5 months in patients without DM
(HR= 1.2 (95% CI 0.9-1.5)). Patients receiving metformin had no survival
benefit comparing to all other SCLC patients, with a median OS of 8.4 and
7.0, respectively (HR= 0.9 (95% CI. 0.7-1.2)). Compared to patients
receiving insulin monotherapy or sulfanylureas (n= 42), outcome was
non-significantly improved in patients receiving metformin monotherapy
(n= 20): median OS 11.0 vs. 7.0 months (HR= 0.9 (95% CI. 0.5-1.6)).
Conclusions. In our series, having diabetes was not associated with worse
prognosis in SCLC patients. However, within the SCLC patients with
diabetes, those receiving metformin had a clinically relevant survival
benefit compared to those receiving other antidiabetics. Due to a
relative small cohort we could not demonstrate significance. Larger
(retro- and) prospective studies and preclinical research must be
performed to elucidate the role of metformin, if any, in the clinical
management of SCLC.

