Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salinomycin sensitized paclitaxel-resistant human ovarian cancer
cells and induced apoptosis.


Ovarian cancer has the highest mortality rate among gynecologic
malignancies in the world.Drug resistance is the main cause of treatment
failure and mortality in cancer patients. The objective of this study was
to establish a paclitaxel (PTX)-resistant human ovarian carcinoma cell
line (OVCAR3) and to sensitize chemoresistant cells. The drug-resistant
tumor cell lines were established in vitro by stepwise sequential
exposure to increased concentration of PTX. For sensitization, OVCAR3/PTX
cells were treated with different concentration of salinomycin alone or
combined with PTX. The cell viability and cell cycle distribution was
measured by MTT and flow cytometric analysis. The transcriptional change
of mRNA was examined by RT-PCR.The induction of apoptosis was measured by
caspase-3 activity test, DNA fragmentation assay and western blot
analysis. The cell viability was significantly reduced by combination
treatment in a dose dependent manner. The flow cytometry result showed an
increase in sub-G1 phase. Combination treatment enhanced the sensitivity
of OVCAR3/PTX cells to PTX with down-regulation of P-glycoprotein,XIAP
and survivin. Taken together, we demonstrated potential effect of
salinomycin in sensitization of PTX resistant ovarian tumor growth. Our
results suggest salinomycin in combination with PTX may be a beneficial
chemotherapeutic strategy, especially in patients with tumors refractory
to PTX alone.

