Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Pten and p53 tumor suppressors cooperate to constrain the
PI3K/mTOR pathway activation.


Loss of Pten expression and mutational inactivation of p53 are frequent
molecular events in liver cancer associated with advanced disease stage
and poor prognosis. The tumor suppressor PTEN is a phosphoinositide
phosphatase that antagonizes the class IA PI3K-engaged oncogenic
signaling by dephosphorylating PtdIns(3,4,5)P(3); however, the specific
roles of class IA PI3K isoforms, p110a and p110b, have not been assessed
in genetically engineered mouse models of liver cancer with Pten
inactivation. Furthermore, effective treatment strategies for Pten and
p53 deficient liver malignancy remain to be defined. In this study, we
showed that combined deletion of Pten and p53 in liver led to rapid
development of hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocellular carcinoma,
the two most common types of liver cancer, with complete penetrance.
While a single ablation of p110a or p110b markedly reduced the tumor
burden, inactivation of both p110a and p110b completely blocked the liver
tumorigenesis. Although liver tumors driven by inactivation of Pten and
p53 showed a good response to GDC-0941, a pan-PI3K inhibitor, the
combined treatment with both GDC-0941 and Rad001, an mTOR inhibitor or
single-agent BEZ235, a dual pan-PI3K and mTOR inhibitor, led to marked
tumor regression. These studies suggest that Pten and p53 cooperate to
constrain the PI3K/mTOR pathway activation and inhibitors targeting both
PI3K and mTOR may effectively treat Pten and p53 deficient liver cancers.

