Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional domain of Annexin A4: which domain is indispensable for
chemoresistance to platinum drugs.


Background: Platinum drugs are often used for the postoperative adjuvant
therapy or treatment in advanced and recurrent ovarian cancer. We have
previously reported that ovarian clear cell carcinoma (CCC) has increased
expression of Annexin A4 (Anx A4) in comparison with other subtype of
ovarian cancer. Enhanced expression of Anx A4 has been shown to induce
chemoresistance via extracellular efflux of carboplatin.Purpose: To
identify the domain of Anx A4 relevant to chemoresistance.Materials and
methods: Anx A4 possesses the NH2-terminal domain and four annexin repeat
domains with one Ca2+-binding site in each domain. Deleting annexin
repeat domains one by one from C-terminal site, we generated four
deletion mutants of Anx A4 named R1, 2, 3, and 4 (arabic figure shows the
number of annexin repeat domains). Stable cell lines overexpressing each
deletion mutants were established in NUGC3 cells. Chemosensitivity to
platinum drugs was evaluated using the MTT assay.Results. Compared with
mock transfected cells, all the four deletion mutants induced
chemoresistance to both cisplatin and carboplatin.Conclusions. The
deletion derivative covering only one annexin repeat domain can induce
chemoresistance to platinum drugs. Further study is underway to determine
the specific site for chemoresistance of Anx A4.

