Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pfetin as a risk factor of recurrence in gastrointestinal stromal
tumors.


Background: Despite complete resection, gastrointestinal stromal tumors
(GIST) may recur or metastasize, depending on tumor grade. As such, a
sensitive and specific marker is sought to select patients at high risk
for recurrence. Previously our group reported Pfetin as prognostic
predictors by use of proteomics technology. We used microarray of IHC to
identify Pfetin as a statistically significant predictor of prognosis in
resected GIST. In this project, we evaluated the role of Pfetin
expression by IHC, controlled for clinicopathological data, as a
predictor for recurrence.Methods: 45 patients with primary GIST were
treated with complete (R0) resection at our institution between 1995 and
2009. Tumors originated in the stomach (38 cases), small intestine (6
cases), and rectum (1 case).Results: There were 8 recurrences, with the
following characteristics. (1) Pfetin negative cases were significantly
related to recurrence (p=0.002). (2) By univariate analysis, tumor size,
mitoses, dissemination (tumor explosion), invasion (other organ) as well
as Pfetin were significant predictors. According to multivariate analysis
using these 5 factors, tumor mitosis and Pfetin were the most significant
risks (p=0.059). (3) All 8 cases of recurrence were grouped as high risk
according to Fletcher's classification. This demonstrated high
accuracy.Conclusions: We determined that tumor mitoses and Pfetin
under-expression correlate with recurrence. These markers may have
utility in selecting patients for adjuvant therapy.

