Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genistein and soy isoflavone isolate decreased tumor incidence and
multiplicity in a Sprague-Dawley ER-positive breast cancer model.


This study evaluated the chemopreventive efficacy of the pure soy
isoflavone genistein and of a soy isoflavone mixture (PTI G-4660)
containing roughly 90% genistein in an ER-positive breast cancer model in
rats. Female Sprague Dawley rats were injected i.v. with N-nitroso-N
-methylurea (MNU) at 50 days of age. In a model examining the effects on
cancer initiation, promotion, and progression, rats were fed either a
standard Teklad diet or a diet supplemented with genistein (200 or 2000
mg/kg diet) beginning at 43 d of age. Supplemented or standard diets were
administered continuously thereafter until the end of the study. In a
separate study testing the effects on progression, rats were administered
standard Teklad diet or diet supplemented with PTI G-4660 (2000 mg/kg
diet) beginning at 55 d of age. All rats were weighed weekly, palpated
for mammary tumors twice per week, and checked daily for signs of
toxicity. The studies were terminated 126 d after MNU treatment and
tumors were weighed. After 126 days, genistein at 200 and 2000 mg/kg diet
decreased tumor incidence in a dose-dependent fashion by 15 and 20%
(pThis study evaluated the chemopreventive efficacy of the pure soy
isoflavone genistein and of a soy isoflavone mixture (PTI G-4660)
containing roughly 90% genistein in an ER-positive breast cancer model in
rats. Female Sprague Dawley rats were injected i.v. with N-nitroso-N
-methylurea (MNU) at 50 days of age. In a model examining the effects on
cancer initiation, promotion, and progression, rats were fed either a
standard Teklad diet or a diet supplemented with genistein (200 or 2000
mg/kg diet) beginning at 43 d of age. Supplemented or standard diets were
administered continuously thereafter until the end of the study. In a
separate study testing the effects on progression, rats were administered
standard Teklad diet or diet supplemented with PTI G-4660 (2000 mg/kg
diet) beginning at 55 d of age. All rats were weighed weekly, palpated
for mammary tumors twice per week, and checked daily for signs of
toxicity. The studies were terminated 126 d after MNU treatment and
tumors were weighed. After 126 days, genistein at 200 and 2000 mg/kg diet
decreased tumor incidence in a dose-dependent fashion by 15 and 20%
(p<0.05), respectively, and significantly decreased tumor multiplicity by
49.6 and 60.3% (pThis study evaluated the chemopreventive efficacy of the
pure soy isoflavone genistein and of a soy isoflavone mixture (PTI
G-4660) containing roughly 90% genistein in an ER-positive breast cancer
model in rats. Female Sprague Dawley rats were injected i.v. with
N-nitroso-N -methylurea (MNU) at 50 days of age. In a model examining the
effects on cancer initiation, promotion, and progression, rats were fed
either a standard Teklad diet or a diet supplemented with genistein (200
or 2000 mg/kg diet) beginning at 43 d of age. Supplemented or standard
diets were administered continuously thereafter until the end of the
study. In a separate study testing the effects on progression, rats were
administered standard Teklad diet or diet supplemented with PTI G-4660
(2000 mg/kg diet) beginning at 55 d of age. All rats were weighed weekly,
palpated for mammary tumors twice per week, and checked daily for signs
of toxicity. The studies were terminated 126 d after MNU treatment and
tumors were weighed. After 126 days, genistein at 200 and 2000 mg/kg diet
decreased tumor incidence in a dose-dependent fashion by 15 and 20%
(p<0.05), respectively, and significantly decreased tumor multiplicity by
49.6 and 60.3% (p<0.05), respectively. PTI non-significantly decreased
tumor incidence by 14% and tumor multiplicity by 24%. In addition, gene
expression profiling of livers from rats treated with standard Teklad
diet or genistein revealed pathways modified by genistein which may be
useful as biomarkers.

