Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic lethality of mifepristone and LY294002 in ovarian
cancer cells.


We have previously shown that the antiprogestin/antiglucocorticoid
mifepristone inhibits the growth of ovarian cancer cells. In this work,
we hypothesized that cellular stress caused by mifepristone is limited to
cytostasis and that cell killing is avoided because of a compensatory
activation of the PI3K/Akt survival pathway.To investigate the role of
this pathway in mifepristone-induced growth inhibition, human ovarian
cancer cells of various histological subtypes and genetic backgrounds
were exposed to cytostatic doses of mifepristone in the presence or
absence of the PI3K inhibitor, LY294002. Mifepristone-induced growth
arrest of ovarian cancer cells was associated with phosphorylation of Akt
(Ser473), which was prevented by treatment with LY294002. The combination
mifepristone/LY294002, but not the individual drugs, killed ovarian
cancer cells via apoptosis, as attested by genomic DNA fragmentation and
cleavage of caspase-3, and the concomitant downregulation of
anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and XIAP. From a pharmacological
standpoint, when assessing cell growth inhibition using a median-dose
analysis algorithm, the interaction between mifepristone and LY294002 was
synergistic. The lethality caused by the combination
mifepristone/LY294004 in two dimensional cell cultures was recapitulated
in organized, tri-dimensional spheroids. This study demonstrates that
mifepristone and LY294002, when used individually cause cell growth
arrest, yet when combined, they cause lethality. This work further
provides proof-of-concept that in combination, targeted cytostatic
therapies can be an efficient tool to engage cancer cells in a death
program.

