Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of common genetic variants in 15 colorectal cancer
susceptibility loci among African Americans .


Background: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) conducted primarily in
populations of European ancestry, have identified multiple
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at 15 loci associated with
colorectal cancer (CRC) risk. Limited studies have been conducted to
evaluate the association of these SNPs with colorectal neoplasia risk in
African Americans.Methods: We analyzed 19 SNPs within 15 CRC loci in
African Americans recruited from two studies, including 206 CRC cases and
1,000 controls from the Southern Community Cohort Study (SCCS), and 203
colorectal adenoma cases and 461 controls from the Tennessee Colorectal
Polyp Study (TCPS). Logistic regressions were used to derive adjusted
odds ratios and their 95% confidence intervals for the associations
between SNPs and disease risk. We also performed a meta-analysis
including 1,586 cases and 2,956 controls regarding the association of 11
SNPs with colorectal neoplasia risk in African Americans.Results: In the
combined analysis of data from the SCCS and TCPS, we found two SNPs
(rs10505477 and rs6983267) at 8q24 to be significantly associated with
colorectal neoplasia risk (P Background: Genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) conducted primarily in populations of European ancestry, have
identified multiple single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at 15 loci
associated with colorectal cancer (CRC) risk. Limited studies have been
conducted to evaluate the association of these SNPs with colorectal
neoplasia risk in African Americans.Methods: We analyzed 19 SNPs within
15 CRC loci in African Americans recruited from two studies, including
206 CRC cases and 1,000 controls from the Southern Community Cohort Study
(SCCS), and 203 colorectal adenoma cases and 461 controls from the
Tennessee Colorectal Polyp Study (TCPS). Logistic regressions were used
to derive adjusted odds ratios and their 95% confidence intervals for the
associations between SNPs and disease risk. We also performed a
meta-analysis including 1,586 cases and 2,956 controls regarding the
association of 11 SNPs with colorectal neoplasia risk in African
Americans.Results: In the combined analysis of data from the SCCS and
TCPS, we found two SNPs (rs10505477 and rs6983267) at 8q24 to be
significantly associated with colorectal neoplasia risk (P < 0.05). Two
additional SNPs, rs7758229 (SLC22A3) and rs4444235 (14q22), showed
marginally significant associations with colorectal neoplasia (P
Background: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) conducted primarily in
populations of European ancestry, have identified multiple
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at 15 loci associated with
colorectal cancer (CRC) risk. Limited studies have been conducted to
evaluate the association of these SNPs with colorectal neoplasia risk in
African Americans.Methods: We analyzed 19 SNPs within 15 CRC loci in
African Americans recruited from two studies, including 206 CRC cases and
1,000 controls from the Southern Community Cohort Study (SCCS), and 203
colorectal adenoma cases and 461 controls from the Tennessee Colorectal
Polyp Study (TCPS). Logistic regressions were used to derive adjusted
odds ratios and their 95% confidence intervals for the associations
between SNPs and disease risk. We also performed a meta-analysis
including 1,586 cases and 2,956 controls regarding the association of 11
SNPs with colorectal neoplasia risk in African Americans.Results: In the
combined analysis of data from the SCCS and TCPS, we found two SNPs
(rs10505477 and rs6983267) at 8q24 to be significantly associated with
colorectal neoplasia risk (P < 0.05). Two additional SNPs, rs7758229
(SLC22A3) and rs4444235 (14q22), showed marginally significant
associations with colorectal neoplasia (P < 0.10). In the meta-analysis
including data from this study and two other studies, rs16892766 (8q23),
rs6983267 (8q24), and rs7014346 (8q24) were significantly associated with
colorectal neoplasia with no evidence of heterogeneity across
studies.Conclusions: Genetic variants at 8q23 and 8q24 identified in GWAS
conducted in European descendants may also be associated with colorectal
neoplasia risk in African Americans.Impact: Findings from this study may
be helpful for future studies to fine-map GWAS-identified loci to
identify causal variants for CRC.

