Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variation in transmembrane transport genes influence epithelial
ovarian cancer risk and histopathologic subtype.


Background. Transmembrane transport (GO:0055085) is the process whereby a
solute/hormone/ion/iron is transported from one side of a membrane to the
other. Disruption of these processes leads to defects in homeostasis
which contributes to cancer risk. We hypothesized that germline single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the cellular transport genes are
associated with EOC risk and histopathology subtype.Methods. We genotyped
305 SNPs from 120 cellular transport related genes in 14,525 cases and
23,448 controls of European ancestry, 387 African, and 2,388 Asian
ancestries from 43 studies in the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium
(OCAC). A custom Illumina iSelect designed for the Collaborative
Oncological Gene-environment Study (COGS) was used. For women of European
ancestry, both invasive cancers combined and the four main histological
subtypes (serous (n=8,369), mucinous (n=943), endometroid (n=2,067) and
clear cell (n=1,024) carcinoma) were analyzed, while for women of African
and Asian ancestry only the serous subtype was analyzed adjusting for
study site and first 5 principal components. Odds ratios and 95%
confidence intervals were calculated using unconditional logistic
regression. We fitted a log-additive genetic model.Results. In women of
European ancestry, the strongest evidence of an association for all
invasive EOCs was the iron transport gene, HEPH rs17216603 (OR=0.85,
95%CI=0.78-0.93, P=2.8x104), which was also the most significant
association for serous histological subtype (OR=0.81, 95%CI=0.73-0.91,
P=2.0x104). For endometrioid EOC, the strongest association was observed
in the glucuronidation gene, UGT1A5 rs11563251 (OR=0.82, 95%CI=0.73-0.92,
P=6.6x104). For clear cell and mucinous EOC, the thyroid hormone
transport protein, SERPINA7 rs1804495 showed the strongest associations
(OR=1.06, 95%CI=1.06-1.38, P=0.0041) and (OR=0.85, 95%CI=0.73-0.98,
P=0.0407), respectively. For women of African ancestry, the strongest
association for serous EOC was the glutathione conjugation gene, MGST
rs6488840 (OR=0.55, 95%CI=0.37-0.82, P=0.0035). This SNP was not
significant in women of European or Asian ancestry. In women of Asian
ancestry, the HEPH rs17216603 (OR=1.45, 95%CI=1.15-1.83, P=0.0019)
demonstrated the strongest association, although the directionality of
risk was reversed compared to European women.Conclusions. Our results
suggest that variation in transmembrane transport genes may influence EOC
risk and histopathologic subtype in women of European, African and Asian
ancestries, highlighting the differences in the disease etiology across
populations. Additional epidemiological and functional studies are
warranted to elucidate translational and clinical utility of these
associations.

