Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Keratinocyte-specific deletion in mice reveals gene dose-dependent
function of SIRT1 in tumorigenesis.


The protein deacetylase SIRT1, a mammalian counterpart of the yeast
silent information regulator 2 (Sir2) and a proto member of the sirtuin
family, regulates various pathways in metabolism, DNA repair, and cell
survival. However, the role of SIRT1 in cancer is still under debate.
Here we show that the role of SIRT1 in skin cancer development induced by
the human skin carcinogen UVB radiation is dependent on its gene dose.
Keratinocyte-specific heterozygous deletion of SIRT1 increases
UVB-induced skin tumorigenesis, whereas homozygous deletion of SIRT1
decreases skin tumorigenesis. In mouse skin, SIRT1 is haploinsufficient
for DNA repair and the expression of xeroderma pigmentosum C (XPC), a
protein critical for repairing UVB-induced DNA damage. Similar to
homozygous SIRT1 deletion, heterozygous SIRT1 deletion reduces the XPC
protein levels and UVB-induced DNA damage repair. As compared with normal
human skin, down-regulation of SIRT1 is in parallel with down-regulation
of XPC in human cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma at both the protein and
mRNA levels. In contrast, homozygous SIRT1 deletion in mouse skin
augments p53 acetylation, and the expression of its transcriptional
target Noxa, and sensitizes epidermis to UVB-induced apoptosis in vivo,
while heterozygous SIRT1 deletion has no effect. Although mice with
homozygous SIRT1 deletion do not develop tumors, these mice suffer severe
sunburn. The gene dose-dependent function of SIRT1 in DNA repair and cell
survival is consistent with its role in UVB-induced skin tumorigenesis
and injury. Taken together, our results indicate that, depending on the
SIRT1 levels, SIRT1 acts as a tumor suppressor and as an oncogene.

