Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alveolar macrophage depletion decreases lung cytokines and
decreases mouse lung tumor growth.


While anti-inflammatory therapies are being evaluated in lung cancer, the
role of specific immune effector cells and their products in lung
carcinogenesis is unclear. Alveolar macrophage numbers increase as lung
tumors progress, and subsequent changes in macrophage function are linked
to increased growth factor production, accelerated tumor proliferation,
enhanced angiogenesis, depressed immune response, and metastasis.
However, the signaling molecules linking alveolar macrophages to advanced
lung tumor growth are not well defined. To examine how macrophages drive
lung tumorigenesis, clodronate-encapsulated liposomes were used to
specifically deplete alveolar macrophages in mice bearing
chemically-induced lung tumors. Treatment efficacy was assessed by
evaluating tumor burden, multiplicity, proliferation index and histologic
stage. Alveolar macrophage populations decreased to 50% of control levels
during six weeks of liposomal clodronate treatment. This was associated
with significantly decreased pulmonary levels of IGF-1, KC, IL-6 and
CCL2. The concentrations of these cytokines strongly correlated with
decreased macrophage numbers in lung lavage fluid. Tumor burden and Ki-67
index was reduced by 50% in clodronate-treated mice, corresponding with
the 50% decrease in macrophage numbers and cytokine content. Therefore,
macrophage depletion attenuates lung tumor proliferation in vivo,
consistent with our previous observations linking macrophage IGF-1
production and lung tumor proliferation in vitro. These cytokines appear
to mediate macrophage-stimulated lung tumorigenesis, and are thus
potential therapeutic targets in lung cancer and chronic inflammatory
lung disease.

