Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective cohort studies of bowel movement frequency and
laxative use and colorectal cancer incidence in US women and men.


Background: It has been estimated that approximately 15-20% of US adults
suffer from constipation and a similar proportion of individuals use
laxatives. Infrequent bowel movements may increase colorectal cancer risk
by increasing concentration and contact time of potential carcinogens in
the large bowel. Given that colorectal cancer remains the third most
common cancer in US adults, any association between this cancer and bowel
movement frequency or laxative use has public health implications.
However, the associations between bowel movement frequency, laxative use
and colorectal cancer incidence remain uncertain. The case-control
studies that assessed information on bowel movement and laxative use
after cancer developed may subject to potential bias since disease status
may have influenced bowel movement frequency or use of laxatives. Prior
limited cohort studies have generally focused on the assessments of bowel
movement frequency or laxative use relatively shortly before the
colorectal cancer diagnosis. To date, no previous studies have accounted
for the potential important latency between bowel movement frequency and
laxative use and colorectal cancer onset.Method: We prospectively
examined these associations among 88,173 women in the Nurses Health Study
(1982-2010) and 23,722 men in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study
(2000-2010). Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to
estimate multivariable hazard ratios (HRs, 95%CIs). We conducted time
lagged analyses to evaluate the potential latency. We adjusted for age,
smoking, history of colorectal cancer and endoscopy, aspirin use, body
mass index, physical activity, postmenopausal hormone use (women only),
alcohol consumption, intakes of red meat and processed meat, calcium,
folate, fiber, and vitamin D.Results: We documented 2,012 incident
colorectal cancer cases during up to 28 years of follow-up. In both men
and women, age-adjusted results were essentially the same as
multivariable-adjusted results. The multivariable HRs (95%CIs) for
infrequent bowel movement (every 3 days or less) relative to daily were
0.86 (95%CI: 0.71-1.04) in women and 0.81 (95%CI: 0.48-1.37) in men. The
HRs for weekly to daily relative to never laxative use were 0.98 (95%CI:
0.81-1.20) in women and 1.41 (95%CI: 0.96-2.06) in men. In women, the HRs
for every 3 days or less bowel movement relative to daily were 0.87
(95%CI: 0.59-1.27) for colorectal cancers that developed within 10 years
of assessment, 1.03 (95%CI: 0.85-1.26) for 11-18 years after assessment,
and 0.73 (95%CI: 0.54-1.01) for 19-28 years after assessment. The
corresponding HRs for weekly to daily relative to never laxative use were
0.93 (95%CI: 0.63-1.37), 1.03 (95%CI: 0.74-1.44), and 0.98 (95%CI:
0.71-1.35), respectively.Conclusion: Bowel movement frequency and
laxative use were not associated with colorectal cancer risk in this
study.

