Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p90RSK2 coordinates pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic signaling
pathways to protect cancer cells from anoikis.


How invasive and metastatic tumor cells evade from anoikis induction
remains unclear. We found that knockdown of RSK2 sensitizes diverse
cancer cells to anoikis induction, which is mediated through
phosphorylation targets, including apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1
(ASK1) and cAMP response element-binding (CREB). We provide evidence to
show that RSK2 inhibits ASK1 by phosphorylating S83, T1109 and T1326
through novel mechanism in which phospho-T1109/T1326 inhibits ATP binding
to ASK1, while phospho-S83 attenuates ASK1 substrate MKK6 binding.
Moreover, RSK2-CREB signaling pathway provides anti-anoikis protection by
regulating gene expression of protein effectors that are involved in cell
death regulation, including anti-apoptotic protein tyrosine kinase 6
(PTK6) and pro-apoptotic inhibitor of growth protein 3 (ING3). PTK6
overexpression or ING3 knockdown in addition to ASK1 knockdown further
rescued the increased sensitivity to anoikis induction in RSK2 knockdown
cells. These data together suggest that RSK2 functions as a signal
integrator to provide anti-anoikis protection to cancer cells in both
transcription-independent and -dependent manners, in part by signaling
through ASK1 and CREB, and contributes to cancer cell invasion and tumor
metastasis.

