Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunological naturalization of immunocompetent host mice to
luciferase-GFP for consistent tracking of transplanted tumors.


Optical imaging of labeled cells is the most prevailing method for cell
tracking in mouse models. However, the immunogenicity of xenobiotic
reporter genes, such as the commonly used firefly luciferase (ffLuc) and
enhanced green fluorescence protein (eGFP), results in inconsistency in
cell labeling and tumor progression, preventing their use in host mice
with normal immunity. To resolve this issue, we have generated a reporter
gene-tolerized transgenic mouse in which an ffLuc-eGFP fusion gene was
targeted to the anterior pituitary gland using a rat Growth Hormone
promoter (dubbed the glowing-head mouse). When ffLuc-eGFP-labeled Lewis
Lung Carcinoma (LLC) tissue was subcutaneously transplanted into
syngeneic glowing-head mice (GH-c-brd), their non-transgenic litter-mates
(WT-c-brd), and immunocompromised Nod-Scid (balb/c) mice, anti-GFP
antibody was induced only in the circulation of WT-c-brd. Labeled LLC
also exhibited fewer CD4+ T cells but more macrophages in GH-c-brd than
in WT-c-brd, suggesting it induced adaptive immunity in the latter.
Moreover, GH-c-brd exhibited faster subcutaneous tumor growth and
post-resection metastatic progression, and maintained more consistent
tumor labeling, as compared to WT-c-brd and even Nod-Scid mice.
Interestingly, in an adjuvant chemotherapeutic setting, the
immunogenicity of the labeled tumor was able to deter metastatic
progression in a manner similar to that obtained by drug treatment. We
conclude that the immunogenicity of xenobiotic labeling markers can
significantly influence disease progression and therapeutic responses
thereby compromising immunocompetent preclinical cancer models, and that
the glowing-head mouse can be used to circumvent such problems and
promote consistent disease monitoring.

