Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo expanded cytokine-induced killer cells maintain cytotoxic
activity against ovarian cancer in an in vivo model.


Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the leading cause of death among
gynecological malignancies and thus there is a compelling need to develop
novel treatment protocols. The study aim was to asses the anti-tumor
efficacy of ex vivo expanded cytokine-induced killer cells (CIK) against
OC using in vitro and in vivo models.Methods: CIK were expanded from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) isolated from OC patients
(n=21) and healthy donors (HD; n=11), in a cocktail of IL-2, IL-12, and
anti-CD3 antibody IL-7 (10 ng/ml). Cell populations present were
determined by flow cytometry. CIK cytotoxicity was assessed against an OC
cell line (SKOV3-AF2) in presence of IL-2 and IFN-2b. To determine in
vivo activity, OC cells (1x106) were injected intraperitoneally (IP) into
female athymic nude mice (n=100). Day-7 post-OC cell injection, mice were
injected IP with treatment cells [CIK (5x106) from OC patient or PBMC
(5x106) from HD]. Also on day-7, IL-2 treatment was initiated (4,000
U/IP-injection) and continued thrice weekly. Control mice with and
without treatment cells or IL-2 were also included. Mice were sacrificed
when they became moribund due to tumor burden at which time solid tumor
and ascitic fluid were measured and collected. Cell and cytokine
treatment efficacy was measured by overall survival of the mice.Results:
CIK expanded exponentially from both HD (149-fold) and OC patients
(139-fold) over 3-weeks; expansion cultures consisted primarily of
T-cells (>98%) by days 7-8. However, CIK expansion was doubled in the
presence of IL-7 (159 vs. 81-fold; pIntroduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is
the leading cause of death among gynecological malignancies and thus
there is a compelling need to develop novel treatment protocols. The
study aim was to asses the anti-tumor efficacy of ex vivo expanded
cytokine-induced killer cells (CIK) against OC using in vitro and in vivo
models.Methods: CIK were expanded from peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) isolated from OC patients (n=21) and healthy donors (HD; n=11), in
a cocktail of IL-2, IL-12, and anti-CD3 antibody IL-7 (10 ng/ml). Cell
populations present were determined by flow cytometry. CIK cytotoxicity
was assessed against an OC cell line (SKOV3-AF2) in presence of IL-2 and
IFN-2b. To determine in vivo activity, OC cells (1x106) were injected
intraperitoneally (IP) into female athymic nude mice (n=100). Day-7
post-OC cell injection, mice were injected IP with treatment cells [CIK
(5x106) from OC patient or PBMC (5x106) from HD]. Also on day-7, IL-2
treatment was initiated (4,000 U/IP-injection) and continued thrice
weekly. Control mice with and without treatment cells or IL-2 were also
included. Mice were sacrificed when they became moribund due to tumor
burden at which time solid tumor and ascitic fluid were measured and
collected. Cell and cytokine treatment efficacy was measured by overall
survival of the mice.Results: CIK expanded exponentially from both HD
(149-fold) and OC patients (139-fold) over 3-weeks; expansion cultures
consisted primarily of T-cells (>98%) by days 7-8. However, CIK expansion
was doubled in the presence of IL-7 (159 vs. 81-fold; p<0.05). CIK from
OC patients and HD elicited a significant cytotoxic response against OC
cells (26.8% and 24.8%, respectively) compared to negative controls
lacking CIK (0.4%; pIntroduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the leading
cause of death among gynecological malignancies and thus there is a
compelling need to develop novel treatment protocols. The study aim was
to asses the anti-tumor efficacy of ex vivo expanded cytokine-induced
killer cells (CIK) against OC using in vitro and in vivo models.Methods:
CIK were expanded from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) isolated
from OC patients (n=21) and healthy donors (HD; n=11), in a cocktail of
IL-2, IL-12, and anti-CD3 antibody IL-7 (10 ng/ml). Cell populations
present were determined by flow cytometry. CIK cytotoxicity was assessed
against an OC cell line (SKOV3-AF2) in presence of IL-2 and IFN-2b. To
determine in vivo activity, OC cells (1x106) were injected
intraperitoneally (IP) into female athymic nude mice (n=100). Day-7
post-OC cell injection, mice were injected IP with treatment cells [CIK
(5x106) from OC patient or PBMC (5x106) from HD]. Also on day-7, IL-2
treatment was initiated (4,000 U/IP-injection) and continued thrice
weekly. Control mice with and without treatment cells or IL-2 were also
included. Mice were sacrificed when they became moribund due to tumor
burden at which time solid tumor and ascitic fluid were measured and
collected. Cell and cytokine treatment efficacy was measured by overall
survival of the mice.Results: CIK expanded exponentially from both HD
(149-fold) and OC patients (139-fold) over 3-weeks; expansion cultures
consisted primarily of T-cells (>98%) by days 7-8. However, CIK expansion
was doubled in the presence of IL-7 (159 vs. 81-fold; p<0.05). CIK from
OC patients and HD elicited a significant cytotoxic response against OC
cells (26.8% and 24.8%, respectively) compared to negative controls
lacking CIK (0.4%; p<0.01). In the in vivo experiments, mice tolerated
all CIK, PBMC and cytokine dosages tested as evidenced by no significant
weight loss (Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the leading cause of
death among gynecological malignancies and thus there is a compelling
need to develop novel treatment protocols. The study aim was to asses the
anti-tumor efficacy of ex vivo expanded cytokine-induced killer cells
(CIK) against OC using in vitro and in vivo models.Methods: CIK were
expanded from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) isolated from OC
patients (n=21) and healthy donors (HD; n=11), in a cocktail of IL-2,
IL-12, and anti-CD3 antibody IL-7 (10 ng/ml). Cell populations present
were determined by flow cytometry. CIK cytotoxicity was assessed against
an OC cell line (SKOV3-AF2) in presence of IL-2 and IFN-2b. To determine
in vivo activity, OC cells (1x106) were injected intraperitoneally (IP)
into female athymic nude mice (n=100). Day-7 post-OC cell injection, mice
were injected IP with treatment cells [CIK (5x106) from OC patient or
PBMC (5x106) from HD]. Also on day-7, IL-2 treatment was initiated (4,000
U/IP-injection) and continued thrice weekly. Control mice with and
without treatment cells or IL-2 were also included. Mice were sacrificed
when they became moribund due to tumor burden at which time solid tumor
and ascitic fluid were measured and collected. Cell and cytokine
treatment efficacy was measured by overall survival of the mice.Results:
CIK expanded exponentially from both HD (149-fold) and OC patients
(139-fold) over 3-weeks; expansion cultures consisted primarily of
T-cells (>98%) by days 7-8. However, CIK expansion was doubled in the
presence of IL-7 (159 vs. 81-fold; p<0.05). CIK from OC patients and HD
elicited a significant cytotoxic response against OC cells (26.8% and
24.8%, respectively) compared to negative controls lacking CIK (0.4%;
p<0.01). In the in vivo experiments, mice tolerated all CIK, PBMC and
cytokine dosages tested as evidenced by no significant weight loss (<10%)
or treatment-associated morbidity (100% survival, post-treatment cell
injection). Mice that received CIK + IL-2 (expanded in the absence of
IL-7) or PBMC + IL-2 demonstrated a survival advantage at 9-weeks (50%
and 55%, respectively) compared to untreated mice (9%), treated with IL-2
alone (13%) or PBMC alone (14%). There was no significant difference in
average tumor weight or ascitic fluid between treatment groups, probably
due to mice being sacrificed when they were moribund due to tumor burden
(not a specific time post-tumor cell injection).Conclusions: Ex vivo
expanded CIK demonstrated an anti-OC effect both in vitro and in a
xenograft model. CIK expanded from HD and OC patients elicited a
significant cytotoxicity against OC cells in vitro. In addition, OC
bearing mice treated with CIK + IL-2 or PBMC + IL-2 showed improved
survival. Additional mouse studies are underway to test the efficacy of
CIK, PBMC, and their combination. Data generated will provide the basis
for development of an immunotherapy-based Phase I trial for OC.

