Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-215 expression in tumor tissue and in vitro effects of its
replacement in colorectal cancer.


Background: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute a robust regulatory network
with post-transcriptional regulatory efficiency for almost one half of
human coding genes, including oncogenes and tumor suppressors.Methods: We
determined the expression profile of 667 miRNAs in colorectal cancer
(CRC) tissues and paired non-tumoral tissues and identified 42
differentially expressed miRNAs. One of the most significantly altered
miRNAs was miR-215, significantly down-regulated in tumor tissue. We
chose miR-215 for further validation on an independent cohort of 125
clinically characterized CRC patients and for in vitro functional studies
on DLD1, HCT116 and HT29 cell lines.Results: MiR-215 was proved to be
significantly decreased in CRC tumor tissues (pBackground: MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) constitute a robust regulatory network with post-transcriptional
regulatory efficiency for almost one half of human coding genes,
including oncogenes and tumor suppressors.Methods: We determined the
expression profile of 667 miRNAs in colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues and
paired non-tumoral tissues and identified 42 differentially expressed
miRNAs. One of the most significantly altered miRNAs was miR-215,
significantly down-regulated in tumor tissue. We chose miR-215 for
further validation on an independent cohort of 125 clinically
characterized CRC patients and for in vitro functional studies on DLD1,
HCT116 and HT29 cell lines.Results: MiR-215 was proved to be
significantly decreased in CRC tumor tissues (p<0.0001) and to be
negatively correlated with clinical stage (pBackground: MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) constitute a robust regulatory network with post-transcriptional
regulatory efficiency for almost one half of human coding genes,
including oncogenes and tumor suppressors.Methods: We determined the
expression profile of 667 miRNAs in colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues and
paired non-tumoral tissues and identified 42 differentially expressed
miRNAs. One of the most significantly altered miRNAs was miR-215,
significantly down-regulated in tumor tissue. We chose miR-215 for
further validation on an independent cohort of 125 clinically
characterized CRC patients and for in vitro functional studies on DLD1,
HCT116 and HT29 cell lines.Results: MiR-215 was proved to be
significantly decreased in CRC tumor tissues (p<0.0001) and to be
negatively correlated with clinical stage (p<0.0001) and tumor grade
(p=0.04). In vitro analyses showed that ectopic expression of miR 215
decreases viability in DLD1 (p=0.05) and HCT116 (p=0,05) cells, increases
apoptosis in HCT116 (p=0.005), promotes cell cycle arrest (inhibited G1/S
transition) in HCT-116 colon cancer cells (p=0.01) and decreases
migration in DLD1 (p=0.05) and HT-29 cells (p=0.05). We further confirmed
transcription factor HOXB9 as direct target of miR-215 on the mRNA and
protein level.Conclusions: These findings indicate that miR 215 play an
important role in CRC as tumor suppressor and contributes to CRC
pathogenesis.Supported by Internal Grant Agency of Czech Ministry of
Health, grant numbers: NT13549-4/2012 a NT13860 4/2012.

