Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variation of ERG oncoprotein expression in prostate cancer
patients with different ethnicities.


Introduction and Objectives: ERG gene fusions leading to ERG
overexpression represent a highly prevalent oncogenic alteration (50-70%)
in prostate cancer (CaP) patients of Caucasian ethnicity. We and others
noted lower ERG frequency in CaP of African Americans (AA) in comparison
to Caucasian Americans (CA). There is no study of ERG alterations in CaP
patients from India. This study focused on comparative analysis of the
frequency of ERG oncoprotein expression in CaP patients with Asian
(India, Japan), African (AA) and Caucasian (CA) ethnicity.Materials and
Methods: Coded archived FFPE tissue blocks from radical prostatectomy
(RP) specimens of 51 patients from the Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute
(RGCI), New Delhi, India, were analyzed for the presence of ERG
oncoprotein by immunohistochemistry (IHC) using a highly specific ERG
monoclonal antibody (ERG MAb, 9FY). From Japan, tissue microarray (TMA)
derived from surgical specimens of 64 patients (160 cancer spots) with
localized CaP was analyzed by the same antiERG MAb. A USA cohort of whole
mount prostate specimens, minimizing sampling bias and allowing for
assessment of ERG in multifocal tumor context, from 91 AA and 91 CA CaP
patients (matched for age, Gleason score and pathologic stage) was
analyzed by ERG IHC.Results: Of thirty evaluable specimens from India,
ERG positive tumors were present in 8 cases (27%). Among 64 patients from
Japan, 16 patients (25%) showed at least one positive cancer spot for ERG
expression in the TMA. No correlation between ERG status and Gleason
score or PSA failure was found. Systematic evaluation of whole mount
prostatectomy specimens revealed that the frequency of ERG positive
prostate tumors was significantly greater among CA than AA men when
assessed in all tumor foci (41.9% vs. 23.9%, pIntroduction and
Objectives: ERG gene fusions leading to ERG overexpression represent a
highly prevalent oncogenic alteration (50-70%) in prostate cancer (CaP)
patients of Caucasian ethnicity. We and others noted lower ERG frequency
in CaP of African Americans (AA) in comparison to Caucasian Americans
(CA). There is no study of ERG alterations in CaP patients from India.
This study focused on comparative analysis of the frequency of ERG
oncoprotein expression in CaP patients with Asian (India, Japan), African
(AA) and Caucasian (CA) ethnicity.Materials and Methods: Coded archived
FFPE tissue blocks from radical prostatectomy (RP) specimens of 51
patients from the Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute (RGCI), New Delhi, India,
were analyzed for the presence of ERG oncoprotein by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) using a highly specific ERG monoclonal antibody (ERG MAb, 9FY).
From Japan, tissue microarray (TMA) derived from surgical specimens of 64
patients (160 cancer spots) with localized CaP was analyzed by the same
antiERG MAb. A USA cohort of whole mount prostate specimens, minimizing
sampling bias and allowing for assessment of ERG in multifocal tumor
context, from 91 AA and 91 CA CaP patients (matched for age, Gleason
score and pathologic stage) was analyzed by ERG IHC.Results: Of thirty
evaluable specimens from India, ERG positive tumors were present in 8
cases (27%). Among 64 patients from Japan, 16 patients (25%) showed at
least one positive cancer spot for ERG expression in the TMA. No
correlation between ERG status and Gleason score or PSA failure was
found. Systematic evaluation of whole mount prostatectomy specimens
revealed that the frequency of ERG positive prostate tumors was
significantly greater among CA than AA men when assessed in all tumor
foci (41.9% vs. 23.9%, p<0.0001) or in index tumors (63.3% vs. 28.6%,
pIntroduction and Objectives: ERG gene fusions leading to ERG
overexpression represent a highly prevalent oncogenic alteration (50-70%)
in prostate cancer (CaP) patients of Caucasian ethnicity. We and others
noted lower ERG frequency in CaP of African Americans (AA) in comparison
to Caucasian Americans (CA). There is no study of ERG alterations in CaP
patients from India. This study focused on comparative analysis of the
frequency of ERG oncoprotein expression in CaP patients with Asian
(India, Japan), African (AA) and Caucasian (CA) ethnicity.Materials and
Methods: Coded archived FFPE tissue blocks from radical prostatectomy
(RP) specimens of 51 patients from the Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute
(RGCI), New Delhi, India, were analyzed for the presence of ERG
oncoprotein by immunohistochemistry (IHC) using a highly specific ERG
monoclonal antibody (ERG MAb, 9FY). From Japan, tissue microarray (TMA)
derived from surgical specimens of 64 patients (160 cancer spots) with
localized CaP was analyzed by the same antiERG MAb. A USA cohort of whole
mount prostate specimens, minimizing sampling bias and allowing for
assessment of ERG in multifocal tumor context, from 91 AA and 91 CA CaP
patients (matched for age, Gleason score and pathologic stage) was
analyzed by ERG IHC.Results: Of thirty evaluable specimens from India,
ERG positive tumors were present in 8 cases (27%). Among 64 patients from
Japan, 16 patients (25%) showed at least one positive cancer spot for ERG
expression in the TMA. No correlation between ERG status and Gleason
score or PSA failure was found. Systematic evaluation of whole mount
prostatectomy specimens revealed that the frequency of ERG positive
prostate tumors was significantly greater among CA than AA men when
assessed in all tumor foci (41.9% vs. 23.9%, p<0.0001) or in index tumors
(63.3% vs. 28.6%, p<0.0001).Conclusions: Frequency of ERG oncoprotein
expression is much lower in CaP patients with Asian (25-27%) or African
(28%) descent than in CaP patients with European descent (63%). This
study underscores that typing of prostate tumors for ERG may enhance our
understanding of biological differences between ethnic groups.This
research in part was supported by the National Cancer Institute
R01CA162383 (S. S.) and USU-CPDR funds.

