Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiRNA-related SNPs and risk of esophageal adenocarcinoma and
Barrett's esophagus: post genome-wide association analysis in the BEACON
consortium.


The incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA) has increased
significantly in recent decades. Although several major risk factors have
been identified for EA and its precursor, Barrett's esophagus (BE),
including reflux, Caucasian race, male gender, obesity, and smoking, only
limited knowledge exists regarding the role of inherited genetic
variation and its interplay with environmental factors. The Barrett's and
Esophageal Adenocarcinoma Consortium (BEACON) recently completed a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 1,517 EA cases, 2,416 BE cases,
and 2,187 controls. Using this dataset, we examined single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that potentially affect the biogenesis or biological
activity of microRNAs (miRNAs), a class of small non-coding RNAs that
regulate post-transcriptional gene expression and are deregulated in many
cancers, including EA. Polymorphisms in three classes of genes were
evaluated for their association with risk of EA or BE: 1) miRNA
biogenesis genes (157 SNPs), 2) miRNA gene loci (234 SNPs), and 3)
miRNA-targeted mRNAs (179 SNPs). 28 SNPs were significantly associated
(P30% reduced risk of EA (OR 0.68, 95% CI 0.55-0.83), which remained
significant after correction for multiple comparisons (adjusted P=0.04).
This inverse association became more pronounced with increasing
pack-years (P-interaction=0.02). Alterations in disease risk associated
with other polymorphisms ranged from 10-40%. This study provides the most
extensive assessment to date of miRNA-related SNPs in relation to risk of
EA and BE and suggests that genetic variation in this pathway may
influence disease susceptibility and interact with known risk factors.

