Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnostic yield of targeted next-generation sequencing for
personalized cancer therapeutics.


We have implemented a clinical assay to perform next-generation
sequencing (NGS) of twenty-five genes relevant to multiple cancer types.
We report findings from 210 consecutive malignancies submitted to
Genomics and Pathology Services at Washington University in St. Louis
(GPS@WUSTL). DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
tumor selected by histopathologic review. Up to 1 g of DNA (minimum, 0.2
g) was used for library preparation using liquid-phase cRNA capture
probes targeting all exons of BRAF, CTNNB1, CHIC2, CSF1R, DNMT3A, EGFR,
FLT3, IDH1, IDH2, JAK2, KIT, KRAS, MAPK1, MAP2K2, MET, NPM1, NRAS,
PDGFRA, PIK3CA, PTEN, PTPN11, RET, RUNX1, TP53, and WT1 (302 kb).
Libraries were sequenced by Illumina technology to obtain 101bp or 150bp
paired-end reads. Mean coverage was 1596; 50x depth was achieved at >95%
of positions. The analysis pipeline was validated for variant allele
frequency >10%. Variants were called and interpreted using the Clinical
Genomicist Workstation. A list of clinically actionable variants (hot
spots) was curated by literature review. Of 210 cases, 94 (45%) were
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), 20 (9.5%) were pancreatic cancer
(PCA), and 17 (8.1%) were colorectal cancer (CRC), the balance
representing 38 diverse other malignancies. FFPE tissue cores yielded a
median of 2.4 g DNA (interquartile range 1.0-4.9 g). Sequencing
identified a mean of 5.4 non-synonymous coding and/or splice site
variants per case (single-nucleotide variants and indels). Of these, a
mean of 2.8/case were not known polymorphisms and likely represented
somatic mutations. Somatic variants most commonly occurred in TP53 (233
variants in 107 cases), KRAS (52 variants in 51 cases), and EGFR (40
variants in 33 cases). Sequencing identified 74 clinically actionable
(i.e., predictive or prognostic) mutations in 61/210 = 29% of cases. In
NSCLC, actionable mutations were present in KRAS codon 12 (29/94 cases),
EGFR exons 19 (5 cases), 20 (1 case) and 21 (5 cases), and the PIK3CA
helical domain (4 cases). In PCA, there were no variants currently
recognized as actionable, but one potentially targetable MET T1010I
variant was found. In CRC, actionable mutations were present in KRAS
codon 12 or 13 (6/17 cases), PIK3CA (3 cases) and KIT (1 case). Average
turnaround time was 29 days. In conclusion, NGS-based diagnostics can
provide clinically relevant information using readily available FFPE
tissue. Actionable variants were identified in 29% of cases. The
existence of targeted therapies suggests that such diagnostics have the
potential to improve patient outcomes.

