Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of genetic polymorphism in UGT1A1, UGT1A7 and UGT1A9 on
irinotecan, SN-38 and SN-38G pharmacokinetics.


Background and objective: SN-38 is the active metabolite of irinotecan
(CPT-11) and mainly responsible of hematological and intestinal toxicity
after CPT-11 treatments. SN-38 is inactivated into SN-38G by uridine
diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzymes. Some polymorphism of
these enzymes leads lower clearance (CL) of SN-38 and therefore bigger
exposition and bigger risk of hematological and/or intestinal toxicity
(1). Therefore, the goal of this study has been to evaluate the influence
of genetic polymorphism in UGT1A1, UGT1A7 and UGT1A9 on the population
pharmacokinetics of CPT-11 and its metabolites, SN-38 and SN-38G on
Caucassian cancer population.Methods: Plasma concentrations of CPT-11,
SN-38 and SN-38G from 72 patients were pooled to develop a joint
population pharmacokinetic model using NONMEM 7. The effect of age, sex,
body surface area, total bilirubin, co-medication, tumor type, and
UGT1A1, UGT1A7 and UGT1A9 genotypes on the model parameters was
evaluated.Results: The typical values (between-subject variability; %) of
the irinotecan, SN-38 and SN-38G clearances were 42,9 L/h (56,4%), 1340
L/h (76,8%) and 188 L/h (70,1%), respectively. Clearance in patients with
some allele (heterozygous or homozygous) associated with low enzymatic
activity of UGT1A1*28 was a 35,7% lower (CI 95%: 6,7 - 64,7; p=0,003)
than in wild-type patients. Additionally, linkage dissequilibrium
indicates a strong interaction between functional UGT1A1, UGT1A7 and
UGT1A9 polymorphisms related to the alteration of the UGT enzyme
activity.Conclusion: The impact of UGT1A1*28 genotype on the systemic
exposure of SN-38 justifies its routine determination in patients
receiving CPT-11 and subsequent dose adjustment.

