Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-specific mutations in adult soft tissue sarcomas.


Understanding of how cancer initiates and progresses is a fundamental
goal of cancer research. Identification of cancer mutations is of
profound importance for both understanding of the disease and for
developing novel therapies. Soft-tissue sarcomas include multiple
uncommon histotypes with features of diverse connective tissue lineages.
Although some of their underlying genetic changes have been elucidated,
for example in those types which contain etiologic chromosome
translocations, in general, the genetic basis of these tumors is
incompletely described. To investigate mutations in 8 subtypes of adult
soft tissue sarcomas, we resequenced coding exons from about 1300 cancer
relevant genes in 66 tumor samples. Data was analyzed for somatic
variants in samples with matched normals while samples without normal
were analyzed individually. The most frequent events were TP53 mutations
(26%) followed by RB1 (9%) and APC (8%) mutations. Even though,
well-defined oncogene activating mutations were present, they were very
rare. Given the prevalence of tumor suppressor mutations in these samples
we are currently integrating CGH results to look for chromosomal
deletions to support loss of tumor suppressor genes. In addition, we are
investigating low-frequency mutations in lesser-known genes that may be
of potential interest. Our preliminary results suggest that these
subtypes of soft-tissue sarcomas depend on tumor-suppressor loss
predominantly, and may have gained multiple complex sets of mutations in
a number of other pathways. In conclusion, our work will be important in
cataloging novel cancer mutations in rare types of adult sarcomas, with
potential implications for understanding their biology and the
development of new therapies.

