Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Either pan class I PI3K inhibitor or PI3K alpha selective
inhibitor sensitizes head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells to
Erlotinib, an EGFR TKI.


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in 90% of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), and is correlated with
poor prognosis. EGFR is therefore a potential therapeutic target for
HNSCC. However, most HNSCC patients do not respond well to small
molecular EGFR inhibitors. One of the possible mechanisms of EGFR TKI
resistance is compensatory collateral activation of PI3K/Akt pathway.
This study sought to explore whether NVP-BKM120, a selective pan class I
PI3 kinase inhibitor, and NVP-BYL719, a novel PI3 kinase alpha selective
inhibitor, may reverse the resistance of HNSCC cells toward erlotinib, an
EGFR TKI. Cells were treated with the PI3K inhibitors, either BKM120 or
BYL719, alone, erlotinib alone, or in combination, and viability was
measured at 72 hours with MTT assay. Combination effect was evaluated by
median effect analysis. Synergism, indicated by a combination index (CI)
value The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in 90%
of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), and is correlated with
poor prognosis. EGFR is therefore a potential therapeutic target for
HNSCC. However, most HNSCC patients do not respond well to small
molecular EGFR inhibitors. One of the possible mechanisms of EGFR TKI
resistance is compensatory collateral activation of PI3K/Akt pathway.
This study sought to explore whether NVP-BKM120, a selective pan class I
PI3 kinase inhibitor, and NVP-BYL719, a novel PI3 kinase alpha selective
inhibitor, may reverse the resistance of HNSCC cells toward erlotinib, an
EGFR TKI. Cells were treated with the PI3K inhibitors, either BKM120 or
BYL719, alone, erlotinib alone, or in combination, and viability was
measured at 72 hours with MTT assay. Combination effect was evaluated by
median effect analysis. Synergism, indicated by a combination index (CI)
value <1, were seen in all five cell lines (SAS, HSC3, UMCC1, CA922 and
FaDu) studied. By immunoblotting analysis, combination of Erlotinib and
either PI3K inhibitor resulted in dowregulation of p-EGFR and p-AKT
expression in SAS cells. When SAS and HSC3 cells were treated with
erlotinib in combination with either BKM120 or BYL719, an additional
increase in the subG1 population by flow cytometry analysis were
observed, indicating an increase of apoptotic cell death. Our data
suggest that additional PI3K blockade might be an effective strategy to
overcome resistance of HNSCC cells toward EGFR TKIs, and the beneficial
effect is similar between pan Class I PI3K inhibitor and PI3K alpha
selective inhibitor. (The study was supported by the grant of
DOH101-TD-B-111-001).

