Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization and development of on-target Mcl-1 inhibitors;
BH3 profiling provides a valuable drug discovery tool.


Anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins are central to the regulation of the
intrinsic apoptotic pathway, and as such constitute an important group of
targets with great potential as oncology therapeutics. The Bcl-2 family
protein Mcl-1 has been demonstrated to facilitate survival and
chemoresistance in multiple myeloma, AML, and other cancers, and agents
which affect this pathway have become highly sought after. Currently,
however, no therapies exist which directly target Mcl-1. We have
identified compounds that target Mcl-1 which may be characterized as both
Mcl-1-selective and pan-Mcl-1/Bcl-2 inhibitors. This effort has been
facilitated by utilization of the BH3 profiling technology to guide SAR.
This assay allows for determination of the mitochondrial priming state of
both cell culture samples and primary patient samples. We have
demonstrated a correlation between myeloma and leukemia cell line
response to treatment with our inhibitors and the mitochondrial priming
state of such cell lines. Such correlations have also been shown with
respect to the extent of cytochrome C release. In the case of the
selective Mcl-1 inhibitor, we have shown that cytochrome C release occurs
preferentially in leukemia cell lines which are highly primed for Mcl-1
rather than Bcl-2. In addition, our Mcl-1 selective inhibitor
demonstrates enhanced cell killing ability in leukemia cells which have
been engineered to selectively express Mcl-1, Bcl-2, and Bcl-xL. Our
current lead candidate possesses excellent drug-like properties and
displays impressive efficacy in a multiple myeloma disseminated xenograft
model. This work demonstrates the utility of the BH3 profiling assay as
providing a functional biomarker for drug discovery tool and its ability
to validate the on-target activity of Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 inhibitors.

