Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metronomic chemotherapy (MCT): comparison of the efficacy of two
combinations of drugs for the treatment of murine mammary adenocarcinomas.


Metronomic chemotherapy (MCT) refers to the chronic, equally spaced,
delivery of low doses of different chemotherapeutic drugs, without
extended interruptions. We have developed two combined MCT schemes for
the treatment of mammary tumors: A) cyclophosphamide (Cy) 30 mg/kg/day
p.o. + celecoxib (Cel) 30 mg/kg p.o. 5 times/week, and B) Cy 20 mg/kg/day
p.o. + doxorubicin (Dox) 0.5 mg/kg, 3 times/week i.p. They were tested in
two experimental models of mammary adenocarcinomas: I) M-406 and II)
M-234p syngeneic with inbred CBi and BALB/c mice, respectively. Our
present aim was to compare efficacy and toxicity of MCT combined A and B
treatments in both tumor-models. There were analyzed antitumor and
antimetastatic effects, survival and toxicity. The % of reduction of
tumor volume of animals in the treated group with respect to control
group without treatment [median (range): AI: 77.9 (50.9-89.9), AII: 84.4
(30-99.4), BI: 95.6 (57-99.6), BII: 75.5 (62.5-96.8)] didn't differ
between treatments or between tumor-models (non parametric ANOVA). The %
of reduction of lung metastatic burden [AI: 99.8 (97.1-99.2) AII: 99.7
(98.7-100), BI: 90.6 (35.9-96.6), BII: 90 (48.4-99.3)] was significantly
different among all the groups (PMetronomic chemotherapy (MCT) refers to
the chronic, equally spaced, delivery of low doses of different
chemotherapeutic drugs, without extended interruptions. We have developed
two combined MCT schemes for the treatment of mammary tumors: A)
cyclophosphamide (Cy) 30 mg/kg/day p.o. + celecoxib (Cel) 30 mg/kg p.o. 5
times/week, and B) Cy 20 mg/kg/day p.o. + doxorubicin (Dox) 0.5 mg/kg, 3
times/week i.p. They were tested in two experimental models of mammary
adenocarcinomas: I) M-406 and II) M-234p syngeneic with inbred CBi and
BALB/c mice, respectively. Our present aim was to compare efficacy and
toxicity of MCT combined A and B treatments in both tumor-models. There
were analyzed antitumor and antimetastatic effects, survival and
toxicity. The % of reduction of tumor volume of animals in the treated
group with respect to control group without treatment [median (range):
AI: 77.9 (50.9-89.9), AII: 84.4 (30-99.4), BI: 95.6 (57-99.6), BII: 75.5
(62.5-96.8)] didn't differ between treatments or between tumor-models
(non parametric ANOVA). The % of reduction of lung metastatic burden [AI:
99.8 (97.1-99.2) AII: 99.7 (98.7-100), BI: 90.6 (35.9-96.6), BII: 90
(48.4-99.3)] was significantly different among all the groups (P<0.01);
Dunn's post-test showed differences in AII vs BII (PMetronomic
chemotherapy (MCT) refers to the chronic, equally spaced, delivery of low
doses of different chemotherapeutic drugs, without extended
interruptions. We have developed two combined MCT schemes for the
treatment of mammary tumors: A) cyclophosphamide (Cy) 30 mg/kg/day p.o. +
celecoxib (Cel) 30 mg/kg p.o. 5 times/week, and B) Cy 20 mg/kg/day p.o. +
doxorubicin (Dox) 0.5 mg/kg, 3 times/week i.p. They were tested in two
experimental models of mammary adenocarcinomas: I) M-406 and II) M-234p
syngeneic with inbred CBi and BALB/c mice, respectively. Our present aim
was to compare efficacy and toxicity of MCT combined A and B treatments
in both tumor-models. There were analyzed antitumor and antimetastatic
effects, survival and toxicity. The % of reduction of tumor volume of
animals in the treated group with respect to control group without
treatment [median (range): AI: 77.9 (50.9-89.9), AII: 84.4 (30-99.4), BI:
95.6 (57-99.6), BII: 75.5 (62.5-96.8)] didn't differ between treatments
or between tumor-models (non parametric ANOVA). The % of reduction of
lung metastatic burden [AI: 99.8 (97.1-99.2) AII: 99.7 (98.7-100), BI:
90.6 (35.9-96.6), BII: 90 (48.4-99.3)] was significantly different among
all the groups (P<0.01); Dunn's post-test showed differences in AII vs
BII (P<0.05). The analysis of survival showed higher values in treated
groups, being the % of survival increase with respect to controls [AI:
56.5 (4.3-56.5) AII: 77.6 (5.3-84.2), BI: 110.9 (60-308.2), BII: 36.1
(12.4-113)] did not reach statistical significance (P=0.054). The
treatments toxicity, evaluated by evolution of body weight and total
leucocytes count, was similar in both tumor-models and treatments. The
antitumor therapeutic efficacy was comparable in both MCT schemes and so
was the toxicity generated by them. The combination Cy + Cel was superior
than Cy + Dox related to antimetastatic power, suggesting its potential
use at the adjuvant setting. That observation, together with the
advantage that represents the oral administration of the Cy + Cel drug
combination, thus leading to a better quality of life for tumor bearers,
points at its election for the treatment of mammary tumors with
metronomic chemotherapy.

