Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphatidylserine-targeting antibody reactivates tumor immunity
and destroys tumor vasculature in mice.


The immunosuppressive lipid, phosphatidylserine (PS), becomes exposed on
tumor blood vessels and tumor cells responding to therapy. The exposed PS
contributes to the immunosuppressed tumor microenvironment. Bavituximab
is a phosphatidylserine (PS)-targeting antibody that is being combined
with chemotherapy in clinical trials in cancer patients. Here, we tested
the hypothesis that innate immunity against cancer can be elicited by
combining chemotherapy with a monoclonal antibody that indirectly binds
exposed phosphatidylserine (PS). We used a murine version of bavituximab,
2aG4, plus docetaxel to treat prostate tumors in mice. Combination
treatment markedly retarded tumor growth, prolonged survival times and
delayed progression to androgen-independent disease. Antibody treatment
reduced the presence of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in the
tumors and caused macrophages to repolarize from the immunosuppressive,
proangiogenic M2-like state into a tumoricidal M1-like state. The
reactivated macrophages destroyed antibody-coated tumor vasculature and
tumor cells. Addition of 2aG4 to MDSCs in vitro caused them to
differentiate into M1-like macrophages and DCs. Thus, PS-targeting
antibodies appear to reactivate innate immunity in tumors resulting in
tumor growth inhibition.

