Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of the pancreatic cancer TERT-CLPTM1L
risk locus on chr5p15.33.


Pancreatic cancer is a highly lethal cancer with few well established
risk factors. PanScan, a genome wide association study (GWAS) of
pancreatic cancer has identified four pancreatic cancer susceptibility
loci in populations of European ancestry. One of these is in a multi
cancer locus on chr5p15.33 where the most significant SNP from the GWAS
(rs401681, P=3.7x10-7, ORAllele=1.19) lies in a region containing two
genes, TERT and CLPTM1L. The TERT gene encodes the catalytic subunit of
telomerase, well known for its essential role in maintaining telomere
ends. The function of CLPTM1L is not as clear, although it has been
proposed to play a role in apoptosis. It is predicted to encode a protein
with 6 transmembrane (TM) domains and two large hydrophilic domains: a
loop of 253 aa between the first and second TM domains, and a C-terminal
tail of 89 aa.We have performed imputation to fine-map the signal to a
SNP three orders of magnitude more significant than the GWAS SNP
(PImputed=1.4x10-10, ORAllele=1.30). As this SNP is located in the
CLPTM1L gene we have performed a series of experiments to investigate the
function of the CLPTM1L gene and its encoded protein. Immunofluorescence
analysis in pancreatic cancer cells (PANC-1) indicates that it localizes
to the endoplasmic reticulum. Affinity purification and mass spectrometry
(HEK-293T, hTERT-HPNE and PANC-1 cells) identified MYH9, a non-muscle
heavy chain myosin, as a potential interacting protein. The interaction
has been validated by co-immunoprecipitation and co-localization
experiments. To examine if CLPTM1L plays a role in growth control, we
created stable PANC-1 cell lines overexpressing the full length CLPTM1L
gene as well as two deletions, a C-terminal deletion and a loop deletion,
and assayed growth in vitro and in vivo. Cell lines overexpressing full
length CLPTM1L grow faster in vitro and in vivo as compared to cells
containing empty vector. Interestingly, the two CLPTM1L mutants abolish
this effect. Furthermore, we have shown by RNA-seq that the CLPTM1L gene
is overexpressed in pancreatic tumors as compared to normal pancreatic
tissues. Our results indicate that CLPTM1L may play a role in the control
of cell growth and oncogenesis in the pancreas. Our current efforts aim
at further characterizing the function of CLPTM1L and to correlate
pancreatic cancer risk variants on 5p15.33 to molecular phenotypes to
attempt to explain the underlying biology of the risk.Citation Format:
Jinping Jia, Irene Collins, Marta Dzyadyk, Abbey Thompson, Adam Cheuk,
Hemang Parikh, Zhaoming Wang, Chris Westlake, Allen Bosley, Gloria
Petersen, Thorkell Andresson, Laufey Amundadottir. Functional
characterization of the pancreatic cancer TERT-CLPTM1L risk locus on
chr5p15.33. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington,
DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr
2556. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2556

