Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of TGFBR2 gene polymorphisms with TGF-RII protein
expression in breast cancer tissues: results from the Shanghai Breast
Cancer Study.


The transforming growth factor (TGF)- signaling pathway plays a
significant role in the carcinogenic process of breast cancer. We have
previously shown that the minor G allele of the single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) rs1078985 in the TGFBR2 gene was associated with
reduced risk of breast cancer. To further investigate the role of genetic
variants of TGFBR2 in breast cancer etiology, we systematically evaluated
common genetic variants (minor allele frequency > 5%) in the TGFBR2 gene
(80 SNPs) for associations with TGF-RII protein expression in breast
tissue from 970 women with invasive breast cancer who participated in the
Shanghai Breast Cancer Study. Expression of TGF-RII was detected by
immunofluorescence staining. The immunofluorescence signals were
designated as negative, positive, or strong-positive based on a modified
Allred scoring system. Associations of genetic polymorphisms with TGF-RII
protein expression were estimated using linear regression models adjusted
for age at diagnosis. Variant alleles of SNPs rs1078985 and rs3773634
were associated with increased TGF-RII expression intensity in breast
cancer tissue (P = 0.0004 for rs1078985 and 0.0022 for rs3773634).
However, these two SNPs were not associated with TGF-RII protein
expression intensity in adjacent normal tissue or in in situ breast
cancer tissue. The sample sizes for the adjacent normal tissue and in
situ breast cancer groups were small. SNPs rs1078985 (located in intron
3) and rs3773634 (located in intron 4) are approximately 7 Kb apart with
strong linkage disequilibrium (r2=0.962 in Asians). We then performed
electrophoretic mobility shift assays to examine whether the DNA sequence
containing SNPs rs1078985 or rs3773634 interacts with nuclear proteins
and whether the single nucleotide change in these polymorphic sites
alters protein-DNA interactions. The variant G allele of SNP rs1078985
altered both DNA-protein complex intensity and patterns in breast cancer
MCF7 and MDA231 cells, but not in MCF10A cells, whereasSNP rs3773634 did
not change DNA-protein intensity or patterns in any of the three types of
cells. Our data suggest that common variants in the TGFBR2 gene are
associated with TGF-RII protein expression in breast cancer tissue. The
variant G allele of SNP rs1078985 may affect transcription factor
binding, and in turn, increase TGF-RII protein expression in breast tumor
tissue. Characterization of genetic variants and their associations with
protein expression in tumor tissue is valuable for elucidating the role
of TGF- signaling in the development and prognosis of breast cancer.

