Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An ethanol extract from black raspberries inhibits myeloid cell
differentiation, STAT3 phosphorylation and alters T lymphocyte chemotaxis
by upregulating CXCR3.


Black raspberries may benefit health as a whole food via their ability to
provide complex mixtures of phytochemicals, or as a source of lead
compounds for future drug development. In particular, bioactive
components from black raspberries have been shown to inhibit
proliferation and promote apoptosis of both premalignant and malignant
cells. Other reports have also demonstrated that administration of a diet
enriched with black raspberries inhibits carcinogenesis in pre-clinical
tumor models. Despite these results, little is known regarding the
mechanisms by which black raspberries or their bioactive phytochemicals
modulate immunologic factors relevant to tumor development and
progression. We hypothesized that black raspberries elicit potent
immunomodulatory properties that impact cellular mediators relevant to
cancer and chronic inflammation. We show that an ethanol extract from
black raspberries (BRB-E) significantly inhibited proliferation of
activated CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes by CFSE dilution and flow
cytometric analysis (pBlack raspberries may benefit health as a whole
food via their ability to provide complex mixtures of phytochemicals, or
as a source of lead compounds for future drug development. In particular,
bioactive components from black raspberries have been shown to inhibit
proliferation and promote apoptosis of both premalignant and malignant
cells. Other reports have also demonstrated that administration of a diet
enriched with black raspberries inhibits carcinogenesis in pre-clinical
tumor models. Despite these results, little is known regarding the
mechanisms by which black raspberries or their bioactive phytochemicals
modulate immunologic factors relevant to tumor development and
progression. We hypothesized that black raspberries elicit potent
immunomodulatory properties that impact cellular mediators relevant to
cancer and chronic inflammation. We show that an ethanol extract from
black raspberries (BRB-E) significantly inhibited proliferation of
activated CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes by CFSE dilution and flow
cytometric analysis (p<0.05). In addition, BRB-E significantly enhanced
the chemotaxis of CD3/CD28-activated CD8+ T lymphocytes in transwell
assays using monokine-induced by gamma (MIG) as an attractant (p=0.01).
This enhanced chemotaxis was associated with upregulation the expression
of CXCR3 (the receptor for MIG) on CD8+ T lymphocytes. BRB-E also
inhibited expansion of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) cultured with IL-6 + GM-CSF in
vitro. Consistent with the reduction in MDSC, pre-treatment of immune
cells with BRB E attenuated IL-6-mediated phosphorylation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) as determined by
immunoblot. We next studied the immunomodulatory effects of anthocyanin
and quercitin, two prominent compounds present when BRB-E is metabolized
in vivo. Indeed, CD4+ and CD8+ T cell proliferation was significantly
inhibited when treated with Cyanidin-3-rutinoside (C3R, anthocyanin
metabolite), but not quercitin-3-rutinoside (Q3R, quercitin metabolite)
(pBlack raspberries may benefit health as a whole food via their ability
to provide complex mixtures of phytochemicals, or as a source of lead
compounds for future drug development. In particular, bioactive
components from black raspberries have been shown to inhibit
proliferation and promote apoptosis of both premalignant and malignant
cells. Other reports have also demonstrated that administration of a diet
enriched with black raspberries inhibits carcinogenesis in pre-clinical
tumor models. Despite these results, little is known regarding the
mechanisms by which black raspberries or their bioactive phytochemicals
modulate immunologic factors relevant to tumor development and
progression. We hypothesized that black raspberries elicit potent
immunomodulatory properties that impact cellular mediators relevant to
cancer and chronic inflammation. We show that an ethanol extract from
black raspberries (BRB-E) significantly inhibited proliferation of
activated CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes by CFSE dilution and flow
cytometric analysis (p<0.05). In addition, BRB-E significantly enhanced
the chemotaxis of CD3/CD28-activated CD8+ T lymphocytes in transwell
assays using monokine-induced by gamma (MIG) as an attractant (p=0.01).
This enhanced chemotaxis was associated with upregulation the expression
of CXCR3 (the receptor for MIG) on CD8+ T lymphocytes. BRB-E also
inhibited expansion of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) cultured with IL-6 + GM-CSF in
vitro. Consistent with the reduction in MDSC, pre-treatment of immune
cells with BRB E attenuated IL-6-mediated phosphorylation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) as determined by
immunoblot. We next studied the immunomodulatory effects of anthocyanin
and quercitin, two prominent compounds present when BRB-E is metabolized
in vivo. Indeed, CD4+ and CD8+ T cell proliferation was significantly
inhibited when treated with Cyanidin-3-rutinoside (C3R, anthocyanin
metabolite), but not quercitin-3-rutinoside (Q3R, quercitin metabolite)
(p<0.05). Similar to cells cultured in BRB-E, C3R also inhibited IL-6
induced pSTAT3. Together these data indicate that bioactive components
present within black raspberries or their metabolites possess
immunomodulatory properties that deserve further investigation for
benefit of chronic inflammation and aberrant expansion of MDSC associated
with malignancy.

