Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of resveratrol and doxorubicin on inducing the
apotosis of mouse and human PTEN deficient T-cell acute lymphoblastic
cells.


Resveratrol (3,5,4-trihydroxy-trans-stilbene), a plant antibiotic
produced in a wide variety of plants in response to stress, injury, UV
irradiation, and fungal infection, has been shown to inhibit cell growth
of several types of cancer. The aim of the present study was to determine
the effects of Resveratrol alone and its combination with Doxorubicin, a
commonly used chemotherapeutics for T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL), on the proliferation and apoptosis of T-ALL cells. Mouse T-ALL
cell lines were derived from T-cell-specific deletion of Pten tumor
suppressor gene, and human T-ALL cells were obtained from ATCC. We
treated T-ALL cells with different concentrations of Resveratrol (0 M to
200 M) alone and in combination with various concentrations of
Doxorubicin (0 M to 1 M) for different durations (0, 12, 24, 48 and 72
hours, respectively). We showed mouse and human Pten deficient T-ALL cell
lines were sensitive to the treatment of Resveratrol in dose- and
time-dependent manners. In addition, low dose Resveratrol (3.125 M) in
combination with very low dose of o (0.01 M) showed a remarkable
synergistic effect on the cell proliferation and apoptosis. Flow
cytometric analysis with Annexin V and Western blot studies on Caspase 3
confirmed that Resveratrol induced apoptosis, especially in combination
with Doxorubicin. This study establishes a potential role of Resveratrol
in the treatment of Pten deficient T-ALL.

