Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of CXCR4/SDF-1 axis expression in gastric cancer
under hypoxic enviroment.


Background: Various types of solid tumors, including gastric cancer, have
a heterogeneously hypoxic environment which has been currently considered
to be associated with aggressive tumor phenotypes cancer. Stromal
cell-derived factor (SDF)-1 and C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR-4)
form an important chemokine/receptor pair, and are supposed to be
up-regulated by hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). Although the
chemokine signaling is associated with malignant potential of various
carcinomas, few studies have addressed the expression and function of
CXCR4 and SDF-1 under hypoxia in gastric cancer. The aim of our study was
to clarify the significance of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under hypoxia in gastric
carcinoma by evaluating the expression of a hypoxic marker, a carbonic
anhydrase 9 (CA-9).Experimental Design: A total of 297 patients who had
undergone a resection of the primary tumor and were confirmed
histologically to have sporadic gastric cancer were enrolled in this
study. Expressions of CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9, were assessed by
immunohistochemistry. We examined the association between the expression
levels of CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9 and clinicopathologic variables of
patients with gastric cancers. Furthermore, using three diffuse-type
gastric cancer cell lines, OCUM-2M, OCUM-2MD3, and OCUM-12, expression
level of CXCR4 and SDF-1 in hypoxia (1% O2) were examined by
RT-PCR.Results: CA-9 expression was found in 48% (143/297) of gastric
cancers, CXCR4 was 47% (141/297), and SDF-1 was 41% (122/297). The CA9
expression was significantly correlated with CXCR4 expression and SDF-1.
The CA9 expression level was significantly high in cases diffuse-type
carcinoma (p=0.028). The prognosis for CA-9-positive patients was
significantly poorer than that of CA-9-negative patients (pBackground:
Various types of solid tumors, including gastric cancer, have a
heterogeneously hypoxic environment which has been currently considered
to be associated with aggressive tumor phenotypes cancer. Stromal
cell-derived factor (SDF)-1 and C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR-4)
form an important chemokine/receptor pair, and are supposed to be
up-regulated by hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). Although the
chemokine signaling is associated with malignant potential of various
carcinomas, few studies have addressed the expression and function of
CXCR4 and SDF-1 under hypoxia in gastric cancer. The aim of our study was
to clarify the significance of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under hypoxia in gastric
carcinoma by evaluating the expression of a hypoxic marker, a carbonic
anhydrase 9 (CA-9).Experimental Design: A total of 297 patients who had
undergone a resection of the primary tumor and were confirmed
histologically to have sporadic gastric cancer were enrolled in this
study. Expressions of CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9, were assessed by
immunohistochemistry. We examined the association between the expression
levels of CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9 and clinicopathologic variables of
patients with gastric cancers. Furthermore, using three diffuse-type
gastric cancer cell lines, OCUM-2M, OCUM-2MD3, and OCUM-12, expression
level of CXCR4 and SDF-1 in hypoxia (1% O2) were examined by
RT-PCR.Results: CA-9 expression was found in 48% (143/297) of gastric
cancers, CXCR4 was 47% (141/297), and SDF-1 was 41% (122/297). The CA9
expression was significantly correlated with CXCR4 expression and SDF-1.
The CA9 expression level was significantly high in cases diffuse-type
carcinoma (p=0.028). The prognosis for CA-9-positive patients was
significantly poorer than that of CA-9-negative patients
(p<0.001,log-rank). The CXCR4 expression level was significantly
correlated with lymph node metastasis (pBackground: Various types of
solid tumors, including gastric cancer, have a heterogeneously hypoxic
environment which has been currently considered to be associated with
aggressive tumor phenotypes cancer. Stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1
and C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR-4) form an important
chemokine/receptor pair, and are supposed to be up-regulated by hypoxia
inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). Although the chemokine signaling is
associated with malignant potential of various carcinomas, few studies
have addressed the expression and function of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under
hypoxia in gastric cancer. The aim of our study was to clarify the
significance of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under hypoxia in gastric carcinoma by
evaluating the expression of a hypoxic marker, a carbonic anhydrase 9
(CA-9).Experimental Design: A total of 297 patients who had undergone a
resection of the primary tumor and were confirmed histologically to have
sporadic gastric cancer were enrolled in this study. Expressions of
CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9, were assessed by immunohistochemistry. We
examined the association between the expression levels of CXCR4, SDF-1,
and CA-9 and clinicopathologic variables of patients with gastric
cancers. Furthermore, using three diffuse-type gastric cancer cell lines,
OCUM-2M, OCUM-2MD3, and OCUM-12, expression level of CXCR4 and SDF-1 in
hypoxia (1% O2) were examined by RT-PCR.Results: CA-9 expression was
found in 48% (143/297) of gastric cancers, CXCR4 was 47% (141/297), and
SDF-1 was 41% (122/297). The CA9 expression was significantly correlated
with CXCR4 expression and SDF-1. The CA9 expression level was
significantly high in cases diffuse-type carcinoma (p=0.028). The
prognosis for CA-9-positive patients was significantly poorer than that
of CA-9-negative patients (p<0.001,log-rank). The CXCR4 expression level
was significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis (p<0.001), and
with higher stages (pBackground: Various types of solid tumors, including
gastric cancer, have a heterogeneously hypoxic environment which has been
currently considered to be associated with aggressive tumor phenotypes
cancer. Stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1 and C-X-C chemokine receptor
type 4 (CXCR-4) form an important chemokine/receptor pair, and are
supposed to be up-regulated by hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1).
Although the chemokine signaling is associated with malignant potential
of various carcinomas, few studies have addressed the expression and
function of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under hypoxia in gastric cancer. The aim of
our study was to clarify the significance of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under
hypoxia in gastric carcinoma by evaluating the expression of a hypoxic
marker, a carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA-9).Experimental Design: A total of 297
patients who had undergone a resection of the primary tumor and were
confirmed histologically to have sporadic gastric cancer were enrolled in
this study. Expressions of CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9, were assessed by
immunohistochemistry. We examined the association between the expression
levels of CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9 and clinicopathologic variables of
patients with gastric cancers. Furthermore, using three diffuse-type
gastric cancer cell lines, OCUM-2M, OCUM-2MD3, and OCUM-12, expression
level of CXCR4 and SDF-1 in hypoxia (1% O2) were examined by
RT-PCR.Results: CA-9 expression was found in 48% (143/297) of gastric
cancers, CXCR4 was 47% (141/297), and SDF-1 was 41% (122/297). The CA9
expression was significantly correlated with CXCR4 expression and SDF-1.
The CA9 expression level was significantly high in cases diffuse-type
carcinoma (p=0.028). The prognosis for CA-9-positive patients was
significantly poorer than that of CA-9-negative patients
(p<0.001,log-rank). The CXCR4 expression level was significantly
correlated with lymph node metastasis (p<0.001), and with higher stages
(p<0.001). The SDF-1 expression level was significantly higher with lymph
node metastasis(pBackground: Various types of solid tumors, including
gastric cancer, have a heterogeneously hypoxic environment which has been
currently considered to be associated with aggressive tumor phenotypes
cancer. Stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1 and C-X-C chemokine receptor
type 4 (CXCR-4) form an important chemokine/receptor pair, and are
supposed to be up-regulated by hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1).
Although the chemokine signaling is associated with malignant potential
of various carcinomas, few studies have addressed the expression and
function of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under hypoxia in gastric cancer. The aim of
our study was to clarify the significance of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under
hypoxia in gastric carcinoma by evaluating the expression of a hypoxic
marker, a carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA-9).Experimental Design: A total of 297
patients who had undergone a resection of the primary tumor and were
confirmed histologically to have sporadic gastric cancer were enrolled in
this study. Expressions of CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9, were assessed by
immunohistochemistry. We examined the association between the expression
levels of CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9 and clinicopathologic variables of
patients with gastric cancers. Furthermore, using three diffuse-type
gastric cancer cell lines, OCUM-2M, OCUM-2MD3, and OCUM-12, expression
level of CXCR4 and SDF-1 in hypoxia (1% O2) were examined by
RT-PCR.Results: CA-9 expression was found in 48% (143/297) of gastric
cancers, CXCR4 was 47% (141/297), and SDF-1 was 41% (122/297). The CA9
expression was significantly correlated with CXCR4 expression and SDF-1.
The CA9 expression level was significantly high in cases diffuse-type
carcinoma (p=0.028). The prognosis for CA-9-positive patients was
significantly poorer than that of CA-9-negative patients
(p<0.001,log-rank). The CXCR4 expression level was significantly
correlated with lymph node metastasis (p<0.001), and with higher stages
(p<0.001). The SDF-1 expression level was significantly higher with lymph
node metastasis(p<0.001), and with higher stages (pBackground: Various
types of solid tumors, including gastric cancer, have a heterogeneously
hypoxic environment which has been currently considered to be associated
with aggressive tumor phenotypes cancer. Stromal cell-derived factor
(SDF)-1 and C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR-4) form an important
chemokine/receptor pair, and are supposed to be up-regulated by hypoxia
inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). Although the chemokine signaling is
associated with malignant potential of various carcinomas, few studies
have addressed the expression and function of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under
hypoxia in gastric cancer. The aim of our study was to clarify the
significance of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under hypoxia in gastric carcinoma by
evaluating the expression of a hypoxic marker, a carbonic anhydrase 9
(CA-9).Experimental Design: A total of 297 patients who had undergone a
resection of the primary tumor and were confirmed histologically to have
sporadic gastric cancer were enrolled in this study. Expressions of
CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9, were assessed by immunohistochemistry. We
examined the association between the expression levels of CXCR4, SDF-1,
and CA-9 and clinicopathologic variables of patients with gastric
cancers. Furthermore, using three diffuse-type gastric cancer cell lines,
OCUM-2M, OCUM-2MD3, and OCUM-12, expression level of CXCR4 and SDF-1 in
hypoxia (1% O2) were examined by RT-PCR.Results: CA-9 expression was
found in 48% (143/297) of gastric cancers, CXCR4 was 47% (141/297), and
SDF-1 was 41% (122/297). The CA9 expression was significantly correlated
with CXCR4 expression and SDF-1. The CA9 expression level was
significantly high in cases diffuse-type carcinoma (p=0.028). The
prognosis for CA-9-positive patients was significantly poorer than that
of CA-9-negative patients (p<0.001,log-rank). The CXCR4 expression level
was significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis (p<0.001), and
with higher stages (p<0.001). The SDF-1 expression level was
significantly higher with lymph node metastasis(p<0.001), and with higher
stages (p<0.001). The prognosis for CXCR4-positive patients was
significantly poorer than that of CXCR4-negative patients (pBackground:
Various types of solid tumors, including gastric cancer, have a
heterogeneously hypoxic environment which has been currently considered
to be associated with aggressive tumor phenotypes cancer. Stromal
cell-derived factor (SDF)-1 and C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR-4)
form an important chemokine/receptor pair, and are supposed to be
up-regulated by hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). Although the
chemokine signaling is associated with malignant potential of various
carcinomas, few studies have addressed the expression and function of
CXCR4 and SDF-1 under hypoxia in gastric cancer. The aim of our study was
to clarify the significance of CXCR4 and SDF-1 under hypoxia in gastric
carcinoma by evaluating the expression of a hypoxic marker, a carbonic
anhydrase 9 (CA-9).Experimental Design: A total of 297 patients who had
undergone a resection of the primary tumor and were confirmed
histologically to have sporadic gastric cancer were enrolled in this
study. Expressions of CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9, were assessed by
immunohistochemistry. We examined the association between the expression
levels of CXCR4, SDF-1, and CA-9 and clinicopathologic variables of
patients with gastric cancers. Furthermore, using three diffuse-type
gastric cancer cell lines, OCUM-2M, OCUM-2MD3, and OCUM-12, expression
level of CXCR4 and SDF-1 in hypoxia (1% O2) were examined by
RT-PCR.Results: CA-9 expression was found in 48% (143/297) of gastric
cancers, CXCR4 was 47% (141/297), and SDF-1 was 41% (122/297). The CA9
expression was significantly correlated with CXCR4 expression and SDF-1.
The CA9 expression level was significantly high in cases diffuse-type
carcinoma (p=0.028). The prognosis for CA-9-positive patients was
significantly poorer than that of CA-9-negative patients
(p<0.001,log-rank). The CXCR4 expression level was significantly
correlated with lymph node metastasis (p<0.001), and with higher stages
(p<0.001). The SDF-1 expression level was significantly higher with lymph
node metastasis(p<0.001), and with higher stages (p<0.001). The prognosis
for CXCR4-positive patients was significantly poorer than that of
CXCR4-negative patients (p<0.001, log-rank). The prognosis for
SDF-1-positive patients was significantly poorer than that of
SDF-1-negative patients (p=0.008, log-rank). The expression level of
CXCR4 mRNA was significantly increased by hypoxia, in comparison with
that in normoxia in all of gastric cancer cells.Conclusion: CXCR4/SDF-1
expression of gastric cancer cells might be regulated with by hypoxic
condition. CXCR4/SDF-1 axis might play an important role for the
progression of diffuse-type gastric carcinoma with hypoxic environment.

