Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in plasma components of -oxidation as a pharmacodynamic
(PD) biomarker of PI3K inhibition by GDC-0941, a potent, pan-inhibitor of
Class I phosphatidyl-inositol-3-kinase (PI3K).


Background: Potent pharmacologic agents that inhibit mediators of the
PI3K pathway, such as GDC-0941, show promise in early phase clinical
trials and their development could potentially be accelerated by the use
of novel, minimally invasive PD biomarkers. We have previously described
a consistent exometabolomic signature in preclinical animal models,
involving components of -oxidation, with perturbations of the PI3K
pathway [1]. Changes in plasma level of -oxidation components may
therefore have potential as PD biomarkers of PI3K pathway
activity.Methods: Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)
metabolomic profiling [2] was performed on plasma from PTEN knockout
mice, as well as PTEN mutated U87MG xenograft-bearing and
non-tumor-bearing NCr athymic mice treated with GDC-0941 or a
chemotherapy agent, BCNU. The metabolomic candidate from preclinical
studies was then clinically qualified using plasma from patients enrolled
in a Phase I dose-escalation trial of GDC-0941 [3] using a targeted,
quantitative and analytically-validated LC-MS assay [4]. The -oxidation
state (BOS) was estimated by taking the ratio of the sum of plasma
acetylcarnitine and propionylcarnitine over carnitine.Results: There was
a consistent decrease in the BOS with PI3K pathway inhibition in both
preclinical models: the median BOS was higher in the PTEN knockout mice
(4.3; range 3.8-4.9) compared with wildtype littermates (2.8; 2.6-3.8)
(p=0.02), while GDC-0941 treatment resulted in a dose-dependent decrease
in the BOS in U87MG-bearing and non-tumor-bearing mice at 24h following
administration. By contrast, there was no evidence of a statistically
significant change in the BCNU-treated mice (p>0.13).In the Phase I
clinical study, the mean intra-subject baseline variability of BOS was
13% (95%CI 8-18). In 29 patients treated with GDC0941 (7 at Background:
Potent pharmacologic agents that inhibit mediators of the PI3K pathway,
such as GDC-0941, show promise in early phase clinical trials and their
development could potentially be accelerated by the use of novel,
minimally invasive PD biomarkers. We have previously described a
consistent exometabolomic signature in preclinical animal models,
involving components of -oxidation, with perturbations of the PI3K
pathway [1]. Changes in plasma level of -oxidation components may
therefore have potential as PD biomarkers of PI3K pathway
activity.Methods: Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)
metabolomic profiling [2] was performed on plasma from PTEN knockout
mice, as well as PTEN mutated U87MG xenograft-bearing and
non-tumor-bearing NCr athymic mice treated with GDC-0941 or a
chemotherapy agent, BCNU. The metabolomic candidate from preclinical
studies was then clinically qualified using plasma from patients enrolled
in a Phase I dose-escalation trial of GDC-0941 [3] using a targeted,
quantitative and analytically-validated LC-MS assay [4]. The -oxidation
state (BOS) was estimated by taking the ratio of the sum of plasma
acetylcarnitine and propionylcarnitine over carnitine.Results: There was
a consistent decrease in the BOS with PI3K pathway inhibition in both
preclinical models: the median BOS was higher in the PTEN knockout mice
(4.3; range 3.8-4.9) compared with wildtype littermates (2.8; 2.6-3.8)
(p=0.02), while GDC-0941 treatment resulted in a dose-dependent decrease
in the BOS in U87MG-bearing and non-tumor-bearing mice at 24h following
administration. By contrast, there was no evidence of a statistically
significant change in the BCNU-treated mice (p>0.13).In the Phase I
clinical study, the mean intra-subject baseline variability of BOS was
13% (95%CI 8-18). In 29 patients treated with GDC0941 (7 at <100 mg od;
22 at 100 mg od), there was a decrease in the BOS at 8h and 24h post-dose
(median relative to baseline 0.57 and 0.66, respectively; pBackground:
Potent pharmacologic agents that inhibit mediators of the PI3K pathway,
such as GDC-0941, show promise in early phase clinical trials and their
development could potentially be accelerated by the use of novel,
minimally invasive PD biomarkers. We have previously described a
consistent exometabolomic signature in preclinical animal models,
involving components of -oxidation, with perturbations of the PI3K
pathway [1]. Changes in plasma level of -oxidation components may
therefore have potential as PD biomarkers of PI3K pathway
activity.Methods: Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)
metabolomic profiling [2] was performed on plasma from PTEN knockout
mice, as well as PTEN mutated U87MG xenograft-bearing and
non-tumor-bearing NCr athymic mice treated with GDC-0941 or a
chemotherapy agent, BCNU. The metabolomic candidate from preclinical
studies was then clinically qualified using plasma from patients enrolled
in a Phase I dose-escalation trial of GDC-0941 [3] using a targeted,
quantitative and analytically-validated LC-MS assay [4]. The -oxidation
state (BOS) was estimated by taking the ratio of the sum of plasma
acetylcarnitine and propionylcarnitine over carnitine.Results: There was
a consistent decrease in the BOS with PI3K pathway inhibition in both
preclinical models: the median BOS was higher in the PTEN knockout mice
(4.3; range 3.8-4.9) compared with wildtype littermates (2.8; 2.6-3.8)
(p=0.02), while GDC-0941 treatment resulted in a dose-dependent decrease
in the BOS in U87MG-bearing and non-tumor-bearing mice at 24h following
administration. By contrast, there was no evidence of a statistically
significant change in the BCNU-treated mice (p>0.13).In the Phase I
clinical study, the mean intra-subject baseline variability of BOS was
13% (95%CI 8-18). In 29 patients treated with GDC0941 (7 at <100 mg od;
22 at 100 mg od), there was a decrease in the BOS at 8h and 24h post-dose
(median relative to baseline 0.57 and 0.66, respectively; p<0.0001) which
was dose-dependent (p=0.003). In 15 patients (treated at 330 mg od) with
plasma samples taken at subsequent time points, the BOS returned to
baseline levels following a protocol-mandated one-week off-drug period
post-day 1 (day 8 versus day 1; p=0.39). With chronic dosing, the BOS
level continued to decrease from day 8 on days 15 and 16 with respective
median levels of 0.21, 0.17 and 0.11 (pBackground: Potent pharmacologic
agents that inhibit mediators of the PI3K pathway, such as GDC-0941, show
promise in early phase clinical trials and their development could
potentially be accelerated by the use of novel, minimally invasive PD
biomarkers. We have previously described a consistent exometabolomic
signature in preclinical animal models, involving components of
-oxidation, with perturbations of the PI3K pathway [1]. Changes in plasma
level of -oxidation components may therefore have potential as PD
biomarkers of PI3K pathway activity.Methods: Liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry (LC-MS) metabolomic profiling [2] was performed on plasma
from PTEN knockout mice, as well as PTEN mutated U87MG xenograft-bearing
and non-tumor-bearing NCr athymic mice treated with GDC-0941 or a
chemotherapy agent, BCNU. The metabolomic candidate from preclinical
studies was then clinically qualified using plasma from patients enrolled
in a Phase I dose-escalation trial of GDC-0941 [3] using a targeted,
quantitative and analytically-validated LC-MS assay [4]. The -oxidation
state (BOS) was estimated by taking the ratio of the sum of plasma
acetylcarnitine and propionylcarnitine over carnitine.Results: There was
a consistent decrease in the BOS with PI3K pathway inhibition in both
preclinical models: the median BOS was higher in the PTEN knockout mice
(4.3; range 3.8-4.9) compared with wildtype littermates (2.8; 2.6-3.8)
(p=0.02), while GDC-0941 treatment resulted in a dose-dependent decrease
in the BOS in U87MG-bearing and non-tumor-bearing mice at 24h following
administration. By contrast, there was no evidence of a statistically
significant change in the BCNU-treated mice (p>0.13).In the Phase I
clinical study, the mean intra-subject baseline variability of BOS was
13% (95%CI 8-18). In 29 patients treated with GDC0941 (7 at <100 mg od;
22 at 100 mg od), there was a decrease in the BOS at 8h and 24h post-dose
(median relative to baseline 0.57 and 0.66, respectively; p<0.0001) which
was dose-dependent (p=0.003). In 15 patients (treated at 330 mg od) with
plasma samples taken at subsequent time points, the BOS returned to
baseline levels following a protocol-mandated one-week off-drug period
post-day 1 (day 8 versus day 1; p=0.39). With chronic dosing, the BOS
level continued to decrease from day 8 on days 15 and 16 with respective
median levels of 0.21, 0.17 and 0.11 (p<0.001), indicating persistence of
-oxidation modulation.Conclusions: This is the first proof-of-concept
clinical qualification of a minimally invasive, potential PD biomarker of
PI3K pathway modulation using a plasma metabolite index of -oxidation.
Further validation of this approach is planned.

