Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2-Hydroxyglutarate: A candidate oncometabolite in breast cancer.


Recent work in our laboratory identified a poor outcome tumor subtype
with a high tissue 2HG concentration, distinct genome-wide DNA
methylation, and a stem cell-like transcriptional signature. Currently,
we do not know the origin of 2HG in these tumors but ruled out that it is
caused by acquired isocitrate dehydrogenase mutations. Tumors with high
2HG tended to be estrogen receptor (ER)-negative and were
over-represented among the African-American patients. Additional
investigations revealed that 2HG can accumulate in a subset of human
breast cancer cell lines to 50- to 100-fold above the baseline in
non-cancerous cells, reminiscent of the difference between 2HG-high
tumors and their adjacent non-cancerous tissue. The majority of the
2HG-high cell lines showed basal-like characteristics. While some cancer
cells had these highly increased 2HG levels, other cell lines did not
accumulate 2HG, providing a model to study 2HG treatment effects in cell
lines with low endogenous 2HG and to identify the origin of increased 2HG
production in those cell lines with high endogenous 2HG. Thus, we tested
the hypothesis that 2HG influences breast cancer phenotypes. These
experiments showed that 2HG induced phenotypic alterations, DNA
methylation pattern alterations, proliferation, increased invasion and
migration, and EGFR pathway activation in breast epithelial cells
consistent with its oncogenic function in breast cancer. However, the
observed phenotypes were partly cell line- and dose-dependent in our
short term assays. Our results also indicated that different subtypes of
breast cancer cells may respond differentially to 2HG, which suggests
that possibly different cellular pathways are activated by 2HG in the
various subtypes.

