Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping deregulated pathways downstream of RTKs in cell line
models.


In virtually all epithelial tumors, growth factor receptor activity is
deregulated by activated mutations, genomic amplification, and autocrine
loops. The dependence of tumor cell survival upon the driving oncogene
has been called oncogene addiction and demonstrates the acute sensitivity
of cancer cells to inhibition of the pathways driving their
proliferation, growth and survival. Major questions regarding the
sensitivity of solid tumors to targeted kinase inhibitors is why some
tumors respond and others do not and why ones which respond still are
able to develop resistance through the activation of other pathways.
Robust, but not durable, response to receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(RTKIs) highlights the need to inhibit pathway activity at multiple
levels.In this study, we identify extensive signaling networks downstream
of receptor tyroine kinases (RTKs) across multiple spaces, including
phosphorylation, acetylation, and methylation. We used the established
method of TMT labeling coupled with serial peptide immunoprecipitation
applied to profile drug-treated and untreated RTK pathway-addicted cancer
cell lines. Quantitative analysis was performed to look at the effects of
drugs on RTK-dependent cell lines: MKN45 (Met) with Crizotinib, H3122
(Alk) with Crizotinib, H1703 (PDGFR) with Gleevec, and H3255 (EGFR) with
Iressa. Phosphotyrosine, acetyl-lysine, methyl arginine, ATM/ATR
substrate (s/tQ), and AGC/CAMK/STE family kinase motif were all selected
for use in peptide immunoprecipitation which allowed us to characterize
and quantify a broad PTM space. In this study we were able to identify
and quantify hundreds of modification sites for phosphorylation, arginine
methylation, and lysine acetylation. Those sites found to be
drug-sensitive, including all PTM types, were used for pathway analysis
of signaling downstream of each RTK disease driver.

