Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Guanidinium antisense oligonucleotides for cancer therapy.


Molecular targeted therapies are being tested in several clinical
settings to target cancer. Most of the drugs being tested are small
molecule inhibitors or antibodies that are specific to target proteins.
Several of which have reduced target specificity or the tumor develops
resistance to the drugs. This results in poor clinical outcomes. An
approach that is highly specific and yet malleable enough to circumvent
resistance mechanisms would be highly appealing. We have developed an
antisense approach that can specifically bind to the mRNA of target
proteins preventing translation and resulting in lower protein levels. In
addition, unlike conventional antisense approaches, our antisense
oligonucleotide carries a pseudo-peptide backbone with positively charged
guanidinium residues rendering these resistant to nucleases and
proteases. The oligomer binds nucleic acids with high sequence
specificity and the hybridized complex is highly stable. As a proof of
principle, we developed a 16 base antisense oligomer targeting the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). EGFR is upregulated in several
cancers and correlates with a poor prognosis. We tested the
guanidinium-peptide nucleic acid (GPNA) EGFR antisense oligomer in tumors
of the head and neck, lung and bladder. We carried out in vitro and in
vivo studies including uptake and antitumor efficacy. Our data
demonstrate that EGFR levels and cell survival are significantly reduced
upon EGFRAS GPNA administration but not a scrambled control. Further, the
EGFRAS GPNA effectively reduced levels of a constitutively active mutant
EGFR (EGFRvIII). In vivo, EGFRAS GPNA had antitumor effects comparable to
EGFR inhibitors that are under clinical testing namely erlotinib and
cetuximab. Our data demonstrate that GPNA oligomers are an effective
therapeutic approach against several tumor types.

