Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study of medical diagnostic x-rays and risk of
thyroid cancer.


While diagnostic x-rays provide important medical benefits, cancer risks
associated with their exposure are also possible. The thyroid gland is
the most radiosensitive organ, and radiotherapy to the head and neck is
associated with an increased risk of thyroid cancer. However, it is not
known whether diagnostic x-rays, which yield a lower dose of ionizing
radiation to the thyroid gland than radiotherapy, also increase the risk.
The United States Radiological Technologists study (1983-2006) is a
nationwide, prospective cohort with extensive questionnaire data on
history of personal diagnostic imaging procedures collected prior to
cancer diagnosis. Cox proportional hazards were used to estimate thyroid
cancer (TC) risks related to the number and type of selected procedures.
Potential modifying effects of age and calendar year of the first x-ray
in each category of procedures were assessed. Incident thyroid cancers
(n=251) were diagnosed among 75,494 technologists (1.3 million
person-years, mean follow-up=17 years). Overall, there was no clear
evidence of TC risks associated with diagnostic x-rays, except for dental
x-rays. The authors observed a 13% increase in TC risk for every 10
reported dental x-rays (95%CI: 1.01-1.26), driven by dental x-rays first
received before 1970, but no evidence that the relationship between
dental x-rays and TC was associated with childhood or adolescent
exposures as would have been anticipated. The lack of association of TC
with x-rays which expose the thyroid to higher radiation doses than
dental x-rays underscores the need to conduct a detailed radiation
exposure assessment to enable quantitative evaluation of risk.Citation
Format: Gila I. Neta, Preetha Rajaraman, Amy Berrington de Gonzalez,
Michele Doody, Bruce Alexander, Steve Simon, D. Michal Freedman, Martha
Linet, Alice Sigurdson. A prospective study of medical diagnostic x-rays
and risk of thyroid cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2541. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2541

