Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spontaneous genomic alterations identified in a chimeric model of
colorectal cancer guide effective combinatorial therapy.


Colon cancer is the second most common cause of cancer mortality in the
western world. We generated a mouse model of colon cancer in which a
conditional mutation of p53 is combined with inducible
delta131-beta-Catenin over-expression in the intestinal epithelium. After
4-12 months of beta-Catenin induction, small adenomas and large solitary
nodules of invasive adenocarcinomas developed in either the upper or
lower intestinal tract, while the remainder of the intestine appeared
normal. Molecular analysis revealed that EGFR and MET were expressed in
advanced adenocarcinomas but not early stage adenomas. Although
propagating mouse colon tumors has been very challenging, we nevertheless
successfully established one tumor line through direct in vivo
propagation in the kidney capsule. This tumor line, CB42, grew
aggressively and metastasized to ancillary lymph nodes as well as the
lung in a subcutaneous metastasis assay and grew in the liver when seeded
there by intra splenic injection. Treatment with a MET inhibitor
Crizotinib, had no effect on either primary tumor growth, or metastasis.
By comparing the genome of CB42 with other colon tumors that did not
propagate, we discovered an amplicon on chromosome five containing genes
that correlated with propagation and metastasis. In addition, whole
genome sequencing revealed that CB42 harbored a mutation in KRAS. Results
from combination therapies against key genetic alterations will be
presented.

