Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maximising the activity of immune checkpoint blockade through
rational combination.


Harnessing the power of the immune system to identify and eliminate
cancer is a promising area of development in cancer therapy. Increasing
T-cell activation, in particular, is now a clinically validated approach
to the treatment of cancer. Cytotoxic Tlymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4,
CD152) and B7-H1 (PD-L1, CD274) are part of a complex system of receptors
and ligands that are involved in limiting T-cell activation through the
delivery of inhibitory signals. MedImmune is currently developing
tremelimumab (anti-CTLA4) and MEDI4736 (anti-PD-L1), for the treatment of
advanced or metastatic solid tumours. Both of these antibodies antagonise
T-cell inhibition signals with the aim of enhancing anti-tumor T cell
activity, and tremelimumab has demonstrated benefit in a sub-set of
patients with melanoma (Ribas, 2010).Published studies characterising the
immunogenic nature of some existing cancer therapeutics provide reason to
believe that a combination strategy, utilising checkpoint blockade
together with current standard of care, or novel therapeutics, could
result in increased activity. We have established and characterised a
panel of syngeneic mouse tumor models and employed these to explore the
immune effects of a number of existing cancer therapies using
pharmacodynamic (PD) and tumor growth inhibition (TGI) endpoints. In
addition mouse cross reactive anti-CTLA-4 and PD-L1 antibodies were used
to assess the potential for combination with these existing therapeutics
and the effect of schedule on PD and TGI activity.

