Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Negative regulation of AMPK-dependent metabolic-stress pathways by
MIF and D-DT in non-small cell lung carcinoma.


AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a nutrient and metabolic stress
sensing enzyme activated by the tumor suppressor kinase, LKB1. Because
macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and its functional homolog,
D-dopachrome tautomerase (D-DT), have pro-tumorigenic functions in
non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) but have AMPK activating properties
in nonmalignant cell types, we set out to investigate this apparent
paradox. Our data now suggest that, in contrast to MIF and D-DT's AMPK
activating properties in non-transformed cells, MIF and D-DT
cooperatively act to inhibit steady state phosphorylation and activation
of AMPK in LKB1 wildtype and LKB1 mutant human NSCLC cell lines. Our data
further indicate that MIF and D-DT - acting through their shared cell
surface receptor, CD74 - antagonize NSCLC AMPK activation by maintaining
glucose uptake, ATP production and redox balance resulting in reduced
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase kinase [[Unsupported Character - Symbol
Font ß]] (CaMKK[[Unsupported Character - Symbol Font ß]])-dependent AMPK
activation. Combined, these studies indicate that MIF and D-DT cooperate
to inhibit AMPK activation in an LKB1-independent manner. This suggests
that MIF and D-DT promote a unique and well conserved adaptation pathway
that is usurped by the malignant cells in order to counter metabolic
stress-induced, AMPK-dependent, tumor suppression. Importantly, because
the LKB1 tumor suppressor locus is mutated in over 30% of NSCLC lesions
rendering these tumors insensitive to AMPK-dependent growth suppression,
the identification of unique AMPK agonists would be expected to have a
tremendous impact on NSCLC disease management for clinicians. Taken
together, simultaneous therapeutic targeting of both MIF and D-DT
represents an innovative and clinically efficacious approach to
re-activating metabolic stress-induced tumor suppression in NSCLC
malignant lesions.

