Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation of APC and GSTP1 in non-neoplastic tissue adjacent to
prostate tumour and mortality from prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer is the most common tumour in men in many populations,
with a crude incidence of 120-130 per 105 in Europe and the United
States. The incidence of prostate cancer has increased dramatically since
the introduction of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing at the end of
the 1980s; opportunistic PSA-based screening for prostate cancer is
widespread, although its ability to decrease mortality is still being
debated.We studied gene methylation in non-neoplastic tissue adjacent to
prostate tumours (NTAT) in association with prostate cancer mortality, as
a marker to discriminate between indolent and aggressive prostate
tumours.From two cohorts of consecutive prostate cancer patients
diagnosed at one pathology ward in Turin, Italy, we selected 157 patients
with available NTAT and followed them up for more than 14 years. We
obtained DNA from NTAT in paraffin-embedded prostatic tumour tissues and
used probe real-time PCR to analyse methylation of the glutathione
S-transferase (GSTP1) and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene
promoters. Prevalence of APC and GSTP1 methylation in the NTAT was
between 40 and 45%. It was associated with methylation in prostatic
tumour tissue for the same two genes as well as with high Gleason. The
hazard ratio (HR) of prostate cancer mortality was 2.16 (1.13-4.13) for
APC methylation, and 2.83 (1.42-5.65) for GSTP1 methylation in NTAT. It
changed to 1.75 (0.95-3.22) and 1.61 (0.80-3.22) after adjusting for
Gleason score and methylation in prostatic tumour tissue. Comparison of 2
vs. 0 methylated genes in NTAT revealed a HR of 3.84 (1.83-8.03), which
decreased to 2.12 (1.03-4.37) after adjustment. Results were stronger in
the first 5 years of follow-up (adjusted HR: 3.03, 95% CI: 1.20-7.67) and
in the biopsy sub-cohort (HR: 5.91, 95% CI: 1.00-35.0).This results show
that changes in gene methylation are an early event in prostate
carcinogenesis and may play a role in cancer progression. Gene
methylation in NTAT is a possible prognostic marker.

