Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of the signaling factors involved in
Ras/MAPK-promoted metastasis in the PTEN/TP53/ mouse model.


The most significant challenges for advanced prostate cancer patients are
resistance to androgen-deprivation therapy and the dissemination of
metastatic cancer cells. Our study begins to address how enhanced Ras
signaling cooperates with combined TP53 and PTEN loss for enhanced
metastatic capability. Because neither PTEN nor TP53 deletion alone is
not sufficient for metastasis, we asked what other signaling pathways are
required. Ras pathway activation is implicated in prostate cancer
metastatic progression in comprehensive genetic analyses of human
prostate tumors. We introduced a lentiviral vector expressing K-rasG12V
into a non-metastatic PTEN//TP53/- adenocarcinoma cell line (clone 2).
Orthotopic prostate injection of clone2/Ras expressing cells resulted in
100% pulmonary metastasis. The metastatic phenotype was paralleled by an
inhibition of sarcomatoid carcinoma transformation. We hypothesized that
Ras signaling modified TGF-mediated EMT signaling, which we have
previously demonstrated leads to sarcomatoid carcinoma formation in this
model. Multiple pathways downstream of TGF initiate signaling including
SMAD4 dependent transcription and other non-SMAD mediated pathways like
TAK1 induced NF-B activation. Pathologic analysis of nuclear p65
labeling, a canonical NF-B marker, showed enhanced labeling in clone2/Ras
developed tumors and lung metastases and undetectable levels in clone 2
developed tumors. These in vivo findings suggest enhanced canonical NF-B
signaling may enable Ras transformed prostate cancer cells with
metastatic capability.

