Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRCA1 expression and genomic aberrations in triple negative breast
tumors.


Among breast cancer tumors, a group named as triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC) which do not express hormone receptors and HER2 (ER-, PR-,
HER2-) do not have specific therapy. Therefore, knowing the genes
involved in this type of tumor is highly relevant for treatment. Intense
research in these tumors has been performed in order to identify new
targets. We studied 48 TNBC tumors from Chilean patients by different
approaches. In these tumors, we determined the expression, by
immunohistochemistry, the different cytokeratins (CK5, CK14, and CK8/18)
and EGFR. In addition, we analyzed BRCA1 expression and localization by
immunohistochemistry. Using array-CGH, we characterized the genomic
aberrations, in order to identify common alterations between tumors. A
62.5% (30/48) of the tumors were classified as basal-like. Expression and
localization of BRCA1 analysis revealed that a 22.9% (11/48) of tumors
presented normal expression of nuclear BRCA1, a 29.2% (14/48) has low or
absent nuclear expression and a 47.9% (23/48) has altered BRCA1
localization, in addition to low expression in some cases. This suggests
that the loss of expression of BRCA1 or its altered localization may be
relevant for tumor progression. Analysis of genomic alterations by
array-CGH revealed regions of gain (4p16.3-p16.2, 7p22.3-p22.2, 11p15.5,
19p13.3) and deleted regions (1q21.1, 6p11.2; 11q22.3) shared by more
than 30% of these tumors. By grouping these tumors we identified three
main groups, one of which correlates with the low expression /
miss-localization of BRCA1. An analysis of the genes contained in these
regions can determine the signaling pathways relevant to the progression
of breast cancer. In this regard, by clustering, we identified a group of
TNBC tumors (17/48) with amplification of AKT1, which may be relevant as
a therapeutic target. FONDECYT 1080595, CONICYT 24091058.

