Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo model of non-small cell lung cancer metastasis to the
brain.


Background: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has a high rate of
metastasis to distant sites such as the brain. Previous reports have
suggested that exogenously expressed EMT transcription factors lead to
EMT-induced migration, invasion, and anchorage-independent growth of
cancer cells in vitro. In other cancer types, increased EMT transcription
factors leads to promotion of metastatic tumor cell dissemination but
simultaneously can also inhibit distant colonization by circulating
metastatic cells. Methods: To investigate the role of EMT in brain
metastasis in NSCLC, we established an in vivo model of brain metastasis
through the isolation of brain metastatic clones from iterative rounds of
systemic cancer cell inoculation in immunodeficient mice. Results: With
each round, an increasing frequency of brain metastasis characterized the
metastatic pattern and earlier onset of brain tumor formation was seen in
select animals. In the metastatic cell lines established from the
explanted brain metastases, we observed elevation of EMT markers such as
TWIST, vimentin, and fibronectin compared to the parental cells. In
addition, metastatic clones to the brain demonstrated markedly increased
migration and EGFR expression. Conclusion: Iterative in vivo passaging of
cancer cells facilitated isolation of subclones demonstrating increased
brain metastasis. Also, these data suggests that the increased expression
of EMT markers does not inhibit the formation of brain metastasis in
NSCLC.

