Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase by
Helicobacter pylori in human gastric carcinogenesis.


Helicobacter pylori (H pylori) infection induces a chronic inflammatory
response, which promotes gastric carcinogenesis. 15-hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) plays a key role as a tumor suppressor in
gastrointestinal cancers. The aim of this study was to elucidate the role
of 15-PGDH in gastric carcinogenesis associated with H pylori. 15-PGDH
expression in gastric biopsies from H pylori-infected (n=25) and
non-infected (n=15) subjects was analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR,
western blot analysis, and immunohistochemisty. 15-PGDH DNA methylation
was evaluated by methylation specific PCR and pyrosequencing. The
expression of 15-PGDH, Snail, ERK1/2, TLR4 and MyD88 in response to H
pylori infection was assessed by immunoblot analysis. Compared to
negative specimens, H pylori positive specimens had 2-fold lower 15-PGDH
mRNA levels and significantly less 15-PGDH protein. In four H pylori
infected subjects with longitudinal follow-up, the suppression of 15-PGDH
expression was reversed by H pylori eradication therapy. In parallel with
suppressing 15-PGDH expression, H pylori infection activated expression
of TLR4 and MyD88 expression, increased levels of phospho-ERK1/2, and
increased expression of Snail. Inhibition of MyD88 reversed suppression
of 15-PGDH expression and reduced phosphorylated ERK1/2. Similarly,
treatment with an ERK1/2 inhibitor also restored 15-PGDH expression.
Heliocobacter pylori appeared to promote gastric carcinogenesis by
suppressing15-PGDH. This process is mediated by the TLR4/MyD88 pathway
via ERK1/2 and Snail transcriptional regulation. 15-PGDH may be a useful
marker and a potential therapeutic target in H pylori-induced gastric
carcinogenesis.

