Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Helicobacter pylori induces phosphorylation of STAT3 Tyr705 and
Ser727 in human gastric epithelial cells.


Helicobacter pylroi (H. pylori) infection has been considered to be one
of the high risk factors of gastritis and gastric cancer, but its
pathogenic implication is still poorly understood. Recent studies
indicate that constitutive activation of the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) plays an important role in
inflammation-associated carcinogenesis. In our previous study, we found
that the phosphorylation of STAT3 at Tyr705 was increased in H. pylori
plus high salt diet-induced gastritis in a mouse model. The similar
results were observed in human gastric AGS cells co-cultured with H.
pylori. Interestingly, H. pylori induced phosphorylation of STAT3 at not
only Tyr705 but also Ser727. However, the phosphorylation of two residues
exhibited different profiles in human gastric epithelial cells upon H.
pylori treatment. The phosphor-Tyr705 increased at early time of H.
pylori infection and then decreased immediately, but phosphor-Ser727
increased thereafter which was first discovered in our present study.
Phosphorylation of STAT3 is an essential event for inducing the
expression of anti-apoptotic/survival proteins, such as Bcl-XL, BcL-2,
survivin and c-Myc which contribute to gastric carcinogenesis. Levels of
all these proteins were elevated in H. pylori-infected AGS cells. In
conclusion, H. pylori induces phosphorylation of STAT3 at both Tyr705 and
Ser727 residues. The role of phospohorylation of STAT3 at the Serine 727
residue in H. pylori-induced gastritis and gastric cancer is under
investigation.

