Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Responsecharacteristics and overall survival of 781 patients with
triple-negativebreast cancer - a meta-analysis on 7 German neoadjuvant
studies.


Background: A specific chemotherapy for patients with early
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC, Background: A specific chemotherapy
for patients with early triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC, <10%
expression of oestrogen- and progesterone receptor (ER, PR) as well as
normal HER2 expression) has not been proven so far.Patients and methods:
We analysed baseline and treatment characteristics of 4592 patients who
received anthracycline/taxane+/-trastuzumab-containing therapy within one
of 7 German prospective neoadjuvant studies during the years 1999 to 2008
and had information on hormone- and HER2-receptor status available for
their prognostic and predictive impact on pathologic complete remission
(pCR; ypT0 ypN0) and overall survival (OS).Results: 781 patients had TNBC
and 3188 patients had non-TNBC. Compared to non-TNBC patients, TNBC
patients had a significantly higher pCR rate (29.7% versus 9.9%,
pBackground: A specific chemotherapy for patients with early
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC, <10% expression of oestrogen- and
progesterone receptor (ER, PR) as well as normal HER2 expression) has not
been proven so far.Patients and methods: We analysed baseline and
treatment characteristics of 4592 patients who received
anthracycline/taxane+/-trastuzumab-containing therapy within one of 7
German prospective neoadjuvant studies during the years 1999 to 2008 and
had information on hormone- and HER2-receptor status available for their
prognostic and predictive impact on pathologic complete remission (pCR;
ypT0 ypN0) and overall survival (OS).Results: 781 patients had TNBC and
3188 patients had non-TNBC. Compared to non-TNBC patients, TNBC patients
had a significantly higher pCR rate (29.7% versus 9.9%, p<.0001); but
showed a significantly lower OS-rate (5 yr OS for TNBC 75%, for non-TNBC
88%; p12 weeks), type of regimen (combination versus sequential), dosing
(conventional versus dose dense), dose of anthracyclines or taxanes (high
versus low) or substance (docetaxel versus paclitaxel) in baseline factor
adjusted multivariate analyses; despite univariate analyses suggested a
better outcome for TNBC patients if treated by combination chemotherapy
(p=.018) or higher anthracycline dose (p=.079). However, early partial or
complete clinical response to the first 2-4 cycles of neoadjuvant therapy
(74.0% in TNBC versus 65.7% in non-TNBC) correlated strongly with OS for
TNBC patients (p=.004), but only marginally for non-TNBC patients
(p=.055).Conclusion: Patients with TNBC achieving a pCR after neoadjuvant
therapy have a highly favourable prognosis at least as good as patients
with non-TNBC and pCR. Different therapeutic approaches don't show an
impact on OS in TNBC. However, pCR and interestingly, early clinical
response to neoadjuvant treatment, correlates with favourable OS in
patients with TNBC.

