Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CT45A6, cancer/testis antigen 45 family member, confer drug
resistance to lung cancer cell lines.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related death in the world.
Although recent advances in development of new chemotherapeutics offer a
great promise to clinical outcome, drug resistance is still major concern
of clinician. Cisplatin is platinum based drug that variously, combined
with many other chemotherapeutics, have been widely used in the treatment
of cancer. However, tumors usually become resistant to cisplatin during
treatment. We performed RNA sequencing with 7 lung cancer cell lines and
selected candidate genes to identify novel drug-resistance genes. RNA
sequence analysis showed that one of these genes contained CT45A6. CT45A6
is a member of CT45 family. CT45 is a cancer/testis antigen family 45
that is located in Xq26.3 and expressed normally in testis and various
cancers including lung cancer. However, little is known about its
biological function, especially about drug resistance. Here, we show that
CT45A6 confers cisplatin resistance into lung cancer cell lines. CT45A6
gene is significantly over-expressed in A549PR (cisplatin-resistant A549
lung cancer cell line) compared with wild type A549 lung cancer cell
line. Interestingly, overexpression of CT45A6 in CT45A6-low NCI-H2009 and
NCI-H358 lung cancer cell lines showed increased resistance to cisplatin
and G2 phase population. Inversely, knockdown of CT45A6 in A549PR cells
significantly decreased cisplatin-resistance. Thus, our findings indicate
that CT45A6 may be a potential target to overcome drug resistance.

