Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-34a as a radio sensitizer of triple negative breast cancer.


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is known to be
relatively resistant to radiation therapy resulting in a comparatively
higher rates of locoregional recurrence compared with non-TNBC patients.
The mechanisms behind this relative radio resistance remain unknown. The
goal of this study is to investigate the role of three miRNAs namely,
miR-34a, miR-21, and miR-210, which are implicated in DNA damage-repair
process, in the response of TNBC cell lines to radiation therapy.
Methods: Seven TNBC breast cancer cell lines were used for the study. The
levels of miR-34a, miR-21 and miR-210 were evaluated by taqman- based
quantitative PCR assay. These cells were exposed to 2 Gy radiation dose
and colonogenic survival was assessed after about 2 weeks. Survival
fraction after 2 Gy (SF2), which is the ratio of number of cell colonies
formed after 2 Gy radiation vs. the number of cell colonies with out
radiation, was determined. The SF2 factor is a reliable index to measure
radio sensitivity, greater the SF2 factor more radio resistant the cells
are. Results: The SF2 value of the TNBC cells varied from 0.31 to 0.74
with MDA-MB-468, HCC-70 being the most radio sensitive cell lines and
MDA-MB-436, BT-20 being the most radio resistant cell lines. MDA-MB- 231,
BT-549 and Hs 578T were found to be moderately radio resistant breast
cancer lines. The oncomiR -21 expression levels in these 7 TNBC cell
lines varied from 0.85 to 4.18 fold with a very poor correlation with SF2
(r2=0.08). The oncomiR 210 levels varied from 0.49 to 9.19 fold and also
did not exhibit any correlation with radio resistance in TNBC cells (r2=
0.141). Whereas the tumor suppressor miR, miR-34a expression showed an
inverse correlation with radio resistance (r2=0.8) in TNBC cells. The
radio resistant cell line (e.g., MDA-MB-436, SF2 = 0.74) expressed
significantly low levels of miR-34a (0.016 fold) relative to miR -34a
levels (set as 1) in HCC 70, which was found to be a radiosensitive cell
line with SF2 of 0.309. Conclusions: Our preliminary data indicates that
miR 34a may play a role in the response of TNBC cells to radiotherapy.

