Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
inhibition in cancer cells.


Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) form complexes with partner cyclins to
regulate cell cycle progression and transcription. CDK1, CDK2, CDK4 and
CDK6 all regulate cell cycle progression and CDK8 and CDK9 are regulators
of transcription. CDK7 is a unique member of this family because it can
regulate the cell cycle CDKs as part of the CDK-activating kinase (CAK)
and also transcription in conjunction with the TFIIH transcription factor
by phosphorylating the COOH-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II (Pol II
CTD). A hallmark of cancer is deregulated cell cycle progression and many
cancers have abnormal CDK activity which makes CDKs a good target for
cancer therapy. Here we show BS-194, a selective and potent CDK
inhibitor, which inhibits CDK2, CDK1, CDK5, CDK7 and CDK9 (IC50 = 3, 30,
30, 250 and 90nmol/L, respectively). In vitro cell based assays have
shown that BS-194 inhibits the phosphorylation of CDK substrates, Rb and
RNA Poll II, down regulation of cyclins A, E and D1 and cell cycle arrest
in the S and G2/M phases. BS-194 also has potent anti-proliferative
activity in 60 cancer cell lines tested (mean GI50 = 28nmol/L). BS-194 is
orally bioavailable and shows potent in vivo tumour growth inhibition of
xenograft models of MCF7 and HCT116 cells.We have used BS-194 as a potent
inhibitor of CDK activity in HCT116 cells and performed gene microarray
analysis to determine novel pathways and identify novel biomarkers
associated with CDK inhibition. In summary, the gene microarray has
identified genes differentially expressed in response to BS-194 treatment
that are primarily involved in cell cycle, apoptosis and transcription
pathways.

