Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow microenvironment contributes to stem cell phenotype in
acute myeloid leukemia.


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease that originates
in the bone marrow (BM). BM consists of a complex hypoxic
micro-environment that includes osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and mesenchymal
stromal cells (MSCs).We previously reported that co-culture with
BM-derived MSCs induces anti-apoptotic and drug resistant genes in
leukemic cells. As drug resistance is a characteristic of cancer stem
cells (CSCs), we hypothesized that components of the micro-environment
such as MSCs and hypoxia induce stem cell phenotype in leukemic cells. To
test the hypothesis, AML cell lines including OCI-AML3 and KG1 cells were
cultured with or without stromal cells at 1% (hypoxia) or 21% (normoxia)
oxygen for 1 or 3 or 5 or 7 days and tested for stem cell related
functions. Co-culture of leukemic cells with bone marrow-derived MSCs
induced Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity in attached fraction of
OCI-AML3 cells from 5.8%3.3% to 36.9%4.7% in a time dependent manner.
Interestingly, ALDH activity was also increased in floating fraction of
OCI-AML3 cells from 2.52%0.9% to 38.5%5.7% when co-cultured with MSCs in
a time dependent manner, suggesting that cell to cell contact is not
necessary to observe this phenotype. In addition, culture of OCI-AML3
cells in 1% oxygen alone increased ALDH+ population from 0.5%0.1% to
25.6%3.2% after 7 days and no-further increase was observed when
co-cultured with MSCs in hypoxic conditions suggesting that stroma or
hypoxia alone are sufficient for induction of stem cell activity in
leukemia cells. Another well characterized property of hematopoietic stem
cells is generation of side population (SP). KG1 cells, when co-cultured
with MSCs, induced side population cells (from 0.2%0.1% to 2.6%0.8%);
Similarly, OCI-AML3 cells induced SP cells (from 0.2%0.1% to 10.2%2.4%)
when cultured under hypoxia conditions, indicating that the
micro-environment induces stemness in leukemia cells. Interestingly, the
size of leukemic cells was reduced from 19.52.3m to 14.41.7m when
cultured in 1% oxygen, suggesting low metabolic activity of these cells.
Cell cycle analysis revealed that hypoxia inhibited cell cycle at G0/G1
phase of the cell cycle. In case of OCI-AML3 cells, S-phase cells were
decreased from 14.5%0.1% to 5.020.1% and the cells in G1-phase were
increased from 68.02%3.1% to 87.62%2.7%. In case of KG1 cells, S-phase
cells were decreased from 26.24%2.2% to 17.071.3% and the cells in
G1-phase were increased from 68.02%3.1% to 77.44%4.7% indicating cells
became more quiescent when cultured under micro-environmental conditions
Gene expression analysis revealed that embryonic stem cell markers,
including oct4, nanog and sox2, were significantly up regulated by 2-3
fold when cells were cultured at 1% oxygen. These findings indicate that
components of the micro-environment induce stem cell phenotype in
leukemic cells which may help their survival during chemotherapy.

