Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of a mouse model of constitutive mTOR inhibition to identify
molecular modulators of acquired resistance.


The AKT/PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway is hyperactivated in cancers,
including both solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. This
hyperactivation is often due to an overexpression or mutation in PI3K,
which is upstream of AKT, or a down regulation of PTEN, an inhibitor of
the PI3K pathway. mTOR is a central downstream target of this pathway and
is a critical modulator of cell cycle, size, proliferation and
metabolism. Resistance to mTOR inhibition has been reported in many
tumors as well as in certain cell lines, resulting in decreased efficacy
of cancer therapy involving this class of inhibitor. In these studies,
mice (Mtortm1.1Lgm) with constitutive reduction in mTOR protein level
were crossed to mice (Lck-MyrAkt2) that spontaneously develop thymic
lymphomas due to constitutive AKT activation to simulate mTOR inhibitor
treatment of thymic lymphoma development. The Lck-MyrAkt2 mice
spontaneously develop thymic lymphomas at 10-20 weeks of age, and
frequently harbor a 14;15 translocation that leads to the apposition of
the TCRalpha and Myc genes. Tumor formation was significantly delayed in
the mTOR knockdown x Lck-MyrAkt2 cohort, and the mice had a median
survival of 181 days compared to 88 days in mice with normal mTOR
expression. A similar t(14;15) translocation frequency was observed in
thymic lymphomas of mice from both groups. To evaluate potential mTOR
resistance mechanisms, gene expression profiling (GEP) of tumors arising
from both groups of mice was performed. Molecular and functional
enrichment analysis of the genes differentially expressed in the tumors
arising despite mTOR inhibition was performed. Increased expression of an
oncogenic transcription factor was observed, and is the subject of
on-going investigation.

