Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KW-2450, a novel IGF-1R/IR inhibitor, enhances the antitumor
effect of lapatinib, letrozole or 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen in breast cancer
cells.


[Background] Both the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) and
insulin receptors (IR) have been found to be promising targets for breast
cancer therapy because their activation has been associated with breast
cancer development, progression and drug resistance. KW-2450, a potent
inhibitor of both IGF-1R and IR, is currently in clinical development in
combination with lapatinib and letrozole for HER2-positive advanced or
metastatic breast cancer. To support the rationale for evaluating this
combination, we examined the combined effects of KW-2450 and lapatinib, a
HER2/EGFR inhibitor, in a HER2/IGF-1R-expressing breast cancer cell line,
and the combined effects of KW-2450 and either letrozole or
4-hydroxy-tamoxifen in a hormone-dependent breast cancer cell
line.[Results] KW-2450 and lapatinib showed a strong synergistic effect
against the HER2/IGF-1R double-positive cell line, MDA-MB-361, probably
caused by enhanced caspase-3/7 activation, compared to the treatment with
lapatinib alone. In this setting, KW-2450 completely inhibited the
phosphorylation of IGF-1R/IR, whereas lapatinib mostly inhibited the
phosphorylation of HER2. Interestingly, neither KW-2450 nor lapatinib
inhibited Akt phosphorylation, however, the combined treatment showed a
remarkable inhibition of Akt phosphorylation. In fact, KW-2450 showed a
potent combined anti-tumor effect in vivo. Furthermore, a microarray
analysis identified other biomarkers, such as Ki67, survivin and TIMP3,
whose expression levels were changed by the combined treatment with
KW-2450 and lapatinib.In an aromatase-dependent cell line, MCF-7-Ac1, the
combination of KW-2450 and letrozole showed a strong synergistic effect.
Moreover, the combination of KW-2450 and 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen showed a
synergistic effect in an estrogen-dependent cell line,
MCF-7.[Conclusions] Our results suggest that the combination of KW-2450
and lapatinib in HER2/IGF-1R double-positive breast cancers and that of
KW-2450 and anti-hormone agents in hormone-dependent breast cancers are
highly effective, exhibiting a synergistic anti-cancer activity.
Therefore, KW-2450 may be a promising platform for carrying out
combination therapy for breast cancer.

