Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting aberrantly activated AREG-EGFR signaling in
CRTC1-MAML2-positive mucoepidermoid carcinoma.


Salivary gland tumors (SGT) are a group of highly heterogeneous head and
neck malignancies with widely varied clinical outcomes and no standard
effective treatments. The CRTC1-MAML2 gene fusion, encoded by a recurring
chromosomal translocation t(11;19)(q14-21;p12-13), is a highly specific
genetic alteration in more than 50% of mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC),
the most common malignant SGT. In this study, we aimed to define the role
of the CRTC1-MAML2 oncogene in the maintenance of MEC tumor growth and to
investigate critical downstream target genes and pathways for therapeutic
targeting of MEC. By performing gene expression analyses and functional
studies via RNA interference and pharmacological modulation, we
determined the importance of the CRTC1-MAML2 fusion gene and its
downstream AREG-EGFR signaling in human MEC cancer cell growth ad
survival in vitro and in vivo using human MEC xenograft models. We found
that CRTC1-MAML2 fusion oncogene was required for the growth and survival
of fusion-positive human MEC cancer cells in vitro and the in vivo.
CRTC1-MAML2 induced the up-regulation of the EGFR ligand AREG by
co-activating the transcription factor CREB and AREG subsequently
activated EGFR signaling in an autocrine manner that promoted MEC cell
growth and survival. Importantly, CRTC1-MAML2-positive MEC cells were
highly sensitive to EGFR signaling inhibition. Therefore, our study
revealed that aberrantly activated AREG-EGFR signaling is required for
CRTC1-MAML2-positive MEC cell growth and survival, suggesting that
EGFR-targeted therapies will benefit patients with unresectable
CRTC1-MAML2-positive MEC.

