Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen induces stearoyl-CoA desaturase expression in human MCF-7
breast carcinoma cells.


Approximately 95% of breast cancers are estrogen-dependant. Estrogen
plays a crucial role in many cellular processes in estrogen-sensitive
breast cancer such as carcinogenesis, production of growth factors,
angiogenesis and growth stimulation. To sustain cell growth, many cancer
cells exhibit an altered metabolism that is characterized by increased
glycolysis and lipogenesis.We observed for the first time an up
regulation of stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (SCD1) in response to estrogen in
the hormone-dependent MCF7 human breast carcinoma cell line. SCD1 is a
key enzyme in the production of monounsaturated fatty acids that are
essential for membrane biogenesis. Using estrogen-starved MCF7 cells,
treatment with 2 nM of estrogen induced cell proliferation, increased
SCD-1 gene expression measured by qPCR (2.60.1 fold increase,
pApproximately 95% of breast cancers are estrogen-dependant. Estrogen
plays a crucial role in many cellular processes in estrogen-sensitive
breast cancer such as carcinogenesis, production of growth factors,
angiogenesis and growth stimulation. To sustain cell growth, many cancer
cells exhibit an altered metabolism that is characterized by increased
glycolysis and lipogenesis.We observed for the first time an up
regulation of stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (SCD1) in response to estrogen in
the hormone-dependent MCF7 human breast carcinoma cell line. SCD1 is a
key enzyme in the production of monounsaturated fatty acids that are
essential for membrane biogenesis. Using estrogen-starved MCF7 cells,
treatment with 2 nM of estrogen induced cell proliferation, increased
SCD-1 gene expression measured by qPCR (2.60.1 fold increase, p<0.05) and
SCD-1 protein expression (7.2 fold increase) determined by immunoblot
analysis, compared to control cells. Estrogen-induced SCD1 expression was
accompanied by important changes in cellular fatty acid compositions with
significant increases in the monounsaturated fatty acid content in
membrane phospholipids and in SCD-1 product/substrate ratios with a
4.30.03 fold increase in the 16:1n-7/16:0 ratio and a 1.90.01 fold
increase in the 18:1n-9/18:0 ratio compared to untreated cells (both
pApproximately 95% of breast cancers are estrogen-dependant. Estrogen
plays a crucial role in many cellular processes in estrogen-sensitive
breast cancer such as carcinogenesis, production of growth factors,
angiogenesis and growth stimulation. To sustain cell growth, many cancer
cells exhibit an altered metabolism that is characterized by increased
glycolysis and lipogenesis.We observed for the first time an up
regulation of stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (SCD1) in response to estrogen in
the hormone-dependent MCF7 human breast carcinoma cell line. SCD1 is a
key enzyme in the production of monounsaturated fatty acids that are
essential for membrane biogenesis. Using estrogen-starved MCF7 cells,
treatment with 2 nM of estrogen induced cell proliferation, increased
SCD-1 gene expression measured by qPCR (2.60.1 fold increase, p<0.05) and
SCD-1 protein expression (7.2 fold increase) determined by immunoblot
analysis, compared to control cells. Estrogen-induced SCD1 expression was
accompanied by important changes in cellular fatty acid compositions with
significant increases in the monounsaturated fatty acid content in
membrane phospholipids and in SCD-1 product/substrate ratios with a
4.30.03 fold increase in the 16:1n-7/16:0 ratio and a 1.90.01 fold
increase in the 18:1n-9/18:0 ratio compared to untreated cells (both
p<0.05). Treatment of estrogen-stimulated cells with a selective SCD1
inhibitor inhibited estrogen-induced cell proliferation and prevented the
estrogen-induced changes in membrane lipid composition.Overall, these
results show for the first time that estrogen induces SCD-1 expression in
breast carcinoma cells and suggests a crucial role for SCD1 in estrogen
dependent cancer cell proliferation. SCD1 may therefore represent a
potential therapeutic target for estrogen-dependent cancer.(This work was
supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Canada
Research Chairs Program).

