Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and proteomic profiling of signaling pathways targeted by
a multi-kinase inhibitor, sorafenib.


Background: Deregulation of intracellular signaling by various genetic
alterations is a hallmark of cancer. Therapeutics targeting such
activated signaling pathways have achieved significant progress, but the
precise pathway(s) targeted by sorafenib has remained unclear.Methods:
Using high-density reverse-phase protein arrays, we profiled the
phosphorylation status of 180 signaling molecules in the 120 pathways
registered on the NCI-Nature curated database in 23 hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) cell lines showing different sensitivities to sorafenib.
We also sequenced the entire coding regions of 518 protein kinase genes
in 20 overlapping HCC cell lines.Results: We identified 25 non-synomymous
alterations in the 4 mTOR and MAPK pathway genes (RPS6KA1, RPS6KA6,
RPS6KB2, and BRAF) in HCC cell lines 1 to 11. We also found that the
levels of phosphorylated S6 ribosomal protein and c-Raf were associated
with the sensitivity of the HCC cell lines to sorafenib. A mTOR
inhibitor, AZD8055, exerted growth-inhibitory activity against
sorafenib-resistant HCC cell lines.Discussion: Although a recent phase
III clinical trial has demonstrated the effectiveness of sorafenib in
patients with unresectable HCC, only a small proportion of the patients
achieved the anticipated therapeutic benefits. The present results
indicate cross-talk between the mTOR and MAPK signaling pathways in
sorafenib-resistant HCC cell lines. Use of a combination of mTOR and MAPK
inhibitors may improve the efficacy of molecular targeting therapy
against HCC.

