Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-genome and RNA sequencing identify a novel recurrent
translocation in adrenocortical carcinoma.


Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a lethal tumor of the adrenal cortex
with limited treatment options. The only possibility for cure is complete
surgical resection, but 50-70% of patients present with metastatic
disease, precluding curative surgery. The outcome for patients with ACC
has remained unchanged in the past 25 years, with the overall 5-year
survival of patients undergoing surgical resection being 40%. Patients
that present with advanced disease fare considerably worse with 5-year
survival rates of 10-20%. The standard chemotherapy regimen of mitotane
(the only approved agent), etoposide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin, has a
response rate of 23.2%. A better understanding of pathobiology is needed
to improve the treatment results for this disease.Previous genomic
studies combined with expression microarray studies have implicated lack
of H19 expression coupled with IGF2 over-expression, beta-catenin
activation, and loss of p53 pathway function as important events in ACC,
but no single alteration has been seen in all ACC. We used a combination
of whole genome sequencing, exome sequencing, and RNA-sequencing on three
tumor/normal pairs from patients. Using data from spectral karyotyping of
the two ACC cell lines, SW-13 and NCI-H295R, we mined the sequencing data
for structural rearrangements in regions of common breakpoints. We
identifieda novel recurrent translocation, t(4;8)(p16.2;p23.1) in all
three tumors that was not present in the normal sequence. Using
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) we validated the translocation
in the three tumors and both SW-13 and H295R. An additional five of five
ACC scored positive for the translocation, as did three malignant non-ACC
tumors (malignant pheochromocytoma, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, and
carcinoid) suggesting that this finding has implications beyond ACC. The
recurrent translocation t(4;8) (p16.2; p23.1) involves two genes of
unknown function, BC042823 (uc003gho.2, IMAGE:5275587) on chromosome 4
and BC030294 (ucoo3wrb.1, IMAGE:5396854) on chromosome 8. RNA- sequencing
data and RT-PCR with primers designed to both derivative chromosomes
revealed transcription from both derivative chromosomes. The cDNA
products were sequenced by Sanger sequencing and show partial homology to
a non-coding RNA, LOC100506990, at chr8:12,338,893-12,452,929.
RNA-sequencing data revealed this locus is highly transcribed in normal
adrenal gland but reduced in expression in the three ACCs. In contrast to
other recurrent translocations previously found in other cancers, this
translocation is only present in 18-30% of the tumor nuclei scored by
FISH, suggesting that it is a necessary alteration in malignant
progression, but underscoring the question of how it might cooperate with
events in other sub-clones to initiate tumor formation and progression.

