Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of AZD6738, a potent and selective inhibitor with the
potential to test the clinical efficacy of ATR kinase inhibition in
cancer patients.


AZD6738 is a potent and selective inhibitor of ataxia telangiectasia and
rad3 related (ATR) kinase with the potential to be used in the clinic. We
report the discovery of a morpholino-pyrimidine series and its subsequent
optimisation to the pre-clinical candidate AZD6738 which has a good
overall balance of potency, selectivity, pharmacokinetic and
biopharmaceutical properties suitable for oral dosing. ATR is a
serine/threonine protein kinase involved in DNA damage response
signalling caused by DNA replication associated stress. Activation of ATR
at stalled replication forks leads to suppression of replication fork
origin firing, promotes repair and S/G2-cell cycle checkpoints to prevent
premature mitosis and maintain genomic integrity. Failure to resolve
damage leads to genomic instability and if sufficiently high, cell death.
Stalled replication forks may collapse leading to formation of DNA double
stranded breaks and activation of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)
kinase. ATM works in conjunction with ATR to efficiently resolve
replication associated DNA damage creating a co-dependency with loss of
one leading to a greater reliance on the other to maintain genomic
stability. ATM is frequently inactivated across B-cell malignancies, head
and neck, breast and lung cancers through chromosomal deletion, promoter
hypermethylation or mutation. ATM-deficient tumours are hypothesised to
be more reliant on ATR for survival and specific inhibition of ATR may
lead enhanced anti-tumour activity while minimizing normal tissue
toxicity. AZD6378 has the potential to test the clinical efficacy of ATR
inhibition in cancer patients as monotherapy against ATM-deficient
tumours or in combination with chemo or radiotherapy.

