Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sirt1-mediated suppression of cell death in breast cancer.


Several lines of evidence suggest that protein lysine acetylation
pathways are deregulated in cancer (1). Moreover, deacetylase inhibitors
are emerging as important anti-tumor therapeutics, suggesting that the
forced reprogramming of protein-lysine acetylation is toxic to tumor
cells. In this study we show that Sirt1, an NAD+-dependent Sirtuin
deacetylase that promotes cancer cell survival, is aberrantly
mislocalized to the cytoplasm of breast tumor cells. Moreover, the
depletion of cytosolic Sirt1 by siRNA sensitizes breast tumor cells to
paclitaxel-induced death. Previously, we developed a biotin-switch
proteomics approach to identify cytosolic Sirt1 substrates (2). This
approach yielded a variety of substrates with roles in metabolism,
survival, and oxidative stress signaling. Our current work focuses on
three of the proteins identified as Sirt1 substrates: SOD1, DJ-1, and
14-3-3z. SOD1 and DJ-1 both suppress oxidative stress-induced death, and
high levels of 14-3-3z expression suppress chemotherapy-induced apoptosis
and correlate with negative patient outcomes in breast cancer. Our
preliminary results suggest that acetylation of DJ-1 and SOD1 suppress
their anti-oxidant functions, while acetylation of 14-3-3z disrupts its
binding to pro-survival proteins. Taken together, our data support a
model in which cytosolic Sirt1 activates multiple pathways that work
together to promote tumor cell survival.

