Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BMN 673 potentiates efficacy of temozolomide in sensitive and
resistant glioblastoma models.


Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) plays an important role in several
DNA repair processes, and previous studies with various PARP inhibitors
have demonstrated robust enhancement of sensitivity to temozolomide (TMZ)
chemotherapy in pre-clinical models of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). The
focus of this study was to evaluate the antitumor effects of a novel PARP
inhibitor, BMN 673, as a single agent and in combination with TMZ in the
established U251 glioma cell line, neurosphere cultures from the primary
Mayo GBM xenograft line GBM12, and TMZ-resistant cells derived from
either line (U251TMZ, GBM12TMZ(MGMT high) and GBM12TMZ(MGMT low)). In a
biochemical assay of PARP inhibition, BMN 673 potently suppressed
poly-ADP-ribosylation of cellular proteins at concentrations of 3 nM
following hydrogen peroxide treatment of U251 cells. Single agent
treatment had modest anti-tumor activity with 30 nM BMN 673 reducing
absorbance in a CyQUANT cell proliferation assay relative to control
treatment in both U251 and U251TMZ cells (Table 1). BMN 673 co-treatment
also enhanced the efficacy of TMZ in both U251-derivative lines at a
clinically relevant concentration of TMZ. Similarly, treatment with
BMN673 alone or in combination with TMZ inhibited primary neurosphere
formation in all three GBM12 models. Notably, the addition BMN 673
clearly re-sensitized both resistant GBM12 sub-lines to relatively low
concentrations of TMZ. Consistent with a mechanism involving disruption
of DNA repair, combined treatment with BMN 673 and TMZ resulted in robust
activation of ATM-mediated KAP1 phosphorylation (Ser824) and ATR-mediated
Chk1 phosphorylation (Ser345) as compared to TMZ or BMN 673 alone 24
hours after treatment. In conclusion, BMN673 is a promising PARP
inhibitor with high potency and cytotoxicity in vitro against both TMZ
sensitive and TMZ resistant GBM cells.
- In vitro antitumor effects of TMZ combined with BMN673

