Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variants in DNA repair pathway genes are associated with
the risk of esophageal adenocarcinoma.


Esophageal Cancer (EC) is one of the leading causes of cancer death in
the world. Over 90% of ECs are either esophageal squamous cell carcinomas
(ESCC) or adenocarcinomas (EAC). EAC is the fastest growing malignancy in
the US in the past three decades. In this large case/control study, we
aim to assess genetic susceptibility to EAC by investigating single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA repair related pathways, including
nuclear excision repair (NER), base excision repair (BER) and
double-strand-break repair (DSBR). The study population included 513
Caucasian EAC cases 1499 Caucasian controls. Genotyping was performed by
candidate gene approach and obtained from genome-wide association study
(GWAS). A total of 464 SNPs (254 SNPs in 26 NER genes, 173 SNPs in 22 BER
genes and 37 SNPs in 26 DSBR genes) were included in the final analysis.
Among the top significant SNPs, SNP rs10258834 in RPA3 from the NER
pathway contributed to over 30% increased EAC risk (OR=1.30, 95%
CI=1.12-1.51, P=5.26x104), SNP rs3827392 in SMC1B from the DSBR pathway
was associated with a 25% increased EAC risk (OR=1.25, 95% CI=1.07-1.47,
P=4.80x103); whereas rs3135998 in LIG3 from the BER pathway was
associated with a decreased risk of EAC (OR=0.73, 95% CI=0.59-0.90,
P=3.87x103). Unfavorable genotype analysis was performed among those SNPs
showing significant association (PEsophageal Cancer (EC) is one of the
leading causes of cancer death in the world. Over 90% of ECs are either
esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCC) or adenocarcinomas (EAC). EAC
is the fastest growing malignancy in the US in the past three decades. In
this large case/control study, we aim to assess genetic susceptibility to
EAC by investigating single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA repair
related pathways, including nuclear excision repair (NER), base excision
repair (BER) and double-strand-break repair (DSBR). The study population
included 513 Caucasian EAC cases 1499 Caucasian controls. Genotyping was
performed by candidate gene approach and obtained from genome-wide
association study (GWAS). A total of 464 SNPs (254 SNPs in 26 NER genes,
173 SNPs in 22 BER genes and 37 SNPs in 26 DSBR genes) were included in
the final analysis. Among the top significant SNPs, SNP rs10258834 in
RPA3 from the NER pathway contributed to over 30% increased EAC risk
(OR=1.30, 95% CI=1.12-1.51, P=5.26x104), SNP rs3827392 in SMC1B from the
DSBR pathway was associated with a 25% increased EAC risk (OR=1.25, 95%
CI=1.07-1.47, P=4.80x103); whereas rs3135998 in LIG3 from the BER pathway
was associated with a decreased risk of EAC (OR=0.73, 95% CI=0.59-0.90,
P=3.87x103). Unfavorable genotype analysis was performed among those SNPs
showing significant association (P<0.05) in individual SNP analysis. We
found a strong cumulative effect overall or stratified by DNA repair
sub-pathway. For example, individuals carrying 10-13 unfavorable
genotypes in BER pathway exhibited a nearly four-fold increased EAC risk
compared to those in the reference group with fewer than 5 unfavorable
genotypes. Our results suggest that genetic variants in DNA repair
pathways significantly modify EAC risk individually and jointly. The
results from this study, if validated in independent populations, could
potentially categorize population into different risk groups and identify
high-risk individuals for cost-effective screening and early detection of
this deadly disease.

