Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pirfenidone as a potential therapeutic treatment for CAFs and
cancer cells in NSCLC.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States.
Due to limited efficacy of current conventional chemotherapy, the
majority of patients face poor prognosis and eventually succumb the
disease. Until recently, the main focus in cancer research has been
targeting the neoplastic cell. However, the importance of the tumor
microenvironment, including cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs), in
cancer progression is now clear and targeting both, the neoplastic cell
as well as the CAF, is being recognized as an important therapeutic
approach. We have recently discovered that pirfenidone might be the drug
to target these cells. Pirfenidone is a small molecule that has been
shown to decrease fibrosis in a variety of fibrotic diseases. The exact
mechanism responsible for its anti-fibrotic effects remains to be
elucidated. Our hypothesis is that pirfenidone (by targeting the CAFs) in
combination with standard chemotherapy (by targeting the cancer cells)
will act synergistically and proffer a more potent therapeutic strategy
for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Our studies show that in the
presence of pirfenidone NSCLC associated CAF viability decreases in
vitro. Furthermore, pirfenidone was able to induce apoptotic cell death
as well as cell cycle arrest in NSCLC associated CAFs. In addition, we
were able to observe that CAFs treated with pirfenidone decreased active
TGF when compared to the control. Moreover, in a spheroid model,
pirfenidone was able to affect the crosstalk between the cancer cells and
CAFs leading to increased apoptosis and decreased viability. Currently,
pirfenidone is being used in Phase II and III clinical trials for
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Our lab is the first one to recognize the
potential of pirfenidone as a potential treatment of NSCLC.

