Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal gene signature regulated by TGF signaling predicts poor
clinical outcome in ovarian cancer .


Despite the clinical and histopathological similarities in initial
disease presentation, patients with advanced ovarian cancer rapidly
develop chemoresistance and succumb to the disease. In order to identify
genes that are associated with poor patient survival, we analyzed
microarray datasets of 795 advanced ovarian cancer patients and
correlated gene expression levels with clinical data. We identified a
60-gene signature that was strongly associated with poor survival. Many
genes in the signature were stromal genes, including POSTN, FN1, COL11A1,
COL6A1, COL3A1, LOX, TIMP3, and VCAN. The same stromal signature was
enriched in ovarian cancer metastases and in a cisplatin-resistant A2780
human ovarian cancer cell line. Expression of many stromal genes was
induced by TGF1 and the effect was reversed by A83-01, a potent TGF1
inhibitor. Interestingly, we found that ovarian cancer stem cells (CSC)
also express TGFR2 and several TGF1-target genes, including COL6A1 and
COL3A1, which were previously implicated in cisplatin resistance.
Culturing of A2780 cells on collagen substrate resulted in increased
cisplatin resistance and expansion of the CSC population. Our results
suggest that TGF1 signaling induces stromal gene expression and forms a
favorable microenvironment for ovarian CSC, thereby leading to cisplatin
resistance and poor patient survival.

