Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of apc and med12 mutations on embryonic liver
development in zebrafish: a potential model for investigating the role of
Mediator in Wnt/-catenin-dependent cancers.


Mutations in adenomatus polyposis coli (APC) result in overactive Wnt
signaling and have been linked to colon cancer and hepatoblastoma in
humans. Therefore, the Wnt pathway is an attractive target for developing
cancer therapeutics. APC directs -catenin degradation; thus, APC loss
results in -catenin accumulation and an increase in -catenin-induced
transcription. Heterozygous apc mutant zebrafish present enlarged livers
at 3 days post-fertilization, and as adults they are predisposed to tumor
development. Recently, the Mediator co-activator complex component,
Med12, was linked to Wnt signaling. Without med12, canonical Wnt/-catenin
signaling is significantly impaired. We hypothesized that heterozygous
med12 mutants will have smaller livers due to a decrease in Wnt activity.
Moreover, a reduction in Wnt/-catenin signaling due to lower levels of
Med12 in double heterozygous med12;apc mutant embryos will be sufficient
to rescue the large liver phenotype observed in heterozygous apc mutant
embryos. In situ hybridization with lfabp probe confirmed the increased
liver size in apchu745/+ embryos and showed smaller livers in med12y82/+
embryos. Importantly, the med12y82/+ mutation rescued the large liver
phenotype of apchu745/+ embryos. The data suggest that med12 and apc
genetically interact to regulate liver development. This interaction
between med12 and apc is also likely to also play a role in the
development and progression of Wnt/-catenin-dependent cancers. Therefore,
rescue of liver hyperplasia in apc mutants may serve as a model for
developing anti-cancer drugs targeting WNT/-catenin signal transduction
through its interaction with MED12.Citation Format: Chamille J. Lescott,
Eric Glasgow. Influence of apc and med12 mutations on embryonic liver
development in zebrafish: a potential model for investigating the role of
Mediator in Wnt/-catenin-dependent cancers. [abstract]. In: Proceedings
of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer
Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer
Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1572. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1572

