Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of cell-free miR-198, carcinoembryonic antigen, and
CYFRA 21-1 as a diagnostic biomarker for lung adenocarcinoma-associated
malignant pleural effusion.


Circulating cell-free microRNAs (miRNAs) have been identified as
potential noninvasive biomarkers in cancer. The aim of this study was to
identify miRNAs that are differentially expressed between benign pleural
effusion (BPE) and lung adenocarcinoma-associated malignant pleural
effusion (LA-MPE). We have also analyzed the expression of
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and cytokeratin fragment (CYFRA) 21-1,
which are the most commonly used tumor markers in pleural effusion.
Cell-free miRNA expression was investigated in 107 patients with pleural
effusion. Microarrays were used to screen 160 miRNAs in a discovery set
comprising 20 effusion samples (10 BPEs and 10 LA-MPEs). The PANArrayTM
miRNA expression profiling kit (PANAGENE, INC. Daejeon, Korea) was used
to identify candidate miRNAs in the discovery set. Real-time quantitative
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used to
validate the profiling results obtained for the discovery set and those
obtained for a validation set comprising 42 BPEs and 45 LA-MPEs. The area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) was used to
evaluate the diagnostic performance of the identified miRNAs, CEA, and
CYFRA 21-1. Microarray profiling showed that miR-198 was significantly
downregulated in LA-MPE compared with BPE (P = 0.002). The miRNA
microarray analysis results were confirmed by qRT-PCR (P Circulating
cell-free microRNAs (miRNAs) have been identified as potential
noninvasive biomarkers in cancer. The aim of this study was to identify
miRNAs that are differentially expressed between benign pleural effusion
(BPE) and lung adenocarcinoma-associated malignant pleural effusion
(LA-MPE). We have also analyzed the expression of carcinoembryonic
antigen (CEA) and cytokeratin fragment (CYFRA) 21-1, which are the most
commonly used tumor markers in pleural effusion. Cell-free miRNA
expression was investigated in 107 patients with pleural effusion.
Microarrays were used to screen 160 miRNAs in a discovery set comprising
20 effusion samples (10 BPEs and 10 LA-MPEs). The PANArrayTM miRNA
expression profiling kit (PANAGENE, INC. Daejeon, Korea) was used to
identify candidate miRNAs in the discovery set. Real-time quantitative
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used to
validate the profiling results obtained for the discovery set and those
obtained for a validation set comprising 42 BPEs and 45 LA-MPEs. The area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) was used to
evaluate the diagnostic performance of the identified miRNAs, CEA, and
CYFRA 21-1. Microarray profiling showed that miR-198 was significantly
downregulated in LA-MPE compared with BPE (P = 0.002). The miRNA
microarray analysis results were confirmed by qRT-PCR (P < 0.001) using
the validation set. miR-198 showed an AUC of 0.887, with a sensitivity of
71.1% and a specificity of 95.2%. The AUC for CEA was 0.898, with a
sensitivity of 78.4% and a specificity of 97.5%. The AUC for CYFRA 21-1
was 0.836, with a sensitivity of 78.4% and a specificity of 82.5%. The
diagnostic performance of miR-198 was comparable with that of CEA, but
better than that of CYFRA 21-1. The AUC for all three markers combined
was 0.926 (95% confidence interval, 0.843-0.973) with a sensitivity of
89.2% and a specificity of 85.0%. The present study shows that expression
of miR-198 was significantly downregulated in LA-MPE compared with BPE,
and combination of cell-free miR-198, CEA and CYFRA 21-1 can be used to
differentiate LA-MPE from BPE with a high degree of accuracy. These
results suggest that miR-198 in pleural effusions may be a potential
diagnostic biomarker for discriminating between BPE and LA-MPE.

