Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN-null tumors cohabiting the same lung display differential Akt
activation and sensitivity to dietary restriction.


PTEN loss is considered a biomarker for activated PI3K/Akt, a pathway
frequently mutated in cancer, and recently shown to confer resistance to
dietary restriction (DR). Here we demonstrate that PTEN loss is not
sufficient to drive Akt activation and resistance to DR in tumors with
low growth factor receptor levels. We describe a murine PTEN-null
Kras-driven lung cancer model that harbors both DR-resistant,
higher-grade, bronchiolar tumors with high-Akt-activity, and
DR-sensitive, lower-grade, alveolar tumors with low-Akt-activity. We find
that this phenotype is cell-autonomous and that normal bronchiolar cells
express higher levels of IGF1R and ENTPD5, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
enzyme known to modulate growth factor receptor levels. Suppression of
ENTPD5 is sufficient to decrease IGF1R levels and sensitize bronchiolar
tumor cells to serum in vitro and to DR in vivo. Furthermore, we find
that a significant percentage of human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
have low Akt activity despite PTEN loss. Our studies point to a
heterogeneity of Akt activation in the same murine PTEN-null lung tissue,
as well as in human NSCLC, underscoring the challenges facing
personalized cancer therapy based solely on cancer genotype. They further
indicate that the tumor response to anti-cancer therapies, including DR,
needs to be based upon PI3K/Akt activity per se, rather than genetic
alterations in the PTEN/Akt pathway.

