Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation of apoptosis-related genes as clinical biomarker
in rectal cancer.


Background: To prevent over- and undertreatment of rectal cancer
patients, there is a need for the development of new biomarkers that can
complement the current staging system. We have previously shown that
apoptosis plays an important role in local tumor recurrence after TME
surgery. We studied the epigenetic regulation of several key apoptosis
genes in rectal cancer tissues, using methylation-sensitive restriction
enzymes.Materials and methods: DNA was obtained from frozen specimens of
138 patients representative for the non-irradiated arm of the Dutch Total
Mesorectal Excision (TME) trial. Isoschizomers HpaII (CpG methylation
sensitive) and MspI (not sensitive) were used for restriction enzyme
digestion of tumor DNA, followed by real-time PCR for apoptosis genes
Apaf1, Bcl2, TrailR2, Fas and p53. A pilot series consisted of 50
patients with tumor stages I-III and 10 normal rectal tissues. For the
validation study stage III patients (n=88) and 18 normal rectal tissues
were selected.Results: Single marker analyses showed a significant
correlation between methylation status and apoptotic status (measured by
immunohistochemical staining of M30) of Fas (p=0.005) and Apaf1
(p=0.052). Combining intrinsic pathway markers Apaf1, Bcl2 and p53,
significant differences were observed between the methylation groups in
survival and recurrence analyses (log rank test), with overall survival
(p=0.054), cancer specific survival (p=0.014) and distant recurrence free
survival (p=0.006).Conclusion: Methylation of apoptosis genes is
representative for the apoptotic status of a tumor and is correlated to
survival and recurrence in rectal cancer patients. The apoptotic status
of a tumor may be used to guide treatment strategies for individual
patients.[A.B. and E.C.M.Z contributed equally to this work.]

