Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of myeloma tumors from a multi-ethnic cohort
using cytogenetics and genomic analysis.


The plasma cell malignancy Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a rare but deadly
form of cancer with 5 year survival rates of 30%. Epidemiological studies
have suggested that MM exacts an especially heavy burden on African
American (AA) patients. We examined a multi-ethnic cohort of MM tumors to
assess potential differences in the frequency of molecular events in
tumors derived from either African American (AA) or European American
(EA) patients. The frequency of 14q32 translocation breakpoints at the
IgH locus was compared among a series of data from 115 AA MM patients
from three studies and EA MM from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
(ECOG). In addition, we analyzed matching genome-wide copy number and
transcriptional data among 45 AA MM tumors and 196 EA MM tumors to
determine differences in the frequency of molecular events in tumors from
these populations.No differences were found for specific translocation
subtypes; however, we detected a statistically significant difference in
the overall frequency of IgH translocations between the two groups, which
occurred more frequently in EA patients (52% vs. 40%; p = 0.032). When
assessing genomic copy number events previously shown to be associated
with poor outcome in MM, frequencies of alterations were not significant
after correcting for multiple testing. Furthermore, there was not a
significant difference in the association of high-risk disease using
expression profiling. Our study represents the first comprehensive
assessment of the frequency and distribution of molecular alterations in
MM tumors from both AA and EA patients and could help shed light on
possible biological features associated with population differences in
incidence and outcome in MM.

