Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Redefining the DNA methylome of prostate cancer using DNA
methylation arrays.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common noncutaneous malignancy and a
leading cause of cancer death among men. Clinically localized disease
might be successfully treated whereas disseminated disease remains mostly
lethal. During prostate cancer development and progression, tumor cells
undergo abnormal epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation
alterations. DNA methylation is the most studied epigenetic alteration in
human cancer, and is associated with transcriptional repression of both
coding and non-coding regions of the genome. Aberrant DNA methylation is
gaining force in the fields of cancer risk assessment, diagnosis and
therapy monitoring in different cancer types, including prostate cancer.
Importantly, aberrant hypermethylation is widespread during neoplastic
alteration of prostate cells, suggesting that restoration of a normal
prostate epigenome through treatment with demethylating drugs could be
clinically beneficial.The main aim of this work was to identify new
epigenetically downregulated CpG's in PCa, using the 450K cytosine
microarray-based approach, followed by validation in a larger set of
clinical samples.We used the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip
(Illumina) to consistently and significantly detect CpG methylation
changes in prostate cancer tissues in comparison with morphological
normal prostate tissue. The selected genomic regions were validated by
pyrosequencing. The methylation data were subsequently confirmed at mRNA
level using qRT-PCR. To prove the functional role of aberrant DNA
methylation, we also performed a treatment with 5-Aza-2-Deoxycytidine in
PCa cell lines.Our work might provide new translational applications to
the clinical management of PCa patients, based on of DNA methylation
changes in PCa.

