Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficient isolation of circulating tumor cells in small cell lung
cancer patients using size- and geometry-controlled microcavity array
system.


Background: We have developed a microcavity array (MCA) system integrated
with a miniaturized device for the isolation of circulating tumor cells
(CTC) without relying on EpCAM expression. The MCA system allows the
filtration of tumor cells from whole blood on the basis of differences in
the size between tumor and blood cells. The previous study has shown that
the MCA system is potentially superior to the conventional epithelial
antigen-based method for detecting CTCs in non-small cell lung cancer.
Recently, we further optimized the shape and porosity of MCA to
efficiently isolate smaller tumor cells as in small cell lung cancer
(SCLC). Here we report the results of clinical study in SCLC patients
comparing MCA system to CellSearch system and exploratory study of novel
rectangular-shaped MCA system.Methods: The MCA is made of nickel by
electroforming and circular MCA is fabricated with 8-9 m diameter pores.
Meanwhile, novel rectangular-shaped MCA is fabricated with 5-9 m-wide and
30-60 m-long pores. NCI-H69 (12 m in diameter) SCLC cells were used for
spike-in experiments. CTCs were defined as cells with round to oval
morphology, a visible nucleus, positive for cytokeratin and negative for
CD45. For the clinical evaluation, paired peripheral blood samples were
collected from 18 SCLC patients to compare the performance of the
CellSearch system and the MCA system for CTC detection.Results: The
recovery rate of spiked NCI-H69 cells with the rectangular-shaped MCA (80
2%) was significantly higher than that with the circular MCA (67 4%)
(p=0.01, t-test). In addition, the carryover of leukocytes on the
rectangular-shaped MCA was 7-fold lower than that on the circular MCA in
the experiment using healthy donor blood. The fluctuation of flow
resistance during filtration with the rectangular-shaped MCA (Background:
We have developed a microcavity array (MCA) system integrated with a
miniaturized device for the isolation of circulating tumor cells (CTC)
without relying on EpCAM expression. The MCA system allows the filtration
of tumor cells from whole blood on the basis of differences in the size
between tumor and blood cells. The previous study has shown that the MCA
system is potentially superior to the conventional epithelial
antigen-based method for detecting CTCs in non-small cell lung cancer.
Recently, we further optimized the shape and porosity of MCA to
efficiently isolate smaller tumor cells as in small cell lung cancer
(SCLC). Here we report the results of clinical study in SCLC patients
comparing MCA system to CellSearch system and exploratory study of novel
rectangular-shaped MCA system.Methods: The MCA is made of nickel by
electroforming and circular MCA is fabricated with 8-9 m diameter pores.
Meanwhile, novel rectangular-shaped MCA is fabricated with 5-9 m-wide and
30-60 m-long pores. NCI-H69 (12 m in diameter) SCLC cells were used for
spike-in experiments. CTCs were defined as cells with round to oval
morphology, a visible nucleus, positive for cytokeratin and negative for
CD45. For the clinical evaluation, paired peripheral blood samples were
collected from 18 SCLC patients to compare the performance of the
CellSearch system and the MCA system for CTC detection.Results: The
recovery rate of spiked NCI-H69 cells with the rectangular-shaped MCA (80
2%) was significantly higher than that with the circular MCA (67 4%)
(p=0.01, t-test). In addition, the carryover of leukocytes on the
rectangular-shaped MCA was 7-fold lower than that on the circular MCA in
the experiment using healthy donor blood. The fluctuation of flow
resistance during filtration with the rectangular-shaped MCA (<1.5 kPa)
was smaller than that with the circular MCA (2 kPa); the
rectangular-shaped MCA enabled recovery of small tumor cells with high
efficiency. In clinical study, compared to the CellSearch, the circular
and rectangular-shaped MCA system identified significantly more SCLC
patients (9 of 18 vs. 18 of 18 vs. 17 of 18, respectively) as CTC
positive. No significant difference was observed in the CTC counts
between the rectangular-shaped MCA (median 16, range 0-545 cells/7.5 mL)
and the circular MCA (median 23, range 2-2329 cells/7.5 mL) (p=0.77,
Wilcoxon test). In contrast, the number of captured leukocytes on the
rectangular-shaped MCA was significantly lower than that on the circular
MCA (pBackground: We have developed a microcavity array (MCA) system
integrated with a miniaturized device for the isolation of circulating
tumor cells (CTC) without relying on EpCAM expression. The MCA system
allows the filtration of tumor cells from whole blood on the basis of
differences in the size between tumor and blood cells. The previous study
has shown that the MCA system is potentially superior to the conventional
epithelial antigen-based method for detecting CTCs in non-small cell lung
cancer. Recently, we further optimized the shape and porosity of MCA to
efficiently isolate smaller tumor cells as in small cell lung cancer
(SCLC). Here we report the results of clinical study in SCLC patients
comparing MCA system to CellSearch system and exploratory study of novel
rectangular-shaped MCA system.Methods: The MCA is made of nickel by
electroforming and circular MCA is fabricated with 8-9 m diameter pores.
Meanwhile, novel rectangular-shaped MCA is fabricated with 5-9 m-wide and
30-60 m-long pores. NCI-H69 (12 m in diameter) SCLC cells were used for
spike-in experiments. CTCs were defined as cells with round to oval
morphology, a visible nucleus, positive for cytokeratin and negative for
CD45. For the clinical evaluation, paired peripheral blood samples were
collected from 18 SCLC patients to compare the performance of the
CellSearch system and the MCA system for CTC detection.Results: The
recovery rate of spiked NCI-H69 cells with the rectangular-shaped MCA (80
2%) was significantly higher than that with the circular MCA (67 4%)
(p=0.01, t-test). In addition, the carryover of leukocytes on the
rectangular-shaped MCA was 7-fold lower than that on the circular MCA in
the experiment using healthy donor blood. The fluctuation of flow
resistance during filtration with the rectangular-shaped MCA (<1.5 kPa)
was smaller than that with the circular MCA (2 kPa); the
rectangular-shaped MCA enabled recovery of small tumor cells with high
efficiency. In clinical study, compared to the CellSearch, the circular
and rectangular-shaped MCA system identified significantly more SCLC
patients (9 of 18 vs. 18 of 18 vs. 17 of 18, respectively) as CTC
positive. No significant difference was observed in the CTC counts
between the rectangular-shaped MCA (median 16, range 0-545 cells/7.5 mL)
and the circular MCA (median 23, range 2-2329 cells/7.5 mL) (p=0.77,
Wilcoxon test). In contrast, the number of captured leukocytes on the
rectangular-shaped MCA was significantly lower than that on the circular
MCA (p<0.0001, Wilcoxon test), suggesting that implementing the
rectangular-shaped MCA diminishes a considerable number of carryover
leukocytes.Conclusion: The MCA system has a potential as a tool for the
efficient recovery of CTCs in small cell type tumors with high purity,
while offering the additional advantages in cost, portability, and
capacity to perform more detailed analyses of CTCs.

