Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alpha-Lipoic acid suppresses migration and invasiveness of thyroid
cancer cells through inhibition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition .


Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are recently known as a contributor to
tumor progression and metastasis through several mechanisms including
induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), invasion, and tumor
angiogenesis. In this study, we investigated the role of alpha-Lipoic
acid (ALA), a potential antioxidant, on EMT in thyroid cancer cell lines.
Human thyroid cancer-derived cell lines, BCPAP (BRAF V600E), HTH83 (HRAS
Q61R), CAL62 (KRAS G12R), BHT101 (BRAF V600E), and FTC133 (PTEN null)
were treated with ALA, and changes in ROS generation were measured by
DCFH-DA. The expression of E-cadherin, vimentin and Twist were determined
by immunoblot analysis. Cell migration and invasion were evaluated by
scratch assay and by Boyden chamber assay. ALA significantly decreased
intracellular ROS generation in most cell lines. The total amount of
E-cadherin increased and those of vimentin and Twist decreased after ALA
treatment in 4 thyroid cancer cell lines (BCPAP, HTH83, BHT101 and CAL62)
in a dose-dependent manner (0.21.0 mM). But, the changes in E-cadherin,
vimentin and Twist were opposite in FTC133 cells. The cell migration and
invasion ability decreased after treatment with ALA in all cell lines
except FTC133 (PTEN null cell). These results suggest that ALA is a
potential agent to inhibit EMT resulting in suppression of migration and
of invasiveness in thyroid cancer cell lines with RAS or BRAF mutation,
probably through reducing cellular amount of Twist. We suggest that it
might be caused by antioxidant effects of ALA, but the exact mechanism of
action of ALA is not clear yet. ALA could be a novel, potential agent to
suppress metastasis of tumors in patients with thyroid cancer.

