Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endoglin requirement for BMP9 signaling in endothelial cells
reveals new mechanism of action for selective anti-Endoglin antibodies.


Endoglin (ENG), a co-receptor for several TGF-family cytokines, is
expressed in activated endothelial cells alongside ALK1, the ACVRL1 gene
product. ENG and ACVRL1 are both required for angiogenesis and mutations
in either gene are associated with Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangectasia,
a rare genetic vascular disorder. ENG and ALK1 function in the same
genetic pathway but the relative contribution of TGF and BMP9 to
SMAD1/5/8 activation and the requirement of ENG as a co-mediator of SMAD
phosphorylation in endothelial cells remain debated. Here, we show that
BMP9 and TGF1 induce distinct SMAD phosphorylation responses in primary
human endothelial cells and that, unlike BMP9, TGF1 only induces
SMAD1/5/8 phosphorylation in a subset of immortalized mouse endothelial
cell lines, but not in primary human endothelial cells. We also
demonstrate, using siRNA depletion of ENG and novel neutralizing anti-ENG
antibodies, that ENG is required for BMP9/pSMAD1 signaling in all human
and mouse endothelial cells tested. Finally, anti-ENG antibodies that
interfere with BMP9/pSMAD1 signaling, but not with TGF1/pSMAD3 signaling,
including the TRC105 clinical candidate, also decrease in vitro HUVEC
endothelial tube formation and inhibit BMP9 binding to recombinant ENG in
vitro. Our data demonstrate that BMP9 signaling inhibition is a key and
previously unreported mechanism of action of TRC105, an anti-angiogenic
anti-ENG antibody currently evaluated in clinical trials.

