Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Farnesyl diphosphate farnesyltransferase induces metastasis via
upregulating secreted phosphoprotein 1 in non-small cell lung cancer.


Identifying cancer progression associated genes that predicting patient
outcome might provide opportunities for developing better therapeutic
strategies for lung cancer patients. In the present study, we
investigated whether farnesyl diphosphate farnesyltransferase (FDFT1), an
enzyme of mevalonate pathway, is a potential biomarker of lung cancer
metastasis. We further investigated its prognostic value and functional
role in lung cancer invasion and metastasis. Our results by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis showed the expression of FDFT1 was
significantly higher in tumors compared to normal lung tissues.
Overexpression of FDFT1 was significantly associated with tumor size (P
Identifying cancer progression associated genes that predicting patient
outcome might provide opportunities for developing better therapeutic
strategies for lung cancer patients. In the present study, we
investigated whether farnesyl diphosphate farnesyltransferase (FDFT1), an
enzyme of mevalonate pathway, is a potential biomarker of lung cancer
metastasis. We further investigated its prognostic value and functional
role in lung cancer invasion and metastasis. Our results by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis showed the expression of FDFT1 was
significantly higher in tumors compared to normal lung tissues.
Overexpression of FDFT1 was significantly associated with tumor size (P <
0.001), advanced tumor stage (P Identifying cancer progression associated
genes that predicting patient outcome might provide opportunities for
developing better therapeutic strategies for lung cancer patients. In the
present study, we investigated whether farnesyl diphosphate
farnesyltransferase (FDFT1), an enzyme of mevalonate pathway, is a
potential biomarker of lung cancer metastasis. We further investigated
its prognostic value and functional role in lung cancer invasion and
metastasis. Our results by immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis showed the
expression of FDFT1 was significantly higher in tumors compared to normal
lung tissues. Overexpression of FDFT1 was significantly associated with
tumor size (P < 0.001), advanced tumor stage (P <0.001), lymph node
metastasis (P = 0.02), distal metastasis (P = 0.043), and poor prognosis
(P Identifying cancer progression associated genes that predicting
patient outcome might provide opportunities for developing better
therapeutic strategies for lung cancer patients. In the present study, we
investigated whether farnesyl diphosphate farnesyltransferase (FDFT1), an
enzyme of mevalonate pathway, is a potential biomarker of lung cancer
metastasis. We further investigated its prognostic value and functional
role in lung cancer invasion and metastasis. Our results by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis showed the expression of FDFT1 was
significantly higher in tumors compared to normal lung tissues.
Overexpression of FDFT1 was significantly associated with tumor size (P <
0.001), advanced tumor stage (P <0.001), lymph node metastasis (P =
0.02), distal metastasis (P = 0.043), and poor prognosis (P <0.001). Loss
of FDFT1 expression significantly suppressed invasion and migration
potential of lung cancer cell lines, whereas FDFT1 overexpression
promoted invasion and migration in vitro and in vivo. Microarray analysis
further identified secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1) as an important
mediator for FDFT1-induced invasion and migration. Furthermore, patients
with high FDFT1 and high SPP1 expression showed dismal outcomes as
compared to patients with low FDFT1 and low SPP1 expression with good
prognosis. In conclusion, we identified the FDFT1 in this study as a new
lung cancer progression biomarker that is associated poor prognosis and
its overexpression resulted in enhanced tumor invasion and metastasis
through upregulation of SPP1. Our findings may implicate the possibility
of targeting FDFT1 as a novel therapeutic strategy to inhibit lung cancer
metastasis.Citation Format: Yi-Fang Yang, Yi-Hua Jan, Michael Hsiao.
Farnesyl diphosphate farnesyltransferase induces metastasis via
upregulating secreted phosphoprotein 1 in non-small cell lung cancer.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 395.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-395

