Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-6 and IGF-1 receptor signal in stemness expression of
HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma .


Expression of cancer stemness in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is linked
to drug resistance and tumor relapse which challenge the current therapy.
However, mechanisms underlying the regulation of cancer stemness in HCC
remain unclear. Effects of interleukin (IL)-6 and insulin-like growth
factor I (IGF-I) on stemness expression in HCC were examined using
OCT4/NANOG promoter luciferase reporter assays, RNA interference,
secondary sphere formation, side population assay, and a xenograft animal
model. Western blot analysis and immunohistochemical staining were used
to detect the expression of OCT4/NANOG and phospho-IGF-I receptor
(p-IGF-IR) in tissues. Levels of OCT4/NANOG and IGF-IR expressions were
analyzed by real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (qPCR) and their association with tumor recurrence of
hepatectomized HCC patients (n = 119) was determined using a Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis. A high positive correlation between OCT4/NANOG and
IGF-IR/p-IGF-IR expressions in human HCC tissues was observed. The
concurrent expression of OCT4/NANOG/IGF-IR was mostly confined to
HBV-related HCC (HBV-HCC) and was significantly associated with early
tumor recurrence. Investigation of the underlying mechanism showed that
IL-6 stimulated the autocrinal IGF-I/IGF-IR expression in a STAT
dependent manner, and IGF-I/IGF-IR activation promoted the expression of
stemness-related properties of Hep3B cells in both cell lines and
xenograft murine models. IL-6 stimulated the expression of
stemness-related properties in Hep3B cells, and inhibition of IGF-IR
activation significantly suppressed the IL-6s effects both in vitro and
in vivo. Conclusions: Expression of OCT4/NANOG is regulated by
IL-6-mediated IGF/IGF-IR signaling in HBV-HCC and is associated with the
early recurrence of HCC.

