Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolite profiling as tool for the identification of
differentiating and prognostic markers of prostate carcinoma.


Background and objective: Metabolomic research offers a deeper insight
into biochemical changes in cancer metabolism and is a promising tool for
identifying novel biomarkers. We aimed to evaluate the diagnostic and
prognostic potential of metabolites in prostate cancer (PCa) tissue after
radical prostatectomy.Material and methods: 107 matched-paired tissue
samples collected after radical prostatectomy were subjected to the MxPTM
Broad Profiling by gas chromatography- mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (Patent WO 2010/139711 A1: "Means
and methods for diagnosing prostate carcinomas"). Aminoadipic acid,
cerebronic acid, gluconic acid, glycerophosphoethanolamine, 2-
hydroxybehenic acid, isopentenyl pyrophosphate, maltotriose,
7-methylguanine, and tricosanoic acid were related to clinicopathological
variables like prostate volume, tumor stage, Gleason score, preoperative
prostate-specific antigen (PSA), and disease recurrence in the follow-up.
Non-parametric statistical tests, receiver- operating characteristics
(ROC) and univariate and multivariate analyses (Kaplan- Meier curve; Cox
regression) were performed.Results: All metabolites showed higher
concentrations in malignant than in non- malignant samples except for
gluconic acid and maltotriose, which had lower levels in tumors. ROC
analyses showed a clear differentiation for all metabolites with a
maximal area under the curve of 0.86 for tricosanoic acid. However, the
metabolites were not related to tumor stage and Gleason grade.
"Aminoadipic acid, gluconic acid, and maltotriose levels were associated
with tumor recurrence (Kaplan-Meier analysis) and were, together with
tumor stage and Gleason score, a successful metabolite combination in the
multivariate Cox regression model for the prediction of tumor
recurrence."Conclusions: This exemplary study performed with selected
metabolites from a global metabolic profiling investigation proves that
metabolites in prostate carcinoma tissue can be used, in combination with
traditional pathological and histomorphological parameters, as promising
diagnostic and prognostic tools.

