Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased sensitivity in whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS):
A novel post-bisulfite conversion library construction method from
sub-nanogram DNA inputs.


Genome-wide analysis of 5-methylcytosines is possible with whole-genome
bisulfite sequencing (WGBS), where unmethylated cytosine residues are
converted to uracil. However, a major challenge in WGBS is the
degradation of DNA that occurs during bisulfite conversion under
conditions required for complete conversion. Typically, 90% of input DNA
is degraded and thus, is especially problematic with limited starting
amounts of DNA. Additionally, regions that are rich in unmethylated
cytosines are more sensitive to strand breaks. As a consequence, a
majority of DNA fragments contained in di-tagged NGS DNA libraries
treated with bisulfite post-library construction can be rendered inactive
due to strand breaks in the DNA sequence flanked by the adapter
sequences. These mono-tagged templates are then excluded during library
enrichment resulting in incomplete coverage and bias when performing
whole genome bisulfite sequencing.Here, we describe a novel
post-bisulfite conversion library construction method for preparing NGS
libraries from genomic DNA prior to the addition of one or both adapters.
This post-bisulfite conversion library construction method uses the
resulting untagged or mono-tagged single-stranded DNA as template for the
subsequent addition of adapter sequences required for NGS. Thus,
single-stranded DNA fragments independent of size and position of strand
breaks remain as viable templates for library construction, eliminating
the loss of fragments and the selection bias associated with a
post-library construction bisulfite conversion strategy. This novel
post-bisulfite conversion library construction method exhibits high
diversity, increased efficiency and sensitivity (500 picograms human
genomic DNA input), and improved coverage required for WGBS.

