Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the metabolic pathways of 13-cis retinoic acid.


Introduction: Isotretinoin (13-cRA) induces differentiation of human
neuroblastoma cells. Althoughhigh-dose, pulse 13-cis-RA treatment
significantly improves overall survival of high-risk neuroblastoma
patients, most recently together with ch14.18 antibody + cytokines, many
children develop recurrent disease during or after 13-cis-RA treatment.
Pharmacokinetic data from clinical trials showed a large variation in the
levels of 13-cRA or a metabolite 4-oxo-13-cis-retinoic acid
(4-oxo-13-cRA) with the metabolite being present up to 7-fold higher than
13-cRA in the plasma at steady-state (Br J Cancer 96:424-31, 2007). We
sought to define the enzymes involved in metabolism of 13-cis-RA using
liver microsomes. Methods: Phase I metabolism was assessed using pooled
human liver (HLM) and intestinal (HIM) microsomes as well as supersomes
expressing the recombinant human CYP isoenzymes (2B6, 2C9*1, 2C9*3, 3A5,
3A4, 2C19 and 2C8) for phase I metabolism. We tested inhibitors of CYP
enzymes: fluconazole (50M) (CYP2C9) and ketoconazole (50M) (CYP3A4). For
UGT (phase II) metabolism, we utilized UGT1A1, UGT1A3, UGT1A7, UGT1A9 and
UGT1A8 isoenzymes. The generation of metabolites was analyzed by high
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Results: We identified
4-oxo-13-cRA, monohydroxy-13-cRA, monohydroxy-4-oxo-13-cRA, and 13-cRA
glucuronide and 4-oxo-13-cRA-glucuronide as metabolites in the plasma of
a 13-cRA treated patient, of which 4-oxo-13-cRA was by far the most
abundant. The enzyme kinetic studies revealed that the formation of
4-oxo-13-cRA by HLM (velocity: v=1.67) was much greater compared with HIM
(v=0.08) at 100 M 13-cRA. The formation of 4-oxo-13-cRA from 13-cRA by
CYP3A4 isoenzyme was the highest, with CYP3A4 generating more than twice
the 4-oxo-13ciRA compared with other isoenzymes tested at a given range
of concentrations. In HLM, the CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole (50M) caused
an 83% 0.0009 reduction in the formation of 4-oxo-13-cRA relative to no
inhibitor controls, supporting that CYP3A4 is a key enzyme in the
generation of 4-oxo-13-cRA. Other CYP isoenzymes (2B6, 2C9*1, 2C9*3, 3A5,
2C19 and 2C8) generated minimal amounts of 4-oxo-13-cRA. Glucuronidation
of 13-cRA was >5 fold higher by UGT1A3 as compared to other UGT
isoenzymes, while 4-oxo-13-cRA was glucuronized at similar rates by
multiple isoenzymes of UGT (UGT1A1, UGT1A3, UGT1A7, UGT1A9, UGT1A8).
Conclusions: CYP3A4 and UGT1A3 are the major enzymes metabolizing 13-cRA
while the major metabolite, 4-oxo-13-cRA is a substrate for a broader
spectrum of UGT enzymes. Future studies on the association between
enzymatic polymorphisms and pharmacokinetics of 13-cRA may inform
strategies to optimize dosing of 13-cRA in high-risk neuroblastoma
patients.

