Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation PET imaging agents: The development of
radiolabeled c-Met specific Anticalin 89Zr-PRS-110 with diagnostic and
therapeutic drug monitoring applications.


The oncogene c-Met is a clinically validated target having been shown to
be involved in tumorigenesis. Imaging agents capable of quantifying c-Met
expression in human tumors would be a valuable tool for aiding diagnosis,
drug scheduling and monitoring the response to targeted therapies.
Anticalins are a novel class of biopharmaceuticals based on the human
lipocalin scaffold with many properties which make them desirable imaging
agents including their smaller size and ease of manufacturing when
compared to antibodies. PRS-110 is a c-Met specific anticalin which is
being developed as a therapeutic and imaging modality. The aim of this
study was to evaluate the utility of the c-Met anticalin as a positron
emission tomography (PET) imaging agent and analyze its biodistribution
in human tumor bearing mice.Methods: A zirconium-89 (89Zr) labeled
version of PRS-110 was generated and biodistribution studies were
performed 96 h after single dose injection of the tracer (10 to 500 g)
into Balb/c mice bearing subcutaneous c-Met expressing human H441
non-small cell lung cancer tumors. PET imaging was executed at 6, 24, 48
and 96 h after injection of 50 g 89Zr-PRS-110 to mice bearing H441 (c-Met
++), primary glioblastoma U87-MG (c-Met +) or ovarian cancer A2780 (c-Met
-) xenografts. After the final scan, biodistribution analysis was
performed. The excised tumors were analyzed for c-Met expression by
immunohistochemistry and fluorescent PRS-110-800CW distribution by
fluorescence microscopy.Results: Biodistribution analyses showed a
PRS-110 dose-dependent 89Zr-PRS-110 H441-tumor uptake, with the highest
tumor uptake at 10 g PRS-110 resulting in 7.5 %ID/g at 96 h after tracer
injection. MicroPET imaging revealed specific tumor uptake of
89Zr-PRS-110 in the c-Met expressing H441 and U87 tumors while imaging of
the c-Met negative A2780 tumor model showed background level similar to a
non-specific anticalin control. Biodistribution data supported the
microPET findings, showing ex vivo tumor uptake of 89Zr-PRS-110 of 5.9,
1.8 and 1.7 %ID/g in H441, U87 and A2780 xenografts respectively, which
correlated with c-Met expression levels. Tumor : blood ratios of
89Zr-PRS-110 compared to 89Zr-Tlc-PEG confirmed these finding. Ex vivo
fluorescence revealed intracellular presence of PRS-110 96 h after tracer
injection.Conclusion: 89Zr-PRS-110 specifically accumulates in c-Met
expressing tumors. PET imaging with this tracer provides real-time
non-invasive information about PRS-110 distribution and tumor
accumulation. This makes 89Zr-PRS-110, which is ready for clinical
evaluation, of interest for the clinical development of PRS-110.

