Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chimeric antibodies to tumor antigen CEA improve detection of
human colon cancer for fluorescence-guided surgery.


Mouse models of human colon cancer were established with fragments of a
CEA-expressing patient colon tumor. Mice received tail vein injections of
a human-mouse chimeric anti-CEA-Alexa-488 antibody or mouse
anti-CEA-Alexa-488 antibody 24 hours prior to fluorescence-guided surgery
(FGS). Pre- and post-operative images were obtained to assess for
completeness of resection. Mice were subsequently followed for 6 months
post-operatively to assess for tumor recurrence and overall survival. At
termination, all tumor lesions were harvested and evaluated
histologically. Furthermore, the chimeric antibody was tested on frozen
tumor and normal tissue arrays comparing it to the mouse antibody. The
chimeric antibody demonstrated improved sensitivity and specificity in
labeling the CEA-expressing tumor compared to the mouse antibody. The
conjugation efficiency of the fluorophore to the chimeric antibody was
2-fold higher than that of the mouse antibody. On frozen tumor tissue
arrays, the signal intensity of the chimeric antibody was significantly
brighter compared to the mouse antibody indicating improved binding to
tumor tissue. The chimeric antibody demonstrated improved specificity as
shown by the lower signal intensity in normal human tissue samples
compared to the mouse antibody indicating decreased binding of the
chimeric antibody. The animals injected with the chimeric antibody had
more effective FGS than the animals injected with the mouse antibody
indicating improved visualization of tumor margins by the chimeric
antibody. The humanized chimeric antibody has greater potential for
clinical application for FGS than a mouse antibody.

