Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial priming of apoptotic machinery in pancreatic cancer
by BPM 31510 to enhance efficacy of chemotherapy.


Recent evidence suggests that the cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy,
specifically in cancer cells is a consequence of pre-treatment priming
event wherein exposure to the chemotherapeutic agents pushes the cancer
cells beyond an apoptotic threshold to effectuate cell death. (Letai, A
et. al, Science. 2011 Nov 25;334 (6059) BPM 31510 is a ubidecarenone
containing proprietary formulation that effectuates a metabolic switch
from glycolysis towards enhanced mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation
resulting in the recapitulation of apoptosis in cancer. The current study
was aimed at investigating whether pretreatment with BPM 31510 results in
mitochondrial priming, thereby augmenting the cytotoxic effect of
standard of care chemotherapeutic agents. The human derived pancreatic
cancer cell line Mia-Paca-2 was subjected to either (a) pretreatment with
BPM 31510 followed by co-treatment with gemcitabine or (b) co-treatment
with BPM 31510 and gemcitabine. BPM 31510 exposure resulted in decreased
cell proliferation rates that were significantly higher than gemcitabine
alone in Mia-Paca-2 cell line. Pre-treatment with BPM 31510 augmented the
cytotoxic potential of gemcitabine, a phenomenon that was also observed
in the co-treatment regimen. In vivo pancreatic cancer model using
Mia-Paca-2 cell lines were developed to further investigate the priming
effect of BPM 31510. Results demonstrate that 1-week and 2-week
pretreatment with intravenous BPM 31510 followed by gemcitabine results
in improved survival in the pancreatic cancer model compared to the
co-treatment regimen. The data demonstrates that addition of BPM31510
synergizes the cytotoxic effect of gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer. In
addition, pretreatment with BPM 31510 followed by gemcitabine treatment
is associated with improved survival. Taken together, the data suggest
that BPM 31510 may be a viable mitochondrial priming agent to sensitize
cancer cells to the cytotoxic effects of gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer.

