Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microfluidic-based unbiased enrichment (negative selection) of
circulating non-hematopoietic tumor cells directly from whole blood
without centrifugation.


The enumeration and analysis of circulating non-hematopoietic tumor cells
(CTCs) is of increasing interest for monitoring disease progression or
response to treatment, specifically as a companion diagnostic for new
anti-cancer drugs, and for research into the mechanisms of disease
progression and metastases. Ideally, CTCs would be enriched from very
small samples, with minimal handling, high recovery, and no requirement
for the expression of specific surface markers.Two technologies have been
combined to meet these requirements. Hematopoietic white blood cells
(WBCs) in whole blood were first cross-linked to magnetic particles using
EasySep anti-CD45 TAC. The sample was diluted and placed in a magnet for
30 min.; an outlet in the bottom of the sample tube was then opened and
the sample flowed by gravity into a microfluidic chamber containing a
high-precision micro-slit membrane. Red blood cells (RBCs) flowed through
the microfluidic chamber, while larger cells such as CTCs were retained
in the chamber. The cells in the chamber were washed with PBS and then
identified by staining with Hoechst [nuclear], anti-cytokeratin
antibodies [epithelial cells], and anti-CD45 antibodies [hematopoietic
cells]. CTCs were defined as Hoechst+, cytokeratin+ and CD45-.The
recovery of MCF-7 breast adenocarcinoma cells spiked into normal whole
blood, at 10, 30, 50, or 100 cells / 2 mL blood was 95 23% (7 1, n=3 for
10 cells; 24 3, n=3 for 30 cells; 57 3, n=3 for 50 cells; 113 27, n=3 for
100 cells) and the log depletion of WBCs exceeded 2.3. The recovery of
H1975 lung adenocarcinoma cells spiked into normal whole blood, at 10,
30, 50, or 100 cells / 2 mL blood was 93 8% (9 1, n=3 for 10 cells; 28 3,
n=3 for 30 cells; 48 6, n=3 for 50 cells; 94 2, n=3 for 100 cells), and
the log depletion of WBCs exceeded 2.14.13 patient samples [10 NSCLC and
3 CRC] were processed with this method and CTCs were detected in every
sample. The number of CTC detected from 2 mL of blood ranged from 1 to
51. WBC log depletion ranged from 2.01 to 2.79. No RBCs were observed on
the membrane of the microfluidic chamber. The entire process requires 60
minutes and could easily be automated. RBC depletion is essentially
complete without the use of centrifugation or chemicals which may be
deleterious to CTCs. The minimal sample handling permits high recovery of
desired cells, allowing the detection of CTCs in much smaller samples
than are currently used for clinical evaluation. CTCs are enriched
without bias as to their surface antigen expression, and are not labeled
with antibodies prior to detection. CTCs can be stained and visualized
directly on the microfluidic chip. This unbiased enrichment approach
could be used to assess the mutation status of CTC in real time.

