Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bcl-xL and IL-6 act independently and synergistically to
accelerate plasmacytopoiesis and plasma cell tumor formation in Balb/c
mice.


Accelerated development of spontaneous plasma cell tumors (PCT) occurs in
mucosal-associated lymphoid tissues of mice bearing both IL-6 and BCL-XL
transgenes (double transgenic (dTg)). 91% of dTG mice developed PCTs at a
mean age of 89 days. In contrast, 53% of the IL-6 Tg mice developed PCTs
at a mean age of 301 days and 12% BCL-XL Tg mice developed PCTs with a
mean age of 433 days. The PCTs formed primarily in Peyer's Patches,
medullary cords of the mesenteric lymph node and/or the lamina propria of
small intestinal villi where they were preceded by massive plasma cell
hyperplasia. To investigate the molecular basis of the cooperation
between IL-6 and BCL-xL transgenes to accelerate PCT development we
performed detailed analysis of cell lines developed from dTG mice and and
spontaneous or pristane-induced tumors of Bcl-xL TG mice. All the tumors
carry Ig/Myc-deregulating chromosomal translocations, which are thought
to be the initiating event of PCT development. Therefore we focused on
finding possible differences in secondary alterations. Although the
subsets were poorly distinguished by microarray-based gene expression
profiling, there were significant differences in the expression of p21,
p19ARF, p53, HUWE1 and pRb as determined by western blotting and qPCR.
DTG tumors were characterized by alterations in pathways governing
expression of pRb that included increased expression of INK4A and down
regulation of pRb itself as well as down regulation of p19ARF. Most
notably we discovered discordance between protein and mRNA levels for pRb
and p19Arf. Efforts to understand the molecular basis for these
distinctions and their contributions to the biology of these PCT subsets
are in progress.

