Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the autotaxin-lysophosphatidic acid (ATX-LPA)
pathway for chemoprevention of hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is increasing in incidence
both in the United States and worldwide. Due to the limited treatment
options for HCC, prevention in high-risk patients with cirrhosis has been
proposed as an alternative strategy. Aberrant activation of the
autotoxin-lysophosphatidic acid (ATX-LPA) pathway, an upstream activator
of RhoA signaling, has been associated with fibrosis in several organs.
Here, we hypothesized that inhibition of the ATX-LPA pathway in fibrotic
liver would reduce progression to cirrhosis and HCC occurrence. Methods:
Rats were treated weekly with 50 mg/kg diethylnitrosamine (DEN) to induce
sequential development of fibrosis, cirrhosis and HCC. After
establishment of liver fibrosis (8 weeks), rats were treated daily by
oral gavage with either vehicle control, 5 mg/kg AM063 (an ATX inhibitor)
or 30 mg/kg AM095 (a LPA receptor 1 (LPA1) antagonist). At the end of the
study, rats were sacrificed, livers were sectioned and stained to analyze
disease progression, and tumor nodules were counted. In addition, the
effect of LPA on RhoA signaling was investigated in hepatic stellate cell
lines (TWNT4 and LX-2). Results: Gene set enrichment analysis revealed
that a RhoA activation gene signature, which was associated with poor
prognosis in human cirrhosis patients, increased in DEN-injured rat
livers. Several members of this gene signature, including pro-fibrogenic
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), were reduced after treatment with
either AM063 or AM095. In addition, both AM063 and AM095 significantly (p
Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is increasing in incidence
both in the United States and worldwide. Due to the limited treatment
options for HCC, prevention in high-risk patients with cirrhosis has been
proposed as an alternative strategy. Aberrant activation of the
autotoxin-lysophosphatidic acid (ATX-LPA) pathway, an upstream activator
of RhoA signaling, has been associated with fibrosis in several organs.
Here, we hypothesized that inhibition of the ATX-LPA pathway in fibrotic
liver would reduce progression to cirrhosis and HCC occurrence. Methods:
Rats were treated weekly with 50 mg/kg diethylnitrosamine (DEN) to induce
sequential development of fibrosis, cirrhosis and HCC. After
establishment of liver fibrosis (8 weeks), rats were treated daily by
oral gavage with either vehicle control, 5 mg/kg AM063 (an ATX inhibitor)
or 30 mg/kg AM095 (a LPA receptor 1 (LPA1) antagonist). At the end of the
study, rats were sacrificed, livers were sectioned and stained to analyze
disease progression, and tumor nodules were counted. In addition, the
effect of LPA on RhoA signaling was investigated in hepatic stellate cell
lines (TWNT4 and LX-2). Results: Gene set enrichment analysis revealed
that a RhoA activation gene signature, which was associated with poor
prognosis in human cirrhosis patients, increased in DEN-injured rat
livers. Several members of this gene signature, including pro-fibrogenic
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), were reduced after treatment with
either AM063 or AM095. In addition, both AM063 and AM095 significantly (p
< 0.01) prevented the development of HCC tumor nodules in DEN-injured
livers from a median of 16 in controls to a median of 8 and 6 in AM063
and AM095-treated rats, respectively. Interestingly, the extent of
fibrosis in DEN-injured rat livers as measured by Ishak score also
significantly (p Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is increasing
in incidence both in the United States and worldwide. Due to the limited
treatment options for HCC, prevention in high-risk patients with
cirrhosis has been proposed as an alternative strategy. Aberrant
activation of the autotoxin-lysophosphatidic acid (ATX-LPA) pathway, an
upstream activator of RhoA signaling, has been associated with fibrosis
in several organs. Here, we hypothesized that inhibition of the ATX-LPA
pathway in fibrotic liver would reduce progression to cirrhosis and HCC
occurrence. Methods: Rats were treated weekly with 50 mg/kg
diethylnitrosamine (DEN) to induce sequential development of fibrosis,
cirrhosis and HCC. After establishment of liver fibrosis (8 weeks), rats
were treated daily by oral gavage with either vehicle control, 5 mg/kg
AM063 (an ATX inhibitor) or 30 mg/kg AM095 (a LPA receptor 1 (LPA1)
antagonist). At the end of the study, rats were sacrificed, livers were
sectioned and stained to analyze disease progression, and tumor nodules
were counted. In addition, the effect of LPA on RhoA signaling was
investigated in hepatic stellate cell lines (TWNT4 and LX-2). Results:
Gene set enrichment analysis revealed that a RhoA activation gene
signature, which was associated with poor prognosis in human cirrhosis
patients, increased in DEN-injured rat livers. Several members of this
gene signature, including pro-fibrogenic connective tissue growth factor
(CTGF), were reduced after treatment with either AM063 or AM095. In
addition, both AM063 and AM095 significantly (p < 0.01) prevented the
development of HCC tumor nodules in DEN-injured livers from a median of
16 in controls to a median of 8 and 6 in AM063 and AM095-treated rats,
respectively. Interestingly, the extent of fibrosis in DEN-injured rat
livers as measured by Ishak score also significantly (p < 0.01) decreased
from a median of 6 in controls to a median of 4 in both AM063 and
AM095-treated rats. Examination of hepatic stellate cell lines revealed
that LPA increased RhoA-mediated CTGF expression, which was inhibited by
AM095. Conclusions: We have identified the ATX-LPA pathway as a major
mediator of liver fibrosis progression. Further, AM063 and AM095 are
potential chemoprevention strategies for HCC.

