Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the effects of somatic mutations in splice factors
on the transcriptome.


Recent studies have identified recurrent somatic mutations in splice
factors, including SF3B1 and U2AF1, in myelodysplastic syndromes, chronic
lymphocytic leukemias, breast cancer, and lung adenocarcinoma. In one
study, 91 tumor and matched normal whole-exomes were sequenced from
patients with CLL and the second most frequently mutated gene was SF3B1.
Analysis of 187 whole-exomes in lung adenocarcinoma and matched normals
revealed recurrent somatic mutations in the splice factor U2AF1 in 3% of
cases. In addition to U2AF1 mutations, recurrent truncating mutations
were observed in a putative splice factor, RBM10, in 4% of lung
adenocarcinomas. The recurrence of somatic mutations in splice factors in
multiple tumor types suggests that alterations in RNA splicing may play
an important role in tumorigenesis.Although these mutations have been
identified in cancer genomes, the effect on the cancer transcriptome has
yet to be fully explored; therefore, we do not understand how mutations
in splice factors can contribute to tumorigenesis. We hypothesize that
somatic mutations in splice factors cause alterations in mRNA splicing of
important cancer genes.We are using a computational tool called JuncBASE
to identify alternative splicing in tumor transcriptomes from RNA-Seq
data. We are then associating somatic mutations in splice factors, found
from whole-exome sequencing, with splicing signatures identified through
RNA-Seq.Preliminary results on the identification of splice events
associated with SF3B1 mutations in CLL reveal novel isoforms of multiple
genes specifically expressed in SF3B1 mutant samples. Additionally, we
examined the effects of SF3B1, U2AF1, and RBM10 mutations on tumor
transcriptomes using RNA-Seq data from The Cancer Genome Atlas.

