Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact on tumor-stromal interactions of loss of collagen XV
from the basement membrane zone.


Most clinical therapeutics used to date depend on specific targeting of
cellular components to treat cancers. However, the environment outside
the tumor cell is also critical since it may provide new targets to treat
malignant and resistant cancers, independent of the tumor.We aim to
target the early stages of cancer, prior to metastasis by determining the
role of a non-fibrillar collagen (Type XV) and its interactions with the
tumor stroma and extracellular environment.Type XV collagen (COLXV) is
found in basement membrane zones where it assumesa pretzel-like structure
but unlike the majority of fibrillar collagens does not form tight
lattice networks surrounding the cell. In aggressive cancers, including
breast, pancreas, ovarian and melanomas, Loss of COLXV precedes basement
membrane invasion and metastasis.Moreover, the loss of COLXV from the
distal side of basement membrane zones and the resulting deficit in its
interactions with other proteins may determine its specific function in
tumor progression and eventual metastasis. In this context we have
identified critical collagen-binding cell surface receptors on the tumor
cell, which interact with COLXV and appear to mediate its functions. A
number of these interacting proteins show altered signaling in cancer. We
previously showed that over-expression of COLXV in cervical cancer cells
alters the growth properties of these cells in vitro and that type XV
collagen is a dose-dependent suppressor of tumorigenicity in vivo. We now
show that over-expression of COLXV inhibits epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in vitro through interactions with cell surface
receptors and has a dramatic effect on the associated signaling events
and alterations on the tumor cell periphery.Alterations in the balance of
downstream signaling events may be responsible for tumor progression
after the loss of COLXV. We are now further investigating the mechanisms
of tumor/stroma crosstalk that are impacted by COLXV and subsequently by
its depletion.

