Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A chemicogenetic interrogation of colorectal cancer identifies a
shared chemical vulnerability in Wnt signaling and telomere length
maintenance.


Despite the general acceptance that loss of the APC tumor suppressor is
the predominant cancer-initiating event in colorectal cancer (CRC), a
therapeutic strategy premised upon disabling deviant gene transcription
associated with this phenomenon currently does not exist. Chemical
antagonism of the poly-ADP ribosylase enzymes Tankyrase 1 and 2 (Tnks1&2)
results in the destruction of the transcriptional co-activator -catenin
by promoting the stability of a -catenin destruction complex. We have
evaluated the consequences of disrupting -catenin activity on the CRC
signaling network using faithful reporters of the most frequently
corrupted cellular processes (Wnt/-catenin, p53, and Kras signaling), and
a portfolio of Tnks inhibitors identified from a chemical library screen.
In addition to inducing loss of -catenin activity, the exposure of cells
to Tnks inhibitors resulted in increased p53 activity. We demonstrated
that this unexpected cellular response is due to loss of Tnks ability to
regulate the shelterin complex that protects the telomeric sequences
found at the ends of chromosomes. Long term culturing of cancerous cells
with Tnks inhibitors resulted in telomere shortening and cellular
senescence. Our findings reveal a single agent strategy for targeting two
cellular processes that support the renewal of cancer initiating cells -
Wnt signaling and telomere length maintenance.

