Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of expression data and SNPs associated with
aggressiveness of prostate cancer identifies specific associations.


Previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS) encompassing 83,975
patients and 96,376 controls have identified more than 40 low-penetrance
susceptibility loci for prostate cancer. The majority of the loci are
located in regions of unknown function. Expression quantitative trait
loci (eQTL) analysis may be used to study the association between gene
expression and risk loci and provides a potential way to understand the
functional consequences of risk loci. In the current study, we collected
32 prostate cancer samples with biochemical recurrence and 41 prostate
cancer samples without biochemical recurrence for an eQTL association
study. The Illumina HumanHap 1M platform was used to get SNP data from
each patient. We used 559 SNPs previously associated with prostate cancer
risk as candidate risk loci in the association analysis. This included
the 40+ most susceptible loci reported in GWAS articles and 500+ loci
with weaker associations, reported in their supplemental documents. The
Affymetrix U133plus2 platform was used to get transcript expression
profiling data from a tumor-enriched portion of the prostate in the same
patients. We selected 4030 transcripts previously identified in prostate
cancer diagnosis and prognosis studies as candidate expression
quantitative traits. We developed a Bayesian clustering method to analyze
these expressed transcripts and risk variants jointly in a single model.
The model assumed that a risk variant can be associated with multiple
transcripts and a transcript can be associated with multiple risk
variants. An Expectation-Maximization algorithm was used to estimate each
variable in the model. From the model, we observed 356 statistical
significant linkages between 76 risk variants and 255 transcripts. Risk
variants rs10163421 and rs14656182 are of the greatest interest because
they were associated with 81 and 53 transcripts respectively. The two
identified variants were also reported as common variants associated with
aggressiveness for prostate cancer in two separate studies3, 4. We
propose to do further analyses in order to verify the associations
between the two risk variants and the associated transcripts, and also
seek themes among the correlated transcripts, which might facilitate
understanding the functions of the two risk variants in the genetic
etiology of prostate cancer.1. Gudmundsson et al. 2007 Nature Genetics,
39(5): 631 - 6372. Eeles et al. 2009 Nature Genetics, 41(10): 1116-11213.
Pal et al. 2009 The Prostate, 69(14):1548-15564. Catalona et al,,
manuscript in preparation

