Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The potential of Resveratrol and Nagami kumquat extracts in
facilitating DNA repair in Raji cells.


Cancer is the second biggest killer in the United States. It has long
been recognized that people differ in their susceptibility to many
different types of cancer. Some of these differences are the heritable
traits that modify the effects of environmental exposures. Genetic
instability, which drives tumorigenesis, is itself fuelled by DNA damage
and often by errors made by the DNA repair machinery. DNA repair, using
natural sources of antioxidants, is a new developing area of cancer
prevention. The aim of the current study was to investigate DNA repair
capacity and DNA damage of Burkitt's lymphoma (Raji) cells exposed to
Resveratrol and different extracts of Nagami kumquat (Fortunella
margarita). Nagami kumquat is known as the little gold gem of the citrus
family, and its pulp has been recently highlighted as one containing the
most potent antioxidant and high phenolic contents among citrus fruits.
Kumquat skin had the highest vitamin C content (3,069.183 g/g) when
compared to both the seed (506.14 g/g) and pulp (2,440.448 g/g). Recent
evidence has shown that diets rich in antioxidants, such as those
including kumquats, may be effective in lowering an individual's risk for
cancer. We measured the DNA repair rate of cells by the Comet Assay,
taken at several time points throughout the course of 1 hour. DNA damage
was induced by exposing the cells to 4mM H2O2 for 15 minutes. This damage
was then measured by the comet assay. We measured the amount of DNA
damage at 0, 6, 15, 30 and 60 minutes, in order to determine the DNA
repair rate. The results were analyzed with Tri-Tek Comet Score Software
Version 1.5. The DNA Repair after one hour, using the kumquat Pulp was
highly significant (PCancer is the second biggest killer in the United
States. It has long been recognized that people differ in their
susceptibility to many different types of cancer. Some of these
differences are the heritable traits that modify the effects of
environmental exposures. Genetic instability, which drives tumorigenesis,
is itself fuelled by DNA damage and often by errors made by the DNA
repair machinery. DNA repair, using natural sources of antioxidants, is a
new developing area of cancer prevention. The aim of the current study
was to investigate DNA repair capacity and DNA damage of Burkitt's
lymphoma (Raji) cells exposed to Resveratrol and different extracts of
Nagami kumquat (Fortunella margarita). Nagami kumquat is known as the
little gold gem of the citrus family, and its pulp has been recently
highlighted as one containing the most potent antioxidant and high
phenolic contents among citrus fruits. Kumquat skin had the highest
vitamin C content (3,069.183 g/g) when compared to both the seed (506.14
g/g) and pulp (2,440.448 g/g). Recent evidence has shown that diets rich
in antioxidants, such as those including kumquats, may be effective in
lowering an individual's risk for cancer. We measured the DNA repair rate
of cells by the Comet Assay, taken at several time points throughout the
course of 1 hour. DNA damage was induced by exposing the cells to 4mM
H2O2 for 15 minutes. This damage was then measured by the comet assay. We
measured the amount of DNA damage at 0, 6, 15, 30 and 60 minutes, in
order to determine the DNA repair rate. The results were analyzed with
Tri-Tek Comet Score Software Version 1.5. The DNA Repair after one hour,
using the kumquat Pulp was highly significant (P<0.05) according to the
percentages of the DNA in the tail (3.72%) followed by skin (3.37%) and
seed (2.28%). The results indicate that among citrus fruits, Kumquat as
an antioxidant has a significant capacity to repair DNA. We were able to
observe the effect of the Resveratrol (RV) on the rate of DNA repair
which showed a highly significant difference when RV was incubated with
the cells for a period of 24 hours compared to the non-treated controls
(pCancer is the second biggest killer in the United States. It has long
been recognized that people differ in their susceptibility to many
different types of cancer. Some of these differences are the heritable
traits that modify the effects of environmental exposures. Genetic
instability, which drives tumorigenesis, is itself fuelled by DNA damage
and often by errors made by the DNA repair machinery. DNA repair, using
natural sources of antioxidants, is a new developing area of cancer
prevention. The aim of the current study was to investigate DNA repair
capacity and DNA damage of Burkitt's lymphoma (Raji) cells exposed to
Resveratrol and different extracts of Nagami kumquat (Fortunella
margarita). Nagami kumquat is known as the little gold gem of the citrus
family, and its pulp has been recently highlighted as one containing the
most potent antioxidant and high phenolic contents among citrus fruits.
Kumquat skin had the highest vitamin C content (3,069.183 g/g) when
compared to both the seed (506.14 g/g) and pulp (2,440.448 g/g). Recent
evidence has shown that diets rich in antioxidants, such as those
including kumquats, may be effective in lowering an individual's risk for
cancer. We measured the DNA repair rate of cells by the Comet Assay,
taken at several time points throughout the course of 1 hour. DNA damage
was induced by exposing the cells to 4mM H2O2 for 15 minutes. This damage
was then measured by the comet assay. We measured the amount of DNA
damage at 0, 6, 15, 30 and 60 minutes, in order to determine the DNA
repair rate. The results were analyzed with Tri-Tek Comet Score Software
Version 1.5. The DNA Repair after one hour, using the kumquat Pulp was
highly significant (P<0.05) according to the percentages of the DNA in
the tail (3.72%) followed by skin (3.37%) and seed (2.28%). The results
indicate that among citrus fruits, Kumquat as an antioxidant has a
significant capacity to repair DNA. We were able to observe the effect of
the Resveratrol (RV) on the rate of DNA repair which showed a highly
significant difference when RV was incubated with the cells for a period
of 24 hours compared to the non-treated controls (p<0.001). The DNA
repair rate was shorter in RV at 15 minute exposure showing 1.09%
compared to the non-treated group at 30 minutes which showed 1.175%. We
also compared RV to the kumquat extracts and we found that there was a
significant difference between the rates of DNA repair, showing that RV
was significantly better compared to kumquat extracts. We can conclude
that RV has three times higher DNA repair activity than extracts of
Nagami kumquat.

