Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Are physician recommendations for BRCA 1/2 testing among breast
cancer patients appropriate? A population based study.


Purpose: To evaluate the rates and predictors of physician recommendation
for BRCA 1/2 testing in breast cancer patients.Patients and Methods:
Women aged 18-64 diagnosed with invasive breast cancer in 2007 in
Pennsylvania completed a survey on family history of cancer, physician
treatment recommendations, and BRCA 1/2 testing (N=2258). Based on age at
diagnosis and family history, women were categorized as high, moderate,
or low risk for BRCA 1/2 mutations. Multivariate logistic regression was
used to assess the odds of physician recommendation for BRCA 1/2 testing
by risk group, age at diagnosis, demographics, and tumor
characteristics.Results: Nearly 25% of participants were at high risk for
carrying a BRCA 1/2 mutation based on age at breast cancer diagnosis and
family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer. Physician recommendations
for BRCA 1/2 testing were strongly associated with risk of carrying a
BRCA 1/2 mutation, with 53% of women at high risk reporting a testing
recommendation compared to 9% of women at low risk. In addition,
physician recommendations were strongly correlated with use of testing in
all risk groups. Among women at high risk of mutation, lack of a
recommendation for BRCA 1/2 testing was more common among women who were
older, had lower income, and were employed.Conclusion: Although BRCA 1/2
testing recommendations appear to be appropriately correlated with
mutation risk among women with breast cancer, a significant proportion of
breast cancer patients who meet criteria for BRCA 1/2 testing may not be
receiving recommendations for such testing from their providers.

