Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of tobacco on prostate cancer cell aggressiveness.


Studies have shown that smoking is associated with both greater incidence
and worse outcomes of prostate cancer. The mechanism involved in this
adverse effect of cigarette smoke on prostate cancer cells is not known.
We hypothesized that cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) would have an
effect on in vitro cell proliferation and motility. CSC is the tar phase
of smoke particulate. We submitted PC-3 cells for proliferation assays
after 4 and 24 hours exposure to varying concentrations of CSC. We also
performed motility assays and probed for epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) using immunohistochemistry on cells exposed to CSC to
investigate how the action of cigarette smoke induces more aggressive
behavior in cells. Results showed that CSC caused up to 83% increase in
cell proliferation depending on dose and time of exposure. The
antioxidant Ebselen, a scavenger of H2O2 and hydroperoxides, decreased
but did not abrogate the proliferation caused by CSC. There was no effect
of CSC on cell motility in Boyden chamber assays. There was also no
effect of CSC on EMT, which was demonstrated by testing the
immunohistochemical expression of vimentin, E-cadherin, and beta-catenin
after cell exposure to CSC. In conclusion, CSC increases cell
proliferation, but has no effect on motility. This action of CSC is at
least in part mediated by H2O2, as shown by Ebselen inhibition of cell
proliferation. The increase in proliferation could in part explain the
worse prognosis of patients who smoke.

