Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting a breast cancer xenograft by modulation of the
microenvironment with zoledronic acid.


Introduction - Targeting breast cancer (BC) via its microenvironment is a
way to avoid tumor plasticity and development of resistance towards
therapy. Bisphosphonates (BPs) are used to treat BC bone metastases.
Prior studies suggest that BPs also exert an anti tumor effect by
interacting with the microenvironment. However, the precise nature of
this interaction is unclear. The chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay
allows assessment of both human BC and microenvironment cells,
circumventing issues of species specificity.Aim - 1) evaluate whether an
indirect anti-BC effect by BPs, can be determined using the CAM assay 2)
Assess potential biomarkers for this intervention.Methods - MTT survival
assays were performed to assess a differential effect of BP zoledronic
acid (ZA) on survival of human BC cell lines (MCF-7, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 progeny cell line SCP2) and human stromal cell line Hs27a. For
biomarker analysis, excretion of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-A and Transforming Growth Factor (TGF) was measured in the
supernatant of Hs27a and MCF-7 cultures and co-cultures treated with ZA
by Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assays (ELISA). The CAM assay was used to
study the effect of ZA on a co-culture system of BC- and stromal cells.
SCP2 cells were inoculated on the CAM with and without Hs27a cells on day
6 of embryonic development. ZA (200 M) or PBS was added on the CAM on day
10 and tumors were harvested at day 14. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
pan-cytokeratin was performed to identify BC cells in the tumors.Results
- ZA (4 days continuous incubation) did not induce a direct anti BC
effect in vitro (IC50>100 M), but strongly affected stromal cell survival
(IC50 8 M). ZA treatment decreased TGF excretion by Hs27a cells dose
dependently (ZA 10, 50, 100 or 500 M for 48 hours) from 53863 pg/ml
(control) to 44657 (ns), 28598 (pIntroduction - Targeting breast cancer
(BC) via its microenvironment is a way to avoid tumor plasticity and
development of resistance towards therapy. Bisphosphonates (BPs) are used
to treat BC bone metastases. Prior studies suggest that BPs also exert an
anti tumor effect by interacting with the microenvironment. However, the
precise nature of this interaction is unclear. The chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) assay allows assessment of both human BC and
microenvironment cells, circumventing issues of species specificity.Aim -
1) evaluate whether an indirect anti-BC effect by BPs, can be determined
using the CAM assay 2) Assess potential biomarkers for this
intervention.Methods - MTT survival assays were performed to assess a
differential effect of BP zoledronic acid (ZA) on survival of human BC
cell lines (MCF-7, SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 progeny cell line SCP2) and
human stromal cell line Hs27a. For biomarker analysis, excretion of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A and Transforming Growth
Factor (TGF) was measured in the supernatant of Hs27a and MCF-7 cultures
and co-cultures treated with ZA by Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assays
(ELISA). The CAM assay was used to study the effect of ZA on a co-culture
system of BC- and stromal cells. SCP2 cells were inoculated on the CAM
with and without Hs27a cells on day 6 of embryonic development. ZA (200
M) or PBS was added on the CAM on day 10 and tumors were harvested at day
14. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for pan-cytokeratin was performed to
identify BC cells in the tumors.Results - ZA (4 days continuous
incubation) did not induce a direct anti BC effect in vitro (IC50>100 M),
but strongly affected stromal cell survival (IC50 8 M). ZA treatment
decreased TGF excretion by Hs27a cells dose dependently (ZA 10, 50, 100
or 500 M for 48 hours) from 53863 pg/ml (control) to 44657 (ns), 28598
(p<.01), 19847 (pIntroduction - Targeting breast cancer (BC) via its
microenvironment is a way to avoid tumor plasticity and development of
resistance towards therapy. Bisphosphonates (BPs) are used to treat BC
bone metastases. Prior studies suggest that BPs also exert an anti tumor
effect by interacting with the microenvironment. However, the precise
nature of this interaction is unclear. The chorioallantoic membrane (CAM)
assay allows assessment of both human BC and microenvironment cells,
circumventing issues of species specificity.Aim - 1) evaluate whether an
indirect anti-BC effect by BPs, can be determined using the CAM assay 2)
Assess potential biomarkers for this intervention.Methods - MTT survival
assays were performed to assess a differential effect of BP zoledronic
acid (ZA) on survival of human BC cell lines (MCF-7, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 progeny cell line SCP2) and human stromal cell line Hs27a. For
biomarker analysis, excretion of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-A and Transforming Growth Factor (TGF) was measured in the
supernatant of Hs27a and MCF-7 cultures and co-cultures treated with ZA
by Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assays (ELISA). The CAM assay was used to
study the effect of ZA on a co-culture system of BC- and stromal cells.
SCP2 cells were inoculated on the CAM with and without Hs27a cells on day
6 of embryonic development. ZA (200 M) or PBS was added on the CAM on day
10 and tumors were harvested at day 14. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
pan-cytokeratin was performed to identify BC cells in the tumors.Results
- ZA (4 days continuous incubation) did not induce a direct anti BC
effect in vitro (IC50>100 M), but strongly affected stromal cell survival
(IC50 8 M). ZA treatment decreased TGF excretion by Hs27a cells dose
dependently (ZA 10, 50, 100 or 500 M for 48 hours) from 53863 pg/ml
(control) to 44657 (ns), 28598 (p<.01), 19847 (p<.01) and 18660 pg/ml
(pIntroduction - Targeting breast cancer (BC) via its microenvironment is
a way to avoid tumor plasticity and development of resistance towards
therapy. Bisphosphonates (BPs) are used to treat BC bone metastases.
Prior studies suggest that BPs also exert an anti tumor effect by
interacting with the microenvironment. However, the precise nature of
this interaction is unclear. The chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay
allows assessment of both human BC and microenvironment cells,
circumventing issues of species specificity.Aim - 1) evaluate whether an
indirect anti-BC effect by BPs, can be determined using the CAM assay 2)
Assess potential biomarkers for this intervention.Methods - MTT survival
assays were performed to assess a differential effect of BP zoledronic
acid (ZA) on survival of human BC cell lines (MCF-7, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 progeny cell line SCP2) and human stromal cell line Hs27a. For
biomarker analysis, excretion of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-A and Transforming Growth Factor (TGF) was measured in the
supernatant of Hs27a and MCF-7 cultures and co-cultures treated with ZA
by Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assays (ELISA). The CAM assay was used to
study the effect of ZA on a co-culture system of BC- and stromal cells.
SCP2 cells were inoculated on the CAM with and without Hs27a cells on day
6 of embryonic development. ZA (200 M) or PBS was added on the CAM on day
10 and tumors were harvested at day 14. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
pan-cytokeratin was performed to identify BC cells in the tumors.Results
- ZA (4 days continuous incubation) did not induce a direct anti BC
effect in vitro (IC50>100 M), but strongly affected stromal cell survival
(IC50 8 M). ZA treatment decreased TGF excretion by Hs27a cells dose
dependently (ZA 10, 50, 100 or 500 M for 48 hours) from 53863 pg/ml
(control) to 44657 (ns), 28598 (p<.01), 19847 (p<.01) and 18660 pg/ml
(p<.001). In the co-culture, ZA (10, 50, 100 or 500 M for 48 hours) also
decreased TGF excretion dose dependently from 62560 pg/ml (control) to
61333 (ns), 53583 (ns), 38948 (pIntroduction - Targeting breast cancer
(BC) via its microenvironment is a way to avoid tumor plasticity and
development of resistance towards therapy. Bisphosphonates (BPs) are used
to treat BC bone metastases. Prior studies suggest that BPs also exert an
anti tumor effect by interacting with the microenvironment. However, the
precise nature of this interaction is unclear. The chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) assay allows assessment of both human BC and
microenvironment cells, circumventing issues of species specificity.Aim -
1) evaluate whether an indirect anti-BC effect by BPs, can be determined
using the CAM assay 2) Assess potential biomarkers for this
intervention.Methods - MTT survival assays were performed to assess a
differential effect of BP zoledronic acid (ZA) on survival of human BC
cell lines (MCF-7, SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 progeny cell line SCP2) and
human stromal cell line Hs27a. For biomarker analysis, excretion of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A and Transforming Growth
Factor (TGF) was measured in the supernatant of Hs27a and MCF-7 cultures
and co-cultures treated with ZA by Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assays
(ELISA). The CAM assay was used to study the effect of ZA on a co-culture
system of BC- and stromal cells. SCP2 cells were inoculated on the CAM
with and without Hs27a cells on day 6 of embryonic development. ZA (200
M) or PBS was added on the CAM on day 10 and tumors were harvested at day
14. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for pan-cytokeratin was performed to
identify BC cells in the tumors.Results - ZA (4 days continuous
incubation) did not induce a direct anti BC effect in vitro (IC50>100 M),
but strongly affected stromal cell survival (IC50 8 M). ZA treatment
decreased TGF excretion by Hs27a cells dose dependently (ZA 10, 50, 100
or 500 M for 48 hours) from 53863 pg/ml (control) to 44657 (ns), 28598
(p<.01), 19847 (p<.01) and 18660 pg/ml (p<.001). In the co-culture, ZA
(10, 50, 100 or 500 M for 48 hours) also decreased TGF excretion dose
dependently from 62560 pg/ml (control) to 61333 (ns), 53583 (ns), 38948
(p<.01) and 24455 (pIntroduction - Targeting breast cancer (BC) via its
microenvironment is a way to avoid tumor plasticity and development of
resistance towards therapy. Bisphosphonates (BPs) are used to treat BC
bone metastases. Prior studies suggest that BPs also exert an anti tumor
effect by interacting with the microenvironment. However, the precise
nature of this interaction is unclear. The chorioallantoic membrane (CAM)
assay allows assessment of both human BC and microenvironment cells,
circumventing issues of species specificity.Aim - 1) evaluate whether an
indirect anti-BC effect by BPs, can be determined using the CAM assay 2)
Assess potential biomarkers for this intervention.Methods - MTT survival
assays were performed to assess a differential effect of BP zoledronic
acid (ZA) on survival of human BC cell lines (MCF-7, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 progeny cell line SCP2) and human stromal cell line Hs27a. For
biomarker analysis, excretion of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-A and Transforming Growth Factor (TGF) was measured in the
supernatant of Hs27a and MCF-7 cultures and co-cultures treated with ZA
by Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assays (ELISA). The CAM assay was used to
study the effect of ZA on a co-culture system of BC- and stromal cells.
SCP2 cells were inoculated on the CAM with and without Hs27a cells on day
6 of embryonic development. ZA (200 M) or PBS was added on the CAM on day
10 and tumors were harvested at day 14. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
pan-cytokeratin was performed to identify BC cells in the tumors.Results
- ZA (4 days continuous incubation) did not induce a direct anti BC
effect in vitro (IC50>100 M), but strongly affected stromal cell survival
(IC50 8 M). ZA treatment decreased TGF excretion by Hs27a cells dose
dependently (ZA 10, 50, 100 or 500 M for 48 hours) from 53863 pg/ml
(control) to 44657 (ns), 28598 (p<.01), 19847 (p<.01) and 18660 pg/ml
(p<.001). In the co-culture, ZA (10, 50, 100 or 500 M for 48 hours) also
decreased TGF excretion dose dependently from 62560 pg/ml (control) to
61333 (ns), 53583 (ns), 38948 (p<.01) and 24455 (p<.001) pg/ml. No TGF
secretion by sole MCF-7 cells was detectable (Introduction - Targeting
breast cancer (BC) via its microenvironment is a way to avoid tumor
plasticity and development of resistance towards therapy. Bisphosphonates
(BPs) are used to treat BC bone metastases. Prior studies suggest that
BPs also exert an anti tumor effect by interacting with the
microenvironment. However, the precise nature of this interaction is
unclear. The chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay allows assessment of
both human BC and microenvironment cells, circumventing issues of species
specificity.Aim - 1) evaluate whether an indirect anti-BC effect by BPs,
can be determined using the CAM assay 2) Assess potential biomarkers for
this intervention.Methods - MTT survival assays were performed to assess
a differential effect of BP zoledronic acid (ZA) on survival of human BC
cell lines (MCF-7, SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 progeny cell line SCP2) and
human stromal cell line Hs27a. For biomarker analysis, excretion of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A and Transforming Growth
Factor (TGF) was measured in the supernatant of Hs27a and MCF-7 cultures
and co-cultures treated with ZA by Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assays
(ELISA). The CAM assay was used to study the effect of ZA on a co-culture
system of BC- and stromal cells. SCP2 cells were inoculated on the CAM
with and without Hs27a cells on day 6 of embryonic development. ZA (200
M) or PBS was added on the CAM on day 10 and tumors were harvested at day
14. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for pan-cytokeratin was performed to
identify BC cells in the tumors.Results - ZA (4 days continuous
incubation) did not induce a direct anti BC effect in vitro (IC50>100 M),
but strongly affected stromal cell survival (IC50 8 M). ZA treatment
decreased TGF excretion by Hs27a cells dose dependently (ZA 10, 50, 100
or 500 M for 48 hours) from 53863 pg/ml (control) to 44657 (ns), 28598
(p<.01), 19847 (p<.01) and 18660 pg/ml (p<.001). In the co-culture, ZA
(10, 50, 100 or 500 M for 48 hours) also decreased TGF excretion dose
dependently from 62560 pg/ml (control) to 61333 (ns), 53583 (ns), 38948
(p<.01) and 24455 (p<.001) pg/ml. No TGF secretion by sole MCF-7 cells
was detectable (<060 pg/ml). ZA had no effect on VEGF-A excretion by BC
or stromal cells. On the CAM, co-cultures were sensitive to ZA treatment
(738.27 vs 3213.15 mm3 (pIntroduction - Targeting breast cancer (BC) via
its microenvironment is a way to avoid tumor plasticity and development
of resistance towards therapy. Bisphosphonates (BPs) are used to treat BC
bone metastases. Prior studies suggest that BPs also exert an anti tumor
effect by interacting with the microenvironment. However, the precise
nature of this interaction is unclear. The chorioallantoic membrane (CAM)
assay allows assessment of both human BC and microenvironment cells,
circumventing issues of species specificity.Aim - 1) evaluate whether an
indirect anti-BC effect by BPs, can be determined using the CAM assay 2)
Assess potential biomarkers for this intervention.Methods - MTT survival
assays were performed to assess a differential effect of BP zoledronic
acid (ZA) on survival of human BC cell lines (MCF-7, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 progeny cell line SCP2) and human stromal cell line Hs27a. For
biomarker analysis, excretion of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-A and Transforming Growth Factor (TGF) was measured in the
supernatant of Hs27a and MCF-7 cultures and co-cultures treated with ZA
by Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assays (ELISA). The CAM assay was used to
study the effect of ZA on a co-culture system of BC- and stromal cells.
SCP2 cells were inoculated on the CAM with and without Hs27a cells on day
6 of embryonic development. ZA (200 M) or PBS was added on the CAM on day
10 and tumors were harvested at day 14. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
pan-cytokeratin was performed to identify BC cells in the tumors.Results
- ZA (4 days continuous incubation) did not induce a direct anti BC
effect in vitro (IC50>100 M), but strongly affected stromal cell survival
(IC50 8 M). ZA treatment decreased TGF excretion by Hs27a cells dose
dependently (ZA 10, 50, 100 or 500 M for 48 hours) from 53863 pg/ml
(control) to 44657 (ns), 28598 (p<.01), 19847 (p<.01) and 18660 pg/ml
(p<.001). In the co-culture, ZA (10, 50, 100 or 500 M for 48 hours) also
decreased TGF excretion dose dependently from 62560 pg/ml (control) to
61333 (ns), 53583 (ns), 38948 (p<.01) and 24455 (p<.001) pg/ml. No TGF
secretion by sole MCF-7 cells was detectable (<060 pg/ml). ZA had no
effect on VEGF-A excretion by BC or stromal cells. On the CAM,
co-cultures were sensitive to ZA treatment (738.27 vs 3213.15 mm3
(p<.001)), whereas BC cells without stromal cells were resistant to ZA
(tumor size: 2214.35 vs 3315 mm3 (ns)). In the co-cultures, tumor cell
percentage evaluated by IHC tended to be smaller in the ZA treated group
compared to control (3115 vs 125 (ns)).Conclusion - Effects of
therapeutic interventions on tumors by microenvironment modulation can be
studied using the CAM assay. Our data suggest an indirect anti-BC effect
of ZA in vivo via stromal cells in the BC microenvironment. This is
accompanied by decreased TGF excretion, which may therefore function as
biomarker for ZA treatment effect.Supported by Dutch Cancer Society grant
RUG 2010-4739

