Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential phosphorylation of signaling targets as a function of
RAS mutation status and tumor histology in non-small cell lung cancer.


Background: While the importance of RAS and mTOR signaling pathways in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is well known, the activation status
of key components in the pathway as a function of histology and oncogene
mutation status has been not completely described. The purpose of this
study is to investigate phosphorylation status of signal transduction
pathway members and to elucidate their prognostic significance in
relation to adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.Methods:
Phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (pERK), MEK
1 and 2 (pMEK), and mammalian target of rapamycin (pmTOR) were
immunohistochemically examined using tissue microarray samples of 269
surgically resected primary NSCLC. Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1)
expression and mutation status of EGFR and KRAS were also evaluated. The
relationships between 5-year progression free survival (PFS) and
phospho-protein expression were investigated by univariate analyses of
log-rank test and multivariate analyses using Cox regression
model.Results: A total of 98 adenocarcinomas and 134 squamous cell
carcinomas were included in the analyses. In adenocarcinoma, pERK
expression was significantly related to pMEK (P = 0.001), pmTOR (P
Background: While the importance of RAS and mTOR signaling pathways in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is well known, the activation status
of key components in the pathway as a function of histology and oncogene
mutation status has been not completely described. The purpose of this
study is to investigate phosphorylation status of signal transduction
pathway members and to elucidate their prognostic significance in
relation to adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.Methods:
Phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (pERK), MEK
1 and 2 (pMEK), and mammalian target of rapamycin (pmTOR) were
immunohistochemically examined using tissue microarray samples of 269
surgically resected primary NSCLC. Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1)
expression and mutation status of EGFR and KRAS were also evaluated. The
relationships between 5-year progression free survival (PFS) and
phospho-protein expression were investigated by univariate analyses of
log-rank test and multivariate analyses using Cox regression
model.Results: A total of 98 adenocarcinomas and 134 squamous cell
carcinomas were included in the analyses. In adenocarcinoma, pERK
expression was significantly related to pMEK (P = 0.001), pmTOR (P <
0.001), and TTF-1 (P = 0.013) expression. In squamous cell carcinoma,
pERK expression was significantly related to pMEK (P Background: While
the importance of RAS and mTOR signaling pathways in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) is well known, the activation status of key components in
the pathway as a function of histology and oncogene mutation status has
been not completely described. The purpose of this study is to
investigate phosphorylation status of signal transduction pathway members
and to elucidate their prognostic significance in relation to
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.Methods: Phosphorylated
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (pERK), MEK 1 and 2
(pMEK), and mammalian target of rapamycin (pmTOR) were
immunohistochemically examined using tissue microarray samples of 269
surgically resected primary NSCLC. Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1)
expression and mutation status of EGFR and KRAS were also evaluated. The
relationships between 5-year progression free survival (PFS) and
phospho-protein expression were investigated by univariate analyses of
log-rank test and multivariate analyses using Cox regression
model.Results: A total of 98 adenocarcinomas and 134 squamous cell
carcinomas were included in the analyses. In adenocarcinoma, pERK
expression was significantly related to pMEK (P = 0.001), pmTOR (P <
0.001), and TTF-1 (P = 0.013) expression. In squamous cell carcinoma,
pERK expression was significantly related to pMEK (P < 0.001) expression.
EGFR or KRAS mutations were significantly associated with TTF-1
expression (P = 0.014) in adenocarcinoma. However, EGFR and KRAS mutation
status were not significantly associated with pERK, pMEK, and pmTOR
expressions in adenocarcinoma. By univariate analyses, high pERK
expression was associated with better 5-year PFS (P = 0.018) in
adenocarcinoma and high pMEK expression was associated with worse 5-year
PFS (P = 0.043) in squamous cell carcinoma. In multivariate analyses,
pERK (P = 0.040) and pMEK (P = 0.048) expression were independent
prognostic factors.Conclusions: There were different patterns of
phospho-protein expression in adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.
pERK expression was a good prognostic factor only in adenocarcinoma and
pMEK expression was a poor prognostic factor only in lung squamous cell
carcinoma.

