Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical and pharmacological activities of protein arginine
methyltransferase 5(PRMT5) enzyme inhibition in acute myeloid leukemia .


With standard cytotoxic chemotherapy the majority of patients with Acute
Myeloid Leukemia (AML) fail to achieve long term remission. Protein
Arginine Methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) can catalyze methylation of arginine
residues in target proteins like histones and P53. The epigenetic marks
of PRMT5 on histones H3 (S2Me-H3R8) and H4 (S2Me-H4R3), directly lead to
transcriptional silencing of genes. Overexpression of PRMT5 has been
reported in hematologic and solid malignancies and represents a promising
therapeutic target. Thus, we hypothesized that inhibition of PRMT5
enzymatic activity using a first in class, selective small molecule
inhibitor BLL1 would result in antileukemic activity and novel methods to
treat AML.PRMT5 was upregulated in AML-derived cell lines and primary
patient samples. PRMT5 in complex with co-repressors like histone
deacetylase (HDAC)s and DNA methyltrasferase (DNMT)s is involved in
epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes. Using Co-IP assay we
captured PRMT5 in association with DNMT3a and HDAC2 in AML cells, in
which treatment with BLL1 (25M) resulted in disruption of this
interaction. We confirmed the ability and specificity of BLL1 by
detecting the loss of unique epigenetic mark of PRMT5, S2Me-H3R8. We
previously reported that pharmacologic inhibition of DNMTs (by
decitabine) and HDACs (by AR42) or the disruption of their repressor
complexes (by bortezomib) can inhibit critical oncogenes in AML, KIT and
FLT3, by upregulating miR-29b and consequently lead to better clinical
response in AML. Similar to these epigenetic-targeting compounds, BLL1
upregulated miR-29b (>7 fold; MV411, FLT3 ITD+ cells) and resulted in
downregulation of FLT3 RNA (>4 fold) and protein (3.8 fold). We examined
the in vitro antileukemic activity of BLL1 in AML and demonstrated a
dose-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation (MTS assay) in AML cell
lines (MV411; IC50=6M & Kasumi1, KITmut, IC50=11M) and primary patient
blasts (#1, FLT3 ITD+, NPM1+, CD34; IC50=8M & #2, FLT3 ITD+, CD34+;
IC50=7.5M). Colony forming ability was significantly decreased (pWith
standard cytotoxic chemotherapy the majority of patients with Acute
Myeloid Leukemia (AML) fail to achieve long term remission. Protein
Arginine Methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) can catalyze methylation of arginine
residues in target proteins like histones and P53. The epigenetic marks
of PRMT5 on histones H3 (S2Me-H3R8) and H4 (S2Me-H4R3), directly lead to
transcriptional silencing of genes. Overexpression of PRMT5 has been
reported in hematologic and solid malignancies and represents a promising
therapeutic target. Thus, we hypothesized that inhibition of PRMT5
enzymatic activity using a first in class, selective small molecule
inhibitor BLL1 would result in antileukemic activity and novel methods to
treat AML.PRMT5 was upregulated in AML-derived cell lines and primary
patient samples. PRMT5 in complex with co-repressors like histone
deacetylase (HDAC)s and DNA methyltrasferase (DNMT)s is involved in
epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes. Using Co-IP assay we
captured PRMT5 in association with DNMT3a and HDAC2 in AML cells, in
which treatment with BLL1 (25M) resulted in disruption of this
interaction. We confirmed the ability and specificity of BLL1 by
detecting the loss of unique epigenetic mark of PRMT5, S2Me-H3R8. We
previously reported that pharmacologic inhibition of DNMTs (by
decitabine) and HDACs (by AR42) or the disruption of their repressor
complexes (by bortezomib) can inhibit critical oncogenes in AML, KIT and
FLT3, by upregulating miR-29b and consequently lead to better clinical
response in AML. Similar to these epigenetic-targeting compounds, BLL1
upregulated miR-29b (>7 fold; MV411, FLT3 ITD+ cells) and resulted in
downregulation of FLT3 RNA (>4 fold) and protein (3.8 fold). We examined
the in vitro antileukemic activity of BLL1 in AML and demonstrated a
dose-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation (MTS assay) in AML cell
lines (MV411; IC50=6M & Kasumi1, KITmut, IC50=11M) and primary patient
blasts (#1, FLT3 ITD+, NPM1+, CD34; IC50=8M & #2, FLT3 ITD+, CD34+;
IC50=7.5M). Colony forming ability was significantly decreased (p<0.001)
in BLL1 (2M) treated AML cells compared to controls. We observed a
BLL1-dependent increase in apoptosis measured by AnnexinV staining (25 &
50M, MV411; 8.6 fold & Kasumi1; 4 fold) within 48 hrs. BLL1 treatment
promoted cell maturation measured by increased monocyte differentiation
marker CD11b in AML cells (50M, MV411; 11.5 fold & Kasumi1; 6.8 fold) and
primary patient blasts (25M, #1; 4 fold).In conclusion, our data suggest
that inhibiting PRMT5 activity interferes with the production or activity
of oncoproteins and, subsequently, disrupts leukemogenic and
proliferation pathways in AML. Given the substantial antileukemic
potential of PRMT5 inhibitor compound on AML cells and primary patient
blasts, an assessment of therapeutic implications of this novel drug in
vivo is highly warranted.

