Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing chemotherapy response with sustained EphA2 silencing
using multistage vector delivery .


RNA interference has the potential to specifically knock down the
expression of target genes, and thereby transform cancer therapy.
However, lack of effective delivery of small inhibitory RNA (siRNA) has
dramatically limited its in vivo applications. We have developed a
multistage vector (MSV) system, composed of discoidal porous silicon
particles loaded with siRNA oligos packaged in dioleoyl
phosphatidylcholine (DOPC) nanoliposomes, that directs effective delivery
and sustained release of siRNA in tumor tissues. Tumor accumulation of
siRNA was observed after i.v. administration of MSV/siRNA, and sustained
release of siRNA from DMSV maintained high levels of siRNA in tumor for
over one week after a single dose of DMSV/siRNA. Treatment of SKOV3ip2
tumor mice with DMSV carrying siRNA oligos specific for the human EphA2
gene (MSV/EphA2) biweekly for 6 weeks resulted in dose-dependent (5, 10
and 15 g/mice) reduction of tumor weight (36%, 64%, and 83%) and number
of tumor nodules compared with the control groups. In addition, tumor
growth was completely inhibited when mice were treated with MSV/EphA2 in
combination with paclitaxel. Furthermore, combination treatment with
MSV/EphA2 and docetaxel inhibited growth of HeyA8-MDR tumors, which were
otherwise resistant to docetaxel treatment. Taken together, MSV/EphA2
merits further development as a therapeutic approach for ovarian cancer.

