Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global bioinformatic analysis for transcription factor genomic
binding sites from ChIP-sequencing.


The technique for Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) combining with
high-throughput DNA sequencing (ChIP-seq), is better than the
ChIP-on-chip, which might reveal interactions between proteins and DNAs
by the new generation sequencing technology. ChIP-seq can accurately
reveal all possible binding sites in the whole cellular genome of the
transcription factors or interesting proteins. TWIST, an important
transcription factor which has a highly conserved, basic helix - loop -
helix (bHLH) domain, can bind with DNA motif CANNTG (E-box). However,
ChIP-seq will generate millions of data and the exactly E-boxes of TWIST
in the whole genome is unknown. In this study, we performed the global
bioinformatic analysis for transcription factor TWIST genomic binding
sites from ChIP-seq result in cell lines. MACS software was used to
identify TWIST binding sites from ChIP-seq data. MEME, a motif discovery
tool, was used to search for statistically over-represented motifs in and
near TWIST-occupied regions. There are 26,229 binding sites and 90,659
E-boxes in whole genome, and 42,390 E-boxes within the peak of 100bp in
the binding sites. The majority of ChIP-seq signals could be
parsimoniously explained by a CABVTG motif within 200bp of ChIP summit
and, of these, CAGCTG is most prevalent. Specifically, the
characteristics of E-box mainly are CACATG, CATATG, CAGATG, CAGCTG and
CACCTG. The CAGCTG is most prevalent E-box with 9% in total, and most
E-boxes located within 200bp of ChIP summit with more than 70% in total.
Additionally, further analysis in chromosome 6 revealed 1936 binding
sites and 6,437 E-boxes. We defined 88 genes in which binding sites
located at promoter region in chromosome 6. Through gene function
prediction, they are divided into three clusters. Some genes from the
clusters function as tumor development and necrosis, which will provide
us the clues for studying TWIST net work regulation and signal pathways
in cancer biology. Therefore, our results showed that bioinformatics
analysis from high resolution ChIP-seq data may be used to drive
effective discovery and dissect all of binding sites for transcript
factors, including TWIST, in silico.This work was supported by NSFC
(30371493, 81172049). We thank Drs. R Chen, J Xu and Ms. J Cheng.Citation
Format: Junjiang Fu. Global bioinformatic analysis for transcription
factor genomic binding sites from ChIP-sequencing. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2902.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2902

