Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MELK-dependent phosphorylation of FOXM1 is essential for mitotic
progression of glioma stem cells.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a life-threatening brain tumor.
Accumulating evidence suggests that eradication of glioma stem-like cells
(GSCs) in GBM is essential to achieve cure. The transcription factor
FOXM1 has recently gained attention as a master regulator for mitotic
progression of cancer cells in various organs. Here, we demonstrate that
FOXM1 forms a protein complex with the serine/threonine kinase MELK in
GSCs, leading to phosphorylation and activation of FOXM1 in a MELK
kinase-dependent manner. The MELK-dependent activation of FOXM1 results
in an increase of mitotic regulatory genes in GSCs. MELK-driven FOXM1
activation is regulated by the binding and subsequent
trans-phosphorylation of FOXM1 by another kinase PLK1 (Polo-like kinase
1). Using neural progenitor cells (NPCs) derived from mouse brains, we
found that transgene expression of FOXM1 enhances, while its
siRNA-mediated gene silencing diminishes clonal neurosphere formation,
suggesting that FOXM1 is required for NPC growth. During tumorigenesis,
FOXM1 expression sequentially increases from NPCs, pre-tumorigenic
progenitors, and GSCs. As expected, sensitivity of GSCs to
pharmacological inhibition of MELK-mediated FOXM1 signaling via the
thiazole antibiotic Siomycin A is substantially higher than NPCs. In
addition, treatment with the first-line chemotherapy agent for GBM,
Temozolomide, paradoxically enriches for both FOXM1 (+) and MELK (+)
cells in GBM cell culture, and addition of Siomycin A to Temozolomide
treatment to mice harboring GSC-derived intracranial tumors enhances the
effects of the latter. Collectively, our data indicate that FOXM1
signaling through its direct interaction with the kinase domain of MELK
regulates mitotic key genes in GSCs in a PLK1-dependent manner and thus,
this protein complex is a potential therapeutic target for GBM.

