Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single and multiple dose-ranging evaluation of safety,
pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of GS-9973, a novel pSYK inhibitor.


Background: GS-9973 is a selective, reversible, ATP-competitive small
molecule spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) inhibitor that blocks BCRmediated
activation/ proliferation, Fc receptor signaling/ function, and inhibits
immune complex-mediated inflammatory cytokine production, including TNF.
The safety, pharmacokinetics (PK), and pharmacodynamics (PD) of GS-9973
were evaluated in a double-blind, single/multiple ascending dose
study.Methods: In sequential cohorts (n=8 active, 2 placebo), subjects
(fasted) received GS-9973 (25 mg to 1200 mg) as a single dose (Part A) or
multiple twice-daily doses for 7 days (Part B). Along with PK, PD
sampling Parts A and B assessed functional inhibition of ex vivo
IgE-stimulated CD63 expression on basophils. Safety and tolerability were
assessed throughout the study, with dose-escalation gated by
pre-specified stopping criteria. PK-PD was evaluated using GS-9973
concentrations vs CD63 inhibition.Results: Across dose cohorts, subjects
were 60% white, 50% male, with mean age of 28 to 37 years. Adverse events
(AEs) were generally mild to moderate, with no AE-driven study drug
discontinuations noted. GS-9973 exposures (Table 1) reached a plateau at
600 mg BID (due to solubility-limited absorption), provided > 90% CD63
inhibition at peak levels, and > 60% inhibition over the dosing interval,
due to 10-14 hr plasma half-life. PK-PD analyses indicated a sigmoidal
exposure-response relationship, with EC50 of 400-450 ng/ml and hill slope
> 1.
Single and Multiple dose PK of GS-9973Conclusions: GS-9973 was generally
well tolerated over a 48-fold dose range. GS-9973 exposures plateaued 600
mg and provided robust exposure-dependent PD activity over the dosing
interval. The overall safety, PK, and PD profile of GS-9973 support
further clinical evaluation of doses with strong PD activity.

