Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SH2D4A is frequently downregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of
cancer-related death worldwide. The lack of effective therapeutic options
combined with an increasing incidence rate in the past 20 years calls for
the identification of early stage HCC molecular markers. SH2D4A maps to
human chromosome 8p21.3 and encodes for SH(2)A. The chromosomal region
containing SH2D4A has been shown to be frequently lost in colorectal,
lung and HCC cancers. Using a combination of gene expression, protein
level and clinical data, our study aimed to investigate the SH2D4A
involvement in HCC pathogenesis. Transcriptome analysis (Affymetrix)
performed on 37 HCC samples (matched with their corresponding
non-neoplastic liver parenchyma) and 5 normal liver donors revealed that
SH2D4A is downregulated in HCC. These results were validated by qPCR in
fresh frozen tissues [25 out of 37 samples (67.6%) showed SH2D4A
downregulation; pHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading
cause of cancer-related death worldwide. The lack of effective
therapeutic options combined with an increasing incidence rate in the
past 20 years calls for the identification of early stage HCC molecular
markers. SH2D4A maps to human chromosome 8p21.3 and encodes for SH(2)A.
The chromosomal region containing SH2D4A has been shown to be frequently
lost in colorectal, lung and HCC cancers. Using a combination of gene
expression, protein level and clinical data, our study aimed to
investigate the SH2D4A involvement in HCC pathogenesis. Transcriptome
analysis (Affymetrix) performed on 37 HCC samples (matched with their
corresponding non-neoplastic liver parenchyma) and 5 normal liver donors
revealed that SH2D4A is downregulated in HCC. These results were
validated by qPCR in fresh frozen tissues [25 out of 37 samples (67.6%)
showed SH2D4A downregulation; p<0.026]. Furthermore, the combination of
qPCR data and immunohistochemistry staining performed on corresponding
formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) needle biopsies demonstrated a
direct correlation between the SH2D4A mRNA expression and SH(2)A protein
levels. Additional data obtained from the analysis of a tissue microarray
(TMA) containing 336 informative specimens confirmed that SH(2)A protein
levels are frequently reduced in HCC and additionally in cirrhosis
nodules compared to normal liver samples. To conclude, our study revealed
that SH2D4A is frequently downregulated in HCC samples thus corroborating
its putative role as tumor suppressor gene. In addition, we provide new
evidence for SH2D4A involvement in HCC pathogenesis demonstrating for the
first time its deregulation also in cirrhotic nodules.Citation Format:
Mariacarla Andreozzi, Luca Quagliata, Michal Kovac, Luigi Tornillo,
Zuzanna Makowska, Marcus Heim, Karl Heinimann, Salvatore Piscuoglio,
Luigi Maria Terracciano. SH2D4A is frequently downregulated in
hepatocellular carcinoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4685. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4685

