Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineered toxin body demonstrating CD20-specific binding and cell
kill in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma cells.


Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) offers an attractive area for therapeutic
biologics. The most successful example of this targeted approach is
rituximab, which is approved for front and second line therapy of NHL.
Rituximab targets the CD20 antigen expressed on 90% of B-cell NHL cells.
However, rituximab has limited direct cell-kill effects, acting instead
primarily through indirect immune responses induced by antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and/or complement dependent
cytotoxicity (CDC). Direct-cell kill approaches to CD20 have been limited
to radioimmunotherapy because CD20 does not efficiently internalize.
Despite improved clinical efficacy seen over Rituximab with both 131
tositumomab and ibritumomab tiuxetan, challenges around the
administration of radioimmunotherapies have severely curtailed
therapeutic use. We have developed an engineered toxin body (ETB)
comprising a CD20 scFv and a modified Shiga-like Toxin A (3F7) capable of
specifically recognizing and killing CD20 expressing cells. Utilizing a
flow cytometry based binding affinity assay, 3F7 demonstrated selective
binding to CD20 positive Raji cells whereas no significant binding was
observed in CD20 negative BC-1 cells. Further, direct competition of 3F7
binding to Raji cells was observed in the presence of rituximab or the
parent monoclonal antibody. 3F7 demonstrated CD20-specific direct cell
kill of Raji, Daudi and Ramos cells with minimal cell kill of CD20
negative BC-1 or Jurkat cells. Initial dose finding studies in mice found
that a therapeutic dosing schedule was well tolerated. Raji xenograft
studies in mice are ongoing. 3F7 is a novel therapeutic approach with
direct cell-kill activity against CD20-expressing cells which could
expand treatment options for B-cell lymphoma.

