Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DKK2 mediates osteolysis, invasiveness and metastatic spread in
Ewing sarcoma.


Ewing sarcomas (ES) are malignant osteolytic bone and soft tissue tumors
mostly affecting children and young adults, and are characterized by
early lung and distant bone metastases. Here we identified the dickkopf 2
homolog (DKK2) as a highly over-expressed gene in ES, compared to normal
tissues. DKK family members are increasingly recognized to be deregulated
in bone metastasis. Using RNA interference, we show that DKK2 promotes
anchorage-independent colony formation and proliferation of ES cells in
vitro and tumorigenicity in vivo. Analysis of the invasion potential in
vitro and in an orthotopic xenotransplantation model revealed a strong
correlation of DKK2 expression and ES invasiveness that is possibly
mediated by its downstream effector matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1).
Gene expression analyses proved DKK2 to differentially regulate genes
such as CXCR4, PTHrP, RUNX2 and TGF1, that are associated with homing,
invasion and growth of cancer cells in bone tissue as well as genes
important for osteolysis, like HIF1, JAG1, IL6 and VEGF. Moreover, we
observed that DKK2 promotes bone infiltration and osteolysis in vivo,
identifying DKK2 as a key factor for osteotropic malignancy.
Interestingly, suppression of DKK2 expression increases neuronal
differentiation, but at the same time decreases chondrogenic and
osteogenic differentiation potential of ES cells. These data provide
evidence that DKK2 is a key player in ES invasiveness and osteolysis,
validating a critical role of DKK2 for malignancy and the differential
phenotype of ES. Findings further suggest a broadly important role for a
member of a family of antagonists of the Wnt pathway in driving bone
invasion and osteolysis with potential implications for bone invasion in
cancer generally.

