Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Negative regulation of lncRNA GAS5 by miR-21.


Protein-coding genes account for only a small part of the human genome
whereas the vast majority of transcripts make up the non-coding RNAs
including microRNAs and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). Both microRNAs
and lncRNAs have been shown to play a critical role in regulation of
cellular processes such as cell growth and apoptosis as well as cancer
progression and metastasis. As master gene regulators, microRNAs can
target a large number of protein-coding genes. However, it remains to be
determined whether microRNAs can also target lncRNAs. In the present
study, we determined whether miR-21 impacts lncRNA expression. Using
lncRNA RT-PCR array carrying 83 human disease related lncRNAs, we showed
that miR-21 was capable of repressing the growth arrest specific 5 (GAS5)
lncRNA which was previously shown to be involved in growth arrest. This
negative regulation between miR-21 and GAS5 was confirmed in breast tumor
specimens. Of interest, GAS5 can also repress miR-21 expression. While
ectopic expression of GAS5 suppressed, GAS5 siRNAs increased miR-21
expression. Importantly, there was a putative miR-21 binding site in exon
5 of GAS5; deletion of the miR-21 binding site abolished this activity.
We further showed that biotin labeled GAS5 RNA probe was able to pull
down the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) and subsequently identified
miR-21 in this GAS5-RISC complex, implying that miR-21 and GAS5 may
regulate each other in a way similar to the microRNA-mediated silencing
of target mRNAs. Together, these results support the endogenous
competitive RNA concept that microRNAs may regulate not only
protein-coding genes, but also non-coding genes such as GAS5.

