Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PPAR promotes mammary tumorigenesis through mTOR activation.


Background: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) regulates a
multitude of physiological processes associated with glucose and lipid
metabolism, inflammation and proliferation. One or more of these
processes are potential risk factors for the ability of PPAR agonists to
promote tumorigenesis in the mammary gland. In the present study, we
describe a new transgenic mouse model in which activation of PPAR by
endogenous or synthetic ligands results in mammary neoplasia.Methods:
Transgenic mice were generated in which expression of PPAR was directed
to the mammary gland under the control of the MMTV long terminal
repeat.Results: Multiparous MMTV-PPAR mice presented with infiltrating
ductal carcinomas after a latency of 12 months. When transgenic animals
were maintained on a diet supplemented with the PPAR ligand GW501516,
rapid progression to ductal and alveolar hyperplasia, dysplasia and
ductal carcinoma in situ occurred within three months, and multifocal
ductal carcinomas occurred after 5 months. Histopathological changes
occurred in concert with a marked increase in phosphatidylcholine (PC)
and lysoPC levels. Gene array profiling revealed an inflammatory,
invasive, metabolic and proliferative signature denoted by enhanced
expression of Saa1/2, S100a8, Klk6/7, Acsl4 and Plac1, and increased mTOR
signaling. Treatment with the mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, dramatically
reversed many of the histopathological and gene expression
abnormalities.Conclusion: MMTV-PPAR mice demonstrate a direct role for
PPAR in breast tumorigenesis that is linked to several previously unknown
signaling processes. These findings suggest a rationale for new
therapeutic approaches to prevent and treat this disease.Supported by
1N01CN43302-WA19 and 1P30CA510081st Choice Category: TB1 Cell Culture and
Animal Models of Cancer

