Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitor ibrutinib synergized with
the proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib and overcame
immunoproteasome-mediated carfilzomib resistance in mantle cell lymphoma .


Introduction: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is not curable and novel
therapeutic agents and their rational combinations are needed. The
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is an attractive target for antitumor
therapy, as its persistent activity is associated with tumor formation,
growth, metastasis, and drug resistance in many cancer types, including
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. 20S proteasome activity is regulated by the
catalytic subunits 1, 2, and 5 or in the case of the immunoproteasome
(i20S) by the inducible catalytic subunits LMP2 (1i), MECL-1(2i), and
LMP7 (5i). Carfilzomib (CFZ), a proteasome inhibitor, inhibits the
proteasome by binding specifically and irreversibly to the catalytic
subunit 5/5i.Materials and Methods: CFZ was supplied by Onyx
Pharmaceuticals (South San Francisco, CA). The Btk inhibitor ibrutinib
(PCI-32765) was provided by Pharmacyclics (Sunnyvale, CA). Human MCL cell
lines (Mino, Jeko-1, Z138, and Rec-1) were either created by our
laboratory or obtained from American Type Culture Collection. Primary
cells were obtained from newly diagnosed MCL patients with informed
consent. Cell viability was assessed by an MTT assay, apoptosis by
Annexin V binding assays, and proteasome expression by Western
blotting.Results: We found that MCL cells had different responses to CFZ.
For the CFZ-sensitive MCL cell lines Mino and Z138 and freshly isolated
MCL cells from 6 patients, CFZ significantly induced the growth
inhibition and apoptosis at a low dose (IC50 2-6 nM). In contrast, for
the CFZ-resistant MCL cell line (Rec-1) and fresh primary MCL cells from
patients with clinical resistance, CFZ did not induce cell death (IC50
not reached at 100 nM). Next, Western blot analysis showed that the
CFZ-resistant cells lacked expression of the i20S subunits LMP2, LMP7,
and MECL-1. By contrast, the CFZ-sensitive cells showed high levels of
LMP2, LMP7, and MECL-1. These results suggest that an intact
immunoproteasome is necessary for CFZ-induced anti-MCL activity. In an
attempt to overcome the CFZ resistance, we studied the effect of
ibrutinib in CFZ-resistant MCL cells. Ibrutinib alone was toxic to both
CFZ-sensitive and CFZ-resistant MCL cells with IC50 values ranging from 3
to 12.5 M. Furthermore, we found that ibrutinib synergized with CFZ in
CFZ-sensitive cell lines, and primary MCL cells. The Chou-Talay
combination index was Introduction: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is not
curable and novel therapeutic agents and their rational combinations are
needed. The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is an attractive target for
antitumor therapy, as its persistent activity is associated with tumor
formation, growth, metastasis, and drug resistance in many cancer types,
including B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. 20S proteasome activity is
regulated by the catalytic subunits 1, 2, and 5 or in the case of the
immunoproteasome (i20S) by the inducible catalytic subunits LMP2 (1i),
MECL-1(2i), and LMP7 (5i). Carfilzomib (CFZ), a proteasome inhibitor,
inhibits the proteasome by binding specifically and irreversibly to the
catalytic subunit 5/5i.Materials and Methods: CFZ was supplied by Onyx
Pharmaceuticals (South San Francisco, CA). The Btk inhibitor ibrutinib
(PCI-32765) was provided by Pharmacyclics (Sunnyvale, CA). Human MCL cell
lines (Mino, Jeko-1, Z138, and Rec-1) were either created by our
laboratory or obtained from American Type Culture Collection. Primary
cells were obtained from newly diagnosed MCL patients with informed
consent. Cell viability was assessed by an MTT assay, apoptosis by
Annexin V binding assays, and proteasome expression by Western
blotting.Results: We found that MCL cells had different responses to CFZ.
For the CFZ-sensitive MCL cell lines Mino and Z138 and freshly isolated
MCL cells from 6 patients, CFZ significantly induced the growth
inhibition and apoptosis at a low dose (IC50 2-6 nM). In contrast, for
the CFZ-resistant MCL cell line (Rec-1) and fresh primary MCL cells from
patients with clinical resistance, CFZ did not induce cell death (IC50
not reached at 100 nM). Next, Western blot analysis showed that the
CFZ-resistant cells lacked expression of the i20S subunits LMP2, LMP7,
and MECL-1. By contrast, the CFZ-sensitive cells showed high levels of
LMP2, LMP7, and MECL-1. These results suggest that an intact
immunoproteasome is necessary for CFZ-induced anti-MCL activity. In an
attempt to overcome the CFZ resistance, we studied the effect of
ibrutinib in CFZ-resistant MCL cells. Ibrutinib alone was toxic to both
CFZ-sensitive and CFZ-resistant MCL cells with IC50 values ranging from 3
to 12.5 M. Furthermore, we found that ibrutinib synergized with CFZ in
CFZ-sensitive cell lines, and primary MCL cells. The Chou-Talay
combination index was < 1, indicating synergism between the two drugs.
Most importantly, the CFZ-resistant MCL cells Rec-1 were sensitive to
ibrutinib, with an IC50 of 6 uM.Conclusion: Our data suggest that LMP2,
LMP7, and MECL-1 may serve as potential biomarkers for patients who are
likely to be sensitive to CFZ. Our data also suggest that ibrutinib may
be useful in patients with CFZ-resistant MCL. Our preclinical data
provide a strong rationale for testing the ibrutinib-CFZ combination
clinically.

