Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of potent oridonin derivatives for the treatment of
breast cancer.


Oridonin, a diterpenoid derived from the herbal Rabdosia rubescens, has
been reported to have antitumor effects on various types of cancer cells.
However, its relatively low aqueous solubility and bioavailability have
limited its development into clinical applications. Herein, we chemically
modified oridonin and generated a series of novel analogues. We then
employed MTT assay to detect their effects on cell growth and a number of
new and potent molecules have been identified. Among them, compounds
CYD-6-86 and CYD-6-92 significantly inhibited the proliferation of human
breast cancer MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells. Furthermore, both compounds
induced enhanced apoptosis in a dose- and time-dependent fashion when
compared with oridonin. Cell cycle analysis indicated that both CYD-6-86
and CYD-6-92 induced S phase arrest in MDA-MB-231 cells and G0/G1 phase
arrest in MCF-7 cells, while oridonin induced G2/M phase arrest in
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells. Consistent with oridonin, Western blot
analysis showed that CYD-6-86 and CYD-6-92 inhibited the expression of
NF-B and Bcl-2, and increased expression of Bax and cleaved PARP.
Intriguingly, compounds CYD-6-86 and CYD-6-92 have demonstrated to
suppress the growth of adriamycin-resistant MCF-7 clone, while at the
same dosage oridonin displayed no effect on these cells. Our findings
suggest that these new analogues may be superior to the natural product
oridonin to overcome the chemo-resistance, and have great potential to be
developed as novel therapeutics for the treatment of breast cancer.

