Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: F14512, a novel vectorized topoiserase II inhibitor, bypasses MDR1
mediated resistance.


F14512 is a novel polyamine-vectorized topoisomerase II inhibitor
currently in phase 1/2 clinical trial in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Since ABCB1 (also called P-glycoprotein or MDR1) has been reported to be
expressed at high levels in patients with resistant leukaemia cells, and
constitutes a pejorative marker of therapy, we decided to investigate
whether F14512 could be exported by ABCB1 or other ABC transporters
susceptible to confer drug resistance to chemotherapy, such as MRP1. In
addition, we established a F14512-resistant cell line to study the
mechanism of resistance to the drug.With membrane preparation enriched in
functional MDR1, we found that F14512 was unable to stimulate the ATPase
activity of this transporter. Using a cellular assay over expressing MDR1
transporter by recombinant transfection of MDCKII cells, F14512 was
detectable, but the intracellular level was unchanged regardless of the
MDR1 status or in presence of MDR1 competitors. Consistently, iterative
selection of a F14512-resistant A-549 cell line with 36 cycles of F14512
at cytotoxic doses (0.5 EC50) over 9 months, led to only moderate shift
of resistance (9 fold). In the resulting selected A-549 subclones, MDR1,
MRP1 and ABCG2 were detectable at the basal level.The ability of F14512
to bypass MDR1 was finally assessed in a vinorelbine-resistant P388 model
overexpressing high level of functional ABCB1 as indicated with the
positive rhodamine export assay and cross resistance to MDR1 substrate.
Moreover, F14512 displays strong antileukemic activity in MDR1-positive
P388 cells in vitro and additional in vivo measurements are in
progress.In conclusion, the data concur to show that the antitumor
activity of the targeted cytotoxic agent F14512 is not impacted by the
MDR1 status of cancer cells. MDR1 clearly does not affect the potency of
F14512 and this characteristic augurs well for the ongoing development of
the drug in AML patients.

