Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MeTA-array, a useful method to identify genes transcriptionally
silenced by tumor-specific hypermethylation in cancer.


Aberrant DNA hypermethylation, the most well defined epigenetic changes
in cancer, is associated with inappropriate gene silencing and this
feature is utilized to search for tumor-specific DNA methylation
biomarkers. Methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) proteins (MBPs) can elicit
the repressive potential of methylated DNA and play a major role in gene
silencing mechanisms. Therefore, if the genes governed by MBPs are
specifically reactivated, it should be possible to uncover them. We
developed a method termed methyl-CpG targeted transcriptional activation
(MeTA) that employs a fusion gene comprised of the MBD from MBD2 and the
NFB transcriptional activation domain. Microarray coupled with MeTA
(MeTA-array) provides not only the information about methylated genes but
also the one about transcriptional repression in a single experiment.We
first applied either MeTA or a conventional DNA demethylating agent,
5-aza-cytidine (Aza-CR), to a human embryonic kidney cell line 293T and
analyzed gene expression profiles by microarray; 138 and 202 genes that
are upregulated 5-fold or more were identified by MeTA and Aza-CR,
respectively. ChIP-Seq analysis indicated that MeTA-inducing protein
containing MBD binds to more than 80% of genes selected by MeTA-array. We
found associations between expressional restorations by MeTA, methylation
status, and NFB (AD)-MBD fusion protein bindings in CpG islands (CGIs)
around the transcription start site of the genes. Importantly, MeTA can
upregulate genes meeting the stringent criteria of CGIs defined by Takai
and Jones (Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99: 3740-3745, 2002) at the promoter
region at higher frequency; 109 of 138 (79.0%) genes in MeTA vs. 121 of
202 (59.9%) genes in Aza-CR.We further applied MeTA-array to 12
pancreatic cancer cell lines along with HPDE (normal pancreatic ductal
epithelial cell line) and identified 31 candidate tumor-specific
hypermethylated genes; 26 of them have never been reported previously
using the conventional DNA demethylating agents. Seven genes, IRX4, LHX6,
NEFH, NEFL, NEFM, NPTX2 and TMEM204 were further examined their
methylation statuses by MSP, and we found that 100% (21/21) of IRX4, 62%
(13/21) of LHX6, 100% (21/21) of NEFH, 100% (21/21) of NEFL, 100% (21/21)
of NEFM, 100% (21/21) of NPTX2 and 95% (20/21) of TMEM204 were methylated
in our series of pancreatic cancer cell lines. Furthermore, 68% (15/22)
of IRX4, 55% (12/22) of LHX6, 55% (12/22) of NEFH, 59% (23/22) of NEFL,
82% (18/22) of NEFM and 82% (18/22) of NPTX2 were also hypermethylated in
primary pancreatic cancer specimens in a tumor-specific manner. Our
results suggest that MeTA-array is a highly efficient method to identify
methylation-mediated transcriptionally silenced genes in human cancer.

