Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flavone derivatives as small-molecule probes of cytochrome P450
enzymes: Inhibitory activity and selectivity.


Cytochrome P450 enzymes are the most important enzymes involved in the
conversion of environmental procarcinogens such as polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) from fuels, cigarette smoke, and charcoal-grilled
foods into carcinogenic species. These carcinogenic species have the
potential to bond to cellular macromolecules such as DNA and can lead to
cancer formation. Therefore, selectively inhibiting certain P450 enzymes
involved in carcinogenesis is a potential approach to cancer prevention.
To investigate the 3D-structural features of the active site cavities of
our target P450s, our approach in this project is to use the natural P450
substrate, flavone, as a lead compound. Here we report the synthesis of
six novel flavonoids (5,6-pyranflavone, 6,5-pyranflavone,
7,8-pyranflavone, 2,3-pyranflavone, 3,2-pyranflaovne, and
4,3-pyranflavone) and the evaluation of their inhibitory activities,
mechanisms of action, and selectivity towards P450 enzymes 1A1, 1A2, 2A6,
and 2B1. All of these target compounds were found to be competitive
inhibitors of these P450 enzymes. A high inhibitory activity represents a
high affinity between the compound and the enzyme. Our data show that the
-naphthoflavone-like flavone derivative, 7,8-pyranflavone, has a high
affinity for P450 1A2 (IC50: 0.05 M), and a relatively low affinity for
P450 1A1 (IC50: 0.25 M). On the contrary, -naphthoflavone-like flavone
derivatives, 5,6-pyranflavone and 6,5-pyranflavone, show higher
affinities for P450 1A1 compared to P450 1A2. However, none of these
three compounds shows any inhibitory activity towards P450s 2A6 and 2B1.
Interestingly, the C-ring modified derivatives (2,3-pyranflavone,
3,2-pyranflaovne, and 4,3-pyranflavone) have relatively low inhibitory
activities toward the P450s 1A1 and 1A2, while showing a weak inhibition
of P450 2B1 (IC50s: ca. 7.0 M). These structural data suggest that the
length of the P450 1A1 active site cavity is probably longer than that of
P450 1A2, while the width of the P450 1A2 active site cavity may be
larger than that of P450 1A1. Further studies of 7,8-pyranflavone,
5,6-pyranflavone, and 6,5-pyranflavone will provide us with more detailed
structural information about the target P450 enzymes.

