Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker search using gene expression databases in a phase III,
controlled clinical trial (ACTS-CC) of postoperative adjuvant
chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer: Results of cluster analysis.


Background: The ACTS-CC trial is a randomized, controlled phase III study
designed to validate the noninferiority of S-1 to UFT/leucovorin as
adjuvant chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer and rectosigmoid cancer.
Recurrence-free survival, the primary endpoint, is scheduled to be
reported in 2013. A biomarker search was performed as an additional study
of the ACTS-CC trial, using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
specimens obtained from 892 patients. The gene expression status of 5-FU
metabolizing enzymes and folate metabolizing enzymes in tumor was
reported (2012 Annual Meeting of AACR). In the present study, we
performed cluster analysis of gene expression data from all patients to
extract the characteristics of each cluster.Methods: Among the
intratumoral expression of 11 genes related to 5-FU and folate metabolism
(TS, DPD, TP, OPRT, FPGS, GGH, DHFR, MTHFR, MTHFD, FOLRA, and GART), the
mean logarithmic values of DPD and TP (both nucleases, Rs = 0.68) and of
TS, OPRT, DHFR, and MTHFD (DNA synthetases and folate-metabolizing
enzymes: Rs = 0.39 to 0.55, median, 0.49), genes that showed strong
correlations, were calculated and defined as Score 1 (S1) and Score 2
(S2). The K-means method was used to calculate clusters on the basis of
S1 and S2 in each patient.Results: All colorectal cancers could be
classified into 6 apparent clusters, designated A to F (A: both S1 and S2
high, 75 cases; B: only S2 high, 133 cases; C: both S1 and S2 low, 20
cases; D: only S2 low, 115 cases; E: only S1 low, 184 cases; and F:
others, 261 cases).Conclusions: Six distinct clusters in patients with
stage III colorectal cancer could be calculated on the basis of the gene
expression status of 5-FU metabolizing enzymes and folate metabolizing
enzymes. Correlations of the mRNA expression of each gene or herein
elucidated clusters to clinicopathological findings are being studied.
Average gene expression levels (normalized value, log2)

