Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CpG methylation signature to predict outcome in preoperatively
treated rectal cancer.


Introduction: Introducing a preoperative therapy in locally advanced
rectal cancer significantly decreased the local recurrence rate whereas
outcome was not improved. To identify patient subgroups that could
benefit from an adjusted therapy a prediction prior to the preoperative
therapy is necessary.Material and methods: Whole genome promoter
methylation analyses were applied to a pilot group of patients (n=11) to
identify targets that separate a good and a bad prognosis group based on
their methylation level. Using a mass spectrometry based approach
(MassArray) candidate CpG probes were assessed in set of 63 patients
(training set). Relevant probes were then validated independently in an
additional patient set (n=93). Data were then compared to the previously
identified biomarkers (CpG island methylatior phenotype (CIPM)) and
clinical data.Results: Relevant DNA regions from whole genome screen were
filtered and the number was reduced down to 20 DNA regions located within
17 different genes (244 different CpGs). In the training set thirteen
regions could be confirmed and a clear separation into a good and a bad
prognosis group was possible (p=0.0394). Validation in an independent
cohort revealed a highly significant result (p=0.000341). Comparing the
results the methylation panel outperformed CIMP or clinical
data.Conclusion: Using the retrieved methylation panel of 13 different
DNA regions allows a highly significant assignment to a good and a bad
prognosis group. These data can now be used to identify patients that are
well treated by standard therapy and others that benefit from alternative
treatment modalities.

