Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The interaction of ZSCAN4 with TRF1: effects on regulation of
telomere elongation in cancer cells.


Telomeres are repetitive sequences at the ends of chromosomes protected
by DNA binding proteins of shelterin complex that form capping
structures. One of these proteins, TRF1, plays a role in the regulation
of telomere length through its interaction with other proteins in the
shelterin complex. High levels of TRF1 expression have been shown to
accelerate telomere shortening, whereas dominant-negative inhibition of
TRF1 leads to telomere elongation. Recently, the newly identified Zinc
finger and SCAN domain containing4 gene (ZSCAN4) plays a key role in
genomic stability by regulating telomere elongation and was shown to
co-localize with TRF1 foci in mouse embryonic stem cell. Here, we show
that ZSCAN4 is a TRF1 association protein in breast cancer cells. We
hypothesized that ZSCAN4 would affect levels of TRF1expression and
correspondingly control the function of TRF1 through negative regulation
and dominant-negative inhibition. Using Co-immunoprecipitation and TNT
Pull-down assay, we demonstrate that ZSCAN4 binds with TRF1 in vitro.
Localization and visualization of interacting protein-protein
interactions in living cells are crucial to elucidate between TRF1 and
ZSCAN4. Using a bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assay, we
show the directly visualize TRF1 and ZSCAN4 interactions in living cells.
Using telomere length assays, we demonstrate that ZSCAN4 is an
association protein of TRF1 to regulate telomere and affect in the
telomere elongation of cancer. The ZSCAN4 mediated cooperative binding of
TRF1 to telomeric DNA has important implications for understanding the
mechanism of telomere extension.

