Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New epigenetic biomarker for colorectal cancer.


DNA is released and circulate in the blood of cancer patients. Epigenetic
changes in the levels of circulating DNA has been associated with tumor
burden and malignant progression. Public physical examination recommends
occult fecal blood test for colorectal cancer (CRC) screening but its
false positive rate is too high. As for serum marker for CRC including
CEA and CA19-9, their sensitivity are nor satisfactory especially in
early stage CRC patients and therefore, the potential use of circulating
DNA for CRC screening has emerged. The aim of this study is the clinical
utility of cell-free DNA as blood biomarkers. Based on our previous
report about the new methylation markers for CRC on a genome-wide scale,
we selected 4 methylation markers positive for CRC and established CRC
screening panel. First, we collected plasma DNA from blood samples of 100
CRC patients preoperatively and 50 age-matched healthy volunteers. Then,
we performed pyrosequence about plasma DNA after bisulfite treatment.
Using this cancer screening panel, 82 CRC patients were positive for at
least 1 marker. On the other hand, no control samples were positive for
any markers and therefore, sensitivity and specificity using this cancer
screening panel for CRC were 82.0% and 100%, respectively. According to
TNM classification, positive rate for earlier stage including 1 and 2
patients were lower than advanced CRC patients. Similarly, the patients
with abnormal serum CEA level harbored higher positive rate for the
cancer panel, but serum CA19-9 level which is another CRC marker was not
associated with positive rate. Two markers of the panel were relatively
high in old age although they were negative for control samples.
Considering that no hypermethylation was detected in control samples,
this cancer panel is superior to preexisting blood tumor markers for CRC
and available for cancer screening.

