Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEDI3379, a human monoclonal antibody against HER3, suppresses
HER3 activity and cell proliferation in both ligand-dependent and
independent cancers.


HER3 (ErbB3) is a member of the EGFR/HER family of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTK), consisting of EGFR, HER2, HER3 and HER4. Due to its unique
kinase-deficient nature, HER3 needs to form heterodimers with EGFR, HER2
or other RTKs to be functionally active. Dimerization is induced by
either HER3 ligand (Heregulin, HRG) binding, or overexpression of partner
RTKs in a ligand-independent (LI) manner. In both settings, HER3 acts as
a critical scaffold coupling the upstream RTKs to efficient PI3K/AKT
pathway induction to drive tumor growth and survival.We have developed a
potent antagonistic human monoclonal antibody against HER3, termed
MEDI3379, and tested it in multiple cancer models with either
ligand-dependent or ligand-independent HER3 activities. For
ligand-dependent models, we have chosen MDA-MB-175VII, a breast cancer
cell-line with known -HRG expression, and HMCB, a melanoma cell-line with
-HRG expression. Efficient suppression of cell proliferation by MEDI3379
or 2C2, a precursor of MEDI3379, was observed in both models. This
anti-tumor effect is directly due to the abrogation of HER3 activation
(as determined by pHER3 formation) and its downstream effector pAKT.
Her2-amplified breast cancer models such as BT474 are known to display
high ligand-independent HER3 activity that is due to constitutive
dimerization of HER2 and HER3. Treatment of BT474 with MEDI3379 led to
effective suppression of pHER3, pAKT, and cell-proliferation in vitro. We
extended this observation in vivo by exploring the antitumor activity of
MEDI3379 in several orthotopic HER2-amplified breast cancer xenografts in
nude mice. Consistent with in vitro observations, the BT474 xenograft
model responded to MEDI3379 treatment with 65% tumor growth inhibition.
In contrast, two published HER3 mAbs (Ab #6 and U1-15) failed to display
activity in this ligand-independent model. In conclusion, our findings
demonstrated that MEDI3379 is a HER3 antagonist that is effective in
models of human cancers driven by both ligand-dependent as well as
ligand-independent HER3 activities.

