Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective study of the relationship between coffee and tea with
colorectal cancer risk: The PLCO cancer screening trial.


Coffee and tea are commonly consumed and carry several potential
anticancer components which could reduce the risk of colorectal cancer
risk; however, the relationships of coffee and tea consumption with
colorectal cancer risk remain unclear. We prospectively examined the
relations of coffee and tea intake to colorectal cancer risk in 53,480
men and women in the intervention arm of the NCI-Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial. The majority of
these men and women (82.3%) received flexible sigmoidoscopy screening at
baseline. Coffee and tea intakes were assessed by a food frequency
questionnaire at study baseline. Six-hundred and twenty-two incident
colorectal cancer cases were ascertained during a median follow-up of
11.4 years. Greater coffee intake was not associated with risk of
colorectal cancer. The relative risks for Coffee and tea are commonly
consumed and carry several potential anticancer components which could
reduce the risk of colorectal cancer risk; however, the relationships of
coffee and tea consumption with colorectal cancer risk remain unclear. We
prospectively examined the relations of coffee and tea intake to
colorectal cancer risk in 53,480 men and women in the intervention arm of
the NCI-Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening
Trial. The majority of these men and women (82.3%) received flexible
sigmoidoscopy screening at baseline. Coffee and tea intakes were assessed
by a food frequency questionnaire at study baseline. Six-hundred and
twenty-two incident colorectal cancer cases were ascertained during a
median follow-up of 11.4 years. Greater coffee intake was not associated
with risk of colorectal cancer. The relative risks for <1 cup/day, 1
cup/day, 2-3 cups/day and 4 cups/day, respectively, were 0.89 (95%
CI=0.65-1.20), 0.92 (95% CI=0.68-1.25), 1.02 (95% CI=0.76-1.36) and 1.08
(95% CI=0.78-1.49); p for trend = 0.16. Associations were also not
detected for 4 cups of coffee/day when stratifying by cancer site
(proximal, distal and rectal, p for heterogeneity = 0.53) or stage of
disease (stage I, stage II and stage III/IV, p for heterogeneity = 0.86).
Furthermore, associations remained unchanged in subsets of participants
for either caffeinated or decaffeinated coffee or when stratifying by
several colorectal cancer risk factors. Similarly, greater tea intake was
not associated with colorectal cancer risk. The relative risks for Coffee
and tea are commonly consumed and carry several potential anticancer
components which could reduce the risk of colorectal cancer risk;
however, the relationships of coffee and tea consumption with colorectal
cancer risk remain unclear. We prospectively examined the relations of
coffee and tea intake to colorectal cancer risk in 53,480 men and women
in the intervention arm of the NCI-Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian
(PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial. The majority of these men and women
(82.3%) received flexible sigmoidoscopy screening at baseline. Coffee and
tea intakes were assessed by a food frequency questionnaire at study
baseline. Six-hundred and twenty-two incident colorectal cancer cases
were ascertained during a median follow-up of 11.4 years. Greater coffee
intake was not associated with risk of colorectal cancer. The relative
risks for <1 cup/day, 1 cup/day, 2-3 cups/day and 4 cups/day,
respectively, were 0.89 (95% CI=0.65-1.20), 0.92 (95% CI=0.68-1.25), 1.02
(95% CI=0.76-1.36) and 1.08 (95% CI=0.78-1.49); p for trend = 0.16.
Associations were also not detected for 4 cups of coffee/day when
stratifying by cancer site (proximal, distal and rectal, p for
heterogeneity = 0.53) or stage of disease (stage I, stage II and stage
III/IV, p for heterogeneity = 0.86). Furthermore, associations remained
unchanged in subsets of participants for either caffeinated or
decaffeinated coffee or when stratifying by several colorectal cancer
risk factors. Similarly, greater tea intake was not associated with
colorectal cancer risk. The relative risks for <1 cup/day, 1 cup/day and
2 cups/day were 1.02 (95% CI=0.82-1.27), 1.14 (95% CI=0.83-1.58) and 0.76
(95% CI=0.53-1.10), respectively; p for trend = 0.15. There were also no
associations observed for 2 cups of tea/day by cancer site (proximal,
distal and rectal, p for heterogeneity = 0.79) or stage of disease (stage
I, stage II and stage III/IV, p for heterogeneity = 0.44). The
associations were also not modified by several colorectal cancer risk
factors. In conclusion, the findings of this study do not provide
evidence to suggest that drinking coffee or tea is beneficial in
protecting against colorectal cancer.

