Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and mechanistic characterization of AV220, a novel small
molecule targeting cancer cell metabolism.


Metabolic plasticity is an adaptive mechanism tumors rely upon for growth
advantage. Without sufficient energy and biomass, cell replication cannot
proceed. Therefore, interrupting cancer-specific metabolic processes
presents a novel means to inhibit tumor growth. The clinical benefit of
this approach has not yet been fully realized due to a lack of suitable
agents targeting cancer cell metabolism. To address this unmet need we
screened our in-house compound library for chemical scaffolds with
potential metabolic activity. In the course of our studies we identified
the small molecule AV220 as a potent metabolic antagonist suitable for
preclinical development. In a panel of cancer cell lines, AV220 showed
anti-proliferative activity in the low micromolar range. Mechanistic
studies indicate a mode of action that involves energy sensing and
regulatory pathways. AV220 treatment produced a rapid and sustained
phosphorylation of AMPK and its substrate acetyl-CoA carboxylase.
Prolonged treatment with AV220 resulted in profound intracellular
vacuolation and increased autophagic flux followed by accumulation of
Grp78, CHOP and ATF4. Additional early intracellular signaling events
associated with AV220 treatment included phosphorylation of p38 and Erk
1/2 and Src and Akt inhibition. A structure-based search of our small
molecule library led to the identification of additional analogs, many of
which displayed similar cytotoxicities and a shared mechanism of action.

