Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Matriptase mediated signaling in breast cancer.


Historically proteases have been associated with tumor progression and
metastasis through degradation of the basement membrane. In recent years
these enzymes have also been shown to play key roles in the activation of
growth factors and cytokines, thereby activating pro-oncogenic signaling
pathways. Matriptase is an epithelia-specific pericellular protease which
has received considerable attention recently spurred by its consistent
dysregulation in human epithelial tumors including breast cancer. Several
institutions are currently developing small and large molecule inhibitors
of matriptase, however thus far no studies have been published focusing
on the role of matriptase in breast cancer growth and progression.
Presently we do not know whether matriptase plays a causal or promotional
role in breast carcinogenesis and therefore its potential as an
anti-cancer drug target is still unexplored. In the following study we
will perform both functional and mechanistic studies of matriptase in
breast cancer using parallel, complementary in-vitro and in-vivo genetic
loss-of-function strategies. Matriptase efficiently cleaves
pro-hepatocyte growth factor (pro-HGF) into active HGF, the cognate
ligand of the proto-oncogene tyrosine kinase receptor c-Met, and thereby
elicits pro-tumorigenic downstream signaling events. Both c-Met and
matriptase are expressed on the surface of mammary epithelial cells and
breast carcinoma cells, whereas the c-Met ligand and matriptase
proteolytic target pro-HGF is secreted by stromal fibroblasts thus
defining a paracrine growth factor activation and signaling mechanism.
Our goal with this project is to determine whether matriptase is a novel
target which could provide an opportunity for developing improved breast
cancer intervention drugs in the future.

