Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of circulating tumor cells in peripheral blood of renal
cell carcinoma patients is correlated with survival.


Purpose:The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical relevance of
the presence of disseminated tumor cells in peripheral blood [so called
circulating tumor cells (CTCs)] for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients
after a median follow-up time of 81 months.Methods:233 peripheral blood
samples from 154 RCC patients were investigated for the presence of
disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) by autoMACS technique and
immunocytochemical (ICC) staining of cytokeratin. The frequency of CTCs
was analyzed statistically for correlation with relevant clinical
data.Results:Two kinds of tumor cells were detected: Those with
expression of cytokeratin 8/18 (CK+), but also cells without a detectable
CK+ expression, which we called large blue stained cells (Bl+) with a
tumor-like morphology. We hypotesized, that the latter cells could be
sleeping tumor cells.After following the CD45 autoMACS depletion
protocol, we identified CTCs in 96 out of 233 peripheral blood samples
(41%), which originated from 81 out of 154 (53%) RCC patients.An update
to follow up the RCC patients was conducted in 2012. Besides a
significant correlation between the detection of CTCs before and after
primary tumor resection a significant association with prognosis was
found (p Purpose:The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical
relevance of the presence of disseminated tumor cells in peripheral blood
[so called circulating tumor cells (CTCs)] for renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
patients after a median follow-up time of 81 months.Methods:233
peripheral blood samples from 154 RCC patients were investigated for the
presence of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) by autoMACS technique and
immunocytochemical (ICC) staining of cytokeratin. The frequency of CTCs
was analyzed statistically for correlation with relevant clinical
data.Results:Two kinds of tumor cells were detected: Those with
expression of cytokeratin 8/18 (CK+), but also cells without a detectable
CK+ expression, which we called large blue stained cells (Bl+) with a
tumor-like morphology. We hypotesized, that the latter cells could be
sleeping tumor cells.After following the CD45 autoMACS depletion
protocol, we identified CTCs in 96 out of 233 peripheral blood samples
(41%), which originated from 81 out of 154 (53%) RCC patients.An update
to follow up the RCC patients was conducted in 2012. Besides a
significant correlation between the detection of CTCs before and after
primary tumor resection a significant association with prognosis was
found (p < 0.002; Chi-squared test). RCC patients with CK+ CTCs in their
peripheral blood had a 5 times risk of tumor-related death compared to
patients without these cells. In a Kaplan-Meier-Analysis these results
were confirmed (p Purpose:The aim of this study was to evaluate the
clinical relevance of the presence of disseminated tumor cells in
peripheral blood [so called circulating tumor cells (CTCs)] for renal
cell carcinoma (RCC) patients after a median follow-up time of 81
months.Methods:233 peripheral blood samples from 154 RCC patients were
investigated for the presence of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) by
autoMACS technique and immunocytochemical (ICC) staining of cytokeratin.
The frequency of CTCs was analyzed statistically for correlation with
relevant clinical data.Results:Two kinds of tumor cells were detected:
Those with expression of cytokeratin 8/18 (CK+), but also cells without a
detectable CK+ expression, which we called large blue stained cells (Bl+)
with a tumor-like morphology. We hypotesized, that the latter cells could
be sleeping tumor cells.After following the CD45 autoMACS depletion
protocol, we identified CTCs in 96 out of 233 peripheral blood samples
(41%), which originated from 81 out of 154 (53%) RCC patients.An update
to follow up the RCC patients was conducted in 2012. Besides a
significant correlation between the detection of CTCs before and after
primary tumor resection a significant association with prognosis was
found (p < 0.002; Chi-squared test). RCC patients with CK+ CTCs in their
peripheral blood had a 5 times risk of tumor-related death compared to
patients without these cells. In a Kaplan-Meier-Analysis these results
were confirmed (p < 0.001).Patients with large blue stained cells (Bl+)
also had a shorter survival time.Conclusion:In summary, for RCC patients,
the presence of CTCs was associated with a poor overall survival and
significantly correlated with an increased risk of tumor-related death.
It is important to evaluate CK+ tumor cells to determine the role of CTCs
in tumor behavior and disease progression. Detection of CK+ CTCs in
peripheral blood is a significant and independent prognostic factor for
renal cell carcinoma patients.

