Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cedarinib inhibits VEGF-stimulated proliferation in NSCLC cell
lines.


Background: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key stimulator
of physiological and pathological angiogenesis. VEGF signals primarily
through VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2), a receptor tyrosine kinase whose
expression is generally considered to be restricted to endothelial cells.
Recently, tumor cell VEGFR2 expression has been reported in several tumor
settings, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The purpose of
this study was to determine the role of VEGFR2 in NSCLC cells, and to
investigate the impact of inhibiting VEGFR2 signaling.Methods: NSCLC
tissue sections (n=52) were stained for VEGFR2 and CD31 expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Total and phosphorylated VEGFR2, AKT and MAPK
protein levels in human NSCLC cell lines (n=8) were determined by Western
blotting. VEGFR2 mRNA levels were measured by RT-PCR. For cell
proliferation assays, cells were seeded (4x103 per well) and 24 h later
treated with VEGF (0-100 ng/mL) +/- cediranib (a potent and selective
inhibitor of VEGF signaling). Alternatively, cells were treated with
VEGFR2 siRNA 24 h post plating (4x103 per well) and then treated with
VEGF (0-100 ng/mL). Cell growth was quantified 5 d after VEGF treatment
using crystal violet staining. For cytotoxicity assays, cells (2x104 per
well) were plated and 24 h later treated with VEGF, chemotherapy agents
or cedarinib and incubated for 48 h. For radiation, cells were exposed to
137Cs (10 Gy, 1.958 Gy/min) 4 h after VEGF treatment. 48 h after VEGF
treatment Hoechst 33258 (25 M, 30 min) was added and apoptotic cells
quantified by fluorescence (INCELL Analyzer 1000).Results: IHC analysis
of tissue sections demonstrated VEGFR2 expression in both adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell carcinoma, and in endothelial cells. Western blot
analysis showed expression of VEGFR2 protein in 3/8 NSCLC cell lines that
correlated with VEGFR2 mRNA expression levels. VEGF-dependent VEGFR2
activation (increased pVEGFR2 and pMAPK but not pAKT) was apparent in
NSCLC cells, and was associated with increased proliferation (1.4 - 1.9
fold, pBackground: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key
stimulator of physiological and pathological angiogenesis. VEGF signals
primarily through VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2), a receptor tyrosine kinase
whose expression is generally considered to be restricted to endothelial
cells. Recently, tumor cell VEGFR2 expression has been reported in
several tumor settings, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The
purpose of this study was to determine the role of VEGFR2 in NSCLC cells,
and to investigate the impact of inhibiting VEGFR2 signaling.Methods:
NSCLC tissue sections (n=52) were stained for VEGFR2 and CD31 expression
by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Total and phosphorylated VEGFR2, AKT and
MAPK protein levels in human NSCLC cell lines (n=8) were determined by
Western blotting. VEGFR2 mRNA levels were measured by RT-PCR. For cell
proliferation assays, cells were seeded (4x103 per well) and 24 h later
treated with VEGF (0-100 ng/mL) +/- cediranib (a potent and selective
inhibitor of VEGF signaling). Alternatively, cells were treated with
VEGFR2 siRNA 24 h post plating (4x103 per well) and then treated with
VEGF (0-100 ng/mL). Cell growth was quantified 5 d after VEGF treatment
using crystal violet staining. For cytotoxicity assays, cells (2x104 per
well) were plated and 24 h later treated with VEGF, chemotherapy agents
or cedarinib and incubated for 48 h. For radiation, cells were exposed to
137Cs (10 Gy, 1.958 Gy/min) 4 h after VEGF treatment. 48 h after VEGF
treatment Hoechst 33258 (25 M, 30 min) was added and apoptotic cells
quantified by fluorescence (INCELL Analyzer 1000).Results: IHC analysis
of tissue sections demonstrated VEGFR2 expression in both adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell carcinoma, and in endothelial cells. Western blot
analysis showed expression of VEGFR2 protein in 3/8 NSCLC cell lines that
correlated with VEGFR2 mRNA expression levels. VEGF-dependent VEGFR2
activation (increased pVEGFR2 and pMAPK but not pAKT) was apparent in
NSCLC cells, and was associated with increased proliferation (1.4 - 1.9
fold, p<0.05) in 2/3 of the VEGFR2-expressing NSCLC cell lines. Cedarinib
inhibited both VEGF-dependent increases in cell proliferation and VEGFR2
downstream signaling. Knock down of VEGFR2 protein expression using siRNA
also reduced VEGF-stimulated NSCLC cell proliferation. Inhibition of
VEGFR2 tyrosine kinase activity using cediranib was more effective than
inhibition of AKT (MK2206) or MEK (AZD6244) for overcoming VEGFR2-driven
cell proliferation. VEGF treatment did not affect cell survival following
treatment with radiation, cisplatin, docetaxel or gemcitabine.Conclusion:
Our data suggest that a subset of NSCLC patients may express functional
tumor cell VEGFR2 which can act to promote VEGF-dependent tumor cell
growth. In this patient subset, therapies targeting VEGFR2 signaling,
such as cedarinib, may have the potential to inhibit both tumor cell
proliferation and angiogenesis.

