Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC inhibition is a potent therapy against glioma and induces
mitotic crisis in cancer cells.


Gliomas are the most common primary tumors affecting the adult human
Central Nervous System (CNS). The most lethal is grade IV glioblastoma
(GBM), which gives a median survival of only 15 months, but less severe
grades also respond poorly to standard therapy. Myc is a bHLHZip
transcription factor, causally implicated in most human tumors. In the
past, we employed a dominant negative of Myc transactivation activity,
termed Omomyc, and we showed that Myc inhibition is a potent strategy in
cancer therapy, both in K-RasG12D-driven lung tumors and in T
antigen-driven pancreatic -cell insulinomas. Now, we make use of a mouse
model of Ha-Ras driven glioma coupled with our Omomyc switchable model in
order to assess Myc inhibition as a therapeutic strategy in glioma. Myc
inhibition has a dramatic therapeutic impact in the animals, being able
to both prevent formation and cause regression of tumors. We also tested
neuroprogenitor cells derived from the same animal model as putative
cells of origin of glioma. In this context, Myc inhibition reduced
proliferation, increased death and impaired the self-renewal of Ha-Ras
transformed neuroprogenitors. Similar results were obtained with human
glioblastoma cell lines, which presented severe mitotic catastrophe as a
consequence of Omomyc expression, revealing a new Achilles heel of
glioblastoma. Finally, Myc inhibition was tested in orthotopic xenografts
using patient-derived tumor samples and showed once again dramatic
therapeutic impact, conferring a significant survival advantage to
recipient animals. Conclusion: Myc inhibition is a potent therapeutic
strategy in glioma and its effects include induction of mitotic crisis in
tumor cells.

