Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-720 promotes cell proliferation and invasion in prostate
cancer cells.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are highly conserved, single stranded, non-coding RNAs
of approximately 21 - 24 nucleotides that regulate gene expression by
posttranscriptional silencing of specific target RNAs, by repressing
translation or cleaving RNA transcripts by binding to the 3 untranslated
region (3UTR) of the target messenger RNAs. miRNAs regulate diverse
cellular processes such as cell-cycle progression, proliferation,
apoptosis and development. miRNAs also have been shown to function as
oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes.MicroRNA profiling has shown that
miR-720 was up-regulated in cancer tissues, however the function of
miR-720 in cancer has not been studied. Here we studied the functional
effects of miR-720 on prostate cancer cells. We found that miR-720 was
up-regulated in human prostate cancer tissues compared to adjacent normal
tissues. We also found that miR-720 was up-regulated in prostate PC-3
cancer cell line compared with normal prostate cell line, RWPE1 cells.
Transfection of miR-720 into prostate cancer cells, PC-3 and DU145 cells,
decreased apoptosis, promoted cell proliferation and cell invasion.
Transfection of anti-miR-720 into PC-3 cells increased apoptosis,
inhibited cell proliferation and cell invasion. These results indicated
that miR-720 has oncogenic functions in prostate cancer cells. In-silico
analysis suggests that miR-720 targets genes of DR1, a down-regulator of
global transdcription, and SWI5, a component of a complex required for
double-strand break repair, which have tumor suppressive functions.
Luciferase assays indicated that miR-720 binds to the 3 UTR of these
genes in prostate cancer cells, suggesting that these genes are targets
of miR-720. Our results suggest that miR-720 promotes malignancy by
targeting DR1 and SWI5 in prostate cancer cells.Funding: National
Institutes of Health through Grant Number RO1CA138642, RO1CA130860 and
RO1CA160079 and VA Merit Review and VA Program Project.

