Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anthropometric, medical history and lifestyle risk factors for
myeloproliferative neoplasms in the Iowa Women's Health Study (IWHS)
cohort.


Background: Essential thrombocythemia (ET), polycythemia vera (PV) and
myelofibrosis (MF) are collectively classified as myeloproliferative
neoplasms (MPN). Given that little is known about their etiology, we
investigated the role of anthropometric, medical and lifestyle factors in
the development of MPNs and the common subtypes (ET & PV) in a
population-based cohort of women.Methods: The IWHS is a prospective
cohort of Iowa women aged 55-69 years at enrollment in 1986. Participants
completed 6 self-administered questionnaires between 1986-2004. This
analysis includes 27370 women who completed the 1993 questionnaire, had
no history of cancer, and were enrolled in Medicare at least 1 year. MPN
cases through 2004 were identified by linkage to Medicare. Relative risks
(RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated using Cox
proportional hazard regression, with age as the underlying time
variable.Results: After >250,000 person-years of follow-up, 257 cases of
MPNs were identified (172 ET, 64 PV and 21 MF). Height, body mass index
(BMI) and waist-to-hip ratio were not associated with risk of MPN. In
subtype analysis, BMI was positively associated with risk of ET (RR=1.52
for >29.3 vs Background: Essential thrombocythemia (ET), polycythemia
vera (PV) and myelofibrosis (MF) are collectively classified as
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN). Given that little is known about
their etiology, we investigated the role of anthropometric, medical and
lifestyle factors in the development of MPNs and the common subtypes (ET
& PV) in a population-based cohort of women.Methods: The IWHS is a
prospective cohort of Iowa women aged 55-69 years at enrollment in 1986.
Participants completed 6 self-administered questionnaires between
1986-2004. This analysis includes 27370 women who completed the 1993
questionnaire, had no history of cancer, and were enrolled in Medicare at
least 1 year. MPN cases through 2004 were identified by linkage to
Medicare. Relative risks (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
estimated using Cox proportional hazard regression, with age as the
underlying time variable.Results: After >250,000 person-years of
follow-up, 257 cases of MPNs were identified (172 ET, 64 PV and 21 MF).
Height, body mass index (BMI) and waist-to-hip ratio were not associated
with risk of MPN. In subtype analysis, BMI was positively associated with
risk of ET (RR=1.52 for >29.3 vs <23.5 kg/m2; p-trend=0.042) but not PV.
Physical activity (PA) showed a suggestive association with MPN (RR=0.74
for high vs low activity; p-trend=0.063), specific only to ET (RR=0.66;
p-trend=0.04). Diabetes (DM) was positively associated with risk of MPN
(RR=1.51; 95% CI 1.02-2.24), also specific only to ET (RR=1.82; 95% CI
1.16-2.84). Regular use of aspirin, but not other non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agents, was associated with a lower risk of MPN
(RR=0.71; 95% CI 0.55-0.92); slightly stronger for ET (RR=0.68; 95% CI
0.50-0.93) than for PV (RR=0.84; 95% CI 0.50-1.43). There was no
dose-response with frequency of use. Cigarette smoking was associated
with risk of MPN, which was stronger for PV (RR=0.94 for former and
RR=2.83 for current; p-trend=0.016) than for ET (RR=1.28 for former and
RR=1.32 for current; p-trend=0.15). There were no associations with
alcohol use. In a multivariate model for ET, the associations for BMI
(RR=1.28; p-trend=0.21) and DM (RR=1.51; 95% CI 0.92-2.46) attenuated,
while there was little change for PA (RR=0.66; p-trend=0.062) or aspirin
use (RR=0.70; 95% CI 0.51-0.96). In PV, there was little impact on the
association with smoking (RR=0.92 for former and RR=2.67 for current;
p-trend=0.028) after adjustment for BMI, PA, DM and aspirin
use.Conclusions: Risk factors were unique to the 2 most common types of
MPN. ET was associated with obesity-related factors (PV was not), and PV
was associated with current smoking (ET was not). Aspirin use had a
stronger inverse association for ET. Our results suggest distinct
etiologies of these PMN subtypes, and raises mechanistic hypotheses
related to inflammation for ET and smoking-related carcinogenic pathways
for PV.

