Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of Src as a therapeutic target in biliary tract cancer
using bosutinib, a c-Src/Abl kinase inhibitor.


Background: Src is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase involved in the
crosstalk and mediation of many signaling pathways that promote cell
proliferation, invasion and angiogenesis. Elevation of Src activity has
been reported in many types of cancers including biliary tract cancer
(BTC). In BTC, no molecular therapeutic target has been validated so far.
Therefore, the prognosis of advanced BTC is limited and there is a huge
unmet medical need in this area. The purpose of this study is to evaluate
of Src as a therapeutic target in BTC and to elucidate the therapeutic
potential and action mechanism of bosutinib, an orally active small
molecule c-Src/Abl kinase inhibitor, alone or in combination with
chemotherapy for the treatment of BTC.Methods: Experiments were conducted
using 8 human biliary tract cancer cell lines (SNU-245, 308, 478, 869,
1079, 1196, HuCCT1, TFK1). MTT assay, colony formation assay and 3D
culture were done for determining growth inhibitory effect of bosutinib,
alone or in combination with chemotherapeutic agents (gemcitabine,
cisplatin). Cell cycle distribution was analyzed by FACS Calibur flow
cytometer. Matrigel invasion assay and wound healing assay were done. The
methods described by Chou and Talalay were used to determine whether a
synergistic effect existed between drug combination.Results: pSrc was
highly expressed in most BTC cells. Bosutinib inhibited the growth of BTC
cells, especially SNU308, SNU478 and HuCCT1 (IC50, 0.6-0.8 mol/L).
Bosutinib induced G1 arrest (decrease of cyclin D, cyclin E, cyclin A,
cyclin B and increase of p27) in SNU308 and SNU478. It decreased pSrc,
pFAK, pAKT and pERK in these cells. Bosutinib also inhibited the cell
migration and invasion in parallel with decrease of snail, not only in
SNU308, SNU478 cells but also in several other cells. Interestingly,
bosutinib showed synergistic antiproliferative effects (Combination Index
value Background: Src is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase involved in the
crosstalk and mediation of many signaling pathways that promote cell
proliferation, invasion and angiogenesis. Elevation of Src activity has
been reported in many types of cancers including biliary tract cancer
(BTC). In BTC, no molecular therapeutic target has been validated so far.
Therefore, the prognosis of advanced BTC is limited and there is a huge
unmet medical need in this area. The purpose of this study is to evaluate
of Src as a therapeutic target in BTC and to elucidate the therapeutic
potential and action mechanism of bosutinib, an orally active small
molecule c-Src/Abl kinase inhibitor, alone or in combination with
chemotherapy for the treatment of BTC.Methods: Experiments were conducted
using 8 human biliary tract cancer cell lines (SNU-245, 308, 478, 869,
1079, 1196, HuCCT1, TFK1). MTT assay, colony formation assay and 3D
culture were done for determining growth inhibitory effect of bosutinib,
alone or in combination with chemotherapeutic agents (gemcitabine,
cisplatin). Cell cycle distribution was analyzed by FACS Calibur flow
cytometer. Matrigel invasion assay and wound healing assay were done. The
methods described by Chou and Talalay were used to determine whether a
synergistic effect existed between drug combination.Results: pSrc was
highly expressed in most BTC cells. Bosutinib inhibited the growth of BTC
cells, especially SNU308, SNU478 and HuCCT1 (IC50, 0.6-0.8 mol/L).
Bosutinib induced G1 arrest (decrease of cyclin D, cyclin E, cyclin A,
cyclin B and increase of p27) in SNU308 and SNU478. It decreased pSrc,
pFAK, pAKT and pERK in these cells. Bosutinib also inhibited the cell
migration and invasion in parallel with decrease of snail, not only in
SNU308, SNU478 cells but also in several other cells. Interestingly,
bosutinib showed synergistic antiproliferative effects (Combination Index
value <1) with gemcitabine in 4 out of 8 BTC cells. Bosutinib was
downregulated TS (thymidine synthase) expression, one of resistance
mechanisms to gemcitabine. Bosutinib also showed synergistic
anti-invasion activity in combination of gemcitabine or
cisplatin.Conclusion: Taken together, these preclinical evaluations
reveal that Src could be a potential therapeutic target in biliary tract
cancer and support clinical development of bosutinib alone or in
combination with chemotherapy in biliary tract cancer.

