Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coffee consumption increases risk of advanced breast cancer among
Singapore Chinese women.


Background: There is experimental evidence supporting a dual role of
coffee-related compounds on breast cancer development. Although reports
from prospective epidemiologic studies do not support a relationship
between coffee intake and breast cancer risk overall, there is support
for an adverse effect among population subgroups defined by body size and
stage of disease.Objective: Using data from a prospective cohort of
Chinese women in Singapore, we examined the relationship between coffee
intake and breast cancer risk.Methods: At baseline, between 1993 and
1998, we collected information on dietary history from 35,303 Singaporean
Chinese women aged 45 to 74 years. Using Cox regression models, we
calculated hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
adjusted for potential confounders. Stratified analysis by menopausal
status and body mass index (BMI) were conducted to evaluate potential
effect modification.Results: After a mean follow-up of 10 years, 629
women developed breast cancer. Average intake among coffee drinkers (80%
of the study population) was 1.5 cups/day (interquartile range = 0.8,
2.3). Women consuming 2 cups of coffee per day had a statistically
borderline significant increase in risk of breast cancer compared with
coffee nondrinkers or monthly drinkers (HR=1.23; 95% CI: 0.98, 1.54;
Ptrend=0.11). The positive association strengthened and became
statistically significant when the analysis was restricted to advanced
breast cancer (n=272) (HR=1.90; 95% CI: 1.30, 2.77; PtrendBackground:
There is experimental evidence supporting a dual role of coffee-related
compounds on breast cancer development. Although reports from prospective
epidemiologic studies do not support a relationship between coffee intake
and breast cancer risk overall, there is support for an adverse effect
among population subgroups defined by body size and stage of
disease.Objective: Using data from a prospective cohort of Chinese women
in Singapore, we examined the relationship between coffee intake and
breast cancer risk.Methods: At baseline, between 1993 and 1998, we
collected information on dietary history from 35,303 Singaporean Chinese
women aged 45 to 74 years. Using Cox regression models, we calculated
hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) adjusted for
potential confounders. Stratified analysis by menopausal status and body
mass index (BMI) were conducted to evaluate potential effect
modification.Results: After a mean follow-up of 10 years, 629 women
developed breast cancer. Average intake among coffee drinkers (80% of the
study population) was 1.5 cups/day (interquartile range = 0.8, 2.3).
Women consuming 2 cups of coffee per day had a statistically borderline
significant increase in risk of breast cancer compared with coffee
nondrinkers or monthly drinkers (HR=1.23; 95% CI: 0.98, 1.54;
Ptrend=0.11). The positive association strengthened and became
statistically significant when the analysis was restricted to advanced
breast cancer (n=272) (HR=1.90; 95% CI: 1.30, 2.77; Ptrend<0.01). A
similar association was observed for intake of total caffeine; HR was
2.23 (95% CI: 1.52, 3.26) the highest relative to the lowest of caffeine
intake (Ptrend median, 23 kg/m2) (HR=2.35; 95% CI: 1.51, 3.66; P for
interaction=0.02). Similar patterns of association were observed with
caffeine intake and advanced breast cancer risk by levels of BMI. There
was no association with either coffee or caffeine intake and localized
breast cancer risk.Conclusion: We provide the first prospective evidence
among an Asian population for the adverse effect of coffee at relatively
low levels of intake on the development of advanced breast cancer. Our
data suggest that a larger body size may influence the adverse effect of
coffee on breast cancer development.

