Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin induces cell cycle arrest and apoptotic death via
targeting hedgehog signaling in basal cell carcinoma cells.


Skin cancer is the most common malignancy in the United States with the
number of incidences persistently rising due to the depletion of the
ozone layer and lack of adequate solar protection. Non-melanoma skin
cancer (NMSC), composed of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), encompasses the vast majority of skin cancers with over
2 million new cases each year. Silibinin, an active bioflavanone was
previously shown to have major protective effect against ultraviolet B
radiation (UVB)-induced SCC through promoting DNA damage repair as well
as inhibiting inflammation and angiogenesis. To date, however, the
efficacy of silibinin has not been tested against BCC, which alone
accounts for about 80% of NMSC incidences. BCC mostly causes
disfigurement, pain and morbidity, and warrants greater attention for its
prevention and treatment. The hallmark of BCC has been the constitutive
activation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, mostly through the loss of
function mutations in the patched (PTCH) gene. In the present study, we
utilized ASZ001 cell line, derived from a mouse BCC tumor induced by
UV-radiation in a PTCH1 heterozygous mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer
efficacy of silibinin against BCC. ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the
PTCH1 gene and closely resembles the PTCH1 status in human BCC. We
treated ASZ001 cells with either DMSO (control) or various doses of
silibinin (25-100 M), and performed trypan blue exclusion, clonogenic,
apoptosis and cell cycle distribution assays. Results showed that
silibinin treatment (25-100 M) decreases the total cell number by 38-51%
(pSkin cancer is the most common malignancy in the United States with the
number of incidences persistently rising due to the depletion of the
ozone layer and lack of adequate solar protection. Non-melanoma skin
cancer (NMSC), composed of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), encompasses the vast majority of skin cancers with over
2 million new cases each year. Silibinin, an active bioflavanone was
previously shown to have major protective effect against ultraviolet B
radiation (UVB)-induced SCC through promoting DNA damage repair as well
as inhibiting inflammation and angiogenesis. To date, however, the
efficacy of silibinin has not been tested against BCC, which alone
accounts for about 80% of NMSC incidences. BCC mostly causes
disfigurement, pain and morbidity, and warrants greater attention for its
prevention and treatment. The hallmark of BCC has been the constitutive
activation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, mostly through the loss of
function mutations in the patched (PTCH) gene. In the present study, we
utilized ASZ001 cell line, derived from a mouse BCC tumor induced by
UV-radiation in a PTCH1 heterozygous mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer
efficacy of silibinin against BCC. ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the
PTCH1 gene and closely resembles the PTCH1 status in human BCC. We
treated ASZ001 cells with either DMSO (control) or various doses of
silibinin (25-100 M), and performed trypan blue exclusion, clonogenic,
apoptosis and cell cycle distribution assays. Results showed that
silibinin treatment (25-100 M) decreases the total cell number by 38-51%
(p<0.001), 67-84% (pSkin cancer is the most common malignancy in the
United States with the number of incidences persistently rising due to
the depletion of the ozone layer and lack of adequate solar protection.
Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), composed of basal cell carcinoma (BCC)
and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), encompasses the vast majority of skin
cancers with over 2 million new cases each year. Silibinin, an active
bioflavanone was previously shown to have major protective effect against
ultraviolet B radiation (UVB)-induced SCC through promoting DNA damage
repair as well as inhibiting inflammation and angiogenesis. To date,
however, the efficacy of silibinin has not been tested against BCC, which
alone accounts for about 80% of NMSC incidences. BCC mostly causes
disfigurement, pain and morbidity, and warrants greater attention for its
prevention and treatment. The hallmark of BCC has been the constitutive
activation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, mostly through the loss of
function mutations in the patched (PTCH) gene. In the present study, we
utilized ASZ001 cell line, derived from a mouse BCC tumor induced by
UV-radiation in a PTCH1 heterozygous mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer
efficacy of silibinin against BCC. ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the
PTCH1 gene and closely resembles the PTCH1 status in human BCC. We
treated ASZ001 cells with either DMSO (control) or various doses of
silibinin (25-100 M), and performed trypan blue exclusion, clonogenic,
apoptosis and cell cycle distribution assays. Results showed that
silibinin treatment (25-100 M) decreases the total cell number by 38-51%
(p<0.001), 67-84% (p<0.001) and 40-95% (pSkin cancer is the most common
malignancy in the United States with the number of incidences
persistently rising due to the depletion of the ozone layer and lack of
adequate solar protection. Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), composed of
basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), encompasses
the vast majority of skin cancers with over 2 million new cases each
year. Silibinin, an active bioflavanone was previously shown to have
major protective effect against ultraviolet B radiation (UVB)-induced SCC
through promoting DNA damage repair as well as inhibiting inflammation
and angiogenesis. To date, however, the efficacy of silibinin has not
been tested against BCC, which alone accounts for about 80% of NMSC
incidences. BCC mostly causes disfigurement, pain and morbidity, and
warrants greater attention for its prevention and treatment. The hallmark
of BCC has been the constitutive activation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling
pathway, mostly through the loss of function mutations in the patched
(PTCH) gene. In the present study, we utilized ASZ001 cell line, derived
from a mouse BCC tumor induced by UV-radiation in a PTCH1 heterozygous
mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer efficacy of silibinin against BCC.
ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the PTCH1 gene and closely resembles the
PTCH1 status in human BCC. We treated ASZ001 cells with either DMSO
(control) or various doses of silibinin (25-100 M), and performed trypan
blue exclusion, clonogenic, apoptosis and cell cycle distribution assays.
Results showed that silibinin treatment (25-100 M) decreases the total
cell number by 38-51% (p<0.001), 67-84% (p<0.001) and 40-95%
(p<0.05-pSkin cancer is the most common malignancy in the United States
with the number of incidences persistently rising due to the depletion of
the ozone layer and lack of adequate solar protection. Non-melanoma skin
cancer (NMSC), composed of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), encompasses the vast majority of skin cancers with over
2 million new cases each year. Silibinin, an active bioflavanone was
previously shown to have major protective effect against ultraviolet B
radiation (UVB)-induced SCC through promoting DNA damage repair as well
as inhibiting inflammation and angiogenesis. To date, however, the
efficacy of silibinin has not been tested against BCC, which alone
accounts for about 80% of NMSC incidences. BCC mostly causes
disfigurement, pain and morbidity, and warrants greater attention for its
prevention and treatment. The hallmark of BCC has been the constitutive
activation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, mostly through the loss of
function mutations in the patched (PTCH) gene. In the present study, we
utilized ASZ001 cell line, derived from a mouse BCC tumor induced by
UV-radiation in a PTCH1 heterozygous mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer
efficacy of silibinin against BCC. ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the
PTCH1 gene and closely resembles the PTCH1 status in human BCC. We
treated ASZ001 cells with either DMSO (control) or various doses of
silibinin (25-100 M), and performed trypan blue exclusion, clonogenic,
apoptosis and cell cycle distribution assays. Results showed that
silibinin treatment (25-100 M) decreases the total cell number by 38-51%
(p<0.001), 67-84% (p<0.001) and 40-95% (p<0.05-p<0.001) after 24, 48 and
72 h of treatment. Clonogenic assay further confirmed the decrease in
cell viability by silibinin, and we observed 18% (pSkin cancer is the
most common malignancy in the United States with the number of incidences
persistently rising due to the depletion of the ozone layer and lack of
adequate solar protection. Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), composed of
basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), encompasses
the vast majority of skin cancers with over 2 million new cases each
year. Silibinin, an active bioflavanone was previously shown to have
major protective effect against ultraviolet B radiation (UVB)-induced SCC
through promoting DNA damage repair as well as inhibiting inflammation
and angiogenesis. To date, however, the efficacy of silibinin has not
been tested against BCC, which alone accounts for about 80% of NMSC
incidences. BCC mostly causes disfigurement, pain and morbidity, and
warrants greater attention for its prevention and treatment. The hallmark
of BCC has been the constitutive activation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling
pathway, mostly through the loss of function mutations in the patched
(PTCH) gene. In the present study, we utilized ASZ001 cell line, derived
from a mouse BCC tumor induced by UV-radiation in a PTCH1 heterozygous
mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer efficacy of silibinin against BCC.
ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the PTCH1 gene and closely resembles the
PTCH1 status in human BCC. We treated ASZ001 cells with either DMSO
(control) or various doses of silibinin (25-100 M), and performed trypan
blue exclusion, clonogenic, apoptosis and cell cycle distribution assays.
Results showed that silibinin treatment (25-100 M) decreases the total
cell number by 38-51% (p<0.001), 67-84% (p<0.001) and 40-95%
(p<0.05-p<0.001) after 24, 48 and 72 h of treatment. Clonogenic assay
further confirmed the decrease in cell viability by silibinin, and we
observed 18% (p<0.05), 92% (pSkin cancer is the most common malignancy in
the United States with the number of incidences persistently rising due
to the depletion of the ozone layer and lack of adequate solar
protection. Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), composed of basal cell
carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), encompasses the vast
majority of skin cancers with over 2 million new cases each year.
Silibinin, an active bioflavanone was previously shown to have major
protective effect against ultraviolet B radiation (UVB)-induced SCC
through promoting DNA damage repair as well as inhibiting inflammation
and angiogenesis. To date, however, the efficacy of silibinin has not
been tested against BCC, which alone accounts for about 80% of NMSC
incidences. BCC mostly causes disfigurement, pain and morbidity, and
warrants greater attention for its prevention and treatment. The hallmark
of BCC has been the constitutive activation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling
pathway, mostly through the loss of function mutations in the patched
(PTCH) gene. In the present study, we utilized ASZ001 cell line, derived
from a mouse BCC tumor induced by UV-radiation in a PTCH1 heterozygous
mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer efficacy of silibinin against BCC.
ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the PTCH1 gene and closely resembles the
PTCH1 status in human BCC. We treated ASZ001 cells with either DMSO
(control) or various doses of silibinin (25-100 M), and performed trypan
blue exclusion, clonogenic, apoptosis and cell cycle distribution assays.
Results showed that silibinin treatment (25-100 M) decreases the total
cell number by 38-51% (p<0.001), 67-84% (p<0.001) and 40-95%
(p<0.05-p<0.001) after 24, 48 and 72 h of treatment. Clonogenic assay
further confirmed the decrease in cell viability by silibinin, and we
observed 18% (p<0.05), 92% (p<0.001) and 100% (pSkin cancer is the most
common malignancy in the United States with the number of incidences
persistently rising due to the depletion of the ozone layer and lack of
adequate solar protection. Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), composed of
basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), encompasses
the vast majority of skin cancers with over 2 million new cases each
year. Silibinin, an active bioflavanone was previously shown to have
major protective effect against ultraviolet B radiation (UVB)-induced SCC
through promoting DNA damage repair as well as inhibiting inflammation
and angiogenesis. To date, however, the efficacy of silibinin has not
been tested against BCC, which alone accounts for about 80% of NMSC
incidences. BCC mostly causes disfigurement, pain and morbidity, and
warrants greater attention for its prevention and treatment. The hallmark
of BCC has been the constitutive activation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling
pathway, mostly through the loss of function mutations in the patched
(PTCH) gene. In the present study, we utilized ASZ001 cell line, derived
from a mouse BCC tumor induced by UV-radiation in a PTCH1 heterozygous
mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer efficacy of silibinin against BCC.
ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the PTCH1 gene and closely resembles the
PTCH1 status in human BCC. We treated ASZ001 cells with either DMSO
(control) or various doses of silibinin (25-100 M), and performed trypan
blue exclusion, clonogenic, apoptosis and cell cycle distribution assays.
Results showed that silibinin treatment (25-100 M) decreases the total
cell number by 38-51% (p<0.001), 67-84% (p<0.001) and 40-95%
(p<0.05-p<0.001) after 24, 48 and 72 h of treatment. Clonogenic assay
further confirmed the decrease in cell viability by silibinin, and we
observed 18% (p<0.05), 92% (p<0.001) and 100% (p<0.001) decrease in
colony formation with 25, 50 and 100 M doses of silibinin, respectively,
in ASZ001 cells. Trypan blue exclusion assay showed that silibinin
treatment (25-100 M) also increased the cell death by 2 folds (pSkin
cancer is the most common malignancy in the United States with the number
of incidences persistently rising due to the depletion of the ozone layer
and lack of adequate solar protection. Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC),
composed of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC),
encompasses the vast majority of skin cancers with over 2 million new
cases each year. Silibinin, an active bioflavanone was previously shown
to have major protective effect against ultraviolet B radiation
(UVB)-induced SCC through promoting DNA damage repair as well as
inhibiting inflammation and angiogenesis. To date, however, the efficacy
of silibinin has not been tested against BCC, which alone accounts for
about 80% of NMSC incidences. BCC mostly causes disfigurement, pain and
morbidity, and warrants greater attention for its prevention and
treatment. The hallmark of BCC has been the constitutive activation of
hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, mostly through the loss of function
mutations in the patched (PTCH) gene. In the present study, we utilized
ASZ001 cell line, derived from a mouse BCC tumor induced by UV-radiation
in a PTCH1 heterozygous mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer efficacy of
silibinin against BCC. ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the PTCH1 gene
and closely resembles the PTCH1 status in human BCC. We treated ASZ001
cells with either DMSO (control) or various doses of silibinin (25-100
M), and performed trypan blue exclusion, clonogenic, apoptosis and cell
cycle distribution assays. Results showed that silibinin treatment
(25-100 M) decreases the total cell number by 38-51% (p<0.001), 67-84%
(p<0.001) and 40-95% (p<0.05-p<0.001) after 24, 48 and 72 h of treatment.
Clonogenic assay further confirmed the decrease in cell viability by
silibinin, and we observed 18% (p<0.05), 92% (p<0.001) and 100% (p<0.001)
decrease in colony formation with 25, 50 and 100 M doses of silibinin,
respectively, in ASZ001 cells. Trypan blue exclusion assay showed that
silibinin treatment (25-100 M) also increased the cell death by 2 folds
(p<0.05), 3 folds (pSkin cancer is the most common malignancy in the
United States with the number of incidences persistently rising due to
the depletion of the ozone layer and lack of adequate solar protection.
Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), composed of basal cell carcinoma (BCC)
and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), encompasses the vast majority of skin
cancers with over 2 million new cases each year. Silibinin, an active
bioflavanone was previously shown to have major protective effect against
ultraviolet B radiation (UVB)-induced SCC through promoting DNA damage
repair as well as inhibiting inflammation and angiogenesis. To date,
however, the efficacy of silibinin has not been tested against BCC, which
alone accounts for about 80% of NMSC incidences. BCC mostly causes
disfigurement, pain and morbidity, and warrants greater attention for its
prevention and treatment. The hallmark of BCC has been the constitutive
activation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, mostly through the loss of
function mutations in the patched (PTCH) gene. In the present study, we
utilized ASZ001 cell line, derived from a mouse BCC tumor induced by
UV-radiation in a PTCH1 heterozygous mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer
efficacy of silibinin against BCC. ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the
PTCH1 gene and closely resembles the PTCH1 status in human BCC. We
treated ASZ001 cells with either DMSO (control) or various doses of
silibinin (25-100 M), and performed trypan blue exclusion, clonogenic,
apoptosis and cell cycle distribution assays. Results showed that
silibinin treatment (25-100 M) decreases the total cell number by 38-51%
(p<0.001), 67-84% (p<0.001) and 40-95% (p<0.05-p<0.001) after 24, 48 and
72 h of treatment. Clonogenic assay further confirmed the decrease in
cell viability by silibinin, and we observed 18% (p<0.05), 92% (p<0.001)
and 100% (p<0.001) decrease in colony formation with 25, 50 and 100 M
doses of silibinin, respectively, in ASZ001 cells. Trypan blue exclusion
assay showed that silibinin treatment (25-100 M) also increased the cell
death by 2 folds (p<0.05), 3 folds (p<0.001), and 4 folds (pSkin cancer
is the most common malignancy in the United States with the number of
incidences persistently rising due to the depletion of the ozone layer
and lack of adequate solar protection. Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC),
composed of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC),
encompasses the vast majority of skin cancers with over 2 million new
cases each year. Silibinin, an active bioflavanone was previously shown
to have major protective effect against ultraviolet B radiation
(UVB)-induced SCC through promoting DNA damage repair as well as
inhibiting inflammation and angiogenesis. To date, however, the efficacy
of silibinin has not been tested against BCC, which alone accounts for
about 80% of NMSC incidences. BCC mostly causes disfigurement, pain and
morbidity, and warrants greater attention for its prevention and
treatment. The hallmark of BCC has been the constitutive activation of
hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, mostly through the loss of function
mutations in the patched (PTCH) gene. In the present study, we utilized
ASZ001 cell line, derived from a mouse BCC tumor induced by UV-radiation
in a PTCH1 heterozygous mouse, to evaluate the anti-cancer efficacy of
silibinin against BCC. ASZ001 cells lack both copies of the PTCH1 gene
and closely resembles the PTCH1 status in human BCC. We treated ASZ001
cells with either DMSO (control) or various doses of silibinin (25-100
M), and performed trypan blue exclusion, clonogenic, apoptosis and cell
cycle distribution assays. Results showed that silibinin treatment
(25-100 M) decreases the total cell number by 38-51% (p<0.001), 67-84%
(p<0.001) and 40-95% (p<0.05-p<0.001) after 24, 48 and 72 h of treatment.
Clonogenic assay further confirmed the decrease in cell viability by
silibinin, and we observed 18% (p<0.05), 92% (p<0.001) and 100% (p<0.001)
decrease in colony formation with 25, 50 and 100 M doses of silibinin,
respectively, in ASZ001 cells. Trypan blue exclusion assay showed that
silibinin treatment (25-100 M) also increased the cell death by 2 folds
(p<0.05), 3 folds (p<0.001), and 4 folds (p<0.001) after 24, 48 and 72 h
of treatment while annexin/PI staining confirmed that silibinin-induced
cell death in ASZ001 cells is mainly apoptotic in nature. FACS analyses
revealed that silibinin treatment significantly modulated the cell cycle
distribution in ASZ001 cells, and we observed an S-phase arrest at 50 M
silibinin dose and a G2M arrest at 100 M silibinin dose after 24 and 48 h
of treatment. Molecular studies showed that silibinin treatment strongly
decreases the expression of hedgehog signaling transcriptional factor
Gli1, which is typically overexpressed in BCC and is known to regulate
the expression of several oncogenes. Together, these results provide the
first evidence of silibinin's efficacy against BCC cells, and suggest
that silibinin could be useful in the prevention and/or treatment of both
types of NMSCs.

