Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coffee prevents early events in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer
patients and modulates hormone receptor status.


Whether coffee modulates response to endocrine therapy in breast cancer
patients is currently unknown. The CYP1A2 and CYP2C8 enzymes contribute
to tamoxifen and caffeine metabolism. The aim was to investigate the
impact of coffee consumption on tumor characteristics and disease-free
survival in relation to breast cancer treatment and CYP1A2 and CYP2C8
genotypes. Questionnaires regarding lifestyle were completed
preoperatively by 592 patients in Southern Sweden. CYP1A2*1F and CYP2C8*3
were genotyped. Clinical data and tumor characteristics were obtained
from patients charts, population registries, and pathology reports.
Coffee consumption was categorized as low (0-1 cups/day), moderate (2-4
cups/day), or high (5+cups/day). The proportion of estrogen receptor
negative (ER-) tumors increased with increasing coffee consumption
(Ptrend=0.042). Low consumption was associated with higher frequency of
discordant receptor status (ER+PgR-) OR 2.61 (1.59-4.29) compared to
higher consumption. Median follow-up time was 4.92 years.
Tamoxifen-treated patients with low consumption had significantly
increased risk for early events compared to patients who consumed two or
more cups/day, adjusted HR 2.50 (1.20-5.26). Low coffee consumption was
also associated with higher risk for distant metastases in
tamoxifen-treated patients with ER+ tumors, adjusted HR 2.43 (1.00-5.88).
Low consumption combined with at least one CYP1A2*1F C-allele or CYP2C8*3
was associated with a high risk for early events in tamoxifen-treated
patients, adjusted HRs 3.49 (1.54-7.90) and 6.14 (2.46-15.34),
respectively. In conclusion, a moderate to high coffee consumption of
caffeinated coffee was associated with significantly lower risk for early
breast cancer events in tamoxifen-treated patients. This may be due to
modification of the hormone receptor status or altered CYP enzyme
activity. If confirmed, new recommendations regarding coffee consumption
during tamoxifen-treatment may be warranted.

