Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling identified FYN as an important gene in
tamoxifen resistance and a predictor of early recurrence in patients
treated with endocrine therapy .


To elucidate the molecular mechanisms of tamoxifen resistance in breast
cancer we performed microarray profiling and identified 366 genes with
altered expression in 4 tamoxifen-resistant (TamRs) vs. the parental
tamoxifen-sensitive MCF-7/S0.5 cell lines. Most of these genes were
functionally linked to cell growth, proliferation, death and control of
gene expression and included FYN, PRKC, ITPR1, DPYD, DACH1, GBP1 and
PRLR. Increased expression of FYN was observed in TamR cells and
treatment with FYN-specific interfering RNA or a specific Src family
kinase (SFK) inhibitor restored the anti-proliferative effect of
tamoxifen in these cells. TamR cells also expressed increased levels of
phosphorylated breast cancer antiestrogen resistance protein 1 (pBCAR1),
an important downstream SFK substrate in the MAPK pathway. Evaluation of
the association of subcellular localization of FYN in cancer tissue and
clinical endpoints was made in 2 cohorts of ER+ breast cancer patients,
one with advanced disease (N=47) and the other with early breast cancer
(N=76). The result showed that plasma membrane-associated FYN expression
in the cancer cells strongly correlated with longer progression-free
survival compared to FYN expression not associated with the plasma
membrane (pTo elucidate the molecular mechanisms of tamoxifen resistance
in breast cancer we performed microarray profiling and identified 366
genes with altered expression in 4 tamoxifen-resistant (TamRs) vs. the
parental tamoxifen-sensitive MCF-7/S0.5 cell lines. Most of these genes
were functionally linked to cell growth, proliferation, death and control
of gene expression and included FYN, PRKC, ITPR1, DPYD, DACH1, GBP1 and
PRLR. Increased expression of FYN was observed in TamR cells and
treatment with FYN-specific interfering RNA or a specific Src family
kinase (SFK) inhibitor restored the anti-proliferative effect of
tamoxifen in these cells. TamR cells also expressed increased levels of
phosphorylated breast cancer antiestrogen resistance protein 1 (pBCAR1),
an important downstream SFK substrate in the MAPK pathway. Evaluation of
the association of subcellular localization of FYN in cancer tissue and
clinical endpoints was made in 2 cohorts of ER+ breast cancer patients,
one with advanced disease (N=47) and the other with early breast cancer
(N=76). The result showed that plasma membrane-associated FYN expression
in the cancer cells strongly correlated with longer progression-free
survival compared to FYN expression not associated with the plasma
membrane (p<0.0002) in the advanced disease cohort. Similarly, in the
early breast cancer patients, plasma membrane associated FYN expression
was associated with longer metastasis-free survival (pTo elucidate the
molecular mechanisms of tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer we
performed microarray profiling and identified 366 genes with altered
expression in 4 tamoxifen-resistant (TamRs) vs. the parental
tamoxifen-sensitive MCF-7/S0.5 cell lines. Most of these genes were
functionally linked to cell growth, proliferation, death and control of
gene expression and included FYN, PRKC, ITPR1, DPYD, DACH1, GBP1 and
PRLR. Increased expression of FYN was observed in TamR cells and
treatment with FYN-specific interfering RNA or a specific Src family
kinase (SFK) inhibitor restored the anti-proliferative effect of
tamoxifen in these cells. TamR cells also expressed increased levels of
phosphorylated breast cancer antiestrogen resistance protein 1 (pBCAR1),
an important downstream SFK substrate in the MAPK pathway. Evaluation of
the association of subcellular localization of FYN in cancer tissue and
clinical endpoints was made in 2 cohorts of ER+ breast cancer patients,
one with advanced disease (N=47) and the other with early breast cancer
(N=76). The result showed that plasma membrane-associated FYN expression
in the cancer cells strongly correlated with longer progression-free
survival compared to FYN expression not associated with the plasma
membrane (p<0.0002) in the advanced disease cohort. Similarly, in the
early breast cancer patients, plasma membrane associated FYN expression
was associated with longer metastasis-free survival (p<0.003) and overall
survival (pTo elucidate the molecular mechanisms of tamoxifen resistance
in breast cancer we performed microarray profiling and identified 366
genes with altered expression in 4 tamoxifen-resistant (TamRs) vs. the
parental tamoxifen-sensitive MCF-7/S0.5 cell lines. Most of these genes
were functionally linked to cell growth, proliferation, death and control
of gene expression and included FYN, PRKC, ITPR1, DPYD, DACH1, GBP1 and
PRLR. Increased expression of FYN was observed in TamR cells and
treatment with FYN-specific interfering RNA or a specific Src family
kinase (SFK) inhibitor restored the anti-proliferative effect of
tamoxifen in these cells. TamR cells also expressed increased levels of
phosphorylated breast cancer antiestrogen resistance protein 1 (pBCAR1),
an important downstream SFK substrate in the MAPK pathway. Evaluation of
the association of subcellular localization of FYN in cancer tissue and
clinical endpoints was made in 2 cohorts of ER+ breast cancer patients,
one with advanced disease (N=47) and the other with early breast cancer
(N=76). The result showed that plasma membrane-associated FYN expression
in the cancer cells strongly correlated with longer progression-free
survival compared to FYN expression not associated with the plasma
membrane (p<0.0002) in the advanced disease cohort. Similarly, in the
early breast cancer patients, plasma membrane associated FYN expression
was associated with longer metastasis-free survival (p<0.003) and overall
survival (p<0.0005) independent of tumor size, grade and node status. Our
results indicate that FYN plays an important role in tamoxifen
resistance, and its subcellular location in breast tumor cells may be an
important novel biomarker of response to endocrine therapy in breast
cancer.

