Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of IGF-II in Vietnamese women in triple
negative breast cancer is dependent on biallelic or monoallelic IGF-II
with ApaI SNP.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is more likely to be advanced,
poorly differentiated, larger, and present in women of younger age and of
lower socioeconomic status. Moreover, TNBC patients have worse outcomes
when treated with currently available adjuvant chemotherapy. We have
demonstrated that Breast cancer (BC) tumors from AA patients express
significantly higher levels of IGF-II compared to Caucasian women (CA),
and show a higher activation of the IGF signaling pathways in tumors
progression (Kalla et.al., 2010). Thus we designed a study in younger
Vietnamese women where TNBC incidence is increasing. A total of 24 paired
BC samples were analyzed by gDNA PCR for IGF-II Apa I polymorphism to
correlate with IGF-II mRNA and protein levels. The levels of IGF-II
correlated with the imprinting status, i.e., Biallelic (BA; n=14)>>,
Monoallelic with SNP (MAS; n=5)>, and Monoallelic non-ApaI SNP (MA;
n=5)>. Higher IGF-II levels were expressed in tumor as compared to normal
BC tissue samples. The free proIGF-II protein and mRNA levels were higher
in biallelic tumor tissues as compared to the proIGF-II levels detected
in monoallelic tumor samples. The growth factor receptors; Insulin
receptor A (IRA), Insulin receptor B (IRB), Vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor (VEGFR), Estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1), Progesterone
receptor (PGR) and Human epidermal growth factor receptor (ERBB2) levels
were determined to show if IGF-II monoallelic or biallelic dosage
regulated the receptor levels. We conclude that biallelic IGF-II
expression in TNBC tumors results in higher IGF-II mRNA, protein and
related receptors levels than in monoallelic samples.

