Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX4 and POU2F1 synergistically regulate metastasis-associated
NRP1 in HCC metastasis.


Gene regulation by SOX proteins depends on the presence of requisite
partners which provides target specificity and combinatorial control.
Previously, we have shown that SOX4 is an oncogenic transcription factor
involved in human hepatocarcinogenesis. By bioinformative prediction, we
identified that POU2F1 is an SOX4 co-factor and further showed that SOX4
and POU2F1 synergistically regulate metastasis-associated NRP1 expression
in HCC cells. Using co-immunoprecipitation experiments, SOX4 and POU2F1
were shown to participate in direct protein-protein interaction in vitro
involving assembly into a complex that required the N-terminus and HMG
domain of SOX4 interacting with POU2F1. In addition, RNAi knockdown of
SOX4 expression of HCC cell lines drastically reduced the expression of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) related genes, N-cadherin, MMP2
and MMP9. SOX4 knockdown also reduced the expression of VEGF related
genes VEGFC, FLT1 and FLT4 and blood vessel distribution in subcutaneous
tumors was decreased in shSOX4, shPOU2F1 and shNRP1-infected Mahlavu
tumor cells. Our results suggest that SOX4 and POU2F1 may play a critical
role in the regulation of genes involved in tumor invasion. These results
support a new regulatory network from SOX4 and POU2F1 to NRP1 that occurs
during liver tumor metastasis. This investigation provides relevant gene
targets that are regulated by SOX4 and POU2F1 in liver tumors and these
results could be used to develop effective diagnostic and alternative
therapeutic strategies for the treatment of intrahepatic HCC.Keywords:
SOX4; POU2F1; hepatocellular carcinomaCitation Format: Ann-Ping Tsou,
Yu-Lun Liao, Yi-Ming Sun, Jorng-Tzong Horng, Michael Hsiao. SOX4 and
POU2F1 synergistically regulate metastasis-associated NRP1 in HCC
metastasis. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington,
DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr
3109. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3109

