Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proline-rich acidic protein 1 (PRAP1), a novel mitotic arrest
deficient 1 (MAD1) interacting partner, suppresses mitotic checkpoint
signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma.


DNA aneuploidy or chromosomal instability is commonly observed in major
types of human cancers, and one of the causes for chromosomal instability
is defective mitotic checkpoint signaling in cells. Loss of mitotic
checkpoint contributes to chromosomal instability, leading to
carcinogenesis. The mitotic checkpoint monitors the status of
kinetochore-microtubule attachment and delays the onset of anaphase until
all kinetochores have been attached with microtubules. Mitotic arrest
deficient 1 (MAD1) is key component in mitotic checkpoint signaling. We
previously identified a novel isoform of MAD1, which we named MAD1 (Sze
et al. Cancer Res 2008;68:9194-9201). In this study, using yeast-two
hybrid screening, we have identified a novel MAD1 interacting partner,
proline-rich acidic protein 1 (PRAP1). The function of PRAP1 is largely
unknown. Hence, we investigated its role in mitotic checkpoint signaling
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We demonstrated the physical
interaction between PRAP1, MAD1 and MAD1 in yeast-two hybrid screening
and with co-immunoprecipitation assay. Both MAD1 and MAD1 proteins were
co-immunoprecipitated with PRAP1. Moreover, we stably expressed PRAP1 in
two HCC cell lines, BEL-7402 and SMMC-7721, which have competent mitotic
checkpoints. We observed that stable expression of PRAP1 induced
impairment in mitotic checkpoint (P DNA aneuploidy or chromosomal
instability is commonly observed in major types of human cancers, and one
of the causes for chromosomal instability is defective mitotic checkpoint
signaling in cells. Loss of mitotic checkpoint contributes to chromosomal
instability, leading to carcinogenesis. The mitotic checkpoint monitors
the status of kinetochore-microtubule attachment and delays the onset of
anaphase until all kinetochores have been attached with microtubules.
Mitotic arrest deficient 1 (MAD1) is key component in mitotic checkpoint
signaling. We previously identified a novel isoform of MAD1, which we
named MAD1 (Sze et al. Cancer Res 2008;68:9194-9201). In this study,
using yeast-two hybrid screening, we have identified a novel MAD1
interacting partner, proline-rich acidic protein 1 (PRAP1). The function
of PRAP1 is largely unknown. Hence, we investigated its role in mitotic
checkpoint signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We demonstrated
the physical interaction between PRAP1, MAD1 and MAD1 in yeast-two hybrid
screening and with co-immunoprecipitation assay. Both MAD1 and MAD1
proteins were co-immunoprecipitated with PRAP1. Moreover, we stably
expressed PRAP1 in two HCC cell lines, BEL-7402 and SMMC-7721, which have
competent mitotic checkpoints. We observed that stable expression of
PRAP1 induced impairment in mitotic checkpoint (P < 0.01). After
treatment with either colcemid or nocodazole, the PRAP1-stably expressing
BEL-7402 and SMMC-7721 cells showed significantly lower mitotic indices
as compared with the corresponding vector control cells. Ectopic
expression of PRAP1 also resulted in chromosome bridge formation (PDNA
aneuploidy or chromosomal instability is commonly observed in major types
of human cancers, and one of the causes for chromosomal instability is
defective mitotic checkpoint signaling in cells. Loss of mitotic
checkpoint contributes to chromosomal instability, leading to
carcinogenesis. The mitotic checkpoint monitors the status of
kinetochore-microtubule attachment and delays the onset of anaphase until
all kinetochores have been attached with microtubules. Mitotic arrest
deficient 1 (MAD1) is key component in mitotic checkpoint signaling. We
previously identified a novel isoform of MAD1, which we named MAD1 (Sze
et al. Cancer Res 2008;68:9194-9201). In this study, using yeast-two
hybrid screening, we have identified a novel MAD1 interacting partner,
proline-rich acidic protein 1 (PRAP1). The function of PRAP1 is largely
unknown. Hence, we investigated its role in mitotic checkpoint signaling
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We demonstrated the physical
interaction between PRAP1, MAD1 and MAD1 in yeast-two hybrid screening
and with co-immunoprecipitation assay. Both MAD1 and MAD1 proteins were
co-immunoprecipitated with PRAP1. Moreover, we stably expressed PRAP1 in
two HCC cell lines, BEL-7402 and SMMC-7721, which have competent mitotic
checkpoints. We observed that stable expression of PRAP1 induced
impairment in mitotic checkpoint (P < 0.01). After treatment with either
colcemid or nocodazole, the PRAP1-stably expressing BEL-7402 and
SMMC-7721 cells showed significantly lower mitotic indices as compared
with the corresponding vector control cells. Ectopic expression of PRAP1
also resulted in chromosome bridge formation (P< 0.01) and aberrant
chromosome numbers (P DNA aneuploidy or chromosomal instability is
commonly observed in major types of human cancers, and one of the causes
for chromosomal instability is defective mitotic checkpoint signaling in
cells. Loss of mitotic checkpoint contributes to chromosomal instability,
leading to carcinogenesis. The mitotic checkpoint monitors the status of
kinetochore-microtubule attachment and delays the onset of anaphase until
all kinetochores have been attached with microtubules. Mitotic arrest
deficient 1 (MAD1) is key component in mitotic checkpoint signaling. We
previously identified a novel isoform of MAD1, which we named MAD1 (Sze
et al. Cancer Res 2008;68:9194-9201). In this study, using yeast-two
hybrid screening, we have identified a novel MAD1 interacting partner,
proline-rich acidic protein 1 (PRAP1). The function of PRAP1 is largely
unknown. Hence, we investigated its role in mitotic checkpoint signaling
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We demonstrated the physical
interaction between PRAP1, MAD1 and MAD1 in yeast-two hybrid screening
and with co-immunoprecipitation assay. Both MAD1 and MAD1 proteins were
co-immunoprecipitated with PRAP1. Moreover, we stably expressed PRAP1 in
two HCC cell lines, BEL-7402 and SMMC-7721, which have competent mitotic
checkpoints. We observed that stable expression of PRAP1 induced
impairment in mitotic checkpoint (P < 0.01). After treatment with either
colcemid or nocodazole, the PRAP1-stably expressing BEL-7402 and
SMMC-7721 cells showed significantly lower mitotic indices as compared
with the corresponding vector control cells. Ectopic expression of PRAP1
also resulted in chromosome bridge formation (P< 0.01) and aberrant
chromosome numbers (P < 0.001) in these cell lines. All these cellular
changes contributed to chromosomal instability. Interestingly, ectopic
expression PRAP1 led to significant underexpression of MAD1 but not MAD1
in HCC cells. Taken altogether, our data indicate that PRAP1 is an
interacting partner of MAD1 and may have functions of degrading MAD1 and
in turn suppressing mitotic checkpoint signaling in HCC.(This study was
partly funded by a Hong Kong Research Grants Council GRF grant [HKU
772608])

