Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isozyme-selective intracellular binding assay for histone
deacetylases .


The precise modulation of histone acetylation is crucial to cellular
survival and control of reproduction.Misregulation of acetylation is
often correlated with uncontrolled cellular proliferation, and general
inhibition of histone deacetylases has proven to be an effective strategy
in the treatment of some cancers. The underlying biology of histone
deacetylases is however quite complex, with four classes of isozymes and
a large number of interacting proteins that modulate the activity of
each. The general scarcity of potent isozyme-selective HDAC inhibitors
further complicates the task of deciphering individual isozyme activity
in a cellular context. We now report a novel approach to monitoring the
intracellular inhibition of single isozymes based on bioluminescence
resonance energy transfer from NanoLucTM, a small and exceedingly bright
bioluminescent reporter. In our approach, a NanoLucTM fusion of the
isozyme of interest is used in combination with an optimized fluorescent
tracer. When bound, energy transfer occurs from the bioluminescent enzyme
to the fluorescent probe. Displacement of the probe by a competitive
inhibitor is then measured as a decrease in the energy transfer ratio,
yielding IC50 data specific to the chosen isozyme. We demonstrate the
ability to measure intracellular IC50 values of inhibitors against
individual isozymes of class I and class IIb based on choice of the
NanoLucTM fusion.

