Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZD3463, a novel ALK/IGF1R inhibitor, overcomes multiple
mechanisms of acquired resistance to crizotinib.


Genomic rearrangement of Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) has been
observed in several tumor types including 60-80% anaplastic large cell
lymphoma (ALCL) and 3-6% of non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although
the ALK inhibitor crizotinib has clinical efficacy in selected ALK
positive NSCLC patients, the majority of patients who show initial
responses eventually relapse. Various mechanisms leading to resistance
have been proposed and include ALK amplification and resistance
mutations, as well as alternative pathway drivers including EGFR, cKIT
and, more recently, IGF1R. We have discovered a novel and potent
inhibitor of ALK, AZD3463 with a Ki value of 0.75nM which also inhibits
additional receptor tyrosine kinases including insulin growth factor
receptor (IGF1R) with equivalent potency. AZD3463 inhibits ALK in cells
as demonstrated by its ability to decrease ALK autophosphorylation in
tumor cell lines containing ALK fusions including DEL (ALCL NPM-ALK),
H3122 (NSCLC EML4-ALK) and H2228 (NSCLC EML4-ALK). Inhibition of ALK is
associated with perturbations in downstream signaling including ERK, AKT
and STAT3 pathways leading to preferential inhibition of proliferation in
the ALK fusion containing cell lines in vitro. AZD3463 also demonstrates
the ability to dose dependently inhibit pALK in xenograft tumors in vivo
resulting in stasis (H3122) or regression (DEL, H2228). AZD3463 retains
good activity against a number of clinically relevant crizotinib
resistant mutations including the gatekeeper mutant L1196M where
equivalent potency to wild type ALK is observed in vitro and in vivo in
EML4-ALK containing BAF3 cell lines. To further assess the potential
ability of AZD3463 to overcome additional resistance mechanisms,
antiproliferative activity was assessed in multiple crizotinib resistant
cell lines independently derived in vitro from H3122 cells as well as a
patient derived crizotinib relapsed model. These resistant cell lines
contain multiple resistance mechanisms including the L1196M gatekeeper
and T115Ins mutations, ALK amplification and/or secondary drivers
including EGFR and IGF1R. AZD3463 retains antiproliferative potency
within 4 fold of parental H3122 cells for 10 out of 12 of these acquired
resistance models in vitro. In summary, AZD3463 is a potent ALK inhibitor
which inhibits additional kinases including IGF1R and has activity in a
number of crizotinib resistant models driven by multiple resistance
mechanisms.

