Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic profiling of signaling pathways in LKB1 deficient
non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) identifies novel therapeutic targets
including IGF1R pathway.


Background: LKB1 is a tumor suppressor gene that is lost in 35% of
non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC), half of which carry concurrent KRAS
mutations. When functioning normally, LKB1 plays a critical role in
energy sensing and regulates the PI3K/mTOR pathway. We have previously
shown that LKB1 loss is associated with greater resistance to certain
targeted drugs. Here, we investigate signaling pathways dysregulated in
the setting of LKB1 loss, with a particular focus on potential novel
therapeutic targets.Methods: Expression of >140 total and
phospho-proteins were measured in 109 NSCLC cell lines by reverse phase
protein array (RPPA). Differences in protein expression between LKB1
deficient versus intact cell lines were determined by t-test, with
correction for multiple testing. IC50s for targeted therapies were
determined by MTS assay in cell lines with and without LKB1. For the drug
combination assay, nine NSCLC cell lines with and without LKB1 were
treated with the IGFR inhibitor OSI-906 plus serial dilutions of the dual
mTOR inhibitor OSI-027. Proliferation was measured after 72 hours. Bliss
algorithm was used to calculate synergy and fractional inhibition for
each plate independently. Further validation was performed using NSCLC
cells stably overexpressing LKB1.Results: Loss of LKB1 via mutation or
deletion was strongly correlated with LKB1 protein expression
(pBackground: LKB1 is a tumor suppressor gene that is lost in 35% of
non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC), half of which carry concurrent KRAS
mutations. When functioning normally, LKB1 plays a critical role in
energy sensing and regulates the PI3K/mTOR pathway. We have previously
shown that LKB1 loss is associated with greater resistance to certain
targeted drugs. Here, we investigate signaling pathways dysregulated in
the setting of LKB1 loss, with a particular focus on potential novel
therapeutic targets.Methods: Expression of >140 total and
phospho-proteins were measured in 109 NSCLC cell lines by reverse phase
protein array (RPPA). Differences in protein expression between LKB1
deficient versus intact cell lines were determined by t-test, with
correction for multiple testing. IC50s for targeted therapies were
determined by MTS assay in cell lines with and without LKB1. For the drug
combination assay, nine NSCLC cell lines with and without LKB1 were
treated with the IGFR inhibitor OSI-906 plus serial dilutions of the dual
mTOR inhibitor OSI-027. Proliferation was measured after 72 hours. Bliss
algorithm was used to calculate synergy and fractional inhibition for
each plate independently. Further validation was performed using NSCLC
cells stably overexpressing LKB1.Results: Loss of LKB1 via mutation or
deletion was strongly correlated with LKB1 protein expression (p<0.0001
by t-test). In agreement with previous studies showing the regulation of
mTOR by LKB1, cells with LKB1 loss had significantly greater activation
of the mTOR signaling pathway, as indicated by higher levels of
phosphorylated (p) mTOR, pS6, and pP70S6K (pBackground: LKB1 is a tumor
suppressor gene that is lost in 35% of non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC), half of which carry concurrent KRAS mutations. When functioning
normally, LKB1 plays a critical role in energy sensing and regulates the
PI3K/mTOR pathway. We have previously shown that LKB1 loss is associated
with greater resistance to certain targeted drugs. Here, we investigate
signaling pathways dysregulated in the setting of LKB1 loss, with a
particular focus on potential novel therapeutic targets.Methods:
Expression of >140 total and phospho-proteins were measured in 109 NSCLC
cell lines by reverse phase protein array (RPPA). Differences in protein
expression between LKB1 deficient versus intact cell lines were
determined by t-test, with correction for multiple testing. IC50s for
targeted therapies were determined by MTS assay in cell lines with and
without LKB1. For the drug combination assay, nine NSCLC cell lines with
and without LKB1 were treated with the IGFR inhibitor OSI-906 plus serial
dilutions of the dual mTOR inhibitor OSI-027. Proliferation was measured
after 72 hours. Bliss algorithm was used to calculate synergy and
fractional inhibition for each plate independently. Further validation
was performed using NSCLC cells stably overexpressing LKB1.Results: Loss
of LKB1 via mutation or deletion was strongly correlated with LKB1
protein expression (p<0.0001 by t-test). In agreement with previous
studies showing the regulation of mTOR by LKB1, cells with LKB1 loss had
significantly greater activation of the mTOR signaling pathway, as
indicated by higher levels of phosphorylated (p) mTOR, pS6, and pP70S6K
(p<0.014). Other proteins expressed at significantly higher levels in
LKB1 deficient NSCLC cell lines included those in the IGF1R pathway (ex.,
IGF1R and its transcriptional regulator SRC3, pBackground: LKB1 is a
tumor suppressor gene that is lost in 35% of non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC), half of which carry concurrent KRAS mutations. When functioning
normally, LKB1 plays a critical role in energy sensing and regulates the
PI3K/mTOR pathway. We have previously shown that LKB1 loss is associated
with greater resistance to certain targeted drugs. Here, we investigate
signaling pathways dysregulated in the setting of LKB1 loss, with a
particular focus on potential novel therapeutic targets.Methods:
Expression of >140 total and phospho-proteins were measured in 109 NSCLC
cell lines by reverse phase protein array (RPPA). Differences in protein
expression between LKB1 deficient versus intact cell lines were
determined by t-test, with correction for multiple testing. IC50s for
targeted therapies were determined by MTS assay in cell lines with and
without LKB1. For the drug combination assay, nine NSCLC cell lines with
and without LKB1 were treated with the IGFR inhibitor OSI-906 plus serial
dilutions of the dual mTOR inhibitor OSI-027. Proliferation was measured
after 72 hours. Bliss algorithm was used to calculate synergy and
fractional inhibition for each plate independently. Further validation
was performed using NSCLC cells stably overexpressing LKB1.Results: Loss
of LKB1 via mutation or deletion was strongly correlated with LKB1
protein expression (p<0.0001 by t-test). In agreement with previous
studies showing the regulation of mTOR by LKB1, cells with LKB1 loss had
significantly greater activation of the mTOR signaling pathway, as
indicated by higher levels of phosphorylated (p) mTOR, pS6, and pP70S6K
(p<0.014). Other proteins expressed at significantly higher levels in
LKB1 deficient NSCLC cell lines included those in the IGF1R pathway (ex.,
IGF1R and its transcriptional regulator SRC3, p<0.001) and MEK pathway
(ex., pERK1/2, pMAPK, pBackground: LKB1 is a tumor suppressor gene that
is lost in 35% of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC), half of which
carry concurrent KRAS mutations. When functioning normally, LKB1 plays a
critical role in energy sensing and regulates the PI3K/mTOR pathway. We
have previously shown that LKB1 loss is associated with greater
resistance to certain targeted drugs. Here, we investigate signaling
pathways dysregulated in the setting of LKB1 loss, with a particular
focus on potential novel therapeutic targets.Methods: Expression of >140
total and phospho-proteins were measured in 109 NSCLC cell lines by
reverse phase protein array (RPPA). Differences in protein expression
between LKB1 deficient versus intact cell lines were determined by
t-test, with correction for multiple testing. IC50s for targeted
therapies were determined by MTS assay in cell lines with and without
LKB1. For the drug combination assay, nine NSCLC cell lines with and
without LKB1 were treated with the IGFR inhibitor OSI-906 plus serial
dilutions of the dual mTOR inhibitor OSI-027. Proliferation was measured
after 72 hours. Bliss algorithm was used to calculate synergy and
fractional inhibition for each plate independently. Further validation
was performed using NSCLC cells stably overexpressing LKB1.Results: Loss
of LKB1 via mutation or deletion was strongly correlated with LKB1
protein expression (p<0.0001 by t-test). In agreement with previous
studies showing the regulation of mTOR by LKB1, cells with LKB1 loss had
significantly greater activation of the mTOR signaling pathway, as
indicated by higher levels of phosphorylated (p) mTOR, pS6, and pP70S6K
(p<0.014). Other proteins expressed at significantly higher levels in
LKB1 deficient NSCLC cell lines included those in the IGF1R pathway (ex.,
IGF1R and its transcriptional regulator SRC3, p<0.001) and MEK pathway
(ex., pERK1/2, pMAPK, p<0.017). Furthermore, we observed increased NRF2
protein levels (0.001) and concomitant downregulation of its suppressor
KEAP1 (Background: LKB1 is a tumor suppressor gene that is lost in 35% of
non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC), half of which carry concurrent KRAS
mutations. When functioning normally, LKB1 plays a critical role in
energy sensing and regulates the PI3K/mTOR pathway. We have previously
shown that LKB1 loss is associated with greater resistance to certain
targeted drugs. Here, we investigate signaling pathways dysregulated in
the setting of LKB1 loss, with a particular focus on potential novel
therapeutic targets.Methods: Expression of >140 total and
phospho-proteins were measured in 109 NSCLC cell lines by reverse phase
protein array (RPPA). Differences in protein expression between LKB1
deficient versus intact cell lines were determined by t-test, with
correction for multiple testing. IC50s for targeted therapies were
determined by MTS assay in cell lines with and without LKB1. For the drug
combination assay, nine NSCLC cell lines with and without LKB1 were
treated with the IGFR inhibitor OSI-906 plus serial dilutions of the dual
mTOR inhibitor OSI-027. Proliferation was measured after 72 hours. Bliss
algorithm was used to calculate synergy and fractional inhibition for
each plate independently. Further validation was performed using NSCLC
cells stably overexpressing LKB1.Results: Loss of LKB1 via mutation or
deletion was strongly correlated with LKB1 protein expression (p<0.0001
by t-test). In agreement with previous studies showing the regulation of
mTOR by LKB1, cells with LKB1 loss had significantly greater activation
of the mTOR signaling pathway, as indicated by higher levels of
phosphorylated (p) mTOR, pS6, and pP70S6K (p<0.014). Other proteins
expressed at significantly higher levels in LKB1 deficient NSCLC cell
lines included those in the IGF1R pathway (ex., IGF1R and its
transcriptional regulator SRC3, p<0.001) and MEK pathway (ex., pERK1/2,
pMAPK, p<0.017). Furthermore, we observed increased NRF2 protein levels
(0.001) and concomitant downregulation of its suppressor KEAP1 (<0.001)
in LKB1 deficient lines, suggesting a potential role in LKB1-mediated
regulation of oxidative stress. Inhibition of IGF1R by OSI-906 showed
activity in LKB1 deficient lines; however, the combination of IGF1R +
mTOR inhibition (OSI-906 + OSI-027) proved to be a more effective
therapy, demonstrating synergistic activity at all dose combinations
studied. These findings were confirmed in A549 cells stably
overexpressing LKB1. Drug combination showed a synergistic effect in A549
control cells compared to A549-LKB1.Conclusions: These studies identify
new potential targets in LKB1 deficient NSCLC, which represents a
significant portion of lung cancer patients. Specifically, the
combination of IGFR and mTOR inhibition demonstrated synergy, supporting
further investigation as a therapeutic approach for this molecularly
defined subset of NSCLC patients.

