Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct response of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells to PI-3K
inhibitor GS-1101 is related to MAPK signaling and likely associated with
IGHV mutation.


Background: PI3K is expressed and regulates survival and proliferation of
malignant B-cells. The PI-3K inhibitor, GS-1101, has promising
therapeutic efficacy in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) through
inhibiting B-cell receptor signaling, PI3K signaling and chemokine
networks. It is currently in clinical trials either as monotherapy or in
combination with others therapies. Here we report the exploration of the
signaling molecules which are related to distinct response of CLL cells
to GS-1101.Methods: Cells isolated from peripheral blood of CLL patients
were treated with GS-1101 and analyzed by flow cytometry based apoptotic
assay. Human Phospho-Kinase Array (R&D Systems) was performed with CLL
cells which had distinct response to GS-1101. RNA or genomic DNA was
isolated and analyzed for IGHV somatic hypermutation (InVivoScribe
Technologies). Sequences containing more than 2% deviation from the
germline sequence were considered as somatically hypermutated.Results: To
date, 20 CLL cases have been tested for their in vitro response to
GS-1101. In comparison to the control group, GS1101-exposed CLL cells
displayed a wide range of apoptotic cells (3 to 59%). 3 cases with high
levels apoptosis in response to GS-1101 were subjected to Human
Phospho-Kinase Array screening. These showed down regulation of
p-ERK1/2(T202/Y204), p-P38(T180/Y182), MEK1/2 (S218/S222), among tested
46 kinases phosphorylation sites, upon GS-1101 exposure. Two of the three
cases also showed down-regulation of p-STAT5(Y699). In contrast, no
alteration or minor up-regulation of the above 4 targets was observed in
a GS-1101 non-responsive case. Currently we are performing immunoblotting
assay to evaluate/confirm the alteration of above targets in multiple CLL
cases and preliminary p-P38 expression data is consistent with that of
array assay. 15 of the tested 20 CLL samples had high quality of IGHV
sequence data from both directions which cover the entire variable region
of IGH (FR1, CDR1, FR2, CDR2 and FR3). Nine cases were IGHV unmutated
with a mean of GS1101 caused apoptotic induction of 25.3% (range 5-59%);
while the mean of apoptotic induction of the 6 cases with somatic
hypermutation was 12.5% (range 3 - 32%). The p value of the unmutated
verse mutated group was 0.046 (T-test).Conclusion: Our preliminary
studies suggest that GS-1101-induced apoptosis is associated with
alterations in the MAPK signaling pathway. Combination of GS-1101 with
MAPK inhibitor may be rational for further synergy study. GS-1101 may
have differential activity against IGHV unmutated CLL cases compared to
IGHV mutated ones. Ongoing studies with additional cases will further
evaluate this observation. Profiling CLL cells for IGHV mutation status
might be a strategy to predict CLL patients response to GS-1101 in
clinical trials.

