Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Could dielectrophoretic testing of oral brush biopsies aid early
detection and diagnosis of oral cancer?.


Cancer of the oral cavity and pharynx was the 9th most common cancer in
US males in 2009, and has a 5-year survival rate of 50%, which has
remained relatively unchanged for several decades. This low survival rate
is partly attributed to patients being diagnosed in advanced stages of
the disease, and has lead to the consensus that early detection and
diagnosis are key to improving survival. The objective of this research
was to use a technique called dielectrophoresis (DEP) to study the
electrophysiological characteristics of cells from normal, dysplastic and
cancerous oral mucosa, collected via oral brush biopsies (OBBs) from
patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) or oral epithelial
dysplasia (OED), and from healthy volunteers. DEP testing involved
applying AC electric fields to the cells collected via brush biopsies,
whilst they were suspended in a conductivity-controlled medium.
Interactions between the cells and the electric field resulted in
cellular movement, dependent both on frequency of the applied electric
field and cell properties. The electrophysiological properties of the
cells cytoplasm and membrane were then deduced as a result of analysing
this cellular movement. After obtaining favourable ethical opinions from
all institutions involved, OBB samples were collected from 61 patients
with OSCC or OED and from 12 healthy volunteers. At the time of abstract
submission, 38 OSCC OBB and 12 OED OBB samples (grouped as Abnormal
samples, N = 50), 36 patient-matched OBB samples of visually healthy oral
mucosa from OSCC and OED patients and 21 OBB samples from the mucosa of
healthy volunteers (grouped as Normal samples, N = 57) had been
successfully tested and studied using DEP. Statistical analysis of these
preliminary results of DEP testing showed statistically significant
differences (pCancer of the oral cavity and pharynx was the 9th most
common cancer in US males in 2009, and has a 5-year survival rate of 50%,
which has remained relatively unchanged for several decades. This low
survival rate is partly attributed to patients being diagnosed in
advanced stages of the disease, and has lead to the consensus that early
detection and diagnosis are key to improving survival. The objective of
this research was to use a technique called dielectrophoresis (DEP) to
study the electrophysiological characteristics of cells from normal,
dysplastic and cancerous oral mucosa, collected via oral brush biopsies
(OBBs) from patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) or oral
epithelial dysplasia (OED), and from healthy volunteers. DEP testing
involved applying AC electric fields to the cells collected via brush
biopsies, whilst they were suspended in a conductivity-controlled medium.
Interactions between the cells and the electric field resulted in
cellular movement, dependent both on frequency of the applied electric
field and cell properties. The electrophysiological properties of the
cells cytoplasm and membrane were then deduced as a result of analysing
this cellular movement. After obtaining favourable ethical opinions from
all institutions involved, OBB samples were collected from 61 patients
with OSCC or OED and from 12 healthy volunteers. At the time of abstract
submission, 38 OSCC OBB and 12 OED OBB samples (grouped as Abnormal
samples, N = 50), 36 patient-matched OBB samples of visually healthy oral
mucosa from OSCC and OED patients and 21 OBB samples from the mucosa of
healthy volunteers (grouped as Normal samples, N = 57) had been
successfully tested and studied using DEP. Statistical analysis of these
preliminary results of DEP testing showed statistically significant
differences (p<0.025) in cell membrane electrophysiological properties of
Abnormal versus Normal OBB samples, OSCC samples versus Healthy Normal
samples and OED samples versus Healthy Normal samples. These preliminary
results suggest that DEP testing of oral brush biopsies has the potential
to form the basis of a minimally invasive bench-top diagnostic tool for
rapid identification of cancerous and potentially malignant lesions.

