Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of carboxyl-modified magnetic nanoparticles and
docetaxel on prostate cancer cells in vitro.


Chemotherapy is used for castration-resistant prostate cancer as one of
treatment options. In this regard, docetaxel-based chemotherapy has been
shown to improve the quality of life in patients with the advanced
disease. However, this needs to be improved because of limitations by
lack of specificity, systemic toxicity, and progression of
docetaxel-resistance. Nanotechnology has served a new role in medical
sciences by a variety of nanotechnology platforms, leading to therapy and
diagnostics. Among these platforms, magnetic nanoparticles (Fe3O4) have
potential applications in drug delivery, cancer diagnosis and therapy. We
have shown that magnetic nanoparticles (MgNPs) would modify the effect of
chemotherapy in cancer cells. In this study, we analyzed the combined
effect of docetaxel and carboxyl-modified magnetic nanoparticles
(MgNPs-COOH) on a prostate cancer cell line, DU145 and their mechanisms
compared with the effect of MgNPs and docetaxel. The combination of
docetaxel and MgNPs/MgNPs-COOH more effectively inhibited cancer cell
growth and induced apoptosis. While only MgNPs produced reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and inhibited cancer cell growth slightly, MgNPs-COOH did
neither produce ROS nor inhibit cancer cell growth. In addition, these
two MgNPs appear to inhibit the different cellular pathways involving
apoptosis and inflammation. These results suggest that MgNPs-COOH may
induce different responses compared with MgNPs, and result in favorable
development of current chemotherapy for the advanced disease and leading
to new tumor ablation therapies.

