Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor infiltrating M1 macrophages work side by side with T cells
to prolong the survival in patients with cervical carcinoma.


One of the hallmarks of cancer is the influx of myeloid cells. In this
study we exploited a cohort of 86 patients with cervical carcinoma to
investigate the constitution of cervical cancer infiltrating myeloid
cells and their relationship to other tumor infiltrating immune cells,
tumor characteristics and the survival of patients. Triple color
immunofluorescent confocal microscopy was used to locate, identify and
quantify macrophages (CD14), their maturation status (CD33) and their
polarization (CD163). Quantification of the numbers of populations of
myeloid cells based on the expression of these three markers revealed
that a strong intraepithelial infiltration of CD14+ cells, more
specifically the population of CD14+CD33-CD163- M1 macrophages, is
associated with a large general influx of intraepithelial T lymphocytes
(p=0.008) and improved survival (p=0.007) as well as forms an independent
prognostic factor for survival (p=0.033). The ratio of intraepithelial
CD8+ T-cells / Tregs also formed an independent prognostic factor
(p=0.010). Combination of these two factors revealed a dramatic
difference in survival between the group of patients whose tumor was well
infiltrated with intraepithelial M1 macrophages and relatively high
numbers of CD8+ T-cells compared to Tregs (100%) and the group of
patients whose tumor displayed a low infiltration with M1 macrophages and
a low CD8+ T-cell / Treg ratio (50%), indicating that these two
populations of immune cells work side by side to improve survival. Our
data suggests that reinforcement and activation of the intratumoral M1
macrophages may form an attractive immunotherapeutic option in cervical
cancer.

