Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMPK-SIRT1 axis: a potential therapeutic target for prostate
cancer management.


Recently we have shown that resveratrol (RES) intervention prevents
development of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplastic (HGPIN)
lesions in prostate-specific PTEN knockout mouse model targeting
SIRT1/mTORC1 axis. It is known that insufficient nutrient supply combined
with high proliferation keeps solid tumors including prostate under
hypoxic and metabolic stress. Tumor cells adapt to survive under such
conditions through activation of AMP-activated kinase (AMPK). AMPK has
been reported to be activated in prostate tumors. Therefore targeting
AMPK and associated signaling pathways will be a promising approach for
prostate cancer management. Accordingly we investigated the role of AMPK
in RES-induced growth inhibitory effects using multiple human prostate
cancer cell lines and preclinical animal model. These data show that RES
treatment (50 M, 24 h) results in activation of SIRT1, significant
inhibition of AMPK phosphorylation and cell survival in human prostate
cancer cells (RWPE-1, LNCaP, C42B and DU145). The observed molecular
changes were associated with induction of apoptosis and autophagy
following treatment with RES. Further dietary administration of RES (0.1
and 2%) to 4-5 week old prostate-specific PTEN knockout mice for 11 and
14 weeks showed prevention of HGPIN development. Interestingly
intervention for 7 weeks showed prevention of HGPIN development at lower
dose but not at high dose. On the other hand, 28-week intervention had no
significant effect on the development of HGPIN lesions.
Immunohistochemical evaluation showed modulation of AMPK, pS6K and SIRT1
in the prostate. Overall these data provide novel insights into
RES-induced prevention of HGPIN development via AMPK/SIRT1/mTORC1 axis.
Supported in part by NIH (CA 137518 and 135451 APK).

