Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HSP90 expression and antitumoral activity of geldanamycin and its
analog 17-AAG in gallbladder cancer.


Background. Gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) is a highly fatal disease with
poor prognosis and few therapeutic alternatives. In Chile, it has an
extremely high incidence and is the second cause of death by cancer among
women. Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is a molecular chaperone and is one
of the most abundant proteins expressed in cells. Many oncogenic proteins
responsible for the transformation of cells to cancerous forms are client
proteins of HSP90. Two molecules have shown to inhibit the action of
HSP90, geldanamycin (GA) and its analog
17-allylamino-17-des-methoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) and hence a potential
target for adjuvant therapy. HSP90 expression and antitumoral activity of
GA and 17-AAG have not been studied in GBC.Methods. Expression of HSP90
was analyzed in 47 selected GBC cases by immunohistochemical staining
using a monoclonal mouse HSP90 antibody (clone JPB24, dilution 1:200,
Novocastra, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). A positive case was interpreted if
at least 50% of the tumor showed cytoplasmic staining. HSP90 expression
was also evaluated in 6 GBC cell lines by Western blot analysis. A
viability assay was performed in GB-d1 cells to determine the median
lethal dose (LD50) of GA and 17-AAG. After treatment with different
concentrations of each inhibitor for 48 h, the percentage of viable cells
was assessed with a colorimetric MTS cell proliferation assay (Promega,
Madison, WI). Treatment with 0.1% of DMSO as solvent was used as control.
We tested the change of migration capability of GB-d1 cells by Transwell
chambers after 24h with GA (15M) and 17-AAG (12M) treatment. Western
blotting of GB-d1 cells before and after treatment with each inhibitor
was done to evaluate the expression of HSP90, EGFR, ERK1/2, Cyclin B1 and
ACTB.Results. HSP90 was frequently overexpressed in GBC primary tumor and
cell lines. The staining intensity ranged from weak to strong, with 35
cases (74%) showing moderate intensity. Average expression was 78%. The
MTS cell viability demonstrated that both GA and 17-AAG elicited
cytostatic and cytotoxic effects on GB-d1 cells. After 24h treatment with
GA or 17-AAG, the migration rates of GB-d1 cells decreased drastically up
to 5% together with the down-regulation of EGFR and Cyclin
B1.Conclusions. Our results showed that HSP90 is highly expressed in GBC
making it a good candidate for targeted therapy. HSP90 inhibition with GA
or 17-AAG induces cytotoxicity and significantly reduces in vitro cell
migration and the expression of oncogenic client proteins of HSP90. Our
results suggest that the inhibition of HSP90 function by GA and 17-AAG
may provide a promising therapeutic strategy for the treatment of GBC.
However, these results must be complemented with in vivo assays and
clinical trials.Grant Support: FONDECYT 1090171

