Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A humanized, high affinity anti-CCR4 antibody for immunotherapy of
cutaneous T cell lymphoma and characterization on T cell function.


Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a heterogeneous group of neoplastic
disorders characterized by clonally derived and skin-homing malignant T
cells that express high level of chemokine receptor CCR4, which is
associated with their skin-homing capacity. CCR4 is also highly expressed
on T-regulatory cells (Tregs) that can migrate to several different types
of chemotactic ligand CCL17- and CCL22-secreting tumors to facilitate
tumor cell evasion from immune surveillance. Thus, its high-level
expression on CTCL cells and Tregs makes CCR4 a potential ideal target
for antibody-based immunotherapy for CTCL and other types of solid
tumors. Here, a humanized and affinity optimized anti-CCR4 monoclonal
antibody (mAb), mAb2-3, was evaluated. In vitro mechanism studies
demonstrated that the potent in vivo anti-tumor effects of this humanized
anti-CCR4 mAb could be attributed to antibody dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC), complement mediated cytotoxicity (CDC) and antibody
dependent cellular phagocytosis (ADCP). In a mouse CTCL tumor model,
anti-CCR4 mAb exhibited an antitumor effect by mediating cellular
cytotoxicity through CDC and ADCC via FcRIIIa expressed murine
neutrophils and human nature killer (NK) cells. Moreover, this anti-CCR4
mAb also effectively inhibits chemotaxis of CD4+CD25high Tregs via CCL22
and abrogates Treg suppression activity in vitro by restoring the
proliferation of CD4+CD25 effector T cells (Teffs). Taken together, this
high-affinity humanized mAb2-3 with potent antitumor effect and a broad
range of mechanisms of action on immunity may provide a novel
immunotherapy for CTCL and other solid tumors.

