Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation-mediated silencing of microRNAs during cervical
carcinogenesis.


Deregulated expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) is common and biologically
relevant in cervical carcinogenesis and appears only partly related to
chromosomal changes. We recently identified 34 miRNAs showing decreased
expression in cervical high-grade precursor lesions and carcinomas not
associated with a chromosomal loss, 6 of which were located within a CpG
island. This study aimed to investigate to what extent these miRNAs are
subject to DNA methylation-mediated silencing in cervical
carcinogenesis.Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) analysis on a cell line
panel representing different stages of human papillomavirus (HPV) induced
transformation revealed an increase in methylation of hsa-miR-149, -203,
and -375 with progression to malignancy, whereas expression of these
miRNAs was restored upon treatment with a demethylating agent. All three
miRNAs showed significantly increased levels of methylation in cervical
carcinomas, whereas methylation levels of hsa-miR-203 and -375 were also
significantly increased in high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
(CIN). A pilot analysis showed that increased hsa-miR-203 methylation was
also detectable in HPV-positive cervical scrapes of women with high-grade
CIN compared to controls. Similar to recent findings on hsa-miR-375,
ectopic expression of hsa-miR-203 in cervical cancer cells decreased both
the proliferation rate and anchorage independent growth.We found evidence
for methylation-mediated silencing of hsa-miR-149, -203 and -375 in
cervical cancer. Methylation of the latter two was already apparent in
precancerous lesions and represent functionally relevant events in
HPV-mediated transformation. In addition, as demonstrated for
hsa-miR-203, these methylated miRNAs may provide valuable markers for
assessment of the presence of (pre)cancerous cervical lesions in
HPV-positive women.

