Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ANG4043: A new brain-penetrant peptide-antibody conjugate that
reduces tumor growth in a HER2-positive orthotopic tumor model.


While monoclonal antibodies to receptor tyrosine kinases such as HER2
have been demonstrated to reduce tumor size and increase survival, these
agents achieve little to no brain penetration, making them ineffective
against metastatic brain tumors. The blood-brain barrier (BBB), which
restricts entry of proteins such as mAbs into the brain, is comprised of
capillary endothelial cells with tight junctions and efflux pumps. Brain
entry of nutrients, hormones, and other required molecules is
accomplished by processes such as receptor-mediated transcytosis. As
low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) is known to
perform this function in BBB endothelial cells, we have created a family
of peptides (Angiopeps) designed for LRP1 recognition. These proprietary
Angiopeps can be used to create novel Peptide-Drug Conjugates that
successfully cross the BBB by LRP1-mediated transcytosis. Here we
describe chemical conjugation of Angiopep-2 (An2) to a mAb against HER2.
This Peptide-Antibody Conjugate, ANG 4043, displays HER2 binding affinity
and in vitro cytotoxic potency similar to that of native anti-HER2.
ANG4043 demonstrates a high rate of entry into the brain, consistent with
achieving therapeutic concentrations. The plasma half-life of ANG4043 is
similar to that of Anti-HER2 in mouse. Mice with intracranially implanted
BT-474 cells showed reduced brain tumor size when dosed with ANG4043
compared to controls. Overall, these data demonstrate that a
brain-penetrant Peptide-Antibody Conjugate is efficacious in a mouse
HER2-positive tumor model. These results extend the validation of An2
conjugation beyond small molecules and peptides to include larger
molecules such as therapeutic mAbs for development of new brain-penetrant
antitumor therapeutics.

