Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic insight into MIG6 phosphorylation-mediated inhibitory
effect on active EGFR.


Genomic alteration of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) plays a
crucial role in pathogenesis of various types of cancer. By a systematic
quantitative phosphoproteomic approach (iTRAQ), we found that tyrosine
phosphorylation occurs within segment 2 of MIG6, a negative feedback
regulator of EGFR, in the cells transformed by lung-cancer derived EGFR
mutants. We further confirmed this MIG6 phosphorylation is directly
induced by activated EGFR by in vitro kinase assay with purified proteins
followed by immunoblotting with phospho-specific antibody. Importantly,
we also found that MIG6 phosphorylation seems to play a crucial role in
its inhibitory role of EGFR activation. While wild-type MIG6 was able to
completely inhibit the enzymatic activation of oncogenic mutant EGFR and
subsequent cellular transformation, phosphorylation defective MIG6
mutants were unable to exert the same effects. Moreover, consistent with
its functional role, we found that phosphorylation defective MIG6 failed
to interact with mutant EGFR by co-immunoprecipitation assay, suggesting
that the phosphorylation on MIG6 is required for interaction between MIG6
and EGFR. Taken together, we propose a working model that phosphorylation
on segment 2 of MIG6 is directly induced by active EGFR, promoting tight
interaction of MIG6 segment 2 and EGFR active site and subsequently
blocking the enzymatic activity of EGFR.

