Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of lung cancer stem-like cells by chronic exposure to
carbon nanotubes.


Our previous studies have shown that chronic exposure to single-walled
carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) induces malignant transformation of human lung
epithelial cells. Most solid tumors including lung cancer cells are
believed to contain poorly differentiated cancer stem-like cells (CSCs)
that initiate tumorigenesis and confer resistance to chemotherapy. In
this study we investigated whether SWCNT-transformed lung epithelial
cells present CSC traits. Similar to human non-small cell lung cancer
H460 cells, SWCNT-transformed lung epithelial BEAS-2B cells but not its
passage-matched control cells formed tumor spheres in stem cell-selective
conditions, indicating the existence of lung CSCs. Lung CSCs have
previously been reported to reside in the side population (SP) of
parental lung cancer cells. Analysis of SP fractions based on the ability
of SP to efflux Hoechst 33342 dye to generate a Hoechst blue-red profile
revealed that the SWCNT-transformed cells and H460 cells have high SP
fractions, while passage-matched control cells showed no SP, thus
confirming the existence of CSC population in SWCNT-transformed and H460
cells. Compared with the corresponding parental cells, the SP cells of
SWCNT-transformed and H460 cells acquired apoptosis resistance to various
chemotherapy including antimycin A, cisplatin, doxorubicin and etoposide.
Together, our results indicate the ability of SWCNT to transform human
lung epithelial cells and induce CSCs which could represent a novel
mechanism of carcinogenesis induced by CNTs.

