Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pin1 regulates the dynamics of c-Myc DNA binding to facilitate
target gene regulation and oncogenesis.


The c-Myc oncoprotein is generally considered to be a master regulator of
gene transcription by virtue of its ability to activate or repress the
expression of a large percentage of all genes. However, mechanisms that
direct c-Myc's recruitment to DNA and target gene selection to elicit
specific cellular functions have not been well elucidated. Here, we
report that the Pin1 prolyl-isomerase regulates c-Myc transcriptional
activity by altering c-Myc's association with target gene promoters.
Specifically, we show that Pin1 enhances the recruitment of
Serine62-phosphorylated c-Myc along with its co-activators to selected
target gene promoters during gene activation, followed by promoting
c-Myc's release associated with its degradation, resulting in cyclic
c-Myc DNA binding. This facilitates c-Myc's activation of target genes
associated with an increase in elongating RNA Polymerase II in the gene
body. Genes impacted by this mechanism are involved in cell growth and
metabolism, resulting in enhanced pro-proliferative activity, even while
controlling c-Myc expression. In cancer cells with impaired c-Myc
degradation, Pin1 still regulates cyclic c-Myc DNA binding, even though
it no longer enhances c-Myc degradation. This allows for simultaneous
high expression of Pin1 and c-Myc in cancer, which can drive a gene
expression pattern that we show is enriched in poor outcome subtypes of
breast cancer. This study provides new insight into mechanisms regulating
c-Myc DNA binding and oncogenic activity, it reveals a novel role for
Pin1 in transcription factor regulation, and it elucidates a mechanism
that can contribute to oncogenic cooperation between Pin1 and c-Myc.

