Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer incidence rate in american women started to
increase: Trend analysis from 2000 to 2009.


Background: Recent report showed that breast cancer incidence rate in the
US stabilized after a sharp reduction in 2002 and 2003. It is important
to continue monitoring breast cancer incidence rates according to age
group, race/ethnicity, estrogen receptor (ER), and tumor stage.Methods:
Age-standardized breast cancer incidence rates were calculated using data
from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) 18 registries
from 2000 to 2009, among 677,774 female breast cancer patients aged 20
and above. Jointpoint regression models were used to fit a series of
joined straight lines on a log scale to the trends of annual
age-standardized rates.Results: The overall breast cancer incidence
significantly increased for non-Hispanic black from 2005 to 2009 (annual
percentage change, APC =2.0%, p=0.01) and Asian/Pacific Islanders from
2000 to 2009 (APC 1.2%, p=0.02). Since 2004, incidence rates in women age
40-49 significantly increased for all racial/ethnic groups (overall APC =
1.1%, p=0.001). Incidence rate of carcinoma in situ significantly
increased in all racial/ethnic groups (APC ranges from 2.3%-3.0%,
pBackground: Recent report showed that breast cancer incidence rate in
the US stabilized after a sharp reduction in 2002 and 2003. It is
important to continue monitoring breast cancer incidence rates according
to age group, race/ethnicity, estrogen receptor (ER), and tumor
stage.Methods: Age-standardized breast cancer incidence rates were
calculated using data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results (SEER) 18 registries from 2000 to 2009, among 677,774 female
breast cancer patients aged 20 and above. Jointpoint regression models
were used to fit a series of joined straight lines on a log scale to the
trends of annual age-standardized rates.Results: The overall breast
cancer incidence significantly increased for non-Hispanic black from 2005
to 2009 (annual percentage change, APC =2.0%, p=0.01) and Asian/Pacific
Islanders from 2000 to 2009 (APC 1.2%, p=0.02). Since 2004, incidence
rates in women age 40-49 significantly increased for all racial/ethnic
groups (overall APC = 1.1%, p=0.001). Incidence rate of carcinoma in situ
significantly increased in all racial/ethnic groups (APC ranges from
2.3%-3.0%, p<0.005) and localized breast cancer incidence significantly
increased in non-Hispanic blacks (APC=1.3%, p=0.004) and Asian (APC=1.2%,
p=0.03). ER positive breast cancer significantly increased in almost all
age/race sub-groups after 2005 (APC by race: non-Hispanic white 1.5%,
non-Hispanic black 4.3%, Asian/Pacific Islander 1.7%, and Hispanic 1.8%,
p-valuesBackground: Recent report showed that breast cancer incidence
rate in the US stabilized after a sharp reduction in 2002 and 2003. It is
important to continue monitoring breast cancer incidence rates according
to age group, race/ethnicity, estrogen receptor (ER), and tumor
stage.Methods: Age-standardized breast cancer incidence rates were
calculated using data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results (SEER) 18 registries from 2000 to 2009, among 677,774 female
breast cancer patients aged 20 and above. Jointpoint regression models
were used to fit a series of joined straight lines on a log scale to the
trends of annual age-standardized rates.Results: The overall breast
cancer incidence significantly increased for non-Hispanic black from 2005
to 2009 (annual percentage change, APC =2.0%, p=0.01) and Asian/Pacific
Islanders from 2000 to 2009 (APC 1.2%, p=0.02). Since 2004, incidence
rates in women age 40-49 significantly increased for all racial/ethnic
groups (overall APC = 1.1%, p=0.001). Incidence rate of carcinoma in situ
significantly increased in all racial/ethnic groups (APC ranges from
2.3%-3.0%, p<0.005) and localized breast cancer incidence significantly
increased in non-Hispanic blacks (APC=1.3%, p=0.004) and Asian (APC=1.2%,
p=0.03). ER positive breast cancer significantly increased in almost all
age/race sub-groups after 2005 (APC by race: non-Hispanic white 1.5%,
non-Hispanic black 4.3%, Asian/Pacific Islander 1.7%, and Hispanic 1.8%,
p-values<0.05), while ER negative breast cancer decreased in most
sub-groups (APC by race: non-Hispanic white -3.9%, non-Hispanic black
-3.7%, Asian/Pacific Islander -1.5%, and Hispanic -4.3%,
p-valuesBackground: Recent report showed that breast cancer incidence
rate in the US stabilized after a sharp reduction in 2002 and 2003. It is
important to continue monitoring breast cancer incidence rates according
to age group, race/ethnicity, estrogen receptor (ER), and tumor
stage.Methods: Age-standardized breast cancer incidence rates were
calculated using data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results (SEER) 18 registries from 2000 to 2009, among 677,774 female
breast cancer patients aged 20 and above. Jointpoint regression models
were used to fit a series of joined straight lines on a log scale to the
trends of annual age-standardized rates.Results: The overall breast
cancer incidence significantly increased for non-Hispanic black from 2005
to 2009 (annual percentage change, APC =2.0%, p=0.01) and Asian/Pacific
Islanders from 2000 to 2009 (APC 1.2%, p=0.02). Since 2004, incidence
rates in women age 40-49 significantly increased for all racial/ethnic
groups (overall APC = 1.1%, p=0.001). Incidence rate of carcinoma in situ
significantly increased in all racial/ethnic groups (APC ranges from
2.3%-3.0%, p<0.005) and localized breast cancer incidence significantly
increased in non-Hispanic blacks (APC=1.3%, p=0.004) and Asian (APC=1.2%,
p=0.03). ER positive breast cancer significantly increased in almost all
age/race sub-groups after 2005 (APC by race: non-Hispanic white 1.5%,
non-Hispanic black 4.3%, Asian/Pacific Islander 1.7%, and Hispanic 1.8%,
p-values<0.05), while ER negative breast cancer decreased in most
sub-groups (APC by race: non-Hispanic white -3.9%, non-Hispanic black
-3.7%, Asian/Pacific Islander -1.5%, and Hispanic -4.3%,
p-values<0.05).Conclusions: Recent incidence of breast cancer appears to
be increasing in certain subgroups, including non-Hispanic black,
Asian/Pacific Islanders, women 40-49 years old, low-stage breast cancer,
and estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer. These changes are unlikely
due to mammography screening rate that has remained stable in recent
years, but may be partially explained by the transition from film to
digital mammography, which has higher sensitivity to detect breast
cancer, especially young-onset breast cancer. It deserves further
investigation on why the rate of estrogen receptor negative breast cancer
declined.

