Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of manual and automated scoring of androgen receptor
staining in prostate tissue.


Although manual scoring is generally used to evaluate the presence of
androgen receptor (AR) protein as detected by immunohistochemistry in
tissue, manual evaluation is tedious, inefficient and subjective.
Therefore, manual scoring is not feasible for the evaluation of large
numbers of patients. In this study, a technician (CP) rated AR staining
in tissue sections of 3 tissue microarrays (TMAs) constructed from 3
cores each of benign and malignant tissue from 134 patients who underwent
radical prostatectomy between 1993 and 2006 at Roswell Park Cancer
Institute. The manual scorer randomly sampled 50 nuclei from each core
and scored each nuclei as not stained (score =0), or lightly (score = 1),
moderately (score=2) or darkly (score = 3) stained. The average staining
intensity was recorded per patient across the benign cores, and across
the tumor cores. Automated staining used the Image Pro image processing
program, in which the entire core was scanned, all nuclei segmented and
average intensity values per between 0 (completely black) and 255
(completely white) were determined for each nucleus. The mean staining
score for each core is calculated by taking the average of all the
identified nuclei in the core, and an average intensity is calculated per
patient across the benign cores, and across the malignant cores.The
Pearson correlation between manual and automated scoring was 0.76. When
stratified by benign or malignant tissue, the Pearson correlation between
manual and automated scoring was 0.75 (benign) and 0.78
(malignant).Automated scoring of AR staining is comparable to manual
scoring of AR in prostate tissue. In light of the greater efficiency of
automated scoring, future evaluations of immunohistochemical staining may
be usefully conducted using automated scoring of nuclei.

