Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retreatment after secondary resistance: A pilot study.


Retreatment with agents to which patients have shown secondary resistance
or a mixed response is usually avoided by oncologists, though recent
results suggest that continuing herceptin after secondary resistance is
associated with a better outcome than discontinuation. Here we present
preliminary results of a pilot study in which patients were retreated
with agents that had previously produced prolonged stable disease (SD),
partial or complete remission (PR/CR) or a mixed response,followed by
progression.This study was performed according the guidelines of the MD
Anderson Cancer Center Institutional Review Board.Eleven patients with
diverse, advanced cancers (median number of prior systemic therapies in
the metastatic setting = four (range, 2-7) have been included to date
(number of men = 8; median age = 57 years; median ECOG performance status
= 1)., The median duration between the initial treatment and the
retreatment regimen was 95 weeks (range 5-323 weeks). Eight of 11patients
(73%) on a retreatment regimen showed stable disease (SD) >24 weeks or a
partial response. Of these eight, two were retreated with precisely the
same agent(s); one, with a different agent that has the same mechanism of
action (EGFR inhibitor; gefitinib first and then erlotinib); and five,
with the same agent(s) but with additional agents added.
*Gap in weeks between the previous treatment and initiation of the
retreatment with some of the same drugs.Our pilot data suggest that
retreatment with agents to which patients had previously shown durable
SD/CR/PR or mixed response followed by secondary resistance can produce
SD > = 24 weeks/ PR when given alone or in combination after a gap
between initial treatment and retreatment. Plausible mechanisms
accounting for this phenomenon include persistence of a suppressed clone
alongside the new resistant clone, drug synergy,and epigenetic modulation
during drug holidays. Further investigation of the effect of retreatment
in patients with advanced metastatic disease is warranted.

