Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX10 is required for cell cycle regulation and melanomagenesis.


The transcription factor SOX10 is essential for proper survival and
differentiation of neural crest cell lineages, and plays an important
role in the establishment and maintenance of melanocytes. SOX10 is also
highly expressed in melanoma tumors, however its role in the progression
of the disease is not yet understood. Here, we report that melanoma tumor
cell lines require wild-type SOX10 expression for proliferation, and
detail the rescue of melanoma in the metabotropic glutamate receptor 1
(Grm1Tg) transgenic mouse by Sox10 haploinsufficiency. Stable SOX10
knockdown in human melanoma cells results in arrested growth, altered
cellular morphology, and senescence. Cells with a stable loss of SOX10
are arrested in the G1 phase of the cell cycle with elevated
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A and 1B (p21 and p27) expression.
SOX10 loss also results in hypophosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein
(RB) and a reduction in the expression of its binding partner E2F1.
Previously, the RB-E2F1 pathway has been shown to play a central role in
cell cycle regulation, and here we demonstrate that SOX10 expression is
required for the maintenance of the RB-E2F1 pathway to promote melanoma
cell growth. One of the main events driving cellular transformation is
the dysregulation of the cell cycle, therefore the role that SOX10 has in
maintaining this process provides great promise for targeted
interventions.

