Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated fibroblast growth factor-inducible 14 (Fn14): a novel
therapeutic target in gastric cancer.


Chemoresistance is one of the most serious problems in the cancer
treatment. Here we show that Fn14 is a gene that promotes resistance to
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in gastric cancer. We found that 5-FU treatment
augmented Fn14 expression at both the RNA and protein level in gastric
cancer cell lines, and that knock-down of Fn14 using shRNA accelerated
sensitivity to 5-FU. We then investigated the underlying mechanism of
Fn14-mediated chemoresistance. 5-FU treatment resulted in up-regulation
of Fn14 expression as well as Bcl-xL by translocation of NF-B to the
nucleus and subsequent transcriptional activation. To examine whether
NF-B binds directly to Fn14 promoter, we performed luciferase assay. As a
result, 5-FU treatment augmented Fn14 promoter activity, while increased
activity of Fn14 reporter gene was reduced by NF-B inhibitor and NF-B
knock-down by siRNA. In chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we revealed
that 5-FU treatment enhanced NF-B binding to Fn14 promoter, indicating
that NF-B activation by 5-FU was the principal event for Fn14
up-regulation followed by resistance to 5-FU in gastric cancer. Our
results suggest that Fn14 is a novel therapeutic target, and that
dysfunction of Fn14 combined with 5-FU treatment is an effective
therapeutic strategy to overcome resistance to 5-FU of gastric cancer
patients.

