Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) supresses Tumor Necrosis
Factor-a (TNF-a)-mediated induction of Caspase-1, STAT1 and Apoptosis in
human cervical carcinoma cells.


Background: Members of Human Epidermal GrowthFactor Receptors are
over-expressed in variety of cancers. The EGFR-mediated activation of
signal transduction pathways ultimately induce cellular growth, supress
apoptosis and can cause tumor malignancy. On the contrary, TNF- induces
the expression of numerous genes which contribute to the inhibition of
growth and the induction of apoptosis. Therefore, we tested the impact of
EGF on TNF--induced expression of Caspase-1, activation of STAT1 and
induction of apoptosis on human cervical carcinoma cells,
(ME180).Results: Treatment of ME180 cells with TNF- (10 ng/ml) induced
the expression of Caspase-1 in a time dependent manner. Also,
pre-treatment of these cells with EGF (10ng/ml) completely
inhibitedTNF-induced Caspase-1 induction. Since Caspase-1 induction is
mediated bySTAT1, the levels of STAT1 activation byTNF was determined. It
was found that TNF induces STAT1 activation in these cells. However,
pre-treatment of ME180 cells with EGF completely inhibited TNF--mediated
activation of STAT1. Parallel to these findings, pre-treatment of ME180
cells with EGF for 1 hour completely inhibited TNF-induced apoptosis in
these cells.Conclusion: These results suggest that tumor microenvironment
created by the tumor or surrounding cells are important in controlling
the growth and apoptosis of cancer cells. Therefore, abundance of growth
factors and pro-apoptotic cytokines may determine the fate of tumor
behavior.

