Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Response to the anti-EGFR antibody panitumumab combined with
standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy in triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC): the immune and IGFR pathways.


Background: EGFR overexpression is one of the hallmarks of the basal-like
TNBC definition by immunohistochemistry (IHC) (Nielsen, 2004). In a phase
II neoadjuvant clinical trial targeting EGFR in TNBC, we investigated
various biomarkers to better identify an EGFR-sensitive population for
potential further regimen development.Methods: Sixty patients (pts) with
stage II-IIIA TNBC were prospectively included. Systemic treatment (ST)
consisted of the anti-EGFR antibody panitumumab combined with FEC 100,
followed by 4 cycles of docetaxel. All pts underwent surgery after ST
completion. Patient characteristics: median tumor size: 40 mm (20-120);
invasive ductal carcinoma: 96.7%; SBR grade III: 71.7%; complete
pathological response (pCR) rate: 46.8% (Chevallier's classification).
Paraffin-embedded and frozen tumor samples were collected before and
after ST for biologic studies. Germinal BRCA1 mutations, and EGFR, KRAS,
BRAF and PI3KCA somatic mutations were analyzed by NGS. EGFR, IGF-1R,
MET, cytokeratins 5/6 and 8/18, PTEN, P-cadherin, ALDH1, Ki-67, p53,
tumoral FOXP3 expression and the number of FOXP3+ or CD8+
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were evaluated by IHC. Biopsies and
surgical samples were analysed using Affimetrix arrays.Results : By
univariate analysis, high CD8+ TILs was response-predictive (pCR rates:
CD8 TILs: 84% high vs 10% low; p=3.4.106). Tumor FOXP3 expression and
high FOXP3 TILs tended to be predictive (pCR rates: tumor FOXP3: 77%
positive vs 36% negative, p=0.07; FOXP3 TILs: 66% high vs 37% low, p=
0.08). High IGF-1R expressors responded better than low expressors (80%
vs 33%, respectively, p=0.028).As could be expected, a positive
correlation between tumor FOXP3 expression and FOXP3 TILs was found (p =
2.7.104, r = 0.56). Surprisingly, a positive correlation was found
between FOXP3 TILs and CD8+ TILs (p = 2.105, r = 0.59) and between tumor
FOXP3 and CD8+ TILs (p = 6.3.103, r = 0.43).Comparison of EGFR, IGF-1R
and Her3 in biopsies versus surgical samples showed reduced EGFR levels
in non-responders (p = 0.037), while Her3 (p = 0.049) and IGF-1R (p =
0.08) increased.Sequencing revealed BRCA1 mutations in 10% of pts. No
difference of response (pCR) was observed between mutated patients and
others (p=0.91). Somatic mutations of PI3K were observed in 6 pts. No
mutations were observed in BRAF, KRAS, or EGFR. Analysis of Affymetrix
arrays for gene expression is underway and will be presented.Conclusions
: Interestingly, the CD8+ TIL count seems to predict the response to
panitumumab. Tumor FOXP3 expression and high FOXP3 TILs also tended to be
predictive. Tumor levels of IGF-1R seem to play a determinant role in
TNBC response to anti-EGFR antibodies, in concordance with our
observations in a head-and-neck cancer cohort (Clin Canc Res 2012).
Confirmatory and mechanistic studies of those biomarkers are warranted.

