Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity within triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC).


Background: TNBC refers to those breast cancers which are negative for
ER, PR and Her2/neu overexpression, thereby unsuitable for hormone and
trastuzumab therapy. Although TNBC overlap with basal-like breast
cancers, these terms are not synonymous. We decided, in a single
institution cohort, to develop a better understanding of the types of
tumors that make up TNBCMaterials and Methods: We carried out a
clinicopathological study of a cohort of 192 patients diagnosed with TNBC
at the University Health Network in 2007. Patient biodata, clinical and
histopathological information of proven prognostic importance was
retrieved from the records. Tissue microarrays were constructed from
duplicate 0.6mm cores of representative tumour tissue and stained with 9
antibodies according to recommended protocols. The TMA slides were
interpreted using the Allred method except for the Ki67 staining which
was interpreted by the visual estimate method of assessing proportion of
nuclei taking up stains. Results were tabulated and summary statistics
was done to determine proportions.Results: The age-range is 28 - 99
years. The median and modal age group was 50 -59 years. 70.3% of the
patients are aged between 40 and 69 years at the time of diagnosis. The
tumour size range was 0.6cm to 16 cm. 41.67% are pT1, 51.04% are pT2
while 6.8% are pT3. Four patients had T4 tumor with skin and nipple
involvement. The diagnosis was predominantly invasive ductal carcinoma
(IDC) in 84.9% of patients. Metaplastic carcinoma (10.4%), pleomorphic
lobular carcinoma (1.5%), and single cases of invasive lobular carcinoma
(ILC), tubular, apocrine and poorly differentiated carcinoma were seen.
DCIS is a prominent feature in 26.6% of the cases. The number of lymph
nodes identified ranged from 0 - 46. 59.90% were in pN0 category, 16.7%
in the pN1 category, pN2 - 8.3%, and 15.1% in pN3 category. Extra-nodal
metastasis at diagnosis was found in 7.3% of patients. The tumour grade:
Grade I - 1.55%, Grade II - 13.47% and Grade III 84.97%. CD44 was
positive in 17.71%, p63 - 4.17%, p53 - 51.56%, e-cadherin - 81.77%,
Vimentin - 77.60%, Cyclin D1 - 22.40%, BCL-2 - 19.27%, and androgen
receptor (AR) - 5.73%. 43.75% of cases show proliferation rates of 15%,
while 26.04% have proliferation rates of between 5% and 14%.Conclusion:
While a large proportion of TNBCs show a high proliferation (Ki67, Cyclin
D1 and grade III), a substantial number did not show this. This study
provides clues to support the current hypothesis that several mechanisms
drive the carcinogenesis of TNBC, with a heterogeneous pattern of
biomarker expression. Further investigation is needed to better
understand the factors driving the development and progression of the
different types of TNBC.

