Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translating preclinical PK/PD tumor volume modeling data to
predict AMG172 PK and dose-escalation scheme in FIH.


Background: AMG 172 is an antibody drug conjugate (ADC) comprised of a
human IgG1 monoclonal antibody (mAb), a non-cleavable linker
(4-[N-maleimidomethyl] cyclohexane-1-carboxylate) conjugated to lysine
residues in the antibody and DM1, a semi-synthetic derivative of
maytansine. AMG 172 binding and internalization into target-expressing
tumor cells, induces metaphase arrest and subsequent cellular apoptosis,
leading to tumor cell death. AMG 172 is being developed as a treatment
for clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), and other indications, as a
single agent or in combination with chemotherapy. The primary goals of
this study were, 1) to predict human AMG 172 PK disposition from
non-clinical data, 2) to determine AMG 172 exposure anti-tumor activity
relationships in mouse xenograft models, and develop an AMG 172
anti-tumor PK/PD model, and 3) to integrate non-clinical toxicology,
pharmacology and pharmacokinetic data to support selection of doses for
the first in human (FIH) clinical studyMaterials and Methods: A PK model
in cynomolgus monkey was developed from single and multiple-dose
pharmacokinetics and toxicokinetics, and used to predict the human PK of
AMG 172. In vivo anti-tumor activity was demonstrated by AMG 172 in human
ccRCC subcutaneous tumor xenografts in mice. Tumor growth inhibition in
mouse xenografts was modeled using a tumor inhibition PK/PD model.
Primary model assumptions for extrapolation of non-clinical PK/PD to
human were: a) AMG 172 PK can be scaled directly from cynomolgus monkey,
and b) anti-tumor efficacy in mouse xenografts is drug dependent and
species independent.Results: A two compartment open linear model best
described AMG 172 pharmacokinetics in cynomolgus monkey. AMG 172 CL was
estimated to be 9.45 mL/hr in a typical human (70 kg) based on
species-invariant time scaling methods. At the STD10 in rats and the
HNSTD in cynomolgus monkey, anticipated AUC margins are approximately
17.9/11.9 and 15.7/10.5 times for Q3wk/Q2wk dosing regimens,
respectively, at the projected clinical starting dose of 0.15 mg/kg.
Using the mouse xenograft PK and PD data, clinical dose projections were
generated that attained model-based, putative target trough
concentrations. Collectively, these results support potential AMG 172
dosing every 23 weeks, thereby providing flexibility in the
clinic.Conclusions: This work demonstrates efficient integration of
non-clinical toxicology, preclinical pharmacology and pharmacokinetic
data in order to support rational selection of AMG 172 doses for FIH
clinical studies.Citation Format: Nelson L. Jumbe, William Fanslow, Sonal
Patel, Benny Amore, Marc Retter, Vincent Chow. Translating preclinical
PK/PD tumor volume modeling data to predict AMG172 PK and dose-escalation
scheme in FIH. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington,
DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr
3359. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3359

