Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engagement of activatory Fc receptors by immunoregulatory
receptor-targeting antibodies mediates antitumor activity.


Inhibitory FcRIIB receptors are required for the therapeutic effects of
agonistic antibodies targeting several tumor necrosis factor receptor
(TNFR) superfamily members, including CD40, DR5, and Fas. However, it
remains unclear how general this requirement is and whether activating
FcRs may be required for antibodies targeting other immunoregulatory
receptors. Here we have explored the involvement of FcRs for the
antitumor effects of antibodies targeted to costimulatory TNFRs expressed
on T cells. Surprisingly, FcRIIB was completely dispensable for
antibody-mediated anti-tumor effects. In contrast, activating FcRs were
required for maximal in vivo activity. A similar dependence on activating
FcRs was observed for antibodies targeted to the T cell surface antigen
CTLA-4. Important changes in the tumor microenvironment and draining
lymph nodes correlated with the in vivo efficacy of these antibodies. Our
findings uncover a previously unknown requirement for activating FcRs in
the anti-tumor effects of immunomodulatory antibodies and raise important
questions about the role of receptor signaling for therapeutic activity.
A greater understanding of this activatory FcR-based mechanism may
improve the design and activity of immune-modulatory antibodies in
clinical development, and those already approved for the clinic.

