Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel tyrosine derivatives of temozolomide active against breast
cancer cell lines.


A series of L- and D-tyrosine derivatives of temozolomide (TMZ) was
synthesized and evaluated as potentially improved anticancer agents
against breast cancer cell lines. TMZ is a well tolerated, broad spectrum
oral alkylating agent that crosses the bloodbrain barrier. It has
demonstrated activity against glioma and melanoma, as well as preclinical
activity against breast cancer. Recent studies have shown the
effectiveness of combining alkylating agents with the amino acid
tyrosine, yielding analogs with significantly improved in vitro
anticancer activity when compared with the parent compound. Following
from this, we seek to improve the efficacy of TMZ by chemically modifying
the C-8 position of the imidazotetrazine to include L- and D-tyrosine
adducts attached either directly or via a linker of varying size. The
novel TMZ derivatives were synthesized in good yields through efficient
peptide synthesis methods. The anticancer efficacy of the derivatives was
evaluated over several hormone-dependent and hormone-independent (ER+ and
ER-) breast cancer cell lines. Preliminary results show that at a
concentration of 2 x 105 M the novel derivatives display at least a 20%
greater in vitro growth inhibitory activity when compared to TMZ,
particularly in hormone-dependent MCF-7 breast cancer cell line.
Structureactivity relationship (SAR) analysis suggests the influence of
both the length of the linker and the stereochemistry of the tyrosine
adduct on the anticancer activity of the derivatives. Further
investigation will reveal if interaction with hormone-related receptors
is involved in the mechanism of action of the newly synthesized
derivatives.

