Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch-antibody drug conjugates have a different mechanism of
action than Notch signaling inhibitors and induce tumor regression.


There are four different Notch receptors in mammalian cells that have
overlapping patterns of expression in embryonic and adult tissues, but
fulfill non-redundant roles during hematopoietic stem cell specification,
T cell development, intestinal crypt cell specification and vascular
development. Notch receptors are over-expressed or amplified in certain
human tumors and regulate cell proliferation, differentiation, and
survival through an intracellular domain that functions as a
transcriptional activator. Several strategies are in development to block
Notch signaling for therapeutic purposes in cancer, including
gamma-secretase inhibitors that block all Notch signaling and
antibody-based targeting of individual receptors. However, blocking
pathway activation with inhibitory antibodies has proven to be less
efficacious than originally anticipated. Therefore, we have targeted
Notch with antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) that combine the specificity
of high affinity anti-Notch antibodies with the cytotoxicity of
microtubule inhibitors. These ADCs enhance efficacy and also allow
targeting in tumors that overexpress Notch but are not driven by its
signaling. Notch antibodies were conjugated though cleavable and
non-cleavable linkers to novel tubulin inhibitor-based payloads.
Notch-ADCs inhibited the in vitro growth of lung, breast and ovarian
cancer cell lines in the low ng/ml range and in vivo regressed the growth
of established human tumor xenografts. Our data demonstrate that
Notch-ADCs are more potent than small molecule inhibitors and
unconjugated antibodies, and induce sustained tumor regression in
pre-clinical models.

