Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An investigation into the potential therapeutic benefit of
targeting Skp2 in neuroblastoma.


Background: S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2) is a component of
an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex which targets several key regulators of
the G1/S transition of the cell cycle. Skp2 is overexpressed in many
cancers and has been implicated in tumourigenesis due to its ability to
degrade the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p27Kip1 and p21Cip1,
promote S phase entry and induce growth. We identified Skp2 as a possible
MYCN target gene in neuroblastoma (Bell et al, Cell Cycle, 2007), and
other groups have reported an increase in Skp2 transcript levels in
aggressive MYCN- amplified neuroblastoma (Westermann et al, Clinical
Cancer Res 2007). As MYCN amplification is a well-established poor
prognostic marker we hypothesise that targeting Skp2 may be a potential
therapeutic approach for neuroblastoma, especially the MYCN-amplified
subtype.Methods: The relationship between MYCN and Skp2 was investigated
using the SHEP Tet21N-regulatable MYCN expression system and Skp2 siRNA.
The effects of Skp2 knockdown on downstream proteins (p21, p27), cell
cycle arrest and cell apoptosis were analysed using western blotting,
flow cytometry, and the caspase-3/7 glow assay, respectively.Results: A
decrease in Skp2 and subsequent increase in p27 and p21 levels was seen
in SHEP Tet21N cells when MYCN expression was suppressed. A G1 arrest was
also induced by MYCN removal, an effect mirrored after Skp2 knockdown in
Tet21N MYCN+ cells. Skp2 knockdown increased both p27 and p21 levels in
non-MYCN amplified SHSY5Y cells and MYCN amplified IMR-32 cells. Both
cell lines had 20% reduction (pBackground: S-phase kinase-associated
protein 2 (Skp2) is a component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex which
targets several key regulators of the G1/S transition of the cell cycle.
Skp2 is overexpressed in many cancers and has been implicated in
tumourigenesis due to its ability to degrade the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors p27Kip1 and p21Cip1, promote S phase entry and induce growth.
We identified Skp2 as a possible MYCN target gene in neuroblastoma (Bell
et al, Cell Cycle, 2007), and other groups have reported an increase in
Skp2 transcript levels in aggressive MYCN- amplified neuroblastoma
(Westermann et al, Clinical Cancer Res 2007). As MYCN amplification is a
well-established poor prognostic marker we hypothesise that targeting
Skp2 may be a potential therapeutic approach for neuroblastoma,
especially the MYCN-amplified subtype.Methods: The relationship between
MYCN and Skp2 was investigated using the SHEP Tet21N-regulatable MYCN
expression system and Skp2 siRNA. The effects of Skp2 knockdown on
downstream proteins (p21, p27), cell cycle arrest and cell apoptosis were
analysed using western blotting, flow cytometry, and the caspase-3/7 glow
assay, respectively.Results: A decrease in Skp2 and subsequent increase
in p27 and p21 levels was seen in SHEP Tet21N cells when MYCN expression
was suppressed. A G1 arrest was also induced by MYCN removal, an effect
mirrored after Skp2 knockdown in Tet21N MYCN+ cells. Skp2 knockdown
increased both p27 and p21 levels in non-MYCN amplified SHSY5Y cells and
MYCN amplified IMR-32 cells. Both cell lines had 20% reduction (p<0.01)
in growth after 72 hours knockdown compared to the scrambled control.
However, only SHSY5Y cells showed a G1 arrest (pBackground: S-phase
kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2) is a component of an E3 ubiquitin
ligase complex which targets several key regulators of the G1/S
transition of the cell cycle. Skp2 is overexpressed in many cancers and
has been implicated in tumourigenesis due to its ability to degrade the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p27Kip1 and p21Cip1, promote S phase
entry and induce growth. We identified Skp2 as a possible MYCN target
gene in neuroblastoma (Bell et al, Cell Cycle, 2007), and other groups
have reported an increase in Skp2 transcript levels in aggressive MYCN-
amplified neuroblastoma (Westermann et al, Clinical Cancer Res 2007). As
MYCN amplification is a well-established poor prognostic marker we
hypothesise that targeting Skp2 may be a potential therapeutic approach
for neuroblastoma, especially the MYCN-amplified subtype.Methods: The
relationship between MYCN and Skp2 was investigated using the SHEP
Tet21N-regulatable MYCN expression system and Skp2 siRNA. The effects of
Skp2 knockdown on downstream proteins (p21, p27), cell cycle arrest and
cell apoptosis were analysed using western blotting, flow cytometry, and
the caspase-3/7 glow assay, respectively.Results: A decrease in Skp2 and
subsequent increase in p27 and p21 levels was seen in SHEP Tet21N cells
when MYCN expression was suppressed. A G1 arrest was also induced by MYCN
removal, an effect mirrored after Skp2 knockdown in Tet21N MYCN+ cells.
Skp2 knockdown increased both p27 and p21 levels in non-MYCN amplified
SHSY5Y cells and MYCN amplified IMR-32 cells. Both cell lines had 20%
reduction (p<0.01) in growth after 72 hours knockdown compared to the
scrambled control. However, only SHSY5Y cells showed a G1 arrest (p<0.05)
and increase in caspase activity (pBackground: S-phase kinase-associated
protein 2 (Skp2) is a component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex which
targets several key regulators of the G1/S transition of the cell cycle.
Skp2 is overexpressed in many cancers and has been implicated in
tumourigenesis due to its ability to degrade the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors p27Kip1 and p21Cip1, promote S phase entry and induce growth.
We identified Skp2 as a possible MYCN target gene in neuroblastoma (Bell
et al, Cell Cycle, 2007), and other groups have reported an increase in
Skp2 transcript levels in aggressive MYCN- amplified neuroblastoma
(Westermann et al, Clinical Cancer Res 2007). As MYCN amplification is a
well-established poor prognostic marker we hypothesise that targeting
Skp2 may be a potential therapeutic approach for neuroblastoma,
especially the MYCN-amplified subtype.Methods: The relationship between
MYCN and Skp2 was investigated using the SHEP Tet21N-regulatable MYCN
expression system and Skp2 siRNA. The effects of Skp2 knockdown on
downstream proteins (p21, p27), cell cycle arrest and cell apoptosis were
analysed using western blotting, flow cytometry, and the caspase-3/7 glow
assay, respectively.Results: A decrease in Skp2 and subsequent increase
in p27 and p21 levels was seen in SHEP Tet21N cells when MYCN expression
was suppressed. A G1 arrest was also induced by MYCN removal, an effect
mirrored after Skp2 knockdown in Tet21N MYCN+ cells. Skp2 knockdown
increased both p27 and p21 levels in non-MYCN amplified SHSY5Y cells and
MYCN amplified IMR-32 cells. Both cell lines had 20% reduction (p<0.01)
in growth after 72 hours knockdown compared to the scrambled control.
However, only SHSY5Y cells showed a G1 arrest (p<0.05) and increase in
caspase activity (p<0.05).Conclusions: These data further establish the
relationship between MYCN and Skp2. The effect of Skp2 knockdown on
growth arrest and apoptosis suggest it would be a valid therapeutic
target in neuroblastoma.

