Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the EZH2-MMSET histone methyltransferase
regulatory axis in cancer.


Histone methyltransferases (HMTases), as chromatin modifiers, regulate
the transcriptomic landscape in normal development as well in diseases
such as cancer. Here, we molecularly order two HMTases, EZH2 and MMSET
that have established genetic links to oncogenesis. EZH2, which mediates
histone H3K27 trimethylation and is associated with gene silencing, was
shown to be coordinately expressed and function upstream of MMSET, which
mediates H3K36 dimethylation and is associated with active transcription.
EZH2 transcript expression levels were compared to all HMTases (n=51) in
our compendium of RNA-seq data comprising 474 malignant and benign
samples, representing 14 different tissue types. MMSET displayed the
strongest correlation with EZH2 expression. Similarly, a meta-analysis of
1755 samples from 22 published microarray gene expression studies in
Oncomine revealed co-expression of MMSET and EZH2 in 15 different
cancers. We found that the EZH2-MMSET HMTase axis is coordinated by a
microRNA network and that the oncogenic functions of EZH2 require MMSET
activity. Together, these results suggest that the EZH2-MMSET HMTase axis
coordinately functions as a master regulator of transcriptional
repression, activation, and oncogenesis and may represent an attractive
therapeutic target in cancer.

