Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between polymorphisms of APE1 and OGG1 genes and risk
of colorectal cancer in Taiwan.


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cause of cancer
death in Taiwan. Previous studies indicated that oxidative damages
resulting from reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation participate in
all stages of the cancer process. Mutagenic 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine,
one of the major DNA lesions generated by ROS, is preferentially repaired
by 8-oxoguanine glycosylase I (OGG1) and apurinic-apyrimidinic
endonuclease 1 (APE1). Since polymorphisms of OGG1 S326C, R154H and APE1
D148E, T-656G were associated with the enzyme activities, this study was
designed to evaluate the roles of the OGG1 and APE1 polymorphisms in CRC
risk.Method: We recruited 727 newly diagnosed colorectal adenocarcinoma
cases and 736 age- and sex-matched healthy controls in a medical center.
Genomic DNA isolated from buffy coat was used for genotyping by PCR
methods. Because the frequency of the sequence variants of OGG1 R154H was
too low (H allele was 0.14%), this polymorphism was excluded in further
data analysis. Unconditional logistic regressions were used to calculate
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).Results: Subjects
with OGG1 326 Ser/Cys genotype had an increased CRC risk (OR = 1.47; 95%
CI = 1.06-2.04) compared to those carrying the Ser/Ser genotype,
particularly among individuals aged more than 60 years (OR = 1.60, 95% CI
= 1.02-2.05). However, there was no significant association between APE1
polymorphisms and CRC risk.Conclusion: Our results indicated that OGG1
S326C polymorphism may associate with CRC risk in Taiwanese population,
whereas APE1 polymorphisms may not modulate this disease risk.

