Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel function of EGFR in epigenetic modulation via hMOF in
breast cancer .


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is aberrantly active in
breast cancer, initiates and drives tumorigenic pathways, and has been
implicated in multiple tumorigenic processes including hyperplasia,
chemo-resistance and metastasis. Histone lysine modifications directly
influence activation and repression of transcription. MYST family
acetyltransferase, human males absent on the first (hMOF), plays an
important role in transcription activity through histone H4K16
acetylation. Loss of hMOF and subsequently the absence of H4K16
acetylation have been shown to be a common feature in human cancer
including breast cancer. However, the regulation of hMOF remains largely
unknown. Recently, we have discovered the acetylation of EGFR in human
breast cancer cells. Thus, we screened a set of EGFR-interacting
acetyltransferases using co-immunoprecipitation analysis and ingenuity
pathway analysis (IPA). Here, we found that EGFR directly interacts with
and phosphorylates hMOF. EGFR-induced phosphorylation hMOF was
significantly reduced in the hMOF YF mutant. Indeed, hMOF YF mutant
showed a higher histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity compare to wild
type hMOF. In addition, tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) also enhanced the
HAT activity of wild type hMOF. Furthermore, we found that EGFR modulates
acetylation status of histone H4K16 via phosphorylating hMOF. We
anticipate our study of EGFR and hMOF to be of therapeutic relevance,
possibly leading to novel discovery in drug development targeting the
receptor tyrosine kinase and the acetylation process.

