Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p62/IMP2 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression.


Autoantibodies to autologous cellular antigens in cancer patients have
been considered as reporters identifying antigenic changes in cellular
factors involved in the transformation process. We have made use of such
autoantibodies from hepatocellular carcinoma patients to immunoscreen a
cDNA expression library and have identified a cytoplasmic RNA-binding
protein p62. Autoantibodies to p62 have been detected in up to 21% of a
cohort of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. Further study has
demonstrated that p62 is a member of insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA
binding protein family (IMPs), which is an isoform of IMP2. The three
members of the IMP family (IMP1, 2 and 3) have been found to regulate
translation of insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) mRNA in a
post-transcriptional manner. Since several studies have suggested that
IMP1 and IMP3 play important roles in cancer progression, whether
p62/IMP2 can also play a role in cancer formation remains to be
investigated. In this study, we intend to interrogate the role of
p62/IMP2 in HCC formation. We found that the expression of p62/IMP2
(57.5%) is significantly higher in HCC specimen than that in normal liver
tissue (15.4%) by immunohistochemistry study. Furthermore, p62/IMP2 is
detected to be overexpressed in several liver cancer cell lines.
Depletion of p62/IMP2 via lentivirus-mediated knockdown in SNU449 liver
cancer cell line decreased the cell proliferation. On the contrary, the
ectopic overexpression of p62/IMP2 increased cell proliferation. Our data
suggested that p62/IMP2 is overexpressed in liver cancer and is
functionally correlated with cancer cell growth.

