Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lymphotoxins activate NF-B-mediated inflammatory and survival
pathways in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are highly inflammatory
and preferentially metastasize to lymph nodes (LN). HNSCC exhibit
constitutively activated canonical and alternative NF-B pathways, but the
upstream signals activating these NF-B pathways have not been well
characterized. We hypothesized that immune regulatory cytokines
Lymphotoxin (LT) and produced by tumor and/or LN cells could be critical
in upstream signal activation of NF-B in HNSCC. Although LTs and their
receptors (LTR and TNFR) are known to be expressed and produced by
lymphocytes, we found that LT and , and their receptors LTR and TNFR, are
also expressed and produced in a subset of HNSCC cell lines and tumor
tissue specimens, when compared with primary human oral mucosal cells. LT
activated both canonical and alternative NF-B pathways, as indicated by
induction of nuclear translocation of NF-B subunits, RELA, cREL, RELB,
p52 in a time dependent manner. In contrast, LT mainly activated the
alternative NF-B pathway, enhancing nuclear translocation of RELB and
p52. In addition, LT-mediated gene expression was examined by Illumina
bead microarray platform, and the top pathways of upregulated genes
included NF-B, immunoregulatory, inflammatory, and survival signaling
pathways. Our data suggested that HNSCC expressed lymphotoxins and their
receptors could be critical factors that contribute to the constitutively
activated NF-B, inflammatory and survival signaling previously implicated
in HNSCC pathogenesis. Understanding of lymphotoxin-mediated cross-talk
with these inflammatory and survival signaling pathways, could provide a
missing link between the inflammation and tumorigenesis in the tumor
microenvironment.

