Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA target site polymorphisms and colorectal cancer risk in
the Ashkenazi Jewish population.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) act as key post-transcriptional regulators of gene
expression via binding to the 3 untranslated regions (UTRs) of mRNAs.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) found in the miRNA sequence and/or
corresponding binding sites can affect the fidelity of this interaction,
and evidence from candidate miRNA studies suggests that such SNPs may
increase or decrease risk of tumor development. This study was designed
to expand the search for miRNA-related polymorphisms important in cancer
etiology across the genome and to investigate the association between
thousands of genetic variants in miRNA target sites and colorectal cancer
(CRC) risk using a novel genotyping platform, the Axiom miRNA Target Site
Genotyping Array (237,858 markers). The final study sample after quality
control filtering included 605 cases and 615 controls from the Molecular
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer (MECC) study, a population-based
case-control study of incident CRC cases in a geographically-defined area
of northern Israel. The marginal association between each marker with
minor allele frequency >=1% and CRC risk was examined assuming a
log-additive genetic model using logistic regression adjusted for sex,
age, and the first two principal components (PC) to capture fine-scale
population structure. There were 11 markers with p-values less than 3E-4,
and the most statistically significant association involved rs12130051
(chr1:19545053; 3-UTR of KIAA0090) with an OR of 2.24 (1.52,3.31) and
p=4.48E-5. In addition, rs1051690 (chr5:142605172; 3-UTR of ARHGAP26),
was statistically significantly associated with decreased CRC risk (OR
(95% CI): 0.71 (0.59, 0.85); p = 2.03E-4). Further, this study provided
evidence for replication of a previously published locus, rs1051690 in
the 3UTR region of the insulin receptor gene, INSR (OR (95% CI): 1.27
(0.96,1.67); p = 0.09). A fixed-effects meta-analysis of sample-size
weighted p-values from a recent publication in Carcinogenesis describing
the INSR variant (Landi et al., 2012) and from the current MECC study
yielded a combined p-value of 0.01. To our knowledge, this is the first
study to examine the association between genetic variation in miRNA
target sites and cancer risk using a genome-wide approach. Work is
ongoing to replicate findings from this study and to characterize the
functional impact of prioritized polymorphisms.

