Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Destruction of prostate cancer cell xenografts by FSH-Lytic
peptide conjugates.


Background: In previous studies (Hansel, et al., Mol. and Cell.
Endocrinol. 269:26-33, 2007),we showed that conjugates of membrane
destroying lytic peptides with either LHRH or with a 15-amino acid
segment of the chain of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) target and
destroy human prostate, breast and ovarian cancer cells in tumor bearing
nude mice. Recently (Radu et al., N. England J. Med. 363:1621-1630, 2012)
reported that endothelial cells in blood vessels supplying cancers
express follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) receptors.Objectives:The
objectives of this study were to synthesize a bioconjugate of a
lyticpeptide (Phor18) to each of three segments of the chain of FSH that
are known to bind to the FSH receptor, and test these conjugates
(FSH90-95-Phor18, FSH81-95-Phor18 and FSH33-53-Phor18) for their ability
to target and lyse prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.Results: In
in vivo experiments, administration of FSH90-95-Phor18 and
FSH81-95-Phor18 significantly (p 0.05). The average tumor volume was
maintained at significantly lower levels in the mice treated with
FSH90-95-Phor18 (p=0.027), FSH81-95-Phor18 (p=0.029) when compared with
vehicle and free peptide treatment groups during the study (p 0.05). The
average tumor volume was maintained at significantly lower levels in the
mice treated with FSH90-95-Phor18 (p=0.027), FSH81-95-Phor18 (p=0.029)
when compared with vehicle and free peptide treatment groups during the
study (p < 0.05). Immunohistochemical analyses for FSHR were performed on
the tumor samples. FSHR-positive endothelial cells were found in many
vessels supplying the tumors of control mice, but few FSHR-positive
endothelial cells were present in tumors of mice treated with
FSH90-95-Phor18, FSH81-95-Phor 18 or FSH33-53-Phor 18. FSH81-95-Phor 18
was the most effective of the three conjugates tested in destroying the
FSHR-bearing endothelial cells and in inhibiting tumor growth of the PC-3
xenografts in nude mice.Conclusion: These data show that Phor18
conjugates of FSH chain segments that bind to FSHR expressed by the
endothelial cells of the blood vessels supplying the tumors are capable
of inhibiting prostate cancer cell tumor growth by inhibiting
angiogenesis. These FSH chain-lytic peptide conjugates may be useful in
treating prostate and other FSHR expressing cancers.

