Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic manipulation of brain tumor diversity using piggybac
transposon mediated transgenesis approach in rat.


Animal models are important for interrogating the native biology of tumor
formation, invasiveness, and may lead to novel therapeutic approaches.
Here we describe the development of a rat glioma model which provides a
fast and convenient approach to reproducibly induce brain tumors of
different type in rat. We utilize a piggybac transposon system delivered
by in utero electroporation (PB-IUE) to express oncogenic HRasV12 in
different cell types in CNS. When expression of HRasV12 was driven by
ubiquitous CAG promoter in radial glia cells, glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) was induced. When we specifically express HRasV12 in astrocytes
using a mouse GFAP promoter, malignant astroglioma resembling GBM was
induced in rat brains. In contrast, anaplastic oligoastrocytoma was
induced when HRasV12 were expressed in oligodendrocytes under the control
a rat MBP promoter. Surprisingly when co-expressing a basic helix loop
helix protein Neurogenin2 (Ngn2) with HRasV12 both driven by CAG
promoter, primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) like tumors were
generated. Molecular classification of tumors induced by CAG and GFAP
HRasV12 matched mesenchymal GBM subtypes. Our data demonstrate the
induction of different tumor types using a non-viral piggyBac transposon
mediated transgenesis approach. The binary plasmid system we developed
provides a method to direct different oncogenetic signals to different
cell types. The models generated with this system should facilitate our
understanding of the sources of tumor diversity.

