Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spliceosome-targeted antitumor drug discovery.


Over the last several years there has been a remarkable convergence of
research related to oncogenic aberrations of the spliceosome, which has
linked the identification of recurrent spliceosome mutations in tumors to
medicinal chemistry. We designed synthetic natural product analogs (the
sudemycins) that modulate the activity of the spliceosome and show potent
and selective antitumor activity. We hypothesized that splicing gene
mutations cause alterations in splice isoforms, which provide a selective
advantage to tumor cells, and that perturbation of this environment with
spliceosome modulators may cause a selective disadvantage for tumors. To
test this hypothesis, we generated MSCV-based retroviruses encoding the
wildtype or S34F mutant U2AF1 alleles. We infected c-kit+ primary
C57BL/6J murine bone marrow cells with these recombinant retroviruses and
cultured them in vitro with cytokine-supplemented media. Vehicle-treated
cells expressing the mutant allele had reduced growth over 5 days,
compared to cells expressing the wildtype allele or empty vector (POver
the last several years there has been a remarkable convergence of
research related to oncogenic aberrations of the spliceosome, which has
linked the identification of recurrent spliceosome mutations in tumors to
medicinal chemistry. We designed synthetic natural product analogs (the
sudemycins) that modulate the activity of the spliceosome and show potent
and selective antitumor activity. We hypothesized that splicing gene
mutations cause alterations in splice isoforms, which provide a selective
advantage to tumor cells, and that perturbation of this environment with
spliceosome modulators may cause a selective disadvantage for tumors. To
test this hypothesis, we generated MSCV-based retroviruses encoding the
wildtype or S34F mutant U2AF1 alleles. We infected c-kit+ primary
C57BL/6J murine bone marrow cells with these recombinant retroviruses and
cultured them in vitro with cytokine-supplemented media. Vehicle-treated
cells expressing the mutant allele had reduced growth over 5 days,
compared to cells expressing the wildtype allele or empty vector
(P<0.0001, n=5 technical replicates, two experiments). At doses of 10-150
nM, sudemycin D1 (but not the inactive analog sudemycin E-OH) induced a
reproducible dose-dependent decrease in cell growth and increase in
apoptosis, as measured by Annexin V, in cells expressing the mutant,
compared to the wildtype allele or empty vector. To study the effect of
the U2AF1 mutation and sudemycin exposure on splicing, we analyzed RNA
isoforms of Fmr1, a gene known to undergo alternative splicing. After
retroviral transduction, GFP+ cells were sorted and RNA was isolated for
RT-PCR analysis at baseline or 2h-6h after exposure to sudemycin D1 (75
nM) or vehicle. The U2AF1 S34F mutation increased the abundance of Fmr1
transcripts utilizing a cryptic splice acceptor, compared to cells
transduced with empty vector or wildtype U2AF1 (POver the last several
years there has been a remarkable convergence of research related to
oncogenic aberrations of the spliceosome, which has linked the
identification of recurrent spliceosome mutations in tumors to medicinal
chemistry. We designed synthetic natural product analogs (the sudemycins)
that modulate the activity of the spliceosome and show potent and
selective antitumor activity. We hypothesized that splicing gene
mutations cause alterations in splice isoforms, which provide a selective
advantage to tumor cells, and that perturbation of this environment with
spliceosome modulators may cause a selective disadvantage for tumors. To
test this hypothesis, we generated MSCV-based retroviruses encoding the
wildtype or S34F mutant U2AF1 alleles. We infected c-kit+ primary
C57BL/6J murine bone marrow cells with these recombinant retroviruses and
cultured them in vitro with cytokine-supplemented media. Vehicle-treated
cells expressing the mutant allele had reduced growth over 5 days,
compared to cells expressing the wildtype allele or empty vector
(P<0.0001, n=5 technical replicates, two experiments). At doses of 10-150
nM, sudemycin D1 (but not the inactive analog sudemycin E-OH) induced a
reproducible dose-dependent decrease in cell growth and increase in
apoptosis, as measured by Annexin V, in cells expressing the mutant,
compared to the wildtype allele or empty vector. To study the effect of
the U2AF1 mutation and sudemycin exposure on splicing, we analyzed RNA
isoforms of Fmr1, a gene known to undergo alternative splicing. After
retroviral transduction, GFP+ cells were sorted and RNA was isolated for
RT-PCR analysis at baseline or 2h-6h after exposure to sudemycin D1 (75
nM) or vehicle. The U2AF1 S34F mutation increased the abundance of Fmr1
transcripts utilizing a cryptic splice acceptor, compared to cells
transduced with empty vector or wildtype U2AF1 (P<0.05, n=3 technical
replicates). These experiments provide proof-of-concept that cells
expressing mutant U2AF1 have increased sensitivity to spliceosome
modulators. The sudemycins show a short half-life (Over the last several
years there has been a remarkable convergence of research related to
oncogenic aberrations of the spliceosome, which has linked the
identification of recurrent spliceosome mutations in tumors to medicinal
chemistry. We designed synthetic natural product analogs (the sudemycins)
that modulate the activity of the spliceosome and show potent and
selective antitumor activity. We hypothesized that splicing gene
mutations cause alterations in splice isoforms, which provide a selective
advantage to tumor cells, and that perturbation of this environment with
spliceosome modulators may cause a selective disadvantage for tumors. To
test this hypothesis, we generated MSCV-based retroviruses encoding the
wildtype or S34F mutant U2AF1 alleles. We infected c-kit+ primary
C57BL/6J murine bone marrow cells with these recombinant retroviruses and
cultured them in vitro with cytokine-supplemented media. Vehicle-treated
cells expressing the mutant allele had reduced growth over 5 days,
compared to cells expressing the wildtype allele or empty vector
(P<0.0001, n=5 technical replicates, two experiments). At doses of 10-150
nM, sudemycin D1 (but not the inactive analog sudemycin E-OH) induced a
reproducible dose-dependent decrease in cell growth and increase in
apoptosis, as measured by Annexin V, in cells expressing the mutant,
compared to the wildtype allele or empty vector. To study the effect of
the U2AF1 mutation and sudemycin exposure on splicing, we analyzed RNA
isoforms of Fmr1, a gene known to undergo alternative splicing. After
retroviral transduction, GFP+ cells were sorted and RNA was isolated for
RT-PCR analysis at baseline or 2h-6h after exposure to sudemycin D1 (75
nM) or vehicle. The U2AF1 S34F mutation increased the abundance of Fmr1
transcripts utilizing a cryptic splice acceptor, compared to cells
transduced with empty vector or wildtype U2AF1 (P<0.05, n=3 technical
replicates). These experiments provide proof-of-concept that cells
expressing mutant U2AF1 have increased sensitivity to spliceosome
modulators. The sudemycins show a short half-life (<15 min) when dosed IV
via a bolus tail vein injection. So we have developed a jugular
continuous infusion model to achieve therapeutic drug levels, and found
that sudemycin D6 is tolerated at doses up to 200 mg/kg/h in mice.
Additionally we have investigated numerous drug combinations and found
significant cytotoxic co-treatment synergism with the experimental dual
mTOR and PI3K inhibitor BEZ235, which suggests opportunities for
multi-agent animal studies as a prelude to the design of human clinical
trials. In this presentation we will also report in vitro and in vivo
data on new sudemycin analogs along with additional work on the
pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, toxicity and in vivo efficacy. Our
results indicate a maturing therapeutic potential for sudemycin D6, which
is in preclinical development for the treatment of subsets of MDS,
melanoma and numerous other human cancers.

