Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The AXL tyrosine kinase receptor contributes to ALK-inhibitor
resistance in neuroblastoma.


The crizotinib-resistant ALKF1174L mutation occurs de novo in
neuroblastoma (NB) and as an acquired mechanism of resistance in ALK
translocation-driven cancers, lending impetus to the development of novel
ALK inhibitors with different modes of action. One such molecule is
TAE684, a structurally unrelated ATP-competitive diaminopyrimidine
derivative that has shown activity against ALKF1174L in both in vitro and
in vivo models of ALK-driven cancers, such as lung cancer and NB.To
identify mechanisms of acquired resistance to TAE684, we established in
vitro models of resistance by serially exposing TAE684-sensitive SH-SY5Y
NB cells (expressing ALKF1174L) to increasing concentrations of the
compound over a prolonged period (> 1 year). The resulting
TAE684-resistant SY5Y-TR cells exhibited >10-fold reduced sensitivity to
TAE684 compared with parental cells. Three TAE684-resistant clonal lines
(TR1-TR3) were analyzed, all of which showed downregulation of pALK. In
addition, TR1 cells showed downregulation of pAKT but increased
expression of pERK1/2 compared to parental cells, suggesting activation
of compensatory signaling pathways. To identify candidate receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) that may account for this observation, we
analyzed TR1 cells using phospho-RTK arrays. Upregulation of the AXL RTK
was seen in the resistant cells as compared to the parental cells, and
this was confirmed by immunoblotting in all the resistant clones.
Concurrent with the role of AXL in tumor cell invasion, TR1 cells
exhibited increased invasiveness in matrigel assays. Depletion of AXL
expression by shRNA knockdown in TR1 cells led to their growth
inhibition. TR1 cells were more sensitive to SKI-606, a Src/Abl inhibitor
with activity against AXL, than parental cells. However, exposure to an
Hsp90 inhibitor led to significant cytotoxicity in all the clones
(IC50sThe crizotinib-resistant ALKF1174L mutation occurs de novo in
neuroblastoma (NB) and as an acquired mechanism of resistance in ALK
translocation-driven cancers, lending impetus to the development of novel
ALK inhibitors with different modes of action. One such molecule is
TAE684, a structurally unrelated ATP-competitive diaminopyrimidine
derivative that has shown activity against ALKF1174L in both in vitro and
in vivo models of ALK-driven cancers, such as lung cancer and NB.To
identify mechanisms of acquired resistance to TAE684, we established in
vitro models of resistance by serially exposing TAE684-sensitive SH-SY5Y
NB cells (expressing ALKF1174L) to increasing concentrations of the
compound over a prolonged period (> 1 year). The resulting
TAE684-resistant SY5Y-TR cells exhibited >10-fold reduced sensitivity to
TAE684 compared with parental cells. Three TAE684-resistant clonal lines
(TR1-TR3) were analyzed, all of which showed downregulation of pALK. In
addition, TR1 cells showed downregulation of pAKT but increased
expression of pERK1/2 compared to parental cells, suggesting activation
of compensatory signaling pathways. To identify candidate receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) that may account for this observation, we
analyzed TR1 cells using phospho-RTK arrays. Upregulation of the AXL RTK
was seen in the resistant cells as compared to the parental cells, and
this was confirmed by immunoblotting in all the resistant clones.
Concurrent with the role of AXL in tumor cell invasion, TR1 cells
exhibited increased invasiveness in matrigel assays. Depletion of AXL
expression by shRNA knockdown in TR1 cells led to their growth
inhibition. TR1 cells were more sensitive to SKI-606, a Src/Abl inhibitor
with activity against AXL, than parental cells. However, exposure to an
Hsp90 inhibitor led to significant cytotoxicity in all the clones
(IC50s<30nM), as compared to parental cells (IC50=304nM). Inhibiting
Hsp90 in the TR1 cells led to a decrease in pAXL and pERK1/2 levels with
a concomitant decrease in the binding of AXL to Hsp90. Analysis of AXL in
TR1 cells ruled out mutation, genomic amplification or promoter
demethylation as a basis for its increased expression; however, the AXL
ligand, GAS6, was increased in the resistant clones.These studies
demonstrate that AXL activation contributes to TAE684 resistance in
ALKF1174L-expressing cells, and suggests that the same would be true for
derivatives of TAE684 in clinical development. The finding that AXL is
also involved in EGFR-targeted therapy in lung cancer suggests that AXL
activation could be a general mechanism of resistance to tyrosine kinase
inhibitor therapy.

