Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microenvironment regulation of acute lymphoblastic leukemia miRNA
profiles.


It is well established that the bone marrow microenvironment provides
cues to hematopoietic tumors that initiate and progress in this unique
anatomical site that likely mimics, to some degree, cell signaling that
directs steady state hematopoiesis. We have previously documented diverse
changes in gene and protein expression in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) cells in contact with either primary bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSC obtained from consenting donors) or human derived osteoblasts
(HOB); two components of the marrow stem cell niche (Wang 2007).
Importantly, many of these changes are coincident with chemoresistance.
In the current study we have expanded our investigation to include
investigation of miRNA profile comparisons of the human Ph+ ALL cell line
Sup-B15 (ATCC # CRL-1929) grown in media versus tumor cells grown in long
term co-culture (greater than 3 months) with adherent BMSC or HOB. We
have previously described the stem cell-like characteristics of Sup-B15,
making it an intriguing cell line for continued study (Wang 2007). In
addition, comparisons were completed for the cell lines Nalm-27 and
Nalm-30 (Fujisaki Cancer Center, Okayama, Japan) for evaluation of tumors
at diagnosis versus relapse of disease. Total RNA was isolated using
Ambion miRVana RNA extraction kit and a microarray assay was performed
using a service provider (LC Sciences, Houston TX) and ParafloTM MicroRNA
Microarray Assays as described (Wei 2009). Preliminary observations
identified over 15 different microRNAs expressed at baseline in all three
lines evaluated which met the medium to high relative threshold according
to the analysis. Profiles of Nalm-27 and Nalm-30 were highly conserved
with the exception of miR-7-1-3p and miR-99b-5p which were upregulated
and miR-142-3p, miR-1260b, and miR-19a-3p which were down regulated when
the cell line established at relapse (Nalm-30) was compared to that from
diagnosis (Nalm-27). Consistent with microRNAs as critical regulators of
diverse cellular processes including proliferation, survival, and
differentiation, several targets were noted to be significantly
influenced by LTCC of Sup-B15 ALL cells with BMSC or HOB. Preliminary
evaluation suggests miR-4254 expression was increased by BMSC and
miR-4484, miR-34b-3p and miR-1237-5p were increased when tumor cells were
provided continual access to HOB. In contrast, miR-221-3p, miR-222-3p,
miR-4521, levels were decreased during BMSC co-culture as well as
miR-221-3p, miR-222-3p, miR-199b-5p, miR-185-5p, miR-4521 during
co-culture with HOB. Collectively these changes highlight the dynamic
expression of microRNAs and emphasize their responsiveness to
microenvironment derived signals. These observations will contribute to
identification of novel pathways that include miRNAs that warrant
consideration as therapeutic targets in efforts to eradicate residual
disease in the setting of ALL.

