Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variations in telomere maintenance pathway genes are
associated with risk of esophageal cancer.


Many studies have shown the association of telomere dysfunction with
aging and cancer development. We hypothesize that genetic variations in
telomere maintenance genes may modulate esophageal cancer risk. To test
this hypothesis, we comprehensively assessed the association of 616 SNPs
in 45 telomere maintenance pathway genes in 602 esophageal adenocarcinoma
cases and 1,512 healthy controls. Unconditional multivariate logistic
regression was used to estimate odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence
interval (CI) while adjusting for age, gender, and smoking status. In
single SNP analysis, a total of 77 SNPs had P value Many studies have
shown the association of telomere dysfunction with aging and cancer
development. We hypothesize that genetic variations in telomere
maintenance genes may modulate esophageal cancer risk. To test this
hypothesis, we comprehensively assessed the association of 616 SNPs in 45
telomere maintenance pathway genes in 602 esophageal adenocarcinoma cases
and 1,512 healthy controls. Unconditional multivariate logistic
regression was used to estimate odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence
interval (CI) while adjusting for age, gender, and smoking status. In
single SNP analysis, a total of 77 SNPs had P value < 0.05. 5 SNPs
remained significant after adjusting for multiple comparisons at FDR Many
studies have shown the association of telomere dysfunction with aging and
cancer development. We hypothesize that genetic variations in telomere
maintenance genes may modulate esophageal cancer risk. To test this
hypothesis, we comprehensively assessed the association of 616 SNPs in 45
telomere maintenance pathway genes in 602 esophageal adenocarcinoma cases
and 1,512 healthy controls. Unconditional multivariate logistic
regression was used to estimate odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence
interval (CI) while adjusting for age, gender, and smoking status. In
single SNP analysis, a total of 77 SNPs had P value < 0.05. 5 SNPs
remained significant after adjusting for multiple comparisons at FDR <
0.10 including 3 SNPs in PINX1 gene and 2 SNPs in TPP1 gene. The most
significant association was observed for rs9657541 in PINX1 gene that
exhibited a significantly reduced risk of esophageal cancer in dominant
model (OR = 0.62, 95% CI = 0.50-0.77, P = 1.54105, FDR = 0.020).
Cumulative effects of SNPs were assessed by the number of unfavorable
genotypes. Each subject was classified into low (zero unfavorable
genotype), medium (one to three unfavorable genotypes), and high-risk
groups (more than three unfavorable genotypes). Compared with the
low-risk group, the OR was 1.58 (95% CI = 1.20-2.09) for the median-risk
group and 2.57 (95% CI = 1.87-3.54) for the high-risk group.
Classification and regression tree (CART) analysis was performed to
identify genetic profiles that can classify individuals into differential
risk of esophageal cancer. CART analysis identified 3 terminal nodes.
Compared to terminal node 1, individuals in terminal nodes 2 and 3 had
significantly increased risks of esophageal cancer with ORs of 1.43 (95%
CI = 1.13-1.80) and 2.46 (95% CI = 1.81-3.34), respectively. We also
performed gene-based analysis to determine the combined effect of SNPs
within a gene region and identified four genes (TPP1, PINX1, TNKS, TERF1)
significantly associated with the risk of esophageal cancer. In
conclusion, our results suggest that genetic variants in telomere
maintenance pathway genes may contribute to the altered risk of
esophageal cancer, both individually and jointly.

