Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) promotes progression of
cholangiocarcinoma by regulating cell cycle and apoptosis.


Background: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a catalytic subunit of
the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). When present in PRC2, EZH2
catalyzes trimethylation on lysine 27 residue of histone H3(H3K27Me3),
resulting in epigenetic silencing of gene expression and cancer
progression. Here, we investigated the expression and the function of
EZH2 in intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC and
ECC).Methods: The influence of EZH2 on cell growth and apoptosis was
assessed by knockdown experiments using siRNA in cholangiocarcinoma cell
lines, RBE and TFK-1. Target genes of EZH2 in cholangiocarcinoma cell
lines were searched by real time PCR. The clinical significance of EZH2
in 84 cholangiocarcinoma patients (ICC and ECC in 45 and 41,
respectively) who underwent a curative surgery was examined by
immunohistochemistry.Results: In vitro analysis, a knockdown of EZH2
reduced cell growth and induced G1 arrest, and induced apoptosis
confirmed by Annexin V staining and increasing sub-G1 population of two
cholangiocarcinoma cell lines. Moreover, a knockdown of EZH2 increased
the expression of p16INK4A and p27KIP1, in real time PCR. In
immunohistochemical study, The upregulation of EZH2 was correlated with
tumor diameter (P = 0.0103) in ICC, lymph node metastasis (P=0.0292) in
ECC, and Ki67 index in both ICC (P=0.0364) and ECC (P=0.0017). In
addition, EZH2 expression was correlated with the poor prognosis in both
ICC (P=0.0447) and ECC (P=0.0227).Conclusion: The current study
demonstrates that the high expression of EZH2 results in acceleration of
cell cycle and anti-apoptosis in vitro analysis, and is related to poor
prognosis in patients with ICC or ECC by IHC study. These results suggest
that EZH2 is a potential target for cholangiocarcinoma therapeutics.

