Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A dual inhibitor of MDR-1 and ABCG2,elacridar, enhances cytotoxic
effects of sunitinib on RCC cell lines.


Sunitinib is a multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
and currently approved for use in advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC). It
is really attractive drug for patients who cannot have surgical
treatment. However, it is reported that TKI might be substrates of
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, which are able to mediate the
efflux of anti-tumor drugs from the tumor cells. In this study, we
suggested that inhibition of MDR transporters by elacridar (dual
inhibitor of MDR-1 and ABCG2) might overcome sunitinib resistance in
experimental RCC.We used 786-O and Caki-1 RCC cell lines. The cells were
treated with sunitinib alone, elacridar alone or the combination, then
cytotoxicity was measured by the MTT cytotoxicity method. The expression
of MDR-1 and ABCG2 mRNA and their protein were detected by real time
RT-PCR or Western blotting. Additionally, P-gp function was analyzed by
using 99mTc-MIBI. MCF-7 cells were used as negative control for P-gp
functional assay.Our results showed that elacridar significantly enhanced
sunitinib cytotoxicity in RCC cells. High P-gp expression was especially
observed in 786-O, though that of ABCG2 was almost the same among cells.
Additionally P-gp assay revealed that the protein would be active and
elacridar blocked its function in 786-O, where the accumulation of the
99mTc-MIBI increased 7 folds compared to the control (non-treatment
group).These findings suggest that sunitinib resistance is partly
mediated by gene and protein expression of MDR transporters. Therefore
combination with elacridar could reverse its resistance in MDR sensitive
cancer cells, as it did in 786-O.

