Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel mechanism of hypoxia-mediated cell cycle dysregulation:
miR-134 targets CDKN2A.


Background: Mechanistic understanding of the biological interplay between
the stromal framework and malignant regions of the tumor remain an unmet
need. In this study, we examined the molecular networks of interplay
between hypoxia and miRNA deregulation. Study methods and results: We
profiled the expression of miRNAs in high-grade ovarian cancer cells upon
exposure to hypoxia (1% O2) using a microRNA microarray (Agilent v14). In
A2780 and Skov3 cell lines, using a statistical cutoff p1.5, normoxia vs.
short term (48 hrs) and long-term (6 days) hypoxia exposure, we found
that 23 MicroRNAs were commonly down regulated, whereas 11 were
upregulated. Among these, miR-134 was validated to be overexpressed under
hypoxic conditions by 3-4 fold for both time-points. Upon extensive
bioinformatic analyses, miR-134 was predicted to target CDKN2A (Miranda,
microT, PITA, RNA22, TargetScan). CDKN2A is a protein involved in cell
cycle control, precisely regulating cell cycle G1 control through
complexing with CDK4. CDKN2A was down-regulated under hypoxia by 55% and
was inversely correlated with miR-134 expression in the cell lines
tested. Quantitative PCR analysis of pri-miR-134 under hypoxia exposure
showed a more than 100-fold increase in expression compared to normoxia,
suggesting a transcriptional regulatory event leading to high miR-134
across the panel of cell lines tested. Upon transfection of A2780 cells
with miR-134 mimics, we observed consistent down-regulation of CDKN2A by
>40%. To understand its functional relevance, migration, invasion,
proliferation and viability assays were performed. We observed increases
in cell proliferation (from 12% to 41%) in miR-134 transfected cells
compared to control in the cell lines tested (p1.5, normoxia vs. short
term (48 hrs) and long-term (6 days) hypoxia exposure, we found that 23
MicroRNAs were commonly down regulated, whereas 11 were upregulated.
Among these, miR-134 was validated to be overexpressed under hypoxic
conditions by 3-4 fold for both time-points. Upon extensive bioinformatic
analyses, miR-134 was predicted to target CDKN2A (Miranda, microT, PITA,
RNA22, TargetScan). CDKN2A is a protein involved in cell cycle control,
precisely regulating cell cycle G1 control through complexing with CDK4.
CDKN2A was down-regulated under hypoxia by 55% and was inversely
correlated with miR-134 expression in the cell lines tested. Quantitative
PCR analysis of pri-miR-134 under hypoxia exposure showed a more than
100-fold increase in expression compared to normoxia, suggesting a
transcriptional regulatory event leading to high miR-134 across the panel
of cell lines tested. Upon transfection of A2780 cells with miR-134
mimics, we observed consistent down-regulation of CDKN2A by >40%. To
understand its functional relevance, migration, invasion, proliferation
and viability assays were performed. We observed increases in cell
proliferation (from 12% to 41%) in miR-134 transfected cells compared to
control in the cell lines tested (p<0.05). Orthotopic mouse ovarian
tumors treated with an anti-VEGF antibody were found to be substantially
hypoxic and showed an inverse correlation between CDKN2A and miR-134. In
tumor samples from patients with ovarian cancer, we observed strong
negative correlation (r = -0.63, p1.5, normoxia vs. short term (48 hrs)
and long-term (6 days) hypoxia exposure, we found that 23 MicroRNAs were
commonly down regulated, whereas 11 were upregulated. Among these,
miR-134 was validated to be overexpressed under hypoxic conditions by 3-4
fold for both time-points. Upon extensive bioinformatic analyses, miR-134
was predicted to target CDKN2A (Miranda, microT, PITA, RNA22,
TargetScan). CDKN2A is a protein involved in cell cycle control,
precisely regulating cell cycle G1 control through complexing with CDK4.
CDKN2A was down-regulated under hypoxia by 55% and was inversely
correlated with miR-134 expression in the cell lines tested. Quantitative
PCR analysis of pri-miR-134 under hypoxia exposure showed a more than
100-fold increase in expression compared to normoxia, suggesting a
transcriptional regulatory event leading to high miR-134 across the panel
of cell lines tested. Upon transfection of A2780 cells with miR-134
mimics, we observed consistent down-regulation of CDKN2A by >40%. To
understand its functional relevance, migration, invasion, proliferation
and viability assays were performed. We observed increases in cell
proliferation (from 12% to 41%) in miR-134 transfected cells compared to
control in the cell lines tested (p<0.05). Orthotopic mouse ovarian
tumors treated with an anti-VEGF antibody were found to be substantially
hypoxic and showed an inverse correlation between CDKN2A and miR-134. In
tumor samples from patients with ovarian cancer, we observed strong
negative correlation (r = -0.63, p<0.01) between CDKN2A and miR-134,
validating the study at a human level. Discussion: This study provides
new insights into the role of miRNA-134 in regulating cell cycle in the
context of hypoxia mediated signaling. These findings may have
implications for new approaches targeted at curbing the deleterious
effects of hypoxia on tumor growth.

