Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor induces apoptosis through PUMA independent of
p53 in prostate cancer cells.


Estrogen receptor 1s (ER1) expression is reduced during the progression
of prostate cancer. In agreement with several studies indicating a tumor
suppressive effect of ER, we find that expression of ER increases
apoptosis in the prostate cancer cells. Cells expressing ER showed an
increase in apoptotic cell population by TUNEL assay and flow cytometric
analysis. In addition, cells expressing ER showed an increase in sub G1
cell population compared to the control cells. Also, ER decreases the
expression of anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-2 and increases the expression of
the pro-apoptotic factor PUMA. Regulation of PUMA was found to be
independent of p53. Although phosphorylation of AKT was decreased by ER
expression we could not see any reduction of phosphorylated FOXO3A, a
known regulator of PUMA. On the other hand total mRNA and protein of
FOXO3A increased indicating a direct regulation of FOXO3A by ER. Using
non-transfected PC3 and LNCaP cells we could observe induction of FOXO3A
and PUMA as well as apoptosis in response to added 3-adiol, DPN or 8-VE2
indicating that the small amount of ER expressed in these cell lines are
sufficient to induce apoptosis in response to ER specific ligands.
Overall, our study indicates an apoptotic action of ER and suggests that
it can be advantageous to treat prostate cancer with ER agonist.

