Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The H1047R point mutation in PI3KCA changes morphology in human
colon cancer cells.


INTRODUCTION: The PI3K signaling pathway involves a wide range of cell
signaling phenomena, including cell proliferation, differentiation,
angiogenesis, survival, adhesion, cytoskeletal rearrangement, invadopodia
formation and motility. Mutations in the catalytic subunit p110 (PIK3CA)
of Class 1A phosphatidyinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) occur in up to 1/3 of
human colorectal cancers (CRC). The kinase domain mutation H1047R is the
most frequent cancer-specific mutation in p110 and results in a gain of
function. In vivo studies have demonstrated that cell lines bearing the
p110 mutation are more metastatic than the cells with wild type p110. We
have previously shown that inhibition of PI3K-p110 significantly delayed
or abrogated the migration of HCT116 parental cell line, which is a CRC
cell line that is heterozygous for the PIK3CA mutation and thus contains
both the H1047R mutation in p110 and a wild type allele of PIK3CA. The
aim of our study was to investigate the mechanism of how the H1047R
mutation of PI3K results in the increased cell motility in HCT116 cell
line. We hypothesize that the rearrangement of the cytoskeleton may be
responsible for the changes in cell morphology and cell motility in the
presence of the H1047R mutation of PI3K.METHODS: HCT116 cells engineered
to contain either the H1047R mutant (MUT) or wild type (WT) PI3KCA allele
were used in this study. Cell morphology was observed by microscopic
approaches and F-actin, the major component of cytoskeleton, was stained
with Alexa Fluor 488 Phalloidin. Effect of PI3K-p110 inhibition on cell
morphology was tested at a series of time points with 1.0 M of A66 and
PIK75, which are specific inhibitors of p110.RESULTS: The morphological
appearance of MUT cells was considerably different as compared to WT
cells. The WT HCT116 cells normally show a rounded and more clumped
morphology. However, the MUT HCT116 cells become elongated and actin
filaments appear to align along the length of the cell. The cells also
adopt less clumped and more fibroblastic morphology. Furthermore, when
the MUT cells were treated with the p110 specific inhibitors, the cell
morphology then again resembled the WT cells. The morphological changes
in MUT HCT116 cells possibly contribute to enhanced migratory
capacity.CONCLUSION: The morphologic appearance of MUT PIK3CA bearing
colon cancer cells is markedly different from WT cells. The inhibition of
mutant PIK3CA function results in morphologic changes that resemble the
WT allele bearing cells. Thus, the interaction of PI3K and the cell
cytoskeleton appears to be an important aspect in regulating cell
motility and subsequently, metastases. The PI3K pathway remains a
desirable target in CRC therapeutics.

