Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of a chimeric anti CEA-conjugated antibody with
AlexaFlour or Dylight fluorescent dyes for imaging pancreatic cancer in
orthotopic nude mouse models.


In this study, we evaluated multiple wavelengths of different
fluorophores of the AlexaFlour (Invitrogen) and Dylight (Thermofisher
scientific) series of fluorescent probes for labeling of mouse models of
pancreatic cancer. BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer cells were cultured
in-vitro and subsequently injected subcutaneously in nude mice. After the
development of subcutaneous tumors, the tumors were harvested and
orthotopically implanted into the pancreatic tails of nude mice (1x1 mm
fragments). The following fluorescent dyes were evaluated: 488 group
(Alexa 488 and Dylight 488); 550 group (Alexa 555 and Dylight 550); 650
group (Alexa 660 and Dylight 650). The dyes were conjugated to chimeric
anti-CEA antibody at a ratio of 3-4moles of dye per mole of protein.
50-100 g of the fluorophore conjugated antibody was injected per mouse
intravenously. Mice were then imaged with the OV100 Small Animal Imager
(Olympus Corp, Tokyo, Japan). Whole body and intravital imaging were done
at various time points (post implantation day 7-14). Mice that had tumor
visible on whole body imaging were sacrificed, after which tumor depth,
size, weight and fluorescence intensity were recorded. The smallest tumor
size was first discernible on whole body imaging with the 650 group of
dyes, followed by the 550 group and finally the 488 group with
significantly larger tumors. The fluorescence intensity of the Dylight
panel of dyes overall was brighter than the AlexaFluor dyes and therefore
able to detect smaller and deeper tumors. The 550 and 650 group of dyes
had the least amount background fluorescence with the highest amount of
tumor to normal tissue contrast. In evaluation of tumor depth the 650
group of dyes were able to detect the deepest tumors; of the group the
488 group had the least tissue penetrance. In this study, the Dylight
group of dyes had brighter conjugates with better tissue penetration and
tumor delineation when compared to the AlexaFluor dyes. The 650 group of
dyes had the most tissue penetration. The 550 group of dyes had similar
background autofluorescence to the 650 group that was signficantly less
than the 488 group. Both the 550 and 650 group had the highest tumor to
background ratio of fluoresence that allows for very high fidelity in the
delineation of neoplastic tissue from normal tissue.

