Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Total synthesis of tubulysins: A new chemical reaction leads to
analogues with enhanced cytotoxicity.


Tubulysins are natural products isolated from myxobacterial species and
are mitotic poisons which exceed the cell growth inhibition of any
clinically relevant traditional chemotherapeutic. Structurally,
tubulysins are linear tetrapeptides comprised of N-methyl pipecolic acid
(Mep), isoleucine (Ile), the novel amino acid tubuvaline (Tuv), and the
novel tyrosine analogue tubutyrosine (Tut). All isolated tubulysins
possess an acid- and base-sensitive N-acyloxymethyl substituent not
previously found in nature. This N,O-acetal of formaldehyde is attached
as a side chain to the amide N-atom of the Tuv fragment. The isolation of
natural tubulysins from culture extracts provides only limited
quantities. Recently, we reported a large scale total synthesis of
natural tubulysin B. Among the multiple synthetic and stereochemical
challenges, the most striking were: a) the incorporation of the labile
N,O-diacyl N,O-acetal and b) the regioselective hydrolysis of the
C-terminal methyl ester (OMe) in the tripeptide Mep-Ile-Tuv-OMe.Herein,
we present a convergent total synthesis of tubulysin analogues
incorporating an alkoxymethyl side chain. Such molecular architecture
allows for compounds that are more base and esterase inert, thus
providing additional metabolic/catabolic stabilization. The key step in
our synthetic strategy relies on use of a novel reagent for the efficient
conversion of the N-acyloxymethyl substituent to novel side chain groups
with concomitant facilitated hydrolysis of the C-terminal methyl ester.
Following LiOH-based hydrolysis of the C-terminal ester, the Tut fragment
is added resulting in novel tubulysin analogues.This novel process opens
the door to tubulysin analogs with improved potency for treating cancer.

