Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Race-specific social gradients in breast cancer burden in
Maryland: 1992-2003.


There is substantial evidence linking adverse breast cancer
characteristics, including more aggressive histology, larger tumor size,
and advanced stage at diagnosis, to both African American race, and lower
social class. However, it is not well known if social class affects black
and white women similarly, and what behavioral or environmental factors
may contribute to the social class gradient for each racial group.Using
data from approximately 55,000 cases of breast cancer reported to the
Maryland Cancer Registry between 1992-2003, we used multi-level random
effects models to examine the relationship between case race, age, year
of diagnosis, area-level social class indices (area-level rates of high
school graduation, employment, white collar work, and income) and three
characteristics associated with adverse cancer outcomes: SEER stage at
diagnosis (stage 2-7 versus 1), large tumor size at diagnosis (>2 cm
versus There is substantial evidence linking adverse breast cancer
characteristics, including more aggressive histology, larger tumor size,
and advanced stage at diagnosis, to both African American race, and lower
social class. However, it is not well known if social class affects black
and white women similarly, and what behavioral or environmental factors
may contribute to the social class gradient for each racial group.Using
data from approximately 55,000 cases of breast cancer reported to the
Maryland Cancer Registry between 1992-2003, we used multi-level random
effects models to examine the relationship between case race, age, year
of diagnosis, area-level social class indices (area-level rates of high
school graduation, employment, white collar work, and income) and three
characteristics associated with adverse cancer outcomes: SEER stage at
diagnosis (stage 2-7 versus 1), large tumor size at diagnosis (>2 cm
versus <=2 cm), and aggressive histological grade of tumor (grade 3 or 4,
versus 1 or 2). We then examined the additional contribution to the model
of an estimate of area-level smoking behavior, using estimates of
area-level average per household tobacco spending. Finally, we examined
whether effects of social class and tobacco use varied for white and
black women.Results demonstrate that black women were more likely to be
diagnosed with later stage cancers (O.R. =1.29, 95% C.I.= 1.22,1.35),
larger tumors (O.R.= 1.45, 95% C.I.= 1.34, 1.56), and more aggressive
tumor histology (O.R. 1.65, 95% C.I.= 1.56,1.74). Social class was
protective for all three outcomes, but statistically significant
interactions showed that this protective effect of social class was
reduced for black women compared to white women. In addition, each $1000
increase in average household level of tobacco spending was significantly
associated with aggressive grade (O.R.=1.01 per $1000) and larger tumor
size (O.R. =1.03, 95% C.I.=1.01,1.06) but not significantly associated
with late stage diagnosis. There were no statistically significant
interactions of tobacco spending by race, indicating that the effect of
tobacco spending are similar for black and white cases.Findings suggest
that social class effects differ by race, and that intersectionality -
the context-based understanding of multiple simultaneous social effects
on health - may be an important approach to understanding excess breast
cancer burden in women. This analysis also suggests that health risk
behaviors, such as group-level tobacco use, may contribute additional
risk, and should be further explored with more robust designs and data.

