Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Pax3:Foxo1a translocation product is a cell cycle-specific
modifier of the alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma tumor phenotype.


BACKGROUND: Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma in
childhood, which falls into one of two biologically distinct subtypes,
alveolar (aRMS) or embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma. aRMS harbors a
translocation-mediated PAX3:FOXO1A fusion gene and has an extremely poor
prognosis.MATERIALS AND METHODS: Primary murine aRMS cultures were
obtained from the Myf6Cre, Pax3:Foxo1a, p53 conditional mouse aRMS model,
in which eYFP is expressed as a second cistron in the targeted
Pax3:Foxo1a-ires-eYFP allele. Limited dilution transplantation
experiments were performed using Pax3:Foxo1a knockdown by siRNA of eYFP
or control aRMS primary cultures. To elucidate the dynamical function of
Pax3:Foxo1a, time-lapse confocal microscopy experiments, cell cycle
analysis, quantitative RT-PCR, western blotting, immunohistochemistry and
mRNA array were performed using murine aRMS primary cell cultures with or
without Pax3:Foxo1a knockdown treated by 6 Gy irradiation, or selected
for ploidy using hoechst33342 sorted cell cycle-specific cells.RESULTS:
Pax3:Foxo1a is not required for tumor repopulating ability in mouse
limiting-dilution transplantation experiments. The expression level of
Pax3:Foxo1a was discovered to be dynamic and varied during the cell cycle
in murine aRMS primary cell cultures and human aRMS cell lines.
Pax3:Foxo1a is enriched in G2 and triggers a transcriptional program
conducive to checkpoint adaptation in genome-wide expression analysis and
quantitative RT-PCR. Radiation resulted in a higher fraction of DNA
breaks amongst mitotic cells (as represented by dual pHH3 positive, H2AX
positive cells) under conditions of Pax3:Foxo1a expression compared with
knockdown, suggesting that Pax3:Foxo1a facilitates G2/M transit,
consistent with checkpoint adaptation.CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that
Pax3:Foxo1a does not function in tumor cell maintenance, the expression
level of Pax3:Foxo1a is dynamic and varies during the cell cycle, and
Pax3:Foxo1a facilitates checkpoint adaptation under stress conditions
such as irradiation. Furthermore, the surprisingly dynamic regulation of
the Pax3:Foxo1a locus is a paradigm that has important implications for
the way in which oncogenes are modeled in cancer biology.

