Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transgenic C57/BL6 x Balb/c F1 mice expressing mitochondrial
targeted catalase have less spontaneous lung cancer.


Human lung cancer is a major cause of morbidity and among the most
frequent and deadly malignancies throughout the world. Discrepancies in
classification and characterization approaches have resulted in
confusions and difficulties in the comparative pathology of mouse and
human lung tumors. Currently, there are very few mouse models of
spontaneous lung cancer that are available to validate human lung
carcinogenesis. Male C57/BL6 x Balb/c F1 (CB6 F1) mice have a high
incidence of pulmonary adenocarcinoma that increases with increasing age.
For example, 28 month old males have a 52 per cent incidence, while 32
month old males have close to 80 per cent incidence. In order to
determine if these tumors were driven by mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species (ROS), we crossed wild type Balb/c females with transgenic males
on the C57/BL6 background expressing human catalase targeted to
mitochondria (mCAT). The offspring were followed through the end of their
lifespan when tissues were collected for histological evaluation. Of 65
males examined, we found that those expressing mCAT had a 29 per cent
incidence of lung tumors, while wild type littermates had an incidence of
71 per cent (p 0.01). The presence of mCAT had a similar effect on the
incidence of lung tumors in females although the overall incidence was
less than in males. Histologically, lung tumors in wild type mice had
higher grade malignancy than lung tumors in mice expressing mCAT
suggesting that ROS generated by mitochondria might be playing a role in
driving this type of cancer in mice. We conclude that spontaneous lung
adenocarcinoma in old CB6 F1 mice could be a useful model to study the
anti-tumor effect of mitochondrial-targeted anti-oxidants for
intervention of human lung cancer.Citation Format: Christina
Pettan-Brewer, John Morton, Piper Treuting, Warren Ladiges. Transgenic
C57/BL6 x Balb/c F1 mice expressing mitochondrial targeted catalase have
less spontaneous lung cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 343. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-343

