Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Safety and efficacy of intracarotid administration of temozolomide
in a rat model of intracerebral metastasis.


Purpose: Temozolomide (Temodar; Merck) is an alkylating chemotherapeutic
agent used to treat glioblastoma and other brain malignancies. After oral
administration, the average brain interstitium to plasma area under the
drug concentration-time curve ratio for temozolomide has been reported as
approximately 0.2 in animal models and patients. We hypothesized that
intra-arterial (IA) drug administration into the internal carotid artery
would improve temozolomide delivery to brain tissue, with subsequent
increased anti-tumor efficacy. Methods: Athymic nude rats received
intracerebral implantation of LX-1 human small cell lung carcinoma cells
as a model of chemosensitive brain metastasis, and were studied 10 days
after cell implantation when tumors measured 10-30 mm3 in volume. To
assess drug delivery, rats received 25 Ci 14C-temozolomide by oral,
intravenous (IV), or IA/osmotic blood-brain barrier disruption (BBBD)
route of administration (n = 5-7 per group). Radiolabeled drug in tumor
and brain was measured 10 min after drug administration by quantitative
autoradiography. To assess efficacy, rats received either no treatment or
a single treatment with 20 mg/kg temozolomide (150 mg/m2) by oral, IV, or
IA route of administration (n = 8 per group) and rats were followed for
survival. Results: The ratio of drug delivery in tumor compared to normal
left hemisphere was equivalent for the oral (2.51 25) and IV (2.56 0.87)
routes (P = 0.90). After IA/BBBD, the tumor to brain ratio was 4.11 1.12
and tumor-specific 14C-radioactivity was 85.4 29.9 nCi/gram tissue,
compared to 38.1 19.9 nCi/gram tissue after IV administration (P = 0.019
by Student t-test). Median survival in untreated control rats was 17.5
days. A single temozolomide dose was effective at increasing survival
when given by oral (median survival 25.5 days), IV (25.5 days), or IA (33
days) route of administration (overall PPurpose: Temozolomide (Temodar;
Merck) is an alkylating chemotherapeutic agent used to treat glioblastoma
and other brain malignancies. After oral administration, the average
brain interstitium to plasma area under the drug concentration-time curve
ratio for temozolomide has been reported as approximately 0.2 in animal
models and patients. We hypothesized that intra-arterial (IA) drug
administration into the internal carotid artery would improve
temozolomide delivery to brain tissue, with subsequent increased
anti-tumor efficacy. Methods: Athymic nude rats received intracerebral
implantation of LX-1 human small cell lung carcinoma cells as a model of
chemosensitive brain metastasis, and were studied 10 days after cell
implantation when tumors measured 10-30 mm3 in volume. To assess drug
delivery, rats received 25 Ci 14C-temozolomide by oral, intravenous (IV),
or IA/osmotic blood-brain barrier disruption (BBBD) route of
administration (n = 5-7 per group). Radiolabeled drug in tumor and brain
was measured 10 min after drug administration by quantitative
autoradiography. To assess efficacy, rats received either no treatment or
a single treatment with 20 mg/kg temozolomide (150 mg/m2) by oral, IV, or
IA route of administration (n = 8 per group) and rats were followed for
survival. Results: The ratio of drug delivery in tumor compared to normal
left hemisphere was equivalent for the oral (2.51 25) and IV (2.56 0.87)
routes (P = 0.90). After IA/BBBD, the tumor to brain ratio was 4.11 1.12
and tumor-specific 14C-radioactivity was 85.4 29.9 nCi/gram tissue,
compared to 38.1 19.9 nCi/gram tissue after IV administration (P = 0.019
by Student t-test). Median survival in untreated control rats was 17.5
days. A single temozolomide dose was effective at increasing survival
when given by oral (median survival 25.5 days), IV (25.5 days), or IA (33
days) route of administration (overall P<0.0001 by the Log Rank test).
Survival times in the oral and IV groups were significantly longer than
control (PPurpose: Temozolomide (Temodar; Merck) is an alkylating
chemotherapeutic agent used to treat glioblastoma and other brain
malignancies. After oral administration, the average brain interstitium
to plasma area under the drug concentration-time curve ratio for
temozolomide has been reported as approximately 0.2 in animal models and
patients. We hypothesized that intra-arterial (IA) drug administration
into the internal carotid artery would improve temozolomide delivery to
brain tissue, with subsequent increased anti-tumor efficacy. Methods:
Athymic nude rats received intracerebral implantation of LX-1 human small
cell lung carcinoma cells as a model of chemosensitive brain metastasis,
and were studied 10 days after cell implantation when tumors measured
10-30 mm3 in volume. To assess drug delivery, rats received 25 Ci
14C-temozolomide by oral, intravenous (IV), or IA/osmotic blood-brain
barrier disruption (BBBD) route of administration (n = 5-7 per group).
Radiolabeled drug in tumor and brain was measured 10 min after drug
administration by quantitative autoradiography. To assess efficacy, rats
received either no treatment or a single treatment with 20 mg/kg
temozolomide (150 mg/m2) by oral, IV, or IA route of administration (n =
8 per group) and rats were followed for survival. Results: The ratio of
drug delivery in tumor compared to normal left hemisphere was equivalent
for the oral (2.51 25) and IV (2.56 0.87) routes (P = 0.90). After
IA/BBBD, the tumor to brain ratio was 4.11 1.12 and tumor-specific
14C-radioactivity was 85.4 29.9 nCi/gram tissue, compared to 38.1 19.9
nCi/gram tissue after IV administration (P = 0.019 by Student t-test).
Median survival in untreated control rats was 17.5 days. A single
temozolomide dose was effective at increasing survival when given by oral
(median survival 25.5 days), IV (25.5 days), or IA (33 days) route of
administration (overall P<0.0001 by the Log Rank test). Survival times in
the oral and IV groups were significantly longer than control (P<0.001)
but did not differ from each other, while survival time in the IA group
was significantly longer than all other groups (PPurpose: Temozolomide
(Temodar; Merck) is an alkylating chemotherapeutic agent used to treat
glioblastoma and other brain malignancies. After oral administration, the
average brain interstitium to plasma area under the drug
concentration-time curve ratio for temozolomide has been reported as
approximately 0.2 in animal models and patients. We hypothesized that
intra-arterial (IA) drug administration into the internal carotid artery
would improve temozolomide delivery to brain tissue, with subsequent
increased anti-tumor efficacy. Methods: Athymic nude rats received
intracerebral implantation of LX-1 human small cell lung carcinoma cells
as a model of chemosensitive brain metastasis, and were studied 10 days
after cell implantation when tumors measured 10-30 mm3 in volume. To
assess drug delivery, rats received 25 Ci 14C-temozolomide by oral,
intravenous (IV), or IA/osmotic blood-brain barrier disruption (BBBD)
route of administration (n = 5-7 per group). Radiolabeled drug in tumor
and brain was measured 10 min after drug administration by quantitative
autoradiography. To assess efficacy, rats received either no treatment or
a single treatment with 20 mg/kg temozolomide (150 mg/m2) by oral, IV, or
IA route of administration (n = 8 per group) and rats were followed for
survival. Results: The ratio of drug delivery in tumor compared to normal
left hemisphere was equivalent for the oral (2.51 25) and IV (2.56 0.87)
routes (P = 0.90). After IA/BBBD, the tumor to brain ratio was 4.11 1.12
and tumor-specific 14C-radioactivity was 85.4 29.9 nCi/gram tissue,
compared to 38.1 19.9 nCi/gram tissue after IV administration (P = 0.019
by Student t-test). Median survival in untreated control rats was 17.5
days. A single temozolomide dose was effective at increasing survival
when given by oral (median survival 25.5 days), IV (25.5 days), or IA (33
days) route of administration (overall P<0.0001 by the Log Rank test).
Survival times in the oral and IV groups were significantly longer than
control (P<0.001) but did not differ from each other, while survival time
in the IA group was significantly longer than all other groups (P<0.01
for all comparisons). Temozolomide could not be given with BBBD in the
efficacy study due to toxicities likely related to the diluent; there was
no evidence of neurotoxicity in rats given IA temozolomide. Conclusions:
Infusion of temozolomide into the internal carotid artery improved drug
delivery and safely increased efficacy in a rat intracerebral tumor
model. The improved efficacy suggests that a clinical trial of IA
temozolomide is warranted in refractory glioblastoma.

