Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gefitinib resistance due to STAT3-mediated Akt activation in lung
cancer cells.


Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs), including gefitinib and erlotinib, are effective drugs for a
subset of non-small cell lung cancer. Gefitinib binds to the tyrosine
kinase domain of EGFR and hence inactivates its downstream prosurvival
signaling pathways, including PI3k/Akt and MAPK pathways. However, most
patients received gefitinib eventually developed resistance to this drug.
In this study, we demonstrated that in gefitinib-treated A549 cells
(human lung cancer cell line), Akt activation undergoes a time-dependent
recovery following an initial inhibition by gefitinib. Since constant
activation of Akt has been associated with treatment failure of gefitinib
in lung cancer cells, exploring the mechanisms that lead to Akt
restoration should provide new insights into the drug resistance and
therapeutic efficacy. For that purpose, alterations in Akt activation and
other signaling pathways, including MAPK and STAT3, involved in
EGFR-mediated cellular responses were determined in A549 cells treated
with gefitinib. Among them, we found that activation of STAT3 was
inhibited in the cells without gefitinib treatment. Gefitinib treatment
inhibited EGFR phosphorylation on tyrosine 1086 (Y1086), which leads to
STAT3 activation. Further studies showed that interruption of the STAT3
signaling by either chemical inhibitor or siRNA against STAT3 prevented
fast recovery of Akt activation and enhanced gefitinib-induced
suppression of cell proliferation. Taken together, these data suggest
that activation of STAT3 is an intrinsic mechanism of drug resistance in
response to EGFR TKIs. Combinational targeting on both EGFR and STAT3 may
enhance the efficacy of gefitinib or other EGFR TKIs on lung cancer.

