Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinicopathological characterization and nutritional assessment of
Hispanics with sporadic microsatellite unstable colorectal cancers.


Introduction: Approximately 10% to 15% of all sporadic colorectal cancers
have microsatellite instability (MSI). MSI has not been well studied in
Hispanics, an ethnic minority at high risk for colorectal cancer (CRC).
Patients with MSI tumors present with better prognosis, higher 5-year
survival and limited response to 5-FU based chemotherapy, compared to
microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors. The aim of this study was to define
the clinic-pathologic phenotype of Hispanics with sporadic MSI CRC and to
evaluate the association of dietary factors and tumor MSI-status.
Methods: The case-case study evaluated the MSI status of sporadic CRC
diagnosed during the period January 1, 2002 to October 31, 2012. MSI
analysis was performed using six markers (BAT26, BAT25, NR21, NR22, NR24
and NR27). Tumors were classified as MSI-high if two or more of the six
microsatellite repeats were mutated and MSS if none of the replicates was
mutated. Frequency analysis, chi-square, Fisher's exact test and Wilcoxon
rank-sum test were used for statistical analysis methods. Unconditional
logistic regression was employed to estimate the odds ratio (OR) between
exposures and MSI using STATA 10.0. Results: A total of 85 participants
(mean age 57.5 12.5 yrs, 51.8% males) were examined. 80 patients had MSS
tumors, while 5 (6%) tumors had MSI. The colorectal neoplasia specimens
analyzed were mostly adenocarcinomas (96.5%) located in the distal colon
(72.0%) with TNM stage III (34.4%). Tumors with MSI did not significantly
differ from MSS tumors with regards to gender (p=0.36), age (p=0.66),
education (p>0.99), family history of CRC (p=0.58) or obesity (p>0.99).
MSI tumors were more likely located in the proximal colon compared to MSS
tumors (OR=12.21; 95% CI 1.4-306.6). There were no statistical
significant associations between MSI and reported consumption of dark
green leaf vegetables (2-4 times/week) (OR=0.77; 95% CI 0.11-6.88),
fruits ( 7 times/week) (OR=3.54; 95% CI 0.24-108.52) and red meats (once
per day) (OR=1.08; 95% CI: 0.04-9.55). Conclusions: We report a lower
prevalence of MSI in Hispanics with sporadic CRC than other Western
populations. As previously reported in other non-Hispanic populations,
MSI tumors were mostly located in the proximal colon. There were no
statistical significant associations between sociodemographic, clinical
and nutritional characteristics and MSI. Ongoing efforts to continue to
examine additional Hispanic patients are underway to determine if dietary
patterns in Hispanics are associated with CRC MSI status.

