Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic selection for identification of functional antibodies
and development of high throughput screening assays.


Discovery of therapeutic antibodies requires the continued identification
of tractable targets, and we have employed a phenotypic screening
strategy to this end. In this study, antibodies from phage display
libraries were screened for their abilities to inhibit MDA-MB-231 (triple
negative) breast cancer cells. The screening cascade included tests for
specific cell binding, antibody internalization, and cytotoxicity as an
antibody-drug conjugate. Targets of these antibodies then were identified
using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, and confirmed by showing
diminished antibody binding after siRNA-mediated knockdown of the
putative target gene. One target was identified as NT5E (also known as
CD73), a 5-ectonucleotidase. NT5E catalyzes the conversion of adenosine
monophosphate to adenosine, and its function has been linked with
immunity, angiogenesis, and cancer. To screen for additional inhibitors
of this target, a novel, high-throughput ectonucleotidase assay was
developed. NT5E activity is typically assayed either by high performance
liquid chromatography or by quantification of free phosphate using
malachite green, and neither of these methods is suitable for
high-throughput screening. One inhibitory antibody was found to
significantly slow growth of MDA-MB-231 xenograft tumors in mice. In
summary, our phenotypic screening approach provides a mechanism for
rapidly discovering and evaluating new antibody targets and is being used
to accelerate the discovery of new cancer drugs.

