Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The influence of didox on the efficacy and toxicity of doxorubicin.


Didox, possess antioxidant propertieson the top of its DNA synthesis and
repair inhibiting ability. Doxorubicin (DOX) is a major chemotherapy for
liver cancer; however it evokes severe cardiotoxic effect which is
attributed to DOX derived free radicals. Herein, we assessed the effect
didox in enhancing DOX efficacy in liver cancer cells while protecting
against its cardiotoxic effects. Combination with didox significantly
reduced in the IC50 of DOX in Huh7 and HepG2 liver cancer cell lines. The
combination index between DOX and didox indicated additive type
interaction (CI-value of 0.81-0.9). Both DOX and didox significantly
blocked the cell cycle in S-phase and their combination significantly
aggravated that block. In addition, didox with DOX showed higher
caspase-3 level compared to DOX alone. This enhancement effect might be
attributed to didox induced PARP enzyme inhibition. On the other hand,
didox (150 mg/kg daily) significantly protected the cardiomyocyte and
decreased the intra cardiac reactive oxygen species induced by DOX
treatment (15 mg/kg). This effect was coupled with reverting DOX induced
cardiomegaly and cardio-pathological features. Didox significantly
prolonged the median survival of DOX treated mice and reduced their
mortality risk by 3.7 folds. In conclusion, didox significantly improved
the cytotoxic effect of DOX in liver cancer cells and protected from its
cardiotoxic side effects.

