Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor is expressed within breast cancer cells with
stem cell like capacity and confers endocrine sensitivity.


Breast cancer stem-cells (BCSCs) are tumor-initiating cells expressing
classical embryonal genes such as NANOG, SOX2 and NOTCH1, with a capacity
to differentiate and form the heterogenous tumor mass in breast cancer.
BCSCs are defined by their potential to grow as mammospheres in vitro
together with their distinct cell-surface antigenic profile
CD44+/CD24-/EpCAMlow as well as ALDH1-expression. It has been suggested
that BCSCs are responsible for therapeutical resistance and
metastasis.About 70-80% of diagnosed breast cancers express ER, which is
demonstrated to have a central role in breast cancer progression and
considered as a marker for endocrine sensitivity. However, in our
research, BCSCs are confirmed to be ER negative and supposed to be
responding to estrogens only through paracrine signaling via stromal
cells. We show that BCSCs purified from fresh surgically resected breast
cancers express the second estrogen receptor; ER. It is also present in
normal mammary stem cells (MSCs) isolated from breast reduction
specimens. Surprisingly, stimulation of ER with a specific agonist
expands the population of BCSCs but not MSCs . Knockdown of ER causes
reduction in the number of mammospheres significantly along with
decreased ALDH1 expression. We also find that treatment with tamoxifen is
not sufficient to inhibit BCSCs proliferation although a specific ER
antagonist reduces tumor growth in xenograft experiments as well as
inhibits proliferation of primary cancer stem cells. In conclusion, we
suggest endogenous ER is proliferative in cancer stem cells in vivo and
in vitro, thus can be targeted by specific ligands, in turn opening up
for a new direction in endocrine stem-cell specific therapy for breast
cancer.

