Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) enhances efficacy and reduces
toxicity of tumor-targeting S. typhimurium A1-R in a syngeneic breast
cancer metastatic mouse model.


We have previously developed a bacterial cancer therapy strategy using
the genetically-engineered strain, Salmonella typhimurium A1-R (A1-R).
A1-R has been shown to be effective against metastatic human prostate,
breast, and pancreatic cancer cell lines as well as osteosarcoma,
fibrosarcoma, and glioma cell lines in nude mouse models. In the current
study, we have evaluated Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) (Huang Zi,
Mai Men Dong, Mu Dan Pi, Sheng Di Huang) in combination with A1-R
bacterial therapy in a syngeneic orthotropic model of 4T1 mouse breast
cancer. TCM treatment improved the host's ability to clear bacteria from
the liver and spleen and prevent body weight loss after bacterial
infection. Fur discoloration and reduced activity was also observed in
mice treated with A1-R only, but ameliorated when bacterial treatment was
combined with TCM. The combination of TCM and A1-R enabled S. typhimurium
to be safely administered at a dose of 1107 CFU once a week i.v. for a
long period of time in immunocompetent mice. Efficacy and survival were
increased by combination treatment compared to monotherapy with A1-R (1
107CFU) . The results of the present study suggest that TCM potentiates
A1-R cancer therapy.

