Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cancer stem cell instigator pathway revealed by transcriptomics,
stem cell mutagenesis, and in-vivo tumor initiation.


We have developed a multi-stage Cancer Stem Cell (CSC) model that
recapitulates the natural process of carcinogenesis. Isogenic human
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) exposed to non-biased mutagens were found to
undergo rare spontaneous CSC transformation. Progenitor induced CSC
(iCSC) clones exhibited classical CSC/SC marker expression, tumorsphere
formation, resistance to common chemotherapeutic agents, and a capacity
to form serially transplantable tumors in immunocompromised animals. A
subset of progenitor clones formed tumors that took on a glioma-like
morphology and produced more highly drug resistant mature CSCs that
exhibited phenotypic characteristics of the primary patient glioma CSCs.
Computational comparison to expression profiles of 313 human tumor lines
confirmed that the mature CSCs had adopted a glioma-like expression
profile.An integrated molecular model of the instigator pathway was
assessed by comprehensive RNASeq transcriptomics, tandem MS proteomics,
microRNA profiling, and mutagen-induced molecular polymorphisms.
Progenitor iCSCs were found to have an ESC expression phenotype,
significantly differing in the expression of only 32 genes, with some
bearing direct evidence of mutagenesis in the expressed transcript. The
instigator genes formed a proto-oncology seed pathway that was expanded
by progressive expression changes to a more classical oncology profile in
the glioma-like tumors and mature iCSCs derived in vivo from the
progenitor iCSC. Classical oncology targets evident in the late-stage
tumor model were absent in the progenitor iCSCs. However, computational
repositioning analysis identified a limited set of existing molecules
that could act directly to mitigate the progenitor pathway in the iCSCs.

