Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography (MSOT) imaging and
quantification of apoptosis in vivo.


Apoptosis is an important mechanism in cellular homeostasis and
imbalances in the apoptotic process are associated with various disease
states. An important example is the acquired ability of cancer cells to
resist their own programmed cell death and therefore it is the aim of
many tumor therapies to either reestablish pro-apoptotic signaling
pathways or induce apoptosis through activation of existing mechanisms
within the cell. Therefore, visualizing and quantifying the apoptotic
process in vivo has great value in monitoring therapy response, diagnosis
and staging disease.By being able to detect subtle changes in perfusion
and tissue oxygenation, the small animal Multispectral Optoacoustic
Tomography (MSOT) scanner offers unprecedented performance in
cross-sectional imaging of tumor heterogeneity as well as a powerful
capacity to simultaneously image molecular processes such as apoptosis by
utilizing novel molecular probes. In this study, apoptotic regions within
a mouse mammary tumor where visualized using a dye-conjugated caspase
probe and compared to the hypoxia status of each tumor region.The
temporal resolution of the MSOT small animal scanner (generation of
multispectral cross-sectional data in less than 1 second) allows for the
dynamic imaging of targeted and control probe simultaneously. To
illustrate this point apoptosis probe was co-injected with a control dye
with similar physical and chemical properties, but a different absorbance
maximum after which the tumor region was imaged over 1 hour with
multi-spectral image acquisition. Next, mice were imaged by MSOT
immediately before and 24 hours post treatment with the chemotherapeutic
Doxorubicin and the induction of apoptosis was visualized and quantified.
Doxorubicin treatment led to a significant increase in signal resulting
from the DyLight 747-conjugated apoptosis probe. In summary, MSOT can be
used to determine the extent of apoptosis in tumors in vivo and thus has
great value in monitoring therapy response, diagnosis and staging disease.

