Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KCNJ2 constitutes a marker and therapeutic target of high-risk
medulloblastomas.


Medulloblastoma comprises the most common malignant brain tumor in
children. Non-WNT/SHH tumors define the most refractory medulloblastoma
subgroups. Interestingly, 17q gain, the most common genetic aberration in
medulloblastoma, comprises a cytogenetic hallmark of these molecular
high-risk tumors detected in group 3 (62%), and group 4 (73%). The
majority of recurrent tumors harbor 17q gain in the corresponding
primary. Virtually all of these tumors develop resistance to current
treatment protocols at relapse. The lack of a common molecular target
hampers the development of urgently needed novel treatment
strategies.Through mRNA expression profiling of 64 primary tumor samples,
we identified potassium inwardly-rectifying channel J2 (KCNJ2) as one of
the most upregulated genes on chromosome 17q in tumors with 17q gain.
High KCNJ2 transcript levels were significantly associated with
non-WNT/non-SHH grouping, anaplastic histology, metastatic dissemination,
and poor clinical outcome. KCNJ2 protein expression was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry in a large cohort of patients (n=199), and high
protein expression levels were found to be strongly correlated with 17q
gain, metastatic dissemination, and inferior prognosis (pMedulloblastoma
comprises the most common malignant brain tumor in children. Non-WNT/SHH
tumors define the most refractory medulloblastoma subgroups.
Interestingly, 17q gain, the most common genetic aberration in
medulloblastoma, comprises a cytogenetic hallmark of these molecular
high-risk tumors detected in group 3 (62%), and group 4 (73%). The
majority of recurrent tumors harbor 17q gain in the corresponding
primary. Virtually all of these tumors develop resistance to current
treatment protocols at relapse. The lack of a common molecular target
hampers the development of urgently needed novel treatment
strategies.Through mRNA expression profiling of 64 primary tumor samples,
we identified potassium inwardly-rectifying channel J2 (KCNJ2) as one of
the most upregulated genes on chromosome 17q in tumors with 17q gain.
High KCNJ2 transcript levels were significantly associated with
non-WNT/non-SHH grouping, anaplastic histology, metastatic dissemination,
and poor clinical outcome. KCNJ2 protein expression was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry in a large cohort of patients (n=199), and high
protein expression levels were found to be strongly correlated with 17q
gain, metastatic dissemination, and inferior prognosis (p<0.0001). To
functionally validate the potential role of KCNJ2 in medulloblastoma
biology, we performed knockdown experiments by small interfering
RNA-mediated silencing in two well-characterized medulloblastoma cell
lines. Transient knockdown of KCNJ2 resulted in a reduced proliferation
rate and induction of apoptosis. Furthermore, treatment of the
medulloblastoma cell lines and medulloblastoma stem cells with amiodarone
and gambogic acid, two inhibitors of this class of Kir channels,
phenocopied these effects in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Whole
cell patch clamp results revealed a nearly complete current blockade upon
inhibitor treatment. Subsequently, we showed that pharmacological
inhibition of KCNJ2 and knockdown KCNJ2 significantly reduced tumor
growth and resulted in prolonged survival in an orthotopic
medulloblastoma mouse model.In summary, our data suggest that
pharmacological inhibition of KCNJ2 may constitute a new therapeutic
option for patients with high-risk medulloblastomas.

