Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MK1775-mediated gemcitabine sensitization correlates with
prolonged DNA damage signaling in S-phase cells.


Pancreatic cancer remains among the most lethal cancers with an overall
5-year survival of Pancreatic cancer remains among the most lethal
cancers with an overall 5-year survival of <5%. Wee1 inhibition has
emerged as a potential approach to sensitize pancreatic cancer to
gemcitabine (Gem), the current standard therapy for both local control
and metastatic disease. In this study, we first characterized the ability
of MK1775, a small molecule Wee1 inhibitor now entering Phase II clinical
trials, to sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to Gem. Using a clonogenic
survival assay, we tested the effects of MK1775 in a panel of pancreatic
cancer cells and found MK1775-mediated Gem sensitization ranged from
80-fold in MiaPaCa2 cells to 12-fold in Panc1 cells. This sensitization
was associated with aberrant mitotic entry in MiaPaCa2 and Panc1 cells,
but not in the other cells lines tested. In addition, MK1775 potentiated
and prolonged Gem-induced DNA damage signaling (-H2AX) as determined by
2-parameter flow cytometry. For example, 48 h post-Gem, 3512% of BxPC3
cells remain -H2AX-positive compared to 763.7% of cells treated with Gem
+ MK1775. Using immunofluorescent staining, we further determined that
Wee1 inhibition with MK1775 qualitatively changed Gem-induced -H2AX
nuclear foci to high intensity pan-nuclear -H2AX pan-staining. Finally,
we tested the ability of the CDK inhibitor roscovitine (Ros) to attenuate
MK1775-mediated chemosensitization. Ros not only prevented aberrant
mitotic entry in MiaPaCa2 and Panc1 cells, but in each cell line
sensitized to Gem by MK1775, Ros inhibited both high-intensity -H2AX
staining after treatment with Gem + MK1775 and chemosensitization. These
results suggest the effects of MK1775 on DNA repair in S-phase cells may
be more important for Gem chemosensitization than the effects of MK1775
on the G2-M checkpoint.

