Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A randomized, placebo-controlled study of the tolerability,
pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of the oral JAK2 inhibitor
SAR302503 in healthy volunteers.


Background: SAR302503 is a JAK2 inhibitor in clinical development as a
treatment for myelofibrosis (MF). In a phase 1/2 study, SAR302503
provided durable reductions in spleen size and disease-related symptoms,
with an acceptable safety profile in patients with MF (J Clin Oncol
2011;29:789).Methods: Healthy males between 18 and 45 years of age
received seven ascending single oral doses of SAR302503 (range, 10 to 680
mg) or placebo under fasted conditions. Blood was collected before the
first dose and at intervals after dosing up to 72 hrs. For the 300, 500,
and 680 mg doses, samples were also collected postdose at 104 hrs and 168
hrs. Dose proportionality was assessed using an empirical power model for
logtransformed Cmax, AUClast, and AUC. Dose effect was analyzed using a
linear fixed effect model for logtransformed t1/2z. STAT3 phosphorylation
(pSTAT3) was measured at predose, and 3 and 24 hrs postdose. The
relationship between pSTAT3 suppression and SAR302503 plasma
concentration was explored using an inhibitory Emax model.Results:
Fifty-six subjects were treated and included in the safety assessment and
37 in the PK evaluation. Treatment-emergent adverse events (MedDRA v14.1)
were all mild in intensity and reported by 20 of 42 subjects (48%) who
received SAR302503 and by 3/14 (21%) who received placebo. There were no
deaths or serious adverse events. The most frequently reported adverse
events with SAR302503 were gastrointestinal occurring in 1 of 6 subjects
at both the 80 and 150 mg doses, 3/6 at 300 mg, 4/6 at 500 mg, and 5/6 at
680 mg. Vomiting occurred in 1/6 and 4/6 subjects at 500 mg and 680 mg,
respectively. SAR302503 was absorbed with a median tmax of 1.8 to 3.0
hrs. Mean t1/2z ranged from 62.1 to 78.2 hrs at the 300 to 680 mg doses
with sampling to 168 hrs. SAR302503 exposure increased in a greater than
dose-proportional manner, with a 68fold increase in dose resulting in
473- and 989-fold increases in Cmax and AUClast, respectively. Dose had
no effect on t1/2z. Subjects receiving a single dose of 300, 500, or 680
mg of SAR302503, demonstrated a reduction in pSTAT3 levels, indicative of
JAK2 inhibition. The mean pSTAT3 levels 3 hrs postdose were 76%, 50%, and
42% of predose levels in the 300, 500, and 680 mg groups, respectively.
The relationship between SAR302503 plasma concentration and pSTAT3
inhibition was described by an inhibitory effect sigmoid maximum effect
Emax model, with an EC50 of 1230 ng/mL.Conclusion: Adverse events
associated with SAR302503 treatment were mild and primarily
gastrointestinal. Following administration of single daily oral doses,
SAR302503 exposure appeared to increase in a greater than
dose-proportional manner. pSTAT3 inhibition was observed at doses of 300
mg and above.

