Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of a natural model of triple
negative breast micrometastasis.


Physiologically relevant animal models of micrometastasis are lacking;
yet micrometastasis activation leading to macrometastasis and/or
recurrent tumors is a major cause of cancer mortality and treatment
resistance. Tumor cell implantation metastasis models typically use large
numbers of tumor cells and immune compromised rodents together with
removal of primary tumors to maximize the number, size and speed of
macrometastases. Genetic and chemical/physical tumorigenesis models are
often inconveniently slow and do not provide consistent metastasis. In
order to develop a platform for investigating the biology of
micrometastasis and for drug development to target micrometastases, we
developed a model to study this phenomenon in vivo. The 4T1 triple
negative syngeneic breast cancer model was chosen without resection of
the primary tumor. A cell titration from 100,000 to 500 4T1-GFP tagged
cells was first completed, with cells implanted into fat pad 3 of immune
proficient 8 wk female BALB/c mice. Implantation of 15,000-100,000 cells
resulted in 90-100% primary tumor take by 7 days; a small number (less
than 15) micrometastases into the lungs by 2 wk; 70-90% of the animals
having macrometastases (as evidenced by a distinct blood supply using
tetrarhodamine labeled dextran) by 4 wk; and with most animals becoming
moribund by 5 wk. Implantation of 7,500 cells resulted in >90% tumor take
by 10 days; in 30-250 micrometastases in the lung (with many animals
having 5-10 brain micrometastases) 2 wk post-implantation; with the first
small macrometastases present at 4 wk; with most (80%) animals having
macrometastases at 5 wk and animals becoming moribund by 6 wk
post-implantation. With animals seeded with 500-1500 cells, the time of
micrometastasis to macrometastasis conversion and animal survival could
be prolonged, though primary tumor take was less (40-60%) than with 7,500
cells. Finally, this model using 7,500 cells was used to test the
efficacy of a first-line chemotherapeutic agent for breast cancer,
docetaxel, given at its maximal tolerated dose (MTD; 30 mg/kg weekly).
Although primary tumor growth could be significantly reduced by docetaxel
(PPhysiologically relevant animal models of micrometastasis are lacking;
yet micrometastasis activation leading to macrometastasis and/or
recurrent tumors is a major cause of cancer mortality and treatment
resistance. Tumor cell implantation metastasis models typically use large
numbers of tumor cells and immune compromised rodents together with
removal of primary tumors to maximize the number, size and speed of
macrometastases. Genetic and chemical/physical tumorigenesis models are
often inconveniently slow and do not provide consistent metastasis. In
order to develop a platform for investigating the biology of
micrometastasis and for drug development to target micrometastases, we
developed a model to study this phenomenon in vivo. The 4T1 triple
negative syngeneic breast cancer model was chosen without resection of
the primary tumor. A cell titration from 100,000 to 500 4T1-GFP tagged
cells was first completed, with cells implanted into fat pad 3 of immune
proficient 8 wk female BALB/c mice. Implantation of 15,000-100,000 cells
resulted in 90-100% primary tumor take by 7 days; a small number (less
than 15) micrometastases into the lungs by 2 wk; 70-90% of the animals
having macrometastases (as evidenced by a distinct blood supply using
tetrarhodamine labeled dextran) by 4 wk; and with most animals becoming
moribund by 5 wk. Implantation of 7,500 cells resulted in >90% tumor take
by 10 days; in 30-250 micrometastases in the lung (with many animals
having 5-10 brain micrometastases) 2 wk post-implantation; with the first
small macrometastases present at 4 wk; with most (80%) animals having
macrometastases at 5 wk and animals becoming moribund by 6 wk
post-implantation. With animals seeded with 500-1500 cells, the time of
micrometastasis to macrometastasis conversion and animal survival could
be prolonged, though primary tumor take was less (40-60%) than with 7,500
cells. Finally, this model using 7,500 cells was used to test the
efficacy of a first-line chemotherapeutic agent for breast cancer,
docetaxel, given at its maximal tolerated dose (MTD; 30 mg/kg weekly).
Although primary tumor growth could be significantly reduced by docetaxel
(P<0.01; two way ANOVA/repeated measures post-test), the number of micro
and macrometastases at the experiment end was not significantly affected
by docetaxel treatment and animal weight, a measure of systemic toxicity,
was significantly reduced in the docetaxel group (PPhysiologically
relevant animal models of micrometastasis are lacking; yet
micrometastasis activation leading to macrometastasis and/or recurrent
tumors is a major cause of cancer mortality and treatment resistance.
Tumor cell implantation metastasis models typically use large numbers of
tumor cells and immune compromised rodents together with removal of
primary tumors to maximize the number, size and speed of macrometastases.
Genetic and chemical/physical tumorigenesis models are often
inconveniently slow and do not provide consistent metastasis. In order to
develop a platform for investigating the biology of micrometastasis and
for drug development to target micrometastases, we developed a model to
study this phenomenon in vivo. The 4T1 triple negative syngeneic breast
cancer model was chosen without resection of the primary tumor. A cell
titration from 100,000 to 500 4T1-GFP tagged cells was first completed,
with cells implanted into fat pad 3 of immune proficient 8 wk female
BALB/c mice. Implantation of 15,000-100,000 cells resulted in 90-100%
primary tumor take by 7 days; a small number (less than 15)
micrometastases into the lungs by 2 wk; 70-90% of the animals having
macrometastases (as evidenced by a distinct blood supply using
tetrarhodamine labeled dextran) by 4 wk; and with most animals becoming
moribund by 5 wk. Implantation of 7,500 cells resulted in >90% tumor take
by 10 days; in 30-250 micrometastases in the lung (with many animals
having 5-10 brain micrometastases) 2 wk post-implantation; with the first
small macrometastases present at 4 wk; with most (80%) animals having
macrometastases at 5 wk and animals becoming moribund by 6 wk
post-implantation. With animals seeded with 500-1500 cells, the time of
micrometastasis to macrometastasis conversion and animal survival could
be prolonged, though primary tumor take was less (40-60%) than with 7,500
cells. Finally, this model using 7,500 cells was used to test the
efficacy of a first-line chemotherapeutic agent for breast cancer,
docetaxel, given at its maximal tolerated dose (MTD; 30 mg/kg weekly).
Although primary tumor growth could be significantly reduced by docetaxel
(P<0.01; two way ANOVA/repeated measures post-test), the number of micro
and macrometastases at the experiment end was not significantly affected
by docetaxel treatment and animal weight, a measure of systemic toxicity,
was significantly reduced in the docetaxel group (P<0.01, unpaired
two-tailed students t-test).

