Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of automated and a semi-automated methods for assessing
Ki-67 staining.


Human evaluation of immuno-staining is limited by the subjectivity of the
human evaluator, is time-consuming and is expensive. Semi-automated means
of tissue evaluation have been proposed, but most of these have large
subjective components. This study assesses semi-automated and
newly-developed fully automated methods of evaluating Ki-67 staining of
benign and malignant tissue from radical prostatectomy specimens. A
research tissue microarray was constructed from 68 prostatectomy
specimens and contained 3 core samples of benign and 3 of malignant
tissue from each research subject. Tissue microarray sections were
immune-stained for Ki-67. Two technicians (SG & CM) evaluated each TMA
core and labeled the nuclei positive for Ki-67 with a green dot, and
negative with a red dot. Images were collected and Image-Pro software was
used to count the number of green and red dots. In a separate procedure,
Image-Pro (IP) software was used to identify nuclei, and grade each
nucleus as positive or negative, and the percentage of positive nuclei
was calculated.The semi-automated results correlated with each other
(0.58, PHuman evaluation of immuno-staining is limited by the
subjectivity of the human evaluator, is time-consuming and is expensive.
Semi-automated means of tissue evaluation have been proposed, but most of
these have large subjective components. This study assesses
semi-automated and newly-developed fully automated methods of evaluating
Ki-67 staining of benign and malignant tissue from radical prostatectomy
specimens. A research tissue microarray was constructed from 68
prostatectomy specimens and contained 3 core samples of benign and 3 of
malignant tissue from each research subject. Tissue microarray sections
were immune-stained for Ki-67. Two technicians (SG & CM) evaluated each
TMA core and labeled the nuclei positive for Ki-67 with a green dot, and
negative with a red dot. Images were collected and Image-Pro software was
used to count the number of green and red dots. In a separate procedure,
Image-Pro (IP) software was used to identify nuclei, and grade each
nucleus as positive or negative, and the percentage of positive nuclei
was calculated.The semi-automated results correlated with each other
(0.58, P<0.001). The semi-automated and fully automated results also
correlated (0.8, PHuman evaluation of immuno-staining is limited by the
subjectivity of the human evaluator, is time-consuming and is expensive.
Semi-automated means of tissue evaluation have been proposed, but most of
these have large subjective components. This study assesses
semi-automated and newly-developed fully automated methods of evaluating
Ki-67 staining of benign and malignant tissue from radical prostatectomy
specimens. A research tissue microarray was constructed from 68
prostatectomy specimens and contained 3 core samples of benign and 3 of
malignant tissue from each research subject. Tissue microarray sections
were immune-stained for Ki-67. Two technicians (SG & CM) evaluated each
TMA core and labeled the nuclei positive for Ki-67 with a green dot, and
negative with a red dot. Images were collected and Image-Pro software was
used to count the number of green and red dots. In a separate procedure,
Image-Pro (IP) software was used to identify nuclei, and grade each
nucleus as positive or negative, and the percentage of positive nuclei
was calculated.The semi-automated results correlated with each other
(0.58, P<0.001). The semi-automated and fully automated results also
correlated (0.8, P<0.001, CM vs. IP and 0.59, PHuman evaluation of
immuno-staining is limited by the subjectivity of the human evaluator, is
time-consuming and is expensive. Semi-automated means of tissue
evaluation have been proposed, but most of these have large subjective
components. This study assesses semi-automated and newly-developed fully
automated methods of evaluating Ki-67 staining of benign and malignant
tissue from radical prostatectomy specimens. A research tissue microarray
was constructed from 68 prostatectomy specimens and contained 3 core
samples of benign and 3 of malignant tissue from each research subject.
Tissue microarray sections were immune-stained for Ki-67. Two technicians
(SG & CM) evaluated each TMA core and labeled the nuclei positive for
Ki-67 with a green dot, and negative with a red dot. Images were
collected and Image-Pro software was used to count the number of green
and red dots. In a separate procedure, Image-Pro (IP) software was used
to identify nuclei, and grade each nucleus as positive or negative, and
the percentage of positive nuclei was calculated.The semi-automated
results correlated with each other (0.58, P<0.001). The semi-automated
and fully automated results also correlated (0.8, P<0.001, CM vs. IP and
0.59, P<0.001, SG vs. IP). When stratified by tissue type (benign vs.
malignant), the semi-automated results and the fully-automated results
also correlated (benign tissue: 0.68, PHuman evaluation of
immuno-staining is limited by the subjectivity of the human evaluator, is
time-consuming and is expensive. Semi-automated means of tissue
evaluation have been proposed, but most of these have large subjective
components. This study assesses semi-automated and newly-developed fully
automated methods of evaluating Ki-67 staining of benign and malignant
tissue from radical prostatectomy specimens. A research tissue microarray
was constructed from 68 prostatectomy specimens and contained 3 core
samples of benign and 3 of malignant tissue from each research subject.
Tissue microarray sections were immune-stained for Ki-67. Two technicians
(SG & CM) evaluated each TMA core and labeled the nuclei positive for
Ki-67 with a green dot, and negative with a red dot. Images were
collected and Image-Pro software was used to count the number of green
and red dots. In a separate procedure, Image-Pro (IP) software was used
to identify nuclei, and grade each nucleus as positive or negative, and
the percentage of positive nuclei was calculated.The semi-automated
results correlated with each other (0.58, P<0.001). The semi-automated
and fully automated results also correlated (0.8, P<0.001, CM vs. IP and
0.59, P<0.001, SG vs. IP). When stratified by tissue type (benign vs.
malignant), the semi-automated results and the fully-automated results
also correlated (benign tissue: 0.68, P<0.001, CM vs. IP, and 0.80,
PHuman evaluation of immuno-staining is limited by the subjectivity of
the human evaluator, is time-consuming and is expensive. Semi-automated
means of tissue evaluation have been proposed, but most of these have
large subjective components. This study assesses semi-automated and
newly-developed fully automated methods of evaluating Ki-67 staining of
benign and malignant tissue from radical prostatectomy specimens. A
research tissue microarray was constructed from 68 prostatectomy
specimens and contained 3 core samples of benign and 3 of malignant
tissue from each research subject. Tissue microarray sections were
immune-stained for Ki-67. Two technicians (SG & CM) evaluated each TMA
core and labeled the nuclei positive for Ki-67 with a green dot, and
negative with a red dot. Images were collected and Image-Pro software was
used to count the number of green and red dots. In a separate procedure,
Image-Pro (IP) software was used to identify nuclei, and grade each
nucleus as positive or negative, and the percentage of positive nuclei
was calculated.The semi-automated results correlated with each other
(0.58, P<0.001). The semi-automated and fully automated results also
correlated (0.8, P<0.001, CM vs. IP and 0.59, P<0.001, SG vs. IP). When
stratified by tissue type (benign vs. malignant), the semi-automated
results and the fully-automated results also correlated (benign tissue:
0.68, P<0.001, CM vs. IP, and 0.80, P<0.001, SG vs. IP; tumor tissue:
0.89, PHuman evaluation of immuno-staining is limited by the subjectivity
of the human evaluator, is time-consuming and is expensive.
Semi-automated means of tissue evaluation have been proposed, but most of
these have large subjective components. This study assesses
semi-automated and newly-developed fully automated methods of evaluating
Ki-67 staining of benign and malignant tissue from radical prostatectomy
specimens. A research tissue microarray was constructed from 68
prostatectomy specimens and contained 3 core samples of benign and 3 of
malignant tissue from each research subject. Tissue microarray sections
were immune-stained for Ki-67. Two technicians (SG & CM) evaluated each
TMA core and labeled the nuclei positive for Ki-67 with a green dot, and
negative with a red dot. Images were collected and Image-Pro software was
used to count the number of green and red dots. In a separate procedure,
Image-Pro (IP) software was used to identify nuclei, and grade each
nucleus as positive or negative, and the percentage of positive nuclei
was calculated.The semi-automated results correlated with each other
(0.58, P<0.001). The semi-automated and fully automated results also
correlated (0.8, P<0.001, CM vs. IP and 0.59, P<0.001, SG vs. IP). When
stratified by tissue type (benign vs. malignant), the semi-automated
results and the fully-automated results also correlated (benign tissue:
0.68, P<0.001, CM vs. IP, and 0.80, P<0.001, SG vs. IP; tumor tissue:
0.89, P<0.001, CM vs. IP and 0.47, PHuman evaluation of immuno-staining
is limited by the subjectivity of the human evaluator, is time-consuming
and is expensive. Semi-automated means of tissue evaluation have been
proposed, but most of these have large subjective components. This study
assesses semi-automated and newly-developed fully automated methods of
evaluating Ki-67 staining of benign and malignant tissue from radical
prostatectomy specimens. A research tissue microarray was constructed
from 68 prostatectomy specimens and contained 3 core samples of benign
and 3 of malignant tissue from each research subject. Tissue microarray
sections were immune-stained for Ki-67. Two technicians (SG & CM)
evaluated each TMA core and labeled the nuclei positive for Ki-67 with a
green dot, and negative with a red dot. Images were collected and
Image-Pro software was used to count the number of green and red dots. In
a separate procedure, Image-Pro (IP) software was used to identify
nuclei, and grade each nucleus as positive or negative, and the
percentage of positive nuclei was calculated.The semi-automated results
correlated with each other (0.58, P<0.001). The semi-automated and fully
automated results also correlated (0.8, P<0.001, CM vs. IP and 0.59,
P<0.001, SG vs. IP). When stratified by tissue type (benign vs.
malignant), the semi-automated results and the fully-automated results
also correlated (benign tissue: 0.68, P<0.001, CM vs. IP, and 0.80,
P<0.001, SG vs. IP; tumor tissue: 0.89, P<0.001, CM vs. IP and 0.47,
P<0.001, SG vs. IP).These results suggest that semi-automated and
automated analysis of Ki-67 staining of prostate tissue produces
comparable results, and automated analysis can be used for prostate
cancer research.

