Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-200c can mediate either poor or good outcome in ovarian cancer
depending on HuR localization in the cell.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) in solid malignancies can behave as predictors of
either good or poor outcome. This is the case with members of the miR-200
family, which are the primary regulators of the epithelial to mesenchymal
transition and have been reported to act as both oncogenes and tumor
suppressors in independent studies. Expression of miR-200c was assessed
in a panel of ovarian cancer cell lines with inherent or acquired
drug-resistance. Luciferase reporter assay and
ribonucleic-immuno-precipitation assay was used to in vitro characterise
the complexes between miR-200c, HuR and class III -tubulin (TUBB3).
Nanofluidic technology and immunohistochemistry were used to analyze the
expression of HuR, TUBB3 and miR-200c in 220 ovarian cancer patients.
Using such approach, we demonstrated that overexpression of miR-200c in
ovarian cancer resulted in poor or good outcome depending on interaction
with the RNA binding protein HuR. When the localization of HuR was
confined in the nucleus, high expression of miR-200c suppressed class III
-tubulin (TUBB3) expression and resulted in a good prognosis, whereas
when HuR occurred in cytoplasm, the same miRNA enhanced TUBB3 expression
and produced a poor outcome. Indeed, in an ovarian cancer cell line
model, the miR-200c increased HuR binding on TUBB3 mRNA in stressing
microenvironmental conditions. This study demonstrated how the prognostic
power of a single factor can depend on interactions with additional
factors. Through a multidimensional analysis of all components, the
actual mechanism(s) underlying the aggressive biological behavior of
ovarian cancer can be unraveled, and the prognosis of ovarian cancer
patients can be rendered based on rational explanations.

