Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AR responsive miR-148a targets p27 and regulates the cell cycle in
LNCaP cells.


Prostate cancer is a commonly diagnosed malignancy and represents the
second leading cause of cancer-related death in US men. Prostate cancer
is initially dependent on androgens for survival and androgen signaling
is mediated by the androgen receptor (AR). Due to the androgen dependency
of prostate cancer, castration-therapy is a common course of action to
combat the progression of this disease. However, almost inevitably,
androgen independent prostate cancer later arises for which few strongly
effective treatment options exist. In many of these cases, despite the
androgen refractive nature of the disease, AR signaling is still
necessary for the survival of the cancer but the downstream mechanisms
that allow the AR to influence cellular proliferation remain to be fully
understood. Further research elucidating these pathways is needed to
discover novel therapeutic options for this disease. It has been shown
that the AR represses the function of the cyclin dependent kinase
inhibitor p27 but the way in which this happens is not completely known
and seems to be multi-pronged. Research from Murata et al. (2010)
demonstrated that miR-148a is an androgen responsive microRNA.
Furthermore, it was shown by Guo et al. (2011) that miR-148a targets p27
in gastric cancer. Here we attempt to link these lines of research and
uncover a novel pathway in which the relationship between the AR and p27
is mediated by miR-148a. We validated previous results showing that
inhibition of AR signaling leads to an increase in p27 expression at both
the protein and mRNA levels in the androgen responsive prostate cancer
cell line LNCaP. It was shown that AR inhibition leads to an 2 fold
decrease in miR-148a expression. Using a microRNA mimic, we demonstrated
the ability of miR-148a to target p27 expression at both the protein and
mRNA levels. We next showed that the miR-148a mimic can rescue the
attenuated androgen signaling phenotype by reducing p27 levels and
further demonstrate that this treatment leads to positive regulation of
the cell cycle. Interestingly, inhibition of function using an antagomir
against miR-148a leads to attenuated growth in LNCaPs suggesting a
putative therapeutic angle by targeting this pathway. These results
demonstrate a novel pathway mediated by the AR in which a miRNA is
expressed which potentiates the cell cycle by targeting p27.Citation
Format: Alan Lombard, Steve Libertini, Maria Mudryj. AR responsive
miR-148a targets p27 and regulates the cell cycle in LNCaP cells.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3093.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3093

