Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dominant negative PI3-Kinase inhibits UV-induced squamous cell
carcinoma in vivo.


Phosphoinositide-3 Kinase (PI3-Kinase) is an upstream regulator of
cellular proliferation and anti-apoptotic signaling that has been
implicated in cancer induction in many tissues, including skin.
Pharmacological inhibition of PI3-Kinase is effective at inhibiting both
chemical and UV-driven skin carcinogenesis. However, the specificity of
these pharmacological inhibitors is often questioned. Therefore, specific
genetic inhibition of PI3-Kinase in the epidermis needs to be carried out
in mice. We report here on the generation of a new transgenic mouse which
constitutively expresses the dominant negative mutant form of the
regulatory subunit of the PI3-Kinase dimer, p85, in the epidermis under
control of the keratin-5 promoter. These p85DN transgenic mice were
derived on the SKH-1 hairless genetic background. A chronic UVB exposure
experiment showed significant inhibition of both tumor size (p=0.0012)
and tumor burden (p=0.0003) for mice carrying the transgene compared to
wildtype littermates. The time to first tumor was also delayed in
transgenic mice, but with only marginal significance (p=0.07). p85DN mice
also showed significant inhibition of epidermal Activator Protein-1
(AP-1) transcription factor activity after acute UVB treatment (p=0.046).
UVB induced activation of AP-1 in the epidermis has been shown to play a
functional role in UVB mouse skin carcinogenesis. Further analysis of
protein expression after acute treatment with UVB suggests that Akt
signaling and COX-2 activation are both downregulated in p85DN transgenic
mice. To our knowledge, this is the first report of genetic inhibition of
PI3-Kinase in mouse skin carcinogenesis studies. Together, these data
suggest a functional role of PI3-Kinase in UVB-induced squamous cell
carcinoma and support the assertion that inhibition of this pathway is
beneficial in chemoprevention of non-melanoma skin cancer. This work was
supported in part by the following NIH grants: K07CA132956,
K07CA132956-02S1, P01CA27502 and P30CA23074.

