Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDCD4 de-repression of Bcl-xl IRES-mediated translation leads to
enhanced chemo-resistance of glioblastoma multiforme tumors.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most prevalent form of tumor of the
central nervous system with an average survival time of less than one
year. Given the location and characteristics of GBM only limited
treatment options are available, thus understanding the mechanisms of GBM
formation or progression may lead to the development of novel treatment
options. Strikingly, a common feature of GBM is the loss of expression of
the tumor suppressor programmed cell death 4 (PDCD4) which correlates
with adverse outcomes for patients in response to chemo- or radiation
therapy. Through both transcriptional and translational regulation, PDCD4
has been shown to regulate many proteins within the cell, although the
precise mechanism of target selection is not known. We have hypothesised
that silencing of PDCD4 in glioblastomas leads to an altered expression
of apoptosis-regulating proteins resulting in the suppression of
apoptotic signals and enhanced chemo-resistance. Indeed, we show that low
levels of PDCD4 correlate with an increase in the anti-apoptotic Bcl-xL
protein. Importantly, Bcl-xL is regulated at the level of protein
synthesis through the internal ribosome entry site (IRES) in its 5
untranslated region (UTR). We further show that PDCD4 regulates the
activity of the Bcl-xL IRES, and is therefore an IRES specific
translational regulator. Importantly, reintroduction of PDCD4 into
glioblastoma cells or directly inhibiting Bcl-xL with the chemical
inhibitor ABT-737 sensitizes these cells to doxorubicin, thus enhancing
cell death. In summary, our work provides a novel role for PDCD4 as a
translational regulator of Bcl-xL as well as a potential therapeutic
option for the treatment of GBM.

