Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pilot study of the association and prevalence of the human
papillomavirus (HPV) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).


Introduction: Given its potent oncogenic properties, the prevalence of
HPV, and the proximity of the bronchial epithelia to the oral cavity we
hypothesized that HPV infection may have a role in the causality of NSCLC
in patients without a significant smoking history. In Asia, studies
report rates of HPV infection in NSCLC tumors as high as 80%. The
expression of p16 in head and neck cancer is a reliable surrogate for
HPV, and its presence portends a good prognosis. The goal of our study
was to analyze archival lung tissue for the presence of p16 expression
and HPV infection among never smokers or Introduction: Given its potent
oncogenic properties, the prevalence of HPV, and the proximity of the
bronchial epithelia to the oral cavity we hypothesized that HPV infection
may have a role in the causality of NSCLC in patients without a
significant smoking history. In Asia, studies report rates of HPV
infection in NSCLC tumors as high as 80%. The expression of p16 in head
and neck cancer is a reliable surrogate for HPV, and its presence
portends a good prognosis. The goal of our study was to analyze archival
lung tissue for the presence of p16 expression and HPV infection among
never smokers or < 10 pack year smoking patients with NSCLC.Methods:
Surgical specimens from never/light smokers was identified in the Fox
Chase Cancer Center Biosample Repository. A tissue microarray was
constructed for immunohistochemistry analysis on the quantitative
platform, AQUA, for p16. DNA was also extracted from archival tissue for
assessment of p16 status. Real-time PCR and reverse hybridization
(INNO-LiPA) was utilized to detect evidence of HPV genes in tumor
samples. In order to determine if the viral genome was episomal or
integrated, PCR to determine E2:E6 ratios were employed. The association
of p16 expression and HPV infection was assessed.Study results: Available
tissue included 36 NSCLC surgical specimens from never/light smokers
(1995-2009). Patient characteristics were: 28 female, age range: 47-84,
Histology: adenocarcinoma (31, 86%), adenosquamous (3, 8%), and squamous
(2, 6%). TNM Stage: T1 (5, 14%), T2 (27, 75%), T3 (1, 3%), T4 (1, 3%), N0
(18, 50%), N1 (8, 22%), N2 (8, 22%), N3 (1, 3%), M1 (2, 5.5%). The p16
AQUA score range: 91-7733. A natural cut point occurred at 3000 with 25
low (p16-) and 8 high (p16+) expressers. AQUA score correlated with
standard IHC H score (p=0.0005). There was no significant relationship
between p16 level and gender, T or N stage. p16+ was associated with a
trend towards inferior survival (HR 2.18, p=0.157). Evidence of HPV 16
and 18 viral DNA, as measured by real-time PCR and reverse hybridization
(INNO-LiPA) was detected in 4 samples; 16 (2, 5.5%), 18 (2, 5.5%).
Additional high risk oncogenic HPV viruses which were also detected
included HPV 35, 52 and 53. Based on the calculation of HPV 16 E2:E6
ratios, both specimens (1 male, 1 female) with evidence of HPV16
infection also had evidence of genome integration of HPV16 DNA. There was
no association between HPV infection and p16 expression.Conclusions: In
our series of NSCLC among never or light smokers, the rate of HPV 16
viral infection and integration was 5.5%. Notably, all HPV 16 infected
tumors had integrated genomes; a novel finding among NSCLC tumors in the
Western population. In our small series, p16+ status was not associated
with HPV infection. Future study of the potential role of HPV in the
pathogenesis of NSCLC warrants exploration, including an assessment of
genomic integration of additional strains of high risk HPV DNA.

