Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXB13 inhibition of succinate dehydrogenase leads to
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in mouse ovarian cancer cell lines.


HOXB13 is a homeobox gene whose dysregulation has been implicated in
cancer. We have previously shown that HOXB13 plays an oncogenic role in
ovarian cancer by driving epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT);
however the mechanism by which this occurs has not been established.
Global metabolomics profiling revealed that overexpression of HOXB13 in
genetically defined mouse ovarian cancer cell lines inhibits succinate
dehydrogenase (SDH) activity. Targeted-knockdown of the SDH subunit SdhB
by shRNA results in mislocalization of E-cadherin and a spindle-shaped
morphology suggestive of EMT. Metabolomics and real-time flux analysis
showed that knockdown of SdhB results in elevated levels of succinate as
well as defective mitochondrial respiration. Despite the mitochondrial
respiration defect, SdhB knockdown cells display increased
anchorage-independent growth in soft agar and enhanced xenograft tumor
formation. Elevated levels of succinate have been shown to inhibit
-ketoglutarate requiring enzymes such as the Jumanji C (JmjC)-domain
containing H3K27 demethylases, UTX and JMJD3. Indeed, knockdown of SdhB
results in a hypermethylated epigenome as evidenced by increased levels
of H3K27me2 and H3K27me3. Both the epigenetic and EMT phenotypes can be
recapitulated by pharmacological inhibition of UTX and JMJD3 in control
cells. These data point to a mechanism wherein modulation of
oncometabolite levels can affect the epigenome, thereby influencing
cancer cell morphology and tumorigenic properties.

