Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Possible circadian modulation of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
by mir-27a and mir-27b.


5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is a commonly administered chemotherapy drug used
for the treatment of various aggressive cancers. Dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase (DPD, encoded by the DPYD gene) is the rate limiting enzyme
of the 5-flourouracil (5-FU) catabolic pathway, and as such limits the
amount of drug available for conversion into active metabolites. Reduced
expression of DPD has been linked to severe adverse toxicity to 5-FU,
including mucositis, diarrhea, hematological toxicities, and, in extreme
cases, death. DPD has been previously shown to follow circadian patterns
of expression in rodent models and in humans. Many microRNAs also exhibit
circadian variations in expression and have been suggested to control
oscillations in target protein expression. Using in silico prediction, we
identified two putative binding domains for the microRNAs mir-27a and
mir-27b within the DPYD gene. One of these sites is located in the 3
untranslated region (UTR) and the other is located within the coding
region just upstream from the stop codon. Using a reporter system, we
show that mir-27a and mir-27b are able to bind to both predicted binding
sites. Furthermore, over-expression of either microRNA reduced endogenous
DPD protein levels in the HT-29 colon cancer cell line. To investigate
mir-27a/b as a potential circadian regulator of DPD expression,
expression was measured in livers collected at 4-hour intervals from
chrono-synchronized mice. As expected, the circadian pattern of DPD
enzyme activity closely matched that of DPD expression. The expression
patterns for mir-27a and mir-27b were inverse of those for DPD expression
and activity. These data suggest that mir-27a and mir-27b may direct
circadian variations in DPD enzyme activity.

