Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression and roles of miR-1246 and miR-1290 in
multiple myeloma cancer stem cell-like subpopulation.


Multiple myeloma (MM) remains an incurable clonal plasma cell malignancy.
The existence of cancer stem cell-like subpopulation in MM may explain
for its unfavourable prognosis and high relapse rate. Studies have shown
that CD138neg MM cells were clonogenic and could be serially
transplanted, while CD138+ cells could not. We characterized CD138neg
cells by checking the presence of such subpopulation and their
tumorigenic properties. In concordance with literature, CD138neg cells
were present in MM cell lines, and possessed higher clonogenic potential
than its non-tumorigenic counterpart as shown in colony formation assay.
They were more quiescent, with less than 1% in G2/M phase compared to
5-10% in CD138+ cells. They also demonstrated higher resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents, including thalidomide and bortezomib. Since
studies in solid tumors have demonstrated that microRNA (miRNA) plays a
role in self-renewal, tumorigenicity and chemoresistance in cancer stem
cells, we hypothesized that specific miRNAs are the key regulators of the
cancer stem cell-like functions in MM clonogenic cells. To search for
these candidates, we first identified miRNAs that are differentially
expressed among the two subpopulations, CD138+ and CD138neg cells, which
were isolated from MM cell lines (NCI-H929, U266 and MM17, our in-house
MM cell line) using MACS-immunomagnetic separation system and subjected
to Exiqon miRCURY LNA miRNA microarray analysis. Ten candidate miRNAs
were identified and selected for further validation by Taqman miRNA
assay. By further independent investigation using fifteen MM patient
samples, concordantly we found frequent up-regulation of miR-483-5p,
miR-1246, miR-1275, miR-1290 and miR-3196 in CD138neg compared to CD138+
cells. MiR-1246 (93.4%, p = 0.006) and miR-1290 (93.4%, p = 0.0015) were
chosen for further examination of the potential roles in MM pathogenesis
and prognosis because they showed significantly higher expression levels
in CD138neg cells than the CD138+ counterparts. Preliminary results
showed that inhibiting miR-1246 (p = 0.0478) and miR-1290 (p = 0.0386)
reduced cell proliferation in CD138neg cells at 24h or 48h of
transfection in unsorted U266 cells, while CD138+ cells were not
affected. As predicted using computational algorithms (miRANDA and
TargetScan), the downstream targets of the two miRNAs include SEMA6A,
STK17A, PHLDA1 and KLF9, which bear functions related to MM pathogenesis
or known to be tumor suppressors. Moreover, we also confirmed that their
mRNA expressions were down-regulated in U266 CD138neg cells compared with
CD138+ cells.Taken together, we suggest that miR-1246 and miR-1290 may
play a regulatory role in MM clonogenic cell proliferation. Our findings
may provide a novel insight for the microRNA-based therapeutics that
specifically targets the clonogenic progenitors, which may prove to be
more effective for cure of MM.

