Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells to guide the choice between chemotherapy
and hormone therapy as first line treatment for metastatic breast cancer
patients: the STIC CTC METABREAST trial.


BackgroundBaseline CTC count already demonstrated its very good
performance as an independent prognostic marker in metastatic breast
cancer (MBC), before the start of any treatment (Cristofanilli, NEJM
2004; Pierga Ann Oncol 2011). Multivariate analyses performed in both a
pooled analysis (Liu, ASCO 2011) and in the IC 2006-04 study showed that
the other independent prognostic factors were the performance status and
hormone-receptor (HR) status. Oppositely, the other criteria that are
frequently used to choose between hormone therapy and chemotherapy for
the treatment of first line hormone receptor-positive MBC patients (e.g.
metastatic sites, metastasis-free interval) were not independent
prognostic factors. On the basis that CTC count may be a better criterion
for this important choice than the currently used empiric criteria, we
designed a large pivotal phase III trial.MethodsN=996 HR+ M+ breast
cancer patients will be randomized between the clinician choice and CTC
count-driven choice. Main inclusion criteria include hormone
receptor-positive MBC patients with no previous treatment for the
metastatic disease, and who can receive either hormone therapy or
chemotherapy as first line treatment. In the CTC arm, patients with 5
CTC/7.5ml will receive chemotherapy whereas patients with
BackgroundBaseline CTC count already demonstrated its very good
performance as an independent prognostic marker in metastatic breast
cancer (MBC), before the start of any treatment (Cristofanilli, NEJM
2004; Pierga Ann Oncol 2011). Multivariate analyses performed in both a
pooled analysis (Liu, ASCO 2011) and in the IC 2006-04 study showed that
the other independent prognostic factors were the performance status and
hormone-receptor (HR) status. Oppositely, the other criteria that are
frequently used to choose between hormone therapy and chemotherapy for
the treatment of first line hormone receptor-positive MBC patients (e.g.
metastatic sites, metastasis-free interval) were not independent
prognostic factors. On the basis that CTC count may be a better criterion
for this important choice than the currently used empiric criteria, we
designed a large pivotal phase III trial.MethodsN=996 HR+ M+ breast
cancer patients will be randomized between the clinician choice and CTC
count-driven choice. Main inclusion criteria include hormone
receptor-positive MBC patients with no previous treatment for the
metastatic disease, and who can receive either hormone therapy or
chemotherapy as first line treatment. In the CTC arm, patients with 5
CTC/7.5ml will receive chemotherapy whereas patients with <5 CTC/7.5ml
will receive endocrine therapy as first line treatment. As every patient
will receive a treatment, this pivotal trial has been designed to show a
non-inferiority of the CTC arm for PFS (primary clinical endpoint) and a
superiority of the CTC arm for the medico-economics study (co-primary
endpoint). The STIC CTC METABREAST trial has been funded by the French
Ministry of Health (STIC program) and Veridex. The promoter is the
Institut Curie (Paris).ResultsThis trial began in February 2012 and more
than 15 French cancer centers participate to this study. The accrual
should be completed in 2 to 3 years.ConclusionThis large pivotal phase
III trial is intended to demonstrate the clinical relevance of baseline
CTC count.

