Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RET fusion gene: translation to the therapy of lung adenocarcinoma.


A considerable proportion of lung adenocarcinomas, the most common
histological type of lung cancer that comprises 40% of the total cases,
develops through activation of oncogenes, for example, somatic mutations
in EGFR or KRAS or fusion of ALK, in a mutually exclusive manner.
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors targeting the EGFR and ALK proteins are
effective in the treatment of lung adenocarcinomas that carry EGFR
mutations and ALK fusions, respectively. We performed whole-transcriptome
sequencing (RNA sequencing) of 30 lung adenocarcinoma specimens from
Japanese individuals to identify new chimeric fusion transcripts that
could be targets for therapy. Then, we identified KIF5B (kinesin family
5B)-RET fusion gene, as another druggable oncogene that is present in 2%
(6/319) of lung adenocarcinomas (Kohno et al., Nat Med, 2012). The
KIF5B-RET fusion leads to aberrant activation of RET kinase and is
considered to be a new driver mutation segregating from mutations or
fusions in EGFR, KRAS, HER2 and ALK. The RET fusion has preferentially
been detected in well or moderately differentiated tumors of never
smokers. The RET fusion in lung adenocarcinoma was also identified by
three other groups: Dr. Ju et al of Seoul National University, Dr.
Takeuchi et al of Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, and Dr. Lipson
et al of Foundation Medicine, USA. A clinical trial to address the
therapeutic efficacy of a RET tyrosine kinase inhibitor, vandetanib, will
be started in 2013 by Dr. Koichi Gotoh (kgoto@east.ncc.go.jp) of National
Cancer Center Hospital East, Japan.

