Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: III-tubulin in glioblastoma: An emerging multifactorial survival
factor role in chemotherapy response and tumor formation.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive primary brain tumour with a very poor
prognosis. Current treatment is usually surgical resection, radiotherapy
and chemotherapy, however, GBM's highly resistant nature renders
treatment ineffective. III-tubulin is a neuronal specific microtubule
protein that is aberrantly expressed in GBM and it has been implicated in
a range of epithelial cancers with poor prognosis and high
aggressiveness1. In gliomas, its high expression correlates with higher
tumour grade2, however the functional relevance of this expression is
unknown. Our aim was to investigate the functional and mechanistic role
of III-tubulin in GBM drug sensitivity and tumorigenesis.Methods: To
study the functional role of III-tubulin in GBM, siRNA gene knockdown was
used in two GBM cell lines, U87 and U87vIII and in a primary GBM
neurosphere culture. Non-targeting siRNA was used as a control. Knockdown
levels were assessed by western blotting. Apoptosis was measured by
AnnexinV staining. Drug sensitivity of cell lines was tested using
drug-treated clonogenic assays. Senescence was assessed by using
cytoplasmic staining for sa--galactosidase. Neurosphere formation was
assessed by soft-agar growth assay.Results: Specific III-tubulin
knockdown achieved a 94% and 52% reduction in III-tubulin levels in GBM
cell lines and neurospheres respectively, compared to control siRNA.
III-tubulin knockdown in U87vIII cells resulted in a significant increase
in sensitivity to both the DNA-damaging agent temozolomide (TMZ) and
tubulin binding agents epothilone B and paclitaxel compared to control
(pGlioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive primary brain tumour with a very
poor prognosis. Current treatment is usually surgical resection,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, however, GBM's highly resistant nature
renders treatment ineffective. III-tubulin is a neuronal specific
microtubule protein that is aberrantly expressed in GBM and it has been
implicated in a range of epithelial cancers with poor prognosis and high
aggressiveness1. In gliomas, its high expression correlates with higher
tumour grade2, however the functional relevance of this expression is
unknown. Our aim was to investigate the functional and mechanistic role
of III-tubulin in GBM drug sensitivity and tumorigenesis.Methods: To
study the functional role of III-tubulin in GBM, siRNA gene knockdown was
used in two GBM cell lines, U87 and U87vIII and in a primary GBM
neurosphere culture. Non-targeting siRNA was used as a control. Knockdown
levels were assessed by western blotting. Apoptosis was measured by
AnnexinV staining. Drug sensitivity of cell lines was tested using
drug-treated clonogenic assays. Senescence was assessed by using
cytoplasmic staining for sa--galactosidase. Neurosphere formation was
assessed by soft-agar growth assay.Results: Specific III-tubulin
knockdown achieved a 94% and 52% reduction in III-tubulin levels in GBM
cell lines and neurospheres respectively, compared to control siRNA.
III-tubulin knockdown in U87vIII cells resulted in a significant increase
in sensitivity to both the DNA-damaging agent temozolomide (TMZ) and
tubulin binding agents epothilone B and paclitaxel compared to control
(p<0.01). Increased sensitivity to TMZ following III-tubulin knockdown in
U87 and U87vIII cells was associated with a significant increase in
drug-induced apoptosis (pGlioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive primary
brain tumour with a very poor prognosis. Current treatment is usually
surgical resection, radiotherapy and chemotherapy, however, GBM's highly
resistant nature renders treatment ineffective. III-tubulin is a neuronal
specific microtubule protein that is aberrantly expressed in GBM and it
has been implicated in a range of epithelial cancers with poor prognosis
and high aggressiveness1. In gliomas, its high expression correlates with
higher tumour grade2, however the functional relevance of this expression
is unknown. Our aim was to investigate the functional and mechanistic
role of III-tubulin in GBM drug sensitivity and tumorigenesis.Methods: To
study the functional role of III-tubulin in GBM, siRNA gene knockdown was
used in two GBM cell lines, U87 and U87vIII and in a primary GBM
neurosphere culture. Non-targeting siRNA was used as a control. Knockdown
levels were assessed by western blotting. Apoptosis was measured by
AnnexinV staining. Drug sensitivity of cell lines was tested using
drug-treated clonogenic assays. Senescence was assessed by using
cytoplasmic staining for sa--galactosidase. Neurosphere formation was
assessed by soft-agar growth assay.Results: Specific III-tubulin
knockdown achieved a 94% and 52% reduction in III-tubulin levels in GBM
cell lines and neurospheres respectively, compared to control siRNA.
III-tubulin knockdown in U87vIII cells resulted in a significant increase
in sensitivity to both the DNA-damaging agent temozolomide (TMZ) and
tubulin binding agents epothilone B and paclitaxel compared to control
(p<0.01). Increased sensitivity to TMZ following III-tubulin knockdown in
U87 and U87vIII cells was associated with a significant increase in
drug-induced apoptosis (p<0.01). TMZ is known to induce senescence3,4 and
III-tubulin knockdown significantly increased TMZ-induced senescence in
U87 (III-tub siRNA: 84.12.6%, pGlioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive
primary brain tumour with a very poor prognosis. Current treatment is
usually surgical resection, radiotherapy and chemotherapy, however, GBM's
highly resistant nature renders treatment ineffective. III-tubulin is a
neuronal specific microtubule protein that is aberrantly expressed in GBM
and it has been implicated in a range of epithelial cancers with poor
prognosis and high aggressiveness1. In gliomas, its high expression
correlates with higher tumour grade2, however the functional relevance of
this expression is unknown. Our aim was to investigate the functional and
mechanistic role of III-tubulin in GBM drug sensitivity and
tumorigenesis.Methods: To study the functional role of III-tubulin in
GBM, siRNA gene knockdown was used in two GBM cell lines, U87 and U87vIII
and in a primary GBM neurosphere culture. Non-targeting siRNA was used as
a control. Knockdown levels were assessed by western blotting. Apoptosis
was measured by AnnexinV staining. Drug sensitivity of cell lines was
tested using drug-treated clonogenic assays. Senescence was assessed by
using cytoplasmic staining for sa--galactosidase. Neurosphere formation
was assessed by soft-agar growth assay.Results: Specific III-tubulin
knockdown achieved a 94% and 52% reduction in III-tubulin levels in GBM
cell lines and neurospheres respectively, compared to control siRNA.
III-tubulin knockdown in U87vIII cells resulted in a significant increase
in sensitivity to both the DNA-damaging agent temozolomide (TMZ) and
tubulin binding agents epothilone B and paclitaxel compared to control
(p<0.01). Increased sensitivity to TMZ following III-tubulin knockdown in
U87 and U87vIII cells was associated with a significant increase in
drug-induced apoptosis (p<0.01). TMZ is known to induce senescence3,4 and
III-tubulin knockdown significantly increased TMZ-induced senescence in
U87 (III-tub siRNA: 84.12.6%, p<0.05, compared to ctrl siRNA: 58.17.1%)
and U87vIII (III-tub siRNA: 83.94.5%, pGlioblastoma (GBM) is an
aggressive primary brain tumour with a very poor prognosis. Current
treatment is usually surgical resection, radiotherapy and chemotherapy,
however, GBM's highly resistant nature renders treatment ineffective.
III-tubulin is a neuronal specific microtubule protein that is aberrantly
expressed in GBM and it has been implicated in a range of epithelial
cancers with poor prognosis and high aggressiveness1. In gliomas, its
high expression correlates with higher tumour grade2, however the
functional relevance of this expression is unknown. Our aim was to
investigate the functional and mechanistic role of III-tubulin in GBM
drug sensitivity and tumorigenesis.Methods: To study the functional role
of III-tubulin in GBM, siRNA gene knockdown was used in two GBM cell
lines, U87 and U87vIII and in a primary GBM neurosphere culture.
Non-targeting siRNA was used as a control. Knockdown levels were assessed
by western blotting. Apoptosis was measured by AnnexinV staining. Drug
sensitivity of cell lines was tested using drug-treated clonogenic
assays. Senescence was assessed by using cytoplasmic staining for
sa--galactosidase. Neurosphere formation was assessed by soft-agar growth
assay.Results: Specific III-tubulin knockdown achieved a 94% and 52%
reduction in III-tubulin levels in GBM cell lines and neurospheres
respectively, compared to control siRNA. III-tubulin knockdown in U87vIII
cells resulted in a significant increase in sensitivity to both the
DNA-damaging agent temozolomide (TMZ) and tubulin binding agents
epothilone B and paclitaxel compared to control (p<0.01). Increased
sensitivity to TMZ following III-tubulin knockdown in U87 and U87vIII
cells was associated with a significant increase in drug-induced
apoptosis (p<0.01). TMZ is known to induce senescence3,4 and III-tubulin
knockdown significantly increased TMZ-induced senescence in U87 (III-tub
siRNA: 84.12.6%, p<0.05, compared to ctrl siRNA: 58.17.1%) and U87vIII
(III-tub siRNA: 83.94.5%, p<0.01, compared to ctrl siRNA: 56.34.3%)
cells. Further validation using a 3D-growth model of primary human GBM
neurospheres, showed that neurosphere formation was significantly reduced
(30.7%, pGlioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive primary brain tumour with a
very poor prognosis. Current treatment is usually surgical resection,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, however, GBM's highly resistant nature
renders treatment ineffective. III-tubulin is a neuronal specific
microtubule protein that is aberrantly expressed in GBM and it has been
implicated in a range of epithelial cancers with poor prognosis and high
aggressiveness1. In gliomas, its high expression correlates with higher
tumour grade2, however the functional relevance of this expression is
unknown. Our aim was to investigate the functional and mechanistic role
of III-tubulin in GBM drug sensitivity and tumorigenesis.Methods: To
study the functional role of III-tubulin in GBM, siRNA gene knockdown was
used in two GBM cell lines, U87 and U87vIII and in a primary GBM
neurosphere culture. Non-targeting siRNA was used as a control. Knockdown
levels were assessed by western blotting. Apoptosis was measured by
AnnexinV staining. Drug sensitivity of cell lines was tested using
drug-treated clonogenic assays. Senescence was assessed by using
cytoplasmic staining for sa--galactosidase. Neurosphere formation was
assessed by soft-agar growth assay.Results: Specific III-tubulin
knockdown achieved a 94% and 52% reduction in III-tubulin levels in GBM
cell lines and neurospheres respectively, compared to control siRNA.
III-tubulin knockdown in U87vIII cells resulted in a significant increase
in sensitivity to both the DNA-damaging agent temozolomide (TMZ) and
tubulin binding agents epothilone B and paclitaxel compared to control
(p<0.01). Increased sensitivity to TMZ following III-tubulin knockdown in
U87 and U87vIII cells was associated with a significant increase in
drug-induced apoptosis (p<0.01). TMZ is known to induce senescence3,4 and
III-tubulin knockdown significantly increased TMZ-induced senescence in
U87 (III-tub siRNA: 84.12.6%, p<0.05, compared to ctrl siRNA: 58.17.1%)
and U87vIII (III-tub siRNA: 83.94.5%, p<0.01, compared to ctrl siRNA:
56.34.3%) cells. Further validation using a 3D-growth model of primary
human GBM neurospheres, showed that neurosphere formation was
significantly reduced (30.7%, p<0.01) upon III-tubulin knockdown compared
to ctrl siRNA.Conclusions: Our data strongly suggests that aberrant
expression of III-tubulin in glioblastoma may play an important role in
intrinsic drug sensitivity to broad classes of chemotherapy drugs.
Targeting III-tubulin increases temozolomide sensitivity by enhancing
drug-induced apoptosis and senescence. Furthermore, we have identified a
potential role for III-tubulin in GBM tumorigenesis.1 Kavallaris. Nature
Rev Cancer, 10:194-204, 20102 Katsetos et al. Arch Pathol Lab Med,
125:613-624, 20013 Mhaidat. Br J Cancer, 97:1225-1233, 20074 Gunther. Br
J Cancer, 88:463-469, 2003

