Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated array CGH and expression profiling revealed candidate
biomarkers in gastrointestinal stromal tumors.


Oncogenic KIT and PDGFRA mutations play an important role in the
development of some, but not all, gastrointestinal stromal tumors
(GISTs). Other chromosomal alterations are involved in the clinical
progression of these cancers, but these have not been well defined. We
studied the association between copy number alterations (CNAs) and gene
expression in 32 GISTs, including 4 wild type tumors, using array CGH and
gene expression analyses.All tumors exhibited multiple CNAs and
significant numbers of novel recurrent regions were identified in wild
type GISTs. Among them, a significant correlation with the corresponding
expression between wild type and mutant GISTs was observed in 1p and 22q,
which harbor SDHB and GSTT1 genes, respectively. All 7 GISTs with copy
number losses on 1p36.33-p11.2 showed loss of heterozygosity in at least
one of 3 microsatellite markers in the SDHB gene. Loss of SDH complex
activity in GISTs can result in increased level of HIF1, which activates
the transcription of VEGF and IGF2. In this study, VEGF (2.31-fold
increase, P=0.025) and IGF1R (2.76-fold increase, P=0.062) expression
levels were higher in wild type/PDGFRA D842V GISTs compared to KIT-mutant
GISTs. As constituents of the MAPK cascade, mRNA levels of BRAF
(0.50-fold increase, P=0.001) and its downstream effector, MYC (2.21-fold
increase, P=0.017) were also increased in wild type/PDGFRA D842V GISTs.
For GSTT1, qRT-PCR on all 32 GISTs in this cohort and 22 additional
malignant GISTs showed significantly frequent gains of GSTT1 copy number
in wild type/PDGFRA D842V GISTs compared to KIT-mutant GISTs (91.7% vs.
54.8%; P=0.03). Gains of GSTT1 copy number correlated positively with
mRNA expression by qRT-PCR (r=0.705, P Oncogenic KIT and PDGFRA mutations
play an important role in the development of some, but not all,
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs). Other chromosomal alterations
are involved in the clinical progression of these cancers, but these have
not been well defined. We studied the association between copy number
alterations (CNAs) and gene expression in 32 GISTs, including 4 wild type
tumors, using array CGH and gene expression analyses.All tumors exhibited
multiple CNAs and significant numbers of novel recurrent regions were
identified in wild type GISTs. Among them, a significant correlation with
the corresponding expression between wild type and mutant GISTs was
observed in 1p and 22q, which harbor SDHB and GSTT1 genes, respectively.
All 7 GISTs with copy number losses on 1p36.33-p11.2 showed loss of
heterozygosity in at least one of 3 microsatellite markers in the SDHB
gene. Loss of SDH complex activity in GISTs can result in increased level
of HIF1, which activates the transcription of VEGF and IGF2. In this
study, VEGF (2.31-fold increase, P=0.025) and IGF1R (2.76-fold increase,
P=0.062) expression levels were higher in wild type/PDGFRA D842V GISTs
compared to KIT-mutant GISTs. As constituents of the MAPK cascade, mRNA
levels of BRAF (0.50-fold increase, P=0.001) and its downstream effector,
MYC (2.21-fold increase, P=0.017) were also increased in wild type/PDGFRA
D842V GISTs. For GSTT1, qRT-PCR on all 32 GISTs in this cohort and 22
additional malignant GISTs showed significantly frequent gains of GSTT1
copy number in wild type/PDGFRA D842V GISTs compared to KIT-mutant GISTs
(91.7% vs. 54.8%; P=0.03). Gains of GSTT1 copy number correlated
positively with mRNA expression by qRT-PCR (r=0.705, P <0.001).
Unexpectedly, all four patients with malignant GISTs in the small
intestine and KIT exon 11 deletion mutations showing primary resistance
to imatinib showed increased copy numbers and mRNA expression of
GSTT1.Our integrative approach reveals that for the patients with wild
type (or imatinib-resistant) GISTs, attempts to target IGF1R and VEGFR2
would seem to be reasonable options. Moreover, copy number analysis of
GSTT1 may be an effective tool to predict imatinib response, and hence
help select the best drug and an optimal dose. Further large-scale and
well-designed clinical studies are warranted to validate our findings.

