Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial dysfunction and radioresistance in esophageal cancer.


Introduction: Radiation therapy is fundamental to the treatment of
esophageal cancer. However, radioresistance is a significant clinical
problem. The elucidation of molecular mechanisms underlying
radioresistance would be of substantial clinical benefit. Mitochondria
are a critical cellular target of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the
generation of which accounts for 65% of radiation-induced damage. We
hypothesize that mitochondrial dysfunction may play a significant role in
driving radioresistance in esophageal cancer.Materials and Methods: An
isogenic model of radioresistance in esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) was
established by chronically irradiating OE33 cells with fractionated,
clinically-relevant doses of 2 Gy X-ray radiation (cumulative dose, 50
Gy). Radiosensitivity was assessed by clonogenic assay. ROS levels were
assessed by fluorimetry and high content screening. Mitochondrial
mutation frequency was determined using the qPCR-based random mutation
capture assay. Oxygen consumption rates (OCR) and extracellular
acidification rates (ECAR) were measured using the Seahorse XF
Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience. Expression of 84 genes
involved in mitochondrial energy metabolism was assessed using qPCR-based
arrays. Mitochondrial number was assessed by transmission electron
microscopy (TEM).Results: Chronic exposure of OE33 cells to fractionated
doses of radiation resulted in a radioresistant subline, OE33 R.
Characterization of this model revealed that, relative to the age- and
passage-matched parent control (OE33 P), radioresistant cells had altered
ROS levels following radiation and increased basal frequencies of random
mitochondrial mutations (p = 0.01). Basal mitochondrial metabolism was
also altered in these cells, with OE33 R demonstrating increased basal
OCR (p Introduction: Radiation therapy is fundamental to the treatment of
esophageal cancer. However, radioresistance is a significant clinical
problem. The elucidation of molecular mechanisms underlying
radioresistance would be of substantial clinical benefit. Mitochondria
are a critical cellular target of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the
generation of which accounts for 65% of radiation-induced damage. We
hypothesize that mitochondrial dysfunction may play a significant role in
driving radioresistance in esophageal cancer.Materials and Methods: An
isogenic model of radioresistance in esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) was
established by chronically irradiating OE33 cells with fractionated,
clinically-relevant doses of 2 Gy X-ray radiation (cumulative dose, 50
Gy). Radiosensitivity was assessed by clonogenic assay. ROS levels were
assessed by fluorimetry and high content screening. Mitochondrial
mutation frequency was determined using the qPCR-based random mutation
capture assay. Oxygen consumption rates (OCR) and extracellular
acidification rates (ECAR) were measured using the Seahorse XF
Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience. Expression of 84 genes
involved in mitochondrial energy metabolism was assessed using qPCR-based
arrays. Mitochondrial number was assessed by transmission electron
microscopy (TEM).Results: Chronic exposure of OE33 cells to fractionated
doses of radiation resulted in a radioresistant subline, OE33 R.
Characterization of this model revealed that, relative to the age- and
passage-matched parent control (OE33 P), radioresistant cells had altered
ROS levels following radiation and increased basal frequencies of random
mitochondrial mutations (p = 0.01). Basal mitochondrial metabolism was
also altered in these cells, with OE33 R demonstrating increased basal
OCR (p < 0.05) and increased expression of 7 genes involved in regulating
mitochondrial energy metabolism. TEM analysis of these radioresistant
cells demonstrated increased basal numbers of mitochondria, which were
darker and denser in appearance, when compared to OE33 P cells. Radiation
did not alter the mitochondrial number in OE33 R cells, which was in
contrast to radiosensitive OE33 P cells.Conclusion: Whilst a role for
mitochondrial dysfunction is strongly implicated in carcinogenesis, its
potential role in modulating the tumor response to anti-cancer therapy is
unknown. We have generated a novel radioresistant subline that differs
from its parent only in terms of radiosensitivity. We have demonstrated
alterations in mitochondrial function, mitochondrial mutagenesis,
mitochondrial metabolism, mitochondrial number and gene expression in
these radioresistant cells. This strongly supports a role for
mitochondrial dysfunction in modulating radioresistance in EAC and
suggests the mitochondria as a potential therapeutic target for improving
the tumor response to radiation therapy.

