Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of VT-464, a novel selective inhibitor of cytochrome P450
17,20-lyase, in castrate-resistant prostate cancer models.


Cytochrome P450 17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17) is a validated
treatment target for metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer
(mCRPC). Abiraterone acetate (AA; Zytiga) inhibits 17-hydroxylase and
17,20-lyase reactions catalyzed by CYP17 and thus reduces androgen
biosynthesis. However, co-administration of prednisone is required to
suppress the mineralocorticoid excess from 17-hydroxylase
inhibitions.VT-464, a non-steroidal small molecule inhibits androgen
production without mineralocorticoid excess or cortisol depletion by
selective inhibition of CYP17 17,20-lyase. We determined the impact of
VT-464 on tumor growth of a mCRPC xenograft, MDA-PCa-133, in vivo, and on
androgen signaling in C4-2B prostate cancer cells in vitro.The
MDA-PCa-133 xenograft is derived from a clinical CRPC bone metastasis.
Subcutaneous MDA-PCa-133 tumor expresses PSA, full-length androgen
receptor (AR) and AR-V7 isoform. We determined the effect of VT464 and AA
on MDA-PCa-133 growing in tumor-bearing castrated male mice:
randomization into three groups; oral treatment with vehicle only,
VT-464, (100 mg/kg bid), or AA (100 mg/kg bid) for 25 days. Both VT-464
and AA reduced tumor volume (>two fold compared to vehicle; p80%)
inhibited; AR-V7-dependent reporter activity was inhibited by 50% by 1 M
VT-464 or AA. We conclude that VT-464 inhibited AR signaling as
effectively as AA in C4-2B prostate cancer cells. The findings suggest
that AR signaling in cells, which express high levels of AR isoform
(AR-V7) are more resistant to androgen biosynthesis inhibitors than those
with wild type AR. Preliminary observations suggest C4-2B cells with
AR-V7 are less sensitive to AA than VT- 464. Ongoing clinical and
co-clinical studies will determine if the observed differences in steroid
profile and relative efficacy of VT-464 compared to AA are clinically and
biologically meaningful.

