Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Supernatant of NIH3T3/Src(Y527F) cell line induced Ana-1
macrophages to tumor-associated macrophages by IL-6.


Macrophages (M) is the major components of the solid tumors.
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) play an important role in the
development of tumor inflammation. The tumor microenvironment could
induce macrophages differentiation into TAM, and the TAM could regulate
tumor growth and invasion.However, the mechanisms that by which signaling
pathways contribute to cell differentiation are not well dened. As we
known, the tumor microenvironment in vivo is complex and integrated by a
variety of cells and factors. In this study, we chose NIH3T3 cell line to
construct a stable Src(Y527F) expression system. We found that its
supernatant could induce macrophages differentiation into TAM in vitro.
When we injected the cell mixture of Ana-1 macrophages and
NIH3T3/Src(Y527F) cells into nude mice, the volume of tumors increased
more quickly than the control group that just injected NIH3T3/Src(Y527F)
cells only. And, we also found that the tumors became more invasive than
control tumors. Furthermore, 62 cytokines were tested by using Cytokine
Antibody Array, the result showed that 13 of them significantly changed
in the supernatant of NIH3T3/Src(Y527F) cells compared with NIH3T3.
Strikingly, IL-6 was 71-fold up-regulated. When we added IL-6 in the
supernatant, it could also induce Ana-1 macrophages differentiation into
a TAM phenotype. Our findings indicated that IL-6 might play an important
role in the differentiation of Ana-1 from macrophages to TAM by using the
supernatant of NIH3T3/Src(Y527F) cell line.

