Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of body mass index and its change with breast cancer
risk by molecular subtypes: a case-control study in Japanese women.


Introduction. Recently, the clinical relevance of molecular subtypes of
breast cancer has been demonstrated, but the evidence on etiologic
differences among them is limited. Some epidemiological studies in
Western populations have shown that body-mass-index (BMI) is a risk
factor for luminal-type breast cancer. However, it is unclear whether the
impact of BMI on the risk differs among tumor subtypes in Japanese
population. Methods. We conducted a case-control study with 715 case
subjects and 1430 age- and menopausal status-matched controls to evaluate
the associations of BMI at current age, age at 20 years, and its change
(from age 20 years to the current age) with the breast cancer risk. We
applied conditional logistic regression models to estimate odds ratios
(ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Tumor subtypes were determined
by estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human
epidermal growth factor 2(HER2) and divided into four subtypes: luminal,
luminal / HER2, HER2-rich, and triple-negative subtype. Results. Current
BMI and BMI change were positively associated with the risk of
postmenopausal breast cancer. On stratified analyses by tumor subtype, we
observed the associations between current BMI, BMI change and
thepostmenopausal breast cancer risk for luminal subtype; OR for each 1
kg/m2increase of current BMI was 1.14 (95%CI: 1.07 - 1.20) and the
corresponding OR of BMI change was 1.16 (1.09 - 1.23) (each Ptrend
Introduction. Recently, the clinical relevance of molecular subtypes of
breast cancer has been demonstrated, but the evidence on etiologic
differences among them is limited. Some epidemiological studies in
Western populations have shown that body-mass-index (BMI) is a risk
factor for luminal-type breast cancer. However, it is unclear whether the
impact of BMI on the risk differs among tumor subtypes in Japanese
population. Methods. We conducted a case-control study with 715 case
subjects and 1430 age- and menopausal status-matched controls to evaluate
the associations of BMI at current age, age at 20 years, and its change
(from age 20 years to the current age) with the breast cancer risk. We
applied conditional logistic regression models to estimate odds ratios
(ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Tumor subtypes were determined
by estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human
epidermal growth factor 2(HER2) and divided into four subtypes: luminal,
luminal / HER2, HER2-rich, and triple-negative subtype. Results. Current
BMI and BMI change were positively associated with the risk of
postmenopausal breast cancer. On stratified analyses by tumor subtype, we
observed the associations between current BMI, BMI change and
thepostmenopausal breast cancer risk for luminal subtype; OR for each 1
kg/m2increase of current BMI was 1.14 (95%CI: 1.07 - 1.20) and the
corresponding OR of BMI change was 1.16 (1.09 - 1.23) (each Ptrend <
0.001). Additionally, we found the same tendency for triple-negative
subtype; the OR for 1 kg/m2 increase of current BMI was 1.21 (1.05 -
1.39), and that for BMI change was 1.18 (1.02 - 1.36) (Ptrend was 0.008
and 0.024, respectively). No significant associations among them were
seen for the other subtypes. In premenopausal women, the suggestive
inverse association was observed between BMI change and breast cancer
risk only for luminal subtype; OR of BMI change was 0.93 (0.87 - 1.00,
Ptrend= 0.054). There were no associations between BMI at age 20 years
and the risk for any tumor subtypes. Conclusions. BMI and its change are
associated with the risk of both luminal and triple-negative breast
cancer among postmenopausal women, despite the molecular and clinical
differences between these two subtypes. Our results provide additional
evidence for an etiological heterogeneity of breast cancer among tumor
subtypes.

