Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo immunomodulatory activity of SGI-110, a second generation
hypomethylating agent, in hematologic malignancies.


Second generation DNA hypomethylating agents own pleiotropic properties
supporting their clinical application in cancer therapy. Among these,
SGI-110 is a dinucleotide synthesized as a deoxyguanosine combined with
decitabine to protect the latter from the cytidine deaminase
inactivation, thus increasing its in vivo exposure and efficacy. A
randomized Phase 1-2 FIH PK/PD-guided, dose-escalation study is being
conducted on MDS or AML patients, to determine safety and tolerability of
SGI-110 and to establish maximum tolerated dose and biologically
effective dose. Subjects were randomized to one of two SQ regimens (daily
x 5 or once weekly x 3, both administered in 28-day courses). The PK
profile showed efficient conversion of SGI-110 to decitabine, longer
apparent half-life and lower Cmax than predicted equivalent decitabine IV
doses. Here, we investigated the immunomodulatory activity of in vivo
administration of SGI-110 in enrolled AML and MDS patients. The
hypomethylating properties of in vivo SGI-110 on CTA-specific promoters
and the resulting effects on the levels of CTA expression were analyzed
in PBMC from patients. Quantitative methylation-specific PCR analyses
showed that the daily regimen reduced the constitutive methylation levels
in promoters of investigated CTA (i.e., NY-ESO-1 and MAGE-A1) in a
dose-dependent manner. The major hypomethylation was observed in patients
treated with the highest dose of SGI-110 (Cohort 7, 125 mg/m2), showing
an average percentage of hypomethylation of 14.2 for NY-ESO-1-promoter
(range 5.0 to 26.7) and 16.3 for MAGE-A1-promoter (range 3.7 to 35.6). In
patients treated with the highest doses (Cohorts 4-6, 60 mg/m2 - 125
mg/m2) of the weekly regimen, it was 4.4 (range 0.4 to 6.2) and 2.5
(range 0.1 to 9.9) for NY-ESO-1- and MAGE-A1-promoter, respectively. The
effects of the hypomethylating activity of in vivo SGI-110 on the
constitutive CTA expression were evaluated by quantitative real-time
RT-PCR. The induction/up-regulation of NY-ESO-1, MAGE-A1, MAGE-A3
expression were transient and observed in 11/18 (NY-ESO-1/-actin
molecules range 10-5 to 1.4*10-3), 5/18 (MAGE-A1/-actin molecules range
10-5 to 8.2*10-5) and 6/18 (MAGE-A3/-actin molecules range 10-5 to
2.4*10-3) patients treated with the highest doses of daily regimen
(Cohorts 4-7). In weekly regimen the induction/up-regulation were
detected in 10/14 (NY-ESO-1/-actin molecules range 10-5 to 1.8*10-3),
1/14 (1.3*10-5 MAGE-A1/-actin molecules) and 11/14 (MAGE-A3/-actin
molecules range 10-5 to 5.9*10-3) patients treated with the highest doses
(cohorts 4-6). These newly identified immunomodulatory properties of
SGI-110, combined with its favorable pharmacologic and pharmacokinetic
features, define SGI-110 as a potentially useful agent to implement new
and more effective combined chemo-immunotherapeutic approaches in
patients with hematologic malignancies.

