Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of alk rearrangement in advanced non-small cell lung
cancer using fluorescent in situ
hybridization,immunohistochemistry,reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction.


Background:ALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase)gene fusions are detected in
3% to 13% of non-smallcell lung cancer(NSCLC). The ALK FISH assay is the
current gold standard assay, but it can be technically challenging and
costly.Therefore,other easy-to-use diagnostic modalities are needed to
select the suitable patients for the target therapy. We investigated ALK
fusions using immunohistochemistry (IHC), reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) in order to compare the three methodologies for
detection of ALK fusions.Methods:139 tumor samples with advanced NSCLC
were collected from Cancer Institute/Hospital of Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences. All of these patients who previously received cell
cytotoxic regimens therapy had progressive disease. ALK protein was
detected by IHC using new clone antibody (D5F3, Cell Signal Techonology,
USA). ALK gene rearrangement was evaluated by FISH using Vysis ALK Break
Apart FISH Probe kit (Abbott, USA) and by RT-PCR detecting 9 EML4-ALK
fusion variants with formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue.Results:132
samples (95.0%)can be evaluated by FISH,137 samples(98.6%) can be
evaluated by IHC and 122samples (87.8%)can be evaluated by RT-PCR in 139
cases.ALK positive samples were34.3% (47/137) by IHC, and ALK
rearrangement samples were 32.6% (43/132) by FISH.EML4-ALK variants were
detectable by RT-PCR in 32.4% (34 of 122) of specimens,and the variants 1
and variants 3 were the most common variant type.The concordance rate is
93.8% (kappa = 0864,p Background:ALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase)gene
fusions are detected in 3% to 13% of non-smallcell lung cancer(NSCLC).
The ALK FISH assay is the current gold standard assay, but it can be
technically challenging and costly.Therefore,other easy-to-use diagnostic
modalities are needed to select the suitable patients for the target
therapy. We investigated ALK fusions using immunohistochemistry (IHC),
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and fluorescent
in situ hybridization (FISH) in order to compare the three methodologies
for detection of ALK fusions.Methods:139 tumor samples with advanced
NSCLC were collected from Cancer Institute/Hospital of Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences. All of these patients who previously received cell
cytotoxic regimens therapy had progressive disease. ALK protein was
detected by IHC using new clone antibody (D5F3, Cell Signal Techonology,
USA). ALK gene rearrangement was evaluated by FISH using Vysis ALK Break
Apart FISH Probe kit (Abbott, USA) and by RT-PCR detecting 9 EML4-ALK
fusion variants with formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue.Results:132
samples (95.0%)can be evaluated by FISH,137 samples(98.6%) can be
evaluated by IHC and 122samples (87.8%)can be evaluated by RT-PCR in 139
cases.ALK positive samples were34.3% (47/137) by IHC, and ALK
rearrangement samples were 32.6% (43/132) by FISH.EML4-ALK variants were
detectable by RT-PCR in 32.4% (34 of 122) of specimens,and the variants 1
and variants 3 were the most common variant type.The concordance rate is
93.8% (kappa = 0864,p < 0.001) in the 130 paired samplesof FISH and
IHC.75 of 76(98.7%)IHC 0 samples was FISH-,34 of 39 (87.2%) IHC 3+
samples were FISH +, 7 of 8 (87.5%) IHC 2+ samples were FISH +, whereas 1
of 7 (14.3%) IHC 1+ samples was FISH +. Considering FISH as the gold
standard, the sensitivity and specificity of IHC were 95.3% and 93.1%,
respectively, when 2+ and 3+ were regarded as IHC positive and 0 and 1+
as IHC negative.The concordance rate is 95.7% (kappa = 0.898,p
Background:ALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase)gene fusions are detected in
3% to 13% of non-smallcell lung cancer(NSCLC). The ALK FISH assay is the
current gold standard assay, but it can be technically challenging and
costly.Therefore,other easy-to-use diagnostic modalities are needed to
select the suitable patients for the target therapy. We investigated ALK
fusions using immunohistochemistry (IHC), reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) in order to compare the three methodologies for
detection of ALK fusions.Methods:139 tumor samples with advanced NSCLC
were collected from Cancer Institute/Hospital of Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences. All of these patients who previously received cell
cytotoxic regimens therapy had progressive disease. ALK protein was
detected by IHC using new clone antibody (D5F3, Cell Signal Techonology,
USA). ALK gene rearrangement was evaluated by FISH using Vysis ALK Break
Apart FISH Probe kit (Abbott, USA) and by RT-PCR detecting 9 EML4-ALK
fusion variants with formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue.Results:132
samples (95.0%)can be evaluated by FISH,137 samples(98.6%) can be
evaluated by IHC and 122samples (87.8%)can be evaluated by RT-PCR in 139
cases.ALK positive samples were34.3% (47/137) by IHC, and ALK
rearrangement samples were 32.6% (43/132) by FISH.EML4-ALK variants were
detectable by RT-PCR in 32.4% (34 of 122) of specimens,and the variants 1
and variants 3 were the most common variant type.The concordance rate is
93.8% (kappa = 0864,p < 0.001) in the 130 paired samplesof FISH and
IHC.75 of 76(98.7%)IHC 0 samples was FISH-,34 of 39 (87.2%) IHC 3+
samples were FISH +, 7 of 8 (87.5%) IHC 2+ samples were FISH +, whereas 1
of 7 (14.3%) IHC 1+ samples was FISH +. Considering FISH as the gold
standard, the sensitivity and specificity of IHC were 95.3% and 93.1%,
respectively, when 2+ and 3+ were regarded as IHC positive and 0 and 1+
as IHC negative.The concordance rate is 95.7% (kappa = 0.898,p < 0.001)
in the 115 paired samples of FISH and RT-PCR . There are 4 negative cases
by RT-PCR with ALK positive by FISH,and 1 positive case by RT-PCR with
ALK negative by FISH. The sensitivity and specificity of RT-PCR were
89.2% and 98.7% respectively.But in the 120 paired samples of IHC and
RT-PCRthe concordance rate is 90.8% (kappa = 0.788,p Background:ALK
(anaplastic lymphoma kinase)gene fusions are detected in 3% to 13% of
non-smallcell lung cancer(NSCLC). The ALK FISH assay is the current gold
standard assay, but it can be technically challenging and
costly.Therefore,other easy-to-use diagnostic modalities are needed to
select the suitable patients for the target therapy. We investigated ALK
fusions using immunohistochemistry (IHC), reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) in order to compare the three methodologies for
detection of ALK fusions.Methods:139 tumor samples with advanced NSCLC
were collected from Cancer Institute/Hospital of Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences. All of these patients who previously received cell
cytotoxic regimens therapy had progressive disease. ALK protein was
detected by IHC using new clone antibody (D5F3, Cell Signal Techonology,
USA). ALK gene rearrangement was evaluated by FISH using Vysis ALK Break
Apart FISH Probe kit (Abbott, USA) and by RT-PCR detecting 9 EML4-ALK
fusion variants with formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue.Results:132
samples (95.0%)can be evaluated by FISH,137 samples(98.6%) can be
evaluated by IHC and 122samples (87.8%)can be evaluated by RT-PCR in 139
cases.ALK positive samples were34.3% (47/137) by IHC, and ALK
rearrangement samples were 32.6% (43/132) by FISH.EML4-ALK variants were
detectable by RT-PCR in 32.4% (34 of 122) of specimens,and the variants 1
and variants 3 were the most common variant type.The concordance rate is
93.8% (kappa = 0864,p < 0.001) in the 130 paired samplesof FISH and
IHC.75 of 76(98.7%)IHC 0 samples was FISH-,34 of 39 (87.2%) IHC 3+
samples were FISH +, 7 of 8 (87.5%) IHC 2+ samples were FISH +, whereas 1
of 7 (14.3%) IHC 1+ samples was FISH +. Considering FISH as the gold
standard, the sensitivity and specificity of IHC were 95.3% and 93.1%,
respectively, when 2+ and 3+ were regarded as IHC positive and 0 and 1+
as IHC negative.The concordance rate is 95.7% (kappa = 0.898,p < 0.001)
in the 115 paired samples of FISH and RT-PCR . There are 4 negative cases
by RT-PCR with ALK positive by FISH,and 1 positive case by RT-PCR with
ALK negative by FISH. The sensitivity and specificity of RT-PCR were
89.2% and 98.7% respectively.But in the 120 paired samples of IHC and
RT-PCRthe concordance rate is 90.8% (kappa = 0.788,p < 0.001),lower than
IHC or RT-PCR with FISH.Conclusion:IHC can be the next frontier of
molecular diagnostics to evaluate ALK fusions in NSCLC screening for ALK
targeted therapy.RT-PCR showed relatively lower sensitivity and higher
specificity for ALK rearrangement,it can be an alternative diagnostic
assay for ALK detection. FISH was the most sensitive method for different
ALK fusions.

