Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer effects of Withaferin A on UP-LN1 carcinoma cells
through the inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation and IFN--mediated
induction of metastatic cancer stem cells .


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been defined as a subpopulation of cancer
cells with the ability of self-renewal, giving rise to different
progenies, and transition between epithelial and mesenchymal status in
response to the tumor microenvironment. Due to the lack of an appropriate
cell model, our understanding of CSC biology remains poor and the
development of CSC antagonists is challenging. We herein used the UP-LN1
cell line as a CSC model which was derived from a gastrointestinal
tumor-to-lymph node metastasis lesion. UP-LN1 cells constitute two major
components, the floating (F) and adherent (A) cells. F cells were
identified as the primary niche of CSCs, and could be serially
subcultured while maintaining their stem-like properties including high
self-renewal potential, formation of suspended grape-like aggregates
and/or spheres, resistance to multiple drugs and NK/LAK effectors, as
well as an increased CDY1 (a novel iPS probe) dye retention. Using this
cell model, we demonstrated that Withaferin A (WA) dramatically reduced
the proliferation of F cells and their ability to form aggregates in
vitro. WA also dose-dependently reduced the side population cells.
Mechanistically, WA treatment resulted in the down-regulation of two
axes, CXCR4 and STAT3, both instrumental in the acquisition of metastatic
ability and the development/maintenance of CSCs. We validated the in
vitro results using non-invasive imaging technique in a xenograft mouse
model. WA-treated animals demonstrated a marked decrease in tumor burden
and metastasis, indicating that WA is potentially an effective agent for
targeting CSCs.

