Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipocalin2, an iron transporter, functions as a novel oncogene and
enhances the proliferation and survival of endometrial carcinoma cell.


Background: The mechanism of carcinogenesis and progression of
endometrial carcinoma has not been fully understood. To elucidate the
molecular machinery, we performed microarray analysis using mRNA
extracted from normal endometria, endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma
and found lipocalin2 (LCN2), an iron transporter, to be markedly
up-regulated along with disease progression. Furthermore, the
over-expression of LCN2 and its receptor, SLC22A17, was associated with
poor outcome of the patients with endometrial carcinoma. In the present
study, we further analyzed the molecular functions of LCN2 using
endometrial carcinoma cells.Methods: An endometrial carcinoma cell line
HHUA over-expressing both LCN2 and SLC22A17 was used. We established
LCN2-silenced HHUA (HHUAsh) and control-HHUA (HHUAc) by transfection of
LCN2-shRNA and scrambled shRNA producing vector, respectively. The growth
and migration were examined by WST-1 assay and wound healing assay. Cell
viability under stress conditions such as ultraviolet (UV) irradiation or
cisplatin (CDDP) treatment, with or without iron-chelation, was measured
by WST-1. The intensity of apoptosis was analyzed by TUNEL staining and
Apostrand assay. The expression of phosphorylated Akt was examined by
Western blotting. In vivo tumor formation was observed by the
subcutaneous injection of those HHUA cells to nude mice. The colony
formation of these HHUA cells in soft agar was evaluated. In addition,
the LCN2 cDNA containing retrovirus vector (LCN2-RET) was transfected to
NIH3T3 to observe the transformation ability.Results: The cell migration
of HHUAsh was decreased compared with HHUAc. After UV irradiation and
CDDP treatment, the residual cell viability of HHUAsh (25.4% and 37.1%,
respectively) was significantly lower than that of HHUAc (51.2% and
77.6%, pBackground: The mechanism of carcinogenesis and progression of
endometrial carcinoma has not been fully understood. To elucidate the
molecular machinery, we performed microarray analysis using mRNA
extracted from normal endometria, endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma
and found lipocalin2 (LCN2), an iron transporter, to be markedly
up-regulated along with disease progression. Furthermore, the
over-expression of LCN2 and its receptor, SLC22A17, was associated with
poor outcome of the patients with endometrial carcinoma. In the present
study, we further analyzed the molecular functions of LCN2 using
endometrial carcinoma cells.Methods: An endometrial carcinoma cell line
HHUA over-expressing both LCN2 and SLC22A17 was used. We established
LCN2-silenced HHUA (HHUAsh) and control-HHUA (HHUAc) by transfection of
LCN2-shRNA and scrambled shRNA producing vector, respectively. The growth
and migration were examined by WST-1 assay and wound healing assay. Cell
viability under stress conditions such as ultraviolet (UV) irradiation or
cisplatin (CDDP) treatment, with or without iron-chelation, was measured
by WST-1. The intensity of apoptosis was analyzed by TUNEL staining and
Apostrand assay. The expression of phosphorylated Akt was examined by
Western blotting. In vivo tumor formation was observed by the
subcutaneous injection of those HHUA cells to nude mice. The colony
formation of these HHUA cells in soft agar was evaluated. In addition,
the LCN2 cDNA containing retrovirus vector (LCN2-RET) was transfected to
NIH3T3 to observe the transformation ability.Results: The cell migration
of HHUAsh was decreased compared with HHUAc. After UV irradiation and
CDDP treatment, the residual cell viability of HHUAsh (25.4% and 37.1%,
respectively) was significantly lower than that of HHUAc (51.2% and
77.6%, p<0.05). Under these stresses, the enhanced apoptosis and
down-regulation of phosphorylated Akt was observed in HHUAsh.
Interestingly, these differences were abolished by iron-chelation. The
growth of HHUAsh showed no difference with that of HHUAc in vitro.
However, LCN2-silencing significantly reduced the tumor growth in nude
mice (84% reduction). Moreover, the down-regulation of phospho-Akt
expression was observed in tumors of LCN2-silenced HHUA. The colony
formation in soft agar of HHUAsh was significantly reduced (66.3%
reduction) from that of HHUAc, and this difference was rescued to 12% by
addition of recombinant LCN2. In addition, NIH3T3 transfected by LCN2-RET
formed focuses.Conclusions: The present study revealed that LCN2 is
involved in the genesis and survival of endometrial carcinoma cells under
stress conditions and in the tumor growth in vivo, via p-Akt signaling in
an iron-dependent manner, suggesting LCN2 to be a novel oncogene.

