Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel, potent, Cyp17 inhibitor with favorable pharmacokinetics
and oral bioavailability for potential treatment of human castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).


Cytochrome P450 17-hydroxylase/C17,20-lyase (CYP17) is a key enzyme in
androgen bio-synthesis in adrenals and testes. It has been validated
clinically as an effective target for CRPC through successful clinical
trials with abiraterone acetate. Abiraterone acetate is a selective,
potent inhibitor of Cyp17, and was recently approved as a treatment for
CRPC. We have designed a novel Cyp17 inhibitor, BMN680, with improved
pharmacokinetic (PK) profile and oral bioavailability while maintaining
potent Cyp17 inhibition. BMN680 inhibits Cyp17 lyase activity with IC50
of 0.8 nM and reduces testosterone production in human adrenal cancer
cell line H295R cells with IC50 of 3.87 nM. in vitro metabolic stability
studies indicate that BMN680 has a half-life of 5-hr in human liver
microsome and 8-hr half-life in human hepatocytes. Animal PK profiling in
rats and monkeys demonstrated BMN680 has in vivo half-life of >4 hr and
oral bioavailability of >30%. Single oral dosing of BMN680 at 10 mg/kg in
normal, intact, Cynomolgus monkeys resulted in suppression of plasma
testosterone level for up to 24 hour. Pharmacodynamic (PD) effect of
single and multi-day oral dosing of BMN680 in monkey will be presented.
In human liver microsome Cyp panel screen, BMN680 exhibited IC50 greater
than 1.5 uM for all Cyp enzymes tested including 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6,
3A4, indicating low potential of drug-drug interaction. In conclusion,
BMN680 is a potent Cyp17 inhibitor with low interaction with Cyp450
isoforms, and desirable PK and oral bioavailability. BMN680 can
effectively suppress testosterone production in vivo, and will be further
evaluated in preclinical development.

