Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stat3 is a positive regulator of gap junctional intercellular
communication in cultured, human lung carcinoma cells.


Neoplastic transformation of cultured cells by a number of oncogenes such
as src suppresses gap junctional, intercellular communication (GJIC);
however, the role of Src and its effector Signal transducer and activator
of transcription-3 (Stat3) upon GJIC in non small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) has not been defined. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed high
Src activity in NSCLC biopsy samples compared to normal tissues. Here we
explored the potential effect of Src and Stat3 upon GJIC, by assessing
the levels of tyr418-phosphorylated Src and tyr705-phosphorylated Stat3,
respectively, in a panel of NSCLC cell lines. Gap junctional
communication was examined by electroporating the fluorescent dye Lucifer
yellow into cells grown on a transparent electrode, followed by
observation of the migration of the dye to the adjacent,
non-electroporated cells under fluorescence illumination.The results
demonstrated an inverse relationship between Src activity levels and
GJIC; in five lines with high Src activity GJIC was absent, while two
lines with extensive GJIC (QU-DB and SK-LuCi6) had low Src levels,
similar to a non-transformed, immortalised lung epithelial cell line.
Interestingly, examination of the mechanism indicated that Stat3
inhibition in any of the NSCLC lines expressing high endogenous Src
activity levels, or in cells where Src was exogenously transduced, did
not restore GJIC. On the contrary, Stat3 downregulation in immortalised
lung epithelial cells or in the NSCLC lines displaying extensive GJIC
actually suppressed junctional permeability. Moreover, expression of the
constitutively active form of Stat3, Stat3C caused an increase in gap
junctional communication.Our findings demonstrate that although Stat3 is
generally growth promoting and in an activated form it can act as an
oncogene, it is actually required for gap junctional communication both
in nontransformed lung epithelial cells and in certain lung cancer lines
that retain extensive GJIC.

