Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin attenuates tumor initiating stem-like property of head
and neck cancer through miR145 axis-mediated paracrine signaling.


Recent reports have demonstrated that head and neck cancer derived tumor
initiating cells (HNC-TICs) presented high tumorigenic,
chemo-radioresistant, metastatic properties, and coupled with gain of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) characteristics. As curcumin, an
active component of the spice turmeric, can exert cytotoxic effects on
cancer cells without harming normal tissues. The aim of this study was to
investigate the chemo-therapeutic effect and regulatory mechanisms of
curcumin on HNC-TICs. We first observed that the treatment of curcumin
significantly down-regulated the ALDH1 activity, CD44 positivity,
self-renewal property, and side population of HNC cells in a dose
dependent manner. Using miRNA/mRNA-microarray analysis, curcumin
significantly increased expression of tumor suppressive miR-145. Further
mechanistic studies showed that the re-expression of PU-PEI-mediated
miR145 delivery led to decreased of TICs properties. Blocking of
endogenous miR145 can dramatically enhance stemness and tumor-initiating
properties in ALDH1-CD44- non-TICs HNC cells. Additionally, the
repressive effect of miR-145 on TICs properties was mediated by
regulating of EMT. Importantly, in vivo nude mice model showed that
cucumin treatment by oral gavage or PU-PEI-mediated miR145 delivery to
xenograft tumors reduced tumor growth and metastasis and prolonged the
survival times of tumor-bearing mice. From these results, we conclude
that the inhibition of tumor aggressiveness in HNC-TIC in by curcumin was
in part was mediated by up-regulation of miR-145, suggesting that
curcumin would be a valuable therapeutics clinically in treatment
modalities for malignant head and neck cancers by elimination of tumor
initiating stem-like, and EMT properties.

