Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Can the moonlighting glycolytic enzyme -enolase be a therapeutic
target in pancreatic cancer.


Aberrant metabolism together with invasion and metastasis are hallmarks
of cancer. This is particularly true for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC), characterized by rapid progression, invasiveness and resistance
to treatments. We have previously described -enolase (ENOA) as a
PDAC-associated antigen. It is a moonlighting protein that works both as
a key metabolic enzyme and as a membrane plasminogen receptor. In order
to clarify its multifunctional role in pancreatic tumorigenesis we
investigated the effect of ENOA knockdown in PDAC cells. Protein
expression alterations following ENOA knockdown in the human PDAC cell
line CFPAC-1 were revealed by LC-MS/MS analysis. On the basis of a
spectra count label-free quantitation approach a large number of proteins
mainly involved in cell adhesion, metabolism and proliferation were found
to be differentially expressed in ENOA silenced cells compared to the
control. After ENOA silencing, PDAC cells displayed a delay in
proliferation and decreased survival and colony formation capabilities,
even if the pyruvate production was not affected. The growth inhibition
was partially due to an increased concentration of intracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS) mainly generated through the sorbitol and NADPH
oxidase pathways. Moreover in ENOA silenced cells, the in vitro
plasminogen-driven invasion was abolished and the number of lung tumor
masses was significantly reduced in SCID-beige mice injected with ENOA
silenced cells compared to mice injected with control cells. These
effects are under further confirmation in other PDAC cell lines. All
together, these findings propose ENOA as a promising target for
developing new therapies in pancreatic cancer management.

