Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concurrent roles for IGF1R and EGFR in driving acquired resistance
to crizotinib and ability to overcome with a combination of the ALK/IGF1R
inhibitor AZD3463 and Iressa.


Genomic rearrangement of Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) has been
observed in several tumor types including 3-6% of non small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Although the ALK inhibitor crizotinib has clinical
efficacy in selected ALK positive NSCLC patients, the majority of
patients who show initial responses eventually relapse. Various
mechanisms leading to resistance have been proposed and include ALK
amplification and resistance mutations, as well as alternative pathway
drivers including EGFR and cKIT. To further evaluate potential mechanisms
of acquired resistance to crizotinib and potential therapeutic strategies
to overcome them, we have developed multiple independently generated cell
line derivatives. H3122 cells, a NSCLC line with an EML4-ALK fusion, was
selected in increasing concentrations of crizotinib up to 1uM over a
period of 4 to 6 months to generate H3122-CR lines. The cell lines
generated were confirmed to be resistance to crizotinib as well as the
selective ALK inhibitor, CH5424802, in cell proliferation experiments.
Evaluation of the levels of potential secondary receptor tyrosine kinase
(RTK) drivers by phosphoRTK arrays and western blotting revealed
increased levels of total and phosphorylated ALK (pALK), along with
increased phosphorylated insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (pIGF1R).
ALK levels were also elevated at the mRNA level. To evaluate potential
strategies to most effectively overcome resistance in these cell lines,
selective inhibitors of ALK CH5424802, IGF1R OSI-906 and epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) Iressa were used alone and in combination to
evaluate ability to inhibit growth of two of the H3122-CR lines. In both
CR lines, OSI-906 and Iressa had no effect alone on cell growth, however
a combination of CH5424802 and OSI-906 or CH5424802 and Iressa increased
sensitivity to CH5424802. Most interestingly however, a combination of
CH5424802, OSI-906 and Iressa had maximal sensitization effect with
complete reversal of resistance observed. A similar finding was obtained
with a combination of the ALK/IGF1R inhibitor AZD3463 with Iressa.
Further, we were able to demonstrate pathway dependency shifts in the CR
lines with OSI-906 inhibiting AKT and Iressa inhibiting ERK and a
combination of CH5424802, OSI-906 and Iressa required to effectively
repress these main pathways to the level observed with CH5424802 alone in
the H3122 parental line. Together, these data support a potential role
for both EGFR and IGF1R as secondary RTK drivers occurring concurrently
to drive resistance to crizotinib. A combination of approaches inhibiting
ALK, IGF1R and EGFR together may therefore be required to most
effectively treat crizotinib relapsed patients and delay onset of
resistance. This could be achieved by combining multiple selective agents
or agents with polypharmacology such as AZD3463 along with Iressa.

