Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Axl receptor signaling in required for stem cell traits and
metastasis in breast cancer.


Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) endows carcinoma cells with
migratory, survival and stem cell-like attributes that facilitate
therapeutic resistance and metastasis. Expression of the Axl receptor
tyrosine kinase in aggressive breast cancer correlates with EMT, poor
survival and is prevalent in patient metastases. Induction of EMT in
immortalized mammary epithelial cells by EMT-transcription factors,
TGFbeta or hypoxia upregulates Axl and establishes an autocrine-signaling
loop with its ligand, Gas6. Axl receptor signaling is required to
maintain EMT-related invasive, drug resistance and cancer stem cell (CSC)
traits of malignant breast cancer cells. Targeting Axl signaling with
RNAi or pharmacological agents blocks the EMT/CSC gene program and
inhibits malignant functions including invasiveness, drug resistance,
mammosphere formation, in vivo tumor initiation, and spontaneous
metastasis in orthotopic breast cancer models. These results suggest that
Axl expression is requisite for the maintenance of EMT and stem cell-like
traits during malignant progression. The EMT program is characteristic of
normal adult mammary epithelial stem/progenitor cells. Congruently, we
show that the Axl receptor expressed on mammary epithelial
stem/progenitor cells, and Axl signaling is necessary for mammary
epithelial multipotent progenitor activity. Thus Axl receptor signaling
represents a novel regulatory pathway linking normal mammary
stem/progenitor cells and breast cancer stem cells. Hence, clinical Axl
inhibitors represent a novel therapeutic avenue to target EMT/CSC traits
of aggressive breast cancer.

