Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of cabazitaxel in pediatric patient-derived
tumor xenografts (PDX).


Background: Cabazitaxel (Jevtana), a semi-synthetic taxane, was approved
for patients with metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer
previously treated with docetaxel-based therapy. Cabazitaxel, which
stabilizes microtubules as efficiently as docetaxel, has a better
antiproliferative activity than docetaxel against chemotherapy resistant
tumor cell lines, a broad spectrum of in vivo antitumor activity in
docetaxel-sensitive tumors and in tumor models in which docetaxel was
either poorly active or inactive. Unlike docetaxel, cabazitaxel is able
to cross the blood-brain barrier and is active in intracranial human
glioblastomas (AACR 2000). The preclinical combination of cabazitaxel and
cisplatin exhibits therapeutic synergism (AACR 2011). Finally,
cabazitaxel demonstrates greater activity than docetaxel in 3 pediatric
tumor xenografts, 1 rhabdomyosarcoma and 2 Ewing's sarcomas (AACR
2012).Methods: The anti-tumor activity of cabazitaxel was further
evaluated in comparison to docetaxel in 3 pediatric patient-derived tumor
xenografts (PDX): 2 osteosarcomas derived from lung metastases of a 19
year old male (DM77) and a 3 year old female (DM113) patient; 1 Ewing's
sarcoma taken from the bone of a 17 year old male patient (DM101).
Cabazitaxel and docetaxel were dosed IV at 5.8, 9.3, 15 or 24.2 mg/kg,
every 4 days for a total of 3 doses (initial tumor burden = 125 - 250
mm3).Results: Both cabazitaxel and docetaxel demonstrated antitumor
activity in these 3 PDX. In DM113, cabazitaxel is significantly more
active than docetaxel at 9.3, 15 and 24.2 mg/kg. Additionally, when
comparing the numbers of partial regressions (PR 50 % initial tumor size
for at least 7days), cabazitaxel is more potent than docetaxel at 15
(4/10 PR versus 0/10 PR, respectively) and at 24.2 mg/kg (5/10 PR versus
1/10 PR, respectively). Using body weight loss as a gross indicator of
toxicity, docetaxel appears to more toxic than cabazitaxel in the 2 other
PDX studies. In DM101, cabazitaxel at 15 or 24.2 mg/kg doses was
significantly more active than docetaxel at the same dose or at the
equitoxic dose (9.3 or 15 mg/kg, respectively). In addition, cabazitaxel
induces more complete regressions (CR = no palpable tumors for at least
7days) and tumor free animals on day 60 (TF) than docetaxel (9/9 CR and
7/9 TF for cabazitaxel versus 4/9 CR and 1/9 TF for docetaxel at 15
mg/kg; 9/9 CR and 8/9 TF for cabazitaxel versus 3/9 CR and 2/9 TFS for
docetaxel at 24.2 mg/kg). Finally, in DM77, cabazitaxel at 15 and 9.3
mg/kg is also more active than docetaxel at an equivalent dose or a
toxicity adjusted dose (9.3 or 5.8 mg/kg, respectively).Conclusion: Both
cabazitaxel and docetaxel are active in these 3 human pediatric PDX;
however, cabazitaxel demonstrates greater activity than docetaxel. Taken
together, preclinical data with cabazitaxel including activity in brain
tumors and therapeutic synergism with cisplatin, support its development
in pediatric indications.

