Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquisition of stem cell-like properties during acquired
resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors.


Acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI) is a critical issue in the treatment of lung
cancer. While several mechanisms have been demonstrated to be responsible
for acquired resistance, all mechanisms have not been uncovered. In this
study, we investigated the molecular and cellular profiles of the
acquired resistant cells to EGFR-TKI in EGFR mutant lung cancers. Four
EGFR-mutant cell lines were exposed to gefitinib by stepwise escalation
and high-concentration exposure methods, and resistant sublines to
gefitinib were established. The molecular profiles and cellular
phenotypes of these resistant sublines were characterized. Although
previously reported alterations including secondary EGFR T790M mutation,
MET amplification, and appearance of epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) features were observed, these 2 drug-exposure methods revealed
different resistance mechanisms. The resistant cells with EMT features
exhibited down-regulation of microRNA-200c by DNA methylation.
Furthermore, the HCC827-derived subline characterized by the
high-concentration exposure method exhibited not only EMT features but
also stem cell-like properties, including aldehyde dehydrogenase isoform
1 (ALDH1A1) overexpression, increase of side population, and self-renewal
capability. Resistant sublines with stem cell-like properties were
resistance to conventional chemotherapeutic agents but equally sensitive
to histone deacetylase and proteasome inhibitors, compared with their
parental cells. ALDH1A1 was up-regulated in clinical samples with
acquired resistance to gefitinib. In conclusion, our study indicates that
the manner of EGFR-TKI exposure influences the mechanism of acquired
resistance and the appearance of stem cell-like property with EGFR-TKI
treatment.

