Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCL4 alters migration and induces the expression of alpha smooth
muscle actin.


Prostate cancer is the most common diagnosed and the second leading cause
of cancer deaths in men in the United States. Inflammation has been
linked to the initiation and metastatic progression of prostate cancer.
CCL4 was reported as a chemokine that is differentially expressed in
patients that had recurrence of prostate cancer. The aim of this study is
to determine the role of CCL4, CX3CL1 and IL-15 using prostate cancer
cell lines and a mouse orthotopic xenograft model. PC3 prostate cancer
cells (androgen independent) and 22RV1 prostate cancer cells (androgen
dependant) were treated in vitro with CCL4 (0.001 and 0.1 ng/mL), CX3CL1
(0.0029 and 0.1 ng/mL) and IL15 (0.0013 and 0.1 ng/mL) and subjected to
adhesion and invasion assays. SCID mice prostates were injected
orthotopically with 250,000 PC3 or 22RV1 cells combined with each
chemokine. Mice were injected bi-weekly with CCL4 (0.001 and 0.1 ng/mL),
CX3CL1 (0.0029 and 0.1 ng/mL) and IL15 (0.0013 and 0.1 ng/mL). Tissues
were collected after eight weeks (PC3) and four weeks (22RV1) of
treatment. Tumor volumes were calculated and tissues were processed and
embedded for immunohistochemistry analysis. In vitro studies indicated
that PC3 cells treated with CCL4 had significantly increased migration
when compared to control (PProstate cancer is the most common diagnosed
and the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men in the United
States. Inflammation has been linked to the initiation and metastatic
progression of prostate cancer. CCL4 was reported as a chemokine that is
differentially expressed in patients that had recurrence of prostate
cancer. The aim of this study is to determine the role of CCL4, CX3CL1
and IL-15 using prostate cancer cell lines and a mouse orthotopic
xenograft model. PC3 prostate cancer cells (androgen independent) and
22RV1 prostate cancer cells (androgen dependant) were treated in vitro
with CCL4 (0.001 and 0.1 ng/mL), CX3CL1 (0.0029 and 0.1 ng/mL) and IL15
(0.0013 and 0.1 ng/mL) and subjected to adhesion and invasion assays.
SCID mice prostates were injected orthotopically with 250,000 PC3 or
22RV1 cells combined with each chemokine. Mice were injected bi-weekly
with CCL4 (0.001 and 0.1 ng/mL), CX3CL1 (0.0029 and 0.1 ng/mL) and IL15
(0.0013 and 0.1 ng/mL). Tissues were collected after eight weeks (PC3)
and four weeks (22RV1) of treatment. Tumor volumes were calculated and
tissues were processed and embedded for immunohistochemistry analysis. In
vitro studies indicated that PC3 cells treated with CCL4 had
significantly increased migration when compared to control (P<0.05).
However, PC3 cells treated with IL-15 showed an opposite effect having
decreased invasion when compared to control (PProstate cancer is the most
common diagnosed and the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men in
the United States. Inflammation has been linked to the initiation and
metastatic progression of prostate cancer. CCL4 was reported as a
chemokine that is differentially expressed in patients that had
recurrence of prostate cancer. The aim of this study is to determine the
role of CCL4, CX3CL1 and IL-15 using prostate cancer cell lines and a
mouse orthotopic xenograft model. PC3 prostate cancer cells (androgen
independent) and 22RV1 prostate cancer cells (androgen dependant) were
treated in vitro with CCL4 (0.001 and 0.1 ng/mL), CX3CL1 (0.0029 and 0.1
ng/mL) and IL15 (0.0013 and 0.1 ng/mL) and subjected to adhesion and
invasion assays. SCID mice prostates were injected orthotopically with
250,000 PC3 or 22RV1 cells combined with each chemokine. Mice were
injected bi-weekly with CCL4 (0.001 and 0.1 ng/mL), CX3CL1 (0.0029 and
0.1 ng/mL) and IL15 (0.0013 and 0.1 ng/mL). Tissues were collected after
eight weeks (PC3) and four weeks (22RV1) of treatment. Tumor volumes were
calculated and tissues were processed and embedded for
immunohistochemistry analysis. In vitro studies indicated that PC3 cells
treated with CCL4 had significantly increased migration when compared to
control (P<0.05). However, PC3 cells treated with IL-15 showed an
opposite effect having decreased invasion when compared to control
(P<0.05). 22RV1 cells treated with CCL-4 showed significantly decreased
adhesion when compared to control (PProstate cancer is the most common
diagnosed and the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men in the
United States. Inflammation has been linked to the initiation and
metastatic progression of prostate cancer. CCL4 was reported as a
chemokine that is differentially expressed in patients that had
recurrence of prostate cancer. The aim of this study is to determine the
role of CCL4, CX3CL1 and IL-15 using prostate cancer cell lines and a
mouse orthotopic xenograft model. PC3 prostate cancer cells (androgen
independent) and 22RV1 prostate cancer cells (androgen dependant) were
treated in vitro with CCL4 (0.001 and 0.1 ng/mL), CX3CL1 (0.0029 and 0.1
ng/mL) and IL15 (0.0013 and 0.1 ng/mL) and subjected to adhesion and
invasion assays. SCID mice prostates were injected orthotopically with
250,000 PC3 or 22RV1 cells combined with each chemokine. Mice were
injected bi-weekly with CCL4 (0.001 and 0.1 ng/mL), CX3CL1 (0.0029 and
0.1 ng/mL) and IL15 (0.0013 and 0.1 ng/mL). Tissues were collected after
eight weeks (PC3) and four weeks (22RV1) of treatment. Tumor volumes were
calculated and tissues were processed and embedded for
immunohistochemistry analysis. In vitro studies indicated that PC3 cells
treated with CCL4 had significantly increased migration when compared to
control (P<0.05). However, PC3 cells treated with IL-15 showed an
opposite effect having decreased invasion when compared to control
(P<0.05). 22RV1 cells treated with CCL-4 showed significantly decreased
adhesion when compared to control (P<0.05). In vivo studies showed that
mice injected with 22RV1 cells and treated with CCL4 had significantly
bigger tumors when compared to control mice after 4 weeks of tumor
development. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that CCL4 treatment
increased the expression levels of alpha smooth muscle actin in 22RV1
tumors when compared to control tumors. Moreover, phospho-histone 3
expression was increased in 22RV1 tumors treated with CCL4 when compared
to control tumors. This study showed that CCL4 altered migration and
adhesion of PC3 cells and 22RV1 cells in vitro. CCL4 treatment induced
tumor growth of 22RV1 cells in vivo using a SCID mouse orthotopic model.
Interestingly tumors treated with CCL4 were associated with increased
levels of alpha smooth muscle actin and proliferation. Our results
indicate that CCL4 may promote tumor growth and metastasis in vivo by
increasing proliferation, altering migration, and changing the expression
levels of alpha smooth muscle actin.

