Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Volitinib (HMPL504), a novel, selective and potent cMET inhibitor,
is efficacious in primary tumor models of cMET-driven gastric cancer.


Gastric cancer (GC) incidence rates are amongst the highest in Asian
countries including; China, Japan and Korea(1). 5-year survival rates in
early stage disease have improved through aggressive combinations of
surgery and chemo/radiotherapy. In late stage disease however, despite
Her2 molecular segmentation and trastuzumab therapy, prognosis remains
dismal and novel therapeutic options are urgently required(2).The MET
oncogene encodes the receptor tyrosine kinase for hepatocyte growth
factor and controls genetic programs leading to cell growth, invasion and
survival. Dysregulation of MET signaling is a common feature of a diverse
range of human tumor types and thus represents a highly competitive and
attractive therapeutic target. Volitinib (HMPL-504) is an orally
bioavailable, highly selective and potent small molecule ATP-competitive
inhibitor, which inhibits cMET autophosphorylation and downstream
signaling (3). Volitinib is currently in Phase I clinical development. To
evaluate the utility of volitinib in treating patients with GC, we
established the incidence of cMET amplification and overexpression and
attempted to correlate this with response to volitinib in primary GC
tumor models. Elevated cMET gene copy number (amplification 5%, high
polysomy 13%), and protein overexpression (12%, cases > IHC 2+, 16% >
IHC1+) were detected in a cohort of 217 Chinese GC samples using
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and immunohistochemical (IHC)
approaches. In vitro proliferation assays were performed on a panel of 26
GC cell lines and profound sensitivity to volitinib was demonstrated in
lines harboring elevated cMET gene copy number (GI50 range 6 to 49nM). In
the cMET amplified GC xenograft model, Hs746t, once-daily oral dosing of
volitinib (2.5mg/kg) elicited potent anti-tumour activity at
well-tolerated doses (97% tumour growth inhibition after 16 days dosing,
PGastric cancer (GC) incidence rates are amongst the highest in Asian
countries including; China, Japan and Korea(1). 5-year survival rates in
early stage disease have improved through aggressive combinations of
surgery and chemo/radiotherapy. In late stage disease however, despite
Her2 molecular segmentation and trastuzumab therapy, prognosis remains
dismal and novel therapeutic options are urgently required(2).The MET
oncogene encodes the receptor tyrosine kinase for hepatocyte growth
factor and controls genetic programs leading to cell growth, invasion and
survival. Dysregulation of MET signaling is a common feature of a diverse
range of human tumor types and thus represents a highly competitive and
attractive therapeutic target. Volitinib (HMPL-504) is an orally
bioavailable, highly selective and potent small molecule ATP-competitive
inhibitor, which inhibits cMET autophosphorylation and downstream
signaling (3). Volitinib is currently in Phase I clinical development. To
evaluate the utility of volitinib in treating patients with GC, we
established the incidence of cMET amplification and overexpression and
attempted to correlate this with response to volitinib in primary GC
tumor models. Elevated cMET gene copy number (amplification 5%, high
polysomy 13%), and protein overexpression (12%, cases > IHC 2+, 16% >
IHC1+) were detected in a cohort of 217 Chinese GC samples using
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and immunohistochemical (IHC)
approaches. In vitro proliferation assays were performed on a panel of 26
GC cell lines and profound sensitivity to volitinib was demonstrated in
lines harboring elevated cMET gene copy number (GI50 range 6 to 49nM). In
the cMET amplified GC xenograft model, Hs746t, once-daily oral dosing of
volitinib (2.5mg/kg) elicited potent anti-tumour activity at
well-tolerated doses (97% tumour growth inhibition after 16 days dosing,
P<0.0001) which correlated well with pharmacodynamic modulation of
phospho-cMET signaling. To strengthen the translational relevance of
these data, a panel of cMET amplified primary GC models were identified
and established. In these models, volitinib demonstrated potent tumor
growth inhibition or regressions (90% and 84% TGI at 10mg/kg/qd, all
PGastric cancer (GC) incidence rates are amongst the highest in Asian
countries including; China, Japan and Korea(1). 5-year survival rates in
early stage disease have improved through aggressive combinations of
surgery and chemo/radiotherapy. In late stage disease however, despite
Her2 molecular segmentation and trastuzumab therapy, prognosis remains
dismal and novel therapeutic options are urgently required(2).The MET
oncogene encodes the receptor tyrosine kinase for hepatocyte growth
factor and controls genetic programs leading to cell growth, invasion and
survival. Dysregulation of MET signaling is a common feature of a diverse
range of human tumor types and thus represents a highly competitive and
attractive therapeutic target. Volitinib (HMPL-504) is an orally
bioavailable, highly selective and potent small molecule ATP-competitive
inhibitor, which inhibits cMET autophosphorylation and downstream
signaling (3). Volitinib is currently in Phase I clinical development. To
evaluate the utility of volitinib in treating patients with GC, we
established the incidence of cMET amplification and overexpression and
attempted to correlate this with response to volitinib in primary GC
tumor models. Elevated cMET gene copy number (amplification 5%, high
polysomy 13%), and protein overexpression (12%, cases > IHC 2+, 16% >
IHC1+) were detected in a cohort of 217 Chinese GC samples using
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and immunohistochemical (IHC)
approaches. In vitro proliferation assays were performed on a panel of 26
GC cell lines and profound sensitivity to volitinib was demonstrated in
lines harboring elevated cMET gene copy number (GI50 range 6 to 49nM). In
the cMET amplified GC xenograft model, Hs746t, once-daily oral dosing of
volitinib (2.5mg/kg) elicited potent anti-tumour activity at
well-tolerated doses (97% tumour growth inhibition after 16 days dosing,
P<0.0001) which correlated well with pharmacodynamic modulation of
phospho-cMET signaling. To strengthen the translational relevance of
these data, a panel of cMET amplified primary GC models were identified
and established. In these models, volitinib demonstrated potent tumor
growth inhibition or regressions (90% and 84% TGI at 10mg/kg/qd, all
P<0.0001), correlated with pharmacodynamic modulation of tumor
phospho-cMET. In contrast, 10mg/kg/qd volitinib was inactive (18% TGI,
P=0.2405) in a cMET non-amplified control model. We also evaluated the
activity of volitinib in combination with docetaxel, a standard of care
chemotherapeutic commonly used in the treatment of gastric cancer. In
model Hs746t, volitinib demonstrated additive benefit when used with
docetaxel at well tolerated doses. These data support the potential
clinical utility of volitinib as a selective agent for the therapeutic
treatment of gastric cancers harboring dysregulated cMET signaling.

