Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-21/Smad 7 signaling determines TGF-1-induced cancer associated
fibroblast (CAF) formation.


Tumor-secreted growth factors such as TGF-1 transform adjacent normal
fibroblasts into cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) which is a major
source of CAF. TGF-1 has canonical and noncanonical Smad pathway, which
pathway mediates TGF-1 signaling during the CAF formation and how TGF-1
activates regulatory Smad proteins is not entirely understood. To
investigate whether the miR-21/Smad 7 signaling determines TGF-1-induced
CAF formation, the in vitro TGF-1-induced CAF model was successfully
established and the function of fibroblasts knocked down or overexpressed
miR-21 or Smad 7 were finally identified in the xenografted mice, with or
without TGF-1 stimulation. Our data showed that the mature miR-21 is
increased in fibroblast after TGF-1 treatment, and miR-21 regulates Smad
7 protein level through the translation inhibition instead of the mRNA
decay. Moreover, our data showed Smad 3 was phosphorylated 2 hours early
than Smad 2 after TGF-1 stimulation and Smad7 knockdown enhanced Smad 2
and 3 phosphorylation; both of their phosphorylations were abolished by
the TGFR kinase inhibitor. Most important, both of the over-expression of
miR-21 or the knockdown of Smad 7 promoted CAF formation, even without
TGF-1 stimulation while the miR-21 knockdown or the Smad 7 overexpression
as well as Smad 2, 3 and Smad 4 knock down blocked the TGF-1-induced CAF
formation.These observations suggest that TGF-1 induces CAF formation
through the canonical pathway, miR-21/Smad 7 is a critical
mediator.Citation Format: Qiong Li, Yongbin Wang, Wujun Xiong, Jun Mi.
MiR-21/Smad 7 signaling determines TGF-1-induced cancer associated
fibroblast (CAF) formation. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 1635. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1635

