Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel therapeutic and diagnostic antibodies against KIR3DL2, a
unique tumor antigen overexpressed on subtypes of T Cell Lymphomas .


KIR3DL2 belongs to the killer immunoglobulin (Ig)-like receptors (KIRs)
family and is composed of three extracellular Ig-like domains. KIR3DL2 is
naturally expressed on some NK cells and minor subpopulations of CD8+ and
CD4+ T cells. Physiologically, KIRD3L2 is an inhibitory receptor for
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules regulating NK cell
activation. Remarkably, KIR3DL2 is also aberrantly overexpressed on
several subtypes of T lymphomas/leukemias, such as Sezary Syndrome,
transformed Mycosis Fungoides and HTLV1+ Adult T Cell Leukemia, making it
a unique therapeutic target in cancer. We have generated a series of
anti-KIR3DL2 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) binding selectively to KIR3DL2,
spanning epitopes on each of the three Ig domains. Their efficacy was
evaluated in vitro and in vivo against KIR3DL2-expressing tumors and
Sezary cell lines as disease model. Various modes of action, such as
complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) and antibody-dependent cell
cytotoxicity (ADCC) were found involved in their anti-tumor activity. In
parallel, anti-KIR3DL2 mAbs were also developed as unique and sensitive
tools for the detection by immunohistochemistry of KIR3DL2 on tumor
biopsies. Owing to the promising efficacy profile of our anti-KIR3DL2 mAb
candidates and to the highly restricted expression pattern of the target
on some T leukemia/lymphoma cells, an antibody-based therapy targeting
KIR3DL2 stands as a potentially unequalled strategy in several orphan
diseases with critical unmet medical need.

