Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mer receptor tyrosine kinase is a novel therapeutic target in
melanoma.


Metastatic melanoma is one of the most aggressive forms of cutaneous
cancers. While recent therapeutic advances have prolonged patient
survival, prognosis remains dismal. Mer is a receptor tyrosine kinase
with oncogenic properties that is often overexpressed or activated in
various malignancies. Using both protein immunohistochemistry and
microarray analyses, we demonstrate that Mer expression correlates with
disease progression. Mer expression was highest in metastatic melanomas
followed by primary melanomas whereas the lowest expression was observed
in nevi. In addition, over 50% of melanoma cell lines overexpressed Mer
compared to normal human melanocytes, however overexpression did not
correlate with mutations in BRAF or RAS. Stimulation of melanoma cells
with the Mer ligand Gas6 resulted in activation of several downstream
signaling pathways including MAPK/ERK, PI3K/Akt, and Jak/STAT. Mer
inhibition via shRNA reduced Mer-mediated downstream signaling, reduced
colony formation by up to 59% (pMetastatic melanoma is one of the most
aggressive forms of cutaneous cancers. While recent therapeutic advances
have prolonged patient survival, prognosis remains dismal. Mer is a
receptor tyrosine kinase with oncogenic properties that is often
overexpressed or activated in various malignancies. Using both protein
immunohistochemistry and microarray analyses, we demonstrate that Mer
expression correlates with disease progression. Mer expression was
highest in metastatic melanomas followed by primary melanomas whereas the
lowest expression was observed in nevi. In addition, over 50% of melanoma
cell lines overexpressed Mer compared to normal human melanocytes,
however overexpression did not correlate with mutations in BRAF or RAS.
Stimulation of melanoma cells with the Mer ligand Gas6 resulted in
activation of several downstream signaling pathways including MAPK/ERK,
PI3K/Akt, and Jak/STAT. Mer inhibition via shRNA reduced Mer-mediated
downstream signaling, reduced colony formation by up to 59% (p<0.05) and
diminished tumor volume by 60% (pMetastatic melanoma is one of the most
aggressive forms of cutaneous cancers. While recent therapeutic advances
have prolonged patient survival, prognosis remains dismal. Mer is a
receptor tyrosine kinase with oncogenic properties that is often
overexpressed or activated in various malignancies. Using both protein
immunohistochemistry and microarray analyses, we demonstrate that Mer
expression correlates with disease progression. Mer expression was
highest in metastatic melanomas followed by primary melanomas whereas the
lowest expression was observed in nevi. In addition, over 50% of melanoma
cell lines overexpressed Mer compared to normal human melanocytes,
however overexpression did not correlate with mutations in BRAF or RAS.
Stimulation of melanoma cells with the Mer ligand Gas6 resulted in
activation of several downstream signaling pathways including MAPK/ERK,
PI3K/Akt, and Jak/STAT. Mer inhibition via shRNA reduced Mer-mediated
downstream signaling, reduced colony formation by up to 59% (p<0.05) and
diminished tumor volume by 60% (p<0.05) in a human melanoma xenograft
murine model. Treatment of melanoma cells with UNC1062, a novel
Mer-selective small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor, reduced
activation of Mer-mediated downstream signaling, induced apoptosis in
culture, reduced colony formation in soft agar and inhibited invasion of
melanoma cells. In addition, Mer inhibition synergized with mutant BRAF
inhibition in signaling and apoptosis assays. This work establishes Mer
as a therapeutic target in melanoma and provides rationale for the
continued development of Mer-targeted therapies.

