Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-cancer PathSeq analysis on TCGA data for pathogen discovery.


An estimated 15-20% of all human malignancies is caused by infectious
agents, such as human papillomavirus (HPV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) or
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori). The recent development of massively
parallel next generation sequencing technology led to the discovery of
Merkel cell polyomavirus, and more recently a significant enrichment of
Fusobacterium nucleatum (F. nucleatum) and related Fusobacterium species
in colorectal carcinomas compared to non-neoplastic colon tissue from the
same patients. However, these studies involved relatively small number of
samples and there are likely many additional cancer-associated microbes
that are yet to be discovered. TCGA sequencing data from over 20 human
cancer types provide an unprecedented opportunity for cancer-associated
pathogen discovery. Using PathSeq, software for pathogen discovery by
computational subtraction, we have begun analyzing TCGA sequencing data
for the presence of viral, fungal or bacterial sequences. We will present
our preliminary data from the analysis of mRNA-seq data including
evidence for (1) a greater role of viral integration into tumor
suppressor gene loci in HPV-driven tumors and (2) complex interplay
between viruses, bacteria and host cancer cells in various cancer types.
We will also discuss our discovery efforts for previously unannotated
pathogens in the TCGA dataset.

