Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK inhibition leads to elevated HER3:PI3K in EGFR or HER2 driven
cancer through feedback induction of HER1:3 and HER2:3 dimers.


In wide range of human cancer, the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT
and RAF/MEK/ERK signaling pathways are activated, regulating cell growth,
metabolism, survival, and proliferation. Inhibition of either PI3K/AKT or
MEK/ERK signaling pathway as a single-agent targeted therapy is often
ineffective due to feedback mechanisms in which inhibition of one
signaling pathway leads to activation of another. Treatment with a
single-agent MEK inhibitor substantially increases ERBB3/PI3K/AKT phospho
levels by relieving an ERK mediated negative feedback on threonine
phosphorylation on the juxtamembrane domains of EGFR (T669) and HER2
(T677). Loss of inhibitory threonine phosphorylation in EGFR and HER2
suggests that increase in phospho HER3 levels may be due to formation of
heterodimers (EGFR:HER3 and HER2:HER3) driving trans-phosphorylation of
ERBB3.Herein we report, utilizing Collaborative Enzyme Enhanced Reactive
(CEERTM) immunoassay, comprehensive analysis of key receptor tyrosine
kinases (HER1, HER2, HER3, cMET, IGF1R, and others) and their downstream
signal proteins (PI3K, Shc, AKT, MEK, ERK, PRAS40, RPS6, P70S6K, RSK),
and dimerization partners (HER1:HER2, HER2:HER3, HER1:HER3, and
HER3:PI3K) in MDA-MB-468, and BT474 treated with either MEK inhibitor
alone (AZD6244) or in combination with PI3K inhibitor (GDC0941). CEER
platform utilizes the formation of an unique
triple-antibody-enzyme-channeling immuno-complex, requiring minimal
sample amount.At MEK inhibitor concentration of 1mol/L, both MDA-MB-468
and BT474 cells sufficiently inhibited ERK and RSK phosphorylation. In
each cell line, we observed increase in phospho-HER3 and activated
HER3:PI3K complex, a phospho-tyrosine signaling cascades that directly
activate AKT. Levels of HER1:3 and HER2:3 dimers were elevated in
MDA-MB-468 and BT474, respectively post MEK inhibitor treatment. Feedback
activation of AKT with AZD6244 was suppressed when combined with GDC0941
at concentration of 1mol/L. With combination of MEK and PI3K inhibitors,
levels of HER1:3 and HER2:3 dimers were unaffected in their respective
cell line, but HER3:PI3K complex was completely suppressed in both cell
lines. The data suggests that loss of negative feedback with MEK
inhibition alone promoted alternate oncogenic AKT signaling. As often the
case, single-targeted therapies are ineffective, since the pathway it is
targeted to inhibit, leads to feedback contributing to therapeutic
resistance. Utilizing CEERTM, clinical specimens with limited
availability can be profiled in a comprehensive manner for potential
feedback mechanisms and selection of combinational therapies suppressing
both the oncoprotein and the feedback program.

