Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition and rapamycin sensitivity in
cancer cell lines.


Activation of the mTOR signaling pathway is common in multiple cancers.
Rapamycin has inhibitory effects on solid tumors through inhibition of
the mTOR kinase and alteration of downstream signaling. Though rapamycin
and its analogs have yielded promising results from in vitro studies in
sensitive cell lines, they have generated only a modest effect in
clinical application. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
cancer cells involves not only the loss of cell-cell adhesion and
acquisition of migratory and invasive properties but also resistance to
cell death, senescence, and chemotherapy. We hypothesized that the EMT
status of cancer cells regulates their sensitivity to rapamycin. We
classified a panel of immortalized cancer cell lines as resistant or
sensitive to rapamycin based on their IC50 as determined by
Sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay. Using reverse phase proteomic array, we
found that EMT markers were differentially expressed in sensitive
compared to resistant immortalized cell lines. Rapamycin sensitive (RS)
cell lines had increased expression of E-cadherin and N-cadherin while
rapamycin resistant (RR) cell lines had increased expression of Smad3
(pActivation of the mTOR signaling pathway is common in multiple cancers.
Rapamycin has inhibitory effects on solid tumors through inhibition of
the mTOR kinase and alteration of downstream signaling. Though rapamycin
and its analogs have yielded promising results from in vitro studies in
sensitive cell lines, they have generated only a modest effect in
clinical application. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
cancer cells involves not only the loss of cell-cell adhesion and
acquisition of migratory and invasive properties but also resistance to
cell death, senescence, and chemotherapy. We hypothesized that the EMT
status of cancer cells regulates their sensitivity to rapamycin. We
classified a panel of immortalized cancer cell lines as resistant or
sensitive to rapamycin based on their IC50 as determined by
Sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay. Using reverse phase proteomic array, we
found that EMT markers were differentially expressed in sensitive
compared to resistant immortalized cell lines. Rapamycin sensitive (RS)
cell lines had increased expression of E-cadherin and N-cadherin while
rapamycin resistant (RR) cell lines had increased expression of Smad3
(p<0.02). To validate these findings, we performed western blotting for
EMT markers in selected RR and RS cell lines. E-cadherin expression was
higher in RS cell lines than RR cell lines; in turn, RR cell lines
expressed increased levels of the mesenchymal marker Vimentin. To
determine if inducing EMT decreases rapamycin sensitivity, we assessed
E-cadherin and Vimentin expression by western blotting in the epithelial,
immortalized breast cancer cell line, MCF7, which was transfected with a
constitutively-active mutant of Snail, a known EMT driver.
Constitutively-active Snail mutant MCF7 demonstrated loss of E-cadherin
and gain of Vimentin expression compared to cells transfected with
nonfunctional mutant Snail or Wild-type Snail. Furthermore, we found
decreased growth inhibition with rapamycin by SRB assay in
constitutively-active Snail mutant MCF7 compared to controls (pActivation
of the mTOR signaling pathway is common in multiple cancers. Rapamycin
has inhibitory effects on solid tumors through inhibition of the mTOR
kinase and alteration of downstream signaling. Though rapamycin and its
analogs have yielded promising results from in vitro studies in sensitive
cell lines, they have generated only a modest effect in clinical
application. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer cells
involves not only the loss of cell-cell adhesion and acquisition of
migratory and invasive properties but also resistance to cell death,
senescence, and chemotherapy. We hypothesized that the EMT status of
cancer cells regulates their sensitivity to rapamycin. We classified a
panel of immortalized cancer cell lines as resistant or sensitive to
rapamycin based on their IC50 as determined by Sulforhodamine B (SRB)
assay. Using reverse phase proteomic array, we found that EMT markers
were differentially expressed in sensitive compared to resistant
immortalized cell lines. Rapamycin sensitive (RS) cell lines had
increased expression of E-cadherin and N-cadherin while rapamycin
resistant (RR) cell lines had increased expression of Smad3 (p<0.02). To
validate these findings, we performed western blotting for EMT markers in
selected RR and RS cell lines. E-cadherin expression was higher in RS
cell lines than RR cell lines; in turn, RR cell lines expressed increased
levels of the mesenchymal marker Vimentin. To determine if inducing EMT
decreases rapamycin sensitivity, we assessed E-cadherin and Vimentin
expression by western blotting in the epithelial, immortalized breast
cancer cell line, MCF7, which was transfected with a
constitutively-active mutant of Snail, a known EMT driver.
Constitutively-active Snail mutant MCF7 demonstrated loss of E-cadherin
and gain of Vimentin expression compared to cells transfected with
nonfunctional mutant Snail or Wild-type Snail. Furthermore, we found
decreased growth inhibition with rapamycin by SRB assay in
constitutively-active Snail mutant MCF7 compared to controls (p<0.05). To
determine if modulating EMT increases rapamycin sensitivity, we induced
MET using ZEB1 siRNA knockdown and miR200b/c transfection in two
mesenchymal cancer cell lines_ACHN and MDA-MB-231. Although miR200b/c
transfection induced E-cadherin expression by immunoblotting in both cell
lines, there was no significant increase in growth inhibition by SRB
assay. In contrast, ZEB1 siRNA knockdown partially reversed EMT in these
cells, which exhibited increased sensitivity to rapamycin by SRB assay.
Most but not all mechanisms of EMT modulation altered rapamycin
sensitivity in immortalized cancer cell lines. Future studies to
determine the mechanism of EMT modulation that results in increased
sensitivity to rapamycin could have important clinical applications for
combination therapies utilizing rapamycin and its analogs.

