Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic functional screening, miRNA and target expression
analyses reveal miR-19, -124, -583, -129 and -876 as key nodes in
prostate cancer proliferation networks.


To discover microRNA (miRNA) regulation of pathways relevant for
proliferation of prostate cancer cells we performed gain-of-function
screening with 1129 miRNA molecules in five prostate cancer (PCa) cell
lines. Using proliferation, viability and apoptosis as read out we
identified 25 miRNAs increasing and 48 miRNAs decreasing cell viability
(threshold FDR q-value 3000 genes containing the predicted targets
(TargetScan) and performed gene set enrichment analysis (MSigDB v. 2.07).
Positively enriched gene sets (total of 17, q-value To discover microRNA
(miRNA) regulation of pathways relevant for proliferation of prostate
cancer cells we performed gain-of-function screening with 1129 miRNA
molecules in five prostate cancer (PCa) cell lines. Using proliferation,
viability and apoptosis as read out we identified 25 miRNAs increasing
and 48 miRNAs decreasing cell viability (threshold FDR q-value 3000 genes
containing the predicted targets (TargetScan) and performed gene set
enrichment analysis (MSigDB v. 2.07). Positively enriched gene sets
(total of 17, q-value <0.01) contained signatures such as mitosis and
androgen signalling and the most enriched gene was AURKA. The negatively
enriched gene sets (total of 207, q-value To discover microRNA (miRNA)
regulation of pathways relevant for proliferation of prostate cancer
cells we performed gain-of-function screening with 1129 miRNA molecules
in five prostate cancer (PCa) cell lines. Using proliferation, viability
and apoptosis as read out we identified 25 miRNAs increasing and 48
miRNAs decreasing cell viability (threshold FDR q-value 3000 genes
containing the predicted targets (TargetScan) and performed gene set
enrichment analysis (MSigDB v. 2.07). Positively enriched gene sets
(total of 17, q-value <0.01) contained signatures such as mitosis and
androgen signalling and the most enriched gene was AURKA. The negatively
enriched gene sets (total of 207, q-value <0.01) involved Ras-signaling
and focal adhesion and the most down regulated gene was CAV1. Network
visualization of the core target genes identified five miRNAs
(hsa-miR-19a, 32, -124a, -583 and 8763p) predicted to regulate both the
positively and negatively enriched target genes suggesting a central role
for both these miRNAs and the core targets in PCa. Our systematic
screening approach combined with in vivo expression, gene set enrichment
analyses and network visualization provide an unbiased way of revealing
novel miRNAs -core targets important in PCa.

