Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of apolipoprotein E polymorphism on the aggressive
potential of prostate cancer cell lines.


Introduction: Defective cholesterol-modulating apolipoprotein E (ApoE)
isoforms could exacerbate prostatic neoplasia. Recent evidence strongly
suggests that specific genetic variants of ApoE control peripheral tissue
cholesterol efflux. Defects in ApoE may result in reduced prostate cancer
cell cholesterol efflux and enriched concentrations of cholesterol in
membranes by reducing clearance. Membrane-rich cholesterol could
potentially activate cancer-driven signaling processes.Objective: To
determine the relevance of specific ApoE phenotypes as risk factors of
aggressive prostate cancer based on their influence on reverse
cholesterol transport.Methods: We evaluated ApoE genotypes of the weakly
tumorigenic or nonaggressive prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP and MDA
PCA 2b), and the moderate and highly tumorigenic or aggressive prostate
cancer cell lines (PC-3 and DU-145). We examined whether ApoE2/E4
variants were associated with tumor aggressiveness via the expression of
caveolin-1(cav-1), a cholesterol-regulated pro-carcinogenic gene.Results:
We observed that the nonaggressive prostate cancer cell lines carried
either the Apo 3/3 or 3/4 alleles, while the aggressive prostate cancer
cell lines carried the Apo 2/4 alleles. Our results showed a two-fold
increase in the expression of cav-1 in the aggressive cell lines, as
opposed to the nonaggressive ones. There was a significantly
(pIntroduction: Defective cholesterol-modulating apolipoprotein E (ApoE)
isoforms could exacerbate prostatic neoplasia. Recent evidence strongly
suggests that specific genetic variants of ApoE control peripheral tissue
cholesterol efflux. Defects in ApoE may result in reduced prostate cancer
cell cholesterol efflux and enriched concentrations of cholesterol in
membranes by reducing clearance. Membrane-rich cholesterol could
potentially activate cancer-driven signaling processes.Objective: To
determine the relevance of specific ApoE phenotypes as risk factors of
aggressive prostate cancer based on their influence on reverse
cholesterol transport.Methods: We evaluated ApoE genotypes of the weakly
tumorigenic or nonaggressive prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP and MDA
PCA 2b), and the moderate and highly tumorigenic or aggressive prostate
cancer cell lines (PC-3 and DU-145). We examined whether ApoE2/E4
variants were associated with tumor aggressiveness via the expression of
caveolin-1(cav-1), a cholesterol-regulated pro-carcinogenic gene.Results:
We observed that the nonaggressive prostate cancer cell lines carried
either the Apo 3/3 or 3/4 alleles, while the aggressive prostate cancer
cell lines carried the Apo 2/4 alleles. Our results showed a two-fold
increase in the expression of cav-1 in the aggressive cell lines, as
opposed to the nonaggressive ones. There was a significantly (p<0.01)
greater cholesterol efflux from the nonaggressive cells lines compared to
the aggressive cells. Also, the aggressive cell lines retained and
localized more cholesterol in their membranes as opposed to the less
aggressive cell lines.Conclusions: These results suggest an association
between cholesterol status and the aggressive potential of prostate
cancer cells. It also highlights the need for further investigation into
whether ApoE2/E4 is the dysfunctional phenotype, and whether it has the
potential as a biomarker of aggressive prostate cancer.GRANT SUPPORT: NIH
R25CA047888

