Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation sulindac.


Sulindac displays promising antineoplastic activity, but toxicity from
cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibition limits its long-term use for
chemoprevention. Previous studies have concluded that the tumor cell
growth inhibitory activity of sulindac is COX-independent and suggest
that safer and more efficacious drugs can be developed by targeting the
underlying mechanism. Here we report that sulindac sulfide (SS) inhibits
cyclic guanosine monophosphate phosphodiesterase (cGMP PDE) activity,
increases intracellular cGMP levels and activates protein kinase G at
concentrations that suppress proliferation and induce apoptosis of colon
tumor cells. Normal colonocytes were refractory to the anti-proliferative
and pro-apoptotic effects of SS as well as its ability to induce cGMP
signaling. PDE5-specific inhibitors such as tadalafil also inhibited the
growth of colon tumor cells that expressed high levels of the
cGMP-specific PDE5 isozyme compared with colonocytes. RNAi knockdown of
PDE5 selectively inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis of colon
tumor cells as did SS. SS, 8-bromo-cGMP, and PDE5 siRNA reduced -catenin
levels, as well as the expression of cyclin D and survivin that are
regulated by -catenin-dependent TCF transcriptional activity by a
mechanism involving the transcriptional repression of -catenin. The
significance of these findings are highlighted by studies in the FCCC Min
mouse model of intestinal tumorigenesis showing that a novel non-COX
inhibitory derivative of SS can strongly inhibit colon tumor formation by
a mechanism that appears to involve cGMP PDE inhibition. These
observations suggest that safer and more efficacious drugs can be
developed for colorectal cancer chemoprevention by targeting PDE5 and
possibly other cGMP degrading isozymes.

