Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NUP98-PHF23 (NP23) binds H3K4me3 and causes a wide spectrum of
leukemias, including AML, T-ALL, and pre-B1 ALL.


Nucleoporin 98 (NUP98) fusions have been associated with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), chronic myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, and
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). An AML patient with a
t(11;17)(p15;p13) chromosome translocation was found to have a novel gene
fusion between NUP98 and plant homeodomain (PHD) finger 23 (PHF23). PHF23
has been reported to act as a reader of tri-methylated histone 3 lysine 4
(H3K4me3) marks, suggesting that PHF23 may function in chromatin
regulation and that the NP23 fusion protein may play a role in aberrant
chromatin modification. To determine the oncogenic potential of NP23, we
generated mice that expressed the NP23 fusion in hematopoietic tissues.We
characterized two founder lines (C10 and B10) that expressed the NP23
fusion. The C10 line principally developed AML that closely resembled the
human disease, with increased blasts in the blood and bone marrow,
widespread organ infiltration, and myeloid immunophenotype. Onset of
disease was as early as 4.5 months, and 70 percent of the NP23 mice
succumbed to leukemia by 12 months of age. The B10 line developed a wider
spectrum of leukemias with similar age of onset and penetrance. The B10
mice predominantly developed T-ALL and AML. Interestingly, four B10 mice
developed a previously unreported form of ALL that was of pre-B1
(B220/CD19+/AA4.1+) origin, indicating that the NP23 protein is oncogenic
in multiple hematopoietic lineages. Gene expression arrays and RQ-PCR
revealed Hoxa5, a7, a9 and a10 to be overexpressed from 10-1000 fold in
both AML and T-ALL, as well as in hematopoietic tissues from clinically
healthy NP23 transgenic mice. Premalignant, clinically healthy mice
showed aberrant hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC)
populations. Bone marrow lineage negative (Linneg) cells were decreased
by half that of WT littermates, and LSK (Linneg/Sca1+/cKit+) cells were
further reduced by 3-fold. NP23 thymi were dramatically smaller in size
with an average 5-fold reduction in thymocytes, which was associated with
a partial differentiation block of thymocytes at the DN2 stage. B2
pre-B-cells were significantly reduced, by 50%, compared to WT controls.
B1-progenitor B-cells (Linneg/CD19+/AA4.1+) in the bone marrow were
reduced by 30% in the bone marrow and mature B1 B-cells (B220/CD19+/IgM+)
of the peritoneal cavity were further decreased to half that of WT. We
also performed genome wide NP23 and H3K4me3 ChIP-seq which identified a
core set of H3K4me3 marked genes bound by the NP23 fusion protein that
were overexpressed in both myeloid and T-cell lineages. The NP23 oncogene
is capable of promoting cell lineage-independent leukemic transformation,
and will be useful in identifying oncoproteins and transformation
pathways that involve chromatin deregulation and HSPC gene signatures
such as those of the HOXA cluster.

