Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple cation-selective transporters contribute to the
anti-proliferative effects of metformin in ovarian cancer cell lines.


PURPOSE: Recent studies show that the anti-diabetic drug metformin
exhibits anticancer effects against a broad spectrum of cancers including
ovarian cancer. Because metformin is highly hydrophilic with a net
positive charge at all physiologic pH values, it requires
cation-selective transporters to enter into cells and interact with its
intracellular target 5 adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase.
The expression pattern and level of these transporters in cancer cells
would determine the intracellular concentrations and subsequently the
anti-proliferative activity of metformin. This study aims to investigate
metformin transporter expression and the impact of these transporters on
metformin uptake and anti-proliferative activity in human ovarian cancer
cell lines that are routinely used to assess potential anti-cancer agents
against this cancer type.METHODS: Total RNA from human ovarian cancer
cell lines (IG, SKOV3 and HEY) was subjected to real-time PCR to
determine expression levels of the common cation transporters organic
cation transporter (OCT) 1-3, plasma membrane monoamine transporter
(PMAT), multidrug and toxin extrusion transporters (MATE) 1 and 2. Uptake
of [14C]metformin (50M) in the presence or absence of the
cation-selective transporter inhibitors famotidine and
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) was assessed to determine the
contributions of transporters to metformin uptake in these cell
lines.RESULTS: OCT3 mRNA was highly expressed in IG cells, with low
levels of OCT2, PMAT and MATE1. Metformin uptake into IG cells was
significantly (PPURPOSE: Recent studies show that the anti-diabetic drug
metformin exhibits anticancer effects against a broad spectrum of cancers
including ovarian cancer. Because metformin is highly hydrophilic with a
net positive charge at all physiologic pH values, it requires
cation-selective transporters to enter into cells and interact with its
intracellular target 5 adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase.
The expression pattern and level of these transporters in cancer cells
would determine the intracellular concentrations and subsequently the
anti-proliferative activity of metformin. This study aims to investigate
metformin transporter expression and the impact of these transporters on
metformin uptake and anti-proliferative activity in human ovarian cancer
cell lines that are routinely used to assess potential anti-cancer agents
against this cancer type.METHODS: Total RNA from human ovarian cancer
cell lines (IG, SKOV3 and HEY) was subjected to real-time PCR to
determine expression levels of the common cation transporters organic
cation transporter (OCT) 1-3, plasma membrane monoamine transporter
(PMAT), multidrug and toxin extrusion transporters (MATE) 1 and 2. Uptake
of [14C]metformin (50M) in the presence or absence of the
cation-selective transporter inhibitors famotidine and
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) was assessed to determine the
contributions of transporters to metformin uptake in these cell
lines.RESULTS: OCT3 mRNA was highly expressed in IG cells, with low
levels of OCT2, PMAT and MATE1. Metformin uptake into IG cells was
significantly (P<0.05) inhibited by 5mM MPP+ (which inhibits all
cation-selective transporters at this concentration), and by 200 M
famotidine (which is a more selective inhibitor of OCT3 than OCT2 at this
concentration). In SKOV3 cells where OCT2 was the predominant transporter
with low levels of OCT3, PMAT and MATE1, metformin uptake was
significantly (PPURPOSE: Recent studies show that the anti-diabetic drug
metformin exhibits anticancer effects against a broad spectrum of cancers
including ovarian cancer. Because metformin is highly hydrophilic with a
net positive charge at all physiologic pH values, it requires
cation-selective transporters to enter into cells and interact with its
intracellular target 5 adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase.
The expression pattern and level of these transporters in cancer cells
would determine the intracellular concentrations and subsequently the
anti-proliferative activity of metformin. This study aims to investigate
metformin transporter expression and the impact of these transporters on
metformin uptake and anti-proliferative activity in human ovarian cancer
cell lines that are routinely used to assess potential anti-cancer agents
against this cancer type.METHODS: Total RNA from human ovarian cancer
cell lines (IG, SKOV3 and HEY) was subjected to real-time PCR to
determine expression levels of the common cation transporters organic
cation transporter (OCT) 1-3, plasma membrane monoamine transporter
(PMAT), multidrug and toxin extrusion transporters (MATE) 1 and 2. Uptake
of [14C]metformin (50M) in the presence or absence of the
cation-selective transporter inhibitors famotidine and
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) was assessed to determine the
contributions of transporters to metformin uptake in these cell
lines.RESULTS: OCT3 mRNA was highly expressed in IG cells, with low
levels of OCT2, PMAT and MATE1. Metformin uptake into IG cells was
significantly (P<0.05) inhibited by 5mM MPP+ (which inhibits all
cation-selective transporters at this concentration), and by 200 M
famotidine (which is a more selective inhibitor of OCT3 than OCT2 at this
concentration). In SKOV3 cells where OCT2 was the predominant transporter
with low levels of OCT3, PMAT and MATE1, metformin uptake was
significantly (P<0.05) inhibited by 5 mM MPP+ and 200 M famotidine.
Cation-selective transporter expression was negligible in the HEY cell
line in which metformin uptake was lower than uptake in IG and SKOV3
cells, and was not inhibited by either of the two inhibitors.CONCLUSIONS:
The ovarian cancer cell lines used in this study are utilized as models
to test anticancer agents against ovarian cancer. In order to use these
cell lines to investigate the anti-proliferative activity of metformin so
as to predict its anticancer effects in ovarian cancer, the expression of
metformin transporters and metformin uptake in relation to the expression
of these transporters needs to be elucidated. Studies on determining the
IC50 values of metformin in ovarian cancer cell lines, as well as
cation-selective transporter expression studies in human ovarian tumor
tissue samples are currently in progress.

