Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of EBV nucleic acid and expression of oncogenic protein
LMP-1 in Reed-Sternberg cells of Hodgkin's lymphoma.


Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is the causative agent of infectious
mononucleosis and is implicated in the development of several human
malignancies, such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and Hodgkin's
Lymphoma (HL). While the incidence of Hodgkin's Lymphoma in Iraq is not
yet investigated, according to the WHO Hodgkin's Lymphoma is one of the
10 most frequent types of cancer in Iraq
(http://www.who.int/disasters/repo/10062.pdf).The present study aimed to
determine the association between HL and EBV in middle Euphrates region
of Iraq, and to determine whether it is related to certain age group or
specific histologic subtypes. It also aims to compare the pattern with
other developing or developed countries.This retrospective study includes
86 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks from HL patients, these
were compared with 35 patients with Reactive Follicular Hyperplasia, that
were age and gender matched. All the samples belonged to the period
between Jan.2008 to April2010. The presence of EBV DNA was investigated
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), while the expression of the oncogenic
protein (LMP-1) in Reed-Sternberg cells by immunohistochemistry (IHC).The
mean age group of HL patients was 28.5 old years with a median of 25
years old. There were 49 males and 37 females. Age group of 16-45 years
was the largest one and represented 66.2%. The third decade took the peak
incidence (26/86, 30.2%). patients aged less than 16 years were 17.5%,
while 16.3% of patients were more than 45 years old. Mixed cellularity HL
was the most common subtype represented 47.6% of all the cases, followed
by nodular sclerosis (33.7%) while the lymphocyte-rich, and lymphocyte
depleted subtypes were (8.1%, 7%) respectively, whereas Lymphocyte
Predominant was seen in 3.48% of cases.EBV DNA was detected in 39.5% of
the cases, while the expression of LMP-1 in Reed Sternberg cells was
found in 85.3% of the EBV-positive HL. The highest rate of EBV was seen
in the children age group (less than 16 years; 53.3%), while the lowest
rate was among young adults (16-45 years; 35.08%). Older age group (more
than 45 years) has a rate of EBV presented (39.5%) which was higher than
the young adult patients, but lower than the children age group.
Histologically, the most frequent viral association was observed in mixed
cellularity subtype (56.1%), followed by lymphocyte-rich and lymphocyte
depleted subtypes (42.9%, 33.3%) respectively. The least frequency of
association was in nodular sclerosis type (20.7%), while lymphocyte
predominant subtype showed negative relationship with EBV-positive HL.
EBV positive cases were mostly males (40.81%) compared to females
(37.8%).Citation Format: Dhiya S. Al-Shumary, Karrar A.A. Ali Beg, Alae
A. Yaseen, Salman A. Al-Jibouri, Kaswer M. Al-Toriahi. Detection of EBV
nucleic acid and expression of oncogenic protein LMP-1 in Reed-Sternberg
cells of Hodgkin's lymphoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4782. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4782

