Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression and function of CXCR4 in human salivary gland cancers.


Salivary gland cancers (SGCs) frequently metastasize to cervical lymph
nodes and distant organs. Currently, the mechanisms responsible for the
metastatic behavior of SGC cells are not fully understood. We previously
demonstrated that the stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1; also known as
CXCL12)/CXCR4 system is involved in the establishment of metastasis in
oral squamous cell carcinoma. In the present study, we investigated the
role of CXCR4 in the metastatic behavior of SGCs. We examined the
expression of CXCR4 mRNA and protein in human SGC cell lines by
quantitative RT-PCR and western blotting, respectively. The expression of
CXCR4 mRNA and protein were frequently upregulated in 5 out of 6 SGC cell
lines. On the contrary to the CXCR4 expression, CXCR7, a recently
identified second receptor for SDF-1, was detected in all SGC cell lines,
expression levels were considerably lower on average compared with that
of CXCR4 expression. Functional CXCR4 expression was demonstrated by the
ability of these SGC cell lines to migrate toward an SDF-1 gradient.
SDF-1 rapidly activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 in
SGC cell lines. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that CXCR4 protein
expression was detected in either the nucleus or cytoplasm of cancer
cells in 16 out of 20 tissues of adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) and in 4
out of 6 tissues of mucoepidermoid carcinoma, which are representative of
SGC. Furthermore, ACC cell lines exhibited dramatic metastasis to the
lung following intravenous inoculation, whereas AMD3100, a CXCR4
antagonist, significantly inhibited lung metastasis of the cells,
ameliorated body weight loss and improved the survival rate of
tumor-bearing nude mice. These results indicate that CXCR4 expression
contributes to the metastatic potential of SGCs.

