Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging DNA damage response (DDR) during oncogenesis.


Introduction: DNA damage repair (DDR) signalling is upregulated during
tumorigenesis and acts as a p53-mediated block on proliferation.
Expression of the DNA double strand break (DSB) repair protein, H2AX, is
induced by the activated kinases pATM or pATR during oncogenesis.
Previously, we showed that H2AX presents an abundant epitope for
non-invasive in vivo imaging of DSBs. We used 111In-labelled anti-H2AX
antibodies, conjugated to the cell penetrating peptide, TAT, to
non-invasively image DDR during oncogenesis in a genetically engineered
mouse model of HER2/neu-overexpression driven breast cancer.Methods:
Balb/neuT mice, genetically modified to express mutated rat neuT under
MMTV promotor control, form multiple palpable carcinomas in mammary fat
pads when animals are 130 days old. SPECT images were acquired weekly
from balb/neuT mice (age 40-140 days; n=23) 24 h after i.v. injection of
111In-labelled anti-H2AX-Tat or the non-selective agent, 111In-rIgG-Tat
using a small animal SPECT/CT scanner. 111In uptake in fat pads was
determined using volume of interest analysis. 111In uptake of >5%ID/g was
deemed positive. Anatomical and histological changes were assessed at
different ages using DCE-MRI imaging and immunohistochemistry.Results:
Balb/neuT mice that were 80 days old developed multiple hyperplastic and
dysplastic lesions in mammary fat pads. H2AX foci were observed in these
regions in balb/neuT mice that were 80-100 days old (10-15 foci/cell),
but were less numerous in overt tumor tissue in 130-day-old mice (4-5
foci/cell). H2AX foci were not observed in normal tissues in older mice
(0 foci/cell), in mammary fat pads in younger mice (0 foci/cell), or in
wild type mice (0 foci/cell). Serial SPECT imaging revealed a 7-fold
increase in 111In-anti-H2AX-Tat accumulation in mammary fat pads in mice
80-110 days old (up to 8.5 %ID/g), compared to non-specific control
(P=0.0007), but not in younger or older mice (P>0.05). Repeated SPECT
imaging itself did not influence tumor occurrence (P>0.05). The median
time to detection of positive tissue was 96 days, much sooner than
detection of lesions >150 m by DCE-MRI (117 days), or palpation (130
days) (PIntroduction: DNA damage repair (DDR) signalling is upregulated
during tumorigenesis and acts as a p53-mediated block on proliferation.
Expression of the DNA double strand break (DSB) repair protein, H2AX, is
induced by the activated kinases pATM or pATR during oncogenesis.
Previously, we showed that H2AX presents an abundant epitope for
non-invasive in vivo imaging of DSBs. We used 111In-labelled anti-H2AX
antibodies, conjugated to the cell penetrating peptide, TAT, to
non-invasively image DDR during oncogenesis in a genetically engineered
mouse model of HER2/neu-overexpression driven breast cancer.Methods:
Balb/neuT mice, genetically modified to express mutated rat neuT under
MMTV promotor control, form multiple palpable carcinomas in mammary fat
pads when animals are 130 days old. SPECT images were acquired weekly
from balb/neuT mice (age 40-140 days; n=23) 24 h after i.v. injection of
111In-labelled anti-H2AX-Tat or the non-selective agent, 111In-rIgG-Tat
using a small animal SPECT/CT scanner. 111In uptake in fat pads was
determined using volume of interest analysis. 111In uptake of >5%ID/g was
deemed positive. Anatomical and histological changes were assessed at
different ages using DCE-MRI imaging and immunohistochemistry.Results:
Balb/neuT mice that were 80 days old developed multiple hyperplastic and
dysplastic lesions in mammary fat pads. H2AX foci were observed in these
regions in balb/neuT mice that were 80-100 days old (10-15 foci/cell),
but were less numerous in overt tumor tissue in 130-day-old mice (4-5
foci/cell). H2AX foci were not observed in normal tissues in older mice
(0 foci/cell), in mammary fat pads in younger mice (0 foci/cell), or in
wild type mice (0 foci/cell). Serial SPECT imaging revealed a 7-fold
increase in 111In-anti-H2AX-Tat accumulation in mammary fat pads in mice
80-110 days old (up to 8.5 %ID/g), compared to non-specific control
(P=0.0007), but not in younger or older mice (P>0.05). Repeated SPECT
imaging itself did not influence tumor occurrence (P>0.05). The median
time to detection of positive tissue was 96 days, much sooner than
detection of lesions >150 m by DCE-MRI (117 days), or palpation (130
days) (P<0.0001).Conclusion: Using a H2AX-targeted radiopharmaceutical,
we were able to image the DNA damage response during neuT-mediated
oncogenesis in balb/neuT mice. DDR imaging identified neoplastic tissue
significantly earlier than anatomical imaging. These results suggest that
H2AX imaging has potential as a screening tool for cancer-prone
individuals.

