Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of SPARC represses MMP-9 mediated metastasis in
neuroblastoma.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common pediatric solid tumor and arises
from defective neural crest cells. NB is characterized by local invasion
and metastasis, which is partly regulated by the proteins matrix
metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9) and secreted protein acidic and rich in
cysteine (SPARC). Although the pleiotropic anti-cancer role of SPARC and
its effect on metastasis has been shown in a variety of cancers, the
mechanism by which it acts is not very clear. In the present study, we
found that the overexpression of SPARC in NB-1649 and SK-AS cell lines
downregulated MMP-9 protein and inhibited the expression of other
metastasis promoting molecules such as N-cadherin, -Catenin and FAK.
Moreover, SPARC overexpression significantly suppressed MMP-9-mediated
migration, invasion and proliferation of NB cells. Interestingly,
immunohistochemistry analysis of 36 human NB paraffin-embedded specimens
showed that higher expression of MMP-9 was associated with lower levels
SPARC. All these data suggest that SPARC and MMP-9 negatively associate
to regulate the various stages of tumor progression. Furthermore,
computational docking studies showed the existence of structural and
physical interaction between SPARC and MMP-9 proteins. This SPARC-MMP-9
interaction was validated by immunoprecipitation and immunohistochemistry
analysis in NB-1649 and SK-AS cells. Consistent with the above results,
we observed a similar MMP-9-SPARC interaction in intracranial NB tumors
of mice and found that the expression of MMP-9 was higher in control mice
when compared to SPARC-treated mice. Taken together, our results
demonstrate the role of SPARC in negative regulation of MMP-9 and
MMP-9-mediated migration, invasion and metastasis of NB cells.

