Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Olig2 phosphorylation by CDK2 implicated in glioma proliferation.


Oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2 (Olig2) is an important proneural
transcription factor that regulates early development of the central
nervous system and formation of glioma. Although recent studies
established the role of developmentally regulated Olig2 phosphorylation
in promoting the proliferation of both normal and malignant neural
stem/progenitor cells, the molecular mechanisms by which Olig2
phosphorylation is regulated and functions as a pro-proliferative factor
are not completely understood. Here we identified Olig2 as a critical
phosphorylation target for cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2). CDK2
stabilizes and activates Olig2, thereby regulating G1-to-S phase
progression by repressing the expression of Cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27kip1. After phosphorylation by CDK2, Olig2 exerts
pro-proliferative effects that are reflected in normal neural/glioma stem
cells and in murine xenograft models of glioma. Olig2 phosphorylation
regulates its binding to E-box sequence in p27 gene promoter and
represses p27 expression. We show that constitutive p27 expression
antagonizes CDK2-mediated Olig2 phosphorylation and attenuates cell
proliferation both in in-vitro and in-vivo glioma models. Expression
analysis of TCGA GBM samples also showed that high Olig2 expression is
always accompanied with high CDK2 expression in the proneural, classical,
and neural subclasses, which could provide a convincing evidence to use a
CDK2 inhibitor to treat Olig2-high gliomas. Treatment with CDK2 inhibitor
preferentially suppresses proliferation of Olig2-high glioma cells. Thus,
we conclude that a CDK2 inhibitor could be of great therapeutic value in
patients with Olig2-high glioma and Olig2 might be used as a biological
marker for CDK2 inhibitors in the future studies.

