Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Let-7 brings new insights into chronic myeloid leukemia therapy.


Human chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a malignancy of pluripotent
hematopoietic cells that is caused by the deregulated activity of the
tyrosine kinase that is encoded by the chimeric bcr-abl oncogene. Given
that CML cells are usually highly resistant to chemotherapy, novel and
more efficacious strategies against this disease are urgently needed.
MicroRNA (miRNA) is a set of newly discovered 20-22 nucleotides RNA
molecules, and they broadly repress their cognate target genes at
post-transcriptional/translational level. Up to date, there are
approximately 2,000 human miRNA transcripts have been characterized,
which are estimated to modulate more than 30% human genes and are widely
involved in many essential biological processes including
differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis, and also tumorigenesis. In
this study, we studied let-7, a miRNA with tumor suppressive signature,
for its therapeutic potential in CML. When treating CML K562 and KU812
cell by imatinib, let-7 can be significantly induced. Overexpression of
let-7 can sensitize K562 and KU812 cells to imatinib, while knock-down of
let-7 can increase the drug resistance of these cells. The mechanistic
studies found that let-7 was able to promote apoptosis of CML cells,
inhibit the tumor cell proliferation, and lead to a cell cycle arrest in
the G0/G1 phase. These results demonstrate that let-7 is a potential
target for treating CML by imatinib and/or other anti-cancer druges. The
pro-apoptosis and anti-proliferation roles of let-7 in CML cells may
provide novel insights into discovery and development novel drugs for
conquering this malignant disease.Citation Format: Bin Yi, Xiaobo Li,
Wenjun Du, Gary A. Piazza, Yaguang Xi. Let-7 brings new insights into
chronic myeloid leukemia therapy. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1848. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1848

