Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial differences in stage at diagnosis and survival for
premenopausal breast cancer patients.


BACKGROUND: There are racial/ ethnic disparities in breast cancer
survival rates in the US. Tumor stage at diagnosis has long been a
prognostic factor in breast cancer. Our objective was to determine
whether there are racial disparities in tumor stage at diagnosis of
breast cancer in pre-menopausal women, using a large national cancer
registry.METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis using data from
the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results database for 1996-2006.
Premenopausal (50 years) women with primary diagnosis of breast cancer
were identified using appropriate ICD-O-3 codes (C500-C509). Comparing
racial/ethnic groups, with white race as the reference, multivariate
logistic regression was used to assess the odds of late stage (stage III
or IV) versus early stage (stage I or II) diagnosis at presentation,
adjusting for prognostic factors, tumor characteristics, and year
differences. All statistical tests were two-sided.RESULTS: A total of
86,570 women met our inclusion criteria. Of those, 56,811 (65.62%) were
White, 10,789 (12.46%) were Hispanic, 9,896 (11.43%) were Black, 8,115
(9.37%) were Asian or Pacific Islanders, 544 (0.63%) were Native American
and for 415 (0.48%) women the race was unknown. A majority of patients
were 46-50 years old (43%) and married (65%) at the time of diagnosis.
Most were diagnosed with stage II (46%), invasive ductal (93%) histology,
1.1-2cm (36%) in size, poorly differentiated (45%), and without distant
metastasis (96%). On multivariate analysis, compared to white women,
Black women had 58% higher adjusted odds (OR: 1.58; 95% CI: 1.49-1.68)
and Hispanic women had 37% higher odds (OR: 1.37; 95%CI: 1.29-1.46) of
having late stage versus early stage breast cancer at time of diagnosis.
Figure 1 shows the race specific percent of women diagnosed with late
stage cancer across the years. Cancer-specific mortality rates were 10.1%
for whites, 21.1% for blacks, 13.4% for Hispanics, 17.6% for Native
Americans, and 9.6 % for Asians (p value BACKGROUND: There are racial/
ethnic disparities in breast cancer survival rates in the US. Tumor stage
at diagnosis has long been a prognostic factor in breast cancer. Our
objective was to determine whether there are racial disparities in tumor
stage at diagnosis of breast cancer in pre-menopausal women, using a
large national cancer registry.METHODS: We conducted a retrospective
analysis using data from the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results
database for 1996-2006. Premenopausal (50 years) women with primary
diagnosis of breast cancer were identified using appropriate ICD-O-3
codes (C500-C509). Comparing racial/ethnic groups, with white race as the
reference, multivariate logistic regression was used to assess the odds
of late stage (stage III or IV) versus early stage (stage I or II)
diagnosis at presentation, adjusting for prognostic factors, tumor
characteristics, and year differences. All statistical tests were
two-sided.RESULTS: A total of 86,570 women met our inclusion criteria. Of
those, 56,811 (65.62%) were White, 10,789 (12.46%) were Hispanic, 9,896
(11.43%) were Black, 8,115 (9.37%) were Asian or Pacific Islanders, 544
(0.63%) were Native American and for 415 (0.48%) women the race was
unknown. A majority of patients were 46-50 years old (43%) and married
(65%) at the time of diagnosis. Most were diagnosed with stage II (46%),
invasive ductal (93%) histology, 1.1-2cm (36%) in size, poorly
differentiated (45%), and without distant metastasis (96%). On
multivariate analysis, compared to white women, Black women had 58%
higher adjusted odds (OR: 1.58; 95% CI: 1.49-1.68) and Hispanic women had
37% higher odds (OR: 1.37; 95%CI: 1.29-1.46) of having late stage versus
early stage breast cancer at time of diagnosis. Figure 1 shows the race
specific percent of women diagnosed with late stage cancer across the
years. Cancer-specific mortality rates were 10.1% for whites, 21.1% for
blacks, 13.4% for Hispanics, 17.6% for Native Americans, and 9.6 % for
Asians (p value <.001).CONCLUSIONS: Utilizing a large cohort of
premenopausal women diagnosed with breast cancer our study showed
African-American and Hispanic women have higher incidence of diagnosis of
late stage breast cancer as compared to their white counterparts. They as
well as Native Americans also have higher cancer specific mortality rates
as compared to their white and Asian counterparts. This study provides
evidence that premenopausal African-American and Hispanic women represent
a high-risk group that will benefit from identification of factors that
contribute to late stage at presentation.Figure 1: Percent of women in
each race diagnosed with late stage breast cancer over time.

