Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Poly(ADP-Ribose) polymerase inhibitor overcomes Rad51- mediated
prostate cancer cells resistance to Topoisomerase I inhibitor under
hypoxia.


Intra-tumoral hypoxia has been proposed to create a mutator phenotype
through down-regulation of DNA repair, leading to increased genomic
instability and drug resistance. There is increasing interest to target
hypoxic cancer cells with DNA-damaging agents and inhibitors of DNA
repair. Here, we showed that hypoxia did not sensitize
castration-resistant prostate cancer cells to the poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) inhibitor veliparib or the DNA-damaging topoisomerase I
inhibitor: Irinotecan or SN38. Although DNA repair proteins like Rad51
were decreased under hypoxia, up-regulation of Rad51 and Rad51 nuclear
foci formation was observed soon after treatment with veliparib and SN-38
under hypoxia. This Rad51 up-regulation occurred at the transcription
level and was mediated at least in part by E2F1. Inhibiting Rad51
expression with siRNA overcame prostate cancer cells resistance to SN-38
under hypoxia. Combining veliparib with Irinotecan significantly enhanced
DNA damage and apoptosis under both hypoxic and normoxic culture
conditions. Such enhanced DNA damage and anti-tumor activities were seen
in the presence of Rad51 up-regulation and confirmed in vivo with PC3
mouse xenografts. These data illustrate a dynamic regulation of Rad51 by
prostate cancer cells in response to hypoxia and DNA damage. The
veliparib and Irinotecan combination can be further explored as a
treatment for metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer patients
who have progressed through standard treatments.

