Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of Wnt/-catenin signaling accelerates progression of
Kras-induced pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), a poor prognostic cancer,
commonly develops following activating mutations in the KRAS oncogene.
Activation of the Wnt signaling pathway is also commonly observed in
PDAC. To ascertain the impact of postnatal activation of the Wnt
signaling pathways in PDAC development, we combined the
elastase-tva-based RCAS-TVA pancreatic cancer model with the established
LSL-KrasG12D, Ptf1a-cre model. Delivery of RCAS viruses encoding
-cateninS37A and Wnt1 stimulated the progression of premalignant PanIN
and PDAC development. Moreover, mice injected with RCAS--cateninS37A and
Wnt1 had reduced survival relative to RCAS-GFP controls (log-rank test; p
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), a poor prognostic cancer,
commonly develops following activating mutations in the KRAS oncogene.
Activation of the Wnt signaling pathway is also commonly observed in
PDAC. To ascertain the impact of postnatal activation of the Wnt
signaling pathways in PDAC development, we combined the
elastase-tva-based RCAS-TVA pancreatic cancer model with the established
LSL-KrasG12D, Ptf1a-cre model. Delivery of RCAS viruses encoding
-cateninS37A and Wnt1 stimulated the progression of premalignant PanIN
and PDAC development. Moreover, mice injected with RCAS--cateninS37A and
Wnt1 had reduced survival relative to RCAS-GFP controls (log-rank test; p
< 0.05). Meanwhile, active -catenin or its DNA-binding partner TCF4
enhanced PDAC cell proliferation, soft-agar colony formation, as well as
migration and invasion activity. In contrast, these phenotypes were
significantly blocked by the introduction of Icat, an inhibitor of the
-catenin/TCF4 interaction. Interestingly, Id2 (inhibitor of
differentiation/DNA binding2) was significantly up-regulated by induction
of -catenin and TCF4, whereas Id2 expression was inhibited by Icat.
Furthermore, nuclear -catenin and Id2 were mainly observed in poorly
differentiated PDACs and sarcomatoid tumors. Together, these data suggest
that the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway stimulates pancreatic tumor
development and progression through the activation of Id2.

