Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial metabolism and phosphorylation of Stat3 in
radioresistant cancer stem cells isolated from glioma U87 cells.


AbstractRadiation therapy continues to play a central role in the
management of brain tumors. The radioresistance of high-grade gliomas
remains one of the reasons for the failure of treatment, which would
otherwise require tumoricidal doses beyond the normal tissue tolerance
and beyond safe clinical practice. Thus, determining the cellular,
molecular and biochemical mechanisms underlying radiation resistance
becomes critical for successful treatment of these tumors. For this
purpose, glioma cell line U87 were treated with fractionated doses of
radiation and the resistant clones isolated from the surviving tumor
cells were characterized. The radioresistant U87 cells showed enhanced
aggressiveness and clonogenic survival with an increased expression of
HER2 and CD133, glioma cancer stem cell surface markers, as well as
elevated mitochondrial membrane potential but lower oxygen consumption
and ATP generation. In addition, compared with the wild type U87 cells,
the phosphorylation of mitochondrial Stat3 at Serine 727 was decreased in
the radioresistant U87 cells, indicating a role for mitochondrial Stat3
in the radioresistance mechanisms. Additionally, mutation of Serine 727
of Stat3 into Alanine resulted in increased radiosensitivity. These
results demonstrate that the radioresistant glioma cells surviving
routine radiotherapy are enriched with cancer stem cells expressing CD133
and HER2. The radioresistant phenotype is linked with a lowered
mitochondrial metabolism and increased anti-apoptotic function due to
inhibition of mitochondrial Stat3 phosphorylation. Thus, improving the
mitochondrial metabolism by enhancing mitochondrial Stat3 phosphorylation
may serve as an effective approach to re-sensitize the radioresistant
glioma tumors.

