Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of Simvastatin and Nimesulide on inflammation and
cardiovascular risk biomarkers in a phase II breast cancer prevention
trial.


Background: Almost one-third of breast cancers (BC) will not be
influenced by hormonal interventions because of the absence of ER
expression. Thus, there is an urgent need to confirm in the clinical
setting the potential efficacy of new compounds in contrasting hormone
non-responsive BC, which are often marked by higher biological
aggressiveness, early onset and worse prognosis. Over expression of COX-2
and HMG-CoA pathway seems to be involved in breast carcinogenesis and
several studies have shown the ability of NSAIDs and statins to reduce
the incidence of BC.Material and Methods: We conducted a randomized phase
II, double blind, placebo controlled trial with simvastatin (20 mg/day)
and nimesulide (100 mg/day) for 1 year in 150 high risk women for ER
negative BC in a 1:1:1 fashion. Participants were treated for one year
and followed-up for an additional year. The primary endpoint was the
change in prevalence of atypical cells obtained by ductal lavage or
ultrasound guided fine needle aspirate and cellular proliferation
(measured by Ki-67), while the secondary objective was to analyze the
efficacy of these drugs in modifying the levels of circulating
inflammatory and cardiovascular risk biomarkers. Circulating
concentrations of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP),
triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol,
antithrombin III and fibrinogen were measured on morning fasting blood
samples drawn at baseline and after 12 and 24 months.Results: Analysis of
the primary endpoint is ongoing and here we present results on
circulating biomarkers. After 12 months of treatment, simvastatin was
associated to a statistically significant mean decrease of hsCRP compared
to the placebo arm (0,90 mg/L vs 3,57 mg/L; p=0.008), while an attenuated
effect of nimesulide was observed (1.61 mg/L vs 3.57 mg/L; p=0.077). As
expected, simvastatin significantly decreased LDL and total cholesterol
levels with respect to placebo (89.1 vs 130 mg/dL and 176.8 vs 218 mg/dL
respectively; both pBackground: Almost one-third of breast cancers (BC)
will not be influenced by hormonal interventions because of the absence
of ER expression. Thus, there is an urgent need to confirm in the
clinical setting the potential efficacy of new compounds in contrasting
hormone non-responsive BC, which are often marked by higher biological
aggressiveness, early onset and worse prognosis. Over expression of COX-2
and HMG-CoA pathway seems to be involved in breast carcinogenesis and
several studies have shown the ability of NSAIDs and statins to reduce
the incidence of BC.Material and Methods: We conducted a randomized phase
II, double blind, placebo controlled trial with simvastatin (20 mg/day)
and nimesulide (100 mg/day) for 1 year in 150 high risk women for ER
negative BC in a 1:1:1 fashion. Participants were treated for one year
and followed-up for an additional year. The primary endpoint was the
change in prevalence of atypical cells obtained by ductal lavage or
ultrasound guided fine needle aspirate and cellular proliferation
(measured by Ki-67), while the secondary objective was to analyze the
efficacy of these drugs in modifying the levels of circulating
inflammatory and cardiovascular risk biomarkers. Circulating
concentrations of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP),
triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol,
antithrombin III and fibrinogen were measured on morning fasting blood
samples drawn at baseline and after 12 and 24 months.Results: Analysis of
the primary endpoint is ongoing and here we present results on
circulating biomarkers. After 12 months of treatment, simvastatin was
associated to a statistically significant mean decrease of hsCRP compared
to the placebo arm (0,90 mg/L vs 3,57 mg/L; p=0.008), while an attenuated
effect of nimesulide was observed (1.61 mg/L vs 3.57 mg/L; p=0.077). As
expected, simvastatin significantly decreased LDL and total cholesterol
levels with respect to placebo (89.1 vs 130 mg/dL and 176.8 vs 218 mg/dL
respectively; both p<0.0001). Interestingly, after 1 year of treatment
interruption, at 24 months from baseline, hsCRP serum levels were
significantly lower with both simvastatin (p = 0.012) and nimesulide (p =
0.017) as compared to placebo. We did not observe a significant change in
mean concentrations of triglycerides, antithrombin III and fibrinogen
during treatment and follow-up.Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate a
favourable anti-inflammatory effect of both agents on circulating levels
of hsCRP, although simvastatin achieved a greater decrease. These results
will be correlated with the main endpoint to further assess the potential
role of simvastatin and nimesulide in breast carcinogenesis and the
potential use of hsCRP as a surrogate endpoint biomarker.

