Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal stromal cells promote tumor engraftment and
progression in tumor xenograft model.


Mouse transplantation model for in-vivo characterization of human tumor
cells exhibits variable and lower tumor-taking efficiency for primary
human tumors than immortalized cancer cell lines. Tumor microenvironment
has been well recognized to have important role for tumor proliferation
and metastasis. However, little is known about potential influence of
species-specific microenvironment for human and mice model. Here, we
investigated the impact of species-barrier for tumor engraftment and
evaluated effects of matrigel and mesenchymal stromal cell (MSC) as a
potential factor that can influence tumor microenvironment. First,
identical CFC-equivalent number (1x104) of mouse sarcoma cell (WEHI164)
and rat sarcoma cell (RR1022) were injected subcutaneously into NOD/SCID
IL2rg/ (NSG) mice and immuno-suppressed rat (Sprague Dawley, treated with
FK506 and Dexamethasone 1 mg/kg/day, each, ip). RR1022 showed earlier and
superior tumor development to those of WEHI164 in rat (P=0.006), whereas,
no significant difference in NSG mice (P=0.50). Subsequently, both
sarcoma cells (1x104 CFC equivalent) were injected with matrigel,
WEHI164+matrigel showed superior tumor development to WEHI164 alone in
rat (P=0.035), but not in NSG mice. Moreover, matrigel didn't show
advantage for RR1022 in both rat and NSG mice. Next, we investigated the
effect of human-MSCs on human sarcoma cells (HT1080) growth by using
co-culture system. HT1080 cells co-cultured with/without transwell showed
1.3 times and 1.8 times (respectively) more rapid growth than HT1080
cells alone at day 6. When HT1080 cells (1x105) were injected with
matrigel, human-MSC or rat-MSC into rat, tumor development were detected
in 100% (6/6, each group) at day 14. However, HT1080 cells with human-MSC
showed greater tumor volume than those with matrigel (P=0.03) and rat-MSC
(P=0.04). In addition, on microscopic examination, tumors from HT1080
co-injected with human-MSC or rat-MSC showed infiltrative growth pattern
with desmoplastic reaction, which were not observed in HT1080 alone or
HT1080 with matrigel. Similar findings were observed in another set of
experiment, 5FU cells (human gastric cancer cell line) co-injected with
human-MSC into NSG mice showed infiltrative growth and lung metastasis,
whereas 5FU cells alone showed only expansile growth pattern without lung
metastasis. In conclusion, our results suggest that the
microenvironmental species-barrier may exist and that human-MSCs would
have tumor promoting effect and could serve as a favorable
microenvironment for xenograftment of human tumor cellsDisclosures: No
relevant conflicts of interest to declare.This research was supported by
a grant (10172KFDA993) from Korea Food & Drug Administration in 2012.

