Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular determinants of sensitivity and resistance to
tumor-directed antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC).


Monoclonal antibodies can induce antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
(ADCC) through immune effector cells, such as natural killer (NK) cells.
Although clinical evidence suggests a role for ADCC in effective antibody
therapy of cancer, molecular determinants of ADCC responsivenessin
oncogenic signaling networks, for examplehave not been well
characterized. Using an in vitro model system including an NK-like cell
line (NK92-CD16V), cetuximab, and A431 cells, we screened 60 genes from
an EGFR gene network by RNAi to assess for synthetic enhancement of ADCC.
Primary and validation screens, and correlative characterization studies,
identified four genes whose knockdown enhanced ADCC: GRB7, PRKCE, RET,
and ABL1. Inhibition of Abl kinase activity enhanced ADCC, phenocopying
the effects of ABL1 knockdown and providing pre-clinical evidence for
combining Abl inhibitors and cetuximab. Next, we derived an
ADCC-resistant cell population (A431/ADCC-R) by treating parental A431
cells with over 30 successive ADCC treatments. We describe the
development, screening, and characterization of A431/ADCC-R. Our
screening strategy has revealed molecular determinants of both tumor cell
sensitivity and resistance to ADCC in vitro that may translate into
increased monoclonal antibody efficacy in the clinic.

