Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aspirin acetylates glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase and inhibits
its activity in colon cancer cells.


Epidemiological studies have demonstrated a significant correlation
between regular aspirin use and reduced colon cancer incidence and
mortality. Although a consensus is emerging on the view that aspirin has
significant anti-cancer properties, it is not yet clear which pathways or
molecular targets might be involved. We hypothesized that aspirin's
anti-cancer effect may occur through acetylation of a panel of protein
targets, including novel candidates with modulated functional activity,
as a result of aspirin-mediated acetylation. In the present study, using
anti-acetyl lysine antibody, we determined aspirin-mediated protein
acetylation profiles in three different colon cancer cell lines namely
HCT-116, HT-29 and GC3/c1, by treating cells with aspirin at different
concentration, and analyzing them in Western Blot. We observed that in
all cell lines tested, aspirin induced acetylation of multiple proteins
in a concentration dependent fashion spanning a molecular weight range
from 20 to 200 kDa. Aspirin's acetylation targets included the tumor
suppressor protein p53, and glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), an
enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway. Mass spectrometry analysis of
the recombinant G6PD, treated with aspirin in vitro, revealed acetylation
of up to 14 distinct lysine residues, including lysine 235 at its active
site. In vitro G6PD assay in lysates isolated from the cancer cell lines
showed that aspirin caused a 70% decrease in the G6PD enzyme activity in
HCT116 cells; however, the reduction in the enzyme activity was less in
HT-29/GC3/c1 cells (up to 30%). Inhibition of G6PD activity leading to a
reduction in ribonucleotide synthesis and cell proliferation may
represent an important mechanism by which aspirin exerts its anticancer
effects.

