Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of the combined treatment of TRA-8, an agonistic DR5
antibody, and tamoxifen on breast cancer cells.


Breast cancer affects an estimated 1.3 million women worldwide annually
(Breast Cancer Res Tr 127(2): 541-7, 2011). Certain breast cancer cell
types are resistant or become resistant to conventional chemotherapy
(Cancer Sci 94: 15-21, 2003). The use of targeted therapy for the
controlled killing of cancer cells has become clinically desirable to
sensitize breast cancer to anti-cancer drugs. TRA-8, a death receptor 5
(DR5) agonistic antibody, has been shown to be effective in activating
apoptosis in breast cancer cells (Molecular Cancer Res 9(4): 403-17,
2011). However, sensitivity to TRA-8 induced apoptosis is dependent on
the breast cancer subtype (Clin Cancer Res 9: 3731-41, 2003). Tamoxifen
(TMX) is known for its potency in the treatment of estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive breast cancers, but some ER-positive breast cancers have
developed resistance to TMX treatment (J. Natl. Cancer Inst,
96(12):926-35, 2004). TMX is an inhibitor of the ER-mediated cell growth
pathway and TMX is also a calmodulin (CaM) antagonist. The goal of this
study is to understand the effect of the combined treatment of TRA-8 and
TMX on breast cancer cell apoptosis. We hypothesize that the combination
treatment of TMX and TRA-8 will sensitize the ER-positive breast cancer
cells to apoptosis. The ER-positive breast cancer cell lines: MCF-7 and
T47D were treated with and without estradiol, and then treated with TRA-8
only, TMX only and combined TRA-8 and TMX. Results showed that both MCF-7
and T47D cells showed synergism between TMX and TRA-8 for the cells
treated with estradiol, but showed antagonism for the cells without
estradiol treatment. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments using a DR5
antibody demonstrated the interactions of CaM with DR5 in MCF-7 and T47D
cell lines. The results suggested that TMX inhibited the estradiol
activated ER cell growth pathway and the cross-talk between DR5-mediated
apoptosis pathway and ER-mediated cell growth pathway contributed to the
observed synergism between TMX and TRA-8 treatment for ER activated MCF-7
and T47D cells. The observed antagonism between TMX and TRA-8 treatment
for ER inactivated MCF-7 and T47D cells could have resulted from TMX
serving as a CaM antagonist to inhibit CaM-DR5 interactions and thus
inhibit DR5-induced apoptosis. Results from this study provide the basis
for further investigations of the role of CaM/DR5 binding in mediating
breast cancer apoptosis and the cross-talk between DR5-mediated apoptosis
and ER-mediated cell growth pathways, which may lead to the novel
therapeutic strategies for breast cancer.

