Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor blockade in prostate cancer bone
metastases.


Castrate-resistant progression and bone metastases (BM) are hallmarks of
advanced prostate cancer (PCa) for which there is no definitive cure. We
previously reported that human PCa BM highly express fibroblast growth
factor (FGF)-9 (J Clin Invest. 2008;118:2697). We now discovered that
human PCa xenografts growing in the bone of mice induce bone cells to
express components of the FGF/FGF receptor (FGFR) complex, Fgfr1, Fgfr2
and Fgf-2, as assessed by mouse-specific RT-PCR in bone bearing MDA PCa
118b tumors and in the contralateral bone (PCastrate-resistant
progression and bone metastases (BM) are hallmarks of advanced prostate
cancer (PCa) for which there is no definitive cure. We previously
reported that human PCa BM highly express fibroblast growth factor
(FGF)-9 (J Clin Invest. 2008;118:2697). We now discovered that human PCa
xenografts growing in the bone of mice induce bone cells to express
components of the FGF/FGF receptor (FGFR) complex, Fgfr1, Fgfr2 and
Fgf-2, as assessed by mouse-specific RT-PCR in bone bearing MDA PCa 118b
tumors and in the contralateral bone (P<0.001). Similar results were
found in 2 other human PCa xenografts. We then tested antitumor activity
of dovitinib (Novartis), a receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
active against FGFR1-3 (IC50 Castrate-resistant progression and bone
metastases (BM) are hallmarks of advanced prostate cancer (PCa) for which
there is no definitive cure. We previously reported that human PCa BM
highly express fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-9 (J Clin Invest.
2008;118:2697). We now discovered that human PCa xenografts growing in
the bone of mice induce bone cells to express components of the FGF/FGF
receptor (FGFR) complex, Fgfr1, Fgfr2 and Fgf-2, as assessed by
mouse-specific RT-PCR in bone bearing MDA PCa 118b tumors and in the
contralateral bone (P<0.001). Similar results were found in 2 other human
PCa xenografts. We then tested antitumor activity of dovitinib
(Novartis), a receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) active against
FGFR1-3 (IC50 <40 nM) in MDA PCa 118b bone tumors. We found that treated
mice had significantly smaller tumors (P=0.016) than the controls had as
assessed by magnetic resonance imaging. By human- and mouse-specific
RT-PCR analyses we found that 7 days treatment reduces FGFR1 expression
in tumor-bearing bones (P20 weeks in a subset of patients (25%).
Dovitinib inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs)
1-3, with IC50s (10 nM) similar to those of FGFR1-3. To assess the
relative antitumor activity of FGFR blockade (with respect to VEGFR), we
tested a TKI, AZD4547 (AstraZeneca), which inhibits FGFR1-3 (IC50s 20
weeks in a subset of patients (25%). Dovitinib inhibits vascular
endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs) 1-3, with IC50s (10 nM)
similar to those of FGFR1-3. To assess the relative antitumor activity of
FGFR blockade (with respect to VEGFR), we tested a TKI, AZD4547
(AstraZeneca), which inhibits FGFR1-3 (IC50s <3 nM) but not VEGFRs. We
found that AZD4547 had antitumor activity against MDA PCa 118b bone
tumors and reduces the volume of normal bones and of FGFR1 expression in
tumor-associated bone cells (P20 weeks in a subset of patients (25%).
Dovitinib inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs)
1-3, with IC50s (10 nM) similar to those of FGFR1-3. To assess the
relative antitumor activity of FGFR blockade (with respect to VEGFR), we
tested a TKI, AZD4547 (AstraZeneca), which inhibits FGFR1-3 (IC50s <3 nM)
but not VEGFRs. We found that AZD4547 had antitumor activity against MDA
PCa 118b bone tumors and reduces the volume of normal bones and of FGFR1
expression in tumor-associated bone cells (P<0.001). Accordingly, we
observed a decrease in the blood levels of bone-specific alkaline
phosphatase of men enrolled in the dovitinib trial, and this reduction
was associated with the time men remained on treatment (P=0.035) (eg,
those who benefited from treatment). No association was found between PSA
blood levels or urinary N-telopeptides and response to therapy. Finally,
we found that PCa cells and/or osteoblasts express FGFR1 in a fraction of
human PCa BM (assessed by immunohistochemistry). We conclude that
dovitinib therapy benefits a subset (25%) of men with PCa BM and that
FGFR blockade contributes to this antitumor effect, at least partially,
by blockade of FGFR-mediated PCa-bone cross talk. Ongoing studies focused
on further understanding the mechanism of this antitumor activity will
help identify likely responders and elucidate FGF signaling interaction
with other candidate targets (eg, AR, c-Met, IGF, Src, VEGF).

