Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased glycolysis by 14-3-3-mediated LDHA up-regulation
contributes to transformation of early mammary epithelial cells.


The Warburg effect is a distinct cancer hallmark that shifts the
metabolic pathway in cancer cells through elevated aerobic glycolysis for
energy supply and biomass. However, the mechanism of early stage
metabolic dysregulation still remains unclear. 14-3-3 was found to be
over-expressed in the early stages of breast disease and cancer (Atypical
ductal hyperplasia and Ductal carcinoma in situ) and in >40% of breast
cancer patients, correlating with poor patient prognosis. We found that
14-3-3 over-expression in non-transformed human mammary epithelial cells
(HMECs), MCF10A and MCF12A, positively correlated with changes in the
cellular glycolytic activity (increased glucose uptake, increased lactate
production and reduced oxygen consumption). Additionally, 14-3-3
over-expression in HMECs induced soft agar colony formation and
disorganized acini in three dimensional (3D) culture. Interestingly, we
identified that lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) was up-regulated in these
14-3-3 overexpressing HMECs. LDHA knockdown in 14-3-3 overexpressing
cells reduced aerobic glycolysis, decreased soft agar colonies and
partially rescued the abnormal acinar structures, indicating LDHA
upregulation contributed to 14-3-3-mediated aerobic glycolysis and early
transformation. Taken together, our data provide new insight into
metabolic deregulation during the early stages of breast cancer
transformation.

