Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin pharmacogenomics: A genome-wide associate study to
identify genetic and epigenetic biomarkers involved in metformin response.


BACKGROUND Metformin, a widely used anti-diabetic drug, is being
considered as a highly promising agent for treatment and prevention of
many types of cancer, including breast cancer. Although the exact
mechanism of action of metformin is unknown, it is thought that metformin
is an AMPK activator. To better individualize metformin therapy and
explore additional underlying molecular mechanism associated with
metformin action, we conducted a metformin pharmacogenomic study using
266 genomic data-enriched lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs).METHODS
Genome-wide microarray data were generated for all LCLs, including 1.3
million SNPs, 485K DNA methylation probes and 54K mRNA expression probe
sets. Metformin cytotoxicity assay was performed using MTS assay.
Genome-wide association (GWA) analyses and integrated analyses using all
the genomic data and metformin cytotoxicity (IC50 value) were performed
to identify top candidate genes for functional validation in breast
cancer cell lines, MDA-MB 231 and Hs578T, using siRNA screening approach.
Further mechanistic study was performed to investigate the role of
candidates in regulation of AMPK activity.RESULTS GWA analyses in LCLs
identified 198 mRNA expression probe sets and 210 DNA methylation probes
associated with metformin IC50 with p-value BACKGROUND Metformin, a
widely used anti-diabetic drug, is being considered as a highly promising
agent for treatment and prevention of many types of cancer, including
breast cancer. Although the exact mechanism of action of metformin is
unknown, it is thought that metformin is an AMPK activator. To better
individualize metformin therapy and explore additional underlying
molecular mechanism associated with metformin action, we conducted a
metformin pharmacogenomic study using 266 genomic data-enriched
lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs).METHODS Genome-wide microarray data were
generated for all LCLs, including 1.3 million SNPs, 485K DNA methylation
probes and 54K mRNA expression probe sets. Metformin cytotoxicity assay
was performed using MTS assay. Genome-wide association (GWA) analyses and
integrated analyses using all the genomic data and metformin cytotoxicity
(IC50 value) were performed to identify top candidate genes for
functional validation in breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB 231 and Hs578T,
using siRNA screening approach. Further mechanistic study was performed
to investigate the role of candidates in regulation of AMPK
activity.RESULTS GWA analyses in LCLs identified 198 mRNA expression
probe sets and 210 DNA methylation probes associated with metformin IC50
with p-value <10-4, respectively. Analysis of 1.3 million SNPs found 12
loci (a region containing at least 1 SNP of p-value BACKGROUND Metformin,
a widely used anti-diabetic drug, is being considered as a highly
promising agent for treatment and prevention of many types of cancer,
including breast cancer. Although the exact mechanism of action of
metformin is unknown, it is thought that metformin is an AMPK activator.
To better individualize metformin therapy and explore additional
underlying molecular mechanism associated with metformin action, we
conducted a metformin pharmacogenomic study using 266 genomic
data-enriched lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs).METHODS Genome-wide
microarray data were generated for all LCLs, including 1.3 million SNPs,
485K DNA methylation probes and 54K mRNA expression probe sets. Metformin
cytotoxicity assay was performed using MTS assay. Genome-wide association
(GWA) analyses and integrated analyses using all the genomic data and
metformin cytotoxicity (IC50 value) were performed to identify top
candidate genes for functional validation in breast cancer cell lines,
MDA-MB 231 and Hs578T, using siRNA screening approach. Further
mechanistic study was performed to investigate the role of candidates in
regulation of AMPK activity.RESULTS GWA analyses in LCLs identified 198
mRNA expression probe sets and 210 DNA methylation probes associated with
metformin IC50 with p-value <10-4, respectively. Analysis of 1.3 million
SNPs found 12 loci (a region containing at least 1 SNP of p-value <10-5
and 1 SNP of p-value BACKGROUND Metformin, a widely used anti-diabetic
drug, is being considered as a highly promising agent for treatment and
prevention of many types of cancer, including breast cancer. Although the
exact mechanism of action of metformin is unknown, it is thought that
metformin is an AMPK activator. To better individualize metformin therapy
and explore additional underlying molecular mechanism associated with
metformin action, we conducted a metformin pharmacogenomic study using
266 genomic data-enriched lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs).METHODS
Genome-wide microarray data were generated for all LCLs, including 1.3
million SNPs, 485K DNA methylation probes and 54K mRNA expression probe
sets. Metformin cytotoxicity assay was performed using MTS assay.
Genome-wide association (GWA) analyses and integrated analyses using all
the genomic data and metformin cytotoxicity (IC50 value) were performed
to identify top candidate genes for functional validation in breast
cancer cell lines, MDA-MB 231 and Hs578T, using siRNA screening approach.
Further mechanistic study was performed to investigate the role of
candidates in regulation of AMPK activity.RESULTS GWA analyses in LCLs
identified 198 mRNA expression probe sets and 210 DNA methylation probes
associated with metformin IC50 with p-value <10-4, respectively. Analysis
of 1.3 million SNPs found 12 loci (a region containing at least 1 SNP of
p-value <10-5 and 1 SNP of p-value <10-3 within 50kb) that were
associated with metformin IC50. Integrated SNP loci-mRNA expression-IC50
analysis indicated that the SNP loci on chromosome 16 was associated with
metformin IC50 through a trans-regulation of expression of 7 genes with
p-value BACKGROUND Metformin, a widely used anti-diabetic drug, is being
considered as a highly promising agent for treatment and prevention of
many types of cancer, including breast cancer. Although the exact
mechanism of action of metformin is unknown, it is thought that metformin
is an AMPK activator. To better individualize metformin therapy and
explore additional underlying molecular mechanism associated with
metformin action, we conducted a metformin pharmacogenomic study using
266 genomic data-enriched lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs).METHODS
Genome-wide microarray data were generated for all LCLs, including 1.3
million SNPs, 485K DNA methylation probes and 54K mRNA expression probe
sets. Metformin cytotoxicity assay was performed using MTS assay.
Genome-wide association (GWA) analyses and integrated analyses using all
the genomic data and metformin cytotoxicity (IC50 value) were performed
to identify top candidate genes for functional validation in breast
cancer cell lines, MDA-MB 231 and Hs578T, using siRNA screening approach.
Further mechanistic study was performed to investigate the role of
candidates in regulation of AMPK activity.RESULTS GWA analyses in LCLs
identified 198 mRNA expression probe sets and 210 DNA methylation probes
associated with metformin IC50 with p-value <10-4, respectively. Analysis
of 1.3 million SNPs found 12 loci (a region containing at least 1 SNP of
p-value <10-5 and 1 SNP of p-value <10-3 within 50kb) that were
associated with metformin IC50. Integrated SNP loci-mRNA expression-IC50
analysis indicated that the SNP loci on chromosome 16 was associated with
metformin IC50 through a trans-regulation of expression of 7 genes with
p-value <10-4. Integrated methylation-mRNA expression-IC50 analysis
showed that 15 DNA methylation probes in 6 genes were associated with
metformin IC50 through both cis- and trans-regulation of expression of 48
genes with p-value BACKGROUND Metformin, a widely used anti-diabetic
drug, is being considered as a highly promising agent for treatment and
prevention of many types of cancer, including breast cancer. Although the
exact mechanism of action of metformin is unknown, it is thought that
metformin is an AMPK activator. To better individualize metformin therapy
and explore additional underlying molecular mechanism associated with
metformin action, we conducted a metformin pharmacogenomic study using
266 genomic data-enriched lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs).METHODS
Genome-wide microarray data were generated for all LCLs, including 1.3
million SNPs, 485K DNA methylation probes and 54K mRNA expression probe
sets. Metformin cytotoxicity assay was performed using MTS assay.
Genome-wide association (GWA) analyses and integrated analyses using all
the genomic data and metformin cytotoxicity (IC50 value) were performed
to identify top candidate genes for functional validation in breast
cancer cell lines, MDA-MB 231 and Hs578T, using siRNA screening approach.
Further mechanistic study was performed to investigate the role of
candidates in regulation of AMPK activity.RESULTS GWA analyses in LCLs
identified 198 mRNA expression probe sets and 210 DNA methylation probes
associated with metformin IC50 with p-value <10-4, respectively. Analysis
of 1.3 million SNPs found 12 loci (a region containing at least 1 SNP of
p-value <10-5 and 1 SNP of p-value <10-3 within 50kb) that were
associated with metformin IC50. Integrated SNP loci-mRNA expression-IC50
analysis indicated that the SNP loci on chromosome 16 was associated with
metformin IC50 through a trans-regulation of expression of 7 genes with
p-value <10-4. Integrated methylation-mRNA expression-IC50 analysis
showed that 15 DNA methylation probes in 6 genes were associated with
metformin IC50 through both cis- and trans-regulation of expression of 48
genes with p-value <10-4, including 4 methylation probes in 3 of those 6
genes that were cis-correlated with its own gene expression. Ingenuity
pathway analysis of top 62 candidate genes identified four major pathways
and 55 genes within those pathways were selected for functional
validation in breast cancer cell lines. The knockdown experiment showed
that down regulation of 25 genes significantly altered metformin
sensitivity in MDA-MB231, and 14 of them also showed the same effect in
Hs578T. Preliminary mechanistic experiment indicated that knockdown of 7
genes significantly reduced AMPK activity in MDA-MB231 and 3 of them had
same effect in Hs578T.CONCLUSIONS GWAS using a genomic data-enriched LCL
model system, together with functional validation in breast cancer cell
lines, could help us to identify novel genetic and epigenetic biomarkers
involved in metformin response and help us to better understand the
mechanisms of metformin in cancer treatment.

