Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The inhibitory effect of long non-coding RNA MALAT1 on Smads
signaling pathway.


Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) is arbitrarily defined as RNA longer than
200 bases that does not encode mRNA, rRNA or tRNA. LncRNAs are involved
in almost every aspect of cellular and molecular biology. In most cases,
lncRNAs assemble with proteins as RNA-protein complexes to execute their
functions. We hypothesize some important molecular in critical signaling
pathway, such as Smad2 and Smad3 in TGF-/Activin pathway, might have
their lncRAN partner/partners to fine regulate their function. Based on
the hypothesis, we carried on little scale screen and finally identified
lncRAN MALAT1 can exclusively bind to pSmad2 and pSmad3 in hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines Hep3B, SK-Hep1 and cholangiocarcinoma cell line
CCLP1 by methods of RNA Immunoprecipitation (RIP). After quantifying by
qRT-PCR, we found that MALAT1 enriched by anti-pSmad2/3 antbodies is >15
times more than that by IgG control. Co-localization of MALAT1 and pSmad2
and 3 in nuclear speckles of Hep3B cells were also proved by methods of
combining FISH and immunofluorescence staining. Further bioinformatics
analysis and immunoprecipitation reveal that pSmad2/3 binding to MALAT1
through SET domain containing 2 (SETD2) indirectly. Accordingly, if SETD2
was knockdown by siRNA, the binding between pSmad2/3 with MALAT1 was
proved decreasing dramatically by methods of RIP. We also found that
MALAT1 knockdown by shRNA or antisense oligonucleotide will increase the
Smad2/3 signaling activity significantly, which was proved by Smad2/3
luciferase reporter constructs, DNA pull-down using synthesized
oligonucleotide containing consensus sequence of Smads binding elements
(SBE) and enhanced inhibition effect of TGF- on the proliferation of
Hep3B and CCLP1 cells. Next, Protein Phosphatase 1A (PPMA1), which act as
a Smad phosphatase to terminate pSmad2/3 activity, was proved to bind to
MALAT1 and MALAT1 knockdown decreased the binding of pSmad2/3 to PPM1A.
Therefore, MALAT1 (together with SETD2) might act as scaffold to facility
the interaction between pSmad2/3 and PPM1A, which lead to the
dephosphorylation of pSmad2/3. This kinetically decrease of pSmad2/3
dephosphorylation might be the reason of increased Smads signaling
activity in MALAT1 knockdown cells.This work was supported by National
Institutes of Health grants CA102325, CA106280, CA134568, DK077776 (to
T.W.) and CA137729 (to C.H.)

