Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing long non-coding RNAs located within a replication
origin at the human DBF4 locus.


Faithful replication of the entire genome only once per cell cycle is
crucial to cell homeostasis. The importance of proper replication is
manifested by the presence of a large library of strict regulatory
mechanisms that a cell employs to govern entry into the cell cycle.
Failure to regulate this licensing process may result in a state of
aneuploidy which is a driving force in cancer development. Besides the
licensing proteins, the precise mechanism of how a cell chooses or
activates replication initiation points is still poorly understood in
mammalian cells. We have been studying the replication origin located at
the promoter region of the human DBF4 gene. This origin contains two
replication initiation zones that fire in opposite directions
sequentially in a time-dependant manner, which we've termed it
asymmetrical bidirectional replication (ABR). We have recently discovered
that the DBF4 origin region contains a unique distribution and
modifications of histones, which appears to be relevant to the regulation
of replication initiation. In addition, we also found high activities of
long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcription up- and down-stream of the
DBF4 origin. Our preliminary data suggest that the active transcription
of the lncRNAs at this locus may have a regulatory function on the
chromatin conformation, transcription and DNA replication. We are
currently carrying out experiments to gain a better understanding of the
mechanism how lncRNA transcription is regulated in the context of
replication initiation and DBF4 transcription.

