Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paleolithic and Mediterranean diet scores and risk of colorectal
adenoma.


Background: A Westernized diet and lifestyle is associated with risk for
colorectal cancer and adenomas. Evolutionary discordance could explain
this association.Objective: We investigated associations of scores for
two proposed healthy diet patterns, the Paleolithic and Mediterranean
diets, with risk for incident, sporadic colorectal adenomas.Methods: In
the Minnesota Cancer Prevention Research Unit case-control study of
colorectal polyps, 1,248 participants with no history of colorectal
neoplasms completed extensive questionnaires, including a Willett food
frequency questionnaire, prior to an elective, outpatient colonoscopy. Of
these participants 564 were identified as cases and 684 as
colonoscopy-negative controls. An additional group of 535 age and sex
frequency-matched population controls were also recruited. Paleolithic
and the Mediterranean diet scores were calculated and categorized into
quintiles, and associations estimated using unconditional logistic
regression.Results: The Paleolithic and the Mediterranean diet patterns
were similarly inversely associated with colorectal adenomas. The
multivariable-adjusted odds ratios [OR] comparing those in the highest
relative to the lowest quintiles of the Paleolithic and Mediterranean
diet scores, respectively, were 0.51 (95% confidence interval [CI]
0.35-0.76) and 0.50 (95% CI 0.33-0.75) when comparing the cases to the
colonoscopy negative controls, and 0.66 (95% CI 0.45 - 0.96, ptrend =
0.03) and 0.65 (95% CI 0.44 - 0.96, ptrend = 0.03) when comparing the
cases to the population controls. These findings tended to be somewhat
stronger among men and those who were overweight or obese.Conclusion:
These findings suggest that higher adherence to the Paleolithic or
Mediterranean diet patterns may be similarly associated with lower risk
for incident, sporadic colorectal adenomas.

