Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKR1C3 is a potential biomarker of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia sensitivity to the pre-prodrug PR-104.


Despite the success of current therapies for childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), novel treatments are required to treat
high-risk or relapsed patients. PR-104 is a pre-prodrug hydrolyzed in
vivo to PR-104A, which is then metabolized under hypoxia by one-electron
reductases to DNA cross-linking metabolites. PR-104A is also activated
under aerobic conditions by aldo-keto reductase 1C3 (AKR1C3). We
previously showed profound in vivo efficacy of PR-104 (550 mg/kg IP
weekly x 6) against a panel of T- and B-ALL xenografts derived from
direct patient explants in immune-deficient mice. However, testing at
doses as low as 10% of the MTD (50-200 mg/kg) showed retention of
efficacy against a T-ALL but not a B-ALL xenograft. This study aimed to
further evaluate PR-104 as a novel treatment for high-risk T-ALL by
testing its in vivo efficacy against a large panel of pediatric ALL
xenografts both as a single agent and in combination with established
drugs. We also aimed to evaluate AKR1C3 as a biomarker of in vivo PR-104
sensitivity in T-ALL. PR-104A was significantly more cytotoxic in vitro
against 8 T-ALL compared to 8 B-ALL xenografts (median IC50 value 9-fold
higher in B-ALL; PDespite the success of current therapies for childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), novel treatments are required to
treat high-risk or relapsed patients. PR-104 is a pre-prodrug hydrolyzed
in vivo to PR-104A, which is then metabolized under hypoxia by
one-electron reductases to DNA cross-linking metabolites. PR-104A is also
activated under aerobic conditions by aldo-keto reductase 1C3 (AKR1C3).
We previously showed profound in vivo efficacy of PR-104 (550 mg/kg IP
weekly x 6) against a panel of T- and B-ALL xenografts derived from
direct patient explants in immune-deficient mice. However, testing at
doses as low as 10% of the MTD (50-200 mg/kg) showed retention of
efficacy against a T-ALL but not a B-ALL xenograft. This study aimed to
further evaluate PR-104 as a novel treatment for high-risk T-ALL by
testing its in vivo efficacy against a large panel of pediatric ALL
xenografts both as a single agent and in combination with established
drugs. We also aimed to evaluate AKR1C3 as a biomarker of in vivo PR-104
sensitivity in T-ALL. PR-104A was significantly more cytotoxic in vitro
against 8 T-ALL compared to 8 B-ALL xenografts (median IC50 value 9-fold
higher in B-ALL; P<0.0001), indicating that the difference in sensitivity
is a cell-intrinsic phenomenon. Microarray analysis of gene expression,
qRT-PCR and immunoblotting showed that AKR1C3 expression was
significantly higher in T-ALL compared with B-ALL xenografts (PDespite
the success of current therapies for childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL), novel treatments are required to treat high-risk or
relapsed patients. PR-104 is a pre-prodrug hydrolyzed in vivo to PR-104A,
which is then metabolized under hypoxia by one-electron reductases to DNA
cross-linking metabolites. PR-104A is also activated under aerobic
conditions by aldo-keto reductase 1C3 (AKR1C3). We previously showed
profound in vivo efficacy of PR-104 (550 mg/kg IP weekly x 6) against a
panel of T- and B-ALL xenografts derived from direct patient explants in
immune-deficient mice. However, testing at doses as low as 10% of the MTD
(50-200 mg/kg) showed retention of efficacy against a T-ALL but not a
B-ALL xenograft. This study aimed to further evaluate PR-104 as a novel
treatment for high-risk T-ALL by testing its in vivo efficacy against a
large panel of pediatric ALL xenografts both as a single agent and in
combination with established drugs. We also aimed to evaluate AKR1C3 as a
biomarker of in vivo PR-104 sensitivity in T-ALL. PR-104A was
significantly more cytotoxic in vitro against 8 T-ALL compared to 8 B-ALL
xenografts (median IC50 value 9-fold higher in B-ALL; P<0.0001),
indicating that the difference in sensitivity is a cell-intrinsic
phenomenon. Microarray analysis of gene expression, qRT-PCR and
immunoblotting showed that AKR1C3 expression was significantly higher in
T-ALL compared with B-ALL xenografts (P<0.01). We also observed a strong
correlation between AKR1C3 mRNA and protein expression and enzymatic
activity (PDespite the success of current therapies for childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), novel treatments are required to treat
high-risk or relapsed patients. PR-104 is a pre-prodrug hydrolyzed in
vivo to PR-104A, which is then metabolized under hypoxia by one-electron
reductases to DNA cross-linking metabolites. PR-104A is also activated
under aerobic conditions by aldo-keto reductase 1C3 (AKR1C3). We
previously showed profound in vivo efficacy of PR-104 (550 mg/kg IP
weekly x 6) against a panel of T- and B-ALL xenografts derived from
direct patient explants in immune-deficient mice. However, testing at
doses as low as 10% of the MTD (50-200 mg/kg) showed retention of
efficacy against a T-ALL but not a B-ALL xenograft. This study aimed to
further evaluate PR-104 as a novel treatment for high-risk T-ALL by
testing its in vivo efficacy against a large panel of pediatric ALL
xenografts both as a single agent and in combination with established
drugs. We also aimed to evaluate AKR1C3 as a biomarker of in vivo PR-104
sensitivity in T-ALL. PR-104A was significantly more cytotoxic in vitro
against 8 T-ALL compared to 8 B-ALL xenografts (median IC50 value 9-fold
higher in B-ALL; P<0.0001), indicating that the difference in sensitivity
is a cell-intrinsic phenomenon. Microarray analysis of gene expression,
qRT-PCR and immunoblotting showed that AKR1C3 expression was
significantly higher in T-ALL compared with B-ALL xenografts (P<0.01). We
also observed a strong correlation between AKR1C3 mRNA and protein
expression and enzymatic activity (P<0.0001). Moreover, AKR1C3 protein
expression significantly correlated with in vitro sensitivity of
xenografts to PR104A as assessed by Alamar blue cytotoxicity assay
(P=0.0003). The in vivo efficacy of PR-104 was assessed using stringent
objective response criteria modeled after the clinical setting, as well
as time to event measurements. PR-104 administered as a single agent at a
dose that provides pharmacokinetics that are readily achievable in adult
leukemia patients (200 mg/kg weekly x 2) was more effective in inducing
regression and progression delay of 3/3 chemoresistant T-ALL xenografts
compared with an induction-type regimen of vincristine (0.15 mg/kg weekly
x 2), dexamethasone (5 mg/kg daily x 5 x 2) and L-asparaginase (1,000
KU/kg daily x 5 x 2) (VXL). However, no therapeutic enhancement was
observed in the combination of PR-104 with VXL. These results indicate
that PR-104 shows promise as a novel therapy for the treatment of
aggressive and chemoresistant T-ALL, and that AKR1C3 is a potential
biomarker of in vivo PR-104 efficacy. The optimal combinations of PR-104
that result in therapeutic synergy with established drugs remain to be
defined. Our findings have implications for the clinical development of
PR-104, since patients with T-ALL may represent a particularly responsive
population. This study was supported by NCI NO1CM42216 and Proacta, Inc.

