Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Result of TORI L-03, a randomized, multicenter phase II clinical
trial of erlotinib (E) or E + fulvestrant (F) in previously treated
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).


Background: EGFR inhibition is an established therapy for previously
treated NSCLC. Estrogen receptors (ER) and aromatase are expressed in
most NSCLC specimens in both men and women. In preclinical models,
estrogen stimulates NSCLC growth, an effect blocked by F, a pure ER
antagonist. Preclinical models show enhanced anti-tumor effects by
combining EGFR inhibitors with F.Methods: We conducted a Phase II
clinical study to evaluate whether addition of F enhances antitumor
efficacy of E. Men and women with advanced NSCLC and > 1 prior
chemotherapy regimen (unless patient refused) were randomized 2:1 to
receive E (150 mg PO qd) + F (500 mg IM q2wk x 3, then q4wk) or E alone.
Stratification for gender and ECOG (0, 1 vs. 2) was performed. Response
rate (RR) was the primary endpoint. Secondary endpoints included
progression free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and correlation
between clinical endpoints and tumor tissue and blood-based
biomarkers.Results: 106 patients (pts) were randomized from March 2006 to
June 2010. 100 (evaluated population) received E +/- F. E + F was well
tolerated, with adverse events well balanced between arms. For E + F and
E respectively, RR (23.6% vs. 14.8%, p = 0.35), PFS [1.9 vs. 1.8 months,
hazard ratio (HR) 0.85, 95% confidence interval 0.55, 1.33] and OS [9.4
vs. 5.7 months, HR 0.96 (0.6, 1.55)] were similar between arms. EGFR
mutational data could be obtained on 69 pts. EGFR mutations were more
prevalent in the E arm (35% vs. 20%). EGFR mutations strongly predicted
best response, PFS and OS (p Background: EGFR inhibition is an
established therapy for previously treated NSCLC. Estrogen receptors (ER)
and aromatase are expressed in most NSCLC specimens in both men and
women. In preclinical models, estrogen stimulates NSCLC growth, an effect
blocked by F, a pure ER antagonist. Preclinical models show enhanced
anti-tumor effects by combining EGFR inhibitors with F.Methods: We
conducted a Phase II clinical study to evaluate whether addition of F
enhances antitumor efficacy of E. Men and women with advanced NSCLC and >
1 prior chemotherapy regimen (unless patient refused) were randomized 2:1
to receive E (150 mg PO qd) + F (500 mg IM q2wk x 3, then q4wk) or E
alone. Stratification for gender and ECOG (0, 1 vs. 2) was performed.
Response rate (RR) was the primary endpoint. Secondary endpoints included
progression free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and correlation
between clinical endpoints and tumor tissue and blood-based
biomarkers.Results: 106 patients (pts) were randomized from March 2006 to
June 2010. 100 (evaluated population) received E +/- F. E + F was well
tolerated, with adverse events well balanced between arms. For E + F and
E respectively, RR (23.6% vs. 14.8%, p = 0.35), PFS [1.9 vs. 1.8 months,
hazard ratio (HR) 0.85, 95% confidence interval 0.55, 1.33] and OS [9.4
vs. 5.7 months, HR 0.96 (0.6, 1.55)] were similar between arms. EGFR
mutational data could be obtained on 69 pts. EGFR mutations were more
prevalent in the E arm (35% vs. 20%). EGFR mutations strongly predicted
best response, PFS and OS (p < 0.0002 for each). RR, PFS and OS were
similar among EGFR mutants between arms in this small subset (17
patients). Among the 52 pts with EGFR WT tumors, 3 partial responses (PR)
were seen with E + F vs. none for E alone. Clinical benefit rate [CBR (RR
+ stable disease): 54.8% vs. 8.3%, p = 0.0056] was significantly higher
among pts with WT tumors treated with E + F. Trends were observed in
favor of E + F in PFS [2.0 vs. 1.6 months, HR 0.56 (0.29, 1.07)] and OS
[7.4 vs. 5.9 months, HR 0.69 (0.36, 1.31)].Conclusion: E + F was well
tolerated in previously treated NSCLC pts, including men and pre- and
post-menopausal women. The study showed a high RR (23.6%) for E + F, that
was not adequately explained by EGFR mutations. Among EGFR WT pts, a
significantly higher CBR that included 3 PRs was seen with trends towards
improved PFS and OS with E + F as compared to E alone. Evaluation of
tumor tissue biomarkers (including ER- and -, aromatase), blood estrogen
levels and EGFR ligands known to be induced by ER signaling is ongoing to
determine NSCLC subpopulations most likely to benefit from antiestrogens.
[Supported by 1K23CA149079, P50 CA090440, V Foundation for Cancer
Research, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wolfen Family Lung Cancer
Research Program, Stiles Program in Oncology, National Lung Cancer
Partnership and One Ball Matt Memorial Golf Tournament]

