Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study of plasma inflammatory markers and risk of
colorectal cancer in men.


Chronic inflammation may mediate risk of colorectal cancer (CRC);
however, the association between circulating inflammatory markers and
risk of CRC has been inconsistent. We prospectively evaluated the
association of plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and
the soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (sTNFR-2) with incident CRC
among 18,225 men in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study who provided
blood samples in 1994. Through 2008, we documented 274 CRC cases and
matched up to 2 controls by age and date of blood draw. We used
conditional logistic regression to estimate relative risks (RRs) and
confidence intervals (CIs). Compared to men in the lowest quartile of
plasma IL-6 (Q1), men in the highest quartile (Q4) had a multivariate RR
for CRC of 1.54 (95% CI, 0.99-2.40; Ptrend = .02). However, after
excluding cases diagnosed within 2 years of blood draw, the association
was substantially attenuated (Q4 versus Q1, RR = 1.26, 95% CI =
0.78-2.05; Ptrend = .21). In analyses restricted to cases diagnosed at
least 2 years after blood draw, the association of IL-6 with CRC appeared
to differ by body mass index such that the significantly positive
association was only present among lean individuals (Pinteraction = .03).
We did not observe any significant association between CRP or sTNFR-2 and
CRC. Taken together, plasma inflammatory markers are not generally
associated with risk of CRC among men. However, the possibility that
plasma IL-6 is associated with increased risk of CRC among lean men
requires further investigation.

