Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Attenuation of mammary tumor growth by gap junction enhancer.


Normal cells have functional gap junctional intercellular communication
(GJIC), while cancer cells exhibit many defects in cellular communication
that contribute to the loss of tissue homeostasis. It is believed that
restoring GJIC is linked to drug sensitivity and reduction of
tumorigenicity. Previous studies show that GJIC and neoplastic cellular
growth are inversely related and small molecule targeting gap junction
can alter tumor growth. A dose of 25 mg/kg gap junction enhancer (PQ) can
cause a 77% decrease of xenograft T47D breast tumors. In addition these
small molecules can induce a decrease of tumor growth by 110%, 129%, and
73% in the pre, early, and late stages of tumor development of the
transgenic mouse strain, FVB/N-Tg(MMTV-PyVT)634Mul/J. Western blot
analysis shows that the gap junction protein, Cx43, was highly expressed
in the PQ-treated tumors compared to the controls. Data suggests that
enhancement of GJIC attenuates tumor growth; specifically Cx43 plays a
significant role in tumorigenesis. Establishment of a continuous line of
mammary tumor cells from the malignant neoplasm of a female transgenic
mouse demonstrates that PQs can cause an increase of Cx43 expression and
subsequently trigger a decrease of cell viability. Overall, targeting gap
junction by small molecule PQ has shed light to the dynamic of connexins
and gap junctions in mammary tumors.

