Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deep targeted sequencing of 12 breast cancer loci in 4,700 women
across four different ethnicities.


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified multiple genetic
loci associated with breast cancer risk. However, the underlying genetic
structure in these regions is not fully understood and it is likely that
the index GWAS signal originates from one or more yet unidentified causal
variants within the region. We used next-generation sequencing to
characterize 12 GWAS-discovered breast cancer loci in a total of 2,300
breast cancer cases and 2,300 controls across four ethnic populations.
Study subjects were women from the Nurses Health Study (NHS) and the
Multiethnic Cohort (MEC). Region intervals spanned between 46kb and 973kb
and we hybrid-captured and sequenced a total of 5.5Mb. On average, we
were able to capture 82% of the non-repetitive sequence in the targeted
regions, and the average fraction of captured bases sequenced with a
depth %gt20x was more than 95%. After single nucleotide variant (SNV)
calling and quality control, a total of 138,898 SNVs remained for
analysis. 87.4% of those had a minor allele frequency less than 0.5% and
50.2% were private mutations. Across all regions, a total of 81 SNVs
showed evidence for association with breast cancer (P&lt0.001) but we did
not find unequivocal association evidence supporting a causal role for
any individual SNV. However, in two of the regions (2q35 and 11q13), we
were able to refine the GWAS signal and identify a high posterior
probability (&gt90%) set including less than 15 SNVs. We also conducted
burden tests of rare variants (MAF&lt0.005) but did not identify any
significant associations after adjusting for number of tests. However,
rare variants in FGFR2 and a second gene at 10q26 were nominally
associated with breast cancer (P&lt0.05). We are currently imputing
existing breast cancer GWAS using this sequencing data as a reference
panel which will triple our current sample size. These results stress the
importance of large study samples when attempting to refine GWAS signals
and illustrate the challenges facing post-GWAS fine-mapping studies.

