Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WAVE3 regulates NFB signaling and sensitizes cancer cells to
apoptosis and cell death driven by TNF.


ABSTRACTWAVE3, a member of actin nucleation proteins promotes cancer
invasion and metastasis, in part through regulation of expression and
activity of key matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) MMP9, which is centrally
involved in invadopodia-mediated degradation of the extracellular matrix
(ECM). MMP9 is also a major NFB target gene, suggesting a potentially
important role of WAVE3 in this pathway. Mechanistically, we found that
loss of WAVE3 in cancer cells leads to significant inhibition of
TNF-induced NFB activation as a result of de-stabilization of the IB-NFB
complex. Conversely, overexpression of WAVE3 was sufficient to enhance
NFB activity by stabilizing the IB-NFB complex. We used both
pharmacological and genetic manipulations of NFB effector molecules and
identified IKK but not IKK as the primary upstream target for
WAVE3-mediated regulation of NFB activity. We also showed that loss of
WAVE3 resulted in a significant inhibition of TNF-mediated MMP9
expression and activity. Loss of WAVE3 also sensitized cancer cells to
TNF-driven apoptosis and cell death. Finally, we showed that either the
basic rich (BR) or the proline rich (PR) domain of WAVE3 is sufficient to
modulate NFkB signaling. Our results identify a novel function of WAVE3
in NFB signaling, where its activity is essential for the stabilization
of NFB complex that promotes the metastatic phenotype of cancer cells.
Therefore, therapeutic targeting of WAVE3 may prove beneficial for
preventing or reducing the metastatic burden in cancer patients.

