Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aldo-keto reductase family 1B10 (AKR1B10) knockdown or inhibition
suppresses pancreatic tumorigenesis in vitro and in vivo.


AKR1B10 is a member of aldo-keto reductase family and has relatively
specific lipid substrates including carbonyls, retinal and
farnesal/geranylgeranial. Metabolizing these substracts is crucial in
carcinogenesis, particularly for the reduction of
farnesal/geranylgeranial to farnesol/ geranylgeraniol that is an
important step for recycling the intermediates of cholesterol synthesis
and for protein prenylation. Mutant KRAS is a most common oncogene
involved in the development of pancreatic cancer, and KRAS requires
protein prenylation for its activity. The aims of this study were to
determine oncogenic role of AKR1B10 in pancreatic tumorigenesis. Using
shRNA knockdown approach and AKR1B10 inhibitor oleanoic acid (OA) in CD18
human pancreatic carcinoma cells, silencing of AKR1B10 resulted in a
significant inhibition of anchor-dependent growth (1703.7colonies/HPF vs.
679.5colonies/HPF, PAKR1B10 is a member of aldo-keto reductase family and
has relatively specific lipid substrates including carbonyls, retinal and
farnesal/geranylgeranial. Metabolizing these substracts is crucial in
carcinogenesis, particularly for the reduction of
farnesal/geranylgeranial to farnesol/ geranylgeraniol that is an
important step for recycling the intermediates of cholesterol synthesis
and for protein prenylation. Mutant KRAS is a most common oncogene
involved in the development of pancreatic cancer, and KRAS requires
protein prenylation for its activity. The aims of this study were to
determine oncogenic role of AKR1B10 in pancreatic tumorigenesis. Using
shRNA knockdown approach and AKR1B10 inhibitor oleanoic acid (OA) in CD18
human pancreatic carcinoma cells, silencing of AKR1B10 resulted in a
significant inhibition of anchor-dependent growth (1703.7colonies/HPF vs.
679.5colonies/HPF, P<0.01), and AKR1B10 inhibtor OA showed a
dose-dependent inhibition of cell growth with IC50 of 30M. Cell invasion
study showed a significant decreased invasion index in shRNA AKR1B10
knockdown cells compared to vector-control cells (0.27 vs. 1.00). A
significant inhibition of cell migration in shRNA AKR1B10 knockdown cells
compared to vector control cells was observed and showed cell migration
index14.01.8% vs. 9.21.2% at 16 hours, 30.53.5% vs. 21.01.1% at 24 hours,
and 88.93.0% vs. 51.95.7% at 48 hours (PAKR1B10 is a member of aldo-keto
reductase family and has relatively specific lipid substrates including
carbonyls, retinal and farnesal/geranylgeranial. Metabolizing these
substracts is crucial in carcinogenesis, particularly for the reduction
of farnesal/geranylgeranial to farnesol/ geranylgeraniol that is an
important step for recycling the intermediates of cholesterol synthesis
and for protein prenylation. Mutant KRAS is a most common oncogene
involved in the development of pancreatic cancer, and KRAS requires
protein prenylation for its activity. The aims of this study were to
determine oncogenic role of AKR1B10 in pancreatic tumorigenesis. Using
shRNA knockdown approach and AKR1B10 inhibitor oleanoic acid (OA) in CD18
human pancreatic carcinoma cells, silencing of AKR1B10 resulted in a
significant inhibition of anchor-dependent growth (1703.7colonies/HPF vs.
679.5colonies/HPF, P<0.01), and AKR1B10 inhibtor OA showed a
dose-dependent inhibition of cell growth with IC50 of 30M. Cell invasion
study showed a significant decreased invasion index in shRNA AKR1B10
knockdown cells compared to vector-control cells (0.27 vs. 1.00). A
significant inhibition of cell migration in shRNA AKR1B10 knockdown cells
compared to vector control cells was observed and showed cell migration
index14.01.8% vs. 9.21.2% at 16 hours, 30.53.5% vs. 21.01.1% at 24 hours,
and 88.93.0% vs. 51.95.7% at 48 hours (P<0.01). AKR1B10 enzyme activity
was also inhibited by OA as dose- dependent pattern. Western blot
analysis revealed a significant down-regulation of active form KRAS and
its downstream signals including phosphorylated C-Raf, ErK, and MEK1/2 as
well as an up-regulation of E-cadherin. A significant reduction of in
vivo tumor growth was observed in shRNA AKR1B10 knockdown CD18 pancreatic
carcinoma cells implanted in nude mice as compared to vector-control CD18
human pancreatic carcinoma cells (tumor volume: 275.968.9mm3 vs.
582.710.5.6mm3, P=0.03; and tumor weight: 0.250.06g vs. 0.520.07g,
P=0.01). Implanted CD18 pancreatic carcinomas in nude mice were further
treated AKR1B10 inhibitor OA and showed a significant smaller tumor size
(315.650.8mm3 vs. 582.710.5.6mm3, P=0.03) and tumor weight (0.350.05g vs.
0.520.07g, P=0.05) as compared to non OA treated tumor. With
immunohistochemical approach, Ki67-labeled cell proliferation and
phosphorylated ERK1/2 exhibited a significant lower in CD18 pancreatic
carcinoma with either shRNA AKR1B10 knockdown or AKR1B10 inhibition. Our
findings provide evidence that AKR1B10 is a unique enzyme involved in
pancreatic carcinogenesis and in modulation of protein prenylation
(KRAS). Thus, AKR1B10 could be a potential target for prevention and
treatment of highly lethal pancreatic carcinoma. (supported NCI R01
CA164041)

