Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chk1 inhibitor targets replicative stress in melanomas.


There are few effective treatments for metastatic melanoma. Chk1
inhibitors are being trialed for their efficacy in enhancing conventional
chemotherapeutic agents, but their effectiveness as single agents is
relatively unexplored. We have examined the effectiveness of two novel
Chk1 selective inhibitors, AR-323 and AR-678, in a large panel (40) of
melanoma cell lines and normal cell types in vitro, and investigated the
mechanism promoting their cytotoxicity in the drug-sensitive cell lines.
We demonstrate that these drugs display single agent activity, with IC50s
in the nanomolar range. The drugs produce cytotoxic effects in cell lines
that are most sensitive to these drugs, whereas normal cells are only
sensitive to these drugs at the higher concentrations where they have
cytostatic activity. The cytotoxic effect is related to inhibition of S
phase Chk1 which drives cells prematurely from late S phase, resulting in
apoptosis either prior to or during an aberrant mitosis. Time lapse
imaging has shown that the timing of cell death is related to the drug
sensitivity of the cell line. The sensitivity to the Chk1 inhibitors was
correlated with the level of endogenous DNA damage indicating replicative
stress, and increasing endogenous replicative stress increased drug
sensitivity. Chk1 inhibitors are viable single agent therapies which
target melanoma cells with high levels of endogenous DNA damage. This
sensitivity suggests that Chk1 is a critical component of an adaptation
to replicative stress in these cells. It also suggests that markers of
DNA damage may be useful in identifying the melanomas and potentially
other tumour types that are more likely to be sensitive to Chk1
inhibitors as single agents.

