Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of imaging-enhanced models of disseminated
multiple myeloma.


Multiple myeloma is a cancer of the plasma cells that is characterized by
multiple localized lesions in the marrow, particularly of the spine,
skull, and pelvis, although soft tissue lesions also occur. It is the
second most common blood cancer, affecting approximately 45,000 people in
the US. Most preclinical modeling of myeloma employs SC xenografts that
mimic the less common plasmacytoma form of the disease. Systemic (IV)
implants are also used, but studies typically are based on a single
survival endpoint, limiting knowledge about the progression and response
of the disease under treatment. In order to more quantitatively monitor
disseminated disease progression and response to treatment, we have
characterized two human (JJN3 and MM1S) and one murine (5TGM1) myeloma
models that have been modified to express luciferase. All models were
characterized by 100% tumor take rate and focal dissemination of the
disease to the spine and skull that mimic clinical experience. These
models showed individual and reproducible patterns of spread to other
sites, and differed in their sensitivities to standards of care. Analysis
of tumor doubling times, tumor titrations, luminescence-based growth
delay, and survival all indicated that the bioluminescence signal was a
reliable quantitative indicator of viable tumor burden, even under
treatment with clinical standard of care agents. Luciferase labeling and
the tight correlation between luminescence signal and viable tumor burden
raises the possibility of differential real-time tracking of tumor
progression and response at individual sites.

