Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of robust copy number assays for tumor FFPE tissues.


Somatic copy number variations (CNVs) are frequently observed in cancer,
likely a result high genomic and structural instability characteristic of
cancer. CNVs have been shown to be important drivers for many oncogenic
pathways and are associated with drug sensitivity and resistance.
Therefore, these genetic alterations are valuable candidate biomarkers
for patient stratification and predictors for therapeutic responses to
targeted therapies. A fundamental challenge for copy number determination
in tumor FFPE DNA is that the material is often degraded and modified by
fixation, processing and storage. Here we present a PCR-based copy number
assay utilizing target specific pre-amplification and a microfluidics
detection system. 45 genes were selected based on literature and their
potential relevance to therapeutic targets. This high-throughput platform
showed excellent specificity and dynamic range from 1 to 100ng input
genomic DNA. A panel of matched frozen and FFPE DNAs from cell lines were
used for cross -validation with copy number identified by array CGH. A
medium-center method is employed to calculate copy number and assess the
extent of degradation in sample DNAs. To evaluate clinical utility of the
technology, copy number alteration from a collection of matched primary
and metastatic breast tumors as well as correlation between copy number
changes and gene expression will be reported. We will also report results
from a survey of other tumor types, including gastric cancer,
mesothelioma, and HER2+ breast cancer.

