Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: XCE853: A novel anticancer candidate preferentially killing
drug-resistant human tumor cells.


Cancer drug pan-resistance is associated with patients having a disease
progression despite receiving new treatments. Often resistance arises in
two steps, initially, the tumor responds to the drug, but not all tumor
cells are killed leading to a selection of tumor cells that do not
respond to any current drug. The nature of the residual disease is linked
to different conditions such the efflux pumps, the quiescent cells, the
stem cells, the DNA repair deficiency or the EMT. Here, we have
identified a family of synthetic compounds displaying a preferential
antiproliferative activity on drug resistant human cancer cells. The lead
compound XCE853 is 5 to 94 more potent on drug resistant cancer cell
lines compared to their parental tumor cell lines (HL60/HL60-Doxorubicin;
MCF7/MCF7-Doxorubicin; A2780/A2780-Cisplatin and A549/AA549-Taxotere).
XCE853 induced a strong and irreversible cytolysis of MCF7-Adriamycin
cells after a short exposure in vitro (250nM, 6 hours). The mechanism of
action of XCE853 is independent of efflux pumps and involves an early
high ROS production leading to cell death by autophagy. The antitumor
activity of XCE853 is also observed using in vivo xenograft models of
human NSCLC. Altogether, these data support further efforts on this drug
candidate to better understand its molecular mechanism of action and the
description of the most sensitive tumor types.

