Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncolytic adenovirus-armed p53 induces apoptosis significantly
through upregulating miR-93 and 106b in human osteosarcoma cells..


Bone and soft tissue sarcomasare the third most common cancer in children
and account for 15.4% of all childhood malignancies. About one fourth of
the patients show a poor response to conventional chemo-radiotherapy,
resulting in subsequent recurrence and leading to a poor prognosis.
Therefore, the development of a novel therapeutic strategy is required.
We previously developed an oncolytic adenovirus, OBP-301 (Telomelysin),
in which the hTERT gene promoter drives the expression of the E1A and E1B
genes linked to an internal ribosome entry site (IRES). Recently, we
revealed that OBP-301 shows the cytopathic activity in human bone and
soft tissue sarcoma cells. However, some human osteosarcoma cells
(MNNG/HOS, SaOS-2) were less sensitive to cytopathic activity of OBP-301.
Therefore, we developed a telomerase-specific p53-armed oncolytic
adenovirus (OBP-702). In this study, we examined the antitumor effect of
OBP-702 in OBP-301-resistant osteosarcoma cells, and revealed the
mechanism. We compared the antitumor effects of OBP-702 and OBP-301 using
XTT assay. The 50% inhibiting dose (ID50) value of OBP-702 and OBP-301
for each cell was calculated using cell viability data obtained on day 5
after virus infection. We further evaluated the expression of p53, p21
and cleaved-PARP proteins using western blot analysis in
OBP-301-resistant osteosarcoma cells after infection with OBP-702 or
Ad-p53, which is a p53-expressing replication-defective adenovirus.
OBP-702 showed more cytopathic activity compared to OBP-301. The ID50
value of OBP-702 was much lower than that of OBP-301 in all cell lines.
Western blot analysis showed OBP-702 infection induced the cleavage of
PARP in a dose-dependent manner and cell cycle analysis also showed that
OBP-702 induced the highest percentages of sub-G1 population in MNNG/HOS
cells compared to Ad-p53 or OBP-301. These results suggest that OBP-702
induces increased apoptosis compared to Ad-p53 or OBP-301. OBP-702
infection induced more profound p53 expression than Ad-p53, but
p53-downstream target p21 proteins were not activated by OBP-702. The
expression levels of miR-93 and miR-106b increased after OBP-702
infection. When SaOS-2 cells were infected with Ad-p53 at an MOI of 10
for 48 hours, pre-transfection with miR-93, miR-106b or both efficiently
suppressed Ad-p53-induced p21 expression. These results suggest that
OBP-702 suppresses p21 expression through E1A-dependent upregulation of
miR-93 and miR-106b. In conclusion, we have clearly demonstrated that the
p53-expressing oncolytic adenovirus OBP-702 has a much stronger antitumor
effect than OBP-301 and Ad-p53. Oncolytic adenovirus-mediated p53 gene
transduction would induce profound p53 expression without p21 activation
regulated by miR-93 and 106b, resulting in the enhancement of antitumor
effect.

