Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparison of 25-OH-vitamin D levels and VDR polymorphisms in
healthy and patients with breast intraepithelial neoplasia or cancer .


Background: Vitamin D is mainly synthesized in the skin through UVB
irradiation, while a minor intake comes from the diet. Vitamin D is
converted in the liver to 25-hydroxyvitamin D-(25(OH)D) and circulating
levels of this metabolite is an appropriate index of vitamin D status. A
further hydroxylation occurs to produce the biologically active
metabolite 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.Epidemiological studies have suggested
a role for vitamin D in cancer prevention showing an inverse relationship
between incidence of cancers and mortality and 25(OH)D plasma levels.
Vitamin D exerts its activity through a nuclear receptor (VDR) that
regulates the expression of multiple genes, including genes for cell
cycle regulation, differentiation, and apoptosisMethods: We have
collected plasma from pre and post menopausal healthy women (HW) and
newly diagnosed patients with an intraepithelial neoplasia (IEN) or
breast carcinoma (BC). We measured circulating levels of 25(OH)D3 using
LC-MS/MS. The median values were then correlated with the disease status.
In a subgroup, we performed a correlation with VDR polymorphisms (SNPs)
and disease recurrences. BsmI, FokI, TaqI and ApaI SNPs were determined
using the Applied Biosystems Taqman Allelic Discrimination Assay.Results:
25(OH)D3 was measured in 249 HW, 175 subjects with IEN and 168 BC
patients undergoing surgery. Age and BMI were taken into account for
adjustments the median age being 51, 46 and 59 years and median BMI being
24, 23 and 25.6 kg/m2 in the HW, IEN and BC categories, respectively.
Median 25(OH)D3 were respectively: 37.2, (inter-quartile range, IQR
25.0-49.7) 43 (IQR 30.0-60.0) and 42 (IQR 30.0-60.0) nmol/L respectively.
The LS means with BC + IEN combined versus HW were 43 (IQR 40.8-45.2) vs
46.4 (IQR 43.9-49.0) nmol/L. The levels of 25(OH)D3 are statistical
different between healthy versus affected subjects (p = 0.05). We also
conducted an exploratory analysis in a subgroup of 228 subjects to
evaluate the correlation of VDR polymorphisms and the disease free
survival (DFS for breast recurrence or new event). With a follow-up of
160 months and a total of 70 breast events, the homozygote and
heterozygote subjects for VDR ApaI polymorphism had a worst DFS compared
to the wild type ones (log rank test p= 0.04).Conclusions: our data
confirm the possible role of the vitamin D and its receptor in the
carcinogenesis process. It is not clear when 25(OH)D level starts to
decline and thus may influence the disease progression. In accordance
with other research groups the ApaI polymorphism may have, together with
other VDR SNPs, an influence on BC incidence and recurrence. Further
correlations and analysis of the VDR genotype are ongoing. A prospective
study to clarify is recommended the issue of the timing of 25(OH)D levels
measurement is warranted.

