Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of premalignancy of esophageal mucosa by multispectral
imaging of autofluorescence from protoporphyrin IX.


Background: We have recently found that chemically induced esophageal
carcinoma emitted a strong fluorescence originating from protoporphyrin
IX (PpIX). The aim of this study was to detect early changes in the
esophageal mucosa for clarifying the mechanism of carcinogenesis. For
this purpose, we established a novel method for detection of
premalignancy based on multispectral fluorescence imaging (MFI) of
autofluorescence (AF) from tissue. Methods: We made an
N-nitroso-methylbutylamine (NMBA)-induced rat esophageal tumor model (15
mg/L in daily drinking water) and extracted the esophagus. The mucosal
side was illuminated by an excitation blue light (405 nm) and the emitted
light was captured on an EM-CCD detector (512 x 512 pixels), of which
each pixel collected a spectrum ranging from 450 nm to 800 nm. The
extracted tissues were further analyzed to measure porphyrins by
high-performance lipid chromatography (HPLC). Results: When the mucosa
was illuminated by the excitation light, AF with a peak at 630 nm was
observed in preneoplastic lesions and HPLC revealed that the origin of AF
was PpIX. MFI based on the spectral difference clearly visualized
preneoplastic lesions: the spectral pattern of the AF from preneoplastic
lesions was different from that from normal mucosa, and the spectral
difference became greater with increase in the duration of NMBA
administration and the concentration of PpIX also increased with the time
course. Conclusion: The results showed that MFI of tissue AF has a
potential for cancer screening.

