Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of BRCA1 associated protein-1 (ubiquitin
carboxy-terminal hydrolase) in melanoma.


In the US alone, 44,250 men and 32,000 women are expected to be diagnosed
with melanoma in 2012. Metastatic melanoma is the leading cause of skin
cancer-related deaths worldwide. In the metastatic cutaneous melanoma
(CM), anti-BRAF and anti-MEK agents have recently been shown to attenuate
progression of the disease, though durable responses are still rare (NEJM
articles). For metastatic ocular melanoma (OM), there is currently no
established treatment strategy. Thus, one major unmet need in the field
is the identification of novel driver physiologies which underpin the
progression of disease and which can be leveraged for therapeutic gain.
One new component in the ubiquitination pathway that has been recently
implicated in the biology of both CM and OM is BRCA1 associated protein-1
(BAP1). Preliminary data from our laboratory showed that germline
inactivating mutations of BAP1 predispose individuals to both CM and
metastatic OM along with other neoplasms. In this study we examined the
effects of BAP1 knockdown and overexpression on melanoma cell lines and
primary melanocytes. BAP1 gene is mutated in melanoma and reported to be
tumor suppressor, however suppression of BAP1 led to paradoxical growth
inhibition, suggesting that the effects of BAP1 may be context dependent.
Currently we are performing global gene expression and allele specific
functional studies in an effort to identify novel substrates and other
pathways impacted by BAP1. These findings may provide mechanistic insight
into the role of BAP1 in melanoma pathogenesis.

