Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational analysis of the tyrosine kinome in serous and clear
cell endometrial cancers.


Endometrial cancers (ECs) arise from the inner epithelial lining of the
uterus. At diagnosis, the majority of ECs are carcinomas of endometrioid,
serous, or clear cell histologies, or an admixture of at least two of
these histological subtypes. Serous and clear ECs are rare at
presentation but contribute disproportionately to mortality from EC.
Thus, there is an acute need for novel therapeutic approaches to treat
serous and clear cell ECs. Small molecule inhibitors directed against
tyrosine kinases have shown clinical efficacy in other types of cancer in
which the target kinase is mutationally activated. Here, we used Sanger
sequencing to systematically search for somatic mutations within 527
exons that encode the catalytic domains of 85 tyrosine kinases from 23
serous, 10 clear cell, and 5 mixed histology ECs. For mutated genes, we
extended the screen to another 73 ECs (21 serous, 10 clear cell, 42
endometrioid). Genes that were mutated in both the primary and secondary
screens were resequenced in a tertiary screen to search for mutations in
all coding exons among the entire panel of 111 endometrial tumors.
Overall, we uncovered nonsynonymous somatic mutations of ACK1, DDR1, and
KDR in 5.4%, 3.6%, and 1% of ECs. Serous tumors had mutated ACK1, DDR1
and KDR in 2.3%, 4.5%, and 2.3% of cases. Clear cell tumors had mutated
ACK1 in 5% of cases. Endometrioid tumors had mutated DDR1 in 2.3% of
cases. Immunoblotting confirmed that ACK1 and DDR1 are endogenously
expressed in endometrial cancer cell-lines. Eighty-seven percent (7 of 8)
of ACK1 mutations and 50% (2 of 4) of DDR1 mutations are predicted to
impact protein function. To our knowledge this is the first report of
ACK1 and DDR1 mutations in endometrial cancer. Our findings warrant
future studies to determine whether the ACK1 and DDR1 mutations uncovered
here are pathogenic.

