Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic ablation of lymphoma development inp53 knockout mice
reveals a novel model of osteosarcoma and hemangiosarcoma.


Homozygous knockout of p53 in mice leads to early mortality from
lymphoma, with almost complete penetrance, thus hampering the study of
other tumor histotypes related to p53. To ablate lymphoma development, we
crossed p53 knockout mice with Rag2-/-;Il2rg-/- (RGKO) mice, which lack
T, B and NK cells. We then compared the tumor spectrum of homozygous
(p53-/-) and heterozygous (p53+/-) mice with those of mice lacking
lymphocytes (RGKO-p53-/- and RGKO-p53+/-, respectively). All mice were of
BALB/c genetic background. Lymphoma incidence in p53-/- mice exceeded
80%, whereas in RGKO-p53-/- it was near zero. The prevalent tumor of
RGKO-p53-/- mice was hemangiosarcoma (incidence was about 60%in both
sexes, median latency 19 weeks), other tumors included soft tissue
sarcomas (incidence 10%), osteosarcomas and mammary carcinomas. Changes
in tumor spectrum occurred also in p53 heterozygotes, in which lymphomas
were relatively rare (Homozygous knockout of p53 in mice leads to early
mortality from lymphoma, with almost complete penetrance, thus hampering
the study of other tumor histotypes related to p53. To ablate lymphoma
development, we crossed p53 knockout mice with Rag2-/-;Il2rg-/- (RGKO)
mice, which lack T, B and NK cells. We then compared the tumor spectrum
of homozygous (p53-/-) and heterozygous (p53+/-) mice with those of mice
lacking lymphocytes (RGKO-p53-/- and RGKO-p53+/-, respectively). All mice
were of BALB/c genetic background. Lymphoma incidence in p53-/- mice
exceeded 80%, whereas in RGKO-p53-/- it was near zero. The prevalent
tumor of RGKO-p53-/- mice was hemangiosarcoma (incidence was about 60%in
both sexes, median latency 19 weeks), other tumors included soft tissue
sarcomas (incidence 10%), osteosarcomas and mammary carcinomas. Changes
in tumor spectrum occurred also in p53 heterozygotes, in which lymphomas
were relatively rare (<20%). Male RGKO-p53+/- had an increased incidence
of hemangiosarcomas, reaching 25%, whereas females had an increased
incidence of osteosarcomas, reaching 20%. The latter shared with human
osteosarcoma the involvement of limbs and a high metastatic ability, in
particular to the lungs. Molecular studies of tumors, in vitro cultured
tumor cells and established cell lines showed specific alterations in the
expression of p53-related genes (p16Ink4a, p19Arf, p15Ink4b, p21Cip1) and
high expression levels of insulin-like growth factors and their
receptors. In conclusion, genetic ablation of lymphoma in p53 knockout
mice led to the development of new models of sarcoma development that can
be now explored to study the development and metastatic spread of
hemangiosarcoma and osteosarcoma.

