Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analyzing in vivo conformational changes of a transcription
factor, c-Myb, using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)
technology.


The c-myb proto-oncogene was first identified as the normal cellular
counterpart to the v-myb oncogene identified in Avian Myeloblastosis
virus (AMV), a retrovirus that transforms immature hematopoietic cells in
tissue culture and induces leukemias in animals. However, the normal
c-Myb protein is not oncogenic, in part because of conformational and
auto-inhibitory interactions that keep its transforming activity in
check. The c-Myb protein functions as both an activator and repressor of
transcription and its regulation involves sequences found in the negative
regulatory domain. We hypothesize that c-Myb protein undergoes
conformational changes due to post-translational modifications and
protein interactions that may help direct it to different sets of target
gene promoters. In addition, there could also be upstream signaling
pathways, for example the signals that direct cells either to proliferate
or to undergo differentiation, that could contribute to its transforming
potential. To address this, we are utilizing FRET technology to elucidate
whether the intramolecular interactions of c-Myb or its interactions with
various co-factors and co-activators change in vivo in response to
extracellular signals that trigger a switch from proliferation to
differentiation. The goal is to determine how the conformations and
protein-protein interactions of c-Myb change in cells in response to
signals that control cell fate.

