Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequencing of mismatch repair deficient tumors identifies a
synthetic lethal interaction with other DNA repair pathways.


DNA replication errors that persist as mismatch mutations make up the
molecular fingerprint of mismatch repair (MMR) deficient tumors and
convey them with different prognostic and therapeutic outcome upon
chemotherapy. Using whole-genome and -exome sequencing, we here
characterize the somatic mutation patterns underlying MMR-deficient
tumors. In particular, we show that mutation frequencies are >30-fold
increased relative to MMR-proficient tumors: insertion-deletion (indel)
mutations are largely confined to homopolymers, whereas substitutions
mainly consist of single basepair transitions located near indels. Since
exonic indels result in loss-of-function frameshift mutations, indels
were less frequent in the exome due to negative selection. However, a
small fraction of exonic indels was positively selected and occurred as
hotspot mutations, preferentially affecting the DNA double-strand break
(DSB) repair by homologous recombination (HR) pathway (on average, each
MMR-deficient tumor contained 2.6 indels in this pathway). We quantified
DSB repair by immunofluorescent staining of RAD51 foci in 8 MMR-deficient
and 4 MMR-proficient tumor cultures in the presence of the PARP inhibitor
olaparib. We did not observe a difference in RAD51 foci formation between
MMR-deficient and MMR-proficient tumor cultures in the absence of
olaparib (102% of cells versus 132% showed RAD51 foci formation, P=0.74).
Upon 10M olaparib exposure, MMR-deficient tumor cultures accumulated less
RAD51-positive foci (193% in MMR-deficient versus 374% in MMR-proficient
cells; P=0.02), thereby confirming that these tumors were at least partly
deficient in DNA DSB repair by HR. We also investigated the degree of
unrepaired DNA damage by H2AX immunofluorescence and olaparib drastically
increased the number of H2AX foci in all cells regardless of their MMR
status. Furthermore, MMR-deficient cultures exhibited a dose-dependent
reduction in proliferation under olaparib, whereas MMR-proficient cells
did not respond (PDNA replication errors that persist as mismatch
mutations make up the molecular fingerprint of mismatch repair (MMR)
deficient tumors and convey them with different prognostic and
therapeutic outcome upon chemotherapy. Using whole-genome and -exome
sequencing, we here characterize the somatic mutation patterns underlying
MMR-deficient tumors. In particular, we show that mutation frequencies
are >30-fold increased relative to MMR-proficient tumors:
insertion-deletion (indel) mutations are largely confined to
homopolymers, whereas substitutions mainly consist of single basepair
transitions located near indels. Since exonic indels result in
loss-of-function frameshift mutations, indels were less frequent in the
exome due to negative selection. However, a small fraction of exonic
indels was positively selected and occurred as hotspot mutations,
preferentially affecting the DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair by
homologous recombination (HR) pathway (on average, each MMR-deficient
tumor contained 2.6 indels in this pathway). We quantified DSB repair by
immunofluorescent staining of RAD51 foci in 8 MMR-deficient and 4
MMR-proficient tumor cultures in the presence of the PARP inhibitor
olaparib. We did not observe a difference in RAD51 foci formation between
MMR-deficient and MMR-proficient tumor cultures in the absence of
olaparib (102% of cells versus 132% showed RAD51 foci formation, P=0.74).
Upon 10M olaparib exposure, MMR-deficient tumor cultures accumulated less
RAD51-positive foci (193% in MMR-deficient versus 374% in MMR-proficient
cells; P=0.02), thereby confirming that these tumors were at least partly
deficient in DNA DSB repair by HR. We also investigated the degree of
unrepaired DNA damage by H2AX immunofluorescence and olaparib drastically
increased the number of H2AX foci in all cells regardless of their MMR
status. Furthermore, MMR-deficient cultures exhibited a dose-dependent
reduction in proliferation under olaparib, whereas MMR-proficient cells
did not respond (P<0.001 by repeated measurement). On average, 1, 3 and
10M of olaparib decreased proliferation of MMR-deficient cells by
respectively 15%, 20% and 42% (P=0.02, PDNA replication errors that
persist as mismatch mutations make up the molecular fingerprint of
mismatch repair (MMR) deficient tumors and convey them with different
prognostic and therapeutic outcome upon chemotherapy. Using whole-genome
and -exome sequencing, we here characterize the somatic mutation patterns
underlying MMR-deficient tumors. In particular, we show that mutation
frequencies are >30-fold increased relative to MMR-proficient tumors:
insertion-deletion (indel) mutations are largely confined to
homopolymers, whereas substitutions mainly consist of single basepair
transitions located near indels. Since exonic indels result in
loss-of-function frameshift mutations, indels were less frequent in the
exome due to negative selection. However, a small fraction of exonic
indels was positively selected and occurred as hotspot mutations,
preferentially affecting the DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair by
homologous recombination (HR) pathway (on average, each MMR-deficient
tumor contained 2.6 indels in this pathway). We quantified DSB repair by
immunofluorescent staining of RAD51 foci in 8 MMR-deficient and 4
MMR-proficient tumor cultures in the presence of the PARP inhibitor
olaparib. We did not observe a difference in RAD51 foci formation between
MMR-deficient and MMR-proficient tumor cultures in the absence of
olaparib (102% of cells versus 132% showed RAD51 foci formation, P=0.74).
Upon 10M olaparib exposure, MMR-deficient tumor cultures accumulated less
RAD51-positive foci (193% in MMR-deficient versus 374% in MMR-proficient
cells; P=0.02), thereby confirming that these tumors were at least partly
deficient in DNA DSB repair by HR. We also investigated the degree of
unrepaired DNA damage by H2AX immunofluorescence and olaparib drastically
increased the number of H2AX foci in all cells regardless of their MMR
status. Furthermore, MMR-deficient cultures exhibited a dose-dependent
reduction in proliferation under olaparib, whereas MMR-proficient cells
did not respond (P<0.001 by repeated measurement). On average, 1, 3 and
10M of olaparib decreased proliferation of MMR-deficient cells by
respectively 15%, 20% and 42% (P=0.02, P<0.001 and PDNA replication
errors that persist as mismatch mutations make up the molecular
fingerprint of mismatch repair (MMR) deficient tumors and convey them
with different prognostic and therapeutic outcome upon chemotherapy.
Using whole-genome and -exome sequencing, we here characterize the
somatic mutation patterns underlying MMR-deficient tumors. In particular,
we show that mutation frequencies are >30-fold increased relative to
MMR-proficient tumors: insertion-deletion (indel) mutations are largely
confined to homopolymers, whereas substitutions mainly consist of single
basepair transitions located near indels. Since exonic indels result in
loss-of-function frameshift mutations, indels were less frequent in the
exome due to negative selection. However, a small fraction of exonic
indels was positively selected and occurred as hotspot mutations,
preferentially affecting the DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair by
homologous recombination (HR) pathway (on average, each MMR-deficient
tumor contained 2.6 indels in this pathway). We quantified DSB repair by
immunofluorescent staining of RAD51 foci in 8 MMR-deficient and 4
MMR-proficient tumor cultures in the presence of the PARP inhibitor
olaparib. We did not observe a difference in RAD51 foci formation between
MMR-deficient and MMR-proficient tumor cultures in the absence of
olaparib (102% of cells versus 132% showed RAD51 foci formation, P=0.74).
Upon 10M olaparib exposure, MMR-deficient tumor cultures accumulated less
RAD51-positive foci (193% in MMR-deficient versus 374% in MMR-proficient
cells; P=0.02), thereby confirming that these tumors were at least partly
deficient in DNA DSB repair by HR. We also investigated the degree of
unrepaired DNA damage by H2AX immunofluorescence and olaparib drastically
increased the number of H2AX foci in all cells regardless of their MMR
status. Furthermore, MMR-deficient cultures exhibited a dose-dependent
reduction in proliferation under olaparib, whereas MMR-proficient cells
did not respond (P<0.001 by repeated measurement). On average, 1, 3 and
10M of olaparib decreased proliferation of MMR-deficient cells by
respectively 15%, 20% and 42% (P=0.02, P<0.001 and P<0.001, respectively
versus untreated cells), whereas no effect was seen in MMR-proficient
tumors (P=NS for all concentrations of olaparib). Finally,
high-throughput profiling of hotspot mutations also more accurately
detected microsatellite instability (MSI) in several cancer types
compared to standard diagnostic methods. Sequencing of MMR-deficient
tumors thus identified an unexpected synthetically lethal interaction
between the major DNA repair pathways, offering novel treatment
opportunities for MMR-deficient tumors.

