Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between variation in LEP A19G and adipokine
concentrations in plasma and breast tissues.


Introduction: Obesity is a well-established postmenopausal breast cancer
risk factor, and an indicator of poor prognosis. The adipokines,
adiponectin and leptin, may be essential to our understanding these
associations. Plasma concentrations of adiponectin are inversely
correlated, while plasma concentrations of leptin are positively
correlated with obesity. Epidemiological studies of these adipokines and
breast cancer risk are suggestive of a positive association for plasma
leptin and an inverse association for plasma adiponectin. We studied
whether genetic variation in several adipokine genes, leptin (LEP),
leptin receptor (LEPR), adiponectin (ADIPOQ), and adiponectin receptors 1
and 2 (ADIPOR1/2) was associated with adipokine concentrations measured
in plasma and breast tissue in a study of healthy women.Methods: Breast
tissues and plasma were collected from 85 women undergoing reduction
mammoplasty between 1997 and 2009. Plasma and breast adiponectin and
leptin concentrations were measured by commercially-available ELISA kits.
DNA was extracted from dissected breast tissues and common, functional
SNPs in LEP (rs2167270), LEPR (rs1137101), ADIPOQ (rs1501299), ADIPOR1
(rs2275737), and ADIPOR2 (rs1044471) were genotyped. Differences in
least-squares mean concentration of plasma and breast adipokines,
adjusted for age, race, and body mass index (kg/m2), were compared using
an F test. Associations between genotypes and adipokines measured in
plasma and tissue were estimated using adjusted regression models, with
log-transformed adipokines as dependent variables. Results for each
genotype are given as e, representing the ratio of plasma adipokines
among those carrying a variant genotype relative to those carrying the
wild-type.Results: Genotype of rs2167270 was significantly associated
with plasma adiponectin and leptin, and breast leptin concentrations.
Compared to the wild-type, homozygous variant allele carriers of the LEP
A19G polymorphism had 27% lower plasma adiponectin (Ratio 0.73, 95% CI:
0.54, 0.98; P=0.03) and plasma leptin (Ratio 0.73, 95% CI: 0.55, 0.96;
P=0.02). Additionally, compared to wild-type, heterozygous variant allele
carriers of this polymorphism had 39% lower breast leptin (Ratio 0.61,
95% CI: 0.39, 0.97; P=0.03), although there appeared to be higher breast
leptin among homozygous variant allele carriers (Ratio 1.67, 95% CI:
0.86, 3.26). No associations were observed for LEPR (rs1137101), ADIPOQ
(rs1501299), ADIPOR1 (rs2275737), or ADIPOR2 (rs1044471) and adipokines
measured in plasma or tissue.Conclusion: Variant alleles of rs2167270
were associated with lower plasma adiponectin and leptin concentrations,
as well as lower breast leptin concentrations. This study provides
evidence for a role of variation in adipokine genes in endogenous
adipokine concentrations both in circulation and within local breast
tissues.

