Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer compound curaxin CBL0137, that simultaneously
suppresses NF-B and activates p53, is highly effective in two independent
mouse models of neuroblastoma.


Background: We have reported that the anti-malarial drug, quinacrine
(QC), has significant in vivo anti-tumor activity (Neznanov et al, Cell
Cycle, 2009, 8: 1-11). We have since identified curaxins, a more potent
class of compounds with similar mechanism of action, whose anti-cancer
activity results from chromatin-trapping of the Facilitates Chromatin
Transcription (FACT) complex (Gasparian et al, Science Transl. Med, 2011,
3, 95ra74). These novel nongenotoxic agents, like QC, cause simultaneous
p53 activation and NF-kB inhibition and tumor cell death. We have now
studied the effects of QC and one of the most active curaxins, CBL0137,
in the TH-MYCN mouse model of neuroblastoma as well as a nude mouse
xenograft model of the disease.Methods: Cohorts of homozygous TH-MYCN
mice with small palpable tumors or of human MYCN-amplified BE(2)-C
neuroblastoma tumor-bearing nude mice (n=10) were treated with QC
(TH-MYCN mice only) or CBL0137, alone or combined with chemotherapeutic
drugs.Results: QC alone had no significant effect on tumor progression
and did not enhance cisplatin or VP16 activity. However, strong
anti-tumor activity was observed when QC was combined with
cyclophosphamide (CPM) (4/10 QC/CPM-treated vs 0/10 CPM-treated long-term
survivors, PBackground: We have reported that the anti-malarial drug,
quinacrine (QC), has significant in vivo anti-tumor activity (Neznanov et
al, Cell Cycle, 2009, 8: 1-11). We have since identified curaxins, a more
potent class of compounds with similar mechanism of action, whose
anti-cancer activity results from chromatin-trapping of the Facilitates
Chromatin Transcription (FACT) complex (Gasparian et al, Science Transl.
Med, 2011, 3, 95ra74). These novel nongenotoxic agents, like QC, cause
simultaneous p53 activation and NF-kB inhibition and tumor cell death. We
have now studied the effects of QC and one of the most active curaxins,
CBL0137, in the TH-MYCN mouse model of neuroblastoma as well as a nude
mouse xenograft model of the disease.Methods: Cohorts of homozygous
TH-MYCN mice with small palpable tumors or of human MYCN-amplified
BE(2)-C neuroblastoma tumor-bearing nude mice (n=10) were treated with QC
(TH-MYCN mice only) or CBL0137, alone or combined with chemotherapeutic
drugs.Results: QC alone had no significant effect on tumor progression
and did not enhance cisplatin or VP16 activity. However, strong
anti-tumor activity was observed when QC was combined with
cyclophosphamide (CPM) (4/10 QC/CPM-treated vs 0/10 CPM-treated long-term
survivors, P<0.001). The effect of CBL0137 alone, administered either
orally or iv, on tumor progression was more dramatic. Oral CBL0137
significantly extended survival (median survival time from start of
treatment = 31.09.9 days versus controls = 3.00.2 days; PBackground: We
have reported that the anti-malarial drug, quinacrine (QC), has
significant in vivo anti-tumor activity (Neznanov et al, Cell Cycle,
2009, 8: 1-11). We have since identified curaxins, a more potent class of
compounds with similar mechanism of action, whose anti-cancer activity
results from chromatin-trapping of the Facilitates Chromatin
Transcription (FACT) complex (Gasparian et al, Science Transl. Med, 2011,
3, 95ra74). These novel nongenotoxic agents, like QC, cause simultaneous
p53 activation and NF-kB inhibition and tumor cell death. We have now
studied the effects of QC and one of the most active curaxins, CBL0137,
in the TH-MYCN mouse model of neuroblastoma as well as a nude mouse
xenograft model of the disease.Methods: Cohorts of homozygous TH-MYCN
mice with small palpable tumors or of human MYCN-amplified BE(2)-C
neuroblastoma tumor-bearing nude mice (n=10) were treated with QC
(TH-MYCN mice only) or CBL0137, alone or combined with chemotherapeutic
drugs.Results: QC alone had no significant effect on tumor progression
and did not enhance cisplatin or VP16 activity. However, strong
anti-tumor activity was observed when QC was combined with
cyclophosphamide (CPM) (4/10 QC/CPM-treated vs 0/10 CPM-treated long-term
survivors, P<0.001). The effect of CBL0137 alone, administered either
orally or iv, on tumor progression was more dramatic. Oral CBL0137
significantly extended survival (median survival time from start of
treatment = 31.09.9 days versus controls = 3.00.2 days; P<0.0001), and
was as effective as cisplatin or CPM single-agent treatment. Remarkably,
CBL0137 administered iv resulted in a significant number of long-term
tumor free survivors (7/9 alive at Day 120). When oral CBL0137 treatment
was combined with CPM, survival was substantially increased (7/10
long-term tumor-free TH-MYCN mice) compared to either CBL0137 (0/10
alive) or CPM (1/10 alive) alone (PBackground: We have reported that the
anti-malarial drug, quinacrine (QC), has significant in vivo anti-tumor
activity (Neznanov et al, Cell Cycle, 2009, 8: 1-11). We have since
identified curaxins, a more potent class of compounds with similar
mechanism of action, whose anti-cancer activity results from
chromatin-trapping of the Facilitates Chromatin Transcription (FACT)
complex (Gasparian et al, Science Transl. Med, 2011, 3, 95ra74). These
novel nongenotoxic agents, like QC, cause simultaneous p53 activation and
NF-kB inhibition and tumor cell death. We have now studied the effects of
QC and one of the most active curaxins, CBL0137, in the TH-MYCN mouse
model of neuroblastoma as well as a nude mouse xenograft model of the
disease.Methods: Cohorts of homozygous TH-MYCN mice with small palpable
tumors or of human MYCN-amplified BE(2)-C neuroblastoma tumor-bearing
nude mice (n=10) were treated with QC (TH-MYCN mice only) or CBL0137,
alone or combined with chemotherapeutic drugs.Results: QC alone had no
significant effect on tumor progression and did not enhance cisplatin or
VP16 activity. However, strong anti-tumor activity was observed when QC
was combined with cyclophosphamide (CPM) (4/10 QC/CPM-treated vs 0/10
CPM-treated long-term survivors, P<0.001). The effect of CBL0137 alone,
administered either orally or iv, on tumor progression was more dramatic.
Oral CBL0137 significantly extended survival (median survival time from
start of treatment = 31.09.9 days versus controls = 3.00.2 days;
P<0.0001), and was as effective as cisplatin or CPM single-agent
treatment. Remarkably, CBL0137 administered iv resulted in a significant
number of long-term tumor free survivors (7/9 alive at Day 120). When
oral CBL0137 treatment was combined with CPM, survival was substantially
increased (7/10 long-term tumor-free TH-MYCN mice) compared to either
CBL0137 (0/10 alive) or CPM (1/10 alive) alone (P<0.005 in each case).
Most dramatic results were observed when CBL0137 was combined with the
standard neuroblastoma relapse protocol of CPM plus topotecan (TOPO).
CPM/TOPO treatment resulted in 0/10 long-term survivors, however when
combined with either oral or iv CBL0137, this combination cured 5/8 or
11/12 TH-MYCN mice, respectively. Moreover, the combination of iv
CBL0137/CPM/TOPO resulted in more than a doubling of lifespan in BE(2)-C
tumor-bearing mice compared to those treated with CPM/TOPO or CBL0137
alone (PBackground: We have reported that the anti-malarial drug,
quinacrine (QC), has significant in vivo anti-tumor activity (Neznanov et
al, Cell Cycle, 2009, 8: 1-11). We have since identified curaxins, a more
potent class of compounds with similar mechanism of action, whose
anti-cancer activity results from chromatin-trapping of the Facilitates
Chromatin Transcription (FACT) complex (Gasparian et al, Science Transl.
Med, 2011, 3, 95ra74). These novel nongenotoxic agents, like QC, cause
simultaneous p53 activation and NF-kB inhibition and tumor cell death. We
have now studied the effects of QC and one of the most active curaxins,
CBL0137, in the TH-MYCN mouse model of neuroblastoma as well as a nude
mouse xenograft model of the disease.Methods: Cohorts of homozygous
TH-MYCN mice with small palpable tumors or of human MYCN-amplified
BE(2)-C neuroblastoma tumor-bearing nude mice (n=10) were treated with QC
(TH-MYCN mice only) or CBL0137, alone or combined with chemotherapeutic
drugs.Results: QC alone had no significant effect on tumor progression
and did not enhance cisplatin or VP16 activity. However, strong
anti-tumor activity was observed when QC was combined with
cyclophosphamide (CPM) (4/10 QC/CPM-treated vs 0/10 CPM-treated long-term
survivors, P<0.001). The effect of CBL0137 alone, administered either
orally or iv, on tumor progression was more dramatic. Oral CBL0137
significantly extended survival (median survival time from start of
treatment = 31.09.9 days versus controls = 3.00.2 days; P<0.0001), and
was as effective as cisplatin or CPM single-agent treatment. Remarkably,
CBL0137 administered iv resulted in a significant number of long-term
tumor free survivors (7/9 alive at Day 120). When oral CBL0137 treatment
was combined with CPM, survival was substantially increased (7/10
long-term tumor-free TH-MYCN mice) compared to either CBL0137 (0/10
alive) or CPM (1/10 alive) alone (P<0.005 in each case). Most dramatic
results were observed when CBL0137 was combined with the standard
neuroblastoma relapse protocol of CPM plus topotecan (TOPO). CPM/TOPO
treatment resulted in 0/10 long-term survivors, however when combined
with either oral or iv CBL0137, this combination cured 5/8 or 11/12
TH-MYCN mice, respectively. Moreover, the combination of iv
CBL0137/CPM/TOPO resulted in more than a doubling of lifespan in BE(2)-C
tumor-bearing mice compared to those treated with CPM/TOPO or CBL0137
alone (P<0.0001).Conclusions: These are the most impressive results that
we have ever observed for any therapeutic protocol in either the TH-MYCN
homozygous or BE(2)-C xenograft mouse models. The combination of CPM/TOPO
with iv CBL0137 appears to be a highly promising new treatment approach
for refractory neuroblastoma. Safety and efficacy of CBL0137 is currently
being investigated in a Phase I clinical trial in advanced cancer
patients.

