Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hormonal and genetic risk factors of soft tissue sarcoma in Sweden.


BACKGROUND AND METHODS. The aetiology of soft tissue sarcoma (STS) is
largely unknown. Merely a handful putative risk factors such as certain
genetic syndromes, a positive family history of cancer/STS, specific
chemical exposures and exposure to ionizing radiation have been
identified. With respect to the genetic aetiology, most STS patients do
not have a clear family history of cancer. Only in rare cases heritable
or germline genetic abnormalities associated with cancer predisposition
syndromes that manifest as STS have been identified. We study STS and
cancer morbidity in first degree relatives (FDR) together with hormone
related factors in the Swedish population in the years between the years
1988 and 2009 using a population-based case-control design. RESULTS. Our
study is the largest on this topic to date, including 855 cases and 2024
controls. It identified protective effects of being shorter than your
peers at age eleven with a relative risk (RR) of 0.5 (0.4 - 0.7). Having
used oral contraceptives (OC), RR 0.6 (0.4 - 1.0), and high parity, RR
0.6 (0.3 - 0.9) comparing three or more children to none, also appeared
to reduce the risk for STS. The reduction increased further comparing use
for eleven years or more to use for three years or less, RR 0.2 (0.1 -
0.6). Those with an FDR with STS and with those with an FDR with cancer
had increased risks, RR 5.16 (1.03 - 25.9) and 1.31 (1.05 - 1.65),
respectively. The latter varied with sex and histological subtype. In
men, the familial risk was significant for malignant fibrous
histiocytoma/undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcomas (MFH), RR 2.21 (1.23 -
3.97) and was higher in younger men (P=0.015). In women, there was a
significant overall familial risk when stratifying on OC use, RR 1.55
(1.06 - 2.26). This risk seemed to derive from a group of rare and
unclassified tumours present mainly in retroperitoneum and visceral
organs, RR 6.19 (0.54 - 71.2). CONCLUSIONS. STS are a heterogeneous group
of tumours with possibly very different aetiologies. However, the genesis
of sarcoma seems to be influenced by both sex and growth hormones as well
as genetic factors. Studies are on the way of the molecular genetic
background of these associations.

