Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling of aurora kinase signaling in microdissected gastric
cancer samples indicates a significant increase in histone deacetylase 4
(HDAC4).


Introduction & Methods: Gastric cancer represents one of the leading
causes of cancer related death in the world second only to lung cancer
resulting in 800,000 deaths per year. Aurora kinases, a family of
serine/threonine kinases essential for cytokinesis and chromosome
segregation, are frequently over-expressed in various cancer types.
Moreover, Aurora kinase has recently been shown to directly regulate
epigenetic changes (Guise et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012
Nov;11(11):1220-9). Aurora kinase signaling may also impact E-cadherin
function via a GSK3-/ induced increase in -catenin. E-cadherin
deregulation has been implicated in gastric cancer, especially in diffuse
types where it is mutated in many cases.We have profiled Aurora kinase
signaling pathway activation and its effects on epigenetic and
cytoskeletal changes in gastric cancer. Human gastric cancer tumor
samples (n=10; 4 diffuse, 5 intestinal, 1 undifferentiated
adenocardinoma) and patient matched normal mucosa were procured by laser
capture microdissection. Reverse phase protein microarrays were used to
quantify total and post-translationally modified proteins in cell
signaling pathways directly and indirectly related to Aurora
kinase.Results: We found a significant increase in histone deacetylase 4
levels (HDAC4, pIntroduction & Methods: Gastric cancer represents one of
the leading causes of cancer related death in the world second only to
lung cancer resulting in 800,000 deaths per year. Aurora kinases, a
family of serine/threonine kinases essential for cytokinesis and
chromosome segregation, are frequently over-expressed in various cancer
types. Moreover, Aurora kinase has recently been shown to directly
regulate epigenetic changes (Guise et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012
Nov;11(11):1220-9). Aurora kinase signaling may also impact E-cadherin
function via a GSK3-/ induced increase in -catenin. E-cadherin
deregulation has been implicated in gastric cancer, especially in diffuse
types where it is mutated in many cases.We have profiled Aurora kinase
signaling pathway activation and its effects on epigenetic and
cytoskeletal changes in gastric cancer. Human gastric cancer tumor
samples (n=10; 4 diffuse, 5 intestinal, 1 undifferentiated
adenocardinoma) and patient matched normal mucosa were procured by laser
capture microdissection. Reverse phase protein microarrays were used to
quantify total and post-translationally modified proteins in cell
signaling pathways directly and indirectly related to Aurora
kinase.Results: We found a significant increase in histone deacetylase 4
levels (HDAC4, p<0.0001) concomitant with increased phosphorylation of
Aurora kinase (pIntroduction & Methods: Gastric cancer represents one of
the leading causes of cancer related death in the world second only to
lung cancer resulting in 800,000 deaths per year. Aurora kinases, a
family of serine/threonine kinases essential for cytokinesis and
chromosome segregation, are frequently over-expressed in various cancer
types. Moreover, Aurora kinase has recently been shown to directly
regulate epigenetic changes (Guise et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012
Nov;11(11):1220-9). Aurora kinase signaling may also impact E-cadherin
function via a GSK3-/ induced increase in -catenin. E-cadherin
deregulation has been implicated in gastric cancer, especially in diffuse
types where it is mutated in many cases.We have profiled Aurora kinase
signaling pathway activation and its effects on epigenetic and
cytoskeletal changes in gastric cancer. Human gastric cancer tumor
samples (n=10; 4 diffuse, 5 intestinal, 1 undifferentiated
adenocardinoma) and patient matched normal mucosa were procured by laser
capture microdissection. Reverse phase protein microarrays were used to
quantify total and post-translationally modified proteins in cell
signaling pathways directly and indirectly related to Aurora
kinase.Results: We found a significant increase in histone deacetylase 4
levels (HDAC4, p<0.0001) concomitant with increased phosphorylation of
Aurora kinase (p<0.1) and a decrease in phosphorylated GSK3-/
(pIntroduction & Methods: Gastric cancer represents one of the leading
causes of cancer related death in the world second only to lung cancer
resulting in 800,000 deaths per year. Aurora kinases, a family of
serine/threonine kinases essential for cytokinesis and chromosome
segregation, are frequently over-expressed in various cancer types.
Moreover, Aurora kinase has recently been shown to directly regulate
epigenetic changes (Guise et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012
Nov;11(11):1220-9). Aurora kinase signaling may also impact E-cadherin
function via a GSK3-/ induced increase in -catenin. E-cadherin
deregulation has been implicated in gastric cancer, especially in diffuse
types where it is mutated in many cases.We have profiled Aurora kinase
signaling pathway activation and its effects on epigenetic and
cytoskeletal changes in gastric cancer. Human gastric cancer tumor
samples (n=10; 4 diffuse, 5 intestinal, 1 undifferentiated
adenocardinoma) and patient matched normal mucosa were procured by laser
capture microdissection. Reverse phase protein microarrays were used to
quantify total and post-translationally modified proteins in cell
signaling pathways directly and indirectly related to Aurora
kinase.Results: We found a significant increase in histone deacetylase 4
levels (HDAC4, p<0.0001) concomitant with increased phosphorylation of
Aurora kinase (p<0.1) and a decrease in phosphorylated GSK3-/ (p<0.05) in
gastric tumor epithelia compared to patient matched normal mucosa.
Gastric cancer samples of diffuse type showed a significantly reduced
expression of E-Cadherin (pIntroduction & Methods: Gastric cancer
represents one of the leading causes of cancer related death in the world
second only to lung cancer resulting in 800,000 deaths per year. Aurora
kinases, a family of serine/threonine kinases essential for cytokinesis
and chromosome segregation, are frequently over-expressed in various
cancer types. Moreover, Aurora kinase has recently been shown to directly
regulate epigenetic changes (Guise et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012
Nov;11(11):1220-9). Aurora kinase signaling may also impact E-cadherin
function via a GSK3-/ induced increase in -catenin. E-cadherin
deregulation has been implicated in gastric cancer, especially in diffuse
types where it is mutated in many cases.We have profiled Aurora kinase
signaling pathway activation and its effects on epigenetic and
cytoskeletal changes in gastric cancer. Human gastric cancer tumor
samples (n=10; 4 diffuse, 5 intestinal, 1 undifferentiated
adenocardinoma) and patient matched normal mucosa were procured by laser
capture microdissection. Reverse phase protein microarrays were used to
quantify total and post-translationally modified proteins in cell
signaling pathways directly and indirectly related to Aurora
kinase.Results: We found a significant increase in histone deacetylase 4
levels (HDAC4, p<0.0001) concomitant with increased phosphorylation of
Aurora kinase (p<0.1) and a decrease in phosphorylated GSK3-/ (p<0.05) in
gastric tumor epithelia compared to patient matched normal mucosa.
Gastric cancer samples of diffuse type showed a significantly reduced
expression of E-Cadherin (p<0.05) as compared to intestinal type gastric
cancer. In contrast, patient samples with lymph node metastasis (n=6)
were associated with an increased level of phospho-GSK3-/ in both normal
mucosa (pIntroduction & Methods: Gastric cancer represents one of the
leading causes of cancer related death in the world second only to lung
cancer resulting in 800,000 deaths per year. Aurora kinases, a family of
serine/threonine kinases essential for cytokinesis and chromosome
segregation, are frequently over-expressed in various cancer types.
Moreover, Aurora kinase has recently been shown to directly regulate
epigenetic changes (Guise et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012
Nov;11(11):1220-9). Aurora kinase signaling may also impact E-cadherin
function via a GSK3-/ induced increase in -catenin. E-cadherin
deregulation has been implicated in gastric cancer, especially in diffuse
types where it is mutated in many cases.We have profiled Aurora kinase
signaling pathway activation and its effects on epigenetic and
cytoskeletal changes in gastric cancer. Human gastric cancer tumor
samples (n=10; 4 diffuse, 5 intestinal, 1 undifferentiated
adenocardinoma) and patient matched normal mucosa were procured by laser
capture microdissection. Reverse phase protein microarrays were used to
quantify total and post-translationally modified proteins in cell
signaling pathways directly and indirectly related to Aurora
kinase.Results: We found a significant increase in histone deacetylase 4
levels (HDAC4, p<0.0001) concomitant with increased phosphorylation of
Aurora kinase (p<0.1) and a decrease in phosphorylated GSK3-/ (p<0.05) in
gastric tumor epithelia compared to patient matched normal mucosa.
Gastric cancer samples of diffuse type showed a significantly reduced
expression of E-Cadherin (p<0.05) as compared to intestinal type gastric
cancer. In contrast, patient samples with lymph node metastasis (n=6)
were associated with an increased level of phospho-GSK3-/ in both normal
mucosa (p<0.05) and matched tumor epithelia (pIntroduction & Methods:
Gastric cancer represents one of the leading causes of cancer related
death in the world second only to lung cancer resulting in 800,000 deaths
per year. Aurora kinases, a family of serine/threonine kinases essential
for cytokinesis and chromosome segregation, are frequently over-expressed
in various cancer types. Moreover, Aurora kinase has recently been shown
to directly regulate epigenetic changes (Guise et al., Mol Cell
Proteomics. 2012 Nov;11(11):1220-9). Aurora kinase signaling may also
impact E-cadherin function via a GSK3-/ induced increase in -catenin.
E-cadherin deregulation has been implicated in gastric cancer, especially
in diffuse types where it is mutated in many cases.We have profiled
Aurora kinase signaling pathway activation and its effects on epigenetic
and cytoskeletal changes in gastric cancer. Human gastric cancer tumor
samples (n=10; 4 diffuse, 5 intestinal, 1 undifferentiated
adenocardinoma) and patient matched normal mucosa were procured by laser
capture microdissection. Reverse phase protein microarrays were used to
quantify total and post-translationally modified proteins in cell
signaling pathways directly and indirectly related to Aurora
kinase.Results: We found a significant increase in histone deacetylase 4
levels (HDAC4, p<0.0001) concomitant with increased phosphorylation of
Aurora kinase (p<0.1) and a decrease in phosphorylated GSK3-/ (p<0.05) in
gastric tumor epithelia compared to patient matched normal mucosa.
Gastric cancer samples of diffuse type showed a significantly reduced
expression of E-Cadherin (p<0.05) as compared to intestinal type gastric
cancer. In contrast, patient samples with lymph node metastasis (n=6)
were associated with an increased level of phospho-GSK3-/ in both normal
mucosa (p<0.05) and matched tumor epithelia (p<0.1).Conclusions: To our
knowledge, this is the first time that increased levels of HDAC4 have
been reported in gastric cancer. The demonstrated increase in Aurora
kinase phosphorylation in gastric tumor epithelia may provide a
mechanistic link to the observed HDAC4 upregulation.

