Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk factors for endometrial cancer in black and white women: A
pooled analysis from the Epidemiology of Endometrial Cancer Consortium
(E2C2).


Introduction: More than 47,000 women will be diagnosed with endometrial
cancer in 2012, making it the most common gynecologic cancer among women
in the United States. Data from the SEER registry from 1975-2009 report
the incidence rate of endometrial cancer is lower among black women than
white women (19.2 and 27.5 cases per 100,000 women, respectively). Tumor
histology also varies by racial group, with a larger proportion of black
women diagnosed with non-endometrioid tumors compared to their white
counterparts. It is possible that risk factors for endometrial cancer may
differ between black and white women; the small number of black women in
individual studies has precluded these analyses. The aim of this study
was to investigate risk factors for endometrial cancer in blacks using a
pooled analysis. For comparison, we pooled data on risk factors among
non-Hispanic white women in the same studies.Methods: We have data from
eleven studies that included >10 black cases and >10 black controls (7
cohort studies and 4 case-control studies). The following information was
collected from each study: age at diagnosis/study entry, education, body
mass index (BMI), smoking status, reproductive variables, hormone use,
and self-reported diabetes and hypertension. Unconditional logistic
regression was used to estimate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals
for each risk factor in blacks and whites separately. Estimates for
endometrioid tumors will also be presented.Results: Data were pooled for
2,011 black women (516 cases and 1,495 controls) and 19,297 white women
(5,693 cases and 13,604 controls). In univariate analyses, the following
variables were associated with endometrial cancer in both black and white
women: BMI, smoking, oral contraceptive use for 10 years or more, and
diabetes. In models adjusted for these variables, along with age and
study site, obesity (BMI 30) was associated with an approximate 3-fold
increase in risk for both black and white women (OR=2.80, 95% CI: 2.00,
3.92 and OR=3.26, 95% CI: 2.96, 3.59, respectively). Diabetes was also
associated with a 30-40% increase in risk among both groups. Cigarette
smoking was associated with reduced risk of endometrial cancer among both
blacks and whites (OR=0.66, 95%CI: 0.47, 0.94 and OR=0.62, 95% CI: 0.54,
0.71, respectively). Increasing parity was more strongly associated with
decreased risk in whites (p-trend Introduction: More than 47,000 women
will be diagnosed with endometrial cancer in 2012, making it the most
common gynecologic cancer among women in the United States. Data from the
SEER registry from 1975-2009 report the incidence rate of endometrial
cancer is lower among black women than white women (19.2 and 27.5 cases
per 100,000 women, respectively). Tumor histology also varies by racial
group, with a larger proportion of black women diagnosed with
non-endometrioid tumors compared to their white counterparts. It is
possible that risk factors for endometrial cancer may differ between
black and white women; the small number of black women in individual
studies has precluded these analyses. The aim of this study was to
investigate risk factors for endometrial cancer in blacks using a pooled
analysis. For comparison, we pooled data on risk factors among
non-Hispanic white women in the same studies.Methods: We have data from
eleven studies that included >10 black cases and >10 black controls (7
cohort studies and 4 case-control studies). The following information was
collected from each study: age at diagnosis/study entry, education, body
mass index (BMI), smoking status, reproductive variables, hormone use,
and self-reported diabetes and hypertension. Unconditional logistic
regression was used to estimate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals
for each risk factor in blacks and whites separately. Estimates for
endometrioid tumors will also be presented.Results: Data were pooled for
2,011 black women (516 cases and 1,495 controls) and 19,297 white women
(5,693 cases and 13,604 controls). In univariate analyses, the following
variables were associated with endometrial cancer in both black and white
women: BMI, smoking, oral contraceptive use for 10 years or more, and
diabetes. In models adjusted for these variables, along with age and
study site, obesity (BMI 30) was associated with an approximate 3-fold
increase in risk for both black and white women (OR=2.80, 95% CI: 2.00,
3.92 and OR=3.26, 95% CI: 2.96, 3.59, respectively). Diabetes was also
associated with a 30-40% increase in risk among both groups. Cigarette
smoking was associated with reduced risk of endometrial cancer among both
blacks and whites (OR=0.66, 95%CI: 0.47, 0.94 and OR=0.62, 95% CI: 0.54,
0.71, respectively). Increasing parity was more strongly associated with
decreased risk in whites (p-trend <0.001) than blacks (p-trend = 0.09).
Similarly, age at first birth was also more protective in whites
(p-trendIntroduction: More than 47,000 women will be diagnosed with
endometrial cancer in 2012, making it the most common gynecologic cancer
among women in the United States. Data from the SEER registry from
1975-2009 report the incidence rate of endometrial cancer is lower among
black women than white women (19.2 and 27.5 cases per 100,000 women,
respectively). Tumor histology also varies by racial group, with a larger
proportion of black women diagnosed with non-endometrioid tumors compared
to their white counterparts. It is possible that risk factors for
endometrial cancer may differ between black and white women; the small
number of black women in individual studies has precluded these analyses.
The aim of this study was to investigate risk factors for endometrial
cancer in blacks using a pooled analysis. For comparison, we pooled data
on risk factors among non-Hispanic white women in the same
studies.Methods: We have data from eleven studies that included >10 black
cases and >10 black controls (7 cohort studies and 4 case-control
studies). The following information was collected from each study: age at
diagnosis/study entry, education, body mass index (BMI), smoking status,
reproductive variables, hormone use, and self-reported diabetes and
hypertension. Unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate odds
ratios and 95% confidence intervals for each risk factor in blacks and
whites separately. Estimates for endometrioid tumors will also be
presented.Results: Data were pooled for 2,011 black women (516 cases and
1,495 controls) and 19,297 white women (5,693 cases and 13,604 controls).
In univariate analyses, the following variables were associated with
endometrial cancer in both black and white women: BMI, smoking, oral
contraceptive use for 10 years or more, and diabetes. In models adjusted
for these variables, along with age and study site, obesity (BMI 30) was
associated with an approximate 3-fold increase in risk for both black and
white women (OR=2.80, 95% CI: 2.00, 3.92 and OR=3.26, 95% CI: 2.96, 3.59,
respectively). Diabetes was also associated with a 30-40% increase in
risk among both groups. Cigarette smoking was associated with reduced
risk of endometrial cancer among both blacks and whites (OR=0.66, 95%CI:
0.47, 0.94 and OR=0.62, 95% CI: 0.54, 0.71, respectively). Increasing
parity was more strongly associated with decreased risk in whites
(p-trend <0.001) than blacks (p-trend = 0.09). Similarly, age at first
birth was also more protective in whites (p-trend<0.001) than blacks
(p-trend=0.76).Conclusions: Overall, risk factors for endometrial cancer
are similar in black and white women, with the exception of some of the
reproductive factors, which do not appear to afford protection in blacks
to the same extent as in whites.

