Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The analytic performance of a TaqMelt PCR assay for the detection
of KRAS mutations in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue (FFPET)
samples of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC).


Mutations in the Kras gene that lead to its constitutive activation are
quite common in many tumor types including NSCLC. We describe the
analytic performance of a TaqMelt PCR assay (cobas KRAS Mutation Test)
that detects 19 mutations in codons 12, 13 and 61 which generates test
results within 8 hours. Using a panel of DNA blends from 18 FFPET samples
of NSCLC, tested at 4 genomic DNA input levels, the correct mutation call
was observed at 5% mutant alleles from the prescribed 50 ng of gDNA/PCR
down to 12.5 ng of gDNA/PCR. A separate panel of 194 FFPET samples of
NSCLC was tested with the PCR test and compared to Sanger sequencing.
There were 15 discordant samples, 9 PCR (+), Sanger (-) and 6 PCR (-),
Sanger (+) samples, that were further analyzed using a quantitative 454
sequencing method. All Sanger discordant samples except 1 PCR (+), Sanger
(-) sample yielded 454 results that agreed with the PCR result. The PPA,
NPA, and overall agreement with sequencing (Sanger resolved by 454) are
100.0%, 98.9% and 99.5%, respectively.
*Includes 1 result for double mutations by Sanger and excludes 1 invalid
result by PCRThe same panel of 194 specimens tested with another lot of
the PCR test gave similar performance. When a panel of 8 FFPET samples of
NSCLC (including 3 near the limit of analytical sensitivity) was
repeatedly tested by 2 operators, using multiple instruments and reagent
lots, a correct result was observed for 100% of tests. PCR test results
were not affected by repeated freezing and thawing of the DNA sample or
test reagents, or by addition of hemoglobin or triglycerides. These
studies show that this PCR test is a robust and reproducible assay that
1) detects 19 mutations in codons 12, 13 and 61, 2) requires a small
amount of DNA (which can generally be obtained from 1x5 m section), and
3) is more sensitive and specific than Sanger sequencing.

