Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of androgen receptor splice variants, ESR1, CYP17,
and CYP19 in human breast cancer.


Many advances have been made in the diagnosis and treatment of breast
cancer in recent years, but it still remains one of the leading causes of
death in women. It is well known that the growth of breast cells is
regulated by the interactions of different steroid hormones, in
particular androgens and estrogens that are related due to their
connected metabolic pathways. A number of novel inhibitors of
steroidogenic enzymes have been developed that target pre-receptor
events_those pertaining to the production, transport, and conversion of
steroid ligands. Critical pre-receptor steps include the conversion of
pregnenolone-like steroids into androgens, mediated largely by the
17-hydroxylase/lyase (CYP17) enzyme complex, and the conversion of
testosterone and androstenedione to estradiol and estrone, mediated by
aromatase (CYP19). Both conversions are implicated in the emergence of
tumor resistance and thus are targets for intervention.Androgen Receptor
(AR) is the sex hormone receptor most frequently found in both primary
and secondary breast tumors, which is indicitative of the importance of
AR in regulating the growth of breast cancer cells. It is estimated that
90% of human genes undergo alternative splicing and AR is no exception.
Alternative splicing of the AR could culminate in a receptor that is
capable of translocation, or can bind DNA without ligand, leading current
AR therapies to be less efficacious.Using TaqMan qRT-PCR we examined 213
female breast-cancer FFPET samples, 80 ER- PR- Her2- samples, 68 ER- PR-
Her2+ samples, and 64 ER+ PR+ Her2- samples, as well as 8 breast-cancer
cell lines for the presence of ESR1, CYP17, CYP19, full length AR and AR
splice variants ARV1, ARV3/V7, ARV567, and Delta3AR. ARV3/V7 and Delta3AR
were the most prevalent variants in the ER+ PR+ Her2- and ER- PR- Her2+
sample sets, with >85% of these samples showing expression of either or
both of these variants. On the other hand, ARV1, ARV3/V7, and ARV567 were
the most prevalent variants in the ER- PR- Her2- sample set, with >90% of
these samples showing expression of one or a combination of these
variants. Lower expression values of most of the AR variants were
observed in higher grade ER+ PR+ Her2- and ER- PR- Her2+ samples as
compared to the lower grade samples. CYP19 was highly prevalent in all
sample sets with >75% of all samples showing expression, while CYP17
expression was observed in Many advances have been made in the diagnosis
and treatment of breast cancer in recent years, but it still remains one
of the leading causes of death in women. It is well known that the growth
of breast cells is regulated by the interactions of different steroid
hormones, in particular androgens and estrogens that are related due to
their connected metabolic pathways. A number of novel inhibitors of
steroidogenic enzymes have been developed that target pre-receptor
events_those pertaining to the production, transport, and conversion of
steroid ligands. Critical pre-receptor steps include the conversion of
pregnenolone-like steroids into androgens, mediated largely by the
17-hydroxylase/lyase (CYP17) enzyme complex, and the conversion of
testosterone and androstenedione to estradiol and estrone, mediated by
aromatase (CYP19). Both conversions are implicated in the emergence of
tumor resistance and thus are targets for intervention.Androgen Receptor
(AR) is the sex hormone receptor most frequently found in both primary
and secondary breast tumors, which is indicitative of the importance of
AR in regulating the growth of breast cancer cells. It is estimated that
90% of human genes undergo alternative splicing and AR is no exception.
Alternative splicing of the AR could culminate in a receptor that is
capable of translocation, or can bind DNA without ligand, leading current
AR therapies to be less efficacious.Using TaqMan qRT-PCR we examined 213
female breast-cancer FFPET samples, 80 ER- PR- Her2- samples, 68 ER- PR-
Her2+ samples, and 64 ER+ PR+ Her2- samples, as well as 8 breast-cancer
cell lines for the presence of ESR1, CYP17, CYP19, full length AR and AR
splice variants ARV1, ARV3/V7, ARV567, and Delta3AR. ARV3/V7 and Delta3AR
were the most prevalent variants in the ER+ PR+ Her2- and ER- PR- Her2+
sample sets, with >85% of these samples showing expression of either or
both of these variants. On the other hand, ARV1, ARV3/V7, and ARV567 were
the most prevalent variants in the ER- PR- Her2- sample set, with >90% of
these samples showing expression of one or a combination of these
variants. Lower expression values of most of the AR variants were
observed in higher grade ER+ PR+ Her2- and ER- PR- Her2+ samples as
compared to the lower grade samples. CYP19 was highly prevalent in all
sample sets with >75% of all samples showing expression, while CYP17
expression was observed in <30% of all the samples tested. Our findings
show the relatively high expression of AR variants and CYP19 in breast
cancer tissues, which may indicate their role in regulating the growth of
these tumors. Hence increased expression of AR splice variants in breast
cancer tumors may be an important biomarker of resistance and targets for
AR related therapy.

