Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical impact of 6q deletion patterns in prostate cancer.


Deletions of chromosome 6q12-22 represent the second common deletion in
prostate cancer. Although most of these deletions are large and span > 50
megabases, a minimal deleted region containing 3-4 megabases was
described at 6q15. MAP3K7 (at 6q15) was suggested as a potential target
gene in this area. Based on the hypothesis, that large 6q deletions
compromising a multitude of genes may have a different impact on the
biology of prostate cancer cells than small circumscribed 6q15 deletions,
a tissue microarray (TMA) containing over 7000 prostate cancers was
analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). All cancers were
analyzed with probes for 6q12, 6q14, 6q15 (MAP3K7), 6q16, and 6q22. 3888
tumors were interpretable for all 5 probes including 463 (10.6%) showing
a 6q deletion. 6q deletions were tightly linked to a negative ERG status
with 15.6% deletions in ERG negative and 5.8% deletions in ERG positive
cancers (pDeletions of chromosome 6q12-22 represent the second common
deletion in prostate cancer. Although most of these deletions are large
and span > 50 megabases, a minimal deleted region containing 3-4
megabases was described at 6q15. MAP3K7 (at 6q15) was suggested as a
potential target gene in this area. Based on the hypothesis, that large
6q deletions compromising a multitude of genes may have a different
impact on the biology of prostate cancer cells than small circumscribed
6q15 deletions, a tissue microarray (TMA) containing over 7000 prostate
cancers was analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). All
cancers were analyzed with probes for 6q12, 6q14, 6q15 (MAP3K7), 6q16,
and 6q22. 3888 tumors were interpretable for all 5 probes including 463
(10.6%) showing a 6q deletion. 6q deletions were tightly linked to a
negative ERG status with 15.6% deletions in ERG negative and 5.8%
deletions in ERG positive cancers (p<0.0001). The frequency of 6q
deletions increased with Gleason grade and pT stage. 6q deletions were
found in 5.4% of 3+3, 10.6% of 3+4, 19.6% of 4+3, and 18.8% of 4+4
cancers (pDeletions of chromosome 6q12-22 represent the second common
deletion in prostate cancer. Although most of these deletions are large
and span > 50 megabases, a minimal deleted region containing 3-4
megabases was described at 6q15. MAP3K7 (at 6q15) was suggested as a
potential target gene in this area. Based on the hypothesis, that large
6q deletions compromising a multitude of genes may have a different
impact on the biology of prostate cancer cells than small circumscribed
6q15 deletions, a tissue microarray (TMA) containing over 7000 prostate
cancers was analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). All
cancers were analyzed with probes for 6q12, 6q14, 6q15 (MAP3K7), 6q16,
and 6q22. 3888 tumors were interpretable for all 5 probes including 463
(10.6%) showing a 6q deletion. 6q deletions were tightly linked to a
negative ERG status with 15.6% deletions in ERG negative and 5.8%
deletions in ERG positive cancers (p<0.0001). The frequency of 6q
deletions increased with Gleason grade and pT stage. 6q deletions were
found in 5.4% of 3+3, 10.6% of 3+4, 19.6% of 4+3, and 18.8% of 4+4
cancers (p<0.0001). 6q deletions occurred in 9.6% of pT2, 11.5% of pT3a,
and 14.8% of pT3b carcinomas (p=0.0160). 6q deletions were also linked to
early PSA recurrence (pDeletions of chromosome 6q12-22 represent the
second common deletion in prostate cancer. Although most of these
deletions are large and span > 50 megabases, a minimal deleted region
containing 3-4 megabases was described at 6q15. MAP3K7 (at 6q15) was
suggested as a potential target gene in this area. Based on the
hypothesis, that large 6q deletions compromising a multitude of genes may
have a different impact on the biology of prostate cancer cells than
small circumscribed 6q15 deletions, a tissue microarray (TMA) containing
over 7000 prostate cancers was analyzed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). All cancers were analyzed with probes for 6q12,
6q14, 6q15 (MAP3K7), 6q16, and 6q22. 3888 tumors were interpretable for
all 5 probes including 463 (10.6%) showing a 6q deletion. 6q deletions
were tightly linked to a negative ERG status with 15.6% deletions in ERG
negative and 5.8% deletions in ERG positive cancers (p<0.0001). The
frequency of 6q deletions increased with Gleason grade and pT stage. 6q
deletions were found in 5.4% of 3+3, 10.6% of 3+4, 19.6% of 4+3, and
18.8% of 4+4 cancers (p<0.0001). 6q deletions occurred in 9.6% of pT2,
11.5% of pT3a, and 14.8% of pT3b carcinomas (p=0.0160). 6q deletions were
also linked to early PSA recurrence (p<0.0001). Remarkably, the clinical
outcome varied markedly with deletion size. PSA recurrence was more
likely in cancers with 6q12-22 deletions as compared to tumors with
6q14-16 deletions (pDeletions of chromosome 6q12-22 represent the second
common deletion in prostate cancer. Although most of these deletions are
large and span > 50 megabases, a minimal deleted region containing 3-4
megabases was described at 6q15. MAP3K7 (at 6q15) was suggested as a
potential target gene in this area. Based on the hypothesis, that large
6q deletions compromising a multitude of genes may have a different
impact on the biology of prostate cancer cells than small circumscribed
6q15 deletions, a tissue microarray (TMA) containing over 7000 prostate
cancers was analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). All
cancers were analyzed with probes for 6q12, 6q14, 6q15 (MAP3K7), 6q16,
and 6q22. 3888 tumors were interpretable for all 5 probes including 463
(10.6%) showing a 6q deletion. 6q deletions were tightly linked to a
negative ERG status with 15.6% deletions in ERG negative and 5.8%
deletions in ERG positive cancers (p<0.0001). The frequency of 6q
deletions increased with Gleason grade and pT stage. 6q deletions were
found in 5.4% of 3+3, 10.6% of 3+4, 19.6% of 4+3, and 18.8% of 4+4
cancers (p<0.0001). 6q deletions occurred in 9.6% of pT2, 11.5% of pT3a,
and 14.8% of pT3b carcinomas (p=0.0160). 6q deletions were also linked to
early PSA recurrence (p<0.0001). Remarkably, the clinical outcome varied
markedly with deletion size. PSA recurrence was more likely in cancers
with 6q12-22 deletions as compared to tumors with 6q14-16 deletions
(p<0.0001). Twelve genes located within 6q14-16 were functionally
evaluated applying colony formation assays to prostate cell lines BPH1,
DU-145, and PC-3. These analyses failed to identify a cell behavior
consistent with a role as a tumor suppressor gene for MAP3K7, as well as
RRAGD, ANKRD6, LYRM2, MDN1, CASP8AP2, BACH2, COQ3, MANEA, RNGTT, SLC35A1,
and MMS22L. In conclusion, the strong impact of the deletion size
suggests, that multiple genes on chromosome 6q12-22 might have a tumor
suppressive role in prostate cancer and that alterations of more than one
of these has an additive adverse effect to cells. Our data do not confirm
MAP3K7 as the main target of 6q deletions in prostate cancer

