Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacologic inhibition of PAI-1 increases apoptosis and inhibits
macrophage migration in cancer.


The paradoxical observation that elevated blood and tissue levels of
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in cancer patients positively
correlate with tumor progression supports a pro-tumorigenic function for
this serine protease inhibitor. The mechanism by which PAI-1 promotes
tumor progression includes a pro-angiogenic function and a protective
effect on Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis in endothelial cells and tumor
cells. Here we have tested the activity of TM5275, a newly developed
small N-acylanthranilic acid derivative, for its anti-tumorigenic
activity in vitro and in vivo. We observed that human fibrosarcoma
HT-1080 cells treated with increasing concentrations of TM5275 exhibited
markedly reduced cell viability (94.59% when treated with 50 uM, p The
paradoxical observation that elevated blood and tissue levels of
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in cancer patients positively
correlate with tumor progression supports a pro-tumorigenic function for
this serine protease inhibitor. The mechanism by which PAI-1 promotes
tumor progression includes a pro-angiogenic function and a protective
effect on Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis in endothelial cells and tumor
cells. Here we have tested the activity of TM5275, a newly developed
small N-acylanthranilic acid derivative, for its anti-tumorigenic
activity in vitro and in vivo. We observed that human fibrosarcoma
HT-1080 cells treated with increasing concentrations of TM5275 exhibited
markedly reduced cell viability (94.59% when treated with 50 uM, p <
0.01). Similarly, colon cancer HCT116 cells exhibited a 73.10% decrease
in cell viability with 75 uM (p The paradoxical observation that elevated
blood and tissue levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in
cancer patients positively correlate with tumor progression supports a
pro-tumorigenic function for this serine protease inhibitor. The
mechanism by which PAI-1 promotes tumor progression includes a
pro-angiogenic function and a protective effect on Fas/FasL-mediated
apoptosis in endothelial cells and tumor cells. Here we have tested the
activity of TM5275, a newly developed small N-acylanthranilic acid
derivative, for its anti-tumorigenic activity in vitro and in vivo. We
observed that human fibrosarcoma HT-1080 cells treated with increasing
concentrations of TM5275 exhibited markedly reduced cell viability
(94.59% when treated with 50 uM, p < 0.01). Similarly, colon cancer
HCT116 cells exhibited a 73.10% decrease in cell viability with 75 uM (p
< 0.01). This was associated with a statistically significant increase in
apoptosis (72.9% for HT-1080 cells treated with a TM5275 concentration of
75 uM and 48.2% for HCT116 cells treated at a TM5275 concentration of 100
uM, p The paradoxical observation that elevated blood and tissue levels
of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in cancer patients
positively correlate with tumor progression supports a pro-tumorigenic
function for this serine protease inhibitor. The mechanism by which PAI-1
promotes tumor progression includes a pro-angiogenic function and a
protective effect on Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis in endothelial cells and
tumor cells. Here we have tested the activity of TM5275, a newly
developed small N-acylanthranilic acid derivative, for its
anti-tumorigenic activity in vitro and in vivo. We observed that human
fibrosarcoma HT-1080 cells treated with increasing concentrations of
TM5275 exhibited markedly reduced cell viability (94.59% when treated
with 50 uM, p < 0.01). Similarly, colon cancer HCT116 cells exhibited a
73.10% decrease in cell viability with 75 uM (p < 0.01). This was
associated with a statistically significant increase in apoptosis (72.9%
for HT-1080 cells treated with a TM5275 concentration of 75 uM and 48.2%
for HCT116 cells treated at a TM5275 concentration of 100 uM, p < 0.01).
We then made two observations suggesting that PAI-1 may inhibit the
recruitment of macrophages by tumor cells. First, we found that tumors
derived from HT-1080 cells in which PAI-1 expression was knocked down by
shRNA showed a 47.8% decrease in tumor associated macrophage (TAM)
infiltration when implanted in PAI-1 null Rag1/ mice versus tumors from
cells transfected with a scramble control and implanted in WT mice (p The
paradoxical observation that elevated blood and tissue levels of
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in cancer patients positively
correlate with tumor progression supports a pro-tumorigenic function for
this serine protease inhibitor. The mechanism by which PAI-1 promotes
tumor progression includes a pro-angiogenic function and a protective
effect on Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis in endothelial cells and tumor
cells. Here we have tested the activity of TM5275, a newly developed
small N-acylanthranilic acid derivative, for its anti-tumorigenic
activity in vitro and in vivo. We observed that human fibrosarcoma
HT-1080 cells treated with increasing concentrations of TM5275 exhibited
markedly reduced cell viability (94.59% when treated with 50 uM, p <
0.01). Similarly, colon cancer HCT116 cells exhibited a 73.10% decrease
in cell viability with 75 uM (p < 0.01). This was associated with a
statistically significant increase in apoptosis (72.9% for HT-1080 cells
treated with a TM5275 concentration of 75 uM and 48.2% for HCT116 cells
treated at a TM5275 concentration of 100 uM, p < 0.01). We then made two
observations suggesting that PAI-1 may inhibit the recruitment of
macrophages by tumor cells. First, we found that tumors derived from
HT-1080 cells in which PAI-1 expression was knocked down by shRNA showed
a 47.8% decrease in tumor associated macrophage (TAM) infiltration when
implanted in PAI-1 null Rag1/ mice versus tumors from cells transfected
with a scramble control and implanted in WT mice (p < 0.01). Second, we
demonstrated that TM5275 (at a concentration of 50 uM) inhibits the
migration of mouse peritoneal macrophage cells toward tumor cell
conditioned media by 37.93% (pThe paradoxical observation that elevated
blood and tissue levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in
cancer patients positively correlate with tumor progression supports a
pro-tumorigenic function for this serine protease inhibitor. The
mechanism by which PAI-1 promotes tumor progression includes a
pro-angiogenic function and a protective effect on Fas/FasL-mediated
apoptosis in endothelial cells and tumor cells. Here we have tested the
activity of TM5275, a newly developed small N-acylanthranilic acid
derivative, for its anti-tumorigenic activity in vitro and in vivo. We
observed that human fibrosarcoma HT-1080 cells treated with increasing
concentrations of TM5275 exhibited markedly reduced cell viability
(94.59% when treated with 50 uM, p < 0.01). Similarly, colon cancer
HCT116 cells exhibited a 73.10% decrease in cell viability with 75 uM (p
< 0.01). This was associated with a statistically significant increase in
apoptosis (72.9% for HT-1080 cells treated with a TM5275 concentration of
75 uM and 48.2% for HCT116 cells treated at a TM5275 concentration of 100
uM, p < 0.01). We then made two observations suggesting that PAI-1 may
inhibit the recruitment of macrophages by tumor cells. First, we found
that tumors derived from HT-1080 cells in which PAI-1 expression was
knocked down by shRNA showed a 47.8% decrease in tumor associated
macrophage (TAM) infiltration when implanted in PAI-1 null Rag1/ mice
versus tumors from cells transfected with a scramble control and
implanted in WT mice (p < 0.01). Second, we demonstrated that TM5275 (at
a concentration of 50 uM) inhibits the migration of mouse peritoneal
macrophage cells toward tumor cell conditioned media by 37.93% (p< 0.01).
We then tested the anti-tumor activity of TM5275 in human HT-1080 cells
implanted subcutaneously in nude mice. In a preliminary experiment, we
showed that in mice treated with TM5275 (administered orally at 50 mg.
/kg. daily from the time of implantation, a dose that resulted in a
maximum plasma concentration of 6.9 uM after 1 hr) tumors reached a
volume of 1500 mm3 at an average of 33 days in comparison with tumors
implanted in mice receiving the vehicle (DMSO) which reached 1500 mm3 at
an average of 26 days (p The paradoxical observation that elevated blood
and tissue levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in cancer
patients positively correlate with tumor progression supports a
pro-tumorigenic function for this serine protease inhibitor. The
mechanism by which PAI-1 promotes tumor progression includes a
pro-angiogenic function and a protective effect on Fas/FasL-mediated
apoptosis in endothelial cells and tumor cells. Here we have tested the
activity of TM5275, a newly developed small N-acylanthranilic acid
derivative, for its anti-tumorigenic activity in vitro and in vivo. We
observed that human fibrosarcoma HT-1080 cells treated with increasing
concentrations of TM5275 exhibited markedly reduced cell viability
(94.59% when treated with 50 uM, p < 0.01). Similarly, colon cancer
HCT116 cells exhibited a 73.10% decrease in cell viability with 75 uM (p
< 0.01). This was associated with a statistically significant increase in
apoptosis (72.9% for HT-1080 cells treated with a TM5275 concentration of
75 uM and 48.2% for HCT116 cells treated at a TM5275 concentration of 100
uM, p < 0.01). We then made two observations suggesting that PAI-1 may
inhibit the recruitment of macrophages by tumor cells. First, we found
that tumors derived from HT-1080 cells in which PAI-1 expression was
knocked down by shRNA showed a 47.8% decrease in tumor associated
macrophage (TAM) infiltration when implanted in PAI-1 null Rag1/ mice
versus tumors from cells transfected with a scramble control and
implanted in WT mice (p < 0.01). Second, we demonstrated that TM5275 (at
a concentration of 50 uM) inhibits the migration of mouse peritoneal
macrophage cells toward tumor cell conditioned media by 37.93% (p< 0.01).
We then tested the anti-tumor activity of TM5275 in human HT-1080 cells
implanted subcutaneously in nude mice. In a preliminary experiment, we
showed that in mice treated with TM5275 (administered orally at 50 mg.
/kg. daily from the time of implantation, a dose that resulted in a
maximum plasma concentration of 6.9 uM after 1 hr) tumors reached a
volume of 1500 mm3 at an average of 33 days in comparison with tumors
implanted in mice receiving the vehicle (DMSO) which reached 1500 mm3 at
an average of 26 days (p < 0.13). The data thus point to an apoptotic
function of small inhibitors of PAI-1 and to the inhibition of macrophage
migration as a potentially novel mechanism supporting the pro-tumorigenic
activity of PAI-1. Whether small molecule inhibitors of PAI-1 have
anti-tumorigenic activity in vivo is being further pursued by our
laboratory in preclinical mouse models.

