Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening of pediatric and adult sarcoma cell lines reveals novel
patterns of sensitivity toward approved oncology drugs and
investigational agents.


Sarcomas represent a heterogeneous group of neglected cancers with
significant unmet medical need. To date, large-scale screening of
compounds for activity against sarcomas has not been carried out in any
systematic fashion to enable drug discovery. Our laboratory has compiled
a panel of > 85 human pediatric and adult sarcoma cell lines, a tumor
type not represented in the NCI60, and has carried out a high throughput
screen of approximately 60 of these lines against the Approved Oncology
Drugs (AOD) and Investigational Agents libraries, using inhibition of
proliferation as an endpoint. The AOD library is comprised of 93
FDA-approved anticancer agents, and is available from The NCI/DTP Open
Chemical Repository. The Investigational Agents library includes about
350 small molecules of interest. The compounds were screened for
inhibition of cell proliferation in 9-point concentration response,
starting at 10 uM and diluting by half-logs. The cells were cultured in
384-well plates for 24 hrs, at which time compounds were added with a
final DMSO concentration of 0.25%. Viability was determined after 96 hrs
of exposure using Alamar Blue. The % viability was determined relative to
a vehicle-treated control, and this value was plotted relative to
compound concentration to determine the EC50. The Ewing sarcoma lines
(19) were unexpectedly more sensitive to pemetrexed, cabazitaxel, and
floxuridine, and were, as expected, sensitive to topoisomerase 1
inhibitors relative to other sarcomas and to historical NCI60 data.
Synovial sarcoma lines were sensitive to vinorelbine, vandetinib, and
gemcitabine relative to other sarcomas. Further analyses and findings
from the data will be presented. Funded by NCI Contract no.
HHSN261200800001E.

