Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted sequencing to identify rare variants in colorectal cancer.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is estimated to be the third most common cancer
in both men and women in the US in 2012, accounting for over 50,000
deaths. Familial CRC accounts for approximately 30% of all CRC, yet only
5% of familial CRCs can be attributed to mutations in known hereditary
colon cancer (HCC) genes. Many families with a strong family history of
CRC do not have mutations in known CRC genes. Finding the genes
underpinning CRC in these families may improve screening for disease and
allow the development of more targeted therapeutics.We completed targeted
sequencing of over 2,000 genes and miRNAs in 1,500 cases of CRC from the
Colon Cancer Family Registry (CCFR) in an effort to identify rare
variants associated with CRC risk and to identify mutations in known CRC
genes missed by conventional sequencing. Several categories of genes were
included: 18 known HCC genes; 18 candidate HCC genes; 185 genes in
previously reported CRC linkage peaks; 1,423 miRNAs; and 363 genes
identified through whole exome sequencing of 40 affected cases in 16
families with hereditary CRC (n=2,007 total genes sequenced). Genomic DNA
samples were indexed, then libraries were made using Agilent's SureSelect
Targeted Enrichment kit. Samples were pooled (96 samples/pool), then each
pool of samples was run on five lanes on an Illumina HiSeq2000 (average
of 19.2 samples/lane). GenomeGPS, an in-house developed workflow, was
used for read alignment, variant calling, and annotation.In early
analyses of the first 161 cases, the mean number of mapped reads exceeded
20 million per sample and over 90% of the target region exceeded 40x
coverage. A total of 26,484 SNPs were identified and passed quality
filtering. Sequencing identified known mutations in MMR genes in positive
control cases as well as mutations in HCC genes in previously untested
cases. Analysis is currently on-going on the remaining samples and we
will report results on the full set of 1500 cases at the meeting.

