Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BRD-inhibitor OTX015 affects proliferation and gene expression
of cells derived from mature lymphoid neoplasms.


Inhibitors of the BET family members BRD2/3/4 are a promising new class
of anti-cancer drugs. Here, we assessed the antitumor activity and the
mechanism of action of OTX015, a selective orally bioavailable BRD2/3/4
inhibitor, in cells derived from human mature lymphoid neoplasms.OTX015
was evaluated in 31 B-cell malignancies cell lines: 13 diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL), 8 anaplastic large T-cell lymphomas (ALCL), 4
mantle cell lymphomas (MCL), 3 splenic marginal zone lymphomas (SMZL),
and 3 multiple myelomas (MM). Anti-proliferative effect was seen in the
majority of the cell lines. The median IC50s, calculated at 72h, were:
DLBCL, 0.19M (range 0.07-12.68); ALCL, 0.48M (0.04-9.1); SMZL, 0.16M
(0.1-0.24); MM, 0.45M (0.06-0.7); MCL, 2M (1.22- >15). There were
apparently no IC50 differences based on the cell of origin (DLBCL) or
ALK-positivity status (ALCL). Apoptosis did not appear as the main effect
of the drug, being not observed in 11 cell lines treated with the IC50
defined by MTT test after 72-hour exposure. However, OTX105 determined a
dose-dependent G1 cell cycle arrest in 12/12 cell lines (DLBCL, MM and
ALCL), and an increased percentage of senescent cells in 3/3 sensitive
cell lines (DLBCL and ALCL).MYC mRNA was suppressed in a dose-dependent
manner in 4/5 DLBCL, 4/4 ALCL and 2/2 MM cell lines. Down-regulation was
usually seen within 1h. Real-time PCR showed that MYC and also NFKB
target genes were affected. Gene expression profiling (GEP), using the
Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 Expression BeadChip array, was done in 3 sensitive
DLBCL cell lines, exposed to DMSO or OTX015 (0.5M) for 4h and 8h. MYC was
the most down-regulated gene. Functional annotation of the down-regulated
genes identified an over-representation of genes involved in RNA and DNA
metabolism and cell cycle, putative MYC target genes and transcripts
reported as down-regulated after treatment with aminopeptidase inhibitors
and HDAC-inhibitors. Up-regulated transcripts were enriched of genes
coding for proteins involved in chromatin structure, as well as putative
MYC target genes and transcripts reported as up-regulated after treatment
with HDAC-inhibitors, demethylating agents or aplidine. Also, GEP
signature was similar to what reported for the BRD-inhibitor JQ1.In
conclusion, OTX015 showed in vitro anti-tumoral activity in a large
series of mature lymphoid neoplasms. The activity was largely cytostatic,
with cell cycle G1 arrest and induction of senescence. Down-regulation of
MYC and its putative targets appeared as the main effect, but it might
not be the only mechanism of action, since a few cell lines did not
appear to down-regulate MYC after exposure to OTX015, which also induced
down-regulation of NFKB target genes and modulation of transcripts
similar to what observed with HDAC-inhibitors. The compound appears worth
of further investigation as a new promising therapeutic agent in
lymphomas.

