Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and optimization of CZ48-loaded microbubbles for
controlled drug delivery .


CZ48, the 20-O-propionate ester of camptothecin, is a prodrug requiring
activation by converting to parental CPT in vivo. To circumvent the
problems of low water solubility, lack of absorption, and poor
bioavailability, novel CZ48-loaded microbubbles were investigated in this
study. CZ48-loaded microbubbles were prepared at particle sizes ranging
from 0.5 m to 6.7 m using a double emulsion technique (W/O/W). The
satisfactory encapsulation efficiency and drug-loading content were
85.732.41% and 26.070.76%, respectively. The successful encapsulation of
the microbubbles was confirmed by confocal laser scanning microscope
(CLSM) observations and X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns. The comparison
between the controlled drug release from CZ48-loaded microbubbles and the
free drug release from plain CZ48 crystals was performed in vitro,
showing that 55% of the CZ48 was steadily released by the CZ48-loaded
microbubbles in the first 48 hrs while more than 90% of the CZ48 was
rapidly released by CZ48 crystals within the first 5 hrs. In vivo
pharmacokinetic studies indicated that the bioavailabilities of CZ48 and
CPT from CZ48-loaded microbubbles raised 121% and 517%, respectively,
after intravenous administration compared to the plain CZ48. Compared to
the plain CZ48, CZ48-loaded microbubbles also showed a higher mean
residence time (MRT) and a longer elimination half-life (T1/2),
indicating that CZ48-loaded microbubbles were indeed able to release CZ48
drug in a finely controlled manner. These results demonstrated that such
microbubbles could be a promising approach for the construction of an
effectively controlled drug delivery system for CZ48 as well as for other
drugs with lower water solubility.

