Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mild ER stress increases human ABC transporter expression and drug
transport function in polarized cell monolayers.


Expression of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter genes such as MDR1
(ABCB1/P-gp) is associated with poor outcome in chemotherapy and a
multidrug resistant phenotype in cancer. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress has been implicated in tumor growth but its role in drug
resistance remains unclear. Here, we hypothesize that ER stress could
increase expression of drug efflux transporters. To test this hypothesis,
we developed a transient expression system in which human ABC
transporters were ectopically expressed in a cell line monolayer by the
BacMam baculovirus. The baculovirus is able to infect several mammalian
cell lines including LLC-PK1, T-84, and MA104 without affecting the
tightness of the host cell monolayers. In LLC-PK1 cells infected by
BacMam vectors, induction of mild ER stress by pre-incubation
(pre-conditioning) with thapsigargin (0.5 g/ml) or tunicamycin (1 g/ml),
which are well-characterized ER-stress inducers, increased ABCB1 (P-gp)
and ABCG2 (BCRP) levels. Drug transport assays showed that P-gp
expressing cells pre-conditioned with thapsigargin showed increased
directional transport of [3H] paclitaxel across the cell monolayer. The
effect of thapsigargin was inhibited by the presence of the Erk inhibitor
PD098059 but not the P38(MAPK) inhibitor SB203580, or the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) inhibitor LY294002, suggesting
that expression of ABC transporter is influenced by mild ER stress
response and, at least in part, by the ERK/MAPK signaling pathway.
Although pre-conditioning with tunicamycin can increase P-gp expression,
it also inhibits N-glycosylation of P-gp. Collectively, our findings
indicate that mild ER stress responses up-regulate drug transporters
introduced into cells by BacMam vectors.

