Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF2 mRNA binding protein 1 drives growth, metastasis and
chemoresistance in osteosarcoma.


Osteosarcoma (OSA) is the most common bone tumor in children arising in
the metaphyseal regions of the appendicular skeleton and frequently
metastasizing to the lungs. Standard treatment for OSA of surgical
resection with neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy using multi-agent
dose intensive therapy has resulted in survival rates of 75%, however for
patients with metastasis at diagnosis, the survival rate is only 20%.
Consequently, increased understanding of the mechanisms that contribute
to metastasis and resistance to therapy is needed. Unfortunately, the
availability of OSA samples for study is extremely limited. However, over
10,000 canine patients spontaneously develop OSA annually and canine
tumors share common histological features, genetic mutations and gene
expression profiles with human OSA. To identify factors that contribute
to metastasis and chemotherapeutic resistance of OSA, we assessed the
gene expression signatures of normal bone and groups of primary canine
OSA tumors surgically resected from dogs with short and long disease free
intervals (DFI) following standard treatment of amputation and therapy
with doxorubicin or platinum-based drugs. Since the average DFI following
treatment in canine osteosarcoma is approximately 200 days, these groups
included tumors from dogs with DFI300 days. We identified IGF2 mRNA
binding protein 1 (IGF2BP1) as a gene with elevated expression in
osteosarcomas from patients with a DFI300 group (7-fold, p=0.047) and
normal bone (920-fold, p300 group (7-fold, p=0.047) and normal bone
(920-fold, p<0.001). IGF2BP1 is an oncofetal protein that binds multiple
mRNA targets to regulate their nuclear transport, stability, translation
and subcellular localization. In five human OSA cell lines we measured an
average 14-fold increase in IGF2BP1 mRNA transcripts compared to normal
human osteoblasts. More importantly, we measured elevated mRNA
transcripts (five-fold, p=0.0368) and protein levels (seven-fold) in the
MG63.2 cell line, a metastatic variant of the MG63 human OSA cell line,
implicating IGF2BP1 in metastasis of osteosarcoma. IGF2BP1 knockdown in
shRNA-expressing MG63.2 clones reduced cell invasion by 42% (p300 group
(7-fold, p=0.047) and normal bone (920-fold, p<0.001). IGF2BP1 is an
oncofetal protein that binds multiple mRNA targets to regulate their
nuclear transport, stability, translation and subcellular localization.
In five human OSA cell lines we measured an average 14-fold increase in
IGF2BP1 mRNA transcripts compared to normal human osteoblasts. More
importantly, we measured elevated mRNA transcripts (five-fold, p=0.0368)
and protein levels (seven-fold) in the MG63.2 cell line, a metastatic
variant of the MG63 human OSA cell line, implicating IGF2BP1 in
metastasis of osteosarcoma. IGF2BP1 knockdown in shRNA-expressing MG63.2
clones reduced cell invasion by 42% (p<0.05). In addition, IGF2BP1
knockdown in MG63.2 cells resulted in a three-fold (p300 group (7-fold,
p=0.047) and normal bone (920-fold, p<0.001). IGF2BP1 is an oncofetal
protein that binds multiple mRNA targets to regulate their nuclear
transport, stability, translation and subcellular localization. In five
human OSA cell lines we measured an average 14-fold increase in IGF2BP1
mRNA transcripts compared to normal human osteoblasts. More importantly,
we measured elevated mRNA transcripts (five-fold, p=0.0368) and protein
levels (seven-fold) in the MG63.2 cell line, a metastatic variant of the
MG63 human OSA cell line, implicating IGF2BP1 in metastasis of
osteosarcoma. IGF2BP1 knockdown in shRNA-expressing MG63.2 clones reduced
cell invasion by 42% (p<0.05). In addition, IGF2BP1 knockdown in MG63.2
cells resulted in a three-fold (p<0.001) decrease in cellular
proliferation compared to cells stably expressing a non-targeted shRNA
construct. A similar experiment was performed in vivo using a
subcutaneous model in nude mice (n=5/group) where the IGF2BP1 knockdown
tumors from two independent shRNA constructs displayed significantly
delayed tumor appearance and reduced tumor volume compared to control at
days 9 (p300 group (7-fold, p=0.047) and normal bone (920-fold, p<0.001).
IGF2BP1 is an oncofetal protein that binds multiple mRNA targets to
regulate their nuclear transport, stability, translation and subcellular
localization. In five human OSA cell lines we measured an average 14-fold
increase in IGF2BP1 mRNA transcripts compared to normal human
osteoblasts. More importantly, we measured elevated mRNA transcripts
(five-fold, p=0.0368) and protein levels (seven-fold) in the MG63.2 cell
line, a metastatic variant of the MG63 human OSA cell line, implicating
IGF2BP1 in metastasis of osteosarcoma. IGF2BP1 knockdown in
shRNA-expressing MG63.2 clones reduced cell invasion by 42% (p<0.05). In
addition, IGF2BP1 knockdown in MG63.2 cells resulted in a three-fold
(p<0.001) decrease in cellular proliferation compared to cells stably
expressing a non-targeted shRNA construct. A similar experiment was
performed in vivo using a subcutaneous model in nude mice (n=5/group)
where the IGF2BP1 knockdown tumors from two independent shRNA constructs
displayed significantly delayed tumor appearance and reduced tumor volume
compared to control at days 9 (p<0.05), 12 and 14 (p300 group (7-fold,
p=0.047) and normal bone (920-fold, p<0.001). IGF2BP1 is an oncofetal
protein that binds multiple mRNA targets to regulate their nuclear
transport, stability, translation and subcellular localization. In five
human OSA cell lines we measured an average 14-fold increase in IGF2BP1
mRNA transcripts compared to normal human osteoblasts. More importantly,
we measured elevated mRNA transcripts (five-fold, p=0.0368) and protein
levels (seven-fold) in the MG63.2 cell line, a metastatic variant of the
MG63 human OSA cell line, implicating IGF2BP1 in metastasis of
osteosarcoma. IGF2BP1 knockdown in shRNA-expressing MG63.2 clones reduced
cell invasion by 42% (p<0.05). In addition, IGF2BP1 knockdown in MG63.2
cells resulted in a three-fold (p<0.001) decrease in cellular
proliferation compared to cells stably expressing a non-targeted shRNA
construct. A similar experiment was performed in vivo using a
subcutaneous model in nude mice (n=5/group) where the IGF2BP1 knockdown
tumors from two independent shRNA constructs displayed significantly
delayed tumor appearance and reduced tumor volume compared to control at
days 9 (p<0.05), 12 and 14 (p<0.001) following tumor cell inoculation.
Finally, IGF2BP1 knockdown resulted in a two-fold increase in doxorubicin
sensitivity in MG63.2 cells (95% confidence interval). Overall, these
data suggest IGF2BP1 drives OSA growth, metastasis and chemotherapeutic
resistance.

