Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the PH domain of TIAM1 to inhibit prostate cancer
metastasis.


TIAM1 (T-lymphoma invasion and metastasis-inducing protein-1) is a highly
conserved guanine nucleotide exchange factor and contains an Dbl Homology
(DH)/C-terminal Pleckstrin Homology (PH) domain. The crystal structure of
DH-PH of TIAM1 in complex with Rac-1 has been reported. TIAM1 has been
found to be over-expressed cancers such as breast, colon and prostate
cancers. An increase in TIAM1 expression has been shown to be associated
with increased metastatic potential of breast cancer cell lines and is
also correlated with poor prognosis of patients with prostate cancer.
TIAM1 is thus a novel PH domain-containing drug target directly related
to cancer progression, metastasis and patient survival. We have
identified and characterized novel small molecule inhibitors targeting
the phosphoinositide lipid binding PH domain of TIAM1 in order to
selectively inhibit cell migration, invasion and survival. An In Silico
screen of our internal and Maybridge library using the crystal structure
of TIAM1 has identified 11 compounds that bind to the PH domain. In vitro
assays revealed that compounds TPH-3 and TPH-15 significantly reduced the
amount of active Rac1 in PC-3 prostate cancer cells (EC50 of 2.730.13 and
2.380.98 M) by binding to PH-TIAM1 with high affinity (KD in the
micromolar range) using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) spectrometry.
Both compounds displaced PtdIns-3,4,5-P3 in a SPR competitive binding
assay. TPH-3 and TPH-15 inhibited cell proliferation with EC50 of 19.83.2
and 28.71.7 M in prostate cancer cells LnCaP and EC50 of 18.61.8 and
33.36.7 M in PC-3. Wound healing assays and lamellipodia formation were
both inhibited by the compounds. TPH-15 inhibited 70% of PC-3 invasion
using a matrigel invasion assay. Finally, TPH-15 exhibits anti-tumor
properties in a PC-3 mouse xenograft study (%T/C38.8) with good
pharmacokinetic properties (T1/25 hours). Cardio-injection of prostate
PC-3 cells in SCID mice was used to test the effects of TPH-15 in the
prevention of bone metastasis. Mice were treated with 50mg/kg ip of
TPH-15 once a day for 5 days. TPH-15-treated mice developed significantly
less pelvic bone lesions than the untreated group and TPH-15 treated mice
lived longer, on average, than the untreated group. Overall, we have
identified novel compounds which exhibit the ability to reduce prostate
cancer bone metastasis by binding to the PH domain of TIAM1, an important
GEF in the process of metastasis.

