Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted liposomes to pancreatic cancer are effective in
controlling the tumor load in mice.


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths. Targeted
drug delivery to pancreas will increase the drug efficacy especially in
inoperable tumors and reduce its toxicity. In this study we prepared
targeted liposomes to SLC7A11 transporter which is upregulated in
pancreatic cancers as our previous work has shown. The objective of our
work was to evaluate the antitumor effect of targeted liposomes loaded
with daunorubicin (DNR) in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer. Mice
C57BL/6 were injected subcutaneously with 1x 106 PanO2 cells. When the
tumors became palpable the mice were injected with different targeted or
non targeted liposomal formulations of DNR. There were 5 groups: group A,
saline; group B, free DNR; group C,DNR encapsulated in non-targeted
liposomes; group D, DNR encapsulated in targeted liposomes; group E; DNR
encapsulated in targeted liposomes with PEG. DNR dose was 5mg/kg once a
week for the first two weeks. Another set of group of mice received a
single dose. We measured the tumor size from the day of treatment until
the animals were euthanized. On the day of autopsy, tumors were removed,
sectioned and placed in a microscope to observe the DNR accumulation.
Animals treated with targeted liposomes containing DNR had a
significantly lower tumor load compared to those received DNR in
nontargeted liposomes. The average body weight of animals that received
free DNR shows a decrease which may be due to drug toxicity. Fluorescent
images of tumor sections showed that the tumors treated with DNR in
targeted liposomes had more fluorescence than tumors treated with free
DNR or DNR encapsulated in nontargeted liposomes.The results indicate
that DNR encapsulated in the targeted liposomes was more effective in
reducing the tumor load compared to free DNR or DNR encapsulated in
nontargeted liposomes.

