Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial MKP1-mediated radioresistance in breast cancer stem
cells.


The overall cure rate of primary tumors has been significantly improved
in the last three decades; however, metastatic and recurrent tumors with
aggressive growth and therapy-resistance remain as the major factors
shortening breast cancer patients survival. MKP1, a mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) phosphatase, was shown to be linked with
chemoresistance in breast cancer cells and was overexpressed in
radioresistant breast cancer cells that survived long-term fractionated
irradiation. Herein, we showed that MKP1 is present in the mitochondria
and mitochondrial MKP1 levels are significantly enhanced in irradiated
cells, suggesting that increased MKP1 translocation into the mitochondria
may function to attenuate pro-apoptotic signals that were initiated from
mitochondria-localized MAPK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). We found that
increased mitochondrial MKP1 levels correlated with the reduced level of
phosphorylated active JNK in irradiated cells. Such mitochondrial
MKP1-mediated dephosphorylation of JNK was predominantly enhanced in the
radioresistant breast cancer cells that can be sensitized by
siRNA-mediated inhibition of MKP1. Our results also demonstrated the
involvement of extracellular regulated kinase (ERK) as the upstream
signal for MKP1 mitochondrial translocation. The identification of cancer
stem cells (CSCs) in all human tumors and their involvement in tumor
radioresistance encouraged the studies investigating whether
MKP1-mediated survival mechanism is present in radioresistant breast
cancer cells. Here we showed that MKP1 is overexpressed in irradiated
HER2-positive breast CSCs. These data provide critical insights on the
aggressive phenotype of breast tumors and define novel diagnostic and
therapeutic targets to re-sensitize resistant breast cancer stem cells.

