Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dependency on c-MYC in multiple myeloma.


The oncogene c-MYC is deregulated in multiple myeloma. Importantly, the
activity of c-MYC is elevated in plasma cells in patients with myeloma
compared to the premalignant state monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined
significance, indicating a prominent role for c-MYC in myeloma
pathogenesis. We earlier found the bone morphogenetic proteins induce
apoptosis in myeloma cell lines and primary cells by SMAD-dependent
downregulation of c-MYC. Repression of c-MYC by short hairpin RNA in
myeloma cell lines has by others also been shown to induce apoptosis. We
wanted to go one step further and study the role of c-MYC in primary
myeloma cells. Transcriptional regulation by c-MYC requires
heterodimerization of c-MYC and its obligate partner MAX. The small
molecular inhibitor 10058-F4 disrupts the formation of such heterodimers
and was used in vitro to test the dependency on c-MYC activity in primary
myeloma cells and myeloma cell lines. The inhibitor induced apoptosis in
a dose-dependent manner in the 22 primary samples tested. Apoptosis was
induced in five of six cell lines tested. The sixth cell line, U266, does
not express c-MYC, and was not sensitive to the inhibitor. Using the
INA-6 myeloma cell line, we found that apoptosis induced by 10058-F4
correlated with downregulation of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL. We
also found that apoptosis was induced by the inhibitor even in the
presence of bone marrow stromal cells derived from myeloma patients. Our
results further support that c-MYC is a potential target for therapy in
multiple myeloma.

