Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-7 targeting PSME3 inhibits the growth of non-small cell
lung cancer.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a family of small non-coding RNAs that function as
important regulators of multiple target genes and participate in diverse
biological roles in carcinogenesis..In this study, we found that the
expression of miR-7 was downregulated not only in cell lines, but also in
human NSCLC tissues compared to the matched adjacent tissues, which
exhibited positive correlation with tumor volume.Restoration of its
expression through miR-7 mimics in NSCLC cell lines including A549 and
H1299 cells inhibited cell proliferation, colony formation, and cell
cycle progression in vitro. More importantly, the tumorigenicity in nude
mice was reduced after administration of miR-7 in vivo, strongly
indicating that miR-7 is a main tumor suppressor miRNA in NSCLC. In
advance, through a series of analysis derived from bioinformatics
prediction, western blot and luciferase assay, we identified a novel
target of miR-7, PSME3 (a proteasome activator) to be enrolled in the
regulation with tumor. Expression of PSME3 in NSCLC tumor samples was
significantly upregulated compared to adjacent non-tumor tissues,
exhibiting a strong inverse relation with that of miR-7. In addition,
knockdown of PSME3 gene induced similar effects to overexpression of
miR-7 in NSCLC cells. All these findings strongly imply that the
overexpression of PSME3 resulted from miR-7 downexpression in NSCLC plays
an important role in promoting cancer cell progress, and consequently
results in NSCLC growth. Thus, strategies targeting PSME3 and/or miR-7
may be the promising molecular therapy in NSCLC treatment.

