Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNP (-617G>A) in ARE-like loci of the NRF2 gene: a new biomarker
for prognosis of lung adenocarcinoma.


Purpose: Accumulating evidence suggests nuclear factor (erythroid-derived
2)-like 2 (NRF2) plays an important role as cellular defense, tumor
suppression, and oncogenesis. However, little information is available as
to the genetic polymorohisms of the NRF2 gene and their clinical
relevance. We aimed to validate the NRF2 gene as a prognostic biomarker
in lung cancer.Experimental Design: We prepared genomic DNA from 392
Japanese patients with primary lung cancer and detected a SNP (c.-617C>A)
in the ARE-like loci of the human NRF2 gene by the rapid genetic testing
method we developed in this study. We analyzed an association between the
NRF2 gene and overall survival.Results: We detected homozygous (A/A) and
heterozygous (C/A) alleles with the SNP (c.-617C>A) in 24 (6.2%) and 147
(38.0%) patients, respectively. The frequency of the homozygote (A/A) was
four-fold higher in females than in males (11.0% versus 2.7%).
Multivariate logistic regression models including standard lung cancer
factors revealed that the homozygous alleles (c.-617A/A) were
significantly related to gender. Interestingly, lung cancer patients
carrying the homozygous alleles (c.-617A/A) exhibited remarkable survival
over 1,700 days after surgical operation (log-rank p=0.021).Conclusion:
The homozygous allele (c.-617A/A) in the NRF2 gene is considered to be a
prognostic biomarker for assessing both the gender-related risk of lung
adenocarcinoma in the non-smoking sub-population and their overall
survival.

