Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of Bcl-2 pro-survival family proteins predicts
pharmacological responses to ABT-199, a novel and selective Bcl-2
antagonist, in multiple myeloma models.


A hallmark feature of cancer is the ability to evade cell death signals
induced by stress response cues mediated, in part, by the the Bcl-2
family of pro-apoptotic and pro-survival proteins. ABT-199 is a potent
BH3-only mimetic that selectively antagonizes the pro-survival function
of Bcl-2. The work presented describes the efficacy of ABT-199 as a
single agent and in combination with bortezomib in preclinical models of
Multiple Myeloma (MM). Expression of Bcl-2 protein was detected in 95% of
MM cell lines (n=21) evaluated and ABT-199 reduced cell viability in a
sub-set of these lines (7/21) with EC50 values less than 0.5 M.
Expression of Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 at the mRNA and protein levels were also
evaluated to determine predictors of drug sensitivity and resistance to
ABT-199. MM lines that expressed higher levels of Bcl-2 relative to
Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 were the most sensitive to ABT-199 treatment while those
that were less sensitive expressed higher levels of Mcl-1 or Bcl-xL.
Other predictors of sensitivity to ABT-199 included higher levels of
Bcl-2/Bim complexes and t(11;14) status. Ex vivo, 75% of the MM bone
marrow biopsies and aspirates (n=27) had high Bcl-2 levels whereas 50%
had high Bcl-xL expression, demonstrating that a subset of patient
samples (33%) have a favorable biomarker profile (Bcl-2-high/Bcl-xL-low)
that may be predictive of ABT-199 activity. Efficacy of ABT-199 as a
single agent and in combination with bortezomib was evaluated in vivo in
MM xenograft models that expressed Bcl-2 (OPM-2, KMS-11, RPMI-8226, H929
and MM.1s). Bortezomib treatment alone at maximum tolerated doses
resulted in tumor regressions or stasis in all xenograft models tested.
ABT-199 at maximum tolerated doses was efficacious as a single agent in
xenograft models that expressed higher protein levels of Bcl-2 but
relatively lower levels of Bcl-xL. The combination of ABT-199 with
bortezomib increased overall response rates, durability of anti-tumor
activity and levels of apoptotic markers such as cleaved caspase 3 and
PARP when compared to bortezomib alone even in MM xenograft models that
also express relatively high levels of Mcl-1. Treatment with bortezomib
in vivo increased levels of Noxa; a pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein that
selectively antagonizes Mcl-1. Therefore, greater efficacy may be
achieved when ABT-199 is combined with bortezomib due to inhibition of
Bcl-2 by ABT-199 and neutralization of Mcl-1 by Noxa in tumors that
express both pro-survival proteins. Our preclinical data supports the
evaluation of ABT-199 as a single agent and in combination with
bortezomib in MM patients in which relative expression of the Bcl-2
pro-survival proteins may serve as predictive biomarkers of drug activity.

