Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the MSI2 gene on 17q22-24.2 and its role in
Breast Cancer.


Introduction: We have previously found genomic gain on 17q22-24.2 to be a
predictor of invasion when detected in duct carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and
of nodal metastasis when detected in invasive duct carcinoma (IDC).
Within this gene-rich amplicon we have identified a gene, Musashi homolog
2 (MSI2), which appears to play an important role in breast cancer
progression. MSI2 is known to have a functional role in neural stem cell
maintenance and the regulation of hematopoietic stem cells. More
recently, this gene was shown to facilitate progression from the leukemic
blast phase to the crisis phase.Methodology: The mRNA expression profile
for MSI2 was determined by qRT-PCR in 9 breast cancer cell lines
(MDA-MB-157, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, BT549, CAMA1, Hs578T, MCF7 and
SKBR3) and a non-malignant mammary epithelial cell line (MCF10A). Western
blots were used to confirm protein expression. MCF7 mammospheres and MSI2
overexpression clones were assessed for breast stem cell markers.
Immunofluorescence was conducted at embryonic stages E10.5 to E15.5 to
determine the role of MSI2 in murine mammary bud formation. MDA-MB-231
and MCF7 cells expressing MSI2-GFP and GFP clones were plated on
transwells to examine cell migration and invasiveness. Proliferation was
analyzed by the MTS assay. To understand the expression of MSI2 in
patient tissue, tissue microarrays (TMAs) containing 232 breast cancers
were analyzed by immunohistochemistry.Results: MSI2 was expressed in all
breast cell lines tested. Immunohistochemical analyses of MSI2 in normal
adult human breast tissue revealed expression in the basal luminal
epithelial cells of the terminal duct lobular unit, with little
expression in the stroma. In murine mammary line formation, E10.5 to
E12.5 showed expression of MSI2 in both the mammary ductal epithelium and
the mesenchyme. MSI2 expression diminished in mesenchyme and was
restricted to the ductal epithelium by E14.5. MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cells
expressing MSI2-GFP demonstrated a 50% increase in cell migration and 30%
more invasion compared to the GFP control. Correspondingly, knockdown
clones showed the reverse effect. Increased MSI2 was coupled with an
increase in the stem cell markers: CD24, CD44, Aldh11, CD133 and ABCG2
receptor. When the study was extended to patient TMAs, high MSI2
expression correlated with higher tumor grade.Conclusion: These
experiments provide strong evidence that MSI2 plays an important role in
normal breast development and breast cancer. MSI2 promotes migration and
invasion and also appears to increase stem cell related properties which
may explain the relationship to higher tumor grade. MSI2 is likely one of
the drivers of the 17q22-24.2 amplicon in breast cancer and a better
understanding of its role in breast cancer may lead the way to novel
therapeutic strategies.

