Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB2/HER2 translocates into mitochondria
and regulates cellular metabolism.


It is well accepted that ErbB2, an important oncoprotein, localizes on
the plasma membrane as a receptor tyrosine kinase. This study describes a
novel observation that ErbB2 localizes in mitochondria of multiple cancer
cell lines and patient samples.We identified an endogenous mitochondrial
targeting sequence in ErbB2 and found that ErbB2 translocates into
mitochondria through the association with mtHSP70, a key player in the
canonical mitochondrial protein importation pathway. Additionally, we
observed that mitochondrial ErbB2 (mtErbB2) negatively regulates
mitochondrial respiratory functions. Oxygen consumption and activities of
complex I, II and IV of the mitochondrial electron transport chain were
decreased in mtErbB2-overexpressing cells. Mitochondrial membrane
potential and the cellular ATP level also were decreased by mtErbB2. In
contrast, mtErbB2 enhanced cellular glycolysis. The translocation of
ErbB2 and its impact on mitochondrial function are kinase dependent.
Mitochondrial ErbB2 regulates the phosphorylation and activity of COX II
and consequently the cytochrome c release and apoptosis. Additional
studies showed that cancer cells with higher levels of mtErbB2 were more
resistant to Trastuzumab and deletion of the mitochondrial targeting
sequence of ErbB2 sensitized the cells to Trastuzumab.Our study provides
a novel perspective on the metabolic regulatory functions of ErbB2 and
reveals that mtErbB2 plays an important role in the regulation of
cellular metabolism and cancer cell resistance to therapeutics. Since
ErbB2 plays important roles in multiple organs and multiple types of
cancers, the study may have broad impact on the fields of cancer
biology.The work was supported by The Vincent F. Kilborn Jr. Cancer
Research Foundation and National Institutes of Health Grant RO1CA149646.

