Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Network interrogations on SNAIL inhibitor GN-25 induced
perturbations in HMLE-SNAIL cell line models.


HMLEs (HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL pairs) serve as excellent model
system to interrogate the effect of SNAIL targeted agents that reverse
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We developed a SNAIL-p53
interaction inhibitor (GN-25) that was shown to suppress SNAIL function.
In this report, using pathway network analysis, we show that GN-25
induces the reversal of EMT to mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET)
in well recognized HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL models. GN-25 induced
MET was found to be concurrent with growth inhibition, suppression of
spheroid forming capacity and induction of apoptosis. We performed
systems and pathway network analysis on mRNA expression by microarrays
from GN-25 treated Kras-HMLE-SNAIL cells that showed an orchestrated
global re-organization of EMT network genes. The expression signatures
were validated at the protein level using confocal microscopy, western
blot analysis and time lapse videography, and we found down-regulation of
mesenchymal markers such as TWIST1, TWIST2, ZEB-1 concurrently with
up-regulation of epithelial marker E-Cadherin. Additionally, RNAi studies
validated SNAIL dependent mechanism of action of the drug. Most
importantly, GN-25 deregulated many major transcription factors (TFs)
such as inhibition of oncogenic TFs Myc, TBX2, NR3C1 and enhancement in
tumor suppressor TFs such as SMAD7, DD1T3, CEBPA, HOXA5, TFEB, IRF1, IRF7
and XBP1, resulting in MET as well as induction of cell death. Our
systems and network investigations provide solid pre-clinical supportive
evidence for clinical application of GN-25 for the reversal of EMT
phenotype to MET in aggressive cancers.

