Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-resolution genomic profiling reveals gains of CCND1 and EGFR
associated with disease progression in Taiwanese oral cavity squamous
cell carcinomas.


The genetic mechanisms underlying Taiwanese oral cavity squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) are still largely unknown. We used high-resolution
single nucleotide polymorphism microarrays (Affymetrix 500K) to detect
copy number alterations (CNAs) in 26 OSCC tumor tissues. Genomic copy
number was determined by calculating the intensity ratio between the OSCC
and a set of 270 normal DNAs from HapMap project. Segmented copy numbers
for each tumor were inferred with the hidden markov model (HMM) using the
Partek GS software. Genomic Identification of Significant Targets in
Cancer (GISTIC) analysis (version 2.0) was used to identify significant
CNAs using a residual Q-value cutoff of 0.25. A total of 25 significant
regions (2 focal amplifications and 23 deletions) were identified. The
well known oncogene EGFR and CCND1 are resided in these two focal
amplification regions (7p11.2 and 11q13.3), respectively. Several
candidate cancer related genes such as FHIT (3p14.2), FAT (4q35.1),
SH3GL2 (9p22.2) and ARHGAP21 (10p12.1) are known to locate in the
identified 23 deletion regions. Furthermore, we found that 7p11.2
amplification and 4q35.2 deletion was mutually exclusive by inter-target
relationships (ITR) analysis using dimension reduction permutation (DRP)
methods. Copy number gains of EGFR and CCND1 were also confirmed along
with fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and TaqMan CN assay
(Hs01818912_cn and Hs00655630_cn), respectively. We found that the
concordance rate was 70.59% for EGFR and 75.00% for CCND1. To further
explore the clinical value of copy number gains of EGFR and CCND1 in
OSCC, 182 OSCC cases were analyzed. Preliminary results indicated that
gains of CCND1 were associated with tumor differentiation, lymph node
metastasis and lymph node extracapsular spread (LNECS); while
amplification of EGFR gene was significantly associated with tumor stage
and lymph node metastasis but not LNECS. Furthermore, gains of CCND1 were
significantly associated with poor disease-free and overall survival. On
the other hand, amplification of EGFR was not associated with either
disease-free or overall survival. Taken together, we have identified that
gains of CCND1 and EGFR gene were significantly associated with disease
progression in Taiwanese oral cavity squamous cell carcinomas.

