Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-20a inhibits thyroid cancer cell growth and invasion through
LIMK1.


There have been conflicting reports regarding the function of miR-20a in
a variety of cancers. In this study, we evaluated the expression and
function of miR-20a in thyroid cancer tissue and cell lines in vitro and
in vivo. We found miR-20a was significantly downregulated in
undifferentiated and aggressive thyroid cancer (pThere have been
conflicting reports regarding the function of miR-20a in a variety of
cancers. In this study, we evaluated the expression and function of
miR-20a in thyroid cancer tissue and cell lines in vitro and in vivo. We
found miR-20a was significantly downregulated in undifferentiated and
aggressive thyroid cancer (p<0.05). Ectopic overexpression of miR-20a
significantly inhibited thyroid cancer cell proliferation in vitro (p
There have been conflicting reports regarding the function of miR-20a in
a variety of cancers. In this study, we evaluated the expression and
function of miR-20a in thyroid cancer tissue and cell lines in vitro and
in vivo. We found miR-20a was significantly downregulated in
undifferentiated and aggressive thyroid cancer (p<0.05). Ectopic
overexpression of miR-20a significantly inhibited thyroid cancer cell
proliferation in vitro (p < 0.01) and in vivo (p There have been
conflicting reports regarding the function of miR-20a in a variety of
cancers. In this study, we evaluated the expression and function of
miR-20a in thyroid cancer tissue and cell lines in vitro and in vivo. We
found miR-20a was significantly downregulated in undifferentiated and
aggressive thyroid cancer (p<0.05). Ectopic overexpression of miR-20a
significantly inhibited thyroid cancer cell proliferation in vitro (p <
0.01) and in vivo (p < 0.01), tumor spheroid formation (p There have been
conflicting reports regarding the function of miR-20a in a variety of
cancers. In this study, we evaluated the expression and function of
miR-20a in thyroid cancer tissue and cell lines in vitro and in vivo. We
found miR-20a was significantly downregulated in undifferentiated and
aggressive thyroid cancer (p<0.05). Ectopic overexpression of miR-20a
significantly inhibited thyroid cancer cell proliferation in vitro (p <
0.01) and in vivo (p < 0.01), tumor spheroid formation (p < 0.05), and
invasion (p There have been conflicting reports regarding the function of
miR-20a in a variety of cancers. In this study, we evaluated the
expression and function of miR-20a in thyroid cancer tissue and cell
lines in vitro and in vivo. We found miR-20a was significantly
downregulated in undifferentiated and aggressive thyroid cancer (p<0.05).
Ectopic overexpression of miR-20a significantly inhibited thyroid cancer
cell proliferation in vitro (p < 0.01) and in vivo (p < 0.01), tumor
spheroid formation (p < 0.05), and invasion (p < 0.05) in multiple
thyroid cancer cell lines. We performed integrated transcriptome analysis
with and without miR-20a overexpression and target prediction analysis,
and identified LIMK1 as a target of miR-20a. Luciferase assay
demonstrated that LIMK1 was a direct target of miR-20a and that direct
knockdown of LIMK1 recapitulated the effects of miR-20a in multiple
thyroid cancer lines. Our findings suggest that miR-20a has a tumor
suppressive function in thyroid cancer which is mediated through LIMK1
and that loss of miR-20a expression may be involved in thyroid cancer
progression.

