Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benefits of follow-up screening for Epstein Barr virus DNA in
patients with localized nasopharyngial carcinoma .


Objective: In this study, we investigated whether detection of Epstein
Barr virus (EBV)-DNA in plasma is a prognostic indicator of disease
recurrence in patients who have been treated for localized nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.Methods: Study subjects comprised 389 patients who had received
treatment for localized nasopharyngeal carcinoma in our outpatient
department. Copy numbers of EBV-DNA in plasma were assessed by real-time
quantitative PCR. Patients in whom disease recurrence was suspected
underwent positron emission tomography (PET) imaging studies.Results:
Plasma EBV-DNA was detectable in 60 of 63 (95%) patients with metastatic
disease and all had positive PET findings. In addition, of the 45
patients with localized recurrent disease, plasma EBV-DNA was detectable
in 23 (51%) patients and positive PET scan results were obtained in 40
(89%) of the patients. Of the 284 patients who were disease free, plasma
EBV-DNA was detected in 90 (32%) patients. Of the 19 patients in disease
free group who were suspected disease recurrence with PET scanning, 7
positive PET images were found including 3 second primary malignancy and
4 non-cancer lesions. Two lymphoma cases with positive EBV-DNA value
sequentially attacked before or after their NPC were
diagnosed.Conclusions: EBV-DNA is a good marker of localized disease
recurrence/metastasis after treatment for NPC but needs to be combined
with imaging studies such as PET to monitor disease status.

