Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of hepatocellular carcinoma cases using a multiplex
cancer biomarker panel.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of
cancer-related mortality worldwide with a 5-year survival rate of only
14% in the United States. The age-adjusted incidence rate of HCC in the
United States is high and rapidly rising (from 1.6 per 100,000 in 1975 to
7.9 in 2009). The only clinically useful serum biomarker for HCC is
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), which has a reported sensitivity of 39 to 64%
and specificity of 76 to 91%. This is neither sensitive nor specific
enough to be useful, especially since most HCC cases are detected at an
advanced state when curative surgery is no longer possible.In this study,
the effectiveness of other cancer-related biomarkers in specifically
detecting HCC was evaluated using an electrochemiluminescence-based,
multiplex serum/plasma immunoassay panel developed on the MSD platform.
An MSD MULTI-ARRAY 10-plex assay panel (AFP, carcino-embryonic antigen
[CEA], cancer antigen 125 [CA125 or Muc-16], carbohydrate antigen 19-9
[CA19-9, sialyl Lewisa], osteopontin [OPN], matrix metalloproteinase 9
[MMP-9], ErbB2, E-cadherin, soluble epidermal growth factor receptor
[EGFR], and cKit) was used to screen 25 HCC, 25 cirrhosis
(alcohol-induced or due to fatty liver disease), and 30 normal subject
serum samples. The assay protocol was simple: a small volume of sample
was diluted and added to blocked and washed plates. After a 2-hour
incubation with agitation, plates were washed and detection antibody
reagent was added. After a 1-hour incubation, plates were washed and read
on an MSD SECTOR Imager 6000 (read time 70 seconds).The levels of AFP,
CEA, CA125, and CA19-9 were found to be significantly elevated in the HCC
samples compared to levels in the cirrhosis and/or normal samples. The
levels of OPN, MMP-9, E-cadherin, and ErbB2 were also significantly
altered in the different sample types. Some of these biomarkers, either
alone or in combination, were better than AFP alone at distinguishing HCC
patients from controls. Combinations of these biomarkers could provide
superior performance compared to existing HCC detection modalities. The
selected biomarkers must be further evaluated using different sample
cohorts to determine effectiveness for detection of HCC cases,
particularly in those with different etiologies of development. Early
detection of HCC in patients would enable therapeutic intervention at a
stage where it would be most effective, significantly reducing mortality
rates for HCC, one of the few cancers showing increasing incidence in the
United States.Citation Format: Anu Mathew, Eli N. Glezer, Martin
Stengelin, Mingyue Wang, Jacob N. Wohlstadter. Detection of
hepatocellular carcinoma cases using a multiplex cancer biomarker panel.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1163.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1163

