Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prolactin and testosterone induction of carboxypeptidase-D to
promote cell survival is greater in prostate cancer cells than benign
prostate cells, and their synergistic action in prostate cancer cells is
effectively blocked by receptor antagonists 1-9-G129R and flutamide.


Introduction: Carboxypeptidase-D (CPD), a membrane-bound
metalloproteinase, cleaves C-terminal arginine, which is the substrate of
nitric oxide synthase for production of nitric oxide (NO). NO regulates
many cellular processes including tumor progression. We have reported
that CPD and NO levels were upregulated by testosterone (T) or prolactin
(PRL) to enhance survival of prostate cancer (pCa) cells. This study
further characterized T/PRL regulation of CPD expression. CPD and NO
levels in benign and malignant prostate cells/tissues were compared to
determine their roles in pCa development.Methods: Quantitative RT-PCR
(QPCR) was used to measure CPD mRNA levels in human prostate cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and tissue microarray (TMA) analysis were used
to compare CPD staining in prostate specimens. NO production was measured
using 4,5-diaminofluorescein diacetate (DAF-2DA) assay.Results: QPCR
analysis showed that CPD mRNA levels were not significantly altered in
the benign prostate cell lines BPH-1 and RWPE1, as compared to a 3-4-fold
increase in the pCa cell line LNCaP, following T or PRL treatment
(PIntroduction: Carboxypeptidase-D (CPD), a membrane-bound
metalloproteinase, cleaves C-terminal arginine, which is the substrate of
nitric oxide synthase for production of nitric oxide (NO). NO regulates
many cellular processes including tumor progression. We have reported
that CPD and NO levels were upregulated by testosterone (T) or prolactin
(PRL) to enhance survival of prostate cancer (pCa) cells. This study
further characterized T/PRL regulation of CPD expression. CPD and NO
levels in benign and malignant prostate cells/tissues were compared to
determine their roles in pCa development.Methods: Quantitative RT-PCR
(QPCR) was used to measure CPD mRNA levels in human prostate cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and tissue microarray (TMA) analysis were used
to compare CPD staining in prostate specimens. NO production was measured
using 4,5-diaminofluorescein diacetate (DAF-2DA) assay.Results: QPCR
analysis showed that CPD mRNA levels were not significantly altered in
the benign prostate cell lines BPH-1 and RWPE1, as compared to a 3-4-fold
increase in the pCa cell line LNCaP, following T or PRL treatment
(P<0.01, n=3-6). T or PRL caused similar increases in other pCa cell
lines (22Rv1, MDAPCa2b and PC-3), in which the androgen receptor (AR)
and/or PRL receptor (PRLR) were expressed. DAF-2DA assays showed that NO
levels were increased 3.5-fold in LNCaP cells after T/PRL stimulation. In
LNCaP cells, T and PRL acted synergistically to upregulate NO, but were
maximally suppressed when both receptors were inhibited with flutamide
and 1-9-G129R in combination. Consistent with these results, TMA analysis
showed significantly increased CPD staining from 8.93.8% (meanSEM, n=18)
of benign epithelial cell area to 30.92.9% (n=79) of tumor cell area
(P3.5-fold in LNCaP cells after T/PRL stimulation. In LNCaP cells, T and
PRL acted synergistically to upregulate NO, but were maximally suppressed
when both receptors were inhibited with flutamide and 1-9-G129R in
combination. Consistent with these results, TMA analysis showed
significantly increased CPD staining from 8.93.8% (meanSEM, n=18) of
benign epithelial cell area to 30.92.9% (n=79) of tumor cell area
(P<0.001). Endothelial cells in blood vessels associated with tumor were
more likely to show positive staining than vessels of benign tissue
(P3.5-fold in LNCaP cells after T/PRL stimulation. In LNCaP cells, T and
PRL acted synergistically to upregulate NO, but were maximally suppressed
when both receptors were inhibited with flutamide and 1-9-G129R in
combination. Consistent with these results, TMA analysis showed
significantly increased CPD staining from 8.93.8% (meanSEM, n=18) of
benign epithelial cell area to 30.92.9% (n=79) of tumor cell area
(P<0.001). Endothelial cells in blood vessels associated with tumor were
more likely to show positive staining than vessels of benign tissue
(P<0.0001). A second TMA also showed increased CPD staining from 5.60.9%
(n=48) in benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) to 17.92.1% (n=88) in pCa.
TMA results were corroborated by IHC assessment of large (50mm2) prostate
tissues from 35 men, where CPD staining increased from 13.12.9% in BPH to
29.54.4% in pCa.Conclusion: T/PRL-stimulated CPD mRNA levels were higher
in tumor than in benign prostate cell lines. Likewise, CPD protein levels
were higher in cancer than benign prostate specimens. Elevated CPD levels
increased NO production, which was maximally suppressed when both the AR
and PRLR were inhibited. Our results suggest that inhibition of both the
AR and PRLR may be a more effective treatment for pCa and implicate the
potential usefulness of the CPD-Arg-NO pathway as a therapeutic target
for pCa.

