Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of genetic variants with prostate cancer risk.


Background: Genetic alterations can contribute to the malignant
transformation and progression of prostate cancer. We have previously
shown a strong association between specific leptin gene alleles, elevated
serum leptin level, and body mass index in subjects with prostate and
breast cancer. These studies showing association with leptin suggest a
strong link with obesity as an increased risk factor. Studies have shown
that adipose tissue TNFa and leptin, which are both overexpressed in
obesity, induces the production of acute phase reactants through their
autocrine or endocrine role. When GSTP1 is inactivated, prostate cells
appear to become more vulnerable to somatic alterations upon chronic
exposure to genome-damaging stresses such as oxidants and electrophiles
that are contributed by environment and lifestyle. Studies also show that
the methylation status of glutathione S-transferase p1 (GSTP1) could
individually distinguish prostate cancer from benign prostatic
hyperplasia. Based on prior studies, it is possible that multi gene
analysis can provide better diagnostic or prognostic values for prostate
cancer. Methods: In this study, we screened leptin gene markers, TNFa,
GSTP1 and BCCIP(TOK-1A) in 126 prostate cancer and normal healthy age &
sex matched controls (Prostate cases: Age range 45-94, Mean age 73.3
Control males: Age range 65-98, Mean age 73.5). Polymerase chain reaction
was used to amplify Leptin, TNF-308 and GSTP1 genes and the products are
analyzed using 3130 Genetic analyzer and PCR-RFLP methods. Statistical
analysis was performed using the SPSS/PC statistical program (version
10.0 for Windows; SPSS, Inc.,Chicago, IL). Relationships between two
groups and genotype variables were assessed by Pearson's correlation
coefficient.Conclusions: Prostate cancer is a complex, heterogeneous
disease and there a variety of gene-based biomarkers that have been
associated with prostate cancer. Our results show strong association of
leptin (pBackground: Genetic alterations can contribute to the malignant
transformation and progression of prostate cancer. We have previously
shown a strong association between specific leptin gene alleles, elevated
serum leptin level, and body mass index in subjects with prostate and
breast cancer. These studies showing association with leptin suggest a
strong link with obesity as an increased risk factor. Studies have shown
that adipose tissue TNFa and leptin, which are both overexpressed in
obesity, induces the production of acute phase reactants through their
autocrine or endocrine role. When GSTP1 is inactivated, prostate cells
appear to become more vulnerable to somatic alterations upon chronic
exposure to genome-damaging stresses such as oxidants and electrophiles
that are contributed by environment and lifestyle. Studies also show that
the methylation status of glutathione S-transferase p1 (GSTP1) could
individually distinguish prostate cancer from benign prostatic
hyperplasia. Based on prior studies, it is possible that multi gene
analysis can provide better diagnostic or prognostic values for prostate
cancer. Methods: In this study, we screened leptin gene markers, TNFa,
GSTP1 and BCCIP(TOK-1A) in 126 prostate cancer and normal healthy age &
sex matched controls (Prostate cases: Age range 45-94, Mean age 73.3
Control males: Age range 65-98, Mean age 73.5). Polymerase chain reaction
was used to amplify Leptin, TNF-308 and GSTP1 genes and the products are
analyzed using 3130 Genetic analyzer and PCR-RFLP methods. Statistical
analysis was performed using the SPSS/PC statistical program (version
10.0 for Windows; SPSS, Inc.,Chicago, IL). Relationships between two
groups and genotype variables were assessed by Pearson's correlation
coefficient.Conclusions: Prostate cancer is a complex, heterogeneous
disease and there a variety of gene-based biomarkers that have been
associated with prostate cancer. Our results show strong association of
leptin (p<0.006), GSTP1 (pBackground: Genetic alterations can contribute
to the malignant transformation and progression of prostate cancer. We
have previously shown a strong association between specific leptin gene
alleles, elevated serum leptin level, and body mass index in subjects
with prostate and breast cancer. These studies showing association with
leptin suggest a strong link with obesity as an increased risk factor.
Studies have shown that adipose tissue TNFa and leptin, which are both
overexpressed in obesity, induces the production of acute phase reactants
through their autocrine or endocrine role. When GSTP1 is inactivated,
prostate cells appear to become more vulnerable to somatic alterations
upon chronic exposure to genome-damaging stresses such as oxidants and
electrophiles that are contributed by environment and lifestyle. Studies
also show that the methylation status of glutathione S-transferase p1
(GSTP1) could individually distinguish prostate cancer from benign
prostatic hyperplasia. Based on prior studies, it is possible that multi
gene analysis can provide better diagnostic or prognostic values for
prostate cancer. Methods: In this study, we screened leptin gene markers,
TNFa, GSTP1 and BCCIP(TOK-1A) in 126 prostate cancer and normal healthy
age & sex matched controls (Prostate cases: Age range 45-94, Mean age
73.3 Control males: Age range 65-98, Mean age 73.5). Polymerase chain
reaction was used to amplify Leptin, TNF-308 and GSTP1 genes and the
products are analyzed using 3130 Genetic analyzer and PCR-RFLP methods.
Statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS/PC statistical program
(version 10.0 for Windows; SPSS, Inc.,Chicago, IL). Relationships between
two groups and genotype variables were assessed by Pearson's correlation
coefficient.Conclusions: Prostate cancer is a complex, heterogeneous
disease and there a variety of gene-based biomarkers that have been
associated with prostate cancer. Our results show strong association of
leptin (p<0.006), GSTP1 (p<0.023) with prostate cancer. Individually TNF
and BCCIP showed a modest association but TNF/BCCIP gene interaction had
a significant effect on prostate cancer risk and disease progression
suggesting a multigene model for prostate cancer screening.

