Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toenail selenium is associated with a decreased risk of advanced
prostate cancer.


Introduction: Selenium status has been associated with a reduced risk of
total prostate cancer (PCa) and there is evidence that the association is
more pronounced for advanced, clinically relevant PCa. This association,
however, has been studied over a relatively narrow range of selenium
status and data from low-selenium populations are missing. Most prior
studies of selenium status and PCa have used plasma/serum selenium, which
reflects recent selenium intake, and few studies have used toenail
selenium, which reflects longer exposure time windows. Methods: We
studied the association of toenail selenium and advanced PCa risk in the
Netherlands Cohort study, which includes 58,279 men aged 55 to 69 years.
The study has a case-cohort design; a random subcohort was sampled at
baseline in 1986 and incident advanced (stage III/IV) PCa cases were
identified during 17.3 years of follow-up. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using Cox proportional hazards
regression models. Results: The study population included 898 advanced
PCa cases and 1,203 subcohort members. The average toenail selenium
concentration among subcohort members was 0.549 g/g (standard deviation:
0.128). Toenail selenium was associated with a reduced risk of advanced
PCa and adjusted HRs for increasing quintiles of toenail selenium were
1.00 (reference), 0.69 (95% CI: 0.52, 0.90), 0.45 (95% CI: 0.34, 0.60),
0.32 (95% CI: 0.24, 0.44), and 0.24 (95% CI: 0.17, 0.33) (P for trend 6
to 12 years, and >12 years of follow-up were 0.91 (95% CI: 0.85, 0.98),
0.85 (95% CI: 0.75, 0.96), and 0.77 (95% CI: 0.71, 0.84), respectively.
Conclusion: Toenail selenium was associated with a substantial decrease
in risk of advanced PCa, particularly during later follow-up. If our
results can be confirmed, a prevention trial of selenium and PCa in a
low-selenium population may be justified. Selenium exerts important
biological functions through its presence in selenoproteins and genetic
variation in the major selenoproteins glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPX1) and
selenoprotein P (SEPP1) has been associated with the risk of PCa. In a
next analysis, in the same population, we will study the association of
common variation in GPX1 and SEPP1 with advanced PCa risk, and we will
evaluate SNP-selenium interactions.

