Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PI3K pathway is the most frequently mutated mitogenic pathway
in HNSCC.


The genomic heterogeneity of HNSCC presents a major obstacle to broadly
effective targeted therapy. We and others previously reported genomic
mutational profiles of over 100 HNSCC tumors. To date, there has been a
major translational gap between genomic findings and patient treatment
selection in HNSCC. Mitogenic pathways are vital to cancer development
and progression. Genetic mutations in mitogenic pathways have been shown
to result in pathway activation, increased proliferation of tumor cells,
and increased sensitivity to agents targeting the specific pathway. Here,
we performed a bioinformatics analysis of 151 HNSCC to examine the
mutational profiles of major mitogenic pathways previously shown to be
important in HNSCC tumor biology, including MAPK, JAK/STAT and PI3K, and
found that the PI3K pathway is the most frequently mutated mitogenic
pathway (30.46% cases; 46/151 tumors) followed by JAK/STAT and MAPK,
(9.27% cases; 14/151 tumors) and (7.95% cases; 12/151 tumors),
respectively.HNSCC tumors with mutations in PI3K harbored 2.3 times more
non-synonymous mutations (165.50 24.08 vs 72.05 6.63 mutations, PThe
genomic heterogeneity of HNSCC presents a major obstacle to broadly
effective targeted therapy. We and others previously reported genomic
mutational profiles of over 100 HNSCC tumors. To date, there has been a
major translational gap between genomic findings and patient treatment
selection in HNSCC. Mitogenic pathways are vital to cancer development
and progression. Genetic mutations in mitogenic pathways have been shown
to result in pathway activation, increased proliferation of tumor cells,
and increased sensitivity to agents targeting the specific pathway. Here,
we performed a bioinformatics analysis of 151 HNSCC to examine the
mutational profiles of major mitogenic pathways previously shown to be
important in HNSCC tumor biology, including MAPK, JAK/STAT and PI3K, and
found that the PI3K pathway is the most frequently mutated mitogenic
pathway (30.46% cases; 46/151 tumors) followed by JAK/STAT and MAPK,
(9.27% cases; 14/151 tumors) and (7.95% cases; 12/151 tumors),
respectively.HNSCC tumors with mutations in PI3K harbored 2.3 times more
non-synonymous mutations (165.50 24.08 vs 72.05 6.63 mutations, P<0.0001)
and twice as many cancer gene mutations than the HNSCC tumors without any
PI3K pathway mutations (7.15 0.75 vs 3.56 0.29 mutations, PThe genomic
heterogeneity of HNSCC presents a major obstacle to broadly effective
targeted therapy. We and others previously reported genomic mutational
profiles of over 100 HNSCC tumors. To date, there has been a major
translational gap between genomic findings and patient treatment
selection in HNSCC. Mitogenic pathways are vital to cancer development
and progression. Genetic mutations in mitogenic pathways have been shown
to result in pathway activation, increased proliferation of tumor cells,
and increased sensitivity to agents targeting the specific pathway. Here,
we performed a bioinformatics analysis of 151 HNSCC to examine the
mutational profiles of major mitogenic pathways previously shown to be
important in HNSCC tumor biology, including MAPK, JAK/STAT and PI3K, and
found that the PI3K pathway is the most frequently mutated mitogenic
pathway (30.46% cases; 46/151 tumors) followed by JAK/STAT and MAPK,
(9.27% cases; 14/151 tumors) and (7.95% cases; 12/151 tumors),
respectively.HNSCC tumors with mutations in PI3K harbored 2.3 times more
non-synonymous mutations (165.50 24.08 vs 72.05 6.63 mutations, P<0.0001)
and twice as many cancer gene mutations than the HNSCC tumors without any
PI3K pathway mutations (7.15 0.75 vs 3.56 0.29 mutations, P<0.0001),
including multiple mutational events of genes in the PI3K pathway,
suggesting that PI3K pathway mutations may promote the expansion of HNSCC
tumor cells that are already genetically unstable. Interestingly however,
in a small subset of HPV-positive HNSCC tumors (3 out of 45), PIK3CA was
the only cancer gene found to be mutated, suggesting that the PI3K
pathway alone may be sufficient to drive some HPV-positive HNSCC. The
observed frequency of PIK3CA mutation in our 151 HNSCC cohort (12.58%; 19
mutations total) is higher than that reported previously in other
smoking-related cancers such as lung cancer and esophageal cancer, where
the respective PIK3CA mutation rates are not greater than 3-5%,
suggesting a likely enrichment of PIK3CA mutations in HNSCC. Other
components of the PI3K pathway were mutated in The genomic heterogeneity
of HNSCC presents a major obstacle to broadly effective targeted therapy.
We and others previously reported genomic mutational profiles of over 100
HNSCC tumors. To date, there has been a major translational gap between
genomic findings and patient treatment selection in HNSCC. Mitogenic
pathways are vital to cancer development and progression. Genetic
mutations in mitogenic pathways have been shown to result in pathway
activation, increased proliferation of tumor cells, and increased
sensitivity to agents targeting the specific pathway. Here, we performed
a bioinformatics analysis of 151 HNSCC to examine the mutational profiles
of major mitogenic pathways previously shown to be important in HNSCC
tumor biology, including MAPK, JAK/STAT and PI3K, and found that the PI3K
pathway is the most frequently mutated mitogenic pathway (30.46% cases;
46/151 tumors) followed by JAK/STAT and MAPK, (9.27% cases; 14/151
tumors) and (7.95% cases; 12/151 tumors), respectively.HNSCC tumors with
mutations in PI3K harbored 2.3 times more non-synonymous mutations
(165.50 24.08 vs 72.05 6.63 mutations, P<0.0001) and twice as many cancer
gene mutations than the HNSCC tumors without any PI3K pathway mutations
(7.15 0.75 vs 3.56 0.29 mutations, P<0.0001), including multiple
mutational events of genes in the PI3K pathway, suggesting that PI3K
pathway mutations may promote the expansion of HNSCC tumor cells that are
already genetically unstable. Interestingly however, in a small subset of
HPV-positive HNSCC tumors (3 out of 45), PIK3CA was the only cancer gene
found to be mutated, suggesting that the PI3K pathway alone may be
sufficient to drive some HPV-positive HNSCC. The observed frequency of
PIK3CA mutation in our 151 HNSCC cohort (12.58%; 19 mutations total) is
higher than that reported previously in other smoking-related cancers
such as lung cancer and esophageal cancer, where the respective PIK3CA
mutation rates are not greater than 3-5%, suggesting a likely enrichment
of PIK3CA mutations in HNSCC. Other components of the PI3K pathway were
mutated in <2 - 3.97% of HNSCC tumors sequenced. Major downstream
effectors of the PI3K pathway, including PDK1, AKT1 were not mutated,
while AKT2 and mTOR were mutated in just 1.29% (2 mutations) of HNSCC
tumors.Importantly, PIK3CA and the PI3K pathway are currently targetable
in human cancers, with several agents in various stages of clinical
development. The growth of HNSCC xenografts derived from a cell line with
a PIK3CA(H1047R) mutation, treated with the mTOR/PI3K inhibitor BEZ-235,
was significantly inhibited. These findings suggest that PIK3CA, and
potentially other PI3K pathway, mutations may serve as predictive
biomarkers in HNSCC to guide treatment selection.

