Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic (PD) assessment of drug activity in tumor tissue
from patients (pts) enrolled in a Phase I study of MEHD7945A (MEHD), a
first-in-class HER3/EGFR dual action antibody, in pts with locally
advanced or metastatic epithelial tumors.


BackgroundMembers of the human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER)
family of oncogenes are often co-expressed and heterodimerized,
suggesting that simultaneous blockade of multiple HER family receptors
may be more effective than targeting single receptors. MEHD is a
dual-action human IgG1 antibody that can bivalently bind to HER3 and EGFR
and block ligand binding to either. FDG-PET imaging is a recognized
method of assessing PD modulation with EGFR inhibitors in the clinic.
HER3 and EGFR signaling via the MAPK and PI3K pathways can be monitored
in tissue by examining phosphorylation of downstream markers.MethodsA
Phase 1, multicenter, open-label study was conducted to evaluate the
safety, pharmacokinetics, and anti-tumor activity of MEHD administered
intravenously every 2 weeks at doses ranging from 1 to 30 mg/kg during
escalation (n=30), and at 14 mg/kg during expansion (n=36). FDG-PET scans
and optional tumor biopsies (bxs) were obtained at baseline and cycle 2,
day 2 (C2D2). Tumor bxs were evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
S235/236-p-S6, T246-p-PRAS40, and T202/Y204-p-MAPK. EGFR and KRAS
mutation (mt) status was determined by PCR. Paired frozen bxs were
utilized for exploratory assessment by reverse-phase protein arrays (see
Penuel et al. abstract).ResultsEvidence of PD modulation by imaging or
IHC was observed in 14 pts including 7 CRC (KRAS mt-2, wt-5), 3 NSCLC, 2
SCCHN, 1 ovarian, and 1 anal cancer. Tumor FDG-uptake was decreased by at
least 20%, indicating a partial metabolic response (PMR), in 9/56
evaluated pts (16%). Tumor bxs were obtained at baseline and C2D2 from 32
pts (12 escalation, 20 expansion). Sufficient viable tumor for IHC was
present in both bxs from 17/32 evaluated pts. IHC signal was decreased
for one or more of the 3 markers in the C2D2 bxs of 6/17 pts (35%), 5 CRC
(KRAS mt-2, wt-3), 1 NSCLC. Best response by CT-RECIST includes PR in 2
patients with SCCHN, both with PMR and both tumors expressing high
heregulin, with duration of response of 10 and 12+
months.ConclusionsEvidence of PD modulation is demonstrated by a PMR rate
of 16% and reduced pathway activity by IHC in 35% of pts with evaluable
biopsies. These data suggest MEHD is biologically active in pts and
downregulates intracellular signaling activity consistent with HER3
and/or EGFR inhibition in tumor tissue and is further supported by
evidence of anti-tumor activity. Phase II studies in SCCHN and CRC are
ongoing.

