Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and functional characterization identify different
manifestations of p53 pathway in 17p13 deletion cases of multiple myeloma.


Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable hematologic malignancy. p53, being
one of the most commonly mutated tumor suppressor gene in human cancer,
is found to be wild type (WT) in almost 90% of MM. Nevertheless, the
frequency of p53 abnormalities is more prevalent in the advanced stage of
MM, suggesting its crucial role in the disease progression. Of paramount
importance, hemizygous deletion of 17p13 (17p13(del)), which harbours the
TP53 gene, has been identified in more than 30% of MM patients and is
significantly associated with poor prognosis. To date, there is no
conclusive evidence that p53 is the critical gene. Essentially, the
integrity of p53 pathway in 17p13(del) cases remains obscure. This study
utilized three human myeloma cell lines (HMCL) which harbour 17p13(del)
encompassing TP53, as study models. Concurrently, HMCLs with various
different p53 status (WT, mutation and null) were recruited as reference
model. We have identified a spectrum of unique protein expression profile
amongst cells with different p53 status upon induction of the pathway.
Genotoxic and non-genotoxic stress confer an intact p53 pathway in WT/WT
p53 cells; whereas, p53 mutant cells and p53 null cells demonstrated a
defective p53 activity, indicating that functional p53 is exclusively
required in triggering the downstream response. Using the WT/WT and the
mutant/null profile as reference, the three 17p13(del) cell lines
exhibited distinctive phenotypes. XG6, which have basal p53 expression
half of that of the WT/WT cell line, displayed a partially compromised
p53 pathway. Differentially, KMS18, which has a very low level of basal
p53, and JJN3 which has a complete absence of basal p53, displayed a
virtual abrogation of p53 response, as evidenced by defective
transcriptional activities of p53 as well as resistance to growth arrest
and apoptosis. Physiological investigations revealed that the remaining
single copy of p53 was likely to be negatively regulated by MDM2
overexpression and epigenetic factors. In conclusion, this study has
identified different behaviors in the p53 pathway in 17p13(del) cases.
p53 appears to possess haploinssufficiency properties whereby hemizygous
p53 loss is sufficient to render a partially defective p53 response. p53
basal level was shown to be the critical determinant of the integrity of
the pathway. This has significant clinical implications as this finding
can be manipulated to identify patients with different outcome and
treatment response.

