Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone demethylase JMJD2C is a coactivator for hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 that is required for breast cancer progression.


Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) activates transcription of genes
encoding proteins that play key roles in breast cancer biology. We
hypothesized that interaction of HIF-1 with epigenetic regulators may
increase HIF-1 transcriptional activity and thereby promote breast cancer
progression. We report that the histone demethylase jumonji domain
containing protein 2C (JMJD2C) selectively interacts with HIF-1, but not
HIF-2, and that HIF-1 mediates recruitment of JMJD2C to the hypoxia
response elements (HREs) of HIF-1 target genes. JMJD2C decreases
trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 9, and enhances HIF-1 binding to
HREs, thereby activating transcription of BNIP3, LDHA,PDK1, and SLC2A1,
which encode proteins that are required for metabolic reprogramming, as
well as LOXL2 and L1CAM, which encode proteins that are required for lung
metastasis. JMJD2C expression is significantly associated with expression
of GLUT1, LDHA, PDK1, LOX, LOXL2, and L1CAM mRNA in human breast cancer
biopsies. JMJD2C knockdown inhibits breast tumor growth and spontaneous
metastasis to the lungs of mice following mammary fat pad injection.
Taken together, these findings establish a novel epigenetic mechanism
that stimulates HIF-1-mediated transactivation of genes encoding proteins
involved in metabolic reprogramming and lung metastasis in breast cancer.

