Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pulmonary emphysema as a tumor-friendly microenvironment: Role of
the MT1-MMP/MMP-2 axis.


Background: We previously demonstrated that human lung cancer arising in
pulmonary emphysema is associated with early recurrence and poor
prognosis. In pulmonary emphysema, the excessive proteolyses may be
involved in the development of alveolar wall destruction, which
potentially act as a tumor-friendly microenvironment because degradation
of the extracellular matrix by proteolysis is an essential process for
tumor progression. Recent data suggest that coordinated action of MT1-MMP
and MMP-2 may facilitate pericellular proteolysis and enhance not only
tumor invasion/migration but also tumor cell growth. Thus, we
hypothesized that tumor progression is accelerated in emphysematous lungs
via the MT1-MMP/MMP-2 axis. Experimental study: A mouse model of
pulmonary emphysema was induced by intratracheal nebulization of
elastase. Intravenous administration of Lewis lung carcinoma (3LL) cells
in the mice resulted in higher lung weight and three-fold increase in
metastatic foci with a diameter of no less than 2 mm on the surface of
the lungs. In addition, visceral pleural invasion was more frequently
observed in the model mice than in the control mice. Interestingly,
larger metastatic foci were found predominantly at the lung portion
possessing severe emphysema. According to an in vitro study,
proliferation of 3LL cells was promoted by incubation with the
conditioned medium containing pneumocytes of the model mice for 48 hours.
The latent form of MMP-2 was overexpressed in monocultures of the
pneumocytes from the model mice. The active form of MMP-2 and MT1-MMP
were synchronously increased in the conditioned medium with the
incubation of 3LL cells. Clinical study: We evaluated the expression of
PCNA, MMP-2, MMP-9 and MT1-MMP by immunohistochemistry in tumor specimens
obtained from 48 patients who underwent lung lobectomy with
lymphadenectomy for clinical stage I non-small cell lung cancer. We also
evaluated signal intensity and localization of MMPs-expressed cells in
the tumor specimen. The results were compared between patients with
pulmonary emphysema and those without. As a result, the PCNA
proliferation index was higher in cancer cells from patients with
emphysema than in those from patients without (52.3% vs. 38.4%,
pBackground: We previously demonstrated that human lung cancer arising in
pulmonary emphysema is associated with early recurrence and poor
prognosis. In pulmonary emphysema, the excessive proteolyses may be
involved in the development of alveolar wall destruction, which
potentially act as a tumor-friendly microenvironment because degradation
of the extracellular matrix by proteolysis is an essential process for
tumor progression. Recent data suggest that coordinated action of MT1-MMP
and MMP-2 may facilitate pericellular proteolysis and enhance not only
tumor invasion/migration but also tumor cell growth. Thus, we
hypothesized that tumor progression is accelerated in emphysematous lungs
via the MT1-MMP/MMP-2 axis. Experimental study: A mouse model of
pulmonary emphysema was induced by intratracheal nebulization of
elastase. Intravenous administration of Lewis lung carcinoma (3LL) cells
in the mice resulted in higher lung weight and three-fold increase in
metastatic foci with a diameter of no less than 2 mm on the surface of
the lungs. In addition, visceral pleural invasion was more frequently
observed in the model mice than in the control mice. Interestingly,
larger metastatic foci were found predominantly at the lung portion
possessing severe emphysema. According to an in vitro study,
proliferation of 3LL cells was promoted by incubation with the
conditioned medium containing pneumocytes of the model mice for 48 hours.
The latent form of MMP-2 was overexpressed in monocultures of the
pneumocytes from the model mice. The active form of MMP-2 and MT1-MMP
were synchronously increased in the conditioned medium with the
incubation of 3LL cells. Clinical study: We evaluated the expression of
PCNA, MMP-2, MMP-9 and MT1-MMP by immunohistochemistry in tumor specimens
obtained from 48 patients who underwent lung lobectomy with
lymphadenectomy for clinical stage I non-small cell lung cancer. We also
evaluated signal intensity and localization of MMPs-expressed cells in
the tumor specimen. The results were compared between patients with
pulmonary emphysema and those without. As a result, the PCNA
proliferation index was higher in cancer cells from patients with
emphysema than in those from patients without (52.3% vs. 38.4%, p<0.05).
The MMP-2 expression intensity was also stronger in cancer cells and
cancer stromal cells from patients with emphysema than in those from
patients without (both pBackground: We previously demonstrated that human
lung cancer arising in pulmonary emphysema is associated with early
recurrence and poor prognosis. In pulmonary emphysema, the excessive
proteolyses may be involved in the development of alveolar wall
destruction, which potentially act as a tumor-friendly microenvironment
because degradation of the extracellular matrix by proteolysis is an
essential process for tumor progression. Recent data suggest that
coordinated action of MT1-MMP and MMP-2 may facilitate pericellular
proteolysis and enhance not only tumor invasion/migration but also tumor
cell growth. Thus, we hypothesized that tumor progression is accelerated
in emphysematous lungs via the MT1-MMP/MMP-2 axis. Experimental study: A
mouse model of pulmonary emphysema was induced by intratracheal
nebulization of elastase. Intravenous administration of Lewis lung
carcinoma (3LL) cells in the mice resulted in higher lung weight and
three-fold increase in metastatic foci with a diameter of no less than 2
mm on the surface of the lungs. In addition, visceral pleural invasion
was more frequently observed in the model mice than in the control mice.
Interestingly, larger metastatic foci were found predominantly at the
lung portion possessing severe emphysema. According to an in vitro study,
proliferation of 3LL cells was promoted by incubation with the
conditioned medium containing pneumocytes of the model mice for 48 hours.
The latent form of MMP-2 was overexpressed in monocultures of the
pneumocytes from the model mice. The active form of MMP-2 and MT1-MMP
were synchronously increased in the conditioned medium with the
incubation of 3LL cells. Clinical study: We evaluated the expression of
PCNA, MMP-2, MMP-9 and MT1-MMP by immunohistochemistry in tumor specimens
obtained from 48 patients who underwent lung lobectomy with
lymphadenectomy for clinical stage I non-small cell lung cancer. We also
evaluated signal intensity and localization of MMPs-expressed cells in
the tumor specimen. The results were compared between patients with
pulmonary emphysema and those without. As a result, the PCNA
proliferation index was higher in cancer cells from patients with
emphysema than in those from patients without (52.3% vs. 38.4%, p<0.05).
The MMP-2 expression intensity was also stronger in cancer cells and
cancer stromal cells from patients with emphysema than in those from
patients without (both p<0.05), while there were no significant
differences in MMP-9 and MT1-MMP expression between the two groups.
Conclusion: These results indicate that tumor progression is accelerated
in emphysematous lungs because the MT1-MMP/MMP-2 axis, which contributes
to enhancing tumor progression, is stimulated in tumors arising in this
environment.

