Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic, low-dose treatment with sulforaphane inhibits growth of
breast cells.


Epidemiological data indicate that dietary consumption of cruciferous
vegetables may reduce the risk of many cancers including breast cancer.
Cruciferous vegetables contain high levels of glucosinolates; stable
phytochemicals that when metabolized produce cancer-preventing active
isothiocyanates. Isothiocyanates, such as sulforaphane (SFN) found in
broccoli sprouts, are thought to prevent tumorigenesis through epigenetic
mechanisms controlling the expression of tumor-related genes. Ingestion
of broccoli sprouts results in rapid distribution of SFN to breast
epithelium, however, the effect of chronic exposure to low levels of SFN
on the growth of breast cells has not been fully explored.In the present
study we assessed the effect of SFN on the growth of an immortalized
breast cell line (MCF10A), and two breast cancer cell lines; the estrogen
receptor positive MCF-7 cell line, and the estrogen receptor negative
TMX2-28 cell line. We first determined the seeding densities for each
cell line that resulted in 80% confluence after three days of growth in
T-25 flasks: MCF10A (1 x 106), MCF-7 (8 x 105), and TMX2-28 (5 x 105) per
5 mL. Next, cells from each line were plated at the predetermined seeding
densities in T-25 flasks and treated with either SFN (5 M) or vehicle
(0.02% DMSO) for up to 40 days. Every third day, cell cultures were
photographed, after which the cells were resuspended in culture medium,
counted using a hemocytometer, and the predetermined numbers of cells
(seeding numbers) were returned to T-25 flasks and treated with SFN or
vehicle. Cells not needed for seeding the flasks were archived for future
analysis of gene expression and DNA methylation.Treatment with SFN
decreased cell growth. After 22 days of treatment with SFN, mean
proliferation of both the MCF10A and MCF-7 cell cultures was inhibited by
62% (t = 2.8; p = 0.02) and 72% (t = 2.6; p = 0.02), respectively. In
contrast, the decrease in proliferation of TMX2-28 cells treated with SFN
was not statistically significant (t = 1.2; p = 0.255) from the vehicle
control at 22 days. However, by day 40, TMX2-28 cell cultures treated
with SFN showed a significant decrease in mean proliferation 36% (t =
2.2; p = 0.04). Ongoing studies are examining the epigenetic mechanisms
by which SFN decreased cell proliferation.

