Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of Wnt/-catenin signaling by niclosamide and related
derivatives.


The Wnt signal transduction pathway is dysregulated in many cancers,
including colorectal cancer (CRC) where activating mutations in this
pathway occur in over 80% of sporadic colorectal cancers. As a result,
drugs that inhibit the pathway are highly sought-after as the basis of a
new generation of innovative therapeutic agents. Unfortunately, a gap
exists in the ability to target the pathway with small, drug-like
molecules, a gap that is the barrier to discovering drugs targeting
defects in this pathway. Recently, we reported the FDA-approved
anthelmintic drug niclosamide inhibits Wnt/-catenin signaling via a novel
mechanism that internalizes Frizzled receptors and leads to decreases in
Dishevelled and -Catenin proteins, even in cells harboring mutations in
APC and -catenin. The biological target driving inhibition of Wnt
signaling by niclosamide is unknown. To support efforts to translate
these findings in clinical trials and assist target identification
efforts, we interrogated the mechanism and structure-activity
relationships. We will present our findings indicating inhibition of Wnt
signaling by niclosamide appears unique among the structurally-related
anthelmintic agents tested and that Wnt/-catenin activity was dependent
on small changes in the chemical structure of niclosamide - including the
ability to convert inhibition to activation. Overall, the findings
support efforts to identify the target of niclosamide inhibition of
Wnt/-catenin signaling and the discovery of novel inhibitors of
Wnt/-catenin signaling to treat cancer, and thus accelerate the
translational application of niclosamide and its derivatives to improve
patient survival from cancer.

