Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphatidylinositol-4-kinase - Potent and selective inhibitors of
PI4K and PI4K.


Phosphatidylinositol (PI) is a phospholipid that resides primarily on the
cytosolic surface of cell membranes. PI can be phosphorylated to generate
seven different phosphatidylinositol phosphates (PIPs), all of which have
distinct biological activities.1 A major first step in the production of
these PIPs is the conversion of PI into phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate
(PI4P) by PI4 kinase.2Here we describe the identification of inhibitors
of PI4 kinase via targeted screening of a kinase subset. This exercise
has delivered inhibitors that are potent inhibitors of PI4 kinase (pIC50
>8), which are selective the - or the -subtypes and do not inhibit
related enzymes on the PI pathway (PI3 kinase pIC50 Phosphatidylinositol
(PI) is a phospholipid that resides primarily on the cytosolic surface of
cell membranes. PI can be phosphorylated to generate seven different
phosphatidylinositol phosphates (PIPs), all of which have distinct
biological activities.1 A major first step in the production of these
PIPs is the conversion of PI into phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PI4P)
by PI4 kinase.2Here we describe the identification of inhibitors of PI4
kinase via targeted screening of a kinase subset. This exercise has
delivered inhibitors that are potent inhibitors of PI4 kinase (pIC50 >8),
which are selective the - or the -subtypes and do not inhibit related
enzymes on the PI pathway (PI3 kinase pIC50 <5 or PIP5 kinase pIC50
Phosphatidylinositol (PI) is a phospholipid that resides primarily on the
cytosolic surface of cell membranes. PI can be phosphorylated to generate
seven different phosphatidylinositol phosphates (PIPs), all of which have
distinct biological activities.1 A major first step in the production of
these PIPs is the conversion of PI into phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate
(PI4P) by PI4 kinase.2Here we describe the identification of inhibitors
of PI4 kinase via targeted screening of a kinase subset. This exercise
has delivered inhibitors that are potent inhibitors of PI4 kinase (pIC50
>8), which are selective the - or the -subtypes and do not inhibit
related enzymes on the PI pathway (PI3 kinase pIC50 <5 or PIP5 kinase
pIC50 <4) and also exhibit good broader kinase selectivity.The effect of
these useful probe compounds on cellular
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-diphosphate and subsequent downstream markers
will be described along with the comparison of these effects with the
corresponding siRNA.1. G. Di Paolo, P. De Camilli, Phosphoinositides in
cell regulation and membrane dynamics. Nature 2006, 443, 651-657.2. T.
Sasaki, S. Takasuga, J. Sasaki, S. Kofuji, S. Eguchi, M. Yamazaki, A.
Suzuki, Mammalian phosphoinositide kinases and phosphatases. Progress in
lipid research, 2009, 48, 307-343.

