Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of methylation status of deep surgical margins with
the local reccurence of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


Background: Locoregional recurrence occurs in as many as 40% of patients
undergoing surgery for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). We
have been focused some molecular alterations exsiting even in
histologically negative surgical margins. However, in head and neck
cancer resection, surgical margins are hard to evaluate because the most
of them usually consists of complicated muscular margins. In order to
evaluate these deep surgical margins, before collecting some margin
tissues, we often conduct tissue imprinting by using one layer
nitrocellulose sheet which can collect proteins without hurting surgical
samples.Method: Both 161 deep margin tissues and 166 deep margin imprints
were collected from 74 histologically margin negative resections of
primary HNSCC from May, 2009 to September, 2012. Bisulfited DNA from
samples were amplified using quantitive methylation-specific polymerase
chain reaction (QMSP) for 6 genes (DCC, EDNRB, HOXA9, KIF1A, NID2 and
NR2B). The cut off value was calculated using QMSP data of tumors and
normal muscles, and was applied to deep margin samples. The correlation
between the QMSP status of deep margin samples and clinical outcome was
evaluated.Results: The average QMSP of tumor tissues, that of normal
muscles and the cut off value are 21.0, 0.6, 2.1 in DCC, 23.3, 0.6, 2.2
in EDNRB, 32.0, 0.7, 2.3 in HOXA9, 20.3, 0.4, 1.3 in KIF1A, 36.0, 3.0,
9.4 in NID2 and 10.7, 0.1, 0.4 in NR2B. Those who has the higher QMSP
values of deep margin tissues than the cut off value tends to have a poor
recurrence free survival (P=0.073 in DCC, P=0.018 in HOXA9, P=0.005 in
KIF1A, P=0.011 in NID2) and a poor overall survival (P=0.076 in HOXA9,
P=0.059 in NID2). Also, those who has the higher QMSP values of deep
margin imprints than the cut off value tends to have a poor recurrence
free survival (P=0.051 in HOXA9) and a poor overall survival (P=0.075 in
HOXA9).Conclusion: The methylation status of HNSCC deep surgical margin
samples is correlated with the local recurrence. Especially,
hyper-methylated HOXA9 gene of both deep margin tissues and imprints is a
significant biomarker of poor recurrence free survival and overall
survival.

