Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of microRNA-based prediction model of Trastuzumab
treatment response for HER2-positive breast cancer using FFPE specimens.


[Background and Aim] Although Trastuzumab has been used for HER2(+)
breast cancer, the treatment response of Trastuzumab therapy depends on
unknown mechanisms among individual cases. In order to avoid unnecessary
adverse events and to lighten financial burden, pre-treatment prediction
of trastuzumab treatment response would be beneficial for patients. Thus,
in this study, we develop a prediction algorithm using microRNA
expression profile using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
specimens of HER2(+) breast cancer. [Materials and Methods] Eighty-three
breast cancer patients who underwent trastuzumab-chemo combined therapy
before operations were enrolled with written informed consent. FFPE
specimens of pre-treatment core needle biopsy samples were collected, and
regions containing cancer and adjacent stromal cells were
laser-microdissected. Total RNA samples extracted from the microdissected
specimens were subjected for microRNA microarray (3D-Gene, Toray, Japan)
analysis. Among these 83 patients, 39 cases had pCR (definition: complete
response in IDC regions regardless presence of DCIS without lymph node
metastasis), and the other 44 cases did not. According to the pCR/non-pCR
information, we develop a prediction model using 35 signature microRNAs
by a SVM technique. Prediction accuracy assessed by Leave-one-out
validation was AUROC=0.889. The 35 signature microRNAs for trastuzumab
treatment response included 7 out of 8 let-7 family members and
miR-125a-5p/b-5p, which were downregulated in pCR specimens. [Conclusion]
microRNA profile could predict treatment response of trastuzumab-chemo
combined therapy for HER2(+) breast cancer, and the developed prediction
algorithm might be a useful tool for clinical decision making.


