Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Open-source RNAi genetic screen platform: discovery of drug
targets in cancer cell models.


We have developed an open-source RNAi genetic screening technology,
funded in part by NIH grants and freely available to the scientific
community. This platform can be used for functional discovery of drug
targets associated with viability and regulation of signaling pathways in
cancer cells. Here we present a novel, free public resource for
genome-wide RNAi screens: DECIPHER pooled lentiviral shRNA libraries.
Results are shown from two RNAi screens with DECIPHER shRNA libraries:
one drop-out screen to identify genes essential for viability in a panel
of leukemic cells, and a second rescue screen to identify genes required
for FAS induced apoptosis. Both screens found a combination of known and
novel signaling pathway and regulatory genes whose functions were
confirmed to be required to produce the biological responses. From the
viability screens in the panel of leukemia cell lines, subsequent
validation using single shRNA-expressing constructs showed that about 80%
of the shRNAs identified in each complex library screen did in fact lead
to cell death when transduced in cells. Analysis of the identified
essential genes for known biological interactions revealed non-random
clusters of interacting proteins that provide a useful strategy for
prioritization of potential targets. Analysis of the lethal combinations
indicates redundant, complementary, and compensatory responses in cancer
cells. In the case of the FAS-induced apoptosis, in vitro screening data
also enabled us to select targets that protected mice from FAS-induced
hepatic failure. These results demonstrate that complex pooled shRNA
libraries provide a highly efficient, flexible, and cost-effective
alternative to array-based RNAi screening methods for identifying genes
regulating biological responses and possible new therapeutic targets.

