Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The molecular diversity of Luminal A breast cancer.


Breast cancer is a collection of diseases with distinct molecular traits,
prognosis, and therapeutic options. Luminal A breast cancer is the most
heterogeneous, both molecularly and clinically. Using genomic data from
nearly 1000 Luminal A tumors from multiple studies, we identified at
least four major subtypes defined by distinct copy-number and mutation
profiles. Here we show an atypical Luminal A subtype characterized by
high genomic instability, TP53 mutations, and increased Aurora kinase
signaling. These genomic alterations lead to a worse clinical prognosis.
Copy number heterogeneity comes in tandem with distinct mutation spectra.
We find a prevalence of PIK3CA, GATA3, and AKT1 mutations in the subtypes
characterized by relatively diploid genomes subtypes.Moreover, we
highlight a strong association between MAP3K1 mutations and gains and
losses of chromosomes 8 and 16. Finally, an unbiased pathway analysis
revealed multiple rare, but mutually exclusive, alterations linked to
loss of activity of co-repressor complexes N-Cor and SMRT. These rare
alterations are prevalent in Luminal A tumors and may predict response to
endocrine therapy. Our work shows how comprehensive genomic
characterization of tumor subtypes is fundamental to inform clinical
trials and to move towards personalized therapies.Figure 1: Luminal A
subtypes as determined by copy-number clustering.Citation Format:
Ciriello Giovanni, Charles M. Perou, Chris Sander, Nikolaus Schultz. The
molecular diversity of Luminal A breast cancer. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 822.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-822

