Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic factors and hepatocarcinogenesis in steatohepatitis.


Background: With the rising prevalence in the US of alcoholism, obesity,
and metabolic syndrome and better treatments for hepatitis B and C,
steatohepatitis is projected to become the leading cause of end-stage
liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by 2025.Objective,
Setting, and Design: Using a prospectively collected database, we
analyzed clinical and pathologic features of HCC in patients who
underwent liver transplantation (LT) for steatohepatitis due to
non-alcoholic (NASH) and alcoholic causes (ALD) between 1/1/02 and
12/31/11 in a large urban transplant center. We further compared patients
with HCC due to NASH (N-HCC) and ALD (A-HCC).Results: HCC was present in
80 of 317 patients who underwent LT for steatohepatitis with equivalent
distribution in NASH and ALD patients (24% vs 26%;P=0.8). On multivariate
analysis, age and diabetes were associated with HCC in the explant but
not BMI, hypertension, or smoking; hyperlipidemia was protective (Table).
Among patients with HCC, N-HCC patients were more likely than A-HCC
patients to be female (58% vs 4%;PBackground: With the rising prevalence
in the US of alcoholism, obesity, and metabolic syndrome and better
treatments for hepatitis B and C, steatohepatitis is projected to become
the leading cause of end-stage liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) by 2025.Objective, Setting, and Design: Using a prospectively
collected database, we analyzed clinical and pathologic features of HCC
in patients who underwent liver transplantation (LT) for steatohepatitis
due to non-alcoholic (NASH) and alcoholic causes (ALD) between 1/1/02 and
12/31/11 in a large urban transplant center. We further compared patients
with HCC due to NASH (N-HCC) and ALD (A-HCC).Results: HCC was present in
80 of 317 patients who underwent LT for steatohepatitis with equivalent
distribution in NASH and ALD patients (24% vs 26%;P=0.8). On multivariate
analysis, age and diabetes were associated with HCC in the explant but
not BMI, hypertension, or smoking; hyperlipidemia was protective (Table).
Among patients with HCC, N-HCC patients were more likely than A-HCC
patients to be female (58% vs 4%;P<0.0001) and have metabolic syndrome
(27% vs 9%;P=0.025). On pathology, N-HCC patients were also more likely
to have steatosis (76% vs 34%;PBackground: With the rising prevalence in
the US of alcoholism, obesity, and metabolic syndrome and better
treatments for hepatitis B and C, steatohepatitis is projected to become
the leading cause of end-stage liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) by 2025.Objective, Setting, and Design: Using a prospectively
collected database, we analyzed clinical and pathologic features of HCC
in patients who underwent liver transplantation (LT) for steatohepatitis
due to non-alcoholic (NASH) and alcoholic causes (ALD) between 1/1/02 and
12/31/11 in a large urban transplant center. We further compared patients
with HCC due to NASH (N-HCC) and ALD (A-HCC).Results: HCC was present in
80 of 317 patients who underwent LT for steatohepatitis with equivalent
distribution in NASH and ALD patients (24% vs 26%;P=0.8). On multivariate
analysis, age and diabetes were associated with HCC in the explant but
not BMI, hypertension, or smoking; hyperlipidemia was protective (Table).
Among patients with HCC, N-HCC patients were more likely than A-HCC
patients to be female (58% vs 4%;P<0.0001) and have metabolic syndrome
(27% vs 9%;P=0.025). On pathology, N-HCC patients were also more likely
to have steatosis (76% vs 34%;P<0.001), steatohepatitis (67% vs
19%;PBackground: With the rising prevalence in the US of alcoholism,
obesity, and metabolic syndrome and better treatments for hepatitis B and
C, steatohepatitis is projected to become the leading cause of end-stage
liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by 2025.Objective,
Setting, and Design: Using a prospectively collected database, we
analyzed clinical and pathologic features of HCC in patients who
underwent liver transplantation (LT) for steatohepatitis due to
non-alcoholic (NASH) and alcoholic causes (ALD) between 1/1/02 and
12/31/11 in a large urban transplant center. We further compared patients
with HCC due to NASH (N-HCC) and ALD (A-HCC).Results: HCC was present in
80 of 317 patients who underwent LT for steatohepatitis with equivalent
distribution in NASH and ALD patients (24% vs 26%;P=0.8). On multivariate
analysis, age and diabetes were associated with HCC in the explant but
not BMI, hypertension, or smoking; hyperlipidemia was protective (Table).
Among patients with HCC, N-HCC patients were more likely than A-HCC
patients to be female (58% vs 4%;P<0.0001) and have metabolic syndrome
(27% vs 9%;P=0.025). On pathology, N-HCC patients were also more likely
to have steatosis (76% vs 34%;P<0.001), steatohepatitis (67% vs
19%;P<0.0001), or nuclear grade 1 or 2 (89% vs 67%;P=0.03). Five-year
survival was similar in N-HCC and A-HCC (67% vs 68%;P=1).Conclusions: We
report the largest series of liver transplantation for HCC in
steatohepatitis. Metabolic factors such as diabetes and hyperlipidemia
appear to play large and independent promoting and protective roles in
hepatocarcinogenesis. Modulation of causative factors may be important in
management of this increasingly common obesity-related disease.Table.
Multivariate Predictors of HCC Presence in Explant
Table. Multivariate Predictors of HCC Presence in ExplantCitation Format:
Ali Zarrinpar, Vatche Agopian, Jonathan Hiatt, Ronald Busuttil. Metabolic
factors and hepatocarcinogenesis in steatohepatitis. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4825.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4825

