Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating C-reactive protein and colorectal cancer risk: a
report from the Shanghai Men's Health Study.


Chronic inflammation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
colorectal cancer. C-reactive protein (CRP), a biomarker of systemic
inflammation, has been investigated in various populations for its
association with colorectal cancer risk, but results have been
inconsistent. We examined pre-diagnostic circulating levels of CRP with
colorectal cancer risk among 288 colorectal cancer cases and 576
frequency-matched controls nested within the Shanghai Men's Health Study
(2002-2006), a population-based cohort study of 61,483 men. Baseline
plasma CRP levels were 47% higher among men who subsequently developed
colorectal cancer than among those who remained free of the disease (1.12
g/ml vs. 0.76 g/ml; P1.19 g/ml had 1.88-fold (95%CI: 1.24-2.86) increased
odds of developing colorectal cancer compared with men in the lowest
tertile with CRP 1.19 g/ml had 1.88-fold (95%CI: 1.24-2.86) increased
odds of developing colorectal cancer compared with men in the lowest
tertile with CRP <0.45 g/ml. The association was observed for both colon
and rectal cancers, became stronger after excluding subjects who took any
antibiotics during past 7 days, and was restricted to cancer cases
diagnosed within 4 years of blood collection (ORs for the highest tertile
being 3.28 (95%CI: 1.28-8.37), 3.68 (95%CI: 1.62-8.38), and 1.05 (95%CI:
056-1.97), respectively for cases diagnosed within 2, 2-4 and 4 years
after blood draw). The findings from our study suggest that circulating
CRP level is positively associated with colorectal cancer risk in Chinese
men, and this association, at least in part, is explained by inflammation
related to cancerous or precancerous processes.

