Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Response of primary culture of breast cancer to hypoxia and drug
treatment.


Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease. Several subtypes of breast
cancer have been characterized and corresponding treatment strategies
have been devised. However, outcomes are not always satisfactory for a
variety of reasons including individual variation in age, race, disease
stages, and genetic variations. In order to improve the outcomes of
breast cancer treatment, personalized treatment has been developed based
on molecular profiling and genetic testing of each individual patient. To
compliment the development of personalized treatment based on molecular
data from genetic profiling, we hypothesized that culture of primary
breast cancer tissue could provide a cell-based model that could be
utilized in the evaluation of the response of individual breast cancer to
therapeutic agents. In this model, breast cancer samples were cultured in
matrigel. To identify the cell types that grew in the matrigel, the cells
were subjected to the staining with antibodies against cytokeratin5,
cytokeratin14, cytokeratin18, ER, vimentin, E-cadherin, N-cadherin, -SMA,
and -catenin. The results demonstrated that the cells which grew from
breast cancer tissue were heterogeneous, including epithelial and stromal
cells. Further analysis of the effect of oxygen indicated that the growth
of breast cancer cells increased by 1.4-1.5 fold with 5% O2 compared to
growth with 21% O2. Interestingly, hypoxia did not stimulate growth of
normal breast tissue. Very intriguingly, growth under hypoxic conditions
demonstrated differential responses to several chemotherapeutic agents.
In these studies cell proliferation was assayed at 5% and 21% O2 of
primary cultures of normal and cancerous breast cells treated with
doxorubicin, LY294002, and PHA665752 (c-Met inhibitor). With doxorubicin
treatment normal breast cells under hypoxia showed significant drug
resistance at 0.1 M and 1 M compared to normoxia (PBreast cancer is a
heterogeneous disease. Several subtypes of breast cancer have been
characterized and corresponding treatment strategies have been devised.
However, outcomes are not always satisfactory for a variety of reasons
including individual variation in age, race, disease stages, and genetic
variations. In order to improve the outcomes of breast cancer treatment,
personalized treatment has been developed based on molecular profiling
and genetic testing of each individual patient. To compliment the
development of personalized treatment based on molecular data from
genetic profiling, we hypothesized that culture of primary breast cancer
tissue could provide a cell-based model that could be utilized in the
evaluation of the response of individual breast cancer to therapeutic
agents. In this model, breast cancer samples were cultured in matrigel.
To identify the cell types that grew in the matrigel, the cells were
subjected to the staining with antibodies against cytokeratin5,
cytokeratin14, cytokeratin18, ER, vimentin, E-cadherin, N-cadherin, -SMA,
and -catenin. The results demonstrated that the cells which grew from
breast cancer tissue were heterogeneous, including epithelial and stromal
cells. Further analysis of the effect of oxygen indicated that the growth
of breast cancer cells increased by 1.4-1.5 fold with 5% O2 compared to
growth with 21% O2. Interestingly, hypoxia did not stimulate growth of
normal breast tissue. Very intriguingly, growth under hypoxic conditions
demonstrated differential responses to several chemotherapeutic agents.
In these studies cell proliferation was assayed at 5% and 21% O2 of
primary cultures of normal and cancerous breast cells treated with
doxorubicin, LY294002, and PHA665752 (c-Met inhibitor). With doxorubicin
treatment normal breast cells under hypoxia showed significant drug
resistance at 0.1 M and 1 M compared to normoxia (P<0.05) while breast
cancer cells were similarly responsive to doxorubicin under normoxic and
hypoxic conditions. With LY294002 treatment hypoxic breast cancer cells
showed an increased drug resistance at 10 and 40M (PBreast cancer is a
heterogeneous disease. Several subtypes of breast cancer have been
characterized and corresponding treatment strategies have been devised.
However, outcomes are not always satisfactory for a variety of reasons
including individual variation in age, race, disease stages, and genetic
variations. In order to improve the outcomes of breast cancer treatment,
personalized treatment has been developed based on molecular profiling
and genetic testing of each individual patient. To compliment the
development of personalized treatment based on molecular data from
genetic profiling, we hypothesized that culture of primary breast cancer
tissue could provide a cell-based model that could be utilized in the
evaluation of the response of individual breast cancer to therapeutic
agents. In this model, breast cancer samples were cultured in matrigel.
To identify the cell types that grew in the matrigel, the cells were
subjected to the staining with antibodies against cytokeratin5,
cytokeratin14, cytokeratin18, ER, vimentin, E-cadherin, N-cadherin, -SMA,
and -catenin. The results demonstrated that the cells which grew from
breast cancer tissue were heterogeneous, including epithelial and stromal
cells. Further analysis of the effect of oxygen indicated that the growth
of breast cancer cells increased by 1.4-1.5 fold with 5% O2 compared to
growth with 21% O2. Interestingly, hypoxia did not stimulate growth of
normal breast tissue. Very intriguingly, growth under hypoxic conditions
demonstrated differential responses to several chemotherapeutic agents.
In these studies cell proliferation was assayed at 5% and 21% O2 of
primary cultures of normal and cancerous breast cells treated with
doxorubicin, LY294002, and PHA665752 (c-Met inhibitor). With doxorubicin
treatment normal breast cells under hypoxia showed significant drug
resistance at 0.1 M and 1 M compared to normoxia (P<0.05) while breast
cancer cells were similarly responsive to doxorubicin under normoxic and
hypoxic conditions. With LY294002 treatment hypoxic breast cancer cells
showed an increased drug resistance at 10 and 40M (P<0.05) while hypoxic
normal breast cells showed a significant increase in drug resistance at
only 40 M compared to normoxic cells. The effects of PHA665752 on cell
proliferation were not affected by hypoxia for either normal or breast
cancer cells. In conclusion, cells grown from breast cancer tissue are
heterogeneous in cell type. These primary cells show some differential
responses to hypoxia condition and drug treatment. An advantage of this
primary cell culture model is that it contains cancer cells in the
context of their respective native supportive stromal cells, thus
creating a microenvironment that is similar to what obtains in vivo.
Therefore, this in vitro primary culture model may have potential
applications for the testing of drugs predicted to be effective for
personalized treatment of breast cancer.

