Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary fat and cholesterol intake in relation to fatal breast
cancer.


Dietary fats are not strongly associated with breast cancer incidence in
general, but it is unknown whether fat intake influences risk of
developing more aggressive, fatal breast cancer. We evaluated intake of
total fat, specific types of fat (saturated, monounsaturated,
polyunsaturated, trans fat; omega 3 polyunsaturated; animal and
vegetable), and cholesterol prior to cancer diagnosis in relation to
fatal breast cancer risk in 88,627 women in the Nurses Health Study (NHS;
1980-2008) and 93,372 women in the Nurses Health Study II (NHS II;
1991-2009). Diet was assessed every 4 years using a semi-quantitative
food frequency questionnaire. Breast cancer cases were confirmed with
pathology reports and deaths were confirmed using the National Death
Index. We calculated cumulative average percent calories from fat intake
and used substitution models to adjust for macronutrient composition. For
cholesterol, we adjusted for total energy intake using the residual
method. We defined fatal cases as women with breast cancer who died and
had breast cancer listed as their primary cause of death. There were 1149
fatal breast cancer cases in NHS and 206 fatal cases in NHS II. After
adjusting for multiple risk factors for breast cancer, neither total fat
nor types of fat were associated with risk of fatal breast cancer in NHS
or NHS II. For example, compared with those in the lowest quintile of
saturated fat intake, those in the highest quintile had a hazard ratio
(HR) of 1.02 (95% CI: 0.75, 1.38; p-trend=0.80) in NHS and 1.14 (0.61,
2.13; p-trend=0.61) in NHS II. In NHS there was a suggestive positive
association between cholesterol and fatal breast cancer (Q5 vs. Q1 HR:
1.28, 95% CI: 1.02, 1.61; p-trend=0.04); this association did not persist
in NHS II (0.73; 95% CI: 0.41, 1.32; p-trend=0.44) but should be examined
further. Long-term pre-diagnosis dietary fat intake was not associated
with fatal breast cancer in these two large prospective cohort studies.
Cholesterol and percent calories from fat in relation to fatal breast
cancer, Nurses Health Study.

