Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of JNK-targeted therapy for
triple-negative breast cancer.


Patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), which is negative for
estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2, have a very poor
prognosis due to metastasis and limited targeted therapies. JNK (c-Jun
N-terminal kinase) signaling promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis and
regulates cancer stem cell self-renewal and maintenance in glioma, and
the JNK pathway is hyperactivated in basal-like TNBC. Therefore, we
hypothesized that suppressing JNK activity inhibits tumorigenesis and
metastasis of TNBC cells.To test our hypothesis, we generated several
JNK-targeted JIP (JNK-interacting protein) mimetic peptides as well as
the small molecule JNK inhibitor JNK-In-8 and assessed their therapeutic
potential in TNBC cells. JIP mimetic peptides were designed and
synthesized on the basis of the D-site of JIP, which is critical for JNK
binding.All the peptides and JNK-In-8 specifically inhibited JNK kinase
activity. Because of high JNK specificity, JIP2 (JIP peptide) and
JNK-In-8 were chosen for bioactivity studies. JIP2 (10 M) inhibited
phosphorylation of JNK and its substrate c-Jun in HEK293 cells. Similar
results were observed for JNK-In-8 (0.5 M) in SUM149 and MDA-MB-231
cells. However, whereas JIP2 was not cytotoxic against SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 cells, JNK-In-8 (IC50=4.0 M) significantly inhibited
proliferation of these cells by inducing G1 cell-cycle arrest at low
doses and apoptosis at high doses. Furthermore, SUM149 and MDA-MB-231
cells treated with JNK-In-8 (2.5 M, PPatients with triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC), which is negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone
receptor, and HER2, have a very poor prognosis due to metastasis and
limited targeted therapies. JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) signaling
promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis and regulates cancer stem cell
self-renewal and maintenance in glioma, and the JNK pathway is
hyperactivated in basal-like TNBC. Therefore, we hypothesized that
suppressing JNK activity inhibits tumorigenesis and metastasis of TNBC
cells.To test our hypothesis, we generated several JNK-targeted JIP
(JNK-interacting protein) mimetic peptides as well as the small molecule
JNK inhibitor JNK-In-8 and assessed their therapeutic potential in TNBC
cells. JIP mimetic peptides were designed and synthesized on the basis of
the D-site of JIP, which is critical for JNK binding.All the peptides and
JNK-In-8 specifically inhibited JNK kinase activity. Because of high JNK
specificity, JIP2 (JIP peptide) and JNK-In-8 were chosen for bioactivity
studies. JIP2 (10 M) inhibited phosphorylation of JNK and its substrate
c-Jun in HEK293 cells. Similar results were observed for JNK-In-8 (0.5 M)
in SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells. However, whereas JIP2 was not cytotoxic
against SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells, JNK-In-8 (IC50=4.0 M) significantly
inhibited proliferation of these cells by inducing G1 cell-cycle arrest
at low doses and apoptosis at high doses. Furthermore, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with JNK-In-8 (2.5 M, P<0.05) exhibited
significant inhibition of anchorage-independent growth, an indicator of
in vivo tumorigenicity.JIP2 (10 M) strongly inhibited SUM149 cell
migration (42.02%, PPatients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC),
which is negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2,
have a very poor prognosis due to metastasis and limited targeted
therapies. JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) signaling promotes tumorigenesis
and metastasis and regulates cancer stem cell self-renewal and
maintenance in glioma, and the JNK pathway is hyperactivated in
basal-like TNBC. Therefore, we hypothesized that suppressing JNK activity
inhibits tumorigenesis and metastasis of TNBC cells.To test our
hypothesis, we generated several JNK-targeted JIP (JNK-interacting
protein) mimetic peptides as well as the small molecule JNK inhibitor
JNK-In-8 and assessed their therapeutic potential in TNBC cells. JIP
mimetic peptides were designed and synthesized on the basis of the D-site
of JIP, which is critical for JNK binding.All the peptides and JNK-In-8
specifically inhibited JNK kinase activity. Because of high JNK
specificity, JIP2 (JIP peptide) and JNK-In-8 were chosen for bioactivity
studies. JIP2 (10 M) inhibited phosphorylation of JNK and its substrate
c-Jun in HEK293 cells. Similar results were observed for JNK-In-8 (0.5 M)
in SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells. However, whereas JIP2 was not cytotoxic
against SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells, JNK-In-8 (IC50=4.0 M) significantly
inhibited proliferation of these cells by inducing G1 cell-cycle arrest
at low doses and apoptosis at high doses. Furthermore, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with JNK-In-8 (2.5 M, P<0.05) exhibited
significant inhibition of anchorage-independent growth, an indicator of
in vivo tumorigenicity.JIP2 (10 M) strongly inhibited SUM149 cell
migration (42.02%, P<0.01) and invasion (42.11%, PPatients with
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), which is negative for estrogen
receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2, have a very poor prognosis due
to metastasis and limited targeted therapies. JNK (c-Jun N-terminal
kinase) signaling promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis and regulates
cancer stem cell self-renewal and maintenance in glioma, and the JNK
pathway is hyperactivated in basal-like TNBC. Therefore, we hypothesized
that suppressing JNK activity inhibits tumorigenesis and metastasis of
TNBC cells.To test our hypothesis, we generated several JNK-targeted JIP
(JNK-interacting protein) mimetic peptides as well as the small molecule
JNK inhibitor JNK-In-8 and assessed their therapeutic potential in TNBC
cells. JIP mimetic peptides were designed and synthesized on the basis of
the D-site of JIP, which is critical for JNK binding.All the peptides and
JNK-In-8 specifically inhibited JNK kinase activity. Because of high JNK
specificity, JIP2 (JIP peptide) and JNK-In-8 were chosen for bioactivity
studies. JIP2 (10 M) inhibited phosphorylation of JNK and its substrate
c-Jun in HEK293 cells. Similar results were observed for JNK-In-8 (0.5 M)
in SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells. However, whereas JIP2 was not cytotoxic
against SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells, JNK-In-8 (IC50=4.0 M) significantly
inhibited proliferation of these cells by inducing G1 cell-cycle arrest
at low doses and apoptosis at high doses. Furthermore, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with JNK-In-8 (2.5 M, P<0.05) exhibited
significant inhibition of anchorage-independent growth, an indicator of
in vivo tumorigenicity.JIP2 (10 M) strongly inhibited SUM149 cell
migration (42.02%, P<0.01) and invasion (42.11%, P<0.01). Similarly,
JNK-In-8 (5 M) blocked migration (36.26%, PPatients with triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC), which is negative for estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor, and HER2, have a very poor prognosis due to
metastasis and limited targeted therapies. JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase)
signaling promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis and regulates cancer stem
cell self-renewal and maintenance in glioma, and the JNK pathway is
hyperactivated in basal-like TNBC. Therefore, we hypothesized that
suppressing JNK activity inhibits tumorigenesis and metastasis of TNBC
cells.To test our hypothesis, we generated several JNK-targeted JIP
(JNK-interacting protein) mimetic peptides as well as the small molecule
JNK inhibitor JNK-In-8 and assessed their therapeutic potential in TNBC
cells. JIP mimetic peptides were designed and synthesized on the basis of
the D-site of JIP, which is critical for JNK binding.All the peptides and
JNK-In-8 specifically inhibited JNK kinase activity. Because of high JNK
specificity, JIP2 (JIP peptide) and JNK-In-8 were chosen for bioactivity
studies. JIP2 (10 M) inhibited phosphorylation of JNK and its substrate
c-Jun in HEK293 cells. Similar results were observed for JNK-In-8 (0.5 M)
in SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells. However, whereas JIP2 was not cytotoxic
against SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells, JNK-In-8 (IC50=4.0 M) significantly
inhibited proliferation of these cells by inducing G1 cell-cycle arrest
at low doses and apoptosis at high doses. Furthermore, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with JNK-In-8 (2.5 M, P<0.05) exhibited
significant inhibition of anchorage-independent growth, an indicator of
in vivo tumorigenicity.JIP2 (10 M) strongly inhibited SUM149 cell
migration (42.02%, P<0.01) and invasion (42.11%, P<0.01). Similarly,
JNK-In-8 (5 M) blocked migration (36.26%, P<0.01) and invasion (77.96%,
PPatients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), which is negative
for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2, have a very poor
prognosis due to metastasis and limited targeted therapies. JNK (c-Jun
N-terminal kinase) signaling promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis and
regulates cancer stem cell self-renewal and maintenance in glioma, and
the JNK pathway is hyperactivated in basal-like TNBC. Therefore, we
hypothesized that suppressing JNK activity inhibits tumorigenesis and
metastasis of TNBC cells.To test our hypothesis, we generated several
JNK-targeted JIP (JNK-interacting protein) mimetic peptides as well as
the small molecule JNK inhibitor JNK-In-8 and assessed their therapeutic
potential in TNBC cells. JIP mimetic peptides were designed and
synthesized on the basis of the D-site of JIP, which is critical for JNK
binding.All the peptides and JNK-In-8 specifically inhibited JNK kinase
activity. Because of high JNK specificity, JIP2 (JIP peptide) and
JNK-In-8 were chosen for bioactivity studies. JIP2 (10 M) inhibited
phosphorylation of JNK and its substrate c-Jun in HEK293 cells. Similar
results were observed for JNK-In-8 (0.5 M) in SUM149 and MDA-MB-231
cells. However, whereas JIP2 was not cytotoxic against SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 cells, JNK-In-8 (IC50=4.0 M) significantly inhibited
proliferation of these cells by inducing G1 cell-cycle arrest at low
doses and apoptosis at high doses. Furthermore, SUM149 and MDA-MB-231
cells treated with JNK-In-8 (2.5 M, P<0.05) exhibited significant
inhibition of anchorage-independent growth, an indicator of in vivo
tumorigenicity.JIP2 (10 M) strongly inhibited SUM149 cell migration
(42.02%, P<0.01) and invasion (42.11%, P<0.01). Similarly, JNK-In-8 (5 M)
blocked migration (36.26%, P<0.01) and invasion (77.96%, P<0.001) of
SUM149 cells as well as migration (62.48%, PPatients with triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC), which is negative for estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor, and HER2, have a very poor prognosis due to
metastasis and limited targeted therapies. JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase)
signaling promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis and regulates cancer stem
cell self-renewal and maintenance in glioma, and the JNK pathway is
hyperactivated in basal-like TNBC. Therefore, we hypothesized that
suppressing JNK activity inhibits tumorigenesis and metastasis of TNBC
cells.To test our hypothesis, we generated several JNK-targeted JIP
(JNK-interacting protein) mimetic peptides as well as the small molecule
JNK inhibitor JNK-In-8 and assessed their therapeutic potential in TNBC
cells. JIP mimetic peptides were designed and synthesized on the basis of
the D-site of JIP, which is critical for JNK binding.All the peptides and
JNK-In-8 specifically inhibited JNK kinase activity. Because of high JNK
specificity, JIP2 (JIP peptide) and JNK-In-8 were chosen for bioactivity
studies. JIP2 (10 M) inhibited phosphorylation of JNK and its substrate
c-Jun in HEK293 cells. Similar results were observed for JNK-In-8 (0.5 M)
in SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells. However, whereas JIP2 was not cytotoxic
against SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells, JNK-In-8 (IC50=4.0 M) significantly
inhibited proliferation of these cells by inducing G1 cell-cycle arrest
at low doses and apoptosis at high doses. Furthermore, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with JNK-In-8 (2.5 M, P<0.05) exhibited
significant inhibition of anchorage-independent growth, an indicator of
in vivo tumorigenicity.JIP2 (10 M) strongly inhibited SUM149 cell
migration (42.02%, P<0.01) and invasion (42.11%, P<0.01). Similarly,
JNK-In-8 (5 M) blocked migration (36.26%, P<0.01) and invasion (77.96%,
P<0.001) of SUM149 cells as well as migration (62.48%, P<0.001) and
invasion (61.49%, PPatients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC),
which is negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2,
have a very poor prognosis due to metastasis and limited targeted
therapies. JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) signaling promotes tumorigenesis
and metastasis and regulates cancer stem cell self-renewal and
maintenance in glioma, and the JNK pathway is hyperactivated in
basal-like TNBC. Therefore, we hypothesized that suppressing JNK activity
inhibits tumorigenesis and metastasis of TNBC cells.To test our
hypothesis, we generated several JNK-targeted JIP (JNK-interacting
protein) mimetic peptides as well as the small molecule JNK inhibitor
JNK-In-8 and assessed their therapeutic potential in TNBC cells. JIP
mimetic peptides were designed and synthesized on the basis of the D-site
of JIP, which is critical for JNK binding.All the peptides and JNK-In-8
specifically inhibited JNK kinase activity. Because of high JNK
specificity, JIP2 (JIP peptide) and JNK-In-8 were chosen for bioactivity
studies. JIP2 (10 M) inhibited phosphorylation of JNK and its substrate
c-Jun in HEK293 cells. Similar results were observed for JNK-In-8 (0.5 M)
in SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells. However, whereas JIP2 was not cytotoxic
against SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells, JNK-In-8 (IC50=4.0 M) significantly
inhibited proliferation of these cells by inducing G1 cell-cycle arrest
at low doses and apoptosis at high doses. Furthermore, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with JNK-In-8 (2.5 M, P<0.05) exhibited
significant inhibition of anchorage-independent growth, an indicator of
in vivo tumorigenicity.JIP2 (10 M) strongly inhibited SUM149 cell
migration (42.02%, P<0.01) and invasion (42.11%, P<0.01). Similarly,
JNK-In-8 (5 M) blocked migration (36.26%, P<0.01) and invasion (77.96%,
P<0.001) of SUM149 cells as well as migration (62.48%, P<0.001) and
invasion (61.49%, P<0.001) of MDA-MB-231 cells. These results indicate
the capability of JIP2 and JNK-In-8 to suppress metastasis of TNBC
cells.Interestingly, JNK-In-8 (2.5 M) also reduced the proportion of
CD44+ CD24- cells (SUM149: DMSO 50.23% vs JNK-In-8 40.41%) and that of
ALDH1+ cells (SUM149: DMSO 38.25% vs JNK-In-8 25.84%; MDA-MB-231: DMSO
19.94% vs JNK-In-8 9.21%) as well as mammosphere formation (SUM149:
65.95%, PPatients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), which is
negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2, have a
very poor prognosis due to metastasis and limited targeted therapies. JNK
(c-Jun N-terminal kinase) signaling promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis
and regulates cancer stem cell self-renewal and maintenance in glioma,
and the JNK pathway is hyperactivated in basal-like TNBC. Therefore, we
hypothesized that suppressing JNK activity inhibits tumorigenesis and
metastasis of TNBC cells.To test our hypothesis, we generated several
JNK-targeted JIP (JNK-interacting protein) mimetic peptides as well as
the small molecule JNK inhibitor JNK-In-8 and assessed their therapeutic
potential in TNBC cells. JIP mimetic peptides were designed and
synthesized on the basis of the D-site of JIP, which is critical for JNK
binding.All the peptides and JNK-In-8 specifically inhibited JNK kinase
activity. Because of high JNK specificity, JIP2 (JIP peptide) and
JNK-In-8 were chosen for bioactivity studies. JIP2 (10 M) inhibited
phosphorylation of JNK and its substrate c-Jun in HEK293 cells. Similar
results were observed for JNK-In-8 (0.5 M) in SUM149 and MDA-MB-231
cells. However, whereas JIP2 was not cytotoxic against SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 cells, JNK-In-8 (IC50=4.0 M) significantly inhibited
proliferation of these cells by inducing G1 cell-cycle arrest at low
doses and apoptosis at high doses. Furthermore, SUM149 and MDA-MB-231
cells treated with JNK-In-8 (2.5 M, P<0.05) exhibited significant
inhibition of anchorage-independent growth, an indicator of in vivo
tumorigenicity.JIP2 (10 M) strongly inhibited SUM149 cell migration
(42.02%, P<0.01) and invasion (42.11%, P<0.01). Similarly, JNK-In-8 (5 M)
blocked migration (36.26%, P<0.01) and invasion (77.96%, P<0.001) of
SUM149 cells as well as migration (62.48%, P<0.001) and invasion (61.49%,
P<0.001) of MDA-MB-231 cells. These results indicate the capability of
JIP2 and JNK-In-8 to suppress metastasis of TNBC cells.Interestingly,
JNK-In-8 (2.5 M) also reduced the proportion of CD44+ CD24- cells
(SUM149: DMSO 50.23% vs JNK-In-8 40.41%) and that of ALDH1+ cells
(SUM149: DMSO 38.25% vs JNK-In-8 25.84%; MDA-MB-231: DMSO 19.94% vs
JNK-In-8 9.21%) as well as mammosphere formation (SUM149: 65.95%,
P<0.001; MDA-MB-231, 65.7%, PPatients with triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC), which is negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor,
and HER2, have a very poor prognosis due to metastasis and limited
targeted therapies. JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) signaling promotes
tumorigenesis and metastasis and regulates cancer stem cell self-renewal
and maintenance in glioma, and the JNK pathway is hyperactivated in
basal-like TNBC. Therefore, we hypothesized that suppressing JNK activity
inhibits tumorigenesis and metastasis of TNBC cells.To test our
hypothesis, we generated several JNK-targeted JIP (JNK-interacting
protein) mimetic peptides as well as the small molecule JNK inhibitor
JNK-In-8 and assessed their therapeutic potential in TNBC cells. JIP
mimetic peptides were designed and synthesized on the basis of the D-site
of JIP, which is critical for JNK binding.All the peptides and JNK-In-8
specifically inhibited JNK kinase activity. Because of high JNK
specificity, JIP2 (JIP peptide) and JNK-In-8 were chosen for bioactivity
studies. JIP2 (10 M) inhibited phosphorylation of JNK and its substrate
c-Jun in HEK293 cells. Similar results were observed for JNK-In-8 (0.5 M)
in SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells. However, whereas JIP2 was not cytotoxic
against SUM149 and MDA-MB-231 cells, JNK-In-8 (IC50=4.0 M) significantly
inhibited proliferation of these cells by inducing G1 cell-cycle arrest
at low doses and apoptosis at high doses. Furthermore, SUM149 and
MDA-MB-231 cells treated with JNK-In-8 (2.5 M, P<0.05) exhibited
significant inhibition of anchorage-independent growth, an indicator of
in vivo tumorigenicity.JIP2 (10 M) strongly inhibited SUM149 cell
migration (42.02%, P<0.01) and invasion (42.11%, P<0.01). Similarly,
JNK-In-8 (5 M) blocked migration (36.26%, P<0.01) and invasion (77.96%,
P<0.001) of SUM149 cells as well as migration (62.48%, P<0.001) and
invasion (61.49%, P<0.001) of MDA-MB-231 cells. These results indicate
the capability of JIP2 and JNK-In-8 to suppress metastasis of TNBC
cells.Interestingly, JNK-In-8 (2.5 M) also reduced the proportion of
CD44+ CD24- cells (SUM149: DMSO 50.23% vs JNK-In-8 40.41%) and that of
ALDH1+ cells (SUM149: DMSO 38.25% vs JNK-In-8 25.84%; MDA-MB-231: DMSO
19.94% vs JNK-In-8 9.21%) as well as mammosphere formation (SUM149:
65.95%, P<0.001; MDA-MB-231, 65.7%, P<0.001), suggesting the potential of
JNK-In-8 to inhibit JNK-mediated cancer stem cell maintenance.Our data
demonstrate that JNK inhibitors may inhibit tumorigenesis and metastasis
of TNBC cells by suppressing cancer stem cell maintenance and that JNK
may serve as a promising target for TNBC therapy. Further studies will be
conducted to determine the molecular mechanisms of JIP2- and
JNK-In-8-mediated antitumor action in TNBC and the therapeutic efficacy
of JIP2 and JNK-In-8 in a TNBC xenograft mouse model.

