Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxicity in vitro, pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of
Link-N3 and Link-F3, two bivalent small molecules inhibitors of c-Myc/Max
interactions in C.B-17 SCID mice bearing Daudi Burkitt's lymphoma
xenografts.


Introduction: c-Myc plays an important role in cellular proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis and cell cycle progression and its
overexpression is associated with aggressiveness and poor prognosis in
many cancers. In order to be transcriptionally active, c-Myc must
heterodimerize via its bHLH-ZIP domain with its obligatory partner Max.
Two small molecules that prevent c-Myc/Max heterodimerization and inhibit
c-Myc function are 10074-G5 and 10058-F4. Analogues of these small
molecule c-Myc inhibitors have been linked together by a flexible bridge
to form Link-N3 and Link-F3. We have characterized the ability of these
Link analogues to inhibit the in vitro growth of a c-Myc-overexpressing
human cell line, Daudi Burkitt's lymphoma. We evaluated their
pharmacokinetics, metabolism and efficacy in mice bearing Daudi
xenografts.Methods: Inhibition of Daudi cell growth by Link-N3 and
Link-F3 was assessed by MTT assay after 72 h of incubation. Accumulation
of Link-N3 and Link-F3 by Daudi cells incubated with 10 M of Link-N3 and
Link-F3 was measured by HPLC. For pharmacokinetic and metabolic studies,
C.B-17 SCID mice bearing Daudi xenografts were treated with 10 mg/kg
Link-N3 or 5mg/kg Link-F3 IV. Plasma and tissues were collected between 5
and 1440 min. Urine was collected at 360 and 1440 min. Concentrations of
Link-N3 and Link-F3 were determined by HPLC-UV, and metabolites were
identified by LC-MS/MS. For efficacy compounds were administered qdx4 at
the same doses.Results: The IC50s for Link-N3 and Link-F3 against Daudi
cells could not be determined because compounds precipitated at
concentrations above 30 M. Daudi cells accumulated Link-N3 and Link-F3
19-fold and 17-fold, respectively, with peak intracellular concentrations
between 3 and 6 h of incubation. Neither compound resulted in tumor
growth inhibition following IV dosing. Following a single IV dose of 10
mg/kg Link-N3 or 5 mg/kg Link-F3, peak plasma concentrations at 5 min
were 27.3 g/ml and 5.3 g/ml, respectively. Plasma Auc0-t for Link-N3 and
Link-F3 were 1759.6 gmin/ml and 137.9 gmin/ml, respectively. Plasma T1/2
of Link-N3 and Link-F3 were 394 and 7 min, respectively. The volume of
distribution was approximately 3204 ml/kg and 35 ml/kg for Link-N3 and
Link-F3, respectively. Clearances for Link-N3 and Link-F3 were 5.6
ml/min/kg and 3.6 ml/min/kg, respectively. Peak tumor concentration of
Link-N3 at 30 min was 0.77 g/g and Link-F3 at 5 min was 0.49 g/g, both
much lower than peak plasma concentrations.Conclusion: The lack of
significant antitumor activity of Link-N3 or Link-F3 in tumor-bearing
mice is related to the low concentrations that reached the xenografts.
Modification will be required in these bivalent compounds to make them
more drug-like.Support: 1R01CA142580 and P30-CA47904

