Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathway convergent evolution underscores treatment response to
MTOR inhibitors in kidney cancers.


Despite the established role of MTOR inhibitors (rapalogs) in treating
advanced kidney cancer, therapeutic benefit varies and predictive
biomarkers are lacking. Intratumor branching heterogeneity, a recently
discovered hallmark of this disease, has raised concerns about the
feasibility of developing genomic biomarkers for targeted agents in
kidney cancer. We undertook an outlier approach to interrogate the
genetic determinants underlying long-term therapeutic response (>20
months) to rapalogs in 6 patients. An integrated ultra-deep
targeted-exome (500x) and standard whole-exome (100x) sequencing was
performed. Additionally, to address intratumor and intertumor
heterogeneity, spatially separated tumor specimens from the same
individuals were analyzed whenever possible. Multiregional sequencing
unveiled surprising MTOR pathway convergent evolution, manifested by MTOR
pathway activation by means of distinct genomic events in spatially
separate sites of disease within the same individual. Amongst the core
components of the MTORC1 pathway, complete functional loss of TSC1 and
TSC2, and a hyperactive MTOR mutant were discovered in 4 of 6 long-term
responders. Mutations in MTOR Clustered at FAT and kinase domains confer
hyperactivity and yet remain sensitive to rapamycin. Here, we affirm
intratumor heterogeneity, identify genomic determinants of drug response,
and discover pathway convergent evolution in the majority of long-term
responders. We propose a river model in which intratumor and intertumor
clonal heterogeneity in cancer patients evolves like a branching river
that converges at critical nodes. These convergent points provide unique
opportunities for the treatment of genetically diverged yet functionally
converged cancers in any given patient.

