Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic biomarkers of anti-PD-L1 activity in pre-clinical
mouse tumor models.


Programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1, CD274, B7-H1) is an immune
checkpoint molecule expressed in various tissues, including multiple
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and placenta. PD-L1 binds its receptor
PD-1 on activated T cells to negatively regulate their function in both
physiological and pathological conditions. PD-L1 also binds B7.1 (CD80),
further down modulating immune responses. Importantly, numerous cancers
resist T-cell mediated cytotoxic activity by over-expressing PD-L1.The
goal of this study was to identify pharmacodynamic biomarkers of response
to agents blocking PD-L1/PD-1 pathway in pre-clinical models. CT-26 and
MC-38 murine mouse tumor models were selected for this analysis, based on
their PD-L1 expression and in-vivo sensitivity to anti-PD-L1 treatment.
Tumors have been collected at various time points following treatment
with an antibody blocking PD-L1 binding to PD-1 and B7.1. Subsequently,
FACS, IHC, qPCR and a multiplex qPCR-based expression assay measuring a
panel of 90 immune-related biomarkers have been used to evaluate changes
in major immune cell subtypes and their activation status. We show that
the intra-tumoral immune environment undergoes a time-sensitive dynamic
modulation in response to PD-L1 pathway blockade, including an early and
potent Th1 driven CTL response, as measured by relevant markers.
Additionally, our findings show that targeting PD-L1 in pre-clinical
tumor models can reinvigorate the host immune responses against the tumor
and lead to T-cell mediated tumor killing. Our data also support
identification of potential pharmacodynamic biomarkers that can be used
to monitor activity of agents targeting the PD-L1 pathway in the clinic.

