Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage FLT1 signaling activates an inflammatory response that
promotes breast cancer distal metastasis.


Macrophages are abundantly found in the tumor microenvironment enhance
malignancy. At distal metastatic sites a distinct population of
metastasis associated macrophages (MAMs) promotes tumor cell
extravasation, seeding and persistent growth. Compared with lung resident
macrophages, MAMs associated with breast cancer lung metastasis in
pre-clinical models express high levels of cell surface FMS-like tyrosine
kinase 1 (Flt1). Blockade of FLT1 signaling using specific inhibitory
antibodies significantly inhibited the metastatic seeding and persistent
growth of both human and murine breast tumor cell. This was confirmed
using a genetic model of Flt1 tyrosine kinase domain (TK) ablation. Using
bone marrow transplantation techniques, we further showed that this
metastasis inhibitory effect was due to the lack of FLT1 signaling in
hematopoietic cells. Furthermore, macrophage specific ablation of the
tyrosine kinase domain of Flt1 by crossing Flt1 flox/flox mice with
macrophage restricted Cre mice (Csf1r-Cre) also significantly inhibited
tumor cell metastatic potential. Since Flt1 is not expressed by other
hematopoietic cells and FLT1 inhibition did not affect the recruitment of
MAMs, it indicated that specific FLT1 signaling in MAMs are important for
their metastasis promoting functions. FLT1 regulated genes were
identified by comparing gene expression profiles using microarray
techniques of FACS sorted MAMs from mice treated with control and
anti-FLT1 inhibitory antibody. Bioinformatics analysis showed that
inflammatory response genes were highly enriched in these genes.
Together, our studies indicated that FLT1 signaling is required for the
activation of metastasis associated macrophages and regulates a set of
inflammatory genes that promote breast tumor distal metastasis.

