Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiling of FGF-receptor pathway genes in squamous
NSCLC tissue by Nanostring.


FGFR1 amplifications have recently been identified in 22% of squamous
non-small cell lung cancers (sqNSCLC) (Weiss et al., Sci Transl Med.,
2(62), 2010) and in pre-clinical models this amplification confers
sensitivity to FGFR inhibitor induced cell growth arrest and death (Zhang
et al., Clin. Can. Res., In press). Ongoing clinical trials of FGFR
inhibitors are selecting patients based on FGFR1 amplifications, as
determined by FISH. The development of additional biomarker assays to
evaluate the expression of FGFRs, FGF ligands and other potential
modulators of response to support analysis of clinical tissues is
warranted.We validated the Nanostring platform to allow gene expression
(mRNA) analysis of 194 genes, including FGFRs and FGF ligands, from one
5m section of formalin fixed paraffin embedded clinical tumor tissue.
Intra- and inter-assay variability was low, as was variability between
adjacent sections from the same tumor sample. Further validation of a
subset of these genes by RT-PCR revealed a good correlation between
platforms. A panel of 50 sqNSCLC tumors were analysed for FGFR1 gene
amplification by FISH and for gene expression by Nanostring. FGFR1
amplfied tumours were enriched for high FGFR1 mRNA expression (pFGFR1
amplifications have recently been identified in 22% of squamous non-small
cell lung cancers (sqNSCLC) (Weiss et al., Sci Transl Med., 2(62), 2010)
and in pre-clinical models this amplification confers sensitivity to FGFR
inhibitor induced cell growth arrest and death (Zhang et al., Clin. Can.
Res., In press). Ongoing clinical trials of FGFR inhibitors are selecting
patients based on FGFR1 amplifications, as determined by FISH. The
development of additional biomarker assays to evaluate the expression of
FGFRs, FGF ligands and other potential modulators of response to support
analysis of clinical tissues is warranted.We validated the Nanostring
platform to allow gene expression (mRNA) analysis of 194 genes, including
FGFRs and FGF ligands, from one 5m section of formalin fixed paraffin
embedded clinical tumor tissue. Intra- and inter-assay variability was
low, as was variability between adjacent sections from the same tumor
sample. Further validation of a subset of these genes by RT-PCR revealed
a good correlation between platforms. A panel of 50 sqNSCLC tumors were
analysed for FGFR1 gene amplification by FISH and for gene expression by
Nanostring. FGFR1 amplfied tumours were enriched for high FGFR1 mRNA
expression (p<0.02) compared to non-amplified samples, although a subset
of non-amplified tumours also demonstrated increased FGFR1 mRNA
expression. Immunohistochemical analysis, employing an FGFR1 specific
antibody, revealed a correlation between FGFR1 mRNA levels and protein
expression in these tumors. Nanostring analysis of additional genes on
the 8p12 region, revealed that several of these, for example PPAPDC1B,
ASH2L, TACC1 and in particular the FGFR1 neighbouring gene WHSC1L1 are
highly expressed in FGFR1 amplified tumors (pFGFR1 amplifications have
recently been identified in 22% of squamous non-small cell lung cancers
(sqNSCLC) (Weiss et al., Sci Transl Med., 2(62), 2010) and in
pre-clinical models this amplification confers sensitivity to FGFR
inhibitor induced cell growth arrest and death (Zhang et al., Clin. Can.
Res., In press). Ongoing clinical trials of FGFR inhibitors are selecting
patients based on FGFR1 amplifications, as determined by FISH. The
development of additional biomarker assays to evaluate the expression of
FGFRs, FGF ligands and other potential modulators of response to support
analysis of clinical tissues is warranted.We validated the Nanostring
platform to allow gene expression (mRNA) analysis of 194 genes, including
FGFRs and FGF ligands, from one 5m section of formalin fixed paraffin
embedded clinical tumor tissue. Intra- and inter-assay variability was
low, as was variability between adjacent sections from the same tumor
sample. Further validation of a subset of these genes by RT-PCR revealed
a good correlation between platforms. A panel of 50 sqNSCLC tumors were
analysed for FGFR1 gene amplification by FISH and for gene expression by
Nanostring. FGFR1 amplfied tumours were enriched for high FGFR1 mRNA
expression (p<0.02) compared to non-amplified samples, although a subset
of non-amplified tumours also demonstrated increased FGFR1 mRNA
expression. Immunohistochemical analysis, employing an FGFR1 specific
antibody, revealed a correlation between FGFR1 mRNA levels and protein
expression in these tumors. Nanostring analysis of additional genes on
the 8p12 region, revealed that several of these, for example PPAPDC1B,
ASH2L, TACC1 and in particular the FGFR1 neighbouring gene WHSC1L1 are
highly expressed in FGFR1 amplified tumors (p<0.0001 for WHSC1L1). In
contrast, expression of LETM2, located between WHSCL1 and FGFR1, was not
significantly increased in amplified tumors.An FGF ligand expression
profile was generated for each tumor, showing that a-FGF, b-FGF and FGF7
were the most abundantly expressed ligands in the sqNSCLC samples, with
increased b-FGF expression detected in high FGFR1 expressing tumours. The
expression of a panel of potential mediators of resistance to FGFR
inhibitor therapy such as c-MET, EGFR and IGF1R were also profiled across
the samples, revealing differential expression of these factors across
each of the tumors and an inverse correlation between FGFR1 expression
and ERBB3 expression.Taken together, these data validate the utility of
the Nanostring platform for expression analysis of FGFR pathway genes
using mRNA isolated from FFPE tumor samples and this platform can be used
to assess the level of expression of potential modulators of clinical
outcome.

