Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput RNAi screening identifies genes controlling
glioblastoma stem cell migration and survival.


Glioblastoma is incurable. Glioblastoma stem cells (GSC) became a model
for explaining tumor recurrence due to their tumorigenic capacity,
migratory nature, and radio-chemoresistant phenotype. To prevent tumor
recurrence, a strategy targeting of GSC must be identified and added into
the treatment. To identify vital genes that promote GSC migration and
sustain self-renewal and anti-apoptotic features we have established
tumorigenic CD133+ GSC lines (n=3 patients), which are capable of clonal
self-renewal and asymmetric division for producing fast-growing CD133-
daughter cells that form tumor spheres. CD133+ GSC can migrate outward
from primary spheres and form spheres again, which provide an visible,
functional model for identifying essential genes of CD133+GSC via
loss-of-function RNA interference (RNAi) screen. To identify genes and
pathways that confer the migration nature and super longevity of GSC, we
constructed a siRNA library consisting of siRNA clones targeting 2079
genes overexpressed in tumorigenic CD133+ GSC when compared to
non-tumorigenic, autologous tumor cell lines, normal brain tissue, human
embryonic stem cells, normal neural stem cells, fetal neural progenitor
cells and glioblastoma tumors, respectively, as determined by the
comparative expression microarray analysis (E/B>2X, E-B>100, p
valueGlioblastoma is incurable. Glioblastoma stem cells (GSC) became a
model for explaining tumor recurrence due to their tumorigenic capacity,
migratory nature, and radio-chemoresistant phenotype. To prevent tumor
recurrence, a strategy targeting of GSC must be identified and added into
the treatment. To identify vital genes that promote GSC migration and
sustain self-renewal and anti-apoptotic features we have established
tumorigenic CD133+ GSC lines (n=3 patients), which are capable of clonal
self-renewal and asymmetric division for producing fast-growing CD133-
daughter cells that form tumor spheres. CD133+ GSC can migrate outward
from primary spheres and form spheres again, which provide an visible,
functional model for identifying essential genes of CD133+GSC via
loss-of-function RNA interference (RNAi) screen. To identify genes and
pathways that confer the migration nature and super longevity of GSC, we
constructed a siRNA library consisting of siRNA clones targeting 2079
genes overexpressed in tumorigenic CD133+ GSC when compared to
non-tumorigenic, autologous tumor cell lines, normal brain tissue, human
embryonic stem cells, normal neural stem cells, fetal neural progenitor
cells and glioblastoma tumors, respectively, as determined by the
comparative expression microarray analysis (E/B>2X, E-B>100, p
value<0.05). An automated high-throughput siRNA screen was performed in
384-well plates using a reverse transfection procedures and the
functional consequence were scored in 3 categories: score 1- degree of
cell migration and size of tumor spheres were slightly decreased, score
2- cell migration was interrupted, and score 3-cell apoptosis was
detected thereby no tumor spheres were formed. The siRNA targeting
endothelin 3 served as positive siRNA control, which suppress GSC
migration and induction of GSC apoptosis. Our primary screen has
identified 193 genes whose inhibition by RNAi had led to impaired cell
migration while knockdown of 128 genes led to the cell apoptosis and loss
of self-repopulating capacity. Overlapped gene functions in regulation of
both GSC migration and survival were detected, and genes which have never
been reported to be associated with cell migration and cell survival were
identified. Genes that maintain GSC survival and self-renewal capacity
(score 3) mainly include those with roles in stemness maintenance, tumor
suppressor/antigrowth/antidifferentiation, DNA repair, cell cycle
checkpoint, While genes involved in GSC migration mainly include those
with a role in cell adhesion, cell spreading, chemotaxis, axon guidance,
neural crest cell migration. A high confidence gene list will be
presented in the meeting. The development of an innovative therapy
targeting essential genes of GSC that promote cell migration and/or cell
survival could attenuate the infiltrating nature of GBM tumor, prolong
treatment sensitivity, and prevent tumor recurrence.

