Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory role of an orphan nuclear receptor LRH-1 in
castration-resistant growth of prostate cancer cells.


The advanced development of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC)
in patients upon androgen-deprivation therapy is generally believed to be
mostly mediated by reactivation of androgen receptor (AR) signaling or
its bypass with mechanisms involved, including clonal selection of
androgen-independent or stem cell-like cell populations, AR
hypersensitivity due to AR overexpression, and ligand promiscuity or
independence by AR mutations, intratumoral conversion of adrenal
androgens to high affinity AR ligands. Besides, the de novo steroid
synthesis from cholesterol in CRPC has also been proposed. In this study,
we found that the nuclear receptor liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1) might
contribute to the CRPC growth or de novo steroid synthesis in prostate
cancer cells through its positive regulation on expression of several
critical enzymes in steroidogenesis, including CYP17A1, HSD3B1, HSD3B2
and StAR. Functional analyses showed that overexpression of LRH-1 could
induce higher resistance to antiandrogen bicalutamide and
steroid-depleted culture condition in AR-positive androgen-sensitive
(LNCaP) but not in AR-negative androgen-insensitive (DU145) prostate
cancer cells. In vivo tumorigenicity study showed that LNCaP-LRH-1 cells
grew more aggressively in castrated or intact SCID mice, contrary to
LNCaP-vector control cells that did not grow in castrated mice.
Importantly, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry showed that
intratumoral androgen concentrations (testosterone and DHT) were
significantly higher in tumors formed by LNCaP-LRH-1 cells than those by
LNCaP-vector control cells. Treatment of LNCaP-LRH-1 cells with a CYP17A1
inhibitor abiraterone could restore their sensitivity to bicalutamide and
steroid-depleted culture condition. Gene knockdown of endogenous LRH-1 in
AR-positive VCaP prostate cancer cells could not only suppress the mRNA
expression of steroidogenic enzymes but also enhance their sensitivity to
antiandrogen. Together, our results indicated that LRH-1 might play a
regulatory role in advanced castration-resistant growth of prostate
cancer via positive control on de novo steroid synthesis in prostate
cancer cells.(This work was supported by a Direct Grant for Research
2011/2012 and a RGC-GRF grant 2009/2010)

