Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p90RSK mediates resistance to PI3K-pathway inhibitors in breast
cancer.


The PI3K signaling pathway regulates diverse cellular processes including
proliferation, survival and metabolism and is aberrantly activated in
human cancer. As such, numerous compounds targeting the PI3K pathway are
currently being clinically evaluated for the treatment of cancer and they
have shown some early indications of efficacy in breast cancer. However,
resistance against these agents, both de novo and acquired, may
ultimately limit the efficacy of these compounds. Here, we have taken a
systematic functional approach to uncover potential mechanisms of
resistance to PI3K inhibitors and have identified several genes whose
expression promotes survival under conditions of PI3K/mTOR blockade,
including the ribosomal S6 kinases RPS6KA2 (RSK3) and RPS6KA6 (RSK4). We
demonstrate that overexpression of RSK3 or RSK4 supports proliferation
upon PI3K inhibition both in vitro and in vivo, in part through the
attenuation of an apoptotic response and upregulation of protein
translation. The addition of MEK- or RSK-specific inhibitors can
extinguish these resistance phenotypes, both in cells engineered to
overexpress RSK and in breast cancer cells that have elevated levels of
RSK activity. These observations provide a strong rationale for the
combined use of RSK and PI3K pathway inhibitors to elicit favorable
responses in breast cancer patients with activated RSK.

