Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro effect of AZD1208 (Pim Kinase Inhibitor) and 17-AAG
(HSP90 Inhibitor) combination in CLL.


Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is a molecular chaperone that regulates the
functional stability of client oncoproteins, which is driven by the
binding and hydrolysis of ATP. The geldanamycin analog, 17-AAG, binds to
the ATP pocket of HSP90 leading to the degradation of client proteins
such as Akt, p53, STAT3, Bcr-Abl, and Pim-1. Pim (Pim-1, -2, -3) kinases
are constitutively active serine/threonine kinases overexpressed in
hematological malignancies such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
Pim kinases have several substrates which are involved in gene
transcription, protein translation, cell proliferation, and apoptosis.
AZD1208 is a small molecule Pim kinase inhibitor currently in clinical
trials. The PI3K-dependent activation of AKT (a client protein of HSP90)
and the JAK/STAT-dependent induction of PIM are partially overlapping
kinase pathways. Therefore, we hypothesized that the mechanism-based
combination of 17-AAG (to decrease AKT levels) with AZD1208 (to inhibit
Pim kinases) will result in an increase in cytotoxicity in CLL cells. An
AZD1208 dose-response experiment was performed in 4 CLL patient samples
to determine the optimal cytotoxic concentrations. AZD1208 concentrations
of 3 M and 10 M were selected to treat 22 additional CLL patient samples
for 24 hours. Cell death ranged from 0-30% and 2-45%, respectively, as
determined by Annexin-V/PI staining after subtraction of endogenous cell
death. All CLL patient samples were sensitive to AZD1208 regardless of
their prognostic markers such as IgVH mutation and ZAP70 positivity or
cytogenetics such as 17p del (p53 locus) or 11q del (ATM locus).
Similarly, prior treatment history or Rai stage did not influence the
biological response of AZD1208 in CLL cells. Based on published data, 0.5
M and 2 M 17-AAG were selected for the combination treatments with
AZD1208 for 24 and 48 hours. Cytotoxicity for these combinations was
assessed in 13 CLL blood samples, resulting in additive (n=8) or more
than additive (n=3) cell death when using the fractional two-drug
combination analysis. Immunoblot analysis was performed in 3 CLL samples
probing for HSP90, HSP70, Akt, Pim-1, Mcl-1, Bcl-2, Phospho-4E-BP1
(Thr37/46), 4E-BP1, and -actin. In agreement with previous work, 17-AAG
treatment resulted in an increase of HSP90 and HSP70 protein levels while
Akt levels were markedly decreased. In these preliminary immunoblots,
Pim-1 and Bcl-2 levels remained unchanged; however, Mcl-1 protein levels
decreased in the combination treatments at 24 and 48 hours. Levels for
total and phospho-4E-BP1 also declined. Taken together, these preliminary
data indicate that AZD1208 (at 3 and 10 M) has a modest cytotoxic effect
in CLL cells. However, when combined with 17-AAG for 24 and 48 hours
there was an additive or more than additive effect in majority of CLL
samples, with the possible mechanisms of action being through the Akt and
4E-BP1 pathways.

