Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics and in vivo metabolism of the naphthofuran
NSC373981 in male nu/nu mice.


NSC 373981 is 1-ethanol, 2-nitro-naphtho[2,1-b]furan that has
demonstrated activity in the NCI60 anticancer screen and in the mouse
hollow-fiber assay. Growth inhibitory activity was also observed in
several xenograft models. There is some evidence that antitumor activity
is greater in vivo than would be predicted by the in vitro results,
suggesting the possibility of activating metabolism. While the mechanism
of anticancer activity is unknown, naphthofurans have been reported to
modulate certain nuclear receptors. The purpose of this study was to
characterize the plasma pharmacokinetics of NSC 373981 following i.v. and
i.p. administration to athymic nude mice and to characterize potential
metabolites of this compound in plasma, urine, and bile. We developed and
validated suitable positive ionization LC/MS/MS methodology for measuring
NSC 373981 that utilized liquid extraction with 1-chlorobutane and MS/MS
detection with the 258>212 and 244>169 transitions, respectively, for NSC
373981 and NSC 329226, an analog that was used as the internal standard.
Baseline separations were achieved on a Polaris C18 column under a mobile
phase consisting of 70:30 methanol:water containing 0.1% formic acid.
Standard curves were linear over the concentration range 2.5-1000 ng/mL
with a lower limit of detection of 2.5 ng/mL. NSC 373981 was stable under
acidic, neutral and basic conditions, as well as human and mouse plasma
during 24-hr incubation at 37C. NSC 373981 pharmacokinetics were
characterized in male nu/nu mice after a 37.5 mg/kg i.v. dose or a 150
mg/kg i.p. dose. Plasma, bile, urine and feces were collected for 24-hr
after drug administration. Following i.v. administration, the peak
concentration was > 5.9 g/mL and the terminal elimination half-life was
1.2 hours. Volume of distribution and plasma clearance values were 694 ml
and 390 mL/hr, respectively. Following i.p. administration, NSC373981
reached a peak concentration of 2.1 g/mL at 15 minutes and the terminal
elimination half-life was 36.8 hours. The i.p. bioavailability of
NSC373981 was 58%. In vivo metabolite profiles were characterized in
plasma, urine, feces, and bile. We detected several Phase I metabolites
in these samples including those produced by reduction of the aromatic
nitro group, oxidation of the primary alcohol moiety on the reduced
metabolite, oxidation of the primary alcohol moiety, benzylic
hydroxylation, hydroxylation and dihydrodiol formation on the naphthalene
moiety, and Phase II metabolites including glucuronidation of the
carboxylic acids and a glutathione metabolite of hydroxylated NSC 373981.
Supported by NCI contract N01-CM-2011-00014.

