Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein-bound polysaccharide induces IL-1 via NLRP3 inflammasome
activation.


Protein-bound polysaccharide-K (PSK) is a hot water extract from Trametes
Versicolor mushroom. It is widely used in Asian countries for its immune
enhancing and anti-cancer potential. We have recently reported that PSK
activates TLR2 and has CD8 T cell- and NK cell- dependent anti-tumor
activity. PSK stimulates the production of multiple pro-inflammatory
cytokines, including IL-1, the production of which requires both TLR and
inflammasome activation. The current study was undertaken to investigate
the mechanism by which PSK activates inflammasome and induces IL-1.
RT-PCR and Western blot analyses showed that PSK induces pro-IL-1 in a
dose- and time- dependent manner. PSK activates caspase-1 and
pre-incubation with z-VAD-FMK, a caspase inhibitor, abolishes PSK-induced
IL-1. Comparison of THP-1 cells and THP-1 cells deficient for NLRP3
demonstrated that PSK-induced IL-1 production requires NLRP3
inflammasome. PSK also up-regulates the expression of NLRP3 mRNA. Further
experiments were performed to investigate whether potassium efflux,
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, or lysosomal perturbation was
involved in PSK-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Results showed
that CA-074-Me, a cathepsin B inhibitor, significantly decreased
PSK-induced IL-1, while the production of TNF- was not affected.
Phagocytosis or ROS generation was not required for PSK-induced NLRP3
inflammasome activation. Altogether, our results suggest that PSK-induced
IL-1 production is a two step process. Step 1 requires TLR2-dependent
induction of pro-IL-1 and upregulation of NLRP3 expression; Step 2
involves NLRP3 inflammasome activation in a cathepsin B-dependent manner.
These results provide novel insights into the mechanisms of the immune
stimulatory and anti-tumor effects of PSK.

