Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Cdk9 blocks ligand induced phosphorylation of
Estrogen receptor alpha at Ser294.


In response to ligand binding, the estrogen receptor (ER, alpha isoform)
becomes phosphorylated on several serines including Ser294 and Ser118 to
initiate an estrogenic transcriptional program that has been well
studied. On the other hand, growth factor stimulation of ER also promotes
serine phosphorylation at several sites including Ser305 and Ser118, but
not Ser294, to drive a transcriptional program different from that
induced by estrogenic ligands. Our previous work demonstrated that
following estrogen or tamoxifen stimulation, cyclin dependent kinase
(Cdk) mediated phosphorylation of the ER hinge region at Ser294 was
essential for full transcriptional activation of ER. Current studies,
using a recently developed rabbit monoclonal antibody to phospho-Ser294
ER, show that the Cdk9 inhibitor SCH727956/Dinaciclib, now in phase II
clinical trials, completely prevents Ser294 phosphorlyation induced by
estrogen stimulation of MCF-7 cells without influencing phospho-Ser118
formation which remains robust. Immunoprecipitation of ER from MCF-7
cells following estrogen treatment results in the co-immunoprecipitaton
of cdk9. Further SCH727965/Dinaciclib has no influence upon epidermal
growth factor (EGF) induced ER phosphorylation at Ser305, consistent with
previous studies linking phospho-Ser305 formation to the activated
kinases PKA and PAK. Ongoing studies evaluating siRNA induced knockdown
of Cdk9 in MCF-7 cells followed by estrogen and/or EGF stimulation are
designed to confirm the specific role of Cdk9 in mediating ligand-induced
ER phosphorylation at Ser294. As Cdk9 is essential to promote
transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II, the Ser294 specific
recruitment of Cdk9 to ER following ligand stimulation offers rationale
for the clinical use of Cdk9 inhibitors such as SCH727965/Dinaciclib in
the treatment of ER-positive breast cancers. In particular, for those
ER-positive breast cancers responsive to endocrine therapy the combined
use of a Cdk9 inhibitor with antiestrogenic therapy is likely to prove
clinically beneficial.

