Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADAR1 promotes malignant progenitor reprogramming in chronic
myeloid leukemia.


The molecular etiology of human progenitor reprogramming into
self-renewing leukemia stem cells (LSC) has remained elusive. While DNA
sequencing has uncovered spliceosome gene mutations that promote
alternative splicing and portend leukemic transformation, isoform
diversity may also be generated by RNA editing mediated by adenosine
deaminase acting on RNA (ADAR) enzymes that regulate stem cell
maintenance. In this study, whole transcriptome sequencing of normal,
chronic phase (CP) and serially transplantable blast crisis (BC) chronic
myeloid leukemia (CML) progenitors revealed increased interferon- pathway
gene expression in concert with BCR-ABL amplification, enhanced
expression of the interferon responsive ADAR1 p150 isoform and a
propensity for increased A-to-I RNA editing during CML progression.
Lentiviral overexpression experiments demonstrate that ADAR1 p150
promoted expression of the myeloid transcription factor PU.1 and induced
malignant reprogramming of myeloid progenitors. Moreover, enforced ADAR1
p150 expression was associated with production of a mis-spliced form of
GSK3 implicated in LSC self-renewal. Finally, functional serial
transplantation and shRNA studies demonstrate that ADAR1 knockdown
impaired in vivo self-renewal capacity of BC CML progenitors. Together
these data provide a compelling rationale for developing ADAR1-based LSC
detection and eradication strategies.

