Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CTC enumeration and molecular characterization in a Phase 1 study
of IGF-1 and IGF-2 inhibition by MEDI-573.


MEDI-573 selectively binds to human insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1
and IGF-2 and inhibits ligand-mediated signal transduction via the
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) and insulin receptor A
isoform (IR-A) pathways, without perturbing glucose homeostasis. As
IGF-1, IGF-2, and IGF-1R are overexpressed in bladder cancer, a Phase 1
expansion study including 20 bladder cancer subjects along with 6
additional subjects with other types of cancers from the dose escalation
study were included for circulating tumor cell (CTC) analysis as part of
a larger 42-subject study (MI-CP184) evaluating PK, safety, and
biomarkers. Our objective for the results reported here was to evaluate
CTC numbers as a prognostic indicator and as a biomarker of response to
MEDI-573 therapy, and to evaluate the expression of IGF-1R on CTC and any
correlation with treatment. Subjects in the expansion study were treated
with MEDI-573 at 5 mg/Kg weekly (QW) (n=10), 15 mg/Kg QW (n=10), whereas
subjects evaluated for CTC in the dose escalation study were treated at
30 or 45 mg/Kg every 3 weeks (Q3W) (n=3 each). CTC collected at screening
and pre-dosing each cycle were enumerated and evaluated for IGF-1R
expression by CellSearch. 92% of subjects had at least one CTC at any
time during the study and 62.5% had at least one CTC at screening. As has
been demonstrated with other tumor types, subjects with 3 CTC at
screening stayed on study longer than subjects with >3 CTC (2.3 vs. 1.2
months, P=0.0125 [no censoring]). Mean overall survival (OS) was also
longer for subjects with 3 CTC compared to subjects with >3 CTC (6.37 vs.
2.83 months (P=0.0218, t test), although Kaplan-Myer curves were not
different (P=0.0854)). Subjects with decreased numbers of CTC or no
change in CTC with treatment stayed on study longer (not significant,
P=0.0512, t test) than subjects with increased CTC with treatment (2.95
vs. 1.70 months). 73.3% (11/15) of subjects with positive CTC at
screening had at least 1 CTC positive for IGF-1R. In conclusion, our
results provide evidence for the utility of CTC as prognostic indicators
in a Phase 1 study.

