Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic analysis provides insights into uncoupling-induced
cancer resistance in the K5-UCP3 mouse model.


Metabolic reprogramming is a hallmark of tumorigenesis and malignancy
across a variety of cancer types. Reduced oxidative phosphorylation and
increased ATP synthesis by glycolytic upregulation is thought to provide
both the energy and metabolic precursors necessary to meet the increased
biosynthetic and energetic demands associated with malignancy. We
hypothesized that since uncoupling protein 3 (UCP3) dissipates the
mitochondrial electrochemical proton gradient, it may lead to the
consumption or depletion of biosynthetic substrates necessary for
carcinogenesis. In support, previous studies have shown that mice
expressing a keratin 5-UCP3 transgene are completely resistant to
chemically- and Ras-induced skin carcinogenesis, however the metabolic
consequences of UCP3 overexpression in relation to cancer resistance are
unclear. To examine the metabolic changes associated with UCP3 expression
and this profound skin cancer resistance, we performed metabolomic
analysis of more than 350 metabolites in epidermis from K5-UCP3 and wild
type FVB/N littermate mice. Results of this analysis show significant
UCP3-dependent changes in metabolites indicative of increased energy
harvesting via glycolysis, beta-oxidation and branched chain amino acid
metabolism. Consistent with decreased energy reserve, K5-UCP3 epidermis
exhibits increased uncoupled respiration, decreased ATP and increased AMP
levels, which correspond to increased AMP Kinase (AMPK) activation
(Thr172 phosphorylation). Taken together, these data suggest that
uncoupling proteins might function to oppose the metabolic demands of
tumorigenesis and suggest that targeting mitochondrial uncoupling may be
a novel and effective strategy in cancer prevention and treatment.

