Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enforced expression of miR-125b promotes the in vivo expansion of
human Lin- CB multi-lymphoid progenitors (MLP) and AML leukemia stem
cells.


We recently demonstrated stem cell gene signatures predict clinical
outcome in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) (Eppert et. al., Nature Medicine,
2011). Concomitant to this work, miRNA signatures for hematopoietic stem
cells (HSC) and leukemia stem cells (LSC) were also generated. miRNA are
small non-coding RNAs that regulate the translation and mRNA stability of
protein coding genes with significant roles in the maintenance of human
HSC (Lechman et. al., Cell Stem Cell, in press). To understand the
functional role of miRNA in normal human blood development, we undertook
an in vivo over-expression screen of 10 miRNA candidates over-represented
in HSC and LSC. Lineage depleted human umbilical cord blood cells (Lin-
CB) were transduced with lentivirus expressing either a candidate miRNA
or control vector and xeno-transplanted into NSG mice. Three miRNA
displayed a competitive growth advantage while 4 miRNA induced a growth
disadvantage along with skewing of lineage output. A top LSC array
candidate, miR-125b, showed the most pronounced phenotype with overt
expansion of marked cells, enlarged spleens and increased lymphoid and
erythroid output. Detailed analysis of miR-125b grafts revealed a greatly
expanded MLP population, in comparison to HSC and MPP. Furthermore, upon
enforced in vivo expression of miR-125b in 3 AML patient samples, we
observed large increases in the CD34+CD117+ populations for all three AML
samples, suggesting increased LSC numbers. Secondary LDA experiments
revealed up to a 34 fold increase in LSC activity in comparison to
control vector transduced AML cells. These data suggest that miR-125b
normally functions in the limited self-renewal of lymphoid committed
early progenitors and this function may be usurped during leukemogenesis
to enhance LSC self-renewal.

