Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cryopreserved, viable and architecturally intact lung tissue from
patients as a model to study drug therapies.


RATIONALE: Surgery, chemotherapy and radiation have not appreciably
improved lung cancer patient survival rates over the past 20 years.
Preclinical anti-tumor efficacy testing models could be improved by being
rapid, reliable and capable of demonstrating tumor responses to dosing
(concentration/timing) and drug interactions, while accounting for
inter-patient variation. High-throughput, 3D in vitro systems hold
promise as such therapeutic models, but linking these models to clinical
responses in patients has been a dilemma.METHODS: We developed a lung
tissue cryopreservation/banking method that optimizes cell viability and
maintains tissue architecture after thawing. This method involves the
expansion-perfusion of fresh patient lung tissue samples with non-toxic
cryoprotectant solutions, followed by controlled-rate freezing of
samples.RESULTS: We used this method to cryopreserve lung tissues from
multiple patients. Although inter-patient variability in lung tissue
compliance was anticipated, a wide range of expansion volumes can be
tolerated without architectural damage. In contrast, tissue integrity was
more sensitive to variations in expansion-perfusion rates (as gauged by
lymphatic expansion/tearing). Cryosubstitution demonstrated that crystal
formation varies with cryoprotectant cocktail and region within the lung,
but can be virtually eliminated under certain conditions. From thawed
lung tissues, we have 1) isolated and expanded viable lung cell types; 2)
isolated decellularized extracellular components; and, 3) reconstituted
intact lung tissue with fluorescent-tagged lung tumor cells. We performed
patient surgeries/preservations individually, thawing, processing and
analysis of lung tissue from multiple patients was performed
simultaneously.CONCLUSION: Cancer cell drug responses are being compared
in lung tissues ex vivo versus on standard monolayer culture using
advanced proteo-/lipidomic mapping techniques (including MALDI MS and
DIGE). Comparing multiple patient-specific lung tissues simultaneously
should afford patient population stratification based on molecular
profiles and achieve more rapid methods for determining personalized
clinical treatment regiments.

