Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining the CEE-selector assay with sequencing for sensitive
mutation detection in cancer.


We previously described the utility of the CEE-Selector assay for the
sensitive detection of the EGFR T790M mutation in plasma samples from
lung cancer patients. The assay combined the CEE-Selector assay with melt
curve analysis of the mutant PCR product, followed by Sanger sequencing
to verify the presence of the mutation. We showed that the assay
selectively amplified the mutant sequence compared to wild type by
>100,000 fold. We have now expanded the CEE-Selector assay to include
additional mutations relevant to patient care (KRAS, BRAF V600E, EGFR
L858R). We are presenting data of allele/mutation-specific as well as
footprint versions of the CEE-Selector assay. The footprint version of
the assay provides for the interrogation of hot spot regions of the
genome where multiple cancer relevant mutations are located within a
small region, as in the case of KRAS codons 12 and 13 where the
CEE-Selector assay is sensitive to all known mutations. Combining the
footprint version of the CEE-Selector assay with next-generation
sequencing, allows us to simultaneously detect, with extremely high
sensitivity, a broad array of mutations of interest. Additionally, when
used with barcoding, samples from multiple patients can be interrogated
simultaneously. The combination of the CEE-Selector assay with
next-generation sequencing increases the sensitivity of sequencing by a
factor of >1000 and allows for simultaneous sensitive detection of
multiple mutations from complex samples, like plasma, where the mutations
may be very rare. With the increases in sensitivity made possible using
the CEE-Selector assay, the limiting factor for the sensitive detection
of mutations/alleles is determined fundamentally by the ability to obtain
at least a single copy of the mutant allele within the sample under
interrogation.

