Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of a non cardiotoxic Doxorubicin analog, 13-deoxy, 5-imino
doxorubicin on decatenation of DNA by Topoisomerase II.


Anthracyclines such as doxorubicin are widely used to treat solid and
hematological cancers. However, within the course of treatment they have
the potential to cause life threatening chronic cardiotoxicity which
limits their potential use. The cause of cardiotoxicity is not thoroughly
understood, with previous research indicating the generation of reactive
oxygen species and free iron accumulation as possible causes for
cardiomyocyte death. Recent publications have shown the interaction
between doxorubicin and Topoisomerase II plays a key role in
anthracycline induced cardiotoxicity. Topoisomerase enzymes are utilized
during the coiling and uncoiling of DNA within the cell and are active
targets of anthracyclines not only in tumoricidal action (Topoisomerase
II) but also in the pathogenesis of cardiotoxicity (Topoisomerase II). In
this research we seek to further evaluate the interaction between
doxorubicin, doxorubicin analogues and Topoisomerase II. The analogues
were selected due to previous chronic in vivo experiments in rabbits
where classical manifestations of cardiotoxicity (including reduced left
ventricular shortening fraction and pathological changes in cardiac
tissue) were not observed. Furthermore, one analogue (13-deoxy, 5-imino
doxorubicin) has shown promising clinical data suggesting a strong
antineoplastic effect without the cardiotoxic effects. Doxorubicin and
this analogue were placed in the presence of catenated DNA for 6 hours at
37C prior to exposure to Topoisomerase II and enzymes. The reaction was
allowed to proceed for 30 minutes at 37C and analyzed for decatenation of
the DNA by the enzyme. This experiment was then repeated in cardiac H9c2
cells to assay possible differential inhibition at the cellular level.

