Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pemetrexed treatment results in DNA replication fork instability
and double strand breaks formation in UNG-/- human cancer cells.


Misincorporation of genomic uracil and formation of DNA double strand
breaks are known consequences of exposure to TS inhibitors such as
5-fluorouracil, and pemetrexed. Uracil DNA glycosylase catalyzes the
excision of genomic uracil and initiates DNA base excision repair (BER).
Thus, a relationship between antifolate cytotoxicity and UNG expression
and activity has been hypothesized. However, a precise mechanism linking
antifolate-induced formation of DSBs to genomic uracil accumulation and
UNG-initiated BER has not been described. Herein, we report that despite
equivalent proliferation indices, DLD1 UNG-/- cells are more sensitive to
pemetrexed mediated intra S-phase arrest, DNA double strand break
formation and apoptosis compared to UNG+/+ cells. Using data from western
blots in chromatin extracts, PCNA staining of cells in S-phase, and
pulse-chase labeling of replicating cells with CldU and IdU, we surmise
that the accumulation of uracil in pemetrexed-treated UNG-/- cells is
associated with significant replication fork instability. In addition,
UNG-/- cells have reduced capacity to recover from pemetrexed-mediated
DNA damage, as indicated by the persistence of S-phase arrest and
gamma-H2AX foci. This defect in recovery was not explained by double
strand break repair capacity, which was equivalent in UNG+/+ and UNG-/-
cells. Using -H2AX ChIP sequencing, we observed a 5-fold increase in the
number of -H2AX binding sites in UNG-/- cells compared to UNG+/+ cells
treated at IC50 levels of pemetrexed. This analysis evinced distinct
patterns of -H2AX binding in UNG+/+ and UNG-/- cells. Double strand
breaks (-H2AX) were more significantly associated with transcription
start sites and putative origins of replication in UNG-/- cells compared
to UNG+/+ cells. Based on these data we conclude that uracil
accumulation, and thus UNG activity, during pemetrexed exposure directs
both the quantity and the location of double strand breaks. These
findings support uracil mediated S-phase arrest and DNA replication fork
collapse as the mechanism of double strand break formation and cell death
in pemetrexed treated UNG-/- cells.

