Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stable isotope resolved metabolomics of colorectal cancer cells
treated with inhibitor of monocarboxylate transporter-1.


The rationale of this cell based study was to examine the metabolic
effects of a synthetic monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1) inhibitor
(AR-C155858) on multiple cellular metabolites in colorectal tumor cells
using [1,2,3,4,5,6-13C6]-D-glucose or [1,2,3,4,5-13C5]-D-glutamine as the
single precursor metabolic tracer. DiFi colorectal cancer cells were
cultured for 24 hrs in the presence of 0.1% DMSO (vehicle control) or 100
nM of MCT-1 inhibitor. Intracellular glycolysis intermediates measured by
liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) included
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), phosphoglycerate (PG), fructose 1,6
bisphosphate (FBP), Glucose-6-phosphate (G6P), Gluconate-6-phosphate,
glyceraldehydes 3-phosphate (G3P), ribose-5-phosphate (R5P),
seduheptulose-7-phosphate (S7P), pyruvate, and lactate. TCA cycle
intermediates measured included malate, -ketoglutarate, succinate,
fumarate, and citrate. Both glutamine and glutamate were also measured.
Increases in PEP, PG3, G6P, Gluconate-6-phosphate, G3P, S7P, pyruvate,
and lactate were induced by MCT1 inhibitor when traced with 13C6 glucose.
When traced with 13C5 glutamine, PEP, G6P, S7P, pyruvate, and lactate
were increased by MCT1 inhibitor. In contrast, decreases in
-ketoglutarate and glutamate were seen with both tracers.

