Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dichloroacetate (DCA), pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK)
inhibitor, enhances the cytotoxic effect induced by metformin .


It has been recently reported that metformin, widely used as an
antidiabetic drug, reduces risk of cancer development in human and
animals based on its inhibitory effects observed in the several cancer
cells and mouse tumor models. Metformin shows anti-tumor activity
indirectly by enhancing insulin sensitivity and decreasing the level of
insulin and IGF in serum. And it was also reported that metformin has
direct anti-tumor activity through AMPK activation and mTOR inhibition.
We also observed that metformin induces cytotoxicity in several different
types of cancer cell lines. However when metformin was treated in high
glucose condition, cytotoxic effect of metformin was significantly
reduced and AMPK activation and mTOR inhibition were not observed.
Metformin increased glycolysis by inhibiting mitochondrial respiratory
complex I activity weakly and also inhibiting pyruvate dehydrogenase
activity more significantly. So cytotoxic effect induced by metformin was
dependent on glucose availability. Significant mitochondrial ROS
production was observed in metformin treated cancer cells. NADPHs are
produced by enhanced glycolysis through the pentose phosphate pathway.
Since reducing power of NADPH is important for protection from ROS
induced damage, we hypothesized that enhanced glycolysis by inhibition of
PDH activity observed in metformin treated cancer cells is a protective
role from metformin induced ROS injury. So when PDH activity was enhance
by dichloroacetate (DCA), pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) inhibitor,
ROS production was more increased and resulted in significant cell death.

