Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and molecular characterization of AGS-15/SLITRK6 as a
novel target for antibody-mediated therapeutic development in bladder
cancer.


Discovery efforts utilizing suppression subtractive hybridization
identified AGS-15/SLITRK6 as a differentially expressed gene in bladder
cancer. SLITRK6 encodes a cell surface type I transmembrane protein, a
member of the SLITRK family of factors with neuronal function activities.
Comprehensive SLITRK6 RNA expression analysis in patient specimens
revealed limited restricted normal tissue expression and high frequent
expression in bladder cancers, as well as expression in subsets of
breast, lung and several other cancer types. Tissue immunohistochemical
analysis validated SLITRK6 protein limited expression in normal tissues
and high expression levels in cancers. SLITRK6 expression profiling in
cancer cell lines and Agensys proprietary patient-derived xenografts
(PDXs) identified model systems in relevant cancer indications for
further target characterization and antibody therapeutics development.
Genomic analyses, including whole exome next generation sequencing,
chromosomal aberrations and gene copy number assessments, were performed
to evaluate SLITRK6 gene status in model cell lines and PDXs. Thus, we
discovered and characterized AGS-15/SLITRK6 as a novel target with high
levels and selective expression in tumors, particularly in bladder
cancer. This cell surface antigen's attractive expression profile is a
major determinant of AGS-15/SLITRK6 as a suitable and preferential
candidate for antibody drug conjugate therapeutic targeting in bladder
cancer treatment and, potentially, in several other cancer indications.

