Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of human Piwi-like genes is associated with prognosis
for soft tissue sarcoma patients and is different in gender.


The family of Argonaute genes is essential for stem cell maintenance and
RNA interference. Piwi-like genes as a subclass of the Argonaute genes
are expressed mainly in the germline. However, these genes may be
re-expressed in tumors, and expression of the Piwi-like genes is
associated with prognosis in several types of tumors.We analyzed the
expression ofPiwi-like mRNAs (Piwi-like 2-4) in125 soft tissue sarcoma
(STS) samples by qPCRs. Statistical tests were applied to study the
correlation of expression levels with tumor-specific survival forSTS
patients.In multivariate Cox's regression analyses, we detected that low
Piwi-like2 and Piwi-like 4 mRNA expression were significantly associated
with a worse prognosis (RR = 1.87; p = 0.032 andRR = 1.82; p = 0.039). In
addition, low expression of both genes was associated with a 2.58-fold
increased risk of tumor-related death (p = 0.01).Next we analysed
expression of Piwi-like genes gender specific. Piwi-like 4 and combined
Piwi-like 2 and 4 mRNA levels correlated significantly with prognosis (RR
= 3.53; p= 0.002 and RR = 5.23; p = 0.004) only for female but not for
male patients.However, combined low Piwi-like 2 and3 transcript levels
were associated with worse survival (RR = 5.90; p = 0.02) for male
patients.In this study, we identified a significant association between
the expression of Piwi-like 2 and 4 mRNAs and the tumor-specific survival
of soft tissue sarcoma patients. A connection between gender and the
impact of Piwi-like mRNA expressions on STS patients prognosis was shown
for the first time.

