Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel function for threonyl-tRNA synthetase as a stimulator of
angiogenesis and endothelial cell migration.


In mammalian systems, several aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are known to
have distinct non-canonical functionality. For the first time, we
demonstrate that human threonyl-tRNA synthetase (TARS) induces
angiogenesis through endothelial cell signaling, and this induction can
be blocked by the borrelidin derivative compound BC194. Upon stimulation
with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) or tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-), human endothelial cells secrete TARS into the
extracellular space. Extracellular TARS induces and BC194 inhibits
angiogenesis in both in vitro tube formation assays and in vivo chick
chorioallantoic membrane assays. Furthermore, the anti-angiogenic effects
of BC194 are specific to its inhibition of TARS angiogenic activity
rather than an indirect stress response. Additional evidence supports a
stimulatory role for TARS in endothelial cell migration as a mechanism
for its angiogenic activity. Taken together, these findings reveal a
previously undefined function for TARS as an angiogenesis inducer
stimulated by hypoxic and inflammatory signals. Detecting or intervening
in the non-canonical extracellular TARS signaling pathway may thus
provide a novel means of diagnosing or treating angiogenesis and
inflammatory responses involved in cancer.

