Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRP78 in association with VEGFR-2 detects early stage ovarian
cancer.


Background: The lack of an effective early detection test makes ovarian
cancer (OVCA) a fatal malignancy of women. Changes in cellular metabolic
processes during ovarian malignant transformation lead to the endoplasmic
reticular (ER) and mitochondrial stress. Glucose-regulated protein of
78kDa (GRP78) is a marker of ER stress. Tumor-associated ER stress causes
relocalization of GRP78 from ER to cell surface with an increase in its
serum levels. Secreted GRP78 also stimulates tumor associated
neoangiogenesis (TAN). Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2
(VEGFR-2) is a marker of ovarian TAN. Thus GRP78 represents a marker of
ovarian malignant transformation and in association with VEGFR-2 may
constitute an early detection test for OVCA. However, information on OVCA
related changes in GRP78 expression and its association with ovarian TAN
is unknown.Objectives: The goals of this study were to examine (i)
whether GRP78 expression increases during malignant changes in the ovary
and (ii) whether the frequency of TAN vessels is associated with ovarian
tumor-associated GRP78 expression at early stage of OVCA in the laying
hen, a spontaneous model of human OVCA.Materials and Methods: 3-4 years
old White Leghorn laying hens with normal (n=25) or ovarian tumors (n=30)
were selected by contrast enhanced transvaginal ultrasound scanning.
Serum samples were collected, hens were euthanized, and ovarian tissues
were processed for routine histology or immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
protein extraction. Ovarian tumors were confirmed by gross morphology and
microscopy. Expression of GRP78 by ovarian malignant cells and VEGFR-2 by
TAN vessels was determined by IHC. IHC observations were confirmed by
immunoproteomic studies.Results: As compared with normal ovaries (n=25),
the intensity of GRP78 expression was significantly (pBackground: The
lack of an effective early detection test makes ovarian cancer (OVCA) a
fatal malignancy of women. Changes in cellular metabolic processes during
ovarian malignant transformation lead to the endoplasmic reticular (ER)
and mitochondrial stress. Glucose-regulated protein of 78kDa (GRP78) is a
marker of ER stress. Tumor-associated ER stress causes relocalization of
GRP78 from ER to cell surface with an increase in its serum levels.
Secreted GRP78 also stimulates tumor associated neoangiogenesis (TAN).
Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) is a marker of
ovarian TAN. Thus GRP78 represents a marker of ovarian malignant
transformation and in association with VEGFR-2 may constitute an early
detection test for OVCA. However, information on OVCA related changes in
GRP78 expression and its association with ovarian TAN is
unknown.Objectives: The goals of this study were to examine (i) whether
GRP78 expression increases during malignant changes in the ovary and (ii)
whether the frequency of TAN vessels is associated with ovarian
tumor-associated GRP78 expression at early stage of OVCA in the laying
hen, a spontaneous model of human OVCA.Materials and Methods: 3-4 years
old White Leghorn laying hens with normal (n=25) or ovarian tumors (n=30)
were selected by contrast enhanced transvaginal ultrasound scanning.
Serum samples were collected, hens were euthanized, and ovarian tissues
were processed for routine histology or immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
protein extraction. Ovarian tumors were confirmed by gross morphology and
microscopy. Expression of GRP78 by ovarian malignant cells and VEGFR-2 by
TAN vessels was determined by IHC. IHC observations were confirmed by
immunoproteomic studies.Results: As compared with normal ovaries (n=25),
the intensity of GRP78 expression was significantly (p<0.001) higher in
hens with early stage OVCA (n=12) and increased further in hens with late
stage OVCA (n=18) (pBackground: The lack of an effective early detection
test makes ovarian cancer (OVCA) a fatal malignancy of women. Changes in
cellular metabolic processes during ovarian malignant transformation lead
to the endoplasmic reticular (ER) and mitochondrial stress.
Glucose-regulated protein of 78kDa (GRP78) is a marker of ER stress.
Tumor-associated ER stress causes relocalization of GRP78 from ER to cell
surface with an increase in its serum levels. Secreted GRP78 also
stimulates tumor associated neoangiogenesis (TAN). Vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) is a marker of ovarian TAN. Thus GRP78
represents a marker of ovarian malignant transformation and in
association with VEGFR-2 may constitute an early detection test for OVCA.
However, information on OVCA related changes in GRP78 expression and its
association with ovarian TAN is unknown.Objectives: The goals of this
study were to examine (i) whether GRP78 expression increases during
malignant changes in the ovary and (ii) whether the frequency of TAN
vessels is associated with ovarian tumor-associated GRP78 expression at
early stage of OVCA in the laying hen, a spontaneous model of human
OVCA.Materials and Methods: 3-4 years old White Leghorn laying hens with
normal (n=25) or ovarian tumors (n=30) were selected by contrast enhanced
transvaginal ultrasound scanning. Serum samples were collected, hens were
euthanized, and ovarian tissues were processed for routine histology or
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and protein extraction. Ovarian tumors were
confirmed by gross morphology and microscopy. Expression of GRP78 by
ovarian malignant cells and VEGFR-2 by TAN vessels was determined by IHC.
IHC observations were confirmed by immunoproteomic studies.Results: As
compared with normal ovaries (n=25), the intensity of GRP78 expression
was significantly (p<0.001) higher in hens with early stage OVCA (n=12)
and increased further in hens with late stage OVCA (n=18) (p<0.05). GRP78
expression was higher in hens with serous OVCA followed by endometrioid
OVCA and was least in hens with mucinous and clear cell OVCA irrespective
of their stages of OVCA. A band of approximately 80kDa was observed for
GRP78 in all ovaries examined and the patterns of expression were similar
to that of IHC. The frequency of VEGFR-2 expressing TAN vessels was
significantly (pBackground: The lack of an effective early detection test
makes ovarian cancer (OVCA) a fatal malignancy of women. Changes in
cellular metabolic processes during ovarian malignant transformation lead
to the endoplasmic reticular (ER) and mitochondrial stress.
Glucose-regulated protein of 78kDa (GRP78) is a marker of ER stress.
Tumor-associated ER stress causes relocalization of GRP78 from ER to cell
surface with an increase in its serum levels. Secreted GRP78 also
stimulates tumor associated neoangiogenesis (TAN). Vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) is a marker of ovarian TAN. Thus GRP78
represents a marker of ovarian malignant transformation and in
association with VEGFR-2 may constitute an early detection test for OVCA.
However, information on OVCA related changes in GRP78 expression and its
association with ovarian TAN is unknown.Objectives: The goals of this
study were to examine (i) whether GRP78 expression increases during
malignant changes in the ovary and (ii) whether the frequency of TAN
vessels is associated with ovarian tumor-associated GRP78 expression at
early stage of OVCA in the laying hen, a spontaneous model of human
OVCA.Materials and Methods: 3-4 years old White Leghorn laying hens with
normal (n=25) or ovarian tumors (n=30) were selected by contrast enhanced
transvaginal ultrasound scanning. Serum samples were collected, hens were
euthanized, and ovarian tissues were processed for routine histology or
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and protein extraction. Ovarian tumors were
confirmed by gross morphology and microscopy. Expression of GRP78 by
ovarian malignant cells and VEGFR-2 by TAN vessels was determined by IHC.
IHC observations were confirmed by immunoproteomic studies.Results: As
compared with normal ovaries (n=25), the intensity of GRP78 expression
was significantly (p<0.001) higher in hens with early stage OVCA (n=12)
and increased further in hens with late stage OVCA (n=18) (p<0.05). GRP78
expression was higher in hens with serous OVCA followed by endometrioid
OVCA and was least in hens with mucinous and clear cell OVCA irrespective
of their stages of OVCA. A band of approximately 80kDa was observed for
GRP78 in all ovaries examined and the patterns of expression were similar
to that of IHC. The frequency of VEGFR-2 expressing TAN vessels was
significantly (p<0.001) higher in OVCA hens than in normal hens. Increase
in the frequency of VEGFR-2 expressing TAN vessels was positively
correlated with the intensity of GRP78 expression.Conclusion: The results
of this study suggest that increase in the GRP78 expression is associated
with ovarian malignant transformation, and this enhanced expression may
stimulate ovarian tumor-associated neoangiogenesis. Thus GRP78 in
combination with VEGFR-2 may constitute an early detection test for OVCA.
These results will constitute a foundation for a clinical study to
establish an early detection test for OVCA. Support: DOD Award #
W81XWH-11-1-0510.

