Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of raloxifene glucuronidation and the role of UGT
genotypes on raloxifene metabolite profiles in vivo.


Raloxifene is a 2nd-generation selective estrogen receptor modulator used
for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis and the prevention of
breast cancer in postmenopausal women. Raloxifene is extensively
metabolized by glucuronidation to form raloxifene-6-glucuronide
(ral-6-Gluc) and raloxifene-4-glucuronide (ral-4-Gluc). The goal of the
present study was to determine whether functional polymorphisms in active
UGTs could play a role in altered raloxifene glucuronidation in vivo.
Using homogenates from HEK293 UGT-overexpressing cell lines, raloxifene
was shown to be glucuronidated primarily by the hepatic UGTs 1A1 and 1A9
and the extra-hepatic UGTs 1A8 and 1A10; no detectable raloxifene
glucuronidation activity was found for UGT2B enzymes. Functional UGT1A1
transcriptional promoter genotypes were significantly (ptrend=0.005)
associated with ral-6-Gluc formation in human liver microsomes, and,
consistent with the decreased raloxifene glucuronidation activities
observed in vitro with cell line over-expressing UGT1A8 variants, the
UGT1A8*2 variant was significantly (p=0.023) correlated with total
raloxifene glucuronide formation in human jejunum homogenates. While
ral-4-Gluc exhibited 1/100th the anti-estrogenic activity of raloxifene
itself as measured by binding to the estrogen receptor, raloxifene
glucuronides comprised 99% of the circulating raloxifene dose in
raloxifene-treated subjects, with ral-4-Gluc comprising 70% of raloxifene
glucuronides. Plasma ral-6-Gluc (ptrend=0.0025), ral-4-Gluc
(ptrend=0.001), and total raloxifene glucuronides (ptrend=0.001) were
increased in raloxifene-treated subjects who were predicted slow
metabolizers [UGT1A8 (*1/*3)] vs intermediate metabolizers [UGT1A8
(*1/*1) or UGT1A8 (*1/*2)] vs fast metabolizers [UGT1A8 (*2/*2). These
data suggest that raloxifene metabolism may be dependent on UGT1A8
genotype and that UGT1A8 genotype may play an important role in overall
response to raloxifene.

