Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Natural product-inspired drug discovery: Chemistry and biology of
oridonin analogs with unique scaffolds and enhanced anticancer profiles .


ABSTRACT: Oridonin, a complex ent-kaurane diterpenoid isolated from
Chinese traditional herb Rabdosia rubescens (Chinese name "Donglingcao"),
has demonstrated great potential in the treatment of various human
cancers due to its unique, safe and remarkable anticancer pharmacological
profile. Nevertheless, the clinical development of oridonin for cancer
therapy has been hampered by its relatively moderate potency, limited
aqueous solubility and bioavailability. Up to now, the oridonin-based
structural modifications and relevant structure-activity relationship
remain sparse partially because of the challenging synthesis and
structural complexity. To develop novel oridonin derivatives with
enhanced anticancer potency and solubility, a sizable compound library of
oridonin analogs with unique scaffolds is being established in our
laboratories through diversity-orientated synthesis. Our successful
synthetic strategies include heterocycle-fused ring A construction, and
ring A-based ,-unsaturated enone formation, as well as other
stereoselective and regioselective approaches. A number of novel
nitrogen-enriched heterocyclic oridonin derivatives and dienone analogs
such as CYD0554, CYD0618, CYD0628, CYD0630, CYD0686, and CYD0692 have
been identified with potent anti-proliferation effects against breast,
pancreatic, and prostate cancer cells with low micromolar to nanomolar
IC50 values. Moreover, some of them also exhibit significantly improved
aqueous solubility and enhanced anticancer profiles for the treatment of
estrogen receptor (ER)-negative including triple-negative breast cancer
in comparison with oridonin. Our success in the chemical design,
synthesis and biological characterization of these new molecules opens
new avenues to develop promising natural product-like drug candidates for
cancer therapy.Key Words: Natural products, Oridonin analogs,
Diversity-orientated synthesis, Anticancer agents, Drug discovery

