Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elafin is a candidate biomarker that underlies the similarities
between basal-like breast cancer and ovarian cancer.


We recently reported that Elafin, a serine proteinase inhibitor encoded
on chromosome 20q12-13.2, is overexpressed and secreted by High grade
serous carcinoma of the ovary (HGS-OvCa) and is associated with poor
overall survival and chemotherapy resistance. Here we show that Elafin
confers a proliferative advantage to HGS-OvCa cells through activation of
the MAP kinase pathway. Mutations in the anti-proteinase domain of Elafin
did not interfere with its ability to stimulate cell growth. This
mitogenic effect can be neutralized by RNA interference, specific
antibodies targeting Elafin and small molecule inhibitor against MEK
kinase. We also observed that IC50 to cisplatin and paclitaxel are
significantly higher in OvCa cell lines (n=11) highly expressing Elafin.
A phosphoproteome array among 20 cell lines derived from patient's
ascites samples showed that expression of Elafin significantly correlates
with increased expression of RAD50 and STAT5A, two proteins involved in
platinum resistance.HGS-OvCa shared genomic features with basal-like
breast cancer (BLBC) including frequent TP53 mutations, genomic
instability, and poor prognosis. Thus, we looked at the expression of
Elafin in BC. A meta-analysis of gene-expression profiling from 7
publicly available BC datasets including more than 1,300 tumors showed
that Elafin is significantly highly expressed in BLBC compared to luminal
and HER-2 subtypes and this observation has been confirmed by IHC on BC
tumors (n=25) and on BC cell lines. Additionally, we observed that RNA
interference against Elafin reduces proliferation of BLBC cell lines.

