Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: First demonstration of in vivo PET imaging for ALK inhibitor using
[11C]ASP3026, a novel brain-permeable type of ALK inhibitor.


The recent breakthrough identifying the onco-driver fusion mutant of ALK
kinase and its inhibitor crizotinib commercially termed as Xalkori has
brought significant benefit to a portion of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients. However, a number of clinical issues in ALK-positive
lung cancer remain, involving resistance to crizotinib caused by
secondary mutation, amplification of the ALK gene, activation of
alternative pathways, and metastatic resistance, etc. Among these
mechanisms, brain metastasis is a critical issue because of its poor
prognosis. We have recently identified ASP3026 as a novel type of ALK
inhibitor under development, and have reported that ASP3026 shows
antitumor activities in several crizotinib-refractory models including
gate keeper mutants. Here, we report the first PET imaging of an ALK
inhibitor using [11C]ASP3026. The study has revealed that ASP3026 shows a
brain tumor permeability in an intracranial xenograft model of H2228-luc
ALK fusion positive cells. In this model, significant growth inhibition
of H2228 intracranial tumor was observed by treatment with ASP3026 (10
mg/kg, q.d.), but not with crizotinib (10 mg/kg, q.d.) as determined by a
bioluminescent imaging technique. Pharmacokinetic measurements of ASP3026
and crizotinib indicated that ASP3026 showed a four-fold better brain
penetration than crizotinib on AUC0-24 base analysis, with a brain/plasma
ratio=0.72 and 0.18 for ASP3026 and crizotinib, respectively. Further, we
synthesized positron-labeled [11C]ASP3026 and performed PET imaging to
clarify penetration of ASP3026 into cranial tumors. Quantitative analysis
of [11C]ASP3026-PET data indicated that ASP3026 showed higher uptake into
cranial tumors (SUV=3.0) than brain parenchyma (SUV=0.8). Moreover,
comparison of pharmacokinetic profiles in several tumor models showed
that tumor uptake of ASP3026 was higher than that of surrounding tissue,
suggesting that tumor accumulation of ASP3026 was dependent on the
microenvironment of tumor. Taken together, these results suggest that
ASP3026 has favorable properties that may be useful for the treatment of
brain metastases in ALK-positive NSCLC patients. Thus, PET imaging using
11C-labeled ASP3026 may allow the tumor penetration of ASP3026 to be
clarified in any primary or metastatic tumor site.

