Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sun protection practices among melanoma survivors.


Purpose: Unprotected sun exposure is a key risk factor for melanoma and
further exposure to ultraviolet radiation after a melanoma diagnosis may
increase the risk of a subsequent melanoma. We sought to determine
whether melanoma survivors observed sun protection practices more
vigilantly than the rest of the population.Methods: The National Health
Interview Survey (NHIS) is an annual, cross-sectional survey of the
civilian, non-institutionalized population of the United States on a wide
range of health topics. We used the 2010 NHIS data on self-reported
history of melanoma, sun protection practices, and indoor tanning to
determine if individuals with a previous history of melanoma adhered more
to sun protection practices than the general population.Results: In 2010,
the NHIS surveyed 27,120 adults, of whom 171 (0.74%) had a prior history
of melanoma. 54.8% of melanoma survivors were men, and 10.2% were under
the age of 40. More melanoma survivors reported they always stay in the
shade than the general population (15.6% vs. 10.5%, pPurpose: Unprotected
sun exposure is a key risk factor for melanoma and further exposure to
ultraviolet radiation after a melanoma diagnosis may increase the risk of
a subsequent melanoma. We sought to determine whether melanoma survivors
observed sun protection practices more vigilantly than the rest of the
population.Methods: The National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) is an
annual, cross-sectional survey of the civilian, non-institutionalized
population of the United States on a wide range of health topics. We used
the 2010 NHIS data on self-reported history of melanoma, sun protection
practices, and indoor tanning to determine if individuals with a previous
history of melanoma adhered more to sun protection practices than the
general population.Results: In 2010, the NHIS surveyed 27,120 adults, of
whom 171 (0.74%) had a prior history of melanoma. 54.8% of melanoma
survivors were men, and 10.2% were under the age of 40. More melanoma
survivors reported they always stay in the shade than the general
population (15.6% vs. 10.5%, p<0.001); however, 15.4% of melanoma
survivors still reported rarely or never staying in the shade. Melanoma
survivors were more likely (than their general population counterparts)
to always wear a baseball cap/visor (31.3% vs. 18.4%, p=0.028), a
wide-brimmed hat (20.5% vs. 6.1%, pPurpose: Unprotected sun exposure is a
key risk factor for melanoma and further exposure to ultraviolet
radiation after a melanoma diagnosis may increase the risk of a
subsequent melanoma. We sought to determine whether melanoma survivors
observed sun protection practices more vigilantly than the rest of the
population.Methods: The National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) is an
annual, cross-sectional survey of the civilian, non-institutionalized
population of the United States on a wide range of health topics. We used
the 2010 NHIS data on self-reported history of melanoma, sun protection
practices, and indoor tanning to determine if individuals with a previous
history of melanoma adhered more to sun protection practices than the
general population.Results: In 2010, the NHIS surveyed 27,120 adults, of
whom 171 (0.74%) had a prior history of melanoma. 54.8% of melanoma
survivors were men, and 10.2% were under the age of 40. More melanoma
survivors reported they always stay in the shade than the general
population (15.6% vs. 10.5%, p<0.001); however, 15.4% of melanoma
survivors still reported rarely or never staying in the shade. Melanoma
survivors were more likely (than their general population counterparts)
to always wear a baseball cap/visor (31.3% vs. 18.4%, p=0.028), a
wide-brimmed hat (20.5% vs. 6.1%, p<0.001), and a long-sleeved shirt
(12.0% vs. 5.2%, p=0.003) when going outside on a warm, sunny day for
more than one hour. They were also more likely to report always using
sunscreen (32.0% vs. 17.2%, p=0.005); however, 27.3% of melanoma
survivors reported never wearing sunscreen when going outside on a warm
sunny day for more than one hour. No significant relationship was found
between melanoma survivors and the general population in wearing long
pants/skirts on a sunny day (22.2% of melanoma survivors always wear such
clothing versus 17.7% of the general population, p=0.404). In addition,
melanoma survivors were less likely to have used indoor tanning devices
in the past 12 months than the general public (2.1% vs. 5.5%,
p=0.009).Conclusion: Melanoma survivors, in general, engage in more sun
protection practices than the general population. However, the fact that
many do not seek shade and never use sunscreen, and some reported tanning
bed use, remains a concern for their skin cancer risk.

