Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CC-223, a selective and potent mTOR kinase inhibitor, synergizes
with 5-Aza and Erlotinib in eight NSCLC lines in vitro.


CC-223 is a potent and selective mTOR kinase inhibitor currently
undergoing Phase 1 clinical evaluation. We evaluated combinatorial effect
of CC-223 with 5-Aza and erlotinib at three different ratios of the two
combining agents in three different orders of addition in eight NSCLC
lines. Combinational indices (CIs) were calculated based upon published
method (Chou and Talalay, 1984). CC-223 synergized with azacitidine
(CICC-223 is a potent and selective mTOR kinase inhibitor currently
undergoing Phase 1 clinical evaluation. We evaluated combinatorial effect
of CC-223 with 5-Aza and erlotinib at three different ratios of the two
combining agents in three different orders of addition in eight NSCLC
lines. Combinational indices (CIs) were calculated based upon published
method (Chou and Talalay, 1984). CC-223 synergized with azacitidine
(CI<0.7) in most of the lines at all ratios of combination when
azacitidine was added first to the cells (SeqM2). Synergism (CICC-223 is
a potent and selective mTOR kinase inhibitor currently undergoing Phase 1
clinical evaluation. We evaluated combinatorial effect of CC-223 with
5-Aza and erlotinib at three different ratios of the two combining agents
in three different orders of addition in eight NSCLC lines. Combinational
indices (CIs) were calculated based upon published method (Chou and
Talalay, 1984). CC-223 synergized with azacitidine (CI<0.7) in most of
the lines at all ratios of combination when azacitidine was added first
to the cells (SeqM2). Synergism (CI<0.7) and moderate synergism
(0.7CC-223 is a potent and selective mTOR kinase inhibitor currently
undergoing Phase 1 clinical evaluation. We evaluated combinatorial effect
of CC-223 with 5-Aza and erlotinib at three different ratios of the two
combining agents in three different orders of addition in eight NSCLC
lines. Combinational indices (CIs) were calculated based upon published
method (Chou and Talalay, 1984). CC-223 synergized with azacitidine
(CI<0.7) in most of the lines at all ratios of combination when
azacitidine was added first to the cells (SeqM2). Synergism (CI<0.7) and
moderate synergism (0.7<CICC-223 is a potent and selective mTOR kinase
inhibitor currently undergoing Phase 1 clinical evaluation. We evaluated
combinatorial effect of CC-223 with 5-Aza and erlotinib at three
different ratios of the two combining agents in three different orders of
addition in eight NSCLC lines. Combinational indices (CIs) were
calculated based upon published method (Chou and Talalay, 1984). CC-223
synergized with azacitidine (CI<0.7) in most of the lines at all ratios
of combination when azacitidine was added first to the cells (SeqM2).
Synergism (CI<0.7) and moderate synergism (0.7<CI<0.85) was also observed
in some cell lines when CC-223 was added first (SeqM1) or simultaneously
(Sim) with azacitidine; however, SeqM2 seems to generate better
synergistic effect across all lines than SeqM1 and Sim. In SeqM2
addition, no significant difference was observed among different ratios
of the two agents. CC-223 synergized with erlotinib (CICC-223 is a potent
and selective mTOR kinase inhibitor currently undergoing Phase 1 clinical
evaluation. We evaluated combinatorial effect of CC-223 with 5-Aza and
erlotinib at three different ratios of the two combining agents in three
different orders of addition in eight NSCLC lines. Combinational indices
(CIs) were calculated based upon published method (Chou and Talalay,
1984). CC-223 synergized with azacitidine (CI<0.7) in most of the lines
at all ratios of combination when azacitidine was added first to the
cells (SeqM2). Synergism (CI<0.7) and moderate synergism (0.7<CI<0.85)
was also observed in some cell lines when CC-223 was added first (SeqM1)
or simultaneously (Sim) with azacitidine; however, SeqM2 seems to
generate better synergistic effect across all lines than SeqM1 and Sim.
In SeqM2 addition, no significant difference was observed among different
ratios of the two agents. CC-223 synergized with erlotinib (CI<0.7) in
most of the cell lines at a ratio of 1:30 (CC-223:erlotinib). Synergism
and moderate synergism (0.7CC-223 is a potent and selective mTOR kinase
inhibitor currently undergoing Phase 1 clinical evaluation. We evaluated
combinatorial effect of CC-223 with 5-Aza and erlotinib at three
different ratios of the two combining agents in three different orders of
addition in eight NSCLC lines. Combinational indices (CIs) were
calculated based upon published method (Chou and Talalay, 1984). CC-223
synergized with azacitidine (CI<0.7) in most of the lines at all ratios
of combination when azacitidine was added first to the cells (SeqM2).
Synergism (CI<0.7) and moderate synergism (0.7<CI<0.85) was also observed
in some cell lines when CC-223 was added first (SeqM1) or simultaneously
(Sim) with azacitidine; however, SeqM2 seems to generate better
synergistic effect across all lines than SeqM1 and Sim. In SeqM2
addition, no significant difference was observed among different ratios
of the two agents. CC-223 synergized with erlotinib (CI<0.7) in most of
the cell lines at a ratio of 1:30 (CC-223:erlotinib). Synergism and
moderate synergism (0.7<CICC-223 is a potent and selective mTOR kinase
inhibitor currently undergoing Phase 1 clinical evaluation. We evaluated
combinatorial effect of CC-223 with 5-Aza and erlotinib at three
different ratios of the two combining agents in three different orders of
addition in eight NSCLC lines. Combinational indices (CIs) were
calculated based upon published method (Chou and Talalay, 1984). CC-223
synergized with azacitidine (CI<0.7) in most of the lines at all ratios
of combination when azacitidine was added first to the cells (SeqM2).
Synergism (CI<0.7) and moderate synergism (0.7<CI<0.85) was also observed
in some cell lines when CC-223 was added first (SeqM1) or simultaneously
(Sim) with azacitidine; however, SeqM2 seems to generate better
synergistic effect across all lines than SeqM1 and Sim. In SeqM2
addition, no significant difference was observed among different ratios
of the two agents. CC-223 synergized with erlotinib (CI<0.7) in most of
the cell lines at a ratio of 1:30 (CC-223:erlotinib). Synergism and
moderate synergism (0.7<CI<0.85) were also observed at other ratios.
Order of addition had no impact on the combinatorial effect for
CC-223+erlotinib. Overall, the data demonstrated that CC-223 synergizes
with azacitidine and erlotinib in multiple NSCLC cell lines in vitro.
Order of addition has an impact for CC-223 combination with 5-Aza but not
with Erlotinib. On the other hand, ratio of the two combinatorial agents
is important for CC-223+erlotinib combination in vitro.

