Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-NMP autoantibodies together with serum levels of death
receptor 6 (DR6) detect ovarian tumors at early stage .


Background: High rate mortality in patients with ovarian cancer (OVCA) is
attributed to the lack of an effective early detection test. OVCA
progression differs from other malignancies in that the tumor typically
spreads in a diffuse intra-abdominal manner. Thus tumor microenvironment
plays an important role both in the inhibition, as well as progression of
ovarian cancer. Malignant nuclear transformation is an early step in OVCA
development which sheds nuclear matrix proteins (NMP) in circulation. The
immune system responds to secreted NMPs by producing anti-NMP antibodies.
Conversely, the tumor evolves immunosuppressive mechanisms to escape
anti-tumor immunity. Death receptor 6 (DR6) has been suggested as an
immunosuppressive agent expressed in several malignancies including OVCA.
Thus, serum anti-NMP antibodies and DR6 may represent early markers of
OVCA. However, association of anti-NMP antibodies and DR6 expression
during OVCA development is unknown.Objectives: The goal of this study was
to determine if serum anti-NMP antibodies and DR6 levels are associated
with malignant ovarian transformation and to examine their feasibility in
detecting OVCA at early stage.Materials and Methods: Access to OVCA
patients at early stage is very difficult. We used laying hen model of
spontaneous OVCA. 3-4 years old normal, low or stopped egg-laying hens
were selected by ultrasound scanning, sera were collected, hens were
euthanized and tissues were processed for histology, immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and RT-PCR. Sera were processed for ELISA for DR6 and anti-NMP
antibodies. Immunoreactions were confirmed by immunoproteomics. Tumor
stage and their histological types were determined by gross inspection
and routine histology. Samples were divided into 3 groups namely, normal
(n= 20), early (n=15) and late (n = 17) stages of OVCA.Results:
Prevalence of anti-NMP antibodies was detected in approx. 75% hens at
early stage and 94% hens at late stage OVCA. All serum samples from tumor
hens detected NMP antigens of 30-80kDa in immunoproteomic studies. The
expression of DR6 by ovarian malignant epithelium was significantly
(pBackground: High rate mortality in patients with ovarian cancer (OVCA)
is attributed to the lack of an effective early detection test. OVCA
progression differs from other malignancies in that the tumor typically
spreads in a diffuse intra-abdominal manner. Thus tumor microenvironment
plays an important role both in the inhibition, as well as progression of
ovarian cancer. Malignant nuclear transformation is an early step in OVCA
development which sheds nuclear matrix proteins (NMP) in circulation. The
immune system responds to secreted NMPs by producing anti-NMP antibodies.
Conversely, the tumor evolves immunosuppressive mechanisms to escape
anti-tumor immunity. Death receptor 6 (DR6) has been suggested as an
immunosuppressive agent expressed in several malignancies including OVCA.
Thus, serum anti-NMP antibodies and DR6 may represent early markers of
OVCA. However, association of anti-NMP antibodies and DR6 expression
during OVCA development is unknown.Objectives: The goal of this study was
to determine if serum anti-NMP antibodies and DR6 levels are associated
with malignant ovarian transformation and to examine their feasibility in
detecting OVCA at early stage.Materials and Methods: Access to OVCA
patients at early stage is very difficult. We used laying hen model of
spontaneous OVCA. 3-4 years old normal, low or stopped egg-laying hens
were selected by ultrasound scanning, sera were collected, hens were
euthanized and tissues were processed for histology, immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and RT-PCR. Sera were processed for ELISA for DR6 and anti-NMP
antibodies. Immunoreactions were confirmed by immunoproteomics. Tumor
stage and their histological types were determined by gross inspection
and routine histology. Samples were divided into 3 groups namely, normal
(n= 20), early (n=15) and late (n = 17) stages of OVCA.Results:
Prevalence of anti-NMP antibodies was detected in approx. 75% hens at
early stage and 94% hens at late stage OVCA. All serum samples from tumor
hens detected NMP antigens of 30-80kDa in immunoproteomic studies. The
expression of DR6 by ovarian malignant epithelium was significantly
(p<0.001) higher in hens with early stage OVCA than normal hens and
increased further in hens with late stage OVCA. Similar patterns were
observed in immunoblotting and gene expression studies. Serum levels of
DR6 were significantly (pBackground: High rate mortality in patients with
ovarian cancer (OVCA) is attributed to the lack of an effective early
detection test. OVCA progression differs from other malignancies in that
the tumor typically spreads in a diffuse intra-abdominal manner. Thus
tumor microenvironment plays an important role both in the inhibition, as
well as progression of ovarian cancer. Malignant nuclear transformation
is an early step in OVCA development which sheds nuclear matrix proteins
(NMP) in circulation. The immune system responds to secreted NMPs by
producing anti-NMP antibodies. Conversely, the tumor evolves
immunosuppressive mechanisms to escape anti-tumor immunity. Death
receptor 6 (DR6) has been suggested as an immunosuppressive agent
expressed in several malignancies including OVCA. Thus, serum anti-NMP
antibodies and DR6 may represent early markers of OVCA. However,
association of anti-NMP antibodies and DR6 expression during OVCA
development is unknown.Objectives: The goal of this study was to
determine if serum anti-NMP antibodies and DR6 levels are associated with
malignant ovarian transformation and to examine their feasibility in
detecting OVCA at early stage.Materials and Methods: Access to OVCA
patients at early stage is very difficult. We used laying hen model of
spontaneous OVCA. 3-4 years old normal, low or stopped egg-laying hens
were selected by ultrasound scanning, sera were collected, hens were
euthanized and tissues were processed for histology, immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and RT-PCR. Sera were processed for ELISA for DR6 and anti-NMP
antibodies. Immunoreactions were confirmed by immunoproteomics. Tumor
stage and their histological types were determined by gross inspection
and routine histology. Samples were divided into 3 groups namely, normal
(n= 20), early (n=15) and late (n = 17) stages of OVCA.Results:
Prevalence of anti-NMP antibodies was detected in approx. 75% hens at
early stage and 94% hens at late stage OVCA. All serum samples from tumor
hens detected NMP antigens of 30-80kDa in immunoproteomic studies. The
expression of DR6 by ovarian malignant epithelium was significantly
(p<0.001) higher in hens with early stage OVCA than normal hens and
increased further in hens with late stage OVCA. Similar patterns were
observed in immunoblotting and gene expression studies. Serum levels of
DR6 were significantly (p<0.001) higher in hens with early and late
stages of OVCA. Increase in serum DR6 levels were positively correlated
with the prevalence of serum anti-NMP antibodies.Conclusion: Results of
this study suggest a concurrent prevalence of immune responses and
immunosuppression to ovarian tumors. Anti-NMP antibodies and DR6 are
associated with tumor initiation and progression. Thus, serum anti-NMP
antibodies together with DR6 levels may detect OVCA at early stage. This
study will provide a foundation for clinical study. Support: DOD Award #
W81XWH-10-1-0523

