Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of alcohol on DB[a,l]P, an environmental pollutant and a
tobacco smoke constituent, on DNA adduct formation in mouse oral tissues.


Alcohol acts synergistically with tobacco smoke to greatly increase the
risk of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) up to 20-fold; the mechanisms
of this synergism remain unknown. Research in this area has been hampered
by the lack of appropriate animal models that would mimic chronic
simultaneous human exposure to alcohol and representative carcinogens in
tobacco or tobacco smoke as a whole. Recently, we developed a more
relevant animal model (Int. J. Cancer, 2012, 2783-90) and showed that
dibenzo[a,l]pyrene (DB[a,l]P), an environmental pollutant and a tobacco
smoke component, induces SCC in oral tissues of mice. We also showed that
its diol epoxide metabolite, ()-anti-DB[a,l]PDE, is a potent and specific
carcinogen in tongue and other oral tissues in mice. We hypothesize that
chronic alcohol consumption will increase the carcinogenic potency of
DB[a,l]P in the mouse oral cavity by multiple mechanisms including the
depletion of glutathione (GSH) and increasing levels of covalent
DB[a,l]PDE-DNA adducts.As an initial study to test our hypothesis, mice
were fed Isocaloric Lieber-DeCarli-type liquid diets formulated by
BioServ (Frenchtown, N.J.) with or without ethanol (35% of total
calories, increased gradually from 0, 11, 22 to 35%). After 3 weeks, mice
were treated with 2 daily doses of DB[a,l]P (240 nmol each) and/or
tobacco smoke particulates (TSP, 2R4F, 2.5 mg/mouse). Mice were
sacrificed 24 hrs later and DB[a,l]PDE-DNA adduct levels were quantified
by our recently developed LC-MS/MS method (Chem. Res. Toxicol. 2011,
1297-303). We showed that alcohol consumption significantly increased the
levels of (-)-anti-trans-DB[a,l]P-dA in the absence of TSP (25%) or in
the presence of TSP (75%). We also demonstrated that GSH levels in buccal
mucosa were decreased (38%) in mice fed with liquid diet (35% calories
from ethanol) compared with mice fed with control diet (0.890.13 mol/g vs
1.230.17 mol/g). Collectively, our preliminary results support our
hypothesis that alcohol consumption will increase the carcinogenic
potency of DB[a,l]P by altering the metabolic detoxification via
depleting GSH and increasing DNA damage in oral tissues of mice.

