Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-Gen deep amplicon sequencing of TP53 complements FGFR3 for
the detection of bladder cancer-related mutations.


Background: We have recently described an ultra-deep amplicon sequencing
method for detection of FGFR3 mutations in urine that closely matches the
frequency of mutations found in bladder cancer tissue. While FGFR3
mutations are present in a large fraction of non-invasive tumors, these
mutations are rarely detected in invasive bladder tumors. To complement
our existing FGFR3 deep sequencing assay, we have developed a sequencing
assay for TP53. Mutations in TP53 are commonly found in advanced bladder
cancer, and show little overlap with FGFR3 mutations. Here, we
demonstrate the detection of FGFR3 and TP53 mutations in bladder cancer
tissue using a Next-Gen sequencing platform.Methods: The FGFR3 sequencing
assay was performed as described previously, permitting the detection of
9 mutations associated with bladder cancer. Similarly, amplicons were
designed against TP53 exons 5-8, permitting the detection of 133 TP53
mutations previously reported in bladder cancer. Primary amplification
was performed on DNA isolated from FFPE or fresh frozen tissue. The
resulting PCR products were used as template for emulsion PCR and
sequenced using the Ion Torrent PGM. Samples were analyzed for total DNA
reads and number of mutant sequencing reads to determine percent
mutation.Results: A set of 57 bladder cancer tissue samples, comprised of
38 non-muscle invasive (NMIBC) and 19 muscle invasive (MIBC) tumors, was
analyzed for mutations in both FGFR3 and TP53. Of these samples, 18 out
of 38 (47.4%) NMIBC tumors were positive for FGFR3 mutations, and 2 of 38
(5.3%) were positive for TP53 mutations. 9 out of 19 (47.4%) MIBC tumors
were positive for TP53 mutations, with an additional 2/19 (10.9%)
positive for FGFR3 mutations. Across all tumor stages tested, 35.1%
(20/57) of samples were positive for FGFR3 mutations, and 19.3% (11/57)
were positive for TP53 mutations. No overlap was seen between samples
positive for FGFR3 or TP53 mutations. In addition, we have now shown that
these assays can detect both FGFR3 and TP53 mutations in the urine of
bladder cancer patients. These studies will be expanded to a large set of
urine samples to more accurately assess clinical performance of this
FGFR3/TP53 deep sequencing assay in bodily fluids.Conclusions: We have
developed FGFR3 and TP53 sequencing assays that can detect mutations in a
broad range of bladder cancer stages. The complementarity of mutations
found in these two genes may allow for the non-invasive detection of
bladder cancer in a larger fraction of undiagnosed patients.

