Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor efficacy of AZD1480 in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.


Aberrant activation of the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) pathway has been implicated in cancer
cell proliferation and survival. AZD1480, a pharmacologic inhibitor of
JAK2, has been tested in several cancer models including glioblastoma,
lung, renal, prostate, breast, and ovarian cancer. However JAK
inhibitors, including AZD1480 has not been evaluated in head and neck
squamous cell cancer (HNSCC). In the present study, the in vitro and in
vivo efficacy of AZD1480 was evaluated in HNSCC preclinical models.
AZD1480 decreased HNSCC proliferation in cell lines with varying levels
of pJAK2 and pSTAT3 with an IC50 ranging from 0.9M - 4M. Further
evaluation demonstrated downmodulation of pJAK2 and pSTAT3 in HNSCC cell
lines by AZD1480. Furthermore, in vivo antitumor efficacy of AZD1480 was
tested in heterotopic xenograft tumor models derived from 2 HNSCC patient
tumors. AZD1480 at a dose of 30mg/kg, was given twice daily via oral
gavage and compared with vehicle (0.5% Hypromellose) control. Tumors
treated with AZD1480 exhibited significant growth inhibition relative to
the tumors treated with vehicle (p=0.0037). In addition, significant
decrease in pSTAT3Tyr705 expression was observed in both the patient
tumors treated with AZD1480 compared to vehicle alone indicating that
AZD1480 targets pSTAT3 and may be considered for study in the treatment
of HNSCC patients.

