Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 18F-FDG-PET/CT imaging analyses for liver metastases of human
colon cancer xenografts in NOG mice.


Colorectal cancer is one of the most common malignant diseases in the
world, and its prognosis is generally poor. Liver metastases of
colorectal cancer significantly affect the fates of patients. To further
understand the pathological aspects of distant metastases, we have
established liver metastasis models of human colon cancer xenografts in
immune-deficient NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rnull (NOG) mice.
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography / x-ray computed
tomography (18F-FDG-PET/CT) is useful in the clinical evaluation of
various human cancers. While PET analysis was established to evaluate
subcutaneous lesions of human cancer xenografts in mice, its application
to internal lesions including liver metastases is still being developed.
We applied PET approaches for the evaluation of in vivo metastatic
lesions in the internal organs of living small experimental animals. In
this study, we analyzed in vivo liver metastases of human colon cancer
cell lines in NOG mice using PET imaging. Experimental liver metastases
were established by intrasplenic injection of human colon cancer cell
line HCT116 (1.0 x 105 or 1.0 x 106 cells/mouse). 18F-FDG-PET/CT scans
were performed 2 weeks after xeno-transplantation. After PET/CT scans,
histopathological examinations were also performed to precisely confirm
lesions. 18F-FDG-PET/CT imaging clearly demonstrated multiple hot spots
on livers in spite of disadvantages in the contrast between tumor soft
tissues and markedly swollen livers. PET/CT analysis also disclosed
increased standardized uptake values (SUV) of FDG in metastatic foci of
NOG mice (control, SUVmean 0.450 0.033, SUVmax 0.635 0.017; 1.0 x 105
cells, 0.853 0.087, 1.254 0.237; 1.0 x 106 cells, 1.211 0.108, 1.701
0.158). There were significant differences in FDG uptakes between the
three groups (ANOVA, p=0.017 in SUVmean, p=0.044 in SUVmax, n=2). We
clearly and quantitatively detected liver metastasis images in NOG mice
by 18F-FDG-PET/CT in vivo. Immunohistochemical examinations confirmed
more metastatic foci and more severe hepatomegaly with 1.0 x 106 than 1.0
x 105 of HTC116 cell inoculations. PET/CT analysis of human cancer
xenografts is a new and reliable system to evaluate metastatic lesions in
internal organs. In conclusion, this model system is useful for analyzing
metastatic mechanisms and developing new therapeutic approaches for the
liver metastatic lesions of human cancer.

