Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Type 2 diabetes mellitus and colorectal neoplasia risk in Puerto
Rican Hispanics: A case-control study.


Introduction: Epidemiological studies have provided inconclusive evidence
regarding the potential link between type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) and
colorectal cancer (CRC).The association between type 2 DM and colorectal
neoplasia (colorectal cancer and/or adenomas) has not been well studied
in Hispanics, an ethnic minority at high risk for type 2 DM.The specific
aim of the study was to evaluate the association between type 2 DM and
colorectal neoplasia (CRN) in Puerto Rican Hispanic adults enrolled in
the studies Epidemiology of Loss of Imprinting in Colorectal Cancer,
Familial Colorectal Cancer Registry and the Type 2 diabetes mellitus and
colorectal neoplasia risk in Hispanics: A case-control study at the VA
Caribbean Healthcare System. Methods: The case-control study included
patients with incident CRN and controls with negative colonoscopy and
without previous history of CRC or adenomas diagnosed from January 1,
2005 to December 31, 2009. Diagnosis of type 2 DM was established by
previous medical diagnosis and/or anti-diabetic medications use.
Unconditional logistic regression was employed to estimate the odds ratio
(OR) between type 2 DM and CRN using STATA 10.0. Results: A total of 501
participants (mean age 60.3 12.6 yrs., 57.9% males), prevalence of type 2
DM was 24.8%. 323 patients with CRN and 178 controls were evaluated. In
the cases, the prevalence of colorectal adenomas was 25.7% (83/323) and
the prevalence of colorectal cancer was 74.3% (240/323). Cases and
controls did not differ by gender (p=0.19), median age (p=0.91), family
history of CRC (p=0.76) and first degree of family history of DM
(p=0.49). Cases had lower education (pIntroduction: Epidemiological
studies have provided inconclusive evidence regarding the potential link
between type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) and colorectal cancer (CRC).The
association between type 2 DM and colorectal neoplasia (colorectal cancer
and/or adenomas) has not been well studied in Hispanics, an ethnic
minority at high risk for type 2 DM.The specific aim of the study was to
evaluate the association between type 2 DM and colorectal neoplasia (CRN)
in Puerto Rican Hispanic adults enrolled in the studies Epidemiology of
Loss of Imprinting in Colorectal Cancer, Familial Colorectal Cancer
Registry and the Type 2 diabetes mellitus and colorectal neoplasia risk
in Hispanics: A case-control study at the VA Caribbean Healthcare System.
Methods: The case-control study included patients with incident CRN and
controls with negative colonoscopy and without previous history of CRC or
adenomas diagnosed from January 1, 2005 to December 31, 2009. Diagnosis
of type 2 DM was established by previous medical diagnosis and/or
anti-diabetic medications use. Unconditional logistic regression was
employed to estimate the odds ratio (OR) between type 2 DM and CRN using
STATA 10.0. Results: A total of 501 participants (mean age 60.3 12.6
yrs., 57.9% males), prevalence of type 2 DM was 24.8%. 323 patients with
CRN and 178 controls were evaluated. In the cases, the prevalence of
colorectal adenomas was 25.7% (83/323) and the prevalence of colorectal
cancer was 74.3% (240/323). Cases and controls did not differ by gender
(p=0.19), median age (p=0.91), family history of CRC (p=0.76) and first
degree of family history of DM (p=0.49). Cases had lower education
(p<0.001) and reported lower use of NSAIDS (p=0.054) and physical
activity (p=0.005) compared to the controls. There were no statistical
significant associations between DM and CRN (OR=1.21; 95% CI: 0.79-1.87),
DM and CRC (OR=1.20; 95% CI: 0.76-1.90) or DM and colorectal adenomas
(OR=1.24; 95% CI: 0.68-2.27). Conclusions: We did not observe a
statistical significant association between type 2 DM and CRN.
Nonetheless, a tendency towards an increase risk of colorectal neoplasia
was observed among type 2 DM patients. Possible explanation for our lack
of association may be related to high prevalence of type 2 DM in cases
and controls.

