Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Akt-mTOR axis determines cell fate through the regulation of
eIF2 phosphorylation pathway.


Metazoans respond to environmental stress by inducing the phosphorylation
of the subunit of translation initiation factor eIF2 at S51 (eIF2P), a
modification that leads to protein synthesis inhibition. We demonstrate
that eIF2P is induced by pharmacological inhibition or genetic ablation
of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway (1). Increased eIF2P is an evolutionary
conserved process that involves the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident
protein kinase PERK, which is negatively regulated by Akt dependent
phosphorylation at T799. The PERK-eIF2P arm is downregulated by Akt in
cells exposed to ER stress or oxidative stress leading to the induction
of cell survival or death respectively. In unstressed cells, the
PERK-eIF2P pathway guards survival and facilitates adaptation to the
deleterious effects of PI3K, Akt or mTOR inactivation. Inactivation of
the PERK-eIF2P arm sensitizes tumor death from pharmacological inhibition
of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway. The PERK-eIF2P pathway links Akt and mTOR
signaling to translational control with implications in tumor treatment
with pharmacological inhibitors of PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway.Citation Format:
Clara Tenkerian, Zineb Mounir, Jothi Krishnamoorthy, Antonis E.
Koromilas. The Akt-mTOR axis determines cell fate through the regulation
of eIF2 phosphorylation pathway. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 3191. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3191

