Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variations in promoter methylation levels of DNA repair genes and
breast cancer risk in the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family
Registry.


Reduced DNA repair capacity contributes to genomic instability, a
hallmark of carcinogenesis. The link between DNA repair capacity and
cancer is especially relevant in breast cancer, where women with
suboptimal repair capacity have been reported to have up to a five-fold
increase in breast cancer risk compared to women with better repair
capacity. We investigated promoter methylation levels of DNA
repair-related genes and their association with breast cancer risk among
participants of the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family Registry,
comparing sisters affected with breast cancer to their unaffected
sisters. We analyzed DNA extracted from viable mononuclear cells from 218
sisters (N=538 women) using pyrosequencing assays designed to target CpG
islands in the promoter regions of BRCA1, MSH2, and MLH1. Breast cancer
risk was not significantly associated with the promoter methylation level
of BRCA1 (OR=1.09 [0.98-1.20]), MLH1 (OR=1.18 [0.90-1.54]) or MSH2
(OR=0.87 [0.47-1.59]). We assessed the Spearman correlation between
methylation and previously generated data on expression level of BRCA1
and MSH2, where we had observed a significant increase in breast cancer
risk among women in the lowest quartile of expression for MSH2. Among the
affected women, no significant correlation was observed between
methylation and expression level for MSH2 (-0.04, p=0.39) or BRCA1
(r=-0.05, p=0.39). These findings suggest that while MSH2 may have
implications for breast cancer risk, as suggested by the previously
observed increase in risk with decrease in expression level of MSH2, the
lack of an association between gene promoter methylation levels of MSH2
and breast cancer risk and the lack of a correlation with expression
level in the current study, indicate that other mechanisms impacting the
reduction in expression level of this gene may be more relevant to
explain the observed increase in breast cancer risk.

