Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potent BET bromodomain inhibitors for treatment
of cancer.


Epigenetic mechanisms are essential for normal development and
maintenance of tissue-specific gene expression. Histone lysine
acetylation is one of the most abundant epigenetic modifications central
to control of gene transcription. Bromodomains are the only known readers
of this specific lysine acetylation code, playing an important role in
transcriptional regulation of diverse cellular processes such as
inflammatory gene expression, mitosis and viral/host interactions.
Recently, the human BET family bromodomains which consists of BRD2, BRD3,
BRD4 and BRDT has emerged as new druggable target class for the
development of specific protein interaction inhibitors, enabling a novel
strategy for the development of new therapies for various diseases. Here
we report the identification of potent BET bromodomain inhibitors using
structure based drug design principle. Multiple distinct series of
compounds have been identified with low nM potency in biochemical binding
assay. Crystal structures of BRD4 in complex with hit compounds have been
solved to assist in optimization. The lead compounds showed very good
cell based activity and favorable ADME properties. The compounds
demonstrated dose dependent inhibition of c-Myc expression confirming the
mechanism of action. Further optimization of these compounds and
profiling in relevant pre-clinical disease models is in progress.

