Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemokine expression profile in prostate cancer cell lines:
Association with metastatic potential.


Background: Metastatic spread poses the greatest challenge for the
management of Prostate Cancer (PCa). Although its frequency at diagnosis
of PCa cases is only 4%, it is associated with poor prognosis, with five
year survival rates of only 30%. Molecular mechanisms involved in
metastatic progression are not completely understood; however, it has
been noted that chemokines and their receptors play a key role in the
establishment of metastatic lesions.Objective: To compare the mRNA
expression profiles of chemokines and their receptors in two human PCa
cell lines with different metastatic phenotypes (LNCaP, PC-3) and in a
control, normal prostate epithelial cell line (PWR-1E).Methods: We
evaluated the expression profiles at the transcript level of chemokines
and their receptors in LNCaP, PC-3 and PWR-1E human cell lines using a
commercial primer panel (Chemokines SensiMix qPCR Primers Panel,Origene
Technologies), as well as a custom primer panel. The relative
quantification of gene expression was determined using the Ct method with
the normal PWR-1E cell line as the reference cell line and normalizing
the expression to -actin, HPRT1 and GAPDH housekeeping genes.Results:
Sixteen gene transcripts were overexpressed in PC-3, 13 of which were
exclusively overexpressed in this cell line and 3 other genes were
up-regulated in both PC-3 and LNCaP cell lines. Of the 13 genes
overexpressed in PC-3, 12 were found under-expressed in LNCaP cell line,
compared to PWR-1E (CCL2, CCL26, CCL28, CXCL2, CXCL3, CXCL4, CXCL4V1,
CXCL6, IL8, CXCL12, CCR10, and CCRL2). Chemokine transcript
under-expression was more frequently found in LNCaP than in PC-3 (11 vs
8) and transcripts for genes CCL3, CCL3L1, CCL3L3, CCL27 and DARC were
underexpressed in both cell lines.Discussion: Here we describe the
differential chemokine expression profile between PCa cell lines with
different metastatic potentials. In addition to chemokines/receptors
known to play a role in PCa, we have identified the differential
expression of chemokine gene transcripts not previously associated with
PCa.Conclusions: Differential chemokine expression at the mRNA level was
found in association with metastatic phenotypes of PCa cell lines.
Additional research is needed to determine mechanisms involved in genic
regulation of this profiles and to determine their roles in tumorigenesis
and cancer progression in the prostate.Financial support: Colciencias
Contract #462-2008

