Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncolytic HSV (34.5ENVE) sensitizes bortezomib-induced cancer cell
killing through induction of RIP1 dependent necroptosis.


The aim of this study is to evaluate the combination of oncolytic herpes
simplex virus (34.5ENVE) and bortezomib in the treatment of solid tumors.
Although phase 1 clinical trials of oncolytic viruses have established
the relative safety of this approach, evidence for efficacy has remained
elusive. Therefore, strategies to enhance the efficacy of this treatment
are being explored. We investigated the impact of 34.5ENVE in combination
with bortezomib, a potent and selective proteosome inhibitor, in the
treatment of multiple solid tumor models. In vitro, various human cancer
cells were treated with bortezomib alone, 34.5ENVE alone, or the
combination of the two. We analyzed the treatments for synergism in
cancer cell killing using Chou-Talalay analysis (CI index The aim of this
study is to evaluate the combination of oncolytic herpes simplex virus
(34.5ENVE) and bortezomib in the treatment of solid tumors. Although
phase 1 clinical trials of oncolytic viruses have established the
relative safety of this approach, evidence for efficacy has remained
elusive. Therefore, strategies to enhance the efficacy of this treatment
are being explored. We investigated the impact of 34.5ENVE in combination
with bortezomib, a potent and selective proteosome inhibitor, in the
treatment of multiple solid tumor models. In vitro, various human cancer
cells were treated with bortezomib alone, 34.5ENVE alone, or the
combination of the two. We analyzed the treatments for synergism in
cancer cell killing using Chou-Talalay analysis (CI index <1: synergy; CI
index The aim of this study is to evaluate the combination of oncolytic
herpes simplex virus (34.5ENVE) and bortezomib in the treatment of solid
tumors. Although phase 1 clinical trials of oncolytic viruses have
established the relative safety of this approach, evidence for efficacy
has remained elusive. Therefore, strategies to enhance the efficacy of
this treatment are being explored. We investigated the impact of 34.5ENVE
in combination with bortezomib, a potent and selective proteosome
inhibitor, in the treatment of multiple solid tumor models. In vitro,
various human cancer cells were treated with bortezomib alone, 34.5ENVE
alone, or the combination of the two. We analyzed the treatments for
synergism in cancer cell killing using Chou-Talalay analysis (CI index
<1: synergy; CI index < 0.8: strong synergy). Combination treatment of
bortezomib and 34.5ENVE displayed strong synergism in multiple cell lines
from ovarian cancer, head & neck cancer, and glioma (CI index The aim of
this study is to evaluate the combination of oncolytic herpes simplex
virus (34.5ENVE) and bortezomib in the treatment of solid tumors.
Although phase 1 clinical trials of oncolytic viruses have established
the relative safety of this approach, evidence for efficacy has remained
elusive. Therefore, strategies to enhance the efficacy of this treatment
are being explored. We investigated the impact of 34.5ENVE in combination
with bortezomib, a potent and selective proteosome inhibitor, in the
treatment of multiple solid tumor models. In vitro, various human cancer
cells were treated with bortezomib alone, 34.5ENVE alone, or the
combination of the two. We analyzed the treatments for synergism in
cancer cell killing using Chou-Talalay analysis (CI index <1: synergy; CI
index < 0.8: strong synergy). Combination treatment of bortezomib and
34.5ENVE displayed strong synergism in multiple cell lines from ovarian
cancer, head & neck cancer, and glioma (CI index < 0.8). In vivo,
subcutaneous and intracranial tumor xenografts were utilized to study the
impact of bortezomib+34.5ENVE on anti-tumor efficacy. Survival was
analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method and evaluated with a two-sided
log-rank test. In vivo, the combination of bortezomib and 34.5ENVE
significantly enhanced anti-tumor efficacy and prolonged mouse survival.
The impact of bortezomib on 34.5ENVE replication was measured by
quantifying virus titer. Sub lethal doses of bortezomib increased virus
replication (p value 0.8). These findings suggest that the combination of
bortezomib and 34.5ENVE leads to synergistic cell killing mediated by
RIP1 dependent necroptosis induction.

