Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OTX008 pharmacokinetics (PK) during the first-in-man phase I study
in patients with advanced solid tumors .


Background: Galectin-1, a multifunctional lectin, modulates cancer cell
proliferation and tumor angiogenesis. OTX-008, a synthetic calixarene
molecule, binds directly to galectin-1 and induces a conformation change
in reduces galectin-1 binding to carbohydrates. In vitro pharmacodynamic
studies showed that OTX008, at micromolar concentrations, inhibited
agglutination, proliferation, and invasion of cultured cancer cells.
Objectives of the ongoing OTX008 phase I study are: determine the
recommended dose, pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics (PD) and a
PK/PD modeling of OTX008 given subcutaneously (SC) in humans.Materials
and Methods: This is a multicenter, dose escalation, open label, phase I
study in successive cohorts of 3 to 6 evaluable patients treated with
OTX008. Nine time point blood samples were collected on D1 of cycle 1 and
two blood samples, just before and 1 hour after OTX008 administration
(Cmin/Cmax) were collected on D2 and D22. Urine samples were collected
during the first 24 hours after D1 administration. At the first DL (65 mg
OTX008 sq qd), tumor samples also were obtained from a patient with
advanced, heavily pre-treated cutaneous angiosarcoma of the scalp at
baseline and at D22.Plasma, urine and tumor concentrations of OTX008 were
measured using a validated Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography with
tandem Mass Spectrometry detection (UPLC-MS/MS) with range of 5 - 250
ng/mL. Pharmacokinetic analyses were carried out using the nonlinear
mixed effect modeling software program Monolix version 4.1.Results: PK
profiles of 7 patients treated at DL1 (65 mg) are reported. A
2-compartment open model adequately described the total OTX008
time-concentration curve with linear elimination. Following D1
administration, mean + SD Cmax was 4666 + 2012 ng/ml; and Tmax ranged
from 0.5 h to 2 h; mean + SD AUC was 48.9 + 36.8 mg.h/l and mean + SD
T1/2 was T1/2=5.5 + 0.9 h. Prior to D2 dosing, all patients had OTX008
plasma concentrations 1 M. No accumulation was observed, steady state was
reached around D22 after drug administration; 8-10 % of dose was
recovered in urine during the first 24 hours. In one patient assessed,
the intra-tumor concentration of OTX008 at D22 was 0.002 nM/mg of tumor.
DL2 130mg sq qd ongoing (ongoing) and 65 mg bid schedule (planned) will
be assessed and also presented.Conclusions: Our DL1 results show that
OTX008 is rapidly absorbed and distributed after single SC
administration. The PK of OTX008 is best described by a two compartment
open model. The influence of BMI will be studied with further DL cohorts
and larger number of patients. Urinary excretion seems to be the major
route of unchanged drug elimination. High plasma concentrations, close to
the active dose in vitro were achieved from DL1.

