Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Finding predictive markers for tumor response to classical
cytotoxic drugs.


As attempts to find predictive markers for cytotoxic drugs have been
relatively unsuccessful using patient tumor samples (1), we are using a
mouse model for BRCA1-deficient mammary tumors to search for such
markers. Although these tumors originate in inbred mice from an
inactivating deletion of the Brca1 and p53 genes, their response to
doxorubicin (2), docetaxel (2), topotecan (3) and PARP inhibitors (4)
varies. We have shown that in this tumor model 5 of the 22 tumors respond
poorly to docetaxel, because of upregulated drug-transporting
P-glycoproteins (5). These 5 were not found by standard gene expression
analytical tools, such as significance analysis of microarrays (SAM), and
we have shown that SAM only detects resistance markers if present in more
than half the tumor samples (5). Better algorithms for the detection of
resistance determinants in a subfraction of tumors are being developed by
De Ronde and Wessels (5). We are still searching for the cause of the
poor docetaxel response in 17 of the 22 tumors.1. Borst,P. and Wessels,L.
(2010). Do predictive signatures really predict response to cancer
chemotherapy? Cell Cycle 9, 4836-4840.2. Rottenberg,S., et al (2007).
Selective induction of chemotherapy resistance of mammary tumors in a
conditional mouse model for hereditary breast cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 104, 12117-12122.3. Zander,S., et al (2010). Sensitivity
and acquired resistance of BRCA1; -53-deficient mouse mammary tumors to
the topoisomerase I inhibitor topotecan. Cancer Res. 70, 1700-1710.4.
Rottenberg,S., et al (2008). High sensitivity of BRCA1-deficient mammary
tumors to the PARP inhibitor AZD2281 alone and in combination with
platinum drugs. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U. S. A 105, 17079-17084.5.
Rottenberg,S., et al (2012). Impact of intertumoral heterogeneity on
predicting chemotherapy response of BRCA1-deficient mammary tumors.
Cancer Res 72, 2350-2361.

