Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ER stress and autophagy induced in pro-inflammatory mast cells
exposed to stimuli associated with a positive energy balance.


Over the past two decades there has been an increase in the incidence of
obesity and metabolic diseases due to sedentary lifestyles, high caloric
intake, genetics and environmental factors. Studies have shown that
obesity is linked with multiple co-morbid pathologies, including
increases in the incidence of some cancers. We have studied the effect of
a nutrient-dense environment upon the mast cell, a pro-inflammatory
immunocyte. Our recently published work shows that these immunocytes are
sites for ectopic lipid deposition (steatosis) under conditions that
mimic high nutrient availability and hyperinsulineamia. Moreover, the
steatotic phenotype is associated with phenotypic change in the mast
cells, with relative over-production of bioactive eicosanoids and other
pro-inflammatory lipid mediators, but suppression of some aspects of the
acute Type I hypersensitivity pathway. In the current study we sought to
further explore the impact of nutrient abundance upon the cell biology of
the mast cell. We observe the induction of ER stress pathways, which is
associated with the re-programming of the ER towards lipid synthesis and
deposition in lipid bodies. Moreover, we observe the induction of
autophagy pathways, which likely reflect cellular attempts to access the
dysregulated ER and lipid bodies in an effort to return to homeostasis.
These studies deepen our understanding of the degree to which altered
nutrient environments can, in turn, cause immunological dysregulation. Of
particular interest for future studies will be the links between mast
cell dysregulation and the systemic and local inflammatory pathology that
is associated with metabolic syndrome.

