Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maintenance or switch maintenance therapy with selumetinib or
cediranib after chemoradiation prolongs survival in an orthotopic human
lung cancer model.


Background The outcome of lung cancer is poor and new therapies are
needed. Selumetinib (AZD6244, ARRY-142886) and cediranib are potent MEK
1/2 and VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, respectively. In the current
study, we evaluated the therapeutic efficacy of each with chemoradiation
followed by maintenance therapy in a KRAS mutant orthotopic human
non-small cell lung cancer model.Methods NCI-H460 lung cancer cells were
injected into the lungs of mice. Mice were randomized (32/group) to
therapy with radiation (20 Gy in 5 fractions) + paclitaxel (200 g/week),
radiation, paclitaxel, and selumetinib (25 mg/kg/day) or cediranib (3
mg/kg/day), or vehicle control (n=8). When controls became moribund, 8
mice from each group were sacrificed and assessed for tumor burden. The
remaining mice were re-randomized to switch or continuation maintenance
with selumetinib or cediranib or vehicle (8/group). Mice were sacrificed
when they became moribund and tumor tissues were subjected to
immunohistologic analyses.Results After the initiation phase,
chemoradiation reduced tumor volume by 78% (p = 0.0002 vs control) with
modest effects on regional metastases. The anti-tumor and anti-metastatic
effects of chemoradiation were markedly enhanced by selumetinib or
cediranib with a reduced total tumor volume of 96% and 99% (p = 0.002 or
0.0002) and primary lung tumor volume of 88% or 98% (p = 0.002 and
0.0002) compared to control. Trimodality therapy inhibited angiogenesis
and tumor proliferation and increased tumor and endothelial cell
apoptosis. In the maintenance phase, selumetinib or cediranib after
chemoradiation prolonged survival compared to vehicle with a median
survival of 41 or 43 vs 33 days (p = 0.008 or 0.005, respectively).
Maintenance selumetinib or cediranib after chemoradiation + selumetinib
resulted in a median survival of 46.5 or 53 vs 36.5 days for control (p =
0.001 or 0.0004, respectively). Maintenance selumetinib or cediranib
after chemoradiation + cediranib improved survival by 52 or 67 vs 39 days
for control (p = 0.0002). There was no significant survival difference
for switch or continuation maintenance. The longest survival (105 days)
was observed for selumetinib maintenance after chemoradiation +
cediranib. Failure patterns with maintenance therapy included regional
and distant metastases with brain, bone, and adrenal metastases
observed.Conclusions Selumetinib or cediranib substantially enhanced the
effects of chemoradiation in an orthotopic human lung cancer model.
Maintenance therapy with selumetinib or cediranib after trimodality
therapy significantly prolonged survival. Mice developed regional and
distant metastatic disease in patterns similar to those observed
clinically. These data provide a basis for clinical trials and our model
allows for the study of failure and resistance patterns with maintenance
therapy in lung cancer.

