Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subtype dependent carcinoma initiation by Rb tumor suppressor
inactivation in multiple epithelial tissues.


Carcinomas arise in a complex microenvironment consisting of multiple
distinct epithelial lineages surrounded by mesenchymal cells. Of major
importance is to understand the relationship among cell types, initiation
event, and ultimate cancer outcome. Mouse models facilitate the
prospective examination of early oncogenic events, which is not feasible
in humans, permitting an analysis of epithelial subtype susceptibility.
Since most solid tumors harbor aberrations in the pRb network, we
assessed the susceptibility of epithelial subtypes expressing cytokeratin
(K) 18 or K19 to the disruption ofRb tumor suppression (Rb-TS) in vivo.
Tumorigenesis could be initiated in either K18- orK19-expressing cells.
However, the susceptibility of epithelial tissues was subtype-dependent.
K19 cells were more prone to hyperplasia and neoplasia thanK18 targeted
cells. Given that a single genetic event was engineered, a small
percentage of animals developed carcinoma/adenocarcinoma, providing the
opportunity to define progression events via engineering or spontaneous
evolution. To extend our analysis to a specific tissue, we employed a
prostate-specific Cre line to target either K18- or K19-expressing
prostate epithelial cells. Differential responses observed in the
frequency and extent of premalignant hyperplastic lesions strongly
supported the notion of cell type-dependent susceptibility to Rb-TS
inactivation. Our data suggest that the tumorigenic consequences of a
single initiation event are dictated by cellular subtype distinctiveness,
underscoring the importance of the tumor cell of origin.

