Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of SHP2 impairs oncogenic activity of EGFR mutants in
non-small cell lung cancer.


Activating mutations of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are found
in 5-15% of non small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC) and are targets of
NSCLC treatment. However, most patients treated with EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors eventually acquire drug resistance, pointing to the need of
evaluating other molecules as potential targets for developing new
therapy for NSCLC. The protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) SHP2 mediates
signaling of growth factor receptors including that of EGFR. SHP2 is
activated by EGFR mutants in lung adenocarcinoma. Inhibition of SHP2 with
the SHP2 PTP inhibitor SPI-112Me or SHP2 knockdown suppressed
proliferation of EGFR-dependent HCC827 and H1975 cells. To assess the
role of Shp2 in the transgenic mouse model of EGFR mutant-driven lung
cancer, we generated transgenic mice carrying a doxycycline
(dox)-inducible, PTP-defective SHP2 (tetO-SHP2CSDA). Bitransgenic
CCSP-rtTA/tetO-SHP2CSDA mice were crossed with tetO-EGFRL858R mice. F1
offspring of dox-induced transgenic mice were analyzed. Erk1/2 and Src
were activated by EGFRL858R in bitransgenic CCSP-rtTA/tetO-EGFRL858R
mice. Both of them were suppressed by SHP2CSDA in
CCSP-rtTA/tetO-EGFRL858R/tetO-SHP2CSDA tritransgenic mice. Importantly,
expression of SHP2CSDA significantly inhibited EGFRL858R-induced lung
tumor in the tritransgenic mice. These results suggest that SHP2 is
critical for lung tumorigenesis mediated by EGFR mutations.

