Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing reveals novel mutations in a GIST and a
paraganglioma occurring simultaneously in a patient with complete form of
Carney triad.


Carney triad is a rare syndrome which is defined by the occurrence of
multicentric gastric GIST, paraganglioma and pulmonary chondroma. In
contrast to the closely-related Carney-Stratakis syndrome (CSS), Carney
syndrome is not inherited. In both syndromes, the tumors are
characterized by a loss of Succinate Dehydrogenase B protein (so-called
SDHB-deficient tumors). Only recently, inactivating mutations in the SDH
subunits A, B, C, and D have been found to be present in the majority of
SDHB-deficient GISTs of CSS, but not in GISTs in the setting of Carney
triad. We performed exome sequencing of DNA samples derived from blood as
well as of the GIST and the paraganglioma from a female patient with a
complete Carney triad. Additionally, the genome from the blood DNA was
sequenced at high coverage, and low coverage genomes of both tumor DNAs
were evaluated for copy number variations. SDHA and B mRNA and protein
expression were analysed by qRT-PCR and Western Blot analysis,
respectively. Both the GIST and the paraganglioma from the Carney patient
were negative for SDHB by immunohistochemistry, and did not display
noticeable levels of SDHB in the Western Blot analysis. In contrast, SDHB
mRNA levels were equal to SDHA levels, and also to GISTs from sporadic
GISTs with KIT mutations. Exome sequencing revealed 10 and 18 somatic
missense mutations in the DNA from the GIST and the paraganglioma, which
were not present in the DNA from the blood. Additionally, one somatic
insertion/deletion was found in each tumor. These novel mutations will
provide better insights in our understanding of this rare albeit
fascinating disease, and might also be suitable as targets for future
therapies.

