Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chebulagic acid can inhibit vascular endothelial growth factor-A
mediated angiogenesis.


Background: Angiogenesis or new blood vessel formation is essential for
the growth, progression and metastasis of malignant tumors. Among the
several pro-angiogenic factors, vascular endothelial growth factor-A
(VEGF-A) plays a critical role in this process of angiogenesis. However,
the current anti-VEGF-A agents in the clinics are not only expensive, but
also have serious side effects. Therefore it is essential to identify
newer, effective, less toxic and inexpensive anti-VEGF-A agents for the
treatment of cancer. We have recently demonstrated the anti-VEGF-A
actions of Triphala churna (THL), a natural medicinal product prepared
from three myrobalan fruits. Because chebulagic acid (CA), a bioactive
tannin present in THL has been reported to inhibit tumor growth, we
therefore investigated the effect of CA on VEGF-A mediated
angiogenesis.Method: Human umbilical vein endothelium cells (HUVECs) were
cultured in vitro, and pre-treated with different doses of CA for 24hrs.
Thereafter, we examined the proliferation migration and tube formation
abilities of these cells. In addition we also determined the effects of
CA on HUVEC cell permeability and on new blood vessel formation utilizing
CAM assay. Finally, the effect of CA on VEGFR-2 phosphorylation was
investigated.Results: 5uM CA can significantly inhibit VEGF-A induced
cell proliferation, migration and permeability of HUVECs. Besides it can
also inhibit formation of tube-like structures by these cells. In vivo
CAM assay also suggested that 5uM CA can suppress VEGF-A stimulated new
vessel formation. Western blot confirmed that CA inhibits VEGF-A actions
by suppressing phosphorylation of VEGFR-2.Conclusion: Our findings
suggest that CA can significantly inhibit VEGF induced angiogenesis.

