Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cathepsin B is a potential therapeutic target in pancreatic and
gastric cancer .


Proteases are critical in tumorigenesis by facilitating rapid cell
cycling, mediating local invasion, fueling angiogenesis, and promoting
metastasis. Cathepsin B (CTSB), a member of papain subfamily of lysosomal
cysteine proteases, is involved in tumor cell invasion, metastasis, and
angiogenesis. Emerging evidence indicated that CTSB is up-regulated in
many cancer nodes and metastatic lesions and functions to protect tumor
cells from apoptosis. Hererin, we have performed microarray-based
comparative hybridization (aGCH) to screen gene copy number variations in
primary tumor samples and found CTSB gene is amplified in 13% (14/107) of
Chinese gastric cancer and 2% (1/54) of Chinese pancreatic samples.
Theses amplifications were confirmed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis. By using siRNA-mediated gene silencing, we
demonstrated for the first time a role of CTSB in cancer cell
proliferation. Down-regulation of CTSB by siRNA interference resulted in
significantly reduced cell proliferation and increased cell death in
HupT4, a CTSB amplified human pancreatic cancer cell line, but not in the
non-amplified cell lines. Together, our results suggest that CTSB is a
potential therapeutic target for pancreatic and gastric cancer with CTSB
amplification.

