Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma growth differentiating factor-15 (GDF-15) and other
inflammatory markers are associated with weight loss and poor prognosis
in cancer patients.


Background: Cachexia is associated with increased inflammatory markers
and decreased survival in cancer. Also, elevated GDF-15 has been
associated with poor prognosis in several cancer types but its role in
cachexia is not well-understood.Methods: We measured body weight change,
appetite, plasma GDF-15, and other inflammatory markers in 62 males with
cancer-cachexia (CC), 72 non-cachectic cancer subjects (CNC) and 64
non-cancer controls (Co) matched by age, gender and pre-illness body
weight. In a subset of patients we also measured grip strength (HGS),
appendicular lean body mass (aLBM), ECOG and KPS.Results: GDF-15, IL-6
and IL-8 were increased in CC vs. other groups. Activin and G-CSF were
significantly upregulated in CC vs. Co. A subset analyses showed that
GDF-15, Activin A and IL-8 were increased in CC vs. CNC in lung cancer
patients and that GDF-15, IL-6 and IL-8 were increased in CC patients
treated with platinum-based chemotherapy.GDF15, IL-6 and IL-8 levels
significantly correlated with 6-month weight loss and with IL-6, IL-1ra,
IL-2, IL-4, IL-9, IL-10, IFN, MCP-10, MIP-1a, MIP-1b, TNF-a, VGEF and
activin in cancer patients. Analysis in a subset of patients showed that
CC had lower grip strength, aLBM, and fat mass; and that ECOG and KPS
were lower in CC and CNC compared to controls. GDF-15 and IL-8 correlated
negatively with aLBM, HGS and fat mass. Activin correlated negatively
with aLBM.Survival analysis showed that GDF-15 and IL-8 predicted
survival adjusting for stage and weight change (Cox regression
pBackground: Cachexia is associated with increased inflammatory markers
and decreased survival in cancer. Also, elevated GDF-15 has been
associated with poor prognosis in several cancer types but its role in
cachexia is not well-understood.Methods: We measured body weight change,
appetite, plasma GDF-15, and other inflammatory markers in 62 males with
cancer-cachexia (CC), 72 non-cachectic cancer subjects (CNC) and 64
non-cancer controls (Co) matched by age, gender and pre-illness body
weight. In a subset of patients we also measured grip strength (HGS),
appendicular lean body mass (aLBM), ECOG and KPS.Results: GDF-15, IL-6
and IL-8 were increased in CC vs. other groups. Activin and G-CSF were
significantly upregulated in CC vs. Co. A subset analyses showed that
GDF-15, Activin A and IL-8 were increased in CC vs. CNC in lung cancer
patients and that GDF-15, IL-6 and IL-8 were increased in CC patients
treated with platinum-based chemotherapy.GDF15, IL-6 and IL-8 levels
significantly correlated with 6-month weight loss and with IL-6, IL-1ra,
IL-2, IL-4, IL-9, IL-10, IFN, MCP-10, MIP-1a, MIP-1b, TNF-a, VGEF and
activin in cancer patients. Analysis in a subset of patients showed that
CC had lower grip strength, aLBM, and fat mass; and that ECOG and KPS
were lower in CC and CNC compared to controls. GDF-15 and IL-8 correlated
negatively with aLBM, HGS and fat mass. Activin correlated negatively
with aLBM.Survival analysis showed that GDF-15 and IL-8 predicted
survival adjusting for stage and weight change (Cox regression p<0.01, HR
3).Conclusion: GDF-15 and other inflammatory markers are associated with
weight loss, decreased muscle mass and strength and poor survival in
cancer patients. GDF-15 may serve as a prognostic indicator in cancer
patients and be a novel therapeutic target for cancer cachexia.

