Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of acquired resistance to the PI3K inhibitors in
colorectal cancer cell lines.


Alterations of the phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway
occur broadly in cancer via multiple mechanisms including mutation of the
PIK3CA gene or loss of the tumor suppressor PTEN. The dysregulation of
this pathway has been implicated in tumor initiation, cell growth and
survival, invasion and angiogenesis, thus, PI3K is a promising
therapeutic target for cancer. There are multiple PI3K inhibitors in
clinical trials and the current study investigates preclinical mechanisms
of resistance to two clinical PI3K inhibitors, GDC-0941 and GDC 0032.
Acquired resistance to PI3K inhibitors was generated in vitro, in SW48
parental and SW48 knock-in clones harboring hotspot PIK3CA mutations. We
found that GDC-0941 resistant clones and GDC-0032 resistant clones
demonstrated a marked signaling increase in the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway
when released from drug inhibition, and different nodes in the pathway
were activated. GDC-0941 resistant clones have elevated pAKT levels due
to loss of PTEN, and the pAKT is further increased when drug is removed.
GDC-0032 resistant clones retained functional PTEN protein, but had
increased pS6 levels in the absence of GDC-0032. The result of increased
PI3K pathway signaling in cells with acquired resistance to PI3K
inhibitors resulted in a decreased sensitivity to inhibitors of the MAPK
pathway upon removal of drug. Resistant cells maintained on PI3K
inhibitors gained sensitivity to MAPK pathway inhibitors. These
preclinical data may provide rationale for combination therapy in the
clinic.

