Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sorafenib modulates macrophages to promote T helper type 1
immunity.


Multiple regulatory processes within the tumor microenvironment work in
concert to limit local anti-tumor immunity, and it is likely that
integrative cancer therapies that target multiple cellular components in
the tumor will be required to optimize antitumor immunity. Sorafenib is a
promiscuous small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor developed as an
anti-angiogenesis agent. We have previously shown that Sorafenib
treatment can shift bone-marrow derived macrophages activated with
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) from the
pro-tumorigenic IL-10 secreting phenotype to the anti-tumor IL-12
secreting phenotype. Here, we extend these studies to explore the effect
of Sorafenib on tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) in a murine model of
HER2+ breast cancer. Sorafenib treatment effectively delays the outgrowth
of HER-2-overexpressing tumors in FVB/N mice relative to vehicle-treated
controls. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed increased infiltration of
F480+ macrophages in Sorafenib-treated tumors. F480+ TAMs isolated from
Sorafenib-treated tumors had greater levels of IL-12 gene expression, and
secreted higher levels of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1); there
was no difference in IL-10 gene expression. Furthermore, F480+ TAMs
isolated from Sorafenib-treated tumors demonstrated a superior ability to
stimulate CD4+ T cell proliferation, and intracellular cytokine staining
of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes isolated from Sorafenib-treated tumors
showed an increase in CD4+ IFN-secreting T cells. Taken together, these
data suggest that Sorafenib may alter the activation state of TAMs to
increase pro-immunogenic signals and promote T helper type 1 immunity in
the tumor microenvironment.

