Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective sensitivity of Ewing's Sarcoma to the PARP inhibitor BMN
673.


Background: A principal function of Poly-ADP-Ribose Polymerase (PARP)
proteins is to help orchestrate the DNA damage response by recruiting a
multitude of proteins to sites of DNA damage. PARP inhibitors have shown
particular promise in settings where a preexisting DNA damage repair
defect exists, such as in tumors that lack a functional homologous
recombination (HR) pathway. PARPs also have roles in epigenetic
modulation and PARP inhibition has been shown to affect the cell cycle
and cellular stress response. As such, PARP inhibitors may be efficacious
in tumors besides those known to have HR defects. We hypothesized that
subsets of bone and soft tissue sarcomas could potentially be selectively
sensitive to BMN 673, an oral, selective PARP-1/2 inhibitor currently in
phase 1 trials (AACR-NCI-EORTC Abstract #B-64, #B-67, 2011).Methods: We
determined the IC50G of BMN 673 across 50 human soft tissue and bone
sarcoma cell lines representing 5 main histologies by exposing the lines
to six BMN 673 concentrations over a 6-day incubation and using direct
cell counts. Synergy was determined by calculating cell growth inhibition
in cell lines exposed to BMN 673 along with gemcitabine and SN-38.
Translocations in Ewings sarcoma lines were available from public
sources. In vivo response was evaluated by monitoring the changes in
tumor volume of established subcutaneous xenografts in 6-8wk old CD-1
athymic, nude mice treated daily with BMN 673 by gavage. Baseline gene
expression profiles of the cell lines were generated using the Agilent
microarray platform.Results: BMN 673 had a potent anti-proliferative
activity in low nanomolar range with 20/24 Ewing's sarcoma lines
demonstrating IC50GBackground: A principal function of Poly-ADP-Ribose
Polymerase (PARP) proteins is to help orchestrate the DNA damage response
by recruiting a multitude of proteins to sites of DNA damage. PARP
inhibitors have shown particular promise in settings where a preexisting
DNA damage repair defect exists, such as in tumors that lack a functional
homologous recombination (HR) pathway. PARPs also have roles in
epigenetic modulation and PARP inhibition has been shown to affect the
cell cycle and cellular stress response. As such, PARP inhibitors may be
efficacious in tumors besides those known to have HR defects. We
hypothesized that subsets of bone and soft tissue sarcomas could
potentially be selectively sensitive to BMN 673, an oral, selective
PARP-1/2 inhibitor currently in phase 1 trials (AACR-NCI-EORTC Abstract
#B-64, #B-67, 2011).Methods: We determined the IC50G of BMN 673 across 50
human soft tissue and bone sarcoma cell lines representing 5 main
histologies by exposing the lines to six BMN 673 concentrations over a
6-day incubation and using direct cell counts. Synergy was determined by
calculating cell growth inhibition in cell lines exposed to BMN 673 along
with gemcitabine and SN-38. Translocations in Ewings sarcoma lines were
available from public sources. In vivo response was evaluated by
monitoring the changes in tumor volume of established subcutaneous
xenografts in 6-8wk old CD-1 athymic, nude mice treated daily with BMN
673 by gavage. Baseline gene expression profiles of the cell lines were
generated using the Agilent microarray platform.Results: BMN 673 had a
potent anti-proliferative activity in low nanomolar range with 20/24
Ewing's sarcoma lines demonstrating IC50G<24 nM. The IC50G of Ewing's
lines to BMN 673 (Mean IC50G: 10.4 nM; n=24 lines) was significantly
lower compared to osteosarcoma (Mean IC50G: 108.6 nM, n=11; p=0.0001) and
liposarcoma (Mean IC50G: 197.4 nM, n=4; p=0.0001) but not statistically
significant compared to rhabdomyosarcoma (Mean IC50G: 19.8 nM, n=9;
p=0.18). Ewing's sarcoma cells harboring EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG
translocations both appear to be highly sensitive to BMN 673 (EWS-FLI1:
Mean IC50G: 10.8 nM, n=18; EWS-ERG: Mean IC50G: 9.0 nM, n=5, p=0.61).
PARP1 mRNA levels were not different among the very sensitive and the
moderately sensitive Ewings lines. Combination of BMN 673 with
gemcitabine or SN-38 generated tumor growth inhibition more potent than
either agent alone. An in vivo dose-dependent sensitivity to BMN 673 was
noted in xenograft studies using 3 Ewing's and 1 osteosarcoma cell line.
Microarray analyses for predictors of response/resistance are currently
ongoing.Conclusions: A large panel of Ewings sarcoma cell lines
demonstrate selective in vitro and in vivo sensitivity to BMN 673, this
response may be augmented by the addition of cytotoxic chemotherapy.

