Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse DLL4 cross-reactive variant of MEDI0639 disrupts
functional vessel formation and inhibits tumor growth in preclinical
models.


Delta-like ligand 4 (DLL4) is a membrane bound ligand for Notch receptors
essential for functional vessel formation during development and
angiogenesis. We have shown previously that MEDI0639, a human anti-DLL4
antibody, has potent in vitro and in vivo activity in blocking DLL4-Notch
interaction. However, because MEDI0639 has low binding affinity to mouse
DLL4, to enable in vivo pharmacology studies using xenograft tumor models
in mice, MEDI0639 was engineered to bind more strongly to mouse DLL4. The
resulting affinity-optimized variant antibody (anti-mDLL4 mAb) bound with
high affinity to both human and mouse DLL4 and maintained binding
specificity to DLL4. In a number of human cancer xenograft models in nude
mice, the MEDI0639 variant antibody markedly inhibited the growth of
tumors. qRT-PCR analysis using the Fluidigm platform showed decreases in
mouse genes downstream of the Notch signaling pathway at efficacious
doses, indicating on-target antibody effect on tumor vasculature. In
addition, IHC and imaging analysis of xenograft tumors from the anti-DLL4
mAb dosed animals showed a dose-dependent increase in microvessel density
and decrease in tumor perfusion compared to the control groups. In
summary, we describe here the generation of mouse and human DLL4
cross-reactive antibody and the utilization of this antibody in
demonstrating a positive correlation between the anticipated mechanism of
action of DLL4 blockade on vasculature and inhibition of tumor growth.

