Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone acetylation mediated by inhibition of Class I histone
deacetylases is critical for induction of cell death in multiple myeloma
cells.


Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are being evaluated as novel
chemotherapeutics in combination with approved and investigational drugs
for multiple myeloma (MM) therapy. Despite the rapid advancement in the
use of HDACi in MM therapy, it is still not clear which HDAC needs to be
inhibited to attain maximal MM cell death. HDAC6, a mediator of the
proteasome pathway through its ability to deacetylate tubulin, is
considered to be a critical target to promote MM cell apoptosis. However
the contribution of Class I HDACs is still unclear. To determine the HDAC
that needs to be inhibited in MM, cell death induced by pan-HDACi
(LBH589) was compared to Class I HDACi (FK228), selective Class I and
HDAC6 inhibitors (ACY-1215, ACY-738) and a specific HDAC6 inhibitor
(ACY-738) utilising human myeloma cell lines (HMCL). The specificity of
these HDACi was determined by characterizing the acetylation induced in
histones (H2A, H2B, H3 and H4) and tubulin through flow cytometry. The
histone acetylation pattern of LBH589 and FK228 were similar, ACY-1215
and ACY-738 have comparatively lesser but discernible histone
acetylation, while ACY-775 did not acetylate histones. ACY-1215, ACY-738
and ACY-775 acetylate tubulin at amounts significantly higher than
LBH589, while FK228 did not acetylate tubulin. To determine if there was
a correlation between the pattern of acetylation and MM cell death, eight
HMCLs were treated with each HDACi and proportion of cell death measured
through flow cytometric enumeration of propidium iodide staining. LBH589
(50 nM) or FK228 (50 nM) induced the same amount of cell death
irrespective of the HMCL used whereas ACY-1215 and ACY-738 were able to
induce cell death comparable to the LBH589 and FK228 only at the highest
concentration used (10 M). Conversely, ACY-775, which induces negligible
histone acetylation, was not able to induce cell death comparable to the
other inhibitors except against RPMI-8226 where ACY-775 (10 M) alone was
able to cause a significant amount of cell death. Assessment of apoptosis
following exposure of primary MM cells (n=8) to HDACi recapitulated the
findings with the HMCL wherein ACY-775 caused the least amount of cell
death. ACY-1215 and ACY-738 at higher concentrations (10 M) were
comparable to LBH589 and FK228 in all samples tested and as in the case
with the HMCLs, a minority of patients (2/8) showed some cell death with
ACY-775 treatment alone. These data suggest that activity against Class I
HDACs is more effective than HDAC6 alone in inducing MM cell death.
Specific HDAC6 inhibition does induce comparable cell death of some MM
cells suggesting that in a subset of patients, inhibiting HDAC6 alone may
be as efficient as Class I HDAC inhibition and identifying these patients
is important. However, it is clear that in several instances histone
acetylation mediated by inhibition of Class I HDAC is sufficient to
induce significant MM cell death.

