Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AC708 is a potent and selective inhibitor of CSF1R and reduces
tumor associated macrophage infiltration in a breast tumor model .


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are thought to be regulators of solid
tumor development based on their capacity to enhance metastatic,
invasive, and angiogenic programming of neoplastic tissue. Colony
stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) is a key cytokine involved in recruitment
and activation of tissue macrophages, exerting these effects through
binding to a high-affinity receptor tyrosine kinase, theCSF-1 receptor.
We have developed a small molecule CSF1R inhibitor AC708 in an attempt to
impact the TAM-related progression of human tumors. Here we demonstrate
that AC708 possesses significant specificity for CSF1R relative to the
rest of the kinome, and to the closely related PDGFR family receptors
PDGFR and , FLT3, and KIT. In cell based assays, AC708 potently inhibited
CSF1R phosphorylation mediated by CSF-1 (IC50= 26 nM) and by IL-34 (IC50
= 33 nM). It also inhibited the viability of growth-factor dependent
cells cultured in CSF-1 (IC50 = 38 nM) orIL-34 (IC50 = 40 nM), and
inhibited the CSF-1-mediated differentiation and survival of primary
human osteoclast with an IC50 of 15 nM. In cytokine release experiments
where enriched human monocytes were stimulated with either CSF-1 or
IL-34, AC708 inhibited MCP-1 release with nearly identical IC50
regardless of which cytokine was used (CSF-1 (93 nM),IL-34 (88 nM)), and
with a lower IC50 than that obtained with the benchmark compound GW-2580
(CSF-1 (148 nM), IL-34 (140 nM)). In vivo, AC708 was assessed for its
ability to inhibit the intraperitoneal growth of M-NFS-60 cells in mice.
In these experiments, AC708 inhibited M-NFS-60 growth in a dose-dependent
manner, with a greater than 80% reduction in cell number at 100 mg/kg,
similar to that achieved with the benchmark compound Ki-20227. Two assays
were employed to assess the ability of AC708 to modulate endogenous
CSF1R. In the first model, AC708 inhibited CSF-1-mediated MCP-1 release
in vivo by 60% when dosed at 100 mg/kg. In the second model, plasma
levels of TRAP5b were determined following injection of recombinant
Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) with or without
co-administration of AC708. PTHrP-induced increases of plasma TRAP5b were
reduced by AC708 in a dose-dependent manner, with levels falling to below
baseline in the 100 mg/kg dose group.Lastly to assess the ability of
AC708 to modulate TAMs we utilized the 4T-1 breast cancer line implanted
orthotopically.Although primary tumor growth was relatively unchanged by
AC708 treatment in this model, administration of drug for two weeks
resulted in a dose-dependent reduction of tumor resident macrophages,
with a 70% reduction at the 100 mg/kg dose relative to vehicle control.
AC708 impact on tumor angiogenesis and metastatic potential is currently
under investigation and will be reported. These studies further validate
CSF1R as a potential target in cancer, and support the development of
AC708 as a therapeutic in oncology.

