Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: F-XA7, a novel derivative of vinca alkaloid with potent antitumor
activity, efficiently overrides P-glycoprotein-mediated drug resistance
both in vitro and in vivo.


Vinorelbine, a semi-synthetic vinca alkaloid, is widely used for the
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer, metastatic breast cancer and
ovarian cancer by inhibiting microtubule assembly. However, drug
resistance mediated by P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and neurotoxic side effect
possibly caused by microtubule paracrystal are major obstacles to
vinorelbine application in clinic. Here, we describe a vinorelbine
derivative F-XA7 as a novel microtubule-disrupting agent. F-XA7 inhibits
microtubule assembly by binding to tubulin at the same site as
vinorelbine and thus inhibiting the proliferation of cultured tumor
cells. In vivo, F-XA7 exhibits potent antitumor activity against human
tumor xenografts in nude mice. More importantly, F-XA7 is active against
vinorelbine-resistant tumor cells mediated by P-gp-overexpression and
significantly suppresses the growth of P-gp-overexpressing tumor
xenograft in vivo, indicating that F-XA7 efficiently overrides
P-gp-mediated drug resistance. In addition, the activity of F-XA7 to
induce microtubule paracrystal is much weaker than that of vinorelbine in
cultured cells, suggesting it may have less neurotoxic side effect.
Collectively, these results indicate that F-XA7 is a novel and promising
microtubule-disrupting agent for cancer therapy.

