Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic and functional characterization of the atypical kinase
SgK269/PEAK1 in breast cancer.


The human genome encodes 518 protein kinases which can be mined for
potential cancer drug targets and biomarkers. Previously, we performed
SILAC labelling in combination with mass spectrometry-based
phosphoproteomics to identify seven proteins exhibiting decreased
tyrosine phosphorylation upon Lyn knockdown in the BT549 and MDA-MB-231
basal breast cancer cell lines. From these we selected the atypical
kinase SgK269 (also known as PEAK1) for further study. SgK269 is
classified as a pseudokinase since it contains critical substitutions in
one of the three conserved motifs important for kinase activity. The
primary objective of this study was to functionally characterize SgK269
and to identify its signaling role through proteomic and phosphoproteomic
profiling in mammary epithelial cells.Initial pull-down experiments using
SgK269 recombinant protein were performed to identify binding partners of
SgK269 in MDA-MB-231 cells. Functional annotation of the identified
binding partners subsequently indicated that SgK269 may be involved in
MAPK signaling, regulation of the actin cytoskeleton and focal adhesions,
and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis.To further interrogate the role of
SgK269 in breast cancer, SgK269 was overexpressed in the human mammary
epithelial cell line MCF-10A. We also expressed a mutant form of SgK269
where the Lyn phosphorylation site, Y635, was altered to phenylalanine
(F). Overexpression of SgK269 resulted in a change in cellular
morphology. In monolayer, cells were elongated resembling a mesenchymal
phenotype and exhibited a decreased expression of E-cadherin and an
increase in N-cadherin, indicative of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). When grown in Matrigel, the SgK269-overexpressing cells
formed large, aberrant acini, while the SgK269 Y635F mutant was unable to
enhance acinar size. In terms of signaling, overexpression of SgK269
increased Erk phosphorylation in three-dimensional culture, an effect
associated with SgK269/Grb2 binding and enhanced interaction between the
EGFR and Grb2. Since SgK269 showed strong binding with Stat3 in pull-down
studies, we also characterized Stat3 signalling in this model. SgK269
overexpression led to enhanced Stat3 tyrosine phosphorylation and
transcriptional activity whilst the Y635F mutation abolished this effect.
The global tyrosine phosphorylation signature associated with SgK269
overexpression in MCF-10A cells is currently under investigation.SgK269
is a poorly characterized kinase that may contribute to the progression
of breast and other cancers. This study provides novel and highly
significant insights into the signaling mechanism and function of SgK269
that highlights potential strategies for the improved treatment of basal
breast cancers, as well as other cancers where SgK269 is
overexpressed.Citation Format: Ling Liu, Howard Chan, David Croucher,
Falco Hochgrfe, Luxi Zhang, Carole Tactacan, Roger Daly. Mechanistic and
functional characterization of the atypical kinase SgK269/PEAK1 in breast
cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2507.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2507

