Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: What is in control of DNA replication timing.


The initiation of DNA replication at specific sites in the genome is
known to be far from perfect, where known initiation sites may or may not
fire in a given single cell during specific cell cycle. At the same time,
from larger scale perspective, one finds that the timing of DNA
replication is highly orchestrated, where specific regions in the genome
are copied at specific, reproducible time points throughout S-phase. In
an attempt to reconcile these two somewhat discordant observations, many
researchers have assumed that a yet unknown, active regulatory mechanism
in the cell is responsible for coordinating replication timing.Here we
present a mechanistic explanation for genome-wide replication timing
patterns. Our model is purely stochastic, does not contain any active
control components and reproduces existing replication timing data with
extreme fidelity (correlation > 0.9, about the same as the correlation
between technical replicates of the experiment). The main findings of our
work areExistence of reproducible genome-wide replication patterns do not
logically necessitate existence of a complex, active control system in
the cellIntegrative analysis of recently released ENCODE data identifies
semi-local chromatin structure as the main determinant of replication
timingPlasticity of replication timing across different cell types are a
direct consequence of changes in the chromatin structure between the
different cell differentiation statesReplication timing is a systems
phenomenon emerging from the collective action of many uncoordinated,
stochastic replication initiation sites. Replication timing cannot be
understood by investigating individual initiation sites: deleting up to
30% of high probability initiation sites does not significantly change
replication timing

