Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Broad spectrum metabolite profiling reveals metabolic finger and
footprinting which correlate to gene expression signatures of
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC).


TNBC constitutes 20% of all breast cancers and disproportionately affects
younger women and African-American women. This genomically heterogeneous
disease is defined by the lack of expression of estrogen and progesterone
receptors and the lack of amplification of HER2/neu. TNBC is resistant to
standard breast cancer therapies. Due to the lack of a predominant
genetic lesion associated with the disease, identification of metabolic
fingerprints within TNBC is a critical first step for identification of
molecular drivers and development of targeted therapies. Metabolite
profiling (metabolomics) of a wide range of metabolites can be used to
globally profile the metabolic state of cancer cells. Nine widely used
TNBC-derived cell lines already characterized by gene expression
signatures were analyzed by metabolomics. Two different approaches were
combined: (i) untargeted, broad profiling including LC-MS/MS and GC-MS,
and (ii) targeted UPLC-MS/MS Energy platform technology which covers
polar key metabolites mainly reflecting energy status and nucleotide
biosynthesis. Finally, 239 high quality metabolites were statistically
evaluated in cell lysates and 128 metabolites in spent media samples
collected from all cell lines. Using innovative bioinformatics and data
mining tools we identified metabolic alterations in energy utilization,
lipid synthesis, and other pathways of importance to highly proliferative
cells that differ significantly from an untransformed control cell line
(MCF-10A). Major metabolic changes combining results of metabolic
fingerprinting and footprinting and their biological relevance will be
discussed.

