Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early tumor regression after endocrine and kinase inhibitor
therapy in an experimental model of breast cancer.


More than 70% of breast cancers express estrogen and progesterone
receptors (ER and PR), and are thus susceptible to adjuvant endocrine
therapy. Treatments for these patients are mainly focused on blocking ER
function at multiple levels. In the last few years, evidence has linked
progestin to breast cancer pathogenesis. According to that, PR would be a
valid target for breast cancer therapy. In addition, up to 40% of
hormone-receptor positive breast tumors have PI3K activating mutations,
and then PI3K/AKT inhibition is becoming a new approach for breast cancer
treatment.The aim of this work was to study early stages of tumor
regression in an experimental model of breast cancer. We tested the
effect of an antiprogestin and a PI3K inhibitor for 48 hs, alone or in
combination. We used the medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA)-induced breast
cancer model. Tumors of this model express high levels of ER and PR.
Initially, they are MPA-dependent, but after a few passages
MPA-independent variants appear spontaneously. These variants may respond
to an endocrine therapy or may progress to a hormonal resistant
phenotype.We have previously demonstrated that the MPA-independent
variant C4-HI regresses after 48 hs administration of the antiprogestin
Mifepristone (MFP, 12 mg/kg/day) or the PI3K inhibitor Wortmannin (WN, 1
mg/kg/day), displaying an increase in ductal differentiation. We now
explored the mechanisms involved in these inhibitory effects.
Proliferation of tumor cells, determined as mitotic and Ki67 indexes, is
reduced (pMore than 70% of breast cancers express estrogen and
progesterone receptors (ER and PR), and are thus susceptible to adjuvant
endocrine therapy. Treatments for these patients are mainly focused on
blocking ER function at multiple levels. In the last few years, evidence
has linked progestin to breast cancer pathogenesis. According to that, PR
would be a valid target for breast cancer therapy. In addition, up to 40%
of hormone-receptor positive breast tumors have PI3K activating
mutations, and then PI3K/AKT inhibition is becoming a new approach for
breast cancer treatment.The aim of this work was to study early stages of
tumor regression in an experimental model of breast cancer. We tested the
effect of an antiprogestin and a PI3K inhibitor for 48 hs, alone or in
combination. We used the medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA)-induced breast
cancer model. Tumors of this model express high levels of ER and PR.
Initially, they are MPA-dependent, but after a few passages
MPA-independent variants appear spontaneously. These variants may respond
to an endocrine therapy or may progress to a hormonal resistant
phenotype.We have previously demonstrated that the MPA-independent
variant C4-HI regresses after 48 hs administration of the antiprogestin
Mifepristone (MFP, 12 mg/kg/day) or the PI3K inhibitor Wortmannin (WN, 1
mg/kg/day), displaying an increase in ductal differentiation. We now
explored the mechanisms involved in these inhibitory effects.
Proliferation of tumor cells, determined as mitotic and Ki67 indexes, is
reduced (p<0.01) similarly by MFP and WN respect to vehicle.
Consistently, we detected a downregulation in the expression of cell
cycle proteins c-MYC and Cyclin D1 determined by western blot and
immunohistochemistry. However, after 48hs only WN increased necrosis,
apoptosis (pMore than 70% of breast cancers express estrogen and
progesterone receptors (ER and PR), and are thus susceptible to adjuvant
endocrine therapy. Treatments for these patients are mainly focused on
blocking ER function at multiple levels. In the last few years, evidence
has linked progestin to breast cancer pathogenesis. According to that, PR
would be a valid target for breast cancer therapy. In addition, up to 40%
of hormone-receptor positive breast tumors have PI3K activating
mutations, and then PI3K/AKT inhibition is becoming a new approach for
breast cancer treatment.The aim of this work was to study early stages of
tumor regression in an experimental model of breast cancer. We tested the
effect of an antiprogestin and a PI3K inhibitor for 48 hs, alone or in
combination. We used the medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA)-induced breast
cancer model. Tumors of this model express high levels of ER and PR.
Initially, they are MPA-dependent, but after a few passages
MPA-independent variants appear spontaneously. These variants may respond
to an endocrine therapy or may progress to a hormonal resistant
phenotype.We have previously demonstrated that the MPA-independent
variant C4-HI regresses after 48 hs administration of the antiprogestin
Mifepristone (MFP, 12 mg/kg/day) or the PI3K inhibitor Wortmannin (WN, 1
mg/kg/day), displaying an increase in ductal differentiation. We now
explored the mechanisms involved in these inhibitory effects.
Proliferation of tumor cells, determined as mitotic and Ki67 indexes, is
reduced (p<0.01) similarly by MFP and WN respect to vehicle.
Consistently, we detected a downregulation in the expression of cell
cycle proteins c-MYC and Cyclin D1 determined by western blot and
immunohistochemistry. However, after 48hs only WN increased necrosis,
apoptosis (p<0.01) and the BAX/BCL-XL ratio. As expected, only WN
decreased pAKT and pS6 levels. Furthermore, when given in combination,
MFP and WN improved all the above mentioned parameters.In an
antiprogestin resistant tumor variant, PI3K inhibition still suppressed
tumor growth. We detected that after 7 days of treatment WN-treated
C4-2-HI tumors were smaller than vehicle-treated tumors (pMore than 70%
of breast cancers express estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER and
PR), and are thus susceptible to adjuvant endocrine therapy. Treatments
for these patients are mainly focused on blocking ER function at multiple
levels. In the last few years, evidence has linked progestin to breast
cancer pathogenesis. According to that, PR would be a valid target for
breast cancer therapy. In addition, up to 40% of hormone-receptor
positive breast tumors have PI3K activating mutations, and then PI3K/AKT
inhibition is becoming a new approach for breast cancer treatment.The aim
of this work was to study early stages of tumor regression in an
experimental model of breast cancer. We tested the effect of an
antiprogestin and a PI3K inhibitor for 48 hs, alone or in combination. We
used the medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA)-induced breast cancer model.
Tumors of this model express high levels of ER and PR. Initially, they
are MPA-dependent, but after a few passages MPA-independent variants
appear spontaneously. These variants may respond to an endocrine therapy
or may progress to a hormonal resistant phenotype.We have previously
demonstrated that the MPA-independent variant C4-HI regresses after 48 hs
administration of the antiprogestin Mifepristone (MFP, 12 mg/kg/day) or
the PI3K inhibitor Wortmannin (WN, 1 mg/kg/day), displaying an increase
in ductal differentiation. We now explored the mechanisms involved in
these inhibitory effects. Proliferation of tumor cells, determined as
mitotic and Ki67 indexes, is reduced (p<0.01) similarly by MFP and WN
respect to vehicle. Consistently, we detected a downregulation in the
expression of cell cycle proteins c-MYC and Cyclin D1 determined by
western blot and immunohistochemistry. However, after 48hs only WN
increased necrosis, apoptosis (p<0.01) and the BAX/BCL-XL ratio. As
expected, only WN decreased pAKT and pS6 levels. Furthermore, when given
in combination, MFP and WN improved all the above mentioned parameters.In
an antiprogestin resistant tumor variant, PI3K inhibition still
suppressed tumor growth. We detected that after 7 days of treatment
WN-treated C4-2-HI tumors were smaller than vehicle-treated tumors
(p<0.001). However, no evident signs of regression were histologically
observed. Ongoing experiments are being conducted to evaluate
histologically tissue response at earlier time points (48hs) after WN
therapy.Taken together, these results suggest that inhibiting PI3K
pathway could represent a useful tool for the treatment of hormone
receptor-positive tumors, even of those that have progressed to a
hormonal resistant phenotype. Understanding the early mechanisms involved
in tumor regression may improve the design and monitoring of cancer
therapies.

