Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal respiratory uncoupling blocks skin carcinogenesis by
inhibiting Akt.


Metabolic reprogramming, characterized by increased glycolysis and
decreased oxygen consumption, is now considered a hallmark of malignancy.
Mitochondrial uncoupling proteins oppose this phenotype by driving futile
mitochondrial respiration that is uncoupled from ATP synthesis, and mice
expressing a keratin 5 - uncoupling protein 3 (K5-UCP3) transgene in the
epidermis are completely protected from the formation of chemically
induced skin carcinomas. We crossed these mice with Tg.AC mice that
express a cutaneous oncogenic v-Ha-Ras transgene, bypassing tumor
initiation. Bi-transgenic Tg.AC/K5-UCP3 mice were still remarkably
resistant to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced
tumorigenesis, indicating that UCP3 likely inhibits tumor promotion.
Accordingly, K5-UCP3 mice exhibited striking resistance to epidermal
proliferation induced by TPA as measured using a bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)
based labeling assay. In agreement with these data, K5-UCP3 epidermis
failed to show activation of Akt (Ser473 & Thr308 phosphorylation) and
phosphorylation of downstream signaling molecules in response to TPA
treatment. This effect corresponded to decreased expression of cyclins D1
and A, and increased expression of the cell cycle inhibitory proteins p21
and p27. Decreased Akt activation was also observed in vitro in response
to epidermal growth factor (EGF) treatment of serum starved, isolated
K5-UCP3 primary keratinocytes. To test the notion that the lack of Akt
signaling was responsible for the lack of TPA induced proliferation and
tumorigenesis, we bred bi-transgenic K5-UCP3/K5-Akt mice, and found that
over-expression of wild type Akt recovered proliferation following TPA
treatment. Future experiments will elucidate the mechanism underlying
UCP3-induced inhibition of Akt activation and signaling.

