Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DIM inhibits growth of human gastric cancer through modulation of
the hippo signaling pathway.


3, 3-diindolylmethane (DIM) has been reported that it has
anti-proliferative effects in many cancer cells. However, the biological
functions of DIM in human gastric cancer cells are unknown. Genetic and
biological studies have confirmed the importance of the novel hippo tumor
suppressor pathway in regulating cell proliferation, apoptosis, organ
size, and tumorigenesis in mammals. Thus, the purpose of this study was
to investigate the cytotoxic effects of DIM in human gastric cancer cells
and to elucidate whether DIM induces cell death by activating the hippo
signaling pathway. Four human gastric cancer cell lines (SNU1, SNU16,
SNU484, and SNU638) were used to test the response of DIM. MTT, cell
cycle and western blot analyses were conducted. DIM significantly
inhibited the proliferation of human gastric cancer cells in a
dose-dependent manner. The percentage of G1 phase cells increased 24h
after being treated by DIM. DIM reduced CDK2, CDK4, CDK6, CyclinD1
protein levels and increased p53 protein levels. DIM also induced cleaved
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, cleaved-caspase-9 levels, and diminished
pro-caspase-3 protein expression levels. Additionally, DIM increased
P-LATS1, Mob1, P-Mob1, P-Yap protein levels and reduced Yap protein
levels. Moreover, DIM inhibited the growth of human esophageal tumors in
an orthotopic mouse model. These results suggest that DIM can sensitize
gastric cancers by modulating the hippo signaling pathway linked to
tumorigenesis.Citation Format: Xiu Juan Li, Hwan Hee Lee, Soo Mi Kim. DIM
inhibits growth of human gastric cancer through modulation of the hippo
signaling pathway. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 3243. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3243

