Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Self-stabilizing ADCs: antibody-drug conjugates prepared with
maleimido drug-linkers that catalyze their own thiosuccinimide ring
hydrolysis.


Many antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) currently in clinical trials employ
maleimide-containing drug-linkers which are conjugated to antibody
cysteine residues to form thiosuccinimide linkages. It is now known that
these thiosuccinimide linkages can undergo two competing reactions while
in plasma: elimination of the maleimide resulting in undesirable loss of
drug from the ADC, and hydrolysis of the thiosuccinimide ring resulting
in a succinic acid derivative which cannot undergo elimination. Thus,
thiosuccinimide ring hydrolysis is a reaction which stabilizes the
chemical linkage of the drug to the antibody. We have engineered a new
class of drug-linkers which incorporate a basic amino group adjacent to
the maleimide, providing intramolecular base catalysis of the ring
hydrolysis. This basic group induces the thiosuccinimide to undergo rapid
self-catalyzed hydrolysis at neutral pH and room temperature, with
complete hydrolysis achieved in less than 2 hours. Once hydrolyzed, the
drug-linker is no longer subject to maleimide elimination reactions,
preventing loss of drug from the antibody by this mechanism and forming a
highly stable ADC. To compare these new drug-linkers to traditional
maleimido drug-linkers, a number of in vitro and in vivo studies have
been conducted. Results of these studies will be presented to demonstrate
a robust improvement in drug-linker stability compared to traditional
drug-linker formats.

