Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urinary biomarkers of oxidative stress and breast cancer survival
among Chinese breast cancer survivors.


Background: Systemic oxidative stress has been implicated in the
pathogenesis and progression of many chronic diseases, including breast
cancer. To our knowledge, no study has investigated the association of
biomarkers of systemic oxidative stress after cancer treatment and breast
cancer prognosis.Methods: We conducted a pilot study to investigate the
association of systemic oxidative stress after primary cancer treatment
with mortality in a nested case-control study in the Shanghai Breast
Cancer Survival Study (SBCSS). Urinary levels of 15-F(2t)-isoprostane
(15-F(2t)-IsoP) and one of its major metabolites
(2,3-dinor-5,6-dihydro-15-F(2t)-IsoP (15-F(2t)-IsoP-M)), two well-studied
biomarkers of systemic oxidative stress, were measured using gas
chromatography/negative ion chemical ionization mass spectrometry for 57
deceased breast cancer patients (cases; 88% due to breast cancer) and 103
matched surviving breast cancer patients (controls) in the SBCSS with
available post-cancer treatment urinary samples. Cases and controls were
aged 26-70 years and were matched approximately 1:2 on age at diagnosis
(+/- 1 year), stage (I-III), and year of diagnosis (2003-2004).
Biomarkers were adjusted for creatinine concentrations and expressed as
ng/mg of creatinine. Adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were derived from conditional logistic regression models,
conditioned on age, stage, and year of diagnosis.Results: Elevated
15-F(2t)-IsoP levels, categorized based on the median level
(1.73;Background: Systemic oxidative stress has been implicated in the
pathogenesis and progression of many chronic diseases, including breast
cancer. To our knowledge, no study has investigated the association of
biomarkers of systemic oxidative stress after cancer treatment and breast
cancer prognosis.Methods: We conducted a pilot study to investigate the
association of systemic oxidative stress after primary cancer treatment
with mortality in a nested case-control study in the Shanghai Breast
Cancer Survival Study (SBCSS). Urinary levels of 15-F(2t)-isoprostane
(15-F(2t)-IsoP) and one of its major metabolites
(2,3-dinor-5,6-dihydro-15-F(2t)-IsoP (15-F(2t)-IsoP-M)), two well-studied
biomarkers of systemic oxidative stress, were measured using gas
chromatography/negative ion chemical ionization mass spectrometry for 57
deceased breast cancer patients (cases; 88% due to breast cancer) and 103
matched surviving breast cancer patients (controls) in the SBCSS with
available post-cancer treatment urinary samples. Cases and controls were
aged 26-70 years and were matched approximately 1:2 on age at diagnosis
(+/- 1 year), stage (I-III), and year of diagnosis (2003-2004).
Biomarkers were adjusted for creatinine concentrations and expressed as
ng/mg of creatinine. Adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were derived from conditional logistic regression models,
conditioned on age, stage, and year of diagnosis.Results: Elevated
15-F(2t)-IsoP levels, categorized based on the median level
(1.73;<1.73(reference)), were inversely associated with mortality
(adjusted OR = 0.36, 95% CI: 0.14-0.96) after adjustment for known
clinical prognostic factors (including cancer treatment and tumor
characteristics), body mass index, vitamin supplement use, and weeks
between breast cancer diagnosis and urine collection. The inverse
association was marginally significant when 15-F(2t)-IsoP was categorized
based on tertiles (p for trend = 0.08). In contrast, elevated
15-F(2t)-IsoPM levels, categorized based on the median level
(0.91;Background: Systemic oxidative stress has been implicated in the
pathogenesis and progression of many chronic diseases, including breast
cancer. To our knowledge, no study has investigated the association of
biomarkers of systemic oxidative stress after cancer treatment and breast
cancer prognosis.Methods: We conducted a pilot study to investigate the
association of systemic oxidative stress after primary cancer treatment
with mortality in a nested case-control study in the Shanghai Breast
Cancer Survival Study (SBCSS). Urinary levels of 15-F(2t)-isoprostane
(15-F(2t)-IsoP) and one of its major metabolites
(2,3-dinor-5,6-dihydro-15-F(2t)-IsoP (15-F(2t)-IsoP-M)), two well-studied
biomarkers of systemic oxidative stress, were measured using gas
chromatography/negative ion chemical ionization mass spectrometry for 57
deceased breast cancer patients (cases; 88% due to breast cancer) and 103
matched surviving breast cancer patients (controls) in the SBCSS with
available post-cancer treatment urinary samples. Cases and controls were
aged 26-70 years and were matched approximately 1:2 on age at diagnosis
(+/- 1 year), stage (I-III), and year of diagnosis (2003-2004).
Biomarkers were adjusted for creatinine concentrations and expressed as
ng/mg of creatinine. Adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were derived from conditional logistic regression models,
conditioned on age, stage, and year of diagnosis.Results: Elevated
15-F(2t)-IsoP levels, categorized based on the median level
(1.73;<1.73(reference)), were inversely associated with mortality
(adjusted OR = 0.36, 95% CI: 0.14-0.96) after adjustment for known
clinical prognostic factors (including cancer treatment and tumor
characteristics), body mass index, vitamin supplement use, and weeks
between breast cancer diagnosis and urine collection. The inverse
association was marginally significant when 15-F(2t)-IsoP was categorized
based on tertiles (p for trend = 0.08). In contrast, elevated
15-F(2t)-IsoPM levels, categorized based on the median level (0.91;<0.91
(reference)), were associated with a statistically non-significant
increased risk of mortality (adjusted OR = 1.39, 95% CI:
0.62-3.09).Conclusion: These preliminary results suggest differing
associations for 15-F(2t)-IsoP and 15-F(2t)-IsoPM with mortality among
breast cancer survivors. To our knowledge, this is the first study to
investigate the association between 15-F(2t)-IsoP or 15-F(2t)-IsoP-M
levels and breast cancer survival. Results from this pilot study require
conformation in future larger studies.

