Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Landscape of DNA methylation status of human hepatocellular
carcinoma revealed by Human Methylation BeadChip 450K.


Global DNA hypomethylation and regional hypermethylation in CpG island
has been recognized as common feature of cancer DNA, including that of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, precise mechanism underlying the
alteration of methylation is still unclear. We conducted a genome-wide
methylation analysis to elucidate distribution and characteristics of
genes that subject to cancer-related DNA methylation in human HCC. With
written informed consent, 20 HCC and 3 corresponding matched
non-cancerous liver tissues were obtained at the time of hepatectomy (2
tumors) or orthotopic living-donor liver transplantation (17 tumors and 3
non-tumors). After bisulfite modification, the converted DNA was subject
to hybridization on Infinium Human Methylation BeadChip 450K (Illumina,
Inc., San Diego, CA) that contained 485,577 CpGs of the human genome
including gene promoters and repetitive DNA elements. The methylation
level for each CpG was represented as a beta value according to the
fluorescent intensity ratio. In order to identify alteration of
methylation profile between HCC and non-tumor liver, difference of
average beta values between tumor and non-tumor was calculated. Of
485,577 CpG loci, differences of average beta values of 460,036 loci
(94.7%) were within 30%. These were considered as constitutively
methylated or unmethylated. Tumor-specific hypomethylation was found at
18,807 loci. Of these, 65.1% were located outside CpG islands, shore or
shelf (so-called open sea). Tumor-specific demethylation rarely occurred
within CpG islands (6.5%). On the other hand, tumor-specific DNA
methylation was found at 6734 loci. Of these, 77.6% were located within
CpG islands. Interestingly, normally methylated CpGs (average beta value
Of 485,577 CpG loci, differences of average beta values of 460,036 loci
(94.7%) were within 30%. These were considered as constitutively
methylated or unmethylated. Tumor-specific hypomethylation was found at
18,807 loci. Of these, 65.1% were located outside CpG islands, shore or
shelf (so-called open sea). Tumor-specific demethylation rarely occurred
within CpG islands (6.5%). On the other hand, tumor-specific DNA
methylation was found at 6734 loci. Of these, 77.6% were located within
CpG islands. Interestingly, normally methylated CpGs (average beta value
< 0.20) were mainly located in CpG islands (95,943 of 138,081, 69.0%),
and many of normally unmethylated or variably methylated CpGs were
located in the open sea (165,209 of 347,496, 47.5%). Tumor-specific
methylation occurring at CpG islands, may simply be dependent on the
distribution of normally unmethylated CpGs. This finding may help us
target epigenetically silenced tumor suppressor genes.

