Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal non-coding RNAs as mediators for cell-cell communications
.


Introduction: Exosomes are 30-100nm membrane vesicles of endocytic origin
containing proteins, mRNAs, microRNAs and lincRNAs. MicroRNAs are small
and lincRNAs are large intergenic non-coding RNAs. They are emerging as
key regulators of diverse cellular processes including cancer. In this
study, we investigated the exosome-mediated transfer of microRNAs and
lincRNAs, regulation and functional significance in breast
cancer.Approach: Exosomes were isolated by ultracentrifugation and
stained with PKH26 dye for cellular uptake in different cells by confocal
microscopy. This uptake was also shown by exosome isolated from stable
293T cell line overexpressing the pCDH-CD63-GFP fusion protein. To
determine the effect of nSMase2 on exosome secretion, stable cell lines
were established with smpd3 gene. Levels of microRNAs and lincRNAs
secreted in media were determined by real time PCR and their function
validated through western blot and cell invasion.Results: We first showed
that exosomes can be transferred among different cell lines through
direct uptake. We found that miR-10b is highly expressed in metastatic
breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells as compared to non-metastatic breast
cells. Also, nSMase2 promoted the exosome-mediated miR-10b secretion
whereas ceramide inhibitor suppressed this secretion. Importantly,
western blot revealed that upon uptake, miR-10b can still reduce the
protein level of its target genes. We also found lincRNA 21A and BC200 to
be secreted through exosome in cell type dependent manner with functional
significance.Conclusion: We found that the exosomes secreted from cancer
cells containing microRNA and lincRNA can be taken up by other cells and
have functional role in the recipient cells suggesting the importance of
exosome-mediated RNA transfer in tumor microenvironment.

