Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rare variants at 16p11.2 and within TP53 influence neuroblastoma
susceptibility.


Background: Neuroblastoma is a cancer of the sympathetic nervous system
that most commonly affects young children and accounts for approximately
10% of all pediatric oncology deaths. We have reported common single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with neuroblastoma within
LINC00340 (NEJM 2008), BARD1 (Nat Genet, 2009), LMO1 (Nature, 2010),
DUSP12 and HSD17B12 (PLoS Genet, 2011), HACE1 and LIN28B (Nat Genet,
2012), and one common CNV at 1q21.1 within NBPF23 (Nature, 2009).
Collectively, however, these variants still account for less than 10% of
the risk for developing neuroblastoma. Based on this observation, along
with the relative paucity of somatic mutations identified in this
childhood cancer, we hypothesized that rare germline variants/mutations
play a significant role in tumorigenesis.Methods and Results: We have
taken a two-pronged approach to study both rare copy number variants
(CNVs) and SNPs in neuroblastoma. First, we analyzed rare (500 Kb) CNVs
associated with neuroblastoma, including a deletion at 16p11.2 (cases
0.43%, controls 0.04%; P = 4.0x104; OR: 8.9, 95% CI: 2.2-41.3). To date,
we have replicated the 16p11.2 association in 1,167 neuroblastoma cases
and 56,752 published controls (P=0.003; OR: 7.8, 95% CI: 2.3-23.6). In
addition, we have validated by quantitative PCR several rare focal
deletions of key developmentally regulated transcription factors, such as
TBX2, detected in neuroblastoma patients but absent in 6,146 controls. In
parallel, to identify relatively rare SNPs (0.5-5.0% minor allele
frequency) influencing neuroblastoma susceptibility, we imputed genotypes
using 1000 Genomes data in a discovery cohort of 2,101 neuroblastoma
cases and 4,202 controls of European ancestry. We observed a strong
association at rs78378222 (P = 6.4x109; OR: 2.1, 95% CI: 1.6-2.1) and
rs35850753 (P = 2.2x109; OR: 1.9, 95% CI: 1.5-2.4), located in the 3' and
5' UTR of TP53 respectively. Both associations replicated robustly in our
Italian and African-American case-series (combined rs78378222: P = 4.22 x
1012, OR: 3.1, 95% CI: 2.1-10.1; rs35850753: P = 3.7 x 1014; OR: 3.2, 95%
CI: 2.0-9.7). These data add neuroblastoma to the subset of malignancies
influenced by rs78378222, which disrupts the polyadenylation signal of
TP53 having a hypomorphic effect and imparting cancer susceptibility (Nat
Genet, 2011). Taken together, we show that rare CNVs and SNPs influence
neuroblastoma susceptibility and have greater effect sizes than common
variants reported thus far from GWAS. Efforts are ongoing to sequence the
16p11.2 region in deletion carriers and to understand the functional
significance of the TP53 variants in neuroblastoma.Conclusions: Rare DNA
variations at multiple loci have a significant influence on neuroblastoma
tumorigenesis and begin to address the unexplained heritability of this
cancer.

