Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor initiating cells and FZD8 play a major role in
drugresistance and tumor progression in triple negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is usually associated with poor
outcome in part due to lack of benefit from targeted therapy. Previous
studies have shown that neoadjuvant chemotherapy before surgery was
effective in the minority of women with TNBC; in contrast, the majority
who had a residual tumor after treatment had a relatively poor outcome.
In order to identify the mechanism by which residual cancer cells survive
chemotherapy, we performed gene expression profile using CRL2335 TNBC
cell line before and after treatment with cisplatin plus TRAIL. We found
a significant increase in the expression of FZD8, one of the Wnt
receptors, and its downstream targets LEF1 and TCF in residual tumor
cells after treatment with cisplatin plus TRAIL compared with untreated
controls. Inhibition of FZD8 by siRNA in the presence of cisplatin plus
TRAIL reduced -catenin and survivin levels, and increased apoptosis
compared to scrambled siRNA-treated cells. In vivo, data demonstrate that
cisplatin plus TRAIL treatment, significantly reduces tumor volume in
nod/SCID mice. However, we found that cisplatin plus TRAIL treatment
predominantly eliminated non-tumor initiating cells (non-TICs), as
demonstrated by whole-body fluorescent imaging of mice injected with
mammosphere-forming cells stably transfected with DsRed. This led to TIC
enrichment in residual tumors, as confirmed by immunostaining for TIC
markers. Moreover, an increase in FZD8 expression was observed in
residual tumors treated with cisplatin and TRAIL. Taken together, our
findings suggest that FZD8-mediated Wnt-signaling may play a major role
in mediating resistance to chemotherapy, making it a potential target to
enhance chemotherapeutic efficacy in patients with TNBC.

