Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-expression of ATM gene and protein associated with canine
breast tumors.


Background: Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene encodes a protein
associated with DNA damage repair that plays an important role in the
maintenance of genome integrity. ATM transcript and protein
down-regulation have been reported in sporadic breast carcinomas and the
absence of ATM protein expression was also significantly associated with
distant metastasis in women, but the mechanisms involved in the ATM
deregulation are not well established.Aim: Due to the fact that mammary
tumor biological behavior is similar between canine and humans, we
evaluate ATM gene and protein expression in canine breast cancer and
compared with normal mammary gland from dogs.Patients and methods: Fresh
samples of non-metastatic (n=23) and metastatic mammary carcinomas (n=11)
and normal breasts (n=10) were evaluated for ATM gene expression by
RT-qPCR and from the same animals, another sample of tumor was collected,
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded to assess ATM protein expression by
immunohistochemistry. Evaluation of ATM protein expression was performed
by the distribution of positively-immunostained tumor cells in scores: 1
(51% cells positive).Results: Down expression of ATM was detected in
tumors samples (non-metastatic and metastatic mammary carcinomas) when
compared to normal breast samples (P= 0,0414). Additionally, scores 1 and
2 of ATM protein expression were exclusively observed in metastatic
tumors presenting score 1: 18% (2 out of 11), score 2: 55% (6 out to 11)
and non metastatic tumors presenting the same score 1 and 2: 17% (4 out
to 23) while all normal breast tissues showed score 3
(P=0,0087).Conclusions: Down expression of ATM transcript was confirmed
by ATM protein expression. Low levels of ATM suggest an involvement of
DNA damage repair transcript and protein in tumorigenesis process of
canine mammary tumors, as in women, corroborating for the use of dogs as
a natural comparative model to study mammary gland tumors in humans.

