Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RIG-I plays a critical role in negatively regulating stemness
properties in hepatoma cell lines.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common cause of death
from cancer worldwide due to its high rate of recurrence. Cancer stem
cells are considered to generate tumors through the stem cell processes
including self-renewal and differentiation into multiple cell types. And
these distinct populations of cells are suggested to cause relapse and
metastasis by eliciting new tumors. Retinoic acid-inducible gene I
(RIG-I) has been identified as a pattern recognition receptor in innate
immune defense for sensing intracellular viral RNAs, like Hepatits C
virus which is one of the major risks of HCC, and inducing type I
interferons production. In previous studies, RIG-I-like receptors
recognizing some potentially oncogenic agents may have functional
consequences that can lead to association of such single nucleotide
polymorphisms with risk of some diseases or even cancers. Thus these gene
polymorphisms may affect cancer risk indirectly. On the other hand, a
previous study have demonstrated that RIG-I is an essential regulator of
physiological myelopoiesis suggesting RIG-I possesses the potential of
modulating stem cell differentiation. In our present study, we examined
Huh7 and its RIG-I-mutant cell line by sphere formation assay and found
solely the mutated cells possessed the self-renewal ability. After
transfection of dominant-negative mutant of RIG-I to Huh7, the
self-renewal ability were rescued as expected. We also injected 1000
cells for each two cell lines into NOD/SCID mice subcutaneously and
observed the mutated cells formed tumors whereas Huh7 didn't. Hence, our
study reveals the potential of RIG-I to suppress the stemness properties
in the HCC cell lines and provides a new possible remedy target of liver
cancer.

