Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and development of novel 4-aminopyrimidines (A9 analogs)
as potential BRCA1-mimetic drugs for the treatment of breast cancer.


IntroductionThe breast cancer type-1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1) is
encoded by the BRCA-1 gene, and mutations on this gene, or defects on its
transcription have been associated with high risks of breast, ovarian,
fallopian tube and prostate cancer. The major role of BRCA1 protein is as
a tumor suppressor agent, which works mainly by repairing DNA
double-strand breaks. We have extensively studied the interactions of
BRCA1 protein with the estrogen receptor (ER-1), and observed that it
strongly inhibits ER-1 activity in cancer cells and blocks estrogen
(E2)-stimulated gene expression and cell proliferation. We have built a
high resolution three-dimensional computational model of the protein
complex BRCA1:ER-1, and used it to virtually screen libraries of small
molecules capable of acting as BRCA1-mimetics. From a focused library, we
identified the compound 2,6-dibenzyl-5-phenylpyrimidin-4-amine (A9) as a
potent inhibitor of the ER-1 activity (IC50 9 uM). Herein, we will report
the synthesis and development of a series of A9-analogs with improved
activity.MethodsThe description of the three-dimensional molecular
modeling of the protein complex BRCA1:ER-1 used to identify A9, and the
functional assay utilized for determination of the E2-dependent
transcriptional activity have been reported (Ma, Y. et al. Oncogene,
2005, 24, 1831-1846). Three distinct series of A9 analogs have been
planned, namely the symmetric, asymmetric and restrict analogs. The
symmetric compounds were synthesized via base-catalyzed trimerization of
aromatic-substituted benzylnitriles using microwave at 165 degrees
Celsius, in three cycles of 15 min. After the reaction, the crude
reaction mixture was purified via flash chromatography (Biotage) to give
the corresponding final 4-aminopyrimidines in yields ranging from 7-23%.
The A9 analogs were dissolved in DMSO and tested for in vitro
E2-stimulated ERE-luciferase activity. An IC50 was calculated from graph
interpolation and expressed in micromolar units.ResultsData for six
initial A9 analogs are reported herein. Their IC50 values and yields of
synthesis are as following: A9, 4-H (IC50= 9 uM); EDO-1-119, 4-NH2 (IC50=
1.3 uM, yield 7.4%); EDO-1-123, 4-Cl (IC50> 20 uM, yield 16.4%);
EDO-1-124, 4-CH3 (IC50= 1.3 uM, yield 12.5%); EDO-1-127, 4-Br (IC50= 1.5
uM, yield 20.3%); EDO-1-112, 4-(3-pyridinyl) (IC50= 2.5 uM, yield 23%);
EDO-1-116, 4-(-naphtyl) (IC50= 5 uM, yield 20%). All compounds were fully
characterized by 1H-NMR and 13C-NMR, and elemental analysis.ConclusionWe
have identified several new analogs with increased BRCA1-mimetic activity
as compared to A9. Initial structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies
suggest that the 4-position at the aromatic ring in A9 can well tolerate
a wide range of substituents including larger aromatic rings. Synthetic
efforts resulted in a 7-fold increase in mimetic activity.Citation
Format: Eliseu O. De Oliveira, Yongxian Ma, York Tomita, Eliot Rosen,
Milton L. Brown. Discovery and development of novel 4-aminopyrimidines
(A9 analogs) as potential BRCA1-mimetic drugs for the treatment of breast
cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2458.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2458

