Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of CD63/Timp1/1 integrin complex in cell survival.


Although malignant melanoma is the less frequently diagnosed skin cancer,
it shows a poor prognosis due its chemoresistance and metastasis
development. One of the acquired abilities of transformed cells is
anoikis resistance and this property is closely related to metastasis
formation. In our laboratory, we developed a model that allows us to
study different steps of melanocyte malignant transformation. Melan-a
melanocytes surviving after 1, 2, 3 and 4 deadhesion cycles showed
modified morphology and independent PMA growth and have been named 1C,
2C, 3C and 4C cells, respectively. Different melanoma cell lines were
established after submitting 4C spheroids to limiting dilution. Previous
data from our group demonstrated increased expression of Timp1 and
resistance to anoikis during the malignant transformation of melanocytes.
Melan-a melanocytes overexpressing Timp1 acquire anoikis-resistant
phenotype. In our laboratory, we observed interaction between CD63, Timp1
and 1-integrin in the 4C, 4C11- and 4C11+ cell lines established after
cycles of anchorage impediment. This seems to be the first study
describing the interaction between Timp1, CD63 and 1-integrin in tumor
cells. However, it is unclear how Timp1 modulates resistance to anoikis.
Therefore, our aim is to analyze the role of Timp1 in the context of
Timp1/CD63/1-integrin complex and the signaling pathways involved in the
acquisition of anoikis resistance. Supported by CAPES and FAPESP.

