Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subgroup-specific pattern of recurrence in medulloblastoma.


Background: Medulloblastoma constitutes the most common malignant brain
tumor of childhood. Although multimodel treatment strategies,
encompassing surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation, results in up to 80%
five-year overall survival, recurrent medulloblastoma is almost always
uniformly fatal. Recent integrated genomic studies have shown that
medulloblastoma comprises 4 clinical and biologically distinct variants.
We sought to delineate subgroup-specific differences in recurrent
medulloblastoma.Methods: We identified a discovery cohort of all
recurrent medulloblastomas at the Hospital for Sick Children between
1994-2012, and subgrouped cases using nanoString. Clinical details were
ascertained via retrospective chart review. Our findings were confirmed
through analysis of an independent validation cohort of 85 recurrences.
Primary and recurrent matched pairs were evaluated where
possible.Results: Twenty-nine recurrent cases were identified, ten with a
local recurrence within the tumor bed only, and 19 recurred with
metastases. Notably, SHH tumors recurred more frequently in the tumor bed
(8/11, 73%) whereas Group 3 and Group 4 developed with metastatic
relapses more frequently (16/18, 89%; pBackground: Medulloblastoma
constitutes the most common malignant brain tumor of childhood. Although
multimodel treatment strategies, encompassing surgery, chemotherapy, and
radiation, results in up to 80% five-year overall survival, recurrent
medulloblastoma is almost always uniformly fatal. Recent integrated
genomic studies have shown that medulloblastoma comprises 4 clinical and
biologically distinct variants. We sought to delineate subgroup-specific
differences in recurrent medulloblastoma.Methods: We identified a
discovery cohort of all recurrent medulloblastomas at the Hospital for
Sick Children between 1994-2012, and subgrouped cases using nanoString.
Clinical details were ascertained via retrospective chart review. Our
findings were confirmed through analysis of an independent validation
cohort of 85 recurrences. Primary and recurrent matched pairs were
evaluated where possible.Results: Twenty-nine recurrent cases were
identified, ten with a local recurrence within the tumor bed only, and 19
recurred with metastases. Notably, SHH tumors recurred more frequently in
the tumor bed (8/11, 73%) whereas Group 3 and Group 4 developed with
metastatic relapses more frequently (16/18, 89%; p<0.01). Late
recurrences were observed more commonly in Group 4 cases with a mean time
to recurrence of 3.2 years compared to under two years for both SHH and
Group 3 (pBackground: Medulloblastoma constitutes the most common
malignant brain tumor of childhood. Although multimodel treatment
strategies, encompassing surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation, results in
up to 80% five-year overall survival, recurrent medulloblastoma is almost
always uniformly fatal. Recent integrated genomic studies have shown that
medulloblastoma comprises 4 clinical and biologically distinct variants.
We sought to delineate subgroup-specific differences in recurrent
medulloblastoma.Methods: We identified a discovery cohort of all
recurrent medulloblastomas at the Hospital for Sick Children between
1994-2012, and subgrouped cases using nanoString. Clinical details were
ascertained via retrospective chart review. Our findings were confirmed
through analysis of an independent validation cohort of 85 recurrences.
Primary and recurrent matched pairs were evaluated where
possible.Results: Twenty-nine recurrent cases were identified, ten with a
local recurrence within the tumor bed only, and 19 recurred with
metastases. Notably, SHH tumors recurred more frequently in the tumor bed
(8/11, 73%) whereas Group 3 and Group 4 developed with metastatic
relapses more frequently (16/18, 89%; p<0.01). Late recurrences were
observed more commonly in Group 4 cases with a mean time to recurrence of
3.2 years compared to under two years for both SHH and Group 3 (p<0.004),
with a tendency to a prolonged interval to death post-recurrence in Group
4 cases (p=0.07). Spinal metastases in the absence of supratentorial
metastases were observed in three non-SHH recurrences. The presence of
metastases at diagnosis and histology were not predictive factors of
recurrence site. In an independent validation cohort of 85 recurrences,
13 recurrences appeared in the tumor bed only of which nine were SHH and
72 recurred with metastases. Of these metastatic relapses, only three SHH
tumors were observed, while 36 and 33 belonged to Group 3 or Group4
(pBackground: Medulloblastoma constitutes the most common malignant brain
tumor of childhood. Although multimodel treatment strategies,
encompassing surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation, results in up to 80%
five-year overall survival, recurrent medulloblastoma is almost always
uniformly fatal. Recent integrated genomic studies have shown that
medulloblastoma comprises 4 clinical and biologically distinct variants.
We sought to delineate subgroup-specific differences in recurrent
medulloblastoma.Methods: We identified a discovery cohort of all
recurrent medulloblastomas at the Hospital for Sick Children between
1994-2012, and subgrouped cases using nanoString. Clinical details were
ascertained via retrospective chart review. Our findings were confirmed
through analysis of an independent validation cohort of 85 recurrences.
Primary and recurrent matched pairs were evaluated where
possible.Results: Twenty-nine recurrent cases were identified, ten with a
local recurrence within the tumor bed only, and 19 recurred with
metastases. Notably, SHH tumors recurred more frequently in the tumor bed
(8/11, 73%) whereas Group 3 and Group 4 developed with metastatic
relapses more frequently (16/18, 89%; p<0.01). Late recurrences were
observed more commonly in Group 4 cases with a mean time to recurrence of
3.2 years compared to under two years for both SHH and Group 3 (p<0.004),
with a tendency to a prolonged interval to death post-recurrence in Group
4 cases (p=0.07). Spinal metastases in the absence of supratentorial
metastases were observed in three non-SHH recurrences. The presence of
metastases at diagnosis and histology were not predictive factors of
recurrence site. In an independent validation cohort of 85 recurrences,
13 recurrences appeared in the tumor bed only of which nine were SHH and
72 recurred with metastases. Of these metastatic relapses, only three SHH
tumors were observed, while 36 and 33 belonged to Group 3 or Group4
(p<0.001), respectively. Strikingly, in all instances where matched
primary and recurrent pairs were available, the subgroup affiliation
remained stable at recurrence.Conclusions: Significant differences in the
pattern of recurrence exist across medulloblastoma subgroups. Longer
surveillance periods across the entire neuro-axis may be required for
Group 4 patients even in the absence of local tumor bed or supratentorial
recurrence. Intensified local therapy should be considered upon initial
treatment for SHH patients.

