Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue-specific prostate specific antigen (PSA).


We attempted to isolate and characterize PSA from prostate tissue. The
aim was to isolate tissue-specific PSA and its initial characterization.
This included: (i) determination of PSA molecular forms (free and
complexed PSA), (ii) enzymatic activity, and its inhibition by metal
ions, (iii) and their relative anti-angiogenic activity. Prostate, tumor
and non-tumor, tissue was acquired under IRB approved protocol. PSA was
isolated from prostate non-tumor (NT-PSA) and tumor tissue (T-PSA) and
characterized using various chromatographic techniques including ligands
such as Thiophilic gel, Concanavalin-A agarose, Protein-A agarose, and
other lectins. The average NT-PSA concentration was 256.3ng PSA/g of DNA
(p=0.0001) and the average T-PSA concentration was 135.7ng PSA/g of DNA
(p=0.0001). On an average, tumor PSA (EA=29.6411.34 p=0.0001)) had twice
as much enzymatic activity as compared to non-tumor PSA (EA=13.293.300
p=0.001). The inhibition of enzymatic activity of PSA by metal ion
(Zn2+)showed that seminal plasma-PSA (SP-PSA) and NT-PSA were inhibited
to the same degree [85.3% and 87.0% respectively (pWe attempted to
isolate and characterize PSA from prostate tissue. The aim was to isolate
tissue-specific PSA and its initial characterization. This included: (i)
determination of PSA molecular forms (free and complexed PSA), (ii)
enzymatic activity, and its inhibition by metal ions, (iii) and their
relative anti-angiogenic activity. Prostate, tumor and non-tumor, tissue
was acquired under IRB approved protocol. PSA was isolated from prostate
non-tumor (NT-PSA) and tumor tissue (T-PSA) and characterized using
various chromatographic techniques including ligands such as Thiophilic
gel, Concanavalin-A agarose, Protein-A agarose, and other lectins. The
average NT-PSA concentration was 256.3ng PSA/g of DNA (p=0.0001) and the
average T-PSA concentration was 135.7ng PSA/g of DNA (p=0.0001). On an
average, tumor PSA (EA=29.6411.34 p=0.0001)) had twice as much enzymatic
activity as compared to non-tumor PSA (EA=13.293.300 p=0.001). The
inhibition of enzymatic activity of PSA by metal ion (Zn2+)showed that
seminal plasma-PSA (SP-PSA) and NT-PSA were inhibited to the same degree
[85.3% and 87.0% respectively (p<0.05)]. However, the level of EA of
T-PSA was significantly lower (52.4%) as compared to T-PSA. In regards to
its molecular complexes, a higher ratio of free to complex-PSA (ACT and
A2M) was obtained from non-tumor prostate tissue-PSA (1.51 p=0.0001) as
compared to tumor prostate tissue-PSA (1.15 p=0.0001). Initial studies on
the effect of SP-PSA on in vitro angiogenesis revealed a dose-dependent
inhibitory effect (1M, 5M, 10M concentrations) on the formation of
tubular structures in HUVEC-Matrigel assay. The inhibitory effect of
T-PSA & NT-PSA was examined and compared to the effect obtained from
SP-PSA. Concentrations of 0.1M, 1M and 5M gave similar levels of
inhibition for SP-PSA, NT-PSA, and T-PSA (NT-PSA p-values for 1M and 5M:
p=0.0057, p=0.0006, respectively; T-PSA p-values for 1M and 5M: p=0.0038,
p=0.0002, respectively). At 0.1 M concentration, both T-PSA and NT-PSA
were not statistically different from control (p=0.3561 and p=0.2532,
respectively). A 10M concentration of both SP-PSA and NT-PSA displayed
similar results (p=0.0001). When comparing the effects between NT-PSA and
T-PSA, only 0.1M concentration produced statistically significant results
(p=0.0149; 1M and 5M: p=0.2301 and p=0.0752, respectively). We found that
both NT-PSA and T-PSA also produced significant dose-dependent inhibition
(1M and 5M NT-PSA and T-PSA (% inhibition): 76.21, 72.58, and 55.07,
54.98, respectively (pWe attempted to isolate and characterize PSA from
prostate tissue. The aim was to isolate tissue-specific PSA and its
initial characterization. This included: (i) determination of PSA
molecular forms (free and complexed PSA), (ii) enzymatic activity, and
its inhibition by metal ions, (iii) and their relative anti-angiogenic
activity. Prostate, tumor and non-tumor, tissue was acquired under IRB
approved protocol. PSA was isolated from prostate non-tumor (NT-PSA) and
tumor tissue (T-PSA) and characterized using various chromatographic
techniques including ligands such as Thiophilic gel, Concanavalin-A
agarose, Protein-A agarose, and other lectins. The average NT-PSA
concentration was 256.3ng PSA/g of DNA (p=0.0001) and the average T-PSA
concentration was 135.7ng PSA/g of DNA (p=0.0001). On an average, tumor
PSA (EA=29.6411.34 p=0.0001)) had twice as much enzymatic activity as
compared to non-tumor PSA (EA=13.293.300 p=0.001). The inhibition of
enzymatic activity of PSA by metal ion (Zn2+)showed that seminal
plasma-PSA (SP-PSA) and NT-PSA were inhibited to the same degree [85.3%
and 87.0% respectively (p<0.05)]. However, the level of EA of T-PSA was
significantly lower (52.4%) as compared to T-PSA. In regards to its
molecular complexes, a higher ratio of free to complex-PSA (ACT and A2M)
was obtained from non-tumor prostate tissue-PSA (1.51 p=0.0001) as
compared to tumor prostate tissue-PSA (1.15 p=0.0001). Initial studies on
the effect of SP-PSA on in vitro angiogenesis revealed a dose-dependent
inhibitory effect (1M, 5M, 10M concentrations) on the formation of
tubular structures in HUVEC-Matrigel assay. The inhibitory effect of
T-PSA & NT-PSA was examined and compared to the effect obtained from
SP-PSA. Concentrations of 0.1M, 1M and 5M gave similar levels of
inhibition for SP-PSA, NT-PSA, and T-PSA (NT-PSA p-values for 1M and 5M:
p=0.0057, p=0.0006, respectively; T-PSA p-values for 1M and 5M: p=0.0038,
p=0.0002, respectively). At 0.1 M concentration, both T-PSA and NT-PSA
were not statistically different from control (p=0.3561 and p=0.2532,
respectively). A 10M concentration of both SP-PSA and NT-PSA displayed
similar results (p=0.0001). When comparing the effects between NT-PSA and
T-PSA, only 0.1M concentration produced statistically significant results
(p=0.0149; 1M and 5M: p=0.2301 and p=0.0752, respectively). We found that
both NT-PSA and T-PSA also produced significant dose-dependent inhibition
(1M and 5M NT-PSA and T-PSA (% inhibition): 76.21, 72.58, and 55.07,
54.98, respectively (p<0.05)). A larger sample size is needed to further
assess the differences between the two groups. Our results provide some
insight into the role of PSA in pathobiology of prostate cancer. PSA
levels in prostate cancer tissue are lower as disease progresses
suggesting that PSA has a role in prostate pathology.

