Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complement promotes growth of ovarian cancer.


Objective: The complement system is a component of innate immunity
against invading pathogens, but also mediates the cell-cell communication
in organ regeneration, angiogenesis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and cell migration. We studied whether the complement system affect
tumor growth in ovarian cancer.Materials & Methods: Complement C3 mRNA
level was quantified using qRT-PCR in ovarian cancer cell lines and in
tumor specimens from patients with ovarian cancer. Small interfering RNA
(siRNA) was used to investigate the consequences of C3 gene silencing in
vitro and in vivo.Results: C3 was expressed in ovarian cancer cell lines
and tumor tissues from patients. Silencing of the C3 gene decreased
ovarian cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion in vitro. In
orthotopic murine models of ovarian cancer, C3 siRNA reduced growth of
implanted tumors by 60% as was evident by lower number and smaller size
of tumor nodules in C3-siRNA treated mice in comparison to those in
scrambled siRNA treated control mice (average tumor weight of 0.19 g in
C3 siRNA vs. 0.61 g in scrambled siRNA, n=8 in each group, p=0.017;
average nodule number of 4.4 in C3 siRNA vs. 11.4 in scrambled siRNA, n=8
in each group, p=0.05; t-test). Consistent with our in vitro and animal
studies, ovarian cancer patients with a higher C3 mRNA level in their
tumors had a worse prognosis with overall survival rates compared to
those with a lower C3 mRNA level (n=75, p=0.03).Conclusion: Our studies
revealed a novel role for complement in cancer biology. Cancer
cell-derived C3 promotes tumor growth and progression. Our studies might
identify the complement system as a new target for the development of new
anti-tumor reagents.

