Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Src phosphorylates splicing factor 45 (SPF45) and regulates SPF45
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, cell migration and invasion.


Src phosphorylates splicing factor 45 (SPF45) and regulates SPF45
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, cell migration and invasionYuying Liu1,
LaShardai Conaway1, Jennifer Rutherford Bethard1, Amber Thompson Bradley1
and Scott T. Eblen1,2From Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology
and Experimental Therapeutics1 and the Hollings Cancer Center2Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, 29425SPF45 is a
bifunctional protein involved in splicing and DNA repair and is
overexpressed in several forms of cancer. Previously, we have shown that
SPF45 overexpression regulates ovarian cancer cell proliferation and
adhesion in a MAP kinase phosphorylation-dependent manner. In this study,
we investigated novel roles of SPF45 and their regulation by the tyrosine
kinase Src. We show by cell fractionation that endogenous SPF45 localizes
in both the nucleus and cytoplasm and that exposure of cells to UV
irradiation or osmotic shock increased SPF45 cytoplasmic accumulation.
Consistent with this result, heterokaryon assays using SKOV-3 cells
stably expressing Myc-SPF45 showed that SPF45 shuttles between the
nucleus and cytoplasm and that pretreatment of the cells with the Src
family kinase inhibitor PP2 inhibited nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. Src
strongly induced SPF45 tyrosine phosphorylation and co-immunoprecipitated
with SPF45 after co-transfection into COS-1 cells. Src phosphorylated
SPF45 in vitro on five tyrosine residues (Y100, Y108, Y194, Y214 and
Y246), as determined by mass spectrometry. Sequential mutation of these
sites to phenylalanine inhibited SPF45 tyrosine phosphorylation in cells
co-transfected with Src, with mutation of all 5 sites (Myc-SPF45-Y5F)
completely inhibiting SPF45 tyrosine phosphorylation. Myc-SPF45-Y5F
stably expressed in SKOV-3 cells showed reduced nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling compared to wild type Myc-SPF45. SKOV-3-Myc-SPF45 cells
demonstrated enhanced migration and invasion compared to vector control
cells, while SKOV-3-Myc-SPF45-Y5F cells migrated significantly less than
SKOV-3-Myc-SPF45 cells. These data are the first to show that SPF45 is a
shuttling protein, a Src substrate, and that Src phosphorylation of SPF45
regulates nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and SPF45-induced cell migration
and invasion.

