Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOSH-aspirin inhibits breast cancer cell growth: an effect
modulated through reactive oxygen species and independent of the ER
status.


Introduction: We recently reported the synthesis and characterization of
NOSH-aspirin a highly potent hybrid; that releases both nitric oxide (NO)
and hydrogen sulfide (H2S) two important signalling molecules of
physiological relevance. The present study was undertaken to unravel some
of the underlying mechanisms of its action. Methods: Cell lines: MCF-7
(ER+), MDA-MB-231 (ER-, PR-, does not over express Her2), HMEpC, normal
human mammary epithelial; Cell growth: MTT; Cell cycle phase
distribution: Apoptosis and cell cycle: Flow cytometry; Proliferation:
PCNA; ROS: measured hydrogen peroxide and super oxide by flow cytometry
using DCFDA and DHE dyes. Xenografts: NuNu mice (N=5/group) implanted
with MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231, after 10 days randomly divided animals and
gavaged daily with NOSH-ASA (100 mg/kg body weight) or vehicle. Tumor
volume and animal weight were recorded every 3 days. After 4 weeks of
treatment, mice were sacrificed, tumors excised, weighed, and fixed in
10% buffered formalin. Results: NOSH-aspirin's IC50 in nM at 24h for cell
growth inhibition were MCF-7 (28520), MDA-MB-231 (989), HMEpC
(20,0003,000); aspirin's IC50 in all cell lines was greater than
5,000,000 nM at 24h. Cell proliferation at 2xIC50 was decreased 314 % in
ER+ cells and 27.8 2% in ER- cells. This was accompanied by a G0-G1 phase
cell cycle arrest (59.5% at IC50 for ER+ cells and 66.3% at IC50 for ER-
cells). NOSH-aspirin at the doses studied, did not cause appreciable
apoptosis at 24hr, at 2xIC50 the values being 32.73% in ER(+) and 242% in
ER(-) cells. These results are in line with our data showing that in PC9
lung cancer cells stably expressing cytochrome c-GFP (used for
mitochondrial cytochrome c release) NOSH-aspirin caused partial release
of cytochrome c up to 3 hours when followed in real -time by fluorescence
microscopy and image analysis. NOSH-ASA increased intracellular H2O2 and
superoxide anions. Pretreatment of cells with N-acetylcysteine, blocked
these. Xenografts: NOSH-aspirin had no effect on the weight of the mice
and there were no overt signs of toxicity. Tumor volume was reduced as a
function of treatment time. The growth rate of ER(-) xenografts was
significantly greater than that of ER(+) ones and NOSH-aspirin had a
greater effect on the ER(-) vs ER(+) xenografts. Tumor mass for each
group were, ER(+): 0.460.056g untreated and 0.210.035g treated, (55%
reduction, P=0.022), ER(-): 1.20.33g untreated and 0.110.058g treated
(91% reduction, P=0.006). NOSH-aspirin inhibited growth of these cancer
cell xenografts as a result of reduced proliferation (decreased PCNA
expression), and induction apoptosis (increased number of TUNEL positive
cells), and induction of ROS. Conclusions: NOSH-aspirin preferentially
affects cancer cells and has potent anti-cancer properties. It targets
parameters important in determining cellular mass and merits further
evaluation.Citation Format: Diandra E. Nesbitt, Mitali Chattopadhyay,
Federica Vannini, Thuy-Tien C. Le, Ravinder Kodela, Niharika Nath,
Khosrow Kashfi. NOSH-aspirin inhibits breast cancer cell growth: an
effect modulated through reactive oxygen species and independent of the
ER status. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4793.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4793

