Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene intron 1
dinucleotide CA repeat polymorphism on protein expression and clinical
outcome in oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma.


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is one of the four members of the
ErbB receptor family and has been shown to play a key role in
tumorigenesis of many human cancers including oral cavity squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC). Previous studies have observed a significant
relationship between EGFR overexpression and poor outcomes in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) including OSCC. Elevated EGFR levels
have primarily been attributed to enhanced transcriptional activity,
rather than amplification of the gene. Since the EGFR intron 1
polymorphic CA dinucleotide repeats has been suggested to affect EGFR
transcription efficiency, the present study was designed to explore the
relationship between this CA repeats polymorphism, gene copy number and
protein levels in Taiwanese OSCC. A total of 194 OSCCs were examined for
EGFR protein overexpression using immunohistochemistry and for copy
number using a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay. DNAs from
peripheral blood of 164 OSCC patients were also available for EGFR intron
1 CA dinucleotide repeats analysis. Overexpression and increased gene
copy numbers of EGFR were found in 101 (52.06%) and 59 (30.41%) cases,
respectively. The length of EGFR CA repeats were not associated with EGFR
protein expression (p = 0.261) while the copy number was strongly related
to protein overexpression (p Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is
one of the four members of the ErbB receptor family and has been shown to
play a key role in tumorigenesis of many human cancers including oral
cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Previous studies have observed a
significant relationship between EGFR overexpression and poor outcomes in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) including OSCC. Elevated
EGFR levels have primarily been attributed to enhanced transcriptional
activity, rather than amplification of the gene. Since the EGFR intron 1
polymorphic CA dinucleotide repeats has been suggested to affect EGFR
transcription efficiency, the present study was designed to explore the
relationship between this CA repeats polymorphism, gene copy number and
protein levels in Taiwanese OSCC. A total of 194 OSCCs were examined for
EGFR protein overexpression using immunohistochemistry and for copy
number using a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay. DNAs from
peripheral blood of 164 OSCC patients were also available for EGFR intron
1 CA dinucleotide repeats analysis. Overexpression and increased gene
copy numbers of EGFR were found in 101 (52.06%) and 59 (30.41%) cases,
respectively. The length of EGFR CA repeats were not associated with EGFR
protein expression (p = 0.261) while the copy number was strongly related
to protein overexpression (p < 0.001). EGFR protein overexpression was
associated with young age (p = 0.036), tumor differentiation (p Epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) is one of the four members of the ErbB
receptor family and has been shown to play a key role in tumorigenesis of
many human cancers including oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
Previous studies have observed a significant relationship between EGFR
overexpression and poor outcomes in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) including OSCC. Elevated EGFR levels have primarily been
attributed to enhanced transcriptional activity, rather than
amplification of the gene. Since the EGFR intron 1 polymorphic CA
dinucleotide repeats has been suggested to affect EGFR transcription
efficiency, the present study was designed to explore the relationship
between this CA repeats polymorphism, gene copy number and protein levels
in Taiwanese OSCC. A total of 194 OSCCs were examined for EGFR protein
overexpression using immunohistochemistry and for copy number using a
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay. DNAs from peripheral
blood of 164 OSCC patients were also available for EGFR intron 1 CA
dinucleotide repeats analysis. Overexpression and increased gene copy
numbers of EGFR were found in 101 (52.06%) and 59 (30.41%) cases,
respectively. The length of EGFR CA repeats were not associated with EGFR
protein expression (p = 0.261) while the copy number was strongly related
to protein overexpression (p < 0.001). EGFR protein overexpression was
associated with young age (p = 0.036), tumor differentiation (p < 0.001)
and lymph node metastasis (p = 0.028). EGFR gene copy number was also
associated with young age (p = 0.009), tumor cell differentiation (p =
0.002), tumor depth (p = 0.001), lymph node metastasis (p = 0.051) and
bone invasion (p = 0.003). However, the length of EGFR CA repeats was not
associated with clinicopathologic factors. Patients with EGFR
overexpression in their tumors were found to have significant poorer
disease-free survival (DFS) (p = 0.026, log-rank test) and overall
survival (OS) (p = 0.019, log-rank test) than those without
overexpression. Patients with CA repeats SS form (both alleles Epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) is one of the four members of the ErbB
receptor family and has been shown to play a key role in tumorigenesis of
many human cancers including oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
Previous studies have observed a significant relationship between EGFR
overexpression and poor outcomes in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) including OSCC. Elevated EGFR levels have primarily been
attributed to enhanced transcriptional activity, rather than
amplification of the gene. Since the EGFR intron 1 polymorphic CA
dinucleotide repeats has been suggested to affect EGFR transcription
efficiency, the present study was designed to explore the relationship
between this CA repeats polymorphism, gene copy number and protein levels
in Taiwanese OSCC. A total of 194 OSCCs were examined for EGFR protein
overexpression using immunohistochemistry and for copy number using a
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay. DNAs from peripheral
blood of 164 OSCC patients were also available for EGFR intron 1 CA
dinucleotide repeats analysis. Overexpression and increased gene copy
numbers of EGFR were found in 101 (52.06%) and 59 (30.41%) cases,
respectively. The length of EGFR CA repeats were not associated with EGFR
protein expression (p = 0.261) while the copy number was strongly related
to protein overexpression (p < 0.001). EGFR protein overexpression was
associated with young age (p = 0.036), tumor differentiation (p < 0.001)
and lymph node metastasis (p = 0.028). EGFR gene copy number was also
associated with young age (p = 0.009), tumor cell differentiation (p =
0.002), tumor depth (p = 0.001), lymph node metastasis (p = 0.051) and
bone invasion (p = 0.003). However, the length of EGFR CA repeats was not
associated with clinicopathologic factors. Patients with EGFR
overexpression in their tumors were found to have significant poorer
disease-free survival (DFS) (p = 0.026, log-rank test) and overall
survival (OS) (p = 0.019, log-rank test) than those without
overexpression. Patients with CA repeats SS form (both alleles < 19
repeats) had significantly shorter DFS and OS than those with SL and LL
forms (both alleles 19 repeats) (p = 0.039 and 0.018 for DFS and OS,
respectively). On the other hand, the association between an increase in
EGFR gene copies and DFS or OS was insignificant. In summary, our current
findings confirm that EGFR protein overexpression is closely related to
EGFR copy number; but, do not support the role of CA repeats as an EGFR
expression regulator. On the other hand, the length of CA repeats was
significantly associated with both DFS and OS.

