Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cutaneous alpha, beta and gamma human papillomaviruses in relation
to basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma.


Objective: Several studies have suggested a role for cutaneous beta human
papillomaviruses in the development of skin cancers in the general
population, and specifically squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Recent
evidence also indicates other cutaneous HPVs, such as the gamma types,
may be related to SCC occurrence. We conducted a comprehensive analysis
to investigate the independent effects of seropositivity for cutaneous
HPVs including alpha, beta and gamma types on risk of skin cancers, as
well as a systematic review and meta-analysis to summarize emerging
trends in the published literature.Participants: As part of an expanded
analysis of our population-based case-control study from New Hampshire,
USA, we examined seropositivity for alpha and gamma cutaneous human
papillomaviruses, along with beta papillomaviruses, in relation to newly
diagnosed, histologically confirmed SCC and basal cell carcinoma (BCC) of
the skin. A total of 2366 histologically confirmed skin cancer cases and
controls from the general population aged 25 to 74 years (663 SCC, 898
BCC and 805 controls) on whom plasma samples were available, were tested
for L1 antibodies to cutaneous human papillomavirus types 2, 3, 7, 10,
27b, 57, 77 in genus alpha, 5, 8, 9, 15, 17, 20, 23, 24, 36, 38, 49, 75,
76, 92, 96 and 107 in genus beta and 4, 48, 50, 65, 88, 95, 101, 103 in
genus gamma using multiplex serology.Results: Prevalence of each of the
individual gamma human papillomaviruses assayed was higher among SCC
cases than controls; however, the association was only weakly evident
among those seronegative for beta HPVs. No association was observed
between the cutaneous alpha HPVs and SCC, and none of the HPV types
related to BCC. In contrast, a consistent increasing trend in the odds
ratios for SCC with number of beta HPVs to which an individual tested
positive remained even among those seronegative for the gamma types.
Using a gene set enrichment analysis, we found genus beta-2 HPVs to be
the most highly represented viral types related to SCC. In a
meta-analysis of 6 case-control studies, although varying in magnitude,
increased odds ratios of SCC and beta HPV seropositivity were observed
across studies, with a summary odds ratio of 1.45 (CI= 1.27,
1.66).Conclusions: In aggregate, we found the association between
cutaneous HPVs and skin cancers was specific to squamous cell carcinomas,
genus beta HPVs, and possibly beta-2 HPV types in a general US population.

