Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Excision repair cross complementing group 1 (ERCC1) and regulatory
subunit of Ribonucleotide Reductase (RRM1) as prognostic and predictive
markers for ovarian cancer.


Background: Ninety percent of ovarian cancers are epithelial in nature
(EOC); the standard approach for treatment is surgery followed by
platinum and taxane based chemotherapy. Gemcitabine has been evaluated
recently in combination with platinum and taxane for platinum sensitive
recurrence and as a single agent for platinum refractory or resistant
recurrent EOC. ERCC1 and RRM1 are involved in DNA synthesis and repair
derived from genotoxic stress, and they have also been reported as
predictive markers for therapeutic efficacy in patients with lung and
pancreatic cancers. Their expression, association and clinical
significance in ovarian carcinoma remain uncertain.Design: 198 archived
cases of epithelial cell ovarian cancer were reviewed and divided into
three subtypes: borderline tumor (BLT), Type I and Type II. 2mm TMAs were
developed with duplicate cores per case. Immunofluorescence combined with
Automated Quantitative Analysis (AQUA) was used to assess the expression
of ERCC1 and RRM1. The average of duplicate cores was used for analysis
and Greedy search was used for establishing the high and low score cutoff
points.Results: 44 cases (22%) were BLT, 29 (15%) were Type I tumors, 121
(61%) wereType II tumors, and 4 cases (4%) were unclassified. Type II
tumors were significantly higher among elderly Caucasian women
(pBackground: Ninety percent of ovarian cancers are epithelial in nature
(EOC); the standard approach for treatment is surgery followed by
platinum and taxane based chemotherapy. Gemcitabine has been evaluated
recently in combination with platinum and taxane for platinum sensitive
recurrence and as a single agent for platinum refractory or resistant
recurrent EOC. ERCC1 and RRM1 are involved in DNA synthesis and repair
derived from genotoxic stress, and they have also been reported as
predictive markers for therapeutic efficacy in patients with lung and
pancreatic cancers. Their expression, association and clinical
significance in ovarian carcinoma remain uncertain.Design: 198 archived
cases of epithelial cell ovarian cancer were reviewed and divided into
three subtypes: borderline tumor (BLT), Type I and Type II. 2mm TMAs were
developed with duplicate cores per case. Immunofluorescence combined with
Automated Quantitative Analysis (AQUA) was used to assess the expression
of ERCC1 and RRM1. The average of duplicate cores was used for analysis
and Greedy search was used for establishing the high and low score cutoff
points.Results: 44 cases (22%) were BLT, 29 (15%) were Type I tumors, 121
(61%) wereType II tumors, and 4 cases (4%) were unclassified. Type II
tumors were significantly higher among elderly Caucasian women (p<0.001)
as compared to African American women. Kaplan Meier curves showed no
statistically significant difference in overall survival (OS) between
Type I and Type II cancers. Low ERCC1 scores were significantly
associated with lower OS rates (hazard ratio (HR) = 1.46), when compared
with high ERCC1 scores. In contrast, low RRM1 scores were associated with
better overall survival (HR = 0.36). Scores for both markers were not
significantly associated with tumor type, histology grade or stage. On
multivariate analysis including ERCC1, RRM1, tumor stage, tumor type, age
and race; only age and tumor type (BLT I&II) persisted as independent
prognostic factors for poor overall survival.Conclusion: Our study
suggests that low expression of ERCC1 and high expression of RRM1 are
associated with poor survival in ovarian cancer patients. Large studies
are warranted to elucidate whether or not the expression of ERCC1 and
RRM1 can be used as prognostic or predictive markers.

