Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tripartite motif 14 (TRIM14) is a putative tumor suppressor gene
in non-small-cell lung cancer.


Background: Non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of all
malignant lung tumors. Our group previously identified Tripartite Motif
14 (TRIM14) as a component of a prognostic multigene expression signature
for NSCLC patients. TRIM14 belongs to a conserved family of Tripartite
Motif-encoding genes that are involved in a broad range of biological
processes, such as transcriptional regulation, cell proliferation, and
apoptosis. However, TRIM14 itself is poorly understood, especially in the
context of cancer progression. Here we investigate the biological
function of TRIM14 in NSCLC.Methods: The expression of TRIM14 was
modified in human NSCLC cell lines (NCI-H1395, NCI-H1650 and NCI-H157) by
lentivirus-mediated overexpression and short-hairpin RNA-mediated
silencing. Effects were assessed by examining in vitro cell proliferation
and anchorage-independent growth, and in vivo tumorigenicity in
mice.Results: In vitro studies show that TRIM14 overexpression in NSCLC
cells suppresses proliferation and anchorage-independent growth, whereas
knock-down of TRIM14 expression promotes cell proliferation and colony
formation. In vivo studies demonstrate that knock-down of TRIM14
expression significantly increases tumor growth in immunodeficient
mice.Conclusion: This is the first study to suggest that TRIM14 may
function as a tumor suppressor gene in lung cancer, affecting cell
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth in vitro and tumor growth
in mice.(Supported by Canadian Cancer Society Research Institute grant
#020527)

