Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive oxygen species mediated activation of AMP activated
protein kinase and c-Jun N-terminal kinase plays a critical role in beta
sitosterol induced apoptosis in multiple myeloma U266 cells.


Although beta sitosterol has been well known to have anti-tumor activity
in liver, lung, colon, stomach, breast and prostate cancers via cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis induction, the underlying mechanism of
anti-cancer effect of beta sitosterol in multiple myeloma cells was never
elucidated until now. Thus, in the present study, the role of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) in association with AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathways was demonstrated in
beta sitosterol treated multiple myeloma U266 cells. Beta sitosterol
exerted cytotoxicity, increased sub-G1 apoptotic population and activated
caspase-9 and -3, cleaved poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) followed by
decrease in mitochondrial potential in U266 cells. Beta sitosterol
promoted ROS production, activated AMPK, acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) and
JNK in U266 cells. Also, beta sitosterol attenuated the phosphorylation
of AKT, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and S6K, and the expression
of cyclooxygenase (COX)2 and VEGF in U266 cells. Conversely, AMPK
inhibitor compound C and JNK nhibitor SP600125 suppressed apoptosis
induced by beta sitosterol in U266 cells. Furthermore, ROS scavenger
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) attenuated beta sitosterol mediated sub-G1
accumulation, PARP cleavage, JNK and AMPK activation in U266 cells.
Overall, these findings for the first time suggest that ROS mediated
activation of cancer metabolism related genes such as AMPK and JNK plays
an important role in beta sitosterol induced apoptosis in U266 multiple
myeloma cells.

