Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase I study of the CXCR4 peptide antagonist LY2510924 in
patients with advanced cancer.


Background: The over-expression of C-X-C motif receptor 4 (CXCR4), a
chemokine receptor implicated in tumor progression, tumor cell growth,
migration, and invasion, correlates with a worse prognosis. LY2510924 is
a selective peptide antagonist to CXCR4. This peptide blocks stromal
cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1), the only known ligand to CXCR4, from
binding to the receptor. Disruption of the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis with CXCR4
antagonists is known to mobilize WBC, neutrophils, and CD34+ cells. The
primary objective of this study was to determine the maximum tolerated
dose (MTD). Secondary objectives were to determine safety,
pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and pharmacodynamic response, which included
mobilization of CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells into the peripheral
blood.Material & Methods: This phase I study in patients (pts) with
advanced cancer included two Parts: a 3+3 dose escalation (Part A) and
dose confirmation (Part B). LY2510924 was administered as a daily
injection subcutaneously (s.c.) on a 28-day cycle.Results: Forty-five
pts, 98% with solid tumors, were enrolled onto study, 25 in Part A and 20
in Part B. The median age was 67.0 years (range: 39-86), 51.1% were male,
and 80.0% were Caucasian. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
performance status was 1 for 73.3% of pts. In Part A, pts in 6 cohorts
were treated with doses of LY2510924: 1.0 (n=3), 2.5 (n=5), 5.0 (n=3), 10
(n=3), 20 (n=4), and 30 mg/day (n=7). Two pts in the 30 mg/day cohort
experienced dose-limiting toxicities, grade 3 neutrophil count increase.
The MTD was determined to be 20 mg/day. Pts in Part B were treated with
either 2.5 (n=10) or 20 mg/day (n=10). For Parts A and B combined, the
most frequently reported (15%) treatment emergent adverse events (TEAE),
regardless of causality, included fatigue, nausea, constipation, anemia,
and anorexia. The most common grade 3 TEAE were increased neutrophil
count, anemia, asthenia, and dypsnea (all occurring in 4.4% of pts).
There were no grade 4 TEAE. The best response was stable disease for 9
pts (20.0%). At the end of Cycle 1, mean peak LY2510924 plasma
concentration (Cmax) and the 24-hour area under the plasma concentration
vs. time curve (AUC) increased slightly more than dose proportionally.
Mean Cmax and AUC ranged from 18.8 ng/mL to 1250 ng/mL, and 61.5 ngh/mL
to 5720 ngh/mL, respectively, in the 1-30 mg dose range. Median time to
Cmax was 0.5 hours independent of dose. Receptor occupancy was
consistently high with median values of 96.9-100% for 2.5 mg, 20 mg and
30 mg, between 0.5 hours through 24 hours after dosing. There was an up
to 18-fold mean increase from baseline in CD34+ cell count in peripheral
blood, with an apparent dose-response relationship between 1mg and 10 mg,
and little additional response with 20 mg or 30 mg. The increase
persisted to the end of Cycle 1, but was somewhat blunted.Conclusions:
LY2510924 demonstrated CD34+ cell mobilization with an acceptable safety
profile up to an MTD of 20 mg/day (s.c.).

