Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic social stress in a mouse model of triple-negative breast
cancer is associated with oncogenic changes in mammary fat.


Chronic social isolation is linked to increased mammary tumor growth in
rodent models of breast cancer. In the C3(1)/SV40 T-antigen (Tag) FVB/N
mouse model of triple-negative breast cancer, the heightened stress
response elicited by social isolation has been associated with increased
expression of metabolic genes in the mammary gland before invasive tumors
develop (i.e. during the in situ carcinoma stage). To further understand
how underlying accelerated mammary tumor growth is associated with social
isolation, we separated the mammary gland adipose tissue from adjacent
ductal epithelial cells and analyzed individual cell types for changes in
metabolic gene expression. Specifically, increased expression of the key
metabolic genes Acaca, Hk2 and Acly was found primarily in the adipocyte,
rather than epithelial fraction. Increased metabolic gene expression in
the mammary adipocytes of socially isolated mice coincided with increased
glucose metabolism, lipid synthesis, and leptin expression. Furthermore,
culture media from isolated mouse mammary adipose tissue resulted in
relatively increased proliferation and decreased apoptosis of mammary
epithelial cancer cells derived from the same mouse strain. Additional
gene expression analyses identified significant upregulation of the novel
carbohydrate response element binding protein beta isoform (CHREBP-) in
socially isolated mammary fat. We hypothesize that the response to social
isolation induces metabolic changes in mammary fat that are coordinated
through CHREBP- and are pro-oncogenic. We are currently performing global
lipidomic and metabolomic analyses of mammary adipose tissue and secreted
culture media to identify bioactive molecules involved in tumor growth.

