Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA 4723-5p is novel tumor suppressor microRNA in prostate
cancer that directly regulates Abelson family of nonreceptor protein
tyrosine kinases.


The Abelson (c-Abl) proto-oncogene encodes a highly conserved nonreceptor
protein tyrosine kinase that has been implicated in many cellular
processes including regulation of cell growth and survival, oxidative
stress and DNA-damage responses, actin dynamics and cell migration.
Aberrant activity of this tyrosine kinase has been implicated in the
stimulation of cancer growth and progression. Abl tyrosine kinase
represents a target for specific anti-cancer therapy in prostate cancer
and Abl inhibitors are being tested clinically for the treatment of
prostate cancer bone metastasis. Here we report that Abl kinases are
regulated by a novel microRNA- miR-4723-5p in prostate cancer. Expression
profiling of miR-4723-5p expression in a cohort of prostate cancer
clinical specimens showed that miR-4723-5p expression is widely
attenuated in prostate cancer. Low miR-4723-5p expression was
significantly correlated with poor survival outcome and tumor progression
and recurrence in prostate cancer. Further, our analyses suggest that
miR-4723-5p has significant potential as a disease biomarker for
diagnosis and prognosis in prostate cancer. To evaluate the functional
significance of decreased miR-4723-5p expression in prostate cancer,
miR-4723-5p was reintroduced in prostate cancer cell lines followed by
functional assays. The over expression of miR-4723-5p led to significant
decreases in cell growth, clonability, invasion and migration.
Importantly, miR-4723-5p reexpression led to dramatic induction of
apoptosis in prostate cancer cell lines suggesting that miR-4723-5p is a
pro-apoptotic microRNA that regulates prostate carcinogenesis. Analysis
of putative miR-4723-5p targets showed that miR-4723-5p targets Integrin
alpha 3 (ITGA3) and Methyl CpG binding protein (MeCP2) in addition to
Abl1 and Abl2 kinases. In conclusion, we have identified a novel microRNA
mediated regulation of Abl tyrosine kinases in prostate cancer. This
study suggests that miR-4723-5p may be an attractive target for
therapeutic intervention in prostate cancer.

