Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myeloid leukemia cell lines suppress T cell activation and
proliferation.


In preliminary experiments to develop the K562 human leukemia cell line
as an artificial antigen presenting cell we found that K562 cells
strongly inhibited T cell proliferation. To explore this phenomenon
further we tested CD4+CD25- T cells from healthy donor PBMC as targets of
proliferation suppression. Targets were co-cultured with 3 chronic
myeloid leukemia (CML) derived cell lines (K562, BV173 and CML1
established from a CML patient in our laboratory), two monocytic leukemia
derived cell lines (THP-1 and U937), the myeloid leukemia derived cell
line (KG1a) and the Burkitt lymphoma cell line (Daudi). To evaluate early
activation, CD154 expression was tested by flow cytometry 16h after
stimulation with CD3/CD28 beads. T cell proliferation was tested by CFSE
dilution in T cells stimulated for 72h. All myeloid lines blocked CD154
expression (10.9-62.8% of control at 1:8 target: suppressor ratio). In
CFSE proliferation assay, K562, KG1a, CML1, THP-1 and U937 induced
comparable suppression (28.4-93.9%, at 1:8 ratio). In contrast, BV173 and
Daudi cells were the least suppressive (4.96-23.0%, PIn preliminary
experiments to develop the K562 human leukemia cell line as an artificial
antigen presenting cell we found that K562 cells strongly inhibited T
cell proliferation. To explore this phenomenon further we tested
CD4+CD25- T cells from healthy donor PBMC as targets of proliferation
suppression. Targets were co-cultured with 3 chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML) derived cell lines (K562, BV173 and CML1 established from a CML
patient in our laboratory), two monocytic leukemia derived cell lines
(THP-1 and U937), the myeloid leukemia derived cell line (KG1a) and the
Burkitt lymphoma cell line (Daudi). To evaluate early activation, CD154
expression was tested by flow cytometry 16h after stimulation with
CD3/CD28 beads. T cell proliferation was tested by CFSE dilution in T
cells stimulated for 72h. All myeloid lines blocked CD154 expression
(10.9-62.8% of control at 1:8 target: suppressor ratio). In CFSE
proliferation assay, K562, KG1a, CML1, THP-1 and U937 induced comparable
suppression (28.4-93.9%, at 1:8 ratio). In contrast, BV173 and Daudi
cells were the least suppressive (4.96-23.0%, P<0.01). Strikingly, CML1
cell line and THP-1 showed more suppressive effect on T cell
proliferation than CD4+CD25+CD127- autologous regulatory T cell (Treg).
Our result showed that myeloid leukemia cell lines but not B cells
strongly inhibit both T cell activation and T cell proliferation.
Suppression of proliferation was greatest in acute myeloid and monocytic
leukemia derived lines. These data indicate that myeloid lekemia cell
lines exhibit features of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) which
can induce T cell tolerance to tumors. Our findings raise the possibility
that myeloid leukemias may actively evade immune control through T cell
suppression. We plan to use such cell lines to further define the
mechanism of MDSC related T cell suppression.

