Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative genomics and expression analysis reveals enhanced
SENP2-mediated desumoylation and a crosstalk with Neddylation pathway in
squamous cell carcinoma of the lung.


Chromosome 3q26-29 amplification is a critical genomic alteration in
squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) of the lung. There remains no consensus on
what driver genes may carry this amplicon throughout tumor progression
and their functional implications. We hypothesized that the amplification
level of a predefined amplicon in a tumor sample can be inferred based on
gene expression data. The hypothesis was tested using the TCGA dataset
with paired copy number and gene expression data and achieved an accuracy
of 90%. Based on the TCGA dataset and six other independent gene
expression datasets (GSE4573, GSE8894,GSE2109,GSE3141 and GSE17710), we
inferred candidate 3q26-29 drivers by searching for genes that were
consistently over-expressed in SCCs with a high-level of 3q26-29
amplification in all seven datasets. The top 20 candidate driver genes
includes PSMD2, DCUN1D1,SENP2, ZNF639, FXR1, SENP5,PRKCI, PIK3CA and
UBXN7, et al. Using NetWalker we further identified a potential driver
network consisting of SENP2, DCUN1D1, UBXN7 and DVL3, which are involved
in SUMOlyation and Neddylation pathway. The amplification and
overexpression of four genes were confirmed by performing genome-wide
Agilent 244k CGH profiling and 44k gene expression profiling on
twenty-four SCC tumors. Knocking down using siRNA against SENP2 resulted
in greatest cell growth inhibition on 3q26-28 amplified SCC cell line
H520. Immunoprecipitation assay showed that SENP2 binds to endogenous
MDM2 in H520 cells. Loss of SENP2 leads to increased SUMO1 expression and
elevated p53 expression associated with a decrease in MDM2 expression.
Furthermore, knocking down SENP2 reduced the expression of DCUN1D1 and
DVL3 but not UBXN7 in H520 cells. Together these data suggest that
SENP2-mediated desumoylation and crosstalk with the Neddylation pathway
contribute to lung SCC progression.

