Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Massbalance, excretion and metabolism of [14C]-Pralatrexate (PDX)
incancer patients in a phase I trial.


Background: PDX is a novel 10-deaza-aminopterin analogue of
methotrex[[Unsupported Character - Codename ­]]ate consisting of a
mixture of R- and S-diastereomeric folate derivatives. PDX inhibits
folate metabolism by binding to and inhibiting the enzyme dihydrofolate
reductase (DHFR). PDX is the first drug approved by the US Food and Drug
Admin[[Unsupported Character - Codename ­]]istration (FDA) specifically
for the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory peripheral
T-cell lymphoma. Mass balance studies in animals and humans with
radiolabeled compounds represent a standard part of the development
process for new drugs. Isotopically labeled analogs of a drug or its
metabolites play an important role in understanding the absorption,
distribution, metabolism and excretion profiles of a compound. The
objectives of this study were to determine the pharmacokinetics (PK),
metabolism and routes of excretion of [14C]-PDX and to characterize its
metabolites in human plasma and urine.Methods: Four patients were
administered intravenously with a mixture of 50 Ci of [14C]-PDX (0.5 mg)
and 224.5 mg of non radioactive PDX over a 3-5 minute infusion. Serial
blood and plasma samples were drawn at: 0 (before PDX infusion), and up
to 144 h after the start of infusion. Urine and fecal samples were
collected for up to 168 h after the start of infusion. Expired air
samples were collected up to 24 hours after administration. The
radioactivity measurement in biological fluids was performed using liquid
scintillation counting.Results: Mass balance was achieved with a mean
recovery radioactivity in excreta= 82.9 % 20.0 % for the four patients.
The mean recovery of radioactivity in urine, feces, and expired air were
34.1%, 38.7% and 10.1%, respectively, indicating renal and fecal
excretions were the major route of elimination of [14C]-PDX. A
three-compartment open model adequately described [14C]-PDX time
radioactivity-concentration courses. The AUC0-, and clearance values for
total radioactivity in plasma were 18.1 nCi.h/mL, and 3.95 L/h,
respectively. Metabolite profiling will be performed using HPLC with beta
radiation detector.Conclusions:This study quantified the mass balance of
PDX and defined its substantial excretion in both urine and feces after
IV administration. The PK of [14C]-PDX was best described by a three
compartment open model. The metabolite profiling of PDX is ongoing.

