Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of ERBIN in suppressing migration in colon cancer.


The LAP (leucine-rich repeat (LRR) and PDZ domain) family protein, ERBIN,
is basolaterally localized protein that has previously been identified as
a regulator of epithelial cell polarity and an ERBB2/HER2 binding
protein. In addition, ERBIN inhibits RAF activation by disrupting by the
RAS/RAF interaction. However, the functional importance of ERBIN in
cancer remains elusive. In this study, we examined the role of ERBIN in
regulating colon cancer progression and metastasis. Stable colon cancer
cell lines, including SW480, LIM2405, and Caco2, were generated using
lentiviral shRNA to deplete endogenous ERBIN expression. Our results
showed that knockdown of ERBIN induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-like phenotype as marked by spindle-like morphology, a decrease in
E-cadherin and an increase in vimentin expression. Moreover, the overall
rate of cell migration was significantly increased in ERBIN knockdown
cells as determined using Transwell assays. When tracking the movement of
individual cells using live cell imaging, we found that ERBIN knockdown
cells were considerably more motile with faster migrating speed when
compared to control cells. Mechanistically, knockdown of ERBIN expression
resulted in an increase in both Akt and ERK signaling activation. Taken
together, we have identified a novel role of ERBIN in suppressing EMT and
cell motility in colon cancer cells.

