Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical characterization of ARGX-110: A neutralizing,
humanized monoclonal antibody to the human CD70 antigen with enhanced
ADCC properties.


The expression of CD70 is normally restricted to activated B- and T-
cells, as well as mature dendritic cells. Overexpression has been
documented in a variety of solid and hematological tumors, where it is
thought to play a role in evasion of immune surveillance. ARGX-110 is a
defucosylated, humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody that selectively
targets and neutralizes CD70, a ligand of CD27. A detailed biological and
functional characterization of ARGX-110 was carried out to support its
clinical development for the treatment of cancers dependent on signaling
through the CD70/CD27 axis. In competitive equilibrium binding
experiments, ARGX-110 bound to human and cynomolgus monkey CD70 with
affinities of approximately 0.4 nmol/L and 0.6 nmol/L, respectively.
ARGX-110 inhibited in a dose-dependent fashion CD70/CD27-induced IL-8
release in Raji cells with IC50 values of 0.1 nmol/L. CD70 is minimally
internalized (The expression of CD70 is normally restricted to activated
B- and T- cells, as well as mature dendritic cells. Overexpression has
been documented in a variety of solid and hematological tumors, where it
is thought to play a role in evasion of immune surveillance. ARGX-110 is
a defucosylated, humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody that selectively
targets and neutralizes CD70, a ligand of CD27. A detailed biological and
functional characterization of ARGX-110 was carried out to support its
clinical development for the treatment of cancers dependent on signaling
through the CD70/CD27 axis. In competitive equilibrium binding
experiments, ARGX-110 bound to human and cynomolgus monkey CD70 with
affinities of approximately 0.4 nmol/L and 0.6 nmol/L, respectively.
ARGX-110 inhibited in a dose-dependent fashion CD70/CD27-induced IL-8
release in Raji cells with IC50 values of 0.1 nmol/L. CD70 is minimally
internalized (<40%) by most hematological cell lines, thus providing a
plausible rationale to develop a therapeutic mAb designed to enhance
ADCC. In cell depletion studies, ARGX-110 was associated with comparable
to better cell lysis compared to Rituximab. Cell lysis by ARGX-110 was
not dependent on the internalization rate of the ARGX-110/CD70 complex in
hematological cell lines. Independence from CD70 copy numbers at the cell
surface was also demonstrated. In a Burkitt lymphoma (CD70+ Raji cells)
SCID mouse model, ARGX-110 administered intraperitoneally twice weekly at
doses ranging from 0.001 to 10 mg/kg starting one day after inoculation
resulted in a dose-response effect on animal survival. In cynomolgus
monkeys, ARGX-110 did not demonstrate any toxicity upon repeated
administration of high doses of 30 mg/kg. B, T and NK cell numbers
remained unaltered. ARGX-110 is currently in phase I clinical trial for
patients with CD70+ malignancies.Citation Format: Karen Silence, Hans De
Haard, Torston Dreier, Peter Ulrichts, Mahan Moshir, Sofie Gabriels,
Alain Thibault. Pre-clinical characterization of ARGX-110: A
neutralizing, humanized monoclonal antibody to the human CD70 antigen
with enhanced ADCC properties. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5470. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5470

