Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the progesterone receptor status using three
different antibodies: A comparison by Allred score system.


Abstract:Breast cancer (BC) hormonal receptors (progesterone, PgR and
estrogen) status is assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC), a specific,
sensitive, and accessible method that guide BC treatment. We evaluated
PgR expression in 53 BC cases using 3 anti-PgR antibodies (AB):
monoclonal (SP42 and RP636) and polyclonal ab62621.Methods:Primary BC
cases (with signed informed consent) were used to generate tissue
microarray platforms, where PgR expression was accessed by IHC and
evaluated by the Allred score. Categorical and quantitative data are
shown in percentage and mean, respectively. Concordance (CON) and
correlation among ABs were analyzed by Kappa factor (K), Spearman's
correlation coefficient () or intraclass correlation coefficient.
Staining patterns of each AB were compared by paired T-Test.Findings:We
noted poor CON and K between ab62621 vs SP42 (CON=64.1%; K=0.247), and
ab62621 vs RP636 (CON=62.3%; K=0.204), but higher CON between SP42 vs
RP636 (CON 90.6%; K =0.738). Data were corroborated by Mc Nemar
statistical test (p=0.019, p=0.014 and p>0.05, respectively). Regarding
staining intensity among PgR+ samples, we found higher proportion of weak
staining and lower IS for ab62621 (48.3%; mean IS=1.6), when compared to
SP42 (20.0%, mean IS=2.1, T-test pAbstract:Breast cancer (BC) hormonal
receptors (progesterone, PgR and estrogen) status is assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC), a specific, sensitive, and accessible method
that guide BC treatment. We evaluated PgR expression in 53 BC cases using
3 anti-PgR antibodies (AB): monoclonal (SP42 and RP636) and polyclonal
ab62621.Methods:Primary BC cases (with signed informed consent) were used
to generate tissue microarray platforms, where PgR expression was
accessed by IHC and evaluated by the Allred score. Categorical and
quantitative data are shown in percentage and mean, respectively.
Concordance (CON) and correlation among ABs were analyzed by Kappa factor
(K), Spearman's correlation coefficient () or intraclass correlation
coefficient. Staining patterns of each AB were compared by paired
T-Test.Findings:We noted poor CON and K between ab62621 vs SP42
(CON=64.1%; K=0.247), and ab62621 vs RP636 (CON=62.3%; K=0.204), but
higher CON between SP42 vs RP636 (CON 90.6%; K =0.738). Data were
corroborated by Mc Nemar statistical test (p=0.019, p=0.014 and p>0.05,
respectively). Regarding staining intensity among PgR+ samples, we found
higher proportion of weak staining and lower IS for ab62621 (48.3%; mean
IS=1.6), when compared to SP42 (20.0%, mean IS=2.1, T-test p<0.01) and
RP636 (2.3, 21.9%, T-test pAbstract:Breast cancer (BC) hormonal receptors
(progesterone, PgR and estrogen) status is assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC), a specific, sensitive, and accessible method
that guide BC treatment. We evaluated PgR expression in 53 BC cases using
3 anti-PgR antibodies (AB): monoclonal (SP42 and RP636) and polyclonal
ab62621.Methods:Primary BC cases (with signed informed consent) were used
to generate tissue microarray platforms, where PgR expression was
accessed by IHC and evaluated by the Allred score. Categorical and
quantitative data are shown in percentage and mean, respectively.
Concordance (CON) and correlation among ABs were analyzed by Kappa factor
(K), Spearman's correlation coefficient () or intraclass correlation
coefficient. Staining patterns of each AB were compared by paired
T-Test.Findings:We noted poor CON and K between ab62621 vs SP42
(CON=64.1%; K=0.247), and ab62621 vs RP636 (CON=62.3%; K=0.204), but
higher CON between SP42 vs RP636 (CON 90.6%; K =0.738). Data were
corroborated by Mc Nemar statistical test (p=0.019, p=0.014 and p>0.05,
respectively). Regarding staining intensity among PgR+ samples, we found
higher proportion of weak staining and lower IS for ab62621 (48.3%; mean
IS=1.6), when compared to SP42 (20.0%, mean IS=2.1, T-test p<0.01) and
RP636 (2.3, 21.9%, T-test p<0.01). Within the entire sample, similar
results were observed following : SP42 vs RP636 (=0.8103); ab62621 vs
SP42 (=0.3524); ab62621 vs RP636 (=0.4075). As for proportion of stained
cells and PS, among PgR+ samples, the mean values for ab62621 (75.4%;
4.8) were significantly higher than those of SP42 (56.3%, 4.3; T-test
pAbstract:Breast cancer (BC) hormonal receptors (progesterone, PgR and
estrogen) status is assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC), a specific,
sensitive, and accessible method that guide BC treatment. We evaluated
PgR expression in 53 BC cases using 3 anti-PgR antibodies (AB):
monoclonal (SP42 and RP636) and polyclonal ab62621.Methods:Primary BC
cases (with signed informed consent) were used to generate tissue
microarray platforms, where PgR expression was accessed by IHC and
evaluated by the Allred score. Categorical and quantitative data are
shown in percentage and mean, respectively. Concordance (CON) and
correlation among ABs were analyzed by Kappa factor (K), Spearman's
correlation coefficient () or intraclass correlation coefficient.
Staining patterns of each AB were compared by paired T-Test.Findings:We
noted poor CON and K between ab62621 vs SP42 (CON=64.1%; K=0.247), and
ab62621 vs RP636 (CON=62.3%; K=0.204), but higher CON between SP42 vs
RP636 (CON 90.6%; K =0.738). Data were corroborated by Mc Nemar
statistical test (p=0.019, p=0.014 and p>0.05, respectively). Regarding
staining intensity among PgR+ samples, we found higher proportion of weak
staining and lower IS for ab62621 (48.3%; mean IS=1.6), when compared to
SP42 (20.0%, mean IS=2.1, T-test p<0.01) and RP636 (2.3, 21.9%, T-test
p<0.01). Within the entire sample, similar results were observed
following : SP42 vs RP636 (=0.8103); ab62621 vs SP42 (=0.3524); ab62621
vs RP636 (=0.4075). As for proportion of stained cells and PS, among PgR+
samples, the mean values for ab62621 (75.4%; 4.8) were significantly
higher than those of SP42 (56.3%, 4.3; T-test p<0.01) and RP636 (60.1%;
4.2; T-test pAbstract:Breast cancer (BC) hormonal receptors
(progesterone, PgR and estrogen) status is assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC), a specific, sensitive, and accessible method
that guide BC treatment. We evaluated PgR expression in 53 BC cases using
3 anti-PgR antibodies (AB): monoclonal (SP42 and RP636) and polyclonal
ab62621.Methods:Primary BC cases (with signed informed consent) were used
to generate tissue microarray platforms, where PgR expression was
accessed by IHC and evaluated by the Allred score. Categorical and
quantitative data are shown in percentage and mean, respectively.
Concordance (CON) and correlation among ABs were analyzed by Kappa factor
(K), Spearman's correlation coefficient () or intraclass correlation
coefficient. Staining patterns of each AB were compared by paired
T-Test.Findings:We noted poor CON and K between ab62621 vs SP42
(CON=64.1%; K=0.247), and ab62621 vs RP636 (CON=62.3%; K=0.204), but
higher CON between SP42 vs RP636 (CON 90.6%; K =0.738). Data were
corroborated by Mc Nemar statistical test (p=0.019, p=0.014 and p>0.05,
respectively). Regarding staining intensity among PgR+ samples, we found
higher proportion of weak staining and lower IS for ab62621 (48.3%; mean
IS=1.6), when compared to SP42 (20.0%, mean IS=2.1, T-test p<0.01) and
RP636 (2.3, 21.9%, T-test p<0.01). Within the entire sample, similar
results were observed following : SP42 vs RP636 (=0.8103); ab62621 vs
SP42 (=0.3524); ab62621 vs RP636 (=0.4075). As for proportion of stained
cells and PS, among PgR+ samples, the mean values for ab62621 (75.4%;
4.8) were significantly higher than those of SP42 (56.3%, 4.3; T-test
p<0.01) and RP636 (60.1%; 4.2; T-test p<0.01). Similar data were found
after analyzing PS for the entire sample: SP42 vs RP636 (=0.8588); SP42
vs ab62621(=0.4832); RP636 vs ab62621(=0.4050).Interpretation:Our data
indicate that anti-PgR monoclonal ABs, RP636 and SP42, are, unlike
ab62621, equally suitable to test BC PgR status by IHC due to their
higher accuracy. Therefore, we suggest their clinical use during BC
diagnosis; thus, enabling more precise therapeutic decisions to treat
BC.Citation Format: Klesia P. Madeira, Renata Daltoe, Alex Carvalho,
Lucas Rezende, Ian Silva, Leticia Rangel. Evaluation of the progesterone
receptor status using three different antibodies: A comparison by Allred
score system. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington,
DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr
4760. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4760

