Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation-induced angiogenesis is associated with
MMP-9-miR-494-Syndecan-1 regulatory loop in medulloblastoma cells.


Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) is one of the most prominent proteins
associated with tumorigenesis and is a modulator of the tumor
microenvironment during angiogenesis. Recently, it has been speculated
that Syndecan-1, a transmembrane heparan sulfate-bearing proteoglycan,
has a critical role in contributing to angiogenesis when associated with
MMP-9. However, the mechanism behind their synergistic regulation is not
fully understood. In the current study, we report that ionizing radiation
(IR)-induced MMP-9 enhances Syndecan-1 shedding and tube-inducing ability
of medulloblastoma cells. Furthermore, tumor angiogenesis is associated
with higher MMP-9-Syndecan-1 interactions on both the cell surface and
extracellular medium. Our results also revealed the existence of a novel
regulatory mechanism where MMP-9 drives the suppression of miR-494,
thereby resulting in enhanced Syndecan-1 shedding and angiogenesis. By
employing bioinformatics and functional luciferase experiments, we
demonstrated that 3-UTR of Syndecan-1 mRNA is a direct target of miR-494.
Moreover, from the in situ hybridization analysis, we found that
MMP-9-specific shRNA (pM) treatment of mouse intracranial tumors resulted
in elevated expression of miR-494. This negative correlation between
MMP-9 and miR-494 levels was found to be dependent on the methylation
status of the miR-494 promoter-associated CpG island region (-186 to
-20), which was confirmed by bisulfite-sequencing and
methylation-specific-PCR (MSP) analysis. Overall, our results demonstrate
a previously unrecognized mechanism of angiogenesis regulation in
medulloblastoma through which miR-494 modulates the transcription of
radiation-induced angiogenesis promoting molecules and that
MMP-9-Syndecan-1 activity creates a negative feedback loop by regulating
the expression of miR-494.

