Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated expression of Fn14 in non-small cell lung cancer
correlates with c-MET and promotes tumor cell invasion and metastasis.


Tumor invasiveness and therapeutic resistance strongly contribute to the
low (Tumor invasiveness and therapeutic resistance strongly contribute to
the low (<10%) five-year survival rate for advanced stage lung cancer;
thus, identification of novel interventions targeting metastasis and
therapeutic resistance is a necessity. Hepatocyte growth factor receptor
(c-Met) and fibroblast growth factor-inducible 14 (Fn14) are two cell
surface receptors known to be associated with lung cancer invasiveness
and cell survival. Our lab recently demonstrated that Fn14 was
over-expressed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), correlated with
activated epidermal growth factor receptor, and that expression of Fn14
modulated NSCLC cell invasiveness and metastasis. We hypothesize that
elevated Fn14 expression can be maintained by c-Met activation, and that
blockade of Fn14 can suppress NSCLC invasiveness driven by c-Met. Here we
demonstrate that Fn14 protein expression significantly correlated with
c-Met expression in primary NSCLC patient tumors. Fn14 and c-Met were
more highly expressed in metastatic tumors compared to patient-matched
primary NSCLC tumors, suggesting a role in the metastatic phenotype. To
further elucidate the relationship between Fn14 and c-Met in NSCLC
invasiveness, we employed two cell lines derived from a primary tumor
(H2073) and metastatic lymph node (H1993) of the same patient. H1993
cells (c-Met receptor amplification) expressed significantly elevated
protein levels of Fn14 compared to H2073 (low c-Met), which were
significantly diminished in H1993 cells upon c-Met inhibition through
SU11274 treatment. Moreover, exposure of H2073 cells to HGF induced the
protein expression of Fn14. The elevated expression of Fn14 through HGF
stimulation (H2073) or c-Met receptor amplification (H1993) was
attenuated by pretreatment of the cells with U0126, a potent MEK
inhibitor, suggesting that c-Met-induced Fn14 expression may depend on
MAPK signaling. To further elucidate the effect of Fn14 on global
c-Met-induced expression, genome-wide expression analysis was employed to
determine genes both over-expressed in H1993 compared to H2073 and
subsequently suppressed in Fn14 depleted H1993 cells. RALGPS2, a gene
over-expressed in lung tumors that induces of c-fos and OPRL1, a gene
elevated in metastatic melanoma, were elevated in the metastatic cell
line and subsequently suppressed with Fn14 depletion. In addition,
shRNA-mediated depletion of Fn14 in H1993 cells attenuated cell migration
and invasion by 45% and 40%, respectively. This work demonstrates that
c-Met and Fn14 may play a critical role in NSCLC metastasis, and suggests
that targeting Fn14 may impact c-Met-driven NSCLC invasiveness.
Successful targeting of NSCLC invasiveness would have significant
clinical impact on a disease that is deadly in its advanced stages.

