Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HER3 and PI3K in head and neck squamous cancer cells.


Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the fifth
most common cancer worldwide, with more than 40,000 new cases developing
annually in the US alone. 80-90% of HNSCC cases display elevated EGFR
expression. Cetuximab an anti-EGFR monoclonal is an approved treatment of
HNSCC. However, patient response to cetuximab is variable. Activation of
the HER2/3 and/or the down stream PI3K pathway is a potential mechanism
leading to cetuximab resistance in HNSCC. LJM716 is a fully human IgG1
ati-HER3 monoclonal antibody. BYL719 is a PI3Ka-selective small molecule
inhibitor. Here, we profiled a panel of HNSCC cell lines for 1) the
activation status of the EGFR/HER2/3/PI3K pathway; 2) their response to
LJM716 and/or to BYL719 in combination with cetuximab.Methods: In this
study, we evaluated LJM716 or BYL719 anti-tumor activity either alone,
combined, or their respective combination with cetuximab in head and neck
squamous cell cancer. LJM716, cetuximab and BYL719 single agent as well
as combination activity of LJM716/cetuximab or LJM716/BYL719 were
assessed in 33 head and neck cell lines using the CellTiter-Glo
Luminescent Cell Viability Assay. Single agent and combination anti-tumor
activities of LJM716 were also tested in selected xenograft mouse models.
To explore predictive markers for LJM716 and BYL719, baseline EGFR/HER2/3
and PI3K activation status was further analyzed. NRG1 level was assessed
based on Affymetrix U133 plus2 genechip array.Results: Both BYL719 and
LJM716 displayed anti-tumor activity in HNSCC cell lines in vitro, with
BYL719 superior in most of the lines tested. There was minimum
combination benefit observed with the combination of LJM716 and BYL719.
Both reagents further enhanced cetuximab activity and expanded the number
of cell lines sensitive to cetuximab. Anti-tumor activity was also
observed with LJM716 or BYL719 in mouse xenograft models either as single
agent or in combination with cetuximab. There was no correlation between
baseline NRG1 or HER3 phosphorylation level with in vitro LJM716 or
BYL719 efficacy.Conclusion: HNSCC is a disease highly dependent on PI3K
activity. Mechanisms leading to sustained PI3K activity in HNSCC include
genomic changes of PIK3CA/PTEN, activation of HER3 and additional
undefined molecular events. Combining HER3/PI3K targeted therapies with
cetuximab may overcome some of the resistance to cetuximab therapy in
HNSCC. Future work is underway to identify biomarkers that would predict
response to these combination regimens.

