Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variations in the MUC16 gene encoding tumor marker CA125
and their association with the risk of epithelial ovarian cancer.


Purpose: MUC16 is a cell surface mucin that is expressed at high levels
by epithelial ovarian tumors, and is detected in serum as the CA125
antigen. MUC16 is clinically used as a tumor marker in the management of
ovarian cancer and has been associated with prognosis. MUC16 is also
thought to play an important role in ovarian tumor cell survival and
metastasis. We studied the association of four tagging SNPs of the MUC16
gene (rs2547065 (C/G), rs1559168 (A/T), rs2121133 (A/G), rs2121133 (A/G))
and risk of ovarian cancer as well as the correlation of these SNPs with
CA125 levels.Methods: MUC16 polymorphisms were genotyped using blood
samples collected from 760 women diagnosed with ovarian cancer and 788
healthy controls enrolled in the New England Case-Control Study between
2003 and 2008. 388 cases had preoperative CA125 levels abstracted from
medical records. Odds ratios and 95%CIs were calculated using logistic
regression; polytomous (multinomial) logistic regression was used to
estimate multivariate odds ratios by ovarian cancer histological subtype.
The association between log normalized pre-operative CA125 levels and MUC
16 SNPs was evaluated using generalized linear models.Results: A
significant association was observed between the rs2547065 polymorphism
and ovarian cancer risk (per allele: OR=1.30, 95% CI: 1.11-1.52). The
risk was greatest for women carrying two copies of the variant allele
(OR=1.78, 95% CI: 1.29-2.45). When stratified by histological subtype,
these associations were most apparent in the recessive model for women
with serous invasive (OR = 1.69; 95%CI: 1.15-2.48) and clear cell (2.49
95% CI: 1.13-5.52) tumors. There were no significant associations between
the other three MUC16 SNPs (rs1559168, rs2121133, rs12984471) and ovarian
cancer risk. The rs2547065 polymorphism was not found to be associated
with pre-operative CA125 levels in cases overall or in the subset of
women with serous and clear cell cancers.Conclusions: These results
suggest that women who carry one or more variant alleles of MUC16 SNP
rs2547065 have an increased risk of ovarian cancer of the serous invasive
and clear cell histological subtype. Further study of MUC 16 SNPs in
relation to risk of ovarian cancer and their effect on CA125 levels is
warranted.

