Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preparation and characterization of scFv antibody against tissue
factor (TF) for the delivery of an MRI contrast agent.


Background: There have been many clinical reports of the increased risk
of thrombosis in cancer patients. Tumor cells and tumor vascular
endothelial cells express tissue factor (TF) at high levels. This
clinical evidence and various biochemical data suggest that TF is
involved in the activation of cancer-related blood coagulation. We
hypothesized that anti-TF antibody could be a useful tool for drug
delivery to solid tumors. Antibodies of various sizes to suit the purpose
could be used to deliver a payload to cancers. Here, we prepared an
anti-TF single chain variable fragment (scFv) antibody as a potential
delivery tool for diagnostic agents.Method: Anti-TF IgG (clone name,
1157) was obtained from a hybridoma that produced IgG with high affinity
for TF antigen. Products of the VL and VH genes of 1157 were obtained
from the hybridoma cDNA and were constructed in both orientations, i.e.
VH-linker-VL and VL-linker-VH. The scFv was produced in Escherichia coli
and was purified by using a conventional method. The affinities of
anti-TF IgG and scFv for TF protein were analyzed with flow cytometry
(FCM). These antibodies were labeled with Alexa647 and given
intravenously to mice bearing chemically induced cutaneous tumors with
marked similarity to human solid cancers generally in terms of growth
rate and stroma. Biodistribution of the antibodies was analyzed with an
OV110 in vivo imaging system. The ratio of the concentration of each
antibody in the tumor to that in the surrounding normal tissue area (T/N
ratio) was calculated.Results and Discussion: In vitro, the scFv gene
VH-linker-VL was expressed as inclusion bodies in E. coli, whereas the
scFv gene VL-linker-VH was expressed in the cytoplasm. scFv gene
construction with VL-linker-VH was therefore more promising than that
with VH-linker-VL, because scFv could be obtained from the former without
the need to refold the scFv protein. FCM analysis revealed that the
anti-TF scFv could bind to TF protein on the membrane of several cancer
cell lines. In vivo, the T/N ratios of scFv in the mice 1, 3, and 6 h
after injection were 1.02, 1.46, and 1.90, respectively. In contrast,
those of the IgG were 1.02, 1.01, and 1.23, respectively. Because a
higher T/N ratio can result in clearer contrast of the tumor, the scFv
may be more useful than IgG as a molecular imaging tool in the 6 h after
injection.Conclusion and Future Plans: Anti-TF scFv accumulated
selectively in tumor tissue for 6 h after iv injection. Our next step
will be to quantify the ratio of the concentration of scFv in the tumor
to that in the plasma (T/P ratio) by using radioisotopes. The scFv may be
a useful tool for the delivery of MRI contrast agents.

