Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Race and breast cancer prognosis by PAM50 subtype in the LACE and
Pathways studies.


Background: African-Americans have poorer breast cancer (BC) prognosis,
and Asians and Hispanics have better prognosis, compared with Whites. The
Black-White difference is unexplained and has been attributed to
diagnosis with less treatable tumor subtypes in African-Americans.
However, little research has examined whether race-survival differences
exist by breast cancer subtype. Therefore, we examined associations
between race and BC survival by PAM50 breast cancer subtypes (luminal A,
luminal B, basal-like, HER2 enriched) in a prospective cohort of 1,282
breast cancer survivors from the Life After Cancer Epidemiology and
Pathways cohorts.Methods: Self-reported race was obtained at study entry
from mailed questionnaires. 1 mm punches were obtained from areas of
representative tumor in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor blocks.
Expression of the PAM50 genes for molecular subtype was determined by
RT-PCR of extracted RNA. After a median 6.3 years of follow-up (range
0.3-15.5 years), 213 deaths, with 118 from breast cancer, were reported.
Delayed entry Cox proportional hazard models were used to estimate hazard
ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of BC mortality,
controlling for time from diagnosis to enrollment, socioeconomic status,
BC severity, BC subtype, treatment, and other known prognostic factors.
Logistic regression was used to evaluate associations between race and
subtype. Survival analyses stratified by subtype were adjusted for age,
time from diagnosis to enrollment, BC severity, and BC treatment.Results:
Consistent with previous research, adjusted for stage and breast cancer
treatment, BC mortality was significantly higher in African-Americans
(HR=2.90, 95% CI: 1.74-4.86) and lower in Latinas and Asians (HR=0.51,
95% CI: 0.26-0.99), compared with Whites. In addition, compared with
Whites, African-Americans had a lower likelihood of the luminal A
(OR=0.61, 95% CI: 0.38-0.98) and luminal B (OR=0.43, 95% CI: 0.23-0.82)
subtypes and a greater likelihood of the less treatable basal subtype
(OR=2.93, 95% CI: 1.94-4.44). Asians were less likely to be diagnosed
with the basal subtype (OR=0.41, 95% CI: 0.23-0.71) and somewhat more
likely to be diagnosed with the HER2-enriched subtype (OR=1.47, 95% CI:
0.97-2.21). Stratified by subtype, African-Americans had poorer prognosis
among those with luminal A (HR=2.64, 95% CI: 0.93-7.49), luminal B
(HR=2.20, 95% CI: 0.43-11.26), basal-like (HR=1.66, 95% CI: 0.78-3.54),
and HER2 enriched (HR=3.25, 95% CI: 1.04-10.15) subtypes than
Whites.Conclusion: African-Americans had worse breast cancer survival
than other racial/ethnic groups and had less treatable types of breast
cancer. However, breast cancer mortality was higher in African-Americans
across tumor subtypes, suggesting that the Black-White survival
difference may not be attributable to differential diagnosis by subtype.

