Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AN-162, a targeted cytotoxic analog of somatostatin, suppresses
growth of human hormone refractory prostate cancers in vitro and in vivo.


BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is the most common non-cutaneous human cancer
found in the US. Although generally prostate cancer does not have
overwhelming effects on patient mortality, the management of hormone
refractory prostate cancers (HRPC) has been found to be challenging
because of the limitations of current therapeutic modalities. Due to
these cancers being hormone refractory alternative therapies have been
sought after. One such therapy focuses on the unusual expression of
somatostatin receptors in a large percentage of human HRPC samples. Here
we tested targeted somatostatin analog, AN-162, consisting of doxorubicin
(DOX) conjugated to a somatostatin analog which acts as a carrier in cell
lines of human hormone refractory prostate cancer in vitro and in
vivo.METHODS: Expression of mRNA for the five subtypes of the
somatostatin receptor in PC-3 and DU-145 human prostate cancer cell lines
was evaluated by RT-PCR. Somatostatin receptor binding was measured with
radioligand assays. The influence of AN-162 and DOX on the viability of
PC-3 and DU-145 cells was assessed by MTS assay. Nude mice bearing PC-3
and DU-145 tumors were randomized to 5 groups (control, AN-162, DOX,
somatostatin analog RC-160 as a control, and DOX + RC-160). Treatment
consisted i.v. injections of AN-162, DOX, RC-160, DOX + RC-160, or
vehicle once a week for 4 weeks. Tumor volume was measured every week;
the study lasted 28 days. The doses of AN-162 were equivalent to 1.45
mg/kg DOX (2.5 mol/kg). In addition, cell cycle analysis was performed
via laser flow cytometry at concentrations of 1M for each group.RESULTS:
The expression of mRNA for the five subtypes of the somatostatin receptor
were demonstrated in PC-3 and DU-145 cell lines and xenografts. Specific,
high-affinity binding sites for somatostatin were demonstrated. AN-162
and DOX (0.10-10 M) suppressed the proliferation of PC-3 and DU-145
prostate cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner. In vivo, AN-162 exerted
a stronger inhibition of growth than DOX alone; but in vitro the
difference was not significant. In vivo, AN-162 significantly inhibited
growth of both tumor models compared with the controls and with the
groups given equimolar doses of doxorubicin, RC-160, or doxorubicin plus
RC-160. Treatment of these cell lines with 1M of AN-162, Doxorubicin, and
the combination of Doxorubicin with RC-160 all expressed significant
blocks in the G2/M phase with AN-162 exhibiting the most effective
blockage of cell growth and leading to an increased number of apoptotic
cells.CONCLUSIONS: Our work establishes potent inhibitory effects of
AN-162 on somatostatin receptor positive hormone refractory prostate
cancers. The effects were superior to any of the components of AN-162.
The mechanisms of action of targeted cytotoxic somatostatin analog,
AN-162, in HRPC should be explored. Our findings suggest a possible use
of AN-162 in HRPC patients.

