Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nucleotide-resolution genomic breakpoint analysis of TMPRSS2-ERG
rearrangements in prostate cancer by target-capture next-generation
sequencing.


TMPRSS2-ERG translocations occur in approximately 50% of prostate cancers
and therefore represent one of the most frequently observed structural
rearrangements in all cancers. However, little is known about the genomic
architecture of such rearrangements. We therefore designed and optimized
a pipeline involving target-capture of TMPRSS2 and ERG genomic sequences
coupled with paired-end next generation sequencing to resolve genomic
rearrangement breakpoints in TMPRSS2 and ERG at nucleotide resolution in
a large series of primary prostate cancer specimens (n = 83). This
strategy showed >90% sensitivity and specificity in identifying
TMPRSS2-ERG rearrangements, and allowed identification of intra- and
inter-chromosomal rearrangements involving TMPRSS2 and ERG with known and
novel fusion partners. Our results indicate that rearrangement
breakpoints show strong clustering in specific intronic regions of
TMPRSS2 and ERG. The observed TMPRSS2-ERG rearrangements often exhibited
complex chromosomal architecture associated with several intra- and
inter-chromosomal rearrangements. Nucleotide resolution analysis of
breakpoint junctions revealed that the majority of TMPRSS2 and ERG
rearrangements (88%) occurred at or near regions of microhomology or
involved insertions of one or more base pairs. This architecture
implicates nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) and microhomology mediated
end joining (MMEJ) pathways in the generation of such rearrangements.
These analyses have provided important insights into the molecular
mechanisms involved in generating prostate cancer-specific recurrent
rearrangements.

