Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Three-dimensional in vivo blood flow mapping in tumors using
optical frequency domain imaging.


Angiogenesis in the tumor microenvironment is a chaotic process that
results in a dysfunctional vascular network. Unlike normal blood vessels,
tumor vessels are dense, tortuous, and leaky. The disorganized nature of
the tumor vascular network often leads to unequal perfusion in different
parts of the tumor. While some vessels see high blood flow rates, others
can be virtually stagnant. This heterogeneity in blood flow can affect
oxygen distribution, and, as a result, the efficacy of radiation and
chemotherapy. Furthermore, knowing how blood flow varies as a tumor
develops is critical for our comprehension of tumor angiogenesis.
Finally, our understanding of how anti-angiogenic and chemotherapeutic
treatments affect tumor vessels depends on our ability to monitor blood
flow. Unfortunately, existing strategies for measuring blood flow are
limited by low spatial resolution, long imaging times, or an inability to
measure flow over whole tumor volumes. Here, we use optical frequency
domain imaging (OFDI) to measure blood flow in individual vessels over an
entire tumor volume growing in a mouse. Previously, we have used OFDI to
obtain high-resolution images of tumor vasculature. Our new technique is
based on an association between the speed of moving blood and the
dynamics of optical speckle patterns that are intrinsically generated in
OFDI. By employing novel methods to measure these speckle patterns and
then relate them to an underlying flow velocity, we are able to generate
high-resolution three-dimensional maps of blood flow within tumors. Our
results expand the potential of OFDI to characterize the tumor
microvasculature by adding wide-field blood flow measurements to its
demonstrated ability to characterize microvascular morphology, tumor
anatomy, tissue viability, and lymphatic vessel morphology.

