Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Rapamycin induced AKT activation elicits
differential anti-tumor response in head and neck cancers.


The PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway is an important signaling axis that is
perturbed in majority of cancers. Biomarkers such as pS6RP, GLUT1 and
tumor FDG uptake are being evaluated in patient stratification for mTOR
pathway inhibitors. In the absence of a clear understanding of the
underlying mechanisms in tumor signaling, the biomarker strategy for
patient stratification is of limited use. Here, we show that no
discernible correlation exists between FDG uptake and the corresponding
Ki67, GLUT1, pS6RP expression in tumor biopsies from Head and Neck Cancer
(HNC) patients. Correlation between GLUT1 and pS6RP levels in tumors was
observed but elevated pS6RP was noticed even in the absence of
concomitant AKT activation, suggesting other downstream molecules of
PI3K/AKT and/or other pathways upstream of mTOR, are active in these
tumors. Using an ex-vivo platform, we identified putative responders to
Rapamycin, an mTOR inhibitor in these tumors. However, Rapamycin did not
induce anti-tumor effect in the majority of tumors with activated mTOR,
potentially attributable to the observation that Rapamycin induces
feedback activation of AKT. Accordingly, treatment of these tumors with
an AKT inhibitor and Rapamycin uniformly resulted in abrogation of mTOR
inhibition induced AKT activation in all tumors but failed to induce
anti-tumor response in a subset. Phosphoproteomic profiling of tumors
resistant to dual AKT/mTOR inhibitors revealed differential activation of
multiple pathways involved in proliferation and survival. Collectively,
our data suggest that in addition to biomarker based segregation,
functional assessment of patient tumor prior to treatment with mTOR/AKT
inhibitors might be useful for patient stratification.

