Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I study of dasatinib in combination with bevacizumab in
advanced solid tumors (NCT01445509).


Background: Inhibition of the MAPK pathway with sorafenib and
neutralization of VEGF with bevacizumab (B) resulted in clinical benefit
with interactive toxicity. Dasatinib (D) is a broad spectrum tyrosine
kinase inhibitor with high affinity for SRC family kinases. We
hypothesized that using this upstream inhibitor of the MAPK pathway with
B would maintain activity with less interactive toxicity.Methods: A 3+3
dose escalation design incorporated with B 5mg/kg q2wk plus daily D 50,
70 and 100 mg in dose levels [DL] 1/2/3, then B 10mg/kg q 2wk plus D
100mg in DL4. DLT was defined during the first 6 weeks of treatment.
Safety was assessed each 28d cycle and disease was reassessed every 2
cycles.Results: 19 pts were treated in the dose escalation portion on 4
DLs. Pts (17F/2M) had a median age of 64 yrs (25-79), ECOG PS 0-1, and
normal end-organ function. Most (14/19) pts had metastatic gynecologic
cancers (6 endometrial/5 ovarian-peritoneal/2 cervix/1 rectovaginal
GIST). Other cancers included breast (2), pancreatic neuroendocrine (1),
medullary thyroid (1) and melanoma (1). Median number of prior treatments
was 4 (1-11). The highest planned dose combination was examined without
exceeding the MTD. No DLT was observed. Grade (g) 3 events included
hypertension (2), pleural effusion (2), dyspnea (1) and pulmonary
hypertension (1). D-mediated marrow suppression was observed in 12 pts:
anemia (g1/2 [12 pts]), lymphopenia (g1/2 [9pts]; g3 [1pt]),
thrombocytopenia (g1/2 [5pts]), and neutropenia (g1/2 [4pts]). Confirmed
PR was seen in 1/17 evaluable pts, a pt with HER2+ breast cancer (5 mo).
Stabilization >/= 4 mo occurred in 9 pts (median 9 mo [4-18+mo]),
yielding clinical benefit in 59%.Conclusions: D 100 mg daily with B
10mg/kg q2wk appears to be active and is well-tolerated in pts with
advanced solid tumors. G 3 adverse events were uncommon and g 4 events or
severe marrow toxicities were not observed at the doses planned and
examined. An expansion cohort is now accruing with functional imaging,
tumor biopsies, and blood sampling for measurement of biochemical changes
in SRC and VEGF signaling pathways.

