Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of CC chemokine receptor-9 in prostate
cancer.


Despite recent advances in diagnosis and treatment, prostate cancer is
the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in US. Precise etiology
and molecular target to treat prostate cancer is yet to be defined. In
recent years, involvement of chemokines and their corresponding receptors
in pathogenesis of prostate cancer has gained tremendous attention. We
have previously shown that CC chemokines receptor-9 (CCR9) is
significantly expressed in prostate cancer cell lines compared to normal
epithelial cells derived from prostate. Furthermore, we have shown higher
invasive and migratory potential of prostate cancer cells under the
chemotactic gradient of CCL25, the only known natural ligand of CCR9. The
aim of this study was to establish the clinical relevance of CCR9 in
prostate cancer using tissue micro array (TMA). The TMAs were stained for
CCR9 and virtual slides were created using an Aperio ScanScope scanning
system to numerically analyze the Immuno-intensity of CCR9. The ScanScope
generated true color digital images of each stained sample, which were
viewed and analyzed using Aperio ImageScope (version 6.25 software). Our
data show higher expression of CCR9 in prostate cancer tissues compared
to match benign tissues. Interestingly, CCR9 immuno-intensity was
stronger in tissues with Gleason grade 8 and above. This study suggests
the potential involvement of CCR9 in pathogenesis of prostate cancer.

