Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of giant obscurins expression in breast epithelium disrupts
epithelial junctions and promotes cell motility and invasion.


Obscurin A (720kDa) and B (870kDa) are giant multidomain proteins,
encoded by the single OBSCN gene, originally shown to play important
roles in the structural organization and contractile activity of striated
muscles. Early studies have indicated that the OBSCN gene is highly
mutated in different types of cancers. In light of this observation, our
laboratory set forth to examine the expression profile and roles of giant
obscurins in normal and cancer breast tissue. Obscurins are readily
expressed in breast epithelial cells, but their expression is
dramatically diminished in breast cancer cells. Down-regulation of
obscurin A and B using small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) in non-tumorigenic
MCF10A breast epithelial cells resulted in decreased protein expression
of -catenin and E-cadherin, which are major components of adherens
junctions and have been heavily implicated in the formation and
metastasis of breast tumors. Specifically, -catenin exhibited a
preferential nuclear accumulation accompanied by a concomitant loss from
cell-cell junctions. Additionally, loss of obscurins led to alterations
in the expression levels and localization of multiple proteins associated
with epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Obscurin-deficient
MCF10A cells showed significantly increased motility in 2-Dimensional
(2-D) substrata and confined spaces, and invasion through a matrigel
coated chamber. Consistent with this, actin filaments re-distributed to
extending filopodia-like protrusions where they exhibited increased
dynamics. Taken together, our findings indicate that loss of giant
obscurins from breast epithelium results in disruption of cell contacts
and acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype that leads to enhanced
migration and invasiveness.

