Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How important is the post TMZ-treatment recovery of GBM neoplastic
cells.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most prevalent central nervous
system malignancy portending dismal prognosis. The median overall
survival (OS) is 14.6 months with currently available standard care of
surgery, radiotherapy and Temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy. TMZ, which is
the best chemotherapeutic drug till date for this malignancy, gives a
median OS advantage of only 2.5 months over surgery and radiotherapy
alone. It is not clear how the benefit of TMZ is severely limited in a
large majority of patients. To understand this we investigated genome
wide sequence alterations of GBM neoplastic cells in response to TMZ. We
present here two cases of GBM, A49910 and M45481, where the first one
(A49910) showed response and the second one (M45481) showed no response
to standard treatment in clinic. We isolated their primary tumor cells at
the time of surgery and cultured them in vitro as neurospheres. When we
exposed these two patient-derived neurospheres to clinically relevant
dose of TMZ in vitro differential responses were observed among the two
neurospheres which mirrored the clinical outcomes of the two patients
respectively. Initially, at the end of 5 days of TMZ treatment, both
A49910 and M45481 neurospheres showed 50% and 65% reduction in viable
cell numbers respectively but after a 23 days of gap (post TMZ-treatment
recovery from the 5 days long drug treatment), at 28th day of the
treatment cycle, the total number of viable cells was 5% in TMZ-treated
A49910 with a stark contrast of 60% in the TMZ-treated M45481 as compared
to their respective DMSO-treated controls. Their growth curves, as
measured by MTT assays, showed the exact reflection of this pattern,
i.e., after 5 days of treatment both TMZ-treated A49910 and TMZ-treated
M45481 showed equally retarded growth compared to their DMSO-treated
controls, and at 28th day, only the TMZ-treated A49910 but not the
TMZ-treated M45481 cells showed growth retardation. Moreover, almost
every single cell of TMZ-treated A49910 appeared bigger and stained
intensely with SA-gal confirming drug induced senescence at 28th day
whereas this phenotype was completely absent in TMZ-treated M45481, where
no apparent sign of senescence was observed. However, apoptosis was
two-fold higher in M45481 than in A49910 after 5 days of TMZ treatment.
Whether this drug induced cellular senescence (DICS) phenotype is more
beneficial to the patients claims further investigation with a larger
cohort of GBM patients. For the proof of principle we sequenced the whole
exome and also analyzed the genome wide single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs, intronic and exonic) in these two patient-derived neurospheres
before and after TMZ treatment in vitro and detected a list of unique
sequence alterations in both the cases, in response to TMZ.

