Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Linking mitochondrial epigenetics to tumorigenesis and the cancer
theory of Warburg.


Otto Warburg first proposed that respiratory insufficiency was the common
metabolic hallmark of all tumor cells. Respiratory insufficiency is the
precursor to aerobic fermentation (Warburg effect), and can also be
linked to dysregulated proliferation and to the genomic abnormalities
seen in the majority of cancers. It is well documented that
tumorigenicity can be suppressed in a broad range of tumor types when
cytoplasm from enucleated normal cells, containing normal mitochondria,
is fused with nucleated tumor cells to form cybrids. Tumorigenicity is
also suppressed in a broad range of tumors following transplantation of
the nucleus from tumor cells into enucleated eggs or somatic cells,
indicating that tumor nuclei are capable of directing development despite
the persistence of tumor-associated mutations. Tumor cell mutations seem
to abort development, rather than induce tumorigenesis. In contrast to
the tumor suppressive effects of cytoplasm containing normal
mitochondria, either cell death or tumor cells arise when nuclei from
non-tumorigenic normal cells are fused with cytoplasm from tumor cells.
The results from these studies indicate that nuclear genomic defects
alone cannot produce tumors, and that normal mitochondria can suppress
tumorigenesis. The findings, when viewed collectively, support Warburg's
central theory and suggest that mitochondrial epigenetics drives
tumorigenesis. Supported in part from the Boston College Res. Expense
Fund.

