Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative network models of signaling and drug response in
melanoma.


Use of targeted drug combinations are potentially key to preventing
emergence of resistance to initially successful single agents such as RAF
inhibitors. Thus, systematic nomination of novel drug combinations is
important to develop effective therapeutic strategies. Here, we present
an experimental-computational network pharmacology method to infer
quantitative signaling networks in tumor cells, predict response to
perturbations, and ultimately, nominate targeted drug combinations that
will generate a desired phenotypic response. We use a series of targeted
drugs, singly or in combination to perturb cancer cells. We measure
quantitative proteomic (total and phoshpo-protein levels) and phenotypic
(e.g. cell viability, apoptosis, cell cycle progression) response
profiles to perturbations. Proteomic responses are measured with the
reverse phase protein array technology. Next, we infer quantitative
network models, using the response profiles as training sets. Solution
space of all network model configurations is prohibitively large and
Monte Carlo based inference algorithms fail to generate accurate network
models in sizes relevant for cancer biology. In order to solve the
inference problem, we have adapted an iterative and probabilistic
inference algorithm, belief propagation from statistical physics.
Resulting network models are based on simple non-linear differential
equations and quantitatively link signaling events to phenotypic changes.
We have generated quantitative network models of signaling in RAF
inhibitor resistant melanoma cell lines in sizes (i.e. 100 nodes)
unreachable by other network inference algorithms. We have nominated
novel combination therapies through combinatorial in silico perturbations
of all nodes in derived networks and experimentally tested the predicted
phenotypic responses.

