Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of estrogen depurinating DNA adduct by sulforaphane or
KEAP1 knockdown in human breast epithelial cells.


Modulation of estrogen depurinating DNA adduct by sulforaphane or KEAP1
knockdown in human breast epithelial cellsSulforaphane (SFN) is a potent
inducer of detoxication enzymes such as NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase
(NQO1) and glutathione-S-transferases (GST) via the Kelch-like
ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1) - Nuclear Factor- E2-related factor
(Nrf2) signaling pathway. NQO1 reduces the carcinogenic estrogen
metabolite, catechol estrogen-3,4-quinone (CE-3,4-Q), while GSTs detoxify
it through nucleophilic addition. CE-3,4-Q can bind with DNA to form
depurinating DNA adducts. Thus, SFN, a isothiocyanate found in broccoli,
may alter estrogen metabolism to protect against estrogen-mediated
carcinogenesis.MCF10A cells were treated with either vehicle or SFN (10
M) and either estradiol (E2) or 4-OHE2 (10 M). NQO1 activity increased
3.2-fold by SFN treatment compared to vehicle. Estrogen metabolites and
depurinating DNA adducts in the cell culture medium were partially
purified by solid phase extraction and then analyzed by UHPLC-MS/MS.
Following E2 treatment, 4-OHE1/2-1-N3Ade and 4-OHE1/2-1-N7Gua adducts
were reduced by 60% in SFN treatment; 4-OHE1/2- glutathione conjugates
increased 1.9 while 4-OCH3E1/2 increased 3.0 fold with SFN. Following
treatment with the proximate metabolite 4-OHE2, 4-OHE1/2-1-N3Ade and
4-OHE 1/2-1-N7Gua adducts also decreased 60% in SFN treated cells
compared to vehicle; while 4-OHE1/2-glutathione-conjugates increased
5.0-fold and 4-OCH3E1/2 levels were 3.4-fold higher.To constitutively
enhance the expression of Nrf2-regulated genes including NQO1, cells were
treated with either scrambled or siKEAP1 RNA and E2 or 4-OHE2. NQO1
activity increased 2.2-fold with siKEAP1 treatment. Following E2
treatment, 4-OHE1/2-1-N3Ade and 4-OHE1/2-1-N7Gua adducts dropped 70% in
siKEAP1 treated cells compared to scrambled; 4-OHE1/2-glutathione
conjugates increased 1.3-fold; however, 4-OCH3E1/2 decreased 50% with
siKEAP1 treatment. Following 4-OHE2 treatment, the 4-OHE1/2-1-N3Ade and
4-OHE 1/2-1-N7Gua adducts declined 60% in siKEAP1 treated cells compared
to scrambled; 4-OHE1/2-glutathione conjugates increased 1.4-fold while
4-OCH3E1/2 declined 60% with siKEAP1 treatment.SFN or siKEAP1 have
similar effects on up-regulating NQO1 transcripts, protein expression and
activity levels and on diminution of depurinating estrogen DNA adducts
following E2 or 4-OHE2 challenge. However, these pharmacologic and
genetic approaches have different effects on COMT. siKEAP1 down-regulates
COMT expression, which inhibits 4-OCH3E1 but not 4-CH3E2 formation whilst
SFN elevates COMT expression and subsequently levels of 4-OCH3E1/2. Thus,
activation of the Nrf2 pathway may account for some but not all of the
protective effects of SFN against estrogen-mediated DNA damage. Supported
by DOD BCRP Postdoctoral Fellowship103928.

