Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel candidate protein biomarkers for cisplatin response
prediction in non-small cell lung cancer.


The five-year survival rate for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is
still less than twenty percent in part due to treatment failure and lack
of biomarkers for personalized therapy. Most NSCLC patients are treated
by chemotherapy and cisplatin is still the major component of most
chemotherapy regimens. However, resistance to cisplatin is a common
phenomenon. Aim of this study was to identify protein biomarkers that can
be used for cisplatin response prediction.The proteomes and secretomes1
of a series of human NSCLC cell lines with a range of IC50-values for
cisplatin (1.5 - 15 M) were analyzed by label-free proteomics based on
GeLC-MS/MS and quantified by spectral counting. Significant differential
expression of proteins was determined by the in-house developed
beta-binomial statistical test2. Network and gene ontology analysis was
performed, with STRING and DAVID respectively, to reveal cellular and
molecular functions associated with the differential proteins.In total,
2885 and 2342 proteins were detected in the cell lysates and secretomes,
respectively. The proteins with significantly higher expression in the
resistant cell lines were associated RNA processing and vesicle
transport, while the proteins with higher expression in the sensitive
cell lines were known to be involved in RNA splicing, DNA damage repair
and extracellular matrix organization. The most promising candidates are
being validated in tissues and sputum of patients with known response to
cisplatin.1 Piersma SR et al. J Proteome Res. 2010 Apr 5;9(4):1913-22.2
Pham TV et al. Bioinformatics. 2010 Feb 1;26(3):363-9.

