Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of metastasis-related microRNA induced by the
stromal-cell derived factor (SDF)-1/CXCR4 system in oral cancer.


We have previously demonstrated that stromal cell-derived factor
(SDF)-1/CXCR4 system is involved in the metastatic process of oral
cancer. Recently, small non coding RNAs, microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved
in the metastatic process of several types of cancers. However, the
miRNAs contributed to metastases induced by the SDF-1/CXCR4 system in
oral cancer are largely unknown. Thus, we examined the metastasis-related
miRNAs induced by the SDF-1/CXCR4 system, using oral cancer cells,
B88-SDF-1, which exhibits functional CXCR4 and distant metastatic
potential, in vivo. We examined the metastasis-related miRNAs induced by
the SDF-1/CXCR4 system by use of a miRNA microarray representing
approximately 1700 miRNA. Consequnetly, we identified 4 kinds of
upregulated-miRNAs in B88-SDF-1 cells whose functions are unknown. Among
these miRNAs, we confirmed the upregulation of miR-5XX in B88-SDF-1 cells
by the real-time PCR analysis. Although LNA-based miR-5XX inhibitor did
not affect the growth of the cells, it did significantly inhibit the
migration of B88-SDF-1 cells. Thus, we examined the target gene(s) of
miR-5XX in the SDF-1/CXCR4 system. cDNA microarray analysis revealed that
6 kinds of mRNA containing the predictive binding site of miR-5XX were
upregulated by the treatment with miR-5XX inhibitor. Furthermore, gene A
mRNA and protein was downregulated in B88-SDF-1 cells, and upregulated by
the treatment with miR-5XX inhibitor. These results indicating that
SDF-1/CXCR4 system might regulate the metastases of oral cancer by the
downregulation of gene A via upregulation of miR-5XX.

