Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear expression of IL23p19 shows indolent tumor features and
favorable outcome in patients with colorectal cancer.


Background: The IL23 signaling pathway is involved in chronic
inflammation and autoimmune disorders but its role in cancer progression
is not fully elucidated. The aim of this study was to characterize the
expression of IL23 subunits p40 and p19 as well as IL23R in the
normal-adenoma-carcinoma-metastasis cascade of colorectal cancers and
investigate the relationship between these proteins and
clinicopathological, molecular and clinical outcome data in colorectal
cancer patients.Methods: Immunohistochemistry for IL12p40 (p40 subunit
shared between IL12 and IL23), IL23 (polyclonal), IL23p19 (monoclonal)
and IL23R was performed on a multiple-punch tissue microarray of 213
colorectal cancers from patients with full clinicopathological and
follow-up information. Normal tissues, matched adenomas and lymph node
metastases were assessed as well as microsatellite instability (MSI),
KRAS and BRAF mutations.Results: IL12p40, IL23, IL23p19 and IL23R
expression were significantly increased in colorectal cancers in
comparison to all other tissue types (pBackground: The IL23 signaling
pathway is involved in chronic inflammation and autoimmune disorders but
its role in cancer progression is not fully elucidated. The aim of this
study was to characterize the expression of IL23 subunits p40 and p19 as
well as IL23R in the normal-adenoma-carcinoma-metastasis cascade of
colorectal cancers and investigate the relationship between these
proteins and clinicopathological, molecular and clinical outcome data in
colorectal cancer patients.Methods: Immunohistochemistry for IL12p40 (p40
subunit shared between IL12 and IL23), IL23 (polyclonal), IL23p19
(monoclonal) and IL23R was performed on a multiple-punch tissue
microarray of 213 colorectal cancers from patients with full
clinicopathological and follow-up information. Normal tissues, matched
adenomas and lymph node metastases were assessed as well as
microsatellite instability (MSI), KRAS and BRAF mutations.Results:
IL12p40, IL23, IL23p19 and IL23R expression were significantly increased
in colorectal cancers in comparison to all other tissue types (p<0.001;
all). Cytoplasmic and/or membranous expression of all proteins was
unrelated to clinicopathological or molecular features. Unexpectedly, 45
cases (23.1%) showed distinct nuclear IL23p19+ expression associated with
smaller tumor diameter (p=0.0333), early TNM stage (p=0.0186), absence of
venous (p=0.0124) and lymphatic invasion (p=0.0493), lymph node
negativity (p=0.0621) and MSI (p=0.0032). IL23p19+ patients had more
favorable overall survival (p=0.0634); none had distant metastatic
disease (p=0.0146). No relationship with KRAS or BRAF was
observed.Conclusion: Our results of a more indolent, less aggressive
cancer expressing nuclear IL23p19 support a more protective role of this
protein in colorectal cancer progression. These findings add to the
current controversy regarding the pro- or anti-tumor effects of IL23
signaling in cancer.

