Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ghrelingene expression avoiding the D-ribose caused HepG2 cell
death.


Liver cancer patients could suffer from high saccharide environment due
to the malfunction of liver. To mimic this high saccharide environment,
HepG2 cells were culture with 30 mM D-riboses.We found that this high
concentration of saccharide cause cell death. Cinnamon was report to
reduce glucose in model rats. We hypothesized that the administration of
cinnamon extracts may benefit liver cancer patients whose metabolism is
defected. To test the hypothesis, three different chemical subtypes of
cinnamon extracts were added into the culture medium. The adding of all
three cinnamon extracts protected HepG2 cells from D-ribose
administration and increased around 20% of surviving cells. These
protections were even better than the addition of aminoguanidine
hemisulfate salt, a chemical used in the treatment of diabetes. The
expressions of ghrelin gene and two ghrelin-related genes was monitored
by RT-PCR. Ghrelin gene expression was up-regulated in cinnamon treated
cells. Also, the ghrelin modify gene, MBOAT4, and ghrelin process enzyme,
furin, gene were all detected in HepG2 cells and cinnnamon treated
cells.These results demonstrated that if ghrelin expressed in HepG2 cell
and maybe liver as well, it can be processed properly. Both ghrelin
transcript variants 1 and 3 recombinant plasmid were transfected into
HepG2 cells and both transcript variants protected HepG2 cells from the
addition of D-ribose without the administration of cinnamon extracts. We
conclude that the cinnamon avoids HepG2 cell damage from D-ribose induced
oxidative stress by inducing ghrelin gene expression, and through the
ghrelin signaling increases cell surviving. Since ghrelin level is
abnormally regulated in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma and
post-hepatitic liver cirrhosis, the understanding of how ghrelin been
regulated in liver may benefit liver disease patients.

