Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoparticle based combinatorial siRNA therapy against human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) .


Background: We have previously demonstrated the therapeutic effect of
lipid nanoparticles (LNP) loaded with single siRNA targeting CSN5 and
WEE1 against human HCC in mouse models.Aim: To test the benefit of a
combinatorial versus single siRNA therapy in mouse models of human HCC
and to identify molecular mechanism(s) involved in therapeutic response
by extensive microarray analyses.Materials and Methods: LNP formulations
of chemically modified siRNAs targeting CSN5 and WEE1 were produced by
Tekmira Pharmaceuticals. SCID-beige mice were used for subcutaneous
(Hep3B) and intra-hepatic (Huh7-luciferase) tumor transplantation. Mice
with established tumors were treated intravenously with 4 mg/kg single
agent siRNA or 2 mg/kg + 2 mg/kg siCSN5:siWEE1 siRNA co-encapsulated in
the same LNP. Tumors were assayed following 1 to 9 injected doses. Tumor
progression in the Huh7 orthotopic model was monitored by bioluminescence
imaging and metastases were evaluated at endpoint.Results: Significant
target silencing was observed in tumors after single or repeat
administration with no antagonism between siRNAs occurring in the
CSN5:WEE1 combination. We observed significant inhibition of tumor growth
and metastases in mice treated with active siRNAs compared to LNP
containing a non-targeting control sequence. Potency was not lost with
siCSN5:siWEE1 LNP, where the concentration of each siRNA is halved in
combination, relative to the most efficacious single agent. Data from
preliminary microarray analyses demonstrate a strong transcriptome
difference between each treatment group.Conclusion: We demonstrate a
clear efficacy of a LNP based combinatorial siRNA therapy in human mouse
models of HCC. Overall this therapy led to a significant decrease of
tumor size induced by mRNA inhibition

