Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alpha-2 Heremans Schmid glycoprotein (AHSG) promotes migration in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the eighth most common
tumor in the world. Approximately 30,000 new cases of HNSCC are reported
each year and 8,000 related deaths, in the United States. HNSCC of the
oral cavity is highly metastatic and has a recurrence rate of 20%-50%,
with a dismal 5-year survival rate of 50%. African-American males have a
5-year survival rate of 42% while the survival rate for Caucasian males
is 52%. To date, there is no consistent means for early detection or a
reliable biomarker for HNSCC, thus perpetuating the lack of improvement
in mortality despite advances in delivery of treatment and surgical
reconstruction. In a proteomic study seeking possible biomarkers for
HNSCC, AHSG was detected at elevated levels in serum. Interestingly, we
have found that some HNSCC cell lines synthesize and secrete AHSG. We
have also shown in earlier studies, that the lack of AHSG reduces mammary
tumor incidence and prolongs tumor latency in a mouse model for breast
cancer. Together, this suggests that this hepatocellular glycoprotein
that is found in most body fluids including serum could be a potential
biomarker for HNSCC. AHSG is a negative acute phase response protein,
which makes the findings of elevated levels of AHSG in the proteomic
study most intriguing. In order to evaluate the role of AHSG in HNSCC
progression (proliferation and metastatic properties) in vitro, we
depleted AHSG in the HNSCC cell lineSQ20B. Thus far, we show that
depletion of AHSG does not affect the proliferation of SQ20B cells.
However, the depletion of AHSG mediates a decrease in migration and
invasion of SQ20B cells. We are currently elucidating the molecular
mechanisms of AHSG-mediated motility.This work was supported by grants
from the NIH-NCI-Score 1 SC1 CA134018-01 (JO); DOD W81XWH-07-1-0254
(J.O); 5 T32 HL007735-15 (SA) and U54 CA091408 (subproject, DM).

