Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Do cancer cells undergo phenotypic switching? The case for
imperfect cancer stem cell markers.


The identification of cancer stem cells in vivo and in vitro relies on
specific surface markers that should allow to sort cancer cells in
phenotypically distinct subpopulations. Experiments report that sorted
cancer cell populations after some time tend to express again all the
original markers, leading to the hypothesis of phenotypic switching,
according to which cancer cells can transform stochastically into cancer
stem cells.Here we explore an alternative explanation based on the
hypothesis that markers are not perfect and are thus unable to identify
all cancer stem cells. Our analysis is based on a mathematical model for
cancer cell proliferation that takes into account phenotypic switching,
imperfect markers and error in the sorting process. Our conclusion is
that the observation of reversible expression of surface markers after
sorting does not provide sufficient evidence in support of phenotypic
switching.Citation Format: Stefano Zapperi, Caterina Anna Maria Laporta.
Do cancer cells undergo phenotypic switching? The case for imperfect
cancer stem cell markers. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5228. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5228

