Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of methylation in a regulatory region of BCL2 in MDS/AML.


Background:Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group of
clonal hematopoietic disorders characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis
and increased risk of progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). A
hallmark of MDS is increased apoptosis, while AML undergoes decreased
apoptosis and increased proliferation. BCL2, an anti-apoptotic protein,
is overexpressed in high grade MDS and AML and may confer poor prognosis
and increased chemotherapy resistance. In this study we examined the DNA
methylation status of BCL2 in MDS and AML.Methods:We conducted DNA
methylation profiling on genomic DNA extracted from bone marrows of 22
refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts (RARS), 8 refractory anemia
with excess blasts (RAEB), 21 de novo AML, 21 therapy related AML, and 7
normal volunteers. We used both Illumina 27K BeadChip and 450K BeadChip
methylation arrays to assess CpG methylation. Standard student T-test was
used to screen differentially methylated MDS and AML CpG sites compared
to normal samples. We validated the microarray data by combined bisulfite
restriction analysis (COBRA) and bisulfite sequencing.Results:We
identified a region in the BCL2 gene body that was among the most
differentially methylated in MDS and AML versus normal bone marrow.
Within that amplicon, BCL2 in both RARS, a low grade MDS, and RAEB, a
high grade MDS, were hypermethylated compared to normal bone marrow (43%
vs 18%, 48% vs 18%, respectively, pBackground:Myelodysplastic syndromes
(MDS) are a heterogeneous group of clonal hematopoietic disorders
characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis and increased risk of
progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). A hallmark of MDS is
increased apoptosis, while AML undergoes decreased apoptosis and
increased proliferation. BCL2, an anti-apoptotic protein, is
overexpressed in high grade MDS and AML and may confer poor prognosis and
increased chemotherapy resistance. In this study we examined the DNA
methylation status of BCL2 in MDS and AML.Methods:We conducted DNA
methylation profiling on genomic DNA extracted from bone marrows of 22
refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts (RARS), 8 refractory anemia
with excess blasts (RAEB), 21 de novo AML, 21 therapy related AML, and 7
normal volunteers. We used both Illumina 27K BeadChip and 450K BeadChip
methylation arrays to assess CpG methylation. Standard student T-test was
used to screen differentially methylated MDS and AML CpG sites compared
to normal samples. We validated the microarray data by combined bisulfite
restriction analysis (COBRA) and bisulfite sequencing.Results:We
identified a region in the BCL2 gene body that was among the most
differentially methylated in MDS and AML versus normal bone marrow.
Within that amplicon, BCL2 in both RARS, a low grade MDS, and RAEB, a
high grade MDS, were hypermethylated compared to normal bone marrow (43%
vs 18%, 48% vs 18%, respectively, p<0.05). BCL2 in de novo AML and
therapy related AML were hypomethylated compared to normal bone marrow
(12% vs 35%, 13% vs 35%, respectively, pBackground:Myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group of clonal hematopoietic
disorders characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis and increased risk
of progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). A hallmark of MDS is
increased apoptosis, while AML undergoes decreased apoptosis and
increased proliferation. BCL2, an anti-apoptotic protein, is
overexpressed in high grade MDS and AML and may confer poor prognosis and
increased chemotherapy resistance. In this study we examined the DNA
methylation status of BCL2 in MDS and AML.Methods:We conducted DNA
methylation profiling on genomic DNA extracted from bone marrows of 22
refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts (RARS), 8 refractory anemia
with excess blasts (RAEB), 21 de novo AML, 21 therapy related AML, and 7
normal volunteers. We used both Illumina 27K BeadChip and 450K BeadChip
methylation arrays to assess CpG methylation. Standard student T-test was
used to screen differentially methylated MDS and AML CpG sites compared
to normal samples. We validated the microarray data by combined bisulfite
restriction analysis (COBRA) and bisulfite sequencing.Results:We
identified a region in the BCL2 gene body that was among the most
differentially methylated in MDS and AML versus normal bone marrow.
Within that amplicon, BCL2 in both RARS, a low grade MDS, and RAEB, a
high grade MDS, were hypermethylated compared to normal bone marrow (43%
vs 18%, 48% vs 18%, respectively, p<0.05). BCL2 in de novo AML and
therapy related AML were hypomethylated compared to normal bone marrow
(12% vs 35%, 13% vs 35%, respectively, p<0.05). We validated these
results by COBRA and bisulfite sequencing. This region coincided with
H3K27ac and H3K4m1 enhancer type marks in ENCODE data in normal
cells.Conclusions:Our study identifies a region of BCL2 that is
hypermethylated in both low and high risk MDS while hypomethylated in AML
compared to normal bone marrows. We hypothesize aberrant epigenetic
modification of BCL2 plays a key role in apoptosis and transformation
from MDS to AML, and our data support the idea of combining demethylating
drugs with BCL2 antagonists. We are currently investigating whether BCL2
protein expression correlates with methylation, and plan to map the
histone marks with CHIP-seq to correlate chromatin accessibility and DNA
methylation in BCL2.

