Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Damage-induced apoptosis in primary human lymphocytes is a genetic
program modified by gender and age.


Apoptosis is a core pathway deregulated in hematologic and other cancers.
Although there are considerable functional and genetic data on the
regulation of apoptosis in vitro and in model organisms, little is known
about how these pathways are modified in primary cells freshly isolated
from people, who are continually subjected to a variety of different and
often unquantified environmental stimuli. We hypothesize that these
exposures may have important and as yet unappreciated modifying effects
on apoptosis that may have implications for cancer risk or response to
therapy. To test this, we isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) from 90 normal healthy individuals and treated them with 5 Gy
ionizing radiation (IR). Damage-induced apoptosis was measured at 24
hours after IR by TUNEL. We observed surprising heterogeneity in
apoptosis among individuals, ranging from 21-65 percent. To determine
whether this diversity in response was programmed or stochastic, we
repeated the experiment 3 times in 10 individuals spanning the entire
IR-induced apoptotic range and found results to be completely
reproducible within individuals, suggesting that it resulted from a
genetic program. We then assessed the association with individual
characteristics. Whereas neither race nor age was associated with
IR-induced apoptosis, gender was significantly associated (Mean: 44.8% vs
32.9%; p = 1.02 x 10-8). Moreover, when stratified by gender, age was
significantly associated with IR-induced apoptosis in males (p = 0.026)
but not females (p = 0.94). Thus, we conclude that IR-induced apoptosis
in freshly isolated human PBMCs results from an intrinsic genetic program
modified by age, but only within males. Genetic models to explain this
will be discussed.

