Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-30 as a tumor suppressor connects EGF/Src signal to EMT and
ERG.


Src tyrosine kinase (Src) is implicated in the development of bone
metastasis and castration-resistance of prostate cancer. Src inhibitors
are currently being tested in clinical trials for such diseases.
Understanding the molecular and cellular actions of Src inhibitors holds
the key to future improvement of this line of therapy. Here we describe
the microRNA expression profiles modulated by two Src inhibitors and
demonstrate that the miR-30 family members are the most prominently
induced species. Consistent with its tumor suppressor role, miR-30 is
downmodulated by oncogenic signals such as epidermal growth factor (EGF)
and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), and is generally underexpressed in
prostate cancer specimens. A number of epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT)-associated genes are predicted targets of miR-30. Among
these genes the Ets Related Gene (ERG) is the most frequently
overexpressed-oncogene in prostate cancer activated by genomic fusion
events between promoter upstream sequences of the TMPRSS2 and coding
sequences of ERG. We showed by ERG 3UTR-reporter and mutagenesis assays
that ERG is a direct target of miR-30. Overexpression of miR-30 in
prostate cancer cells suppresses EMT phenotypes and inhibits cell
migration and invasion. It also inhibits the in vitro and in vivo growth
of VCaP cells, which depends on TMPRSS2-ERG for proliferation.
TMPRSS2-ERG is generally regulated by androgen at the transcriptional
level. Our finding reveals a new post-transcriptional mechanism of
TMPRSS2-ERG regulation by Src and growth signals via miR-30 providing a
rationale for targeting ERG positive castration resistant tumors with Src
inhibitors.

