Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune-suppressive myeloid cells are induced during disease
progression in patients with advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma.


Background: Pancreatic cancers produce multiple immune-suppressive
factors that can be measured in peripheral blood. Elevated levels of
myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) induced by tumor derived factors
are associated with inhibition of immune responses in gastrointestinal
malignancies (Mundy-Bosse, et al., CII, 2011). We hypothesized that
levels of MDSC and pro-MDSC cytokines would be elevated in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma patients with progressive disease.Methods: Plasma and
immune cells from peripheral blood were obtained from 30 pancreatic
adenocarcinoma patients. Group A consisted of 15 patients undergoing
chemotherapy (11 stage III/IV, 4 stage II). Group B consisted of 15
chemonaive patients (10 stage III/IV, 5 stage II) and group C consisted
of 9 normal patients. The nonparametric Wilcoxon test was used to compare
the cytokines in the plasma between the various groups (A/B vs C, A vs
B). The Bonferroni method was used to adjust for data obtained for 27
cytokines via BioPlex assay. Pathway analysis on cytokine profiles
obtained from the BioPlex analysis was performed using IPA. A S100A9
ELISA was performed on chemonaive patients and the Wilcoxon test was used
to compare levels between patients with different cancer stages. MDSC
(HLADRneg/low, CD33+, CD11b+, CD15+/ and CD14+/) were phenotyped via flow
cytometry.Results: BioPlex analysis was performed on all subjects (Groups
A, B and C). Increases in the levels of pro-MDSC cytokines were observed
for A/B vs C (IL4 (p=0.005), IL5 (p=0.046), IL10 (p=0.046), GCSF
(p=0.027). Increases were also observed in levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines (e.g. RANTES pBackground: Pancreatic cancers produce multiple
immune-suppressive factors that can be measured in peripheral blood.
Elevated levels of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) induced by
tumor derived factors are associated with inhibition of immune responses
in gastrointestinal malignancies (Mundy-Bosse, et al., CII, 2011). We
hypothesized that levels of MDSC and pro-MDSC cytokines would be elevated
in pancreatic adenocarcinoma patients with progressive disease.Methods:
Plasma and immune cells from peripheral blood were obtained from 30
pancreatic adenocarcinoma patients. Group A consisted of 15 patients
undergoing chemotherapy (11 stage III/IV, 4 stage II). Group B consisted
of 15 chemonaive patients (10 stage III/IV, 5 stage II) and group C
consisted of 9 normal patients. The nonparametric Wilcoxon test was used
to compare the cytokines in the plasma between the various groups (A/B vs
C, A vs B). The Bonferroni method was used to adjust for data obtained
for 27 cytokines via BioPlex assay. Pathway analysis on cytokine profiles
obtained from the BioPlex analysis was performed using IPA. A S100A9
ELISA was performed on chemonaive patients and the Wilcoxon test was used
to compare levels between patients with different cancer stages. MDSC
(HLADRneg/low, CD33+, CD11b+, CD15+/ and CD14+/) were phenotyped via flow
cytometry.Results: BioPlex analysis was performed on all subjects (Groups
A, B and C). Increases in the levels of pro-MDSC cytokines were observed
for A/B vs C (IL4 (p=0.005), IL5 (p=0.046), IL10 (p=0.046), GCSF
(p=0.027). Increases were also observed in levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines (e.g. RANTES p<0.0027) and angiogenic cytokines (e.g. VEGF
p=0.0027 and IL8 pBackground: Pancreatic cancers produce multiple
immune-suppressive factors that can be measured in peripheral blood.
Elevated levels of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) induced by
tumor derived factors are associated with inhibition of immune responses
in gastrointestinal malignancies (Mundy-Bosse, et al., CII, 2011). We
hypothesized that levels of MDSC and pro-MDSC cytokines would be elevated
in pancreatic adenocarcinoma patients with progressive disease.Methods:
Plasma and immune cells from peripheral blood were obtained from 30
pancreatic adenocarcinoma patients. Group A consisted of 15 patients
undergoing chemotherapy (11 stage III/IV, 4 stage II). Group B consisted
of 15 chemonaive patients (10 stage III/IV, 5 stage II) and group C
consisted of 9 normal patients. The nonparametric Wilcoxon test was used
to compare the cytokines in the plasma between the various groups (A/B vs
C, A vs B). The Bonferroni method was used to adjust for data obtained
for 27 cytokines via BioPlex assay. Pathway analysis on cytokine profiles
obtained from the BioPlex analysis was performed using IPA. A S100A9
ELISA was performed on chemonaive patients and the Wilcoxon test was used
to compare levels between patients with different cancer stages. MDSC
(HLADRneg/low, CD33+, CD11b+, CD15+/ and CD14+/) were phenotyped via flow
cytometry.Results: BioPlex analysis was performed on all subjects (Groups
A, B and C). Increases in the levels of pro-MDSC cytokines were observed
for A/B vs C (IL4 (p=0.005), IL5 (p=0.046), IL10 (p=0.046), GCSF
(p=0.027). Increases were also observed in levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines (e.g. RANTES p<0.0027) and angiogenic cytokines (e.g. VEGF
p=0.0027 and IL8 p<0.0027) when comparing A/B vs C. When comparing
treated vs untreated patients, statistically increases in the level of
cytokine IL6 (p=0.011) were observed for group A. Pathway analysis
predicted the pro-MDSC protein S100A9 would increase with cancer stage.
Levels of S100A9 were greater in plasma of newly diagnosed surgically
unresectable patients as compared to surgically resectable patients by a
factor of 2.4 fold (p= 0.025). To date, 11 patients who have undergone
chemotherapy have been phenotyped and the PD patients (n=7) had
statistically higher HLADRneg/low/CD33+ cells (9.1 6.1 %) than SD (n=4)
patients (1.4 0.6%), with p=0.01 based on the Mann-Whitney test. MDSC and
T cells isolated from a patient with 19.3% HLADRneg/low/CD33+ cells in
peripheral blood were co-cultured and demonstrated that MDSC decreases T
cell proliferation and responsiveness to interferon stimulation by
85%.Conclusions: Levels of pro-MDSC cytokines are increased in the
circulation of pancreatic adenocarcinoma patients. MDSC chemotaxic
factors such as S100A9 increase with stage. This study suggests that MDSC
in peripheral blood may be a predictive biomarker of chemotherapy failure
in pancreatic cancer patients.

