Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RAR1 as a novel drug target to improve conventional hormonal
adjuvant therapy of breast cancer.


Genetic or epigenetic changes must occur and be propagated for breast
cancer cells to develop resistance to hormonal adjuvant therapies. This
would require a basal level of cell cycling during hormone depletion or
tamoxifen treatment. We have previously demonstrated that the retinoic
acid receptor 1 (RAR1) apoprotein supports a basal level of proliferation
in breast cancer cells that are either hormone depleted or treated with
tamoxifen. This action of RAR1 was ligand-insensitive (reflecting a
nonclassical mechanism) and involved the activation of growth supporting
genes by the RAR1 apoprotein. As RAR1 is genetically redundant, we
hypothesize that including targeted downregulation of RAR1 will improve
the outcome of hormonal adjuvant therapy in breast cancer. Tissue array
analysis indicated prevalence of RAR1 in clinical breast tumors covering
a wide pathologic spectrum. We have synthesized a high affinity
RAR-specific antagonist, AGN194301, as a means of selectively targeting
RAR. AGN194301 did not affect the ability of RAR1 to support basal cell
proliferation and did not alter the level of RAR1 protein. Preliminary
SAR studies showed the positions at which the compound could be modified
without abrogating its ability to bind to RAR. Further studies and
strategies for attaining downregulation of RAR1 using modified versions
of this compound will be discussed.

