Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetic analysis of CFAK-C4 in dogs and estimation of
first dose in man.


Purpose: Inhibition of the FAK-VEGFR-3 interaction by the small molecule
inhibitor chloropyramine hydrochloride (CFAK-C4) has been shown to reduce
tumor growth both alone and synergistically with doxorubicin and
gemcitabine in an animal tumor model. A multiple dose study of CFAK-C4 in
dogs was investigated to gain knowledge in estimating a first in man
dose. Methods: CFAK-C4 was given to two female and two male dogs as an IV
infusion at 1.25 or 2.5 mg/kg for five minutes, on three consecutive
days, days 1, 2 and 3. Single- and multiple-dose PK samples were
collected on days 1 and 3 of dosing. Plasma samples were collected at
0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 24 hours post-dose. CFAK-C4 concentrations were
determined using LC-MS/MS, with a LLOQ of 2.5 pg/ml. Noncompartmental PK
analysis was performed using WinNonlin (Pharsight, version 5.3).Results:
The mean CFAK-C4 plasma concentration-time profiles revealed a
biexponential decline of drug following IV infusion, independent of day
of dosing. The median (range) half-life was 3.42 hours (2.75-4.06 hours)
and 3.79 (3.5-5.0) on days 1 and 3 following administration of 1.25 mg/kg
CFAK-C4. At the 2.5 mg/kg dose level, the median half-life was similar.
The median (range) Cmax of 1.25 mg/kg CFAK-C4 was determined to be 75
ng/ml (41-87 ng/ml) on day 1 and 99 ng/ml (84-102 ng/ml) on day 3. After
the 2.5 mg/kg dose the Cmax was 185 ng/ml (165-244 ng/ml) and 171 ng/ml
(153-181 ng/ml) on days 1 and 3 respectively. The AUC0-24 at the 1.25
mg/kg dose level was similar on both days 1 and 3 with a median (range)
of 167 ng*hr/ml (117-231 ng*hr/ml) and 178 ng*hr/ml (170-194 ng*hr/ml),
respectively. The AUC0-24 was also similar after the 2.5 mg/kg dose on
days 1 and 3 with a median (range) of 447 ng*hr/ml (434-495 ng*hr/ml) and
406 ng*hr/ml (400-460 ng*hr/ml), respectively. The median (range)
clearance for dose 1.25 mg/kg was 7.46 L/hr/kg (5.36-10.59 L/hr/kg) on
day 1 and 6.47 L/hr/kg (6.07-6.91L/hr/kg) on day 3. For the 2.5 mg/kg
dose level, the median (range) clearance was slightly lower compared with
the 1.25 mg/kg dose, with values of 5.48 L/hr/kg (5.02-5.66 L/hr/kg) and
5.85 L/hr/kg (5.04-5.93 L/hr/kg) on days 1 and 3, respectively. Utilizing
allometric scaling techniques of PK parameters from mice and dogs for
CFAK-C4, the estimated human PK parameters for volume of distribution,
clearance and half-life were 1695 L, 126 L/hr, and 9.34 hours,
respectively. Subsequently, using a no observable adverse event level
(NOAEL) of 44.5 mg/kg IP for mice and a NOAEL of 2.5 mg/kg IV for dog,
the human starting dose (assuming a 70 kg human) would be a daily dose of
25 mg and 10 mg based on mouse or dog, respectively. Given that dogs are
the most sensitive species, 10 mg daily is the suggested first dose in
man for CFAK-C4. Conclusions: These results demonstrate that CFAK-C4 has
linear kinetics and that no accumulation of drug occurs after multiple
dosing. Allometric scaling of mouse and dog data allowed for the
estimation of the first in man dose of CFAK-C4.

