Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel isoquinolinone derivatives with dual PARP-1/PARP-3
inhibitory activity are highly active against pTEN mutated colorectal
cancer and glioblastoma models..


Inhibitors of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs) family of proteins
are currently in clinical trials as potential anticancer agents. PARP-1
is a key nuclear enzyme activated by DNA strand breaks and its activation
contributes to the recruitment of DNA repair and checkpoint proteins to
the sites of damage. PARP-2 shows overlapping functions with PARP-1, as
demonstrated by the embryonic lethality phenotype observed in double
knockout mice, compared with the viability observed for single knockout
of either gene. Genetic disruption in mice of PARP-2, but not of PARP-1,
has been reported to affect different processes including
spermatogenesis, adipogenesis, and thymocyte survival.It has been
demonstrated that BRCA1 and BRCA2-deficient cell lines are sensitive
towards PARP inhibition through prevention of DNA damage repair. However,
recent studies have highlighted new potential genetic backgrounds in
which PARP inhibition may have a therapeutic rationale. Accordingly, it
has been reported that tumor cell lines bearing PTEN mutations, or with
defects in mismatch repair genes are sensitive to PARP inhibitors.Here we
describe the in vitro and in vivo characterization of small molecule
inhibitors belonging to the isoquinolinone chemical class, with dual
PARP-1 and PARP-3 inhibitory activity and which are selective versus
PARP-2. Representative compounds of the class, such as NMS-P914, whose
co-crystal structure with the human PARP-1 catalytic domain will be
shown, and NMS-P648, are endowed with nanomolar potency against PARP-1
and PARP-3, are >100 selective versus PARP-2, possess almost complete
oral bioavailability in the mouse and excellent in vitro ADMET properties
across species. In cells, NMS-P914 and NMS-P648 inhibit DNA
damage-induced PARP-1 activity with an IC50 of 1 nM and display single
agent cytotoxicity in BRCA deficient breast tumor cell lines (IC50
Inhibitors of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs) family of proteins
are currently in clinical trials as potential anticancer agents. PARP-1
is a key nuclear enzyme activated by DNA strand breaks and its activation
contributes to the recruitment of DNA repair and checkpoint proteins to
the sites of damage. PARP-2 shows overlapping functions with PARP-1, as
demonstrated by the embryonic lethality phenotype observed in double
knockout mice, compared with the viability observed for single knockout
of either gene. Genetic disruption in mice of PARP-2, but not of PARP-1,
has been reported to affect different processes including
spermatogenesis, adipogenesis, and thymocyte survival.It has been
demonstrated that BRCA1 and BRCA2-deficient cell lines are sensitive
towards PARP inhibition through prevention of DNA damage repair. However,
recent studies have highlighted new potential genetic backgrounds in
which PARP inhibition may have a therapeutic rationale. Accordingly, it
has been reported that tumor cell lines bearing PTEN mutations, or with
defects in mismatch repair genes are sensitive to PARP inhibitors.Here we
describe the in vitro and in vivo characterization of small molecule
inhibitors belonging to the isoquinolinone chemical class, with dual
PARP-1 and PARP-3 inhibitory activity and which are selective versus
PARP-2. Representative compounds of the class, such as NMS-P914, whose
co-crystal structure with the human PARP-1 catalytic domain will be
shown, and NMS-P648, are endowed with nanomolar potency against PARP-1
and PARP-3, are >100 selective versus PARP-2, possess almost complete
oral bioavailability in the mouse and excellent in vitro ADMET properties
across species. In cells, NMS-P914 and NMS-P648 inhibit DNA
damage-induced PARP-1 activity with an IC50 of 1 nM and display single
agent cytotoxicity in BRCA deficient breast tumor cell lines (IC50 < 100
nM). Interestingly, NMS-P914 and other members of the class also display
similar potency against colorectal cancer and glioblastoma cell lines
bearing defects in pTEN and in mismatch repair genes, and are active
against glioblastoma cell lines resistant to temozolomide, irinotecan and
to known PARP inhibitors such as olaparib and veliparib. In combination
studies, NMS-P914 was found to be synergistic with temozolomide, both in
temozolomide sensitive and resistant glioblastoma contexts. Furthermore,
combination of NMS-P914 with temozolomide gives prolonged tumor
regression without increasing temozolomide toxicity in vivo, showing
better tolerability compared to temozolomide combination with olaparib.

