Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The head and neck cancer biomarker wiki: A tool for data mining
and biomarker meta-analyses.


Biomarkers that accurately predict outcome or treatment response is
lacking for most human tumor types, including for common and well-studied
cancers like head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). With the aim
to summarize existing genomic analysis and biomarker data into a format
analyzable with bioinformatics processing tools, we set out to develop a
biomarker wiki for HNSCC, hypothesizing that meta-analyses would reveal
novel and potentially clinically useful sets of biomarker genes. We
applied the user-friendly MediaWiki interface for collecting data in the
public domain, and separated the results under the categories: primary
tumor profiling, metastasis profiling, cell line profiling and treatment
response. The information was captured applying controlled and
standardized vocabularies, including with data storage in the multi-omics
Investigation/Study/Assay (ISA-Tab) format. Bioinformatics-driven
meta-analyses of results from currently over 50 publications indicate
that the wiki serves to accurately identify common gene patterns, gene
ontologies, molecular networks and key regulator genes within and among
the respective categories. Additionally, independent validations relative
other databases such as the Human Gene Expression Map, the Human Protein
Atlas and the cBio Cancer Genomics Portal confirm many associations,
including with significant correlations to poor outcome for gene
sub-sets. Overall, the wiki results so far agree with the hypothesis
under testing, suggesting novel biomarker genes/signatures for future
clinical assessment. On completion, we foresee a query-enabling
update-friendly knowledge platform for head and neck cancer studies in
the public domain.

