Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of gefitinib-resistant human lung cancer cells by
indolizino[6,7-b]indole derivatives.


According to the most prevalent, poor prognosis, and lowest 5 year
survival rate, patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are one
of the most common issues in global health problem. Although tyrosine
receptor inhibitors (TKI), cetuximab, erlotinib, and gefitinib, which
target epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), are only effective in
certain subpopulations, TKI resistance is developed after a median of 10
to 14 months via acquisition of second mutation as well as several other
mechanisms. Developing therapeutic agent against TKI resistance is of
critical and essential. In this study, we demonstrated that the
derivatives of 1,2-bis-hydroxy- indolizino[6,7-b]indiole diols, a novel
class of DNA crosslinking agent, effectively kill NSCLC cell lines
including PC9 (exon 19 deletion), PC9/gefb4 (exon 19 deletion and
resistant to gefitinib), CL100 (exon 19 deletion), and CL97 (exon 19
deletion and T790M). Our results also showed that BO-1922, one of
derivatives, was almost equally effective in suppression the growth of
various H1299 cell lines which ectopically expressed wild type or a
variety of mutant EGFR (such as including L858R, exon 19 deletion,
L858R/T790M, and exon 19 deletion/T790M, respectively). The selected
derivatives, BO-1922 and BO-1978, were shown to induce DNA double-strand
crosslink by modified comet assay and modulate the expression of DNA
repair proteins. By aid of flow cytometric assay, we found that exposure
of PC9 and PC9/gefb4 cells to BO-1922 resulted in accumulation of cells
at the G2/M phase, while BO-1978 causes cell cycle delay at the G1 and S
phase. Furthermore, BO-1922 and BO-1978 given at 25 mg/kg significantly
suppressed the growth of PC9/gefb4 xenograft tumors. Our present results
revealed that BO-1922 and BO-1978 may have potential against NSCLC with
EGFR mutations and gefitinib resistance.

