Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of S3I-1757, a STAT3-STAT3 dimerization disruptor that
inhibits STAT3 activity, tumor survival, migration and invasion.


The ability of STAT3 to translocate to the nucleus, bind DNA and
transcriptionally regulate STAT3 target genes depends on tyrosine
phosphorylation STAT3-STAT3 dimerization. Our chemistry efforts led to
the discovery of S3I-1757 that disrupts STAT3-STAT3 dimerization.
Fluorescence polarization assays and molecular modeling show that
S3I-1757 interacts with Y-705 binding site in the STAT3-SH2 domain and
displaces fluorescein-labelled GpYLPQTV phosphotyrosine peptide from
binding to STAT3. Furthermore, using co-immunoprecipitation and
co-localization studies we show that S3I-1757 inhibits STAT3 dimerization
and STAT3-EGF receptor binding in intact cells. Treatment of human cancer
cells with S3I-1757 (but not a closely related analogue, S3I-1756, that
does not inhibit STAT3 dimerization), inhibits selectively the
phosphorylation of STAT3 over Akt and Erk1/2, nuclear accumulation of
P-Y705-STAT3, STAT3-DNA binding and transcriptional activation and
suppresses the expression levels of STAT3 target genes such as Bcl-xL,
survivin, cyclin D1 and MMP9. Furthermore, S3I-1757 but not S3I-1756
inhibits anchorage-dependent and -independent growth, migration and
invasion of human cancer cells which depend on STAT3 selectively over
those that do not. Finally, STAT3-C, a genetically engineered mutant of
STAT3 that forms a constitutively dimerized STAT3, rescues from S3I-1757
effects. Our results warrant further development of S3I-1757 as a
STAT3-STAT3 dimerization inhibitor capable of blocking hyper activated
STAT3 and suppressing malignant transformation of STAT3-dependent human
tumors.

