Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic efficacy of an optimized quadruply mutated IL13-based
bacterial cytotoxin in an orthotopic murine glioma model.


Interleukin 13 receptor alpha 2 (IL13R2) is a tumor-restricted plasma
membrane receptor that is overexpressed on greater than 70% of
Glioblastoma Multiformes (GBMs) as well as in other malignancies,
including melanoma, adenocarcinoma, ovarian cancer and renal cell
carcinoma. We and others have therapeutically exploited this attractive
target using IL13-based targeting strategies to deliver bacterial toxins,
chemotherapeutics, nanoparticles, viruses and immunotherapy directly to
the IL13R2 tumor-restricted biomarker. In past work, we found multiple
mutational hotspots on IL13 that (a) abrogated its binding to the
physiologically abundant IL13R1/IL4R receptor heterodimer, and (b)
increased its binding to the tumor-restricted IL13R2. Based on these
findings, we created a delivery platform established as an optimized
IL13R2-Targeted Quadruple Mutant of IL13 (TQM13;
IL13.E13K/R66D/S69D/K105R) that we demonstrated binds with high affinity
towards IL13R2, but not the IL13R1/IL4R receptor heterodimer. Of
importance, we demonstrated the ability of radiolabeled TQM13 to target
IL13R2-expressing tumors in vivo using positron emission tomography
(PET). The objective of this current work was to demonstrate for the
first time the in vivo IL13R2-targeted killing effect of our optimized
TQM13 ligand genetically fused to a potent derivative of Pseudomonas
exotoxin (PE).We successfully expressed TQM13 and TQM13-PE proteins in an
E. coli expression system, denatured, refolded and purified them via
Nickel-based affinity and ion exchange chromatography. We demonstrated
IL13R2-specific affinity of TQM13 using a novel IL13R2-inducible system
in which B16 melanoma cells expressed varying amounts of IL13R2 in
proportion to the concentration of doxycycline. Of importance, the number
of induced TQM13 binding sites (in vitro and in vivo) was comparable to
the range seen in GBM and other malignancies (50,000-4,500,000
receptors/cell). In addition, we demonstrated that TQM13-PE killed cells
in direct proportion to IL13R2 expression. Therefore, we tested the
efficacy of TQM13-PE in an orthotopic murine GBM model by injecting mice
with 1 g of TQM13-PE intracranially on day 7 and 14 post stereotactic
tumor cell implantation. We found a significant increase in survival only
in mice bearing IL13R2-expressing orthotopic tumors, in contrast to mice
bearing IL13R2-negative tumors.Thus, we have successfully generated an
optimized, biomarker-targeted anti-GBM agent that demonstrated specific
therapeutic potential against the tumor-associated IL13R2 biomarker in
vivo.

