Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-FLIP (L) dual function in cervical cancer.


Cellular FLICE-like inhibitory protein (c-FLIP) is a caspasa-8/10 homolog
catalytically inactive that interferes with the efficient formation of
DISC. There are three isoforms of this protein: c-FLIPL (long) of 55kDa,
c-FLIPS (short) of 26kDa y c-FLIPR (Raji) of 24kDa. c-FLIPS and c-FLIPR
functions have been well established: both can block extrinsic pathway of
apoptosis by inhibiting procaspasa-8 activation in DISC. However, c-FLIPL
function still remains unclear. When c-FLIPL is overexpressed, as in some
cancers, has an anti-apoptotic function very similar to c-FLIPS, but also
can be a proapoptotic molecule at low concentrations. The aim of this
study is to characterize c-FLIP functions in cervical uterine
carcinogenesis.Three cervical cancer cell lines were used in this study:
SiHa, C-4I and C-33A. c-FLIP expression in cell lines was determined by
real time PCR and western blottting. c-FLIP expression was transiently
downregulated by siRNA and the silencing effects on cell viability,
proliferation and apoptosis were analysed, by comparing with a control
negative siRNA-transfected cells.Using MTS analysis, SiHa and C4I c-FLIP
transfected cells showed a increment of viability compared with scramble,
since 24 hours after transfection in C 4I and 72 hours in SiHa (PCellular
FLICE-like inhibitory protein (c-FLIP) is a caspasa-8/10 homolog
catalytically inactive that interferes with the efficient formation of
DISC. There are three isoforms of this protein: c-FLIPL (long) of 55kDa,
c-FLIPS (short) of 26kDa y c-FLIPR (Raji) of 24kDa. c-FLIPS and c-FLIPR
functions have been well established: both can block extrinsic pathway of
apoptosis by inhibiting procaspasa-8 activation in DISC. However, c-FLIPL
function still remains unclear. When c-FLIPL is overexpressed, as in some
cancers, has an anti-apoptotic function very similar to c-FLIPS, but also
can be a proapoptotic molecule at low concentrations. The aim of this
study is to characterize c-FLIP functions in cervical uterine
carcinogenesis.Three cervical cancer cell lines were used in this study:
SiHa, C-4I and C-33A. c-FLIP expression in cell lines was determined by
real time PCR and western blottting. c-FLIP expression was transiently
downregulated by siRNA and the silencing effects on cell viability,
proliferation and apoptosis were analysed, by comparing with a control
negative siRNA-transfected cells.Using MTS analysis, SiHa and C4I c-FLIP
transfected cells showed a increment of viability compared with scramble,
since 24 hours after transfection in C 4I and 72 hours in SiHa (P<0.05),
while C-33A cells do not show differences. Ki-67 immunocitochemestry was
performed to evaluate proliferation in cervical cell lines. Statistical
differences were found between SiHa and C 4I c-FLIP transfected cells
compared with scramble (PCellular FLICE-like inhibitory protein (c-FLIP)
is a caspasa-8/10 homolog catalytically inactive that interferes with the
efficient formation of DISC. There are three isoforms of this protein:
c-FLIPL (long) of 55kDa, c-FLIPS (short) of 26kDa y c-FLIPR (Raji) of
24kDa. c-FLIPS and c-FLIPR functions have been well established: both can
block extrinsic pathway of apoptosis by inhibiting procaspasa-8
activation in DISC. However, c-FLIPL function still remains unclear. When
c-FLIPL is overexpressed, as in some cancers, has an anti-apoptotic
function very similar to c-FLIPS, but also can be a proapoptotic molecule
at low concentrations. The aim of this study is to characterize c-FLIP
functions in cervical uterine carcinogenesis.Three cervical cancer cell
lines were used in this study: SiHa, C-4I and C-33A. c-FLIP expression in
cell lines was determined by real time PCR and western blottting. c-FLIP
expression was transiently downregulated by siRNA and the silencing
effects on cell viability, proliferation and apoptosis were analysed, by
comparing with a control negative siRNA-transfected cells.Using MTS
analysis, SiHa and C4I c-FLIP transfected cells showed a increment of
viability compared with scramble, since 24 hours after transfection in C
4I and 72 hours in SiHa (P<0.05), while C-33A cells do not show
differences. Ki-67 immunocitochemestry was performed to evaluate
proliferation in cervical cell lines. Statistical differences were found
between SiHa and C 4I c-FLIP transfected cells compared with scramble
(P<0.05). All three c-FLIP transfected cell lines showed a higher level
of apoptosis than scramble control (PCellular FLICE-like inhibitory
protein (c-FLIP) is a caspasa-8/10 homolog catalytically inactive that
interferes with the efficient formation of DISC. There are three isoforms
of this protein: c-FLIPL (long) of 55kDa, c-FLIPS (short) of 26kDa y
c-FLIPR (Raji) of 24kDa. c-FLIPS and c-FLIPR functions have been well
established: both can block extrinsic pathway of apoptosis by inhibiting
procaspasa-8 activation in DISC. However, c-FLIPL function still remains
unclear. When c-FLIPL is overexpressed, as in some cancers, has an
anti-apoptotic function very similar to c-FLIPS, but also can be a
proapoptotic molecule at low concentrations. The aim of this study is to
characterize c-FLIP functions in cervical uterine carcinogenesis.Three
cervical cancer cell lines were used in this study: SiHa, C-4I and C-33A.
c-FLIP expression in cell lines was determined by real time PCR and
western blottting. c-FLIP expression was transiently downregulated by
siRNA and the silencing effects on cell viability, proliferation and
apoptosis were analysed, by comparing with a control negative
siRNA-transfected cells.Using MTS analysis, SiHa and C4I c-FLIP
transfected cells showed a increment of viability compared with scramble,
since 24 hours after transfection in C 4I and 72 hours in SiHa (P<0.05),
while C-33A cells do not show differences. Ki-67 immunocitochemestry was
performed to evaluate proliferation in cervical cell lines. Statistical
differences were found between SiHa and C 4I c-FLIP transfected cells
compared with scramble (P<0.05). All three c-FLIP transfected cell lines
showed a higher level of apoptosis than scramble control (P<0.05), using
a TUNEL-based analyzed performed by flow cytometry.Our results suggest
that c-FLIPL could be having a dual function in cervical cancer cell
lines, both inhibiting proliferation and apoptosis.Grant Support: This
investigation was financed by Proyect CORFO-INNOVA N07CN13PBT-222 and
Proyect CORFO N 09CN14-5960 (CEGIN). CI is recipient of grants from
FONDECYT Postdoctoral Proyect N 3130630. PB is recipient of grants from
FONDECYT Postdoctoral Proyect N 3120141Citation Format: Carmen G. Ili,
Priscilla Brebi, Alejandra Andana, Patricia Garcia, Pamela Leal, Oscar
Tapia, Tamara Viscarra, Helga Weber, Juan Roa. c-FLIP (L) dual function
in cervical cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2956. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2956

