Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In utero estrogenic exposures increase tamoxifen resistance in a
new pre-clinical model of estrogen receptor positive breast cancer.


Maternal estrogenic exposures during pregnancy increase breast cancer
risk among daughters in humans and in animal studies, possibly through
epigenetic mechanisms. In addition, our findings obtained using systems
biology tools to analyze mRNA microarray data suggest that in utero
estrogenic exposures reduce the efficacy of antiestrogen treatment. Here
we tested whether development of tamoxifen (TAM) resistance is
pre-programmed in the offspring by maternal exposure to estradiol during
pregnancy. Pregnant rats were exposed either to 0 or 0.1 ppm ethinyl
estradiol (EE2) during pregnancy, and their offspring were treated with
DMBA to induce ER+ mammary tumors.Untreated mammary tumors in the EE2
offspring and in women who subsequently recurred (in Loi dataset),
exhibited reduced expression of genes in the ATF6 pathway of unfolded
protein response (UPR), including an apoptosis-inducing gene CHOP
compared with tumors in the control rats or in women who did not recur.
In addition, gene microarray analysis identified SEMA3b (pMaternal
estrogenic exposures during pregnancy increase breast cancer risk among
daughters in humans and in animal studies, possibly through epigenetic
mechanisms. In addition, our findings obtained using systems biology
tools to analyze mRNA microarray data suggest that in utero estrogenic
exposures reduce the efficacy of antiestrogen treatment. Here we tested
whether development of tamoxifen (TAM) resistance is pre-programmed in
the offspring by maternal exposure to estradiol during pregnancy.
Pregnant rats were exposed either to 0 or 0.1 ppm ethinyl estradiol (EE2)
during pregnancy, and their offspring were treated with DMBA to induce
ER+ mammary tumors.Untreated mammary tumors in the EE2 offspring and in
women who subsequently recurred (in Loi dataset), exhibited reduced
expression of genes in the ATF6 pathway of unfolded protein response
(UPR), including an apoptosis-inducing gene CHOP compared with tumors in
the control rats or in women who did not recur. In addition, gene
microarray analysis identified SEMA3b (p<.012) as down-regulated and KAL1
(pMaternal estrogenic exposures during pregnancy increase breast cancer
risk among daughters in humans and in animal studies, possibly through
epigenetic mechanisms. In addition, our findings obtained using systems
biology tools to analyze mRNA microarray data suggest that in utero
estrogenic exposures reduce the efficacy of antiestrogen treatment. Here
we tested whether development of tamoxifen (TAM) resistance is
pre-programmed in the offspring by maternal exposure to estradiol during
pregnancy. Pregnant rats were exposed either to 0 or 0.1 ppm ethinyl
estradiol (EE2) during pregnancy, and their offspring were treated with
DMBA to induce ER+ mammary tumors.Untreated mammary tumors in the EE2
offspring and in women who subsequently recurred (in Loi dataset),
exhibited reduced expression of genes in the ATF6 pathway of unfolded
protein response (UPR), including an apoptosis-inducing gene CHOP
compared with tumors in the control rats or in women who did not recur.
In addition, gene microarray analysis identified SEMA3b (p<.012) as
down-regulated and KAL1 (p<.02) as up-regulated in the mammary tumors in
the EE2 offspring and in TAM resistant LCC9 human breast cancer cells.
SEMA3b is a tumor suppressor, perhaps because it induces apoptosis
through Akt-mediated pathway, and is found to be methylated in clinical
breast cancer and LCC9 cells. In turn, TGF- regulated KAL1 gene is
overexpressed in breast cancer and suggested to induce cell survival and
cancer metastasis.TAM treatment (15 mg/kg TAM via feed) was started when
first tumor reached a size of 1.30.2 cm in diameter. In rats that
exhibited a TAM-resistant tumor, valproic acid (HDAC inhibitor) and
hydralazine (DNMT inhibitor) were added as a 2nd line treatment. Control
rats were more likely to exhibit complete response to TAM (54%) than in
utero EE2 exposed rats (38%), and de novo resistance was also lower in
the controls (38%) than in the EE2 group (53%). Acquired resistance
(re-growth after a complete response to TAM), characterized by
over-expression of UPR gene GRP78, was seen in 23% of the tumors in the
control and 42% in the EE2 group (pMaternal estrogenic exposures during
pregnancy increase breast cancer risk among daughters in humans and in
animal studies, possibly through epigenetic mechanisms. In addition, our
findings obtained using systems biology tools to analyze mRNA microarray
data suggest that in utero estrogenic exposures reduce the efficacy of
antiestrogen treatment. Here we tested whether development of tamoxifen
(TAM) resistance is pre-programmed in the offspring by maternal exposure
to estradiol during pregnancy. Pregnant rats were exposed either to 0 or
0.1 ppm ethinyl estradiol (EE2) during pregnancy, and their offspring
were treated with DMBA to induce ER+ mammary tumors.Untreated mammary
tumors in the EE2 offspring and in women who subsequently recurred (in
Loi dataset), exhibited reduced expression of genes in the ATF6 pathway
of unfolded protein response (UPR), including an apoptosis-inducing gene
CHOP compared with tumors in the control rats or in women who did not
recur. In addition, gene microarray analysis identified SEMA3b (p<.012)
as down-regulated and KAL1 (p<.02) as up-regulated in the mammary tumors
in the EE2 offspring and in TAM resistant LCC9 human breast cancer cells.
SEMA3b is a tumor suppressor, perhaps because it induces apoptosis
through Akt-mediated pathway, and is found to be methylated in clinical
breast cancer and LCC9 cells. In turn, TGF- regulated KAL1 gene is
overexpressed in breast cancer and suggested to induce cell survival and
cancer metastasis.TAM treatment (15 mg/kg TAM via feed) was started when
first tumor reached a size of 1.30.2 cm in diameter. In rats that
exhibited a TAM-resistant tumor, valproic acid (HDAC inhibitor) and
hydralazine (DNMT inhibitor) were added as a 2nd line treatment. Control
rats were more likely to exhibit complete response to TAM (54%) than in
utero EE2 exposed rats (38%), and de novo resistance was also lower in
the controls (38%) than in the EE2 group (53%). Acquired resistance
(re-growth after a complete response to TAM), characterized by
over-expression of UPR gene GRP78, was seen in 23% of the tumors in the
control and 42% in the EE2 group (p<0.007). Adding HDACi-DNMTi as a 2nd
line of treatment significantly reduced de novo (from 53% to 19%,
pMaternal estrogenic exposures during pregnancy increase breast cancer
risk among daughters in humans and in animal studies, possibly through
epigenetic mechanisms. In addition, our findings obtained using systems
biology tools to analyze mRNA microarray data suggest that in utero
estrogenic exposures reduce the efficacy of antiestrogen treatment. Here
we tested whether development of tamoxifen (TAM) resistance is
pre-programmed in the offspring by maternal exposure to estradiol during
pregnancy. Pregnant rats were exposed either to 0 or 0.1 ppm ethinyl
estradiol (EE2) during pregnancy, and their offspring were treated with
DMBA to induce ER+ mammary tumors.Untreated mammary tumors in the EE2
offspring and in women who subsequently recurred (in Loi dataset),
exhibited reduced expression of genes in the ATF6 pathway of unfolded
protein response (UPR), including an apoptosis-inducing gene CHOP
compared with tumors in the control rats or in women who did not recur.
In addition, gene microarray analysis identified SEMA3b (p<.012) as
down-regulated and KAL1 (p<.02) as up-regulated in the mammary tumors in
the EE2 offspring and in TAM resistant LCC9 human breast cancer cells.
SEMA3b is a tumor suppressor, perhaps because it induces apoptosis
through Akt-mediated pathway, and is found to be methylated in clinical
breast cancer and LCC9 cells. In turn, TGF- regulated KAL1 gene is
overexpressed in breast cancer and suggested to induce cell survival and
cancer metastasis.TAM treatment (15 mg/kg TAM via feed) was started when
first tumor reached a size of 1.30.2 cm in diameter. In rats that
exhibited a TAM-resistant tumor, valproic acid (HDAC inhibitor) and
hydralazine (DNMT inhibitor) were added as a 2nd line treatment. Control
rats were more likely to exhibit complete response to TAM (54%) than in
utero EE2 exposed rats (38%), and de novo resistance was also lower in
the controls (38%) than in the EE2 group (53%). Acquired resistance
(re-growth after a complete response to TAM), characterized by
over-expression of UPR gene GRP78, was seen in 23% of the tumors in the
control and 42% in the EE2 group (p<0.007). Adding HDACi-DNMTi as a 2nd
line of treatment significantly reduced de novo (from 53% to 19%,
p<0.001) and acquired TAM resistance (from 42% to 6%, pMaternal
estrogenic exposures during pregnancy increase breast cancer risk among
daughters in humans and in animal studies, possibly through epigenetic
mechanisms. In addition, our findings obtained using systems biology
tools to analyze mRNA microarray data suggest that in utero estrogenic
exposures reduce the efficacy of antiestrogen treatment. Here we tested
whether development of tamoxifen (TAM) resistance is pre-programmed in
the offspring by maternal exposure to estradiol during pregnancy.
Pregnant rats were exposed either to 0 or 0.1 ppm ethinyl estradiol (EE2)
during pregnancy, and their offspring were treated with DMBA to induce
ER+ mammary tumors.Untreated mammary tumors in the EE2 offspring and in
women who subsequently recurred (in Loi dataset), exhibited reduced
expression of genes in the ATF6 pathway of unfolded protein response
(UPR), including an apoptosis-inducing gene CHOP compared with tumors in
the control rats or in women who did not recur. In addition, gene
microarray analysis identified SEMA3b (p<.012) as down-regulated and KAL1
(p<.02) as up-regulated in the mammary tumors in the EE2 offspring and in
TAM resistant LCC9 human breast cancer cells. SEMA3b is a tumor
suppressor, perhaps because it induces apoptosis through Akt-mediated
pathway, and is found to be methylated in clinical breast cancer and LCC9
cells. In turn, TGF- regulated KAL1 gene is overexpressed in breast
cancer and suggested to induce cell survival and cancer metastasis.TAM
treatment (15 mg/kg TAM via feed) was started when first tumor reached a
size of 1.30.2 cm in diameter. In rats that exhibited a TAM-resistant
tumor, valproic acid (HDAC inhibitor) and hydralazine (DNMT inhibitor)
were added as a 2nd line treatment. Control rats were more likely to
exhibit complete response to TAM (54%) than in utero EE2 exposed rats
(38%), and de novo resistance was also lower in the controls (38%) than
in the EE2 group (53%). Acquired resistance (re-growth after a complete
response to TAM), characterized by over-expression of UPR gene GRP78, was
seen in 23% of the tumors in the control and 42% in the EE2 group
(p<0.007). Adding HDACi-DNMTi as a 2nd line of treatment significantly
reduced de novo (from 53% to 19%, p<0.001) and acquired TAM resistance
(from 42% to 6%, p<0.001) in the EE2 offspring, but did not affect TAM
resistance in the controls. Treatment with HDACi-DNMTi also reversed the
changes in SEMA3b and KAL1 in the rat tumors and reversed TAM resistance
in LCC9 cells.Our findings suggest that in utero estrogenic exposures
increase TAM resistance by inducing epigenetic changes leading to
down-regulation of specific tumor suppressor genes and up-regulation of
pro-survival genes. These changes could be reversed by adding HDACi-DNMTi
to TAM treatment. Our results may have important clinical implications
for treatment of antiestrogen refractory ER+ breast cancer.

