Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) regulates melanoma progression.


Background: Melanoma is the worst poor-prognosis skin cancer in the U.S.
Although Ca2+ is well recognized as a major second messenger, the role of
Ca2+ remains poorly understood in the cancer research field including
melanoma. Store-operated calcium entry (SOCE) is the mechanism of Ca2+
entry from the extracellular space in response to Ca2+ depletion in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). SOCE is regulated by interaction between
STIM1 (stromal interaction molecule 1) in the ER and Orai (ORAI calcium
release-activated calcium modulator) in the plasma membrane. Our previous
studies have demonstrated the presence of SOCE is observed in melanoma
cells, and potentially regulates cell migration and cell cycle. In the
present study, we extensively examined the effects of SOCE on migration
and proliferation in multiple melanoma and melanocyte cell lines as well
as on metastasis in mice.Method: Changes in intracellular Ca2+ level were
measured by Fluo4-AM, a Ca2+-sensing fluorescent dye. In order to ablate
STIM-1 or Orai-1, shRNA for each protein was induced with lentiviral
infection in SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24 and C8161 cells. Proliferation was
measured by the MTT assay. Migration was examined with the Boyden
chambers and the scratch assay. Immunocytochemistry was performed to
count the number of lamellipodia with F-actin staining. The experimental
metastasis assay was performed as follows. Three weeks after the
intravenous injection of SK-Mel-2 cells with knockdown of Orai1 or STIM1
in Balb/c nu/nu mice, the lungs were removed and fixed with picric acid.
The number of metastatic colonies in the lung surface was
counted.Results: SOCE, as demonstrated by enhancement of Ca2+ entry from
extracellular space after Ca2+ depletion in the ER, was observed in 5
primary and 3 metastatic human melanoma cell lines, a mouse melanoma cell
line, human and mouse melanocyte cell lines. In addition, metastatic, but
not primary, melanoma cell lines showed significantly greater SOCE
compared to melanocytes, suggesting that SOCE may positively correlate
with malignancy of melanoma. Knockdown of STIM1 inhibited proliferation
in metastatic melanoma cells (SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24 and C8161)
(pBackground: Melanoma is the worst poor-prognosis skin cancer in the
U.S. Although Ca2+ is well recognized as a major second messenger, the
role of Ca2+ remains poorly understood in the cancer research field
including melanoma. Store-operated calcium entry (SOCE) is the mechanism
of Ca2+ entry from the extracellular space in response to Ca2+ depletion
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). SOCE is regulated by interaction
between STIM1 (stromal interaction molecule 1) in the ER and Orai (ORAI
calcium release-activated calcium modulator) in the plasma membrane. Our
previous studies have demonstrated the presence of SOCE is observed in
melanoma cells, and potentially regulates cell migration and cell cycle.
In the present study, we extensively examined the effects of SOCE on
migration and proliferation in multiple melanoma and melanocyte cell
lines as well as on metastasis in mice.Method: Changes in intracellular
Ca2+ level were measured by Fluo4-AM, a Ca2+-sensing fluorescent dye. In
order to ablate STIM-1 or Orai-1, shRNA for each protein was induced with
lentiviral infection in SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24 and C8161 cells.
Proliferation was measured by the MTT assay. Migration was examined with
the Boyden chambers and the scratch assay. Immunocytochemistry was
performed to count the number of lamellipodia with F-actin staining. The
experimental metastasis assay was performed as follows. Three weeks after
the intravenous injection of SK-Mel-2 cells with knockdown of Orai1 or
STIM1 in Balb/c nu/nu mice, the lungs were removed and fixed with picric
acid. The number of metastatic colonies in the lung surface was
counted.Results: SOCE, as demonstrated by enhancement of Ca2+ entry from
extracellular space after Ca2+ depletion in the ER, was observed in 5
primary and 3 metastatic human melanoma cell lines, a mouse melanoma cell
line, human and mouse melanocyte cell lines. In addition, metastatic, but
not primary, melanoma cell lines showed significantly greater SOCE
compared to melanocytes, suggesting that SOCE may positively correlate
with malignancy of melanoma. Knockdown of STIM1 inhibited proliferation
in metastatic melanoma cells (SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24 and C8161) (p<0.01),
suggesting that SOCE activates proliferation of melanoma. Inhibition of
SOCE with knockdown of Orai1 or STIM1 suppressed migration in cell lines
tested (SK-Mel-2 and SK-Mel-24) (pBackground: Melanoma is the worst
poor-prognosis skin cancer in the U.S. Although Ca2+ is well recognized
as a major second messenger, the role of Ca2+ remains poorly understood
in the cancer research field including melanoma. Store-operated calcium
entry (SOCE) is the mechanism of Ca2+ entry from the extracellular space
in response to Ca2+ depletion in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). SOCE is
regulated by interaction between STIM1 (stromal interaction molecule 1)
in the ER and Orai (ORAI calcium release-activated calcium modulator) in
the plasma membrane. Our previous studies have demonstrated the presence
of SOCE is observed in melanoma cells, and potentially regulates cell
migration and cell cycle. In the present study, we extensively examined
the effects of SOCE on migration and proliferation in multiple melanoma
and melanocyte cell lines as well as on metastasis in mice.Method:
Changes in intracellular Ca2+ level were measured by Fluo4-AM, a
Ca2+-sensing fluorescent dye. In order to ablate STIM-1 or Orai-1, shRNA
for each protein was induced with lentiviral infection in SK-Mel-2,
SK-Mel-24 and C8161 cells. Proliferation was measured by the MTT assay.
Migration was examined with the Boyden chambers and the scratch assay.
Immunocytochemistry was performed to count the number of lamellipodia
with F-actin staining. The experimental metastasis assay was performed as
follows. Three weeks after the intravenous injection of SK-Mel-2 cells
with knockdown of Orai1 or STIM1 in Balb/c nu/nu mice, the lungs were
removed and fixed with picric acid. The number of metastatic colonies in
the lung surface was counted.Results: SOCE, as demonstrated by
enhancement of Ca2+ entry from extracellular space after Ca2+ depletion
in the ER, was observed in 5 primary and 3 metastatic human melanoma cell
lines, a mouse melanoma cell line, human and mouse melanocyte cell lines.
In addition, metastatic, but not primary, melanoma cell lines showed
significantly greater SOCE compared to melanocytes, suggesting that SOCE
may positively correlate with malignancy of melanoma. Knockdown of STIM1
inhibited proliferation in metastatic melanoma cells (SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24
and C8161) (p<0.01), suggesting that SOCE activates proliferation of
melanoma. Inhibition of SOCE with knockdown of Orai1 or STIM1 suppressed
migration in cell lines tested (SK-Mel-2 and SK-Mel-24) (p<0.01) and the
SOCE inhibitors suppressed it in cell lines (SK-Mel-2 and C8161)
(pBackground: Melanoma is the worst poor-prognosis skin cancer in the
U.S. Although Ca2+ is well recognized as a major second messenger, the
role of Ca2+ remains poorly understood in the cancer research field
including melanoma. Store-operated calcium entry (SOCE) is the mechanism
of Ca2+ entry from the extracellular space in response to Ca2+ depletion
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). SOCE is regulated by interaction
between STIM1 (stromal interaction molecule 1) in the ER and Orai (ORAI
calcium release-activated calcium modulator) in the plasma membrane. Our
previous studies have demonstrated the presence of SOCE is observed in
melanoma cells, and potentially regulates cell migration and cell cycle.
In the present study, we extensively examined the effects of SOCE on
migration and proliferation in multiple melanoma and melanocyte cell
lines as well as on metastasis in mice.Method: Changes in intracellular
Ca2+ level were measured by Fluo4-AM, a Ca2+-sensing fluorescent dye. In
order to ablate STIM-1 or Orai-1, shRNA for each protein was induced with
lentiviral infection in SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24 and C8161 cells.
Proliferation was measured by the MTT assay. Migration was examined with
the Boyden chambers and the scratch assay. Immunocytochemistry was
performed to count the number of lamellipodia with F-actin staining. The
experimental metastasis assay was performed as follows. Three weeks after
the intravenous injection of SK-Mel-2 cells with knockdown of Orai1 or
STIM1 in Balb/c nu/nu mice, the lungs were removed and fixed with picric
acid. The number of metastatic colonies in the lung surface was
counted.Results: SOCE, as demonstrated by enhancement of Ca2+ entry from
extracellular space after Ca2+ depletion in the ER, was observed in 5
primary and 3 metastatic human melanoma cell lines, a mouse melanoma cell
line, human and mouse melanocyte cell lines. In addition, metastatic, but
not primary, melanoma cell lines showed significantly greater SOCE
compared to melanocytes, suggesting that SOCE may positively correlate
with malignancy of melanoma. Knockdown of STIM1 inhibited proliferation
in metastatic melanoma cells (SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24 and C8161) (p<0.01),
suggesting that SOCE activates proliferation of melanoma. Inhibition of
SOCE with knockdown of Orai1 or STIM1 suppressed migration in cell lines
tested (SK-Mel-2 and SK-Mel-24) (p<0.01) and the SOCE inhibitors
suppressed it in cell lines (SK-Mel-2 and C8161) (p<0.01 for both cell
lines), indicating that SOCE regulates melanoma migration. Indeed, the
number of lamellipodia, which reflects the activity of migration, was
decreased by deletion of STIM1 or Orai1 (pBackground: Melanoma is the
worst poor-prognosis skin cancer in the U.S. Although Ca2+ is well
recognized as a major second messenger, the role of Ca2+ remains poorly
understood in the cancer research field including melanoma.
Store-operated calcium entry (SOCE) is the mechanism of Ca2+ entry from
the extracellular space in response to Ca2+ depletion in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). SOCE is regulated by interaction between STIM1 (stromal
interaction molecule 1) in the ER and Orai (ORAI calcium
release-activated calcium modulator) in the plasma membrane. Our previous
studies have demonstrated the presence of SOCE is observed in melanoma
cells, and potentially regulates cell migration and cell cycle. In the
present study, we extensively examined the effects of SOCE on migration
and proliferation in multiple melanoma and melanocyte cell lines as well
as on metastasis in mice.Method: Changes in intracellular Ca2+ level were
measured by Fluo4-AM, a Ca2+-sensing fluorescent dye. In order to ablate
STIM-1 or Orai-1, shRNA for each protein was induced with lentiviral
infection in SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24 and C8161 cells. Proliferation was
measured by the MTT assay. Migration was examined with the Boyden
chambers and the scratch assay. Immunocytochemistry was performed to
count the number of lamellipodia with F-actin staining. The experimental
metastasis assay was performed as follows. Three weeks after the
intravenous injection of SK-Mel-2 cells with knockdown of Orai1 or STIM1
in Balb/c nu/nu mice, the lungs were removed and fixed with picric acid.
The number of metastatic colonies in the lung surface was
counted.Results: SOCE, as demonstrated by enhancement of Ca2+ entry from
extracellular space after Ca2+ depletion in the ER, was observed in 5
primary and 3 metastatic human melanoma cell lines, a mouse melanoma cell
line, human and mouse melanocyte cell lines. In addition, metastatic, but
not primary, melanoma cell lines showed significantly greater SOCE
compared to melanocytes, suggesting that SOCE may positively correlate
with malignancy of melanoma. Knockdown of STIM1 inhibited proliferation
in metastatic melanoma cells (SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24 and C8161) (p<0.01),
suggesting that SOCE activates proliferation of melanoma. Inhibition of
SOCE with knockdown of Orai1 or STIM1 suppressed migration in cell lines
tested (SK-Mel-2 and SK-Mel-24) (p<0.01) and the SOCE inhibitors
suppressed it in cell lines (SK-Mel-2 and C8161) (p<0.01 for both cell
lines), indicating that SOCE regulates melanoma migration. Indeed, the
number of lamellipodia, which reflects the activity of migration, was
decreased by deletion of STIM1 or Orai1 (p<0.01). The experimental
metastasis assay demonstrated that the number of lung colonies was
reduced by knockdown of STIM1 or Orai1 (pBackground: Melanoma is the
worst poor-prognosis skin cancer in the U.S. Although Ca2+ is well
recognized as a major second messenger, the role of Ca2+ remains poorly
understood in the cancer research field including melanoma.
Store-operated calcium entry (SOCE) is the mechanism of Ca2+ entry from
the extracellular space in response to Ca2+ depletion in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). SOCE is regulated by interaction between STIM1 (stromal
interaction molecule 1) in the ER and Orai (ORAI calcium
release-activated calcium modulator) in the plasma membrane. Our previous
studies have demonstrated the presence of SOCE is observed in melanoma
cells, and potentially regulates cell migration and cell cycle. In the
present study, we extensively examined the effects of SOCE on migration
and proliferation in multiple melanoma and melanocyte cell lines as well
as on metastasis in mice.Method: Changes in intracellular Ca2+ level were
measured by Fluo4-AM, a Ca2+-sensing fluorescent dye. In order to ablate
STIM-1 or Orai-1, shRNA for each protein was induced with lentiviral
infection in SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24 and C8161 cells. Proliferation was
measured by the MTT assay. Migration was examined with the Boyden
chambers and the scratch assay. Immunocytochemistry was performed to
count the number of lamellipodia with F-actin staining. The experimental
metastasis assay was performed as follows. Three weeks after the
intravenous injection of SK-Mel-2 cells with knockdown of Orai1 or STIM1
in Balb/c nu/nu mice, the lungs were removed and fixed with picric acid.
The number of metastatic colonies in the lung surface was
counted.Results: SOCE, as demonstrated by enhancement of Ca2+ entry from
extracellular space after Ca2+ depletion in the ER, was observed in 5
primary and 3 metastatic human melanoma cell lines, a mouse melanoma cell
line, human and mouse melanocyte cell lines. In addition, metastatic, but
not primary, melanoma cell lines showed significantly greater SOCE
compared to melanocytes, suggesting that SOCE may positively correlate
with malignancy of melanoma. Knockdown of STIM1 inhibited proliferation
in metastatic melanoma cells (SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-24 and C8161) (p<0.01),
suggesting that SOCE activates proliferation of melanoma. Inhibition of
SOCE with knockdown of Orai1 or STIM1 suppressed migration in cell lines
tested (SK-Mel-2 and SK-Mel-24) (p<0.01) and the SOCE inhibitors
suppressed it in cell lines (SK-Mel-2 and C8161) (p<0.01 for both cell
lines), indicating that SOCE regulates melanoma migration. Indeed, the
number of lamellipodia, which reflects the activity of migration, was
decreased by deletion of STIM1 or Orai1 (p<0.01). The experimental
metastasis assay demonstrated that the number of lung colonies was
reduced by knockdown of STIM1 or Orai1 (p<0.01).Conclusion: Our results
demonstrated that inhibition of SOCE suppressed proliferation, migration,
and metastasis in melanoma, thus SOCE could be a new target for melanoma
therapy.

