Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disseminated tumor cell heterogeneity and dormancy in prostate
cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) can remain in the bone marrow for a prolonged
period of time (>5 years) while the patient shows no evidence of disease
before the cancer eventually recurs. Dormant cancer cells can be detected
in bone, the principal metastatic site of PCa, and these bone-homing
cancer cells are known as disseminated tumor cells (DTC). Little
information is available on the heterogeneity and dormancy of DTC in PCa.
In this study, we isolated and compared the gene expression profile of
individual DTC (n=45) from the bone marrow of 4 PCa patients with no
evidence of disease and 5 patients with advanced disease. Using principle
component analysis and cluster analysis of the 1000 most variable genes,
we determined the heterogeneity of the DTC population within each
patient. To identify a dormancy signature from DTC in the bone marrow and
primary PCa cells, we carried out two gene expression analyses: DTC in
patients with no evidence of disease vs. those with advanced disease, and
primary PCa tissues from patients with a short vs. long dormancy period
post radical prostatectomy (8-86 months). Genes associated in other
cancers with cellular senescence, cell-cycle inhibition, and dormancy
were analyzed. Candidate genes from both gene expression arrays were
validated at the protein level by a tissue microarray consisting of 64
primary PCa cases that recurred after either a short or long dormancy
period post radical prostatectomy (6-121 months).The identification of
heterogeneous gene signatures in DTC and novel proteins that promote
dormancy will guide the development of possible biomarkers and
therapeutic targets to prevent PCa recurrence, possibly by either
eliminating DTC or inhibiting their escape from dormancy.

