Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel strategy for eradicating lymph node metastasis of
early-stage colorectal cancers using telomerase-dependent replicating
adenoviral agent.


One of the biggest challenges in endoscopic therapeutic approach for
early colorectal cancer with submucosal invasion is how to treat regional
lymph nodes (LNs) possibly metastasized. The rate of LN metastasis in
submucosal invasive colorectal cancer are estimated approximately 10%.
Since endoscopic treatment can't clean LNs outside the bowel physically,
open or laparoscopic surgical treatment is still gold standard for
submucosal invasive colorectal cancer. We previously reported that in an
orthotopic rectal tumor mouse model, a telomerase-dependent tumor killing
adenoviral agent (OBP-301) spreads to the regional LNs, selectively
replicates in cancer cells in metastasized LNs, and inhibits LN
metastasis, when administered into the primary advanced rectal tumor. In
this study we evaluated the effectiveness of novel less invasive
treatment against submucosal invasive colorectal cancer, using local
tumor resection such as endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) and
OBP-301. HCT-116-GFP human colon cancer cells were orthotopically
implanted into the submucosal layer of nude mouse rectum with resultant
submucosal invasive early rectal tumor. LN metastasis was observed in
78.5% of mice as early as 7 days after cancer cell inoculation, and the
rectal tumor of mice with LN metastasis got locally excised with prior
peritumoral injection of OBP-301 solution, mimicking ESD technique. Seven
days after tumor resection, treatment of OBP-301 showed a significant
inhibition in LN metastasis status compared to control group. Moreover,
LN metastatic recurrence was not detected in OBP-301 treated group even 4
weeks after tumor resection. The combination of ESD and OBP-301 has
promising potential to take place of the conventional surgical approach
in treating submucosal invasive colorectal cancer.

