Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-638, a novel tumor suppressor for ER-negative breast cancer.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous non-coding RNAs of 1925 nt in length,
which regulate many protein-coding genes. miRNA dysregulation is observed
in a variety of cancers, including breast cancer. miRNAs have emerged as
an important set of biomarkers. miRNA profiling studies have led to the
identification of miRNAs that are aberrantly expressed in human breast
cancer, with miR-10b, miR-125b and miR-145 being down-regulated and
miR-21, and 155 being up-regulated. In our previous miRNA expression
profiling studies using microdissected FFPE tissues, we identified 8
clusters of miRNAs, which discrete the normal and breast lesions such as
ADH, DCIS and IDC. miR-638 is one of the differentially expressed miRNAs
during breast cancer progression. We first sought to determine the
expression of miR-638 in different breast cancer cell lines such as
MCF-7, Hs578T, T47D and MDA-MB-231 using qRT-PCR, which shows a very low
expression compared to normal tissues. This led us to hypothesize that
miR-638 may function as a tumor suppressor during breast cancer
development. To determine the role of miR-638 in both ER+ and ER- breast
cancer cells, we transfected miR-638 mimic oligos and scrambled oligo
mocks into MCF-7 (ER+), T47D (ER+), MDA-MB-231 (ER-) and Hs578T (ER-)
cells. After 48 hours, we found that the proliferation rate was
significantly down-regulated in ER- cells but not in ER+ cells by MTT
assay. Our preliminary matrigel analysis shows that miR-638
overexpressing MDA-MB-231 cells had 34 fold invasiveness decrease
compared to the control. Further, our TargetScan analysis revealed that
BRCA1 is one of the direct targets of miR-638 among the 30 conservative
target genes. We found that overexpression of miR-638 resulted in an
upregulation of BRCA1 mRNA expressions in ER- cell lines, MDA-MB-231 and
Hs578T but not in ER+ cell lines, T47D and MCF-7. Taken together, these
findings showed that miR-638 may function as a tumor suppressor in ER-
breast cancer, possibly in part by upregulating BRCA1 tumor suppressor
gene. Further functional analysis is underway to decipher the exact role
of miR-638 in ER- breast cancer, which could become a therapeutic target.

