Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A quick and easy way of assembling TALE/TALEN modules for genetic
modifications in mammalian cells .


The transcription activator-like effectors (TALEs) are a family of
virulence factors produced by plant bacterial pathogens, and they are
able to regulate expression of specific host genes by binding to the
corresponding promoter regions in a sequence-specific manner. The
transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) is made by fusing
a nuclease to the DNA binding modules of TALE, which would allow for
generation of DNA deletions, knockouts or knockins. Since their
discovery, genes from different organisms have been successfully targeted
using designer TALEs through assembling sequence specific modules, which
is a critical step to make TALE/TALEN vectors. However, current methods
of assembling DNA binding modules, such as the golden-gate ligation, are
still time consuming and labor intensive. Moreover, they are also
technically challenging. In the present study, we adopted a single step
approach to assemble TALE modules. For proof of principle, we used p53
binding site (Tgacttgcatgtacatgcc) derived from the lncRNA-RoR promoter
for proof of principle. First, we designed four gBlock DNA oligos which
carried 30 bp overlapping between two adjacent oligos. Then, we linked
them together by PCR and subsequently directly cloned into an expression
vector which carries two flanking TALE sequences. To determine the
function of this construct, we generated a reporter vector carrying this
p53 binding site and mCherry and showed that this newly made construct
was able to activate the mCherry reporter. Experiments are underway to
test if the p53 specific TALE is able to activate the endogenous
lncRNA-RoR.

