Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase I study of MEK inhibitor BAY 86-9766 in Japanese patients
with advanced or reflactory solid tumors.


Background: BAY 86-9766 (RDEA119) is a potent, orally administered,,
allosteric inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase kinase
(MEK) 1/2, a key protein in the MAP kinase signaling pathway, located
downstream of RAS and RAF. We conducted a phase I study to evaluate the
safety and pharmacokinetics (PK) of BAY 86-9766 in advanced/refractory
Japanese cancer patients.Patients and Methods: BAY 86-9766 was
administered at 30 mg bid (cohort 1) and at 50 mg bid (MTD; cohort 2)
over a 28-day treatment cycle which was continued until disease
progression or unacceptable toxicity. PK samples were collected after
single doses (Day 1 to Day 4) and during multiple dosing through Day 22.
Tumor response was assessed after every even cycle by RECIST
v.1.1.Results: A total of 12 patients were enrolled, including 6
colorectal cancer, 2 GIST, and one hepatocellular cancer, carcinoid
tumor, neuroendocrine tumor and leiomyosarcoma, respectively (5 patients
in cohort 1: 30mg bid; 7 patients in cohort 2: 50mg bid). There were no
DLTs in Cycle 1 of cohort 1 and cohort 2. The most common adverse event
regardless of grade was rash acneiform in 12 subjects (100.0%), followed
by elevated AST, creatine phosphokinase (CPK) or hypoalbuminemia in 9
subjects (75.0%), fever or elevated ALP in 7 subjects (58.3%), elevated
ALT or decreased platelet count in 6 subjects (50.0%). Of those, the most
common drug-related adverse events were rash acneiform (100.0%), followed
by elevated CPK (66.7%), laboratory-others (66.7%), elevated AST (58.3%),
and elevated ALP (50.0%). There were three cases of serious adverse
events - thrombocytopenia, bile duct stenosis and elevated CPK - with
only the elevated CPK being regarded as drug-related. There were no
deaths on study. In Cohort 2, 7 out of 7 patients had elevated CPK, with
4 patients Grade 3 or higher. None of these were considered clinically
significant and were not regarded as DLT's. Three patients had a positive
de-challenge and re-challenge and 2 patients experienced muscle-related
symptoms (neck pain and muscle weakness of the lower limb). PK parameters
were comparable to the non-Japanese population.Conclusions: BAY 86-9766
was generally well tolerated at both the 30 mg bid dose and the MTD of 50
mg bid. BAY 86-9766 administration increased CPK in a majority of
patients but this was manageable by dose reduction.

