Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and characterization of SAR260301, a novel
PI3K-selective inhibitor in clinical development for the treatment of
PTEN-deficient tumors .


The PI3K/mTOR pathway is involved in promoting tumor cell proliferation,
survival and metastasis. The development of new anticancer therapies
targeting different components of this pathway has been motivated by the
identification of somatic PIK3CA missense mutations as well as the high
frequency of loss of negative regulatory proteins such as the tumor
suppressor PTEN. In this last case, the abnormal activation of downstream
effectors is mediated by PI3K. PTEN deficiency has also been reported to
be involved in the resistance to a variety of anticancer therapies. The
preceding findings support investigation into selective modulators of the
lipid kinase activity of p110 as agents for the treatment of
PTEN-deficient tumors, with potentially reduced on-target adverse events
described for pan-PI3K inhibitors currently undergoing clinical
trials.SAR260301 is a selective PI3K lipid kinase inhibitor that has
demonstrated higher potency in vitro on p110 (IC50= 52 nM) than on p110
and p110 isoforms and no or weak activity against p110, mTOR and a wide
range of protein kinases (>400 enzymes). The potency and selectivity
against the intended target was further confirmed in mechanistic cellular
models (IC50 = 32 nM, p110; 26- and 88-fold selective over p110 and p110,
respectively). Moreover, SAR260301 also modulates pAkt levels exclusively
in PTEN-deficient tumor cell lines with IC50 values ranging from 39 to
310 nM and from 20 to 209 nM for pAkt-S473 and pAkt-T308, respectively.
When administered orally, the compound shows dose and time-dependent
inhibition of the PI3K pathway in human PTEN-deficient tumor xenografts
in mice. In these models, target engagement correlates with compound
exposure and is associated with good tolerability.The MAPK pathway also
plays an important role in cancer and is often constitutively and
simultaneously activated with the PI3K pathway. Furthermore, PTEN loss
has been shown to correlate with resistance to MAPK inhibitors.
Preclinical data evidencing the ability of SAR260301 to modulate pAkt
levels in genetic contexts where PTEN deficiency co-exists with MAPK
pathway activation, as well as the effects of combining SAR260301 with
MAPK inhibitors will also be presented.The foregoing studies support
ongoing Phase I clinical investigation of SAR260301 in patients with
PTEN-deficient malignancies.

