Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Th1 and Th2 cytokines determine how CD40 activation changes human
macrophage function in vitro.


Tumour associated macrophages (TAM) often adopt an M2-like
immunosuppressive phenotype, promoting tumour growth and metastasis.
However, TAM display phenotypic plasticity, and can be repolarised by
agents including CD40 agonists to a Th1-immunostimulatory, tumoricidal M1
phenotype, inhibiting tumour growth. T cell-activating therapies
synergise with CD40 agonists to induce more extensive TAM repolarisation
and tumour growth inhibition, indicating that T cell-derived cytokines
may enhance CD40 agonist effects on TAM. We therefore set out to
determine how Th1 and Th2 cytokines shape the functional consequences of
CD40 activation on human macrophages in vitro. We report that CD40 ligand
(CD40L) activates human monocyte-derived macrophages in a similar, but
not identical fashion to bacterial LPS in the absence of Th1 or Th2
cytokines. Under these conditions, CD40L activated macrophages adopt an
M2-like phenotype, with low tumoricidal activity and producing high
levels of immunosuppressive IL-10. The Th1 cytokine IFN enhanced
anti-tumour functions of CD40-activated macrophages, promoting a switch
from immunosuppressive IL-10 to Th1-immunostimulatory IL-12p70
production, and enhancing direct tumoricidal activity. We found that the
Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 also enhanced IL-12p70 production by
CD40L-activated macrophages, but, unlike IFN, these cytokines did not
inhibit IL-10 production. IL-4 and IL-13 also promoted a smaller
enhancement in CD40-induced macrophage tumoricidal activity than IFN.
Thus the presence of Th1 / 2 T cell-derived cytokines in the tumour
microenvironment may shape the outcome of CD40 agonist therapy by
modulating CD40 agonist effects on TAM.

