Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of BET bromodomain inhibition in Kras-positive non-small
cell lung cancer.


Amplification of MYC is one of the most common genetic alterations in
lung cancer, contributing to a myriad of phenotypes associated with
growth, invasion and drug resistance. Murine genetics has established
both the centrality of somatic alterations of Kras in lung cancer, as
well as dependency of Kras-dependent tumors on c-Myc function.
Unfortunately, drug-like small-molecule inhibitors of KRAS and c-Myc have
yet to be realized. The recent discovery in hematologic malignancies that
bromodomain inhibition impairs MYC expression and MYC-dependent
transcriptional function prompted the possibility of targeting
KRAS-driven NSCLC with a potent, prototypical BET bromodomain inhibitor,
JQ1. Here, we report that NSCLC cells harboring the KRAS mutation are
sensitive to JQ1 while NSCLC cells with concurrent mutant KRAS and LKB1
mutations are resistant to JQ1. In sensitive NSCLC models, JQ1 treatment
results in the coordinate downregulation of the MYC-dependent
transcriptional program. Furthermore, we evaluated JQ1 in transgenic
mouse lung cancer models expressing mutant kras or concurrent mutant kras
and lkb1. We found that JQ1 treatment produces significant tumor
regression in mutant kras mice. As predicted, tumors from mutant kras and
lkb1 mice did not respond to JQ1. Together, these data provide a
compelling rationale for the study of BET bromodomain inhibitors in a
common, genetically-defined population of patients with aggressive NSCLC.

