Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of oral bioavailability and intermittent dosing
schedules for pharmacodynamic effects by SGI-110, a novel subcutaneous
(SQ) second generation hypomethylating agent (HMA), in male cynomolgus
monkeys .


Background: SGI-110 is a second generation hypomethylating agent
consisting of a dinucleotide of decitabine and deoxyguanosine designed to
release decitabine upon administration. SGI-110 is being evaluated in
patients with relapsed/refractory MDS and AML. This study evaluated
pharmacodynamic effects of three alternate weekly intermittent dosing
schedules of Subcutaneous (SQ) SGI-110, and also the bioavailability of
SGI-110 when given orally.Methods: Group A received a single 10 mg/kg
dose of SGI-110 by oral gavage. Group B received SQ injections of 1.5
mg/kg on Days 1,2, 8,9 and 15,16; Group C received SQ injections on Days
1,4, 8,11, 15 and 18; group D received injections on Days 1,2,3 and
15,16,17. Pharmacokinetics of SGI-110 and decitabine were evaluated on
Day 1 for all treatment groups. The pharmacodynamic effect of SGI-110 was
assessed through Day 28 (Days 1, 4, 8, 11, 14, 21 and 28) by measuring
LINE1 methylation status in PBMCs from monkeys in groups B, C and
D.Results: Animals tolerated SGI-110 treatment well through the study.
Relative oral bioavailability of decitabine appeared to be very low with
only trace amounts of decitabine detected in plasma from Group A animals.
A time-dependent LINE1 hypomethylating effect was observed in monkeys
from Groups B, C and D relative to baseline pre-treatment values from Day
1. The maximal extent of hypomethylation varied between 11-14% within the
groups and was achieved earlier in the cycle for Groups B and C (Day 11
and Day 14, respectively), whereas for Group D a second maximum peak
effect was observed on Day 21. All groups trended towards baseline by Day
28 but Groups C and D still had significant hypomethylation (8-9%)
present by the end of the study. On average, Group C and D seemed to
achieve the maximum and most prolonged hypomethylation but only group C
had a sustained effect.Conclusions: SGI-110 was well tolerated in
cynomolgus monkeys for both single PO and repeat SQ dosing using
intermittent alternate-weekly schedules. Oral bioavailability of SGI-110
was very low, suggesting very high first-pass contribution to SGI-110 and
decitabine clearance upon oral administration. All SQ schedules achieved
significant hypomethylating effect; the extent and the duration of effect
were more favorable for Groups C and D with group C showing a more
sustained effect over the 28-day cycle. We concluded that the twice
weekly SQ regimen is a highly effective and convenient regimen to study
in clinical trials as it may achieve a more sustained pharmacodynamic
effect.

