Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hormone therapy and incident colorectal cancer risk by ER beta
protein expression level in a population-based cohort of older women.


Background: Hormone therapy (HT) may prevent colorectal cancer (CRC), but
the molecular mechanisms have not been fully defined. Expression of
estrogen receptor beta (ER) has been associated with CRC stage and
survival and may influence HT-related prevention pathways. In this
prospective cohort study, we examined HT-associated CRC risk by ER
protein expression levels in the population-based Iowa Women's Health
Study (IWHS).Methods: The IWHS recruited 41,836 randomly selected Iowa
women, ages 55-69 years, with a valid driver's license at study entry
(1986). Exposure variables were assessed at baseline, by self-report.
Incident CRC cases were ascertained by annual linkage with the Iowa
Cancer Registry. Archived, paraffin-embedded tissue specimens were
collected from 732 CRC cases, diagnosed through 12/31/2002, for molecular
epidemiology studies. HT was categorized as never, former, and current
and with durations of 5 years. ER protein expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays. For each tumor core, both
staining intensity (0-3) and proportion of cells stained (0-5) were
scored. These two scores were added to determine negative (0), low (1-5)
or high (6-8) ER protein expression levels. Multivariate Cox regression
models were fit to estimate relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).Results: Complete HT and ER data were available from 484
CRC cases. Associations between HT and CRC subtypes defined by ER
expression level are shown in the Table.Conclusions: Data from the IWHS
cohort suggest that current and longer-duration HT exposure favorably
influence the risk for ER-neg or ER-low CRC cases to a greater degree
than ER-high CRC cases. Further investigation is required to confirm
these observations, and to clarify the underlying mechanisms.


