Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNase-L modulates the immune response to intestinal damage and
ameliorates murine colitis and colitis-associated cancer.


The endoribonuclease RNase-L is a Type-I interferon (IFN)-regulated
component of the innate immune response that functions in antiviral and
antibacterial activities. Here we identify a protective role for RNase-L
in the inflammatory response to gastrointestinal (GI) injury and
commensal bacteria. In a dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-induced model of
ulcerative colitis RNase-L-/- mice exhibited a more severe clinical score
and increased mortality compared to wild type animals. The enhanced
sensitivity to GI damage was accompanied by delayed leukocyte
infiltration and reduced expression of the proinflammatory cytokines IFN,
TNF, IL-1 and IL-18 at early times post-DSS exposure. This impaired
innate immune response corresponded with increased inflammation and a
decreased capacity to recover from GI injury at later times. Consistent
with the established role of inflammation as a risk factor for colorectal
cancer, in a model of colitis-associated cancer DSS treated RNase-L-/-
mice displayed an increased carcinogen-induced tumor burden and
mortality. A potential mechanism by which RNase-L functions in the
response to GI damage and commensal bacteria is via the production of RNA
agonists of RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), sensors of cytosolic
pathogen-associated RNAs that initiate signaling to induce
proinflammatory cytokines important to GI homeostasis. Indeed, we found
that bacterial RNA triggers IFN induction in macrophages in an
RNase-L-dependent manner. Together, these results support a model in
which the protective role for RNase-L in experimental colitis and
colitis-associated cancer occurs through RNase-L-dependent RLR signaling
and IFN induction.

