Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of hepatocellular carcinoma using radiolabeled
monoclonal antibody PET probes targeting glypican-3.


Background: Glypican-3 (GPC3) is a cell-surface protein which is
over-expressed in more than 50% of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
patients, but is negligibly expressed in normal livers, benign liver
lesions, and tissues adjacent to HCC. GPC3 is therefore a potential
molecular target for HCC diagnosis.Methods: Two radiotracers,
64Cu-DOTA-GPC3 and 89Zr-DFO-GPC3, were synthesized based on the human
anti-GPC3 monoclonal antibody (MAb clone 1G12). These radiotracers were
used for positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of subcutaneous or
orthotopic HCC xenografts in nude mice, generated from HCC cell lines
expressing high (HepG2), moderate (Hep3B), or low (PLC/PRF/5) levels of
GPC3. Biodistribution analysis and tumor-to-liver ratios were calculated
to assess the performance and specificity of these radiotracers.Results:
The anti-GPC3 MAb showed high binding affinity to recombinant human GPC3
protein in vitro (KD = 0.40 0.04 nM), and specifically identified HCC
cell lines and human specimens with high GPC3 expression. In vivo,
64Cu-DOTA-GPC3 showed significantly higher uptake in HepG2 xenografts
(17.05 1.31% ID/g) compared with non-specific 18F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose
(18F-FDG) (3.17 0.59% ID/g), and the non-targeting 64Cu-DOTA-IgG (5.10
1.27% ID/g) at 72 h post-injection (p.i.) (p Background: Glypican-3
(GPC3) is a cell-surface protein which is over-expressed in more than 50%
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients, but is negligibly expressed
in normal livers, benign liver lesions, and tissues adjacent to HCC. GPC3
is therefore a potential molecular target for HCC diagnosis.Methods: Two
radiotracers, 64Cu-DOTA-GPC3 and 89Zr-DFO-GPC3, were synthesized based on
the human anti-GPC3 monoclonal antibody (MAb clone 1G12). These
radiotracers were used for positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of
subcutaneous or orthotopic HCC xenografts in nude mice, generated from
HCC cell lines expressing high (HepG2), moderate (Hep3B), or low
(PLC/PRF/5) levels of GPC3. Biodistribution analysis and tumor-to-liver
ratios were calculated to assess the performance and specificity of these
radiotracers.Results: The anti-GPC3 MAb showed high binding affinity to
recombinant human GPC3 protein in vitro (KD = 0.40 0.04 nM), and
specifically identified HCC cell lines and human specimens with high GPC3
expression. In vivo, 64Cu-DOTA-GPC3 showed significantly higher uptake in
HepG2 xenografts (17.05 1.31% ID/g) compared with non-specific
18F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose (18F-FDG) (3.17 0.59% ID/g), and the
non-targeting 64Cu-DOTA-IgG (5.10 1.27% ID/g) at 72 h post-injection
(p.i.) (p < 0.005). However, the tumor-to-liver ratio was only 0.46 0.32
at 72 h p.i., due to high uptake of 64Cu-DOTA-GPC3 in the liver. To
increase tumor-to-liver ratio, we synthesized the 89Zr-DFO-GPC3
radiotracer, which displayed specific cellular uptake in GPC3-positive
cells in vitro, and also internalized over time in these cells. In vivo,
89Zr-DFO-GPC3 showed high and specific uptake in the subcutaneous HepG2
xenografts, but not in the non-HCC, GPC3-negative ones (PC3 and A375M).
Consistently, in vivo biodistribution analysis demonstrated significantly
higher uptake of 89Zr-DFO-GPC3 in HepG2 xenografts at 48 h p.i. (10.80
1.69% ID/g, n=4) and 192 h p.i. (8.76 1.12% ID/g, n=4), compared to 1.19
0.27% ID/g in PC3 xenografts and 2.02 0.58% ID/g in A375M xenografts at
192 h time point (p Background: Glypican-3 (GPC3) is a cell-surface
protein which is over-expressed in more than 50% of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) patients, but is negligibly expressed in normal livers,
benign liver lesions, and tissues adjacent to HCC. GPC3 is therefore a
potential molecular target for HCC diagnosis.Methods: Two radiotracers,
64Cu-DOTA-GPC3 and 89Zr-DFO-GPC3, were synthesized based on the human
anti-GPC3 monoclonal antibody (MAb clone 1G12). These radiotracers were
used for positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of subcutaneous or
orthotopic HCC xenografts in nude mice, generated from HCC cell lines
expressing high (HepG2), moderate (Hep3B), or low (PLC/PRF/5) levels of
GPC3. Biodistribution analysis and tumor-to-liver ratios were calculated
to assess the performance and specificity of these radiotracers.Results:
The anti-GPC3 MAb showed high binding affinity to recombinant human GPC3
protein in vitro (KD = 0.40 0.04 nM), and specifically identified HCC
cell lines and human specimens with high GPC3 expression. In vivo,
64Cu-DOTA-GPC3 showed significantly higher uptake in HepG2 xenografts
(17.05 1.31% ID/g) compared with non-specific 18F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose
(18F-FDG) (3.17 0.59% ID/g), and the non-targeting 64Cu-DOTA-IgG (5.10
1.27% ID/g) at 72 h post-injection (p.i.) (p < 0.005). However, the
tumor-to-liver ratio was only 0.46 0.32 at 72 h p.i., due to high uptake
of 64Cu-DOTA-GPC3 in the liver. To increase tumor-to-liver ratio, we
synthesized the 89Zr-DFO-GPC3 radiotracer, which displayed specific
cellular uptake in GPC3-positive cells in vitro, and also internalized
over time in these cells. In vivo, 89Zr-DFO-GPC3 showed high and specific
uptake in the subcutaneous HepG2 xenografts, but not in the non-HCC,
GPC3-negative ones (PC3 and A375M). Consistently, in vivo biodistribution
analysis demonstrated significantly higher uptake of 89Zr-DFO-GPC3 in
HepG2 xenografts at 48 h p.i. (10.80 1.69% ID/g, n=4) and 192 h p.i.
(8.76 1.12% ID/g, n=4), compared to 1.19 0.27% ID/g in PC3 xenografts and
2.02 0.58% ID/g in A375M xenografts at 192 h time point (p < 0.005) The
tumor-to-liver ratios for HepG2 xenografts at 48 h and 192 h were 2.64
0.20, and 4.10 0.17, respectively. More importantly, 89Zr-DFO-GPC3 was
able to delineate orthotopic HCC xenografts from the surrounding normal
liver. Biodistribution analysis in these orthotopic xenografts showed
uptake of 14.0 2.50% ID/g for HepG2; 7.71 1.64% ID/g for Hep3B; and 5.54
1.00% ID/g for PLC/PRF/5 at 168 h p.i. The corresponding tumor-to-liver
ratios were 6.65 1.33 for HepG2, 6.15 1.75 for PLC/PRF/5, and 4.29 0.52
for Hep3B.Conclusion: We demonstrate that anti-GPC3 MAb-based PET probes
can detect GPC3-positive HCCs in subcutaneous and orthotopic animal
models. Especially, 89Zr-DFO-GPC3 is a promising probe and clinically
useful probe for the specific imaging of GPC3-positive HCCs.

