Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implication of Np73 isoform in drug resistance.


Background: Aberrant expression of Np73 has been associated with shorten
cancer patient survival. We evaluate here whether this event could be due
to the induction of drug resistance mechanisms.Experimental Design:
HCT116 colon cancer cell line transfected with a vector containing Np73
or a mock vector were treated with oxaliplatin and checked for the
viability by MTT, Flow-citometry, TUNEL assay and Caspase-3 protein
expression levels. Additionally, we determined in 77 colon cancer
patients the expression of Np73 and their putative target genes related
with drug resistance ABCB1, HMGB1 and CASP1 by quantitative real-time
RT-PCR. Disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) were
examined in each patient.Results: Ectopic expression of Np73
significantly associated with a higher viability after oxaliplatin
exposure. Positive correlations were observed between the expression
levels of Np73 variants and HMGB1. A trend was also observed for ABCB1.
Overexpression of Np73 isoforms predicted shortened OS (p = 0.05). High
levels of ABCB1 and HMGB1 associated with shorter OS (p = 0.04 and p =
0.05, respectively). Multivariate analysis showed that, in addition to
the tumor stage, ABCB1 and HMGB1 had independent relationships with OS (p
= 0.008).Conclusions:The association of the upregulation of Np73 with
higher cancer cell viability after oxaliplatin treatment along with the
fact that it could trigger HMG1 and ABCB1 in vivo, supports the
hyphotesis that the shorten survival observed in those cancer patients
showing overexpression of Np73 could be due to the induction of drug
resistance processes by this isoform.

