Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia induces Plk4 expression and promotes immortalization of
proliferating cells.


Introduction: Polo-like kinase 4 (Plk4) is a serine/threonine kinase
essential for centrosome duplication and cell cycle progression.High
tumor expression of Plk4 is associated with poor prognosis in breast,
pancreas and colorectal cancer patients. In addition, our laboratory has
found evidence for a novel function of Plk4 in promoting cell migration.
Endogenous Plk4 transiently localizes to cell protrusions during
migration and spreading. Plk4 deficient cells show decreased spreading
and migration potential, while Plk4overexpression enhances spreading and
migration. While Plk4 is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor in
hepatocellular carcinoma, we hypothesize that Plk4 functions as an
oncogene in promoting invasion in other cancer histologies.Solid tumors
develop with a microenvironment characterized by regions of chronically
and transiently hypoxic cells. It has beensuggested that acute hypoxia
drives tumor progression and facilitates metastasis. The objective of
this project is to determine if hypoxic conditions affect Plk4 expression
and Plk4-dependent cell phenotypes. Methods: Plk4+/+ and Plk4+/murine
embryonic fibroblast (MEFs) were cultured under hypoxic (3% oxygen)or
normoxic (21% oxygen)conditions. Real time RT-PCR was used to quantify
Plk4 expression. FACS analysis was used to determine ploidy. MEFs were
passaged with either a 3T3 protocol (300,000 cells plated every 3d) or a
3T5 protocol (300,000 cells plated every 5d). At each passage, cells were
counted, collected for RNA isolation and fixed for flow cytometry (n=2
embryos/genotype for each passaging protocol and condition). Results:
Plk4+/+ and Plk4+/ MEFs show increased proliferation when cultured at 3%
compared to 21% oxygen. Using a 3T5 protocol under normoxic
conditions,Plk4+/+ cells undergo senescence by passage 8 whereas Plk4+/
cells become immortalized. These results are consistent with our
previously published data (Rosario et al., PNAS 2010). Using a 3T3
protocol under normoxic conditions, Plk4+/+and Plk4+/cells grow at a
similar rate up to passage 5, after which they senesce. By contrast,
during hypoxia, both Pk4+/+ and Plk4+/ MEFs immortalize with the 3T5 or
3T3 protocol. FACS analysis showed no apparent difference in ploidy
between Plk4+/+ and Plk4+/cells growing at 3% oxygen. Plk4 mRNA
expression is induced under hypoxic conditions in both wildtype and
heterozygous MEFs, compared to normoxic conditions. Conclusions: Culture
at 3% oxygen alters the senescence program of MEFs, and induces Plk4
expression. Together, these changes may be sufficient to rescue the
cytokinesis defect and development of aneuploidy otherwise observed in
Plk4+/ MEFs immortalized with 3T5 passaging. The oscillating hypoxic
microenvironment typical of solid tumors may facilitate tumor progression
in part through induction of Plk4, with consequent augmentation of tumor
cell proliferation, migration and metastatic potential.

