Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical study of the cytotoxic effect of nutlin-3a as
monotherapy or in combination with gemcitabine in non-small cell lung
cancer cell lines.


Introduction: P53 is an important tumor suppressor protein, acting in
response to cellular stress signals. In 50% of all tumors inactivating
mutations in the p53 gene frequently disturb its function. Another
mechanism that can suppress the p53 function is the overexpression of its
negative regulator MDM2. Therefore, several small molecule inhibitors
were developed which block the interaction between p53 and MDM2, leading
to increased levels of p53 in the cell. Nutlin-3a is a very potent small
molecule inhibitor, which binds the p53-binding pocket on MDM2, thus
blocking their interaction. In this study, the effect of nutlin-3a was
evaluated on a series of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines
when administrated alone or in combination with gemcitabine
(dFdC).Methods: Three human NSCLC cell lines (A549 (p53 wt), A549-LXSN
(p53 wt), A549-E6 (p53 null) and CRL-5883 (p53 mut)) were treated with
either nutlin-3a (0-30 M) for 24 hours, or dFdC (0-100 nM) for 24 hours
or with simultaneous or sequential exposure schedules (dFdC followed by
nutlin-3a) in a concentration range of nutlin-3a and a fixed
concentration of dFdC (IC20) for 24 hours. The resulting cell survival
was assessed with the sulforhodamine B assay and IC50 values
(representing the drug concentration reducing cell growth to 50%) were
calculated.Results: The observed IC50 values for nutlin-3a were clearly
higher for p53 null or mutant cell lines, compared to p53 wt cell lines,
with CRL-5883 showing the strongest resistance.Cytotoxity of dFdC was
comparable between A549, A549-LXSN and A549-E6, while the CRL-5883 cell
line showed an IC50 almost twice as high.When dFdC treatment was followed
by nutlin-3a treatment, a slight to moderate synergistic effect was
observed in all cell lines (0,80Introduction: P53 is an important tumor
suppressor protein, acting in response to cellular stress signals. In 50%
of all tumors inactivating mutations in the p53 gene frequently disturb
its function. Another mechanism that can suppress the p53 function is the
overexpression of its negative regulator MDM2. Therefore, several small
molecule inhibitors were developed which block the interaction between
p53 and MDM2, leading to increased levels of p53 in the cell. Nutlin-3a
is a very potent small molecule inhibitor, which binds the p53-binding
pocket on MDM2, thus blocking their interaction. In this study, the
effect of nutlin-3a was evaluated on a series of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cell lines when administrated alone or in combination with
gemcitabine (dFdC).Methods: Three human NSCLC cell lines (A549 (p53 wt),
A549-LXSN (p53 wt), A549-E6 (p53 null) and CRL-5883 (p53 mut)) were
treated with either nutlin-3a (0-30 M) for 24 hours, or dFdC (0-100 nM)
for 24 hours or with simultaneous or sequential exposure schedules (dFdC
followed by nutlin-3a) in a concentration range of nutlin-3a and a fixed
concentration of dFdC (IC20) for 24 hours. The resulting cell survival
was assessed with the sulforhodamine B assay and IC50 values
(representing the drug concentration reducing cell growth to 50%) were
calculated.Results: The observed IC50 values for nutlin-3a were clearly
higher for p53 null or mutant cell lines, compared to p53 wt cell lines,
with CRL-5883 showing the strongest resistance.Cytotoxity of dFdC was
comparable between A549, A549-LXSN and A549-E6, while the CRL-5883 cell
line showed an IC50 almost twice as high.When dFdC treatment was followed
by nutlin-3a treatment, a slight to moderate synergistic effect was
observed in all cell lines (0,80<CIIntroduction: P53 is an important
tumor suppressor protein, acting in response to cellular stress signals.
In 50% of all tumors inactivating mutations in the p53 gene frequently
disturb its function. Another mechanism that can suppress the p53
function is the overexpression of its negative regulator MDM2. Therefore,
several small molecule inhibitors were developed which block the
interaction between p53 and MDM2, leading to increased levels of p53 in
the cell. Nutlin-3a is a very potent small molecule inhibitor, which
binds the p53-binding pocket on MDM2, thus blocking their interaction. In
this study, the effect of nutlin-3a was evaluated on a series of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines when administrated alone or
in combination with gemcitabine (dFdC).Methods: Three human NSCLC cell
lines (A549 (p53 wt), A549-LXSN (p53 wt), A549-E6 (p53 null) and CRL-5883
(p53 mut)) were treated with either nutlin-3a (0-30 M) for 24 hours, or
dFdC (0-100 nM) for 24 hours or with simultaneous or sequential exposure
schedules (dFdC followed by nutlin-3a) in a concentration range of
nutlin-3a and a fixed concentration of dFdC (IC20) for 24 hours. The
resulting cell survival was assessed with the sulforhodamine B assay and
IC50 values (representing the drug concentration reducing cell growth to
50%) were calculated.Results: The observed IC50 values for nutlin-3a were
clearly higher for p53 null or mutant cell lines, compared to p53 wt cell
lines, with CRL-5883 showing the strongest resistance.Cytotoxity of dFdC
was comparable between A549, A549-LXSN and A549-E6, while the CRL-5883
cell line showed an IC50 almost twice as high.When dFdC treatment was
followed by nutlin-3a treatment, a slight to moderate synergistic effect
was observed in all cell lines (0,80<CI<0,90) which was stronger when
dFdC was combined with a lower concentration of nutlin-3a. Simultaneous
treatment with dFdC and nutlin-3a showed an additive effect in all cell
lines (0,96Introduction: P53 is an important tumor suppressor protein,
acting in response to cellular stress signals. In 50% of all tumors
inactivating mutations in the p53 gene frequently disturb its function.
Another mechanism that can suppress the p53 function is the
overexpression of its negative regulator MDM2. Therefore, several small
molecule inhibitors were developed which block the interaction between
p53 and MDM2, leading to increased levels of p53 in the cell. Nutlin-3a
is a very potent small molecule inhibitor, which binds the p53-binding
pocket on MDM2, thus blocking their interaction. In this study, the
effect of nutlin-3a was evaluated on a series of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cell lines when administrated alone or in combination with
gemcitabine (dFdC).Methods: Three human NSCLC cell lines (A549 (p53 wt),
A549-LXSN (p53 wt), A549-E6 (p53 null) and CRL-5883 (p53 mut)) were
treated with either nutlin-3a (0-30 M) for 24 hours, or dFdC (0-100 nM)
for 24 hours or with simultaneous or sequential exposure schedules (dFdC
followed by nutlin-3a) in a concentration range of nutlin-3a and a fixed
concentration of dFdC (IC20) for 24 hours. The resulting cell survival
was assessed with the sulforhodamine B assay and IC50 values
(representing the drug concentration reducing cell growth to 50%) were
calculated.Results: The observed IC50 values for nutlin-3a were clearly
higher for p53 null or mutant cell lines, compared to p53 wt cell lines,
with CRL-5883 showing the strongest resistance.Cytotoxity of dFdC was
comparable between A549, A549-LXSN and A549-E6, while the CRL-5883 cell
line showed an IC50 almost twice as high.When dFdC treatment was followed
by nutlin-3a treatment, a slight to moderate synergistic effect was
observed in all cell lines (0,80<CI<0,90) which was stronger when dFdC
was combined with a lower concentration of nutlin-3a. Simultaneous
treatment with dFdC and nutlin-3a showed an additive effect in all cell
lines (0,96<CIIntroduction: P53 is an important tumor suppressor protein,
acting in response to cellular stress signals. In 50% of all tumors
inactivating mutations in the p53 gene frequently disturb its function.
Another mechanism that can suppress the p53 function is the
overexpression of its negative regulator MDM2. Therefore, several small
molecule inhibitors were developed which block the interaction between
p53 and MDM2, leading to increased levels of p53 in the cell. Nutlin-3a
is a very potent small molecule inhibitor, which binds the p53-binding
pocket on MDM2, thus blocking their interaction. In this study, the
effect of nutlin-3a was evaluated on a series of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cell lines when administrated alone or in combination with
gemcitabine (dFdC).Methods: Three human NSCLC cell lines (A549 (p53 wt),
A549-LXSN (p53 wt), A549-E6 (p53 null) and CRL-5883 (p53 mut)) were
treated with either nutlin-3a (0-30 M) for 24 hours, or dFdC (0-100 nM)
for 24 hours or with simultaneous or sequential exposure schedules (dFdC
followed by nutlin-3a) in a concentration range of nutlin-3a and a fixed
concentration of dFdC (IC20) for 24 hours. The resulting cell survival
was assessed with the sulforhodamine B assay and IC50 values
(representing the drug concentration reducing cell growth to 50%) were
calculated.Results: The observed IC50 values for nutlin-3a were clearly
higher for p53 null or mutant cell lines, compared to p53 wt cell lines,
with CRL-5883 showing the strongest resistance.Cytotoxity of dFdC was
comparable between A549, A549-LXSN and A549-E6, while the CRL-5883 cell
line showed an IC50 almost twice as high.When dFdC treatment was followed
by nutlin-3a treatment, a slight to moderate synergistic effect was
observed in all cell lines (0,80<CI<0,90) which was stronger when dFdC
was combined with a lower concentration of nutlin-3a. Simultaneous
treatment with dFdC and nutlin-3a showed an additive effect in all cell
lines (0,96<CI<1,06).Conclusion: Nutlin-3a induces a markedly higher
cytotoxic effect in p53 wt cells than in p53 null/mutant cell lines,
although the latter cell lines still experience some p53 independent
cytotoxic effect. Further study will be necessary to determine which
pathways are involved in this p53 independent response to nutlin-3a. The
combination of nutlin-3a with dFdC was slightly to moderately synergistic
in all cell lines after sequential exposure, but was stronger at low
concentrations of nutlin-3a. When dFdC and nutlin-3a were administrated
simultaneous no synergistic effect was observed. As only a low
concentration of dFdC was used, further study with increased dFdC
concentrations will be performed.

