Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling to understand stages in breast cancer
development and progression: importance of tissue sampling and context .


Background: During the past decade, gene expression profiling has been
widely employed to understand the heterogeneity of tumor biology. Novel
biomarkers and signatures discovered using these techniques have impacted
tumor diagnosis and prognosis, and have led to important insights into
etiology. However, application of mRNA profiling to define mechanisms
mediating breast cancer risk factor exposure remains underexplored.
Identifying mediating pathways of breast carcinogenesis by tumor tissue
profiling may be problematic because genomic instability may obscure
causal changes. Methods: To evaluate how etiologically relevant
signatures are expressed during different stages of carcinogenesis, we
analyzed gene expression data from three types of whole tissue samples:
benign tissues from non-diseased breasts (normal), benign tissues
adjacent to cancer (cancer-associated), and tumors. We assessed three
published signatures (Age, Obesity, and Parity, originally defined in
normal breast tissues from healthy women) in 149 tumor tissues and paired
cancer-adjacent benign tissues from the Polish Women's Breast Cancer
Study. Associations of chronological age, body mass index and parity with
their related mRNA signatures were evaluated. Results: The association
between Obesity signature and actual obesity status showed a marked
gradient from normal breast tissues (obese vs. non-obese: OR=5.78,
p=0.0009) to cancer-adjacent and tumor tissues (cancer-adjacent: OR=1.85,
p=0.09; tumor: OR=0.80, p=0.54). A similar pattern was also observed for
Age signature (normal: OR [Background: During the past decade, gene
expression profiling has been widely employed to understand the
heterogeneity of tumor biology. Novel biomarkers and signatures
discovered using these techniques have impacted tumor diagnosis and
prognosis, and have led to important insights into etiology. However,
application of mRNA profiling to define mechanisms mediating breast
cancer risk factor exposure remains underexplored. Identifying mediating
pathways of breast carcinogenesis by tumor tissue profiling may be
problematic because genomic instability may obscure causal changes.
Methods: To evaluate how etiologically relevant signatures are expressed
during different stages of carcinogenesis, we analyzed gene expression
data from three types of whole tissue samples: benign tissues from
non-diseased breasts (normal), benign tissues adjacent to cancer
(cancer-associated), and tumors. We assessed three published signatures
(Age, Obesity, and Parity, originally defined in normal breast tissues
from healthy women) in 149 tumor tissues and paired cancer-adjacent
benign tissues from the Polish Women's Breast Cancer Study. Associations
of chronological age, body mass index and parity with their related mRNA
signatures were evaluated. Results: The association between Obesity
signature and actual obesity status showed a marked gradient from normal
breast tissues (obese vs. non-obese: OR=5.78, p=0.0009) to
cancer-adjacent and tumor tissues (cancer-adjacent: OR=1.85, p=0.09;
tumor: OR=0.80, p=0.54). A similar pattern was also observed for Age
signature (normal: OR [<40 y vs. 40y] =5.03, pBackground: During the past
decade, gene expression profiling has been widely employed to understand
the heterogeneity of tumor biology. Novel biomarkers and signatures
discovered using these techniques have impacted tumor diagnosis and
prognosis, and have led to important insights into etiology. However,
application of mRNA profiling to define mechanisms mediating breast
cancer risk factor exposure remains underexplored. Identifying mediating
pathways of breast carcinogenesis by tumor tissue profiling may be
problematic because genomic instability may obscure causal changes.
Methods: To evaluate how etiologically relevant signatures are expressed
during different stages of carcinogenesis, we analyzed gene expression
data from three types of whole tissue samples: benign tissues from
non-diseased breasts (normal), benign tissues adjacent to cancer
(cancer-associated), and tumors. We assessed three published signatures
(Age, Obesity, and Parity, originally defined in normal breast tissues
from healthy women) in 149 tumor tissues and paired cancer-adjacent
benign tissues from the Polish Women's Breast Cancer Study. Associations
of chronological age, body mass index and parity with their related mRNA
signatures were evaluated. Results: The association between Obesity
signature and actual obesity status showed a marked gradient from normal
breast tissues (obese vs. non-obese: OR=5.78, p=0.0009) to
cancer-adjacent and tumor tissues (cancer-adjacent: OR=1.85, p=0.09;
tumor: OR=0.80, p=0.54). A similar pattern was also observed for Age
signature (normal: OR [<40 y vs. 40y] =5.03, p<0.0001; cancer-adjacent:
OR [Background: During the past decade, gene expression profiling has
been widely employed to understand the heterogeneity of tumor biology.
Novel biomarkers and signatures discovered using these techniques have
impacted tumor diagnosis and prognosis, and have led to important
insights into etiology. However, application of mRNA profiling to define
mechanisms mediating breast cancer risk factor exposure remains
underexplored. Identifying mediating pathways of breast carcinogenesis by
tumor tissue profiling may be problematic because genomic instability may
obscure causal changes. Methods: To evaluate how etiologically relevant
signatures are expressed during different stages of carcinogenesis, we
analyzed gene expression data from three types of whole tissue samples:
benign tissues from non-diseased breasts (normal), benign tissues
adjacent to cancer (cancer-associated), and tumors. We assessed three
published signatures (Age, Obesity, and Parity, originally defined in
normal breast tissues from healthy women) in 149 tumor tissues and paired
cancer-adjacent benign tissues from the Polish Women's Breast Cancer
Study. Associations of chronological age, body mass index and parity with
their related mRNA signatures were evaluated. Results: The association
between Obesity signature and actual obesity status showed a marked
gradient from normal breast tissues (obese vs. non-obese: OR=5.78,
p=0.0009) to cancer-adjacent and tumor tissues (cancer-adjacent: OR=1.85,
p=0.09; tumor: OR=0.80, p=0.54). A similar pattern was also observed for
Age signature (normal: OR [<40 y vs. 40y] =5.03, p<0.0001;
cancer-adjacent: OR [<45 y vs. 45y] =6.97, p=0.005; tumor: OR=0.58
p=0.35) and Parity signature (parous vs. nulliparous, normal: OR =3.95,
p=0.0002; cancer-adjacent: OR=1.38, p=0.44; tumor: OR=1.20, p=0.65).
Simulation studies further demonstrated that the association strength was
influenced by the proportion of risk factor-associated genes that were
dysregulated during carcinogenesis. Differences in cellular composition
between samples may also affect association strength. Conclusions: These
results suggest that associations between risk factors and gene
signatures are strongest in benign tissues from non-diseased breasts and
may be weakened by the responses of cancer-adjacent issues to cancer
progression, and by the effects of genomic instability in tumors. While
tumor tissue is readily available in many epidemiologic studies, use of
this tissue for studying etiologically relevant pathways may have
important limitations. Identification of etiologically relevant pathways
may rely on studies of well-annotated tissues from women without
cancer.Citation Format: Xuezheng Sun, Alexandre Lockhart, Gretchen L.
Gierach, Mark Sherman, Jonine D. Figueroa, Sallie S. Schneider, D. Joseph
Jerry, Melissa A. Troester. Gene expression profiling to understand
stages in breast cancer development and progression: importance of tissue
sampling and context . [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 1818. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1818

