Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacogenomic assessment of outcomes of pemetrexed-treated
patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung.


Purpose: The main objective of this study was to evaluate the association
between polymorphisms of the target genes of pemetrexed and clinical
outcomes in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with
pemetrexed. Materials and Methods: We assessed polymorphisms at 8 sites
in 4 genes (thymidylate synthase (TS), dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR)
[1610, 680, 317, intron 1], methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR)
[677, 1298], glycinamide ribonucleotide formyl transferase (GARFT)
[2255]) associated with pemetrexed metabolism using polymerase chain
reaction, gene scanning, and restriction fragment length polymorphism
analysis in 90 patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung. Results:
Survival was significantly longer with pemetrexed in patients with TS
3RGCC/3RGCC or 3RGGC/3RGGC compared with the other groups (PFS; 5.2
months vs. 3.7 months, p=0.03: OS; 31.8 months vs. 18.5 months, p=0.001).
Patients with DHFR 680CC experienced fatigue more frequently (50% vs.
8.6%, p=0.008). Polymorphisms of MTHFR and GARFT were not significantly
associated with clinical outcomes with of pemetrexed. Conclusions: The TS
genotype was associated with survival and one DHFR polymorphism was
associated with fatigue in NSCLC patients treated with pemetrexed.
Further large prospective studies are required to identify other
biomarkers that affect patients being treated with pemetrexed for
adenocarcinoma of the lung.Citation Format: Minkyu Jung, Chul Ho Lee,
Hyung Soon Park, Ji Hyun Lee, Dae Joon Kim, Sun Min Lim, Joo Hang Kim,
Byoung Chul Cho. Pharmacogenomic assessment of outcomes of
pemetrexed-treated patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung. [abstract].
In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association
for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA):
AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2369.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2369

