Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapy of childhood ALL and Ewing's sarcoma using
antiCD19 (antiCD99)-Hybrid Polymerized Liposomal Nanoparticles (HPLN).


Current success in childhood cancer therapy improves the survival rate of
patients but unfortunately not all childhood cancers have shown
successful survival rates and still many types of childhood cancer
continue to have a poor prognosis. Furthermore due to the poor
specificity of cancer therapies almost two-third of childhood cancer
survivals experience side effects such as secondary cancers, heart or
lung damage, infertility or chronic hepatitis. Therefore a reliable,
non-toxic high therapeutic window targeted therapy is urgently needed to
treat childhood cancer patients. In our study a novel nanoparticle (HPLN)
was used for the treatment of childhood ALL and Ewing's sarcoma. The
tumor specific monoclonal antibody was conjugated to the PLN into which
Doxorubicin was uptaken using active loading method. AntiCD19 and
antiCD99 antibodies were used for targeting of ALL and Ewing tumor,
respectively. These tumor specific HPLNs effectively inhibit tumor growth
in a murine model of ALL and Ewing's sarcoma. Removal of targeting
antibody or drug eliminates the antitumor effects, which proves this
anticancer effect of HPLN is very specific to the target cancer cells and
dependent upon drug. Additionally, no abnormalities in liver and kidney
function tests, complete blood counts or pathology of major organs are
observed from tail-vein administrations. These data provide strong
evidence for the safety and efficacy of this targeted HPLN delivery
system of anticancer drugs to childhood cancer.

