Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short hairpin RNA targeting autotaxin reduces the human gastric
carcinoma AGS cell proliferation, migratory and invasive capability in
vitro and causes tumor regression in vivo.


To investigate the effect of short hairpin RNA(shRNA) targeting autotaxin
on the migratory and invasive capability of human gastric cancer cell AGS
and the growth xenografts in nude mice. The pSUPER-ATX and pSUPER-mock
(non-specific), which were constructed in corresponding to the ATX-shRNA
and negative control mock-shRNA synthesized on basis of gene sequence,
were transfected with blank plasmid pSUPER-control into human gastric
cancer cell AGS by Lipofectamine. At 24 h, 48 h and 72 h
post-transfection, the cells were harvested and analyzed. The endogenous
ATX mRNA and protein of different group AGS cells were detected by RT-PCR
and western blot assays. The cell proliferation was measured by MTT
assay. In vitro Transwell and Matrigel assay were used to detect the cell
migratory and invasive capability. Tumor xenograft model was generated by
subcutaneous injection of AGS cells into the dorsum of nude mice. The
growth of xenograft tumor was monitored and measured; change of the tumor
morphology and mice organs were observed by HE staining. The expressions
of autotaxin, MMP-2 and MMP-9 protein in xenograft tumor tissue were
detected by immunohistochemistry and western blot. in vitro, both the
mRNA and protein level of ATX in pSUPER-ATX group were significantly
down-regulated (PTo investigate the effect of short hairpin RNA(shRNA)
targeting autotaxin on the migratory and invasive capability of human
gastric cancer cell AGS and the growth xenografts in nude mice. The
pSUPER-ATX and pSUPER-mock (non-specific), which were constructed in
corresponding to the ATX-shRNA and negative control mock-shRNA
synthesized on basis of gene sequence, were transfected with blank
plasmid pSUPER-control into human gastric cancer cell AGS by
Lipofectamine. At 24 h, 48 h and 72 h post-transfection, the cells were
harvested and analyzed. The endogenous ATX mRNA and protein of different
group AGS cells were detected by RT-PCR and western blot assays. The cell
proliferation was measured by MTT assay. In vitro Transwell and Matrigel
assay were used to detect the cell migratory and invasive capability.
Tumor xenograft model was generated by subcutaneous injection of AGS
cells into the dorsum of nude mice. The growth of xenograft tumor was
monitored and measured; change of the tumor morphology and mice organs
were observed by HE staining. The expressions of autotaxin, MMP-2 and
MMP-9 protein in xenograft tumor tissue were detected by
immunohistochemistry and western blot. in vitro, both the mRNA and
protein level of ATX in pSUPER-ATX group were significantly
down-regulated (P<0.01), and the cell proliferation, migration and
invasive capability were significantly decreased as well. In vivo, no
obvious damage of the organs was found. The pSUPER-ATX significantly
suppressed the tumor volume and weight since 7th week after cell
transplantation, when compared to the pSUPER-mock, pSUPER-control and WT
groups, the inhibition rates were about 50%(PTo investigate the effect of
short hairpin RNA(shRNA) targeting autotaxin on the migratory and
invasive capability of human gastric cancer cell AGS and the growth
xenografts in nude mice. The pSUPER-ATX and pSUPER-mock (non-specific),
which were constructed in corresponding to the ATX-shRNA and negative
control mock-shRNA synthesized on basis of gene sequence, were
transfected with blank plasmid pSUPER-control into human gastric cancer
cell AGS by Lipofectamine. At 24 h, 48 h and 72 h post-transfection, the
cells were harvested and analyzed. The endogenous ATX mRNA and protein of
different group AGS cells were detected by RT-PCR and western blot
assays. The cell proliferation was measured by MTT assay. In vitro
Transwell and Matrigel assay were used to detect the cell migratory and
invasive capability. Tumor xenograft model was generated by subcutaneous
injection of AGS cells into the dorsum of nude mice. The growth of
xenograft tumor was monitored and measured; change of the tumor
morphology and mice organs were observed by HE staining. The expressions
of autotaxin, MMP-2 and MMP-9 protein in xenograft tumor tissue were
detected by immunohistochemistry and western blot. in vitro, both the
mRNA and protein level of ATX in pSUPER-ATX group were significantly
down-regulated (P<0.01), and the cell proliferation, migration and
invasive capability were significantly decreased as well. In vivo, no
obvious damage of the organs was found. The pSUPER-ATX significantly
suppressed the tumor volume and weight since 7th week after cell
transplantation, when compared to the pSUPER-mock, pSUPER-control and WT
groups, the inhibition rates were about 50%(P<0.05). However, no
significant differences of these parameters were found among the WT,
pSUPER-mock and pSUPER-control group. Furthermore, autotaxin, MMP-2/MMP-9
were expressed at significantly lower level in pSUPER-ATX group than in
other three groups (PTo investigate the effect of short hairpin
RNA(shRNA) targeting autotaxin on the migratory and invasive capability
of human gastric cancer cell AGS and the growth xenografts in nude mice.
The pSUPER-ATX and pSUPER-mock (non-specific), which were constructed in
corresponding to the ATX-shRNA and negative control mock-shRNA
synthesized on basis of gene sequence, were transfected with blank
plasmid pSUPER-control into human gastric cancer cell AGS by
Lipofectamine. At 24 h, 48 h and 72 h post-transfection, the cells were
harvested and analyzed. The endogenous ATX mRNA and protein of different
group AGS cells were detected by RT-PCR and western blot assays. The cell
proliferation was measured by MTT assay. In vitro Transwell and Matrigel
assay were used to detect the cell migratory and invasive capability.
Tumor xenograft model was generated by subcutaneous injection of AGS
cells into the dorsum of nude mice. The growth of xenograft tumor was
monitored and measured; change of the tumor morphology and mice organs
were observed by HE staining. The expressions of autotaxin, MMP-2 and
MMP-9 protein in xenograft tumor tissue were detected by
immunohistochemistry and western blot. in vitro, both the mRNA and
protein level of ATX in pSUPER-ATX group were significantly
down-regulated (P<0.01), and the cell proliferation, migration and
invasive capability were significantly decreased as well. In vivo, no
obvious damage of the organs was found. The pSUPER-ATX significantly
suppressed the tumor volume and weight since 7th week after cell
transplantation, when compared to the pSUPER-mock, pSUPER-control and WT
groups, the inhibition rates were about 50%(P<0.05). However, no
significant differences of these parameters were found among the WT,
pSUPER-mock and pSUPER-control group. Furthermore, autotaxin, MMP-2/MMP-9
were expressed at significantly lower level in pSUPER-ATX group than in
other three groups (P<0.05), and a significant correlation between ATX
and MMP-2 expression was displayed (r=0.869, PTo investigate the effect
of short hairpin RNA(shRNA) targeting autotaxin on the migratory and
invasive capability of human gastric cancer cell AGS and the growth
xenografts in nude mice. The pSUPER-ATX and pSUPER-mock (non-specific),
which were constructed in corresponding to the ATX-shRNA and negative
control mock-shRNA synthesized on basis of gene sequence, were
transfected with blank plasmid pSUPER-control into human gastric cancer
cell AGS by Lipofectamine. At 24 h, 48 h and 72 h post-transfection, the
cells were harvested and analyzed. The endogenous ATX mRNA and protein of
different group AGS cells were detected by RT-PCR and western blot
assays. The cell proliferation was measured by MTT assay. In vitro
Transwell and Matrigel assay were used to detect the cell migratory and
invasive capability. Tumor xenograft model was generated by subcutaneous
injection of AGS cells into the dorsum of nude mice. The growth of
xenograft tumor was monitored and measured; change of the tumor
morphology and mice organs were observed by HE staining. The expressions
of autotaxin, MMP-2 and MMP-9 protein in xenograft tumor tissue were
detected by immunohistochemistry and western blot. in vitro, both the
mRNA and protein level of ATX in pSUPER-ATX group were significantly
down-regulated (P<0.01), and the cell proliferation, migration and
invasive capability were significantly decreased as well. In vivo, no
obvious damage of the organs was found. The pSUPER-ATX significantly
suppressed the tumor volume and weight since 7th week after cell
transplantation, when compared to the pSUPER-mock, pSUPER-control and WT
groups, the inhibition rates were about 50%(P<0.05). However, no
significant differences of these parameters were found among the WT,
pSUPER-mock and pSUPER-control group. Furthermore, autotaxin, MMP-2/MMP-9
were expressed at significantly lower level in pSUPER-ATX group than in
other three groups (P<0.05), and a significant correlation between ATX
and MMP-2 expression was displayed (r=0.869, P<0.01). The specific shRNA
targeting ATX down-regulated the endogenous ATX of human gastric cancer
AGS cells, and could inhibite the AGS cell proliferation, migratory and
invasive capability. Moreover, the shRNA targeting autotaxin inhibited
the growth of human gastric cancer xenograft in nude mice.Citation
Format: Zhouxun Chen, Yingpeng Huang, Xian Shen, Henning Dralle, Cuong
Hoang-Vu, Oliver Gimm. Short hairpin RNA targeting autotaxin reduces the
human gastric carcinoma AGS cell proliferation, migratory and invasive
capability in vitro and causes tumor regression in vivo. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 391.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-391

