Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of gemcitabine and docetaxel for the treatment of
Korean children and adolescents with recurrent or refractory osteosarcoma.


Background: The combination of gemcitabine and docetaxel (GEMDOX) has
demonstrated promise in adult sarcomas. Still, its efficacy in children
and adolescents with recurrent or refractory osteosarcoma is
controversial, due to a relatively small number of cases. We evaluated
the efficacy of this combination in Korean pediatric patients with
recurrent or refractory osteosarcoma.Methods: A retrospective case review
of 23 patients (15 male, 8 female) with recurrent or refractory
osteosarcoma who received gemcitabine (675 900 mg/m2 intravenously on
days 1 and 8) and docetaxel (100 mg/m2 intravenously on day 8) at the
Korea Cancer Center Hospital was undertaken.Results: The patients (ages
7.8 12.4 years) received a total of 78 courses of GEMDOX chemotherapy
(median 3 courses; range 1 8 courses). For the 23 patients, 13 patients
received GEMDOX as adjuvant chemotherapy, and the remaining 10 cases were
eligible for response evaluation; there were 3 partial response (PR) and
1 stable disease (SD). The overall objective response was 30% and disease
control rate was 40%. Median duration of response was 6.5 months (range,
3 13 months). GEMDOX chemotherapy was well tolerated and no treatment
related death was observed. The most common toxicity was
myelosuppression, however, no infectious complication have
occurred.Conclusion: The poor prognosis of patients with recurrent or
refractory osteosarcoma, lack of effective salvage chemotherapy regimen,
and case series reporting its activity, including ours, suggest that
GEMDOX chemotherapy is beneficial in palliative setting and need to be
considered for large scale clinical trials.

