Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complete regression and long-term specific protective immune
responses obtained in rodent tumor models after intratumoral treatment
with LTX-315 .


LTX-315 is a de novo designed peptide derived from a naturally occurring
host defence peptide. LTX-315 has the potential to induce long-term
specific protective immune responses by stimulating immune cells,
inducing tumor cell lysis with subsequent release of danger signals (e.g.
HMGB1) and tumor associated antigens (TAA`s). A complete tumor regression
has been obtained in several syngenic rodent tumor models by intratumoral
(i.t.) injection with LTX-315. The effect was T- cell- dependent since
the intervention was inefficient in immune-deficient animals. Studies on
treated tumor tissue confirmed infiltration of immune cells and a switch
in the cytokine profile towards a Th1 response. Successfully treated
animals were protected against re-challenge with the tumor cell type
treated, but not against other types of tumor cells. Moreover, tumor
resistance could be adoptively transferred by spleen cells from
LTX-315-treated animals. The resistance was abrogated by depletion of T-
lymphocytes. Additional studies also indicate that LTX-315`s potential to
locally activate the innate immune system by the immunogenic stressing of
cells, in addition to the subsequent release of endogenous adjuvants and
natural danger signals, provides a strong rationale for using LTX-315 as
an adjuvant for vaccines based on tumor-associated antigens (TAA) and for
combination with other types of immunemodulatory therapies. LTX-315 is
currently being tested in a Phase I dose escalation clinical study and
may represents a novel strategy for personalized in situ vaccination
against cancer.

