Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the clonal hierarchy of cancer-driving genomic lesions.


Characterizing the genomic evolution of cancer is critical to
understanding disease progression and identifying potential therapeutic
targets. By examining the clonal hierarchy of genomic lesions in common
tumors, it would be possible to reconstruct the path of oncogenic events
that drive carcinogenesis. Reliable assessment of such paths from
high-throughput genome sequencing data is complicated by the admixture of
normal DNA in tumor samples and by reduced data signal for highly
subclonal events. We introduce an approach that exploits individuals
genetic background by using the abundant germline SNP genotype data
provided by whole genome sequence coverage to assess the clonality of
genomic alterations, including copy number changes, rearrangements, and
point mutations.We developed a novel algorithm, CLONET (CLONality
Estimate in Tumors), which analyzes patient-specific heterozygous SNP
loci (informative SNPs) and mono-allelic somatic deletions to assess
levels of stromal DNA admixture and infer the clonal status of each
aberration. For every mono allelic deletion, CLONET assesses the allelic
fractions of informative SNPs to determine the apparent proportion of
normal cells DNA. Next, through a conservative use of simulation-based
error estimates, deletions with the lowest proportions of normal DNA
reads are considered clonal. For point mutations, the tumor allelic
fraction is corrected for stromal DNA admixture level and subclonality is
inferred when it differs significantly from the expected value for clonal
lesions. Similarly, the proportions of reads that span each side of a
putative breakpoint involved in a rearrangement are matched against the
expected values. CLONET also addresses tumor aneuploidy by searching for
chromosomes with coverage and allelic fractions of informative SNPs not
consistent with a diploid genome.CLONET was tested on 55 whole genome
sequences from prostate cancers, a highly heterogeneous tumor type, to
catalogue the accumulation of somatic alterations during oncogenesis and
progression. In 98% of the cases CLONET made confident assessment of
admixture and clonality. We observed consistent clonal lesions involving
NKX3-1, the 3Mb region between TMPRSS2 and ERG and FOXP1, as well as
early point mutations in SPOP and FOXA1. Overall, we observed a higher
rate of subclonal protein-coding point mutation versus deletions (p-value
Characterizing the genomic evolution of cancer is critical to
understanding disease progression and identifying potential therapeutic
targets. By examining the clonal hierarchy of genomic lesions in common
tumors, it would be possible to reconstruct the path of oncogenic events
that drive carcinogenesis. Reliable assessment of such paths from
high-throughput genome sequencing data is complicated by the admixture of
normal DNA in tumor samples and by reduced data signal for highly
subclonal events. We introduce an approach that exploits individuals
genetic background by using the abundant germline SNP genotype data
provided by whole genome sequence coverage to assess the clonality of
genomic alterations, including copy number changes, rearrangements, and
point mutations.We developed a novel algorithm, CLONET (CLONality
Estimate in Tumors), which analyzes patient-specific heterozygous SNP
loci (informative SNPs) and mono-allelic somatic deletions to assess
levels of stromal DNA admixture and infer the clonal status of each
aberration. For every mono allelic deletion, CLONET assesses the allelic
fractions of informative SNPs to determine the apparent proportion of
normal cells DNA. Next, through a conservative use of simulation-based
error estimates, deletions with the lowest proportions of normal DNA
reads are considered clonal. For point mutations, the tumor allelic
fraction is corrected for stromal DNA admixture level and subclonality is
inferred when it differs significantly from the expected value for clonal
lesions. Similarly, the proportions of reads that span each side of a
putative breakpoint involved in a rearrangement are matched against the
expected values. CLONET also addresses tumor aneuploidy by searching for
chromosomes with coverage and allelic fractions of informative SNPs not
consistent with a diploid genome.CLONET was tested on 55 whole genome
sequences from prostate cancers, a highly heterogeneous tumor type, to
catalogue the accumulation of somatic alterations during oncogenesis and
progression. In 98% of the cases CLONET made confident assessment of
admixture and clonality. We observed consistent clonal lesions involving
NKX3-1, the 3Mb region between TMPRSS2 and ERG and FOXP1, as well as
early point mutations in SPOP and FOXA1. Overall, we observed a higher
rate of subclonal protein-coding point mutation versus deletions (p-value
< 107). We validated this approach by IHC and FISH for predicted clonal
and sub-clonal events. A predicted subclonal homozygous deletion of CHD1
was confirmed by FISH that demonstrated the presence of both nuclei with
homozygous and with hemizygous deletion of CHD1. Finally, to assess the
general validity of CLONET, we analyzed data from 53 additional tumor
genomes, including 25 melanomas and 28 lung adenocarcinomas.In summary,
our results imply the existence of consensus paths of tumor
carcinogenesis that favor dysregulation of cancer genes in a defined
sequence.

