Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of cancer-associated mutations in human LATS1
and LATS2 tumor suppressors.


Large Tumor Suppressor LATS1 and LATS2 (LATS1/2) are the key kinases of
the hippo pathway, which regulates organ size and tumorigenesis in
Drosophila and mammals in an evolutionary conserved pattern. Lats1
deficient mice develop soft tissue sarcomas, while disruption of Lats2 in
mice and lats(wts) in Drosophila cause embryonic lethality. The Cancer
Genome Project has identified 31 Lats1 and 21 Lats2 somatic mutations in
the primary tumor tissues from a variety of human cancers, such as lung
and ovarian cancer. However, the consequences of these mutations are
still to be elucidated. In our study, evolutionary conservation analysis
and structure remodeling predict 9 potentially damaging missense
mutations, seven of which are located in the kinase domain.
Immunoblotting demonstrates that one of the LATS2 mutants does not encode
the protein product, whereas the other LATS1/2 mutants impair their
phosphorylation, and attenuate their kinase activities on phosphorylating
oncogene YAP. Furthermore, luciferase-based reporter assay shows that
transcriptional coactivator activity of YAP is inhibited by wild type
LATS1/2, but not by the mutants. In addition, in vivo transgenic
expressions of LATS1/2 mutants result in less growth suppression in the
Drosophila wing, when compared with the wild type. LATS1/2 mutants also
fail to fully rescue the lethality causing by endogenous lats(wts)
knockdown. Together, these results suggest that human LATS1 and LATS2
mutations deregulate oncogene YAP and highlight the crucial role of hippo
pathway control in tumor suppression.

