Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXO3a transcriptionally regulates pro-apoptotic function of Par-4
and induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells.


Deletion and mutation of tumor suppressor genes (PTEN and p53) may play
an important role in the carcinogenesis of prostate cancer (CaP).
Constitutive activation of Akt promotes cell proliferation and survival
by regulating a number of transcription factors/genes in many cancer
cells including CaP. Activation of AKT negatively regulates the
pro-apoptotic functions of Fork head transcription factor (FOXO3a) and
prostate apoptosis response-4 (Par-4) in CaP cells. In our studies, we
found a molecular interplay between FOXO3a and Par-4 in CaP cells and
more precisely, how, FOXO3a regulates Par-4 function in CaP cells.
Knockin and knockout assays in CaP cells suggest that FOXO3a is upstream
of Par-4 and FOXO3a may responsible for the transactivation of Par-4 and
its pro-apoptotic function in CaP cells. Further, Immunofluorescence
assays suggest during apoptotic stimuli, Par-4 and FOXO3A colocalization
in nucleus, which in turn initiates pro-apoptotic signaling and induction
of apoptosis. These results were further confirmed by pull down assays,
which supports the physical interaction of these two proteins. These
findings encouraged us to explore the FOXO3a binding sites in the
promoter region of Par-4. We identified four FOXO3a binding sites at
-2075 to -2069, -1810 to -1804, -1561 to -1555, and -1340 to -1334 in the
promoter region of Par-4 gene. Luciferase reporter constructs of Par-4
promoter (2.1 kb) spanning the FOXO3a binding sites and sequentially
deleted constructs were utilized to identify the crucial FOXO3a binding
site for the regulation of Par-4. Sequential deletion of FOXO3a binding
sites in Par-4 promoter resulted in inhibition of Par-4 function and
induction of apoptosis in CaP cells. Further, confirm the role of FOXO3a,
we specifically activated Par-4 function by small molecules and
simultaneously co-transfect with dominant-negative FOXO3a constructs. As
expected dominant negative FOXO3a abrogates Par-4 function in CaP cells,
confirming FOXO3a is an upstream of Par-4 signaling and it is required
for Par-4 induced apoptosis in CaP cells. We believe, these results
decipher the mechanisms associated with FOXO3a induced Par-4 gene
activation and apoptosis in CaP cells and activating of FOXO3a may result
Par-4 mediated apoptosis in CaP cells.Citation Format: Trinath P. Das,
Chendil Damodaran. FOXO3a transcriptionally regulates pro-apoptotic
function of Par-4 and induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5457.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5457

