Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of small molecule TAK1 inhibitors with antiproliferative
activity in cell lines derived from hematological malignancies.


Transforming growth factor -activated kinase 1 (TAK1), a member of the
MAPKKK family, is a key mediator of proinflammatory and stress signaling.
It was shown previously that inhibition of TAK1 via the use of siRNA or
small-molecule kinase inhibitors can inactivate NF-B, down-regulate p38,
and activate the intrinsic caspase pathway, resulting in profound
induction of apoptosis. Herein we report the discovery of
5-fluoro-4-(imidazo[1,2-b]pyridazin-3-yl)-N-phenylpyrimidin-2-amines as
TAK1 ATP competitive small molecule inhibitors. These compounds inhibit
the kinase activity of TAK1 in vitro with low nanomolar potency. Evidence
is presented that supports a mechanism of action consistent with
inhibition of TAK1 kinase activity within the NF-B pathway. Optimization
of potency and selectivity for this series from hit to lead will be
discussed, including the structure-based design and crystallographic
determination of the binding mode. The outcome of efforts aimed at
improving the in vivo pharmacokinetics of compounds is described. Results
of kinase selectivity profiling for both an in vitro probe compound - AZ
TAK1 - and an in vivo probe compound will be presented. Furthermore, we
report low nanomolar antiproliferative activities in cell lines derived
from Haematological Malignancies for these compounds. This cellular
activity profile is suggesting that TAK1 inhibition presents therapeutic
potential in Haematological Cancers.

