Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel inhibitors of NFkB inducing kinase (NIK) are cytotoxic for
myeloma cell lines with NIK-dependent activation of NFkB.


NFkB activity is critical for survival and proliferation of normal
lymphoid cells and many kinds of B-cell tumors, including multiple
myeloma (MM). NFkB activating mutations, which are apparent progression
events, enable MM tumors to become less dependent on bone marrow signals
that activate NFkB. Mutations that activate NFkB-inducing kinase (NIK)
protein are the most prevalent among the many kinds of NFkB mutations in
MM tumors. NIK is the main activating kinase of the alternative NFkB
pathway, although over-expression of NIK also can activate the classical
pathway. Three Amgen compounds (two NIK inhibitors and an isomeric
control) were tested with human myeloma cell lines. These specific NIK
inhibitors are selectively cytotoxic for cells with NIK-dependent
activation of NFkB. The combination of NIK-inhibitors with IKK-inhibitors
or dexamethasone show a synergistic effect that might more efficiently
target some MM tumors.Citation Format: Yulia N. Demchenko, Walter Michael
Kuehl. Novel inhibitors of NFkB inducing kinase (NIK) are cytotoxic for
myeloma cell lines with NIK-dependent activation of NFkB. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2099.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2099

