Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Strong synergistic effects with cisplatin and APR-246, a novel
compound reactivating mutant p53, in ovarian cancer cell lines and
primary cells from patients.


Background: The tumor suppressor protein p53 is frequently mutated in
cancer, and cancer cells carrying defects in p53 are generally more
resistant to conventional chemotherapy. About 60% of patients with
ovarian cancer have p53 mutations. Thus, restoration of wild type
function of p53 is a promising strategy for cancer therapy. APR-246
(PRIMA-1MET) belongs to a class of small molecules (quinuclidinones) that
reactivate mutated or otherwise non-functional p53 by promoting its
correct wt folding thus triggering apoptosis (Lambert et al. Cancer Cell
15, 2009). In various in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo cancer models APR-246
has shown good antitumor activity and a unique pharmacological profile.
In a Phase I/II clinical dose-finding study on hematological malignancies
and prostate cancer APR-246 had a good safety profile, and both
biological and clinical responses were observed (Lehmann et al. J Clin
Oncol 30, 2012). A Phase II Proof of Concept study in p53 mutant ovarian
cancer patients is currently under way. Here results from combination
studies with APR-246 and platinum compounds in p53 mutant ovarian cancer
cell lines, and primary cells from patients, are presented. Methods: Cell
viability/proliferation was assessed with WST-1, MTT and/or FMCA assay.
p53 gene status was determined with Sanger sequencing and single strand
conformation analysis. p53 expression was determined with Western
immunoblotting. Results: In the ovarian cancer cell line OVCAR-3, with
homozygous hot spot p53 core domain mutation (R248Q), strong/outstanding
synergistic effects with APR-246 and cisplatin were observed (CI
Background: The tumor suppressor protein p53 is frequently mutated in
cancer, and cancer cells carrying defects in p53 are generally more
resistant to conventional chemotherapy. About 60% of patients with
ovarian cancer have p53 mutations. Thus, restoration of wild type
function of p53 is a promising strategy for cancer therapy. APR-246
(PRIMA-1MET) belongs to a class of small molecules (quinuclidinones) that
reactivate mutated or otherwise non-functional p53 by promoting its
correct wt folding thus triggering apoptosis (Lambert et al. Cancer Cell
15, 2009). In various in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo cancer models APR-246
has shown good antitumor activity and a unique pharmacological profile.
In a Phase I/II clinical dose-finding study on hematological malignancies
and prostate cancer APR-246 had a good safety profile, and both
biological and clinical responses were observed (Lehmann et al. J Clin
Oncol 30, 2012). A Phase II Proof of Concept study in p53 mutant ovarian
cancer patients is currently under way. Here results from combination
studies with APR-246 and platinum compounds in p53 mutant ovarian cancer
cell lines, and primary cells from patients, are presented. Methods: Cell
viability/proliferation was assessed with WST-1, MTT and/or FMCA assay.
p53 gene status was determined with Sanger sequencing and single strand
conformation analysis. p53 expression was determined with Western
immunoblotting. Results: In the ovarian cancer cell line OVCAR-3, with
homozygous hot spot p53 core domain mutation (R248Q), strong/outstanding
synergistic effects with APR-246 and cisplatin were observed (CI < 0.5).
This cell line was established from a patient resistant to clinically
relevant concentrations of cisplatin, doxorubicin and melphalan. The
OVCAR-3 cell line expresses a high level of p53. In the in vitro
cisplatin resistant ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780-CP20, IGROV-1/CDDP,
IGROV-1/Pt-1) harboring heterozygous frequently occurring p53 core domain
mutations, synergistic (CI Background: The tumor suppressor protein p53
is frequently mutated in cancer, and cancer cells carrying defects in p53
are generally more resistant to conventional chemotherapy. About 60% of
patients with ovarian cancer have p53 mutations. Thus, restoration of
wild type function of p53 is a promising strategy for cancer therapy.
APR-246 (PRIMA-1MET) belongs to a class of small molecules
(quinuclidinones) that reactivate mutated or otherwise non-functional p53
by promoting its correct wt folding thus triggering apoptosis (Lambert et
al. Cancer Cell 15, 2009). In various in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo
cancer models APR-246 has shown good antitumor activity and a unique
pharmacological profile. In a Phase I/II clinical dose-finding study on
hematological malignancies and prostate cancer APR-246 had a good safety
profile, and both biological and clinical responses were observed
(Lehmann et al. J Clin Oncol 30, 2012). A Phase II Proof of Concept study
in p53 mutant ovarian cancer patients is currently under way. Here
results from combination studies with APR-246 and platinum compounds in
p53 mutant ovarian cancer cell lines, and primary cells from patients,
are presented. Methods: Cell viability/proliferation was assessed with
WST-1, MTT and/or FMCA assay. p53 gene status was determined with Sanger
sequencing and single strand conformation analysis. p53 expression was
determined with Western immunoblotting. Results: In the ovarian cancer
cell line OVCAR-3, with homozygous hot spot p53 core domain mutation
(R248Q), strong/outstanding synergistic effects with APR-246 and
cisplatin were observed (CI < 0.5). This cell line was established from a
patient resistant to clinically relevant concentrations of cisplatin,
doxorubicin and melphalan. The OVCAR-3 cell line expresses a high level
of p53. In the in vitro cisplatin resistant ovarian cancer cell lines
(A2780-CP20, IGROV-1/CDDP, IGROV-1/Pt-1) harboring heterozygous
frequently occurring p53 core domain mutations, synergistic (CI < 0.8) or
strong synergistic effects were observed. Also these cell lines express
p53 but at lower level. These resistant cell lines have been developed
from parental cisplatin sensitive cell lines derived from untreated
patients with wt p53, by chronic in vitro exposure to cisplatin.
Carboplatin and doxorubicin showed cross-resistance in cisplatin
resistant cell lines, while the sensitivity of APR-246 did not change.
Primary ovarian cancer cells were also investigated and strong
synergistic effect was found in all samples. In vivo efficacy (xenograft)
combination studies using cisplatin resistant ovarian cancer cell lines
in nude mice are ongoing. Conclusion: These results further support the
Phase II Proof of Concept study of APR-246 in p53 mutated ovarian cancer
patients who are candidates for further platinum-based chemotherapy.

