Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between IL1B gene haplotypes and colorectal cancer
risk in Colombian populations: a case-control study.


Background: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in cytokines can
affect gene expression causing an effect in inflammation and
carcinogenesis. There are conflicting results in the association between
IL1B gene markers with colorectal cancer (CRC). Most reports on the
association of IL1B and CRC have analysed individual SNPs despite several
studies have implied that studying the haplotype context is important to
understand the biological effect in IL1B gene expression and
carcinogenesis. Aim: To evaluate the association of CRC and adenomatous
polyps (AP) with IL1B haplotypes in Colombian populations Methods: 308
CRC cases, 208 AP and 524 age-sex matched controls were recruited from
six Colombian cities with different CRC risk in a multicenter
hospital-based case-control study aiming at identifying the environmental
and genetic risk factors for CRC in Colombia. Participants gave written
informed consent, donated blood samples and answered
guided-questionnaires. Subjects were genotyped for IL1B SNPs: -31, +3954,
-3737, -1464 and -511 using TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assays. Hardy-Weinberg
Equilibrium (HWE) was assessed and statistical analysis was done using
conditional logistic regression adjusting for risk factors and genetic
ancestry. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) was calculated using Haploview 4.0
and D and r2 statistics. Recessive and codominant models were explored
for haplotype analysis using STATA v11.0. The Ethics Board of The
National Cancer Institute of Colombia approved this study Results: Among
controls all IL1B SNPs were in HWE (p>0.05). We found one haplotype block
including all 4 SNPs in the IL1B gene, except the IL1B+3954 SNP which was
left out (MAF=0,14). IL1B-31 and IL1B-511 showed to be in high LD (D:
0,998; r2: 0,948). Under recessive model, we found an association with an
increased risk for PA and CRC with the -31C/-511T/-1464G/-3737C haplotype
(OR 2.42 IC 1.21 - 4.84 pBackground: Single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in cytokines can affect gene expression causing an effect in
inflammation and carcinogenesis. There are conflicting results in the
association between IL1B gene markers with colorectal cancer (CRC). Most
reports on the association of IL1B and CRC have analysed individual SNPs
despite several studies have implied that studying the haplotype context
is important to understand the biological effect in IL1B gene expression
and carcinogenesis. Aim: To evaluate the association of CRC and
adenomatous polyps (AP) with IL1B haplotypes in Colombian populations
Methods: 308 CRC cases, 208 AP and 524 age-sex matched controls were
recruited from six Colombian cities with different CRC risk in a
multicenter hospital-based case-control study aiming at identifying the
environmental and genetic risk factors for CRC in Colombia. Participants
gave written informed consent, donated blood samples and answered
guided-questionnaires. Subjects were genotyped for IL1B SNPs: -31, +3954,
-3737, -1464 and -511 using TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assays. Hardy-Weinberg
Equilibrium (HWE) was assessed and statistical analysis was done using
conditional logistic regression adjusting for risk factors and genetic
ancestry. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) was calculated using Haploview 4.0
and D and r2 statistics. Recessive and codominant models were explored
for haplotype analysis using STATA v11.0. The Ethics Board of The
National Cancer Institute of Colombia approved this study Results: Among
controls all IL1B SNPs were in HWE (p>0.05). We found one haplotype block
including all 4 SNPs in the IL1B gene, except the IL1B+3954 SNP which was
left out (MAF=0,14). IL1B-31 and IL1B-511 showed to be in high LD (D:
0,998; r2: 0,948). Under recessive model, we found an association with an
increased risk for PA and CRC with the -31C/-511T/-1464G/-3737C haplotype
(OR 2.42 IC 1.21 - 4.84 p<0.01). Stratified analysis of PA and CRC risk
separately, showed similar results. This risk decreases when the rare
allele of the -1464C was also present in the haplotype (p 0.05). These
associations persist after adjusting for confounding Conclusions: The
-31C/-511T/-1464G/-3737C haplotype was associated with premalignant and
malignant lesions in colon and rectum, interesting the effect of the rare
alleles -31C and -511T was countered by the -1464C allele since the
haplotype -31C/-511T/-1464C/-3737C showed no association with the
disease. These findings are correlated with functional assay studies in
which the former haplotype increase promoter activity of the IL1B gene
and the later decrease that effect supporting the importance of
understanding the haplotype context in association studies. These
associations with the disease remained after corrected by Caucasian and
African ancestry, meaning that these are true and not due to differences
in the genetic background of the Colombian population

