Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D intake and lung cancer risk in the Women's Health
Initiative (WHI).


Background: Prior research suggests that vitamin D protects against lung
cancer with evidence only among subgroups including women and
non-smokers. We investigated whether vitamin D intake was associated with
lung cancer and explored whether vitamin A intake modified the
association.Methods: Data from 128,779 postmenopausal women including
1,771 incident lung cancers in the Women's Health Initiative, 1993-2010,
were analyzed. Twelve percent of women received active intervention (1 g
calcium+400 IU vitamin D3 daily) in the Calcium/Vitamin D Trial. Baseline
total intake was assessed by a food frequency questionnaire and
supplement bottle labels. Hazard ratios (HR) were estimated by Cox
proportional hazard models.Results: No association was observed overall.
Among never smokers, vitamin D intake was inversely associated with total
lung cancer (HR=0.37, 95% confidence interval [CI]=0.18-0.77, 800 vs.
Background: Prior research suggests that vitamin D protects against lung
cancer with evidence only among subgroups including women and
non-smokers. We investigated whether vitamin D intake was associated with
lung cancer and explored whether vitamin A intake modified the
association.Methods: Data from 128,779 postmenopausal women including
1,771 incident lung cancers in the Women's Health Initiative, 1993-2010,
were analyzed. Twelve percent of women received active intervention (1 g
calcium+400 IU vitamin D3 daily) in the Calcium/Vitamin D Trial. Baseline
total intake was assessed by a food frequency questionnaire and
supplement bottle labels. Hazard ratios (HR) were estimated by Cox
proportional hazard models.Results: No association was observed overall.
Among never smokers, vitamin D intake was inversely associated with total
lung cancer (HR=0.37, 95% confidence interval [CI]=0.18-0.77, 800 vs.
<100 IU/d; P-trend=0.01). The Calcium/Vitamin D Trial active intervention
was not associated with a lower lung cancer risk among women with vitamin
A intake 1,000 g/d Retinol Activity Equivalent (RAE), but among those
with vitamin A intake Background: Prior research suggests that vitamin D
protects against lung cancer with evidence only among subgroups including
women and non-smokers. We investigated whether vitamin D intake was
associated with lung cancer and explored whether vitamin A intake
modified the association.Methods: Data from 128,779 postmenopausal women
including 1,771 incident lung cancers in the Women's Health Initiative,
1993-2010, were analyzed. Twelve percent of women received active
intervention (1 g calcium+400 IU vitamin D3 daily) in the Calcium/Vitamin
D Trial. Baseline total intake was assessed by a food frequency
questionnaire and supplement bottle labels. Hazard ratios (HR) were
estimated by Cox proportional hazard models.Results: No association was
observed overall. Among never smokers, vitamin D intake was inversely
associated with total lung cancer (HR=0.37, 95% confidence interval
[CI]=0.18-0.77, 800 vs. <100 IU/d; P-trend=0.01). The Calcium/Vitamin D
Trial active intervention was not associated with a lower lung cancer
risk among women with vitamin A intake 1,000 g/d Retinol Activity
Equivalent (RAE), but among those with vitamin A intake <1,000 g/d RAE
(HR=0.69, 95% CI=0.50-0.96; P-interaction=0.09). Among current smokers
with excess vitamin A intake (3,000 g/d RAE), the intervention was
associated with a higher lung cancer risk (HR=2.26, 95% CI=1.02-5.01), as
no association was observed among current smokers with vitamin A intake
Background: Prior research suggests that vitamin D protects against lung
cancer with evidence only among subgroups including women and
non-smokers. We investigated whether vitamin D intake was associated with
lung cancer and explored whether vitamin A intake modified the
association.Methods: Data from 128,779 postmenopausal women including
1,771 incident lung cancers in the Women's Health Initiative, 1993-2010,
were analyzed. Twelve percent of women received active intervention (1 g
calcium+400 IU vitamin D3 daily) in the Calcium/Vitamin D Trial. Baseline
total intake was assessed by a food frequency questionnaire and
supplement bottle labels. Hazard ratios (HR) were estimated by Cox
proportional hazard models.Results: No association was observed overall.
Among never smokers, vitamin D intake was inversely associated with total
lung cancer (HR=0.37, 95% confidence interval [CI]=0.18-0.77, 800 vs.
<100 IU/d; P-trend=0.01). The Calcium/Vitamin D Trial active intervention
was not associated with a lower lung cancer risk among women with vitamin
A intake 1,000 g/d Retinol Activity Equivalent (RAE), but among those
with vitamin A intake <1,000 g/d RAE (HR=0.69, 95% CI=0.50-0.96;
P-interaction=0.09). Among current smokers with excess vitamin A intake
(3,000 g/d RAE), the intervention was associated with a higher lung
cancer risk (HR=2.26, 95% CI=1.02-5.01), as no association was observed
among current smokers with vitamin A intake <3,000 g/d RAE
(P-interaction=0.01).Conclusion: Vitamin D intake was associated with a
lower lung cancer risk in never-smoking, postmenopausal women. Lower
vitamin A intake may be important for a beneficial association of 1 g
calcium+400 IU vitamin D3 supplementation with lung cancer.

