Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the role of the Rad6 pathway in tumor resistance to
platinum-based compounds.


Platinum-based therapies are used to treat a broad range of malignant
diseases, but their efficacy is limited by development of resistance.
Repair of DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) induced by platinum-based
compounds involves multiple DNA repair pathways including the Fanconi
anemia (FA) and postreplication repair (PRR) pathways. Rad6 is essential
for PRR as mutation of its ubiquitin conjugation site renders cells
PRR-compromised. Recent studies suggest PRR pathway proteins Rad6, Rad18
and PCNA are pivotal in FancD2 activation, a critical event in FA pathway
repair of ICLs. To determine the role of Rad6 in sensitivity and repair
of platinum-induced damage, we used cancer cell models displaying
intrinsic cisplatin (CDDP) resistance (metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells, IC50 12.5 M) and an isogenic model of acquired oxaliplatin
(OxPt) resistance (parental HCT116, IC50 1.2 M vs. resistant HCT116
(HCT116-OxR) colon carcinoma cells, IC50 12 M). MTT assays showed that
pretreatment with a Rad6 small molecule inhibitor increased sensitivities
to CDDP (IC50 reduced from 12.5 to 2.8 M) and OxPt (22% increased
cytotoxicity at concentrations Platinum-based therapies are used to treat
a broad range of malignant diseases, but their efficacy is limited by
development of resistance. Repair of DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs)
induced by platinum-based compounds involves multiple DNA repair pathways
including the Fanconi anemia (FA) and postreplication repair (PRR)
pathways. Rad6 is essential for PRR as mutation of its ubiquitin
conjugation site renders cells PRR-compromised. Recent studies suggest
PRR pathway proteins Rad6, Rad18 and PCNA are pivotal in FancD2
activation, a critical event in FA pathway repair of ICLs. To determine
the role of Rad6 in sensitivity and repair of platinum-induced damage, we
used cancer cell models displaying intrinsic cisplatin (CDDP) resistance
(metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, IC50 12.5 M) and an isogenic
model of acquired oxaliplatin (OxPt) resistance (parental HCT116, IC50
1.2 M vs. resistant HCT116 (HCT116-OxR) colon carcinoma cells, IC50 12
M). MTT assays showed that pretreatment with a Rad6 small molecule
inhibitor increased sensitivities to CDDP (IC50 reduced from 12.5 to 2.8
M) and OxPt (22% increased cytotoxicity at concentrations < 5 M OxPt).
Consistent with these data, immunoblot analysis indicated Rad6 inhibitor
decreased CDDP induction of H2AX, reflecting reduced repair and increased
drug sensitivity. Although Rad6 protein levels were minimally affected by
the inhibitor, levels of CDDP-induced monoubiquitinated-PCNA (indicating
Rad6 TLS pathway activation) and CDDP-induced ubiquitinated-FancD2
(indicating FA pathway activation) were reduced. Immunofluorescence
staining and subcellular fraction analysis indicated increased CDDP
sensitivity in the presence of Rad6 inhibitor is associated with
decreased CDDP-induced nuclear localization of H2AX, FancD2, PCNA and
Rad6. Orthotopic tumors produced by MDA-MB-231 cells pretreated with Rad6
inhibitor were significantly smaller compared to control, and tumor
volumes were further reduced when combined with CDDP. A similar
relationship between OxPt-induced Rad6 and FA pathway crosstalk was
observed in HCT116-OxR cells. Rad18 protein was upregulated, and FancD2
and PCNA were constitutively monoubiquitinated in HCT116-OxR cells
compared to parental HCT116 cells, in which FancD2 and PCNA
ubiquitination was observed only after OxPt exposure. H2AX was
constitutively upregulated in HCT116-OxR cells. These data suggest OxPt
tolerance is conferred by active damage signaling and repair. Rad6
inhibitor treatment decreased H2AX, monoubiquitinated-PCNA and FancD2.
These data imply a major role for the Rad6 PRR pathway in intrinsic and
acquired platinum-based compound resistance and suggest inhibition of
Rad6 ubiquitin conjugating activity may be exploited to alleviate
resistance to platinum-based therapies. Supported by DOD
W81XWH-09-1-0608, WSU Bridge Funding and KCI Strategic Research
Initiative Grant.Citation Format: Matthew A. Sanders, Malathy PV Shekhar.
Exploring the role of the Rad6 pathway in tumor resistance to
platinum-based compounds. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5505. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5505

