Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of 7/11, a functional prolactin-binding protein.


Prolactin is essential for normal mammary gland development and
differentiation, and has been shown to promote tumor cell proliferation
and chemotherapeutic resistance. Soluble isoforms of the prolactin
receptor have been reported to regulate prolactin bioavailability by
functioning as prolactin binding proteins. Included in this category is
7/11, a product of alternate splicing of the prolactin receptor primary
transcript. However, the direct interactions of prolactin with 7/11, and
the resulting effect on cell behavior, have not been investigated.
Herein, we demonstrate the ability of 7/11 to bind prolactin using a
novel proximity ligation assay and traditional immunoprecipitation
techniques. Biochemical analyses demonstrated that 7/11 was heavily
glycosylated, similar to the extracellular domain of the primary
prolactin receptor, and that glycosylation regulated the cellular
localization and secretion of 7/11. Low levels of 7/11 were detected in
serum samples of healthy volunteers, but were undetectable in human milk
samples. Expression of 7/11 was also detected in six of the 62 primary
breast tumor biopsies analyzed; however, no correlation was found with
7/11 expression and tumor histotype or other patient demographics.
Functional analysis demonstrated the ability of 7/11 to inhibit
prolactin-induced cell proliferation as well as alter prolactin-induced
rescue of cell cycle arrest/early senescence events in breast epithelial
cells. Collectively, these data demonstrate that 7/11 is a novel
regulatory mechanism of prolactin bioavailability and signaling.

