Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced expression of miR-342-3p in prostate cancer.


Patients with bone metastasis of the prostate have a 5-year survival rate
of less than 30%. Due to inconsistencies in the presentation, prognosis,
and treatment options of metastatic prostate cancer (PCa), biomarkers are
urgently needed for personalized treatment of this disease. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small, non-coding, single-stranded endogenous RNAs that
regulate the expression of multiple messenger RNA targets. Studies have
demonstrated that these non-coding RNAs are significantly expressed in
lung, breast and prostate cancer tumors. We hypothesize that miRNAs are
differentially expressed between non-cancerous and aggressive tumor
phenotypes in PCa, e.g. bone-specific metastasis. To test this
hypothesis, we evaluated 384 miRNAs in the serum of stage-matched
patients with stage I (n = 5), stage III (n = 5), stage IV (n = 5) PCa
compared to non-cancerous age and stage-matched controls (n = 5). Total
RNA was isolated from 500 l of serum (Bioserve Biotechnologies, Ltd). The
expression profiles of miRNAs were measured using TLDA cards and
statistical analyses were performed using Expression Suite Software
version 1.0. MiRNAs (miR-106b/17, -302b, -342-3p) were differentially
expressed in the serum of PCa patients with (stage I, III, IV) when
compared to controls. Mir-342-3p was significantly reduced in expression
(P = 0.018-0.028) in all PCa patients relative to non-cancerous controls,
after adjusting multiple hypothesis testing. However, other serum miRNAs
were differentially expressed for only stage III PCa (P=0.001-0.018).
Validation of these differentially expressed miRNAs in large sample sizes
will lead to the identification of pre- and metastatic biomarkers.
Ultimately, the investigation of these biomarkers will improve
personalized treatment of PCa patients.

