Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem cell hypothesis and function of Lgr5 in the development of
colon cancer.


Similar to normal colonic epithelium, colorectal carcinomas (CRC)
comprise subpopulations of cells with stem-like properties.
Leucine-rich-repeat-containing G-protein-coupled receptor 5 (Lgr5) is
associated with these stem cells in normal colonic epithelium and CRC.
Here, we analyzed the functional and molecular consequences of
shRNA-mediated silencing of Lgr5 in CRC cell lines SW480 and HT-29.
Additionally, we exposed Lgr5-EGFP-IRES-Cre-ERT2 mice to
azoxymethane/dextrane sodium sulfate (AOM/DSS) which induces
inflammation-driven colon tumors. Tumors were then flow-sorted into Lgr5
high and low epithelial cell fractions and molecularly characterized
using gene expression profiling and array comparative genomic
hybridization. Silencing of Lgr5 in SW480 cells resulted in a depletion
of the spheroid cell fraction, yet did not affect the adherently growing
cell population. It also reduced proliferation, migration, and colony
formation in vitro as well as tumorigenicity in vivo, consistent with a
down-regulation of Notch signaling. Spheroid cells were enriched for
several stem cell-associated genes including Lgr5. Lgr5 high cells of
AOM/DSS-induced mouse colon tumors displayed higher Wnt signaling
compared to both their Lgr5 low tumor cell counterparts as well as Lgr5
high normal colon stem cells. Lgr5 high and low tumor cells were both
chromosomally stable. In conclusion, our data suggest Lgr5 as a
functionally important marker for stem-like cells in CRC, representing a
potential therapeutic target.

