Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK2 rather than ERK1 contributes to EMT and metastatic potential
in triple-negative breast cancer.


Background: Patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), which
lacks estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor and has low HER2
expression, have a very poor prognosis because the disease often
metastasizes. Preventing metastasis, as well as inhibiting tumor growth,
is crucial to improving the prognosis of patients with TNBC. We
previously showed using reverse-phase protein array analysis that
patients with ERK2-overexpressing TNBC had a higher risk of death than
those with low-ERK2-expressing TNBC. TNBC is characterized by an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype, which has features
in common with those of cancer stem cells. Cells undergoing EMT may
contribute to the metastatic process and have increased ability to form
mammospheres in vitro. The roles of the 2 ERK isoforms, ERK1 and ERK2, in
TNBC are not well defined. We hypothesized that ERK2, but not
ERK1promotes EMT and metastasis in TNBC.Methods & Results: We compared
parental SUM-149 TNBC cells and stable clones that constitutively
expressed shERK1 or shERK2 and observed no differences in cell
proliferation. However, reducing the expression of ERK2, but not reducing
the expression of ERK1, changed the mesenchymal phenotype of TNBC to an
epithelial phenotype, reduced formation of mammospheres in a
dose-dependent manner, and reduced the stem cell subpopulation
(CD44+/CD24-), which correlated with a reduction in migration and
invasion. In addition, ERK2 knockdown inhibited anchorage-independent
growth, an indicator of in vivo tumorigenicity. To determine which genes
are involved in ERK2-induced EMT and metastasis, we performed
transcriptional profiling using real-time PCR-based EMT and metastasis
arrays. After normalization, we observed that mRNA levels of the
epithelial markers KRT7 and KRT14 were increased by 4 and 1.8 fold,
respectively, in ERK2-silenced cells as in control cells; mRNA levels of
the mesenchymal markers Twist1, vimentin, and ZEB1 were reduced by 0.6,
0.1 and 0.2 fold respectively, in ERK2-silenced cells as in control
cells; and mRNA levels of the metastasis-related genes MMP-2, MMP-7,
MMP-13, IL1B, and COL4A2 were reduced by 0.3, 0.3, 0.6, 0.6 and 0.3 fold
respectively, in ERK2-silenced cells as in control cells. Further, using
an Affymetrix gene chip and the Inflammatory Breast Cancer World
Consortium patient data set (n=389), we did a class comparison test in
which the P value was calculated by Wilcoxon test. We observed
significantly lower ERK1 mRNA expression in the TNBC group than the
non-TNBC group (P Background: Patients with triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC), which lacks estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor and has
low HER2 expression, have a very poor prognosis because the disease often
metastasizes. Preventing metastasis, as well as inhibiting tumor growth,
is crucial to improving the prognosis of patients with TNBC. We
previously showed using reverse-phase protein array analysis that
patients with ERK2-overexpressing TNBC had a higher risk of death than
those with low-ERK2-expressing TNBC. TNBC is characterized by an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype, which has features
in common with those of cancer stem cells. Cells undergoing EMT may
contribute to the metastatic process and have increased ability to form
mammospheres in vitro. The roles of the 2 ERK isoforms, ERK1 and ERK2, in
TNBC are not well defined. We hypothesized that ERK2, but not
ERK1promotes EMT and metastasis in TNBC.Methods & Results: We compared
parental SUM-149 TNBC cells and stable clones that constitutively
expressed shERK1 or shERK2 and observed no differences in cell
proliferation. However, reducing the expression of ERK2, but not reducing
the expression of ERK1, changed the mesenchymal phenotype of TNBC to an
epithelial phenotype, reduced formation of mammospheres in a
dose-dependent manner, and reduced the stem cell subpopulation
(CD44+/CD24-), which correlated with a reduction in migration and
invasion. In addition, ERK2 knockdown inhibited anchorage-independent
growth, an indicator of in vivo tumorigenicity. To determine which genes
are involved in ERK2-induced EMT and metastasis, we performed
transcriptional profiling using real-time PCR-based EMT and metastasis
arrays. After normalization, we observed that mRNA levels of the
epithelial markers KRT7 and KRT14 were increased by 4 and 1.8 fold,
respectively, in ERK2-silenced cells as in control cells; mRNA levels of
the mesenchymal markers Twist1, vimentin, and ZEB1 were reduced by 0.6,
0.1 and 0.2 fold respectively, in ERK2-silenced cells as in control
cells; and mRNA levels of the metastasis-related genes MMP-2, MMP-7,
MMP-13, IL1B, and COL4A2 were reduced by 0.3, 0.3, 0.6, 0.6 and 0.3 fold
respectively, in ERK2-silenced cells as in control cells. Further, using
an Affymetrix gene chip and the Inflammatory Breast Cancer World
Consortium patient data set (n=389), we did a class comparison test in
which the P value was calculated by Wilcoxon test. We observed
significantly lower ERK1 mRNA expression in the TNBC group than the
non-TNBC group (P < 0.0001) but significantly higher ERK2 mRNA expression
in the TNBC group than in the non-TNBC group (P Background: Patients with
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), which lacks estrogen receptor and
progesterone receptor and has low HER2 expression, have a very poor
prognosis because the disease often metastasizes. Preventing metastasis,
as well as inhibiting tumor growth, is crucial to improving the prognosis
of patients with TNBC. We previously showed using reverse-phase protein
array analysis that patients with ERK2-overexpressing TNBC had a higher
risk of death than those with low-ERK2-expressing TNBC. TNBC is
characterized by an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype,
which has features in common with those of cancer stem cells. Cells
undergoing EMT may contribute to the metastatic process and have
increased ability to form mammospheres in vitro. The roles of the 2 ERK
isoforms, ERK1 and ERK2, in TNBC are not well defined. We hypothesized
that ERK2, but not ERK1promotes EMT and metastasis in TNBC.Methods &
Results: We compared parental SUM-149 TNBC cells and stable clones that
constitutively expressed shERK1 or shERK2 and observed no differences in
cell proliferation. However, reducing the expression of ERK2, but not
reducing the expression of ERK1, changed the mesenchymal phenotype of
TNBC to an epithelial phenotype, reduced formation of mammospheres in a
dose-dependent manner, and reduced the stem cell subpopulation
(CD44+/CD24-), which correlated with a reduction in migration and
invasion. In addition, ERK2 knockdown inhibited anchorage-independent
growth, an indicator of in vivo tumorigenicity. To determine which genes
are involved in ERK2-induced EMT and metastasis, we performed
transcriptional profiling using real-time PCR-based EMT and metastasis
arrays. After normalization, we observed that mRNA levels of the
epithelial markers KRT7 and KRT14 were increased by 4 and 1.8 fold,
respectively, in ERK2-silenced cells as in control cells; mRNA levels of
the mesenchymal markers Twist1, vimentin, and ZEB1 were reduced by 0.6,
0.1 and 0.2 fold respectively, in ERK2-silenced cells as in control
cells; and mRNA levels of the metastasis-related genes MMP-2, MMP-7,
MMP-13, IL1B, and COL4A2 were reduced by 0.3, 0.3, 0.6, 0.6 and 0.3 fold
respectively, in ERK2-silenced cells as in control cells. Further, using
an Affymetrix gene chip and the Inflammatory Breast Cancer World
Consortium patient data set (n=389), we did a class comparison test in
which the P value was calculated by Wilcoxon test. We observed
significantly lower ERK1 mRNA expression in the TNBC group than the
non-TNBC group (P < 0.0001) but significantly higher ERK2 mRNA expression
in the TNBC group than in the non-TNBC group (P < 0.005).Conclusions:
ERK2 but not ERK1 may promote tumorigenesis of the TNBC subgroup by
enriching the cancer stem cell population and inducing EMT and
metastasis. Our long-term goal is to confirm these findings in xenograft
studies and develop ERK2-targeted therapy for TNBC.

