Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tangeretin enhances sensitivity of human pancreatic cancer cells
to gemcitabine through targeting the reprogramming of stemness.


Background: As a single agent, gemcitabine (2,2-difluorodeoxycytidine)
has shown only a modest improvement in survival in patients with
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Our recent studies found CCN1 (a
member of CCN family of growth factor) as an important factor in
determining PDAC aggressiveness as it promotes epithelial to mesenchymal
transition, tumor stemness, migration and tumorigenicity in xenograft
model, possibly through the regulation of multiple miRNAs that are known
to link with the progression of cancers and survival and the maintenance
of cancer stem cells. Targeting CCN1 may lead to the development of novel
therapeutic approaches for human cancers. Here, we examined the effects
of tangeretin, a polymethoxylated flavonoid compound produced by citrus
fruits in combination of gemcitabine on CCN1-sonic hedgehog (SHh)
signaling in pancreatic cancer cells, and assessed the therapeutic
potential of tangeretin with gemcitabine for the treatment and/or
prevention of pancreatic cancer.Methodology/Principal Findings: Cell
viability and apoptosis were measured by crystal violet staining assay
and annexinV/PI staining assay, respectively. Gene and protein
expressions were measured by Western blot analysis, respectively. We
found that tangeretin in combination with gemcitabine significantly
decreased cell survival, clonogenicity, wound-healing capacity,
sphere-forming capacity (pancreatospheres) in pancreatic cell lines.
Tangeretin also decreased the expression of cancer stem cells (CSC)
markers, CD44, Notch-1, Nanog, Oct-4, ABCG2, SHh and CCN1.Conclusions:
Collectively, these studies clearly suggest that tangeretin helps in
sensitizing pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine by reprogramming the
CSC-specific markers. Thus tangeretin could be useful for overcoming
therapeutic resistance of pancreatic cancer cells.

