Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow-derived Gr1+ cells can generate a metastasis-resistant
microenvironment via induced secretion of thrombospondin-1.


Previous studies have shown that metastatic tumors establish
premetastatic niches comprised of recruited bone marrow (BM)-derived
cells in potential distant target metastatic organs. These premetatatic
niches serve as permissive hubs for supporting future metastases.
However, little is known about whether tumors that lack metastatic
potential establish such niches, or generate niches that inhibit
metastasis. Here, we show that metastasis-incompetent tumors are also
capable of systemically generating BM-derived niches in the metastatic
organs. However, by secreting the glycoprotein prosaposin these tumors
systemically stimulate expression of antitumorigenic factor
thrombospondin-1 (Tsp-1) in the Gr1+ myeloid cells converting them it
into a metastasis-refractory niche. Genetic deletion of Tsp-1 abolished
the inhibition of metastasis, which was restored by BM transplant from
Tsp-1+ donors.We developed a 5-amino acid peptide from prosaposin as a
pharmacological inducer of Tsp-1 in Gr1+ BM cells. Strikingly, the
peptide suppresses metastasis. These results provide mechanistic insights
into why certain tumors are deficient in metastatic potential and
implicate recruited Gr1+ myeloid cells as the main source of Tsp-1,
contrary to previous notion. These results also underscore the plasticity
of Gr1+ cells, which, depending on the context and the nature of
paracrine factor/s can either promote or inhibit metastasis. Clinically,
examination of a tumor tissue microarray (TMA) compiled from 103 prostate
cancer patients with long and complete follow up, revealed that
prosaposin expression positively correlated with increased overall
survival, suggesting that the prosaposin peptide may be a potential
therapeutic agent against metastatic cancer.

