Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of microRNA:target interaction in bladder cancer
metastasis.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene
expression through base pairing with other mRNA transcripts. MiRNA
expression signatures have characterized many phenotypes in bladder
cancer, including grade, stage, and metastasis. However, simultaneous
mRNA changes accompanying the miRNA profile, along with the miRNA:mRNA
interaction, have not been systematically studied in these phenotypes. To
gain insights into the miRNA regulatory network in bladder cancer
metastasis, we profiled miRNA and mRNA expression in two pairs of
metastatic and non-metastatic cell lines. Interactions between
differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs were predicted using 6 software
programs. The candidate miRNA:mRNA pairs were further selected by their
clinical relevance, including their expression in grade, stage, and tumor
in 2 cohorts totaling 256 human tumors. We identified more miRNA:mRNA
pairs with up-regulated miRNAs and down-regulated genes in metastatic
cells than the pairs with down-regulated miRNAs and up-regulated target
genes. The novel overexpression of one of the miRNAs, hsa-miR-146a, was
confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR in metastatic cell lines. It has been
shown that decreased level of hsa-miR-146a is associated with progression
of prostate cancer and polymorphism in hsa-miR-146a gene is associated
with prostate cancer risk. We are carrying out in vitro and in vivo
experiments on the top 5 scoring pairs ranked by the number of prediction
software and clinical relevance. Our results suggest the significance of
miRNA regulatory network in cancer metastasis and provide a list of
potential miRNA:mRNA pairs for further investigation.

