Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug- induced generation of Mcl-1128-350 fragment triggers
apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells through upregulation of c-Jun.


Myeloid cell leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) gene, a pro-survival member of the Bcl-2
family, has been suggested to play a key role in Multiple Myeloma (MM)
pathogenesis and drug resistance. Our present data demonstrate
significant overexpression of Mcl-1 gene in a data set comparing samples
from more than 500 MM patients with samples from healthy donors. These
findings indicate Mcl-1 as a potential therapeutic target in MM. One
strategy to inhibit Mcl-1 activity in MM and other malignancies is the
induction of proteasome- independent Mcl-1 degradation. Indeed, our own
and other previous studies demonstrate that a caspase- induced 28 kD
Mcl-1 fragment, Mcl-1128-350 inhibits MM cell proliferation and survival.
Importantly, our present results show that bortezomib, staurosporine and
adaphostin, but not doxorubicin, thalidomide or enzastaurin induce
generation of Mcl-1128-350 in MM cells. We next sought to identify
molecular sequelae downstream of Mcl-1128-350, which mediate its
pro-apoptotic effect. Surprisingly, we observed nuclear accumulation of
drug- induced or transfected Mcl-1128-350, followed by elevated mRNA and
protein levels of c-Jun as well as enhanced AP-1 reporter activity.
Supporting a key role of Mcl-1128-350 in c-Jun transcription, drug-
induced c-Jun upregulation was blocked after introduction of point
mutations into the two highly conserved Mcl-1 caspase- cleavage sites
Asp127 and Asp157. Consistent with these data, treatment with bortezomib
triggered c-Jun upregulation followed by apoptosis in Mcl-1wt/wt, but not
Mcl-1d/null murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Conversely, transfection
of a plasmid carrying Mcl-1wt into Mcl-1d/null MEFs restored bortezomib-
induced Mcl-1 fragementation, c-Jun upregulation and cell apoptosis.
Importantly, Mcl-1 sequencing in several MM cell lines and primary cells
didn't show the existence of point mutations in Mcl-1 caspase- cleavage
sites, excluding a potential mechanism of drug resistance. In order to
identify c-Jun downstream effectors of MM cell apoptosis, gene array
profiling was finally performed on MM cells transfected with Mcl-1wt or
Mcl-1128-350. Taken together, the present study demonstrates a promising
therapeutic role of Mcl-1128-350 in MM. Moreover, our preliminary data
indicate that a similar therapeutic role of Mcl-1128-350 may also exist
in a variety of solid and other hematologic malignancies.

