Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KGP94, a small-molecule cathepsin L inhibitor with antitumor
activity.


Purpose: Cathepsins are a class of proteolytic enzymes recognized to play
an important role in tumour progression, invasion and angiogenesis. The
present study evaluated the anti-tumour activity of the small-molecule
cathepsin L inhibitor KGP94 in a murine breast tumour model.Materials and
Methods: Male CDF1 mice were inoculated on the right rear foot with a C3H
mammary carcinoma. A solution of KGP94 was prepared each day by
dissolving in a mixture of 10% Tween 80 and 90% HEPES-buffer. It was
intraperitoneally injected at 0.01ml/g mouse bodyweight. Various doses
(5-20mg/kg) were administered between 5-20 days, starting either from the
day of tumour implant or when tumours had reached a volume of 200mm3.
Tumour response was assessed by determining the tumour growth time, which
was either the time in days to reach a volume of 500mm3 (TGT500) for
animals treated from the day of tumour implant, or 1000mm3 (TGT1000) for
animals treated when tumours were at a volume of 200mm3. Results are
listed as Mean ( Standard Error). One-way ANOVA with a posthoc
Student-Newman-Keuls comparison of group means was performed, and a
PPurpose: Cathepsins are a class of proteolytic enzymes recognized to
play an important role in tumour progression, invasion and angiogenesis.
The present study evaluated the anti-tumour activity of the
small-molecule cathepsin L inhibitor KGP94 in a murine breast tumour
model.Materials and Methods: Male CDF1 mice were inoculated on the right
rear foot with a C3H mammary carcinoma. A solution of KGP94 was prepared
each day by dissolving in a mixture of 10% Tween 80 and 90% HEPES-buffer.
It was intraperitoneally injected at 0.01ml/g mouse bodyweight. Various
doses (5-20mg/kg) were administered between 5-20 days, starting either
from the day of tumour implant or when tumours had reached a volume of
200mm3. Tumour response was assessed by determining the tumour growth
time, which was either the time in days to reach a volume of 500mm3
(TGT500) for animals treated from the day of tumour implant, or 1000mm3
(TGT1000) for animals treated when tumours were at a volume of 200mm3.
Results are listed as Mean ( Standard Error). One-way ANOVA with a
posthoc Student-Newman-Keuls comparison of group means was performed, and
a P<0.05 was considered significant.Results: The TGT500 for control
animals was 18.3 days ( 0.4). Treating tumours with 10mg/kg for 5 days
significantly increased the TGT500 to 21.9 days ( 0.7). When the time of
treatment with this dose was increased to 10 or 20 days, no additional
growth inhibition was observed. Varying the drug dose for this 5 days
treatment period showed that the TGT500 with 5mg/kg and 20mg/kg were 23.5
days ( 1.9) and 23.4 days ( 1.1), respectively. For experiments in which
treatments were started when tumours had already reached 200mm3 an effect
on TGT1000 was only observed with the highest drug dose at 20mg/kg; the
respective TGT1000 being 5.9 days ( 0.2) for controls and 8.3 days ( 0.7)
for KGP94.Conclusion: This synthetic, small-molecule cathepsin L
inhibitor significantly delayed tumour growth, but the effect was
primarily on the early phase following tumour inoculation. Such an effect
suggests that KGP94 may have a role to play in inhibiting metastatic
development rather than influencing the growth of established
tumours.Supported by The Danish Cancer Society, The Danish Council for
Independent Research: Medical Sciences, and OXiGENE Inc.

