Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of miR-196b and HOXA10 characterize a
poor-prognosis gastric cancer subtype.


Background: Gastric cancer is composed of disease subgroups with
heterogeneous clinical and biological behaviors. A previous study
identified two subgroups with distinct gene-expression profiles strongly
associated with prognosis. To identify molecular biologic differences
between these two subgroups, we performed an integrative analysis of
mRNA, microRNA, and protein expression.Methods: Array technologies were
used to generate microRNA and protein expression profiles of frozen
tissue samples from 60 patients with gastric cancer. All patients
underwent curative gastric resection in 2005 and distributed from stage I
to IV and their clinical characteristics were collected. BRB-ArrayTools
were used for microarray data analysis. Data was compared between gastric
cancer tissue and normal gastric tissue and also between two different
prognostic groups. Aberrantly expressed microRNA and associated mRNA in
patients with poor-prognosis gastric cancer were validated by
quantitative RT-PCR and tissue microarray, respectively.Results: Four
microRNAs were aberrantly expressed in gastric cancer tissue, especially
poor prognostic group (P Background: Gastric cancer is composed of
disease subgroups with heterogeneous clinical and biological behaviors. A
previous study identified two subgroups with distinct gene-expression
profiles strongly associated with prognosis. To identify molecular
biologic differences between these two subgroups, we performed an
integrative analysis of mRNA, microRNA, and protein expression.Methods:
Array technologies were used to generate microRNA and protein expression
profiles of frozen tissue samples from 60 patients with gastric cancer.
All patients underwent curative gastric resection in 2005 and distributed
from stage I to IV and their clinical characteristics were collected.
BRB-ArrayTools were used for microarray data analysis. Data was compared
between gastric cancer tissue and normal gastric tissue and also between
two different prognostic groups. Aberrantly expressed microRNA and
associated mRNA in patients with poor-prognosis gastric cancer were
validated by quantitative RT-PCR and tissue microarray,
respectively.Results: Four microRNAs were aberrantly expressed in gastric
cancer tissue, especially poor prognostic group (P < 0.05). In the
poor-prognosis subgroup, miR-196b showed the most significantly high
expression patterns and also miR-135b, miR-93. On the contrary, miR-29c*
was down-regulated. MiR-196b expression was positively correlated with
HOXA10 expression (r = 0.726; P Background: Gastric cancer is composed of
disease subgroups with heterogeneous clinical and biological behaviors. A
previous study identified two subgroups with distinct gene-expression
profiles strongly associated with prognosis. To identify molecular
biologic differences between these two subgroups, we performed an
integrative analysis of mRNA, microRNA, and protein expression.Methods:
Array technologies were used to generate microRNA and protein expression
profiles of frozen tissue samples from 60 patients with gastric cancer.
All patients underwent curative gastric resection in 2005 and distributed
from stage I to IV and their clinical characteristics were collected.
BRB-ArrayTools were used for microarray data analysis. Data was compared
between gastric cancer tissue and normal gastric tissue and also between
two different prognostic groups. Aberrantly expressed microRNA and
associated mRNA in patients with poor-prognosis gastric cancer were
validated by quantitative RT-PCR and tissue microarray,
respectively.Results: Four microRNAs were aberrantly expressed in gastric
cancer tissue, especially poor prognostic group (P < 0.05). In the
poor-prognosis subgroup, miR-196b showed the most significantly high
expression patterns and also miR-135b, miR-93. On the contrary, miR-29c*
was down-regulated. MiR-196b expression was positively correlated with
HOXA10 expression (r = 0.726; P < 0.001), which was significantly
increased in poor-prognosis patients (P Background: Gastric cancer is
composed of disease subgroups with heterogeneous clinical and biological
behaviors. A previous study identified two subgroups with distinct
gene-expression profiles strongly associated with prognosis. To identify
molecular biologic differences between these two subgroups, we performed
an integrative analysis of mRNA, microRNA, and protein
expression.Methods: Array technologies were used to generate microRNA and
protein expression profiles of frozen tissue samples from 60 patients
with gastric cancer. All patients underwent curative gastric resection in
2005 and distributed from stage I to IV and their clinical
characteristics were collected. BRB-ArrayTools were used for microarray
data analysis. Data was compared between gastric cancer tissue and normal
gastric tissue and also between two different prognostic groups.
Aberrantly expressed microRNA and associated mRNA in patients with
poor-prognosis gastric cancer were validated by quantitative RT-PCR and
tissue microarray, respectively.Results: Four microRNAs were aberrantly
expressed in gastric cancer tissue, especially poor prognostic group (P <
0.05). In the poor-prognosis subgroup, miR-196b showed the most
significantly high expression patterns and also miR-135b, miR-93. On the
contrary, miR-29c* was down-regulated. MiR-196b expression was positively
correlated with HOXA10 expression (r = 0.726; P < 0.001), which was
significantly increased in poor-prognosis patients (P < 0.001). HOXA10
protein-positive expression was identified in 56 of 368 gastric cancer
tissue microarray samples. In reverse-phase protein array, 46/124
proteins were expressed differently (P Background: Gastric cancer is
composed of disease subgroups with heterogeneous clinical and biological
behaviors. A previous study identified two subgroups with distinct
gene-expression profiles strongly associated with prognosis. To identify
molecular biologic differences between these two subgroups, we performed
an integrative analysis of mRNA, microRNA, and protein
expression.Methods: Array technologies were used to generate microRNA and
protein expression profiles of frozen tissue samples from 60 patients
with gastric cancer. All patients underwent curative gastric resection in
2005 and distributed from stage I to IV and their clinical
characteristics were collected. BRB-ArrayTools were used for microarray
data analysis. Data was compared between gastric cancer tissue and normal
gastric tissue and also between two different prognostic groups.
Aberrantly expressed microRNA and associated mRNA in patients with
poor-prognosis gastric cancer were validated by quantitative RT-PCR and
tissue microarray, respectively.Results: Four microRNAs were aberrantly
expressed in gastric cancer tissue, especially poor prognostic group (P <
0.05). In the poor-prognosis subgroup, miR-196b showed the most
significantly high expression patterns and also miR-135b, miR-93. On the
contrary, miR-29c* was down-regulated. MiR-196b expression was positively
correlated with HOXA10 expression (r = 0.726; P < 0.001), which was
significantly increased in poor-prognosis patients (P < 0.001). HOXA10
protein-positive expression was identified in 56 of 368 gastric cancer
tissue microarray samples. In reverse-phase protein array, 46/124
proteins were expressed differently (P < 0.05); COX2 (P Background:
Gastric cancer is composed of disease subgroups with heterogeneous
clinical and biological behaviors. A previous study identified two
subgroups with distinct gene-expression profiles strongly associated with
prognosis. To identify molecular biologic differences between these two
subgroups, we performed an integrative analysis of mRNA, microRNA, and
protein expression.Methods: Array technologies were used to generate
microRNA and protein expression profiles of frozen tissue samples from 60
patients with gastric cancer. All patients underwent curative gastric
resection in 2005 and distributed from stage I to IV and their clinical
characteristics were collected. BRB-ArrayTools were used for microarray
data analysis. Data was compared between gastric cancer tissue and normal
gastric tissue and also between two different prognostic groups.
Aberrantly expressed microRNA and associated mRNA in patients with
poor-prognosis gastric cancer were validated by quantitative RT-PCR and
tissue microarray, respectively.Results: Four microRNAs were aberrantly
expressed in gastric cancer tissue, especially poor prognostic group (P <
0.05). In the poor-prognosis subgroup, miR-196b showed the most
significantly high expression patterns and also miR-135b, miR-93. On the
contrary, miR-29c* was down-regulated. MiR-196b expression was positively
correlated with HOXA10 expression (r = 0.726; P < 0.001), which was
significantly increased in poor-prognosis patients (P < 0.001). HOXA10
protein-positive expression was identified in 56 of 368 gastric cancer
tissue microarray samples. In reverse-phase protein array, 46/124
proteins were expressed differently (P < 0.05); COX2 (P < 0.001) and
cyclin B1 (P = 0.017) were clearly over-expressed in the poor-prognosis
group.Conclusion: Integrative analysis of RNA and protein expression
profile facilitates interpretation of the molecular biologic
heterogeneity of cancer. Co-activation of miR-196b and HOXA10
characterized a poor-prognosis subgroup of patients with gastric cancer.
As HOXA10 is involved in the proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells
and progenitor cells, the relevance of hematopoietic progenitor cell and
gastric cancer development/progression should be further investigated.

