Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Markers of cell proliferation and growth as potential
preneoplastic biomarkers of risk for colorectal neoplasms.


Background: Increased colorectal epithelial cell proliferation and growth
are early, common events in sporadic colorectal cancer. To assess the
potential of cell proliferation and growth markers as pre-neoplastic
biomarkers of risk for colorectal neoplasms, we conducted a pilot,
colonoscopy-based case-control study (n = 51 cases and 154 controls) of
incident, sporadic colorectal adenoma.Methods: We evaluated transforming
growth factor alpha (TGF), TGF1, and telomerase reverse transcriptase
(hTERT) expression in normal-appearing mucosa from the rectum and
ascending and sigmoid colon using automated immunohistochemistry and
quantitative image analysis in a subset of cases and controls (n = 40 and
46, respectively). Mean differences in staining batch-standardized
biomarker labeling optical density between cases and controls were
assessed using analysis of covariance, and associations of the biomarkers
with adenomas were assessed using unconditional logistic
regression.Results: In the normal rectal mucosa, hTERT expression was 13%
(P = 0.06) higher in cases than in controls, and higher hTERT expression
(above the median in controls) was associated with a three-fold increased
risk of colorectal adenoma (OR = 3.28, 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.04
10.35). TGF expression was 31% (P = 0.25) higher in cases than in
controls, and higher TGF expression was associated with a 44% increased
risk of colorectal adenoma (OR = 1.44, 95% CI 0.50 4.16). TGF1 expression
alone and the ratio of TGF to TGF1 expression were 3% (P = 0.86, OR =
0.91, 95% CI 0.39 2.11) and 61% (P = 0.30, OR = 1.23, 95% CI 0.45 3.36),
respectively, higher in cases than in controls.Conclusions: These
preliminary data suggest that hTERT and TGF expression and, perhaps
especially, the balance of TGF and TGF1 expression in the normal rectal
mucosa may be directly associated with risk for incident, sporadic
colorectal neoplasms, providing support for further investigation of
these markers as potential biomarkers of risk for colorectal neoplasms.

