Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch and DLL4 expression in bevacizumab-treated colon cancer
patients.


Background: In order to investigate mechanisms of resistance to
angiogenesis inhibitors, Notch and Delta-like 4 ligand (DLL4) expression
was correlated with response and survival in a series of bevacizumab
treated advanced colon cancer patients. DLL4-mediated Notch signalling
has recently emerged as an attractive target for angiogenesis-based
cancer therapies, given that DLL4 is an important component of
Notch-mediated stem cell self-renewal and vascular development.
DLL4-induced Notch signalling mediates tumour-resistance to anti-VEGF
therapy by inducing the formation of large vessels and activating
multiple pathways in preclinical models. Method: Notch and DLL4
expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on 65 primary
colon cancer patients enrolled within randomized clinical trials
assessing first-line bevacizumab plus chemotherapy. Results: Notch
positivity was localized to the cytoplasm of malignant epithelial cells.
In all, 10/60 (17%) evaluable primary tumours had a high Notch
expression. Five of the 10 cases (50%) with high Notch expression
experienced progressive disease compared with 5/49 (10%) Notch negative
cases (p=0.008). Median progression-free survival (PFS) was 2.8 months
for Notch positive cases compared with 13.07 months for Notch negative
cases (p=0.045). Membranous and/or cytoplasmic DLL4 immunoreactivity of
tumour vessels was observed in 30/56 (54%) evaluable colon cancers. No
correlation was found between DLL4 expression and clinical outcome.
Conclusion: Clinical trials investigating the therapeutic efficacy of
bevacizumab in colon cancer did not explore the impact of DLL4-Notch
pathway on response and clinical outcome. Our results seem to suggest
that high Notch expression might be involved in tumour resistance in
colon cancer patients treated with bevacizumab.Citation Format: Francesca
Negri, Cecilia Bozzetti, Pellegrino Crafa, Costanza Lagrasta, Stefano
Cavalli, Giuseppe Pedrazzi, Giorgio Gardini, Ione Tamagnini, Rosa Porzio,
Luigi Cavanna, Carlo Paties, Ida Romano, Antonino Musolino, Gianluca
Tomasello, Pier Giorgio Petronini, Andrea Ardizzoni. Notch and DLL4
expression in bevacizumab-treated colon cancer patients. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4646.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4646

