Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of a fully human Gas6 neutralizing antibody with
anti-tumor activity in vivo.


Growth arrest specific 6 (Gas6) is a vitamin-K dependent protein that is
involved in the regulation of a wide array of cellular activities,
including adhesion, migration, immune evasion, and apoptosis. Gas6 as
well as its receptors Axl, Mer, and Tyro3 are highly expressed in
multiple malignancies suggesting that signaling through this axis may be
tumor promoting in human disease. A strategy was devised to generate
fully human neutralizing antibodies against Gas6 using XenoMouse
technology. Hybridoma supernatants were first screened for their ability
to bind Gas6, then for their ability to inhibit Gas6 binding to the Axl
receptor and block Gas6-induced Axl phosphorylation in human cells. Two
purified antibodies isolated from the screened hybridomas, 1D9.1 and
1G9.1, maintained potency in all 3 assays and also inhibited Gas6-induced
cellular migration and proliferation. In the scratch wound migration
assay, the antibodies inhibited both basal and Gas6-induced wound closure
to a greater extent than the soluble extracellular domain of the receptor
Axl (Axl- Fc). In the proliferation assay, the antibody 1D9.1 completely
inhibited Gas6-induced proliferation with a half maximal effective
concentration (EC50) of 0.15nM. In vivo characterization of one of the
antibodies, 1D9.1, was conducted using a pharmacodynamic (PD) assay that
measured the ability of the antibody to inhibit Gas6-induced Akt
activation in the mouse spleen. Treatment of mice with a single dose
(100-1000 g) of 1D9.1 led to greater than 90% inhibition of Gas6-induced
phosphorylated Akt (pAkt) for up to 72 hours. Based on the target
coverage observed in the PD assay, we tested the efficacy of 1D9.1
against Panc-1 human pancreatic adenocarcinoma xenografts implanted in
athymic nu/nu female mice. At doses of 50 and 150 g, twice weekly, the
Gas6 neutralizing antibody 1D9.1 was able to inhibit 55% and 76% of tumor
growth, respectively. (pGrowth arrest specific 6 (Gas6) is a vitamin-K
dependent protein that is involved in the regulation of a wide array of
cellular activities, including adhesion, migration, immune evasion, and
apoptosis. Gas6 as well as its receptors Axl, Mer, and Tyro3 are highly
expressed in multiple malignancies suggesting that signaling through this
axis may be tumor promoting in human disease. A strategy was devised to
generate fully human neutralizing antibodies against Gas6 using XenoMouse
technology. Hybridoma supernatants were first screened for their ability
to bind Gas6, then for their ability to inhibit Gas6 binding to the Axl
receptor and block Gas6-induced Axl phosphorylation in human cells. Two
purified antibodies isolated from the screened hybridomas, 1D9.1 and
1G9.1, maintained potency in all 3 assays and also inhibited Gas6-induced
cellular migration and proliferation. In the scratch wound migration
assay, the antibodies inhibited both basal and Gas6-induced wound closure
to a greater extent than the soluble extracellular domain of the receptor
Axl (Axl- Fc). In the proliferation assay, the antibody 1D9.1 completely
inhibited Gas6-induced proliferation with a half maximal effective
concentration (EC50) of 0.15nM. In vivo characterization of one of the
antibodies, 1D9.1, was conducted using a pharmacodynamic (PD) assay that
measured the ability of the antibody to inhibit Gas6-induced Akt
activation in the mouse spleen. Treatment of mice with a single dose
(100-1000 g) of 1D9.1 led to greater than 90% inhibition of Gas6-induced
phosphorylated Akt (pAkt) for up to 72 hours. Based on the target
coverage observed in the PD assay, we tested the efficacy of 1D9.1
against Panc-1 human pancreatic adenocarcinoma xenografts implanted in
athymic nu/nu female mice. At doses of 50 and 150 g, twice weekly, the
Gas6 neutralizing antibody 1D9.1 was able to inhibit 55% and 76% of tumor
growth, respectively. (p<0.001 for both treatments vs. control Ig). When
combined with gemcitabine, 1D9.1 was able to inhibit tumor growth to a
greater extent than either agent alone (pGrowth arrest specific 6 (Gas6)
is a vitamin-K dependent protein that is involved in the regulation of a
wide array of cellular activities, including adhesion, migration, immune
evasion, and apoptosis. Gas6 as well as its receptors Axl, Mer, and Tyro3
are highly expressed in multiple malignancies suggesting that signaling
through this axis may be tumor promoting in human disease. A strategy was
devised to generate fully human neutralizing antibodies against Gas6
using XenoMouse technology. Hybridoma supernatants were first screened
for their ability to bind Gas6, then for their ability to inhibit Gas6
binding to the Axl receptor and block Gas6-induced Axl phosphorylation in
human cells. Two purified antibodies isolated from the screened
hybridomas, 1D9.1 and 1G9.1, maintained potency in all 3 assays and also
inhibited Gas6-induced cellular migration and proliferation. In the
scratch wound migration assay, the antibodies inhibited both basal and
Gas6-induced wound closure to a greater extent than the soluble
extracellular domain of the receptor Axl (Axl- Fc). In the proliferation
assay, the antibody 1D9.1 completely inhibited Gas6-induced proliferation
with a half maximal effective concentration (EC50) of 0.15nM. In vivo
characterization of one of the antibodies, 1D9.1, was conducted using a
pharmacodynamic (PD) assay that measured the ability of the antibody to
inhibit Gas6-induced Akt activation in the mouse spleen. Treatment of
mice with a single dose (100-1000 g) of 1D9.1 led to greater than 90%
inhibition of Gas6-induced phosphorylated Akt (pAkt) for up to 72 hours.
Based on the target coverage observed in the PD assay, we tested the
efficacy of 1D9.1 against Panc-1 human pancreatic adenocarcinoma
xenografts implanted in athymic nu/nu female mice. At doses of 50 and 150
g, twice weekly, the Gas6 neutralizing antibody 1D9.1 was able to inhibit
55% and 76% of tumor growth, respectively. (p<0.001 for both treatments
vs. control Ig). When combined with gemcitabine, 1D9.1 was able to
inhibit tumor growth to a greater extent than either agent alone (p<0.001
vs. either monotherapy). Together, the data suggest that Gas6
neutralization should be further explored as a potential strategy for the
treatment of pancreatic cancer.

