Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-treatment EGFR mutation analysis predicts clinical outcome in
a retrospective analysis of 24 non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients treated with second line afatinib.


PurposeStage IV EGFR mutation positive NSCLC patients treated with
reversible tyrosine kinase inhibitors(TKI) (i.e., erlotinib (E) or
gefitinib (G)) develop resistance after 6-12 months, in half of the
patients mediated by the T790M gatekeeper mutation. Afatinib (BIBW2992,
Boehringer Ingelheim) has shown in a phase III study to prolong
progression free survival (PFS) in patients progressing on EGFR TKI. The
EGFR mutational pattern underlying these responses to afatinib is
unknown. The current study was set out to evaluate response rate to
afatinib in relation to tumor EGFR genotype.Material/MethodsPatients with
activating EGFR mutations, or without known EGFR mutations meeting
Jackman criteria, progressing on E/G, and who had a re-biopsy before
afatinib treatment were included. Mutations in exons 18-21 of the
EGFR-gene were tested using high-resolution melting with reflex Sanger
sequencing in both centers. We retrospectively studied EGFR mutations,
PFS, and overall survival after treatment with afatinib. Statistical
analysis was performed using Kaplan-Meier and Chi-square
test.ResultsInitially 21/24 (88%) patients had stage IV NSCLC with a mean
performance score of 1 (range 0-2). Before afatinib treatment 17/24 (71%)
of patients received a platinum doublet. All patients received E or G.
Three patients received both TKI sequentially. Four patients without
mutation were treated for more than 6 months with E/G resulting in stable
disease. PFS on previous E/G was 16 months (range, 2.0 - 37.9). At
rebiopsy, 12/24 (50%) patients had a T790M mutation, no other secondary
mutations were detected. There was no difference in duration of E/G
administration neither in occurrence of T790M mutation (median 12.4
months (range, 6.8-34.4) with T790M vs. 19.2 months (range, 2.0-37.9)
without T790M at rebiopsy; p=0.22). After PD on E/G, patients received
afatinib mostly as 2nd or 3rd line therapy.Tumor response rate on
afatinib was 12.5% (n=3). Of these, 1 had a T790M mutation. Disease
control rate was 71%, median PFS was 3,0 months (range, 1.2-18.7 months).
Median OS was 6.8 months (range, 1.3-19.0 months). The presence of T790M
mutation did not influence PFS (with T790M, 2.9 vs without T790M, 3.2
months; p=0.684). However, it did influence OS (7.2 months vs. 3.5
months; p=0,039).ConclusionIn our cohort of patients, PFS on afatinib was
similar to the Lux-lung 1 study and similar for patients with or without
T790M mutations. Duration of first generation TKI administration did not
influence occurrence of T790M mutation. T790M mutation was in favor of a
longer OS on afatinib.

