Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significant changes in D2-like dopamine gene receptors expression
associated with non- small -cell lung cancer: A case control study.


Introduction : Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death
and a major health problem worldwide. Approximately 75% of lung tumors
are non - small - cell lung cancer (NSCLC) .The alterations of five
different Dopamine receptor genes expression (DRD1,DRD2,DRD3,DRD4 and
DRD5) in certain diseases of immune and nervous systems have been
reported and play multiple role in various disorders such as cancer.
Previous controlled studies demonstrated a relationship between changes
in dopamine receptor gene expression profiles and clinical improvement.
In the present study, it was hypothesized that the dopamine receptor gene
expression profile of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in NSCLC
patients could be different from those normal individuals which probably
increases the risk of NSCLC.Material and methods: We investigated
dopamine receptors gene expression changes in peripheral Blood
Mononuclear cells (PBMC) of 30 NSCLC patients compared to normal
individuals . The PBMC was separated from normal whole blood by
Ficoll-hypaque and then the total cellular RNA was extracted and cDNA was
synthesized, Real Time PCR was done By using primer pairs specific for
five dopamine receptors mRNA and -actin as internal control . Finally the
specificities of the obtaine PCR products for the respective dopamine
receptors fragments were comfirmed by sequencing and expression comparing
of two group (patients and normal cases) was done by SPSS analysis
.Results: the results show that DRD2, DRD3 and DRD4 expression changes
profile were significant change in NSCLC patients compared to normal
individuals . but DRD1,DRD5 genes didn't show any significant and changes
. Conclusions: We conclude that there is a quantitative significant
difference of D2-like dopamine receptor genes expression in non small
cell lung cancer . On the other hand these significant differences and
profiles could contribute in diagnosis, treatment and survey and
monitoring of non small cell lung cancer .In addition it could be a lead
for design of future therapeutic strategiesKey words: Dopamine receptors
- Non-small cell lung cancer - Gene expression

