Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential oncogenicity of N-RAS mutations in melanoma.


In human cancer, N-RAS mutations resulting in constitutive, oncogenic
signaling are predominately localized to codons 12, 13 or 61.
Traditionally, activating RAS mutations have been considered
oncogenically equivalent, yet recent studies suggest important clinical
distinctions between colon cancers containing K-RAS codon 12 vs. codon 13
mutations. More than 20% of human melanomas harbor N-RAS mutations, the
vast majority of which target codon 61, as opposed to N-RAS mutations of
codon 12 or 13, which are common in other tumor types. To address this
issue, we characterized syngeneic knock-in mouse models conditionally
expressing either N-RasG12D or N-RasQ61R under the control of the
endogenous locus. In primary melanocyte cultures, activation of either
N-Ras allele reduced cellular proliferation even in the presence of
concomitant p16INK4a deletion. Correspondingly, melanocyte-specific
N-RasG12D expression combined with p16INK4a loss failed to efficiently
promote melanoma formation in mice. In contrast, melanocyte-specific
N-RasQ61R induction readily combined with p16INK4a loss to promote
melanoma formation in vivo with short latency and high penetrance. These
results provide a first murine model of melanoma featuring knock-in N-Ras
mutationQ61R, and suggest that the preference for codon 61 mutations in
human tumors is conserved in mice.

