Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DSRCT: Establishing xenograft and tissue culture cell lines and
assessing chemosensitivity.


Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is an extremely rare and
aggressive neoplasm which mainly affects young males and generally
presents as a widely disseminated tumor within the peritoneal cavity. Due
to the rarity of the tumor, a younger and overall healthier patient
population, and because it lacks definitive histologic and
immunohistologic features, it is possible that DSRCT is frequently
delayed in diagnosis or is entirely misdiagnosed as a different kind of
abdominal sarcoma. This study seeks to rectify the dearth of models that
exist for this rare neoplasm through the development of several DSRCT
tissue culture and xenograft lines. Samples were received from surgeries
and biopsies from patients around the world and were immediately
processed for xenograft development in nude mice. Tumor tissues were
minced and fragments were injected onto the dorsal flank of nude mice. Of
the 15 samples received, 9 were established into xenograft lines and 6 of
those into tissue culture lines. Xenografts displayed the microscopic
histology of their parent tumors and two different growth rates among
established xenograft lines. Chemosensitivity of tumors was assessed
against a variety of chemotherapeutic agents and IC50 values established
for each drug and cell line. Interestingly, the cell lines were split
into two distinct groups in terms of morphology, growth rate and
chemosensitivity. Overall, the establishment of these xenograft and
tissue culture lines gives researchers tools to evaluate DSRCT response
to chemotherapy and investigate DSRCT-specific signaling pathways or
mechanisms.

