Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Feedback dependent suppression of mitogenic signaling and its
effect on RAF inhibition in BRAFV600E melanomas.


RAF inhibitors have remarkable activity in melanomas harboring BRAFV600E
mutations. We previously found that active Ras induces RAF dimers in
tumors with wild-type RAF, and, that RAF inhibitors transactivate these
dimers. Because BRAFV600E melanomas have enhanced ERK signaling, they are
hypothesized to have feedback-mediated suppression of Ras in order to
maintain monomeric and inhibitor-sensitive BRAFV600E. To test this
hypothesis we evaluated the response of these tumors to RAF inhibitors
over time. We found that in the treatment-naive state, BRAFV600E
melanomas had suppressed RTK signaling and maintained a low level of
Ras-GTP. This occurred through a multifactorial negative feedback process
driven by active ERK. In this baseline state, BRAFV600E was sensitive to
RAF inhibitors. After treatment with RAF inhibitors, however, inhibition
of ERK signaling lead to loss of feedback, a process that restored
signaling from RTKs and resulted in Ras activation. In turn, this
diminished the effect of RAF inhibitors and lead to a partial, but
sustained, reactivation of ERK signaling. In this post-treatment state,
ERK signaling was insensitive to RAF inhibitors but sensitive to MEK
inhibitors. Targeting the regulatory components of this new steady state,
either through co-administration of a MEK inhibitor or a RTK inhibitor
along with a RAF inhibitor resulted in improved antitumor activity. These
results highlight the need to understand the adaptive response to ERK
pathway inhibition in order to design better combinatorial therapies and
achieve maximal antitumor effects.

