Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetically encoded chimeric polypeptide nanoparticles for
paclitaxel delivery to triple negative breast cancer.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) represents an important clinical
challenge, because TNBC, like other breast cancer subtypes is highly
metastatic, but TNBC displays a shorter median time to relapse and death.
Chemotherapy remains the mainstay of treatment of TNBC, as it gives a
markedly higher response rate than endocrine therapy or other available
targeted agents. Current treatment strategies for TNBC include treatment
with anthracyclines, taxanes, and platinates. Like other drugs,
paclitaxel shows a lack of selectivity towards tumor cells, sub-optimal
pharmacokinetics and bio-distribution, leading to limited efficacy and
significant systemic toxicity. Although AbraxaneTM (albumin bound
paclitaxel) an improved formulation of paclitaxel compared to the
original chremophor formulation has been used to treat TNBC, it also
suffers from systemic toxicity such as sensory neuropathy, neutropenia,
nausea, and anemia.In an effort to overcome the limited efficacy and
systemic toxicity of current paclitaxel formulations, we have designed a
novel polypeptide drug delivery system where paclitaxel is covalently
attached to a genetically engineered chimeric polypeptide (CP) through a
pH sensitive linker such that covalent conjugation of multiple copies of
Paclitaxel at one end of the CP spontaneously triggers the self-assembly
of the drug-CP conjugate into sub 100 nm size nanoparticles that are
ideal for targeting solid tumors through the enhanced permeability and
retention (EPR) effect.We found that in a human triple negative breast
cancer cell (MDA-MB-231), the CP-paclitaxel conjugate showed substantial
cytotoxicity that was similar to free drug. CP-Paclitaxel nanoparticle
treated mice with orthotopic MDA-MB-231 tumors showed significantly
greater tumor regression as well as enhanced overall survival compared to
free drug. These results are promising because they demonstrate the
potential of rationally engineered nanoparticle drug carriers to greatly
improve the efficacy of currently approved cytotoxic agents for the
treatment of solid tumors. In future work, we will evaluate the efficacy
of CP-Paclitaxel nanoparticles combined with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor
that mimics current combination chemotherapy.

