Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promoter methylation in epithelial cells isolated from breast milk
of women from Istanbul, Turkey.


Current models of assessing breast cancer risk do not adequately predict
whether an individual woman will develop breast cancer. Assessment of
healthy tissue for epigenetic changes that result in silencing of tumor
suppressor genes may provide a more accurate assessment of individual
breast cancer risk. Breast milk is an underutilized source of epithelial
cells from non-symptomatic women that can be used for risk assessment.In
the present pilot study, we examined promoter methylation of three tumor
suppressor genes in epithelial cells isolated from breast milk of Turkish
women. Forty-three women living in Istanbul, Turkey were recruited to
complete a health and reproductive history questionnaire and to donate a
single milk sample. Women ranged in age from 19 to 43 years old, had an
average of 2 children (range: 1-5), a mean age at first birth of 25 years
(range: 16-36), and a mean BMI of 26 (range 19.3-33.6). Nine percent
reported smoking and thirty two percent reported exposure to second-hand
smoke. Three of the 43 women had a family history of breast cancer, while
four women reported having a family history of ovarian cancer. Each woman
donated a single breast milk sample, with a mean volume of 17 ml (S.D.
11.6 ml, range: 2-49 ml), which was processed within 12 hours of
donation. Epithelial cells were isolated from the milk via immunomagnetic
beads. The breast milk samples yielded an average of 320,000 epithelial
cells (S.D. 480,000, range: 10,000-2,600,000), from which DNA was
extracted.Utilizing the extracted epithelial DNA, promoter methylation of
three tumor suppressor genes; Rass association domain family 1(RASSF1),
secreted frizzle related protein 1(SFRP1), and glutathione-S-transferase
class pi 1 (GSTP1), was determined by pyrosequencing. For RASSF1 the
average promoter methylation was 6.3% (n= 33); there were two outliers
whose average methylation was 54.48%. For SFRP1 the average promoter
methylation was 5.7 % (n= 17) with one outlier at 53.4% methylation. For
GSTP1, the mean methylation was 4.4% (n= 29), with two outliers whose
average methylation was 16.9%. Methylation scores were not correlated
with any of the demographic factors, such as second hand smoke exposure,
age or BMI. As expected of non-symptomatic breast tissue, promoter
methylation scores were in general low; however, outlier scores suggest
that promoter methylation may be useful in assessing risk. Long-term
follow-up is required to evaluate the predictive value of promoter
methylation in tumor suppressor genes.

