Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutrophil count, cancer incidence and cancer mortality: disparate
relationships by race.


Studies have demonstrated an association between elevated levels of total
white blood cell (WBC) count, within the clinically normal range, and an
increased risk of overall cancer incidence and mortality. However, a
paucity of data exists on the relationship between WBC subtypes and
cancer outcomes. We hypothesize that chronic low-grade inflammation in
healthy individuals, reflected by elevated neutrophil count, is
associated with an increased risk of subsequent cancer incidence and
mortality.To test this hypothesis, we prospectively evaluated the
association between neutrophil count, cancer incidence, and mortality in
the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Total neutrophil
counts were measured at enrollment (1987-1989) and, in a subset, at visit
2. Participants with a neutrophil count more than two standard deviations
from the mean and cancer at baseline were excluded. Cancer incidence and
mortality data were available through 12/31/2006 and 12/31/2009,
respectively. Hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
estimated using Cox proportional hazards models. Neutrophil count was
modeled as tertiles, with separate cut-offs for whites and blacks to
account for differences in their distribution.The analytic cohort
consisted of 6,252 whites (51% female) and 3,400 blacks (62% female). The
mean age at blood draw was 54 years and 53.5 years, respectively. The
mean neutrophil count was 3.7 cu/mcL (range: 1.9-6.6) in whites and 2.7
cu/mcL (range: 1.0-5.7) in blacks. Among whites, 1,346 cancer cases
developed over 102,541 person-years and, among blacks, 655 cancer cases
developed over 53,308 person-years. In analyses of cancer mortality, 504
cancer deaths occurred over 125,744 person-years in whites and 301 over
63,592 person-years in blacks. The proportion of cancer subtypes did not
differ by race for either outcome. Neutrophil count was not associated
with cancer incidence in whites or blacks. However, in blacks, neutrophil
count was associated with a significant but non-linear increase in cancer
mortality in the highest tertile compared to the lowest (HR: 1.4, 95% CI:
1.0, 1.8) after adjusting for study center, age, sex, education level,
body mass index, prior cardiovascular disease, diabetes, smoking, alcohol
intake and aspirin use in the past two weeks. This association was
modified by smoking status (p-interaction=0.04). Among never smokers, a
linear increase in mortality was observed with a 2.1-fold (95% CI: 1.1,
3.7) increase in risk in the highest versus lowest tertile. This
association remained when the average neutrophil count (baseline and
visit 2) was used. A similar pattern was not observed in
whites.Neutrophil count measured prior to diagnosis was associated with
cancer mortality among non-smokers in blacks but not whites. This
supports a relationship between chronic low-grade inflammation and cancer
outcomes in blacks, the mechanism of which remains to be elucidated.

