Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Linkage between the lipogenic pathway and the progression of
breast carcinomas.


Fatty acid synthase (FASN) is a lipogenic enzyme responsible for the novo
synthesis of fatty acids (FAs) from acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA in a NADPH
dependent manner in cells. FAs are essential constituents of all
biological membranes lipids and are important substrates for energy
metabolism. While normal cells (except liver and adiposities) express low
levels of FASN and have low to undetectable levels of FASN enzymatic
activity, FASN expression and activity is observed in a vast majority of
human cancers. Whether the increase in FASN is merely a consequence of
disease progression or it is a metabolic oncogene that drives disease
progression remains unclear. Here, we undoubtedly demonstrated that
knockdown FASN results in inhibition of tumor formation and angiogenesis
in athymic nude mice. Moreover, the histopathological features of the
FASN knockdown remaining tissue in vivo appear globular, well
differentiated with low nuclear grade compared to the control tumors,
which appear invasive, undifferentiated, and of high nuclear grade. When
tissues where stained for Ki-67, Vimentin and E-Cadherin the classical
mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) was observed in the tissue
derived from FASN knockdown tumors. Our studies establish a possible role
for FASN as a metabolic oncogene in breast cancer. Given the data
presented here, we propose that FASN is a perfect marker to develop
personalized targeted therapy.

