Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A dose-escalation study of anastrozole and everolimus in patients
with advanced gynecologic and breast malignancies: tolerance, biological
activity, and molecular alterations in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.


BackgroundCombining aromatase inhibitors with PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibitors is
synergistic and may overcome hormone resistance.Patients and MethodsWe
evaluated anastrozole and everolimus in patients with metastatic estrogen
receptor (ER) and/or progesterone receptor (PR)-positive breast and
gynecologic tumors. Endpoints were safety, antitumor activity and
molecular correlates.ResultsFifty-five patients were enrolled. Full doses
of anastrozole (1 mg PO daily) and everolimus (10 mg PO daily) were well
tolerated. Fifty patients were evaluable for response with a median age
of 57 (range: 24-82) and a median number of prior therapies of 3 (range:
0-13). Twelve of 50 patients (24%) achieved stable disease (SD) 6
months/partial response (PR)/complete response (CR), including 9 of 32
patients (28%) with breast cancer, 2 of 9 patients (22%) with ovarian
cancer and 1 of 6 patients (17%) with uterine cancer. Six of 8 patients
(75%) with SD 6 months/PR/CR with molecular testing demonstrated at least
one alteration in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway including mutations in PIK3CA
(n=3) and AKT1 (n=1) or PTEN loss (n=3). All 3 patients who had next
generation sequencing demonstrated additional alterations: amplifications
in CCNE1, IRS2, MCL1, CCND1, FGFR1 and MYC and a rearrangement in PRKDC.
Six of 22 patients (27%) with molecular alterations in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway achieved SD 6 months/PR/CR.ConclusionCombination anastrozole and
everolimus is well tolerated at full approved doses and active in heavily
pretreated patients with ER and/or PR-positive breast, ovarian and
endometrial cancers. Patients with SD 6 months/PR/CR frequently had
alterations in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.

