Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary intake of dairy foods, calcium, fat, protein and risk of
hepatocellular carcinoma in the European Prospective Investigation into
Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study.


Background: Dairy foods are an important food group whose intake may be
associated with cancer. On the one hand, dairy foods are high in
saturated fats and high dairy food consumption may increase circulating
levels of IGF-1, a growth factor. Conversely, dairy foods contain calcium
and vitamin D, which have been shown to be cancer protective at some
sites. However, information on association of intake of dairy foods is
limited or inconsistent for many cancer sites, such as hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), the sixth most common malignancy and the third most
common cause of cancer death worldwide.Objective: To investigate the
association between dairy foods and their components (calcium, fat and
protein intakes), with incident HCC (Ncases=191) in the EPIC cohort,
including a nested case-control sub-set with assessment of hepatitis B/C
virus infections status.Methods: A total of 477,206 participants were
followed up for an average of 11 years. Diet was assessed by
country-specific validated questionnaires. For cohort analyses, the Cox
proportional hazard model was used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and
95% confidence intervals (95%CI). For case-control analyses, conditional
logistic regression was used to calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95%CI.
All models were adjusted for relevant confounders.Results: In the cohort
study, a significant positive association for total dairy foods (highest
vs. lowest tertile, HR=1.58, 95% CI:1.08-2.33; Ptrend=0.022), total
dietary calcium (HR=1.74, 95%CI:1.14-2.68; Ptrend=0.009), and dairy
calcium (HR per 200 g/day 1.11, 95% CI:1.02-1.20) were observed with HCC
risk after multivariable adjustment. Non-significant associations were
observed for milk (HR per 200g/day 1.06, 95% CI:0.95-1.17), cheese (HR
per 50 g/day 1.21, 95% CI: 0.96-1.53), yoghurt (HR per 100 g/day 1.03,
95% CI:0.89-1.19), dairy fat (highest vs. lowest tertile, HR=1.36, 95%
CI:0.90-2.04; Ptrend=0.290) and dairy protein intakes (HR=1.29,
95%CI:0.86-1.92; Ptrend=0.214). The results were similar after excluding
individuals diagnosed with HCC within 2 years after recruitment or with
self-reported diabetes at baseline. In the nested case-control study,
similar results were observed among hepatitis-free
individuals.Conclusions: Results from this large prospective cohort study
suggest that higher consumption of total dairy foods, total dietary
calcium, and calcium from dairy sources are associated with increased HCC
risk, emphasizing the role of diet in liver cancer etiology. Potential
biologic mechanisms that could explain the positive associations may
include circulating IGF-I or vitamin D concentrations, and require
further exploration in prospective settings.

