Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of peptidomimetic inhibitors of the ERG transcription
factor in prostate cancer.


Transcription factors play a key role in the development of a number of
cancers, and therapeutically targeting them has remained a challenge. In
prostate cancer, the ETS transcription factor ERG is recurrently
rearranged and likely plays a critical role in prostate oncogenesis. Here
we identified a consensus peptide from a phage library which interacts
specifically with the DNA binding domain of ERG. The interactive
interface was mapped to 9-residues in the 3rd -helix of the ETS domain,
which is critical for ERG activity as a transcription factor. The
peptides were found to efficiently disrupt ERG-mediated protein-protein
interactions, transcription, DNA damage, and cell invasion. Furthermore,
a retroinverso peptidomimetic suppressed tumor growth, intravasation, and
metastasis in vivo. Taken together, our results suggest that
transcription factors have specific residues that are important for
protein-protein interactions, that may be amenable to therapeutic
targeting.Citation Format: Xiaoju Wang. Development of peptidomimetic
inhibitors of the ERG transcription factor in prostate cancer.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5535.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5535

