Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplexed systems pathology for in-depth analysis of the tumor
microenvironment: a strong correlation between pAkt and androgen receptor
in the epithelial component of prostate cancer.


It is important to understand the heterogeneity across the cancer tissue
as well as the spatial interactions and signaling between the different
components that constitute the tumor microenvironment; epithelium,
stroma, inflammatory cells, etc. The state of the tumor microenvironment
and its variability within and in between tumors may give important
insights on cancer initiation and progression, diagnostics, prognostics
and therapeutic assessment. Thus, there is a major need to assess
multiple molecular targets simultaneously, quantitatively, and within the
specific tumor sub-compartments. Here, we demonstrate a systems pathology
approach for quantitative detection of multiple proteins in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded patient tissue samples using a
combination of immunohistochemistry and high-throughput fluorescence
imaging.The study cohort consisted of 50 prostate cancer tissue samples
from 25 patients exhibiting different disease stages in a tissue
microarray (TMA) format. We developed a multiplexed assay for detecting
pAkt, AR, and cytokeratin 8 (CK8) simultaneously using fluorescent
nanoparticle labeling and high-throughput quantitative imaging.
Fluorescent signals of pAkt and AR were automatically quantified within
the segmented CK8-positive prostate epithelium. The stromal compartment
and the non-malignant prostate tissue were analysed separately.Our
results showed that the expression of pAkt and AR correlated strongly in
the prostate cancer epithelium (Pearson correlation coefficient 0.89, p
It is important to understand the heterogeneity across the cancer tissue
as well as the spatial interactions and signaling between the different
components that constitute the tumor microenvironment; epithelium,
stroma, inflammatory cells, etc. The state of the tumor microenvironment
and its variability within and in between tumors may give important
insights on cancer initiation and progression, diagnostics, prognostics
and therapeutic assessment. Thus, there is a major need to assess
multiple molecular targets simultaneously, quantitatively, and within the
specific tumor sub-compartments. Here, we demonstrate a systems pathology
approach for quantitative detection of multiple proteins in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded patient tissue samples using a
combination of immunohistochemistry and high-throughput fluorescence
imaging.The study cohort consisted of 50 prostate cancer tissue samples
from 25 patients exhibiting different disease stages in a tissue
microarray (TMA) format. We developed a multiplexed assay for detecting
pAkt, AR, and cytokeratin 8 (CK8) simultaneously using fluorescent
nanoparticle labeling and high-throughput quantitative imaging.
Fluorescent signals of pAkt and AR were automatically quantified within
the segmented CK8-positive prostate epithelium. The stromal compartment
and the non-malignant prostate tissue were analysed separately.Our
results showed that the expression of pAkt and AR correlated strongly in
the prostate cancer epithelium (Pearson correlation coefficient 0.89, p <
0.001). This suggests that the androgen-dependent signaling is strongly
associated with the pAkt signaling in cancer, with potential
ramifications for administrating and monitoring anti-androgens and/or
Akt-inhibitor therapy. The systems pathology approach enables
quantitative in situ multianalyte detection for any key cancer signaling
proteins. The analyses can be readily expanded to TMAs of large
prospective or clinical trial cohorts with automated imaging. The ability
to quantitatively study the spatial arrangement of the tumor
microenvironment could have decisive advantages and improve the
diagnostic and therapeutic predictions.

