Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anticancer effects of resveratrol and clofarabine in
malignant mesothelioma cells.


Malignant mesothelioma is highly resistant to apoptosis. Hence, new
strategies to enhance the apoptotic signal and overcome resistance to
therapeutic drugs are necessary to improve the therapeutic efficacy of
malignant mesothelioma. Here, we investigated the effects of the combined
treatment of various phytochemicals as a chemo-potentiator in combination
with the chemotherapeutic agent clofarabine in malignant mesothelioma
MSTO-211H cells and normal mesothelial Met-5A cells. Treatment with
resveratrol in combination with clofarabine at a subtoxic concentration
produced a synergistic antiproliferative effect and induced apoptotic
cell death, as evidenced by increased subG1 peak on flow cytometric
analysis, chromatin condensation and nuclear fragmentation on DAPI
staining, and DNA laddering on agarose gel electrophoresis, in MSTO-211H
cells, but not in Met-5A cells. In MSTO-211H cells, endogenous expression
of the transcription factors Nrf2 and Sp1 proteins, several Nrf2 and
Sp1-regulated gene products (HO-1, c-Met, and cyclin D1), and Akt
phosphorylation, were effectively suppressed by the combined treatment of
clofarabine and resveratrol. Furthermore, the nuclear accumulations of
Nrf2 and Sp1 were inhibited by the combination treatment. In combination
with clofarabine, the ability of resveratrol to increase the contents of
the phosphorylated p53 and the apoptotic molecules, PARP and cleaved
caspase 3, was also evident in a time- and dose-dependent experiment.
Taken together, the data provide evidence that the synergistic
antiproliferative effect of resveratrol and clofarabine is linked to
simultaneous suppression of multi-target molecules, such as Nrf2, Sp1,
and Akt activities, and suggest that this combination may have
therapeutic value in treatment of malignant mesothelioma.

