Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cell-selected patient-derived xenograft models with
sensitivity to FAK and Pan-PI3K/mTOR inhibitors .


In this study, Tumor-initiating (Creighton et al, 2009) and EMT gene
expression signatures (Gupta et al., 2009, Taube et al, 2009) were used
as classifiers. Tumors from 25 human triple negative breast cancer
Patient-Derived Xenografts (PDX) were examined with Affymetrix U133Plus2
RNA arrays. Datasets were RMA normalized, and samples scored with the TI
or EMT signature based on the Pearson Correlation Coefficient of a vector
of mean-centered expression values of signature genes and a vector of
indicators for signature genes such that 1 (up-regulated, correlated)
genes and -1 (down-regulated, anti-correlated) genes formed a TI or EMT
score. A high EMT score is also representative of mesenchymal tumors.
Several of the triple negative breast cancer PDX models had both high TI
and high EMT scores, indicated by pIn this study, Tumor-initiating
(Creighton et al, 2009) and EMT gene expression signatures (Gupta et al.,
2009, Taube et al, 2009) were used as classifiers. Tumors from 25 human
triple negative breast cancer Patient-Derived Xenografts (PDX) were
examined with Affymetrix U133Plus2 RNA arrays. Datasets were RMA
normalized, and samples scored with the TI or EMT signature based on the
Pearson Correlation Coefficient of a vector of mean-centered expression
values of signature genes and a vector of indicators for signature genes
such that 1 (up-regulated, correlated) genes and -1 (down-regulated,
anti-correlated) genes formed a TI or EMT score. A high EMT score is also
representative of mesenchymal tumors. Several of the triple negative
breast cancer PDX models had both high TI and high EMT scores, indicated
by p<0.05 of a one-sided Pearson Correlation Coefficient test. Two of the
PDX models with high positive TI and EMT scores, 4664 and 3887, were
evaluated for sensitivity to a FAK inhibitor (VS-4718), a pan-PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor (VS-5584), and chemotherapy (docetaxel). FAK and PI3K/mTOR are
implicated in tumorigenesis, including tumor initiation, growth,
angiogenesis and metastasis. Both 4664 and 3887 tumors were
N-cadherin-positive (mesenchymal), and strongly positive for CD44 (TI
marker) by immunohistochemistry. These tumors were also weakly positive
for E-cadherin and highly heterogeneous for pan-cytokeratin, two
epithelial marker patterns suggesting a mesenchymal phenotype. Whereas
3887 was Notch3-positive, 4664 was Notch3-negative. VS-4718-treated 4664
and 3887 models showed diminished tumor growth over 21 days compared with
vehicle-treated animals. VS-4718-treated animal tumors showed decreased
FAK autophosphorylation (pY397) by immunohistochemistry. Likewise, the
VS-5584-treated 4664 and 3887 animals blocked tumor growth over 21 days.
In these models, the PI3K/mTOR pathways activate downstream signaling
phosphorylation of pS6 pSer240/244, p4EBP1 pThr70, and pPRAS40 pThr246.
In the VS-5584-treated 3887 tumors, pS6 pSer240/244 levels were
significantly diminished relative to vehicle- and docetaxel-treated
tumors. As predicted by TI and EMT gene expression indicators, both
models were docetaxel-resistant.These findings and our previous work on
these agents for the inhibition of CSCs support the clinical development
of the FAK and the pan-PI3K/mTOR inhibitors to target CSCs for treatment
of breast, mesothelioma, ovarian and other cancers.

