Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Weekly EZN-2208 (pegylated SN-38) in combination with bevacizumab
in patients with refractory solid tumors.


Background: Anti-angiogenic therapies such as bevacizumab (Bev) have been
shown to up-regulate hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), a possible
mechanism of resistance. Camptothecin analogues, including SN-38, have
been shown to reduce the expression and transcriptional activity of HIF-1
in preclinical models. Thus, co-administration of pegylated SN 38 (EZN
2208) could offset the induction of HIF-1 following administration of
Bev, resulting in synergistic anti-tumor effects. We are conducting a
trial of the combination of EZN 2208 (E) with Bev in patients with
refractory solid tumors to determine the safety and tolerability of the
combination, and to evaluate modulation of HIF-1 protein in tumor
biopsies following administration of study drugs. Methods: Eligible pts
have refractory advanced solid tumors that have progressed following
standard therapy; 18 yrs of age; ECOG PS 0-2; adequate organ function.
Bev at 5mg/kg is administered on D-7 and D15 for cycle 1 only and on D1,
15 for each subsequent cycle; q28d cycles. E(9mg/kg) is administered on
D1, 8, and 15. Tumor biopsies and dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI)
are obtained on D1 prior to EZN administration (7 days post Bev) and on
C2D15 post Bev and E. An additional DCE-MRI is also performed at baseline
prior to Bev on D-7. Tumor biopsies are analyzed for HIF-1 protein levels
using a validated immunoassay, and HIF-1 response genes, Hexokinase
2(HK), vascular endothelial growth factor A(VEGF), pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinase, isozyme 1(PDK1), carbonic anhydrase IX(CA9), solute carrier
family 2 (GLUT1), are assessed using RTPCR.Results: Twelve pts have been
enrolled to date; median age 50 (range 27-76 yrs); median # prior
therapies 3 (1-6); Dx: Soft tissue sarcoma (4), colorectal cancer (2),
parotid gland cancer (1), malignant hurthle cell tumor (1), HCC (1),
melanoma (1), gastrointestinal stromal tumor (1), Head and neck cancer
(1). Grade 3/4 toxicities (#pts): neutropenia (8), leucopenia (3),
lymphopenia (2), hypertension (1). Eight pts are evaluable for response;
prolonged stable disease was observed in 2 pts: HCC 16 cycles,
desmoplastic round cell tumor 7 cycles. HIF-1 protein and mRNA levels of
HIF-1 dependent genes were assessed in 5 pts who had paired biopsies.
Reduction in HIF-1 protein levels compared to baseline (post Bev alone)
was seen in 4 of 5 pts (range 24% - 64%), with evidence of modulation of
mRNA in 3 of 5 pt tumors evaluated. Quantitative analysis of DCE MRI from
3 pts revealed changes in Ktrans and kep maps following drug
administration. Correlation of observed changes with tumor response is
ongoing.Conclusions: This clinical trial provides preliminary proof of
mechanism demonstrating modulation of HIF-1 levels in tumors following
administration of a camptothecin analog, EZN 2208. Accrual is ongoing to
establish safety, efficacy, and further proof of target modulation.

