Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer therapeutics and the GBP cytokine. Activation of death
pathways prior to and after PI3K inhibition, and efficacy in vivo.


Phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI3K) signaling is crucial to the
viability of cancers and represents a selective target for therapeutic
intervention. Our strategy against cancer is based on the use of a newly
identified cytokine (GBP), a natural inhibitor of both class IA and class
IB PI3K that in cancer cells, but not in normal cells, is a potent
activator of cell death: a novel therapeutic concept which carries no
chemotherapeutic disadvantages and that can be tested and utilised in
clinical trials.Cell death by Hu-r-GBP follows two modes:1) Apoptosis
consequent to downregulation of signaling downstream of PI3K where
inhibition of PI3K activity by Hu-r-GBP has two major outcomes:
suppression of Ras-GTP loading leading to block of ERK activation, and
negation of akt gene expression leading to loss of Akt, conditions that
either by blocking the ability of cancer cells to proliferate or by
impairing their ability to survive erase oncogenicity in many cancer
cells including those from prostate, HER2-driven and triple negative
breast cancer.2) Apoptosis consequent to induction of protein-protein
interactions from GBP receptor to PI3K where conformational changes
conveyed by allosteric modulation from the GBP receptor to p110 lead to
changes in PIP2 spatial distribution at the plasma membrane, loss of
PIP2-actin linkages, increased macromolecular mobility within the plane
of the plasma membrane, clustering of death receptors and devastating
death in Kras-mutant cancer cells, therapeutically reproducible in vivo.

