Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tanshinone II-A inhibits angiogenesis through down regulation of
COX-2 in human colorectal cancer.


Tanshinone II-A Inhibits Angiogenesis through Down Regulation of COX-2 in
Human Colorectal CancerQi Li*, Li-Hong Zhou, Hua Sui, Yan Wang, Xuan Liu,
Ning-Ning Liu, Pei-Hao YinClinic Oncology, Putuo Hospital, Shanghai
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai China*correspondence
to Qi Li, Lzwf@hotmail.comAngiogenesis plays a significant role in
colorectal cancer (CRC). cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is involved with
multiple aspects of CRC angiogenesis. The aim was to investigate the
inhibitory effects of Tan II-A(Tanshinone II-A, Tan II-A) on tumor growth
in mice, as well as alteration of expression of COX-2 and VEGF in CRC. We
established the mice xenograft model of C26 CRC cell line, and injected
0.5, 1, 2mg/kg of Tan II-A and 1mg/kg of 5-FU in different individuals
respectively in vivo. Then, we assayed tumor weight and volume, evaluated
microvascular density and expression of VEGF. COX-2 promoter and COX-2
plasmids were transfected into HCT-116 cells, followed by detection of
COX-2 promoter activity by chemiluminescence, detection of COX-2 mRNA
expression by fluorescence quantitative PCR. Taken together, the results
showed Tan II-A could inhibit tumor growth and VEGF level in vivo. Cell
experiment showed marked inhibitory effect of Tan II-A on COX-2 and VEGF
of HCT-116 cell lines in a dose-dependent manner. That means Tan II-A can
effectively inhibit tumor growth and angiogenesis of human colorectal
cancer via inhibiting the expression level of COX-2 and VEGF.Keywords:
Tanshinone II-A - colorectal carcinoma - angiogenesis - cyclooxygenase 2
- vascular endothelial growth factor

