Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Divergent control of Cav-1 expression in non-cancerous Li-Fraumeni
Syndrome and human cancer cell lines.


Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is primarily characterized by development of
tumors exhibiting germ-line mutations in the p53 gene. Cell lines
developed from patients of a LFS family have decreased p53 activity as
evidenced by the absence of apoptosis upon etoposide treatment. To test
our hypothesis that changes in gene expression beyond p53 per se are
contributing to the development of tumors, we compared gene expression in
non-cancerous skin fibroblasts of LFS-affected (p53 heterozygous) versus
non-affected (p53 wild-type homozygous) family members. Expression
analysis showed that several genes were differentially regulated in the
p53 homozygous and heterozygous cell lines. We were particularly
intrigued by the decreased expression (88%) of a putative tumor
suppressor protein, caveolin-1 (Cav-1), in the p53-mutant cells.
Decreased expression of Cav-1 was also seen in both p53-knockout and
p21-knockout HTC116 cells suggesting that p53 controls Cav-1 expression
through p21 and leading to the speculation that p53, Cav-1 and p21may be
part of a positive auto-regulatory feedback loop. The direct relationship
between p53 and Cav-1 was also tested with HeLa cells (containing
inactive p53), which expressed a significantly lower Cav-1 protein. A
panel of nonfunctional and p53-deficient colon and epithelial breast
cancer cell lines showed undetectable expression of Cav-1 supporting the
role of p53 in the control of Cav-1. However, in two aggressively
metastasizing breast cancer cell lines, Cav-1 was strongly expressed
suggesting a possible role in tumor metastasis. Thus, there is a
divergent control of Cav-1 expression as evidenced in non-cancerous
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome and some aggressive human cancer cell lines.

