Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Color-coded imaging of interaction between RFP-expressing blood
vessels and v integrin-GFP expressing osteosarcoma cells.


We report here imaging the interaction between v integrin tagged to GFP
in human osteosarcoma cells and blood vessels growing on Gelfoam@
implanted subcutaneously in mice. 143B osteosarcoma cells expressing v
integrin-GFP were generated by transfection of an v integrin-GFP vector.
Gelfoam@ (55 mm) was treated with basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF)
and transplanted subcutaneously in RFP transgenic nude mice. Skin-flap
imaging windows were made at days 7, 14, 21, 28 after transplantation of
Gelfoam@. Angiogenesis was observed in the Gelfoam@ using fluorescence
imaging via the skin flap windows. Frozen sections were made at day 28
after Gelfoam@ transplantation. RFP-expressing blood vessels were imaged
growing into the Gelfoam@. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed that
CD31 and RFP fluorescence co-localized in the newly formed RFP-expressing
blood vessels in the Gelfoam@. To observe the interaction of tumor cells
and RFP blood vessels, 143B cells (5105),expressing v integrin-GFP, were
injected into the Gelfoam@ 7 days after transplantation. Seven days after
cancer-cell injection, the cancer cells were observed in the Gelfoam@ by
confocal microscopy via skin-flap windows. 143B cells expressing v
integrin-GFP proliferated into the Gelfoam@ as observed by
skin-flap-window imaging. Strong expression of v integrin-GFP cells was
observed near RFP vessels in the Gelfoam@ in the RFP mice 28 days after
cancer cell injection. The results show that Gelfoam@ is a useful tool to
observe angiogensis in vivo and the interactions of v integrin-GFP with
blood vessels which will allow further understanding of its role in
angiogenesis and tumor progression.

