Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soy and salty food intake and risk of stomach cancer in Seoul Male
Cohort.


Stomach cancer is the most common cancer among men in Korea. High
prevalence of H. pylori infection and salty food intake has been
suspected to be the main contributors of the high incidence of stomach
cancer in Korea. Many studies reported an inverse association between soy
food and risk of stomach cancer, but some studies showed that fermented
soy food increased the risk of stomach cancer probably due to the high
concentration of salt in it. We aimed to evaluate the association between
fermented and non-fermented soy, and other salty food and the risk of
stomach cancer in a prospective cohort study in Korea. Seoul Male Cohort
was established in 1993. Members were recruited from the male
beneficiaries of the Korean Health Insurance Company, who were aged 40-59
and living in Seoul. A lifestyle questionnaire survey was conducted
through mailing. Dietary intake was measured using a quantitative food
frequency questionnaire with 88 food items. Cancer occurrence was
identified through data linkage to the Korean Central Cancer Registry and
Korean Death Records. A total of 14,512 members were followed up until
December 31, 2008, and 362 stomach cancer cases were identified. Total
calorie adjusted multivariable odds ratio (aOR) and 95% confidence
interval (95%CI) were calculated using logistic regression. Soybean paste
stew, a very popular fermented soy food in Korea, was positively
associated with the risk of stomach cancer. Men who ate soybean paste
stew 23 cups per week had 1.45 times higher risk of stomach cancer than
men who ate less than one cup per week (95% CI = 1.11-1.92).
Non-fermented soy foods, including soybean, tofu, and soy drink, were not
associated with the risk of stomach cancer. The aOR of stomach cancer for
the highest intake of soybean compared to the lowest intake was 1.02
(95%CI = 0.77-1.36), for the highest intake of tofu was 1.05 (95%CI =
0.75-1.46), for the highest intake of soy drink was 1.11 (95%CI =
0.84-1.47). Other salty foods, including Kimchi stew (highest vs. lowest,
aOR=1.47, 95%CI=1.05-2.06), and salt-fermented radish (highest vs.
lowest, aOR=1.45, 95%CI=1.11-1.90) were positively associated with the
risk of Stomach cancer. However, Kimchi itself, the most popular
salt-fermented vegetable in Korea, was not associated with the risk of
stomach cancer (highest vs. lowest, aOR=1.06, 95%CI=0.77-1.46). In
conclusion, we found no evidence of inverse association between
non-fermented soy food and risk of stomach cancer. When soy is fermented,
its high concentration of salt may increase the risk of stomach cancer.
Most of the other salty foods may increase the risk of stomach cancer.

