Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation pattern predicts treatment response and survival
in patients with metastatic or recurrent colorectal cancer.


Background: The epigenetic changes such as DNA methylation affect various
steps in tumorigenesis of colorectal carcinoma. The aim of this study was
to investigate whether DNA methylation pattern was associated with
chemotherapeutic response and survival in patients with metastatic or
recurrent colorectal cancer.Patients and method: We retrospectively
collected tumor tissues of primary site from 236 patients with metastatic
or recurrent colorectal cancer (mCRC). Pyrosequencing was used to examine
the methylation of 7 CpG island loci (p16, p14, MINT1, MINT2, MINT31,
hMLH1, DKK3) in DNA extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
specimens. To elucidate the predictive role of DNA methylation markers,
Kaplan-Meier survival estimation and Cox regression were performed for
time to progression (TTP) and overall survival (OS). KRAS and BRAF
mutations were also analyzed.Result: The methylation frequencies of the 7
genes analyzed were 45.8% for p16, 14.0% for p14, 22.0% for MINT1, 14.4%
for MINT2, 19.9% for MINT31, 2.1% for MLH1, and 33.9% for DKK3. As for
mutation status, 28.8% (68 of 229) tumors harbored KRAS mutation and 2.5%
(6 of 125) tumors harbored BRAF mutation. Both mutations were mutually
exclusive. We devided patients into three groups on the basis of the
number of methylated genes (group 1, 01 methylation n=117; group 2, 24
methylation n=73; group 3, 5-7 methylation n=9). Median OS of group 3 was
significantly shorter than other groups (median OS 38.1m in group1 vs
19.4m in group 3, log rank P=0.003; median OS 38.0m in group2 vs 19.4m in
group3, log rank P=0.012). In 129 patients with measurable lesions, group
3 (n=6) showed a trend toward lower disease control rate (DCR=66.7%) and
shortend TTP (median 3.5m) than group 1 (n=76, 86.8%, 7.6m) or group 2
(n=47, 80.9%, 6.6m). In multivariate analysis for OS, initial tumor stage
(AJCC 1-3 vs 4: HR=2.67; 95%CI, 1.82-3.93, P Background: The epigenetic
changes such as DNA methylation affect various steps in tumorigenesis of
colorectal carcinoma. The aim of this study was to investigate whether
DNA methylation pattern was associated with chemotherapeutic response and
survival in patients with metastatic or recurrent colorectal
cancer.Patients and method: We retrospectively collected tumor tissues of
primary site from 236 patients with metastatic or recurrent colorectal
cancer (mCRC). Pyrosequencing was used to examine the methylation of 7
CpG island loci (p16, p14, MINT1, MINT2, MINT31, hMLH1, DKK3) in DNA
extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens. To elucidate
the predictive role of DNA methylation markers, Kaplan-Meier survival
estimation and Cox regression were performed for time to progression
(TTP) and overall survival (OS). KRAS and BRAF mutations were also
analyzed.Result: The methylation frequencies of the 7 genes analyzed were
45.8% for p16, 14.0% for p14, 22.0% for MINT1, 14.4% for MINT2, 19.9% for
MINT31, 2.1% for MLH1, and 33.9% for DKK3. As for mutation status, 28.8%
(68 of 229) tumors harbored KRAS mutation and 2.5% (6 of 125) tumors
harbored BRAF mutation. Both mutations were mutually exclusive. We
devided patients into three groups on the basis of the number of
methylated genes (group 1, 01 methylation n=117; group 2, 24 methylation
n=73; group 3, 5-7 methylation n=9). Median OS of group 3 was
significantly shorter than other groups (median OS 38.1m in group1 vs
19.4m in group 3, log rank P=0.003; median OS 38.0m in group2 vs 19.4m in
group3, log rank P=0.012). In 129 patients with measurable lesions, group
3 (n=6) showed a trend toward lower disease control rate (DCR=66.7%) and
shortend TTP (median 3.5m) than group 1 (n=76, 86.8%, 7.6m) or group 2
(n=47, 80.9%, 6.6m). In multivariate analysis for OS, initial tumor stage
(AJCC 1-3 vs 4: HR=2.67; 95%CI, 1.82-3.93, P <0.0001), tumor
differentiation (well/moderate vs poor/mucinous: HR=2.18; 95%CI,
1.41-3.37, P Background: The epigenetic changes such as DNA methylation
affect various steps in tumorigenesis of colorectal carcinoma. The aim of
this study was to investigate whether DNA methylation pattern was
associated with chemotherapeutic response and survival in patients with
metastatic or recurrent colorectal cancer.Patients and method: We
retrospectively collected tumor tissues of primary site from 236 patients
with metastatic or recurrent colorectal cancer (mCRC). Pyrosequencing was
used to examine the methylation of 7 CpG island loci (p16, p14, MINT1,
MINT2, MINT31, hMLH1, DKK3) in DNA extracted from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded specimens. To elucidate the predictive role of DNA
methylation markers, Kaplan-Meier survival estimation and Cox regression
were performed for time to progression (TTP) and overall survival (OS).
KRAS and BRAF mutations were also analyzed.Result: The methylation
frequencies of the 7 genes analyzed were 45.8% for p16, 14.0% for p14,
22.0% for MINT1, 14.4% for MINT2, 19.9% for MINT31, 2.1% for MLH1, and
33.9% for DKK3. As for mutation status, 28.8% (68 of 229) tumors harbored
KRAS mutation and 2.5% (6 of 125) tumors harbored BRAF mutation. Both
mutations were mutually exclusive. We devided patients into three groups
on the basis of the number of methylated genes (group 1, 01 methylation
n=117; group 2, 24 methylation n=73; group 3, 5-7 methylation n=9).
Median OS of group 3 was significantly shorter than other groups (median
OS 38.1m in group1 vs 19.4m in group 3, log rank P=0.003; median OS 38.0m
in group2 vs 19.4m in group3, log rank P=0.012). In 129 patients with
measurable lesions, group 3 (n=6) showed a trend toward lower disease
control rate (DCR=66.7%) and shortend TTP (median 3.5m) than group 1
(n=76, 86.8%, 7.6m) or group 2 (n=47, 80.9%, 6.6m). In multivariate
analysis for OS, initial tumor stage (AJCC 1-3 vs 4: HR=2.67; 95%CI,
1.82-3.93, P <0.0001), tumor differentiation (well/moderate vs
poor/mucinous: HR=2.18; 95%CI, 1.41-3.37, P <0.0001), resectability
(resectable vs unresectable: HR=2.55; 95%CI, 1.54-4.22, P Background: The
epigenetic changes such as DNA methylation affect various steps in
tumorigenesis of colorectal carcinoma. The aim of this study was to
investigate whether DNA methylation pattern was associated with
chemotherapeutic response and survival in patients with metastatic or
recurrent colorectal cancer.Patients and method: We retrospectively
collected tumor tissues of primary site from 236 patients with metastatic
or recurrent colorectal cancer (mCRC). Pyrosequencing was used to examine
the methylation of 7 CpG island loci (p16, p14, MINT1, MINT2, MINT31,
hMLH1, DKK3) in DNA extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
specimens. To elucidate the predictive role of DNA methylation markers,
Kaplan-Meier survival estimation and Cox regression were performed for
time to progression (TTP) and overall survival (OS). KRAS and BRAF
mutations were also analyzed.Result: The methylation frequencies of the 7
genes analyzed were 45.8% for p16, 14.0% for p14, 22.0% for MINT1, 14.4%
for MINT2, 19.9% for MINT31, 2.1% for MLH1, and 33.9% for DKK3. As for
mutation status, 28.8% (68 of 229) tumors harbored KRAS mutation and 2.5%
(6 of 125) tumors harbored BRAF mutation. Both mutations were mutually
exclusive. We devided patients into three groups on the basis of the
number of methylated genes (group 1, 01 methylation n=117; group 2, 24
methylation n=73; group 3, 5-7 methylation n=9). Median OS of group 3 was
significantly shorter than other groups (median OS 38.1m in group1 vs
19.4m in group 3, log rank P=0.003; median OS 38.0m in group2 vs 19.4m in
group3, log rank P=0.012). In 129 patients with measurable lesions, group
3 (n=6) showed a trend toward lower disease control rate (DCR=66.7%) and
shortend TTP (median 3.5m) than group 1 (n=76, 86.8%, 7.6m) or group 2
(n=47, 80.9%, 6.6m). In multivariate analysis for OS, initial tumor stage
(AJCC 1-3 vs 4: HR=2.67; 95%CI, 1.82-3.93, P <0.0001), tumor
differentiation (well/moderate vs poor/mucinous: HR=2.18; 95%CI,
1.41-3.37, P <0.0001), resectability (resectable vs unresectable:
HR=2.55; 95%CI, 1.54-4.22, P <0.0001), and number of methylation (0-4
methylated vs 5-7 methylated: HR=2.26; 95%CI, 1.11-4.60, P=0.025) were
independent prognostic factors.Conclusion: This study suggests that DNA
methylation status may predict treatment outcome and survival in patients
with metastatic or recurrent colorectal carcinoma.

