Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The E3 ubiquitin ligase Siah2 regulates the androgen receptor
activity and contributes to castration-resistant prostate cancer.


The androgen receptor (AR) plays a central role in the development of
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), which is a major challenge
for hormone therapy of advanced/metastatic prostate cancer (PCa). Here,
we demonstrate that the ubiquitin ligase Siah2 targets a select pool of
NCOR1-bound, transcriptionally inactive AR for ubiquitination-dependent
degradation, and this promotes the subsequent recruitment of p300-bound,
transcriptionally active AR to a select group of AR target gene
promoters/enhancers. Consequently, Siah2 promotes the expression of 13%
of androgen-responsive genes involved in lipid metabolism, cell motility
and proliferation. The Siah2 binding sites located within the AR
ligand-binding domain are mutated in PCa, resulting in attenuation of
Siah2-mediated regulation. Siah2 is required for growth of PCa cells
under the androgen-deprivation condition in vitro and in vivo.
Significantly, inhibition of Siah2 promotes PCa regression upon
castration and Siah2 expression is markedly increased in human CRPCs.
Collectively our findings identify a key role for Siah2 in CRPC through
the selective regulation of AR transcriptional activity.Citation Format:
Jianfei Qi, Manisha Tripathi, Natasha Sahgal, Ladan Fazil, Susan
Ettinger, William J. Placzek, Giuseppina Claps, Leland W.K. Chung, David
Bowtell, Martin Gleave, Neil Bhowmick, Ze'ev Ronai. The E3 ubiquitin
ligase Siah2 regulates the androgen receptor activity and contributes to
castration-resistant prostate cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5456. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5456

