Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protective effect of Traditional Chinese Medicine formula LQ
against cyclophosphamide-induced renal damage in nude mice.


TCM formula LQ is an herbal cocktail. Cyclophosphamide (CYC) is widely
used in cancer chemotherapy. However renal damage is a dose-limiting side
effects of CYC. In the current study, we determined if LQ can protect
against damage. The heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, and intestine of
a mouse from control, LQ pretreatment, CYC pretreatment, and CYC+LQ
treatment were stained with HE. The histology of each organ was observed
under microscopy. The histology of the heart, liver, spleen, lung and
intestine showed normal histopathological structure in all groups. The
kidneys in the control mice, LQ pretreated mice, and CYC+LQ pretreated
mice showed normal architecture of kidney cortex and medulla. The cortex
showed normal renal corpuscle, proximal convoluted tubules, and distal
convoluted tubules. The inner medulla and outer medulla all contained a
thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle, and interstitial connective
tissue. However, kidney of the CYC pretreatment mice showed damage in
structures compare with other groups. The toxic effect of CYC on the
kidney involved the glomeruli, the tubules, and the interstitium. The
structures of the cortex in CYC pretreated group showed disconnection
between glomeruli and tubules. The ducts in the medulla were destroyed.
LQ also protected against weight loss and cachexia induced by CYC. LQ may
be a promising drug for combination with CYC to improve its therapeutic
index.

