Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photochemical internalization (PCI): a novel technology for
site-specific drug delivery.


The utilization of macromolecules in therapy of cancer and other diseases
is becoming increasingly important. Recent advances in molecular biology
and biotechnology have made it possible to improve targeting and design
of cytotoxic agents, DNA complexes and other macromolecules for clinical
applications. To achieve the expected biological effect of these
macromolecules in many cases internalisation to the cell cytosol is
crucial. At an intracellular level, the most fundamental obstruction for
cytosolic delivery of therapeutic macromolecule is the membrane-barrier
of the endocytic vesicles. Photochemical internalisation (PCI) is a novel
technology for release of endocytosed macromolecules into the cytosol.
The technology is based on the use of photosensitizers located in
endocytic vesicles that upon activation by light induces rupture of the
endocytic vesicles and thereby release of the macromolecules into the
cytosol. PCI has been shown to enhance the biological activity of a large
variety of macromolecules and other molecules that do not readily
penetrate the plasma membrane, including type I ribosome-inactivating
proteins (RIPs), gene-encoding plasmids, adenovirus, oligonucleotides and
the chemotherapeutic agent bleomycin. For clinical utilization a novel
photosensitizer has been developed and evaluated for PCI of bleomycin.
Preclinical results with this combination will be presented. Furthermore,
a phase I/II dose-escalating clinical trial has been finalized and
results from this trial will also be presented.

