Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological inhibition of ATM results in mitochondrial
biogenesis in AMPK independent manner.


The gene mutated in Ataxia telangiectasia termed Ataxia Telangiectasia
Mutated (ATM) encodes for a Serine/Threonine protein kinase which
functions at the core of signalling network responsible for DNA damage
recognition and repair. Recent evidence has supported the role of ATM
beyond DNA repair and has been shown to function in metabolic regulation
and cellular homeostasis. Here, we show that ATM regulates mitochondrial
biogenesis in MCF-7 and A549 cancer cell lines. Inhibition of ATM kinase
activity with its specific inhibitor KU55933 (KU) both with and without
DNA damage by Doxorubicin or Bleomycin resulted in evoked cytosolic Ca2+
ions leading to rapid, but sustained induction of mitochondrial
biogenesis in these cell lines. This induction was independent of AMPK, a
kinase previously shown to be involved in mitochondrial biogenesis as KU
treatment resulted in downregulation of phospho AMPK. Moreover siRNA
mediated knockdown of AMPK could not prevent KU dependent induction of
mitochondrial biogenesis. Interestingly, KU treatment resulted in
induction of Extracellular signal-regulated kinase(ERK) and CREB
phosphorylation. Inhibition of ERK signalling by using MEK inhibitor
U0126 disrupted KU dependent induction of mitochondrial biogenesis
demonstrating the involvement of ERK signalling cascade in mitochondrial
biogenesis upon ATM or AMPK inhibition. These results demonstrate that
ATM maintains cellular homeostasis by regulating AMPK mediated
mitochondrial biogenesis and that perturbation in this pathway by KU
treatment causes a switch in mitochondrial biogenesis in ERK dependent
manner. This study indicates cancer cell's fail-safe mechanism in
maintaining its homeostasis by up-regulating mitochondrial biogenesis
upon inhibition of ATM.

