Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin contributes to prostate cancer progression.


Obesity is a complex chronic disorder that can result in a number of
metabolic and endocrine disturbances and may thus account for the
disparity seen in epidemiologic studies investigating the association
between obesity and prostate cancer. Although the association between
dietary factors and the occurrence of prostate cancer has been studied
extensively, there is yet to be a published study on the relationship
between diet and disease progression among prostate cancer patients.
Circulating levels of most adipokines are positively correlated with
obesity and exert a variety of biologic effects on prostate cancer cells
modulating a variety of cellular processes. This would suggest that the
presence of obesity may promote the progression of established prostate
cancer rather than being a risk factor for the development of prostate
cancer; however, a direct link has yet to be established. Recognizing
adipose tissue as a metabolically active endocrine organ and identifying
tumor promoting adipokines would support such an association.To better
understand the effects of increased dietary fat in prostate cancer, we
used the prostate-specific PTEN conditional knockout mouse model to show
that consumption of a high-fat diet (HFD) promoted prostate-specific
cancer progression and decreased survival. Molecular analysis identified
elevated levels of leptin as a likely molecule involved in driving tumor
progression. In this study we provide data from in vitro experiments show
that leptin promoted invasiveness, motility and adhesion of PC3, human
prostate cancer cells. Together, our findings show that increased levels
of leptin, induced by dietary fat, contributes to promote prostate cancer
progression by upregulating STAT3 signal cascades.

