Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of TCL1-Tg:p53-/- mice that resemble human
chronic lymphocytic leukemia with 17p-deletion: alterations in
p53Mir30EZH2 axis.


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common adult leukemia in
the United States and Europe. CLL patients with deletion of chromosome
17p, where the tumor suppressor p53 gene is located, often develop a more
aggressive disease with poor clinical outcomes. However, the underlying
mechanism remains unclear. We have recently generated mice with
E-Tcl1-Tg:p53-/- genotype and showed that these mice develop aggressive
leukemia that resembles human CLL with 17p deletion. In the present
study, we further demonstrated that the p53 deficiency in the Tcl1
transgenic mice resulted in significant down-regulation of microRNAs
miR-15a and miR16-1, associated with a substantial up-regulation of
Mcl-1, suggesting that the p53-miR15a/16-Mcl-1 axis may play an important
role in CLL pathogenesis. Interestingly, we also found that loss of p53
resulted in a significant decrease in expression of the miR-30 family in
leukemia lymphocytes from the E-Tcl1-Tg:p53-/- mice. Consistently,
primary leukemia cells from CLL patients with 17p deletion also showed a
decrease in the miR-30d expression. To further exam the biological
significance of decrease in the miR-30 family in CLL, we investigated the
potential involvement of EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2), a component
of the Polycomb repressive complex known to be a downstream target of
miR-30d and plays a role in disease progression in several solid cancers.
RT-PCR and western blot analyses showed that both EZH2 mRNA transcript
and protein levels were significantly increased in the lymphocytes of
E-Tcl1-Tg:p53-/- mice relative to E-Tcl1-Tg:p53+/+ mice. Exposure of
leukemia cells isolated from E-Tcl1-Tg:p53-/- mice to the EZH2 inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin (DZNep) led to induction of apoptosis, suggesting EZH2
may play a role in promoting CLL cell survival and this may contribute to
the aggressive phenotype of CLL with loss of p53. Our study reveals that
the p53-miR30-EZH2 axis may play an important role in CLL pathogenesis,
and EZH2 may potentially be a target for CLL treatment.

