Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIK3CA mutation, aspirin use and mortality in patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer participating in early-phase clinical trials
.


Background: Regular use of aspirin use has been associated with reduced
risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) and CRC-specific mortality. Preclinical
data demonstrates that aspirin down-regulates phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) signaling activity by inhibiting cyclooxygenase-2.
Recently, regular use of aspirin was found to be associated with better
survival among patients with mutated, but not wild-type PIK3CA
CRC.Methods: 296 patients with CRC referred to the Clinical Center for
Targeted Therapy (CCTT) at the MD Anderson Cancer Center from 10/2008
were analyzed for PIK3CA mutation status. Survival and medication data
was collected from 243 patients who participated in early-phase clinical
trials. Aspirin use was defined as regular aspirin use at the time of the
initial CCTT clinic visit. Primary outcome was time from the initial CCTT
visit till the last day of follow up or death. Cox proportional-hazards
model was used to compute the multivariate hazard ratio (HR) for
mortality.Results: Mean age of the study cohort was 58 years (standard
deviation, 11 years). 55% was male and 72% were Caucasian, 15%,
Afro-American, and 10%, Hispanic. Median survival was 8.8 months. PIK3CA
mutation was found in 38 patients (15.6%), and 25 (10.3%) of them were
using aspirin. Aspirin users and nonusers were similar in clinical
characteristics except for older age in aspirin users (mean difference of
8.6 years, pBackground: Regular use of aspirin use has been associated
with reduced risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) and CRC-specific mortality.
Preclinical data demonstrates that aspirin down-regulates
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling activity by inhibiting
cyclooxygenase-2. Recently, regular use of aspirin was found to be
associated with better survival among patients with mutated, but not
wild-type PIK3CA CRC.Methods: 296 patients with CRC referred to the
Clinical Center for Targeted Therapy (CCTT) at the MD Anderson Cancer
Center from 10/2008 were analyzed for PIK3CA mutation status. Survival
and medication data was collected from 243 patients who participated in
early-phase clinical trials. Aspirin use was defined as regular aspirin
use at the time of the initial CCTT clinic visit. Primary outcome was
time from the initial CCTT visit till the last day of follow up or death.
Cox proportional-hazards model was used to compute the multivariate
hazard ratio (HR) for mortality.Results: Mean age of the study cohort was
58 years (standard deviation, 11 years). 55% was male and 72% were
Caucasian, 15%, Afro-American, and 10%, Hispanic. Median survival was 8.8
months. PIK3CA mutation was found in 38 patients (15.6%), and 25 (10.3%)
of them were using aspirin. Aspirin users and nonusers were similar in
clinical characteristics except for older age in aspirin users (mean
difference of 8.6 years, p<0.001). There was no difference in PIK3CA
mutation status between aspirin users and nonusers (14.6% vs. 16.5%,
p=0.79). Prognostic impact of the Royal Marsden Hospital (RMH) score
(albumin upper limit of normal (ULN) vs. ULN, and >2 vs. 2 sites of
metastases) was ascertained in our cohort.Aspirin use was not associated
with difference in survival (HR=1.37, 95% confidence interval
[CI]=0.80-2.35, p=0.25). This was also true with adjustment for the RMH
score (adjusted HR [AHR]=1.56, 95%CI=0.91-2.67, p=0.11). Among patients
with wild-type PIK3CA CRC, aspirin use was associated with inferior
survival (AHR=1.80, 95%CI=1.01-3.23, p=0.04). In contrast, among patients
with mutated PIK3CA, aspirin use did not impact survival (AHR=0.75, 95%
CI=0.17 to 3.20, P=0.70)Conclusion: Aspirin use was associated with
shorter survival in patients with wild-type PIK3CA metastatic CRC treated
with early-phase clinical trials, but not in patients with mutated
PIK3CA. Larger studies are required to further explore and validate
possible interactive effect between PIK3CA mutation and aspirin use on
survival of patients with metastatic CRC.

