Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accumulation of amino acids in metastatic foci of human colon
cancer xenografts revealed by newly developed method for imaging mass
spectrometry of amino acids.


MALDI imaging mass spectrometry (IMS) provides information about the
spatial distribution of metabolites within thin slices of tissue, and has
been used to elucidate complex phenotypes under various physiological
conditions. Previously, our group reported distinct spatial distribution
of a variety of metabolites in experimental model of hepatic
micrometastasis of the solid tumor. However the metabolic properties in
tumor and host tissues are not fully characterized, because of difficulty
in visualizing most amino acids, due to their lower ionization
efficiency.Here, by using of p-N,N,N-trimethylammonioanily
N-hydroxysuccinimidyl carbamate iodide (TAHS) as a derivatizing reagent,
we have successfully developed the method for the detection of various
amino acids simultaneously by MALDI-MS on tissue section. We prepared
liver section from hepatic metastasis model of human colon cancer, and
then performed MALDI-IMS. To compare the signal intensities of amino
acids among the different sections, we normalized the MALDI-IMS data with
the quantified value of each amino acid obtained from capillary
electrophoresis-mass spectrometry. The result indicated the amount of
glycine, phenylalanine, leucine, glutamate, and glutamine were
significantly elevated in metastatic foci compared to liver parenchyma.
Other metabolites such as ATP and glutathione also accumulated in
metastatic foci, and these results suggested that increased amino acid
pool were required to maintain ATP and GSH levels in tumor.In conclusion,
we have demonstrated that novel imaging technique by using of IMS
combined with on-tissue TAHS derivatization enables the visualization of
amino acid distribution in tissue. The current method could be powerful
tool to elucidate the mechanism for metabolic changes of cancer disease
in vivo.

