Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eribulin and Paclitaxel differentially affect gene expression
profiling of blood vessel cells and in vitro angiogenesis in co-cultures
of human endothelial cells with pericytes.


Objectives: Eribulin mesylate (ERI) is a simplified synthetic macrocyclic
ketone analog of the marine sponge natural product halichondrin B. We
examined effects of ERI and Paclitaxel (PTX) on blood vessel cells by
gene expression profiling (GEP) in mono- and co-culture assays of
pericytes and endothelial cells. Activity of ERI and PTX against cell
growth inhibition and pericyte-driven in vitro angiogenesis was also
studied.Methods: We first assessed IC50s of ERI and PTX in 4-day growth
inhibition assay in isolated primary human brain vascular pericytes
(HBVP) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Based on
identified IC50s, cells were treated with 10X IC50s of ERI or PTX and GEP
was analyzed at 24 h using either Affimetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0
arrays or custom TaqMan Low Density Cards (TLDA) designed with 92 genes
related to angiogenesis, metastasis/ Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition
(EMT) and cell differentiation signal pathways. Inhibitory activity of
drugs on the length of capillary-like networks was analyzed in co-culture
of HUVEC with HBVP.Results: ERI and PTX inhibited cell growth of HBVP at
IC50s of 1.2 and 3.1nM and HUVEC was more sensitive than HBVP by 1.9 and
3.3 fold in cell growth assay, respectively. In HUVEC, most genes were
down-regulated by both ERI and PTX treatments, while in HBVP about equal
number of genes were up- or down-regulated with microarray analysis.
Interestingly, 63% affected genes in HUVECs overlapped for both
treatments. In HBVPs, altered gene signatures were drug-dependent and an
overlap was limited by 16%. ERI specifically affected genes in HIF1 and
caveolar-mediated signaling pathways while PTX regulated genes in HER2,
PI3K/AKT and HGF signaling pathways among others. We confirmed obtained
altered GEP using TLDA and identified 42 significant genes differentially
regulated by ERI and PTX in HBVP. To examine effects on pericyte-driven
in vitro angiogenesis, we compared length of capillary-like networks in
co-culture of HUVEC with HBVP. ERI disrupted capillary-like networks
starting at about 2 nM, while PTX showed limited inhibitory activity by
less than 50% even at 100-1000 nM for 4 days treatments. In co-culture
assay, TLDA data showed decreased expression levels of
angiogenesis-related genes DLL4 (14% compare to control), PDGFRB (70%)
and metastasis/EMT-related genes ZEB1 (53%), TGFB3 (54 %), VIM (62 %)
after treatment with 10X IC50s of ERI (pObjectives: Eribulin mesylate
(ERI) is a simplified synthetic macrocyclic ketone analog of the marine
sponge natural product halichondrin B. We examined effects of ERI and
Paclitaxel (PTX) on blood vessel cells by gene expression profiling (GEP)
in mono- and co-culture assays of pericytes and endothelial cells.
Activity of ERI and PTX against cell growth inhibition and
pericyte-driven in vitro angiogenesis was also studied.Methods: We first
assessed IC50s of ERI and PTX in 4-day growth inhibition assay in
isolated primary human brain vascular pericytes (HBVP) and human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Based on identified IC50s,
cells were treated with 10X IC50s of ERI or PTX and GEP was analyzed at
24 h using either Affimetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 arrays or custom
TaqMan Low Density Cards (TLDA) designed with 92 genes related to
angiogenesis, metastasis/ Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and
cell differentiation signal pathways. Inhibitory activity of drugs on the
length of capillary-like networks was analyzed in co-culture of HUVEC
with HBVP.Results: ERI and PTX inhibited cell growth of HBVP at IC50s of
1.2 and 3.1nM and HUVEC was more sensitive than HBVP by 1.9 and 3.3 fold
in cell growth assay, respectively. In HUVEC, most genes were
down-regulated by both ERI and PTX treatments, while in HBVP about equal
number of genes were up- or down-regulated with microarray analysis.
Interestingly, 63% affected genes in HUVECs overlapped for both
treatments. In HBVPs, altered gene signatures were drug-dependent and an
overlap was limited by 16%. ERI specifically affected genes in HIF1 and
caveolar-mediated signaling pathways while PTX regulated genes in HER2,
PI3K/AKT and HGF signaling pathways among others. We confirmed obtained
altered GEP using TLDA and identified 42 significant genes differentially
regulated by ERI and PTX in HBVP. To examine effects on pericyte-driven
in vitro angiogenesis, we compared length of capillary-like networks in
co-culture of HUVEC with HBVP. ERI disrupted capillary-like networks
starting at about 2 nM, while PTX showed limited inhibitory activity by
less than 50% even at 100-1000 nM for 4 days treatments. In co-culture
assay, TLDA data showed decreased expression levels of
angiogenesis-related genes DLL4 (14% compare to control), PDGFRB (70%)
and metastasis/EMT-related genes ZEB1 (53%), TGFB3 (54 %), VIM (62 %)
after treatment with 10X IC50s of ERI (p<0.05).Conclusions: Endothelial
cells and pericytes responded differently to ERI and PTX treatments and
effects of ERI on GEP of pericytes were distinct from PTX. ERI inhibited
pericyte-driven in vitro angiogenesis at sub nM using co-culture assay of
HUVEC with HBVP. Further analysis of the role of ERI on GEP of pericytes
and pericyte-driven angiogenesis in anti-tumor activity will be warranted.

