Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survivin regulates endothelial cell proliferation, survival and
angiogenesis.


Background - Survivin is a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein
(IAP) family, and is reported to be overexpressed in a number of human
cancers with high unmet medical need including breast, non-small-cell
lung (NSCLC), colorectal, gastric, glioblastoma, and pancreatic cancers.
Multiple studies have described survivin as a key regulator of tumour
cell proliferation, survival and drug resistance, which has led to the
advancement of survivin inhibitors, including antisense and small
molecule drugs, and cancer vaccines, into clinical testing. In the tumour
micro-environment, survivin overexpression has also been reported in
tumour blood vessels and conditional deletion of survivin in endothelial
cells results in murine embryonic lethality secondary to haemorrhage and
defective vascular development. We therefore hypothesised that inhibition
of survivin function in endothelial cells could have anti-angiogenic or
vascular disruptive effects.Methods and Results - To better understand
the role of survivin in primary endothelial cells we designed siRNAs
capable of targeting multiple isoforms of human survivin. Using high
content imaging assays we demonstrated that the siRNA were highly
selective for survivin, inhibited the expression of multiple survivin
splice variants, and had potent in vitro effects on endothelial cells.
Survivin knockdown resulted in inhibition of cell cycle progression with
the formation of enlarged, multi-nucleated cells, and in reduced
endothelial cell survival. Survivin knockdown also impaired the formation
of tube-like networks in vitro when co-cultured with human fibroblasts,
but did not disrupt more established networks.Conclusion These data show
an important role for survivin in primary endothelial cells, and suggest
that targeted inhibition of survivin may have anti-angiogenic effects,
but may not disrupt more established blood vessels.

