Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caspase recruitment domains: New potential markers for diagnosis
of hepatocellular carcinoma in Egyptian patients.


Background: Chronic HCV is a major leading cause of HCC development.
Caspase Recruitment Domains (CARD) is protein modules that regulate
apoptosis. Besides; numerous CARD proteins play an important role in
various carcinogenesis processes. Aim: To assess the possible role of
CARD9, CARD10 and Caspase only protein (COP) in progression of liver
fibrosis and pathogenesis of HCC in chronic HCV G4 Egyptian
patients.Methods: One hundred and thirty patients were recruited and
classified into 4 groups; group I: Chronic HCV, group II: Chronic active
hepatitis, group III: Liver cirrhosis, group IV: HCV related HCC.
Biochemical, virological studies, abdominal ultrasonography and liver
biopsy were performed. Quantitative estimation of mRNA of CARD9, CARD10
and COP were performed by reverse transcription PCR in liver biopsy from
all collected patients.Results: In HCC patients; age, AFP and liver
profile were significantly higher, HB and platelets were significantly
lower, (p value Background: Chronic HCV is a major leading cause of HCC
development. Caspase Recruitment Domains (CARD) is protein modules that
regulate apoptosis. Besides; numerous CARD proteins play an important
role in various carcinogenesis processes. Aim: To assess the possible
role of CARD9, CARD10 and Caspase only protein (COP) in progression of
liver fibrosis and pathogenesis of HCC in chronic HCV G4 Egyptian
patients.Methods: One hundred and thirty patients were recruited and
classified into 4 groups; group I: Chronic HCV, group II: Chronic active
hepatitis, group III: Liver cirrhosis, group IV: HCV related HCC.
Biochemical, virological studies, abdominal ultrasonography and liver
biopsy were performed. Quantitative estimation of mRNA of CARD9, CARD10
and COP were performed by reverse transcription PCR in liver biopsy from
all collected patients.Results: In HCC patients; age, AFP and liver
profile were significantly higher, HB and platelets were significantly
lower, (p value <0.01). The expression levels of mRNA of CARD9, CARD10
and COP in liver biopsies of HCC group (IV) were significantly higher
than other groups (p valueBackground: Chronic HCV is a major leading
cause of HCC development. Caspase Recruitment Domains (CARD) is protein
modules that regulate apoptosis. Besides; numerous CARD proteins play an
important role in various carcinogenesis processes. Aim: To assess the
possible role of CARD9, CARD10 and Caspase only protein (COP) in
progression of liver fibrosis and pathogenesis of HCC in chronic HCV G4
Egyptian patients.Methods: One hundred and thirty patients were recruited
and classified into 4 groups; group I: Chronic HCV, group II: Chronic
active hepatitis, group III: Liver cirrhosis, group IV: HCV related HCC.
Biochemical, virological studies, abdominal ultrasonography and liver
biopsy were performed. Quantitative estimation of mRNA of CARD9, CARD10
and COP were performed by reverse transcription PCR in liver biopsy from
all collected patients.Results: In HCC patients; age, AFP and liver
profile were significantly higher, HB and platelets were significantly
lower, (p value <0.01). The expression levels of mRNA of CARD9, CARD10
and COP in liver biopsies of HCC group (IV) were significantly higher
than other groups (p value<0.01). On differentiation between HCC and non
HCC patients each CARD was assessed separately then in combination with
others as follow; CARD 9, CARD 10, COP and AFP separately showed best
cutoff at (87, 89.5, 20.3, 10.35) with sensitivity (80%, 90%, 90%, 87%)
and specificity (80%, 63%, 81%, 68%) with positive predictive value (61%,
51.4%, 69.2%, 54%) and negative predictive value (85.7%, 93.3%, 94.8%,
91%) respectively. On combing AFP with CARD9 then CARD 10 then COP, they
showed (93%, 100%, 100% sensitivity), (57%, 46%, 57% specificity), with
positive predictive value (49%, 45%, 51%) and negative predictive value
(94%, 100%, 100%) respectively. On combing the 3 CARDs (CARD 9, CARD 10,
COP), the sensitivity was 100%, specificity was 48%, with positive
predictive value 47% and negative predictive value 100% as shown in
figure 1.Conclusions: CARD9, CARD10 and COP had no role in liver fibrosis
but may be involved in hepatic carcinogenesis processes and they could be
used as markers for HCC diagnosis

