Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study identifies a novel susceptibility
locus at 12q23.1 for lung squamous cell carcinoma in Chinese.


Adenocarcinoma (AC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC) are two major
histological subtypes of lung cancer. Genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have made considerable advances in the understanding of lung
cancer susceptibility. Obvious heterogeneity has been observed between
different histological subtypes of lung cancer, but genetic determinants
in specific to lung SqCC have not been systematically investigated. Here,
we performed the GWAS analysis specifically for lung SqCC in 833 SqCC
cases and 3,094 controls followed by a two-stage replication in
additional 2,223 lung SqCC cases and 6,409 controls from Chinese
populations. We found that rs12296850 in SLC17A8-NR1H4 gene region
at12q23.1 was significantly associated with risk of lung SqCC at
genome-wide significance level [additive model: odds ratio (OR) = 0.78,
95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.72-0.84, P= 1.1910-10]. Subjects
carrying AG or GG genotype had a 26% (OR = 0.74, 95% CI = 0.67-0.81) or
32% (OR = 0.68, 95%CI = 0.56-0.83) decreased risk of lung SqCC,
respectively, as compared with AA genotype. However, we did not observe
significant association between rs12296850 and risk of lung AC in a total
of 4,368 cases with lung AC and 9,486 controls (OR= 0.96, 95%CI =
0.90-1.02, P=0.173). These results indicate that genetic variations on
chromosome 12q23.1 may specifically contribute to lung SqCC
susceptibility in Chinese population.

