Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase I study of a p70S6 kinase inhibitor (LY2584702) in
patients (pts) with solid tumors.


Introduction: LY2584702 is an inhibitor of p70S6 kinase, a downstream
effector of the AKT pathway which is activated in multiple tumor types.
Suppressing p70S6 kinase activity is expected to inhibit cell growth,
cell proliferation, and possibly cell death. A phase 1 study was
conducted to evaluate the safety and tolerability of LY2584702 in
Japanese pts with solid tumors.Methods: Patients received a single oral
dose of LY2584702 on Day1, followed by the same doses given twice daily
(BID) from Day3 to Day30 (Cycle 1), and were evaluated for occurrence of
dose limiting toxicity (DLT). Other measurements included safety,
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics (PD biomarkers) and efficacy. The
first 3 pts were assigned to 50 mg BID LY2584702, and the following 6 pts
assigned to 75 mg BID. Study treatment was repeated until progressive
disease or intolerable toxicity occurred.Results: Cancer types included
colon, gastric and esophagus cancers. All pts in the trial completed
Cycle 1 without showing DLT. There were no serious adverse events or
discontinuations due to adverse events during the study. Adverse events
of Grade 3 were observed in 2 pts receiving 50 mg BID LY2584702: one with
increased alkaline phosphatase, and another with increased bilirubin. Of
these 9 pts, 5 had aPTT elongation and 4 had PT/INR elongation. After a
single dose, the PK parameters showed relatively high variability; tmax,
t1/2, and apparent clearance ranged from 5 to 8 h, 14.7 to 28.1 h, and
5.18 to 7.79 L/h, respectively. Accumulation ratio of exposure ranged
from 1.41 to 2.07. While PD biomarkers (pS6RP, pAKT, and pPRAS40) showed
no meaningful findings, a pattern in the kinetics of these biomarkers was
observed after LY2584702 exposure; there was a reduction in the level of
expression of pS6 positive cells from the entire epidermis, and 3 PD
biomarkers in PBMCs showed the same kinetic pattern with consistent
down-regulation. No complete or partial responses were observed, but 2
pts (colon and esophagus cancers) exhibited long-term stable disease (one
for 183 days; the other 137 days).Conclusion: No remarkable safety
concern was revealed during the phase 1 study of LY2584702 in Japanese
solid tumor pts. Despite a limited number of pts and high variability,
Cmax and AUC in this study were generally consistent with those in a
previous US phase 1 study. Coagulation response was down-regulated after
LY2584702 exposure, which would have opposite effects of everolimus. In
addition, since a pattern of kinetics of PD biomarkers was observed in
both PBMCs and skin biopsies after LY2584702 exposure, our PD marker
analysis may encourage their future potential as biomarker candidates for
PI3K-Akt pathway.

