Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: USP7 and Daxx regulate mitosis progression and taxane sensitivity
by affecting stability of Aurora A kinase.


A large number of patients are resistant to taxane-based chemotherapy.
Functional mitotic checkpoints are essential for taxane sensitivity.
Thus, mitotic regulators are potential markers for therapy response and
could be targeted for anticancer therapy. In this study we identified a
novel function of Ubiquitin Specific processing Protease-7 (USP7) that
interacts and cooperates with protein Daxx in regulation of mitosis and
taxane resistance. Depletion of USP7 impairs mitotic progression,
stabilizes cyclin B and reduces stability of the mitotic E3 ubiquitin
ligase, Checkpoint with Forkhead and RING finger (CHFR). Consequently,
cells with depleted of USP7 accumulate Aurora A kinase, a CHFR substrate,
thus elevating multipolar mitoses. We further show that these effects are
independent from the USP7 substrate p53. Thus, USP7 and Daxx are
necessary to regulate proper execution of mitosis, partially via
regulation of CHFR and Aurora A kinase stability.Results from colony
formation assay, in silico analysis across the NCI60 platform and in
breast cancer patients suggest that USP7 levels inversely correlate with
response to taxanes, pointing at the USP7 protein as a potential
predictive factor for taxane response in cancer patients. In addition, we
demonstrated that inhibition of Aurora A attenuates USP7-mediated taxane
resistance, suggesting that combinatorial drug regimens of Taxol and
Aurora A inhibitors may improve the outcome of chemotherapy response in
cancer patients resistant to taxane treatment. Finally our study offers
novel insights on USP7 inhibition as cancer therapy.

