Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of Nrf2 on the development of ethyl carbamate/ butylated
hydroxytoluene-induced lung tumorigenesis in mice.


Chronic inflammation has been linked to the development of various types
of cancers and has been recently recognized as the seventh hallmark of
cancer. Accumulating evidence suggests that Nrf2 plays a pivotal role in
protection against oxidative tissue damage and inflammation. Previous
findings from ours as well as other laboratories have demonstrated that
Nrf2 possesses the protection effects in the inflammation-associated
carcinogenesis in preclinical models. The aim of the present study is to
investigate the role of Nrf2 in butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT)-induced
pulmonary inflammation and BHT-urethane/ethyl carbamate (EC) induced
two-stage lung carcinogenesis. Nrf2 deficient mice showed an increased
susceptibility to BHT-induced pulmonary inflammation, whereas Nrf2 WT
mice have higher antioxidant proteins level and lower pro-inflammatory
markers. Although lung inflammation was slightly more severe in Nrf2KO
mice as compared to their wildtype counterpart, the tumor incidence and
tumor multiplicity were found to be significantly lower in Nrf2KO mice
treated with EC-BHT. Tumor multiplicity was also lower in Nrf2KO mice
treated with EC alone. In summary, on one hand, Nrf2 is required to
dampen inflammation, but Nrf2 may be disadvantage in EC or BHT-EC
mediated lung tumorigenesis.

