Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CYP3A4 promotes mammary carcinoma angiogenesis in a cell
iIntrinsic fashion.


Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) has been recently been implicated in breast
cancer cell growth and survival, but the role of cell intrinsic CYP3A4 in
breast cancer cell engraftment and angiogenesis is unknown. Previously,
we have characterized CYP3A4 knock down lines in which CYP3A4 is stably
suppressed [J Biol Chem. 2011 May 20;286(20):17543-59]. The CYP3A4 knock
down lines exhibit reduced proliferation and clonogenicity in vitro. We
therefore tested in an estradiol dependent nude mouse mammary fat pad
xenograft model whether the MCF-7 3-18 line (CYP3A4 shRNA), in which
CYP3A4 protein levels are suppressed by 60%, exhibits reduced growth
compared to a non-target line MCF-7 NT2. Before implantation, the
suppression of CYP3A4 mRNA in the shRNA compared to NT2 cells was
confirmed by qPCR. After 46 days of monitored tumor growth, the MCF-7 NT2
tumors exhibited a median size of 273 mm3 (medianSEM) compared to 20.6
mm3 for the MCF-7 CYP3A4 shRNA tumors. Tumor growth was modeled by a
Gompertzian method and the difference was statistically significant
(P=0.0018). The mammary fat pads were removed after sacrifice at the end
of the experiment, inked, oriented and subjected to z-sectioning. All
mice exhibited tumors. The CYP3A4 shRNA tumors exhibited necrosis (5 of 6
evaluable mice) whereas the NT2 control tumors did not (0 of 6 evaluable
mice) (P=0.0152; two tailed Fisher's exact test). Angiogenesis was
measured by CD31 immunohistochemical staining using an automated
microvessel image analysis algorithm (Image Analysis Toolbox, Aperio
Technologies) allowing measurement of percentage of area occupied by CD31
staining cells at the cortex of tumor nodules. Percent area occupied by
CD31 positive cells was 2.690.46 vs. 0.670.64 (meanSEM) (P=0.033).
Together, these results suggest that cell intrinsic CYP3A4 is important
for mammary carcinoma growth and angiogenesis in a xenograft model.

