Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computerized quantification of synergism or antagonism in
anticancer drug combination with different mechanisms and/or modes of
actions.


Drug combination is widely used in therapy against the most dreadful
diseases such as cancer and AIDS. The combination index (CI) theorem
based on the general median-effect equation (MEE) of the mass-action law
(MAL) has been broadly used in combination of drug-drug, drug-radiation
and drug-oncolytic virus, etc. (Chou TC. Pharmacol Rev 58: 621-681, 2006;
free access: http://pharmrev.aspetjournals.org/cgi/reprint/58/3/621). The
article introducing the CI concept (Chou TC & Talalay P. Adv Enz Regul
22: 27-55, 1984) has been cited 2,700 times in 523 biomedical journals
(Thomson Reuters Web of Science, www.researcherid.com/rid/B-4111-2009).
Its 3rd generation computer software, CompuSyn (2005), is now available
for free download beginning on 08/01/2012 (www.combosyn.com). A typical
drug combination in vitro requires only 16 data points and the experiment
can be done in 1-2 weeks and the computer simulation in 1-2 seconds after
data entries. Since the CI algorithm is mathematically derived from the
physico-chemical principle of MAL, it is mechanism and unit independent,
and has been applied in vitro, in animals and in clinical trials
(Pharmacol. Rev. above & Cancer Res. 70: 440-446, 2010). Although in
vitro & in vivo share the same CI theorem, it should be noted that in
vivo involve much higher cost, time, effort, and have regulatory and
legal or ethical implications. With recommended experimental design
(constant ratio combination), more than two-drug (n-drug) combinations
can be simulated automatically (e.g., 5 drugs).The CompuSyn Report
provides PD parameters (Dm and m), the dose-effect curves, the
median-effect plot (Chou plot), the Fa-CI plot (Chou-Talalay plot),
Isobologram, Dose-normalized isobologram (Chou-Chou Isobol),
Dose-reduction index (DRI) plot (Chou-Martin plot), Polygonogram
(graphics e.g., for 3-7 drugs), and Summary Table. The CI method has the
following features: (i) The only MAL-based drug combination method
available in literature; (ii) The only computerized simulation of drug
combination analysis with derived algorithm;" (iii) Allow small-size
experimentation with a small number of data points; (iv) Determine
synergism or antagonism at any dose or any effect levels; (v) Amendable
for determining the optimal combination ratio or the optimal schedule of
treatment. The general MEE and its CIE provides efficient, and rigorous
quantitative approach for econo-green biomedical research over all, and
improves the cost-effectiveness for new drug R&D as has been illustrated
in Chou, Integrative Biol. 3: 548-559, 2011 and in Am. J. Cancer Res.
1(7) 2011 (free access: www.jacr.us).Citation Format: Ting-Chao Chou.
Computerized quantification of synergism or antagonism in anticancer drug
combination with different mechanisms and/or modes of actions.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3276.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3276

