Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A real-time PCR assay for the detection of PIK3CA mutations in
formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue (FFPET) specimens of breast
cancer (BC).


Somatic mutations in the PIK3CA gene encoding the p110 catalytic subunit
of the PI3K protein have been linked to human cancer and have been found
to occur at a high frequency in BC (25-40%). Therapeutics that target key
nodes in the PI3K signaling pathway are currently being developed and
stratifying patients based on their PIK3CA mutation status is becoming
more important. We describe the analytical performance of the cobas
PIK3CA Mutation Test (For Research Use Only), a multiplex allele-specific
PCR assay designed to detect 17 mutations in exons 1, 4, 7, 9 and 20 in
the PIK3CA gene in 3 PCR wells. The test detects 94% of known PIK3CA
mutations found in BC.The amount of DNA required for the assay (150 ng)
can typically be isolated from a single 5 m FFPET section with automated
test results generated within 8 hours. The analytical sensitivity of the
test, defined as 95% mutation detection rate, was found to be 5% mutant
allele in BC FFPET tumor sections representing 4 prevalent PIK3CA
mutations (H1047R, E545K, E542K, and Q546K). Additionally, the test was
able to detect all 17 mutations at 5% mutant allele in plasmid/gDNA
blends. The test was also compared to 2X bi-directional Sanger sequencing
using 110 BC FFPET specimens. The PCR test detected mutations in 50
specimens that were Sanger (+) (100% positive agreement). Moreover, the
test detected mutations in 4 Sanger (-) specimens and detected a second
mutation in 1 Sanger (+) specimen that was not detected by Sanger. All 5
of the PCR (+)/Sanger (-) were confirmed mutant by 454 sequencing.
*One specimen had an additional mutation.When a panel of BC FFPET
specimens was repeatedly tested over multiple days by 2 operators using 2
instruments and 2 reagent lots, a correct call was obtained in 99.5%
(191/192) of tests. The results demonstrate that the cobas PIK3CA
Mutation Test is a fast, accurate and reproducible assay that is more
sensitive than Sanger sequencing for the detection of PIK3CA mutations in
BC tumors.

