Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Src homology region 2 domain-containing phosphatase-1 is a major
target of sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Sorafenib is the only clinical approved drug in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Previously, we have investigated that Signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a kinase-independent target of
sorafenib (Journal of Hepatology, 2012). Here, we report that sorafenib
relieves the anto-inhibited Src homology region 2 domain-containing
phosphatase-1 (SHP-1) to increase its phosphatase activity and inhibit
p-STAT3-related signaling. Sorafenib increases SHP-1 activity either in
HCC cell-based test or purified recombinant SHP-1 protein directly.
Deletion of N-SH2 domain (dN1) or point mutation (D61A) of SHP-1
abolished the effect of sorafenib on SHP-1 and phospho-STAT3 (p-STAT3)
and apoptosis in HCC, suggesting that sorafenib may affect SHP-1 by
switching the transformation from auto-inhibition to the active form. The
significant correlation between inhibited SHP-1 and overexpression of
p-STAT3 was demonstrated in immunohistochemistry of clinical HCC samples.
Novel sorafenib derivatives, SC-43 and SC-40, showed more potent effects
than sorafenib on enhancing the activity of SHP-1 activity, inhibiting
p-STAT3, induction apoptosis and overcoming sorafenib resistance in HCC.
SC-43 showed better survival benefits than sorafenib in orthotopic HCC
tumors. SHP-1 represents a major target of sorafenib in HCC. Sorafenib
derivatives (SC-43 and SC-40) show better anti-HCC effects than sorafenib
by targeting SHP-1. Further clinical investigations may be warranted.

