Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel protein modulators of p53 family function
using photochemical crosslinking of stapled peptides.


Considered to be the guardian of the genome, the tumor suppressor p53
works to counteract genetic mutation through cell cycle arrest, DNA
repair or apoptosis to prevent proliferation of damaged cells.
Dysfunction of the p53 pathway is a large driver of tumorigenesis, with
an estimated more than 50% of cancers bearing some p53 abnormality;
hence, the normalization of p53 function is considered an important
clinical goal for cancer therapy. Many of the interactions involving p53
have been extensively studied; however, absent structural information,
the identification of the precise nature of the binding interactions
proves challenging, more so if they are transient. Using the hydrocarbon
stapled peptide methodology previously used by our group to study
interactions mediated by alpha-helices, we have begun identifying novel
binding targets of the p53 transactivation domain (TAD) as well as its
related proteins p63 and p73 through biochemically specific, covalent
photochemical crosslinking reactions. Methodologically, we have developed
the use of photoreactive stapled alpha helices (pSAHs) representing a
unique way to use highly selective, biochemically specific cross-linking
reagents. These can be used more broadly to study protein-protein binding
interactions in cell-free and cell based assays. The technique has
allowed us to learn more about the biologically active state of proteins
that interact with the p53-family member TADs as well as the
identification of unexplored binding partners and their mechanism of
action in disease.

