Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan HDACs inhibitor ST3595 targets PARP activity and has curative
effect in breast BRCA-deficient model when combined with cisplatin
treatment.


Acetylation is emerging as a major form of post-translational regulation
of gene expression beyond histones and the maintenance of chromatin.
Acetylation has been found to play a role in many cellular functions
including DNA repair, cell division, apoptosis, cell signaling, chaperone
activity and in the cytoskeleton. It is now evident that, given the
pleiotropic effects of HDAC inhibitors (HDACi), their therapeutic
potential is expected to be best exploited through combination with other
antitumor agents . Indeed preclinical data with several tumor cell lines
have shown synergistic effects when combining HDACi with various DNA
damaging agents, suggesting their involvement in the modulation of DNA
damage response (Munshi et al. Clin Cancer Res (2005) 11: :4912-4922;
Chen et al. Cancer Res 2007, 67: 5318-5327).To increase our understanding
on the molecular and pharmacological properties of ST3595 (Zuco et al.
PLoS ONE,2011, 6(12)), a novel Pan- HDACs inhibitor, we have investigated
its role in modulating the DNA-repair genes expression and how this
modulation could eventually be translated into a therapeutical approach.
Our studies evidentiated that, besides the modulation of typical pathways
associated to HDAC inhibition (i.e. cell cycle control, DNA replication,
apoptosis, cell differentiation, etc.) and mainly mediated by acetylation
of histones, ST3595 strongly induces the modulation of molecular markers
associated with DNA-damage signalling (-H2A.X, acetyl-p53Lys373/382,
p-Chk1/2, etc.), p53- signalling and response pathways (i.e. MDM2, Bax,
Noxa, PUMA, p21, etc.), and ER-stress response (gadd-153, ATF-3, ATF-4,
Grp78, Grp34, HERPUD1 et others), in several tumour models. In addition,
an extensive TaqMan gene expression analysis in ST3595-treated tumour
cells, revealed several target genes, including ATM, gadd45-, gadd45-,
and some repair enzymes, modulated directly or indirectly by this
molecule. Since PARP-1 acts as a DNA damage sensor and has been
implicated in multiple DNA repair pathways, including the SSB, DSB, and
base excision repair (BER) pathways, we tested ST3595 as putative PARP
inhibitor. In these experiments, although ST3595 have a mild direct
effect against the enzyme, a very strong inhibitory effect (at low M
dose) was measured in vitro, by means of a specific Poly-ADP-ribosylation
(parylation) assay, on HeLa cells. To assess the specificity and the
therapeutical relevance of this observation, we investigated the efficacy
of ST3595 in two breast cancer models, MDA MB436 (triple negative,
BRCA1/2 mutated) compared to MDA MB231 (triple negative). The results
from in vitro and in vivo experiments have shown an increased antitumor
activity of ST3595 against BRCA1/2 mutated tumor and cured mice, when the
drug has been associate to Cisplatin.

