Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apogossypolone derivative -BI97D6 effectively targets MCL1
overexpressing Acute Myeloid Leukemia cells.


Aberrant expression of anti-apoptotic proteins such as BCL2, MCL1, and
BCL-XL is observed in many tumors including Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML).
An obvious strategy for AML therapy would be to target the anti-apoptotic
BCL2 family members. While compounds such as ABT-737 have shown promise
for treatment of some malignancies, the compound binds poorly to MCL1 and
thus cells that overexpress MCL1 usually display high resistance to the
drug. Furthermore, ABT-737 activates ERK signaling resulting in MCL1
overexpression in surviving cells (Konopleva, et al, Leukemia 2011). The
apogossypolone derivative -BI97D6 binds MCL1 and BCL2, BCL-XL, BFL1 with
high affinities (Wei, et al, J Med Chem 2010). We recently reported that
-BI97D6 (a) efficiently kills AML cell lines even in the presence of
protective mesenchymal stroma cells, (b) interferes with the association
between MCL1/BIM and BCL2/BAX, (c) stimulates BAX conformational change,
(d) requires BAX or BAK for cell killing, and (e) does not induce ER
stress. These data suggests that -BI97D6, unlike other gossypol or
apogossypol compounds, acts mainly as a BH3 mimetic.In the current study,
we first examined the role of MCL1 in -BI97D6-mediated killing. OCI-AML3
cells are extremely resistant to ABT-737 due to its high expression of
MCL1. MCL1 expression was suppressed by lenti-viral shRNA in OCI-AML3
cells and knockdown of MCL1 protein by 80% was achieved as determined by
quantitative western blot. Compared to cells with non-specific control
shRNA, cells with MCL1 shRNA were greatly sensitized to ABT-737, and
significantly sensitized to AraC, while -BI97D6, which binds MCL1 with
high affinity, is almost equipotent in knockdown and control cells. Since
results with AML cell lines have been promising, we examined the efficacy
of -BI97D6 on primary AML samples. Flow cytometry analysis revealed that
-BI97D6 potently induced apoptosis in AML blast cells at low nM
concentration (EC50Aberrant expression of anti-apoptotic proteins such as
BCL2, MCL1, and BCL-XL is observed in many tumors including Acute Myeloid
Leukemia (AML). An obvious strategy for AML therapy would be to target
the anti-apoptotic BCL2 family members. While compounds such as ABT-737
have shown promise for treatment of some malignancies, the compound binds
poorly to MCL1 and thus cells that overexpress MCL1 usually display high
resistance to the drug. Furthermore, ABT-737 activates ERK signaling
resulting in MCL1 overexpression in surviving cells (Konopleva, et al,
Leukemia 2011). The apogossypolone derivative -BI97D6 binds MCL1 and
BCL2, BCL-XL, BFL1 with high affinities (Wei, et al, J Med Chem 2010). We
recently reported that -BI97D6 (a) efficiently kills AML cell lines even
in the presence of protective mesenchymal stroma cells, (b) interferes
with the association between MCL1/BIM and BCL2/BAX, (c) stimulates BAX
conformational change, (d) requires BAX or BAK for cell killing, and (e)
does not induce ER stress. These data suggests that -BI97D6, unlike other
gossypol or apogossypol compounds, acts mainly as a BH3 mimetic.In the
current study, we first examined the role of MCL1 in -BI97D6-mediated
killing. OCI-AML3 cells are extremely resistant to ABT-737 due to its
high expression of MCL1. MCL1 expression was suppressed by lenti-viral
shRNA in OCI-AML3 cells and knockdown of MCL1 protein by 80% was achieved
as determined by quantitative western blot. Compared to cells with
non-specific control shRNA, cells with MCL1 shRNA were greatly sensitized
to ABT-737, and significantly sensitized to AraC, while -BI97D6, which
binds MCL1 with high affinity, is almost equipotent in knockdown and
control cells. Since results with AML cell lines have been promising, we
examined the efficacy of -BI97D6 on primary AML samples. Flow cytometry
analysis revealed that -BI97D6 potently induced apoptosis in AML blast
cells at low nM concentration (EC50<50nM). -BI97D6 also effectively
killed putative CD34+CD38- leukemia stem cells (LSC). Importantly,
primary AML with FLT3-ITD and FLT3-D835 mutations showed similar
sensitivity as those without FLT3 mutations (EC50Aberrant expression of
anti-apoptotic proteins such as BCL2, MCL1, and BCL-XL is observed in
many tumors including Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML). An obvious strategy
for AML therapy would be to target the anti-apoptotic BCL2 family
members. While compounds such as ABT-737 have shown promise for treatment
of some malignancies, the compound binds poorly to MCL1 and thus cells
that overexpress MCL1 usually display high resistance to the drug.
Furthermore, ABT-737 activates ERK signaling resulting in MCL1
overexpression in surviving cells (Konopleva, et al, Leukemia 2011). The
apogossypolone derivative -BI97D6 binds MCL1 and BCL2, BCL-XL, BFL1 with
high affinities (Wei, et al, J Med Chem 2010). We recently reported that
-BI97D6 (a) efficiently kills AML cell lines even in the presence of
protective mesenchymal stroma cells, (b) interferes with the association
between MCL1/BIM and BCL2/BAX, (c) stimulates BAX conformational change,
(d) requires BAX or BAK for cell killing, and (e) does not induce ER
stress. These data suggests that -BI97D6, unlike other gossypol or
apogossypol compounds, acts mainly as a BH3 mimetic.In the current study,
we first examined the role of MCL1 in -BI97D6-mediated killing. OCI-AML3
cells are extremely resistant to ABT-737 due to its high expression of
MCL1. MCL1 expression was suppressed by lenti-viral shRNA in OCI-AML3
cells and knockdown of MCL1 protein by 80% was achieved as determined by
quantitative western blot. Compared to cells with non-specific control
shRNA, cells with MCL1 shRNA were greatly sensitized to ABT-737, and
significantly sensitized to AraC, while -BI97D6, which binds MCL1 with
high affinity, is almost equipotent in knockdown and control cells. Since
results with AML cell lines have been promising, we examined the efficacy
of -BI97D6 on primary AML samples. Flow cytometry analysis revealed that
-BI97D6 potently induced apoptosis in AML blast cells at low nM
concentration (EC50<50nM). -BI97D6 also effectively killed putative
CD34+CD38- leukemia stem cells (LSC). Importantly, primary AML with
FLT3-ITD and FLT3-D835 mutations showed similar sensitivity as those
without FLT3 mutations (EC50<50nM). As FLT3 mutations are associated with
poor prognosis in AML, these findings suggests that -BI97D6 can target
AML LSC and could benefit even high risk patients. In summary, compound
-BI97D6 may be a promising drug candidate for MCL1-targeted AML therapy.

