Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of acrolein-derived cyclic DNA adducts in human cells by
monoclonal antibodies.


Acrolein (Acr) is a ubiquitous environmental pollutant found in cigarette
smoke and automobile exhaust. It can also be produced endogenously by
oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids. The Acr-derived
1,N2-propanodeoxyguanosine (Acr-dG) adducts in DNA are mutagenic lesions
that are potentially involved in human cancers. In this study, monoclonal
antibodies were raised against Acr-dG adducts and characterized using
ELISA. They showed strong reactivity and specificity towards Acr-dG,
weaker reactivity towards crotonaldehyde- and
trans-4-hydroxy-2-nonenal-derived 1,N2-propanodeoxyguanosines, and weak
or no reactivity towards 1,N6-ethenodeoxyadenosine, 8-oxo-deoxyguanosine,
and benzo(a)pyrene- and malondialdehdye-derived adducts. Using these
novel antibodies, we developed assays to detect Acr-dG in vivo: First, a
simple and quick FACS-based assay for detecting these adducts directly in
cells; Second, a highly sensitive direct ELISA assay for measuring Acr-dG
in cells and tissues using only one g DNA; And third, a competitive ELISA
for better quantitative measurement of Acr-dG levels in DNA. The assays
were validated using Acr-treated HT29 cell DNA samples or calf thymus DNA
and the results were confirmed by LC-MS/MS-MRM. An immunohistochemical
assay was also developed to detect and visualize Acr-dG in HT29 cells as
well as in human oral cells. These antibody-based methods provide useful
tools for the studies of Acr-dG as a cancer biomarker and of the
molecular mechanisms by which cells respond to Acr-dG as a ubiquitous DNA
lesion. (This work was supported by NCI grant CA134892)

