Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The evolution of diverse cancer stem cells in human liver cancer.


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are considered a pivotal target for the
eradication of liver cancer. CSCs have been identified by the use of
various stem cell markers; however, it remains unclear how individual CSC
markers are expressed in individual tumors. We hypothesized that the
distinct marker-positive CSCs show unique features of
tumorigenicity/metastasis and chemosensitivity which may reflect the
heterogeneous nature of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Gene expression
profiling and immunohistochemistry analyses were used to analyze 364
tumor specimens. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) was used to
isolate marker-positive HCC cells, which were tested for hepatic
stem/progenitor cell properties. CSC markers EpCAM and CD90 are
independently expressed in primary liver cancer. EpCAM+ cells share
features with tumorigenic epithelial stem cells, whereas CD90+ cells
share those of metastatic vascular endothelial cells with expression of
c-Kit. CD90+ cells facilitate metastasis of EpCAM+ cells through
activation of TGF-beta signaling, and this effect is abolished by c-Kit
inhibitor imatinib mesylate. These distinct tumorigenic/metastatic CSCs
can evolve from marker-negative cells de novo, and their frequencies vary
dramatically according to the genomic alterations and genotoxic stress.
Our results suggest that liver CSCs are not a single, static entity but
rather exist heterogeneously and undergo dynamic changes through genomic
alteration and genotoxic stress. The evolution of CSCs explains the
enrichment of CSCs in advanced cancer and the limitation of targeting
marker-positive CSCs alone for tumor eradication.

