Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of radiation target volume on circulating lymphocyte
counts in patients with malignant glioma receiving radiation therapy and
temozolomide.


Introduction: Treatment induced lymphopenia (TRL) is an independent
negative prognostic factor for survival in patients with malignant glioma
(MG). Radiation therapy (RT) is a likely contributor to TRL through the
irradiation of circulating lymphocytes. Previous modeling studies
suggested that RT target volume (PTV) would not have an appreciable
impact on total lymphocyte count (TLC) at the end of RT given the large
PTVs in patients with MG. In this study, we attempted to validate the
model by studying % changes in total lymphocyte count (TLC) during brain
RT in patients with MG.Methods: This was an IRB-approved retrospective
chart review study. All patients received 59.4-60Gy given in 1.8-2Gy
daily fractions with concurrent temozolomide (TMZ; 75 mg/m2). Data on
baseline patient characteristics were collected along with data on weekly
TLC obtained through the clinical laboratory and data on PTV obtained
from the RT planning system (Pinnacle). Pearson correlation was used to
test the relationship between PTV size and TLC after RT.Results: This
study included 63 patients, 30 (45%) female and 37 (55%) male. Median age
was 58 years (range 22-79 years). Median baseline KPS was 90 (range
30-100). Most patients (n=58; 87%) had GBM. Gross total resection was
performed in 25 patients (37%), subtotal resesction in 34 (50%) and
biopsy in 8 (12%). Median PTV size was 337 cm3 (range 103-879 cm3).
Median baseline lymphocyte count was 1230 cells/uL (range, 331-4790).
Median lymphocyte counts decreased during and after the course of
treatment. Median TLCs during the last week of RT/TMZ, one month after
RT/TMZ, and two months after RT/TMZ were 730 cells/uL (range 84-2270),
910 cells/uL (range 331-4790), and 820 cells/uL (range 183-1900),
respectively. PTV was not correlated with % decrease in the lymphocyte
count at the end of treatment nor at one or two months after completing
treatment (r = 0.005, 0.11, and 0.16; p = 0.99, 0.42, and 0.27,
respectively). There was no significant difference in mean PTV size among
patients who developed grade 3-4 lymphopenia compared with those who did
not.Conclusions: Brain radiation induces lymphopenia which is progressive
over the course of therapy. PTV size was not correlated with lymphocyte
count at the end of treatment nor with the risk of developing grade 3-4
lymphopenia. Although modeling predicts that differences in PTV size may
impact lymphocyte counts very early in treatment or when very small PTVs
are used, it is unlikely that changing PTV size will have a major effect
on lymphocyte counts given a six-week course to a large field such as is
used in malignant glioma. These conclusions may not apply to patients
treated with very small PTVs or with only a few RT fractions (i.e.,
stereotactic radiosurgery). Alternative strategies are needed to prevent
or treat lymphopenia in patients receiving protracted RT courses to a
large target volume.

