Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of RUNX3 and RUNX3-related chemokines in lung
cancer-induced bone resorption.


Lung cancer frequently metastasizes to bone, which is associated with
significant morbidity and a dismal prognosis. Runt-related transcription
factor 3 (RUNX3) functions as a tumor suppressor in many cancers, and may
be also important in the development of lung cancer. In this study, we
found that RUNX3 knockdown increased the proliferation, migration and
invasion of human lung cancer A549 cells. Interestingly, the receptor
activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL)/osteoprotegerin (OPG)
ratio, an index of osteoclastogenic stimulation, was significantly
increased in human osteoblastic hFOB1.19 cells treated with RUNX3
knockdown A549 cell-derived conditioned medium (CM) as compared to CM of
RUNX3-expressing A549 cells. In the chemokine and receptor PCR array to
identify RUNX3-regulated factors that mediate bone invasion of lung
cancer cells, RUNX3 knockdown led to upregulation of CCL5 and
downregulation of CCL19 and CXCL11 in A549 cells. CCL5 increased the
proliferation, migration and invasion of A549 cells but CCL19 and CXCL11
had not a remarkable effect. CCL5 increased RANKL/OPG ratio in hFOB1.19
cells but CCL19 and CXCL11 decreased. CCL5 promoted RANKL-induced
osteoclast differentiation in BMMs, while CCL19 and CXCL11 reduced. In
the mouse model that RUNX3-expressing or RUNX3 knockdown A549 cells were
injected subcutaneously over the calvaria, RUNX3 knockdown resulted in
the increased tumor size and severe bone destruction. Additionally, in
the osteolytic bone invasion model that the cells were inoculated into
bone marrow of mouse tibia, bone lesions appeared more seriously in mice
injected with RUNX3 knockdown A549 cells. The serum level of CCL5 was
increased, while those of CCL19 and CXCL11 were decreased, in RUNX3
knockdown A549 cell-inoculated mice as compared with RUNX3-expressing
A549 cell-inoculated mice. Taken together, bone invasion of lung cancer
cells may be closely related with RUNX3 and RUNX3-regulated chemokines.

