Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-211 is contributive to the progression of oral carcinoma
through modulating transcription factor 12 (Tcf12).


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the prevalent neoplasms
worldwide. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short RNA molecules that regulate
pathogenesis, including OSCC carcinogenesis, by post-transcriptional
down-regulation of target genes. Our previous study has identified a
relationship between high miR-211 expression and the invasiveness of
OSCC. This study further dissects the molecular mechanisms underlying the
progression of OSCC as affected by miR-211. miR-211 is predicted to
target the 3UTR of transcription factor 12 (Tcf12). Reporter assays
confirmed the direct targeting of miR-211 on Tcf12. Tcf12 is a
helix-loop-helix transcription factor with obscure functions in
malignancies. miR-211 expression decreased both endogenous and exogenous
Tcf12. Exogenous Tcf12 expression suppressed oncogenic phenotypes of
OECM-1 OSCC cells. On the contrary, knockdown of endogenous Tcf12
expression enhanced the oncogenic phenotypes of OSCC cells. Tcf12
expression was highly associated with EZH2 activity, and the expression
levels of HOX family members in OSCC cells. To elucidate the in vivo
oncogenic roles of miR-211 in OSCC carcinogenesis, K14 promoter driven
miR-211 transgenic mouse lines (K14-GFP- miR-211) were established. The
increased miR-211 expression was found to be associated with Tcf12
down-regulation in the squamous epithelium of transgenic mice. After
tumor induction by 4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide, the transgenic mice
exhibited more and bigger tumors comparing to wild type mice. The
incidence of epithelial dysplasia on the tongue was also higher in the
transgenic mice than that in control mice. In summary, this study reveals
that miR-211 is a regulator of OSCC progression by targeting Tcf12. The
in vivo model based on the K14-GFP-miR-211 transgenic mice will help
further studies of the pathogenic mechanisms underlying OSCC progression
and development of therapeutic strategy.

