Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and targeting of small noncoding RNAs implicated in
tumor angiogenesis.


Bone marrow (BM)-derived endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) contribute
to angiogenesis-mediated tumor growth. In previous studies[1], we showed
that EPCs can be tracked from the BM to sites throughout the body,
including the BM compartment of the tumor stroma. We also demonstrated
that the Inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (ID1) proximal promoter can be used
to silence genes in EPCs, through directed delivery of short hairpin RNA
inhibition. Here we report the elucidation of a novel small RNA pathway
regulated by miR-10b, required for regulation of EPC function and tumor
angiogenesis. We demonstrate that this pathway is required for tumor
vascular biology and through in situ hybridization (ISH) that it is
preferentially up-regulated in the vasculature of aggressive late stage
Infiltrating Ductal Carcinomas, and not in more contained Ductal
Carcinomas. Such analysis reveals the clinical implications of in vivo
targeting of miRNAs, such as miR-10b in cancer therapeutics, and reveals
the need for cell specific localisation of miRNA expression in
understanding tumor malignancy.[2]1. Mellick AS, Plummer P, Nolan D, et
al. Using Transcription Factor Id1 to Selectively Target Endothelial
Progenitor Cells Offers Novel Strategies to Inhibit Tumor Angiogenesis
and Growth. Cancer Res. 70:7273-82, 2010.2. Plummer PN, Freeman R, Taft
R, Vider J, Sax M, Umer BA, Gao D, Johns CA, Mattick JS, Wilton SD, Ferro
V, McMillan NA, Swarbrick A, Mittal V, Mellick AS. MicroRNAs regulate
tumor angiogenesis modulated by endothelial progenitor cells. Cancer Res.
2012 Jul 25. [Epub ahead of print].

