Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the translation of A-myb mRNA by tumor suppressor
protein Pdcd4.


Pdcd4 (Programmed cell death protein 4) was first identified as a protein
to be expressed during apoptosis. Later it was shown that Pdcd4 acts as a
tumor suppressor protein and regulates the cellular processes on various
levels, encompassing transcription and translation. Pdcd4 interacts with
the translation initiation factor eIF4A and inhibits its helicase
activity which is required to unwind secondary structures in the 5UTRs of
mRNAs. Previous studies on artificial mRNAs have revealed that it
inhibits the translation of mRNAs with secondary structures in their 5
UTRs. Recently, c-myb mRNA was identified as a natural target RNA of
Pdcd4. A-myb is a member of the myb family which is expressed in certain
hematopoietic cells, such as B-cells, but also in certain
non-hematopoietic cells. We have observed that Pdcd4 inhibits the
translation of A-myb mRNA in co-transfection experiments using Pdcd4
expression vectors as well as on the endogenous level, as demonstrated by
the analysis of a Pdcd4 knock-out model in the Chicken B-cell line DT40.
We found that a mutant of Pdcd4 which no longer interacts with eIF4 is
still able to inbihit the translation of A-myb RNA, suggesting that Pdcd4
acts in an eIF4A independent manner and contradicting the current view of
how Pdcd4 suppresses translation. Similar to the situation in the case of
c-myb RNA we have localized the Pdcd4 responsive region in the coding
region of A-myb mRNA. We therefore conclude that Pdcd4 suppresses the
translation of A-myb RNA by a novel mechanism. Ribosome density profiling
technique is widely used nowadays to explore the topography of the
various stages of translation. Currently we aim to exploit the technique
of ribosome density profiling to further understand how Pdcd4 affects the
translation of A-myb RNA.

