Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Re-engineering of the duocarmycin structural architecture enables
tumour-selective CYP2W1-mediated drug activation in human colon cancer
xenografts.


There is now growing evidence that CYP1A1, 1B1, 2J2, 2S1 and 2W1 are
over-expressed in many human tumour types. The ultrapotent duocarmycins
are ideal candidates for bioprecursor drug development and we have
demonstrated that these can be re-engineered into derivatives selectively
activated by CYP1A1 in vitro and in vivo.1,2 In the present study, we
have focussed on CYP2W1 as a potential therapeutic target. CYP2W1 is
detected in 30% of colon cancers, while its protein expression in
non-transformed adult tissues is absent or insignificant.3 We have
presented results indicating that the immunohistochemically assessed
level of CYP2W1 enzyme could fulfil the criteria for being a prognostic
biomarker for stages II and III colorectal cancer.4 Here we present data
on furanoindole-based duocarmycins that have the potential to be used as
a chemical probe (e.g. ICT2726) to show CYP2W1 functional activity. We
also report on indoline-based analogues that elicit potent
antiproliferative activity after CYP2W1-mediated activation in cancer
cells. Specifically, we have transfected human HEK293, Colo320 and SW480
cells to express CYP2W1 and shown that these suffer rapid loss of
viability following treatment with two halogenated duocarmycin
bioprecursor compounds (ICT2705 and ICT2706) while no activity in
mock-transfected cells was seen. Significantly, ICT2706 was shown to
totally prevent tumour growth when administered to SCID mice bearing
SW480-2W1 xenografts (dosed daily with 100 mg/kg for 8 days) but not the
mock-transfected variant. Subsequent to this treatment, the tumours were
extracted for further analysis. Using H2A.X phosphorylation as a marker
for DNA damage, our data revealed a time-dependent increase in expression
supporting CYP2W1-mediated activation of ICT2706 in vivo. Our findings
reveal the opportunities in targeting CYP2W1 as a novel therapeutic
approach in colon cancer chemotherapy.

