Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delayed urticarial reactions in the phase II trial of HER2/neu
peptide vaccines + GM-CSF vs. GM-CSF alone in high risk breast cancer
patients.


We are conducting a phase II trial evaluating two HER2-specific vaccines
(AE37 and GP2) in the adjuvant setting for the prevention of breast
cancer (BC) recurrence. We have observed the development of delayed
urticarial reactions (DURs) in several patients after inoculation. In
this report, we characterize the DURs and analyze immunologic responses
(IR) in this population.After completion of standard of care therapy,
disease-free, node-positive or high-risk node-negative BC patients (pts)
with any level of HER2 expression (IHC1-3+) were randomized to receive
either a peptide+GM-CSF (VG) or GM-CSF (CG). Pts receive 6 monthly
intradermal inoculations during the primary vaccine series (PVS) followed
by four boosters (B) every 6 mos. IR were measured by local reaction (LR)
and delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) pre (R0) and post-PVS (R6).Ten
(4.3%) of a total 231 initiated pts have had a DUR; 5 in VG (vDUR)
(3AE37, 2 GP2), and 5 in CG (cDUR). Median time to onset of symptoms was
the same for cDUR/vDUR (median 8 days (d); range, 0-17 d). All DUR pts
described generalized pruritis/hives, with two also having difficulty
swallowing/globus. Symptoms resolved with IV/oral steroids (n=4), oral
steroids only (n=3), or antihistimines (n=3). Duration ranged from 4 d-4
mos with a median of 21 d. vDUR pts had a longer median duration of
symptoms than cDUR pts (105 d v 9 d, p=0.02). Four pts (3 vDUR, 1 cDUR)
had recurrent symptoms that resolved after treatment similar to above.
The majority of events (9) occurred between B1 and B3, but one event did
occur after the first inoculation. All DUR pts have received no further
inoculations.Comparing pts who have had a DUR to those who have not
(noDUR), there were no significant differences in age, tumor size/grade,
HER2 expression, or ER/PR status. 70% of DUR pts have environmental
allergies. No other risk factor has been identified. vDUR pts had weaker
IR than VG noDUR (LR- R0: 21v36mm, p=0.14; R6: 30v57mm, p=0.17) (DTH -
R0: 0.6v2mm, p=0.25; R6: 17v25mm, 0.21). cDUR pts had stronger IR than CG
noDUR (LR - R0: 46v1mm, p=0.005; R6: 93v50mm, p=0.01) (DTH - R0:
9.1v2.3mm, p=0.003; R6: 15.3v5mm, p=0.03). There have been no recurrences
in the DUR group compared to 11.4% in the noDUR group (p=0.26).DUR has
occurred infrequently with no long-term sequelae. DURs have occurred
evenly between vDUR and cDUR indicating GM-CSF is the likely cause.
Stronger IR in the cDUR group suggest that these pts's immune system may
have a predisposition toward a more robust response to GM-CSF. Less
robust DTH/LR as well as longer symptom duration in the vDUR suggest the
vaccine may potentiate non-specific systemic immune activation in some
pts. We plan to further characterize DUR in our ongoing trial.

