Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor a (VEGF-A) in
advanced gallbladder cancer.


Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is a highly fatal disease with poor prognosis
and few therapeutic alternatives. Molecular mechanisms involved in GBC
pathogenesis remain poorly understood. The Vascular Endothelial Growth
Factor A (VEGF) is a potent proangiogenic agent involved in the
carcinogenesis of many human tumors and it is an attractive target for
cancer therapy. The aim of this study was characterize VEGF expression in
advanced gallbladder cancer and determine it's relationships with
clinicopathologic features and utility as a prognostic factor. VEGF
expression was examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissue
microarrays containing 224 advanced gallbladder carcinomas and 39 cases
of chronic cholecystitis (CC). The advanced GBC were classified as low or
high expression to evaluate the association of VEGF expression level with
clinical variables. Statistical analysis was performed using univariate
analyses with a significance level of PGallbladder cancer (GBC) is a
highly fatal disease with poor prognosis and few therapeutic
alternatives. Molecular mechanisms involved in GBC pathogenesis remain
poorly understood. The Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A (VEGF) is a
potent proangiogenic agent involved in the carcinogenesis of many human
tumors and it is an attractive target for cancer therapy. The aim of this
study was characterize VEGF expression in advanced gallbladder cancer and
determine it's relationships with clinicopathologic features and utility
as a prognostic factor. VEGF expression was examined by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissue microarrays containing 224 advanced
gallbladder carcinomas and 39 cases of chronic cholecystitis (CC). The
advanced GBC were classified as low or high expression to evaluate the
association of VEGF expression level with clinical variables. Statistical
analysis was performed using univariate analyses with a significance
level of P<0.05; survival analysis was performed by the Kaplan- Meier
method with the log-rank test. High expression of VEGF was observed in
183 of 224 (81%) tumors and 2 of 39 (5.1%) of chronic cholecystitis
(PGallbladder cancer (GBC) is a highly fatal disease with poor prognosis
and few therapeutic alternatives. Molecular mechanisms involved in GBC
pathogenesis remain poorly understood. The Vascular Endothelial Growth
Factor A (VEGF) is a potent proangiogenic agent involved in the
carcinogenesis of many human tumors and it is an attractive target for
cancer therapy. The aim of this study was characterize VEGF expression in
advanced gallbladder cancer and determine it's relationships with
clinicopathologic features and utility as a prognostic factor. VEGF
expression was examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissue
microarrays containing 224 advanced gallbladder carcinomas and 39 cases
of chronic cholecystitis (CC). The advanced GBC were classified as low or
high expression to evaluate the association of VEGF expression level with
clinical variables. Statistical analysis was performed using univariate
analyses with a significance level of P<0.05; survival analysis was
performed by the Kaplan- Meier method with the log-rank test. High
expression of VEGF was observed in 183 of 224 (81%) tumors and 2 of 39
(5.1%) of chronic cholecystitis (P<0.0001). The VEGF expression had a
significant relationship with clinical or pathological features included
histological grade and TNM stage (PGallbladder cancer (GBC) is a highly
fatal disease with poor prognosis and few therapeutic alternatives.
Molecular mechanisms involved in GBC pathogenesis remain poorly
understood. The Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A (VEGF) is a potent
proangiogenic agent involved in the carcinogenesis of many human tumors
and it is an attractive target for cancer therapy. The aim of this study
was characterize VEGF expression in advanced gallbladder cancer and
determine it's relationships with clinicopathologic features and utility
as a prognostic factor. VEGF expression was examined by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissue microarrays containing 224 advanced
gallbladder carcinomas and 39 cases of chronic cholecystitis (CC). The
advanced GBC were classified as low or high expression to evaluate the
association of VEGF expression level with clinical variables. Statistical
analysis was performed using univariate analyses with a significance
level of P<0.05; survival analysis was performed by the Kaplan- Meier
method with the log-rank test. High expression of VEGF was observed in
183 of 224 (81%) tumors and 2 of 39 (5.1%) of chronic cholecystitis
(P<0.0001). The VEGF expression had a significant relationship with
clinical or pathological features included histological grade and TNM
stage (P<0.05). Moreover, 5-year survival analysis indicated that high
expression of VEGF is associated with a poor prognosis in patients with
advanced gallbladder cancer (P = 0.0116). Our results indicate that VEGF
is highly expressed in gallbladder cancer and correlates with poor
prognostic, suggesting that VEGF expression could be used as a biomarker
for predicting malignant behavior and to identify a subset of patients
who may benefit from anti-VEGF therapies.

