Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myeloid cells display immunosuppression activities during
pregnancy, participating to the establishment of pre-metastatic niches.


During pregnancy, major physiological changes occur that include
inflammation and reduced immunity, conditions that are both implicated in
promoting tumor growth. Tumors are indeed more aggressive during
pregnancy and have greater metastatic proclivity. To gain insight into
the mechanisms that may render pregnancy permissive for tumor growth, we
addressed the biological and functional properties of myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSC), a heterogeneous population of hematopoietic
cells of variable plasticity and immunoregulatory properties, during
mouse and human gestation.Gene expression profiling of mouse MDSC has
been shown to differ in pregnant and virgin mice, and the gene expression
profile of pregnant animal-derived MDSC bears similarity to that observed
in MDSC of tumor bearing mice. Common induced genes include Fibronectin1
and Olfactomedin4, which are known to be involved in extracellular matrix
remodeling and tissue permissiveness to tumor cell implantation.In human
pregnancy, CD33+ myeloid cells isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) are shown to be more strongly inhibitory of T cell
proliferation in pregnant than in non-pregnant women. We also observed
reduced natural killer cell numbers in the circulation of pregnant women,
but which was not linked to a decrease in their cytotoxic activity, even
after co-culture with CD33+ PBMC.Our observations suggest that mouse
MDSC, as well as human CD33+ cell populations that arise during the
physiological state of gestation, mimic tumor progression-associated MDSC
and participate in the constitution of a permissive soil, often referred
to as the pre-metastatic niche.

