Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EP4 antagonist suppresses bone metastasis in prostate cancer.


IntroductionBone metastasis is one of the most common complications in
clinical intractable castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and
advanced prostate cancer period. The invasion ability of cancer cells was
thought to have important relationship with the potential of cancer
metastasis. EP4 receptor is overexpressed in several cancers, and
enhanced EP4 receptor signaling has been previously shown to correlate
with the invasion of several different cancer types. In present study, we
found that EP4 antagonist can in vitro suppress the invasion phenotype
abilities of CRPC PC3 cells, LNCaP cells with EP4 overexpressed which
have the tendency to castration-resistance and in vivo suppress the CRPC
bone metastasis animal models.Materials and methodsMaterialsIn vitro: PC3
cell and LNCaP cell in vivo: PC3/Luc cell.EP4-specific antagonist:
ONO-AE3-208MethodsRNA interference was used to stably transfected EP4 to
LNCaP with the pcDNA3.1-EP4, so as to be the LNCaP with vector control
(LNCaP-mock) and LNCaP with EP4 overexpressed (LNCaP/EP4+) as described
in our previous article.Effect on cell proliferation was determined
firstly by the MTT assay. Transwell invasion assay was used to in vitro
examine the metastasis abilities of PC3 cells, LNCaP cells, LNCaP/EP4+
and all after EP4 antagonist affected. Cells with ONO-AE3-208 at the
final concentration of 0.1mol/L, 1mol/L and 10mol/L were administrated to
be the experimental group. To observe the effect of EP4 antagonist on the
bone metastasis of prostate cancer in vivo, PC3/Luc cells were inoculated
into the left cardiac ventricle of 5-week-old male nude mice. The mice
developed osteolytic lesions with a mean endpoint at 527 days.To assess
whether EP4 antagonist suppresses bone metastasis, ONO-AE3-208 (10
mg/kg/d) was given to the animals 5 days a week I.p. which the same
volume of DDW was given as the control.To detect PC3 cell dissemination,
bioluminescent imaging (BLI) was applied using a cooled CCD camera. We
evaluated the efficacy of ONO-AE3-208 by measuring the photon counts of
the metastatic lesions in the mandible and both hip joints in a blinded
manner.ResultsThe invasion assay showed that ONO-AE3-208 can inhibit the
invasive abilities of both PC3 and LNCaP/EP4+ in a dose-dependent manner
(p IntroductionBone metastasis is one of the most common complications in
clinical intractable castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and
advanced prostate cancer period. The invasion ability of cancer cells was
thought to have important relationship with the potential of cancer
metastasis. EP4 receptor is overexpressed in several cancers, and
enhanced EP4 receptor signaling has been previously shown to correlate
with the invasion of several different cancer types. In present study, we
found that EP4 antagonist can in vitro suppress the invasion phenotype
abilities of CRPC PC3 cells, LNCaP cells with EP4 overexpressed which
have the tendency to castration-resistance and in vivo suppress the CRPC
bone metastasis animal models.Materials and methodsMaterialsIn vitro: PC3
cell and LNCaP cell in vivo: PC3/Luc cell.EP4-specific antagonist:
ONO-AE3-208MethodsRNA interference was used to stably transfected EP4 to
LNCaP with the pcDNA3.1-EP4, so as to be the LNCaP with vector control
(LNCaP-mock) and LNCaP with EP4 overexpressed (LNCaP/EP4+) as described
in our previous article.Effect on cell proliferation was determined
firstly by the MTT assay. Transwell invasion assay was used to in vitro
examine the metastasis abilities of PC3 cells, LNCaP cells, LNCaP/EP4+
and all after EP4 antagonist affected. Cells with ONO-AE3-208 at the
final concentration of 0.1mol/L, 1mol/L and 10mol/L were administrated to
be the experimental group. To observe the effect of EP4 antagonist on the
bone metastasis of prostate cancer in vivo, PC3/Luc cells were inoculated
into the left cardiac ventricle of 5-week-old male nude mice. The mice
developed osteolytic lesions with a mean endpoint at 527 days.To assess
whether EP4 antagonist suppresses bone metastasis, ONO-AE3-208 (10
mg/kg/d) was given to the animals 5 days a week I.p. which the same
volume of DDW was given as the control.To detect PC3 cell dissemination,
bioluminescent imaging (BLI) was applied using a cooled CCD camera. We
evaluated the efficacy of ONO-AE3-208 by measuring the photon counts of
the metastatic lesions in the mandible and both hip joints in a blinded
manner.ResultsThe invasion assay showed that ONO-AE3-208 can inhibit the
invasive abilities of both PC3 and LNCaP/EP4+ in a dose-dependent manner
(p < 0.01). In animal experiment, metastatic bone lesions in the control
group progressed while the photon emission was significantly suppressed
in the ONO-AE3-208 treatment group during the observation period from day
28 every 7 days (p IntroductionBone metastasis is one of the most common
complications in clinical intractable castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) and advanced prostate cancer period. The invasion ability
of cancer cells was thought to have important relationship with the
potential of cancer metastasis. EP4 receptor is overexpressed in several
cancers, and enhanced EP4 receptor signaling has been previously shown to
correlate with the invasion of several different cancer types. In present
study, we found that EP4 antagonist can in vitro suppress the invasion
phenotype abilities of CRPC PC3 cells, LNCaP cells with EP4 overexpressed
which have the tendency to castration-resistance and in vivo suppress the
CRPC bone metastasis animal models.Materials and methodsMaterialsIn
vitro: PC3 cell and LNCaP cell in vivo: PC3/Luc cell.EP4-specific
antagonist: ONO-AE3-208MethodsRNA interference was used to stably
transfected EP4 to LNCaP with the pcDNA3.1-EP4, so as to be the LNCaP
with vector control (LNCaP-mock) and LNCaP with EP4 overexpressed
(LNCaP/EP4+) as described in our previous article.Effect on cell
proliferation was determined firstly by the MTT assay. Transwell invasion
assay was used to in vitro examine the metastasis abilities of PC3 cells,
LNCaP cells, LNCaP/EP4+ and all after EP4 antagonist affected. Cells with
ONO-AE3-208 at the final concentration of 0.1mol/L, 1mol/L and 10mol/L
were administrated to be the experimental group. To observe the effect of
EP4 antagonist on the bone metastasis of prostate cancer in vivo, PC3/Luc
cells were inoculated into the left cardiac ventricle of 5-week-old male
nude mice. The mice developed osteolytic lesions with a mean endpoint at
527 days.To assess whether EP4 antagonist suppresses bone metastasis,
ONO-AE3-208 (10 mg/kg/d) was given to the animals 5 days a week I.p.
which the same volume of DDW was given as the control.To detect PC3 cell
dissemination, bioluminescent imaging (BLI) was applied using a cooled
CCD camera. We evaluated the efficacy of ONO-AE3-208 by measuring the
photon counts of the metastatic lesions in the mandible and both hip
joints in a blinded manner.ResultsThe invasion assay showed that
ONO-AE3-208 can inhibit the invasive abilities of both PC3 and LNCaP/EP4+
in a dose-dependent manner (p < 0.01). In animal experiment, metastatic
bone lesions in the control group progressed while the photon emission
was significantly suppressed in the ONO-AE3-208 treatment group during
the observation period from day 28 every 7 days (p < 0.01).ConclusionWe
demonstrated that EP4 antagonist can in vitro inhibit the invasive
abilities of CRPC PC3 and LNCaP/EP4+ cells. The administration of it can
also suppress the bone metastasis of CRPC in vivo.

