Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Production and characterization of ErbB1 (EGFR) associated with
nanolipoprotein particles via cell-based and cell-free methods.


The four members of the ErbB family of mammalian receptor tyrosine
kinases are essential for the development and maintenance of a variety of
tissues. Aberrant activation or over-expression of these receptors leads
to the progression of epithelial and brain tumors. An understanding of
the mechanistic and structural changes that occur to activate the
intracellular receptor tyrosine kinase domain via extracellular ligand
binding and receptor dimerization is desirable for identifying specific
and efficient methods to inhibit signal transduction. Previous methods to
study this process achieved low success due to low protein yield, poor
water solubility of the membrane protein, and the large size of receptor.
We report progress on overcoming these technical hurdles by forming the
ErbB family members in nanolipoprotein particles (NLPs), which are 20 nm
disc-shaped cell membrane analogs. Here we compare an optimized
cell-based method with a novel cell-free method to produce NLPs
containing the ErbB1 receptor, also called EGFR. The cell-produced
ErbB1-NLPs retain kinase activity compared to cell-free produced material
with higher yields. However, the cell-free produced receptors have
regions of correct folding and can be produced in less than a day. The
cell-free produced constructs can be labeled conveniently with unnatural
amino acids to enable characterization of dimerization interactions.
These two receptor production systems can be utilized synergistically to
enable new studies of conformational changes associated with ligand
binding or protein mutations, as well as to identify small molecule
inhibitors of these receptors.

