Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-4 and CpG therapy suppresses the outgrowth of tumors by
activating tumor-specific Th1-type immune responses.


Although interleukin (IL) -4 is often regarded as a type-2 response
inducer, recent studies have demonstrated that local IL-4 delivery at the
site of vaccination activates local dendritic cells (DCs) and promote
type-1 T cell responses. In particular, IL-4 supports DC maturation and
enhances IL-12p70 secretion from DCs. Microbial molecules such as
lipopolysaccharides, bacteriaderived RNA, and DNA are recognized by host
cells through the TLR family, which belongs to the family of
pattern-recognition receptors and stimulates immune responses. It has
been reported that DNA vaccines and synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN)
containing an unmethylated cytidine-phosphate-guanosine (CpG) motif
promote Th1-type immune responses. CpG stimulates DCs through TLR9 and
enhances DC maturation, which may improve the therapeutic effects on
established tumors. In this study, we evaluated the antitumor effects of
IL-4 gene therapy and CpG-ODN treatment in a poorly immunogenic murine
cancer model. We used the IL-4 gene-overexpressing murine colorectal
cancer MC38 cell line (MC38-IL4). Incubation with MC38-IL4 and CpG-ODN
enhanced bone marrow-derived dendritic cell (DC) maturation in vitro. In
addition, interferon (IFN)- production was significantly increased in
nave splenocytes after they were coincubated with MC38-IL4 and CpG-ODN.
When mice bearing MC38 wild-type tumors were inoculated subcutaneously
with MC38-IL4 cells and CpG-ODN, the outgrowth of established parental
tumors was significantly suppressed compared to those in the
MC38-IL4-treated group (IL-4 vs IL-4 + CpG-ODN, p= 0.015). A marked
infiltration of CD8+ cells in the established parental tumors of mice
treated with MC38-IL4 and CpG-ODN was confirmed by immunohistochemical
analyses (MC38-IL4: 2.8 1.9 cells/field vs MC38-IL4 + CpG-ODN: 20.7 15.3
cells/field, p=0.027). Obvious tumor-specific cytolysis was detected when
splenocytes of MC38-IL4 + CpG-ODN-treated mice were stimulated by
-irradiated MC38-IL4 cells and CpG-ODN twice weekly in vitro and used as
effector cells in a chromium-release assay (32.2% 3.5% for MC38 cells vs
3.2% 1.1% for YAC-1 cells; at an effector to target ratio of 40). These
results suggest that IL-4 and CpG-ODN treatment promotes potent Th1-type
antitumor immune responses. Therefore, the combination of IL-4 gene
therapy and CpG-ODN treatment for cancer should be evaluated in clinical
trials.

