Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of SAR302503, a JAK2 inhibitor, in primary human acute
myeloid leukemia xenografts.


Small molecule inhibitors of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) such as Ruxolitinib
and SAR302503 have demonstrated efficacy in clinical trials for treatment
of myeloproliferative disorders. Activated JAK2 signaling has been
reported in some acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples even though JAK2
mutations are relatively rare in AML. Whether JAK2 inhibitors are
effective in AML, particularly against the disease-sustaining leukemia
stem cells (LSC), is not clear. We report that SAR302503 (Sanofi,
Cambridge MA), an orally administered small molecule JAK2 inhibitor,
shows efficacy in a xenograft model of human AML established by
intrafemoral injection of primary AML cells into sublethally irradiated
NOD.SCID mice. The AML samples tested were of multiple subtypes with
heterogeneous cytogenetic and molecular abnormalities. Starting 2 weeks
post transplantation to permit establishment of an AML graft, mice
received twice daily oral gavage with 60 mg/kg SAR302503 or vehicle alone
(0.5% methylcellulose) for 14 consecutive days. In 17 of 34 AML samples,
SAR302503 treatment reduced leukemic engraftment in the injected femur
(56-94% relative reduction, RR, compared to controls; pSmall molecule
inhibitors of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) such as Ruxolitinib and SAR302503
have demonstrated efficacy in clinical trials for treatment of
myeloproliferative disorders. Activated JAK2 signaling has been reported
in some acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples even though JAK2 mutations
are relatively rare in AML. Whether JAK2 inhibitors are effective in AML,
particularly against the disease-sustaining leukemia stem cells (LSC), is
not clear. We report that SAR302503 (Sanofi, Cambridge MA), an orally
administered small molecule JAK2 inhibitor, shows efficacy in a xenograft
model of human AML established by intrafemoral injection of primary AML
cells into sublethally irradiated NOD.SCID mice. The AML samples tested
were of multiple subtypes with heterogeneous cytogenetic and molecular
abnormalities. Starting 2 weeks post transplantation to permit
establishment of an AML graft, mice received twice daily oral gavage with
60 mg/kg SAR302503 or vehicle alone (0.5% methylcellulose) for 14
consecutive days. In 17 of 34 AML samples, SAR302503 treatment reduced
leukemic engraftment in the injected femur (56-94% relative reduction,
RR, compared to controls; p<0.05) as well as non-injected bones (30-95%
RR; pSmall molecule inhibitors of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) such as
Ruxolitinib and SAR302503 have demonstrated efficacy in clinical trials
for treatment of myeloproliferative disorders. Activated JAK2 signaling
has been reported in some acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples even
though JAK2 mutations are relatively rare in AML. Whether JAK2 inhibitors
are effective in AML, particularly against the disease-sustaining
leukemia stem cells (LSC), is not clear. We report that SAR302503
(Sanofi, Cambridge MA), an orally administered small molecule JAK2
inhibitor, shows efficacy in a xenograft model of human AML established
by intrafemoral injection of primary AML cells into sublethally
irradiated NOD.SCID mice. The AML samples tested were of multiple
subtypes with heterogeneous cytogenetic and molecular abnormalities.
Starting 2 weeks post transplantation to permit establishment of an AML
graft, mice received twice daily oral gavage with 60 mg/kg SAR302503 or
vehicle alone (0.5% methylcellulose) for 14 consecutive days. In 17 of 34
AML samples, SAR302503 treatment reduced leukemic engraftment in the
injected femur (56-94% relative reduction, RR, compared to controls;
p<0.05) as well as non-injected bones (30-95% RR; p<0.05). 5 additional
samples exhibited a partial response (Small molecule inhibitors of Janus
kinase 2 (JAK2) such as Ruxolitinib and SAR302503 have demonstrated
efficacy in clinical trials for treatment of myeloproliferative
disorders. Activated JAK2 signaling has been reported in some acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) samples even though JAK2 mutations are relatively
rare in AML. Whether JAK2 inhibitors are effective in AML, particularly
against the disease-sustaining leukemia stem cells (LSC), is not clear.
We report that SAR302503 (Sanofi, Cambridge MA), an orally administered
small molecule JAK2 inhibitor, shows efficacy in a xenograft model of
human AML established by intrafemoral injection of primary AML cells into
sublethally irradiated NOD.SCID mice. The AML samples tested were of
multiple subtypes with heterogeneous cytogenetic and molecular
abnormalities. Starting 2 weeks post transplantation to permit
establishment of an AML graft, mice received twice daily oral gavage with
60 mg/kg SAR302503 or vehicle alone (0.5% methylcellulose) for 14
consecutive days. In 17 of 34 AML samples, SAR302503 treatment reduced
leukemic engraftment in the injected femur (56-94% relative reduction,
RR, compared to controls; p<0.05) as well as non-injected bones (30-95%
RR; p<0.05). 5 additional samples exhibited a partial response (<50% RR
in injected femur and 31-64% RR in non-injected bones, pSmall molecule
inhibitors of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) such as Ruxolitinib and SAR302503
have demonstrated efficacy in clinical trials for treatment of
myeloproliferative disorders. Activated JAK2 signaling has been reported
in some acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples even though JAK2 mutations
are relatively rare in AML. Whether JAK2 inhibitors are effective in AML,
particularly against the disease-sustaining leukemia stem cells (LSC), is
not clear. We report that SAR302503 (Sanofi, Cambridge MA), an orally
administered small molecule JAK2 inhibitor, shows efficacy in a xenograft
model of human AML established by intrafemoral injection of primary AML
cells into sublethally irradiated NOD.SCID mice. The AML samples tested
were of multiple subtypes with heterogeneous cytogenetic and molecular
abnormalities. Starting 2 weeks post transplantation to permit
establishment of an AML graft, mice received twice daily oral gavage with
60 mg/kg SAR302503 or vehicle alone (0.5% methylcellulose) for 14
consecutive days. In 17 of 34 AML samples, SAR302503 treatment reduced
leukemic engraftment in the injected femur (56-94% relative reduction,
RR, compared to controls; p<0.05) as well as non-injected bones (30-95%
RR; p<0.05). 5 additional samples exhibited a partial response (<50% RR
in injected femur and 31-64% RR in non-injected bones, p<0.05). In
preliminary serial transplantation studies, AML cells harvested from
SAR302503-treated primary mice showed reduced ability to generate a
leukemic graft in untreated secondary mice compared to controls,
suggesting that JAK2 inhibition reduces LSC function and/or survival.
Given the heterogeneous response to SAR302503 treatment observed in vivo,
we carried out phosphoflow cytometric analysis of patient samples to
identify biomarkers that could predict drug response. AML samples that
were sensitive to JAK2 inhibition in xenotransplantation assays exhibited
high basal levels of pSTAT5, often in only a small subset of cells, that
were rapidly decreased by SAR302503 treatment in vitro, whereas
non-responding samples showed low levels of pSTAT5, suggesting that
pSTAT5 is a useful drug response biomarker. Our results demonstrate the
potential of SAR302503 to target AML cells including LSCs in a broad
cross section of AML patients, and warrant further studies to identify
responders and non-responders and better characterize proteomic
biomarkers of drug response. The approach we have taken, which focuses on
large-scale analysis of primary samples using state-of-the-art xenograft
assays, offers a new paradigm for preclinical drug development to
identify both novel agents that effectively target LSCs and the patients
most likely to benefit from targeted treatment.

