Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of MDMX by XI-011 induces p53-mediated apoptosis in
head and neck cancer.


Overexpression of MDM2 or MDMX inactivates the tumor-suppressive function
of p53. Restoration of p53 function counteracting these p53 repressors
can lead to in vivo tumor regression. Therefore, we evaluated whether the
restoration of p53 function by a small-molecule p53 activator XI-011, a
pseudouria derivative NSC146109, induce apoptosis in head-and-neck cancer
(HNC). The effects of XI-011 treatment in four HNC cell lines were
tested, individually or in combination with nutlin-3a, an inhibitor of
MDM2-p53 interactions, and its growth suppression, cell-cycle arrest, and
apoptosis were assessed. XI-011 induced accumulation and reactivation of
p53 in a wild-type TP53-bearing HNC cell line. XI-011 showed maximal
growth suppression in tumor cells with overexpression of MDMX and
MDMX-dependent p53 degradation. With down-regulation of MDMX mRNA and
protein levels, XI-011 upregulated expression of p21 and proapoptotic
genes and promoted apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. Notably, the
apoptotic response was blocked by inhibition of p53 or MDMX gene
expression, demonstrating the p53 and MDMX dependence of XI-011 effects.
XI-011 decreased the viability of HNC cells expression low levels of MDMX
in a less-efficient manner. Interestingly, in combination therapy, XI-011
synergistically acted with nutlin-3a to inhibit growth of HNC cells. Our
data suggest that the MDMX inhibition and p53 functional restoration by
XI-011 effectively induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis in cancer cells, an
action that may offer a promising strategy for treating HNC.

