Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capillary electrophoresis for upstream and downstream
biopharmaceutical development.


In order to bring an antibody or other biologic drug to market, each step
of the process needs to be carefully monitored. Charge heterogeneity and
apparent MW via SDS-PAGE are two of the most commonly assessed
parameters. Ideally, similar methods should be used from the beginning of
development (low expression, complex matrix) to late in production and QC
(high concentration, pure material).Capillary techniques such as iCE and
CE-SDS are currently heavily used in downstream product development but
pose challenges for small scale screening and characterization during
cell culture and formulation development. Here we present the Simple
Western that combines in one novel instrument, Peggy, capillary
electrophoresis with an immunoassay to provide highly reproducible and
fully automated analysis of monoclonal antibodies. This sensitive
technology measures either size or charge in complex samples and provides
critical charge heterogeneity, size, and product titer information
without the need for sample purification. Data will be presented
demonstrating the application of the Simple Western technique and the iCE
technology for the analysis of monoclonal antibodies against VEGF and the
ability of the two techniques to provide consistency of data across the
whole range of product development. In addition we show examples for the
unique capability of this technology to assess affinity information for
these anti VEGF antibodies to different charge isoforms of VEGF.

