Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of transcriptional response to phorbol ester,
bryostatin 1, and bryostatin analogue in LNCaP and U937 cells provides
insight into their differential mechanism.


Bryostatin 1 (bryo 1) is a promising cancer chemotherapeutic agent with a
unique mechanism of action. Whereas bryo 1 binds to and activates protein
kinase C (PKC) like the phorbol esters, it paradoxically antagonizes most
phorbol ester responses. Previously, we compared the changes in
transcription in response to the phorbol ester phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA), to bryo 1, and to the synthetic bryo 1 derivative Merle
23 in the human cancer cell lines LNCaP and U937. Bryo1 failed to induce
a typical phorbol ester biological response in either cell line, whereas
the bryo 1 analog Merle 23 resembled PMA in the U937 cells and bryo 1 in
the LNCaP cells. In both cell lines, bryo 1 differed from PMA in inducing
a shorter duration of the transcriptional responses for a panel of
PKC-regulated genes as quantitated by qPCR. Merle 23, in contrast,
induced a pattern very similar to that of PMA. Here, we analyzed by
microarray the genome wide transcriptional changes in LNCaP and U937
cells treated with maximally effective doses of PMA, bryo 1 and Merle 23
for 6 and 8 hours, respectively. Several thousand genes were
significantly up- or down-regulated by PMA (3131 and 3206), bryo 1 (1569
and 2454) and Merle 23 (3533 and 3207) compared to control in LNCaP and
U937 cells, respectively. As seen previously for selected genes, the
magnitude of the changes was much greater for LNCaP cells than for U937
cells. The great majority of the genes followed a pattern in which bryo 1
induced changes similar to PMA but to a significantly smaller extent
(3096 and 1610 genes significantly different in LNCaP and U937 cells),
whereas Merle 23 was very similar to PMA (only 230 and 30 genes different
between them). A detailed qPCR analysis (dose and time courses) of
representative outlier genes revealed that the shorter duration of bryo 1
induced response was responsible for the differences between bryo 1 and
PMA effect in all cases. The dose response experiments did not reveal a
difference in bryo 1 potency linked to any specific pattern of response.
Analysis of transcription factors revealed overrepresentation of the same
families of transcription factors (13 in the LNCaP cells; 12 in the U937
cells) among the genes differentially regulated by PMA and bryo 1. These
included AP2F, E2F, EGRF, KLF, NRF1, SP1F. However, the target genes of
the transcription factor families were largely different between the two
cell lines. The analysis of 45 signaling pathways using reporter assays
identified significant changes in 7 pathways induced both by PMA and bryo
1 at 6 hours. While the analysis of the microarray data is ongoing, we
conclude that early turn-off of the induced responses by bryo 1 is the
central feature accounting for its difference from PMA in its
transcriptional response. Understanding the basis for this transiency of
response may reveal a more general strategy for inhibition of PKC
pathways.

