Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase II study of first line chemotherapy with tegafur/uracil and
oral leucovorin in elderly patients with advanced or metastatic
colorectal cancer.


Objective: This phase II trial was performed to evaluate the efficacy and
tolerability of tegafur/uracil (UFT) and oral leucovorin (LV) in elderly
patients with advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer who had not
received prior chemotherapy. Methods: Patients aged 70 years were
eligible. UFT and LV were taken orally on days 1-28 of the cycle at doses
of 300 mg/m2/day and 75 mg/body/day, respectively. Treatment was
administered on an outpatient basis every 35 days and consisted of at
least two cycles until disease progression.Results: A total of 30
patients were enrolled in this study. The median age of the patients was
81.5 years (range: 74-88 years). The observed overall response rate was
17.9%. The estimated median overall survival time was 23.5 months. Two
patients (7%) experienced toxicities with a worst grade of 3, and one
patient (4%) experienced toxicities with a worst grade of 4. There were
no treatment-related deaths. No patients experienced grade 3 or 4
hematological adverse events.Conclusions: Although the response rate to
UFT/LV was moderate, a favorable survival time and good tolerability were
observed. UFT/LV can be one of the optional treatments for elderly
colorectal cancer patients.

