Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of STAT1 predicts outcome in prostate cancer patients at
diagnosis by regulating the proliferation of prostate epithelial cells.


Background. Dysregulation of STAT factors along with the negative
feedback regulators of the Janus-activated kinase (JAK)-STAT pathway,
such as members of the SOCS family have been implicated in prostate
cancer (PCa) cell growth and survival. Although STAT3 involvement in PCa
has been extensively studied, little is known about the role of STAT1. In
this study, we aim to determine the clinical significance and functional
role of STAT1 expression in PCa.Material and Methods. STAT1 cytoplasmic,
nuclear and membrane expression in PCa epithelial cells, was measured by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) on 78 patients with hormone nave prostate
adenocarcinoma recruited at a referral centre between 1992 -2002.
Biochemical relapse, survival from biochemical relapse and
disease-specific survival according to high/low protein expression were
analysed using Kaplan-Meier methods. Significant findings were included
in a cox-regression model. Chi square test was used to assess
associations with clinical parameters and Pearson's rank correlation
coefficients (c.c) to assess association between protein expression. In
in vitro studies we assessed the role of STAT1 in PCa epithelial cell
(LNCaP and PC3) proliferation by wst-1 incorporation and real time
tracking of growth of cells using XCELLigence (Roche, UK), apoptosis by
DNA fragmentation and clonogenic capacity following transient silencing
of STAT1 with siRNA (SmartPool, Dharmacon, UK).Results. At diagnosis PCa
patients with low membrane expression of STAT1 had significantly shorter
time to biochemical relapse (3.8 vs 7.3 years, p=0.021) and overall
survival (6.62 vs 9.34 years, p=0.056). To test whether these results
stemmed from the functional role of STAT1 in regulating the proliferation
of prostate epithelial cells, we silenced STAT1 in PCa cell lines. STAT1
silencing resulted in a moderate increase in LNCaP cells (72h, control:
100 18 %; siRNA STAT1 treated: 114 4.5 %, n=3), however a very pronounced
increase was observed in the proliferation of PC3 cells (72h, control:
100 12.1 %; siRNA STAT1 treated: 177.4 38 %, n=4, pBackground.
Dysregulation of STAT factors along with the negative feedback regulators
of the Janus-activated kinase (JAK)-STAT pathway, such as members of the
SOCS family have been implicated in prostate cancer (PCa) cell growth and
survival. Although STAT3 involvement in PCa has been extensively studied,
little is known about the role of STAT1. In this study, we aim to
determine the clinical significance and functional role of STAT1
expression in PCa.Material and Methods. STAT1 cytoplasmic, nuclear and
membrane expression in PCa epithelial cells, was measured by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) on 78 patients with hormone nave prostate
adenocarcinoma recruited at a referral centre between 1992 -2002.
Biochemical relapse, survival from biochemical relapse and
disease-specific survival according to high/low protein expression were
analysed using Kaplan-Meier methods. Significant findings were included
in a cox-regression model. Chi square test was used to assess
associations with clinical parameters and Pearson's rank correlation
coefficients (c.c) to assess association between protein expression. In
in vitro studies we assessed the role of STAT1 in PCa epithelial cell
(LNCaP and PC3) proliferation by wst-1 incorporation and real time
tracking of growth of cells using XCELLigence (Roche, UK), apoptosis by
DNA fragmentation and clonogenic capacity following transient silencing
of STAT1 with siRNA (SmartPool, Dharmacon, UK).Results. At diagnosis PCa
patients with low membrane expression of STAT1 had significantly shorter
time to biochemical relapse (3.8 vs 7.3 years, p=0.021) and overall
survival (6.62 vs 9.34 years, p=0.056). To test whether these results
stemmed from the functional role of STAT1 in regulating the proliferation
of prostate epithelial cells, we silenced STAT1 in PCa cell lines. STAT1
silencing resulted in a moderate increase in LNCaP cells (72h, control:
100 18 %; siRNA STAT1 treated: 114 4.5 %, n=3), however a very pronounced
increase was observed in the proliferation of PC3 cells (72h, control:
100 12.1 %; siRNA STAT1 treated: 177.4 38 %, n=4, p<0.001). These results
were in accordance with data collected from XCELLigence showing increased
PC3 cell numbers in STAT1 silenced cells over 10 days. In clonogenic
assay an increased surviving fraction of cells was recorded after 10 days
of silecing the cells with STAT1 compared to control. Furthermore, there
was no significant change in apoptosis recorded in siRNA STAT1 treated
cells.Conclusion. Our results enable us to conclude that loss of STAT1
favors tumor formation in hormone naive PCa cells by leading to increased
proliferation of PCa cells. We are currently investigating downstream
transcription factors that STAT1 might employ in order to control the
proliferation of PCa cells.

