Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic landscape of copy number aberrations enables the
identification of oncogenic drivers in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Cancer is a genetic disease with frequent somatic alterations in DNA.
Study of recurrent copy number aberrations (CNAs) in human cancers would
enable the elucidation of disease mechanisms and the identification of
key oncogenic drivers with causal roles in oncogenesis. We have
comprehensively and systematically characterized CNAs and accompanied
gene expression changes in the tumors and their matched non-tumor liver
tissues from 286 hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. Our analysis
identified 29 recurrently amplified regions and 22 deleted regions with a
high level of copy number changes, harboring established oncogenes and
tumor suppressors, including CCND1, MET, CDKN2A and CDKN2B, as well as
many other genes not previously reported to be involved in liver
carcinogenesis. Pathway analysis of cis-acting genes in the amplification
and deletion peaks suggests the alterations of core cancer pathways,
including cell cycle, p53, PI3K, MAPK, Wnt and TGF signaling, in large
proportions of HCC patients. We further credentialed two candidate driver
genes, BCL9 and MTDH, from the recurrent focal amplification peaks and
showed that they play a significant role in HCC growth and survival. In
summary, we have demonstrated that characterizing the CNA landscape in
HCC will facilitate the understanding of disease mechanisms and the
identification of oncogenic drivers that may serve as potential
therapeutic targets for the treatment of this devastating disease.

