Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SEC11A contributes to malignant progression through promotion of
EGF and TGF- secretion in gastric cancer.


Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common human cancers. We
previously performed Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE) on four
primary GCs and identified several GC-specific genes. In the present
study, we have built an in-house oligonucleotide array on which 394 genes
selected based on our SAGE data and previously reported array data to
allow for the study of the genes that are most relevant to gastric
carcinogenesis. We focused on the SEC11A gene, which encodes SPC18
protein. SPC18 is one of the member of signal peptidase complex. SPC18
mRNA expression was measured by quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) in GC tissue samples.
Expression and distribution of SPC18 protein was investigated by
immunohistochemistry in two independent GC cohorts (Hiroshima cohort, n =
99 and Chiba cohort, n = 989). To determine the effect of SPC18 on cell
growth and invasiveness in vitro, MTT and Boyden chamber invasion assays
were performed. To evaluate the influence of SPC18 on cell growth in
vivo, GC cells were injected into SCID mice. The levels of TGF- and EGF
in media from the GC cells were measured by ELISA. Overexpression of
SEC11A mRNA was observed in 40% of GC cases by qRT-PCR.
Immunohistochemical analysis of SPC18 revealed that 26% of GC cases were
positive for SPC18 in Hiroshima cohort and 20% of GC cases were positive
for SPC18 in Chiba cohort. SPC18-positive GC cases showed poorer survival
than SPC18-negative GC cases in both Hiroshima cohort and Chiba cohort by
Kaplan-Meier analysis. Forced expression of SPC18 activates GC cell
growth in vitro and in vivo. The levels of TGF- and EGF in culture media
from GC cells were reduced by knockdown of SPC18. These results indicate
that SPC18 contributes to malignant progression through promotion of EGF
and TGF- secretion in GC.

