Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel ATP-competitive protein kinase D inhibitors: in vitro
characterization and SAR analysis.


Protein Kinase Ds (PKDs) are serine/threonine kinases targeted by the
second messenger diacylglycerol. The three isoforms of PKD (PKD1, PKD2,
and PKD3) have emerged as key mediators in diverse cellular processes
pertaining to cancer development including proliferation, apoptosis,
migration/invasion and angiogenesis. Potent and selective PKD inhibitors
are powerful tools in dissecting PKD-mediated cellular pathways and
promising leads for developing effective anticancer agents. From targeted
kinase inhibitor library screens we identified three highly potent novel
ATP-competitive PKD inhibitors, IKK 16, 1-naphthyl PP1 and SD 208 with in
vitro PKD inhibitory activity in low nanomolar range. All inhibitors
except IKK 16 showed high selectivity for PKD relative to the related
kinase family PKC and CAMK. When tested in LNCaP prostate cancer cells
the compounds inhibited phorbol ester-induced PKD1 activation in a
concentration dependent manner. SD 208 was found to be most specific for
PKD and it did not affect the PKC mediated trans-phosphorylation of PKD1
at S744/748. Importantly, 1-naphthyl PP1 and SD 208 potently blocked
prostate cancer cell proliferation and concentration-dependently induced
cell death. SAR analysis of SD 208 and 1-naphthyl PP1 led to
identification of key structural elements that are important for PKD
inhibitory activity. In summary, we have identified and evaluated a panel
of structurally divergent novel ATP-competitive PKD small molecule
inhibitors with potent PKD inhibitory activities that could be further
developed as potential antitumor agents in prostate cancer.

