Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new small molecule compound restoring p53 pathway induces cell
death via active p73 and degradation of mutant p53 in colorectal cancer
cells.


Tumor suppressor p53 is critical for protection against cancer. Over 50%
of human cancers harbor mutant p53 which is hyper-stabilized and blocks
p53 family member p73/p63 activity. Mutations not only abrogate the p53
tumor suppressor function, but also endow mutant p53 with
gain-of-function (GOF) as pro-oncogene which contributes to tumor
progression and chemotherapy resistance. Targeting mutant p53 to restore
the p53 pathway is a promising strategy for cancer therapy. Small
molecule restoring p53 pathway is mostly based on conformational change
in mutant p53 or upregulation of wild-type p53. It is barely reported
about small molecule compound with ability to both restore p53 pathway
and deplete mutant p53 GOF. In this study, we describe a new small
molecular compound, NCI-8 that specifically depletes mutant p53 protein
and activates p73 to induce p53 responsive transcriptional activity and
cell death in mutant p53 colorectal cancer cells. NCI-8 treatment
increased p53 responsive bioluminescence and p53 target gene expression
such as P21, Puma and DR5 specifically in mutant p53 colorectal cancer
cells. Accompanied with p53 pathway restoration, NCI-8 down-regulated
mutant p53 in cancer cells with no evident wild-type conformational
change in mutant p53. NCI-8- mediated down-regulation of mutant p53 was
rescued by MG132, a proteasome inhibitor and nutlin-3, an MDM2 inhibitor.
NCI-8 induced ubiquitination of mutant p53. Taken together these results
indicate that NCI-8 induces mutant p53 protein degradation via an
MDM2-mediated ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Further, we examined the role
of p73 in NCI-8 action to p53 pathway restoration. NCI-8 enhanced
p53-responsive bioluminescence with10-fold increase in cells
overexpressing p73, but only 2-fold increase in p53-overexpressing cells.
NCI-8- induced p53-responsive bioluminescence was significantly reduced
by knock-down of p73, but not by knock-down of mutant p53. Knock-down of
p73 significantly reduced NCI-8 induction of p53 target genes in mutant
p53 cancer cells. These results indicate that p73 is required for NCI-8
to restore the p53 pathway in mutant p53-expressing cancer cells.
Importantly, NCI-8 induced cell death in cancer cells, but not in normal
cells. No genotoxicity of NCI-8 was detected in cancer and normal cells.
Knock-down of p73 reduced cell apoptosis in mutant p53-expressing cancer
cells treated with NCI-8, while, overexpression of p73 sensitized these
cancer cells to NCI-8 induced cell death. Combination treatments
demonstrate that NCI-8 synergizes with CPT11chemotherapy to induce cell
death in mutant p53 colorectal cancer cells. These results suggest that
p53 pathway restoration and cell death induced by NCI-8 occur via
activation of p73 and depletion of mutant p53 GOF. NCI-8 is a promising
lead compound specifically targeting mutant p53 for the development of
new anti-cancer drugs.

