Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A model of RAS pathway in colorectal cancer elucidates molecular
traits and drug sensitivity: an integrated analysis of gene expression
from human tumors, mouse xenografts and the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
(CCLE).


Background: KRAS mutation status alone is an imperfect predictor of
response to anti-EGFR therapy in CRC, motivating efforts to identify
additional molecular traits for RAS pathway activity. This study aimed to
build a quantitative readout of RAS pathway activity to: (1) unravel
molecular surrogates of RAS activity (2) correlate in vitro drug
sensitivity in a large drug panel screen of cell lines and in xenografts
(3) improve prediction of Cetuximab response at the clinical
setting.Materials and Methods: The CRC data set used for model training
(KFSYSCC, n=290) will be made publicly available upon publication. The
following data sets were used for validation: TCGA CRC (n=148),
Khambata-Ford et al (n=68), Gaedcke, et al (n=65). Penalized logistic
regression (ElasticNet) was used to build a model of RAS pathway
activity. Drug sensitivity correlation between RAS model and IC50 of 21
drugs was evaluated in the entire panel of CRC cell lines (n=19) of the
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE). Xenograft data (n=54) was obtained
from Julien, et al, 2012.Results: (1) The prediction performance of our
model was remarkably robust in predicting KRAS mutated samples with AUCs
of 0.82, 0.80, 0.78, 0.90 for KFSYSCC (internal validation), TCGA,
Khambata-Ford, and Gaedcke, respectively. Moreover, samples with an NRAS
and BRAF mutation had a higher RAS pathway readout compared to wild-type
(p Background: KRAS mutation status alone is an imperfect predictor of
response to anti-EGFR therapy in CRC, motivating efforts to identify
additional molecular traits for RAS pathway activity. This study aimed to
build a quantitative readout of RAS pathway activity to: (1) unravel
molecular surrogates of RAS activity (2) correlate in vitro drug
sensitivity in a large drug panel screen of cell lines and in xenografts
(3) improve prediction of Cetuximab response at the clinical
setting.Materials and Methods: The CRC data set used for model training
(KFSYSCC, n=290) will be made publicly available upon publication. The
following data sets were used for validation: TCGA CRC (n=148),
Khambata-Ford et al (n=68), Gaedcke, et al (n=65). Penalized logistic
regression (ElasticNet) was used to build a model of RAS pathway
activity. Drug sensitivity correlation between RAS model and IC50 of 21
drugs was evaluated in the entire panel of CRC cell lines (n=19) of the
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE). Xenograft data (n=54) was obtained
from Julien, et al, 2012.Results: (1) The prediction performance of our
model was remarkably robust in predicting KRAS mutated samples with AUCs
of 0.82, 0.80, 0.78, 0.90 for KFSYSCC (internal validation), TCGA,
Khambata-Ford, and Gaedcke, respectively. Moreover, samples with an NRAS
and BRAF mutation had a higher RAS pathway readout compared to wild-type
(p < 1e-08 and p Background: KRAS mutation status alone is an imperfect
predictor of response to anti-EGFR therapy in CRC, motivating efforts to
identify additional molecular traits for RAS pathway activity. This study
aimed to build a quantitative readout of RAS pathway activity to: (1)
unravel molecular surrogates of RAS activity (2) correlate in vitro drug
sensitivity in a large drug panel screen of cell lines and in xenografts
(3) improve prediction of Cetuximab response at the clinical
setting.Materials and Methods: The CRC data set used for model training
(KFSYSCC, n=290) will be made publicly available upon publication. The
following data sets were used for validation: TCGA CRC (n=148),
Khambata-Ford et al (n=68), Gaedcke, et al (n=65). Penalized logistic
regression (ElasticNet) was used to build a model of RAS pathway
activity. Drug sensitivity correlation between RAS model and IC50 of 21
drugs was evaluated in the entire panel of CRC cell lines (n=19) of the
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE). Xenograft data (n=54) was obtained
from Julien, et al, 2012.Results: (1) The prediction performance of our
model was remarkably robust in predicting KRAS mutated samples with AUCs
of 0.82, 0.80, 0.78, 0.90 for KFSYSCC (internal validation), TCGA,
Khambata-Ford, and Gaedcke, respectively. Moreover, samples with an NRAS
and BRAF mutation had a higher RAS pathway readout compared to wild-type
(p < 1e-08 and p < 2e-04, respectively), while PIK3CA mutated/KRAS wt
samples were not significantly different from wild-type (TCGA CRC
cohort). (2) Applying our model to the CCLE drug sensitivity panel, we
were able to predict sensitivity to the experimental MEK inhibitors
PD-0325901 and AZD6244 (p .1) This result was confirmed in a mouse
xenograft experiment, where KRAS+ mice treated with AZD6244 (n=2)
reported a lower RAS readout score compared to control (n=3, p=.08) (3)
On a large mouse xenograft cohort derived from human CRC (n=54), our
model accurately predicted response to Cetuximab (p .1). Finally,
analyzing the Khambata-Ford cohort (metastatic CRC patients treated with
Cetuximab, n= 57), we were able to predict drug response (AUC=.75) more
accurately than KRAS status (AUC=.70). Interestingly, our model correctly
identified 5 out of the 6 KRAS mutant patients who benefited from
Cetuximab treatment (p .1). Finally, analyzing the Khambata-Ford cohort
(metastatic CRC patients treated with Cetuximab, n= 57), we were able to
predict drug response (AUC=.75) more accurately than KRAS status
(AUC=.70). Interestingly, our model correctly identified 5 out of the 6
KRAS mutant patients who benefited from Cetuximab treatment (p <
.05).Conclusion: We provide a gene expression model of the RAS pathway in
CRC, suitable for robust interrogation of pathway activity in cell lines,
xenografts, and human tumors. The promising utility of our model for
predicting response to both Cetuximab and MEK inhibitors warrants further
studies to confirm at the clinical setting.

