Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: hTERT inhibition stimulates cyclooxygenase2 (COX2) expression in
cancer cells and synergizes with celecoxib to exert anti-cancer effects.


Telomerase and telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) confer cancer
cells sustained proliferation and survival potentials through telomere
lengthening dependent and independent activities. Targeting telomerase or
hTERT is thus a novel anti-cancer strategy. However, telomerase/hTERT
inhibition alone has minimal clinical efficacy. We explored the
relationship between hTERT and oncogenic cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) and
evaluated the synergistic anti-cancer effects of targeting both hTERT and
COX2. hTERT depletion in gastric and cervical cancer cells led to robust
increases in mRNA and protein levels of COX2. The COX2 promoter activity
increased substantially in hTERT-depleted cancer cells. Mechanistically,
hTERT depletion led to the activation of p38 MAPK that was responsible
for the stimulation of COX2 gene transcription. hTERT depletion or the
COX2 inhibitor celecoxib alone did not affect gastric cancer cell
survival, while their combination synergistically killed them both in
vitro and in vivo. Taken together, hTERT induces COX2 expression in
cancer cells and simultaneously targeting hTERT and COX2 synergistically
kills cancer cells, which may help path a new avenue in telomerase-based
cancer therapeutics.Citation Format: Tiantian Liu, Magnus Bjrkholm, Dawei
Xu. hTERT inhibition stimulates cyclooxygenase2 (COX2) expression in
cancer cells and synergizes with celecoxib to exert anti-cancer effects.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 582.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-582

