Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EBV infection of mammary epithelial cells promotes malignant
transformation.


Whether the human tumor virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) promotes breast
cancers remains controversial and a potential mechanism has remained
elusive. Herein we show EBV binds mammary epithelial cells (MECs) via
CD21 and upon establishing a persistent infection triggers expansion of
MEC progenitor cells (CD24low/CD44high), increases mammosphere formation,
blocks differentiation and in conjunction with activated Ras accelerates
formation of breast cancers in NOD/SCID mice. Similar to nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC), breast cancers derived from EBV-infected and
Ras-transduced MECs exhibited a latency II pattern infection (LMP1 high,
LMP2A positive) with a significant number of lytic transcripts. A human
gene expression signature for EBVness was derived from these tumors and
application to publicly available data sets of breast cancer patients
showed EBVness was - associated with high grade (40 vs 13.5%)
estrogen-receptor (ER)-negative status (31.8 vs. 10.5%), p53 mutation
(37.5 vs 14.5%) and poor survival.Citation Format: Hai Hu, Gerburg Wulf,
Ashish Juvekar, Dirk P Dittmer, Joyce Fingeroth. EBV infection of mammary
epithelial cells promotes malignant transformation. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4781.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4781

