Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deaths due to smoking in a population where women started to smoke
as teenagers: Nationally representative prospective cohort study.


Background: Recent studies suggest that the population attributable
fraction (PAF) of mortality due to smoking is larger than previously
reported. We wanted to examine the effect of smoking on all-cause and
cause-specific mortality and calculate the corresponding PAF in the
Norwegian Women and Cancer Study, a nationally representative prospective
cohort study.Methods: We followed 85,320 women, aged 31-70 years, who
completed a questionnaire in 1991-1997, through linkages to national
registries through December 2008. Questionnaire data included information
on lifestyle factors, including lifetime history of smoking. Poisson
regression models were fitted to estimate relative risk s (RR) with 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) adjusting for age, birth cohort, education,
alcohol consumption and body mass index, all at enrollment. During a mean
follow-up time of 14 years 2,842 deaths occurred. Compared with that of
never smokers, current smokers had a mortality rate that was double
(RR=2.38; 95% CI 2.17-2.62) from deaths overall, triple (RR=3.32; 95% CI
2.27-4.85) from cerebrovascular diseases, almost four fold (RR=3.71; 95%
CI 2.21-6.21) from myocardial infarction (MI), twelve times (RR=12.26;
95% CI 7.89-19.07) from lung cancer and seventeen times (RR=17.08; 95% CI
5.98-48.81) from chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases . The
attributable fraction and the PAF of mortality due to smoking was 47% and
30%, respectively Conclusions: We find that one in two deaths among ever
smokers, and one in three deaths among middle aged women in Norway can be
attributed to smoking. Our results may be generalizable to populations
where women start to smoke as teenagers.

