Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hsp90 inhibitor AUY922 abrogates mTOR inhibitor AZD8055-induced
up-regulation of HER2/HER3 and potentiates antiproliferative activity in
human breast cancer cells.


Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) has been validated as a promising
target for cancer therapy. Several mTOR kinase inhibitors displaying
potent antitumor activity due to their capability to inhibit both mTORC1
and mTORC2 have entered clinical trials. It has been recently reported
that long term inhibition of mTOR led to activation of upstream receptor
tyrosine kinases and Akt, which may attenuate the efficacy of mTOR kinase
inhibitors. As a number of receptor tyrosine kinases and AKT are client
proteins of Hsp90, we hypothesized that combination of inhibitors
targeting mTOR and Hsp90 respectively would potentiate the anticancer
activity. By calculating the Combination Index, mTOR kinase inhibitor
AZD8055 and Hsp90 inhibitor AUY922 displayed synergistic effect against a
panel of human breast cancer cells irrespective their ER, HER2 or PI3K
status. The combination of sub-optimal concentration of these two drugs
exerted significant antiproliferative activity, which is associated with
enhanced cell cycle arrest but not induction of apoptosis.
Down-regulation of either raptor or rictor by specific shRNA reinforced
the antitumor activity of AUY922, indicating restraint of both mTORC1 and
mTORC2 contribute to the synergistic activity of AZD8055 with AUY922. In
T47D cells,long time exposure to AZD8055 led to restoration of
phosphorylated AKT at T308 and GSK3 at S9, indicating reactivation of
AKT, which was abrogated by AUY922 co-treatment. Moreover,
phosphorylation of AKT at S473 was more significantly inhibited when
cells were co-treated with AZD8055 and AUY922 than single agent
treatment. We further revealed that AUY922 prevented feedback activation
of PI3K upon AZD8055 treatment. As PI3K is not a client protein of Hsp90,
block of PI3K activation by AUY922 might be due to down-regulation of
upstream tyrosine kinase receptors. Accordingly, though the mRNA levels
of EGFR, HER2, HER3 and HER4 increased after either single agent
treatment or co-treatment, AUY922 not only inhibited the expression of
tested tyrosine kinases, but more importantly, abrogated activation of
HER2/HER3 induced by AZD8055 .In summary, the combination of catalytic
mTOR inhibitor and Hsp90 inhibitor demonstrated synergistic activity
against breast cancer cells, which is due to inhibition of tyrosine
kinases expression and abrogation of feedback activation of HER2/HER3. As
both AZD8055 and AUY922 are in clinical trials for breast cancer therapy,
this study established a mechanistic rationale for a combination approach
using AZD8255 and AUY922 in the treatment of breast cancer.

