Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of protein phosphatase 2A radiosensitizes pancreatic
cancer cells by modulation of CDC25C.


The combination of radiation with chemotherapy improves survival in
patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. However, the median
survival remains at approximately one year, and strategies to improve
upon chemoradiation therapy for pancreatic cancer are warranted. We
screened an 8,800 gene RNAi library in order to identify novel targets
for sensitization to chemoradiation. In MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer
cells, we found PPP2R1A, a scaffolding subunit of protein phosphatase 2A
(PP2A), among the top 5 identified targets. Thus, we went on to test the
ability of LB100 (Lixte Biotechnology, East Setauket, NY), a small
molecule PP2A inhibitor, to sensitize pancreatic cancer cells and tumors
to radiation. In both MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells, treatment with LB100
(3uM; 2 hours pre- and 48 hours post- radiation) caused significant (PThe
combination of radiation with chemotherapy improves survival in patients
with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. However, the median survival
remains at approximately one year, and strategies to improve upon
chemoradiation therapy for pancreatic cancer are warranted. We screened
an 8,800 gene RNAi library in order to identify novel targets for
sensitization to chemoradiation. In MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells, we
found PPP2R1A, a scaffolding subunit of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A),
among the top 5 identified targets. Thus, we went on to test the ability
of LB100 (Lixte Biotechnology, East Setauket, NY), a small molecule PP2A
inhibitor, to sensitize pancreatic cancer cells and tumors to radiation.
In both MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells, treatment with LB100 (3uM; 2 hours
pre- and 48 hours post- radiation) caused significant (P<0.05)
radiosensitization (similar to that observed with PPP2R1A siRNA) with
radiation enhancement ratios (ER) of 1.3 0.03 and 1.4 0.04, respectively.
Importantly, LB100 did not cause radiosensitization in normal small
intestine cells. Because PP2A regulates intermediates in the DNA damage
response, we investigated several of these known PP2A substrates. We
found, that treatment with LB100 in combination with radiation caused an
increase in pCDC25C (T130, an activating phosphorylation), which was
associated with decreased pCDK1 (Y15, an inhibitory phosphorylation). To
begin to determine whether CDC25C modulation was responsible for the
observed radiosensitization by LB100, we depleted CDC25C from MiaPaCa-2
cells and assessed radiosensitization in response to LB100. We found that
CDC25C siRNA partially rescued LB100-mediated radiosensitization in
MiaPaCa-2 cells (ER: control siRNA+LB100 1.32 0.03; CDC25C siRNA + LB100
1.16 0.03, PThe combination of radiation with chemotherapy improves
survival in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. However,
the median survival remains at approximately one year, and strategies to
improve upon chemoradiation therapy for pancreatic cancer are warranted.
We screened an 8,800 gene RNAi library in order to identify novel targets
for sensitization to chemoradiation. In MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer
cells, we found PPP2R1A, a scaffolding subunit of protein phosphatase 2A
(PP2A), among the top 5 identified targets. Thus, we went on to test the
ability of LB100 (Lixte Biotechnology, East Setauket, NY), a small
molecule PP2A inhibitor, to sensitize pancreatic cancer cells and tumors
to radiation. In both MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells, treatment with LB100
(3uM; 2 hours pre- and 48 hours post- radiation) caused significant
(P<0.05) radiosensitization (similar to that observed with PPP2R1A siRNA)
with radiation enhancement ratios (ER) of 1.3 0.03 and 1.4 0.04,
respectively. Importantly, LB100 did not cause radiosensitization in
normal small intestine cells. Because PP2A regulates intermediates in the
DNA damage response, we investigated several of these known PP2A
substrates. We found, that treatment with LB100 in combination with
radiation caused an increase in pCDC25C (T130, an activating
phosphorylation), which was associated with decreased pCDK1 (Y15, an
inhibitory phosphorylation). To begin to determine whether CDC25C
modulation was responsible for the observed radiosensitization by LB100,
we depleted CDC25C from MiaPaCa-2 cells and assessed radiosensitization
in response to LB100. We found that CDC25C siRNA partially rescued
LB100-mediated radiosensitization in MiaPaCa-2 cells (ER: control
siRNA+LB100 1.32 0.03; CDC25C siRNA + LB100 1.16 0.03, P<0.05) and
rescued pCDK1 (Y15) levels in response to LB100+radiation treatment. To
test the ability of LB100 to sensitize in vivo, mice bearing MiaPaCa-2
xenografts were treated with LB100 (1.5mg/kg) followed 2 hours later by
radiation (1.2Gy/fraction) Mon-Fri for 2 cycles. Treatment with LB100
caused minimal weight loss (The combination of radiation with
chemotherapy improves survival in patients with locally advanced
pancreatic cancer. However, the median survival remains at approximately
one year, and strategies to improve upon chemoradiation therapy for
pancreatic cancer are warranted. We screened an 8,800 gene RNAi library
in order to identify novel targets for sensitization to chemoradiation.
In MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells, we found PPP2R1A, a scaffolding
subunit of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), among the top 5 identified
targets. Thus, we went on to test the ability of LB100 (Lixte
Biotechnology, East Setauket, NY), a small molecule PP2A inhibitor, to
sensitize pancreatic cancer cells and tumors to radiation. In both
MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells, treatment with LB100 (3uM; 2 hours pre- and
48 hours post- radiation) caused significant (P<0.05) radiosensitization
(similar to that observed with PPP2R1A siRNA) with radiation enhancement
ratios (ER) of 1.3 0.03 and 1.4 0.04, respectively. Importantly, LB100
did not cause radiosensitization in normal small intestine cells. Because
PP2A regulates intermediates in the DNA damage response, we investigated
several of these known PP2A substrates. We found, that treatment with
LB100 in combination with radiation caused an increase in pCDC25C (T130,
an activating phosphorylation), which was associated with decreased pCDK1
(Y15, an inhibitory phosphorylation). To begin to determine whether
CDC25C modulation was responsible for the observed radiosensitization by
LB100, we depleted CDC25C from MiaPaCa-2 cells and assessed
radiosensitization in response to LB100. We found that CDC25C siRNA
partially rescued LB100-mediated radiosensitization in MiaPaCa-2 cells
(ER: control siRNA+LB100 1.32 0.03; CDC25C siRNA + LB100 1.16 0.03,
P<0.05) and rescued pCDK1 (Y15) levels in response to LB100+radiation
treatment. To test the ability of LB100 to sensitize in vivo, mice
bearing MiaPaCa-2 xenografts were treated with LB100 (1.5mg/kg) followed
2 hours later by radiation (1.2Gy/fraction) Mon-Fri for 2 cycles.
Treatment with LB100 caused minimal weight loss (<10%) and a significant
delay in the time required for tumor volume doubling relative to
radiation alone (LB100+radiation 34 days; radiation 24 days; PThe
combination of radiation with chemotherapy improves survival in patients
with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. However, the median survival
remains at approximately one year, and strategies to improve upon
chemoradiation therapy for pancreatic cancer are warranted. We screened
an 8,800 gene RNAi library in order to identify novel targets for
sensitization to chemoradiation. In MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells, we
found PPP2R1A, a scaffolding subunit of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A),
among the top 5 identified targets. Thus, we went on to test the ability
of LB100 (Lixte Biotechnology, East Setauket, NY), a small molecule PP2A
inhibitor, to sensitize pancreatic cancer cells and tumors to radiation.
In both MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells, treatment with LB100 (3uM; 2 hours
pre- and 48 hours post- radiation) caused significant (P<0.05)
radiosensitization (similar to that observed with PPP2R1A siRNA) with
radiation enhancement ratios (ER) of 1.3 0.03 and 1.4 0.04, respectively.
Importantly, LB100 did not cause radiosensitization in normal small
intestine cells. Because PP2A regulates intermediates in the DNA damage
response, we investigated several of these known PP2A substrates. We
found, that treatment with LB100 in combination with radiation caused an
increase in pCDC25C (T130, an activating phosphorylation), which was
associated with decreased pCDK1 (Y15, an inhibitory phosphorylation). To
begin to determine whether CDC25C modulation was responsible for the
observed radiosensitization by LB100, we depleted CDC25C from MiaPaCa-2
cells and assessed radiosensitization in response to LB100. We found that
CDC25C siRNA partially rescued LB100-mediated radiosensitization in
MiaPaCa-2 cells (ER: control siRNA+LB100 1.32 0.03; CDC25C siRNA + LB100
1.16 0.03, P<0.05) and rescued pCDK1 (Y15) levels in response to
LB100+radiation treatment. To test the ability of LB100 to sensitize in
vivo, mice bearing MiaPaCa-2 xenografts were treated with LB100
(1.5mg/kg) followed 2 hours later by radiation (1.2Gy/fraction) Mon-Fri
for 2 cycles. Treatment with LB100 caused minimal weight loss (<10%) and
a significant delay in the time required for tumor volume doubling
relative to radiation alone (LB100+radiation 34 days; radiation 24 days;
P<0.05) and was associated with accumulation of pCDC25C (T130) and a
corresponding decrease in pCDK1 (Y15) in tumor cells. Collectively, these
data demonstrate that inhibition of PP2A induces radiosensitization in
pancreatic cancer cells and tumors in part via modulation of CDC25C.
Future studies will address the functional consequences of modulation of
CDC25C and CDK1 by LB100 which lead to radiosensitization.

