Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Joint effect of arsenic exposure and vascular endothelial growth
factor polymorphisms on urothelial carcinoma risk.


Arsenic exposure is a major environmental risk factor for Urothelial
carcinoma (UC) which includes cancers of bladder, renal pelvis and ureter
(upper urinary tract). Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an
important factor in angiogenesis which plays a critical role in various
malignancies including UC. The aim of this study is to investigate the
joint effect of arsenic exposure and VEGF polymorphisms on UC risk. A
hospital-based case-control study consisted of 730 histologically
confirmed UC cases and 850 age-matched cancer-free controls were
recruited from September 1998 to December 2009. Polymorphisms in VEGF
gene was determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment
length polymorphism. The joint effects on UC risk were estimated by odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) using unconditional
multivariate logistic regression. Subjects with high arsenic exposure had
significantly increased risks of 2.4 and 2.5 for bladder cancer and upper
urinary tract UC (UUTUC), respectively. A significantly higher UUTUC risk
of 1.7 was found in those with one or more risk genotypes of VEGF gene.
Individuals with high arsenic exposure who carried one or more risk
genotypes of VEGF gene had significantly increased risks of 2.9 (95%
CI=1.8-4.7) and 4.2 (95% CI=2.3-7.7) for bladder cancer and UUTUC,
respectively. The UUTUC cases with high arsenic exposure carrying one or
more risk genotypes of VEGF gene had a higher risk of advanced tumor
stage. Our findings suggest that the joint effect of arsenic exposure and
risk genotypes of VEGF gene is relatively predominant in UUTUC than in
bladder cancer. Keywords: Arsenic, Bladder cancer, Upper urinary tract,
Urothelial carcinoma, Vascular endothelial growth factor

