Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significant protection against gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic
cancer cells with tumor lysate vaccine, engineered to express -gal
epitopes.


Gemcitabine(Gem)-based chemotherapy is typically offered as a standard
care of pancreatic cancer (PC) patients. However most of patients do not
survive longer than 6 months, as the PC cells are naturally resistant to
current chemotherapy. New therapeutic approaches need to be encouraged.
Human natural anti-Gal is an IgG known to be presented in large amounts
(1% of circulating IgG) in normal subjects and cancer patients. Anti-Gal
specifically interacts with -gal epitopes (Gal1, 3Gal1, 4GlcNAc-R),
synthesized by 1, 3 galactosyltransferase (1, 3GT) on cell surface
glycolipids and glycoproteins. We previously showed the in vitro and in
vivo effectiveness of new immunotherapy by vaccination with whole PC
cells, expressing -gal epitopes (Cancer Res; 70(13); 5259-69, 2010). For
the clinical development, we proposed that tumor lysate is a suitable
source of tumor-associated antigens (TAAs), because it contains several
known as well as unknown TAAs that could elicit an anti-tumor immune
response against heterogeneous PC cell populations, including
Gem-resistant PC cells (Gem-resi cells). In this study, we investigate
whether vaccination by PC tumor lysate, expressing-gal epitopes can
efficiently induce anti-tumor response against both PC cells and gem-resi
cells. A human PC cell line, PANC1 was transfected by 1,3GT gene (-gal
PANC1), 2106 of either parental or -gal PANC1 were injected s.c. into
NOD/SCID mice. The grown PANC1 tumors were enucleated and homogenized.
1,3GT KO mice were pre-immunized with pig tissues to produce anti-Gal in
their sera like human. These mice were vaccinated intraperitoneally by 10
mg of either parental (control group) or -gal PANC1 tumor lysate (-gal
group). Tumor lysate of parental PANC1 lacked of -gal epitopes and it of
-gal PANC1 expressed 40 106 of these epitopes per 1mg of lysate. To
demonstrate in vivo tumor destruction, an animal model was performed.
Splenocytes from vaccinated KO mice were prepared, and these cells were
transferred ip (30106 cells/ip 3 times) into NOD/SCID mice. Transferred
mice were challenged with S.C. injection by either 1107 of live PANC1 or
gem-resi PANC1. PANC1 tumors in mice transferred from parental group
reached the size of 100 mm2 at 40.3 days after injection. For tumors in
mice from -gal group, regrowth of tumor was completely prevented.
Survival of -gal transferred mice was prolonged [-gal vs. parental:
82.521.9 vs. 48.06.7 days, pGemcitabine(Gem)-based chemotherapy is
typically offered as a standard care of pancreatic cancer (PC) patients.
However most of patients do not survive longer than 6 months, as the PC
cells are naturally resistant to current chemotherapy. New therapeutic
approaches need to be encouraged. Human natural anti-Gal is an IgG known
to be presented in large amounts (1% of circulating IgG) in normal
subjects and cancer patients. Anti-Gal specifically interacts with -gal
epitopes (Gal1, 3Gal1, 4GlcNAc-R), synthesized by 1, 3
galactosyltransferase (1, 3GT) on cell surface glycolipids and
glycoproteins. We previously showed the in vitro and in vivo
effectiveness of new immunotherapy by vaccination with whole PC cells,
expressing -gal epitopes (Cancer Res; 70(13); 5259-69, 2010). For the
clinical development, we proposed that tumor lysate is a suitable source
of tumor-associated antigens (TAAs), because it contains several known as
well as unknown TAAs that could elicit an anti-tumor immune response
against heterogeneous PC cell populations, including Gem-resistant PC
cells (Gem-resi cells). In this study, we investigate whether vaccination
by PC tumor lysate, expressing-gal epitopes can efficiently induce
anti-tumor response against both PC cells and gem-resi cells. A human PC
cell line, PANC1 was transfected by 1,3GT gene (-gal PANC1), 2106 of
either parental or -gal PANC1 were injected s.c. into NOD/SCID mice. The
grown PANC1 tumors were enucleated and homogenized. 1,3GT KO mice were
pre-immunized with pig tissues to produce anti-Gal in their sera like
human. These mice were vaccinated intraperitoneally by 10 mg of either
parental (control group) or -gal PANC1 tumor lysate (-gal group). Tumor
lysate of parental PANC1 lacked of -gal epitopes and it of -gal PANC1
expressed 40 106 of these epitopes per 1mg of lysate. To demonstrate in
vivo tumor destruction, an animal model was performed. Splenocytes from
vaccinated KO mice were prepared, and these cells were transferred ip
(30106 cells/ip 3 times) into NOD/SCID mice. Transferred mice were
challenged with S.C. injection by either 1107 of live PANC1 or gem-resi
PANC1. PANC1 tumors in mice transferred from parental group reached the
size of 100 mm2 at 40.3 days after injection. For tumors in mice from
-gal group, regrowth of tumor was completely prevented. Survival of -gal
transferred mice was prolonged [-gal vs. parental: 82.521.9 vs. 48.06.7
days, p<0.0001]. For gem-resi tumors in mice from -gal group, regrowth of
them was markedly protected [size of 100 mm2; -gal vs. parental: 74.3 vs.
37.4 days]. Survival was prolonged [-gal vs. parental: 93.617.7
vs.46.27.3 days, p=0.0018]. In conclusion, immunotherapy with tumor
lysate vaccine, expressing -gal epitopes effectively targets both PC
cells and gem-resi cells and may provide PC cure by the elimination of
the replenishing pool of all PC cells.

