Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genome-wide contribution of microRNAs to gene regulation in
Ewing sarcoma.


The identification of microRNA (miR) targets within a given cellular
context still poses a largely unsolved problem. MiR targets are predicted
based on the presence of seed sequences in the 3'UTR of mRNAs. Target
candidate lists are filtered assuming mRNA destabilization, and validated
by artificially forcing ectopic expression of miR analogs, or by
interfering with miR expression by antagomirs. However, the expression
level and amplitude of physiological miR variations is much smaller than
experimentally induced miR perturbations. Crosslinking and immuno
precipitation (CLIP) followed by sequencing of bound RNA allows
monitoring of dynamic changes in miR/mRNA occupancy of RISC. However, it
is unclear if increased miR activity will lead to increased target read
counts due to elevated RISC occupancy or to decreased read counts as a
consequence of target destabilization.Ewing sarcoma (ES) expresses an
oncogenic transcription factor, EWS/FLI1.To study the impact of miRs to
the gene regulatory network downstream of EWS/FLI1, we used a combination
of mRNA and miR expression profiling, ChIP-seq, PAR-CLIP of AGO2, AGO2
knockdown, and SILAC monitoring of proteome changes in an inducible
EWS/FLI1 knockdown ES cell line. Our data suggest that EWS/FLI1 perturbs
gene regulation primarily on the transcriptional level and miRs play only
a modulatory role for gene expression. Furthermore EWS/FLI1 affects the
expression of many miR biogenesis and miR activity as well as RISC
associated proteins. Knockdown of EWS/FLI1 results in pronounced changes
of miR specific PAR-CLIP spectra. Disabled RISC activity lead to only
minor changes in genome-wide mRNA expression. Our results are consistent
with a complex role of the miRNome in the fine tuning of gene regulatory
networks in Ewing sarcoma.Supported by grants EU-FP7 259348 and Austrian
Science Fund FWF 24708-B21.

