Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequency and prognostic value of hormone receptor expression in
epithelial ovarian cancer.


Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the second most common and most
lethal gynecological cancer. High recurrence rate and poor prognosis
underline the need to explore targeted therapies. Potential targets
include hormone receptors (androgen receptor [AR], estrogen receptor
[ER], estrogen receptor [ER], and progesterone receptor [PR]). Clinical
studies have shown modest effects of endocrine agents in phase II
studies. Nevertheless, the role of hormones and their putative receptors
in OC remains largely unknown. To further probe their role, tumor
material for hormone receptor analysis was obtained from a group of
patients who were treated in a prospective clinical trial. Methods:
Between March 2003 and November 2008, 196 epithelial OC patients were
included in a prospective multicenter randomized controlled phase II
trial and assigned to carboplatin/docetaxel celecoxib. The majority
(92.5%) of patients had high-stage disease. Histologic material for
biomarker analysis was obtained from 121 patients. Histological subtypes
were serous (70%), endometrioid (17%), clearcell (9%), and mucinous (4%).
Mean PFS and OS were 16 and 32 months. Tissue micro arrays (4
cores/sample) were constructed and stained for AR, ER, ER, and PR and
scored semi-quantitatively by two independent observers. A cut-off of
>10% positive staining was used to dichotomize results. Receptor
expression was correlated to PFS and OS in uni- and multivariate analysis
(including age, FIGO stage, grade, histological subtype, and residual
disease after surgery). Results: Tumors were positive for AR, ER, ER, and
PR in 10%, 31%, 78%, and 21% of the cases. ER-positivity was
significantly correlated with ER-positivity (p = 0.021). Both ER- and
ER-positivity were significantly correlated with AR-positivity (p
Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the second most common and most
lethal gynecological cancer. High recurrence rate and poor prognosis
underline the need to explore targeted therapies. Potential targets
include hormone receptors (androgen receptor [AR], estrogen receptor
[ER], estrogen receptor [ER], and progesterone receptor [PR]). Clinical
studies have shown modest effects of endocrine agents in phase II
studies. Nevertheless, the role of hormones and their putative receptors
in OC remains largely unknown. To further probe their role, tumor
material for hormone receptor analysis was obtained from a group of
patients who were treated in a prospective clinical trial. Methods:
Between March 2003 and November 2008, 196 epithelial OC patients were
included in a prospective multicenter randomized controlled phase II
trial and assigned to carboplatin/docetaxel celecoxib. The majority
(92.5%) of patients had high-stage disease. Histologic material for
biomarker analysis was obtained from 121 patients. Histological subtypes
were serous (70%), endometrioid (17%), clearcell (9%), and mucinous (4%).
Mean PFS and OS were 16 and 32 months. Tissue micro arrays (4
cores/sample) were constructed and stained for AR, ER, ER, and PR and
scored semi-quantitatively by two independent observers. A cut-off of
>10% positive staining was used to dichotomize results. Receptor
expression was correlated to PFS and OS in uni- and multivariate analysis
(including age, FIGO stage, grade, histological subtype, and residual
disease after surgery). Results: Tumors were positive for AR, ER, ER, and
PR in 10%, 31%, 78%, and 21% of the cases. ER-positivity was
significantly correlated with ER-positivity (p = 0.021). Both ER- and
ER-positivity were significantly correlated with AR-positivity (p <0.001;
p = 0.041). From 67 patients, also tissue of synchronous omental
metastases was available. Gain of receptor expression was observed in
9-23% of the omental metastases compared to the primary tumor. Loss of
receptor expression was observed in 9-19%. In multivariate analysis, ER
staining of the primary tumor was associated with decreased PFS and OS
(HR 1.85, p = 0.073; HR 2.15, p = 0.048). Conclusion: We showed that
steroid receptors are present in a significant subpopulation of OC tumors
and have prognostic value. Based on literature they can serve as
potential targets for adjuvant and palliative endocrine therapy. Effects
of endocrine therapy can probably be improved by taking into account
heterogeneity of receptor expression. Evaluation of the predictive value
of hormone receptor expression for response to endocrine therapy in OC
therefore deserves further evaluation.

