Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch3 is a marker of tumor-propagating cells in non-small cell
lung cancer and is required for their self-renewal.


We investigated tumor cell heterogeneity in mouse models of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that recapitulate key genetic events in this
disease. In tumors driven by simultaneous expression of an oncogenic Kras
allele and loss of the tumor suppressor Trp53, only a relatively rare
subset of tumor cells is capable of propagating tumor growth in both a
clonogenic in vitro assay and an in vivo orthotopic transplantation
assay. The tumor-propagating cell (TPC) population was enriched by
sorting for the combination of the cell surface markers CD24, ITGB4 and
Notch(1-4). We demonstrate a critical and specific role for Notch3
signaling in the maintenance of TPCs in the KrasG12D; Trp53fl/fl mouse
model. Knock-down of Notch3, but not Notch 1, 2 or 4, decreased
self-renewal of TPCs in vitro. In addition, knock-down of Notch3 was
critical for tumor propagation in vivo. The relevance of these studies to
human NSCLC was confirmed by demonstrating a significant effect of Notch
inhibition on the self-renewal of primary human lung adenocarcinoma cells
in ex vivo cultures established directly from patients. These findings
identify a novel subpopulation of tumor cells with distinct functional
capabilities, underscoring the importance of interrogating heterogeneity
in NSCLC. The unique role of Notch3 in tumor propagation may provide a
novel therapeutic target for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer.

