Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ciglitazone increases ovarian cancer cell death by inhibiting
GLUT-1 expression.


Ciglitazone is a kind of thiazolidinedione and a potent, selective
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR ) ligand and it is
active in vivo as an anti-hyperglycemic agent in the murine model.
Glucose metabolism plays a key role in the maintenance of energy
homeostasis in organisms and changes in cellular glucose uptake rate are
found in malignant diseases. Significant increase in glucose consumption
can be found in many malignant conditions and research so far has focused
on its apoptotic and inhibition of proliferation properties but their
role in cell death is unclear. We show that ciglitazone inhibits glucose
uptake in ovarian cancer cell through GLUT-1 expression. In this study,
we investigated the effect of ciglitazone to GLUT-1 expression and cell
proliferation. We further demonstrate that ciglitazone pretreated tumor
cell was increased apoptosis dose dependent manner and siGLUT-1 treated
tumor cell showed increased apoptosis. Interestingly, not only cancer
cell line but also in vivo state, ciglitazone could decrease tumor
mass.Specificity protein (Sp) is highly expressed in tissues of prostate
cancer, breast carcinomas and lung cancer when compared to normal tissues
or cells. Previous studies showed that Sp1 plays an important role in
carcinogenesis and metastasis of several human tumor types by regulating
growth-related signal transduction, cell cycle control molecules,
apoptosis, oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes. In this study there was no
relation with apoptosis and SP1 expression. We demonstreated that
ciglitazone inhibit glucose uptake in ovarian cancer cell lines and the
relationship between ciglitazone and GLUT-1 in ciglitazone induced cell
death.

