Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGSF4 methylation is an independent marker of HPV positive OPSCC.


Human papilloma virus (HPV) is a known causative agent for oropharyngeal
squamous cell cancer (OPSCC). The goal of our study was to determine the
relationship of HPV type 16 (HPV16) infection and methylation status in
an OPSCC cohort. HPV16 was detected using real-time quantitative PCR
(qPCR) in a retrospective cohort of 111 primary OPSCC. A 24 tumor
suppressor gene candidate panel was assessed for methylation using the
methylation specific-multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
(MS-MLPA) assay. Univariate associations with HPV and gene methylation,
age, gender, race and smoking were analyzed using Fisher's exact tests
and logistic regression. A final multiple logistic regression model, to
include patient characteristics and genes significant on univariate
analysis, was built using backwards selection of genes. Statistical
significance was set at pHuman papilloma virus (HPV) is a known causative
agent for oropharyngeal squamous cell cancer (OPSCC). The goal of our
study was to determine the relationship of HPV type 16 (HPV16) infection
and methylation status in an OPSCC cohort. HPV16 was detected using
real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) in a retrospective cohort of 111
primary OPSCC. A 24 tumor suppressor gene candidate panel was assessed
for methylation using the methylation specific-multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) assay. Univariate
associations with HPV and gene methylation, age, gender, race and smoking
were analyzed using Fisher's exact tests and logistic regression. A final
multiple logistic regression model, to include patient characteristics
and genes significant on univariate analysis, was built using backwards
selection of genes. Statistical significance was set at p<0.05 and all
analyses were done using SAS 9.2. In univariate analyses, Caucasian
American (CA) OPSCC were more likely to be HPV positive as compared to
African American (AA) OPSCC (OR=3.01, 95% CI 1.28, 7.07, p=0.011). Also,
smoking (never vs current) [OR=3.60 (1.06, 12.24), p=0.04], and TIMP3,
DAPK1, ESR1, and IGSF4 were associated with HPV positive status (OR=5.03,
p=0.021; OR=3.71, p=0.04; OR=5.03, p=0.021; OR=7.68, p=0.012,
respectively). The final model, after controlling for patient
characteristics and after backward elimination of genes, indicated IGSF4
methylation is an independent predictor of HPV positive status [OR=7.07
(1.22, 40.79), p=0.029]. HPV infection status is independently associated
with methylation of IGSF4, indicating interplay of DNA methylation and
HPV in OPSCC pathogenesis.

