Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Punctuated evolution of prostate cancer genomes.


The analysis of exonic DNA from prostate cancers has identified
recurrently mutated genes, but the spectrum of alterations across the
entire genome has not been profiled extensively in this disease. We
sequenced the genomes of 55 primary prostate tumors and matched normal
tissues to catalogue somatic alterations and to study how they accumulate
during oncogenesis and progression. By implementing an algorithm to
identify genomic alterations that arise together, we found abundant sets
of DNA rearrangements and deletions that may occur simultaneously in a
single cell. This phenomenon, which we term chromoplexy," frequently
accounts for the dysregulation of prostate cancer genes including PTEN,
NKX3-1, TP53 and CDKN1B. The somatic fusion of TMPRSS2 and ERG, which
occurs in approximately half of prostate cancers, predominantly arises
with additional genomic rearrangements in the context of chromoplexy. We
further demonstrate that TMPRSS2-ERG fusion-positive tumors display a
unique profile of chromoplexy, with complex chains of rearrangements that
may fuse DNA from four or more distinct chromosomes.In prostate cancer
and other neoplasms, chromoplexy induces considerable genomic derangement
in a series of relatively few events. In several instances, multiple
cancer genes from non-contiguous regions of the genome appear to be
disrupted simultaneously by this process, suggesting a model of
punctuated progression during cancer evolution. By characterizing the
clonal hierarchy of genomic lesions in prostate tumors, we constructed a
path of oncogenic events along which chromoplexy drives prostate
carcinogenesis.

