Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of 14-3-3zeta impairs oncogene-induced mammary tumorigenesis
and metastasis.


The 14-3-3 family proteins are highly conserved in eukaryotes and can
interact with signaling proteins by binding phosphorylated Ser/Thr
motifs. Studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that 14-3-3zeta is
overexpressed in greater than 40% of breast cancer patients and is a
strong indicator of poor patient prognosis, however the role of
14-3-3zeta in an in vivo context, especially its role in cancer, remains
to be examined. We generated a 14-3-3zeta knockout mouse model to
characterize the role of 14-3-3zeta in breast cancer progression. Loss of
14-3-3zeta resulted in neonatal lethality in the C57Bl/6 genetic
background due to respiratory failure. Outbreeding to CD-1 or
backcrossing to FVB/N background rescued the neonatal lethality. Crossing
14-3-3zeta knockout mice with MMTV-PyMT and MMTV-neu transgenic mice
revealed that loss of 14-3-3zeta prolonged tumor latency and reduced lung
metastasis as compared to MMTV-PyMT and MMTV-neu mice. Mechanistically,
loss of 14-3-3zeta suppressed tumor proliferation and angiogenesis and
promoted apoptosis. Reverse phase protein array analysis suggested that
loss of 14-3-3zeta suppressed the Akt and Erk pathway and upregulated the
expression of the tumor suppressor p53. Our results demonstrate an
important role for 14-3-3zeta in normal development and cancer.
Additionally our 14-3-3zeta knockout mouse model will also enable future
studies on the role of 14-3-3zeta in other physiological and pathological
processes.

