Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cigarette smoke induces TNF- secretion from macrophages through a
pathway consisting of PPAR, MUC1, ERK and JNK.


The glycoprotein Mucin 1 (MUC1 in human and Muc1 in animals) is expressed
in the lung and has been shown to be associated with lung carcinogenesis.
Recently we have found that cigarette smoke (CS) significantly increased
MUC1 expression in mouse lung macrophages and that MUC1 is required for
CS-induced tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-) secretion from macrophages.
Because CS potently elicits chronic pulmonary inflammation that is
important for the development of lung cancer, we investigated the cell
signaling pathways for CS-induced MUC1 expression and MUC1-mediated TNF-
secretion in macrophages using an in vitro model. The results showed
that: CS extract (CSE) strongly induced MUC1 expression at both the mRNA
and protein levels; Suppression of PPAR effectively blocked CSE-induced
MUC1 expression in THP1 cells, suggesting CSE induces MUC1 expression
through PPAR-mediated transcription; The induction of TNF- expression was
effectively blocked when ERK and JNK were blocked, suggesting these
pathways are involved in CSE-induced TNF- expression in macrophages;
Knockdown of MUC1 significantly suppressed CSE-induced ERK and JNK
activation; and Suppression of PPAR that effectively blocked CSE-induced
MUC1 expression also inhibited CSE-induced TNF- secretion from
macrophages. Thus, our results suggest a possible involvement of a
signaling pathway consisting of PPAR, MUC1 and ERK/JNK for CSE-induced
TNF- secretion from macrophages that may contribute to
inflammation-associated lung cancer development. Note: This work is
supported by the NIH/NIEHS grant 1R01ES017328.

