Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BROMOscan - a high throughput, quantitative ligand binding
platform identifies best-in-class bromodomain inhibitors from a screen of
mature compounds targeting other protein classes.


Post-translationally appended acetyllysine marks on histone tails are key
regulatory features of the epigenetic code. Bromodomains are readers of
this specific lysine acetylation code, playing an important role in
chromatin remodeling and regulation of gene expression. Bromodomains have
emerged as an important new druggable target class in small-molecule
inhibitor drug discovery, and several bromodomain-containing proteins
have been associated with disease. There are 57 bromodomains contained in
41 different proteins; however, few small molecule bromodomain inhibitors
have been reported. One primary factor limiting the discovery of new
inhibitors is the absence of a comprehensive biochemical bromodomain
screening platform. Here we describe the application of DiscoveRx
Corporation's proven ligand binding assay technology (KINOMEscan) to the
development of quantitative ligand binding assays for human bromodomains
(BROMOscan). We have developed a carefully validated assay panel that
covers >30 percent of the human bromodomain family, and this panel is
suitable for HTS, selectivity profiling, and quantitative affinity (Kd)
assessment. We have used this panel internally to identify novel
bromodomain inhibitors and, remarkably, have demonstrated that known,
mature inhibitors thought to be selective for targets from other protein
families have best in class affinity for bromodomains as well. These data
shall be presented, as will a description of the BROMOscan panel replete
with extensive assay validation data.

