Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxic effect of photosensitive fluorescent protein
KillerRed-expressing adenovirus against human cancer cells.


Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is an anticancer therapy to induce
tumor-specific cytotoxicity by accumulation of photosensitizers (PSs) and
following non-toxic light irradiation to tumor tissues. Non-toxic light
irradiation induces the PS-mediated generation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and subsequent cytotoxicity in tumor cells. For clinical
application, some kinds of PSs, such as photofrin and laserphyrin, are
intravenously injected before light irradiation in anticancer PDT.
However, the lack of sufficient and continuous accumulation of PSs in
tumor tissues makes difficult to eradicate tumor cells by PDT. Therefore,
the development of novel PSs that accumulate to tumor tissues more
efficiently and persistently is required to improve the antitumor effect
of PDT. A bioengineered fluorescent protein KillerRed has been previously
reported to generate ROS upon green light irradiation, suggesting a
potential of KillerRed fluorescent protein as a novel PS. We recently
confirmed that transient or stable transfection with KillerRed-expressing
plasmid vector efficiently suppressed the cell viability through
induction of ROS-mediated apoptosis in various types of human cancer
cells when combined with light irradiation. In this study, we constructed
non-replicative adenovirus expressing cytotoxic KillerRed (Ad-KillerRed)
or non-cytotoxic red fluorescent protein Katushka (Ad-Katushka). The
cytotoxic effect of these viruses was investigated in human cancer H1299,
HCT116 and HT29 cells in combination with light irradiation. Infection
with Ad-KillerRed or Ad-Katushka did not induce any cytotoxic effect in
human cancer cells without light irradiation. When combined with light
irradiation, human cancer cells infected with Ad-KillerRed, but not
Ad-Katushka, showed morphological change like round-shape. However, the
cell viability was not significantly suppressed in Ad-KillerRed-infected
cancer cells after light irradiation. These results suggest that
replication-competent adenovirus is necessary to efficiently induce
KillerRed-mediated cytotoxic effect in human cancer cells in combination
with light irradiation. Now we are planning to generate the
replication-competent oncolytic adenovirus expressing KillerRed and
investigate its antitumor effect on the in vitro and in vivo settings.

