Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression in childhood germ cell tumors (GCT).


Introduction: Childhood germ cell tumors (GCTs) are a rare, heterogeneous
group of malignancies classified together due to a common origin in the
primordial germ cell. Studies in adults and a mouse stem cell model
suggest microRNA (miRNA) expression may be involved in GCT etiology. We
evaluated whether miRNA expression differed in pediatric GCTs with
respect to tumor histology as well as by patient age at diagnosis and
sex.Methods: MiRNA expression was measured in 44 samples from 38
individuals (38 GCT and 6 normal adjacent) using the NCounter platform
(NanoString Technologies, Seattle, WA) which precisely quantifies
discrete counts up to 800 miRNAs by imaging color-coded molecular
barcodes. We compared miRNA expression across the main histologic
subtypes of GCT (8 yolk sac tumor (YST), 8 dysgerminoma, 8 immature
teratoma, and 10 mature teratoma) using NanoStride software, which
analyzes raw count data from NCounter to perform differential expression
analysis by employing the appropriate negative binomial distributional
assumption and Benjamini-Hochberg correction (BH) for multiple
testing.Results: Assessing all samples together, three miRNA species were
found to significantly differ across the five categories (four tumor
histologies and normal samples) (hsa-miR-371-5p, BH q-value 0.006;
hsa-miR-122, BH q-value 0.03; and hsa-miR-302d, BH q-value 0.03). YSTs
showed substantially higher expression of both hsa-miR-302d and
hsa-miR-122 compared to all other histologies, while dysgerminomas
exhibited considerably higher levels of hsa-miR-371-5. Upon pairwise
analysis, YSTs differed from dysgerminomas with respect to four miRNA
species (hsa-miR-375, BH q-value 0.009; hsa-miR-122, BH q-value 0.01;
hsa-miR-296-5p, BH q-value 0.04; hsa-miR-1247, BH q-value 0.04) and from
mature teratomas with respect to three miRNAs (hsa-miR-302d BH q-value
0.005; hsa-miR-122 BH q-value 0.008; hsa-miR-302a, BH q-value 0.01). No
differences were found with respect to patient age at diagnosis or sex.
When grouping all tumor samples together and comparing them to normal
samples, no differences were found.Discussion: These results indicate
differential expression of miRNA species by tumor histology in GCT. These
could be reflective of malignancy or simply cell type as the most
persistent differences were across histologic subtype not between
malignant and normal samples. While differences were not found between
malignant and normal samples after correction, the most significantly
different species from that analysisthe miRNA 371-73 and miRNA-302
clusterhave been previously identified as differential in adult GCTs.
Further study is needed to identify the RNA targets of these miRNAs and
to determine their functional significance in GCTs. If confirmed in
larger studies, these results suggest that miRNAs may play a significant
role in childhood GCT.

