Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA-related gene variants and prostate cancer aggressiveness and
recurrence.


Introduction: miRNA expression has been correlated with prostate cancer
aggressive and recurrence. However, the role of miRNA-related gene
variants in prostate cancer aggressiveness and recurrence has not been
adequately studied. In this study, we evaluated the association between
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in miRNA-related genes and
prostate cancer aggressiveness and recurrence.Methods: We conducted a
two-stage (discovery and replication) analysis of 136 miRNA-related gene
variants (in 18 genes) in aggressive and non-aggressive prostate cancer
cases. A discovery dataset of 437 aggressive and 603 non-aggressive cases
was derived from a historical cohort of prostate cancer cases treated at
the Moffitt Cancer Center from 1987 to 2003. A replication set of 659
aggressive and 492 non-aggressive cases was derived from existing
genome-wide association data from Cancer Genetic Markers of
Susceptibility (CGEMS). In both datasets, patients with a Gleason score >
7 or stage > III were considered to have aggressive disease and all other
patients were categorized as non-aggressive. Associations between SNPs
and aggressive disease were evaluated using unconditional logistic
regression to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals
(95%CI). We also evaluated the associations between SNPs and
recurrence-free survival using Cox regression models to estimate hazard
ratios (HR) and 95%CI among 245 recurrent and 979 non-recurrent cases. We
calculated q-values to estimate false discovery rates in the analysis of
recurrence.Results: For the analysis of aggressiveness, ten SNPs in seven
genes (EIF2C2 [rs7009635, rs2280833 and rs13276958], FMR1 [rs28282],
GEMIN4 [rs2291779], LIN28B [rs1149280], PIWIL1 [rs1106042], RAN [rs14035]
and XPO5 [rs7752811, rs7748977] were significantly associated with
aggressive prostate cancer in the discovery dataset. Five of the 10
significant SNPs had data available in the replication dataset, but none
of them was statistical significant in this dataset. For the analysis of
recurrence, a total of 13 SNPs in seven genes were associated with
recurrence-free survival (P-values Introduction: miRNA expression has
been correlated with prostate cancer aggressive and recurrence. However,
the role of miRNA-related gene variants in prostate cancer aggressiveness
and recurrence has not been adequately studied. In this study, we
evaluated the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in miRNA-related genes and prostate cancer aggressiveness and
recurrence.Methods: We conducted a two-stage (discovery and replication)
analysis of 136 miRNA-related gene variants (in 18 genes) in aggressive
and non-aggressive prostate cancer cases. A discovery dataset of 437
aggressive and 603 non-aggressive cases was derived from a historical
cohort of prostate cancer cases treated at the Moffitt Cancer Center from
1987 to 2003. A replication set of 659 aggressive and 492 non-aggressive
cases was derived from existing genome-wide association data from Cancer
Genetic Markers of Susceptibility (CGEMS). In both datasets, patients
with a Gleason score > 7 or stage > III were considered to have
aggressive disease and all other patients were categorized as
non-aggressive. Associations between SNPs and aggressive disease were
evaluated using unconditional logistic regression to estimate odds ratios
(OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95%CI). We also evaluated the
associations between SNPs and recurrence-free survival using Cox
regression models to estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 95%CI among 245
recurrent and 979 non-recurrent cases. We calculated q-values to estimate
false discovery rates in the analysis of recurrence.Results: For the
analysis of aggressiveness, ten SNPs in seven genes (EIF2C2 [rs7009635,
rs2280833 and rs13276958], FMR1 [rs28282], GEMIN4 [rs2291779], LIN28B
[rs1149280], PIWIL1 [rs1106042], RAN [rs14035] and XPO5 [rs7752811,
rs7748977] were significantly associated with aggressive prostate cancer
in the discovery dataset. Five of the 10 significant SNPs had data
available in the replication dataset, but none of them was statistical
significant in this dataset. For the analysis of recurrence, a total of
13 SNPs in seven genes were associated with recurrence-free survival
(P-values < 0.05 and q-values 0.12): one each in DDX20 (rs12745851),
PRKRA (rs4894020) and Lin28 (rs17163904); two each in EIF2C2 (rs13273553
and rs2977491) and LIN28B (rs170276 and rs7750532); and three each in
GEMIN4 (rs7813, rs2291779 and rs910925) and RNASEN (rs673019, rs3805521
and rs1749275). The most significant association was observed at DDX20
rs12745851 (HR=1.52, 95%CI=1.20-1.91, p=0.0004, q=0.04).Conclusion:
Findings from this study suggest that variants in miRNA-related genes may
influence prostate cancer recurrence, but not aggressiveness. Further
studies are warranted to confirm these findings.

