Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UV radiation interacts with Endothelin 3 and loss of nucleotide
excision repair pathway to promote melanomagenesis.


Melanomagenesis is influenced by the interaction of environmental (such
as UV radiation) and genetic factors. The Xpa gene is important in the
Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER) pathway. Similar to humans afflicted
with Xeroderma Pigmentosum, which results from mutations in genes that
play a role in NER, Xpa deficient mice show high sensitivity to UV light,
leading to skin cancer development. However, Xpa deficient mice do not
develop melanoma even upon UV exposure. The Endothelin 3 (Edn3) signaling
pathway is essential for proliferation, survival and migration of
melanocyte precursor cells. In humans, this pathway has also been
implicated in melanoma progression and its metastatic potential. The
purpose of this study is to develop a UV induced melanoma mouse model
that combines Xpa deficiency with the over-activation of the Edn3
pathway. To this end, transgenic mice over-expressing Edn3 under the
control of the keratin 5 promoter (K5-Edn3) and carrying a targeted
mutation in Xpa were exposed to a single suberythemal neonatal dose of UV
radiation. A subgroup of mice was also exposed to a second dose of UV
radiation at 6 weeks of age. Histomorphology and immunostaining were used
to confirm the melanocytic origin of primary skin tumors and metastases.
Melanoma was only found in animals with the K5-Edn3 transgene. High
penetrance was observed in animals exposed to one dose of UV radiation
that were Xpa null (100%, n=3) when compared to Xpa heterozygous (73%,
n=11) or Xpa wild type (43%, n=7). Enlarged and hyperpigmented lymph
nodes were present in animals with melanoma skin lesions and these were
diagnosed as local metastases. These results indicate that UV radiation
exposure, in conjunction with over-activation of the Edn3 pathway is
sufficient to lead to melanomagenesis in mice.

