Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fluorescence laparoscopy with an LED light source enables
fluorescence-guided resection of pancreatic cancer, labeled with
fluorophore-conjugated antibodies, in mouse models.


Orthotopic mouse models of human pancreatic cancer were established with
the BxPC-3 RFP pancreatic cancer cell line. Two weeks after implantation,
mice were randomized to undergo bright light laparoscopic resection (BLR)
(n=19) or fluorescence-guided laparoscopic resection (FLR) (n=19).
Fluorescence laparoscopy was performed with a 495-nm emission filter and
a Stryker L9000 LED light source 24 hours after tail vein injection of
anti-CEA-Alexa 488 antibodies. Bright light laparoscopy was performed
with a Stryker X8000 xenon light source. Pre- and postoperative images
were taken with the Olympus OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System to assess
completeness of resection. Postoperatively, whole body images were
obtained to assess for recurrence and follow tumor progression.
Intravital and ex vivo images were obtained at termination to evaluate
tumor burden. FLS enabled real-time identification and localization of
brightly-fluorescent BxPC-3 RFP tumor labeled with anti-CEA-Alexa 488.
Furthermore, there was adequate background illumination for surgical
navigation permitting improved resection. At termination at 12 weeks,
mice in the FLS group had a smaller pancreatic tumor burden compared to
mice from the BLS group (5.75 mm2 vs 28.43 mm2; p=0.012). Mice in the FLS
group also experienced decreased local recurrence (47.4% vs 78.9%,
p=0.046) and distant recurrence (68.4% vs 94.7%, p=0.045) compared to
mice in the BLS group. Fluorescence-guided surgery has significant
potential to improve laparoscopic approaches in the treatment of
pancreatic cancer.

