Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA profiles discriminate among colon cancer metastasis.


MicroRNAs are being exploited for diagnosis, prognosis and monitoring of
cancer and other diseases. Their small non immunogenic size, high tissue
specificity, and critical role in oncogenesis provide new biomarkers for
diagnosing and classifying cancer as well as predicting patients
outcomes. MicroRNAs signatures have been identified for many human
tumors, including colorectal cancer. This tumor affects about one million
individuals in developed countries, and about half of them die for
recurrences. In most cases, metastatic disease is difficult to predict
and to prevent with adequate therapies. The identification of microRNAs
signatures for metastatic disease, could aid to define the risk and
localization of recurrences in patients with unknown micrometastasis.In
this study, tissues of three different groups of colorectal cancer (CRC)
patients were analyzed: microarray and cards analysis were performed on
66 patients with or without lymph nodes and/or liver recurrences; a
second group of 16 metastatic patients were selected for RT-PCR; finally,
in situ hybridization was carried out on tissue cores arrays belonging to
a different set of patients with and without positive lymph nodes and/or
liver metastasis.MicroRNA-31, 21, 93, and 103 up-regulation together with
miR-566 down-regulation defined the CRC metastatic signature. Moreover,
in situ hybridization data defined metastatic localization: miR-200c
up-regulation together with miR-566 down-regulation characterized
lynphonodal invasion, while liver recurrences were defined by miR-31, 93
and 103 over-expression.

