Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic analysis of liver inflammation and cancer formation in
mice with heterozygous lose of -spectrin (2SP).


Acquisition of specific genetic alterations has been shown to play a
pivotal role in the progression of various stages of liver cancer, and
studies have proved that alteration of transforming growth factor- (TGF-)
signaling pathway can lead to the development of gastrointestinal cancers
including liver cancer. -Spectrin (2SP) is one of adapter proteins for
Smad3/Smad4 complex formation during TGF- signal transduction. Forty % of
2SP+/- mice develop liver cancer, and the underlying molecular mechanisms
remain largely unclear. Hypothesis: Compared to wild-type (WT) mice,
2SP+/- mice had significantly higher number of inflammatory nodules in
the liver and this pathological feature might be one of mechanisms
contributing to liver cancer formation seen in 2SP+/- mice. Inflammation
plays a crucial role at different stages of tumor development. We
hypothesize that an increase in liver inflammation leads to liver cancer
formation in 2SP+/- mice. We proposed to study the mechanism by which 2SP
regulates liver inflammation and suppresses liver cancer development.
Experimental Procedures and Results: (1) We dissected livers from
18-month-old WT and 2SP+/- mice and processed for paraffin embedding and
the tissue slides were used for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. We
observed inflammatory nodules in the liver of near 60% 2SP+/- mice
compared to less than 5% in WT mice. (2) To identify the type of
leucocytes infiltrated in the liver tissues, we carried out
immunohistochemistry staining by using antibodies directly against
macrophage, T-cell receptor and B-cell antigen, and found that the number
of T- and B-lymphocytes in the liver was significantly higher in 2SP+/-
mice than that in WT mice. (3) Microarray and quantitative real-time
RT-PCR analyses indicated that hepatic expression of interleukin-1 (IL-1)
and IL-1 mRNA was highly upregulated only in 2SP+/- mice. (4) Western
blot analyses showed that STAT3 activation in the liver was higher in
2SP+/- mice than that in WT mice. Double mutant mice with 2SP+/- and
liver specific deletion of STAT3 (LSTAT3-/-) had reduced inflammatory
nodules and IL-1 expression compared to 2SP+/- mice, suggesting that
STAT3 is one of the regulators in mediating the cross-talk between 2SP
and IL-1 in the regulation of inflammatory response in liver. Conclusion:
Our results suggest that hepatic expression of IL-1 and IL-1 is induced
in 2SP+/- mice, which is likely due to the elevated activation of STAT3
and contributes to the increased hepatic inflammation in 2SP+/- mice.

