Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRAF inhibition is enhanced by BH3-mimetic through BIM induction.


Vemurafenib (Vem) is a highly selective inhibitor of mutant BRAF,
FDA-approved for the treatment of patients with BRAF-positive advanced
melanoma. While response rates to Vem are high, the emergence of
resistance is common, placing high priority in the development of
strategies to enhance Vem efficiency. Navitoclax is a BH3-mimetic that
binds and inactivates the anti-apoptotic proteins BCL-2, BCL-xl, and
BCL-w and leads to apoptosis in tumors with low expression of another
anti-apoptotic protein, MCL-1. Our data demonstrates that treatment of
BRAF-mutant melanoma patients with Vem is associated with decreased
expression of MCL-1 in addition to an increase in the pro-apoptotic,
BH3-only protein BIM in serial biopsy samples. Therefore, we hypothesize
that the combination of PLX-4720 (Vem analog) with navitoclax will result
in increased anti-tumor activity. To test our hypothesis, we performed
cell viability studies, Annexin:PI and ELISA apoptosis assays in addition
to protein and mRNA analysis. In-vivo studies were performed in two BRAF
mutant xenograft models using navitoclax and PLX-4720. In-vitro, our cell
viability studies demonstrated that concurrent treatment with PLX-4720
and navitoclax results in an additive viability reduction in BRAF mutant
but not in BRAF WT cell lines. The decrease in cell viability correlated
to downmodulation of MCL-1 and BIM induction after PLX-4720 treatment,
with further enhancement of BIM expression and PARP cleavage after adding
navitoclax. In vivo, the navitoclax enhanced the efficacy of PLX-4720 in
both xenograft models. The combination of a selective BRAF inhibitor with
a BH3-mimetic may be a promising therapeutic strategy to enhance the
clinical efficacy of BRAF inhibitors.

