Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo antitumor activity of the next generation
HSP90 inhibitor, AT13387, in both hormone-sensitive and
castration-resistant prostate cancer models.


HSP90 is a molecular chaperone involved in the conformational maturation
and function of a large number of client proteins that have been
implicated in oncogenesis. The androgen receptor (AR), a key driver of
prostate cancer growth and treatment resistance, is an HSP90 client and
its function is dependent on HSP90 chaperone activity. The aim of this
study was to evaluate the anti-tumour activity of AT13387, a novel second
generation non-ansamycin HSP90 inhibitor, in prostate cancer models.
AT13387 is currently being investigated in the clinic in GIST and NSCLC.
It is a potent inhibitor of HSP90 (Kd 0.71 nM) and has previously been
shown to inhibit proliferation and bring about the depletion of client
proteins in a wide range of cell lines as well as inhibiting tumor growth
in a number of xenograft models. In prostate cancer cell lines (VCaP,
LNCaP, 22Rv1), AT13387 treatment depleted HSP90 clients such as AKT,
HER-2 and CRAF, along with the induction of HSP72, confirming target
inhibition. AT13387 treatment also resulted in depletion of mutant and
wild-type AR, as well as the constitutively active truncated AR splice
variant 7 (AR-V7). HSP90 inhibition disrupted AR nuclear localisation and
AR transcriptional activity and resulted in down-regulation of
AR-regulated genes in vitro. Inhibition of HSP90 translated into
proliferative inhibition, with GI50 values in the range of 15-70 nM, and
induction of apoptosis. AT13387 showed substantially greater potency than
the first generation, natural product-based HSP90 inhibitor 17-AAG in
modulating HSP90 client proteins, inhibiting cell growth and inducing
cell death. The anti-tumor activity of AT13387 was demonstrated in vivo
in a human xenograft model of castration-resistant prostate cancer. Our
data suggest that HSP90 inhibition, through the use of more potent and
better tolerated HSP90 inhibitors, will be active in multi drug resistant
prostate cancer. These led to the design of a Phase I/II clinical trial
of AT13387 with and without abiraterone acetate in castration-resistant
prostate cancer no longer responding to abiraterone that is now accruing
patients (NCT01685268).

