Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer stem/initiating cells are targets of both innate
and adaptive immunity and elicit potent immune responses against
autochthonous prostate tumors.


Purpose. Objectives of this study were to investigate if prostate cancer
stem/initiating cells (CSC) obtained from autochthonous tumors possess
the molecular characteristics that allow their in vitro and in vivo
recognition by cells of the innate and/or adaptive arms of the immune
system, and if CSC are source of antigens for the induction of
tumor-specific immune responses.Material and Methods. CSC lines
established from the prostate of transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse
prostate (TRAMP) mice were assessed in vitro for the expression of
tumor-associated antigens and susceptibility to NK and T cell killing. We
also investigated NK and T cells immune surveillance against CSC by
measuring the frequency of CSC-induced tumors in immunocompetent and
selectively immunodeficient mice. Finally, we assessed if vaccination
with dendritic cells pulsed with CSC induced a tumor-specific immune
response able to delay the growth of both transplantable and
autochthonous prostate tumors.Results. CSC expressed prostate cancer
associated antigens, MHC I and MHC II molecules and ligands for natural
killer (NK) cells. Indeed, CSC were targets of NK and cytotoxic T
lymphocytes both in vitro and in vivo. Vaccination with dendritic cells
pulsed with apoptotic CSC induced a tumor-specific immune response that
delayed tumor growth in mice challenged with prostate CSC, and caused
tumor regression in TRAMP mice.Conclusions. CSC are targets of both
innate and adaptive immune responses and could be exploited for the
design of novel immunotherapeutic approaches against cancer.

