Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulator FTY720
synergistically inhibits colon cancer cell growth with 5-fluorouracil,
irinotecan and oxaliplatin.


Introduction: Despite the appearance of new cancer chemotherapeutics
during the last decade, the five-year survival rate of advanced colon
cancer remains low. Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a bioactive lipid
mediator, plays critical roles in cancer biology by regulating cell
proliferation, migration, metastasis and angiogenesis. S1P exerts most of
its functions via its specific cell surface receptors. The
immunosuppressive drug, FTY720 (fingolimod), is a functional antagonist
of S1P receptor 1 and is approved by FDA for treatment of multiple
sclerosis. Although there have been some reports on the effects of FTY720
on breast and prostate cancers, its effects on colon cancer have not yet
been examined. The aim of this work was to determine whether FTY720
suppresses survival of colon cancer cell lines either alone or in
combination with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), irinotecan, or oxaliplatin the
most commonly used chemotherapies for colon cancer. Methods: The effects
of FTY720 on cell survival of multiple cancer types were assessed with
the NCI-60 panel. Colon cancer cell lines, human well-differentiated
(DLD-1), human moderately differentiated (HT29), and human poorly
differentiated (HCT-116) were seeded at a density of 2000 cells per well
in 96-well culture plates and FTY720 and 5-FU, or irrinotecan, or
oxaliplatin or both were added after 24 hours. Effects on cell viability
were examined by WST-8 assay 48 hours later. Results: Among the 9 types
of cancers tested in the NCI-60 cell line panel, colon cancer and
leukemia were the only ones in which all cell lines responded to FTY720.
FTY720 completely suppressed growth of DLD-1 and HCT-116 cells at a
concentration of 5 M or greater in a dose dependent manner. The half
maximal (50%) inhibitory concentrations (IC50) of FTY720 were less than
1.8 uM in the 3 colon cancer cell lines. The IC50 values for 5-FU,
irinotecan, and oxaliplatin alone were about 8.0 uM, 5.8uM,and 1.1uM
respectively, in the same 3 colon cancer cell lines. The combined
treatment with FTY720 and 5FU synergistically suppressed survival. Also
the combination treatment of FTY720 and irinotecan synergistically
suppressed survival of these cell lines, except for HT29 cells. As for
the combination treatment with FTY720 and oxaliplatin, it synergically
suppressed survival HT29 cells. Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that
FTY720 has a synergistic cell killing effect with 5-FU, irinotecan, and
oxaliplatin on colon cancer cell lines. Further studies will focus on
delineating the mechanisms determining susceptibility to these drugs.
This work was supported by NIH (R01CA160688 to KT and R01CA61774 to SS).
M.N. is a Japan Society for the Promotion of Science Postdoctoral Fellow.

