Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of ATF3 on the gain-of-function of mutant p53.


Activating Transcription Factor 3 (ATF3) is a member of the ATF/CREB
family of transcription factors and can be rapidly induced by DNA damage
and other cellular stresses. We previously found that ATF3 activates p53
by binding to the C-terminus of the tumor suppressor and blocking its
ubiquitination, and consequently inhibits cellular transformation. Since
TP53 is mutated in half of human cancers and mutant p53 proteins (mutp53)
acquire oncogenic activities including promoting drug resistance and
driving cancer cell invasion and metastasis, we were interested to
explore effects of ATF3 on the mutp53 gain-of-functions (GOF). One major
mechanism by which mutp53 promotes tumorigenesis is through binding
another p53 family member p63 and inhibiting its tumor suppressor
functions. We found that ATF3, but not a mutated ATF3 protein (102-139)
devoid of its p53-binding region, bind the p53R175H mutant and disrupted
the interactions between mutp53 and p63. As a consequence, while mutp53
inhibited the p63 transcriptional activity, ATF3 but not the 102-139
protein counteracted mutp53 and resumed p63 activity. Consistent with
these results, ATF3 expression inhibited mutp53-promoted cell migration
and invasion. In addition to effects on the mutp53-p63 interaction, we
also found that ATF3 repressed mutp53-induced NFB activity, thereby
sensitizing mutp53-expressing cells to treatments with etoposide and
cisplatin. We conclude that ATF3 suppresses the GOF of mutant p53 and
thus may also contribute to tumor suppression in p53-mutated cancer cells.

