Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disulfiram suppresses growth of the malignant pleural mesothelioma
cells in part by inducing apoptosis.


Disulfiram (DSF) is a member of the dithiocarbamate family of compounds
that bind with copper and function as inhibitor of aldehyde
dehydrogenase. DSF is one of the drugs approved by Food and Drug
Administration for treatment of alcoholism. Recent studies have indicated
anti-tumor and chemosensitizing properties of DSF. However, the molecular
mechanisms of DSF action remain unclear. Here we investigated malignant
pleural mesothelioma (MPM) suppressive effects of DSF and the molecular
mechanisms involved. DSF inhibited growth of the murine as well as
patient-derived MPM cells in part by decreasing the chymotryptic activity
of the proteasome that resulted in accumulation of ubiquitinated
proteins. DSF suppression of MPM growth also involved elevated apoptosis
as evidenced by activation of caspase-3, elevated levels of pro-apoptotic
Bax protein and cleavage of poly-(ADP-ribose)-polymerase. Our studies
including gene-array based analyses further revealed that DSF suppressed
a number of cell growth and metastasis-promoting genes including matrix
metallopeptidase 3 and 10. DSF treatments also stimulated expression of
sulfatase 1, growth arrest-specific (GAS) 6 protein, and CARP-1/CCAR1, a
novel transducer of cell growth signaling. Administration of 50mg/kg DSF
by daily i.p injections inhibited growth of murine MPM cell-derived
tumors in vivo in part by stimulating cell growth arrest and apoptosis.
Together our in vitro and in vivo studies suggest that DSF suppresses MPM
growth by targeting multiple pathways that include blockage of metastasis
signaling and stimulation of apoptosis, and thus holds promise as an
anti-MPM agent.

