Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Penile intraepithelial neoplasia in a multinational cohort of men:
the HPV Infection in Men Study.


The human papillomavirus (HPV) is an established etiologic agent in 50%
of penile cancers. While invasive penile cancer is rare in the US, the
incidence is nearly 2-fold higher in Hispanics versus non-Hispanics.
Recent evidence from Europe suggests that the incidence of penile cancer
and its precursor lesion (penile intraepithelial neoplasia [PeIN]) may be
on the rise. Little is known about the epidemiology of PeIN and the role
of HPV in PeIN lesion development in healthy men. Thus, the purpose of
this study was to describe the incidence of PeIN, HPV type distribution
within PeIN tissue, and HPV natural history leading to PeIN diagnosis in
a cohort of HIV-negative men.A total of 4,117 men ages 18-70 years living
in the US, Brazil, and Mexico were enrolled in the prospective HPV
Infection in Men (HIM) Study. Men were examined at baseline and every 6
months over 4 years of follow-up (median: 42 months). At each clinical
visit, exfoliated cells of the external genital skin (coronal
sulcus/glans penis, shaft, and scrotum) were routinely collected and
tested for HPV DNA using Roche Linear Array. Visually identified,
HPV-related lesions were biopsied and subjected to pathologic evaluation.
The INNO-LiPA genotyping assay was used to detect HPV DNA from within
biopsy tissue. Estimates of PeIN incidence included newly diagnosed
lesions with person time estimated from study entry to the date of
biopsy.Eleven men in the HIM Study cohort developed
pathologically-confirmed, dysplastic penile lesions. Two men exhibited
PIN I, 4 had PeIN II, and 4 had PeIN III; one man was diagnosed with
invasive penile cancer and was excluded from further analyses. The
incidence rate of PeIN was 0.08 per 100 person-years (95% CI: 0.04-0.15).
The median age at PeIN diagnosis was 26 years (range: 24-42). Among 9
lesions with adequate specimens for HPV analysis, HPV DNA was detected in
the tissues of all PeIN lesions. Most lesions (n=8; 89%) were infected
with an oncogenic HPV type, 1 (11%) was infected with only non-oncogenic
HPV types, and 4 (44%) were co-infected with multiple HPV types. HPV16
was the most common type detected (5; 56%), followed by oncogenic types
HPV51 (2; 22%), HPV18 (1; 11%), and HPV39 (1; 11%), and non-oncogenic
types HPV11 (3; 33%) and HPV6 (2; 22%). HPV16 was present in the normal
genital skin 12 months prior to lesion detection in 60% (n=3) of men with
HPV16+ PeIN, and HPV51 was present in 100% (n=1) of men 12 months prior
to detection of HPV51+ PeIN. The mean time from HPV16 detection to the
development of HPV16+ PeIN lesions was 16.2 months (SD: 18.9).This is the
first prospective evaluation of the incidence of penile cancer precursor
lesions in HIV-negative men over a broad age range. The prevalence of HPV
DNA in PeIN was high, particularly for HPV16. Both HPV16 and HPV51 were
found to persist at least 12 months before PeIN diagnosis. These data may
be useful as baseline measurements to monitor future trends in PeIN
lesions.

