Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of nitric oxide on invasiveness and metabolism of cancer
cells.


Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) expression has been shown to be upregulated
in cancer cells compared to normal cells. The resulting increased nitric
oxide (NO) production changes the metastatic ability of cancer cells. The
link between NOS expression, NO production, apoptosis, and drug
resistance in ovarian cancer is beginning to be studied. However, the
effect of NO on metabolism and invasiveness of ovarian cancer cells is
not known. Here, using gas chromatography - mass spectroscopy based
isotope analysis we show that highly-invasive ovarian cancer cells
convert arginine to citrulline via the nitric oxide pathway as opposed to
less-invasive ovarian cancer cells. We hypothesize that NO is important
for the proliferation, migration, invasion, and drug resistance in
highly-invasive ovarian cancer cells as opposed to less-invasive ovarian
cancer cells, and that these changes in metastatic behavior are linked to
changes in metabolism. We show that L-NG-Nitroarginine Methyl Ester
(L-NAME), an inhibitor of NOS, decreases NO production and thus decreases
proliferation, migration, and invasion of ovarian cancer cells, as well
as decreases drug resistance. Using metabolic assays, we show that NO
affects the glucose consumption, lactate secretion, and pyruvate uptake,
and provides us with clues regarding the effect of NO on glycolytic
activity of highly-invasive and less-invasive ovarian cancer cells.
Lastly, we show that NO affects oxygen consumption rate in these cells,
and thus oxidative phosphorylation. Our findings are the first to link NO
production and invasiveness with metabolism in ovarian cancer cells.

