Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined blockade of PI3K/AKT and EGFR/HER3 enhances antitumor
activity in triple negative breast cancer.


Background: Up to 60% of triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) express
high levels of EGFR. Moreover, TNBCs are associated with increased
frequency of phosphatase and tension homologue (PTEN) loss of function,
leading to hyperactivation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT
pathway. This provides the rationale for using PI3K/AKT inhibitors in
this subset of patients. However, compensatory expression of receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) such as HER3 may limit efficacy of PI3K/AKT
inhibitors. Therefore, we hypothesize that combined targeting of both
EGFR and HER3 and the PI3K/AKT pathway will result in superior antitumor
activity compared to single agent in TNBC. Materials and Methods: Several
TNBC cell lines were treated with MEHD7945A, a dual-action antibody that
targets both EGFR and HER3, AKT inhibitor GDC-0068, and pan-PI3K
inhibitor GDC-0941. Cell viability was measured by CellTiter-Glo and
Crystal Violet. Both cell line- and patient-derived xenograft models of
TNBC were treated with MEHD7945A, GDC-0068, GDC-0941, or the combination
of MEHD7945A with either GDC-0068 or GDC-0941. Tumor size and histology
were examined. Protein expression was measured by Western blot, Mass
Spectometry, CEER and immunohistochemistry. Results: GDC-0068 and
GDC-0941 treatment resulted in variable inhibition of cell viability,
with IC50s ranging from 170 nM to >1 M across all TNBC cell lines. In
cells stimulated with either EGF or Heregulin MEHD7945A prevented
EGFR/HER3 receptors phosphorylation and improved the antiproliferative
activity of the PI3K/AKT inhibitors. To test the activity of these
compounds in vivo we used three different models of TNBC, two cell line
(MDA-MB-468 and HCC70)-based and a patient-derived xenograft. MEHD7945,
GDC-0941 and GDC-0068 showed variable delay in tumor growth whereas
combination of MEHD7945A with either GDC-0068 or GDC-0941 was always
superior to single agent treatment. Both combinations either prevented
tumor growth or led to tumor shrinkage with complete responses achieved
in 1/2 mice in each cohorts. Of note, all the treatments (up to 9 weeks
of therapeutic exposure) were well tolerated. Analysis of treated tumors
reveals potent inhibition of the PI3K/AKT pathway, with decreased levels
phospho-PRAS40 and phospho-S6. Moreover, we confirmed that MEHD7945A
effectively prevented EGFR and HER3 phosphorylation consequent to PI3K
inhibition. Conclusions: Combined therapy with MEHD7945A and either
GDC-0068 or GDC-0941 was superior to monotherapy in preclinical models of
TNBC. We are currently exploring the levels of expression/activation of
EGFR and HER3 following PI3K/Akt blockade in samples from patients
treated with GDC-0068. These findings provide the rationale for combined
targeting of PI3K/AKT and EGFR/HER3 in triple negative breast cancers.

