Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of constitutive aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
signaling attenuates androgen indepenent signaling and growth in (C4-2)
prostate cancer cells.


The aryl hydrocarbon receptor is a member of the basic-helix-loop-helix
family of transcription factors. AhR mediates the biochemical and toxic
effects of a number of polyaromatic hydrocarbons such as
2,3,7,8,-tetrachloro-dibenzo-dioxin (TCDD). AhR is widely known for
regulating the transcription of drug metabolizing enzymes involved in the
xenobiotic metabolism of carcinogens and therapeutic agents, such as
cytochrome P450-1B1 (CYP1B1). Additionally, AhR has also been reported to
interact with multiple signaling pathways during prostate development.
Here we investigate the effect of sustained AhR signaling on androgen
receptor function in prostate cancer cells. Immunoblot analysis shows
that AhR expression is increased in androgen independent (C4-2) prostate
cancer cells when compared to androgen sensitive (LNCaP) cells. RT-PCR
studies revealed constitutive AhR signaling in C4-2 cells without the
ligand induced activation required in LNCaP cells. A reduction of AhR
activity by pharmacologic inhibitors or short RNA mediated silencing in
C4-2 cells reduced expression of both AhR and androgen responsive genes.
The decrease in androgen responsive genes correlates to a decrease in
phosphorylated androgen receptor and androgen receptor expression in the
nucleus. Furthermore, the forced decrease in AhR expression resulted in a
50% decline in the growth rate of C4-2 cells. These data indicates that
AhR is required to maintain hormone independent signaling and growth by
the androgen receptor in C4-2 cells. Collectively, these data provide
evidence of a direct role for AhR in androgen independent signaling and
provides insight into the molecular mechanisms responsible for sustained
androgen receptor signaling in hormone refractory prostate cancer.

