Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel phosphorylation and ubiquitination sites regulate
ROS-dependent degradation of c-FLIP and sensitization of cancer cells to
TRAIL.


The cytosolic protein c-FLIP (cellular Fas-associated death domain-like
interleukin 1-converting enzyme inhibitory protein) is an inhibitor of
death receptor-mediated apoptosis that is up-regulated in a variety of
cancers, contributing to apoptosis resistance. Several compounds found to
restore sensitivity of cancer cells to TRAIL, a TNF family death ligand
with promising therapeutic potential, act by targeting c-FLIP
ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. The generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) has been implicated in c-FLIP protein
degradation. However, the mechanism by which ROS post-transcriptionally
regulate c-FLIP protein levels is not well understood. We show here that
treatment of prostate cancer PPC-1 cells with the superoxide generators
menadione or paraquat down-regulates c-FLIP long (c-FLIPL) protein
levels, which is prevented by the proteasome inhibitor MG132.
Furthermore, pretreatment of PPC-1 cells with a ROS scavenger prevented
ubiquitination and loss of c-FLIPL protein induced by menadione or
paraquat. We identified lysine 167 as a novel ubiquitination site of
c-FLIPL important for ROS-dependent degradation. We also identified
threonine 166 as a novel phosphorylation site and demonstrate that T166
phosphorylation is required for ROS-induced K167 ubiquitination. The
mutation of either T166 or K167 was sufficient to stabilize c-FLIP
protein levels in PPC-1, HEK293T, and HeLa cancer cells treated with
menadione or paraquat. Accordingly, expression of c-FLIP T166A or K167R
mutants protected cells from ROS-mediated sensitization to TRAIL-induced
cell death. Our findings reveal novel ROS-dependent post-translational
modifications of c-FLIP that regulate c-FLIP protein degradation and
subsequent sensitization of cancer cells to TRAIL.

