Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of radiation response in KRAS mutant non-small cell
lung cancer cells with the MEK inhibitor GSK1120212.


Biomarkers that can select appropriate patient subsets for optimal
treatment will likely improve personalized delivery of cancer treatment.
While radiotherapy is a cornerstone for the management of non-metastatic
lung cancers, there are no clinically useful biomarkers to help predict
for radiation responsiveness and to help select drugs to enhance
radiation sensitization in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). KRAS
mutations are found in 20%-30% of NSCLC and confer drug resistance. Drugs
that target downstream pathways activated in KRAS mutant cells could
enhance cytotoxic effects. The purpose of this study is to evaluate if
the potent MEK1/2 inhibitor GSK1120212 can selectively enhance radiation
response based on the genomic context in lung cancer cell lines. We
selected a panel of NSCLC cell lines with or without KRAS mutations and
tested their response to combinational treatment with radiation and MEK
inhibitor via clonogenic survival assay. We found that GSK1120212 had no
radiation enhancement effect in the three KRAS wild type (WT) cell lines
tested. In contrast, in three KRAS mutant lung cancer cells, GSK1120212
dramatically reduced clonogenic survival to radiation treatment
(radiation enhancement factor 1.2-1.9). We found that GSK1120212
selectively induced G1 cell cycle arrest through regulating the
expression of several cell cycle regulation proteins, such as Cyclin B1,
Cyclin E1 and RB. GSK1120212 also enhanced the G2/M phase arrest caused
by radiation therapy and significantly decreased cell number in S phase.
Ultimately, this led to cellular senescence selectively in KRAS mutant
but not WT cells. At the dose chosen for this study (IC30), GSK1120212
didn't augment DNA damage or induce cell apoptosis caused by radiation.
Taken together, our data suggested that MEK inhibitor GSK1120212 may have
some selectivity in enhancing radiation effects in KRAS mutant lung
cancer cells. A phase I clinical trial is currently ongoing to test the
safety and preliminary efficacy of combining GSK1120212 and
chemoradiation in locally advanced NSCLC.

