Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of action of L-BLP25 in preclinical pancreatic tumor
models.


Background. L-BLP25 is an investigational antigen-specific cancer
immunotherapeutic agent targeting human mucin 1 (MUC1). A single low dose
of cyclophosphamide (CPA) is known to be immunostimulatory and may
enhance the anti-tumor effects of L-BLP25 when given 3 days before
treatment initiation. Here we report the immune and anti-tumor efficacy
of L-BLP25 with CPA pretreatment in subcutaneous (s.c.) and orthotopic
models of murine pancreatic cancer. These models allow for reproduction
of the clinical scenario, where 8 weekly doses of L-BLP25 are
administered. Methods. Murine pancreatic tumor cells Panc02 transfected
with human MUC1 were injected for comparison s.c. or orthotopically into
human MUC1 transgenic mice. Mice received either vehicle control (PBS),
CPA (100 mg/kg), L-BLP25 (100 g), or L-BLP25 (100 g) + CPA (100 mg/kg).
CPA was administered intravenously (i.v.) 3 days prior to initiation of 8
weekly intradermal (i.d.) or s.c. L-BLP25 injections. Tumor volume was
monitored and splenic cell populations were quantified by FACS. In the
s.c. tumor model, the contribution of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets to the
inhibition of tumor growth was studied. In the orthotopic model,
antigen-specific IFN- secretion was assessed via ex vivo T cell
re-stimulation with antigen alone. Results. In the s.c. model of
pancreatic cancer, tumor volume was reduced compared to vehicle at day 49
after i.d. administration of L-BLP25 (41.4%, pBackground. L-BLP25 is an
investigational antigen-specific cancer immunotherapeutic agent targeting
human mucin 1 (MUC1). A single low dose of cyclophosphamide (CPA) is
known to be immunostimulatory and may enhance the anti-tumor effects of
L-BLP25 when given 3 days before treatment initiation. Here we report the
immune and anti-tumor efficacy of L-BLP25 with CPA pretreatment in
subcutaneous (s.c.) and orthotopic models of murine pancreatic cancer.
These models allow for reproduction of the clinical scenario, where 8
weekly doses of L-BLP25 are administered. Methods. Murine pancreatic
tumor cells Panc02 transfected with human MUC1 were injected for
comparison s.c. or orthotopically into human MUC1 transgenic mice. Mice
received either vehicle control (PBS), CPA (100 mg/kg), L-BLP25 (100 g),
or L-BLP25 (100 g) + CPA (100 mg/kg). CPA was administered intravenously
(i.v.) 3 days prior to initiation of 8 weekly intradermal (i.d.) or s.c.
L-BLP25 injections. Tumor volume was monitored and splenic cell
populations were quantified by FACS. In the s.c. tumor model, the
contribution of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets to the inhibition of tumor
growth was studied. In the orthotopic model, antigen-specific IFN-
secretion was assessed via ex vivo T cell re-stimulation with antigen
alone. Results. In the s.c. model of pancreatic cancer, tumor volume was
reduced compared to vehicle at day 49 after i.d. administration of
L-BLP25 (41.4%, p<0.02) and L-BLP25 + CPA (55.5%, pBackground. L-BLP25 is
an investigational antigen-specific cancer immunotherapeutic agent
targeting human mucin 1 (MUC1). A single low dose of cyclophosphamide
(CPA) is known to be immunostimulatory and may enhance the anti-tumor
effects of L-BLP25 when given 3 days before treatment initiation. Here we
report the immune and anti-tumor efficacy of L-BLP25 with CPA
pretreatment in subcutaneous (s.c.) and orthotopic models of murine
pancreatic cancer. These models allow for reproduction of the clinical
scenario, where 8 weekly doses of L-BLP25 are administered. Methods.
Murine pancreatic tumor cells Panc02 transfected with human MUC1 were
injected for comparison s.c. or orthotopically into human MUC1 transgenic
mice. Mice received either vehicle control (PBS), CPA (100 mg/kg),
L-BLP25 (100 g), or L-BLP25 (100 g) + CPA (100 mg/kg). CPA was
administered intravenously (i.v.) 3 days prior to initiation of 8 weekly
intradermal (i.d.) or s.c. L-BLP25 injections. Tumor volume was monitored
and splenic cell populations were quantified by FACS. In the s.c. tumor
model, the contribution of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets to the inhibition
of tumor growth was studied. In the orthotopic model, antigen-specific
IFN- secretion was assessed via ex vivo T cell re-stimulation with
antigen alone. Results. In the s.c. model of pancreatic cancer, tumor
volume was reduced compared to vehicle at day 49 after i.d.
administration of L-BLP25 (41.4%, p<0.02) and L-BLP25 + CPA (55.5%,
p<0.02). In multiple studies, tumor volume was consistently lower in mice
treated with L-BLP25 + CPA vs. L-BLP25 alone. L-BLP25 + CPA s.c.
treatment was effective at day 49 with 44% greater inhibition of tumor
growth and more pronounced extended survival compared to i.d. treatment,
supporting the route of administration in the clinic. Various splenic
immune cell populations were increased by s.c. L-BLP25 + CPA treatment
compared to vehicle and L-BLP25 alone, including the CD8+ effector
memory/Treg ratio. Mice treated with s.c. L-BLP25 + CPA after CD8+ T cell
depletion had a greater tumor volume compared to T cell-sufficient mice,
while CD4+ T cell depletion had no effect. In the orthotopic model of
pancreatic cancer, median survival was improved with s.c. L-BLP25 + CPA
treatment vs. vehicle (pBackground. L-BLP25 is an investigational
antigen-specific cancer immunotherapeutic agent targeting human mucin 1
(MUC1). A single low dose of cyclophosphamide (CPA) is known to be
immunostimulatory and may enhance the anti-tumor effects of L-BLP25 when
given 3 days before treatment initiation. Here we report the immune and
anti-tumor efficacy of L-BLP25 with CPA pretreatment in subcutaneous
(s.c.) and orthotopic models of murine pancreatic cancer. These models
allow for reproduction of the clinical scenario, where 8 weekly doses of
L-BLP25 are administered. Methods. Murine pancreatic tumor cells Panc02
transfected with human MUC1 were injected for comparison s.c. or
orthotopically into human MUC1 transgenic mice. Mice received either
vehicle control (PBS), CPA (100 mg/kg), L-BLP25 (100 g), or L-BLP25 (100
g) + CPA (100 mg/kg). CPA was administered intravenously (i.v.) 3 days
prior to initiation of 8 weekly intradermal (i.d.) or s.c. L-BLP25
injections. Tumor volume was monitored and splenic cell populations were
quantified by FACS. In the s.c. tumor model, the contribution of CD4+ and
CD8+ T cell subsets to the inhibition of tumor growth was studied. In the
orthotopic model, antigen-specific IFN- secretion was assessed via ex
vivo T cell re-stimulation with antigen alone. Results. In the s.c. model
of pancreatic cancer, tumor volume was reduced compared to vehicle at day
49 after i.d. administration of L-BLP25 (41.4%, p<0.02) and L-BLP25 + CPA
(55.5%, p<0.02). In multiple studies, tumor volume was consistently lower
in mice treated with L-BLP25 + CPA vs. L-BLP25 alone. L-BLP25 + CPA s.c.
treatment was effective at day 49 with 44% greater inhibition of tumor
growth and more pronounced extended survival compared to i.d. treatment,
supporting the route of administration in the clinic. Various splenic
immune cell populations were increased by s.c. L-BLP25 + CPA treatment
compared to vehicle and L-BLP25 alone, including the CD8+ effector
memory/Treg ratio. Mice treated with s.c. L-BLP25 + CPA after CD8+ T cell
depletion had a greater tumor volume compared to T cell-sufficient mice,
while CD4+ T cell depletion had no effect. In the orthotopic model of
pancreatic cancer, median survival was improved with s.c. L-BLP25 + CPA
treatment vs. vehicle (p<0.05) and vs. L-BLP25 alone (non-significant).
When stimulated ex vivo with the BP25 peptide, the frequency of IFN-
producing CD4+ T cells isolated from the spleens of mice treated with
L-BLP25 + CPA was significantly higher than in all other treatment groups
(pBackground. L-BLP25 is an investigational antigen-specific cancer
immunotherapeutic agent targeting human mucin 1 (MUC1). A single low dose
of cyclophosphamide (CPA) is known to be immunostimulatory and may
enhance the anti-tumor effects of L-BLP25 when given 3 days before
treatment initiation. Here we report the immune and anti-tumor efficacy
of L-BLP25 with CPA pretreatment in subcutaneous (s.c.) and orthotopic
models of murine pancreatic cancer. These models allow for reproduction
of the clinical scenario, where 8 weekly doses of L-BLP25 are
administered. Methods. Murine pancreatic tumor cells Panc02 transfected
with human MUC1 were injected for comparison s.c. or orthotopically into
human MUC1 transgenic mice. Mice received either vehicle control (PBS),
CPA (100 mg/kg), L-BLP25 (100 g), or L-BLP25 (100 g) + CPA (100 mg/kg).
CPA was administered intravenously (i.v.) 3 days prior to initiation of 8
weekly intradermal (i.d.) or s.c. L-BLP25 injections. Tumor volume was
monitored and splenic cell populations were quantified by FACS. In the
s.c. tumor model, the contribution of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets to the
inhibition of tumor growth was studied. In the orthotopic model,
antigen-specific IFN- secretion was assessed via ex vivo T cell
re-stimulation with antigen alone. Results. In the s.c. model of
pancreatic cancer, tumor volume was reduced compared to vehicle at day 49
after i.d. administration of L-BLP25 (41.4%, p<0.02) and L-BLP25 + CPA
(55.5%, p<0.02). In multiple studies, tumor volume was consistently lower
in mice treated with L-BLP25 + CPA vs. L-BLP25 alone. L-BLP25 + CPA s.c.
treatment was effective at day 49 with 44% greater inhibition of tumor
growth and more pronounced extended survival compared to i.d. treatment,
supporting the route of administration in the clinic. Various splenic
immune cell populations were increased by s.c. L-BLP25 + CPA treatment
compared to vehicle and L-BLP25 alone, including the CD8+ effector
memory/Treg ratio. Mice treated with s.c. L-BLP25 + CPA after CD8+ T cell
depletion had a greater tumor volume compared to T cell-sufficient mice,
while CD4+ T cell depletion had no effect. In the orthotopic model of
pancreatic cancer, median survival was improved with s.c. L-BLP25 + CPA
treatment vs. vehicle (p<0.05) and vs. L-BLP25 alone (non-significant).
When stimulated ex vivo with the BP25 peptide, the frequency of IFN-
producing CD4+ T cells isolated from the spleens of mice treated with
L-BLP25 + CPA was significantly higher than in all other treatment groups
(p<0.001). CD8+ T cells were found to produce no IFN- after in vitro
re-stimulation. Conclusions. When administered after a single, low-dose
pre-treatment of CPA, L-BLP25 immunotherapy exhibits anti-tumor activity,
immune activation and prolonged survival in murine pancreatic cancer
models. T cell depletion data indicate a CD8+ T cell-mediated anti-tumor
response, whilst IFN- production by CD4+ helper T cells may contribute to
prolonged survival.

