Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ONO-4059, a novel oral Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) inhibitor
that demonstrates potent pharmacodynamic activity through Phosphorylated
Btk (P-Btk) inhibition, in addition to effective anti-tumour activity in
a TMD-8 (DLBCL) xenograft model.


Purpose: The B-cell receptor (BCR) pathway plays a central role in signal
transduction pathways that regulate survival, activation, proliferation,
and differentiation of B-lineage lymphoid cells. Btk is a key regulator
of the BCR signaling pathway and abberant BCR signaling has been
implicated in the survival of malignant B-cells. Recent studies indicate
that targeting Btk may be effective in the treatment of B-cell
malignancies. ONO-4059 is a highly potent and selective oral Btk
inhibitor with an IC50 in the sub-nmol/L range. Previous studies with
ONO-4059 (formerly known as ONO-WG-307; AACR 2012) demonstrated that
Btk-mediated signaling through Akt and PKD is a critical role for the
survival of activated B-cell-like (ABC) sub-type of diffuse large B cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) cell lines [TMD-8]. It was also of interest to determine
the extent of gene expression changes induced in TMD-8 cells after
treatment with ONO-4059. To understand the effects of ONO-4059 on gene
transcription, we analyzed the gene expression patterns of ONO-4059 in
the TMD-8 xenograft model.Methods: TMD-8 cells were implanted
subcutaneously into SCID mice and ONO-4059 was administered orally, twice
a day (BID) in two groups of animals, at doses of 3 and 10 mg/kg. When
the mean tumour volumes reached 100-200mm3, treatment was initiated daily
for 14 days. After the final treatment of ONO-4059, the total RNAs were
extracted from frozen re-sected tumour tissue specimens, which comprised
of 10 samples at each dose, along with 10 vehicle tissue samples.
Microarray analysis was conducted by Agilent technology.Results: The
inhibitory level of P-Btk achieved indicates profound anti-proliferative
activity of ONO-4059 in the TMD-8 model. Gene expression studies
demonstrated that ONO-4059 affects a core set of genes which contains 9
down-regulated and 8 up-regulated genes in a dose-dependent manner.
CXCL-10 is the prominent regulated gene that is down-regulated after
ONO-4059 treatment and CXCL-10 has been shown to be involved in the
pathological processes of human disorders, such as, infectious diseases,
inflammatory and autoimmune diseases as well as cancer. From a publicly
available microarray database, CXCL-10 expression has been shown to be
up-regulated in lymphoma patients, suggesting that CXCL-10 may be a
potential biomarker for ONO-4059 in the treatment of B-cell
malignancies.Conclusion: Our data show that ONO-4059 has potent
anti-tumour activity in a ABC-DLBCL xenograft model and that ONO-4059
achieves active tumor exposures as measured by P-Btk in vivo. ONO-4059 is
currently being developed in a Phase I clinical trial for the treatment
of B-cell malignancies. Additional work is now underway to determine
whether the combining ONO-4059 with other targeted agents affects CXCL-10
expression.

