Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting triple negative breast cancer using novel cell permeable
inhibitor to block ATM-PELP1-p53 axis.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is clinically aggressive and TNBC
patients do not benefit from antiestrogen and herceptin-based therapies;
so new therapeutic drugs are urgently needed. DNA damage response (DDR)
is critical for the maintenance of genome stability and serves as an
anti-cancer barrier. Recent evidence suggests that deregulation of key
components of the DDR pathway such as p53 and ATM is associated with TNBC
progression and metastasis. Our ongoing studies have identified proline,
glutamic acid, leucine rich protein 1 (PELP1), a proto-oncogene
overexpressed in breast cancer, as a novel substrate of ATM. PELP1
overexpression in breast cancer is an indicator of poor prognosis. The
objective of this study is to determine the mechanism and significance of
the ATM-PELP1-p53 pathway in TNBC cells. For this purpose, we used
ER-negative mutant (MT) p53 (MDA-MB-231, BT20, MDA-MB-468) and
ER-positive wildtype (WT) p53 (ZR-75 and MCF7) breast cancer cell lines.
We generated model cells that have stable expression of control or
PELP1shRNA. Our results with PELP1 knockdown models indicate that PELP1
functions as a co-regulator of p53. Immunoprecipitation and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that PELP1 interacts with p53
and is recruited to p53 target genes, respectively. The p53 regulatory
role of PELP1 is mediated by the phosphorylation of PELP1 (p-PELP1) by
ATM at the conserved SQ motif. Through model cell lines that overexpress
WT or MT (S1033A) PELP1 we demonstrated the significance of p-PELP1 in WT
p53 co-activation functions. Utilizing the unique sequence surrounding
the ATM phosphorylation site in PELP1, we developed a novel cell
permeable peptide (TAT-1033PELP1 peptide) as well as a p-PELP1 antibody
that uniquely recognizes S1033 p-PELP1. We confirmed ATM mediated
phosphorylation of PELP1 in vivo using S1033 p-PELP1 antibody. The
TAT-1033PELP1 inhibitor peptide significantly reduced ATM mediated
phosphorylation of endogenous PELP1. Interestingly, in TNBC cells that
have MTp53, PELP1 knockdown or treatment with TAT-1033PELP1 peptide
resulted in a significant loss of cell viability in response to genotoxic
stress. However, treatment of ER- positive breast cancer cells with this
peptide or PELP1 knockdown resulted in resistance to genotoxic stress,
suggesting unique therapeutic activity of TAT-1033PELP1 peptide towards
TNBC cells. Mechanistic studies showed that PELP1 functionally interacts
with MTp53 and regulates the expression of NF-Y and p63/p73 target genes.
The TAT-1033PELP1 peptide also reduces the migratory potential of TNBC
cells. IHC analysis of a tumor tissue array revealed increased PELP1
phosphorylation in TNBC tumors. Collectively, our results suggest that a
hyperactive ATM-PELP1-p53MT pathway contributes to TNBC progression and
that the TAT-1033PELP1 peptide represents a novel therapeutic to block
PELP1 oncogenic functions in TNBC.

