Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the PP2A tumor suppressor for the treatment of human
pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer is a disease with a high rate of mortality, as it is
generally diagnosed in the advanced stages when few effective treatments
are available. Given the clinical aggressivity of this disease and the
lack of good treatment options, the development of new therapeutic agents
for the treatment of pancreatic cancer is of the upmost importance.
Recent reports have suggested that disruption of several key signal
transduction pathways is important for the development of pancreatic
cancer. Many of these pathways are negatively regulated by PP2A, a
phosphatase that plays a role in many cellular processes, and whose
inhibition is essential for cell transformation. PP2A inhibition can
occur through inactivation by viral oncogenes, mutation of specific
subunits, or by overexpression of endogenous inhibitors, including SET
(also known as I2PP2A) and Cellular Inhibitor of PP2A (CIP2A). Here, we
show that SET and CIP2A are frequently overexpressed in human pancreatic
cancer cells and primary patient samples. This overexpression results in
decreased PP2A activity, and overexpression and stabilization of a key
PP2A target, c-Myc. Knockdown of SET or CIP2A increases PP2A activity and
reduces tumorigenic potential. Furthermore, inhibition of SET using a
peptide mimetic (OP449) in pancreatic cancer cell lines increases PP2A
activity, reduces migration and invasion, and decreases tumorigenic
potential. Thus, antagonizing SET and CIP2A could be an innovative
approach for the treatment of human pancreatic cancer.

