Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-19a-3p inhibits breast carcinoma metastasis via reversing M2
phenotype of TAMs.


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), most of which exhibit M2 phenotype,
function as immunosuppressive cells in tumor microenvironment (TME).
Polarization of TAMs from a pro-immune (M1 like) phenotype to an
immune-suppressive (M2-like) phenotype is one of the hallmarks of
malignancy, but their molecular basis is still remains unknown. It has
been reported that microRNAs are involved in monocyte-macrophage
differentiation. In this study, we found that miR-19a-3p, broadly
conserved in vertebrate, could reverse the M2 phenotype of RAW macrophage
cells. When mouse breast tumor cells such as 4T1, 4TO7 and EMT6 were
co-cultured with RAW macrophage cells which over express miR-19a-3p, the
invasion capacity was suppressed. Meanwhile, when the conditional medium
of RAW cells which were transfected with miR-19a-3p mimic was added into
culturing medium of tumor cells, the migration capacity of 4T1 and EMT6
breast cancer cells was inhibited. Moreover, when miR-19a-3p was injected
intratumor, consistent with the in vitro experiments, we found that the
M2 phenotype of TAMs was suppressed significantly. Although 4T1 xengraft
breast tumor growth was not affected by miR-19a-3p, lung metastasis of
tumor cells was significantly suppressed. Taken together, our findings
indicate that miR-19a-3p is down-regulated in M2 phenotype RAW macrophage
and TAMs in TME. The low expression of miR-19a-3p plays an important role
in inducing M2 macrophage polarization and promoting migration and
invasion capacity and metastasis.Citation Format: Jian Yang, Na Li,
Zhuhong Zhang, Qin Si, Chong Chen, Yan Liu, Ralph A. Reisfeld, Peiqing
Sun, Dwayne Stupack, Rong Xiang, Yunping Luo. miR-19a-3p inhibits breast
carcinoma metastasis via reversing M2 phenotype of TAMs. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2828.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2828

