Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional implication of TGFBR3 dysregulation and its clinical
application in oral cancer.


TGF- type III receptor (TGFBR3), a co-receptor for TGF- family members,
is required for the high-affinity binding of ligands to their receptors
to begin their cellular function. More and more studies showed
contrasting roles of TGFBR3, tumor suppressor or oncogene, depending on
the cancer type. However, the exact role of TGFBR3 and the responsible
mechanism in oral cancer remains to be characterized. By using
immunohisotochemical staining and real-time PCR, we found a
down-regulation of TGFBR3 in oral cancer tissues. In the same line of
this observation, we also detected a significant decrease of soluble
TGFBR3 (sTGFBR3) in the oral cancer patient sera when compared with
normal sera. Using Kaplan Meyer survival curve analysis and log rank
test, we found that low TGFBR3 expression patients tend to have poor
clinical outcome than those with high expression. Genetic manipulation of
TGFBR3 was used to examine the role of TGFBR3 in oral cancer cells.
Although the alteration resulted in differential effects on cell
proliferation, TGFBR3 knockdown significantly increased migration and
Matrigel invasion. TGFBR3 overexpression had the opposite effect on cell
migration and invasion. Xenograft tumorigenesis and metastasis will be
used to confirm the effect observed in vitro. Since TGFB is frequently
overxpressed in oral cancer cells, we will evaluate the therapeutic
potential of using sTGFBR3 in treating oral cancer in mice. Our study
should facilitate studying the role of TGFBR3 in oral cancer progression
and metastasis, and evaluating the possibility of using TGFBR3 as a
therapeutic target for oral cancer treatment.

