Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppressing excessive reactive oxygen species accumulation by RIP1
potentiates BPDE-induced transformation of human bronchial epithelial
cells.


Cell survival signaling is important for the malignant phenotypes of
cancer cells. Although the role of receptor-interacting protein 1 (RIP1)
in cell survival signaling is well documented, whether RIP1 is directly
involved in cancer development has never been studied. In this report, we
found that RIP1 expression is substantially increased in human non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tissues and cell lines. RIP1 expression in human
bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) was significantly induced by cigarette
smoke extract (CSE) or benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide (BPDE), the active
form of the tobacco-specific carcinogen benzo (a) pyrene (BaP). In RIP1
knockdown HBECs, BPDE-induced cytotoxicity was significantly increased,
which was associated with induction of cellular reactive oxygen species
(ROS), mainly hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) including JNK, ERK and p38.
Scavenging ROS suppressed BPDE-induced MAPK activation and inhibiting ROS
or MAPKs substantially blocked BPDE-induced cytotoxicity, suggesting
ROS-mediated MAPK activation is involved in BPDE-induced cell death. The
H2O2-reducing enzyme catalase is destabilized in an ERK- and
JNK-dependent manner in RIP1 knockdown HBECs and application of catalase
effectively blocked BPDE-induced H2O2 accumulation and cytotoxicity.
Importantly, BPDE-induced transformation of HBECs was significantly
reduced when RIP1 expression was suppressed. Altogether, these results
strongly suggest an oncogenic role for RIP1, which promotes malignant
transformation through protecting DNA-damaged cells against
carcinogen-induced cytotoxicity associated with excessive ROS production.

