Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMP9 processing of HSBP1 regulates tumor metastases.


Matrix metalloproteinases regulate pathophysiological events by
processing matrix proteins and secreted proteins. Previously, we
demonstrated that soluble heat shock protein B1 (HSPB1) is released
primarily from endothelial cells (ECs) and regulates angiogenesis via
direct interaction with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Here
we report that MMP9 can cleave HSPB1 and release anti-angiogenic
fragments, which play a key role in tumor metastasis. We mapped the
cleavage sites and explored their physiological relevance during these
processing events. HSPB1 cleavage by MMP9 inhibited VEGF-induced ECs
activation and the C-terminal HSPB1 fragment exhibited more interaction
with VEGF than did full-length HSPB1. HSPB1 cleavage occurs during B16F10
lung metastases in wild-type mice and is decreased in B16F10 lung
metastases of MMP9-null mice. Finally, we confirmed that secretion of
C-terminal HSPB1 fragment was significantly inhibited lung metastases of
B6F10 melanoma cells, compared to full-length HSPB1. These data suggest
that in vivo MMP9-mediated processing of HSPB1 acts to maintain an
angiogenic balance against tumor metastases. Moreover, these findings
potentially explain an anti-target effect for the failure of MMP
inhibitors in clinical trials, suggesting that MMP inhibitors may have
pro-tumorigenic effects by reducing HSPB1 fragmentation.

