Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eribulin caused re-modeling of tumor vasculature altering gene
expression profiling in angiogenesis and Epithelial Mesenchymal
Transition (EMT) signaling pathway of host cells within human breast
cancer cell (BCC) xenografts in nude mice.


Objective: Eribulin mesylate (ERI) is a synthetic macrocyclic ketone
analog of the marine sponge natural product halichondrin B and an
inhibitor of microtubule dynamics. The objective of this study was to
examine the effect of ERI on tumor vasculature with immunohistchemical
(IHC) analysis and gene expression profiling (GEP) in normal host cells,
such as endothelial cells and vascular mural cells within tumor
microenvironments in human BCC xenograft modelsMethods: Anti-tumor
activity of ERI was examined at doses of 1.5 and 3.0 mg/kg, i.v. at day
1, in human BCC MX-1, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-453 sc xenografts in nude
mice. For IHC and GEP analysis, tumor tissues were collected at day 4 and
day 8. IHC analysis was performed using mouse CD31 antibody to stain
endothelial cells. Microvessel density (MVD) and vessel perimeter were
determined by using Aperio Image Scope. GEP analysis for mouse host and
human tumor cells within tumor tissues was done by using mouse and human
TaqMan Low Density Arrays (TLDAs) consisting of a set of 92 genes related
to angiogenesis, metastasis/EMT and cell differentiation signal pathways.
Results shows % of non-treatment group (NT).Results: ERI showed
significant anti-tumor activity against all three human BCC xenografts in
a dose dependent manner. IHC analysis showed that ERI altered morphology
of tumor vasculature day 8 after treatments and increased number of
vessels with small size of perimeter (300um) in both MX-1 and MDA-MB-231
xenograft models (p300um) in both MX-1 and MDA-MB-231 xenograft models
(p<0.05 vs NT). ERI altered morphology of tumor vascular, which resembled
normalized vasculature in two of triple negative (TN) breast cancer
xenograft models. Next, GEP analysis revealed that in three human BCCs
xenograft models, expression of endothelial (CD31, CD105) and pericyte
markers (SMA, NG2) were decreased in host cells 4 days after treatment of
ERI (1.5mg/kg). ERI also decreased the expression of angiogenesis
regulating genes (VEGF; 22.6%, Dll4; 30.4%, Notch4; 42.6%, Tie2; 63.4%)
and genes in the EMT/metastasis pathway (TGFB1, ZEB1 and TWIST) in two of
TN BCC (65.1%, 65.0%, 56.5% in MX-1 and 41.6%, 55.8%, 46.1% in
MDA-MB-231, respectively) models compared to NT (p300um) in both MX-1 and
MDA-MB-231 xenograft models (p<0.05 vs NT). ERI altered morphology of
tumor vascular, which resembled normalized vasculature in two of triple
negative (TN) breast cancer xenograft models. Next, GEP analysis revealed
that in three human BCCs xenograft models, expression of endothelial
(CD31, CD105) and pericyte markers (SMA, NG2) were decreased in host
cells 4 days after treatment of ERI (1.5mg/kg). ERI also decreased the
expression of angiogenesis regulating genes (VEGF; 22.6%, Dll4; 30.4%,
Notch4; 42.6%, Tie2; 63.4%) and genes in the EMT/metastasis pathway
(TGFB1, ZEB1 and TWIST) in two of TN BCC (65.1%, 65.0%, 56.5% in MX-1 and
41.6%, 55.8%, 46.1% in MDA-MB-231, respectively) models compared to NT
(p<0.05), suggesting anti-EMT activity in host tissues within
tumors.Conclusions: ERI induced re-modeling of tumor vasculature in human
BCC xenograft models. GEP related to angiogenesis and EMT/metastasis
pathway was significantly affected with ERI treatment in host cells under
tumor microenvironments. ERI might cause remodeling of tumor vasculature
by regulating GEP in host cells. Further investigation may be warranted
to examine if the activity of ERI against host cells in tumor tissues
contributed to anti-tumor activity of ERI.

