Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triple negative breast cancer: BRCAness and concordance of
clinical features and treatment response with BRCA1 mutation carriers.


IntroductionPrevious work from our group and other groups has shown that
triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) frequently show BRCAness, the
phenotype that some sporadic tumors share with BRCA-mutated cancers. We
propose the use of a BRCA1-like genomic profile and of BRCA1 promoter
methylation as indicators of BRCAness. In a randomized trial, tumors with
this BRCA1-like profile responded more favorably to intensified
alkylating chemotherapy. We now assessed the frequency of BRCAness in a
large cohort of TNBCs. In addition, we determined the association with
clinicopathological variables and treatment response.MethodsA total of
388 TNBCs were included in this study. These were obtained from three
different sources: a neoadjuvant chemotherapy trial (n=152), a series of
patients from breast cancer families but without germline mutations
(n=145), and a series of patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy
(n=91). Two assays for BRCAness were employed: array Comparative Genomic
Hybridization (aCGH) to asses a BRCA1-like profile and methylation
specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) to
determine BRCA1 promoter methylation. BRCA1 germline mutation status was
known for half of the patients. Clinicopathological characteristics were
available for most patients, and chemotherapy response data was available
for the neoadjuvant series.ResultsIn the three series, 66% to 69% of the
tumors had an aCGH BRCA1-like profile and 27% to 37% showed BRCA1
promoter methylation. 87% of the tumors with promoter methylation showed
a BRCA1-like aCGH profile. A germline mutation in BRCA1 and somatic BRCA1
promoter methylation did not occut together (n=155; p = 10-6). Patients
with aCGH BRCA1-like or BRCA1 methylated tumors were younger than
patients with non-BRCA1-like or unmethylated tumors (p=0.02 and
pIntroductionPrevious work from our group and other groups has shown that
triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) frequently show BRCAness, the
phenotype that some sporadic tumors share with BRCA-mutated cancers. We
propose the use of a BRCA1-like genomic profile and of BRCA1 promoter
methylation as indicators of BRCAness. In a randomized trial, tumors with
this BRCA1-like profile responded more favorably to intensified
alkylating chemotherapy. We now assessed the frequency of BRCAness in a
large cohort of TNBCs. In addition, we determined the association with
clinicopathological variables and treatment response.MethodsA total of
388 TNBCs were included in this study. These were obtained from three
different sources: a neoadjuvant chemotherapy trial (n=152), a series of
patients from breast cancer families but without germline mutations
(n=145), and a series of patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy
(n=91). Two assays for BRCAness were employed: array Comparative Genomic
Hybridization (aCGH) to asses a BRCA1-like profile and methylation
specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) to
determine BRCA1 promoter methylation. BRCA1 germline mutation status was
known for half of the patients. Clinicopathological characteristics were
available for most patients, and chemotherapy response data was available
for the neoadjuvant series.ResultsIn the three series, 66% to 69% of the
tumors had an aCGH BRCA1-like profile and 27% to 37% showed BRCA1
promoter methylation. 87% of the tumors with promoter methylation showed
a BRCA1-like aCGH profile. A germline mutation in BRCA1 and somatic BRCA1
promoter methylation did not occut together (n=155; p = 10-6). Patients
with aCGH BRCA1-like or BRCA1 methylated tumors were younger than
patients with non-BRCA1-like or unmethylated tumors (p=0.02 and p<0.01,
respectively). BRCA1 mutated tumors and aCGH BRCA1-like tumors were more
often of histological grade 3 (97% vs. 74% (pIntroductionPrevious work
from our group and other groups has shown that triple negative breast
cancers (TNBC) frequently show BRCAness, the phenotype that some sporadic
tumors share with BRCA-mutated cancers. We propose the use of a
BRCA1-like genomic profile and of BRCA1 promoter methylation as
indicators of BRCAness. In a randomized trial, tumors with this
BRCA1-like profile responded more favorably to intensified alkylating
chemotherapy. We now assessed the frequency of BRCAness in a large cohort
of TNBCs. In addition, we determined the association with
clinicopathological variables and treatment response.MethodsA total of
388 TNBCs were included in this study. These were obtained from three
different sources: a neoadjuvant chemotherapy trial (n=152), a series of
patients from breast cancer families but without germline mutations
(n=145), and a series of patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy
(n=91). Two assays for BRCAness were employed: array Comparative Genomic
Hybridization (aCGH) to asses a BRCA1-like profile and methylation
specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) to
determine BRCA1 promoter methylation. BRCA1 germline mutation status was
known for half of the patients. Clinicopathological characteristics were
available for most patients, and chemotherapy response data was available
for the neoadjuvant series.ResultsIn the three series, 66% to 69% of the
tumors had an aCGH BRCA1-like profile and 27% to 37% showed BRCA1
promoter methylation. 87% of the tumors with promoter methylation showed
a BRCA1-like aCGH profile. A germline mutation in BRCA1 and somatic BRCA1
promoter methylation did not occut together (n=155; p = 10-6). Patients
with aCGH BRCA1-like or BRCA1 methylated tumors were younger than
patients with non-BRCA1-like or unmethylated tumors (p=0.02 and p<0.01,
respectively). BRCA1 mutated tumors and aCGH BRCA1-like tumors were more
often of histological grade 3 (97% vs. 74% (p<0.01) for BRCA1-mutated vs.
BRCA1 wildtype and 86% vs 67% (pIntroductionPrevious work from our group
and other groups has shown that triple negative breast cancers (TNBC)
frequently show BRCAness, the phenotype that some sporadic tumors share
with BRCA-mutated cancers. We propose the use of a BRCA1-like genomic
profile and of BRCA1 promoter methylation as indicators of BRCAness. In a
randomized trial, tumors with this BRCA1-like profile responded more
favorably to intensified alkylating chemotherapy. We now assessed the
frequency of BRCAness in a large cohort of TNBCs. In addition, we
determined the association with clinicopathological variables and
treatment response.MethodsA total of 388 TNBCs were included in this
study. These were obtained from three different sources: a neoadjuvant
chemotherapy trial (n=152), a series of patients from breast cancer
families but without germline mutations (n=145), and a series of patients
treated with adjuvant chemotherapy (n=91). Two assays for BRCAness were
employed: array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) to asses a
BRCA1-like profile and methylation specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent
Probe Amplification (MLPA) to determine BRCA1 promoter methylation. BRCA1
germline mutation status was known for half of the patients.
Clinicopathological characteristics were available for most patients, and
chemotherapy response data was available for the neoadjuvant
series.ResultsIn the three series, 66% to 69% of the tumors had an aCGH
BRCA1-like profile and 27% to 37% showed BRCA1 promoter methylation. 87%
of the tumors with promoter methylation showed a BRCA1-like aCGH profile.
A germline mutation in BRCA1 and somatic BRCA1 promoter methylation did
not occut together (n=155; p = 10-6). Patients with aCGH BRCA1-like or
BRCA1 methylated tumors were younger than patients with non-BRCA1-like or
unmethylated tumors (p=0.02 and p<0.01, respectively). BRCA1 mutated
tumors and aCGH BRCA1-like tumors were more often of histological grade 3
(97% vs. 74% (p<0.01) for BRCA1-mutated vs. BRCA1 wildtype and 86% vs 67%
(p<0.01) for aCGH BRCA1-like vs. non-BRCA1-like tumors). BRCA1-mutated
tumors had a higher response rate to neoadjuvant chemotherapy than BRCA1
wildtype tumors (71% vs. 37% (p=0.04) pathological complete remission
rate). For aCGH BRCA1-like and BRCA1 methylated tumors, a non-significant
trend for a better chemtherapy response was observed.ConclusionThe
majority of the TNBCs in this study show signs of BRCAness, and these
tumors share clinicopathological characteristics with BRCA1 mutated
tumors. Somatic BRCA1 promoter methylation and BRCA1 germline mutations
are mutually exclusive events. A better characterization of TNBC and the
presence of BRCAness will not only have consequences for treatment, but
also for hereditary breast cancer screening.

