Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of the chr13q22.1 pancreatic cancer risk locus
suggests allele-specific effects on DIS3 expression.


Pancreatic cancer is the 10th most common cancer and 4th most common
cause of cancer mortality in the United States. A genome wide association
study has revealed pancreatic cancer susceptibility loci on chromosomes
13q22.1, 1q32.1 and 5p15.33. The chr13q22.1 region contains the most
significant of all risk SNPs, rs9543325, (P= 3.27 x 1011) which is
located in a gene desert. The nearest genes are KLF5, KLF12, PIBF1, DIS3
and BORA, which range in distance from 265kb to 586kb, respectively, from
the most significant variants. Given the high linkage disequilibrium
across this risk locus, there are many candidate functional variants to
consider. Imputation in the region did not improve the signal but gave a
set of highly correlated SNPs which likely includes the functional
variant(s). In an effort to identify the functional variant(s) we
performed eQTL analyses to test the association between the genotypes of
these candidate SNPs and expression of nearby genes. Among 100 normal
pancreatic tissue samples, DIS3 showed the strongest association with
SNPs in our risk locus (P-values as low as 0.0004). Mutations in DIS3
have been identified in acute myeloid leukemia and multiple myeloma, and
its expression has been correlated with metastatic potential in
colorectal cancer, suggesting this gene could be important in pancreatic
cancer biology. Chromosome Conformation Capture (3C) was performed to
test for physical interactions between the risk locus and nearby genes.
This assay confirmed the three dimensional proximity of the risk locus
and DIS3 promoter. Sub-regions of the risk locus were then cloned
upstream of a minimal promoter controlling luciferase expression to assay
for potential allele specific enhancer/silencer activity. This assay
revealed a sub-region downstream of rs9543325 that causes allele-specific
silencing. These results suggest that a sub-region of the chr13q22.1 risk
locus has allele-specific effects on DIS3 expression, which may have
implications in the susceptibility to pancreatic cancer.

