Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect and safety of FOLFOXIRI+B-mab as preoperative chemotherapy
for multiple liver metastases of colorectal cancer.


Background; R0 resection for liver metastases of colorectal cancer is one
of the promising treatment to improve prognosis of advanced colorectal
cancer. Powerful regimen FOLFOXIRI including 3 cytotoxic drugs; 5FU,
irinotecan and oxaliplatin was reported as promising treatment for
advanced colorectal cancer (J Clin Oncol 2007; 25: 1670-76). In our
department Phase I/II study of FOLFOXIRI+B-mab including
fluoroiuracil/oxaliplatin/irinotecan/bevacizumab for advanced liver
metastases of colorectal cancer as pre-operative chemotherapy has been
conducted now, and Phase I was concluded. In this study, we report effect
and safety of FOLFOXIRI+B-mab in Phase I study. Methods: The study was
designed as a single-arm, open-label phase I/II trial. Phase I was
conducted as sequential dose escalation to define the maximum- tolerated
dose (MTD) of irinotecan. Patients who are colorectal cancer with 4 or
more liver metastases and no other distant metastases are included. The
regimen includes bevacizumab; 5 mg/kg, oxaliplatin; 85 mg/m2, l-LV; 200
mg/m2, 5FU; 400 mg/m2 administered on day 1, followed by 5FU; 2400 mg/m2
continuously administered for 46 hours. Dose escalation of Irinotecan was
planned from level 1; 150 mg/m2, level 2; 180 mg/m2 and level 0; 125
mg/m2. In Phase II, R0 resection rate of liver metastases as primary
endpoint will be evaluated using MTD of irinotecan estimated in Phase I.
Results: Currently, 9 patients were enrolled. In level 1, 1 patient
showed Grade 3 diarrhea as dose-limiting toxicity and for the other 5
patients 150 mg/m2 of irinotecan was tolerable. In level 2, 2 patients
showed DLT; one was Grade 3 diarrhea in the 1st cycle and the other one
was febrile neutropenia in the 2nd cycle. Then 180 mg/m2 of irinotecan
was over the MTD. Then Phase I study was concluded and recommend dose of
irinotecan was decided as 150 mg/m2. In all adverse event, Grade 3/4
neutropenia was detected in 66%. Excluding hematological toxicity, Grade
3 or worse adverse event was 2 cases of Grade 3 diarrhea. In the 6
patients, one patient have dropped out, 4 patients were performed R0
resection and one patient could not be performed R0 resection after 6
cycles of regimen. All 5 patients showed PR and average of reduction rate
was 62.7%. There was no pathological CR in the 4 patients who was
performed R0 resection. There was no severe postoperative complication in
them. Conclusion: This regimen is safe and shows high PR rate. So, the
regimen is effective and improve R0 resection rate for multiple liver
metastases of colorectal cancer. Further investigation of this study is
still ongoing now.

