Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ponatinib potently inhibits the activity of mutant variants of
FGFR commonly found in endometrial, lung and other cancers.


Introduction: Members of the fibroblast growth factor receptor family
(FGFR1-4) are mutationally-activated in a number of tumor types. A broad
array of mutations have been observed that likely activate through
different mechanisms, given the disparate functions of the domains they
are found in: the ligand binding (LB) domain, the extracellular (EC)
domain that effects receptor dimerization, the transmembrane (TM) domain,
and the kinase domain (KD). FGFR2 is mutated in 10% of endometrial
cancers, with 90% of all mutations found at six specific codons. In
addition, mutations have been found in 12% of lung squamous cell
carcinomas (SCCs; FGFR1-4), 50% of bladder cancers (FGFR3), and in
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM; FGFR1). Ponatinib (AP24534) is an oral
multi-targeted kinase inhibitor being developed for the treatment of CML
or Ph+ ALL. Previously, ponatinib was shown to also be a potent inhibitor
of all 4 FGFRs, inhibiting viability of Ba/F3 cells dependent on
activated variants of native FGFR1-4 (via fusion to a TEL dimerization
domain) with IC50s of 14-47 nM. Similar potency was observed in HEK cells
transiently transfected to overexpress full-length FGFR1-3, as measured
by inhibition of FGFR phosphorylation (IC50s 15-35 nM). Here, the HEK
cell system was used to test the ability of ponatinib to inhibit a broad
panel of naturally-occurring mutant variants of FGFR1-3, with a primary
focus on mutant variants of FGFR2 that have been observed in endometrial
and/or SCCs.Results: Of 12 FGFR2 mutants tested, ponatinib inhibited the
activity of 10 with high potency and 2 with moderate potency. The 10
mutants inhibited most potently (IC50s Introduction: Members of the
fibroblast growth factor receptor family (FGFR1-4) are
mutationally-activated in a number of tumor types. A broad array of
mutations have been observed that likely activate through different
mechanisms, given the disparate functions of the domains they are found
in: the ligand binding (LB) domain, the extracellular (EC) domain that
effects receptor dimerization, the transmembrane (TM) domain, and the
kinase domain (KD). FGFR2 is mutated in 10% of endometrial cancers, with
90% of all mutations found at six specific codons. In addition, mutations
have been found in 12% of lung squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs; FGFR1-4),
50% of bladder cancers (FGFR3), and in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM;
FGFR1). Ponatinib (AP24534) is an oral multi-targeted kinase inhibitor
being developed for the treatment of CML or Ph+ ALL. Previously,
ponatinib was shown to also be a potent inhibitor of all 4 FGFRs,
inhibiting viability of Ba/F3 cells dependent on activated variants of
native FGFR1-4 (via fusion to a TEL dimerization domain) with IC50s of
14-47 nM. Similar potency was observed in HEK cells transiently
transfected to overexpress full-length FGFR1-3, as measured by inhibition
of FGFR phosphorylation (IC50s 15-35 nM). Here, the HEK cell system was
used to test the ability of ponatinib to inhibit a broad panel of
naturally-occurring mutant variants of FGFR1-3, with a primary focus on
mutant variants of FGFR2 that have been observed in endometrial and/or
SCCs.Results: Of 12 FGFR2 mutants tested, ponatinib inhibited the
activity of 10 with high potency and 2 with moderate potency. The 10
mutants inhibited most potently (IC50s < 45 nM) included the 2 mutants
that together account for over half of those observed in endometrial
cancer (S252W and N550K) and included mutants located in all 4 functional
domains: the LB domain (S252W and P253R), the EC domain (Y376C and
W290C), the TM domain (C383R), and the KD (I548V, N550K, G584W, K660N and
R738K). The 2 FGFR2 mutants inhibited with moderate potency (IC50:
113-152 nM) were N550H and K660E. Select mutant versions of FGFR1 and 3
were also examined. Ponatinib had moderate potency against the
FGFR3-S249C EC domain mutant (IC50 128 nM) commonly found in bladder
cancer, and did not inhibit the less common K652E KD mutant. Ponatinib
potently inhibited the FGFR1-N546K KD mutant found in GBM (IC50 18 nM).
Importantly, in patients dosed once daily at 45 mg with ponatinib, peak
and trough concentrations are 145 nM and 64 nM, respectively. These
exposure levels exceed the IC50s for most mutants tested here.Conclusion:
Ponatinib potently inhibited the activity of a broad spectrum of FGFR
mutant variants, including FGFR2 mutants observed in endometrial and
SCCs. Most of the mutant variants were inhibited at concentrations shown
to be achievable in the clinic. These results provide strong support for
clinical evaluation of ponatinib in FGFR-driven cancers.

