Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinical significance of tissue miR-124 methylation in
sporadic and ulcerative colitis-associated colorectal cancer.


Background: Growing evidence indicates that the expression of several
miRNAs can be epigenetically regulated through methylation of their
promoter CpG sequences. MiR-124 is one such tumor suppressive miRNA,
which is expressed at lower levels in various human cancers due to
methylation of its promoter region. The present study aimed to determine
miR-124 methylation status and determine its clinical significance in
sporadic and ulcerative colitis-associated colorectal cancer (CRC).
Materials & Methods: We analyzed 579 colorectal tissues, which included
176 sporadic CRC and the corresponding adjacent normal colonic mucosa
(NC), 57 colorectal adenomas and 20 normal colonic mucosae from
non-cancer patients (NN). In addition, we also examined 135 normal
mucosae (N-UC), 12 dysplasia(D-UC) and 12 colitic cancers (C-UC) from UC
patients. We performed quantitative bisulfite pyrosequencing analysis to
determine miR-124 promoter methylation levels. Results: MiR-124
methylation rate was significantly higher in CRCs and adenomas compared
to NC or NN (PBackground: Growing evidence indicates that the expression
of several miRNAs can be epigenetically regulated through methylation of
their promoter CpG sequences. MiR-124 is one such tumor suppressive
miRNA, which is expressed at lower levels in various human cancers due to
methylation of its promoter region. The present study aimed to determine
miR-124 methylation status and determine its clinical significance in
sporadic and ulcerative colitis-associated colorectal cancer (CRC).
Materials & Methods: We analyzed 579 colorectal tissues, which included
176 sporadic CRC and the corresponding adjacent normal colonic mucosa
(NC), 57 colorectal adenomas and 20 normal colonic mucosae from
non-cancer patients (NN). In addition, we also examined 135 normal
mucosae (N-UC), 12 dysplasia(D-UC) and 12 colitic cancers (C-UC) from UC
patients. We performed quantitative bisulfite pyrosequencing analysis to
determine miR-124 promoter methylation levels. Results: MiR-124
methylation rate was significantly higher in CRCs and adenomas compared
to NC or NN (P<0.0001, CRC vs. NC; PBackground: Growing evidence
indicates that the expression of several miRNAs can be epigenetically
regulated through methylation of their promoter CpG sequences. MiR-124 is
one such tumor suppressive miRNA, which is expressed at lower levels in
various human cancers due to methylation of its promoter region. The
present study aimed to determine miR-124 methylation status and determine
its clinical significance in sporadic and ulcerative colitis-associated
colorectal cancer (CRC). Materials & Methods: We analyzed 579 colorectal
tissues, which included 176 sporadic CRC and the corresponding adjacent
normal colonic mucosa (NC), 57 colorectal adenomas and 20 normal colonic
mucosae from non-cancer patients (NN). In addition, we also examined 135
normal mucosae (N-UC), 12 dysplasia(D-UC) and 12 colitic cancers (C-UC)
from UC patients. We performed quantitative bisulfite pyrosequencing
analysis to determine miR-124 promoter methylation levels. Results:
MiR-124 methylation rate was significantly higher in CRCs and adenomas
compared to NC or NN (P<0.0001, CRC vs. NC; P<0.0001, CRC vs. NN).
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis revealed that
methylation levels of miR-124 can robustly discriminate patients with CRC
(AUC=0.977) and adenomas (AUC=0.985) from healthy controls. Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis showed that patients with high miR-124 methylation
demonstrated poor overall survival (p=0.001), and high miR-124
methylation was an independent prognostic factor of sporadic CRC
(p=0.028). Similarly, miR-124 methylation was significantly higher in
C-UC and D-UC compared to N-UC (pBackground: Growing evidence indicates
that the expression of several miRNAs can be epigenetically regulated
through methylation of their promoter CpG sequences. MiR-124 is one such
tumor suppressive miRNA, which is expressed at lower levels in various
human cancers due to methylation of its promoter region. The present
study aimed to determine miR-124 methylation status and determine its
clinical significance in sporadic and ulcerative colitis-associated
colorectal cancer (CRC). Materials & Methods: We analyzed 579 colorectal
tissues, which included 176 sporadic CRC and the corresponding adjacent
normal colonic mucosa (NC), 57 colorectal adenomas and 20 normal colonic
mucosae from non-cancer patients (NN). In addition, we also examined 135
normal mucosae (N-UC), 12 dysplasia(D-UC) and 12 colitic cancers (C-UC)
from UC patients. We performed quantitative bisulfite pyrosequencing
analysis to determine miR-124 promoter methylation levels. Results:
MiR-124 methylation rate was significantly higher in CRCs and adenomas
compared to NC or NN (P<0.0001, CRC vs. NC; P<0.0001, CRC vs. NN).
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis revealed that
methylation levels of miR-124 can robustly discriminate patients with CRC
(AUC=0.977) and adenomas (AUC=0.985) from healthy controls. Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis showed that patients with high miR-124 methylation
demonstrated poor overall survival (p=0.001), and high miR-124
methylation was an independent prognostic factor of sporadic CRC
(p=0.028). Similarly, miR-124 methylation was significantly higher in
C-UC and D-UC compared to N-UC (p<0.0001). ROC analysis showed that
miR-124 methylation can successfully discriminate C-UC (AUC=0.978) and
D-UC (AUC=0.884) from N-UC. Interestingly, high levels of miR-124
methylation in rectal specimens were an independent predictor for the
development of UC-associated CRC. Conclusions: miR-124 methylation is an
early event in sporadic, as well as ulcerative colitis-associated CRC.
Since miR-124 methylation could robustly identify patients with
colorectal adenomas and cancers, this miRNA has the potential to serve as
a diagnostic marker in colorectal neoplasia.

