Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained release of drug eluting nanoparticles from implantable
devices for loco-regional chemoradiation therapy.


Systemic chemotherapy is often used with radiation therapy in the
management of prostate, cervix and lung cancer patients, but leads to
severe systemic toxicities. We have introduced a new modality of
loco-regional chemoradiation therapy termed in-situ image guided
radiation therapy (BIS-IGRT) that offers the potential to deliver
planned, localized and sustained delivery of chemotherapy agent, without
systemic toxicities, as part of routine minimally invasive image guided
radiation therapy procedures. Such image guided chemoradiation therapy
requires characterization of the drug distribution produced by
implantable drug eluters. This work presents imaging based means to
measure temporal and spatial properties of diffusion distributions around
spacers coated with dye-loaded nanoparticles.The distribution of 250nm
silica nanoparticles (NP) conjugated to Cyanine 7.5 dye was evaluated
with a custom built high-speed near-infrared small animal imaging
platform providing 0.1 millimeter spatial resolution with >1Hz image
acquisition rate. A brachytherapy spacer loaded with the Cy7.5/silica NP
was injected subcutaneously on the left hind flank of a mouse and one was
inserted into a xenograft tumor on the opposite flank as part of an
approved animal research protocol. The mouse was imaged more than 36
days.The in vivo imaging experiments show that the area of high signal
increases with time suggesting that NP accumulate in the vicinity of a
spacer without diffusing to the rest of the body. The spatial and
temporal characteristics of NP accumulation indicate that a BIS-IGRT
approach may provide an effective means to improve the therapeutic ratio
of brachytherapy.Conclusion: In-vivo measurements demonstrate that NP
remain resident in the vicinity of the implanted eluting spacers with
accumulation over times appropriate to improve brachytherapy's
therapeutic ratio. Future work will optimize the NP and substrate
properties of an implantable spacer to attain the optimal chemotherapy
distributions for simultaneous placement during image guided
brachytherapy implants.We acknowledge partial support from NSF DGE
0965843 and HHS/5U54CA151881-02.

