Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Individual and combined activities of STAT1 and STAT3 have
prognostic relevance for the progression of colorectal carcinoma.


Aberrant activities of JAK/STAT signalling pathways have been implicated
in the development and spread of various cancer entities, among them
colorectal carcinoma (CRC). By immunohistochemical analysis of a tissue
microarray covering more than 400 CRC biopsies from patients with full
clinical documentation, the expression and activity status of STAT1 and
STAT3 was determined. Results were correlated with clinical information.
A significant association of high STAT1 activity (as indicated by nuclear
location) with longer patient overall survival was observed.
Unexpectedly, strong STAT3 expression in surgical specimens could be
clearly correlated with an increase in median overall survival by about
30 months.Interestingly, combined consideration of STAT1/3 expression and
activity levels in CRC specimens revealed patterns that match the
clinical outcome with statistical significance. For instance, tumors with
concomitant absence of STAT1 and STAT3 have a worse prognosis, while high
STAT1 activity along with low STAT3 activity proved associated with
longer patient survival.To address the signal transduction background of
these findings, STAT1/3 expression was experimentally modified inCRC cell
lines and effects on the growth of xenograft tumors were studied.
MimickingSTAT1/3 patterns from patient biopsies in xenografts resulted in
alterations in tumor growth well corresponding to clinical data. From
these experiments we draw the conclusions that the ratio of nuclear
STAT1/STAT3 is a determinant of colon carcinoma progression.Supported by:
Deutsche Krebshilfe, IZKF Jena, European Regional Development Fund ERDF

