Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Krppel-like factor 8 targets matrix metalloproteinase-14 to
promote breast cancer invasion and metastasis .


Krppel-like factor 8 (KLF8) regulates critical gene transcription and
invasion events associated with cancer, including epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and extracellular matrix degradation. Here,
we report a novel KLF8-to- matrix metalloproteinase-14 (MMP14) signaling
that promotes human breast cancer cell EMT, invasion and metastasis.
Cell-surface protein biotinylation and streptavidin pull-down showed that
overexpression of KLF8 induced cell-surface accumulation of MMP14 in
MCF-10A cells in a FAK-dependent manner, which was correlated with
increased MMP14 activity and the ectodomain shedding of E-cadherin. On
the other hand, knockdown of KLF8 in MDA-MB-231 cells reduced expression
and activity of MMP14 on the cell surface. Promoter reporter assays and
chromatin and oligonucleotide precipitations determined that KLF8
activated the human MMP14 gene promoter both directly and indirectly via
beta-catenin. Importantly, Matrigel invasion assays showed that MMP14 was
required for the KLF8-induced MCF-10A cell invasion in vitro. Experiments
using nude mice demonstrated that MMP-14 overexpression downstream of
KLF8 in the MDA-MB-231 cells makes a significant contribution to the
invasion and angiogenesis in the local primary tumors and lung
metastasis. Taken together, this work identified a novel role and
mechanisms for MMP14 downstream of KLF8 in the progression of breast
cancer metastasis.

