Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel 3D co-cultural model for epithelial-stromal cells
interaction in prostate cancer.


Paracrine function is a major mechanism of cell-cell communication within
tissue microenvironment in both normal development and disease. In vitro
cell culture models simulating tissue or tumor microenvironment are
necessary tools to delineate epithelial stromal interactions including
paracrine function. Yet an ideal 3-dimensional (3D) tumor model
specifically studying paracrine function is currently lacking. In order
to fill this void we developed a novel 3D co-culture model, using double
layered alginate hydrogel microspheres to incorporate prostate cancer
epithelial and stromal cells. The cells remained confined and viable
within their respective spheres for over 30 days. As a proof of principle
regarding paracrine function of the model, we measured shedded component
of E-cadherin (sE-cad) in the conditioned media, a major membrane bound
cell adhesive molecule that is highly dysregulated in cancers including
prostate. In addition to demonstrating that sE-cad can be reliably
quantified in the conditioned media, the time course experiments also
proved that the amount of sE-cad is influenced by epithelial stromal
interaction. In conclusion, the study establishes a novel 3D in vitro
co-culture model that can be used to study cell-cell paracrine
interaction.

