Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity induced leptin-notch signaling axis in breast cancer.


Obesity leads to increased leptin levels and signaling which has been
linked to the growth of breast cancer (BC). We early identified leptin as
an inducer of Notch in BC cells. However, whether leptin-induction of
Notch is instrumental to the development of BC is unknown. Objective:
Therefore, we examined the impact of obesity and inhibition of leptin
signaling (via LPrA2 antagonist) on the growth of syngeneic E0771-derived
BC and tumor expression of Notch in lean and obese mice and in E0771 cell
cultures. Methods: C57BL/6J female mice were fed either high-fat diet
(HFD, 60% Kcal from fat) or normal diet (10% Kcal from fat). Obesity was
defined as BW 20% BW Lean-control at week 5. Lean and
diet-induced-obesity (DIO) mice were orthotopically inoculated with mouse
E0771 cells in the lower left region of the mammary pad. One week later
the mice were treated with either (1) pegylated leptin peptide receptor
antagonist 2, PEG-LPrA2 or (2) PEG-Scrambled peptide (as control; 50l
i.v. tail vein/ 0.1 mM) following the two-arm design: (a) one and (b) two
doses/weekly. Treatment lasted for 4 weeks. Tumor onset and growth was
determined overtime and expression of Notch, its ligands, and crosstalk
factors were assessed using western blot, immunohistochemistry, and
ELISA. Leptin's effects on Notch and crosstalk factors were also
investigated in E0771 cell cultures. Results: Obesity induced E0771-BC
onset and growth and, increased the expression of Notch in vivo.
Inhibition of leptin signaling had a higher impact on DIO mice than in
lean mice by delaying onset and reducing tumor growth and the expression
of Notch. Therefore, high levels of leptin in DIO-mice played a positive
role in tumorigenesis. Similarly, leptin induced and PEG-LPrA2 decreased
Notch expression in E0771 cells in vitro. Present data further validate
the idea that the consumption of a high-fat diet leads to early BC onset
and growth, which was linked to the leptin-Notch axis. Our results
reinforce the potential use of inhibition of leptin signaling as a novel
approach to fight breast cancer, especially in obese patients showing
higher levels of leptin and incidence of BC.Funding: This work was
supported by NIH/NCI 5SC1CA138658-03 and the Georgia Cancer Coalition
Distinguished Cancer Scholar Award (to RRGP), NIH/2G12RR003034-26; U54
MSM/TU/UAB Cancer Center Partnership; and 1R21CA153172-01A1 (to MTK).
This research was also supported, in part, facilities and support
services at Morehouse School of Medicine (NIH 1C06 RR18386).

