Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel dynamic biomarkers of FGFR inhibition by
the FGFR1,2 and 3 selective inhibitor AZD4547.


AZD4547 is an orally bio-available, highly selective and potent small
molecule inhibitor, ATP competitive inhibitor of FGF receptors 1, 2 and
3. To identify novel dynamic transcript biomarkers of FGFR signalling
inhibition by AZD4547, a gene expression profiling study was performed.
Cell lines defined as sensitive or resistant to AZD4547 (n=10 for each
class) were treated with AZD4547 or DMSO control for 2, 6 or 24 hours and
processed for microarray analysis. Amongst those genes modulated by
AZD4547, the MEK signature genes DUSP6 and ETV5, together with the MAPK
pathway regulator SPRED1 were repressed on AZD4547 treatment across all
sensitive cell lines over time, consistent with FGFR signalling through
this pathway. Further in vivo validation using three FGFR
sensitive/responsive xenograft models (SNU16, KMS11, KG1a) was performed.
We observed time dependent repression (16h to 24h) of DUSP6, ETV5 and
SPRED1 across all three xenograft models which was consistent with plasma
exposure of AZD4547 in vivo. In addition, modulation of these transcript
biomarkers corresponded with inhibition of phosphorylation of FGFR, FRS2
and ERK, supporting engagement of the FGFR signalling pathway. Taken
together, these data identify novel dynamic biomarkers of FGFR inhibition
in vivo.

