Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common and different effects induced in primary human mesothelial
cells and mice exposed to chrysotile or crocidolite asbestos.


Crocidolite is considered the most oncogenic asbestos type. Chrysotile
accounts for >90% of asbestos used worldwide, however its capacity to
induce MM is still debated. We linked crocidolite carcinogenesis to the
release of High-Mobility Group Box-1 protein (HMGB1) and activation of
downstream genes (TNF- and NF-B). We compared the carcinogenicity of
crocidolite and chrysotile in primary human mesothelial cells (HM).
Microarray analyses of HM exposed to crocidolite or chrysotile identified
57 genes that were significantly induced or repressed. Forty-eight hours
after exposure we observed induction of HMGB1 and NF-B targeted genes and
E-cadherin and SFRP4 down-regulation. In vitro, both crocidolite and
chrysotile induced HMGB1 and TNF- secretion, induced -catenin nuclear
translocation and caused HM death and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
in surviving cells. Five weeks from exposure these effects were sustained
in HM exposed to crocidolite; the expression of these genes had returned
to normal in HM exposed to chrysotile. Soon after injection, serum HMGB1
levels were elevated in mice injected with either crocidolite or
chrysotile, and remained elevated 10 weeks post-injection only in mice
injected with crocidolite. Our results show that chrysotile induces the
same intracellular signaling elicited by crocidolite, however these
effects are transient. Accordingly, HM exposure to chrysotile in the
presence of TNF- or in co-culture with macrophages, induced foci
formation with a lower transforming efficiency compared to crocidolite.

