Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of SJG-136 with cognate sequences of oncogenic
transcription factors.


The pyrrolo[2,1-c][1,4]benzodiazepines (PBDs) are sequence-selective DNA
minor-groove interacting agents. They have a chiral centre at their
C11a(S)-position which provides them with the appropriate 3-dimensional
shape to fit securely within the DNA minor-groove. They also possess a
soft electrophilic imine moiety at their N10-C11 position which can form
an aminal linkage with the C2-NH2 group of a guanine base. The PBD dimer
SJG-136 is presently in Phase II clinical trials in ovarian cancer and
leukaemia. Transcription factors act through direct or indirect binding
to specific DNA consensus sequences within gene regulatory regions, or by
forming a complex with other proteins which then act as transcription
factors. Covalent or non-covalent interaction of small molecules with key
consensus DNA bases can prevent a transcription factor from recognizing
its cognate sequence, thus preventing expression of genes critical for
the survival and proliferation of cancer cells. The cognate sequences of
a number of oncogenic transcription factors are unusually rich in GC
sequences and provide ideal alkylation substrates (for both inter- and
intrastrand cross-links and mono-alkylation) for both PBD dimers (e.g.
SJG-136) and PBD monomers, and there is growing evidence that PBDs exert
their pharmacological effects through this mechanism. We have developed a
reversed-phase ion pair HPLC/MS method as a tool to evaluate the
interaction of DNA-binding molecules with oligonucleotides of varying
length and sequences. Using this methodology along with custom-designed
oligonucleotides containing the cognate sequences of the transcription
factors NFB, AP-1, EGR-1 and Stat3, all of which contain ideal GC-rich
binding sequences for SJG-136, we have observed both kinetic and
thermodynamic adduct formation with SJG-136. Crucially, we observed a
significant difference in rate and extent of adduct formation between the
different cognate sequences which could partly explain the differences in
activity of SJG-136 toward different tumour cell lines. For example,
SJG-136 formed an adduct rapidly with the NFB sequence (>50% adduct
within 3 hours), moderately with the STAT3 (>35% adduct within 3 hours)
and EGR-1 cognate sequences (>30% adduct within 3 hours) while showing
insignificant adduct formation with the AP-1 cognate sequence (The
pyrrolo[2,1-c][1,4]benzodiazepines (PBDs) are sequence-selective DNA
minor-groove interacting agents. They have a chiral centre at their
C11a(S)-position which provides them with the appropriate 3-dimensional
shape to fit securely within the DNA minor-groove. They also possess a
soft electrophilic imine moiety at their N10-C11 position which can form
an aminal linkage with the C2-NH2 group of a guanine base. The PBD dimer
SJG-136 is presently in Phase II clinical trials in ovarian cancer and
leukaemia. Transcription factors act through direct or indirect binding
to specific DNA consensus sequences within gene regulatory regions, or by
forming a complex with other proteins which then act as transcription
factors. Covalent or non-covalent interaction of small molecules with key
consensus DNA bases can prevent a transcription factor from recognizing
its cognate sequence, thus preventing expression of genes critical for
the survival and proliferation of cancer cells. The cognate sequences of
a number of oncogenic transcription factors are unusually rich in GC
sequences and provide ideal alkylation substrates (for both inter- and
intrastrand cross-links and mono-alkylation) for both PBD dimers (e.g.
SJG-136) and PBD monomers, and there is growing evidence that PBDs exert
their pharmacological effects through this mechanism. We have developed a
reversed-phase ion pair HPLC/MS method as a tool to evaluate the
interaction of DNA-binding molecules with oligonucleotides of varying
length and sequences. Using this methodology along with custom-designed
oligonucleotides containing the cognate sequences of the transcription
factors NFB, AP-1, EGR-1 and Stat3, all of which contain ideal GC-rich
binding sequences for SJG-136, we have observed both kinetic and
thermodynamic adduct formation with SJG-136. Crucially, we observed a
significant difference in rate and extent of adduct formation between the
different cognate sequences which could partly explain the differences in
activity of SJG-136 toward different tumour cell lines. For example,
SJG-136 formed an adduct rapidly with the NFB sequence (>50% adduct
within 3 hours), moderately with the STAT3 (>35% adduct within 3 hours)
and EGR-1 cognate sequences (>30% adduct within 3 hours) while showing
insignificant adduct formation with the AP-1 cognate sequence (< 5%
adduct within 3 hours) even though their GC contents are comparable.
These findings add to knowledge of the possible mechanism of SJG-136, and
could help with interpretation of the activity of SJG-136 in various
biochemical and pharmacological assays.

