Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Does selenium supplementation increase serum glucose levels in men
at high risk for prostate cancer.


Background: Current literature regarding the effect of selenium
supplementation on risk of diabetes is inconclusive. Hence a longitudinal
study was conducted to investigate the effect of selenium supplementation
on serum glucose levels in elderly men.Methods: Data were obtained from
699 men participating in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
Phase 3 clinical trial investigating the effect of two doses of selenium
(200 and 400 g/day) compared to placebo on incidence of prostate cancer.
Subjects were followed every six months for up to five years. Serum
glucose levels were obtained every six months. Mixed effects regression
models were used to assess if rate of change of serum glucose levels was
significantly different in the selenium supplemented groups as compared
to placebo. Sensitivity analyses were performed to assess the robustness
of findings and to minimize the possibility of residual bias due to
fasting status.Results: Of the total 2893 glucose measurements, 734 were
carried out when the subject had been fasting for 8 hours. The changes in
serum glucose levels during the course of the trial were not
statistically significantly different as compared to placebo for the
selenium 200 g/day (p = 0.88) or selenium 400 g/day (p = 0.45) treatment
groups. Sensitivity analyses demonstrated comparable results for models
using the total population and models restricted to subjects with only
fasting glucose data.Conclusion: These results do not support a
relationship between selenium supplementation and risk of diabetes. Hence
recommendations regarding selenium supplementation based on increased
risk of diabetes seem premature.

