Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-17A activates tumor progression locus 2 to induce
neoplastic cell transformation and breast carcinogenesis.


Interleukin-17 (IL-17) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine secreted by
activated CD4+ memory T cells. Although the role of T cells in cancer
promotion has been examined, little is known about the underlying
molecular mechanisms of interleukin-17 A (IL-17A) in carcinogenesis. In
the present study, we first found that IL-17A induces neoplastic
transformation of JB6 Cl41 cells through activation of tumor progression
locus 2 (TPL2). IL-17A activates MEKs-ERKs, JNKs-c-Jun, and STAT3
signaling pathways, which are inhibited by a TPL2 kinase inhibitor (TKI).
Furthermore, IL-17A activates c-fos and c-jun promoter activity,
resulting in increased activator protein-1 (AP-1) activity. When small
interfering RNA (siRNA) of IL-17A receptor (IL-17R), IL-17A, and TPL2
were introduced into JB6 Cl41 cells, respectively, IL-17A-induced AP-1
activity was significantly decreased compared to control cells.
Similarly, TPL2 inhibition suppressed AP-1 activity induced by IL-17A.
The knockdown of IL-17R and TKI treatment in JB6 Cl41 cells resulted in
decreased IL-17A-induced cell transformation. The in vivo chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) assay also showed that IL-17A increased tumor formation of
JB6 Cl41 cells, whereas TKI inhibited the tumorigenesis promoted by
IL-17A. Consistent with these observations, knockdown of IL-17A and/or
inhibition of TPL2 attenuated tumorigenecity of human breast cancer MCF7
cells. Moreover, immunohistochemical staining showed that both
expressions of IL-17A and TPL2 were highly upregulated in human breast
cancers. Together, our findings point to a critical role for the
IL-17A-induced TPL2 signaling pathway in supporting cancer-associated
inflammation in the tumor microenvironment. Therapeutic approaches that
target this pathway may therefore effectively inhibit
carcinogenesis.Citation Format: Garam Kim, Hong Seok Choi.
Interleukin-17A activates tumor progression locus 2 to induce neoplastic
cell transformation and breast carcinogenesis. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1422.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1422

