Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAp73 depletion unleashes p53-mediated apoptotic response to
lethal DNA damage.


DNA damage response is essential for maintenance of genomic integrity and
functions as a guardian against oncogenic transformation. Ionizing
radiation and chemotherapeutic drugs used in anticancer therapies often
incur DNA damage in killing of tumor cells. The central regulator of DNA
damage response is the tumor suppressor p53, which inhibits cell cycle
progression by activating p21 and other cell cycle regulators, or induces
apoptosis through proapoptotic targets such as PUMA and Bax. In addition
to p53, other p53 family members, such as p73 and p63, also play a
significant role in DNA damage response. However, it has remained unclear
how coordination of different p53 family members modulates DNA damage
response. In this study, we found that sub-lethal levels of DNA damage
up-regulated TAp73, the transcriptionally active form of p73, whereas
lethal doses of DNA damage triggered TAp73 depletion. In response to mild
DNA damage, TAp73 occupied p53 responsive elements in the promoters of
p53 target genes to keep the transcriptional activity of p53 in check,
which resulted in cell cycle arrest. Following excessive DNA damage, the
depletion of TAp73 resulted in enhanced induction of p53 target genes
such as PUMA, Noxa and Bax, leading to apoptosis initiation. Furthermore,
our results demonstrated that TAp73 depletion after excessive DNA damage
was caused by ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated degradation of E2F1, which
activates TAp73 expression to maintain cell survival. Collectively, our
results suggest that modulation of p53 activity by TAp73 mediates
differential responses to genotoxic stress.

