Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CKD-516 displays vascular disrupting properties and enhances
anti-tumor activity in combination with chemotherapy in a murine tumor
model.


PURPOSE: CKD-516 is a benzophenone analog with a modification of the B
ring, which is replaced by a carbonyl group. The aim of this study is to
assess the antivascular effects and the inhibition of cell proliferation
of CKD-516.MATERIALS AND METHODS: To assess the effect of CKD-516 on
vascularization, we analyzed the effect on endothelial cells (HUVECs). To
determine the inhibition of cell proliferation of CKD-516, we used a lung
carcinoma cell line (H460). The alteration of microtubule analyzed using
immunoblot, RT-PCR and confocal image. To evaluate the anti-tumor effects
of gemcitabine and/or CKD-516, H460 xenograft mice were treated with
CKD-516 (2.5 mg/kg) or gemcitabine (40 mg/kg) or CKD-516 + gemcitabine,
and tumor growth was compared with vehicle-treated control. For
histologic analysis, liver, spleen and tumor tissues were taken at 12 and
24 hours after CKD-516 injection from H460 xenograft mice.RESULTS: We
determined that cytoskeletal changes of HUVECs treated with 10 nM CKD-516
were assessed by immunoblot and confocal imaging. CKD-516 disrupts
tubulin assembly and results in microtubule dysfunction inducing cell
cycle arrest (G2/M). CKD-516 markedly enhanced the depolymerization of
microtubules which may be related to vascular disrupting properties of
CKD-516. Interestingly, CKD-516 decreased amount of total tubulin protein
in HUVECs. Especially, CKD-516 decreased mRNA expression -tubulin (HUVECs
only) and -tubulin (HUVECs and H460) at early time point (4 h).
Immunocytochemical analysis showed that CKD-516 changed the cellular
microtubule network and inhibited the formation of polymerized
microtubules. We also showed extensive central necrosis of tumor by 24 h
after treated with CKD-516 (2.5 mg/kg, i.p.). In H460 xenograft, CKD-516
combined with gemcitabine significantly delayed tumor growth as compared
to control and gemcitabine alone.CONCLUSION: These results suggest that
CKD-516 is a novel agent with vascular disrupting properties, and
enhances anti-tumor activity in combination with chemotherapy.

