Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting procollagen secretory pathway for the treatment of
primary brain tumor through ER stress.


We have previously shown that primary brain tumor from patients and cell
lines possess type I alpha 1 procollagen. Procollagen type I, III, and IV
have also been reported to be expressed in certain glioma subtypes.
Although the function of these procollagens is not known, they are most
likely involved in invasion and signaling. We have further investigated
whether manipulation of the secretion of these procollagens can be used
to kill glioma cells. We have studied the expression of procollagen type
I alpha 1 and2 (Pro-col1A1 & A2), procollagen type III alpha 1
(Pro-col3A1) and procollagen type IV alpha 1&2 (Proc-col4A1 & A2) in 5
cell lines (Glioma-1, U-373, U-118, U-87, and A-172) using real time
RT-PCR (qPCR) and western blot when antibody was available. Our data
showed that A-172 expressed all 5 types of procollagen, while U-87, U-118
and Glioma-1 expressed primary Pro-colA1 and A2, and U-373 expressed only
pro-col1A2 and pro-col4A1 and A2. Hsp47, which is a major chaperone in
the folding of procollagen type I, is not expressed in U-373. This cell
line also possessed very high levels of GRP-78 which is indicative of
increased ER stress. We also investigated the presence of collagen
receptor Endo 180 and DDR1 (discodin domain receptor 1) in these cell
lines. Endo 180 was present in all 5 cell lines, but to a much lesser
extent in U-373. The DDR1 expression by qPCR was the highest in A-172
followed by U-118 (>5 arbitrary units) while U-373, U-87 and Glioma-1
have less than 3 arbitrary units. It is known that procollagen needs to
be folded at ER and then secreted out of the cells, where it will be
processed to form collagen. Collagen can then bind DDR1, a receptor
tyrosine kinase which plays a role in attachment, migration,
proliferation and survival. In this regard, we have detected pro-col1A1
and A2 in the media which verified that pro-col1A1 and A2 are secreted
outside the cells. We hypothesize that inability to secrete procollagen
will result in both ER stress and inability for signaling. To accomplish
this, we have studied the cytotoxic effect of brefeldin (BFA) which is
known to block the transport of secretory protein from ER/Golgi network
to the cell surface in these five cell lines. All five cell lines are
very sensitive to brefeldin with IC50 of 3.0 ng/ml for U-118, A-172 and
U-87. In U-373 and Glioma-1 the IC50 was 5.0 ng/ml. Interestingly, cancer
stem cells isolated from U-87 did not possess pro-co1A1, but DDR1 mRNA
was present and was 3 times higher than in the non stem cells. They also
have different metabolic profiling than their parental cells, such as
they do not express argininosuccinate synthetase, a key enzyme to
synthesize arginine which made them sensitive to arginine deprivation
treatment. Whether these differences exist in vivo is not known. Overall,
our data indicate that the expression of procollagen and its secretory
pathway can be used as a new paradigm to treat primary brain tumor
through ER stress-mediated cell death.

