Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TEL-AML1-induced STAT3 activation is essential for
t(12;21)-associated childhood leukemia.


The t(12;21)(p13;q22) translocation is the most common chromosomal
abnormality in pediatric leukemia, present in up to 25% of children with
pre-B cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL). This translocation
involves two transcription factors, TEL(ETV6) and AML(RUNX1), both of
which have crucial roles in regulating hematopoiesis.Our lab has
previously established a list of TEL-AML1 transcriptional target genes
using Affymetrix GeneChip global gene expression analysis of mouse fetal
liver hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) over-expressing the fusion
cDNA. This analysis demonstrated deregulated expression of genes
associated with STAT3 signaling, known to be one of the most important
pathways required for proliferation and maintenance of multipotency in
cancer stem cells.In this study, we analyze the importance of STAT3
activity in a mouse model of TEL-AML1 overexpression, in human TEL-AML1
positive leukemia cells and primary human leukemic samples. Our results
show that activation STAT3, via RAC1 induction, is necessary for the
survival, proliferation and self-renewal of TEL-AML1 positive leukemia
through transcriptional regulation of MYC expression.In conclusion we
show a novel signaling pathway important for the maintenance of TEL-AML1
leukemia that constitutes a promising novel therapeutic strategy for the
treatment of TEL-AML1 leukemia.

