Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design of a model for the development of cisplatin resistance in
H526 human small cell lung cancer xenografts.


Treatment of Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC) often fails due to the rapid
development of resistance to chemotherapy drugs. Reversal of resistance
has proven to be difficult to achieve; thus, we have suggested an
alternative strategy - prevention of its development [Frenkel & Caffrey,
Current Pharmaceutical Design, (2001) 7: 1595-1614]. In order to
investigate this possibility we previously designed a model of the
development of cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer xenografts, which
mimics the development of clinical resistance in ovarian cancer patients
[Caffrey & Frenkel, Cancer Chemotherapy Pharmacology (2000) 46: 74-78].
We used this model to identify compounds which are able to prevent
resistance; these are being further investigated in a Phase I clinical
trial. We have now designed an analogous model of the development of
resistance in SCLC xenografts. Mice were injected sc with H526 SCLCL
cells. Those bearing visible tumors were injected i.p. with a single
pretreatment dose of cisplatin ranging from 0.75 - 3.0 mg/kg. On the 3rd,
5th or 7th day after this pretreatment, mice were injected i.p. with a
single high dose of cisplatin (3.0 mg/kg). This high dose decreased the
growth rate of control (PBS pretreated) tumors by 40%. Tumors whose
growth curve was decreased by less than 40% were considered resistant.
Our results indicated that several potential models resulted in a low
incidence of resistance. However, pretreatment with 1.5 mg/kg followed
seven days later by high dose treatment of 3.0 mg/kg consistently
resulted in the development of cisplatin-resistant tumors. This model can
be used to screen a variety of agents for their ability to prevent the
induction of platinum resistance in SCLC tumors. Supported by a grant
from the PA State System of Higher Education.

