Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-29 family as tumor suppressive microRNAs in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma: microRNA-29a/b/c inhibits cell migration and
invasion targeting focal adhesion and ECM pathways.


BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth
most common malignancy worldwide. In spite of considerable advances in
multimodality therapy such as surgery, radiation therapy and
chemotherapy, the overall five-year survival rate for patients with HNSCC
is around 40%. Understanding of the molecular cancer pathway underlying
HNSCC could significantly improve diagnosis, therapy, and disease
prevention. Our microRNA (miRNA) expression signatures of hypopharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and maxillary sinus SCC revealed that the
expression of microRNA-29 family (miR-29a/b/c) was significantly reduced
in cancer tissues. The aim of the study was to investigate the functional
significance of miR-29a/b/c and to explore the novel molecular pathways
and responsibility genes regulated by miR-29a/b/c in HNSCC.METHODS:
Gain-of-function studies were performed to investigate cancer cell
proliferation, migration and invasion by mature miRNAs transfection into
HNSCC cell lines (SAS and FaDu). To identify the biological processes or
pathways potentially regulated by the miR-29 family, we applied
genome-wide gene expression analysis and in silico study; TargetScan
database [http://www.targetscan.org/] and GENECODIS software, which
assigned a number of the putative miRNA targets to known pathways in KEGG
[http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html]. The expression levels of
miR-29-family target genes were verified using public database of Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) in HNSCC clinical specimens.RESULTS: Expression
levels of miR-29 family were significantly reduced in HNSCC clinical
specimens compared to adjacent non-cancerous tissues (PBACKGROUND: Head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
malignancy worldwide. In spite of considerable advances in multimodality
therapy such as surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy, the overall
five-year survival rate for patients with HNSCC is around 40%.
Understanding of the molecular cancer pathway underlying HNSCC could
significantly improve diagnosis, therapy, and disease prevention. Our
microRNA (miRNA) expression signatures of hypopharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), and maxillary sinus SCC revealed that the expression of
microRNA-29 family (miR-29a/b/c) was significantly reduced in cancer
tissues. The aim of the study was to investigate the functional
significance of miR-29a/b/c and to explore the novel molecular pathways
and responsibility genes regulated by miR-29a/b/c in HNSCC.METHODS:
Gain-of-function studies were performed to investigate cancer cell
proliferation, migration and invasion by mature miRNAs transfection into
HNSCC cell lines (SAS and FaDu). To identify the biological processes or
pathways potentially regulated by the miR-29 family, we applied
genome-wide gene expression analysis and in silico study; TargetScan
database [http://www.targetscan.org/] and GENECODIS software, which
assigned a number of the putative miRNA targets to known pathways in KEGG
[http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html]. The expression levels of
miR-29-family target genes were verified using public database of Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) in HNSCC clinical specimens.RESULTS: Expression
levels of miR-29 family were significantly reduced in HNSCC clinical
specimens compared to adjacent non-cancerous tissues (P<0.05).
Restoration of each miR-29 family significantly inhibited cancer cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion in the HNSCC cell lines. Our
expression and in silico analysis showed that miR-29 family appeared to
be an important modulator of tumor cell processes through suppression of
many targets, particularly those involved in focal adhesion and ECM
(extra-cellular matrix)-receptor interaction signaling pathways
(PBACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth
most common malignancy worldwide. In spite of considerable advances in
multimodality therapy such as surgery, radiation therapy and
chemotherapy, the overall five-year survival rate for patients with HNSCC
is around 40%. Understanding of the molecular cancer pathway underlying
HNSCC could significantly improve diagnosis, therapy, and disease
prevention. Our microRNA (miRNA) expression signatures of hypopharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and maxillary sinus SCC revealed that the
expression of microRNA-29 family (miR-29a/b/c) was significantly reduced
in cancer tissues. The aim of the study was to investigate the functional
significance of miR-29a/b/c and to explore the novel molecular pathways
and responsibility genes regulated by miR-29a/b/c in HNSCC.METHODS:
Gain-of-function studies were performed to investigate cancer cell
proliferation, migration and invasion by mature miRNAs transfection into
HNSCC cell lines (SAS and FaDu). To identify the biological processes or
pathways potentially regulated by the miR-29 family, we applied
genome-wide gene expression analysis and in silico study; TargetScan
database [http://www.targetscan.org/] and GENECODIS software, which
assigned a number of the putative miRNA targets to known pathways in KEGG
[http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html]. The expression levels of
miR-29-family target genes were verified using public database of Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) in HNSCC clinical specimens.RESULTS: Expression
levels of miR-29 family were significantly reduced in HNSCC clinical
specimens compared to adjacent non-cancerous tissues (P<0.05).
Restoration of each miR-29 family significantly inhibited cancer cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion in the HNSCC cell lines. Our
expression and in silico analysis showed that miR-29 family appeared to
be an important modulator of tumor cell processes through suppression of
many targets, particularly those involved in focal adhesion and ECM
(extra-cellular matrix)-receptor interaction signaling pathways (P<0.05).
Among two pathways, seven genes were putative targets regulated by miR-29
family (CAV2, CDC42, ITGA6, LAMC1, COL4A1, LAMC2, and COL6A1). Gene
expression data showed that three genes (ITGA6, COL4A1 and LAMC2), were
significantly up-regulated in clinical HNSCC tumor specimens compared
with normal epithelium.CONCLUSIONS: miR-29 family functioned as pivotal
suppressor of cell migration and invasion in HNSCC through targeting
focal adhesion and ECM signaling pathways. Elucidation of tumor
suppressive miR-29 family-mediated cancer pathways and putative targets
might be provided the novel molecular mechanisms to understand local
tumor recurrence or distant metastasis of HNSCC.

