Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gliomas: methylation status of MGMT gene monitoring in plasma DNA
of patients receiving chemotherapy with alkylating agents.


The protein MGMT (O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase) is responsible
for the DNA repair from damage in O6 position of guanine induced by
alkylating agent such as temozolomide, which represent the conventional
treatment of gliomas. Silencing of the MGMT gene by epigenetic
methylation of its promoter may disable this repair mechanism, thus
increasing the cytotoxicity of chemotherapy. Previous studies showed that
glioblastama patients, with a methylated MGMT gene promoter in tumour
tissue, are more sensitive to the action of alkylating agents and
experience higher survival.The aim of the study was to verify the
feasibility and the utility of monitoring the state of methylation of
MGMT in circulating DNA as a predictive marker of prognosis and response
to treatment.Fiftyeight patients with glioma (12 with low and 46 with
high grade) who underwent surgical resection and who were eligible for
therapy with temozolomide, were enrolled in the study. Blood samples for
the analysis of MGMT methylation status were collected before any
treatment (T0) and during the treatment at the time of each magnetic
resonance imaging (about every 3 months). The methylation status of the
MGMT gene promoter in circulating DNA was investigated using PCR with a
specific probe for the methylated sequence.The MGMT promoter methylation
status in tumour tissue and in plasma was highly concordant: in the 79%
of the patients the MGMT promoter was methylated both in tumour tissue
and plasma, while in the 21% of patients MGMT promoter was methylated in
tissue but not in plasma (Cohen's kappa coefficient = 0.75, p The protein
MGMT (O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase) is responsible for the DNA
repair from damage in O6 position of guanine induced by alkylating agent
such as temozolomide, which represent the conventional treatment of
gliomas. Silencing of the MGMT gene by epigenetic methylation of its
promoter may disable this repair mechanism, thus increasing the
cytotoxicity of chemotherapy. Previous studies showed that glioblastama
patients, with a methylated MGMT gene promoter in tumour tissue, are more
sensitive to the action of alkylating agents and experience higher
survival.The aim of the study was to verify the feasibility and the
utility of monitoring the state of methylation of MGMT in circulating DNA
as a predictive marker of prognosis and response to treatment.Fiftyeight
patients with glioma (12 with low and 46 with high grade) who underwent
surgical resection and who were eligible for therapy with temozolomide,
were enrolled in the study. Blood samples for the analysis of MGMT
methylation status were collected before any treatment (T0) and during
the treatment at the time of each magnetic resonance imaging (about every
3 months). The methylation status of the MGMT gene promoter in
circulating DNA was investigated using PCR with a specific probe for the
methylated sequence.The MGMT promoter methylation status in tumour tissue
and in plasma was highly concordant: in the 79% of the patients the MGMT
promoter was methylated both in tumour tissue and plasma, while in the
21% of patients MGMT promoter was methylated in tissue but not in plasma
(Cohen's kappa coefficient = 0.75, p <0.001). The overall survivals (OS)
was higher in methylated versus unmethylated MGMT promoter patients both
in tumour tissue and plasma, even if with a borderline statistically
significance (p = 0.06 by the log-rank test for plasma).The risk of death
increased in patients with unmethylated MGMT promoter both in tumour
tissue (Adjusted HR=2.23; 95%CI 0.99-5.04) and in plasma (Adjusted
HR1.73; 95%CI 0.92-3.22)Finally, in all patients after one year from
diagnosis we noticed a decrease of the state of methylation of MGMT
promoter in plasma. At the end of follow up in the 98% of patients who
presented the methylation of the MGMT promoter at T0, a complete
unmethylation was observed.In conclusion the results of this study
confirm the feasibility of monitoring the state of methylation of MGMT in
circulating DNA in glioma patients. MGMT promoter methylation status may
be a prognostic marker of clinical interest in tissue and in plasma.
Furthermore the complete unmethylation of MGMT promoter in the 98% of the
glioma patients after one year from diagnosis, is a potentially important
finding for future researches on biological history and treatment of
gliomas.

