Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tomato carotenoids and testosterone modulate mRNA and miRNA
profiles during prostate carcinogenesis.


There is considerable evidence supporting the hypothesis that tomato
carotenoids may contribute to prostate cancer prevention however the
mechanisms remain uncertain. We propose that bioactive tomato components,
such as lycopene, may impact testosterone signaling to inhibit prostate
carcinogenesis. Four week-old C57/BL6 WT and TRAMP male mice were fed
either control (AIN93G), 10% tomato powder or 0.25% lycopene beadlets. At
eight weeks of age, mice were randomized among treatments: intact,
castration, or castration + 2.5mg/kg testosterone repletion and animals
sacrificed at 10 weeks of age. Prostate gene expression was quantified by
Nanostring nCounter was used to quantify prostate gene expression with a
200 gene murine prostate carcinogenesis custom codeset and miRNA with
codeset v1.1. Carotenoid analysis is by HPLC and proliferation (Ki67) by
immunohistochemical evaluation. Feeding dietary tomato or lycopene
increased serum lycopene, for example, in WT mice concentrations reached
335 +/- 33 nmol/L and 337 +/- 34 nmol/L in tomato and lycopene fed
animals, respectively. As expected, the TRAMP genotype and testosterone
stimulate proliferation with diet as a modulating factor. In the WT
intact prostate, the tomato powder and lycopene diet decreased
proliferation (pThere is considerable evidence supporting the hypothesis
that tomato carotenoids may contribute to prostate cancer prevention
however the mechanisms remain uncertain. We propose that bioactive tomato
components, such as lycopene, may impact testosterone signaling to
inhibit prostate carcinogenesis. Four week-old C57/BL6 WT and TRAMP male
mice were fed either control (AIN93G), 10% tomato powder or 0.25%
lycopene beadlets. At eight weeks of age, mice were randomized among
treatments: intact, castration, or castration + 2.5mg/kg testosterone
repletion and animals sacrificed at 10 weeks of age. Prostate gene
expression was quantified by Nanostring nCounter was used to quantify
prostate gene expression with a 200 gene murine prostate carcinogenesis
custom codeset and miRNA with codeset v1.1. Carotenoid analysis is by
HPLC and proliferation (Ki67) by immunohistochemical evaluation. Feeding
dietary tomato or lycopene increased serum lycopene, for example, in WT
mice concentrations reached 335 +/- 33 nmol/L and 337 +/- 34 nmol/L in
tomato and lycopene fed animals, respectively. As expected, the TRAMP
genotype and testosterone stimulate proliferation with diet as a
modulating factor. In the WT intact prostate, the tomato powder and
lycopene diet decreased proliferation (p<0.009). The TRAMP genotype and
endocrine status impacted the expression of multiple genes and miRNAs in
several distinct patterns. For example, Birc5, Ki67, PCNA, BRCA1, ATM,
Aurora kinase A / B, Cdc25c, Cyclin B2, cyclin E2, Fox M1,and miRs 15b,
16, 25, 200a, 200b, and 429 are increased in the TRAMP prostate, only
when testosterone is present. Alternatively, TMPRSS2, CD31, CD34, Cox 2,
nCad, Cyclin D1, Keratin 5, Shh, and p63, and miRs 145, 205, 328, and
423-5p are decreased in the TRAMP prostate in the presence of
testosterone. Nkx3.1, miR 148a, and miR 375 are decreased upon castration
whereas beta catenin, FGFR1 and TNF alpha are increased. Tomato and / or
Lycopene modestly decreased expression of eCad, HIF 1 alpha, Paxillin,
RxR alpha, Sca 1 and Vimentin and increased expression of CD133 and miR
22. These highly controlled in vivo studies document the strong
interactions between genetic defects in the prostate, the hormonal
environment, and diet in modulating early prostate carcinogenesis.

