Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional studies of HLA SNPs associated with risk of follicular
lymphoma.


Background: GWAS suggest an important role of genetic variation in the
etiology of follicular lymphoma (FL). We previously identified multiple
FL risk loci in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) Class II region on
chromosome 6p21.33-32, including rs10484561 (OR=1.95, P=1.12x10-29) and
rs2647012 SNP (OR=0.64, P=2x10-21) (Conde et al., Nat Gen, 2010; Smedby
et al. Plos Gen, 2011). HLA typing revealed that the rs10484561 and
rs2647012 SNPs are in complete LD (D=1) with the extended HLA haplotypes
DRB1*01:01-DQA1*01:01-DQB1*05:01 and DRB1*15-DQA1*01-DQB1*06,
respectively (Skibola et al., Tiss Antigens, 2012). HLA gene variants may
alter immune responses to specific antigens and influence tumor
development through effects on gene expression or protein structure. By
comparing GWAS data with RNA sequencing data, we identified expression
quantitative trait loci (eQTL) in LD with rs2647012 that influence gene
expression (Conde et al, in press). To gain a further understanding of
the mechanisms involved, here we explored the effects of FL-associated
HLA SNPs and alleles on expression at both the transcriptional and
protein level.Methods: Thirty-eight lymphoblastoid cell lines (Coriell
Institute) and monocyte-derived dendritic cells from 28 individuals with
HLA typing information were cultured, and RNA and DNA were extracted.
Genotype data for rs10484561, rs2647012 and recently identified eQTLs
were obtained from HapMap or by Taqman genotyping. mRNA expression levels
of HLA Class II genes were measured by RT-qPCR and protein levels were
measured by flow cytometry, ELISA and Western blotting. Correlation
between genotype and expression data was tested using the Spearman's rank
correlation test.Results: The variant (protective) alleles of
rs2647012-linked SNPs were significantly associated with higher HLA-DQB1
transcript levels, confirming our previous eQTL analysis. Flow cytometry
and ELISA with HLA-specific antibodies also confirmed that these
FL-protective alleles were associated with higher HLA-DQB1 (but not
HLA-DQA1 or -DRB1) protein levels. No significant changes were observed
in HLA-DRB1, -DQB1 or -DQA1 transcript or protein levels when analyzing
the correlation of rs10484561-linked SNPs and HLA gene expression.
Similar results were found in lymphoblastoid cell lines, and in immature
and mature monocyte-derived dendritic cells.Conclusions: eQTL SNPs in LD
with the protective rs2647012 variant were associated with higher
HLA-DQB1 mRNA and protein expression, suggesting that rs2647012 or a SNP
in LD influences FL risk through effects on HLA-DQB1 gene expression. No
significant differences were found in transcript or surface protein
levels based on rs10484561 genotypes. These findings suggest that the
increased risk of FL associated with rs10484561 that is in high LD with
the HLA-DRB1*0101_DQA1*0101_DQB1*0501 extended haplotype is not due to
transcriptional modulation, but may be due to effects on protein

