Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone metastasis targeting: a novel approach to reach bone using
zoledronate anchored nanoparticles loaded with docetaxel.


Bone metastasis targeting remains largely unexplored. Some of the bone
diseases are seldom cured just because of poor distribution of drug to
the bone. Zoledronic acid (ZOL) possess a strong affinity towards bone,
and hence its utility in bone metastasis management makes it a perfect
ligand for bone targeting. Recent studies revealed that ZOL in
combination with docetaxel (DTX) showed significant synergism in the
management of bone metastasis. DTX-loaded ZOL-conjugated polyethylene
glycol (PEG)ylated polybutyl cyanoacrylate (PBCA) NPs (PBCA-PEG-ZOL) were
prepared using the anionic polymerization technique. Physiochemical
Characterization, pharmacokinetics, in vitro bone binding assay,
quantitative cellular uptake, NP uptake route characterization, and
cellular IPP/ApppI (isopentenyl pyrophosphate/triphosphoric acid
1-adenosin-5-yl ester 3-(3-methylbut-3-enyl) ester) levels were
performed. DTX was efficiently entrapped (75.94 3.82%) in the Zol
conjugated NPs, estimated by HPLC. They had discrete spherical shape, and
size of around 82 nm estimated by zetasizer and transmission electron
microscopy. Biodistribution studies using technetium-99m radiolabeling
showed prolonged blood circulation half-life, and that the ratio of
PBCA-PEG-ZOL NPs in tumor bearing bone to the normal bone was 3 fold, at
any time point. Further, ZOL conjugated NPs localization in tumor bearing
bone significantly increased with time and found to be 7.5 (pBone
metastasis targeting remains largely unexplored. Some of the bone
diseases are seldom cured just because of poor distribution of drug to
the bone. Zoledronic acid (ZOL) possess a strong affinity towards bone,
and hence its utility in bone metastasis management makes it a perfect
ligand for bone targeting. Recent studies revealed that ZOL in
combination with docetaxel (DTX) showed significant synergism in the
management of bone metastasis. DTX-loaded ZOL-conjugated polyethylene
glycol (PEG)ylated polybutyl cyanoacrylate (PBCA) NPs (PBCA-PEG-ZOL) were
prepared using the anionic polymerization technique. Physiochemical
Characterization, pharmacokinetics, in vitro bone binding assay,
quantitative cellular uptake, NP uptake route characterization, and
cellular IPP/ApppI (isopentenyl pyrophosphate/triphosphoric acid
1-adenosin-5-yl ester 3-(3-methylbut-3-enyl) ester) levels were
performed. DTX was efficiently entrapped (75.94 3.82%) in the Zol
conjugated NPs, estimated by HPLC. They had discrete spherical shape, and
size of around 82 nm estimated by zetasizer and transmission electron
microscopy. Biodistribution studies using technetium-99m radiolabeling
showed prolonged blood circulation half-life, and that the ratio of
PBCA-PEG-ZOL NPs in tumor bearing bone to the normal bone was 3 fold, at
any time point. Further, ZOL conjugated NPs localization in tumor bearing
bone significantly increased with time and found to be 7.5 (p<0.01), 20
(pBone metastasis targeting remains largely unexplored. Some of the bone
diseases are seldom cured just because of poor distribution of drug to
the bone. Zoledronic acid (ZOL) possess a strong affinity towards bone,
and hence its utility in bone metastasis management makes it a perfect
ligand for bone targeting. Recent studies revealed that ZOL in
combination with docetaxel (DTX) showed significant synergism in the
management of bone metastasis. DTX-loaded ZOL-conjugated polyethylene
glycol (PEG)ylated polybutyl cyanoacrylate (PBCA) NPs (PBCA-PEG-ZOL) were
prepared using the anionic polymerization technique. Physiochemical
Characterization, pharmacokinetics, in vitro bone binding assay,
quantitative cellular uptake, NP uptake route characterization, and
cellular IPP/ApppI (isopentenyl pyrophosphate/triphosphoric acid
1-adenosin-5-yl ester 3-(3-methylbut-3-enyl) ester) levels were
performed. DTX was efficiently entrapped (75.94 3.82%) in the Zol
conjugated NPs, estimated by HPLC. They had discrete spherical shape, and
size of around 82 nm estimated by zetasizer and transmission electron
microscopy. Biodistribution studies using technetium-99m radiolabeling
showed prolonged blood circulation half-life, and that the ratio of
PBCA-PEG-ZOL NPs in tumor bearing bone to the normal bone was 3 fold, at
any time point. Further, ZOL conjugated NPs localization in tumor bearing
bone significantly increased with time and found to be 7.5 (p<0.01), 20
(p<0.001) and 155 (pBone metastasis targeting remains largely unexplored.
Some of the bone diseases are seldom cured just because of poor
distribution of drug to the bone. Zoledronic acid (ZOL) possess a strong
affinity towards bone, and hence its utility in bone metastasis
management makes it a perfect ligand for bone targeting. Recent studies
revealed that ZOL in combination with docetaxel (DTX) showed significant
synergism in the management of bone metastasis. DTX-loaded ZOL-conjugated
polyethylene glycol (PEG)ylated polybutyl cyanoacrylate (PBCA) NPs
(PBCA-PEG-ZOL) were prepared using the anionic polymerization technique.
Physiochemical Characterization, pharmacokinetics, in vitro bone binding
assay, quantitative cellular uptake, NP uptake route characterization,
and cellular IPP/ApppI (isopentenyl pyrophosphate/triphosphoric acid
1-adenosin-5-yl ester 3-(3-methylbut-3-enyl) ester) levels were
performed. DTX was efficiently entrapped (75.94 3.82%) in the Zol
conjugated NPs, estimated by HPLC. They had discrete spherical shape, and
size of around 82 nm estimated by zetasizer and transmission electron
microscopy. Biodistribution studies using technetium-99m radiolabeling
showed prolonged blood circulation half-life, and that the ratio of
PBCA-PEG-ZOL NPs in tumor bearing bone to the normal bone was 3 fold, at
any time point. Further, ZOL conjugated NPs localization in tumor bearing
bone significantly increased with time and found to be 7.5 (p<0.01), 20
(p<0.001) and 155 (p<0.001) times higher after 1, 4 and 24 h
respectively, as compared with unconjugated but pegylated NPs, possibly
due to the remodeling of the bone lining by tumor metastasis. In vitro
bone binding assay using human simulated bone-hydroxyapatite powder
results confirmed that ZOL has strong binding affinity to bone, and
maintained the affinity even when used as a surface ligand conjugated to
NPs. It was noticed that after 4 h of treatment with BO2 cells, ZOL
conjugated NPs showed two times longer residence time (measured by flow
cytometry) than un-conjugated ones. PBCA-PEG-ZOL NPs showed an enhanced
cytotoxic effect (MTT assay) in both BO2 and MCF-7 cell lines, due to
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis (by flow cytometry). Uptake route
characterization studies (by confocal microscopy & flow cytometry) with
different inhibitors revealed that PBCA-PEG-ZOL NPs uptake is not
entirely based upon clathrin or caveolae mediated endocytosis.
PBCA-PEG-ZOL NPs blocked the mevalonate pathway and showed 7 and 5.3
times increase in IPP and ApppI production (measured by Liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry; LC-MS), in comparison to ZOL treatment,
and 138 times higher than the control group in MCF-7 cell line. These
results provide evidence that ZOL-conjugated NPs provide an efficient and
targeted delivery system for bone metastasis. Hence, these NPs present a
promising treatment in the near future for bone related diseases.

