Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous copy number gains of NUPR1 and ERBB2 predicting poor
prognosis in early-stage breast cancer.


The full extent of chromosomal alterations and their biological
implications in early breast carcinogenesis has not been well examined.
In this study, we aimed to identify chromosomal alterations associated
with poor prognosis in early-stage breast cancers (EBC). A total of 145
EBCs (stage I and II) were examined in this study. We analyzed copy
number alterations in a discovery set of 48 EBCs using
oligoarray-comparative genomic hybridization. In addition, the
recurrently altered regions (RARs) associated with poor prognosis were
validated using an independent set of 97 EBCs. A total of 23 RARs were
defined in the discovery set. Six were commonly detected in both stage I
and II groups (> 50%), suggesting their connection with early breast
tumorigenesis. There were gains on 1q21.2-q21.3, 8q24.13, 8q24.13-21,
8q24.3, and 8q24.3 and a loss on 8p23.1-p22. Among the 23 RARs, copy
number gains on 16p11.2 (NUPR1) and 17q12 (ERBB2) showed a significant
association with poor survival (P=0.0186 and P=0.0186, respectively). The
patients simultaneously positive for both gains had a significantly worse
prognosis (P=0.0001). In the independent replication, the patients who
were double-positive for NUPR1-ERBB2 gains also had a significantly
poorer prognosis on multivariate analysis (HR=7.31, 95% CI 2.65-20.15,
P=0.0001). The simultaneous gain of NUPR1 and ERBB2 can be a significant
predictor of poor prognosis in EBC. Our study will help to elucidate the
molecular mechanisms underlying early-stage breast cancer tumorigenesis.
This study also highlights the potential for using combinations of copy
number alterations as prognosis predictors for EBC.

