Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Magnolol suppresses vascular endothelial growth factor-induced
angiogenesis by inhibiting Ras-dependent mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathways.


Magnolol, a hydroxylated biphenyl compound isolated from Magnolia
officinalis, has been reported to possess anti-cancer activity. Recent
studies have also demonstrated that magnolol inhibits cell growth and
induces the apoptosis of cancer cells. However, the effects of magnolol
on vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-induced angiogenesis in
endothelial cells have not been studied. In the present study, we have
used human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) to investigate the
anti-angiogenic effect and molecular mechanism of magnolol. Magnolol
inhibited the VEGF-induced proliferation, chemotactic motility and tube
formation of HUVECs in vitro as well as the vessel sprouting of the aorta
ex vivo. Furthermore, magnolol inhibited VEGF-induced Ras activation and
subsequently suppressed extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK),
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and p38, but not Src and focal
adhesion kinase (FAK). Interestingly, the knockdown of Ras by short
interfering RNA produced inhibitory effects that were similar to the
effects of magnolol on VEGF-induced angiogenic signaling events, such as
ERK and Akt/eNOS activation, and resulted in the inhibition of
proliferation, migration, and vessel sprouting in HUVECs. In combination,
these results demonstrate that magnolol is an inhibitor of angiogenesis
and suggest that this compound could be a potential candidate in the
treatment of angiogenesis-related diseases.

