Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A glial origin for medulloblastoma and inhibition of MYCN
stabilization.


The origin of MYCN-driven medulloblastoma, a poor-prognosis childhood
brain tumor is not known. We recently showed that MYCN could generate
tumors with high penetrance from a glutamate transporter (GLT1) promoter
in a transgenic model (GTML) of medulloblastoma. By using Rosa26-lsl-LacZ
reporters we also showed that GLT1-positive neural stem cells (NSCs) from
normal brain represent putative cells of tumor origin.GTML mice generate
aggressive MYCN-driven medulloblastoma 2-3 months after birth.
BrdU-labeling of 3-week-old GTML mice detected significantly more
proliferation in thalamic forebrain cells and of BrdU/BLBP-double
positive Bergmann glia in the cerebellum as compared to corresponding
normal brain. Retroviral tagging with the RCAS/tv-a system marked BLBP-
or GFAP-positive tumor initiating cells and expression analysis could
further determine genetic profiles of tumor origin.Interestingly, MYCN
levels and early proliferation of brain tumors could be reduced by
specific inhibition of CDK2 or by using the bromodomain inhibitor JQ1.
Both treatment strategies induced tumor cell senescence as seen by
SA-beta-gal activity and by downregulated Lamin B1. Our results propose a
radial glial or a Bergmann glial origin for MYCN-driven medulloblastoma
and further suggest ways to inhibit tumor growth by repressing MYCN
stabilization.

