Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PI 3-K isoforms lead to reactivation of Akt
signaling in a subset of breast cancer cell lines.


The aggressive behavior of malignant breast cancer cells is determined by
a complex array of signaling pathways that regulate functions such as
growth, survival, and migration. Production of
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-P3 (PIP3) by phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI
3-K) results in activation of downstream targets including the protein
kinase Akt that plays critical roles in cell survival and growth. Recent
studies have highlighted alternate, PI 3-K independent pathways often
associated with malignancy that lead to Akt reactivation. The goal of our
studies is to investigate the role of PI 3-K catalytic subunits in Akt
reactivation in breast cancer.Surprisingly, knock-down of the catalytic
subunit of class I PI 3-K PIK3CA actually enhances phosphorylation of
Akt, as well as the downstream targets S6K1 and GSK3 in a subset of
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines. The resulting increase
in Akt phosphorylation is mTORC2-dependent and is insensitive to the
class I PI 3-K inhibitors. Rescue experiments with wild type PIK3CA
alleles reveal a further enhancement of Akt phosphorylation, when
compared to PIK3CA knock-down alone. Moreover, silencing of distinct
class I subunits PIK3CB and PIK3CD also enhanced Akt phosphorylation in
TNBC. However, this effect is not universal and is not observed in
numerous other breast cancer cell lines, or using specific PIK3CA
inhibitors. This reactivation of Akt signaling suggests the interruption
of a feedback loop similar to the mTOR-S6K-IRS1 negative feedback loop.
It also indicates specific roles for individual PI 3-K isoforms in breast
cancer and dependent on the mutational status of PTEN and PIK3CA.This
research is supported by Susan G. Komen for the Cure postdoctoral
fellowship KG111139 to EC and AT.

