Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endoglin (CD105) is a target for ovarian cancer cell-specific
therapy through induction of DNA damage.


Background: Endoglin (ENG, CD105) is a protein markedly overexpressed in
tumor-associated endothelial cells, and a target for anti-angiogenic
therapy. Recently we have noted it to be overexpressed in chemoresistant
ovarian cancer cells as well. Our objective was to evaluate the effects
and mechanisms of targeting endoglin specifically in ovarian cancer
cells.Methods: Endoglin expression was assessed in multiple ovarian
cancer lines by Western blot, immunohistochemistry, and flow cytometry.
Anti-endoglin siRNAs were used to downregulate expression in ES2 and
HeyA8MDR. In vitro, the effects of endoglin-knockdown individually and
with chemotherapy were evaluated by MTT assay, cell-cycle analysis,
alkaline comet assay, -H2AX foci formation and qPCR array for mediators
of DNA damage and repair. In an orthotopic murine model, mice inoculated
with ES2 or HeyA8MDR cell lines were administered chitosan-encapsulated
anti-ENG siRNA or control siRNA with and without carboplatin. PCNA, H2AX,
and 53BP1 IHC and the TUNEL assay were performed to examine biologic
effects of endoglin knockdown. Results: Endoglin is expressed to varying
degrees by multiple ovarian cancer cell lines. Expression was on the cell
surface, consistent with its recognized role as a cofactor with TGF-beta
receptor, in only 5% of cells, with most other cells having cytoplasmic
expression. In ES2 and HeyA8MDR cell lines, endoglin inhibition decreased
cell viability, increased apoptosis, induced double-stranded DNA damage,
and increased cisplatin sensitivity. Endoglin downregulation led to a
decrease in expression of several DNA repair genes, including NBN, NTHL1,
BARD1, H2AFX and SIRT1, and an increase in expression of DDIT3 and
PPP1R15A. BARD1-specific downregulation, in turn, led to a significant
decrease in BRCA1 expression, likely through ubiqutinylation. In vivo,
anti-endoglin treatment decreased tumor weight in both ES2 and HeyA8MDR
models when compared to control (35-41% reduction, pBackground: Endoglin
(ENG, CD105) is a protein markedly overexpressed in tumor-associated
endothelial cells, and a target for anti-angiogenic therapy. Recently we
have noted it to be overexpressed in chemoresistant ovarian cancer cells
as well. Our objective was to evaluate the effects and mechanisms of
targeting endoglin specifically in ovarian cancer cells.Methods: Endoglin
expression was assessed in multiple ovarian cancer lines by Western blot,
immunohistochemistry, and flow cytometry. Anti-endoglin siRNAs were used
to downregulate expression in ES2 and HeyA8MDR. In vitro, the effects of
endoglin-knockdown individually and with chemotherapy were evaluated by
MTT assay, cell-cycle analysis, alkaline comet assay, -H2AX foci
formation and qPCR array for mediators of DNA damage and repair. In an
orthotopic murine model, mice inoculated with ES2 or HeyA8MDR cell lines
were administered chitosan-encapsulated anti-ENG siRNA or control siRNA
with and without carboplatin. PCNA, H2AX, and 53BP1 IHC and the TUNEL
assay were performed to examine biologic effects of endoglin knockdown.
Results: Endoglin is expressed to varying degrees by multiple ovarian
cancer cell lines. Expression was on the cell surface, consistent with
its recognized role as a cofactor with TGF-beta receptor, in only 5% of
cells, with most other cells having cytoplasmic expression. In ES2 and
HeyA8MDR cell lines, endoglin inhibition decreased cell viability,
increased apoptosis, induced double-stranded DNA damage, and increased
cisplatin sensitivity. Endoglin downregulation led to a decrease in
expression of several DNA repair genes, including NBN, NTHL1, BARD1,
H2AFX and SIRT1, and an increase in expression of DDIT3 and PPP1R15A.
BARD1-specific downregulation, in turn, led to a significant decrease in
BRCA1 expression, likely through ubiqutinylation. In vivo, anti-endoglin
treatment decreased tumor weight in both ES2 and HeyA8MDR models when
compared to control (35-41% reduction, p<0.05). Combination treatment
with anti-Endoglin siRNA and carboplatin was associated with even greater
inhibitory effect compared to control (58-62% reduction, pBackground:
Endoglin (ENG, CD105) is a protein markedly overexpressed in
tumor-associated endothelial cells, and a target for anti-angiogenic
therapy. Recently we have noted it to be overexpressed in chemoresistant
ovarian cancer cells as well. Our objective was to evaluate the effects
and mechanisms of targeting endoglin specifically in ovarian cancer
cells.Methods: Endoglin expression was assessed in multiple ovarian
cancer lines by Western blot, immunohistochemistry, and flow cytometry.
Anti-endoglin siRNAs were used to downregulate expression in ES2 and
HeyA8MDR. In vitro, the effects of endoglin-knockdown individually and
with chemotherapy were evaluated by MTT assay, cell-cycle analysis,
alkaline comet assay, -H2AX foci formation and qPCR array for mediators
of DNA damage and repair. In an orthotopic murine model, mice inoculated
with ES2 or HeyA8MDR cell lines were administered chitosan-encapsulated
anti-ENG siRNA or control siRNA with and without carboplatin. PCNA, H2AX,
and 53BP1 IHC and the TUNEL assay were performed to examine biologic
effects of endoglin knockdown. Results: Endoglin is expressed to varying
degrees by multiple ovarian cancer cell lines. Expression was on the cell
surface, consistent with its recognized role as a cofactor with TGF-beta
receptor, in only 5% of cells, with most other cells having cytoplasmic
expression. In ES2 and HeyA8MDR cell lines, endoglin inhibition decreased
cell viability, increased apoptosis, induced double-stranded DNA damage,
and increased cisplatin sensitivity. Endoglin downregulation led to a
decrease in expression of several DNA repair genes, including NBN, NTHL1,
BARD1, H2AFX and SIRT1, and an increase in expression of DDIT3 and
PPP1R15A. BARD1-specific downregulation, in turn, led to a significant
decrease in BRCA1 expression, likely through ubiqutinylation. In vivo,
anti-endoglin treatment decreased tumor weight in both ES2 and HeyA8MDR
models when compared to control (35-41% reduction, p<0.05). Combination
treatment with anti-Endoglin siRNA and carboplatin was associated with
even greater inhibitory effect compared to control (58-62% reduction,
p<0.001). Conclusions: Targeting endoglin improves platinum sensitivity
of ovarian cancer cells both in vivo and in vitro. Endoglin
downregulation induces DNA damage at multiple levels, one of which is
through decreased expression of BARD1 and BRCA1. Anti-endoglin therapies
should be pursued further as their development would allow dual treatment
of both tumor angiogenesis and an aggressive subset of chemoresistant
tumor cells.Citation Format: Angela J. Ziebarth, Somaria Nowsheen, Adam
D. Steg, Monjri M. Shah, Ashwini A. Katre, Zachary C. Dobbin, Anil K.
Sood, Michael G. Conner, Eddy S. Yang, Charles N. Landen. Endoglin
(CD105) is a target for ovarian cancer cell-specific therapy through
induction of DNA damage. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5475. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5475

