Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carfilzomib demonstrates broad antitumor activity in preclinical
lung cancer models.


Carfilzomib (CFZ), is an irreversible inhibitor of the chymotrypsin-like
activity of the proteasome that was recently FDA approved for treatment
of refractory and relapsed multiple myeloma. Early Phase 1B studies of
CFZ showed signs of clinical activity in a number of solid tumors,
including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer
(SCLC). We investigated the anti-tumor activity of CFZ monotherapy and in
combination with cisplatin in NSCLC and SCLC cell lines and xenograft
models. CFZ showed marked anti-proliferative activity in A549, H1993,
H520, H460, H1299 NSCLC cell lines, with IC50 values after 96 hours of
treatment ranging from 1.0 nM to 27 nM. CFZ + cisplatin resulted in
antagonistic anti-proliferative activity in the NSCLC A549, H1993, and
H520 cells, independent of sequence of drug administration. In vivo, CFZ
monotherapy resulted in tumor growth inhibition in an A549 NSCLC murine
xenograft model. In contrast, the SCLC cell lines SHP77 and H69 were more
resistant to the anti-proliferative effects of CFZ, with IC50 values at
96 hours of 0.917 M and >30 M, respectively. In vitro, in the SHP-77 SCLC
cell line CFZ + Cisplatin showed synergistic activity. In vivo, in a
SHP-77 SCLC SCID murine xenograft model CFZ monotherapy resulted in an
8-day tumor growth delay to reach 1500 mm3. No additive or synergistic
anti-tumor efficacy was observed for CFZ + cisplatin in this model.
Western blot analysis from SHP-77 cell lines grown in vitro and treated
with CFZ showed an increase in cleaved PARP and p53, supporting
activation of apoptosis. We will report on inhibition of the
chymotrypsin-like proteasome activity in CFZ-treated lung cancer cell
lines. Together, these pre-clinical studies support further preclinical
and clinical investigations of CFZ in NSCLC and SCLC, including novel CFZ
+ anti-cancer drug combinations.

