Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Excess weight gain accelerates 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea
(MNU)-induced mammary carcinogenesis in ovary-intact Sprague Dawley
(Levin) rats fed 31.8% dietary calories from fat.


Though population data for breast cancer indicate that adult weight gain
is associated with increased risk in postmenopausal women, the generally
accepted lack of effect of obesity on premenopausal breast cancer risk
has recently been challenged (Cecchini et al Cancer Prev Res; 5(4);
583-92, 2012). In that publication from the National Surgical Adjuvant
Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP), BMI >30 was significantly associated
with increased risk of invasive breast cancer in high-risk premenopausal
women (HR= 1.70). As the effects of excess weight gain on breast
carcinogenesis in women prior to menopause remain poorly understood, the
Levin strains of outbred Sprague Dawley rats that are dietary obesity
sensitive (DS) or resistant (DR) were used to investigate this issue. The
Levin rats, which are available from Taconic Farms, were selectively
outbred for >20 generations for resistance (DR) or susceptibility (DS) to
weight gain when fed a purified diet of similar fat content as the
typical diet consumed by women in the United States (31.8% fat by kcal).
DS rats gain more weight than DR rats and develop metabolic syndrome
after several weeks, including dyslipidemia and insulin resistance.
Ovary-intact DS (n=101) and DR (n=103) rats were injected with 50 mg/kg
of 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (MNU) at 21-24 days of age, and began ad
libitum feeding of the purified diet the following day. The experiment
was terminated 9 weeks post-carcinogen at which point DS rats were
approximately 17% heavier than their DR counterparts (220.3 22.1 g vs.
187.9 14.6 g, pThough population data for breast cancer indicate that
adult weight gain is associated with increased risk in postmenopausal
women, the generally accepted lack of effect of obesity on premenopausal
breast cancer risk has recently been challenged (Cecchini et al Cancer
Prev Res; 5(4); 583-92, 2012). In that publication from the National
Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP), BMI >30 was
significantly associated with increased risk of invasive breast cancer in
high-risk premenopausal women (HR= 1.70). As the effects of excess weight
gain on breast carcinogenesis in women prior to menopause remain poorly
understood, the Levin strains of outbred Sprague Dawley rats that are
dietary obesity sensitive (DS) or resistant (DR) were used to investigate
this issue. The Levin rats, which are available from Taconic Farms, were
selectively outbred for >20 generations for resistance (DR) or
susceptibility (DS) to weight gain when fed a purified diet of similar
fat content as the typical diet consumed by women in the United States
(31.8% fat by kcal). DS rats gain more weight than DR rats and develop
metabolic syndrome after several weeks, including dyslipidemia and
insulin resistance. Ovary-intact DS (n=101) and DR (n=103) rats were
injected with 50 mg/kg of 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (MNU) at 21-24 days of
age, and began ad libitum feeding of the purified diet the following day.
The experiment was terminated 9 weeks post-carcinogen at which point DS
rats were approximately 17% heavier than their DR counterparts (220.3
22.1 g vs. 187.9 14.6 g, p<0.0001). The incidence, multiplicity, and
tumor burden per rat of histopathologically confirmed palpable mammary
carcinomas were significantly higher in the DS versus DR rats (incidence
93.07% vs. 64.08%, pThough population data for breast cancer indicate
that adult weight gain is associated with increased risk in
postmenopausal women, the generally accepted lack of effect of obesity on
premenopausal breast cancer risk has recently been challenged (Cecchini
et al Cancer Prev Res; 5(4); 583-92, 2012). In that publication from the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP), BMI >30 was
significantly associated with increased risk of invasive breast cancer in
high-risk premenopausal women (HR= 1.70). As the effects of excess weight
gain on breast carcinogenesis in women prior to menopause remain poorly
understood, the Levin strains of outbred Sprague Dawley rats that are
dietary obesity sensitive (DS) or resistant (DR) were used to investigate
this issue. The Levin rats, which are available from Taconic Farms, were
selectively outbred for >20 generations for resistance (DR) or
susceptibility (DS) to weight gain when fed a purified diet of similar
fat content as the typical diet consumed by women in the United States
(31.8% fat by kcal). DS rats gain more weight than DR rats and develop
metabolic syndrome after several weeks, including dyslipidemia and
insulin resistance. Ovary-intact DS (n=101) and DR (n=103) rats were
injected with 50 mg/kg of 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (MNU) at 21-24 days of
age, and began ad libitum feeding of the purified diet the following day.
The experiment was terminated 9 weeks post-carcinogen at which point DS
rats were approximately 17% heavier than their DR counterparts (220.3
22.1 g vs. 187.9 14.6 g, p<0.0001). The incidence, multiplicity, and
tumor burden per rat of histopathologically confirmed palpable mammary
carcinomas were significantly higher in the DS versus DR rats (incidence
93.07% vs. 64.08%, p<0.05; multiplicity, 4.17 tumors vs. 1.82 tumors,
pThough population data for breast cancer indicate that adult weight gain
is associated with increased risk in postmenopausal women, the generally
accepted lack of effect of obesity on premenopausal breast cancer risk
has recently been challenged (Cecchini et al Cancer Prev Res; 5(4);
583-92, 2012). In that publication from the National Surgical Adjuvant
Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP), BMI >30 was significantly associated
with increased risk of invasive breast cancer in high-risk premenopausal
women (HR= 1.70). As the effects of excess weight gain on breast
carcinogenesis in women prior to menopause remain poorly understood, the
Levin strains of outbred Sprague Dawley rats that are dietary obesity
sensitive (DS) or resistant (DR) were used to investigate this issue. The
Levin rats, which are available from Taconic Farms, were selectively
outbred for >20 generations for resistance (DR) or susceptibility (DS) to
weight gain when fed a purified diet of similar fat content as the
typical diet consumed by women in the United States (31.8% fat by kcal).
DS rats gain more weight than DR rats and develop metabolic syndrome
after several weeks, including dyslipidemia and insulin resistance.
Ovary-intact DS (n=101) and DR (n=103) rats were injected with 50 mg/kg
of 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (MNU) at 21-24 days of age, and began ad
libitum feeding of the purified diet the following day. The experiment
was terminated 9 weeks post-carcinogen at which point DS rats were
approximately 17% heavier than their DR counterparts (220.3 22.1 g vs.
187.9 14.6 g, p<0.0001). The incidence, multiplicity, and tumor burden
per rat of histopathologically confirmed palpable mammary carcinomas were
significantly higher in the DS versus DR rats (incidence 93.07% vs.
64.08%, p<0.05; multiplicity, 4.17 tumors vs. 1.82 tumors, p<0.01; tumor
burden, 7.42 g vs. 1.93 g, pThough population data for breast cancer
indicate that adult weight gain is associated with increased risk in
postmenopausal women, the generally accepted lack of effect of obesity on
premenopausal breast cancer risk has recently been challenged (Cecchini
et al Cancer Prev Res; 5(4); 583-92, 2012). In that publication from the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP), BMI >30 was
significantly associated with increased risk of invasive breast cancer in
high-risk premenopausal women (HR= 1.70). As the effects of excess weight
gain on breast carcinogenesis in women prior to menopause remain poorly
understood, the Levin strains of outbred Sprague Dawley rats that are
dietary obesity sensitive (DS) or resistant (DR) were used to investigate
this issue. The Levin rats, which are available from Taconic Farms, were
selectively outbred for >20 generations for resistance (DR) or
susceptibility (DS) to weight gain when fed a purified diet of similar
fat content as the typical diet consumed by women in the United States
(31.8% fat by kcal). DS rats gain more weight than DR rats and develop
metabolic syndrome after several weeks, including dyslipidemia and
insulin resistance. Ovary-intact DS (n=101) and DR (n=103) rats were
injected with 50 mg/kg of 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (MNU) at 21-24 days of
age, and began ad libitum feeding of the purified diet the following day.
The experiment was terminated 9 weeks post-carcinogen at which point DS
rats were approximately 17% heavier than their DR counterparts (220.3
22.1 g vs. 187.9 14.6 g, p<0.0001). The incidence, multiplicity, and
tumor burden per rat of histopathologically confirmed palpable mammary
carcinomas were significantly higher in the DS versus DR rats (incidence
93.07% vs. 64.08%, p<0.05; multiplicity, 4.17 tumors vs. 1.82 tumors,
p<0.01; tumor burden, 7.42 g vs. 1.93 g, p<0.0001) and cancer latency was
reduced (37.9 9.0 days vs. 44.0 6.7 days, pThough population data for
breast cancer indicate that adult weight gain is associated with
increased risk in postmenopausal women, the generally accepted lack of
effect of obesity on premenopausal breast cancer risk has recently been
challenged (Cecchini et al Cancer Prev Res; 5(4); 583-92, 2012). In that
publication from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project
(NSABP), BMI >30 was significantly associated with increased risk of
invasive breast cancer in high-risk premenopausal women (HR= 1.70). As
the effects of excess weight gain on breast carcinogenesis in women prior
to menopause remain poorly understood, the Levin strains of outbred
Sprague Dawley rats that are dietary obesity sensitive (DS) or resistant
(DR) were used to investigate this issue. The Levin rats, which are
available from Taconic Farms, were selectively outbred for >20
generations for resistance (DR) or susceptibility (DS) to weight gain
when fed a purified diet of similar fat content as the typical diet
consumed by women in the United States (31.8% fat by kcal). DS rats gain
more weight than DR rats and develop metabolic syndrome after several
weeks, including dyslipidemia and insulin resistance. Ovary-intact DS
(n=101) and DR (n=103) rats were injected with 50 mg/kg of
1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (MNU) at 21-24 days of age, and began ad libitum
feeding of the purified diet the following day. The experiment was
terminated 9 weeks post-carcinogen at which point DS rats were
approximately 17% heavier than their DR counterparts (220.3 22.1 g vs.
187.9 14.6 g, p<0.0001). The incidence, multiplicity, and tumor burden
per rat of histopathologically confirmed palpable mammary carcinomas were
significantly higher in the DS versus DR rats (incidence 93.07% vs.
64.08%, p<0.05; multiplicity, 4.17 tumors vs. 1.82 tumors, p<0.01; tumor
burden, 7.42 g vs. 1.93 g, p<0.0001) and cancer latency was reduced (37.9
9.0 days vs. 44.0 6.7 days, p<0.0001). Molecular subtypes of tumors in DS
and DR are currently being evaluated. These results suggest that the
Levin model of DS and DR rats represents a valuable preclinical tool for
further investigating how excessive energy intake and weight gain with
accompanying metabolic syndrome affect the carcinogenic process in the
breast.Supported by PHS grant CA52626 from the National Cancer Institute.

