Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of imidazo[1,5-a]pyrazine derived potent, selective and
orally bioavailable ACK1 inhibitors.


Activated Cdc42-associated kinase (ACK1) is a non-receptor tyrosine
kinase originally identified by virtue of its binding to GTP-bound small
GTPase Cdc42. Considerable attention has been paid to ACK1s involvement
in cancer in recent years. For example, gene amplification and
over-expression of ACK1 were found in multiple cancers including lung,
ovarian and prostate cancers and were associated with poor prognosis and
metastatic phenotypes. Activated ACK1 has been shown to phosphorylate and
activate androgen receptor function and to promote the progression of
prostate cancer. More recently, activated ACK1 was found to phosphorylate
and promote the activation of Akt, a protein kinase that plays a central
role in growth, proliferation and cell survival in various cancers. Taken
together, these literature data suggest that ACK1 is a potential target
for cancer treatment. Several series of ACK1 inhibitors have been
previously disclosed in literature. Unfortunately, compounds from these
series suffer from poor oral pharmacokinetic (PK) properties which have
prevented them from being utilized further for in vivo studies.
Therefore, there is a clear need for potent, selective and orally
bioavailable small molecule ACK1 inhibitors to further probe its role in
cancer, both in the in vitro and in vivo setting. This report describes
the medicinal chemistry effort towards a series of novel
imidazo[1,5-a]pyrazine derived inhibitors of ACK1. Virtual screening led
to the discovery of the initial hit, and subsequent exploration of
structure-activity relationships and optimization of drug metabolism and
pharmacokinetic properties led to the identification of potent, selective
and orally bioavailable ACK1 inhibitors.

