Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a 3-dimensional synthetic lethality screening
approach targeting KRas-mut cells.


Three-dimensional (3D) in vitro models have been used in cancer research
to overcome limitations of 2D systems. 3D in vitro models recapitulate
many aspects of actual tumors including hypoxia, metabolism,
proliferation gradients, cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions and
closer clinical gene expression profiles than those seen in 2D.
Importantly, some cancer drugs showed high potency only in the 3D
environment compared to 2D (Muranen, et al, Cancer Cell, 2012). In order
to identify improved cancer drugs, we established a simple and versatile
3D spheroid culture approach for high-throughput screening for compounds
that selectively kill cancer cells with certain genetic backgrounds. We
used HCT116 (parental: HCT116/KRas-mut) and an isogenic counterpart that
expresses a genetically modified KRas gene (HCT116/KRas-wt) for 3D cell
culture. To validate this approach, HCT116/KRas-mut and HCT116/KRas-wt
were cultured separately, treated with 15 selected tool compounds and
viability was measured using a caspase 3/7 assay. We found 4 compounds
that induced caspase 3/7 activity only in 3D culture of HCT116/KRas-mut
and not in 2D. Furthermore, 5 compounds were predominantly sensitive to
HCT116/KRas-wt cells in 3D culture, but not in HCT116/KRas-mut 3D
culture. These results indicate that the more physiological relevant 3D
synthetic lethal screen is an attractive approach to cancer drug
discovery and may identify compounds missed in conventional 2D culture
model screens.

