Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two complementary populations of human adipose tissue CD34+
progenitors promote breast cancer angiogenesis, growth, and metastases.


We recently reported that human white adipose tissue (WAT) progenitors
promote breast cancer growth and metastases in preclinical models
(Martin-Padura et al, 2012). Here we report that two populations of human
WAT progenitors cooperate in breast cancer angiogenesis, growth and
metastatic progression. Sorting, electron microscopy, culture and in vivo
studies defined human WAT CD45-CD34+CD31+CD13-CCRL2+ endothelial
progenitors (EPCs) as small, undifferentiated cells overexpressing
endothelial-restricted genes (VE-Cadherin, Claudin 5; Tie-2, ICAM-2,
Dll4, etc) and able to generate in vitro and in vivo mature endothelial
cells. A second population of purified WAT CD45-CD34+CD31-CD13+CD140b+
pericyte progenitors (PPCs) was found to overexpress perivascular genes
(Endosialin, Adam12, PDGF receptors, TGFbeta, CD44, RUNX1, etc). In vivo
and in vitro, CD34+ PPCs generated differentiated CD34- pericytes and
adipocytes. In co-culture, WAT EPCs and PPCs - together - induced in
ductal breast cancer cell lines an overexpression of EMT genes (SNAIL2,
ZEB1, MAP1B, etc). Similarly, WAT EPCs and PPCs induced - together - an
increase in breast cancer cell migration towards chemoattractants. When
only EPCs or only PPCs were added to breast cancer cell cultures, their
EMT- and migration-induction effects were significantly lower than those
observed when both EPCs and PPCs were co-cultured together. In vivo,
human WAT EPCs and PPCs increased breast cancer angiogenesis, growth and
metastases in several orthotopic models. When only EPCs or only PPCs were
injected, their effects on breast cancer growth and metastases were
significantly reduced in comparison to the effects observed when EPCs and
PPCs were injected together. Z-stack showed that functional cancer blood
vessels with a lumen were made of human cells only when EPCs and PPCs
were co-injected together. To understand WAT EPCs and PPCs migration
potential, we measured WAT EPCs and PPCs in the blood of patients before
and after different stem cell mobilization procedures. WAT-EPCs (always
We recently reported that human white adipose tissue (WAT) progenitors
promote breast cancer growth and metastases in preclinical models
(Martin-Padura et al, 2012). Here we report that two populations of human
WAT progenitors cooperate in breast cancer angiogenesis, growth and
metastatic progression. Sorting, electron microscopy, culture and in vivo
studies defined human WAT CD45-CD34+CD31+CD13-CCRL2+ endothelial
progenitors (EPCs) as small, undifferentiated cells overexpressing
endothelial-restricted genes (VE-Cadherin, Claudin 5; Tie-2, ICAM-2,
Dll4, etc) and able to generate in vitro and in vivo mature endothelial
cells. A second population of purified WAT CD45-CD34+CD31-CD13+CD140b+
pericyte progenitors (PPCs) was found to overexpress perivascular genes
(Endosialin, Adam12, PDGF receptors, TGFbeta, CD44, RUNX1, etc). In vivo
and in vitro, CD34+ PPCs generated differentiated CD34- pericytes and
adipocytes. In co-culture, WAT EPCs and PPCs - together - induced in
ductal breast cancer cell lines an overexpression of EMT genes (SNAIL2,
ZEB1, MAP1B, etc). Similarly, WAT EPCs and PPCs induced - together - an
increase in breast cancer cell migration towards chemoattractants. When
only EPCs or only PPCs were added to breast cancer cell cultures, their
EMT- and migration-induction effects were significantly lower than those
observed when both EPCs and PPCs were co-cultured together. In vivo,
human WAT EPCs and PPCs increased breast cancer angiogenesis, growth and
metastases in several orthotopic models. When only EPCs or only PPCs were
injected, their effects on breast cancer growth and metastases were
significantly reduced in comparison to the effects observed when EPCs and
PPCs were injected together. Z-stack showed that functional cancer blood
vessels with a lumen were made of human cells only when EPCs and PPCs
were co-injected together. To understand WAT EPCs and PPCs migration
potential, we measured WAT EPCs and PPCs in the blood of patients before
and after different stem cell mobilization procedures. WAT-EPCs (always
<1/mL before mobilization) increased to 2-800/mL after G-CSF
administration. The addition of chemotherapy and/or CXCR4 inhibitors did
not increase WAT-EPC mobilization. WAT-PPCs were always We recently
reported that human white adipose tissue (WAT) progenitors promote breast
cancer growth and metastases in preclinical models (Martin-Padura et al,
2012). Here we report that two populations of human WAT progenitors
cooperate in breast cancer angiogenesis, growth and metastatic
progression. Sorting, electron microscopy, culture and in vivo studies
defined human WAT CD45-CD34+CD31+CD13-CCRL2+ endothelial progenitors
(EPCs) as small, undifferentiated cells overexpressing
endothelial-restricted genes (VE-Cadherin, Claudin 5; Tie-2, ICAM-2,
Dll4, etc) and able to generate in vitro and in vivo mature endothelial
cells. A second population of purified WAT CD45-CD34+CD31-CD13+CD140b+
pericyte progenitors (PPCs) was found to overexpress perivascular genes
(Endosialin, Adam12, PDGF receptors, TGFbeta, CD44, RUNX1, etc). In vivo
and in vitro, CD34+ PPCs generated differentiated CD34- pericytes and
adipocytes. In co-culture, WAT EPCs and PPCs - together - induced in
ductal breast cancer cell lines an overexpression of EMT genes (SNAIL2,
ZEB1, MAP1B, etc). Similarly, WAT EPCs and PPCs induced - together - an
increase in breast cancer cell migration towards chemoattractants. When
only EPCs or only PPCs were added to breast cancer cell cultures, their
EMT- and migration-induction effects were significantly lower than those
observed when both EPCs and PPCs were co-cultured together. In vivo,
human WAT EPCs and PPCs increased breast cancer angiogenesis, growth and
metastases in several orthotopic models. When only EPCs or only PPCs were
injected, their effects on breast cancer growth and metastases were
significantly reduced in comparison to the effects observed when EPCs and
PPCs were injected together. Z-stack showed that functional cancer blood
vessels with a lumen were made of human cells only when EPCs and PPCs
were co-injected together. To understand WAT EPCs and PPCs migration
potential, we measured WAT EPCs and PPCs in the blood of patients before
and after different stem cell mobilization procedures. WAT-EPCs (always
<1/mL before mobilization) increased to 2-800/mL after G-CSF
administration. The addition of chemotherapy and/or CXCR4 inhibitors did
not increase WAT-EPC mobilization. WAT-PPCs were always <1/mL before
mobilization. G-CSF administration was associated to a minimal
mobilization of these cells (10-70/mL), but only in 3 out of 15 patients.
Again, the addition of chemotherapy and/or CXCR4 inhibitors to G-CSF did
not increase PPC mobilization. WAT-EPCs, but not WAT-PPCs, were found in
large numbers in human lymph nodes (LNs). Our studies indicate that human
WAT EPCs and PPCs are able to migrate to LNs (EPCs) and blood and to
promote breast cancer angiogenesis, EMT, growth and metastases through
complementary mechanisms. We are currently investigating several
candidate inhibitors of WAT EPCs and PPCs cooperation in vitro and in
vivo.

