Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parathyroid Hormone-related Protein (PTHrP) is critical for breast
tumour metastasis and may constitute a novel target for therapeutic
intervention.


An increase in PTHrP circulating levels is associated with breast cancer
recurrence and reduced survival. Despite the frequent association of
PTHrP dysregulation with many tumor types, a precise and direct role for
PTHrP in cancer development and progression has been difficult to prove,
and its involvement in tumor initiation in vivo and in critical steps of
malignant conversion is not clear. In this study, mice carrying a
conditional PTHrP allele were crossed with the PyVMT transgenic mouse
mammary tumor model and then with a separate transgenic strain expressing
Cre in the mammary epithelium (MMTV/Cre). Circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
were detectable in animals with PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Crephenotype but not
in animals with PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Cre+ phenotype. The invasive ability
in vitro of PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Cre+cells was reduced by over 80% (PAn
increase in PTHrP circulating levels is associated with breast cancer
recurrence and reduced survival. Despite the frequent association of
PTHrP dysregulation with many tumor types, a precise and direct role for
PTHrP in cancer development and progression has been difficult to prove,
and its involvement in tumor initiation in vivo and in critical steps of
malignant conversion is not clear. In this study, mice carrying a
conditional PTHrP allele were crossed with the PyVMT transgenic mouse
mammary tumor model and then with a separate transgenic strain expressing
Cre in the mammary epithelium (MMTV/Cre). Circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
were detectable in animals with PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Crephenotype but not
in animals with PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Cre+ phenotype. The invasive ability
in vitro of PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Cre+cells was reduced by over 80%
(P<0.001) as compared to control cells (PyVMT-PTHrP flox/flox-Cre).
Metastatic spread to lungs was seen in 100% of animals with PyVMT-PTHrP
flox/flox-Cre phenotype but none of the animals with PyVMT-PTHrP
flox/flox-Cre+ phenotype. AKT1 and CXCR4 expression by Western blot and
confocal microscope in both isolated cells and tumors from both
genotypes. Akt 1 and CXCR4 expression by Western blot and
immunofluorescence were markedly reduced (over 80% PAn increase in PTHrP
circulating levels is associated with breast cancer recurrence and
reduced survival. Despite the frequent association of PTHrP dysregulation
with many tumor types, a precise and direct role for PTHrP in cancer
development and progression has been difficult to prove, and its
involvement in tumor initiation in vivo and in critical steps of
malignant conversion is not clear. In this study, mice carrying a
conditional PTHrP allele were crossed with the PyVMT transgenic mouse
mammary tumor model and then with a separate transgenic strain expressing
Cre in the mammary epithelium (MMTV/Cre). Circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
were detectable in animals with PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Crephenotype but not
in animals with PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Cre+ phenotype. The invasive ability
in vitro of PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Cre+cells was reduced by over 80%
(P<0.001) as compared to control cells (PyVMT-PTHrP flox/flox-Cre).
Metastatic spread to lungs was seen in 100% of animals with PyVMT-PTHrP
flox/flox-Cre phenotype but none of the animals with PyVMT-PTHrP
flox/flox-Cre+ phenotype. AKT1 and CXCR4 expression by Western blot and
confocal microscope in both isolated cells and tumors from both
genotypes. Akt 1 and CXCR4 expression by Western blot and
immunofluorescence were markedly reduced (over 80% P<0.001) in
PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Cre+cells and tumors as compared to
PyVMT-PTHrPflox/flox-Cre cells and tumors. Anti-PTHrP neutralizing mAbs
significantly inhibited matrigel invasion by human MDA-MB-435 breast
cancer and their growth in vivo when injected into the MFPs of BALB/c
nu/nu mice. After 6 weeks, approximately 100% of control animals
presented lung metastases in contrast with 33% for mAb-treated mice the
mAbs antibody reduced the expression of CXCR4 and AKT1 in mammary tumours
by over 80% these results suggest that anti-PTHrP antibodies can be
considered for therapeutic use against human breast cancer progression.
Overall,our study demonstrates that PTHrP plays a crucial role in
metastatic spread possibly by altering critical checkpoint of cancer
progression and suggest its potential usefulness to prevent progression
and recurrence of breast cancer. These results also suggest that
anti-PTHrP antibodies can be considered for therapeutic use against human
breast cancer progression.

