Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive markers on risk of developing lymph node metastasis in
early-staged oral cancer patients.


Introduction: Cervical lymph nodal metastasis is the most important
variable for unimproved survival of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
patients. Resulting from lack of predictive marker, unnecessary neck
dissection (ND) has tremendous impact on costs and patient's quality of
life. Current literature have shown contradictory results in predicting
markers using clinico-pathological parameters.Objectives: 1) to collect
the demographics, clinico-pathological information of primary OSCC
patients with intent-to-cure surgery; 2) to categorize these patients
according to their nodal status at and after surgery; 3) to determine the
impact of nodal status to overall survival; and 4) to assess
clinic-pathological variables predicting nodal disease of N0 early-stage
OSCC patients.Methods: Between 2003 and 2007, 303 primary OSCC patients
were identified from the BC Cancer Registry Database with complete
clinico-pathological information and received primary curative surgical
treatment with at least 5-year follow-up (FU). Patients were categorized
into 4 groups: Gr.A were N0 at surgery or during FU (N=118); Gr.B were N0
at surgery but N+ during FU (N=57); Gr.C received concurrent ND and were
N0 at the time of surgery (N=57); and Gr.D received concurrent ND and
were N+ at the time of surgery (N=71). Data retrieved included
demographics, clinico-pathological factors, treatment, and time to
outcomes (survival or nodal disease).Results: Nodal disease at the time
of surgery (Gr.D) or during the FU (Gr.B) has a pivotal impact on the
5-year survival rates (44% and 55%, respectively, PIntroduction: Cervical
lymph nodal metastasis is the most important variable for unimproved
survival of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) patients. Resulting from
lack of predictive marker, unnecessary neck dissection (ND) has
tremendous impact on costs and patient's quality of life. Current
literature have shown contradictory results in predicting markers using
clinico-pathological parameters.Objectives: 1) to collect the
demographics, clinico-pathological information of primary OSCC patients
with intent-to-cure surgery; 2) to categorize these patients according to
their nodal status at and after surgery; 3) to determine the impact of
nodal status to overall survival; and 4) to assess clinic-pathological
variables predicting nodal disease of N0 early-stage OSCC
patients.Methods: Between 2003 and 2007, 303 primary OSCC patients were
identified from the BC Cancer Registry Database with complete
clinico-pathological information and received primary curative surgical
treatment with at least 5-year follow-up (FU). Patients were categorized
into 4 groups: Gr.A were N0 at surgery or during FU (N=118); Gr.B were N0
at surgery but N+ during FU (N=57); Gr.C received concurrent ND and were
N0 at the time of surgery (N=57); and Gr.D received concurrent ND and
were N+ at the time of surgery (N=71). Data retrieved included
demographics, clinico-pathological factors, treatment, and time to
outcomes (survival or nodal disease).Results: Nodal disease at the time
of surgery (Gr.D) or during the FU (Gr.B) has a pivotal impact on the
5-year survival rates (44% and 55%, respectively, P<0.0001). Cox
proportional hazard models identified positive nodal disease, TNM
staging, and adjuvant radiotherapy as significant predictors for survival
(HR: 2.43, 95%CI, 1.18-5.02; P=0.02; 1.31, 95%CI, 1.0-1.7; P=0.03; 6.53,
95%CI, 2.86-14.91; PIntroduction: Cervical lymph nodal metastasis is the
most important variable for unimproved survival of oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) patients. Resulting from lack of predictive marker,
unnecessary neck dissection (ND) has tremendous impact on costs and
patient's quality of life. Current literature have shown contradictory
results in predicting markers using clinico-pathological
parameters.Objectives: 1) to collect the demographics,
clinico-pathological information of primary OSCC patients with
intent-to-cure surgery; 2) to categorize these patients according to
their nodal status at and after surgery; 3) to determine the impact of
nodal status to overall survival; and 4) to assess clinic-pathological
variables predicting nodal disease of N0 early-stage OSCC
patients.Methods: Between 2003 and 2007, 303 primary OSCC patients were
identified from the BC Cancer Registry Database with complete
clinico-pathological information and received primary curative surgical
treatment with at least 5-year follow-up (FU). Patients were categorized
into 4 groups: Gr.A were N0 at surgery or during FU (N=118); Gr.B were N0
at surgery but N+ during FU (N=57); Gr.C received concurrent ND and were
N0 at the time of surgery (N=57); and Gr.D received concurrent ND and
were N+ at the time of surgery (N=71). Data retrieved included
demographics, clinico-pathological factors, treatment, and time to
outcomes (survival or nodal disease).Results: Nodal disease at the time
of surgery (Gr.D) or during the FU (Gr.B) has a pivotal impact on the
5-year survival rates (44% and 55%, respectively, P<0.0001). Cox
proportional hazard models identified positive nodal disease, TNM
staging, and adjuvant radiotherapy as significant predictors for survival
(HR: 2.43, 95%CI, 1.18-5.02; P=0.02; 1.31, 95%CI, 1.0-1.7; P=0.03; 6.53,
95%CI, 2.86-14.91; P<0.0001, respectively). Among the 205 N0 at the time
of surgery (Gr.A+Gr.B), strikingly, one-in-four developed nodal disease
in average 13.214.1 months and with 76% in the first 18-months post
surgery. Between Gr.A and Gr.B, there was no significant differences in
tumor depth (4.20.4 mm vs. 5.00.5 mm, P=0.25). Using multivariate
analysis, age (P=0.03) and tumor grade (P=0.001) were significant
predictive markers. Tumor depth of 4 mm, the current standard factor on
the necessity of prophylactic ND, did not predict nodal status
(P=0.11).Conclusion: Nodal status is highly associated with patient
survival. The data strongly suggest aggressiveness of neck metastasis
either at the time of surgery or during FU. Effective markers to predict
nodal disease pre-surgery can benefit high-risk patients to have early
intervention and avoid unnecessary ND for the low-risk.(Supported by the
Canadian Cancer Society Research Institute (CCSRI-20336), and Terry Fox
Research Institute (TFRI-2009-24). CFP is supported by a Scholar Award
from the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research.)Citation Format:
Kelly YP Liu, Scott Durham, Kenneth W. Berean, Catherine F. Poh.
Predictive markers on risk of developing lymph node metastasis in
early-staged oral cancer patients. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5125. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5125

