Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: WNT/beta-catenin signaling inhibitors improve the
anti-proliferative effect of sorafenib against hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) cells.


[Background] Sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor targeting Raf kinase and
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, is currently the only
indicated therapy for patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). The aberrant activation of WNT/-catenin signaling pathway, which
is associated with the carcinogenetic process of HCC, has been shown to
mediate the resistance to various types of anti-cancer therapy. We
hypothesized that inhibition of WNT/-catenin signaling pathway might
improve the anti-tumor effect of sorafenib in HCC.[Materials and Methods]
Huh7, HepG2, PLC5, and Hep3B HCC cells were treated with sorafenib with
or without inhibitors of WNT/-catenin pathway, and evaluated for
viability in vitro. WNT/-catenin signaling inhibitors included ICG-001
which down-regulates -catenin/TCF signaling by specifically binding to
cyclic AMP response element-binding protein, and XAV939 which targets
tankyrases and facilitates degradation of -catenin.[Results] Sorafenib
induced an anti-proliferative effect in HCC cells, with IC50s of 3.50.3
M, 3.70.4 M, 7.70.8 M and 140.3 M for HepG2, Huh7, PLC5, and Hep3B cells,
respectively. Upon treated with 10 M sorafenib for 24 hours, the total
cellular amounts of -catenin were significantly decreased in HepG2 and
Huh7 cells, moderately decreased in PLC5 cells, and unchanged in Hep3B
cells. In all HCC cells, XAV939 or ICG-001 enhanced the
anti-proliferative effect of sorafenib dose-dependently. The median
effect analysis showed a synergistic anti-proliferative effect for the
combination of ICG-001 plus sorafenib in all HCC cells.[Conclusion]
Inhibitors of WNT/- catenin signaling pathway in combination with
sorafenib resulted in an improved anti-tumor effect against HCC in vitro.
(The study was supported by the grant NSC 100-2325-B-002-043 from
National Science Council of Taiwan)

