Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lifetime and adulthood dietary genistein intake have opposing
effect on tamoxifen resistance in rats.


High childhood and adolescent dietary intake of isoflavone genistein
(GEN) in soyfoods reduces later breast cancer risk, but since GEN has
estrogenic properties, it is not clear whether it is safe to start
consuming it after breast cancer has been diagnosed. Using a new
preclinical model, we investigated the effects of childhood, adult and/or
post-diagnosis consumption of GEN on the ability of tamoxifen (TAM) to
treat breast cancer.95 female Sprague-Dawley rats consuming AIN93G diet
were supplemented with 0 or 500 ppm GEN between postnatal days (PND) 15
to 30 (prepubertal exposure) and then were fed AIN93G diet with no GEN
between PND 30 and 55. On PND 48, rats received 10 mg DMBA to induce
mammary tumors, and were then divided to four dietary groups on PND 55:
prepubertal GEN-adult GEN group (GG, n=20); prepubertal GEN-adult control
group (GC, n=20); prepubertal control-adult GEN (CG, n=20); and
control-control (CC, n=35). When mammary tumor reached a size of 1.4 cm
in diameter, 337 ppm TAM was added to rats diet. GG and CG rats continued
also consuming GEN, and all rats in GC and 20 rats in CC groups stated
consuming GEN one week after the TAM treatment started. 15 CC rats were
never fed GEN.Mammary tumor latency was longer in GG (pHigh childhood and
adolescent dietary intake of isoflavone genistein (GEN) in soyfoods
reduces later breast cancer risk, but since GEN has estrogenic
properties, it is not clear whether it is safe to start consuming it
after breast cancer has been diagnosed. Using a new preclinical model, we
investigated the effects of childhood, adult and/or post-diagnosis
consumption of GEN on the ability of tamoxifen (TAM) to treat breast
cancer.95 female Sprague-Dawley rats consuming AIN93G diet were
supplemented with 0 or 500 ppm GEN between postnatal days (PND) 15 to 30
(prepubertal exposure) and then were fed AIN93G diet with no GEN between
PND 30 and 55. On PND 48, rats received 10 mg DMBA to induce mammary
tumors, and were then divided to four dietary groups on PND 55:
prepubertal GEN-adult GEN group (GG, n=20); prepubertal GEN-adult control
group (GC, n=20); prepubertal control-adult GEN (CG, n=20); and
control-control (CC, n=35). When mammary tumor reached a size of 1.4 cm
in diameter, 337 ppm TAM was added to rats diet. GG and CG rats continued
also consuming GEN, and all rats in GC and 20 rats in CC groups stated
consuming GEN one week after the TAM treatment started. 15 CC rats were
never fed GEN.Mammary tumor latency was longer in GG (p<0.003) and GC
rats (pHigh childhood and adolescent dietary intake of isoflavone
genistein (GEN) in soyfoods reduces later breast cancer risk, but since
GEN has estrogenic properties, it is not clear whether it is safe to
start consuming it after breast cancer has been diagnosed. Using a new
preclinical model, we investigated the effects of childhood, adult and/or
post-diagnosis consumption of GEN on the ability of tamoxifen (TAM) to
treat breast cancer.95 female Sprague-Dawley rats consuming AIN93G diet
were supplemented with 0 or 500 ppm GEN between postnatal days (PND) 15
to 30 (prepubertal exposure) and then were fed AIN93G diet with no GEN
between PND 30 and 55. On PND 48, rats received 10 mg DMBA to induce
mammary tumors, and were then divided to four dietary groups on PND 55:
prepubertal GEN-adult GEN group (GG, n=20); prepubertal GEN-adult control
group (GC, n=20); prepubertal control-adult GEN (CG, n=20); and
control-control (CC, n=35). When mammary tumor reached a size of 1.4 cm
in diameter, 337 ppm TAM was added to rats diet. GG and CG rats continued
also consuming GEN, and all rats in GC and 20 rats in CC groups stated
consuming GEN one week after the TAM treatment started. 15 CC rats were
never fed GEN.Mammary tumor latency was longer in GG (p<0.003) and GC
rats (p<0.095), compared to CC rats. The response of tumors to TAM
treatment was classified as complete or partial response, or de novo
resistant. Prepubertal and life-time GEN intake increased, and intake
starting during TAM treatment reduced response to TAM (pHigh childhood
and adolescent dietary intake of isoflavone genistein (GEN) in soyfoods
reduces later breast cancer risk, but since GEN has estrogenic
properties, it is not clear whether it is safe to start consuming it
after breast cancer has been diagnosed. Using a new preclinical model, we
investigated the effects of childhood, adult and/or post-diagnosis
consumption of GEN on the ability of tamoxifen (TAM) to treat breast
cancer.95 female Sprague-Dawley rats consuming AIN93G diet were
supplemented with 0 or 500 ppm GEN between postnatal days (PND) 15 to 30
(prepubertal exposure) and then were fed AIN93G diet with no GEN between
PND 30 and 55. On PND 48, rats received 10 mg DMBA to induce mammary
tumors, and were then divided to four dietary groups on PND 55:
prepubertal GEN-adult GEN group (GG, n=20); prepubertal GEN-adult control
group (GC, n=20); prepubertal control-adult GEN (CG, n=20); and
control-control (CC, n=35). When mammary tumor reached a size of 1.4 cm
in diameter, 337 ppm TAM was added to rats diet. GG and CG rats continued
also consuming GEN, and all rats in GC and 20 rats in CC groups stated
consuming GEN one week after the TAM treatment started. 15 CC rats were
never fed GEN.Mammary tumor latency was longer in GG (p<0.003) and GC
rats (p<0.095), compared to CC rats. The response of tumors to TAM
treatment was classified as complete or partial response, or de novo
resistant. Prepubertal and life-time GEN intake increased, and intake
starting during TAM treatment reduced response to TAM (p<0.001). Mammary
cancer recurrence rate was highest in the rats which started consuming
GEN during TAM treatment, and significantly lower in life-time,
prepubertal and adulthood only GEN intake groups (pHigh childhood and
adolescent dietary intake of isoflavone genistein (GEN) in soyfoods
reduces later breast cancer risk, but since GEN has estrogenic
properties, it is not clear whether it is safe to start consuming it
after breast cancer has been diagnosed. Using a new preclinical model, we
investigated the effects of childhood, adult and/or post-diagnosis
consumption of GEN on the ability of tamoxifen (TAM) to treat breast
cancer.95 female Sprague-Dawley rats consuming AIN93G diet were
supplemented with 0 or 500 ppm GEN between postnatal days (PND) 15 to 30
(prepubertal exposure) and then were fed AIN93G diet with no GEN between
PND 30 and 55. On PND 48, rats received 10 mg DMBA to induce mammary
tumors, and were then divided to four dietary groups on PND 55:
prepubertal GEN-adult GEN group (GG, n=20); prepubertal GEN-adult control
group (GC, n=20); prepubertal control-adult GEN (CG, n=20); and
control-control (CC, n=35). When mammary tumor reached a size of 1.4 cm
in diameter, 337 ppm TAM was added to rats diet. GG and CG rats continued
also consuming GEN, and all rats in GC and 20 rats in CC groups stated
consuming GEN one week after the TAM treatment started. 15 CC rats were
never fed GEN.Mammary tumor latency was longer in GG (p<0.003) and GC
rats (p<0.095), compared to CC rats. The response of tumors to TAM
treatment was classified as complete or partial response, or de novo
resistant. Prepubertal and life-time GEN intake increased, and intake
starting during TAM treatment reduced response to TAM (p<0.001). Mammary
cancer recurrence rate was highest in the rats which started consuming
GEN during TAM treatment, and significantly lower in life-time,
prepubertal and adulthood only GEN intake groups (p<0.001). Brca1 mRNA
level was highest in the mammary gland of life-time GEN consuming rats
(pHigh childhood and adolescent dietary intake of isoflavone genistein
(GEN) in soyfoods reduces later breast cancer risk, but since GEN has
estrogenic properties, it is not clear whether it is safe to start
consuming it after breast cancer has been diagnosed. Using a new
preclinical model, we investigated the effects of childhood, adult and/or
post-diagnosis consumption of GEN on the ability of tamoxifen (TAM) to
treat breast cancer.95 female Sprague-Dawley rats consuming AIN93G diet
were supplemented with 0 or 500 ppm GEN between postnatal days (PND) 15
to 30 (prepubertal exposure) and then were fed AIN93G diet with no GEN
between PND 30 and 55. On PND 48, rats received 10 mg DMBA to induce
mammary tumors, and were then divided to four dietary groups on PND 55:
prepubertal GEN-adult GEN group (GG, n=20); prepubertal GEN-adult control
group (GC, n=20); prepubertal control-adult GEN (CG, n=20); and
control-control (CC, n=35). When mammary tumor reached a size of 1.4 cm
in diameter, 337 ppm TAM was added to rats diet. GG and CG rats continued
also consuming GEN, and all rats in GC and 20 rats in CC groups stated
consuming GEN one week after the TAM treatment started. 15 CC rats were
never fed GEN.Mammary tumor latency was longer in GG (p<0.003) and GC
rats (p<0.095), compared to CC rats. The response of tumors to TAM
treatment was classified as complete or partial response, or de novo
resistant. Prepubertal and life-time GEN intake increased, and intake
starting during TAM treatment reduced response to TAM (p<0.001). Mammary
cancer recurrence rate was highest in the rats which started consuming
GEN during TAM treatment, and significantly lower in life-time,
prepubertal and adulthood only GEN intake groups (p<0.001). Brca1 mRNA
level was highest in the mammary gland of life-time GEN consuming rats
(p<0.05). Tumor suppressor genes p21WAF1/CIP1 and p16INK4a mRNA levels
were significantly higher in both prepubertal GEN groups (GC and GG) than
in CC rats (pHigh childhood and adolescent dietary intake of isoflavone
genistein (GEN) in soyfoods reduces later breast cancer risk, but since
GEN has estrogenic properties, it is not clear whether it is safe to
start consuming it after breast cancer has been diagnosed. Using a new
preclinical model, we investigated the effects of childhood, adult and/or
post-diagnosis consumption of GEN on the ability of tamoxifen (TAM) to
treat breast cancer.95 female Sprague-Dawley rats consuming AIN93G diet
were supplemented with 0 or 500 ppm GEN between postnatal days (PND) 15
to 30 (prepubertal exposure) and then were fed AIN93G diet with no GEN
between PND 30 and 55. On PND 48, rats received 10 mg DMBA to induce
mammary tumors, and were then divided to four dietary groups on PND 55:
prepubertal GEN-adult GEN group (GG, n=20); prepubertal GEN-adult control
group (GC, n=20); prepubertal control-adult GEN (CG, n=20); and
control-control (CC, n=35). When mammary tumor reached a size of 1.4 cm
in diameter, 337 ppm TAM was added to rats diet. GG and CG rats continued
also consuming GEN, and all rats in GC and 20 rats in CC groups stated
consuming GEN one week after the TAM treatment started. 15 CC rats were
never fed GEN.Mammary tumor latency was longer in GG (p<0.003) and GC
rats (p<0.095), compared to CC rats. The response of tumors to TAM
treatment was classified as complete or partial response, or de novo
resistant. Prepubertal and life-time GEN intake increased, and intake
starting during TAM treatment reduced response to TAM (p<0.001). Mammary
cancer recurrence rate was highest in the rats which started consuming
GEN during TAM treatment, and significantly lower in life-time,
prepubertal and adulthood only GEN intake groups (p<0.001). Brca1 mRNA
level was highest in the mammary gland of life-time GEN consuming rats
(p<0.05). Tumor suppressor genes p21WAF1/CIP1 and p16INK4a mRNA levels
were significantly higher in both prepubertal GEN groups (GC and GG) than
in CC rats (p<0.05), as was the expression of pro-apoptotic gene Bax
(pHigh childhood and adolescent dietary intake of isoflavone genistein
(GEN) in soyfoods reduces later breast cancer risk, but since GEN has
estrogenic properties, it is not clear whether it is safe to start
consuming it after breast cancer has been diagnosed. Using a new
preclinical model, we investigated the effects of childhood, adult and/or
post-diagnosis consumption of GEN on the ability of tamoxifen (TAM) to
treat breast cancer.95 female Sprague-Dawley rats consuming AIN93G diet
were supplemented with 0 or 500 ppm GEN between postnatal days (PND) 15
to 30 (prepubertal exposure) and then were fed AIN93G diet with no GEN
between PND 30 and 55. On PND 48, rats received 10 mg DMBA to induce
mammary tumors, and were then divided to four dietary groups on PND 55:
prepubertal GEN-adult GEN group (GG, n=20); prepubertal GEN-adult control
group (GC, n=20); prepubertal control-adult GEN (CG, n=20); and
control-control (CC, n=35). When mammary tumor reached a size of 1.4 cm
in diameter, 337 ppm TAM was added to rats diet. GG and CG rats continued
also consuming GEN, and all rats in GC and 20 rats in CC groups stated
consuming GEN one week after the TAM treatment started. 15 CC rats were
never fed GEN.Mammary tumor latency was longer in GG (p<0.003) and GC
rats (p<0.095), compared to CC rats. The response of tumors to TAM
treatment was classified as complete or partial response, or de novo
resistant. Prepubertal and life-time GEN intake increased, and intake
starting during TAM treatment reduced response to TAM (p<0.001). Mammary
cancer recurrence rate was highest in the rats which started consuming
GEN during TAM treatment, and significantly lower in life-time,
prepubertal and adulthood only GEN intake groups (p<0.001). Brca1 mRNA
level was highest in the mammary gland of life-time GEN consuming rats
(p<0.05). Tumor suppressor genes p21WAF1/CIP1 and p16INK4a mRNA levels
were significantly higher in both prepubertal GEN groups (GC and GG) than
in CC rats (p<0.05), as was the expression of pro-apoptotic gene Bax
(p<0.05). No changes in estrogen receptor (ER) protein expression in the
mammary gland were seen among the groups, but progesterone receptor
(pHigh childhood and adolescent dietary intake of isoflavone genistein
(GEN) in soyfoods reduces later breast cancer risk, but since GEN has
estrogenic properties, it is not clear whether it is safe to start
consuming it after breast cancer has been diagnosed. Using a new
preclinical model, we investigated the effects of childhood, adult and/or
post-diagnosis consumption of GEN on the ability of tamoxifen (TAM) to
treat breast cancer.95 female Sprague-Dawley rats consuming AIN93G diet
were supplemented with 0 or 500 ppm GEN between postnatal days (PND) 15
to 30 (prepubertal exposure) and then were fed AIN93G diet with no GEN
between PND 30 and 55. On PND 48, rats received 10 mg DMBA to induce
mammary tumors, and were then divided to four dietary groups on PND 55:
prepubertal GEN-adult GEN group (GG, n=20); prepubertal GEN-adult control
group (GC, n=20); prepubertal control-adult GEN (CG, n=20); and
control-control (CC, n=35). When mammary tumor reached a size of 1.4 cm
in diameter, 337 ppm TAM was added to rats diet. GG and CG rats continued
also consuming GEN, and all rats in GC and 20 rats in CC groups stated
consuming GEN one week after the TAM treatment started. 15 CC rats were
never fed GEN.Mammary tumor latency was longer in GG (p<0.003) and GC
rats (p<0.095), compared to CC rats. The response of tumors to TAM
treatment was classified as complete or partial response, or de novo
resistant. Prepubertal and life-time GEN intake increased, and intake
starting during TAM treatment reduced response to TAM (p<0.001). Mammary
cancer recurrence rate was highest in the rats which started consuming
GEN during TAM treatment, and significantly lower in life-time,
prepubertal and adulthood only GEN intake groups (p<0.001). Brca1 mRNA
level was highest in the mammary gland of life-time GEN consuming rats
(p<0.05). Tumor suppressor genes p21WAF1/CIP1 and p16INK4a mRNA levels
were significantly higher in both prepubertal GEN groups (GC and GG) than
in CC rats (p<0.05), as was the expression of pro-apoptotic gene Bax
(p<0.05). No changes in estrogen receptor (ER) protein expression in the
mammary gland were seen among the groups, but progesterone receptor
(p<0.05) and phosphorylated HER2/ErbB2 (pHigh childhood and adolescent
dietary intake of isoflavone genistein (GEN) in soyfoods reduces later
breast cancer risk, but since GEN has estrogenic properties, it is not
clear whether it is safe to start consuming it after breast cancer has
been diagnosed. Using a new preclinical model, we investigated the
effects of childhood, adult and/or post-diagnosis consumption of GEN on
the ability of tamoxifen (TAM) to treat breast cancer.95 female
Sprague-Dawley rats consuming AIN93G diet were supplemented with 0 or 500
ppm GEN between postnatal days (PND) 15 to 30 (prepubertal exposure) and
then were fed AIN93G diet with no GEN between PND 30 and 55. On PND 48,
rats received 10 mg DMBA to induce mammary tumors, and were then divided
to four dietary groups on PND 55: prepubertal GEN-adult GEN group (GG,
n=20); prepubertal GEN-adult control group (GC, n=20); prepubertal
control-adult GEN (CG, n=20); and control-control (CC, n=35). When
mammary tumor reached a size of 1.4 cm in diameter, 337 ppm TAM was added
to rats diet. GG and CG rats continued also consuming GEN, and all rats
in GC and 20 rats in CC groups stated consuming GEN one week after the
TAM treatment started. 15 CC rats were never fed GEN.Mammary tumor
latency was longer in GG (p<0.003) and GC rats (p<0.095), compared to CC
rats. The response of tumors to TAM treatment was classified as complete
or partial response, or de novo resistant. Prepubertal and life-time GEN
intake increased, and intake starting during TAM treatment reduced
response to TAM (p<0.001). Mammary cancer recurrence rate was highest in
the rats which started consuming GEN during TAM treatment, and
significantly lower in life-time, prepubertal and adulthood only GEN
intake groups (p<0.001). Brca1 mRNA level was highest in the mammary
gland of life-time GEN consuming rats (p<0.05). Tumor suppressor genes
p21WAF1/CIP1 and p16INK4a mRNA levels were significantly higher in both
prepubertal GEN groups (GC and GG) than in CC rats (p<0.05), as was the
expression of pro-apoptotic gene Bax (p<0.05). No changes in estrogen
receptor (ER) protein expression in the mammary gland were seen among the
groups, but progesterone receptor (p<0.05) and phosphorylated HER2/ErbB2
(p<0.05) were both expressed at a lower level in rats consuming GEN
through the life-time, compared with rats which consumed GEN during adult
life (CG rats).Our findings show that rats exposed prepubertally or
through the life-time to GEN were at lower risk of developing TAM
resistance than rats which started GEN intake in adulthood or
post-diagnosis. The effect of prepubertal GEN exposure in increasing TAM
responsiveness may be related to up-regulation of tumor suppressor genes
Brca1, p16INK4a and p21WAF1/CIP1 in their mammary gland. Recurrence rate
was highest in those rats that were consuming GEN for the first time
during TAM treatment. If true for humans, women with ER+ breast cancer
should not start consuming GEN during TAM treatment.

