Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DrIMS-3DCC: Drug imaging mass spectrometry of 3D cell culture
systems.


3D cell cultures have increased complexity compared to simple monolayer
and suspension cultures, recapitulating the cellular architecture in the
body. For example, many colon cancer cell lines form rounded
heterogeneous spheroid structures that mimic the pathophysiological
properties of tumors when grown under appropriate cell culture
conditions. Classical imaging methodologies, like immunohistochemistry,
are commonly used to examine the distribution of specific species within
the spheroids. However, there is a need for an unbiased discovery-based
methodology that would allow examination of protein/peptide distributions
in 3D culture systems, without a need for prior knowledge of the
analytes. We have developed a MALDI imaging mass spectrometry approach to
examine protein distributions in 3D culture models (MALDI IMS-3DCC),
allowing us to map the spatiotemporal dynamics of proteins in these
valuable model systems.We are currently expanding our approach to image
the distribution of drugs within 3D cell cultures. We are using our MALDI
IMS-3DCC to analyze the penetration of drugs within 3D cell cultures.
With our mass-spectrometric based approach, we have the ability to map
the distribution of the 1) the drug, 2) the metabolites produced from the
drug, and 3) the spatiotemporal changes in proteins following treatment.
Thus far, we have successfully evaluated the effects of two clinically
relevant species, oxaliplatin and Irinotecan, on spheroids. In the
future, we will expand our approach to evaluate new therapeutic
compounds. We believe that our novel imaging strategy will drastically
alter how new therapeutic compounds are evaluated, reducing the need for
animal models in the early stages of drug development, thereby speeding
up the drug evaluation process.

