Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNA-21 predicts the response to hypomethylating
agents in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.


Background: Although hypomethylating agents therapy have considerably
improved the outcomes of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS),
the discovery of sensitive non-invasive biomarkers that can facilitate
the prediction of response to hypomethylating agents (HMA) and
therapeutic outcomes are highly desirable to determine optimized
strategies of epigenetic therapy for MDS. Circulating microRNAs have been
evaluated as potential biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and prognosis
prediction.Purpose: We evaluated the significance of miR-21 expression in
serum as a biomarker for predicting response in MDS patients treated with
HMA.Patients and methods: Serum miR-21 level was measured by quantitative
real-time PCR in 58 MDS patients at diagnosis and 14 healthy controls. We
analyzed the correlation between serum miR-21 level and clinical
characteristics and response to HMA and survival.Results: We found that
serum miR-21 level was significantly downregulated in patients with MDS
than those in healthy controls (PBackground: Although hypomethylating
agents therapy have considerably improved the outcomes of patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), the discovery of sensitive non-invasive
biomarkers that can facilitate the prediction of response to
hypomethylating agents (HMA) and therapeutic outcomes are highly
desirable to determine optimized strategies of epigenetic therapy for
MDS. Circulating microRNAs have been evaluated as potential biomarkers
for cancer diagnosis and prognosis prediction.Purpose: We evaluated the
significance of miR-21 expression in serum as a biomarker for predicting
response in MDS patients treated with HMA.Patients and methods: Serum
miR-21 level was measured by quantitative real-time PCR in 58 MDS
patients at diagnosis and 14 healthy controls. We analyzed the
correlation between serum miR-21 level and clinical characteristics and
response to HMA and survival.Results: We found that serum miR-21 level
was significantly downregulated in patients with MDS than those in
healthy controls (P<0.001). Moreover, miR-21 level was significantly
lower in patients with response (CR, mCR, PR and SD with HI) to HMA
compared to those without response (median, 0.94140.6349 vs.
1.14430.7707; P=0.041). Receiver-operator characteristic curve analysis
indicated that serum miR-21 was useful in differentiating responder from
non-responder with AUC of 0.648. At a cut-off value of 1.2613 for serum
miR-21 level, the optimal sensitivity and specificity were 83.3% (95% CI:
68.6-93.3%) and 45.8% (95%CI: 25.5-67.1%), respectively. Patients, whose
miR-21 level at diagnosis was higher than cutoff level, were defined as
high miR-21 group (n=17) and the low miR-21 group representing the
remaining 41 patients. We found that patients in high miR-21 grooup,
compared with those in low miR-21 group, had a shorter median PFS
(P=0.001). On multivariate analysis, Serum miR-21 level remained as a
significant prognostic factor for response to HMA and PFS.Conclusion: In
this study, we evaluated the levels of serum miR-21 in patients with MDS,
and found that serum miR-21 level predicts response to HMA and PFS in
MDS. Although this prognostic significance should be validated in an
independent set of patients receiving HMA, serum miR-21 level is a
promising biochemical marker for response prediction to HMT.

