Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capsaicin enhances the effect of radiation in prostate cancer
through NFB suppression.


Introduction and Objective: Radio-sensitizing agents sensitize cells to
the lethal effects of ionizing radiation (IR). This permits use of lower
doses of radiation to achieve equivalent cancer control thereby
minimizing adverse effects to normal tissues. Given their lack of
toxicity compounds occurring naturally in the diet make ideal potential
radio-sensitizing agents. Capsaicin is the active compound chilli
peppers. Traditionally capsaicin is used to treat chronic pain syndromes;
however, recently evidence using in vitro prostate cancer (PCa) models
describes its anti-carcinogenic potential. In our studies we have
demonstrated that capsaicin can enhance the effect of radiation of
prostate cancer in vitro and in vivo. The objective of the present study
is to assess the how capsaicin enhances the effect of radiation in vitro
an in vivo models.Methods: Using clonogenic assays we assessed the effect
of ionizing radiation (1-8 Gy) and/or capsaicin (1-10M) on colony
formation rates in 4 human PCa cell lines (LNCaP, PC3, PC3AR2, DU145).
Western Blot and immunocytochemical analysis was performed to examine
mechanistic changes. Athymic nude mice were inoculated subcutaneously
with human PCa (LNCaP) cells. Once xenografts reach 100mm3 forty animals
will be randomized into 4 groups (15 /group); control (no treatment),
capsaicin alone, ionizing radiation (IR) alone and capsaicin and IR.
Treatments were administered over a two-week time period. Capsaicin (5
mg/kg/d) or vehicle was administered 3/week by gavage. RT will be
delivered to animals in sterile cages as one fraction (6 Gray). Tumours
were measured thrice weekly and volumes were calculated. Tumours were
fixed and stained for pathological analyses and immunohistochemical
evaluation.Results:Exposure of cells to capsaicin (1-10M) or IR (1-8Gy)
caused significant dose-dependent inhibition of colony formation
(pIntroduction and Objective: Radio-sensitizing agents sensitize cells to
the lethal effects of ionizing radiation (IR). This permits use of lower
doses of radiation to achieve equivalent cancer control thereby
minimizing adverse effects to normal tissues. Given their lack of
toxicity compounds occurring naturally in the diet make ideal potential
radio-sensitizing agents. Capsaicin is the active compound chilli
peppers. Traditionally capsaicin is used to treat chronic pain syndromes;
however, recently evidence using in vitro prostate cancer (PCa) models
describes its anti-carcinogenic potential. In our studies we have
demonstrated that capsaicin can enhance the effect of radiation of
prostate cancer in vitro and in vivo. The objective of the present study
is to assess the how capsaicin enhances the effect of radiation in vitro
an in vivo models.Methods: Using clonogenic assays we assessed the effect
of ionizing radiation (1-8 Gy) and/or capsaicin (1-10M) on colony
formation rates in 4 human PCa cell lines (LNCaP, PC3, PC3AR2, DU145).
Western Blot and immunocytochemical analysis was performed to examine
mechanistic changes. Athymic nude mice were inoculated subcutaneously
with human PCa (LNCaP) cells. Once xenografts reach 100mm3 forty animals
will be randomized into 4 groups (15 /group); control (no treatment),
capsaicin alone, ionizing radiation (IR) alone and capsaicin and IR.
Treatments were administered over a two-week time period. Capsaicin (5
mg/kg/d) or vehicle was administered 3/week by gavage. RT will be
delivered to animals in sterile cages as one fraction (6 Gray). Tumours
were measured thrice weekly and volumes were calculated. Tumours were
fixed and stained for pathological analyses and immunohistochemical
evaluation.Results:Exposure of cells to capsaicin (1-10M) or IR (1-8Gy)
caused significant dose-dependent inhibition of colony formation
(p<0.001). Combining capsaicin with IR resulted in further significant
inhibition of colony formation rates (PIntroduction and Objective:
Radio-sensitizing agents sensitize cells to the lethal effects of
ionizing radiation (IR). This permits use of lower doses of radiation to
achieve equivalent cancer control thereby minimizing adverse effects to
normal tissues. Given their lack of toxicity compounds occurring
naturally in the diet make ideal potential radio-sensitizing agents.
Capsaicin is the active compound chilli peppers. Traditionally capsaicin
is used to treat chronic pain syndromes; however, recently evidence using
in vitro prostate cancer (PCa) models describes its anti-carcinogenic
potential. In our studies we have demonstrated that capsaicin can enhance
the effect of radiation of prostate cancer in vitro and in vivo. The
objective of the present study is to assess the how capsaicin enhances
the effect of radiation in vitro an in vivo models.Methods: Using
clonogenic assays we assessed the effect of ionizing radiation (1-8 Gy)
and/or capsaicin (1-10M) on colony formation rates in 4 human PCa cell
lines (LNCaP, PC3, PC3AR2, DU145). Western Blot and immunocytochemical
analysis was performed to examine mechanistic changes. Athymic nude mice
were inoculated subcutaneously with human PCa (LNCaP) cells. Once
xenografts reach 100mm3 forty animals will be randomized into 4 groups
(15 /group); control (no treatment), capsaicin alone, ionizing radiation
(IR) alone and capsaicin and IR. Treatments were administered over a
two-week time period. Capsaicin (5 mg/kg/d) or vehicle was administered
3/week by gavage. RT will be delivered to animals in sterile cages as one
fraction (6 Gray). Tumours were measured thrice weekly and volumes were
calculated. Tumours were fixed and stained for pathological analyses and
immunohistochemical evaluation.Results:Exposure of cells to capsaicin
(1-10M) or IR (1-8Gy) caused significant dose-dependent inhibition of
colony formation (p<0.001). Combining capsaicin with IR resulted in
further significant inhibition of colony formation rates (P<0.001).
Western Blot and IHC analysis showed that LNCaP cells treated with
capsaicin and/or IR suppressed AR and NFB, and increase DNA damage. Mice
treated with capsaicin or IR alone had a significant reduction in tumour
growth overtime (p Introduction and Objective: Radio-sensitizing agents
sensitize cells to the lethal effects of ionizing radiation (IR). This
permits use of lower doses of radiation to achieve equivalent cancer
control thereby minimizing adverse effects to normal tissues. Given their
lack of toxicity compounds occurring naturally in the diet make ideal
potential radio-sensitizing agents. Capsaicin is the active compound
chilli peppers. Traditionally capsaicin is used to treat chronic pain
syndromes; however, recently evidence using in vitro prostate cancer
(PCa) models describes its anti-carcinogenic potential. In our studies we
have demonstrated that capsaicin can enhance the effect of radiation of
prostate cancer in vitro and in vivo. The objective of the present study
is to assess the how capsaicin enhances the effect of radiation in vitro
an in vivo models.Methods: Using clonogenic assays we assessed the effect
of ionizing radiation (1-8 Gy) and/or capsaicin (1-10M) on colony
formation rates in 4 human PCa cell lines (LNCaP, PC3, PC3AR2, DU145).
Western Blot and immunocytochemical analysis was performed to examine
mechanistic changes. Athymic nude mice were inoculated subcutaneously
with human PCa (LNCaP) cells. Once xenografts reach 100mm3 forty animals
will be randomized into 4 groups (15 /group); control (no treatment),
capsaicin alone, ionizing radiation (IR) alone and capsaicin and IR.
Treatments were administered over a two-week time period. Capsaicin (5
mg/kg/d) or vehicle was administered 3/week by gavage. RT will be
delivered to animals in sterile cages as one fraction (6 Gray). Tumours
were measured thrice weekly and volumes were calculated. Tumours were
fixed and stained for pathological analyses and immunohistochemical
evaluation.Results:Exposure of cells to capsaicin (1-10M) or IR (1-8Gy)
caused significant dose-dependent inhibition of colony formation
(p<0.001). Combining capsaicin with IR resulted in further significant
inhibition of colony formation rates (P<0.001). Western Blot and IHC
analysis showed that LNCaP cells treated with capsaicin and/or IR
suppressed AR and NFB, and increase DNA damage. Mice treated with
capsaicin or IR alone had a significant reduction in tumour growth
overtime (p < 0.001). Mice treated with capsaicin and IR capsaicin had a
reduction in the tumour volume greater than either capsaicin alone
(pIntroduction and Objective: Radio-sensitizing agents sensitize cells to
the lethal effects of ionizing radiation (IR). This permits use of lower
doses of radiation to achieve equivalent cancer control thereby
minimizing adverse effects to normal tissues. Given their lack of
toxicity compounds occurring naturally in the diet make ideal potential
radio-sensitizing agents. Capsaicin is the active compound chilli
peppers. Traditionally capsaicin is used to treat chronic pain syndromes;
however, recently evidence using in vitro prostate cancer (PCa) models
describes its anti-carcinogenic potential. In our studies we have
demonstrated that capsaicin can enhance the effect of radiation of
prostate cancer in vitro and in vivo. The objective of the present study
is to assess the how capsaicin enhances the effect of radiation in vitro
an in vivo models.Methods: Using clonogenic assays we assessed the effect
of ionizing radiation (1-8 Gy) and/or capsaicin (1-10M) on colony
formation rates in 4 human PCa cell lines (LNCaP, PC3, PC3AR2, DU145).
Western Blot and immunocytochemical analysis was performed to examine
mechanistic changes. Athymic nude mice were inoculated subcutaneously
with human PCa (LNCaP) cells. Once xenografts reach 100mm3 forty animals
will be randomized into 4 groups (15 /group); control (no treatment),
capsaicin alone, ionizing radiation (IR) alone and capsaicin and IR.
Treatments were administered over a two-week time period. Capsaicin (5
mg/kg/d) or vehicle was administered 3/week by gavage. RT will be
delivered to animals in sterile cages as one fraction (6 Gray). Tumours
were measured thrice weekly and volumes were calculated. Tumours were
fixed and stained for pathological analyses and immunohistochemical
evaluation.Results:Exposure of cells to capsaicin (1-10M) or IR (1-8Gy)
caused significant dose-dependent inhibition of colony formation
(p<0.001). Combining capsaicin with IR resulted in further significant
inhibition of colony formation rates (P<0.001). Western Blot and IHC
analysis showed that LNCaP cells treated with capsaicin and/or IR
suppressed AR and NFB, and increase DNA damage. Mice treated with
capsaicin or IR alone had a significant reduction in tumour growth
overtime (p < 0.001). Mice treated with capsaicin and IR capsaicin had a
reduction in the tumour volume greater than either capsaicin alone
(p<0.001) or radiation alone (pIntroduction and Objective:
Radio-sensitizing agents sensitize cells to the lethal effects of
ionizing radiation (IR). This permits use of lower doses of radiation to
achieve equivalent cancer control thereby minimizing adverse effects to
normal tissues. Given their lack of toxicity compounds occurring
naturally in the diet make ideal potential radio-sensitizing agents.
Capsaicin is the active compound chilli peppers. Traditionally capsaicin
is used to treat chronic pain syndromes; however, recently evidence using
in vitro prostate cancer (PCa) models describes its anti-carcinogenic
potential. In our studies we have demonstrated that capsaicin can enhance
the effect of radiation of prostate cancer in vitro and in vivo. The
objective of the present study is to assess the how capsaicin enhances
the effect of radiation in vitro an in vivo models.Methods: Using
clonogenic assays we assessed the effect of ionizing radiation (1-8 Gy)
and/or capsaicin (1-10M) on colony formation rates in 4 human PCa cell
lines (LNCaP, PC3, PC3AR2, DU145). Western Blot and immunocytochemical
analysis was performed to examine mechanistic changes. Athymic nude mice
were inoculated subcutaneously with human PCa (LNCaP) cells. Once
xenografts reach 100mm3 forty animals will be randomized into 4 groups
(15 /group); control (no treatment), capsaicin alone, ionizing radiation
(IR) alone and capsaicin and IR. Treatments were administered over a
two-week time period. Capsaicin (5 mg/kg/d) or vehicle was administered
3/week by gavage. RT will be delivered to animals in sterile cages as one
fraction (6 Gray). Tumours were measured thrice weekly and volumes were
calculated. Tumours were fixed and stained for pathological analyses and
immunohistochemical evaluation.Results:Exposure of cells to capsaicin
(1-10M) or IR (1-8Gy) caused significant dose-dependent inhibition of
colony formation (p<0.001). Combining capsaicin with IR resulted in
further significant inhibition of colony formation rates (P<0.001).
Western Blot and IHC analysis showed that LNCaP cells treated with
capsaicin and/or IR suppressed AR and NFB, and increase DNA damage. Mice
treated with capsaicin or IR alone had a significant reduction in tumour
growth overtime (p < 0.001). Mice treated with capsaicin and IR capsaicin
had a reduction in the tumour volume greater than either capsaicin alone
(p<0.001) or radiation alone (p<0.03). Two mice experienced mild to
moderate inflammation of the stomach. No other toxicities were observed.
Mechanistic studies revealed that mice administered capsaicin and
radiation had an increased yH2AX expression, and significantly lower Ki67
index, AR, and NFB expression.Conclusion: These studies suggest that
capsaicin enhances the effect of radiation through a number of mechanisms
including the suppression of NFB and AR.

