Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel inhibitors of PIM-1, PIM-2, and PIM-3 protein kinases:
medicinal chemistry leading to AZD1208.


The PIM serine/threonine kinase family, composed of three highly
homologous members, PIM-1, PIM-2 and PIM-3, are upregulated in leukemias
and lymphomas, including AML, NHL and CLL, highlighting the potential of
these kinases as therapeutic targets in these indications.
Over-expression of PIM-1 or PIM-3 has also been observed several solid
tumors, in particular prostate, pancreatic, gastric, bladder and
hepatocellular cancers. PIM kinases are downstream effectors of many
cytokine and growth factor signaling pathways and are direct
transcriptional targets of STAT transcription factors activated by these
pathways, thereby mediating cell proliferation and survival. We have
identified novel, potent and highly selective inhibitors of the PIM
family kinases. The synthesis, X-ray crystallographic binding mode, and
SAR of this benzylidene-1,3-thiazolidine-2,4-dione series are described.
Examples from this series exhibit single digit nanomolar potency against
all three PIMs, and have been shown to be selective across a panel of
more than 440 kinases, with inhibition found for only approximately 3% of
the panel, and at least 10-fold selectivity over kinases outside the PIM
family. The compounds additionally are stable in rat microsomes, have
high aqueous solubilities, and are not potent against the hERG ion
channel. The series has antiproliferative activity in a panel of AML
cells, has excellent pre-clinical pharmacokinetic properties, and lead
compounds have shown strong tumor growth inhibition in vivo in mouse AML
xenograft models. From this series, AZD1208 has recently entered Phase I
clinical trials for AML and solid tumors.

