Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel calcium-dependent direct binding of S100B to p90
ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK) decreases MAP kinase-mediated RSK activation in
malignant melanoma.


S100B is an effective and extensively used prognostic marker for
melanoma, with increasing serum S100B being predictive of disease stage,
increased recurrence, and low overall patient survival. Establishing the
mechanism by which S100B alters cell signaling provides insight into how
it may facilitate the progression of melanoma and aid in developing new
pharmacological drugs to inhibit cancer advancement. To evaluate specific
roles for S100B in malignant melanoma, our S100B knock-down and
over-expression studies established a correlation between S100B
expression and cell viability. ERK phosphorylation was also found to
correlate with S100B levels. We have discovered RSK, a downstream ERK
target, as a novel binding partner of S100B. RSK is known to regulate
MAPK signaling in melanoma but the mechanism is unclear. We observed an
inverse relationship between activated and phosphorylated RSK and S100B
levels. We used a Ca2+-binding mutant of S100B (E31A + E72A) to
demonstrate that the S100B-RSK interaction was calcium-dependent.
Pull-down experiments revealed the C-terminal domain of RSK to be
necessary for S100B binding. In vitro, S100B was found to reduce
ERK-dependent phosphorylation of RSK at Thr573. Our cellular
fractionation and immuno-fluorescence studies showed that S100B protein
prevented nuclear localization of phosphorylated RSK. These data are
consistent with a mechanism in which elevated S100B binds directly to RSK
in a calcium-dependent manner, preventing ERK-mediated phosphorylation of
RSK and inhibiting RSK localization to the nucleus. We have identified
the S100B-RSK interaction as a novel drug target in melanoma cells. We
are currently screening compounds for inhibitors of the S100B-RSK
interaction.

