Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target tubulin polymerization with novel reverse ABI analogs
interacting with the colchicine binding site.


Cancer remains one of the leading causes of mortality worldwide. While
current therapies are effective in treating early stage cancers, their
efficacy against advanced cancers, especially multidrug-resistant
cancers, is limited. Our lab recently reported a set of
2-aryl-4-benzoyl-imidazoles (ABI) derivatives with potent
anti-proliferative activity against melanoma and prostate cancer cell
lines and xenografts. Further optimization has led to the synthesis of a
new series of 4-aryl-2-benzoyl-imidazoles with the aryl group and the
benzoyl group reversed as compared to the previous ABI structure. The
reverse ABI (RABI) compounds were evaluated for biological activity
against 8 cancer cell lines including some which were
multidrug-resistant. The in vitro results showed that several RABI
compounds had excellent antiproliferative properties with IC50 values in
the low namomolar range, comparable to existing tubulin-targeting agents
such as paclitaxel, colchicine, or vinblastine, but with the ability to
effectively circumvent Pgp-mediated drug resistance. The IC50 of the most
active compound 12a was 9 nM. The mechanism of action (MOA) of the RABI
compounds was investigated using cell cycle analysis, tubulin
polymerization assays and molecular docking studies. These studies showed
that their antitumor activity was achieved through inhibition of tubulin
polymerization at the colchicine binding site. Our results suggest that
the novel RABI compounds may be developed as a promising antitumor agent
for advanced cancers.

