Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell death and growth arrest pathways mediating the actions of
stilbene 5c in HCT-116 colon cancer cells and B16F10 melanoma cells.


The stilbene derivative, cis-3, 4, 5-trimethoxy-3-aminostilbene (stilbene
5c), is a potentially potent antitumor agent that acts via binding to the
colchicine-binding pocket in microtubules. Earlier studies have shown
that stilbene 5c induces cell death in ovarian cancer cells and leukemic
cells (Cao TM et al. Am J Hematol. 2008;83:390-7; Durrant D et al.
Gynecol Oncol. 2008; 110:110-7).). The present study was designed to
investigate the effectiveness of this microtubule poison against the
HCT-116 human colon cancer cell line as well as B16F10 melanoma cells and
its mechanisms of action. Time course studies demonstrated that stilbene
5c produces a decrease in cell viability in both cell lines. The capacity
of the cells to proliferate was not restored upon removal of the drug
after 5 days of exposure. Consistent with the results of the time course
studies, -galactosidase staining indicated that treatment with stilbene
5c also promotes senescence. In addition to senescence, HCT-116 cells and
B16F10 melanoma cells treated with stilbene 5c displayed formation of
autophagic vesicles by acridine orange staining, which was supported by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Further evidence of autophagy
was derived from treatment of HCT116 cells expressing an RFP-LC3
construct with stilbene 5c, in which LC3 puncta formation increased in a
time-dependent manner. DAPI staining, TUNEL, and Annexin 5 staining
indicated that apoptosis is also occurring in stilbene 5c-treated HCT-116
cells. Cell cycle analysis of HCT116 cells demonstrated growth arrest at
both G1 and G2/M, and an increase in the subG1 population at days 3 and
5, which correspond to senescence and apoptosis respectively.
Interestingly, DAPI and Hoechst staining of HCT116 cells revealed
morphological changes in the cell nuclei (binucleated and micronucleated
cells), which suggest that mitotic catastrophe may also serve as a mode
of cell death after treatment with stilbene 5c. Our studies also
indicated that stilbene 5c works in a p53-independent manner. p53-null
HCT116 cells demonstrated similar sensitivity to stilbene as p53-wild
type HCT116 cells. Consistent with previous studies in other experimental
cancer models, this work indicates that stilbene 5c could potentially be
effective against melanoma and colon cancer through the promotion of
multiple modes of cell death.

