Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preventive effects of branched-chain amino acids supplementation
on the spontaneous development of hepatic preneoplastic lesions in
C57BL/KsJ-db/db obese mice.


Obesity and its associated disorders, such as non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis, increase the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Branched-chain amino acids (BCAA), which improves protein malnutrition in
patients with liver cirrhosis, reduces the risk of HCC in these patients
with obesity. In the present study, the effects of BCAA supplementation
on the spontaneous development of hepatic premalignant lesions, foci of
cellular alteration (FCA), in db/db obese mice were examined. Male db/db
mice were given a basal diet containing 3.0% of either BCAA or casein, a
nitrogen content-matched control of BCAA, for 36 weeks. At sacrifice,
supplementation with BCAA significantly inhibited the development of FCA
when compared to casein supplementation by inhibiting cell proliferation,
but inducing apoptosis. BCAA supplementation increased the expression
levels of PPAR-, p21CIP1, and p27KIP1 mRNA and decreased the levels of
c-fos and cyclin D1 mRNA in the liver. BCAA supplementation also reduced
both the amount of hepatic triglyceride accumulation and the expression
of IL-6, IL-1, IL-18, and TNF- mRNA in the liver. Increased macrophage
infiltration was inhibited and the expression of IL-6, TNF-, and MCP-1
mRNA in the white adipose tissue (WAT) were each decreased by BCAA
supplementation. BCAA supplementation also reduced adipocyte size, while
increasing the expression of PPAR-, PPAR-, and adiponectin mRNA in the
WAT compared to casein supplementation. These findings indicate that BCAA
supplementation inhibits the early phase of obesity-related liver
tumorigenesis by attenuating chronic inflammation in both the liver and
WAT. BCAA supplementation may be useful in the chemoprevention of liver
tumorigenesis in obese individuals.

