Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of different methods for radiochemical purity (RCP)
control of 99mTc-tetrofosminin oncology.


Background : The 99mTc-tetrofosmin is a radiopharmaceutical used in
oncology for scintigraphic quantification of the myocardial perfusion.
The reference method for quality control is thin layer chromatography,
using TLC SA bands. This method is simple but only separates two types of
impurities: free technetium and hydrolyzed technetium combined to
hydrophilic impurities such as gluconate-99mTc and takes from 30 to 35
minutes. Alternative methods by planar or liquid chromatography have been
developed (Whatman (W) plate, Sep-Pak or HPLC). The aim of our study is
to evaluate each method versus the reference one.Methods : The reference
method is a method using planar chromatography TLC SA tape, size 1 cm x
20 cm. Two marks were scored: one at 3 cm from the bottom indicates the
deposit (10 L of the preparation) and the other at 15 cm from the bottom
the end of migration. Mobile phase was acetone: dichloromethane (65:35,
v/v). The band marks were quantified by radioactive counting using a
miniGITA radiochromatograph (Raytest) equipped with a scintillation
probe.The other planar chromatographic methods are W 1 (0.18 mm) and W
3MM (0.34 mm), the principle and the quantifying method are similar to
reference method.SEP-Pak(Waters) method uses a C18 chromatography column
with 2 mobile phases (NaCl 0.9% and ethanol) and a sample volume between
25 to 50 L. Activity was quantify with a calibratorCRC 25 (Capintec)The
chromatographic system consisted in a Symmetry Shield column RP18 5m100
(Waters) with a gamma detector Gammaram (Lablogic). Empower software
(Waters) is used for peak integration. The mobile phase flowing at a rate
of 1.0 mL / min consisted in a mixture of acetonitrile and Titrisol
buffer (Waters) (40:60, v/v), the sample volumes were no more than 10 to
30 L.Results : The RCP was measured simultaneously by the different
methods with 30 preparations.For HPLC, mean RCP = 97.21%, = 2.178%
[91.6%-99.63%].For TLC SA, mean RCP = 97.99%, = 1.135%[94.31%-99.86%].For
Sep-Pak mean RCP = 97.15, = 1.133 [94.96%-99.55%],For W 3 MM meanRCP =
99.11 = 0.3252 [98.28%- 99.81%],For W 1 meanRCP = 98.32 = 0.5677
[97.01%-99.23%].The results obtained by these methods were compared using
the Wilcoxon t test. = 0.05. TheRCP obtained by TLC SA and SEP-Pak method
are significantly different (p = 0.026).The RCP obtained by TLC SA and W
1 and 3 MM methods are also significantly different (p w1 = 0.041, p w3
Background : The 99mTc-tetrofosmin is a radiopharmaceutical used in
oncology for scintigraphic quantification of the myocardial perfusion.
The reference method for quality control is thin layer chromatography,
using TLC SA bands. This method is simple but only separates two types of
impurities: free technetium and hydrolyzed technetium combined to
hydrophilic impurities such as gluconate-99mTc and takes from 30 to 35
minutes. Alternative methods by planar or liquid chromatography have been
developed (Whatman (W) plate, Sep-Pak or HPLC). The aim of our study is
to evaluate each method versus the reference one.Methods : The reference
method is a method using planar chromatography TLC SA tape, size 1 cm x
20 cm. Two marks were scored: one at 3 cm from the bottom indicates the
deposit (10 L of the preparation) and the other at 15 cm from the bottom
the end of migration. Mobile phase was acetone: dichloromethane (65:35,
v/v). The band marks were quantified by radioactive counting using a
miniGITA radiochromatograph (Raytest) equipped with a scintillation
probe.The other planar chromatographic methods are W 1 (0.18 mm) and W
3MM (0.34 mm), the principle and the quantifying method are similar to
reference method.SEP-Pak(Waters) method uses a C18 chromatography column
with 2 mobile phases (NaCl 0.9% and ethanol) and a sample volume between
25 to 50 L. Activity was quantify with a calibratorCRC 25 (Capintec)The
chromatographic system consisted in a Symmetry Shield column RP18 5m100
(Waters) with a gamma detector Gammaram (Lablogic). Empower software
(Waters) is used for peak integration. The mobile phase flowing at a rate
of 1.0 mL / min consisted in a mixture of acetonitrile and Titrisol
buffer (Waters) (40:60, v/v), the sample volumes were no more than 10 to
30 L.Results : The RCP was measured simultaneously by the different
methods with 30 preparations.For HPLC, mean RCP = 97.21%, = 2.178%
[91.6%-99.63%].For TLC SA, mean RCP = 97.99%, = 1.135%[94.31%-99.86%].For
Sep-Pak mean RCP = 97.15, = 1.133 [94.96%-99.55%],For W 3 MM meanRCP =
99.11 = 0.3252 [98.28%- 99.81%],For W 1 meanRCP = 98.32 = 0.5677
[97.01%-99.23%].The results obtained by these methods were compared using
the Wilcoxon t test. = 0.05. TheRCP obtained by TLC SA and SEP-Pak method
are significantly different (p = 0.026).The RCP obtained by TLC SA and W
1 and 3 MM methods are also significantly different (p w1 = 0.041, p w3 <
0.0001). The RCP obtained by either TLC SA or HPLC method are not
significantly different (p = 0.497)Conclusions : A new HPLC method was
developed for the control of the RCP 99mTc-tetrofosmin. The other methods
differ fromRCP (reference method). Whatman methods overestimate RCP
values versus TLC SA or HPLC method. This study allows us to improve the
detection of the cardiotoxic side effects due to chemotherapy more
quickly than TLC SA method and permits early prevention of toxicity by
dose adjustment of anticancer drugs.

