Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A loss of function Cbl-c mutation in a murine breast cancer model.


Receptor Tyrosine Kinase (RTK) signaling is essential for normal
biological processes and inappropriate RTK activity can result in
malignant transformation. Cbl proteins are a family of RING finger
ubiquitin ligases that negatively regulate a variety of RTKs, including
EGFR, MET, RET and components of the TCR pathway and disruption of this
negative regulation can lead to tumor initiation and progression. Recent
studies have identified a growing number of Cbl mutations associated with
human myeloid neoplasias and epithelial tumors. Cbl-c is the most
recently identified human Cbl protein and is expressed exclusively in
epithelial cells. Recently, a novel Cbl-c cDNA has been isolated from a
ductal carcinoma which developed in a C3(1)SV40Tag mouse, a murine model
of breast cancer driven by Large T antigen. This mutant cDNA encodes a
Cbl-c protein which lacks the catalytic domain of Cbl-c, thereby
resembling known Cbl family mutations associated with myeoloid
neoplasias. Genomic analysis of both parental and transgenic lines shows
no evidence of germline mutation indicating that this mutation is likely
somatic and may contribute to malignant transformation in this animal
model. In overexpression studies, this mutant Cbl-c protein fails to
mediate ubiquitination and degradation of activated EGFR and acts as a
dominant negative protein, preventing ubiquitination of the EGFR by wild
type Cbl proteins. The mutant Cbl-c protein also enhances transformation
of NIH 3T3 cells by SV40 Large T antigen and through subsequent analysis
of transforming capacity and signal pathway regulation, we are assessing
interacting partners of Cbl-c and the potential role of this mutation in
tumorigenesis. This mutant Cbl-c protein is the first functional evidence
for the involvement of Cbl-c in transformation.

