Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of breast cancer metastaticprogression by a novel uPAR
targeted monoclonal antibody, ATN-658, correlateswith the uPAR expression.


The urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) has been implicated
in the progression of metastatic disease in a number of different solid
tumor types including breast cancer. We have developed a therapeutic
monoclonal antibody, ATN-658, that targets uPAR in a novel manner.
ATN-658 does not inhibit the binding of uPA to uPAR but appears to have
pleiotropic effects on other uPAR interactions including those with
various integrins. In the present study, we utilized 231LM2-4H2N,a novel
highly metastatic variant of the triple negative breast cancer cell line
cell line, MDA-MB-231, to evaluate the effect of ATN-658 on metastasis.
This variant has been transfected to also express HER2 and metastases in
this model are resistant to targeted treatments such as trastuzumab and
sunitinib. Orthotopic 231LM2-4H2N xenograft tumor spontaneously
metastasizes to lung and liver and forms large macroscopic metastases
that lead to death. We transfected 231LM2-4H2N cells with dTomato and
Luc2 to allow for real time assessment of metastatic progression using
IVIS imaging. Primary orthotopic tumors were staged to 500 mm3, at which
time they were resected and the mice followed using bioluminescence to
detect metastases, which typically appear in the lungs within 2-3 weeks
post-resection.Mice were randomized once lung metastases were visible and
treatment was initiated using vehicle control, lapatanib (30 mg/kg QD),
ATN-658 (10 mg/kgQ3D) or the combination of lapatanib and ATN-658. Growth
of metastases was estimated using average radiance measurements. ATN-658
inhibited metastatic progression by 90% and doubled median survival
compared to the vehicle control in this study. Lapatanib had no effect on
the size of the metastases or survival and the combination
ofATN-658+lapatanib inhibited metastatic progression and survival to the
same extent as ATN-658 monotherapy. The activation of ERK was
significantly inhibited by ATN-658 in vivo although this alone was
insufficient to inhibit tumor growth since lapatanib also inhibited ERK
to the same extent suggesting the other effects were being mediated by
ATN-658.The effect of ATN-658 monotherapy on metastatic tumor growth was
much greater in the 231LM2-4H2N model than in the parental MDA-MB-231
model. In order to probe the reason for this difference in effect, we
analyzed the expression of uPAR in the variousMDA-MB-231 variants. uPAR
expression was significantly upregulated in HER2-transfected MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells suggesting that the level of uPAR expression may
dictate the degree of response toATN-658. If this hypothesis can be
validated, this would provide a patient enrichment strategy for the
humanized version of ATN-658, huATN-658, which is getting ready to go
into the clinic.

