Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of caffeine in sensitizing lung cancer cells to
cisplatin-induced apoptosis.


Cisplatin is an important anticancer drug that has been used widely for
treatment of many types of cancer, including lung cancer. The
effectiveness of the drug, however, often diminishes quickly due to the
development of tumor cell drug resistance in patients. Therefore, it is
important to explore different strategies that either can sensitize tumor
cells to cisplatin or can reverse the tumor cell drug resistance. We have
studies the effect of caffeine in cisplatin-induced apoptosis of lung
cancer cells. Using both CRL5985 lung adenocarcinoma cells and HTB182
lung squamous carcinoma cells, the results of our caspase-3 activation
studies demonstrated that the caffeine prior treatment significantly
increased the cisplatin-induced caspase-3 activation in these lung cancer
cells. Our quantitative PCR (real time PCR) results revealed that the
prior caffeine treatment caused a great increase in transcription of
PUMA, a pro-apoptotic protein, in the cisplatin-treated HTB182 and
CRL5985 lung cancer cells. Our western blot results further indicated
that the protein level of the PUMA was significantly more increased when
the lung cancer cells was treated with caffeine prior to the cisplatin
treatment. In addition, our western blot results also revealed that the
phosphorylation level of Chk1 at serine 317 was decreased but the
phosphorylation level of ATM at serine 1981 was increased for the lung
cancer cells treated with caffeine prior to the cisplatin treatment
compared to that of the cells treated with only cisplatin. These results
suggest that caffeine can sensitize lung cancer cells to cisplatin via
inhibiting ATR but increasing ATM activation, resulting in an increase in
PUMA expression and apoptosis of the treated lung cancer cells.
Therefore, caffeine can sensitize lung cancer cells to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis.

