Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-targeting c-Met and COX-2 leads to enhanced inhibition of lung
tumorigenesis in a murine model with heightened HGF signaling in the
airways.


The hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-Met signaling pathway is often
dysregulated in lung cancer. We previously showed that HGF activation of
c-Met in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells led to a significant
induction of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) followed by secretion of PGE2. PGE2
caused secretion of TGF by NSCLC cells, followed by both phosphorylation
of EGFR and later, delayed phosphorylation of c-Met that does not require
HGF. Secretion of PGE2 also appears to boost c-Met pathway signaling
downstream via cross-activation by EGFR, in a reinforcing loop that is
independent of HGF. We hypothesized that targeting of both c-Met and
COX-2 might lead to enhanced anti-tumor effects by blocking both upstream
and downstream pro-tumor events. Maximum effects on cell proliferation,
invasion and EMT markers were observed in vitro in NSCLC cell lines with
combination celecoxib and crizotinib treatment. We next tested whether
targeting c-Met with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor crizotinib combined
with celecoxib to target COX-2 would result in enhanced anti-tumor
effects in an animal model with heightened HGF/c-Met pathway signaling in
the airways. Mice transgenic for airway expression of human HGF were
treated with the tobacco carcinogen,
4-(methylnitroso-amino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone, from weeks 1-4.
Crizotinib (40mg/kg), celecoxib (50mg/kg), combined crizotinib and
celecoxib or placebo control was administered by oral gavage daily from
week 3 until week 15, at which time lung tumors were evaluated. A highly
significant decrease in the number of lung tumors per animal was observed
with crizotinib treatment (mean 3.6, range 2-6), celecoxib treatment
(mean 4.3, range 3-6) and combination treatment (mean 1.5, range 0-3)
compared to placebo control (mean 9.9, range 6-13; PThe hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF)/c-Met signaling pathway is often dysregulated in lung
cancer. We previously showed that HGF activation of c-Met in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells led to a significant induction of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) followed by secretion of PGE2. PGE2 caused
secretion of TGF by NSCLC cells, followed by both phosphorylation of EGFR
and later, delayed phosphorylation of c-Met that does not require HGF.
Secretion of PGE2 also appears to boost c-Met pathway signaling
downstream via cross-activation by EGFR, in a reinforcing loop that is
independent of HGF. We hypothesized that targeting of both c-Met and
COX-2 might lead to enhanced anti-tumor effects by blocking both upstream
and downstream pro-tumor events. Maximum effects on cell proliferation,
invasion and EMT markers were observed in vitro in NSCLC cell lines with
combination celecoxib and crizotinib treatment. We next tested whether
targeting c-Met with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor crizotinib combined
with celecoxib to target COX-2 would result in enhanced anti-tumor
effects in an animal model with heightened HGF/c-Met pathway signaling in
the airways. Mice transgenic for airway expression of human HGF were
treated with the tobacco carcinogen,
4-(methylnitroso-amino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone, from weeks 1-4.
Crizotinib (40mg/kg), celecoxib (50mg/kg), combined crizotinib and
celecoxib or placebo control was administered by oral gavage daily from
week 3 until week 15, at which time lung tumors were evaluated. A highly
significant decrease in the number of lung tumors per animal was observed
with crizotinib treatment (mean 3.6, range 2-6), celecoxib treatment
(mean 4.3, range 3-6) and combination treatment (mean 1.5, range 0-3)
compared to placebo control (mean 9.9, range 6-13; P<0.001, Poisson
regression). The number of tumors in the combination treatment group was
also significantly lower than either single agent treatment (PThe
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-Met signaling pathway is often
dysregulated in lung cancer. We previously showed that HGF activation of
c-Met in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells led to a significant
induction of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) followed by secretion of PGE2. PGE2
caused secretion of TGF by NSCLC cells, followed by both phosphorylation
of EGFR and later, delayed phosphorylation of c-Met that does not require
HGF. Secretion of PGE2 also appears to boost c-Met pathway signaling
downstream via cross-activation by EGFR, in a reinforcing loop that is
independent of HGF. We hypothesized that targeting of both c-Met and
COX-2 might lead to enhanced anti-tumor effects by blocking both upstream
and downstream pro-tumor events. Maximum effects on cell proliferation,
invasion and EMT markers were observed in vitro in NSCLC cell lines with
combination celecoxib and crizotinib treatment. We next tested whether
targeting c-Met with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor crizotinib combined
with celecoxib to target COX-2 would result in enhanced anti-tumor
effects in an animal model with heightened HGF/c-Met pathway signaling in
the airways. Mice transgenic for airway expression of human HGF were
treated with the tobacco carcinogen,
4-(methylnitroso-amino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone, from weeks 1-4.
Crizotinib (40mg/kg), celecoxib (50mg/kg), combined crizotinib and
celecoxib or placebo control was administered by oral gavage daily from
week 3 until week 15, at which time lung tumors were evaluated. A highly
significant decrease in the number of lung tumors per animal was observed
with crizotinib treatment (mean 3.6, range 2-6), celecoxib treatment
(mean 4.3, range 3-6) and combination treatment (mean 1.5, range 0-3)
compared to placebo control (mean 9.9, range 6-13; P<0.001, Poisson
regression). The number of tumors in the combination treatment group was
also significantly lower than either single agent treatment (P<0.001).
There was also a significant decrease in mean tumor size with crizotinib
(mean 0.20mm2), celecoxib (mean 0.22mm2) and combination (mean 0.15mm2)
compared to placebo (mean 0.38mm2, PThe hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF)/c-Met signaling pathway is often dysregulated in lung cancer. We
previously showed that HGF activation of c-Met in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cells led to a significant induction of cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2) followed by secretion of PGE2. PGE2 caused secretion of TGF by
NSCLC cells, followed by both phosphorylation of EGFR and later, delayed
phosphorylation of c-Met that does not require HGF. Secretion of PGE2
also appears to boost c-Met pathway signaling downstream via
cross-activation by EGFR, in a reinforcing loop that is independent of
HGF. We hypothesized that targeting of both c-Met and COX-2 might lead to
enhanced anti-tumor effects by blocking both upstream and downstream
pro-tumor events. Maximum effects on cell proliferation, invasion and EMT
markers were observed in vitro in NSCLC cell lines with combination
celecoxib and crizotinib treatment. We next tested whether targeting
c-Met with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor crizotinib combined with
celecoxib to target COX-2 would result in enhanced anti-tumor effects in
an animal model with heightened HGF/c-Met pathway signaling in the
airways. Mice transgenic for airway expression of human HGF were treated
with the tobacco carcinogen,
4-(methylnitroso-amino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone, from weeks 1-4.
Crizotinib (40mg/kg), celecoxib (50mg/kg), combined crizotinib and
celecoxib or placebo control was administered by oral gavage daily from
week 3 until week 15, at which time lung tumors were evaluated. A highly
significant decrease in the number of lung tumors per animal was observed
with crizotinib treatment (mean 3.6, range 2-6), celecoxib treatment
(mean 4.3, range 3-6) and combination treatment (mean 1.5, range 0-3)
compared to placebo control (mean 9.9, range 6-13; P<0.001, Poisson
regression). The number of tumors in the combination treatment group was
also significantly lower than either single agent treatment (P<0.001).
There was also a significant decrease in mean tumor size with crizotinib
(mean 0.20mm2), celecoxib (mean 0.22mm2) and combination (mean 0.15mm2)
compared to placebo (mean 0.38mm2, P<0.001, mixed effects modeling).
Three biomarkers (COX-2, PGE2, and P-MAPK) were optimally down-modulated
by combination treatment, compared to single treatment. Additionally,
E-cadherin expression was up-regulated while the E-cadherin repressor,
snail, was down-regulated with dual treatment. In a pulmonary environment
with heightened HGF/c-Met pathway activity, dual inhibition of the c-Met
and COX-2 pathways may enhance anti-tumor effects by targeting
reinforcing up- and downstream signaling. Such a combination has
potential clinical benefit for lung cancer patients with dysregulated
c-Met/COX-2 pathways. Supported by R01 CA79882 and P50 CA090440.

