Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sorafenib analogues SC-1 and SC-43 show better apoptotic effects
than sorafenib through SHP-1 dependent STAT3 inhibition in breast cancer
cells .


Background: STAT3 has emerged as a novel potential anti-cancer target and
its signaling is constitutively activated in various cancers including
breast cancer. Our previous study has shown that STAT3 is a major
kinase-independent target of sorafenib in HCC. (J Hepatol. 2011). We have
designed and synthesized a series of sorafenib analogues devoid of
sorafenib's kinase inhibition activity, some of which showed stronger
p-STAT3 inhibition and apoptosis-inducing effects than sorafenib in HCC
cells (Eur J Med Chem. 2011). In addition, a protein tyrosine phosphatase
SHP-1 has been demonstrated to downregulate p-STAT3 via its phosphatase
activity. Here, we tested the efficacy of two sorafenib analogues, SC-1
and SC-43, in breast cancer cells and examined the drug mechanism.
Methods: breast cancer cell lines were used for in vitro studies.
Apoptosis was examined by both flow cytometry and Western blot. Signal
transduction pathways in cells were assessed by Western Blot. Tyrosine
Phosphatase Assay Kit was used for SHP-1 activity assay. Gene silencing
was done by small interference RNA (siRNA). In vivo efficacy of
Sorafenib, and SC-1 and SC-43 were tested in xenografted nude mice.
Results: SC-1 and SC-43 induced more potent apoptosis than sorafenib, in
association with downregulation of p-STAT3 and its downstream proteins
cyclin D1 and survivin in a dose-dependent manner in breast cancer cell
lines (HCC-1937, MDA MB-468, MDA MB-231, MDA MB-453, SKBR-3, MCF-7).
Overexpression of STAT3 in MDA MB-468 cells protected cells from
apoptosis induced by sorafenib, SC-1, and SC-43. Moreover, SC-1 and SC-43
upregulated SHP-1 activity to a greater extent than sorafenib as measured
by in vitro phosphatase assays. Knockdown of SHP-1 by siRNA reduced
apoptosis induced by SC-1 and SC-43. Importantly, SC-1 and SC-43 showed
more efficacious antitumor activity and p-STAT3 downregulation than
sorafenib in MDA-468 xenograft tumors. These data indicated that
inhibiton of p-STAT3 by up-regulating SHP-1 activity mediated apoptotic
effects of SC-1 and SC-43 in breast cancer cells. Moreover, a
representative breast tumor tissue demonstrated reciprocal expression of
SHP-1 and p-STAT3 in cancer cells and adjacent non-cancer breast tissue.
Conclusions: Novel sorafenib analogues SC-1 and SC-43 induce apoptosis
through SHP-1 dependent STAT3 inactivation and demonstrate greater
potency than sorafenib in human breast cancer cells. (Supported by Yen
Tjing Ling Medical Foundation; NSC 101-2325-B-075-006 and NSC
100-2325-B-010-007; VN101-03 (TVGH-NTUH Joint Research Program),
V99-B1-016, and V100-D-005-4)

