Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid, highly multiplexed somatic mutation analysis of FFPE
tissues by deep amplicon sequencing on MiSeq.


DNA extraction from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor
tissues typically results in low quantities of poor-quality, damaged DNA,
which present challenges for sequencing. Here we present a fast,
streamlined sample-to-answer workflow using probe design software and
sample preparation methods optimized to overcome these challenges.
DesignStudio allows for the targeting of up to 1,536 user-defined genomic
regions and supports amplicon sizes (150- and 175-bp) ideal for
characterizing genomic hot-spot regions or sequencing of whole exons with
FFPE DNA. The TruSeq Custom Amplicon (TSCA) workflow delivers high target
enrichment specificity (>80% of reads on target), robust target
multiplexing (up to 1,536 amplicons per reaction), and scalable sample
indexing (up to 96 libraries) that supports simultaneous sequencing using
the MiSeq. We have optimized the DNA extraction and hybridization
processes to achieve higher DNA yields and more uniform target
representation, respectively. In addition, the improved TSCA assay and
software analysis tools significantly reduce false-positive variant
calls. In conclusion, we have developed an integrated solution for highly
accurate and reproducible detection of somatic variants implicated in
cancer biology.

