Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical developments of the G3 Designed ankyrin repeat
protein (DARPin) for in vivo assessment of HER2 expression .


Background:Breast cancer HER2 molecular imaging can potentially identify
disease relapse, inform treatment decisions and assess treatment
responses. Molecular imaging relies upon achieving high tumour:blood and
tumour:normal tissue ratios. The G3 DARPin is a small protein with
picomolar affinity for HER2, based on the ankyrin repeat scaffold that is
expressed in humans. The hexahistidine (His6) tagged G3 DARPin labelled
with 99mTc(CO)3 can image HER2+ SK-OV-3 tumours [Zahnd et al. Cancer Res
2010;70:1595-605].Alteration of the His6 tag to a negatively charged and
hydrophilic histidine-glutamate (HE)3 tag can reduce background liver
uptake, while enabling tag mediated purification by immobilised metal
affinity chromatography [Hofstrom et al. J Med Chem 2011;54;3817-26]. We
hypothesized that the biodistribution of 111In and 125I G3 DARPin could
be optimised by altering the N-terminal domain.Methods:His6, HE3 and
untagged G3 were produced in E. coli and or P. pastoris and labelled
directly with 125I or with DOTA via a C-terminal cysteine for 111In.
BALB/c mice were injected with 0.3 MBq of 111In or 125I G3. The optimal
G3 construct was assessed with 111In and 125I in HER2+ human breast
tumour (BT474)-bearing mice.Results:Biodistribution of the DARPins was
evaluated in BALB/c mice at 4 and 24 h. Results showed that 111In-HE3-G3
had lower or similar uptake to 111In-His6-G3 and 111In-untagged-G3 in 11
different normal tissues tested. Superiority of HE3-G3 for normal tissue
uptake was also observed when the DARPins were labelled with 125I.HE3-G3
was assessed in HER2+ tumour-bearing mice. The tumour uptake for
125I-HE3-G3 was approximately 2 fold higher than 111In-HE3-G3 at 4 h.
However, 111In-HE3-G3 tumour uptake was better maintained, so that by 24
h 111In-HE3-G3 tumour uptake was approximately 1.5 fold higher than
125I-HE3-G3. Normal tissue uptake was generally lower for 111In-HE3-G3
than 125I-HE3-G3 at 4 h, except in the kidneys which were higher for
111In-HE3-G3 throughout. At 24 h, the differences in normal tissue uptake
between 111In-HE3-G3 and125I-HE3-G3 were smaller. 111In-HE3-G3 had faster
serum clearance than 125I-HE3-G3, resulting in higher normal tissue:blood
ratios for all assessed tissues except stomach. As a consequence, the
tumour:blood ratios for 111In-HE3-G3 were the most impressive, > 150:1 at
4 h and > 300:1 at 24 h . 111In-HE3-G3 microSPECT/CT imaging demonstrated
tumour uptake at 2 and 4 h.Conclusions:N-terminal tags effect tissue
biodistribution of G3. HE3-G3 radiolabelled with 111In and 125I had lower
uptake in normal tissues compared to untagged or His6 tagged G3.
111In-HE3-G3 achieved and maintained the highest tumour:blood ratios over
24 h. Based on its superiority, development will focus on the
radiolabelled C-terminal cysteine DOTA conjugated HE3-G3 for SPECT and
PET HER2 imaging.

