Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of endothelin axis signaling pathway in astrocyte
mediated chemoprotection of tumor cells.


Purpose: More than 40% of patients with the breast cancer develop brain
metastasis that are resistant to conventional chemotherapeutic agents. We
have reported that reactive astrocytes establish gap junction
communication channels with adjacent tumor cells and protect tumor cells
from chemotherapy by up-regulation of survival genes in the tumor cells.
We now report on the mechanism by which astrocytes up-regulate expression
of the survival genes in tumor cells.Materials and Methods: Human breast
cancer cells, MDA-MB-231 cultured with murine astrocytes produce
endothelin 1 (ET-1) leading to expression and activation of endothelin
receptors (ETRs). Using small interfering RNA (siRNA) of ETAR and ETBR,
and ETRs specific antagonists (BQ123, BQ788, and PD145065) demonstrated
the correlation between the activation of the endothelin axis in tumor
cells and the induction of survival genes (BCL2L1, GSTA5, and TWIST1)
leading to chemoresistance.Results: Co-culture of MDA-MB-231 cells and
murine astrocytes induced up-regulation of ETRs (ETAR and ETBR) and
activation of endothelin receptors axis in tumor cells as well as
increased production of ET-1 by murine astrocytes. Activation of the ETRs
by exogenous ET-1 up-regulated the expression of survival genes, such as
BCL2L1, GSTA5 and TWIST1 via activation of phosphorylated AKT/MAPKinase
signal transduction pathways, leading to resistance of tumor cells to
several chemotherapeutic agents. Knockdown of both ETAR and ETBR by
siRNAs or treatment of tumor cells with dual ETR inhibitor abolished the
chemoprotection induced by astrocytes.Conclusion: ET axis signaling
pathway plays an essential role in astrocytes-mediated induction of
chemoresistance of tumor cells by up-regulation of survival genes in
tumor cells. Simultaneous blockade of both ETR can prevent tumor cells
from developing resistance to chemotherapeutic agents.

