Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Control of integrin expression and signaling by claudin-3 and
claudin-4 in ovarian cancer.


Changes in cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion are central to ovarian
cancer metastasis. We have previously demonstrated that the two major
tight junction proteins claudin-3 (CLDN3) and claudin-4 (CLDN4) function
to restrain in vivo growth and metastatic potential of ovarian cancer
cells by sustaining expression of E-cadherin and limiting -catenin
signaling. Here we report that CLDN3 and CLDN4 control integrin v3
expression and signaling through which they regulate cell-matrix adhesion
and anchorage-dependent growth. Knockdown of CLDN3 or CLDN4 in human
ovarian carcinoma cells reduced their ability to adhere to fibronectin
whereas increased expression of CLDN3 or CLDN4 enhanced adherence to the
extracellular matrix protein. A flow cytometric analysis revealed that
CLDN3 and CLDN4 knockdown reduced v3 complex formation at the cell
surface by a factor of 1.7- and 12.4-fold, respectively, relative to the
parental 2008 cells. Deconvoluting microscopic analysis of
immunocytochemically stained cells confirmed the reduction in v3
expression in the CLDN3KD and CLDN4KD cells. Measurement of 3 mRNA levels
by qRT-PCR demonstrated a 55 11.0% reduction in the CLDN3KD cells and a
51 13.7% decrease in the CLDN4KD cells while the v mRNA level was not
affected. Interestingly, ablation of v3 increased CLDN3 and CLDN4
expression at both the mRNA and protein level. Anchorage-independent
growth was markedly reduced in both CLDN3KD and CLDN4KD cells with
respect to the number and the size distribution of the colonies that
formed in soft agar. Moreover, loss of either CLDN3 or CLDN4 resulted in
activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) as the phosphorylation of
Tyr-397 residue within FAK, which reflects FAK activity, was
significantly increased in the CLDN3 and CLDN4 knockdown cells. Taken
together, these results indicate a novel role for CLDN3 and CLDN4 in
regulating integrin v3 expression and signaling that control cell-matrix
adhesion and aggressiveness of the ovarian carcinoma cells.Citation
Format: Xinjian Lin, Xiying Shang, Gerald Manorek, Stephen Howell.
Control of integrin expression and signaling by claudin-3 and claudin-4
in ovarian cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 211. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-211

