Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiosensitization of GBM by a novel peptidomimetic of the Second
Mitochondria-derived Activator of Caspases (SMAC).


TL32711 is a novel small molecule peptidomimetic of the SMAC (Second
Mitochondria-derived Activator of Caspases) that promotes caspase
activation in the cytochrome c/Apaf-1/caspase-9 pathway. Normally SMAC is
located in the mitochondria; however it is released into the cytosol when
cells undergo apoptosis. Release into the cytosol and cleavage of SMAC
promotes caspase-9 activation by binding to inhibitors of apoptosis
proteins, IAPs. Removing the inhibitory activity of IAPs increases cells
sensitivity to apoptotic stimuli and abrogates NF-B survival signaling.
Thus, by targeting and eliminating IAPs, SMAC mimetics re-activate death
signals in cancer cells, inhibit resistance mechanisms and induce tumor
death by apoptosis.This study was undertaken to determine radiation
sensitization potential of TL32711 in GBM using in vitro and in vivo
approaches. TL32711 alone did not cause any killing effects in GBM cells.
However, in vitro apoptosis was increased when TL32711 was combined with
radiation in GBM cell lines. In vivo data demonstrated that TL32711 alone
delayed the growth of implanted xenograft tumors that were further
delayed when combined with radiation. The survival of mice was greatly
increased in TL32711 plus radiation treated GBM intracranial orthotopic
model when compared to TL32711 or radiation treatment alone.
Mechanistically, TL32711 confers radiation sensitization by abrogating
NFB activity that is elevated by radiation-induced TNF-. Taken together,
this is the first report that provides strong evidence that TL32711 in
combination with ionizing radiation has potential to increase the
effectiveness of radiotherapy.Funded by NCI Contract No.
HHSN261200800001E.

