Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone-targeted MMP inhibitors for the treatment of multiple myeloma.


Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy that is hallmarked by
areas of extensive bone destruction. Our group, and others have recently
shown that individual host or tumor derived MMP-2 and MMP-9 play an
important role in the progression of many cancers in the bone
microenvironment, including MM. These data support the design of
selective inhibitors of individual MMPs for the treatment of multiple
myeloma. Previous clinical trials with broad-spectrum matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitors failed, arguably because the precise
roles of individual MMPs had not been fully appreciated. Therefore, in
the current study, we have developed novel bone seeking MMP inhibitors
(BMMPIs) that are highly selective to MMP-2 and structurally are based on
the bone targeting bisphosphonate, Tiludronate. In vitro, BMMPIs showed
greater enzyme inhibition, and specificity for MMP-2 than previously
synthesized bisphosphonates (e.g. Zoledronate, Etidronate and
Tiludronate) with Ki values in the nanomolar range. Further treatment of
the 5TGM1 mouse MM cell line with low micromolar concentrations of the
BMMPI inhibitors significantly reduced cell viability through inhibition
of cell growth (pMultiple Myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy that
is hallmarked by areas of extensive bone destruction. Our group, and
others have recently shown that individual host or tumor derived MMP-2
and MMP-9 play an important role in the progression of many cancers in
the bone microenvironment, including MM. These data support the design of
selective inhibitors of individual MMPs for the treatment of multiple
myeloma. Previous clinical trials with broad-spectrum matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitors failed, arguably because the precise
roles of individual MMPs had not been fully appreciated. Therefore, in
the current study, we have developed novel bone seeking MMP inhibitors
(BMMPIs) that are highly selective to MMP-2 and structurally are based on
the bone targeting bisphosphonate, Tiludronate. In vitro, BMMPIs showed
greater enzyme inhibition, and specificity for MMP-2 than previously
synthesized bisphosphonates (e.g. Zoledronate, Etidronate and
Tiludronate) with Ki values in the nanomolar range. Further treatment of
the 5TGM1 mouse MM cell line with low micromolar concentrations of the
BMMPI inhibitors significantly reduced cell viability through inhibition
of cell growth (p<0.05). In vivo, 5TGMI tumor-bearing mice receiving BMMP
inhibitors three times a week, showed significant increase in overall
survival compared to vehicle and tiludronate treated mice over 80 days
(pMultiple Myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy that is hallmarked by
areas of extensive bone destruction. Our group, and others have recently
shown that individual host or tumor derived MMP-2 and MMP-9 play an
important role in the progression of many cancers in the bone
microenvironment, including MM. These data support the design of
selective inhibitors of individual MMPs for the treatment of multiple
myeloma. Previous clinical trials with broad-spectrum matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitors failed, arguably because the precise
roles of individual MMPs had not been fully appreciated. Therefore, in
the current study, we have developed novel bone seeking MMP inhibitors
(BMMPIs) that are highly selective to MMP-2 and structurally are based on
the bone targeting bisphosphonate, Tiludronate. In vitro, BMMPIs showed
greater enzyme inhibition, and specificity for MMP-2 than previously
synthesized bisphosphonates (e.g. Zoledronate, Etidronate and
Tiludronate) with Ki values in the nanomolar range. Further treatment of
the 5TGM1 mouse MM cell line with low micromolar concentrations of the
BMMPI inhibitors significantly reduced cell viability through inhibition
of cell growth (p<0.05). In vivo, 5TGMI tumor-bearing mice receiving BMMP
inhibitors three times a week, showed significant increase in overall
survival compared to vehicle and tiludronate treated mice over 80 days
(p<0.05). This was associated with a reduction in tumor burden and
protection from tumor-associated bone loss compared to vehicle treated
mice as measured by x-ray and histomorphometry. These data suggest that
given the roles for MMPs in tumor progression in bone, that our novel
BMMPIs may be effective in the treatment of MM. We predict that MMP-2
specific BMMPIs may be more effective than current clinically used
bisphosphonates for the treatment of MM, and may eliminate undesirable
side effects of broad-spectrum MMP inhibitors due to their high
specificity and bone seeking nature. We are currently continuing to
characterize these BMMPI both as single agents, and in combination with
existing MM treatments (eg. Bortezomib) for the treatment and eradication
of MM.

