Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an androgen-dependent prostate Champions TumorGraft
cancer model.


Prostate cancer (PCa)is the second most frequently diagnosed cancer and
the sixth leading cause of cancer death in males, with the highest
incidence rates recorded in developed countries such as those in North
America (Jemal et al., 2011). While the five year-survival rate for PCa
patients with localized disease is 100%, it is only 30.6% once the cancer
metastasizes (Vishnu et al., 2010). One of the biggest challenges for
finding a better treatment for metastatic PCa is the lack of predictable
and accurate preclinical models that closely recapitulate different
stages of the pathogenesis of human PCa. Champions Oncology focuses on
the development of Champions TumorGraft models derived from the direct
implantation of patient tumors into immunocompromised mice. Compared to
traditional cell line-based xenograft models, the patient-derived
TumorGraft models maintain stable gene-expression patterns and mutational
status and correlate to clinical predictability. To overcome the
challenge for PCa, Champions Oncology has utilized its TumorGraft
technology to establish and characterize a new androgen-dependent
prostate cancer TumorGraft model, CTG-0488. This involved the
implantation of a primary human prostate tumor in immunocompromised mice
in a manner that preserves the biological properties of the original
human tumor. In this preliminary work, the characteristics of Champion
TumorGraft model CTG-0488 are showcased, including tumor histology,
mutational status, and chemosensitivity profiles to several standard of
care compounds. Overall the development of an androgen-dependent prostate
cancer Champions TumorGraft model will significantly aid in the
development of oncology compounds focused on androgen-dependent prostate
cancer.

