Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMPK regulates HER2/EGFR activity in HER2-positive breast cancer.


The AMP-activated Protein Kinase (AMPK) is a master regulator of cell
metabolism, controlling fatty acid synthesis, protein synthesis and
carbohydrate metabolism. Physiological states with increased AMPK
activity are associated with decreased cancer incidence, leading to
interest in AMPK as a potential target for cancer therapy and prevention.
To explore a possible role of AMPK modulation in breast cancer therapy,
we investigated how activation of AMPK affects breast cancer cell
signaling and survival. Initial experiments found that breast cancer cell
lines with amplification and over-expression of HER2 (BT474, HCC1419, and
SKBR3) are 2-fold to 5-fold more sensitive to cytotoxic effects of AICAR,
a canonical pharmacological activator of AMPK, than breast cancer cell
lines that lack HER2 amplification (MCF7 and MDA231). In parallel to this
activation of AMPK, we observed dose- and time-dependent inhibitory
effects on phosphorylation and activity of HER2 and EGFR in these
AICAR-treated, HER2-amplified breast cancer cells, with activation of
AMPK and suppression of HER2/ EGFR activity preceding commitment to cell
death. To further explore how AMPK activity affects HER2/ EGFR, we stably
transfected HER2-amplified breast cancer cells with constitutively active
AMPK and observed that AMPK activated by this genetic manipulation also
leads to decreased HER2 and EGFR phosphorylation and associated
downstream signaling as well as reduced cell growth. Finally, we found
that morin, a flavinoid compound previously found to inhibit fatty acid
synthesis, also activates AMPK and inhibits HER2 and EGFR signaling in
parallel, further supporting the link across these pathways. Our results
lead us to postulate that AMPK regulates HER2 and EGFR activity in
HER2-amplified breast cancer cells, and activation of AMPK might provide
therapeutic benefit in such cancers.

