Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caffeine modulates the cell cycle in cancer cells to enhance
cisplatin efficacy.


Caffeine has been shown to enhance the efficacy of chemotherapy, but the
mechanism is not well understood. In this study, we investigated
cell-cycle modulation induced by caffeine in combination with cisplatinum
treatment of human cancer cells. Proliferation inhibition was determined
with a clonogenic assay. Mitotic and apoptotic changes were observed by
imaging of 143B dual-color cells, in which GFP is expressed in the
nucleus and RFP in the cytoplasm. Modulation of the cell-cycle in
combination with cisplatinum was observed using time-lapse imaging
analyses of HeLa cells expressing a fluorescent cell-cycle indicator,
FUCCI (Fluorescent Ubiquitination-based Cell Cycle Indicator). The
clonogenic assay showed that caffeine increased the efficacy of cisplatin
on inhibition of cell proliferation. Dual-color imaging demonstrated that
cisplatin decreased mitosis and induced apoptosis in 143B cells. The
combination of cisplatin and caffeine reduced the decrease of mitosis and
increased apoptosis. Time-lapse FUCCI imaging showed that cisplatin
strongly induced cell-cycle arrest at the S/G2/M phases in HeLa cells.
Caffeine released the cell-cycle arrest induced by cisplatin, resulting
in increased cell-killing efficacy. These data indicates that caffeine
can effectively modulates the cell-cycle in cancer cells treated with
cisplatin and possibly other drugs.

