Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NK cell response and tumor debulking are associated to prolonged
survival in recurrent glioblastoma treated by dendritic cells loaded with
autologous tumor lysate.


Recurrent glioblastoma (GB) are highly aggressive tumors allowing 6-8
month survival. Here we evaluated the possible benefits of immunotherapy
with mature dendritic cells (DC) loaded with autologous tumor lysate in
15 patients with recurrent GB. After a median follow-up of 8 months
median progression free survival (PFS) was 4.4 months and median overall
survival (OS) 8.0 months. Patients with small tumors at first vaccination
(Recurrent glioblastoma (GB) are highly aggressive tumors allowing 6-8
month survival. Here we evaluated the possible benefits of immunotherapy
with mature dendritic cells (DC) loaded with autologous tumor lysate in
15 patients with recurrent GB. After a median follow-up of 8 months
median progression free survival (PFS) was 4.4 months and median overall
survival (OS) 8.0 months. Patients with small tumors at first vaccination
(< 20 cc; n = 8) had significantly longer PFS and OS than others: 6.0 vs
3.0 months (p = 0.01) and 16.5 vs 7.0 months (p = 0.003), respectively.
Patients were analysed for CD8+ T cells, CD56+ NK cells and other
relevant immunological parameters in peripheral blood before and after
immunization, defining a vaccination/baseline ratio (V/B ratio).
Increased V/B ratio of NK but not CD8+ T cells was significantly
associated to longer PFS and OS. Patients showing NK cell responses had
higher levels of IFN- and E4BP4, the NK cell transcription factor.
Furthermore, NK V/B ratio was inversely correlated with TGF-2 and VEGF
V/B ratio. The results suggest that tumor-loaded DC may increase survival
of recurrent GB after effective tumor debulking and emphasize the role of
NK cell responses in this therapeutic setting.Citation Format: Serena
Pellegatta, Marica Eoli, Simona Frigerio, Carlo Antozzi, Maria Grazia
Bruzzone, Gabriele Cantini, Sara Nava, Elena Anghileri, Lucia Cuppini,
Valeria Cuccarini, Emilio Ciusani, Marta Dossena, Bianca Pollo, Renato
Mantegazza, Eugenio A. Parati, Gaetano Finocchiaro. NK cell response and
tumor debulking are associated to prolonged survival in recurrent
glioblastoma treated by dendritic cells loaded with autologous tumor
lysate. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2839.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2839

