Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical PK/PD/efficacy characterization of AZD1480, a JAK1/2
kinase inhibitor.


Constitutive activation of the transcription factor STAT3, manifest as
Y-705 phosphorylation, is a feature of many hematologically-derived and
solid tumor malignancies. Accumulating evidence indicates that JAK
kinases are the key mediators of STAT activation in solid tumor models.
AZD1480, an inhibitor of Janus kinases 1 and 2 (JAK1/2), is a
bioavailable small molecule whose inhibition of the JAK-STAT signalling
pathway may provide clinical benefit by suppression of the pleiotropic
tumorigenic effects of constitutive STAT3 activation (tumor cell
proliferation, motility and survival, tumor angiogenesis, tumor immune
suppression).Here we present a pre-clinical population-based
effect-compartment pharmacokinetic / pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) model to
describe the onset, intensity, and duration of pSTAT3 inhibition as a
function of unbound concentration and time in the MDAH-2774 ovarian
xenograft mouse model. A mathematical tumor growth inhibition model
capturing the relationship between systemic exposure to AZD1480 and tumor
growth inhibition was built to provide a pharmacokinetic rationale for
tumor growth inhibition. Furthermore, the pSTAT3 inhibition PK/PD
relationship for AZD1480 was quantitatively integrated into a tumor
growth inhibition model providing a mechanistic pharmacodynamic rationale
for tumor growth inhibition pre-clinically. Taken together, these
pre-clinical data recommend that increasing inhibition of pSTAT3
correlates with greater tumor growth inhibition and provide a
PK/PD/Efficacy platform of evidence for clinical hypothesis
testing.Citation Format: Patricia Schroeder. Pre-clinical PK/PD/efficacy
characterization of AZD1480, a JAK1/2 kinase inhibitor. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3368.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3368

