Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative sequencing reveals novel alterations in untreated and
castration resistant prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer is the third most common source of male cancer deaths in
developed countries. The standard of care for aggressive prostate cancer
is androgen ablation, which prolongs survival until the tumor acquires a
castration resistant phenotype. The molecular pathology underlying
prostate cancer progression is not yet fully understood. We used
integrative high throughput sequencing to study cancer-associated
alterations in 53 prostate cancer related neoplasia at the DNA, RNA and
epigenetic levels. The cohort included both hormone-naive and castration
resistant prostate cancers, along with two neuroendocrine prostate
cancers. We identified two new fusion genes, one of which associated with
neuronal differentiation and castration resistance. We also identified a
number of novel prostate cancer associated transcripts, including
transcripts specific to castration resistant tumors. Based on ChIP-seq
data from prostate cancer cell lines, many of the novel transcripts were
regulated by known oncogenes such as ERG and AR. Methylation sequencing
revealed a near-identical pattern of promoter hypermethylation in both
hormone-naive and castration resistant tumors. Enrichment of
hypermethylation was observed at EZH2 binding sites, supporting the role
of EZH2 in the recruitment of DNA methyltransferase in prostate cancer.
Promoter hypermethylation suppressed the expression of hundreds of genes,
but a subset of genes characterized by promoter H3K27 trimethylation
responded to hypermethylation with increased expression.

