Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of CD19-targeted Chimeric Antigen Receptor-modified T (CART19)
cells in ALL and CLL produce transient cytokine release syndrome (CRS),
macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) and durable responses.


CART19 combines an antiCD19 scFv antibody antigen recognition domain with
intracellular signal 1 (CD3z) and signal 2 (4-1BB) domains into a single
chimeric protein, which results in remarkable antitumor activity with
massive in vivo expansion and long-term persistence of CART19 cells in
NSG mice. We reported dramatic anti-tumor activity of CART19 T cells in 3
pts with CLL with shorter follow up (Porter, et al NEJM 2011). We now
report on outcomes, longer follow up, and complete responses in CLL and
ALL from 12 pts treated with CART19.12 pts with relapsed/refractory
leukemia have received CART19: 10 adults with CLL and 2 children with ALL
(1 s/p cord blood transplant); all had high disease burdens. A median of
7.5x108 total cells (range 1.7-50; 1.5x108 CAR+ [0.1-5.9]) were infused.
Of 10 CLL pts, 1 is not yet evaluable, 7 had a CR or PR, including 3
sustained CRs and 2 complete BM responses. Both ALL patients had a CR,
one sustained for 6mo. While there was no acute infusional toxicity, all
responding pts also developed CRS. All had high fevers, as well as grade
3 or 4 hypotension/hypoxia. CRS preceded the peak of CART19 cells, and
then increased in intensity until the peak (D10-70 post infusion). One
ALL pt experienced grade 4 hypotension and respiratory failure and
steroid therapy produced no improvement. On D9, with high levels of TNFa
and IL6 (peak increases above baseline: IFNg=6040x; IL6=988x; IL2=163x
and TNFa=17x), we gave TNFa and IL6 antagonists etanercept and
tocilizumab. This resulted in resolution of fever and hypotension within
12hr and rapid wean off the ventilator. This had no apparent impact on
CART19 cell expansion or efficacy, with a peak of CAR T cells (2539 CAR+
cells/uL; 77% of CD3 cells) occurred on D11, and D23 BM showed CR with
negative MRD, compared to 65% ALL in her on-study BM. Clinical assessment
of patients with major responses showed all had evidence of MAS including
dramatic elevations of ferritin, peaking at 44,000 to 605,000 around the
time of peak T cell proliferation. Subsequently, 3 CLL patients have also
been treated with tocilizumab, also with prompt and striking resolution
of symptoms. Interestingly, both ALL pts showed detectable CART19 cells
in the CSF in each post-treatment sample (40-78% CAR+). CART19 cells and
B cell aplasia have persisted in patients who achieved a CR out to the
longest follow up (beyond 2yrs in 2 CLL pts)CART19 T cells may produce
massive in-vivo expansion, long-term persistence, and potent and
sustained responses, but can also cause significant CRS with features
suggestive of MAS that responds rapidly to cytokine blockade. Prior to
the CART19 proliferative phase IL6 blockade may interfere with
proliferation and effector function, but if given at a point where cell
proliferation is underway, it may ameliorate the symptoms that correlate
with robust clinical responses.

