Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR targeting antibody SYM004 causes radiosensitization in tumor
cells expressing wild-type K-Ras via modulation of MAPK signaling.


SYM004 is a promising new cancer therapeutic agent containing a mixture
of two antibodies that target distinct epitopes on domain III of the
EGFR. Treatment of tumor cells with SYM004 leads to clustering of EGFR
followed by rapid internalization and degradation. We have recently shown
that the combination of SYM004 and radiation therapy (RT) induces potent
anti-tumor effects in head and neck (H&N) and lung cancer cell lines.In
this study we demonstrate that radiosensitization via SYM004 correlates
with inhibition of DNA double strand break repair and induction of
apoptosis. These effects are promoted by down regulation of the MAPK
pathway. Treatment of SCC6 and H226 cell lines with SYM004 for 30min or
24h prior to irradiation leads to a 1.2 - 1.7 fold increase in unrepaired
DNA double strand breaks (DSB) 24h after 2 Gy RT (detected via DNA repair
foci formation). The fraction of early (1.8 -1.9 fold) and late (1.3 -
1.7 fold) apoptotic cells increased in both cell lines. However, these
effects were reversible by treating the cells with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), an activator of Raf, for 30
min before RT at concentrations as low as 0.1 M. In addition, mutant
K-Ras cells lines A549 and H358 showed no radiosensitization after
treatment with SYM004 for 24h prior to RT via DNA repair or apoptosis.
Furthermore, transfection of SCC6 cell lines with a K-Ras version
carrying an activating SNP (G12V) reversed the inhibitory effect on DNA
repair induced by SYM004 in wild type K-Ras cells. These data suggest
that the superior impact of combination therapy with SYM004 and RT on
wild type K-Ras tumor cell lines reflects alterations in DNA repair and
apoptosis via modulation of the MAPK pathway.

