Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapy of human LN229 glioblastoma growing in the brain of nude
mice by Macitentan, a dual endothelin receptor A and B antagonist,
combined with Temozolomide.


Purpose: We determined whether the blockade of endothelin receptor
pathways can reverse the chemoprotection mediated by astrocytes and
produce therapy of Human LN 229 Glioblastoma cells growing in the brain
of nude mice treated with the dual endothelin receptor antagonist,
Macitentan and Temozolomide (TMZ).Materials and Methods: In the first set
of experiments, murine astrocytes were cultured with tumor cells in the
presence or absence of Macitentan and TMZ. For therapy studies the
leuciferas labeled LN229 cells were implanted (stereotactically) into the
brains of nude mice. The mice were ear tagged and imaged by IVIS
spectrometer at multiple times. On day 24 the mice were randomized to
receive vehicle, TMZ (p.o., 7.5mg/kg, one week on and two weeks off),
Macitentan (p.o., 10mg/kg, daily) and Macitentan plus TMZ. Survival of
mice was compared by Kaplan-Meyer curve (log-rank test) and
immunohistochemical analyses were carried out for multiple
markers.Results: Simultaneous blocking of endothelin receptor A and B
pathways reversed the in culture protection induced by astrocytes against
TMZ (pPurpose: We determined whether the blockade of endothelin receptor
pathways can reverse the chemoprotection mediated by astrocytes and
produce therapy of Human LN 229 Glioblastoma cells growing in the brain
of nude mice treated with the dual endothelin receptor antagonist,
Macitentan and Temozolomide (TMZ).Materials and Methods: In the first set
of experiments, murine astrocytes were cultured with tumor cells in the
presence or absence of Macitentan and TMZ. For therapy studies the
leuciferas labeled LN229 cells were implanted (stereotactically) into the
brains of nude mice. The mice were ear tagged and imaged by IVIS
spectrometer at multiple times. On day 24 the mice were randomized to
receive vehicle, TMZ (p.o., 7.5mg/kg, one week on and two weeks off),
Macitentan (p.o., 10mg/kg, daily) and Macitentan plus TMZ. Survival of
mice was compared by Kaplan-Meyer curve (log-rank test) and
immunohistochemical analyses were carried out for multiple
markers.Results: Simultaneous blocking of endothelin receptor A and B
pathways reversed the in culture protection induced by astrocytes against
TMZ (p<0.05). Therapy with Macitentan and TMZ significantly prolonged the
survival of mice (pPurpose: We determined whether the blockade of
endothelin receptor pathways can reverse the chemoprotection mediated by
astrocytes and produce therapy of Human LN 229 Glioblastoma cells growing
in the brain of nude mice treated with the dual endothelin receptor
antagonist, Macitentan and Temozolomide (TMZ).Materials and Methods: In
the first set of experiments, murine astrocytes were cultured with tumor
cells in the presence or absence of Macitentan and TMZ. For therapy
studies the leuciferas labeled LN229 cells were implanted
(stereotactically) into the brains of nude mice. The mice were ear tagged
and imaged by IVIS spectrometer at multiple times. On day 24 the mice
were randomized to receive vehicle, TMZ (p.o., 7.5mg/kg, one week on and
two weeks off), Macitentan (p.o., 10mg/kg, daily) and Macitentan plus
TMZ. Survival of mice was compared by Kaplan-Meyer curve (log-rank test)
and immunohistochemical analyses were carried out for multiple
markers.Results: Simultaneous blocking of endothelin receptor A and B
pathways reversed the in culture protection induced by astrocytes against
TMZ (p<0.05). Therapy with Macitentan and TMZ significantly prolonged the
survival of mice (p<0.0001) .The blockade of endothelin receptor A and B
significantly decreased the level of expression of phosphorylated AKT and
MAPK, and down-regulated the expression of BCL2L1, TWIST1 and GSTA5 in LN
229 cells growing in the brain. Proliferation of tumor cells and
tumor-associated endothelial cells was significantly decreased. Moreover
the apoptosis of LN229 cells was significantly increased in the brain of
the combination treatment group.Conclusion: Blockade of endothelin
receptor A and B pathways by Macitentan combined with TMZ provides a new
approach for the treatment of patients with Glioblastoma.

