Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of anti-PD-1 and anti-4-1BB antibody treatment on
melanoma-specific T cells in a murine model of melanoma.


Adoptive cell therapy with tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) is a
promising immunotherapeutic approach and has resulted in durable response
rates of 20-30% in patients with metastatic melanoma. However, several
limitations exist to prevent the widespread implementation of adoptive
cell therapy, including inadequate infiltration of tumor-specific T cells
into tumors and anemic expansion of tumor-specific T cells in vitro. One
such factor is PD-1 expression on T cells that plays an important role in
T cell exhaustion. Agonistic co-stimulatory molecules such as 4-1BB which
is transiently expressed on activated T cells can reverse T cell
exhaustion and enhance anti-tumor immune response. In this study, we have
examined two approaches to improve the frequency of tumor-specific T
cells in tumors and TIL cultures. First, we examined whether blocking
PD-L1/PD-1 signaling increased the infiltration of tumor-specific T cells
in the murine B16 melanoma model. Mice bearing B16 tumors were treated
with NrIgG or anti-PD-1 antibodies. T cells were isolated from B16 tumors
on day 18 after tumor injection. Increased IFN- production following B16
restimulation was observed in TIL isolated from mice treated with
anti-PD-1 antibody (1445 48 pg/ml) compared to TIL isolated from mice
treated with control antibody (748 25 pg/ml, pAdoptive cell therapy with
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) is a promising immunotherapeutic
approach and has resulted in durable response rates of 20-30% in patients
with metastatic melanoma. However, several limitations exist to prevent
the widespread implementation of adoptive cell therapy, including
inadequate infiltration of tumor-specific T cells into tumors and anemic
expansion of tumor-specific T cells in vitro. One such factor is PD-1
expression on T cells that plays an important role in T cell exhaustion.
Agonistic co-stimulatory molecules such as 4-1BB which is transiently
expressed on activated T cells can reverse T cell exhaustion and enhance
anti-tumor immune response. In this study, we have examined two
approaches to improve the frequency of tumor-specific T cells in tumors
and TIL cultures. First, we examined whether blocking PD-L1/PD-1
signaling increased the infiltration of tumor-specific T cells in the
murine B16 melanoma model. Mice bearing B16 tumors were treated with
NrIgG or anti-PD-1 antibodies. T cells were isolated from B16 tumors on
day 18 after tumor injection. Increased IFN- production following B16
restimulation was observed in TIL isolated from mice treated with
anti-PD-1 antibody (1445 48 pg/ml) compared to TIL isolated from mice
treated with control antibody (748 25 pg/ml, p<0.001). In addition, we
examined whether the expansion of T cells during TIL culture in vitro
could be augmented by targeting the co-stimulatory molecule, 4-1BB. T
cells were isolated from B16 tumors and cultured in vitro with 10 mcg/mL
anti-4-1BB antibody. After 5 days, increased B16-specific IFN- was
measured in TIL cultured with anti-4-1BB antibody (1865 64 pg/ml,
pAdoptive cell therapy with tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) is a
promising immunotherapeutic approach and has resulted in durable response
rates of 20-30% in patients with metastatic melanoma. However, several
limitations exist to prevent the widespread implementation of adoptive
cell therapy, including inadequate infiltration of tumor-specific T cells
into tumors and anemic expansion of tumor-specific T cells in vitro. One
such factor is PD-1 expression on T cells that plays an important role in
T cell exhaustion. Agonistic co-stimulatory molecules such as 4-1BB which
is transiently expressed on activated T cells can reverse T cell
exhaustion and enhance anti-tumor immune response. In this study, we have
examined two approaches to improve the frequency of tumor-specific T
cells in tumors and TIL cultures. First, we examined whether blocking
PD-L1/PD-1 signaling increased the infiltration of tumor-specific T cells
in the murine B16 melanoma model. Mice bearing B16 tumors were treated
with NrIgG or anti-PD-1 antibodies. T cells were isolated from B16 tumors
on day 18 after tumor injection. Increased IFN- production following B16
restimulation was observed in TIL isolated from mice treated with
anti-PD-1 antibody (1445 48 pg/ml) compared to TIL isolated from mice
treated with control antibody (748 25 pg/ml, p<0.001). In addition, we
examined whether the expansion of T cells during TIL culture in vitro
could be augmented by targeting the co-stimulatory molecule, 4-1BB. T
cells were isolated from B16 tumors and cultured in vitro with 10 mcg/mL
anti-4-1BB antibody. After 5 days, increased B16-specific IFN- was
measured in TIL cultured with anti-4-1BB antibody (1865 64 pg/ml, p<0.001
compared to TIL cultured with control antibody). Combination treatment
with anti-PD-1 antibody therapy in vivo and anti-4-1BB antibody in vitro
demonstrated synergistic effects, with increased levels of IFN- (4440 486
pg/ml) produced by B16-specific TIL. These findings suggest that
anti-PD-1 antibody treatment in combination with in vitro 4-1BB antibody
treatment can enhance the frequency of tumor-specific T cells isolated
from B16 melanoma. This may represent a potential strategy to increase
the effectiveness of TIL therapy in patients with melanoma.

