Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PBF overexpression causes increased p53 ubiquitination and
degradation via MDM2.


The pituitary tumor-transforming gene-binding factor (PBF) is a
relatively uncharacterised proto-oncogene, which is overexpressed in
thyroid tumours. PBF elicits tumor growth in nude mice, whilst thyroid
targeted transgenic overexpression in the PBF-Tg mouse induces
hyperplasia and macrofollicular lesions, accompanied by induction of the
E2 ubiquitin ligase Rad6. Our previous unpublished data showed that PBF
binds to p53, and reduces stimulation of downstream target genes by
competitive binding. Further, half-life studies of p53 showed reduced p53
stability when PBF was overexpressed in K1 and TPC-1 thyroid papillary
cancer cell lines, and ubiquitination assays confirmed this was due to
increased ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by the proteasome.
Now, GST pull-down assays demonstrate direct binding between PBF and
MDM2, the principal negative regulator of p53. The competitive inhibitor
of p53-MDM2 binding, Nutlin-3, revealed that the increased degradation of
p53 observed when PBF was overexpressed was mediated by MDM2. No change
in p53-MDM2 binding stringency was detected when PBF expression was
ameliorated by siRNA treatment, and MDM2 subcellular localisation was
unchanged by PBF overexpression. However, co-immunoprecipitation assays
revealed that PBF specifically interacts with Rad6, which has previously
been shown to regulate p53 ubiquitination. Further, PBF-Tg mice
demonstrated significantly induced genetic instability at 6 weeks of age,
as determined by FISSR-PCR. Thus we propose that aberrantly expressed PBF
functionally inactivates p53 via a complex interplay between Rad6 and
MDM2, thus promoting genetic instability and tumorigenesis. Our studies,
carried out in a panel of thyroid and colorectal cells lines, suggest
this may be pertinent not only to thyroid cancer, but to colorectal and
other tumour types.

