Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA miR-99a exerts anti-tumorigiceffect through decreasing
myotubularin related protein 3 expression in oralcancer.


Head and neck cancer is the six most common carcinomas worldwide. Oral
cancer, one head and neck cancer subtype, is the fourth leading causes of
male cancer death in Taiwan.The deregulation of certain microRNAs has
been associated with the progression and metastasis of various cancer
types. MicroRNAs are noncoding RNA molecules in a length of 1925
nucleotides, which can mediate gene expression by base pairing to the
3untralslated region of target mRNAs. Using human microRNA microarray
analysis, we found that miR-99a was most down-regulated among 1146 miRs
in oral cancer cells when compared to normal oral keratinocytes.
Real-timePCR analysis further confirmed the down-regulation of miR-99a
both in both tested oral cancer cell lines and human clinical specimens.
Transient and stable expression of miR-99a inhibited the migration and
invasion of oral cancer cells while having differential effects on cell
proliferation depending on the cell types. The introduction of
anti-miR-99a, silencing the effect of miR-99a, led to the increase of
cell migration and invasion. Luciferase reporter assays and site-directed
mutagenesis identified MTMR3, a member of myotubularin-related genes
encoding phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate 3-phosphatases, to be a
downstream target of miR-99a. Knocking down MTMR3 expression in
highMTMR3-expressing oral cancer cells significantly impaired the ability
of oral cancer cells to proliferate, migrate or invade Matrigel,
suggesting an oncogenic role of MTMR3 in oral cancer cells. Together, our
findings suggest that miR-99a plays a repressive role in cell migration
and invasion partly through regulating MTMR3 expression in oral cancer
cells.

