Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acetaldehyde and drug hypersensitivities of Fanconi anemia
defects: Implications for cancer initiation, prevention, and therapy.


Studies of cells harboring Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway defects have aided
clinical understanding of inherited cancer risks and therapeutic
strategies. Here, we observed a novel and large (27X) hypersensitivity of
BRCA2- and PALB2-null genotypes to the epidemiologically important
ethanol metabolite, acetaldehyde. This prominent acetaldehyde sensitivity
may hold evolutionary and clinical significance. Interrogation of a novel
panel of cells engineered to be null for various FA genes also revealed
two classes of chemical hypersensitivities: the shared and divergent
phenotypes. Prominent chemical hypersensitivities to various interstrand
crosslinking (ICL) agents in vitro (melphalan, mitomycin C, and
cisplatin), to -radiation in vitro, and to mitomycin C in vivo were
essentially similar among the tested genotypes. A large divergence of
responsiveness existed, however, between the cell lines when using the
PARP inhibitor KU0058948, the topoisomerase II inhibitor etoposide, and
acetaldehyde. These results indicate that, toward some agents, not all FA
defects are necessarily equivalent; this divergence among phenotypes may
dissect functions differing among FA genes and may presage differing
clinical and epidemiological implications. We additionally present the
first engineered PALB2-null human cancer cells. The results suggest new
applications in cancer epidemiology, prevention, and targeted therapy.

