Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK-mediated regulation of NFAT3 enhances CXCR4 expression in
HeyA8 ovarian cell line.


The G-protein coupled chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor CXCR4 is linked to
cancer, HIV, and WHIM (Warts, Hypogammaglobulinemia, Infections, and
Myelokathexis) syndrome. While CXCR4 is widely studied and characterized
extensively to be over-expressed in multiple human tumor tissues, we have
seen poor surface CXCR4 expression in many solid tumor cell lines in
vitro. To better understand how CXCR4 is regulated, cells grown under 3-D
spheroid conditions were compared to normal adherent culturing
conditions. When cultured as 3D spheroids, HeyA8 cells showed a dramatic
increase in surface CXCR4 protein levels as well as mRNA transcripts.
Furthermore, HeyA8 3D spheroids showed a decrease in pERK levels when
compared to adherent cells. Using an inhibitor of the MEK-ERK pathway,
the treatment of adherent HeyA8 cells with U0126 resulted in a
significant increase in surface CXCR4 expression similar to 3D spheroids.
Additional investigation using PCR array showed a wide range of
transcription factors being up-regulated but notably a > 20 fold increase
in NFAT3 transcription factor. Using a calcineurin inhibitor, cyclosporin
A diminished the U0126 treated up-regulation of CXCR4 surface expression.
Finally, Chromatin Immunoprecipitation analysis showed direct binding of
NFAT3 on the CXCR4 promoter to increase CXCR4 expression in HeyA8 ovarian
cell line. Taken together, our results suggest that phospho-ERK levels
regulate CXCR4 expression through the NFAT3 signaling pathway.Citation
Format: Keven Huang, Christine Kiefer, Adeela Kamal. ERK-mediated
regulation of NFAT3 enhances CXCR4 expression in HeyA8 ovarian cell line.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1801.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1801

