Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting breast cancer stem cells via oxidative stress with
inhibitors of hydroperoxide metabolism and decyl-triphenylphosphonium.


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) exhibit lower intracellular reactive oxygen
species (ROS) levels than non-CSCs, which may be due to the increased
expression of free radical scavenging systems. Exogenous agents may be
useful to increase ROS and selectively kill CSCs by oxidative stress.
Here we tested a combination approach to increase ROS as an effective
strategy to eradicate breast CSCs and metastases. Buthionine sulfoximine
(BSO) and auranofin (AU) were used to deplete glutathione (GSH) and
inhibit thioredoxin reductase (TR), respectively, while
mitochondrial-targeted decyltriphenylphosphonium (dTPP) was used to
elevate ROS levels. In vitro clonogenicity assays using SUM159 cells
showed that treatment with dTPP alone resulted in Cancer stem cells
(CSCs) exhibit lower intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels
than non-CSCs, which may be due to the increased expression of free
radical scavenging systems. Exogenous agents may be useful to increase
ROS and selectively kill CSCs by oxidative stress. Here we tested a
combination approach to increase ROS as an effective strategy to
eradicate breast CSCs and metastases. Buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) and
auranofin (AU) were used to deplete glutathione (GSH) and inhibit
thioredoxin reductase (TR), respectively, while mitochondrial-targeted
decyltriphenylphosphonium (dTPP) was used to elevate ROS levels. In vitro
clonogenicity assays using SUM159 cells showed that treatment with dTPP
alone resulted in <30% survival, while AU+BSO, BSO+dTPP and AU+BSO+dTPP
all resulted in Cancer stem cells (CSCs) exhibit lower intracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels than non-CSCs, which may be due to
the increased expression of free radical scavenging systems. Exogenous
agents may be useful to increase ROS and selectively kill CSCs by
oxidative stress. Here we tested a combination approach to increase ROS
as an effective strategy to eradicate breast CSCs and metastases.
Buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) and auranofin (AU) were used to deplete
glutathione (GSH) and inhibit thioredoxin reductase (TR), respectively,
while mitochondrial-targeted decyltriphenylphosphonium (dTPP) was used to
elevate ROS levels. In vitro clonogenicity assays using SUM159 cells
showed that treatment with dTPP alone resulted in <30% survival, while
AU+BSO, BSO+dTPP and AU+BSO+dTPP all resulted in <1% survival. These
effects were reversible with N-acetylcysteine pre-treatment. The
Aldefluor+ (CSC) population was also measured following drug treatment in
vitro. dTPP or AU treatment alone resulted in Cancer stem cells (CSCs)
exhibit lower intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels than
non-CSCs, which may be due to the increased expression of free radical
scavenging systems. Exogenous agents may be useful to increase ROS and
selectively kill CSCs by oxidative stress. Here we tested a combination
approach to increase ROS as an effective strategy to eradicate breast
CSCs and metastases. Buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) and auranofin (AU) were
used to deplete glutathione (GSH) and inhibit thioredoxin reductase (TR),
respectively, while mitochondrial-targeted decyltriphenylphosphonium
(dTPP) was used to elevate ROS levels. In vitro clonogenicity assays
using SUM159 cells showed that treatment with dTPP alone resulted in <30%
survival, while AU+BSO, BSO+dTPP and AU+BSO+dTPP all resulted in <1%
survival. These effects were reversible with N-acetylcysteine
pre-treatment. The Aldefluor+ (CSC) population was also measured
following drug treatment in vitro. dTPP or AU treatment alone resulted in
<50% of CSCs remaining, while BSO+AU or BSO+dTPP resulted in Cancer stem
cells (CSCs) exhibit lower intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS)
levels than non-CSCs, which may be due to the increased expression of
free radical scavenging systems. Exogenous agents may be useful to
increase ROS and selectively kill CSCs by oxidative stress. Here we
tested a combination approach to increase ROS as an effective strategy to
eradicate breast CSCs and metastases. Buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) and
auranofin (AU) were used to deplete glutathione (GSH) and inhibit
thioredoxin reductase (TR), respectively, while mitochondrial-targeted
decyltriphenylphosphonium (dTPP) was used to elevate ROS levels. In vitro
clonogenicity assays using SUM159 cells showed that treatment with dTPP
alone resulted in <30% survival, while AU+BSO, BSO+dTPP and AU+BSO+dTPP
all resulted in <1% survival. These effects were reversible with
N-acetylcysteine pre-treatment. The Aldefluor+ (CSC) population was also
measured following drug treatment in vitro. dTPP or AU treatment alone
resulted in <50% of CSCs remaining, while BSO+AU or BSO+dTPP resulted in
<25% of CSCs remaining, and treatment with all three compounds resulted
in Cancer stem cells (CSCs) exhibit lower intracellular reactive oxygen
species (ROS) levels than non-CSCs, which may be due to the increased
expression of free radical scavenging systems. Exogenous agents may be
useful to increase ROS and selectively kill CSCs by oxidative stress.
Here we tested a combination approach to increase ROS as an effective
strategy to eradicate breast CSCs and metastases. Buthionine sulfoximine
(BSO) and auranofin (AU) were used to deplete glutathione (GSH) and
inhibit thioredoxin reductase (TR), respectively, while
mitochondrial-targeted decyltriphenylphosphonium (dTPP) was used to
elevate ROS levels. In vitro clonogenicity assays using SUM159 cells
showed that treatment with dTPP alone resulted in <30% survival, while
AU+BSO, BSO+dTPP and AU+BSO+dTPP all resulted in <1% survival. These
effects were reversible with N-acetylcysteine pre-treatment. The
Aldefluor+ (CSC) population was also measured following drug treatment in
vitro. dTPP or AU treatment alone resulted in <50% of CSCs remaining,
while BSO+AU or BSO+dTPP resulted in <25% of CSCs remaining, and
treatment with all three compounds resulted in <1% of CSCs remaining. In
a preclinical model of breast cancer metastasis, long-term adjuvant
treatment with each individual compound significantly reduced the amount
of metastases and increased survival, with dTPP treatment alone resulting
in 100% survival rate. Interestingly, the combination of all three
compounds resulted in increased metastases compared to the single agents.
This may potentially be a stress-induced effect resulting from drug
toxicity. In conclusion, the approach of increasing ROS in breast cancer
cells may be an effective way to target CSCs and useful for adjuvant
therapy to reduce metastases in patients.

