Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new, highly sensitive IHC test for the detection of HER2 protein
in breast cancer (BC) tissue.


HER2 protein over-expression occurs in 15-20% of invasive BC. Trastuzumab
and other HER2-targeted agents have mainly been investigated in HER2
over-expressing BC (HercepTest 2+/3+). Analysis of clinical study
NSABP-31 suggests patients with HER2 non-over-expressed BC (HercepTest 0,
1+, 2+ and/or HER2 FISH negative) may benefit from anti-HER2 therapy.
Other novel agents are under investigation in HER2 non-over-expressed BC
including AZD8931. No IHC assays are optimized for reliable detection of
HER2 in the non-over-expressed range. We have therefore developed a
highly sensitive, robust HER2 IHC test with a low limit of detection
(HER2Low Test).Methods and results:The HER2Low Test uses a novel, high
affinity anti-HER2 rabbit monoclonal antibody. Antibody specificity was
demonstrated by western blotting using cell lysates expressing HER1,
HER2, HER3 or HER4. Analytical sensitivity experiments on BC cell lines
showed an ability to differentiate lower levels of HER2 than HercepTest.
Three HER2Low Test staining categories were defined: Low, Medium and
High, reflecting differing levels of HER2 expression. A comparative study
between HER2Low Test and HercepTest on 182 AZD8931 clinical trial BC
samples with appropriate ethical approval and consent (Table) showed a
redistribution of HercepTest scores 0, 1+ and 2+ into HER2Low Test
categories Low, Medium and High, demonstrating increased analytical
sensitivity of the HER2Low Test. HER2Low Test reproducibility and
repeatability studies showed intra-run agreement of 97%, inter-run
agreement of 96%, inter-instrument agreement of 87% and
observer-to-observer agreement of 89%.Conclusion:Presented here is a
novel, reproducible and highly sensitive HER2 IHC assay. This is the
first study to demonstrate accurate differentiation across a wide range
of HER2 expression levels in non-over-expressed BC. This assay may
supplement existing HER2 testing methods for the accurate segmentation of
HER2 non-over-expressing BC patients.
HER2Low Test score and conventional HercepTest (HcT) score in the tested
samples from a phase II clinical trial (NCT00900627"
locator-type="CLINTRIALGOV">NCT00900627)

