Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARP inhibition in HPV positive head and neck cancers.


Purpose: The human papilloma virus (HPV) has recently become a prevalent
cause of human head and neck cancer (HNC), which often exhibits
dysregulated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling. We
previously reported that in non-HPV-associated HNC, inhibition of EGFR
(EGFRi) attenuates DNA double stranded break (DSB) repair and
subsequently sensitizes tumors to inhibitors of poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP), which target DNA repair deficient tumors. Because
patients with HPV-associated HNC have been shown to exhibit increased
sensitivity to DNA damage, we evaluated the response of HPV (+) HNC cells
to combination EGFRi and PARPi compared to HPV (-) HNC cells.Methods: HPV
(-) UM-SCC1 and UM-SCC6, as well as HPV (+) SCC-47 and SCC-90 were
utilized for in vitro studies. Cell growth and survival fraction were
evaluated via cell proliferation and colony formation assays,
respectively. DNA damage studies were performed using standard -H2AX and
Rad51 foci. Lastly, in vivo studies were conducted in mice bearing HNC
tumor xenografts as well as a human tumor explant from a lymph node
metastasis of a HPV(+) HNC patient.Results: Interestingly, HPV (+) HNCs
exhibited the greatest sensitivity both in vitro and in vivo to PARP
inhibition alone. This correlated with a blunted DNA damage response. In
contrast, HPV (-) HNCs were most sensitive to combination EGFRi/PARPi,
which correlated with persistent DNA damage.Conclusions: HPV(+) head and
neck cancers may be sensitive to PARP inhibition alone. Our in vitro and
in vivo results warrant further testing of PARP inhibitors as part of
therapy for HNCs.

