Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic analysis of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
progression.


Skin cancer is the most common class of malignancy in humans. In the
United States, there are over 3 million cases of skin cancer a year with
significant costs not only in morbidity and mortality, but an estimated
$500 million in treatment-related costs and $2 billion in overall
economic impact including lost productivity. The vast majority of these
skin cancers arise in keratinocytes and within this group, cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) comprises 15-20% of cases. cSCC has the
best-defined progression from a distinct precancerous lesion, the actinic
keratosis (AK) to invasive cSCC which has appreciable metastatic
potential particularly in high-risk scenarios. Beyond serial, disfiguring
surgeries, there is no effective therapy.AKs are the most common
precancerous lesion in humans, affecting upwards of 5.5% of women and
13.9% of men in U.S. Our understanding of the molecular events that lead
from normal skin to AK to cSCC is very poor and represents a fundamental
gap in our understanding of this progression sequence. Such an
understanding would be of enormous importance. While destructive
modalities are the mainstay of treatment of AK, they must be repetitively
used and there is no basis for identifying those most likely to progress.
Therefore, there is a tremendous need for rationally designed targeted
diagnostics and therapy for AKs, which presents an ideal opportunity for
molecularly-informed skin cancer screening and secondary prevention.We
have performed next generation sequencing (Illumina HiSeq) for microRNA
and mRNA on matched samples from 10 patients. Each matched set is
composed of clinically normal skin, AK, and cSCC from the same patient,
minimizing background genetic heterogeneity. For miRNA-seq, 6.1 million
reads with 720,000 mapped reads were obtained on average. RNA-seq
analysis yielded over 64 million reads per sample with 92% mapped.
Following unsupervised clustering, we found cSCCs clustered together, and
AKs clustered with both normal skin and with cSCC confirming the
clinico-pathologic characterization of these lesions as precursors to
cSCC.Changes in expression of only two miRNA and 367 mRNA emerged as the
most significant predictors of overall progression from normal skin to AK
to cSCC. In pairwise comparisons between normal skin and cSCC, we
identified 628 functional miRNA-mRNA pairs comprising a total of 59 miRNA
and 179 predicted mRNA targets. Surprisingly, the number of miRNA and
mRNA expression changes between AK and cSCC were very limited (Skin
cancer is the most common class of malignancy in humans. In the United
States, there are over 3 million cases of skin cancer a year with
significant costs not only in morbidity and mortality, but an estimated
$500 million in treatment-related costs and $2 billion in overall
economic impact including lost productivity. The vast majority of these
skin cancers arise in keratinocytes and within this group, cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) comprises 15-20% of cases. cSCC has the
best-defined progression from a distinct precancerous lesion, the actinic
keratosis (AK) to invasive cSCC which has appreciable metastatic
potential particularly in high-risk scenarios. Beyond serial, disfiguring
surgeries, there is no effective therapy.AKs are the most common
precancerous lesion in humans, affecting upwards of 5.5% of women and
13.9% of men in U.S. Our understanding of the molecular events that lead
from normal skin to AK to cSCC is very poor and represents a fundamental
gap in our understanding of this progression sequence. Such an
understanding would be of enormous importance. While destructive
modalities are the mainstay of treatment of AK, they must be repetitively
used and there is no basis for identifying those most likely to progress.
Therefore, there is a tremendous need for rationally designed targeted
diagnostics and therapy for AKs, which presents an ideal opportunity for
molecularly-informed skin cancer screening and secondary prevention.We
have performed next generation sequencing (Illumina HiSeq) for microRNA
and mRNA on matched samples from 10 patients. Each matched set is
composed of clinically normal skin, AK, and cSCC from the same patient,
minimizing background genetic heterogeneity. For miRNA-seq, 6.1 million
reads with 720,000 mapped reads were obtained on average. RNA-seq
analysis yielded over 64 million reads per sample with 92% mapped.
Following unsupervised clustering, we found cSCCs clustered together, and
AKs clustered with both normal skin and with cSCC confirming the
clinico-pathologic characterization of these lesions as precursors to
cSCC.Changes in expression of only two miRNA and 367 mRNA emerged as the
most significant predictors of overall progression from normal skin to AK
to cSCC. In pairwise comparisons between normal skin and cSCC, we
identified 628 functional miRNA-mRNA pairs comprising a total of 59 miRNA
and 179 predicted mRNA targets. Surprisingly, the number of miRNA and
mRNA expression changes between AK and cSCC were very limited (<50 mRNA
and Skin cancer is the most common class of malignancy in humans. In the
United States, there are over 3 million cases of skin cancer a year with
significant costs not only in morbidity and mortality, but an estimated
$500 million in treatment-related costs and $2 billion in overall
economic impact including lost productivity. The vast majority of these
skin cancers arise in keratinocytes and within this group, cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) comprises 15-20% of cases. cSCC has the
best-defined progression from a distinct precancerous lesion, the actinic
keratosis (AK) to invasive cSCC which has appreciable metastatic
potential particularly in high-risk scenarios. Beyond serial, disfiguring
surgeries, there is no effective therapy.AKs are the most common
precancerous lesion in humans, affecting upwards of 5.5% of women and
13.9% of men in U.S. Our understanding of the molecular events that lead
from normal skin to AK to cSCC is very poor and represents a fundamental
gap in our understanding of this progression sequence. Such an
understanding would be of enormous importance. While destructive
modalities are the mainstay of treatment of AK, they must be repetitively
used and there is no basis for identifying those most likely to progress.
Therefore, there is a tremendous need for rationally designed targeted
diagnostics and therapy for AKs, which presents an ideal opportunity for
molecularly-informed skin cancer screening and secondary prevention.We
have performed next generation sequencing (Illumina HiSeq) for microRNA
and mRNA on matched samples from 10 patients. Each matched set is
composed of clinically normal skin, AK, and cSCC from the same patient,
minimizing background genetic heterogeneity. For miRNA-seq, 6.1 million
reads with 720,000 mapped reads were obtained on average. RNA-seq
analysis yielded over 64 million reads per sample with 92% mapped.
Following unsupervised clustering, we found cSCCs clustered together, and
AKs clustered with both normal skin and with cSCC confirming the
clinico-pathologic characterization of these lesions as precursors to
cSCC.Changes in expression of only two miRNA and 367 mRNA emerged as the
most significant predictors of overall progression from normal skin to AK
to cSCC. In pairwise comparisons between normal skin and cSCC, we
identified 628 functional miRNA-mRNA pairs comprising a total of 59 miRNA
and 179 predicted mRNA targets. Surprisingly, the number of miRNA and
mRNA expression changes between AK and cSCC were very limited (<50 mRNA
and <10 miRNA). These findings are in stark contrast to many previously
reported studies on un-matched samples, which validates our novel
approach. We are functionally validating our findings in cells and in our
mouse model of UV-driven SCC, and we anticipate that we will identify key
drivers of cSCC progression that will yield insights relevant for other
cancers.

