Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fine-mapping identifies multiple prostate cancer risk loci at
5p15, one of which associates with TERT expression.


We have previously reported an association between prostate cancer (PrCa)
risk and rs2242652 on 5p15. rs2242652 lies in intron 4 of TERT, which
encodes telomerase reverse transcriptase, the catalytic subunit of the
telomerase ribonucleoprotein complex. Telomerase catalyzes the de novo
addition of telomere repeat sequences on to chromosome ends and thereby
counterbalances telomere-dependent replicative senescence. Associations
between SNPs in the TERT region and multiple cancer types have been
reported; however no correlation has been observed thus far between the
cancer-associated SNPs in TERT and gene expression or telomere length. To
comprehensively evaluate the association between genetic variation across
this region and PrCa we performed a fine-mapping analysis by direct
genotyping using either a custom Illumina iSelect array (114 SNPs on
iCOGS) or Sequenom MassArray iPlex (25 SNPs) followed by imputation of
1,094 SNPs in 22,301 PrCa cases and 22,320 controls in the PRACTICAL
consortium. To determine independently associated variants in this
region, we performed multiple stepwise logistic regression analysis; SNPs
were included in the model if they were significant at PWe have
previously reported an association between prostate cancer (PrCa) risk
and rs2242652 on 5p15. rs2242652 lies in intron 4 of TERT, which encodes
telomerase reverse transcriptase, the catalytic subunit of the telomerase
ribonucleoprotein complex. Telomerase catalyzes the de novo addition of
telomere repeat sequences on to chromosome ends and thereby
counterbalances telomere-dependent replicative senescence. Associations
between SNPs in the TERT region and multiple cancer types have been
reported; however no correlation has been observed thus far between the
cancer-associated SNPs in TERT and gene expression or telomere length. To
comprehensively evaluate the association between genetic variation across
this region and PrCa we performed a fine-mapping analysis by direct
genotyping using either a custom Illumina iSelect array (114 SNPs on
iCOGS) or Sequenom MassArray iPlex (25 SNPs) followed by imputation of
1,094 SNPs in 22,301 PrCa cases and 22,320 controls in the PRACTICAL
consortium. To determine independently associated variants in this
region, we performed multiple stepwise logistic regression analysis; SNPs
were included in the model if they were significant at P<104 after
adjustment for other SNPs. Regression models identified multiple
independent associations, reflecting the complexity of this region. These
SNPs fall into four regions consisting of clusters of highly or
moderately correlated variants, and there is only weak LD between SNPs in
different regions. To investigate whether SNPs in any of these regions
were associated with TERT gene expression, we performed qPCR assays on
RNA from benign prostate tissue samples using the Fluidigm Biomark HD
system. We found evidence that the risk reducing alleles of several
variants in region one associated with elevated TERT expression,
providing a plausible mechanism for the differential effect of SNPs on
PrCa risk. Deep re-sequencing of these loci may help to further refine
this region and facilitate selection of prospective causal variants for
functional validation studies.

