Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating metabolic homeostasis as a therapeutic tool for
leukemia.


Genetic studies in humans and rodents support the notion that alterations
in metabolic homeostasis can directly contribute to carcinogenesis and
metabolic processes may be targets for therapy. The nuclear hormone
receptors (NR) control a wide variety of metabolic processes by
regulating the expression of genes encoding key enzymes, transporters,
and other mediators. Therefore we explored potential links between
cellular metabolic control by NRs and viability of cancer cells. In this
study we tested the effect of 127 NR modulators, targeting receptors
known to be important in regulating metabolism or known to be viable
cancer targets on the growth of different leukemic cells lines. Of the
compounds tested 8, mainly targeting ER and RAR, induced significant
apoptosis in these leukemias. The effects of the 8 active compounds on
mitochondrial metabolism were tested in Jurkat cells and 5 compounds
significantly reduced lactate levels. However, only the synthetic
retinoid (CD437) significantly affected pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
activity. CD437 also effected the expression of genes involved in
leukemia development and therapeutic responses with the PKC pathway being
the primary target. CD437 induced PKC Kinase activity and activated its
downstream signals AKT and JNK. CD437 downregulated CPT-1a,and decreased
the overall O2 consumption rate. Additional CD437 induced genes included
those involved in the mitochondrial respiratory complex I and III and
increased the production of ROS. Our results indicate that the apoptotic
effect of CD437 can be linked to its regulation of mitochondrial
oxidative metabolism.

