Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of NT1014, a novel AMPK activator, on ovarian cancer
cell proliferation and apoptosis.


Introduction: Anti-diabetic biguanide drugs, such as metformin, have been
shown to have anti-tumorigenic effects by behaving as AMPK activators and
mTOR inhibitors. NT1014 (NovaTarg Therapeutics) is a novel AMPK activator
that enters cells specifically through the organic cation transporter,
OCT1. Thus, we sought to assess the effect of NT1014 on cell
proliferation and apoptosis in human ovarian cancer cell lines.Methods:
Ovarian cancer cell proliferation was assessed by MTT assay after
exposure to NT1014. Apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC assay. Cell
cycle progression was evaluated by Cellometer. Phosphorylated-S6, pan-S6,
and OCT1 were evaluated by Western immunoblotting analysis.Results:
NT1014 significantly inhibited proliferation in a dose-dependent manner
in both ovarian cancer cell lines (IC50 1000 M for SKOV3, 500 M for
IGROV1), within 48 hours of exposure. Treatment with NT1014 resulted in
G1 cell cycle arrest in both cell lines. Apoptosis occurred in IGROV1
cells exposed to NT1014, but not in SKOV3 cells. Western immunoblot
analysis demonstrated that NT1014 decreased phosphorylation of the S6
protein, a key downstream target of the mTOR pathway. Expression of OCT1
was also decreased in a dose-dependent fashion.Conclusion: NT1014
suppressed ovarian cancer cell growth, predominantly through G1 cell
cycle arrest, and resulted in inhibition of the mTOR pathway. More work
is needed to determine if metformin and related novel agents, such as
NT1014, will be beneficial in the treatment of women with ovarian cancer.

