Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Met reduces response to radiation in breast cancer.


The c-Met receptor promotes cell survival and proliferation by activating
signalling pathways. c-Met is abundant in several cancers and in some
cases it interferes with treatment response. In vitro, c-Met has been
shown to be up-regulated and activated after radiation treatment, which
renders the cells resistant to apoptosis and radiation. Therefore, it was
hypothesised that high c-Met expression could influence response to
radiation in breast cancer. In this study, it was aimed to determine the
number of MET gene copies and c-Met protein expression in breast tumours.
Tumours of 172 post-menopausal patients with primary breast cancer were
analysed for MET using qPCR. Increased MET copy number (three or more
copies) was found in 34% of the tumours. Five or more gene copies were
found in 4.7% of the patients and indicated a significantly higher risk
of developing distant metastasis. For the patients that received
radiotherapy as the only postoperative treatment, the number of MET
copies was associated with increased risk of distant metastasis. In terms
of loco-regional recurrence, it was found that increased MET copy number
was associated with worse response to postoperative radiation therapy
compared with chemotherapy. c-Met protein analysis by
immunohistochemistry in tumours of 208 pre-menopausal patients with
primary breast cancer revealed that patients with low expression of c-Met
responded better to radiotherapy compared with patients with a high c-Met
expression. These results suggest that radiotherapy in combination with a
Met inhibitor may be an option for patients with increased c-Met
expression, to overcome radio-resistance.

