Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lin28 promotes growth of prostate cancer cells and activates the
androgen receptor.


Purpose: Lin28 is essential for stem cell viability and pluripotency.
Recently Lin28 expression has been linked to several malignancies and its
mechanisms of action proposed to be both let-7-dependent and
-independent. It is a master regulator of let-7 miRNA biogenesis as well
as a regulator of translation of a multitude of eukaryotic proteins. This
study tested the hypothesis that Lin28 is overexpressed in prostate
cancer (CaP) and that it activates the androgen receptor (AR) and
promotes growth of CaP cells. Experimental Design: Human clinical CaP
samples were analyzed for the expression of Lin28 by qRT-PCR, Western
blotting and immunohistochemistry. Lin28 was transfected into a panel of
CaP cell lines and growth was monitored. LNCaP cells stably expressing
Lin28 were generated and growth was examined. Clonogenic ability of CaP
cells expressing Lin28 was determined by colony formation and soft agar
assays. Increase in expression of the AR and subsequent increase in
transcription of AR-target genes were analyzed by qRT-PCR, luciferase
assays and ELISA. LNCaP cells stably expressing Lin28 were injected into
nude mice and tumorigenesis was monitored. Results: Lin28 was found to be
overexpressed in clinical CaP compared to the benign tissues.
Overexpression of Lin28 enhanced while downregulation of Lin28 reduced
growth of CaP cells. Lin28 enhanced the ability of CaP cells to form
colonies in anchorage-dependent and -independent manners. LNCaP cells
stably expressing Lin28 exhibited significantly higher tumorigenic
ability in vivo. Furthermore, Lin28 induces expression of the AR and its
target genes such as PSA and NKX3.1. Conclusions: Lin28 promotes growth
of CaP cells in vitro and in vivo. Lin28 induces expression and
activation of the AR. Our findings suggest an important role of Lin28 in
CaP development and activation of the AR axis.

