Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FAT1: A novel regulator of cancer and inflammation.


FAT1, a member of cadherin superfamily is a large trans-membrane protein
with 34 cadherin repeats. FAT1 was originally identified as a tumor
suppressor gene in Drosophila but its role in human cancers is just
beginning to unfold. Considering its tumor suppressive role in
Drosophila, few studies have reported similar function of FAT1 in human
cancers but on the contrary several studies have also demonstrated
oncogenic role of FAT1. In this study we identified oncogenic role of
FAT1 in human glioma where knockdown of FAT1 was found to inhibit
migration and invasion of glial cells. Further investigation into
molecular mechanism of FAT1 function revealed direct link to AP-1
mediated transcription via Programmed Cell Death 4 (PDCD4). Knockdown of
FAT1 was found to inhibit AP-1 mediated transcription and expression of
downstream target genes. AP-1 is a known mediator of cancer and
inflammation and accordingly we found decreased expression of several
pro-inflammatory markers like COX-2, cytokines like IL-6, IL-1 and
chemokines like IL-8, MCP-1 and MIP-2 after FAT1 knockdown.
Interestingly, the expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 was
found to be increased after FAT1 knockdown. Moreover FAT1 expression was
also found to positively correalate with COX-2 and IL-6 expression in
primary GBM tumors. Thus, in this study FAT1 was found to act as an
oncogene as well as to orchestrate the inflammatory milieu of the glioma
cells by regulating AP-1 mediated transcription via PDCD4.

