Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of phosphoinositide 3-kinase/mammalian target of
rapamycin using NVP-BEZ235 suppressed tumor growth in a genetically
engineered mouse model of serous ovarian cancer.


Introduction: The PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway plays a central role in
regulating cancer cell proliferation and survival, and activation of the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway is commonly seen in ovarian cancer. NVP-BEZ235 is a
novel agent that targets two molecules in this pathway, PI3K and mTOR.
Thus, we explored the effects of NVP-BEZ235 on proliferation in human
ovarian cancer cell lines and inhibition of tumor growth in a genetically
engineered mouse model of serous ovarian cancer.Methods: Four ovarian
cancer cell lines (SKOV3, ES2, HEY, IGROV1) were treated with NVP-BEZ235
(NOVARTIS Pharmaceuticals) at different concentrations for up to 72 hours
and proliferation was measured using the MTT assay. Cell cycle
progression was evaluated by Cellometer. Apoptosis was determined by
Annexin V-FITC assay. Phosphorylated (phos)-Akt, phos-S6 were evaluated
by Western blot analysis. Adhesion was assessed by ELISA assay. The
K18-gT121+/;p53fl/fl;Brca1fl/fl (KpB) genetically engineered serous
ovarian cancer mouse model was used for the in vivo studies. The KpB mice
were subjected to a 60% calories-derived from fat in a high fat diet
(HFD) versus 10% calories from fat in a low fat diet (LFD) to mimic
diet-induced obesity and subsequently exposed to NVP-BEZ235 or placebo
for 4 weeks.Results: NVP-BEZ235 inhibited proliferation in all four
ovarian cancer cell lines, in both a dose and time dependent manner
(IC50=30 nM for SKOV3, 42 nM for ES2, 7 nM for IGROV1, 30 nM for HEY,
p=0.00001). Treatment with NVP-BEZ235 resulted in G1 cell cycle arrest
but failed to induce apoptosis. Western blot analysis demonstrated that
NVP-BEZ235 decreased phosphorylation of both Akt and S6 within 24 hours
of exposure. Cellular adhesion was decreased by 34-51% in the ovarian
cancer cell lines at a dose of 50 nM (p=0.00001). In the KpB mice fed a
high fat diet (obese) and treated with NVP-BEZ235, tumor weight decreased
by 77% (p=0.0015) when compared with control animals. Among KpB mice fed
a low fat diet (non-obese), tumor weight decreased by 59% after treatment
with NVP-BEZ235 (p=0.03).Conclusions: NVP-BEZ235 potently inhibited cell
growth via G1 arrest and decreased cellular adhesion in human ovarian
cancer cells. In vivo studies using the KpB mouse model found that
treatment with NVP-BEZ235 inhibited tumor growth in both obese and
non-obese mice, but was more efficacious in the obese mice. Given that
alterations in the PI3K/Akt/mTOR parthway are common in both obeso- and
onco-genesis disease processes, this may explain the enhanced effect of
NVP-BEZ235 in the obese KpB mice. This work suggests that NVP-BEZ235 may
be a novel chemotherapeutic agent for ovarian cancer treatment that is
potentially more beneficial in the obese population.

