Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exercise slows tumor progression and normalizes tumor vasculature
in murine models of breast cancer.


The effect of endurance exercise to improve post-ischemia perfusion of
normal tissues is established but whether such effects extend to hypoxic
solid tumors is largely uninvestigated. Thus, we evaluated the hypothesis
that exercise slows tumor growth and improves the structure and function
of tumor blood vessels, resulting in decreased hypoxia and increased
effectiveness of cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. To investigate the
effects of exercise on tumor microenvironment, we utilized voluntary
wheel running after tumor cell implantation in two orthotopic models of
murine breast cancer: ER(-) 4T1 breast tumor cells in BALB/c mice and
ER(+) E0771 breast tumor cells in C57Bl/6 mice. Endurance exercise
significantly increased microvessel density (CD31, pThe effect of
endurance exercise to improve post-ischemia perfusion of normal tissues
is established but whether such effects extend to hypoxic solid tumors is
largely uninvestigated. Thus, we evaluated the hypothesis that exercise
slows tumor growth and improves the structure and function of tumor blood
vessels, resulting in decreased hypoxia and increased effectiveness of
cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. To investigate the effects of exercise on
tumor microenvironment, we utilized voluntary wheel running after tumor
cell implantation in two orthotopic models of murine breast cancer: ER(-)
4T1 breast tumor cells in BALB/c mice and ER(+) E0771 breast tumor cells
in C57Bl/6 mice. Endurance exercise significantly increased microvessel
density (CD31, p<0.003), vessel maturity (co-localization of NG2 and
desmin with CD31, pThe effect of endurance exercise to improve
post-ischemia perfusion of normal tissues is established but whether such
effects extend to hypoxic solid tumors is largely uninvestigated. Thus,
we evaluated the hypothesis that exercise slows tumor growth and improves
the structure and function of tumor blood vessels, resulting in decreased
hypoxia and increased effectiveness of cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. To
investigate the effects of exercise on tumor microenvironment, we
utilized voluntary wheel running after tumor cell implantation in two
orthotopic models of murine breast cancer: ER(-) 4T1 breast tumor cells
in BALB/c mice and ER(+) E0771 breast tumor cells in C57Bl/6 mice.
Endurance exercise significantly increased microvessel density (CD31,
p<0.003), vessel maturity (co-localization of NG2 and desmin with CD31,
p<0.003), and perfusion (ADCperf, pThe effect of endurance exercise to
improve post-ischemia perfusion of normal tissues is established but
whether such effects extend to hypoxic solid tumors is largely
uninvestigated. Thus, we evaluated the hypothesis that exercise slows
tumor growth and improves the structure and function of tumor blood
vessels, resulting in decreased hypoxia and increased effectiveness of
cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. To investigate the effects of exercise on
tumor microenvironment, we utilized voluntary wheel running after tumor
cell implantation in two orthotopic models of murine breast cancer: ER(-)
4T1 breast tumor cells in BALB/c mice and ER(+) E0771 breast tumor cells
in C57Bl/6 mice. Endurance exercise significantly increased microvessel
density (CD31, p<0.003), vessel maturity (co-localization of NG2 and
desmin with CD31, p<0.003), and perfusion (ADCperf, p<0.05), which
resulted in significant reductions in intratumoral hypoxia (EF5, pThe
effect of endurance exercise to improve post-ischemia perfusion of normal
tissues is established but whether such effects extend to hypoxic solid
tumors is largely uninvestigated. Thus, we evaluated the hypothesis that
exercise slows tumor growth and improves the structure and function of
tumor blood vessels, resulting in decreased hypoxia and increased
effectiveness of cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. To investigate the
effects of exercise on tumor microenvironment, we utilized voluntary
wheel running after tumor cell implantation in two orthotopic models of
murine breast cancer: ER(-) 4T1 breast tumor cells in BALB/c mice and
ER(+) E0771 breast tumor cells in C57Bl/6 mice. Endurance exercise
significantly increased microvessel density (CD31, p<0.003), vessel
maturity (co-localization of NG2 and desmin with CD31, p<0.003), and
perfusion (ADCperf, p<0.05), which resulted in significant reductions in
intratumoral hypoxia (EF5, p<0.002). This was associated with significant
inhibition of tumor growth (pThe effect of endurance exercise to improve
post-ischemia perfusion of normal tissues is established but whether such
effects extend to hypoxic solid tumors is largely uninvestigated. Thus,
we evaluated the hypothesis that exercise slows tumor growth and improves
the structure and function of tumor blood vessels, resulting in decreased
hypoxia and increased effectiveness of cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. To
investigate the effects of exercise on tumor microenvironment, we
utilized voluntary wheel running after tumor cell implantation in two
orthotopic models of murine breast cancer: ER(-) 4T1 breast tumor cells
in BALB/c mice and ER(+) E0771 breast tumor cells in C57Bl/6 mice.
Endurance exercise significantly increased microvessel density (CD31,
p<0.003), vessel maturity (co-localization of NG2 and desmin with CD31,
p<0.003), and perfusion (ADCperf, p<0.05), which resulted in significant
reductions in intratumoral hypoxia (EF5, p<0.002). This was associated
with significant inhibition of tumor growth (p<0.004), and increased
apoptosis compared with sedentary controls (cleaved caspase-3, pThe
effect of endurance exercise to improve post-ischemia perfusion of normal
tissues is established but whether such effects extend to hypoxic solid
tumors is largely uninvestigated. Thus, we evaluated the hypothesis that
exercise slows tumor growth and improves the structure and function of
tumor blood vessels, resulting in decreased hypoxia and increased
effectiveness of cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. To investigate the
effects of exercise on tumor microenvironment, we utilized voluntary
wheel running after tumor cell implantation in two orthotopic models of
murine breast cancer: ER(-) 4T1 breast tumor cells in BALB/c mice and
ER(+) E0771 breast tumor cells in C57Bl/6 mice. Endurance exercise
significantly increased microvessel density (CD31, p<0.003), vessel
maturity (co-localization of NG2 and desmin with CD31, p<0.003), and
perfusion (ADCperf, p<0.05), which resulted in significant reductions in
intratumoral hypoxia (EF5, p<0.002). This was associated with significant
inhibition of tumor growth (p<0.004), and increased apoptosis compared
with sedentary controls (cleaved caspase-3, p<0.05). Next, given that
hypoxia is a major cause of chemoresistance, we tested whether
exercise-induced improvements in perfusion and reduction of hypoxia could
improve the efficacy of conventional chemotherapy. The combination of
exercise plus cyclophosphamide was associated with significantly
prolonged growth delay compared with exercise or chemotherapy alone (pThe
effect of endurance exercise to improve post-ischemia perfusion of normal
tissues is established but whether such effects extend to hypoxic solid
tumors is largely uninvestigated. Thus, we evaluated the hypothesis that
exercise slows tumor growth and improves the structure and function of
tumor blood vessels, resulting in decreased hypoxia and increased
effectiveness of cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. To investigate the
effects of exercise on tumor microenvironment, we utilized voluntary
wheel running after tumor cell implantation in two orthotopic models of
murine breast cancer: ER(-) 4T1 breast tumor cells in BALB/c mice and
ER(+) E0771 breast tumor cells in C57Bl/6 mice. Endurance exercise
significantly increased microvessel density (CD31, p<0.003), vessel
maturity (co-localization of NG2 and desmin with CD31, p<0.003), and
perfusion (ADCperf, p<0.05), which resulted in significant reductions in
intratumoral hypoxia (EF5, p<0.002). This was associated with significant
inhibition of tumor growth (p<0.004), and increased apoptosis compared
with sedentary controls (cleaved caspase-3, p<0.05). Next, given that
hypoxia is a major cause of chemoresistance, we tested whether
exercise-induced improvements in perfusion and reduction of hypoxia could
improve the efficacy of conventional chemotherapy. The combination of
exercise plus cyclophosphamide was associated with significantly
prolonged growth delay compared with exercise or chemotherapy alone
(p<0.01). In this work, we provide the first conclusive evidence that
exercise may do more than decrease symptoms and improve quality of life
for cancer patients. Our data suggest that exercise may be an effective
adjunct therapy to reduce tumor hypoxia leading to enhanced efficacy of
anticancer therapy.Funding: ASB is supported by DOD BC093532. LWJ is
supported by NIH CA143254, CA142566, CA138634, CA133895 and funds from
George and Susan Beischer. MWD is supported by NIH CA40355.

