Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA-21 inhibitor potentiates anti-tumor effect of radiation
therapy in vitro and in vivo.


microRNA-21 (miR-21) plays significant roles in carcinogenesis and is
highly expressed in diverse human cancers. In this study, we evaluated
the potential of targeting miRNA-21 to overcome the radioresistance of
human cancer cells having an activated PI3K-Akt signaling and also aimed
to elucidate the mechanisms of radiosensitization, and the effect on
epithelial- mesenchymal transition (EMT).A panel of human cancer cells
(U251, U87, A549, MDA-MB-468, SKBR-3 cells) were transfected with miR-21
led to up-regulation of PI3K-Akt signaling and increased radioresistance
compared with the cancer cells that were treated with nonspecific
control. In contrast, a specific inhibitor of miR-21, an antipeptide
nucleic acid (PNA) attenuated PI3K-Akt signaling and radiosensitized a
panel of human cancer cells we tested. Inhibition of miR-21 was
associated with persistent H2AX foci formation and down-regulation of
p-DNA-PKcs. While ectopic overexpression of miR-21 exhibited higher
invasion and migration potential and increased vascular tube formation,
inhibitor of miR-21 decreased these typical features of EMT. Treatment of
anti-miR-21 significantly decreased tumor burden in nude mice bearing
intracranial U251 xenografts compared to control as measured by
bioluminescence. Combined treatment of anti-miR-21 and radiation further
decreased tumor burden compared to each treatment alone.In summary,
miR-21 is an important onco-miR which confers radioresistance and diverse
features of EMT. Inhibition of miR-21 could be a potential strategy for
improving the efficacy of radiation therapy via unique modulation of
PI3K-Akt signaling and EMT.

