Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective and longitudinal evaluations of telomere length in
circulating serum DNA as a noninvasive risk factor of hepatocellular
carcinoma in HBV patients.


Background: In a recent retrospective case-control study, we showed that
patients with HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) had
significantly longer telomeres in circulating serum DNA than cancer-free
HBV patients, indicating that circulating DNA telomere length may be a
novel HCC marker. Prospective and longitudinal evidence is needed to
confirm this finding.Method: In a cohort of 323 cancer-free HBV patients
who had been followed for >1 year and did not develop HCC within 1 year,
we determined the relative telomere length (RTL) in baseline serum DNA
samples and conducted prospective and longitudinal analyses to assess the
relationships between RTL and HCC risk.Results: In a median follow-up of
4.5 years (range, 1.1-21.1), 37 patients developed HCC. Using the median
baseline RTL as cut-off, long RTL conferred a significantly increased HCC
risk compared to short RTL (HR=4.93, 95% CI 2.00-12.13, P=0.0005,
Plog-rank=1.7x10-6). This association remained significant when the
analysis was more stringently restricted to patients who had been
followed for >5 years and did not develop HCC within 5 years (HR=7.51,
95% CI 1.56-36.18, P=0.012, Plog-rank=0.0024), indicating that the
RTL-HCC association was unlikely due to the inclusion of undiagnosed HCC
patients in the cancer-free HBV cohort, thus further minimizing the
effect of the reverse-causation limitation that is inherent in most
previous telomere length-related retrospective studies. The area under
the curve (AUC) in the time-dependent ROC analysis increased from 0.769
(demographic variables only) to 0.868 (demographic variables and baseline
RTL), with a statistically significant difference (P=1.0x10-5) assessed
by 10,000-time bootstrap resampling. Finally, in a nested longitudinal
sub-population of 22 matched cases-control pairs with multiple samples
for each patient collected at different follow-up time points, we found a
significant increase in RTL from baseline to HCC diagnosis in cases
(slope=0.032, P=4.0x10-5), in contrast to a RTL decrease from baseline to
last follow-up in controls (slope=-0.020, P=0.026). Using a mixed-effects
model for longitudinal case-control analysis, we showed that long RTL
conferred a significantly increased risk of HCC (OR=4.55, 95% CI
1.91-10.89, P=0.0007). Collectively, the longitudinal data were
consistent with the prospective analysis results, indicating that
telomere lengthening may be an important driving factor in
hepatocarcinogenesis.Conclusions: To our best knowledge, this is one of
the first prospective and longitudinal evaluations of RTL in cancer risk
prediction. Our data suggests that RTL of circulating serum DNA may be a
novel non-invasive prospective marker of HBV-related HCC. Future studies
are needed to generalize this finding in broader populations and test its
clinical applicability in HCC prevention.

