Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A targeted exome sequencing platform for routine clinical
molecular profiling of advanced thoracic malignancies relevant to
targeted therapy.


Increasing number of oncogenic mutations important to the clinical
management of advanced thoracic malignancies is being identified. To
translate this into routine clinical testing environment, we developed
and validated a targeted exome sequencing method using next generation
sequencing (NGS) technology that is designed to detect both single
nucleotide variants and short insertions or deletions (indels) by
employing a custom designed target selection system. In each individual
assay, 197 cancer related genes, including 12 clinically relevant genes
(AKT1, AKT2, BRAF, EGFR, ERBB2, HRAS, KIT, KRAS, MEK1, NRAS, PIK3CA, and
PTEN) are simultaneously sequenced from 100-500ng of total DNA extracted
from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. To date, we have
performed this assay on over 250 FFPE tissues from Non-Small-Cell Lung
Cancers (NSCLC), Small-Cell Lung Cancers (SCLC), and thymic malignancies.
Mutations in all 12 clinically relevant genes including EGFR L858R, KRAS
codon 12 missense mutations as well as EGFR exon 19 deletions, EGFR exon
20 insertions, and ERBB2 exon 20 insertions have been identified and
validated with alternate technology in approximately 30% of all samples
tested. Compared with conventional capillary sequencing, which typically
requires in excess of 25% mutant DNA, this assay can detect mutations
with 5% - 10% mutant allele frequency. This is a robust, reliable and
cost effective assay that not only is suitable for prospective molecular
profiling of clinically relevant targets, but also provides a powerful
tool for retrospective analysis of existing FFPE tissues from clinical
trials.

