Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic multicellular mechanics controlling protrusion in 3D.


Despite much effort, the transition from benign to malignant breast
cancer remains poorly understood, resulting in overtreatment of women
with in situ lesions. A growing appreciation for the role of cell
mechanics in driving cell behavior has prompted interest in how
mechanical interactions might control tumor growth and progression. How
these parameters impact the transition from benign to malignant breast
cancer remains unclear.Mechanical interactions among cells via adherens
junctions, and between cells and the ECM via focal adhesions, can each
exert dominant effects on cell behavior. Cell motility and invasion
require force interactions by harnessing cytoskeletal dynamics, which
permit shape changes and generate and transmit forces. Tension maintained
across the actin cortex mechanically restricts protrusions, and may be
transmitted across multiple cells via adherens junctions. Thus epithelial
cells form mechanically integrated tissues that may be responsive to
changes in cortical tension over great distances. However, the regulatory
role of cortical tension in restricting cells from protruding is unclear.
Overall, we lack detailed morphologic and mechanical models of cell
protrusion and invasion out of 3D collectives.Using MDCK cell exposure to
HGF as a model for rupture of epithelial integrity and protrusion, we
have demonstrated the morphologic parameters that permit protrusion of a
cell from its surrounding epithelium. Combined with work from our lab on
force interactions between cells via adherens junctions, as well as
mechanical interactions between a cell and its substrate, we may
extrapolate detailed force interactions that underlie the observed cell
shape and motility parameters that permit protrusion.

