Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microarray analysis of dynamic regulation of genes in early and
late stages of chemically induced esophageal carcinogenesis in rats.


Esophageal carcinogenesis is a multistage process characterized by
morphological changes from normal esophagus to basal cell hyperplasia,
dysplasia, carcinoma in situ and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Our
laboratory has used the model of N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine
(NMBA)-induced esophageal SCC in rats to investigate carcinogenesis and
identify putative chemopreventive agents for this disease. The current
study is part of large scale investigations on carcinogenesis of
esophageal SCC. F344 rats were treated with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) or a
solution of 20% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in water (the solvent for NMBA)
three times per week for five weeks. The esophageal tissues were
collected at 6 and 29 weeks. The RNA pools from 3 individual RNA samples
each were prepared for microarray analysis using Affymetrix Rat Genome
230 2.0 Array. Triplicate microarrays were completed for total 27 rats/9
microarrays. A P-value cutoff of 0.001 with a minimum 2.0-fold change was
used to define the differently expressed genes. Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA) software was used to identify cancer-related pathways and
cellular functions. At 6 weeks (tumor incidence = 20%), 173 genes were
modulated by NMBA when compared to control animals. Among which, 20 genes
were associated with cancer, cellular development, cellular assembly and
organization network; 34 genes were associated with inflammatory disease.
The top five cellular functions altered by NMBA were cellular
development, carbohydrate metabolism, cell death and survival, cellular
growth and proliferation, and cellular function and maintenance. At 29
weeks (tumor incidence = 100%), we identified 1628 genes which were
significantly up- or down-regulated by NMBA treatment when compared to
normal animals and among which, 466 genes were involved in tumor
development. In addition, we identified four cancer-related pathways
(nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 mediated oxidative stress
response, protein kinase A signaling, mitochondrial dysfunction, and
AMP-activated kinase signaling) and five cellular functions (cellular
development, cell morphology, cell death and survival, carbohydrate
metabolism and molecular transport). Among genes altered during
NMBA-induced esophageal carcinogenesis, 16 genes differently expressed
only at 6 weeks including Gbp2, Psmb, Psmb9, Lgals3bp, Id1, Igfbp3,
Agpat4, rCG_35099, Tes, RGD1563091, Cyp26b1, Itga1, Scarb1, LOC682861,
Serpinb2 and Slfn3. The fold changes of Plcd4, Hbb, Bmper, Hba-a2, Defb4,
LOC100134871 and LOC364653 increased from 6 weeks to 29 weeks. In
conclusion, we identified differently expressed genes in early and late
stages of NMBA-induced esophageal SCC by microarray analysis. Further
investigations on biomarkers and cellular/molecular events during
multistage of carcinogenesis in NMBA-rat preclinical model of esophageal
SCC are underway.

