Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGFR/ and VEGFR2 SNPs incolorectal cancer.


Angiogenesis plays an essential role in tumor growth and metastasis, and
is a major target in cancer therapy. VEGFR and PDGFR are key players
involved in this process. The purpose of this study was to assess the
incidence of genetic variants in these receptors and its potential
clinical implications in colorectal cancer (CRC). VEGFR2, PDGFR and PDGFR
mutations were evaluated by sequencing their tyrosine kinase domains in 8
CRC cell lines and in 92 samples of patients with CRC. Correlations with
clinicopathological features and survival were analyzed. Four SNPs were
identified, three in PDGFR [exon 12 (A12): c.1701A>G; exon13 (A13):
c.1809G>A; and exon 17 (A17): c.2439+58C>A) and one in PDGFR (exon19
(B19): c.2601A>G) (figure 1). SNP B19 was present in 58% of tumor samples
and in 4 cell lines (LS174T, LS180, SW48, COLO205), and this was
associated with higher PDGFR and pPDGFR protein levels. 5-year survival
was greater for patients with PDGFR B19 wild type tumors (AA) than for
those harboring the G-allele genotype (GA or GG) (51%vs17%; P=0.073).
Multivariate analysis confirmed SNP B19 (P=0.029) was a significant
prognostic factor for survival, independent of age (P=0.060) or TNM stage
(PG SNP is commonly encountered in CRC patients and is associated with
increased pathway activation and poorer survival. Implications regarding
its potential influence in response to PDGFR targeted agents remain to be
ellucidated.

