Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variants in microRNA genes and breast cancer risk.


microRNA (miRNA) are small noncoding molecules that function as
regulators of the genome. Genetic variants in miRNA binding sites and
miRNA genes have begun to be evaluated in relation to disease risk;
however, no studies have yet comprehensively evaluated miRNA variants in
relation to breast cancer risk. Using a two stage study design, and
genome-wide association study (GWAS) data, we evaluated genetic variants
within 1,425 miRNA genes (5kb). In Stage 1, a total of 2,213 common
genetic variants were evaluated among 2,876 breast cancer cases and 2,285
controls using data from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Genetics Study.
Nominally significant associations (P value 0.05) were found for 108
variants in 96 genetic loci (r0.6). In Stage 2, 94 variants in 84 loci
were evaluated among 2,225 cases and 2,052 controls from the Seoul Breast
Cancer Study; nine variants in eight loci had nominally significant
associations. In analyses of the two study stages combined, 14 loci had
highly significant associations (P value 0.01) and 19 additional loci had
significant associations (P value 0.05) with breast cancer risk, all with
consistent directions of association between the two study stages. These
36 variants in 33 loci have been mapped to 16 miRNA genes, many in the
promoter regions. Based on our findings, genetic variants in miRNA genes
are likely to contribute to breast cancer susceptibility.

