Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-CGU promotes progression and metastasis through a
negative regulation of ERM protein in human gastric cancer.


Background: miRNAs have an important role in tumor carcinogenesis. They
may act either as oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes through their
regulated-target genes. The aim of this study was to identify useful
biomarkers from miRNAs that might regulate the tumorigenesis or
progression of gastric cancer.Materials and Methods:Differential miRNA
profile was analyzed with a 270 miRNAs-based qRT-PCR assay in a total of
6 pairs of tumor tissues and matched non-tumor mucosa from surgical
specimens. One of the top strongest up-regulated miRNAs was selected, and
it was validated by qRT-PCR in fresh frozen tissues of gastrectomized
specimens from gastric cancer patients. The target gene was searched and
identified. The clinicopathologic correlations of the candidate miRNA and
target gene were evaluated for their clinical significance.Results:The
miR-CGU significantly increases by more than 40.2-fold (p Background:
miRNAs have an important role in tumor carcinogenesis. They may act
either as oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes through their
regulated-target genes. The aim of this study was to identify useful
biomarkers from miRNAs that might regulate the tumorigenesis or
progression of gastric cancer.Materials and Methods:Differential miRNA
profile was analyzed with a 270 miRNAs-based qRT-PCR assay in a total of
6 pairs of tumor tissues and matched non-tumor mucosa from surgical
specimens. One of the top strongest up-regulated miRNAs was selected, and
it was validated by qRT-PCR in fresh frozen tissues of gastrectomized
specimens from gastric cancer patients. The target gene was searched and
identified. The clinicopathologic correlations of the candidate miRNA and
target gene were evaluated for their clinical significance.Results:The
miR-CGU significantly increases by more than 40.2-fold (p < 0.001) in
gastric cancer tissues compared with their matched adjacent nontumorous
tissues (n = 109). Overexpression of miRNA was significantly associated
with tumor progression that included serosal invasion, lymph node
metastasis, distant metastasis and pathological stage (all p Background:
miRNAs have an important role in tumor carcinogenesis. They may act
either as oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes through their
regulated-target genes. The aim of this study was to identify useful
biomarkers from miRNAs that might regulate the tumorigenesis or
progression of gastric cancer.Materials and Methods:Differential miRNA
profile was analyzed with a 270 miRNAs-based qRT-PCR assay in a total of
6 pairs of tumor tissues and matched non-tumor mucosa from surgical
specimens. One of the top strongest up-regulated miRNAs was selected, and
it was validated by qRT-PCR in fresh frozen tissues of gastrectomized
specimens from gastric cancer patients. The target gene was searched and
identified. The clinicopathologic correlations of the candidate miRNA and
target gene were evaluated for their clinical significance.Results:The
miR-CGU significantly increases by more than 40.2-fold (p < 0.001) in
gastric cancer tissues compared with their matched adjacent nontumorous
tissues (n = 109). Overexpression of miRNA was significantly associated
with tumor progression that included serosal invasion, lymph node
metastasis, distant metastasis and pathological stage (all p < 0.001).
Higher expression of miR-CGU was significantly associated with a worse
5-year survival outcome (log rank p Background: miRNAs have an important
role in tumor carcinogenesis. They may act either as oncogenes or tumor
suppressor genes through their regulated-target genes. The aim of this
study was to identify useful biomarkers from miRNAs that might regulate
the tumorigenesis or progression of gastric cancer.Materials and
Methods:Differential miRNA profile was analyzed with a 270 miRNAs-based
qRT-PCR assay in a total of 6 pairs of tumor tissues and matched
non-tumor mucosa from surgical specimens. One of the top strongest
up-regulated miRNAs was selected, and it was validated by qRT-PCR in
fresh frozen tissues of gastrectomized specimens from gastric cancer
patients. The target gene was searched and identified. The
clinicopathologic correlations of the candidate miRNA and target gene
were evaluated for their clinical significance.Results:The miR-CGU
significantly increases by more than 40.2-fold (p < 0.001) in gastric
cancer tissues compared with their matched adjacent nontumorous tissues
(n = 109). Overexpression of miRNA was significantly associated with
tumor progression that included serosal invasion, lymph node metastasis,
distant metastasis and pathological stage (all p < 0.001). Higher
expression of miR-CGU was significantly associated with a worse 5-year
survival outcome (log rank p < 0.001, and p = 0.005, respectively).
Functional assays showed that overexpression of this miRNA enhanced
gastric cancer cell migration and invasion in vitro and lung metastasis
formation in vivo. In addition, a target gene, ERM protein, was
identified for miR-CGU. Elevated expression of miRNA in gastric cancer
cells could reduce the mRNA and protein levels of ERM protein, and vice
versa. Luciferase assays confirmed that miR-CGU could directly bind to
the 2-8 nucleotides of 3 untranslated region of ERM protein. Moreover, an
inverse correlation between miR-CGU and ERM protein expression was
observed in gastric cancer tissues. The Interaction of miR-CGU and ERM
protein expression was further studied in gastric cell
lines.Conclusion:The miR-CGU is highly upreglated in gastric cancer
tissues. It functions as a tumor metastasis enhancer in gastric cancer,
and its overexpression contributes to lymph node metastasis and
progression of gastric cancer. Overexpression of its target gene, ERM
protein may have a therapeutic potential to suppress gastric cancer
metastasis.

