Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Statins and breast cancer mortality.


Background: Breast cancer is a common malignancy and cause of cancer
death. Recent studies have suggested that statins, an established drug
group in the prevention of cardiovascular mortality, could have
beneficial effects against recurrence and progression of breast cancer.
We evaluated breast cancer-specific and overall mortality among statin
users in a cohort of breast cancer patients.Methods: Our study cohort
included all newly diagnosed breast cancer patients in Finland during
1995-2003 (31,236 cases), identified from the Finnish Cancer Registry.
Information on statin use during these years was obtained from a national
prescription database. We used Cox proportional hazards regression method
to estimate mortality among statin users separately for pre- and
post-diagnostic usage.Results: A total of 4,169 participants had
ever-used statins. During the median follow-up of 3.25 years (range
0.08-9.0 years), a total of 6,011 participants died, of which 3,619
(60.2%) was due to breast cancer. Post-diagnostic statin use was
inversely associated with breast cancer mortality (participants with
localized tumors: HR 0.33, 95% CI 0.24-0.42; metastatic tumors: HR 0.52,
95% CI 0.31-0.86) and also overall mortality. The association between
statin use and mortality was dose-dependent. In stratified analyses, the
reduction did not significantly vary by lipophilicity of statins.
Additionally, long-term pre-diagnostic statin use was also associated
with lower breast cancer mortality.Conclusion: Lower breast cancer
mortality observed for both pre-diagnostic and post-diagnostic statin use
suggests that statins could lower risk of death in breast cancer
patients. A clinical trial testing statins effect on survival in breast
cancer patients is feasible.

