Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent immunomodulatory effects of lenalidomide enhance the effect
of a therapeutic vaccine against established lymphoma in mice .


Lenalidomide is an effective therapeutic agent with direct inhibitory
effects on malignant B- and plasma cells and immunomodulatory effects on
the T cell activation. The dual function of lenalidomide makes it an
appealing candidate for combination with other novel cancer agents. We
investigated the immune stimulatory effects of lenalidomide,
administrated to mice in doses which provided comparable pharmacokinetics
to human patients, on the potency of a novel fusion DNA lymphoma vaccine.
The combination protected mice from lethal challenge with syngeneic A20
murine lymphoma, resulting in significantly improved survival compared
with vaccine or lenalidomide alone and induced immune memory. In vivo
depletion experiments demonstrated a requirement for effector CD8+ and
CD4+ T cells. Surprisingly, lenalidomide alone was associated with
reduced numbers of systemic immune suppressive cells (MDSC/Treg) in
tumor-bearing, but not nave mice, an effect that was independent of
simple tumor burden reduction. Finally, the combination of lenalidomide
and vaccine produced significantly improved survival in mice with 7 day
established tumors. These results demonstrated the dual effect of
lenalidomide on enhancing antigen-specific T-cell immunity and a novel
mechanism of action reversing tumor-induced immune suppression, which
makes it ideal for combination with vaccines as an immune adjuvant.

