Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor p53 inhibits expression of the pro-metastasis
protein Toca-1.


Transducer of Cdc42-dependent actin assembly-1 (Toca-1) is an adaptor
protein that recruits key actin regulatory proteins to invadopodia in
metastatic breast cancer cells. We recently showed that stable silencing
of Toca-1 led to reduced invadopodia formation, cell invasion and tumor
metastasis in an orthotopic xenograft model in mice. These results raise
the possibility that Toca-1 upregulation may occur during tumor
progression to metastatic disease. Here we show that Toca-1 expression is
higher in triple negative breast cancers (HER2/ER/PR) compared to other
subtypes. Since triple negative breast cancers frequently harbor
mutations in the tumor suppressor p53, we tested whether p53 regulates
Toca-1 expression. In wild-type (WT) p53-expressing normal breast
epithelial and breast cancer cells, stabilization of WT p53 by inducing
DNA damage, or treating cells with Mdm2 inhibitor Nutlin-3, led to
dose-dependent reductions in Toca-1 mRNA and protein expression.
Likewise, ectopic expression of WT p53 in p53-null HCC1806 cells also led
to repression of Toca-1 levels. To test if this was a direct effect of
p53 on the Toca-1 gene, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies were
performed. Indeed, the proximal promoter region and intron 2 of the
Toca-1 gene (which contained a predicted p53 binding site) were detected
in p53 ChIP assays in WT p53-expressing cells, but not mutant p53
expressing breast cancer cells. Together, these results identify a novel
pathway to inhibit Toca-1 expression in cells with WT p53, and imply that
the loss of p53 in highly metastatic breast cancer subtypes may lead to
elevated Toca-1 expression and progression to metastatic disease.

