Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variation in EVER1/EVER2 and beta human papillomavirus
infection in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.


Objective: Cutaneous human papillomavirus (HPV) antibodies and/or DNA in
eyebrow hairs have been associated with cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) in several case-control studies, including one from New Hampshire
and ours from Florida. In the New Hampshire study, a single nucleotide
polyomorphism (SNP) in the EVER2 gene (rs72080422) was associated with
both SCC and cutaneous HPV seropositivity among controls (Patel et al Int
J Cancer, 2008). Additional genetic variants in the EVER1/2 region of
chromosome 17q25 have since been identified and shown to be associated
with cervical cancer susceptibility (Castro et al Int J Cancer, 2011). We
investigated the identical EVER1/2 variants in association with multiple
markers of cutaneous HPV infection, including HPV seropositivity, and HPV
DNA in eyebrow hairs and SCC tumor tissues. Methods: Patients with
histologically-confirmed cutaneous SCC (n=142) were recruited from a
university dermatology clinic in Tampa, FL. Controls were patients
undergoing skin cancer screening exams who screened negative for skin
cancer and reported no history of any type of cancer (n=265). Levels of
antibodies against capsid antigens for 15 cutaneous HPV types in genus
beta were determined by fluorescent bead-based multiplex serology. DNA
for 25 beta-HPV types was measured in eyebrow hairs from cases and
controls, and in fresh-frozen tumor tissues from 119 SCC cases using
multiplex PCR. Twenty-one SNPs in in the EVER1/2 region of chromosome
17q25 were measured from eyebrow hair DNA, including rs7208422.
Associations between EVER1/2 SNPs and SCC, and between EVER1/2 SNPs and
HPV serostatus or DNA status, were estimated by odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) calculated using logistic regression with
adjustment for age and sex. Results: None of the 21 SNPs in the EVER1/2
region were associated with SCC, including rs7208422 in EVER2, for which
the TT genotype was observed in 23% of cases and 22% of controls (vs. AA:
OR=0.99, 95% CI=0.52-1.90). Seropositivity for any beta-HPV type was not
associated with any of the EVER1/2 SNPs among the cases or the controls,
nor with seropositivity for HPV types 5 and/or 8 specifically. Beta-HPV
DNA in eyebrow hairs was associated with two SNPs among the controls only
(rs2290907, AG vs. AA: OR= 2.96, 95% CI=1.37-6.40; rs16970829, AG vs. AA:
OR=12.8, 95% CI=1.71-95.90). Among the cases, beta-HPV DNA in tumor
tissue was associated with rs7217374 (AG vs AG: OR=3.65, 95%
CI=1.42-9.36; AA vs GG: OR=2.02, 95% CI=0.71-5.79), but not with any of
the other 20 SNPs. Conclusion: In this small case-control study, genetic
variation in the EVER1/2 region was not associated with SCC, and none of
the 21 SNPs measured were consistently associated with different
biomarkers of beta-HPV infection among cases or controls.

