Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of TCGA RNASeq data using SpliceSeq provides a survey of
alternative splicing in cancer.


The vast majority of human genes express more than one transcript
isoform, and aberrant splicing patterns or changes in isoform expression
ratios can lead to disease, notably cancer. Next generation sequencing
platforms deliver the finest resolution yet of the transcriptome, and the
wealth of sequencing data produced by TCGA provides an excellent basis
for a broad study of alternative splicing in cancer. We have developed an
interactive, exceptionally user-friendly tool, SpliceSeq, for
investigation of alternative splicing in RNASeq data. The program is a
follow-up to our SpliceCenter package
(http://projects.insilico.us/SpliceCenter/SpliceOverview.jsp), which
provides tools for use by the bench biologist in assessing experimental
observations that may result from splice variation.Our results from
SpliceSeq for TCGA RNASeq data from several cancer types will be
presented. We identify pervasive changes in splicing patterns across
different cancer types by comparing tumor vs. normal and clinical
subgroups (e.g. tumor stage, hyper-mutator status, and MSI designation).
Interesting observations include striking splice variations in APP, the
amyloid beta precursor protein, and in PKM, which is centrally involved
in the balance between oxidative and glycolytic metabolism in tumors.
SpliceSeq is freely available at
http://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/main/SpliceSeq:Overview.1. Ryan MC,
Cleland J, Kim R, Wong WC, Weinstein JN. SpliceSeq: A Resource for
Analysis and Visualization of RNA-Seq Data on Alternative Splicing and
Its Functional Impacts. Bioinformatics, 10.1093, 2012.2. Ryan MC, Zeeberg
BR, Caplen NJ, Cleland JA, Kahn AB, Liu H, and Weinstein JN.
SpliceCenter: a suite of web-based bioinformatic applications for
evaluating the impact of alternative splicing on RT-PCR, RNAi,
microarray, and peptide-based studies. BMC Bioinformatics 9:313, 2008.3.
Kahn AB, Ryan MC, Liu H, Zeeberg BR, Jamison DC, Weinstein JN.
SpliceMiner: a high-throughput database implementation of the NCBI
Evidence Viewer for microarray splice variant analysis. BMC
Bioinformatics 8:752, 2006.Supported by NCI Grant No. U24CA143883. The
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent official views of NCI or NIH. Also supported in
part by a gift from the Mary K. Chapman Foundation and a grant from the
Michael and Susan Dell Foundation honoring Lorraine Dell.

