Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome sequencing links MAPK1 mutation to exquisite
sensitivity to brief erlotinib monotherapy in head and neck cancer.


Activating mutations of EGFR, primarily found in a subgroup of lung
cancers, serve as predictive biomarkers for EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) sensitivity. Clinical responses to EGFR TKIs in other
cancers are only moderate and predictive biomarkers are lacking. Here, we
report a head and neck cancer patient with no EGFR genetic alterations,
who experienced a complete histologic clinical response after 14 days of
erlotinib monotherapy on a window-of-opportunity presurgical trial. To
determine the somatic genetic events underlying the extraordinary and
unexpected response to erlotinib alone, whole exome sequencing was
performed. A bi-allelic missense mutation of MAPK1(E322K) was detected in
the tumor in the absence of other mutations reported to be correlated
with EGFR TKI sensitivity in preclinical models or cancer patients.
Combined bioinformatics analyses of genomics-drug databases revealed, for
the first time, that loss-of-function of MAPK1 or MAPK1 mutation
correlates with erlotinib sensitivity. Functional studies confirmed
heightened sensitivity to erlotinib by loss-of-function of MAPK1 in HNSCC
cells. Our preliminary findings suggest that this MAPK1 mutation, which
is also found at low frequencies in HNSCC and cervical cancers, may
identify a subgroup of cancer patients who may be cured with EGFR TKI
monotherapy.

