Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-125b suppresses p14ARF and modulates p53-dependent and
p53-independent apoptosis in prostate cancer cells.


Increasing evidence has revealed that miR-125b functions as a potential
oncogene in different types of human cancer. Our previous studies
demonstrated that miR-125b directly targets p53, Puma and Bak1 in human
prostate cancer (CaP). To further elucidate the role of miR-125b in
modulating the p53 network, we utilized a bioinformatics approach to
identify miR-125b-regulated, CaP-relevant tumor suppressor gene, and
identified p14ARF gene as a miR-125b target. We first evaluated the
effect of miR-125b on the regulation of p14ARF expression, and found that
miR-125b treatment induced reduction of p14ARF by 80% in LNCaP CaP cells
and 60% in 22Rv1 CaP cells. Conversely, anti-miR-125b increased the
p14ARF level by 40% in LNCaP and 30% in 22Rv1. We then performed
luciferase assay to validate that the miR-125b binding site in the 3UTR
of p14ARF mRNA is responsible for the regulation of p14ARF by miR-125b.
Since p14ARF accelerates Mdm2 degradation, resulting in p53
up-regulation, we thus assessed the effect of miR-125b on the expression
of Mdm2 and p53. Compared with miRNA control, miR-125b treatment induced
a dramatic increase in Mdm2 and a significant reduction of p53 in CaP
cell lines, as well as in miR-125b-overexpressed xenograft tumor.
Additionally, miR-125b treatment resulted in a reduction of interaction
between p14ARF and Mdm2. Next, we examined the effect of miR-125b on CaP
cell proliferation. Both LNCaP and 22Rv1 cells were transfected with
miR-125b and cell proliferation was determined by clone formation assay.
When compared with the control, miR-125b treatment increased clonogenic
survival of CaP cells, while anti-miR-125b caused a dramatic reduction in
the number of colonies. We evaluated the effect of downregulation of
miR-125b on apoptosis in p53-positive 22Rv1 CaP cells. Data from TUNEL
assay demonstrated that anti-miR-125 caused 63% of cells to undergo
apoptosis. Similarly, in p53-negative PC3 CaP cells, miR-125b treatment
induced a 2-fold increase in survival, while anti-miR-125b caused 50% of
cells to undergo apoptosis. In summary, we observed that overexpression
of miR-125b negatively regulates the expression of p14ARF, resulting in
promotion of cell proliferation and inhibition of apoptosis. Inactivation
of miR-125b using anti-miR-125b affects apoptosis involving both
p53-dependent and p53-independent pathways. Therefore, our data suggest
that miR-125b has a great potential to be used as a therapeutic target
for CaP treatment.

