Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Habitual intake of total flavonoids and flavonoid subclasses and
risk of colorectal cancer in men and women.


Background: Flavonoids inhibit the growth of colon cancer cells in vitro.
In a recent randomized controlled trial, the Polyp Prevention Trial, a
higher intake of one sub-class, flavonols, was significantly associated
with a 76% reduced risk of recurrent advanced adenoma. Cohort studies
that have examined the association between flavonoid intake and risk of
colorectal cancer (CRC) have yielded inconsistent results, but most
previous studies only evaluated habitual intake of a limited number of
subclasses and there is growing evidence for differential effects
depending on subtle difference in structure between the
sub-classesObjective: To examine whether higher habitual dietary intake
of total flavonoids and their subclasses (flavanones, anthocyanins,
flavan-3-ols, flavonols, flavones and polymers) are associated with lower
risk of CRC.Methods: Using data from validated food frequency
questionnaires administered every four years and an updated USDA
flavonoid food composition database flavonoid intakes were calculated for
73,666 participants from the Nurses Health Study I, and for 32,059
participants from the Health Professionals Follow-up Study.Results:
During 16 years of follow-up, 1,405 colorectal cancer cases (652 in men,
753 in women) were identified. Intakes of total flavonoids and subclasses
were not associated with risk of CRC (hazard ratios (95% confidence
interval) multivariable adjusted for age, smoking before age 30, family
history of colorectal cancer, history of endoscopy, aspirin use, body
mass index, physical activity, postmenopausal hormone use in women,
alcohol consumption, intake of total energy, calcium and vitamin D;
highest vs. lowest quintile: total flavonoids, men: 0.97 (0.75-1.26),
women: 1.00 (0.80-1.26); flavonols, men: 0.98 (0.76-1.26), women: 1.21
(0.96-1.52); flavones, men: 0.86 (0.67-1.11), women: 0.90 (0.72-1.13);
flavanones, men: 0.98 (0.75-1.28), women: 1.00 (0.80-1.26); flavan-3-ols,
men: 1.00 (0.78-1.29), women: 0.96 (0.76-1.21); anthocyanins, men: 0.89
(0.69-1.15), women: 1.25 (0.98-1.60); polymers, men: 0.92 (0.71-1.18),
women: 0.88 (0.69-1.11)).Conclusion: Our findings do not provide support
for the hypothesis that a higher intake of flavonoids or any specific
sub-class decrease risk of CRC.

