Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of the heat-shock response upregulates the tumor
suppressor APC and alters intestinal tumorigenesis in mice.


Mutation of the tumor suppressor gene Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) is
considered an initiating event in the development of most intestinal
tumors. Although much effort has been spent determining functions of the
APC protein, to date little is known about the mechanisms that regulate
cellular APC levels. Here we report that in cultured cells, induction of
a heat-shock response, via heat or compounds such as the HSP90 inhibitor
17-AAG, resulted in increased levels of APC. A novel non-toxic small
molecule that we developed, KN1, also induced a heat-shock response and
led to increased APC levels in both cultured cells and mice. To
investigate the effect of heat-shock response induction and elevation of
Apc level in intestinal tumorigenesis, we performed a series of
experiments treating mice with either KN1 or 17-AAG. We tested these
compounds on two mouse models with different germline Apc mutations,
ApcMin/+ and Apc1322T/+. In both cases, a moderate dose of either drug
did not change tumor burden, but surprisingly altered the distribution of
intestinal polyps. In a third mouse model, colonic tumors were induced
via administration of the mutagen azoxymethane (AOM) and colon irritant
dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) rather than by germline Apc mutation. In
AOM-DSS-treated mice, KN1 reduced tumor incidence, multiplicity, and
size. Moreover, KN1-treated mice lost significantly less weight and had
smaller spleens than vehicle-treated mice, suggesting KN1 may also
suppress colitis. We conclude that induction of the heat-shock response
affects intestinal tumorigenesis in germline Apc-mutant and
colitis-induced tumor models.

