Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urinary excretion of rigosertib (ON 01910.Na), a novel synthetic
benzylstyrylsulfone, in a phase I trial.


Rigosertib (ON 01910.Na, MW 473.5 Da), a novel synthetic
benzylstyrylsulfone, was given to 27 patients with solid tumors in a
Phase I clinical trial. Drug doses were 50 to 1,700 mg/m2/24 h x 3 days,
continuously infused for 72 h (one cycle), repeated every 2 weeks. The
drug was generally well tolerated. In isolated cases severe toxicities,
including neuromuscular changes, small bowel obstruction and
hyponatremia, were encountered. Urine samples were collected from 14
patients. For 12 patients, urine was collected only in the first cycle
with the following doses: 400 mg/m2 - 2 patients, 850 mg/m2 - 1 patient,
1,050 mg/m2 - 3 patients, 1,375 mg/m2 - 5 patients, 1,700 mg/m2 - 1
patient. For two patients, urine was collected both in the 1st and 4th
cycle: 1 patient with 325 mg/m2 in both cycles, and another patient, with
850 mg/m2 in the first cycle, and 1,050 mg/m2 in the fourth cycle. Urine
collection periods were 0-4 h, 4-8 h, 8-24 h, 24-48 h, 48-72 h (end of
infusion), 72- 96 h and 96-120 h (post-infusion). Urine was collected in
4 L bottles (volume recorded) and alkalinized with sodium bicarbonate to
pH 8.0-9.0; 50 mL fractions were frozen at -80 C, until analysis. Liquid
chromatography-electrospray-mass spectrometry was used with selected
reaction monitoring (SRM) of m/z transition from 474 to 216 for
rigosertib and from m/z 379 to 120 for the internal standard (ON 01370,
an analog compound, MW 378.4 Da). Transition of m/z from 394 to 162 was
monitored to determine a possible metabolite (ON 01500, the parent
compound). Urinary excretion of rigosertib was rapid in all patients, and
ceased soon after the end of infusion. There were no cumulative effects
in repeated collections in the fourth cycle. In terms of total drug
recovered, the urinary excretion averaged 3.0% (0%-15%) in the 72-96 h
collection interval and 0.14% (0-0.56%) in the 96-120 h interval. These
results suggest that most drug excreted by 72 h. The amount of drug
excreted ranged 3% to 15% of the total administered. Among 16 sets of
urine samples (from 14 patients, including 2 patients with 2 sets each),
at the dose of 325-400 mg/m2 (n=4) the level of urinary excretion ranged
3-9%; drug excretion was 8-15% at 850-1,050 mg/m2 (n=6), and at
1,375-1,700 mg/m2 levels the excretion was 7-15 % (n=6). Clinical
toxicities did not appear to have influenced urinary excretion patterns.
No significant amount of ON 01500 (a possible metabolite) was found in
any urine sample examined; the detection limit was 10 ng/mL. These
results are consistent with and complementary to previous reports: strong
(up to 98%) protein binding of rigosertib in human plasma (Cancer
Chemother. Pharmacol. 65:177, 2009), and discontinuous albumin binding of
the drug (Drug Metab. Dispos. 38:1480, 2010), suggesting that high
protein binding of rigosertib likely have influenced active tubular
absorption and resulted in low levels of urinary excretion.

