Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum cytokine profiling in metastatic colorectal cancer patients:
IL-8, MCP-1, and MCP-3 are theranostic targets.


Background: The prognostic value of many circulating cytokines in
metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) patients is undetermined. By using
high through-put approach, this study was to evaluate the prognostic
values of circulating cytokines in patients with metastatic CRC and
identify potential therapeutic targets.Methods: Thirty-nine cytokines
were simultaneously analyzed in serum samples from 99 patients with
metastatic CRC by using multiplex bead-based Luminex technology. Three
CRC cell lines, together with three more aggressive lines derived from
them, were used to validate three potential therapeutic targets by
applying neutralizing antibodies.Results: Elevated levels of 17 cytokines
were found to be significant risk factors for the overall survival (OS)
of patients. Only macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC) positively
correlated with better prognosis. Interleukin-8 (IL-8), monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), MCP-3 and MDC were significant independent
predictor of OS in multivariate analyses. The risk scoring system
developed by combining IL-8, MCP-1, MCP-3, and MDC, was more effective
than each individual factor to predictor the OS. IL-8 was secreted by
three CRC cell lines, with higher expression observed in more-aggressive
cells. Blocking of IL-8 with a neutralizing antibody inhibited the
invasiveness of CRC cells. MCP-1 and MCP-3 were secreted by SW480 cell
line, with higher expression in more-aggressive cell. Neutralizing
antibodies against MCP-1 or MCP-3 significantly inhibited the cellular
invasion.Conclusions: The serum levels of 18 cytokines correlated with
the prognosis of metastatic CRC patinets. Among them, IL-8, MCP-1, MCP-3
and MDC were independent prognostic factors for OS. IL-8, MCP-1, and
MCP-3 are potential therapeutic targets in CRC.

