Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The parp inhibitor olaparib (AZD2281) greatly enances the effect
of temozolomide in soft tissue sarcoma cell lines.


Sarcomas are heterogeneous mesenchymal neoplasms which have very limited
treatment options. Chemotherapies for advanced sarcoma include DNA
damaging agents such as doxorubicin, dacarbazine and gemcitabine with
very low response rates. We elected to study the effects of olaparib
(AZD2281), a novel, potent orally active PARP inhibitor in combination
with standard chemotherapy Temozolomide (TMZ) in various sarcoma
subtypes. We examined the effects of olaparib and TMZ in a panel of 7
sarcoma cell lines including leiomyosarcoma (SK-LMS, SK-UT1, SK-UT1b),
liposarcoma (LS141, DDLS) and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
(MPNST, ST8814). In vitro results have shown inhibition of cell viability
with combination treatment in all cell lines at concentrations of 300uM
TMZ and 1 uM olaparib. After 48 hrs of drug treatment, we also examined
biochemical effects showing PAR inhibition, p53 induction and H2AX
increase, indicative of DNA damage. Flow cytometric analysis of each cell
line indicated G2/M cell cycle arrest with combination treatment. These
observations correlated with enhanced apoptosis as measured by
biochemical PARP cleavage and DNA content (sub-G1 population). Taking
these observations and results, there is strong evidence to support
combining standard chemotherapy TMZ with the PARP inhibitor olaparib in
various sarcoma subtypes.

