Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of tumor cell invasiveness and in vivo tumor growth by
microRNA-874 in non-small cell lung cancer.


MicroRNAs are a family of small non-coding RNAs that regulate expression
of many genes involved in normal development as well as human disorders
including cancer. Here, we show that miR-874 plays a tumor suppressor
role in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in vitro and in vivo.
Interestingly, in silico target prediction analysis revealed numerous
pro-oncogenes associated with tumor initiation, angiogenesis, invasion
and migration, including MMP-2, uPA, NFAT5, PAK3, PAK7, LIMD, PECAM1,
VEGF-A, Stat3, CUX1 and FGF1 as the putative target genes of miR-874. Our
preliminary in situ hybridization experiments demonstrated the diminution
of miR-874 expression in lung cancer tissues as compared to its normal
counterparts. Overexpression of miR-874 in CD133-positive NSCLC cancer
stem cell (CSC) population led to a significant loss in CSC phenotype and
enhanced sphere de-differentiation into epithelial-like morphology.
Restoration of miR-874 expression drastically reduced the invasive
ability of cells in comparison to mock and control-miR treated cells by
suppressing the protein levels of MMP-2 and uPA. Further, miR-874
treatment decreased orthotopic tumor growth in nude mice as compared to
mock and control-miR treatments. Further, in vivo orthotopic tumor
experiments in nude mice revealed the significant decrease in the
immunoreactivity of human anti-MMP-2 and anti-uPA in miR-874-treated
tumor sections. In conclusion, our study highlights the possible tumor
suppressor role of miR-874 in NSCLC-initiating cells and suggests miR-874
as a potential target in the future treatment of NSCLC.Citation Format:
Divya Kesanakurti, Dilip Maddirela, Subramanyam Chittivelu, Jasti S. Rao,
Chandramu Chetty. Suppression of tumor cell invasiveness and in vivo
tumor growth by microRNA-874 in non-small cell lung cancer. [abstract].
In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association
for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA):
AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3070.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3070

