Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FL118, a survivin/Mcl-1/XIAP/cIAP2-selective inhibitor,
effectively inhibits human mesothelioma xenograft growth in animal models.


We have identified and characterized a novel small chemical molecule
(designated FL118). Our in vitro studies showed that FL118 selectively
inhibits the expression of survivin, Mcl-1, XIAP and cIAP2, while showing
no inhibitory effects on control genes. In an intraperitoneal (i.p.)
route, the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of FL118 was found to be about
1.5 mg/kg at a weekly x 4 schedule in a Tween 80-comtaining formulation,
FL118 showed superior antitumor activity in mouse models of human colon
and head-&-neck tumor xenografts (PLOS ONE. 2012, 7: e45571). However, we
found that actually, the weekly x 4 schedule for FL118 in the Tween
80-containing formulation is the best schedule for showing the maximal
antitumor activity for FL118. So further improvement of FL118 antitumor
efficacy would have no rooms with this formulation. In this regard, we
have developed a Tween 80-free formulation that fits the intravenously
(i.v.) injection. Here we report our results with this formulation on
human mesothelioma in animal models. Two mesothelioma cell lines
(MSTO-211H, NCI-H226) were used to establish human xenograft in SCID
mice. After the established human mesothelioma tumor in mice was
sub-transplanted 2-3 times, the tumor masses were then used for testing
FL118 efficacy and toxicity in a Tween 80-free formulation. We first
determined FL118 MTD via i.v. routes in three commonly used schedules in
clinical practice - every day for five times (daily x 5), every other day
for five times (q2 x 5) and every week for 4 times (weekly x 4). Our
result showed that the MTD for FL118 in the Tween 80-free formulation via
i.v. increases 3-7 times in comparison with the FL118 MTD in the Tween 80
containing formulation. In the new formulation, FL118 reached 1.5 mg/kg,
(daily x 5, q2 x 5) and 5 mg/kg (weekly x 4), respectively. Then we
tested the efficacy of FL118 for inhibiting mesothelioma tumor growth and
found that FL118 induced tumor regression in all three clinical
compatible schedules, while the toxicity profile appears to be improved
in comparison with the outcome from FL118 in the Tween 80-containing
formulation. Specifically, our data showed that FL118 effectively
inhibits MSTO-211H-derived tumor growth, induces tumor regression and
even achieved a cure in a percentage of human mesothelioma xenograft,
while the tumors in control mice without FL118 treatment reached the
maximal size (2000 mg/mm3) allowed in less than five weeks. Additionally,
FL118 also showed effective inhibition of NCI-H226-established tumor
growth. Therefore, we conclude that we developed a clinical suitable
formula for FL118 i.v. administration. We also, for the first time,
demonstrated that FL118 possesses superior antitumor activity in animal
models of human mesothelioma cancer cell line-established tumor
xenograft, which provides a hope to use FL118 as a superior option to
effectively treat mesothelioma in clinical practice.

