Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive markers in patients with non-small cell lung cancer
with pemetrexed treatment.


Background: This study is desiged to evaluate biomarkers that are
correlated with the efficacy of pemetrexed in patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Methods: Patients with stage III or IV
NSCLC who received pemetrexed monotherapy after failure of one or more
chemotherapy regimen between January 2003 and August 2011 were included.
Polymorphism of reduced folate carrier gene (SLC19A, rs1051298),
5,10-methylenetetrahydroflate reductase (MTHFR, rs1801133) and
thymidylate synthase (TS, rs45445694, rs16430) gene were analyzed by PCR
and direct sequencing method using peripheral blood.Results: Total 123
patients were included. The median age was 61 years (range 35-82). Fifty
eight (47.2%) patients were female. Predominant histology was
adenocarcinoma (92.7%). Metastatic diseases were 114 (80.5%) patients.
Patients received one or more lines of systemic therapy before pemetrexed
therapy, one line in 53 (43.1%) patients, two in 51(41.5%), three in 14
(11.02%), and four in 4 (3.3%). Median 4 cycles of chemotherapy were
given (range 1-44). Response rate was 22.7% (CR, n=2, PR, n=26) and
stable disease was detected in 54 patients (43.9%). Median follow up
duration was 28.7months (range 4.07-84.33months). Median progression free
survival (PFS) was 4.2 months (95% CI: 2.9-5.6) and median overall
survival (OS) was 18.9 months (95% CI: 13.3-24.6). Clinical factors like,
sex, histology of tumor (adenocarcinoma vs, nonadenocarcinoma),
differentiation, smoking status and EGFR mutation status (active mutation
vs. other mutation vs. wild type) did not have any significant difference
on response and PFS. Only polymorphisms of TS promoter enhancer region
(TSER) were related with PFS. 2R/2R repeat in the TSER (2R/2R vs 2R/3R,
3R/3R 1.0m vs 4.3m, pBackground: This study is desiged to evaluate
biomarkers that are correlated with the efficacy of pemetrexed in
patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Methods: Patients with
stage III or IV NSCLC who received pemetrexed monotherapy after failure
of one or more chemotherapy regimen between January 2003 and August 2011
were included. Polymorphism of reduced folate carrier gene (SLC19A,
rs1051298), 5,10-methylenetetrahydroflate reductase (MTHFR, rs1801133)
and thymidylate synthase (TS, rs45445694, rs16430) gene were analyzed by
PCR and direct sequencing method using peripheral blood.Results: Total
123 patients were included. The median age was 61 years (range 35-82).
Fifty eight (47.2%) patients were female. Predominant histology was
adenocarcinoma (92.7%). Metastatic diseases were 114 (80.5%) patients.
Patients received one or more lines of systemic therapy before pemetrexed
therapy, one line in 53 (43.1%) patients, two in 51(41.5%), three in 14
(11.02%), and four in 4 (3.3%). Median 4 cycles of chemotherapy were
given (range 1-44). Response rate was 22.7% (CR, n=2, PR, n=26) and
stable disease was detected in 54 patients (43.9%). Median follow up
duration was 28.7months (range 4.07-84.33months). Median progression free
survival (PFS) was 4.2 months (95% CI: 2.9-5.6) and median overall
survival (OS) was 18.9 months (95% CI: 13.3-24.6). Clinical factors like,
sex, histology of tumor (adenocarcinoma vs, nonadenocarcinoma),
differentiation, smoking status and EGFR mutation status (active mutation
vs. other mutation vs. wild type) did not have any significant difference
on response and PFS. Only polymorphisms of TS promoter enhancer region
(TSER) were related with PFS. 2R/2R repeat in the TSER (2R/2R vs 2R/3R,
3R/3R 1.0m vs 4.3m, p<0.01) and CC homozygote variant in second repeat of
the 3R allele (CC vs GC, GG 2.8m vs 5.0m, p=0.04) had poor PFS. All
polymorphism did not have effect on response rate and overall
survival.Conclusions: This study suggests that polymorphisms of TSER
associated PFS in pemetrexed treatment. Further prospective studies will
be needed to validate these polymorphism as a useful biomarker of
pemetrexed treatment in NSCLC patients.

