Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOSH-aspirin is a potent inhibitor of colon cancer cell growth:
effects of positional isomerism.


Background: We recently reported the synthesis of NOSH-aspirin, a novel
hybrid capable of releasing both nitric oxide (NO) and hydrogen sulfide
(H2S). In NOSH-aspirin, the two moieties that release NO and H2S are
covalently linked at the 1, 2 positions of acetyl salicylic acid, ie
ortho-NOSH-aspirin. Here we compared the cell growth inhibitory
properties of ortho-NOSH-aspirin to that of the 1,3 (meta-NOSH-aspirin)
and the 1,4 (para-NOSH-aspirin) positional isomers. We also incorporated
electron donating/withdrawing groups about the bezyl ring in order to
evaluate the effect of substitution on stability and biological activity
of these novel compounds. Methods: Cell line: HT-29 and HCT 15 human
colon adenocarcimoa; Cell growth: MTT; Cell cycle phase distribution:
Flow cytometry; Apoptosis: subdiploid (sub-G0/G1) peak in DNA content
histograms; Proliferation: PCNA; ROS: measured hydrogen peroxide and
super oxide by flow cytometry using DCFDA and DHE dyes. Results: All
positional isomers of NOSH-aspirin were potent growth inhibitors of both
cell lines. The IC50s for growth inhibition in nM at 24h were, HT-29:
ortho-NOSH-ASA (0.04 0.011), meta-NOSH-ASA (0.24 0.11), para-NOSH-ASA
(0.46 0.17); significance between the groups were: o vs m P>0.05, o vs p
P0.05; HCT 15: ortho-NOSH-ASA (0.062 0.006), meta-NOSH-ASA (0.092 0.004),
para-NOSH-ASA (0.37 0.04); significance between the groups were: o vs m
P>0.05, o vs p P0.05; HCT 15: ortho-NOSH-ASA (0.062 0.006), meta-NOSH-ASA
(0.092 0.004), para-NOSH-ASA (0.37 0.04); significance between the groups
were: o vs m P>0.05, o vs p P<0.001, m vs p P0.05; HCT 15: ortho-NOSH-ASA
(0.062 0.006), meta-NOSH-ASA (0.092 0.004), para-NOSH-ASA (0.37 0.04);
significance between the groups were: o vs m P>0.05, o vs p P<0.001, m vs
p P<0.001. Electron donating/withdrawing groups significantly affected
these IC50s. All positional isomers qualitatively had similar effects on
proliferation, apoptosis, and caused G0/G1 cell cycle arrest in both
colon cancer cell lines. The underlying mechanism for these observations
appeared to be mediated through generation of intracellular H2O2 and
superoxide anions as pretreatment of cells with N-acetylcysteine,
partially blocked these effects. Conclusions: Positional isomerism
affects the potency of NOSH-aspirin and offers a platform for drug
design. Further, NOSH-aspirin merits further evaluation as an anti-cancer
agent.

