Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ROR1 inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
metastasis.


The receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1) is an
evolutionarily-conserved, type-I membrane glycoprotein that is expressed
in embryonic development, but not by virtually all normal post-partum
tissues. Recent studies have found the ROR1 protein expressed by a
variety of different cancers, particularly those that appear less
differentiated and/or have high-grade histology (Am J Pathol. 2012, PMID
23041612). Because there appeared to be a tight association between gene
and protein expression, we interrogated the gene-expression data on
breast adenocarcinomas from each of 582 patients (pt) for ROR1. Because
of our earlier observation that approximately a third of breast cancer pt
in a different cohort had tumors with high-level expression of ROR1
protein (PLoS One, 2012, PMID 22403610), we divided the cohort of 582 pt
into tertiles based upon their tumors relative expression of ROR1. Pt in
the tertile with cancers having the highest expression of ROR1 (ROR1H)
had a significantly higher rate of metastases than did pt with tumors
having the mid (ROR1M) or lowest (ROR1L) expression of ROR1 (e.g. 61% vs.
35% or 41%, respectively, pThe receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan
receptor 1 (ROR1) is an evolutionarily-conserved, type-I membrane
glycoprotein that is expressed in embryonic development, but not by
virtually all normal post-partum tissues. Recent studies have found the
ROR1 protein expressed by a variety of different cancers, particularly
those that appear less differentiated and/or have high-grade histology
(Am J Pathol. 2012, PMID 23041612). Because there appeared to be a tight
association between gene and protein expression, we interrogated the
gene-expression data on breast adenocarcinomas from each of 582 patients
(pt) for ROR1. Because of our earlier observation that approximately a
third of breast cancer pt in a different cohort had tumors with
high-level expression of ROR1 protein (PLoS One, 2012, PMID 22403610), we
divided the cohort of 582 pt into tertiles based upon their tumors
relative expression of ROR1. Pt in the tertile with cancers having the
highest expression of ROR1 (ROR1H) had a significantly higher rate of
metastases than did pt with tumors having the mid (ROR1M) or lowest
(ROR1L) expression of ROR1 (e.g. 61% vs. 35% or 41%, respectively, p<
0.0001). Moreover, pt with ROR1H tumors had a higher rate of early
relapse and poorer survival than did pt with ROR1L/M tumors, irrespective
of ER or HER2 status (HR=2.3, pThe receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan
receptor 1 (ROR1) is an evolutionarily-conserved, type-I membrane
glycoprotein that is expressed in embryonic development, but not by
virtually all normal post-partum tissues. Recent studies have found the
ROR1 protein expressed by a variety of different cancers, particularly
those that appear less differentiated and/or have high-grade histology
(Am J Pathol. 2012, PMID 23041612). Because there appeared to be a tight
association between gene and protein expression, we interrogated the
gene-expression data on breast adenocarcinomas from each of 582 patients
(pt) for ROR1. Because of our earlier observation that approximately a
third of breast cancer pt in a different cohort had tumors with
high-level expression of ROR1 protein (PLoS One, 2012, PMID 22403610), we
divided the cohort of 582 pt into tertiles based upon their tumors
relative expression of ROR1. Pt in the tertile with cancers having the
highest expression of ROR1 (ROR1H) had a significantly higher rate of
metastases than did pt with tumors having the mid (ROR1M) or lowest
(ROR1L) expression of ROR1 (e.g. 61% vs. 35% or 41%, respectively, p<
0.0001). Moreover, pt with ROR1H tumors had a higher rate of early
relapse and poorer survival than did pt with ROR1L/M tumors, irrespective
of ER or HER2 status (HR=2.3, p<0.0001). We also examined for ROR1
expression in 14 distinct breast-cancer epithelial cell-lines, including
6 basal-type breast cancer cell-lines and 8 luminal-type breast cancer
cell-lines. All 6 basal-type, metastases-prone, cell-lines expressed
ROR1, which was not the case for low-invasive, luminal-type cell-lines.
Silencing ROR1 in the basal cell-lines attenuated expression of proteins
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) (e.g. vimentin,
SNAIL-1/2, and ZEB1), enhanced expression of epithelial cytokeratins and
tight-junction proteins (e.g. CK-19 and ZO-1), and impaired each
cell-line's migration/invasion capacity in vitro and metastatic potential
in immune-deficient mice. Moreover, silencing ROR1 in parental MDA-MB-231
cells (or its derivatives LM2-4175 and BoM-1833, which preferentially
metastasize to the lung or bone, respectively) inhibited each cell-line's
capacity to generate orthotopic lung metastases or experimental lung and
bone metastases in vivo. Treatment of MDA-MB-231 or other basal-type
cell-lines with a monoclonal antibody (mAb) specific for ROR1
down-modulated vimentin and inhibited each cancer-cell-line's
migration/invasion capacity in vitro. This mAb also significantly
inhibited tumor metastasis when given to immune-deficient mice engrafted
with MDA-MB-231 cells. Collectively, this study indicates that ROR1 may
regulate EMT and metastasis, and that antibodies targeting ROR1 can
inhibit cancer progression and metastasis.

