Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary fiber intake reduces colorectal polyp risk in cigarette
smokers.


BACKGROUNDResults regarding the association of dietary fiber intake with
colorectal tumor risk remain inconsistent. The association may differ
between smokers and nonsmokers. We evaluated this hypothesis in a large
colonoscopy-based case-control study.METHODSDietary fiber intakes were
estimated by a food frequency questionnaire designed to capture dietary
intakes in the study population. Unconditional logistic regression
analysis was used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence limits
(95% CLs) with adjustment for potential confounders. Analysis also was
stratified by cigarette-smoking status and sex.RESULTSOverall, colorectal
polyps (P-trend BACKGROUNDResults regarding the association of dietary
fiber intake with colorectal tumor risk remain inconsistent. The
association may differ between smokers and nonsmokers. We evaluated this
hypothesis in a large colonoscopy-based case-control study.METHODSDietary
fiber intakes were estimated by a food frequency questionnaire designed
to capture dietary intakes in the study population. Unconditional
logistic regression analysis was used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and
95% confidence limits (95% CLs) with adjustment for potential
confounders. Analysis also was stratified by cigarette-smoking status and
sex.RESULTSOverall, colorectal polyps (P-trend < 0.001), including
adenoma only (P-trend = 0.006), were associated inversely with high
dietary fiber intake. When stratified by smoking status, this inverse
association was only observed among tobacco smokers, but not among never
smokers, (Pheterogeneity = 0.039) for either males or females and for all
participants. The protective effect was observed only among smokers for
high-risk adenomas (Pheterogeneity = 0.018) and low-risk adenomas, but
not for never smokers. The protective effect was particularly strong for
high-risk adenomas in smokers. Consuming more than 19.9 g/day of dietary
fiber was associated with a 41-44% decreased risk for high-risk adenomas
among smokers (P-trend BACKGROUNDResults regarding the association of
dietary fiber intake with colorectal tumor risk remain inconsistent. The
association may differ between smokers and nonsmokers. We evaluated this
hypothesis in a large colonoscopy-based case-control study.METHODSDietary
fiber intakes were estimated by a food frequency questionnaire designed
to capture dietary intakes in the study population. Unconditional
logistic regression analysis was used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and
95% confidence limits (95% CLs) with adjustment for potential
confounders. Analysis also was stratified by cigarette-smoking status and
sex.RESULTSOverall, colorectal polyps (P-trend < 0.001), including
adenoma only (P-trend = 0.006), were associated inversely with high
dietary fiber intake. When stratified by smoking status, this inverse
association was only observed among tobacco smokers, but not among never
smokers, (Pheterogeneity = 0.039) for either males or females and for all
participants. The protective effect was observed only among smokers for
high-risk adenomas (Pheterogeneity = 0.018) and low-risk adenomas, but
not for never smokers. The protective effect was particularly strong for
high-risk adenomas in smokers. Consuming more than 19.9 g/day of dietary
fiber was associated with a 41-44% decreased risk for high-risk adenomas
among smokers (P-trend < 0.001).CONCLUSIONSCigarette smoking may modify
the association of dietary fiber intake and the risk of colorectal
polyps, especially high-risk adenoma risk.

