Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Substrate specificity and inhibitors of histone lysine HMTase
NSD1, NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, and NSD3/WHSC1L1.


The nuclear receptor binding SET domain proteins (NSDs) is a family of
three histone-lysine N-methyltransferases, NSD1, NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, and
NSD3/WHSC1L1. The NSDs are oncogenes. The amplification of NSD1 has been
reported in multiple myeloma, lung cancer, neuroblastomas and
glioblastomas. The amplification of either NSD1 or NSD2 triggers the
cellular transformation to cancer formation. NSD2 is associated with
tumor aggressiveness or prognosis in most types of cancers including
prostate cancer and multiple myeloma and is overexpressed in at least 15
different cancers. Increased NSD2 activity was reported in tumor
proliferation in glioblastoma multiforms and myeloma, resulting in
aberrantly high global levels of H3K36me2. NSD3 is involved in lung
cancer and found amplified in breast cancer cell lines and primary breast
carcinomas. The abnormal NSD1-NUP98 and NSD3-NUP98 fusions increase H3K36
methylation, leading to acute myeloid leukemia. Although the NSD proteins
are instrumental in the development of numerous cancers, their mechanisms
of action in this context remain unclear. However, it appears that
consequently increased H3K36 methylation by deregulated NSDs concomitant
with decreased H3K27 methylation is perhaps one of the underlying
mechanisms that alter gene expression profiles. In this study, we defined
the molecular determinants of the recognition of histone marks by the
NSDs to provide medicinal chemistry insights into the design of selective
and specific NSDs inhibitors. Our data highlights the catalytic
versatility of NSD1, NSD2, and NSD3 in regulating the epigenome. Our
results propose the first molecular models of the binding of 6-mer
peptides H3K4 a.a.1-7; H3K9 a.a.5-11; H3K27 a.a.23-29; H3K36 a.a.32-38;
H3K79 a.a.75-81; H4K20 a.a.16-22 with the catalytic domain of the NSDs.
Exploiting this data, we derived a virtual ligand screening strategy to
identify inhibitors targeting NSD1, NSD2 and NSD3. In vitro, using
recombinant NSDs-SET purified enzyme, we performed H3K36me1 inhibitory
assays with the top candidates. Here for the first time, we report the
discovery of a small subset of NSD inhibitors (namely LEM-xx) that do not
violate the empirical Lipinski's rule of five, have a wcLogP The nuclear
receptor binding SET domain proteins (NSDs) is a family of three
histone-lysine N-methyltransferases, NSD1, NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, and
NSD3/WHSC1L1. The NSDs are oncogenes. The amplification of NSD1 has been
reported in multiple myeloma, lung cancer, neuroblastomas and
glioblastomas. The amplification of either NSD1 or NSD2 triggers the
cellular transformation to cancer formation. NSD2 is associated with
tumor aggressiveness or prognosis in most types of cancers including
prostate cancer and multiple myeloma and is overexpressed in at least 15
different cancers. Increased NSD2 activity was reported in tumor
proliferation in glioblastoma multiforms and myeloma, resulting in
aberrantly high global levels of H3K36me2. NSD3 is involved in lung
cancer and found amplified in breast cancer cell lines and primary breast
carcinomas. The abnormal NSD1-NUP98 and NSD3-NUP98 fusions increase H3K36
methylation, leading to acute myeloid leukemia. Although the NSD proteins
are instrumental in the development of numerous cancers, their mechanisms
of action in this context remain unclear. However, it appears that
consequently increased H3K36 methylation by deregulated NSDs concomitant
with decreased H3K27 methylation is perhaps one of the underlying
mechanisms that alter gene expression profiles. In this study, we defined
the molecular determinants of the recognition of histone marks by the
NSDs to provide medicinal chemistry insights into the design of selective
and specific NSDs inhibitors. Our data highlights the catalytic
versatility of NSD1, NSD2, and NSD3 in regulating the epigenome. Our
results propose the first molecular models of the binding of 6-mer
peptides H3K4 a.a.1-7; H3K9 a.a.5-11; H3K27 a.a.23-29; H3K36 a.a.32-38;
H3K79 a.a.75-81; H4K20 a.a.16-22 with the catalytic domain of the NSDs.
Exploiting this data, we derived a virtual ligand screening strategy to
identify inhibitors targeting NSD1, NSD2 and NSD3. In vitro, using
recombinant NSDs-SET purified enzyme, we performed H3K36me1 inhibitory
assays with the top candidates. Here for the first time, we report the
discovery of a small subset of NSD inhibitors (namely LEM-xx) that do not
violate the empirical Lipinski's rule of five, have a wcLogP < 3 and a
total polar surface area The nuclear receptor binding SET domain proteins
(NSDs) is a family of three histone-lysine N-methyltransferases, NSD1,
NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, and NSD3/WHSC1L1. The NSDs are oncogenes. The
amplification of NSD1 has been reported in multiple myeloma, lung cancer,
neuroblastomas and glioblastomas. The amplification of either NSD1 or
NSD2 triggers the cellular transformation to cancer formation. NSD2 is
associated with tumor aggressiveness or prognosis in most types of
cancers including prostate cancer and multiple myeloma and is
overexpressed in at least 15 different cancers. Increased NSD2 activity
was reported in tumor proliferation in glioblastoma multiforms and
myeloma, resulting in aberrantly high global levels of H3K36me2. NSD3 is
involved in lung cancer and found amplified in breast cancer cell lines
and primary breast carcinomas. The abnormal NSD1-NUP98 and NSD3-NUP98
fusions increase H3K36 methylation, leading to acute myeloid leukemia.
Although the NSD proteins are instrumental in the development of numerous
cancers, their mechanisms of action in this context remain unclear.
However, it appears that consequently increased H3K36 methylation by
deregulated NSDs concomitant with decreased H3K27 methylation is perhaps
one of the underlying mechanisms that alter gene expression profiles. In
this study, we defined the molecular determinants of the recognition of
histone marks by the NSDs to provide medicinal chemistry insights into
the design of selective and specific NSDs inhibitors. Our data highlights
the catalytic versatility of NSD1, NSD2, and NSD3 in regulating the
epigenome. Our results propose the first molecular models of the binding
of 6-mer peptides H3K4 a.a.1-7; H3K9 a.a.5-11; H3K27 a.a.23-29; H3K36
a.a.32-38; H3K79 a.a.75-81; H4K20 a.a.16-22 with the catalytic domain of
the NSDs. Exploiting this data, we derived a virtual ligand screening
strategy to identify inhibitors targeting NSD1, NSD2 and NSD3. In vitro,
using recombinant NSDs-SET purified enzyme, we performed H3K36me1
inhibitory assays with the top candidates. Here for the first time, we
report the discovery of a small subset of NSD inhibitors (namely LEM-xx)
that do not violate the empirical Lipinski's rule of five, have a wcLogP
< 3 and a total polar surface area <90 A**2.Citation Format: Eric Di
Luccio, Masayo Morishita. Substrate specificity and inhibitors of histone
lysine HMTase NSD1, NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, and NSD3/WHSC1L1. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 676.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-676

