Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule activation of diaphanous-related formins as a novel
anti-cancer strategy.


Formin-based cytoskeletal remodeling contributes to structural
rearrangements that support an array of cellular demands, including
chemotaxis and cell division. The Diaphanous formin family is managed in
cells by Rho small GTP-binding proteins. Rho-GTP binding to the formin
interferes with the intramolecular interaction between the Dia-inhibitory
and -autoregulatory (DID & DAD) domains that flank the critical formin
homology-2 (FH2) domain. The FH2 domain can then interact with
microtubules to stabilize microtubule dynamics and loosely associate with
barbed ends of polymeric actin filaments to add actin monomers. As a
consequence of monomer consumption into filaments, formins also activate
the MAL/MRTF-SRF transcription factor axis.DAD-derived peptides can
activate formins in cells by interrupting the DID-DAD autoregulatory
mechanism. We screened for drug-like small molecules with in vitro,
cellular, and in vivo activities that could mimic the impact of DAD
peptides. Two chemically similar molecules, called the Intramimics (IMMs)
were identified. Both molecules (IMM-01 and -02) blocked DID-DAD binding
in vitro, induced actin/microtubule stabilization in cells, activated
SRF, and impaired cell-cycle progression. The IMMs each reduced xenograft
tumor growth in mice. Due to their novel activity on formins, the IMMs
represent an innovative therapeutic strategy for the study and treatment
of diseases impacted by defects in cell structure, including autism,
neurodegenerative disease, and cancer.

