Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel multifunctional nanocarriers for drug delivery, photodynamic
therapy, sonodynamic therapy, MRI and PET imaging.


We have previously reported the development of a versatile nanocarrier
platform comprised of PEG-cholic acid cluster telodendrimers that can
self-assemble together with hydrophobic cytotoxic anti-cancer agents to
form stable nanoparticle drugs. We have successfully loaded these
nanoparticles with a number of different cancer drugs. These include
paclitaxel, doxorubicin, vincristine, vinblastine, actinomycin D,
bortezomib, temsirolimus, sarofinib, and lapatinib. Using electron
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, we have demonstrated that the
micelles can be disrupted by HDL, LDL, VLDL or chylomicron causing
premature drug release. Such undesirable properties can be eliminated by
cross-linking the telodendrimers with disulfide bonds or
boronate-catechol linkages. Very recently, we have developed a series of
novel highly versatile multi-functional nancarriers that not only allow
efficient delivery of hydrophobic drugs, but can also (i) deliver
proteins and nucleic acids to target cells, (ii) allow efficient
photodynamic therapy and sonodynamic therapy, and (iii) function as
sensitive MRI and PET imaging agents for the detection of cancers. Tumor
cell surface binding ligands identified through one-bead-one-compound
combinatorial chemistry can be easily incorporated into these
nanocarriers for effective tumor targeting. On-demand releasable
mechanism can also be built into such novel nanoplatforms for more
efficacious therapy.

