Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression signatures differentiate primary and metastatic
uterine leiomyosarcoma.


Leiomyosarcoma (LMS) is the most common uterine sarcoma, but is a rare
cancer. The genetic events related to LMS metastasis are unknown to date.
The aim of the present study was to compare the global gene expression
patterns of primary uterine LMS and LMS metastases in order to identify
potential biological targets. Gene expression profiles of 13 primary
uterine LMS and 15 LMS metastases were analyzed using the HumanRef-8
BeadChip from Illumina. Differentially expressed candidate genes were
validated using quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using all 54,675 genes in the array
separated primary from metastatic LMS samples. We identified 203 unique
probes that were significantly differentially expressed in the two tumor
groups by greater than 2-fold with 1% FDR cutoff using one-way ANOVA with
Benjamini-Hochberg correction, of which 94 and 109 were overexpressed in
primary and metastatic LMS, respectively. Genes overexpressed in primary
uterine LMS included OSTN, NLGN4X, NLGN1, SLITRK4, MASP1, XRN2, ASS1,
RORB, HRASLS and TSPAN7. Genes overexpressed in LMS metastases included
FOLR3, TDO2, CRYM, GJA1, TSPAN10, THBS1, SGK1, SHMT1, EGR2 and AGT.
Results for selected genes were validated by quantitative real-time PCR
and immunohistochemistry. We present the first study in which gene
expression profiling was shown to distinguish between primary uterine LMS
and LMS metastases. The molecular signatures unique to primary and
metastatic LMS may aid in understanding tumor progression in this cancer
and in providing a molecular basis for prognostic studies and therapeutic
target discovery.

