Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variants in the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway as
indicators of ovarian cancer risk and survival.


Ovarian cancer is the ninth most common cancer in women and the fifth
leading cause of cancer death in 2012. Much is known about the
correlation between BRCA mutations and ovarian cancer, but less is known
about the impact of common, germline genetic variants on ovarian cancer
risk and clinical outcomes. The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway has major roles
in regulation of stem cells and other cellular pathways and has been
shown to be involved in the development of several different cancers.
Therefore, we examined 434 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway in 339 ovarian cancer cases and 349 controls.
These variants were then assessed for association with risk and clinical
outcomes of ovarian cancer. Sixteen polymorphisms had a statistically
significant association with ovarian cancer risk with the most
significant association being for rs11668593 in APC2 under the dominant
model [odds ratio (OR)=0.61; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.44-0.83].
Unfavorable analysis showed a highly significant cumulative effect of
these 16 SNPs on risk (P for trend = 4.22x1015). In the clinical outcomes
analysis, there were eight SNPs that showed an association with ovarian
cancer survival. The most significant association with survival was seen
for rs11054760 in LRP6 [OR=2.16; 95% CI, 1.33-3.50] which resulted in a
poorer survival in patients carrying the heterozygous or homozygous
variant genotypes compared to those with the homozygous common genotype.
Individuals with the common genotype for rs11054760 had a longer median
survival time of 52.7 months compared to only 25.9 months for those with
variant containing genotypes (Plog-rank = 3.54x104). A gene-dosage effect
with a decrease in survival as the number of unfavorable genotypes
increased was evident (P for trend = 4.57x109). These results implicate
genetic variation in the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway as having an
impact on risk and clinical outcomes of ovarian cancer.

