Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reversible disruption of mSWI/SNF-like BAF complexes by the
SS18-SSX oncogenic fusion in synovial sarcoma.


Recent exon sequencing studies have revealed frequent mutations in
subunits of SWI/SNF or BAF complexes and implicated them as tumor
suppressors. Indeed, we estimate that they are mutated in 15.8 percent of
sequenced human cancers. Interestingly, the subunits most commonly
mutated are not required for chromatin remodeling in vitro and thus may
contribute to chromatin regulation in a novel way. One difficultly in
understanding the role of these complexes in cancer is distinguishing
primary driving mutations from passenger mutations. To investigate the
underlying mechanism we studied human synovial sarcoma (SS), in which
transformation results from a remarkably precise and uniform
translocation of exactly 78 amino acids of SSX to the SS18 protein. In a
proteomic study we discovered that SS18 is a dedicated, non-exchangeable
subunit of BAF complexes. We demonstrate that the hallmark SS18-SSX
fusion incorporates into BAF complexes, evicting both the wild-type SS18
protein and the tumor suppressor, hSNF5 (BAF47). The altered complex
binds the Sox2 locus, reversing polycomb-mediated repression and results
in Sox2 activation. Sox2 is uniformly expressed in SS tumors and is
essential for their proliferation. Increasing the concentration of
wild-type SS18 leads to reassembly of the wild-type complex, retargeting
of BAF complexes away from the Sox2 locus, polycomb-mediated repression
of Sox2 and cessation of proliferation. This mechanism of transformation
depends on only two amino acids of SSX and hence provides a potential
foundation for therapeutic intervention.

