Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A population pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (POP-PK/PD) modelling
of EZN-3042 administered with or without docetaxel in patients with
advanced solid tumors or lymphoma.


Background: Survivin, a member of the apoptosis protein inhibitor family,
is an essential regulator of cell division and a modulator of programmed
cell death. Overexpression of survivin has been noted in multiple cancers
and is associated with poor prognosis and decreased overall survival.The
survivin mRNA antagonist EZN-3042 is a locked nucleic acid
(LNA)-antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) that specifically down-modulates
survivin mRNA and consequently protein.The objectives of this study are
to determine the recommended dose, pharmacokinetics (PK), and
pharmacodynamics (PD) and to perform a POP-PK/PD modeling of EZN3042 in
patients with advanced solid tumors or lymphoma.Materials and Methods: A
phase 1, open-label, dose-escalation study evaluating the safety and
tolerability of EZN-3042 given weekly as a 2-hour iv infusion was
previously presented (AACR; San Francisco, CA; November 13, 2011). Dose
levels ranged from 2.5 mg/Kg to 8.0 mg/Kg. For PK analysis, 10 time point
blood samples were collected on D1 of cycle 1 and 1 blood sample just
before administration (Cmin) was collected on D1 of each subsequent
treatment cycle.POP-PK/PD analyses were carried out using the nonlinear
mixed effect modeling software program Monolix version 4.1.2.
Proportional residual variability and exponential between subject
variabilities (BSVs) were used. Different covariates including Body
Weight (BW), and sex were investigated. The PK parameters were
allometrically normalized for BW to a 70 kg individual.Results: From 30
patients (16 males, 14 females), 479 time-plasma concentrations and 307
ANC were available for analysis. A 3-compartment open model adequately
described the total EZN3042 time-concentration curve with linear
elimination. The BSVs could be well estimated for all structural
parameters (clearance: CL, volume of distribution: V, inter-compartmental
clearances: Q) except for V2 and V3.The main PK parameters (RSE%)
estimated for EZN3042 were CL=4.2 (17%) L/h, Q2=0.26 (31%) L/h, Q3=1.22
(13%) L/h, V1=11.7 (6%) L, V2=3.7 (17%) L, and V3=640 (10%) L.The main
covariate effects were related to BW, only V1 (central volume) was
influenced by BW.Conclusions: The POP-PK modeling satisfactorily
described the plasma EZN-3042 time-concentration curves in patients. The
main covariate effect was related to BW and this influenced only the
central volume of distribution. This indicates that the central volume of
distribution of EZN-3042 increased when the body weight increased. A
central volume higher than the circulating blood volume and a large
volume of the deep compartment suggest that EZN-3042 has large tissue
diffusion. POP-PK/PD modeling with ANC is ongoing.

