Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumoral activity of INC280 against adult glioblastoma brain
tumors xenografts.


INTRODUCTION: INC280 is an oral, highly selective c-Met receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor. The hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-c-Met pathway is one
of the most frequently dysregulated pathways in human cancers. Aberrant
HGF-c-Met signaling has been documented in a wide range of human
malignancies. The c-Met pathway can be activated by abnormal HGF and
c-Met expression levels, c-Met activating mutations and gene
amplifications. At this time, INC280 is in development for the treatment
of solid tumors with activation of the c-Met pathway. As a part of this
study, we looked at the antitumoral activity of INC280 in adult
glioblastoma (GBM) brain tumor xenografts with elevated levels of Met or
HGF expression.METHODS: Met expression and copy number was determined by
ELISA and qPCR, HGF mRNA by RT-qPCR. Adult GBM tumor xenografts were
grown subcutaneously in athymic BALB/c mice. After tumor size reached
200-500 mm3 subcutaneously, groups of 10 mice were randomly treated with
either drug vehicle/control or INC280 (10mg/kg BID) PO for 30 days. Tumor
responses for subcutaneous xenografts were assessed by tumor growth delay
and regression.RESULTS: Based on activation of the c-Met pathway, the
following two xenograft lines were selected for treatment with INC280:
D-09-0337 MG and D-09-0477 MG. As a single agent, INC280 demonstrated
statistically significant (pINTRODUCTION: INC280 is an oral, highly
selective c-Met receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor. The hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF)-c-Met pathway is one of the most frequently dysregulated
pathways in human cancers. Aberrant HGF-c-Met signaling has been
documented in a wide range of human malignancies. The c-Met pathway can
be activated by abnormal HGF and c-Met expression levels, c-Met
activating mutations and gene amplifications. At this time, INC280 is in
development for the treatment of solid tumors with activation of the
c-Met pathway. As a part of this study, we looked at the antitumoral
activity of INC280 in adult glioblastoma (GBM) brain tumor xenografts
with elevated levels of Met or HGF expression.METHODS: Met expression and
copy number was determined by ELISA and qPCR, HGF mRNA by RT-qPCR. Adult
GBM tumor xenografts were grown subcutaneously in athymic BALB/c mice.
After tumor size reached 200-500 mm3 subcutaneously, groups of 10 mice
were randomly treated with either drug vehicle/control or INC280 (10mg/kg
BID) PO for 30 days. Tumor responses for subcutaneous xenografts were
assessed by tumor growth delay and regression.RESULTS: Based on
activation of the c-Met pathway, the following two xenograft lines were
selected for treatment with INC280: D-09-0337 MG and D-09-0477 MG. As a
single agent, INC280 demonstrated statistically significant (p<0.001)
growth delays of 40.23 and 30.13 days in D-09-0337 MG and D-09-0477 MG,
respectively. In addition, when treated with INC280, tumors implanted
with D-09-0337 MG (10 out of 10) or D-09-0477 MG (4 out of 10)
regressed.CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate the therapeutic efficacy of
the inhibition of a c-Met receptor tyrosine kinase in adult brain tumor
xenografts with activation of the c-Met pathway. These results warrant
further exploration of INC280 in clinical trials for the treatment of
adult brain tumor patients with dysregulated proto-oncogene c-Met and its
ligand HGF.

