Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is upregulation of CYP2R1-, CYP27B1- and CYP24 genes in clear cell
renal cell carcinoma tissue involved in carcinogenesis.


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) represent approximately 3-5% of all
malignancies reported each year. Among these clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC) represent the most frequently diagnosed histological
classification accounting for 80% of renal cell carcinoma. The incidence
has been reported to be higher in countries located at higher latitudes.
In this context UVB-light which is essential for the synthesis of vitamin
D has been inversely associated with the development of diverse
carcinomas including renal cell carcinoma. Further steps of vitamin D
synthesis are performed by CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and CYP24.We therefore
investigated the quantitative mRNA expression of the CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and
CYP24 genes in patients (n=29) with ccRCC. For this purpose total RNA was
isolated from tumor and corresponding adjacent healthy tissues of all
patients and integrity was assessed on a denaturing agarose gel stained
with ethidium bromide. Intact RNA was transcribed using random hexameric
primers and reverse transcriptase. Reverse transcription was performed
and amplified by real-time PCR. Statistic association was evaluated by
Mann-Whitney-Test and Kruskal-Wallis-Test. A P value less than 0.05 was
considered significant.mRNA of all three genes (CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and
CYP24) was expressed in both normal and carcinoma tissue with a
significant upregulation in carcinoma tissue compared to normal tissue
(pRenal cell carcinoma (RCC) represent approximately 3-5% of all
malignancies reported each year. Among these clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC) represent the most frequently diagnosed histological
classification accounting for 80% of renal cell carcinoma. The incidence
has been reported to be higher in countries located at higher latitudes.
In this context UVB-light which is essential for the synthesis of vitamin
D has been inversely associated with the development of diverse
carcinomas including renal cell carcinoma. Further steps of vitamin D
synthesis are performed by CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and CYP24.We therefore
investigated the quantitative mRNA expression of the CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and
CYP24 genes in patients (n=29) with ccRCC. For this purpose total RNA was
isolated from tumor and corresponding adjacent healthy tissues of all
patients and integrity was assessed on a denaturing agarose gel stained
with ethidium bromide. Intact RNA was transcribed using random hexameric
primers and reverse transcriptase. Reverse transcription was performed
and amplified by real-time PCR. Statistic association was evaluated by
Mann-Whitney-Test and Kruskal-Wallis-Test. A P value less than 0.05 was
considered significant.mRNA of all three genes (CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and
CYP24) was expressed in both normal and carcinoma tissue with a
significant upregulation in carcinoma tissue compared to normal tissue
(p<0.0001). In tumor tissue CYP24 displayed a significantly higher
expression than CYP27B1 or CYP2R1. Furthermore CYP27B1 showed a higher
expression than CYP2R1 (pRenal cell carcinoma (RCC) represent
approximately 3-5% of all malignancies reported each year. Among these
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) represent the most frequently
diagnosed histological classification accounting for 80% of renal cell
carcinoma. The incidence has been reported to be higher in countries
located at higher latitudes. In this context UVB-light which is essential
for the synthesis of vitamin D has been inversely associated with the
development of diverse carcinomas including renal cell carcinoma. Further
steps of vitamin D synthesis are performed by CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and
CYP24.We therefore investigated the quantitative mRNA expression of the
CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and CYP24 genes in patients (n=29) with ccRCC. For this
purpose total RNA was isolated from tumor and corresponding adjacent
healthy tissues of all patients and integrity was assessed on a
denaturing agarose gel stained with ethidium bromide. Intact RNA was
transcribed using random hexameric primers and reverse transcriptase.
Reverse transcription was performed and amplified by real-time PCR.
Statistic association was evaluated by Mann-Whitney-Test and
Kruskal-Wallis-Test. A P value less than 0.05 was considered
significant.mRNA of all three genes (CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and CYP24) was
expressed in both normal and carcinoma tissue with a significant
upregulation in carcinoma tissue compared to normal tissue (p<0.0001). In
tumor tissue CYP24 displayed a significantly higher expression than
CYP27B1 or CYP2R1. Furthermore CYP27B1 showed a higher expression than
CYP2R1 (p<0.0001). No differences in the expression of CYP2R1, CYP27B1
and CYP24 were found in normal renal tissue.We therefore conclude that
differing gene expression of CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and CYP24 in normal- and
carcinoma tissue could be involved in the pathogenesis of renal cell
carcinoma.

