Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2-mediated H3K27me3 is involved in epigenetic repression of
DLC1 (Deleted in liver cancer 1) in human cancers.


Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), the histone methyltransferase of the
Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 catalyzing histone H3 lysine 27
tri-methylation (H3K27me3), is frequently up-regulated in human cancers,
including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In this study, we identified
the tumor suppressor Deleted in liver cancer 1 (DLC1) as a target of
repression by EZH2-mediated H3K27me3. DLC1 is a GTPase-activating protein
for Rho family proteins. Inactivation of DLC1 results in hyper-activated
Rho/ROCK signaling and is implicated in actin cytoskeleton reorganization
to promote cancer metastasis. By chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we
demonstrated that H3K27me3 was significantly enriched at the DLC1
promoter region of a DLC1-nonexpressing HCC cell line, MHCC97L. Depletion
of EZH2 in MHCC97L by short hairpin RNA reduced H3K27me3 level at DLC1
promoter and induced DLC1 gene re-expression. Conversely, transient
overexpression of GFP-EZH2 in DLC1-expressing Huh7 cells reduced DLC1
mRNA level with a concomitant enrichment of EZH2 on DLC1 promoter. An
inverse relation in the expression pattern between EZH2 and DLC1 was
observed in the liver, lung, breast, prostate, and ovarian cancer
tissues. Treating cancer cells with the EZH2 small molecular inhibitor,
3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), restored DLC1 expression in different cancer
cell lines, indicating that EZH2-mediated H3K27me3 epigenetic regulation
of DLC1 was a common mechanism in human cancers. Importantly, we found
that DZNep treatment inhibited HCC cell migration through disrupting
actin cytoskeleton network, suggesting the therapeutic potential of DZNep
in targeting cancer metastasis. Taken together, our study has shed
mechanistic insight into EZH2-H3K27me3 epigenetic repression of DLC1 and
advocated the significant pro-metastatic role of EZH2 via repressing
tumor and metastasis suppressors.

