Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear MTA1 overexpression is associated with aggressive prostate
cancer and metastasis in African American men.


Metastasis-associate protein 1 (MTA1) plays essential role in prostate
cancer (PCa) progression and metastasis. We hypothesized that nuclear
MTA1 overexpression in primary tumor tissues may provide meaningful
information on prediction of poor prognosis, i.e. MTA1 may serve as a
prognostic biomarker for aggressive PCa and a predictor of recurrent
disease and metastasis. We used tissue microarrays and
clinicopathological information of 301 patients (146 Caucasian Americans
and 155 African Americans) who underwent prostatectomy in University of
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS and in University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA. We evaluated MTA1 expression by immunohistochemistry with the
emphasis on subcellular localization and total staining score, which
accounted intensity and frequency. MTA1 was detected in both cytoplasm
and nucleus, however exhibited different expression patterns in terms of
subcellular localization depending on pathological category of PCa and
metastasis. A significant statistical correlation (p=0.063) was observed
between MTA1 nuclear staining and localized PCa compared to PIN, reaching
more significance with the worst grade (Gleason >7) and metastatic
lesions (pMetastasis-associate protein 1 (MTA1) plays essential role in
prostate cancer (PCa) progression and metastasis. We hypothesized that
nuclear MTA1 overexpression in primary tumor tissues may provide
meaningful information on prediction of poor prognosis, i.e. MTA1 may
serve as a prognostic biomarker for aggressive PCa and a predictor of
recurrent disease and metastasis. We used tissue microarrays and
clinicopathological information of 301 patients (146 Caucasian Americans
and 155 African Americans) who underwent prostatectomy in University of
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS and in University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA. We evaluated MTA1 expression by immunohistochemistry with the
emphasis on subcellular localization and total staining score, which
accounted intensity and frequency. MTA1 was detected in both cytoplasm
and nucleus, however exhibited different expression patterns in terms of
subcellular localization depending on pathological category of PCa and
metastasis. A significant statistical correlation (p=0.063) was observed
between MTA1 nuclear staining and localized PCa compared to PIN, reaching
more significance with the worst grade (Gleason >7) and metastatic
lesions (p<0.006). When analyzed in terms of racial differences, the
difference in MTA1 nuclear overexpression between patients with localized
PCa was highly significant (p7) in African Americans and not in
Caucasians, indicating that MTA1 may serve as an ethnic biomarker for
aggressive disease in African Americans. Moreover, there was a tendency
for higher MTA1 nuclear staining in recurrent compared to non-recurrent
group (n=50), particularly in African Americans (2.3 times difference).
In summary, our observation might have clinical relevance in
discriminating subset of low grade Gleason7 African American patients
with low MTA1 expression who will remain recurrent-free from the same
subset that have high MTA1 levels indicating possibility to develop more
aggressive disease and metastasis. Putting together results of the
current study and our previous finding that MTA1 is downregulated by
dietary stilbenes we emphasize new perspectives for PCa management in
African American men.

